R399 13212323 98511
OBSERVATIONS TOPOGRAPHICAL, MORAL, & PHYSIOLOGICAL; Made in a JOURNEY Through part of the LOW-COUNTRIES, Germany, Italy, and France: WITH A Catalogue of PLANTS not Native of England, found Spontaneously growing in those Parts, and their Virtues. By JOHN RAY, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY. Whereunto is added A brief Account of Francis Willughby Esq his Voyage through a great part of Spain. LONDON: Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1673.
To his Honoured Friend Philip Skippon, Esq SIR, AFter the deplora∣ble Death of that Reverend and Worthy Prelate, John Lord Bishop of Chester, to whom the Dedication of this Work was intended, several weighty considerations indu∣ced me to recommend it to your
Patronage. As first, that I might thereby take occasion publicly to own my Obligati∣ons to you, and profess my gratitude. 2. Because having been much assisted in the Com∣piling thereof by your Notes and Communications; you have so great interest in it, that it's but equal I should present you with it. 3. Having tra∣velled constantly in your Com∣pany, during my continuance beyond the Seas, you are well acquainted with most of the particulars therein delivered, and can attest the truth of them if any one should questi∣on or deny it. As for the Work it self, my first design was on∣ly a Catalogue of outlandish
Plants of my own discover∣ing, such as grew wild be∣yond Sea, and were not com∣mon to us in England. The English Observations are but an accession to the Catalogue, and intended only to help de∣liver the Press of that. Wherefore being hudled up in some haste, upon a deli∣berate perusal of them I find the Phrase and Language in many places less ornate, and in some scarce congruous. But my main aim having been to render all things perspicuous and intelligible (which I hope I have in some measure effe∣cted) I was less attentive to Grammatical and Euphonical niceties. The Catalogue I
have had already some years by me, deferring the publica∣tion thereof, because I still entertain'd some thoughts of making another Voyage beyond the Seas; and then I doubt not but I should have augmen∣ted it by the addition of ma∣ny Plants, with their Virtues and uses. But now the Death of Friends and other Adversi∣ties that have lately befallen me besides my Age having cut off my hopes, and well quali∣fied, not to say quite extin∣guished my desires of further Travelling, I have ventured it abroad as it is, and submit it to the censure of the Ju∣dicious and Candid Reader. If either Catalogue or Ob∣servations
prove any ways use∣ful to the Public, by afford∣ing matter of Information, or if nothing else innocent Di∣version to those that abound with leisure, and might per∣haps bestow their time worse, I have what I desire, and as much as I can reasonably ex∣pect. But to detein you no lon∣ger, I am not so ignorant of my own Abilities, or so well conceited of any Composition or Performance of mine, as to think I shall do you any Honour by this Dedication; I rather hope your Name prefixed will gain Reputation to my Book and procure it acceptance in the World. Be
pleased therefore to behold and receive it, according to my intention before intimated, as a token and expression only of the respect and gratitude of SIR, Your much Obliged Servant JOHN RAY.
THE PREFACE. WHen I had Travelled over the greatest part of England in search of Plants, and suf∣ficiently informed my self what sorts my own Countrey naturally pro∣duced; I grew desirous to see what Varieties Foreign Countries of a dif∣ferent Soil and Temperature of Air might afford. For which reason I was easily induced to accompany Francis Willughby Esquire, Philip Skip∣pon Esquire and Nathanael Bacon Gent. in a Voyage beyond the Seas. The success whereof, as to the number of Plants found, exceeding my ex∣pectation (notwithstanding the short∣ness of our stay in most places gave
me not leave to make an exact scru∣tiny) I thought it might not be a∣miss for the satisfaction of the curi∣ous, and direction of those who may heerafter travel the same places with like design, to publish a Catalogue of all not native of England that I had observed. But considering the paucity of those who delight in stu∣dies and enquiries of this nature, to advantage the Catalogue I have ad∣ded thereto a brief Narrative of our whole Voyage, with some Observati∣ons Topographical, Moral and Natural, made by my self and the foremen∣tioned Gentlemen. I shall say no∣thing to recommend them, but only that what I write as of mine own knowledge is punctually and in all circumstances true, at least accord∣ing to my apprehension and judg∣ment, I not giving my self that li∣berty which many Travellers are wont to take, and the common Proverb seems to allow them. And for what I write from the Relation of
others, though I will not warrant it for certain, yet to me it seemed most likely and probable. What Birds, Beasts, Fishes and Insects I observed abroad, whether common to us in England, or peculiar to other Coun∣tries, I have forborn to set down, be∣cause the taking notice and descri∣bing of them was the particular de∣sign and business of that excellent person Mr. Francis Willughby lately deceased; and he having prepared store of materials for a History of Animals, and likewise digested them into a con∣venient method, that work (if God grant leisure and ability to bring it to due perfection) is intended to be made public, and the Reader may there find what is heer omitted. I might have been more large concerning France but that we were frustrated in our design of making Grand tour (as they there call it) being driven out thence by the Fr. Kings Declaration, commanding all the English to withdraw themselves and
their effects out of his Dominions within two months time. And yet that Country being near us, much travelled by and well known to those of our Nation, and there being many Itineraries and Descriptions of it ex∣tant in Print, I thought it less needful to write much concerning it. As for Spain, it being a Countrey out of the ordinary road of Travel∣lers, and those that have viewed it ging others little encouragement to follow their example, but rather con∣demning themselves for their curiosi∣ty, as having found nothing there which might answer their trouble and expence, that the Reader may know something of it without the hazard and charge of travelling it, I have added by way of Appendix a short account of Mr. Francis Willughby's Voyage through a great part of it, collected out of his notes; which had he himself published he would doubt∣less have enriched with more Observa∣tions, and cloathed with better Lan∣guage.
Now whereas in the Narrative, discoursing concerning the petrifica∣tion of Shells, Fish-bones, &c. I have delivered as my opinion or con∣jecture, that those bodies, which are commonly known in England by the names of Star-Stones and S. Cutberts Beads, were nothing else but the spines and tail-bones of some Fishes, I must own my self to have been therein mi∣staken. For my learned and ingeni∣ous Friend Mr. Martin Lister hath lately advised me, that he hath found of them ramose and branched like trees: which doth sufficiently evince they were not of that original I sup∣posed. Wherefore unless we will grant them to be primary and immediate productions of Nature, as they are in the form of stones; we must em∣brace Mr. Hook's opinion, that they were the roots of some Plants; though I confess I never as yet saw any Roots or Branches shaped and joynted in that manner. Possibly there may be or have been such kind of subma∣rine
Plants or Roots which have hi∣therto escaped my knowledge. For that the parts not only of Trees but al∣so of Herbs themselves may some∣times petrifie, the stalks of Equisetum which we gathered up on the banks of the River Tanaro in Piemont do a∣bundantly convince and satisfie me. And this is all that I thought needful to acquaint the Reader with by way of Preface.
ERRATA. In the Observations. PAge 210, line 31 lege, extraordinariam, p. 214 l. 32. mutis, p. 215. l. 26. Abano, l. 20 Abano, p. 218. l. 17. temperandum, p. 220. l. 35. far, p. 222. l. 13. Montferrat, p. 223. l. 22. adde us, p. 235. l. 8. ripis Rheni Bononiensis, l. 25. propè, p. 244. l. 35. Ca∣stella, p. 249. l. 22. Counties, p. 256. l. 37. Globularia, p. 257. l. 23. disjoyned, p. 263. l. 7. the word [being] is omitttd, p. 267. l. 24. Neopolitans, p. 276. l. 22. dele upon, p. 277. l. 1. Neopolitana, l. 33. Neopolitano, p. 280. l. 24. vulgari, p. 282. l. 33. Messan, p. 285. l. 10. dele are, p. 287. l. 34. Medica, p. 303. l. 20. Seniour, p. 315. l. 34. inne, p. 316. l. 27. one, p. 318. l. 25. wild, p. 343. l. 35. Bols, p. 414. l. 6. di Dio, p. 415. l. 20. hath, p. 416. l. 2. vessels, p. 418. l. 30. to is omitted, p. 422. l. 16. Friburg, p. 432. l. 11. Versoy, p. 439. l. 30. laevi, p. 446. l. 25. Sanicula, p. 450. l. 2. Cha∣racias, ib. l. 21. Frontignana, p. 454. l. 16. 30. p. 480. l. 4. bad, p. 484. l. 37. devotissimus, p. 486, l. 33. las, p. 489. l. 5. the. In Catalogo. PAge 1. line 37. leptophyllos, p. 3. l 27. fontaine que brusle, ib. l. 32. Ocymi, p. 10, l. 8. sterilioribus, p. 18. l. 4. maritima, p. 30. l. 14. racemosum, p. 32. l. 40. accensusque, p. 46. l. 33. Dioscoridis, p. 47. l. 33. purpurea, p. 56. l. 8. pro ejus scribe ra∣dicis, p. 83. l. 39. dele garis, p. 85. l. 13. ossiculis, p. 86. l. 19. nigri∣cans, p. 8. l. 35. Pulmonaria, p. 97. l. 17. Zanclaeum, p. 101. l. 23. dele tris. Errata leviora in punctis & literulis quae nec sensum pervertunt, obscurúmve, aut ancipitem reddunt, nec in errores orthographicós aliosve, lectores minùs peritos inducere apta sunt, verùm unicuiquè non prorsus  manifesta, Lectori bene∣velo vel condonanda vel emendanda permissimus.
OBSERVATIONS Topographical, Moral and Physiological, Made in a JOURNEY Through Part of the Low-Countries, &c. April 18, 1663. We passed over in the Packet-Boat from Dover to Ca∣lais,Calais. a Town formerly held by the English about 210 years, viz. from the 21. of King Edward the Third, when it was taken, till the last year of Queen Mary, when it was lost. Since that time, Anno 1596. it was taken by the Spaniards under Arch-Duke Albert in three days time, only the Castle held out seven or eight. And last of all, Anno 1598. it was restored to the French upon the Trea∣ty at Vervin, who now hold it. It is advantage∣ously situate for Defence, and now very strongly fortified after the modern fashion with an impene∣trable Wall and Bastions of Earth, a deep Trench full of Water to the landward, and a large Citadel. The new Wall and Citadel were built about 44 years since. The old Stone-Wall and Ditch are still remaining, but enclosed within the new. The Town for bigness exceeds Dover, and seem'd to us frequent and full of People. It hath a large square Piazza Market-Place, wherein are two great Markets
GATES FOR A LOCK TO KEEP UP THE WATER OF ANY RIVER FOR THE VSE OF NAVIGATION ETC.
the convenience of its Harbour, which is of good Capacity, safe from Winds, well defended, and deep enough to receive Ships of great Burthen. The Buildings of the Town are not tall, but hand∣som and uniform; the Streets regular, well paved, exactly level and streight. And it is no wonder they should be so, the present Town having been contrived and set out all at once. For when it was surrendred up to Arch-Duke Albert after that famous Siege of three years, the Spaniards found nothing there but great Heaps of Earth and Rubbish, scarce, one House of the old Building remaining. This Town is most regularly and exactly fortified, so that it seemed to us one of the strongest Pieces in all the Low-Countries. The fourth by some esteemed the fifth Port Town of Flanders which hath the largest and most capa∣cious Harbour of all the rest,Sluys. viz. Sluys, subject to the States of the United Provinces, we saw not. April 24. We took places in the Passage-Boat for Bruges, and at a League and halfs end came to a Lock or Sluce, where we shifted our Boat. These Locks or Sostegni (as the Italians significantly call them) are usually placed at a great Declivity of any Chael or Fall of water, and serve to sustain or keep up the Water, (as the Italian Name imports) to make a River navigable which either wants Water or hath too seep a Descent. There are of them in England (as we have been informed) upon Guildford River in Surrey, and have been formerly upon the Trent. They are usually thus contrived, First, there are placed a pair of Folding-doors or Flood-gates cross the Chanel to stop the water descending: Then, a competent space being left to receive Boats and Lighters, &c. another single Gate: In each of these Gates, toward the bottom, is made a Hole or Win∣dow sitted with a convenient Shut or Wicket (Por∣tello
the Italians call it) to open and shut as occasion requires. When a Vessel comes down stream to the Sostegno, first they open the Portello of the foremost Gates and let the Water into the inclosed space, which will necessarily rise there till it come to be equal with the Level of that above the Gates; then they shut the Portello, and the Stream making no re∣sistance, easily draw back the Gates, and receive in the Boat. Which done, they open the Portello of the lower Gates, whereupon the Stream above presently drives to and keeps fast the foremost Gates, and the Water in the enclosed space sinks till it be even with that in the Chanel below; and then they open the Gate itself and let the Boat out. When a Boat goes up Stream, they first open the lowermost Gate, and receive it into the middle or enclosed space, then withdraw or set open the Portello in the upper∣most Gates, letting in the water till it come to be equal with the level of that above the Gates, and lastly draw back the Gates themselves and let out the Boat. N. B. That both upper and lower Gates open against the Stream, and are driven to and kept shut by it, and that the Leaves of the upper Gates lie not in the same plain when shut, but make an obtuse Angle, the better to resist the force of the Water. Bruges,Bruges. so called from the multitude of Bridges therein, is four Leagues distant from Ostend, a large City and well built, many of the Houses being four or five, and some six Stories high. It is of a round figure, well walled and entrench'd hath been for∣merly one of the chief Mart-Towns in Europe, and though it be at present less than what it was for Trade, Riches and number of People, yet is it no mean, poor or inconsiderable place, but in so good condition, that it may well challenge place among the Cities of the second rate in Europe. It is now an Epi∣scopal See, and hath been noted for handsom Wo∣men.
THE FIGVRE OF THE GATES AS WELL OF THE INSIDE OF THEM AS THE OVT.
An Engine to raise water a chain of Buckets, taken out of Kirchers MVNDVS SVBTERRANEVS
Here we first observed the Custom mention∣ed by Erasmus in his Colloquies, of fasning a small piece of white Linen to the Ring of Rapper of the Door of that House where a Woman lies in. A. Forte pieteriens has aedes vidi cornicem obductam candido demirabar quid esset causa. Fa. Adeóne hosper es in hac Repub. ut ignores hoc esse symbolum puerperi i aedibus? Erasm. Colloqu. Puerpera. We saw the manner of raising up Water for the use of the Ci∣tizens by a Chain whereon are fastned Cylindrical Iron Buckets. This Chain is round in form of a Bracelet, Neck-lace or Wheel-band, and put over a large Axis deeply furrowed, from which it hangs down into a Well of Water, and being turned about by the Axis, the descending Buckets have their mouths downward, and take up Water as they pass through the Well; which (ascending with their mouths upward, but a little inclining from the Chain outward) they bring up to the Axis, to which so soon as they are come, by reason of their Posi∣tion they must needs turn it out into a Trough pla∣ced under the Axis, by which it is conveyed to a Cistern, and thence by Pipes to private Houses. This kind of Machin is generally used in Italy, Spain and France for raising up Water, to water their Gardens in Summer time. The deep Furrows in the Axis are to catch hold of the Buckets, that the Chain slip not back by reason of the weight of the ascending Buckets. In this City are no more than seven Parish Churches, but of Monasteries or Reli∣gious Houses (as they call them) good store, 60 ac∣cording to Golnitz. In the Church of Nostre-dame or S. Mary lies the Body of Charles the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, and Lord of most of the Netherlands, under a stately Monument with a French Inscription upon it, which tells us, that he was slain in the Battel of Nancy, 1476. and his Body brought from Nancy hither by his great Grand-child Charles the Fifth,
Emperour, and that K. Philip the Second erected to him that Monument. We saw in this Town one John Tates, a Man of a Gigantick Stature, born at Schoonhoven in Holland: one of a middle Stature might well stand under his arm-pit, from his middle fingers end to his elbow was 25 inches and a half, the length of his hand to his wrist 11 inches, his middle finger 7 inches. He was well shaped, and all his Limbs proportionable to his height. He was afterwards (as we heard) brought over into England to be shown. Near this City (as Boetius de Boot, who was Na∣tive thereof relates) digging ten or twenty Ells deep in the Earth, they find whole Woods of Trees, in which the Trunks, Boughs and Leaves do so exact∣ly appear, that one may easily distinguish the seve∣ral kinds of them, and very plainly discern the Se∣ries of Leaves which have fallen yearly. These sub∣terraneous Woods are found in those places which 500 years ago were Sea, and afterwards either left and thrown up by the Sea, or gained from it, the Tides being kept off by Walls and Fences. But be∣fore the fore-mentioned term of 500 years, there is no memory that these places were part of the Continent. And yet seeing the tops of these Trees do for the most part lie Eastward, because (as is pro∣bable) they were thrown down by Western Winds, which on this Coast are most boisterous and violent, it will necessarily follow that in the most antient times and before all memory of man, these places were Firm Land, and without the limits of the Sea. The Describer of Amsterdam tells us, that in Friesfland and Groningland, there are great numbers of these under-ground Trees found and digged up in Mosses and fenny Grounds where they dig for Turves. In Egland also there are found of them plentifully in many places, the Wood whereof
they usually call Moss-Wood, because it is for the most part digged up in the Mosses or moorish boggy Fens and Levels where they get Turves; though sometimes it be found in firmer Grounds, and some∣times in the sides of Mountains. The Question is, How these Trees came to be buried so deep under ground? To which we may probably answer, that many Ages ago before all Records of Antiquity, yea before primitive Fame or Tradition itself, these places were part of the firm Land, and covered with Wood; afterwards being undermined and overwhelmed by the violence of the Sea, they con∣tinued so long under water, till the Rivers brought down Earth and Mud enough to cover the Trees, fill up these Shallows, and restore them to the firm Land again. In like manner upon the Coast of Suffolk about Dunwich, the Sea doth now and hath for many years past very much encroached upon the Land, undermining and overwhelming by degrees a great deal of high ground; insomuch that anti∣ent Writings make mention of a Wood a mile and half to the East of Dunwich, which is at present so far within the Sea. Now if in succeeding Ages (as likely enough it is) the Sea shall by degrees be filled up, either by its own working, or by Earth brought down by Land-Floods still subsiding to the bottom, and growing up over the tops of these Trees, and so this space again added to the firm Land; the men that shall then live in those parts (if the World so long last) will, it's likely, dig up these Trees, and as much won∣der how they came there, as we do at the present Moss-Wood. And now that I am speaking of filling up and atterrating (to borrow that word of the Italians) the Skirts and Borders of the Sea, I shall take leave to add by the by, that to me it seems very probable, that all the Low-Countries have been in this manner gained from the Sea. For Varenius in his Geography
tells us, That sinking Well in Amsterdam, at near an hundred foot depth they met with a Bed or Floor of Sand and Cockle-shells, whence it is evident that of old time the bottom of the Sea lay so deep, and that that hundred foot thickness of Faith above the Sand arose from the Sediments of the Waters of those great Rivers, which there emptied themselves into the Sea, and in times of Floods brought down with them abundance of Earth from the upper Grounds: Which yet is a strange thing, consider∣ing the novity of the World, the Age whereof ac∣cording to the usual Account is not yet 5600 years. That the Rain doth continually wash down Earth from the Mountains, and atterrate or add part of the Sea to the firm Land, is manifest from the La∣gune or Flats about Venice; the Camdrg or Isle of the River Rhosue about Aix in Provence, in which we were told that the Watch-Tower had in the memory of some men been removed forward three times, so much had been there gained from the Sea; and many places in our own Land: only it is a received Traditi∣on, and may perhaps be true, that what the Sea loses in one place, it gets in another. That the height of the Mountains, at least those which consist not of firm rocks, doth continually diminish, is I think very likely, not to say certain. I have been credibly informed, that whereas the Steeple of Craich in the Peak of Derby∣shire in the memory of some old men yet living could not have been seen from a certain Hill lying between Hopton and Wirksworth, now not only the Steeple, but a great part of the Body of the Church may from thence be seen: Which without doubt comes to pass by the sinking of a Hill between the Church and place of View. Hence it would fol∣low, that in process, of time (but it would be many thousands of years first) all the Hills and Mountains (except the rocky) would by Floods and Shots of Rain be quite washed away and the whole Earth le∣velled.
But to return to the Trees: One material Excep∣tion against our Solution still remains, and that is, that a great many of these subterraneous Trees dig'd up in England are thought to be Firs, whereas that kind of Tree doth not at present, and consequently we have reason to believe never did, grow wild in this Kingdom. To which I answer, that this Exception would indeed much puzzle me, were it certain and manifest, that this is Fir-Wood, which is so generally reputed from its Grain, In∣flammability and other Qualities. But since it doth not clearly appear to me so to be, I shall re∣spite my Answer, till I be fully satisfied concerning it. From Bruges, April 27. We went be Boat to Gaut,Gaunt. the greatest City of Flanders; whence the Emperour Charles V. who was born here, was wont to boast, that he could put Paris into his Gane; in which word there is an Equivoque, Gane in French signifying a Glove. Yet is the Wall too great for the Buildings, enclosing much void ground. In this City as in Bruges, are 7 Parish Churches, and according to Golux, about 55 Religious Hou∣ses. We ascended the Tower called Bellefort about four hundred Steps high, and saw the famous Bell calld Roland, not so great as we imagined. This City is well built, well wall'd and trench'd about, and the Inhabitants to us seemed very buse and in∣dustrious. From Gaunt, April 30. we travelled to Brussels, about thirty English Miles distant, passing through Aolst,Aolst a fortified Town of some note. Brussels is the capital City of Brabant,Brussels. where the Spanish Governour of these Provinces, who was then the Marquess of Caracene, usually resides. It is well built, large and populous. The Streets are broad; the Stadt-house a fair and uniform Build∣ing. The Common People here, and also at Ant∣werp,
Lovain, Mechlin, and other Cities of Brabant, (as hath been noted by others) make use of Dogs to draw little Carts and Wheel-Barrows laden with Commodities about the Streets. But for the Ad∣vantage they make of them, setting aside the main∣taining of an old Custom, I think they might as well employ their own Arms and Shoulders. In the Gallery by the Riding -place, is an Echo, which reflects the Voice fifteen times as we were assured: We observed about ten distinct Reflections, the Wind hindering us as to the rest. At this time it happened Ludovicus de Bills to be in Town, whom we visited and saw five Bodies which he had with him, embalmed and preserved after his newly invented manner, entire with all their Entrails and Bowels. He was then going to the University of Lovain, with whom he had made an agreement for Discovery of his Art and reading publick Anatomy Lectures. Our next remove (May 2.) was to Lovain,Lovain. a large City, but neither well built nor well kept, only the Stadt-house is a stately Structure, and makes a fair show at a distance. The Wall is of great extent, more in Circuit than that of Gannt by three Rods, taking in much void ground. The Colleges are in number 43, the Names whereof to∣gether with their Founders are exhibited in the en∣suing Catalogue which we there found published in Print.
Almae Vniversitatis Lovani∣ensis Collegia ac Paedagogia Anno Salutis M.D-C.LIV. enumerata. Magnum sive Majus Theologicum, in via quam Praepositi vocant, omnium Academiae Collegiorum primum maximúmque est; erectum in honorem S. Spi∣ritûs, Anno Dom. 1442. Vniversitatis deeimo-sexto, per Ludovicum Ryckium, Patricium Lovaniensem, a Principum Brabantiae quaestorem: quod ex tennibus ex∣ordiis (ut plera{que} alia) variorum donationibus itoae ex∣crevit, ut in aliud eidem adhaerens, quod hujus compa∣ratione Minus dicitur, Anno 1562. divisum fuerit. Mirum quam —Humili, eorùm faelicibus, ortu, Creverit auspiciis Academia magna LovanI. Juris Utrius{que} vulgò Baccalaureorum, S. Ivoni di∣eatum, in viae nova, Anno 1483. per Robertum à Lacu Gandensem inchoatum, ac ab aliis auctum. S. Donatiani, in viâ Felinâ, Anno 1484. Juris utri∣us{que} studiosis fundatum, ita dictum, quia Primus Fundator Antonius Haveron, decretorum Doctor, & Maximiliani I. Consilarius, Praepositus, fuit ad S. Donatiani Brugis: Praecipuum agnoscit fautorem Joannem Carodeletum, ibidem Praepositum, atque Archiepiscopum Panormi∣tanum. Standonicum, in viâ Proetoriâ, à Joanne Stanc∣donck, Mechliniensi, Doctore Sorbonico, (qui & alias pauperum scholarium demos Parisiis, Cameraci, Valen∣cenis
& Mechliniae condidit) in magnum Ecclesiae bonum, Anno 1490. pauperibus fundatum. Atrebatense, in viâ Praepositi, à Nicolao Rutherio, patriâ Luxemburgensi, & Atrebotiorum Episcopo, mag∣nificâ domo at{que} opimâ dote, Anno 1505. in honorem S. Nicoli inchoaum. Winkelianum, in viâ cavâ, auctorem agnoscit ab Anno 1505. Joannem Winkelium, Conservatoris. Aca∣demici Notarium: item{que} Joannim hujus fil. Doctorem Medicum, qui sua, sororis{que} bona, circa An. 1554. ex voto patris, (si uterque, ut accidit, sine legitimâ prole decederet) in usum Collegii studiosorum J. V. impendit. Houterlaeum, in viá Vaccariâ, Anno 1511. per Henricum de Houterle, Hooghstratonum, D. Petri hîc Scholarcham a Militem Hierosolymitanum, Anno 1643. renovatum. Buslidianum, vulgariter Trilinguae, quòd Linguae Hebraica, Graeca, Latina in eo doceantur: juxta forum pisarium, auctorem habet Hieronymum Buslidium, Luxemburgi, è sui cognominis pago oriundum, Proepositum Ariensem ac Francisci Archiepisc. isuntini ta∣trem, Anno 1517. Pontificium, in viâ Praetoriât erexi Adrianus VI. Vltrajectinus, Pont. Max. ante Adrianus Floreitinus dictus, qui illud, cùm hîc in D. Petri Decanus esset, Theo∣logis sub tutelâ S. Augustini destinavit, & postea Pon∣tifex confirmavit Anno 1522. Sabaudiae, in viâ Nummariâ, Anno 1548. ab Eu∣stachio Chapuys, Sabaudo, Annessiacensi J. V. Doctore ac Carolo V. à Consiliis &c. in gratiam suorum popula∣rium, ut & aliud in patriâ in honorem S. Eustachii, magnificè extructum & dotatum. S. Annae, in viâ Praepositi, Nicolaus Goblet, Bovi∣niensis, Dionantensis Praepositius, Anno 1553, fundavit. Druitianum, in angulo vulgò Cucullinò, à Micha∣ele Druitio, oriundo ex Vollerinchove territorii Casleten∣sis, J. V. Doctore, Prof. & hîc ad D. Petrum Dece, qui obiit Anno 1559.
Van-dale, in viâ Praepositi, structure magnificentiâ, & hospitio Principum clarum, construxit Petrus Van-dale Antuèrpianus, J. V. Doctor & Decanus Alostanus, Anno 1565. Viglianum, quod eitam Frisonum, in viâ S. Quin∣tini, Anno 1568. à Viglio ab Aytta Zuichemo, Fristo, Praeposito Gandavensi, & apud Belgas privati Concilii Praeide, popularibus suis àc Gandavensibus cum amplâ dote aedisieatum. Praemonstratense, in viâ Praepositi, primordia sua debet Carolo vander Linden Parcensi, Aegidio Heyni Averbodiensi, & Michaeli Maleno Ninoviensi Abba∣tibus, Anno 1571. Quibus postea accesterunt Grint∣bergensis, Antuerpiensis, Tongerloensis & Heilesse∣mensis. Cranendonck, ad viam Judaicam incoepit Anno 1574. Auctore Marcello à Cranendonck, Taxandro, Tongelrensi D. Jacobi hic Canon. in honorem quinque Vulnerum Christi. Divaei in monte Capelloe, ut vocant, Auctor, est Greg. Divaeus, Bruxellensis, qui Namurci, Româ ex Jubilaeo rediens, ad beneficii mercedem & itineris quietem è vitâ decessit, Anno 1576. atatis suae 22. Brugelianum, unicum Medicorum, in viâ novâ, à Petro Brugelio Sylvaedaucensi Med. Doctore ac Professore, Anno 1577. Seminarium Regium, in viâ Praepositi, à Philippo II. Hispaniarum Rege ac Belgarum Principe, de Academiâ & alii titulis bene merito, procurante Joanne Vende∣villio, Anno 1579. Pelssanum, in viâ Pra¦edicatorum, minificentia Joan∣nis Pels à Recklinchifià Westphalt, huic Universitati ab actis, An. 1574. suis conterraneis, fundatum & con∣cinne renovatum, An. 1622. Montense, in viâ novâ, de Bievene, Montensis, J. V. D. ac Professor, moriens reliquit, Anno 1596. Seminarium Leodiense, in via monetali, S. Lam∣berto sacrum, auspiciis Serenissimi Electrois Ernesti Du∣cis
Bavaria, Episcopi Leodiensis, & An. 1605. Opus & dote & structurâ Auctore suo dignum. S. Willebrordi quod vulgò Sylvaeducense, in viâ novâ, jam ab annis plus minus 20. initium habuit, confirmatum ost 1625. morte Fundatoris sui Nicolai Zoesii Amorsforiii Episc. Sylvaduc. Bayanum sive Bayorum, in viâ cavâ, exordia pri∣ma accepit à magno Theologo Michaele du Bay, Han∣none, Melinensi, D. Petri hîc Decano, qui illud erigere coeperat ad Ledam D. Augustino dicatum: transtulit deinde ad eum ubi nunc visitur locum precipuus ejus Fundator Jacobus du-Bay è fratre nepos, similiterque S. Th. Doctor & Decanus D. Petri: hujus denique nepos AEgidius S. Th. Doctor & Professor, Anno 1614. solemniter aperuit, aedificiis & dote magnifice auxit. Divae Pulcheriae, in foro Boario, fundatum bonis auspiciis Lovanii, Anno 1616. per divisionem cujus∣dam Fundationis universitatis Coloniensis, magna quo∣tidie incrementa sumit piâ multorum liberalitate. Ordinis Teutonici, ad vism lapideam exordiebatur Edmondus Huyn ab Anstemraeds Ord. Tent. Eques & Commendator Provincialis Balivioe Juncesanioe, &c. Anno 1617. Canonicorum Regularium S. Augustini, in viâ lapideâ juxta S. Jacobum, 1618. procurantibus Anto∣nio van Berghim Priore in Viride-Valle, & Joanne Pe∣tersem Bethlehemico juxta Lovanium. Mylianum vulgò Luxemburgense, in viâ vaccariâ, Auctore Joanne Mylio Luxemburgensi J. V. Doctore, qui ingentem pecuniae summam moriens in hunc finem reli∣querat, tandem stabilitum Lovanii vigesimo tertio à morto Fundatoris anne, scilicet Dom. 1619. Hibernicum, in viâ quae Bakelanica vocatur, Aucto∣ritate Apostolicâ per sacram de propag. Fidei Congre∣gationem studio & dote Eugenii Matthoei Archiepise. Dublinensis, An. 1623. inchoatum. Alnense, in viâ quintinianâ, per Edmundum Jon∣vent
Chymacensem, Alnae Ord. Cisterc. Abbatem, pro Monachis ejusdem Coenobii Anno 1626. faelicibus auspi∣ciis aedjificatum. Floreffiense, in Bakelanicâ, Anno 1626. exordia sua aocepit à Joanne Roberti Floreffiensi Ord. Proemonst. Prasule, Suppriore Generali ac Circariarum Floreffiae & Flandrioe Vicario. Joan. Malderi, in viâ Martinianâ, Episcopi An∣tuerpiensis, Anno 1633. coemptis in eum usum aedi∣bus à V. N. Ludovico Tempelio, Praetore Vrbis Lova∣niensis. Franc. Hovii, Londerzelii, S. T. L. Pastoris ad S. Walburgim Antuerpiae, in Monte siliceo, cui Fun∣dator inscribi voluit Patrimonium Christi. Obiit An. 1633. Ibid. Decembris. Minimorum, pro Religiosis Ord. S. Francisci de Paula, Anno 1639. Beggardorum, pro Religiosis sui Ordinis, Anno 1640. Collegium S. Michaelis fundatum per R. & Erudi∣tissimum D. Laurentium Zoenium Sacrae Theol. Licent. Insignis Ecclesiae Collegiatae S. Petri Lovanii Canonicum & Sacerdotem Jubilarium Anno 1649. Obiit 20. Aprilis, 1651. Sequuntur quatuor Paedagogia, ut vocant, in quibus Artes liberales, Philsophiáque docetur, Academi∣arum omnium famosissimae Scholae, de quibus hoc vulgare Tetrastichon: Quatuor hîc inter sese Collegia certant De Sophiae studiis, & vincere quodque laborat. Porcus alit doctos: volitat super omnia Falco: Castrum bella gerit: florescunt Lilia primis. Lilium, in viâ paganâ, cui nomen ab insigni ad∣haesit, SS. Joanni Evangelistae, vero castitatis lilio, & Giseno sacrum est. Hujus Professor ac Rector Primus
cârolus Virulus, Casletensis, suae aetatis Philosophus fa∣minissimus, postquam annos 6. & 50. remit officio & vitâ functus, An. 1493. Falco, in viâ, cavâ à Falcono insigni domus, Re∣gentem & fautorem inter primos babuit Gasparem Kin∣schotium Turnhoutanum, qui obitt An. 1488. Peda∣gogium hoc fuit ex alio loco, qui hodièque vetus Falco dicitur, translatum à variis tandem & ipsa Focultate Artium cumulatò auctum: sub intelà est magnorum Philosophorum DD. Dionysii Areopagitae & Catharinoe. Industriâ & liberalitate D. Claudii Losson, Havraei, S. T. ibidem Regentis ac Professoris, hâc, quae modo vi∣sitvr, splendidâ aedificii structurâ decoratum, Anno 1636. Castrum, in viâ Castrensi, prium vocavit regentem Godefridum van Gompel, Dessellensem, qui ibidem ante conditam Vniversitatem literas humoniores docuit: ele∣ctis Patronis Beatiss Mariâ, turri fortissimâ & S. Cornelio Papâ Martyre invincibili. Porcus, in viâ Praetoriâ, structurâ & frequentiâ pri∣mum, cui hoc nomon mansit (cùm aliàs Paedagogium Stanedonck audire malit) à domo in viâ Praepositi, qua etiamnum ho infigue Porci prnefert, cui Pedagogium hoc quondam oppositum fuit, inchoatum, Auctore Joanne Widoë; ejusque primus Rector suit Henricus Loen Lo∣vaniensis, vitae sanctitate clarus. Martini Caverenne Regentis industriâ splendidis aedificiis adornatum. DD. Antonio & Anne hoc sacrum est, in quo adhuc humaniores docentur literae: ut etiam in Vaulxiano, communiter Gandense, in viâ Longo∣Brulia dictâ, quod initium voto Francisci Niuland Gandensis habuit: dotem à Joanise del-Vaulx, Anno 1593. Item Scholae PP. Augustinianorum, in utilitatem Inven∣tutis apertae, Anno 1612. Felixque augmentum precatur J. O.
The several Faculties are distinguished by their Habits: Divinity-Students wear constantly Gowns and square Caps; those of other Faculties wear none, except at their publick Exercises in the Schools. The principal Colleges, called Pedagogies, are four. In these only is Philosophy taught by two Profes∣sors, the one called Primarius, the other Secunda∣rius. Those Students that are Gentlemen sit in a higher Form, called Scamnum Nobilium; and give each of them six Gilders quarterly to the Primarius Professor, and two Patacoons to the Secundarius. Those of inseriour rank who sit in the lower Forms give half so much to each. The Primarius reads in the morning from half an hour after six of the clock till half an hour after seven, then they go to Mass till eight, and after that to their private Studies till ten, then the Professor reads again till eleven. In the afternoon the Secundarius Professor reads from half an hour after one, till half an hour after two. He begins again half an hour after four and reads till half an hour after five. All Students must write after the Professors in a large Note-Book, and in the intervals of Lectures peruse and study what they wrote. The Professors Readings are divided into Dictata, which are Theses or Propositions, and An∣notata which are Solutions of Objections. The first thing they require of Students when they come to this University is to be matriculated, and swear their Be∣lief of all the Doctrines of the Romish Church. The Close or End of the Oath is the same with that of our Universities, Ita me Deus adjuvet & haec sancta Dei Evangelia. Young Students give their Names to the Presi∣dent of their College or Pedagogy, and for every time they are absent from Lectures are punished a Stiver, which is somewhat more than a Penny English. For every time they miss a publick Exercise in Law or Physick they pay three Sti∣vers;
if they be to exercise themselves and miss, they are mulcted twenty Stivers. The Students are not allowed to wear Swords about the Streets. The Professors of each Pedagogy chuse yearly 12 of the best Scholars who are of two years stand∣ing. These 48 are publickly examined, and out of them about 12 usually chosen to Burses or Exhibi∣tions. The Burses signifie their Diet, Chamber and a greater or less Stipend according as the Bur∣ses are. It is very creditable to be chosen to a Burse. He that is the first of the chosen hath a Bell rung for him in his College 48 hours together without intermission. When they are thus chosen, they may go into what College they will and study what they please. They are commonly preferred to Professorships and afterwards to Canons Places. The Degrees here conferred are Batchelour, Licen∣tiate and Doctor. In Divinity after two years stand∣ing they may be Baccalaurei ourrentes, after another year Baccalaurei formati. Seven years after this they may be Licentiates in Divinity. They are seldom created Doctors till they attain to 50 years of Age, unless they be very eminent for Learning. Every Batchelor is called Doctissimus: A Licentiate in Medicine Peritissimus, in Law Consultissimus, in Di∣vinity Eximius: Doctors of Medicine and Law are Clarissimi, of Divinity Eximii Domini & Magistri nostri. When any one goes out Licentiate, there is a Treat∣ment made, to which all the Doctors and the Oppo∣nents are invited, and have Gloves given them. The Graduate is attended from the Schools with Drums and Trumpets. At his Lodging a Bell is hung up and rung for 24 hours together. He hath liberty to chuse a Coat of Arms, and is immediately reputed a Gentleman. The men of most note for Learning in this Uni∣versity at present [1663.] are Gutischovius, Medi∣cinae
& Matheseos Professor. Vopiscus Fortunatus Plem∣pius, Medicinae Professor primarius, called Fortunatus because he was cut out of his Mothers Womb, as we were informed. Dorlix, Med. Doctor. Sinnichius, Theologiae Doctor, an Irish-man. Pontanus, Theologiae Doctor, Dean of S. Peters, and Censor Librorum. Bradhy, an Irish-man, Juris Canonici Doctor. Loyens, Juris Canonici Doctor. Gulinx was Professor of Philosophy here, but is now turned Protestant, and lives at Leyden: Van Verve, Theol. Professor Prim trius. The publick Schools are old, mean and homely. May 4. we walked out of Lovain about half a mile to see the D. of Areschot's Palace, and the Cele∣stines Cloister adjoining. We found among the Corn by the way-sides as we went, plentifully growing Caryophyllus arvensis umbelliferus J. B. and Alsine foliis hederaceis Rutae modo divisis Lob.Plauts a∣bout Lo∣vain. both in flower. At this City we first observed Storks, Women-Porters and Soldiers begging on Horse-back. From Lovain, May 5. we travelled to Mechlin, Malines the French call it,Mechlin. a very elegant and well-built City, exceeding our expectation both for Beauty and Greatness. It is the Seat of an Arch∣bishop, and with a small Territory of nine Villa∣ges about it makes one of the seventeen Provinces, called the Lordship of Mechlin The Cathedral Church is dedicated to S. Rumbald. Many Manu∣factures exercised here of the most gainful sort, as making of Linen Cloth, casting of great Artillery and Bells; and which we especially took notice of, Tanning, there being two or three whole Streets of Tanners. Hence May 5. we boated to Antwerp,Antwerp a City for Strength and Beauty comparable to any of its big∣ness in Europe. For the latter in my opinion, it much excels Florence, with which it is wont to be put in competition. And for the former, it is en∣compassed
with a Wall of Earth faced with Free∣stone, of that thickness that there are several Rows of Trees and broad Walks upon it; and with a Ditch of water of a very great depth and breadth, excepting on that side the River Scheld washes it. So that, considering also the advantage of its Situ∣ation in a low and level Countrey, it seemed to me the strongest City in all the Netherlands. The Cita∣del first built by the Duke of Alva, and afterward repaired by the Prince of Parma, of a Pentagonal Figure, serves as well to bridle as defend the Town. The Houses of Antwerp are for the most part of Brick, some few wooden ones of the antient Build∣ing here and there remaining, which the Owners are not suffered to repair. The Chappel of the Jesuites College is very rich and sumptuous. The Steeple of S. Maries Church is so curiously built and carved, that the Emperour Charles V. (as we were told) was wont to say, that it deserved to be kept in a case and shewn only upon Holy-days. The Exchange or Burse was the Pattern after which our old Royal Exchange was built, but in all respects in∣feriour to it, the Copy excelling the Original. The Stadthouse is a magnificent Structure. Several other publick Buildings there are that deserve to be viewed, most of which are represented in the adjoined Map. Plantius Printing-House, menti∣oned by Golnitz and others, is for a thing of that nature the best we have any where seen. This City for Trading and Wealth is much decayed since the Low-Countrey Wars. In the Garden of one Franciscus van Steerbeck a Priest, we saw many rare Plants: Among others we took more especial no∣tice of Lentiscus, Pistacia, Spiraea Theophrasti, Barba Jovis frutex, Cerasus nana, Amygdalus nana, Althaea montis Olbii in Gallo-provincia, Morus fructu albo, Jasminum hederaceum, Lycium, Rosa sine spinis, Cap∣pris leguminosa sive Fabago, Convolvulus heptaphyllus,
Acanthus aculeatus, Esula rara Venetorum, Petroseli∣num Macedonicum, Daucus Creticus verus, Convolun∣lus Althaeae folio, Thapsia latifolia, Ephemerum Mat∣thioli, Pistolochia Virginiana, Pyrethrum verum, Au∣ricula ursi folio & flore Boraginis, Sandalida Cretica, Sahdariffae species, Telephium legitimum Antiquorum, Gnaphalium Americanum flore luteo pleno, Spartum marinum, Laurus Alexandrina, Absinthium arbo∣rescens, Lilium Allobrogum majus, Geranium tu∣berosum Hellebori albi tres species seu potiùs varie∣etates, Centaurium majus Helenii folio & Scoly∣mi folio, Coralloides, Vrtica fata Virginiana, Campanula Damascena lactescens flore purpureo & albo. May 15. we took Boat for Middleburgh; at Lillo a Fort upon the Scheld,Lillo. three Leagues below Ant∣werp, belonging to the States of Holland, our Boat was searcht, as are all Vessels going to and from Antwerp. The Wind and Tide favouring us, we reach'd Middleburgh before Sun-set, having made in all this day about 54 English miles. Up∣on the Flats we passed over, at a good distance from us, we saw several Sea-Calves upon the Sands. Middleburgh is the capital City of Zealand, large,Middle∣burgh. well-built, having spatious Streets, populous, full of wealthy Merchants, and well fortified, as are generally all Cities and Towns of any account in the United Netherlands. It is situate near the mid∣dle of the Isle Walachria, whence no doubt it took it's Name, and not from Metellus, quasi Metelli Bur∣gum, as some have fondly imagined. From that side the Island respecting Antwerp is an artificial Chanel cut up to the Town, capable of Ships of good burthen, which come into the Town, the said Chanel passing through and making Havens in three or four of the Streets. There are (as we were informed) about twenty Churches of all sorts
in this City, the Lutherans, French, Anabaptists and Jews being here tolerated and allowed places of publick Worship. At the Stadthouse we observed two Eagles kept, which we were told the Citizens were obliged to by their Charter, by which they have great Immunities granted them by the Emperour, as Freedom from Arrests any where but in their own City, &c. May 16.Flushing. we walked out to Flushing about two miles and an half distant from Middleburgh; a Town once cautionary to the English, though not so large nor so well built as Middleburgh, and ha∣ving narrow Streets, yet very considerable for its Strength and Riches, the opportunity of its Situa∣tion and conveniency of its Harbour, Ships of good burthen coming up into several Streets of the Town in artificial Chanels, and lying there secure from Wind and Weather. May 19.Vere. we took another Walk to Vere, called by the Dutch Ter-Vere or Camp-Vere, some three miles distant from Middleburgh to the Northward; a Town for bigness inferiour to Flushing, well for∣tified, having two fair Harbours for Ships with broad Wharfs or Keys within the Walls. We re∣turned back through Armuyden, a small Town con∣sisting of one Street, yet entrench'd about. Here hath been formerly a good Trade driven. By the way we observed the Sea-banks to be faced with a kind of matting of Rushes or Flags staked down as high as the Tide usually arises, to defend them from being washed away by the Water. May 20.Bergen op Zome. we went by Boat from Middleburgh to Bergen op Zome, passing by Rammekens, a strong Fort at the Entrance of the Chanel leading to Middle∣burgh. Bergen is a place of very great Strength, be∣sides the Wall and Trench, being fortified with Half Moons, Horn-Works, &c. famous for the no∣table Resistance it made first to the Duke of Parma,
and afterwards to the Marquess Spinola besieging of it, Anno 1622, At our being there it was held with a strong Garrison, consisting of twelve Com∣panies of Foot, two whereof were English, and two Troops of Horse, beside four Companies of Townsmen. May 21. we travelled to Breda,Breda. eight hours distant from Bergen, for so they reckon or measure their way in these Countreys, by the time they spend in passing it. This Town is considerable for its bigness, well built and populous; of great Strength, being en∣compassed with very thick Walls and Mounts of Earth and two Trenches full of Water, the one broad and deep: At our Entrance in we passed through two Ports, and over five Draw-Bridges. It belongs to the Prince of Orange, who hath a Castle and a fair Palace in the Town. Here are maintained in Garrison for defence of this impor∣tant Strength thirteen Companies of Foot, two whereof were English at our being there, and four Troops of Horse. Ever since the Surprise of this Town by the Truf-Boat, it is the Custom to search all Boats laden with Commodities that enter here by stabbing them through in sundry places with a Spit. May 22. we travelled from Breda first to S. Ger∣trudenberg,S. Gertru∣denberg. belonging to the States, no great Town, but well fortified and entrencht, garrison'd by three Companies of Foot, one whereof was English, and a Troop of Horse: and from Gertrudenberg the same day by water to Dordrecht or Dort,Dort. a large City, very rich and populous, well built with tall Houses of Brick, not inferiour to those of Antwerp. The Streets elegantly paved, in the middle with Stone, and on each side next the houses with Brick set edgeways, so clean that a man may walk them in Slippers without wetting his foot in the midst of Winter. Thus paved and thus cleanly kept are
the Streets of all the Cities and great Towns in Holland. The English Merchants have great Privi∣leges, and keep their Court in this Town. Here are two English Churches and one French. From the Tower of the principal Church we had a fair Prospect of the City and Countrey adjacent, the Steeple of Breda coming into view. In one of the upper Rooms of the Gunners Doel or Guild sate the Synod assembled here, Anno 1611. The Seats round about are still remaining. May 23. we took places in one of the Passage-Boats that go off several times daily to Roterdam,Roter∣dam. some three Leagues distant from Dort, which brought us thither in five hours. Roterdam is of a triangular Figure, and much larger than I thought it to have been. It equals if not exceeds any City in Holland except Amsterdam and perhaps Leyden. It hath been lately much augmented by the addi∣tion of many Streets of new buildings. Near the principal Church dedicated to S. Laurence is a little House where Erasmus was born, over the door of which is placed his Picture, and on one side of that this Distich written, Aedibus his ortus mundum decoravit Erasmus Artibus ingenuis, relligione, fide. Under it in Spanish this, En esta casa es nacido Erasmo Theologo celebrado, Par doctrina sennalado, la pura fee nos a revelado. And in Latin this, Fatalis series nobis invidit Erasmum, At Desiderium tollere non potuit. In a large Piazza stands a stately Brass Statue erected to his Memory, with the Figure of a Book
of the same Metal in its hand, and in the posture of turning over a Leaf, of which in drollery the People say, that every time it hears the Clock strike, it turneth over a Leaf. The Citizens of Roterdam exercise no Handicraft or Manufacture to trade withal, but all their Riches proceed from their Sea-Trade and Merchandise. They have a very good Port, Ships of great Burthen coming up in deep Chanels into the very Town: where they lie se∣cure from all danger, and lade and unlade their Commodities at the Merchants doors. The Go∣vernment is by a President, four Burgomasters, and twenty four Magistrates or Senators, which they call the Vroetschap. These chuse all publick Officers out of their own number. Themselves continue in place during life, and when any one dies, the rest chuse out of the Citizens another into his room. So that the People have no interest or share at all in the Government. The form of Go∣vernment is most what the same in all the other Cities and Towns of Holland, only the number of Counsellours or the Vroetschap is in some more, in some less. Every hour of the day at the ringing of a Bell goes off a Passage-Boat,Delft. somewhat like our Pleasure-Barges on the Thames, to Delft. We took places in one of these, May 25. which in two hours time brought us to Delft, three Dutch miles. This is also a large City, fair and well-built, water runs through many of the Streets. The Stadthouse is a very handsom Structure. Here are two large Churches, the one called the old, the other the new Kirk. In the middle of the Quire of the new Kirk is a stately Monument erected to the Memory of Grave William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange (who was assassinated here) with this In∣scription:
D. O. M. Et Aeternae memoriae Guilielmi Nassovii, Supremi Arausiouensium Prinicipis, Patr. Patr. Qui Belgii fortunis suas posthabuit Et suorum. Validissimos exercitus aere plurimum privato Bis conscripsit, bis induxit; Ordinum auspiciis Hispaniae tyrannidem propulit: Verae religionis cultum, avitas patriae leges Revocavit, restituit: Ipsam deniq libertatem tantùm non assertam Mauritio Principi Paternae virtutis haeredi filio Stabiliendam reliquit; Herois vere filii, prudentis, invicti: Quem Philip. II. Hisp. R. ille Europae timor timuit, Non domuit, non terruit; Sed empto percussore fraude nefanda Sustulit. Foederat. Belg. Provinc. Perenne mentor, monum. Fec. In the Quire of the old Kirk is a Monument to Van Trump with this Inscription: Aeternae Memoriae. Qui Batavas, qui virtutem ac verum laborem amas, Lege ac luge. Batavoe gentis decus, virtutis bellicae fulmen hic jacet, qui vivus nunquam jacuit, & imperatorem stantem mori debere suo exemplo docuit: amor civium, ho∣stium terror, Oceani stupor, Martinus Harperti Trompius: Quo nomine plures continentur laudes
quàm hic lapis capit sanè angustior, Et cui Schola Oriens & Occidens, mare materia triumphorum, universus Orbis theatrum gloriae fuit: praedonum certa pernicies, commercii felix assertor, familiari∣tate utilis non vilis, postquam nautas ac milites du∣rum genus paterno & cum efficacia benigno rexit imperio, post L praelia quorum Dux fuit aut pars magna, post insignes supra fidem victorias, post sum∣mos infra meritum honores, tandem bello Anglico tanùm non victor, certè invictus, X. Aug. Anno Aerie Christianae MDVCLIII. Aet. LVI. vi∣vere ac vincere desiit. Foederati Belgii Patres Heroi optimè merito M. P. Over his Arms this written, i. e. Del∣phi. Vrbs Phoebi cineres jactat, sed currusPhoebi∣nimirum seu Solis. honores Ingreditur quoties egreditur{que} mari. One Jean vander Mere an Apothecary in this Town hath a Musaeum well stored with natural and arti∣ficial Rarities, which we viewed, and therein ob∣served among many bother things the following particulars. Zibetta or the Civet Cat. Dens Hip∣popotami, as he pretended, though it be a Question whether or no there be any such Animal as the Hip∣popotamus, Dentes Phocoe, Cornu Gazellae, of these we have since that seen in several Cabinets, Costa Sirenis dicta, Cornua hirci Bezoardici, Cornua & pe∣des Alcis; This Animal in English we call an Elk, I take it to be the same which in New England and Virginia they call a Moose, it is of the Deer-kind, the biggest and tallest of that genus. The Horns have no Brow-Antlets, but only a broad palm with several Snags upon it. I have seen one of these Horns at Mr. Holney's an Apothecary in Lewis that weighed 25 pounds: The Skin of an Elk stuft we saw in the Great Duke's Gallery at Florence. Cornu∣cervi
Americani. The Rattle-Snakes Skin. An Ele∣phants Tail, a very small thing considering the bigness of the Animal. Lacertus Indicus squamosus. Acûs piscis 4 species. A piece of a Rhinocerot's Skin. At the Anatomical Theatre we saw the whole Skin of a young Rhinocerot stuft. The Head of a Dol∣phin. A Giants tooth, si credere fas sit. The Head of a horned Hare. A Chamaeleon. A Soland-Goose out of Groenland. A Tatou or Armadillo. Os petro∣sum Balaenae. A young Whale. A Morse or Sea-horses Head. Guaina, a Fish from the Island Mau∣ritius. Petim-buaba or the Tobacco-pipe Fish. Or∣bis echinatus. Cancer Moluccanus ex novo Belgio, which some call the Sea-Spider. Corallium nigrum sive Antipathes. Spongia infundibuli specie. Mustela Afri∣cana. Indian Habits, an Indian Saddle, several sorts of Indian Bread, Indian Dice, several antient Idols. The Cup Prince William of Nassaw last drank out of. Penecillum Sinense. A Japan Letter writ∣ten to the Dutch Governour, odly painted. Passer Brasiliensis. Several sorts of Tominio's or humming Birds. A Feather-Garment from the Streights of Mageliane. Siliqua arboris sacciferae. Nidus avis ex Surat. Cancer Americanus. Many sorts of Indian Tobacco-Pipes from New Belgium. A Dart from Fretum Davis, wherewith the Natives kill Fish. A Locust of that sort that S. J. Baptist ate in the Wil∣derness. Onocrotali caput. Rostrum Rhinocerotis avis sive Corvi Indici cornuti of Bontius, which is worth twelve Florens at Amsterdam. A Cassawaries or Emeus Egg. A Pelecans Skin and Bill. Many sorts of Indian Weapons from Brasil. Eggs of an In∣dian Goose. Cor Veneris [a Shell like a Nerites.] Star-Stones from Compostella. Several Indian and exotick Fruits and Seeds. Putorius Africanus with Hairs spotted like the Quills of a Porcupine. In this City is a Chirurgical and Anatomical The∣ater, where Lectures are read every Wednesday, and
several Rarities preserved, as the Skin of a young Rhinocerot stuft, before-mentioned. Lacertus squa∣mosus of a different kind from what we had before seen. Manucodiatae seu avis Paradisi nova species. A flying Squirrel. The Sceleton of a Dolphin. The Tail of an Indian Peacock. The Head of an Ele∣phant. The Horns of a Hare. The Head of a Babi∣roussa; it hath two long Tushes on the lower Jaw, and on the upper two Horns that come out a little above the Teeth and turn up toward the Eyes. In the Entry below hangs a Groenland man in his Boat, of which we have seen in several places, particularly in the Trinity-House at Hull. This Town is noted for good earthen Ware, as Stone-Jugs, Pots, &c. of which great Plenty is made here. The Government is by a Praetor, two Burgomasters, seven Eschevins, and forty Senators, which they call here as in other Towns of Holland, the Vroetschap. May 28. we went by Boat in an hours time from Delf to the Hague,Hague. which though not walled about is rather a great City than a Village. It hath fair Streets, stately and beautiful Houses, especially about the Palace where the States sit. Near this Town is a large Grove full of pleasant Walks; where we first observed Monophyllum growing wild in great plenty. At Scheveling a Village by the Sea-Side, a mile from the Hague, we found a sort of Spar∣tum maritimum much taller and larger than our English kind. From the Hague we made an excursion to a Vil∣lage called Lausdun,Lausdun. distant about an hour and halfs riding, famous for the Burial of the Countess of Zealand and her 365 Children. The two Brass Ba∣sins in which they are reported to have been baptized hang up still in this Church, an over them this In∣scription, which contains the History.
En tibi monstrosum nimis & memorabile factum, Quale nec à mundi conditione datum. Margarita Hermanni Comitis. Hennenbergiae Vxor Quarti Florenti Comitis Hollandiae & Zelandiae Filia, Gulielmi Regis Romanorum ac postea Cae∣saris seu gubernatoris Imperii at{que} Aletheiae Comitis Hannoniae Soror; cujus Patruus Episcopus Traje∣ctensis, Avunuli autem filius Dux Brabantiae, & Comes Thuringiae, &c. Haec autem illustrissima Co∣mitissa, annos quadraginta circiter nata, ipso die Parasceues, nonam circiter horam, Anno 1276. 365 enixa est pueros, qui priùs à Guidone Suffra∣ganeo Trajectensi omnes in duabus ex aere pelvibus baptizali sunt, quorum masculi quotquot erant Jo∣annes, puellae autem omnes Elizabethae vocatae sunt, qui simul omnes cum matre uno eodemqùe die fatis concesserunt, atque in hoc Latsdunensi tem∣plo sepulti jacent. Quod quidem accidit ob pouper∣culam quandam foeminam, quae ex uno partu gemel∣los in ulnis gestabat pueros, quam rem ipsa Comi∣tissa admirata dicebat, id per unum virum fieri non posse, ipsamque contumeliose rejecit; unde hae paupercula animo perturbata atque perculsa, mox tantum prolium numerum ex uno partu ipsi impre∣cabatur, quot vel totius anni dies numerentur. Quod quidem praeter naturae cursunt obstupenda quadam ratione ita factum est, sicut in hac tabula in perpetuam hujus rei memoriam, ex vetustis tam manuscriptis quàm typis excusis Chronicis breviter positum & enarratum est. Deus ille ter maximus hac de re suspiciendus, honorandus ac laudibus ex∣tollendus in sempiterna secula. Amen.
May 31. we took places in one of the Passage Boats from the Hague to Leyden,Leyden. which brought us thither in three hours. These Boats are drawn to and fro by Horses. Leyden is next to Amsterdam I think the greatest City in Holland; and well built. In the great Church dedicated to S. Peter, are many Monuments set up to the Memory of persons emi∣nent for Learning, as Heurnius the famous Physician, Bontius, Tho. Erpenius, Rembertus Dodonaeus, Anto∣nius Thysius, Festus Hommius, Everardus Bronckhorst, and others, their Inscriptions you may find in Hege∣nitius his Itinerarium Hollandiae. In the French Church lie buried Joseph Scaliger, Carolus Clusius, Willebrordus Snellius and Joannes Polyander à Kerck∣hove. The Schools are Pile of Building of Brick, three Stories high, containing two Rooms on a Floor. The lower two are the Divinity and Phy∣sick Schools. The middle the Law and Philosophy Schools. The uppermost or Garrets are the Officina Elzeviriana. The following Series Lectionum (of which sort there is one yearly printed and affixed to the School-gates) will give an account, what were the Names of the Professors in each Faculty at the time of our being there, and what Books and at what hours they read. Rector & Senatus Academiae Lugduno-Bat. Lectori Salutem. CVmin constitutione Academiarum nihil magis spe∣ctetur, quam Lectionum series, quae in omni Facul∣tate hybernis & aestivis temporibus habentur: visum
nobis fuit, ut de his non nostris tantum, sed & exteris constaret, brevem indicem earum, & tabellam quasi dare: ut qui Academiae hujus nostrae celebritatem apud alios commemorari audiunt, quid in ea doceatur, intel∣ligant, priusquam ad eam accedant: aut potius ut ac∣cedant, cultum{que} animi in ea percipiant. Ordo LECTIONUM Aestivarum in Academia Batava Leidensi. Anno 1663. MANE. HORA OCTAVA. D. Joannes van Horne, Anat. & Chir. Profess. ord. in Institutionibus Medicinae praelegit Methodum Me∣dendi. HORA NONA. D. Joannes Cocceius, SS. Theol. Doct. & Pro∣fessor, Epistolam Pauli ad Philippenses succinctè ex∣plicat. D. Albertus Rusius, J. V. D. & Prof. Institutiones Juris interpretatur. D. Jacobus Golius, Prof. Matheseos, Element Astronomica exponit. HORA DECIMA. D. Abrahamus Heidanus, SS. Theol. Doct. & Pro∣fessor, locos communes profitetur. D. Daniel Colonius, J. V. D. & Professor, Acade∣miae à Secretis, Codicem interpretatur. D. Adolfus Vorstius, Med. Doct. & Professor prima∣rius, interpretatur Aphorismos Hippocratis. D. Henricus Bornius, Philosophiae Professor, Stu∣diorum Celsissimi Arausionensium Principis Ephorus; Ethicam profitetur.
D. David Stuartus, L. A. M. SS. Theol. Doctor & Philosophiae Professor Logices Praecepta & Quaestiones illustres Metaphysicas, alternis interpretarur. HORA UNDECIMA. D. Joh. Antonides vander Linden, Doct. & Pro∣fessor Medicinae Practicae primus, Morbos particulares cognoscendi & curandi methodum juxta Rationalis Me∣dicinoe praecepta tradit. D. Antonius Thysius, J. V. D. & Eloquentiae Pro∣fessor, Illustriss. & Praepot. D. D. Ordinum Holland. & West Fris. Historicus, & Bibliothecoe publicae proefectus, ad Pomponium Melam memorabilia totius terrarum orbis exponit. Diebus autem Mercurii & Saturni Jus publi∣cum interpretatur. A MERIDIE. HORA PRIMA. D. Jacobus Golius, in Arabicis Alcoranum inter∣pretatur, & ubi opus est refutat. D. Johannes Fredericus Gronovius, J. V. D. & Linguae Graecae Groecarumque Historiarum Professor, alteruis Herodianum & Historiam Romanam recitabit. HORA SECUNDA. D. Johannes Hoornbeek, SS. Theol. Doctor & Pro∣fessor, librum Mosis explicat, Leviticum. D. Adrianus Beeckerts à Thierien, J. V. D. & Professor, Acad. in praesens Rector, Pandectas inter∣pretatur. D. Franciscus de le Boe, Sylvius, Medicinoe pra∣ctic Professor, Affectus graviorts, frequentisve in Praxi Medieâ obvenienies tractat.
HORA TERTIA. D. Allardus Uchtmannus, Hebr. Ling. Professor, Pentateuchi capita selecta & difficiliora interpretabitur in Genesi, & Hebraeam Grammaticam. D. Georgius Hornius, Historiarum Prof. alterna∣tim C. Tacitum & Historiam Vniversalem interpre∣tatur. HORA QUARTA. D. Stephanus Marchant, J. V. D. & Prof. Institu∣tiones Juris interpretatur. D. Joannes de Raei, L. A. M. Medicinoe Doctor & Philosophiae Professor ordinar. profitetur Physicam. D. Adolfus Vorstius, Medicinae & Botanices Pro∣fessor primarius, Plantas in Horto Acad. demonstrat. D. Petrus à Schooten, Math. Prof. Belgicus, Forti∣ficationem exponit, deinde Perspectivam, tum communem, tum curiosam, ejusque in Cosmographia & Gnomonicis usum scientifice est explicaturus: Hora undecima loco solito. D. Johannes Antonides vander Linden, Med. pra∣cticae Professor primus, alternis trimestribus in publico Nosocomio Studiosos Medicinae singulis septimanis ali∣quoties in aegrotorum visitationibus, & morborum, qui sese offerunt, cognoscendi atque curandi ratione instruit, causasque mortis in cadaveribus dissectis ad oculatam, quantum fieri potest, fidem demonstrat. D. Franciscus de le Boe, Sylvius, Medicinae Practicae Professor in Nosocomio publico trimestribus alternis, die∣bus singulis, exceptis Dominicis, Studiosos Medicinae in Morborum dignotione per sua signa, cognitione per suas causas, & curatione per sua indicata exercet, atque sic ad praxin manuducit. Quicquid autem de partibus verè affectis & eausis affectuum latentibus capi sensibus
potert, id omne in demortuorum sectione rimatur & pate∣facit. Exercitia Anatomica publica fient mensibus Hybernis à D. Joanne van Horne, Anatomes & Chirurgiae Pro∣fessore Ordinario. D. Antonius Thysius, Eloquentiae Professor, Collegi∣um Oratorium publicum instituit. D. Henricus Bornius, Philosophiae Professor, Studi∣orum Celsissimi Arausionensium Principis Ephorus, in omni Philosophiae parte Collegia habet & Disputationes, ac in illustr. V. H. Grotii lib. de Jure Belli ac Pacis Ex∣ercitationes instituit. D. Johannes Fredericus Gronovius Graecae Linguae & Grcarum Historiarum Professor, Graecos & Latinos auctores antiquos, quos studiosi desiderabunt, privatis Collegiis interpretabitur. Ex Authoritate publica, diebus Mercurii & Saturni, Georgio Hornio Collegii Oratorii publici Praeside, in omnis generis & illustris argumenti Orationibus, ut & disputationibus Politicis habendis, publicè exercere se possunt, quotquot illis studlis operam suam addixerunt. D. David Stuartus Philosophiae Professor Collegia Ex∣plicatoria, Examinatoria & Disputatoria per totam Philosophiam auspicatur ter in anno, mense videl. Sept. Jan. April. eaque trimestri constanter absolvit; ut Aca∣demica juventus Philosophiae stadium saepius decurrat aispatio. Disputationes etiam publicas de illustribus materiis habet, cum praesto sunt Respondentes, singulis septimanis. Adjoining to the School-Yard is the Physick∣Garden, a Square of less than an Acre of Ground, but well stored with Plants, of which there have been at sundry times several Catalogues printed. Here are no Colleges for Students to live in, as in our Universities, (excepting two of the nature of Hospitals for the maintenance only of poor Scho∣lar) but the Students live in private Lodgings in
the Town, where they can best provide themselves. No Scholastical Habits as Gowns or Caps worn by any of the Students, but they walk up and down, come to the Schools, and perform their Exercises in Cloaks. The Professors when they read Lectures or preside at Disputations wear Gowns. No cap∣ping Professors or University-Officers in the publick Schools, but all the Students are covered both at Lectures and Disputations, not only in the Uni∣versity, but in all the Universities we have been at beyond the Seas. If an desire to be admitted of the University, they go to the Rector magnificus, who gives them each a Seal, and then they are freed from paying Exeise. The Students usually list themselves under some Professor, who reads to them in private, running through a whole Faculty, which they call Collegium instituere, and for this they give a Gratuity to the Professor. In conferring Degrees here is no Respect had to Standing. When any one intends to commence in any Faculty, he makes Theses upon the Subject he intends to an∣swer, which Theses are printed, and these he is obli∣ged to defend against all Opponents. The Respon∣dent hath his Seat under the Prosessors, as in our Schools: for the Opponents there is no particular Seat, but in any part of the Schools where they happen to be, they arise and there stand and oppose, first asking leave of the Professor that presides at the Act. Any one that pleases may oppose with the Professors leave. Liberalium Artium Magister and Doctor are the only Degrees conferred here. Each of the Professors have 200 or 300 l. per an. stipend allowed them by the States. The chief Trade of this City is Clothing. The Roofs of the Houses are more steep than ordi∣nary, made so on purpose to cast the Rain-Water into a Chanel or Trough, which conveys it into a large Cistern, where it is kept for the uses of the
House. Great Chanels of Water pass through ma∣ny of the Streets. On the Tower of the Stadt∣house stands a Watchman, who blows a Trumpet every hour, and if any Fire happens he sounds an Alarm. Below stands a Guard of thirty armed Soldiers, and at each Port ten. Every hour of the night a man goes about the Streets, and making a noise with a Rapper, tells with a loud voice what of the Clock it is. In the Anatomical Theater are preserved many Sceletons of Men and Beasts, Skins of Beasts, parts of exotic Animals, and other Ra∣rities. We noted a horned Beetle from the East-Indies; an Armadillo; petrified Mushromes; La∣pis ceraunias; Caput porci fluviatilis è Brasiliâ Ala Hirundinis marinae ex Oceano Orientali; Gammari Aethiopici; Thus fossile Moravicum; Capsula Chinensis cum capite animalis partim cervinam, partim porcinam naturam repraesentante ex insulâ Celebes Indiae Orien∣talis; Niduli crustacei ex cautibus regni Jehovae, quae à Chinensibus in deliciis habentur, these we saw after∣wards in Kircher's Musaeum at Rome and elsewhere; Folium Betle sive Siri, it resembles the great Satyrion Leaf: Of these Leaves and the Fruit of the Tree Arek mingled with a little Chalk is made the Indian Betle which is very stomachical and a great Regale at visits. Faba Aegyptia sive Bonamicia; Elephants Skulls; Guandur formicas vorans or the Ant-Bear, Myrenceter, bigger than an Otter, having a very long Snout, long crooked Claws, coarse bristly Hair, and a long brush Tail; Grallae sive Calopodia Norvegica; a Fish with two Feet; Capriscus Rondeletii, Tigris capta in Jacatra regno. In the publick Library are preserved the Manuscripts of Joseph Scaliger, and Libri Orientales quos Vir Cl. Jacobus Golius impensis publicis ex Oriente huc advexit. This Town is well walled and trencht about, encompassed with plea∣sant Walks of Lime-Trees. He that desires more particular Information concerning the University
and publick Buildings of the City, &c. may consult Meursius his Athenae Batavae and Hegenitius his Itine∣rarium Hollandiae. Before we left Leyden we made a by-Journey to Sevenhuys,Seven∣huys. a Village about four leagues distant, to see a remarkable Grove, where in time of year se∣veral sorts of Wild-Fowl build and breed. We ob∣served there in great numbers (1.) Scholfers i. e. Gracculi palmipedes, in England we call them Shags, they are very like to Cormorants, only less. We were much surprised to see them, being a whole-footed Bird, alight and build upon Trees. (2.) Le∣pelaers, called by Gesner Plateoe sive Pelecani, by Al∣drovandus Albardeolae, we may term them in Eng∣lish Spoon-Bills. (3.) Quacks or Ardeae cinereae minores, the Germans call this Bird the Night-raven, because it makes a noise in the Night, Nocte cla∣mat voce absonâ & tanquam vomiturientis. Gesner. (4.) Reyers or Herons. Each sort of Fowl hath its several Quarter. When the young are ripe, they who farm the Grove with an Iron Hook fastned to the end of a long Pole lay hold on the Bough on which the Nest is built, aud shake the young ones out, and sometimes Nest and all down to the ground. Besides the fore-mentioned Birds there build also in this Wood Ravens, Wood-Pigeons and Turtle-Doves. This place is rented for 3000 Gilders per Annum of the Baron of Pelemberg, who lives at Lovain, only for the Birds and Grass. By the way to this Place we observed in the Ditches Lysimachia lutea flore glo∣boso, and Arum sive Dracunculus aquaticus. All the Countrey about Sevenhuys towards Leyden is a flat or fenny Level, full of shallow Pools of Water; there we observed their manner of making Turf. They rake or fish up Mud from the bottom of the Water with a Net like a Hoop-Net fastned to the end of a Pole, and fill therewith a flat-bottomed Boat. Out of the Boat they throw this Mud with
a long Shovel or Scoop on an even piece of ground, making of it a Bed of an equal thickness so near as they can; there it lies to drain and dry: After a while they tread it with broad Boards fastned under their feet to make it close and smooth. When it is moderately dry, they cut the whole Bed with a kind of Spade into pieces of the bigness of a Brick. These they pile up in small conical Stacks or long Ranks, laying the Turves so, that a man may see through the Stacks, and the Wind blow through them, to be further dried. At last they house them in Barns that are thatcht, the sides not walled up close, but made of wooden Bars set at a little distance one from another. June 6. we took Boat for Haerlem,Haerlem. where we arrived at four hours end. This is a large, popu∣lous and pleasant City, strongly wall'd and entren∣ched. Water is brought through many of the Streets. Without the Walls towards Leyden are pleasant Groves. In the Summer-House in the Garden of the Princes Court here, is a Picture of Laurentius Costerus, in a furr'd Gown, holding the Letter A in his Hand, and this Inscription over it, M. S. Viro Consulari, Laurentio Costero Harle∣mensi alteri Cadmo, & Artis Typographicae circa Annum Domini MCCCCXXXX Inventori pri∣mo. His Statue and the Inscription on his House in the Market-place, mentioned by Hegenitius, we could not find, being as we were told, lately bought and removed thence. The Butchery of this Town is a handsome Building and covered with Lead, which we thought not unworthy the notice-taking, it having been the first publick Building that we saw so rooft since we left England. The Citizens here drive a great Trade of Weaving as well Silks, v. g. Damask, Velvet, Sattin, Taffaty, &c. as Linen
Cloth, Tiffany, Holland, &c. On the Sea-Coast near Haerlem and all along North-Holland, are great sandy Hills or Downs, which are a great defence to the Countrey hereabout against the Encroachments of the Sea. June 8. From Haerlem we boated to Amsterdam,Amster∣dam. two hours distant. About the mid-way we passed by two great Mears where we changed our Boat. At the Port of Amsterdam stand two armed Sol∣diers, one within, the other without. This is the greatest City in all the Low-Countries, and one of the richest and best traded Empories of the whole World. At our being there we judged it to be about the bigness of Venice, and lesser than one half of London; but they had then taken in and enclo∣sed with a substantial Wall and Trench, a great space of Ground, wherein they had designed and set out Streets, with intention to make their City for bigness also comparable with the best of Europe, London and Paris not excepted. I hear since, that this void Ground is filled with Rows of stately and beautiful Houses. The publick Buildings we espe∣cially took notice of were, (1.) The New Stadthouse lately erected, the old one having been burnt down to the Ground in three hours space (as we were told) June 7, 1651. but (as I find it in the Printed Description of Amsterdam) in July 1652. This is a magnificent Pile of Building, of a square figure, large and tall. The Outside or Facing of the Walls round about is of Free-Stone, the body of the Walls of Brick. It is reported, that the Foundati∣on of this Structure under ground cost as much as the Superficies above ground, viz. 100000 l. sterling. The Describer of Amsterdam saith, that it standeth upon 13659 great Masts or Piles driven into the ground. (2.) The Burse or Exchange, like our old Royal Exchange at London, but not a perfect Square, being longer than it is broad. The first Stone of
this Building wad laid May 29, 1608. and the first meeting of the Merchants there August 1, 1613. Merchants of all Nations resort thither, but of all Strangers the Jews are the most numerous, who fill one Walk. (3.) The Admiralty-House, a hand∣some Building with fair Rooms. (4.) The Maga∣zine, and (5.) the several Hospitals and Houses of Correction. In this City is an Athenaeum or Schola illustris, in which are maintain'd six Professors, who read publick Lectures in several Faculties in Summer-time. Here is also a publick Physick-Garden. The Jews are here allowed the free and open Exer∣cise of their Religious Worship. They live together in one Quarter of the City, and are said to be in number about 20000 souls. They are in better condition and richer than in most places where they are tolerated. They are for the most part of a dark or tawny Complexion and have black hair. Not only the Jewish but all other Religions, the Romish not excepted, are here tolerated. But if any beside those of the State-Religion build Churches, they are prohibited to erect Steeples, or make use of Bells for the assembling of the Pople. In the new Church is a handsome Monument to John van Galen, with this Inscription: Generosissimo Heroi Johanni à Galen Essensi Qui ob res fortiter & feliciter gestas, sexies uno anno, Dunkerckanorum Praedatorum navem captam, & à Barbaris opima spolia reportata, Ordinum Classi in Mari Mediterraneo Praefectus memorabili praelio ad Livornam, Deo auxiliante, Anglorum navibus captis, fugatis, incendio & submersione delctis, commercium cum dicti maris aceolis restituit, idlbus Martii, A▪ MDCLIII. El altero pede truncatus, nono
die post Victoriam, annos natus XLVIII obiit, ut in secula per gloriam viveret. Illustriss. & Praepotent. Foederati BelgiiOrdinum decreto, Nob. & Pot. Senatus Archithalass. Qui est Amstelodami M. H. P. In this Church is a stately Pulpit said to have cost 1000 l. sterling the building. We were told that in this City there were 24 Ministers pensioned by the States. The Government is by a Scout or Praetor,The Go∣vernment of Amster∣dam. four Burgomasters, nine and Scabins, and 36 Counsellors, or Senators, which they call the Vroetschap. The Scout is Stadtholder of Holland, ad hath the first place in the Bench of Scabins. He is chosen to this Office by the Burgomasters with the consent and approbation of the Vroetschap for three years: though he may continue in Office six or more, if they see good. He must have been a Freeman at least seven years fore he be chosen. His Office is with the Burgomasters and Scabins to make Laws and Constitutions: to ap∣prehend and imprison all Malefactors within the Li∣berties of the City. He, as chief Judge in civil as well as criminal Causes, hears the Pleadings, and with consent of the Burgomasters Scabins pronounces Sentence, condemning the guilty to Death, if the Cause require, and taking care that the Sentence be executed. In other Cities the Praetor hath to do only in criminal Causes, being no more than the Commonwealths Solicitor or publick Accuser and Prosecutor of Malefactors. The number of Burgomasters is twelve, whereof four are regent yearly. They must not be under forty years of age. Every year by the major Vote of all the Burgomasters that have ever been Scabins, three out of the twelve are chosen to be Regents,
which three newly elect take to themselves a fourth out of the three chosen the year before, who gives the three new ones their Oaths, and hath the Pre∣sidency the three first Moneths. Out of the other eight are other Officers chosen, as Treasurers, Ma∣sters of Hospitals; one for the Convention of the States at the Hague; one for the Council of the Ad∣miralty in Amsterdam, &c. The Burgomasters Office is to govern the City, to arbitrate differences be∣tween man and man, to take care of the Streets, Walls, Houses and publick Buildings, &c. When one of the twelve dies, another is chosen into his room by the Vroetschap. As for the Scabins, the Vroetschap chuse fourteen persons, out of which the Burgomasters take seven; but so that none of them be near of kin to the Scout or the Regent Burgoma∣sters. To these seven the new and old Burgomasters with the new chosen Scabins do by most voices add two out of the seven that were chosen the last year; the which two for that year are the first and second Presidents. The Scabins are Judges in all Causes civil and criminal. The Council of 36 or Vroeschap continue in place during Life, and when one dies the rest chuse an∣other into his room, but none under 25 years of age. This Council chuses the fourteen Scabins, and is assembled upon important occasions by the Burgomasters for their Advice and Direction in the weighty Affairs and Concerns of the City. The Supreme Power seems chiefly to rest in these. Formerly none was capable of being Burgomaster except his Father had been a Freeman a year and six weeks before he was born; but of late they have made a Constitution, that he who will pay five hundred Gilders, may be made free of the City, and capable of being Burgomaster after seven years. Any one may be made a Freeman for fifty
Gilders, but then he shall never be capable of being chosen Burgomaster. The Describer of Amsterdam saith that there were in that City 18 years ago 54000 Houses, whereas in Paris there were then but 46000, which is a thing by no means to be credited. The Militia of Amsterdam consists of 54 Compa∣nies divided into five Regiments, each containing eleven Companies, and every Company consisting of 150 men, so that the whole amounts to 8250. Two Companies watch every night for the guard of the City. June 16. we took Boat for Vtrecht,Vtrecht. where we arrived at six hours end. This is a great Town and the head of a Province, environed with a thick and high Wall and a deep Trench. The Streets and Buildings far short of the Elegancy, Beauty and Cleanliness of those in Holland; much like the Houses and Streets of our English Towns. Water runs through many of the Streets in deep Chanels. The Domo or Cathedral Church hath a great tall Tower, ascended by 460 Steps, from whence we had a fair Prospect of the City and Countrey round about. Here is an University erected by the States of the United Provinces in the year 1636. Who were the Professors in each Faculty at the time of our being here, the following Series Lectionum will acquaint the Reader.
Series Lectionum in Acad. Ultrajectina, Anno Christi M.DC.LXIII. Priore Se∣mestri. MANE, HORA OCTAVA. D. Antonius Matthaeus, J. V. D. & Professor, die∣bus Lunae & Martis Institutiones, Jovis autem & Veneris Selectiores Pandectarum titulos interpretabitur. D. Regnerus à Mansvelt, Philosophiae Doctor, Logices & Metaphysices Professor, diebus Lunae & Martis Logicm cum quaestionibus Metaphysicis; Jovis vero & Veneris, Naturalem Theologiam docebit. HORA NONA. D. Cyprianus Regnerus ab Oosterga, J. V. D. & Professor, Codicem Academicâ & Forensi explicatione explanabit. D. Henricus Regius, Eques Auratus & Medicinae Professor Primarius, suos Medicinoe Medicationumque libros interpretabitur; & dibus Veneris Stirpium de∣monstrationes in Horto Publico instituet. D. Daniel Berckringer, L. A. M. & Philosophiae practicoe atque Eloquentioe Professor, diebus Lunae & Martis Institutiones suas Ethicas, Jovis verò & Ve∣neris Politicas, cursoriè interpretabitur. HORA DECIMA. D. Gisbertus Voctius, SS. Theologiae Doctor &
Professor, diebus Jovis & Veneris perget in explica∣tione Politicae Ecclesiasticoe; diebus verò Lunae & Martis, in Explicatione prioris partis Locorum Com∣munium. D. Isbrandus de Diemerbroeck, Med. Doct. ac Medicinae Practieae & Anatomes Professor, diebus Lunae & Veneris in Academia explicabit Historias morborum capitis, quibus absolutis, perget ad Historias morborum thoracis, diebus Martis & Jovis in Nosocomio decum∣bentes aegrotos inviset, eorumque examen & medicatio∣nem docebit, ac praxeos specimina exhibebit. Demon∣strationes vero anatomicas in theatro publico instituet, quum subjecti humani copia dabitur. HORA UNDECIMA. D. Andreas Essenius, S. Theologiae ac Philosophiae Doctor, illius Professor, diebus, Lunae, Martis, & Jovis Controversias tractabit ad selecta loca V. T. Veneris quo{que} Historiam Ecclesiasticam saeculi Christiani duodecimi, enarrabit. D Johannes Georgius Graevius, Philosophiae Doctor, Historiarum & Eloquentiae Professor, diebus Lunae, Mar∣tis & Jovis explicabit C. Taciti Annales, die verò Veneris Ciceronis orationem pro Milone. A MERIDIE, HORA PRIMA. D. Paulus Voet, J. V. D. & Professor, Juris Pan∣dectas continuatâ serie, interpretabitur. D. Johannes Leusden, L. A. M. & Linguae Sanctae Professor, diebus Lunoe, Martis & Jovis explicabit Psalmos Hebraioos; diebus verò Veneris interpretabitur Rabbinum aliquem, vel selectos & difficiliores 564 versus Psalterii, in quibus omnes ejus voces & pleraeque radices V. T. continentur. Post explicationem textualem semper addet quaestiones Philologicas, concernontes Phi∣ologiam
Hebraicam, Controversias & Ritus Judaeorum & quidem eo ordine, quo eoe post invicem describuntur in Spicilegio Philologico. HORA SECUNDA. D. Franciscus Burmannus, SS. Theologiae Doctor & Professor, diebus Lunae & Martis Euangelistam Matthaeum cum necessariis quoestionibus & observationio∣bus, quâ poteri brevitate, enarrabit; diebus verò Jovis & Veneris Oeconomiam salutis humanae sub Foedere Vet. ac Novo tractabit. D. Johannes de Bruyn, L. A. M. Physicae & Ma∣theseos Professor, & p. t. Academiae Rector, diebus Lunae & Martis in Pbysicis lectionibus perget; Jovis verò & Veneris continuabit explicationem fundamento∣rum Mechanicorum. De Heer Hugo Ruys, sal Woensdaeghs en Sater∣daeghs van Elftot Twaelf uyren inde Fortificatie continueren. The Garrison consisted of eight Companies of Soldiers, whereof one was English. The Govern∣ment is by an upper and under Scout, and four Bur∣gomasters, whereof two new chosen yearly. June 18. we went by Boat to Vianen,Vianen. passing over a Branch of the River Rhene called the Lech. This is a privileged Town, wall'd and trench'd about, subject to the Lord of Brederode. Here we noted an Engine or wheel for the weaving of Inkle and Tape, which moves many Shuttles at once. The same day we travelled on to Leerdam,Leerdam three hours distant from Vianen, a small inconsiderable Town, belonging to the Prince of Orange. June 19. we passed through AsperenAsperen. a small wall'd Town, and further on ferried over the River
Wale (Vahalis in Latine) to a pretty pleasant wall'd Town called Bommel standing in an Island.Bommel. Here lay in Garrison four Companies of Soldiers, whereof one of Scotchmen. Not far from hence we ferried over the Mose, and passed by a strong Fort nigh the Water called Creve∣coeur,Creve∣coeur. and not much further another called Engelen, and after four hours came to the Bosch,The Bosch. Hertogen∣bosch the Dutch call it, and the French Bois le duc, i. e. Sylva Ducis. Before we entred the Town, we passed through a Water and over two Draw Brid∣ges. This Place is situate on a Hill in the midst of a low fenny Level of a great extent, the greatest part whereof is (at least now was) covered with Water, so that the only Avenues to the Town are upon artificial Causways. It is encompassed with a strong Wall and a deep Trench. At one end stands a Citadel strongly fortified, which commands the Town. By reason of its Situation and Fortifi∣cations, one would judge this Place impregnable, yet hath it been taken in the late Wars. At our being there were kept in Garrison for the Defence of this important Strength 21 Companies of Foot and four Troops of Horse. In the Quire of S. Johns Church are painted the Arms of many of the Knights of the Golden Fleece and over the upper Stalls or Seats this written in French, Le treshaut & tres puis∣sant Philip, dit le bon, &c. which because it con∣tains the History of the Authors first Institution and Model of this Order, I thought fit to translate into English, and here set down. The most High and Mighty prince Philip called the Good, by the Grace of God Duke of Burgundy, Lorain and Bra∣bant, in the year 1429. in the City of Bruges, did in imitation of Gedeon create and institute to the Honour of God and the virgin Mary, and for the sake of S. Andrew Protector and Patron of Burgundy, a Company or Society of Honourable
Knights, into which might be received Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Marquesses and other Personages, as well of his own Subjects as of forein Countries, provided they were of Noble bloud and good fame: and called these great Persons, Knights of the Golden Fleece, to whom he gave for perpetual Chief, him that should be lawful Duke of Burgundy, and have the Seigneury or Lordship of the Low-Countries; li∣miting their number to 24, comprehending also the Chief. And for occurrences and use of the Order he created four Honourable Officers, viz. A Chan∣cellor, a Treasurer, a Secretary, and a King of Arms. And for the Establishment and well regu∣lating of this Order he made notable Statutes and Ordinances. The Houses of this Town are of a different make from those of Holland, the outside being covered with Boards, like those of Eden∣burgh in Scotland. We observed great store of wild Fowl to frequent the Waters hereabout; and found growing wild Herniaria hirsuta on the sandy and gravelly Banks. June 20. We took a Wagon drawn by three Horses abreast, as is usual in these Countries, which in six hours time brought us to Eindhoven,Eindho∣ven. a small wall'd Town; and thence in four hours more to Haumont.Hau∣mont. a pitiful walled Town belonging to the Bishop of Liege. June 21. Three hours Riding brought us to another little wall'd Town called Bry;Bry. the Houses whereof were old and decaying. Be∣tween Haumont and this place, we rode over Heaths of great extent, called the Champagne. We then left the level Countrey and ascended some Hills, from whence we had a pleasant Prospect of the Mose and Maestricht,Mae∣stricht. where we arrived this Evening, though it be accounted seven hours distant from Bry. This City is fortified with good Outworks, besides a strong Wall and Trench, garrisoned with 31 Companies of Foot, and six Troops of Horse,
it being a great Town and a Frontier. Half of the Magistrates are Protestants and half of the Romish Religion. The greater part of the Citizens Ro∣manists. There are in Town near 20 Cloisters or Monasteries of both Sexes; and they have the free and publick Exercise of their Religious Worship. For the Protestants there are three Dutch Churches, and one English and French, which those Nations use alternately. The old Buildings of his City are like those of the Bosch; but since the States have been Masters of it, it is become a rich and thriving place, and they are building fair new brickt Houses space. They were also setting up a large Stone Stadthouse, of a square Figure, resembling that at Amesterdam. The River Meuse divides the City into two parts, which are joined together by a broad stone-Bridge of nine Arches. The lesser part over the Water is called, Wick. The Garrison-Soldiers are all Protestants. The Common People of Holland,The Man∣ners and particular Customs of the Low-Dutch. especially Inn∣keepers, Wagoners (Foremen they call them) Boat∣men and Porters are surly and uncivil. The Wa∣goners bait themselves and their Horses four or five times in a days Journey. Generally the Dutch men and women are almost always eating as they travel, whether it be by Boat, Coach or Wagon. The men are for the most part big-boned are gross-bodied. The first Dish at Ordinaries and Entertainments is usually a Salade, Sla they call it, of which they eat abundance in Holland. Their Meat they commonly stew and make Hotchpots of it. Puddings neither here nor in any place we have travelled beyond Sea do they eat any, either not knowing the goodness of the Dish, or not having the Skill to make them: Puddings and Brawm are Dishes proper to England. Boil'd Spinage minc'd and buttered (sometimes also with Currans added) is a great Dish all over these Countreys. The Common People feed much upon
Cabiliau (that is Cod-fish) and pickled Herrings, which they know how to cure or prepare better than we do in England. You shall seldome fail of hung Beef in any Inn you come into, which they cut into thin slices and eat with Bread and Butter, laying the slices upon the Butter. They have four or five sorts of Cheese, three they usually bring forth and set before you. (1.) Those great round Cheeses, coloured red on the outside, commonly in England called Holland-Cheeses. (2.) Cummin-seed Cheese. (3.) Green Cheese, said to be so coloured with the juice of Sheeps Dung. This they scrape upon Bread buttered, and so eat. (4.) Sometimes Angelot's. (5.) Cheese like to our common Countrey Cheese. Milk is the cheapest of all Belly-Provisions. Their strong Beer, (thick Beer they call it, and well they may) is sold for three Stivers the Quart, which is more than three pence English. All manner of Vi∣ctuals both Meat and Drink are very dear, not for the Scarcity of such Commodities, but partly by reason of the great Excise and Impost wherewith they are charged, partly by reason of the abundance of Money that is stirring here. By the way we may note, that the dearness of this sort of Provisions is an argument of the Riches of a Town or Coun∣trey, these things being always cheapest in the poor∣est places. Land is also here sold at 30 or 40 years Purchase, and yet both Houses and Land set at very high annual Rents: So that were not the poor Workmen and Labourers well paid for their pains, they could not possibly live. Their Beds are for the most part like Cabbins, inconveniently short and narrow, and yet such as they are, you pay in some places ten Stivers a night the man for them, and in most six. There is no way for a Stranger to deal with Inn-keepers, Wagoners, Porters and Boat∣men, but by bargaining with them before-hand. Their Houses in Holland are kept clean with extra∣ordinary
ordinary niceness; and the Entrance before the Door curiously paved with Stone. All things both within and without, Floor, Posts, Walls, Glass, Houshold-stuff marvellously clean, bright, and hand∣somly kept: nay some are so extraordinarily cu∣rious as to take down the very Tiles of their Pent∣houses and cleanse them. Yet about the preparing and dressing of their Victuals our English Houswives are, I think, more cleanly and curious than they. So that no wonder Englishmen were formerly noted for excessive eating, they having greater temptation to eat, both from the goodness of their Meat, and the curiosity of the dressing it, than other nations. In the principal Churches of Holland are Organs, which usually play for some time after the Sermon is done. The Collections for the Poor are made in Ser∣mon-time, a Purse with a Bell hanging at the bottom of it and fastned to the end of a Pole being by the Collector reach'd to every one. The Psalm to be sung is marked upon Slates, which are hung up and down the Churches. The People of these Countreys buy and sell small Commodities, and travel by Wagon or Boat upon the Lords Days. Their travelling Wagons are some covered and some open: few travel on Horse∣back. No Beggars to be seen in all Holland, care being taken to set on work all that are able, and Provision made for the aged and impotent. There are in this one Province of Holland three or four and twenty walled Towns and Cities, and six of these at least, beside Amsterdam, bigger than any we have in England except London; and Amsterdam by this time well approaches to the Bigness of London. To these I shall add some Observations concern∣ing the Low-Countries, made by my much honoured Friend Francis Barnham Esq deceased, at his being there in the Retinue of my Lord Ambassadour Holles.
In all the Cities and Towns of Note throughout the Vnited Netherlands there is a continual Watch kept night and day upon the highest Steeple, for the more ready and speedy discovery of Fires, or other things of a surprising nature, which we have already noted in our Description of the City of Leyden. All Differences arising between Skippers and Fore∣men, &c. are decided by casting the Die: this we often observed them to do, when several of them strove who should carry us. The Rain that falls upon the Houses is by Pipes and Gutters conveyed into a Cistern, and there reserved for the uses of the House, as at Venice in Italy. This particular we have also before taken notice of in the Description of Leyden. The generality of the Dutch from the better sort to the meanest, do much dread their Superiours: I think the cause is, because upon Complaint made, there is speedy care taken to do Justice. The generality of the People of all sorts are strange∣ly given to the humour of running up and down to see any new or strange thing. The Common sort have any thing that is rich or gay in great admira∣tion, insomuch that when my Lord Holles made his Entry into Breda, the Coronets that were on the top of his Coach were talkt of with wonder all the Countrey over. The People universally are great lovers of Mo∣ney, very covetous and greedy of Gain, yet in their Bargains punctual and just. The Knowledge of most of them extends no further than the Arts of getting Money, and an ability to talk of State-Affairs, wherein you shall meet with mean persons very well seen: I think the Reason may be, because the lowest of them is not without hopes of coming to be a Burger, and at last one of the States.
I cannot allow the Low-Dutch to be of a valiant and couragious temper generally, notwithstanding they fight so well at Sea; For the Constitution of their Bodies which is Phlegmatic, and the tempe∣rature of the Air which is moist, and their Diet which is gross and foggy, forbid it. Yet are there few or none in these Countries that die of Consumptions. There is Liberty of all Religions and Professions, but abundance of Spies to watch them, that they disturb not the publick Peace. I think it harder to be a Traitor under the Go∣vernment of Holland than under any other Kingdom or State, because they seem to be more watchful and suspicious. The People say and print what they please, and call it Liberty. The better, much more the worse, sort have little sense of Honour, governing themselves more by the Rules of Profit and Advantage, than of Ge∣nerosity and Decorum. Murder is not prosecuted with so much diligence and concern as Felony or Theft. The times of the day for Marriages and Burials are limited, but with difference is respect of places; for at Breda they must bury their dead before 12 of the clock, and at Amsterdam not till the After∣noon. When any famous Deed or Exploit is done by any of their Nation, it is represented to the People with all insinuating circumstances, to make them proud of the Honour of being Subjects in a State where such mighty deeds are done. Besides, for encouragement there is for the most part a Monu∣ment or Statue erected to the memory of them who do great things. Their Solemnizations of Victoirs, as they call them, seems to me of great use, like Triumphs
among the Romans. For those Bonfires and other expressions of Joy do make glad the People, and give them better thoughts of their Governours, and dis∣pose them to their service. In the service of God the People seem more de∣lighted and concerned in that part of Worship which consists in singing than any other, and they provide more for it. For in their Churches there are few other Books among them than Psalters bound up with the Church-Catechism. The common sort of Women (not to say all) seem more fond of and delighted with lascivious and obscene Talk than either the English or the French. The Women are said not much to regard Chastity while unmarried, but when once married none more chast and true to their Husbands. The Women even of the better sort do upon little Acquaintance easily admit saluting with a Kiss: and it is familiarly used among themselves either in Frolicks or upon Departures and Returns though never so short. The Women are in a sense Privy-Counsellors to their Husbands for they are for the most part privy to all their Actions: and the Men seldom do any thing without their Advice and Consent. Yet doth not this Indulgence enamour them of their own Nation; for it is said, that if a Woman can get an English Husband, she will never marry a Dutch. The Dutch when they see their Friends at the point of Death, and past all hope of Recovery, out of Pity and Tenderness desirous to rid them out of their Pain, will sometimes hasten their end by withdrawing the Pillow or the like. Thus far Mr. Barnham. In most of the Cities and Towns in the Nether∣lands there are a great number of chiming little
Bells which seldom rest, but were to us trouble∣some with their frequent Jangling. But for Rings of great Bells all Europe cannot shew so many as England alone, so that it might well be called the Ringing Island. A multitude of Storks frequent these Countries, building upon their Chimnies in the Towns and Cities as well as Villages; but not in the Territories of Common-wealths only (as some imagine) but of Kings and Princes also, as at Lovain and elsewhere in the King of Spain's Countrey, and in Germany in several Princes Dominions. June 22. we travelled from Maestricht to Liege four Leagues distant. In the side of a Hill we a∣scended at some distance from Maestricht, we saw an arched Passage into a Vault (as we were inform∣ed) some two hours in length. A good way within under ground they dig Stone which here they bring out in Carts. It being a wet season we made no stay to go into this Vault, therefore I have added here the Description of it out of the Philosophical Transactions Numb. 67. pag. 2051. There is an excellent Quarry within Cannon-shot of Maestricht upon the very brink of the River Mase, lying in a Hill, where there are about 25 Fathoms of Rock and Earth over head; the length of the Hill being of some miles extending along the River towards Liege, situate on the same River; and towards Maestricht having in breadth some half or quarter of a mile, but somewhat more further off. This Quarry hath one Entry towards the Ri∣ver, where Carts can pass with great case, and un∣load the Stones upon the brink of the River, the Quarry within lying parallel to the Horizon or Level, (which is a great advantage) and elevated but very little above the River. This same Quarry which hath well nigh undermined the whole Hill, affords one of the most surprising Prospects, when
well lighted with many Torches, that one can ima∣gine. For there are thousands of square Pillars in large level Walks, and those almost every where above twenty, and in some places many more foot high, and all wrought with so much neatness and regularity, that one would think it had been made rather with curious Workmanship for an under∣ground Palace, than that those Pillars and Galle∣ries were made by Quarriers that did it only for getting Stone to build above ground. This Quarry serveth the People that live thereabouts for a kind of impregnable Retreat when Armies march that way. For being acquainted with all the ways in it, they carry into it whatsoever they would have safe, as well their Horse and Cattel as their moveable Fur∣niture, till the danger be over, there being so vast a deal of room, that 40000 people may shelter themselves in it. And he that should attempt to seek them out in this vast Wilderness of Walks and Pillars, without an expert Guide, would not only be in hazard of losing his way, but of being knockt on the head at the corner of every Pillar, where People lurking in the dark with their Carbines and Fowling-Pieces would have fair opportunity of shooting at them by the Light of their own Tor∣ches, &c. vide. Further upon the Downs we saw three or four more of these Passages, and from hence had again a very pleasant Prospect of Maestricht and the Coun∣trey about the River Mose. Liege or Luyck is a large City,Liege. but not comparable to the Holland Towns for Beauty or Riches; built for the most part of Timber; some of the Houses being covered with boards after the Scotch fashion, and some with Slate [the Walls I mean,] the rest uncovered and of Clay. The Streets are neither broad not clean-kept. The River Mose here divides itself, and runs through the Town in two or three
Branches, over which are several Bridges. Here is a convenient Key, and upon the River we ob∣served Boats of an extraordinary length, the like whereto we had before seen at Vtrecht and Dort. This City is pleasantly situate and environed almost round with Hills. On the Brow of a Hill which hangs over it, stands a Fort or Castle which com∣mands it. Upon the sides of these Hills are abun∣dance of Orchards and Cherry-Gardens: On those near the City we first saw Vineyards; though there are near Lovain, which we saw not. All Belly-Provisions are cheap here. A great many of Poor and Beggars you meet with at every corner, but they are not importunate if denied. The Coun∣trey People are civil, well-manner'd and kind to Strangers. The Women are of a dusky Com∣plexion, and generally not so handsom as the Hol∣landers. They do a great deal of Drudgery, the poorer sort carrying Coals and other Burthens on their backs in Baskets of a Conical Figure, to the end or bottom of which they apply a stiff Baston, and so rest themselves without setting down their Burthens. Near this City are gotten Coals in great plenty, but they lie very deep under ground; some of us went down into a Pit 150 yards deep. The Coal are like our Stone-Coal. The arts they use to get Air enough to serve them in the bottom of these Delfs see in the Philosoph. Transact. At Luyck they use also for Fewel a sort of round Balls made of Clay mixed with a certain proportion of Coal, beaten small, tempered together, and dri∣ed in the Sun, which they call Hotshots. These we never saw used any where but here, though the making of them is described in many Books. They serve to slake the Heat of the Fire, and keep the Coals from burning out too fast. Here and at Na∣mur (as we were told) are made Stone-Pots and Jugs. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to S. Lam∣bert,
to which belong 60 Canonici majores, who must be all of Noble Blood, except some few Scho∣lars which they may chuse in. By these the Bishop and Prince of Liege is elected. Besides these there are twelve Canonici mediocres and twelve minores sive parvae mensae. On weighty occasions the Prince as∣sembles the States of the Countrey for their Advice. The Clergy, Gentry and Commons send their several Deputies to these Conventions. No Law can be made nor any great Tax imposed without their consents. In this City are an incredible number of Monasteries or Religious Houses as they call them. In the Garden of the English Jesuites Col∣lege we saw many ingenious Dials invented by Fran∣ciscus Linus. In the Church of the Gulielmites Cloi∣ster without the Walls we saw Sir John Mondeville's Tomb-Stone. In the Vestry are kept his Saddle, Spurs and Bridle-bit, as also two great Knives, which the Monks, who shew'd us these things, told us were given him by the Emperor of the Turks, being such as himself used. Upon his Tomb-Stone was this Inscription: HIC JACE VIR NOBILIS DNS JOES DE MANDEVLLE AL' DICTUS AD BAR∣BAM MILES DNS DE CAPDI NATUS DE ANGLIA, MEDICINE PROFESSOR, DE∣VOTISSIMUS ORATOR ET BONORUM LARGISSIMUS PAUPERIBUS EROGATOR, QUI TOTO QUASI ORBE LUSTRATO, LEODII DIEM VITE SUE CLAUSIT EX∣TREMUM ANNO DNI Mo CCCo LXXIo MENSIS NOVEMBRIS DIE XVII. Thereon was also engraven the Figure of an armed man, treading on a Lion, having a forked
Beard, his Hand lift up to his Head in a blessing Posture, and these words going out of his Mouth, VOS KI PASEIS SOR MI POVR L' AMOVR DEIX PROIES POR MI. Which is old French, signifying You that pass over me for the love of God pray for me. June 26.Spaw. we travelled hilly and stony way from Liege to the Spaw, seven hours distant. We had in prospect on the left hand as we rode, Franchimont Castle, and soon after came to the view of a deep Valley, in the bottom of which lay the Spaw. It is a pleasant little walled Town, though called a Village, indifferently well built for a place so re∣mote from Commerce. The Inhabitants reap no small benefit from the frequency of Strangers, which in the Summer-time repair thither in great numbers to drink the Medicinal Waters. There is one Well called Pouhont, within the Town, in the Market-place, which tasts strong of Vitriol, the Virtues whereof are contained in this Distich written over it Obstructum reserat, durum terit, humida siccat, Debile fortificat, si tamen arte bibis. The other Wells are at a good dnce from the Town. (1.) Sauvenir, to the Eastward, about an hours walk remote, (2.) Geronster, as far to the Southward, and (3.) Tonnelet, about the mid-way between Pouhont and Sauvenir. These Waters seem∣ed to me more brisk and sprightly, and better sated with Mineral Juices than any I have tasted in Eng∣land, and doubtless are more nimble and vigorous in their Operations. But of their several Natures and Virtues Henricus ab Heers hath written a parti∣cular Treatise, entitled Spadacrene, to which I re∣fer the Reader that is desirous to know more of them. In the Woods and upon the Rocks near this Town we found many rare Plants, which we had
not before met with, I mean spontaneously grow∣ing in their natural places, viz. Asclepias flore albo, Polygonatum minus, Cyanus major, Rapunculus spicatus, Campanula persicifolia, Sideritis flore pallido similis Ladano segetum, &c. June 28. From the Spaw we travelled to Aken,Lim∣bourg. passing through Limbourg three hours distant, a Town considerable for its Strength, being situate on the side of a Hill, and encompassed with a strong Wall and Trench; not for its Bigness, it consisting only of one short broad Street, nor for its Beauty, the Buildings being all of Wood. The Garrison at our being there was about 300 Soldiers. Before we entred the Town we were met upon the way by some of these Soldiers, who very insolently stopt our Horses, demanding Money of us, which we were forced to give according to their discretion, before they would let us pass, which though it were no considerable Sum, yet was more than we were willing should be violently extorted from us. When we were past the Town, we met also with many of these Straglers, by whom (it was told us) many Rob∣beries are committed hereabout. Aken,Aken. called by the French Aix la Chappelle, to distinguish it, I suppose, from Aix in Provence, is a free City of the Empire, very considerable for its Strength and Greatness, being encompassed with a double Wall, and having in it 30 Churches. About now some 15 years ago here happened a lamentable Fire which almost ruined the Town, burning down to the ground 4500 Houses, from which Calamity it was not half recovered at the time of our being there. In the great Piazza or Market-place is a handsom Fountain, with this Inscription about the edges of the Basin: Hîc aquis per Granum Princi∣pem quendam Romanum, Neronis & Agrippae fratrem inventis, calidorum fontium thermae à principio constru∣ctae, postea verò per D. Carolum Magnum Imp. constituto
ut locus hic sit caput & regni sedes trans Alpes, renovatae sunt: quibus thermis hîc gelidus fons influxit olint, quem nunc demum hoc aeneo vase illustravit S. P. Q. Aquisgranensis, Anno Domini 1620. The Iron Crown wherewith the Emperor is crown'd, and the Sword of Charlemaigne, which he holds when he is crown'd; and is obliged to wear by his side three days toge∣ther, and wherewith he creates Noblemen; as also the Gospels, said to be written by the Evangelists own hands, are here kept, and every Coronation sent to Frankfurt. The Chair wherein the Empe∣ror sits when he is crown'd here, hath its Sides of Ivory, and its Bottom as they fondly imagine of the Wood of Noah's Ark. This City (according to the best information we could get there,) is governed by a Maior, two Con∣suls or Burgomasters, fourteen Scabins and about 120 Senators or Counsellors. The Maior is Presi∣dent of the Scabins and executes their Sentences; he is put in by the Duke of Gulick and continues du∣ring Life, modò bene se gesserit. The Consuls are chosen by the Suffrage of the several Companies of the City, and continue two years modò bene se gesse∣rint; every year there is one chosen. One that is no Senator may be chosen Consul or Burgomaster, and yet these have the chief power. The Scabins are Judges and continue during Life; when one of them dies, the rest chuse another in his place. The Senators are chosen by the several Companies, of which there are about fourteen or fifteen in this City. Every Company chuses eight. Half the Se∣nate are yearly chosen. The Territory of this City is large, containing about 200 Villages, and is for the most part encompassed with Mountains. We saw here the manner of making Brass of Copper, by mingling and melting therewith Lapis Calami∣naris, which changes the colour thereof from red to yellow, and increaseth the weight by thirty in
the Hundred. But that for which this Place is most remarkable, and from which it took its Name, are the Hot Baths, of which there are several with∣in the Walls and others without, at Borcet a great Village less than an English mile distant. The Waters of Borcet at the Sources where they issue out of the Earth are much hotter than those of the Bath in England, and the Springs more plenti∣ful. The People there told us, and I can easily believe them, that they will serve to boil Eggs in. Their Tast seemed to us saltish. They are used outwardly for Bathing, and taken inwardly for many Diseases. As we walked to Borcet we could not but take notice of a Pool whose Wa∣ters were almost tepid by reason of a little Stream from the Hot Baths running through it, wherein we were assured were bred and fed good store of Fish, which are put into cold Water for a moneth or two before they eat them. But of the Nature, Kinds, Ingredients and Uses of the several hot Wa∣ters, as well those of the City, as of Borcet, the following abstract of an Epistolary Discourse con∣cerning them written in French, and published by Francis Bloudel M. D. will give the Reader more particular Information.
Observations concerning the Baths of Aken, collected out of an Epistolary Discourse Published in French by Francis Blondel, M. D. NOt to trouble the Reader with the various Opi∣nions of Antient and Modern Philosophers concerning the Cause of the actual Heat of natural Baths, our Authors accompt thereof in reference to these of Aken is in brief as follows. These Waters (saith he) passing through a certain argillaceous Earth, pregnant with a kind of nitrous Salt, almost of the same tast with the Waters of the Baths (which is to be found in good quantity in the lands about this City) charge themselves there∣with, and so become a menstruum capable of dissol∣ving such Minerals and Metals as are conteined in the Veins of the Earth through which they run. This Solution he conceives is made by piercing and corroding the Minerals after the same manner as Spirit of Nitre and other Aquae Stygiae are wont to do, which usually causes a great Ebullition and Heat. So then the actual Heat of these Springs proceeds from the Mixture and Encounter of their Waters (impregnate as is before intimated) with the Mineral and Metallic Substances, Juices and Spirits conteined in the Veins of the Earth through which they have their Course. The nitrous Salt fore-mentioned may perhaps be the Hermetic Salt of Monsieur Rochas, or the esurine Salt of Helmont. Now the Water once heated, being conteined in the Vaults of the Mountains as in a Stove, continues hot a long time, the Eruption thereof being, it is
likely, at a good distance from the place where it did at first conceive its Heat. At the long continuance and duration of the Heat of these Waters for so many ages past no man need wonder: For (1.) It is generally taken for granted that all sorts of Mines do grow and increase by addition, converting the more refined, subtile part of the Earth, and which hath a seminal disposition of such a change, into their own nature. (2.) The nitrous Salts, the first Ingredients of these Waters, are also restored in their Matrices, after the same manner as we see it happens in the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, which though the Vitriol hath been once or twice extracted from it, will by being exposed to the Air again recover more; whether it be by conversion of its Matrix into its own nature by a kind of Aggeneration and Transmutation, or by imbi∣bing and retaining those subtile and volatile saline Exhalations, which continually ascend out of the Earth or wander up and down the Air. As for the Ingredients of these hot Waters in ge∣neral he saith, That besides a threefold Salt-Nitre fixed, volatile and mingled or Armoniack, they par∣take of a fixed and volatile Sulphur, a Manna of Alum, some Vitriol, divers Metals, as Copper and Iron, a very little volatile Earth, a certain Argilla, Sand and Calaminary Flowers. That they parti∣cipate of Copper he proves in that the Territory of Aken abounds in divers places with Lapis Calami∣naris, which is as it were the Aliment of Copper: For being mingled in the Furnaces with red Copper it augments it by the addition of 30 pound weight per Cent. and gives it a yellow or golden Tincture. As for Iron, the many ferrugineous Springs that are found within and without this City are an evident testimony that there are plenty of Iron Mines here∣about; and therefore most likely it is, if not cer∣tain, that these hot Waters charge themselves with
that Metal. That they contain a threefold nitrous Salt, he proves from their natural Evaporations. (1.) The fixed is found in the Wells of Borcet and the Emperor, crystallized into small shining square grains, ming∣led with a little Flower of Sulphur, sticking to the Covers of those Wells, which have not been of a long time opened. It may be also found in the Chymical examination of these Waters by Evapora∣tion or Destillation. (2.) The Volatile is carried up by the volatile Sulphur, as is hereafter shew'd in the Description of the first sort of these Baths. (3.) The mingled or Armoniac is daily seen in all the Waters of the City and of Borcet, swimming in little Cy∣linders on the surface of the Water, and this is that Cream or Scum which is ordinarily found upon the Waters in the Basins. That they contain the rest of the fore-mentioned Ingredients shall be shewn in the Description of the particular Baths: the Waters whereof our Author reduces to four sorts. 1. Nitro-sulphureous, such are those of the Em∣perors Bath, the Little Bath, and S. Quirin's Bath. 2. Sulphureo-nitrous, such are those of Compus or the Poor-mens Bath, the Rose-Bath and S Cornelius his Bath. 3. Sulphureo-nitro-vitriolic, such is ano∣ther Bath of the same S. Cornelius. 4. Salso-alumino∣nitrous, viz. those of Borcet a Village adjoining to Aken. I. As for the Nitro-sulphureous kind, those of the Emperors Bath and the Little Bath are but one Wa∣ter coming from the same Source, and collected in one and the same Well. That part reserved in the Emperors Bath is divided into five great Basins or Receptacles: that in the Little Bath into three. All which might be renewed daily, if time would permit, the Spring is so copious. But by reason of the excessive Heat of the Waters, it is necessary oft-times that they stand in the Basin 16 or 18 hours to cool, before they be fit for the Patients use. Not∣withstanding
when they are come to a just temper, one may bath in them and endure them a long time, as those of Borcet, without any Inconvenience. This Source hath that of peculiar to itself, that in its Well one may find distinctly a quantity of Nitre coagulated, and good plenty of Flowers of Sulphur very light, purely fine and well sented. The Nitre sticks to the sides of the Well, and so do the Flow∣ers of Sulphur above that: The which sometimes whether by the extraordinary boiling up of the Fountain, or by the impetuosity of the ascending Vapours, or by their own weight are broken off, and fall back into the Source; from whence being no more dissolved by the Water, they come forth intire into the Basins. If you take of this Water, and let it stand in a Vessel certain days, it will pre∣cipitate of these yellow Flowers of Sulphur to the bottom of the Vessel. Besides these volatile Flow∣ers, these Waters contein also fixt Flowers of Sul∣phur, a competent quantity of Nitre and volatile, fixt and mixt or Armoniac, a little Alum, less Vitriol, the Spirits and Principles of Copper and Iron, a very little volatile Earth, Argilla and Sand: no Bitumen, for let them stand as long as you please, you shall find no fatty substance swimming upon them as upon the Spaw Waters. The volatile Sulphur eva∣porates so strongly that it carries up with it a quan∣tity of Nitre, as one may see after the solution of the Vapours congeled and frozen in Winter-time, when it remains incorporated upon the Walls in the places where the Iceicles were. These Waters are in weight equal to those of the Spaw; coming fresh out of the Source they appear whitish or blu∣ish, but having stood a while and grown cold, greenish. They are very pure and leave no kind of Mud or Lutum thermale behind them; in cooling they yield a small Scum or Cream of Nitre. Far from their Source, being wrought upon by the Air,
they let fall a little whitish Sediment, as those of Boret do a blackish one. They preserve the colour of Roses put into them and cause them not to wi∣ther, as doth common Water. The Vapours ascen∣ding from them make Silver Plate black, as those of Boreet make it white. The other Source of S. Quirin's Bath differs from these in no other re∣spect, save that the Water thereof is cooler. It is reserved in three Basins. In this Well you find neither Sulphur nor Salt-peter sticking to the sides, probably because it is open or uncovered. II. The second or Sulphureo-nitrous sort of Com∣pus, &c. though they spring up in several places and have different Wells, yet is the Nature of them all, their Composition and Mineral Ingredients the same. The Poor mens Bath hath one great Basin or Receptacle, the Rose Bath four, whereof two only are used, and S. Cornelius's Bath of this Mine two. These Waters are fit for use at all sea∣sons, being of a temperate Heat, more efficacious and of greater force in their Operations than the first sort; they weigh two per Cent. more than they, and are of a stronger Sent. In these is never found any Sulphur condensed, no not in their Wells though they be covered: but when they are em∣ptied and new Water let in (as in the Rose-Bath) the Water running down along the Walls and Seats into the bottom of the Basins or Conservatories, the exter∣nal Air prevailing upon it so spread and in such little quantity arrests, fixes and condenses its Sulphur all along the said Walls and Seats, refreshing the eyes of the Spectators with its Beauty and Lustre. But the Water arising in the fore-mentioned Basins, and covering the Seats and Walls, the Sulphur again unites and incorporates with its Dissolvent, and disappears and hides itself therein. The Water of these Sources conteins great quantity of Sulphur very fine and sweet, less nitrous Salt, a little Vitriol
and less Alum, more of the other Minerals and Me∣tals than the first sort or those of Borcet. So that they are more compounded, oleous and bituminous than any of the other Sources; and though they come out of the Earth very temperate as to actual Heat, yet can sick persons hardly endure them for any long time, for the most part scarce half an hour. III. The third sort which I call Sulphureo-nitro-vitriolic, and is also of S. Cornclius, differs from the precedent in that the Tast is a little more acid, the Smell sweeter and liker that of Spirit of Vitriol, and the Touch less oily. It is of less Efficacy in use than the second sort, and of more than the first. Of this Source there are three Basins, which with the two others of S. Cornelius before-mentioned make five in this House. These Waters do agree much what in their Composition with the prece∣dent. They are very pure and clear, especially in their Wells; and though they seem troubled in their Basins, yet taken in a Glass they appear clear. IV. The fourth or Salso-alumino-nitrous kind are those of the Neighbourhood or Borcet.Borcet Baths. These come out of the Earth extreme hot, and in great abundance, are all of the same Medicinal Quality, have several Wells, and are reserved in ten or twelve Houses, each whereof hath two Basins or Recep∣tacles, besides which there is a common Bath expo∣sed to the Air, for the use of poor people. These Waters cast off a copious Excrement or Tartar, which yet is not Stone, but only a Sand mingled with and united to the nitrous and aluminous Salt of the Water, coagulated by the beating of the cold Air on its Superficies, to which also concurs the cold of the Walls exposed to the same Air. These Excrescencies are found in the subterrancous Conduits, not only of these but the other Baths in
the City; being held to the Fire they soon become friable, and are nothing but a pure round Sand like the common. The higher Houses and Basins have the more of this Tartar, yet is it so little that it is not to be seen or perceived in the Water. These Waters are of a different Species, Virtue and Ope∣ration from those of the City; are very easie to suffer, and serve often for Divertisement and Re∣creation to persons that are in health. The content of them is a great quantity of Sea-Salt and Alum, less nitrous Salt, a very little Sulphur and not much of Metallic Substances. Concerning the Virtues and Effects of these Waters inwardly taken, he discourses to this pur∣pose: These Waters taken inwardly are very available against the Phthisic, Asthma or Difficulty of Breath∣ing occasioned by tough Phlegm lodging in the branches of the Wind-Pipe; against the Weakness of the Stomach, Indigestion, Crudities, Flatulencies, Vomitings, Hiccoughs and inveterate Colics. They dissipate and dry up all manner of Catarrhs and se∣rous Deluxions; and are very proper to be drunk by those that are troubled with the Palsie, before the use of the Baths. They quicken the Appetite, cleanse the Blood and open the obstructions of the Mesentery. They are of excellent use against Hy∣pochondriacal Maladies, especially in such as have weak and cold Stomachs. They mollifie the hard∣ness of the Liver, Spleen and Mesentery. They dissolve and bring away the Gravel of the Reins and the lesser Stones: And here he produces many Examples of such as avoided Stones upon the drinking these Waters, and among the rest of some that had drank the Spaw Waters, and came from thence without reciving any Benefit. They cleanse the Ulcers of the Bladder, dissolving not only the gross, phlegmatic and viscous Humours which co∣agulate
the Stone, but even the Stone itself whilst it is yet tender. They have sometimes cured inter∣mittent Fevers of long continuance, and scrophulous Tumors. They dry up and heal the Itch, Leprosie and other Affections of the Skin. They stop the immoderate Flowing of the Menses in Women and cure the Jaundise, the Paleness and Discolouring of the Skin in Virgins: and finally they give ease and relief in the Gout. Of all these Faculties he brings Instances and Examples in Persons that have been cured. Particularly that these Waters drunk may have a power of dissolving the Stone, he proves by this Experiment: Taking a Stone voided by a man about two years before, and infusing it in Water hot from the Fountain for the space of three days, we found it (saith he) mollified and reduced into a soft Phlegm. Which Virtue of the Waters was further confirmed to us by a late Accident: for opening the Vault of a Well there was found a certain Glue or Mucilage, which it's to me probable, came from the solution of the Morter of Lime and Sand in long time, by the volatile and dissolvent Spirits of the Waters; especially there being found no other Cement between the Stones, and in that this same Glue or Mucilage mingled itself intirely with the Waters of the Fountains without any appearance of Scum or Fat swimming on the top, so as Gum of Cherry or the like is wont to do in Water, and being cast into the Fire burnt not, but dried up. These Experiments and Observations were made upon occasion of a Burgomaster of Riga (who being afflicted with the Stone drank these Waters) his passing his Urine through a Linen Cloth, and find∣ing therein a certain thick Phlegm left behind, which being kept a while upon Paper hardned into a stony Substance.
From Aken,Altenho∣ven. Gulick. June 29. we travelled through a small walled place called Altenhoven to Gulick, five hours distant. This is an elegant little Town, built of Brick, though the Houses be but low, having streight Streets and a square Piazza. It is well for∣tified with a strong Wall and Trench, but most consi∣derable for its Citadel, which for Greatness, Strength and Beauty gives place to few that we have seen. Within it is a stately Palace of the Princes, who for the Defence and Security of this City maintains here a Garrison of 1000 Soldiers. About ten or twelve years since this Place was possessed by the Spaniards. When the Peace was concluded between them and the Hollanders, it was agreed, that the Duke of Newbergh should have Gulick and Berg; and the Marquess of Brandenburgh Mark and Cleve. The main Trade and Employment of this Town is ma∣king of Malt. June 30. we proceeded on to Collen some seven hours distant from Gulick, by the way passing through a little walled Place called Berchem.Berchem. A great part of this days Journey was through plea∣sant Woods. We observed by the way-side and in the Woods and Hedges as we went Mezereon Ger∣manicum, Mollugo montana latifolia ramosa, Pul∣monaria maculosa, Galeopsis sive Vrtica iners flore pur∣purascente majore, folio non maculato, and among the Corn, Vaccaria Ger. Collen,Collen. though it gives Title to an Archbishop who is one of the Electors, is a free City of the Empire, and one of the greatest in Germany. The middle part of it is well built of Stone, wherein are two fair and large Piazza's, the Skirts meaner and of Wood. The Walls of the City are of Stone, very tall, but not proportionably thick, and covered with a Tectum. Round the Walls without is a pleasant Walk of Trees, two deep Trenches, and at convenient Intervals strong Bulwarks. Within the
Wall are enclosed 300 Acres of void ground (not built upon I mean) planted with Vines; of the Grapes whereof we were told many hundred Tuns of Wine are yearly made. In the Domo or Church of S. Peter are preserved in a golden Chest the Bodies (as they would have us believe) of the three Wise men of the East that came to worship our Saviour, commonly called the three Kings of Collen; Melchior, Gaspar and Balthasar. To this Church belong 54 Canons Nobles, and 8 Canons Presbyters. By these 62 with the Dean of the Cathedral, who hath two Votes in the Election, and the two Consuls regent of the City who have four, is the Archbishop cho∣sen, who is not allowed to continue in the City at any time for above three days together. The Go∣vernment of the City is by six Consuls or Burgo∣masters, who continue in Office during life, yet but two only in power yearly; seven Scabins and 150 Senators. When a Burgomaster dies, the Se∣nate chuses another into his Place. The Sena∣tors are chosen by the several Companies of the City, and continue during life; only fifty are in power yearly; so the Power revolves to the same every third year. The Scabins are put in by the Prince, and continue during life. The main body of the Citizens is of the Roman Religion; yet are there a good number both of Lutherans and Refor∣med or Calvinists. The Lutherans are allowed a Church within the Walls; the Reformed are forced to go cross the Water a mile out of town to Church. In one of the Churches of this Town are preserved the Bones of those 11000 Virgins which accompanied S. Vrsula to Rome, and in their return here suffered Martyrdom. From Collen we went up the Rhene in a Boat drawn by Men, which brought us the first day to a small Village called Vidich. By the way we found grow∣ing among the Corn in great plenty, Delphinium suaplici flore purpuro-caeruleo vulgare, and Nigella
rvensis: in some barren Grounds near the River' Stoechas citrina Germanica latiore folio J. B. Next mor∣ning we passed Bonna, a pretty walled Town with a handsom Piazza. Here the Elector of Collen hath his Palace and usual Residence. This night we lodged at a pitiful poor walled Town called Brisaca, where we first began to have Feather-Beds laid upon us instead of Blankets and Coverlets. July 6.Ander∣nach. we passed by Rineck Castle on our right hand, and about a mile from Brisaca came to Ander∣nach a walled Town of some note, subject to the Archbishop of Collen. Over against this Town is Hammerstein Castle belonging to the Archbishop of Triers. Then we passed by two Castles of the Earl of Weets, one on the right hand on a high Rock, well built, with a Cloister in it. Two leagues from Andernach we passed by En∣gers, and this night lodged at Coblentz,Coblentz a consider∣able City belonging to the Archbishop of Triers, cal∣led in Latin Confluentes, because situate at the Con∣fluence of the Rivers Moselle and Rhene. Here is a fair Stone-Bridge of 13 Arches over the Moselle, which notwithstanding its diminutive Name, is no small River. Here is also a Bridge of Boats over the Rhene to a strong Castle called Hermanstein, situ∣ate on a high Rock; under which near the River is a beautiful Palace of the Archbishop of Triers, whose Name is Carolus Caspar. Not far hence is Helfen∣stein Castle, near which springs an acid Water. Another Well of this nature there is at Antonistein, three or four hours distant from Andernach, belong∣ing to a Cloister of Carmelites, who sell the Water sealed up in Bottles; A third of greatest note at Zwolbach, four miles off Frankfurt. All these Wa∣ters are sold to the Towns and Countrey about, and commonly drunk mixt with Wine, to which they give a pleasant tast and purging quality. I cannot say, as Blondel affirms of them, that upon
mixture with Wine I saw them smoke, or found them actually hot: Indeed I was not careful to observe these particulars. July 7. we passed by Lodesheim Town and Castle on the left hand, and Capelle, a Castle of the Bishop of Triers on the right, then a large Island in the middle of the Rhene; next Rens a small walled place belonging to the Archbishop of Collen, on the right hand and a little further Browbach and a Castle above it:Bopport. About four hours from Coblentz, Boppaert a walled Town of some note on the right hand, and not far thence a Castle called Bornholm on the left. We rested this night at a Village called Hertz∣nach July 8. in the morning we came to a pretty plea∣sant wall'd Town called S. Gower,S. Gower. a mile distant from Hertznach, under the Lantgrave of Hessen, who lives in a fair Castle, built on a Rock above the Town. On one of the Towers of the Wall by the Rivers side is fastned a brass Ring, given by the Emperor Charles V. which is put upon Strangers Necks, and then they are obliged to drink Wine, else they are sprinkled with Water. The Magi∣strates and greatest part of the Inhabitants of this Town are of the Reformed Religion, yet have both Lutherans and Papists their Churches. Just without the Walls over against S. Gower is a Town and Castle called Wellnich. Somewhat further on the right hand is Wesel Town and Castle of the Archbishop of Triers,Cub. and higher up on the left hand Cub, a considerable walled Town with a Castle upon a Rock, belonging to the Prince Elector Pala∣tine. Here we observed a Flote of Timber going down the River, which was directed by many men who moved two long Oars at each end thereof, which served in stead of Rudders. In the Rocks hereabout is Slate gotten.Baccha∣rach. Next we came to Bac∣charach a wall'd Town on the right hand, having
many Towers, subject to the Prince Elector Pala∣tine, famous for the goodness of its Wine, as is also Rhincow, a Town not far from Mentz. At this and many other Towns between Collen and Mentz our Boatmen payed Toll. A little distance from hence we had in view a small walled Town on the left hand, and on the right we left a pitiful Village, yet walled about, called Heinbach, and came to a second of no better note, called Dreckhausen, where we lodged. Both these are under the Archbishop of Mentz. Over against Heinbach is Lewry a small walled Town of little account. July 9.Mouse-Tower. we passed by Aspithouse Castle, then by Mouse-Tower, standing in a little Island, famous for the Story of the Bishop devoured by Mice and Rats. Over against this Tower stands a Castle, and a little further up the River on the right hand Bing,Bing. a handsom walled Town belonging to the Elector of Mentz: At some distance hence on the left hand Rodes, then Gison and Elveldt a wall'd Town, and lastly Wallop, where we observed Storks Nests upon the Chimnies. This night we arrived at Mentz. From Collen to Widdich the River is of a great breadth, but above that till you come to Mouse-Tower, much narrower, being streightned by high Hills and Rocks on each side, The sides of these Hills are in some places covered with Wood, in some planted with Vines, and below the Vine-yards near the Ri∣ver are large Orchards of Fruit-Trees. The Vines are tied to Stakes or Poles of about a mans highth, so that were not the Poles much shorter, their Vine∣yards would nearly resemble our Hop-Gardens. All this way the River flows with so swift a Current, that I conceive it impossible to get up Stream with Oars and Sails. In this Journey in the Corn-Fields, Meadows, Rocks, Woods and Sands by the Rivers side, &c.
(which the slowness of our Boats progress gave us leisure to search) we observed many Plants which we had not elsewhere or but rarely before found growing wild,Plants ob∣served as we travel∣led be∣tween Collen and Mentz. viz. Gentiana cruciata, Chamaedrys spuria angustifolia, Chondrilla juncea, Chamaedrys la∣ciniatis foliis, Lychnis sylvestris calyculis striatis, Per∣sicaria siliquosa, Genistella montana Germanica Park. Genistella aculeata, Buphthalmum vulgare, Fraxinella, Cardamine impatiens, Iberis, Millefolium nobile, Di∣gitalis lutea magno flore, Eryngium arvense foliis serrae similibus, Caucalis albis floribus, Saxifraga Venetorum, Chondrilla caerulea, Tithymalus magnus multicaulis sive Esula major, Helleboraster maximus in great plenty, Tithymalus pineus and sundry others. Near the City of Mentz we found the Sea-gilly-flower or Thrift cal∣led by C. Bauhine Caryophyllus montanus major flore globoso, Caryophyllus gramineo folio minimus, Caryo∣phyllus arvensis umbelliferus, Cynoglossum minus, Thlaspi minus, aliis Alysson minus J. B. Thlaspi capsulis sub∣longis incanum, Heliotropium majus, Camphoratae congener, Prunella flore majore & Prunella foliis dis∣sectis. Mentz is a large City and well fortified:Mentz. The Buildings generally old and but mean, the Streets narrow and not well paved, yet are there many great Houses of Noblemen scattered up and down. The Princes Palace is moted about. The present Prince or Archbishops Name is. Joannes Philippus à Schaen∣born, he was besides Bishop of Wurtzburgh, and a few weeks since chosen also Bishop of Worms. The Canons of S. Martin's Church here, who are in number 24, all Barons or Noblemen, chuse the Archbishop out of their own number; and when any one of themselves dies or is removed, a Canon into his room out of the Domicillares. The Arms of the Archbishoprick is a Wheel, derived from the first Archbishop, who was a Wheelwrights Son, his Name Willigesus, a Saxon; He was wont to say,
Willigese, Willigese, recogita unde veneris. Jews are allowed in this City. Here is a Bridge of Boats over the Rhene. July 13. we took Boat for Frankfurt, going up the River Maonus which near Mentz runs into the Rhene. By the way we took notice (1.) of Ruse∣theim, a handsom Fort on our right hand, belong∣ing to the Lantgrave of Darmstadt. (2.) A little further up on our left hand a small Village called Etersheim,Hocht. and (3.) Hocht, a walled Town on the same hand, garrisoned by the Elector of Mentz. Here we may note, that the Dominions of the Prin∣ces of Germany that border on the Rhene are strangely mingled one with another. Frankfurt is about five Miles or Leagues distant from Mentz,Frank∣furt. though the Houses thereof are for the most part built of Timber, yet is it fair, populous and rich, very strongly fortified and encompassed with a deep Trench of water; the Walls and Bull∣warks are kept very trim and in good repair. The River Main divides it into two parts, the lesser on the South side is called Saxenhausen. They are joyned by a fair Stone-Bridge of about fourteen Arches. In the great Piazza are three handsom Fountains. The Emperor is now adays usually chosen here in the Curia or Senate-house; and crowned in the Colle∣giate Church of S. Bartholomew. There have been about 25 or 26 Emperors here chosen. By the fa∣vour of one of the Consuls or Burgomasters we saw the Original Imperial Grant or Constitution, where∣by the College of Electors is appointed, called Bullae aurea. It had in place of the Seal a great Medal of Gold hanging at it, on which was stamped or en∣graven, on one side the Figure of the Emperor Charles IV. with this Inscription round, Carolus quartus, divinâ favente clementiâ, Romanorum Impe∣rator semp. Aug. On the reverse the Figure of the City Rome, and thereon written Aurea Roma, and
round about this rhythming Verse, Roma caput mundi regit orbis fraena rotundi. This City is governed by 42 Senators, two Bur∣gomasters, a Praetor and 14 Scabins. The Sena∣tors are divided into three Scamna or Benches: The highest is Scabinorum, the second or middle∣most Literatorum, and the lowest Opificum. When one of the Scabins dies or is removed, they chuse into his room one out of the Scamnum Literatorum. Those of the Scamnum Opificum can rise no higher. These Senators chuse yearly the two Consuls or Burgomasters out of their own number. The People have no part or interest in the Government of the City or choice of the Senate. Many Jews live here who have their Ghet or particular Quarter, where∣in they are locked up every night. Their Trade is only Brokage, and most of them are very poor. They are forced to wear a piece of yellow Cloth somewhere about them to distinguish them from other people. All the Magistrates and the greatest part of the Citizens are Lutherans, who have five Churches. The Roman Catbolics are allowed the free Exercise of their Religion, and have within the City two Cloisters of Men, and one of Women. The Re∣formed had formerly a Church within the Walls, afterwards, that being taken from them, they had one just without, which being burnt down, whether by Accident or Malice, their Church is now a good distance from the Town. The English Church, used in Q. Maries days, goes to decay. The English House is made a Granary or Store-house. The Countrey hereabout is pleasant, and the Ground rich. We found growing wild Gramen amoris di∣ctum & Ischaemon vulgare, Portulaca sylvestris, and in some Hedges Alsine baccifera, which it was not my fortune in all this Voyage to meet with any where else.
July 17. we left Frankfurt, taking the Post-Coach for Frankenthal. After one half-hours riding we entred into Pine-Woods, the first we met withal: They reach'd almost to our Lodging, this night, which was at a Village called Geirsheim three German miles from Frankfurt. July 18.Kern∣sheim. Worms. at a little walled Town called Kern∣sheim we ferried over the Rhene, and at six miles end came to Worms, a great old City, but meanly built and in a decaying condition. It seems formerly to have been richer and more populous. The Bi∣shop is chosen by the Canons of the great Church being 20 in number. All the Magistrates are Lu∣therans. After we had passed Worms one hours riding brought us to Frankenthal or (as we usually pronounce it) Frankendale,Franken∣dale. a Town belonging to the Prince Elector Palatine, situate in a Level by the Rhene, more considerable for its Strength than Greatness. The Houses are low built, the Streets broad and streight. The Wall, Mounts and Out∣works neatly kept in good repair. The Garrison consists of five Companies, whereof two are Citi∣zens. There are in it three Churches, one Almagne, one Low-Dutch, and one French. July 20. we travelled from Frankendale beside the Rhene, through Oberskeim a small walled Town to Spier,Spier. two miles and an half distant. Spier though it hath a Bishop, yet is it a free City of the Empire, and governed by its own Magistrates, of considerable Strength and Greatness. The Houses are most old∣built of Timber, rather vast than handsom or con∣venient. We could not learn that there was any considerable Trade driven here, so that were it not for the Imperial Chamber (which draws much Com∣pany hither) we believe it would soon grow poor and infrequent enough. The Romish Religion pre∣vails most, yet have the Lutherans their Church. In the Cathedral Church are the Monuments of several
Emperors and Bishops who lie interred there. The Imperial Chamber consists of 36 Assessors and a chief President appointed by the Emperor,Imperial Chamber. besides whom there are other three Presidents chosen by the Em∣peror out of the Delegates. Every Elector of the Empire, and each of the ten Circles send two Dele∣gates or Assessors. There is another Chamber of like power at Vienna. These Courts determine all Controversies arising between the several Princes and States of the Empire by majority of Vote. The Subjects also of many of the Princes may appeal from their own Princes to this Court; but it is not prudent nor safe for them so to do, unless they first withdraw themselves out of their Territory. Some Princes, as the Count Palatine, have Jus non appel∣landi. July 21. we returned a little backwards and cros∣sed over the Rhne to Manheim,Man∣heim. a Town belonging to the Prince Elector Palatine, situate just in the Angle made by the Neccar and Rhene meeting, and strongly fortified. The Houses in the late Wars were most of them beaten down, but now they are rebuild∣ing them apace, the Prince having given the Town great Privileges, to invite Strangers to come and in∣habit there. At the time of our being there, his Highness was building a new Citadel, which was like to prove a strong Piece. It wanted not much then of being finished. Who it was that first ad∣vanced this place to the dignity of a City and for∣tified it with Walls, Ditches and Bulwarks, this Inscription over the Gate towards the Neccar will acquaint the Reader. Quod felix faxit Jehova, Fredericus IIII. Elector Palatinus Rheni, Dux Bavariae, E veteri Paga Manhemio Ad Rheni Nirique confluvium
Justa spatiorum dimensione Nobilem Vrbem molitus, Vallo, fossa, muro clausit, Portam bonis civibus aperuit. Anno Domini MDCX. July 22. From Manheim we rode to Heidelberg,Heidel∣berg. just before we entred the Town passing a wooden Bridge over the Neccar covered over with a tectum, as are also many of the great Bridges in Switzerland, to preserve the Timber, as I conceive, from the injuris of the Weather. Heidelberg, though none of the greatest Cities, yet is the chief of the Pala∣tinate, and for its bigness populous; which is much considering the Devastations made by the late Wars in this Countrey. The Houses are most of Timber, yet handsom and in good repair; which argues the Inhabitants to be industrious and in a thriving con∣dition. It is situate on the right bank of the River Neccar, under Hills of considerable highth; by rea∣son of which it cannot be made strong, though it be encompassed with a double Wall and Trench. In this City are five Jurisdictions, (1.) Aulica, under which are all the Princes or Noblemen: of this Jurisdiction the Marshal of the House is Presi∣dent. (2.) Cancellaria, under which are all the Councils and other Officers as Advocates, Doctors of Law, &c. (3.) Bellica, or the Soldiery: the General is their President. (4.) Academica, in which the Rector magnificus presides, and (5.) Civica. The Members of each Jurisdiction may refuse to be judged by any but their own Judge, before whom the Plaintiff must implead them, according to the Maxim in Law, Actor sequitur forum rei. The City is divided into four Quarters, and governed by Praetor and Burgomasters. It can raise two Compa∣nies of Foot and one of Horse. The Lutherans are
permitted the Exercise of their Religion here, and have lately built them a Church: There are also Roman Catholics who have a Church without the Walls. About the middle of the ascent of the Hill called Koningsthall stands the Castle where the Prince keeps his Court, a stately Pile and of great capacity, en∣compassed with a strong Wall and a deep Trench hewn out of the Rock, which upon occasion may be filled with Water. Over the Gate leading into the Palace is a Dutch Inscription, signifying the building of it by Ludovicus V. in the year 1519. It is not all of one Piece, but since the first Founda∣tion several Buildings have been added by seve∣ral Princes. One part is called the English Buil∣ding. Under one of the Towers stood the great Tun, which almost filled a Room. It held 132 Fudders, a Fudder (as we were informed) being equal to 4 Eng∣lish Hogsheads. The old Tun is taken in pieces, and there is a new one in building by the Princes Order, which is to contain 150 Fudders or 600 Hogsheads. Being invited by the Princes order we dined in the Palace, where we observed all things carried with little noise and great decency. After dinner his Highness was pleased to call us into his Closet, and shew us many Curiosities, among others (1.) a Purse made of Alumen plumosum, which we saw put into a Pan of burning Charcoal till it was throughly ignite, and yet when taken out and cool, we could not perceive that it had received any harm at all from the Fire. (2.) Two Unicorns horns each eight or ten foot long, wreathed and hollow to the top. By the way we may note, that these are the Horns of a Fish of the cetaceous kind, (two distinct species whereof you may find de∣scribed and figured in the History and Description of the Antilles or Caribee Islands written in French by R. F. of Tertre, and the Head of one in Wormius his
Musaeum) not the Horns of a Quadruped as is vul∣garly but erroneously thought. Whatever the An∣tients have delivered, modern Voiages and Enquiries have discovered no other terrestrial Unicorn besides the Rhinocerot, which, its most likely, is signified by the word  used in Scripture, which the Sep∣tuagint render . (3.) The Imperial Crown and Globe of Rupertus Imp. who was of this Family, richly adorned with pretious Stones. (4.) An ex∣cellent and well-digested Collection of antient and modern Coins and Medals of all sorts, in which the Prince himself is very knowing. Among the rest we could not but take notice of a Swedish Doller of Copper, about the bigness and of the figure of a square Trencher, stamped at the four Corners with the Kings Image and Arms, of that weight, that if a man be to receive ten or twenty pound in such Coin, he must come with a Cart and Team of Horse, to carry it home. The Prince Palatines Name and Titles are Carolus Ludovicus, Comes Palatinus Rheni, sacri Romani Imperii Elector, utrius{que} Bavariae Dux. He speaks six Languages perfectly well, viz. High-Dutch, Low-Dutch, English, French, Italian and Latine, is greatly beloved of his Subjects of whom he hath a paternal Care, and whose Interest he makes his own. In the great Church where the famous Library was kept, we observed many fair Monuments of Princes of this Family, some with Dutch, most with Latine Epitaphs or Inscriptions: Others in the Fran∣ciscans Church. In S. Peter's Church also a great number of Monuments of learned men of the Uni∣versity; which is of good account and one of the best in Germany. Three or four Colleges there are built and endowed chieflly for the maintenance and accom∣modation of poor Students. The Government of this University is by a Senate, which consists only of 16 Professors. The number
of Professors is limited, and their Stipends fixt by the Statutes of the University given them by their Founder Rupertus Count Palatine Anno 1346. and confirmed by the Pope and Emperor. Of these Pro∣fessors three are of Divinity; four of Law; three of Medicine, and six of Philosophy. Of the Philosophy Professors four only are admitted into the Senate, lest they should make too great a party. Besides the Senate chuses anew the Philosophy Professors every year, and may change them if they please: the other Professors are chosen for term of life. When one dies the Senate chuses two and presents them to the Prince, of which he takes one to succeed in the va∣cant place. This Senate chuses every year a Rector ma∣gnificentissimus, which is only an Honorary Title con∣ferred upon some Prince or great person, for he hath no power at all in the University. (2.) A Rector ma∣gniflus out of their own number by major Vote, the chief Officer for power and answerable to our Vice-chancellour. (3.) An Aedilis who takes care of the public Buildings. (4.) A Praefectus rei vinariae. (5.) A Praefectus rei frumentariae, which Officers answer to our Taxers. (6.) A Quaestor, who gathers up the University Revenue and Rents. Further this Senate is a Jurisdiction by themselves, and have absolute power in criminal Causes extending to Life and Death: only after Sentence given the Prince may pardon. The Degrees conferred here are in Philo∣sophy Masters, of which lately there have been but few created; in Law and Medicine Licentiates and Doctors; in Divinity Batchelors, Licentiates and Do∣ctors, of which last there have been but few lately. They confer Degrees without any regard of Stand∣ing. The Candidate must undergo a double Exa∣men. (1.) By the Faculty wherein he is to commence, the Rector magnificus being present, and if he be found unsufficient he is remitted, and appointed a certain time to study to prepare himself. (2.) By all the
Professors together, the Rector magnificus being also present. The first they call Examen tentatorium, the second rigorosum. Having past both Examens he is to dispute publicly sb Praeside, then to make a Le∣cture in the Faculty wherein he is promoted, and lastly a Speech. The Speech ended, he asks the Vice-chancellour, ut det facultatem promotori ipsum promo∣vendi. Note that by the Statute the Praepositus Eccle∣siae Wormatiensis is perpetual Chancellour, and sub∣stitutes a Vice-chancellour in his place. But now this is only done pro forma, for the University is not obnoxious to the Chancellour. The Vice-chancellour granting leave, the Promoter, who is usually the Note, that the Professrs in each Faculty take the Deanship by turns, though the Senate may ap∣point any other. Dean of the Faculty, in the name of the Prince Elector, and by the leave of the Vice-chancellour, pronounces such an one Doctor, and bids him ascend in superiorem cathedram, then kisses him, puts a Ring on his Finger, and a Cap on his Head, and gives him a Book first shut and then open. Then the Graduate takes an Oath touching with his Fin∣ger the two Beadles Staves set leaning one against the other, and last of all feasts the Professors in the room called the Prytancum, which is now used as the Divinity-Schools: At which Feast the Prince him∣self is present or sends the Marshal of his House. To save Charges two or three Candidates, if they be of meaner condition, get to be promoted toge∣ther.
D. T. O. M. A. Cursus Lectionum Publicarum & Privatarum, quas almae Vniversitatis Archipalatinae DD. Professores hoc Anno M.DC.LXII. Rectore ma∣gnifico Jacobo Israel Med. Doct. & Physiolog. Prof. or∣dinario, habebunt, juxta Fa∣cultatum seriem distributus. In FACULTATE THEOLOGICA. FRidericus Spanhemius▪Horâ X. SS. Theologiae Doctor, & Professor Ordinarius Novi Testamenti; Diebus Lu∣nae, Martis, Jovis & Veneris, alterâ quidem Septimanâ persequitur Vindicias Locorum controversorum, alterâ verò illustriora ex Paulinis Epistolis loca, eâ methodo exsequitur, ut praemissis Quaestionibus, ad elucidationem cujus{que} loci subjungatur, cùm Analysis Logica, tum Pa∣raphrasis Rhetorica, tandémque cruantur ordine usus cum theoretici tum practici. Collegia privata exegetia, disputatoria, examinato∣ria, prioribus nuper absolutis, Studiosis offert, Dispu∣tationes ordinarii & extraordinarii argumenti negantur nunquam.
Johannes Ludovicus Fabricius,Horâ IX. SS. Theologiae Do∣ctor & Professor Ordinarius, diebus Lunae, Martis, Jovis & Veneris Theologiae Systema explanare perget, praeterea absoluto Casuistico Collegio, Vniversale explicatorio-examinatorium, aliáque pro Studiosorum desiderio ex∣ercitia tum publica tum privata continuabit atque in∣stituet. II. In FACVLTATE JVRIDICA. Henricus David Chuno,Hora IX. D. & Jurium Professor primarius Academiaeque Procancellarius, Lectiones Co∣dicis, cujusque tituli principiis & fundamentis propositis, legibusque peregrinis & fugitivis, id est, non suo titulo collocatis, (ubi spicilegium facturus est) seorsim expla∣natis, publicè continuabit: addendo Jurium concurren∣tium ampliationes & restrictiones ex omni Jure. Idem privatim operam suam pro capn & desiderio Studiosorum aequè ponet. Johannes Fridericus Bôckelman,Horâ I. J. V. D. Pande∣ctarum Professor Ordinarius, & Judicii Electoralis Au∣lici Assessor, publicè Pandectas docebit hac methodo, ut (1.) cujusque tituli quae est, ostendat connexionem. (2.) Jus crtum, quod in Legibus eò spectantibus repe∣ritur, per definitiones, divisiones & Canones compen∣diosè proponat. (3.) Controversas quaestiones, additis solidioribus rationibus propugnandi & oppugnandi sub∣jungat. (4.) Siqua lex nostris Viciniorumque mori∣bus antiquata est, moneat. (5.) Denique textus in quibus singularis materiae alicujus sedes est, speciatim assignet. Collegium etiam disputatorium publicum, necnon ex∣plicatorium privatum, utrumque ad Pandectas institu∣tum, continuabit, aliisque exercitiis Auditoribus, uti hactenus prodesse studebit.
Banier Shuttenius,Horâ X. J. V. D. Institutionum Imperi∣alium Professor Ordinarius, in tradendis Institutionibus sensum cujusque paragraphi genuinum ubi exposuerit, dubia occurrentesque circa praesentem materiam contro∣versias breviter resolvet. In Collegiis privatis, explicandi, dictandi, dispu∣tandi operam (quam nec publicè denegabit) etiam pollicetur. III. In FACVLTATE MEDICA. Johannes Casparus Fausius,Horâ IX. Medicinae Doctor & Professor primarius, necnon Archiater Palatinus; Pra∣cticam Medicinam docet, Ideas morborum succinctè tra∣dit. Medicamenta , officinalia & Chymica, eorumque praeparationem enarrat, & formulas eleganti∣ores cum propriis longoe praxeos experimentis feliciter tradit. Chymicam quoque officinam ejus rei Studiosis aperuit. Jacobus Israel,Horâ III. Med. Doct. & Physiologiae Professor Ordinarius, à Nundinis Autumnalibus ad Vernales Anatomiam & Chirurgiam: à Vernalibus verò ad Au∣tumnales Institutiones Medicas enodabit. Ex Collegiis privatis unum Anatomicum dissectorium, quod circa manualem dissectionem operabitur: alterum de generatione & incrementis pulli in ovo beneficio furni Chymici & ignis Lampadis habebit. IV. In FACVLTATE PHILOSOPHICA. Johannes à Leuneschlos,Horâ I. P. & M. D. Mathema∣tum & Physices Professor Ordinarius, in Physicis pub∣licè specialium nostrae telluris Corporum naturam enu∣cleabit, privatim Collegia aperiet, in quibus res gene∣rationi & corruptioni obnoxia docebitur, & ad inter∣rogata respondebitur.Horâ XII Circa Geographiam theoricam
& practicam Auditoribus industriam suam non solùm publicè docendo probabit, sed & eosdem privatim tum in eadem, tum in aliis spatiosae Matheseos partibus, ut Arithmetica, Harmonica, Geometria, Astronomia, Op∣tica, Architectonica Civili & Militari, aliisque vel ne∣cessariis, vel rarioribus Elegantiis, tam theoricè in aedibus suis, quam practicè in Observatorio & Campo ad discentium nutum & captum instituere haud gra∣vabitur. Johannes Scobaldus Fabricius,Horâ IX. SS. Theologiae Doct. & Ecclesiastes, necnon Linguae Graecae Professor Ordi∣narius, Xenophontis . per∣tractabit. Sebastianus Ramspeck,Horâ II. Politices & Eloquentiae Pro∣fessor Ordinarius, Synopseos Politicae telam propediem pertexet, Oeconomicorum Epitomen breviter illustrandam additurus, idque diebus Lunae, Martis & Jovis: diebus Veneris M. Tullii de Oratore libros Rhetoricè ac Po∣liticè illustrabit. Studiosis quinetiam id petituris publica privatáque industria succurret. Stephanus Gerlachius,Horâ X. Historiae Ecclesiasticae Pro∣fessor, Historiam Sulpitii Severi eâdem quâ coepit me∣thodo hoc Semestri persequetur. Statum nempe ac faciem Veteris Ecclesiae, ab obitu usque Mosis ob oculos ponens: modum Reip. ritus morésque explanans. Sententias Judaeorum ac Christianorum, cum veterum tum recen∣tium Impp. breviter exhibens & conferens, quicquid denique ad ornandam Historiam lucemque ei foeneran∣dam facere videtur, proponet. Si insuper nonnulli forsan in caeteris Studiis literariis privatim ipsius operam expetierint, fide suâ istis ac in∣dustria non dcerit. Samuel Pussendorff,Horâ III. Professor Publicus, Jus Na∣turae & Gentium ad ductum Grotii tradere perget, &
in eo erit, ut hac hyeme opus istud ad finem perducatur. Operam quoque suam privatam, siqui eam sunt petituri, nemini denegabit. Joh. Carreus,Horâ III. Verb. Dei Minist. & Collegii Sapientiae Praeceptor, in Metaphysicis, Logicis & Ethicis Lectiones habet diebus Lunae, Martis & Jovis, die Veneris Theses disputandas proponit. Honorum verò Academicorum, Disputationum, Le∣ctionum Cursoriarum, Anatomicarum demonstrationum & Panegyrici actus creberrimi habentur. Et ne animus solùm Sapientiâ excolatur, verùm & ipsum corpus ingenuis Exercitiis ad virilem virtutem excitetur, Vir Artis Equestris callentissimus, cujus fama celeberrima jam plusquam percrebuit, Equestri Gymnasio singulari cum laude praeest. Linguarum verò exoticarum Praeceptores, Lanistae, at{que} aliarum elegantiarum Artifices, certatim in artibus suis edocendis peritiam ac sedulitatem demonstrare alla∣borant. The Prince Elector is absolute in his own Terri∣tory. He can make Laws and repeal them, treat with forein Princes, sending Embassadors to them, and receiving Embassadors from them, make War and Peace, impose Tributes arbitrarily on his Sub∣jects without the consent of the States of the Coun∣trey. The Emperor hath nothing to do with his Subjects, they swearing Allegiance only to him. He only can excommunicate, having reserved to himself the Episcopal Power. The Prince Elector hath seven Councils or Courts, (1.) Concilium Au∣gustum or his Privy Council. (2.) Concilium Statûs. (3.) Concilium Ecclesiasticum, consisting of four, where∣of two are Lay men, and two Clergy. (4.) Dica∣sterium, who judge Causes between man and man. (5.) Concilium feudale. (6.) Concilium redituum temporalium or rationum. (7.) Concilium redituum
Ecclesiasticorum. The Prince hath thought fit to keep these two last distinct, partly that he may know how to proportion the Ministers Allowance; and partly that if any of his Successors should happen to change his Religion (as is ordinary for Princes to do in Ger∣many) they may be able to distinguish clearly be∣tween their own proper Temporal and the Church Revenue. The Prince in his own Territory is general Bishop and supreme Head in Ecclesiastical Affairs. Formerly this Countrey was under the Inspection and Juris∣diction of the Bishop of Spier, but since the Refor∣mation, the Prince hath not only seized the Reve∣nues of the Church into his own hand, but also as∣sumed to himself entirely the Episcopal Power and Jurisdiction. He also is universal Patron, and dis∣poses of all vacant Benefices as he pleases; indeed the Council of four nominate and present two unto him, of which usually he chuses one, because it may well be presumed that he knows not so well as they what persons are best qualified and fit to be preferred; but he is not obliged to confer the Benefice upon ei∣ther of the persons by them so nominated, but may either put in another known to himself, or com∣mand them to nominate others, if he like not those presented. The Religion of the Countrey is the Reformed. The whole Palatinate is divided into three Praefècturae, and some, viz. the greater of these subdivided into less. Every Praefectura hath its In∣spector or Bishop, who is Pastor of some Church in that Praefectura: He differs not from any other in any Jurisdiction, but in that commonly he hath a larger Stipend. His business is only to give Infor∣mation, if he be of a lesser Division, to the Inspector of the whole Praefectura under which he is, if of a greater, to the Council of foar. If need be every Praefectura or great Town hath a Presbytery. The Presbytery of Heidelberg consists of the five Ministers
of the City, two Deputies from each Jurisdiction except the Aulica: and two from each Quarter of the City; so that at this time the number in all is 21. These all have equal Suffrages the Lay-men with the Ministers, only one of the Ministers always presides in his Course. This Presbytery assembles once every week, at whose meeting is always pre∣sent a Delegate from the Prince, to see that nothing be agitated there which it concerns not the Presby∣tery to meddle withal. This Presbytery hath no power to excommunicate or inflict any Church Cen∣sure; but if any person be accused to them of any Crime, they send him to the Jurisdiction to whom he appertains, to enquire into his Offence. The Court having received this Information from the Presbytery, either neglect it if they please, or if they see cause enquire into it, and punish the Delinquent according to his Demerit, and in the close of the Sentence or Warrant for execution add this Clause, Quod ad Scandalum Ecclesiae datum remittimus te ad Presbyterium. Now at last, all they can do, is to exact of him a public Confession before the Church, and a promise of Amendment for the future. As for Ordination, it is given by the Council of four by Imposition of Hands, after examination of the per∣son to be ordained, and Testimonials exhibited from the University or other Persons of known Credit. The Prince receives all Tithes, except such as in some places for conveniencies sake are paid imme∣diately to the Ministers; and other Church-Reve∣nues, most whereof is paid out again in Stipends to the Ministers, which the Prince proportions accor∣dieg to their Merit and his own Discretion; the rest is reserved for Emergencies. July 25. we hired a Coach for Strasburgh, which brought us thither in three days. At three miles di∣stance from Heidelberg we passed in sight of Philips∣burg,Philips∣burg. a well fortified place situate in a level near the
Rhene: now possessed by the French. The Castle or Palace yielded a goodly Prospect. A mile further we passed through Graffe a small Town with a Ca∣stle belonging to the Markgrave of Tourlach, where our Coachman paid Toll. We lodged this first night at a Village called Linknom under the same Lord, who is a Lutheran. July 26. at four miles end we baited at a large Village called Raspach; and two miles on further we passed through Stolchoven a little walled Town,Stolcho∣ven. where our Coachman paid another Toll; and after one mile more another walled Town called Lichte∣naw,Lichte∣naw. both under the Marquess of Baden. This se∣cond night we took up our quarters at Sertz, a Vil∣lage under the Earl of Haaw. July 27. we passed over the Rhene divided into two Branches or Streams by two great Wooden-Bridges, which instead of Boards are floored with whole Fir-Trees laid loose across, neither pinned nor nailed down: I conceive that the Bridge might upon any exigent be more suddenly thrown down and broken. Soon after we were past the Bridges we entred Strasburgh. In this Journey we observed great plenty of Maiz or Indian Wheat planted, in some places Lathyrus sativus, and in others Cartha∣mus or bastard Saffron sown in the fields: Grow∣ing wild besides what we had before observed in other places, Blattaria, Solidago Saracenica, and in the Meadows near Strasburgh, Carduus. Pratensis Tragi. Strasburgh is a free City of the Empire,Stras∣burgh. large, well built, rich and populous, encompassed with a double Wall and Trench full of Water, besides the advantage of a good situation in a large Level, very exactly fortified, and the Walls and Works most regular, elegant, and scrupulously kept in repair: so that it seems no easie thing by force to take this City; neither was it I think once attempted
in the late German Wars. It lies as a Block in the Frenchmens way, and is as it were the Rampart of the Empire in these parts. The Government is by a greater Council of 300, chosen by the several Com∣panies of Citizens, and a lesser of 71, of which num∣ber six are Burgomasters, six Stetmasters, 15 Patres Patriae and 13 of the Militia. The Women of this City are well-favoured and of good Complexions. The Inhabitants are most part Lutherans, who have seven Churches: some Papists, who have one Church and four Cloisters, two for Men and two for Women; and a few Reformed, who yet are not allowed a Church in Town, but forced to go some two miles to Church in the Territory of the Earl of Hanaw. This City is an Episcopal See, the Bishop whereof is Lord of the lower Alsatia. He hath a Palace in the City, but is not suffered to lodge therein above three days together; in an Inn he is allowed eight days at a time. Here is the fairest, largest, best furnished, and handsomeliest kept Armory or Arse∣nal that we saw in Germany, or in all these respects any where else. Here are also public Granaries, Wine-Cellars and Store-houses. The River Elle runs through the Town. The Domo or Cathedral Church is a fair Building of Stone, having a great pair of Brass Folding-Doors at the West end. Herein we viewed the famous Clock described by Coryat and others, a Piece of excellent Workmanship, made, as were told by one Isaac Habrechtus of Strasburgh. The Steeple of this Church is curiously built of carved Stone, and incomparably the highest that ever we yet saw. The number of Steps from the bottom to the top is 662. We ascended 640 Steps to the place called the Crown, from whence we had a wide Prospect of the Countrey round about. In this Steeple two men watch constantly by day and four by night.Sowre∣bourn. Ten hours distant from Strasburgh towards Stutgard is Sowrebourn, from whence acid
Water is brought hither, which they mingle with their Wine and drink as at other places. By the In∣habitants of this and other Imperial Cities, especially the Women, are many different sorts of Habits used. July 31. we left Strasburgh and began our Jour∣ney towards Basil, travelling as far as Tivelsheim a Village under the Bishop of Strasburgh, some two miles and half▪ August 1. after three miles riding forward we passed through a small walled Town be∣longing to the same Bishop called Marklesheim. Two miles further we rode in sight of Brisach,Brisach. a Town seated on a Rock by the Rhene side, a place of great Strength and Importance, much contended for in the late Wars. It is now in the French hands, as is all Alsatia almost to the Walls of Basil: and after two other miles we came to a Village called Lode∣sheim pleasantly situate in a large Plain where we lodged. Aug. 2. we rode but one league and an half ere we arrived at Basil.Basil. This City is large and fair, the Houses being for the most part built of Stone, tall and painted on the out side. It is compassed about with a double Wall and Trench, rich and po∣pulous, built upon Hills, so that which way soever you go you either ascend or descend. The River Rhene divides it into two parts, which are joined together by a Bridge of 14 Arches. That part on the North side of the River is called Little Basil. There are said to be 300 Fountains in this City, scarce a Street or House of note but hath one. It is one of the thirteen Cantons of Switzerland, and hath in its Territory about 100 Villages. It gives Title to a Bishop chosen by Canons, who yet is not suffered to lodge in the Town one night. He lives at Broudint, keeps the State of a Temporal Prince, and coins Money, which is not current in Basil.
As to the Civil Government, the Citizens are di∣vided into 15 Tribes or Companies. Each Compa∣ny chuses 12 men by major Vote, who are called Sexers, because six of them only are regent at once, viz. one six one year, and the other six the next, and so alternately. These twelve Viri or Sexers chuse out of each Tribe two Tfunff-Masters or Tri∣buni Plebis for their Lives. The Tribuni Plebis chuse two out of each Tribe who are called Senators. Of these 60 and the four Heads (two whereof are called Burgomasters and chosen by the Senators properly so called, and two Tribuni Plebis or Tfunft-meisters and chosen by the Tribuni Plebis) the lesser Council consists. Both Burgomasters and Tfunft-meisters, Tribunes and Senators rule alternately. The old Senators, or that half of the lesser Council which was in power the precedent year, do first debate and agree upon any business of moment before it be pro∣pounded to the new Senate; who afterwards con∣firm or reject as they please. The Great Council (which is assembled by the ordinary Council upon weighty occasions) consists of all the Magistrates, viz. The 12 Viri and all the lesser or ordinary Council. The lesser Council Judges in criminal Causes. In this City is an University founded by Pope Pius the Second. The University-Senate consists of the seventeen Professors. The Names of the pre∣sent Professors in each Faculty, now Anno 1663. are, In DIVINITY, Johannes Buxtorfius Professor Veteris Testamenti & Linguae Hebraicae. Joh. Rudolphus Wetstenius Professor N. Testamenti. Lucas Kamlerus primarius Pastor & Prof. Controver∣siarum.
In LAW. Remigius Fechsius Pandectarum Prof. He has col∣lected many Rarities. Lucas Burchardus Cod. Prof. magnificus Rector. Jacobus Brandmullerus Institut. Prof. In MEDICINE. Emmanuel Stupanus Med. Theor. Prof. Joh. C. Bauhinus pater, Praxeos Prof. Hieronymus Bauhinus F. Anatomes & Botanices Prof. Of these two the Father is the Son, and the Son consequently the Grand-child of that famous Herbarist and Anatomist Caspar Bauhinus. In PHILOSOPHY and Humane Literature. Christophorus Feesius, frater Remigii, Histor. Prof. Rheinhardus Iselius Ethic. Prof. Rudolphus Burchardus, cognatus Lucae, Mathem. Prof. Mr. Henricus Keselbachius, Phys. Prof. Fridericus Burchardus, Henrici patruus, Orat. & Eloq. Prof. Samuel Burchardus, Logicae Prof. cognatus cate∣rorum. Simon Bathienus, Rhet. Prof. Joh. Zuingerus, Gr. Linguae Prof. The Professors are to read every day in the week in Term-time, except Thursdays and Sun∣days, their Stipends are small and not a competent maintenance. Here are no Doctors in Divinity created beside the Professors, and some the condition of whose places require that Degree. In Law they confer two
Degrees, Doctor and Licentiate; in Medicine only Do∣ctor; in Philosophy, Master and Batchelour. The Ecclesiastical Government is by the three Professors of the first Faculty, the four Scholarchae and all the Ministers. When a Benefice happens to be vacant, the Senate nominates three to it, out of which the Ministers chuse one. The City-Ministers have a certain Stipend in Money; in the Countrey-Villa∣ges the Ministers have part of their Allowance in Tithes, and part in Money. No Minister before or after Imposition of hands is obliged by Oath or Promise to continue his Profession so long as he lives, but may leave his Ministry when he pleases, and betake himself to some other Calling. This and all other the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland are of the Reformed Religion. In this City Erasmus Rot.Erasmus. lived the latter part of his time, and here he died and lies buried in the great Church, where there is a fair Marble Monu∣ment erected to his Memory, against a Pillar on the North side of the Communion-Table. He founded and endowed a College in Basil, wherein are main∣tained 20 persons, eighteen whereof are to be Stu∣dents in Divinity, who may live there as long as they please, provided they follow their Studies and continue unmarried: only the Magistrates have a power to command them thence to another kind of life. Of the other two one is a Bedel, and the other a School-master. Over this College there is a Regent, without whose leave no Student may lodge out of the House one night. Ten of the Stu∣dents are to be Basileans and ten Strangers. At the great Church is preserved Erasmus his Library, cal∣led Bibliotheca Amberbachiana,Bibliothe∣ca Amber∣bachiana. because Erasmus be∣queathed it o Amberbachius, by his last Will and Testament, which we saw written with his own hand in half a Sheet of Paper, Dated the 12. of Fe∣bruary, 1536. In this Library are preserved many
good Pieces and Designs of Holbenius a famous Painter born in Basil: A Box full of Diplomata, gi∣ven to Erasmus by the Pope, Emperor and several Kings and Princes of Europe. Erasmus his Seal and Ring: A fair Gold Medal sent to Erasmus by the King of Poland: Many antient and modern Coins and Medals: Three Rappers (i. e. small Pieces of Money of a mixt Metal not so big as a Silver Penny of the value of a Farthing) turned into Gold by Leon. Turnitius a famous Alchymist of this place, who turned the Nail at Florence: Several antient Entaglie: Many Papers of Amberbachius, concerning the Antiquities of Augusta Rauracorum, formerly a great City, now a Village called Augst, not far di∣stant from Basil. The great Church or Cathedral at Basil was built by the Emperor Henry II. who married Cunigunda the Daughter of an English King. S. Pantalus an English man was the first Bishop here. The graver sort of Citizens and Magistrates wear Ruffs and Steeple-Caps. The Professors and Mini∣sters wear the same Caps and Ruffs, and besides short Gowns, which reach little lower than their Knees. Many of the Countrey-Boors wear Straw-Hats. The Women wear their Coats very short, and some of them little round Caps on their Heads, very like the young Scholars Caps in Cambridge, but less; and a Tin-Girdle about their Wasts. We saw in this City Dr. Fel. Platerus his Musaeum or Cabinet, wherein there is a good Collection of Minerals, Stones, Me∣tals, dried Fishes, and other natural and artificial Rarities, gathered by Tho. Platerus the Father, and Fel. Platerus the Son, and disposed in a good Me∣thod, the Names being set to each one. Here and at Zurich are Sermons every day in the week at seve∣ral Churches. David George that monstrous Fanatic died in this City, at whose Death there happened a great Tem∣pest of Thunder and Lightning, and a Thunder-bolt brake into his House.
About Basil we found growing wild beside what we had before met withal, Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta, Passerina Tragi among the Corn. Phalangium parvo flore ramosius, Blitum minus album J. B. in fime∣tis. Cymbalaria Italica hederacea, in muris urbis ad portam quae Argentinam ducit. Stoebe major calyculis non splendentibus, in marginibus agrorum & muris passim toto itinere à Frankendaliâ ad Basileam usque. Polium montanum Lavendulae folio, Consolida media Genevensis J. B. & Cneorum Matthioli seu Thymelaea minor Cordi. But if any one desires a more parti∣cular account of what Plants grow wild about Basil, C. Bathinus his Catalogus Plantarum circa Basileam nascentium will give him full satisfaction. August 10. from Basil we set forward for Zurich. At the end of one Dutch mile we passed Augst, sup∣posed to have been Augusta Rauracorum. There we view'd the Ruines of an antient Building, judged by Amberbachius to have been an Amphitheater. Next we rode fast by a wall'd Town on the Rhene subject to the Archduke of Inspruck. On the Hills here∣about we first saw Fir-trees growing wild. Then we passed through Bruck a pretty little walled Town having one handsom Street well built with tall Houses of Stone, and Fountains in the middle, and lodged at the Baths of Baden six miles distant from Basil. This day we first took notice of the little green Tree-Frogs. The Baths here are said to be sixty in number, but small; the Water is very hot. Baden is a walled Town, seated on the side of a Hill by the River Limagus, about half an English mile distant from the Baths. Here the Delegates of the thirteen Cantons meet and sit. The poor People put a Cheat upon Strangers, bringing them to sell (as they pretend) fossile Dice, which they say, they dig out of the Earth naturally so figured and marked. But I am well assured, such as they brought us were artificial Dice, and if they dig'd them out
of the Earth, they first buried them there them∣selves. From Baden, Aug. 11. we rode along by the Limagus on one hand, and fair Vineyards on the other to Zurich. Zurich is pleasantly situate at the end of a Lake call'd Zurich-Sea,Zurich. scarce so big as Basil, but I think more populous. The River Limagus which runs out of the Lake divides it into two almost equal parts, which are joined together by two Bridges; one very broad for Carts and Horses to pass over. The Houses are built of Timber with Clay-Walls, handsomly painted, many of them four or five Sto∣ries high. The Streets are narrow but well paved with Flints and great Pebbles. This City is as well fortified as the Situation of it will permit, besides the Wall, being encompassed round with good Earthworks and Trenches after the modern fashion. The River Sele runs by and gives defence to it on the South side, and a little lower empties itself into the Limagus. The Citizens are given to Merchan∣dise, all very busie and industrious. They either are rich or at least so esteemed, and therefore envied by their Neighbours of the Romish Religion. Here are no Guards of Soldiers at the City-Gates; no Strangers examined or searcht either at coming in or going out. We observed the colour of the Wa∣ter of the Zurich-Sea to be greenish and well ap∣proaching to that of Sea-water. Afterwards we found the Water of all the Lakes and Rivers near the Alpes to be of the same colour, at which we were not a little surprised. For we were wont to attribute that colour in the Sea-water to the mixture of Salt that is in it, whereas the Water of these Lakes and Rivers discovers to the Tast nothing of Salt or brackish. But afterwards considering that these Wa∣ters did consist for the most part of Snow dissolved; and that Snow is supposed to contein good store of nitrous Salt, we thought it not altogether impro∣bable
that this Colour may be owing to the nitrous Particles remaining in the Water, though they be not copious enough to affect our Tast; and it would be worth the while to distil good quantities of this Water, to see whether it would leave any Salt be∣hind. That these Lakes and Rivers do consist for the most part of Snow-water it is manifest, for that upon the Mountains (excepting the lower parts of them) no Rain falls in Winter-time, but only Snow, with which the higher parts of them are covered to a great thickness for at least six moneths in the year; and for that the Rivers that flow from the Alpes run lowest in Winter, and abound most with Water in the Summer-time; so that sometimes they over∣flow their Banks in the hottest moneths of the year, and when no Rain falls▪ as my self can testifie con∣cerning the River Rhodanus; because the Sun at the season melts the Snow upon the Mountains. Hence it appears, that their Opinion was not so absurd who attributed the yearly Increase and Overflowing of the River Nilus to the dissolution of the Snow upon those Mountains where it hath its first Rise. Though I do not think this to be the true Cause, partly because that part of the Earth where those Mountains lie is so hot by reason of its Situation under the direct and sometimes perpendicular Beams of the Sun, that it's not likely any Snow should fall, much less lie there: chiefly because Travellers gene∣rally agree, that in most parts of that Climate where those Mountains lie, there are at that time of the year great falls of Rain, to which therefore the Overflowing of Nilus is more probably attributed. The Government of this City is by a greater and a lesser Council. The lesser Council consists of 50, viz. 24 Tribunes or Masters of the Companies chosen by the twelve Tribes or Companies, into which the City is divided, two by each Company.
These 24 are called Zwelvers because twelve of them only are regent at once. Twelve Senators, chosen out of the Companies, one out of each Company by the greater Council according to our Informa∣tion, according to Simler by the lesser. Six, elected by the same greater Council as we were informed, but according to Simler by the lesser, out of the People indifferently where they please; four Tribuni nobilium chosen by the Gentlemen; two Senatores nobilium; and two Burgomasters or Consuls chosen by the Council of 200. The Consuls and half this Council rule by turns, viz. 12 Zwelvers and 12 Se∣nators with one Consul one half year and the other half the next; and this half that rules is called Con∣cilium novum. All the 50 meet every week, and if any Decree be to be made, it is dated in the presence of the Concilium novum & vetus. All the 50 hear Civil Causes, Simler saith eight chosen by the 50; and the Concilium novum judge in Criminals alone. The greater Council consists of 200, viz. 144 elected out of the Tribes, twelve out of each Tribe; 18 cho∣sen by the Noblemen among themselves; 24 Zwel∣vers; 4 Tribuni nobilium; 2 Senatores nobilium; the 6 elected indifferently, and the two Burgomasters. Why the twelve chosen by the greater Council should be left out, we know not, and therefore suspect our Information was not good about the making up the great Council; but of the 12 out of each Tribe, and 18 out of the Noblemen we are sure. This great Coun∣cil chuses Landvoghts, and assembles upon impor∣tant occasions that concern the whole Common∣wealth. They elect four Stadthalters or Proconsuls out of the 24 Masters of the Companies; two Sekelmasters or Treasurers either out of the twelve Senators of the Companies or the twelve Tribunes of the Concilium novum. Half the lesser Council is chosen every half year at Christmas and Midsummer. The Concilium vetus goes out, and then the Concilium
novum becomes vetus, and chuses a new Concilium novum, but for the most part the same are chosen again. Aug. 12. from Zurich we travelled to Schaffhaussen,Schauff∣haussen. passing by a great Cascate or Catarract of the River Rhene called Wasserfall; near to which we first ob∣served Orobus sylvaticus purpureus vernus and Hepatica nobilis growing wild. This Journey we also found Vlmaria major sive Barba capri by a little Bridge not far from Schaffhaussen. Schaffhaussen is seated upon the River Rhene, over which there is here a Bridge, part of Wood and part of Stone. All Boats or Flotes that come down the River must here unload, there being no passing further by reason of great Stones in the Chanel, and the precipitious Descent of the water at Wasserfall. This Town is well-built, (the Houses being most of Stone) walled about and intrencht. It hath two fair Streets handsomly paved, besides many other small ones. Here as at Zurich, the Citizens when they walk abroad wear their Swords. As to the Civil Government, the Citizens are divided into twelve Tribes or Companies. Each Tribe chuses two Tribuni Plebis, and these 24 make the lesser or ordinary Council. The great Council consists of these and sixty more, chosen also by the Companies, each Company chusing five. The Father and Son, or two Brothers cannot be together of the Council. By the greater Council are chosen yearly two Con∣suls or Burgomasters, two Quaestors, one Proconsul, and one Aedilis, but for the most part they chuse the same. All Causes Civil and Criminal are tried be∣fore the lesser Council. Every one of the twenty four hath 52 Florens and  modii frumenti allowed him yearly. Aug. 13. we rode to Constance.Constance By the way we found Horminum luteum glutinosum sive Colus Jovis, and in a Wood upon a Mountain Pyrolafolio mucro∣nato
serrato, Pseudoasphodelus Alpinus, Anonymus flore Coluteae, & Sonchus caeruleus latifolius. Constance is an Imperial City pleasantly situate in a fair Level by the Rhene side,Bodenzee and at the end of the Bodenzee or Lake of Constance, called antiently Lacus Brigantinus and Lacus Acronius. There is a long Bridge over the River or Lake, made part of Wood and part of Stone. The Streets of the City are fair, and the Buildings of Stone. The Council that was held here Anno Dom. 1417. at which John Hus was con∣demned hath made this place well known. For what end this Council was assembled and what they did, the following Inscription on the Council-house will acquaint the Reader: Gaude clara Domus, pacem populo generâsti Christicolae, dum Pontifices tres Sohismate vexant; Tunc omnes abigit Synodus quam tu tenuisti. Ipse sedem scandit Martinus nomine quintus Dam quadringentos numerant post mille Salutis Festo Martini decem & septem simul annos. This Town is also famous for the Resistance it made to the Suedish Forces commanded by Horn, besieging of it Anno 1598. vid. Galeazzo. Yet it seemed to me but slenderly fortified, having toward the Water only a Wall, and toward the Land an earthen Rampart or Wall and Ditch drawn at a good distance from the Stone-Wall. It hath indeed advantage by its Situation, having a Lake on one side and a fenny Level on the other. Aug. 15. we took Boat, and crossed the Bodenzee from Constance over to Lindaw,Lindaw. and by the way had a fair Prospect of the strong Town of Oberlingen. Lindaw standeth in the middle of the Lake envi∣ron'd with Water. It is joined to the Land by a Bridge of 290 paces, one half of it being Stone, and the other (that is that next the Town) Wood,
which may upon occasion easily be taken down and removed. This City besides its natural Strength by reason of its Situation, is also artificially fortified with stout Walls and Bulwarks standing in the Wa∣ter, that side most which is nearest the Land. On that side toward the Lake are many Rows of great Stakes driven into the ground, to hinder the ap∣proach of any Boat or Vessel to the Town. So that a man would think this place impregnable. The Streets and Houses are not so spatious and fair as those of Constance, yet proper enough: Several Fountains also there are in the Streets. Towards the Bodenzee are two Walls, and between the Walls a large vacant space of Land wherein Vineyards are planted, of the Grapes whereof are said to be made yearly 100 Fudders, that is 300 English Hogsheads of Wine. Eight Villages belong to this City, their Territory extending about three hours. For Plants we found not far from Lindaw in the mountainous Woods, Erica procumbens herbacea, Scahiosa latifolia rubro flore, Gentiana Asclepiadis fo∣lio, and in the moister places Vlmaria major sive Barba capri, & Lactuca montana purpuro-caerulea major C. B. In the moist Meadows Pneumonanthe plentifully. On the Banks of a small River running into the Bo∣denzee near Lindaw, Myrica sylv. altera Clus. In the moist and fenny places near the Lake both here and at Constance, Gratiola vulgaris plentifully. Aug. 17. we rode Post from Constance toward Munchen in Bavaria. The several Stages where we changed Horses were (1.) Wangen a small Imperial Town,Wangen. two miles distant from Lindaw. (2.) Laykirk,Laykirk. another small Imperial Town, two miles further on. (3.) Memmingen,Memmin∣gen. a free City of the Empire, and one of the chiefest of Suevia both for Greatness and Strength. The Streets are broad, Water running through them. (4.) Mundelheim a small Town under the Duke of Bavaria,Mundel∣heim. where we lodged. (5.) Lans∣berg,
a pretty Town,Lans∣berg. with a handsom Fountain in the Market-place built in 1663. four German miles from Mundelheim. From hence we rode through no considerable Town till we came to Munchen, pas∣sing by the Ammerzee,Ammer∣zee Lake. a great Lake about three Ger∣man miles in length, where we had the Alps or some very high Mountains in Prospect. All Strangers that enter MunchenMunchen are first strictly examined at the Gate, their Names sent in to the the Governour, and they deteined till the return of the Messenger with leave for their Admission. This City is very strongly walled and fortified, and for the bigness of it is the most splendid and beautiful place we have seen in all Germany, so that well might Cluverius term it omnium Germanicarum pul∣cherrimam. The Streets are broad and streight, a∣dorned with sumptuous Churches and Cloisters, and stately Houses. Above all the Dukes Palace deserves Respect, not to say Admiration, it being the most magnificent and sumptuous Edifice for a House, that we have any where hitherto seen beyond the Seas. In the great Garden of this Palace we saw many rare Plants, among the rest we especially took no∣tice of the Aloe-trees (for so I may well call them for the Greatness and Highth of their Stalks which shoot up in one year) of which there were more, I verlly think, in this one Garden than in all Europe besides; I mean of such as came to Stalk and Flower. In this City so far remote from our native Countrey it seemed strange to us to find a Cloister of English Nuns. We thought it worth noting that the Bodies of the Churches here are filled with Pews and Seats, as ours in England, whereas generally in the Chur∣ches of the Roman-Catholics there are no fixed Seats, or but very few; the People either standing to hear their Sormons, or sitting on moveable Benches and Stools; that so when the Sermon is ended the Body of the Church may be again cleared. Having view∣ed
Munchen, the nearness of Augsburgh invited us thither, where we arrived August 21. having pas∣sed by the way a pleasant little Town belonging to an Abby of Bernardines called Pruck; and after that a little walled Town seated on a Hill, called Frid∣berg. Augsburgh is a great City about eight miles in Compass,Augs∣burgh. well walled and trenched about, standing upon the River Lech; The Houses for the most part well-built, the Streets adorned with several stately Fountains: The Armory comparable to that of Stras∣burgh, consisting of twelve Rooms filled with Arms and Weapons of all sorts; The Stadthouse next to that of Amsterdam the fairest and most stately of any we have yet seen; in which there is one upper Room or Chamber very large and high-rooft, paved with Marble, richly gilt and painted both Roof and Walls, and in all respects scarce to be parallel'd. The Ci∣tizens are divided between Papists and Lutherans, these latter being esteemed double the number of the former; yet have they seven Cloisters of Men and five of Women, whereof one English. Very few Reformed here. This is a free City of the Empire and governed by its own Magistrates. It seems to me at present for the bigness not very populous, and is, I believe, somewhat decayed, and short of what it hath been, both as to Riches and Multitude of Inhabitants: which may be attributed to the Losses and Injuries i susteined in the late Wars. In a large Plain not far from Augsburgh, over which you pass going thence to Munchen, we observed many rare Plants, viz. Tithymalus verrucosus, Trifolium pratense album à Fuchsio depictum sive mas J. B. Pseudo-asphodelus Al∣pinus C. B. Thlaspi clypeatum asperifolium seu biscuta∣tum; Horminum sylv. latifolium Ger. Phalangium parvo flore non ramosum C. B. Carlina herbariorum Lob. Getianella Autumnalis flore caruleo quinquefolio, ca∣lyce pentagono grandi. Floris tubus è calyce non emi∣net,
ut in hujus generis aliis; sed folia tantùm ex∣panduntur supra margines calycis, ut in Caryophyllis. Gentianellae species minima flore unico caeruleo elegan∣tissimo, an minima Bavarica? Linum sylvestre latifo∣lium caule viscoso flore rubro C. B. fortè. Folia habet pilosa, acuminata, modicè lata, nervis quinque per longitudinem decurrentibus, longitudine foliorum Lini: flos quinquefolius, coloris incarnati, ut vo∣cant, saturatioribus & velut sanguineis lineolis stria∣tus; Radix lignosa est, & per plures annos durare videtur. Cirsii seu cardui duae species: Priori flos Cirsii nostri Anglicani flori simillimus, & in uno caule plerun{que} unicus; verùm folia pallidè sunt vi∣ridia, profundè laciniata & spinulis horrida; ad modum ferè Cardui viarum vulgatissimi: Alteri, quae jam defloruerat, folia viridia, non laciniata, breviora & latiora quàm praecedenti, in ambitu spi∣nosa, & Hyoseris masculi foliis figurâ suâ nonnihil similia. Saxifraga Venetorum, Daucus montanus Apii foliis, flore luteo; Another sort of umbelliferous Plant very like to the Figure of Caucalis Peucedani folio; Lotus siliquosa lutea Monspeliensis J. B. near the River Lech, as also Bellis caerulea Monspeliaca Ger. Dorynio congener planta; Thalictrum angustissimo fo∣lio. By the way-side near the City in sandy Ground Rhamnus primus Diascoridis; and all about in stony places Caryophyllus gramineo folio minimus; not to mention those that we had elsewhere seen, v. g. Aster Atticus Italorum flore purpureo; Mezereon Ger∣manicum, Asclepias flore albo, Anonymus flore Colu∣teae, &c. Aug. 28. we departed from Augsburgh, and being loth to leave behind us unseen so considerable a City as Nurenberg, which Cluver calls Germanicarum su∣perbissimam, we bestowed three days on a Journey almost directly backwards to see it. The first day, after the Riding of six German miles we crossed the Danow over a Wooden Bridge to Donavert,Donavert a prett
Town belonging to the Duke of Bavaria, where we lodged. The second being the 29. of August we pas∣sed through two walled Towns,Mon∣haim. viz. Monhaim and Papenhaim,Papen∣haim. and lodged at Weissenbergh an Imperial Town of some note, the Inhabitants whereof are all Lutherans,Weissen∣bergh. it is ive miles distant from Donavert. Nigh this Town is a strong Fort built upon a Hill, belonging to the Marquess of Anspach, who is also a Lutheran. The third day being the thirtieth, we passed through a small walled Town called Pleinfeldt,Plein∣feldt. and at three miles distance we rode close beside another walled Town called Rotte,Rotte. under the Marquess of Anspach, and after two hours riding more through Woods of Pine, we arrived at Nurenberg,Nuren∣berg. which City we found to answer if not exceed our Expecta∣tion; it being the most stately and best built that we have seen in Germany. The Houses are for the most part of Free-Stone, and were they but as uni∣form as those of the Low-Countrey-Towns, Nuren∣berg would not for Beauty give place to any of them. Besides it is rich, populous, and for bigness I think not inferiour to the best in Germany, though I am not ignorant that in this last respect some give Collen, some Erfurt the Preeminence. It hath under it a large Territory, comprehending above 100 Towns and Vil∣lages. The Countrey round about is barren and san∣dy▪ and the City far distant from the Sea, and standing upon but a small River; notwithstanding which Dis∣advantages, by the Industry of the people, it is become one of the best traded and most potent Towns in Ger∣many. The Inhabitants are for the most part Luthe∣rans; they seemed to us in the Ornaments of their Churches and manner of their Worship more to sym∣bolize with the Roman-Catholics than any other People of that Profession we had then observed. The Papists are allowed a small Church within the Walls, but the Reformed none. The great Piazza, the
Stadt-house and other public Buildings deserve re∣membrance. This Town wants not for Walls and Ditches, being every way well fenced and fortified. Finally, it is an Imperial City or Free Common∣wealth, being governed by a Senate and Magistrates of its own: but of the Model or Form of Govern∣ment for want of good Acquaintance, we could not get a perfect account. As for Plants, we found no great variety near the City, but by the way we came from Augsburgh, we observed in several Woods near Papenhaim, Caryo∣phyllus flore tenuissimè dissecto C. B. Not far from Weissenberg, Draba lutea siliquis strictissimis C. B. Gen∣tianula lanugine ad singulorum foliorum lacinias donata, flore quadripartito J. B. Buglossum angustifolium, Cytisus Gesneri cui flores ferè spicati J. B. and a kind of Plant like to our Meadow Saxifrage, but taller and larger, An Seseli pratense Lob.? September 3. from Nurenberg we began our Jour∣ney to Ratisbone or Regensberg. This day we pro∣ceeded no further than Aldtdorf, a little walled Town and an University belonging to the Nuren∣bergers, where there is a pretty Physic-Garden. This Inscription in a Cloister in the College conteins the History of the Founding of this University. Hoc Pietatìs & Doctrinarum omnium laudandum Do∣micilium inclytus Senatus Noriberg. liberaliter extrui curavit die quae BB. Petro & Paulo sacra; inauguravit & publicavit, Anno Salutis MDLXXV. imperante D. Maximiliano II. Caes. Aug. PP. Cura∣toribus Eccles. & Scholarum Georgio Volcomero, Philippo Geudero, & Hieronymo Baumgraffnero, Oppidi{que} Praefecto Balthasare Baumgraffnero. Ades ô Deus & piis conatibus volens propitius fave, ut certè favor exinde numinis eluxit, dum Anno quidem MDLXXVIII. subscribente votis landatissimi Sena∣tûs autoritate & clementiâ augustissimi & invictissimi
Imperatoris Rudolphi II. Curatoribus Hieronymo Baumgraffnero, Vilibaldo Schlisselfeldero, Bar∣tholomaeo Poemero & Julio Geudero in culmen Academiae Gymnasium evexit: tandem{que} Anno Aerae Christianae MDCXXIII. ejusdem Senatûs desiderium sanctissimum prosperante divinitus amplissimâ indul∣gentiâ sacratissimi Caesaris Augusti D. Ferdinandi II. Scholarchis Christophoro Furero, Georgio Christ. Volcomero, Udalrico Grundero & Carolo Schlif∣selfeldero Universitatis titulo privilegiisque per∣beavit. Fac proprium hoc nobis bonum, ô Fons aeterne boni. In the College are mainteined 36 Students at the Charges of the City of Nurenberg, which also pays the Professors their Stipends. The Degrees confer∣red here are Doctor of Law, Physic and Poetry, Batchelour of Divinity and Master of Arts. As for Plants there is a double Catalogue put out by Dr. Mauritius Hofman: one of such as are nursed up and preserved in the Physic-Garden: the other of such as grow wild near the Town; in the compo∣sing of which he seems to have taken much pains, so that I believe this Catalogue is very full and exact. Dr. Hofman shewed us several Cornua Ammonis, or Serpent-Stones and some petrified Cochle and Muscle-shells found in the Fields and Hop-Gardens near Altdorf, of which we our selves the day fol∣lowing as we travelled from thence to Nieumarkt, in some fields we passed through, observed, and ga∣thered up good store. Of these kinds of Bodies, I shall here take leave by way of digression to discourse a little: And first I shall make a particular enume∣ration of some of the most remarkable places where they have been found, as well in England as beyond the Seas, partly of my own Observation, partly out of good Writers. Secondly, I shall give the Opi∣nions
of the best Authors concerning the Original and Production of them. First then those places of England which afford plen∣ty of these petrified Shells are (1.) Whithy or Whitebay in the North Riding of York-shire, where (as Camden relates in his Description of that Country) Lapides in∣veniuntur serpentum in spiram revolutorum effigie, naturae ludentis miraculum.—Serpentes olim fuissê crederes quos lapideus cortex intexisset. Besides these Serpent-Stones which he alone mentions, we found there both upon the Shores and in the rocky Cliffs by the Sea-side petrified Muscles and Belemnites in great plenty. (2.) Huntley-nabb, on the same Coast, not far from Whitby to the Northwards, where (as the same Camden relates) upon the Shores under the Cliffs lie Stones varia magnitudine tam affabrè sphaericâ figurâ à natura efformati, ut globi artificis manu in majorum tormentorum usum tornati videantur. In quibus effractis Inveniuntur Serpentes saxei, suis spiris revoli, sed qui pleri{que} capitihus destituti. At this place I never was, but upon the Shore at Whitby, I observed many of this kind of Balls, that is, Ser∣pent-stones crusted over with or enclosed in another Stone, as in their Case or Matrix, and leaving there∣in when broken, their Impression, but none of that exact sphaerical roundness he mentions, but rather of a lenticular figure. (3.) Alderley in Glocester∣shire mentioned by the same Author in his Descri∣ption of that Country. Ad fontes Avon fluvioli (saith he) vix vcto mill. pass. à litore in collibus prope Alderley viculum lapides cochlearum & ostrearum specie enascun∣tu, quae sive viva fuerint aliquando animantia, sive naturae ludicra quoerant Philosophi naturae venatores. (4.) Kinesham or Cainsham in Somersetshire, not far from Alderley, so called (saith Camden) from Keina a holy British Virgin, quam serpentes in lapides mutasse superioris aevi credulitas multis persuasit, eò quòd ejusmodi Indeulis naturae miracula ibi in latomiis nonnunquam
inveniantur, Vidimus enim lapidem hinc delatum ser∣pentis in spiram revoluti effigie, cujus caput imperfectius in circumferentia prominuit, extremâ cauda centrum occupante. Of these Serpent-Stones we saw several sorts here, and some of that extraordinary bigness, that (as I remember) they were about a Foot in Dia∣meter. (5.) Farnham in Surrey, mentioned by Dr. Merret in his Pinax. (6.) Richmond in York-shire mentioned by Camden. Beside which places my self and Friends have seen and gathered of them at Lyme in Dorsetshire, Adderbury in Oxfordshire (which doubtless thence had its name) about five miles di∣stant from Banbury, Bricksworth in Northamptonshire, and in several places near Daventry, Verulam in Hartfordshire, Shukborough in Warwickshire. And which is most strange, Mr. Eyre of Highlooe in the Peak of Derbyshire shew'd us a great lump of them amassed together by a Cement as hard as Marble, found in that mountainous Countrey; And Mr. Mar∣tin Lister assures us that there are store of them found in Craven the most mountainous and craggy part of York-shire: and in a Discourse of his con∣cerning them, published in the Philosophical Tran∣sactions, Numb. 76. pag. 2283. he mentions for them Adderton in York-shire, thence denominated, Wansford Bridge in Northamptonshire, and Gunthrop and Beau∣voir. Castle in Lincoln and Nottingham-shires. Besides these petrified Shells there are found in several places of England other congenerous Bodies, viz. Star stones, by some called Astroites; by Boetius de Boot, Asterias vera seu Lapis stellaris; by Gesner, Sphragis Asteros; by Fer. Imperat. Stella Judaica. (2.) S. Cuthhert's Beads or Trochites and (3.) Cap-Stones or Echinites, called by Naturalists Lapides brontioe. Of the Glossopetrae I have not yet heard that there have been any found in England, which I do not a little wonder at, there being Sharks frequently taken upon our Coasts.
1. Of those they call Star-Stones (because they run out into five Angles like so many Rays as they use to picture Stars with) there are found at Shukborough in Warwick-shire and Cassington near Glocester, where we also have gathered of them. Camden mentions a third place, that is Beauvoir-Castle in Lincolnshire, sub quo (saith he) inveniuntur Astroites lapides, qui stellas invicem connexas repraesentant, in quibus radii eminent singulis angulis quini, & singulis radiis cavitas media subsidet. We have had them also sent us out of York-shire, but remember not where they were ga∣thered. II. Those they call S. Cuthhert's Beads are found on the Western shore of the s Holy Island. This last Summer [1671.] Tho. Willisell discovered them in the Chinks of the Stones in the bottom of the Cha∣nel of the River Tees, which parts York-shire and the Bishoprick of Duresine. These are round and not angular like the Star-Stones. Both (if they be owing to the Sea) seem to be the Spinoe dorsales or Tail-Bones of Fishes petrified, they consisting for the most part of several Plates or Pieces sticking to∣gether like so many vertebrae, though I confess the particular Pieces are shorter or thinner than the Ver∣tebres of any Fish I have as yet observed. III. The Echinites or Brontiae are found scattered all over England of several magnitudes and shapes. I have not heard of any Bed of them or great num∣ber found in one place. Beyond the Seas we have (besides the place which gave occasion to this Dis∣course) found of them at Brescia in Lombardy on the sides of a Hill adjoining to the City: upon the Banks of the River Tanaro in Piedmont four miles be∣low Aste, but most plentifully in the Island of Malta, where we also saw great store of Glossopetrae or Sharks Teeth petrified of all sorts and sizes. For the Glossopetroe, Boetius de Boot lib. 2. cap. 168. saith they are found in the Sands near Daventer in
Overyssel, and in the Alum-Mines near Lunenburgh in Germany. Goropius Becanus in Orig. Antverp. l. 3. saith that they are often digged up in the Ditches about Antwerp; and found in so great plenty in a Hill near Aken in Germany, that he thinks it a good Argument to prove that they could not be the Teeth of Sharks: In colle illo qui Aquisgrano imminet tantum id genus piscium fuisse qúis crederet quantum de Glosso∣petrarum copia conjectari deberet. For petrified Cochles and other Sea-Shells, Geo. Agricola saith there are found of them in the Stone-Quarries of Galgeberg and those beyond Mount Maurice in the Territory of Hildesheim in Saxony; and sometimes in the new part of the City itself in digging of Cellars and in the Town-Ditch, (2.) At Alfeld in the same Saxony between the Watch-Tower and the Town as one goes to Embeck. (3.) At Hannover in the Lime or Chalk-stone Pits, and near a Village called Lindaw. (4.) In Misnia in the Vil∣lage Rabschyts near the Brook Trebitia. (5.) In a certain place of Prussia called the Rose- Garden. (6.) In Hassi near the Castle of Spangeberg. (7.) In Italy in a Mountain near Verona. (8.) In the Banks of the River Elsa, & prope oppidum ex Florentinis condi∣toribus nominatum. Of these Shells amassed together into great Stones by a petrified Cement are found (as Pausanias relates) in the Quarries of Megara, which kind of Stone is therefore called Conchites. They are also found in Thessaly, Hemionia, Mace∣donia, the Mountains of Calabria, &c. And Steno in his Prodromus saith, that in those huge Stones which lie scattered in some places about the Town of Volterra (being the remainders of antient Walls) there are found all sorts of Shells, and not long since in the middle of the Market-place there was cut out a Stone full of streaked Cochles. Jo. Bauhine saith that in the Slate-stone digged out of the Foun∣tain of Boll, where with the Inhabitants covered their
Houses, there appeared several Figures, whereof some represented Serpents, some Snails, some Scal∣lops, some Cochles, some Muscles, &c. and that there were digged up many petrified Shells of Cochles, Muscles, Scallops, Periwinkles, Cornua Ammonis, &c. Scaliger Exercitat. 196. Sect. 9. saith, In saxis La∣narum (tractus est hic Agri Vasateusis) ad pagum qui Cohors dicitur, saxeos canros multos vidimus, procul à mari plurimum, â Garumnâ 30 circiter millia passuum. Bernardus Palissius names these places in France where petrified Shells are found; The Suburb of S. Martial near Paris; The Mountains of the Forest of Arden, especially near Sedan; The Province of Valois; The Mountains near Sissons; The Province of Xantogae and Champagne. Joannes de Laet in his second Book de Gemmis, cap. 29. relates how Bartholomew Morisot wrote to him from Dijon in Burgundy, that in a Rock near that City at the distance from the Sea, called le Fort aux Feos, were found great numbers of Stones imi∣tating Sea-shells, his words are, Vbique prostant lapi∣des formâ rotundâ ac striatâ, qui ipsam superinduisse videntur Conchyliorum marin orum materiem, uesio quo sale per infirmiora crescentium lapidum penetrante, pau∣latimque ita crescente ut ambienti undi{que} lapidi unifor∣mem Conchyliorum formam faciat, nist quod alia aliis majora sint, ita ut si lapidi lapident attriveris, è medio utrisque conchyli lapidea rumpant, obversa, transversa, mixta, inaequali quidem poportione sed formâ unâ, &c. The same Joannes de Laet gives us another Rela∣tion from Jacobus Salmasius Uncle to Claudius Sal∣masius and Lord of Sauvignac, of great store of these petrified Shells found in the stony Fields about Sau∣vignac, which I shall here exhibit to the Reader in his own words; Pagus ille Salviniacum uno milliari distat ab Avallono, ut nun appellatur, vel ut prius
vocabatur Aballono, & 3 aut 4 mil. à Vezelio poetria Theodori Bezae. Hujus pagi ager arabilis montosus est & lapidosus totus, qui tamen est feracissimus. In la∣pidibus illis reperiuntur inserta quasi ex differenti lapi∣dis materia omne genus conchylia aliquando plura, ali∣quando pauciora prout est ipsius saxi magnitudo. Visun∣tur ibi Pectines, Ostrea, Solenes, Cornua Hammonis & alia genera. In toto illo tractu per spatium trium aut quatuor milliarium haec  in agris reperi∣untur us{que} ad appidum vel castrum Montis Regalis, no∣mine Mont-real, cujus ditionis ager consitus est totus hujusmodi lapidibus varias conchyliorum species, partim interis inserts, partim in superficie etiam extantes praeferentibus. In Italy besides the places already mentioned, we were told, that there were found of these Shells in the Territory of Modena in a Mountain called Monte Nicani, and in the Chanel of a River near Vdine in Friuli thence called Rivus miraculorum, and doubt∣less in many other places. And for the Lon-Coun∣tries, Goropius l'ecanus saith, Apud vicinos nostros Limburgos, Leodios, Chondrusios, Namurcos, Han∣nones, Atrebates, Tornacenses, & alios multos, à quibus vel Marmora nobis vel alia lapidum genera ad∣vehuntur, non parva est concharum copia & varietas. Vidi in silice durissimo Bethunis advecto, quo viae apud nos sternuntur, tot conchulas totas lapideas, & conclusis valvulis integras, magnâ ut curd & arte ex illis fuisse caemento aliquo compactus judicaretur. Besides all which places and others mentioned by Writers I doubt not but in Italy, Germany, France, England and the Low-Countries there are many not taken notice of where these Bodies might be found, were diligent Search and Observation made. That they have not been discovered or taken notice of in other parts of Europe and in Asia and Africa is cer∣tainly to be attributed to the Negligence and Rede∣ness of the People who mind nothing that is curious,
or to the want of learned Writers who should com∣municate the Histories of them to the World. I come now to give an account of the Opinions of the best Authors concerning the Original and Pro∣duction of these Stones. The first and to me most probable Opinion is that they were originally the Shells or Bones of living Fishes and other Animals bred in the Sea. This was the general Opinion of the Antients, insomuch that Steno saith, It was never made a Question among them, whether such Bodies came from any place else but the Sea. It hath of late times and is now received and embraced by divers learned and ingenious Philosophers, as in the precedent age by Fracastorius, and in the present by Nicolaus Steno and Mr. Robert Hook, after whom I need name no more to give it countenance and authority in the World. In his Micrographia, Observ. 17. He thus discourses concerning these Bodies. Examining some of these very curiously figured Bodies (found about Keinsham, which are commonly thought to be Stones formed by some extraordinary plastic Vir∣tue latent in the Earth itself) I took notice of these particulars. First, that these figured Bodies were of very dif∣fering Substances as to hardness: some of Clay, some Marl, some soft Stone, almost of the hardness of those Stones, which Masons call Fire-Stone, others as hard as Portland Stone, others as hard as Marble, and some as hard as a Flint or Crystal. Next, they were of very differing Substances as to Transparency and Colour; some white, some almost black, some brown, some metalline or like Marcasites, some transparent like white Marble, others like flaw'd Crystal, some gray, some of divers colours; some radiated like those long petrified drops, which are commonly found at the Peak and in other subterraneous Caverns, which have a kind of Pith in the middle.
Thirdly, that they were very different as to the manner of their outward Figuration: for some of them seem'd to have been the Substance that had filled the Shell of some kind of Shell-fish; others to have been the Substance that had conteined or enwrapped one of these Shells, on both which the perfect impres∣sion either of the inside or outside of such Shels seem'd to be left, but for the most part those impressions seem∣ed to be made by an imperfect or broken Shell, the great end or mouth of the Shell being always wanting and oftentimes the little end and sometimes half, and in some there were Impressions, just as if there had been Holes broken in the figurating, imprinting or moulding Shell: some of them seem'd to be made by such a Shell very much bruised or flaw'd, inso∣much that one would verily have thought, that very figured Stone had been broken or bruised whilst a Gelly as 'twere, and so hardned, but within the Grain of the Stone there appeared not any sign of any such bruise or breaking, but only on the very uttermost Superficies. Fourthly, they were very different as to their outward covering, some having the perfect Shell both in Figure, Colour and Substance sticking on its surface, and adhering to it, but might very easily be separated from it, and like other common Cochle or Scallop-shells, which some of them most accurately resembled, were very dissoluble in common Vinegar: others of them, especially those serpentine or helical Stones, were covered with or reteined the shining or pearl-coloured Substance of the inside of the Shell, which Substance on some parts of them was exceed∣ing thin, and might very easily be rubbed off; on other parts it was pretty thick, and reteined a white Coat or flaky Substance on the top, just like the sides of such Shells: some of them had large pieces of the Shell very plainly sticking on to them, which were easily to be broken or flaked off by degrees:
they likewise some of them reteined all along the surface of them very pretty kind of Sutures, such as are observed in the Skulls of several kinds of living Creatures, which Sutures were most curiously shaped in the manner of Leaves, and every one of them in the same Shell exactly one like another; which I was able to discover plainly enough with my naked eye, but more perfectly and distinctly with my Mi∣croscope: All these Sutures I found by breaking some of the Stones to be the Termini or boundings of certain Diaphragms or partitions, which seemed to divide the Cavity of the Shell into a multitude of very proportionate and regular Cells or Caverns: these Diaphragms in many of them I found very perfect and complete, of a very distinct Substance from that which filled the Cavities, and exactly of the same kind with that which covered the out∣side, being for the most part whitish or mother of-Pearl coloured. As for the Cavities between those Diaphragms, I found some of them fill'd with Marl, and others with several kinds of Stones, others for the most part hollow, only the whole Cavity was usually covered over with a kind of Tartareous petrified Sub∣stance, which stuck about the Sides, and was there shot into very curious regular Figures, just as Tartar or other dissolved Salts are observed to stick and crystallize about the sides of the conteining Vessels; or like those little Diamants, which I before obser∣ved to have covered the vaulted Cavity of a Flint; others had these Cavities all lined with a metalline or Marcasite-like substance, which I could with a Microscope as plainly see most curiously and regularly figured, as I had done those in a Flint. From all which and several other particulars which I observed, I cannot but think, that all these, and most other kinds of stony bodies which are found thus strangely figured, do ow their Formation and
Figuration not to any kind of Plastic Virtue inherent in the Earth, but to the Shells of certain Shell-fishes, which either by some Deluge, Inundation, Earthquake or some such other means came to be thrown to that place, and there to be filled with some kind of Mud or Clay, or petrifying Wa∣ter or some other Substance, which in tract of time hath been setled together and hardned in those shelly Moulds into those shaped Substances we now find them; That the great and thin end of these Shells, by that Earthquake, or whatever other extraordi∣nary cause it was that brought them thither, was broken off; and that many others were otherwise broken, bruised and disfigured; that these Shells which are thus spirallied and separated with Dia∣phragms, were some kind of Nautili or Porcelane-Shells; and that others were Shells of Muscles, Cochles, Periwinkles, Scallops, &c. of various sorts; that these Shells in many from the particular nature of the conteining or inclosed earth or some other cause, have in tract of time rotted and mouldred away, and only left their Impressions both on the conteining and conteined Substances; and so left them pretty loose one within another, so that they may easily be separated by a knock or two of a ham∣mer. That others of these Shell-fishes according to the nature of the Substances have by a long continu∣ance in that posture, been petrified and turned into the nature of Stone. That oftentimes the Shell may be found with one kind of Substance within and quite another without, having perhaps been filled in one place and afterwards translated to another, which I have very frequently observed in Cochle, Muscle, Periwincle, and other Shells, which I have found by the Sea-side. Nay further, that some parts of the same Shell may be filled in one place, and some other Caverns in another, and others in a third or a fourth or a fifth place, for so many differing Sub∣stances
have I found in one of the petrified Shells, and perhaps all these differing from the encompassing Earth or Stone: The means how all which varieties may be caus'd, I think will not be difficult to conceive, to any one that has taken notice of those Shells, which are commonly found on the Sea-shore: And he that shall throughly examin, several kinds of such curiously form'd Stones, will (I am very apt to think) find reason to suppose their generation or formation to be ascribable to some such Accidents as I have mentioned, and not to any Plastic Virtue. For it seems to me quite contrary to the infinite prudence of Nature, which is observable in all its works and productions, to design every thing to a determinate end, and for the atteining that end makes use of such ways as are (as far as the knowledge of man has yet been able to reach) altogether consonant and most agreeable to mans reason, and of no way or means that doth contradict or is contrary to human ratiocination; whence it has a long time been a ge∣neral Observation and Maxim, that Nature doth no∣thing in vain: it seems I say contrary to that great wisdom of Nature, that these prettily shaped Bodies should have all those curious figures and contrivan∣ces (which many of them are adorn'd and contriv'd with) generated or wrought by a Plastic Virtue, for no higher end than only to exhibit such a form; which he that shall throughly consider all the circum∣stances of such kind of figured Bodies, will I think have great reason to believe, though I confess one cannot be able presently to find out what Natures designs are. Thus far Mr. Hook. And Steno agrees exactly with him, and is far more positive and con∣fident; For (saith he) that these Shells were once the parts of Animals living in a fluid, though there never had been any testaceous marine Creatures, the very view of the Shell itself evinceth, as may be evident by the instance of bivalve Cochle-shells. Con∣cerning
these Shells his Observations and Discourses are very consonant with Mr. Hook's. One or two particulars not yet mentioned, which may further confirm this Opinion, I find in him, viz. (1.) That there was found a Pearl-bearing Shell in Tuscany, a Pearl yet sticking to the Shell. (2.) A piece of the greater Sea-nacre [Piuna marina] in which the silk-like substance within the Shell being consumed, the colour of that substance did remain in that earthy matter which had filled the Shell. (3.) That about the City of Volterra there are many beds of earth not stony, which do abound with true Cochle-shells that have suffered no change at all, and yet they must needs have lain there above 3000 years; whence it is evident, that part of Tuscany was of old time covered with the Sea, and why then might not as well all those other places where these petrified Shells are found. Against this Opinion lie two very considerable and material Objections, which I shall heer pro∣pound. First, it will hence follow that all the Earth was once covered by the Sea, and that for a considerable time: for there being found of these Shells in the middle of Germany, at least 200 miles distant from any Sea, as my self can witness, nay, upon the high∣est Mountains of Europe, even the Alps themselves, (as may be proved by sufficient Authority) the Sea must needs have covered them, and consequently, the water keeping its level, all Europe and the World besides. Now that ever the Water should have co∣vered the Earth to that highth as to exceed the tops of the highest Mountains, and for a considerable time abode there, is hard to believe, nor can such an Opinion be easily reconciled with the Scripture. If it be said that these Shells were brought in by the universal Deluge in the time of Noah, when the Mountains were covered. I answer, that that De∣luge
proceeded from Rain, which was more likely to carry Shells down to the Sea, than to bring any upwards from it. But because some may argue from what the Scripture saith, [The fountains of the great deep were broken up,] that the Deluge proceeded part∣ly from a breaking forth and overflowing of the Sea, and consequently might bring in these Shells: To that I answer, that had it been so, such a Flood would have been more likely to scatter such Shells as it brought in indifferently all over the surface of the Earth, than to lay them in great beds in particu∣lar places: such beds seem to have been the effect of those Animals breeding there for some considerable time. If it be said, that those Mountains where such Shells are found might at first have been low places, and afterwards raised up by Earthquakes, that seems not likely, because they are found upon so many Mountains, unless it be said, that all Mountains were at first so raised, and then the former difficulty will recurr, and it will follow, that before the rai∣sing of the first Mountains, the whole Earth was covered by the Sea. Besides, this Hypothesis seems to me in itself improbable, for that though there be mention made in Histories of some such Mountains raised by Earthquakes, yet they are but very few and of no considerable highth or greatness, compared with those chains of high and vast Mountains, the Alps, Pyrenees, Appennine, Taurus, Caucasus, Imaus, Haemus, Atlas, &c. In general since the most anti∣ent times recorded in History, the face of the Earth hath suffered little change, the same Mountains, Islands, Promontories, Lakes, Rivers still remain∣ing, and very few added, lost or removed. Whence it will follow, that if the Mountains were not from the beginning, either the World is a great deal older than is imagined or believed, there being an incre∣dible space of time required to work such changes as raising all the Mountains, according to the leisurely
proceedings of Nature in mutations of that kind since the first Records of History: or that in the primitive times and soon after the Creation the earth suffered far more concussions and mutations in its superficial part than afterward. II. Among these petrified Shells are many sorts, which are not at this day that we know of any where to be found; nay some proceed so far as to affirm, that there is not the like to any one of these supposed petrified Shells to be found among our present Shell-fishes. If it be said, that these Species be lost out of the World: that is a supposition which Philo∣sophers hitherto have been unwilling to admit, esteeming the destruction of any one Species to be a dismembring the Universe and rendring it imper∣fect, whereas they think the Divine Providence is especially concerned to preserve and secure all the Works of the Creation. Yet granting that some few Species might be lost, it is very unlikely that so many should, and still more unlikely that such as were so diffused all over Europe and found in so many places; but most of all that a whole Genus, of which there were so many several Species, and those scattered in so many distinct and from each other remote places, should be so utterly extinct and gone, at least out of our Seas, that there should not one in an age be found. Such are for example the Serpentine Stones or Cornua Ammonis supposed originally to have been Nautili, of which I my self have seen five or six distinct Spe∣cies, and doubtless there are yet many more. Add heerunto the greatness of some of these Shells, viz. the Cornua Ammonis, whereof there are found of about a foot Diameter, far exceeding the bulk of any Shell-fish now breeding or living in our Seas. The second Opinion is of those who imagine these bodies to have been the effects and products of some Plastic power in the Earth; and to have been formed after the manner of Diamants and other pre∣tious
Stones, or the Crystals of coagulated Salts, by shooting into such figures. Of these bodies my very ingenious and learned Friend Mr. Martin Lister discourses in a Letter of his inserted in the Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 76. to this purpose, upon occasion of Mr. Steno's Prodromus. We will easily believe, that in some Countries, and particularly along the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, there may all manner of Shell-fishes be found promiscuously included in rocks or earth, and at good distances too from the Sea. But for our English inland Quarries, which also abound with infinite numbers and great varieties of Shells, I am apt to think there is no such matter as petrifying of Shells in the business (or as Steno ex∣plains himself, Pag. 84. in the English version & alibi, that the substance of these Shells formerly belonging to Animals, hath been dissolved or wasted by the penetrating force of Juices, and that a stony substance is come in the place thereof) but that these Cochle∣like Stones ever were as they are at present, Lapides sui generis, and never any part of an Animal. That they are so at present is in effect confessed by Steno in the above-cited page; and it is most certain, that our English Quarry-shells (to continue that abusive name) have no parts of a different texture from the Rock or Quarry they are taken, that is, that there is no such thing as Shell in these resemblances of Shells, but that Iron-stone Cochles are all Iron-stone, Lime or Marble all Lime-stone and Marble, Spar or Crystalline Shells all Spar, &c. and that they never were any part of an Animal. My Reason is, that Quarries of different Stone yield us quite different sorts or Species of Shells, not only one from another (as those Cochle-stones of the Iron-stone Quarries of Adderton in Yorkshire differ from those found in the Lead-Mines of the neighbouring Mountains, and both these from that Cochle-Quarry of Wansford-Bridge in Northamptonshire, and all thee from those
to be found in the Quarries about Gunthorp and Beauvor-Castle, &c.) but I dare boldly say from any thing in Nature besides, that either the Land, salt or fresh Waters do yield us. 'Tis true that I have picked out of that one Quarry of Wansford very re∣semblances of Murices, Tellinae, Turbines, Cochleae, &c. and yet I am not convinc'd, when I particularly examined some of our English Shores for Shells, as also the fresh Waters and the Fields, that I did ever meet with any one of those Species of Shells any where else but in their respective Quarries, whence I conclude them Lapides sui generis, and that they were not cast in any Animal mould whose Species or race is yet to be found in being at this day. Thus far Mr. Lister. The like Argument also Goropius Becanus uses to prove that these Bodies are not petri∣fied Shells. Scallop-shells (saith he) are so rare upon the shores of Flanders, that they are brought thither by Pilgrims from the coast of Gallicia in Spain, and shown for strange things; and yet in the ditches about Antwerp there is such plenty of them, that in digging there they throw up heaps of them like little mountains, so that he that would gather of them need not take the pains to travel to Gallicia, or so much as to the Sea-shores. To these he adds ano∣ther Argument which yet to me seems of little force. In some places about Antwerp digging for water, they meet with in the earth a crust or Layer of two foot thickness and in some parts thinner, wholly made up of Sea-shells, whereas there was never found such a Mass of Shells upon any of the Sea-shores; so that no man can reasonably assert that they were thrown up by the Sea and there left, the waters receding and forsaking them; for then with∣out question we should hear of the like heaps or beds of them found on the coasts of Holland, Zealand and Flanders But to this I answer that the reason why at this day there are not such beds of them to be
found upon the shores, may be, because they are ga∣thered up and carried away by men, partly out of curiosity, partly to burn for lime or other ways to make use of. Besides we know that in the bottom of the Sea, these Shell-fishes many times lie in great beds, and there breed in great abundance, and it is not altogether unlikely, that the Sea might on occasion suddenly recede and desert such beds, and they afterwards come to be buried in the Earth. But to argue further in defence of this Opinion. There are found in the earth many such like figured Stones which we know not whither to refer, as re∣sembling neither any part of an Animal, nor of a Plant: Such are those that Naturalists call Lapides Lycurii, Belemnites, Lapides Judaivi, Trochites, Aseriae and others, to which if there be at present any Shells, Bones, Fruits, Roots, &c. like, I am as yet wholly to seek for them. And if there are now no such things in being, they that defend the contrary Opinion must have recourse to that gratu∣itous supposition that such Species are lost out of the World. Besides I have been told by a person of good cre∣dit of a Stone of this nature resembling a Cochle-shell found in the stomach of a Beef; where in all likelihood it must be bred and shoot into that figure; which if true, there can be no reason to doubt, but those in the Stone-Quarries and other places are so generated. A third Opinion there is, that some of these bodies are really Shells petrified, or the cases of such bodies or their contents: and that others of them are stones of their own kind resembling such Shells, so shaped and figured by some Plastic power. That Shells may be and are sometimes petrified (as are also Bones and Wood) cannot be denied, and I my self have gathered such upon the Sea-shore; and on the other hand, he that asserts that there are bodies
naturally growing in the earth, which do imitate Sea-shells, delivers himself from the trouble of an∣swering the Arguments which urge the contrary opinion. But yet methinks this is but a shift and refuge to avoid trouble, there not being sufficient ground to found such a distinction. For my own part I confess I propend to the first Opinion, as being more consonant to the nature of the thing, and could wish that all external arguments and obje∣ctions against it were rationally and solidly answered. The Names of the Professors in each Faculty, and what Books they read, together with their Exercises, the following Series Lectionum will acquaint the Reader. Catalogus Lectionum at{que} Ex∣ercitationum Academicarum quas inclutae Norimbergen∣sium Universitatis Altdorffinae Professores, cum Deo, post fe∣rias, Caniculares hujus Anni MDLXII. coeptas usque ad proxime futuram Panegyrin Petro-Paulinam publice pri∣vatim{que} continuabunt. Rectore Mauritio Hoffmanno, M. D. Anat. Chir. & Botan. Prof. publ.
Sub faelicibus auspiciis virorum nobilissi∣morum, perstrenuorum atque prudentis∣stmorum Dn. Leonhardi Grundherri III. Viri, Dn. Jodoci Christophori, Kress à Kressenstein in Re∣kelsdorff & Durrenmungenaw, Dn. Georgii Sigismundi Furers ab Heimendorff & Steinbuhl, Dn. Gabrielis Nûzelii ab & in Sun∣dersbuhl, Illustris Reipub. Norimb. Senatorum & Curatorum Academiae benemeritissimorum. SS. THEOLOGIAE PROFESSORES. JOhannes Weinmann D. Evangelii S. Johannis eâ, quâ hactenus usus est, methodo, ad finem usque, divinâ opitulante gratiâ, continuabit, & praeter publicas disputationes, etiam privata exercitia, cùm le∣ctoria, tum disputatoria, ex libris Biblicis & locis Theo∣logicis partim instituta, partim instituenda, frequentabit. M. Lucas Fridericus Reinhartus Controversias ad textus Evangelicos Dominicales agitari solitas; tum Exegeticas, tum Dogmaticas & Morales monstrat, & optimam sententiam, quâpote, confirmat. M. Joh. Conradus Dûrr Introductionem aphoristi∣cam in libros Symbolicos Ecclesiae Noribergensis intra vertentem hunc annum ad inem perducere allaborabit.
Gnomologiam Aristotelicam simul cum interpretatione librorum Nieomachiorum pertexet. JVRIS PROFESSORES. Wilhelmus Ludwell D. à Tit. lib. 4. C. de Oblig. & Action. usque ad tit. de Vsur. insigniores & diffici∣liores leges, adeo{que} materiam obligationis, probationis & compensationis explicare, & si Deus vitam & valetu∣dinem concesserit, intra annum absolvere conabitur. Adjectis etiam iis, quae ex Jure Canonico & Feudali huc pertinere videbuntur. Idem coepta Collegia continuabit, & petentibus nova aperiet. Nicolaus Rittershusius D. Explicationes nobiliorum Legum libri xxviii. ff. & sequentium, publicè continu∣abit, privatim verò Collegia habebit, unum Institutionum Juris, alterum Historicum. Ernestus Cregel D. Absolutis libri IV. Institut. Impp. titulis XII. ultimis, de integro earum interpretationem aggrediar, & cum studiosè, ea praeprimis, quae ad The∣oriam spectant, in illis obscura adhuc illustraverim, ti∣tulos deinceps in Praxi frequentiores intrae sesquiannum, cum Deo, enodabo. Ad Publicum Jus quod attinet, meae in eo sunt defixae cogitationes, ut illud juxta seriem Juris Civilis, Perso∣narum scil. Rerum & Actionum ubi libro VII. ac VIII. Jurisprudentiae Publicae Georgii Braudlacht finis est impositus, , tractetur. Privatim quem∣admodum explicando ac disputando accuratas Excellen∣tissimi JCti & fidelissimi olim mei Doctoris D. Joachimi Schnobelii, &c. in Digesta Disputationes impraesentia∣rum evolvo: ita pro virili, in aliis tam privatis Collegiis, quam publicis circularibus{que} Exercitiis qua disputaturis, qua audituris non deero.
MEDICINAE PROFESSORES. Mauritius Hoffman D. Quoad per negotia Magi∣stratus Academici licebit, post absolutas demonstrationes Botanicas, in praelectionibus Anatomicis h. 9. matut. historiam partium corporis foeminini nuperrimè dissecti physiopathologicè explicabit. In Chirurgicis tractatum de Fracturis proponet. Privatim verò Aphorismorum Hippocr. ex naturâ sanguinis interpretationem & singulis inensibus disputationes familiares continuabit. Jacobus Pancratius Bruno D. diebus Lunae & Martis h. 3. pomer. Institutiones Medicas perspicuâ bre∣vitate explicabit. Diebus verò Jovis & Veneris mor∣borum particularium cognitu & curatu difficiliorum tractationem suscipiet, operáque suâ novâ studia Au∣ditorum privatim quoque pro viribus dispatando pro∣movebit. PHILOSOPHIAE PROFESSORES. M. Abdias Trew in Mathematicis Elementa Eucli∣dis in Syllogismos resoluta repetet. Subjunctis post denas circiter propositiones Problematibus ex Mathes speciali, ut ita Studiosi simul & fundamentorum Ma∣thematicorum rationem, & eorundem usum perspi∣ciant. In Physicis decisionem brevem potiorum & usum prae reliquis habentium controversiarum, nuper inchoatam pertexet. M. Joh. Paul. Felwinger Compendium Logicae ab∣solvet: In Metaphysicis tractabit doctrinam Affectio∣num Entis: In Politicis, in tractatu de Magistratu, perget. Collegia Logica, Metaphysica & Politica ape∣riet; & Disputationes Metaphysicas in Aristotelem, si qui futuri sixt Respondentes, continuabit.
Georgius Matthias Kônig proximè Syntagma de Viris literatis  auspicabitur. In Epistolâ ad Galatas etiam perget, eá{que} finitâ, ad Epistolam ad Ephesios se conferet. M. Joh. Leonhardus Schwaeger explanabit Cioe∣ronis Brutum de claris Oratoribus, ejusque Oratorem, seu de perfecto Oratore ad M. Brutum: Characteres verò, quos hactenus sub explicatione textus Virgiliani sparsim oftendit, ac porro ostendet, in unum ctiam simul collectos, uberius{que} diductos, priorum exemplo excepturis, ad calamum dictabit. Vtrum{que} per vices ab ipso fiet horâ pomeridianâ tertiâ, at{que} insuper ejus opera ad Exercitia Oratoria, tam publica quam privata, in prosa pariter ac ligata petituris parata erit. M. Christophorus Molitor diebus Lunae & Martis specimen Philologematum Sacrorum, juxta ductum Schickardiani horologii vel Atrii Dilherriani dictabit, diebus autem Jovis & Veneris, quae in Arabicis restant, continuabit. Privatim, si futurus est justus Auditorum numerus, Collegium tam Rabbinicum, quam Ebraicum aperiet, in Rabb. explicabit & continuabit Theologiam Talmudicam Dn. Hackspanii b. m. In Ebraico verò lin∣guae fundamenta docebit, & uti hactnus sic nunquam omittet circulum Oratorium. Habebuntur praeterea, ex Superiorum munificentiâ, sine Studiosorum sumptibus, quâvis hebdomade disputationes, quas vocant, circulares in Theolo∣gicâ, Juridicâ, Medicâ & Philosophicâ Facul∣tate, necnon singulis mensibus Exercitia Ora∣toria.
Sept. 4. we proceeded on our journey to Ratis∣bone, and passed through Nieumarkt, a little walled town belonging to the Duke of Bavaria. 5. We passed through Heinmaw a small walled town subject to the Duke of Neuburg, and at night, passing the River Danow, by a fair Stone-Bridge, we entred Ratisbone or Regensberg so called from the River Regen, which heer falls into the Da∣now. This City is large and well built (the houses be∣ing for the most part of stone) adorned with many fair palaces of noble men,Regens∣berg or Ratisbon well walled about and fortified. The streets are but narrow. The roofs of the houses are not built so steep as at Augsburgh, Nurenburgh, &c. or as ours in England, but flattish after the Italian made. The Diet of the Empire is usually held heer, it being an Imperial City, and governed by its own magistrates, though in the D. of Bavaria's countrey. This city hath a Bishop, who is of the Romish Religion, but he hath little to do, all the magistrates and the greatest part of the Inhabitants being Lutherans. Yet some cloi∣sters there are of Monks and Nuns, and a college of Jesuits. Upon the rocks not far from Ratisbone a little be∣low the town on the other side the river we found, besides many of the rarer sort of our English plants, Asclepias flore albo. Daucus montanus Apii folio major C. B. Apium montanum nigrum J. B. Caucalis Peucedani folio Ger. as I take it: It hath a fine leaf, a small root (which I believe yearly perishes) reddish stalks, an umbel of white flowers, to which suc∣ceed small round seeds with purple apices: An Dau∣cus montanus Apii folio, flore luteo C. B? It hath wing∣ed leaves like to Bipennella but larger, the several wings of each leaf being as large as and like unto the intire leaf of the said Bipennella; a great root, but not hot; in tast as the Burnet-Saxifrages are; the
stalk riseth up to the highth of a man almost; the seeds are round, striate, covered with a hoary down, reddish toward the top, and of a hot spicy tast. Ti∣thymalus verrucosus J. B. Stoebe major calyculis non splendantibus C. B. Hepaticum trifolium Lob. Flam∣mula Jovis; Cerinthe major flore luteo; Fraxinella; Cytisus supinus sylvest. Ratisponensis flor. lut. ad exortum foliorum prodeuntibus Cat. Aldtdorf. Cytisus Gesneri cui flores ferè spicati J. B. Euphrasia pratensis lutea C. B. which we first found not far from Heinmaw; Pha∣langium ramosum; Chamaedrys vulgaris & Cham. foliis laciniatis; Aster montanus luteus hirsuto salicis folio; Aster Austriacus 4 Clus. i. e. Linaria aurea Tragi; Aster Atticus Italorum flore purpureo Park. Oxyacantha sive Berberis; Bugula caerulea Alpina; Orobanche mi∣nor purpureis floribus, sive ramosa, in the Corn-fields. Chondrilla carulea J. B. Folia huic valdè laciniata, gla∣bra, glauca. Flores longis insident pediculis, dilutè caerulei & ad ruborem inclinantes. Securidaca du∣metorum major flore vario, siliquis articulatis C. B. which is common all over Germany. Veronica supina facie Teucrii pratensis no less common; Lepidium annuum growing among Radishes; and Foenum Grae∣cum which I suppos, was sown there. Septemb. 10. we hired a Boat for Vienna: First, on our left hand as we went down the river, we passed by a little village and a castle standing on a hill, called Thonastan. About three miles and half below Regensberg we passed in sight of Wert, a castle belonging to the Bishop of Ratisbone, seated on a hill by a river called Wisent, which heer runs into the Danow.Strau∣bing. This night we lodged at Straubing, a very handsom, pleasant, walled Town, belonging to the Duke of Bavaria, five miles below Ratis∣bone. Sept. 12. in the morning we past Pogen where is a Church standing on a high hill. Four miles below Straubing we rowed under a wooden bridge which
there crosses the Danow. Heer on the left hand as one goes down, stands Dreckendorf, a walled town belonging to the Duke of Bavaria. A little further off we passed by the mouth of the river Iser. Then we had a prospect of Osterhoven on our left hand, and not far thence a small village called Hofkirchen, and on the same side still a little castle called Hilkersberg, where the shores along the river began to be rocky. This night we lodged at a pretty little walled town built of stone,Vilsho∣ven. called Vilshoven, belonging to Bavaria. Sept. 13.Passaw. At four miles distance from Vilshoven we came to Passaw, a considerable city for its strength and greatness, formerly well built with many fair stone houses. But about three quarters of a year before our being there, a most dreadful Fire burnt down, ruin'd and destroy'd almost the whole Town, Churches, public buildings and all. It is situate just at the confluence of the rivers In and Danow, and subject to the Archduke of Inspruck, who, we were told, gave 50000 dollars towards the rebuild∣ing of it. Heer is a bridge over the river In to a town called Instat. Hitherto the river Danow flow∣ed gently down, but below Passaw, it began to be streightned by hills on both sides and to run with a swifter stream. Seven miles from Passaw we passed by Nayhonse castle, and this third night lodged at a pretty little village belonging to the Emperor called Asch, standing on the right side of the river. Sept. 14. we had an open countrey again, no hills being near the river. At four miles end we landed at Lintz,Lintz. and viewed the city, which we found to be a very elegant place, well built with stone hou∣ses flat rooft after the Italian fashion; having a large square Piazza with two fountains in it, and on the highest part a fair palace of the Emperor, whence there is a pleasant prospect of the Danow and Coun∣trey adjacent. About three miles below Lintz we
passed a pretty village on our left hand, called Mal∣hausen. Then we had a prospect of a town on our right hand situate upon the river Ens called Intz. Seven miles below Lintz are hills again on both sides the river. Heerabouts is a village called Greine, where the Earl of Lichtenstein hath a house situate on a hill. Below Greine on the left hand is a little village, where we past a dangerous place in the river called Strom, where the stream being streightned by hills on each hand runs very swiftly, and besides is full of rocks: a little further below a rock, which jets a good way out into the river, we passed a vio∣lent whirtl-pool called the Werble. At some distance further on the left hand stands a small village under a high hill, half whereof fell down about two years before our being there, which made so great a noise that it was heard two German miles off, at Ips, a little town we passed by on the right hand. We lod∣ged this fourth night at a small village called Mor∣pach, 11 miles from Lintz. Sept. 15. in the morning we went by a rich cloi∣ster called Melk on our right. At six miles distance from our lodging we passed a fair house of the Earl of Dernstein's on our left hand, and heerabout had a prospect of Ketwein a rich Abby strongly situate on a hill, attempted by the Swedes without succchess. About nine miles from Marbach we passed under a wooden bridge by a little walled town called Stein, where the Swedes (they told us) were notably beaten and driven out again after they had entred the town; which repulse they afterwards revenged, when they took the place, by plundering and spoiling it. Not far hence we landed to view Krembs,Krembs. a considerable city seated on the side of a hill, well-built, walled about and trenched towards the river. From hence we came into an open countrey, and the river being at liberty, the chanel grew much wider. Six miles below Krembs we passed by a small walled Town oh
the right hand called Deuln; then we had the pro∣spect of Greitenstein, a castle situate on a hill at some distance from the river on the left hand; next we had a sight of Cornberg, a wall'd town in a plain not far from the Danow; taken by the Swedes in the late wars and by them notably defended against the Emperor. Heer and afterward at several other pla∣ces we observed mills built upon two boats, the wheel lying between the boats, which are fixed at a convenient distance one from another, and so the stream coming between the boats, and by reason it is streightned by degrees, running more swiftly, turns the wheel. One of the boats is by strong cables or chains at each end fastned to the bank, and so the boats, mill and all rise and fall with the water. About a mile and half before we reach'd Vienna we went by a fair rich Abby called Claisternaiberg, with a little wall'd town of the same name; and at the end of 19 German miles, which the swiftness of the current assisting us, we made this day, we arrived at Vienna,Vienna. the chief city of Austria, and at present the imperial seat, so called from the river Wien which runs into the Danow no the East side of the Town. It is for the bigness of it the most frequent and full of people that we have yet seen beyond the seas. The wall is not above four or five English miles in cir∣cuit, but there are large Suburbs at a little distance from the town, those houses that were very near being lately pull'd down to clear the wall and works for fear of a Siege: The Tures at the time of our being there having taken Neuhausel, and news com∣ing that they were marching with their whole army towards Presburg in Hungary, not above 40 English miles distant from Vienna. This City is regularly and strongly fortified with a high and impenetrable wall of earth faced with brick, a broad and deep trench, into which they can (as they told us) when they please draw the water; Bastions, half-moons
and horn-words, &c. that it is justly reputed one of the strongest holds of Christendom. The inner wall, which was said to be built with the ransom of Richard. I. King of England, is of little strength or consideration in comparison with the new and outer one. The houses are sufficiently tall and well built of stone, the roofs flattish after the Italian mode: The streets rather narrow than broad; the markets well stored with all necessaries. Heer we first met with tortoises to be sold, at the rate of six pence apiece: they are found in muddy ditches in these parts. Heer also we first took notice of the fruit of Sorbus legitima; and first saw in the fish-markets the Silurus or Sheat-fish, the greatest of all fresh∣water fish that we have seen, some of them weighing above 100 pound. The Emperors palace, the Ca∣thedral church and other public buildings deserve remembrance were it my design minutely to describe places. The Emperor is of a mean stature and dark complexion, thin-visaged, his hair black, his under∣lip thick and hanging down a little, much like his effigies on his coin.Plants observed about Vi∣enna. As for plants we found heer∣about, Onobrychis spicata flore purpureo, Psyllium vul∣gare; Kalispinosum, at this distance from the Sea. Scabiosa foliis dissectis, flore albo vel  Clus. Dorycnio congener in great plenty. Marrubium album angustifolium peregrinum C. B. as it seemed to me. In the Island of Danubius near Vienna, Aristolochia Cle∣matitis & Solanum vesicarium sive Alkekengi plenti∣fully. We hired a coach for Venice and began our journey thitherward,Sept. 24. and this night lodged at a great Vil∣lage called Trayskerk four miles distant from Vienna: by the way-side we found store of Absinthium Austri∣acum enuifolium Clus. At four miles end we came to Neustat (Neapolis Austriaca they call it) well walled and trencht about,25. Neustat. of a square figure, mean bigness, handsomly built,
having streight streets and a fair square market-place. At three of the corners are mounts or bastions, and at the fourth a Castle. In the layes near this town I first found Asperula caerulea. Two miles beyond Neustat we began to leave the open countrey and to come among hills. We lodged this night at a village called Gluknitz four miles distant from Neustat. The houses in these villages are for the most part covered with shingles of wood: the hills clothed with woods of Pine. After two miles riding we came to a village cal∣led Schadwyen or Shadwin,26. seated between the mountains and enclosed with a gate at each end. Heer we alighted and our Coachman hired ten oxen (which stood there ready for that purpose) to draw his Coach up a steep ascent to the top of the hills which part Austria and Stiria. On the sides and top of this hill we found these plants,Plants found on the hills at Shad∣win. Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park. Cyclamen autumnale of two sorts. Tussilago Alpina folio rotundo. A sort of small Trachelium that I have not elsewhere seen. A small sort of Muscus clavatus, with leaves like Juniper. Larix abundantly. Lysimachia lutea in alis) foliorum florens. A kind of Glaux with a rough cod. Gen∣tiana folio Asclepiadis abundantly, and many others that we had before met with. In this journey we also found Muscus denticulatus major in the shady lanes in many places: and in watery and springy places Alsine muscosa J. B. further on we came to a little wall'd place near the river Muercz, called Mert∣zuschlag. Heerabout are many mills; and sithes and sickles made heer; then we passed through a village called Langenwang, where stands a castle on a hill: after that another called Kriegla, where we crost the river. This afternoon we passed through a pleasant valley among woody mountains, and at night took up our loding at Kimberg a large village six long miles distant from Glocknitz.
We travelled along the same valley,27. and passed through a great village called Kapsuberg; besides many other villages, castles and Gentlemens houses on the sides of the hills, which we rode near to; and at three miles end came to Pruck an der Mure,Pruck an der Mure. i. e. Bons Muroe a fair town for this Countrey, and walled about, having a large market-place with a fountain in it. Proaeding on in the same valley some two leagues further,Lewben. we passed Lewben, a very neat, pleasant and well-built walled town, better than we expected to have found any in this moun∣tainous Countrey. It hath a fair market-place with fountains. And we observed much Iron lying in the streets, which is heer made, and wherewith the inhabitants drive a great trade. Heer we crossed the Mura twice, and soon after we were past Lew∣ben we rode over a hill, and following the course of the said river among the mountains, at evening we came to a village called S. Michael, where, we lod∣ged. We saw in these parts many men and women with large swellings under their chins or on their throats, called in Latin or rather in Greec, Broncho∣celt, and by some in English, Bavarian, Pkes. Some of them were single, others double and treble. This is a disease which these Alpine Nations have of old been subject to Quis tumidum guttur miretur in Al∣plbvs? Yet among the Grisons, who live on the highest parts of the Alps, I do not remember to have seen any of these I dare say there are not half so many thereabouts as in these Countries. What should be the Cause of this evil, whether the drink∣ing of Snow-water, or water infected with the vi∣ose steams and particles of Mercury, or other mi∣nerals and metals, wherewith in all probability those mountains abound, is no easie matter to determin. For on the one hand, in some mountainous coun∣tries, where the snow lies as long as it doth-heer, and consequently their waters are little else then
snow dissolved, we shall find very few infected with this disease: and on the other hand, as few in Hun∣gary, Transylvania and other countries abounding with mercury and other minerals. We must there∣fore suspend, till some ingenious Physician of these Countries, by long and diligent observing what causes or occasions these Tumours, and likewise what prevents and cures them, instructs us bet∣ter. We also observed in these Countries more Idiots and delirous persons than any where else; which we imputed sometime to the snow-water, sometime to the inordinate eating of Cabbage, of which in all the market-towns we saw monstrous heaps lying to be sold. But upon further consideration I think with Palmarius, it ought rather to be attributed to the mineral steams that infect their waters, espe∣cially Mercurial. For we see the vapour of Quick∣silver doth principally affect the brain and nervose parts, begetting palsies and deliriums in Painters, Gilders. Miners and those that are much conversant about it. We travelled on by the river Mures side to Knittle∣field,28. Knittle∣field. a walled town three miles from S. Michael, and then proceeding along the same valley, we passed by some Noblemens houses and castles, and lodged at a village upon the Mure called S. Georgio, four miles from Knittefield. We travelled on in the same valley by the river Mure till we came to Newmarkt,29. New∣markt. a little walled place, four miles from S. Georgio. Then we fol∣lowed the course of another little river which runs into the Dravus about Volckmarck, in a narrow val∣ley between high hills, and a mile from Newmarkt we came to a considerable wall'd town called Frei∣sach,Freisach in which are four cloisters. A mile further we came to Heirt in Carinthia where we lay this night.
We rode rocky ways through valleys to S. Veit or Vit, a wall'd town of some note,30. S. Vit. three miles di∣stant from Heirt. The Emperor hath a Mint-house for coining money heer. Proceeding on three miles further we arrived at Vilkircken, which had been a market-Town of note, but about three years since a lamentable Fire burnt it down to the ground. We rode very rugged way among the mountains and rocks,Octob. 1. passing the whole length of a Lake called Oostsukersey, and at the further end of it observed a strong castle seated on a high hill belonging to the Earl of Dietrichstein, a Prince of the Empire,Dietrich∣stein. who coins money. Then we came down into a pleasant valley, and so over the river Dravus. which is heer navigable, and runs by the walls of Villach,Villach. a well∣built town and one of the chief of this Countrey, three miles distant from Vilkerck. A good distance from Villach we passed the Guile, a considerable river falling into the Dravus; and had very rocky way among high mountains till we came to Orlesteina, a village where we lodged. We travelled among high mountains very bad way to a village called Klein Tarvis two miles,2. and proceeding on still among the mountains we came to the river Timent, which runs into the Adriatic Sea;Pontieba. and lodged this night at Pontieba, the last town we passed in the Emperors countrey, part of it is sub∣ject to the Emperor called Pontieba Imperiale, and part to the Venetians, called Pontieba Veneta, where we took a bill of health for Venice. Between Klein Tarvis and Pontieba, we saw a herd of Goats fol∣lowing the Goat-herd like so many dogs: in other places we have seen sheep in that manner following their shepherd, which no doubt was usual in Judaea; for our Saviour John 10. 4. comparing himself to a shepherd and his disciples and servants to sheep, saith, And he goeth before his sheep, and they follow him, for
Which would have seemed strange to the hearers had the shepherds been wont only to drive their sheep, as with us they do. We past over the river Timent by a bridge that parts Carinthia from Friuli.3. About a German mile off we came to a little fort in a village called Clausen, where are two draw-bridges, which we were not permitted to pass, till we had delivered our bill of health. Hence we travelled along by the river, and observed tim∣ber-trees floted down the stream, and when the rocks stopped them, men with hooks put them off and directed them into the force of the current. This is the manner all over the Alps and other high mountains, they fell trees and get them to any little current of water and expect a good shot of rain, and then flote them down to the greater rivers. This day we passed Vensonga,Vensongo. Hospita∣letto. a pretty little wall'd town, and lodged at Hospitaletto a large village, where we got quit of the mountains, and came into the plain Countrey of Friuli. We passed by Limonia a wall'd town situate on the rising of a hill at the foot of the mountains,4. Limonia. S. Dani∣ele. Some miles further we passed S. Danicle; then we forded the river Timent in several places. The river heerabouts in a time of rain or when the snow melts on the mountains, spreads itself to a very great breadth, as appears by the empty chanel. Soon af∣ter we had passed the river, we ascended a cliff and entred the walls of a little town called Spilimberg, where were rows or cloisters on each side the street under the houses,Spilim∣berg. which we after found in many of the towns of Lombardy; ten Italian miles further ri∣ding brought us to S. Avogio, a village where we rested this night. We rode along the plains and at ten miles end came to Saribe a walled town,5. Saribe. where the river Li∣venza
divides itself and encompasseth the wall. From hence we drove on about two Dutoh miles and lodged at Conegliano,Conegli∣ano. a wall'd Town seated on the ridge of a hill a place of good account, as is also Saribe. All the way we travelled in Italy hitherto we had little other bread than what was made of Sorghum, a grain the blade whereof arises to seven or eight foot highth and is as great as ones finger, bearing a large panicle on the top, the berry or seed being bigger than that of wheat, and of a dusky co∣lour. We rode a Dutch mile and then ferried over the river Anaxus or Piave,6. and at ten Italiam miles further come to Treaviso a large Town,Treviso. the head of a Pro∣vince called Marea Trevisana, an important place for strength, but too near and too obnoxious to Ve∣nice to be rich. From Treviso we rode through a very fertil and well cultivated countrey to Mestre, a little Town by the Lagnne,(so they call the Flats about Venice, which are all covered with water when the Tide is in) where we took boat for Ve∣nice. Upon the mountains we passed over this voy∣age, we found a great number of plants we had not before met with, as Quinquifolium albm majus cau∣lesc C. B. Quinquefolium album majus alterum C. B. Teucrium Alpinum Cisti flore, Epimcdium vilgae; Linaria purpurea parva J. B. And not far from Pon∣tieba on Italy side upon the rocks, Ledum Alpinum hirsutum C. B. Ledum Alpinum hirsutum minus, An Cistus Austriacus myrtifolius? Auricula ursi Sedum serra tum alterum foliis longis angustis; Sedum Alpinum mi∣nimum, foliis cinereis, flore candido J. B. Siler montanum and many others. Helleborus niger verus plentifully all over the highest mountains. Scabiosa argentea an∣gustifolia, in the chanels of the torrents in Friuli: and Galega by the rivers and ditches every where in Italy.
In Marea Trevisana, some part of Friuli, and the greatest part of Lombardy, we observed the Corn-fields to be so thick set with rows of trees, that if a man from an hill or high tower should look down upon the Countrey at a distance, he would take it to be a Wood. Against every Tree is planted a Vine, which runs up the tree, and the branches of the neighbour-vines they draw from tree to tree and tie together: So that their Corn-fields are also Woods and Vine-yards, the same land sufficing for all these productions, and not being exhausted with so much spending (as one would be apt to imagine) by reason of the depth and richness of its soil. Neither in this hot Countrey doth the Corn receive any preju∣dice from the shade or dropping of the Trees, (which in our colder Climate would quite marr it) but rather advantage, there falling little rain in Summer-time, and the Trees keeping off the scorching Sun-beams, which else might dry up and wither it; the heat notwithstanding sufficing to bring the Grain to perfect maturity. Whereas with us all the Sun we can give it is little enough, and the very grass which grows under the trees is sowr and crude: for that usually we have too little heat for our moisture, and they too much. This part of Italy hath been deservedly celebrated for fertility, and may justly in my opinion be stiled the Garden of Europe.
OF VENICE. VEnice is built upon certain little Islands in the middle of the Sea, or rather in the middle of certain Flats or Shallows, covered all over with wa∣ter at full Sea, but about the City when the Tide is out in many places bare, called by the Italians Lagune. These Lagune are enclosed and separated from the main Gulf or Adriatic Sea by a bank of earth (il Lito or Lido they call it) extending accor∣ding to Contarini about 60 miles, according to Le∣ander Albertus and others (who come nearer the truth) but 35, and resemble the space conteined in a bent Bow, the bow being the shore of the firm land, and the Lido the string. The City stands at an equal distance from the firm land of Italy and from the Lito, viz. five miles from each. This Lido serves as a good fence or rampart to secure the City and other included Islands against the raging waves of the Sea in stormy weather. It is discontinued by seven, say some, say others by five breaks or aper∣tures, and those not very wide ones, which they call Ports or Havens, and by which the Lagune communicate with the Gulf. Of these Inlets two only are deep enough to admit any vessels of con∣siderable bulk or burthen, viz. those of Malamocco and Lio. Into or not far from the Lagune most of the great rivers of Italy empty themselves, v. g. Padus now call'd Po, Athesis now Adige, Meduacus major now Brenta, Meduacus minor now Bacchilione, Tiliaventum now Taiamënto, Liquentia now Livenza, Silis now Sile, Anassus now Piave; which, especially in time
of flouds, bring down with them from the moun∣tains a great deal of earth and silt, which will, its probable, in process of time fill up the Lagune and make dry land of them. For I believe at the first building of Venice no part of them lay bare at low water as now there doth. Gianotti saith, that an∣tiently the City was ten miles distant from the firm land, the Lagune extending as far as Oriago, which, as some think, was so called quasi Ora lacus; and and that all that space between Oriago and Fusina (where they now imbark that go from Padua to Ve∣nice) had been added to the firm land notwith∣standing all the endeavours the Venetians could use. This City was first founded, according to the best Authors, about the time that Attila with his Hunnes invaded Italy, burning and destroying all before him; by some families who seeing no end of these irruptions of barbarous nations, sought refuge for themselves in these desolate Islands, in the year 456 or thereabouts. Others make the first begin∣ning of it to have been before that time in the year 421 or 423. But though in the times of former irruptions many of the neighbouring people fled hither to shelter themselves from the present storm, yet I believe they did not think of settling them∣selves heer or making these Islands their fixt habi∣tation, and uniting themselves into one City till the expedition of Attila. Whenever it began, it hath continued a Virgin-City, (having never been ravish∣ed nor attempted by any Enemy) since its first foundation for at least 1200 years, which is more than any other City of that antiquity, so far as I have read or heard, can boast of. Yet is it not at present nor ever was it fortified or so much as wal∣led about; neither indeed doth it need it, being sufficiently strong by its ituation alone, which is such, that it is not likely for the future ever to be ta∣ken,
unless the Sea quite leave it, and the Lagune be∣come dry land conjoined with the Continent. For by Sea great ships can come no nearer than the haven of Malamocco, and those apertures in the Lido, where boats and lesser Vessels may enter, are defended by strong Forts and Castles: besides that every tide the Chanel doth so vary, that without the guidance of an expert Pilot they will not be able to find the way in, but be in danger of being stranded upon the flats. This City is in circuit, taking in the Giudecha, eight Italian miles. Viewing it from S. Mark's tower we judged it to be about the bigness Amsterdam was then of. It is divided into two parts by the Grand Canale, which passes through the middle of it in the form of the letter S. It is also divided into six parts or regions, called thence Sestieri; three on one side the Canale, viz. Castello, S. Marco and Ca∣nareio; and three on the other side, viz, San Paolo, Santa Croce and Dorso duro. It conteins 70 Parishes, though some make them 72; 67 Monasteries, whereof 33 of Freres and 34 of Nuns, according to a survey taken in the year 1581. since which time, I believe, the number hath been increased. According to the same survey there were then in the City, of Noble Men 1843 Women 1659 Boys 1420 Girls 1230 Citizens, Men 2117 Women 1936 Boys 1708 Girls 1418 Servants 3732 Maids 5753 Artisans, Women 31617 Men 32887 Boys 22765 Girls 18227 Beggars, Men 75 Women 112 Monks 945 Nuns 2508 Priests 516 Poor of the Hospital 1290 Jews 1043
The Sum total is 134871. Sansovinus reckons the number of souls in his time to have been 180000, but, I suppose, he takes in Muran and the other Islands, which in this survey are left out. I am not ignorant that several late writers make the present number of Inhabitants to be at least 300000, but I believe they speak at random, and by conjecture, upon no good grounds; (as I have been often told, that there are in Paris a million and half of people, whereas it is well if there be half  million) there being no reason to think that the Cit is much in∣creased since Sansovinus his time. I find the Sum total of the number of males to exceed the total of the number of females in this survey by above 3500, which comes near to the account of the excess of males in England, given us by Capt. Graunt in his Observations upon the weekly Bills of Mortality in London. And I doubt not but if exact, observations were made in other places, there would be found the like proportion between the number of males and females born into the world in hot countries as in cold. So that from this Topic the Asiatics have no greater plea for multiplicity of wives than the Europeans. Little chanels of water cross and di∣vide the city into many Islets, and may rather be called the Streets of it, than those narrow Lanes or Alleys (Calle they call them) through which you pass on foot from one place to another. By these cha∣nels you may convey your self and goods from any one place of the city to any other, by boat; which is the only way of carriage, except mens shoulders, there being neither coach nor litter, cart nor wain, horse nor ass▪ used or so much as to be seen eer. For passage on foot there are built about 450 bridges cross the chanels, most of them of stone and of one arch, among which the most famous is that over the Canal grande, called Ponte di Rialto: and for passage by water there are a great number of Gon∣dalo's
and other boats; some say eight, some ten, some twelve, nay, some fifteen thousand, but I believe all is conjecture; and they were never num∣bered. The Buildings are generally tall and fair: the Palaces of Noblemen thick set all over the City, but especially upon the Canal grande, which though not vast, are handsom and well-built. The founda∣tions of the houses are great piles or masts driven into the ground as at Amsterdam. The Arsenal is said to be three miles in circuit, they that speak modestly allow it but two; well stored with arms, ammunition and all provisions for war. Heer the Galleys are made and laid up, of which the Republic hath (they say) at least 200. Heer also lies the famous Vessel called the Bucentoro, in which upon Ascension day yearly the Duke accom∣panied with the Senators, and attended by some thousands of Gondalo's bravely set out and adorned, goes forth as it were in solemn procession some two or three miles to Sea, and casting thereinto a ring, saith, I espouse thee in token of perpetual dominion. Heer are said to be kept 20000 pieces of Ordnance great and small, and arms for above 250000 men. A great number [1550] of Artificers, as Shipwrights, Carpenters, Smiths, Founders, &c. are constantly kept at work at the public charge. Of the other public places and buildings of the City, as the Piazza of S. Mark, the Church of S. Mark, with the Treasury; the Tower of S. Mark; the Palace of the Duke; the Chamber of the great Council; the private Armory, the Theatres for acting the Opera, with the contrivances for moving the Scenes; the Ponte di Rialto; the Schools or Halls for the Fraternities; the Mint-house, Pillars, Statues, and other Ornaments of this City, I shall forbear to say any thing, but refer the Reader to Sansovinus, Las∣sels and others, who have minutely described those things.
Venice, according to the old Epithet Venetia la∣ricca, hath been esteemed the richest City, not of Italy only but of all Europe: and doubtless was so before the passage to the East-Indies by the Cape of good hope was discovered: when besides a large share of Lombardy the best Countrey of Italy, Friuli, Istria and Dalmatia, the Islands of Cyprus and Candia, Zant, Cephalonia and Corfu, with others in the Ar∣chipelago subject to them, they were chief if not sole masters of the East-India Trade, furnishing the greatest part of Europe with the commodities coming from thence, which were then brought by Mer∣chants to Alexandria in Egypt, and there by them bought up. So that then it was a Proverb in Italy, Il bianco e'l negro han fatto ricca la Venetia. White and black, i. e. Cotton and Pepper have made Venice rich. Since the loss of that trade, and by the vast expences of long wars with the Tures, wherein they came off losers at last, having parted with first Cyprus and lately Candia to them, their treasures, I believe, are well exhausted. Yet the riches of pri∣vate persons must needs be great, the City having never been sackt nor having ever undergone any such change of Government as that one considerable party of the people hath been oppressed and their goods confiscate. And though the public be not so rich as it hath been, yet will it soon recover itself and grow wealthy again upon the enjoyment of Peace and free Commerce. Though the wings of this Common-wealth have been a little clipt, yet hath it enough still remaining under its dominion to denominate it a potent State: viz. In Italy (1.) The Dogado, of which the City of Venice itself is the head. (2.) The City and Territory of Padua called Padoano. (3.) Of Vicenza called Vicentino. (4.) Of Verona called Veronese. (5.) Of Brescia called Bresci∣ano. (6.) Of Bergamo called Bergamasco. (7.) Of Crema called Cremasco. (8.) Marca Trevisana under
which are compehended Feltrino and Bellunese the territories of the Cities Feltre and Belluno. [Leander Albertus reckons the territories of Verona, Vicenza and Padua in Marca Trevisana; and of Brescia, Ber∣ganio and Crema in Lombardy.] (p.) Friuli. (10.) Istria, (11.) The territory of Rouigo called Il Polesine de Rouigo, formerly belonging to the Dukedom of Fer∣rara, the whole in length being extended 250 miles, and above half so much in breadth. Out of Italy they have a good part of Dalmatia, the Islands of Zant, Cephalonia and Corfu, besides others of less ac∣count. The ordinary annual revenues of this Republic, according to our information amount, to about five millions and three hundred and twenty thousand Venetian Ducates yearly. A Ducat is somewhat less than a French Crown. Of which Venice it self yields 1400000 Brescia 1000000 Padoa 140000 Vicenza 200000 Verona 230000 Bergamo 140000 Crema 100000 Il Polesine 70000 Istria 150000 Il Friuli 100000 La Marca Trevisana 190000 Gli stati di mare 450000 La Zecca 150000 This City is well served with all provisions of Victuals, especially fish and wild-fowl. Fresh water they have none but what is brought from land; and rain water which they preserve in cisterns, and which serves well enough for the ordinary uses of the house. The Air is very sharp in Winter-time
by reason of its vicinity to the Alps. Venice is no∣ted for the best Treacle; the best both drinking and looking-Glasses, made at Muran a large Burgo or Town, about three miles in circuit, and divided in the middle by a broad chanel like Venice, in an Island about a mile distant from the City, so that it may pass for a Suburb of it: for Paper, for Turpentine, for Needle-work Laces called Points; and if that be worth the mentioning, for Courtezans. Heer is also made Sope not inferiour for goodness to that of Castile. The Gentlemens and Citizens Wives are kept close, seldom walking abroad unless it be to Church, and then with an old woman at their heels to guard them. Most of the Gentlemen and Citizens of qua∣lity put their daughters so soon as they come to seven or eight years of age, into some Cloister of Nuns, to be there educated; whence they are not taken out till they be married. The Suiter seldom sees his Mistress before they go to be married, or if he doth see her, it is only at the grate of the Cloister without speaking to her, all things being transacted by the Parents on each side, or by the mediation of an old Woman. The Government is Aristocratical, but among the Gentlemen themselves were there no Citizens or Subjects it would be purely Democratical. As for the Doge or Duke, though they call him Prince, yet they do but mock him, for he hath only the Title and shew, nothing of the power or Authority of a Prince. The form of Government as it is ex∣actly and particularly described by Contarini, Gianotti and Sansovinus out of him, because it is much talked of, I shall heer briefly set down. The Government then of the Common-wealth is chiefly in the Great Council; the Senate or Council of Pregadi; the College; the Council of ten; and the Siguoria.
Of the GREAT COVNCIL. The Great Council is as it were the basis of the Commonwealth, in which the supreme power resides, and from which as well the Senate as all the Magi∣strates derive their Authority. It is made up of all the Gentlemen of the City who have passed the 25. year of their age; the number of which is about 2500 in all. But yet before they can be admitted to give their suffrages in Council they must before theThe Auvogadori di Commune are those who bring in all Causes to the 40 Criminal Judges, called the Qua∣rantia Criminale, to whom appeals are made in Criminal Causes from the sentences of inferiour Judges as well wihtin the City as without. Those then that would appeal must first have recourse to the Auvogadors; who are all diligently to examin the Cause, and consider whether it ought to be brought in, and if they all agree that it ought not, then he that would ap∣peal hath no remedy, but to expect another set of Auvogadors; but if but one of them accepts it, it is enough to bring it in. Auvogadori di Com∣mune, by the oath of their fathers or mothers, or if they be dead, of their near∣est kinsmen, prove that they have atteined that age; and by the testimony of two witnesses, that they are the legitimate sons of such Gen∣tlemen as they profess or pretend themselves to be. But to satisfie the longing of such young men as desire to tast the sweetness of Go∣vernment sooner, there is a way fo some of those who are but twenty years of age complete to get into the Council, viz. Before the fourth of December being S. Barbara's day, all such young men must in the manner we have already mentioned, before the Auvogadori prove themselves to be full twenty years old, and the legitimate sons of Gentlemen. Which done the Secretary of the Auvogadori gives to each a Schedule sealed by the three Auvogadori, signifying so much. These Schedules they carry to the Secre∣tary of the Quarantia criminale, who writes the names of them who brought the Schedules, each in
a scroll by itself; and on the 4. of December carries all these scrolls before the Duke and Counsellors, in whose presence they are all put into one Urn, and into another are put so many golden balls as are equal to the fifth part of the number of scrolls, if it be less than 30; if it be more than 30, there are yet put in but 30 balls, and so many silver: ones as with the golden shall be equal to the number of the young men competitors. These being shaken together, the Duke out of the first urn draws a scroll and reads the name, then out of the other takes a ball, which if it proves to be a golden one; such an one whose name was written in the scroll is understood to be admitted into the Council. And so he proceeds, drawing out first a scroll and then a ball, till all the golden balls are drawn out; and so without more ado those thirty whose lot it is to have the golden balls may go into the Council and ballot: The rest must stay till another year and then take their chance, if they are not before come to the age of 25. In troublesom times when the Common-wealth wants money, they have also conferred this honour upon such as are under 25 years for assisting the Public with the gift or loan of a certain sum of money. At one end of the Great Council chamber (or Hall as they call it, though it be an upper room) sits the Duke on a tribunal elevated above the level of the chamber, with three of the Counsellours and one of the heads or chiefs of the Court called Quarantia criminale (Capi de Quaranta) sitting on his right∣hand; and the other three Counsellors, and below them the other two chiefs of the Quarantia on his left; and on benches on each side the tribunal, which make right angles with the end, sit the Great Chancellour and Secretaries. The fashion of the Hall and Benches on which the Gentlemen sit, and the places of the chief Officers and Magistrates, I shall omit, as being hardly intelligible to such as
have not seen the place, and not very material to be understood. The Council is assembled every Sunday, and sometimes oftner, by the tolling of a bell, which begins at noon and ceases not till one of the clock; and elects the Magistrates and Officers in this man∣ner: First of all the Electors or Nominators are drawn by lot. After that those that are nominated by such Electors are balloted in the Council, and those that have above half the suffrages of the Gen∣tlemen present are understood to be elected. Now because there must be at least nine Magi∣grates created at every meeting of the Council, there∣fore it is necessary to make at least nine Electors: and because some Magistrates places may have but two Competitors and some four, and in some days are created of one sort, in some of another, and in some of both together; when there are only such created as can have but two Competitors (which sel∣dom happens) then there need be but two Sets or Companies of Electors made: but when any such are to be created as must have four Competitors, then there are four Sets of Electors made, of nine in each Set. While the bell tolls, all the Gentle∣men that can with convenience are to repair to the Council, which being once assembled, the doors lockt up and the Keys brought and laid down at the Dukes feet, none can afterwards be admitted to en∣ter, except he be a Counsellor, an Auvogador, one of the heads or chiefs of the Council of ten (called Capi de Dieci) or a Censor. NB. (1.) For the creation of Magistrates there is no Quorum or determinate number of Gentlemen required to be present to make a Council; though it seldom happens the Council-chamber not to be full. For other business as the establishing new Laws, determining any Sentence, &c. the Quorum is 600, without which number nothing can be done.
(2.) Unless there be four of the Counsellors present, there can be neither Officers created nor any other business agitated in the Great Council. The Duke; the chief Magistrates and Officers, and all the Gentlemen being set down in their places; before the Tribunal on which the Duke sits, in the plain of the Council-chamber, are placed on a three urns called Capelli, upon stands so high above the floor that no man can look into them, and yet for greater security they are also covered, only the two outermost have two holes in their covers to put in the hand to draw out the balls. The mid∣dlemost that stands over against the Duke hath but one hole. In each of the two outermost urns are put about 800 balls made of copper and gilded over with silver (which I shall take leave to call silver balls, as those that are gilded with gold, golden balls) so that the whole number in both amounts to about 1500 or 1600, for so many Gentlemen are commonly present at each meeting of the Great Council. Besides in these urns together with the silver are mingled 60 golden balls, 30 in each urn. In the middlemost urn are put 60 balls, where∣of 36 are golden and 24 silver. Then the Great Chancellor (who is always a Citizen and no Gentle∣man) goeth to his place appointed for that purpose, and reads what Magistrates are to be created that day, which done, he returns to the tribunal, and calling the Auvogadors, the Capi de Dieci, the Cen∣sors and the old and new Auditors, he administers to them an oath to observe the laws of the Council, in which is conteined, that all shall sit▪ that none shall change his bench at prohibited times; that none shall seek any Magistracy by dishonest means, or favour and abet any other in so doing, &c. When they are sworn, they return to their places, and the three junior Counsellors rising up, the eldest of them goes and sets him down over against the middlemost urn,
the next before that on the right hand of the Duke, and the youngest over against that on the left. Then there are lots drawn what bench shall come first up to the Capello, (the whole Council being divided into five benches of Gentlemen) and what end of that bench, and what side of that end (for all the benches are double) in this manner. There are put into an urn ten silver balls, five of them marked with the five first figures or the characters of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and by each number is written such an end and such a side. The other five balls are marked with the same figures, but on each of them is writ∣ten the contrary end and contrary side. So that if under the figure 1 in the first five be written, the end towards the Broil and the side towards S. Georges; under the figure 1 in the other five is written, the end towards Castello and the side next S. Mark's. Then they draw out of the urn one of these balls, the figure and inscription whereof shews what bench and what end and side of that bench is to come first up to the Capello. Then they look into the urn and take out that ball which is marked with the same fi∣gure and the contrary end and side. After the same manner they draw out by lot another ball, and so a third, fourth and fifth, calling up the benches in or∣der, till all the Electors are made. Of the bench that is called first, each one in order comes up to one of the exteriour urns, and draws thereout a ball, which if it be silver, he puts it into another urn set on the floor at the foot of that out of which he drew it, and returns to his place, having obteined nothing; but if it be a golden one, he delivers it into the hand of that Counsellor who sits by that urn, and goes presently to the middle urn, and thence also draws out a ball; which if it be silver, having presented it to the Counsellor who sits before the urn, he re∣turns to his place: but if it be gold, he delivers it likewise to the Counsellor, and is understood to be
one of the Electors of the first set; and sits down on the bench on which the said Counsellor sits (which stands across the Dukes tribunal) with his face to∣ward the Duke, that none in the Hall may by any nod or other sign recommend themselves to him. Then a Secretary pronounces his name aloud, that all of his family or near to him by affinity may take notice of it. There he continues sitting till all the other eight of the first set of Electors be in like man∣ner by lot created. And if by chance two of one family are drawn in the first set, the second of them is reserved for the second set or company, and he that is first taken for the second set comes in his room into the first. And then for that day none of that family nor any that are of near affinity to him can come any more to the Capello, because it is pro∣vided by the Laws, that in all the four sets of Ele∣ctors which make up 36, there shall be no more than two of the same family; and that those two shall not be in the same set, so that the nine that are of the same set must be of nine several families. To the youngest of the nine of this first set is by one of the Secretaries delivered a Schedule sealed by the public Seal, wherein are written in order all the Magistrates that are to be that day created. Then all the nine take an oath, to chuse those whom they shall judge most fit to serve the Common-wealth, and go forth the Council-chamber into a private room appointed for them. In like manner are the other three sets of Electors made, who being sworn do likewise take their Schedules, and withdraw into their respective rooms. When all the four sets of Electors are chosen and withdrawn, then any of the Gentlemen in the Council-chamber may change his bench as he pleases. [NB. When there are only such Magistracies to be disposed of as can have but two Competitors, there are but two sets of Electors made.] When the first set is withdrawn, they sit
down, taking place according to their age. Then a Secretary appointed for that purpose reads to them the laws and constitutions which they are obliged to observe in the choice of Magistrates: after which he puts into an urn nine balls, marked with the nine numeral characters or figures, and each Elector ac∣cording to his age draws out one till they be all drawn out. He that draws the ball marked 1, is understood to have the nomination of the Competi∣tor for the first Magistrates place set down in the Schedule, and he who draws that marked 2, to have the nomination of the second, and so in order of the rest. When there are eleven Magistrates to be made in a day, he that hath the nomination of the first, nominates also the tenth, and he that hath the second the eleventh. [NB. One of these Ele∣ctors may nominate himself to any Office: they may also change their Votes among themselves, as for example, he that hath the nomination of the Competitor for the first place may change with him who hath the nomination for the second or third, &c. and so of any other.] He then who hath by lot obteined the nomination of a Competitor for the first Magistrate, names one whom he pleases, who is balloted among the nine, and if he hath two thirds of the suffrages, he is understood to be elected; if not, he names a second and so a third, till he comes to propound one that gets two thirds. His name that is so approved is by the Secretary set down in the Schedule under the name of that place to which he is nominated, with the name of him who pro∣pounded him, and the set of Electors he was of; be∣cause if the nominated be to a place wherein he is entrusted with the management of public moneys, he that nominates is surety for him, and is to make good what he defrauds the Common-wealth of. Then he that hath the second voice names his man, who is balloted and approved in like manner, &c.
The same order of nomination and approbation is observed in the other three sets of Electors. Only in the third and fourth sets when there are some of those places to be disposed of which can have but two Competitors, its necessary that some of the Electors, to whose lot the nomination to such pla∣ces falls, nominate not at all; because the Compe∣titors to such places are already nominated and ap∣proved in the two first sets. Yet is not their being Electors altogether useless and insignificant, because they have power to ballot those that are nominated by the other Electors. If any difficulty arises among the Electors about any person nominated, v. g. whether he may be balloted or the like, one of the Auvogadors and one of the Capi de Dieci go into the room where those Electors are and deter∣min it. The Competitors being in this manner chosen, none of the Electors returns any more into the Council-chamber, unless he be one of the Counsel∣lors, or one of the Capi di Dieci, or of the Auvoga∣dors, or of the Censors. The Secretaries then of the several companies of Electors present to the Great Chancellor the Schedules in which are written the Magistrates to be elected, and under every one the Competitors, for it. Now it may happen that one and the same Gentleman may be chosen Com∣petitor for a Magistracy by two or three or all four of the sets of Electors, and then though he hath no Competitor he may be balloted, because he is understood to be Competitor to himself. But if for one place there be chosen in each of the sets a Com∣petitor, then they look first whether he be not un∣capable of such a place, either by reason he hath had some Magistracy lately, and the time not yet expired that is required by the law before he be ca∣pable of another, or because some of his kinred is in an incompatible place; or bacause he is indebted
to the public or the like. Now if of four Compe∣titors three are found uncapable, the fourth remain∣ing without a Competitor cannot be balloted. But if one be elected in two sets and his two Competi∣tors uncapable of standing, yet may he be balloted, for the reason before alleged. The Great Chancellor having received the Sche∣dules, reads aloud the names of all the Magistrates places with their Competitors; and then beginning from the first he propounds the Competitors for that, and first him that was nominated by the first set, and if he were nominated by any other of the sets, he mentions that also. And when he hath read the names of all the Competitors for one place, they all that are nominated and all of their family and near affinity go out of the Council-chamber into a private room, where they stay till they have been all balloted, and the second place propounded with its Competitors; and then they return again and ballot. As soon as they are withdrawn, the Great Chancellor with a loud voice -puts all in mind, that both by the Divine and humane law every one is obliged to favour him whom he judges to be best of all and fittest to serve the Common-wealth in such place as they shall chuse him to. Then he nominates the first Competitor, and little boys appointed for that purpose (having first delivered to every Gentle∣man a ball) run about the chamber with balloting boxes in their hands to gather the suffrages. The balls are made of linen that they may make no noise when they fall into the boxes. The boxes are made double, the one painted white, the other green. The white is marked with Si, i. e. Yea, into which they that accept put their balls; and the green with No, into which they that refuse the party propound∣ed put theirs. The boxes are made in that manner with a hole in the side to thrust in the hand, that no man can see into which box you let fall the ball.
These little boys as they go along gathering the balls, repete still aloud the name of the person that is then balloted. When they have gathered up the balls, they carry them to the Dukes tribunal, and put the Yea's in a white vessel there standing, and the No's in a green. The Affirmative or Yea's are told over by the Counsellors sitting on the right hand of the Duke, and the Negative or No's by them sitting on the left; and if the Si's are less than half the whole number of suffrages, such a person hath lost it; but if they be more he may obtein it; and therefore the number by which it exceeds the half is set down. In the mean time the other Competitors are named and balloted in like manner, and at last he whose affir∣mative suffrages or Si's exceed the half by the greater number, is understood to be chosen to that place. The like method of proceeding is observed in the choice of the second, third and all the rest of the Magi∣strates for that day. When the balloting and coun∣ting is done, the Great Chancellor gives notice who are elected, commanding them to present themselves before the Censors, who take an oath of them that they have not done any thing contrary to the laws to obtein those places; which done the Council is dis∣mist. NB. If none of the Competitors for any place have above half the number of suffrages, there is none as yet understood to be chosen to that place. And be∣cause by an antient Law the Great Council is to break up before Sun-set, if it happens any of the Competi∣tors are not before that time come to the ballot, the names of such Magistrates and Officers as are chosen are read, and they that remain to be balloted lose the benefit of their nomination, because the next Coun∣cil-day all is begun anew and there are other Compe∣titors made. It is permitted to any stranger to be present at the meetings of the Great Council (as we were several times) to see the manner of proceeding there, and there is a particular bench appointed for them to sit on.
Of the PREGADI. In the Council of the Pregadi are debated and de∣termined all the great and weighty affairs of the Common-wealth. This Council in former times consisted of no more than 60. Afterwards they began to add thereto sometimes 25, sometimes 20, insomuch that it was at last concluded, that there should be made an addition to it (Aggiunta they call it) of as many more. The cause of such additions was, I suppose, the greatness and importance of the affairs then to be considered and treated of, that so a greater number of Gentlemen being present at such consultations and debates, matters might be better disputed, and more throughly scanned and ex∣amined. In the number of the 60 Pregadi there can be but three of one and the same family, and if there be three in the Pregadi there can be but two in the Giunta; if there but two in the Pregadi there may then be three in the Giunta. Besides the 120 we have mentioned, this Council takes in also many other Councils and Magistrates, whereof some have suffrages and some have not, only to add reputation to them, they are permitted to be present, to hear the debates and understand the affairs of the Com∣mon-wealth. Those which enter into this Council with power of balloting are, The Duke; the six Counsellors; the Council of ten; the Auvogadors; all the Procurators of S. Mark, which in Sansovinus his time were 24; the forty Judges in Criminal causes; the three Counsellors that sit with them, cal∣led the Consiglieri da Basso; the two Censors, who after they have finished their Magistracy have power to enter into the Council and ballot, the three that are over the acts of the Sopracastaldi, who after they have ended their office have power for a time limi∣ted to enter into the Council and ballot; the three
Signori alle biave, that is, those who are to take care of bread-corn and of mills, to make provision there∣of for the City, if need require, &c. the four Signori al sale, who take care of the making of salt, and farm out the excise of it; the three Camerlinghi di commune, who receive and disburse all the public Revenue, we might English them Treasurers; the three Signori alle Ragioni vecchie, who are to disburse what is necessary for the entertainment of forein Princes and Embassadors coming to the City, and what else is appointed them by the Common-wealth; the three alle Ragioni nuove, who are to exact what is due to the Common-wealth of those who have farmed the public custom and excise, and to punish them that are slack and run behind hand; the three Proveditori di commune, who take care that Ships be made of just bigness, and not freighted beyond their measure, oversee the high-ways and bridges, as also all the Arts of the City and the small Schools or Fraternities, for the Capi de Dieci are set over the great ones; the three that are over the Arsenal; the three Proveditori sopra le Camere, who take account of the general Collectors of the revenues of all the Cities subject to the Common-wealth; the three Proveditors à dieci Officii, who exact and gather up such moneys of the public customs or excise as are not fully and absolutely sifted and examined by the Custom-Officers, the three Cataueri, who have also to do with part of the public revenue, as Escheats to the Commonwealth, in case a man dies intestate and without heirs; mulcts of such as are cast in a Suit: they judge also concerning treasures found either at sea or land. Those that enter into the Council and have no suffrages are the College or Company of the Savi; The Proveditors sopra le Acque, who are to take care of the Lagune and scouring the chanels, &c. The Dieci Savii, who see that tithes be duly set out and
paid; give possession, register Bargains and Sales, &c. The three Officers of Health, who take care that the City be kept clean, and nothing noisome or offensive left in the Streets, nothing that is corrupted, or that may cause sickness and infection bought and sold ei∣ther by land or water; from these Mountebanks and Physicians take licenses, and they keep account of the number of Whores who are licensed, and in time of any Epidemical Disease they have absolute power of life and death. The three over the Datii, or public Customs and Excise; the Proveditors over the of Alexandria; the twelve over that of Damascus, and the twelve over that of London. The Pregadi were so called, as some think, be∣cause anciently they were assembled by public Mi∣nisters, and by them as it were prayed and entreated that they would come and consult of the affairs of the Commonwealth. The Pregadi properly so called are chosen by the Gr. Council, as the other Magi∣strates are, in the manner before related. They be∣gin so soon to chuse them that all of them may be elected by the beginning of October, at which time they enter upon their Office. The Giunta or other 60 are chosen both by the Council of the old Pregadi and the Great Council in this manner. Upon Michaelmas day the Council of the old Pregadi is assembled, wherein each one of those that have suffrages nomi∣nates the person whom he would have to be of the Giunta. All the nominated are written down. The next day the Great Council is convened, and the names of all the persons nominated by the Pregadi having been first read, are put into an urn, and thence one by one drawn out be one of the Secretaries, and balloted by the Council; and he that obtains above half of the suffrages is reckoned to be one of the Giunta. The other Magistrates comprehended in this Council, it matters not at what time they be created;
because when the Pregadi enter upon their admini∣stration, those who at present exercise such offices are numbred among them as members of the Coun∣cil; and if their offices determine before the Prega∣di's, their successours enter in their places. Besides those who assist the Commonwealth in a time of need with their estates, lending such a sum of mony as the Law determines, have liberty granted them to be present in this Council, and to understand the management of public affairs (yet without power of balloting) till such time as their moneys be repaid, and sometimes longer. For the Law prescribes them such a time to enjoy this honour, though their mony be repaid them before. By this constitution the Com∣monwealth reaps a double benefit. First, it seldom wants mony upon any exigent, many being willing to lend, that they may enjoy this privilege. Secondly, it trains up young men to the knowledge of State-affairs, and qualifies and enables them to manage public business when they shall be thereto called. The Pregadi are assembled as often as it pleases the College. A Council is also granted to the Magistrates when they would confirm any Law, and to the Au∣vogadors, when they have any difficult case to bring in to be determined. The time of their meeting is signified by the tolling of a Bell; it is also a custom to send to give notice and invite them by public Ser∣jeants or Ministers. They cannot enter into any con∣sultation about public business, unless there be pre∣sent four of the Counsellours, and 60 at least of such as have suffrages. In this Council are consultations had, and resolutions taken about Peace and War, truces and agreements, and ways of providing mo∣ney for the necessities and uses of the Commonwealth. How these affairs are treated of will appear when we shall come to speak of the College. Laws are also confirmed in this Council, which are first considered by those Magistrates, who are over that business to
which such Laws appertain, Such Magistrates come first to the College, and there shew either the necessi∣ty or the benefit and utility of such Laws as they would introduce; and if the College approves of them, then they are permitted to bring them into the Council of Pregadi; and if they pass there, then are they valid, and published by public bando or Pro∣clamation; after which every one is obliged to take notice of them and observe them: and the Magi∣strate that introduced them is to see that they be put in execution. They use also sometimes to get their laws confirmed, not only in the Council of Pregadi, but also in the Great Council. The which thing (saith my Author) is I suppose principally in the power of him who brings in the Law to do, and is usually done to gain more reputation, and add strength to the Law. Besides in the Council of Pregadi is chosen a Captain of the Armata, in case the Commonwealth hath occasion to make war by Sea; and a Provedi∣tor of the Camp when they make war by Land: those three kinds of Magistrates, which they call, i. e. Savi grandi, Savi di Terra ferma & Savi di mare: which elections are made after this manner. Each one of the Pregadi nominates one whom he pleases. All that are so nominated are balloted, and he that obtains more then half the number of suffrages is understood to be chosen to that office or dignity. But because it may often happen that he who is judged fittest for such or such an office may be known to be unwilling to accept it, and no man for fear of dis∣pleasing him may dare publicly to nominate him; therefore to avoid that inconvenience, each of the Pregadi writes down in a paper the name of him whom he would chuse to such a place; which Scrolls are all together put into an urn, and drawn out by the Great Chancellor one by one; and the names written therein being openly read, they are put to the ballot, and on him who hath more then half the
suffrages is such Office or Dignity conferred. But when there is a Captain of the Armata to be made, he that is in this manner chosen in the Council of Pregadi must be afterwards ballotted in the Great Council, and have Competitors given him by the four sets of Electors in manner before related, and he who hath most suffrages above the half is under∣stood to be elected. The Counsellours also, and the Censors are elected partly by the Council of Pregadi, and partly by the Great Council. Of the COLLEGE. The College is the third member of the Com∣monwealth, and of great reputation. It is made up principally of three sets or kinds of Magistrates. First those they call Savi grande. 2. Those they call Savi di terra ferma. And 3. those they call Savi di mare. The number of the Savi grandi is six; of each of the other, five; in all sixteen. And besides these of the Signoria, that is the Duke, the six Coun∣sellors, and the three heads or chiefs of the 40 Crimi∣nal Judges, called Capi di Quaranta. The Savi of the Sea, who are otherwise called Savi à gli ordini, take care of all maritime affairs, as well such as con∣cern peace and war as other matters. The Savi of the Land manage and govern Land affairs, such as ap∣pertain to peace and war, and their especial charge is to keep account of all Souldiers that are in the Com∣monwealths pay. The Savi grandi over-see and take care of both, as well at home as abroad. And their particular charge is to make provision both for Peace and war, to write to and answer Princes Letters, and finally to counsel and govern the whole Com∣monwealth. It is to be noted that anciently the Sa∣vi grandi did include the authority and administration of the Savi of the Land, whence the Savi grandi might intermeddle with the affairs belonging to the
Land, though not excluding the Savi of the Land. In the same manner the Savi of the land included those of the Sea, but were not included by them, and therefore with the Savi of the Sea could take into their consideration Sea-affars. So that the Savi grandi included both the Savi of the Land, and the Savi of the Sea; the Savi of the Land only those of the Sea. But in our times, and not many years since the way of managing such affairs is a lit∣tle altered. For that by Law it is determined, that the Authority and administration of the Savi of the land shall be equal to that of the Grand Savi; only that of the Savi of the Sea remains in the same terms it was. In old time there were no other then the Grand Savi; afterward the naval power and com∣mand at Sea being encreased, it was found necessary to create a Council for Sea affairs or Savi di mare. The like happened afterward when the Republic began to grow great on the Land, the Senate being constrained to create Savi di terra ferma, which was presently after that Treviso came under their domini∣on. Anciently the Savi di mare were of greater re∣putation then those of the terra ferma, but after that the Dominion of the Commonwealth began to encrease upon the Land, they bent their counsels and endeavours that way, and so the Savi di mare lost their reputation, and those of the Terra ferma gained it. These three kinds of Magistrates are chosen by the Council of Pregadi in the same manner as the Pro∣veditor of the Camp. None can be made Savio grande unless he be of mature age, and reputed of the greatest abilities. The Savi of the Land are al∣ways men of reputation for prudence, but not so great as the Savi grandi; the Savi of the Sea are still of less esteem then they. And at present this Magistracy serves rather to give young men occasion to exercise themselves in State-business, then for any other pur∣pose, because in matters of moment the Savi grandi,
and Savi di terra ferma are always employed. Each of these companies of Magistrates chuse one of them∣selves Praepositus, or Prevost, who is chief of that Magistracy for one week; he propounds matters in the College and Records those things which are to be executed which appertain to his Magistracy. The manner of proceeding and transacting public af∣fairs in the College is this. Every morning two hours after Sun-rising the College is convened. [N. B. whenever we speak of the College we understand the three Societies of Magistrates before-mentioned, to∣gether with the Duke, the Counsellors, and the three Capi de Quaranta, that is with the Signoria, who have their places not only in this College, but also in the Grand Council, the Council of Pregadi and the Council of ten: So that nothing is debated without their presence and intervention.] The College being assembled, all those Letters are read that were re∣ceived since their last meeting: Audience is given to publick Oratours and Embassadours, if any require it; and each of the three Societies of Savi dispatch such business as appertains to them, and was pro∣pounded and recorded by their Provost. If therefore there be any business to be debated appertaining to the Grand Savi, the Savi of the Land, and of the Sea may be excluded: but if it be not of very great importance, they do not use to prohibit them to be present at such deliberations, but their part is only to hear and hold their peace: or if they do deliver their opinions, yet are they not noted down to be brought into the Council of Pregadi, but only the opinions of the Grand Savi, the Counsellors, the Capi de Quaranta, and the Duke. And to the end that the whole method and order of this administra∣tion may be the better understood by an example, let us suppose there is a consultation to be had about some affairs appertaining to the Savi of the Sea, they cannot exclude the Savi of the Land, and the Grand
Savi, if they please to interpose and meddle with that affair. After consultation had thereupon, not on∣ly the Savi of the Sea, but they of the Land, and the Grand Savi, the Duke also and the Counsellors and Capi de Quaranta, may deliver their opinions if they please, and according as they are of one or more different opinions, make one or several par∣ties [by parties we mean nothing but propositions or sentences.] For that each Savio and Counsellour, much more the Duke, when they do not agree to the opinions of others, may each bring in a party (that is, propound his sentence or judgment about a busi∣ness) alone. All these parties are noted by a Secreta∣ry, each one with the name of that Savio or other person that was the Author of it. And because no matter belonging to the public administration can be determined without the approbation and consent of the Council of Pregadi; therefore that Council being assembled, the aforesaid Magistrates come with their parties or propositions noted, and propound them in order. If the parties be more then one (as suppose four) they are all propounded together, but that is first read the Author whereof is the more ho∣nourable Magistrate, and therefore those of the Duke and Counsellors ought to precede the rest, those of the Savi grandi, them of the Savi of the Land; and theirs those of the Savi di mare. And if any of the three Societies of Savi in matters apper∣taining to their charge have taken several parties, that party ought first to be propounded, of which he is Authour, who in that Society is most honor∣able. The parties being propounded, if any of the Savi will speak against them, he ought to precede the rest of the Pregadi, and among them first that Savio who is of greatest Authority. After that any of the Pregadi hath liberty to do the same. After suf∣ficient debate upon all the parties, they are all balloted together in this manner. Suppose the parties to be
four, then there are four Secretaries come in, having each a white box in his hand: after them another Secretary follows with a green box, and after him still another with a red box. The first of the four goes from person to person, repeating the name of him that was author of the party first propounded: the second, third, and fourth in like manner repeat∣ing the names of the second, third, and fourth, and each one of the Pregadi puts his ballot into what box he pleases. So that if he approves not the first party, he puts his ballot in his box that gathers the suffra∣ges for that party that pleases him. If he approves none of the four, then he puts his ballot in the green box: but if the matter be not yet clear to him, and he be not fully satisfied about it, he puts his ballot in∣to the red box that comes last, and is called the box of the Non sinceri, i. e. such as neither approve or re∣ject. The Suffrages being thus gathered, the ballots of each party are told over, and that which exceeds the half by most suffrages is understood to be confir∣med and ratified; but if none come up to the half, then that which hath the least number of suffrages being laid aside, the other three are balloted after the same manner, with three boxes, and after them a green and a red one. If none of the three get half the number of suffrages, then that which hath fewest being again laid aside, the remaining two are ballo∣ted in like manner; and if neither of these passeth the half, then that which hath the most suffrages is balloted alone: and if the suffrages for that exceed not the half, none of the parties balloted is under∣stood to be confirmed: in which case new parties must be brought in, if the matter treated of be ne∣cessary, which may be done the same day, because the Duke, any one of the Counsellors, Capi di Qua∣ranta, or Savi may bring in new parties. Such a bu∣siness may also be referred to another day. But it sel∣dom happens that of so many parties no one is ap∣proved.
When none of them is confirmed, and the matter requires further debate, we shall declare what order is taken when we come to treat of the Council of Ten. But it is to be noted, that the first time all the parties are balloted together, it may happen that there are more then half the suffrages in the box of the Non-sinceri, i. e. such as suspend, being not clear in the point; and in such case none of the parties can be balloted, but the matter requiring new debate, new parties are to be brought in. And because it may happen that some one of the Council of Pregadi may have upon some matter under consideration a propo∣sition to make, which may be for the benefit and ad∣vantage of the Commonwealth, which came not in∣to the minds of the Savi or others who have power of propounding their judgments or opinions in Council, that such advantage be not lost, it is or∣dained that such opinion or sentiment be communi∣cated to one of those who have power to propound, and by him propounded to the Council. But that none but the Savi and others before-mentioned should have liberty to bring in parties, is ordained to avoid prolixity and confusion; it being also unlikely that what comes not into the thoughts and conside∣ration of the College, in which are the wisest per∣sons of the City, should be imagined or found out by other men. But granting this might sometimes happen, yet it would be so seldom, that no great ac∣count ought to be made of it; and so much the ra∣ther, because in every constitution the lesser conve∣nience ought to give place to the greater. To every of these three Societies of Savi, the same time of six months determines their office: but yet are not all the persons in each chosen at the same time. For the grand Savi are chosen at two several times, three at once; and from the choice of the first to the choice of the second intercedes three months time. The Savi of the Land, and the Savi of the Sea are also chosen at
two times, three the first time, and two the second; with the same interval between. To the grand Savi there is sometimes, great affairs requiring it, added an Aggiunta of three more, and these we call Savi straordinarii. One may be chosen into the Council of Pre∣gadi successively two or more years one after another. Of the DVKE. Of the Antiquity of this Magistrate, and what great power and authority he had in ancient times, and how afterwards it came to be moderated and di∣minished, I shall say nothing, only shew in what manner he is elected, and what Authority he hath in our times. So soon as the former Duke is dead, the six Counsellors enter into the Palace with the three Capi de Quaranta, of whom we shall speak heerafter. The senior Counsellor is understood to be Vice-Duke, and therefore he performs some business which belongs to the office of the Duke, as the sealing of bollettines for them that are to undertake any new of∣fice, &c. The Letters which the Signoria writes to Magistrates and Commanders abroad go in the name of the Governatori. The Counsellors once entred the Palace, go not out thence till the new Duke be crea∣ted. The Palace-gates are also kept lockt up, and only the wickets left open to enter in and go out at: and besides there is a Guard, more for ancient usage then any necessity; for that there is no more alterati∣on in the City upon the death of the Duke, then upon the death of any private Gentleman, that is none at all.Nic. Crassus saith, that it is now by law ordained that be∣sides the Auvoga∣dors some other Magistrates shall also sit and administer Justice. An∣not. 27. in Gianot. Its true indeed the Magistrates do not proceed in the administration of their offices, before there be a new Duke created▪ but that is, because its suppo∣sed they are all busied about the Election. The body of the deceased Duke being adorned with the Ducal Vestments, is brought down, and placed in a low room called the Sala de Pioveghi, where it remains
❀ DOMINICAS CONTARENO DEI GRATIA DVX VENETIARVM. portrait
three days; and there are twenty Gentlemen ap∣pointed, who being clothed with Scarlet, accompany it when it is carried down, and sit round about it till night, returning again the next morning, and this they continue to do for three days. Then is the Funeral celebrated with all the Pomp and Magnifi∣cence which the Dignity of such a Magistrate re∣quires. The next day after the Funeral the Great Council is convened, and given to understand by the Great Chancellor, that being to give beginning to the Election of a new Duke, they are first to make choice of five Correctors and three Inquisitors. The Vice-Duke then standing up, makes a Speech to the Council, and having commended the Life, Behavi∣our, and Government of the Duke deceased, exhorts and stirs up every one to make choice of a person to succeed him, that may be useful and honourable to the Commonwealth. Then doth he cause the Laws to be read, which prescribe the manner and order of electing the new Duke: and last of all the Council proceed to elect the said five Correctors and three Inquisitors after the same manner they use in the choice of other Magistrates. The office of the Inqui∣sitors is diligently to examine the life and actions of the deceased Prince, and if they find that he hath in any thing erred or done amiss, they are obliged to accuse him; and look what punishment he hath de∣served is inflicted on his heirs. But such punishments are never corporal, but only pecuniary mulcts. And such a Cause, by reason it is a business of great im∣portance, is not finally determined by the Inquisi∣tors, but agitated in the Great Council, and may also be examined in the Quarantia criminale. These Inquisitors have a years time to finish their Inquisiti∣on in. The office of the Correctors is to see and consider well if any new Law to be observed by the succeeding Prince is needful to be introduced: and if there have been any error discovered in the admini∣stration
of the Precedent Duke that ought to be cor∣rected. For the doing of which so soon as they are created they are brought into a certain Chamber, where they meet so often till they be agreed upon what to them seems needful to be amended, or sit to be newly introduced; and this commonly takes up three or four days. When they have finished their considerations, they therewith acquaint the Signoria, who cause the Great Council to be convened, in the accustomed place and manner; whither the said Cor∣rectors come, and there cause all such Laws and Cor∣rections as they judge fit to be made, to be publicly recited; which being balloted one by one in the great Council, are either confirmed or rejected. This done, the Great Council the day following is again called, to which meeting none can come but such as have passed the 30 year of their age. The doors being shut at the appointed time, all that are present in Council are numbred over, and in an urn or Capello of that sort which have but one hole in their cover, are put 30 golden balls, marked with a certain note, and as many silver ones as together with the golden are equal to the number of the Gentlemen present. After this the junior Counsellor goes out into St. Marks Church, which is fast by, and having made his reverence to the Altar, takes a little boy which he finds there, and brings him along with him into the Council; who is to draw the ballots out of the urn for the Gentlemen who they come up to the Capello, they not being permitted to draw them out them∣selves, to avoid fraud. This boy is called the Ballo∣tino, and is he that in processions goes before the Duke, who is bound so soon as the boy comes to be of convenient age to make him one of the Secreta∣ries. The Ballotine being brought in before the Sig∣noria, one Counsellor and one Capo de Quaranta cho∣sen by lot, go and set themselves down before the Capello, Then they draw lots which Bench is to come
up first. [N. B. Because there is but one Capello, the Benches do not come up by two and two, as in the creation of Magistrates, but one by one; and there∣fore there are put in ten lots into the urn and drawn out as before, and the benches come up accordingly.] If one of those five benches on the side towards St. Georges be drawn, they are to begin to come up at that end that is toward the Broil; and if one of those five that are toward S. Marks be drawn, they are to begin to come up at the end toward Castello. The lots being drawn, that Gentleman that sits first at that end of the bench which is to begin, arises and goes up to the Capello. Then the Ballotine in his name draws out a ball, which if it be a silver one, he puts it in another Capello standing at the foot of that out of which he drew it, and he for whom it was drawn goes presently out of the Council-chamber. But if it be gilded and marked, he delivers it to the Coun∣sellor sitting by, and the Great Chancellor pronoun∣ces aloud the name of him for whom it was drawn: who presently between two Secretaries is carried into a room out of the Council Chamber. Then all those who are of his Family, his Uncles, Cousins, Father-in-law, and they that are of near affinity to him are called, and being come up to the Tribunal, numbred by one of the Secretaries, and so many silver balls taken out of the Capello as are equal to the sum of them, and so they depart the Coun∣cil-chamber. In the same order all the rest of the benches are called by lot, till all the golden balls are drawn out of the Capello. And after those who have obtained them are withdrawn into the fore-mention∣ed room the Council is dismist: and the 30 come all before the Signoria, and sit down on two benches there standing, half on the one, and half on the other. Then in a certain Capello there placed are put 21 silver Balls and 9 golden; and these 30 per∣sons being called according to the order they were
chosen in, come up one by one to the Capello, and the Ballotine draws out a ballot for each one, till all the golden balls are drawn. Those then for whom the silver balls were drawn depart, and those nine who obtained the golden withdraw into the fore-menti∣oned room; where when they are all come together they are by the Signoria conducted into another room, where are set ready all necessary accommoda∣tions for them: and having given oath to make a good election, they continue there locked up toge∣ther till they have chosen 40 of 40 different Families: in which election they thus proceed. So soon as they are shut up they draw lots among themselves, who shall nominate first, who second, who third, &c. and accordingly in that order nominate. Those nomi∣nated are balloted among the nine, and if they have seven suffrages they are understood to be of the 40. The election being finished, they signifie so much to the Signoria. The which the same day, or if it be too late the day following, cause the Great Council to be called; which when it is assembled, the Great Chancellor with two Secretaries goes to the nine for the Schedule in which the 40 Electors are written; and returning therewith into the Council by the command of the Signoria reads over the names of them that are chosen; who one by one coming before the Tribunal are sent out of the Council into a cer∣tain Chamber; and if any one of the 40 happens not to be present in Council, one of the Counsellors and one Capo de Quaranta go to search him out, and with∣out giving him leave to speak to any body, bring him into the Council-chamber, and afterwards into the room where his companions are withdrawn. When the 40 are all met together the Council is dismist, and then after the manner of the former 30, these 40 come before the Signoria, and being set up∣on the two benches in the middle, they are likewise by lot called up to the Capello, wherein are put 28
silver balls, and 12 golden. Those for whom the sil∣ver balls are drawn depart the Hall; and those for whom the golden are brought by the Signoria either into the Chamber where the former nine were, or in∣to another as they please; where having taken oath to make a good election, they are locked up, and by way of suffrage chuse 25 of 25 several Families, in the same manner as the nine chose the 40; to which Election 9 suffrages of the 12 are necessary. The Election being made, they acquaint the Signoria therewith; which if the time permits, causes the great Council to be assembled the same day; if not, the day following, and after the same manner the Great Chancellor reads the names of the 25: and those that are chosen when they hear their names read, come up to the Tribnnal, and are sent out of the Council into a room by themselves as were the 40: and if any one be not present, he is searched out and brought in like wise. When all the 25 are met, the Council is broken up, and the 25 come be∣fore the Signoria, and sitting down, are called by lot, and come up to the Capello, into which are put 16 silver balls, and nine golden. Those for whom the Ballotine draws the silver balls depart; those that get the golden remain; and being lockt up together, they do in the same manner as the former 12, by 7 suffrages chuse 45 of 45 several Families; who after∣wards being called by the Signoria into the Great Council, the present and absent being all come to∣gether, as we said before, the Council is dismissed. And the 45 being set before the Signoria in form a∣foresaid, and called by lot, come up to the Capello; into which are put 34 silver balls, and 11 golden. Those for whom the silver balls are drawn go at their pleasure, those for whom the golden, remain; and having given oath to make a good Election, they are shut up as the former, and by way of suffrage chuse 41 of so many several Families, of whom each must
have 9 ballots, and these are the Electors of the Duke. After these 41 are thus elected, and in the Great Council pronounced, and also all met in the room appointed, in manner aforesaid; first of all the Mass of the Holy Ghost is celebrated, then eve∣ry one of the Electors promises by solemn oath to lay aside all humane passions, and to chuse for Duke him whom to chuse in his conscience he shall judge to be most for the interest and honour of the Com∣monwealth, as like to do it most credit and best ser∣vice; and that with the profoundest silence he will keep secret whatever is said or done among them. After this they are lockt up together alone, without any other Ministers or Secretaries, so close that no person can be admitted to see them: and first of all among themselves of the ancientest they chuse three heads or chiefs which they call Priors; and also of the youngest among them they chuse two who perform the office of Secretaries. The Priors sit down, having before them a table upon which are placed two bal∣loting boxes of that sort that are used in the Great Council; in one of which are put 40 balls, marked with a certain mark, that no deceit may be used. The rest of the 41 sit also down, each where he pleases. The two Secretaries make 41 Schedules, and having folded them up give to each person one, they take also the ballots and distribute them to all. Then they are called one by one before the three Priors, and each one writes in his Schedule the name of him whom he would have to be Duke, and leaves it up∣on the table. The two Secretaries note the names of them that are written in the Schedules, and by how many each one is named. [The names in all the Schedules seldom pass 6 or 8, because there are never more who can be judged sit to be promoted to such a Dignity.] After which all the names so noted are put into an urn, and thence by lot drawn out. And he that is first drawn, if he be one of
the Electors is presently sent out into the Chamber of the Quarantia, and there shut up; and liberty is then given to any one of the Electors to speak any thing he hath to object against him, why he is not fit for so great a place. And if any thing be by any one objected, it is set down by the Secretaries: and he being called in, all that hath been spoken against him is read to him, and if he will stand upon his de∣fence he may make his answer; which when he hath done he returns into the same Chamber again. The same order is used till there be none left who will ob∣ject any thing against him, or till he will defend himself no longer; after which he is presently bal∣loted, and as soon as that is done all the Electors go up before the Priors, the eldest of which with a lit∣tle staff numbers over those that are in the affirma∣tive box, and also those that are in the negative; and if the affirmative amount to 25, the person bal∣loted is understood to be chosen Duke; and there can be no other balloted. This order hath been since changed, and notwithstanding the first or any other have come to 25 suffrages, yet have the rest been bal∣loted; and he that hath obtained most suffrages hath been made Duke. But if the affirmative suffrages do not amount to 25, there is taken by lot another out of the urn, in which the names set down each with the number of its nominators were put, and the same order of proceeding observed till they come to one who gets 25 ballots. It may happen that none comes up to that number, in which case the Electors continue shut up, and name and ballot the nominated so often, till one comes to get the fore∣said number of suffrages. The Duke being on this wise created, many Ceremonies are wont to be per∣formed. First of all the 41 by the Great Chancel∣lor send word to the Signoria who it is that is crea∣ted Duke, who first of all go to congratulate him, and give him joy; and if it be in the day time,
cause all the Bells to be rung. Then his Kinred and Friends come to visit him, and at the same time there is money coined with his name upon it. After which the 41 Electors with the Duke go into St. Mark's Church, and having done reverence to God, all mount up a Scaffold, and the ancientest of them tells the people (who by this time have filled the Church) that they have chosen a Duke in the room of the deceased; and commending the Election, shews him to the People, who in token of confirma∣tion and joy give him loud acclamations. The Duke then speaks to the People, and encourages them to hope well of his Government; which done, they go down the Scaffold, and bring the Duke before the Altar; where by the Procurators of the Church an Oath is tendred him to observe the Laws and a Standard put into his hand by the Vicar of the Pri∣micerius of St. Marks. After this, having made an offering at the Altar, he comes to the door of the Choire, where he is placed upon a little low move∣able Scaffold (Pergoletta they call it) accompanied by one that carries the Standard, and by another of his near Friends or Relations, who carries a cup full of gold and silver money stamped with his name; and by the mariners of the Arsenal he is drawn out of St. Marks, and carried round about the Piazza, he that carries the cup scattering money among the peo∣ple as he goes along. When he hath rounded the Pi∣azza, he enters in by the principal gate into the Pa∣lace; where being arrived at the foot of the stairs he goes off the Pergolette to go up. In the midst of the stairs he finds the Counsellors and Capi de Qua∣ranta who there wait for him. When he is got up to the top of the stairs, the eldest Counsellor puts upon his head the Ducal Cap; and thence he is lead into theTo put him in mind of his mortality, because that is the place where the Corps of the deceased Dukes lie in state. Sala de Pioveghi, and after he hath sitten
a while there in a seat appointed for that purpose, he is conducted by them to his Lodgings; and the Pa∣lace being resigned to him, they all go to their own homes. His habit much differing from the common renders him venerable. On his head he wears a Du∣cal Cap, called il Corno, because it hath an Apex or horn arising above the top of it on the hinder part, and under that a white coif, with little strings, which from the ears hang down backward upon his neck. On his back a loose vest or mantle without sleeves so long that it draws upon the ground, of velvet, Da∣mask, Scarlet, or any other rich cloth. When he goes abroad the Bells of St. Marks are rung: there are certain Banners carried before him, and Trumpets of an extraordinary greatness sounded: then follows the Cushion or Pillow, and the seat of Gold, and after that the Duke himself under an Vmbrella, between two of the principal forein Embassadors or Agents then in town, and the others behind him. After him follow about 30 couple of the chief Gentlemen, all in cloth of Scarlet; and he that hath the right hand in the first couple carries a Sword upright in his hand. The COVNSELLORS. The Duke cannot determine, nor so much as ex∣cute any the least besiness alone without the presence of the Counsellors, who are in number six, one for each Sestiero. They are always chosen of the most ho∣nourable Gentlemen of the City; the greatness and dignity of their office requiring it. They are not all six chosen at the same time, but by three and three; those for the three Sestieri on one side the Great cha∣nel at one time, and those for the Sestieri on the other side at another. They are chosen by the Great Coun∣cil, and are of the number of those Magistrates that require four Competitors: but the Council of Pre∣gadi
for each of these makes one Competitor; who is afterward balloted in the Great Council. So then when there is an Election to be made of three Coun∣sellors, the Great Council is assembled, and after that the four sets of Electors are made, and with∣drawn into their several rooms, to make their Ele∣ctions after the order before set down, one of the Secretaries gives notice to all who have votes in the Council of Pregadi, that they withdraw into the Chamber adjoyning to the Great Council-chamber, where the Council of Pregadi, uses to meet. Where when they are all met, the Duke with the Counsel∣lors and Capi de Quaranta goes in to them; and it being by lot determined for what Sestiero a Counsel∣lor shall be first chosen, every one names him whom he would have to be Counsellor. All the persons nomina∣ted are written down, and afterwards balloted; and he that hath more then half the number of suffrages is cohsen Competitor: and this manner of chusing in the Council of Pregadi is called Scrutinio. The Council of Pregadi and the Duke being returned into the Great Council, and the Competitors made, they are all balloted after the manner fore-mentioned, and he that hath most above half the number of suffra∣ges is understood to be chosen Counsellor. It may happen that in the Great Council one only may come to be nominated Competitor, and sometimes the same that is chosen by the Pregadi, in which case he ought to be balloted; notwithstanding that by the Law none can be balloted without a Competitor: because being nominated in divers Councils, he is understood to be Competitor with himself, as hath been before intimated; and if he hath more then half the suffrages he is chosen, [NB. Where there are more Competitors then one balloted for any place for which the Pregadi chuse a Competitor, it hap∣pens for the most part that he is chosen who was made Competitor by the Pregadi, because of the Dignity
and Reputation of that Council.] The six Counsel∣lors sit with the Duke, and with him administer all affairs, and dispatch especially all private business: as for example, give Audience, read publick Letters, grant Privileges, and the like; which things cannot be done by the Duke, if there be not four Counsellors present; and yet the Counsellors may dispatch any the like business, though the Duke be not with them. They have power of propounding in the Great Council, the Council of Pregadi, and Council of Ten; which he Savi who have power of pro∣pounding matters in the Council of Pregadi, and the Capi di Dieci who have privilege of propound∣ing in the Council of Ten, have not; so that the the Authority of the Counsellors is greater then that of the Savi, or Capi di Dieci. [NB. That any one Counsellor, though no other concur with him, may propound in the Council of Pregadi, but not in the Council of Ten, unless three more concur with him in the same opinion.] This Magistracy continues for a whole year, but is exercised but 8 months; the other four months being spent in the Quarantia criminale, wherein three Counsellors continually sit, who during that time are called Consiglieri da basso, i. e. lower Counsellors. They may sit in this Court either the first 4 months, or the last 4, or the two first and two last, And therefore it is necessary that there be always nine Counsellors, six who sit constantly with the Duke, and the three now men∣tioned: and when these are to go sit with the Duke, or go out of their office, three of those which sit with the Duke come down to sit in the Quaranatia or finish their office, and there are three new ones crea∣ted. Moreover it is to be understood, that with the Duke and six Counsellors do also sit three of the Quarantia criminale, i. e. the 40 Judges in criminal causes, whom they call Capi de Quaranta, who hold this Dignity two months: so that by the Signoria
is understood the Duke, the six Counsellors, and the three Capi di Quaranta. Anciently the Duke with his Counsellors was wont to be present at the judg∣ments of the Quarantia; but Marcus Cornarus who was made Duke in the year 1365. by reason of the multitude of business which daily encreased in the Commonwealth, left that care to those Counsellors we have been speaking of. The three Capi de Qua∣ranta sit with the Duke and Counsellors, that as the Quarantia participates with the Signory, having three Counsellors joined with them; so the Signory may partake of the Quarantia, the three Capi de Qua∣ranta sitting with them. And so the Signory comes to intermeddle with the business of the Quarantia, and the Quarantia with the affairs of the Signory. And now to acquaint the Reader with all the Dukes management. First, he with the Counsellors inter∣venes in, and is part of the College, the Council of Pregadi, and the Great Council, as we have already signified. He is also present in the Council of Ten, and hath power of propounding in all these Coun∣cils; so that no affairs can be cannot treated of without his presence, though alone he cannot dispatch any busi∣ness. Public Letters are written in his name, as also all Privileges and publick Writings, as though he were the Author of them. All Letters that come from Forein Princes and Embassadors, and Agents sent abroad by the Commonwealth, are directed to him. When the Savi of the Land or Sea, or other Magistrates write Letters to their Proveditors, they subscribe them with the Dukes name thus, Domini∣cus Contarenus Dux Venetiarum. And this mode is observed in all other sorts or public Writings, as Patents, Privileges, Obligations, Laws, &c. The Council of Ten varies this form and subscribes in two manners, for either the whole Council writes and then they subscribe Dominicus Contarenus Dux Venetiarum, &c. cum nostro Concilio Decem; and those
that answer superscribe accordingly. Or only the Heads or Chiefs of the Council of Ten, called Capi di Dieci, write; and then the Subscription is, Domi∣nicus Contarenus Dux Venetiarum, &c. cum Copitibus Concilii Decem. And those that return answer super∣scribe accordingly. Every eighth day, that is on Wednesday weekly, the Duke is wont to go down and visit the Courts of Justice, making a tour round the two Corridores, where the Magistrates sit, stop∣ping a while at each Court, and stirring up and en∣couraging the Judge or Magistrate that presides there to administer Justice impartially. And if there be any one that thinks he hath not right done him, he recommends himself to the Duke, acquainting him with his cause; and if the Duke judges that he is in∣jured by false judgment, he presently commands that Magistrate or Judge to do him right; but if the contrary appears to him, he reproves him that thought himself agrieved, and goes on in his Visita∣tion. Some Dukes have changed this order, not vi∣siting always on the same day, that they might come upon the Mgistrates unexpected. Multitude of bu∣siness sometimes constrains the Duke to intermit this usage for a week or two. All the money of the Com∣monwealth is also stamped with the Dukes name, but not with his face or image. That he may be the better enabled (saith my Authour) to maintain his port, and live with that magnificence such a place requires, he hath an allowance from the Public of 3500 Ducats per annum; a sorry Revenue for one that hath the shew and Title of a Prince, being less than so many French Crowns. And yet he is obli∣ged to keep a Family that may be honourable and suitable to such a Dignity; and moreover to make 4 Feasts yearly at 4 several times, viz. upon St. Ste∣phen's day, St. Mark's day, Ascension day, and St. Vit's day: to which Feasts it is the custom tō invite all the Gentlemen according to their ages. To the
first, besides the Counsellors, the Capi de Quaranta, the Auvogadors, and the Capi de Dieci, are invited those that are of greatest age and gravity: to the second those that are younger; and so to the third and fourth still those that are younger and younger: besides which Feasts, he is bound also to send to eve∣ry Gentleman that comes to the Great Council a Pre∣sent, which was formely 5 wild Ducks: but now adays there is a sort of money coined for that pur∣pose; upon one side whereof is the figure of St. Mark reaching out a Standard to the Duke, on the other side the name of the Duke, and the year current of his Dukeship, on this manner, Dominici Contareni Venetiarum Principis munus, Anno IV. The Council of TEN. The Council of Ten, though it be a member of great importance, yet is it rather accessary or adjun∣ctive then principal, and seems to me much to re∣semble the Dictator, that was wont to be created by the Romans in times of great and imminent danger; only differs in that the Commonwealth is never without this Magistracy. The Authority thereof is equal to that of the Council of Pregadi, and the whole City; and therefore it may meddle with and transact any State-affairs as it pleases, without appeal, or being accountable to any Superior Power. Though this power be not used by it, except only in cases of greatest importance, and which cannot otherwise be remedied or provided for: as for example, to con∣sider about making War, concluding a Peace, or other negotiation secretly, to send a Proveditor into the Camp speedily: which things if they should be first treated of in the College, and afterwards deba∣ted in the Council of Pregadi, they could not be ma∣naged and transacted with that secresie, expedition, and other cirumstances as the time and conjuncture
of affairs requires. When the College then intends to manage any business secretly; as suppose to con∣clude an agreement with any Prince or State, to at∣tempt any thing on their enemies, or begin any new enterprise or design, which ought to be kept secret till the time of execution, then they cuase Letters to be written to such Agents or other persons as are to be employed in that business, with this Inscripti∣on, Dominicus Contarenus Dux Venetiarum, &c. cum Concilio nostro Decem: and they superscribe their an∣swers in like manner: and their Letters are received by the Capi de Dieci, who bring them to the Col∣lege; at which time the three Capi de Quaranta, and the Savi di mare are excluded: and then they treat of the business, and debate it as long as is needful; yet not they alone, for the Capi de Dieci call the rest of the Council of Ten. Besides at such consultati∣ons are present not only the Duke, the Counsellors, and all the Council of Ten, but the Grand Savi, and the Savi of the Land, the Giunta which consists of fifteen, the Auvogadors and nine of the Procura∣tors. N. Cras∣sus saith, That at present there are none of any sort added to the Coun∣cil of X, but this Council consists only of the Duke, the six Counsel∣lors, and the Decemviri; and that this Council doth not now meddle at all with Peace and War, and the publick Treasury, but only punish enormous Offence, and especially Rebellion and Treason. But all these have not power of giving suf∣frages but only those ten of the Council of X, the Giunta, the Duke, and the six Counsellors. The Aggregate of all these united with the Council of X is called the Council of X with the Giunta; which is not convened but on weighty occasions, to debate and manage great affairs and such as appertain to the state of the whole City; which affairs might be treated of and dispatched by the Council of Pregadi, but for the respects afore∣said are undertaken by this Council. The Council of X was erected some say after the death of Vitale Michaeli, to punish such as had plotted treason against the Commonwealth. Others say it had its beginning
in the time of Pietro Gradenigo. At first its Authority was but small, but by little and little its reputation encreased. It punishes besides such as practice Trea∣son or conspire against the Commonwealth, those that coin counterfeit monys, those that commit sins against Nature, as Sodomy and bestiality. It also disposes of certain moneys which are assigned to it by the Chamberlains and other Officers: it hath the command of certain Galleys in the Arsenal, marked with these two letters, C and X, signifying that such Vessels are in the power of the Capi de Dieci. It also takes care of the Artillery. When any of these things are to be considered of, then only those Ten that are of the Council of X with the Duke and Counsellors are assembled; and this is called absolutely and sim∣ply the Council of X. The ten of this Council are chosen in the Great Council like the other Magi∣strates for one year; out of which are taken by lot every month three, who are called the Heads or Chiefs of the ten [Capi de Dieci] and of these one presides every week, which is he who in the Great Council-chamber takes place over against the Duke. The office of these is to convoke the Council of X, and propound their opinions therein; yet not singly but all three together, or at least two; and they are obliged to call the Council every 8 days, and oftner if occasion require. Anciently there was no deter∣minate time for assembling this Council, but because every time it was convened the whole City was mo∣ved and troubled, as judging that it was not without some great reason; therefore to avoid and prevent such disturbance and disquiet of mens minds there was a time determined for its meeting. When they are to pass sentence upon any offender that is in their hands for the forementioned crimes, he cannot ei∣ther by himself or any other person plead his cause or defend himself but appears before the Council and is examined, and there are notes taken of all he
saith. And when the Capi di Dieci bring in such a cause into the Council, either one of them must un∣dertake his defence and plead for him, or else he cannot be defended at all. From the Sentence of this Council there is no appeal, neither can it be re∣versed or changed but by themselves or successors, if the matter be such as is capable of change. Those of this Council so soon as they go out of their of∣fice may presently enter upon another. For all these places, the Grand Savi, the Savi of the Land and Savi of the Sea, the Counsellors, the ten of this Council, the Auvogadors and Censors give no im∣pediment one to another; but so soon as a Gentle∣man hath finished one of these Offices, he may enter upon another. If it happens that any one while he is exercising a lesser Magistracy be chosen to a greater, he may if he pleases relinquish the less, and take the greater. The Procurators of St. MARK. The Office of Procurator is of great reputation in this City. Though it be not of the number of those which have to do with the administration and government of the Commonwealth: yet is it ho∣nourable, because, as that of the Duke, it continues for life; and is besides ancient, and hath maintained its Reputation to the present times. There was ne∣ver any Gentleman of great esteem in the City, but he was adorned with this Dignity: so that very few have been Dukes since this Magistracy was ordained but they have before been Procurators. Anciently there was but one Procurator made, to take care of the Church of St. Mark and its treasure; but after the death of Sebastian Ciani, he having left a great Legacy to St. Marks, the Revenues whereof were to be distributed by the Procurator; one person not sufficing for so much business, it was found necessary
to create another; whose charge it should be to su∣perintend and manage the Legacy of Sebastian Ciani. Afterwards Legacies being multiplied, in the year 1270. in the time of Rinieri Zeno, a third was thought fit to be created; and they did so divide the business among them, that one took care of the Church, an∣other of the Legacies bequeathed by them that dwelt on this side the great Chanel; and the third of their Legacies who dwelt on the other side of the great Chanel. In the same Dukes time there was a fourth created to be Collegue with him that governed the Church and its Treasures. For the same reason two more were added when John Soranzo was Duke. Afterwards in the year 1423. when Francis Foscaro was made Duke there were three more created anew; so that then the whole number was nine; three of whom took care of the Church and its Treasures; three of the Legacies of the three Sestieri on one side the great Chanel; and three of the Legacies of the three Sestieri on the other side. In the year 1509. when the Republics Armies were broken and routed at Addua by Lewis XII, King of France, they were constrained to create six for mony, conferring that honour upon such as would lend the Commonwealth such a certain sum. These Procurators have power to compel Heirs to perform the Wills of the Testators. They wear Ducal habits, and carry servants about with them; and have the precedence of all other Magistrates. In processons the Counsellors and three Capi de Quaranta take place of them. They have either an habitation assigned them, or 60 Ducats per annum allowed. They all enter into the Coun∣cil of Pregadi, but not all into the Council of Ten, but only nine chosen by the said Council, three for a Procuracy. They are not capable of any other Ma∣gistracy, except that of Savio grande and the Gi∣unta of the Council of X. When there is a Captain of the Armata, or a Proveditor of the Camp to be
chosen, there is a Law made in the Pregadi, that any one that is Procurator may obtain that Dignity. They cannot go to the Great Council, but only in the Election of the Duke; which license is then granted them by an especial Law. They were wont anciently upon all those days the Great Council met, during all the time the Council sate, to continue in the Court of the Palace, and never to depart thence till the Great Council was risen; that if any unex∣pected or suddain accident should happen they might be ready to remedy or assist. And this perchance was the reason that it was forbidden them to go to the Great Council. But in our time this usance is not ob∣served, because of that quiet and tranquility the Commonwealth enjoys: Which is such, that no man thinks there can any accident happen in the City which shall require the presence of the Procurators more is one place than in another. There is no Ma∣gistracy or Dignity in the City of much desired by the Gentlemen as this of Procurator: Yet I think that it hath lost much of its ancient reputation. For whereas formerly it was not wont to be granted to any but ancient men, and great repute; in our times we have seen many adorned therewith, who were neither of mature age, nor great esteem and credit. Of the other Officers and Magistrates (whereof this Republic hath good store) I shall say nothing, they belonging rather to the administration of Justice and particular civil affairs, then the Government of the Commonwealth. Only it is worth the notice ta∣king, that they have so many Offices divided among the Gentlemen, to busie and employ the greater num∣ber of them, that so having something to entertain their time with, they may not be at leisure to think upon innovating in the Government, or any way de∣sign and practice against the constitution of the Commonwealth, to the disturbance of the peace.
The Gentlemen while they are in the City wear black Gowns with narrow sleeves, and caps; with∣out which habit they never appear in the streets, or any public place. In the Piazza of S. Mark, that side next the Great Council-chamber is appropriated to them to walk in, where no others mingle with them. This walk, or rather the company of Gentlemen walking together there; they call the Broil [Broglio.] The principal diversion of the Gentlemen, Citizens, and Strangers is to walk in this Piazza. The present Citizens of what quality or estate so∣ever have no share or interest at all in the Govrern∣ment of the Commonwealth. Probable it is, that when the Creat Council was shut up (as they phrase it) that is, determined to such a number of Families excluding all the rest, that all the Citizens of any quality were therein comprehended; because before that time the Government having been common to all, it is not likely the present establishment would have taken place without commotion and distur∣bance, if there had been a considerable number of Citizens of fashion and interest left out. Formerly this honour hath been given to many Citizens of eminent merit. Lately since the Wars with the Turks in Candy for 100000 Ducats any Citizen might be created Nobleman▪ By which means the State raised millions of Ducats there ha∣ving been more then fourscore Families advanced to that Dignity. They put not weapons into the Citizens hands, but chuse rather to make use of mercenary Souldiers in their Wars. There is no Law that prohibits any Citizen to be chosen to any place or Office by the Great Council, nor doth there need it: For that they are as sure not to be cosen as though there were such a Law, the interest of the Nobility being as strong a bar to such a choice as Law would be. And yet Gianotti saith,
that some have attained to be nominated and balloted in the Great Council. The air, notwithstanding the situation of the Ci∣ty, is held to be very good and healthful, and (which is more) agreeable to people of all countreys and tempers. We never enjoyed our health better, nor had better stomachs to our meat in any place beyond the Seas then we had heer. Heer we first saw the Ludicrum, called by some Diabolus in carcre, from a little hollow glass-image made like the Picture of the Devil (though a glass-bubble would serve the purpose as well or better) which being put into a cylindrical glass-tube full of water they could make ascend, descend or rest in any part of the tube at pleasure. The manner thus, They prepare an icuncula or glass-bubble hollow and ha∣ving in the heavier end of it a little hole of such a poise as just to ascend and swim in water, and having put it into a glass-tube stopt close or sealed at one end, and almost full of water, they clap their hand on the mouth of the tube, and press down the air upon the superficies of the water. The water being thus prest, presses upon the air in the icuncula or bubble; which giving place, part of the water thrusts into it by the little hole. The bubble thereupon be∣coming heavier sinks in the water. Then taking up the hand and removing the force, the air in the icuncula or bubble by its elastic power expands it self, and expelling the water again, the icuncula or bubble ascends; and so by proportioning the force they can make it not only ascend and descend from top to bottom, but rest at what point of height or depth they please. Of this and other ludicrous ex∣periments concerning the motion of these bubbles, I shall not think much heer to set down what Doctor Cornelius of Naples hath delivered in his Progymnas∣mata Physica, Epist. de Circumpulsione Platonica I was (saith he) informed by Lud. Casalius of an expe∣riment
invented at Florence, viz. Two glass-bubbles being put into a vessel of water were so alternately moved, that in cold water the one sank to the bot∣tom, the other swam on the top; but putting in a little hot water they changed places, that at the bot∣tom ascending up to the top, and that on the top sinking down to the bottom. Being taken with the novity of the thing, I applyed my mind to consider what might be the Physical reson of it, and soon found out how it might be effected, to wit, one of these Glass-bubbles was perforated with a little hole on the heavier side, and blown so light as to swim in water: then some of the air being suckt out, there was so much water let in in the room thereof, as to make the bubble sink in cold water, which upon fil∣ling the Vessel with hot water would mount up to the top. For the air in the bubble being rarefied or dila∣ted by the heat of the water presently expells the water contained in the bubble, and so the bubble be∣coming lighter ascends, The other glass-bubble is imperforate and made of that poise as to swim in cold water and sink in hot. He goes on. Sed cùm in ejusmodi ludicris inventis occuparemur, rumor ad aures nostras perfertur, versari in manibus viri cujusdam in∣geniosi admirabile artificium, nempe vitreum tubum aquâ plenum, in quae plures orbiculi vitrei sursum de∣orsumque ferebantur ad nutum ejus qui tubi ostium digito obturabat. Tum eò cogitaionem intendi, ut qua rati∣oneid fieri posset assequerer: neque diu haesitaveram, cùm intellexi orbiculos illos esse aliquanto levioures aqua, & for∣amina habere, per qua digiti pressu aqua intruderetur; aere intus contento in minus spatium coacto; ut proinde orbiculi graviores facti fundum peterent: at mox digito laxato dum aer sese iterum ad debitam expansionem redi∣geret, aquam per foramen extrudi; atque idcirco orbi∣culos levioures factos iterum sursum adsurgere. Quibus animadversis memoria mihi suggesit ea, quae aliàs meditatus eram de impulsu aquae in cavum orbis
infra illam demersi, cujus supra facta est mentio, Quam∣obrem existimavi posse orbiculos perforatos sursum vel de∣orsum ferri, & in medio libratos detineri, absque ulla caloris aut frigoris vi: Item sine ullo digiti manúsve pressu; sed tantùm impulsu ipsius aquae, quae modò ma∣jorem modò minorem altitudinem supra dictos orbiculos assequeretur, hoc scilicet modo. In tubum vitreum retortum ABCD aquae plenum im∣mittantur orbiculi perforati B, C, D, quae ità aquae tubo inclusae innatent, ut minimi ponderis ac∣cessone fundum petant; tum digito com∣primente vel spiritu adacto, cogantur di∣cti orbiculi ad fundum descendere, tubùs∣que ità invertatur, ut illi versus D feran∣tur. Quibus positis observabimus dictos orbiculos per tubulum BCD ascendere & descendere pro ratione inclinationis ipsius tubi. Etenim cùm recta AB horizonti perpendiculariter insistit, globuli ex D descendunt versus B; at contra càm tubus ità aptatur ut recta AB ad horizontem in∣clinetur, tunc iidem orbiculi ex B ascen∣dent versus D. At verò positis globulis, ut ferè semper contingit, aliquo gravitatis excessu sese superantibus, tunc poterimus multiformi ter illos movere; namque alter pessum ibit dum reliqui sursum feruntur; item alius quovis in loco quasi libratus pendebit; si scilicet organum tantundem inclinemus, quantum ad opus requiri experientiâ didi∣cerimus. Ratio cur haec ità contingant manife∣sta est ex iis, quae jam exposuimus de aqua, quae in orbiculos eò  opiosiùs intruditur, quo fuerit altior, ut accidit cùm tubus AB ad horizontis planum erectum fuerit, nam ex inclinatione ipsius tubi aquae altitudo decrescit ac proinde ejus vis seu conatus fit minor.
Structuram vitrei tubi usus docebit: Id curandum est petissimùm, ut ejusdem crura AB, DB quodammodo parallela sint; altitudo autem BA altitudini BD tripla vel quadrupla. Tubus aequalem ubique habeat ampli∣tudinem, vel in crure BA, sit aliquanto amplior quàm in crure BD. Orbiculi eâ parte quae pertusa est praeponderent, ut dum in aqua librantur foramina deorsum vergant, &c. A Nobleman of this City shewed us a Boy, who had a faculty of charging his belly with wind, and discharging it again backward at pleasure; which we saw him perform. When he charged himself he lay upon his hands and knees, and put his head on the ground almost between his legs. The same Nobleman shewed us the experiment, and gave us the receipt of a fulminating powder, which will do almost as well as that chargeable one made of gold. Take of salt of Tartar one part, of com∣mon Brimstone two parts, of Nitre or Salt-peter three parts; put these three all at once into a Mortar, beat them fine and mingle them well together. Take of this powder and put it on a plate of iron, or in a fire∣pan or other vessel, and hold it over a flame of fire or a pan of charcoal: When the powder begins to melt, it will explode with a very smart crack like to Aurum fulminans. The same or the like fulmina∣ting powder hath been since shewn us by Mr. Fisher of Sheffield. It is not unlikely that there may be se∣veral sorts of powder made, which shall explode and fulminate after this fashion. The same Gentleman also shew'd us the whole process of making Venice-Sope, which is very like and nothing inferiour to Castile-Sope. It is made of the best Oil Olive, and a lixivium or Lye. The lixivium is thus made. They take of the ashes of Kali, made in Spain, and in England known by the name of Beriglia, two thirds, of Kelp, i. e. the ashes of the ordinary Sea-wrack one third. These they
break into small pieces with a mallet or hammer, and mingle well together. This done they put them into a mill, such as we grind apples in to make Cider, and grind them to powder, and then sift them. This powder they mingle with a little slaked lime, and make it up into pellets, which they put into letches or troughs, and pouring water upon them make the Lixivium. The Cauldrons wherein they boil their Sope are very large. The bottom of them is a copper vessel, but the sides are made up of stone close ce∣mented together, bound about with iron hoops, and enclosed in a case of Wood. Into these Cauldrons they put a great quantity of Oil, it may be one third part of the measure, or more or less as they please: then they fill them up with the lixivium, and putting fire under it, cause it to boil continually; as the lixivium boils away still filling it up with new, till all the oil be consumed or boiled out of it. For the oil uniting it self with the salt of the lixivium rises continually up to the top in the form of a scum or froth, which by degrees grows thicker and thicker, and by reason of the cold of the air condenses into that body we call Sope. This scum continues to rise so long as there is any oil remaining in the vessels; the cremor or coat of Sope growing still thicker. Those that are practised can tell by the smell when all the oil is boiled away. The lixivium they account strong enough so long as it will bear an egg. This lixivium they make of Sea water, but they told us they might as well make it of fresh water. To ex∣pedite the making the lixivium, they take some of the boiling lixivium out of the Cauldrons; to which purpose there is a pipe comes out of the Cauldron in the region of the lixivium, whereby they let out the boiling lixivium into a trough; and this together with cold water they pour upon the ashes to promote the separation of the salt. When the oil is boil'd away they let all cool, and taking the cremor or crust
of Sope off the superficies of the liquor, spread it upon a floor, and smooth it, and so let it dry in a bed of more then a bricks thickness. When it is dried they cut it long ways and cross ways into ob∣long parallelograms, or the figure of oblong bricks, there being nicks in the borders of the beds on pur∣pose to direct the instruments to cut it. This done they pare these pieces from any impurities that may adhere to them from the bottom of the bed, (For the beds are all strowed with Lime-dust to hinder the sticking of the Sope to the floor) and run them over a plane, to smooth them. These large pieces they subdivide into lesser, and seal them with a Seal. The reason why they mix Kelp with the Beriglia, is because Beriglia alone would make the Sope too soft, and Kelp alone too brittle. To colour the Sope green they take the juyce of Beet, a good quantity, and put it into the Cauldron with the lixivium and oyl. The Germans will have it thus coloured, and perhaps the Nitre which is in this juyce may add some vigour to the Sope. The fire is continually kept burning, and so the liquor boiling till the operation be finished.
OF PADUA. PAdua [Patavium] watered by the Rivers Brenta and Bacchilio, is an ancient City, supposed to be built by Antenor after the taking of Troy by the Grecians. That Antenor came into these parts Livy (who was native of this City) witnesseth in the very beginning of his History, in these words, Jam pri∣mum omnium satìs constat, Trojâ captâ in caeteros sae∣vitum esse Trojanos, duobus Aeneâ Antanoréque, & ve∣tusti jure hospitii, & quia pacis reddendaeque Helenae semper auctores fuerant, omne jus belli Achivos abstinuis∣se. Casibus deinde variis Antenorem cum multitudine Henetûm, qui seditione ex Paphlagonia pulsi & sedes & Ducem, Rege Pylaemene ad Trojam amisso, quaerebant, ve∣nisse in intimum maris Adriatici sinum, Euganeísque, qui inter mare Alpesque incolebant, pulsis, Henetos Troja∣nósque eas tenuisse terras. And that he founded Pa∣dua Virgil saith expresly, Aen. 1. Antenor potuit mediis elapsus Achivis Illyricos penetrare sinus, atque intima tutus Regna Liburnorum & fontem superare Timavi; Vnde perora novem vasto cum murmure montis It mare praeruptum, & pelago premit arva sonanti. Hîc tamen ille urbem Pàtavî, sedésque locavit Tecrorum, & genti nomen dedit, armáque fixit. And Martial uses this compellation to Valerius Flaccus the Poet, a Paduan, Antenoreispes & alumne laris. And yet some there be who will have Alti∣num to be the City of Antenor, and Padua to have
been built by one Patavius, a King of the Ve∣neti. It was celebrated of old time for the chastity of its women, according to that of Maritial, Vda puella legas sis Patavina licet. After the decay of the Roman Empire it was ruined and destroyed by Attila; resto∣red again by Narses; then sackt and burnt by the Lombards; and after various successes, in the time of the Emperor Otho I. it obtained its liberty, and was governed as a Commonwealth by its own Ma∣gistrates; till first Ezzellinus the tyrant, and not long after him the Carraresi made themselves Lords of it; from whom the Venetians extorted it in the year 1405. though they pretend that the Padunas volun∣tarlly delivered themselves up to them. It is enclosed with two walls: the interior (called Antenors wall, though of a far later make) is about three miles in circuit. The exterior of great strength with bastions and other fortifications and deep trench before it for the most part filled with water, about 6 miles in compass, built by the Venetians when Leonardo Loredano was Duke, in the time of the League of Cambray, when the Pope, the Emperor, the Kings of France and Spain, the Dukes of Mantua and Fer∣rara joyned themselves together against the Veneti∣ans; as appears by this Inscription over the Gate of All-Saints. Hanc antiquissimam urbem literarum omnium Asy∣lum, cujus agrum fertilitatis sumen natura esse voluit, Auteor condidit: Senatus autem Venetus his belli propugnaculis ornavit, Leonardo Lau∣redano Duce Venetorum invictissimo, enjus Princi∣patus varias fortunae vices excepiens quàm gloriosè superavit. It was stoutly defended by the Venetians against the Emperor Maximilian besieging of it with an
Army of 80000 men, Anno 1610. Though it be large in compass, yet is it neither rich nor populous; the number of the inhabitants, according to the largest reckoning, amounting to no more then 38000 souls, which I believe exceeds the just sum at least 10000. The territory of this City is a large plain or level and the Soil very rich and fertile; so that it is come to be a Proverb;i. e. Bo∣nonia the fat, but Padua surpasses it, and Venice wasts it. Bononia la grassa, ma Padoa la passa, & Venetia la guasta. Their bread is esteemed as good as it is cheap, according to that other Pro∣verb, Pan Padoano, Vin Vicentino, Trippe Trevisane & Putana Venetiana. Bread of Padua, Wine of Vicenza, Tripes of Treviso, and Courtesans of Venice are the best in their kinds. No Wood is permitted to be planted for the space of one mile from the wall round about; that in case it should be besieged in a time of War, the Enemy might find no shelter among the trees: and this is called the Wast, and is reserved only for corn. There are very few Me∣dows or Pastures near the Town, which is the rea∣son that Milk is dear heer. They make bread for the poor of Mayz or Indian Wheat (which they call formentone) and Sorgum, whereof they plant good store heerabout. The most considerable build∣ings in the City are 1. The Town-hall, 256 feet long, and 86 feet wide, according to Schottus; by some thought to be the largest room in Europe, but we judged it to be less then Westminster-Hall; under∣neath it are Shops, so that you ascend many steps to go into it; it is called Palazzo della Ragione, because the Courts of Justice are held there. 2. The pub∣lick Schools. 3. The Chruch of St. Antony, called the Santo 4. The Chruch of S. Justina with the Benedictine Cloyster. 5. The Palace of the Arena or Amphitheater 6. The Castle of the Magazines of Corn and Ammunition. 7. The Bridge called Ponte molino, where there are about 30 water mills
together, upon the River Brenta. 8. The Palace called the Court of the Capitaneo. 9. Antenor's Tomb, as they would have us believe. The particular de∣scriptions of all which places may be seen in Schottus and others. Near the Domo we observed a fair build∣ing called Mons pietatis, where there is a great bank or stock of money, some say 40000 crowns, for the use of poor men, who bringing a pawn and depositing it heer may have mony to the value of it, without any interest if it be a small sum, if a considerable sum, then they are to pay for it five per cent. which serves to defray the charges of Clerks and other Ministers and Attendants, &c. and if there be any surplusage, it is divided yearly among the Poor, the stock still remaining entire. The like charitable foundations we observed in many other Cities of Italy, and I could wish there were of them among us in England. This City is most famous for its University, foun∣ded by the Emperour Frederic the II. Anno 1220. for a full History whereof I refer the Reader to Tho∣masinus his Gymnasium Patavinum. I shall only add the Series Lectionum, whereby may be seen what Professors there were in each faculty at the time of our being there, and what Books they were to read.
In Nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi Amen. GEnerale, ac novum principium Inter∣pretationum nobilissimae, ac florentis∣simae Academiae DD. Artistarum Patavi∣ni Gymnasii, anni praesentis 1663. & 1664. feliciter incipiet die 3 Novembris, sub felicibus auspiciis Illustrissimorum, & Excellentissimor. DD. Michaelis Mauroce∣ni pro Sereniss. Repub. Veneta Praetoris, & Simeonis Contareni Praefecti Patavii, nec∣non Illustriss. ac Generosissimi D. Joannis Georgii Noesleri Nob. Norisbergensis Pro-Rectoris, & Syndici dignissimi. Aggredientur Infrascripti DD. Explicando Infrascripta. Ad Theologiam in Via S. Thomae. R. P. D. M. Michael Archangelus Rivetta Casalensis Leg. Tertium Lib. Mag Sententiarum hora tertia matutina. Ad Theologiam in Via Scoti. R. P. D. M. Matthaeus Ferchius Vegliensis. Ad Lecturam Sacrae Scripturae. R. P. D. Leo Matina Monachus Cassinensis. Ad Metaphysicam in Via S Thomae. R. P. D. M. Jo. Dominicus Pusterla Mediolanensis Leg. Septimum Metaphysicorum hora secunda matutina. Ad Metaphysicam in Via Scoti. R. P. D. M. Antonius Cotonius Nicosiensis. Ad Theoricam ordinariam Medicinae. Exc. D. Antonius Molinettus Venetus in primo loco. Exc. D. Prosper Todeschius à Castiglione Florenti∣no in secundo loco Leg. Aphorismos Hippocratis hora prima matutina.
Ad Practicam ordinariam Medicinae. Exe. D. Raymundus Jo. Fortis Veronensis in primo loco. Exc. D. Jo. Franciscus Bonardus Patavi∣nus in secundo loco Leg. de Febribus hora prima Promeridiana. Ad Philosophiam ordinariam. Primus locus vacat. R. & Ex. D. Anastasius Galdiolus Vic. Abb. Cassin. ac Praes. Gener. in 2 loco Leg. Octavum Lib. Phy∣sicorum hora secunda Pomeridiana. Ad Anatomen ordinariam. Exc. D. Antonius Molinettus Venetus in primo loco. Exc. D. Petrus de Marchettis Patavinus Eq. D. Mar∣ci in secundo loco Administrabunt Anatomen die, ac tempore debito hora 3 matutina. Ad Theoricam extraordinariam Medicinae. Exc. D. Hieronymus Sanctasophia Patavinus in pri∣mo loco. Exc. D. Ermencgildus Pera Foroju∣liensis ex Portu Buffoletto in 2 loco. Exc. D. Her∣cules Saxonia Patavinus in tertio loco Leg. Primam Fen Avicennae in pulsatione Campanae hora pr∣pomerid. Ad Practicam extraordinariam Medicinae. Exc. D. Hieronymus Frigimelica Patavinus Comes in primo loco. De Pulsibus, & Vrinis in Xenodochio diebus vacantibus. Ex. D. Angelus Montagnana Patavinus in secundo loco. Exc. D. Hilarius Spinellus Patavinus in ter∣tio loco Leg. de Morbis particularibus à corde in∣fra hora secunda matutina. Ad Philosophiam extraordinarium. Exc. D. Petrus Franzanus Vicentinus in primo loco. R. & Exc. D. Valerianus Bonvicinus Ver. Canoni∣cus Estensis in 2 loco. R. P. D. M. Adrianus à Sancta Juliana Patavinus in tertio loco Leg. primum, & secundum Libr. Physic. hora prima Vespertina.
Ad Lecturam Philosophiae Moralis. R. P. D. Joseph Meraviglia Clericus Regularis Medio∣lanensis Leg. tertium & quartum Ethicor. hora prima Pomeridiana dieb. vac. Ad Lecturam Meteorian, & Parvorum Naturalium Arist. Locus vacat. Ad Lecturam Chirurgiae ordinariam. Exc. D. Dominicus de Marchettis Patavinus in pri∣mo loco. Exc. D. Franciscus Bosellus Venetus in secundo loco Leg. de Tumoribus praeter naturam hota tertia matutina. Ad Lecturam Simplicium. Exc. D. Georgius à Turre Patavinus Interpretabi∣tur Lib. VI. Dioscoridis, Ubi de Venenis, & Vene∣nor. Curat. in horto incipiet docere die 2 Maii hora 22. Idem ad ostensionem Simplicium. Ad Theoricam extraordinariam diebus vacantibus. Exc. D. Alexander Borromeus Patavinus Leg. Ar∣tem parvam hora 2. Vespertina diebus vacantibus. Ad Lecturam Tertii Libri Avicennae. Exc. D. Sebastianus Scarabiccius Patavinus in primo loco. Exc D. Jo. Pompilius Scotus in secundo loco Leg. de Morbis particularib. à capite usque ad cor hora prima mat. dieb. vac. Ad Logicam. Primus Locus vacat. Exc. D. Jacobus Cadenedus Scotus in secundo loco. Exc. D. Albanius Albanesius Patavinus in tertio loco Leg. secundum Posteriorum hora prima matutina. Ad Mathematicam. R. P. D. Stephanus de Angelis Venetus Leg. tertium Libr. Euclidis Elementorum. Ad Humanitatem Graecam & Latinam. R. & Exc. D. Octavius Ferrarius Mediolanansis Leg. Virgilium, & Theophrasti Characteres. Landus Moneghina Bidellus Generalis.
In Christi Nomine Amen. ROtulus Excellentissimorum DD. Le∣gentium in Publico Gymnasio Pata∣vino, ad infrascriptas Lecturas, quas ag∣gred. Die 3 Novembris anni instantis 1663. & 1664. sub felicibus auspiciis▪ Il∣lustrissimorum, & Excellentissimorum DD. Michaelis Mauroceni pro Serenissi∣mo Dominio Veneto Praetoris, & Simeonis Contareni Praefecti Patavii; necnon Il∣lustrissimi, & Generosissimi D. Comitis Pauli Bennassuti Vicentini, Almae Univer∣sitatis DD. Juristarum Pro-Rectoris, & Syndici Meritissimi. Ad Lecturam Juris Canonici demane. Exc. I. V. D. D. Jacobus de Sala Canonicus Pat. & Abbas in primo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Jo. Anto∣nius de Bonis Canon. Estensis in secundo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Ubertinus Discaltius Patavinus in tertio loco Explicabunt Librum primum Decre∣talium incipiendo à titulo de constitutionibus. Ad Lecturam Juris Canonici de sero. Exc. I. V. D. D. Antonius Paulutius Ven. Abbas, & Can. Pat. in primo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Vincenti∣us Francisconus Canonicus Patavinus in 2 loco. Rev. & Exc. D. Placidus Frascata Monacus Cas∣sinensis in tertio loco Exponent Librum quartum Decretal. à tit. primo de Sponsalib. & Matrim. Ad Lecturam Juris Caesarei de mane. Exc. I. V. D. D. Jo. Michael Pieruccius Florentinus in primo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Paulus Dottus de Ca∣stro Franco in secundo loco Legent primam ff. Ve∣teris Partem.
Ad Lecturam Juris Caesarei de sero. Mag. & Exc. I. V. D. D. & Co. D. Jacobus Caimus Utinensis in primo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Antonius Aloysius Aldrighettus Pat. in paritae primi loci. Exc. I. V. D. D. Jo. Franciscus Savonarola Patavi∣nus in tertio loco Legent primam ff. Novi Partem. Ad Lecturam Criminalium. Exc. I. V. D. D. Joannes Galvanus Patavinus Expo∣net Rub. ff. ad. L. Jul. de adult. & subinde alios titulos. Ad Lecturam Pandectarum. Exc. I. V. D. D. Achilles Bonfiglius Patavinus Prose∣quetur explicationem libri primi ff. Veteris, & in∣cipiet à titulo de Adoptionibus. Ad Lecturam Codicis. Exc. I. V. D. D. Joannes Capivaccaeus Patavinus Inci∣piet à titulo de pactis, inde ad alios titul. procedet. Ad Lecturam Institutionum. Exc. I. V. D. D. Joseph Marchius Appulus in primo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Nicolaus Gagliardus Tri∣dentinus in secundo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Ludo∣vicus Justachinus Patavinus in tertio lcco Explica∣bunt materiam ultimae voluntatis, & incipient à tit. de testamentis ordinandis. Ad Lecturam Feudorum. Exc. I. V. D. D. Scipio Gonnemius Cyprius Tractabit hoc anno de feudi origine, nomine, causis, seù forma, & constitutione ad varios feudal. libr. tit. Ad Lecturam Authenticorum. Exc. I. V. D. D. Toldus Bellini Constini Patavinus Explicabit authenticum sive Novellam 39. de Re∣stitutionibus, & ea q. parit in 11. Mense post Mor∣tem Viri, Juncto Authentico 108. de Restitutioni∣bus, & 159. de Restitutione Fidei commiss. &c. Ad Lecturam de Regulis Juris. Vacat. Ad Lecturam Artis Notariae. Exc. I. V. D. D. Aloysius Angeli Patavinus Legato∣rum tractatum prosequetur. Stephnus Giachelius Bidell. Gener.
The Citizens and Strangers heer dare not stir abroad in the dark for fear of the Scholars and others, who walk up and down the Streets most part of the night, armed with Pistols and Carbines. If any one comes within hearing, they cry Che va li? i. e. Who goes there? and if they answer, they bid them turn back; which if they do not suddenly do, they shoot at them. When two parties of these Scho∣lars meet, each man standing behind a pillar (for the streets have Portico's or Cloysters on each side) they shoot one at another. These Martenalia noctura as some call them, or Che va li's are thought to have had their original from the acidental meeting and quarrelling of some Scholars who went to the same Mistresses or Whores. A wonder it is to me that the Venetians will suffer such mis-rule. Heer is a publick Physick Garden, well stored with Simples, but more noted for its Prefects, men emi∣nent for their skill in Botanics, viz. Aloysius Mun∣della, Aloysius Anguillara, Melchior Guilandinus, Ja∣cobus Antonius Corusus, Prosper Alpinus, Joannes Ve∣slingius. The Epitaph of which last, being so consi∣derable a person, I shall heer exhibit to the Reader, as I found it on his monument in the Church of S. Antony. Joanni Veslingio Mindano, Equiti. Naturae verique scrutatori solertissimo, qui sapientiae Atque exoticarum stirpium studio Aegypto peragratâ. Ab Venet Senatu rei herbariae Et corporum Sectioni praefectus, eum Latinitatis Et Graecae eruditionis cultum multis artibus circumfudi, Vt illîc naturae ludentis pampam aemularetur; Hîc spectaculi diritatem oratione deliniret, Vt quantùm oculi paterentur tantùm sibi placerent aures: Ad. extremum laboribus fractus,
Dum miserae plebi gratuitam operam commodat, Noxio contactu publicae saluti vitam impendit. XXX Mensis Aug. An. Chr. MDCXLIX. Aet. LI. In the Dormitory of the Cloyster of the Dominican Freres we saw the Cell of Alberius Magnus, over the door of which were inscribed these Monkish Verses. Quam legis Alberto Domus haec fuit bospita magno, Parva quidem, haud parvo sed tamen ampla viro. Parvus erat subiit parvae eùm limina portae, Magnus at exiguo sub lare factus erat. Senserat hoc dixitque superba Ratisbona magnum Hospitem in hospitio dispare Padua colis: Archisacerdotis mitram magnósque penates Accipe Magne ratis, sic bona navis erit. Post mojora Deus reserans palatia, Magne Dixit, habe magni magna theatra poli. Audiit & magni propylaea petivit Olympi, Nam majore capi limine magnus habet. Deo ter maximo numini: Alberto ter magno lumini. Padua is governed by a Padestà or Maior, who is chief in civil matters; and a Capitaneo or Governour who is over the Military; both elected and sent by the Venetians. From Padua we made a by-journey to Albano, an∣ciently Apoa, some 5 miles distant, where we view∣ed the hot baths. The Springs arise in a rocky hillock, consisting of a porous stone, and are so plentiful that one of them drives an overshot mill. The water is so hot, that in one of the sources, the Countrey-people usually scald their hogs to get off the hair. It contains a copious white salt which shoots upon the earth where the water runs. This the common people heerabout gather, and use with their meat, which
yet hath not the true tast of common falt, but some∣what approaching to Nitre or Salt-armonac. Besides it is so impregnate with stone, (which by reason of the salt it contains actuated by the heat, it dissolves and imbibes in the stone quarries it passeth through) that it suddainly precipitates it on the bottoms and sides of the Chanels wherein it runs, which become thereby as it were so many stone troughs; and on the mill-wheel it drives, which it so encrusts with a stone of a dark gray colour, that every other month they are fain to peck it off. That the waters which petrifieSuch as are those of Pool-hole in Derby∣shire, Wo∣key-hole in Som∣merset∣shire and other subterra∣neous grots as well in England as be∣yond the Seas. Febr. 3. do by running through stone-quarries wash off small ramenta or particles, and being in motion support them, and when they stand or settle in any place let them fall again, is more than probable, by what we see in daily experience, the hardest stones being worn and hollowed by a constant dropping of water upon them: much more will water be able to do this, when impregnate with salt, and that salt actuated by heat. The waters of Albano are not made use of to drink, but only to bathe in, as at Aken, Baden, &c. though Schottus saith that they usually drink of one of the sources. We travelled to Vicenza, a City less in circuit than Padua, as being but 4 miles round, but more popu∣lous, containing between 30 and 40 thousand souls. It is encompassed with a Brick-wall, but of no great strength. It stands upon the River Bacchilio, and is al∣so watered by the Rero or Eretenus, beside two little Brooks called Astichello and Seriola. It is full of No∣bility and Gentry, being said to have 200 Families worth 1500 crowns per annum each, and better. So that there is a Proverb in Italy, Quanti ha Venetia de Ponti & Gondalieri, Tanti ha Vicenza de Conti & Ca∣valieri. Of the several changes of Government which this City hath undergone I shall say nothing, but for that refer the Reader to Schottus and Leander-Al∣bertus:
Only it is worth the notice taking, that when they were set at liberty, and absolved of their Oaths of Allegiance by Catharine relict of Galeazzo Visconte first Duke of Milan, they did of their own accord deliver up themselves to the State of Venice, for which reason they enjoy great privileges and immu∣nities. The Theater of the Academy called the Olym∣pici is a pretty building and deserves to be remem∣bred. The Inhabitants of this City drive a great trade in breeding and feeding of Silk-worms, and in winding, twisting, and dying of silk. The Wines of this Territory are very rich and gustful, especially that sort called Dolce & piccante. Hence we made an excursion of about 6 miles, to see the famous Cave of Custoza, said by some to be seven miles in length; but more truly by Jo. Georgi∣us Trissinus (who himself measured it, and gives an account of it in a Letter to Leander Albertus) no more then 650 perches, which make about 4000 feet in length, 490 perches or 3000 foot in breadth, and about three miles in circuit. We took it to be nothing else but a Cave left from the digging of stone; as the same Trissinus by sufficient arguments proves it to be. 1. Because the ancient buildings of Padua and Vicenza are of the same kind of stone. 2. Because to support the roof they have every where at distances sometimes greater, sometimes less, left huge pilasters of the quarry, of 3 perches square a∣piece; of which pilasters in the whole cave there are thought to be about 1000. 3. There are some great square pieces of stone cut round about, in order to taking them up and carrying them away. 4. There remain manifest prints and tracks of cart-wheels; whereas no man living can remember that ever cart went in there. We observed many Bats clinging to the roof and walls of this Cave; and in some standing waters a kind of fish or rather insect, which they called
Squillae Venetianae i. e. Venice-shrimps, but they are of that sort which naturalists call Pulices marini or aquatici, i. e. Sea-fleas or water-fleas. At this Village we saw the so much talked of Ven∣tiduct belonging to one Tridentus a Nobleman of Vicenza, serving to cool the rooms of his Palace in Summer time. From a large high-rooft subterrane∣ous grot or cave there are Chanels cut out of the rock to the Palace. When they would have a cool air in any of the rooms, they shut up a gate in the cave, and open a door at the end of the Chanel, which lets in the fresco, every room having a hole in the wall or pavement to admit it. On a stone there is this in∣scription, Franciscus Tridenteus Vicentius JCtus Hierosolymitani equitis filius gelidi venti flatum in ca∣verna Cubola vocatâ spirantem in aedes proprias per hanc erypto-porticum deduxit, ad temporandum ardentes & aestivos calores, tum cohibendo tum relaxando, novo at∣que mirabili artificio per cubicula quaeque ducendo, quae pro libitu suo refrigerare & ealefacere valet: ita ut ejus Villa ingenio, diligentiâ, impensâ ac aemulatione ornati∣or effecta, inter regia ornamenta connumerari possit: Anno MDLX, Aetatis suae XXII. From Vicenza we journeyed to Verona, a fair, large, populous City, pleasantly situate upon the Ri∣ver Athesis, which is heer of a great breadth, over which there is one very fair stone-bridge esteemed the handsomest Bridge in Europe, besides 3 others of less account. The City is 7 miles in circuit, exclu∣ding the Suburbs, which are very large too; and thought to contain 70000 souls. It is strong by si∣tuation, and extraordinarily fortified with walls, bastions, towers, bulwarks, and deep ditches full of water drawn from the River Athesis round about, and strengthened with 3 Castles; that of St. Peter, that of St. Felix, and so that it is lookt upon as impregnable. Heer we saw several Ca∣binets or Collections of natural and artificial rari∣ties.
1. That of Seignior Mapheus Cusanus an Apo∣thecary, wherein where shewn us many ancient Aegy∣ptian Idols, taken out of the Mummies, divers sorts of petrified shells, petrified cheese, cinnamon, spunge and Mushromes. A Jasper stone and an Agate having crystal within them. Stones having upon them the perfect impression or signature of the ribs and whole spines of fishes. A Catapulta of brass found 1656. about Trent. Several curious Entaglia's or stones en∣graved with figures of heads, &c. An ancient Roman gold Ring. A good collection of ancient Roman Coins and Medals, as well Consulary as Imperial, besides modern medals. A stone called Oculus mundi, n. d. which when dry shews cloudy and opake, but when put into water, grows clear and transparent. An account of this stone may be seen in the History of the Royal Society, brought in by Dr. Goddard. Among his Medals we observed a Maximinian and a Diocle∣sian, with this on the reverse inscribed, Verona Am∣phitheatrum. 2. That of Seignior Muscardo, a Gentleman of Verona, a civil and obliging person. He also hath a very good collection of ancient Roman medals, among which he shew'd us an Otho of Gold, and told us that those of brass were all counterfeit, there ha∣ving never been any found of that metal. Many sorts of lachrymal Urns and Lamps, great variety of Shells and some fruits and parts of plants petrified. Several exotic fruits and seeds: the ores of metals and minerals: Gems and precious stones in their matrices as they grew: Lapis obsidianus and a kind of stone called Adare. But because there is a de∣scription of this Museum published in Italian, I shall not descend to more particulars, but refer the Reader thither. 3. The Museum of Seignior Mario Sala an Apo∣thecary, containing only some reliques of Calceolarius his Museum, printed many years ago.
The Amphitheater of Verona, called now the Are∣na, is a very stately and capacious one, and seem'd to me when it was entire not to have been much in∣feriour either for beauty or greatness to that of Titus at Rome. The outward wall or circle is all gone save a little piece, from whence we may make an estimate of the heighth and beauty of the whole. The remain∣der setting aside this exteriour circle is kept in good repair by the Veronese; the Arena of it is 34The length of a per∣tica or perch of this mea∣sure is some∣what more than 6 foot. pertiche long and 22 ½ broad, and compassed about by 42 rows of stone benches one above another, after the manner of stairs, upon which 23000 persons may sit commodiously. As it is imperfect it seemed to us one of the most pleasant and goodly spectacles for a structure of that nature that ever we beheld. He that desires a more full and particular description of it may consult Schottus, and the Antiquities of Verona written by Torellus Saraina a Veronese, as also Lipsius his Book de Amphitheatris. As for government and subjection this City un∣derwent almost the same changes with Padua and Vi∣cenza, and did also voluntarily, deliver it self up to the Venetian Government. Heer are very good white Wines, especially that sort they call Garganico. The air is clear and healthful, but must needs be sharp in Winter time, being so near the high mountains: among which Baldus is famous for the great variety of choice simples growing thereon, of which Joan. Pona an Apothecary of Verona hath written a parti∣cular Catalogue and description. Which Book and thereupon the Paduan herbarists making simpling voyages yearly thither hath gotten Baldus its repu∣tation, for I am very confident that many hills about the Alps produce as great variety and as choice plants as that. Not for from Verona is the Lago di Garda ancient∣ly called Lacus Benacus, which furnishes the City with plenty of excellent Fish, especially trouts, Sar∣dinie,
and a sort of Fish of the Trout kind, called Carpione, peculiar to this lake. Those we saw were not a foot long, of the fashion of Trout. We travelled from Verona to Mantua 24 miles,Febr. 9. by the way passing through some large Villages, but no considerable Town.Mantua. Six miles short of Mantua, at a place called Marmirola, we viewed an elegant palace of the Dukes, richly furnished and adorned with pictures and statues. The City of Mantua is of great antiquity, strong by situation, as standing in the middle of a lake, and well fortified. Schottus saith that it is 4 miles in circuit, hath 8 gates, and about 50000 souls. It seemed to us a great City, but not answerably populous, having not yet recovered it self of the losses it sustained when it was miserably sackt by the Emperor Ferdinand II. his Army in the year 1630. A little out of the City stands a pretty house of the Dukes called Palazzo del Te, wherein there is a square room having the roof arched round in form of Cupola, called the Giants-hall, so con∣trived, that if two stand in the opposite corners, one laying his ear to the wall may hear what the other whispers with his face to the corner, which he that stands in the middle of the room or in the cor∣ner on the same side shall not. The like room we were told there is in the Duke of Parma's Palace at Caprarola. Our whispering place in the Cathedral Church of Glocester is of somewhat a different make. In a Village near Mantua called Ande, now Petula, was born the Prince of Latine Poets, P. Virgilius Maro. In this City are two Societies of Virtuosi (Aca∣demies they call them) the one stile themselves Ac∣cesi, the other Timidi. This City hath according to the fate of her neigh∣bours undergone several changes of Government. In the year 1328. Lewis Gonzaga by the favour of the people made himself Lord of it, from whom the
present Duke is descended. In the year 1433. John-Francis Gonzaga was created Marquess of Manina, by the Emperor Sigismund IV. In the year 1530. Frederic Gonzaga was created Duke of Mantua by the Emperor Charles V. The Dukes yearly revenue is said to be 400000 crowns, according to the account we had of it in particulars somewhat less, viz. the mills pay 4000 crowns per annum. The Jews (who are about 6000 in number, and wear no badge of distinction) give 20000 crowns per annum. The rest of the Citizens of Mantua 70000 crowns. The Countrey yields 60000 pistols; and Montserrat 13000, in all 386000 crowns the year. Yet is the present Prince, through ill husbandry not proportioning his expences to his income, become very poor, being indebted to the Venetians (as Leti saith) four millions of crowris. To advance his Revenue at the time of our being there he was put to that pitiful shift of debasing his coin, so that none of his money would pass further then his own Territory. His name was Carolus Gon∣zaga II. since dead, and his Son Caroulus Ferdinandus succeeds him in his estates. There are besides of this Family 4 or 5 small Princes, feudatory of the Em∣pire, but Sovereign Lords having Jura Regalia in their petty States, viz. The Princes of 1. Novellara. 2. Bozolo. 3. Gustalla. 4. Sabionetta, in which the male line is failed. 5. Castiglione. We were told that these Princelets were obliged to attend the Duke of Mantua's Court three months in the year. The Dukes Council of State or Privy Council consists on∣ly of six of the chief Nobility. In these parts all the children of the common peo∣ple have equal shares of their Parents Estates, at least their moveables. The wife when her husband dies carries her dowry back with her: if she dies first, then her children (if she leaves any) divide her dower equally among them. If she die childless her dower
is divided, half goes to her husband, and half to her next kindred. If a woman hath had children by one husband and he dying she marries again and hath children by her second husband, her estate is divided into equal parts, one moiety goes to her first hus∣bands children, and the other to her second's. We took boat for Ferrara, which brought us first into the lake, then into the chanel of the River Min∣cius, [which runs out of the Lago di Garda (called in Latine Lacus Benacus) at a strong Fort of the Ve∣netians called Peschiera, and coming to Mantua spreads it self into a lake of 5 miles long.] At 16 miles end we came to a Bridg and Sluce at a place cal∣led Governo, where we entred the River Po; going down stream we passed by Ostia 10 miles distant from Governo; and 10 miles further down Massa, both on our left hand; and 7 miles below Massa came to Stellata, a large Village on our right hand, under the Pope. Heer the Territory of Mantua ended. Eight miles beyond this place we left the River Po at a Village called Il Ponte, and struck up an artificial Chanel of 4 miles long, which brought streight to the Gates of Ferrara. This City is very considerable as well for its greatness as its strength. It is said to be about 7 miles in compass, and besides the advantage of its si∣ruation in a fenny level it is strongly fortified with walls an bulwarks, and surrounded with a broad and deep trench full of water; so that I look upon it for a City of that bigness as the strongest in all Italy. It had formerly a Prince of its own, but is now, with all its territory, subject to the Pope. From Ferrara we went with the Procaccio or Courrier to Bologna, shifting our boat at a place called Mal-Al∣bergo, some 17 miles from Ferrara, where we went up into a higher chanel, viz. the Rhenus Bononiensis, and passing through 9 locks or sostegni, we arrived at Bologna, distant by water from Ferrara 45 miles.
A great part of the Countrey we passed through be∣tween Ferrara and Bologna. is a perfect level, and fen∣ny ground, much like to the Isle of Ely in England. Bononia is a large City,Bologna of a round figure, and yet 7 or 8 miles in circuit. The houses not tall, fair por∣tico's on each side the streets, convenient to walk in, as well in Summer to defend one from the scorching beams of the Sun, as in Winter to shelter form the rain. Many Gentlemens houses (palaces they call them) which make no great shew outwardly in the street, but within are very handsome and very con∣venient, having more in the recess then they pro∣mise in the front. The number of Inhabitants is about 80000 souls. The Bologna sausages, wash∣balls, and little dogs are much esteemed and talked of in all Italy and elsewhere. Heer is also a great silk trade driven, and the best Engines for winding and twisting of it that we have any where seen. The University of Bologna is one of the most ancient and famous in Europe, especially for the study of the Law. There is such a multitude of professors in all faculties, that I am afraid few Readers will have the patience to run over the list of them, which for the satisfa∣ction of the curious I here exhibit.
The Series Lectionum of the University of the Jurists. Classes Matutinae. Primâ hora in pulsu Campanae. Ad Lecturam Decret. extraord. Illustrissimus D. Rector. Vact. Ad Lecturam Decret. ordin. Legant de Constitut. usque ad Tit. de off. Delegat. D. Franciscus Mathesilanus. Rus. D. Prosper Pollinus Metrop. Praepos. D. Jo. Baptista Dulfus. D. Jo. Bapt. Panzacchius Abbas. D. Petrus de Sandris. D. Raphael Bertucerus S. Petrnii Canonicus. D. Constantius Scasellius. A. Alexander de Domnis. D. Julius Argolus Metropol, Canonicus. D. Abbas Cititus Maria Guidonus Metrop. Secundâ Horâ. Ad Lecturam off. Veteris ordin. Leg. tit. ff. De off. ejus cui mandata est jurisdiction. D. Franciscus Barbadorius emeritus. D. Alfonsus Arnoldus S. Petronii Canon. D. Matthaeus Griffonius S. Petronii Canon. D. Nicolaus Alle. D. Jac. de Gottis. D. Hippolytus Farnasaius Abbas. D. Odoardus Guidonus. D. Antonius Francavatia.
Tertiâ Horâ. Ad Lecturam Summae Rolandinae. D. Carolus Dulphus. Ad Lecturam Sexti & Clementinarum. D. Co. Franciscus Ursius. D. Carolus Gaggius. D. Augustinus de Balthassaris. D. Leonardus Bacchionus Caccaneus. D. Christoph. Gulinellus. D. Franciscus Guidonus. Ad Lecturam de Maleficiis, Legant Legem unicam de Raptu Virginum. D. Gasper Elephantucius. D. Joseph Coltellinus. D. Petrus Pomp. Vincentius Mantachetus. Quarta Horâ. Ad Lecturam de Verb. signific. D. Christoph. Lucatellus. D. Jo. Antonius Fantellus. D. Hieronymus de S. Petro Metrop. Canon. abs. cum res. Ad Lecturam repetit. part. Legant primo omnes Populi ff. de just. & jure, deinde legant de minoribus 25 annis. D. Jo. Baptista de Astis. D. Calabrebius Pistorinus. D. Hippol Franc. Vinea abs. cum res. D. Dominicus Medices. D. Hippol. Maria de Conventis. D. Laurentius Simonius.
Ad Practicam Judiciario. D. Paulus Zanius. D. Joannes Calvus. Ad Lecturam Pandectar. D. Alexander Sanutus Pellicanus. Classes Pomeridianae. Primâ Horâ in pulsu Companae. Ad Lecturam Instit. Legant tit. de usu fructu, deindè transeant ad tit. de usucapionibus. D. Joannes Mazzantus. D. Clemens Leonius abs. cum reserv. D. Franciscus Maria Burdocchius. D. Horatius Battalia. D. Anton. Franc. Siverius. D. Jacobus Maria Ugolottus. D. Gasper Vincens Berna. D. Camillus Bernardinus Albaus. D. Joan. Antonius Ruinus. D. Laurentius Placentus. D. Prosper Cattalanus. D. Onuphrius Rabastens Col. major. S. Clem. Hisp. Secundâ Horâ. Ad Lecturam ff. legant tit. de novi operis nunciat. deinde tit. de acquirend. Possess. Excellentissimus D. Cornelius Canalius emeritus. D. Franciscus Munarius aetate ff. Metrop. Canon. S. P. D. Joan. Baptista Farnasarius. D. Carolus Antonius de Blasiis. D. Joseph Franchinus.
Tertiâ Horâ. Ad Lecturam Decret. Legant in causis incipiendo à Prima. D. Hippolytus Nanius Elephatuccius. D. Co. Annibal de Blanchis Metrop. Canonicus. D. Felicianus Mollinus Coll. Maj. S. Clem. Hisp. Ad Lecturam C. lib. X. D. Carolus de Landis. D. Paulus Forada, Coll. maj. S. Clem. Hisp. Ad Lecturam Decretal. Legant de Regularibus & transeuntibus ad Religionem. D. Alexander Barberius. D. Co. Hieronimus Boschettus. Ad Lecturam de regulis Juris. D. Petrus de Masiis. D. Franciscus Maria Cuccus. Quartâ Horâ. Ad Lecturam de fedis. D. Jo. Baptista Giovagonius abs. cum reserv. D. Julius Carcellerius. Ad Lecturam Institut. Legant tit. de usu fructu, deinde transeant ad tit. de usu capionib. D. Co. Ludovicus Marsilius abs. cum reser.
D. Jo. Baptista Sannutus Pellicanus. D. Jacobus Daniolus. D. Albertus de Planis. P. Abbas Petrus Hercules Abergettus abs. cum re∣serv. D. Rochus Franc. Bonfiolus. D. Gaspar Linder. D. Fabius Bordacchius. D. Hercules Maria Matthiolus. Lecturae Vniversitatis. Ad Lecturam Decretorum. D.— Ad Lecturam Sexti & Clementinarum. D.— Ad Lecturam Decret. extraord. D.— Ad Lecturam Decret. sive Infortiati ordinar. D.— Ad Lecturam Voluminis. D.— Ad Lecturam ff. novi seu G. extraordinar. D.—
The Series Lectionum of the University of the Artists. Classes Matutinae. Prima Hora in pulsu Campanae. Ad Lecturam Medicinae extraordinariam. Illustrissimus Dominus Rector. vacat. Ad Lecturam Chirurgiae legant de Vlceribus. D. Jo. August. Cuccus emeritus, Q. S. A. D. Albertus de Fabris. D. Alexander Guicciardinus. Ad Anatomen. D. Jo. August. Cuccus emeritus, Q. S. A. D. Albertus de Fabris. D. Jo. Baptista Capponius. D. Carolus Galeratus. D. Joan. de Larentiis. Ad Lecturam Simplicium Medicinalium. D. Hyacinthus Ambrosius. Ad Lecturam humanarum literarum. D. Cosmus Gualdandus. Ad Lecturam Logicae, Legant secundum librum Posteriorum. D. Dominicus Maria Burgus. D. Dominicus Clericus. D. Aloysius Magnus. Secundâ hora. Ad Theoricam Medicinae ordinariam, legant Apho∣rismos Hippocratis. D. Petrus Jacobus Florenus. D. Carolus Galleratus.
D. Joan. de Laurentiis. D. Joan. Antonius Castarius. Ad Lecturam Logicae, Legant secundum lib. Posteriorum. D. Secinius Orettus. D. Carolus Ant. Siverius. D. Andreas Banderia. D. Marius Marianus. Tertiâ Horâ. Ad Practicam Medicinae extraord. Legant 4 partem primi Avicenae. D. Jacobus Accurtius. D. Jo. Baptista Lingarus. D. Jo. Car. Matthosillanus. D. Vincentius Franchinus. D. Florianus Bertellus. D. Barthol. Raymundus. Ad Philosophiam ordinariam, Legant Parva naturalia. D. Fulvius Magnanus. D.— Ad Lecturam Metaphysicae, Legant primum librum. P. Mr. Laurentius de Fabris, Franciscus. Ad Lecturam humanarum literarum. D. Laurentius Grimaldus. abs. cum reserv. Quartâ Hora. Ad Philosophiam moralem, Legant de amicitia. D. Ovidius Montalbanus. D. Jacobus Servanus, S. Petronii Canonicus. Ad Lecturam Logicae, Legant secundum lib. Posteriorum. D. Raymundus Abelus. D. Bartholomaeus Ferrarius.
Ad Lecturam Humanarum liter. D. Michael B. Ad Mechanicas. D. Petrus Mengolus. Ad Particulas Graecas Domi. D.— Ad Arithmeticam Domi. D. Simon Mengolus. Ad Grammaticam Domi. D. Nicolaus Banderia. D. Bonaventura Rubens. Classes Pomeridianae. Primâ Horâ in pulsu Companae. Ad Theoricam Medicinoe extraord. Legant primam partem Avicennae. D. Jo. Carol. Lancius Paltronus. D. Angelus Antonius Livizanus. D. Ludovicus Lodius. D. Berlingerius de Solitis Syracusanus. Ad Lecturam Sarae Scripturae Legant ad Bene∣placitum. P. M. Ericus Marchettus Servita. Secundâ Horâ. Ad Practicam Medicinae ordin. Legant de Febribus. D. Jo. Baptista Capponius. D. Rubertus Muratorius. D. Marcellus Malpighius abs. cum reser. D. Carolus Fracassatus. D. Raymundus M. Pistorinus.
Ad Philosophiam extraord. Legant de Anima. D. Caesar Zoppius. P. M. Vitalis Ferra-rubeus Mon. Cassinus. D. Petrus Maria Cianus. P. M. Marc. Ant. Fabiaus de Caritate. Tertiâ Horâ. Ad Lecturam Metaophysicae, Legant duodecimum librum. P. Abb. Fabianus de Landis. Can. Lat. abs. cum re∣serv. D. Flavius Zinus. Ad Philosophiam ordin. Legant de Caelo & mundo. D. Franciscus Natalis. D. Alexander Magnus. D. Franciscus Gherardus. D. Carolus Saxius. Quartâ Horâ. Ad Practicam Medicinae extraord. Legant ad beneplacit. P. Pompeius Bolognettus emeritus. D. Carolus Riarius. D. Franciscus Sacentus. Ad Lecturam S. Theologiae Scholasticae. Leg. primum lib. Sentent. P. M. Ant. Mar. Gherardus Francisc. D. Gregorius Fallonus Hibernus. P. M. Sac. Philip. Pollinus Dominicanus. Ad Lecturam Casuum Conscientiae. P. Car. Anton. Jeachimus. Ad Mathematicam, Legant Astronomiam Ptolemaei. P. M Joannes Riccius Carmelita. D. Jo. Dominicus Cassinus Januens.
Ad Artem Scribendi. D. Franciscus Guidicellus. D. Jo. Andreas de Abantis. Lecturae Vniversitatis. Ad Lecturam Medicinae. D.— Ad Lecturam Philosophioe. D.— Ad Lecturam Astronomiae. D.— Ad Lecturam Rhetoricae. D.— At Bononia we saw the formerly famous exercise of Justing or Tilting, which is there stil used in Carneval time. The combatants being mounted on horseback, armed cap-a-pee, and adorned with huge Plumes of Feathers and Scarfs, with Launces in their hands, run one at another a full gallop, one on one side and another on the other side of a low rail. They aim at one particular part (I think it is the eye) and he that comes nearest is the best Juster. We saw several Launces broken but no person dismoun∣ted, nor any hurt done. Heer by the favour of Dr. Ovidio Montalbano one of the Professors, we had a sight of the Museum of aldrovandus, which by his last Will he left as a Legacy to the City. It is kept in the Cardinal Le∣gates Palace commonly called Palazzo del Confalo∣niero. Among many natural and artificial Rarities therein preserved we took more especial notice of 10 Volumes of the pictures of Plants, and 6 of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, drawn exactly in colours by the hand. The same Dr. Montalbanus very civilly brought
. us to the house of Jcaobus Zenoni, an Apothecary, a skilful herbarist and a collector of Rarities, who among other things shewed us three pieces of rock-Crystal, with drops of water enclosed in the middle of them, which we could plainly perceive when the crystal was moved to and fro. He hath a Garden well stored with Simples, wherein we noted Arun∣do nastos sive farcta, in rivis Rheni Boniensis: Sola∣num Americanum fructu molli. Eyst. Geranium triste Cornuti: Scammonea Syriaca; Polytrichum Alpinum inciso folio, costâ viridi; Convolvulus Althaeae folio non inciso; Pentaphyllum lucidum folio hirsuto, ab ipso in∣ventum prope Rhenum Bononiensem; Malva Alpi∣na folio laciniato; Jacobaea folio Betonicae, n. d. Abro∣tanum foemina inodorum; Bardana de Congo; Helle∣borus niger trifolius spinosus; Cyclamen Baldense folio rotundo, flore odorato; Thlaspi folio Sampsuchi; item folio sedi; Dau us Creticus verus; Stachys Cretica sal∣viae folio; Clematis Smilaci Asperae similis, verum non aspera; Clematis tetraphylla Americana; Malva folio Betonicae, ab ipso inventa; Labrum Veneris Indicum altissimum; Eruce Tanaceti folio; Genista Alpine sive Spartium. Col. Adianthum nigrum ramosum Cana∣dense Cornut. Chamaedryos spuriae species, ab ipso in∣venta propriè Rheum fl. Bononiensem; besides many others which had not yet put forth, it being early in the Spring. The same day we visited Seignior Gioseppi Bucemi a Chymist,The La∣pis Phos∣phorus or shining stone. who prepares the Bononian stone, or Lapis Phosphorus, which id exposed a while to the illumi∣nated air will imbibe the light, so that withdrawn into a dark room, and there look't upon it will ap∣pear like a burning coal; but in a short time gradu∣ally loses its shining till again exposed to the light. The crude stone is like a kind of sparre or fluor; it acquires this quality by being calcined (ad he told us) in any small furnace, laying the pieces of stone upon an iron grate over a fire of wood. But we believe
there is somewhat more of mystery in it; for some of us calcining part of the stone we purchased of him ac∣cording to his direction, it sorted not to make it shine. The prepared stone in time loses its vertue and ceases to shine, as we found by experience in those pieces we bought and brought along with us. Heerabout and all along as we rode in Lombardy we saw now in flower Aconitum hyemale, call'd by same Anemone Bononiensium We left Bologna,Feb. 22. and travelled to Modena, by the way about 15 miles from Bol pssing by Castel-Franco,Castel France. a strong Fort near a Village called Villa Franca, built by Pope Vrban the VIII. on the Frontier of Modena.Modena. Modena is 20 miles distant from Bono∣nia, no great City, but for the bigness populous, be∣ing the place of the Dukes usual residence; which must needs draw company and business. It is encom∣passed about with a thick wall and broad ditch, and tolerably well fortified with bastions and outworks. Heer as at Bononia, Padua, and several other Cities in Lombardy and Friuli, are Portico's or Cloysters, (Rows they call them at Chester) on each side the streets to walk in. The houses are most built of brick, and but of mean height, as we observed them to be in all those Cities where the streets cloystered on both sides, which we conjecture was the manner of building of the Goths or Lombards that invaded Italy, and setled themselves in these parts. Heer we saw the Dukes Palace, which though it be not vast, nor makes any great shew outwardly; yet are the rooms within very elegant and richly adorned with gilding, hangings, and Pictures of the best Masters. What we most minded was the Cabinet or museum, furnished with choice of natural Rarities, Jewels, ancient ad modern Coins and Me∣dals, ancient and modern Entaglia's, curious turn'd Works, dried Plants pasted upon smooth boards whitened with ceruss, which may be put in frames and hung about a room like pictures; and a great
collection of designs of the best Painters. Among other things we took notice of a humane head pe∣trified; a hens egg having on one side the signature of the Sun, which I the rather noted, because some years before Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich sent me the picture of one having the perfect signature of a Duck swimming upon it, which he assured me was natural. Moss included in a piece of Crystal, silver in another. A fly plainly discernable in a piece of Amber. A Chi∣nese Calendar written on wooden leaves. Almericus Father to the present Duke (who at our being there was a child of about 3 years old) made this Collecti∣on, and was treating with Manfredus Septalius Ca∣non at Millain for his Cabinet, so much talked of all over Italy; for which they told us he was to give 1000 pistols: But before the bargain was concluded the Duke died in the 28 year of his age. The Revenues of this Prince are said to be 350000 Crowns per ann. his ordinary expences not to exceed 180000. In a Mountain in this Territory called Zibbo nigh Paiuli Castle some 28 miles distant from Modena is a Fountain where Petroleum issues out of the earth. In another Mountain called Monte Nicani are found pe∣triied cockles and others shells. We began our Journey to Parma,Feb. 24. and at 7 miles end forded the River Serchio, passing by strong lit∣tle Town on our left hand called Rubiera, and after 8 miles more entred Reggio. a city almost as big as Modena,Reggio and of equal strength, subject to the same Prince, who is called Duke of Modena, and Reggio. It is more extended in length, and makes a fairer shew, having one broad and long street. Heer there are many Sculptors who make pretty carved works in Ivory, and wood, for which this Town is noted. Ten miles onward we passed a long Bridge over the River Lenzo, and entred the Duke of Parma's Coun∣trey; and five miles more brought us to Parma, a
larger City then Modena, of a round figure, well built of brick, though the houses be not tall. The streets broad and well paved, but no porticos under the houses. In short, it is a very pleasant and hand∣some Town, but not so well fortified as many other Cities in Italy. We travelled to Piacenza.Feb. 26. At 6 miles distance from Parma we ferried over the River Taro.Piacenza Nine miles further we came to a large Burgo called St. Donin. Eight miles beyond St. Donin we passed through a pretty little Town called Fiorenzuola,Fioren∣zuola. and just with∣out the Town crossed the River Arta; and proceed∣ing on still 12 miles, we came to Piacenza, a City for bigness not inferiour to Parma, and for strength Superior (being well walled and trench's about, and having a strong Citadel) but not so handsome and well built. The Revenues of the Duke of Parma are said by some to be 500000, by some but 400000 crowns per ann. He keeps 3000 foot, and 1000 horse in costant pay; and can upon occasion raise 20000 foot, and 1000 horse more. Besides Parma and Piacenza he holds in the State of the Church the Dukedom of Castro and the County of Ronciglione, the first of which was pawned to the Pope, and for want of payment of the money forfeited to the Church, concerning the restitution whereof there hath been such a stir of late, He holds also five Cities in Abruzzo. The present Dukes name is Ranutius Far∣nesius. We rode to Crema,27. 13 miles foom Piacenza, pas∣sing through Castigno, a large Burgo in the State of Milan, two miles thence ferrying over the River Adda, and 2 miles further the River Serio, which runs into the Adda. Heer we entred the Venetian Territory, and at the end of other five miles arrived at Crema,Crema. no great City, but strongly fenced and fortified, and for the bigness populous; held with a good Garrison of about 500 Souldiers by the Vene∣tians,
as being a frontier place. It is situate in a fair and spacious plain, near the River Serio, and hath a large territory about it, called Cremasco. This City is famous for fine thread made by the Nuns, and lit∣tle brushes made of the roots of a king of grass called Capriole, which I take to be Gramen Scoparium is∣chaemi paniculis of Lobel. We hired horses for Brescia,29. 30 miles distant from Crema.Brescia By the way we rode through 1. a little Town called Osanengo, about 3 miles from Crema. 2. Ro∣manengo a great Burgo with a small Castle, belong∣ing to the King of Spain, some 3 miles from Osan∣engo: and about 4 miles further onward 3. Soncin,Soncin. a considerable wall'd Town in the Dutchy of Milan, which Schottus takes notice of as a very civil place to strangers, and mentions panem ex Amygdalis dulci∣bus & lucernas praestantissimas ex orichalco made there. Near this Town we ferried over the River Oy or Ollius, and entred again into the Venetian Territory. Two miles off this place we rode close by L'orzi nuo∣vi,L'orzi nuovi. a small Town, but one of the best fortified places we have seen, carefully guarded by a good Garrison which the Venetians maintain there. Two miles from this Fortress we passed a great Village called L'orzi vecchii, then several Villages the most consi∣derable whereof was Lo grado. Heerabout and at L'orzi nuovi, is great store of flax planted, and fine linnen cloth made. The Countrey we rode through this day was full of Villages and well peopled, divi∣ded into small Fields, and those enclosed with hed∣ges like our enclosed Countreys in England. The City of Brescia is less then Verona,Brescia. but consi∣dering the bigness more populous, well built, having broad and streight streets, paved with stone in the middle, and with bricks set edge wayes on each side, after the manner of the Holland Cities; as are also the streets of Parma, Piacenza, and Crema. It is en∣compassed with two walls, the interiour of old
building more slight and weak, the exterior of good strength, and thickness, with a broad trench before it. The inhabitants are very busie and industrious, driving a great trade of making Guns and other iron ware. The Brescian Guns are much esteemed not on∣ly in Italy, but all over Europe, as well for the good∣ness of the iron and temper, as the excellency and neatness of the workmanship. The Markets are well stored with all things necessary for humane life. The territory of this City is in length from Moso near Mantua to Dialengo in the upper end of Val Camonica 100 miles, in breadth from Limone upon the Lago di Garda to L'orzi nuovi 50; fruitful of corn and wine. The hills clothed with Woods, and the val∣leys abundant in good pastures; so that there is ex∣cellent cheese made heer, and sent abroad to Venice and other parts of Italy. In the Mountains are iron and copper mines, which yield great profit to the owners, and inrich the whole Coutrey. Few Ci∣ties in Italy have so large and so rich a territory, so populous and full of Towns and great Villages. The City it self hath often changed Lords and Govern∣ments, and was for a long time miserably torn in pieces, and wasted by intestine quarrels and fightings between the Factions of the Guelfs and Ghibellines. The Visconti of Milan made themselves masters of it and held it for many years. In the time of Phil∣lippus Maria, the Citizens being much oppressed and aggrieved, and having often in vain sent Embssa∣dors to him for redress, they finally delivered them∣selves up to the Venetians in the year 1426. who now keep in Garrison for the security of this City 800 Souldiers, and 300 more in the Castle, which stands on a rocky hill and commands the whole Town. On the sides of this hill we found Serpent Stones or Cornua Ammonis, besides other petrified shells. We travelled to Bergamo passing through 1. Hos∣pitaletta,March 2. a Village 7 miles distant from Brescia 2. Co∣kai,
a large Village 5 miles further.Palaz∣zuolo. 3. Palazzulolo a great Village standing on a steep bank on each side the River Ollio We had a full view of the Alps all along as we rode.Bergamo. Bergamo is seated upon the side of a hill, and is a City of good account for greatness and strength, encompassed about with high strong walls, and a broad dry ditch or trench. The streets are narrow, but the houses fair. Upon the top of the hill above the City stands the Castle, which though it be but a small place is strongly situate, and commands the Town. They told us that there was a Vault under ground from the Castle to the Palace of the Capitaneo. Without the Walls of the City are five large Borgo's or Suburbs. 1. That of St. Leonardo below the hill, which hath fair streets, and is inha∣bited by rich Merchants. 2. That of St. Antonio. 3. Of Sancta Catharina. 4. S. Thomaso or Borsa di pignole. These three stand at some little distance one from another, and some of them are walled about. 5. Borgo Canale or di S. Gotardo. This City seemed to us a busie and thriving place. In the Church of the Augustines Cloyster lies buried Ambrosius Cale∣pinus, a Monk of that Order, Author of the known Dictionary, without any monument or Inscription: In the Priors Cell they shewed us his Picture with this subsribed. F. Ambrosius, dictus Calepinus, Comitis Trussardi Calepii primi vallis Calepiae feudatarii filius prae∣alaro suo Dictionario nusquam antea ab aliquo ex∣cogitato (vulgò Calepinum nominant) cùm Here∣mitanum ho S. Augustini Monasterium, & Bergo∣mum patriam suam egregiè illustrâsset, omnibus li∣terarum studiosis utilissimus quievit in Domino Anno salutis MDXI. aetatis suae 71. This City hath undergone almost the same chan∣ges of Lords and Government with Brescia, and did
likewise voluntarily deliver it self up to the Venetians in the year 1428. under whose Government it con∣tinued till the year 1509, when the Venetian Army was routed, broken and utterly defeated by Lewis XII King of France, in the Ghiara of the River Adda, and then it submitted to him and remained at his Devotion so long as he held the Dutchy of Milan. In the Year 1512, the French being expelled Italy, it became subject to Maximilian Sforza Duke of Mi∣lan. By reason of some grievances it revolted from him and returned under the Venetians; but being besieged by Raimundus Cardona a Spaniard, Vice-roy of Naples, and Captain of the League, with a great army, it was forced to surrender to the will of Maximilian, and to avoid pillaging to pay 40000 Ducats of Gold, whereas before it would not pay 10000, Anno 1514. In fine, Anno 1516, it again returned under the Government of the Venetians, who continue to this day Lords of it, and send thi∣ther ai. e. A Maior, a Gover∣nor, a Cham∣berlain, and a Gover∣nor of the Castle. Podestà, a Capitaneo, a Camerlengo and a Ca∣stellano. The Italians have a Proverb of this City, Se Bergamo fosse in pian Sarebbe piu bel che non è Milan. If Bergamo stood in a plain it would be a fairer City than Milan. NB. After the forementioned rout and disomfi∣ture of the Venetian Army, not only Bergamo, but also Brescia, Verona, Vicenza, Padua, and the rest of the Cities subject to them, save only Treviso, readily submitted to the Emperour and King of France; not∣withstading they were well fortified and had strength enough to resist: So that the Venetians ut∣terly despaired of and wholly gave up for lost all they had on the firm land of Italy; but yet in a short time they recovered it all again. From Bergamo we rode to Calonica, a Village in the State of Milan, seated upon the River Adda, where we took water for the City of Milan.
OF MILAN. MILAN is one of the four principal Cities of Italy; the other three being Rome, Venice and Naples. It is called la grande, and well may it be so, being ten Italian miles in circuit: and yet (which is more) the figure of it approaches to a cir∣cle. It conteins 11 Collegiate Churches, 71 Parishes, 30 Covents of Freres, 8 of Regular Canons, and 36 of Nuns. The number of Inhabitants of all sorts is said to be 300000, but I believe they who report it speak by guess and at random. All provisions for the belly are very plentiful and cheap heer: so that it is a proverbial saying, Solo in Milano si mangia, They eat well only at Milan. The Domo or Cathe∣dral Church is next to S. Peters at Rome the greatest, most sumptuous ad stately pile of building in Italy. It is 250 cubits long, and 130 broad, according to Schottus, and of an answerable highth. A more par∣ticular description whereof may be seen in Schottus. The great Hospital is the largest and most magnificent, I think, in Europe, more like a stately Cloyster or Princes Palace than an Hospital. There is one great square Court, surrounded with a double portico, the one below, the other obove flairs; besides four or five other smaller Courts. The Revenues of this house amount to more then 50000 crowns yearly; and there are maintained in it about 4000 poor, in∣firm and sick persons. In this City are many fair and large Monasteries, and a great number of Churches [of all sorts 238] beautified with exqui∣site pictures and statues of the best Masters, and fur∣nished with rich Altar pieces, Reliques, Vests, and
other Ornaments: The particulars may be seen in Schottus and others. The Library called Bibliotheca Ambrosiana is a handsom building furnished with store of Good Books, and free for all persons, as well strangers as Citizens, to enter into and make use of. It was founded by Cardinal Carolus Borro∣mens, of whom they have made a Saint. The Col∣lege called Hermathenaeum is a stately building, ha∣ving a handsome Court, encompassed with a double Portico or Cloyster, one above the other. The pillars of both Porticoes are double, the lowermost of the Ionic, the upper of the Tuscan Order. The Castle of Milan is esteemed one of the prin∣cipal Fortresses of Europe, as well for its strength (having never been taken by force) as for its great∣ness and beauty. This Castle since its first building hath been twice enlarged; for the ancient Castle, built by the Visconti(which is now the Palace of the Governour, and before which is Court having a round stone-tower at each corner;) the French taking in a great space of ground, enclosed with a square wall of a very great highth and thickness, and a deep ditch. Upon the top of this wall one may walk un∣der cover round about, and from thence have a fair prospect of the Countrey, and the new Fortificati∣ons of the Castle, or the new line added by the Spa∣niard, being of a pentagonal figure, and having at each angle a Bastion or Mount, and between every two Bastions an half Moon. It is well furnished round about with great Guns ready mounted. With∣in the Castle is a water-mill, which they told us was driven by water which springs up within the Ca∣stle-walls. Schottus saith that the circuit of the whole Fortress besides the trenches is 1600 paces. The Gar∣rison at our being there consisted of about 600 Soul∣diers, and the Castellana or Governours name was Don Balthasar Markadel. We saw the Museum or Gallery of Seignior Man∣fredus
Septalius son to Ludovicus Septalius the fa∣mous Physician;March 6. wherein we took notice of a box with a multitude of Looking-glasses so disposed as by mutual reflexion to multiply the object many times, so that one could see no end of them: the best in this king that I have any where seen. A plain plate of glass with so many spherical protuberances wrought upon it, that if you lookt through it up∣on any object you saw it so many times multiplied as there were protuberancies or segments of spheres upon the plain of the glass. Likewise a Speculum of the same fashion, by looking upon which through the former you see your face so many times multipli∣ed as to be equal to the product of the sum of the protuberancies of the one glass multiplied into the sum of the protuberancies of the other. Several concave burning Specula of metal; and we saw the experiment of burning by reflexion. Several En∣gines counterfeiting a perpetual motion, of which afterward we understood the intrigue. Several au∣tomata and clocks of divers fashions, among the rest two of a cylindrical figure which moved without weight or spring, only by being placed upon an en∣clining plain, their own weight was the spring of their motion. Pieces of Amber with Flies, Grashop∣pers, Bees enclosed in them. Pieces of Crystal with Grass, Moss, Leaves, Insects, &c. enclosed in them. A large piece of Crystal with a drop of water in it, and in that water a bubble of air, which as you tur∣ned the stone moved upwards. A little Cornelian with a great quantity of water enclosed in it. Pictures made of feathers by the Indians. A great collection as well of ancient as modern coins and medals. Several Enta∣glie, Camei & Nicoli. The Pietra imboscata of Impe∣ratus, having the lively signatures of herbs and trees upon it. Of this sort is found plenty about Florence, where they polish them and make Cabinets of them. Perfumed knives. Persian, Arabic, Chinese, and Ja∣ponic
manuscripts; and a China Calendar in wood, Great variety of shells. Telescopes and Microscopes of his own making. A large piece of the minera or matrix of Emeralds, with the stones growing in it. Many musical instruments and divers sorts of pipes of his own invention. Ancient Rings. Indian Scepters and Bills made of stone. Several things petrified. Chymical Oils extracted by himself without fire. The Skeleton of a Morsses head. Divers and very large Rhinocerots horns, Gazells horns, and an Uni∣corns horn. Curious pieces of turned work of Ivory very fine and subtil. Several pieces of past and coloured glass. Several pieces of most transpa∣rent Crystal-glass, excelling that of Venice, made and invented by himself. Factitious China or Por∣cellane of his own invention and making, hardly to be distinguished from the true. But there being a printed Catalogue of this Cabinet set out by the owner himself, I refer the Reader thither for fur∣ther satisfaction. In this City they work much in Crystal, making drinking-glasses and other vessels, cases for tweezers, seals, and an hundred pretty knacks of it: they also engrave figures upon it. They grind and polish it with a brass wheel, upon which they put the powder of Smiris mingled with water; and af∣ter to smooth it they use the power ofi. e. Dead stone. Sasse-mort, which is a stone they find in the River fast by. This stone by lying in the water by degrees dies, from a heavy pebble first becoming light like a pumice, and afterward if it lie longer in the water crumbling to dust. Most ordinary stones by lying in this water, or where the water sometimes comes, will (as they told us) die in this manner, excepting the clear pel∣lucid pebbles, which are immortal. We left Milan and began our journey to Turin.March 10. We rode all along upon the bank of the River Navi∣lio, passing several small Villages, leaving Biagrassa, a Town of some note,Biagrassa a little on our left hand, and
lodged at Bufalora 22 miles distant from Milan. Heer in the hedges we found Fumaria bulbosa flore purpureo & albo now in flower: as also Aristolochia rotunda in flower. We passed through Novara a strong Town be∣longing to the Spaniard 10 miles distant from Bufa∣lora;11. and rode on 10 miles further to Vercelli be∣longing to the Duke of Savoy;Novara. Vercelli. a large Town, but neither strong nor well peopled. This Town was delivered up by the Spaniard to the Duke, when Trin was restored to the Spaniard by the French. We were told that the Citizens pay ten times more to the Duke then they did to the Spaniard, and for that cause such as are able leave the City and remove to other places. We travelled as far as a Village called Sian,12. 18 miles passing by a large borgo called S. German. Being stopt by the waters we were constrained to stay all night at Chivas,13. no more then 8 miles forward. We got safe to Turino,14. passing by the way many waters, two we ferried over, viz Orco and Stura. Turin,Turin. anciently Augusta Taurinorum, seated upon the River Padus or Po, is no large City, but by rea∣son the Duke of Savoy usually keeps his Court there, frequent and populous. The ancient buildings are not better than those of our English Towns: but there is one long street of new buildings tall and uniform; and about the midst of it a large square Piazza, having on each side a fair Cloyster, very handsome and sightly. At one end of this street is another Piazza before the Dukes Palace, a fair build∣ing but not yet finished. Heer is a Citadel with 5 bastions serving as well to bridle as defend the Town. Heer we met with some of the Protestants of the Valleys of Lucern and Angrona, who told us that by the intercession of the Cantons of Zurich and Bern, the Duke hath at present made an accord with them, permitting them still to enjoy the liberty of their Re∣ligion.
They dwel in 14 pagi or Villages, have no Town, are in number about 15000 souls, and of them about 2000 fighting men. These are divided into 14 Companies under so many Captains, among whom Jean Janneville is noted for a valiant man and a good Souldier. The Papists call these men Barbetti and Genevrini. They are the only Prote∣stants in Italy, and have maintained the purity of their Religion all along these 1200 years. They run over the mountains like chamois, never shooting (if themselves may be believed) but they hit. They boasted to us that in the late War they had not lost above 40 or 50 men, and had killed 500 of the Dukes; nevertheless the Duke hath built a strong for∣tress at a place called La torre in the middle of them. The City of Turin hath an University, and boasts to have been the first that brought the use of Print∣ing into Italy. All provisions are plentiful and cheap there, the Countrey round about being very rich and fertile. Indeed the whole Principality of Piemont is esteemed inferiour to no part of Italy for pleasant∣ness, and plenty of Corn, Cattel, Wine, Fruit, Hemp, Flax, Metals, and almost every thing necessary for humane life: and withal it is so populous, that the Italians use to say, that the Duke of Savoy hath only one City in Italy of 300 miles in compass. It hath 8 Episcopal Cities and 150 Towns. The Inhabitants are more given to Husbandry than Merchandise, so that the land is no where better cultivated then in Pie∣mont. They are also very affectionate to their Prince, and for his honour and safety ready upon all occa∣sions to venture their lives and fortunes. Leti saith that they are good Souldiers, expert in warlike ex∣ercises, and so valiant that they will rather die than turn their backs. Of the riches of this Countrey we may (saith he) take an estimate by the late Wars which continued for 23 years, during which time were maintained by the Duke in Garrison, and in
the field between 25 and 30 thousand Souldiers, for the most part without any assistance or supplies of money or men from any other place but Piemont; which besides all this contributed to the Duke in 15 years 11 millions. The same Author saith, it is not in Piemont as in other Countreys, wherein there are some persons excessive rich, but the generality of the people extremely poor: but on the contrary the Piemontese are generally well to live, and there are very few among them of extraordinary estates. As for the Duke he by all mens confession keeps a splendid and regal Court, answerable to his Title of Royal Highness. His annual Revenue is said to be a million of gold: according to Leti 1800000 crowns; of which Piemont alone yields 1400000. He is able to bring into the Field 30000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, and yet leave enough at home to guard the Countrey. The States which the Duke possesses in Italy are, The Principality of Piemont, The Mar∣quesates of Saluzzes(which he had of the French in exchange for la Bresse) and of Asti; the Duchy of Aosta; the Countries or Earldoms of Nizza, and of Vercelli. The present Dukes name is Carolus Emmanuel, son of Victor Amideus: he was at the time of our being there about thirty years of age; and was then in mourning for his Duchess Francesca Borbona, and his Mother Christiana di Francia whom they call Madam Royal, who were lately dead. He hath two or three handsome Palaces near the City, adorned with rich Hangings, goòd Pictures and other Fur∣niture. 1. That called the Venery, or hunting Pa∣lace lately built. 2. Millefiore. 3. Valentine. The making of oil'd cloth for Hoods, Hat-cases, and Coats to fence off the rain, was first invented at Turin by one Giacomo Marigi, and is still held as a secret by them, though now it be done in other pla∣ces as well as there.
We took horses and a guide at Turin for Genua,Mar. 17. which we reacht at three days end. About a mile below Turin we past the River Po(which heer begins to be navigable) by a Bridge, and after we had rode about a mile further, by the Rivers side, we moun∣ted the hills under which the River heerabout runs, which are very steep and difficult to ascend. Not far from the foot of these Mountains, in the Woods wherewith they are covered, and in the ditches by the way side, I observed growing wild,i. e. Dogs tooth Violet; common Bulbous Violet; the great∣er Tooth∣wort; common Leopards bane; the lesser Grape-Hya∣cinth, and Hepatica or No∣ble Li∣verwort. Chier. Dens cani∣nus flore purpureo Ger. Leucoium bulbosum vulgare C. B. Dentaria aphyllos Clus. sive Anblatum Cordi. Doroni∣cum vulgare J. B. Hepaticum Trifolium Lob. Hyacin∣thus botryodes 2 Clus. This grow plentifully on the banks and borders of the Corn-fields, and by the way sides all along as we rode from Turin to Genua. At 5 miles distance from Turin we passed through a pretty large Town called Chier, where we took no∣tice of a triumphant Arch erected to Victor Amadeus Father to the present Duke of Savoy. About 4 miles further we passed by a walled Town called Villa nova;Aste. and this first night lodged at Aste, a large Town, but that seemed to us to be poor and decay∣ing, 20 miles distant from Turin. We proceeded on our journey as far as Nove,18. a pretty large Town under the Genoese, 27 Piemont miles distant from Aste; I think they may well pass for 35 English. About 4 miles from Aste upon the bank of the River Tanar (which is there very high) and on the sands under the bank we found great va∣riety of petrified shells, as Oysters, Scallops, Cochles, &c. as also tubuli striati, call'd by some Antales, which Seignior Rosaccio a Mountebank in Venice first shewed us: Belemnites and other rare sorts of stones. In the Corn-fields we passed through we observed i. e. Yel∣low star of Beth∣lehem; Mr. John∣son Mini∣ster of Brignel near Gre∣ta-bridge in the North Riding of York-shire hath found this growing plentifully in the skirts of the Woods there∣abouts, and flowring together with the Wood-Anemony. Ornithogalum luteum C. B. in great plenty now in
flower. This day we passed by a large Village called Non, and another which had formerly been walled, called Felizan: then Alexandria, an large Town upon the River Tanar, of more strength than beauty; the buildings both public and private being generally but mean. It was so called in honour of Pope Alex∣ander III; because in his time it was peopled by the Milanese, whose City was then almost quite destroy∣ed ad made desolate by the Emperour Frederic Bar∣barossa, for siding with the Pope against him. The River (which seemed to me as large as the Po at Tu∣rin) divides the City in two parts, which are joyned together by a fair brick-bridge. In our passage through the Town we took notice of a triumphal Arch erected to Philip IV. King of Spain upon his marriage. We rode from Nove to Genna 30 miles all over mountains.19. About 6 miles from Nove we passed through a handsom little walled Town, called Gavi,Gavi. where there is a strong castle on a hill over the Town; and about 6 miles further onward, another elegant and well-built Town called Voltagio.Voltagio. From hence we ascended continually for about 7 or 8 miles till we came to the top of a very high hill, from whence we had a prospect of Genua and the Sea. Then we descended constantly till we came to the City. In all this way we met with and overtook Mules and Asses going to and returning from Genua, to the number of 500 or 600 or more. Between Gavi and Voltagio we observed Dens caninus with a white flower; and all along on the mountains from Gavi to Genoa, stoechas citrina altera tenuifolia sive Italica J. B. as also Psyllium majus semper virens, & sedi minoris species flore albo quadrifolio, now in flow∣er. Petasites flore albo on the side of a mountain about 6 miles from Voltagio in the way to Genoa. Erica ar∣borescens Monspeliensis flore purpurascente ramulis ternis J. B. by way sides abundantly from Gavi to
Genoa. It is a stately plant, the tallest of this kind, arising to the stature and bigness of broom heer∣about; near Monpellier it is less. We viewed Genua,Mar. 20. Genua. which for the building of it is certainly the most stately and, according to its Epi∣thete, superb City in all Italy. The houses are gene∣rally tall, scarce a mean house to be seen in Town. The New-street answers the fame that goeth of it. It is but short, consisting only of 8 or 10 Palaces, built of marble, very sumptuous and magnific, the mean∣est of them) as Cluverius saith) being able to receive and lodge the greatest Prince and his Retinue. The only deformity of this City is the narrowness of the streets unanswerable to the tallness of the houses; and yet they are made so on purpose, partly to save ground, which heer is precious; and partly to keep off the scorching beams of the Sun in Summer time, for the conveniency of walking cool; for which reason I have observed many of the ancient Towns of Italy and Gallia Narbonensis to have their streets made very narrow. This City lies under the moun∣tains exposed to the South, so that it must needs be very hot in Summer, as witness the Orange and Olive trees which grow so plentifully heer, that they can afford those fruits at easie rates, and drive there∣with a great trade, furnishing with Oranges Florence and a good part of Tuscany, and sometimes send∣ing them into England. It is built in form of a Thea∣ter, or Crescent, encompassed with a double wall toward the land. The exterior or new wall of a great highth and thickness passes over the top of mountains, and takes in a great deal of void ground. The famous new mole, which now makes this a secure Harbour, is said to have cost as much as the new wall: for a work of that nature I believe it is not to be parallel'd in the whole world. The man∣ners of the Inhabitants are not answerable to the
beauty of their houses; they being noted among their own Countrey-men the Italians for proud, un∣faithful, revengeful, uncivil to Strangers, and horri∣bly exacting. There goeth a proverbial saying of Genoa, that it hath, montagne senza alberi, mare senza pesce, huomini senza fede & donne senza vergogna, that is, Mountains without trees, a Sea without fish, Men without faith, and Women without shame. The number of the Inhabitants must needs be great, they having lost in the last great Plague (as we were credibly informed) to the number of 80000 souls. The chief Trade of the Town is Silks and Velvets; they make also prety turned works of Coral. The Government of it according to the new laws made by the Popes Legate, and the Emperors and King of Spains Embassadors, not long after the time of Andreas Doria, is on this wise. There is 1. a Duke, who continues in office 2 years. 2. Two Collegia; one of Governatori(as they term them) the other of Procuratori. The Governatori 12, the Pro∣curatori 8, all elected, besides those that of course come in for their lives. 3. A greater Council of 400. 4. A lesser Council of 100. 5. A Seminary for the 2 Collegia of 120. The 2 Collegia of Governatori and Procuratori, are as it were the chief Senate or Privy Council or House of Lords; and are chosen twice a year, viz. about the middle of June and about the middle of December, after this manner. All the Se∣minarium of 120 have their names together with their surnames and fathers names written in little scrolls of parchment, an put into an iron box, which is kept very securely under many locks. When the time of election comes this box is brought forth before the Duke, the 2 Collegia, and the lesser Coun∣cil. Then a boy, who must be under ten years of age, puts his hand into the box, and draws out 5 scrolls, which are read, and the 3 first, if they be
capable, are Governatori, the 2 last Procuratori. If a man be 100 miles off the City he is uncapable of be∣ing elected for that time. Likewise two of the same family cannot be Procuratori or Governatori together. Therefore if the two first that are drawn out or the two second be of the same family, the first is Governa∣tor, and the second Procurator: if the two last be of the same family, the first drawn out is a Procurator, and the second is returned into the box again, and the boy draws out another. So that every six months five are chosen into the Collegia, and five go out, and eve∣ry one stays in office two years. In the Collegium Procuratorum, besides the 8, are all those who have been Dukes, and are gone out of office, who (modò benè se gesserint) continue Procuratori during their lives. To supply or make up the Seminarium 120, every year in the stead of those who are dead, made unca∣pable, or chosen into the 2 Collegia, the lesser Coun∣cil chuses a double number, all which must have 3 suffrages of 5. And out of these the greater Council chuse half by the major vote. For chusing the Councils both greater and lesser, the lesser Council in presence of the Duke and 2 Collegia chuse 30 Electors,(all which must be of the Nobili∣ty) by 3 suffrages of 5. These 30 chuse both the greater and lesser Council, but the lesser out of the number of the greater, by a like proportion of suf∣frages. The greater Council is assembled upon im∣portant occasions, and with the Duke and 2 Collegia makes the supreme power: The lesser Council takes care of the lesser and ordinary concerns of the City and Common-wealth. Those who are capable of be∣ing chosen into the greater Council must be 25 years of age; only the 30 Electors may, if they please or see it expedient, chuse to the number of 60 who are but 22 years old. Of the lesser Council the one half must be 30 years of age, the others at least 27,
excepting Doctors of Law and Physic, who if they be well qualified may be chosen two years younger. Those who are capable of being chosen into the Se∣minarium must be 40 years of age. The choice of the Duke is in this manner. The great Council being assembled there are put into an Urn 10 golden balls marked with 10 several letters. One of these being drawn out is shewn to the Conservators of the Laws, who thereupon put into another Urn standing by the Dukes throne 50 golden balls marked with the same letterThis is done to prevent fraud, for if the gol∣den balls were ei∣ther not marked at all, or with any sign or letter known before∣hand, any one of the Coun∣cil might bring such a ball with him, and taking it in his hand make shew as if he drew it out of the Urn., and 50 silver balls. These being shaken together, the lesser Council of 100, excluding the 2 Collegia, draw out each man a ball. He that draws out a golden ball shews it to the Censors, who sit by, and presently writes in a scroll of paper the name of him whom he thinks fit to nominate for Duke and goes out of the Council. When all the golden balls are drawn out, the two Collegia bring them into order, and count them over, and if the number of the nomi∣nated amount to 20 then they are propounded to the greater Council, who out of them by major vote chuse 15. Out of these 15 the lesser Council chuse 6 by 3 suffrages of 5. Out of these 6 again by major vote the greater Council chuse the Duke. These suf∣frages are all occult, that is, given by putting of balls into balloting boxes. If in the greater Council for any person the negative and affirmative suffrages are equal, then 5 by lot are to be put out of the Council, and the rest to ballot again. Many other provisions there are in case of equality or disagreement, &c. Nothing can be propounded in Council but by the Duke, who during the time of his regency lives in the Palace, and hath (according to Sansovinus) a guard of 500 Suitzers. The Office of S. George is (as far as I understand it) nothing but a company of Bankers, which lend money to the Common-wealth, for which they are
allowed so much per cent. and have assigned to them the publick gabells and other revenues, and for their further security have also the Island of Corsica enga∣ged to them. This company chuse yearly out of their own number 8 protectors, who are to take care of and manage the affairs of all the Creditors. Into this bank strangers usually put in money and so become of the Company, for which they receive yearly interest, proportionable to the improvement made of the whole stock of moneys then in bank. The public Revenue of this State is said by some to be 120000 crowns per annum, and yet scarce suf∣ficient to defray the public expences. There are many private Citizens heer very rich. The Republic is thought to be able to raise an Army, of 30000 men, and to set out to Sea 12 Gallies and 20 Ships of War. They hold good correspondence with all Christian Princes and States excepting the Duke of Savoy by reason of his pretence to the City of Savona. Upon the Cliffs about the Pharos or watch tower and near it we found these plants: Trifolium bitumi∣nosum Ger. Jacobaea marina Ger. Conyza major Mon∣speliensis odorata J. B. Alaternus; Carduus galactites J. B. Thymum vulgare rigidius folio cinereo J. B. Ge∣ranium folio Anthaeae C. B. Thlaspi Alysson dictum ma∣ritimum C. B. Lotus Libyca Dalechampii; Lotus pen∣taphyllos siliquosus villosus C. B. Smilax aspera; Adian∣thum sive Capillus veneris J. B. Hyoscyamus albus Park. Haec species quàm in muris & rupibus circa Genuam frequentem vidimus, folia habet breviora, viridiora, ro∣tundiora, minùs laciniata quam vulgaris niger; florem minorem, in nonnullis totum luteum, in aliis plantis fun∣do obscurè purpureo. On the walls we observed Stock-July-flowers growing plentifully, whether springing spontaneously, or of seed casually scattered out of Gardens we cannot determine; likewise Globula Monspeliensum, and Genista Hispanica on thè
rocks eastward of the City. Upon the shores we found cast up in great plenty of the ballae marinae Sea-balls, which are little round lumps, (some of them as big as Tennis-balls) of Festucae amassed together, which we supposed to be cast out of Fishes sto∣machs. We went in a Feluca from Genoa to Porto Venere,April 2: Luca. and thence cross the bay of Spezzia to Lerici, where we took post horses, and rode that night to Massa, passing through Sarzana, a strong Town belonging to the Genoese and a Frontier.Massa. Massa is but a small City, yet hath it a Prince of its own, who is Lord also of Carrara, whose chief Revenues arise from the marble quarries. The Prince is by birth a Ge∣noese, of the family of Cybo. Over the Town gate we observed this inscription, Albericus Cybo Malas∣pina Sacri Romani imperii, civitatisque Massae prin∣ceps. We rode on to Luca in a Valley by the foot of hills over a great deal of moorish and boggy ground,3. through a Countrey not well inhabited. We passed through Pietra Santa,Pietra Santa. a Town belonging to the Duke of Florence, but utterly disjoynted from the rest of his state by the interposition of the Territory of Luca. In this journey I observed the following plants. Scrophularia Vrticae folio C. B. which I found also plentifully upon the walls of Pisa. Orchis macrophyl∣la. Col. between Massa and Sarzana. Moly parvum caule triangulo ibid. Narcissus medioluteus polyanthos Ger. among the corn plentifully all along as we rode, now in flower. On the sides of the Mountains between Massa and Luca, Antirrhinum luteo flore C. B. Tithymalus dendroides J. B. Lentiscus; Anagyris sive Laburnum; Colutea vesicaria, Colutea scorpioides, Ruta sylvestris maj J. B. Laurus vulgaris; Teucrium; On ditch banks and in shadow places by the way side Arisarum latifolium Clus. and Aristolochia longa. A sort of Dentaria aphyllos with a purple flower, co∣vering
the ground with a thick tuft almost after the manner of Housleek, having scarce any stalk. Lychnis surrecta folio angustissimo, floro rubello, among flax. Ornithogalum vulgare Ger. among the corn plentifully. Cyclamen vernum, good store among shrubs upon the hills sides, now in flower. Myrtus minor vulgaris; Philyrrea angustifolia; Philyrrea 3 Clus. Genista Hispanica Ger. Upon the descent of the mountains 4 miles distant from Luca, Hesperis sylvestris latifolia flore albo parvo Park. A kind of Al∣sine hirsuta myosotis with a very large flower. A shrub like to Guaiacum Patavinum, if not the same. A king of Thlaspi monospermos with a white flower; Sedum minus semine stellato; an Sedum echinatum flare luteo J. B. in rupibus & aggeribus sepium. Alsine foliis he∣deracis Rutae modo divisis Lob. Anemone tuberosa ra∣dice Ger. now in flower. Near Porto Venere, Alsine fo∣lio crasso. Luca is no great City, Sansovinus saith 2 miles round, (but I take it to be three or more) yet is it very populous, containing within its walls in San∣sovinus his time about 34000 persons; which num∣ber I believe is now much encreased by reason of the freedom and ease the subjects enjoy under this Go∣vernment above their neighbours of Tuscany. It is situate in a pleasant Valley, well fortified, the walls and bulwarks both very strong and in good repair; the mounts and platforms stored with great Guns; several half Moons of earth without the walls: The walls themselves planted with rows of trees, and we permitted to walk them without scruple or que∣stion. The buildings of the City good; the Churches though not great, yet as well kept and handsomely adorned within side as a man shall see any: The streets cleanly and well paved; in a word all things both within and without the City very trim and po∣lite. Both Citizens and Countreymen are very cour∣teous and well manner'd, and seem both by their
habit and address, and the chearfulness of their looks, to live more freely and in better condition, and to have more spirit and courage then the other people of Italy. That they live more freely and in better circumstances then their neighbours, them∣selves are sensible, and thereupon so well affected to their Governours, and studious to maintain their liberty, that upon giving them a token by making a fire upon one of the towers all the Countreymen run presently to the City, so that in 2 or 3 hours time they can have ready 30000 men in Arms: And withal they are so couragious and stout, that they seem to have no fear at all of the Duke of Tuscany their potent neighbour, but told us, that if their Go∣vernours would lead them, they would not fear to march up to the very Gates of Florence. That liberty doth naturally beget courage and va∣lour, and on the contrary slavery and oppression break and debase mens spirits, is so clear in experi∣ence, that I need not go about to prove it. And yet were it not so, it is no wonder that men who find themselves well at ease, and have something to lose or are at least in a capacity of growing rich if not al∣ready so, should be very loth to change their condi∣tion for a worse, and stoutly defend themselves a∣gainst any that should endeavour to bring them un∣der the yoke; whereas those that are oppressed and aggrieved having nothing to lose, and being already in as bad a condition as they are like to be under any other Government, must needs have little heart to fight for their Princes, and be indifferent which way things go. The women are not so strictly guarded and confi∣ned as in other Cities of Italy, but walk up and down more freely. They are many of them hand∣some and well-favoured, and notwithstanding their liberty I think more modest then their neighbours: in their habit and attire they imitate somewhat the French fashions.
This City is very vigilant and careful to preserve its liberty: Though they have 3 Gates they permit strangers to enter in and go out only at one, that so they may more easily know what number are in the City, for fear of a surprise. They permit none to walk about the streets so much as with a Sword, un∣less he have license from the Antiani. The Government is by a great Council of 160 an∣nually chosen out of the Nobility, (the commons ha∣ving no interest or share therein) who must be all at least 25 years old, nine Antiani and a Gonfaloniere. The Antiani and Gonfaloniere are chosen anew every two months. These are called the Signoria, and must live in the Palace during the time of their office and authority. They have a guard of Switzers in the Pa∣lace of about 80. The Gonfaloniere is the supreme of∣ficer, yet hath little advantage above the rest more then his title and precedency; and we were told that during his office he is exempted from all taxes and gabels, which the Noblemen pay equally with the Commons. The City is divided into 3 parts cal∣led Terzieri, each Terziero hath its Arms or Banner called Gonfalone; whence the name Gonfaloniere. At the corners of each street are painted both the Arms and name of the Terziero, and the Bulwark they are to defend. Out of each Terziero are chosen by the Council three Antiani. The public revenue is thought to be 100000 crowns per ann. The Olives that grow in this terri∣tory are reputed the best in all Italy.
OF PISA. PISA was formerly, so long as it continued a Free-state or Common-wealth, a rich, popu∣lous, potent and flourishing City; but since it hath come under the Florentine yoke it is become poor, weak, and almost desolate, notwithstanding all the endeavours the Dukes of Tuscany have used to in∣vite and draw people thither, by founding an Uni∣versity, setting up an order of Knighthood, and building an Exchange for Merchants there. It is situ∣ate upon the River Arnus in a fenny level; so that the air must needs be bad and unwholesome for such as are not born there. The most remarkable things we took notice of in this City were 1. The Church of the Knights of S. Stephen, an Order founded by Cosmus the first great Duke of Tuscany. 2. The house of Bartlus now made a College for Students in Law and Philosophy, and thereon this Inscription, Fer∣dinandus Medices magnus Dux Etr. III. bas aedes quas olim Bartolus Juris interpres celeberr. incoluit nune re∣novatas & instructas adolescentibus qui ad Philosophorum & Juris consultorum Scholas missi publico urbium atque oppidorum suorum sumptu separatim alebantur, publicae utilitati consulens addixit, legèsque quibus in victu, ve∣stitu vitâque simul degendâ uterentur tulit, Anno salu∣tis MDLXXXXV. 3. The Domo or Cathedral Church, a sumptuous building or Marble, having all the doors of brass curiously engraven; a double isle on each side the Nave, and two rows of Marble pillars, adorned with stately Altars and rare Pi∣ctures; the walls are hung round about with red
Velvet; the roof richly gilded. On each side the high Altar is a Picture, and under it an inscription ex∣plaining the history of it; which because they con∣tain two of the notablest adventures and successes of this City, I thought it might not be amiss heer to in∣sert. I. Templum hoc ut auctae potontiae ac religionis insigne monumentum posteris extaret, Pisanis ex Sarace∣norum spoliis captâ Panormo aedificatum an Sancto∣rum reliquiis è Palaestina usque advectis auctum Gelasius II. P. M. solenni pompa consecravit, A. D. MCXIX. II. Pascale II. P. M. autore, Pisani classe 300 trire∣mium Petro Arch. Pis. duce Baleares insulas profli∣gatis Saracenis in ditionem redigunt, Christianó∣que nomini adjungunt, captâque regia conjuge ac filio praeclaram victoriam illustri pióque triumpho exornarunt. A. D. 1115. 4. The Baptisterium, having in the middle a large marble Font like the Cistern of a Fountain, with wa∣ter continually running into it. There is also a mar∣ble pulpit curiously carved. 5. The burying place called the Campo Santo, because made of earth brought out of the holy Land. The earth is said to consume a body in 48 hours: it is an oblong square, encompassed with a broad Portico, paved with Grave-stones, and the walls painted. 6. The Cam∣panile or Steeple, a large round tower of a consider∣able highth, so very much enclining or seeming to encline or lean to one side, that one would think it could not long stand upright, but must needs fall that way. I suppose it was on purpose built so at first, one side being made perpendicular and the other en∣clining, to deceive the sight, though some say it
sank after it was built, and doth really incline. 7. The Aqueduct of above 5000 arches, begun by Cosmus, and finished by Ferdinand I. great Dukes of Tuscany, bringing water to the City from the moun∣tains about 5 miles distant. This water is so good that it is carried in flasks as far as Ligorn to sell. 8. The Physic-garden, at our there but meanly stored with simples. From Pisa we went by boat to Ligorn,Ligorn. [Livorno] called anciently Portus Liburnus, some 10 or 12 miles distant. This Town is not large, and but low built, yet very pleasant and uniform, having streight streets, and a spacious Piazza in the middle. It stands in an open level, without mountain or hillock within 5 miles of it on any side. It is well-fortified with walls and bastions, and a deep trench round except on the Sea-side; and secured with a good Garrison, being one of the most considerable and important places in all Tuscany. Since the Great Duke made it a free port it hath encreased mightily in trading and riches, great numbers, of Merchants from all Nations resorting hither, and most of the bargains for the commodities of the whole Levant being heer driven. The greatest part of the Inhabi∣tants are Strangers and Jews, which last are esteem∣ed one third of the whole number of people, and thought to amount to 5000 persons and upward. Before these privileges granted to Ligorn, when it was thin of Inhabitants, it was accounted a very bad air and an unhealthful place, by reason of the fens and marshes adjoyning; but now since it is become populous, the multitude of fires (as is supposed) hath so corrected the air, that people enjoy their health as well and live as long heer as in any other Town or City of Italy. Near the Haven is a very magnificent statue of Ferdinand I. Great Duke, about the pedestal where∣of are 4 brass Statues of slaves chained of a gigan∣tick
bulk and stature. The haven within the mole is but small, but heer is good riding for Ships without. The Great Duke in Lent time uses to make his resi∣dence in this Town; heer being great variety of good fish taken in the Sea near hand, and to be sold at reasonable rates; all other provisions being dear enough. In Ligorn we saw workmen filing of mark∣ing-stones, called in Latine Lapis galactites & mo∣rochthus, in Italian Pictra lattaria; which they told us were found at Monte negro and thereabout some 5 miles distant from Ligorn, and from hence transpor∣ted into France, Spain, England, the Low Countreys, &c. Of the dust and filings of this stone they make the body of power for hair, as the workmen in∣formed us. Of Plants we observed about Ligorn,Plants observed about Ligorn. Kali geni∣culatum majus, in the marshes by the Sea-side: Absin∣thium Seriphium Gallicum; Polium montanum album C. B. Medica doliata spinosa; Medica cochleata Spi∣nosa; Med. marina, on the Sands; Caltha arvensis C. B. Hyacinthus palustris vernus, flosculis fimbriatis albis; Hyacinthus comosus Ger. Lathyrus flore cocci∣neo; Vicia luteo flore sylvestris; Ochrus sive ervilia Dod. these three last among the Corn; as also Gla. diolus Narbonensis Lob. Telephium scorpioides Anguill. in arenosts; Phyteuma Monspeliensium; Cichorium pratense vesicarium Col. Medica Scutellata J. B. Iris humilis violacea latifolia, & eadem flore albo, in ru∣pibus ad mare: Herniaria hirsuta; Allii species, an Ampeloprassum? Ferrum equinum Lob. Orchis ma∣crophylls Columnae; Trifolium fragiferum sive vesi∣carium, floribus nitidis rubellis, flosculis velut in umbel∣la parva dispositis; Chrysanthemum Bellidis folio Hort. Pat. inter segetes: Buphthalmum Cotulae folio C. B. an Chrysanthem. Valentinum Clusii? Anthyllis legu∣minosa flo. purpureo. Cruciata minima muralis Col. Peplus minor J. B, Ageratum sive Balsamita mas: A sort of Draba with a white flower; Hieracium per∣foliatum;
besides many which we had found in other places, as that sort of Dorycnium which J. Bauhinus calls Trifolium album rectum hirsutum valdè; Carduus Chrysanthemus Narbonensis, which Lobel calls Eryn∣gium luteum Monspeliensium; Heliotropium majus; Carduus solstitialis Ger. Cichoreum pratense verruca∣rium, in arvis passim; Blattaria flore luteo; Convol∣vulus minimus spicifolius Lob. Melissa sylvest. hirsuti∣or, minùs odorata; Dorycnio congener planta: Rapi∣strum monospermon; Ammi vulgare; Passerina Tragi; Sideritis vulgaris; Aster luteus foliis ad florem rigidis; Stoebe major caliculis non splendentibus. Between Pisa and Ligorn we noted Leucoium bulbosum majus polyanthemum Ger. in the marshes near Pisa plenti∣fully; Aristolochia clematitis; Aster conyzoides nobis dictus; Asparagus altilis: Gramen supinum aculea∣tum J. B. Besides these we observed some which grow wild in England, but more rarely, as Leucoium marinum majus folio sinuato; Orchis fuciflora galeâ & alis herbidis; Hyacinthus stellaris vernus minor; Eran∣themum sive flos Adonis; Trifolium pumilum supinum flosculis longis albis P. B. Ferrum equinum Germani∣cum siliquis in summitate C. B. At Ligorn finding a good Dutch Vessel ready to set sail for Naples, we put our selves aboard her: The wind not favouring us we spent five days in this passage before we reached our Port. The Captain of the Ship told us that heerabouts usually in the fore∣noon the wind blows from the Land, and in the af∣ternoon from the Sea; so that it is Easterly in the forenoon, and Westerly in the afternoon. We also observed in this Voyage, that about Sun-set the wind fell; so that soon after Sun-set there was little or no wind stirring: and likewise several days about Sun-rising we had but little wind. In our return back∣wards from Messina to Naples, and from Naples to Ligorn, we observed that the wind for the most part sate contrary to us. And the Sea men told us that
this was general in Summer time. So that you have a much quicker passage from Ligorn to Naples, and thence to Messina, than backwards. We observed al∣so that the wind follows the Sun, so that every morn∣ing we could make some use of the wind to sail with, but in the afternoon none at all; which a∣grees exactly with our Captains observation, the land lying Eastward, and the Sea West. Our Cap∣tain also told us that when they made a Voyage from Holland to the West-Indies, they sailed down the Coast of Africa as far Southward, as the place in the West-Indies whither they intended to go lay, and then steer'd directly Westward; both the wind blowing constantly from the East, and the Sea also running the same way. Which relation of his con∣curring with the general vogue of Mariners (if true) doth much confirm the opinion of the diurnal moti∣on of the earth. When they return backwards from thence into Holland, they go round about the Bay of Mexico, and up a good way northward, and then strike over to Europe, the water being reflected (as he said) that way, and the wind also often blowing that way. Naples lies by the Sea side under hills,Naples. in form of a Theater; for its figure and situation much like to Genua, but somewhat bigger, and much more po∣pulous; so that before the last great Plague (which swept away as we were credibly informed at least 120000 souls) one might well reckon the number of Inhabitants to have been about three hundred thou∣sand. The circuit of the walls is not above seven Italian miles, but it hath large Suburbs. The Town is well built of stone; the houses tall and massy; for the most part flat rooft, and covered with a kind of plaster, which fences out the rain, and endures the weather well. Notwithstanding this City lies so far South, and under hills, yet is not the heat ex∣treme, but such as may well be endured even in the middle of Summer, they having for the most part
about noon-tide a brize of wind, which cools and refreshes much. Two or three hot days we had, but the rest temperate enough. They told us that there uses to be very little rain there in Summer time, how∣beit at our being there (which was in the latter end of June and beginning of July) it rained every other day, and sometimes so plentifully, that the water ran down like a river in the streets. When they have no rain, to cool the streets in the afternoon they draw about a tun filled with cold water, and bored with several holes, whence the water gushes out as it goes along. The Dialect of the common people is much different from the Tuscane, and not to be un∣derstood but by one who hath a long time conversed with them. This City is well served with all provi∣sions, especially fruit which is very cheap heer. In this place we took first notice of the Cucurbita an∣guina, Cucumis anguinus, Mala insana, & Limoncelle, to be sold in market. Macarones and Vermicelle (which are nothing but a kind of paste cut into the figure of worms or thongs) boil'd in broth or water, are a great dish heer as well as at Messina, and as much esteemed by the vulgar, as Frumenty by the Coun∣trey people in England. All the Neopolitans and Si∣cilians, and genenrally the Italians drink their Wine and water snowed; and you shall see many stalls in the streets where there is snowed water to be sold: many also you shall meet, with a barrel at their backs and glasses in their hands, cryingi e. Snowed water or∣iced wa∣ter. Acqua ghi∣acciata, or Acqua nevata. We were credibly infor∣med that before the last great Plague the very gabel upon snow was farmed at 25000 crowns per annum. NB. To cool the water or wine they do not put the snow into it, but round about the vessel wherein it is contained: so they have a vessel conteining the snow or ice, and into that they set the vessel contein∣ing the wine or water. There are in this City an incredible number of
Monasteries or Religious houses (as they call them.) Beltrano Descript. Neap. gives us a Catalogue of 160 of all sorts, whereof 121 of men and 39 of wo∣men; the number of the persons contained in them being 1242. Four Castles there are to secure and bridle the Ci∣ty withal, 1. Castel d'Ovo, built on a rock in the Sea, having an artificial Caussey or mole leading to it from the shore. 2. Castel S. Elmo or S. Hermo stand∣ing on a hill above the City. 3. Castel Novo by the water side, near the Haven where the Gallies lie. 4. Torrione di Carmine, made use of by Massaniello and Anese in the time of the Rebellion. This is on∣ly a tower belonging to the Carmelites Cloyster. The Churches in this Town are generally very handsome within side; many of them richly gilt and sumptuously adorned; some of them not only paved with marble of divers colours, but their walls encrusted all over with marble inlaid. Of all the Cloysters I have any where seen that of the Carthusi∣ans, close adjoyning to the Castle S. Elmo, is the most splendid and magnific, where there is a large square Court compassed about with the fairest peri∣stylium or Cloyster that I ever saw: All the pillars and all the pavement (of the Portico I mean) being of mar∣ble of several colours well wrought, polish'd and laid, and so cleanly and elegantly kept, that one cannot see a more pleasant spectacle of this nature. For my own part I was much taken with the sight of it. Heer is a fair Arsenal to build Gallies in, now made but little use of. The public Granary deserves notice taking, it being the greatest and best furnished of any we have seen. They told us there was Corn enough al∣ways in store to serve the whole City some years up∣on any exigency. There are great Vaults made under∣ground to keep it in in Winter time, and large rooms above to keep it in Summer. A great number of men they hire to turn all the beds of Corn every
day. The Bakers of the Town are obliged to take every month 25000A to∣molo is a measure bigger then an English Bushel. tomoli out of this Granary, that so there may be a succession of new Corn yearly. This they paying a good rate for, is the reason why bread is dearer in Naples than otherwise it would be. In the City of Naples are 5 Seggi, that is Benches or Companies of Noblemen, viz. that of 1. Capua. 2. Nido. 3. Montagna. 4. Porta. 5. Porta nova. In the whole Kingdom of Naples there are 148 Ci∣ties, of which 21 [20] are Archbishopricks, and 127 [128] Bishopricks: to about 30 of which the King of Spain nominates: 87 Princes; 122 Dukes; 159 Marquesses, and 7 Earls. The Kingdom is divided into 12 Provinces, viz. 1. TERRA DILAVORO anciently called Campania felix, in which are 14 Cities, viz. 1. Aversa 2. Capua. 3. Caserta. 4. Gaeta. 5. Ischia. 6. Massa-Lubrense. 7. Nola. 8. Pozzuoli. 9. Sessa. 10. Sorrento. 11. Teano. 12. Traetto. 13. Venafro. 14. Vico Equense. 2. PRINCIPATO CITRA, in which are 18 Ci∣ties, 1. Amalfi. 2. Campagna. 3. Capri in the Island Capreae near Naples famous for the retire∣ment of Tiberius Caesar. The greatest part of the Revenue of the Bishop of this Island they told us arises from the Quails taken therein. 4. Casella. 5. Contursi. 6. Eboli. 7. Cappaccia. 8. Gragna∣no. 9. Lettere. 10. Laurino. 11. Nocera. 12. Sa∣lerno. 13. San-severino. 14. Saponara. 15. Sar∣no. 16. Scala. 17. Tramonti. 18. Ravello. 3. PRINCIPATO ULTRA, in which are 14, viz. 1. Beneveno. 2. Solofra. 3. Consa. 4. Ariano. 5. Avellino. 6. Bisaccio. 7. S. Angclo de Lom∣bardi. 8. Cedogna. 9. Monte marano. 10. Nusco. 11. Voltorara. 12. Vico. 13. Vico della Baronia. 14. S. Agatha delli grotti. 4. BASILICATA, which hath 11 Cities, viz. 1. Lavello. 2. Amalfi. 3. Policastro. 4. Venosa. 5. Acirenea. 6. Muro. 7. Monte peloso. 8. Potenza. 9. Rapolla. 10. Tri∣carico.
11. Tursi. 5. CALABRIA CITRA, in which are 12, viz. 1. Mantea. 2. Cosenza. 3. Paola. 4. Montalto. 5. Rossano. 6. Bisignano. 7. Cari∣ari. 8. Cassano. 9. Martirano. 10. Strongoli. 11. S. Marco. 12. Ubriatico. 6. CALABRIA ULTRA, 16, viz. 1. Catanzara. 2. Crotone. 3. Squillaci. 4. Taverna. 5. Tropia. 6. Rhezo or Reggio, anciently Rhegium. 7. Belicastro. 8. Bo∣va. 9. S. Severina. 10. Gieraci. 11. L'isola. 12. Montilene. 13. Melito. 14. Nicastro. 15. Ni∣coterra. 16. Oppido. 7. TERRA D'OTRANTO 14, viz. 1. Gallipoli. 2. Lecce. 3. Brindisi. 4. Matera. 5. Ostuni. 6. Tarento. 7. Otranto, Hydruntum. 8. Alessano. 9. Castellaneta. 10. Ca∣stro. 11. Motola. 12. Nardo. 13. Oria. 14. Ugen∣to. 8. TERRA DI BARI, 16. 1. Andria. 2. Ba∣ri. 3. Barletta, a very strong hold. 4. Bitonto. 5. Terra di Mola. 6. Molfetta. 7. Monopoli. 8. Trani. 9. Giovenazzo. 10. Biseglia. 11. Bi∣tetto. 12. Conversano. 13. Gravina. 14. Mono∣ruino. 15. Polignano or Putignano. 16. Ruvo. 9. ABRUZZO CITRA 5. viz. 1. Chieti. 2. Sulmo∣na. 2. Benevento. 4. Borrelle. 5. Ortona. 10. AB∣RUZZO ULTRA 5. 1. Aquila. 2. Atri. 3. Cam∣pli. 4. Civita di Penna. 5. Teramo. 11. CON∣TADO DI MOLISI 4. 1. Boiano guardia. 2. Al∣feres. 3. Isernia. 4. Trivento. 12. CAPITA∣NATA 13. viz. 1. Monte S. Angelo. 2. Ascoli. 3. Bovino. 4. Ferensuola. 5. Larino. 6. Lucera. 7. Lesina. 8. Salpe. 9. Vieste. 10. Volturara. 11. Termole. 12. Sancto Severo. 13. Manfredo∣nia: in all about 151. But many of these are pi∣tiful poor desolate places, inferiour to the better sort of our English Villages. Every hearth (fires they call them) in this King∣dom of Naples pays 15 Carolines the year to the King, which is about six and six pence or seven shil∣lings English. The number of fires in the whole
Kingdom is 475727, besides 5804 which are exempt from payment. In which number are not compre∣hended the fires of the Albanese and Illyrians com∣monly called Sclavonians who pay no more then 11 Carolines the year, are numbred every year, and are permitted to remove from place to place in the Kingdom. The number of these extraordinary fires is 4451. So then the whole sum of the Hearth∣mony is 719095 Ducats 4 Carolines, from which deducting what is to be abated for places privileged and exempt from payment, that which comes clear into the Kings treasury will be 654873 Ducats, and six Carolines. The Adogo or tax which feudatories pay to the King in lieu of personal service amounts in the whole Kingdom to 120568 Ducats: They also pay Reliefs after Deaths one half of a years Revenue. Besides these there are abundance more taxes and gabels paid by the Subject; an account of all which in par∣ticular may be seen in Scipio Mazzella his Descripti∣on of the Kingdom of Naples, written in Italian and printed 1601. So that one would think it were impossible for poor Pesants to pick up so much money as they pay to the King only: and yet I believe the gabels and payments are since that time much encrea∣sed. The wholesum of all the Kings Entrata or Re∣venue yearly accruing from this Kingdom then was 2996937 Ducats, 3 Carolines and 14 grains. While we staid in this City we were present at the meeting of the Virtuosi or Philosophic Academy, which is held weekly on Wednesdays in the Palace of that most civil and obliging, noble and vertuous person the Marquess D' Arena. There were of the Academy but 15 or 16 admitted, but at the meeting were present at least threescore. First there was shew∣ed the experiment of the waters ascending above its level in slender tubes, upon which when they had discoursed a while, three of the Society recited dis∣courses
they had studied and composed about parti∣cular subjects, which were appointed them to consi∣der the week before: and after some objections against what was delivered and reasonings to and fro about it, the company was dismist. A man could scarce hope to find such a knot of ingenious persons and of that latitude and freedom of judgment in so remote a part of Europe, and in the communion of such a Church. They are well acquainted with writings of all the learned and ingenious men of the immediately preceding age, as Galileo, Cartes, Gas∣sendus, Harvey, Verulam; and of the present yet sur∣viving, as Mr. Boyle, Sir George Ent, Dr. Glisson, Dr. Willis, Dr. Wharton, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Hook, Monsieur Pecquet, &c. We were very much pleased and satis∣fied with the conversation and discourse of some of them. Amongst the rest Dr. Thomas Cornelius hath made himself known to the world by his Writings. We went by water to Pozzuolo anciently Puteoli;April 24 Pozzuolo there so soon as we were come into our Inn many Sea-men and Countrey people came about us, some bringing Shells, others Hippocampi dried, others an∣cient medals and Entaglie, others pieces of coloured glass raked out of the Sea, (as they told us) about Argenteria. Near this Town are several arches of stone [13 peers] reaching a great way into the Sea. Some are of opinion that this was the beginning of Caligula's Bridge over this Bay, and that from the end of this pile as far as Baiae the rest of the Bridge was made of vessels locked together and fastened with Anchors on each side. But more probable it is that this was intended for a mole or peer to secure the Harbour, and for Ships to lie behind, because upon every peer a great stone perforated stands jet∣ting out of tie vessels unto. That it was an ancient Roman work the manner of the Arches, the figure of the bricks, and the stateliness of it do sufficiently ar∣gue.
From Pozzuolo we passed over the Gulf to Baiae, where are so many Antiquities, that to discourse fully of them would require a volume alone. And others having written at large of them both in English and Latine, I shall not so much as mention any thing save only the sweating vault being one of the grots called thei. e. The Baths of Titoli. Bagne de Tritoli. It is a long and narrow pas∣sage like the entry into some room, the upper part whereof is so hot, that a man cannot endure to walk upright, being then in danger to be stifled by the hot and suffocating vapour with which the upper part of the Vault is filled: the lower part though not cold is yet tolerable. Indeed one would not think there could be so great a difference in so small a di∣stance. He therefore that goes in there is necessitated to stoop low; for if you do but hold up your hand it sweats suddenly. We observed that of the lower part of this vault where it was cool the sides were a firm stone, but of the upper part where it was hot, a soft, friable, yet unctuous yellow clay. It seemed to us to have a mixture of sulphur and fixt salt deli∣quated in it, but we made no trial of it by fire or otherwise. Where this stratum or region of clay be∣gins there precisely doth the heat begin; so that where the region of clay goes lower there you must stoop lower to avoid the heat. In this hot steam there is a watery vapour conteined, as appears by the drops notwithstanding all the heat condensed on the sides of the vault as on an Alembic head. As we returned we viewed the new Mountain, called by somei. e. The Mountain of ashes or cin∣ders. Monte di cenere, raised by an Earth-quake Septemb. 29. 1538, of about an hundred foot per∣pendicular altitude; though others make it much higher, according to Stephanus Pighius it is a mile ascent to the top, and 4 miles round at the foot. We judg'd it nothing near so great. The people say it bears nothing; nothing of any use of profit I suppose they mean, else I am sure there grows Heath, Myrtle,
Mastich-tree, and other shrubs upon it. It is a spungy kind of earth, and makes a great sound under a mans feet that stamps upon it. The same Earthquake threw up so much earth stones, and ashes as quite filled up the Lacus Lucrinus, so that there is nothing now left of it but a fenny meadow. In our return from Poz∣zuolo we viewed the mountain called Solfatara, an∣ciently Campi Phlegraei, which continually burns. On the top of the mountain is a large excavated oval place like an Amphitheater, in length 1500 foot, in breadth 1000; where the burning is. There are se∣veral holes or vents where the smoke issues out, as out of a furnace. We gathered perfect flowers of sulphur to appearance, and salt-Armoniac sticking to the mouths of these vents. If you thrust a Sword or any iron instrument into one of the holes where the smoke comes out, and suddainly draw it back again, you shall see it all over bedewed or thick set with drops of water. Whence it is manifest that this smoke is not only a dry exhalation, but hath also good quantity of the vapour of water mixt with it. We observed that these flores of Sulphur would not burn, nor easily melt over the fire, by reason of the ad∣mixture of some heterogeneous body with them. The stones and earth of this mountain are crusted over with these flowers of Brimstone, which they gather and distil Brimstone out of. As one walks heer the earth makes a noise, as if it were hollow underneath, and one may perfectly hear as it were the hissing and boiling of some melted mineral, me∣tal or other liquor just under ones feet. One that should see this smoke, hear this noise and feel the heat would wonder that the mountain should not suddenly break out into a flame. This great hollow above was I suppose excavated partly by force of the burning, the earth sinking down, and partly by pa∣ring away the top to distil for Brimstone.
Five miles distant from Naples is the mountain Vesuvius,Vesuvius. so famous in all ages for its burning. The ground all about the sides of it we found covered with cinders and pumice stones, which had been cast out in the time of the burnings. We observed also great channels, like gulls made by suddain torrents and land-floods, which they told us were made by water thrown out at the top of the mountain in the conflagrations. Toward the top grew very few plants. Acetosa ovilla where nothing else was to be seen: A little lower grew Colutea Scorpioides and some shrubs of Poplar. Near the top the ascent was steep, and very toilsome to get up. Upon the very top is a great pit or hollow in form of an Amphi∣theater, of about a mile round, caused by the fires blowing up the upper part of the mountain several times with great violence. There are still about the bottom of this great cavity some small spiracula of smoke, but inconsiderable and which seem'd not to threaten any future eruption. We viewed the cave called Grotta di cane near the Lago Agnano.The Grot∣ta di cane. This Grot is narrow and short. Whatever others have written or said to the contrary, a man may without any great prejudice go into and continue in it a long time, even in the further end of it, as some of us did above an hours space. The venenose vapour (whether it be purely sulphureous or also Arsenical) ascends not a foot from the ground, but so high as it ascends one feels his feet and legs hot. If you hold your head down near the ground where the vapour is, you shall presently find a fierce sulphureous twinge in your nose, just as if you held your head over burning brimstone, or more violent, which makes a man stagger at first stroke, and stifles before one be aware. We carried with us a dog, which by hold∣ing his nose down we almost killed suddainly; and then throwing him into the lake to try whether that would recover him (as is generally believed) the dog
being not lively enough to swim was there drowned. I believe if we had left him in the air he would have recovered. We then put in a pullet, which was mor∣tified immediately; next a frog, which held not out long; and last of all a serpent, which lived about half an hour. The steam, if you hold a candle where it comes, presently puts it out. I believe this vapour arises not only in this grot precisely, but also all heerabout, as I am confident would be found were there other grots dug out of the hill near it. Going to this grot;The Grot or Hole through Mount Pausilypus we passed through the vault or artificial high-way wherewith the mountain Pau∣silypus is perforated, made by one Cocceius in 15 days. It is said to be a mile in length, but we judged it not above half an English mile. It is highest at each end, and lowest in the middle, and yet there about 12 foot high; broad enough for two carts meeting to pass one another. About the middle of the Vault it is so dark (no light now coming in but at the ends) that those who meet cannot see one another; and therefore lest they should justle or fall foul one upon upon another, they that go toward the Sea cry Alla marina, and they which go into the Countrey cry Alla montagna, so each take their left hand, and pass commodiously. The ports may be seen from end to end, and any where in the mid-way; but in cloudy weather it is so dark in the middle that a man can scarce see his hands held up to the light. This road is much frequented; though the bottom be stone yet is it very dusty. Near the end toward Naples we saw a window at the top. They that write of this grot mention two windows made by Alphonsus the first King of Naples; but we saw only this, which doth yield but little light. The Plants we took more especial notice of about Naples were these,Plants observed about Naples. Trifolium corniculatum incanum maritimum majus; Lotus siliquis Ornithopodii; Medi∣ca orbiculata minor; Medica doliata spinosa; Jacea
purpurea maritima capitulo spinoso Neopolitana; Rham∣nus primus Clus. Stoechas citrina altera tenuifolia sive Italica J. B. Linaria odorata Monspessulana; Medica marina; In litoribus arenosis passim. On the Rocks about Baiae, Puteoli, &c. Cytisus incanus, siliquis fal∣catis; Acantbus sativus; Laurus Tinus caeruleâ baccâ; Acacia altera trifolia Ger. Gnaphalium maritimum; Sonchus Creticus foliis laciniatis C. B. Chrysanthemi Cretici duae aut tres differentiae; Faba Veterum serratis foliis Park. Moly parvum caule triangulo; Centaurium luteum novum Col. Cerinthe minor flore luteo; Lychnis sylvestris hirta Lob. Lychnis montana viscosa alba la∣tifolia C. B. Gramen tremulum maximum; Lagopus ma∣ximus Ger. On the mountain Vesuius or near to it, Helianthemum flore maculoso Col. Trifolium stellatum C. B. Vicia seu Lathyrus gramineo folio, flore coccineo; Colutea scorpioides; Lotus arbor; Arbutus; Linariae graminea floribus congestis purpureis; Linaria purpu∣rea magna J. B. Genista Hispanica. As you go up from the City to the Cloyster of the Camaldulenses, Martagon Chymistarum Lob. Aristolochiarotunda; Oro∣bus sylvaticus Viciae foliis C. B. Laurus; Chrysanthe∣mum Bellidis folio; Digitalis lutea vel pallida parvo flore C. B. Hemionitis multifida; Horminum luteum glu∣tinosum sive Colus Jovis; Trifolium bituminosum, quo nihil frequentius per totam Italiam, & Siciliam; Cytisus hirsutus J. B. Whole woods of Chesnut; Ge∣nista Hispanica; Colutea tum vesicaria tum scorpioides; Ferula Lob. Genista tinctoria Hispanica; Vicia floribus pallidè luteis amplissimis; After montanus lutens Sali∣cis glabro folio; Millefolium odoratum; Hesperis syl∣vestris latifolia flo. albo parvo Park. Androsaemum foe∣tidum sive Tragium, Speculum veneris majus; Pan∣cratium Lob. In litore Neopolitano, Lotus corniculata siliquis singularibus vel binis, tenuis J. B. Tribulus ter∣restris copiosissimè; Hyoscyamus albus; Juncus cy∣peroides Maritimus Ad. Lob. In arenosis maritimis Italiae & Siciliae frequens. Mala insana; Italis Me∣longena,
Neapoli in foro olitorio venalia; Cucumis fle∣xuosus anguinus Lob. ibidem. Cucumeres Italis di∣cuntur Citrulli; Melones aquatici cucumere. Cucur∣bita anguina Lob. Malus Limonia fructu parvo, Li∣moncelles dicto, Neapoli & Messinae. Fructus nucleis caret, hoc est raros nucleos habet. In the night time we saw many Fisher-boats out at Sea with a light at one end of them, to invite the Fish to follow the Boat, where stands a fellow with an instrument in his hand like a mole-spear ready to strike them. In the same Vessel which brought us to Naples we began our voyage to Messina in Sicily,April 29 Messina. where we ar∣rived May 2. We sailed in sight of the Aeolides or Vulcaniae insulae, two of which, viz. Stromboli and Vulcano, do still burn; and Stromboli with that rage sometimes that no man dares live upon it. As we passed by in the night-time we saw it flame. It is dif∣ficult to enter in at the mouth of the strait by the Faro of Messina, because of the current, which runs heer violently sometimes towards Calabria, some∣times toward Sicily: so that Mariners who have not often sailed this strait are forced to hire a Pilot of Messina to conduct them in; who for the most part when they see any Vessel coming go out in boats to meet it, and offer their service to guide it into the Harbour, for which they will be well paid; our Ca∣ptain being forced to give ten pieces of Eight. The Haven of Messina is very commodious and secure, compassed almost round with the City on one side and a narrow languet or neck of land on the other, resembling a large Fishpond. The City makes a goodly show as one comes to it by Sea, the houses all along the shore being built of Free-stone, tall and uniform, and having a fair broad Key before them. But the streets within are narrow, not well paved, nor the houses near so fair. So that it is a Proverb, A Messna Assai polvere, pulce & putane. At Messina
you have dust, fleas, and whores store. This City pretends to be the principal and metropolis of Sicily, [Regni caput] and will be no means give place to Palermo. The Vice-roy is obliged to reside 18 months heer, and 18 at Palermo. They stand much upon their privileges granted them by Charles the fifth Emperor; and one privilege they have, not to shew their privileges. They contend earnestly to have the staple or monopoly of Silk heer, and had lately ob∣tained a grant thereof from Spain: but the Paler∣mitans seeing how much this would redound to their prejudice, have got it reversed. It seems for∣merly all the Silk made in Sicily was vended at Mes∣sina, but by degrees Palermo hath got part of this trade to its self, and now pleads prescription for it. There is a great emulation and enmity between the Palermitans and Messanese, which involves the whole Island; some Cities taking part with one, and some with the other. The titles the Messanese give their City in their public instruments and writings are the Noble and Exemplary City of Messina. The In∣habitants are none of the most civil, but extraordi∣narily proud, and ready to expel the Vice-roy if he displeases them. The King of Spain hath 4 Castles in and about this City, and the Citizens as many in their hands.The Go∣vernment of Messina The City Gates stand open all night, so that its free for any man to enter in and go out at pleasure. Their government among themselves is by six Jurats, four of the Gentry, and two of the Citizens. They are chosen after this manner. Every year there is a certain number who do ambire ma∣gistratum, or (as they phrase it) concur to come in cap; sometimes more, sometimes fewer. The Gen∣tlemen chuse by themselves, and the Citizens by themselves. The names of all the Gentlemen of aboue 25 years of age, and likewise of all the Ar∣tisans and Tradesmen, are written in little scrolls of paper, and those rolled up and cast upon a table.
Then comes in the Kings delegate and takes up of each heap of these scrolls to the number of 36, and those are the Electors. These Electors are brought into a room where are boxes set according to the number of Competitors, and have balls given them blue and white; the blue affirmative, and the white negative; and they give to every one of the Candi∣dates their suffrages as they please. Those eight of the Noblemen and four of the Citizens which have most suffrages are elected, and come in cap. Now on the first of May these 12 have their names written in little scrolls of paper put in a cap; and a little boy puts his hand in, and takes out one by one to the num∣ber of six; and those six are the Jurats for that year. The Jurats for the Nobility though they be the grea∣ter number, yet can they do nothing without the consent of one of the Jurats for the Citizens. After all this stir these Jurats have but little power, nothing to do either in civil or criminal causes of any mo∣ment. Of Plants we found heer on the baich or languet of land between the Haven of Messina and the Fre∣tum Siculum.Plants growing about Messina. Peucedanum majus Italicum; Linaria angustifolia flore luteo, vulgapersimilis; Sideritis ver∣ticillis spinosis J. B. Faenugraeco sylvestri Tragi in qui∣busdam accedens planta J. B. Some call this plant Vicia Sesamacea Apula; I think it might be fitly titled Glaux peregrina annua; Vicia maritima multiflora alba, Messanensis nobis dicta; Spina Solstitialis flore con∣nivente, capitulis sessilibus; An Solstitialis mitior Apu∣la Col? Thlaspi clypeatum hieracifolium majus Park. Trifolium stellatum C. B. Polygonum niveum; Securi∣daca siliquis planis dentatis Ger. Trifolium capitulis globosis sine pediculis caulibus adnexis; In Anglia hanc speciem nupet invenimus. Gramen tremulum maxi∣mum; Melilotus Messanensis procumbens, folliculis fla∣vicantibus, per maturitatem, rugosis, sublongis, spicâ florum breviore, verùm seminibus grandioribus quàm
Meliloti vulgaris: Aegilops Narbonensis Lob. Grami∣nis Alopecuroidis nova species: Ornithopodium majus; Ammi vulgare; Cyminum sylvestre alterum Dioscoridis Italorum Lob. Sysirynchium majus Ger. In other places, especially on the hills above the City, Ricinus sive Palma Christi in the hedges plen∣tifully, both heer and in other places of Sicily. Tor∣dylium sive Seseli Creticum minus Park. Convolvulus Althaeae folio; Alsine folio oblongo serrato, flore caeruleo J. B. Valeriana Mexicana; Arbutus; Sonchus lana∣tus Dalechampii; Geranium cicutae folio, acu longissi∣mâ C. B. Lupinus sylvestris flore caerulèo; Lupinus flore luteo; Senecionis an Chrysanthemi species folio Bellidis; Calix Senecionis calicem exactè refert, ve∣rùm Flos circulum habet foliorum in margine ad mo∣dum Jacobaeae; Plantula tenera est, radicem habens fibrosam, folia Bellidis. Lychnis parva, folio angusto, flore rubello. Ab aliis facile distinguitur, quòd calyx floris longus sit & gracilis, ipsáque florum petala ad unguem propè fissa velut Alsines. Trifolium halicaca∣bu sive vesicarium J. B. Hedysarum clypeatum Ger. flore purpureo & albo; Trifolium bituminosum, ubi∣que; Lotus siliquâ quadratâ Ger. Gladiolus Narbo∣nensis Lob. Medica orbiculata lAevis major & minor. Medica fructu ovali echinato; Scorpioides Bupleuri fo∣lio Ger. Anagyris foetida; Crataegonon seu Euphrasia erecta flore luteo magno; Radix huic non simplex sed surculosa, annua. Caulis erectus cubitalis aut etiam altior, quadratus, nonnihil lanuginosus. Foli ple∣runque ex adverso bina, longa, angusta, rariùs den∣tata, & omnino foliis Crataegoni Euphrosynes facie similia. Spica florum in summo congesta, quadrata, lanuginosa & nonnihil etiam viscida. Flores lutei, ampli, cucullati, figurâ florum Ladani segetum. Crataeogonon erectum flore vario ex albo & purpureo; Priori simillimum est, & in eo praecipuè dissert, quòd non sit adeò procerum, quòd caules & aliquando etiam margines foliorum rubeant, quòd flores mino∣res
sint & coloris diversi; cuculli v. g. rubent, La∣bia medio albent, ad margines rubore diluuntur. Pos∣sent hae plantae ad Cristas galli reduci; nos in catalo∣go ad Melampyra retulimus. Holosteum Plantagini simile J. B. Gramen dactylon geminâ spicâ Asphode∣lus major ramofus flore albo J. B. After luteus foliis ad florem rigidis C. B. Trachelium parvum, folio Bellidis subrotundo, Radix ei alba, simplex, lignosa, annua. Caulis erectus, striatus. Folia alternatim posita, sub∣rotunda, sine pediculis caulibus adnexa. Flores Tra∣chelii. Trifolium album rectum hirsutum valdè J. B. Dorycnii species; Medica orbiculata fructu circa mar∣gines dentato, an Medica coronata Cherleri J. B. Lych∣nis ad Pseudomelanthium accedens, glabra feré. Radico nititur albâ, lignosâ, unde & planta annua esse vide∣tur. Caulis nunc simplex ab eadem radice exurgit, nunc multiplex, vel saltem ab imo statim ramosus, pro ratione soli in quo nascitur, geniculatus. Folia ad genicula ex adverso bina, viridia, longa, angusta, Graminis leucanthemi foliis nonnihil similia, raris pilis hirsuta. Flores in summitatibus caulis & ramo∣rum pediculis longis insident, quinquefolii pallidè purpurei, vice staminum in medio habentes calycem equinque foliolis in summo bifidis compositum, ut Lychnidis sylvestris flores. Perianthium seu calix floris striatus velut Pseudomelanthii. Semina nondum maturuerant. Absinthium arborescens; Paronychia sive Alsinefolia incana J. B. Androsaemum faetidum Park, i. e. Tragium; Acanths; sativus; Sedum me∣dium flore albo, apicibus staminum luteis; Ferula Lob. Thapsia latifolia Hispanica Park. latifolia P. Castello in Catal. Messanensi. Hyssopus sylvat. Halimus Lob. propè Pharon Messan abundat, item in arenosis ad maris litus, versùs meridiem, Agnus castus ibidem; Oleander, ad aquarum rivulos frequens; Sorbus vul∣garis domestica; Myrtus angustifolia; Thymelaea Ger. Hieracium calyce barbato Col. Chondrilla saxatilis vis∣cosa, caule  Col. Acetosa Ocymi folio Nea∣politana
Col. ubíque in Sicilìa; Scro∣phularia Ruta canina dicta; Linaria altera botryodes montana Col. frequens in montosis; Asteris species, an Baccharis Col? Daucus 3 Dioscoridis Col. Carduus Chrysanthemus Narbonensis Ger. Carduus chrysanthe∣mus Dod. Carlina sylvestris vulgaris Clus. Psyllium vulgare; Kali majus semine cochleato; Lotus arbor; Cotinus Chamaemespilo similis; Valeriana rubra Dod. Delphinium sylvestre; Antirrhinum luteum Ger. Co∣lutea scorpioides; Chrysocome capitulis conglobatis Ger. Alsine folio crasso P. Castel. Lanaria sive Stru∣thium Dioscoridis Imprato J. B. upon the Rocks. Bo∣trys vulgaris; Marrubium album fatuum P. Castel. Acarna flore purpuro-rubente patulo C. B. Millefolium odoratum; Sedum echinatum vel stellatum flore albo J. B. Hyacinthus comosus Ger. Anagallis caeruleo flore, in Sicilia & meridionali parte Italiae non minùs fre∣quens est quàm flore phoeniceo. Asparagus petraeus sive Corruda Ger. Smilax aspera; Antirrhinum mi∣nus slo. carneo seu pallido, rictu striato; Atractylis, in Italy and Sicily most common. Heliotropium majus; In barren Fields and among rubbish every where. Blitum rubrum minus; Buglossum angustifolium; Car∣duus galactites J. B. i. e. leucographus tenuifolius Mssanensis P. Castel. Cerinthe flo. pallidè luteo; Chon∣drilla viminea Lob. Cicer sativum; Plurimae Astra∣gali, Lathyri & Viciae species, quas tempore exclusi non satis accuratè distinximus; Cymbalaria Italica; Cucumis asininus; qui & hîc & pluribus Italiae, Me∣litae, Siciliaeque locis ruderatis frequens occurrit. Hyoscyamus albus major & minor, which sort only we found in Italy and Sicily; Juncus acutus mariti∣mus capitulis rotundis C. B. Stoebe Salamantica prima Clusiii Park. Caucalis maritima supina echinato mag∣no fructu; Ad maris litus ubique tam in Sicilia quàm in Italia, Nigella arvensis; Oxys lutea; Ger. Reseda major flore albo; Rhamnus salicis folio; i. e. Oleaster Germanicus Cordi, ut vult P. Castel. Satureia S. Ju∣liani
Ger. Scrophularia urticae folio; Linaria pusilla, procumbens latifolia, flore albo, rictu luteo. Radix huic simplex quidem, verùm multis fibris majusculis sti∣pata, sublutea, annua. Cauliculi exinde emergunt plures infirmi, rotundi, glauci. Folia Polygoni foli∣orum figurâ sed minora, glauca, nunc bina ex adver∣so nunc terna & interdum etiam quaterna simul ad eundem exortum, & proinde ramuli nunc singuli, nunc bini, nunc terni simul. Flores longis pedicellis subnixi, albi, rictu luteo, calcaribus tenuibus longis∣simis; pars illa floris quae erigitur, in medio ssa in duas velut auriculas dividitur. Florem quinque cir∣cunstant foliola viridia pro calice. Postquam flos eva∣nuit pediculus ejus deorsum incurvatur. Vasculum se∣minale rotundum apparet, Anagallidis vasculo simile; Verùm si curiosè spectetur, duos habet lobos semini∣bus repletos pusillis, ruffis. Frequens est Messanae in vineis & hortis. Quam primùm semen maturescit vasculum seminale dehiscit, adeò ut difficile sit ejus semina colligere. Hyssopoides major flore grandiore; Melissae quaedam species non descr. Tithymalus arbo∣reus; Tithymalus folio longo glauco, caule rubro, semi∣nibus verueosis; Teucrium arborescens lucidum; Iberis Cardamantica; Alaternus; Elatine flore caeruleo; Cy∣perus paniculis squamosis; which I take to have been Trasi, but we regarded not the root of it. Anthyllis leguminosa flore rubro; Erica ramulis per intervall ter∣nis; Chamaecistus annuus flore luteo, Vrtica Romana, passim; Securidaca minor Ad. Lagopus altera angu∣stifolia Lob. Coronopus foliis acutis in margine dentatis. And now that I have named so many Strangers, let no man imagine that there are no Plants common to Sicily and England; for that is so far from be∣ing true, that I believe there be but few Plants grow∣ing in England but may somewhere or other be found in Sicily. There is in this respect great diffe∣rence between Northern and Southern Countreys, the Southern having a vast number of species which
the Northern miss, whereas the Northern have but few which are wanting in the Southern. And the reason is obvious, because there are places in Sou∣thern Countreys which agree with the Northern in the temperature of the air; as for example, the sides and tops of mountains: but no places in the Northern which have like temperature of air with the Southern. Form this experiment I have made in comparing England with Sicily I am induced to believe, that there are are scarce any two Countreys in this Continent so far remote the one from the other, but they have some common plants, however it be thought there be none common to America and this Continent; which I cannot but wonder at, and wish it were more diligently enquired into. We hired a Feluca to carry us to Malta and back again.May 5. The first day being May 6. we had a brisk gale of wind,Catania. which brought us into Catania, 60 miles distant from Messina, by 3 of the clock after∣noon. Heer as in Spain we were fain to go into the Market to buy all our provision of bread, meat, and drink our selves. This is but a mean Town, only some good Cloysters there are in it. We heard much of S. Agatha their peculiar protecteress. May 7. We proceeded as far as Syracusa, 40 miles by the way we had in prospect Augusta,Augusta. famous for the goodness of the wine there made, and sent abroad to Messina, Malta, and other places. Syracusa that now is stands in a Peninsula,Syracusa and is only that part of the ancient Syracusae called It is at present but a small City, indifferently well built and thinly inhabited. It is fortified with very strong walls and bastions, especially towards the land. These works they told us were made by the Knights Hospitallers, when they were driven out of Rhodes by the Turks. They then intended to have settled themselves heer, but the Emperor Charles V. not liking their company in Sicily, gave them
Malta. About a mile and half from the present City we saw some ruines of the ancient Syracusae, among other things the rudera of an Amphitheater. We saw also what is commonly shew'd to all Strangers,The Grot called Dionysius his ear. the Grot at present called orecchio di Dionysio or Dionysius his ear, becuase it is hewn out of the Rock in fa∣shion of a mans ear. They fancy that Dionysius had a Chamber above this Cave or Grot, wherein he sate and over-heard whatever was spoken or but whis∣pered in the Grot below, where he used to put suspe∣cted persons together in prison. The Grot is cut out of the side of a high Cliff or Rock, and is it self ve∣ry high, and goes a little winding, but is not long. In our return from Malta we entred into and viewed one of the ancient  or burying places,The an∣cient  now cal∣led Cata∣cumbe. which they all Catacumbe, and of which there are several both heer and in Malta. That we entred into was of S. Antonio's Church. Heerin were many vaulted or arched walks hewn out of the Rock, and on each hand all along other vaults at right angles with them, the floor or bottom of which lateral vaults was some foot and half higher then the floor of the main walk, and all hewn into troughs or lo∣culi, wherein they deposited their dead bodies; in some of these were 20 loculi, in some more, in some less. In this coemeterium at intervals are round rooms or halls cupoloed, where several of the forementi∣oned walks meet: for the whole is a kind of maze or labyrinth, and very difficult to thread, being of a huge extent: so that I believe there were many thousands of bodies laid up heer. These cuniculi or vaulted walks are in many places earth'd and stopt up by stones and rubbish fallen from the roof. They told us that the Vault of S. Lucia reacht as far as Ca∣tania under ground, which though it be a monstrous untruth, yet we may thence gather, Multum esse quod vero supersit. The wind being contrary we were forced to makeMay 8.
use of our oars,Capo Passaro. and rowed as far as Capo Passaro, anciently called Promontorium Pachynum, 40 miles distant from Syracuse. Upon the utmost point of land stands a little Castle held by a Garrison of about 20 men. This Castle stands now in a little Island, made so by the force of the Sea, which not long since brake it off from the land. The wind being contrary and blowing a stiff gale made the Sea so rough, that we dared not venture out, but were for∣ced to rest heer 2 nights. Howbeit we entertained our time pleasantly enough in searching out and de∣scribing of plants, which this little Island afforded great variety of.Plants observed in the Island of Capo Pas∣saro. v. g. Lotus siliquâ quadratâ Ger. Lo∣tus siliquis Ornithopodii; Lotus edulis Creticus Park. fortè Lotopisum Belli, which we found also about Na∣ples, though it be not there mentioned. Lentiscus; Chamaerrhiphes sive Palma minor; Limonium folio si∣nuato Ger. Chrysanthemum Cretioum Ger. Aster lu∣teus foliis ad florem rigidis C. B. Medica magna tur∣binata J. B. Auricula muris Cameraii, Medica do∣liata spinosa; Gnaphalium roseum Park. Hedysarum clypeatum minus flore purpureo; Onobrychis fructu echi∣nato minor C. B. Fiores huic parvi purpurei, semen grande; Trifolium halicacabum sive vesicarium; As∣phodelus major ramosus flore albo; Asph. luteus, sive Hasta regia; Asp. minor Clus. Echium procumbens flore parvo caeruleo; ornithogalum spicatum Ger. Ja∣cea lutea capite spinoso; Carduns lacteus peregrinus Cam. an potiùs Silybum majus annuum Park? Car∣duns galactites J. B. Teucrinm Baeticum Ger. Trago∣pogon perenne foliis angustis incanis, floribus dilutè cae∣ruleis, an potiùs Scorzonera dicenda? Sanamunda tertia Clus. Anonis viscosa, spinis carens lutea major C. B. Convolvulus coeruleus minor, folio oblongo Ger. Ammi vulgare & foliis mag incisis Meda orbiculata major J. B. Tordylium majus; Scorpioides Bupleuri folio; Crithmum spinosum sive Pastinaca marina; Passerina Lob. Aparine semine Coriandri Saccharato; Trifo∣lium
stellatum C. B. Cerinthe flore luteo; Melissa pe∣regrina flore albo, Cortex ramulorum antiquiorum (caules enim perennant) cinereus, juniorum ruber. Caules quadrati. Folia bina ex adverso, quàm Melissae minora, pediculis satis longis subnixa. Flores cucul∣lati albi, cum aliqua tamen ruboris mixtura. Vascula seminalia qualia Moluccae laevis ferè, excepto quòd in 5 lacinias dividantur, duabus inferiùs, tribus supe∣riùs sitis. Semina itidem qualia Moluccae. Odor plan∣tae gravis. Nigella arvensis; Sysirynchinum majus; Li∣monium parvum Narbonense oleaefolium; Cichorea spi∣nosa Cretica Ponae; Daucus lucidus; Asparagus pe∣traeus sive Corruda; Tragos sive Vva marina major her∣bariorum Lob. Beta Cretica spinosa Park. Trifolium capitulis glomeratis, glomerulis spinosis; Linum sylvestre caeruleum; Caltha arvensis; Atractylis; Cruciata mi∣nima muralis Col. Coronopus folils acutis in margine dentatis, i. e. Plantagini affinis Bibinella Siciliae her∣bula, J. B. Malva flo. carneo minore; Ex radice alba simplici plures emittit caules humi procumbentes, hirsutos, superna parte rubentes. Folia ima subro∣tunda, longis pediculis annexa; quae in caulibus sunt in tres aut quinque lacinias dissecta, hirsuta & circa margines crenata. Flores parvi, quinquefolii, carnei. Semina qualia malvae vulgaris; Alaternus; Philly∣rea latifolia seu serrata secunda Clus. Glaux peregrina annua; Iva moschata Monspeliensium; Asparagus syl∣vest. spinosus Clus. Sedum minus luteum ramulis re∣flexis; Geranium procumbens Althaeoe folio. We put to Sea again,May 10. but the wind still continu∣ing contrary, and the Sea very rough, when we were gotten about half over the channel, we were forced to return back again to the primo terreno of Sicily, viz. the Castle of Puzallu. The greatness of the waves not permitting us to come ashore there, we rowed 6 miles further South, and put in at a little Cove called the Harbour of Punto Cerciolo.Punto Cerciolo. The wea∣ther continuing foul we were deteined heer 3 days,
having no other shelter then a pitiful small hut o two, which the two Sentinels (who stand constant∣ly at this point to watch and give notice to the Countrey of the coming of Corsairs) had set up for themselves to creep into in stormy weather. We should have been glad of fresh straw to lie in, having nothing in our kennel but old short straw, so full of fleas that we were not able to sleep in it. Our diet was the blood and flesh of Sea-tortoises, that our Sea-men took by the way, and bread we brought along with us. Wine we got at house about half a mile off our lodging, but when our bread failed we were fain to send 8 miles for more: Fish or flesh we could get none. This stop gave us leisure enough to search the shores and neighbouring Countrey for plants;Plants found a∣bout Pun∣to Cercol of which we found, Panax Herculeum ma∣jus Ger. Cinara sylvestris Ger. Ruta sylvestris; Limo∣nium elegans Raumolfii; Beta Cretica spinosa Park. Medica orbiculata fructu minore; Med. orbiculata ele∣gans, fructu circum oras rugoso; Hypericum foliis parvis crispis seu sinuatis; Perfoliata angustifolia montana Col. Siliqua arbor seu Panis S. Joannis; Medica ma∣rina; Anonis lutea parva procumbens. In arenosis nascitur radice albâ, longâ, simplici, fibris nunc pau∣cioribus nunc pluribus & majoribus donatâ Folia ei parva, tripartitò divisa, pediculis nullis, verùm duae inferiores partes cauli adjacent ut in Lotis fit, ac proinde haec planta eodem modo trifolia est quo Loti quinquefoliae. Quinetiam folia saturè viridia sunt, in margine eleganter dentata, alternatim posita. Flores lutei Anonidis vulgaris. Siliquae breves, tumi∣dae, subrotundae, duobus intus ordinibus seminum figurâ lienis praeditorum. In arenosis maris litoribus circa Siciliam frequens, v. g. propè Cataniam, circa Promontorium Pachynum & hoc in loco. Cistus mas 4 folio oblongo, albido J. B. Lotus flore luteo, cor∣niculis articulatis. Radix ei simplex alba, in nonnul∣lis
tamen plantis ima parte in fibras spargitur. Cau∣liculi plures in terram procumbentes. Folia glauca, pentaphylla si auriculas ad caulem hinc indè apposi∣tas adnumeres. Flores parvi, lutei, Trifolii cornicu∣lati sed minores, ad nodos nunc singuli nunc bini, & interdum etiam terni. Siliquae graciles, longae, con∣tortae in spiram seu corniculatae, articulatae, semina oblonga in singulis internodiis continentes. Caucalis maritima J. B. Smyrnium Creticum; Gladiolus Nar∣bonensis; Polium montanum album; Saxifragia Ve∣netorum Ad. Psyllium vulgare; Acanthium Illyricum; Telephium scorpioides Anguillarae: Tragos sive uva marina major J. B. Opuntia marina, in litus reje∣cta, and many others before observed in other places. The wind ceasing we put to Sea again,May 13. and had a very good passage over to Malta.The man∣ner of ta∣king Tor∣toises. By the way we saw our Seamen take several Tortoises on this man∣ner. When they espy a Tortoise floting on the top of the water (as they can easily do at a good di∣stance) with as little noise as they can possibly they bring their boat up close to him; then they either catch him with their hands and draw him up into the boat, or if they cannot get near enough to do so, one leaps out of the boat into the Sea, and turns the Tortoise on his back, and then with ease drives him before him up to the boat; the Tortoise being not able to turn himself or swim away on his back. They say (and it is not unlikely) that the Tortoise while he flotes thus upon the water sleeps; which is the reason why they are so still and make so little noise in bringing their boat up to him.Bernacle∣shells growing upon the back of a Tortoise. One of these Tortoises which they caught had two great bunches of those they call Bernacle-shells sticking or growing to his back, and some of them the largest and fair∣est of that kind which we have seen. As for that opinion of a bird breeding in them (which some
have affirmed with much confidence, (and of which Michael Meyerus hath written a whole Book) it is without all doubt false and frivolous. The Bernacles which are said to be bred in them being hatcht of eggs of their own laying like other birds; the Hol∣landers in their third Voyage to discover the North∣east passage to Cathaia and China, in 80 degrees, 11 minutes of Northern latitude, having found two Islands, in one of which they observed a great num∣ber of these Geese sitting on their eggs, &c. as Dr. Johnson relates out of Pontanus. As for these shells, they are a kind of Balanus marinus, as Fabius Co∣lumna proves, never coming to be other then what they are, but only growing in bigness as other shells do. All the ground of this fancy (as I conceive) is because this fish hath a bunch of cirri, some∣what resembling a tuft of Feathers, or the tail a Bird, which it sometimes puts out into the water, and draws back again. We were much surprised to find of this shell-fish in these Seas so southernly and far from the scene of the Bernacle∣fable. I shall now set down what plants we found about Catania and Syracusa. About Catania,Plants observed about Catania and Sy∣racuse. Scammonea Monspeliacoe affinis Park. Plumbago Plinii; Aganus castus; which two we observed also in many other places. Cruciata marina, Anonis marina procumbens flore luteo, jam descripta; Sedum minimum non acre totum rubrum, flore hexaphyllo purpureo. Upon Mount Aetua we found Tragacantha C. B. To∣wards the top of the Mountain we observed Bar∣berry-trees growing plentifully, which is a rare shrub in hot Countreys, and which we found no where else in Italy or Sicily. At Messina they shewed us for a rare plant the common Goose-berry bush. About Syracusa, Thymum Creticum Ger. Origanum flore albo, capitulis squammatis rotundis; Verbas∣cum
4 Matthioli. The same kind of Melissa we found about Messina, and have already described; Teucrium Baeticum; Jacea lutea capitulis spinosis; Lagopus quaedam procumbens spicâ longiore; Anonis purpurea minima supina non spinosa. Many others we might doubtless have found had it been safe for us to have searched the Rocks near this City.
OF MALTA. THE Island of Malta is 20 miles long, 12 miles broad, and 60 miles in circuit; distant from the primo terreno or nearest part of Sicily 60 miles; from the Cape of Calipia anciently called Promontorium Mercurii, the nearest point of the Con∣tinent of Africa, 200 miles, (as divers of the most skilful and experienced Pilots did affirm to Abela for an undoubted truth) from the Cape of Spartivento in Italy but 190. So that upon account of vicinity it is rather to be attributed to Europe than Africa; especially if we allow Sicily to have been of old time united to and so part of the Con∣tinent. The reason why others make it a member of Africa is because the present Inhabitants of the Countrey speak a kind of Moresco or Arabic. The old City, called Città notabile, situate about the middle of the Island, hath 35 degrees, 15 mi∣nutes of Northern latitude, and the longest day there is of 14 hours, 52 minutes. I am not ignorant that Heylin and others, who reckon this among the Isles of Africa, place it nearer the Coast of Barbary, assign it less latitude, and al∣low the longest day no more then 14 hours; but I do in these and other particulars follow the more accurate observations of Johannes Franciscus Abela, a learned man and native of this Island, in his Mal∣ta illustrata, written in Italian and published in Mal∣ta, Anno 1646. in folio. The whole Island from the shallowness of its soil, there being in few places above two foot depth of
of earth before you come to firm stone; and from the lowness of its situation, not much elevated above the level of the water and having no considerable hill in it, seems to have been in the most ancient times nothing else but a great Rock, wholly over∣whelmed and covered with the Sea; especially if we consider the multitude of Sea shells of all sorts, Sharks teeth, vertebres of Thornbacks and other fish bones petrified found all over the Island even in the highest parts of it, and most remote from the shore. For that these were formed by some plastick power in the stone-quarries, being nothing else but the effects or productions of nature sporting her self in imitation of the parts and shells of these ani∣mals, I can hardly be induced to believe; nature (which indeed is nothing else but the ordinary power of God) not being so wanton and toyish as to form such elegant figures without further end of design than her own pastime and diversion. But a very like∣ly thing it is, that the Sea being shallow above this Rock for some ages before it came to be uncovered, there should great beds of Shell-fish harbour and breed in so convenient a place, and the water leaving them their shells remain and petrifie. I confess its hard to imagine, how the carcasses of so many Sharks should come to be lodged heer as by the mul∣titude of teeth that have been for so many years past, and are still daily digg'd up, we must needs grant; unless perchance they remain of the heads of such Sharks as were caught and eaten by the Fisher-men, who it is likely after the discovery of this Rock fre∣quented heer and made it a station for fishing before it came to be inhabited. To this difficulty Mr. Steno returns answer in these particulars, 1. That such Sharks or Sea dogs have each of them 60 teeth and more, and that all the time they live they breed new teeth. 2. That the Sea agitated by the winds is wont of protrude thosebo∣bodies
it meets with towards some one place, and there heap them together. 3. That Sharks swim in great troops or sholes, and consequently that the teeth of many of them may have been left in one place. 4. That in the Malta earth besides these Sharks teeth are found also sundry Cochle-shells; so that if the number of teeth should encline a man to ascribe their production to the earth, on the other hand, the make of the same teeth, and the abun∣dance of them in every animal, and the earth like the bottom of the Sea, and other marine bodies found in the same place do favour the contrary opi∣nion. The soil,The na∣ture of the Soil. notwithstanding the rockiness and shal∣lowness of it, hath been by the Ancients celebrated for fertility; Fertilis est Melite sterili vicina Cosyroe Insula. Ovid. Fast. But undeservedly if we understand it of Corn; for there is not much Wheat sown heer, and that we saw upon the grounds was but thin and slight. And though Barley be their chief crop, and of which the Countrey people make their bread; yet have they not near enough of that to serve the ordinary uses of the Inhabitants; so that they are forc'd to fetch most of their Bread-corn out of Sicily The main commodities which the Island yields,The Commo∣dities of Malia. wherewith the Inhabitants drive a good trade and inrich themselves, are 1. Cumin-seed, which they call Cumino agro or sharp Cumin; of which are gathered about 3000 Cantares yearly; one Cantare being equal to 116 pound weight English. 2. An∣nise-seed, which they call Sweet-cumin, of which are gathered and transmitted into Foreign parts 1000 Cantares yearly. These seeds are sold at 7, 8, or 9 crowns the Cantare: and we were told that the
year before our being there [Ann. 1663.] were ven∣ded 7000 Cantares of both sorts. 3. Cotton-wool, called in Latine Xylon or Gossipium, of which they send abroad yearly 14000 Cantares in the husk. They have of late begun to plant Indigo, which my Author saith agrees with the soil, and likes and thrives there very well. He also mentions a sort of excrescence or moss or scurf, which the Rocks about S. Maria el Aalia and other places on the North side of the Island naturally put forth, called by the Coun∣trey people Vercella, which they scrape off with an iron instrument, and having washed it with a cer∣tain liquor, and mingled it with other Ingredients [He tells us not what that liquor or those ingredients are] they expose it to the Sun, and use it to dye wool of a carnation colour. This kind of moss, cal∣led in Wales Kenkerig, and in England Cork or Ar∣cel, is gathered and used for the same purpose in Wales and the North of England. Malta hath been famous of old for a breed of lit∣tle Dogs called Catuli Melitaei, the race whereof is quite extinct: and now their Cats are as much esteemed. The Roses of Malta contend for sweet∣ness with those of Paestum; and the Honey with that of Hybla or Hymettus: So that some suppose this Island had its name Melita from  signifying honey. The air is clear and healthful, and the people long lived. Not much rain falls heer, yet sufficient to sup∣ply water to feed their springs; of which there are several in the high grounds, or small hills about the middle of the Island.The ori∣ginal of Springs. That these Springs proceed from rain-water only my Author doth very well prove, because they are found only at the foot of little hills, consisting of a certain porous stone which the Maltese call Giorgiolena, or a chalky earth which easily imbibes the rain. And to speak in ge∣neral, that all springs and running waters owe their
rise and continuance to rain, seems to me more than probable; 1. Because I never yet saw any springing or running waters breaking out, either on the top of a hill or so near the top, but that there was earth enough above them to feed such Springs, considering the con∣dition of high mountains, which are almost con∣stantly moistned with clouds, and on which the Sun∣beams have but little force: and yet I have made it part of my business in viewing the highest hills in England and Wales to examine this particular. Nor have I yet ever observed such springing and running waters in any plain, unless there were hills so near, that one might reasonably conclude they were fed by them. 2. Many springs quite fail in dry Summers, and generally all abate considerably of their waters. I am not ignorant that some make a distinction be∣tween failing springs and enduring springs, and would have the former to proceed from rain, and the latter from the Sea, but I see no sufficient foundati∣on for such a distinction, and do think that both the one and the other are to be attributed to rain; the failing and enduring being to be referred either to the different quantity and thickness of earth that feeds them; or to the different quality, the one more quickly the other more slowly transmitting the wa∣ter, or some such like accident. 3. In clay grounds, into which the water sinks with difficulty, one shall seldom find any springs, but in sandy, gravelly, rocky, stony or other grounds into which the rain can easily make its way; one seldom fails of them. 4. They who would have fountains to arise from and to be fed by the Sea have not as yet given a satisfactory account of the ascent of water to the tops of mountains and its efflux there. For though water will creep up a filtre above its level, yet I question whether to so great an excess above its aequilibrium with the air, whereas in pumps we see it will not rise above two or three and thirty foot; or if it should, whether it
would there run out at the top of the filtre, we not having as yet heard of any experiment that will countenance such a thing. For the ascent and efflux of sap in trees I suspect may be owing to a higher principle then purely mechanical. As for the Sabu∣lum Quellem or Arena bulliens of Helmont, I look upon it as an extravagant conceit of his; and yet some ground there is to believe, that there is a kind of earth lying up and down in veins, which doth like a filtre retain the water and carry or derive it along as it lies from place to place, till it brings it to the supersicies of the earth, where it runs out. In other places there are subterraneous channels like the veins in animals, whereinto the water soaking into the earth is gathered, and wherein it runs as above ground out of smaller rivulets into greater streams: and where one of these veins opens in the superficies of the earth there is a spring greater or lesser accord∣ing to the magnitude of the vein. Nor need we won∣der that springs should endure the length of a dry Summer, for in many sorts of earth the water makes its way but slowly; since we see that in those troughs or leches, wherein Landresses put ashes, and there∣upon water to make a lixivium, the water will be of∣ten many hours before it gets all through the ash, and the Lech ceases to drop; and in many Chymical pre∣parations which are filtred, its long before the li∣quor can free it self and wholly drain away from the earthy and feculent part. Some attribute the original of fountains to wa∣tery vapours elevated by subterraneous fires, or at least by that generally diffused heat which Miners find in the earth when they come to 50 or 60 fa∣thoms under ground; and condensed by the tops and sides of the mountains as by an Alembick head, and so distilling down and breaking out where they find issue. And in reason one would think, that generally the deeper one digs in the earth the colder one should
find it, sith the Urinators affirm that the deeper they dive in the Sea the colder still they find the wa∣ter. And yet were there such subterraneous heats, they are not so great as that it is likely they should elevate vapours so high, through so thick a coat of earth, which it must be an intense heat indeed will carry them through, which heat none say is found near the superficies of the earth. Mr. Hook's account, viz. that salt water being hea∣vier than fresh, by reason of its preponderancy it may drive up the fresh as high above the surface of the Sea as are the tops of mountains before it comes to an aequilibrium with it, is very ingenious, and would be most likely, were there continued close channels from the bottom of the Sea to the tops of mountains, not admitting the air, which I believe will not be found in many places.Ebbing and flow∣ing Well What is said about ebbing and flowing wells in confirmation of it, adds no strength; for none of those ebbing and flowing wells that I have yet seen do at all observe the motion of the Sea, but reciprocate two or three times or oftner every hour, excepting one on the Coast of South-Wales in a sandy ground by the Sea-side not ¼ of a mile from the water, which observes the Tides; but it is no running water, nor doth it I believe arise above the level of the Sea. I do therefore shrewdly suspect for fabulous whatever hath been written of Wells remote from the Sea, which in their ebbing and flowing ob∣serve its motions. But for a reason of the ebbing and flowing of these Wells I must confess I am hitherto at a great loss. Whereas some say that rain sinks not above a foot or two deep into the earth, if they un∣derstand it of all earths it is manifestly false, for that we see in Coal delfs, and other mines in wet weather the Miners are many times drown'd out (as they phrase it) though no water run down into the mouths of their pits and shafts; and in sandy and heathy grounds in the greatest rains little water runs
off the land, as on Newmarket-heath, Gogmagoghills, Salisbury-plain, &c. and therefore it must needs sink in: and out of the mouth of Pool-hole near Buxton in the Peak of Derby and other Caves in the sides of mountains in rainy seasons streams of water many times run out, where in dry weather and Summer time there are none. Neither is this opinion we defend any more re∣pugnant to the Scripture then the other. For where∣as it is said, Eccles. 1. 7. All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come thither they return again; we grant it to be most true; nay we think such a circulation ab∣solutely necessary to the being of springs, only we assert it to be performed not under ground but above: that is, the clouds take up water out of the Sea, and pour it down again upon the earth; and from part thereof falling upon and soaking into the higher grounds arise the springs. But to return to Malta,The Ha∣ven. the Haven is very commo∣dious and secure, divided into two by a little pro∣montory or neck of land some 1500 canes long, and 380 broad, upon which the new City is built. Of these two that on the West side the City is called sim∣ply and per Antonomasian Marsa, that is the Haven, and is in length 1800 canes or poles, of ten palms the cane Roman measure, and is sub-divided into other crecks or sinus's. That on the East-side called Marsa moscetto is as large as the other; in a little Island within which is the Lazaretto; near it Ships that come from infected places keep their Quarentain. The new City called Valetta is divided into 20 streets,The new City cal∣led Va∣letta. 8 in length and 12 in breadth, all streight. Though they be not paved, yet they need it not, the Town being built upon a solid rock. They want no uniformity but being level, which the place being uneven, uphill and down-hill, will not admit. The houses are all of stone, flat-rooft and covered with
plaister, which is sufficient heer, there falling but lit∣tle rain; though they be not tall yet are they neat and pleasant. Upon the roofs of their houses in Summer time the people set their beds, as at Aleppo, and sleep in the open air. The number of the Inha∣bitants of all ages, according to a survey taken in the year 1632, was 10744, the number of houses 1891, which sum is I believe since that time much encrea∣sed. Over the gate of this City leading to the land, called Porta reale, you have this Inscription, giving an account of the first founding and building of it. Fr. Jo. de Valetta sacrae Domûs Hospitalis Hierosol. M. Magister, periculorum annosuperiore à suis mi∣litibus populóque Melitoeo in obsidione Turcica perpessorum memor, de condenda nova urbe, eâque moeniis, arcibus & propugnaculis ad sustinendam vim omnem propulsandósque inimici Turcae impe∣tus aut saltem reprimendos munienda, inito cum Proceribus consilio, Die Jovis 28 Martii 1566; Deum omnipotentem Deiparmque virginem & nu∣men tutelare D. Joannem Baptistam Divósque caeteros multa precatus, ut faustum felixque Reli∣gioni Christianae fieret, ac Ordini suo quod incepta∣bat bene cederet, prima urbis fundamenta in mon∣te ab incolis Sceberras vocato jecit, eámque de suo nomine Valettam, (dato pro insignibus in Parma miniata aureo leone) appellari voluit. Fr. Antonius de Paula M. Mag. invictiss. Conditoris tantaeque rei monimentum P. C. Anno ab Vrbe Fundata 68. It is fortified with impregnable Walls and Bul∣warks, especially toward the land, where one would think there are too many, and yet they are still ad∣ding more. Within the outmost wall or between the two walls and outworks they have enclosed a great space of void ground, whether with design to en∣large
the City, filling that space with houses, or to receive the Country-people in case the enemy should land upon the Island, I know not. All the walls and bulwarks are mined or vaulted underneath, that so in case the besiegers should get upon them they might be blown up and rendred useless. The charge of all these Walls, Castles, and Fortifications would be in∣tolerable had they not stone at hand and slaves to work. This City is well served with all provisions, there being every morning a Market plentifully fur∣nished with bread, flesh, fish, poultry, fruits, herbs, &c. of the best in their several kinds and to be bought at easie rates. The most considerable buildings in this City are 1.St, John Baptists Church. The Church of St. John Baptist patron of the Or∣der, wherein are many Chappels and Altar-pieces richly gilded and adorned. Heer lie buried the Grand Masters that have been since the Order was transla∣ted hither in a vault under ground; several of them having in the Church Monuments with inscriptions. This Church is not yet quite finished. The Castle of S. Elmo,The Ca∣stle of St. Elmo. which stood heer before this City was built, on the utmost point of the Pro∣montory: A strong place but of no great capacity. Heer we observed the like winding ascent to the top without any steps or stairs, as in the tower of S. Mark at Venice. Upon the top of this Castle is constant watch and ward kept. When they descry any Vessel coming toward the Island be it great or small they set up a Flag suitable to the bigness of the Vessel; if two Vessels two, if three three, and so on accord∣ing to their number; signifying also by the place where they set these Flags from what quarter, East, West, North or South such Vessel or Vessels come: So that the City is presently advised what Vessels and how many are near the Port. In this Castle are im∣prisoned such Knights as have committed any mis∣demeanour, and held in restraint longer or less time,
or further proceeded against according to the merit of their fault. Before this Castle are the Granaries, where the provisions of Corn for the City are kept.The Gra∣naries and Stores. These are nothing but Caves hewn out of the rock in the form of a Cupola, or ordinary Bee-hive, having each a narrow mouth above. They are constantly stored with Corn enough beforehand to serve the whole City for a year. They have also magazines or stores of wine, oil and all other necessaries. The Alberghi or Halls of the eight several Nati∣ons (Lingue they call them) of the Order.The Al∣berghs or Halls. The Na∣tions are French, Italian, German, English, Provençal, Auergnois, Castilian and Aragonian. These Albergs are most of them fair buildings like Colleges; and in each of them is a public hall, wherein the Knights of each Nation dine and sup as many as please; the others have their parts or demensum sent to their lodgings, or dispose otherwise of it as they see good. The Seignior of each Nation is superiour of the Al∣berg, Grand Prior of his Nation, of the Great Cross, (Gran Croce they term it) and one of the Privy Council to the Great Master. These are distinguish∣ed from the rest by a great white Cross upon their breasts, made of silk sown into their garments. Heer is an Alberg for the English Nation, or rather a piece of ground enclosed, with the foundation of an Al∣berg, the walls being scarcely reared up. This ground we were told some of the Citizens would have bought and built upon, but the Grand Master and Council refused to sell it, not despairing it seems that one day our Nation may be reduced again to the obedience of the Romish Church. The Armory [Salad Armi] within the Palace of the Great Master,The Ar∣mory. consisting of two rooms; the one (which they call the Hall) the fairest and largest room employed for such an use that we have any where seen; the other much lesser. In both together are
kept arms for 30000 men, so entire, clean, bright and fit for use, that we were much taken with the sight of them. Heer are some of those little Drakes that may be charged behind, a leather gun, and other cu∣riosities, the like whereto we have seen in several Armories. The Hospital [Infermaria] a fair building,The Hos∣pital No∣sodochium. which they are now enlarging. The sick persons are served by the Knights, viz. such a number of Knights are appointed to carry them their meat daily with cap in hand; which thing we saw them do in this man∣ner. The meat was all brought into the middle of a great room where many of the sick lay. Then one of the Knights (the Steward I suppose he was) read the names of the sick one by one out of the Physicians bill, wherein was prescribed each sick persons diet. As he read a name the Cook took his part whose name was read, and dishing it up delivered it to one of the Knights, who carried it to his bed-side, where stood a stool covered with a napkin having bread and salt upon it. This duty their very name inti∣mates to belong to them; viz. Knights, i. e. Servants of the Hospital, and therefore we may be excused if we have been more particular and circumstantial in describing the manner of it. If any of the Order falls sick, he is not to stay in a private house but must presently repair hither, where he is most carefully tended, one or two Knights being appointed to be always by him. The Palace of the Great Master,The Gr. Masters Palace. where he hath several Apartments for Winter and Summer. There is also a stable of good horses, in which besides coach-horses and ordinary saddle-horses, are kept 40 or 50 great horses. A thing worth the nothing in this Island, where there is so great scarcity of horses, that Knights and persons of quality ride upon no better then asses.
The Slaves prison,The slaves prison. a fair square building, where all the Slaves in the City lodge every night so long as the Gallies are abroad in Corso. At the ringing of the Ave-Mary bell, which is just at Sun-set, they are to repair thither. When the Gallies are at home those that belong to private persons are permitted to lodge in their Masters houses. The number of Slaves now in Town was about 2000 belonging to the Or∣der, and 300 to private persons, besides those that were abroad in the Gallies. Besides this new City there are 3 considerable Towns distant from it only by the breadth of the haven.The Isola. 1. The Isola (as they commonly call it) or Town of Senglea, with the Fort of S. Michael, sea∣ted in a Peninsula made by 2 creeks running out of the principal haven. It contains 994 houses and 4050 souls. For the stout resistance it made to the Turks in 1565 it obtained the nameThe in∣vincible City. Città in∣vitta. 2. The Borgo (as they call it) i. e.The Borgho. Burgo del Castello à mare, built likewise on a little Lingua or neck of land between two creeks of the same haven, on the utmost cape whereof stands the Castle of St. Angelo divided for greater strength from the Town by a ditch of water cut cross the lingua. This Burgh contains 782 houses and 3063 souls. For its valour and fidelity in holding out so resolutely against the Ottoman Army besieging it, Anno 1565, it is deser∣vedly honoured with the title ofThe victori∣ous City. Città vittoriosa. Between these two Burghs is a secure Harbour where the Gallies and most of the other Vessels of the Ci∣ty lie; which in time of danger is shut up with a great iron chain. 3. Birmula, rather a suburb of Senglea then a distinct Town: it contains 642 fires and 2778 souls. We rode out to see some part of the Countrey;May 25. The old City. passing two great Villages (Casales they name them) we came to the old City called anciently Melita after the name of the Island, now Città notabile, a small
place at present but wel fortified, containing no more then 565 houses and 2620 souls. It hath been formerly much greater, and incomparably more po∣pulous. The new City, as being more conveniently situate, daily draining away and withdrawing its in∣habitants. Heer they shew'd us the Pillar of S. Paul (as they call it) where when he stood preaching (as they fondly believe or at least would perswade us) his voice was heard distinctly all over the Island. 2. The Grt of St. Paul. Heer out of a small cave is taken that white earth,Terra di S. Paolo, or Sigil∣lata Mli∣tensis. called Terra di S. Paolo and by some terra sigillata Melitensis, which they seal and sell to strangers, attributing thereto great vertues against all poison and infection. This cavern though there be continually great quantities of earth taken out of it, according to their conceited tradition, re∣tains still the same dimensions, becoming no grea∣ter then it was at first. That S. Paul suffered ship∣wrack on the coast of this island, and wintered heer, and not on that other Melita in the Adriatic Sea on the coast of Dalmatia, now called Meleda, I think it sufficiently proved and made clear by Cluverius, Abela and others: but that upon occasion of a Viper fast∣ning on his arm he changed all the Serpents of the Island into stones, and endued the earth with an Alexipharmical quality to resist and expel poison, is a superstitious and ungrounded fancy. From the old City we rode on to the Great Ma∣sters Boschetto,The Gr. Masters Boschetto. where he hath a pretty little Palace in form of a Castle, from the top whereof we had a good prospect of the Island. Heer are a great num∣ber of Gardens and Orchards well furnished with all sorts of fruits and flowers; good water-works and a grove of trees: indeed this Palace wants no∣thing for conveniency or delight. The Palace is si∣tuate upon a little hill, and the gardens lie under it in a hollow or bottom, almost compassed about with rocks.
But to speak of the Island in general,The seve∣ral Inha∣bitants and Con∣quests of Malta. Malta hath been inhabited by several Nations and often changed masters. The most ancient Inhabitants are by Cluve∣rius taken to have been the Phaeaces mentioned by Homer, who were expelled by the Phaenicians. The Phaenicians were most of them driven out by the Grecians. After this is changed Masters rather than Inhabitants, being first subdued and held by the Car∣thaginians; then for a long time by the Romans: af∣ter that the Goths came hither, who were driven out by the Eastern Emperours. Next the Saracens possest themselves of it. The Normans expelled them and got the dominion. Then the Germans or Suevi be∣came Lords of it; then the French; then the Ara∣gonians, and Spaniards; and now last of all the or∣der of the Knights Hospitallers. The History of all which changes if any man desire to be fully and par∣ticularly acquainted with, let him consult Abela. In all these changes it followed for the most part the for∣tune of Sicily, as having little strength to resist any foreign power invading. It is now so well fortified and manned that it would prove a very difficult mat∣ter for the greatest Prince or Potentate in the world to take it by force; having when it was in far worse condition then now it is resisted and baffled the Arms of one of the greatest Emperours the Turks ever had. It is very populous,The number of the villages and peo∣ple. containing betwee 30 and 40 great Casales or Villages, some of them of above 500 houses, more like to great Towns than Villages, and 26 Parish Churches, beside those of Gozo. The number of fighting men was said to be about a 5000, but I believe there are scarce so many, for according to a survey taken in the year 1632 the whole number of souls upon the Island besides the Knights was but 50112; of which we cannot reckon much above one fifth part to be fighting men. And though since that time the number of Inhabitants be much encrea∣sed, yet I think scarce doubled.
The language of the Natives is a corrupt Arabic or Moresco,The lan∣guage. introduced by the Saracens, the ancient language before their coming in probably having been Greek, with a mixture of Punick: whence I think one may reasonably conjecture that the Sara∣cens did either destroy or drive out the former Inha∣bitants. Howbeit the people can generally speak Ita∣lian, there being no other language but that and La∣tine used in any of the Courts of Malta. The Great Master of the Order is now Prince and supreme Governour of the whole Island,The Gr. Master Prince of the Island. which with Gozo and the adjacent islets, after the loss of Rhodes was granted to this Order by the Emperour Charles V. in the year 1530. The Government is managed with that prudence and justice, that the Island is now in a very flourishing condition, the Inhabitants enjoying a great deal of freedom and se∣curity; being also in their carriage and conversation among themselves and to Strangers since the coming in of the Order very civil and courteous, however formerly they have been branded for the contrary: so that few subjects live more happily then they do. The Great Master when he goeth abroad it atten∣ded by many of the Knights, and 2 or 3 Pages, of which he keeps (as we were told) about 24. The Knights of the Order are always uncovered in the presence of the Great Master, excepting those 16 which are of the Gran Croce: they take place, of what birth or quality soever they are, according to their seniority from the time of their admission; so that there is never any difficulty or question about precedency. All the Knights are of noble or gentile extraction, none being capable of admission but such as can prove their Gentility for three or four de∣scents. The Great Master wears a black short Gown with hanging sleeves, the rest of the Knights are ha∣bited as they please at home, but when they go in Curso (as they call it) upon the Gallies they wear
the proper habit belonging to their Order. The number of Knights was said to be between 2000 and 3000, of which for the most part reside in the City the major part, except when the Gallies are abroad. The name of the Great Master at our being there was Nicolaus Cottoner of Majorca, and I suppose he is still living, not having since heard of his death. The names of the Great Masters that have been since the Order removed to Malta are as follows. 43. Frater Philippus de Villiers Listeadam, a French man, who brought the Religion into Malta, Anno 1530, being the 43 Great Master from the first insti∣tution of the Order. He died 21 August 1534. 44. Fr. Petrinus del Ponte, an Italian, the first that was chosen Great Master in Malta 26 Aug. 1534. He died 17 Novemb. 1535. 45. Fr. Desiderius di Tolono Santaialla, of Daul∣phiny, chosen in his absence 22 Novemb. 1535. He died 26 Sept. 1536, being on his way coming to∣wards Malta, at Montpellier. 46. Fr. Joannes D'omedes, an Aragonian, elected 20 Octob. 1536, died 6 Sept. 1553. 47. Fr. Claudius della Sengle, a Frenchman, chosen while he was Embassadour for the Order at Rome, 11 Sept 1553. He died 18 Aug. 1557. 48. Fr. Joannes Di Valetta, a Gascoigner, elected 21 Aug. 1557. died 21 Aug. 1568. In his time Malta was invaded, and the City besieged by the Turks, who were notably repulsed. 49. Fr. Petrus de Monte, an Italian, elected 23 Aug. 1568. died. 27 Jan. 1572. 50. Fr. Joannes L'evesque de la Cassiere, an Au∣vergnian, elected 30 Jan. 1572. died in Rome 21 Decemb 1581. 51. Fr. Hugo Loubenx Verdalle, a Gascoigner, af∣terwards made Cardinal, elected 12 Jan. 1581. died 4 May 1595.
52. Fr. Martinus Garzes, an Aragonian, elected 8 May 1595, died 7 Feb. 1601. 53. Fr. Aloysius de Wignacourt, a Frenchman, ele∣cted 10 Febr. 1601. died 14 Sept. 1622. 54. Fr. Lewis Mendez de Vasconcelos, a Portuguese, chosen 17 Sept. 1622. died 7 March 1623. 55. Fr. Antonius de Paula, a Gascoigner, chosen 10 March 1623. died 9 June 1636. 56. Fr. Joannes Paulus Lasoaris de Castellar of Nizza, elected 11 June 1636. He was living in the year 1647, when Malta illustrata was published; and to him succeeded 57. Fr. Martinus de Redin, a Spaniard, in the year 1657. 58. Fr. Gassant de Clermont of Daulphiny, in the year 1659. and died in the same year. 59. Raphael Cotoner of Majorca, who died in the year 1663. he was Brother to the present Grand Master. About 5 miles distant from Malta Westward lies the Island Gozo,Gozo. called by the ancients Gaulos, 12 miles long; 6½ broad, and about 30 in circuit. The soil like that of Sicily very deep and fruitful of Wheat and other grain. This Island is mountain∣ous, yet all cultivated, furnished with store of fresh sorings. It maintains upon it 3000 persons, the num∣ber of houses being about 500. It was much more populous before the Turkish Armata most inhumanely wasted it in the year 1565, carrying away prisoners 6000 persons. In the streight betwixt Malta and Gozo lies a little Island called Comina, anciently, according to Cluve∣rius, Hephaestia, about 5 miles in compass and well cultivated; for the defence whereof the Gr. Master Wignacourt caused a Fort to be built opposite to that on the other side the streight in Gozo, to secure the streight and hinder any vessels passing between the Islands without leave.
That there is great plenty of shells and fish-bones petrified found in Malta, I have already intimated. I shall now therefore only name those which are not at all or but rarely found with us in England. 1. Glossopetrae,The pe∣trified shells in Malta, &c. which are nothing else but Sharks teeth, of several shapes and sizes. These the Maltese call Serpents Tongues. 2. The Vertebres of Thorn∣backs and other cartilagineous fishes. 3. Cats heads (as they call them from their likeness to a little skull.) 4. Serpents eyes of several figures and colours. The most of them red and like to those they call Toad∣stones; the exteriour superficies being a segment of a sphaerical, and shining as if it were polished, so that they are commonly set in rings. I have seen great lumps or masses of these cemented together. That the Toadstone is nothing else but the jaw-tooth of a fish called Lupus marinus by Schonfeldius,What the Toad∣stone so called is. Dr. Merret in his Pinax hath first published to the world; and I doubt not but these have the same or like ori∣ginal. 5. Serpents teeth, which are small, oblong, striate stones of a polite superficies, but no certain fi∣gure. Whither to refer these as yet I know not, as neither 6. Those they call Serpents eggs, which are somewhat like the former but not striate with lines. 7. Bastons of S. Paul [Baculi S. Pauli] having the resemblance of small snagged sticks. 8. Petrified Lentils, because for colour, figure and magnitude somewhat like to that pulse. Besides, I found among the stones I bought there some exactly figured like the fore teeth of a man, and doubtless many other sorts by diligent search might be found, which have not as yet been named or taken notice of. As for Plants I found heer very few sorts but what I had before observed in Italy and Sicily, viz. Cucumis asininus; Hypericum tomentosum; Consolida regalis peregrina parvo flore J. B. Carduus lactens pe∣regrinus Cam. There are but few trees growing up∣on the Island, the greatest want they have being of
fewel, to supply which defect they have of late be∣gun to make use of Sea-wrack to burn in their ovens, prepared after a certain manner invented by a pesant of Malta, for which he is highly commended by Abela as a great benefactor to his Countrey. Heer I first noted the custom of slitting up the notrils of Asses; because they being naturally streight or small, suffice not to admit air enough to serve them when they travel or labour hard in these hot Countreys. For the hotter the Countrey is, the more air is necessary for respiration and refreshment of the body; there being less of that menstruum which serves to nourish or continue fire and conse∣quently he vital heat of Animals (which hath great likeness thereto) in hot air then in cold; whence we see that fire burns furiously in cold weather and but faintly in hot. Whether it be because the air is thin∣ner in hot weather and hot Countreys, or because the reflected Sun-beams spend and consume a good part of the forementioned menstruum, or from both these causes. That the air is thinner and consequent∣ly the menstruum also more diffused in hot weather is clear in experience. I need mention no other expe∣riment to demonstrate it then the air enclosed in the shank of an ordinary weather-glass, which in hot weather dilates its self, and in cold contracts very considerably. So then to give an account of the ra∣ging of fire in the coldest weather, we need not have recourse to the insignificant term of Antiperi∣stasis; the true reason thereof being the density of the ambient and contiguous air containing plenty of that menstruum which nourishes the fire. I omitted to mention the ancient Coemeteria, or subterraneous burying-places called Catacumbe, of which there be many in Malta, because of these we have already had occasion to discourse in our descri∣ption of Syracuse in Sicily. That this Island produces or nourishes no Serpent
or other venemous creature, the common people af∣firm; but because I find no mention heerof in Abela, I give little credit to their report: should it be true, it would be to me a great argument that this was not the Island upon which St. Paul was cast when he suf∣fered Shipwrack, but rather that Melita before men∣tioned upon the Coast of Dalmatia, for which there is also some ground in the Scripture, which saith Acts 27. 26. For that St. Paul upon the Vipers fastning on his hand did by his Prayers obtain of God, that all the Serpents in Malta should be turned into stones, and the Island for the future wholly free from all vene∣mous beasts, is a Monkish fancy, grounded upon the forementioned petrified fish-bones, which they fondly imagined were sometime parts of Serpents: whereas in other places where plenty of such stones are found there is no lack of Serpents. I confess it is difficult to imagine how Serpents should come at first to breed heer, if the whole Island were once (as we conceive) a submarine Rock covered with the Sea; and there be no spontaneous generation of animals, as wel also believe: because it can scarce be imagined that any man should on purpose bring over Serpents hither; unless perchance to shew them for a curio∣sity. Whether there be venemous beasts or no I am sure there are venemous insects heer, the very biting ox stinging of the Gnats (with which the City is much infested) being more virulent then in other places. For my part I do not remember that in Eng∣land the biting of a gnat did ever cause a swelling, or leave a mark behind it in the skin of my face (though I know in some it doth) but there it both raised a swelling, and left a mark behind it that was not out for a month after. The Maltese easily defend them∣selves from the annoyance and bitings of this insect, keeping them out of their beds by large linnen cur∣tains lapping over one another. At first we were
not aware of the trouble these Animals were like to give us, and left our curtains open. From Malta we returned the same way to Messina; staying a day at Catania; where we hired horses and took a Souldier to guide us up Mount Aetna,Mount Aetna. now called Mon-Ghibello. The top of which at Catania was told us to be 30 miles distant. We ascended for the most part all along from Catania, and we found the ground rich, and well cultivated, and the Coun∣trey well inhabited; for the slag and cinders cast out of the mountain, being in process of time dissol∣ved by the weather, doth mightily fatten and enrich the soil. We rode up so high till we came to the con∣servatories of snow; and seeing the mountain above us all covered with snow; we did not, nor indeed could we ascend any higher. The trees heerabout had at this time scarce put out their leaves. As we went up we found in one place the ground covered for a quarter of a mile broad, and 4 or 5 miles in length, with cinders, which had been thrown forth by the mountain, and was cartainly the relique of a huge stream of melted coals, iron, stones and sulphure poured out in the time of the last eruption, nothing as yet growing among these stones and cinders. This mountain hash in former times thrown forth stones and slag as far as Catania it self, as we could mani∣festly see; but of all the eruptions that ever were I believe this last which happened [Anno 1669.] since our being there was the greatest and most horrid; for a full description and exact account wherof I refer the Reader to Borellus his learned Treatise De incendiis Aetnae. This mountain is of a very great height, and we were told by credible persons, that one might see it at Sea over the whole Island any way one came thither. We could clearly discern the top of it as far as the Island of Malta, which in a right line must needs be at least 100 miles distant. One thing we could not but wonder at, that there should
be a ring of snow about the top of Aetnas, but the highest top it self bare, without any snow upon it. The Inhabitants of Sicily are noted for churlish and uncivil to Strangers,Observa∣tions a∣bout the Inhabi∣tants and Customs of Sicily. and I think not undeser∣vedly. The Italians have a Proverb, Omnes insulani mali, Siciliani autem pessimi. All Islanders are bad, but the Sicilians worst of all. This Island is confes∣sedly a very ill place to travel in, by reason of the Robbers and Banditi wherewith it is infested, thanks to the good Government, which takes no more care to cleanse it of such vermine. These Bandits will not be content with your money, but will also seize your person and detain you prisoner in the mountains till you give them a good ransom for your deliverance. We took notice of some Laws and Customs pro∣per to Sicily during our stay heer. 1. It is unlawful to carry out of this Island in money more then ten crowns a person; if any one carries out more and be taken, all is forfeited. But the searchers are not so strict, but that if you give them a little money they will let you pass, especially if you be a stranger and traveller, without any searching at all. 2. It is unlawful to kill any Calves in this Island, so that no Veal can be procured heer. And yet at Malta they have Veal enough, transported hence by stealth. 3. It is unlawful to take above one ounce of silver without weighing of it; so that if you buy any thing which comes to more, though your money be never so good, you shall see them pro forma put it in their scales. 4. No person under age [imberbis Iuvenis] may be received in any time in Sicily, unless he hath a patent and license to travel. 5. It is prohibited under pain of death to any man to carry pistols about him; but long guns they may and do all carry. The reason is because a pistol
may easily be hid, and so men murthered unawares. 6. All the money current in Sicily is coined at Messina. After our return to Messina, May 27. we passed by boat over the Fretum to see Rhegio or Rhezo,Rhegium, now Rhe∣zo. anciently Regium, an old City, but now Ve∣ry mean and poor. All they have to boast of at pre∣sent is their Gardens well stored with all sorts of the best fruits; their Silk, of which plenty is made heer and (if we may believe themselves) the best in Italy or sicily: And S. Pauls. pillar which burned, of which they have but a small fragment remaining. They told us many stories and legends of it, which we gave little heed to. We took boat and went as far as Scylla,May 29. The man∣ner of catching the Sword∣fish. to see the fishing of the Pesce Spada or Sword-fish. The maner whereof is thus. On the top of the Cliffs by the Sea-side stand Speculatores (Huers our Fisher-men call them) to espy the Fish, who so soon as they see them, either by voice if they be near, or by known signs if at distance, give notice to the Fishing-boats whereabouts the fish are. The boat presently makes towards the place; then one gets up to the top of a little mast in the boat, made with steps on purpose, and there stands to observe the motion of the fish and direct the rowers, who accordingly ply their oars. When they are come very near him, he upon the mast comes down, and taking the harping iron in his hand, if he can strikes it into him. The fish be∣ing wounded, plays up and down and wearies him∣self, and when he is faint and spent they draw him up into the boat: This is much like the Whale-fish∣ing. The harping iron is put on a staff or pole of wood. The point of it is sharp and hath beards on each side like a barbed arrow, so joynted that if you hold the point upward they clap close to the shaft, if downward they fall off from it on each side, so that they resist not the going in of the iron but only the
drawing out. This fish is held a great dainty by the Messanese, as much longed for and as greedily bought up by them as Soland goose by the Scots; sold in Messina at first coming in for six pence English the pound. In May and beginning of June it is taken on the coast of Calabria; about the latter end of June it comes over to the Sicilian side and is ta∣ken about the Faro till August. There because there be no rocks or cliffs hanging over the Sea, they pre∣pare a large boat or brigandine, and pitch up in it a tall mast with shrowds like the mast of a ship, on the top of which the Speculator or Huer stands. In the beginning of June yearly is celebrated at Messina a great Festival called The Feast of our Lady of the Letter: it continues near a weeks time with great solemnity. During this time all the house∣keepers hang out in all the streets a multitude of lamps, candles, and tapers, and set their windows as full of lights in paper-lanthorns as they can hold, which burn all night, so that the streets are as light∣some almost by night as by day. Nay the light was so great, that at a good distance from the Town as we came thither late at night, the reflection thereof from the clouds and atmosphere appeared to us like the Aurora or Crepuseulum, though we saw not the lights themselves, and it was no dark night, the moon as I remember shining. They call it the Feast of our Lady of the Letter, because it is held in me∣mory of a Letter written to them (as they say) by the Virgin Mary; which how sorry and ungrounded a fiction it is the pretended Letter it self (of which also they confess themselves not to have the Greek original, but only a Latine copy) will best demon∣strate to any not grosly stupid Reader. It runs thus,
Maria virgo Joachim filia Dei humillima, Christi Jesit crucifixi mater, ex tribu Juda, stirpe David Messa∣nensibus omnibus salutem & Dei patris omnipotentis benedictionem. Vos omnes fide magna legatos ac nuncios per pub∣licum documentum ad nos misisse constat: Filium nostrum Dei genitum Deum & hominem esse fatemi∣ni; & in coelum post suam resurrectionem ascendis∣se, Pauli Apostoli electi praedicatione mediante viam veritatis agnoscentes. Ob quod vos & ipsam civita∣tem benedicimus, cujus perpetuam protectricem nos esse volumus. Anno Filii nostri XII. Indict, I, III Nonas Junii, Luna XXVII, Feria V. Ex Hierosolymis Maria virgo quae supra hoc chirographum appro∣bavit. We departed from Messina,June 6. Tropia. takin a Feluca for Naples. The first night we lodged at Tropia, a small Town in Calabria about 60 miles distant from Mes∣sma. Heer we observed growing on the Rocks near the Town Ziziphus sive Jujuba sylvest. Park. Conyza minor vera Ger. Androsaemum foetidum Park. i. e. Tragium; besides many others which we had before found in Sicily. The second night we lay at S. Lucido,7. S. Lucido where we also observed the mild Jujube. The third night we lay at Porto Nicolo,8. Scalea. a little creek or cove, not far from Scalea, where there is a small Castle. Heer and at Scalea we observed the common Cypress tree; Lamium Pergrinum sive Scu∣tellaria C. B. Rosmarinum vulgare, quod in toto hoc litore in rupibus copiosè provent: Sabina baccifera, called also Cedrus Lycia retusa Bellonii; Chondrilla rara purpurea, Crupina Belgarum dicta Park. Meum al∣terum italicum quibusdam J. B. Caryophyllus maximus rubber; the largest and fairest-flower'd wild Pink or
July flower, which I have any where seen, on the rocks at Scalea; Caryophyllus gramineo solio minimus; a sort of small Scorzonera or Goats-beard; Jacea in∣cana, teuuiter laciniata, capitulis Jace nigrae vulgaris; Valeriana quaedam supina serpyllifolia, n. d. This was afterward shew'd us dried by Joan. Maria Ferro an Apothecary in Venice, to whom it was sent by the name of Periclymenum: Myrtus communis Italica C. B. Auricula ursi; which we wondered to find heer upon the rocks, being an Alpine plant, and which delights in colder places. Casia poetica Lob. Not to mention Ferrum equinum siliquâ singulari C. B. Acanthium Illyricum; Polium montanum al∣bum C. B. and some sorts of Securidaca, common elsewhere in Italy. Heer also I first sound that spe∣cies of Campanula, which I have denominated mi∣nor, folio rotundo, flore caeruleo pentagono grandi. It hath a leaf like to the common Campanula minor ro∣tundifolia, sometimes rough and hairy, sometimes smooth. Agnus castus in toto hoc litore in arenosis frequentissimus est. The fourth night at a little place called Chiupo.9. We lodged at Salerno where we quitted our boat,10. Salerno. and stayed one day. Salerno though the Sea of an Archbishop is at present but a mean City, ha∣ving narrow streets. Whatever there hath been for∣merly, there is now neither University nor Schola il∣lustris in it, that we could hear of: scarce any foot∣steps of the old School remaining. In the Cathedral Church dedicated to S. Matthew we observed the Monuments of the famous Hildebrand, Helbrand the Germans call him, the great introducer of the Ce∣libate of Priests, and opposer of the Emperour, called Pope Gregory the VII. In the Porch before the Church lie many ancient Roman Grave-stones, wich inscriptions.Plants observed about Salerno. As for Plants we heer noted, Barba Jo∣vis frutex, on the rocks plentifully; Saturcia durior J. B. Laurus Tinus caeruleâ baccâ Lob. Cytisus glaber
siliquâ lata J. B. on the rocks, which plant is was not my hap to meet withal growing wild any where else beyond the Seas: Colutea minima sive Coronilla Ger. Melissa sylvestris birsutior & minùs odorata; Echium majus & asperius flore albo C. B. Thlaspi Can∣diae Ger. Lamium peregrinum sive Scuttellaria; Sorbus domestica Lob. Peucedani facie pusilla planta Lob. Lotus arbor; Staphylodendron; Colus Jovis; Besides these many before set down, found in Sicily and other parts of Italy, viz. Antirrhinum majus purpureum; Lentiscus; Alaternus; Conyza major Monspeliensis odorata J. B. Ricinus sive Palma Christi; Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta; Stoechas citrina angustifolia; Ge∣nista Hispanica; Tithymalus arboreus Park. Valeriana rubra Dod. Ilex arborea J. B. Copparis; Scorpioides Bupleuri folio; chrysanthemum Bellidis folio Hort. Pat. Teucrium majus vulgare Park. Colutea scorpioi∣des; Chrysocome capitulis conglobatis Ger. Caprificus; Trifolium bituminosum; Meum alterum Italicum; Cy∣clamen hederae folio; Periclymenum perfoliatum li∣darum regionum Lob. Anagyris foetida; Smilax as∣pera; Asparagus sylvestris sive Corruda; Acantbus sativus; Dorycnium Monspessulanum fruticosum J. B. Trifolium album rectum hirsutum valdè J. B. Tele∣phium scorpioides Ang. Lob. Martagon Chymistarum Lob. Geranium Romanum versicolor sive striatum Park. Monte Angelo a Mountain near this Town is a place noted for variety of plants, but we had not time to search it. From Salerno we travelled by land to Naples,12. pas∣sing through La Cava a pretty Town having Porti∣cos on each side the streets, and Nocera, both Epis∣copal Seas; Scafata; Torre d' Annunciata, Torre di Greco, considerable Burghs. We returned back from Naples to Ligorn by wa∣ter,30. baulking Rome for the present, being deterred from going thither by the general vogue in Italy, that in the Summer months, and till the rains fall, it
is very dangerous for him that is in Rome to go out thence, or him that is out to enter in there. The first night we reacht no further then Nisita, a little Island in the mouth of the bay of Pozzuolo, about 5 miles distant from Naples. The second day we proceeded as far as Sperlonga, a little short of Terracina ancient∣ly Anxur, about 60 miles. The third day we passed by Monte Circello or the Promontorium Circeium, where the famous enchantress Circe is reported to have dwelt. This Promontory stands out a great way in∣to the Sea, so that at a distance we took it for an Island. As we were just over against the utmost point of it, we observed a great number of insects very like to Cicadae and which we have not elsewhere seen, flying about in the air. Our boatmen called them Gronge. Divers of them we caught in our boat; and yet we were at least two leagues distant from land. Possibly they might fly out a great way further to Sea; for what reason we cannot easily imagine; perhaps only to sport themselves in the Sun. Howbeit we do not remember to have seen any other land-insect fallying out so far from land.Cicada. And now that we have made mention of the Cicada, it may not be amiss by the way to take notice of a common error commit∣ted in our English Schools in translating or rendring this word Cicada in English by Grashopper, whereas a Cicada is a much different insect, of a rounder and shorter body, that sits commonly upon trees, and makes a noise five times louder then a Grashopper, whose true name in Latine is Locusta, and not Cicada. Of these Cicadae there are great numbers in the hot Countreys, but none on this side then Alps and Sevenes. This night we lodged at Astura, where yet remain some ruines of an ancient Town and the foundati∣ons of some buildings in the water. Not far hence the fourth day we passed the new Town of Antio,Antium. and about a mile distant great ruines of the old Town, and of a great mole for the Ha∣ven;
and this night lodged at a little tower called S. Michael near the mouth of the River Tiber not far from Ostia. The 5th. day we hed a favourable gale of wind, which brought us to a little place called S. Stefano, not far from Orbetello. This day we passed in sight of Civita Vecehia and Porto Hercole, compassing Monte Argentaro. The 6th. day there happened a great Borasco (as they term it) that is a storm of thunder, lightning and rain accompanied with a violent wind, which continued all the sorenoon; in the afternoon we rowed about 18 or 20 miles, and put in to a little Cove or harbour under a tower called Calo di Furno. On the Sea-shore heerabout we found those opercula concharum, which some naturalists make to be stones and call Vmbilici marini. The Italians call them S. Lucies eyes. The 7th. day we proceeded as far as the Island Troia, when the wind being contrary we were for∣ced to take up at a little harbour under the shelter of a small tower called Lo Molino. The 8th. day we passed Piombino, a walled Town which hath a Prince of its own, Populonia P. Bar∣reto, S. Vincentio, Castagneto, and Vada, and lodged at a tower called Castiglione. The 9th. day it having blown hard all night, not∣withstanding there was no wind stirring in the mor∣ning, we found the Sea very rough, yet through the good providence of God we got safe into Ligorn about noon. The Plants we took more especial notice of in this voyage were, Rosmarinum vulgare; cedrus Ly∣cia folio retuso Bellonii; Barba Jovis frutex, on the rocks and cliffs by the Sea side in many places: Cru∣ciata marina, on the sands at Astura plentifully: Thlaspi capsulis sublougis incanum J. B. ibid. Cicho∣rium verrucarium sive Zacyntha, at the mouth of Ti∣ber
and about S. Stefano plentifully; Lotus siliquosa lutea Monspeliensis J. B. besides another sort of Lotus with a longer and flenderer cod: Aristolochia clema∣titis; A semper-virent shrub with a leaf like Ole∣ander; Terebinthus; Paliurus; Thlaspi biscutatum; Ambrosia vulgaris; which it was not our hap to meet with elsewhere in all our travels; Cirsii quoedam spe∣cies quae jam defloruerat, at S. Stefano: Chamaerrhiphes sive Palma humilis about Orbetello and elsewhere on the cliffs of Hetruria: Draba quaedam filiquosa foliis longis angustis incanis; Euphrasia pratensis lutea; Phil∣lyrea angustifolia, in montosis propè maris litus in toto hoc tractu frequentissima; Phillyrea serrata 2 Clus. Colutea minima sive Coronilla Ger. In rupibus maritimis propè turrim Castiglione.
OF FLORENCE. FRom Ligorn we travelled through Pisa to Flo∣rence,Florence. a City which answers its name and epi∣thete Fiorenza la bella, Florence the fair. Yet for beauty in my opinion it must give place to Antwerp and some other Cities in the Low Countreys, only it excells them in multitude of large stone-palaces, scattered up and down the streets, sch as are those of the Grand Duke both the old and the new called the Palazzo de Pitti, because purchased of them; of the Strozzi, the Salviati, &c. Many of the streets are streight, which adds no little to the beauty of them. They are all paved with great broad stones, like Luca or Collen in Germany: yet but narrow as in many other Towns of Italy and Gallia Narbonensis to keep off the scorching beams of the Sun in sum∣mer time, which reflected from these broad stones would else make them more than sufficiently hot. The Paper-windows and they too for the most part broken and tattered, do very much disgrace the fair stone-houses. The River Arno divides this City into two parts, which are joyned together by 4 fair stone∣bridges; one of which, called Ponte vecchio or the old bridge, hath on each side it a row of Gold∣smiths-shops. All of them, but especially the two middlemost, are remarkable for the breadth and flat∣ness of their arches. The circuit of the walls is said to be 6 Italian miles: but therein is comprehended a great deal of wast ground, [I mean not filled up with buildings] the gardens and walks of the Great Dukes Palace being at least a mile in compass; besides
on the other side the River are some hundreds of acres of land taken up in vineyards and gardens belong∣ing to private persons. The number of Parishes ta∣king in the 12 Priorates is 44, the number of Inha∣bitants according to Schottus 85000 souls, and I be∣lieve he exceeds in his account, though some make them 90000, and other 100000. There are an in∣credible number of Nunneries: Schottus saith 54; we were told 56, whereas there are but 24 Mona∣steries of Freres. But that which is most strange is the multitude of Hospitals and Alms houses, of which there are said to be 37: one of which, viz. the Orphanotrophium maintains 900 persos, and hath 70000 crowns yearly revenue. This City is of no great strength, being encom∣passed only with an old-fashioned wall: but the Great Duke hath 3 Castles or Cittadels in it, I think rather to bridle then defend it; one on the South∣side, held by a good Garrison, neatly kept and di∣ligently watcht, wherein are laid up Arms for 30000 men. Another is a small Fortress in lthe Gr. Dukes garden, to which he may retire in case of any sud∣dain danger or exigent: heer they say his treasure or a good part of it is kept. The third we viewed not. The Churches in Florence though they be not so richly gilded as some we have seen,Churches in Flo∣rence. The Do∣mo or Cathe∣dral. yet for their Ar∣chitecture they excel most, especially the Domo, or Church of S. Maria Florida, which is some mens opinion is the compleatest structure that ever was set upon the earth. The pilasters the support the nave or body of the Church stand at so great a distance, and are withal so very slender, that they do not ob∣scure the Isles, but at one view you enjoy the whole Church. Besides the Cupola, though the first and pattern of all the rest, is the largest and tallest of any in Italy, excepting that of S. Peters in Rome: under which is the Quire, of an octagonal figure. The
walls of this Church are crusted over on the out-side with marble of several colours, cut into small pieces and variously checquer'd; which though the Italians now despise and count but a toy, yet makes a pretty gaudy shew. Within this Church beyond the Quire are 4 inscriptions; one concerns the building to the Church, and is as follows. Anno à Christiorts 1280 Florentini magnis divitiis partis,Inscripti∣ons. & rebus domi forisque commodè constitutis cum urbem moenibus auxissent, pulcherrimisque aedificiis publicè decorâssent, ut Rem Divinam quoque optimè ordinarent, & posteris insignis mag∣nisicentiae ac Religionis suae exemplum proderent, hoc angustissimum templum in Dei honorem ejúsque matris semper Virginis Mariae instituerunt, & Pontisicio Legato Cardinale praesento, primùmque lapidem ponente summa cum omnium laetitia ac devotione inchoârunt VI. Id. Septembris. The second concerns the Dedication or Consecra∣tion of this Church by Pope Eugenius IV, and runs thus. Ob insignem magnificentiam Civitatis & Templi Eu∣genius PP. IIII omni solennitate adhibita dedica∣vit 25 Martii 1436. Cujus dedicationis gratiâ Pons ligneus insigni magnificentiâ & ornatu fa∣ctus est ab Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae Novellae ubi PP. inhabitabat usque ad hanc Ecclesiam, &c. The third concerns the union of the Greek and Roman Churches in these words. Ad perpetuam rei memoriam; Generali Concilio Florentiae celebrato pòst longas dis∣putationes unio Graecorum facta est in hac ipsa Eo∣clesia, Die 6 Julii 1438. Praesidente eidem Con∣cilio
Eugenio Papa IV cum Latinis Episcopis & Praelatis, & Imperatore Constantinopolitano cum Episcopis & Praelatis & Proceribus Graecorum in copioso numero, sublatisque erroribus in unam èan∣démque rectam fidem quam Romana tenet Ecclesia consenserunt. The fourth concerns the translation or removal of the body of Zenobius from the Church of S. Lau∣rence hither by Arch-bishop Andreas his successor. Some Monuments also I observed in this Church; the Inscriptions whereof they being of considerable persons it may not be amiss heer to set down. Of Marsilus Ficinus, En hospes! hic est Marsilius Sophiae pater: Platonicum qui dogma culpâ temporum Situ obrutum illustrans, & Atticum decus Servans, Latio dedit; fores primus sacras Divinae aperiens mentis, actus numine. Vixit beatus ante Cosmi munere Lauríque Medicis, nunc revixit publico. S. P. Q. F. MDXXI. Of Jottus a good Architect, and the first reviver of Painting in Italy; though Vassari in his Lives of Painters makes Cimabue to have been the first revi∣ver, and to have taught Giotto and others. The ver∣ses of his Epitaph were made by Ang. Politian, and are as follows. Ille ego sum per quem Pictura extincta revixit; Cui quàm recta manus tam fuit & facilis. Naturae deerat nostrae quod defuit arti; Plus nulli licuit pingere nec meliús. Miraris turrim egregiam sacro aere sonantem: Haec quoque de modulo crevit ad astra meo.
Denique sum Jottus, quid opus fuitista referre? Hoc nomen longi carminis instar erit. Obiit Anno 1336. Concives posuere B. M. 1490. Of Philippo Brunelleschi, a famous Architect, who designed the Cupola of this Church, and also that of S. Laurence's, D. S. Quantum Philippus Architectus arte Daedalea valu∣erit cùm hujus celeberrimi templi mira testudo, tum plures machinae divino ingenio ab eo adinventae do∣cumento esse possunt. Quapropter ob eximias ani∣mi sui dotes singularésque virtutes XV. Kal. Maias 1446. ejus B. M. corpus in hac humo supposita grata Patria sepeliri jussit. In this Church on the North wall is the picture of and English Knight on horseback; Joannes Acutus they write him, and therefore some think that his name was Sir John Sharp; I encline rather to their opinion who suppose his name to have been Sir John Hawkwood, especially seeing Guicciardine writes him Aucutus and not Acutus. Whatever his name were he was a valiant man and an eminent Captain. Heer is also a painted Table hung up in memory of Dante, the famous Italian Poet, who was native of this City, but lived in exile and was buried at Ravenna. On the frame of this Table are these ver∣ses inscribed, Qui coelum cecinit mediúmque imúmque tribunal, Lustravitque animo cuncta poeta suo, Doctus adest Dantes, sua quem Florentia saepe Sensit consiliis ac pietate patrem. Nil potuit tanto mors saeva nocere poetae, Quem vivum virtus, carmen, imago facit.
In the Church of Santa Croce is the Monument of Michael Angelo Buonarota,The Church of St. Croce. the famous Architect, Sculptor and Painter. Above stands his Effigies; un∣der that is a Coffin, and under the Coffin three Sta∣tues sitting of rare workmanship, worth their weight in silver, which signifie Painting, Sculpture, and Ar∣chitecture. Below this Inscription, Michaeli Angelo Bonarotio, E vetusta Simoniorum familia, Sculptori, Pictori & Architecto, Famâ omnibus notissimo. Leonardus patruo amantissimo & de se optimè merito translatis Româ ejus ossibus, atque in hoc templo Major. suor. Sepulchro conditis, cohortante Sereniss. Cosmo Med. Magno Etruriae Duce P. C. Anno Sal. MDLXX. In the Church of the Annunciata besides several others is the Monument of John Bologna,The Church of the Annunci∣ata. a man well known in Italy. It stands in a Chappel behind the Quire built by himself, and is thus infcribed, Johannes Bologna Belga, Mediceorum PPum nobilis alumnus, Picturâ, Sculpturâ & Architecturâ cla∣rus, virtute notus, moribus & Pietate insignis Sa∣cellum Deo, Sep. sibi cunctisque Belgis earundem artium cultoribus P. An. Dom. MDIC In the Church of S. Mark is a small monument for a great person,The Church of St. Mark. viz. Joannes Picus Mirandulanus, with this Inscription, Johannes jacet hîc Mirandula, caetera norunt Et Tagus & Ganges, forsan & Antipodes. Ob. An. Sal. MCCCCLXXXXIIII, vixit An. XXXII. Hieronymus Benivenius, n disjunctus post mortem
locus ossa separet quorum animos in vita conjunxit amor, hac humo supposita poni curavit. Ob. An. MDXXXXII. vixit An. LXXXIX. Men. VI. In the Cloyster of S. Laurence by the Church door is the Monument of Paulus Jovius thus inscribed, Paulo Jovio Novocomensi Episc. Nucerino Historiarum sui temporis Seriptori Sepulchrum quod sibi testameto decreverat Posteri ejus integra fide posuerunt; Indulgentia maximorum optimorúmque Cosmi Et Francisci Etruriae Ducum. Anno MDLXXIIII. In the Baptisterium or Church of S. John, supposed to have been anciently a temple of Mars; of an octa∣gonal figure, and having three pair of brass doors ar∣tificially cast or engraven with curious figures in mezo relievo, is a fair monument of Pope John 23, who was deposed In the Council of Constance, with this Inscription. Joannes quondam Papa XXIIIus obiit Florentiae An∣no Domini MCCCCXVIIII. XI Kalendas Januarii. in the Church of S. Laurence are interred several of the Great Dukes family.S. Lau∣rence his Church. The Chappel of St. Laurence. And to this Church be∣longs the famous Chappel of S. Lorenzo; built by the Great Dukes, which when finished is like to be for its bigness the most sumptuous, rich and magnific structure in the world. This Chappel is of an octa∣gonal figure, and the roof of it a large Cupola. The inside of it is encrusted over with several sorts of pre∣cious stones I may call them, for they are all above the rate of marble, viz. Jasper of several kinds and colours, Agate, Lapis Lazuli, Touchstone, &c. all polisht and respleudent, inlaid and wrought into
various figures. Of this octagon one side is left void for the high Altar, for which there is a sumptuous tabernacle preparing, that now stands in the Great Dukes Gallery. The side opposite to the Altar is for the door. On the rest of the sides are to be placed Statues and Monuments for such as have been Great Dukes. The first, beginning on the left hand as you enter in, intended (as we conjectured) for Alexander who was only Duke of Florence, is not yet made up. The rest have on the top the names, and underneath in a nich the Effigies of the Great Dukes, some in stone and some in brass, under that a Coffin or Cushion with a Ducal Crown lying upon it, and nethermost an Inscription in this order, Franciscus Mag. Dux Etruriae II, vixit ann. XLVI. ob XIX Octob. MDLXXXVII. Cosmus Mag. Dux Etr. I, vixit ann. LV. ob. XI Kal. Maii MDLXXIIIV. Ferdinandus Mag. Dux Etr. III. vixit ann. LX. ob VII Id. Febr. MDCIX. Cosmus Magn. Dux Etr. IV. vixit. ann. XXX. obiit XXVIII Febr. MDCXX. So there is one side more remaining for Ferdinand II, the V. Great Duke, who is dead since our being there; the present Great Dukes name being Cosmus III. Between the Monuments of Duke and Duke are the arms of two of the Cities subject to the Great Duke, the names whereof are these, Monte Pulciano, Borgo San Sepolchro, Cortona, Volterra, Arezzo, Pi∣stoia, Pisa, Florence, Fiesole, Siena, Grossetto, Massa, Montalce, Suana, Chiusa, Pientia, all Episcopal Seas: besides which in Tuscany are many considerable Towns, Castles, and Fortresses. I shall enlarge no further concerning the Churches, Towers, Pillars, Fountains, Statues of brass and stone,
and picturés, of which there are a great number in this City and of excellent workmanship: only I cannot omit to mention two Statuae equestres in brass, much greater than the life; one of Cosmus I, upon the great Piazza: the other of Ferdinand I, in the Piazza of the Annunciata, erected by Ferdi∣nand II. The Great Dukes Gallery is in the old Palace,The Gal∣lery of the Gr. Duke. a handsome pile of building. Under ground as it were in Cellars are the Stables: above them fair Portico's or Cloysters to walk in. Above the Portico's are shops for all manner of Artificers to work in for the Great Duke. The uppermost story is the Gallery properly so called; where in an open walk free for any man to come into stand many ancient and some also mo∣dern Statues. Round about on each side this walk hang the pictures of many Princes and other persons, who have been famous in the world for learning or valour. Among the rest we noted the Pictures of Queen Elizabeth, King James, Oliver Cromwel and Joannes Acutus before remembred. The chief Rarities are lockt up in Closets of which we saw four. The things which in our tran∣sient view we took more especial notice of were, a huge terrestrial globe and a Sphaera armillaris, bigger then that. A brancht Candlestick including many little figures of ivory or white wax appearing through the transparent Amber: An Engine coun∣terfeiting a perpetual motion, like those of Septalius at Milan. Seveal stone-tables so curiously inlaid with small pieces of precious stones of divers colours, as to compose figures of plants, fruits and flowers, birds, beasts, and insects, so natural and to the life, that scarce any picture drawn by the hand can excel them. One of these, the best and richest that we have any where seen, both for the excellency of the work∣manship, and costliness of the materials, being set with many Rubines and Pearl, they valued at 100000
Florence Scudi, which is more than so many English crowns, Several rich Cabinets. That of the greatest value, which they rated at 500000 Scudi, was thick set with Gems of the first magnitude; a pearl of an enormous greatness, but not perfectly round; several Topazes almost as big as Walnuts, large Ru∣bines and Emeralds, besides other stones of inferi∣our note, studs of Amethyst, &c. Heer we also saw the nail pretended to be one continued body, half iron, half gold, part of the iron having been turned into gold by one Thurnhausserus an Alchymist of Ba∣sil before mentioned. To us it seem'd counterfeit and not neatly neither, the iron and the gold being but bunglingly joyned together. A large topaz as big as a pullets egg. An entire image made of one Turchois stone: Many ancient Roman idols of brass; old Roamn lamps found in Sepulchres of several fa∣shions: A press full of turn'd work of ivory very fine and subtil: Rhinocerots horns, &c. I omit se∣veral pictures and statues wherewith the rooms were adorned, made by the best Masters, and much esteem∣ed by those that have judgment in such things. In the Armory we saw several remarkables,The Ar∣mory. as the Armour of many great persons of Europe, among others of Henry IV King of France and (harles V Emperour: Hannibal's head-piece (as they called it) It had engraven on it many ancient Morcsco cha∣racters: A suit of Persian Armour for a man on horseback; made of little scales of iron. A Load∣stone having its poles at the greatest distance I ever saw any: Several Indian Royal Vests, made of Fea∣thers. Five great Swords such as the Pope uses to bless on Christmas day, and send to Princes. A King of China's Armour made of Fish-bones, and a wood∣en Sword. This sure they mistook for an Indian King's, the Chinese having of a long time had the use both of iron and guns: Japan Arms and Swords without point and broad at the top. Divers Turkish
scymitars; Scanderbeg's Sword: The hair of a hor∣ses mane 7 yards in length; the skin of this horse stuft up, sent by the Duke of Lorain: several con∣ceited guns: Pistols on whose muzzles were screw'd heads of Halberds, or Pole-axes. Nine Pistol-bar∣rels so laid on a frame, that by letting down one cock they were all discharged, making 18 shot, for each is double charged, and a train of powder leads from the touch-hole of the middlemost to the touch∣holes of all the rest in channels made for that pur∣pose. An Engine made like a hat; with several pi∣stols in the crown; this they called the bona notte, being to be discharged upon your enemy when you complement him and bid him good-night: A long gun and also a pistol whose barrels are of beaten gold. Several round bucklers, one with Medusa's head painted upon it by Michael Angelo, an highly estèemed piece. Italian Jocks for suspected wives: Ancient Balistae (as they called them) which are no other then great Cross-bows. A thong cut out of the hide of a Buffle, 250 yards long. A press full of rich prizes of Arms taken from the Turks. In the Argenteria or Wardrobe we saw several presses or Cup-boards [12 in number] full of rich plate.The Ar∣genteria or Ward∣robe. In one all manner of vessels of beaten gold. In another a sumptuous Altar of the same metal (as they told us) set with Diamonds and other precious stones of the highest value. On it was inscribed in great Capitals (the letters all made up of Rubines) Cosmus II, Dei gratia magnus Dux Etruriae ex voto. In some by-rooms we saw the skin of a Morsse or Sea-horse stuft; the skin of an Elk s the skin and Sceleton of an Elephant, which was shown in Florence some 8 or 10 years ago, and died there. I might spend many words in describing the Gr. Dukes new Palace, and Gardens stored with great variety of trees and shrubs valuable for shade, beauty, fruit or sent; adorned with a multitude of Statues
thick set up and down the walks and knots: plea∣sant fountains and water-works; stately and delici∣ous walks both close and open; goodly flowers aud choice plants. We took notice of Dictamnus Creticus, Quamoclit Indorum; Tragoriganum; Stramonium peregrinum Ger. i. e. pomo spinoso rotundo; Pisum cor∣datum, Balsamina cucumerina, Chamaerrhiphes, &c. Heer in an enclosed place were kept two male Ostri∣ches and one female. In the Dukes Theriotrophium we observed these sorts of wild beasts, Lion, Tiger, Leopard, Bear, Wolf, Porcupine, Wild Boar. The snout of this was longer in proportion than that of tame or domestic Swine: the ears rounder and shorter and of a black colour, as were also the feet and tail. These wild Swine are constantly of the same colour, which is a grisly or iron-grey. Its worth the observation that most wild Animals keep to the same colour both Beasts and Birds; but those that are kept tame vary infinitely, which is (I suppose) to be attributed partly to the va∣riety of their food, and partly to the highness of their feeding; to which the difference of the Cli∣mate and Soil may contribute something. So we see that upon the Alps and other high mountains cover∣ed for the most part with snow, several animals, as Bears, Foxes, Hares, Partridges, &c. change their na∣tural colours, and become white, whether by reason of the coldness of those mountains, or of the con∣stant intuition of snow. In Florence many of the Palaces are made of great, rough-hewn stones, not laid smooth, but each pro∣tuberating above the supersicies of the wall: which fashion of building the Italians call maniera rustica. This City at present is rather in a decaying than thriving condition, there having not been (as we were credibly-informed) a new house built there these 40 years: the Citizens generally being but poor. This comes to pass partly by the great decay
of their trade; for whereas formerly they served France with Silks, now the French themselves work them as well or better than they; partly by reason of the great exactions of the Great Duke, who lays immoderate gabels upon all commodities that are bought and sold. The greatest Foreign trade they have at present is with our nation; and that is not much, we having most of our Silk from Messina, Aleppo, and other places in the Levant and working it at home. This City is well situate in a good air, only somewhat sharp in winter time; the Inhabi∣tants are ingenious and quick-witted. It hath bred more excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects then any one City in Italy besides: and for Scholars and great wits it may vie with most. It's the fashion heer for Gentlemen to sell their own wine by retail. Yet no body goes into the pa∣lace to drink; but there is a hole made in the Cellar or Buttery-wall, to give in and take out flasks or other vessels; and there is a servant attending for the most part so long as there is wine to sell. At the pa∣lace gate or wall they usually hang up the hackles of old flasks to give notice that there is wine to be sold there. The Gentlemen think it a disparagement to them to practise Physic; so that none of them bring up their children to the study of medicine; but they think it no disparagement to exercise merchandise; and for this they have the example of the Great Duke himself, who is the greatest Merchant in Eu∣rope; nay Leti saith, That it is reported, he trades for more then all the Merchants in Genoa. The Great Duke is both heer and in all his domini∣ons supreme and absolute Lord, and may pro arbi∣trio impose what taxes and gabels he pleases; and therein he is not sparing. Every house pays to him the tenth of its yearly rent. No house or land sold but a good part of the price (at least one tenth) goes
to him. No woman married but he hath 8 per cent. of her portion. Every one that goes to Law pays 2 per cent. of what he fues for. Every young Heifer that is sold pays a crown; Not so much as a basket of eggs comes to market but it pays somewhat for toll. So that his Revenue must needs be great: some say a million and half, others two millions of crowns yearly. His expences amount not to one million; and consequently, considering also the in∣come of his trading, he must needs have an immense treasure; by Leti's reckoning more then 60 millions of crowns: but its well if it amounts to half that sum. And though some at Florence would have per∣swaded us that the world was mistaken in this opini∣on of his great riches, yet we sew good reason to continue in that belief; he using all ways of thrift and sparing as well as getting; keeping no house but allowing his servants board-wages, and being at a set rate with his Cook, and his Baker, who for the monopoly of fine bread (Pane di bocca they call it) furnishes his private table, and pays 1000 Scudi per annum besides. Moreover it was a maxime with him, that a good treasure of mony is the greatest strength and security of a Prince, and he would often say of our late King Charles I, that want of money ruined him, and therefore it may well be presumed himself would take care to fill his Coffers with that. Besides the territories of Florence and Pisa, called the old State, of which he is absolute Lord and So∣vereign; and the territory of Siena, called the new State, for which he is feudatary of the King of Spain, He is also possessed of part of the isle of El∣ba, which he holds of Spain, part of Graffignana, bought of the Marquesses Malaspina; the Earl∣dom of S. Fiora, purchased of the Strozzi; the Marquisate of Scanzano, and the Earldom of Pi∣tigliano and Sorano formerly belonging to the Vrsini,
and some other small places, for all which he is feu∣datary of the Emperour. Radicofani in Tuscany and Borgo san Sepolchro in Vmbria, for which he is feuda∣tary of the Pope. His Citadels and Fortresses, especially those on the borders, are thought to be the best fortified and pro∣vided with Ammunition and victual of any in Eu∣rope; for the guard of which he keeps four or five thousand Souldies in constant pay. The 3 principal offices of trust are the Governours of Siena, of Li∣gorn and Petigliano. He hath always about his person a guard of German Souldiers. He is able to send into the Field 40000 footmen and 3000 horsemen. Leti saith, that he hath 40000 footmen enrolled, who are obliged to stand ready at every call; and 1000 horsemen listed and divided into 12 Compa∣nies, and these last have the priviledge not to be imprisoned for debt. He can also put forth to Sea upon oceasion 12 gallies, 2 galeasses and 20 ships of war. He entertains and diverts the Citizens of Florence in Summer-time with sports and shows, especially races for prizes (Pallio's they call them) sometimes Barbary horses, sometimes ordinary horses running through one of the streets of the Town (which thence they call the Curso) without any riders. To make them go they fasten little flaps of leather stuck with prickles upon their backs. The Great Duke holds good correspondence and amity with all Christian Princes and States; except the Pope [upon account of Borgo San Sepolchro, to which the Pope pretends; the Marquisate of Monte feltre, to which the Duke hath some pretensions in right of his Wife, who was heiress to the late Duke of Vrbin; and the business of Castro:] and the Duke of Savoy, between whom and him there hath been an ancient emulation about precedency.
The Duke hath the nomination of the Bishops and Governours of all the Cities in his Dominions. The Ecclesiastical Revenues of the Dukes whole State, according to a Survey taken in the year 1645, were found to be 765000 Scudi or crowns per an. For this Leti is my Author. The Family of the Medici have had two Dukes besides those of Tuscany, viz. William Duke of Ne∣vers and Laurence Duke of Vrbin; two Arch-Du∣chesses married to them, viz. Joan daughter of the Emperour Ferdinand I, wife of Francis I; and Ma∣ry daughter of Ferdinand II, wife of Cosmus II: four Popes, viz. Leo X. Clement VII, Pius IV, and Leo XI: two Queens of France, viz Katharine wife of Henry II and Mary wife of Henry IV, mother to our late Queen-mother, who died in Collen 1640. Their greatness began to exceed the measure of other Fa∣milies (saith my Author) by the death of Pope John XXIII, deposed in the Council of Constance in the year 1414, who died in the house of John Medices, and made him his heir. The Gentlemen and Citizens of quality keep not their daughters at home after they be 8 or 10 years of age, but put them into Nunneries, where they are bred and taught all manner of womens work. Out thence they come not till they be married. He that makes love to any of them may with the parents consent see and speak with them at the grate of the Nunnery. This is not only a secure but also a cheap way to bring up their daughters. For they pay not to the house above 16 pounds a year for diet and all. About Florence we observed very few plants but what we had before met withal in other places.Plants observed about Florence. Those we noted were Carduus chrysanthemus Narbonensis Ger. Acarna flore purpuro-rubente patulo C. B. Echi∣um majus & asperius flore albo C. B. Carduus solstitialis Ger. Atractylis; Conyza major Monspeliensis odorata
J. B. Galega; Scrophularia, Ruta canina dicta; Lo∣tus pentaphyllos siliquosus, villosus C. B. Aster luteus foltis ad florem rìgidis C. B. Iberis J. B. Juncus acutus maritimus capitulis rotundis C. B. Ageratum vulgare; Stoechas citrina angustifolia; Sideritis vulgaris Ger. Nigella arvensis Park. Satureia aestiva hortensis Ger. Scorpioides Telephium Ang. Lob Passerina Tragi J. B. Globularia Monspeliensium; Melilotus major flore albo; Chrysanthemum Bellidis folio Hort. Pat. Medica orbi∣culata J. B. Solanum vulgare fructu lutco; Melissa vulgaris; Chondrilla juncea Ger. Chamaesyce; Stoebe calyculis argentcis C. B. Ischaemon vulgare; Gramen dactyloides radice repente Ger. Buphthalmum vulgare Ger. Buglossum angustifolium Lob. Botrys; Psyllium vulgare; Cichorium verrucarium sive Zacyntha; Scor∣dium; Xeranthemum; Kali spinosum, so far from the Sea. Gramen supinum aculeatum J. B. Gramen amoris dictum; duae varietates. Iris floribus albis, in muris urbis copiosissimè, unde Florentina denomi∣natur. In collibus urbi vicinis, Arbutus; Laurus; Lotus arbor; Cyclamen folia anguloso J. B. Phillyrea serrata 2 Clus. Erica arboreseens Monspeliensis, flore purpurascente, ramulis ternis J. B. Satureia S. Juliani J. B. Cistus foemina Ger. Lychuis minima rigida Cher∣leri J. B. Pyracantha, in sylvosis juxta Arnum; Arislolochia Saraceneca Ger. ibid. Gratiola; Colutea vesicaria; Rhamnus 1 Chusii flo. albo Ger. Digitalis lutecavel pallida parvo flore C. B. The red Florence wine is most commened for a table wine of any in Italy; and doubtless it is most wholesome, and to them who are used to it also most gustful and pleasant. It is of a deeper colour than or∣dinary Claret, which is caused by letting it stand longer upon the husks or vinacea before it be pressed. For it is the skin only which gives the tincture, the interiour pulp of the grape being white. We began our journey to Rome.Sept. 1. First we passed through Castiano a pretty little Town 8 miles di∣stant
from Florence; and when we had proceeded 4 miles further, we left the ordinary road to Siena by Poggi bonzi, (which is the plainer but longer) and rode to S. Buco, a good large Village, and from thence to S. Donato, a poor walled Town 16 miles from Florence, and 14 from Siena. From S. Donato we rode on to Castellina di Campi 5 miles further, from whence to Siena we had 9 miles more; the first four mountainous and stony way, the last five good. All this Countrey we rode through, and ge∣nerally all Tusany, is mountainous and barren. Yet are not the mountains very high. About 5 miles from Florence we took notice of the Certosa or Car∣thusian Cloyster, seated on a pleasant hill by the way side. We had the prospect of Siena about 10 miles before we came at it.Siena. Siena is a fair City, some 4 miles in compass. The Piazza or Market-place is compassed about with good buildings, and for the figure of it not unfitly resembled to a cochle or scal∣lop-shell. This fancy had they who paved it, for on one side, viz. that next the Palace, they have placed the figure of the heel of a cochle-shell made in stone, and from thence have drawn rayes or ribs of stone (answering to the ridges or striae of a cochle-shell) to the edges round. The Domo or Cathedral Chruch is a stately edifice of marble, having a beautiful front; adorned withinside with the heads of all the Popes, placed in the wall, round about the body of the Chruch. Part of this Church is paved with Marble inlaid, or a more elegant sort of M∣saic work, containing part of the History of the Bi∣ble, done by Micherino Sanese. This pavement is covered with a moveable floor of boards to preserve it. Had it been finished as intended, all Europe could not have shown the like; but there is not a fourth part done. The painting of the Library walls in this Chruch, containing the History of Alneas Sylvius afterwards Pope Pius II, half by the hand of Petrus
Peruginus, and half by Raphael Vrbin, is in my judgment the most excellent painting that ever I beheld, and so fresh and lively as if it had been done but yesterday. Heer are also other good Churches and handsome Palaces. We ascended the Tower cal∣led Torre di mangio, from whence we had a fair pro∣spect of the whole City, which runs out into 3 an∣gles. The walls enclose much void ground, which is made use of for Gardens and Vineyards. All the streets and Piazza are paved with brick set edge∣ways, after the manner of Venice, and the sides of the streets of the Holland Towns. The whole Town is well built and situate upon a hill, and by that means always clean. They heer make no use of snow or ice to cool or refresh their Wines, their cellars keeping it cool enough. In the Palace of the Podestà we saw a room, the walls and roof whereof were painted by Micherino Sanese, valued at more then the whole Palace besides. We took notice also of the Theater for Comedies, a fair brick building; and the Studium, called the Sapienza, where are the public Schools, a mean building much like that of Pisa. This City is counted a very good place to sojourn in for a Stranger that would learn Italian, as well because the Citizens heer speak the purest language, as for that they are very civil and courte∣ous to Foreigners. Besides by reason of its situation the air is temperate even in Summer time; Provi∣sions also are reasonable. We travelled to Radicofani 34 miles,Sept. 3. passing through 1. Lucignano a post-village, and in sight of Cuna a Village on a hill; also a little walled Town called Fuon-convento, then Tornieri a post-village, and lastly S. Quiricho, i. e. S. Cyriaci oppidum.S. Qui∣richo. Which so soon as we had passed I found great plenty of La∣vender-cotton, which grew all along by the way∣side. There grew also all this days journey in great plenty Absinthium Romanum Caes. Between S. Qui∣richo
and Radicofani Cinara sylv. and two other spe∣cies of thistle, one I guessed to be Carduus tomentosus Lob. the other I knew not; Acarna flore purpuro∣rubente Patulo; Veronica spicata coerulea; Winter Savory; After luteus Linariae folio; Colchicum cover∣ed all the pastures. Between S. Quiricho and Radi∣cofani we passed no considerable Town or Village. All the Countrey we rode through this day is moun∣tainous and barren, very little wood growing on the ground.Radico∣fani. Radicofani being a frontier is strongly for∣tified and held with a Garrison of 300 Souldiers by the Great Duke. This Radicofani is situate upon a high hill, so that one may see it going or coming 12 or 14 miles. We travelled from Radicofani to Viterbo 38 miles.Sept. 4. About 10 miles from Radicofani we passed over a small River called at a place called Ponte Argentino, which divides the State of the Gr. Duke and of the Pope. It is to be noted that in all this Countrey the Towns and Villages are generally set upon the tops of hills, for coolness I suppose. We observed also that the Countrey subject to the Great Duke, at least that part we travelled this Voy∣age, was craggy and bare of trees, and seem'd to us to be but dry parcht and barren land. But so soon as we came into the Ecclesiastical State the world was well amended; for the hills were for the most part covered with trees, and the valleys very fruit∣ful. Fourteen miles from Radicofani we passed Aqua∣pendente a large old Town,Aqua∣pendente. ex re nomen habens, for it stands upon the brow of a hill from which the water falls perpendicularly. Then we passed S. Lo∣renzo, a little Town on the edge of the lake of Vol∣sinii now called Bolsena, and rode along the brink of the lake 5 miles to Bolsena. From Bolse we mounted up to Monte Fiascone,Monte Fiascone. Vilerbo. where we tasted the so much celebrated wine, and after 8 miles further riding over a spacious and fruitful plain arrived at Viterbo, a large
and well situate Town, but not very fairly built. All that we took notice of there was 2 or 3 handsome Fountains, and the monument of Pope John XXI in the Domo. There are Sulphure-wells and hot springs about the Town, but we had not time to examine or so much as view them. We rode to Baccano 22 miles from Viterbo,Sept. 5. passing through Ronciglione a pretty Town belonging to the State of Castro. In the woods we travelled through this day upon the mountains near Viterbo, we found many rare plants, v. g. Carduus globosus Ger. Viola matronalis; Casia poetica Lob. Cerrus minore glande Ger. Orobus sylvaticus viciae foliis C. B. Cyclaminus folio anguloso J. B. plentifully in all the Woods be∣tween Viterbo and Rome: Mespilus vulgaris; Hesperis sylvestris latifolia, flore parvo albo Park. Thlaspi Can∣diae Ger. Lamium scntellaria dictum; Sorbus; Lina∣ria major purpurea; Blattaria lutea; Cytisus cortice cinereo aut albido, siliquis hirsutis. We cannot yet certainly determine what this plant is called by Bo∣tanic writers. Plumbago Plinii at Bolsena and about Rome plentifully by the way sides; Polygonum vel Li∣nifolia per terram sparsa flore Scorpioidis J. B. Hellebo∣rus niger hortensis flore viridi J. B. in vepretis montosis passim. We travelled from Baccano to Rome 16 miles.6. From a mountain we passed over not far from Bac∣cano we had a wide prospect of the Campania of Rome, which being covered over with a thick mist, appeared to us (looking down upon it from the clear sky above) like a huge lake of water, nor could we have perswaded our selves otherwise had we not be∣fore observed the like Phaenomenon in some places of England. About 3 miles short of Rome we passed by an ancient monument like to those we had observed at Modena, which they call the Sepulchre of Nero; and somewhat more than a mile before we entred the City,Ponte Molle. we passed over the Tiber by the Ponte Molle,
anciently Pons Milvius; and came upon the Via Flaminia, a streight paved way having Ville and Gardens on either side it, which brought us to the Gate called Porta del Popolo, whereat we entred the City.
OF ROME. OF Rome both ancient and modern, though more might be said than of any City in the world, yet because so much hath been written by others both in Latine and English, I shall be very brief, it being needless to trouble the world with what hath been already published in other books. The most remarkable Antiquities to be seen in Rome are some ruines and remainders of Heathenish Temples, Theatres and Amphitheatres, Circi, Baths, Aquaeducts, Obelisks, Triumphal Arches, Pillars, Fora, Masolaea, Statues, Altar stones, Grave-stones and other stones with inscriptions, Medals, Entaglie or Gems en∣graven with figures, sacrificing vessels and instruments, Sepulchral urns, Lachrymal urns, ancient Lamps, Weights, Rings, Fibulae and abundance of other imple∣ments. First for ancient Temples the most remarkable that I observed yet remaining,Ancient Temples. either entire or some parts or ruines of were 1. The Pantheon,The Pan∣theon or Rotonda. now dedicated to the Virgin Mary and All-Saints, and commonly called the Ro∣tunda from its figure. Its highth was 144 feet, and its breadth as much. The roof was vaulted in form of a cupola, and all the light it received was by a large round hole of 3 yards diameter just in the top. It had a porch of 16 tall and massive pillars of speckled marble called Oriental granite; each pillar being of one entire stone; of which there are at present only 13 remaining. Upon the Architrave of the Portico is inscribed in large letters.
M. AGRIPPA L. F. COS. TERTIUM FECIT. And underneath that in lesser Letters this, IMP. CAES. L. SEPTIMIUS. SEVERUS. PIUS. PERTINAX. ARABICUS. ADIABENICUS. PARTHICUS. MAXIMUS. PONTIF. MAX. TRIB. POT. XI. COS. III. P. P. PROCOS. ET. IMP. CAES. M. AURELIUS. ANTO∣NINUS. PIUS. FOELIX AUG. TRIB. PO∣TEST. V. COS. PROCOS. PANTHEUM. VETUSTATE. CORRUPTTM. CUM. OM∣NI. CULTU. RESTITUERUNT. This Temple was covered with copper-plates or tiles, taken away by Pope Vrban VIII; whence that Pasquinate, Quod non fecere barbari fecere Bar∣berini. He thereupon (as was thought) to silence and appease the clamour of the people, caused thereof to be made the 4 famous wreathed pillars and Canopy of the high Altar in S. Peter's Church. Of the very nails [clavi trabales] which fastned the tiles of the Portico was cast a great gun of the weight of 2800 pounds now to be seen in Castle S. Angelo with the figure of one of the nails, and an inscription upon it signifying whereof it was made, viz. Ex clavis trabalibus Porticus Agrippae. This Temple remains still entire, only despoiled of its ancient statues and ornaments. For heer besides many others was that famous Minerva of Phidias. When it was first built it had an ascent of 7 steps which encompassed it round, now you descend 11 steps to go into it: so much is the rubbish and earth grown up above it. Indeed a great part of old Rome lies buried under ground in its ruines. One remarkable thing in this Temple they bade us take notice of, which I find not in books, that is, that the lintel and side-posts of
the great door of this Church (which is of a huge highth and breadth for a door) are all of one entire stone; which we were content to believe rather than put our selves to the trouble of examining. In this Church is the monument of Raphael Vrbin, whose Epitaph (he being so eminent a person and one that carried on painting to its highest perfection) I shall heer insert. Raphaeli Sanctio Joan. F. Vrbinat. Pictori eminentiss. Veterúmque aemulo, Cujus spirantes propè imagines si Contemplêre, naturae atque artis foedus Facilè inspexeris. Julii II & Leonis X Pontt. maxx. picturae Et Architect. operibus gloriam auxit. V. A. XXXVII integer integros. Quo dic natus est co esse desiit, VII. Id. Aprilis MDXX. Hîc situs est Raphael, timuit quo sospite vinci Rerum magna parens, & moriente mori. 2. Templum Fortunae virilis, according to some; according to others Templum Lunae, but more pro∣bably of the Sun and Jupiter. It stands by the River side not far from the broken bridge; is now called S. Maria Aegyptiaca, and therein the Armenians have their service. 3. Templum Solis; according to some Templum Vestae; and to others Templum Herculis Victoris. It stands near the precedent, and is now called La Ma∣donna del Sole, or S. Stefano allc carrozze. It is but small, of a round figure, having a portico or gallery of striate pillars round about it. The Walls are of stone, and it hath no windows, but receives all its light from a round hole in the top, like the Rotonda. This and the former remain still almost entire. 4. Templum Dianae Aventinae, now the Church of
S. Sabino. It is large; the walls of brick and the nave divided from the Isles by 12 striate pillars on each side. 5. Templum Herculis Aventini; now the Church of S. Alexius and Bonifacius; situate on the top of the Aventine mount, not far from the former. 6. Templum Jani quadrifrontis, in the Cow-mar∣ket. This seems rather to have been an Arch than a Temple. 7. Templum Concordiae, at the foot of Mons Capi∣tolinus, of which there remains only the portico, he∣ving eight great pillars of marble, most of them of one stone. 8. Templum Saturni, anciently the treasury, now S. Adrian's Church: at the foot of the Capital, near Severus his Arch. The frontispiece of this Church is a remainder of the old Temple. 9. Templum Antonini & Faustinae; now S. Loren∣zo in Miranda. The portico of this remains  en∣tire with its ancient inscription, and a great part of the walls made of massy square stones. The marble pillars of the porch suffer much by the weather, be∣ing of that sort of stone, which hath a grain lying one way, and so riving or cleaving like wood. 10. Templum Romuli & Remi, now of S. Cosmo & Damiano; little of the old Temple remaining: the stones it seems being carried away by Ignatius Loyola for his foundation. There is a concurrent Echo, in a cupola you pass under to go into the body of this Church. 11. Templum Isidis & Scrapidis sive Solis & Lunae, now S. Maria nuova, near Titus his arch. The pre∣sent Church is no part of the old Temple, nor built exactly upon the place where it stood: but behind the Cloyster are some part of the ruines of the old Temple still remaining. 12. Templum Pacis. This was the largest of all the ancient Temples in Rome, built by Vespasian.
There are yet standing part of 3 vaults or arches; and the plant of the whole may easily be discerned. The great striate pillar set up before the Church of S. Maria maggiore was taken hence, and was one of eight which supported the nave or body of this Temple. It is the greatest pillar of one entire stone now remaining in Rome. 13. Templum Jovis Statoris. Of this the 3 pillars remaining in the Campo vaccino near the Palatine mountain are supposed to have been part. 14. Templum Jovis tonantis. Of this the 3 pillars almost buried in the earth, on the architrave whereof are these letters ESTITUER, standing on the left hand the clivus as you go up from Severus his arch to the Capitol are supposed to have been part. 15. Templum Fauni, now S. Stefano rotundo, a large round fabric, having two circles of pillars conical; the outermost of lesser pillars; the innermost of larger: in the outermost are 44 pillars, in the inner the just half of that number. Besides the pillars of the inner circle stand exactly at the same distance one from another as do those of the outer. 16. Templum Herculis Callaici, now Galluzzo. It stands in the vineyards near S. Bibiana; a very tall building of brick not exactly round but decagonal. The roof of it is a vault or cupola not so great as that of the Rotonda and yet not much less. It had two doors diametrically opposite, and in the other sides were 8 niches for statues. 17. Templum Bacchi extra portam Piam, one mile without the City walls: now the Church of S. Co∣stanza. This also is a round structure. The walls are of brick and of a great thickness: within it hath a lesser round or concentrical circle of 12 large pil∣lars There stands an ancient monument of Por∣phyry of the fashion of a huge chest or trough, ha∣ving
a stone to cover it. This is curiously engraven with several figures of branches of trees, boys tread∣ing of grapes, of birds, &c. They call it the monu∣ment of Bacchus. In several places of the roof are to be seen very fresh the pictures of bunches of grapes and several things belonging to the vintage. The freshness of the colours and rudeness of the figures makes me doubt whether this was ancient Roman painting or no. 18. Templum Solis. Of this there was lately a piece standing in the Garden of the Columnae upon monte cavallo, called Frontispicium Neronis and Torre∣di Nerone by the vulgar. It is now quite thrown down; only there remain in the Garden vast marble stones, the greatest that ever I saw, and some of them curiously carved which came from the top of this building. 19. Templum Romuli & Remi sub monte Palatino, now dedicated to S. Theodore. This is a round brick building, into which you descend by many steps as into the Rotonda. Secondly, For Amphitheaters and Theaters there are yet remaining great ruines of the Amphitheater of Titus now called the Coliseo, round without, and of an oval figure within; capable of 85000 men to sit and see. There are also some footsteps of the Am∣phitheater of Statilius Taurus, near to the Church of S. Croce in Gierusalemme; and lastly a good part of the walls of the Theatre of Marcellus, upon which the Savelli's Palace is built. Thirdly, Of Circi there is 1. a good part of that of Antoninus Caracalla, a mile out of the City. 2. Of the Circus maximus there is little remaining, only the fashion of it may be plainly discerned. 3. The Circus Agonalis stood where now is the Piazza Na∣vova. 4. Of the Circus of Nero in Campo Vaticano no∣thing remains now to be seen; as neither of 5. the Circus Flaminius.
Fourthly, For Baths there are great ruines of those of 1. Diocletian, wherein there were seats for 3200 persons to bathe themselves without seeing or hindering one another; in the building of which he is said to have employed 40000 Christians for 15 years together. 2. Antoninus Caracalla, in which were 1600 seats or closets of polished marble. These were those Thermae in modum Provinciarum extructae. Be∣sides there are some ruines remaining of 3. The Thermae of Titus. 4. Of Agrippa, near the Rotonda, called Ciambella. 5. Of Constantine near S. Sylvesters. 6. Of Nero near the Church of S. Eustachius. 7. Of Paulus Aemilius at the foot of Monte cavallo, called Magnanapoli. Many others there were anciently of which now scarce any foot-steps to be seen. Fifthly, Of Aquaeducts the Author of Roma an∣tica & moderna mentions 4, of which something re∣mains, viz. that of 1. the Aqua Martia brought 37 miles, 2. the Aqua Claudia, brought 35. Upon the gates called Porta di S. Lorenzo and Porta maggiore there are ancient inscriptions signifying what Em∣perours reparied and built these Aquaeducts. 3. The Appia, brought 8 miles. 4. The Aqua Virginis brought also 8 miles, which was repaired by Pope Nicholas V, and is yet made use of, being called Fonte di Trivio. Of new Aquaeducts there are two very stately ones built by late Popes, of which the two following inscriptions will give the Reader an account.
I. Sixtus V.This work is said to have cost above 200 thousand crowns. Pont. max. Picenus Aquam ex agro Columnae Viâ Praenest. sinistrorsum Multarum collectione venarum Ductu sinuoso à receptaculo Mill. XX. à Capite XXII Adduxit: Foelicémque de nomine Ant. Pont. dixit. Coepit anno Ì. absolvit III. MDLXXXVII. II. Paulus V Pontifex maximus aquàm in agro Braccia∣nensi saluberrimis è fontibus collectam, veteribus aquoe Alseatinae ductibus restitutis novisque additis XXXV ab Vrbe milliario duxit, Anno Domini MDCXII. Pontifi∣catus sui septimo. Sixthly, Obelisks we took notice of nine, 1. That in the Piazza within the Porta del Popolo. It stood an∣ciently in the Circus maximus, but being fallen down and broken in several pieces was by the appointment and at the charge of Sixtus V taken out thence, and the several pieces being handsomely set together again, erected heer upon a fair pedestal; on each side of which it hath an inscription; two ancient ones on the opposite sides in the same words, viz. Imp. Caesar Divi F. Augustus Pontifex maximus Imp. XII. Cos. XI. Trib. Pot. XIV Aegypto in potestatem Populi Romani redact. Soli donum dedit.
two modern ones on the other two sides: on one this, Sixtus V Pont. max. Obeliseum hunc A Caesare Aug. Soli In Circo max. ritu Dicatum impio, Miserandâ ruinâ Fractum obrutúmque Erui, transferri, Formae suae reddi, Crucique invictiss. Dedicari jussit. A. MDLXXXIX. Pont. IV. On the other this, Ante Sacram Illius aedem Augustior Laetiórque surgo Cujus ex utero Virginali Aug. imperante Sol Justitiae Exortus est. It is engraven on each side with 3 rows of Hiero∣glyphics. 2. That in the Piazza before Saint Peter's Church, the only one that still remains intire and unbroken. It was taken out of the Circus of Cali∣gula and Nero, and set up by Dominicus Fontana, by the other, and at the charge of Pope Sixtus V, as were also those of S. Maria maggiore and S. Job. Lateran This obelisk hath no Hieroglyphics upon it, is 72 foot high besides the pedestal, in all 108, said to weigh (according to Lassels) 956148 pounds. Of the manner of taking up and rearing this stone, and the engines employed about it, there is a particu∣lar book written. The 4 modern Inscriptions on the 4 faces of the pedestal, and the ancient one on the obelisk it self may be seen in Roma antica & moderna. 3. That of S. Joan. Lateran having 3 rows or files of Hieroglyphics on each side it. This is the greatest of all the obelisks in Rome, being 112 foot long besides the base, an at the base 9 1/2 feet thick one way and 8 foot the other. Who brought it to Rome and where it was set up, this Inscription upon it will acquaint the Reader.
Fl. Constantius Aug. Constantini Aug. F. obeliscum à patre loco suo motum, diúque Alexandriae ja∣centem trecentorum remigum impositum navi mi∣randae vastitatis per mare, Tiberimque magnis mo∣libus Roman convectum in circo maximo ponen∣dum curavit S. P. Q. R. D. D. It was broken into several pieces but is well men∣ded and set together again, and the wanting Hiero∣glyphics supplied. 4. That of S. Maria maggiore, lesser then any of the forementioned, having on it no hieroglyphics. It was taken out of the Mausoleum of Augustus. 5. That of the Piazza Navona, erected by Pope Innocent X. It was taken out of the Circus of Cara∣calla, is the least of all the forementioned by much, having but one row of hieroglyphics. Of this Athan. Kircher hath written a book in folio, which he calls Obeliscus Pamphylius, from the Popes name to whom he dedicates it. 6. That of S. Mahuto fast by the Jesuites Church. It seems to be but a small piece of the top of an obe∣lisk broken off; it is engraven with hieroglyphics, and set up negligently on 4 rude stones. 7. That in the Garden of the Medici: it is full of hieroglyphics, and set upon a base without any inscription. It is but a small thing, and seems to have been only the top of a broken one. 8. That in the Garden of the Mattei, given them by the Senate and people of Rome. This also is a small one, and broken in two pieces, whereof the uppermost hath toward the top some hieroglyphics, the lower piece hath none. 9. In the Court of the Palace of the Prince of Paloestrina of the family of the Barberini lieth an obe∣lisk broken in 3 pieces, engraven with hieroglyphics, which its like was longer. 10. Roma antica mentions another standing at
the foot of the stairs in the Palace of the Vrsini in the Campo di fiore: but this we saw not. 11. We were told of an obelisk lying in the Cam∣pus Martius under a row of houses, as big if not big∣ger then any of those already erected, and supposed to continue intire and unbroken. These obelisks, all that are engraven with hiero∣glyphics, are of one and the same kind of stone, viz. a marble of a mingled colour red and white, which some call very hard, and which hath not in so many ages suffered the least by the weather. As for the figure of them they are made taper-wise, lessening from the basis to the vertex by little and little, so that indeed they are not much unlike a spit, from whence they took their name. Yet are they not continued till they terminate in a point; but when they are become too small to en∣grave more hieroglyphics upon, the tops are cut into the form of an obtuse pyramid. It is said, and I think truly, that the hieroglyphics engraven upon these obelisks are from the bottom to the top greater and greater by degrees; so that the lowermost and the rest all along to the uppermost appear to the specta∣tor of equal bigness. Seventhly,Trium∣phal Ar∣ches. Of triumphal Arches there are yet re∣maining that of Septimius Severus; that of Titus Vespasian; that of Constantine the Great; that in the Cow-market called the Goldsmiths Arch erected to Septimius Severus his son Antoninus: that of Gllie∣nus and Salonina commonly called the Arch of S. Vito. As for the Arch called Arco di Portogallo in the Via Flaminia, mentioned in Roma antica, it is I sup∣pose demolished, for we could find nothing of it. The inscriptions upon these arches, and the places where they stand may be seen in the book entituled Roma antica & moderna. Eighthly,Pillars. Of pillars beside such as belonged to temples there are 4 remaining. 1. The Columna mil∣liaria,
which stood in the Forum Romanum, as it were in the center of the City, from whence they began to reckon the distance from Rome to all parts. This pillar is marked toward the top with this nu∣meral letter I, of a great bigness, signifying one or the first stone, and upon every public way at a miles end was set up a second stone marked II, and so in order at every miles end a stone marked with the number of the miles of its distance from Rome: So that ad secundum lapidem signified at one miles di∣stance from this pillar; ad tertium two, and so on. This pillar is not considerable for its greatness but only for the use of it, and the ancient inscriptions upon it. It is now set up on one side of the Area of the Capitol. 2. The Columna rostrata, erected in the Forum Romanum to C. Duilius, who obtained a victory over the Carthaginians in a Sea-fight. There is upon it a long inscription in old Latine, full of lacunae, and hardly intelligible; which as it is supplied and made out may be seen in Roma antica. 3. The Columna Trajana or pillar of Trajan of white marble, still standing ever since its first erecti∣on. It is 128 foot high beside the base, which is of 12 feet. Within it is hollow and hath a pair of win∣ding stairs of 192 steps, whereby one may ascend to the top, and there are in it 44 little windows to give light. It is made up of 24 stones, and every stone hath in it 8 steps. On it are carved in an helical area, compassing the pillar after the manner of a screw from top to bottom, the exploits and atchievements of Trajan in his Dacic expedition, &c. The pede∣stel of this pillar was all buried under ground, and not to be seen, till they dug about it and laid it open by the order of Pope Paul the III. Upon it are in∣scribed these words.
S. P. Q. R. Imp. Caesari Divi Nervae F. Nervae Trajano Aug. Germ. Dacico, Pont. maximo, Trib. Potest XVI. Imp. VI. Cos. VI. PP. ad declarandum quantae ltitudinis mons & locus tantis operibus sit egestus. 4. The pillar of Antoninus, much like the former, 175 foot high, ascended by 206 steps and having 56 little windows. This pillar was broken and miser∣ably defaced; but by Pope Sixtus V mended and re∣stored to its pristine form. Vide Roma antica. Ninthly,Mauso∣laea. Of Mausolaea, there are only that of Augustus and the moles of Adrian, now called Castle S. Angela. Tenthly,Statues. Of Statues there are an infinite number in the palaces and gardens about Town, both ancient and modern: I believe more then in all Europe be∣sides. Some of the most famous and esteemed are, the Equestris Statua in brass of M. Aurelius Antoninus Pius, now standing in the area of the Capitol. The statues of the two horses with men by them in stone, now standing upon the Mous Quirinalis which is thence called Monte Cavallo. The statues of Laocoon, the trunk of Hercules, and Cleopatra, in the Popes garden called Belvedere. The famous statue of the Bull in the D. of Parma's palace, called, II Toro di Farnesi. The incomparable statue of Venus in the Duke of Tuscany's villa, made by Apollodorus the Athenian. Venus verecunda ib. Marsyas hung up by the hands, ib. The Wrestlers, ib. The Countrey-man who discovered Catiline's conspiracy in a sitting posture with a wood-knife in his hand, ib. The sta∣tue of Meleager in the palace of the Pichini. The statue of Pasquin, whereon the Libels use to be fast∣ned. The statue of the fellow plucking a thorn out of his foot in the Capitol. The statue of the shee∣woolf giving suck to Romulus and Remus in brass, esteemed the ancientest in Rome. The Gladiator in
white marble worth its weight in gold, in the Villa Borghese. A copy of this in brass stands in S. James's Park, London. Two statues resembling friendship, in the Villa Ludovisia. Of Altar-stones, grave-stones and other stones with inscriptions there is great plenty in all quarters of the City. Of ancient Medals and Entaglie there are daily digged up store;Ancient Medals and Enta∣glie. and no wonder it is, this having been the seat of the Empire so long. They are to be sold in many shops, and I have frequently seen of them lying upon the stalls in the market-places. Divers also of the Virtuosi have collected whole series of imperial medals. Of sepulchral urns of several fashions and magni∣tudes, some made of earth,Sepul∣chral urns. some of stone, there are abundance to be seen in the ville, gardens and pala∣ces of the great persons, and in the Cabinets of the Virtuosi. As for sacrificing vessels and instruments, lachry∣mal urns, ancient lamps, rings, fibulae, and other im∣plements, tesserae hospitalitatis, weights, &c. several antiquaries there are in town, who have likewise made collections of them; as Leonardus Augustinus the then Popes Antiquary, and John Petro Bellori, a very ingenious person and skilful in Antiquities, who shew'd us a great number of these things and very well conserved. That worthy and ingenious Gentleman Cavalier Carlo Antonio dal Pozzo shew'd us some 20 volumes in folio, wherein were the fi∣gures of most of the Antiquities in and about Rome, drawn exactly by the hand. In one of these were all the vessels and instruments used about sacrificing. In others of them we noted the Crepundia antiqua, which were little images made of earth like children, hares, apes, &c. found in urns. The Sistrum of Ca∣valier Gualdi figured in Roma Antica: Ancient Sta∣terae; ancient weights. Of these ancient weights we
saw in the museum of Leonardus Augustinus some made of a dark red stone handsomely polished, of the figure of Holland cheeses, and of several mag∣nitudes, marked on one side with the number of ounces or pounds which they weighed. Of these weights I have seen two in the Church of S. Maria in Cosmedin, called Schola Graeca, and two in the Church of S. Maria in Trastevere of the bigness of good large Holland cheeses, which they have a tra∣dition and have inscribed on the wall where they were hung up, that they were stones that the heathens hung at the feet of Christian Martyrs when they suffered, to stretch and torment them. A medal with the figure of a talus on one side and on the other this inscription, Qui ludit arrham det quod satis sit The ancient Fritillus or dice-box, like those now in use. The ancient Strigiles: A medal of that sort that was used to be hung about slaves necks, having on the one side the figure of the wolf with Romulus and Remus hanging at her paps; on the other in 3 concentrical circles these words, Tene me nè fugiam & revoca me in foro Trajani purpuretica ad Pascasium Dominum meum. A drinking glass made like a Priapus, which explains that of the Poet, Vitreo bibit ille Pri∣apo. The ancient timbrel, like those we have seen used now a days. It is made in fashion of a sieve, the bottom of it on which they strike, of vellum, the rim of wood, having several long holes or crannies in it, wherein are hung round pieces of brass like great medals upon their centers; besides there is a string cross the instrument hung full of bells. Rome is a large City, but seemed to us not so po∣pulous as either Venice, Milan or Naples: they reckon the number of inhabitants to be about 120000 souls besides strangers, of which there are a great num∣ber always heer. The extent of the walls is greater than of any City in Europe, viz. 13 miles; but they take in a great deal of wast ground. The City is now
crept down from the hills (upon which the chief of it formerly stood) into a valley by the rivers side sur∣rounded with hills. It is generally well built; many of the streets straight and adorned with a great num∣ber of stately palaces scattered up and down all over the town; full of Monasteries and Churches, of which they say of all sorts there are above 300. It is well served with all provisions for the belly: yet are not things generally so cheap there as either at Naples or Florence. Their beef (as I intimated before) is ve∣ry good, not much inferiour to ours in England. Be∣fore they kill their beasts they put them in a great heat and chafe, for the same reason I suppose that we hunt Deer and bait Bulls in England, viz. to make the flesh eat more tender and short, which yet spoils the colour of the meat, and in some mens judgment the taste too, disposing it to putrefaction. Their suck∣ing veal, which they call vitella mungana, they ima∣gine all Europe cannot parallel for goodness and deli∣cacy. Their kid or Caprette is also accounted very good meat; and so is their Swines-flesh. Their Mut∣ton is the least commendable, as being for the most part tough and dry. Tame fowl they have as good and savory as in any place, v. g. Hens, Capons, Tur∣keys, tame Pigeons. Geese are seldom heer to be sold▪ Plenty also there is of wild foul of the best sorts, and cheap enough, as Partridge of two kinds, the com∣mon and red legg'd Partridge, Wood-cocks, Snipes, Duck and Mallard, Wigeon, Teal, Gray, green and bastard Plover, Curlews, Quails. Of small birds the greatest plenty that I have any where seen, as Thrushes in winter time an incredible number, Black∣birds store, Larks infinite. One would think that in a short time they should destroy all the birds of these kinds in the Countrey. For besides that you never fail of great numbers of them in all the Poulterers shops, there is every afternoon a market of small birds wherein they are sold by the Countrey people.
Besides the forementioned there are sometimes to be sold Cranes, wild Geese, Shell-drakes, Avosettae, Water Hens, Berganders and several other sorts of wild fowl. I have seen lying frequently in the Poulterers shops, and therefore I presume some people eat them, such Birds as in England no man touches, viz. Kites, Buz∣zards, Spar-hawks, Kestrels, Jayes, Magpies and Wood-peckers. Nothing more commonly sold and eaten heer and in all Italy, than Coots and Stares. They spare not the least and most innocent birds, which we account scarce worth the dressing, much less powder and shot, v. g. Robin-red-breasts, Fin∣ches of all kinds, Titmise, Wagtails, Wrens, &c. No want of fish either of fresh or salt water, though it be sold commonly dearer than flesh, as be∣ing brought a great way. Scarce any fish to be found any where on the coast of Italy but some time or other it may be met withal heer. Those that are the most frequent in the markets are, of River or Fresh-water fish, Pike, Carp, Tench, Trout, Eel, Barble, Chevin, Dace. I do not remember that I ever saw a Perch to be sold in Rome. Of Sea-fish, Mullus antiquo∣rum, which they call Triglia, of which they have a Proverb, La Triglia non mangia chi la piglia. He that takes the Triglia eats it not. This fish the French call Rouge from its colour; and we in Cornwal (where I have seen of them taken) Surmullet. Spie∣gole, in Latine Lupus marinus, of which kind I have not seen any in England; Orate, Giltheads; Cephali, which we in English call Mullet, the ancients cal∣led it Mugil; Sarde, a kind of Sprat; Conger; Lamprey; Sole; Plaise and others of the flat kind; Merluzzos, which we call Hake; sometimes small sturgeons; Dog-fish of several sorts; Tuny and Sword-fish is also to be sold heer. Wild Boar and venison of wild Deer you shall sel∣dom fal of, to be sold in the Poulterers shops. Their wild Deer they call Capreole, it is for the most part
very lean▪ Porcupine also is sometimes to be sold in the markets. Oranges and Lemons are cheap in Rome; Pears and Apples, if they be good and large fruit, dear, they sell them by weight heer, as they do generally all over Italy. Their bread is very good and light notwithstand∣ing they use no yeast to raise it, and cheaper than ours in England. And heer by the way it may not be amiss to take notice, that the use of yeast for the raising and fermenting of bread in these Northern Countries hath been very ancient. I find mention of it in Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 6. who thereupon gives their bread the preeminence for lightness. Gal∣liae, saith he, & Hispaniae frumento in potum resoluto, quibus diximus generibus, spumâ itâ concretâ pro fer∣mento utuntur. Quâ de causâ levior illis quàm caeteris panis est. Heer is great variety of Wines: more sorts com∣monly sold than in any other City of Italy: as Greco, Lagrime or Naples, Languedoc wine, wine of Syragusa and Augusta in Sicily, Orvietano, Jensano, Monte Pulciano, di Monte fiascone, Castelii, Romano, and which is most commonly drunk, Albano. Most of the wines are sweet and full-bodied, and will bear half water. Sweet wines they call abboccati and rough wines asciuti. They have little wine so harsh and rough upon the palate as our French Claret and Florence red wine, though those also are to be had heer. Their Olives are small, but good and sweet. They have plenty of Wall-nuts and Hazel-nuts, and other fruits the same that we have. For Ap∣ples and Pears no Countrey hath better, I had almost said so good as we in England. For Apri∣cocks I tasted none beyond the Seas comparable to ours. Rome is noted for several commodities and ma∣nufactures, as Viol and Lute-strings the best in Eu∣rope;
perfumed gloves; combs made of Buffles horns, womens fans, Vitriol, Essences. Commonly all strangers that travel thither buy of those things not for their use only, but to make pre∣sents of to their friends. Heer is doubtless the best music in the world, es∣pecially voices, there being many Eunuchs and Nuns, a great part of whose employment it is to sing in the Quire. For pictures of the best masters Rome excells all places, there being more heer than I think in all Italy besides, so that Rome is become the school of Painters, who come from all parts of Europe hither to study and practise. At present Cavalier Bernini is the most noted and indeed only excellent Sculptor, and Pietro de ortona the most eminent painter. The ville (as they now call them) of the Princes and prime Nobility of Rome, for gardens of flowers, groves and thickets of trees, cut hedges of Cypress, Alaternus▪ Laurel, Bay, Phillyrea, Laurus tinus and other semper-virent plants, close and open walks of great length, orchards of fruit-trees, Labyrinths, fountains and ingenious water-works, Bird-cages, statues and other ornaments, especially their great∣ness (some being in compass 3 or 4 miles) excel the orchards, gardens and walks of any Prince in Chri∣stendom that I have seen. Of these there are a great number, but the chief of all are 1. The Villa Bor∣ghese, of which family was Pope Paul V. This is esteemed the best of all the villae and gardens about Rome, though it be not so vast as 2. the villa Pam∣phylia, of which family was Pope innocent X. This is on the Janiculum without S. Pancras's gate and is said to be 4 miles in compass. 3. The Villa Ludo∣visia belonging to the Prince Ludovisio; of which family was Gregory XV. 4. The Popes garden at the Vatican called Belvedere. 5. The Popes garden at monte cavallo. 6. The garden of the Grand Duke
or the villa de Medici. 7. The garden of Montaltō. 8. The garden of the Mattei. In all which there are little palaces furnished and adorned with excellent statues, bassi rilievi, pictures and other curiosities, which I forbear to enumerate and describe at large, that I may not spend time, and waste paper in wri∣ting what few will think worth their while or pains to read; and which hath already been published by Mr. Lassels in his voyage of Italy, to which I refer the curious for further satisfaction. Of the palaces and public buildings I shall say nothing, only I cannot forbear a word or two of S. Peter's Church, which is in my opinion the most stately, sumptuous and magnificent structure that now doth, or perhaps ever did stand upon the face of the earth. This was the only building that sur∣prised me and exceeded my expectation, being for a work of man the most pleasant and goodly, not to say ravishing object that ever I beheld. The whole pile of that majestic bulk and greatness that it ex∣ceeds in all dimensions the most famous Temples mentioned by the ancients: being in length 520 foot (as Mr. Lassels tells us) and 385 in breadth: and in some, the greatest Christian Churches; for though it be not so long as S. Pauls London, yet is it much broader, and in that respect much handsomer; the breadth being more proportionate to the length. The cupola of that marvellous highth and compass (the diameter thereof beng equal to that of the Pantheon) and sustaining on the top a huge stone∣lanthorn, with great pillars of stone about it, that it may well be accounted the boldest piece of Archi∣tecture (as he saith) that I think the world hath seen. The Roof arched or vaulted, and the vault divided into great squares or panes like wainscot after the old Roman fashion; the ribs and transverse borders which terminate those squares or pannels being chan∣nelled and richly gilded, and the area of each square
almost fill'd up with a gilt rose. The oval Portico encompassing a large area before the Church, consist∣ing of 4 rows of great stone pillars standing so thick that they show like a grove of great trees: The stately porch to which you ascend out of this area by 24 steps; not to mention the incrustation of some part of the walls with polished marble; the excel∣lent statues, stately Altars, rare pictures and other ornaments, render this Church truly admirable, and in all respects I will not say comparable to but excelling the best in the world. During our stay at Rome we rode forth to see 1. Frescati 12 Italian miles distant, anciently called Tusculum, where Cicero had a villa or Countrey∣house, of which as yet they shew some remains. Heer are at present 3 noted ville, 1. That of the Borghesi with the palace called Mondragone, and two others. 2. The Villa Aldobrandina or Belvedere be∣longing to Prince Pamphylio. 3. The Villa Ludovisia; all of them for walks, groves, Labyrinths, gardens and other ornaments not inferiour to the best about Rome, and for cascates or falls of water, wetting sports and other ingenious water-works, beyond them. What we took more especial notice of, as ha∣ving not before seen, was the imitation of a tempest or storm of thunder and rain. This artificial thun∣der they call Girandola. 2. Tivoli, anciently Tibur, 18 Italian miles off Rome. Of this City Horace was much enamoured, praying that it might be the seat and retirement of his old age. Tibur Argeo positum colono, Sit meae sedes utinam senectae, Sit modus lasso maris & viarum mili∣tiaeque. It stands like Frescati on the brow of a hill and overlooks the Campagna of Rome. Heer are some remains of ancient temples and other build∣ings, and a remarkable cascate of the river Aniene or Teverone. The villa of Este for gardens and or∣chards, walks and groves, the Girandola and other
water works is nothing inferiour to those at Frescati. About 5 miles distant from Tivoli we passed over the Sulphur-river, the water whereof is warm, of a blewish colour and noisom smell, much like to that of the Sulphur-well at Knareburgh in Yorkshire. It encrusts the channel it runs in with a whitish kind of friable stone, which in many places in the bottom and sides of the channel congeals in the figure of confects or sugar-plums which they call Confetti de Tivoli. Of these you have boxes full to be sold at Rome, so exactly resembling confects both for fi∣gure and colour that no man can distinguish them; but they are not naturally found so figured, as they would make strangers believe, but artificially made so by casting in moulds. About Frescati we found great store of Styrax arbor growing wild in the hed∣ges, which we found no where else beyond the Seas. The Campagna of Rome seems to be good land, but is esteemed a very bad air and unhealthful Coun∣trey to live in, which is the reason it is so desolate and thin of inhabitants. I had almost forgot one natural Phaenomenon we observed at Rome, which did a little surprise us. In sharp rosty weather in the middle of Winter, the water which the servants brought up to wash with in the morning was hot to that excess that we did verily believe they had heated it over the fire; nor could we be perswaded of the contrary till we went down to the fountain, and found it there of equal temper with what was brought up. It was formerly taken for granted by the Peripatetic Schools, that fountains of springing water are hotter in cold wea∣ther or winter and colder in hot or summer than at other times; the reason whereof they assigned to be an Antiperistasis, satisfying themselves with that, and seeking no further. Later Philosophers who could not content themselves with the notion of An∣tiperistasis, chose rather to deny the truth of the ex∣periment,
and affirmed that fountain-water was not really warmest in the coldest weather, or coldest in the hottest, but only seemed so to our sence; the temper of which is much altered according to the difference of the weather: So that what is much colder than our temper in hot weather, is not much colder in cold weather, and so seems not so cold, and on the contrary. Or thus, We judging of the heat and cold of other things by the proportion they bear to the temper of the air about us, when the air is very cold, though the water hath the same degree of cold it had before, yet it may be hotter then the air, and consequently seem to us actually hot, and vice versa. But for my part whatever the reason be, I must needs assert the truth of the experiment, being very confident that the water, at least of some sour∣ces, doth not only seem to be but really is much hot∣ter in cold frosty weather than at other times; else this water could not possibly have seemed to us, as it did, more than luke-warm. Great store of rain falls heer in winter time to make amends for the extraordinary heat and drought of the summer. Rome is a place not only well worth the seeing, but very convenient to sojourn in, there being where∣withal to entertain and divert men of all sorts of hu∣mors and tempers. The present Romans seemed to me in their houses and furniture, particularly their beds and lodging, in their diet, in their manners and customs and in their very pronunciation (so liquid, plain and di∣stinct) more to symbolize and agree with us English then any other people of Italy, whether it were that we learned of them or they of us or both mutually of each other, when there was that great commerce and entercourse between us and that City for so ma∣ny years together. To describe at large the Court of Rome with all
its Officers and Ministers; the Ecclesiastical govern∣ment of the Romish Church in general; their Cere∣monies and shows; the civil government of the ter∣ritories subject to the Pope and particularly of the City of Rome; the interest of the Pope and the terms he stands in with other Princes, would require a vo∣lume alone; and therefore I shall chuse rather whol∣ly to omit those particulars for the present, and pass on to the description of our succeeding voyage. January 24. 1664. We departed from Rome and began our journey to Venice; riding along the Via Flaminia, and passing the Tiber again by the Ponte Molle or Pons Milvius. At 7 miles distance from Rome we passed a small village called Prima porta.Prima Parta. Some suppose that anciently the City extended thus far: which conjecture I conceive is grounded upon the name of this place. Eight miles further riding brought us to a small town called Castel novo, where we lodged. All this afternoon we rode near the Ti∣ber, upon the Via Flaminia, which reaches as far as Rimini. It is paved with broad flints, and pebbles, and hath on each side a border of stone, and in that border at every second or third pace a stone standing up higher than the level of the border. We obser∣ved in the fields we passed through this day great store of vernal crocuses now in flower. We proceeded on to Arignano or Ariano,25. Ariano. a little town and a post-stage 8 miles. Heer we left the Via Flaminia, and rode round a high hill (which stands single,Civita Castella∣na. and may be seen 20 miles forward) to Civita Castellana a little town standing on a hill and a post-stage, 9 miles. Not far from hence we had the pro∣spect of Caprarola and the Duke of Parma's Palace,Capraro∣la. [where we were told is a whispering room like that in the Palace of Te at-Mantua] which seemed not to be more than two or three miles distant in a right line, but we were assured that as the way lay it was ten or twelve miles thither.
Four miles further we came to a poor small town called Borgetto;Borghetto a little below which we passed the Tiber by a bridge called Ponte Felice,Ponte Felice. begun by Sixtus V and finished by Vrban VIII, for the benefit of Travellers and Pilgrims, as appears by an inscripti∣on upon it. Not far from the river on our right hand we passed under a little town, standing on the top of a hill,Maglia∣no. called Magliano, and rode on about 6 miles near the bank of the river, (having in prospect at a good distance on our left hand a town called Horta) till we came to Vtricoli,Horta. which town at pre∣sent stands upon a hill,Vtricoli. but by the ruines that re∣main, the ancient Ocricoli seems to have lain near the river, at least part of it. From Vtricoli we had stony way over the moun∣tains for five miles. For about a mile before we en∣tred Narni we rode upon the brink of a horrid pre∣cipice by the river Nera's side.Narni. Narni anciently called Nequinum, and afterwards Narnia from the river Nar which runs beneath that steep rocky mountain upon the ridge whereof this City stands, was formerly a Roman colony and a place of some account, but is now very mean, poor, and inconsiderable. Leander Albertus saith it was ruined and left almost quite de∣solate by the Venetian Souldiers who were quartered there in the time that the Emperour Charles V be∣sieged Pope Clement VII in the Castle S. Angelo. Gatta∣melata the famous Captain for the Venetians, to whom they have erected a brass statue on horseback near S. Antonies Church in the City of Padua, was native of this town. Near Narni are seen the re∣mainders of vast arches of stone, which some say were of a bridge, others more probably of an Aque∣duct, over the river from one mountain to another. We rode from Narni over a pleasant and fruitful valley,26. encompassed with mountains, and cultiva∣ted after the manner of Lombardy, to Terni, anciently Interamna from its situation, a handsome little City,
having a pretty piazza, on which stands a Church that seems to have been an ancient temple. About 4 miles from this town is that famous Cascate or fall of water from the lake di Pie di Luco. At the fur∣ther end of this valley beyond Terni and upon the hills were the greatest olive-yards or rather forests of huge olive-trees that I have any where seen in Italy, and at this time of the year we found the people ve∣ry busie in brushing down and gathering of olives. From Terni we had mountainous way to a little place called Tritura, another Post-stage, and from thence we descended to Spoleto,Spoleto. the chief town of Vmbria thence called Ducato Spoletano. The walls of this City are of a large extent, and the houses in∣differently fair, and there are to be seen many ruines of ancient buildings in it. From Spoleto we rode through a very pleasant and fruitfull valley of a great extent, surrounded with mountains, much resembling the Arena of an Amphi∣theater, planted with rows of trees and vines after the manner of Lombardy. The hills round about yield a pleasant prospect, being sprinkled every where with little towns and houses set thick upon them. About 4 miles short of Foligno we rode under an indifferent great town, standing on a round hill, called Trevi.Trevi. Foligno [Fulginium] is a pleasant and handsome little town,Foligno. noted for confections and sweet-meats. At the end of the valley of Spoleto beyond Fuligno we observed the like woods of olive-trees as in the valley of Terni. Leaving Foligno we ascended again in a way cut out of the side of a mountain,Jan. 27. having on our left hand a huge precipice, and below a valley between very high and steep hills, into which at the upper end falls down a little river called Dale, which drives some paper-mills; a pleasant place to behold. About 4 or 5 miles from Foligno we got up to the top of the
Apponnine, where the mountains all about us were co∣vered with snow. On the top of these mountains is a little plain, and upon it a small lake or pool of water, and a village called Col fiorito, a very pleasant place in Summer-time, as its name imports. When we had passed over this plain we began again to descend, and the next considerable village we came to was Serravalle, ex re nomen habens, it being situate in the jaws of a narrow valley, 14 miles distant from Foligno. From Serravalle we rode among the mountains by the side of a little river, passing several small villages, viz. La Muccia or Mu∣tia and Pulverina, &c. and lodged at Valcimarra. We rode through Tolentino a pretty little town, having a handsome piazza,28. Tolenti∣ne. distant 9 miles from Val∣cimarra. This was the Birth-place of Franciscus Phi∣lelphus a learned man, and a great Critic in the Greek tongue. He it was that invented the word stapes for a stirrop, which before had no name in Latine.Macera∣ta. From Tolentino we had 10 miles to Mace∣rata, a large, well-built and populous town, having a handsome piazza. It is the Capital city of Marca Anconitana, where the Cardinal-Legate or gover∣nour of the Province usually resides. From Maccrata we rode to Loreto passing through Recanati,Recana∣ti. in La∣tine Ricinetum, a very pretty town, situate on the ridge of a hill, and but 3 miles short of Loreto.Loreto It arose from the ruines of Helvia Ricina, destroyed by the Goths. Heer we took notice of a table with a brass statue of the Virgin Mary in basso relievo upon it, and an inscription, giving thanks to her that she was pleased to fix her house in the territory of this City. Loreto stands likewise upon a hill, a pretty small place, consisting only of one little street within the walls, and a Burgo or Suburb without likewise of one street, as big as the City within. The Church and College of the Canons stands at one end of the street. Before the Church is a little piazza having a
cloyster or Portico on one side where the Canons lodgings are. In the midst of this piazza is a hand∣some fountain, and before the Church door a brass statue of Sixtus V in a sitting posture, with an in∣scription signifying that he had advanced Loreto to the dignity of a city, giving it a Bishop. The doors of the Church are of brass cast and graven with several histories. The Church is built like our Ca∣thedrals in form of a Cross, having a Cupola in the middle, directly under which stands the Santa Casa or holy house (as they call it) enclosed in a case of white Parian marble, curiously engraven with seve∣ral figures in b. r. representing several histories, by the best sculptors then living. The house it self is sufficiently described in the history of it written by Tursellinus. The walls (which are now only remain∣ing, the roof being removed) are made of a kind of red stone (as they would have us believe) not only of the colour but also of the figure of bricks, indeed so like bricks that I can hardly perswade my self they were any other. This kind of stone, they say, at this present is found about Nazareth and no where else, which if true is one of the best arguments they have to prove that this house came from thence. That the Reader may see what weak proofs and little evidence they have of the miraculous transporation of this house from Judea hither, I shall heer insert the whole Relation of it made by themselves, which is translated into 13 several languages and hung up in tables heer in the Church: and in English runs thus, Ave Domina Angelorum. The miraculous Origin and Translation of the Church of our Lady of Loretto. The Church of Loreto was a Chamber of the B. Virgin nigh Jerusalem, in which she was born and
bred, and saluted by the Angel, and therein concei∣ved and brought up her Son Jesus to the age of 12 years. This chamber after the Ascension of our Savi∣our was by the Apostles consecrated into a Church in honour of the B. Lady: and S. Luke made a pi∣cture to her, likewise extant therein to be seen at this very day. It was frequented with great devotion by the people of the Countrey where it stood whilst they were Catholics. But when leaving the Faith of Christ they followed the Sect of Mahomet, the An∣gels took it and carried it into Sclavonia and placed it by a town called Flumen, where not being had in due reverence, they again transported it over the Sea to a wood in the territory of Recanati, belong∣ing to a Noble woman called Loretta, from whence it took the name of our Lady of Loreto; and thence again they carried it, by reason of the many robbe∣ries committed, to a mountain of two brothers in the said territory: and from thence finally, in re∣spect of their disagreement about the gifts and offer∣ings, to the common high-way not far distant, where it now remains without foundations, famous for many signs, graces and miracles; whereat the inhabitants of Recanati, who often came to see it, much wondering, environed it with a strong and and thick wall, yet could no man tell whence it came originally, till in the year 1296. the B. V. ap∣peared in sleep to a holy devout man, to whom she revealed it, and he divulged it to others of Autho∣rity in this Province, who determining forthwith to try the truth of the vision, resolved to chuse xvi men of credit, who to that effect should go all to∣gether to the City of Nazareth, as they did, carrying with them the measures of this Church, and com∣paring therewith the foundatious remnant, they found them wholly agreeable; and in a wall there by engraven, that it stood there, and had left the place. Which done they presently returning back,
published the premisses to be true: and from that time forward it hath been certainly known, that this Church was the Chamber of the Virgin Mary: to which Christians began then, and have ever since had great: devotion, for that in it daily she hath done and doth many and many miracles. One Frere Paul de Sylva an Eremite of great sanctity, who lived in a cotage nigh unto this Church, whither daily he went to Mattins, said that for ten years space on the 8th. of September, two hours before day he saw a light descend from heaven upon it, which he said was the B. V. who there shewed her self on the Feast of her Nativity. In confirmation of all which two virtuous men of the city of Recanati divers times declared unto the Prefect of Terreman and Gover∣nour of the forementioned Church is followeth, The one called Paul Renalduci avouched, that his Grandfather saw when the Angels brought it over the Sea, placed it in the forementioned wood, and had often visited it there: the other called Francis Prior in like sort affirmed, that his Grandfathers Grandfather, being 120 years old, had also much frequented it in the same place, and for further proof that it had been there, he reported that his Grand∣fathers Grandfather had a house nigh unto it, where∣in he dwelt; and that in his time it was carried by the Angels from thence to the mountain of the two Brothers, where they placed it as abovesaid. By order of the right reverend Monsignor Vincent Cassal of Bo∣lognia, Governour of this holy place, un∣der protection of the most reverend Car∣dinal Moroni. I Robert Corbington Priest of the Society of Jesus in the year 1634. have faithfully translated the pre∣misses out of the La∣tine original hanging in the said Church. To the honour of the ever-glorious Virgin.
The Treasury of this Church is very rich, full of Jewels, precious stones, gold and silver vessels, and tabulae votivae, embroidered Altar-clothes, copes, vests, &c. of great value, besides other ornaments and curiosities, which have been presented by seve∣ral Prinves and great persons. The most considerable particulars those that are curious may find set down in Lassels his Voyage of Italy, as also of the vessels and plate in the house it self. The earthen pots in the Apothecaries shop, most part of them painted by the hand of Raphael de Vrbino, and the great wine cellar, are things that use to be shewn to tra∣vellers. We travelled from Loreto to Ancona 15 miles of foul way.30. Ancona. This is a considerable city, well peopled and frequented by Merchants, by reason of the com∣modiousness of the harbour, which was formerly the verybest in all the gulf, but is now run much to decay. The chief remarkables we took notice of were [1.] The Remainders of the stones securing the ancient port, where stands that famous trium∣phal arch of white Parian marble, by order of the Senate erected to Trajan: composed of huge stones and thus inscribed. Imp. Caesari. Divi. Nervae. F. Nevae. Trajano. Optimo. Aug. Germanic. Daci. Co. Pont. Max. Tr. Pot. XIX. Imp. IX. Cos. VI. PP. providentissi mo. Principi. Senatus. P. Q. R. Quòd. accessum. Italiae. hoc. etiam. addito. ex. pecunia. sua. portu. tutiorem. navigantibus reddiderit. On the right side is inscribed, Plotinae. Aug. Conjug. Aug. and on the left side Divae. Marcianae. So∣rori. Aug. On the top of this Arch formerly stood a Statua equestris of Trajan, which is now taken down and
set over the gate of the Merchants Hall or Exchange, which was [2.] the second remarkable. [3.] The Theatre for Comedies. [4.] The Domo or Church of S. Cyriacus. [5.] The Cittadel. [6.] The shell-fish called Pholades in Latine, because they live in holes within a soft kind of stone, or hard clay, which being exposed to the air in process of time becomes a perfect stone for hardness. The Italians call these stones Balle di Sasso, and the fish Ballare or Dattylide mare. They find the stones (as they told us) but at Sea in great plenty, and taking them up being them into the harbour where they keep them. We had a dish of them drest which were no unpleasant meat, inferiour for tast to no shell fish except an oy∣ster. We travelled along the Sea-coast 20 miles to Sini∣gaglia,31. Siniga∣glia. anciently Sena Gallica, a handsome little city well walled about and fortified. Heer is a small har∣bour for boats and barges. From Sinigaglia we still followed the Sea-shore to Fano, 15 miles distant; by the way,Fano. passing over two long bridges. Fano, an∣ciently Fanum Fortunae, is a much larger city then I had imagined, well walled and fortified. There is an old triumphal Arch erected to Augustus, which because it had been somewhat broken and defaced in the wars with Malatesta, they have in the wall by set a model of it as it was when entire, whereon is inscribed, Effigies arcûs ab Augusto erecti, posteáque ex parie diruti bello Pii II. contra Fanenses; Anno MCCCCLXIII. DIVO AUGUSTO PIO CONSTANTINO PATRI DOMINOPUM. IMP. CAES. DIVI F. AUGUSTUS PONTI∣FEX MAXIMUS COS. XIII TRIBUNITIA POTEST XXXI IMP. XXVI PATER PA∣TRIAE MURUM DEDIT.
CURANTE L. TURCIO SECUNDO APRO∣NIANI PRAEF. URB. FIL. ASTERIO V. C. CORR. FLAM. ET PICENI. Heer we saw the ancient temple of Fortuno now the Augustine Freres Church: And the brass statue of Fortune which was adored, taken out thence, now standing in the palace. In this City is a Senate of 70 Gentlemen changed every third or fourth year, who out of their own number elect every two months 2 Priors and a Gonfalonier, but the Gover∣nour or Monsignor placed heer by the Pope is the Dominus fac totum. Malatesta tyrant of Rimini (as they call him) seized also upon this place, but was driven out by Pope Pius II, assisted by the Duke of Vrbin, Carignano of Ancona and one Cassaro. These two Gentlemen had each of them a ladder for his arms, the one red, and the other white. The city out of gratitude took these two ladders for their Arms, leaving their former, which was a gate or Arch with this motto under it, In hac porta stat hîc Leo fortis. This City is by some esteemed one of the best situated in Italy. We still held along the shore till we came to Pesa∣ro,Feb. 1. 1664. Pesaro. anciently Pisaurum, 7 miles. This is a very elegant and pleasant City, having a handsom piazza, en∣compassed with fair buildings; therein stand many ancient stones with inscriptions. We passed through a long well-built street, and had a prospect of the Cupo∣la of the Domo. The haven is almost choaked up. It is walled about and fortified wih bastions and a castle. We saw this town only in transitu, but it merited a little demurr. From hence we crossed the Countrey to a village called Catolica 10 miles. We left Gradara on our left hand but came not in sight of it. From Catolica we rode along the Sea-shore for the most part till we came within 2 or 3 miles of Rimini, and then left the shore and took the Via Flaminia. From
Catolica to Rimini they reckon 15 miles, yet may Ri∣mini easily be seen from thence.Rimini. Rimini is a pretty proper City, having streight streets like Pesaro and Fano, yet are the buildings but low. Within the walls of this town we passed under a high stone-arch erected to Tiberius (Schottus saith Augustus) Caesar, but the inscription was somewhat defaced. In the piazza we viewed the stone on which J. Caesar is said to have stood when he made a Speech to his Souldi∣ers, animating them to accompany him to Rome and invade the Cities liberty. On it are these modern in∣scriptions, C. Caesar Dict. Rubicone superato civili bell. commilit. suos hîc in foro Ar. adlocut. Suggestum hunc vetustate collapsum Coss. Ariminen∣sium Novembris & Decembr. MDV. Restit. In another Piazza we saw a brass statue of Paulus V. Being Carneval time we found the Gentlemen heer tilting. They ran not at one another but at a Puppet or man of straw, Bamboccio they call it. We made a digression to S. Marino,2. S. Mari∣no. a little town standing on the top of a very high hill, some 10 miles or more distant from Rimini. This place hath maintained it self in the condition of a free State or Commonwealth, as the Inhabitants boast, for above 1000 years, but its well if half so long. The territory of this Republic is but one mountain about 3 miles in length, and some 9 or ten miles round. In this small territory they have 4 Castelli or villages, viz. Serravalle, Fietano, Monte Giardino, and Fiorentino: 8 corn mills upon the little river Canova, which bounds this territory towards the North, and a powder-mills: the number of souls is about 4000 or 5000, of Souldiers or fighting men 1500. The Arms of this Republic are 3 towers upon a moun∣tain, and under it this Motto, Libertas perpetua.
The Borgho of S. Marin stands at the foot of the hill upon which the town is built, and is like some of our North-Wales towns. In this Borgh weekly on Wednesdays is held a market, where are bought and sold a great number of Swine, especially in Carne∣val time, 3, 4, or 5 thousand on a market-day. The reason of this great concourse to buy and sell heer is because they pay so little toll, viz. about six pence for a drove be they more or less. From the Borgho up to the town are two ascents, the one more easie and winding about to the furthermost gate, by which coaches may make a shift to get up, the other steep to the nearer gate. On one side the town is walled about, on the other side it needs it not, for it stands on the brow of a precipitious rock of a very great height, whereon they have placed 3 towers in a row. On the side where the wall goes the hill is very steep and almost impossible to climb but by the made ways. There is no hill near it that can any way offend it, and those that are next far lower than that whereon the town is built. The streets of the town are nar∣row, and the houses but mean. Heer live about 60 Jews. Two cloysters they have within the walls, one of discalceate Franciscans or Succolanti, the other of Nuns of the Order of Santa Clara; with∣out the walls in the Borgho is a Monastery of Capu∣cines, and about a mile from the town a fair Con∣vent of the Servitae. They have 25 small pieces or Drakes and 2 Culverines. This place is a Bishops Sea and the Bishop of it is Bishop also of S. Leo, Monte Feltre, and La Penna. This Republic is sur∣rounded by the territory of the Pope; they stamp no money; they have neither friendship nor enmi∣ty with any of the States or Princes of Italy; and in the several wars of Italy they have enjoyed peace. On occasion they send Embassadours to the neigh∣bouring Princes and States. At Rome they have their Protector, who at present is Cardinal Carlo Barbe∣rini,
to whom they sometimes send presents, viz. 100 little Cheeses or a Butt of Muscatella. They ac∣knowledge no Superior under God, but have abso∣lute power in civil and criminal causes. If a person banished from other places retires hither, they some∣timet give him protection, but it is done by the ma∣jor vote of the Council. If one man kill another, though in his own defence, he is sentenced by the Commissary or Judge to pay 100 Scudi, but he pe∣titioning the Council, they usually bring it down to 25. If one murthers another and flies, he is banish∣ed for ever and all his goods confiscate. This Repub∣lic maintains a Physician and a Surgeon at the pub∣lic charge. The Muscatella's of this place are much esteemed, and the Gentry heerabout in Summer∣time come ordinarily hither to drink them, and en∣joy the fresco. Cows they have none, but sheep and goats good store; of whose milk they make little cheeses that eat well. From the hill we had a pro∣spect of Monte Leone, a strong fortress formerly be∣longing to this Republic, but taken from them by the Duke of Vrbin. They have 4 great Fairs every year, the chiefest of all is on S. Bartholomew's day, at which time there is a general muster of all their Forces. At these Fairs there is great abundance of young cattel sold. Many veals driven as far as Flo∣rence. These fairs and markets disgust the neighbour∣ing Princes, as being a great diminution of their tolls. The Government of S. Marino is by a Council of 45, which they call Corpo di Prencipe. Of these 15 are Gentlemen (for there are about 20 families of Gentlemen in this State) 15 Artisans or tradesmen and 15 farmers or count reymen. They continue for their lives, and when one dies another is chosen by two third parts of the votes, when a Gentleman a Gentleman, and so of the rest. These Counsellors chuse out of their own number from 6 months to
6 months  Capitanie, (which have the like power as nsuls, or Maior, with us) after this manner. When the old Captains go out of office they nomi∣nate 12; the names of these are written in 6 scrolls of Paper, viz. two names in a scroll. These scrolls are put into a hat or box, and a boy puts in his hand and draws out 3. These 3 the elder Captain takes and carries to the Church of the Sacrament, and Te Deum being sung, a Priest puts the 3 scrolls into a hat, and a young child puts in his hand and draws out one, and they whose names are therein written are Capitanei for the next 6 months. These Capitanei cannot be eleced again for two years fol∣lowing. Besides, the Great Council elect out of themselves by major vote a lesser Council of 12, viz. 4 out of each order. And to this Council civil and criminal causes and quarrels of right and wrong are referred. This Commonwealth hath a Commissary or Judge, who must be a Doctor of Law, and always a foreigner. He is elected by the Council and conti∣tinues 18 months. His stipend is ten crowns the month. His sentence is confirmed, or may be re∣pealed or mitigated by the Council. The Chancel∣lor is elected in like manner. He is a notary and his allowance is 60 scudi or crowns per annum. They have also a Captain of the Militia, who continues in office as long as the Council pleases. But enough and more then needs will most Readers think of this petty Commonwealth; concerning which I should not have been so large, but that no body that I know of before me hath made any particular description of its State and Government, as accounting it not worth their while to enquire into it, or their pains to set it down. We travelled from Rimini to Ravenna. 3. We pas∣sed the famous bridge over the river Rimino, begun by Augustus and finished by Tiberius. The people say that the stones are joyned together without any ce∣ment.
Indeed the sides or walls of it are of vast stones, each as high as the border and or breadth proportionable, immediately contiguous without any morter or cement between that I could discern. There is upon it an inscription in large letters signi∣fying when and by whom it was built. At 15 miles distance from Rimini we passed through a little town called Cesenatic; then Cervia about 5 miles further,Cesena∣tico. Cervia. a place enveroned with fens. It is a Bishos Sea and therefore hath the title of a City, yet is it t a mean and pitiful town. All the way between Cervia and Ravenna till we came withn 2 or 3 miles of the town, we had a wood of Pine-trees on our right hand called Pigneda, bearing fruit enough (as Schot∣tus saith) to serve all Italy. Ravenna stands between two rivers [Bedesis and Montone] one running on one side,Raven∣na and the other on the other. It is a large town but ragged and not well built, the houses are all very low. It hath 5 gates, an ole castle of brick; 3 very fair Covents, one called the Classe, belonging to the Monachi Clas∣senses, the Church whereof is dedicated to S. Ro∣mualdo. A second called the Porto, because it is de∣dicated to S. Maria Portuenses. It belongs to the Ca∣nonici reguulares Lateranenses. A third of Benedictine Monks dedicated to S. Vitale. The Church of this Covent is a double octagon, the one concentrical to and included in the other, built as they told us by Justinian. The Monks shew'd us heer 2 marble pil∣lars, for which they said the Venetians offered them their weight in silver; but we have seen the like elsewhere, viz. in the Library at Zurich, and at Verona in our Ladies Chappel in the Garden of Seig∣nior Horatio Giusti. Their generation at first was of a mass or heap of small flints and pebbles united in∣to one body by a cement petrified as hard as them∣selves and capable of politure. Probably this cement was separated by degrees from a fluid wherein these
stones lay. To these Monks belongs the Rotonda, a little round Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, about ¼ of a mile without the walls: the entire roof whereof is of one single stone, notwithstand∣ing that the Diameter of the Church is 14 of my ordinary paces, which are near so many yards. In the midst of this stone is a round hole to let in the light. Upon the top of it formerly stood a porphyry monument of Theodoricus a Gotthick King who is supposed to have built it. This monument is now taken down and set in the wall of the Covent of the Succolanti, by the way-side with this inscription, Vas hoc Porphyriacum ol. Theodorici Gottor. imp. cineres in Rotundae apice recondens, huc Petro Donato Caesio Narnien. praesule favente translatum ad perennem me∣moriam Sapientes Reip. Rav. PP. C. MDLXIII. The Monastery of the Succolanti is one of the fairest we have seen belonging to that order, and the Church dedicated to S. Apollinaris deserves no∣tice taking, as well for the double row of marble pillars brought from Constantinople by Theodoricus, as for the ancient figures of Mosaic work in the walls. In the Domo we noted the figures of the Arch∣bishops of Ravenna in Mosaic work. Eleven of them had a Dove standing upon their heads, which they say were chosen by a Dove alighting and sitting upon their heads, the legend whereof may be seen more at large in Schottus. Near the Franciscans Cloyster is the monument of Dante the famous Poet, which is an arch erected to his memory by Bernardus Bembus the Venetian Podestà in Ravenna; under which is his effigies, and two inscriptions in Latine verse,
I. Exiguâ tumuli Dantes hîc sorte jacebas, Squallenti nulli cognite penè situ; At nunc marmoreo subnixus conderis arcu, Omnibus & cultu splendidiore nites. Nimirum Bembus musis incensus Etruscis Hoc tibi quem inprimis hae coluere dedit. II. Jura monarchiae, superos, Phlegetonta lacúsque Lustrando cecini voluerunt fata quousque: Sed quia pars cssit melioribus hospita castris, Auctorémque suum petiit felicior astris, Hîc claudor Dantes patriis extorris ab oris, Quem genuit parvi Florentia mater amoris. These verses are said to have been made by Dante himself, sed Musis parùm faventibus, and if he had not composed better in Italian he had not deserved the reputation of so great a Poet. This City may boast of its antiquity and what it hath been, not what it is, and yet the Cardinal Legate Governour of Romandiola usually resides heer. It is very ill ser∣ved with fish, notwithstanding it is so near the Sea: there's scarce a good Inn in Town, it lying out of the way of travellers, and strangers, and being no through∣fare. What was true of old is true still heer; Its har∣der to get good water than good wine, Sit cisternae mihi quam vinea malo Ravennae, the water being all brackish: Neither yet was the wine we met withal any of the best. I wonder this City should not be more populous and rich; the Countrey on the Northside all along to Faenza, seeming to be fat and fertile land, and being planted after the manner of Lombardy. It lies indeed very low, yet I believe now adays is never overflown. We observed in this journey from Rome to Venice a great difference between the temperature of the air on this side and on the other side the Appennine
mountains, on the other side it being very tempe∣rate and warm, but on this side as cold and raw as it is at any time in winter with us, or indeed can well be in open weather; and that this cold did not proceed from a general change of weather since our coming on this side we are well assured; for we heard of no such change, and we found snow lying heer in the low grounds in many places, which on the other side was all melted and gone even upon the hills be∣fore our coming over. The reason of this is obvious, because this ridge of hills being higher than the low∣er region of the air, or place where the Sun-beams are reflected, hinders the commixture of the warm Southerly and Western air with the cold Northerly and Eastern, but especially stopping on one hand the South and West winds which else would drive the temperate air and tepid vapours into these parts; and on the other hand the cold Northern and Eastern blasts, which else would temper and much abate the warmth of those beyond the mountains. Hence I do not think incredible nor much wonder at what is related by some Travellers of a mountain in the East-Indies, on the one side whereof it is Summer when on the other it is Winter. We left Ravenna and rode along the bank of the River Montone till we came within 4 or 5 miles of Faenza.Feb. 5. The Countrey on each side this river was much like to Lombardy. The river ran very swiftly notwithstanding to the eye the Countrey seemed to be an exact level. From Ravenna to Faenza we had 20 long miles. Faenza is a pretty little City,Faenza. encompassed with a strong brick wall, at present neglected and out of repair; famous for earthen ware made heer, esteemed the best in Italy. Before we entred the Town we passed a little Suburb, and then the bridge, in the midst of which stands a tower. Upon S. Thomas his day yearly all the Gentlemen of Faenza meet and
chuse Magistrates for all the year, viz. 8 Antiani or Senators and a Chief who is called Prior for every month, so that for every year there are 12 several Senates. From Faenza we travelled on to Imola 10 miles.Imola. The way was very streight, I suppose part of the Via Aemilia. About the midway between Faenza and Imola we passed through a little walled Town called Castel Bolognese. Half a mile short of Imola we ferried over the river Senio. Imola anciently Forum Cornelii is a lesser Town then Faenza, hath a fair square piazza with a cloy∣ster or Portico on one side it. We travelled to Bologna upon the Via Aemilia.6. Bologna. In this side of Italy they have a custom to boil their wines to make them keep better. The boil'd wine, which they call Vin Cotto, seemed to us much stronger than the wine unboil'd, which they call Vin Crudo. We took the Florentine Procaccios boat to Venice.7. Passing through 9 Sostegni we came to Mal Albergo, where we shifted our boat going down from a higher to a lower channel, which brought us to Ferrara, which they reckon to be 45 miles distant from Bo∣logna. From Ferrara we were towed by a horse up a streight artificial channel to a place called Ponte,Ferrara. where we changed our boat again, coming into the river Po: In the Po we were rowed down stream about 27 miles to Corbola; where we shifted our boat the fourth time, not for any necessity of the place as be∣fore, but because we then came into the Venetian territory and so must take a Venetian boat. We went but 2 or 3 miles further down the Po, and then struck into a channel on our left hand, passing a sluce to a little Town called Loreo, and proceeding on about 15 miles further we passed near to Chioza a large Town built among the lagune,Chiozza. and Pelestri∣na a village standing upon the Argine or Lido, we
entred into the lagune at the haven of Malamocco, and soon after arrived at Venice Feb. 9. of which City we have already written as much as suffices for our purpose. We began our journey from Venice to Geneva by the way of Rhoetia and Swizzerland.March 13. Passing by boat to Mestre 7 miles, and from Mestre to Treviso by coach 12 miles. At Treviso we took horses and a Vitturine for Trent:Treviso. in which journey we spent two days and an half, it being almost 80 miles riding. The first day we passed through C. Franco 12 miles,Castel Franco. Bassano. and then over a fair champian Countrey to Bassano, a very handsome and pleasant walled Town upon the river Brenta, over which there is a good bridge of wood. This Town drives a great trade of weaving silks. As soon as we were past Bassano we entred among the mountains, going up beside the river Brenta 14 miles, and lodged at Pont Sigismund. The second day we rode still up beside the river, and about 2 miles from Ponte we passed through a gate where we paid Datii to the Arch-Duke of Inspruck. At this pass is hewn out of the rock a box or little castle cal∣led Caolo a great height above the road,Caolo. to which there is no avenue at all, but both the Souldiers that keep it and all their provisions must be drawn up by rope and pully, only there is a fountain of fresh wa∣ter in it. Notwithstanding that this fortress belongs to the Arch-Duke, yet the Venetian territory extends 4 or 5 miles further to a place called Sixteen miles riding brought us to a pretty little Town called Bergo,Perzine. and 13 miles more to Perzine a rich and populous Borgh, 5 miles short of Trent. Near this Town is a good valley, but at our being there the snow was not melted. Between Bassano. and Ponte the Countrey on the left hand the river Brenta as we went up belongs to the Sette Commune, and on the right hand to Bassano; Upon the river were seve∣ral saw-mills, and a great quantity of timber floted
down the stream to Padua. As soon as we got among the mountains we every where found stoves in the houses instead of Chimneys. The plants we observed in this journey were Erica Pannonica 4. Clus. now in flower upon the sides of the mountains and the Rocks plentifully: Fumaria bulbosa; Leucoium bul∣bosum vulgare C. B. & Leuc. bulbosum minus triphyl∣lon J. B. We got early to Trent,16. Trent a pretty little City, seated upon the river Athesis at the foot of the mountains, which do encompass it almost round, save the val∣ley where the river runs. The inhabitants speak al∣together Italian; and the Venetian money passes cur∣rent among them, notwithstanding their present Prince is Arch-Duke of Inspruck. Beside the North door of the Domo we found the monument of Mat∣thiolus having on it these inscriptions. Above, Herbarum vires nec rectiùs edidit alter, Nec mage te clarus hac super arte fuit. Si mens ut corpus depingi posset, imago Vna Dioscordis Matthiolique foret. Under his Effigies this, D. O. M. Petro Andreae Matthiolo Senensi III Caesarum Ferdinandi, Maximiliani & Rudolphi Consiliario Et Archiatro, Et Hieronymae Comitissae ex atiqua & illustri Castellanorum seu Comitum Varmi familia, Ferdinandus Matthiolus Caesari Ferdinando Aus∣triae Archiduci, & Joanni Georgio Saxoniae Elec∣tori à consiliis & cubiculis medicus; Apostolica & Imperiali auctoritatibus Sacri Pala tii Lateranen. Aulaeque Caesareae comes, Et armatae militiae eques auratus, Vna cùm Maximiliano fratre
Anniversariis precibus institutis Parentibus bene merentissimis PP. Ann. MDCXVII. Vixit ille an. LXXVII. Ann. Christi MDLXXVII. obiit Tridenti. Vixit illa an. XXXII. Obiit ibidem An. Dom. MDLXIX. Below this Distich, Saxa quidem absumit tempus, sed tempore nunquam Interitura tua est gloria Matthiole. On the front of the Quire is this following in∣scription concerning the Council held in this City. Sacrosanctum postremum Oecumenicum generale Concilium fuit in hac celeberrima civitate celebra∣tum; & quidem sub Papa Paulo III, Anno MDXLV, XIII Decembris pro felice inchoatione fuit facta Processio generalis per totam Urbem, ab Ecclesia Sanctissimae Trinitatis ad hanc Ecclesiam Cathedra∣lem; quâ finitâ primus Cardinalis Praesidens, qui postea fuit Papa Julius III, [prout etiam alter Card. Praesidens fuit Papa Marcellus II nominatus] in hoc loco eminentiore, tunc magis amplo, ad celebran∣dum Concilium & Sessiones faciendas deputato, ad altare S. & Gloriosissimi martyris Vigilii hujus Ec∣clesiae patroni celebravit missam de Spiritu S. Ac re∣liquis caeremoniis peractis fuerunt sub D. Paulo III celebratae octo publicae Sessiones cum decretis, & aliae tres ob vastam pestem in hac Urbe grassantem Bononiae, ubi nihil fuit decretum, Anno MDXLVII. Postea cessante peste & bellis fuit reductum hoc Con∣cilium, & in hoc eodem loco fuerunt sub Papa Julio III celebratae aliae publicae sex Sessiones cum Decretis Annis 1551, 1552, quibus interfuerunt tres Seren is∣simi Principes Ecclesiastici, S. R. I. Electores Ar∣chiepiscopi, Moguntinus, Trevirensis, Coloniensis, 1° Die Septemb. 1551. hanc Urbem ingressi; prout
etiam Serenissimus Elector Brandenburgensis duos oratores huc ablegavit. Demum sub Papa Pio IV Anno 1561 & 1563 fuerunt celebratae ultimae no∣vem publicae Sessiones cum Decretis in Ecclesia S. Mariae majoris hujus urbis, istius Ecclesiae Reveren∣dissimo Capitulo incorporata, sicuti etiam Ecclesia S. Petri. Et nihilominus ad pedes Sanctissimi Crucifixi tum in hoc loco existentis & nunc aliò translati pro Decretorum corroboratione scmper fuerunt publica∣ta omnia dicti Concilii Decreta. Interfuerunt sub dictis summis Pontificibus celebrationi Cardinales Legati 13, inter quos Christophorus Madrucius; non Legati 4, inter quos Ludovicus Madrucius: Oratores Principum totius Europae 29: Patriarchae 3: Ar∣chiepiscopi 33: inter quos Archiepiscopus Rossani∣ensis, qui postea fuit Vrbanus 7 nominatus: Epis∣copi 233: Abbates 18: Generales ordinum 12: Theologiae Doctores 148; Procuratores 18: Of∣ficiales Concilii 3: Cantores 9: Natarii 4: Cur∣sores Papae 2. Sacrosancto Spiritui S. omnium Conciliorum di∣rectori sacratissima Die Pentecostes, Anno 1639. di∣catum. Heer are no remarkable Churches or other build∣ings. The Bishop is both spiritual and temporal Prince. Under him there is a Governour who yet can do nothing without the Council, which consists of 8 persons, viz. The Podestà or Mayor of the Ci∣ty; the Capitaneo, two Canons of the Church and 4 Gentlemen or Citizens. All these are nominated and appointed by the Bishop and continue in power during life modò bene se gesserint. There be 14 Ca∣nons bel onging to the Cathedral all Noblemen, and by these the Bishop is chosen. The Bishops name then was Sigismundus E. of Tirol, commonly called Arch-Duke of Inspruck.
Of the natural Abilities, Temper and In∣clinations, Manners and Customs, Vir∣tues and Vices of the Italians. THE Italians are, by the general confession of all that write of them, ingenious, apprehen∣sive of any thing and quick-witted.Icon. anim. Barclay (who is not too favourable to them in the Character he gives of them) saith, they have animum rerum om∣nium capacem; and again that there is nothing so difficult ad quod Italici acuminis praestantia non tolla∣tur. They are patient and assiduous in any thing they set about or desire to learn, never giving over till they master it and attain the perfection of it. They are a still, quiet people, as being naturally melancholy; of a middle temper between the fa∣stuous gravity of the Spaniard and unquiet levity of the French, agreeing very well with the English, as the Scots are observed to do with the French, and Spaniards with the Irish. They are very faithful and loving to their friends, mindful of a courtesie received, and if it lies in their way or power for one good turn will do you two. This I had from a very intelligent person who hath lived and conversed long enough among them to know them throughly. Barclay himself confesseth, that where they do truly love omnia discrimina ha∣bent infra tam humani foederis sanctitatem. Understand it of the better sot; for Shopkeepers and Trades∣men are false and fraudulent enough; and Inn-keep∣ers, Carriers, Watermen and Porters as in other pla∣ces horribly exacting if you make not an explicit
bargain with them beforehand: insomuch that in many places the State hath thought it necessary by public Bando and decree to determine how much Inn-keepers shall receive of travellers for their dinner and for their supper and lodging. They are not easily provoked, but will bear long with one another; and more with strangers than their own Countreymen. They are also very careful to avoid all occasions of quarrel; not to say or do any thing that may offend any person, especially not to abuse any one by jesting or drollery; which they do not like nor can easily bear. No people in Europe are more scrupulous and ex∣act in observing all the punctilio's of civility and good breeding (bella creanza they call it) only methinks the Epithets they bestow upon mean persons are somewhat extravagant, not to say ridiculous, as when they stile a mechanic or common tradesman Signor molto magnifico and the like. When they are in company together they do not only give every man his turn of speaking, but also attend till he hath done, accounting it a piece of very ill breeding to interrupt any man in his dis∣course, as hating to be interrupted themselves. Con∣trary to the manner of the French and Dutch, who make no scruple of interrupting one another, and sometimes talk all together. As careful are they, not to whisper privately one to another when in compa∣ny, or to talk in an unknown language which all the company understands not. They do also shew their civility to strangers in not so much as asking them what Religion they are of, avoiding all unnecessary disputes about that subject, which are apt to engen∣der quarrels: which thing we could not but take no∣tice of, because in France you shall searce exchange three words with any man, before he ask you that question. It is not easie for a stranger to get acquaintance and
familiarity with the Italians, they not much delight∣ing to converse with strangers, as not knowing their humours and customs. Yet is their conversation when gotten pleasant and agreeable, their discourse profit∣able and carriage obliging. Most of them, even of the ordinary sort of peo∣ple, will discourse intelligently about Politic affairs and the government and interest of their own Coun∣trey; being much addicted to and delighted in Po∣litic studies and discourses. Most of them are very covetous of liberty, espe∣cially such Cities as have been formerly Common-wealths, discourses or treatises of that subject ma∣king deep impressions on their minds: So that in some places not only books but also discourses about former revolutions are prohibited. Barclay also saith, that they are gloriosae libertatis cupidi, cujus adhuc imaginem vident. Hence the Princes of Italy build store of Castles and cittadels in their territories, not so much to defend themselves against their enemies as to bridle their Subjects, and secure themselves against tumults and insurrections. A strange thing it is, that of all the people of Italy the Neapolitans, who never tasted the sweetness of liberty, nor men∣ded their condition by their commotions, but always (as we say) leapt out of the frying-pan into the fire, should be the most tumultuous and given to rebel against their Princes. Leti tells us of one of those petty subordinate Princes in this Kingdom of Naples called Thomaso Ferrari, who governed his subjects not like vassals, but with that sweetness and gen∣tleness, as if they had been his own children; yet some of these fellows taking arms come into their Princes presence, and say to him, Sir Prince, we are come to drive you out of your Palace and burn all your moveables. Why (answers the Prince) can you find fault with my government? Are you aggrieved in any thing and it shall be redressed: No (replied they)
but because we understand that many of our Countrey∣men have revolted from their Lords, we also to shew that we love revolutions, are resolved to rebel against you. The Italians are greatly delighted in Pictures, statues and music from the highest to the lowest of them, and so intemperately fond of these things that they will give any rate for a choice picture or statue. Though all of them cannot paint or play on the music, yet do they all affect skill and judgment in both: And this knowledge is enough to deno∣minate a man a virtuoso. Many of them are also cu∣rious in collecting ancient coyns and medals. They are great admirers of their own language, and so wholly given to cultivate, polish and enrich that, that they do in a great measure neglect the La∣tine, few of them now adays speaking or writing well therein; but mingling so many Italian idio∣tisms with it, that you have much ado to understand what they speak or write. As for the Greek, few or none have any tolerable skill in it, the study thereof being generally neglected and laid aside. They are very temperate in their diet, eating a great deal of sallet and but little flesh. Their wine they drink well diluted with water, and seldom to any excess. We saw only one Italian drunk by the space of a year and half that we sojourned in Italy. Whe∣ther it be that in hot Countreys men have not so good stomachs as in cold; or whether meat as be∣ing better concocted nourishes more there; or that the Italians are out of principle, temper or custom more sober and temperate than other nations. Their herbs seemed to me more savory and better concocted than ours. Their water also was not so crude. But for flesh ours in my judgment much excels theirs, being much more succulent and sapid. Yet in Rome have I eaten beef not inferiour to ours: but I suppose it might be of German oxen; of which (as we were informed) there are many driven thither: and for sucking veal
the Romans (as we have already noted) think theirs preferrable to any in the world. The Italians, especially those of inferiour quali∣ty, are in all things very sparing and frugal: Whe∣ther it be because they are so educated and accustom∣ed, or because the gabels and taxes which they pay to their governours are so great that they cannot af∣ford to spend much on themselves; or because na∣turally loving their case they had rather live nearly then take much pains. The Nobility and great persons chuse rather to spend their revenues in building fair palaces and adorning them with Pictures and statues, in making stately and spacious orachards, gardens and walks, in keeping coaches and horses and a great retinue of servants and staffiers, than in keeping great houses and plentiful tables; giving board-wages to their servants and attendants, which in my opinion is the better way of spending estates, these things finding poor people employment, so that the money comes to be distributed among them according to their in∣dustry; whereas the other way maintains in idle∣ness such persons for the most part as least deserve relief: those that are modest and deserving chusing rather (if possibly they can) to maintain themselves and their families by the labour of their hands, than hang about great houses for a meals meat. Besides that great house-keeping is very often, not to say al∣ways, the occasion of great disorder and intempe∣rance. Were I therefore Gods steward for a great estate (for such all rich men are or ought to be) I should think it more charity to employ poor people and give them mony for their work, than to distri∣bute my estate among them freely and suffer them to live in idleness, I mean such as are able to labour. The inferiour Gentry affect to appear in public with as much splendour as they can, and will deny themselves many satisfactions at home that they may
be able to keep a coach, and therein make the tour à la mode about the streets of their City every even∣ing. The Italians when they call, speak to, or of one another, use only the Christian name, as Signor Giacomo, Signor Giovanni, &c. unless it be for distin∣ctions sake, so that you may converse among them perchance some months before you hear any mans surname mentioned. The Italian Gentry live for the most part in the Cities, whence it is that the Cities are so splendid and well built, so populous and rich; and the Countrey so poor and thinly inhabited. Yet are the Noblemens Palaces rather great and stately, than commodious for habitation. In many Cities the pa∣per windows (which are for the most part tatter'd and broken) disgrace the buildings, being unsuitable to their magnificence. The houses are generally built of stone, thick walled and high rooft, which makes them warm in Winter and cool in Summer: but they contrive them rather for coolness than warmth, and therefore make the windows large to give them air enough. Of the Gentry in Italy, especially in Venice, if there be many brothers of one house only one usual∣ly marries, and that the eldest if he pleases; if he be not disposed then any other, as they can agree among themselves. The rest do what they can to greaten him that is married, to uphold the Family. The brothers that marry not keep concubines or whores; which though it be sin, yet their Confes∣sors can easily absolve them of it. In most of the Cities and Towns of Italy there are Academies or Societies of Virtuosi, who have at set times their meetings and exercises, which are for the most part prolusions of wit and Rhetoric, or discourses about moral subjects, curious questions and Problems, or Paradoxes, sometimes extempo∣rany,
sometimes premeditated. These have their head whom they call Prince, and a certain number of Academists, who are chosen by balloting, but they seldom refuse any that offer themselves to ele∣ction. Many of these Academies assume to them∣selves conceited or fanciful names, and take a sute∣able imprese or coat of arms; as for example the Academists of Bergamo call themselves Eccitati, and their imprese is the picture of the morning. In Man∣tua the Academists called Accesi have taken for their Emblem a Looking-glass reflecting the Sun-beams; those called Timidi a hare. As for the other Cities of Italy, in Rome there are 3 Academies, the Hu∣moristi, the Lyncei and the Fantastici: in Padua 3, the Ricoverati, Infiammati and Incogniti: in Bologna 3, Ardenti, Indomiti, and one innominate: in Venice 2, Discordanti and Gussoni: in Naples 2, Ardenti and Intronati: in Luca 2, Oscuri and Freddi: in Florence la Crusca: in Siena Intronati: in Genoa Addormen∣tati: in Vicenza Olympici: in Parma Innominati: in Pavia Affidati: in Milan Nascosti: in Ferrara Ele∣vati: in Rimini Adagiati: in Cesena Offuscati: in Ancona Caliginosi: in Fabriano Disuniti: in Perugia Insensati: in Viterbo Ostinati: in Brescia Occulti: in Faenza Philoponi: in Treviso Perseveranti: in Fer∣mo Raffrontati: in Verona Philarmonici: in Mace∣rata Catenati: in Alessandria Immobili: in Vrbin As∣sorditi. Most of the Italians of any fashion wear black or dark coloured cloths, and for the fashion of them follow the French (but not too hastily) excepting those Countries which are subject to the King of Spain; which use the Spanish habit. As for their vices, they are chiefly taxed for three. 1. Revenge; they thinking it an ignoble and un∣manly thing to put up or pass by any injury or af∣front. Many times also they dissemble or conceal their displeasure and hatred under a pretence of
friendship, that they may more easily revenge them∣selves of whom they hate by poisoning, assassinating or any other way; for nothing will satisfie them but the death of those who have injured them: and there be Bravo's and cut-throats ready to murther any man for a small piece of mony. Besides, which is worst of all, they are implacable, and by no means to be trusted when they say they pardon. Hence they have a Proverb among them, Amicitie reconciliate & menestre riscaldate non furono mai grate. The women also provoke their children to revenge the death of their fathers by shewing them the weapons where∣with they were murthered, or cloths dipt in their blood or the like, by which means feuds between families are maintained and entail'd from generati∣on to generation. These are the qualities for which we usually say, An English man Italianate is a De∣vil incarnate. 2. Lust, to which the inhabitants of hot Coun∣treys are by the temper of their bodies inclined. Hence it is that all Cities and great Towns do so swarm with Courtezans and Harlots; and to avoid worse evils the State is necessitated to give them pub∣lic toleration and protection. As for masculine venery and other works of darkness, I shall not charge the Italians with them, as not having sufficient ground so to do; and because (as Barclay saith) Haec scelera tenebris damnata & negari faciliùs à consciis possunt, & ab aemulis fingi. 3. Jealousie, which strangely possesses this peo∣ple; so that for every little suspicion they will shut up their wives in a chamber, and carry the key with them, not suffering them to stir abroad unless them∣selves accompany them. To salute an Italians wife with a kiss is a stabbing matter; and to call a man cornuto or Cuckold in good earnest is the greatest af∣front or disgrace you can put upon him. The mar∣ried women in Italy by this means have but bad
lives, being for the most part confined to their hou∣ses except when they go to Church, and then they have an old woman attending them: the doors of their houses shut up at dinner and supper; all visits and familiar discourses with men denied them; nei∣ther can they speak or smile without suspicion: one reason of this among others may be, because the husbands knowing themselves to be so dishonest and false to their wives, they presume that had they op∣portunity they would not be more true to them. And yet for all this guarding and circumspecti∣on are not the Italian Dames more uncorrupt than the matrons of other Nations, but find means to de∣ceive their husbands, and be dishonest in spight of jealousie. To these I might add Swearing, which is so or∣dinary among all sorts, the Priests and Monks them∣selves scarce abstaining from oaths, that I believe they account it no sin. It is a general custom all over Italy to sleep an hour or two after dinner in Summer time; so that from two of the clock till four in the afternoon you shall scarce see any body stirring about the streets of the Cities. Indeed if one sits still it is very hard to keep his eyes open at that time. Either this custom did not prevail when the School of Salerno wrote their Physic precepts, or that direction, Sit brevis ant nullus tibi somnus meridianus, was calculated for England, to whose King that Book was dedicated. And yet the Italian Physicians still advise people ei∣ther not to sleep at all after dinner, or if they must sleep, to strip off their cloths and go to bed, or on∣ly to take a nod in a chair sitting. In many Cities of Italy are Hospitals where Pil∣grims and poor travellers are entertained, and have their diet and lodging for three days (if they have reason to stay so long) gratis, besides a piece of mo∣ny when they go away.
There are also Hospitals to receive exposed chil∣dren, if I may so term them; that is, any without exception that shall be brought and put in at a grate on purpose, whither upon ringing of a bell an Of∣ficer comes presently and receives the child, and asking the party that brought it, whether it hath been baptized? carries it to a nurse to give it suck; and there it is maintained till it be grown up. The place where it is put in is so strait as to admit only children new born or very young. This I look upon as a good institution in great Cities, taking away from women the temptation of murthering their new-born children, or destroying their conceptions in the womb, to hide their shame. I know what may be objected against it, viz. that it emboldens them to play the wantons, having so fair a way of concealing it: Sed ex malis minimum. In Rome, Venice and some other Cities of Italy they have a way of exercising charity little used among us. Several Confraternities of well-disposed per∣sons raise sums of mony by a free contribution among themselves, which they bestow yearly in portions for the marrying of poor maids, which else might want husbands, and be tempted to dishonest practises to maintain themselves. This I look upon as well-plac'd alms and worthy the imitation; it be∣ing very convenient and in a manner necessary, that new-married people should have somewhat to fur∣nish their houses and begin the world with; and no less fitting, that young persons should be encouraged to marry, as well for multiplying of people, where∣in the strength of the Commonwealth chiefly con∣sists, as for the preventing those evils to which young and single persons are strongly tempted and inclined. It is troublesome thing to travel with fire-arms in Italy, you being forc'd in most Cities to leave them at the gate with the Guard, who give you a
tally or token; and when you Leave the City you bring your tally and receive your arms. This is done to prevent assaults and murthers, which are so fre∣quent in many Cities of Italy. For this the G. Duke of Tuscany is much to be commended, there being no such muthers and outrages committed in any of the Cities under his dominion as in other places: so diliegent is he in searching out, and severe in pu∣nishing Bravo's, Cut-throats, Assassins and such kind of malefactors. As much might be said for the Pope in the City of Rome, but in other Cities in his Ter∣ritories there is killing enough. When you depart from any City you must be sure to take a bill of health out of the Office that is kept every where for that purpose: without which you can hardly get to be admitted into another City, es∣pecially if it be in the Territory of another Prince or State. If any one comes from an infected or sus∣pected place he is forced to keep his Quarantain (as they call it) that is, be shut up in the Lazaretto or Pest-house 40 days before he be permitted to come into the City. So scrupulously careful are they to pre∣vent Contagion. In Rome and other Cities of Italy we have often observed many labourers that wanted work standing in the market places to be hired; whither people that want help usually go and bargain with them. Which custom illustrates that Parable of our Saviour recorded in the beginning of the 20th. Chapter of S. Matthew's Gospel, wherein the housholder is said to go out about the third hour, and see others standing in the market-place, ver. 3. and in ver. 6. he is said to find others about the eleventh hour, and to say to them, why stand ye heer all the day idle; and ver. 7. they an∣swer, because no man hath hired us. In Italy and other hot Countreys so soon as they have cut down their corn they thresh and winnow it usually, or at least a great part of it, on a floor
made in the open air, before they bring it into the house. Hence in the Scripture we read of threshing floors as open places without roof or cover. Such I suppose was that where Boaz winnowed barley, Ruth 3. 3. Neither is it any wonder that he should lie there all night: for at Aleppo and even in Malta in Summer time they set their beds upon the roofs of their houses, and sleep sub Dio, in the open air. One custom we have in England, which (as far as I could observe) is no where used beyond the Seas, and that is for children to beg their Parents and Godfathers blessing upon the knee. One custom which prevails generally in foreign Countreys is but little used in England, that is to sa∣lute those that sneez by vailing the bonnet, and pray∣ing God to bless, assist or defend them, &c. There is a kind of sport or game much used this day by the Italians, called Gioco di mora, which seems to have been used by the ancients and called micare digitis. It is for the most part between two, who put out just at the same time each of them as many fingers as they please and also name each of them what number he thinks fit, and if either of them happens to be the number of the fingers which both of them together threw out, then he that names that number wins one. Several sorts of Meats, Fruits, Sallets, &c. used in Italy, and other Observati∣ons about Diet. 1. IN Lombardy and other parts of Italy, Tartufale (as they call them) i. e. Tubera Terrae, a kind of subterraneous Mushrome, which our Herbarists
English Trubs, or after the French name Trufles, are accounted a choice dish, held by naturalists to be in∣centive of lust. The best of all are gotten in Sicily, and thence sent over into Malta, where they are sold dear. The way to get them is to turn swine into a field where they grow, who find them by the smell, and root them up out of the ground, and set one to follow the swine, and gather them up. 2. Snails boil'd and served up with oyl and pepper put into their shells are also accounted a good dish: I am sure they are sold dear at Venice and elsewhere, es∣pecially the great whitish or ash-coloured. shell-snails, which we had not then seen in England, but have since found plentifully upon the Downs near Darking in Surrey, whither (as we were informed by the ho∣nourable Charles Howard Esq) they were brought from beyond Seas by. Mr. Martin Lister hath found them on the banks of that hollow lane, leading from Puckeridge to Ware. These snails before winter stop up the mouth or aperture of their shells with a thick hard white paste like a good lute or plaister, and are kept all Winter in barrels or other vessels, and sold by the Poulter∣ers. The first place where we met them to be sold in the market was Vienna in Austria, where they imi∣tate the Italians as well in their diet as in the manner of their buildings. 3. Frogs are another Italian viand which we in England eat not. These they usually fry and serve up with oil. At Venice they eat only the loins and hind∣legs, as also at Florence, and that upon fish-days. In some places of Lombardy they eat their whole bo∣dies, and besides their frogs are of a larger size than ordinary. Their flesh shews white and lovely as they lie in the markets skin'd and ready prepared to be fried. Howbeit even there in Italy, Kircher in his book de Peste condemns them as an ambiguous and dangerous meat, and I think deservedly; wherefore
we do well having plenty of better food, wholly to abstain from them. 4. Land Tortoises are accounted with them a better meat than Sea-tortoises, and are commonly to be sold in the markets. They are eaten by those Orders of Freres whose rule obliges them to abstain from flesh, as Carthusians, Carmelites, &c. 5. They eat also many sorts of Shell-fish, which we either have not or meddle not with, as Purples, Periwinkles of several sorts, Patellae or Limpets, Sea-urchins, which last are to be found every day in the markets at Naples. They also eat the Sea-tortoi∣ses, of which the blood put into the stomach and boil'd is the best part. 6. Paste made into strings like pack-thread or thongs of whit-leather (which if greater they call Macaroni, if lesser Vermicelli) they cut in pieces and put in their pots as we do oat-meal to make their menestra or broth of, much esteemed by the common∣people. These boil'd and oil'd with a little cheese scraped upon them they eat as we do buttered wheat or rice. The making of these is a trade and mystery; and in every great town you shall see several shops of them. 7. They scrape or grate Cheese upon all their dishes even of flesh; accounting that it gives the meat a good rellish; which to those that are unaccu∣stomed makes it rather nauseous or loathsome. 8. Chesnuts roasted and the kernels served up with juyce of Lemon and sugar are much esteemed, and by some called the Pistachios of Italy. At Bono∣nia they grind them and make little cakes of the flower of them, which though eaten by the poor are no desirable dainty to a delicate palate. Roasted Chesnuts are a great part of the diet of the poor Pe∣sants in Italy; as we have elsewhere noted. 9. They eat all manner of small birds as well as the Germans, viz. Wrens, Stares, Titmise, Butcher-birds,
&c. and several great ones which we touch not in England, as Mag-pies, Jayes, Wood-peckers, Jack-daws, &c. nay we have frequently seen Kites and Hawks lying on the Peulterers stalls; as we have already noted in our description of Rome. 10. They use several herbs for Sallets, which are not yet, or have been but lately used in England: v. g. Selleri, which is nothing else but sweet smal∣lage, the young shoots whereof with a little of the head of the root cut off, they eat raw with oyl and pepper: In like manner they eat Fennel: Artichoke also they eat raw with the same sauce; [the same part of it that is eaten boild.] In Sicily at the high∣est village upon that side Mount Aetna that we as∣cended, they gave us to eat for a Sallet the stalks of a tall prickly thistle, bearing a yellow flower, I sup∣pose it was the Carduus Chrysanthemus Dod. which the rankness of the soil had caused to mount up to that stature. Besides in most of their sallets they mingle Rocket, (Rachetta they call it) which to me gives them an odious taste. Curl'd Endive blancht is much used beyond Seas; and for a raw sallet seemed to excel Lettuce it self: Besides it hath this advan∣tage that it may be kept all Winter. 11. Many fruits they eat which we either have not or eat not in England, v. g. Jujubes, sold by the Hucksters while they are yet green: L'azarole, the fruit of the Mespilus Aronia, of a pleasant acid taste: both fruit and tree exactly like the common Haw∣thorn, but bigger. Services or Sorbes the true, as big as little Pears; those that grow with us are the fruit of the Sorbus torminalis: Green figs both white and blew in great plenty; a most delicate fruit when fully ripe, comparable for the taste to the best mar∣malade, and which may be eaten freely without danger of surfeiting: The husks or cods of Carobs, called in Latine Siliqua dulcis, in Greek , the word used Luke 15. 16. and therefore by some sup∣posed
to be the husks the Prodigal is said to have de∣sired to fill his belly with. Indeed we thought them fitter meat from swine than men; for though they had a sweet taste, yet afterwards they troubled our stomachs and purged us: but they have not up∣on all men the like effect; for the Italians and Spa∣niards eat them ordinarily without any such trou∣ble: Love-apples: Mad-apples both raw and pick∣led: Water-melons; which they use to eat to cool and refresh them, and some Physicians allow sick persons to eat them in Feavers. They are almost as as big as Pompions, have a green rind and a reddish pulp with blackish seed when ripe. The Italians call these Cucumeri, whereas Cucumers they call Citrulli. Several sorts of Gourds, as Cucurbita lagenaria, and Cucurbita flexuosasive anguina; which eats very well boild in pottage: Cucumis anguinus, which is more esteemed and indeed better tasted then the Cucum∣ber. The common people both in Italy and Sicily eat green Chich-pease raw, as our people do com∣mon pease. 12. In their Desserts and second courses they com∣monly serve up pine-kernels, and in time of year green Almonds: also a kind of sweet-meat or Con∣fection made up of mustard and sugar, which they call Italian mustard. 13. To cool and refresh their wines they use ge∣nerally snow, where it may easily be had, else ice, which they keep in conservatories all Summer. With∣out snow they that are used to it do not willingly drink, no not in winter. 14. In the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily they make a sort of cheese which they call Caseo di cavallo, i. e. Horse-cheese, for what reason I could not learn. These cheeses they make up in several forms; some in the fashion of a blown bladder, some in the fa∣shion of a cylinder and some in other figures. They are neither fat nor strong, yet well-tasted and accep∣able
to such as have eaten of them a while. The pulp or body of them lies in flakes and hath as it were a grain one way like wood. They told us that they were made of Buffles milk, but we believed them not, because we observed not many Buffles in those Countries, where there is more of this cheese made than of other sorts. 15. In Italy and other hot Countries their meat is not only naturally more lean and dry then ours, but they roast it also till it be ready to fall from the bones, and there be little juyce left in it. Besides when they roast their meat they draw coals under the spit, and let the fat drop on them, the nidor where∣of perfumes the meat, but not our gust who are not used to it, and what they lose in dripping they save in fewel. Their roasting differs not much from our broiling or carbonadoing. I speak this of or∣dinary Inns and mean peoples houses, in great houses and Inns it is otherwise. The Italians count not their hours as we do, from twelve to twelve, beginning at midday and mid∣night; but from one to four and twenty, beginning their count at Sun-set, which is a much more trouble∣some way; the setting of the Sun being a moveable point or term, and they being therefore necessitated to alter and new-set their clocks every day: whereas midday and midnight being fixt points, the clocks need no setting anew. As for Italy in general, though the Italians imagine it to be the best Coun∣trey in the world, and have a Proverb among them that Italy is the garden of the world: yet setting aside Lombardy, Campania and some few other places, the rest is mountainous and barren enough: the earth so parcht by the Sun-beams that it bears no grass, and (as Barclay faith) seldom yieldeth grain enough for three year successively to supply the ne∣cessities and uses of its inhabitants, whatever they may boast of the Itala gleba. The reason why the
Italians are so conceited of their own Countrey is, because they seldom travel abroad, and so see not the beauty and fertility of others. I might have taken notice of the vast and incredi∣ble number of Religious houses there are in Italy. I have sometimes thought they might in all of both sexes amount to eight or ten thousand. Of these the Gentlemen make advantage. For such of their daugh∣ters as either they cannot get husbands for, or are not able to give portions to, suitable to their birth and quality, they can in one of these houses for a smal matter honourably dispose of and settle for their lives. The institution of such houses as these, whi∣ther young women of quality, who for want of sufficient fortunes or personal endowments cannot easily provide themselves suteable matches, might retire and find honourable provision, might per∣chance be tolerable, yea commendable, were they purged from all superstition the women not admit∣ted too young, and under no vow of perpetual cha∣stity, only to leave the house in case they married. But because of the danger of introducing Monkery, I think it more safe for a Christian State not to per∣mit any such foundations. Bussles are a common beast in Italy, and they make use of them to draw their wains as we do of oxen: only because they are somewhat fierce and un∣ruly, they are forced to lead them by an iron-ring put in their noses, as our Bear-wards do their Bears. For insects the most remarkable sorts which we want in England, are, 1. The Cicadae before mentioned. 2. The flying Glow-worms, which are there every where to be seen in Summer time. These fly∣ing or winged Glow-worms are nothing else but the males of the common creeping or unwinged Glow-worm Fabius Columna relates, that Carolus Vinti∣miglia of Palermo in Sicily having out of curiosity
kept many unwinged Glow-worms in a glass did put in among them a flying one, which presently in his sight did couple with them one by one after the manner of silk-worms; and that the next day the unwinged ones or females began to lay their eggs. That the males are also flying insects in England, though they do but rarely or not at all shine with us, we are assured by an eye-witness, who saw them in conjunction with the common shining unwinged Glow-worms. Heer by the way it may not be amiss to impart to the Reader a discovery made by a cer∣tain Gentleman and communicated to me by Francis Jessop Esq which is, that those reputed Meteors called in Latine Ignes fatui, and known in England by the conceited names of Jack with a Lanthorn, and Will with a Wisp, are nothing else but swarms of these flying Glow-worms. Which if true, we may give an easie account of those strange phaenomena of these supposed fires, viz. their suddain motion from place to place and leading travellers that follow them into bogs and precipices. 3. Scorpions, which in Italy sting not, or at least their stings are not venenose, as the learned Franciscus Redi affirms; though by experience he found the stinging of the African Scorpions to be mortal, or at least very noxious. 4. Tarantula's so called because found about Ta∣rentum, (though we have seen of them at Rome) which are nothing else but a large sort of Spiders; the biting whereof is esteemed venemous, and thought to put people into Phrenetic fits, enforcing them to dance to certain tunes of the Music, by which means they are cured, long and violent exer∣cise causing a great evacution by sweat. These fits they say do also yearly return at the same season the Patient was bitten. But Dr. Thomas Cornelius of Co∣senza before mentioned, a learned Physician and Virtuoso in Naples, diligently enquiring into this ge∣nerally
received and heertofore unquestioned story, that he might satisfie himself and others whether it were really true in experience. 5. Cimiei as the Italians call them, as the French Punaise. We English them Chinches or Wall-lice, which are very noisome and troublesome by their bitings in the night time, raising a great heat and redness in the skin. They harbour in the straw of the bolsters and mattresses and in the wood of the bedsteds, and therefore in some Nosocomia or Hospi∣tals for sick persons, as for example at Genua, the bedsteds are all of iron. This insect if it be crushed or bruised emits a most horrid and loathsome scent, so that those that are bitten by them are often in a doubt whether it be better to endure the trouble of their bitings, or kill them and suffer their most odi∣ous and abminable stink. We have of these insects in some places of England, but not many, neither are they troublesome to us. We departed from Trent intending for Coira or Chur in the Grisons Countrey called in Latine curia Rhaetorum.March 18. We rode up the valley wherein the river Athesis runs, called Val Venosta, every 5 miles pas∣sing through a large village, and one handsome lit∣tle town called Burgo, and lodged at a small place called Brunsole. We rode through Bolzan considerable Town and for bigness comparable to Trent,19. Bolzan. Maran. and 10 miles fur∣ther Maran a large Town, and lodged at a village called Raveland. We passed through Latourn,20. Slach, Schlanders, Maltz, all villages and Towns of note, and last of all Cleurn a pretty great walled Town, and then struck up on the left hand among the mountains to a village called Tavers where we lodged. We rode on through the snow to Monastero,21. where the Grisons Countrey begins, and S. Maria a small terra, and stopt at Gherf a village at the foot of the
high mountains. In this Countrey the people use a peculiar language of their own, which they call Romansch, that is Lingua Romana. It seems to be nearer Spanish than Italian, though distinct from both. Besides their own language they generally speak both Italian and Dutch: so that after we had lost Italian in the valleys we wondered to find it heer again among the hills. Their wines they bring all out of the Valtelline, from Tirano, about 2 days journey distant. The Countrey at this time was all over covered with snow, so that they are fain to keep their cattel within doors for six months! yet the people said that heerabouts the snow did not lie all Summer, no not on the tops of the highest moun∣tains. Heer we ob∣served that to draw their sleds over the snow, instead of Oxen they make use of Bulls, one Bull drawing a little sled. About Tavers we observed them sowing of dust upon the snow, which they told us was to make the snow melt sooner: I suppose it was rather for manure. They use stoves in all places, and good reason they have the Countrey being so cold, A great number of Chamois or Gemps [Rupicaprae] are taken all over these Countries upon the high hills, as, though the people had not told us, we must needs have gathered from the multitude of horns we saw stuck up in the houses where we lodg∣ed. Bears there are and Wolves among the high mountains but not many. The men generally wear ruffs and long bushy beards. All the people (as far as we had experience or could judge of them in the short stay we made among them) we found to be ho∣nest, hearty and civil, and the common sort very mannerly. Their houses are built of stone, and co∣vered with shingles of wood, the walls thick and the windows very small to fence against the cold. They have no strong holds or fortified places among them; nor will they permit any to be erected; having so much confidence in their own valour, that they
think they need no other defence: indeed their Countrey is such as one would think none of their neighbouring Princes should covet unless for the security of his own Territories. We passed the Mountain of Bufalora in 7 or 8 hours.22. In the top of the Mountain, in the mid way between Cherf and Zernetz, is an Inn called Furno. From Zernetz we rode in the Valley of the higher Engadine through Zuotz a great terra, and two o∣ther Villages, and lodged at a little place called Ponte.
OF THE GRISONS. THe Grisons are divided into 3 Leagues, and each League subdivided into Communes: each com∣mune contains several Villages; not all an equal number, but some more some fewer. The Lega Grisa (according to Simler) hath 19 Communes. The Lega della casa Dio hath 21 Communes, which are sometimes contracted into 11. Cleurn, Tavers and Maltz have sately revolted from this League, and put themselves under the Archduke of Inspruck. The Dieci Dritture have ten, as the name imports. Each Commune hath its annual chief Magistrate, whom in some places they call Maestrale, and a certain num∣ber of Assessors or Judges, which in their language are called Truoeder. Each terra or Village chuses its Judges by majority of votes. [Sometimes the Peo∣ple chuse only a certain number of Delegates, which Delegates are to make choice of the Judges.] All the People, as well rich as poor, as well Servants as Masters, have their Suffrages so soon as they come to the age of 16 years. The time of their Election is St. Matthias day. The Commune of Engadina alta hath 10 great Villages (terre they call them) 16 Judges called Truoeder, one Maestrale, one Chancel∣lour or Notary. The Maestrale, the Chancellour, and 4 Truoeder are always of Zuotz. The other terre have some one, some two, according to their bigness. [In other Communities the several terre have the Maestrale and other Officers by turns.] These Ma∣gistrates are changed every two years, but confirm∣ed every year, and may be put out by the People if
they please. The Maestrale (called in some places Landamman) is the chief, and assembles the Truoeder together, makes Processes, and in sum hath the executive power. When they have occasion to meet to decide any business, or judge in any criminal cause, he that is cast or condemned, if he hath goods bears the charges, if he hath none then the Com∣mune bears the charges; So that every Commune is a Common-wealth by its self, and its government purely Democratical. Every two years they have two Diets or general Councils: The first Diet (when the Officers which they send to their seve∣ral Praefecturae are elected) is at Michaelmas, the se∣cond (when they take an account of their Officers) is on St. John Baptists day. To these Diets each Commune sends its Delegates, Messi they call them, or Commissioners, some one and some two. These Delegates must act according to the instructions gi∣ven them by their several Communities. Each League hate its Head or Chief. The Burgomaster of Coira is always Head of the League della casa di Dio. In the Lega Grisa there are four Communities that by ancient custom have the Head (who is here cal∣led Landtreichter) by turns. In the Dieci Dritture six Communities have the choice of the Chief, who is called Landamman. Those six Communes send each its Delegate to Tavas, and the Delegates by the major vote chuse the new Landamman. These some∣times with some assistants meet as a lesser Council, but have no absolute or decisive sentence. There lies an Appeal from the general Diet to the Com∣munities, and what the major part of those con∣cludes or agrees upon is valid. The Grisons pay no sort of Datii, Gabels or Taxes. In Italy the Coun∣ty of Chiavenna and the Valtelline are subject to the Grisons. To the County of Chiavena they sent for∣merly two Podesta's or Bailifls, one to Plurs, which Town was miserably destroyed by the falling of a
Mountain upon it, and one to Chiavena, who is cal∣led Commissario. Near Plurs are made Pots and Ves∣of stone turned after the manner of wood, which will endure the fire. The Valtelline according to Simler is divided into six Praefecturae, whether the Grisons send Podesta's or Governors. Those are Bor∣mio, which some make a County by it self, Tirano, Tellio, Sondrio, Morbegno and Travona. They named to us two more, viz. Ponte and Chiur. These Pode∣sta's are changed every two years, the principal or head of them is the Prefect of Sondrio, who is not called Podesta, but Governatore as we were told, as Simler saith Capitaneo. In the chusing of Praefects the order both of the Leagues and of the Commu∣nities is observed. So that for example, if the Lega Grisa chuses the Governor of Sondrio for this two years, the Lega della casa di Dio shall have the choice of him the next two, and the Dieci Dritture the following. The like order is observed in the seve∣ral Communities of each League. The People of Valtelline, the Country of Bormio, and the County of Chiavenna pay no Taxes or Gabels more than for the maintenance of their Governors or Podesta's. We left Ponte,Mar. 24. and passed over another high Mountain called in a very bad season, for that it snowed exceeding fast all the while we were abroad, which in many places so filled up the track that we could see no way at all, only we could presently find when were out, for then our hor∣ses were almost up to the belly in snow: besides a brisk gale of most bitter cutting wind blew just in our faces, which did so affect my eyes that I could not open tem without great pain for three days, nor easily endure to look upon snow for a great while after. The reason why my eyes were more affected than others I conceive was, because I was not careful to wipe the snow off my face, but suffer∣ed it to freez to the hair of my eyebrows and eye∣lids:
the cold whereof being contiguous to them, stupified, and would in time have quite mortified my eyes. And here by the way we may take notice, that the People living in this mountainous cold Country look more swarthy and dusky, at least their their faces and parts exposed to the air, and have not so good complexions as those that live below in a milder and more temperatre Region. It is an observation of Bodin in his Method of History, That the Inhabitants of the temperate Zone, as you go further and further from the Tropic are still whi∣ter and whiter, till you come to a certain degree of latitude, and then they grow dusky and dark-co∣loured again; 3 witness the Greenlanders, Laplanders; &c. extremity of cold parching and tanning the skin as well as excess of heat. And we found this true by our own experience; for our faces were so hackt and burnt (if I may take so to use that word) by the cold in our passage over these Moun∣tains, that for some time after we lookt like so ma∣ny Gypsics. This night we lodged in a terra called Bergun. We went on to Coira the capital City of the Gri∣sons,25. Coira or Chur. a pretty little Town standing on a small River that falls into the Rhene, about half a mile below, environed almost with Mountains, save only on that side the River Rhene runs; where there is a pleasant Valley, having very good Meadow and Pasture grounds. The Inhabitants of Coira are all Prote∣stants, excepting the Bishop (who coyns money that is current here) and 24 Canons. The Bishop hath nothing at all to do in the Government of the Town. The form of Government is much like that of Zurich and Basel, viz. the Citizens are divided into sive Tribes or Companies, each of which chuses 14 Senators, which make up the great Council of 70. These are called Ratsheren, and are chosen by the people anew every year on S. Martins day; a∣new
I say, for the same are usually chosen again so long as they live. Out of this greater Council are chosen yearly of each Tribe sive into the lesser Coun∣cil, to which are added the 5 Masters of the Com∣panies for the last year, who make up the number of 30. Half these are called Senators, and govern the Common-wealth. The chief Officers who preside in the Senate are the two Burgomasters who rule al∣ternately, one one year, the other the next. The Council of 30, with the regent Burgomaster, who is called Stativoht, judge in criminal causes, Be∣sides there is a Bench of Judges made up of the five Masters of the Companies, and ten out of the Coun∣cil of 30, wherein the Praetor of the City called Stattrichter presides, which determines civil con∣troversies and actions of debt. But from them there lies an Appeal to the Council of 30. In the mountanous Pastures about this Town we observed growing plentifully Crocus vernus flore albo,Plants observed about Coira. & flo. Caeruleo, & flo. ex albo. & caerulco variegato; Hepatica nobilis ubique; Leucoium bulbosum Tab. & Ornithogalum flore luteo. Besides Coira the Grisons have two little Towns which they call Cities, May∣field and Eylandts. For their Religion the Grisons are divided; some Communities being Romanists, some Protestants; but most Protestants, of whom they told us there were in all the Country about 17000 fighting men. We travelled from Coira to Walenstat,Mar. 29. 1665. Walen∣stat. situate be∣side a small Lake, thence called Walenstatter-Sea: passing by the way through Mayfield, Ragats, and Sargans. Both Sargans and Walenstat are Voghtia's or Praefecturae belonging the seven Cantons. We ferried over the Lake to Wesen,30 Glaris. and from Wesen rode to Glaris, one of the 13 Cantons of Switzerland. Heer we saw the horns of the Ibex,The Steinbuck or Ibex. (which they call Steinbuck.) They are somewhat like to Goats horns, but larger. They told us that there
were none of these beasts found heerabouts, but that in Wallisland, and in the Archbishoprick of Saltzburgh in Germany there were of them. But of the Rupicaprae or Gimpses,Chamois or Gemps. and Mures Alpini ma∣jores, called Marmottoes,Marmot∣toes. they have good store. Of birds they have in plenty Merulae torquatae, which they call Ringer-Amzel; Merulae aquaticae, which they call Wasser-amzel; Vrogallus, or Cock of the wood, Lagopus, a milk white bird somewhat bigger than a Partridge, feathered down to the very toes and claws, of the Heath-cock kind, but more of these in the Grisons Country, where they brought them us to sell. The people of this Canton of Glaris, as also Appenzel, are mixt, two third parts Prote∣stants and one third Roman-Catholics. They both make use of the same Church for their several Ser∣vices: first the Priest comes and does Mass, then the Minister and preaches. The Governments of the several Cantos of Swit∣zerland may be reduced to three forms or heads. The first is of those Cantons which have no Cities, whose chief Officer is called Landamman; and in these the supreme power is in all the People, by whose counsel all businesses of moment are decided. Of this sort are Vri, Suits, Vnderwalden, Zug, Glaris and Appenzel. The second, of those which have Cities that were either built by, or sometime sub∣ject to Princes, whose chief Officer is called Scul∣tetus or Scout: This form is most Aristocratical of all others; and of this sort are Bern, Lucern, Fri∣burg, and Solothurn. The third, of those which have Cities divided into several Tribes or Companies, by whose suffrages the Magistrates are yearly cho∣sen; of this Order are Zurich, Basel, and Schaff∣hausse.
GLARIS Is divided (according to Similer) into 15 parts, but as we were told there into 12 Parishes, of which some have five Counsellors, some six; some more some less, according to their bigness. These make up the Senate or Council, which consists of 60, whereof two parts are of the reformed Religion and one of the Romish, besides the Landamman and o∣ther cheif Officers, who have the privilege of sit∣ting in Council when their term is expired. The chief and supreme power is in the whole people. Upon the last Sunday in April yearly there is a ge∣neral Convention of all the males above 16 years of age, together with the Magistrates at a place called Schuandan. This general Meeting or Convention is called Landtskmein: and by these by majority of Sussrages the Magistrates and Officers are chosen; and first the Landamman, who continues in Office sometimes two, sometimes three years. Into this Office they may choose out of all the people whom they please without any regard of place. 2. The Statthalter who is the Landammans Lieutenant. These Offices in the Canton are thus divided be∣tween the Protestants and Papists. Three years the Landamman is a Protestant, and the Statthalter a Papist; then the two following the Landamman is a Papist and the Statthalter a Protestant. 3. The Seckelmeister or Treasurer. 4. Pannerheer or Stan∣dard-bearer. 5. Landshauptman or chief Captain, and under him in time of war Lieutenant. 6. Landts∣fendricht or Ensign. These three last continue for life. 7. Three Landtschrieben, i. e. Secretaries or Chancellours, who are present in Council, but have no suffrages. 8. Landtweible or Apparitour; he gathers the votes in the general Convention, sum∣mons the Council by Proclamation in the Church,
&c. The Landscmein chuses also the Landtvogts or Prefects, and either confirms or abrogates public Edicts and Constitutions. The 60 Senatours usu∣ally continue in office during life modo bene se gesserint, yet are they yearly chosen anew or confirmed at the general Convention, not by the whole Con∣vention, but each one by that part of Parish to which he belongs, and by which he was chosen; who al∣so when any one dies chuse another into his place. The Landamman when his office is expired is called old Landamman, and may still sit in council, which is a favour allowed him in regard of his former dignity. The aforementioned Officers do also sit in council. The Landamman puts men in prison by his Authority, propounds business to the Council, ap∣points the days of the Councils meeting, and to that end appoints the Officer to give them notice in the Church. In this Canton, to avoid the ambition and inordinate expences of Candidates for Offices, who were wont to court and feast the people, they have lately introduced Lottery in the choice of Officers and Governours. All the Candidates are first put to the vote, and those eight (if there be so many for any one place) who have most surages are set in the middle. Then the Landtschrieb or Secretary takes eight balls, one of which is gilt, and wraps them up in single papers, and puts them into a hat which he holds under his arm, whilst a little child puts in his hand and takes out the balls one by one, and gives them to the eight. He who happens to have the gilt ball is the Officer. Besides these Councils there are also two Consistories of Judges; one con∣sisting of nine, chosen by the Landtskmein out of the Council or Ratsheeren, to whom the Landamman is added as President, who determine all causes of injuries, and all business of inheritances, and where money is gained with hazard of life: the other con∣sisting of five who determine actions of debt. These
Consistories (saith Simler) sit only in May and September. Private quarrels by consent of the parties are usually referred to a Councellour of the Parish. To the general Died at Baden the Reformed send the Landamman when he is a Protestant, and the Roman Catholics the Statthalter, and so vice versa. The Territory of Glaris is about eight hours long, that is allowing 3 English miles to an hour, 24 miles: The number of Freemen of both Reli∣gions about 2500. This Canton hath one Vogtia or Bayliewick proper to it self, that is Werdenburg, to which every three years they send a new Landt∣vogt or Prefect, who is Protestant. In the Cantons of Basel, Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Schaffhausse, Triburg and Soloturn, the Citizens only are Freemen, and the Territory or Country round about will all the Towns therein are Subjects, and divided into several Bayliwicks or Praefecturae, (Vogties they call them) to every of which the Ci∣ties send a Bayliff or Landtvogt, who is Governour there, whom they change in some Cantons every second, in some every third, in some every sixth year. In the other Cantons where there are no Cities, all the Countrymen inhabiting the Canton, properly so called, are freemen; I say the Canton properly so called; for these also have their Subjects, whom they govern likewise by their Prefects or Landt∣vogts. Besides the proper there are also common Praefectures or Vogties, some to two, some to three, some to seven, some to twelve, and some to all the Cantons: to which the Cantons concerned by course send their Landtvogts. To the 12 Cantons (Appenzel is the excluded) belong the 4 Italian Praefecturae, which they obtained by the donation of Maximilian Sforze Duke of Milan, An. 1513. viz. Lugano, Logarno, Mendriz and Val Madia. To the 7 Cantons, that is Zurich, Lucern, Suitz, Vri, Vn∣derwald,
Glaris and Zug, belong Baden, Liberae Pro∣vinciae, and Sargans: to these 7 and Bern belongs Turgow; to these 7 and Appenzel belongs Rhineck or Rheinthall. To the 3 Cantons, i. e. Vri, Suitz, and Vnderwald belongs Bellinzona in Italy, whose Territory is divided into three Bayliwicks, to which those three Cantons send Landvogts by course, viz. Bellinzona, Val Palensa and Riviera. To the two Cantons of Suitz and Glaris belong Vznach and Wesent, or Castra Rhoetica. At Glaris they told us, that in their own Coun∣trey those of the Canton of Suitz were good Sol∣diers, but living most upon milk and white meats, they could not last and endure abroad. That those of Vri, Appenzel, and the lower part of Glaris made the best Soldiers of all. We travelled from Glaris through Nafels a little Village,April 1. and several other Villages near the Lake of Rappersville or the Zurich-sea, especially Lachen, where they usually take boat for Zurich, and after an hours riding by the Lakes side, and in sight of Rappersvill, and the long Bridge cross the Lake, we climb'd up a very high Mountain on our left hand, to the top of which when we were ascended we rode throogh a Country all covered with snow, which in the Summer time seems to be a very plea∣sant place. Heer we found Eynsidle,Eynsidle. where is a famous Monastery of Benedictine Freres, in whose Church is an Image of our Lady, which works great miracles, si credere fus sit. This is a place of great devotion, visited by Strangers and Pilgrims after the manner of Loreto. And as there is the Holy house, so here is a Chappel divinely consecrated, set in the body of the Church, and enclosed in a case of Marble, given by an Archbishop of Saltzburg. Near the door of this Church is an Alley of Shops of Beads and Medals, as at Loreto; and here as there an incredible number of Beggers continually waiting. The Canton of
Switz is Protector of his Abbey. If any one desire to know more of this place he may consult the Hi∣story of it, entitled (as I remember) Sanctae Virginis Eynsiddlensis. We rode again over the snow for about three hours,3. Schwytz. and then descending by degrees we passed through three Villages, and at last arrived at Swyts, a fair Village (for its counted no other, though it be comparable to the best of our Market Towns) ha∣ving a large Piazza handsomely paved. The government of this Canton is much what the same with that of Glaris.The Go∣vernment of the Canton of Suitz. The whole Canton is divided into 6 parts or quarters. Each division hath 10 Counsellors; so that the Council or Se∣nate consists of 60, which they call Ratsheeren. When a Senatour dies, that quarter to which he belonged chuses another by the major vote of all the people. Every quarter hath its head, who is called Siebener: because they are seven in all, the Landamman ma∣king one of the number; which make a lesser Coun∣cil to manage and take care of the public revenue. The Senatours are obliged in important causes to take each his man to be his assistant, and in the most weighty of all (as concerning peace and war) each two men; so that then the Council is tripled. The last Sunday of April (as at Glaris) is the Conven∣tion of the whole Canton called the Landtskmein, when all the males above 16 years of age meet and elect by major vote the Landamman and other Offi∣cers and Landvogts. To this meeting all the people that can conveniently are obliged to come; and eve∣ry one to swear fidelity to their Countrey, to main∣tain their Liberties, &c. The Officers are the same as at Glaris. This Canton and every one of the rest send two Messi to the general Diet at Baden, of which the Landamman is usually one. This Canton hath also the like two little Councils or Consistories as Glaris.
We rode about 3 miles to a place called Brunen, beside the lake of Lucern,3. Altorff. and there embarkt for Al∣torf, spending in our passage upon the water about 3 hours, and then we had but a mile to the town. From Swytz to Altorf there is no travelling by land (as they told us) unless we would go some scores of miles about. Altorf hath no piazza, yet is it a larger town than Schwytz, and hath a pretty Church and a Monastery of Capucines. Heer we heard at large related to us the story of William Tell and the Lant∣vogt, which he that is desirous to know may con∣sult Simler. On the top of a pillar over one of their fountains in the street is set the statue of this Tell, with his cross-bow on his shoulder, and leading his son by the hand. At some distance stands a tower on which are painted the several passages of the Story. The Government is almost the same with that of Schwytz. The number of Senators, manner of their election the same. The Officer and Magi∣strates the same, only they mentioned a Suk-heer, who hath the charge of the Ammunition, whom they told us not of in other Cantons, and 6 Fier∣sprachts, i. e. Proctors or Councellors, but not of the Council. The Senatours being to judge in cri∣minal causes take to them another man, so that then the Council is doubled. They have also a lesser Council of 15 called the Landtram, which decides civil causes. These are taken out of the great Coun∣cil, and go round in a rota. They meet the first Munday every moneth. A third Council also they have called the Poderade, which sits weekly about actions of debt where the sum exceeds not 60 li∣vers. The Senators (as they told us) have no Salary or allowance at all. When one of the Council is chosen Landtvogt he is put out of the Council. Vri is the first Canton that set it self at liberty.
We returned to the lake of Lucern,April 4. Vnder∣walden. and taking boat we went by water within one hour of Stantz, the principal village of Vnderwald, where we lodg∣ed. As we sailed upon this lake we happened to see a great fall of snow from the tops of some moun∣tains hanging over the lake, which made a ratling and report not unlike thunder, as Monsieur de Cartes in his Meteors notes. At Stantz they have a very fair Church, and two Convents, one of Capucine Freres, and one of Muns. Heer and at Altorf, Switz, Lucern, &c. we observed in the Church-yards crosses set upon the graves, some of wood, some of iron, and on some of them hanging a little copper kettle with holy water in it. Some women we saw com∣ing with a bunch of herbs in their hands, which they dipped in the kettle, and sprinkled the water therewith upon the graves. These I suppose were Widows or Mothers who sprinkled the water upon the graves of their dead Husbands or Children. This Canton is divided into two parts, Oberwald or the upper, whose capital village is Stanner, and the lower or Vnderwald, the head whereof is Stantz. In the lower are 60 Senatours chosen by 11 Commu∣nes, some whereof have more, and some fewer, ac∣cording to their bigness. The Officers are the same, and chosen in like manner as in Schwytz and Vri, only the Landamman and Statthalter continue in of∣fice but one year. The Lantweible or Apparitor and 7 Judges, cho∣sen one out of a Commune, judge in civil causes. From these there is an appeal to another Tribunal of 11, consisting of the Landamman, and one ele∣cted out of each Commune save tat the Landam∣man is of. These 11 are chosen out of the Council, the seven indifferently. In capital causes the Coun∣cil of 60 Judges, and besides any one of the Coun∣trey may be present and give his suffrage if he plea∣ses, though ordinarily none do but the Senators,
who are all there to by oath obliged. The Senators and Officers of this Canton have all salaries. Heer and in Vri all the males of all conditions that are 14 years old and upward have their suffrages at the Landtskmeind. Oberwald hath likewise a Council, Landamman and other Officers by themselves, in∣deed nothing common with Vnderwald. They no∣minate Landvogts and Embassadors by turns. They might be esteemed two Cantons were it not for that they have but two Delegates at the Diet at Baden, as the other Cantons have. These three Cantons, Vti, Switz, and Vnderwald, consist chiefly, not to say wholly, of pasture ground: No cornfields or vineyards heer. Their wine is imported from Italy, their corn from several parts. They boast that by this means their ground is not so subject to the casualties of weather, or injuries of bad seasons as either plowed fields or vineyards, and yields to the owners a more certain profit. It's well if one reason why they maintain all their ground pasture, be not because they are unwilling to take pains in husbandry. Wine is dear heer. At Altorf and Stantz they have it from Logarno. At Switz they have both Valtelline and Logarno-wine. The people are very honest and good natured, keep their houses neat and cleanly, and withal very po∣lite and in good repair. The men are given much to drinking. The meat stands before them three or four hours, and they now and then cat a bit, but the main business is drinking. We travelled to Lucern,April. 5. Lucern. crossing over a part of the lake. This is a very neat city and pleasantly situate upon the lake: divided into parts by a river which runs out of the lake; over which there are three bridges, one for carts and horses, the other two handsome foot bridges covered over with a roof or penthouse, one near a quarter of a mile long. Be∣sides there is a fourth bridge which leads towards
the Church covered like this last, and longer than it. The great Church stands without the city wall, a very handsome tall, and lightsome structure. O∣ver the Western door is the greatest Organ that ever I saw: A man might very well creep into the hol∣low of the greater pipes of it. The account of the Government that was given us heer was much dif∣ferent from Simlers. They told us that the Great Council consisted of 136, whereas he writes that it consists of no more that 100: but these may be re∣conciled; for that, I suppose, he excludes the lesser Council, which they included. They continue in office during life; and when one dies, the rest of the Council chuse another into his place, out of the Citizens whom they think fit. Simler saith that the lesser Council of the last half year chuse the new Senators. This Council hath two Presidents whom they call Sculteti, who preside alternis annis, and continue in office during life. Simler saith they are chosen yearly by the Suffrages of both the Councils. The manner of chusing Officers and Senators is this. Behind a curtain according to the number of Com∣petitors are placed two, three, or more boxes. E∣very Senator hath given him a little medal or piece of money for that purpose; and so the Senators go one by one behind the curtain, and put the medal into what box they please, and he that hath most of these pieces is understood to be cho∣sen. Out of the great Council is chosen a lesser of the most ancient and wise, who also continue du∣ring life, and judge in civil causes, and take care of the ordinary concerns of the City; and for that purpose they sit daily. They are divided into two equal parts, 18 for the Summer, and 18 for the Winter. If one of the Winter dies, those of the Sum∣mer elect one into his place out of the 100, and vice versa. The great Council of 136 judge in cri∣minal causes. Those of the lesser Council have five
Batz [about 10 d. or 1 s. English] and those of the great Council two Batz per diem for every day they sit in Council. All the people of the territory of this city are Subjects, and divided into 19 or 20 Proefe∣cturoe: the number of fighting men about 18000. The Subjects in time of peace pay no more tribute than 5 Batz or a hen the man per annum to the Lanivogt. From Lucern we travelled to Zugh called in Latine Tugium,April. 6. Zugh. about 15 miles.The Go∣vernment of the Canton of Zug. This City is by one half less than Lucern; it stands by the side of a little lake. The Government of this Canton is popular like those of Vri, Switz and Vnderwalden. Besides the City there are 3 Communes which have an interest in the government, viz. Eyry, Mensinguen and Baar. They have a Council of 40 (as they told us there) but according to Simler of 45; 9 out of each Com∣mune and 18 out of the City. The 3 Communes have the Landamman 6 years and the City 3. So that when the Landamman is of a Commune he continues in Office but two years, when of the City three years. When one of the Council dies another is chosen in∣to his place by major vote of all the males above 18 years of age of the City or that Community to which he that died belonged. The Magistrates are the same and elected in like manner as in Vri and Switz, &c. All the Praefecturae, (which are in number eight) be∣long to the City only. The City together with its subjects can arm 4000 Souldiers: the 3 Communi∣ties not 2000. Yet are they obliged by ancient Con∣vention to bear two third parts of the charge in case there be nay war. In criminal causes they have 12 Judges taken out of the Council, 3 of the City and 3 of each Community. In civil the Senators judge in their several Communities. To the general Diet at Baden the City sends one and the three Commu∣nities another. The nomination of the common Lantvogts the City hath once and the Communities
twice. When the Landamman is of the Communi∣ties he is obliged during his Office to reside in the City. The lake of Zugh hath great variety of fish, more then any other lake of Switzerland, if the people there may be believed. They named to us Eels, Carps, Perches, Trouts, Salmons, which is very strange, there being no way for them to get thither but up the Rhene, and so they must have a course of above 500 miles; and besides there being at Wasserfal a huge Catarract of the whole river, which one would think it were impossible to pass. Esch called by the Ita∣lians Temelo, and in English Grayling, Trisea or Tra∣sine, in English Eelpout, Pikes (of which we saw one taken that weighed 30 pound) Weiss-fish or Alberlin, called at Geneva Farra. This fish is taken in the lake of Bala in Merionethshire in Wales, and there called Guiniad from the whiteness of it: and in Huls-wa∣ter near Pereth in Cumberland and there called Schel∣ley: Hassler, which I take to be the Charre of Win∣andermere in Westmerland, and the Torgoch of North∣wales: Balla: Nase, called by Naturalists Nasus, Breams, Crevises; and a great many sorts more to the number of at least 50. In many of the shadowy lanes we passed through about Stantz, Zug and else∣where we observed growing plentifully Aublatum Cordi or Dentaria aphyllos. We travelled from Zug to Zurich which is 5 good hours riding.April 7. Zurich. But of that City we have already written. From Zurich we rode to Mellingen a free Town not far from Baden,13 Mellin∣gen. 4 good leagues; and then through a little walled Town belonging to the Ber∣nese called Lensburgh,Lens∣burg. Arauw. and lodged at Arauw a consi∣derable Town upon the river Aar, subject also to the Bernese, 4 short leagues. We travelled a streight rode passing no consider∣able Town till we arrived at Soloturn14. Soloturn. 9 leagues di∣stant
from Arauw. This though it be the head of a Canton is no large Town, nor very considerable for its strength. We diverted out of the common rode to Geneva to see Bern,15. Bern. 6 hours distant from Soloturn. This is a handsome City, built all of stone, though the hou∣ses be not tall. It hath one fair long street with nar∣row portico's or Cloysters on each side. It lies stret∣ched out in length upon a hill which I may call a Pe∣ninsula, it is so almost begirt about with the river. On that side where it is not com∣passed with the river it is strongly fortified with good bastions and outworks. The Founder of this City as also of Friburg in Switzerland, and Friburg in Brisgoia was Berchtoldus Duke of Zerin; as ap∣pears by the inscription upon their moneys. To him they have erected a monument in the great Church. This Church is one of the handsomest stone-fabrics in all Switzerland. The territory of this City is more then on third part of the Countrey of the Suisses, and is divided into 60 Praefecturae or Bailyages, besides 4 which are common to them with Friburg. For this reason there must needs be many rich men in the City, though they have but little trade. The Landtvogts or Bay∣liffs continue in office 6 years, during which time they enrich themselves well; yet do not their sub∣jects complain, but acknowledge themselves well used by their Governours. Heer they keep 5 or 6 Bears in a pit. These Bears I observed to climb the firr-trees growing in the pit, and delighting to sit on the tops of them like birds on a perch. The Arms of the Town is also a Bear, which they took I sup∣pose alluding to their name Bern: And they first coyned the mony called Batzes from the figure of a bear stamped upon it: which afterward all the Can∣tons imitated, calling it also by the same name. From Bern we rode to Friburg a handsome Town17. Friburg.
and the head of a Canton, built upon a hill almost begirt with a river after the manner of Bern and by the same Founder, on all sides environed with hills, save where it is continuous to the land. Their terri∣tory is surrounded with and enclosed in the territory of Bern. From Friburg we travelled through Maulton to Lausanna,18. Lausan∣na. Morges. a great Town and an University, and from Lausanna April 19. through Morges a large Town, Rolle and Nion considerable Towns by the lake of Geneva's side and Verfoy a little Town on the lake near Geneva, belonging to the French, and came to our lodging at Geneva, where we rested and so∣journed near 3 months. The Governments of Soloturn. Bern and Friburg are much like that of Lucern. In Soloturn the num∣ber of the lesser Council is 35, and of the greater 115. When one of the 35 dies, the 34 remaining chuse one into his place out of the 115. When one of the 115 dies or is advanced the rest chuse one in∣to his place out of the number of the Citizens. In Bern the greater Council consists of 200, and the lesser (as we were told there) of 42, though Simler makes them but 26. These Councils are chosen by 20 Electors and the Sculthess, viz. the four Signiferi of the City and 16 whom they pick out of the whole body of the Citizens and joyn with themselves. In Friburg the lesser Council is of 24 and the greater of 200. When one of the lesser Council dies they chuse one into his place out of the greater: and when one of the greater dies or is removed the lesser (as I un∣derstood them) chuse one into his place out of the number of the Citizens. All these Cities have 2 Sculteti or Consuls who rule alternis annis. He that desires a more full and particular account of the go∣vernment of these Cities may consult Simler de Re∣pub. Helvetiorum. Each of the Cantons have some Saint or other to be their Patron and protector,
whose image the popish Cantons set on the reverse of their monies, v. g. S. Oswald a King of England Protector of Zug. In their Church they have his re∣liques, and have set up his image on horseback. The Protestant Cantons are Zurich, Bern Basel, Sehaf∣hausse, part of Glaris and part of Appenzel. That which most frequently breeds differences a quar∣rels among the Suitzers is the business of the com∣mon vogties or Bailywicks. For most of these [I mean the Dutch ones] being of the reformed reli∣gion are oppressed and injured by the Popish Lant∣vogts, the Protestant Cantons not knowing how ei∣ther to help and relieve them or retaliate. For the Popish Cantons being more in number than the Pro∣testants, they send Lantvogts to these places twice to the Protestants once. This one of the Ministers of Zurich told me wad fundi sui calamitas, and occasion∣ed the two late breaches among them. The Switzers on each side are very stiff in their Religion; the Pa∣pists not permitting or tolerating one Protestant, nor the Protestants one Papist in their proper territories. Though the Cantons adhering to the Church of Rome are more in number, yet the reformed are much the greater, besides that their land is better, very like to ours in England. The Romanists are ac∣counted the better Souldiers, and good reason they have, being more exercised in War, serving the Spanish and French Kings, as being of the same Re∣ligion. Besides, the Zurichers who anciently had the reputation for valour, are now much given to merchandise and to accumulate riches, and so taken off from martial studies and exercises. The Bernese though they have far the greatest and best territory of all (so that it's said they can arm as many men as the Dutchy of Milan; send into the field 100000 Souldiers and yet leave enough at home to till the land) yet have they no reputation for Souldiers; they lost their credit quite in the late skirmish with the
Lucernese, who account them rather Savoyards than Switzers. All the Cantons of Switzerland coyn money except Appenzel, Vnderwald and Glaris, of which Glaris formerly hath coined though now it doth not. All the Swizzers in general are very ho∣nest people, king and civil to strangers. One may travel their Countrey securely with a bag of gold in his hand. When we came to out Inns they would be troubled if we distrusted them so far às to take our Portmanteau's into our lodging-chambers and not leave them in the common dining rooms. They keep their houses very clean and polite like our good housewives in England. For plants, going from Zurich to Mellingen we observed common Gooseberry in the hedges and by the way-sides very plentifully, and in some places Barberries. Sigillum Solomonis and Herba Paris are the most common plants that grow in this Countrey in the woods and hedges every where: Anonymus flore Coluteae on the mountains near Zurich. From Arauw to Soloturn Helleboraster maximus out he hills sides, as also Christophoriana, not to mention Fumaria Bulbosa every where grow∣ing in the shady lanes. Geneva is pleasantly seated at the lower end of the Lacus Lemanus,Geneva. now called Genffer-zee or the lake of Geneva, upon a hill side respecting the lake; so that from the lake you have a fair prospect of the whole Town. It is divided by the river Rhodanus or Rhosne into two parts, which are joyned together by two wooden bridges, one of which hath on each side a row of houses after the manner of London∣bridge, only they are low. The two principal and indeed only considerable streets in the Town are the low street [Rüe bas] which runs along by the river and lakes side: and the high street or great street [Rüe grand] which runs up the hill. The City is indifferently strong, and they have lately been at great expences to fortific it alla moderna with ram∣parts
and bastions of earth. Though it be but small yet is it very populous, being supposed to contain 30000 souls, St. Peter's Church, formerly the Ca∣thedral, is handsome and well-built, and in it is a stately monument for the Duke of Rohan. The Citizens are very busie and industrious, subsisting chiefly by trading: the whole territory of this Re∣public being not so great as some one Noblemans estate in England for extent of land. All provisions of victuals are very plentiful and cheap at Geneva, especially milk-meats, the neighbouring mountains feeding abundance of cattel. The tops of Jura, Saleve and other high moun∣tains of Savoy, Daulphiny and the Alps, where they are bare of wood, put forth very good grass so soon as the snow is melted off them, which usually is about or before mid-May. And then the Countrey people drive up their cattel to pasture, and feed them there for three months time. Upon these hill tops they have heer and there low sheds or dairy houses, which serve the men to live in and to make their butter and cheese in, so long as they keep their beasts above. The men I say, for they only ascend up thither and do all the dairy work, leaving their wives to keep house below; it being too toilsome for them to clamber up such high and steep hills. By reason of these cotes it is very convenient simpling upon the mountains, for if a man be hungry or thirsty he may soon find relief at one of them. We always found the people very kind and willing to give us such as they had, viz. brown bread, milk, whey, butter, curds, &c. for which we could scace fasten any mony uon them. For the temper of the air in respect of heat and cold Geneva I think is very like England, there being no great excess of either extreme. The City is well governed, vice discountenanced, and the people ei∣ther really better or at least more restrained then in
other places: Though they do take liberty to shoot and use other sports and exercises upon the Lords day, yet most of their Ministers disallow it and preach against it. Our long stay heer at Geneva,Plants observed about Geneva. and that in the pro∣per season for simpling, gave us leisure to search for and advantage of finding many species of plants in the neighbouring fields and mountains, of which I shall heer present the Reader with a catalogue: Such as are native of England are in the Roman letter. In Colle la Bastie dicto & Sylvis clivosis ad Rhodani ripas. Colutea scorpioides: Melissophyllon Fuchsio flore albo atque etiam vario: Lilium flore nutante ferrugi∣neo majus J. B. Monophyllon Ger. Orobus Pannonicus 1 Clus. Hepaticum trifolium Lob. Frangula; Chamae∣drys falsa maxima, &c. J. B. Bellis sylvatica J. B. Tri∣folium purpureum majus folio & spica longiore J. B. Orobus sylvaticus viciae foliis C. B. Tithymalus cypa∣rissias J. B. Tithymalus non acris flore rubro J. B. Hor∣minum luteum sive Colus Jovis; Aquilegia vulgaris. In monte Saleve dicto unâ circiter leucâ à Geneva distante. Cotoneaster Gesneri J. B. Diospyros J. B. Bellis cae∣rulea Monspeliaca Ger. Scabiosa 10 sive repens Clus Alsine muscosa quibusdam J. B. Ad rivulos propè Sa∣leve. Ageratum purpureum Dalechampii J. B. ad ra∣dices montis. Sanieula Alpina guttata, In summita∣te propè fontes. Pes cati flo. albo & suaverubente ibid & copiosissime. Gentiana major Ger In pascuis propè summitatem montis abunde. Gentianula quae Hippion J. B. ibid. Caalia quibusdam J. B. in sylvo∣sis suprema montis parte. Polygonatum angustifolium, ibid. polygonatum floribus ex singularibus pedicu∣lis
J. B. In rupibus & saxosis ad latera montis. Draba alba siliquosa repens, juxta fontes propè montis sum∣mitatem. Hesperis sylvestris latifolia flore albo parvo Park. Ribes Alpinus dulcis J. B. In sylvosis summo montis cacumine. Anagyris sive Laburnum, In syl∣vosis ad latera montis. Ferrum equinum Gallicum sili∣quis in summitate C. B. Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro Ger. Doronicum vulgare J. B. Dentaria hepta∣phyllos C. B. In sylvosis ad latera montis. Barba ca∣pri J. B. ibid. Lilium convallium, ibid. Christopho∣riana, ibid. Lilium floribus reflexis montanum C. B. Aria Theqpharsti; Melissophyllum Fuchsii; Poly∣gonatum vulgare; Polemonium petraeum Gesn. Co∣lutea scorpioides; Thlaspi oleraceum Tab. Fraxinus bubula; Alchimilla vulgaris, in pascuis in suprema montis parte abundè Pyrola vulgaris; Pyrola fol. mucronato serrato C. B. utraque in sylvosis. Filix ra∣mosa minor J. B. Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park. In saxosis ad latera montis. Siler montan um Officina∣rum J. B. Carum: Lactua sylvatica purpurea J. B. Cyclaminus folio anguloso J. B. Filix Saxatilis non ra∣mosa minima; Caryophyllus gramineo folio minimus; Aconitum lycoctonum luteum C. B. Vicia maxima du∣metorum J. B. in sylvis in ascensu montis. Sedum Al∣pinum hirsutum luteum C. B. E saxorum rimis emer∣git. Peucedani facie pusilla planta Lob. E rupium fissuris. Sedum serratum J. B Vva ursi; Colus Jovis; Gramini Luzulae affine flore albo J. B. In sylvosis & dumetis propè imam montis partem. Thlaspi Alpi∣num minus capitulo rotundo C. B. In rupibus humi∣dioribus. Rubia caerulea elatior J. B. inter segetes. Phalangium pulchrius non ramosum J. B. Androsae∣mum Campoclarense Col. Helianthemum Alpinum folio Pilosellae minoris Fuchsii J. B. Helleborine ex albido sublutea J. B. In ylvosis ad radices montis. Astra∣galus Monspeliano candidior & Onobrychis qumundam J. B. In saxosis. Helleborine flore albo, In sylvis su∣prema montis parte. Astrantia nigra, In pratis mon∣tosis.
Cicutaria latifolia hirsuta J. B. ibid. Pentaphylloides erectum J. B. Propè arcem antiquam jam dirutam. Chamaenerium vulgare: Pilosellae majoris sive Pulmo∣nariae luteae laciniatae species minor J. B. Hieracium par∣vum hirtum caule aphyllo crispum ubi siccatum J. B. ad radices montis. Orchis strateumatica minor J. B. Pseu∣do-asphodelus quibusdam J. B. In paludosis ad radices montis. Orchis parva autumnalis lutea J. B. ibidem. Diospyros J. B. In sylvosis ad latera montis. Thyme∣laea quaedam incana. Ad pedalem & sesquipedalem altitudinem assurgit, & in plures ramos dividitur hic frutex. Lignum ejus supra modum fragile, Cor∣tex cinereus; Folia Mezerei Germanici sed minora, acuminata, utrinque hirsuta, glauca. Flores in sum∣mitatibus ramulorum 4 aut 5, Out etiam plures simul conferti, pediculis nullis, nullo calicè, è tubo longi∣usculo in 4 foliola alba acuminata expanduntur, Sta∣minula crocea intus continentes. Floribus succedunt baccae longiusculae quae nondum matumerant. Flo∣ret initio Maii; in sylvosis ad latera montis. Den∣taria Pentaphyllos; Damasonium purpureum dilutum sive Helleborine 4 Clus. J. B. In sylvosis ad latera mon∣tis. Calceolus Mariae, ibid. Carduus Cirsium dictus folio laciniato nigrius J. B. Pentaphyllum recutm J. B. è rupium fissuris. Campanula repens flore minore cae∣ruleo J. B. Digitalis flore minore subluteo, angustiore folio J. B. Alsine maxima Hist. Lugd. Valeriana Al∣pina J. B. Hanc Patavini Valerianam Trachelii folio denominant, aptâ sanè appellatione: Sunt enim ei folia Traehelii majoris. Radix valdè aromatica est & odorata. Valeriana Alpina altera foliis integris, in∣odora: Radices longae, repentes, fibris donatae sub∣inde germina protrudunt. Folia valerianae minoris sylv. ex rotundo oblonga pediculis longis insident, non laciniata, ne illa quidem que in caule consi∣stunt, ad margines obiter nonnunquam dentata, vio∣lae foliis quodammodo similia. Radix nec saporm nec odorem (quem quidem ego sentire potui) aroma∣ticum
habuit. Caulis pedalis, rotundus, striatus, concavus, duplici plerunque foliorum pari, quae sine pediculis illos amplectuntur, praediti. Flores albi, Valerianae sylvestris simillimi, uti sunt & semina. Scabiosa maxima dumetorum folio non laciniato J. B. Herba Doria, Propè Carthusianorum coenobium. Ra∣numculus magnus valdè hirsutus flore luteo J. B. ibid. Sedum an potiùs Draba minima siliquosa flore albo. Radice nititur simplici, fibrosâ, albâ: Folia juxta terram plura Senecionis aut Bellidis majoris sed mi∣nora & pro magnitudine breviora, per oras rariori∣bus incisuris dentata, extremitatibus subrotundis, atrovirentia, rarioribus pilis iis tamen rigidiusculis aspera. E medio foliorum emergunt caules rotundi, rubentes, rarioribus pilis hirsuti, foliis nudi praeter∣quam ad florum pediculos. Flores in summitatibus caulium singulorum 5 vel etiam 6 & nonnunquam plures, albi, quadrifolii, è calice longiusculo, her∣baceo, quadrifolio exeunt. In summitate montis sub initium Maii florere incipit. In monte Jura circa vertices Thuiri & la Dolaz rariores. Helleborus albus in pascuis montosis copiosissimé. Tussilago Alpina minor folio rotundo J. B. in summis verticibus. Soldanella Alpina quibusdam J. B. ibid. Scabiosa montana maxima Park. In vertice Thuiri Ranuneulus albus simplici flore J. B. In sylvosis propè summitates montis. Ranunculus montanus albus bir∣sutus J. B. ibid. Thalictrum majus folliculis angulo∣sis, caule levi J. B. ibid. Oxalis maxima sylva∣tica. J. B. Oxalis folio rotundiore repens J. B. ibid. Lonchitis altera cum folio denticulato, sive Lon∣chitis altera Matthioli J. B. In ipso montis vertice in rupibus. Sedum majus vulgare ibid. Sedum trida∣cty lites Alpinum, ibid. Chamaoedrys Alpina flore Fra∣gariae albo J. B. Auricula muris pulchro folre, folio te∣nuissimo
J. B Accedit haec planta ad Saxifragam no∣stram palustrem Anglicam. Antithora flore luteo Aco∣niti J. B. in summis montis jugis. Linaria purpurea parva J. B. Dentaria quinquefolia J. B. in sylvosis ad latera montis. Coralloides altera sive septifolia J. B. ibid. Cacalia quibusdam J. B. ibid Pentaphyllum sive potiùs Heptaphyllum argenteum flore muscoso J. B. Ca∣rum; Phyllon thelygonon Dalechampii; Sigillum So∣lomonis angustifolium. Echium Alpinum luteum C. B. Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park. Astrantia nigra; Sa∣nicula Alpina guttata; Helianthemum Alpinum folio Pilosellae minoris Fuchsii J. B. Crocus vernus latifolius flore purpureo minore J. B. Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum luteo flore J. B. ad radices montis. Pes cati; Ribes Alpinus dulcis J. B. Lactuca sylvatica purpurea J. B. Valeriana Alpina; Cyanus major; Polygonatum floribus ex singularibus pediculis J. B. Digitalis lutea magno flore J. B. Ad radices montis. Thora folio Cy∣clamini J. B. i. e. Phthora Valdensium; in summitate montis copiosé. Diospyros J. B. In sylvosis ad latera montis. Plantago angustifolia Alpina J. B. Nerium Alpinum quibusdam, aliis Ledum glabrum J. B. Cha∣mae mespilus J. B. Acini pulchra species J. B. Veronica saxatilis J. B. Chamaedryi vulgari falsae aliquatenus assinis Alpina, an Clinopodium Alpinum Ponae? J. B. Gentiana Alpina magno flore J. B. in altisimo vertice Thuiri. Bistorta minima J. B. an Bistorta Alpina media c. B? Orchis palmata flore viridi C. B. in pas∣cuis montosis. Orchis rotunda Dalechampii J. B. Lu∣naria Botrytis J. B. Ranunculus flore globoso, qui∣basdam Trollius flos J. B. Piloscll sive Pulmonaria lutea angustiore foli J. B. E rupium fissuris exori∣tur. Nasturtiolum Alpinum tenuissimè divisum J. B. Aster purpureus montanus J. B. Viola martia lutea J. B. Sideritis Valerandi Dourez brevi spica J. B. Geranium phae sive pullo sore Clusii J. B. Daucus Creticus se∣mine hirsuto J. B. Apium montanum nigrum J. B. Ad radices montis. Circa verticem La Dolaz dictum.
Sonchus caeruleus latifolius J. B. Tussilago Alpina folio longo J. B. Rapunculi genus folio serrato rotundi∣ore J. B. Orchis palmata minor odoratissima purpurea sive nigra J. B. Iu pascuis montosis. Pentaphyllum Alpinum splendens aureo flore J. B. Gnaphalium Alpi∣num pulchrum, In summo montis cacumine. Asarum, In sylvis non longè ab Abbatia de Beaumont. Helle∣borine flore atro-rubente, Chamae-iasme Alpina J. B. in Append. in altissimo vertice la Dolaz. Hieracium Alpinum flo. singulari magno cauli cubitali insidente, ibid. Iterum in monte Thuiri. Pilosella minore flore, hirsutior & elatior non repens J. B. Astragalus quidam montanus vel Onobryobis aliis J. B. Caryophylli sylvestris quaedam species, flore pur∣pureo odorato, foliis glaucis. Caryrphyllus flore te∣nuissime dissecto C. B. Solidago Sarcenica; Siler montanum; Pulssatilla alba J. B. Lunaria major sili∣quâ longiore J B. Hieracium latifolium montanum Ge∣nevense folio Conyzae majoris Monspessulanae J. B. Ad latera montis Caryophyllus montanus tenuifolius Lini flore. Radix ei lignosa, vivax: Cauliculi ex eadem radice plurimi ut in caryophyllis, lignosi, cortice ci∣nereo tecti, [vetustiores intelligo] geniculis crebris intercepti. Ad singula genicula ramulorum hornoti∣norum folia ex adverso bina Tunicae minimae vel Spergulae purpureae, angusta, graminea. Cauliculi in ramulos divisi, inferiùs ferè glabri, supernè hirsuti, in summitatibus suis flores gestant amplos in pediculis longis hirsutis, albos, pentapetalos, striatos, Lini floribus similes; foliis quippe compositos subrotun∣dis, & minimè bifidis cujusmodi solent esse Alsines & Lychnidum, non tamen caducos ut in Lino, sta∣mina continentes plurima herbacea seu luteola. Vas∣culum seminale longiusculum, crassum. Floret circa finem Junii & Julii initio Psendostachys Alpina C. B. Ranunculus tenuifolius montanus lutcus J. B. Bellis
Alpina major rigido folio C. B. Salix pumila latifolia folio utrinque glabro, supernè autem splendente. Ra∣mos per terram spargit minimi digiti crassitudine, annosos cortice glauco, juniores virente praeditos, in plurimos surculos divisos, adèo ut terram cooperi∣ant. Folia in ramulis crebra alternatim posita, pe∣diculis brevibus fulta, parva, ex rotunditate acumi∣nata, utrinque glabra, supernè saturo virore splen∣dentia, nervosa, unciam plerunque rariùs sescunciam longa. Julos profert creberrimos, breviusculos, è pluribus vasculis seminalibus in acutum apicem ex la∣tiori base paulatim fastigiatis compositos. In altissi∣mis jugis montis Jurae. Veronica Saxatilis parva cau∣libus nudis. Eodem modo repit & in varios dividi∣tur caespites quo Cotyledon Matthioli, aut Sedum serratum. Folia ei Veronicae parva, subrotunda, hir∣suta; ad margines serrata. Caules eodem modo ex∣urgunt quo in Phyllo Dalechampii thelygono, duo∣rum triúmve digitorum altitudine, rotundi, foliis de∣stituti. Flores in summo 5, 6 aut etiam plures Cha∣maedryos spuriae aut Veronicae, caerulei, quadrifolii. Vascula seminalia magna Thlaspeos aut Veronicae vulgaris repentis. Sedum minimum montanum non acre flore purpuráscente parvo. Radix ci alba, tenu∣is, nec ultra annum (ut mihi visum est) vivax, pluri∣bus fibris capillata. Caulis nunc simplex, nunc plu∣res, semipalmares, crecti, rotundi, rubentes, foliis vestiti creberrimis, circumcirca nullo ordine positis, crassis, teretibus fere, apicibus obtusis, rubentibus. Flores in summis caulibus velut in umbellas digesti, exigui, pentapetali, vix se pandentes. Florum pe∣tala acuta, purpurascentia, linea per medium satura∣tioris purpurae decurrente. Vascula seminalia quin∣quepartita, stellata.
In pratis, pascuis, sais, collibus, dumetis, aggeribus, alveis, muris, viis publicis, & alibi circa urbem. Thlaspi oleraceum Tab. Campanula Persicifolia, in dumetis. Chamaedrys foliis laciniatis; Mezereon Ger∣manicum; Christophoriana; Eryngium campestre; Sigillum Solomonis; Lilium convallium; Chamae∣pitys; Vva ursi; Rhamnus secundus Clus. In areno∣sis ad Rhodanum. Aria Theophrasti; Berberis; Thlaspi minus quibusdam, allis Alysson minus J. B. passim. Rapunculus Spicatus C. B. in dumetis. Pul∣monaria maculosa Lob. ibid. Sinapi Genevense sylve∣stre J. B. In muris ad pontem Arvae flu. Pentaphyl∣lum parvum hirsutum J. B. Saponaria minor quibusdam J. B. Tanacetum inodorum clus. Typha minor J. B. in sa∣liceto non longè â ponte Arvoe flu. Trifolium pratense album à Fuchsio depictum sive mas J. B. Tithymalus cyparissias J. B. In agris siccioribus ad aggeres ubi{que}. Tithymalus platy phyllos Fuchsii J. B. Psyllium ma∣jus erectum. in arenosis propè fluvium Arve. Lysima∣chia silicusa speciosa angustifolia J. B. In alveo flu. Arvae. Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta, ibidem & co∣piose. Chamaedrys vulgaris; Abrotanum campestre; Phyteuma Monspeliensium, J. B. Pereclymenum rectum fructu rubro & nigro J. B. sepibus &dumetis. Be∣tonica coronaria sive Caryophyllus sylvestris vulgatissimus J. B. in pratis. Gallitrichum sylvestre vulgò, sive sylve∣stris Sclaraea flore purpureo caeruleóve magno J. B. Or∣chis galeâ & alis ferè cinereis J. B. Orchis myodes; Orchis fuciflora galeâ & alis herbidis; In aggeri∣bus sylvosis utraque & copiose. Asclepias flore albo; Tamarix Germanica, sive minore fruticosa J. B. Ad Arve fluvium. Polemonium petraeum Gesneri; Ad Rbodani ripas, inque ipsis urbis muris. Crista galli u∣tra{que} mas & foemina J. B. in pratis. Lotus siliquosa lu∣tea Monspeliesis J. B. Chamaemelum vulgare amarum J. B. inter segetes. Chamaebalanus leguminosa sive Ter∣roe glandes; in vineis & seget: extra portam S. Ger∣vasii.
Lathyrus flore vario ex coccineo & albo, inter segetes: Rosa rubello flore simplici non spinosa J. B. in collibus. Gramen cyperoides exiguum seminibus bullatis; Melampyrum multis sive Triticum vaccinum, J. B. inter segetes. Melampyrum cristatum J. B. As∣phodelus bulbosus Dodonaei, sive Ornithogalum spicatum flo. virente J. B. inter segetes. Orchis magne latis fo∣liis, galeâ fuscâ vel nigricante J. B. Ad latus sylvosi cujusdam collis propè montem saleve. Thlaspi umbel∣latum arvense amarum J. B. In arvis non procul à Thuiri copiosé. Allium umbelliferum pratense J. B. Rapistrum monospermon, in aggeribus fossarum, Cam∣panula rotundifolia minima J. B. in glareosis ad fluv. Arve. Rosasylvestris rubella parvo frutice J. B. in colli∣bus & dumetis copiosissimè.  Medica major erectior floribus purpurascentibus J. B. seritur aliquibus in licis ad pabulum jumentorum. Rubia crecta quadrifolia J. B. Melilotus quinta Tragi J. B. i. e. Securidaca flo. vario siliquis articulatis: Blattaria flo. albo & lu∣teo, ad vias. Chamaedrys spuria augustifolia J. B. in dumetis. Pilosella minor folio angustiore, minùs piloso, repens J. B. Hyacinthus maximus botryodes, comâ cae∣ruleâ J. B. inter segetes passim. Thlaspi minus, jux∣ta S. Gervasii, in muris. Sedum parvum folio circina to, flore albo J. B. in muris. Heliotropium majus, Ad ripas fl. Arve. Stachys Fuchsii; ad vias. Cynoglossum minus J. B. in ruderatis & ad vias. Cardiaca, ibid. Lathyrus siliquâ hirsutâ J. B. inter segetes circa Champe. Atractylis, juxta vias propè urbem Saxi∣fragia Venetorum, in collibus ad Arvam fl. Anonis lutea non spinosa, Dalechampio Natrix J. B. juxta fl. Arve. Armeria prolifera Ger. Ad vas passim. Orobus sive Ervum multis, inter segetes non longe ab oppi∣do Jay. Latbyrus anguloso semine J. B. Hujus duae varietates circa Genevam seruntur, alia flore albo, a∣lia flore dilutè caeruleo & striato. Conyza media Monspeliensis, quibusdam Asteris Atticigenus folio gla∣bro rigido J. B. Tragorohis minor flore fuliginoso J. B.
In pascuis quibusdam trans Rhodanum. Sedum echi∣natum vel steliatum flore albo J. B. in muscosis sepium aggeribus. Allium spaerocepahalum purpurascens. Bul∣bus ei simplex albus velut parvae cepae. Folia fistulosa, glauca tria quatuórve. Caulis dodrantalis, in cacu∣mine flores gestans in orbiculare ferè capitulum con∣globatos, è membrana ceo purpurascente involucro, striato, in duas carinas dehiscente erumpentes. Flos∣culi singulares brevibus pediculis nixi, sex foliolis constant longiusculis, acuminatis, pallidè purpureis, saturatiore lineâ purpureâ per medium decurrente, stamina sex brevia cum apiculis purpureis occultan∣tes. Floret initio Julii: in arenosis ad Rhodanum fluv. Gramen cum panicula molli rubente J. B. Besides these which we found out J. Bauhine observed some few others, which we had not the hap to meet withal, viz. Carduus pratensis Tragi, in monte Thuiri: Eryngi∣um Alpinum latis foliis, magno capite oblongo caeruleo, ibid. Ledum Alpinum minus hirsutum, ibid. Galega montana Dalechampii, ibid. Lapathum folio acuto Al∣pinum ibid. From Geneva we travelled to Lions,Lions. the second City in France for greatness, handsome building, trade, riches, and multitude of people; If any, set∣ting aside Paris, may compare with it for any one of these, for altogether I am sure none can. But be∣cause; we were hurried out of France by the Kings Declaration before we had finished one third part of our intended travels there: and because this Re∣lation is already swell'd to a greater volume than I at first intended, I shall only set down the names of the chief places we saw, and plants we found in that part of France, where we spent our time till we returned home to England. In our journey from Geneva to Lions we took notice only of two plants which were strangers to us, viz Valeriana ru∣bra angustifolia J. B. about Nantua a considerable town in Savoy and Anchusa
lutea, in some barren fields we passed through about a days journey short of Lion. From Lions we travelled to Grenoble,July 25. Grenoble Legrand Char∣truse. and thence to the grand Chartruse. By the way thither, but e∣cpecially upon the mountains about this Cloyster, we found a great many plant which we had not met with any where before, to wit, Linariae aliqua∣tenus sumilis folio Bellidis J. B. In some fields about 5 or 6 leagues from Lion in the way to Grenoble: Catanance Dalechampii folio Cyani, flore Coronopi J. B. On the sides of the mountains about half a league above Grenoble in the way to the grand Char∣truse. Melampyro affinis Parietaria caerulea quorundam J. B. ibid. in sylvosis. In the mountains about the Cloyster, Sambucus racemosa; Circaea minima Col. Helleborus niger Lob. Trachelium majus Belgarum; Radix Rhodia, copiosissimè Gentianella Alpina ver∣na mogno flore; Pulsatilla alba J. B. Solidago Sarace∣nica; Periclymenum rectum fructu nigro Park. Xylo∣steum Allobrogicum i. e. Periclymenum rectum fructo rubro Ger. Chamaemespilus Gesneri; Imperatoria vul∣garis; Sonchus caeruleus latifolius J. B. Nerium Al∣pinum quibusdam, aliis Ledum glabrum J. B. Auri∣cula ursi; Victorialis longa; Trifolium Alpinum argen∣teum Park. Helleborus niger Caniculae folio minor. Park. Pedicularis sive Crista galli montana; Radix ei sim∣plex, alba, paucis fibris donata, magnitudine & fi∣gurâ radicis Tragopogi, nisi quòd longior sit, sapo∣re non ingrato nucis Avellanae paulò amariore. Fo∣lia ad radicem pauca [unum aut duo] alata, ex plu∣ribus pinnarum conjugationibus Filicis ferè in mo∣dum composita, inferiùs hirsuta, in actum desi∣nentia, pallidè viridia. Singulae pinnae ad margines serratae Cristae galli vulgaris folia benè imitantur. Caulis ab eadem radice singularis, dodrantalis aut pedalis, rotundus, firmus, nonnihil hirsutus, intus concavus, in summitate gestans spicam palmarem florum densè stipatorum, pallidè luteorum, Cristae
galli similium, nisi quòd vix sese aperiant, è calice ventricoso pentagono emergentium, pediculis nullis. In calice latet vasculum seminale turbinatum semini∣bus minutis rotundis repletum. Unum habet haec planta in caule folium infra Spicam: in ipsa Spica ad singulos flores singula folia. Horminum seu Pseudo-stachys quaedam Alpina. Ra∣dice nititur obliquè actâ, multis fibris praeditâ. Fo∣lia longis pediculis hirsutis insident hirsuta & ipsa, rugosa, urticae similia, circa margines serrata vel den∣tata denticulis majoribus. Caules pedales hirsuti, medullâ farcti, striati & quodammodo quadrati, plerunque duobus, interdum uno duntaxat folio∣rum pari vestiti: Folia quae in caule iis quae ad ra∣dicem similia, sed minora, & brevioribus pediculis (ut in hoc genus plantis solenne est) fulta. In sum∣mitate caulium spicae breves compactae, Betonicae ae∣mulae. Flosculi galeati, lutei, è calicibus in 5 mol∣liores spinulas terminatis exeunt. Julii 17 jam penè defloruerat. Asteri montano purpureo similis J. B. Radix ei sa∣tis crassa, obliqua, intus nonnihil lutea, sapore acri∣usculo, fibris aliquot donata. Folia ad radicem plu∣ra, longa, angusta, figurâ ferè Polemonii petraei Gesneri, saturo virore splendentia, ad latera nonni∣hil pilosa, ne{que} dentata ne{que} serrata. Caules semi∣pedales aut dodrantales, surrecti, foliis vestiti alter∣natim positis, iis quae ad radicem similibus, ramosi, singulis ramulis florem sustinentibus Bellidis mino∣ris, nisi quòd limbus seu corona foliorum radiato∣rum in margine minoribus brevioribús{que} foliolis constet colore purpurascente praeditis, interiores a∣flosculi qui fundum floris componunt inter viridem quasi & luteum colorem ambigunt. In ascensu mon∣tium Julii 17 florentem inveni, & Bellidem Alpi∣nam ramosam flore purpurascente denominavi. Ptarmica folio alato. Radix ei alba, obliqua, re∣pens, fibris longis crbris firmata. Caules erigit cu∣bitales,
rotundos, inanes, brevi & vix perceptibili lanugine praeditos, foliis crebris alternatim positis vestitos. Folia alata 4 aut 5 pinuarum coniugatio∣nibus constant; singulae pinnae circa margines den∣tatae, & subinde etiam altius incisae. Flores in sum∣mitate caulis velut in umbella, albi & Ptarmicae vul∣garis vel potiùs Absinthii albi umbelliferi floribus omnino similes. Nullus in hac planta vel odor vel sapor insignis: initio gustanti subamara videtur. In sylvis montosis Junio floret Bellis caerulea coul nudo C. B. Haec à Globularia vulgari Monspel▪ omnino specie diversa est. Pentaphyllum argenteum Alpinum flore albo Radi∣cem non observavi. Folia quinquepartita reliquo∣rum hujus generis more, exigua, lanugine molli argenteau utrin{que} canentia, in extremitatibus dunta∣xat crenata. Caules ex eadem radice plures, pariter villosi, infirmi, foliis duobus tribúsve tripartiò ut plurimùm divisis vestiti; quae appendicibus duabus caulem amplectuntur, flores in summitate sustinen∣tes duos vel tres pentapetalos, albos, cum numerosis intus staminulis purpureis apicibus ornatis. Vice styli congeries & velut fasciculus quidam filamento∣rum. Calyx (ut in reliquis hujus generis) 10 foli∣olis hirsutis constat, quin{que} nimirum latioribus, quin∣que angustioribus alternatim positis: Est hoc Pen∣taphyllum foliis infernè, & supernè incanis J. B. Muscus Alpinus flore insigni dilutè rubente J. B. Haec planta rectiùs meo judicio Caryophyllus aut Lyol∣nis inscriberetur. Cerinthe quorundam major, versicolore floro J. B. Pe∣rennis esse videtur haec planta; foliis est maculosis, floribus purpurascentibus pentagonis; seminibus reli∣quis sui generis minoribus, cùm planta ipsa omni∣um maxima sit. Alsine minima Alpina flre albo majore. Hypericum nummulariae folio C. B.
Planta quaedam umbellifera Pimpinellae simillae, quam describere nescio quomodo omisi. From Grenoble we travelled to Orange,Orange. in which journey we observed Echinopus minor J. B. which grows plentifully all over Gallia Narbonensis, Jaca cum spinosis capitulis purpurea tennifolia J. B. which is as common; Thymum vulgare rigidius folio cine∣reo J. B. This also is found every where in the sto∣ny grounds in this Countrey; Pulegium cervinum by the Rhosne side at Pont S. Esprit; Lavendula major five vulgaris Park. As common every where as Thyme; Dentellaria Rondeletii; Acanthium Illyricum; Chondrilla viseosa aule  Col. Echii sive An∣chusae quaedam species flore carneo, An Lycopsis? From Orange we proceeded to Avignon,Avignon. where∣about we observed whole fields sown with Foenum Burgundiacum: and besides what we found about Orange, Paliurus; Cistus Ledon Monspeliensium; Ci∣stus faemina folio Salviae; Malus granata; quae per totam Galliam Narbonensem frequentissima est. Catanance Dalechampii flore cyani folio Coronopi J. B. per Galliam Narbonensem passim. Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum flore luteo J. B. Helianthemum flore albo, folio angusto hirsuto J. B. Faeniculum tortu∣sum J. B. Millefolium odoratum; Millefolium tomon∣tosum luteum J. B. quod non adeò vulgare circa Monspelium; Staechas citrina tenuifolia Narbonensis J. B. Capparis; Ile coccifera; Genista Hispanica, Botrys; Cucumis sininus; Aspalathus 2. Monspeliensit J. B. and many others which grow also about Mont∣pellier. Our next Stage was Nismes,Nismes▪ where besides those mentioned about Avignon, most of which are also found heer, we noted Thlaspi biscutatum asperum hie. racifolium & majus C. B. Psyllium semper virens, Cam∣phorata Monspeliensium, Trifolium bituminosum; Ru∣ta sylvestris, Peganium Narbonensium; Tithymalus serratus; Lotus arbor; Convolvulus spicaefolius, Plum∣ag
bago Plinii; Scabiosa montana colidarum regionum Lob Tithymalus characius Amygdaloides, Papaver corni∣culatum luteum; Clemtis sive Flammula repens C. B. Phyteuma Monspeliensium; Siderius veritcillis spinosis; Alkekengi; Clematis daphnoides major; Lepidium vul∣gare Chondrilla viscosa caule , Col. Et quod nusqum alibi hactenus invenerim, Abrota∣num faemina folis Ericae sive Vnguentaria Lutetiano∣rum. From Nismes we traveled to Montpellier,Montpel∣lier. where we abode all the Autumn and part of the Winter, during which time, though the season of the year for simpling was past, we observed the following plants. Absinthium Seriphium Narbonense Park. Ad mare. Acarna flore purpura rubente patulo C. B. in aggeribus. Acarna major caule folioso C. B. In arvis non procul à Miravalle: Juxta vias eundo a Monspelio ad Pede∣natium. Alsine oblongo folio serrato, flore caeruleo J. B. in muris. Althaea frutescens foo rotundiore incano C. B. In scopulis non longe à specu Frontignano. Alypum montis Ceti, &c. Lob, In Promontorlo Cei, vidimus etiam in montibus propè oppidum S. Cha∣mas in Galloprovincia. Anchusa angustifolia C. B. in collibus juxta Castelneuf & aux Garigues. Anchusa Monspeliaca C. B. in colle arenoso non longe à Castel∣neuf versùs Grammontium lucum. Androsace Matth. in fndo stagni Volcarum Estang dicto copiosissime. Aristolochia Pistolochia dicta; in arvis quibusdam aux Garigues copiosè. Anonis pusilla fruticans Cherleri J. B. in collibus siccioribus. Aphyllantes Monspeliensibus J. B. in collibus propè Castelneuf aliis{que} oppido vicinis. Aristolochia Scracenica Ger. in vineis, foliis & agge∣ribus frequens. Aspalathus 2 Monspelienfis J. B. in col∣libus petrosis abunde. Aster conyzoides odoratus luteus hort. Eyst. Ad viarum aggeres veriis in rocis. Bellis caerulea Monspeliaca. Bupleurum folio rigido C. B. In sylva Grammontia & sylva prope Selneuf. Bupleu∣rum
angustifolium; in locis saxosis non longe à Bou∣tonet. Caltha simplici flore, in agris frequens. Cardu∣us bulbosus Manspeliensis, sive Acanthus sylvestris qui∣busdam foliis laciniatis J. B. In pratis circa Monspe∣lium passim. Carduus chrysanthemus Hispanicus Clus. Viâ inter S. Lupian & Pedenatium, & alibi propè urbem. Carduus lanceolatus ferocior J. B. Propè mon∣tem Lupi. Cardus solstitialis, ubique fere. Chamelaea tricoccos; Chamaepitys sive Iva moschata Monspelionsi∣um J. B. in collibus saxosis. Chondrilla lutea J. B. in aggeribus ipsius urbis. Cistus mas 4 folio oblongo al∣bido J. B. Cistus Ledon Monspeliensium J. B. Cistus fae∣mina Ger. Omnes hae species in collibus & sylvis frequentes. Clematis sive Flammula repens C. B. in saxosis collibus & arvis arenosis Convolvulus spicifo∣lius Park. Conyza maritime caerulea an Jacobaea quae∣dam? Circa Peroul. Coris caerulaea maritima C. B. in arenosis ad mare praesertim. Cyanus pulchro semine Centaurii majoris J. B. i. e. Crupina Belgarum Lob. in collibus prope flu. Ladum juxta Castelneuf. Cype∣rus paniculâ sparsa speciosâ J. B. in pratis propè Bou∣tonetum & Castrum novum. Dorynium Monspeliense J. B. in aggeribus sepium frequens. Echinopus minor J. B. i. e. Carduus caeruleus sphaerocephalus minor C. B. in collibus & ad vias passun. Erica arborescens Monspeliensis, flore purpurascente, ramulis ternis J. B. in luco Grammontio. Erica arborescens floribus luteolis vel herbaceis minimis J. B. ibid. Ferula Lob. Foenicu∣lum tortuosum. passim. Geranium folio Althaeae C. B. juxta munitiones arcis, non procul à nivis recondi∣torio. Geranium cicutae folio, acu longissimâ C. B. Ad agrorum margines & in aggeribus. Gingidium um∣bellâ, longâ, in prato quodam juxta viam quae Fron∣tignanam ducit copiose. Gnaphalium ad Stoechadem citrinam accedens, juxta fluv. Ladum. Gramen mini∣mum Dalechampii J. B. in vineis, vere primo floret. Gramen parvum pulchrum paniculâ compressà nigrican∣te J. B. in aquosis. Hedypnois Monspessulana sive Dens
leonis Monspessulanus J. B. in aggeribus terrenis passim. Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum flore luteo J. B. in collibus aridioribus passim. Helianthemum flore albo folio angusto hirsuto J. B. in collibus Castro novo vici∣nis & alibi. Herba Doria Lob. Ad Ladum amnem copiose. Herniaria glabra, in prato quodam juxta lucum Grammont. Hieracium parvum hirtum caule a∣phyllo J. B. in arenosis collibus propè Sellam novam & alibi passim. Holosteum Plantagini simile J. B. in aggere quodam inter urbem & Ladum amnem. Hy∣pericum tomentosum J. B. in humidioribus circa Sel∣neuf & alibi. Ilex cocifera, in collibus saxosis. Jacea cum spinosis capitulis pururea tenuifolia J. B. passim. Jocea montana capite magno Strobili J. B. in collibus juxta Costelneuf, Selneuf, &c. Jacea luitea capite spi∣noso C. B. satis frequens in pascuis & collibus. Kali majus semine cochleato Ger. In litoribus maris & sal∣sis palustribus. Lathyrus major Narbonensis angustif∣lius J. B. in collibus quos Garigues vocant. Leucum maritimum angustifolium, in lingua illa inter stagnum Volcarum Estang dictum & mare, Linum marinu luteum Ad. in pratis circa Sellam novam, Castrum no∣vum, item{que} ad mare. Linaria luteo parva annua J. B. in summitate montis Lupi. Lotus siliquosa lutea Mou∣speliensis J. B. in collibus & pascuis. Marrubium ni∣grum longifolium i. e. Herba venti Monspliensium, in aggeribus & ad vias. Moly moschatum capillaceo folin C. B. propè sylvam non longè à Selneuf, & in collibus quos Garigues vocant. Orobus receptus ber∣bariorum Lob. in agris passim Peucedanum vulgare, propè sylvam Grammontium. Phyllon arrhonogonon & thelygonon J. B. in aggeribus fossarum & praecipue secus fluvios. Phyteuma, passim. Polemonium sive Tri∣folum fruticans Ger. in sepibus vulgatiss. Prunella angustifolia J. B. Pulegium cervinum angustifolium J. B. in locis ubi per hyemem aquae stagnârant. Polygoni quaedam species erecta, an Arenaria J. B.? Ad agrorum margines. Rhus folio Vlmi C. B. in collibus propè
Castelneuf copiosè. Rhus myrtifolia Monspeliaca. Ad sepes, praecipuè verò ad ripas Ladi amnis. Rubia maritima, in lingua illa inter Estang & mare. Scam∣monea Monspeliaca foliis rotundioribus C. B. Ad mare propè Peraux, villam novam, &c. Scorpioides siliqua campoide hispida, in aggeribus munitionum. Securidacae genus triphyllon J. B. in collibus propè Castelnef. Sideritis Monspessulana J. B. Propè pati∣hulum, aux Garigues, &c. Sideritidis genus verticillis spinosil J. B. in agris copiosè. Sinapi echinatum J. B. inter segetes. Smilax aspera J. B. Ad sepes passim. Sonchus lanatus Dalechampii J. B. Sonchis affinis Ter∣racrepola, in pascuis. Stoechas Arabica, in Grammon∣tia sylva copiose & in sylva propè Selneuf. Stoechas rina tenuifolia Narbonensis J. B. passim. Stoechadi citrinae affinis capitulis parvis raris squamosis, in pap∣pos evanescentibus J. B. in fissuris rupium juxta Ca∣stelneuf & alibi. Tamarix major sive arborea Narbo∣nensis J. B. Ad mare copiosè. Telephium scorpioides J. B. circa Castelneuf. Thlaspi clypeatum serpylli folio C. B. Thlaspi fruticosum spinosum C. B. in rupibus in summa parte montis Lupi. Thlaspi umbellatum tenui∣ter diviso folio amarum Narbonense J. B. in arvis pro∣pe patibulum & alibi. Thymum vulgare rigidius fo∣lio cinereo J. B. in aridioribus passim. Tragos sive Vva marina minor, ad mare copiosè. Tribulus terre∣stis, in agris passim. Trifolium argentatum floribus lu∣teh J. B. in collibus propè Castelneuf & alibi in agro Monspeliaco. Trifolium haemorrhoidale seu Lotus Libyea Dalechampii, ad ripas Ladi amnis. Trifolium stella∣tam purpureum, circa patibulum & alibi. Valeriana rubra angustifolia C. B. in rupibus montis Lupi. Verbascum sylaestre Monspeliense flore luteo hiante J. B. in collibus saxosis. Vinca pervinca major. Ad sepes.
OF MONTPELLIER. MOntpellier is a round Town, standing upon a hill in the midst of a stony Countrey; some∣what bigger than Geneva but not so populous. The number of Inhabitants at present being about 25000, of which two third parts are Papists and one Protestants. The Protestants have 2 Churches (Temples they call them) in Town. The streets of this City are very narrow, short and crooked, with∣out any uniformity or beauty at all, so intricate that its half a years work to understand them all, and learn the way from place to place. The houses are many of them well built of free stone, which were they set well together in order would make 3 or 4 handsome streets. No large Piazza or market-place in Town. The number of Apothecaries in this lit∣tle City is scarce credible, there being 130 shops, and yet all find something to do: Their Cypres pow∣der, sweet bags, Cassolets, Treacle, Confectio. Alkermes & Hyacinthi having a name all France over. The Queen of Hungaries water (as they call it) made heer is likewise much bought up. It is nothing but common Spirit of Wine in which Rosemary flowers have been macerated, distilled from the said flowers. The wines heerabout are very strong and bear wa∣ter well. Their vineyards are of dwarf vines with∣out any support, the standards when the branches are prun'd off being like the standards of our Osier∣gardens. At Montpellier the best Verdet or Verdgreece (Vi∣ride aeris) is made.The man∣ner of making Verde: They told us that so good could not be made elsewhere though they used the same
method and the same materials, whether it be to be attributed to the just temper of heat, or the nature of the wine they use, or some other unknown qua∣lity. The manner thus, irst they take Grape-stalks: well cleansed from the raisins and from all filth, and putting in the bot∣tom of a pot a quantity of the best red wine, they set sticks cross a little above the wine, and upon them lay a quantity of Grape-stalks first also drenched in wine, and let them a lone about 15 days more or less according to the season, till they come to make (as they call it) a rose, that is the out-lides become to appearance dry, and the middle only wet. These grape stalks being thus prepared, they put in the bottom of a large earthen pot of the best red wine that begins to be sower, but is not yet come to be vi∣negar, to the quantity of about two or three inches depth, somewhat above the wine they set sticks cross the pot, and having reatly many little plates of Copper, they lay upon the dross sticks first a layer of the prepared Grape-stalks, then a layer of copper plates, and so alternately S S S till the pot be full. In the middle of the pot they usually leave a hole all along for the vapour of the wine to ascend; neither are the copper plates laid near together for the same reason. When they have filled up the pot they cover it, and set it in a cellar, and after some 5 or 6 days turn the copper plates, letting the pot re∣main in the cellar 3 or 4 days more. In 8 or 10 days according to the season the Verdet will be come. Then they take out the plates and laying them 6 or 7 on a heap put them in a trough and sprinkle the edges of them with the same wine for 3 or 4 days; next they press them with heavy weights for 4 or 5 days, and last of all scrape off the Verdet with knives, and moulding it with a little wine, dry it and sell it. The same plates are again put into pots and used as before. So then the Verdet is nothing but the rust or
surf of the copper calcined by the vapour of the wine. Heer also we saw the manner and process of blan∣ching of Bees wax.The man∣ner of blanch∣ing wax. First they melt the wax in a great copper Caul∣dron, then they have ready a mould or form of wood of the figure of a Sugar-loaf or the block of a stee∣ple-crown'd hat, which having besmeared over with slime of snails they dip into the wax thus melted. This takes up a skin or film of wax as candles upon dipping do. This they smooth with their hands and dip in water, and when it is cold take it off the form, from which by reason of the noining the form with the forementioned mucilage it will readi∣ly slip in the form of a cone or long-crucible. These cones (so let me call them) are set in a garden in ranks singly one by one, supported with canes or reeds crossing one another on this fashion, Round about they set pots with water, where∣with they sprinkle the wax often to keep it from melting. In Summer time, when the Sun lies hot upon it some 6 or 7 times a day, otherwhiles but 3 or 4 times. In 14 or 15 days the upper end of there cones will grow white, and then they turn them to whiten the other end. In a months time more or less according to the weather they will become white all over. Then they melt the wax again in earthen pans like Metae or scuttles, and run it so melted through the neb of a m pot into water, and as it runs down into the water a man either breaks it with his hand into grains, or works it into round figures like spiral wreaths or corollae, and these they expose again to the weather in the garden and order as be∣fore,
till they become purely white; and then melt into great pieces to fell. The mucilage where with they be smear the forms is made of snails taken alive shells and all, and pounded in a mortar till they be∣come a perfect pan or viscus. The form once besmea∣red well over with this pap will last dipping many times. Wax whitened is almost twice as dear as yellow wax. Yellow wax is solutive and used where there is an inflammation and the sore not ripe, white wax on the contrary very astringent. They say Montpiellier is a place proper for, the whitening of wax and that the same workmen coming over into England found the air of a different temper and not convenient for this trade. At Montpillier is made the best Confectio Alkermes,Confectio Alkermes. as reason there is it should, the grain which gives it its denomination being in no Countrey of Europe found so plentifully as heer. The manner of the pre∣paration of this grain for the making the Confection you may find setdown in the Philosoph. Transactions, Numb. 20. page 362. and I shall therefore heer omit. These grains have formerly been thought to have been proper to the dwarf or shrub-Ilex, called there∣fore lex occifera, and a by-fruit or excrescency of the twigs of that plant. But my learned and in∣genious friend Mr. Martin Lister, who hath been very happy in making discoveries in natural Histo∣ry, hath found the like grains heer in England upon the twigs of cherry and other trees, and judged them to be the work of an insect, and by her affixed to the twigs for nests to breed and harbour her young; and indeed to me they appeared to be so, easily re∣ceding and falling off from the wood when the young are hatcht and gone. As for the grains them∣selves they are so like the Kermes grains, that they are scarce to be distinguished and grow to the twigs just in the same places and manner. But for a more full and compleat History of them I refer the Reader
to Mr. Listers Letters published in the Philosophical Transactions. At Montpellier I observed the manner of making oil-olive:The man∣ner of making Oil olive. First they take olives, whether fresh ga∣thered or laid a while on a heap it matters not (as they told me) and bruise or grind them to a paste, as we do apples to make cider, with a perpendicular mill-stone running round in a trough. This paste or the olives thus bruised they put in round thin bas∣kets made of Spartum like frails, having a round hole in the top; but both top and bottom clapping together, so that when pressed they look like a thin round cake. Half a score or more of these baskets filled with olive pouce they lay on a heap in the press and letting down the press-beam, squeeze them at first without any mixture. Then winding up the beam they take out the baskets, and into each one put a good quantity of scalding water, (which they have always ready) and shaking the basket mingle it with the pouce and then piling them one upon an∣other as before, press them down a second time. This second operation they repeat again, and then taking out the pouce put in new and proceed as before. The oil together with the water runs out in∣to vessels set to receive it. The water with the Amur∣ca sinks to the bottom, and the oil swims above it, which they take off with a copper dish like a fleeting dish, as good housewives ski the cream from their milk. The water mixed with the red juyce of the olives becomes red and thick, not at all mingling with the oil, so that it cannot easily the least drop of it be taken up without perceiving it. Its said that in Provence they spread their olives on a floor after they are gathered, and there let them rest 30 days to dry, and for that reason their oil is better than that of Languedoc. Others lay them on a heap a while to let them sweat, as they call it. It is worth the no∣ting that though the olives be very bitter and of a
firy ungrateful taste, yet the on which is drawn from them is sweet; the like is observed in bitter Al∣monds, and it is very likely might be in all other bitter fruits; which is a sufficient proof that the taste of such fruits doth not inhere in the oil, at least which is made by expression; and it deserves exa∣mination, whether the chymical oil may not also be devested of the taste of the vegetable from which it is extracted. Olives when they come to maturity change colour and become black as some other plums do, but it is very late in the year first. They are then notwith∣standing of a horrid and ungrateful taste, firing the throat and palate of one that eats them. They afford most oil when fully ripe, but best (as they told us) when gathered and pressed green. Sometimes they pickle ripe olives, but they will not last; therefore those which they pickle to send abroad are gathered green. The pickle they use is nothing else but a brine of salt and water. Near Peroul about a league from Montpellier we saw a boiling fountain (as they call it) that is the wa∣ter did heave up and bubble as if it boiled.The boil∣ing foun∣tain. This phaenomenon in the water was caused by a vapour as∣cending out of the earth through the water, as was manifest, for that if one did but dig any where near the place and pour water upon the place new dig∣ged, one should observe in it the like bubbling, the vapour arising not only in that place where the foun∣tain was but all thereabout. The like vapor ascending out of the earth and causing such ebullition in wa∣ter it passes through hath been observed in Mr. Hawk∣ley's ground about a mile from the Town of Wigan in Lancashire, which vapour by the application of a lighted candle, paper or the like, catches fire and flames vigorously. Whether or no this vapour at Peroul would in like manner catch fire and burn I cannot say, it coming not in our minds to make the experiment.
From Montpellier we took a journey of pleasure to see the adjacent Countrey, and first we rode to Fron∣tignan, a little wall'd Town by the Estang side, 3 miles distant, which gives name to the so famous muscate wine. The Countrey about this Town to∣ward the Sea southward lies open to the Sun, but to∣ward the land northward it is encompassed with a ridge of hills in form of a bow, touching the Sea at each end; so that the whole is like a Theatre: in the Arena and on the sides of the hills grows the muscate grape of which this wine is made. In this space are contained two other little Towns, the one called Miraval, the other Vich. This last gives name to a mineral water, springing near it, much used heerabout. It hath an acide Vitriolic taste, but no∣thing so strong as our Spaw-waters, and therefore I guess the operation of it is much weaker. At Frontignan and other places we saw the man∣ner of making raisins [uvae passae] They take the fairest bunches,The man∣ner of drying grapes to make raisins. and with a pair of scissers ship off all the faulty grapes, and tie two bunches together with a string. Then they dip them in a boiling lye [lixivium] into which they put a little oil, till they are very plump and ready to crack. Jo. Bauhinus saith that they let them continue so long in the boil∣ing lixivium, quoad flaccescant tantùm & corrugentur. But we observed no such thing, for they did not con∣tinue the bunches half a minute, but presently took them out again and washed them in a vessel of fair cold water, then they put them upon wooden poles for two or three days in the shade to dry, and after that exposed them to the Sun, taking them in in the night-time or rainy weather. Cyprianus Eichovns describes the manner of making raiins in Spain thus. There are (saith he) two sorts of Vvae passoe or rai∣sins; the one of those they call Raisins of the Sun, of a blew colour, the other of the Vvae passae Lixae, which they call Frail or basket-Raisins. In preparing
the first sort they thus proceed. When the bunch they design for that purpose begins to grow tipe, they cut the foot-stalk of it half asunder, that so the radical juyce or moisture may be at least in a great measure deteined and not pass to the grapes; and so they leave it hanging on the vine. Then by the heat of the Sun the grapes are by degrees dried. When they are sufficiently dry they gather them and put them up in vessels. The second sort they make on this fashion. When they prune their vines, they bind up the cut∣tings in faggots and reserve them till the vintage time. Then they burn them and of their ashes make a lye or lixivim, which they boil in great vessels, and there in immerse the bunches of grapes one by one. Afterwards to dry them they spread them up∣on a paved floor clean swept, made for that pur∣pose in the vineyard, that so they may be the more speedily dried by the Sun-bams. When they are sufficiently concocted and dried they put them up in frails or baskets. After the same manner they pre∣pare figs for to dry, by dipping them in a lixivium made of the ashes of the dried branches of the fig∣tre cut off in pruning. But however they superstiti∣ously observe to make their lixivium for raisins of the ashes of branches pruned off of the vine, &c. I doubt not but the ashes of any wood indifferently taken would serve as well for that purpose. From Frontignan we rode to Balleruch▪Baths at Balleruch. to see the hot waters which are used as well inwardly as out∣wardly. At our being there, which was in the begin∣ning of September, the water was scarce luke-warm; they told us that in the Winter it was very hot. The Bath is not above two flight-shots distant from the Estang, and the water thereof tastes very salt and brackish; whether by reason of the Seas being so near it, or because the water comes from some salt mine I know not, yet the latter seemeth the more
probable, because should it come from the Sea, the water straining through so much sand would proba∣bly lose its salt by the way, as we have found by ex∣periment in England. At Gabian about a days journey from Montpellier in the way to Beziers is a fountain of Petroleum.A foun∣tain of Petroleum It burns like oil, is of a strong pungent scent, and a blackish colour. It distils out of several places of the rock all the year long, but most in Summer time. They gather it up with ladies and put it in a barrel set on one end, which hath a spiggot just at the bot∣tom, when they have put in a good quantity they open the spiggot to let out the water, and when the oil begins to come presently stop it. They pay for the farm of this fountain about 50 crowns per. ann. We were told by one Monsieur Beaushoste a Chymist in Montpellier, that Petroleum was the very same with the oil of Jet, and not to be distinguished from it by colour, taste, smell, consistency, virtues, or any other accident, as he had by experience found. Upon the coast of the Mediterranean Sea in seve∣ral places, as at Berre,Making of salt by evapora∣ting Sea-water by the Sun∣beams. near Martegue in Provence, at Messina in Sioily, &c. they make salt of the Sea-wa∣ter drawn into shallow pools and evaporated by the Sun-beams in Summer time. First they let the wa∣ter into a large shallow plain like the cooler in a Brew-house and there being well heated they run into several shallow beds like the beds of a garden, when the Sun hath dried up all the water they let in more, and so again 3 or 4 times till the salt re∣maining at the bottom of these receptacles come to be 3 fingers thick, and then they take it up with sho∣vels, and heap it on little hills: but the whole pro∣cess of this operation being exactly described in the Philosophical Transact. Numb; 51. page 1025. I shall forbear to enlarge any further concerning it. Now that I have mentioned Martegue,The pre∣varation  Btar I shall add the manner of making Botargo, out of Mr. F. Wil∣lughbye's
notes. At Martegue they take abundance of Mullets [Mugiles not mulli as one would be apt to think by the English name] in their Burdigos, which are places in the shallows, enclosed with hedges of reeds. The male Mullets are called Allettants, be∣cause they shed the milt [Lac piscium.] The females Botar, of the rows or spawn of which Botargo is made. They first take out the spawn entire, and cover it round with salt for 4 or 5 hours: then they press it a little between two boards or stones; then they wash it, and at last dry it in the Sun for 13 or 14 days ta∣king it in at nights. Decemb. 7. 1665. from Montpellier we made an excursive voyage into Provence. The principal Ci∣ties and Towns that we saw were 1.Lunel. Arles. Lunel about 4 leagues distant from Montpellier. 2. Arles a consider∣able City once the head of a Kingdom, called anci∣ently Arelate, standing upon the river Rhosne, which a good way above this City divides it self into two branches, and makes an Isalnd called the Camarg. All this Island is full of Vermicularis frutex growing by the ditch sides all along. Beyond this City in the way to Marseilles we passed over a large plain or le∣vel all over covered with stones, called now the Craux or les Champs pierreux, anciently Campi lapidei, to 3.S. Cha∣mas. S. Chamas a large burgh standing upon the ridge and on each side a narrow hill, which is perforated like Pausilypus. Upon the rocks near this town I found Seseli Aethiopicum frutex growing in great plenty, as also Alypum montis Ceti, Coris Monspessulana; Ruta sylvestris minor; Colutea caule Genistae fungoso J. B. We observed also this day all along as we rode upon the hills and by the way sides our common Furze or Genista spinosa. 4. Marseilles,Marseil∣les. an ancient City not great but well built with tall stone-houses for the most part, and very populous. We were told that the number of souls was about 120000. The streets are narrow as
in most of the ancient Towns in this Countrey to keep off the scorching beams of the Sun in Summer time. The haven is the most secure and commodious that I have seen: the entrance into it so strait and narrow that a man may easily cast a stone cross it, but the haven within large enough to contain 500 vessels or more: of an oval figure. On one side of this haven the Town is built which compasses it more than half round, having before it a handsome kay well paved, which serves the Citizens for a walk or Promenade. This haven is not capable of ships of above 600 tun. On the rocks near this Town I found growing plentifully the same Colutea I obser∣ved at S. Chamas: Valeriana rubra Dod. Carduus ga∣lactites J. B. By the Sea side Tragacantha Massilien∣sium plentifully. After luteus supinus J. B. Tithymalus myrsinites angustifolius; Coronopus Massiliensis Lob. 5. Bausset.Bausset. Olliole. Toulon. 6. Olliole, two little Towns. 7. Toulon, no great Town, but well fortified and the best haven the King of France hath on the Mediterranean Sea, having large bay capable of the greatest vessels, where there is good riding for ships. At Toulon they make holes in their stone-walls at three or four foot distance, near the ground, and there plant capers, the fruit whereof they prepare and pickle after this fashion. They gather the buds or blossoms of the flowers before they be explicated, and spreading them thin, lay them in the shade to wither for three or four hours, to prevent the opening of the flower. Then they put them in a vessel, and pour vinegar upon them, covering the vessel with a board, and so let them stand for nine days; at the end whereof they take them out and press them gently, and put them in fresh vinegar, letting them stand as long as before: this done the third time, they put them up in barrels with vinegar. Some mingle salt with their vinegar, which is the best way, and preserves the Ci∣pers for three years both for colour and taste as good
as at the first. I observed near Bausset great plenty of Myrtle in the hedges; near Olliole Acanthus: sativus; Althaeairutestens folio rotundiore incano C. B. Fuma∣ria minor sive tenuifolia surrecta J. B. Acacia trifolia; Tencrium vulgare; Arisarum latifolium; Chrysocome Ger.S. Ma∣ximin. 8. S. Maximine, near which is the famous Gro of Mary Magdalen, called S. Baulme. 9. Aix,S. Baulme. Aix. anciently Aquae Sextiae from the hot baths that are there. This is a very elegant and pleasant City, well built with fair stone houses, having broad streets and handsome piazzas. 10. Selogne,Selogne. Salonia. In the Cordeliers Church lies buried Nostradamus the famous French Prophet, whose verses the Franch-men esteem as oracles. In the Church wall is placed a stone with this inscription to his memory. D. M. Clariss. ossa. M. Nostradami unius omnium mortalium judicio digni, cujus penè divino calamo totius orbis ex astrorum influxu futuri eventus con∣scriberentur. Vixit. an. 62. m. 6. d. 10. Obiit Salo: MDLXVI. Quietem posteri nè invidete. Anna Pontia Gemella Salonia conjugi optimo V. F. 11. Aiguemortes, a small Town but of great strength, near the Sea in a fenny place some 6 leagues distant from Montpellier. From Montpellier we returned to Lions, from Li∣ons we travelled with the Messenger to Paris, from Paris again to Calais and so cross the Strait to Dover: whence we at first set out and began our Journey.
A Relation of a Voyage made through a great part of Spain by Francis Wil∣lughby Esq containing the chief Ob∣servables he met with there, collected out of his Notes. AVgust 31. 1664. we left Bagnols in the Coun∣ty of Roussillon, being the last or furthest Town belonging to the French, and at about ¾ of a leagues distance came to a great stone erected heer for a boundary between France and Spain; and pas∣sing very bad way among desolate mountains after many hours riding we came to Lansa the first Town of the King of Spains Countrey. All along these mountains grew Rosemary, common Furze or Gorsse and Agnus castus of two sorts, the one with a carneous, the other with a blew flower. From Lansa we went on the same day as far as Cau de Creux, 5 leagues or 20 English miles from Bagnols. Among these mountains we met with no brooks and scarce any water. September 1. We intended to have seen the Coral-fishing heer, but the windy weather hindred us. The Sea must be very calm and smooth, else it is impos∣sible for them to fish for it. It grows downward (as the urinators told us) under the hollow rocks, and not upwards as trees. I believe rather that it grows indifferently either upwards or downwards accord∣ing to the situation of the rocks.
The engine they use to get it is a great cross of wood ABCD, that at the middle E hath a huge weight of lead made fast to it and at each end A, B, C, D, a round net. To the lead at E is fast∣ned a long rope. They go out in little boats and let down this cross; and when they have found a rock at the bottom of the Sea, he that manages the rope thrusts it into the hollows, getting in one or two of the legs, and if there be any coral it entangles in the nets at the end of the cross, by which it is torn off and brought up. The natural colour of the coral while it is alive and growing to the rocks is a pale carneous; but when the scurf (which answers to the bark in trees) is rubbed off, it is red. The Coral that dies or is broken off from the rocks loses that carneous scurf or bark in the Sea and becomes red, though sometimes it gets a greenish white rust. They
say it is 50 years before it comes to its full growth: but that I conceive is an ungrounded conjecture. They sometimes but very rarely find branches of three or four pounds weight. It rots, dies, grows light, worm-eaten and full of holes like wood. They all affirmed it to be hard and not soft as it grows un∣der water, contrary to the current tradition of the Ancients, Moliis fuit herba sub undis. I believe the outward scurf or bark may be soft, it easily crum∣bling off afterwards, which might give occasion to the fable. They told us that a piece of Coral (having the carneous scurf upon it) wetted is just the same as when it is first taken out of the Sea. The best Coral rude as it is found is worth a Pistol the pound, or two or three pieces of eight: Polished and wrought into beads, bracelets, &c. at Marseilles it is sold for 30, 40 and sometimes 60 sols (i. e. so many pence) the ounce. They find heer white coral also but very rarely. Near C. de Creux upon the mountains they find a kind of Selenitis, which may be cut or flit into very thin plates, like the common Muscovy-glass. Upon the shore are thrown up conchae venerea of several sorts and magnitudes, and other smal shells of affinity to them, which they call Porcellane▪ These they put in the juyce of lemons or citrons and set them out in an open bottle all night. Th dew mingling with the acid juyce dissolves the Por∣cellane. This liquor they use for a Cosmetic. They catch fish about C. de Creux as at Naples b hanging a fire-brand or other light at the end of th boat, which entices the fish into the nets. This day we passed by Rosas a strong Garrison Castillon, Villa sacra and lay at Figera. Sept. 2. We passed Crispia, Basalon, Argelague S. Ja and lay at Castel-foulet, 5 league All the way we observed abundance of Pomegrana trees. C. Foulet is a small Garrison.
3. We passed by Aulot, where we saw a Bufalore, of which there are divers in that Town. It is a hole or cave out of which continually issues a cool air. They keep bottles of wine, fruit, &c. in a little house built over the cave. The wine heer kept drinks as cool as if it were kept in ice or snow. They say that it is the water running and falling down under the ground that makes these Spiracula, which is not unlikely. They are all on the left side of the river as you go to Vict, and none on the right. This day also we passed Rhoda and lay at Vict, 7 leagues. 4. We went to the hill where the Amethysts or Violet stones are found distant two leagues from Vict, called S. Sigminont. On the top of the hill is an her∣mitage and place of devotion, where S. Sigminont a Burgundian King did penance. The Amethysts are found lower in the side of the hill, Viscount Jacque is lord of the Soil, and whoever opens a mine pays him a pistol and an half per mensem. They find the stones by following a vein of reddish or black earth, or a vein in the rock so coloured. They are all hexan∣gular and pointed like crystal. There are of three sorts, the best are the blackest or deepest violet. 2. Others are almost quite white. 3. Some, but very rarely, are found tinctured with yellow, They some∣times stick a great many together to the rock like the Bristow-diamonds; but those are never good: the best are found loose in the chinks of the rock in a fat yellowish or reddish earth. They scrape out this earth with long narrow knives that enter into the chinks, and then crumble it in pieces with their fin∣gers to feel for the stones. They are afterwards ground and polished upon leaden moulds after the same manner as crystal is. First they use the dust of Smiril or Emery, and at last of Tripoli. All along the way to this hill we saw abundance of Arbutus and Rbus coriariorum called Rhondo. In this Countrey they use not bark of Oak to tan their leather, as we do, but
the leaves and branches of this shrub, which they first bruise with a perpendicular stone, and then mingle with water, and heating the water luke-warm, steep the skins in it 3 or 4 days. In these mountains are also found Emeralds, Gold and other sorts of mine∣rals and stones, but it doth not turn to account to search for them. Topazes are found in a lake called the lake of Silles, not far from S. Colonna near Girona. They find them upon the shore of the lake. At Vict there is a great Market-place,Sept. 5. and a Church at a Covent, said to have been built by Char∣lemagne when he had discomfited the Saracens & driven them out of Catalonia. This night we lodged at Moia having travelled only 3 leagues. We rode within sight of Montserret,6. broken at the top into rocks standing like the teeth of a Saw, from whence it took its name. There is a Chappel of our Lady, a place of great devotion. This night we lodged at Casa della pobla, a single Inn, 5 leagues. We came to Cardona 2 leagues.7. All the way as we rode the rocks and stones were full of round holes, just like those in the stones at Ancona in which the Pholades harbour; and there is no question but these holes have been made by some animal before the stones were hardned. We viewed the mountain of salt,8. where were three Officers, one to weigh the salt, another to re∣ceive money, and the third to keep accounts. The Revenue of this Salt amounts yearly to about 30000 pieces of eight. For every Quintal, that is 104 pounds, they pay ten reals of two sous to a real. The salt is hard and transparent like crystal, and when powdred fine as white as snow. They hew it out with axes and mattocks; and make chaplets, boxes, &c. of it. They say there is no end of it, but that it reaches to the center of the earth. Near the place where they work there are two caves within the rock of salt, to the end of one of which they never durst venture to go.
Not far from this there is another mountain of salt, where the salt sticks to the rocks, and is most of it tinctured with red. Of this red salt they make broad plates like tiles, which they call Ruggiolas; these they heat before the fire, but never put them into it, and use them to take away aches, strengthen the stomach, keep the feet warm, &c. Well heated on both sides they will keep warm for 24 hours. Amongst this red salt there is a kind of Selenitis, (which some call Ising-glass, and the Italians Gesso, from the Latin wo Gypsum, signifying chalk, be∣cause when burnt it is turned into a white calx) which naturally roches into Parallelipipedums of the figure of a Lozenge. Of which sorts of stones are found in several places of our nation. About these mountains of salt grows great plenty of Hali∣mus and Limonium. Cardona is a Dukedom containing 3 or 4 villa∣ges besides the town. The Duke thereof is one of the richest Grandees of Spain, having 3 Dukedoms, 4 Marquisates, 2 Earldoms &c. The name of his family is Folke. He lives for the most part at Ma∣drid, but sends every three years a Governour. The King of Spain hath nothing at all to do with this city: and the Duke never imposes any taxes, but hath only all the tithes of the corn, wine, &c. There is a Council of 36 changed every year, and he that hath been of the Council must wait three years be∣fore he can be chosen again. The last thing the Council does is to chuse a new Council for the year following. This new Council is divided into four Ranks, not equally, but as the old Council shall think fit; and their names are put into 4 boxes, out of every box a child takes out one to be Consul. He that is drawn out of the first box is the first Consul, and so in order. Near the town is a castle, and in the castle a tower said to be built by Charlemagne. Every Duke hath an oath given him by the Consuls,
wherein is an Article that he must reside in the ca∣stle, which is never kept. We passed through Kalah,Sept. 9. and lay at a single Inn a league and an half further, four leagues and an half distant from Cardona. We passed through S. Columba,10. Roccafort, and lay at Sirreall five leagues and an half. We passed by Pobla a famous ancient Monastery,11. about two leagues distant from Sirreall. In the Church there are a great many monuments. They told us that 13 Queens and 7 Kings lay interred there. Then we passed Praves, and lay that night at Coulnouvil 5 leagues. All over Catalonia they reckon a league two hours, and make account that 4 Cata∣lonian leagues are equal to 6 French. We heard that there were Amethysts also found about Praves. We passed by Falsot two leagues from Coulnou∣ville,12. where are a great many Lead-mines. The oar is very rich, and they melt it just as it is taken out of the mine, without beating it to powder. They fell the oar for 40 Reals of Ardit the Quintal, a Quintal being 122 pounds: Five Quintals of oar usually yield four Quintals of lead. This town and the mines about it belong to the Duke of Cardona. They told us that the vein of metal lay always East and West. The best and finest of this oar they grind to powder, and thereof make varnish to lead ear∣then pots and vessels with, sprinkling the powder upon the pots. This night we lay at Tivisa, four leagues. We passed Venu-falet, Tivians,13 and lodged at Tor∣tosa, 6 leagues. All along the way we saw a great deal of Palma humilis. Hispanica non spinosa. The fruit grew up in bunches out of the ground like the berries of Arum, and was not much bigger. Those that were ripe were of a reddish colour, of an oblong figure, and divided into 4 quarters: those that were less ripe were yellowish. The skin and pulp
very thin, and did but just serve to cover the stone. It hath the smell and taste of Dates. The stones be∣ing broken are not at all hollow, but have a hard white kernel or pearl within them. We observed al∣so abundance of Garossus (as they call it) i. e. Caro∣ba sive Siliqua dulcis, the cods whereof they give their mules instead of provender. The Spanish Sol∣diers at the siege of Barcellona had nothing but these Siliquae and water to live upon. All over Catalonia the people are generally poor. They use neither glass nor paper in their windows, but only shuts of wood. Tortosa is a very poor and desolate town. There is a bridge of boats over the river Iberus, now called Ebro, in sight of which we rode all along from Ti∣visa hither. At Tortosa they were wont to make salt-sellars, mortars, bouls, beads, &c. of a kind of mar∣ble of a mingled colour, red and yellow, sound near the town, which they call Jasper, and of another greenish marble spotted with black, brought from Genoa. We went to the Jasper mine about 2 miles from the town,15. with one of the chief workmen. We saw there vast pillars hewn out and wrought for a Church in Palermo. He told us that all the veins of marble, jasper, &c. went from East to West. That they sawed these stones to make tables, &c. with only water and sand. That when there was not e∣nough red in the stone they made little holes and set in red stones. That the cement they used for all stones in Mosaic works was made of one half ma∣stich, and one half Greek pitch. That in building they joyned the stones together with ordinary lime, but on the outside they filled up the chinks with a cement made of the powder of the Jasper mingled with sulphur and Mangra; to make it more white they put in more sulphur, to make it more red they put in more Mangra. The Jasper was hew'd
out with chizzels and hammers, just as stone in our stone-pits. It is afterwards polished with Armoril, i. e. the powder they use to polish armour with and to give it a lustre, so that one may see his face in it with the powder of the cinders of the best Tin. This day we set out towards Valence passing the Ebro by the bridge of boats, and lodged at Galera a small village 2 leagues distant from Tortosa. We passed by Tregera,Sept. 16. whereabouts seemed to be the ruines of an old Romane way; Mattheau, Sal∣sandail, and lay at Lescouvas, 7 leagues. Near Les∣couvas we found store of Oleander with a red flower. We passed Cabanos,17. Pobletta, Buriol, villa real, Annules, 7 leagues. This journey we saw a great many rivers quite dried up, and for above a month together had scarce any rain. That little that was always came just from the sea. We passed Chinoes,18. Almenaro, Moulvedere (an Sa∣guntus?) Massa-magril, Albalade, and arrived at Va∣lence, 7 leagues. Near Valence the Countrey is ve∣ry populous and well cultivated. Abundance of Mul∣berry-trees are planted in rows all the fields over. As we passed through the Market-place at Valence all the people houted at us, and threw parings of melons, &c. on our cloaks. It seems they are not used to see strangers and travellers there. This was the first place; in Spain where we were searched. In this city is an University. I heard a Professor read Logic. The scholars are sufficiently insolent and very disputacious: One of them asked me, Quid est Ens universale? and whether I was of Tho∣mas Aquinas his opinion: another, Quid est Genus? None of them understood any thing of the new Philosophy, or had so much as heard of it. None of the new books to be found in any of their Book∣sellers shops: In a word the University of Valence is just where our Universities were 100 years ago.
In the Kingdom of Valence the King of Spain is not absolute; but to impose taxes, raise soldiers, &c. he must have the consent of the three Estates, i. e. 1. The Clergy. 2. The Nobility. 3. The Ci∣ties and Villages: and if one of these refuse to con∣sent nothing can be done. These three Estates have 6 Deputies, 2 for each, who are changed e∣very third year. Of the two for the Cities one is for the City of Valentia, and the other for all the rest. Each City chusing a Syndic, one is taken by lot to be a Deputy. The six Deputies have the care and government of the Militia. Upon any urgent occasion the Deputies must assemble the 3 Estates, i. e. the chief of the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Syndics of the Cities. The City of Valence is governed by six Jurats or Consuls. They are taken by lot out of 6 Urns or Burses, two out of each: In the first Urn are the names of all the better sort of Nobility that have the title of Dons: in the second Urn the names of all the lower rank of Nobility, that have not the title of Don: in the third the names of all rich Citizens that are not Gentlemen; they must have al least 400 crowns yearly rent besides what their wives bring. Besides these there is a Rationel and two Syndics changed every third year; six Advo∣cates for their lives, and 40 Plebeians changed yearly. The City being divided into 15 Trades or Companies; each Company chuses two, which make 30; the other ten are chosen, two by the Ratio∣nel, and eight by the six Jurats and two Syndics, each chusing one. Of all these Officers and the 40 Plebeians consists the Senate. But nothing can be done unless there be 29 of the Plebeians present at least. There is also 1. a Judge for criminal causes, taken by turns out of the 3 Urns, and changed yearly. He hath an Advocate to assist him, who is changed yearly, but so that all the Advocates in
the City have the place by turns: and a Lieutenant criminel, taken by lot out of the 40 Plebeians. 2. A Mustafa who has the care of all kind of victuals, corn, weights, measures, &c. He is taken by lot out of the 3 burses as the criminal Judge is, and hath also a Lieutenant out of the 40. Moreover there is a Judge for civil causes taken out of the 3 Burses, who has an Advocate like the criminal Judge; but he cannot decide causes of above fifteen crowns. The University is governed by the Town, who every third year chuse a Rector that must be a Ca∣non. The other Officers are a Bedel, a Sergeant and a Puntadore, who is to take notice when any Professour fails to read. There are eight Praepositi in this University, four for Divinity, two for the Ca∣non Law, and two for the Civil Law; who have each 500 crowns yearly. There are also four Rea∣ders for Philosophy, seven for Physic, one for the Greek tongue, one for the Hebrew, and two for the Mathematics. These have but small stipends, but all their scholars that come to hear their lectures pay somewhat yearly. If a Professor promote 3 rich scholars, that are able to pay the fees, to any de∣gree, he may promote a fourth that is poor for no∣thing. The degrees are the same with those in our Universities, viz. 1. Batchelour after they have finish∣ed a course in Philosophy; which degree costs a∣bout 12 crowns. 2. Master of Arts, which costs 80. 3. Batchelour in Divinity, Law or Physic, which costs 16. 4. Doctor, which costs 150. They may be Masters of Arts presently after they are Batchelours if they will, and in like manner Doctors. In the Market at Valence and all Spain over they divide hens and chickens into pieces and sell them by quar∣ters: They make great vessels of Goats skins to put wine and oil in, and lesser bottles which they call boto's. The women paint, laying it on so thick as
if one daubed minium upon a wall. No Garrison nor soldiers heer. We set out from Valence, and passing by Masa∣nasse,Sept. 24. Catareggi & Seille lodged at Mussafes, 3 leagues. Coming out of Valence we were fain to give money at 3 places to avoid searching. We passed Cullera,25. where we ferried over a great river called Xucar, and lay at Gandia. There is a College and an University, as appears by this in∣scription upon the wall of the Col. Sanctus Franci∣scus à Borgia, Dux Gandiae 4, Praepositus generalis So∣cietatis Jesu 3 hoc Collegium & hanc Vniversitatem à fundamentis erexit A. D. 1546. At Cullera the wine first began to be sweet, and 3 leagues off at Gandia the Plantations of Sugar-canes began. Q. Whether the nature of the soil that was fit to nourish the Sugar-canes did not also contribute to the sweet∣ness of the Grapes? At Gandia we first found raisins of the sun (as they are called in England) in Spain they call this kind Pansas, and they seem to be the Duracinae of the Ancients. They are all white, round, and have a tougher skin than other Grapes. They gather them when fully ripe, and dip them in a boiling Lixivium of water and ashes, just dipping them in, and taking them out again; and then dry them upon boards in the sun, taking them in by night or in foul weather. The name Raisin comes from Racemus. Figs are dried just as they are ga∣thered, not being dipt into any lixivium. I went to Olives,26. where and at Gandia are the Engines for Sugar-works, the best are at Olives. By the way we saw the Sugar-canes growing in several places. They are planted in low wet grounds, well mucked and dressed, divided into beds or hil∣locks are furrows. They cut the canes close to the roots in November and December, and cutting of the slender tops, which afford no good juice, keep them under ground till March, and then prick them into
these hillocks or beds; out of every talea or cut shoot 4, 5, or 6 canes, which will be ripe the next Decem∣ber. The knots or joynts of the cane at the bot∣tom are very close together, scarce an inch asunder, but upwards the distance is more as the cane grows slenderer. Within is a white pulp or pith, full of sap, sweet as honey. They sell them at Gandia to eat, and cutting them into pieces just in the middle between two knots, suck the pieces at both ends. To make sugar, after the canes are cleansed from the tops and leaves, and cut into pieces, they are first bruised either with a perpendicular stone running round, as apples to make cider, or olives to make oil; or between two axes strongly capped with iron horizontally placed and turned contrary ways; and then pressed as grapes or olives are. The juice thus pressed out is boiled in three several Cauldrons, one after another. In the third Cauldron it becomes thick and black, and is then put into conical pots which at the bottom have a little hole stopped only with course and foul sugar; Mr. Ligon saith with Plantain leaves. These pots are covered when full with a cake of past, made of a kind of earth called in Spanish Gritto, and found near Olives, which is good to take spots out of clothes, which cap or cover sinks as the sugar sinks. [Mr. Swift told me that the clay they use with us is tobacco-pipe clay, or very like it, and that the water in the clay served to wash down and carry away the Molossos, at least the clay helps the separation and precipitation of it] These conical pots are put into other pots, into which by the hole at the vertex the juice dreins down through the course sugar at the bottom. It dreins so for 5 or 6 moneths, in which time the su∣gar in the conical pots grows hard and white, all the juice being either drunk up by the lute, or run out by the hole at the vertex. This juice is boiled a∣gain so long as it is good for any thing, but at last
it makes only a foul red sugar that will never be bet∣ter. The conical loaves of sugar after they are taken out are set to drein over the same pots for 14 or 15 days. To make the sugar more white they must boil it again, but about one sixth is lost every time. A pound, of sugar of 12 ounces is sold at Olives for three sous and a half; refined for 5 or 6 sous. The sugar-juice is strained through strainers of linnen, as it is put out of one Cauldron into another. They take it out of the first and second Cauldrons so soon as it begins to boil: but in the third Cauldron they let it boil till the scum rises, and then take off only the scum with a scummer, and put it into a long trough to cool, and when it is cool put it into the conical pots. One scum rises after another in the third Cauldron. The scum when it is taken off is white, but turns to a black liquor in the trough. They never refine the sugar more than 3 or four times. They use for the refining of it whites of eggs putting in 2 or 3 dozen into a Cauldron. They use but one Cauldron for refining. When it is refined it grows white and hard in 9 or 10 days. The juice boiled up is eaten with bread tosted as honey: The juice of the refined sugar is much better than the first juice. The Duke of Gandia sends presents of this refined juice to the Queen of Spain. When they refine it they put in a little water into the cauldrons to dissolve it the better. But for a more exact description of the whole process of the Sugar-works, I refer to Piso in his natural history of Brasil, and Ligon in his De∣scription of the Barbados. The Sugar of Olives is better than the Sugar of Gandia. At Meuttria in Gra∣nada they also make a great deal of Sugar. About Valence, Gandia, &c. the earth is alwayes wrought, and never lies fallow or idle. They rec∣kon 5 Raccolta's or crops in one year. 1. Of Mul∣berry leaves for silk. 2. Wheat and other European grain. 3. Darsi, i. e. Maiz or Indian Wheat. 4. Grapes.
5. Olives; and 6. at Gandia Sugar-canes. After the wheat is cut they presently sow the Indian Wheat. They complained that lately for a great many years together they had very vad Raccolta's for want of rain, which had almost ruin'd Spain. We passed Benegana and lay at Chativer six leagues and a half.Sept. 27. Chativer is an antient Town of the Moors, and was once head of one of their little Kingdoms. About a league from the Town began a very remar∣kable Aquaeduct made by the Moors. It was just over a river along the side of a hill, in most places not above a yard or two under ground, and had a great many funnels just like the tops of chimneys to give vent, and let out the water when there should be too much. The tops of these funnels were made of a red clay and pebble stones. The water came al∣most to the top in all of them, but run over but in one. We passed in sight of Montesa a castle belonging to the Knights of Montesa that wear a red cross;28. Ortenente, and lodged at Beobert, 6 leagues. Near Alicant among the mountains there is a very good breed of Falcons.29. In the plains near Alicant grows abundance of Gramen spartum Plinii sive spor∣tularum Officinarum J. B. i. e. Matweed▪ of which the frails wherein they put raisins and other fruit are made. This is Spain they call Spar, at Marseilles Auffe. The women heerabout gather abundance of this, and steep it in sea-water till it be well softned. Then they dry it and carry it by sea to Marseilles, where they sell it at 8 escus the Milliere: Every Milliere consists of 10 Packieres; every Packiere of 100 Manados or handfuls. Of this they make cables for ships, baskets, &c. In this day journey we saw a great many fountains covered with long arches▪ to hinder them from being dried up. We passed Elda; Novelda, Aspe, Clavillente, Albitella, and lay at Ori∣vola, 11 leagues.
We came to Murcia,Sept. 30. 4 leagues. Near Orivola (which City is an Episcopal Sea) we observed many Turpentine-trees, some in flower, and some with ripe berries. Near Elda they dig up a sort of Sele∣nite, which they burn and put into wine to clarifie it. About a league from Orivola began the Kingdom of Murcia; two leagues from Orivola we were fain to give money to avoid searching. Murcia, which gives denomination to this Kingdom is a pitiful de∣solate Town. The Fish-market heer is shut up in cage or grate as at Genoa, the people crowding a∣bout it, and thrusting in their baskets as there. We travelled through a miserable desolate Coun∣trey to Mula,Octob. 1. 7 leagues. We passed through Caravacca,2. where they drive a great trade of making little crosses of silver, brass, wood, &c. After that Pilgrims, Travellers, &c. have bought them, they carry them to the Castle to touch them by a famous Cross, which according to their fabulous Legend descended miraculously from hea∣ven, which forsooth infuses a wonderful virtue in∣to them. We lay this night at an odd house four leagues off Caravacca, having travelled in all ten leagues. We passed by Venta nova,3. and came to Huesca, 8 leagues. At Huesca we first saw a yellowish white wine like sack. The Kingdom of Granada began about 4 leagues before we came to Huesca. The town of Huesca belongs to the Duke of Alva. We passed by Basa and rested at Venta,4. 8 leagues. We travelled to Guadix,5. an Episcopal Sea, and ancient Roman Colony. Upon the gates we took notice of this inscription. Recepit Colonia Accitana Gemeliensis provinciae caput prima omnium Hispanica∣rum fidem Christi Jesu, rejectis idolis, evangelizantibus sanctis Torcato & sociis, Anno salutis 70, Pontificatùs S. Petri 37, imperii Neronis 13. Vrbs Accis patrono suo sanctissimo D. D. 1593.
Honorati sunt Amici tui Deus. Colonia Accitana. We travelled to Granada 6 leagues distant from Desinos,6. where we lodged the night before. Heer we saw the Castle called La Lhambra, the seat of the Kings of Granada. Within the walls of the Ca∣stle live abundance of people which dare not live in the City for debt or other causes. There is a fair Palace begun by Charles V and yet unfinished: the outside of it is square, but it is round within, ha∣ving two rows of Cloysters one above another round about the Court. Adjoyning to this is the antient Pa∣lace of the Kings of Granada: within there is all the same kind of Moresco-work wrought in mortar and stone with gold and painting. The Cloysters are supported by long slender pillars. In this Palace is an octagonal Chamber vaulted at the top, with 8 doors, one in every side. If one stand in one angle and whisper to another that stands in the angle dia∣metrically opposite, the voice is conveyed as in the the whispering place at Glocester: but if you stand in an angle that is not diametrically opposite you hear nothing. The reason of the conveying the voice is the vault above, and the corners being streightned into a very sharp angle or channel. In Granada are two great Market-places, one called Plassa nova, the other de villa Rambla. In the great Church are two Monuments, one for Ferdinand and Isabella, with this inscription, Mahometicae sectae prostratores, Haereticae per∣vicaciae extinctores, Fernandus Aragonum & Helisabetha Castellae, vir & axor unanimes, Catholici appellati mar∣moreo clauduntur hoc tumulo. The other is of Philippus I, and Joanna, daughter and heir of Ferdinand and Isabella without an inscription. In the river Daro that runs by Granada they find gold among the sand. In the mountains of Sierra neveda near Gra∣nada are said to be divers sorts of minerals, which are not at all looked after. Near Motril at the Cap di Gatto there is a Mine of Granates covered with
the sea. They are pointed as Amethysts and Cry∣stal, but the best come from Africa. We saw that day Montesacro, a place within half a league of the Town, of great devotion. In Castile, Granada, &c. the greater Cities have a Corregidore, and the lesser an Alcayde, who administer justice, and are appoint∣ed and sent by the King to govern the Towns. All over the Kingdom of Castile they eat flesh upon Sa∣turdays, and observe only Fridays. We left Granada,12. and passing by Santa Fede, tra∣velled to Lotta, 8 leagues. At Lotta we were troubled with soldiers that came from the frontiers of Portugal to take up their winter Quarters.13. There had been of this party 2600, but this summer at Alcantara they were reduced to 900, the rest being slain, or dead of diseases. We passed this day by Archidona, Lalameda, Larouda, and lay at Pedrera, 10 leagues. We passed by Ossuna,14. La Pobla, and lay at Ela∣zabal, 10 leagues. This Countrey was the best we saw since we came into Spain, the land being for the most part well planted and cultivated. We passed by Gandula,15. and arrived at Sevil, 7 leagues. Between Gandula and Sevil there are abun∣dance of Olive-trees. Heer we first saw the greater sort of Olives, which are usually eaten in England for a sallet, called the great Spanish Olive; all that we had seen in Italy or in Spain before being of the lesser sort. Here is a brave Aqueduct of brick, which conveys water from Carmona, six leagues di∣stant: under the Arches there are Stalactites, as at the Aqueduct of Pisa. The Gallions bring nothing home from the West-Indies but Plate, the Merchants ships are loaden with leather, Cacao, Sugar, Lana di Vigonna, &c. Of the Cacao Nut they make Choco∣late thus; First they tost the berries to get off the husk, then pound the kernels to powder, and to e∣very Miliao, i. e. 3 pound and a half of powder they
add and mingle two pound of Sugar, 12 Vanillas, a little Pimentone or Guiny Pepper, (which is used by the Spaniards only) and a little Acchiote to give a colour; but these two last may be omitted. They melt the Sugar, and then mingle all well together, and work it up either in rolls or loaves. Sevil hath of late decayed very much, and doth continually decay more and more, the trading being most removed to Cales; the reason whereof is be∣cause they pay about 27 per cent. for all merchandi∣ses at Sevil, and but 4 or 5 per cent. at Cales. The chief places to be seen in Sevil are 1. The great Church. 2. The Kings or Assistants Palace. 3. The Archbishops Palace. 4. The Steeple of the great Church, like Saint Marks Tower at Venice, which you ascend almost to the top without stairs, by gently inclining plains. 5. The Franciscan Covent. 6. The Longha, where the Merchants meet about the affairs of the flote. 7. The Convent of Nostredame del peuple. 8. The Bridge of boats over the Gua∣dalquivir i. e. the river Baetis. The Town on the o∣ther side this river is called Triana. 9. The Inqui∣sition or Castle of Triana just over the Bridge. 10. An old Tower, called Torre d'oro, where St. Ferdinand that recovered Sevil kept money made of leather. 11. The Aqueduct. 12. The old Palace and Garden of the Moors. Near the Bridge along the river side they come every night with their Coaches to take the fresco. In the great Church be∣tween two Altars are three Monuments for St. Fer∣dinand the wise, his wife Beatrice and his son Alphon∣sus. The same Epitaph in Hebrew, Arabic, Greek, and Latin. Hîc jacet illustrissimus Rex Fernandus Castelliae & Toleti, Legionis, Galliciae, Sibillae, Cordubae, Murciae, & Jaheni, qui totam Hispaniam conquisi∣vit, fidelissimus, veracissimus, constantissimus, justissi∣mus, strenuissimus, detentissimus, liberalissimus, patien∣tissimus, piissimus, humillimus, in timore & servitio
Dei efficacissimus; qui contrivit & exterminavit penitus hostium suorum proterviam; qui sublimavit & exalta∣vit omnes amicos suos, qui civitatem Hispalem quae ca∣put est & metropolis totius Hispaniae de manibus cri∣puit paganorum, & cultui restituit Christiano; ubi solvens naturae debitum ad Dominum transmigravit ul∣tima die Maii, Anno ab incarnatione Domini 1252. In the same Church is Fernandus Columbus Chri∣stopher Columbus his Son buried, with this Epitaph. A qui jace el mucho magnifico signor Don Hernando Co∣lon. el quel expleo y gasto toda su vida y facenda en au∣mento di los Lettras y en juntar y perpetuar en esta civi∣dad todos los libros di todas las sciencias qui in su tempo hallo y en ridurlos à quatro libros segun estan à qui sn ilados. Fallescio en esta cividad à 12 di Julio 1532. An. de. su edad 50 an. 10 meses & 14 dies. Fue Hyio del valoroso & memorabile Signor Don Christophoro Co∣lon. primicro Admirante qui descubio las Indias y nuevo mondo, en vida di los Catholicos Reys Don Fernando y Donna Isabella di gloriosa memoria, à onze de Ottobre dy mill quatrocentos y noventa, y dos annos, y partio del puerto de Palos à descubrirlas con tres Carabelas y noventa personas à tres de Agosto……. iuntes……. y bolbio à Castilla con la vittoria à quattro di Marzo del anno siguente, y torno despues otras dos vezes a poblar lequale scubri, y al sin fallescio à Valladolid à vente de Maio de mill y quincentos y seys annos, Rogad al Sen∣nor por ellos. Chocolate is sold at Sevil for something more than a piece of eight the pound. Vanillas which they mingle with the Cacao to make Chocolate for a Real di Plato. Acchiote, which they mingle with the other ingredients to give a colour is made of a kind of red earth brought from New Spain, wrought up into cakes it is sold for a Real di plato the ounce. All the oil and wine they have in the West-Indies goes from Spain, they not being permitted to plant Vines or Olive-trees, that they may always have a
dependence upon Spain. At and near Sevil we paid two Reals de quarto a bed; bread, wine flesh, and all other Commodities excessive dear, excepting on∣ly Olives and Pomegranates, which were better heer than in any other part of Spain. There had lately been a great plague in Sevil, which had very much depopulated and impoverished, indeed almost rain∣ed, the City. I set out from Sevil towards Madrid:Octob. 23. the first day we travelled to Carmona, where the Aqueduct forementioned begins, 6 leagues, in all which way we saw no houses; but a great many Aloe-trees. We passed Les fontes and lay at Euia,24. a great Town of above 20000 inhabitants. Between Car∣mona and Euia is a very good Countrey, abundance of corn and olive trees. Ossiuna is within 4 leagues of Euia, where the Duke of Ossuna hoth a palace. We travelled this day 9 leagues. We passed over the river Xenil that runs into Guadalquivir,25. baited at Arrasith and lodged at Cordova, 8 leagues, About a league from Cordova we passed another little river that runs into Guadalquivir. Be∣fore we entred Cordova we rode over a great stone-bridge that heer crosses the Guadalquivir. In the mid∣dle of the bridge stands a statue erected to the Angel Raphael with this inscription. Beatissimo Raphaeli Angelorum proceri, custodi suo vigilantissimo, qui ante annos 300 sub Paschali antistite, populum peste depopulante se medi∣cum tantae cladis futurum praedixit, qui subinde Anno 1578, venerabili Presbytero Andreae de Cas Roelas S. S. M. M. exuvias evulgavit, & tandem patefecit Cordubensium tutelam sibi à Deo demum datam. Quare ut justa gratitudo diu sta∣ret S. P. Q. Cordubensis hanc lapideam statuam cautus & pius erexit, multâ procuratione Domini Josephi de Valdeanas & Herera & Domini Gun∣desalvi
de Cea & Rios Senatorum, Pontifice Inno∣cente X, Hispan. rege Philippo IV, Episcopo Do∣mino Fratre Petro de Tapia, Praetore Domino Alphonso de flores & monte negro: Anno 1651. The most considerable places in Cordova are 1. The Bishops Palace. 2. The Cavallerisca, where the King keeps a great many horses. 3. The ruines of Almansor's Palace, the last King of the Moors. 4. Plassa di Corridera: 5. The Church of the Au∣gustine Freres. 6. The great Church, which was anciently a Mosque. It is large but very low, sup∣ported by a great many rows of pillars in a quadrate order, 16 rows one way and 30 another. Upon ma∣ny of the pillars are Moors heads carved in the stone, and one or two with turbants on. In the middle of this Church is the great Chappel where are several Bishops interred. In one of the Chappels that is now dedicated to S. Peter in the Moors time was kept a thigh of Mahomet: Round about the cornish of this Chappel and that part of the Church next it is an Arabic inscription. The People complain grievously that Cordova is quite ruined and undone by Gabels and taxes. We left Cordova and after a league or two riding entred the Sierra Morena,27. a miserable desolate moun∣tainous Countrey, and lodged at a little village cal∣led Adamus; 6 leagues. We travelled all day through the Sierra Morena,28. and lay at a village called La conquista; 9 leagues. In this days journey we saw abundance of galls up∣on the Ilices, which were of like bigness, figure, co∣lour, consistency and other accidents with those that grow upon Oaks. This day we first met with red wine again which they call Vino tinto. We got safe out of Sierra Morena, and came to Almedovar del campo, a great Lougar, 9 leagues. About the middle
of Sierra Morena are the bounds of Castilia nova and Andaluzia. We passed by Caraquol,Octob. 30 Cividad real and lay at Malagon, 10 leagues. Between Malagon and Cividad real we passed over the river Anas now called Gua∣diana, which was there but a little brook. In this days journey we met with a great many great flocks of sheep and goats going towards the Sierra Morena out of Castile: it being the custom all Summer to feed their sheep upon the mountains of Castile, and in Winter in the Sierra Morena. We passed by the ruines of an Aqueduct about 4 leagues from Malagon,31. then Yvenas a good big lou∣gar, and lay at Orgas; 10 leagues. We passed through Toledo and lay at Esquinas 11 leagues.Nov. 1. As soon as ever we were passed the Si¦erra Morena we felt a great change of weather, the warm air that comes from Afric and the Mediterra∣nean Sea being stopped by the interposition of the mountains This day there was heer a hard frost and pretty thick ice. The most considerable things in Toledo are 1. The bridge over Tagus consisting of but two arches, one great one and one little one. 2. The shambles, where notwithstanding the cold∣ness of the day I saw abundance of flies, which con∣futes the story that there is but one great fly there all the year. 3. The great Church, where there are many monuments of Bishops, but without inscri∣ptions; in the Capella maggior lie interred two Kings, and in the Capella de los Res four Kings. 4. The Kings palace. 5. The ruines of a famous Engine to raise up water to the Kings Palace. There is so little of it remaining that it is impossible thence to find out all the contrivance and intrigue of it. Between Toledo and Madrid the Countrey is ve∣ry populous and the soil very good. All along the road from Sevil to Madrid the common fare is Rab∣bets, red-leg'd Partridges and Eggs: which are suf∣ficiently dear.
We arrived at Madrid;2. 6 leagues near the Town we passed over the river Xarante. Madrid is very po∣pulous, well built with good brick houses, many having glass windows, which is worth the noting, because you shall scarce see any in all Spain besides. The streets are very foul and nasty. There is one ve∣ry fair piazza or market place, encompassed round with tall an uniform houses, having 5 rows of Balconies one above another, and underneath por∣ticos or cloysters quite round. The chief things to be seen in Madrid are, 1. The Prison. 2. The Piazza just now mentioned. 3. The Kings Chappel. 4. Pa∣laces of several Noblemen, as that of the Duke of Alva, that of the Duke of Medina de los Torres, &c. 5. The Kings palace, where there is the Kings Ca∣vallerisca and the Queens Cavallerisca. 6. A great pi∣azza before the palace, where are abundance of coaches always attending. 7. The English College of Theatines. 8. Il retiro. Out of the Town the Escurial, and El Pardo. I set out from Madrid for Port S. Sebastian.5. We passed within sight of the Escurial and El Pardo, and lay that night at S. Augustin; 6 leagues. We passed Butrago and lay at Samoserra,6. all the way a barren, miserable, mountainous Country; 11 leagues. We passed Frecedille and lay at Aranda having crossed the river Durius or Duero;7. 11 leagues. We passed Bahalon and Lerma,8. where is a Con∣vent of Dominican Freres and a palace of the Duke or Lerma's, and came that night to Burgos; 12 leagues. The most considerable things in Burgos are 1. The bridge over the river Relarzon. 2. The gate at the end of the bridge, where are the statues of Charles V; of Janus Calvus; of Diego Porcellero: of Fernandez Gonsales: of Nunio Pasures, of Don Carlotte, all famous men of Burgos. 3. The market-place. 4. The great Church in which are a great many monuments of Bishops and Canons, two great
monuments, of Pedro Fernando di Velasco, Constable of Castile, and his Wife Mencia di Mendoza Coun∣tess of Haro. This night we lodged at Quintora-vi∣des; 5 leagues. We passed by Pancorva,10. a place very famous for good water, Miranda a great Town, where there is a good bridge over the river Iberus, and after that we passed over two other rivers Baias and Sadurra, and lay at Erminian; 11 leagues At Miranda there is a great market for wheat. We travelled to Vittoria.11. Over one of the gates is the statue of King Bamba, and inscribed in gold let∣ters, Haec est victoria quae vincit; 4 leagues. Vit∣toria is the chief City of a little Countrey called Alaba. We passed this day by Salines the first Town of Guipuscoa and lay at Aescurias; 9 leagues. In Gui∣puscoa they pay no taxes or other duties to the King without the consent of the Countrey. The whole Province is more commonly called Provincia than Guipuscoa; it is cantoned out into a great many Cor∣porations and Villages, every one of which send 1, 2 or 3 Representatives to the general meeting when there is any public business. All offices are annual, and chosen diversly according to the differing cu∣stoms of the Towns. The chief Officer in each town to determine all civil and criminal causes is the Alcalda; but from him they may appeal to the Go∣vernour of the Province, sent by the King every third year; and from the Governour to the Kings Council at Valladolid. Next to the Alcalda are 2 Regidores to look after the prices of all commodi∣ties; a Bolser for the treasury; a Medino for the pri∣son, Argozils or Serjeants, &c. They boast that they are the walls of Spain, and therefore have many priviledges. Guipuscoa is under the Bishop of Pam∣pelona. In Guipuscoa and Biscay they have a pecu∣liar language of their own, and therefore send their children to School to learn Spanish, (which
they call Romance) as we do ours to learn Latin. The Searchers having hindred us we were forced to travel great way in the night. We were lighted by Tias or Teas, which burnt as well and gave as good a light as torches. When they went out they tossed them up and down in their hands, which kindled them again. These Teas (so called doubtless from the Latin word taeda) are very commonly used in this Countrey, and are nothing else but bastons of wood hacked and cleft, (but so as the pieces hang together) and afterwards soundly dried in an Oven or Chimney. Along the middle they use to cleave them almost quite asunder. They are made of seve∣ral sorts of wood, of Robla, i. e. Oak, Aiga, i. e. but the best of Avellana, i. e. Hazel. I wonder much at this, unless they have some way of preparing the wood, by steeping it in oil or other inflammable matter. The taedae of the Ancients were made only of the trunks of old and sappy pines. We passed by Mondragone,12. where there is a fa∣brica of Arms for the King, Oniate, Legaspa, Villa real, and lay at Villa franca; 7 leagues. We left S. Adrian, which is the ordinary road, a little on our left hand. This Countrey is very populous and well wooded, all the hills being covered with oaks. They use no ploughs but turn over the ground with tridents of iron; 4 or 5 of them working together, and thrusting in their tridents all together, turn up a yard or two of earth at a time, which they after∣wards dress and level like beds in a garden. The peo∣ple are something better conditioned than the Spa∣niards; richer and far more populous. 1. Because there is a better government and greater liberty. 2. There is abundance of wood and iron. 3. More rain than in the other parts of Spain. We passed Tolosa,13. and arrived this night at S. Se∣bastian, having travelled 8 leagues. The most ob∣servable things in S. Sebastian are 1. The walls and
guns. 2. A great Convent of Dominican Freres in which there is a famous pair of stone-stairs, each step being of one entire stone and supported only on one side. 3. The haven The Government of S. Se∣bastian consists of a great Council of all that have one or more houses and are married, but none can bear office unless he have two houses, of these there is not above 150 or 200, though the town be very populous conteining about 24000 souls. Once in a year all the names of this 150 or 200 are put into an urn, and a child takes out 8 to be Electors. Every one of this 8 chuses his man. the old Magistrates that are just then going out divide these 8 that the Electors have chosen into 4 pairs, fitting them as well as they can, v. g. an old man and a young to∣gether, &c. These 4 pairs are put into an urn. The first pair that are drawn out are the two Alcaldas for that year; the second pair the two Deputy Alcal∣das; the third pair the two Regidores the fourth pair the two Deputy Regidores. In much the same man∣ner they chuse two Jurats, one Syndic or Atturney general, one Treasurer, &c. all these Officers make a lesser Senate; but in businesses of importance the whose number meets. There is no distinction of Nobiles and Plebeii; but all that are descended from Guipuscoans, that are married and have one house are in capacity to be Electors; all that have two houses to be Magistrates. The Jurats places are most desired, there being a great many Ecclesiastical pre∣ferments belonging to the Town, the disposition whereof when they come to be vacant is in them, who usually bestow them upon their Relations and Friends. Every Winter there are several whales caught up∣on this coast, they coming hither in Winter and frequenting heer, as they do upon the coast of Groenland in Summer. They catch them by striking them with a harping iron, after the same manner as
they do Sword-fish upon the coast of Calabria, and Sicily. Abundance of Cider made about S. Sebastian and Bayonne. From S. Sebastian I travelled through Orogna, Irun, on the left hand of which is Fontarabia a strong Fort just on the Frontiers of Spain. About 1½ league from Irun is the river that parts France and Spain. In the middle of this river is an Island where the Kings of France and Spain met, when Lewis XIV the present King married Philip the IV his daughter. The island was divided just in the middle, and a house built so that at the table where they sate to eat, the King of France sate in France, and the King of Spain in Spain. Spain is in many places, not to say most, very thin of people, and almost desolate. The causes are 1. A bad Religion. 2. The tyrannical Inquisition. 3. The multitude of Whores. 4. The barrenness of the Soil. 5. The wretched laziness of the peo∣ple, very like the Welsh and Irish, walking slowly and always cumbred with a great Cloke and long Sword. 6. The expulsion of the Jews and Moors, the first of which were planted there by the Empe∣rour Adrian, and the latter by the Caliphs after the Conquest of Spain. 7. Wars and Plantations. In all the Towns especially in the South and West parts of Spain a great many ruines of houses to be seen. Within a quarter of a league of a Town you begin to see ground ploughed, else all a wild Countrey, and nothing but Rosemary, Cistus, Juniper, Laven∣der, Broom, Lentiscus, &c. growing in the fields, and on the hills. Little or no hay any where in Spain, they feeding their mules and horses with straw. At least one half of Spain is mountainous. The Spaniards are not so abstinent as most people take them to be, eating the best they can get, and freely enough if it be at another mans cost: and in Inns never refusing Partridges, Quails, &c. for the
dearness if they have but money. Laziness and sloth makes them poor, and poverty makes them pinch their bellies and fare hardly. They seldom mingle water with their wine, it being a common saying among them Vino poco & puro, though all over Spain the wine is very hot and strong. They delight much in Pimentone, i. e. Guiny pepper and mingle it with all their sauces. In roasting of meat they ne∣ver use dripping pans but draw the coals just under the meat, which though it be not so cleanly yet is the quicker and more thrifty way for saving of few∣el. They tear Rabbets in sunder with their hands when they are almost roasted, and stew them in a pot with water and Pimentone. To toast bread they throw it upon the coals. They long and ask for every thing they see, to avoid which a Merchant that travelled with me was wont to put in some thing into his victuals which they did not love. They take Tobacco much in snuff, and if one take out a box of snuff he must give some to all the company. The best person in the company at table cuts and tears the meat in pieces, and gives to every one his share. They are most impertinently inquisitive, whence you come? whither you go? what business you have, &c. most horribly rude, insolent and imperi∣ous, uncivil to strangers, asking them, What do you come into our Countrey for? we do not go into yours. [This is to be understood of the middle and inferiour sort of people, many of the Gentry be∣ing very civil and well-bred.] Their children are the most unmannerly and ill-bred of any in the world. The sons of French fathers and Spanish women when they are grown up often turn their fathers out of doors, having many privileges above them for being born in Spain. They are ex∣tremely given to lying. Almuzzos and such kind of fellows not to be believed or trusted in any thing they promise.
They ride altogether upon mules, and carry their Portmanteau's before them, for fear they should be lost or stollen from behind them; they lie between a high pummel of the saddle and an iron hook. Instead of stirrops persons of quality use great clogs of wood of the shape of shooes without heels. They cut away the mules hair close to the skin under the Saddles, and Portmanteau's to avoid galling. Of this bastard breed of Animals the males are usu∣ally bigger than the females. Q. Whether the rea∣son be that they are always bred of a mare and an he ass? 2. They piss very often. Q. Whether the reason be the sharpness of their urine or the smallness of their bladder? 3. They piss almost always when they go through water. 4. They shooe them with shooes a great deal broader than their feet, to prevent I suppose the breaking of their hoos. Under the mouths of their mules of bur∣then they usually hang a net with provender in it. These beasts are better at climbing of mountains than horses, have a greater courage to endure long and hard travel, and besides are maintained with less charge. The Spaniards seldom ride alone, but stay for a troppas as they do for a Caravan in Arabia. The com∣mon phrases or forms of salutation when they meet or pass by one another, are, Garda Dios vostes, i. e. vous autres [God defend you] A Dios [adieu] Vaga con Dios [God go along with you.] When they are angry Cornuto, i. e. Cuckold, is the first word, and sometimes Cornutissimo. When they speak to their mules or boys they send of errands, they say, Anda Cornuto, [Go Cuckold.] When they refuse a courtesie, or complement to drink first, go first or the like, they say, Non per vita mea, [no by my life.] At any thing strange or ridiculous they cry out, Cuerpo di Dios or di Cristo [Body of God or body of Christ.] When they call to one to make
him hear, instead of Escoutes in French, or Senti in Italian, they cry O-yes just as our Criers do in Eng∣land. When they put off a beggar not giving him an Alms, they say, Vostes perdonnè. [Good friend pardon or excuse me.] As for their Religion the Spaniards are the most orthodox and rigid Romanists in the world, it be∣ing a saying among them Faltando in uno punto à Dios. [If you leave the Church in one punctilio, God be with you, you must needs be damned.] All over Spain there are abundance of pitiful wooden Crosses set up in the middle of heaps of stone. Un∣der all the pictures of the Virgin Mary is written i. e. Con∣ceived without original sin. Concebida sinpeccado originale. At the Ave-Mary bell they all fall down upon their knees; whereas in other Countries they are contented only to pluck off their hats. When they have done their Devo∣tions, as also after their meals when they take away, and when they go to bed they say Sia lodato il san∣tissimo Sacramento, [Praised be the most holy Sacra∣ment.] For fornication and impurity they are the worst of all Nations, at least in Europe; almost all the Inns in Andaluzia, Castile, Granada, Murcia, &c. having Whores who dress the meat and do all the bu∣siness. They are to be hired at a very cheap rate. It were a shame to mention their impudence, lewd∣ness and immodest be behaviours and practices. In Ca∣talonia, Guipuscoa and some other places they are not so bad. They are so lazy that in their shops they will say they have not a commodity rather than take pains to look for it: not to be hired to carry a Portmantean, go of an errand, &c. but at an excessive rate. Mer∣cers never tie up any thing they sell, and if they al∣low paper, they only rudely mumble up the com∣modities in it. Of their fantastical and ridiculous pride, and that too in the extremest poverty all
the world rings. If there be any employment that you would set them about which they think themselves too good for, they presently say send for a French-man. Indeed the French do almost all the work in Spain. All these best shops are kept by French-men, the best workmen in every kind are French, and I believe near ¼ or ⅕ part of the people in Spain are of that Nation. I have heard some tra∣vellers say, that should the King of France recal all his Subjects out of Spain, the Spaniards would ha∣zard to be all starved to death. Bread is very scarce and very dear in many places or Spain, because of the barrenness of the soil and want of rain, but chiefly because of the sloth of the people in letting a great deal of ground lie untilled, and in not taking the pains to fetch corn and bread from those places where there is plenty. So that in a days journey the price of bread will be trebled, and in another days journey fall as much again. This Summer there was a tumult at Ma∣drid: the poor people gathering about the Kings pa∣lace cried out, Let the King live, but let the ill go∣vernment die; let exactors die, &c. just as they did at Nuples in the rebellion under Masaniello. Upon which the King sent to all the Towns about for bread-corn, and in two or three days bread was very plentiful and cheap. All over Catalonia bread was very cheap. The Spanish bread is commended for the best of the world, and well it may be, if as we have heard, they pick their wheat grain by grain. At my being at Madrid there was an Engineer there sent by the Emperour, that had invented a low, called by the Spaniards, a Sembrador, to sow corn at equal distances, and one grain in a hole; the description whereof hath been since published in the Philosophical Transactions. In all kind of good learning the Spaniards are
behind the rest of Europe, understanding nothing at all but a little of the old wrangling Philosophy and School-divinity. The people are much discontented all over Spain, complaining of Taxes, evil Counsellours, &c. but they have a good opinion of and age generally well-affected to their King, whose intentions they say are very good. As for their habit and dress in that they are to be commended that they are constant to the same fa∣shions, though they be not the most convenient that might be devised. To change for the better I think it rather commendable than blame-worthy; but to change out of meer levity or an apish imita∣tion of others is foolish and unreasonable. They wear great hats with broad crowns and the top breader than the bottom. Their hair most com∣monly, but especially when they travel, they tie up in a knot behind, aud sometimes braid like womens. Their bands lie upon black collars just of the same bigness or a little bigger. They are joyned to the collar and they put on collar and band together. They wear very much Cambrick half-shirts, and have their sleeves open before and behind both Win∣ter and Summer; they have great skirts upon their doublets. Their breeches are very streight and close to their thighs, and buttoned down on each side, and reach a little lower than the knee. They wear very slight-wrought black silk-stockins, that the white linnen-stockings which they wear under∣neath may be seen through them. Their shooes just fit for their feet, very light and thin, with low heels. Over their doublets they wear a close coat or jerkin with open sleeves like the doublet, and for the most part with hanging sleeves like childrens, yet never reaching lower than their skirts: a very long sword, and a short dagger hanging just behind them, and at last over all a cloak with a great cape.
The women wear great Vardingales, standing so far out an each side, that to enter in at an ordinary door they are fain to go side-ways: when they go abroad are covered with a vail of black having only a hole left for one eye. The poor people wear shooes made of packthread. The most noble sport in Spain is the Jeu de Tau∣reau, or Bull-fighting, practised at Valentia, Ma∣drid, &c. At Madrid 3 times in the year, where in the Market-place a brave Don on horseback, and a great many pages on foot fight with a wild Bull: When one Bull is killed or much wounded they turn in another. Seldom but some of the pages are kil∣led. And with these cruel and bloody spectacles the people are much delighted, as were the Romans of old in the time of Heathenism. He that desires to know more of the good qualities of the Spaniards, may read Mr. Galliards Character of Spain. FINIS.
CATALOGUS STIRPIUM IN Exteris Regionibus A nobis Observatarum, Quae vel non omnino vel parcè admodum IN ANGLIA Sponte proveniunt. LONDINI: Typis Andreae Clark, Impensis J. Martyn Regalis Societatis Typographi, apud quem prostant ad insigne Campanae Coemeterio Divi Pauli. MDCLXXIII.
PRAEFATIO. OCto plus minus abhinc annis plantarum in∣dagandarum studio in transmarinas regio∣nes profectus Germaniae utrius{que} Italiae, Galliae bonam partem peragravi. Cujus itineris quis fructus fuerit, quem nunc ex∣hibeo Stirpium exoticarum Catalogus, Amice Lector, te certiorem faciet. An tibi titulos & nomina nuda perlegere jucundum futurum sit nescio; mihi certe Plantas ipsas liberas & spontis suae quales eas alma tellus è benigno suo sinu effundit, contemplanti incre∣dibilis quoedam voluptas oborta est: nec minus gaude∣bam (ut cum Clusio loquar) nova aliqua stirpe primùm inventa quàm si amplissimum thesaurum offendissem: Cúm{que} plurimas quotidie vel mihi antea incognitas, vel Britanniae nostrae hospites obvias haberem, magnum me operae pretium peregrinando fecisse ratus, in Hispaniam quoque profectionem meditabar: verùm praetextu belli, Anglis omnibus publico programmate Regis Galliae è finibus suis excedere jussis, Hispanicum iter minùs tu∣tum fore ratus, in patriam, reversus sum. Liceat jam mihi pauca quaedam de Plantis in genere à me observata Praefationis loco Catalogo praemittere. I. Quo ad meridiem & Solis cursum propius accedas tò plures plantarum species sponte oriri aimadvertes. Quamvis enim Regiones frigidae & Septentrionales suas quo{que} stirpes peculiares obtineant, paucissimae tamen eae sunt si cum earum multitudine conferantur quae in tem∣peratis & calidioribus tantùm proveniunt. Cui accedit quòd juga, vertices aut etiam latera montium in Re∣gionibus calidis, cum frigidiorum depressis, planis & sylvosis aeris temperamento quodammodo conveniant, quo ft ut easdem fere stirpes producant, adeo{que} nè plantae quidem Septentrionales Meridionalibus desint.
II. Huc etiam facit quod secundo in loco à nobis ob∣servatum fuit: Montes scilicet excelsos quorum vertices maximam anni partem nivibus operiuntur varietate spe∣cierum praecipuè abundare. Alpes certè quae Italiam à Gallia & Germania dividunt inexhausto plantarum penu Botanicorum scrutiniis in hunc us{que} diem sufficiunt, magna adhuc nondum proditarum residua multitudine. Quòd tanta soli fertilitas dicam an luxuria nivibus de∣beatur extra controversiam est, seu quia velut veste im∣posita radices foveat & ab injuriis caeli & frigoris ve∣hementiâ defendat, sive quod sale nitroso, quo abundare creditur, terram laetificet & foecundet. III. Arbores nonnullae in aliis regionibus humiles perpetuò & pusillae frutium mensuram non excedunt; in aliis eximiam magnitudinem & staturam assequuntur, cùm trobi{que} spontis sue sint. Hujusmodi sunt Len∣tiscus, Arbutus, Juniperus, Buxus, &c. Praeterea sunt quae apud nos satoe & in hortis cultae tenerae & molles perpetuò manent, adte ut ad herbarum genus pertinere videantur; quoe tamen ubi sponte exeunt in frutices satis rassos & lignosos adolescunt, quod in Ri∣cino & Tragio obscrvavimus. IV. Ejusdem generis arbores aut etiam herbae in aliis Regionibus vel succos fundunt, vel fructus spurios edunt, in aliis minimé. Sic Fraxinus v. g. in Cala∣bria Manna exudat, cùm alibi nè in Italia quidem id faciat. Lentiscus in sola insula Chio Mastichen fundit, ut Bellonius & Hermolaus affirmant: certè in Italia & Gallia Narbonensi, ubi tamen copiosissima est, vel nullam vel paucissiman praebet. Idem observatur in Fe∣rula, Panace Heracleo, Aloe aliis{que}. Quod ad fru∣ctus spurios attinet, Quercus in Italia, Illyrico, Hi∣spania aliis{que} temperatioribus Gallas edit, cùm in Bri∣tannia & frigidioribus nullus unquam auditus sit Gal∣larum proventus. Difficilis quaestio est, an Plantae quaepiam nullo semine raevio sponte è terra oriantur: (1.) Quod ad imper∣fectas
vulgò dictas, Fungas, Tubera & id genus atti∣net, manifestum est eas ex semine non nasci cùm nullam gignant. (2.) Oh eandem rationem submarinae omnes Algae, Fuci, Coralia, Alcyonia, &c. sponte oriri cen∣sendae sunt, cùm nullum in iis. semen hactenus animad∣versum fuerit; quod tamen imprimis mirum videtur, cùm earum innumerae ferè species & ingens ubique proventus sit. (3.) Perfectiores quo{que} quamvis plerun{que} Semini ortum debeant, nonnunquam tamen spontis suae esse magnum nobis argumentum suppeditat viseus arbo∣ribus innatus, etiam in prona seu aversa ramorum parte. Vnde omnino fabulosum esse constat quod de ejus ortu Veteres prodiderunt, quod{que} Proverbio illi, Tur∣dus malum ipse sibi cacat, originem dedisse perhi∣betur. Nec minùs anceps & difficilis quaestio cst, An Plantae aliquae degenerent & speciem mutent? Cui ut aliqua in parte satisfaciam, dico primò pro diversis speciebus minimè habendas esse quaecun{que}, ex ejusdem plantae se∣mine vulgò oriuntur, quaeque speciem suam iterum non propagant, quantumvis accidentibus nonnullis, v. g. floris colore, petalorum gemina aut multiplici scrie, aliisve accidentibus à nobis in Praefatione Catalogi Plantarum Angliae recensitis differant. Cùm enim numerus specierum in natura certus sit & determinatus, floris autem colore, multiplicitate, &c. variantium mul∣titudo novis quotannis exorientibus infinita, meritò eas à specierum gradu & dignitate removemus. Nam si haec sufficerent ad specificam distinctionem inducendam, certè Aethiops quo{que} ab Europaeo, Juvencus niger ab albo, rubro variove specie differret; quod nemo, ut opi∣nor, sanae mentis unquam concesserit. Hinc Tulipa∣rum, Anemonarum, Caryophyllorum, Auricularum, &c. inexplicabilis varietas ad tres quatuórve species facilè reducitur, cùm reliqua diversitas quae in floris colore, plenitudine, geminatione, &c. consistit, merè accidentalis sit miniméque specisia, coeli aut soli ali∣mentive
differentiis imputanda. Quid quod Plantae hae in eodem loco (ut alibi monuimus) diutiùs relictae & neglectae, paulatim degenerent, florum gratiâ, seu quae in colorum pulchritudine, seu quoe in petalorum numero spectatur, pereunte, & ad sylvestrium tandem formam & ingenium redeant. Ob easdem rationes nec figura, color saporve fructus seu pericarpii in Pomis & Pyris essentialem & specificam differentiam arguunt. Quòd scilicet fructus his acci∣dentibus diversi ex eodem semine oriantur, quòd{que}, con∣stanti naturae lege speciem suant semine iterum non pro∣pagent. Atque hîc obiter monere convenit, varietates seu species novas vulgò creditas Pomorum & Pyrorum ab insitione (quantumvis magna cum fiducia id affirment arcanorum jactatores) frustra sperari, cùm, Fructum perpetuò surculi naturam sequi, mihi, pro certo & in∣fallibili in Hortiultura axiomate semper fuerit, verùm quas habemus differentias smini deberi & ex semine novas indies oblineri posse. Quod adeò verum est, ut varietates etiam in floribus, foliis, caulibus superius memoratas, (quamvis vel translatione iterata de loco in lo∣cum, vel irrigando aquâ colore aliquo imbuta nonnunquam effici posse, Laurembergio, in iis quae ipse expertus est, Authori  aliis{que} affirmantibus fidem non dene∣gaverim) frequentiùs tamen facilius{que} ex semine in ter∣ram pinguem & opulentam aut alio quovis modo à natu∣rali & solita diversam projecto oriri minimè dubium sit. Quantam autem vim & efficaciam habeat ad haec effecta producenda alimentorum diversitas in domesticis & man∣suetis animalibus pact. Cùm enim fera in pleris{que} spe∣ciebus eosdem colores servent in universum omnia, man∣sueta & domestica coloribus infinitum variant, nec co∣loribus tantùm sed & carnis sapore aliis{que}, accidentibus. Coeli soli{que} diversitas quid in hoc genere possit pluribus exemplis facile esset demonstrare. Hinc in Septentrio∣alibus frigidis & montibus altissimis maximam anni partem nivibus obtectis Vrsi; Vulpes, Lepores, Perdices,
Corvi albi non pauci reperiuntur, quae in temperatiori∣bus rarissimè occurrunt & pro monstris ferè habentur. Hinc in Anglia nostra boves Lancastrenses v. g. mirum quantum à Sussexianis cornuum pulchritudine totâ{que} spe∣cie externâ, à Wallicis & Scoticis magnitudine diffe∣rant. Idem est & de ovibus, quae in montosis & steri∣lioribus adeò parum magnitudine proficiunt ut pro quin∣que solidis singulae veneant; in pinguibus verò tempe∣ratis in eam molem excrescunt, ut duas etiam libras nostrae monetae valeant. Quòd si animalia isthaec mutuo trans∣feras, Septentrionalia sci. aut montosa in locum Meri∣dionalium campestriumve, & vice versa, prosapiam suam non diu retinent, verùm paulatim degenerant & ad indigenarum mensuram & indolem accedunt. Dico secundo, Dari interdum in plantis veram speci∣erum traensmutationem omnino concedendum esse, ni testi∣bus & gravibus imprimis scriptoribus omnem fidem derogare velimus. Nam Wormius Musei lib. 2. cap. 7. pag. 150. asserit se habere hordeum quod Herma∣phroditicum vocat, quia in una spica & hordeum & secale continet, cujus descriptionem vide sis loco citato. John∣sonus quoque apud Gerardum lib. 1. cap. 46. pag. 65. sibi ostensum refert à D. Goodyer spicam Tritici albi, circa cujus mediam partem tria aut quatuor grana ave∣nacea undi{que} perfecta enata sunt. Et biennio abhinc affirmavit mihi, cùm Oxonii essem, Jacobus Bobertus filius, è semine Primulae veris majoris sibi exortas Pri∣mulam vulgarem, & Primulam pratensem inodoram luteam. Observandum autem est, transmutationem hanc dari tantùm inter species cognatas & ejusdem ge∣neris participes.
A ABies foemina, sive  J. B. Abies Park. Abies & Abies mas Ger. Nos enim has non distinguimus, quamvis C. Bauhin quo{que} Bellonium & Dodonaeum secutus praeter Piceam duas faciat Abietis species, nimirum I, i. e. conis fursum spectantibus, sive marem, & II, i. e. albam sive foeminam. Hac de re fusiùs disse∣rentem vide J. Bauhinum qui nec Bellonium nec Dodonaeum Abietem distinctè novisse demonstrat. The female Fir-tree. In Sueviae & Bavariae sylvis primùm observavimus, postea in Alpibus copiosè. Quae de Abiete annotavimus vide in Cat. Ang. † Abies mas Theophr. Picea Latinorum, sive Abies mas Theophrasti J. B. Picea Park. Picea major Ger. P. ma∣jor I, sive Abies rubra C. B. Haec est quam vulgò in Anglia The Fir-tree vocant, fnque hortis & areis co∣lunt. Cum priore, sed copiosiùs multò. Abrotanum foemina vulgare Park. foem. foliis teretibus C. B. Chamaecy parissus J. B. Ger. Common Lavender Cotton. Circa oppidum S. Cyriaci in Etruria copiosè at{que} indè incipiendo ad Statum us{que} Ecclesiasticum seu territorium Papae, secus vias. N. Ventris lumbricos sumptum interimit, quotidiano experimento muliercularum, tum semen, tum etiam her∣ba. Folia sicca ad sistenda alba foeminarum profluvia conferre scribit Matthiolus. Abrotanum faemina villosis & incanis foliis C. B. Seriphium Dioscoridis Abrotani foem. facie Ad. Lob. In Gallo∣provincia, montis celsi D. Magdalenae cryptâ celebris ac∣clivibus Lobelio & nobis observatum. Fragrantius mihi visum est vulgari Abrotano foem. alioquin ei per∣simile. Abrotanum foemina foliis Ericae C. B. Park. Chamaecypa∣rissus unguentaria J. B. In collibus saxosis circa molen∣dina Nemausi. † Abrotanum inodorum Lob. campestre C. B. Ger. Park. Artemisia tenuifolia sive leptaphyllos, aliis Abrotanum sylvestre J. B. In Germania, Italia & Gallia Narbo∣nensi ad vias & in sterilioribus ubi{que} ferè. Hanc speciem & in Anglia nuper observavimus, v. Cat. Ang.
Absinthium arborescens Lob. Park. arborescens Lobelii J B. Abrotanum foem. arborescens Ger. Abr. latifolium arborescens C. B. Italis & Siculis Herba bianca. Tree-Wormwood. In Sicilia, Regno Neapolitano, & insula∣rum adjacentium rupibus maritimis. Absinthium Ponticum & Romanum quibusdam J. B. Ait Caesalpinus in collibus argillosis agro Senensi frequens, esse: quod & nos verum comperimus cùm Florentiâ Romam iremus. Absinthium Scriphium Narbonense Park. Seriph. tenui∣folium maritimum Narbon. J. B. Seriph. Gallicum C. B. Propè Portum Liburnum in Italia atque etaim juxta Monspelium ad maris litus & alibi. Absinthium tenuifolium Austriacum Ger. Park. Auster. te∣nuifolium J. B. Ponticum tenuifolium Austriacum C. B. Ad vias non longè á Vienna Austriae quà ad Neapolin Austriacam itur. De Absinthii facultatibus consule Cat. Ang. Acacia altera trifolia Ger. II, sive trifolia C. B. secunda, seu altera Dioscoridis Park. altera Dioscoridis notior Europaea▪ folio Cytisi, facie & siliquis Genistae-sparti spinosi Lob. Aspalathus secunda tifolia, quae Acacia se∣cunda Matthiolo trifolia J. B. In Sicilia propè Mossa∣nam; Italia circa Neapolin, & Gallo-provincia circa Tolonam portum. Acanthus sativus Lob. Ger. Park. sativus vel mollis Virgi∣lii C. B. Carduus Acanthus, sive Branca ursina J. B. Brank-ursine or Bears-breech. In Italiae meridionalibus circa Baias & Neapolin, itémque in Sicilia copiosé. N. Est è 5 herbis emollientibus. Usus potissimùm externus est in clysteribus aliss{que} paregoricis quarum∣cunque formularum & ut plurimum in cataplasmatis. Schrod. Prodest etiam, auctore Dodonaeo, tabidis, san∣guinem spuentibus, ex alto delapsis, ictu aliquo aut co∣natu supra vires laesis, non minùs quam Symphyti majo∣ris radices, quas substantiâ, lento succo, & qualitate proximè resert. 2. Acanthi folia ob figurae veustatem & elegantiam veteres Architecti columnarum capitulis insculpere sole∣bant. Frondibus Acanthi (inquit Vitruvius, lib. 4. cap. 1.) Columnas Corinthiacas coronabant. Acanthium Illyricum Park. Illyric. purpureum Ger. Spi∣na tomentosa altera spinosor C. B. Carduus quibusdam dictus Acanthium Illyricum, aliis vero Onopordon J. B. In Italia, Sicilia & Gallia Narbonensi frequens oc∣currit.
Acarm flore purpuro rubente patulo C. B. Park. Acan∣thoides parva Apula Col. In Sicilia propè Messanam, Italia propè Florentiam, & Gallia Narbonensi propè Monspelium, in arenosis. Acarna major caule folioso C. B. Park. Acarnae similis flore purpureo, Chamaeleon Salmanticensis Clusio J B. Propè montem S. Lupi non longè ab oppidulo S. Lupian dicto, itémque juxta vias non longè ab oppidulo Vic in valle Frontigniana. Acer acutioribus foliis Gesn. hort. III, sive montanum te∣nuissimis & acutis foliis C. B. Aceris majoris varietas altera J. B. In montibus Stiriae & in Alpibus Sabaudicis propè Genevam. † Acer majus Ger. emac. ma. latifolium, Sycomorus falsò dictum Park. maj. multis falsò Platanus J. B. I, seu montánum candidum C. B. The Sycomore tree or greater Maple. In montibus propè Genevam. Acer majus folio rotundiore minús{que}, laciniato. An Acer II, i. e. montanum flavum sive crispum C. B.? Observa∣vimus primò in Hetruriae sylvis non longè à Viterbo, postea etiam in montibus Genevae vicinis. Acer trifolium C. B. Creticum trifolium Park. Monspes∣sulanum Lugd. J. B. In sylva Valena propè montem S. Lupi; itémque in collibus juxta Castelneuf pagum Monspelio propinquum. Invenimus etiam propè Gra∣tianopolin, in rupibus juxta pontem quem transimus cundo à la fountaine que brusli. N. Ralix, prodente Plinio, contusa è vino jecinoris doloribus utilissimè imponitur. Acetosa montana maxima v. Oxalis maxima. Acetosa Ocymi facie Neapolitana C. B. Neapolitana Ocy∣mi folio Park. Ocymus facie Neapolitana Col. In Sicilia & Rego Neapolitano, in vineis & are∣nosis frequentissima. Achillea v. Millefolium. Acini pulchra species J. B. Clinopodium IV, sive monta∣num C. B. Austriacum Clus. Park. In ascensu montis Jurae vaiis in locis. Stone-Basil. Acoium lycoctonum Napello simile Neuberagense, folii latioribus, flore purpureo J. B. An Aconitum Napello simile sed minus, caeruleum, praecocius ejusdem? Hanc plantam in sepibus non longe à Memminga Sueviae urbe observavimus. Aconitum folio Platani, flore luteo pallescente J. B. II, sive lycoctonum luteum C. B. lut. Ponticum serotinum Park. luteum Ponticum Ger. Yellow Wols-bane. In
colle La Bastle, aliisque montibus Genevae vicinis co∣piosè. N. Facultato est hominibus aliisque animalibus exiti∣ali & pernitiosâ. Semen ejus aut radix in pulverem redacta, & oleo temperata ut unguentum indè fiat illitu pediculos ac furfures enecat & abstergit. Trag. Aconitum hyemale Ger. Park. hyem. Belgarum Lob. 1, si∣ve unifolium luteum bulbosum C. B. Ranunculus cum flore in medio folio, radice tuberosâ J. B. Anemone Bononiensium nonnullis dicitur, quoniam circa Bono∣niam & per totam etiam Lombardiam copiosissimè pro∣venit, mensis Februarii initio florens. Aconitum pardalianches v. Thora. Acontitum racemosum v. Christophoriana. † Adianthum  sive furcatum Thalii. Filix faxatilis Tragi. J. B. Park. saxat. V, sive corniculata C. B. In rupium fissuris propè Rhenum Fl. invenimus etiam in Italia. Tho. Willisellus nuper in Scotia. v. Cat. Ang. Adianthum sive Capillus Veneris J. B. verum, sive Capil∣lus Veneris verus Park. I, seu foliis Coriandri C. B. Ca∣pillus Veneris verus Ger. Black Maiden-hair. In humidis & umbrosis rupibus & puteis, in Gallia Narbonensi & Italia vulgaro. N. Pulmonum renú{que} vitiis medetur; epatis & lie∣nis obstructiones reserat; Urinam & menses ciet. Schrod. Verùm de ejus virtutibus & usu integrum libellum scri∣psit Gallicè Petrus Formius M. D. Monspeliensis. Aegilops Narbonensis Lob. Festuca sive Aeg. Narbonensis Park. Festuca Italica Ger. Gramen Festucae XIV, sive Festuca altera capitulis duris C. B. In Sicilia, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi vulgatissima. Ageratum purpureum Dalechampii J. B. purpureum Park. serratum Alpinum C. B. In rupibus ad radices montis Salevae & in ascensu montis Jurae prope Genevam; Utrobi{que} copiosè. Ageratum Sèptentrionalium Lob. vulgare, sive Costus hor∣torum minor Park. foliis serratis C. B. Ager. pleris{que}, Herba Julia quibusdam J. B. Balsamita foemina sive Ageratum Ger. Maudlin Tansie. In Etruria circa Li∣burnum, Florentiam, &c. itém{que} circa Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi abundé. Trago & Matth. Eupatorium Mesuae dicitur. N. 1. Substantiae tenuis est, saporis aromatici, atte∣nuat, exterget, putredini resistit, Epaticum est, laxat alvum quàm blandissimé. Extrinsecùs ciet urinam, ute∣rúm{que} emollit (suffitu) Schrod.
2. E foliis hujus & Ophioglossi contusis inque oleo oli∣varum bullitis, addito cerae, resinae siccae & Terebin∣thinae tantillo, unguentum sive emplastrum efficitur sarcoticum praestantissimum, Gerardo saepiùs probatum. Agnus castus Offic. Ag. folio non serrato J. B. Vitex foliis angustioribus Cannabis modo dispositis C. B. Vitex sive Agnus castus Ger. Vitex sive Agnus castus folio angusto Park. The Chast tree. In Sicilia & Regno Neapolitano satìs frequens. Agnum castum Officinae ineptè appel∣lant, non advertentes castum nibil aliud esse quàm ex∣positionem Agni. N. 1. Calf. & siccat, insignite discutit, menses ciet, appetitus Venereos cohibet, semen imminuit. Schrod. Plurimas ei virtutes ascribunt Veteres, quos consulat qui velit. 2. Athenis, Thesmophoriis Cereris sacro mulieres ca∣stitatem custodientes foliis Viticis cubitus sibi sternere solebant, unde ei  nomen. Aizoon v. Sedum. Alaternus major seu prior Park. Bourgespine Monspolien∣sium, Alaternus Plinii Clusio & Anguillarae Lob. Spinae Burgi Monspeliensium J. B. Philyca elatior C. B. In Ita∣lia, praecipuè ad mare inferum, necnon circa Monspe∣lium in collibus saxosis. Foliorum figurâ & incisuris multùm variat. Alcea pentaphyllea Park. Pentaphylli folio vel cannabi∣na J. B. V, sive cannabina C. B. fruticosa cannabina Ger. In aggeribus fossaurm circa Monspelium. Alcea villosa J. B. VIII, sive hirsuta C. B. minor villosa Park. In vinetis circa Monspelium, & in sepibus non procul Genevâ. Alchimilla minor quinquefolia C. B. v. Pentaphyllum. Alcyonium 4 Dioscoridis v. Bursa marina. Alcyonium 5 Dioscoridis, sive Auricula marina Caes. Fun∣gus auricularis Caesalpini C. B. In rupibus aquâ marinâ tectis propè Portum Liburnum & alibi juxta italiam & Sicillam. Alkekengi Lon. Halicacabum sive Alkakengi vulgare Park. Solanum bacciferum II, sive vesicarium, quòd folliculi vesicae inflatae similes; vel ut Plin. l. 21. c. 31. quoniam vesicae & calculis prosit, C. B. halicacabum Ger. hal. vulgare J. B. Primò in sylvosis in insula Danubii jux∣ta Viennam Austriae; deinde in Italia propè Romam in scrobibus invenimus. N. Hujus baccae nephriticae, diureticae ac lithontri∣pticae insignes sunt. Usus praecip. in calculo renum &
vesicae, in ictero (baccae & folia) in sanguine coagulato. Schrod. Sumi autem possunt vel vio infusae, vel in sero lactis aut Zythogalo decoctae, vel in pulverem redactae in quovis liquore. Allium Alpinum v. Victorialis. Allium sphaerocephalum purpureum sylvestre J. B. Allium seu Moly montanum purpureum elegantissimo flore Clus. pan. An Allium IV, sive sphaericeum folio latiore C. B.? In Germania. Allium sylv. bicorne purpureum proliferum J. B. ubi accu∣rata ejus habetur & figura & descriptio. Al. montanum II, sive mont. bicorne anguistifolium flore purpurascente C. B. Moly montanum 2 Clusii Ger. In Germania inter Lodeshemium & Basileam. Allium sylv. bicorne flore obsoleto C. B. bicorne proliferum flore intus albescente, cum stria purpurascente externè J. B. Genevae inter segetes freq. Allium sylv. perpusillum v. Moly moschatum. Aloe vulgaris C. B. J. B. vulg. sve sempervivum marinum Ger. Park. in Sicilia & Melita insolis, in muris & e∣ctis. N. 1. Succus hujus plantae, Aloe dictus, vim praeter purgantem obtinet & exiccantem, calefacientémque; proritat haemorrhoidas & menses, roborat ventriculum, enecat & expellit lumbricos, arcet putredinem, astrin∣git, consolidat, exterget, adeó{que} vulnerarium est in∣signe. Schrod. 2. Aloe pene sola medicamentorum quae alvum sol∣vunt; confirmat etiam stomachum, adeo non infestat i aliqua contrariâ Plin. Galen. &c. 3. Quòd frequens Aloes usus haemorrhoidum venas aperiat, ego (inquit Fuchsius) millies observavi; & vos ex 100 eorum qui Aloe ad excernendas faeces utuntur vi∣debitis 90 haemorrhoidarum fluxum pati; omisso verò Aloes usu venas illas claudi. 4. Caeterùm tria Aloes genera in Officinis habentur, (1.) Socotrina, omnium optima & purissima, ab insula Socotora unde advehitur dicta. (2.) Hepatica, colore hepatis referens, priore impurior. (3.) Caballina, quae est Aloes crassamentum, seu pars impurior, arenosa & sordibus conspurcata, ideó{que} caballis seu equis exhi∣benda. His addit Schroderus (4.) Lucidam, adeò de∣puratam ut transparens sit: Alii non distinguunt Soco∣trinam ab Hepatica, ut ne{que} Lucidam à Socotriná; adeó{que} duo tantùm genera faciunt, Hepaticam scilicet & aballinam.
Alopecuros Ger. genuina Park. Gramen Alopecuroides spicâ rotundiore C. B. Gr. Alopecuros spicâ Brevi J. B. Fox-tail. In Sicilia, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi, prae∣sertim in arenosis, ut v. g. propè oppidum Frontinia∣nam, circa Baias, &c. Alsine baccifera Ger. scandens baccifera C. B. repens bac∣cifera Park. Cacubalum quibusdam vel Alsine baccifera J. B. In sepibus, primò non longè á Francosurto ad Moenum, postea in Italia. quo{que} & Gallia Narbonensi observavimus. Alsine folio crasso, an Alsine f{que}etida Fabii Columnae Dio∣scoridea J. B.? Primò se nobis obtulit in Liguria circa Portum Veneris, deinde alibi etiam tum in Italia, tum Sicilia. † Alsine foliis hederaceis Rutae modo divisis Lob. recta triphyllos, sive laciniata Park. IV, sive triphyllos cae∣rulea C. B. folio profundè secto, flore purpureo seu vio∣laceo J. B. Inter segetes propè Lovanium. Hanc nuper in Anglia invenit. T. Willisellus, v. Cat. Ang. Alsine folio oblongo serrato, flore caeruleo J. B. item Erinos Columnae minor ejusdem. Rapunculus minor foliis inci∣sis C. B. In muris & siccioribus Messane & Monspelii. Nos cum primùm hanc vidimus ad speculum Veneris retulimus. Alsine maxima Lugd. max. Hist. Lugdunensis J. B. Als. oblongo folio C. B. In sylvosis ad latera montium Jurae & Salevae prope Genevam. Alsine muscosa quibusdam J. B. tenuifolia muscosa C. B. Locis humidis ad fontes & aquarum scaturigines in mon∣tibus Stiriae, itém{que} in Jura & Saleve mox dictis. Flos hujus tetrapetalos est. Althaea frutex Clusii Ger. Alth. frutescens folio rotundiore incano C. B. Alth. arborescens J. B. Haec eadem non est cum Althaea Olbii Ad. licèt Lobelius velit, sed diversa, ut rectè Clusius; quamvis & hanc quo{que} speciem circa Olbiam Gallo-provinciae observaverimus spontaneam. Foliis est Malvae vulgaris rotundis, at incanis, flore majore incarnato. In rupibus non longè á specu Fron∣tignana & propè Tolonam. Alypum montis Ceti, sive Herba terribilis Narbonensium Ad. Al. Monspeliensium sive Herba terribilis Park. Al. Monspelianum, sive Frutex terribilis J. B. Thymelaea foliis acutis, capitulo Succisae, sive Alypum Monspelien∣sium C. B. Titulus locum designat v. g. Promontorium Ceti propè Frontignanam. Invenimus etiam non minùs copiosè in collibus saxosis juxta S. Chamas Gallo-provin∣ciae oppidum.
Aly ssum minus v. Thlaspi minus. Amarantus luteus v. Stoechas citrina. Ambrosia Ger. maritima C. B. hortensis Park. Ambrosia quibusdam J. B. In maritimis Etruriae arcnosis. Amelanchier Lob. v. Diospyros. Ammi vulgare Ger. vulgatius Lob. Park. majus C. B. vul∣gare majus latioribus foliis, semine minùs odoro J. B. In Sicilia & Italia in hortis, vineis & pinguioribus arvis interdum nimis frequens. Hujus differentiam observa∣vimus foliis magìs incisis. N. 1. Semen Ammeos veri (quod ab hoc diversum est) partium est tenuium, incidit, aperit, disc. Hinc con∣venit in dolore colico & uterino, in mensibus & urina obstructis, in inflatione ventriculi usûs{que} praecipuè in∣terni est, hinc & externi. Schrod. 2. Mirificè prodest mulierum sterilitati, si in pulve∣rem contritum propinotur manè drachmae pondere ex vino meraco vel carnium jure, tribus ante cibum ho∣ris, &c. Remedium est praestantiss. & pluries expertum. Matth. Amygdalus Ger. Park. Am. dulcis & amara J. B. sativa C. B. The Almond tree. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi in agris, non tamen ut puto sponte. N. 1. Amygdalae dulces multùm nutriunt, corpus pin∣guefaciunt, humorum acrimoniam leniunt, semen geni∣tale augent, unde tabidis & macilentis conveniunt. Ad∣hibentur autem praeciquè in emulsionibus. 2. Amygdalae (inquit Galenus & experientia confir∣mat) nihil prorsus habent facultatis adstringentis; unde non audiendi sunt qui febribus lactis Amygdalini di∣cti usum ideo vetant, nè sc. alvum astringat. 3. Sunt qui sibi persuadent non turum esse cremoris Amygdalini usum febricitantibus & iis qui stomachum biliosum habent, quia ob unctuositatem suam facilè in∣flammatur, choleram auget & vaproes ad caput mittit. Nos in cremore unctuositatem illam non observavimus, nec quicquam nocumentorum jam dictorum, licet in fe∣bribus & calidis morbis saepe usi sumus, & utamur ipsi indies etiamin nostro corpore. J. B. quem adi. Bauhino nostra quo{que} experientia suffragatur. 4. Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium pulmoni & pectori utilissimum esse nostrâ experientiâ multorum commodo saepissimè exploratum: J. B. & paulo post, Est sanè me∣dicamentum verè , & ad multa efficax, blan∣dum, gratum & veluti quidam typus aliorum oleorum ejusdem generis; seimus quid possit in colico dolore ab
induratis faecibus, ab humore acri, in quibus tutò & maximo successu multoties exhibuimus. Sed recenter oportet esse expressum. Dos. à ℥iij. ad lbss. vel per se, vel in jure carnium. In constipata alvo mite, tutum & probatum medicamentum etiam renum dolore dive∣xatis. Est etiam insigne anodynum & unicum prope∣modum infantium medicamen: quibus etiam recens natis exhibetur ad tormin ventris compescenda cum Sac∣charo penidiato ad ʒij. 5. Magma reliquum post expressionem olei ad exter∣sionem manuum & faciei, & cutis laevigationem quovis sapone praestanitus est. 6. Amygdalae amarae calide sunt & siccae, atten. aper. exterg. diureticae sunt, obstructioni jecoris, lienis, me∣senterii, uterí{que} conferunt. Extrirsecùs lentigines tol∣lunt si masticatae illinantur, capitis dolori subveniunt (in frontalibus.) Schrod. 7. Am. amarae ebrietatem arcere dicuntur. Novimus tamen (inquit J. B.) qui amuletum illud in usu haben∣tes nihilo secius à Baccho vincuntur, &c. 8. Amygdalas amaras vulpeculis si comedantur le∣thales esse tradunt. Marcellus Virgilius in fele pesti∣feram earum vim expertus est: Jo. Lutzius in gallinis, quae ex esu magmatis post olei expressionem projecti mortuae sunt. J. B. Anagyris Lob. foetida C. B. Park. Ger. vera faetida J. B. In montibus prope Messanam & alibi tum in Italia, tum etiam in Sicilia. Anagyris Ger. non foetida major vel Alpina C. B. non fae∣tida sive Laburnum majus Park. Laburnum, arbor tri∣folia Anagyridi similis J. B. In montibus Jurâ & Sa∣levâ propè Genevam & alibi in Alpibus Sabaudicis. N. 1. Folia Anag. foetidae trita & imposita tumores reprimunt; sicca in passo pota menses & secundas mo∣vent, faetum mortuum ejiciunt. Semen commanduca∣tum vomitus movet. Haec ex Veteribus, nam Offici∣nis nostris in usu non est. Quòd vomitiones faciant tum semen, tum folia omnes consentiunt. 2. Accidit interdum, ut caprae & oves in Creta fame vexatae, hujus folia depascant, li odoris sit ingratis∣simi, & postea ex harum lacte caseus conficiatur: quò si fortè ignarus aliquis vescatur, aut lac bibat, statim excitentur tum vehementissimi vomitus, tum fluxus ven∣tris; & cùm hoc saepissimè accidat, multi in discrimen vitae veniunt; quam ob causam frutex hic omnibus sit exosus. Bellus.
3. Quòd Laburni flores apes non attingant, Plinius eúm{que} secuti recentiores Botanici affirmant. Saepenu∣mero autem Laburnum ob ligni duritiem & nigrorem pro Ebeno vaenit ex quo pulchrae fiunt pectinum thecae. J. B. Anchusa angustifolia C. B. lignosior angustifolia Lob. Park. minor lignosior J. B. Libanotidis species Rondeletio ejus∣dem: bis enim describit hanc plantam. In collibus ste∣ribus agri Monspeliensis, aux Garigues, propè Castel∣neuf, &c. Anchusa lutea J. B. Ger. major floribus luteis C. B. lutea major Park. In agris sterilioribus non longè à Lugduno quà Genevam iter est. Anchusa Monspeliaca J. B. itém{que} minor seu Alcibiadion & Onochiles ejusdem. IV, sive puniceis floribus C. B. Anchusa Alcibiadion Ger. minor purpurea Park. In colle arenoso inter Gramontiam sylvam & Castrum novum, non longè à Monspelio. N. Plurimas virtutes Anchusae tribuunt Veteres, quos consule. Radix oleo soluta rubro colore tingit: petroleo infusa & illita praestans est ad vulnera recentia & pun∣cturas. Park. Androsace Matthioli Ger. Androsaces Matthioli sivè Fun∣gus petraeus marinus, sive Umbilicus marinus J. B. And Matth. sive Cotyledon marina, & Umbilicus mari∣nes Park. Androsaces Chamae conchae innascens vel mi∣nor C. B. In fundo stagni marini Volcarum, inter Pro∣montorium Ceti & Balleruch copiosissimè & alibi in eodem stagno. Androsaemum foetidum Park. capitulis longissimis filamentis donatis C. B. Ruta hypericoides quibusdam, Sicilianae affinis sive, Tragium J. B. In Sicilia & Calabria ad aqua∣rum rivos & scaturigines, ubi in satis magnum fruticem adolescit. Anemone sylv. alba major C. B. magna alba, plurima par∣te anni slorens J. B. sylv. latifolia alba, sive tertia Matthioli Park. In Germania superiore. Anemone tuber  Ger. tenuifolia simplici flore tertia, sive  foliis, flore violaceo hexaphyllo C. B. An Italica  enlis spinosis foliis {rum} Clusii J. B.? Itinere à Lrieio ad Maslam Liguriae copiosam vidimus, postea & alibi in Italia. Anisum Lob. Ger. Park. J. B. An. herbariis C. B. In insula Melitensi magno proventu seritur. N. 1. Semen attenuat, discutit, commanducatum ha∣litum eris emerdat; divreticum est, calculos pellit; lac
auget, pulmonicum ac stomachicum, imprimis audit. Hinc usus praecip. in tussi & orthopnaea; in ructu & inflatione ventriculi, torminibus intestinorum, &c. Oleum ejus aut Quintessentiam ad phrenesin & morbum comitialem commendat Parkinsonus. 2. Nos in doloribus ventriculi à flatibus & pituitosis humoribus ortis oleum Anisi magni faclmus, exhibitum cum jusculo, modo paucae dentur guttulae, tres sc. aut quatuor, quod tum in nobismet ipsis tum in aliis sumus experti. Colicos ciuciatus quos non potuit sanare [aliis remediis] oleo Chymico Anisi sanavit Heur∣nius. J. B. 3. Infantibus ℈i. exhibitum blandè per superiora ac inferiora saburram ventriculi intestinorúmque ejicit. Schrod. 4. Caeteris flatum discutientibus medicamentis gra∣tius est ventriculo, minus haet acrimoniae & plus sua∣vitatis. 5. Pinsunt hoc in panem ex quo Biscoctum parant: quin & spiritibus illis tenuibus, è quibus generosiores & aquas vitae dictas eliciunt, leviter contusum ante de∣stillationem infunditur, ad gratum saporem iis iterata destillatione exaltandis concilandum. 6. Anisum Melitenses Cuminum dulce appellant, un∣de C. Bauhinus deceptus Cuminum dulce Melitensium pro∣distincta specie Cumini habuit. Anonis viscosa spinis carens lutea major C. B. lutea non spinosa, Dalechampio natrix J. B. Natrix Plimi sive Anonis non spinosa lutea major Park Primò illam ob∣servavimus in arenofis insulae istius exiguae Promontorio Siciliae Pachyno dicto nuper impetu maris abruptae; deinde ad fluvium Arve propè Genevam; tandem circa Monspelium copiosé. Anonis non spinosa parva procumbens lutea. In arenosis maris litoribus propè Cataniam Siciliae copiosé. Anonis non spinosa purpurea supina minima. In sterilio∣ribus Calabriae juxta mare. Has duas plantas nondum descriptas putamus. Anonis pusilla fruticans Cherleri J. B. Trifoliis affinis. In collibus sterilioribus Narbonensis Galliae inter Ilices, Thymos aliós{que} frutices multa. Anonymus flore Coluteae Clus. Chamaebuxus flore Co∣luteae Ger. C. B. Chamaebuxus sive Chamaepyxos qui∣busdam J. B. Pseudo-chamaebuxus Park. Primò obser∣vavimus in sylvis Constantiam inter & Scaphusiam, de∣inde in planitie quadam propè Augustam Vindelicerum,
tandem non longè à Tiguro Helvetiae plurimam, mense Maio florentem. Anthyllis leguminosa purpurascente flore Clus. Loto affinis flore subrubente C. B. In agrorum marginibus circa Liburnum portum & alibi in pascuis Italiae. Anthyllis altera herbariorum Park. v. Chamaepitys moschata. marina incana, &c. v. Paronychia. leguminosa Hispanica v. Trifolium Halicacabum, & Auricula muris. Antirrhinum luteum Ger. luteo flore C. B. flore luteo gran∣di Cam. flore subluteo Dod. Circa Messanam in muris: unde Petrus Castellus in Catalogo suo Messanense illud appellat. Invenimus insuper in rupibus non procul à Petra sancta Hetruriae oppido. Antirrhinum purpureum Ger. majus alterum folio longiore C. B. vulgare J. B. In aggeribus fossarum & ad sepes propè Monspelium abundé. Antirrhinum minus flore carneo, rictu striato. In Italia & Sicilia. Antithora flore luteo Aconiti J. B. Anthora Park. Aconi∣tum salutiferum seu Anthora C. B. Anthora sive Aconi∣tum salutiferum Ger. In monte Jura circa verticem Thuiri, & alibi in istius montis jugis. N. 1. Radix insigniter amara est: venenis omnibus adversari dicitur, & peculiariter radici Thorae. Addit Guainerius magnae etiam esse adversus pestem efficacix, eui subscribit Matth. Solerius non modo per inferiorem ventrem, sed & per superiora largas ait Anthorae radi∣ces expurgationes moliri; modum esse ad quantitatem Phaseoli in jusculo aut vino. 2. Considerenrt lectores (inquit J. B.) an radix pur∣gans conveniat commorsis à viperis & cane rabido, itém{que} peste laborantibus. Quis tandem credat ra∣dicem purgantem auxiliari omnibus cordis affectibus? Aparine semine Coriandri saccharati Park. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum & alibi in Sicilia. Aphyllanthes Monspeliensium J. B. Lob. Caryophyllus cae∣ruleus Monspeliensium C. B. Park. In collibus juxta Castelneuf, aliis{que} sterilioribus Monspelio vicinis. Aphyllanti affinis, &c. v. Scabiosa. Apium montanum nigrom J. B. VI, sive montanum folio ampliore C. B. ejusdem Ap. VIII, seu montanum nigrum: ejusdem Daucus VI, seu montanus Apil folio minor, ex sententia fratris J. Bauhini; adeó{que} ex una planta tres facit. Apium montanum vulgatius & Apium montanum Parisiensium Park. Oreoselinum Ger. In Germaniae
montosis & ad latera montis Jurae non procul Ge∣nevâ. Apium peregrinum v. Daucus tertius Dioscoridis. Apocynum latifolium amplexicaule J. B. v. Scammonea Monspeliaca. Arbor Judae Lob. Ger. Park. Judaica arbor J. B. Siliqua sylv. rotundifolia C. B. Primò observavimus in collibus Romae vicinus, Tyberi fluvio imminentibus; deinde in Appenninis montibus. Arbutus Ger. Park. Arb. Comarus Theophrasli J. B. Arb. sive Unedo Lob. Arb. folio serrato C. B. In Siciliae, Italiae & Galliae Narbonensis sylvosis plurima. N. 1. Arbuti fructus, memaecylum Graecis dictus, ventriculo incommodus est & capitis dolorem inducit. Mihi sanè quoties comedi (inquit J. Bauhinus) ldolorem causârunt ventriculi hi fructus. Ego sine ulla noxa multos edi. Clus. & revera sapore sunt non ingrato. 2. Amatus ex Arbuti foliis & floribus aquam vi∣treis organis elici tradit, eámque servari tanquam sacratissimum adversùs pestem & venena antidotum. Matthiolus pulverem ossis de corde cervi ei admis∣cet. 3. Scribit Bellonius in montis Athos, tantopere priseis celebrati, vallibus Arbutos (qui ut plurimum aliis locis fruticent) in vastae magnitudinis arbores evadere. Juba author est quinquagenûm cubitorum altitudine in Arabia nasci. Plin. Arisarum latifolium Park. Ger. latifolium quibusdam J. B. latifolium alterum C. B. In aggeribus sepium & umbro∣sis, itiner inter Massam & Lucam copiosum vidimus: postea etiam in Gallo-provincia non longè á Tolona portu, ad montium latera. Aristolochia rotunda Lob. Ger. J. B. rotunda vulgatior Park. rotundo flore ex purpura nigro C. B. In Italia passim ad sepes & in aggeribus fossarum. Aristolochia polyrrhizos J. B. Arist. Pistolochia dicta C. B. Pistolochia Ger. Pistolochia vulgatior Park. In arvis propè Sellam novam agri Monspeliensis, sub oleis. Aristolochia Saracenica Ger. Ar. clematitis Park. Ar. clematitis recta C. B. clematitis vulgaris J. B. Circa Monspelium in vineis, fossis & aggeribus plus satis luxu∣riat. N. Aristolochia utra{que} cephalica, epatica & pulmo∣nica inprimis est; attenuat, aperit. Hinc prodest ad tartaream mucilag nem resolvendam expectorandámque; ad menses ciendos, tumores internos rumpendos, venena
discutienda. Insuper longae infusio ad scabiem exic∣candam vel vulgo hîc usitatissima est. Extrinsecùs ad∣hibetur usu creberrimo ad exiccanda & mundificanda vulnera. Rotunda tenuiorum est partium quàm longa, adeó{que} efficacior, & in primis mensibus ac secundinis ciendis celeberrima. Schrod. Aiunt & radici huic vim purgatricem inesse. Armeria prolifera Ger. Caryphyllus prolifer Park. syl∣vestris prolifer C. B. Betonica coronaria squamosa sylv. J. B. In Italia, Sicilia, Germania, Gallia satis fre∣quens. Armeria rubra Ger. Betonica coronaria sive Caryophyllus sylv. vulgatissimus J. B. Caryophyllus sylv. vulgaris la∣tifolius C. B. Cum priore & magis etiam vulgaris. Artemisia tenuisolia v. Abrotanum inodorum. Arum venis albis C. B. magnum, rotundiore folio Park. ma∣jus Veronense Lob. Primò in insulis circa Venetias no∣bis conspectum, etiam Novembri mense virens, foliis vitidibus, vulgaris duplo majoribus, venis albis; vidi∣mus & alibi in Lombardia. Asarum Lob. Ger. C. B. J. B. vulgare Park. In sylvis ad la∣tera montis Jurae, quà ascenditur ad verticem Dole di∣ctum copiose. Vidimus & in Bavaria. N. Crassam pituitam & utram{que} bilem per vomitum ac nonnunquam per secessum violenter expurgat. Diu∣recticum est & emmenagogum insigne. Epar, lienem, vesicám{que} fellis aperit. Hinc utile est in arthritide, hydrope, febribus, praecipuè tertiana ac quartana, icte∣ro, &c. Folia exhibentur n. 6, 7, 8, vel 9, infusa aut cocta & expressa. Asclepias Lob. flore albo Ger. Park. C. B. Ascl. sive Vin∣cetoxicum multis, floribus albicantibus J. B. Per Ger∣maniam, Italiam, Galliam Narbonensem in dumetis & ad sepes ubi{que} feré. N. Alexipharmaca est ac sudorifera insignis. Usus Praecip. in peste aliís{que} venenosis affectibus, in obstru∣ctionibus mensium, in torminibus intestinorum, in pal∣pitatione cordis ac lipothymia, in hydrope. Semen commendatur ad calculum. Extrinsecùs usus tam florum quàm radicum & seminis est in ulceribus sordidis ac ma∣lignis purificandis, ad ictus insectorum venenatorum, in tumoribus mammarum, &c. Schrod. Facultatibus cum Aristolochia longa covenit ex sententia Tragi. De vi ejus ad hydropem vide J. B. & Trag. Aspalathus 2 Monspeliensis J. B. alter Monspeliensis Park. Genista-spartium spinosum majus I, flore luteo C. B. In
aridis & sterilibus saxosis collibus circa Monspelium, Nemausum & alibi in Gallia Narbonensi. Asparagus marinus J. B. marinus crassiore folio Park. marit. crassiore folio C. B. palustris Ger.  sive palustris Galeno. In palustribus propè marinum Volcarum stag∣num, non longe à Monspelio. Haec planta mihi non visa est specie differre ab Asparago sativo, sicut nec sylvestris ab eo dissert aliter quàm culturâ. Quae ad Asparagum annotavimus vide in Cat. Ang. Asparagus petraeus sive Corruda Ger. petraeus, sive Corruda aculeata Park. Asparagus foliis acutis C. B. Corruda J. B. In Italia ad sepes & in dumetis frequens. Pro∣venit quó{que}. circa Monspelium in Liguadocia. Asparagus sylv. aculeatus Ger. aculeatus, spinis horridus C. B. spinosus, sive Corruda spinis horrida Park. In insula Promontorio Pachyno adjacente, & alibi in ma∣ritimis Siciliae. Asparagus sylv. spinosus Clusii Ger. aculeatus tribus aut quatuor spinis ad eundem exortum C. B. Ad mare prope Tauromonium in Sicilia. Harum specierum meminit J. Bauhinus in capite de Corruda. Asperula flore caeruleo Ger. Park. caerulea arvensis C. B. Rubia caerulea erectior elatiórve J. B. In monte Salevâ inter segetes; itém{que} propè Neapolin Austriae & Mons∣pelium. † Asphodelus bulbosus Dodonaei, sive Ornithogalum spi∣catum flore virente J. B. Ornithogalum angustiofolium majus, floribus ex albo virescentibus C. B. Asphodelus bulbosus Ger. Inter segetes unâ circiter leucâ à Geneva versùs Salevam montem. Hanc T. Willisellus in Anglia invenit. vide Cat. Ang. † Asphodelus luteus Ger. J. B. lut. minor Park. luteus & flore & radice C. B. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum & alibi in Sicilia. N. 1. Asphodeli Veteribus frequens in medicina usus fuit. Videsis Dioscoridem, Plinium & Galenum, qui∣plurimas ei facultates assignant. Recentioribus nunc dierum ferè neglectus est: sunt tamen qui radices ejus ad icterum commendant. 2. Hastulae regiae caulis seu scapus totus Graecis an∣thericos dicebatur, uti Latinis, teste Plinio, albucus. Sunt & qui eo nomine semen Asphodeli signisicari voluerint. Asphodelus major ramosus flore albo J. B. major albus ramosus Park. albus ramosus mas C. B. ramosus Ger. In montibus Messanae imminentibus, at{que} etiam in collibus saxosis agri Monspeliensis.
Asphodelus minor Clus. albus non ramosus C. B. non ra∣mosus Ger. In Sicilia circa Syracusas & alibi. Asphodelus minor foliis fistulosis v. Phalangium Cretae Sa∣lonensis. Lancastriae verus Ger. emac. v. Pseudo-asphoedelus. Aster Atticus Italorum flore purpureo Park. Italorum Lob. Ger. Atticus caeruleus vulgaris C. B. Att. purpureo & al∣bo flore J. B. Inasperis Germaniae collibus secus Rhenum & alibi copiosé. Aster Atticus Ger. Caes. Atticus luteus verus Park. luteus foliolis ad florem rigidis C. B. In Italia, Sicilia & Gallia Narbonensi ubi{que} obvius. Aster montanus luteus Salicis glabro folio C. B. montanus foliis salicis Park. Ger. Conyza media Monspeliensis, quibusdam Asteris Attici genus, folio glabro rigido J. B. In collibus juxta Castelncus & alibi in vicinia Monspelii. Eundem observavimus in Germania juxta Rhenum ex ad verso Manhemii; & in sylis supra Neapolim Italiae, versùs Camaldulensium coenobium. Aster purpureus montanus J. B. Alpinus caeruleo magno flore Park. Atticus caeruleus III, sive montanus caeru∣leus magno flore, foliis oblongis C. B. Aster 7 Clusii Ger. In summis jugis montis Jurae, itémque in mon∣tibus maximo Carthusianorum coenobio imminenti∣bus. Asteri montano purpureo similis J. B. Videtur J. Bauhi∣nus describerre plantam quam inveni in montibus syl∣vosis max. Carthusianorum caenobio vicinis, quamvis per omnia non respondeat Figura aut Descriptio; & quid mirum? cùm sicca jam delineata & descripta fuerit. Aster Tripolii flore C. B. minor angustisolius Park. Atti∣cus Monspeliensis purpureus, angustioribus foliis J. B. minor Narbonensis Tripolii flore, Linariae folio Lob. In prato juxta molendinum Castri novi, ín{que} sylva Valena & alibi propè Monspelium. Aster supinus Park. luteus supinus Clusii Ger. Ast. luteus supinus spinosus J. B. perperàm spinosum appellat. Ast. luteus XII, sive supinus C. B. Circa Massiliam ad maris litus. Aster montanus X, sive luteo magno flore C. B. monta∣nus 3 Ger. Britannica conyzoides, quibusdam Aster Pannonicus Clusio J. B. In Germania ad Rhenum; ín{que} Italia ad margines sossarum inter Liburnum & Pisas. Semper in aquosis. Aster luteus lanuginosus Park. hirsutus Ger. luteus V,
sive hirsuto Salicis folio C. B. An Aster luteus XI, sive luteus montanus villosus magno flore C. B.? Aster mon∣tanus flore luteo magno hirsutus, quibusdam Oculus Christi J. B.? In montosis medio circiter itinere in∣ter Genevam & Lugdunum. Huic non adeò dissimi∣lis est figura Asteris angustifolii lutei apud J. Bauhi∣num. Astragalus Monspelianus J. B. Securidaca II, sive lutea minor corniculis recurvis C. B.? An potiùs Astragalus V, seu villosus floribus globosis ejusdem? Certè Astra∣galus Monspelianus J. B. diversus est ab Hedysaro seu Securidaca minore, proinde reprehendit Lobelium, quòd non adverterit Astragalum Monspeliensium diversum esse à Securidaca minore. Verùm Monspelienses, cùm ibi essemus Anno 1665. ostenderunt nobis Securidacam minorem pro suo Astragalo: Astragalum autem Mons∣pessulanum J. B. nondum vidimus. Astragalus Monspeliano candidior, & Onobrychis quorun∣dam J. B. An Astrag. V, seu villosus floribus globosis C. B.? qui Astragalum Monspelianum Clusii huc refert. purpureus Lugd. In rupibus montis Salevae Genevam spectantibus copiosé. Astragalus quidam montanus vel Onobrychis aliis J. B. Onobrychis X, seu floribus Viciae majoribus caeruleo∣purpurascentibus, vel foliis Tragacanthae C. B. In al∣tissimo vertice montis Jurae Thuiri dicto. Astragalus major Fuchsio v. Orobus sylvaticus. Astrantia nigra Lob. nigra, sive Veratrum nigrum Dio∣scroidis Dod. Ger. Helleborus niger Saniculae folio major Park. C. B. Sanicula foemina quibusdam, aliis Hellebo∣rus niger J. B. In sylvis quibusdam non longè à Mona∣chio Bavariae; necnon in Salevae pratis montosis urbi Genevae vicinis. N. Hujus radici vim per alvum purgatricem Helle∣boro albo similem sed mitiorem multò inesse Gesnerus primùm se expertum refert. Atractylis Lob. Ger. lutea C. B. flore luteo Park. vera flore luteo J. B. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi ad vias & in agrorum marginibus ubi{que} feré. N. Hujus folia succum sanguireum praebent, quem∣admodum Theophrastus de Atracylide refert, qui ta∣men tusis & expressis non elicitur, sed avulsis dum adhuc tenera sunt & succo praegnantia, sponte è venis effluit; quo modo etiam ex Aloes plantae foliis se Aloen purissimam & optimam Neapoli collegisse scribit F. Columna.
Atriplex marina Ger. maritima J. B. maritima laciniata C. B. marina repens Park. In litoribus arenosis maris Mediterranei nusquam non occurrit. A nostrati a ma∣ritimo omnino diversa est. Avicularia Sylvii J. B. v. Speculum Veneris. Auricula muris Camerarii J. B. Anthyllis leguminosa ma∣rina Baetica vel Cretica, sive Auricula muris Camera∣ril Park. Loto affinis IV, sive hirsutis circinatis sili∣quis C. B. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum, ubi arx praesidio Hispanico tenetur, & alibi in Sicilia. Auricula muris pulchro flore, folio tenuissimo J. B. In monte Thuiri non procul à Genevâ. Auricula Ursi flore purpureo Ger. A. U. sive Primula veris Alpina flore rubente J. B. Sanicula Alpina pur∣purea C. B. Primò invenimus in Alpibus non longè à Pontieba vico qui ab ea parte Limes est Ditionis Vene∣tianae: postea etiam in clivis maritimis Regni Neapo∣litani; tandem in Alpibus, Chambery inter & max. Car∣thusianorum coenobium. Auricula leporis v. Bupleuron. B BArba capri J. B. Ger emac. B. caprae floribus oblongis, Melandryon Plinii C. B. Ulmaria major sive altera Park. Propè Genevam à la Bastie. Invenimus & in Helvetia non longè à Scaphusia. Balsamita v. Ageratum. Barba Jovis frutex C. B. Clus. Park. &c. Jovis barba pul∣chre lucens J. B. In clivis maritimis Etruriae & Regni Neapolitani copiosè. Bellis sylvatica J. B. media sylvest. Ger. VI, sive sylv. media, caule carens C. B. In montibus circa Gene∣vam. Bellis Alpina major folio rigido C. B. Park. In summis jugis montis Jurae copiosé. Bellidis utrius{que} facultates quaere in Cat. Ang. Bellis caerulea Monspeliaca Ger. caerulea II, sive caule folioso C. B. Aphyllantes Anguillarae, sive Globularia Bellidi similis J. B. Globularia Monspeliensium, Bellis caerulea Park. Circa Monspelium plurimis in locis;
quin & ad radices montium Jurae & Salevae propè Ge∣nevam, & alibi tum in Italia, tum etiam in Germa∣nia. Bellis caerulea caule nudo C. B. In sylvis & montibus max. Carthusianorum, caenobio vicinis. Haec priore elatior est, foliis angustioribus longioribús{que} & omnino specie ad ea diversa, quicquid repugnat J. Bauhinus, cui certè nunquam conspecta fuit. Beta Cretica spinosa Park. Cretica semine spinoso J. B. semine aculeato Ger. minor V, seu Cretica semine aculeato C. B. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum Si∣ciliae. Bistorta minima J. B. IV, sive Alpina media C. B. minor Alpina Park. In supremis herbidis jugis montis Jurae copiosé. Puto hanc non esse specie diversam à nostrate, quamvis C. Bauhinus distinguat. Blattaria lutea J. B. lutea minor seu vulgaris Park. lutea folio longo laciniato C. B. flore luteo Ger. Variis in locis hanc observavimus tam in Germania quam in Ita∣lia & Gallia Narbonensi. Solo floris colore ab hac differt Blattaria flore albo, siqnidem ex eodem semine oritur, ut in hortulo nostro Cantabrigiae aliquando ex∣perti sumus. Blitum rubrum majus C. B. Ger. pulchrum rectum, ma∣gnum rubrum J. B. In hortis oleraceis circa Monspe∣lium. Blitum rubrum minus J. B. C. B. Ger. minus sylv. rubrum Park. In vineis, hortis & fimetis circa Monspelium & alibi. Quomodo & an omnino specificè inter se differant album minus & rubrum minus, mihi non satìs constat. Quod in Germania circa Basileam & alibi tam copiosè provenit videtur esse Blitum minus album J. B. Bottys Ger. vulgaris Park. ambrosiodes vulgaris C. B. Botrys pleris{que} Botanicis J. B. In arenosis circa Rhe∣gium in Calabria, Florentiam in Etruria, Monspelium & Nemausum in Narbonensi Gallia. N. 1. Herba in pulverem redacta, mellé{que} in Ele∣ctuarii formam excepta praestat contra pulmonum vomi∣cas, quo remedio multos ego curavi qui pus sereabant. Matth. Valere dicitur & ad dolores uteri, ad menses ci∣endos & emortuos foetus ejiciendos. 2. Nonnulli inter vestes eam reponunt ad tineas abi∣gerdas, & odoris suavitatem communicandam. Botrys verticillata J. B. v. Chamaedrys foliis laciniatis. Branca ursina v. Acanthus sativus. Briza monococcos Ger. Zea Briza dicta, vel monococcos
Germanica C. B. Zea monococcos, sive simplex, sive Briza Park. Zea monócoccos, Briza quibusdam J. B. In Germania Argentoratum inter & Basileam ejus segetes vidimus. Buglossum angustifolium Lob. angustifolium minus C. B. vulgare angustifolium minus J. B. minus sativum Park. Ad vias & agrorum margines in Italia, Gallia, Ger∣mania subinde occurrit. An hoc à sativo aliter quàm culturâ differat considerandum. Vulgare latifolium circa Messanam invenimus. N. Viribus cum Boragine convenit. Flores inter quatuor illos cordiales famosos recensentur. Omnibus affectibus ex atra bile oriundis conducunt, ut & radix & folia. In oleribus usurpantur, valéntque ad sedandos dolores varios. Bugula v. Consolida. Buphthalmum vulgare Ger. Dioscoridis C. B. Matthioli, sive vulgare Millefolii foliis Park. Chamaemelum chry∣santhemum quorundam J. B. Variis Germaniae in locis, v. g. in muris oppidi Bonnae propè Coloniam, &c. In Italia circa Florentiam in alveis torrentum. N. Usus sum hâc herbâ in vino decoctâ ad versùs in∣veteratam fellis suffusionem, potu illam decoctionem calidam hoc morbo laborantibus tanquam concoquens & discutiens remedium exhibui, certó{que} deprehendi eam extenuandi, discutiendí{que} & educendi citra dolorem & periculum vi praeditam. Trag. Buphthalmum Cotulae folio C. B. alterum Contulae folio Park. tenuifolium folio Millefolii ferè J B. In agris circa Liburnum portum. Vel eadem est haec planta, vel certè simillima Chrysanthemo Valentini Clusii. Chry∣santh, tenuifolium Baeticum Boelii. Ger. Bupleurum angustifolium; An Bupleurum III, sive arg∣stissimo folio C. B.? Figura Bupleuri angustifolii Mons∣peliensis Ger. optimè conveit huic plantae quam circa Monspelium invenimus. Est a. specie distincta à nostrate Auricula leporis seu minimâ J. B. Bupleuron latifolium Monspeliense Ger. I, seu folio rigido C. B. latifolium Park. Auricula leporis altera sive ri∣gidior J. B. In sylvis & dumetis circa Monspelium. Bupleurum folio subrotundo sive vulgatissimum C. B. An B. angustifolium Park.? Auricula leporis umbellâ luteà J. B. In Germaniae & Italiae montosis, ad sepes & in dumetis. Bursa marina & Alcyonii genus 4 Dioscoridi Caes. Arancio marino Imper. Algae pomum Monspeliensium J. B. Al∣cyonium
XII, sive Bursa marina Caesalpini C. B. Apud Scriptores nostros Anglicos nulla hujus mentio, quod sciam. In litoribus maris arenosis ad Siciliae Punctum Cerciolum dictum reperi. † Bursae pastoriae loculo sublongo affinis pulchra planta J. B. B. p. major folio non sinuato C. B. Thlaspi Veronicae folio Park. Medio circiter itinere inter Lucam & Pisas ad sepes. Hanc nuper in Anglia nostra invenimus spon∣taneam, v. Cat. Ang. Bursa pastoris minor foliis Perfoliatae J. B. v. Thlaspi oleraceum. C CAcalia quibusdam J. B. III, sive foliis cutaneis acu∣tioribus & glabris C. B. folio glabro Ger. glabro folio acuminato Park. In sylvosis montium Jurae & Salevae propè Genevam. Cacubalum Plinii v. Alsine baccifera. Calamintha montana praestantior Lob. Ger. Park. monta∣na flore magno, ex calyce longo J. B. magno flore C. B. In montibus propè maximum Carthusianorum coeno∣bium. Invenimus & in montosis Etruiae sylvis. Caltha arvensis C. B. simplici flore J. B. Calendula sim∣plici flore Ger. Circa Monspelium, Liburnum, &c. An Caltha minima J. B? Small wild Marigold. N. Flores cardiaci censentur, hinc & hepatici & Alexipharmaci, sudores movent, variolas expellunt, ictero medentur, menses cient, partum promovent (fu∣mus subditus parturienti.) Aqua destillata oculorum rubedini & inflammatieni medetur. Folia in olere sum∣pta alvum leniunt. 2. Decoctum florum Calendulae in Zythogalo seu liquore posseti vulgò praescribitur ad variolas expellen∣das; ejùs{que} usus à tempore ferè inter omnes in∣crebuit. 3. Planta haec Solsequia & Solis sponsa dicitur, quòd flos ejus ortu Solis aperiatur & occasu claudatur. Campanula rotundifolia minima C. B. J. B. Park. An Camp. glabra XXII, sive minor rotundifolia Alpina C. B.? Fortè enim hae duae non differunt specie. In Alpibus Stiriacis & Carinthiacis. Folia hujus ex rotunditate oblonga sunt & serrata eo ferè quo Saniculae Al∣pinae guttatae.
Campanula minor folio rotundo, flore caeruleo pentagono grandi. In clivis maritimis Regni Neapolitani. An à quoquam descripta sit nescio. Campanula Persicifolia Ger. Park. angustifolia caerulea & alba J. B. Rapunculus glaber X, seu Persicifolius magno flore C. B. Observavimus hanc propè Spadam urbecu∣lam acidulis celebrem flore albo: in montibus & colli∣bus Genevae vicinis flore caeruleo. Campanula repens flore minore caeruleo J. B. An Trache∣lium sive Campanula hirsuta VIII, i. e. Urticae foliis oblongis, minùs asperis C. B.? Hujus meminit Clusius in Hist. cap. de Trachelio, quem adi. In arvis inter se∣getes prope Genevam & alibi. Camphorata hirsuta C. B. Monspel. J. B. major Monspeli∣ensium Park. Monspeliensium, an Chamaepeuce Plinii Lob. Circa Monspelium, Nemausum, Avenionem & alibi in Gallia Narbonensi. Camphoratae congener C. B. Camph. Monspeliensium quoad figuram J. B. Anthyllis altera Italorum Ger. Camphoratae congener, sive Anthyllis altera Italorum Park. In Germania, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi in ar∣vis & vervactis frequens. Capparis spinosa folio rotundo Park. rotundiore folio Ger. spinosa fructu minore folio rotundo C. B. Cap. spinosa J. B. qui species hasce non distinguit. In muris & ru∣deribus Romae, Senarum, Florentiae, & alibi in Italia. Circa Tolonam in Gallo-provincia colitur. N. Florum gemmae antequam explicantur decerptae & muriâ conditae ad nos transportantur, & intinctiûs ferè loco ad carnes & pisces assatos adhibentur: appe∣titum augent, hepati & lieni conferunt obstructiones eo∣rum reserando. Memorabile est (si modò verum) quod scribit Plinius. Ferunt eos (inquit) qui quotidie Cap∣parin Italicam edunt Paralysi non periclitari, nec Li∣enis doloribus. Cortex, radicis inprimis, lienes in∣duratos juvat, tum intus assumptus, tum foras impo∣situs; menses educit, ulcera exterget & desiccat, ad dolorem ischidicum valere dicitur, & assectus Arthri∣ticos. Cardamine Alpina v. Nasturtiolum Alpinum. † Cardamine impatiens vulgó. Sium minus impatiens Ger. minimum Alpini: minimum, Noli me tangere dictum, sive impatiens Nasturtii sylv. folio Park. An Sisymbrii Cardamines species quaedam insipida J. B.? Certè & icon & descriptio huic ad amussum quadrant. In Germania juxta Rhenum, locis glareosis ubi aquae scaturiunt.
Carduus chrysanthemus Narbonensis Ger. Scolymos chry∣santhemus C. B. Spina lutea J. B. Scolymus Theophrasti siva Eryngium luteum Monspeliensium Park. In Italia Sicilia & Gallia Narbonensi, ad mare praesertim fre∣quentissimus. Carduus chrysanthemus Dod. Scolymus Theophrasti Hi∣spamicus Clus. Propè oppidulum S. Lupiani, eundo ad Pedenatium, & alibi circa Monspelium. Haec planta reverà specie differt à praecedente, quicquid contradicit C. Bauhinus. N. Salmanticenses tenellam adhuc plantam & primùm germinantem, cum ipsa radice elotam crudam aut etiam coctam cum carnibus edunt; ipsius lacteo succo omne lactis genus coagulant; etiám{que} ejus flore Crocum adul∣terant, ut quaedam nationes Cnici flore. Hujus autem radice Sues non minùs libenter vescuntur quàm Eryngii Clus. Carduus chrysanthemus procerus caule eduli. Ad radices montis Aetnae 8 mil. supra Cataniam, ubi vulgus cum aceto & pipere caules ipsius crudos acetarii loco com∣edit. Haec planta an à praecedente specie diversa sit subdubito, quamvis duplo altiùs assurgat. At fortè illud solo debetur. Carduus caeruleus sphaerocephalus minor C. B. Crocodilium Monspeliensium Lugd. Card. globosus minor Ger. Echi∣nopus minor J. B. In Gallia Narbonensi vulgatissimus. Carduus galactites J. B. Apud alios Botanicos hunc non invenio. In Sicila & Melita insulis, itém{que} in Italia propè pharum Genuensem, necnon circa Monspelium in locis ruderatis & incultis. Carduus lacteus peregrinus Camerarii J. B. albis maculis notatus exoticus C. B. Silybum minus Baeticum Park. In Melita & Sicilia insulis. Color seminis in hoc fuscus est & minimè albus, ut in peregrino Camerarii, & pro∣inde fortè rectiùs refertur ad Silybum majus annuum Park. Carduus lanceolatus ferocior J. B. Primò invenimus eum proximè fontem quem vocant ardentem, a Gratianopoli duabus circiter leucis remotum, deinde in itinere ab Au∣rantia ad Nemausum; tandem propè montem S. Lupi, tribus Monspelio leucis distantem. Est ei flos albus & major quàm Lanceolati vulgaris. Carduus parvus J. B. In Siciliae agris non longè à castello Puzzallu ex adverso Melitae. Carduus Cirsium dictus folio laciniato nigrius J. B. In montibus propè Genevam. Hic an ab aliis descriptus
sit video J. Bauhinum dubitare, proinde & ego . Carduus Pratensis Asphodeli radice latifolius C. B. bulbo∣sus Monspeliensium Park. bulbosus Monspeliensis, sive Acanthus sylv. quibusdam, foliis laciniatis J. B. In Pra∣tis Monspelio vicinis. Carduus pratensis latifolius C. B. Park. pratensis Tragi. mollis Lapathi folio J. B. In pratis Rheno vicinis circa Argentoratum, Basileam, &c. N. Hujus folia in cibis ut reliqua olera expetuntur, undè à mulierculis Brassica pratensis nominatur. J. B. Trag. Carduus solstitialis Ger. stellatus IV, sive luteus foliis Cy∣ani C. B. Cardui stellati varietas, Jacea lutea Clusii Lob. Spina solstitialis J. B. In Italia & Gallia Narbo∣nensi ubi{que} feré. N. Herba haec in morbo regio efficacissima est expe∣perientià Fontanoni; valet & ad cachexiam, hydro∣pem, febres diuturnas, virginum decolorem faciem, &c. J. B. Carduus sphaerocephalus latifolius vulgaris C. B. globosus Ger. Echinopus major J. B. In montosis sylvis propè Viterbum quà indè Romam itur. Carlina herbariorum Lob. humilis Park. Carlina, sive Chamaeleon albus Dioscoridis Ger. acaulos magno flore C. B. caulifera & acaulis J. B. nam, hae duae specie non differunt. In Germaniae pascuis sterilioribus & du∣metis frequens; nec minùs in Italia, Gallia Narbo∣nensi, & circa Genevam. De hujus viribus, v. Cat. Ang. N. 1. Refert Gesnerus, hujus floris calycem tum re∣centem, tum etiam siccum noctu claudi, ad Solem verò aperiri. Germanis Eberwurtz dicitur, i e. Apri herba, quia nimirum Apri ejus radices appetunt; non (ut vult Fuchsius) quòd sues in polenta exhibeatur, perimat; hoc enim experientiae repugnat. 2. Hujus capitula carnosa, calyce, floribus ac semine resectis, ox aquâ butyro, sale & pipere suave edu∣lium praebent. Gesn. 3. Chamaeleonem album idèo Ixiam appellatum ait Dioscorides, quòd quibusdam in locis Viscum ad ipsius radices inveniatur, quo etiam pro Mastiche utuntur mulieres. Haec appellatio ab aliis Chamaeleoni etiam nigro rectè tribui dicitur: quin & plantae cuidam vene∣natae ab utro{que} Chamaeleonte distinctae, cujus meminit Dioscorides lib. 6. competit, autore Guillandino, quem consule aliós{que} herbarios, qui plura de hac voce habent.
Carthamus v. Cnicus. Carlina sylvest. vulgaris Clus. Cnicus sylv. spinosior C. B▪ An sylv. spinosior polycephalos ejusdem? Hujus plant ae radix est diuturna, cum vulgaris nostratis annua ferè sit; plures quoque ad eadem radice caules ei exeunt, cum vulgari unus tantùm: Deni{que} floris color in hâc falvu est, in nostrate pallidè luteus. v. Cat. Ang. Caryophyllata montana Park. Ger. montana flore magno luteo J. B. VI, sive Alpina lutea C. B. In montibus altissimis maximo Carthusianorum coenobio imminen∣tibus. Caryophyllus arvensis umbelliferus J. B. rvensis umbel∣latus Park. holosteus arvensis Ger. holostes arvens V, sive arv. umbellatus folio glabro C. B. Inter segetes propè Lovanium. Caryophyllus gramineo folio minimus seu saxifraga Caes. Caryoph. saxat. IX, sive minimus muralis C. B. Betonica coronaria sive Tunica minima J. B. Circa Genevam, Florentiam, Lansbergum & alibi tam in Italia, quàm in Germania copiosum vidimus. † Caryophyllus sylv. humilis flore unico C. B. &c. Hunc in Anglia variis in locis sponte natum vidinus. v. Cat. Ang. Caryophyllus simplex laciniatus I, seu flore tenuissimè dis∣secto C. B. Betonica coronaria tenuissimè dissecta, sive Caryophyllea superba elatior vulgaris J. B. In mon∣tibus Genevae propinquis, minùs tamen frequens; in∣venimus & Germania, non longè á Weissenberg Fran∣coniae oppido. Caryophyllus montanus major flore globoso C. B. Caryo∣phylleus flos aphyllocaulos, vel junceus major J. B. Ca∣ryophyllus mediterraneus Ger. In collibus propè Mo∣guntiam. Non alia in re quám magnitudine omnium partium à vulgari sive maritimo nostrate disterre videtur. N. Mirum alicui videri possit, plantam hanc, quae nullibi apud nos quàm in maritimis oritur, in regionibus transmarinis tam procul à mari provenire. Verùm nos alias praeter hanc maritimas in mediterraneis nascentes observavimus, v. g. Tragon Matthioli sive Kali spinosum in arenosis propè Viennam Austriae; Rhamnum secun∣dum Clusii non longè ab Augusta Vindelicorum; Al∣thaeam, vulgarem variis Germaniae in locis. Quin & Tragus lib. 1. cap. 39. scribit se invesse magnâ copiâ in agro Vangionum inter segetes Papaver corniculatum lu∣teum, quod in Anglia nusquam nisi in arenosis Oceani litoribus provenit.
Caryophyllus holosteus Alpinus tenuifolius Lini flore albo. In ascensu montis Jurae propè suprèmum verticem Thuiri. N. Aqua florum sylvestris Caryophylli destillata sin∣gulari experimento ad pellendum calculum mensurâ trium aut quatuor cochlearium bibitur. J. B. Caryophyllus sylv. vulgatissimus & Car. sylv. prolifer v. Armeria. Casta poetica Lobelii Ger. poetica Monspeliensium Park. Osyris frutescens baccifera C. B. Cassia ligna Monspe∣liensium J. B. In Italia ad mare inferum, item{que} circa Monspelium plurima. Catanance Dalechampii flore cyani, folio coronopi J. B. Chondrilla caerulea cyani capitulis C. B. Chondrilla Se∣samoides dicta Park. Sesamoides parvum Matthioli Ger. In aridis & saxosis collibus agri Narbonensis passim ob∣via, invenimus etiam propè Gratianopolin eundo ad max, Carthus. coenobium. Caucalis albis floribus Ger. vulgaris albis floribus Park. IV, sive arvensis echinata magno flore C. B Lappula canaria flore pulchro magno albo J. B. Inter segetes in Germania passim, itémque circa Genevam & Monspe∣lium. Caucalis maritima supina echinata magno fructu. Lap∣pula canaria sive Caucalis mariima J. B. IX, sive pu∣mila maritima C. B. In arenosis Siciliae litoribus propè Messanam & alibi. Caucalis minor pulchro semine sive Bellonii J. B. Seseli Creticum minus C. B. Ger. Tordylium, sive Seseli Cre∣ticum minus Park. In Sicilia intra ipsa urbis Messanae moenia. Caucalis Peucedani folio Ger. XII, sive folio Peucedani C. B. Park. Saxifragiae tenuifoliae affinis, quibusdam Cau∣calis J. B. In planitie quadam propè Augustam Vinde∣licorum in Germania. Cedrus Lycia retusa Bellonio dicta J. B. baccifera I, seu folio Cupressi major, fructu flavescente C. B. Cedrus Phoenicea folio cupressi Park. Oxycedrus Lycia Ger. Ad hac non diversam existimamus secundam speciem Cedri bacciferae C. B. ut ne{que} tertiam, cùm ipse asserat eas magnitudine solâ differre. Fortè etiam Sabina bac∣cifera dicta ab hac non fuerit diversa: certè haec nobis Monspelii ostensa fuit pro Sabina baccifera. Et nos quo{que} in eadem planta observavimus inferiores & primos in te∣nellis plantis ramulos foliis pungentibus & acutis, superio∣res verò & in adultioribus obtusis & rotundis vostitos.
Centaurium luteum pusillum C. B. minimum luteum Park. luteum novum Col. Centaurii lutei varietas Ger. emac. In tecto veteris aedificii Baiani Piscina mirabilis dicti. Solo floris colore à minore purpureo differre videtur. Centaurium minus spicatum album C. B. Park. In agro Monspeliensi & alibi in Narbonensi Gallia flore purpu∣reo frequens. Cerinthe asperior flavo flore Ger. major flavo flore Park. Cer. quorundam major spinoso folio, flavo flore J. B. flore flavo asperior C. B. In Italia & Sicilia admodum frequens. Cerinthe major Ger. major flore luteo & rubro Park. quo∣rundam major, versicolore flore J. B. Cerinthe, seu Cyno∣glossum montanum majus C. B. In montibus sylvosis max. Carthus. coenobio imminentibus. Perennis mihi visa est haec planta: semina a. ei minora sunt quàm vel pur∣pureae vel flavae. Cerasus sylv. amara Mahaleb putata J. B. Cerasus XV, sive Ceraso affinis C. B. Macaleb Gesneri Ger. Machaleb Germanicum Park. qui C. Bauhinum reprehendit, quòd confundat Machaleb Matthioli & Gesneri. In sepibus propè Gratianopolin quà itur à la grand Chartruse. Nu∣clei hujus fructus calefaciunt & emolliunt, saponarios globulos ingrediuntur, pilós{que} horridiores & duriores emolliunt affrictu crebro Matth. Ex iis etiam oleum cònficitur jucundi odoris, quo ad illinendas manicas utuntur. Lugd. Ceratia v. Siliqua. Cerrus minore glande Ger. Haliphlaeos, sive Cerrus foe∣mina minore glande Park. Quercus Burgundica calyce hispido J. B. VI, sive calyce hispido, glande minore C. B. In Etruria ad lacum Volsiniensem. Vidimus Ve∣netiis Ceri glandium calyces maximos, quos Vallonia ibi appellant, ad Apollonia Dalmatiae urbe vulgò nunc Vallonia dictâ unde adferuntur. His coriarii utuntur ad coria sua densanda. J. Bauhinus horum usum esse ad iniciendos atro colore pannos Gallarum vice scri∣bit. Chamaebalanus leguminosa J. B. Lathyrus arvensis repens tuberosus C. B. Lathyrus arvensis, sive Terrae glandes Park. Terrae glandes Dod. Lob. Ger. In arvis juxta Ge∣nevam & alibi. N. 1. Hujus radices tuberosae sapore sunt subdulci Glandis aut Castaneae, astringente, slatulentum, suavem tamen succum creant: Sanguinis, uteri, renum, ventris fluores compescunt. Lob.
2. Ex hujus floribus aquam distillant quidam, qui ità rosaceam ementitur, ut pro illa nonnunquam vendi solet. Cam. Chamaebuxus flore Coluteae v. Anonymus flore Coluteae. Chamaecyparissus v. Abrotanum foemina. Chamaecistus v. Helianthemum. Chamaecerasus Alpina v. Periclymenum. Chamaedrys major Park. major latifolia Ger. major re∣pens C. B. Itinere à Vienna ad Venetias. Chamaedrys vulgaris Park. minor Ger. minor repens C. B. Chamaedrys vulgò vera existimata J. B. In Italia & Gallia frequens. Chamaedrys laciniatis foliis Park. Lob. ob. Chamaepitys foemina Ger. Botrys chamaedryoides C. B. Bot. verticil∣lata J B. In Germaniae agris sterilioribus itém{que} circa Genevam passim. Chamaedrys falsa maxima, an Teucrium I, seu majus Pan∣nonicum Clusio J. B. Chamaedrys spuria major altera sive frutescens C. B. Ch. ma. sp. frutescens Park. Teu∣crium majus Pannonicum Ger. emac. In sylvosis Ger∣maniae atque etiam circa Genevam plurimis in locis. † Chamadrys spuria montana Cisti flore Park. Ch. Alpi∣na flore Fragariae albo J. B. Ch. Alpina Cisti flore C. B. Teucrium Alpinum Cisti flore Ger. In montis Jurae supremis jugis: invenimus & in Alpibus Carinthiacis. Hanc in Hybernia invenit D. Heaton v. Cat. Ang. Chamaedryi vulgari falsae aliquatenus affinis, & Clinopo∣dium Alpinum Ponae J. B. Clinopodium Alpinum Park. Teucrium Alpinum comâ purpuro-caeruleâ C. B. In su∣prema parte montis Jurae, & in Alpibus Sabaudicus. Chamaedrys sputia angustifolia J. B. spuria major angusti∣folia C B. Veronica supina Ger. Teucrii facie Park. su∣pina, facie Teucrii pratensis Lob. Circa Genevam & in Germania in pascuis propè Rhenum frequens. Chamaegenista v. Genistella minor. Chamelaea tricoccos J. B. C. B. Park. Arabum tricoccos Ger. Widow-wail. Inter Monspelium & Frontignanam in collibus saxosis plurimam vidimus. Chamelaea Germanica v. Mezereon. Chamaemelum vulgare leucanthemum Dioscordis C. B. vulgare amarum J. B. Inter segetes circa Genevam. Chamamelum chrylanthemum v. Buphthalmum vulgare Ger. Chamaemespilus Ger. v. Cotoneaster. Chamamespilus J. B. Cotoneaster folio oblongo serrato C. B. Cotonaster Gesneri Ger. emac. in Append. In summi∣tate montis Jurae.
Chamaenerion Gesneri Lob. alterum angustifolium Ger. Lysimachia Chamaenerion dicta angustifolia C. B. Lys. siliquosa angustifolia, Chamaenerion Gesnero dicta Park. Lys. siliq. speciosa angustifolia J. B. In alveis torrentum & fluviorum in Foro Julii Italiae & alibi variis in locis, v. g. Genevae ad fluv. Arve & Rhodanum. Chamaepitys moschata foliis serratis C. B. Cham. sive Iva moschata Monspeliensium J. B. Iva moschata Monspe∣liaca Ger. Anthyllis altera herbariorum Park. In saxosis collibus circa Monspelium & alibi in Gallia Narbonensi; itémque in insula ad Promont. Pachy∣num. Chamaerrhiphes Dod. Lob. Palma minor C. B. Palma hu∣milis spinosa J. B. Palmites sive Chamaerrhiphes Ger. Palma humilis, sive Chamaerrhiphes, vel Palmites Park. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum Siciliae, itém{que} in ru∣pibus martimis Hetruriae. N. 1. Species illa quam nos observavimus spinosa fuit, prout rect è eam describit Matthiolus. diversa ergo à Pal∣ma humili Hispanica non spinosà. Figurae a, apud Par∣kinsonum transpositae sunt. 2. Pars tuberosa juxta radicem, tenerrima, sapida & ori gratissa (Encephalum vocant) estur secundis men∣sis pro bellariis, cardui esculenti modo, cum pipere & salis momento; adstringenti facultate pollet. Matth. Ad Venerem excitandam haud parùm praestare creditur. E foliis Hispanicae sportulae, tegetes & scopae fiunt. Chamaesyce Dod. Lob. C. B. J. B. Ger. Park. In vineis & agris Italiae, Siciliae & Galliae Narbonensis. Chondrille vel Chondrilla caerulea J. B. Ch. caerulea sive purpurea Park. caerulea Ger. caerulea altera Cicorei sylv. folio C. B. In Germania superiore inter & Moguntiam secus Rhenum flumen. Chondrilla lutea J. B. Coronopi aut Cyani facie, tenui∣folia lutea vinearum Lob. In aggeribus & vineis circa Monspelium & ad muros ipsius urbis. Ad Sonchum lae∣vem vulgarem proximè accedit. Chondrilla rara purpurea, Crupina Belgarum dicta Park. rara, purpurante flore, semine nitido deciduo Lob. Hi∣spanica Ger. foliis laciniatis, serratis, purpurascente flore C. B. Cyanus pulchro semine Centaurii majoris J. B. Circa Monspelium in colle Castri novi, necnon propè Scaleam in Regno Neapolitano. Chondrilla foliis non dissectis, caule nudo J. B. Ad ra∣dices montis Salevae, & in arenosis ad fluv. Arve propè Genevam.
Chondrilla juncea Ger. juncea viscosa arvensis, quae pri∣ma Dioscoridis C. B. viminea J. B. viminalibus virgis Park. In Germania, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi, in arenosis copiosé. Chondrilla viscosa, caule foliis obducto C. B. viscosa sa∣xatilis caule  Col. In Sicilia circa Messanam, & in Gallia Narbonensi circa Monspel. Chondrilla bulbosa, conyzae facie, foliis angustioribus C. B. Conyza marina Lugd. J. B. In planitie quadam non longè à monte Lupi. Haec planta Conyza aut Aster rectiùs dicitur quàm Chondrilla. Chondrilla caerulea cyani capitulis C. B. v. Catanance. † Christophoriana Lob. Ger. vulgaris Park. Aconitum ra∣cemosum, Actaea quibusdam J. B. Acon, ramosum, an Actaea Plinii? C. B. In sylvis montosis circa Gene∣vam, & in Germania ad Rhenum copiosé. Nuperri∣mè & haec quoque in Anglia sponte orta nobis ostensa fuit. Chrysanthemum Bellidis folio hort. Pat. latifolium J. B. Hispanicum rotundioribus foliis Park. Bellis lutea III, sive foliis subrotundis C. B. Inter segetes circa Libur∣num portum copiosé. Chrysanthemum Creticum Ger. J. B. Park. majus, folio in minores lacinias diviso C. B. In vineis & hortis ole∣raceis circa Messanam & alibi. Chrysanthemum Valentinum Clus. v. Buphthalmum Co∣tulae folio. Chrysocome v. Stoechas citrina. Chrysocome capitulis conglobatis Ger. Helichrysum IX, sive sylvestre angustifolium capitulis conglobatis C. B. Stoechas citrina altera odora Park. Stoechadi citrinae alteri inodorae Lobelii affinis capitulis brevioribus J. B. In muris & rupibus circa Messanam in Sicilia, Tolonam in Gallo-provincia, &c. Cicer sylvestre Matth. Ger. sylv. multisolium J. B. sylv. foliis oblongis hispidis majus C. B. sylv. majus Park. In∣ter segetes non longè ab oppido Jay Genevam versús. Haec planta (me judice) ad Glycyrrhizam sylv. propiùs accedit quàm ad Cicer. Cicer sativum Ger. C. B. arietinum J. B. sativum, sive arietinum rubrum, nigrum vel album Park. Cicera in Italia, Sicilia & Melita in agris seruntur, ubi Rustici ea cruda comedunt, viridia scilicet & adhuc imma∣tura. N. Quod cicera urinam & menses cieant, calculos pellant, ad Venerem stimulent, status gignant, ferè o∣mnes
tum Veteres, tum Recentiores consentiunt. Ex∣trinsecùs adhibetur farina in cataplasmatis. Cichorium spinosum Ger. J. B. C. B. spinosum Creticum Park. In insula saepius memorata ad Promont. Pachy∣num in Sicilia. Cichorium pratense vesicarium Park. Col. prat. hirsutum vesicarium C. B. In sepibus & agrorum marginibus à Li∣burno portu non longè. Cichorium verrucarium sive Zacintha Ger. Park. verru∣cosum, sive Zacyntha hieraciis adnumerandum J. B. Chondrilla verrucaria foliis intybaceis viridibus C. B. Ad ostia Tybridis copiosé: itém{que} circa Liburnum por∣tum, & Florentiam. Cicutaria latifolia hirsuta J. B. palustris alba Park. palu∣stris latifolia alba C. B. palustris latifolia rubra ejusdem ab hac fortè non differt specie. In pascuis montosis Jurae & Salevae montium propè Genevem, praecipuè ad rivulos. Cinara sylvestris Ger. sylv. latifolia C. B. Scolymus Dio∣scoridis Park. Carduus Scolymus sylvestris J. B. Wild Artichoke. In Sicilia & Italia, necnon Gallia Narbo∣nensi; ubi floribus ejus coaguli vice ad lac condensan∣dum utuntur. N. 1. Apponuntur capita [sativae] aqua decocta; eorúm{que} pulpa estur cum butyro & pipere; nec tantùm capita nondum florescentia, sed & caules teneriores eli∣xatos & cum butyro conditos comedunt Germani & Galli. Itali rarò decoquunt, sed cruda cum sale, oleo & pipere vorant. Venerem in utro{que} sexu irritant, ut quod maximè; unde nil mirum si in tanto pretio sint, ut sine cibo hoc, nisi tempus anni neget, vix ulla opipara sit aut adjicialis caena. Scolymus quo{que} urinam ciere praecipuè traditur. J. B. Plin. 2. Cinarae [sativae] folia in liquore posseti [è lacte & vino albo] decocta ad icterum inprimis commendan∣tur, ut medicamentum nulli secundum. Circaea Lutetiana minor Park. minima Col. Solanifolia Circaea Alpina C. B. In sylvis montosis max, Carthusi∣anorum coenobio vicinis. Cirsium v. Carduus Cirsium dictus J. B. Cirsium foliis non hirsuits, floribus compactis C. B. mon∣tanum capitulis compactis Park. Carduus Cirsium Mon∣spelianum, folio glabro longo Matthioli J. B. Ad La∣dum amnem & alibi propè Monspelium. Cirsium foliis non laciniatis virore Brassicae J. B. Hujus ico∣ni valde simile fuit quod invenimus propè Plombinum in Etruria.
Cistus annuus 2 Clusii Ger. annuus flore guttato Park. flore pallido, puricante maculâ insignito C. B. annuus 2 Clusio, flore pallido, punicante maculâ insignito J. B. Ad radices Vesuvii montis, ubi tamen maculam non ha∣bet. Vide Columnam. Suspicatur. J. Bauhinus plantam hanc eandem esse Cisto annuo flore guttato Ponae & Tu∣berariae Myconi; nec sine ratione. Cistus foemina Ger. foem. Monspeliaca J. B. foem. vulgaris Park. foem. folio Salviae C. B. Per Siciliam, Italiam & Galliam Narbonensem in sterilioribus & saxosis colli∣bus & sylvis. Duplex habetur, elatior & humilior, ut rectè notat. C. Bauhinus. Cistus ladanifera Monspeliensium C. B. ladanifera, sive Ledum Monspeliacum angusto folio nigricans J. B. Ci∣stus ledon 5 Clusii Ger. An Cistus Ledon IX, i. e. foliis Oleae sed angustioribus C. B.? In iisdem cum priore locis, & multò etiam copiosior. Cistus mas folio oblongo incano C. B. mas 4, folio oblongo albido J. B. mas cum Hypocistide Ger. mas vulgaris Park. Cum prioribus. Cùm Clusius in Hispania tot Cisti species invenerit, mirum nos neque in Italia, neque in Sicilia, ne{que} in Gallia Narbonensi, alias observâsse spe∣cies quàm tres proximè scriptas. N. 1. Hujus folia & tenella germina, sed praecipuè flores desiccant & astringunt strenuè, unde & dysentericis & solutionibus ventris prosunt, & ulcera sanant. 2. Cisti radicibus adnascitur Hypocistis dicta, quem∣admodum Rapum Genistae; Haec magis adstrictoria est quàm Cisti folia; unde ad omnes fluxiones, haemorrha∣giam; profluvia muliebria, coeliacos, dysentericós{que} af∣fectus prodest. Succus ejus in usu est. Caeterùm Hypo∣cistin, qua passim utuntur Officinae, ex Hirci barbae ra∣dicibus impostores conficiunt, succum indè exprimen∣tes, ac ut concrescat insolates. Errandi causam de∣derunt. Arabes, quòd Cistum Hirci barbulam appellent. J. B. 3. E foliis Cisti (Ledon appellati) exudat liquor qui∣dam, Ladanum dictus, in massas graves ex purpura fuscas coactus, odore valido sed suavi, inflammabilis, accensá{que} gratum odorem halans. Tradit Dioscorides succum hunc hircorum barbis dum fruticem depascuntur adhaerescere, indé{que} depecti. Quidam etiam (inquit) funiculos per frutices trahunt, & adhaerentem ipsis pin∣guedinem ita derasam efformant. Bellonius hujus colli∣gendi rationem, quam ipse in Creta observavit, ita de∣scribit, Graeci (inquit) colligendo Ladano peculiare
instrumentum parant rastro dentium experti simile, Er∣gastiri illis dictum. Huic affixae sunt multae ligulae sive zonae è corio rudi nec praeparato confectae, eas leniter affricant ladaniferis fruticibus, ut inhaereat liquidus ille humor circa folia concretus, quid deinde à ligulis per sum∣mos ardores solis cultris est abradendus. 3. Ladanum emollit, digerit, maturat, attenuat, ape∣rit, orificia venarum reserat, inspissat. Usus praecip. in capite humido ac catarrhoso, in dysenteria, &c. Ex∣trinsecùs ejus usus est in emplastris emollientibus, ano∣dynis, tussim sedantibus, in Alopecia (inunge vel coque in vino & lava) in odontalgia, & cardialgia doloréque ventriculi (cum modico Bdellii pilulas faciunt dandas num. 1. & 2. horâ 1. ante pastum. Crato.) in suffoca∣tione uteri (introrsum adhibitum) cicatrices curat. Schrod. Clematis sive Flammula surrecta alba J. B. Clematitis VI, sive Flammula recta C. B. Flammula Jovis surrecta Ger. Park. In sepibus ad montes propè Ratisbonam in Ger∣mania. Clematis sive Flammula repens C. B. Clem. sive Flam∣mula scandens, tenuisolia alba J. B. Clem. urens Ger. urens flore albo Park. Circa Monspelium in collibus saxosis. N. Hujus folia facultatis sunt acris & adurentis, im∣posita cutem exulcerant: intra corpus vix tutò assu∣muntur. Clematis Daphnoides major C. B. ma. flore caeruleo & albo J. B. Daphnoides sive Pervinca major Ger. Cle∣matis Daphn, latifolia, sive Vinca Pervinca major Park. Circa Monspelium variis in locis. Vires Clematidis vide in Cat. Ang. Clinopodinm v. Acinos. Alpinum v. Chamaedryi vulga∣ri, &c. Cneorum Matth. v. Thymelaea minor Cordi. Cnicus sativus sive Carthamum Officinarum C. B. Cnicus sive Carthamus sativus Park. Carthamus sive Cnicus J. B. Ger. Bastard Saffron. Ab hortulanis Argentinen∣sibus & Spirensibus quotannis inter aestivas fruges se∣ritur. N. 1. Flosculis tusis condimenti vice utuntur nec ma∣lè, cibos nam{que} croceo colore commendant, & alvum emolliunt: dicuntur & ictero mederi. 2. Praecipuus florum usus est ad sericum aliós{que} pannos tingendos, [colore incarnato] quin & eorum admixtione Crocum adulterant.
3. Medulla seminis pituitam viscosam ac aquas vo∣mitu & dejectione purgat: pectori maximè confert, mirè flatus discutit, proinde colicis & anasarcae con∣ducit. Ventriculo adversatur, ideó{que} corrigitur stoma∣chicis, anis. galang. zinzib. &c. Dosis in infuso à ʒiij. ad vj. 4. Ex semine facta compositio diacarthami insigniter confert hydropicis. 4. Seminis succus lac cogere dicitur, & magìs ipsum resolvendae alvi facultate donare. Coccygria aut Coggygria v. Cotinus. Colus Jovis v. Horminum luteum. Colutea Ger. vesicaria C. B. J. B. vesicaria vulgaris Park. In Italia multis in locis reperitur, & speciatim in as∣censu montis Vesuvii plurima, ubi nullae ferè aliae plantae. Habetur etiam circa Monspelium. Colutea scorpiodies Ger. J. B. Scorp. major Park. siliquosa sive scorpioides major C. B. In collibus circa Genevam, Monspelium & Salernum. Colutea minima sive Coronilla Ger. Coluteae▪ parva spe∣cies, Polygala Valentina Clusii J. B. Polygala Valen∣tina Clusii Park. Polygala altera C. B. In clivis mari∣timis propè Salernum, at{que} etiam in Hetruria. Colutea caule Genistae sungoso J. B. qui titulus optimè respondet huic nostrae. Polygala I, seu major Massilio∣tica C. B. Polygala Valentina 3 Clus. Val. marina Clu∣sii Park. sub quinta. In Gallo-provinciae clivis monto∣sis propè oppidum S. Chamas. N. Hujus folia, sed praecipuè semina, non solùm pur∣gant per inferiora, sed & vomitiones movent, velut se∣mina Genistae; sunt autem ventriculo & visceribus ini∣mica, ideó{que} nonnisi robustioribus exhibenda. Consolida media Genevensis J. B. An Consolida media caerulea Alpina C. B.? Bugula Alpina caerulea Park. Ad agrorum margines circa Genevam & Basileam co∣piosé. Consolida regalis v. Delphinium. Convolvulus Althaeae folio Park. argenteus Althaeae folio C. B. Ger. emac. peregrinus pulcher folio Betonicae J. B. Circa Messanm in lingula inter fretum Siculum & por∣tum Messanensem procurrente, inter frutices copiosé. Convolvulus caeruleus minor folio oblongo Ger. VII, sive peregrinus caeruleus folio oblongo C. B. An minor caeru∣leus Hispanicus Park? In insula ad Promont. Pachy∣num. Flos huic pulcher caeruleus. Convolvulus spicae-folius Park. minimus spicae-folius Ger.
Ad. Lob. Linariae folio C. B. Volvulus terrestris J. B. In Italia, Sicilia & Narbonensi Gallia vulgatissima. Conyza mas Theophrasti, major Dioscoridis C. B. major verior Dioscoridis Park. major Monspeliensis odorata J. B. odorata Ger. In Italia, Sicilia & Gallia Narbo∣nensi passim. Conyza minor vera Ger. J. B. minor vera Ponae Park. foemina Theophrasti, minor Dioscoridis C. B. Circa Monspelium & in Italia ad mare inferum. Conyza quaedam marina. Propè Peroul non longè à Mon∣spelio. Conyza marina J. B. v. Chondrilla. Coris caerulea maritima C. B. caerulea Monspeliaca Ger. Monspeliensium Park. Monspessulana purpurea J. B. In arenosis maris litoribus propè montem Ceti & a∣libi. Cornus mas Ger. sylv. mas. C. B. mas fructu rubro Park. sativa sive domestica J. B. In sepibus Pedemontanis & Mediolanensibus. N. Corna refrigerant, exiccant, adstringunt, consti∣pant quomodocun{que} sumpta. Hinc conveniunt prae∣cipuè in diarrhoea ae dysenteria: ardorem febrilem & sitim gratâ suâ aciditate leniunt & restinguunt. 2. Condiuntur muriâ ut Olivae; fit etiam ex iis sapa quemadmodum ex cerasis; itém{que} è pulpa electuarium, ad febres, ad fluxiones biliosas, ad sitim, ad excitan∣dam appetentiam utilia. In diarrhoea & dysenteria ex∣hibentur fructus exiccati & pulverisati ad ʒj. 3. Cornum arborem caveri oportet circa alvearia, nam flore ejus degustato alvo concita moriuntur apes. Plin. 4. Hujus lignum omnibus lignis durius perhibetur, ad radios rotarum utilissimum; quin & eundem habet effectum in demorsis à cane rabido quem foemina Cor∣nus. Coronopus foliis acutis in margine dentatis. Plantagini affinis Bibinella Siciliae herbula J B. Haec planta optimè describitur à Caesalpino sub titulo Bibinellae. Non esta. Plantago maritima nostras, nec ei multùm similis, quamvis C. Bauhinus eandem faciat. Plantago Apula bulbosa laciniata Col. i. e. angustifolia VII, sive Plan∣tago pilosa bulbosa C. B. Apula bulbosa Park. huic no∣strae persimilis est, & fortasse eadem, verùm an bulbo∣sam habuerit radicem non animadvertimus. Propè Messanam in lingula quae portum efficit, & alibi in Si∣cilia.
Coronopus Massiliensis Lobelii J. B. Coron. sive Serpen∣tina minor Ger. Holosteum VIII, sive Massiliense C. B. An VI, sive strictissimo folio majus ejusdem? Verùm quicquid de aliis sit, Planta quam volumus ipsissima est quam Lobelius describit; nam{que} in eodemmet loco eam invenimus Massiliae. Coronopus maritimus Rainaudeti J. B. Coronopi & Sedi montani media planta Massiliensium Lob. In arenosis ad mare propè Massiliam. Corruda v. Asparagus sylvestris. Cotonaster folio oblongo v. Chamaemespilus. Cotoneaster Gesneri J. B. Park. Cotonaster folio rotundo non serrato & Chamaemespilis Cordi C. B. Chamaemes∣pilus Ger. Epimelis Lugd. In montibus propè Genevam & Rhenum flumen. Cotinus Matth. Coccygria sive Cotinus putata J. B. Cog∣gygria Theophrasti vel Cotinus coriarius Plinii Ger. Coggigria sive Cotinus coriaria Park. Cocconilea sive Coggygria C B. Propè pontem quà transitus est eundo à Gratianopoli à la fontaine que brusle. Cotyledon media foliis oblongis serratis C. B. v. Sedum. Crithmum 4 Matth. v. Eryngium. Crithmum spinosum Ger. maritimum spinosum C. B. marit. spinosum sive Pastinaca marina Park. Pastinaca marina, quibusdam Secacul, & Crithmum spinosum J. B. In are∣nosis Maris Mediterranei litoribus nusquam non obvium. Crocus vernus latifolius flore purpureo Ger. vernus minor purpurascens C. B. vernus latifolius flore purpureo mi∣nore J. B. In agtis & pascuis Romae vicinis, ínque montosis pascuis circa Curiam Rhaetorum, necnon in summitatibus montis Jurae. Cruciata minima muralis Col. minima in maritimis Caes. Rubia echinata saxatilis Park. Rubeola echinata saxatilis C. B. Rubia quadrifolia verticillato semine J. B. In are∣nosis juxta mare propè Liburnum. Cucumis asininus Ger. agrestis sive asininus Park. sylv. asininus dictus C. B. sylv. sive asininus J. B. Cucumis Elaterii sylv. Lob. In locis ruderatis & ad vias in Italia, Sicilia & Gallia Narbonensi frequens. N. Hujus succus leniter expressus ac inspissatus Ela∣terium dicitur. Ultra 100 annos efficax manere credi∣tur. Aliis maximè probatur quod lucernae objectum facilè flagrat; aliis quod lucernis admotum lumen ex∣tinguat. v. Park. & J. B. Humores serosos vehementer purgat supernè & infernè, menses movet, foetúm{que} in∣terimit. Verùm quia malignitate non caret corrigi de∣bet
Lacte, Tragacantho, Bdellio, & corroborantibus ido∣neis, ut Cinnam, Spec. Diarrhod. Abbatis, &c. Cyanus major Lob. Ger. major vulgaris Park. Alpinus ra∣dice perpetua J. B. montanus latifolius, vel Verbascu∣lum cyanoides C. B. Primò invenimus in montibus juxta Spadam vicum, postea etiam in monte Jurâ saepiùs me∣moratâ. Cyanus V, sive repens latifolius C. B. peramarus repens folio Lavendulae J. B. repens latifolius Lobelii Park. repens latifolius Ger. Circa Monspelium frequens. Re∣ctiùs, meâ sententiâ Jaceis annumeraretur. Cyclaminus folio rotundiore elatior J. B. Cyclamen orbi∣culato folio, infernè purpurascente C. B. orbiculato fo∣lio Ger. Autumnale vulgare folio rotundo Park. In mon∣tibus circa Genevam Junio & Julio floret; invenimus etiam in Alpibus Stiriacis. N. Cyclamini hujus caput interdum in longitudinem excrescit, & in duo velut cornua dividitur, ut nos cum J. Bauhino observavimus, cùm in Alpibus Stiriacis aliquot ejus radices erueremus. Proinde frustra multiplicat species C. Bauhinus, cùm Cyclaminum longiùs radicatum Gesn. & Cycl. radice instar capitis arietini ejusdem species ab hac distinctas facit. Cyclaminus folio anguloso J. B. hederae folio C. B. Lob! Ger. autumnale folio hederae Park. In collibus sylvosis circa Romam abundat, mense Septembri florens. Cyclamen vernum Lob Ger. folio anguloso C. B. In sylvis quas transivimus itinere à Massa ad Lucam primo vere floruit. N. Hujus radix potenter incidit, aperit, absterg. errhinum est. Usus praecip, in obstructis mensibus, im∣pellendo foetu mortuo, in ictero, incalculo expellendo, strumis ac tuberculis discutiendis. Internè cauto opus est; externo usui praestat. Adeò vehemens ejus facultas est (inquit Galenus) ut abdomine illito ventrem sub∣ducat & foetum interimat. Icterum sanat experientiâ certâ prodente Mesuâ. Ad tinnitum aurium singulare est remedium oleum, &c. v. Matth. Cymbalaria C. B. Italica hederacea Park. Italica Ger. flos∣culis purpurascentibus J. B. Basileae in ipsius urbis muris; At in Italia nihil frequentius. Cyminum sylvestre alterum Dioscoridis Italorum Lob. Cuminum corniculatum, sive Hypecoon Clusii Ger. Hypecoum C. B. Hypecoon siliquosum J. B. Hypecoon legitimum Clusii Park. In Sicilia, lingulâ illâ Portum Messanensem à freto Siculo diimente.
Cyminum sive Cuminum satinum J. B. vulgare Park. sati∣vum Ger. semine longiore C. B. In insula Melita se∣ritur. Cyminum sive Cuminum seminibus hirsutis seu villosis. In insula praedicta cum praecedente succrescit, sed ra∣riùs. Hoc nescio an à quoquam hactenus sit descri∣ptum. N. Semen resolvit ac flatus discutit, ideó{que} utile est in colica, tympanite & vertigine: tussim sedare & tho∣racem expurgare dicitur. Utiliter pani incoquitur, & caseis inditur, ita concoctionem juvat & flatus dissi∣pat. Cynoglossum minus J. B. C. B. minus flore caeruleo Park. Circa Moguntiam & Genevam se nobis in conspectum dedit. Cyperus longus Ger. longus odoratus Park. odoratus ra∣dice longa, sive Cyperus Officinarum C. B. paniculâ sparsâ speciosâ J. B. In pratis circa Monspelium; ob∣servavimus etiam in Italia & Sicilia. N. Stomachica est ac uterina. Usus praecip. in urina ac mensibus ciendis, cruditate ventriculi consumenda, hydrope inchoato praeservando, colica ac vertigine dis∣cutienda; ad ulcera oris & pudendorum exiccanda & sananda [pulvis inspersus] valere dicitur: masticata emendat oris foetorem. Cocta in oleo, contusa & im∣posita renibus ac pectini, urinam proritat. Schrod. Cytisús glaber siliquâ latâ J. B. Cytisus Ger. Cyt. glaber foliis subrotundis, pediculis brevissimis C. B. Pseudo∣cytisus foliis subrotundis Park. In civis maritimis propè Salernum. Cytisus incanus siliquis falcatis C. B. Cyt. Maranthae Mat∣thiolo Lob. siliquâ incurvâ folio candicante J. B. 7 cor∣nutus Ger. Cyt. Galeni creditus Maranthae, cornutus Park. Ad Baias invenimus. Cytisus hirsutus J. B. Hispanicus arboreus Park. incanus vel hirsuntus VI, sive foliis subruffâ lanugine hirsutis C. B. Pseudo-cytisus hirsutus Ger. Hic in magnum fruticem adolescit, estque in Italia & Sicilia vulgatissimus. Cytisus sylvestris Ratisponensis floribus luteis, ad exortum foliorum prodeuntibus horti med. Altorffini. In Suevia & Bavaria propè Ratisponam. Hic an descriptus sit, nondum scimus. Cytisus Gesneri cui flores ferè spicati J. B. glaber III, sive glaber nigricans C. B. Cytisus Ger. Pseudo-citysus niger Park. In Austria & Stiria itinere à Vienna ad Venetias copiosum observavimus.
Cytisus HispanicusClusii, folio virescente J. B. minori∣bus foliis, ramulis tenellis villosis C. B.? Dubitat J. Bauhinus an Cytisus suus montis Calcaris sit idem huic primo Clusii nécne, & an uter{que} sit idem Cytiso Lo∣belii in Adv. descripto, quem viâ à Roma ad Floren∣tiam in planitie propè Aquas pendulas invenit, ubi & nos hunc nostrum. Cortex ei glabra & candicaus. D DAmasonium v. elleborine. Daucus Creticus semine hirsuto J. B. Alpinus, Cre∣tico similis Park. Alpinus multisido longó{que} folio, sive montanus umbellâ candidâ C. B. In summitate mon∣tis Jurae. Daucus 3 Dioscoridis Col. Apium IX, sive peregrinum foliis subrotundis C. B. Visnaga minor quorundam, Se∣linum peregrinum Clusio, semine hirsuto J. B. Selinum sive Apium peregrinum Clusii Park. In sepibus circa Messanam Siciliae urbem. Daucus glauco folio, similis Foeniculo tortuoso J. B. In collibus inter vepres juxta Castelneuf, Monspelio non longé. Daucus montanus Apii folio, flore luteo C. B. Park. In montosis propè Ratisponam promò, deinde etiam circa Genevam in monte Jurâ. Hujus foliorum divisura ac∣cedit ad Pimpinellam saxifragam minorem; ei{que} satìs aptè congruit icon Park. & C. B. Aliquando existimavi hanc suisse Umbelliferam Alsaticam magnam, umbellâ parvâ luteâ J. B. Daucus selinoides v. Saxifraga Venetorum. Delphinium simplici flore purpuro-caeruleo vulgare J. B. Consolida regalis arvensis C. B. regalis sylvestris Ger. Delphinium sive Consolida regalis sylvestris Park. In Germania, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi inter se∣getes. Delphinium flore caeruleo minore, folio lato. Flos Ca∣puccio 2 Caes. Consolida regalis latifolia parvo flore C. B. reg. peregrina, parvo flore J. B. In insula Melita circa urbem novam in ruderibus & muris. Vidimus etiam in Sicilia & Italia. N. Visum acuit & roborat tum succus florum expressus, tum eorundem aqua destillata; imo vel continuus intu∣itus.
In potionibus vulnerariis utile esse perhibetur, consolidat enim & glutinat, unde & Consolidae nomen in∣deptum est. Et ut nihil omittam, tradit Jo. Bauhinus▪ Herbam in pulverem redactam cum ejusdem aqua stil∣latitia potam venenis adversari, cardialgiae conferre, calorem praeter naturam extinguere, bilem reprimere, necnon tussim & stillicidium Conserva florum com∣mendatur ad tormina ventris infantum, & ad ardorem stomachi. Schrod. qui Calcatrippam appellat. Dens caninus flore albo Ger. canis latiore rotundioréque folio C. B. In Liguriae montibus eundo à Nova oppido ad Genuam. Dens caninus flore purpureo Ger. Erythronium flore pur∣pureo Lob. Satyrium quorundam Erythronium bifolium, flore unico radiato albo & purpureo J. B. Propè Augu∣stam Taurinorum ad latera montis quem ascendimus eundo indè ad Astam, Hae duae plantae mihi non aliter differre visae sunt quàam solo floris colore. N. Ventris tineas necare; coli dolores mitigare; vires reficere & nutrire; Venerem excitare; ex aqua pueros Epilepticos juvare dicitur. J. B. è Clusio & Lob. Dens leonis bulbosus Ger. D. l. III, sive Asphodeli bul∣bulis C. B. D. l. Monspeliensium, siv Asphodeli bulbu∣lis Park. Circa Sellam novam vicum Monspelio vici∣num. Dentaria aphyllos purpurea cespite denso. Ex singulis squamis singulos promit flores, pediculis semuncialibus insidentes, è calyce amplo in quinque lacinias diviso, galeatos, magnos, purpurascehtes cum staminulis in∣tùs plutimis. Calyx striatus, turgidulus, In Italia eundo à Lericio ad Lucam in umbrosis vidimus Dentaria heptaphyllos C. B. Park. heptaphyllos Clusii Ger. Coralloides altera sive septifolia J. B. In Jura & Saleva montibus copiosé. Dentaria pentaphyllos C. B. Park. pentaphyllos Clusii Ger. quinquefolia J. B. In sylvosis jugis montis Jurae copiosé. Dentellaria Rondeletii v. Plumbago. Dictamnus albus Officinarum v. Fraxinella. Digitalis lutea magno flore C. B. lutea folio latiore, flore majore J. B. amplo flore Park. In montibus circa Ge∣nevam & in Germania. Digitalis lutea Ger. lutea vel pallida parvo flore C. B. flore minore subluteo, angustiore folio J. B. Cum priore, itém{que} circa Salernum & Neapolin in Italia.
Diospyros J. B. Alni effigie lanato folio minor C B. Vi∣tis Idaea tertia Clusii Park. Vaccinia alba Ger. Amelan∣chier Lob. In montibus circa Genevam, & in lateribus montium Rheno imminentium. Doronicum vulgare J. B. Park. majus Officinarum Ger. Romanum Lugd. radice Scorpii C. B. In montibus pro∣pe Genevam copiosè: ast radix nihil habet cum Scorpio similitudinis. N. Disputatur inter Botanicos, an Doronicum sit venenatum nécne: Matthiolus illud affirmat, & expe∣rimento caniculae, quam 4 drachmis radicis strangula∣vit, probat. Huic contradicit Lobelius, & more suo in Matthiolum acriter invehitur: nec refert (inquit) quòd caniculis perniciosum sit, cùm non pauca reperi∣antur aliis animantibus noxia & lethifera, quae homini non modò innocua sed & salutaria sunt. Nam expe∣rimento certum habemus, Aloe saluberrimâ interfici vulpes, & ex Plutarcho easdem enectas Amygdalis ama∣ris discimus, &c. Verùm ego mallem suffragari Mat∣thiolo, quàm in humano corpore experiri quod canibus aliísve quadrupedibus perniciosum comperi. Gesnerus ut manifestè redargueret Matthiolum, scribit se ʒij. radicis hujus sumpsisse, & per 8 quidem horas bene habuisse; verùm its elapsis ventrem ac stomachum in∣slari sensisse, & circa os ventriculi imbecillitatem quan∣dam, & corpus totum infirmius, ita ferè ut aliàs semel ac iterum ex nimio frigidae potu perceperat. Quae symptomata cùm biduo durarent, nec videbantur sponte cessatura ingressum fuisse aquae calidae solium & curatum fuisse. Costaeus scribit Gesnerum esu radicis Doronici obiisse. C. Hoffm. De Medicam. Officin. Dorycnium Monspessulanum fruticosum J. B. suppositi∣tium Monspeliense & Hispanicum Park. Hispanicum Ger. Trifolium album angustifolium, floribus velut in capitu∣lum congestis C. B. In saxosis collibus & ad sepes propè Monspelium. Doryenio congener planta J. B. Doryenio congener Clusii Park. Lotus pentaphyllos incanus C. B. In palustribus prope mare non longè à Monspelio. In Germania ad Lycum propè Augustam. Draba alba siliquosa repens C. B. Park. Hesperis Alpina seu muralis minor repens J. B. Draba altera repens Ger. emac. In montibus Jura & Salv, praesertim locis hu∣midis ad aquarum scaturigines. Draba vulgaris Park. Dioscoridis Ger. multis flore albo J. B. Draba umbellata, vel Draba major capitulis doa∣ta
C. B. Intra muros Antverpiae. Quin & in Germa∣nia, Italia, Gallia non infrequens. Draba lutea Park. lutea quibusdam J. B. lutea síliquis strictissimis C. B. 4 Ger. In Italia aliquoties vidimus viis humidis ad sepes. In Germania prope Weissen∣bergh. Draba siliquosa Lysmachiae facie, an Myagri species? In alveo torrentis cujusdam prope Florentiam Etruriae urbem. Dracunculus aquaticus Ger. J. B. noster aquaticus Park. palustris, sive radice arundinacea Plinii C. B. In Hol∣landiae fossis prope Sevenhuys. E EChinopus v. Carduus Sphaerocephalus. Echium Alpinum luteum C. B. Alopecuros Alpinus quibusdam, Echium montanum Dalechampii J. B. Trachelium spicatum tenuifolium Park. In altissimis jugis montis Jurae. Echium majus & asperius flore albo C. B. flore albo majus J. B. In agro Salernitano & Romano, ín{que} Etruria & Gallia Narbonensi. Hae reverà totâ specie distincta est à vulgari Echio, & non floris colore tantùm. Echium Candiae, flore pulchrè rubente J. B. Creticum latifolium rubrum C. B. Park. Flos plantae quam in∣telligimus diluteè rubet. In Galliae Narbonensis locis plurimis copiose, circa Monspelium tamen rariùs oc∣currit. Echium procumbens flore parvo caeruleo, In Sicilia circa Messanam. Elatine folio acuminato, flore caeruleo C. B. flore caeruleo, folió{que} acuminato Park. In Sicilia circa Messanam, itémque in Italia & Gallia Narbonensi inter segetes. Non alia re differt à vulgari quàm floris colore. Epimedium Lob. Ger. C. B. Park. &c. quorundam J. B. In Alpibus non longè à Pontieba, quà ad Viennam Austriae Indè iter est. Erica arboresceus, floribus luteolis vel herbaceis minimis J. B. major scopatia, foliis deciduis C. B. Scoparia Park. In luco Gramuntio propè Monspelium, & in ericetis prope Liburnum.
Erica arborescens Monspeliensis flore purpurascente, ra∣mulis ternis J. B. An Erica ramulis per intervalla ter∣nis Ger. C. B.? Er. coris folio 5 Clusii Park. Maxima haec est ex omnibus quas hactenus vidimus Ericis. In itinere à Nova ad Genuam observavimus quae humanam altitudinem longè superaret, jam tum Aprilis initio flo∣rere incipientem. Flosculi dilutâ purpurâ obiter tin∣guntur. In sylva Gram. tantam altitudinem non asse∣quitur. † Erica folio Corios multiflora J. B. maxima purpurascens longioribus foliis C. B. Juniperifolia densè fruticans Narbonensis Lob. Ericae Corios folio secundae species altera Clus. Coris folio maxima purpurascens Park. Circa Pedenatium quà indè Monspelium itur copiosé: itèm{que} eundo à Monspelio ad oppidulum S. Lupian secus vias. Seriùs & sub finem aestatis, ín{que} multum Autum∣num floret. Hanc speciem non ita pridem invenimus in Cornubia Angliae, v. Cat. Ang. Erica Pannonica 4 Clus. parva Pannonica, foliis Corios ternis, flore carneo, capitulis Thymi J. B. procumbens, ternis foliolis carnea C. B. Er. coris folio 9 Clusii Ger. emac. supina carnea Park. In rupibus eundo à Tridento ad Bolzanum mense Februario florentem copiosam inve∣nimus. Erica procumbens herbacea C. B. supina herbacea Park. parva foliis corios quaternis, flore herbaceo, foliaceis capitulis J. B. In sylvis montosis non longè à Lindavia Germaniae urbe ad lacum Acronium sitâ, sub finem men∣sis Augusti jam tum florere incipientem observavimus. Primae speciei similis est sed minor. Erinus Caes. & Col. v. Alsine oblongo serrato folio. Eruca echinatâ siliquâ C. B. Monspeliaca siliquâ quadran∣gulâ Park. Sinapi echinatum J. B. Lugd. Inter segetes non longè à Lucâ, secus viam quae indè ad Pisas du∣cit. Ervilia v. Ochrus. Eryngium luteum Monspeliense, v. Carduus Chrysanthe∣mus. Eryngium arvense foliis serrae similibus, C. B. montanum Ger. Crithmum 4 Matthioli umbelliferum J. B. Inter segetes in Germania circa Rhenum frequens. Hoc Park. cum Sphondylio ineptè confundit. Eryngium caeruleum J. B. montanum Amethystinum C. B. In montibus Stiriae. Solo summitatum colore à vulgari campestri differre videtur. Erysimum Matthioli alterum Lob. alterum Italicum Gr.
verum sive montanum Park. alterum Matthioli, siliquis parvis, quibusdam Dentaria J. B. Erys. polyceration sive corniculatum C B. In ipso maris litore ad Rhegium Ca∣labriae urbem. Esula v. Tithymalus. Euphrasia pratensis, lutea C. B. prat, major lutea Park. Coris Monspessulana lutea J. B. Sideritis pratensis lu∣tea Lugd. Primó cam invenimus in Germania non pro∣cul Altdorffio Norimbergensium Academia, deinde in Etruriâ tandem in Narbonensi Gallia. Seriùs post me∣diam aestatem floret. F FAba veterum serratis foliis Park. Ger. in App. Ara∣cus fabaceus serratus J. B. Inter frutices circa Baias. Ferrum equinum Lob. Ger. equinum majus Park. Solea equina J. B. Ferrum equinum siliquâ singulari C. B. Circa Liburnum, Neapolin & alibi in Italia. Ferrum equinum Gallicum Park. Gallicum siliquis in summitate C. B. Polygalon Cortusi J. B. Ad latera montis Salevae propè Genevam, & in Delphinatu circa Gratianopolin. Ferula Lob. Ger. foemina Plinii C. E. tenuiore folio Park. folio Foeniculi, femine latiore & rotundiore J. B. In montibus Messanae imminentibus copiosè, & alibi in Sicilia & Italia: plurima quinetiam & procera in Nar∣bonensi Gallia, praesertim illis rupibus praeruptís{que} saxis propè subterraneas cryptas, vià qua Monspelio Fronti∣gnanam itur ad dextram, Lobelio olim, nobis nuperrimè observata. N. 1. Medullâ hujus caulium fungos pro fomite ad ignem concipiendum nonnullos in Sicilia usos observa∣vimus, cùm in insula illa peregrinaremur; unde intel∣ligitur cur Poetae sinxerint Prometheum ignem coelestem cavâ ferulâ exceptum deportâsse in terram. . Hesiod. 2. Hujus viridis medulla pota sanguinem spuentibus & coeliacis prodest, sanguinis eruptiones sistit: Semen potum torminibus auxiliatur. Diosc.
3. Hujus succus inspissatus seu Gummi Galbanum dici∣tur: cujus usus intrinsecus est in mensibus ae partu pel∣lendis; in tussi inveterata ac asthmate; Adversatur to∣xicis. Extrinsecùs prodest in partu ac mensibus, suf∣focatione uteri, vertigine; in furunculis & lentiginibus. Schrod. 4. E ferulis primâ tantùm germinatione corculum quoddam pastores eximunt, ovi luteum induratum re∣ferens, quod sub cineribus assatum, priùs tamen chartâ aut linteo madefactis involutum, mox pipere & sale con∣spersum, non modò gustui gratissimus est cibus, sed etiam ad excitandam Venerem valentissimus. Ficus J. B. Ger. vulgaris Park. communis C. B. The com∣mon Fig-tree. In Italia & Gallia Narbonnsi frequen∣tissima, non tamen sponte. Ficus sylvestris Dioscoridi C. B Caprificus Ger. J. B. Park. The wild Fig-tree. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi pas∣sim provenit. N. 1. Veteres in descriptione virium hujus arboris admodum sunt prolixi, videsis Plinium & Dioscoridem. Caricae calefac. & humectant, pulmonariae sunt & be∣chiae, arenulis renum & vesicae medentur, venenis re∣sistunt: praecipui usûs sunt in variolis & morbillis ad cutem pellendis; maturant, molliunt, attrahunt, unde & bubonibus pestilentialibus (innuente S. Scripturâ) conferunt. Mulierculis nostratibus, appropinquante partu, ficuum tostarum esus ad partum facilitandum est familiarissimus. Quin & familiare est super ficus spiri∣tum vini accendere, brodiùm{que} ad tussim sedandam pro∣pinare. Schrod. 2. Ficuum frequentem esum pediculos generare praeter Galenum Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius & recentiorum quamplurimi sibi persuasum habent: quae opinio & apud vulgus nostratium viget. Cujus rei causam tum demum inquiremus cùm de experimento nobis consti∣terit. 3. Ficus recentes modò maturae sint à ventriculo ocyssimè & facillimè consiciuntur, imò quovis alio fru∣ctu horario celeriùs coquuntur. Quod vel indè con∣stat, quòd non solùm citra noxam copiosius aliis fru∣ctibus eas ingerimus, sed etiam illis praesumptis, si con∣suetum & parem cibi modum addamus id nihil incom∣modat. J. B. Nos certè in Italia ante prandium ficûs saepenumero sine ullo incommodo copiose ingessimus. Galenus, ut salubrem vitam degeret ab omni sugaci pomo abstinuisse se tradit à 28. anno aetat. ad senectutem
usque, exceptis exactè maturis ficubus at{que} uvis: Quin & amicos qui ejus monitu ab  fructibus abstinu∣erunt sine morbis fuisse. J. B. 4. Quae de caprificatione Veteres tradunt sic brevibus complexus est J. Bauhinus, E putrescente Caprifici fructu culices geniti, in urbanae fructus evolant, eós{que} morsu aperientes superfluam humiditatem depascuntur, radiósque unà solares intromittunt, adeóque eorundem concoctionem & maturitatem promovent & accele∣rant. 5. Literae quae succo seu lacte turionum hujus arboris in charta exarantur omnino inconspicuae sunt, donec charta igni admota vehementer calefiat; quod etiam aceto, succo limonum aliss{que} pluribus commune est. Acris est & causticus hic succus, lac coagulat, &c. 6. Ficus à plerisque botanicis flore carere traditur. Verùm (inquit J. Bauhinus) Fructus cùm ad mediam magnitudinem pervenerit, flores intra se concipit, si∣gurâ consertis staminibus similes; colore in candido pur∣purascentes, undi{que} è carne exeuntes, at{que} ad mediam fructûs cavitatem se dirigentes: quod Cordus primùm observavit. Filix saxatilis non ramosa minima, an Dryopteris Dale∣champii J. B.? An Dryopteris sive Filix querna re∣pens Adv.? In rupibus squalidis montium Jurae & Sa∣levae. Flos Adonis flore rubro Ger. Adoris vulgo, aliis Eran∣themum J. B. Adonis sylvestis, flore phoeniceo ejús{que} foliis longoribus C. B. Circa Liburnum inter segetes. Filix saxatilis corniculata v. Adinthum. Flammula Jovis v. Clematis. Foeniculum tortuosum J. B. Seseli Massiiense Foeniculi fo∣lio quod Dioscoridi censetur C. B. Park. In Sicilia circa Messanam primò, postea circa Monspeliam copioslimum vidimus, Scriùs floret. Foenum Burgundicum v. Medica. Fraxinella Ger. Park. Cordi & Officinarum Lob. Dicta∣mnus albus vulgo, sive Fraxinella C. B. Fraxinella, Officinis Dictamnus J B. In praeruptis montium Rheno vicinorum non semel vidimus. N. 1. Radix cordialis est alexipharmaca, uterina, cephalica. Vermes necat, menses & urinas movet, se∣cundas & foetum mortuum educit, valet ad alvi torsio∣nes & ejiciendos renum calculos in vino pota. Usus praecip. in peste & morbis malignis, in Epilepsia, aliis{que} affectibus capitis.
2. Siliquae & flores contactu pruritum faciunt, & in calidioribus regionibus cutem exulcerant. Frumentum Indicum v. Maiz. Fucus marinis rotundifolius C. B. v. Opuntia marina. Fumaria bulbosa flore albo C. B. bulbosa, radice cava, flore albo J. B. Radix cava major alba Ger. Ubi{que} fere ad sepes, in{que} scrobibus umbroiis{que} sepibus Alpium Helveticarum. Fumaria bulbosa flore purpureo C. B. radice cava, flore purpureo J. B. Radix cava major purpurea Ger. Cum priore sed magìs frequens, nec aliter ab ea differre vi∣detur quàm solo floris colore. Invenimus hanc in agro Mediolanensi, cùm vere primo Mediolano Taurinum iter faceremus. Fungus auricularis Caesalpini v. Alcyonium. G. GAleopsis sive Urtica iners flore purpurascente ma∣jore, folio non maculato J. B. Synonyma quaere apud J. Bauhinum. Autores nostri hanc speciem confundunt cum Lamio purpureo, folio & flore minore, quod solum in Anglia sponte provenit. Suspicatur Par∣kinsonus Lamium purpureum minus incognitum fuisse Caesalpino, Matthiolo & antiquioribus Botanicis, quo∣niam Lobelius & Dodonaeus primi veram ejus iconem ediderunt, & proinde Angliae peculiare & exteris regio∣nibus minus notum conjectatur. At verò utrum{que} La∣mium purpureum regionibus transmarinis frequens & ubi{que} ferè obvium. Speciem majorem in Anglia non∣dum spontaneam vidi. Galeopsis maculata J. B. Lamium albâ lineâ notatum C B. Lam. Plinii montanum Columnae Park. Milzadella vulgò, Leucas Dioscoridis fortè Caes. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi frequens occurrit. Nescio an alia re qua∣quam à minore purpureo differat quàm albo hoc ductu in foliis mediis. Galega Lob. Ger. J. B. vulgaris C. B. Park. Rùta capraria Gesn. In Italia nusquam non obvia. N. 1. Celeberrimum est alexipharmacum ac sudori∣ferum, venenum inprimis pestilentiale insigniter discu∣tiens. Usus ejus praecipue in petechiis expellendis,
aliís{que} morbis pestilentialibus, ipsâ{que} peste curanda; in morbillis; in Epilepsia infantum (exhibetur succi cochlear. 1.) in ictibus serpentum; in lumbricis, quos etiam extrinsecus applicata fugat. Estur a. herba ipsa cruda vel cocta, ad hos usus. 2. Foliorum succus vel etiam folia ipsa tusa & impo∣posita tumoribus apum aut vesparum ictibus excitatis, dolorem statim mitigant & tumores discutiunt. Gallium rubrum Ger. C. B. flore rubro Park. flore rubro Sprengerianum J. B. In Alpibus dum Viennâ Austriae Venetias iter faceremus saepiùs in conspectum se de∣dit. Gallium flore albo majus v. Mollugo montana. Genista Hispanica Ger. juncea J. B. Spartum Hispanicum frutex vulgare Park. Spartum arborescens seminibus Lenti similibus C B. In Italia, Sicilia & Gallia Narbo∣nensi vulgatissima. Genista argentea J. B. In planitie non longè ab oppido S. Lupiani quam transimus eundo à Monspelio ad mon∣tem Lupi. Genistella aculeata Ger. Park. aculeata foliosa J. B. spinosa minor Germanica C. B. In Germania passim. Haec omnino specie differt à Genistella spinosa nostrate vulgò dicta, ut in Cat. Ang. monuimus. Genistella montana Germanica Park. lagopodoides major Ger. herbacea, sive Chamaespartium J B. Chamaege∣nista sagittalis C. B. In pascuis Germaniae sterilioribus abunde provenit, itém{que} circa Genevam. Genistella tinctoria Hispanica J. B. infectoria Ger. Ge∣nista tinctoria Hispanica Park. Genista tinctoria fru∣tesces foliis incanis C. B. In montibus sylvosis supra Neapolin versus Camaldulensium coenobium. Gentiana major Ger. major lutea C. B. Park. vulgaris ma∣jor Hellebori albi folio J. B. Great Gentian or Fellwort. In montibus circa Genevam copiose. N. 1. Alexipharmaca est [Radix] aperit, attenuat. Usus praecip. in peste aliis{que} venenatis affectibus, in ob∣structione epatis & lienis, &c. & hinc in hydrope, tum in suffocatione uteri, in imbecillitate ventriculi, lum∣bricis, febribus intermittentibus, morsu eanis rabidi, &c. Extrinsecùs adhibetur creberrimè in vulneribus ac fon∣ticulis mundificandis, in morsu canis rabidi arcendo (cum theriaca imposita) Schrod. 2. Succus inspissatus creberrimi est usûs in febribus in∣termittentibus in quibus ante paroxysmum â ʒss. ad ʒj. yel ℈iv. exhibetur felici cum successu. Schord. Matth.
Aqua destillata maculas cutis deterget. Est a. Gentiana amara admodum, indé{que} putredinis hostis infensissimus & veneni mors (ut inquit Lobelius.) 3. Hepaticis & stomachicis qui cibum sumptum retine∣re non valent, Gentianae radicis pulvis è vino exhiberi debet; quod qui fecerit auxilium praeseus sentiet. Trag. Gentiana Asclepiadis folio C B. Park. major 2 caeruleo flore Clusii Ger. folio Asclepiadis vulgò creditae J. B. In montosis propè Lindaviam & alibi in Germania. Gentiana cruciata C. B. Park. minor cruciata Ger. mi∣nor seu vulgi cruciata J. B. In Germaniae pascuis mon∣tosis passim. Habetur etiam satis frequens in Gallia & Italia. Gentianella verna major Ger. Alpina verna major Park. Alp. magno flore J. B. Alp. angustifolia magno flore C. B. In altissimis verticibus montis Jurae. Gentianula quae Hippion J. B. Gentianella Alpina verna major C. B. Alpina verna Ger. minor verna Park. In montibus Genevae vicinis. Gentianula lanugine ad singulorum foliorum floris lacinias donata, flore quadripartito J. B. Gentiana angustifolia Autumnalis major, itém{que} minor floribus ad latera pilosis C. B. Gentianella Autumnalis simbriato flore Park. Itinere ab Augusta ad Norimbergam. Gentianella Autumnalis minima calyce turgido pentagono. In planitie ad fluvium Lycum non procul Augustâ Vin∣delicorum copiosè, exeunte Augusto florens. Gentianella omnium minima v. Muscus Alpinus. Geranium Althaeae folio C. B. Althaeodes majus Park. ma∣lacoides Ger. malvaceum J. B. Circa Genuam in stalia, Monspelium & alibi in Gallia Narbonensi. Geranium Creticum Ger. Park. folio Cicutae vel Myrrhi∣dis VII, sive latifolium longissimâ acu C. B. speciosum annuum longissimis rostris Creticum J. B. In Sicilia propè Messanam. Geranium cicutae folio, acu longissima C. B. Monspeliacum laciniatum Park. Ad agrorum margines & in aggeribus circa Monspelium. Geranium nodosum Park. Anemones folio rotundo XII, sive nodosum C. B. nodosum Plateau Clus. Ger. magnum folio trifido J. B. Ad sepes, itinere à Gratianopoli à la fontaine que brusle. Geranium phaeo sive pullo flore Clusii J. B. pullo flore Park. Ger. Anemones folio rotundo VIII, sive montanum suscum C. B. batrachoides pullo flore Ger. In monte Jura propè Thuiri.
Geranium Romanum versicolor sive striatum Park. In sylvis montosis Salernum inter & Cavam in Regno Nea∣politano. Gingidium v. Visnaga. Gladiolus sive Xiphion J. B. Gladiolus Narbonensis Lob. Ger. Glad. floribus uno versu dispositis major C. B. Cir∣ca Liburnum inter segetes. † Glastum sylvestre Ger. Park. Isatis sylv. vel angustifolia C. B. In Germania secus Rhenum. Culturâ tantùm à sativa differre videtur. Glaux peregrina annua. Vicia Sesamacea Apula Col. Foenugraeco sylvestri Tragi in quibusdam accedens plan∣ta J. B. Ornithopodio affinis hirsuta semine stellato C. B. qui Stellam leguminoosam hue refert, cùm sint distinctae plantae. In lingula Fretum Siculum à portu Messanensi dividente. Globularia Monspeliensium v. Bellis caerulea. Gnaphalium Alpinum pulchrum J. B. montanum IV, sive Alpinum magno flore, folio oblongo C. B. Leontopo∣dium Dod. Gnaph. Alpinum Ger. In montis Jurae prae∣alto vertice La Dolaz dicto. Gnaphalium roseum Park. roseum sylv. C. B. Umbellatum minimum J. B. In insula ad Prom. Siciliae Pachynum vulgò Capo Passaro, ubi arx ab Hispanis praesidio te∣netur. Gnaphalium ad Stoechadem citrinam accedens J. B. In pratis non longè à Castro novo vico Monspelio vi∣cino. Gossipium sive Xylon Ger. Goss. frutescens annuum Park. frutescens semine albo C. B. Xylon sive Gossipium her∣baceum J. B. In insula Melitensi quotannis magno pro∣ventu seritur. N. Seminis medulla tussientibus & difficulter spiran∣tibus mirificè auxiliatur, Venerem stimulat; oleum indè expresum lentigines, varos, alphos, caeterásque cutis infectiones delet. Lanugo usta sistit sanguinis pro∣fluvia. † Gramen dactylon latiore folio C. B. Graminis genus Dens caninus 3, sive Gramen primum, vel Galli crus J. B. Ab hoc sativum, quod Gramen Mannae vocant, nonnisi culturâ differre videtur, inquit J. B. Ischaemon vulgare Ger. sylvestre latiore folio Park. In Germania, Italia, Gallia, in agris passim. Hanc speciem in An∣glia non ita pridem invenit T. Willisellus. Gramen digitatum hirsutum J. B. Gr. dactylon sive Ischae∣mum V, i. e. Dactylon angustifolium spicis villosis C. B.
Isch aemon sylvestre spicis villosis Park. Ab hoc non diversum putamus Gramen scoparium Ischaemi paniculis Gallicum, ex cujus nimirum radiculis scopulae fiunt. Gramen illud è quo Cremae praesertim in Lombardia scopulae hujusmodi siunt, Capriola ibi appellant: unde Matthiolum falsum esse suspicamur, qui Gramen Mannae pro Capriola habet, quod annua est planta, cujús{que} ra∣dices huic usui nec adhibentur, ne{que} idoneae sunt. Fortè Capriola nomen commune est huic generi Graminis digi∣tati; vulgus enim non distinguit. Gramen repens cum panicula Graminis Mannae J. B. da∣ctyloides radice repente Ger. canarium ischaemi pani∣culis Park. dactylon folio arundinaceo majus C. B. quod nomen huic nostro, utpote minori & supino, minimè con∣venit. Circa Genevam & Monspelium in arenosis. Gramen dactylon Messanense geminâ ab eodem exortu spicâ. An Gramen distachophoron Col.? Habet a. in eodem caule (ni malè memini) plura spicarum paria. In montibus Meslanae alteri Siciliae metropoli adjacen∣tibus. Gramen tremulum maximum C. B. J. B. trem. maximum Hispanicum Park. Phalaris pratensis altera Ger. emac. Pluribus Italiae & Siciliae in locis, speciatim circa Baias copiosé. Gramen pulchrum parvum paniculâ latâ compressà J. B. cyperoides paniculâ sparsâ sufflavescente Park. cyp. mi∣nus paniculâ sparsâ subslavescente C. B. Cur a pani∣culâ sparsâ denominat, cùm è contra paniculâ sit con∣glomeratâ? In humidioribus & ubi per hyemem aquae stagnârant in Germania, Italia, & Narbonensi Gal∣lia. Gramen parvum pulchrum paniculâ compressâ nigricante J. B. cyperoides paniculâ nigricante Park. cyp minus paniculâ sparsâ nigricante C. B. In palustribus non pro∣cul Monspelio. Quin & in Italiâ ad ipsos Florentiae urbis muros in fossulis collegimus. Gramen Alopecuros spicâ longâ tomentosâ candicante J. B. Alopecuros major spicâ longiore C. B. Gr. alopecuroi∣des alterum radice repente, sive Pseudo-schoenanthum Monspeliensium Park. Schoenanthum adulterinum Ger. In maritimis Monspelio vicinis. Gramen paniculatnm elegans Ger. Gr. amoris dictum J. B. Gr. paniculis elegantissimis, sive  major C. B. Phalaris pratensis major, sive Gramen tremulum ma∣ximum Park. inepté. Primò nobis occurrit Francofurti ad Moenum; deinde passim per Germaniam, Italiam
& Galliam Narbonensem. Hujus varietatem circa Monspelium & Florentiam observavimus, quae dici poterit Gramen amoris alterum paniculis strigosioribus magís{que} sparsis. Gramen minimum Dalechampii J. B. minimum paniculis elegantissimis C. B. In vineis circa Monspelium sub ini∣tium veris, imò ipsâ adhuc hyeme floret. Gramen paniceum spicâ simplici C. B. Panicum sylvestre spicâ simplici Park. sylv. Ger. sylv. & Dens canis pri∣mus J. B. In Germania, Italia & Gallia passim. Gramen paniceum spicâ divisâ C. B. Graminis genus qui∣busdam, Gallis Dens canis 2, sive Panicum sylvestre spicâ divulsâ J. B. Panicum vulgaro Ger. sylvestre hor∣bariorum Park. Ad rivulos & in locis ubi per hyemem aquae stagnârant in Germania, Italia, Gallia. Gramen paniceum spicâ aristis longis armatâ C. B. pani∣ceum Ger. paniceum aristis longis armatum Park. Est hoc (ut rectè monèt J. Bauhinus) naturae duntaxat lusus: in eadem enim planta observavit spicarum utriculos alios desinentes in aristam, alios eâdem destitutos. Ad∣venire autem illud dicit ratione soli at{que} aetatis, quod & mihi probatur. Unde meritò reprehendendus videtur C. Bauhinus qui sine necessitate entia multiplicat. Gramen parvum echinatum J. B. caninum marinum aspe∣rum Park. caninum maritimum spicâ echinatâ C. B. In arenosis circa Monspelium copiosè; Vidimus etiam in Arni fluminis alveo Florentiae. Gramen nemorosum hirsutum minus paniculis albis C. B. nem. hirsutum minimum Park. praeter rationem mini∣mum appellat, cùm satìs altè assurgat. Gramini Luzu∣lae assine flore albo J. B. Ad latera montis Salevae propè Genevam, & in colle La Bastie. Gramen supinum aculeatum J. B. aculeatum Italicum Park. echinatum & aculeatum III, sive album capitulis aculea∣tis Italicum C. B. Inter Liburnum & Pisas, necnon circa Monspelium copiosé. Gramen arvense paniculâ crispâ C. B. Park. minimum ru∣brum sive Xerampelinum Ger. Gramen cum paniculâ molli rubente J. B. Genevae inter segetes copiosè, quin & in muris ipsius urbis. Simillimum est hoc gramen montano nostro spicâ gramineâ foliaceâ dicto. Gramen alopecuroides spicâ asperâ C. B. alopecuroides spicâ asperâ brevi Park. Gr. cum cauda leporis aspe∣ra, sive spicâ murinâ J. B. Circa Monspelium collegi∣mus.
Gramen arundina ceum ramosum plumosum album C. Bau∣hini J. B. quod asserit circa Perault & Magallonam re∣periri, ubi & nos illud invenimus, utì etiam propè litus Calabriae. Gramen calamogrostis Lobelii J. B. arundinaceum I, sive spicâ multiplici C. B. Calamogrostis sive gramen tomen∣tosum Park. at cur tomentosum denotinat? Gr. ha∣rund inaceum paniculatum Ger. In arenosis maris lito∣ribus circa Magallonam non longè à Monspelio. Fi∣gura J. B. optimè respondet nostrae plantae: non autem Parkinsoni, utì nec titulus, nec descriptio Lobelii in Adv. Gramen marinum cypeoides J. B. cyperoides mariti∣mum C. B. Juncus cyperoides maritimus Lob. marit. Narbonensis Park. In arenosis litoribus propè Nea∣polin copiosé. Habetur etiam ad mare Monspelii. Gratiola J. B. Lob Ger. vulgaris Park. centauroides C. B. In palustribus propè Constantiam Germaniae urbem u∣berrimè. Provenit etiam in aquosis tum in Italia, tum in Gallia Narbonensi, ut v. g. propé lucum Gramontium non procul Monspelio. N. 1. Efficax remedium est in humoribus aquosis, len∣tis biliosis{que} specificè evacuandis, quos vel ex remo∣tissimis partibus trahir, at{que} tum per secessum, tum per vomitum expurgat. Hinc magnus ejus usus esse poterit in hydrope, ictero flavo, &c. Et quia amaritudine in∣super dotata est insigni, fugat lumbricos, eorúm{que} sa∣burram expurgat. Hactenus Schroderus. 2. Prodesse dicitur adversùs diutinos coxendicis dolo∣res & inveteratas febres sive sicca sive recens decocta; verùm quoniam nimis violenter nec sine molestia purgat, corrigenda est. Grossularia v. Uva crispa. Guaiacum Patavinum Park. Patav. latifolium Ger. Guaia∣cana J. B. Lotus Africana latifolia C. B. In praeruptis collibus non longè à Massa quà indè Lucam iter est, hanc ipsam plantam vel ei simillimam collegimus proinde for∣tasse deceptus non fuit Gesnerus, qui eam in montibus cir∣ca Veronam nasci scripsit, quod J. Bauhini pace dixerim.
H HAlimus Lob. Hal. Clusii J. B. latifolius sive fru∣tescens C. B. latif. sive Portulaca marina incana major Park. In Sicilia propè Messanam hinc indè ad maris litus copiosé. Hedypnois Monspessulana, sive Dens leonis Monspessulanus J B. Chondrilla lutea X, sive foliis Cichorei tomento∣sis C. B. Chondr. prior Dioscoridis, legitima Clusii Park. Chondrilla lutea Ger. Circa Messanam & Monspelium copiosé. Ab hac planta omnino diversa est Dens leonis Asphodeli bulbulis dicta, utcun{que} J. B. eandem faciat. Hedysarum clypeatum Ger. clypeatum vulgare Park. Astragalus Romanus, sive Hedysarum clypeatum sili∣quâ asperâ J. B. Onobrychis semine clypeato aspero major C. B. In montibus Messanae imminentibus, ubi etiam flore albo observavimus. Hedysarum clypeatum minus flore purpureo. An Ono∣brychis semine clypeato aspero minor C. B.? In insula Promontorio Siciliae Pachyno proximâ. Hedysarum minus Park. v. Securidaca minor. majus siliquis articulatis Ger. v. Securidaca. Helianthemum flore albo, folio angusto hirsuto J. B. Cha∣maecistus foliis Thymi incanis C. B. An Helianthemum angustifolium Park. Ger.? Propè Monspelium in collibus Castro novo adjacentibus, at{que} etiam circa Nemausum. Folia hujus oblonga sunt, incana, & figurâ sua ad Ro∣rismarini. folia nonnihil accedunt, nisi quòd breviora sint. Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum flore luteo J. B. Cha∣maecistus Ericae folio luteus C. B. Chamaec. Ericae foliis Park. Ad radices montis Jurae, in{que} collibus saxosis circa Genevam. Ab hoc diversum facit J. Bauhinus Helianthemum folio Thymi incano, quod putat Lobelium miscere cum Helianthemo tenuifolio glabro. Has si∣miles esse plantas, differentes tamen diligentiùs consi∣deranti asse it. Et nos idem cum Bauhino aliquando sensimus, postea tamen in eadem planta vidimus inferi∣ora folia tenuissima, qualia ferè Camphoratae Monspeli∣ensium: superiora autem longè diversa, viridia & He∣lianthemi proximè scripti sollis omnino eadem. Inve∣nimus
tamen circa Massiliam cujus omnia folia tenuissima, camphoratae similia & glabra. q. ult. Helianthemum Alpinum folio Pilosellae minoris Fuchsii J. B. Ad latera & radices montis Salevae propè Gene∣vam copiosè. Hoc an ab aliis descriptum sit nècne mihi nondum constat. Consule J. B. Heliochrysum v. Stoechas citrina. Heliotropium majus Lob. Ger. Park. majus flore albo J. B. majus Dioscoridis C. B. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi in agris ubique feré: Vidimus & circa Moguntiam Germaniae. Helioropium tricoccon C. B. J. B. Ger. Park. Circa Mon∣spelium cum priore sed rariús. N. 1. Hujus capita sive siliquae pannis affrictae, florido viridi colore eos iniciunt, qui temporis momento in cae∣ruleum eúm{que} elegantem mutatur. Hujusmodi panni aquam cui immerguntur vini rubri colore imbuunt; eorúm{que} usus est ad gelatinas aliás{que} confectiones pur∣pureo colore tingendas. 2. Heliotropium dicitur non quòd ad Solis diurnum motum convertatur, sed quòd aestivo solstitio floreat, cùm Sol longissimè ab Aequinoctiali circulo digressus ad ipsum rursus  sive conversionem faciat. Dod. Helleborine ex albo sublutea J. B. In sylvula monti Sale∣vae vicina. Floret omnium hujus generis prima. Helleborine flore albo C. B. Damasonium Alpinum, sive Helleborine floribus albis J. B. In sylvosis propè sum∣mitatem montis Salevae. Floret vere simul cum pri∣ore, aut aliquanto seriús. Elleborine minor flore albo Park. Helloborine montana angustifolia purpurascens C. B. Da∣masonium purpureum dilutum, sive Helleborine 6 Clusii J. B. Hel. angustifolia 6 Clusii Ger. Elleborine flore purpurante Park. Ad radices montis Salevae, versùs Genevam sci copiosè. Inveni insuper Helleborinem flore atro-rubente in ascensu montis Jurae propè oppidum Jay copiosè. Cal∣ceolum Mariae dictum in sylvis ad latera montis Salevae. Verùm hae duae species in Anglia habentur. Helleborus albus Ger. J. B. albus vulgaris Park. albus flo∣re subviridi C. B. In montosis pascuis in summitate mon∣tis Jurae copiosissimé. N. 1. Hellebori albi radix ob violentiam purgationis quam per superiora & inferiora movet, usum purgandi internum soli ferè Helleboro nigro reliquit, Schrod. Potest tamen (inquit Tragus) per 24 horas vino aut oxy∣melite
macerata posteá{que} resiccata ʒss. pondere cum vino exhiberi furiosis & melancholicis. Helleborum utrum{que} dicit Gesnerus [si cum aceto & melle tempere∣tur & decoquatur ut syrupus fiat] medicamontum in∣noxium & ad pleros{que} phlegmaticos morbos [thoracis & capitis inprimis, ut asthma, dyspnoeam, epilepsiam] saepe utilissimè se expertum esse, &c. vide apud J. B. Optima ejus praeparatio, (inquit Parkin∣sonus) est ut succo mali Cydonii insundatur, aut Cydo∣nio indita in furno aut sub cineribus coquatur. Quin si ab Elleboro sumpto strangulationis periculum sit, Cy∣donia comesta eorúmve succus aut syrupus remedio∣sunt. 2. Rad. in aceto decocta, ac in ore aliquandiu retenta dolorem dentium tollit. J. B. è Trago. 3. In lixivio decocta, si illo postea caput abluas, pe∣diculos & furfures enecat & abstergit: idem unguento aliquo permista efficiet. Idem. scabies, impetigines, ser∣pigines sanat: animalia plera{que} interimit, mures, la∣certas, aves, &c. 4. Pulvis naribus inditus sternutamenta movet, unde & Anglicè Neese-wort dicitur. 5. De Hispanorum toxico ex ea facto consule Parkin∣sonum & Jo. Langium Epist. med. lib. 1. Epist. 68. Hel∣leborus autem uter{que} in furiosis & insanis sanandis olim celeberrimus. Helleborus niger Lob. niger verus Ger. Park. niger flore roseo C. B. niger flore albo, interdum etiam valdè ru∣bente J. B. In Alpibus non longè á Pontíeba abun∣dé. N. Purgat potenter humores melancholicos, utile per consequens medicamenum est omnibus affectibus indè originem trahentibus, quales mania, insania, hypo∣chondriaca passio, elephantiasis, herpes, cancer, quar∣tana, vetigo, epilepsia, apoplexia, scabies, &c. v. Schrod. qui eam [radicem] violenter purgare ait; alii, si rectè usurpetur innoxium esse medicamentum scribunt, ut tutò pueris, gravidis & debilibus corporibus dari possit. Corrigitur cardiacis ac stomachicis ut Cinnamomo, Aniso, Foeniculo, &c. Dosis à ℈j. ad ℈ij. Variis modis ad usum praeparatur. Helleborus niger Saniculae folio major v. Astrantia ni∣gra. Helleborus niger Saniculae folio minor Park. C. B. In summis montium jugis max, Carthusianorum coenobio vicinis.
Helleborum nigrum foetidum sive Enneaphyllon in Germania, lateribus montium quos eluctatur Rhenus inter Coloniam & Moguntiam, &c. copiosissimum ob∣servavimus. Helleborum nigrum hortensem flore vi∣ridi C. B. in monte illo praecelso cui inaedisicatur S. Ma∣rini urbs, 10 circiter milliaribus Arimino distans. Hae species in usum medicum rarissimè veniunt, iisdem ta∣men cum Helleboro nigro vero facultatibus dotatae videntur. Hemionitis multifida C. B. altera Dalechampii silici flori∣dae similis J. B. Ilvensis Dalechampii, multifido folio Park. Propè Salernum primò, deinde in viis umbrosis circa Neapolin, quà ascenditur ad Camaldulensium coe∣nobium copiosè. Hepaticum trifolium Lob. Ger. Trif. hepaticum flore sim∣plici C. B. hepaticum sive Trioitatis herba flore caeruleo J. B. In montibus circa Taurinum, Scaphusiam, Gene∣vam copiosè. Herba Doria Lobelii, Ger. H. D. vulgaris Park. Alisma Matthioli, sive Doria J B. Doria Narbonensium quasi Aurea, quam perperàm Doriam vocant, foliis Limo∣nii aut Rumicis Adv. Virga aurea major vel Doria C. B. Ad Ladum amnem Monspeliacum copiosé. Herba venti Monspeliensibus J. B. Marrubium nigrum lon∣gifolium C. B. Ger. Park. In aggeribus & ad vias circa Monspelium copiosé. Herniaria hirsuta J. B C. B. In arenosis primò circa Syl∣vam Ducis in Brabantia, deinde pe Germaniam, Italiam & Galliam Narbonensem copiosé. Hesperis sylvestris latifolia flore albo parvo Park. He∣speridi Alpinae murariaeve similis surrecta & magna J. B. In monte Salevâ copiosè, collegimus etiam in montibus non longè à Luca versùs Massam. Hesperis v. Viola matronalis. Hesperis Alpina v. Draba. Hieracium Alpinum glabrum, flore singulari magno, cauli cubitali insidente. In summo montis Jurae doiso La Dole dicto. Hoc an à quoquam descriptum sit inquirendum. Hieracium asperum v. Hypochaeris. Hieracium montanum latifolium Genevense, folio Cony∣zae majoris Monspessulanae J. B. In ascensu montis Jurae propè Thuiri. Hieracium falcatâ siliquá Lob. C. B. falcatum Lobelii Ger. falcatum sive stellátum Park. stellatum J. B. An fortè Hieracium stellatum Boelii Ger. emac. in App.? Circa Monspelium non longè à Castro novo.
Hieracium capitulum inclinans semine adunco C. B. flo∣rem inclinans J. B. Hieracium folio Hedypnoldis Park. Circa Monspelium & Messanam. Hieracium calyce barbato Col. falcatum barbarum Park. proliferum falcatum C. B. Messanae & Monspel pas∣sim. Hieracium parvum hirtum caule aphyllo, crispum ubi sie∣cautm J. B. In agro Monspessulano non longe à Sella nova in arvis. Holosteum Massillense C. B. v. Coronopus. Holosteum Plantaglni simile J. B. Salmaticense primum Clus. hirsutum albicans majus C. B. Salamanticum Ger. Park. Propè Monspelium. Horminum sylvestre latifolium Ger. sylv. latifolium verti∣cillatum C. B. Germanicum humile Park. Gallitricho aftinis planta, Horminum sylvestre latifolium Clusio J. B. In agris & vervactis non longè ab Augustà Vindelicorum, eundo indè ad Monachium Bavariae metropolin. Horminum lutem glutinosum C. B. Colus Jovis Ger. Lob. Horminum luteum sive Colus Jovis Park. Galeopsis species luntea, viscida, odorata, nemorensis J. B. In colle La Bastie, & in montibus circa Genevam. Vidi∣mus etiam aepius in Italia & Germania, locis lutosis ubi∣fontes scaturiunt ad latera montium. Horminum pratense foliis serratis C. B. Gallitrichum sly∣vestre vulgò, sive sylv. Sclaraea flore caeruleo put pureòve magno J. B. Hae planta à vulgari nostrate Oculo Christi floris magnitudine potissimùm dissert: unde & nostrum vulgare Horminum, sylvestre Lavendulae flore Clusio dictum est. Ait enim se observâsse Greenvici ad arcis regiae. Hippodromum hanc speciem. Nos autem penè certi sumnus non aliam ibi unquam enatam hujus generis plantam. Hyacinthus caeruleus Ger. racemosus caeruleus minor juncl∣folius C B. vernus botryodies minor caeruleus, anguistio∣ribus foliis, odoratus J. B. In agro Pedemontano ad vias. Hyacinthus comosus Ger. comosus major purpureus C. B. maximus botryoides comâ caeruleâ J. B. Inter segetes circa Liburnum & Genevam copiose. Hyacinthus palustris vernus flosculis fimbriatis albldis. Ad fossarum margines & in humidioribus inter Liburnum & Pisas. Hanc speciem nondum descriptam puto. Hypecoum v. Cuminum sylvestre alterum. Hypericum foliis parvis crispis seu sinuatis. In Sicilia pro∣pe Punto Cerciolo non longè à Castello Puzallu. Nondum, quod sciam, descripta est haec species.
Hypericum Nummulariae folio Park. C. B. Ex ipsis rupium max. Carthusianorum caenobio imminentium fissuris emergit. Flos ei odoratissimus. Hypecicum tomentosum Lob. J. E. tomentosum Lobelii Ger. supinum toemntosum minus Park. sup. tom. minus, vel Monspellacum C. B. In insula Melitensi primùm, deinde circa Monspelium in fossis & humidioribus. Hyolcyamus amus albus major & minor C. B. albus Park. albus, & albus minor J. B. Ger. Bgo enim cum Parkinsono unam duntaxat ineciem agnosco. In Italia ad mare in∣ferum, ín{que} Sicilia, & circa Monspelium copiosé. Floris color in hoc nostro pollide luteus est, & fundum habet purpurem, in quibus cum Cretico dicto convenit. Hypochoeris porcellia Ger. Hieracium asperum, Hypo∣choeris sive Porcellia dictum Park. Hieracium dentis leonis, folio obtuso V sive minus Dentis iconis folio sub∣aspero C. B. Hieracii parva species, Hyoseris angustiso∣lia aspera J. B. In quibusdam Bavariae sylvis. Hyssopodies major flore grandiore. In palustri planitie propè Syracusas, itém{que} non laongè à Meffana Siciliae. Hujus flos quadruplo major est vulgaris flore. Quin & utram{que} speciem unà crescentem observavimus propè Messanam, uti eas specie differre ampliìs non dubitemus. J. Bauhinus duas habet. Hyssopifoliae species: verùm quam ille minorem inscribit est vulgaris nostras: quam Hyssopifoliam aquaticam simpliciter vocat planta est de qua agimus. I JAcea non spinosa laciniata lutea, An Jacea laciniata lutea C. B.? Jacea montana minima lutea Park.? In alveis torrentum & fluviorum quorundam, qui brumali tempore planities latè inundant in Foro Julii. Mihi nondum planè constat plantam hanc descriptam esse, nam diversa videtur à Jacea lutea montana minima te∣nuifolia Col. Jacea Oleae folio v. Xeranthemum. Jacea purpurea maritima capitulo spinoso Neapolitana. An Jacea cyanoides ochinato capite C. B.? i. e. Jacea montana purpurea echinato capite Park.? an Jacea la∣ciniata Sonchi folio Park.? In maris litore arenoso prope Neapolin Italiae copiosissimè.
Jacea lutea capite spinoso C. B. lut. cap spinosis Park. major lutea Ger. Centaurium collinum, sive Jacea spinosa slore luteo J. B. Circa Monspelium & Messanam. Jacea cum spinosis capitulis purpurea tenuifolia J. B. Stoebe IX, sive squamis asperis C. B. Circa Monspelium & alibi in Gallia Narbonensi. Habetur & in Etruria. Jacea incana tenuiter laciniata, capitulis Jaceae nigrae vulgaris. An Jacea incana laciniata, capitulls Cirsii flore uno aut altero J. B.? Jacea montana candidissima Stoebes foliis Park. C. B. qui titulus huic nostrae optimè convenit. In rupibus seu clivis maritimis Calabriae. Jecea montana capite magno Storbili J. B. incana Pini capite C. B. pumila Narbonesis Park. In collibus sa∣xosis circa Monspelium. Jacobaea marina Ger. marina, sive Cineraria vulgaris Park. marina, sive Cineraria J. B. maritima C. B. Ad litora maris inferi ubi{que}. Jacobaea Senecionis facie. Calix floris Senecionis calicem exactè refert, verum circulum seu coronam aut limbum foliolorum in margine ad modum chrysanthemi obtinet. Plantula tenora est, radice fibrosa, foliis Bellidis maj. Prope Messanam. Jasminum luteum v. Polemonium. Iberis J. B. Cardamantica Lob. Ger. Nasturtii folio C. B. Park. Sciatica Cresses. In incultis, ruderatis & secus vias ubi{que} ferè tum in Germania, tum etiam in Italia, Sicilia & Gallia Narbonensi. N. Tusa cum modica axungia & coxedici imposita 4 horarum spátio, & deinde ablata dolores ischiadicos & podagricos lenit, &c. vide Plinium alió{que} Veteres. Ilex arboiea J. B. major aculeata & non aculeata Park. IV, sive folio rotundiore molli modicé{que} smuato C. B. jusdem. I, seu folio oblongo serrato; Ego enim has non distinguo. In arbusculis junioribus folia sinuata sunt, aculeata & Aquisolii aemula: in vetustioribus ob∣longa, ne{que} aculeata, ne{que}sinuata, & Oleagins simi∣lia. Ilex major glandifera Ger. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi in sylvis & sepibus passim. Ilex coccigera J. B. Ger. aquifolia, sive coccigera Park. aculeata cocciglandifera C. B. In collibus saxosis circa Monspelium, Nemausum, Avenionem & alibi in Gallia Narbonensi. N. Huic arbusculae seu frutici innascitut granum illud tictotium seu coccus baphica tantopere celebrata, & tictoibus expetita, ex quo paratur confectio illa car∣diaca Alkermes Officinis dicta.
2. Arbuscula haec nou ubi{que} coccum gerit. Nam iis solùm regionibus quae Mediterraneo mari vicinae sunt, & magno Solis ardore torrentur, nasci animad vertebam. Sed ne{que} isthic perpetùo fert; cùm enim frutex adeò adolevit ut glandem alere incipiat, coccum non gignit: ideò{que} solent incolae quadriennes aut adultiores frutices urere, ut proximo anno novelli resurgant, qui deinde singulis annis aliquot subsequentibus coccum ramulis in∣haerentem instar exiguorum pisorum coloris cinerei gig∣nunt. Clus. Imperatoria J. B. Ger. major C. B. Imper. sive Astrantia vulgaris Park. In montibus max. Carthusianorum coe∣nobio imminentibus. N. Saporis est acerrimi, Alexipharmaca ac sudori∣fera: discutit mirificè ventriculi, intestinorum, & unteri flatus, unde in colico cruciatu utilis. Usus praecip. in venenatis morbis ac ictibus; in pulmonum tartaro re∣solvendo & expectorando, in foetore anehliûs correigen∣do, in capitis affectibus phlegmaticis, Paralysi, Apo∣plexiâ, &c. Aiunt nonnulli quartanâ eos sanari qui pulveris cochlearis dimidium horâ unâ ante accessionem ex mero biberint. Commendatur & ad hydropem. Ex trinsecùs in Odontalgia (gargaris.) in catarrhis exic∣candis (susfitu) in tumoribus ac Arthritide frigida. In scabie capitis exiccanda (lotione) in serpigine inveterata sananda (cum adipe suillo illita) in globulis sagittisve corpori extrahendis (imposita) Schord. & Matth. Unde non immeritò inquit J. B. Imperatoriae nomen sibi as∣civit. cùm tot tantís{que} viribus praestet. Caeterùm ut facie externa & odore Angelicam resert, ita iisdem cum illa facultatibus dotata est. Iris humilis laiifolia flore violaceo J. B. Chamriris II, sive variegata C. B. Primò in rupibus quibusdam ma∣ritimis non longè à Liburno portu eam observavimus, flore purpureo at{que} etiam albo: deiude circa Monspeli∣um aux Garigues, ubi & Lobelius. Iris Germanica Fuch. vulgaris Germanica sive sylvestris C. B. vulgaris violacca sive purpurea hortensis & sylve∣stris J. B. vulgaris Ger. In muris, tectis, locis redera tis, &c. in Germania. Iris Florentina Ger. latifolia V, sive Florentina alba C. B. flore albo J. B. In muris urbis Florentiae magna ejus habetut copia. N. 1. Plurimae hujus plantae radici virtutes à Veteri∣bus & Neotericis assignantur. Sic. breviter Schrod. Usus praecip. in mucilagine seu tartaro pulmonum, tussi, asth∣mate,
obstructione mensium mensium, torminibus ventris infan∣tum. Extrinsecus abstergit cutis maculas & lentigines (cum Elleboro & melle mixta.) Creberrimus usus mo∣dernis est in pulveribus qui capillis insperguntur: vulgus vocat pulveres de Cypro. Aiunt & hydropi eam con∣ferre & ictero. 2. Iridis radix in vino aut cerevisia suspensa, linc dulcem conservat, illud jucundo tum odore tum sapore commendat, illius planè aemulo quem mora Rubi Idaei communicant, ut nos in vino rubro saepiùs experti su∣mus. Sed & pistoribus ad parandum fermentum triticei panis magnopere usitata est. Haec partim e Tiago, partim nostrae sunt observationis. Ischaemon v. Gramen dactylon. Iva moschata Monspeliensium v. Chamaepitys moschata. Jujube Arabum v. Zizyphus. Juncus acutus maritimus capitulis rotundis C. B. acutus maritimus alter Lob. Park. In Sicilia, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi ad maris litus valdè frequens. Juncus cyperoides maritimus Lobelii v. Gramen cyperoides. Juncaria J. B. Junc. Salmanticensis Ger. Park. Rubia VIII, sive linifolia aspera C. B. In Germania non longè à Ratispona. Juniperus major bacca rufescente C. B. Oxy cedrus Park. Oxycedrus Phoenicea Ger. Cerdus Phoenicea Bellonio, sive Oxycedrus, quibusdam Juniperus major baccâ ru∣brâ J. B. In collibus circa Monspelium. K KAli semper virens grandius perpetuum C. B. Prod. geniculatum majus J. B. C. B. Salicoria sive kali geniculatum Ger. In palustribus ad Mare Medi∣terraneum valde frequens. Multò lignosius est nostrate h. e. minore; per multos annos durat & in satis magnum fruticem adolescit, ín{que} hortis culturam paritur, expe∣rimento J. Bauhini. Kali majus semine cohieato C. B. Ger. majus cocheatum Park. vulgare J. B. Ad mare Mediterraneum sponte provenit plurimis in locis. Seritur Monspelii in lacu∣bus salsis ad Sal Alcali conficiendum, jus modum v. apud J. Bauhinum.
L LAburnum v. Anagyris. Lactuca sylvatica purpurea J. B. montana purpuro∣caerulea major C. B. sylvestris purpureo flore Park. Sonchus sylvaticus Ger. emac. In sylvis montosis Jurae, Salevae &c. frequens. Lagopus altera angustifolia Lob. major angustifolius Park. Trifolium angustifolium spicatum J. B. Trifolium mon∣tanum angustissimum spicatum C. B. In montibus supra Messanam; at{que} etiam circa Monspelium, utrobi{que} co∣piosè Flores dilutè rubent. Ab hac non diversam specie puto Lagopum angustifoliam Hispanicam Clus. Lagopus maximus Ger. max. flore rubro Park. Trifolium spicâ subrotundâ rubrâ C. B. Trif. albo incarnatum, spi∣catum, sive Lagopus J. B. Quod circa Neapolin pro∣venit flores habet pulchre rubentes aut coccineos; quod prope Genevam albo-incarnatos aut pallidos. Lagopus major folio pinnato Park. major spicâ longiore Ger. Trifolium purpureum majus, folio & spicâ longi∣ore J. B. montanum spicâ longissimâ rubente C. B. In collibus circa Genevam. Lamium peregrinum sive Scutellaria C. B. peregrinum, Scutellaria dictum Park. Cassida Col. In Italia circa Florentiam, Liburnum & alibi. Maguam habet simi∣litudinem seu convenientiam florum respectu cum Lysi∣machia galericulata; unde eam primo aspectu Lysima∣chiam galericulatam Uriticae folio denominavimus. Lamium v. Galeopsis. Lanaria sive Struthium Dioscoridis Imperato J. B. Sapo∣naria Lychnidis folio, flosculis albis C. B. In preaeruptis montium Messanae proximorum aut ipsum Imperati Stru∣thium, aut plantam ei simillimam collegimas, needum ineunte Junio floruerat. Larix C. B. Ger. Park. folio decidao conifera J. B. The Larch-tree. In Alpibus Stiriacis & Carinthiacis eundo à Vienna ad Venetias copiosé. N. 1. Hujus Resina est quam Terebinthiuam Venetam Officinae vocant. Matth. Park. J. B. Quae de Resinae viribus traduntur, vide sub Pinu. Laricis materies fir∣missima est at{que} solidissima, adeó{que} Solis ardoribus aerís{que} injuriis resistit nec rimas facit.
2. Haec sola arbor ex Resiniferis folio est deciduo; Folia a. monente J. Bauhino, non decidunt Autumno, nec antequam alia initio Veris succedunt. 3. Hujus trunco seu caudiei innascitur Fungus ille pituitae purgatrix Agaricum dictus. 4. Quae Plinius alií{que} Veterum tradunt, non ardere eam, nec carbones facere, nec alio modo vi ignis con∣sumi quàm lapides; omnino falsa este vel indè constat, quòd apud Vallesianos quibusdam in locis non alia ligna in usum foci adhibeantur, ac alicubi etiam in Alpibus ad ferrarias fodinas carbones ex eâ fiant. J. B. Matth. Lathyrus major Narbonensis angustifolius J. B. angustiofo∣lius Park. Circa Monspelium non longè à Sella nova, & alibi. Lathyrus sativus flore purpureo C. B. angustifolius flore purpureo Ger. anguloso semine J. B. Circa Genevam copiosé: seritur & in Germania. Lathyrus sativus flore fructú{que} albo C. B. Circercula sive Lythyrus sativus flore albo Park. Et hic circa Genevam & in Germania seritur. † Lathyrus siliquâ hirsutâ J. B. angustifolius siliquâ hirsutâ C. B. Inter segetes circa Genevam. Hic etiam in An∣glia sponte oritur. Lathyrus sylvestris flore vario ex albo & coccineo. Et hunc ctiam circa Genevam inter segetés copiose enatum vidimus, necnon circa Liburnum. Lavendula major, sive vulgaris Park. Lav. flore caeruleo Ger. Lavandula latifolia C. B. Pseudonardus, quae vul∣gò spica J. B. In Gallia Narbonensi passim & copiosis∣sime. Provenit ibidem & Pseudonardus quae Lavendula vulgò J. B. N. Saporis est subacris & subamari, paritum tenuium, cephalica ac nervina. Usus praecip, in catarrhis, para∣lysi, spasmo, vertigine; lethargo, & tremore artuum. In urina, mensibus ac foetu pellendo (unde & parturien∣tibus exhiberi solet) in torminibus ventris flatulentis. Extrinsecùs in lixivils capitis ac artuum, in masticato∣liis pro catarho exiccando ac revellendo ad palatum, ne in pulmones defluat. Odore suo fugat pediculos. Schord. In usu sunt praecipuè flores. Hi quo{que} cum linteaminibus & vestimentis in arculas recondi solent ad odoris suavitatem communicandam. Laureola solio deciduo v. Mezereon. Laurus Ger. J. B. vulgaris C. B. major sive latifolia Park. In sylvis & sepibus Italiae satìs familiaris. N. Baccae pausò calidiores sunt, emolliunt, resolvunt.
Usus praecip. in mensibus & urinis ciendis; in affectibus nervorum, paralysi; in colica, in dolore post partum, in crudltatibus ventriculi. Extrinsecùs conferunt folia ad ictus vesparum, molliunt tumores, promovent men∣ses (in sussitu & balneo) leniunt dolores, odontalgiám{que} mitigant (in gargarism.) Schrod. Laurus Tinus caeruleâ baccâ Lob. sylv. Corni foeminae fo∣liis, subhirsutus C. B. Laurus Tinus Ger. Tinus altera J. B. An Laurus sylv. folio monore C. B.? In Italia circa Roman, Tybur & alibi frequens. Invenimus quo{que} in sylvâ Valenâ prope montem Lupi nou longè à Monspelio. Ledum Alpinum hirsutum C. B. Ledum Alpinum, sive Ro∣sa Alpina Park. Nerium Alpinum quibusdam, aliis Le∣dum hirsutum J. B. In Alpibus prope Ponitebam. Ledum Alpinum foliis ferrea rubigine nigricantibus C. B. Nerium Alpinum quibusdam, aliis Ledum glabrum J. B. Chamaerhododdendros Alpigena Ger. Ledum Alpinum sive Rosa Alpina Park. In summis jugis montis Jurae prope Genevam. Ledum Alpinum hirsutum minus, An Cistus pumilus mon∣tis Baldi fortè. Austricacus myritisolius J. B.? Unà cum Ledo Alpino hirsuto; cui quoad folia satis similis est, multis tamen numeris minor, & flore (quantum me∣mini) luteo. Leatiscus Lob. Ger. Park J. B. vulgaris C. B. In saxosis collibus Italiae, Siciliae & Narbonensis Galliae; ubi nun∣quam. (quod equidem viderim aut audiverim) justam arboris stauram & magnitudinem assequitur, sed frutex perdurat; quamvis alibi, teste Bellonio & aliis, in ar∣borem satis proceram adolescat. N. 1. Partibus suis omnibus (fructu, foliis, cortice) adstrictoria est, unde utilis est ad fluxiones cujucun{que} generis, haemorrhagiam, sanguinis exputitionem, alvi profluvium & dysenteriam, menses immodicos, proci∣derntiam uteri & sedis. In summa Acaciae & hypocisti∣dis vices supplet; urinam ciet. 2. Dentiscalpia ex Lentisco parata tum priscis, tum hoc seculo magnatibus ac delicatioribus in usu quotidi∣ano pro optimis & praestantissimis habentur. 3. Lentiscum in sola insula Chio Mastichen praebore tum Bellonius, tum Hermolaus Barbarus assirmant. Alii in Italia quo{que} Mastichen ferre sed non copio&am tradunt, ut v. g. Matthiolous, Caesalpinus, Lacuna, Schro∣derus refert se habere ex donatione Galseri frustulum Mastiche ditissimum ex Helveticis Alpibus transmissum.
Nos cùm in Italia & Gallia Narbonensi peregrinaremur nunquam Mastichen fundentem vidimus hanc arborem; nec quis fide dignus nobis unquam retulit se vidisse. 4. Huic arbori vel sponte vel vulneratae exudat Ma∣stiche dicta, quae (referente Schrodero) subastringit, emollit, ventriculum roborat. Usus praecip. in vomitu, nauseâ ac fluxu alvi compescendo. Obtundit ac corri∣git purgantium acrimoniam, reprimit exhalationes ven∣triculi quae caput alias ferire solent (grana aliquot post pastum deglutita) roborat caput, nervosùm{que} genus, expuitioni sanguninis ac tussi medetur: emendat oris ha∣litum, pituitam è cerebro elicit (masticando.) Extrin∣secus ejus usus creberrimus est in dentifriciis, emplastris ac cataplasmatis stomachicis. Leonotopodium Dod. v. Gnaphalium Alpinum pulchrum. Lepidium aunuum Ger. Park. II, sive galstifolium C. B. non repens J. B. In agris prope Ratisponam; ibidem Foenugraecum aut satum aut sponte provenit. Lepidium Dentellaria dictum v. Plumbago. Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus Ger. bulbosum minus triphyllon J. B. In convallibus Alpium, viâ quà Bas∣sano Tridentum itur. Leucoium bulbosum vulgare C. B. bulbosum hexaphyllum cum unico flore, rariùs bino J. B. bulb. serotinum Ger. In umbrosis Helvetiae pascuis pluribus in locis; quin & in Italia prope Taurinum, sylvis montosis, itém{que} inter Bassanum & Tridentum. Leucoium bulbosum majus polyanthemum Ger. Leuco∣narcisso-lirion pratense Lob. Leuc. bulb. polyanthemum tardiús florens, floribus monoribus J. B. L. b. majus sive multiflorum, quod aliqui Acrocorion Plinii statuunt C. B. In palustribus prope Pisas. Lecoium maritimum angustifolium C. B. J. B. marinum minus Park. marinum minus Lobelii & Clusii Ger. In arenosis maris Mediterranei litoribus Prope Frontigna∣nam. Leucoium spinosum v. Thalspi spinosum. Libanotis altera Theophrasti nigra v. Saxifragia Vene torum. Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park. latifolia altera sive vulgatior. C. B. Lib. Theoph quorundam, sive Seseli Aethiopicum Matthiolo, Cervaria alba J. B. In mon∣tibus circa Genevam copiosè. Lichen marinus rotundifolius Ger. v. Opuntia marina. Ligusticum v. Siler montanum. Lilim aui eum v. Martagon Chymistarum.
Lilium floribus reflexis montanum C. B. montanum minus Ger. flore nutante ferrungineo majus J. B. In colle La Bastie & in monte Salveâ prope Genevam copiosé. Limonium folio sinuato Ger. peregrinum Rauwolsii Park. peregrinum foliis Asplenii C. B. Lim. quibusdam rarum J. B. In insula ad Promontorium Pachynum, & ad Punto Cerciolo in Sicilia, utrobi{que} copiosé. Limoniuni parvum Narbonese oleae-folium Lob. minus J. B. minus maritimum oleae folio C. B. parvum Ger. Narbonese parvum Park. Ad mare prope Monspelium copiosé. Invenimus qúo{que} in Etruria circa Liburnum. Limonium alud parvum Narbonese floribus majoribus. An Limonium minimum C. B. Park.? In iisdem cum priore locis. Linariae aliquatenus similis folio Bellidis J. B. Lin. crecta latifolia VII. seu Bellidis folio C. B. Linaria odorata Park. purpurea odorata Ger. In agris quibusdam Lugdu∣num inter & Gratianopolin 5 aut 6 leucis Lugduno remotis. Linaria aurea Tragi Ger. L. folioso capitulo luteo major C. B. Heliochrylos Tragi, sive Linaria 3 J. B. In mon∣tibus prope Ratisponam & alibi in Germania. Hane plantam ad Virgam auream rectiùs retuleris quàm ad Linariam. Linaria purpurea magna J. B. L. erecta angustiofolia X, sive purpurea major odorata C. B. Circa Neaposin & ad radices montis Vesuvii. Maxima est ominium quas hac∣tenus vidimus; flore parvo, intense prupureo. Linaria graminea floribus congestis purpureis. Linaria caerulea calcaribus longis J. B. Ad radices montis Ve∣suvii copiosé. Altitudo ei dodrantalis, folia graminea; flores in summo caule densè stipati velut in brevispicâ. † Linatia odorata Monspessulana J. B. erecta angustifolia XI, sive capillaceo solio odora C. B. Circa Monspelium ubi{que} Hanc speciem in Cornubia invenimus. Consule Cat. Ang. Folia capillacea huic plantae perperiám attri∣buit C. Bauhinus. Linaria purpurea parva J. B. pumila seu repens IV, sive caerulea repens C. B. purpuro-caerulea repens Ger. cae∣rulea repens Park. In Alpium jugis & monte Jura. Malè inseribitur repens. Linaria parva purpurea foliis sine ordine dispositis J. B. Lin foliis carnosis cinereis C. B. In alveis fluviorum Alpestrium & torrentum. Linaria lutea parva annnua J. B. pumila seu repens II, i. e. pum. foliis carnosis, flosculis minimis flavis C. B. In ca∣cumine montis Lupi, duobus â Monspelio leucis distantis. Autumno florentem inveni.
Linaria pumila procumbens latifolia flore pallido, rictu luteo. In vineis quibusdam Messanae. Vere loacute;ret. Linum luteum Narbonense J. B. marinum luteum Ger. ma∣ritimum luteum C. B. sylv. angustifolium luteum Park. In pratis juxta Monspelium & Sellam novam. Floret Sep∣tembri: Hujus varietatem duplo grandiorem inveni∣mus ad mare, quam tamen specificè differre neutiquam concedimus. Flores nempe, caules, capitula, semina utri{que} eadem. Differentia tantùm in magnitudine & statura, quae ratione loci evenit. Instinctu J. Bauhii haec duo studiosè inter se contulimus. Linum sylv. angustis & densioribus foliis, flore minore C. B. Haec species an eadem sit nostrati Lino tenuifolio, an diversa inquirendum. In sterilioribus circa montem Lupi Septembri florentem observavimus. Est autem iis in locis perexigua, foliis angustiss. densis, flore satìs grandi, coloris ex purpurâ albicantis. Linum sylv. latifolium Ger. sylv. latifolium caeruleum Park. sylv. latifolium hirsutum caeruleum C. B. sylv. latifolium hirsutum flore caeruleo J. B. In planitie quadam prope Augustam Vindelicorum. An potiùs Linum sylv. lati∣folium caule viscoso, flore rubro C. B.? quod circa In∣golstadium reperiri asserit. Nostri certè flos ruber po∣tiùs quàm caeruleus, quamvis nullius in caulibus visco∣sitatis meminerimus. Lithospermum Linari folio C. B. v. Passerina. Lonchitis aspera C B. asp. major Ger. asp. major Mat∣thioli Park. altera cum folio denticulato, sive Lonchitis altera Matthioli J. B. In sum mis rupibus montis Jurae. Lotus arbor Lob. Ger. L. arbor fructu Cerasi J. B. L. fru∣ctu Cerasi C. B. In Italia circa Romam & Gallia Nar∣bonensi circa Monspelium. Lotus siliquâ quadratâ Ger. quadripinnatis siliquis Park. ruber siliquâ angulosâ C. B. flore fusco tetragonolobus J B. In Sicilia propè Messanam in olivetis. Lotus siliquosa lutea Monspeliensis J. B. pratensis siliquosus luteus C. B. pratens. Moaspeliensium Park. Circa Tybri∣dis fluvii ostia in pratis. Circa Genevam quoque & Monspelium copiosé. Lotus siliquosa lutea siliquis strictioribus & longioribus. In Italia prope Tybridis fluvii ostia. Lotus edulis Cretica Park. L. pentaphyllos siliquâ convexâ I, sive pentaphyllos siliquâ cornutâ C. B. Trifolium sive Lotus Hierazune edulis siliquosa J. B. Primò observavi in Italia prope Neapolin, postea in Sicilia. Lotus siliquis Ornithopodii C. B. J. B. Circa Messanam ad latera montium urbi proximorum.
Lotus flore luteo, corniculis articulatis. An Lotus penta∣phyllos siliquis recurvis, pedes corvinos referentibus C. B.? Coronopus ex codice Caesareo Dod. Ger.? Ad Punto Cer∣ciolo non longè à Castello Puzallu in Sicilia. Lotus siliquis rectis incana vulgaris major. Neap. in ru∣pibus maritimis. Lotus asperior fruticosior Park. fruticosus incanus siliquosus C. B. L. trifolia corniculata Ger. Trif. argentatum floribus luteis J. B. Hanc plantam C. B. perperam pentaphyllum denominat, cùm trifolia sit. In collibus circa Monspelium. Lotus corniculata siliquis singularibus vel binis tenuis J. B. corniculatus minor pilosus Park. Trifolium coriculatum minus pilosum C. B. Prod. Prope Neapolin collegimus. Lotus Libyca Dalechampii Lugd. L. pentaphyllos siliquis rectis X, sive siliquosus glaber flore rotundo C. B. Trifo∣lium haemorrhoidale alterum minus, sive Lotus Libyca Dalechampii Park. Trifolium rectum Monspessulanum J. B. In locis humidis circa Messanam Siciliae, Tropiam Calabriae, & Monspelium Galliae Narbonensis. Lotus incana, sive Oxytriphyllum Scribonii Largi Ger. Lo∣tus pentaphyllos siliquis rectis IX, sive pentaph. siliquo∣sus villosus C. B. An Lotus haemorrhoidalis major, sive Trifolium haemorrhoidale majus Park.? Trifolium album rectum hirsutum valde J. B. Circa Monspelium eundo ad Peroul. Prope Mesanam major abetur & lignosior. Figura quae à Parkinsono exhibetur pro Trifolio argen∣tato floribus luteis J. B. à Gerardo pro hoc ponitur, cui quidem nullo modo convenit. Lotus pentaphyllos vesicaria C. B. Anthyllis leguminosa vesi∣caria Hispanica Park. idonea sanè appellatione. Trifo∣lium halicacabum sive vesicarium J. B. perperam. Circa Messanam & alibi non in Sicilia modò, sed & in Italia. Loto affinis v. Anthyllis & Auricula muris. Lunaria radiata Robini J. B. v. Securidaca. peltata v. Thlaspi clypeatum minus. biscutata v. Thlaspi clypeatum. Lupinus sativus flore albo C. B. sativus albus Park. vulgaris flore & semine albo sativus J. B. In Italia prope Li∣burnum Etruriae portum & alibi satum vidimus. Lupinus sylv. flore caeruleo C. B. flore caeruleo Ger. sylv. purpureo flore, semine rotundo vario J. B. In Sicilia circa Messanam sponte & copiosé. Lupinus flore luteo Ger. Park. sylv. luteo flore, semine com∣presso vario J. B. In arenosis ad Fretum Siculum inter Messanam urbem & Pharum Messanensem copiosé. N. Haec sola planta è leguminosis gustu est amaro. J. B.
Lychnis coronaria vulgò J. B. coronaria sylvestris C. B. co∣ron. vulgaris Park. cor. rubra Ger. In Italia passim, ubi & flore albo, medio incarnato cernitur. Lychnis erecta parva flore rubello, folio longo angusto. In∣ter segetes Lini vidimus, medio quasi itinere à Massa ad Lucam. Lychnis minima rigida Cherleri J. B. In collibus pope Florentiam. Apud alios Botanicos nulla hujus metio quod sciam. Lychnis sylv. hirta Lob. Ger. sylv. hirta major Park. sylv. lanugine canescens, flore majusculo rubescente, Clusio 5 J. B. Circa Neapolin primò, deinde circa Messanam. Lychnis parvo flore rubello è calyce oblongo angusto. Sunt a, petala in medio profundè fissa seu biida. Juxta Mes∣sanam in primo montium ascensu. Suspicarer hanc ean∣dem esse cum Ocymoide flore rubro minore ret. si flo∣rum petala responderent. Lychnis sylvestris calyculis striatis Park. cal. str. 2 Clusii Ger. sylv. latifolia calyculis turgidis striatis C. B. Mus∣cipula major, calyce turgido ventricoso J. B. In Ger∣mania agris prope Rhenum copiosé. † Lychnis montana viscosa alba latiolia C. B. An Musci∣pula altera flore albo Park.? Polemonium petraeum Ges∣neri J. B. Genevae in ipsius urbis muris & in collibus vicinis frequens. In Germaniae quo{que} meridionalibus nusquam non obvia. Hanc nuper in Anglia spontaneam observavimus, vide Cat. Ang. Lychnis montana repens v. Saponaria minor. Lychnis viscosa purpurea latifolia laevis C. B. Muscipula Lobelii Ger. Park. Centaurium minus adulterinum, qui∣busdam Lychnidis viscidae genus J. B. In agris montosis ad Rheni ripas inter segetes. Lychnis viscosa erecta annua caryophylloides. In margi∣nibus Grammontiae sylvae prope Mospelium. Lychnis segetum rubra foliis Perfoliatae C. B. Lychnis seg. Vaccaria rubra dicta Park. Vaccaria J. B. Ger. Inter segetes in Gallia & Germania passim. Lysimachia lutea in alis foliorum florens Caes. lutea minor J. B. Ger. Park. lutea II, sive minor foliis nigris pun∣ctis notatis C. B. In Alpibus Stiriacis. Lysimachia lutea flore globoso Ger. Park. bifolia flore glo∣boso luteo C. B. altera lutea Lobelii, flore quasi spicato J. B. In fossis palustribus prope Sevenhuys in Hollan∣dia. Lysimachia siliquosa speciosa v. Chamaenerium.
M MAchaleb v. Cerasus sylvestris. Maiz sive Frumentum Indicum Ger. Maiz, frumen∣tum Indicum vel Turcicum vulgare Park. Fru∣menctum Indicum Mays dictum C B. Triticum Indicum J. B. Seritur nunc dierum non in Italia duntaxat, verùm etiam in Germania. Farina ejus subflava est non alba. Nequicquam multiplicant species Tabernamontanus & Gerardus ob solum granorum aut florum colorem; cùm in eadom spica grana flava & spadicea observaverimus. Panis hinc confectus lentur est & gravis, nec fermento intumescit dum pinsitur aut coquitur, proinde obstruen∣tis naturae sit necesse est, & difficilis concoctionis, velut panis azymus. Marrubium album fatuum P. Castelli in Cat. plantarum Messanensium. An Marrubium album peregrinum bre∣vibus & obtusis foliis C. B.? In glareosis ad mare non longè à Messana. Haec planta à nonnullis credita est Pseudodictamnus alter Ponae; verùm non respondent acetabula, quae Moluccae similia esse dicit. Marrubium album angustifolium peregrinum C. B. Creticum Ger. Park. album angustiore folio J. B. Ad vias & agrorum margines prope Viennam Austriae. Miramur interim Clusium aliam proposuisse ab hac diversam Marrubii spe∣ciem circa Viennam spontaneam, quae nobis ibi non visa. Marrubium nigrum longifolium C. B. v. Herba venti Mon∣speliensium. Martagon Chymistarum Lob. Lilium aureum Ger. purpuro∣croceum majus C. B. rubens vel croceum majus J. B. In sylvis supra Neapolin prope Camaldulensium coenobium. Maragon v. Lilium floribus reflexls. Medica major erection floribus purpurascentibus J. B. Tri∣folium siliquâ cornutâ, sive Medica C. B. Trifolium Bur∣gundiaum Ger. Poenum Burgundiacum, sive Medica le∣gitima Park. Circa Genevam & Monspelium, & alibi. Circa Avenionem in agris satam vidimus. Medica sentellata J. B. Trifolium cochleatum Ger. coch∣leatum fructu latiore C. B. Ad agrorum margines propè Liburnum Etruriae portum. Medica orbiculata J. B. Trifolium cochleatum vel scutella∣tum, fructu latiore, folio minuto obtuso C. B. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum & alibi in Sicilia.
Medica orbiculata fructu minore. Prope Messanam. Hujus orbiculi dimidio minores sunt quàm praecedentis; & plu∣res simul in eodem ramulo sive communi pediculo con∣fertim nascuntur. Medica magna turbinata J. B. Medicae majoris Baeticae spi∣nosae species altera Ger. emac. p. 1200. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum mox dicta. Medica coronata Cherleri parva J. B. In Sicilia circa Messanam; itém{que} circa Monspelium & Neapolin. Medica doliata spinosa. In arenosis maris litoribus ad Mes∣sanam & alibi tum in Sicilia, tum etiam in Italia. Medica doliata lenis. Ubi invenimus jam non recordamur. Medica orbiculata elegans fructu circum oras rugis veluti crispato. In Sicilia non longè à Puzallu vico & Punto Cerciolo. Medica fructu compresso circum oras dentato. An Medica lunata quaedam minor J. B.? Prope Messanam ad mar∣gines vinearum. Medica echinata, fructu ovato, spinulis brevibus, crebris, rigidis. Prope Messanam Siciliae. Medica Catalonica elegans vulgò dicta. Hanc ubi colle∣gimus jam non recordamur. Fructus figurae doliaris est & crebris tuberculis scaber, persimilis ligno illi quo bra∣chia manús{que} muniunt Itali ad pilam defendendam▪ & feriendam propellendámve in ludo dicto. Medica ciliaris Guilandini. Hanc in Alpibus invenimus. Fructus orbiculum aut rotulam imitatur, habét{que} in circumferentia molles & oblongas spinulas seu setas, ci∣liorum aemulas. Medica marina Park. Medicae marinae spinosae species Ger. Trifolium cochleatum maritimum spinosum C. B. Trifo∣lium cochleatum marinum, seu Medica marina J. B. Ad litora Maris Mediterranei frequens. Hae duae species proximè scriptae perennes suut, reliquae omnes annuae. Medica echinata fructu parvo oblongo, spinis rarioribus rigidis. Hanc etiam in Sicilia collegimus. Melampyrum multis sive Triticum vaccinum J. B. Melam∣pyrum purpurascente comâ C. B. Melampyrum purpure∣um Ger. Crataeogonon flore vario Park. Melampyrum ejusdem. Inter segetes per Germaniam & Galliam vul∣gatissimum. Melampyrum caeruleâ comâ C. B. caetuleum Ger. Melam∣pyro affinis Parietaria caerulea quorundam J. B. In sylvis montosis non longè à Gratianopoli, qua indè ad max. Carthusianorum coenobium itur. Melampyrum erectum flore luteo amplo. Ad latera montium Messanae imminentium.
Melampyrum erectum flore vario ex albo & purpureo. An Antirrhinum album serrato folio J. B.? Cum priore, à quo etiam fortasse non differt specie. Possunt hae plantae ad Euphrasias aut Cristas Galli referri. Melanthium v. Nigella. Melica sive Sorghum Dod. Ger. Park. Sorghi J. B. Milium arundinaceum subrotundo semine, Sorgo nominatum C. B. In Foro Julii ad paniicia seritur: ést{que} haud dubiè Milium illud quod suo tempore ex India in Italiam inve∣ctum scripsit Plinius, nigrum colore, amplum grano, ha∣rundineum culmo, quód{que} adolescit ad pedes altitudine septem praegrandibus culmis. E paniculis hujus à granis repurgatis scopulas efficiunt ad mundandas vestes aliós{que} usus, cujusmodi Venetiis vonales vidimus. Melilotus quinta Tragi v. Securidaca. Melilotus major candida Trag. Germanica Ger. flore albo albo Park. In Germania, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi frequens. Haec reverà specie differt à vulgari nostra lu∣tea, quamvis C. Bauhinus, qui aliàs plerun{que} nimis mul∣tiplicat species, eandem faciat. Melilotus Messanensis procumbens folliculis rugosis sublon∣gis, spicis florum brevioribus. In loco humido, in lin∣gula illa inter portum Messanensem & fretum Siculum. Melissa sylvestris hirsutior minùs odorata. Melissophylli sylvestris genus Matthiolo. In sepibus prope Liburnum & Salernum copiosé. Haec est, puto, quam J. Bauhinus memorat Hist. lib. 28. cap. 12. Habemus (inquit) nos quandam Melissam nigriorem & hirsutiorem, à nemine memoratam. Hîc Matthiolus à Botanicis injustè argu∣itur, qnasi Melissophyllum suum sylvestre à sativo non esset distinctum. Melissae similis foliis minoribus, floribus albis, labello punctato. Circa Messanam, in insula ad Prom. Pachy∣num in Sicilia. † Menthastrum Ger. hortense, sive Mentha sylvest. Park. Mentha sylvestris folio longiore C. B. Menthastrum spi∣catum folio longiore candicante J. B. In agris & pascuis prope Arnum flumen non longè à Florentia. Mespilus J. B. sativa Ger. vulgaris sive minor Park. Ger∣manica folio laurino non ferrato C. B. In Etruriae sepibus non procul Viterbo. Mespilus Aronia Ger. Aronia Veterum J. B. Aronia sive Neapolitana Park. Apii folio laciniato C. B. Sponte pro∣venire dicitur in montibus Galliae Narbonenss, quamvis me non vidisse fateor spontaneam. Meum alterum Italicum quibusdam J. B. alterum Italicum
Ger. spurium Italicum Park. latisolium adulterinum C. B. In collibus & clivis maritimis Regni Neapolitani. Mezereon Germanicum, an Chamaedaphne Dioscoridis Lob.? Laureola folio deciduo, flore purpureo C. B. Laur. fol. dec. sive Mezereon Germanicum J. B. Chamaelaea Germanica sive Mezereon Ger. Cham. Ger. sive Meze∣reon vulgò Park. In montosis Germaniae passim. Ha∣betur & in collibus & montibus circa Genevam. Facul∣tatis est causticae & adurentis, nec intra corpus tutò su∣mitur. Milium arundinaceum C. B. v. Melica. Millefolium nobile Trag. Achillea sive Millefolium nobile Ger. Achillea Sideritis, sive nobilis odorata Park. A∣chillea millefolia odorata J. B. Tanacetum minus album odore Camphorae C. B. In Germania ad Rhenum, Gal∣lia Narbonensi circa Monspelium, & in Italia passim. Millefolium luteum Ger. Park. tomentosum luteum J. B. C. B. Circa Avenionem, & juxta viam quae Auriaco Avenio∣nem ducit, ubi & lusio observatum Hist. lib. 3. cap. 37. Mollugo montana latisolia ramosa C B. Gallium sive Mol∣lugo montana Ger. Gallium flore albo majus, sive Mol∣lugo montana Park. Rubia sylvatica laevis J B. In syl∣vis, agro Luceburgensi & Aquisgranensi. Moly moschatum capillaceo folio C B. moschatum vel Zi∣bettinum Monspeliense Park. Allium sylv. perpusillum juncifolium moschatum J. B. In collibus prope Monspe∣lium & Sellam novam, aux Garigues. Moly parvum caule triangulo C. B. caule & foliis triangula∣ribus Pak. Primò inter Lericium & Massam; deinde circa Baias copiosé. Monophyllon Ger. Mon. sive Unifolium Park. Mon. recen∣tiorum Lob. Mon. sive Lilium convallim minus C. B. Unifolium, sive Ophrys unifolia J B. Pimò in luco quodam juxta Hagam Comitum Hollandiae, deinde in omnibus fere editioribus Belgii & Germaniae sylvis & dumetis. Morus alba Ger. Park. J B. fructu albo C. B. The white Mulberry. In Sicilia, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi co∣piosissimè seritur ad bombyces alendos; sunt enim folia ejus teneriora & vermiculis hisce gratiora quàm nigrae. Morus nigra Park J. B. fructu nigro C. B. Morus Ger. The black Mulberry-tree. Cum priore. N. . Fructus nigrae (mora Celsi officinis dicti) imma∣turi refrig. sicc. astringunt validé. Usus praecip. in diar∣rhoea, dysenteria, fluxu menstruo, expuitione sanguinis: Extrinsecùs in faucium ac oris inflammationibus ulceri∣bús{que} Schrod.
2. Mora matura refrigerant, alvum subducunt initio pastûs & ante alios cibos sumpta, nam post alios cibos facilè corrumpuntur; sitim sedant, appetitum excitant, &c. Schrod. 3. Cortex rdicis abstergit, astringit, hepar ac lie∣nem aperit, alvum laxat, tineas latas necat: Circa mes∣sem circumfossa & incisa dat succum qui concrescit & ad dentium dolores efficax est. Quin & folia vel sola vel cum cortice cocta odontalgiam sedant. Veteres plura habent, quos consule. Syrupus mororum ad supradicta omnia valet, & grata sua aciditate febrilem ardorem restinguit. 4. Morus urbanarum novissima germinat, nec nisi exacto frigore, ob id dicta sapientissima arborum. Plin. Muscus Alpinus flore insigni dilutè rubente J. B. Gentia∣nella omnium minima C. B. Park. In altissimis verticibus montium max. Carthusianorum coenobio imminentium Muscus denticulatus Ger. denticulatus major C. B. Park. terrestris denticulatus Lob. pulcher parvus repens J. B. In aggeribus umbrosis in Italia & parte meridionali Germaniae. Muscus capillaceus longissimus, i. e. Muscus arboreus II, C. B. Hunc longissimis capillaceis filamentis densè sti∣patis ex Abieibus dependentem in Germania vidimus & collegimus. Chartas in quibus composita fuit colore flavo ad ruffum tendente infecit. Myagro affinis herba capitulis rotundis J. B. Myagro si∣milis siliquâ rotundâ C. B. Park. Hanc inter plantas no∣stras siccas habemus, ubi collegiums jam non recorda∣mur. Myrica 1 Clus. Tamariscus folio tenuiore Park. Narbo∣nensis Ger. Tamarix altera folio tenuiore, sive Gallica C. B. major sive arborea Narbonensis J. B. Ad mare propè Monspelium abundé. Myrica sylv. altera Clus. Tamariscus folio latiore Park. Germanica Ger. Tamarix fruticosa folio crassiore, sive Germanica C. B. Germanica, sive minor fruticosa J. B. Ad ripas fluviorum, v. g. circa Augustam Vindelicourm, Genevam, &c. N. 1. Absterg. ac subastringit. Usus praecip. in ob∣structione ac tumore lienis. Adeò mirabilem antipathi∣am contra solum hoc viscerum faciunt (inquit Plinius) ut affirment, si ex alveis factis bibant sues sine liene inveniri. De ligno Aegyptii (teste Alpino) decoctum parant ad luem Veneream curandam non secus ac nostri de Guaiaco, quod exhibent leprosis, scabiosis, &c. cum
foelici successu. Idem faciunt in melancholicis, ictericis nigris & hydropicis. Extrinsecùs in tinea capitis & ob∣structione mensium valet. 2. Doliola è Myricae assulis Francofurti ad Moenum venalia memorat Clusius, quibus contentus liquor lie∣nosis prodest. 3. Curae Edmundi Grindalli Archiepiscopi Cantua∣riensis Tamaricem Angli debent, quam induratam lienis passionem eximiè juvare expertus primus in Angliam transtulit. Camden. Annal. Elizab. Myrtus communis Italica C. B. An Myrtus fructu albo Ger.? Myrtus vulgaris nigra & alba, sativa & sylvestris J. B. In Italia & Gallo-provincia frequentissima, ad mare inferum, itém{que} in Sicilia. N. 1. Hujus tum folia, tum baccae (myrtilli Offici∣narum) refrigerant temperatè, siccant validè astrin∣gúnt{que}. Usus internus rarior est, nihilominus tamen ad∣hibentur in fluxu alvi ac expuitione sanguinis. Extrin∣secus usus utrius{que} crebrior. Folia emendant foetorem sub axillis ac inguinibus (pul∣vis aspersus) sudorem corporis immodicum sistunt (fri∣ctione) membris catarrhosis opitulantur, alvi fluxui suc∣currunt, defensivum exhibent in herpetibus, putredinem oris sanant, haemorrhagiam narium sistunt; polypo me∣dentur (cum melle ac vino.) Baccae mitigant oculorum inflammationes; juvant lu∣xatos articulos ac ossa fracta; subveniunt procidentiae uteri ac ani; capitis tineas furfuraceá{que} excrementa abi∣gunt. Schrod. Praecipuae eorum vires dependent ab adstrictione & suavitate odoris, ut singulas examinanti manifestum fiet. 2. Bellonius refert Illyricos Myrti foliis coria perfi∣cere, quemadmodum Macedones Rhoe; Aegyptios A∣caciae siliquis; Asiae minoris incolas glandium Aesculi calycibus; Gallos Quercûs libro; Phryges sylvestris Pini corticibus. Clus. hist. lib. 1. cap. 43.
N NArcissus medioluteus Lob. Ger. An medioluteus po∣lyanthos Ger.? medioluteus XI, sive copioso flore, odore gravi C B. Narcissus multos ferens flores, medioluteus Narbonensis J. B. Itinere à Lericio ad Massam, & à Massa ad Lucam inter segetes copiosé. Natrix Plinii v. Anonis lutea major. Nasturtiolum Alpinum tenuissimè divisum J. B. C. B. Car∣damine Alpina Ger. Alpina minor Park. In summis jugis montium Jurae & Salevae locis humidioribus. Nerium Alpinum v. Ledum. Nerium v. Oleander. Nigella arvensis Park. arvensis cornuta C. B. Melanthium Sylvestre Lob. Ger. Sylv. sive arvense J. B. Per Ger∣maniam, Italiam & Galliam Narbonensem inter segetes passim. N. 1. Usus semin. praecip. in mucilagine pulmonum re∣solvenda & expectoranda, lacte augendo, urinâ ac men∣sibus ciendis, morsibus venenatis corrigendis. Specificè in febribus quartanis & quotidianis. Extrinsecùs crebri usûs est in Cephalalgia sedanda, catarrhis exiccandis, in cucuphis epithemat, &c. applicatum Schrod. 2. Radix sistit proprietate sua haemorrhagiam, si dentibus masticetur, naribúsque imponatur. Idem. 3. Exprimitur ex semine isto oleum, quo imperiti Pharmacopoei plerique pro oleo nardino non absque gra∣vi utuntur errore. Dod. O OCymastrum Valerianthon v. Valeriana. Ocymoides repens v. Saponaria minor. Ochrus sive Ervilia Dod. Lob. Ger. Och. sive Erv. flore & fructu albo Park. Och. folio integro ca∣preolos emittente C. B. Lathyri species quae Ervilia syl∣vestris Dodonaeo J. B. Inter segetes propè Liburnum portum. Olea sativa J. B. Ger. Park. C. B. In territorio Lucae
urbis. In Gallo-provincia, & alibi in Italia & Gallia Narbonensi copiosissimé. N. Oleae vires & usus explicare nimis prolixum foret & perdissicile. Sic breviter Schroderus. Folia refrige∣rant, exiccant & astringunt. Usus externus & praecip. in fluxu alvi, mensium, in herpetibus & sim, Fructus im∣maturi exiccant & astringunt, praesertim sylvestres. Olivae conditae excitant appetitum, movent alvum, humentem ventriculum exiccant & confortant. Condiuntur a. an∣tequam plané maturuerint. 2. Oleum quod exprimitur ex olivis maturis calfacit & humectat moderaté (N. vetus calidius est recenti) emollit digerit, vulnerararium est, alvum laxat (cum cerevisia calida assumptum ℥i) ariditatem pectoris cor∣rigit, tormina ventris mitigat, meatus urinarios laxat, erosos abstergit & consolidat. Extrinsecùs creberrimi usûs est in clystersbus, tumoribus calidis, &c. Cum aqua tepida assumptum movet vomitum. 3. Oleo quidem non Apes tantùm sed & omnia inse∣cta exanimantur Plin. lib. 11. cap. 19. quod Cl. Vir M. Malpighius in Bombyce aliísque experiendo verum in∣venit. Ratio est, quia oleum meatus Spiritûs, seu poros quibus aer attrahitur & redditur obstruit, ob cujus de∣fectum animalculum illicò moritur. Nec enim minimis hisce insectis respiratio minùs necessaria est ad vitam quàm majoribus & perfectioribus animalibus: saltem sine aeris beneficio diu movere & vivere non possunt. 4. Oleum picem è pannis extrahit, quod aqua non facit. Vulgatum est, (inquit Sennertus) ut siquis ma∣num pice inquinet, eam aquâ non mundet sed oleo ali∣quo aut pinguedine, quae picem liquefacíat. Hypomn. 1. cap. 5. 5. Scribit F. Licetus, se vidisse Rechi in horto patrui sui stipitem oleae sativae aridum ferè ac levem, per de∣cennium & ultra à trunco separatum, neque posthac un∣quam terrae implantatum, ad alterius ligni fulcrum in terram demissum, & ligno cui fulcimentum praestabat clavis ferreis affixum, pullulâsse, germinâsséque eodem anno, plures olivarum novellas foliis & fructibus onustas, atque in posterum etiam per plures annos protulisse, Sen∣nert. Hypomn. 5. cap. 7. Unde abundè confirmatur il∣lud Poetae, Truditur è sicco radix oleagina ligno. 6. In Hispania oleas admotis scalis manu legunt, & non decutiunt ut in Gallia Narbonensi; ne sc. sequentis anni spem decussis germinibus praeripiant. Vehemen∣ter enim laborant percussae & detrimentum capiunt. Clus.
7. Olivae qúamvis per maturitatem nigrae sunt, sapore quoque acri, amaro & nescio quid nauseosi admixtum habente; oleum tamen quod indè exprimitur ferè pel∣lucidum est, nonnihil flavicans, sapore dulci & grato, unde patet saporem hunc & odorem parti aqueae seu amurcae inhaerere. Laudatissimum autem apud nos ha∣betur oleum, quod coloris omnis & saporis maximè ex∣pers est. Oleander flore rubro Park. Nerium sive Oleander Ger. Nerium sive Rhododendron J. B. Nerion floribus ru∣bescentibus C. B. In Sicilia ad aquarum rivulos in ascensu montis Aetnae. Onobrychis spicata flore purpureo Park. C. B. flo. purpu∣reo Ger. quibusdam, flore purpureo J. B. In loco quo∣dam glareoso non longè à Vienna Austriae. Onobrychis vulgris minor Park. fructu echinato minor C. B. Ad radices Vesuvii montis & in insula saepiùs me∣morata ad Prom. Pachynum. Flos hujus purpureus est & minor quám vulgaris; fructus a. echinatus major. Onobrychis arvensis C. B. v. Speculum Veneris. Onobrychis semine clypeato aspero v. Hedysarum cly∣peatum. Opuntia marina Park. Scutellaria sive Opuntia marina J. B. Lichen marinus rotundifolius Ger. Fucus folio rotundo C. B. Sertolara Imper. In maris litora rejectam collegimus ad Punto Cerciolo, non longè à Castello Pu∣zallu in Sicilia. † Orchis galeâ & alis ferè cinereis J. B. Cynosorchis la∣tifolia hiante cucullo minor C. B. Cynosorchis altera Dod. de floribus, ubi bona ejus habetur descriptio. Cy∣nosorchis major altera Ger. latifolia minor Park. Circa Genevam ad agrorum margines. Aprili & Maio mensi∣bus floret. Hanc non ità pridem in Anglia sponte natam observavimus. V. Cat. Ang. Orchis anthropophora flore fusco. In marginibus agro∣rum quorundam propè ripas Rhodani non longè à Ge∣neva. Orchis macrophyllos Columnae Park. Orchis sive Testi∣culus maximo flore J. B. Orchis montana Italica flore ferrugineo, linguâ oblongâ C. B. Per totam fere Italiam ad mare inferum, vidimus enim Massae, Liburni, Nea∣poli in pascuis siccioribus. Orchis magna, latis foliis, galeâ suscâ vel nigricante J. B. Ad latera montis Salevae propè Genevam. Thyrsus flo∣rum speciosus est. Orchis strateumatica minor Ger. J. B. Cynosorchis mili∣taris
minor C. B. Park. In pascuis ad latera montis Salevae. Orchis rotunda Dalechampii J. B. Cynosorchis capitulo globoso Park. Cyn. milit. IX, sive globoso flore C. B. In summitatibus Jurae montis. Orchis palmata minor odoratissima purpurea sive nigra J. B. palmata XXI, sive Alpina angustifolia nigro flore C. B. palmat. augustifolia minor odoratissima Park. In herbidis jugis & pascuis montium Jurae & Salevae co∣piosé. Orchis foetida III, sive odore hirci minor C. B. Tragorchis foemina Ger. minor & verior Park. Tragorchis minor flore fuliginoso J. B. In pascuis quibusdam non longe à Geneva. Oreoselinum v. Apium montanum nigrum. † Ornithogalum luteum C. B. Dod. luteum, sive Caepe agraria Ger. Bulbus sylvestris Fuchsii flore luteo, sive Ornitho∣galum luteum J. B. In agro Pedemontano ad sepes & in∣ter segetes. Invenimus etiam in Helvetia. Ornithogalum spicatum Ger. spic. flore albo Monspessu∣lanum J. B. majus spicatum flo. albo C. B. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum, atque etiam Monspelii inter se∣getes. Ornithogalum vulgare Ger. vulgare & verius, majus & minus J. B. umbellatum medium angustifolium C. B. In Lombardia, Pedemontio, & agro Lucensi inter se∣getes. Ornithogalum spicatum flore virente v. Asphodelus. Ornithopodio similis hirsuta Scorpioides C. B. Scorpioi∣des leguminosa J. B. Dod. Ger. Park. Circa Messanam Siciliae & Neapolin ltaliae frequens. Orobanche ramosa Ger. Park. C. B. minor purpureis flo∣ribus, sive ramosa J. B. In arvis demessa segete primò circa Ratisponam in Germania observavimus, posteà etiam in Italia & Gallia Narbonensi. Orobus receptus herbariorum Lob. Ger. vulgaris herbario∣rum Park. siliquis articulatis, semine majore C. B. Oro∣bus sive rvum multis J. B. In agris circa Monspelium & Genevam. Orobus sylvaticus purpureus vernus C. B. Pannonicus 1 Clus. sylvaticus purpureus major Park. sylvat. vernus Ger. emac. Galega nemorensis verna J. B. In dumetis à la Bastie, & alibi circa Genevam, inque Germaniae & Helvetiae sylvis srequens. Orobus sylvaticus Viciae foliis C. B. Pannonicus 2 Clus. A∣stragaloides Ger. Astrag. herbariorum Park. Astragalus
major Fuchsio J. B. Abundat in colle La Bastie, ad ripas Rhodani & in montis Salevae sylvosis prope Genevam: in Germania quo{que} non admodum rarus est. Oryza Lob. Ger. Park. J. B. Italica C. B. IN Itsae palu∣stribus Ferrariam inter & Bononiam satam vidimus. N. In cibis admodum est familiaris, gratissimi sapo∣ris; multùm nutrit & semen auget: vùm obstruentis naturae est & alvum lenter adstringit Proinde datur in cibis utiliter dysentericis, coeliacis & diarrhoeâ affe∣ctis: Oryzâ nunc dierum vescitur ( Americanos exci∣pias) humani generis pars maxima, Turcae, Persae, Iudi, Africani, Sinenses, &c. Oxalis maxima sylvatica J. B. Acetosa montana maxima C. B. Acetosa max. Germanica Park. In monte Thuiri prope Genevam. Oxyacantha Theophrasti Ger. v. Pyracantha. Oxys lutea Ger. J. B. lutea corniculata repens Lob. luteo flore Park. Trifolium acerosum II, sive corniculatum C. B. In Italia & Sicilia, umbrosis praesertim, ubique ferè obvium. Oxycedrus v. Cedrus Lycia retusa J. B. Juniperus. P PAliurus Lod. Dod. Ger. Paliurus sive Rhamnus 3 Dio∣scoridis Park. Rhamnus sive Paliurus folio Juju∣bino J. B. Rhamnus folio subrotundo, fructu com∣presso C. B. In sepibus circa Veronam, Bergamum, Romam & alibi in Italia, necnon circa Monspelium. Palma sive Manus marina J. B. Urtica marina X, sive Ma∣nus marina C. B. Habuimus ex sinu Adriatico, & mari infero circa Romam. Palma humilis v. Chamaerrhiphes. Palma Christi v. Ricinus. Panax Herculeum majus Ger. pastinacae folio, an Syria∣cum Theophrasti C. B. Heracleum alterum sive peregri∣num Dodonaei Park. Sphondylio, vel potiùs Pastinacae Germanicae affinis, Panax, vel Pseudo-costus flore luteo J. B. In Sicilia non longè à castello Puzallu. N. Ex hujus vulnerato circa radicem caule succus aestivis mensibus manat aestate fervida, etiam in Belgio. Dod. In Opopanacis grumis reperta semina in Belgio sata hanc plantam produxere. C. Hoffman.
Pancratium Lob. marinum Ger. Monspessulanum, multis Scylla alba parva J. B. Narcissus maritimus C. B. In arenoso maris litore prope Neapolin copiosé. Post sol∣stitium aestivum floret. Panicum sylvestre v. Gramen paniceum. Paronychia sive Alsinefolia incana J. B. Anthyllis imariti∣ma incana Park. marit. Alsinefolia C. B. marina incana Alsinefolia Ger. In vineis circa Messanam & Monspe∣lium. Passerina Lobelii J. B. P. Linariae folio Lobelii Ger. Li∣thospermum Linariae folio Monspeliense Park. IX, sive Linariae folio Monspeliacum C. B. Circa Monspelium. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum proceriorem observa∣vimus. Passerina Tragi J. B Pas. altera Ger. Lithospermum Li∣nariae folio C. B. Lithospermum Germanicum, Passerina Tragi Park. In arvis demessa segeta circa Basileam, Genevam, Monspelium, &c. Pastinaca marina Lob. v. Ctithmum. Pedicularis Alpina lutea. Yellow mountain Louse-wort, Rattle or Cocks-comb. In altissimis montibus maximum Carthusianorum coenobium cingentibus. Peganium Narbonensium Lob. v. Ruta sylvestris minima. Pontaphyllum sive potius Heptaphyllum argenteum flore muscoso J. B. Alchimilla Alpina quinquefolia C. B. mi∣nor quinquefolia Park. In monte Jura & in Alpibus Sabaudici, copiosé. De hac planta v. J. B. Pentaphyllum v. Quinquefolium. Peplus minor J. B. In agris prope Ladum Monspelia cum amnem non longe à Castelneuf. Perfoliatum angustifolium montanum Col. Perfoliata minor angustifolia, Bupleuri folio C. B. Perf. angustif. Alpina minor Park. Auriculae Leporis affinis, Odontitis lutea Valerandi ac Dalechampii J. B. In agris quibusdam Si∣ciliae sterilioribus prope Punto Cerciolo, non procul Pu∣zallu vico. Perfoliata minor foliis gramineis J. B. P. Alpina gramineo folio, sive Bupleuron angustifolium Alpinum C. B. An Perfoliata Alpina angustifolia minima C B.? In summis montibus max. Carthusianorum coenobio vicinis. Icon Ponae, quam proponit Parkinsonus sub titulo Bupleuri angustifolii Alpini; Gerardus sub tit. Sedi petraei Bu∣pleuri folio, huic nostrae plantae non bene convenit. Periclymenum perfoliatum Ger. J. B. C. B. perfoliatum ca∣lidarum regionum Lob. perfoliatum sive Italicum Park. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi.
Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro J. B. Park. rectum Ger∣manicum Ger. Chamaecerasus dumetorum fructu gemino rubro C. B. In Germania, ad sepes & in dumetis vulga∣tissimum. Periclymenum rectum fructu nigro Park. rect. ructu ge∣mino nigro J. B. Chamaecerasus Alpina fructu nigro gemino C. B. In sylvis juxta Sacellum Brunonis, à la grand Chartruse. Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro Ger. fructu rubro sin∣gulari majore Park. sed perperàm, nam semper geminum habet. Chamaecerasus Alpina fructu rubro gemino, du∣obus punctis notato C. B. Chamaecerasus Gesneri, seu Chamaepericlymenum quoddam Alpinum J. B. In monte Saleve copiosé. Petasites albus anguloso folio J. B. minor C. B. Park. In declivibus montium quos transivimus eundo à Gavia ad Genuam. Peucedanum majus Ger. majus Italicum Lob. J. B. C. B. Park. In lingula illa Portum Messanensem à Freto Si∣culo dirimente. Phalangium pulchrius non ramosum J. B. An Phalangium flore Lilii ejusdem? Phalangium I, sive magno flore, & fortè etiam II, sive parvo flore non ramosum C. B. Pha∣langium non ramosum Ger. In monte Sabaudiae Genevae vicino, Saleve dicto. Phalangium parvo flore ramosius J. B. III, sive parvo flore ramosum C. B. ramosum Ger. Park. Circa France∣furtum, Basileam, Genevam, &c. in collibus, pascuis montosis & ericetis. Phalangium Cretae Salonensis Lob. Ger. Asphodelus VII, sive foliis fistulosis C. B. minor foliis fistulosis J. B. In campis lapideis seu Salonensi Creta vulgò The Craux, in∣ter Arelaten urbem & oppidum Salonam copiosissimé. Phalaris semine nigro Park. major semine nigro J. B. C. B. Circa Messanam in Sicilia; Baias & Neapolin in Italia; & Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi. Ab hac non dif∣ferre suspicor Gramen phalaroides majus sive Italicum C B. Grana hujus minora sunt quàm Phalaridis vulgaris. garis. Phillyrea serrata 2 Clusii Ger. & Phillyrea latisolia spi∣nosa C. B. seu 1 Clusii. Phillyrea folio Alaterni, & Phil∣lyrea folio Ilicis J. B. Phillyrea latifolia aculeata, & Ph. folio lato serrato Park. Existimo enim has duas non differre specie. In Etruria copiosissime. itém{que} circa Monspelium in praeruptis clivis non longè á specu Fron∣tignana; ad montem Lupi & alibi.
Phillyrea angustifolia J. B. Ger. Lob. angustifolia prima C. B. angustifolia secunda Park. In Etruria abundè, necnon circa Monspelium. Phillyrea latiusclo folio J. B. latiore folio Ger. angusti∣solia prima Park. Phil. 4, sive folio Ligustri C. B. In Etruria inter Massam & Lucam; item in Provincia Gal∣lica. Haec fortè non differt specie á priore, nam in hujus plantae, ut & Alaterni, foliorum figurâ, magnitudine, colore, incisuris mirè ludit natura. Phthora v. Thora. Phyllon marificum & foeminificum Park. arrhenogonon & thelygonon folio incano Monspessulanum J. B. Phyllon testiculatum, & Phyllon spicatum C. B. Phyl. arrheno∣gonon sive marificum, & Phyl. thelygonon sive foemini∣ficum Ger. In aggeribus fossarum & viis publicis Mon∣spelii, praesertim prope aquas. Phyteuma Monspeliensium Lob. J. B. Resedae affinis Phy∣teuma C. B. Res. aff. Phyteuma Monspeliensium dicta Park. Circa Monspelium passim; in Italia quo{que} circa Romam & alibi. Haec planta omnino Resedis annume∣randa est. Picea Latinorum v. Abies mas Theophrasti. Pilosella minor folio angustipre minùs piloso repens J. B. major repens minùs hirsuta C. B. In pascuis & collibus circa Genevam. Pilosella minore flore hirsutior & elatior non repens J. B. Pil. major erecta C. B. major Ger. altera erecta Park. Et hanc circa Genevam inveni. Pilosella sive Pulmonaria lutea angustiori folio, valdè pi∣losa altera J. B. In monte Saleva Genevae propinquo. Pilosellae majoris seu Pulmonariae luteae laciniatae species minor J. B. In praedicto monte Saleva, in rupium fis∣suris. Pinaster, sive Pinus sylvestris Hispanicus major Clus J. B. Pinus VI, sive maritima altera C. B. Ab hoc non dif∣fert specie, ipso Clusio monente, Pinaster Austriacus major albus Clus. J. B. Pinus II, sive sylvest. C. B. Par∣kinsonus & Gerardus in hac arbore mihi non satisfaciunt. Habet a. folia longa, in viriditate nigricantia; conos oblongos, turbinatos, ramorum alas spectantes & re∣flexos, nucleis parvis, nec mali vulgaris nucleis multò majoribus, quibus & figurâ suâ accedunt. Habetur in viridariis nostris in Anglia frequens; nonnullis The mountain Pine dicta: ubi (ut recté Ciusius) in Pini sat. altitudinem excrescit. Provenit, autore Clusio, in A∣quitania & Pyrenaeis frequentissimè; quod & D. Willughby
nobis confirmavit; & plurimam Resinam fundit; est etiam in Suevia, Bavaria, Austria, &c. passim obvia. Suspi∣catur J. Bauhinus non differre hanc à Pinu sua sylvestri & Taeda. Pinaster alter Hispanicus vel minor Hispanicus Clus. Pinus V, sive maritima major C. B. sylvestris sterilis elatior Park. sylv. maritima conis firmiter ramis adhaerentibus J. B. In Alpibus Stiriacis. Hujus folia breviora sunt & magis glauca quám praecedentis, coni minores. Hor∣tulanis nostris perperam the Scotch-Firre, i. e. Abies Sco∣tica dicitur. Pinus sativa C. B. sativa siva domestica Ger. urbana sive domestica Park. assiculis duris, foliis longis J. B. In Gallia Narbonensi & Italia: copiosissimè autem propè Ravennam. N. 1. Haec arbor vulnerata Resinam fundit liquidam, quae postea coquendo fit arida. 2. Pix liquida seu navalis è Pinu vi ignis excoquitur hoc modo. Pinuum vetustarum stipites pingues & Resinâ adeò praegnantes ut accensi instar facis ardeant, (hujus∣modi arbores Antiqui taedas appellant) assulatim caesos super area seu pavimento è luto usto aut lapidibus anteà praeparato, & à centro undique ad circumferentiam pau∣latim declivi, in strues aut acervos componunt, iis simi∣les quos extruunt qui carbones faciunt. Strues hasce ra∣mulis faginis pinessve circumcirca contegunt, & deinde pulvere aut luto superimposito curiosè loricant, ne quà fumus aut flamma exire possit. Ignem postea desuper ac∣cendunt, quemadmodum carbonarii solent, qui liquorem ligni oleosum inferiùs subsidere ad ima compellit. Is autem ob pavimenti declivitatem, in canalem, (qui acervum undique coronae instar cingit) prompte delabi∣tur, indéque per alios ductus in foveas aut vasa ei recipi∣endo destinata, derivatur. Ex hoc in cortinas injecto, & tandiu decocto donec humor omnis absumatur, sit Pix arida & rasilis, Graecis  dicta. Nostrates Pi∣cem liquidam Tarre vocant; siccam verò seu aridam Pitch. 3. Pini cujuscunque cortices & folia refrigerant & astringunt, undè in dysenteria & fluore mensium pro∣sunt. Nuces pineae caliditate temperatae sunt & humi∣dae, maturant, leniunt, impinguant. Nuclei saporis sunt delicatissimi, & in Italia mensis secundis adjiciuntur. Usus praecip. in phthisi (quia nutriunt bene) tussi, stranguria ac acrimonia urinae, quam mitigant: Seg∣nem excitant Venerem, ulcera renum mundificant, &c.
4. Decoctum aut infusum summitatum Pinûs in cere∣visia alióve idoneo liquore ad calculum renum & vesicae plurimùm valere creditur, necnon ad scorbutum aliósque thoracis affectus. N. Resina omnis confert praecipuè tussi aliísque pul∣monum affectibus (cum melle) urinae ac alvo ciendae; calculum pellit, arthriticos affectus juvat, gonorrhoeam sistit. Extrinsecûs Chirurgis usitatissima est in empla∣stris; movet enim pus, maturat, & scabiei medetur. Sunt qui Terebenthinam vulgarem (est autem ea laricis resina) in cerevisia infundunt, atque simul defervere si∣nunt, pro potu ordinario in praeservatione calculi visce∣rúmque obstructionibus. Plantago quinquenervia cum globulis albis pilosis J. B. angustifolia VIII, sive paniculis Lagopi C. B. angustr∣folia paniculis Lagopi Park. Circa Messanam. Habetur quoque Monspelii & Nemausi. Plantago angustifolia Alpina J. B. Holosteum III, sive hirsutum nigrans C. B. In summis jugis montis Jurae. Plumbago Plinii Ger. Dentilaria Rondelerii J. B. Lepidium Dentellaria dictum C. B. Lep. Monspeliacum, Dentel∣laria dictum Park. Circa Syracusas in Sicilia, Romam & alibi in Italia, Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi. Polemonium sive Trifolium fruticans Ger. Polem. sive Trif. frut. vel Jasminum luteum vulgare Park. Trifoli∣um fruticans, quibuldam Polemonium, slore luteo J. B. Jasminum V, sive luteum vulgò dictum, bacciferum C. B. In sepibus circa Monspelium; vidimus etiam in Regno Neapolitano propè Scaleam. Polium montanum album C. B. Ger. Monspessulanum J. B. P. Mont. Monspeliacum Park. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi. C. Bauhinus male, meo quidem judicio, distinguit inter Polium montanum album & P. maritinum erectum Monspelia cum, cùm una & eadem planta sint. Polium montanum Lavendulae folio Park. montanum I, seu Lavendulae folio C. B. Pol. Lavandulae folio, flore albo Ger. In montosis circa Basileam, Genevam & alibi. N. Polium cùm acre sit & amarum, urinam & menses ciet, venenatis morsibus auxiliatur, Hydropicos & icte∣ricos juvat, secundùm veteres. Theriacam & Mithrida∣tium ingreditur. † Polygonatum Lob. Ger. latifolium vulgare C. B. Polyg. vulgo Sigillum Solomonis J. B. In Belgio, Germania, Gallia & Italia, in saxosis & ad sepes ubique. Haec planta in Angliae Australibus sponte provenit, v. Cat. Ang. † Polygonarum floribus ex singularibus pediculis J. B. lati∣folium
2 Clus. latifolium IV, flore majore odoro C. B. ma∣jus flore majore Park. latifolium 2 Clusii Ger. In rupibus montis Saleve. Et haec Angliae indigena est. V. Cat. Ang. Polygonatum minus Lob. Ger. angustifolium Park. J. B. angustifolium non ramosum C. B. In sylvis circa Spadam oppidulum acidulis celebre copiosissimé. Vidimus & in sylvosis montis Salevae. Polygonum montanum niveum Park. montanum Ger. minus candicans C. B. Paronychia Hispanica Clusii sive An∣thyllis nivea J. B. White Mountain Knotgrass. Circa Mes∣sanam copiosé. Polygonum vel Linifolia per terram sparsa, flore Scorpioi∣dis J. B. In Etruria nun longè à Viterbo, cùm Romam contenderemus, copiosam observavimus, J. Bauhinus extra scopum jaculatur, cùm hanc refert ad Millegranam minimam Lobelii, à qua longè differt. Polygonum bacciferum maritinum v. Tragos. Portulaca sylvestris Lob. Ger. Park. sylv. minor sive spon∣tanea J. B. angustifolia, sive sylvestris C. B. In Italia, Sicilia, Gallia Narbonensi & Germania, in vervactis & ad vias, Sativam ab hac culturae tantùm ratione differre existimo, quam vis in magnitudine omnium partium in∣signis sit differentia. N. 1. In acetariis frequens usus est Portulacae, stoma∣chi ardorem lenit & bilis fervorem, & hinc in febribus putridis ac malignis, ardore urinae, & Scorbuto prodest; venerem inhibet, venerisque insomnia. Dentium stupo∣rem commanducata tollit, & mobiles dentes stabilit. Verminantibus pueris cum successu exhibetur. Verum esus ejus nimius cavendus est quoniam ob frigiditatem suam & humiditatem in ventriculo putrescere apta est, ejúsque & viscerum reliquorum tonum dissolvere. 2. Solet apud nos condiri ad intinctus eodem modo quo Cappares, Genistae flores, Lingua avis, &c. condiuntur. Portulaca marina, v. Halimus. Prunella angustifolia J. B. hyssopifolia C. B. Circa Mon∣spelium variis in locis. Prunella caeruleo magno flore C. B. magno flore purpureo Park. flore magno folio non laciniato J. B. Primò ob∣servavimus hanc Moguntiae, postea circa Genevam & alibi. Prunella laciniata flore magno purpureo J. B. Prunella Lobelii Ger. Pru. laciniato folio Park. Cum priore. Pseudo-asphodelus quibusdam J. B. Asphodelus Lancastriae verus Ger. emac. minimus Norvegicus luteus palustris Scoticus & Lancastriensis Lob. Pseudo-asphodelus minor
folio Iridis angustifoliae Park. Psuedo-asphodelus palustris Scoticus, & Pseudo-asphodelus Alpinus C. B. qui hos duos (ut ihi videtur) unalè separat. Ad radices mon∣tis Salevae in aquosis. Vidimus quoqu nonnusquam in Germania. Pseudo-molanthium glabrum. In Sicilia inter segetes pro∣pè castellum Puzallu, & in montibus Messanae imminun∣tibus. Simile est Pseudo-melanthio vulgari, diversum tamen, &, ut puto, nondum descriptum. Pseudo-stachys Alpina C. B. Park. In summis jugis montis Jurae. Psyllium majus supinum C. B. J. B. majus semper virens Park. semper virens Lobelii Ger. Plinianum forte, ra∣dice perenni, supinum Lob. Cirea Monspolium & in Ita∣lia frequens. Psyllium vulgare Park. maju erectum C. B. . B. Psyllium sive Pulicaris herba Ger. Cirea Monspelium in agris co∣piosè. Psyllium dicitur quia somina ejus pulicibus simi∣lia sunt. N. Evaeuat bilem flavam, muellaginéque sua acri∣moniam humorum obtundere aptum est. Hine conve∣nit maximopere in Dysenteria & corrosione intestino∣rum. Semen Psyllii hoc peculiare prae caeteris purgan∣ibue habet, quod qualitate refrigerandi sit praeditum. Verùm enimyèrò non tamen extra reprehensionem, po∣situm est, quam incurrt ratione virulentiae suae. Schrod. Nimio usu stomachum offendit, & animi deliquium in∣ducit. Pearmica Impernti, v. Xeranthemum. Paiegim angustifolium Ger. C. B. angustifolium sive cer∣vinum I. ob. Park. cervinum angustifolium J. B. Primò vidimus ad Rhodanum proximè pontem S. Spiritûs di∣ctum, deinde circa Monspelium in humidioribus. Pulmonoria maculosa Lob. Ger. maculata Park. Symphy∣tum maculosum, sive Pulmonaria latifolia C. B. Pulmo∣naria Italorum ad Buglossum accedens J. B. In sylvis propè Coloniam Agrippinam primò, posteà in omnibus ferè montosis dumetis juxta Rhenum & propè Geneyam in conspectum se nobis dedit. Pulmonaria Gallorum v. Pilosèlla. Pulsatilla alba J. B. Park. flore albo C. B. Ger. In sum∣mis Jurae montis jugis. Haec non floris colore tamùm, sed etiam totâ specie distincta est à vulgari Pulsatilla, quam mémini me alieubi vidisse flore albo Punica malus sylvestris C. B. Ger. Punica sylvestris major, sive Balaustium majus Park. Malus Puica J. B. The
Pomegranate-tree. In Gallia Narbonensi & Provincia passim. N. Poma in genere censentur boni succi, ventriculo convenientia sed pauci nutrimenti. Dulcia eorúmque syrupus a dhibentur in tussi chronicà & pleuritide: in febribus minùs commoda sunt, quia Ventriculo inflations causant. Acida frigida sunt & adstringentia, stomachica. Usus praecip. in febribus biliosis, in Gonorrhoea, pica gra∣vidarum compescenda, orisque putredine corrigenda & sim. Vinosa (acidò-dulcia, Granata muzae) mediae sunt nà∣turae intér dulcia & acida, cardiaca ac cephalica. Usus praecip. in syncope, vertigine, &c. Ex malis hisc ad usus supradictos succus exprimintur & fermentatus depu∣ratúsque vinum dicitur. Flores, tam Balaustia quàm Cytini, ejusdem sunt na∣turae, terrestris sc. validè adstringentis; unde creberri∣mus eorum usus esse solet in ómnis generis fluxionibus v. g. diarrhoea, dysenteria, fluxu uterino, &c. in san∣guine vulnerum cohibendo, gingivarum laxitate emen∣danda, in hernia curanda, &c. Haec omnia Schro∣derus. Cortex (malicorium, psidium) ejusdem naturae cum floribus est. Utilis etiam ad coria praeparanda, & ad atramentum vice gallarum. Addit Constantïnus, Mali∣corium vino decoctum ac potum omnes ventris tineas necare, maximè eas quas Ascaridas vocant. Nuclei refrigerant itidem, astringúntque, imprimis qui éx pomis acidis collecti. Scbrod. Breviter Flores, Cortex, nuclei, [adde & folia] ad ea conducunt qui∣buscunque adstrictione opus est. Ex malis Punicis contusis cum suis corticibus exprimi∣tur succus qui purgat bilem flavam, ut scribit Caesal∣pinus. Pyracantha Lob. Clus. Pyr. quibusdam J. B. Oxyacan∣tha Theophrasti Ger. Oxyacantha Dioscoridis, sive Spina acida Pyri folio C. B. Circa Florentiam & alibi in Etruria copiosé. Pyrola folio serrato J. B. folio mucronato serrato C. B. tenerior Park. 2 tenerior Clusii Ger. In montibus Ge∣nevae vicinis, inque sylvis montosis non longè à Con∣stantia versùs Scaphusiam. N. In store Pyrolae vulgaris insignem observavi varie∣tatem. In una enim planta inferior floris lacinia sive labellum magis propendet quàm in altera: Stylus etlam
in una magis depender & deorsum incurvatur quàm in altera. Fortè una infoecunda est, flores duntaxat pro∣serens, illa nimirum cujus labellum & stylus propendent, cùm & caulis exuccus & evanidus videatur, altexa foe∣cunda, cùm & caulis robustior sit & succulentior. Q QUinquesolium album majus caulescens C. B. verum descriptio non bene convenit huic nostrae planae: Meliùs respondet figura J. Bauhini sub titulo Pen∣taphylli recti. Vidimus Primo in Alpibus Carinthiacis, deinde in monte Salévae, tandem ad exteriorem portam max. Carthusianorum coenobii, ubi{que} è rupium fislúris exiens. Quinquefolium album majus alterum C. B. sylvaticum ma∣jus flore albo Ger. Pentaphyllon album J. B. majus al∣terum album Park. In Alpibus Stiriacis inter oppidu∣lum S. Michaelis & Knittlefield. Quinquefolium minus repens luteum C. B. An Quinque∣folium minus repens lanuginosum luteum ejusdem? Pen∣taphyllum incanum Ger. repens minus Park. Pentaphyl∣lon parvum hirsutum J. B. In Episcopatu Tridentino & Helvetia, itém{que} circa Genevam e plain palais. Mar∣tio & Aprili floret, undo à Schwenckfeldio rectè denomi∣natur, Quinquefolium vernum minus. Quinquefolium minus repens Alpinum aureum C. B. minus flore aureo Ger. emac. Alpinum splendens flore aureo J. B. Pentaphyllum incanum repens Alpinum Park. In mon∣tis Jurae summo vertice La Dole dicto. Quinquefolium rectum luteum minus. An Quinquefolium montanum erectum hirsutum luteum C. B.? Pentaphyllum montanum erectum Park.? In sylva Valena prope mon∣tem Lupi. Folia longis insident pediculis & circumćirca dentata sunt, denticulis majoribus, non admodum hir∣suta. Caules ex eadem radice plures exount, dodran∣tales, qui in summitatibus suis numerosos gestant flores. Quinquefolium Alpinum argenteum album. In altiss. montibus max. Carthusianorum coenobio proximis. Per∣simile est Trifolio Alpino argenteo Ponae. Quinquefolium fragiferum C. B. Pentaphyllum fragiferum Ger. Park. Pentaphylloides erectum J. B. In monte Sa∣levâ prope arcem antiquam jam fere collapsam.
Quinquefollo fragifero affinis C. B. Pentaphyllum supinum Potentillae facie Ger. Park. Pentaphylloides supinum J. B. In Germania prope Rhenum, infra Mogun∣tiam. R RAdix cava v. Fumaria bulbosa. Rapistrum monospermon J. B. C. B. Park. In Italia non longè à Liburno, circa Genevam etiam & Mon∣spelium. Rapunculus spicatus C. B. spicatus sive comosus albus & caeruleus J. B. spicatus alopecuroides Park. Rapuntium majus Ger. Primo eum observavimus circa Spadam Epi∣scopats is Leodiensis urbeculam acidulis celebrem, in montosis postea in collibus Genevae vicinis, ut La Bastie, &c. Rapunculi genus folio serrato rotundiore J. B. In monte Jura. Haec planta an ab aliis descripta sit nécne non∣dum comperimus. Ranunculus albus simplici flore J. B. Alpinus albus Ger. montanus albus minor simplex Park. mont. Aconiti fo∣, flore albo minore C. B. In Jura & Saleva monti∣us copiosè. Maio floret. Ranunculus montanus albus hirsutus J. B. montanus Pen∣naei Park. mont. hirsutus purpureus Ger. emac. montanus VI, sive montanus hirsutus purpurascente flore C. B. In sylvosis Jurae montis prope verticem Thuiri. Ranunculus tenuifolius montanus luteus J. B. In montis Jurae praealta parte Thuiri J. Bauhino & nobis etiam in∣ventus. Ranunculus montanus lanuginosus foliis Ranunculi pratensis repentis C. B. Park. Ran. màgnus valde hirsutus, flore luteo J. B. cujus descriptio quae desumpta est è Phyto∣pinace C. B. nostro Ranunculo (quem in Saleva copio∣sum invenimus) adamusim respondet. Ranunculus v. Aconitum. Reseda alba J. B. maxima Ger. C. Bauhini (quem sequi∣tur Parkinsonus) mentem non capio; nam Resedam suam majorem cum floribus luteis describit. In Italia satis frequens. Resedae affinis v. Phyteuma.
Rhamnus▪ Clusii flore albo Ger. secundus Monspeliensium sive primus Clusii Park. cujus figura plantae huic non re∣spondet. Rham. spinis oblongis, flore caudicante C. B. Rh. cortice albo Monspeliensis J. B. Circa Florentiam & Monspelium. Rhamnus folio subrotundo v. Paliurus. Rhododendron v. Oleander. Rhus folio Ulmi C. B. coriaria Dod. Ger. obsoniorum Lob. Clus. Sumach, sive Rhus obsoniorum & coriariorum Park. Rhus sive Sumach J. B. In collibus circa Monspelium prope Castelneuf, aux Garigues, &c. N. 1. In agro Salmanticensi (referente Clusio) quae∣stûs gratiâ diligenter colitur. Caeduntur singulis annis enati surculi cubitales ad radicem us{que} deinde desiccan∣tur, in pollinem rediguntur, & ad coria densanda adhi∣bentur. 2. Semen & folia refrigerant & astringunt, unde flu∣xum quemern{que} alvi, uteri, mensiûmve, haemorrhoi∣dum compescunt, vomitum sistunt, bilem obtundunt, seu intus in jusculis & sorbitionibus sumpta, sive extus adhibita. Dentes denigrant; putredini & Gangraenae resistunt. Gummi dentibus inditum odontalgiam sedat. Schrod. Rhus myrtisolia Monspeliaca C. B. myrtifolia Ger. Plinii putata J. B. Plinii myrtifolia Park. Circa Monspelium copiose, praecipuè ad ripas Ladi amnis. Ad coria ir∣manda cunctae Narbonae notissimam & usitatissimam i∣cit Lobelius. Ricinus major vulgaris J. B C. B. Ricinus sive Palma Chri∣sti Ger. Ricinus sive Cataputia major vulgatior Park. Circa Messanam Siciliae & Rhegium Calabriae in sepibus frequens, ubi in fruticem satis grandem, Sambuci aemu∣lum adolescit, & multos annos durat. Semen Ricino insecto simile, unde plantae nomen. N. Semen seu nuclei potenter bilem & pituitam pellunt, verùm ob vehementiam rarissimi usûs sunt. Ex semine oleum exprimitur ad multa utile, v g. tumoes & flatus praesertim ventris, coli & ilci dolores, artus contractos, duritiem alvi & ventris tincas in pueris, tumores & duritias mammarum, si partes eo illinantur, & duae aut tres guttulae in lacte aut pingui aliquo jure su∣mantur. Oleum hoc ficûs infernalis oleum vocant. Haec ferè Monardes & Clusius. Rosa rubella flore parvo, simplici non spinosa J. B. sylv. minor rubello flore C. B. In montibus circa Gene∣vam.
Rosa sylvestris rubella parvo frutice J. B. In collibus pro∣pè Genevam, v. g. ld Bastie, Champe, &c. Rosmarinus coronarius fruticosus J. B. spontaneus latiore folio C. B. Rosmarinus coronaries Ger. Libanotis coro∣naria, sive Rosmarinum vulgare Park. In Italia & Gal∣lia Narbonensi in collibus saxosis propè mare affatim. N. In usu sunt solia, flores (Anthos officinis dicti) semen. Cephalica sunt è praecipuis ut & uterina. Usus praecip in affectibus capitis ac nervorum, Apoplexia, Hpilepsia, Paralysi, Vertigine, Caro, &c. visum acuunt, foetorem halitûs emendant; Epatis, Lienis ac Uteri ob∣structiones resolvunt, ictero ac fluori albo mulierum me∣denture, córque confortant. Herba ipsa sussitu & va∣pore suo pestis tempore aerem emendat & salubrem reddit. Rubia angustisolia spicata Park. C. B. Circa Monspelium plurimis in locis, v. g. collibus juxta Castelneuf: Agris Gramontiae sylvae vicinis, &c. Rubia marina Ger. Park. marina Narbonensium J. B. ma∣ritima C. B. Ad Mare Mediterraneums, in litoribus are∣nosis prope Syracusas; Cataniam, Terracinam, Mon∣spelium collegimus. † Rubia erecta quadrifolia J. B. In pascuis quibusdam propè Genevam trans Rhodanum fluvium. Hanc non ità pridem in Westmorlandia Angliae Provincia in∣veni. Rubia laevis Taurinensium Park. Rubia cruciata laevis Ger. quadrifolia, vel latifolia laevis C. B. quadrifolia Italica hirsuta J. B. In Italia à D. F. Willughby in∣venta. Rubia echinata Saxatilis v. Cruciata minima. Rubia sylvatica laevis v. Mollugo. Ruta capraria v. Galega. Ruta canina v. Scrophularia. Ruta pratensis v. Thalictrum. Ruta sylvestris Lob. sylv. major C. B. J. B. Park. sylv. montana Ger. In collibus petrosis circa Monspelium & Nemausnm. In Etruria non longè ab oppido Massa eam vidimus sponte natam. Ruta sylvestris minor C. B. J. B. Park. sylv. minima Ger. Peganiu Narbonensium Lob. In agris sterilioribus non circa Monspelium tantùm sed per totam Narbonensem Galliam. N. Ruta Alexipharmaca est, cephalica ac nerviná. Usus praecip. in peste allisque affectibus malignis praeser∣vandis ac curandis (unde & Theriaca pauperum nonnullis
dicitur) visu acuendo, lascivia reprimenda (Ruta facit castum Schol. Salern.) pleuritide curanda, imbecilli∣tate ventricull corrigenda, colicâ discutlendâ, morfu canis rabidi debellando, Schrod. qui plura habet de usu ejus extrinseco; quem adi ut & Parkinsonum. Summa∣tim Interne sumpta ad tria praecipuê celebratur, viz. 1. pestem praeservandam aut arcendam; 2. oculorum caliginem discutlendam, &acuendum visum, 3. appe∣titus venereos cohibendos. S SAbina baccifera v. Cedrus Lycia. Salix Alpina latifolia pumila glabra, An Salix pu∣mila latifolia prior Clus.? An Salix pumila folio utrinque glabro J. B.? In supremis jugis montis Jurae propè Genevam. Salvia fruticosa lutea v. Verbascum IV Matth. Sambucus racemosa rubra C. B. Park. racemosa acinis ru∣bris J. B. racemosa vel cervina Ger. In Alpibus Carin∣thiacis, & in sylviss propè max. Carthusianorum coeno∣bium. N. Cervum Sambucum racemosam sicut & Solanum lethale magno desiderio inquirere didici. Ubi namque locorum eas stirpes provenire intellexit eò se confert. Quódque mirari subit, solent binae hae stirpes plerunque eodem situs occupare, Hisce cervus unicè delectatur, folia utriusque non baccas decerpens, &c. Praeterea (quod non minùs admiratione dignum est) observayi cervum solum follis harum plantarum vesci, non autem cervam, nisi ea praegnans fuerit & cervum in utero gesta∣verit, tum enim, &c. Trag. lib. 3. cap. 24. Sanè vix fi∣dem apud me obtinent quae hoc in logo Tragus scripsit, quamvis se experientiâ doctum affirmet. Sanamunda prima Clusii v. Tarton-raire. Sanamunda tertia Clusii Ger. Park. Sesamoides parvum Dalechampii, Sanamunda 3 Clusii J. B. Thy melaea to∣mentosa foliis Sedi minoris C. B. In insla ad Promont. Pachynum. Sanicula guttata Ger. Park. Alpina guttata J. B. mon∣tana rotundifolia major C. B. In Alpibus Helveticis; item in montibus Jurâ & Salevâ. Sanicula foemina Matth. v. Astrantia nigra.
Saponaria minor quibusdam J. B. Ocymoides repens Park. repens montnum C. B. Lychnis montana repens Ger. In colle la Bastie propè Genevam, inque Etruria non pro∣cul à Massa, viâ quà indè Lucam itur. Satureia hortensis Ger. vulgaris Park. durior J. B. mon∣tana C. B. In Gallia Narbonensi circa Monspelium, Nemausum, &c. in collibus. Invenimus etiam in He∣truria in alveo cujusdam torrentis propè Radico∣fanum. Satureia aestiva hortensis Ger. hortensis Park. sativa J, B. hortensis, sive Cunila sativa Plinii C. B. In agris circa Castelneuf, non longè à Monspelio copiosé. Satureia S. Juliani Ger. spicata C. B. spicata S. Juliani Park. foliis tenuibus, sive tohuifolia, S. Juliani quoru∣dam J. B. In collibus Messanensis agri, non minùs fre∣quens quàm in ipso monte S. Juliani. Vidimus & in ipsis urbis Florentiae muris. N. 1. Saporis & odoris est acris & calidi. Usus in affectibus ventricli, cruditate, anorexia, &c. pectoris, asthmate; uteri, mensibus obstructis; visum acuit. Ex∣trinsecùs discutit tumores, dolorem ischiadicum lenit▪ ejúsque succus cum tantillo olei ros. auribus instillatus tinnitum & surditatem aufert. 2. Germanis in usu est ad Brassicas capitatas condien∣das, qui fit, ut illae jucundissimum odorem & saporem gratissimum acquirant; quin & fabis, aliísque legumini∣bus incoqui solet, ad eorum flatuositatem corrigendam. J. B. Schrod. Saxifragia Venetorum Ad. Daucus selinoides major Park. montanus Apii folio major C. B. Libantis altera quo∣rundam, aliis dicta Cervaria nigra J. B. Lib. Theo∣phrasti nigra Ger. In pascuis montosis & vineis juxta Rhenum in Germania, & in collibus Genevae vicinis co∣piosé. Scabiosa montana max. Park. Ger. Alpina foliis Centau∣rii majoris C. B. Alpina maxima Ad. In ascensu montis Jurae non longè ab altissimo vertice Thuiri. Scabiosa argentea angustifolia Park. G. B. graminea argen∣tea J. B. In planis Fori Julii depressis, quae aquae ox Alpibus ubertim delabentes hyberno tempore aliquoties late inundant; alyeos torrentum dicere posses nisi lati∣tudo obstaret. Scabiosa latifolia rubro flore J. B. montana V, sive lati∣folia rubra non laciniata secunda C. B. rubra Austriaca Ger. emac. In montibus Genevae proximis, inque Ger∣manicis montosis sylvis passim luxuriat.
Scabiosa Pannonica flore albo Park. montana calidarum regionum major Lobelio J. B. montana alba Ger. pra∣tensis & arvensis V, sivo fruticans angustifolia lba C. B. In collibus saxosis agti Narbonensis petquaàm fa∣miliaris. Ab hac non mltùm diffort Soabosa gla∣bra foliis rigidis uiridibus, ut ipsemet Lobelius fatotur. Scabiosa multifido folio, flore albo vel potiùs J. B. multifido folio, flore flavescente . B. Ho pallido Ger. emac. Pannonica flore albo quoad figuram Park. Circa Viennam Austriae ud sopes & in pascuis. Simillima est superiori, ideoque non immeritò ejus icone pro priote usus est Parkinsonus. Scabiosa 10, sive repens Clusii J. B. minima Bellidis folio Ger. Scab. Globulariae Bellidis foliis Park. Belli oaeru∣lea IV, sive montana frutescens G. B. quem justè repre∣hendit Parkinsonus, quòd eam frutascere dicat. Ad ra∣dices montis Salevae copiosé. Scammonea Monspeliaca dicta Park. Monspel. flore parvo C. B. Monspeliaca foliis rotundioribus C. B. Monspeii∣ensis Ger. Ad mare propè Monspelium. Scammoneae Monspeliacae affinis Park. Scam. Monspelia∣cae affinis foliis acutioribus G. B. Apocynum latifolium amplexicaule J. B. cur a. latifolium apellat? Juxta Cataniam Siciliae urbem. Scolymus Theophrasti Park. v. Cinara sylvestris. Scorpioides Bupleuri folio Ger. G. B. Scor. siliquâ cam∣poide hispidâ J. B. Scorp. Bupleuri folio minor splu∣ribus corniculis asperis Park. quamvis ille hane à ne∣mine ante se editam glorietur. Messanae in collibus, & Monspelii in sossis & aggeribus ipsius arcis. Scorpioides Telephium Anguillarae Lob. Scorpioides Mat∣thioli Ger. Scorp. Matthioli, sive Portulacae folio Park. Telephium Scorpioides J. B. Telephium Dioscofidis, seu Scorpioides ob siliquarum similitudinem G. B. Ciria Liburnum, Messanam, Monspelium, &c. Scorpioides leguminosa v. Ornithopodio similis. Scorpioides leguminosa altera J. B. In vineis & hortis ad latera montium Messanae imminentium. Hanc plantan à nullo alio scriptore proditam censemus. Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta Park. Scroph. Ruta ca∣nina dicta, vulgaris C. B. Ruta canina Lob. Ger. Scroph. 3 Dodonaei tenuifolia, Ruta canina quibusdam ly ca∣a J. B. Ad Rheni ripas propè Basileam primò, deinde in Italia, Gallia Narbonensi &c. circa Goneyam oliser∣vavimus. Scrophularia folio Urticae C. B. peregrina Park. flore ru∣bro
Camerani J. B. irca Psas copiosè in muris ipsius urbj & libi iu Italia. Stellaria J. B. v. Opuntia marina. Securidaca minor Lob. minor lutea Ger. altera sive minor J. B. lutea minor cotniculis recurvis C. B. Hedysarum minus Park. In oollibus circa Messanam. Securidaca major articulata Park. dumetorum major flore vario, siliquis articulatis C. B. Melilotus 5 Tragi J. B. Ad agrorum margines in Germania passim. Securidacae gonus triphyllon J. B An Foenugrae cum sylv. alterum poly ceration C. B.  Foenum Graecum sylvestre Ger. Park. In collibus propè Castelneuf eis Ladum Mon∣speliacum amnem. Securidaeâ silliquis plani dentatis Ger. sliquis planis utrin∣que dentatio J. B. perrgrina Clusii Park. Lunaria ra∣diata Robini J. B. In lingua illa procurrente inter Por∣tum Zanchaeum & fretum Siculum, & alibi circa Mes∣sanam. Sedum majus vulgare C. B. J. B. Park. Sempervivum ma∣jus Ger. In summis Jugis montis Jurae, inque Alpibus Sabaudicis & Helveticis, &c. Sedum minus loteum ramulis reflexis C. B. minus luteum, flore se circumflectente J. B. Aizoon Scorpioides Ger. Vermicularis Scorpioides Park. Sedum serratnm J. B. Cotyledon media foliis oblongis ser∣ratis C. B. Umbillcu Veneri minor Ger. In montibus Tyrolensibus & Helveticis, itémque in Jura & Saleva Genevoe vicinis. Sedum serratum alterum foliis longis angustis. An Sedum Pyrenaeum serratum longifolium Hort. Blaes? A priore diffrt longitudine & angustia foliorum. Invenimus in Alpibus non longè à Pontieba: vidimus postea in horto Regio Parisensi. Sdum Alpinum minimum foliis cinereis, flore candido J. B. Saxatile & Alpinum II, sive album foliolis com∣pactis C. B. minimum Alpinum Muscoides Park. in montibus non longe a Bolzano Martio mense floruit. Sedum Alpinum 4 Clusii Ger. emac. minimum Alpinum villosum Park. Alpin III, sive hirsutem lacteo flore C. B. Chaliiasme Alpina J. B. in Aspend. tom. 3. In altissimo cacumine montis Jurae la Doie dicto. Flos can∣didus aetote rubescie dum recens odoratissimus est Jas∣mini instar. Sedum parvum folio circinato, flore albo J. B. minus folio circinato C. B. Vermicularis dasyphyllos Park. Circa Monspelium, Genevam, &c. in muris & rupibus copìosé.
Sedum echinatum vel stellatum flore albo J. B. In musco∣sis sepium aggeribus non longè à Geneva; secus viam quae Indè ad oppidum Jay ducit. Messanae quo{que} simi∣libus in locis invenimus. Descriptio J. Bauhini plantae huic nostrae per omnia exactè non congruit. Sedum echinatum flore luteo J. B. Circa Portum Veneris & alibi in Italia. Palnta haec & proximè antecedens à F. Columna describuntur. Nostra a. ab illius nonnihil diversa videtur; folia enim habet ad Alsinem accedentia & ut memini nonnhil crenata. Sedum Alpinum hirsutum luteum C. B. petraeum Ger. pe∣traeum montanum luteum Park. Phyllon thelygonon Dalechampio J. B. In monte Saleva Genevae vi∣cino. Sedum montanum siliquosum lore albo, an Hesperidis Alpinae specis? In suprema parte montis Salevae ad aquarum scaturigines. Sedum montanum minimum non acre flore purpurascente parvo. In altissimis rupibus Jurae montis. Sedum minimum non acre totum rubrum flore hexaphyllo purpureo. Cataniae in muris & tectis copiose. Sedum medium flore albo staminibus luteos apices gestanti∣bus. In muris quibusdam prope Messanam Siciliae. Sempervivum v. Sedum. Sonecio folio non laciniato J. B. folio non laciniato My∣coni Park. VI, sive folio non laciniato C. B. In sabulosis inter oppidum Rot & Norimbergam Germaniae urbem. Eundem etiam Messanae in ascensu montium obser∣vavi. Sertolaria Imperati v. Opuntia morina. Seseli Aethiopicum Salicis folio C. B. Ses. Aethiopicum fru∣tex Park. Ger. Ses. Aethiopicum fruticosum folio eri∣clymeni J. B. In rupibus oppido S. Chamas in Gallo∣provincia vicinis: Aiunt & circa Monspelium sponte provenire; verùm nos ibi non vidimus. Seseli Creticum minus v. Caucalis minor pulchro semine. Massiliensium v. Foeniculum tortuosum. Officinarum v. Siler montanum. Sideritis Monspessulana J. B. Scordioides Ger. Monspeli∣ensis Scordioides Lob. Monspellensis Lobelii Park. foliis hirsutis profundè crenatis C. B. Monspelii circa patibu∣lum copiose, & alibi aux Garigues. Sideritis vulgaris Ger. vulgaris Clusii Park. vulgaris hir∣suta J. B. hirsuta IV, sive vulgaris hirsuta erecta C. B. Per Germaniam, Italiam & Galliam in agrorum mar∣ginibus vulgatissima.
Sideritis genus verticill spinosis J. B. In Italia & Gallia Nar bonetisi prope Monspelium in agris. Icon Sideri∣tidis procumbentis non ramosae Clus. huic non dissimilis est. Sideritis Valerandi Dourez brevi spieâ J. B. Alpina hyssopi∣folio Ger. C. B. montana hyssopifolia Park. In monte Thuiri, Attendantur figure & descriptio J. B. Nam aliorum neque figurae, neque descriptiqnes per omnia quadrant. Sideritis pratensis lutea v. Euphrasia pratensis lutea. Sigillum Solomonis v. Polygonatum. Siler montânum Officinarum Lob. Ger. Seseli sive Siler montanum vulgare J. B. Siler montanum, vulgò Siselios Park. Ligustieuni, quod Seseli officinatum C. B. In Jura & Saleve montibus prope Genevam, sn{que} Alpibus Pon∣tiebae vicinis. Siliqua arbor sive Ceratia J. B. Sil. edulis C. B. Sil. dulcis sive vulgatior Park. Ceratia Siliqua sive Ceratonia Ger. In Sicilia non longe à Puzallu oppido, & sponte & copiosè provenit. Offioinis Caroba dicitu haec arbor, Germa∣nis & Belgis Panis S. Johannis. N. Siliquarum (ut rectè Plinius) cortex ipse manditur, èstque dulei & mellèo sapore, per siccitatem intellige, nobis tamen nonnihil nauseosus & ventriculo ingratus. Miror a Veteres scripsisse quod astringat & ventrem sistat, cum nobis (quotquot de eo contederimus cùm essemus Venetlis) alvum solvit non secus ac Cassia. Non tamen nega verim posse eos qui huio fructui assueverunt eo innoxiè vesci. Sinapi Genevense sylvostre J. B. In alveo fluvii Arve prope Genevam copiosé. Haec planta an ab alio quo∣quam descripta sit hesclo. sinapi echinatum v. Bruca echinata. Smilax aspera Lob. Ger. J. B. aspera fructu rubente C. B. aspera fructu rub. Park. In Sicilia, Italia & Gallia Nar∣bonensi in sepibus passim. N. Succedaneum est Sariaparillae in curanda lue Ve∣nerea, inque articulorum & nervorum doloribus; no∣xios humores per sudorem & transpirationem evacuat, cutis vitia expurgar. Datu vel in pulverem redacta vel in aqua alióve liquore decocta. Smyrnium Lob. Creticum Ger. Park. Creticum perfolia∣tum J. B. peregrinum rotundo folio C. B. In Sicilia circa Pumto Cerciolo. Solidago Saracenica Dod. Lob. Sarasenica vera Salicis fo∣lio Park. Virga aurea angustifolia serrata C. B. aurea
angustifolia serrata, sive Solidago Saracenica J. B. In fossis prope Argentoratum, inque summis jugis montis Jurae ad scaturigines aquarum. N. Vulneraria insignis censetur, nec Saniculae aut Bu∣gulae inferior, usu interno & externo adhiberi apta. Solanum halicacabum v. Alkekengi. Solanum vulgare sive Officinarum acinis Iuteis. Circa Florentiam in Italia, & Monspelium in Gallia Narbo∣nensi in vineis. Hanc baccarum differentiam Matthiolus etiam olim observavit. Sonchus lanatus Dalechampii J. B. villosus luteus major C. B. Park. Circa Messanam & Monspelium. Sonchus caeruleus latifolius J. B. montanus I, i. e. laevis laciniatus caeruleus sive Alpinus caeruleus C. B. Alpinus caeruleus Park. In monte Jura, in{que} montibus max. Carthusianorum caenobio imminentibus. Sonchis affinis Terra-crepola J. B. Sonchus laevis angusti∣folius C. B. Ger. emac. Park. Herba quae nobis Monspelii pro Terra-crepola oftensa fuit, similior erat figurae sstius plantae quam J. Bauhinus Chondrillis asfinem aliquam laciniatam an Trinciatellam nuncupat. Icones Terra-cre∣polae apud Lobelium, Gerardum & Parkinsonum ei bene respondent. Apud Monspelienses in acetariis frequens hujus usus est. Soldanella Alpina quibusdam J. B. Alpina major & minor Park. Ger. emac. III, sive Alpina rotundifolia C. B. In monte Jura & Alpibus Sabaudicis copiose. Sorbus J. B. Ger. domestica Lob. legitima Park. sativa C. B. In montibus supra Messanam spontaneam vidinius. In alsiosis montibus ad Rhenum; ne{que} non sylvis Medio∣matricum ad fluvios Saram & Blisam dictos admodum familiaris, autore Trago. Nos Viennae Austriae Sorba fructum antea nobis incognitum in foro primum venalem vidimus. N. Sorba sed praecipue immatura valde astringunt, unde fluxui cujuscun{que} generis conveniunt, & vomitum etiam sistunt. Pueris qulbus ob dentitionem alvus fluit commodè exhibentur. Sorghum v. Melica. Speculum Veneris Ger. majus Park. Avicularia Sylvii qui∣busdam J. B. Onobrychis arvensis, sive Campanula ar∣vensis erecta C. B. In Germania, Italia & Gallia Nar∣bonensi inter segetes passim. Spartum max. maritimum Hollandicum spica secalinâ. In arenosis ad vicum Schevelingam, uno ab Haga Comitum milliari.
Spartium arborescens v. Genista Hispanîca. Staphy lodendron J. B. Nux vesicaria Ger. Park. Pistacia sive sylvestris C. B. The Bladder-nut Tree. In clivis ma∣ritimis Regni Neapolitani prope Salernum. Stella leguminosa v. Glaux peregrina annua. Stoebe Salamantica prima Clusii Park. Salmanticensis prior Clusio, sive Jacea inty bacea J. B. argentea major Ger. major foliis Cichoraceis, moliibus lanuginosis C. B. Cir∣ca Monspelium passim, nec minùs frequens in Sicilia & Italia. Stoebe calyculis argenteis C. B. argentea minor Ger. Sala∣mantica argentea sive tertia Clusii Park. Scabiosa squammata argentea J. B. In Italia prope Tropiam Calabriae urbecuolam. Stoebe major calyculis non splendentibus C. B. Austriaca elatior Park. Centaurli majoris species tenuifolia J. B. In Germania, Italia & Gallia Narbonensi frequens. Stoechas citrina Germanica latiore folio J. B. Elichryson sive Stoechas citrina latifolla C. B. Amarantus luteus la∣tifolius Ger. In sterilioribus prope Rhenum supra Colo∣niam Agrippinam plurima. N. Hujus flores vino decocti & poti lumbricos ventris tris expellunt, quod ego experientia verum esse didici. Trag. Stoechas citrina tenuifolia Narbonensis J. B. Elichrysum sive Stoechas citrina angustifolia C. B. Stoechas citrina sive Amarantus luteus Ger. Chrysocome sive coma aurea & Stoechas citrina vulgaris Park. Circa Monspelium & alibi in Gallia Narbonensi vulgatissima. Stoechas citrina altera tenuifolia sive Italica J. B. Eli∣chrysum foliis oblongis, Staechadi citrinae similis Dod. In montibus Liguriae non procul Gavia oppido, & alibi in Italia. Stoechadi citrinae affinis, capitulis parvis, raris, squamo∣sis, in pappos evanescentibus J. B. Elichryson sylv. an∣gustifolium capitulis conglobatis C. B. Stoechas citrina altera odora Park. In saxis & rupium fissuris circa Monspelium variis in locis. Stoechas citrina altera odora Park. v. Chrysocome. Stoechas sive Spica hortulana Ger. vulgaris Park. purpurea C. B. St. Arabica vulgo dicta J. B. In sylva Grammon & alibi circa Monspelium, item{que} medio circiter itinere inter Monspelium & Arelaten. N. 1. Stoechas Arabica praecipui usûs est in affectibus capitis ac nervorum, sc. in vertigine, Apoplexia, Para∣lysi ac Lethargo: in morbis pectoris idem praestat quod
Hyssopus. Insuper urinam & menses ciet, venenis re∣sistit, affectibus hypochondriacis succurrit. Extrinsecùs in lotionibus capitis, suffitu, &c. Schrod. 2. Stoechadis citrinae flores diuretici sunt & vulnera∣rii, usus praecip. in obstructione urinae, epatis, lienis, mensium; coagulatum sanguinem resolvunt, catarrhos exiccant, menses nimios sistunt, lumbricos fugant: Commendantur & inprimis ad exiccandas deflluxiones acres pulmonum, &c. Extrinsecus faciunt ad emoien∣dam uteri duritiem (in balneo) lendes abigunt (inlixi∣vio) capitis defluxiones siccant & discutiunt (susfitu.) Schrod. Styrax arbor Ger. J. B. St. arbor vulgaris Park. Styrax folio mali cotonei C. B. Circa Tusculum in sepibus & sylvis copiosé: ubi & Caesalpinus eam observavit. N. Styrax cephalicus inprimis est & nervinus; me∣detur tusli, catarrhis, raucedini, gravedini; vulvae prae∣clusae duritiéve laboranti extra & intra datus convenit. Immiscetur cardiacis & laetificantibus, alvum leniter mollit si cum Terebinthinâ in forma Catapotii assumatur. Miscetur utiliter malagmatis discutientibus & acopis. Scbrod. è Diosc. Suber latisolium J. B. Ger. Park. II, sive latifolium per∣petuò virens C. B. The broad-leaved Cork-tree. D. Wil∣lughby hane arborem observavit itinere à Neapoli ad Romam. N. 1. Cortex tritus ex aqua calida potus sanguinis fluxum sistit. Ejusdem cinis ad idem valet. Usus ejus est ad anchoralia navium, piscantium tragulas, cadorum ob∣turamenta, foeminarum calceatum hy∣bernum, alvearia, &c. 2. Detrahendis corticibus haec est ratio. Quà stipes telluri committitur, circumscinditur ad lignosam us{que} ma∣teriam, paritér{que}, in summis humeris antequam in bra∣chia dividat sese: mox à summo ad imum fiditur detra∣hitúr{que} cortex. Non explanantur aqua sed igni, nec de∣muntur cortices nisi tertio mox anno. Quod si paucis diebus à tonsura largi imbres supervenerint, arbor interit: quod rarò evenit nimirum regione calida & sicca, & tem∣porum observatione rarò sallente. Clus. è Quinquerano. Sumách v. Rhus. Symphytum maculosum v. Pulmonaria maculosa. Sysirynchium majus Ger. Clus. Park. majus flore luteâ ma∣culâ notato C. B. Iridi bulbosae affine Sysirynchium ma∣jus J. B. In lingua illa quae Portum Messanensem à Freto Siculo dividit, & in insula ad Prom. Pachynum, utro∣bique copiosé.
T TAmarix v. Myrica. Tanacetum inodorum Park. non odorum Ger. mon∣tanum inodorum minore flore C. B. album J. B. In colle la Bastie propè Genevam & ad Rhodani ripas. N. Haec planta florem habet radiatum Bellidis ma∣joris aemulum, ideóque cùm nec odorem Tanaceti ha∣beat, rectiùs ad Bellides refertur, & Bellis leucanthe∣mo Tanaceti follo à D. Morrisono denominatur. Tarton-raire Gallo-provinciae Lob. Ger. Massiliensium Park. Massil. Sanamunda 1 Clusii J. B. Thymelaea fo∣liis candicantibus, Serici instar mollibus C. B. In ru∣pibus maritimis non longè à Salerno. Telephium Scorpioides J. B. v. Scorpioides. Terrae glandes v. Chamaebalanus leguminosa. Terebinthus Ger. J. B. vulgaris C. B. angustiore folio vul∣gatior Park. Circa Monspelium: invenimus eam & in Etruria. N. 1. Terebinthi folia, fructus, cortex (tradente Di∣oscoride) quâ pollent adstringendi vi, ad eadem ad quae Lentiscus conveniunt. Ejus fructus esculentus est, at stomacho noxius, urinam verò ciet & excalefacit. Est & ad excitandam venerem aptissimus: ex vino verò potus contra Phalangiorum morsus prodest. 2. Species sunt Gallae, magnitudine Avellanae, in∣tus cavae, provenientos ex excrescentiis foliorum Tere∣binthorum masculorum. Has colligunt Rustici Thra∣ciae & Macedoniae, ac carè vendunt ad tingenda se∣rica subtilia diversis coloribus in urbe Bource. Colli∣gunt a vere quo tempore nisi colligerentur, in longi∣tudinem semipedalem excrescerent ad formam cornu. Bellon. 3. Quae pro Resina terebinthina in officinis habetur vel Laricis resina est vel abietis, nam vera terebinthina ad nos hodie non adfertur, Botanicorum unanimi sen∣tentiâ. Resinae autem vires & usus vide sub Pinu. Teucrium C. B. majus vulgare Park. latifolium Ger. Teu∣crium multis J. B. In Sicilia & Italia perquam fami∣liare.
Teucrium Baeticum Ger. Baeticum & Creticum Clusii J. B. Teucrium Creticum & Teucrium Baeticum Park. nam pu∣tamus haec duo non differre specie. Teuct. peregrinum folio sinuoso C. B. & Teucrium Creticum incanum C. B. Propè Syracusas, in insula ad Promont. Pachynum, circa Puzallu, & alibi in Sicilia. Invenit D. Willughby in iti∣nere à Neapoli ad Romam. N. Ut facie sic viribus cum Chamaedry convenit. Veteres lienem absumendi validam vim ei attribuunt. Teucrium majus Pannonicum v. Chamaedrys falsa ma∣xima. Alpinum cisti flore v. Chamaedrys. Thalictrum angustissimo folio Park. pratense angustiss. fo∣lio C. B. Prodr. A'd fluvium Lycum propè Augustam Vindelicorum in Germania. Thalictrum majus Hispanicum Ger. emc. majus album Hispanicum Park. maj. folliculis angulosis, caule laevi J. B. 4, sive majus florum staminulis purpurascentibus C. B. In sylvosis Jurae montis circa Thuiri. Thapsia latifolia Hispanica Park. latifolia Clusii Ger. Thapsia 1 Clusii latifolia, flore luteo, semine lato, si∣milis Seseli Pelóponnensi Lobelii J. B. An Thapsia si∣ve Turbith Garganicum semine latissimo ejusdem? Messanae pro Turbith utuntur hac planta, ut recte no∣tat Imperatus, v. J. B. Messanae in lingula saepiùs me∣morat. N. Haec planta violenter admodum purgat, ideóque in ea exhibenda cauto opus est. Messanenses, ut dictum, pro Turbith eâ utuntur, cujus vires notae. v. Schrode∣rum & alios. Thlaspi clypeatum hieracifolium majus Park. biscutatum asperum hieracifolium & majus C. B. clypeatum Lobe∣lii Ger. Lunaria biscutata J. B. In Germania, Italia, Sicilia & Gallia variis in locis. Thlaspi minus clypeatum Ger. clyp. minus Serpylli folio Park. clyp. Serpylli folio C. B. Lunaria peltata mini∣ma, quibusdam ad Thlaspi referenda J. B. Circa Mon∣spelium sed rarius. Thlaspi Candiae Ger. umbellatum Creticum Iberidis folio C. B. Creticum quibusdam flore rubente J. B. In sylvis montosis prope Salernum in Regno Neapolitano, & Vi∣terbum in Etruria. Thlaspi umbellatum arvense amarum J. B. umbellatum arvense Iberidis folio C. B. Park. Thl. amarum Ger. Inter segetes in monte Saleva, & cca Thutri dabus à Geneva leucis copiosé.
Thlaspi umbellatum Nasturtii folio Monspeliacum C. B. Park. umbellatum Narbonense Ger. umbellatum, tenui∣ter diviso folio, amarum Narbonense Lobelii J. B. In agris Castri novi Monspelio vicinis, & alibi circa Mon∣spelium. Thlaspi spinosum Ger. spinosum fruticosum Park. C. B. Leucoium spinosum, sive Thlaspi spinosum aliis J. B. In summis rupibus montis Lupi, tribus Monspelio leucis distantis. Thlaspi capsulis sublongis incanum J. B. fruticosum inca∣num Ger. C. B. incanum Mechliniense Park. In agro Ro∣mano abundat, ad hyemem usque florens. Thlaspi Narbonense Centunculi angusto folio Ad. Nar∣bonense Lobelii Ger. Nasturtium vel Thlaspi maritimum J. B. Thlaspi. Alysson dictum maritimum C. B. Ad Mare Mediterraneum ubique feré. Thlaspi minus quibusdam, aliis Alysson minus J. B. Thl. Alysson dictum campestre minus C. B. Thlaspi arvense minus luteum Park. Thlaspi Graecum Lob. Circa Ge∣nevam in glareosis passim, atque etiam circa Mogun∣tiam, & Monspel. Thlaspi oleraceum Tab. rotundisolium Ger. arvense per∣foliatum majus C. B. Park. Bursa pastoris, foliis Per∣foliatae J. B. Circa Bresciam in Italia & Genevam in Gallia. Thlaspi Alpinum minus capitulo rotundo C. B. Park. pe∣traeum minus Ger. emac. petraeum myagryodes Ponae. In rupibus humidioribus montium Jurae & Salevae. Thora Valdensis Ger. Phthora folio Cyclamini J. B. Aco∣nitum pardalianches II, seu Thora minor C. B. Park. itemque I, seu Thora major eorundem. Non enim con∣cesserim has duas specie differre. In altissimis jugis montis Jurae propè Thuiri. Thymelaea Ger. Park. foliis Lini C. B. Monspeliaca J. B. In Italia & Gallia Narbonensi, agris depressioribus, in∣ter alios frutices passim. N. Hujus plantae fructum coccum seu Granum Gni∣dium vocant herbarii peritiores. Ast Officinis nostris Mezerei Germanici baccae Cocci Gnidii appellantur, monente Schrodero. Cocco Gnidio vis ardens est & fau∣ces adurens, Undè mirum nobis videtur quod scribit Clufius, Fructu Thymelaeae maturo & rubro Perdices & aviculas avidissimè vesci. Thymelaea minor Cordi J. B. Thymelaeae affinis facie ex∣terna C. B. Thymelaea minor sive Cneorum Matthioli Park. In Germania circa Basileam & alibi.
Thymelaea quaedam incana Genevensis. In sylyosis rupibus ad latera montis Salevae ex parte quae Genevam respicit, è saxorum sissuris. Thymelaea tomentosa v. Sanamunda. foliis candicantibus v. Tarton-raire. Thymum Creticum Ger. Creticum sive. Antiquorum J. B. Thymus capitatus, qui Dioscoridis C. B. Thymum legi∣timum capitatum Park In saxosis prope Syracusas. Thymum durius Ger. durius vulgare Park. vulgare rigi∣dius folio cinereo J. B. vulgare folio tenuiore C. B. In Gallia Narbonensi vix alia communior planta. N. Usus hujus herbae praecip. in affectibus Tarta∣reis, (1.) Pulmonum, ut Asthmate, tussi. (2.) Ar∣tuum, ut Podagrae; omnia viscera reserat, appetitum excitat. Extrinsecus in tumoribus frigidis, sugilla∣tionibus, inslationibus ventriculi, doloribus arthriticis. Schrol. Tithymalus folio longo glauco, caule rubro, seminibus ver∣rucosis. Prope Meslanam. Elatior & major est multo Tithymalo verrucoso vulgari. Tithymalus arboreus Park. dendroides J. B. dendroides ex codice Caesareo Ger. dendroides, Italis Tithymalo ar∣boreo Lob. myrtifolius arboreus C. B. Sed cur appellat myrtifolium, cùm folia ejus magìs accedant ad Mezereon Germanicum? In montosis non longè à Massa prope Salernum, & alibi in Italia, ubi in magnum & lignosum fruticem adolescit. Tihymalus non acris flore rubro J. B. Esula sive Pityusa III, i e Tithymalus montanus non acris C. B. qui huc refert Esulam dulcem Tragi, & Pityusam, sive Esulam minorem alteram floribus rubris Lob. Ger. Park. Planta quam volumus optimè descripta est  J. Bauhino: olim nobis missa suit Londino sub titulo Apios tuberosa ra∣dice. Tithymalus myrsinites Lob. J. B. Park. myrtifolius latifolius Ger. Figura quam Gerardus exhibet pro Tith. myrti∣folio latifolio, Parkinsonus dat pro myrsinite incano. Tith. myrsinites latifolius C. B. Juxta arcem Rhegii in Calabria. Tithymalus myrsinites angustifolius C. B. Ger. Parkinsonus hujus iconem ponit pro Tithymalo myrsinite Lob. Verùm hae duae plantae specifice inter se differunt: haec enim minor est, sed tamen erectior priore: Folia habet an∣gustiora & crebriora; bene etiam respondet figurae Lo∣beliane. Invenimus prope Massiliam ubi & Tragacan∣tham, juxta mare.
Tithymalus pineus Ger. foliis Pini, fortè Dioscoridis Pi∣tyusa C. B. Pityusa, Tithymalus pineus, sive Esula minor Park. Tithymalo cyparissiae similis, Pityusa multis J. B. Crepidines sabulosae fluminum & vicini colles frequen∣tiùs hunc alunt, inquit J. B. quod & nobis experientia confirmat, nam in locis similibus secus Rhenum copio∣sum vidimus. Tithymalus Amygdaloides sive characias J. B. characias II, sive rubens peregrinus C. B. characias Monspelien∣sium Ger. Park. In saxosis circa Monspelium, quin & in Italia circa Lericium, & alibi saepiùs nobis con∣spectus. Tithymalus serratus Dalechampii J. B. characias serratus Ger. characias folio serrato C. B. char. serratus Mon∣speliensium Park. In Gallia Narbonensi passim & co∣piosè circa Nemausum, Monspelium, &c. Thtiymalus verrucosus J. B. verrucosus Dalechampii Park. myrsinites, fructu verrucae simili C. B. Circa pagum Thuiri duabus à Geneva leucis, quin & in Germania ali∣quoties eum invenimus. Tithymalus magnus multicaulis, sive Esula major J. B. Pityusa sive Esula II, i. e. Tithymalus palustris frutico∣sus C. B. Esula major Germanica Ger. Park. In Ger∣mania ad Rhenum copiosissimè; circa Genevam quo{que} & in planis campis agri Lugdunensis, per quos Genevâ Lugdunum iter est. Tithymalus palustris Pisanus. An Tithym. myrsinites in∣canus herbariorum? Frequens in paludibus Pisanis, unde non dubito hanc esse quam intelligit Caesalpinus per suum Tithymalum palustrem. Folia ejus hirsuta sunt, & ad Tithymali characiae amygdaloides nostratis folia ac∣cedunt. Tordylium minus v. Caucalis minor pulchro semine. Trachelium parvum folio Bellidis subrotundo. Radix ei alba, simplex, lignosa, annua: Caulis erectus, striatus: Folia alternatim posita, subrotunda, sine pediculis cau∣libus adnexa. Flores Trachelii majoris. Circa Messa∣nam. Trachelium Alpinum &c. v. Echium Alpinum luteum. Tragacantha C. B. vera Park. Massiliensis J. B. Tragacan∣tha, sive Spina hirci Ger. Ad latra montis Aetnae, 14 supra Cataniam milliaribus, prope nivis repositoria. Circa Massiliam ad maris litus, Fortè tamen Massili∣ensis ab Aetnaea specie differt. N. E radice hujus plantae incisa, vel (ut alii volunt) sponte sua exudat gummi Tragacantha pariter dictum,
cujus usus praecip. ad tussim inveteratam, fauces exaspe∣ratas, retusas voces, caeterás{que} destillationes (cum melle fit linctus, subditúrve linguae ut liquescat) contra renum dolorem & vesicae rosiones (in passovel brodio) in dy∣senteria. Extrinsecùs ad dysenteriam in clysteribus, ad rubedinem & acres destillationes oculorum (soluta in aqua rosacea vel lacte) ad palpebrarum scabritiem. Dos. ʒj. Schrod. Tragium v. Androsaemum foetidum. Tragorchis v. Orchis. Tragopogon perenne, sive Scorzonera fol. angustis incanis, floribus dilutè purpureis. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum. Tragos sive Uva marina major herbariorum Lob. Uva ma∣rina major Ger. Tragos sive Uva marina major J. B. Po∣lygonum bacciferum maritimum majus C. B. In Sicilia prope Punto Cerciolo, ubi humanam altitudinem aequat. Polygonum bacciferum sive Uva marina major Park. Tragos sive Uva marina minor J. B. Uva marina minor Ger. Polygonum bacciferum maritimum minus C. B. Po∣lygonum bacciferum minus, sive Uva marina minor Park. In arenosis litoribus prope montem Ceti & Frontigna∣nam, at{que} etiam in saxosis collibus vicinis. Tribulus terrestris J. B. Ger. Park. terrest. ciceris folio, fructu aculeato C. B. In Sicilia, Italia & Gallia Narbo∣nensi passim. Seriùs & sub Autumnum floret. Trifolium bituminosum Ger. Asphaltites sive bituminosum Park. bitumen redolens C. B. Asphaltites sive bitumino∣sum odoratum J▪ B. In Italia, Sicilia & Gallia Narbo∣nensi, in saxosis collibus non procul à mari. Trifolium Alpinum argenteum Park. Alpinum argenteum, Persici flore C. B. In praeruptis altissimorum montium max. Carthusianorum coenobio imminentium. † Trifolium capitulis globosis sine pediculis caulibus ad∣natis. Circa Mestanam Siciliae metropolin alteram. Hanc speciem nuper invenimus in agro Suffolciensi. Trifolium cochleatum echinatum, peltatum, orbiculatum, &c. v. Medica. Trifolium fragiferum sive vesicarium floribus nitidis rubel∣lis. Circa Liburnum portum & alibi in Italia. Non longé absimile est, imò fortè idem Trifolio folliculaceo sive vesicario minori purpureo J. B. Trifolium fruticans v. Polemonium. Trifolium pratense album à Fuchsio depictum sive mas J. B. Alii Botanici speciem hanc cum Trifolio albo vulgari confundunt, à quo tamen diversissima est. Circa Gene∣vam in pascus & ad agrorum margines.
Trifolium stellatum C. B. stellatum Monspeliensium Park. stellatum purpureum Monspessulanum J. B. Ad radices Vesuvii montis copiosè; nec minùs circa Messanam in Sicilia, & Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi. Trifolium annuum erectum capitulis è glumis acerosis con∣flatis. Hanc speciem in Regno Neapolitano ad maris litus collegi, cùm Messanâ Neapolin redirem. Tripolium minus J. B. C. B. Park. minus vulgare Ger. Ad mare prope Monspelium. Omnibus suis partibus nostrate minus est. Tubera J. B. Park. Tuber C. B. Tubera terrae Ger. Truffles. Tartufali the Italians call them. Haec quamvis è terra ipsi nunquam eruimus, quia tamen tum in Lombardia tum alibi in Italia & Gallia ex agris vicinis petita nobis in cibis apposita sunt, noluimus omittere. Sunt autem tubera magno hodie in pretio apud gulae proceres, tum saporis gratiâ, tum maximè quòd Veneris incentiva sint. N. Ratio seu modus quo (ut nobis relatum est) rustici tubera exquirunt, aut si vis venantur, perridiculus est: Porcellum scilicet funiculo ad alterum pedem alligato prae se agunt in pascua ubi horum proventum esse nôrunt, qui ubi ad locum venit in quo tuber latitat, odore mox id percipit, rostró{que} è terra eruit, erutum qui insequun∣tur surripiunt, & ad alia indaganda porcellum abigunt. Tussilago Alpina Ger. emac. Alpina minor folio rotundo J B. II, sive Alpina rotundifolia glabra C. B. Alpina folio glabro Park. In Alpibus Stiriacis primò, post in monte Jura eam invenimus. Tussilago Alpina folio longo J B. Alpina folio oblongo Park. IV, sive Alpina folio oblongo C. B. In montis Jurae partibus altissimis Thuiri & Dole dictis. Haec planta Alismati Matthioli sive Plantagini Alpinae dictae persimi∣lis est, non tamen eadem, & ad Doronica potiùs quàm ad Tussilagines referri debet. Typha minor J. B. minima Park. palustris minor C. B. Hanc plantam in eodem loco in quo olim Lobelius, nimirum ad flu. Arve prope Genevam inveni. Cùm primò eam observavi perexigua fuit, clavâ gracili, unde minimè tum dubitavi quin distincta species esset: postea verò caput cylindraceum clavatum in tantam intumuit crassi∣tiem, ut meritò dubitaverim, annon ipsius parvitas loco potiùs (siquidem extra aquam crevit) quàm plantae na∣turae imputanda esset.
V VAccaria Ger. v. Lychnis segetum rubra. Vaccinia v. Vitis Idaea. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei Ger. Park. rubra C. B. latifolia rubra J. B. Ocymastrum Valerianthon Lob. Messanae in muris antiquis: in Italiae quoque locis pluri∣mis è muris & saxis erumpit. Valeriana rubra angustifolia C. B. J. B. Ubi J. Bauhinus eam invenit ibi & nos quoque, nimirum Nantuae Sa∣baudorum, in colle extra portam quà itur Lugdunum, ad dextram. Provenit quoque copiosè in rupibus mon∣tis Lupi. Valeriana Mexicana Ger. Indica sive Mexicana Park. peregirna seu Indica J. B. Valerianella echinata C. B. Circa Messanam Siciliae copiosé. Valeriana Alpina J. B. XI, sive Alpina altera C. B. Al∣pina major sive latifolia Park. In monte Saleve supra Carthusianorum coenobium. Valeriana Alpina altera foliis integris, inodora, An Al∣pina prima C. B.? In montibus circa Genevam co∣piosé. Valeriana pumila supina serpyllifolia. In rupibus mari∣timis Regni Neapolitani. Ostensa mihi fuit posteà Venetiis à Joanne-Maria Ferro pharmacopoeo botanico peritissimo, pro Caprifolio n. d. rectiùs tamen meo ju∣dicio ad Valerianas refertur. Verbascum latis Salviae foliis C. B. Matthioli Ger. sylv. salvifolium exoticum folio rotundiore J. B. Salvia fru∣ticosa lutea latifolia, sive Verbascum sylvestre quar∣tum Matthioli Park. Circa Tauromenium in Si∣cilia. Verbascm angusto Salviae folio C. B. Ger. Monspeliense flore luteo hiante J. B. Salvia fruticosa lutea angustifolia, sive Phlomos lychnitis Dioscoridis Clusio Park. In col∣libus saxosis circa Monspelium. Verbascum crispum & sinuatum J. B. laciniatum Park. nigrum VI, sive nigrum folio Papaveris corniculati: &
Cam. C. B. In Italia ad vias passim. J. Bauhino circa Monspelium; nos illud ibi non observavimus. Vermicularis v. Sedum. Veronica saxatilis J. B. fruticans serpyllifolia Ger. fortè, Alpina frutescens C. B. malè, non enim fruticat haec. minor Alpina Park. qui distinguit Alpinam suam mino∣rem à Veronica fruticante. Pro Veronica min. Alpina ponit figuram fruticantis serpyllifoliae Ger. proque fru∣ticante sua aliam exhibet iconem: & meâ quidem sen∣tentiâ, rectè separat Veronicam fruticantem Clusi ab Alpina minima serpyllifolia Ponae. Nostra haec de qua agimus non omninò fruticat, sed exigua est & herbacea semper. Attende descriptionem J. B. In summis jugis montis Jurae circa Thuiri. Veronica saxatilis parva caulibus nudis. Iu pascuis in sum∣mitate montis Jurae. An planta haec à quoquam descri∣pta sit mihi nondum est compertum. Vicia sylvatica maxima Piso sylvestri similis. J. B. In syl∣vosis in ascensu montis Salevae, ab eo latere quod Gene∣vam spectat. Vicia seu Lathyrus gramineus flore coccineo. Ad radices montis Vesuvii non longè à mari: necnon circa Gene∣vam inter segetes. Vicia maritima multiflora alba Messanensis. In Sicilia circa Messanam & alibi ad maris litus. † Vicia luteo flore sylvestris J. B. Circa Liburnum & alibi in Italia inter segetes. Victorialis longa Clus. Allium Alpinum J. B. Alpinum la∣tifolium, seu Victorialis Ger. anguinum Park. IX, sive montanum latifolium maculatum C. B. In summis jugis altissimorum montium max Carthusianorum coenobio proximorum & velut imminentium. Vinca pervinca v. Clematis daphnoides. Viola bulbosa v. Leucoium bulbosum. Viola martia lutea Ger. Park. J. B. martia VII, sive Al∣pina rotundifolia lutea C. B. In suprema parte montis Jurae circa Thuiri. Viola lunaris longioribus siliquis Ger. lunaria III, sive major siliquâ oblongâ C. B. Lunaria major siliqua lon∣giore J. B. In montibus Saleva & Jura, sed parciús. Viola matronalis flore purpureo Ger. matronalis, sive Hes∣peris hortensis C. B. Hesperis J. B. Cùm à Salerno Neapolin iter facerem, hanc in pratis observavi. Visnaga J. B. Matth. Lob. Visnaga, Gingidium appella∣tum Park. Gingidium Hispanicum Ger. Gingid. um∣bellâ
longá C. B. In pratis quibusdam non longè à Mi∣ravalle, secus viam quae Monspelio Frontignanam du∣cit; copiosè etiam in Etruriae agris, & circa Cataniam Siciliae. N. Pediculi seu umbellarum radii pro dentiscalpiis multis in usum veniunt, praecipuè Hispanis, ob rigidita∣tem suam & suaveolentiam: undè & nostratibus Spanish Picktooth appellatur. Vitex v. Agnus castus. Vitis Idaea foliis carnosis & velut punctatis, sive Idaea radix Dioscoridis C. B. Radix Idaea putata, & Uva ursi J. B. Uva ursi Galeni Clusio Park. Vaccinia ursi, sive Uva ursi apud Clusium Ger. emac. In montibu. Saleve & Ju∣ra Genevae vicinis, itemque in colle La Bastie. Vitis Idaea v. Diospyros. Ulmaria major v. Barba caprae. Unifolium v. Monophyllon. Uva crispa Ger. Dod. Lob. crispa, sive Grossularia J. B. Grossularia vulgaris Park. Grossularia simplici acino, vel spinosa sylvestris C. B. Per totam Helvetiam in sepi∣bus vulgatissima. In Sicilia studiosè in hortis colitur, & pro planta rara, ostensa nobis fuit. Amat enim frigidos tractus; in calidioribus minùs frequens est. N. Uvae crispae immaturae refrigerant, undè febrici∣tantibus & cholericis utilter exhibentur, tim sedant; astringunt quoque, unde ad omne ventris profluvium & haemorrhagiam quamcunque conducunt; Urinam insuper ciere, & calculo aut arennlis laborantibus prodesse di∣cuntur. Saccharo conditae gratâ suâ aciditate appe∣tentiam conciliant, & febriles ardores restinguunt. Con∣cinantur & in placentas cupediarum & scitamentorum vice; vulgò Tartas vocant. Uva marina v. Tragos. Ursi v. Vitis Idaea.
X XYlon v. Gossipium. Xeranthemum J. B. Jacea Oleae folio, flore mi∣nore C. B. Ptarmica Imperati sive minor Park. Ptarmica Imperati, An Ptarmicae Austriacae species Clus.? cur. post. Ger. emac.? Primò eam observavimus in Arni fluminis alveo propè Florentiam; postea etiam circa Monspelium. Z ZAcyntha v. Cichorium verrucarium. Zea monococcos v. Briza. Zizipha sylvestria J. B. Ziziphus sive Jujuba syl∣vestris Park. Jujuba sylvestris C. B. In rupibus ad Tropiam Calabriae urbecualam copiosè.
Explicatio Nominum abbreviatorum. AD. & Ad. Lob. Adversaria Penae & Lobelli. C. B. Caspari Bauhini Pinax. C. B. Prod. Caspari Bauhini Prodromus. Caes. Caesalpinus. Cam. Camerarius. Cat. Ang. Catalogus Plantarum Angliae. Clus. & Clus. hist. Caroli Clusii historia. Col. Fabius Columna. Dod. Dodonaeus. Fuch. Leonardus Fuchsius. Ger. & Ger. emac. Jo. Gerardi historia emaculata à Tho. Johnson. Gesn. Conradus Gesnerus. Hort. Pat. Hortus Medicus Patavimus. J. B. Joannes Bauhinus Caspari frater. Lob. ob. Lobelius in Observationibus. Lob. ico. Idem in iconibus à Plantino editis. Lon. Adamus Lonicerus. Lugd. Historia Lugdunensis. Matth. Matthiolus in Dioscoridem. Park. Jo. Parkinsoni Theatrum Botanicum. Park. parad. Ejusdem Paradisus terrestris seu Hortus. Schrod. Schroderus in Pharmacopoea Medico-chy∣mica. Tab. Tabernaemontanus. Thal. Thalius in Harcynia. Trag. Hieronymi Tragi historia. Nota haec † cuicunque plantae praefigitur indicat illam in Anglia sponte provenire. FINIS.
