S2227A 13142629 98011
A Seasonable DISCOURSE, SHEWING, That it is the INTEREST OF BOTH PAPISTS & PROTESTANTS, To Serve their MAjESTIES in the Present War AGAINST FRANCE. Licensed, May 15th, 1689. J. Fraser. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, next the Black Bull in the Old-Bayly. MDCLXXXIX.
A Paradox in Season: OR, Good News BOTH TO Roman Catholicks and Protestants. THE late great and stupendious Revolu∣tion in the State of Great Britain, is the Astonishment of the present Age, and will be the Wonder of the next: The generality of Men were (no doubt) strangely surprized at so swift and dexterous a Change of our English Scenes, every one gazing on it as a Prodigy, but with different Sentiments and Passions, according to their various Interests, Prepossessions and Prejudices; some looking on it with Delight, others with Horror, but all with Admiration, as not being acquainted with the hidden Springs and origi∣nal Wheels which gave the first Birth to this unpa∣rallel'd Alteration of our Affairs: Nay, most Men are yet to seek, though many are very curious and
inquisitive in diving into the depth of this Profound MYSTERY: It is not my province or design (were I able) to Unravel the Secret; for I ever was of o∣pinson, that the Arcana Imperii ought to be Veild, and not exposed to the Eyes of the Vulgar, but like the Delphick Oracles, they should be wrapt up in Aenig∣matic Clouds. of this , is to make such Remarks and Observations on the pre∣sent Posture of Affairs, as may conduce to the Satis∣faction of all Honest and Well-meaning Christians of what Perswasion soever, my Aim being to Com∣pose and Settle (as far as in me lies) the precipitate Thoughts of rash and unthinking Men, who at this time seem to be fermented into a restless Concern for they know not what, and to be as it were Hag∣ridden with a kind of State-Bigotism, they Dream Waking, and Groan under a Phantastick Load of Chimera's, meer Vapour raised from their own crude and indigested Thoughts. And because I would not have this Discourse swell to too great a bulk, so as to discourage the Reader at first sight. I will chuse for my Subject the present War that is declared between England and France; and the better to comply with my Title, I will Address my self first to Roman Catholicks, and the rather, be∣cause they seem most to be dissatisfied at the present Transactions in Europe. Those that are conversant in the History of Chri∣stendom, cannot but know, that the Kings of France first received the Title of [Most CHRISTIAN] from the Bishops of Rome, on the account of the signal and eminent Services they had done to that See, and the whole Western Church, by strenuous∣ly
opposing the Incursions of the Goths and Vandals, who like a mighty Torrent were over-running all Christendom; so that had it not been for the match∣less Valour of the French Armies, all Italy itself was near lost: Hence also they were stiled Eldest Sons of the Church; and the Roman Pontiffs graced them with many Favours and Priviledges, beyond other Princes, as Acknowledgments of their Merit. Thus flourish'd that Crown for many Centuries, the Scourge of Infidels, Patron of the Church, Envy of Neigh∣bouring Nations, and Darling of the Chief Bishop: but of later Years the Case is alter'd, the Tide turn'd, and that glorious Title beforementioned, seems al∣most as fit for the Grand Seigniour, as for him who now possesses it: that Eldest Son of the Church is now become Rebellious, that Patron is turn'd Perse∣cutor, that Enemy of Infidels now shakes hands with them, that Darling is now deservedly out of Favour not only with the Pope, but almost with all Christen∣dom: His Confederacy with the Turks, his breaking the Treaty of Nimeghen, his ill-tim'd Incursions into the Empire, then actually engaged in a War with the Ot∣tomans, his injurious Dealing with the Duke of Lor∣rain, the Elector Palatine, the Prince of Orange, in fine, his accumulated Tyrannies, Oppressions and Per∣secutions, his repeated Affronts and Oppositions to the Pope, and Interest of the Roman Church, have render'd him justly Odious in the sight of all honest Men of that Communion, and have stirred up most of the Princes and States in Europe to make open War against him; among whom his present Majesty King William has been pleased to Interest himself, ha∣ving published a Declaration of War against France the 11th of this instant May 1689.
I believe all men of sence among the Catholicks are satisfied as to the Justice of this War; even the ve∣ry Subjects of France it self wish for a delivery from the present Bondage and Slavery they groan under: therefore I need not enlarge upon that Theme, one∣ly it may be presumed, that some over-zealous Mem∣bers of that Communion, not rightly understanding the Consequences of the general Preparations and Ap∣proaches which are every-where making against France, and not relishing well the Declaration of a Protestant King against a Crown and Kingdom in Communion with the Roman Church; I say, they may be disgusted, and out of pure Zeal may imagine that the Interest of the Church will be weakned, if so considerable a Member of it, as France is, should be crush'd (as in all likelihood it will) by so many po∣tent Adversaries. But pray, Gentlemen, give me leave to Expostulate a little with you; Do you think the Emperour of Germany comes short of you in his Zeal for the Catholic Religion? Is not the King of Spain as much Devoted to the Interest of the Church, as any of your Communion? And yet these are both joyntly engaged against the King of France. Or, what say you to the Pope himself, who is esteemed the Father of the Church? You are sensible how far he is concern∣ed in abetting and encouraging the present War a∣gainst France: He no doubt has in many repeated in∣stances found that the Grandeur of the French Crown cannot consist with the Church's Interest: Witness the Decrees of some late Assemblies and Convocations of the French Clergy, when they voted against several established Doctrines of the Roman Church, and even against Infallibility itself, being influenced by the Pro∣mises and Threatnings, the Insinuations and Com∣mands of the Great Disturber of Christendom, whose
Humors and Caprichio's must over-rule all Law and Justice; and a Sic Volo, sic Jubeo, must supercede the very Pandects of the Church, thus sacrificing all things both Humane and Sacred to his own exorbitant Am∣bition. Can you imagine now that the Pope does not consult the common Good of Christendom, in being so forward to quell the monstrous Pride of France? In my Opinion you ought to acquiesce to his Conduct in this, as well as you do in other cases of this nature. Besides it is well known, that the House of Austria (of which the German Emperours and Kings of Spain are most illustrious Branches) have for these two last Centuries at least, been the main Support not only of the Papacy, but of the whole Western Church; the one being the Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks, the other bravely stemming the Tides of Moorish Invasi∣ons. Look but into the present Turkish War, with what a formidable Army did the Ottomans Invest the Imperial City Vienna, and how bravely were they Re∣pulsed? For how many Years has the German Eagle pursued them through all their Nests in Hungary? With what indefatigable Pains has she broke through the Toils of War? And now Triumphantly Displays her Wings within the Verge of the Ottoman Court! And if she now, after all these Grand Fatigues, do Crop the Unprofitable Lilly, will you repine? A Lilly grown to such a Height and Rankness, as with its Baneful Shaddow to destroy the Neighbouring Flowers, and to become a general Annoyance in the Garden of Europe. To conclude, if you understand and value the True Interest of the Church, and prefer the common Good of Christendom to your own private Inclinations and Profits, if you are not byass'd with some fond Compas∣sion or Self-love, you cannot but approve of what has been said; since what you loose in the Pound, you gain
in the Hundred; and by the Fall of France all Chri∣stendom rises, and recovers its ancient Lustre and Glory, which was neer Eclips'd by the Interposition of this growing Meteor. In short, if I understand Play, the Cards are now managed by the best Gamesters in Eu∣cope, I mean of your own side: and I question not, but they know how to nick the Advantage of this juncture, and Shuffle them with that dexterity, as, let Fortune cut where she pleases, the best Hand shall fall to the Church; who, no doubt, will improve it so well that, Ni fru∣stra Augurium vani docuere Parentes, she will not one∣ly maintain her newly recover'd Ground in Hungary and elsewhere, but in all probability may from the re∣sult of this League gather such strength, as will gain her more sooting than she has lost these hundred Years before. And now acccording to my promised Method, I am obliged to shew the Protestants, how they are like to be Gainers by this War, which seems to me an easie task; since by the same proportion that Roman Catho∣licks may promise to themselves a more general and firm Establishment of their Church from the success of the Consederated Catholick Princes against France, by the same may the Protestants assure themselves of a more flourishing and prosperous State of their Religion from the success of the Confederated Protestant Princes: Neither will these different Roligions interfere, or ob∣struct one another, the Interests of State being abstract∣ed from those of Religion, where divers Nations of se∣veral Religions are united in a League against one com∣mon Enemy, tho' each particular Religion at the same time is protected by the State where it is profess'd: To speak more plainly, France is deservedly esteem'd the common Enemy to the general Interests both of Roman Catholicks and Protestants; therefore both Catho∣lick
and Protestant Princes and States are united against her. Now where the Catholick Religion is establish'd, there will its Interest al∣so be strengthened by the Downfal of France, as in Italy, Germany, Spain, &c. by the same rule, where the Protestant Religion is settled, there also will it be more strongly confirmed by the Ruine of the Common Spoiler; as in England, Holland, Brandenburgh, Saxony, &c. They all fight Pro Aris & Focis, for Religion and Property, and each Particular will have a proportionable share in the success. But to draw my Discourse toward a Period, let us consider our own Na∣tion, and the present Circumstances it lies under. Before the late Revolution in this Government, the King of France seemed to maintain a fair Correspondence with the Crown of Eng∣land; and though the French Faction were always plotting and con∣triving one Mischief or other against this Nation, yet their Intrigues were managed with a great deal of secrecy; all their Machinations were cover'd with the mask of Friendship; and as we use to say, they put a good face on a bad matter: But since King James Deserted the Kingdom, they found there was no more insinuating in the English Court, they could not any longer Cajole us with specious Pretences, and smile in our Faces whilst they cut our Throats; therefore they were resolved to lay aside the Vizard, and appear in their own Colours; and taking advantage of King James his Application to the French Court, under pretence of Assisting him, they commit all acts of Hosti∣lity against, us by Sea and Land, Seizing our Ships, Imprisoning the English, Invading Ireland, and designing to Land with a great Army in England also, if not prevented by the hearty and unanimous Reso∣lution of the Subjects of this Nation, to stand by one another against this Troubler of the World. To obviate this approaching Danger, His Majesty King William has been pleased to declare open War a∣gainst France, as I have already said, and is making all Preparations requisite to carry it on: Now there are a sort of People, who out of Tenderness to King James, may endeavour to possess themselves and others with an opinion, that if they should take up Arms against the French, they should fight against him who was once their Soveraign, since they are made to believe, that the late Conquest of Ireland by the French Forces, is nothing else but the Restoring King James to his Right in that Kingdom; and after the same manner do they conceive of the designed Invasion of this our Country by the French. But they seem to lie under a great mistake, since it is plain by their Conduct in reland, that the French King does but abuse the Trust which King James reposes in him, and under the pretext of Assisting and Restor∣ing him, has render'd himself Absolute Master of that Nation: This s apparent from matter of Fact, since Monsieur d' Avaux rules the bast there, placing and displacing whom he pleases in Military and
Civil Employments, only for a blind they make use of King James his Name, but assume all the Power and Authority to themselves. And no question but the case would be the same, if ever they should Land in England. Now it is possible for a man to have an affecti∣on for King James, and yet at the same time not to be willing to espouse the Interest of a Potent Enemy, by being gull'd into a be∣lief that it is King James his Quarrel. I believe many men of ge∣nerous Tempers, look on King James his Misfortunes, with a great deal of Compassion, who at the same time would abhor that such a Compassion should make them betray their Country to the French King: Besides, we are obliged to oppose the French King, as our Na∣tion is concerned in the general League against that Ambitious Mo∣narch, a League altogether previous to the Misfortunes of King James, a League into which 'tis probable he himself would have enter'd, had he tarried longer in the Nation. In short, I see no other way to avoid inevitable Slavery, than by carrying on this War with all Vigor and Resolution, like true Eng∣lish-men, so shall we secure our Liberties and Properties, our Reli∣gion and Laws, our Lives and Estates, and whatsoever is dear to us in this World, all which we are in danger to loose if the French once prevail in this Nation: Then we shall be reduced to Poverty and Misery, then we shall be Pill'd and Poll'd, Taxt and Fleec'd, trampled on and abused by our new Lords and Masters the French, whereas if we heartily unite our Forces against them, we shall not only escapee all these Tragical Consequences, but also have a share in the Conquest of that Kingdom, and so recover the Glory of our Renowned An∣cestors. FINIS.
A CATALOGUE Of some Books lately Printed for R. Baldwin. THE History of the most Illustrious William, Prince of Orange: deduc'd from the first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau: Together with the most Considerable Actions of this Present Prince. Fourteen Papers, viz. 1. A Letter from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his Friend in London, upon occasion of a Pamplet Entituled, A Vindica∣tion of the present Government of Ireland, under his Excellenoy Richard Earl of Tyreonnel. 2. A Letter from a Freeholder, to the rest of the Freeholders of England, and all Others, who have Votes in the Choice of Parliament-Men. 3. An Enquiry into the Reasons for Abrogating the Test imposed on all Members of Parliament. Offered by S. Ox. 4. Re∣flections on a late Pamphlet Entituled, Parliomentum Pacificum. Li∣censed by the Earl of Sunderland, and Printed at London in March 1688. 5. A Letter to a Dissenter, upon occasion of his Majesties late Gracious Declaration of Indulgence. 6. The Anatomy of an Equivalent. 7. A Letter from a Clergy-man in the City, to his Friend in the Country, containing his Reasons for not Reading the Declaration. 8. An Answer to the City Minister's Letter, from his Country Friend. 9. A Letter to a Dissenter from his Friend at the Hague, concerning the Penal Laws, and the Test; shewing, that the Popular Plea for Liberty of Conscience, is not concerned in that Question. 10. A plain Account of the Persecu∣tion laid to the Charge of the Church of England. 11. Abby and other Church-Lands, not Assured to such Possessors as are Roman Catholicks; Dedicated to the Nobility and Gentry of that Religion. 12. The King's Power in Ecclesiastical Matters truly Stated. 13. A Letter of several French Ministers fled into Germany upon the account of the Persecution in France, to such of their Brethren in England as approved the King's Declaration touching Liberty of Conscience. Translated from the Origi∣nal in French. 14. Papish Treaties not to be Rely'd on: In a Letter
from a Gentleman at York, to his Friend in the Prince of Orange's Camp: Addressed to all Members of the next Parliament. The Way to Peace amongst all Protestants: Being a Letter of Re∣conciliation sent by Bishop Ridley to Bishop Hooper, with some Obser∣vations upon it. By Samuel Johnson. Purgatory Prov'd by Miracles: Collected out of Roman Catholick Authors. With some remarkable Histories relating to British, English and Irish Saints. With a Preface concerning Miracles. By S. Johnson. An Historical Relation of several Great and Learned Romanists who did imbrace the Protestant Religion, with their Reasons for their Change, deliver'd in their own Words. Collected chiefly from the most eminent Historians of the Roman Perswasion. To which is ad∣ded, a Catalogue of sundry-great Persons of the Roman Catholick Re∣ligion, who have all along oppos'd the Tenets of the Church of Rome. The Character of a Trimmer: His Opinion of 1. The Laws and Government. 2. Protestant Religion. 3. The Papists. 4. Foreign Affairs. By the Honourable Sir W. Coventry. A Seasonable Discourse, shewing the Unreasonableness and Mischiefs of Impositions in matters of Religion, recommended to serious Consi∣deration. By Mr. Andr. Marvell, a late Member of the Honourable House of Commons. The Revolter. A Trage-Comedy acted between the Hind and Panter, and Religio Laici, &c. The Absolute Necessity of Standing by the Present Government: or, a View of what both Church-men and Dissenters must Expect, if by their Unhappy Divisions Popery and Tyranny should return a∣gain. An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdalen Colledge in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687, containing only Matters of Fact as they occurred. Collected by a Fellow of the said Colledge.
