S4127 13030684 96729
I Do Appoint Robert Boulter to Print this my Narrative, Entituled, A Further DISCOVERY of the late Horrid and POPISH-PLOT, &c. and that no others Print the same. JOHN SMITH. October 12. 1679.
THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. John Smith OF Walworth, in the County-Palatine of Durham, Gent. Containing a further DISCOVERY Of the late Horrid and POPISH-PLOT. With an Account of 1st. The inconsistency of the Popish-Principles with the Peace of all States. 2ly. Their Destructiveness to all Protestant Kingdoms. 3ly. The Incouragements upon which the Papists undertook so Hellish a Design against England. 4ly. The Progress they had made in it. 5ly. The Reasons of their endeavouring, more especially the Death of His present Majesty. 6ly. With a Vindication of the Justice of the Nation upon the Traitors already Executed. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Robert Boulter at the Turks-head in Corn-hill, 1679.
To the KING. AS I owe my Allegiance, and have Dedicated my Life to Your Majesty; so I desire with all Humility in my self, and Zeal for Your Hap∣piness, to offer up these Papers unto You. Many of Your Subjects are capable to present You, with what is more sutable to the Greatness of Your Understanding; but nothing can be laid at Your Feet which more nearly concerns the Preservation of Your Sacred Person, the Safety of Your Crown, and Se∣curity of Your Royal Dignity. The danger of Conspiracies lies in their being con∣cealed, none ever perished by a detected Plot, but such as have wilfully abandoned themselves to be destroyed. And therefore, while some of your Subjects, to de∣feat the Hellish Machinations of the Papists against your Majesty and People, are contented to expose themselves, not only to secret Assassinations, but to the vow'd Revenge of a disloyal and desperate Party; It is hoped, that you will not at once both desert your Self, and de-relinquish the care of three Kingdoms, as well as Sacrifice those Loyal Souls, to gratifie implacable Enemies. Sir, 'Tis past the Malice and Strength of your Adversaries, either to destroy your Life, or subvert your Government, unless (which God avert) you joyn in the Conspiracy, by some Personal accession. And against dangers that you volun∣tarily expose your self unto, there is no promise that the immense Wisdom, or Almighty Power, should interpose to save you. The Conspirators find it con∣venient to alter the Methods of accomplishing their
Treason; but they remain unchangeable in their Trai∣terous Designs. But Sir, it is in your own Power, not only to Reign in defiance of their violent Attempts, but to render your People happy while you live, and relinquish them safe when you dye. For to all this there is no more required, but your hearkning to the Advice of your Parliament; who as they are best able to Counsel you, so their own interest, and the welfare of those they represent, will always oblige them to it. Might your Popish Adversaries but once divide be∣twixt you and your People, and dispossess you out of the hearts of your Subjects; the next thing will be (having left you none to stand by you) to wrest your Crown from you, and deject you from your Throne. As it is impossible you should miscarry while you and your People agree, so no humane means can prevent the Destruction of these Kingdoms, and the Unhap∣piness of your Royal Self and Family in their Ruines, if through the Clamours of the Popish Party you should be divided from your People as represented in Parliament, and to be withdrawn from hearkning to their Advice. Your Majesties Most humble, and most loyal Subject, JOHN SMITH.
TO THE READER. HAd the many Discoveries of the Plot already communicated to the World, served either to dismay the Conspirators from their further proceeds, or to awaken the Nation proportionably to its danger, The Conveying of this to the knowledge of the Kingdom, had been wholly forborn. 'Tis true, that the offering this Information to His Majesty and the Council, was an indispensible Duty, which could not be superseded without Disloyalty to the Government: but the divulging it to the Kingdom, is to be resolved into that Lethargy as the motive of it, which too many still lye under. Shall it be said that our supine folly and unreasonable unbelief, promote our ruine beyond what the malice of our Enemies was able to accomplish? Shall their Ad∣dress in impudent Pamphlets, wheedle a company of easie and silly Souls, to disbelieve what the King, the Council, and two Parliaments (being first as∣sured themselves) have both recommended it to the Faith of these Kingdoms, and consigned it over to Posterity, as an unquestionable certainty. It is not without astonishment, that I observe how a generation of men, whose interest makes it necessary, and whose principles makes it lawful, to Lye, are able by meer impudence, to out-face the fullest Evidence, and most uncontrollable Con∣victions of their Guilt. Reader, Thou wilt therefore find in these following Sheets, not only a further Attestation given to prove a Hellish Conspiracy against His Majesty, the Prote∣stant Religion, and the Government by Law Established; but thou wilt meet with some account, both of the Advantages which did facilitate them in their designs, and of the several steps which they had taken to accomplish them. And if after all this, the Protestant Inhabitants of these Nations will suffer themselves to be destroyed, (by continuing their Divisions) notwithstanding such fair warn∣ing, I will only say, that they deserve to perish without Compassion and Pity.
A further DISCOVERY Of the late Horrid and Popish-PLOT. WHat disturbances and fatal mischiefs, the claim and exercise  of Papal Authority and Jurisdiction, have caused even in Kingdoms where both Princes and People were in all things else of the Romish Faith: the Histories of foregoing Ages do sufficiently inform us. The alone demurring to the Usurpations of the Roman Pontife, hath derived from the pretended Infallible Chair, the Excommunication of Princes, the discharging Subjects from their Allegiance, the Alienation of Crowns and Kingdoms, the interdicting the performance of all Divine Services in Nations, which according to their own stile, were in all things else Catholick. For besides the manifold in∣stances which all parts of the Western World afford us to this purpose, such as Gregory the seventh, his Excommunicating Henry the fourth; Sylvester the third, his Anathematizing Henry the fifth; Gregory the ninth, his cursing Frederick the second, Emperour of Germany. And Innocent the third, his Excommunicating Philip August, and setting his Kingdom under an Inter∣dict; Benedict the thirteenth, Charles the sixth, and Boniface the eighth, Philip the Faire, Kings of France: I say, besides these, and many other Forraign instances of this nature, the Kingdom of England alone hath afforded us too many woful proofs of the Papal Ʋsurpation, and falsly pretended Jurisdiction over Temporal Monarchs, and their Dominions. So that towards the recommending the Romish Religion, and the Authority of the See of Rome, to the love of my Country-men, I need only put them in mind of the Entertainment that William Rufus, Henry the second, King John, and Henry the eighth, Princes of this Kingdom, met with from the Universal Father. For even that Prince whom I mentioned last, not only lived and died himself in the Romish Faith, but put to death all such as were Arraigned for being otherwise minded; So that the only reason why he was Excommunicated by two Popes one after another, his King∣dom interdicted, his Subjects absolved from the Fealty they owed him, and a disposal made of his Crown to others, who were intrusted with the Exemption of the Papal Censure, was nothing but his declining the Au∣thority and Jurisdiction of the Pope, and his vindicating those Rights which by our ancient Law appertained to the Imperial Crown of this Land. Let Princes and People be never so zealous in all other points of the Roman Faith, if they do but dispute the Universal-Jurisdiction of the Triple Crown, they expose themselves to Depositions, Interdicts, and
whatsoever else it pleases his Holiness to denounce against them. It is but for a Monarch or State to thwart the Capricio, and cross the humour of the Pope, or disoblige the Court of Rome, and they immediately run the hazard of being destroyed, under the very Countenance and Allowance of those Doctrines which have the stamp of Articles of Faith. The Inter∣dict of the State of Venice by Paul the fifth, the Murther of Henry the third of France, and the Assassination of Henry the fourth, likewise of France; were some of the late Commentaries upon the foregoing Principles, and Items to the world, that though they did not think fit to act up to them at all times, yet they reserved them in their Petto, to be made use of upon occasion. And it may not be altogether unworthy of our observation, that the Murther of Henry the third by James Clement a Dominican, was not only magnified in a solemn Oration by Sixtus the fifth, which was afterwards Printed and Published at Rome, but it hath been lately tran∣slated by some Romish Priest, or other, with the Latin in one Column, and English in another; and that in all likelihood to inflame some Papal Votary to the like attempt upon His Sacred Majesty. So that were there no dishonour to arise to God, danger to the Souls of men, by the re-introduction of Popery amongst us, the hazard of ensla∣ving these Nations to a Forraign Power, and of making the Crown truckle to the Papal Mitre; may awaken every generous as well as Loyal Soul, both to watch against, and oppose all secret tendencies, as well as open attempts, towards a matter of so pernicious a Consequence. Nor is it unworthy of our remark, that besides those foregoing advantages which the Pope would have over this Nation, in common with other Nations, by virtue of his Monarchy over all persons and things in ordine ad spiritu∣alia, upon which alone he might (as heretofore he hath done) Anathe∣matize our Kings, Divest them of their Royal Power, and not only Ab∣solve their Subjects from Fidelity and Obedience, but Commissionate and Impower them to make War upon their Soveraigns; and both to Depose and Murder them, under the encouragement of meriting Heaven by so doing. I say it is not unworthy of our reflection, what other latent claims (besides these) as he may be likely to revive of an absolute and uncontroul∣able Temporal Jurisdiction over these Kingdoms. The King of England, saith Bellarmine,Lib. cui Titulus Tortus, p. 19. See Baron. ad Ann. 1172. is subject to the Pope by a two-fold right, first by reason of his Apostolick Power, and secondly, by right of proper Dominion. For as to England he may be ready to plead, if not King Henry the second his submit∣ting his Crown to the Pope; yet King John's resignation of it into the hands of the Popes Legat, and receiving it again as a Feudatory to the See of Rome. And for Scotland, he may possibly revive that title which so long ago as Boniface the Eighth,Matth. Westm. lib. 2. Polyd. Virg. lib. 17. Hist. Angl. he pretended over that Kingdom; namely, That the Kingdom of Scotland belongs of right to the Church of Rome, and that it is in the Popes power alone, to give it to, or take it from whom he pleases. And lastly for Ireland, who knoweth but that they may start, as a pretence for a temporal Jurisdiction over that Nation, Henry the thirds swearing homage to the Pope for it, and obliging himself to pay a Tribute in re∣cognition of the Papal right. Its true, these things are impertinent and ridiculous in themselves; yet were Popery re-established in England, and the people brought under the conduct of the Jesuites, who as they labour most effectually in the perversion of the Nation, so being the Janizaries of the Holy See its easie to apprehend how far they may mis-improve them towards the serving the interest of the Pope, in case any difference should arise either between the King and him, or any other Forraign Prince that
his Holiness, for secular ends shall think fit to befriend. Surely its with respect to these pretensions, that Bellarmine so solemnly declareth,ubi supra. That these Kingdoms are the Diminions of the Church; and that the Pope is our natural and direct Lord; and the King at best but his Vassal. And it was in pursu∣ance of this right that Gregory the thirteenth Commissioned Tho. Stukeley, an English Rebel against Queen Elizabeth, to conquer the Kingdom of Ireland for his Holiness's Bastard-Son James Boncompagnon. And by vir∣tue of the same pretension did Innocent the tenth, during the late Wars, usurp a Royal Power over that Nation, and accordingly gave forth all kind of Commissions by the hands of his Nuncio. And if divers principles of Popery are unfriendly to the safety of Mo∣narchs, and quiet of Kingdoms, even where their Religion is Nationally received and submitted to; we cannot imagine that the Peace and Secu∣rity of these Nations, who not only are of a different Religion, but de∣clare against them as Antichristians and Idolaters, should be better provi∣ded for, if occasion serve to do mischief. For besides the liableness of all Protestant Princes and People to the fatal consequence of the foregoing Doctrines of the Papal Usurpation and Jurisdiction over all Nations, they have others particularly and especially calculated to Authorise and Justifie their destruction and ruine. Such, as that we are all Hereticks, and there∣upon are not only de jure Excommunicated by the Lateran Councel under Innocent the third, but de facto, pronounced such for ever by Paul the fourth, anno 1558. And as if that were not sufficient, we are in de Bulla Coenae Domini, read commonly on Maunday Thursday, solemnly Cursed. And thereupon the Papists in the several Dominions where the Protestant Religion obtains, are not only discharged from all Allegiance to Princes, but all Catholicks are obliged by the strictest bond of Conscience, and under the penalty of the utmost hazard of their Souls, to depose such Heretical Princes. They are so far from being guilty of murder, saith Ʋrban the third, that kill any who are Excommunicate, that they are bound to exterminate He∣reticks, as they would be esteemed Christians themselves, saith the Decree of the Lateran Councel under Innocent the third. Yea, by the late Bull of Cle∣ment the tenth, for any Papist to be Loyal to an Heretical Prince, is pub∣lickly declared to be a crime; and such are solemnly cursed in the view of all the world, for that which the principles of Reason and Revelation, and without which no Government is safe, oblige them unto.De Laicis lib. 3. cap. 22. Bellarmine speaketh intelligibly when he saith, That Hereticks are to be destroyed root and branch, if it can possibly be done; but if it appear that the Catholicks are so few that they cannot conveniently with their own safety, attempt such a thing, then it is best in such a case to be quiet, least upon opposition made by Here∣ticks, the Catholicks should be worsted.In 2.2. Th. qu. 12. Hereupon Bannes hath no other Apo∣logy to make for the English Papists, that they do not forcibly rise against the King and his Protestant Subjects, but that they are not powerful enough for such an undertaking and therefore the Attempt would be to their own preju∣dice and damage. So that upon the whole, Protestants do only hold their lives at the courtesie of the Papists, till they be in a condition by number and strength to destroy and extirpate them. Good natur'd people that forbear to kill us, forasmuch as one of our lives may cost three of their own. And yet though at sometimes they seem to judge it convenient, either to conceal the foregoing principles, or to suffer them for a season to lye dormant by them: yet in reality such hath been their faithfulness to their Doctrines, that they have never suffered us to be any considerable
while without some testimony of the good will they maintain for Here∣ticks, and how ready they are to do all those meritorious offices of kil∣ling and destroying us, which their Religion obligeth them to do. I shall not mention here, the vast numbers of Christians that have been butchered by the sentence of the Roman Inquisition, of which it is reported that Paul the 4th should say, that the Authority of the See of Rome depended upon that office, and that it was setled in Spain by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. But surely he meant not that which came down from Hea∣ven, but that which was sent from Rome in a Cloak-bag. Nor shall I insist upon the infinite slaughters of such as professed Jesus Christ in sincerity, by Crusado's and sanctified Wars, though Authentick Authors tell us, that in France alone there were slain ten hundred thousand persons in the persecu∣tion raised against the Waldenses, upon no other account but their dissent∣ing from the Church of Rome. Neither shall I dwell upon the Parisian Massacre, by which in a few days there were murdered above forty thousand persons, and that for no other cause, but because the Church of Rome had adjudged them Hereticks; but I shall rather call over some of the attempts against these Nations, commenced upon, and justified by the foregoing principles of the Papal Church, in reference to those who differ in Reli∣gion from them. No sooner was Reformation established in England un∣der Edward the sixth, than divers Rebellions in several parts of the Land, were by the influence of the aforesaid Doctrines, and the instigation of Priests and Friars, raised against the King and Government, as every one may read in our vulgar Chronicles. The number of those Rebels may be guessed at by the lists of the killed and taken at some of the defeats given unto them; And if we will believe our Histories, there were above five thousand slain and taken Prisoners, of those that rebelled in Cornwall and Devon-shire; and above five thousand slain, of those that rose in Norfolk and Suffolk, besides those which were taken Prisoners there, and who were cut off and apprehended in suppression of the Rebellion in York-shire. Now this excellent Prince being dead, and Queen Mary Esta∣blished on the Throne, though she was not of a bloody, or of an ill dispo∣sition in her self, yet her Religion obliged her to those Cruelties, which have at once left an indelible stain upon her memory, and given us to fear what we may expect if the Government should at any time fall into the hand of one infected with the Papal Doctrine. For though her Reign was but short, yet there were in the compass of a few years, two hun∣dred seventy seven publickly burnt, besides near as many more who perished by imprisonment, torment and famine. And all these meerly for Religi∣on, not so much as one of them being chargeable with any traiterous Machination against the Government. Upon her removal by a natural death, and Queen Elizabeth succeeding on the Throne, the Reformed Re∣ligion was again re-established in the Kingdom. And whereas notwith∣standing the severity which had been expressed to her self, and the cru∣elty which had been exercised upon those of the same Faith with her; She not only buried all resentments, but was willing to suffer the Papists to live quietly, both in the injoyment of their Estates, and the private exercise of their Religion: yet it is not to be expressed by what ways of Assassination, Conspiracy, Rebellions at home, and Invasions from abroad, they endeavoured to destroy Her Person, overthrow the Government, and make the Kingdom a Field of blood. In pursuance of what by their Re∣ligion they owe to Hereticks, Pius the 5th did not only solemnly Excommu∣nicate and Damn her self and all her Protestant Subjects, but likewise cursed all
the Papists that should give any Obedience to her, or her Laws. That whole Bull proceeds upon her being a Heretick, and for being so, the holy Father deprives her of all Dominion and Dignity, absolves all her Subjects from any Obligation of Allegiance; and includes them under the same Curse, though Papists, that should yield any Subjection to her. Here was a Pa∣raphrase upon the Principles of the Romish Religion towards Hereticks, which the Papists from time to time exemplified by practices sutable to the Doctrines of their Faith, and the infallible Commentaries of the Ro∣man Mufti. For I may confidently say, that the Treasons of one kind and another that were contrived against her, and her Protestant Subjects, were more for number, than the years of her Government. But all their Machinations and Attempts, being by the infiite wisdom and goodness of God, detected, disappointed and defeated; and She laid in her Grave, accompanied with the Tears of her People: The like Conspira∣cies continued against King James who succeeded her. For as they had endeavoured by a Book published under the counterfeit name of Dole∣man, but wrote by Parsons, by communication with Cardinal Allen, and Sir Francis Inglefield, to disprove at least Sully his Title to the Crown: so they obtained two Breve's from Clement the 8th to exclude him, unless he would swear to promote the Romish Religion. Nor is it any matter of amazement or surprise, that the Roman See should act in that manner to King James, forasmuch as Gregory the 14th had a little before by two Mo∣nitory Bulls declared Henry the 4th uncapable of the Crown of France, and that upon no account, but because he was a Heretick; yea (which may be a little more startling to those who are not acquainted with trans∣actions of this nature) notwithstanding that Henry the third was both a loyal Son of the Church of Rome, and had been a bloody and severe prosecuter of the Hugonots, and had more adored the Pope than ever any King of France did, yet the Pope did both covenant and agree with the Duke of Guise, to depose the said Prince, and to transfer the Crown from those to whom by the Laws of France it was to descend; and to settle it on the said Duke and his Posterity, only with this proviso, That he would cause the Estates of France to acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the Roman See, and without modification or restriction, to abolish the Liberties and Priviledges of the Gallican Church. But to return, King James being in defiance of all Papal contrivances, Established in the Throne; The first fruits of their Loyalty to an Heretical King, and the first Evidence of their Principles to such as renounce the Communion of the Church of Rome, was to welcome him with a Plot, contrived by Watson and Clarke two secular Priests, but wheedled into it by the Jesuits (as I have heard themselves often de∣clare) and afterward discovered in revenge, for their writing two Books; the one stiled, Quodlibets, and the other, Important Considerations. I know the Jesuits and their Factors have of late the impudence to say, that they were drawn into that Conspiracy by Gray,See Com∣pend. of the Plot, p. 73. Cobham, and Rawleigh, Protestants; who having been Queen Elizabeths old Favorites, disliked King James his succession to the Crown; and that Watson acknowledged his infamous death to be a Just Judgment for his Factious Writings, and designs against their Order and Society. Things as wholly false in them∣selves, so recorded by no authentick Historian of the times when they were transacted. But to pass this: That Plot miscarrying, the Jesuits, the great Crafts-masters in all Conspiracies, designed another, and that such a one as might every way correspond to the Principles of the Roman Re∣ligion, and bear proportion to the good will which by vertue of those
principles, they bear to Hereticks. And accordingly they contrived the blowing up the King, Lords, and Commons; the whole Kingdom, as well in Epitome, as in its Representatives. And this they did meerly in pur∣suance of what their Religion obliged them unto, being withall quick∣ned to the design by the two Briev's received some years before, but hi∣therto kept dormant to operate upon a convenient occasion, and good opportunity. But being disappointed in that also, (through its having been discovered by means that I now enquire not into) and the Prodigi∣ousness of the Conspiracy, having awakened England to a more signal watchfulness, and effectual care for its own preservation, as it had asto∣nished the whole world, Pagan as well as Christian, where the report of it arrived; the Kingdom had some reprieve for a few years, from the publick workings of the Popish principles, in the Catholick Service, and office of destroying and murthering Hereticks. But even in that interval wherein they seemed to lye most dormant, they gave us instances enough how acceptable those Heretick murthering Doctrines are at Rome. For while all the world stood amazed at the former attempt, and many of the Papists abroad seemed to express their detestation of the Principles which produced it, The Pope and Court of Rome took all imaginable care to have the Traytors magnified and honoured. For Garnet the Provin∣cial of the Jesuits, though by his acknowledgment under his own hand, he dyed for Treason; yet had his name inserted into the English Martiro∣logy, and his Bones were reserved for Reliques, and his Image erected over Altars: and two Jesuits who had been principal Conspirators in that Hellish Plot, and had by misfortune escaped the Halter, which was the reward due to them for their barbarous Conspiracy; were upon their arrival at Rome, both of them advanced to be the Popes Penitentiaries. And moreover, when the King and Parliament for the security of the Kings person, and preserva∣tion of the Government, and the lives of his Subjects, were forced to enact and impose on the Papists the Oath of Allegiance; Paul the 5th published divers Bulls against it, and both Becanus and Bellarmine, besides many more, wrote expresly in opposition to the taking of it. But the next impression of their Faith in its sutable and proper works, made amends for their laziness and barrenness during that interim: for through the in∣fluence of the same principles, and being animated by the Pope, they murdered above two hundred and fifty thousand in Ireland, without any other inducement to it, save that they were Protestants; and that in killing of them the Catholick cause was promoted. For at no time did the Irish enjoy more liberty as to their Religion, and more tranquility as to their Persons and Estates, than immediately before they broke out in∣to that horrid Rebellion. Nor was that quiet and security they possessed, the fruits only of a connivance, but the effects of many Acts of Grace, which had a little before past in favour of them. And as there was no alarm given of this, either by foregoing Citations to return into the bo∣som of the Mother-Church, nor by any solemn publication of their being Excommunicated, nor by any proclaimed Crusadoes, or a holy War; least the secure Hereticks being numerous, and not willing to part with their lives tamely, might have been roused to self-defence; so this barbarous massacring of so many thousand persons, who had laid innumerable obli∣gations upon their Popish Irish Neighbours, can be resolved into nothing but the principles of the Romish Religion, and the Obligations that Pa∣pists are under by vertue of their very Faith, to root out Hereticks, when a conveniency offereth. And take possession of their Estates, which by
the Decree of the Lateran Councel under Innocent the third, are forfeited to the Roman Catholicks; and which not only may, but ought to be seized, whensoever it comes within the Circle of their Power to accom∣plish it. There are many other instances which might be re-collected of their readiness to be as kind and merciful to Hereticks, as their Religion not only instructeth, but obligeth them, were it not that this damnable and hellish Plot, which hath been for some years last past, and still is, carried on for murthering the King, subverting the Government, and rooting out the Protestant Religion, supercedeth all further need of in∣sisting upon those things. To make then a nearer approach to the present Plot, the Agents of  the Church of Rome having with the utmost diligence, as well as all ima∣ginable craft and art, especially since the Restoration of His Majesty, projected and pursued the re-introduction of Popery into these Kingdoms, and the Extirpation of Heresie, (as they are pleased to stile the Protestant Religion) they were at last (as they apprehended) come within view of infallibly compassing their design. Now there were some things which afforded them advantages for the attaining these Ends, which at no time since the Reformation, were they before now possessed of the assistance of. The first was, That Interest at Court, and universal esteem through the whole Kingdom, which the pretented Loyalty of many Catholicks, during the late unhappy War betwixt His late Majesty, and many of His People, who acted under the influence and supposed Authority of a Par∣liament; reconciled and gave unto them. This, together with the Assi∣stance which some of the Papists, contributed to the escape of his present Majesty, and the seeming readiness of many of them, to co-operate with others, in his Restauration, gave them not only a share in the peace and quiet which these Kingdoms were restored unto; but procured a further degree of respect to them, than had been either usually, or universally shown them since the Reformation. And though I would not endeavour to lessen their Loyalty at any time, when they might but seem to pretend to it; yet to deal plainly, I know very little reason for their pretences of Loyalty to King Charles the first, more than to His Majesty who now hap∣pily Reigns: yea, I know very much why they ought at least to supercede all right of merit on that foot of account. For not to insist upon what preceded the unhappy War; though antecedently to that, we are told of a Conspiracy to destroy the Kings Life, whereof the discovery was found in Archbishop Land's Library,See Prynt Discovery of a Popish Plot by Haberfeld. being declared by Andreas ab Haber∣feld to Sir William Boswell, Embassador then at the Hague, who revealed it to the Archbishop. But I say, not to dwell upon this, nor upon that, that I am now to say, namely, that it is affirmed, and that with all the moral certainty imaginable, that the Romish Emissaries were both the principal Authors of that Ʋniformity with England, which was pressed upon Scotland, and also prime sticklers to prevent its being entertained there, and all to foment a War betwixt the two Kingdoms. The Priests names have been oftner then once published to the world, who were sent by Cardinal Richlieu into that Kingdom, to raise and inflame differences be∣twixt the two Nations. And the motives upon which that great Boutefeu of Europe was so earnest to kindle a War in His Majesties Dominions, are sufficiently understood, by all who are not wholly strangers to the affairs of that time. But there are two things which overthrow all their pre∣tences of Loyalty to his late Majesty, of which they so confidently boast,
and have made so large advantages. One is their commencing that bloody War in Ireland, in the massacring so many of His Majesties Protestant Subjects; which as it increased the Jealousies, that the like might be de∣signed against those of the same Religion, in this Kingdom; so the making all Assistances (by the War which they had begun there) from thence im∣possible, gave confidence to the Parliament to be the more peremptory in those demands, which His Majesty finding it necessary to refuse to com∣ply with, proved the causes of that unnatural War which fell out among our selves, and of all the fatal consequences of it. And as a further Te∣stimony of their Loyalty to that Prince, they not only renounced all Al∣legiance to Him, and banished His Lieutenant, but assumed the Royal Au∣thority to themselves, owing only a dependance upon the Pope and his Nuncio. The second is, that accession which they had to the murder of His late Majesty. For as the principles upon which those seem to have acted, who publickly destroyed the King, are not only countenanced, but most especially taught by the Doctors and Casuists of the Church of Rome; so the effects of those principles are to be charged as well upon them that teach Doctrines of such pernicious consequence, as upon them that practise them. Hear then what the greatest Authors in the Romish Church declare to the purpose before us.De Laicis lib. 3. ca. 6. The Power of a Nation, saith Bellarmine, is setled in the whole multitude as its true and proper Subject; and accordingly they may change a Kingdom into an Aristocratical, or Democratical state, whensoever they find cause for it.De jure & Instit. lib. 2. cap. 6. If a Prince be a Tyrant, saith Lessius; he may be deposed, or declared a publick enemy by the Common-wealth; and thereupon it may be lawful to attempt any thing against his Person. When the Common-wealth,De Rego, lib 6. ca. 6. saith Mariana, cannot other ways secure and preserve its own peace and safety, it may by a right inherent in it self, declare the King to be the common Enemy, and then destroy him with the Sword. Thus we plainly see, that whatsoever others did, the Jesuits had first taught them the principles upon which they might justifie the doing of it. But this is not all, for over and above this, they have not only been openly charged to have had a hand in the contriving and actually compassing the late Kings death; but the person that doth thus accuse them, undertakes the Justifi∣cation of it, either before his present Majesty, or before any one who can legally require it of him. And which is an evident demonstration of their Guilt, notwithstanding all the interest which they have had of late years, from which they might at least promise themselves Justice, if they could not expect Favour; yet though challenged to bring this mat∣ter to a hearing, they have not so much as once dared to attempt it. Yea the late King himself, was informed a little before his death, that the Jesuits at a general meeting in France, in revenge for his condescending in the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, to pass some Bills in prejudice of them, and the Romish Religion, had unanimously resolved by the power, in∣terest, and influence that they had in and upon the Army, to bring him to Justice, and get him Executed. Accordingly when the stroke was given, both one that was a Romish Priest, and a Confessor, namely, Sara∣bras, brandished his Sword, and proclaimed, That now their greatest Enemy was cut off and destroyed. I suppose that the Judgment of Sir William Morrice late Secretary of State, will bear some weight with all English men, as well upon the account of his great Integrity, as the many opportunities he enjoyed beyond others, of satisfying himself in a mat∣ter of this importance;See Mou∣lins Vin∣dicat. hear then what he declares in a Letter to Dr. du Moulin, August the 9th. 1673. This I may say safely, and will do it confi∣dently,
that many Arguments did create a violent suspition, very near con∣vincing Evidences, that the irreligion of the Papists, was chiefly guilty of the murder of that excellent Prince, the Odium whereof they would file — to the account of the Protestant Religion. However, the Papists having not only escaped Legal Arraignments upon this account, but having since the Kings return, been esteemed by some, His late Majesties best friends; they have thereupon arrived at more respect, as well as enjoy'd more peace in their Persons and Estates, than they were in possession of at any time since the Reformation. Nor do I believe that there is any Prote∣stant that would have envied them the security they enjoyed, or the fa∣vour they had attained to, provided they had not abused them to the destruction of His Majesties Person, the supplanting of His Government, and the extirpating the Religion which was Legally established. But alas, good and peaceable Souls, such an opportunity of promoting the Catho∣lick interest, was not to be lost. They might now carry on their designs for the Triple-Crown, none daring to suggest any thing to bring them un∣der a jealousie, who would not be immediately aspersed, as maligners of the Kings best friends. And it is not to be apprehended what improve∣ment of that little stock of credit, which some of the Popish Gentry had gotten by their being on the late Kings side in the last War; the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, made to the furtherance of the subjugating these Na∣tions again to Rome, For now were all the principles of the Papal Reli∣gion (by which those that espouse it, are obliged to root out Heresie, and Establish the Jurisdiction of the Pope) inculcated from day to day upon persons of one quality and another of the Papal Profession. A second thing, which gave them no less advantage for the carrying on  of their designs, was the division among the Protestants themselves. And here two things greatly ministred to the sub-serving the design of the Pa∣pal Agents. (1) The parties divided were come to a more equal bal∣lance as to numbers on each side respectively, than at any season hereto∣fore. For during the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the first, the Dissenters from the Established way of the Church of England, were but few, in comparison of those who were for Episco∣pacy, and the Rites and Ceremonies required by Law in Divine Worship. So that there being then little jealousie of any danger to the Church of England, from the Protestant Dissenters, how zealous soever they might even in those days be for their way, the watchfulness of the Dignitaries of the Church, and the labours of the inferiour Clergy, were chiefly exer∣cised and laid out in reference to the Papists. But those who stile them∣selves Non-conformists, being now multiplied to that degree, as that they seem to bear a much nearer proportion to the other party, than heretofore they did; The main care of the Over seers of the Church, hath thereupon much abated towards the Papists, and been exerted towards them. (2) The Animosities between the Protestants thus divided into two parties, were become higher, and their mutual exasperations grown fiercer, than here∣tofore. For partly through the ill entertainment which the Bishops and the conformable Clergy met with in the late times, and partly through the ill entertainment which the Bishops and the conformable Clergy met with in the late times, and partly through the retaliation they have mea∣sured to Protestant Dissenters, since they had the Authority of the Law, and assistance of the Government to befriend them, they are wonder∣fully inflamed in mutual heats towards, and disgust of one another. Of
which it is easie to imagine, what manifold uses the Factors for the Roman See, have made to the furthering of their own designs, which tend equal∣ly to the ruine of both. For as the pretence of these Divisions, hath served as a plea to proselyte such who know not that the Divisions of the Church of Rome are more numerous, and their feuds more irreconcilea∣ble; so the subtile Ministers of the Papacy have, by winding themselves into all Companies, if not the mustering themselves in all parties, endea∣voured both to heighten the differences, and to make their Animosities against each other, not only hotter, but more immortal. And while the one party of Protestants hath been crying out of Schism, and the other party of persecution; the Papists have to the reproach of both, been undermining that common Faith which they equally centre in, and carrying on a design of destroying the one as well as the other, being in their account both equally Hereticks. I would be loath to believe, that through the grandure which the Clergy are exalted unto the possession of in the Church of Rome, that therefore our Protestant Bishops and other Dignitaries of the English Church, should think them the less dangerous; but this I know, that those vulgarly stiled Phanaticks, have judged them∣selves highly justified in their clamours against the Conformable Clergy, in that they are so severely treated, while in the mean time, no difference in any fundamental Doctrine from the Church of England, can be ob∣jected unto them. And as the Jealousies which the differences betwixt dissenting Protestants, have caused, have made every overture, though for the preservation of Religion in general, and the safety of the Nation, (wherein they are both alike interested) if proposed by one party, to be suspected by the other; so the distrust which these Divisions have caused in one Protestant towards another, hath in no small measure em∣boldned the Papists to hope, that in whatsoever they should attempt, there could be no confederation among Protestants, either to resist or op∣pose them, And though I cannot say it upon my own knowledge, yet I have cause to believe it from the reason of the thing, as well as upon the Testimony of Mr. Dugdale, that they were the more confident in their design privately to Assassinate the King, as hoping when they had so done, to have Fathered it upon the Phanaticks. And as they might very rati∣onably believe, that would the Nation have been so possest, they would have avenged it upon that party, even to the extirpating of them; so they assuredly knew, that thereby their own design of destroying the Episcopal Protestants, would have been rendred much the more facile. A third thing that equally contributed with the former, to the intro∣duction of Popery into these Kingdoms, was the general prophaneness which hath greatly over-spread these Nations, beyond what at any time heretofore hath been observed. For besides that every prophane person is truly of no Religion, and therefore indifferent to seem to be of any, as interest and temptation sways him; so no man can care much to be of that Religion, which not only condemns all the ways he is resolved upon, but the more because he is of such a Religion that doth not allow them. And withall there is this further whereby such men are disposed for Po∣pery more than others, viz. That it can both allow them in all the sins which they have a mind to, and secure them from the fears of Eternal pu∣nishments in the practice of them. For partly by making many things which Christ hath forbid, and men from the power of their Lusts, and the in∣fluence of their interest have a desire to commit, to be no sins: and part∣ly
by making such things which the Gospel stiles enormous crimes, to be but venial offences, which even in the Justice of God do deserve Eternal punishment; and partly by that security from future wrath, which they propose to them who are guilty of the most daring and prodigious Enor∣mities, through their Doctrines referring to Pennances, Absolutions, and Papal Indulgencies; They had all imaginable grounds of confidence, that no profane Protestants (whatsoever others did) would withstand them in their designs of introducing a Religion which had so carefully provided for them. Now being furthered by these several advantages for the introducing  their Religion into these Kingdoms again, and the overthrowing the an∣cient and legal Government. The next thing to be discoursed of, is the several steps which they had actually taken, and the progress which they had made for the final compassing of those direful and tragical designs. And their first remarkable advance, was their merciless and cruel burning of the City of London, whereof as they were evidently proved the Au∣thors, and Instruments, by many Depositions taken by Order and Au∣thority of Parliament, Anno 1667. so it hath been further testified against them by Mr. Oates and Mr. Bedloe, with an enumeration of many particulars, clearly demonstrative beyond all controll, of their Guilt in that particular. And though they were prevented and disappointed of what they further intended at that time, and whereunto the burning of London was only designed as a Prologue; yet the compassing the devasta∣tion of the City; was in it self alone, no small attainment in the matter of their Catholick and main project. For besides the greatly impove∣rishing the whole Nation, as well as the Inhabitants of the said City there∣by; the re-building of London, and the providing of Bread for distres∣sed Families, was subject enough to employ the thoughts and cares of most men for divers years, without affording them leisure to watch, ob∣serve and provide against the Designs of the Papists. Besides, it may not be improbably conceived, that through Londons lying in Ashes, and the whole Kingdoms being distressed through the influence which this Metropolitan hath upon all parts of the Nation; both the War which His Majesty was then engaged in with the Dutch, was the less vigorously prosecuted, and they emboldned to that which they perpetrated in burning some of the Royal Navy in His Majesties Chambers. And which hath been more fa∣tal, from this Fountain of Distress that the Kingdom laboured under, as an effect of the burning of London, was the French King encouraged to the aggrandising himself, by those Conquests which he made upon the Spanish Provinces in the Netherlands. And His Majesty, whose Wisdom sufficiently instructed him, that it was the interest even of His own Domi∣nions, to have the ballance of Europe kept even, found himself disabled from giving that Check and Opposition to that Princes designs, which we may very well conceive that otherwise he would have done. A second step, which the unwearied Enemies of the Protestant Religion  in these Dominions, had taken, towards both the extirpating of it, and subverting the Government was, their having interested the French King in their Councels, and their having in a great measure engaged him to assist them with Money, and what else might be convenient for the executing their Designs and Attempts. As the Jesuits heretofore laboured in nothing
more effectually, than the advancing the King of Spain to the universal Monarchy of Europe: So that Crown, being by various ways and means, (not here to be insisted upon) much weakned, and rendred wholly un∣capable of aspiring any further in that matter; The pragmatical and treacherous Jesuits, have of late years entirely applied themselves, to the serving the interest, and promoting the grandure of the French Monarch. And when time, the revealer of truth, shall have discovered the myste∣rious workings of those Sons of pride and deceit, it will then appear how they have both kindled those flames of War, which have for some years past laid many flourishing Provinces in Europe wast, and rendred all the Neighbouring Kingdoms and Lands, fields of Blood; but that they have by the interest which they have obtained in all Courts, influenced some Princes to a Neutrality, and others to an open Confederacy with France; so that the French Monarch is now justly become the dread of all his Neighbours. But that which I am observing is this, namely, that the French King being arrived at that formidable greatness which he now stands in, the Plotters and Contrivers of the ruine of England, drew him into their Councels,See Cole∣mans Tri∣al, and therein his Let∣ters. and obtained promises of Assistance towards the rooting out of Heresie, (as according to the Roman stile they call the Protestant Religion) and nourishing a mis-understanding betwixt His Majesty and His People. And as they do conceive this to be a great ad∣vance towards their main project, otherwise they would neither have so laboured to compass it, nor bear themselves so much upon it, having gained that point; so in case that other means for the enslaving of these Nations, and subversion of Religion, should fail them, which at present they nourish their hopes with the success of, we may rationally look for no better consequences and effects from what I have mentioned, than that the King being Excommunicate, and the Nation cursed with him; Lewis the 14th should be intrusted to execute the Papal Bann. And that Inno∣cent the 11th having made a donation of these Kingdoms to him, as Pius the 5th did to Philip the 2d. King of Spain, he should with a strength pro∣portionable to the extent of his own Dominions, and the greatness of his preparations for less designs, endeavour to take possession of them, as Philip the second once did. And how ready they will be to animate the French King to contribute the assistance of his Treasure and Arms, for the rooting out of English Hereticks, we may justly fear and presume from the Councels they give him in reference to his own Subjects, that are of the Reformed Religion.Politicks of France, cap. 5. For in a late Book, to the maxims of which the conduct of his whole affairs seems very much adapted, he is not only informed, that his Ancestors never failed to be Protectors of the Apostolick See, and the Church, but that they turned their Arms, and exposed their Lives against the Albigenses; they vanquished them, they destroyed them, they imprisoned the poor men of Lyons. And he is further told, that both by principles of Christianity, and maxims of Policy, it is necessary for him to reduce all his Subjects to one and the same belief; and that the Edict of Nantes, as being extorted from his Predecessors by violence, and with Sword in hand, ought to be no obstruction in the execution of so blessed a design, but that the said Edict is to be revoked, or at least neg∣lected. Now his compliance with this advice against the Protestants in France, evidenced in many instances,See Perse∣cution of the Prote∣stants in France. whereby he hath endeavoured to extirpate them and their Religion, though by degrees, and in the ways of Fraud and Art, as well as by Power and Force; may at once and instruct us what
measure and favour his Heretical Neighbours are to expect from him, if incited against them by the Pope, and invited to the Undertaking by the English Papists. If neither the advancing his Granfather Henry the Great to the Crown, nor the securing himself in his Royalty, when sought to be dethron'd by the Prince of Condy, deserve or obtain better mea∣sure of Requital, that what the Hugonots in France daily meet with; what may these of the Protestant Religion in England look for from a Prince, that besides his knowing the pretensions of the Kings of England to the Do∣minion of France, and his remembring the Conquests that our Ancestors made upon that Monarchy, and his sensing that his present Majesties Council and Arms have hindred the Carrere of his late Successes, I say what may we look for from a Prince, who besides all this, is at once encouraged by the Pope, invited by the Roman Catholiques in England, and inflamed by his own ambition and pride, as well as animated by his zeal to the Catho∣lique Cause, to turn his Formidable Preparations against these Lands? But to conclude this, I do particularly affirm that the success of the French Arms abroad, hath emboldned the Papists in England in their de∣signs of Subverting not only Religion, but the Government. A Third great step, they had made to the subjugating these Kingdoms to  their Idolatrous Religion, and the Tyranous yoke of the Roman Court; was their preventing the Presumptive Heir to the Crown. For howsoever they can here affirm with all the Asseverations imaginable, especially when in conversation with credulous and easie Protestants, that the Duke of York is still of the Established Religion, only that he is a Prince of more gene∣rousness, than to comply with the Capricioes of a Parliament, in renoun∣cing this, or Swearing to that, as they shall in an humour Enact: Yet they not only know and beleeve the contrary, but both make their boasts of it, and erect their further hopes upon it. Father Anderton Rector of the English College of Jesuits at Rome, Father Campion Minister of the same College, and Father Green Procurator for their Order at Monto Portio, have often told me when I was in Italy, that the Duke of York was of their Religion. And as the Perversion of his Royal Highness gave them nearer prospects of their Establishing their Superstition and Tyranny, once again in these Kingdoms and Dominions; so it contributed to, too effe∣ctually to the bringing over many of all Ranks and Qualities to them. For as I have, when abroad, frequently heard the Jesuits glory, both in the acquisition of such a Convert, and that many Gentlemen through his example had renounced Protestancy and embraced the Roman Catholique Doctrine; so the thing carries a self Evidence in it, nothing being more familiar in the observation of Ages, than that the influence of a Person of the rank, quality, and legal hopes of his Royal Highness, should sway vast and large numbers of people, to espouse the Persuasion that he had ta∣ken up. There is a great part of mankind that seems to own this or that Religion, who yet do it not upon any rational grounds, or motives of conviction, but with respect of Secular interests, wordly advantages, and accomodations. And persons of this Figure, being in truth of no Reli∣gion, will not publickly avow themselves, but vigorously impose that upon others, which appears suited and calculated unto their carnal an worldly Ends. And the Atheistical Principles, which I am afraid too many have imbib'd from a great pretender to Philosophy and Politicks, namely that all the obligations of the Law of God upon the consciences of men, may be violated by the Authority of the Sovereign in his own Do∣minions,
and that no person is accountable at the Tribunal of the Lord, for renouncing Christianity it self, and much less for the disclaiming Pro∣testancy, providing he hath the command of a Ruler to authorise him in what he doth: I say I am justly apprehensive that these and the like abo∣minable Notions, which many have suckt in from Mr. Hobbs, do not only dispose men to be of the Roman Faith, if at any time the Sovereign proves to be so, but that not a few under the meer prospect of what is likely to be, have judged it most convenient to antidate themselves of that Reli∣gion, which they foresee that in a little time they must be of. Moreover it is not easie to be conceived how the Duke of Yorks being a Papist, hath encouraged vast numbers of Romish Emissaries to come over hither, affor∣ded them security while here, and emboldned them in their addresses to all ranks and degrees of Persons. And as the City and Country never swarmed so much with all sort of Romish Ecclesiasticks both Secular and Re∣gular, as since the perversion of his Royal Highness; so by their accosting the hopes of some, and addressing the fears of others, from the Duke's be∣ing a Papist, they have (and that upon my own personal knowledge) prevailed upon many to conform to—his Example. For I very well remember, that Father Campian being returned from England to Rome, where I then was, did not only confirm them that were here, in the belief of the Duke of Yorks being a Papist, and of his having been often at Mass, but withall affirmed that through his Example, many Gentlemen were not only turned Roman Catholicks, but Jesuits. Surely it was upon a due knowledge, as well as mature deliberation, that the Great Senate of the Nation April 27. 1679. Resolved Nemine Contradicente, That the Duke of York's being a Papist, and his hopes of Coming to the Crown such, hath given the greatest Incouragement to the present Conspiracy, and Designs of the Papists, against the King and the Protestant Religion. Nor was this either the only progress they had made to the Reinsla∣ving the Nations to Rome; but through the interest of the Duke of York, and the universal influence he had both at Sea and Land, and likewise at Home and Abroad, they obtained divers of these persons who were most zealous for the Papal Jurisdiction, and in whom they could best con∣fide, to be advanced and preferred into places of Power and Trust. And of this there needs no further Evidence (though many more instances might be assigned) but the advancement of my Lord Clifford to be Lord High Treasurer, and Sr. William Godolphin to be his Majesties Embassador in Spain, and my Lord Bellasis to be Governor of Hull. 'Tis true that by the late Tests—which His Majesty and the Parliament have provided for such as were to be Imployed in publick Trusts (that Papists might be the better and more effectually known and distinguished from Protestants) There are both some removed, who had been advanced to places of Trust, Authority and profit, and some others kept from arriving at those stati∣ons in the Commonwealth, and in the attaining that place and interest in the manage of publick Affairs, which they not only aspired after, but stood recommended unto. Yet give me leave to say, that there are some that have taken these Tests, who notwithstanding continue still Votaries to the Church of Rome, and are only Protestants in Masquerade. For as it was for the Credit of the Roman Church, that some should rather resign their employes and places, than renounce the Papal Jurisdiction, or any part
of the Tridentine Faith; so it being their interest (at least for a while) to have it concealed what persons universally were Papists, and it being also for their advantage, to have some of their Party continued in pub∣lick Offices, without suspicion of their Religion, the better to promote their further designs, they have accordingly made provision for the one as well as the other. And as the losses which some of the party have ap∣peared willing to undergo, upon the Foregoing occasion, have served to enhance— the reputation of their Church; so others being best qualified by their taking— the Tests for the enjoying Preferments and Revenues under the present Government, are not only Spies upon the Councils of the Nation, but Vipers nourished with the profits of the Land, to betray and undermine the Government. And whereas some may think that no person cordial in any—Religion, should for Secular accommodations and worldly Advantages, offend against God, and indanger their own Souls, by Renouncing their Faith, and forswearing that, upon which they su∣perstruct all their hopes for Salvation: The Church of Rome hath by more methods than one, secured such, not only from all fear and hazard of future wrath, but from all danger of sinning against God by so doing. And as to this purpose the Doctrines of Papal Absolution and Indulgence, are admirably suited, supposing their should be sin in such a case; so the Doctrines of Equivocation, Mental Reservation and Authoritative Dispensa∣tions, are no less calculated for preserving them from all Guilt— notwithstanding their taking the Oaths, and making the Declarations which the Law requires. Having now made these happy proceeds, as they thought, towards the  overthrow of the Protestant Religion and the Established Government, there remained only for the Accomplishment of these, and all other their Ex∣ecrable Designs, but the destroying the Life of the King. And there are these ensuing Reasons which not only justifie such endeavours in all that are furnished with Evidence, for the making a further detection, but which do indispensably oblige them not to conceal any thing that may serve to unravel and unvail the Conspiracy. (1.) The vindication of the Justice of the Nation on those Traitors that have suffered, doth bespeak and require this at every mans hand. For though the utmost Candor imaginable, was extended to the Crimi∣nals, and the stricktest scrutiny by interrogations in favour of the Male∣factors, exercised towards the Kings Witnesses, and the several Juries that were Impannelled for their Tryal, were of the most knowing, honoured; and Impartial Persons that either the City of London, or the neighbour∣ing County could afford; yet all these have not been sufficient to pre∣vent the arraignment of the Justice of the Kingdom, for Condemning those Conspirators. For not to mention what their surviving Friends, do as falsly as reproachfully give out in favour of their Innocency in all Com∣panies; the very Press (almost to the Ignominy of the Government that suffereth it) hath swarmed with Pamphlets in justification of their ha∣ving died Guiltless. Such Pamphlets, are the Letter to both Houses; the sober and seasonable Queries, in order to the Choice of the New Parliament; the second Edition with Additions, &c. The Jesuits Plea, in answer to a Let∣ter, entituled Lying allowable with the Papists to deceive Protestants: The Plot of the Papists, to transform Traitors into Martyrs: The Compendium of the late Tryals, in relation to the present Plot: besides divers other Prints equally scurrilous, as well as filled with pernicious Reflections upon the
Honour and Justice of the Nation, so that every man of Sense, is surprised at their impudence, and every person of Loyalty, roused to a zeal of vin∣dicating the King and Kingdom, from the obloquies of Injustice cast up∣on them. And though the Kings Witnesses do intend publickly to vin∣dicate themselves from the Calumnies with which they are aspersed, and will, I doubt not, perform it both to the universal satisfaction of the Na∣tion, and the utter confusion of their Adversaries; yet let me offer these two or three Remarks upon the foregoing Pamphlets, which I judge not only sufficient to baffle them, but eternally to expose them to contempt, as so many infamous Libels. First then, what credit ought to be given to him, that shall dare publish in the view of all the Nation, That not one Person accused in this pretended Conspiracy,So the New Plot to Trans∣form, &c. p. 15. did either fly or abscond (ex∣cept only the Priests who were obnoxious to the Law for their Priesthood) when in the mean time (besides many others of all ranks and qualities, who upon their being some of them accused, and others suspected, have withdrawn themselves) the four Villains who are charged for conspiring to Assassinate the King, do notwithstanding his Royal Proclamation re∣quiring their appearance, either by flight or concealment absent them∣selves. Secondly, who pretending to be either a good Christian, or a faithfull Subject, can have any Faith for such a person, who is not afraid no more than ashamed, openly thus to slander the King himself, namely That though he be both most concerned, and has had the best opportunities of ex∣amining the Discovery of the Plot,Letter to both Houses, p. 2. yet he is so far from believing it that he openly laughs at it. Vile Impostor! that dares thus accuse the King both to the World, and his own People. How often hath His Majesty told us in his Royal Proclamations, that he is fully convinced of a Hellish and Po∣pish Conspiracy, against his own Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government: And yet this impudent Generation of Romish Votaries do not blush to affirm; that He laughs at it as a fabulous and Romantick Story. Doth not the King in his Proclamation Octob. 30. 1678. call it a Bloody and Traiterous design, of Popish Recusants, against his Majesties Person, and Government, and the Protestant Religion? And doth he not by his Proclamation Nov. 20. 1678. declare that the Popish Priests and Jesuits, lurking within this Realm, have contrived, and set on foot divers traiterous Plots and Designs, against His Majesty, his Government, and the Protestant Religion by Law Established? And doth he not also by his Pro∣clamation for a Fast, March 28. 1679. declare, that through the impious and malicious Conspiracies, of the Popish Party, there is a Plot not only in∣tended, to the Destruction of his Royal Person, but the total Subversion of the Government, and of the true Protestant Religion within the Realm by Law Established? And doth not my Lord Chancellor in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, March the 6. 1678/9. assures us, That his Majesties Royal Person hath been in danger, by a Conspiracy against his Sacred Life, malitiously contrived, and industriously carried on by the Seminary Priests, and Jesuits, and their Adherents, who think themselves under some ob∣ligation of Conscience to effect it, and having vowed the Subversion of the True Religion amongst us, find no way so likely to compass it, as to wound us in the Head, and kill the Defender of the Faith? And besides what the last Parliament declared to that purpose, did not the House of Commons of the Parliament which was then sitting when the Plot was first disco∣vered, with the Approbation of the House of Lords, resolve, That that House was of Opinion, that there hath been, and still is, a Damnable and Hel∣lish Plot, contrived and carried on by Popish Recusants, for Assassinating
and Murdering the King, and for Subverting the Government, and rooting out and destroying the Protestant Religion. So that now upon the whole matter, He that dare assume the boldness to tell us, that the King laughs at the Plot, as a ridiculous and ill contrived Story, doth Brand the King, the Lord Chancellor, and Two Parliaments for a company of Impostors. And if this be not enough to stigmatise such Rascals for the worst of Slan∣derers, and overthrow their credit with all Mankind, surely nothing in this World can be alledged more effectual to do it. Thirdly, need we more to satisfie us, that there is any thing to be expected from men of a Papal Complexion, by lies and calumnies, if we will but consider, that after they had inhumanly murdered Sr. Edmund-bury Godfrey, fastned di∣vers slanders upon him before he was found, and afterwards endeavour∣ed to impose plain impossibilities upon our Faith, namely that he had kil∣led thimself, when the place where he lay, the manner of his laying, and many other circumstances uncontroulably demonstrated the contrary; so at last, one of these scandalous and villainous Scriblers dare now so∣lemnly avouch, That he was an entire Friend to the Popish Party, and that he had performed the utmost service in their behalf,Compen∣dium of the Trials, p. 69. that friendship it self could suggest. Can there be any thing said more effectual at once to con∣vince this Fellow of being a Slanderer, or to disabuse those men of little understanding, that are inclined to believe him in any thing he says, than that he should offer to obtrude upon the Faith of Englishmen; that Sr. Edmund-bury Godfrey was a Papist, or at least a very friend to the Papal Party? It were to abase the patience of all who knew that worthy Gen∣tleman, and are masters of Sense or Honesty, to offer to prove that Sr. Edmund-bury Godfrey was a Protestant, or that he was far enough from supposing himself inrolled in the number of the friends of the Popish Fa∣ction. Alas poor Gentleman! as he little dreamed that a professed Mem∣ber of the Church of England, and a liberal Asserter of the Protestant Doctrine, and constant Reliever of the necessities of those that were of the Reformed Religion, but one (as himself frequently related) that expected to be the first Martyr under the Popish Rage, should be con∣signed down to Posterity as the Cordial friend to those avow'd Enemies of his own Religion, or a principal Confident of those Bontefeus of the Kingdom, for whose peace and safety he was a watchfull Magistrate. Nothing allyed to truth can be expected, from such who after they had barbarously Murdered an innocent Gentleman, do by robbing him after∣wards of his honour, credit and reputation, assassinate him a second time. It is a great effect of the Divine Wisdom, to give up Impostors to the ven∣ting some palpable falshoods, that the easie and credulous World may be the better fortified against those other reports, which they cannot so easi∣ly disapprove. For they who are found wilfull and evident Slanderers in some things, ought not to be credited in any thing unless it be accom∣panied with better Credentials, than the authority of their Testimony. These few Remarks are sufficient to take off the credit of those Popish Scri∣blers, that have attacked the Reputation of the Kings Witnesses, and slandered the Justice of the Nation, so a reply being preparing to all the particular instances in which they are slandered, may discharge me from calling those Pamphletters to a further Account. Yet forasmuch as I do not think it enough to have these Advocates  of the Plot proved meerly to be Slanderers, I shall therefore moreover show that the Papists may not only be publick Defamers with a Consi∣stancy
to their Religion, but that the Doctrines of their chief Casuists, instruct and incourage them to be so. And this I shall perform in a brief consideration of two Particulars. First, in that they teach the Mem∣bers of their Church, to be under no obligation to speak Truth either to, or of Hereticks; but that they may calumniate them without the fear of guilt or Divine wrath. It is the common opinion of the Jesuits in all their Scholastick and Casuistical Writings, that it is no sin to Calumniate those who speak ill of them or the Roman Church. They are under no mo∣ral Obligation to Hereticks; but may cheat them without dishonesty, violate Oaths made unto them without perjury, rob them without theft, kill them without murder, and lie to them, or concerning them without the violation of the measures of Truth or Justice. Nor is it any ways strange, that while they may meritoriously destroy us, they should with innocency defame us. For by the same Principles, that no Faith is to be kept with Hereticks, no Faith is due to them. When we meet with such Maxims, as that Servants owe no fidelity to Heretical Masters, nor Children obedience to Heretical Parents, nor Wives conjugal duty to Heretical Husbands, nor Subjects loyalty to Heretical Princes; ought we after this to be surprised, upon finding it established as a received Doctrine at least of the Jesuits, that they may innocently slander and defame Hereticks of whatsoever quality and degree? And as by the knowledge of their Principles in this matter, I can make a shift to understand Balsec, Cocleus, Sanders, &c.— in their virulent and slanderous Books, against Calvin, Luther, and other blessed Reformers, without finding my self obliged to believe them in any one word they speak, to the defamation of those whom they accuse; so by the same means I judge my self conducted not to give credit to any Papist, speaking to the prejudice of an Heretick, unless I be otherwise as∣sured of the Truth of what he declares. But secondly, if you will add to this, that they are countenanced by the maxims of their Divines, to de∣fame any one of what Religion soever he be, that doth them an injury, we may then be fully armed against all Impressions of disbelieving the Plot, that the late Scriblers are designed to raise or beget. In all the Casuistical Divinity of the Jesuits, there is hardly a case wherein they do so unanimously conspire and agree as in this, That it is lawfull to invent crimes to ruine their credit who speak ill of them. And this they have not only declared in their Books, but maintained in the Theses, which they have proposed to be disputed in their Schools.See the Mystery of Jesuits. Let. 15. I know that which sur∣prizeth many, who know not the Rules and measures the Papists act by, is the men not only pretending to some Religion themselves, but intrusted with the conduct of the Consciences of others, should publish and divulge such and such things, if they were not true; when alas! the Principle they act by, is not whether the thing they affirm be true, but whether it be for their advantage, honour, and secular interest to have it believed.De Justit. lib. 1. Tr. Disp. 12. I do maintain saith Dicastellus—That Calumny when it is used against a Calumniator, (i. e. one that doth them or their Order a mischief) though grounded on absolute falsities, is not for that any mortal sin, either against Justice or Charity. That is is only any mortal sin to Calumniate fal∣sly,Theolog. Fundamen. N. 1151. Lib. 9. De∣col. 2. Sect. 2. De Justit. lib. 2. c. 9. to preserve ones honour, is no doubt, saith Caramuel, a probable opinion. It is a probable Opinion, that we may lawfully slander that person, by char∣ging him with crimes that are false, against whose Testimony we are not able otherwise to defend our selves, saith Sambourin. Nor is it any ways strange that they should hold it lawfull to Calumniate any one that accuseth them, seeing they declare it lawfull to kill such a one. We may without
mortal sin, saith Lessius, kill an accuser,See also Escobar. Morus. Theolog. Tract. 1. Exam. 7. cap. 2. Amicus de Justit. Disp. 36. Sect. 5. Ʋbi supt. Sect. 7. though the crime whereof he ac∣cuseth us be true, so it were secret. It is lawfull even for an Ecclesiastick or Monk, saith Amicus, to kill that person who threatens to produce great crimes against him or his Order. Now having established Maxims by which they make it lawfull not only to Calumniate, without endangering their Sal∣vation, but destroy those that injure them; is it any thing strange that they should practise what they esteem lawfull, especially when their do∣ing it is so necessary, not only to the preservation of the credit and safe∣ty of their Order, but of their Church, and all their Party in England? Can any man imagin, but that having made it lawfull to Calumniate, they should at this time, if ever, act accordingly, there being no way left to vindicate themselves, or discredit their Accusers, save the making their recourse to lies, slanders and revilings. I desire in reference to all they say, to bring the business to this issue with them; either their Ca∣suists teach such Maxims, or they do not. As to their teaching them, let them deny it if they dare, I both assign the Men that do so, and the places where. And besides those I have mentioned, shall be ready if called thereunto, to produce many more concurring in the same Doct∣rine. And seeing they do teach these Maxims, let them if they can, give but any Rational person satisfaction, that any credit is due to such, who may lawfully act (as every Papist may) upon these Principles. Let them not then offer to abuse the World any more, by Discourses demon∣strative of the Unlawfulness of lying and Calumniating, by arguments from natural light, and Divine Revelation, seeing neither Scripture, nor the light of Reason are the measures which they Govern themselves by. And all Treatises of that nature are but fresh instances of their lying and deceiving, while they are declaring it unlawfull to do so. And let me add this, that the late Pamphlets most adapted to impose upon the World, a belief of the credibility and sincerity of the Jesuits, such as the Letter to the Two Houses; the Jesuits Plea; and the New Plot to transform Jesuits into Martyrs, &c. Do overlook all those Maxims of their Casuists, which have been advanced against them, by the Authors both of the Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits; and of the Letter intituled Lying allowable with Papists to deceive Protestants: and do only insist upon other Principles, which by their Maxims they are not obliged to go∣vern themselves by. And whereas they are pleased to ask us, whether we take those who have been either Condemned, or only Arraigned, to have been Atheists, that they should do that, which not only the Prin∣ciples of the Gospel, but the common Sentiments of Mankind not only forbid under the greatest penalty, but teach us to detest? I answer that I take them to have been worse, namely Jesuits, or their Disciples, who under the names of Christians, to the reproach of Religion, as well as the debauching of Mankind, and ruine of all Societies and Govern∣ment, have established that as lawfull, which the Gospel threatens with eternal Wrath, and with all states punish either with the Gibbet or the Pillory. A second Reason, why it is not only every ones duty, but at this time  indispensally necessary to contribute to the further detection of the Popish Plot, is the awakening the Kingdom to provide in all legal and due ways, for the Protection of His Majesties Person, and its own defence and Se∣curity. The Lethargy that the generality of the Nation laboureth under, is that which amaseth its Friends, and incourageth its Enemies. They
are greatly deceived, that think the Papists have laid their design, alas they do more industriously than over pursue it. The Case is so stated, that there is no retreat, and rather than miss their hopes, they are resol∣ved to stake lives, fortunes, and all upon a venture. They have labou∣red too long to bring things to the pass they are in, to loose in a mo∣ment the fruits of all their toyls and indeavours. Though the Prote∣stants should be willing to forgive them, yet they know that they have proceeded too far to rely upon Mercy; and therefore their guilt light∣ning their fears, makes them desperate. The death of Traytors who have suffered, instead of dismaying the Party, hath greatly enflamed them to revenge. They know too well, that many more both deserve, and may meet with the like measure, and rather than tamely suffer it, they will all run on in the same fortune. They are at present negotiating with all Foreign States for Assistance, and he must needs be a stranger to conversation, that hath not heard of the liberal Contributions pro∣viding for them in all Popish Countries. The boldness they every where express, is not the effect of their Innocency, but of their Vil∣lany and confidence of Success, through the Aids which they look for. Nor hath their slandering the King to his People, and their misre∣presenting many of his Protestant Subjects to him, any other tendency but to prevent mutual confidence between them; which if they can but hinder, its impossible, as things stand, that they should miscarry in their design, or that either His Majesty or his Protestant Subjects should escape. To tell us by one hand, that the King laughs at the Plot as a matter whol∣ly fabulous;Season∣able Que∣ries, p. 1. and by another, that the Two late Parliaments were a Com∣pany of Factious Men: What design can this have? but to beget a distrust betwixt His Majesty and his People, and deprive us of that mutual confidence in one another, which is so absolutely necessary to our Preservation. When I have told you (as I shall anon) that the Kings Person is more in danger than any of his People, it may serve to promote your confidence in the Government, and to unite among your selves in order to His Majesties Preservation. For as His Majesty hath most just cause to apprehend the designs of the Papists against his Life, so we may not only fear, but too groundedly conclude, that both our Religion, and Civil Liberties, with whatsoever else is dear unto us, will become a Sacrifice to the lusts of the Romish Party, if they succeed in their Conspi∣racies against his Life. Whoever he be that maketh profession of the Protestant Religion, and will not seem to believe there is a Plot, nor ac∣knowledge the Nation to be in danger, he ought to be listed under one of these three Ranks of Men. First, he is either of the number of those weak Fools, whom God hath given riches to, in consideration for ha∣ving denied them understanding. For there are a kind of silly Coxcombs, that are first pusled, and then missed by Insinuations, which none but Knaves would suggest, and Idiots be swayed with. Or secondly, he is re∣duceable to them, whose fears make them both dissemble and ready to deny what they too well know; for there are a great many, whose dread prescribes to their reason and Conscience. Now these apprehending it impossible to prevent the Designs on foot, though they were not at first in them, and possibly intend not actually to be, yet having a mind to preserve themselves, they are therefore not only willing to connive at that, which they judge impossible to be defeated, but to make an inte∣rest with the Conspirators, in serving them as far as they can, without running the hazard of the Halter. Or thirdly, he may be numbred amongst
them, who rather than a Company of discountenanced Protestants, should be a little indulged, they will sacrifice the very Protestant Religion to the pleasure and lusts of the Papists; Through an apprehension which they have, that should the Plot be believed, the Nonconformists may meet with some degree of Favour in order to their better encouragement to ingage a∣mong others for the defence of the Government; they are resolved so that they may have the pleasure of seeing them destroyed, to expose (at least as far as in them lies) the Nation to be ruined with them. Nor can I apprehend why the late House of Commons comes—to be aspersed by some publick Scriblers, as well as in Coffee-house Twatlers, unless it be that they did not think meet, whilest they were providing for the secu∣rity of the Kings Person, and safety of the Kingdom from the Conspira∣cies of the Papists, at the same time to Enact new Laws, and those writ∣ten in Blood, against persons of the same Religion with themselves, and who do only differ from them in some few Rites and Ceremonies, nowise essential to the Protestant Religion. He can therefore be no friend to the Protestant Religion, to the King, or to the Government, that when our Ruine is conspired by a company of desperate Popish Enemies at home, and threatned by a Combin'd Power of Papists from abroad, endeavoureth then to disunite and weaken us, by groundless Aspersions and Calum∣nies cast upon men, sound in all the Fundamentals of the Protestant Doct∣rine, and ready to venture their Lives and Fortunes as soon as any, for the defence of His Majesty and the Government. And therefore among o∣ther reasons for my contributing all I can to the further Detection of the Plot to the Nation, (having first discovered what I know of it to His Majesty and the Privy Council) I do plainly deliver this to be one, that they who question it from principles of Weakness and Simplicity, may be more fully informed, and they who endeavour to shame it upon base, corrupt, and perverse Considerations, may be taken notice of and esteemed Abetters of the Popish Conspirators in their most Hellish Designs. And that the Light I arrived at concerning the Design against His  Majesties Person, and the Protestant Religion in these Nations, may be conveyed to others with the more Intelligibleness, as well as the greater Credibility; it is convenient that I should intimate these three things. (1.) That I was originally a Protestant, being both trained up in that Faith, whilest a Child here at home, and further instructed in the Refor∣med Doctrine whilest at Geneva abroad. But being Travelling in France, I was by the art, craft, and unwearied persuasions of Abbot Mountague, and Mr. Thomas Carr, perverted from the Protestant Religion, and allu∣red into the Communion of the Romish Church. And as none are so industrious in Foreign Nations, to debauch his Majesties Protestant Sub∣jects, whom they occasionally there meet with, as the English, Scotish, and Irish Papists, residing in those Parts; So the various methods they take to inveigle those, whom they have opportunity to meet with and address, are not easie to be expressed. For by suting their Temptations sometimes to the Necessities, and at other times to the lusts and Ambi∣tions of those they accost, they prove more successfull in their Attempts for Seducing young Travellers, than can readily be imagined. For if they be persons of Quality, they allure them with hopes of esteem in Foreign Courts, the favour of Access to, and Correspondence with Princes and Potentates abroad, and especially with promises of being Exalted at home
upon the Alteration, which they give themselves out as prepared to in∣troduce into these Nations. And if they be Persons of Scholastick abili∣ties, then they assault them with assurances of Preferment, and that they shall not only be accomodated and esteemed sutably to their Parts in their Colleges abroad, but that they shall be made Dignitaries of the Church here, upon the Revolution that is ready to take place in these King∣doms. And if the Persons are indigent then they attack them with offers, not only to supply their present wants, but to provide for them even to their own wishes and desires for the future: Yea, if those they meet with, chance either to be Malefactors, that have fled beyong Sea for their crimes, or Bankrupts who have withdrawn thither to escape their Cre∣ditors, unto such they offer either a Sanctuary in their Monasteries, or to recommend them to some Grandee that may imploy them agreeably to their inclination and humour. So that what in one way and what in another, there are none come within their Circle, whom they have not Temptations prepared for, and futed unto. And I wish that the sad ex∣perience of their success upon my Self, as well as the many conquests I have seen them make of others; might not only influence Parents to be less forward in sending their Sons beyond Sea, but awaken the Govern∣ment to provide, if not against the thing, yet against the dangers that at∣tend it. Secondly, I would intimate this, that being after manifold per∣suasions, perverted from the Protestant Religion and induced to Espouse the Faith of the Church of Rome. I was accordingly received with great Ceremony into the said Church by Cardinal Grimaldi, Archbishop of Aix in Provence. 'Tis true, they do not think meet to celebrate the reception of every one that goes over to them, with so much solemnity, but yet it is not without many and considerable reasons, that they think meet some∣times to do it. For though in effect they have only cause of glorying over the ignorance, weakness or lusts of the Party they have Proselited; yet they would have it pass for a Triumph over the Religion which he hath for∣saken. And though all that they can truly boast of, be the ensnaring some Person, that neither understood the Religion which he relinquished, nor that which he espoused, but was meerly captivated with the hopes of Pleasure, Profit, and Preferment; Yet, Protestancy must be brought upon the stage as weary of it self, and the Popish Religion must be recommen∣ded to the Ignorant multitude, from the Victory it hath obtained over such a thinking, learned and conscientious Man. Thirdly, I would suggest this, that being received into the Bosom of the Romish Church; I went thereupon to Rome, and was entertained in the Jesuits College. Where, by my continuance four years, and running through my whole course of Philosophy, and at last taking Orders of Priesthood, and through my being sometime Prefect of the Study, I injoyed these opportunities of knowing their Sentiments, and Doctrines concerning Protestant Princes, and of their Designs against these Nations, with their hopes of Reensla∣ving them, which I shall now declare. Nor will it, I hope, be reckoned a piece of Immodesty; and I do affirm that partly through my success in my Scholastick Exercises, and partly through the favour I had with Car∣dinal Rochi, Major Domo to the Pope, to whom I had dedicated all my Theses, and partly from the familiarity I had with all the principal Fa∣thers of the Jesuits in the English College, I had not only the advantage of Hearing what was publickly said, either in Schools or Refectory, but was allowed Access to private Discourse with the most Eminent Fathers in the College, where I had their Opinions concerning the King of England,
and an account of their Purposes towards Him, and the Kingdom, incul∣cated to me. These things being briefly premised and intimated, That which I have  next to offer, is, that whilest I was at Rome, I frequently heard the Je∣suits both teach in Schools, and preach in Pulpits the Doctrine of the Pope's power to depose Kings. So that according to them no King doth Reign, but at the pleasure of the Pope. And from hence we may learn these two things. (1.) That it is not only lawfull, but necessary in order to the preservation of the peace and safety of the Kingdom, that all who have imbib'd these Doctrines, should be accounted Traytors, and according∣ly proceeded against, though never convicted to acting up to them. The Principle it self is the highest of Treasons, and therefore there needs no further Over-act, for the condemning such Criminals. So far as the Popish Religion hath only an influence upon the future state of men, it was never punished with death in England; it is only upon the foot of those Doctrines, which instruct and countenance them to overthrow the State and Government, that Romish Priests are justly made liable to suffer. And therefore the Priests who were lately Executed, without being Arraigned for any thing, save for their being so, and their withdraw∣ing His Majesties Subjects from the Religion by Law Established, were as reall Traytors, as those who were convinced for Conspiracy against the Kings Life. (2.) I would further infer from the foregoing Doctrine, that no security can be had of the Loyalty of any Person that is so pos∣sest. For so long as he holds that any one hath Authority to depose the Prince, under whose Government he lives, it is impossible that such a Prince can be secured of the fidelity and allegiance of that Subject. And it is very remarkable, that whereas some of the Irish Papists since His Majesties Restauration, had in a Remonstrance prepared for the persuading the Go∣vernment of their Loyalty, only acknowledged (though they had not sworn it) that King Charles is their Lawfull King, and the Pope hath no power to Depose him, how thereupon they are told from Rome, that they had renounced the Catholick Faith, and that they were fallen under the Condemnation of the Apostolick See. For as the Popes Nuncio at Brus∣sels by a Letter dated July 21. 1662. informs them, how that their Re∣monstrance being examined at Rome by Cardinals and Divines, was found to contain Propositions condemned by Paul the Fifth, and Innocent the Tenth, and that the Pope was so far from approving it, that he did not so much as permit, or connive at it, and therefore condemned it in this Form, that it could not be kept without breach of Faith, according to the Decrees of Paul the Fifth; and that it denied the Popes Authority in matters of Faith, according to that of Innocent the Tenth. I do further declare, that during my abode at Rome, I heard the Jesuits  often affirm and publish, that it was not only lawfull to Kill any Prince or Person Excommunicated, and declared a Heretick, but that it was merito∣rious to do so. Nor was this the Opinion only of one or two, or of such as might be esteemed Rash and Giddy, but it was the common Doctrine of all the Jesuits there. And I do by all that may obtain credit with Man∣kind, testifie that I have heard it Asserted by Father Anderton, Rector of the English College of the Jesuits at Rome, Father Campion, Minister of the said College, Father Robert Southwell Assistant to the General of the Jesuits, Father Buckley Pentionary for the Pope, Father Green Procurator
for the Jesuits at Monto Portio within fifteen Miles of Rome. And from this I desire to make these three Remarks. (1.) That every Protestant Prince is hereby exposed to the mercy of any one, that under the encou∣ragement of meriting Heaven, will take the boldness to Assassinate Him. For all such Princes, both by the Decrees of their Councils, and the Can∣nons of their Church, as well as by the Bulls of divers Popes, are not on∣ly pronounced Hereticks, but actually Excommunicate: Nor are the Je∣suits singular in this Opinion, that it is lawfull to kill Heretical Princes, for the Pope himself by a Decree in their Canon Law, hath taught and decla∣red the same.Causa. 23. q. 5.Canon Ex∣communi∣catorum. We do not esteem them Murderers, saith Pope Ʋrban, who shall happen to kill any Excommunicate person, out of an ardour and zeal to the Catholick Church their Mother. Secondly, I would observe from hence, what opinion we are to have of all that the five Jesuits de∣clared upon their Salvation in their late dying Speeches. God was equal∣ly invok'd to be a Witness of all they said, and their Salvation was alike pawn'd upon the truth of one thing, as well as another. And whereas then we find them evidently Tardy by their saying that there is not one Jesuit (except Mariana) that holds it lawfull for a private person to kill a King,See Ga∣vans Speech. although an Heretick, although a Pagan, although a Tyrant; we may very rationally suspect their sincerity and Truth in all the rest. What! is there not one Jesuit but Mariana, who maintains King-killing Doctrine? Yes, I do affirm that I have frequently heard Anderton, Cam∣pion, Southwell, &c. in their daily Discourses, Lectures, and Sermons at Rome teach the same. And, though all that know me will receive more upon the credit of my Word, than this comes to, yet to put it out of doubt, that the Jesuits died Liars; I shall convince the World of their Teaching the King-killing Doctrine from their publick Writers. Was not Cardinal Tolet a Jesuit, and doth he not declare, That Subjects are not bound to maintain unviolate their Oath of Allegiance to an Excommunicate Person?Lib 1. Instruct. c. 13.Lib. 5. de Rom. Pon∣tif. c. 8. Tom. 3. in Th. Disp. 1. q. 12. Was not Cardinal Bellarmine a Jesuit, and doth he not affirm, That the Pope hath the same right and power over Kings, as Jehoiada had over Athalia? Was not Gregory Valentia a Jesuit, and doth he not teach, that the Pope may deprive Heretical Kings of all Dominion and Superiority over their Subjects? Was not Creswell a Jesuit, and doth he not affirm, that if a Prince be not of the Romish Religion, he looseth all Right and Title to Govern, and his Subjects are discharged from all obligation of Obedience, and that he may be proceeded against as the Enemy of Mankind? Was not Franciscus Varona Constantinus a Jesuit, and doth he not in his Apology for John Chastel,Part 2. c. 2 who wounded Hen. 4. of France, tell us, That it is lawfull for a private man to murder Kings, and Princes condemned of Heresie? Is not this a Point so evident, that De Harlay, the first President of the Parli∣ament of Paris, who both knew the Doctrine of the Jesuits, and had seen the wofull Effects of it, in the murder of Two Kings of France, pub∣lickly avow it to be their common Opinion in all their Writings, That the Pope hath a right to Excommunicate Kings,Vide Thu∣an. lib. 130 ad Ann. 1604. and that thereupon their Subjects may with Innocency assault and destroy them? Have Englishmen learned from the Jesuits the guilt of Forgetfulness, so as not to remember that Cardinal Allen wrote a Book to prove that Princes Excommunicate for Heresie, not only might, but were to be deprived of their Kingdom and Life? And was not William Parry provoked thereby to kill Queen Elizabeth, which though before he had promised at Rome to do, yet he was Hesitating in his mind about it, till incouraged by that Book? Or is it past into Obli∣vion with us, that Father Gifford instigated one John Savage to kill the
same Queen, and that upon the Bull of Pius 5. And which is remarkable at the same time, that they might be the less suspected, and the Queen the more secure, they wrote a Book, wherein they admonished the Papists in England not to attempt any thing against their Princess, but to fight against their Adversaries only with the Weapons of Christians, viz. with Tears,See Camb∣dens Life of Queen Eliz. Spi∣ritual reasonings, Prayers, Watchings and Fastings. To all this I shall only add, that going in the company of Capt. Richardson to visit Mr. Thomas Jenison the Jesuit, then in Newgate (but since deceased) the said Mr. Jenison acknowledged in Discourse, That the Jesuits both held for lawfull, and taught in their Writings, that an Excommunicate King might be law∣fully either Deposed, or Murthered; but that he himself would not have ac∣cession to the practice of these Principles. Thirdly, I desire to recommend this further to the Reader, viz. That though it be both the Doctrine of the Court of Rome, and commonly maintained by the Jesuits in their Writings, that it is lawfull to kill an Heretical Prince, yet it is not usual to press it upon their Youth, and inculcate it to their Scholers, but upon the prospect of some great occasion. They have it always ready in the Books of their Scholasticks and Casuists, to teach their Votaries what may lawfully be done, but it is not their custom to urge it in their Common discourse, nor to recommend it to their Disciples in private or publick Conferences, but with respect to something of that Nature to be speedi∣ly transacted. Thus when they had a purpose to murder Hen. 4. of France, Father Generet a Jesuit, instructed John Chastell in this King-kil∣ling and Heretical Doctrine.See Anti-Coton. And Father Fayre did the same by Francis Veron, to dispose him for the same Design. Yea, when they were ready to perpetrate that barbarous Villany upon that Generous Prince, the ve∣ry Sermons of the Jesuits were all fram'd to instigate men to so Bloody an attempt, so that Ravilliack, when examined about the Causes, why he stabb'd the King? answered, that they might understand them by the Ser∣mons of the Preachers. I do further declare, that during my residence at Rome, I heard the Je∣suits  frequently affirm, that the King of England was an Heretick, and so in Form condemned. And when I was leave to the College and return to England, which was about June 1676. the said Fathers did both seve∣rally and together Teach and Instruct me, that I was not to pay Obedience to an Heretical or Excommunicated Prince. Now whereas there are divers other Protestant Kings and Princes in Europe, beside the King of Great Brittain, that which both then gave me amazement, and hath also cost me some thoughts since, is, why only the King of England should be upon all occasions represented as an Heretiek, and that no other Prote∣stant Prince should be so much as once mentioned under that Character. Nor am I able to resolve it into any thing but this, that it was likely to be more for the advantage of the Church of Rome to have the King of England murthered, than any other Prince besides. For whatsoever ill-will they may bear to them all, yet they are not so foolish as to undertake a thing that carries a hazard of scandal and danger in it, if the success in the Attempt may not recompence the difficulties in the At∣chievement. Now there being no Prince of the Reformed Religion at this day in the World, whose Death would turn so much to the profit of Rome, as that of the King of England, it is the less to be marvelled, that they should be contented to allow others to live, and are only sollicitous to get him removed. And the gain which they promise
themselves from the Death of his Majesty, ariseth from a Consideration of these three things. First, That the Duke of York, the pesumptive Heir to the Crown, is a Papist. And ought it then to be a matter of any surprize, that to further and hasten his Succession, they should con∣spire the destruction of His Majesty, who is the only obstacle in the Duke's way to the Throne? Are we so unacquainted with the History of our own Nation, as not to know how upon the like hopes from Mary Queen of Scots, being next Lineal Successor to Queen Elizabeth, the Romish Party did from time to time contrive and design the death of that Excellent Princess of ever Blessed Memory? And was it not the sense which our An∣cestors had of this, that influenced them to enter into an Association through the whole Kingdom (even in an Interval of Parliament) where∣in they mutually obliged themselves, in case the Queen should be ta∣ken off by any undue means, to avenge it upon the Papists? And this Association was so far then from being apprehended a Seditious or Illegal Bandying of Persons together, that the Parliament that assembled the Year after, did not only Approve it, but Ratifie it into a Law. Well do the Papists know, that should they loose this Advantage, (which they have from the Duke's being a Papist, and of such legal hopes of the Crown) for the Reestablishment of their Religion, they may never en∣joy so fair and probable an Opportunity again. They perceive the King as likely to live as the Duke, and therefore reckon it absolutely necessary, to Anticipate the Course of Nature, and not trust matters of so great Consequence, as the seeing these Nations once more subjugated to Rome, to such a contingency as the Kings Dying in a natural way, be∣fore the Duke. And that which Mr. Dugdale divulgeth every where to this purpose, deserveth a serious Remark; namely, That the Jesuits having calculated the King's and the Duke's Nativities (which by the way is Treason by Law) and finding that the King would in a course of Na∣ture outlive the Duke, they thereupon agreed and resolved to have him cut off by violence. The having a Popish King again in England, would be of so great concernment to the See of Rome, that we may easily conceive (especially seeing the Principles of their Religion do befriend them) that they will not boggle at the Murder of his Present Majesty, to compass and effect it. And whatsoever security the Protestants may flatter themselves with, as to their Religion, from the Promises which his Highness may make unto them, yet this may serve to undeceive them, that not only the Council of Constance hath determined that no Faith is to be kept with Hereticks,Vide Crab. Tom. 2. p. 4. Cochl. Hist. Hus∣sitar. lib. 5. but that Martyn the 5. told Alexander Duke of Lithuania, that if he kept his Oath with such, he sinned mortally.—Se∣condly, the advantage which they reckon upon the Kings Death, ariseth not only from the consideration that the Presumptive Heir is a Papist, but that he is more zealous for that Religion, than Princes of the same Religion, either are, or use to be. It is of great concernment to their Interest, to see a Papist (how lukewarm and indifferent so ever in that Profession) exalted to the English Throne. But to have a Prince of burning Zeal and Ardour for the dignity of the Triple Crown, to be ad∣vanced to sway the English Sceptre, is of far greater consequence to them than most Persons are willing to apprehend. I know that there are some Monarchs of the Faith of the Church of Rome, that are not of the Faith of the Court of Rome, and therefore though they give all due protecti∣on and incouragement to the Romish Religion, yet it is still without suf∣fering it to undermine the State, or to introduce the Papal Jurisdiction.
Though they countenance their Subjects in the Papal Worship, yet they are not willing to see them inslaved to the Popes Usurpation. But whether the Duke of York, should he once arrive at the Crown, would think it enough to allow the Pope only his power in Spirituals, without granting him the right which he challengeth in Temporals, I cannot tell; but this I can say, that the hopes which the Jesuits have, of seeing the whole Papal Jurisdiction established by his means, and as fruits of his Zeal to the Holy See, over these Kingdoms, is a great motive to precipitate his ad∣vancement to the Monarchy, and for their conspiring the Destroying of His Majesty, who is the only Remora in the way. Thirdly, the advan∣tage which they count upon by the Kings Death, ariseth not only from their Assurance of the Presumptive Heir's being a Papist, and one of zeal and ardor for the Papal Chair, but that he is moreover under the con∣duct of the Jesuits. For I do remember, that Father Campian, and Father Anderton, did not only frequently declare, that the Duke of York was of the Romish Religion, but that he was brought over by their Body, and that they had the greatest influence over Him. And as this was the common discourse in the Jesuits College at Rome, so it was received with great joy and acclamation by the whole Society. Now as there can be nothing more fatal to any State, than to have the Prince under the Con∣duct of the Jesuits; so the power they pretend to have obtained over the Duke of York, hath its share in the animating them to hasten his Reign, and in order thereunto to destroy His Majesty. And to this pur∣pose I shall here add, what I heard some of the Fathers say. For Fa∣ther Campian having intimated that many set themselves against the Esta∣blishment of the Popish Religion in England, he added, that nevertheless it must flourish again in that Nation, and we are do the great Work, and restore it. And Father Warner (upon whom I had a Bill of Exchange from Rome, he being Procurator for the Jesuits at Paris, having paid me the Bill) did thus declare himself unto me, Religion must be set up in as high a manner, as ever, in England, and we must be the Promoters of it, though many set themselves in opposition to us. Blessed Promoters and Restorers of Religion! who conspire the Murder of Kings, and Over∣turning of Kingdoms in order thereunto. And are they not fit men to have the Guidance of the Consciences of Princes, who, besides all the o∣ther ill Principles which they are imbued with, are more sworn Vassals to the Jurisdiction of the Pope, than any other Order of the Roman Church? I do moreover declare, That when I was about to leave Rome, and  return into England, both Father Anderton, Father Campian, and Father Green, assured me that there would suddenly be great Alterations in Church and State in this Kingdom; And that there was but one Man in the way (meaning the King) who might be soon removed out of it. Yea, the same Fathers informed me, That they were assured from the most Eminent persons of this Nation, that their Religion should be Established again in these Dominions, in as great Glory, as at any time heretofore, and who∣soever opposed the Establishment of it, should be removed. And I do with∣all remember, that waiting upon Abbot Montague at Paris, as I was in my return homeward, the said Abbot after he had congratulated the seeing me in a Religious Habit, and told me that being of the Order of Secular Priests, I was in the Apostolical way of Teaching; he further subjoyn'd, That I should suddenly see great Changes for the better, both in
Church and State in England, and that I should receive signal Imployment there. So that now from all this, these Four things do immediately fall under the view of every Person that is but so much as capable to un∣derstand Common Sense. (First) That the Kings Life, is judged the only obstruction to the Reenslaving these Nations to Rome, and that so long as he lives, they do utterly despair of subjugating these Kingdoms to the Papal Tyranny. Which as it should make His Majesties Life the more dear to all his Subjects; So it should influence Himself from that regard which he hath so often Solemnly profest to bear to the Protestant Religion, to be the more carefull of his own Safety. (Secondly) not∣withstanding their despair, of being ever able to impose their Faith and Worship upon these Nations, whilest His Majesty liveth; yet they are at the same time confident of seeing this all accomplished. Which is in effect, as much as if they had told us, that they were resolved and prepared to remove Him, and that by some horrid Attempt upon His Life. (Thirdly) That the Confederacy against the Protestant Religi∣on, and these Kindoms is powerfull and strong. For neither any For∣reign Combination, nor the Encouragement which they can have from so small a Number as the open and avowed Papists in the Land amount to, could ever give matter for such Towring hopes, nor administer ground for so high a Confidence; no less than the Engagement of many of the most Eminent Persons of the Nation, (to use their own Phrase) could be Foundation sufficient to erect so vast Expectations upon. And as it is the Interest of the Kingdom to have these (hitherto unknown) Persons detected, so it should be the Prayer of all, and the Endeavour of those Chosen to sit in the Great Senate of the Nation, that the Kingdom may be secured from their Treacherous Designs. (Fourthly) That understanding the Size of the Persons, who have renounced their Allegiance to His Majesty, as well as the Religion by Law Established, instead of being thereby Intimidate, we would grow sensible of the dangers which threaten us, and provide Remedies to withstand them. And seeing there are some Persons, of the foregoing Bulk and Character, actually Impeached, let us by Prayers and Intreaties sollicit His Majesty, that he would not abandon Himself, His Government, and People, to the hazards, which a further Procrastination of their Tryals may occa∣sion. For if they be Innocent, besides the honour of being Vindicated, not only from the Suspicions they lie under, but the Treasons they are charged withall, they will reap the happiness of being restored both to their Liberty, and the good Opinion of their Fellow Subjects. And if they be Guilty, it is both His Majesties Interest, as well as the Nations, and what his Subjects may expect from the Justice he oweth His People, as well as the Grace he hath hitherto exercised towards them, that such villanous Conspirators, as would subjugate these Kingdoms to Popish Idolatry and Slavery, may undergo the severest Pu∣nishments, which by Law are due unto their Crimes. There is one thing more which I learned from the aforementioned Fathers both at Rome and Paris, namely, That He being removed, who alone stood in the Gap, their Religion must needs flourish again in these Na∣tions. Forasmuch as the Duke of York and the Queen were of their side. Now though this way seem to such as know not how to knit two Thoughts together, matter of no great moment, yet to Persons ac∣customed to use their Understandings in a rational train of Discourse, it
suggests that which may give us a very sad apprehension. For besides▪ as I have already observed, that the Duk's being a Papist is the Foun∣tain of all Attempts upon the Kings Life, and the alone rise of all the Danger which His Person is daily exposed to; There is something fur∣ther, and that of a most Tragical Consideration, wrapt up as the sense of those Expressions. For supposing the Duke to be a Papist, and that he should come to the Crown (which God by the Prolongation of His Majesties Life avert) yet without a trampling upon all our Laws (our Religion being incorporate into them, and settled by them) Popery cannot flourish again in these Nations. Protestancy is not only now the Religion of the Kingdom, but it is become a part of the Polity, and an Essential Ingredient of the constitution of our Legal Government. Nor can any (as matters are by Law Established) supplant Religion, which is our legal Right, without Overthrowing all those Laws which secure us of it. So that to tell us that through having the Duke on their Side, were the King once Dead, their Religion should be exalted to its greatest heigth, and flourish in these Nations as much as at any time heretofore, is in Effect to say that our whole Government shall be Changed, and all those Laws subverted, which Entitle us to the Prote∣stant Religion, and protect us in it. What Provision His Majesty, and his Two Houses of Parliament, may think fit to make, to give the Na∣tion security in this matter, as it is to be left to their Wisdom, so it is our duty quietly to acquiesce in what they Agree about, and Enact to this purpose. But if there be any Sense in what I have related from the Jesuits Mouths, they intend not that Protestants shall enjoy much benefit by any Law that shall be made to such an End. They may im∣prove it indeed to facilitate in the minds of short-sighted People, the Duke's Accession with quiet to the Crown; but they have told us be∣forehand, that our Religion shall be never the more secured unto us by a Law of that kind. It is needfull for the Papists at this time to talk of such a Law, to promote that which they themselves first aim at, but having under the favour of it once compassed that, it will be as needfull to destroy it, that they may accomplish the rest. Having related whatsoever may give light to the Horrid Plot against  these Nations, and especially His Majesties Life, so far as my Informations beyond Sea inable me to do. I am in the next place, to give an ac∣count of the further Knowledge I arrived at concerning it, after my Return into England. Being then after divers Years absence, come into my Native Countrey about December 1676. and being recommended as a Secular Priest, to Minister and Officiate in the Family of John Je∣nison Esquire, in the County Palatine of Durham. The first thing that I did, was to recollect the Disloyal and Traiterous Doctrines, which I heard the Jesuits Teach at Rome, and elsewhere. For as these Prin∣ciples had given me such a disgust against their Order before, that though highly tempted and frequently importuned to be One of that Society, I absolutely refused it, and chose rather to be a Secular; so the reflecting upon them at leasure and with sedateness of mind, after I became settled at Mr. Jenisons, heightned my Abhorrency of them. For it is an easier thing to divest a man of the Principles of Supernatural Re∣velation, than to eradicate out of him the Principles of natural Religi∣on.
We may be sooner brought to Renounce the Doctrines of Faith, than the measures of Justice betwixt Man and Man. And there are some who would more easily let go all the Articles, upon which future Happiness depends; then bid farewell to those Dictates of Natural Light, upon which the Government of Kingdoms and the peace of So∣cieties hang and bear. And to deal freely, as I sooner observed the falshood of the Romish Doctrines, which relate to Magistrates, than of those which concern Jesus Chrìst, and Salvation by him; so the convi∣ction I was under of the Erroneousness of the former, was that which led me first to examin, then to doubt of, and at last to renounce all the latter. For as I plainly perceived, that no man can be loyal to his Prince, and faithfull to the Government he lives under, and withall maintain the Universal Jurisdiction of the Pope, viz. his right to De∣pose Kings, and Absolve Subjects from their Allegiance: so I suddenly came to understand, that no one can be a Papist, but he who holds them. For to disclaim them, is to disclaim both the Infallibility of the Pope, and the Authority of General Councils; which is in effect to abjure the whole Popish Religion, as having no other foundation but the Decrees of Popes, and Canons of Councils. Being then settled (as I intimated) at Mr. Jenisons House, and having called over all the Traiterous Positions I had heard the Jesuits teach, and having found them agreeable unto, and justified by their publick Writings; I there∣upon made it my business to exclude both all Jesuits, and all other Priests Jesuitically inclined, from coming to the said House, or where∣soever else Mr. Jenison had to do. For though I was not yet so far en∣lightned my self, as to think of Converting that Family from being Papists, yet I was resolved to preserve them from being Traytors, and accordingly to hinder all such from coming among them, who might in∣fect them with Disloyal Principles Now during my abode there, and my Converse with the Countrey about, the first suspition I received of the Plot, was an Ʋniversal Col∣lection of Moneys, which I observed to be made among the Papists. I was my self sollicited by Mr. William Gascoyne, and other Secular Priests to assist in it; but I not only declined Cooperating in such a business, but diswaded Mr. Jenison, and all others I had the Conduct of, from con∣tributing Money upon any occasion. 'Tis true, the Pretence was to re∣pair the College of Doway (which is penall by the Law, should it be granted that the Money was so applyed) but I have reason to appre∣hend, that under the Umbrage of repairing a College, they were provi∣ding for the Ruine of a Kingdom. For the Collections were Univer∣sall in all the Northern Parts; and not only the Gentry, but most others of the Popish Religion in those Counties contributed their Proportions, some to Five pounds, some to Ten pounds, and some to Twenty pounds. He must be of a very shallow Understanding, that can once imagine, that so great Treasure as this would come to, should be all sa∣crificed to the Repair of a College. No, it must have been some greater Design, that so large a supply of ready Money was inten∣ded for. I grant that my own refusing to assist in that Affair, toge∣ther with the Jealousies they had conceived of me, for excluding all the Jesuits, and such other Priests as were tainted with their Principles, from admission into Mr. Jenisons House, gave them
sufficient reason to conceal the disposal of it from me. But this I know, that all the Moneys which were collected, were either paid, or to be paid to Mr. William Stephenson a Priest. Though the many foregoing passages (which I have truly repor∣ted) gave me full assurance of a Conspiracy against His Majesties Life, and the Protestant Religion, as by Law Established in these Nations, yet I knew that it would have been morally impossible, through the interest which the Papists had in Persons near His Majesty to get the Jesuits, and much less the Romish Party Convicted upon this General, and withall, single Evidence. And therefore I found it necessary for a season to conceal these things, lest I should not only miscarry my self upon attempts to Detect them, but withall enrage the Papists to preci∣pitate their Designs upon the Sacred Life of the King. However I re∣solved to be watchfull over all Opportunities, whereby I might attain a more perfect insight into their Hellish and Mysterious Conspiracies. And as in this interim, the Plot came to be discovered by Mr. Oates, so an occasion presented it self in a Conference thereupon betwixt Mr. Robert Jenison and me, which not only contributed to my own more perfect satisfaction in reference to their Bloody Designs, but hath gi∣ven rise to Mr. Jenisons own Discovery. And as it is convenient that the World should know the sense and tenor of that Discourse which past betwixt Mr. Jenison and me, so I think it fittest to deliver it in the words of the Information, which I gave in to one of His Majesties Justices of the Peace. Middls. West. ss. Part of the Information of John Smith of Walworth in the County Palatine of Durham Gentleman, taken upon Oath the 8. day of September 1679. before me Edmund War∣cup Esquire, one of His Majesties Justices of the Peace in the said County and City. THis Informant saith, that Mr. Robert Jenison came to his Fathers House in September 1678. where, after he had been some days; Sr. Edward Smith came to Walworth, and produced a Letter, signifying a Discovery of a Popish Plot in London, and upon enquiry who were in it, Ireland and Whitebread were named. About three or four days after which, Mr. Robert Jenison before his Father, Sisters and this Informant, said, he believed there was something of a Plot, for that he had heard Mr. Ireland say, 'twas an easie matter to take off the King. Where∣upon this Informant asked him, what that Ireland was? Who answer∣ed, he was a Jesuit, and his Cousen. And Mrs. Katherine Jenison his Sister asked, when he saw Mr. Ireland? Who answered, a little before he came out of Town, at his Lodging in Russel-street, which was on the Day that himself came from Windsor, and the same Day that Mr. Ireland came Post out of Staffordshire, and that he then found him pulling off his Boots. Mrs. Katherine Jenison then asked him, how her Aunt in Staffordshire did? Who replied, Mr. Ireland said she was well, and that he had been with her in Staffordshire at that time. This Informant then asked him, what a kind of Man Mr. Ireland was? Who answered,
that he was a fine countenanced, smiling Man, and swore if he be Guil∣ty of this Plot, I will never trust a Smiling Man again. Thereupon this Informant asked him what he thought of him? Who answered, I doubt there is some Guilt in him, because he had enquired of him, when he came from Windsor, how the King diverted, and how he went attended? Whereunto he answered, in Hawking and Fishing, attended only with three or four Persons; Mr. Ireland replied, he wondred He would go so slenderly Guarded, He were easily taken off; and then he paused. But sometime after, Mr. Robert Jenison repeated, that he fear∣ed there was something in that Plot, for that Mr. Ireland said to him at another time, that there was but One in the way, and were He remo∣moved, the Catholique Religion must flourish again in England. Where∣upon this Informant said, those were damnable suspitious things, which Mr. Ireland had spoken about the King. And thereupon old Mr. Jeni∣son rose up, and swore Mr. Ireland was a Rogue, and so left the Room, and determined the discourse at that time. But some time after in this same Month, this Informant walking on the Leads with Mr.Robert Je∣nison, discoursing of the Jesuits being in the Plot, the said Robert Jeni∣son told this Informant, that Mr. Ireland had at another time told him, that Sr. George Wakeman was a Fit person to Poyson the King, being the Queens Physician, and a Papist, upon which this Informant said, he hoped the King would not take Physick of any Papist, in re∣gard they might be Jesuitically inclined; and the Jesuits were against Monarchy in Temporal Princes, though appointed by God himself. Upon which the said Mr. Robert Jenison asked, are the Jesuits against Monarchy? Whereto this Informant replied, you may easily judge that by their taking off many Kings and Princes, and by their holding it lawfull for the Pope to deprive Kings of their Kingdoms, and to dis∣pose of them at his pleasure, so that though a King be Anointed of the Lord, and one that should not be touched by violent Hands, yet not only His Kingdom, but His Sacred Life lie at the Popes plea∣sure. Mr. Jenison answered, does the Pope allow of this? This In∣formant answered, yes, they have often practised it in this and other Kingdoms, and thereby brought more Schism and Division into the Church, than ever was before such Damnable things were practised by the Pope and his Emissaries. Whereto Mr. Jenison replied, you Secu∣lars are generally against the Jesuits, and in many things against the Pope. Whereunto this Informant replied, if you please to consider the Frauds and Devilish Artifices the Jesuits use in their practice and teach∣ing their Politick Interest, and industrious Self-seeking, all under the Hypocritical zeal and Characters of Religious, though none so Irreli∣gious, you would not admire why all Secular Priests are against them, and the Pope for upholding them, and their Practices, and Principles Mr. Jenison replied thereunto, he beleeved they were Craf∣ty men; upon which this Informant asked him▪ how he came now to say they were Crafty men, having formerly spoke so much of their Sanctity? He replied, because he considered several odd and suspi∣cious Expressions Mr. Ireland had spoken to him. Whereupon this Informant replied, you will not only give the King and Country sa∣tisfaction, in Declaring the odd and suspicious Expressions of Ireland, who is now imprisoned for the Plot, but also discharge the duty of a Christian, and Obligation of a Subject, urging many other reasons
to perswade Mr. Jenison to make a full Discovery to the Council. Whereunto Mr. Jenison replied, he doubted the Jesuits would prove as Black as their Habits, adding that his Brother Mr. Thomas Jenison the Jesuit, told him there was a Design in hand, in which if he plaid his part, he might with ease and safety raise his Fortune; and that he answered his Brother, he would use all lawfull means; and that he thereupon replied, the means were not only Lawfull but Meritorious, otherwise their Body, and the Chief Catholicks of England would not be therein concerned as now they were. Whereupon this Informant asked him, what he understood by his Brothers discourse, and whether he did not understand that the Jesuits, and Papists, had some design against the King and Religion? Who answered, he might well under∣stand and suspect they had some such Design in hand. And thereupon this Informant again pressed him to make a full Discovery to the Council, when he came to London, if his Evidence were judged ma∣terial. And this Informant told him, that he held himself bound in Conscience to discover all that he heard from him, if he omitted to do it himself, urging that his Evidence would at least wise, be fortifying to others Testimony. And this Informant very well remembers, that coming about a Week afterwards with Mr. Robert Jenison from Mr. Fenwick's House at Baywell, Mr. Bowes met them, and drew Mr. Jenison aside, all discoursed together some time, after which, Mr. Jenison sing∣led out this Informant, and told him, that he believed his own Brother Mr. Thomas Jenison, would be Hanged, and several other Persons of Quality, who were concerned in this Horrible Design. Thereupon this Informant asked why? Who answered, a Handfull of Jesuits could not carry on such a Design without the assistance of Persons of Note and Power, and the Pope himself must be in, because of his Purse; and he believed the Plot was Universal, because his said Brother had told him, the Greatest Catholiques in England were concerned in that Design, wherein he would have had him to have plaid his Part. Declaring he had reason to believe, it was to destroy the King and Government. Whereunto this Informant replied, can you swear it? Who answered, I will not swear it now, and thereunto this Informant replied, will and can are two things. Mr. Jenison further added, he was once in Company of Five or Six Jesuits, and that all their discourse was then tending to the Destruction of the King and Government, all agreeing to the self∣same end, but himself, but that he had not contradicted them in regard he was young, and inferiour in Scholarship. And this Informant asked him what he meant by Persons of Note and Power ingaged in the Plot? He answered, the Chiefest Catholiques in England, but refused to name them, saying in passion, do you think I am privy to it? But added, by God, they will have a Bout with the Duke, whereby this Informant did believe there was a Hellish Plot, and that the greatest Catholiques in England were in it, and that Mr. Robert Jenison knew more of it, than he did at that time lay open. And this Informant speaking something of the Popish Emissaries ingaged in the Plot, meaning the Jesuits and Monks; Mr. Jenison asked him, whether he was not a Popish Emissary? Wher∣unto this Informant replied, No, he did abhor the Name, and that he was a Preacher after the Ancient, Apostolical Way, which teacheth all to fear God, and honour the King, and to be obedient to all Superiour Laws and Magistrates. To which Mr. Jenison replied, the Jesuits hold
it lawfull to Depose and Murder any Heretick Kings, and to dispose of their Kingdoms. And this Informant further saith, that Mr. Jenison told him also at Walworth, that Mr. Ireland had lent him Twenty pounds, which he desired the Informant to send him to London to pay Mr. Ire∣land again. This being the Narrative of the Information, so far as it relates to this Purpose, which was given in by me to Edmund Warcup Esquire, one of His Majesties Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and City of Westminster. I shall only make these few Remarks upon what is here declared. (1) It strongly and most effectually serveth to Corroborate all the De∣positions which Mr. Robert Jenison hath made. For all these Discourses past betwixt him and me, whilest he was a Papist, and before ever he had entertained a thought either of Changing his Religion, or Informing concerning the Plot. He must be very obstinate, as well as an incredu∣lous Person, that can after this deny Mr. Irelands being in London in August, seeing the very Party that conversed with him told it to so ma∣ny credible Witnesses, within so few days after. And which is most re∣markable; all this was declared to his Father, Sister, and my self, when neither he nor any alive could apprehend, that ever there would be an occasion of bringing this Circumstance upon the Stage. And this being therefore so demonstratively made out, none but Conspirators or Abettors of this Conspiracy, can either bring into question the Truth of the Plot, or give credit to Papists in any thing they say. Nor can there be a greater Evidence of the Combination of the whole Papal Party to de∣stroy the Nation, then, that rather than the Design should miscarry, they will sacrifice their Souls and Consciences in the justification of a most pal∣pable Lie. (2.) It may both induce us to believe, that Mr. Jenison hath more to discover, than he hath yet declared, and also oblige us to give all credit to what he shall further say. For it is plain from many passages which dropt from him, that his Acquaintance with the Conspirators, and his knowledge of their Devilish Machinations, are more considerable than as yet he hath divulged. Tis true, he hath neither done wisely, nor with that simplicity which became a Christian, either in delaying his Informing at first, or in those Reserves which he still maintains. Yet if we will ob∣serve the influence he was under, partly from the regard he bore to the credit of the Romish Religion; (which himself then profest) partly from the love he had to many of the Papists, as his Kinsfolk and Friends, partly from the concernment he had for his own Reputation, which he knew upon his Dis∣covering, would be assaulted; not to insist upon the apprehensions he might entertain, concerning the danger and hazard to his Life which would ensue; we may be not only the less surprized at his backwardness to discover, but admire the over-ruling power of God in conquering his passions and jealousies so far, as that he should make any Discovery at all. And besides the Divine Wisdom, which can serve it self both of our sin and folly, hath turned it to wonderfull advantage, that he informed not sooner. For had he appeared before the Trial of Mr. Ireland, there would never have been any such thing mentioned, as Ireland's being in Staffordshire all the month of August. No, it was from an Opinion, that none who knew of his Being in London would appear against him, (save Mr. Oates)
that gave him the confidence of betaking himself to that Shift. And the Confounding them since in this particular, hath both been, and will here∣after prove of wonderfull Consequence. (3.) The discourses mentioned in the foregoing Depositions, may serve to testifie my own Innocency, as to any thing that relates to this Hor∣rid Plot. For though I had prevailing Reasons to persuade me to be∣lieve, that there was a design carrying on against the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Government of the Kingdom; yet I neither directly nor indirectly had Accession to it, nor assisted in it. Yea, so soon as I arri∣ved at that measure of knowing it, as Mr. Jenisons Conferences with me helpt me unto, I did from thence forward, not only by all means promote his coming to Inform, but threatned the having himself (in case he continued obstinate and refractory) apprehended and proceeded against. For besides those Letters of mine, to that purpose Printed by himself in his own Nar∣rative; I wrote him many more upon the same Occasion; which, as they had the success upon him, which I aimed at, so having been designed for no other end, but what is already accomplished, I shall not trouble the World with them. FINIS. Page 13. l. 21. read perverting. p. 14. l. 10. dele not. p. 18. l. 47. for only r. not. p. 19. l. 48. r. indispensably.
