T2467 R11884 13798623 101889
A True and Faithful ACCOUNT Of an Intire and Absolute VICTORY OVER The French FLEET IN THE WEST-INDIES, BY Two East-India Ships, And other VESSELS, at BARBADOES, Made into MEN of WAR. WITH The Number of those Taken and Sunk in the Engagement, together with the Taking, Sack∣ing, and Burning several of the French Plan∣tations in those parts. YEsterdays Post gives Advice from Bristol, that two days before there was arrived a small Vessel which came directly from the Island of Nevis in the West-Indies, leaving the same the beginning of the last Month, and Informs, That about 12 or 14 Sail of French Vessels, form'd into Men of War, had, besides the taking of St. Christophers, Infested the Coast greatly, obstructing the Traffick and Commerce of the English Plantations, Alarming all the Islands with making a Descent, whereby they were forced o stand continually upon their Guards, and in several places beat them off pon their Attempts.
'Twas greatly feared that they would have performed some considerabl Detriment upon Nevis, and several other lesser Islands, before Assistanc could come to them from England: But it so Fortunately hapned that  w of the East-India Company's Ships, Charles II. and the London, Vessels o considerable Burthen, being at Sancta Hellena, in their Return to England from India, and there hearing of the War between England and France, and therefore considering how dangerous it might be to make a safe passage t London, since they also understood that the Kingdom of Ireland, by which they usually Sailed, was in possession of the French, they took a Resolution to make to the Island of Barbadoes, where they were joyfully received, i hopes to find a Convoy there, or stay till some of His Majesties Ships arri∣ved to accompany them to England. In the Interim, the Noise of the French continuing on the Coast, the As∣sembly of the Island met, and Representing to Captain Andrews, and th other Commander of the East-India Ships, how serviceable it would be both to King and Countrey, to unlade their Effects, converting their Ships into Men of War, and stand after the French, promising at the same time, that they would afford all possible Assistance of Men, and other Shipping; That they would make it their utmost Endeavour so to represent the Matter t the King, and Company, that they doubted not but that they should applau and confirm the Undertaking. Accordingly the two Captains were prevailed upon to Unfreight their Ships, and become Men of War; and being joined by Seven other smalle Vessels, Equipped out by the Plantations, they put to Sea with 2300 Land men on Board, went in search after the French Fleet, whom they found nea St. Christophers, and Attacked them, being about the like Number, and in less than two hours time Boarded, and took their Admiral, a Ship of 3 Guns, and another of 30, sinking two others of the Fleet: And had un¦doubtedly destroyed the whole, had they not run under the Cannon of th Fort. After which, our Fleet made a Descent upon St. Christophers, which th French lately took from the English, drove all the People to the Woods, kil¦ling those that made Resistance, sacked and destroyed the greatest pa thereof, and after three days returned to their Ships, laden with great Plun∣der and Riches. The same Account adds, That this Victorious Fleet of Barbadians, t the great Honour and Reputation of the Island, being flushed with Success was resolved to make Efforts on other the French Plantations, the like o which they did to Martinico, Guadalupa, &c. And 'tis said they have acqui∣red near 100000 l. of Merchandizes, and Things of Value from their En my, returning to Barbadoes, laden with Victory and Spoil, to the great En¦couragement and Preservation of all the English Plantations, and Terro and Afrightment to the French. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-Bridg. 1690.
