T2550 R8592 12589533 63847
A True and perfect RELATION Of the Apprehension of 5. Fryers, one Pilgrim and three Souldiers; who were all bound for Jreland but were stayd and taken at S. Ives, in the Coun∣ty of Cornwall, by the Vice-Admirall Master Basset, and from thence brought up to London, with the Master of their Ship, and committed to New-gate on Friday the ninth of Aprill, 1642. With the severall names of the Prisoners, and an Order of Parliament concerning the same. Henry Elsinge, Cler. D. Parli. woodcut of a ship London Printed for John Wright, 1642.
woodcut of a ship
A true and perfect Relation of the Apprehension of five Fryers, one Pilgrim, and three Souldiers, &c. NOt to trouble my Reader with any tedi∣ous preamble to little or no purpose, but to come readily and truly to the matter in hand, which being such an extraordi∣nary passage, of Gods good providence towards this Land and Nation; in preserving us from the daily Plots and wicked machinations of his and our adversaries. It is not fit it should lye al together smother'd up in the pit of oblivion; but be divulg'd and spread abroad in each cor∣ner of this Kingdome, that so all true hearted Protestants may know, and knowing, may un∣derstand how infinitely they are ingaged to blesse God for such wonderfull deliverances, and with David extoll his Name, from one ge∣neration to another. It were needlesse to stand upon particulars in a poynt so plaine and obvious to the eye of every faithfull Protestant. If you aske who's our adversaries, the questi∣on
is soone answered, who? But the Jesuites, Fryers, Papists Priests, and others of the wicked adherents to the sect of Rome. If you aske how this is manifested, daily ex∣perience proves it; how many hellish Plots and Conspiracies hath this infernall tribe hatcht a∣gainst these his Majesties Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, since the beginning of re∣formation? When the Illustrious splendor of the Gospell first began to shine in our Brittish Horizon to this present, poore afflicted Ireland can sadly witnesse the truth hereof, whose de∣plorable condition at this time, by the cruell inhumanity and barbarous actions of the blood thirsty Papists, against the faithfull Professors of the Protestant Religion in that Kingdome, would extract teares from a heart of flint, to heare that such tygers should be coucht under the shapes of men, but the particulars of this their tyranny, is well knowne to all men. I shall not therefore insist upon that or any other discourse, but come briefely to this last project, hatch by their grand-father the Devill, blest by their holy father the Pope, put in pra∣ctice by his children, the Fryars and Jesuites; but discovered by God, whose never slumbring eye continually sees, and seeing, derides all such foolish combinations against his Church and people, and now brought to light, that all true Christians and subjects may bee thank∣full
for the same, and praise the great Name of the Lord for ever and ever. In March last 1642, a certaine ship under the conduct of Patrick Symt who was Master thereof, should have transported it into Ireland, with these passengers, whose names are as fol∣loweth, Thomas Fastell, Teage Barr, Patrick Carr, Richard Birke, Francis Cauthon, Fryars; Malathyn Gaggon Pilgrim; Thomas Moham, Bryant Mackall Greahall, Daniel Brianon Souldiers. This goodly company being minded to visit their traitorous Confederates in Ireland, upon what enterprise is not yet knowne, untill the wisedome of the Parliament shall further exa∣mine the businesse; but being greatly suspected, and not without good cause, both shippe and passengers were stayd in their journey at Saint Ives in Cornwall, by the Vice-Admîrall M. Basset, and information presently given to the Parlia∣ment, who immediatly made an Order, dire∣cted to the Sheriffes of each County, to pro∣vide stron guards for their safe conduct to Lon∣don, which was accordingly performed, and they committed to New-gate on Friday the 9 of Aprill 1642, where now they remaine expe∣cting the pleasure of that Honorable Assembly for their further tryall. A true Coppy of which order is here inser∣ted.
Die Veneris 4 die Martii 1641. IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parlia∣ment, that the Master of the ship, and the five Fryars, a Pil∣grim, three Souldiers, and what others prisoners soever shall bee delivered unto him by the Vice-Admirall or his deputy, were bound for Ireland, and taken at St. Ives in the County of Cornwall, by the said Vice-Admirall Master Basset, bee forthwith sent for up, and the severall Sheriffes of every County (through which they are to passe) are hereby required to provide strong and sufficient guardes for the conducting of the said persons in safe custody through their severall Counties
to London, And the Sheriffe of Cornwall ordered to receive the said prisoners at the Towne of Redruth, where they now are. H. Elsing Cler. Parl. To the Sheriffes of Cornwall to all other Sheriffes of Counties through which they shall passe. The names of the prisoners. Patricke Symot, master of the ship. Thomas Fastell, Fryars. Theage Barr, Fryars. Patrick Carr, Fryars. Richard Birke, Fryars. Francis Cathon, Fryars. Malathyn Gaggon, Pilgrim. Thomas Moham, Souldiers. Bryant Mackall Greahall, Souldiers. Daniel Brianon, Souldiers. FINIS.
