T3579a 12177845 55567
Tyrconnel's Letter TO THE FRENCH KING, FROM IRELAND. Licensed August 18. 1690. Thrice Invincible, Thrice August, and Thrice Christian Majesty, WHilst for many years the most thinking Statesmen have not been at a loss, nor altogether in the Dark, when they have considered, That the vast and pendious Growth, and Preparations of the French own, must necessarily produce most Astonishing d unaccountable Effects and Revolutions on the heatre of the World: Now is the Time, when ur Intrepid Councils, your Irresistable Arms, your fathomable Conduct, and stupendious Alli∣ces, are to shew themselves in the Acquest of that ory, which must unavoidably be the Consequence of ch Sagacious, Close, and Important Designs. It is by these Inimitable Methods, that your unri∣l'd Majesty hath Aggrandiz'd the Throne of France, hilst the immortal Names of Nero and Caligula, ll fade and languish, when that more Tremendous le of Lewis the Great shall be mentioned. The ighty Lewis, who sits at the Steerage of the Ʋni∣erse, having grasp'd the Power of the Fates in his ands, and can sink or swim the trembling Vessel at is Pleasure. This hath occasion'd some of our Modern Divines to see the Deity through the Hero, nd, with a Flattery beyond any but your own Ab∣st Parasites, give you a Style no less Sacred and mmortal, than that of the Gods of Old; There anted nothing but the Assigning Altars, and a Ser∣ce, and you might have sat in the Pantheon, if that ompany be not too much beneath your Standard. With what polish'd Foreheads have our Jacobited Clergy, and their inferiour Fry of Kittling Tories made the Coffee-houses and Clubs of the Town, re∣sound with your unparallell'd Victories and Successes? The Glory of your Arms, the Grandure of your Em∣pire? The Wealth, Ease, and Luxury of your Vassals, have been their daily Theams, not omitting the unspeakable Happiness of those that have put them∣selves under the Umbrage of your Protection. O! Had the Courage of their Hands equall'd the Rhodomontades of their Tongues, your Royal Allie, our Abdicating Master had again been Re-instated in the Throne of Britain, and call'd his perfidious Peo∣ple to account, for opposing his Sacred Designs of Restoring Religion to Pristine Paganism; the Monar∣chy to an Absolute, Ʋncontroulable, and Ʋnlimited Sway; and the People to an Orthodox, Couchant, Bigotted State of Slavery. But that the Infallible Maxims of Polity, where∣by your All-subduing Majesty arrived to this indisput∣able Power, may now at length, shine forth in their Native Lustre, and convince the stupid World, how impossible it was for them to hinder the Ac∣complishment of your glorious Purposes; I shall with all humble Reverence, presume to open the sacred Cabinet of your most Christian Intrigues, that the whole World may see how Ʋnavoidable it is for them to become your Vassals. The Foundation of that stupendious Machine upon which the whole Texture of your Majesties Glorious Projects have moved, may aptly fall under these four Considerations, mention'd in the begin∣ing
which gives an undeniable Demonstration of your profound Sagacity, and the great Ascendence you have acquired over Princes of inferiour Allay. I shall touch these in Order, and speak, 1 First of your Council, which may be divided into two Parts, Simple, and Mixt. That which I call Simple, is either the uncom∣pounded Advice which is taken from the mighty Oracles of Cardinal Mazarine's Papers, when the Great Lewis retires into the Conclave of his Closet to consult his Father, Guardian and Tutor, who having the Ambition of an Ecclesiastick, and the Subtilty of a Statesman, easily foresaw, 'twas im∣possible for France to encrease, as long as that Great Captain, and Politician Cromwel, sate at the Helm of England: Therefore 'twas necessary to Contract private Alliances with the Exil'd Princes, and to give them such measures, that France might always keep the Ascendent. He that considers the state of your Majesties Kingdom in the Year 60, and the prodigious In¦crement it is arrived to since, may easily be satisfi∣ed in this. But the more simple Council is, when your most August Monarchship consults only your own Will and Pleasure; and then by an Ʋncontroulable Power, raise an ARMT to thaw the Snow off the sides of the Alpes with their Encampments, whilst the Vicar General at Rome is compelled to set up the Picture and Hatchment of your Divinity above that of his Holiness; and by a formal Embassie to supplicate, That the Trophies of your Glorious Victories may be enclosed from the publick View, least the Inhabitants of Rome fall to their old Excess of Loyalty, to Deisie their Empe∣rour. Your mixt Council is such, as of whom it may without Vanity be said, That no Prince in the World, except the Prince of Darkness himself, ever saw the Fellows of them: Their Councils so close and dark; Their Designs so Impenetrable and deep, as if brooded in the Infernal Region: Nor has it been in the power of your Enemies, with all their Subtilty, to bring their amazing Pro∣jects to Light, 'till they have discovered themselves by the Radiant Beams of Opulent Cities all on Fire, and Fertil Villages in Blaze. What did they ever stick at, that might advance the Grandure of your Throne, and spread your devouring Le∣gions over the Neighbouring Provinces? Have they not precipitated your Majesty on all those Glorious Enterprizes that must render you the most accomplish'd of Hroes, and Eternize your Memory in the same fragrant and immortal Roll with Julian, Tarquin, and Heliogabalus? With what Indefatigable Zeal have your great Ministers been listing up the Reputation of your Faith and Veracity, of which the Exiling your Protestant Subjects, and Ravaging the Territories of you Neighbour Princes and Allies, are such standin Testimonies, that they have raised Monuments t your Fame, that will out-last your Statues, Pillars, and Triumphal Arches. So that what was onc said of your Neighbouring Clergy, may no with greater Reason be applied; Clerus Brittanic slupor Mundi, may very aptly be recorded of you Matchless Council; They are, like their stupendi Master, the Wonder and Astonishment of th rest of Mankind. And when your Sultanship descen to sit in Divan among them, you look so like th Son of the Sun, or Jupiter Hammon, or what yo please, that compared to your Greatness, all you Predecessors look'd but like Tooth-drawers or Jac Puddings. 2. And this, most August Monarch, brings m to the second Head (viz.) your Allies, whic speak you no less formidable then your Counci If the strength of a Monarch be to be Calc∣lated from the considerableness of his Alliances Those of the Mighty lewis cannot but speak yo Majesty very terrible to the Opposers of yo Greatness; for that, having for many years co∣tracted an Amity with your Brother of the Alcors He hath on his part so irrefragably stuck to yo powerful Interest, that it hath not only cost t displacing one Emperour from the Throne, but e∣dangered the total shaking off the Empire from th present Sultan: Notwithstanding which, so Inviolab are his Resolutions of preserving your Majesti Friendship, that he prefers it above the Contem∣ible Throne of Mahomet; and there being so gre a Resemblance in your Designs, there is no fe of his falling off, unless some unhappy Different should arise betwixt the Musti, and the Arch shop of Paris about Precedence. Others, which your Immense Wisdom admitted t the Honour of your Friendship, were the two la Kings of Great Britain, who likewise postponing a Considerations to that of serving your exalted I∣terests, gave up themselves and their Councils to b wholly at your Majesties Disposal. The first of the was so entirely devoted to the pursuit of his sens Appetites, as if the Safety, Honour and Wealth of  Kingdoms had not appertained to his Care, but th all the Trust, Power, and Interest he was exalted  had been only entrusted with him to aggrandi your sacred Sultanship, and to capacitate your M∣jesty for the attaining your vast unbounded Design 'Twas this gave the rise to that mighty Flota, whic from your Majesty justly claims the Name of Invi∣cible: This was it, That made him hold the Neigh∣bouring Princes in suspence with Treaties, League and pretended Alliances, till your Majesty had by a unpractised Method taken their Provinces, and Te∣ritories into your powerful Protection, and Poss-ss And it was this made the Faith and Conduct of th
unwy Prince of very little Reputation amongst the r Potentates of Europe, as was well and nota∣ expressed to your victorious Majesty, upon deli∣ing up the Keys of the City of Ghent, and lay∣ them at your Illustrious Feet. he last of these by an Act of superlative, inimita∣ and unpresidented Friendship, so absolutely renoun∣ all his own Interest to his Crown, and Kingdoms,  he relinquished, and abdicated them All, rather n not follow that incomparable Pattern, your ab∣  Majesty had set him, to compel all his People  submit to what Law, and what Religion the un∣ing Wisdom of a Prince, who alone aspired to the our of being like your Majesty, should think fit  et up. Oh! had his Troops been so good Apostles  your Dragoons, and the Doctrin of Passive Obedience n as heartily obeyed, and practised, as it was preach'd,  inculcated, what a happy Reformation had been on the Face of the Earth? How boundless had n the Extent of your Glorious Empire? Who ld not have been of a Religion recommended  the most Christian Monarch? And why, since r Potent Predecessors of Assyria, Persia, Ethiopia,  Rome, and your present Ally at the Port, have med to themselves a Power (some of them) not to determine the Modalities of Worship, but r very Gods too; should the more potent Lewis  denyed setting up Temples, and Altars to whom  thinks fit; Yea even to your most sacred self, if so Royally enclined? Hath not a late Bi∣shoparker Ec∣s. Polity. Empowered the Magistrate to set up any Religion he thinks most a∣greeable to the Nature and Ends of vernment? and ought such a Glorious Preroga∣e to be parted with? No, farewel Crown! fare∣l Dominion! —It were much better, with my great ster, to be content to keep a Nursing Room, and k the Cradle of a growing Prince at St. Germans, n to be head of such a Refractory People. What Prince in the Universe could ever be hap∣r in his Allies? 'tis in the Choice of these the ustre of your great Wisdom shines to the Admi∣ion of all the Courts in Christendom! Was ever ith, was ever Constancy, and Sincerity like theirs? ok into all the other Actions of their Lives, and u will find them bear no proportion with their Fi∣ity to your Majesties most Attractive, Charming, d All-Chaining Interest. 3. A Third head to be spoken to is your Invinci∣ Armes, the Terrour of which hath put the whole orld under Contribution to your matchless Prowess! Are not the Gates of more Cities opened to your oles, than ever were broken open by your Bombs? ave not your Lewi's D' or contributed more to your ighty Conquests within, than ever your Batteries, and cks could arrive to without! What General ever ounted so succesful an Artillery? These never sail∣ Petards have turned so vastly to your Majesties Interest; That out of an unexampled Piece of Po∣lty, your most Christian Majesty hath ordered the Coyning-up of your Houshold-Plate, and the Church-Plate, into Battering Pieces of that Kind: And having heard of a War maintained by Bodkins, and Thimbles, your Majesty hath resolved to try how a Storm of Cawdle Cups, Candlesticks, Basons, and Church-Plate will succeed. This unaccountable Stratagem can never fail of attaining wonders; especially if the Titular Prince of Wales, and the Duke of Burgundy lead the Van. Of your other Artillery I shall take leave to speak when there is Occasion. 4. That singular, and auspicious Conduct which hath managed, and given Reputation to all your Majesties Actions, shall be the last thing I will now presume to mention, and trouble your Royal Pati∣ence withal! And, herein, it must be acknowledged your Majesty hath out-done all former Precedents. Hath not the ever victorious James reduced Ireland? Is not Monsieur Catinat in the Bowels of Savoy? were not the Dutch Troops all cut to pieces in the Plain of Flerus, and the English Fleet sunk to the Bottom of the Sea, all but about Eighty Sail now in quest of the Victorious French Fleet? Are not not all the Maritime Towns in England burnt, their Country Ravaged, and have given their late King, Queen, and the Prince of Wales for Hostages, that they will be Loyal and Obe∣dient Vassals to your Majesty for the future? If this Horour be denied to your Majesty after so many glo∣rious Efforts of your inimitable Courage, and Con∣duct, what can be hoped from a blind, sordid, and un∣grateful World? I am not ignorant the Censorious part of Man∣kind think, that the equipping the most Glorious Fleet that ever put to Sea out of the Ports of France, and that to a Charge so stupendiously great, that it hath sunk the mighty Heaps your Majesty hath been for many Years past Ravaging from the rest of Eu∣rope; They think the proligious Charge of that Fleet, and the Army in Ireland have not been answered by Successes of either. They little consider the Glory that is acquired by burning the Fisherboats, and Cottages at Tingmouth; and the vast Reputation Monsieur Lau∣zun and my self have purchased to our selves by for∣tifying Limrick, and Galloway, from whence we have Convenience of Retiring, when we can stay no lon∣ger! And what will their Great Captain and Leaden King William have Conquered after all the exposing his Person, and fatigue of his Army, but a bare Skelleton of a Kingdom; a Country despoiled, and depopulated? And such your great Wisdom hath taken Care the French Kingdom shall be, if ever the Consederate Arms should possess themselves of their Dividents there. We have not omitted, Mighty Sir, to smoak the Al∣tar of St. Patrick every Day, and to call upon all our Tutelar Guardians, Male, and Female; but whether they are so busied in preparing Equipages to grace your solemn Triumphs, or whether they are resolved
your Majesty shall have the Glory of your Acquests entirely to your self; certain it is we have not been able to prevail with them, to set one Finger to the work; which makes our Enemies vociferate, as if the Day were their own: Nothing can give checque to their Insolence, but the Pomps of your Majesties Triumphal Medals, Statues, and Arches; and rather than let the Notion of your Victories yet out of your Peoples heads; had I the Honour to be of your su∣pream Divan, my humble Motion should be, that Lustrations, Ovations, and a General Jubile should be proclaimed; That if the Enemies Troops come into your Country, they may find such Marks of Joy and Satis∣faction, that may prevail with them to lay down their Arms, and put themselves under the happy Govern∣ment of so clement a Monarch: Or if that shall not prevail with them to omit the Prosecution of their Revengeful Purposes, How glorious, and unpresidented will it be for your Invincible Monarchship to expire Phoenix-like in your own Nest of Spices at Versailes! To conclude this swelling Paper, How very ∣temptible must the great Alexander, and Caesar,  upon themselves to be, when they shall consider much greater Lewis in all his Glories, amidst Altars, Triumphs, Acclamations and Statues, sitting down  an undisturbed Calmness, like a Roman Deity, ei playing a Game at Cards with Madam Maintini his Pompous Trianon, for the next To-be-conqu Kingdom, or else diverting himself amongst his ∣ter-works: And that shall see the Mighty James loa with Lawrels and Triumphs, forsake his growing ∣tories to come, and shake a Rattle to his Mirac Prince at St. Germains? Who, I say, can behold  unexampled Heroes; thus innocently entertaining th∣selves amidst the unintelligible Crouds of their h∣ble Adorers? This, Mighty Conquerour, is the h∣piness I most Ambition, and shall take the first o∣portunity to number my self amongst these  Throngs: I am, Most Dread, Most Invincible, Most Tremendous Monarch, Your Most Christian Majesties, Most Bigotted, Most Stupid, and Most Constant Vassal, Adorer and Admirer, TYRCONNEL London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, in the Old-Baily, 1690
