T461 12598798 64094
A full and compleat Answer against the Writer of a late Volume set forth, entituled A Tale in a Tub, or A Tub-Lecture: with a Vindication of that ridiculous name called ROUND-HEADS. Together with some excellent verses on the defacing of Cheap-side Crosse. Also proving that it is far better to preach in a Boat than in a Tub. By THORNY AILO, Annagram. LONDON, Printed for F. Cowles, T. Bates, and T. Banks. 1642.
First, The Complaint of the abused most ridiculous Round-heads. COme, brethren, let's deplore our wofull state, Since all we have done is almost undone: Our paines and charges both betimes and late Is like the battry of an Eld Gun; We back againe unto our trade must fall, Nor shall we be allow'd to preach at all. And we from Sylla to Charybdis cast And from Chrybdis back to Sylla hurld, From wrong to injurie, from griefe that's past, To woe that's present, we rub through the world, 'Twixt Hawke and Buzzard, we seeme Planet-struck, 'Midst Chance and Fate, bad Fortune and ill Luck. 'Tis manifest that we have done our best, To bring all wit and learning in disgrace; Tho Church and Church-men we do still molest, In hope we each might have a Preachers Place: Our zeale hath still the House of Prayer deni'd, And many a Barne and Stable sanctifi'd. What have we not done? we have rav'd and rail'd, Vnail'd, revil'd, exclaim'd, and made a noyse, Brake windowes downe, left nothing unassail'd, And wanting men (to clamour) borrowed boyes: We have most stoutly play'd the beasts like men, In hope to be all benefic'd, (But when?)
'Tis said, that they which China dishes make, Doe burie them in the earth an hundred yeares: Their Makers being dead, their Heires doe take Those dishes from the earth, and all our feares Is, that doe what we can with works and wishes, Our labours will be like to China dishes. For now againe the wicked 'gin to rise, And call us Round-heads, and such scurvie names, And do our pure profession scandalize With Libels, Pamphlets, and most true exclaimes: So that we gape like pining Tantalus, For all we have done is wroth seant a Lowse. But why do I thus toll our griefes in Meetre, Prose is mee∣ter for our capacities by halfe, hang Poets and Poetry, wee could never endure them, no verse is more sweet than a mans neck-verse (if it be said in season) and as for Rhime, it is as much distastefull to us as Reason, Yet I would needs know by what Reason wee have the name of Round-heads put upon us; me thinks our heads are no rounder than our fore-fathers: Some say they call us so, because our tongues do trowle more roundly than our Ancestours did, and that they did use ho∣nest Square dealing, and we only professe and practise Round Talking or speaking. Others say, that we are so termed, be∣cause wee doe cut our haire shorter than our eares; and the reason is, because long haire hinders the sound of the Word from entring into the heart: and (truly) it is no shame for a man to weare his owne eares. Yet in the 19. Chapter of Leviticus, and the 27 verse, we are forbid to cut round the corners of our heads, or to mar the tufts of our beards; but those words were spoken to the Iewes by Moses, and all the world knowes that we are Gentiles, we have nothing to doe with Iewes or ceremonies, I can eat Pork and Pig (which was for∣bidden to the Iewes) and I love a good Sow or a Bore next my wife and my selfe. Others there be that say we are called Round-heads, in re∣gard that by our heads wee are more like Globes than those
that weare their haire long, and man being a little world, is by the roundnesse of the head a figure or embleme of the greater. Morgan Llewellin (that grave Greek Author) saith in the ninth Chapter of his Litigious Aphorismes, That Bias the Philosopher was borne in an Haven Towne of Ionia, called Pine: This Bias had a Round Running head, and hee devi∣sed (from the mold of his head) the first Round Bowles, in memorie whereof they are called Bias Bowles to this day; but the world is too full of rubs now, and most heads run like Bowles, contrary to the Bias, that an honest man can hardly win a good game all his life time. There are some that report, that wee are called Round-heads, and Ovall-heads, by reason of the similitude of an egg, I mused why that comparison was, but at last I perceived, that the alusion was not to the Ovall for me of the Egg, but to the addlenesse of the braines in the head, which I hold to be very significant. There was a fellow lately did set forth a Pamphlet, enti∣tuled A Tale in a Tub, or A Tub Lecture; The speaker of it hee saith was one My heele mend sole, an inspired Brownist, and a most upright Translator: The house (where it is said to be spoken) was neere Bedlam; the time when, the 21 of December last, and the writers name of it, is only under the two thred-bare letters of I. T. I could almost perswade my selfe, that those letters of I. T. should stand for Iohn Taylor the Aquaticall Poet, and yet mee thinks he should have preferred a Boate before a tub to make a pulpit of, for a Boate is more primitive to preach out of, then a Tub or a Kinderkin. A fishers boate once served the best Preacher that ever was, for a Canonicall Pulpit; but let that businesse alone, and returne to the Tub. It is not im∣possible, but a Cobler may draw or vent a Firkin of smal wit out of a Hogs-head, and (verily) me thinks it was a rare busi∣nesse, that the Hogs-head did not leake when the man ran o∣ver amaine; But it is the property and policy of a Learned man to barrell up more then he can broach. There was such Vertue once in Tub, that a grave and wise Philosopher made
choise of one for his study, which tub hee valued so highly, that he would not change it for the Place of Alexander the Great, (or Alexander of St. Magnus) and that may bee the reason that our brother (the Cobler) made choyse of a Tub, (he that is offended at it, I wish him in Cornelius his Tub, and that is a pocky Tub, as a French Gentleman told me the o∣ther day) but to returne to our purpose, I have read of a peo∣ple inhabiting somewhere beyond the unknowne Southerne World (or Terra Australis Incognita) these people do once a year offer their old shooes and boots to their Heathen Gods, O what a mighty trade might a preaching Cobler drive there being able alone of himselfe, to prepare and offer the Sacri∣fice, and so preach the oblation Sermon too, I know a wor∣thy member fit to be an Assistant to him, one that is original∣ly a Heele-maker, but now he is an inspired expounder, there are so many of us now a dayes in England, that some may bee well spared into other Countryes. In the history of Spayne in the City of Salamanca, there dwelt a most Heroicall and Magnificent Cobler named Sig∣nior Lazaillo Bobadilla de Tormes, this brave Sparke (at his death) and on his deathbed called his eldest sonne to him, and after he had given his last blessing, he gave him this counsell. My son (quoth he) I must leave thee, thou knowest that my father (and thy Grandfather) was a famous Cordwainer in Ci∣vill, thy mother a Millers daughter of Tolledo, they and I here live in fame and reputation, and I dye a man renowned for my Art. And therefore I charge thee (on my blessing) that thou do thy best endeavour to retaine the dignity of the Majesty of so great a family. Truly, a man of such mighty spi∣rit was too good to be a Spanyard, a Papist or a Cobler, had he been inspired as some of our Brethren are, he would have proved that Simon called Simon Magus was at Rome once, (welfare all good tokens he brake his neck there) but as con∣cerning Simon Peter, many wise men will never beleeve that, he was there, though the Papists say to the contrary and with Tooth and Nayle defend their furious asseverations. Also he would have proved Pope Ione to have been both literally and mystically the Arrant whore of Babylon.
It is devoutly acknowledged that we have had many Wor∣thy and zealous Brethren that have stifly stood for the cause, (as the Sisters can testifie if they please) as namely the reve∣rend Mr. How the Cobler, The most industrious Mr. Walker the Ironmonger, the zealous Mr. Greene the Felt-maker, the painefull Mr. Spencer the Stablegroome, the pavior of Mon∣mouth, the Sowgelder of Wallingford, the Barber and Baker of Abingdon, and many hundreds more of true religious Mil∣lers Weavers, I had almost for got Taylors, but that one Mr. Squire, a Gentleman of that function at Roderhith beinga double yarded man, because he hath two, but neither of them London measure, he is a mighty painestaker for us all in the true wy of rayling downe Learning, wit, order and decency, what though he faile now and then in stretching silver lace on a petticoate, that he can frugally save out of 4. yards com∣passe one yard; I say a Taylor may stretch lace and consci∣ence, and his bill too, but all is one for that, he is a true zelot & so forth, but though these have the honour to be named in our catalogue of remembrance, yet one of our chiefe props and pillers, is ingratefully forgotten, he being a man of such a vast merit, that it is a shame hee should be buried alive (in his fame I meane) the first letter of his name is a Brewers Clarke, he is a man that hath more in him then all the world is worthy to see or know, he hath some pith or weight in him & had he but couragiously attempted the downfall of the Ba∣bell Crosse in Cheapeside, if he had been but valiantly secon∣ded hee would would have laid it levell with the pavement, for he feares not the Hangman, and is able to keepe a Quar∣ter as big as halfe a yeare with any man. But I am afraid that our cake is but dough bak'd, (though our zeale was warme enough to heate the Oven as hot as a furnace) for we are crost, and the Crosse stands to baffle and brave us, and further an unhappy pated fellow did lately write these following Verses, in the behalfe of the Crosse, & disgrace of us.
Verses upon the defacing of Cheape∣side Crosse, with the Pictures of Christ and Saint Peter. HOw? steale the leade from Cheapeside-crosse (O base) I'le take my oath on't 'tis a hoavy case: Some say the Devill did it, and I graunt The Devill is a mighty Puritant. He never could endure the Crosse because Man (on the Crosse) was ransomd from his claws; But whosoe're 'twas, Brownist, Punk or Pimp: If not the Devill, 'twas the Devils Impe, What e're he may pretend, he is a Grosse Damb'd Iew, that tortures Christ upon the Crosse? I wonder why the watchmen did not scare Vm, Sure 'twas some sleeping watch that lackt a larum And so St. Peter (whom our Saviour chose) One of his twelve Apostles, had his Nose, And both his Armes knockt of, were was the Cock That did not wake S. Peter at that knock? Christ made him an Apostle, now who can Without his Arms make him Some Crop-eare did it in revenge I feare, Because St. Peter cut off Malchus eare. What did the babe, what did our Lady do? Poore Innocents alas, they fuffered too. This shews the Devils brood, like th'Irish wild, Will spare no man or woman, maid or child: Now my opinion of the crosse is this, It is amisse to such as make't amisse. To such as reverence it, or adore it, Or say their prayers to it, or before it. Such do pervert it from its proper use, And turn an Ornament to an abuse. Turks, Infidels, Moores, Pagans, Heathen, Iewes, They know not Christ, therefore no Crosses use.
And no true Christian justly can repine, To let a Crosse stand as a Christian signe. Knaves may deface it, fooles may worship it, All which may be for want of grace or wit, To those that wrongd the Crosse this is my curse, They never may have crosses in their purse. And thus Brethren you may perceive and see, how these Iigmaking jeering Poets, doe with their pestiferous Rimes (or Verses) support and prop up that Golden-Leaden nest of Idols and Images, but for a conclusion, if I cannot have it o∣verthrowne, demolished, cast downe, raced, confounded, overturned, defaced, delapidated, distroyed, laid waste, rui∣nated, subverted, or call it what you will, (so it bee taken a∣way) and the lead melted into bullets to kill Irish Rebels; I say if I cannot have it so, I will wish it so, and there is an end before Finis. FINIS.
