T510 12621151 64516
Mr. Holk chief Agent in the Uprore
A Seasonable Lecture, OR A most learned Oration: Disburthened from Henry VValker, a most judicious Quon∣dam Iron-monger, a late Pamphleteere and now (too late or too soone) a double diligent Preacher. As it might be delivered in Hatcham Barne the thirtieth day of March last, Stylo Novo. Taken in short writing by Thorny Ailo; and now printed in words at length, and not in figures. And Toby went forth, &c Printed at London for F. Cowles, T. Bates, and T. Banks. 1642.
A Seasonable Lecture: OR A most learned Oration, Disburthened from Henry Walker, a most ju∣dicious Quondam Iron-monger, a late Pamphle∣teere, and now (too late, or too soone) a double dligent Preacher. Men and Women, Male or Female, Old and Young, Boyes and Girles, Lads and Lasses, Babes and Children, Omnium gatherum; attend to my Text, as you shall find it written in the fifth Chapter of the Booke of Tobias, and part of the six∣teenth verse. So they went forth both and departed, and the dog of the young man went with them. BEfore I enter upon my Text, Beloved, it is correspondent, meet, necessarie and convenient, that I do unveile, lay open, describe, discover, and manifest unto you, some reasons why, wherefore, up∣on what causes, grounds, or reasons, this Dog is mentioned in my Text. This portion that I shall administer unto you at this time, I have divided into six parts; first, the
time when this Dog lived; secondly, whose Dog hee was; thirdly, whither he went; fourthly, what fashion'd or kind of Dog hee was; fifthly, his demeanour and carriage; and lastly, his name: Of all these in order, as 3 houres short time, and your long patience will permit. First, the time that this Dog lived, was about the death of Zenacherib, that blasphemous King of Assyria, as it is in the first of Tobit, and the one and twentieth verse, where is men∣tion made, that after he was slaine, Sarchedonus his son raig∣ned after him. It was then a wicked time, full of oppressi∣on, crueltie, and idolatrie: and at this time lived honest, old, hospitable Tobias, who being oppressed by tyranny, went into Media, and left ten Tallents of silver in safe custody with his kinsman Gabael, who dwelt in a citie called Rages in Media, as you shall find it in the first Chapter and fourteenth verse. Beloved, Toby was of the Tribe of Nepthalim, who were idolatrous, and offered to an Heifer they called Ball, Chap. 1. 5. in Galilee, and dwelt in a citie called Thisbe there, from whence hee was carried captive into Assyria by Salmanazer, as you shall have it in the first and second ver∣ses. Now it followeth that Toby, after much trouble went home againe, Chap. 2. and vers. 1. This was the time where∣in this Dog lived. I will presently proceed, and go forward, or speake further, as your patience may permit. About this time old Tobias wasstricken blind, and in some want of his ten Tallents of silver, which hee left so far off in Media with Gabael, for which he determined to send his son (young Tobias) but he was in great care to have a Guide with him in so long a journey, and to help him to bring so great a charge as ten Tallents back with him (which is, Ile warrant you, 40 pounds of our money, or thereabouts) and in the third Chapter and the nineteenth verse, the Angel Raphael came in the shape of a man, whom old Tobiab hired for a groat a day to go with his son out and home as it is in the 5 of Tobit and 14 verse. And thus much shall suffice for the time when the Dog lived.
So they went forth both, and departed, and the dog of the young man went with them. Some simple observations might be gathered out of the first word of my Text, So; but it is a matter of So, so, and there∣fore I will passe it over so; yet (Beloved) as wee are men all made of one mold, one proportion and shape, our sences all alike, So it is not lawfull that one man should have any power or authoritie over another so as they have; but every man ought to bee a rule and guide to himselfe, So that hee should not need to be ruled so, and guided so by other men; for many men desire soveraigntie, superioritie, dignitie, pro∣motion, advancement, preheminence, domination, sway (or call it what you please) but the truth is (my Brethren) that as we are all made alike, So wee should equally rule alike, and live in such a communitie, that all things should be in com∣mon, So that mine is thine, and thine is mine, bee it what it will, either wife, children, goods, or lands, &c. So that none shall command, nor any one obey: and so much shall suffice to be spoken of the word So. So they went forth. They, what They? The word is not in the singular num∣ber, He or she went forth, but They, which argueth the plu∣ralitic of They that went forth; now who where this tey This they were no other than the Angell Raphael, who was hired for a groat a day by old Tobit (as is before specified in the first leafe and seventeenth page) and the other who was one of the same they (without whom they could not have beene they) was young Tobias the son of old Tobias, who ha∣ving taken leave of his father, went to fetch the ten Tallents of silver from Gabael at Rages in Media. So they went forth and departed, and the dog of the young man went with them. So they went. It is to bee noted, that if they had not beene sent, they would not have went: Beloved, this is an instruction of re∣proofe to such as will do nothing but what they are bidden, nor go any whither except they be sent or commanded; but those that are industrious will alwayes bee busie in some
thing, though they have no thanks for their paines, it is no matter for that, So they went, they were sent in a lawfull er∣rand, but that is no rule to us, that we should stay till wee be sent; for when should I have been sent to preach? I think never. Therefore as many zealous Trades-men before mee, went and thrust themselves into this holy Calling, without being sent; so I having tried trade after trade, hard Iron and Steele, and soft Books and Ballads, have now fallen upon the only common trade of trades to preach, and indeed my zeale was so hot that I had no leasure to stay till I was sent forth: but I as they (the rest of my brethren) so went forth. So they went forth both. Both doth signifie two, twaine, a couple, a paire, a dupli∣citie, or the Plurall Number, They went forth both. The Dog is not yet specified, for then it might have been said, that three went forth both at once; but they went forth and departed. This word and standing betwixt forth and departed, hath a mysticall sense, that a man may goe forth and not depart, that he may also depart and not goe forth, And that hee may both goe forth and depart, and likewise he may neither depart or goe forth. I went forth and departed from one calling to an∣other, I went forth and departed from an Iron-monger to be a Book-seller, and I thank the whole Company of Stationers they took my kind intrusion into their Societie with more respect than it becomes mee to make boast of; but lately I went forth and departed from that Function, and am Theo∣logically qualified, and if that doe not thrive with me, I can returne to the Book-sellers trade againe, with as much leave and love as I had before. And thus much shall suffice, satisfie, or be enough, or sufficient for the explanation, manifestation, or declaration, for your edification of this part of my Text, So they went forth both and departed. And the dog of the young man went with them. This word And (Beloved) I have somewhat spoken of before, yet there is observation worthy to be noted, which is, that this (And) is never placed in the end, last word, or
period of a speech; and for your further instruction when you see this word (And) in the beginning of any speech or sntence you must expect that some other thing is mentioned afterwards, as it is in my Text, And the Dog of the young man went with them. The Dog (my Brethren) was the Dog of the young man, which by interpretation was the young mans dog, now the young man was young Tobias, and old Tobias being his fa∣ther, (out of question) young Tobias was his son, and the law∣full owner and master of the Dog. There is not any mention made, that this Dog was commanded, or called to goe with his Master; no sure, he was a loving and a willing Dog, to attend without compulsion: he was not like Coles dog, that would neither goe to Church, nor tarry at home, such a Cur would be hang'd Brethren. I doe not find at what time of the yeare it was when this Dog went, but it may be it was in the Dog-dayes, for then the dayes be long, the wayes faire, and most fit for a long journey: and the proverb saith, A dog hath a day, &c. This Dog was a Dog of extraordinary note, for he is mentioned for his diligent attendance againe in the eleventh Chapter and fourth verse, in these words, And the Dog followed them. In my Text it is said that the Dog went with them, and here it is said that the Dog followed them; in both places there is much dutie exprest: In the first here is to be noted Toby, To∣bies Dog, and Tobies Dogs taile: In the second, hee went with them when they went from home: and in the latter, he followed them at their returne back. It is said hee fol∣lowed, hee went not saucily before his Master. I will not question what age this Dog was of, or whether hee was whelp'd in the Dogs dayes, or out of the Dogs dayes, or in the Cats nights; for there is no Dogs nights, though the learned write of the beginning of the Dog-dayes, and of the ending of them also: but surely this was a wise Dog, not a wag wanton, or a foolish Puppie-dog, but he was a sage and a wise Dog, and my reason is, because he followed them,
attended upon them, waited upon them, and did not stir out of the house till they went forth: I cannot say, or any way prove or find, that he was gelt or libb'd, as I may terme it, which made this Dog the more observant and dutifull; but whether hee was or no, I am confident hee was a verie mannerly Dog, for he did not run before and yelp, and baule, Waw, waw, waw, no, he went forth with them mildly, gent∣ly, meekly; he was not to look for abroad, or up and downe the house, or under, or upon the beds, or in some corner or hole of the house did this honest Dog obscure himselfe. This shewes he had no bad actions or crimes laid to his chage, ei∣ther by the Kitchin-maid, or the Chamber-maid: but this Dog was of the true kind, mannerly, good conditioned, and well-favoured, which serves for an exhortation or docu∣ment for such unmannerly Serving men and Foot-boyes, that are so forward, that they will be in their roast meat before their Masters are out of their boyl'd. They are called their Masters followers, and ought to be so in all lawfull things (sving their Mistresses.) There are divers opinions amongst the Learned concer∣ning this Dog; Quabo the American in his third Book, fol. 900 of his Dogmatists; and Nimpshag the Gymnosophist, both these doe agree, that this Dog was no Bob-tail'd Tyke, Trunle-tail'd Tyke, Wee Tyke, or Muckle Tyke (as you call Dogs in Scotland.) Surely my opinion is, that hee was no Hound (though all Dogs are called Hounds in Germany, and for one man to call another Hounds-foot, it is dangerous to be spoken.) Tobias was no Hunter, therefore it cannot be gathered that it was a Buck-hound, Bloud-hound, Otter∣hound, Goose-hound, Grey-hound, Fox-hound, or any kind of Hund. Nor was his Master addicted to the game of Haw∣king or Ducking, so that it may be conjectured that the Dog was neither Land, or Water Spaniell; neither was hee a Cnny-catching Tumbler, for no such Shark was to have en∣tertainment under Tobias his oofe. Hee was not a oysting Hound, for Tobias the elder was old and blind, and his wife
Anna was stricken in yeares, and therefore they had no de∣light to play with Whelps or Puppies (my Brothers) of that or the like Litter; nor was it a Shogh from Ireland, or an Island Cur; for those are Dogs of small delight to ancient people, and young Tobias was unmarried, therefore hee had no wife to play with a Dog. I cannot think this Dog to be a Mungrell, because he was not variable, but kind and constant to his Master. Nor was it a Mastiffe, a Bull dog, or a Beare∣dog, for such sports are for such as can see, for young people, for Beare-wards, Butchers, and such grave Athenians, and not for old blind folks. In summe, this Dog is manifestly and authentiquely supposed to be a Whippet, or prettie hand∣some house dog, such as will stay at home with their Masters, and goe abroad with their Masters, that are watchfull in the night, to bark and give warning, if the house be in danger of Theeves to break it open, or of any other noyse or perill, this Dog would give warning and bark before he bit. From which vertues of this Apocryphall Dog, many worthy in∣structions might be gleaned and gathered: but (Beloved) the present time being past, and the time to come cals us to dinner, I will trouble your patience no further, but leave these my former sayings to your over-ripe considerations. Vale. FINIS.
