V250B 99831304 35767
THE Compleat SCHOLLER; OR, A Relation of the Life, and Latter-End especially, of CALEB VERNON; Who dyed in the Lord on the 29th of of the ninth month, 1665. Aged twelve years and six months. Commending to Youth the most Excel∣lent Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS the Lord. Psal. 34. 11. Come ye Children, hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I account all things but loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Iesus my Lord. Psal. 8. 2. Out of the mouth of Babes and Suck∣lings hast thou ordained strength, because of thine Enemies, that thou maist still the Enemy and the Avenger. London, Printed for the Author, 1666.
The PREFACE to Pa∣rents of Children. Tender Parents, AFter the death of my late dear and precious little one, I looked into what he had left, and found a little Legacy of Grace from God for you and yours, left by him (besides what was lost through the too great care∣lesness of such as were about him in his sickness) but these reliques at last were faithfully set down for you & yours in writing from his mouth, which being of value in my conscience (and those. I con∣verse with, who were Witnesses thereof) I durst not detain, (whoever are so full as to despise them) hoping the distribution hereof will be to the refresh∣ment of every hungry soul. I intended at first to have sent them with an Epistle directed to your Children themselves, and to his School-fellows especially, (who commend his harmless conversation amongst them before his effectual calling of God in Christ Iesus, had so overlaid through Grace all those endowments,
begetting deep abasements for School-slightiness amongst the most sober sort, to his becoming whol∣ly (as it were) another new creature since their acquaintance with him:) But upon more serious consideration of the trust committed to me, know∣ing I must be accountable; I have for my own se∣curity and clearing (as Paul, Acts 20. 26, 27.) thought it meet to commend it to your managing and improvement faithfully towards their eternal good estate, praying you to discharge your trust herein, on the behalf of your little ones, and see that none of them play it away (by means of your slightiness) lest you weep with them at the last, knowing that you also must give an account of this and them to God, as committed to your charge: And I beseech you beware, that herein, neither love to this World (nor any thing in this World, either the riches, or honour, or wisdom, &c. thereof) nor any weakness in the ensuing Trea∣tise (either in the esteem of that wisdom in You, or real shortness in the Publisher thereof) may make you afraid your Children should follow God so fully after the example herein, lest it come against you, as the Lord hath said, the Queen of the South and Men of Nineveh shall, against some too like this Generation. How far it may concern your selves to become as little children (in the sence of 1 Cor. 14. 20 and Mat. 18. 3.) like the little subject of th discourse, I leave to your consciences who sha
vouchsafe to reade it over humbly, and weigh it uprightly in the wisdom which is from above; but sure I am such bowels of mercy to your poor Children, as be get most sollicitude for the souls of them which remain from the Pestilence, before the woful day come, will prove most profitable, when all earthly promotions will stand them in no stead, but may be bewailed to have hurt the possessors of them: Beware therefore lest your want of wisdom herein expose your tender vessels, newly lanched into the sea of this sinful world, and richly laden with variety of Natures endowments, to miscar∣riage in their great voyage Heaven-wards, for want of your skilful steerage of them amongst those Rocks and Sands, on which so many have suffered shipwrack to their utter undoing, through their over-bold adventure thereby, against such fair warnings, as Prov. 4. 14, 15. Luke 8. 14. 1 Joh. 2. 15, 16. Isa. 5. 12. I will therefore only set up a Sea-mark to warn you of four or five (least seen through self-love) on which multitudes have early been split and bulged, fulfilling the Word of the Lord, 1 Tim. 6. 9. But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. Towards which those Parents prove unhappy Pilots who are, 1. Inordinately fond of Children in minority. 2. Vainly inconsiderate in the Schooling of them.
3. Unconscionably worldly in disposing them to outward Callings. 4. Earthly-minded or ambitious in bestowing them in Marriages. 5. Negligent in Family-duty, or of ill conver∣sation in the use thereof, to the stumbling their Children by bad example. Indeed most of these have been the sin and shame of Professing-Parents, and the spoil of their poor Childrens souls; and my hope of good times lies much in the expectation of a Spirit of Holiness upon Children, to give them escape from the sin of their fathers, few of whom I fear will live to inherit the Good they look for, through such spoyl this world hath made in their spirit, as declares too plainly they have supposed, as 1 Tim. 6. 5. that, Gain is Godliness, what-ever they say or profess to the contrary; And the most re∣formed Fathers will humbly accept it as great fa∣vour from the Lord, (after such provocation) if they find Grace, in return to the Prayer, Psal. 90. 16. and the fulfilling Psal. 45. 16. Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, &c. O therefore that Children may enter into more pe∣culiar obligation to Christ as the Lord, with heartiest Hosanna's in the highest, in sence of be∣ing redeemed, (in this evil-day) as the Scrip∣tures speak, from the vain conversation re∣ceived by tradition from their Parents, 1 Pet. 1. 18. and follow Christ soveraignly, Rev. 1.
4. Learning of him, in all their subjection to Pa∣rents, the holy limits laid down, Eph. 6. 1. that they obey always only in the Lord; that is, as they command according to Christ, whom all are to hear in the highest, Mat. 17. 5. as they would walk well-pleasing to God; for I fear many Pa∣rents who make great profession, are grown very vain, first, towards Children in minority, so fondly affecting them to their hurt, as if (with all their baubles) they were made to be but Apes and Baubles to Childish Parents for their present plea∣sure, instead of discharging faithfully their great trust for their immortal souls in their minority, by wisely nurturing them in the fear of the Lord, timely inclining their tender years towards God, as they would not make themselves sport so long and so far, with the first fruits of their Childrens folly in the witty office of stubborn natures wilful∣ness and sinful speech, as by delight therein to expose the Child to such self-willedness, that at last through the Parents fondness they cannot en∣dure the Child should undergo a moments smart (though never so necessary) to preserve either body or spirit from sickness or sin. For hence the discerning Child perhaps is fitted (through Satan) more early for such Companions abroad, as were MEETING-MOCKERS, and smarted together at Bethel of old, under the great Fathers displeasure, for want of timely discharge of earthly Parents duty
towards restraining them, 2 King. 2. 23, 24. Yea, though they may be restrained from this, (through their Parents profession) yet other inor∣dinate affection in neglect of the Lord doth often fulfil the threatning, Ezek. 24. 25. (against Professors fondness) in the lives of their little ones. Let not tender Parents therefore look lightly over such Scriptures as these, Prov. 22. 6. 15. & ch. 29. 15, 19. and ch. 23. 13, 14. Eph. 6. 4. But if Children be wisely steered by tender Parents through this danger in minority, and grow up soberly by degrees under their care, and now fit for School, how vainly inconsiderate Pa∣rents become, what they learn there, or by whom they are taught, that word, Luke 16. 8. in this may be for a Lamentation: How do the Children of this world grow stricter in their care, lest their Children at Schools should unawares learn the excellent knowledge of Christ, than Professors are, lest their Children at School should learn the vileness of this world. O the heart-greived complaint of this Scholler (on his sick-bed) over School-pastimes, choaking for a season his first serious convictions, wherein yet he was not long, nor at large, nor an associat ever with any deboist, but with the most sober youths. And what tender sense had he before his sick∣ness of the Name of God blasphemed, in the conti∣nued upholding and preferring of Heathen Au∣thors
(by Christian Schoolmasters) wherein Hea∣ven and Hell are turned into fictions, to the ha∣zarding Professors Children to setled Atheism, or unsetled profession of Christ, the Eternal Iudg∣ment and Glory to come; but how did the soul of this little one (in need of favour, and dread of wrath, in hopes towards Heaven and fear of Hell) tremble hereat? I desire to remember, with self∣abasement, and exceeding joy for the Angel of the Covenant, who met with him, saying, This is the Way, walk in it. But how (alas) are our Daughters also brought up by professing-Parents, as if they would have them attain the cursed commendation of Herodias Daughter, Mat. 14. 6. rather than in the educa∣tion and adorning, Psal. 45. 13, 14. become truly lovely to Christ, v. 10. How many, O how ma∣ny, like Micha's Mother, Judg. 17. 4. are at greatest cost for snares to their Childrens souls! How did the pride of our new-blown Gentry (un∣der great profession) bud and blossom in the va∣nities foregoing, before their fall, as before Isra∣els, Ezek. 7. 10. and it were to be wished that abused fulness were not lusted after again by any already under smart for it, unsensible of their sin. But if Children die in the midst of these de∣lights (or the Plague take them in paths so con∣trary to the expectation of the Lord, Isa. 22. 13, 14.) then how few Parents (thus preparing
them for spoyl before) speak a word of their sing∣ing, dancing, stately tripping, mantling and min∣cing attainments, or any of that vain tribe of their trinkets and trumperies, recounted by the Spirit more particularly, Isa. 3. 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. about the most modish uses whereof perhaps yet they spent more circumspection, and anger at their Childrens dulness, than about their sin and soul-neglects to the last; When conscience also upbraiding the visited Children in the words of Rom. 6. 21. What profit had you then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death: Then perhaps they too late begin to teach the Child untimely to take up some words of God, or Christ, or Heaven, or Faith, or Repentance, (little thought of before) and to apply a promise out of the path, to uphold them in hopes of rest from Him whom they rejected for rule, whilst they could enjoy their vanity, and flatter them∣selves in the Childs good estate (though never so doubtful) especially having the approbation of any easie Prophet they have set up for themselves, as Ezek. 44. 8. in the case. But why? Parents, why? is not that Learn∣ing on which only you dare lay stress in Plagues and in death (which is so certain to you and your children, yet in a time so uncertain both to you and them) preferred in life, as the great Lesson commended and commanded by the Master,
Mat. 6. 33. chap. 11. 29. who must judge us at the last day according to what he hath taught us, and we may not so easily trifle away, Joh. 12. 48. Be considerate then Parents in your Childrens Schooling, lest the door should be shut, and they as the foolish Virgins (when they can be vain no longer) are willing to learn what may be hid from their eyes. But if Shipwrack be not in this danger neither, a Rock is in sight, and Sands about it, that split or suck up many a stately Vessel that saileth too nigh, and that is called a CALLING (though the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus the Scripture more calls so, is seldom so called now by Professors) and in this how unconscionable are Parents in the dispose of their Children to their undoing! for how little are they bounded by such Commands and Counsel in the case; as Titus 3. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 24. How few Children therefore abide with God in their outward Calling, and how many with the World, the Flesh and the Devil, either in the dishonest nature thereof, or sinful entrances thereinto, vile customs therein, or to effect their freedom (so called, though the very servants of corruption) therefore, which yet if never so honest in all should be minded, to the neglecting the Invitation of the Gospel to Christ becomes as pernicious as open prophaness; where∣fore he complains of souls so swallowed up in the most lawfull outward callings, as the Epidemical
means of perdition, Luke 14. 18. Mat. 22. 5. How many poor Children herein are, instead of being (as Samuel) lent to the Lord, sold to the world by their parents as long as they live, defer∣ring soul-concernment till death, when they la∣ment too late they had not such a Mother as Samuel and Timothy had in their youth, and mourn at the last, as Eccl. 12. 1. wishing in the day of wrath (when riches profit not) that their Parents had lesse indulged their bodies for a moment, and more their immortall souls. Yet Fourthly; If this be escaped, the earthly mind and ambition of Parents in marriage adds a multiplying Cypher; as after Ahabs sin, so obnoxious before, 1 Kings 16. 31. and a Sydo∣nian with silver, is now far more esteemed than a daughter of Sion without it, or with little less; as if the half Language of Ashdod already, were intended to be perfected, rather than our posterities more compleatness in Christ. O shameful Profes∣sors! How unlike Rebecca are you herein, Gen. 27. 46. Surely Smithfield would better become such your Marriage-Markets, than a Congre∣gation of Christ: How few hereby find a Wife, as Solomon speaketh, Prov. 18. 22. (that is, to the end God instituted them) but seeking money (as a HELP-MEET to them) get a Woman with the World, and the Devil with her unawares (as Eve, when the mouth of the Deceiver) to a bitter day, perhaps a Saphira
helping (by hypocrisie) to save their earthly Estates, and lose their Souls. Herein Parents add to their prayer for Childrens Conversion, their pains to effect their Perdition; as one that prayeth a fire may go out, adding fuel thereto, so are these provisions for Lust under prayer for Life. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? yet among many Nations, was there no King like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him King over all Israel, Neh. 13. 26. Nevertheless, even him did outlandish-women cause to sin. But lastly, How doth neglect of Parents in∣struction of families, or ill example therein before their Childden, either in pride, covetousness, wrath, lightness, or other ill carriage (unbecom∣ing profession in Parents) expose their obser∣vant Children, and make fruitless and frivo∣lous their performances amongst them, when they shall discern them to fulfil Tit. 1. 16. before them; Beware therefore of this above all, that you lay not a stumbling example before them, but that in simplicity and godly sincerity you shew them your good conversation in Christ, filling up faithfully every relation in secret (according to your open profession) that they be not stumbled by finding the contrary: for O the wound which Christ an Truth and souls have received by eminent l gifted Professors of contrary conversations!  little have either the lusts or Inhabitants
world fallen before them! How would Abraham be ashamed of such Children, who so have shamed their profession in their opportunities, Heb. 11. 15. wherein else they might have shined to the conviction and conversion of many, Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 16. O tender Parents, for the Lords sake then, and for the sake of the soules under your charge, pray for your own return to the attaining again the holy Examples of Fathers in Christ, that they who dwell under your shadow, may revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the sent whereof shal be as the Wine of Lebanon, Hos. 14. 7. That your Children and Servants may bless you in the name of the Lord; and add not to their corrupt Nature any of these hazards afore∣said, under your education, in the sence whereof, and how many poor Children lately may have been carried Christless thither, and like sheep layd into the grave (whose Parents thought it time enough perhaps to teach them soul-concernments at lei∣sure) this earnest of encouragement to poor en∣deavours for the souls of Children, is published in love, which its hoped by your acceptance and help may provoke very many to the salvation of souls. And a special double Note is placed in the Margent, pointing to the sick-bed lamentation of s little one for the loss of first convictions in  most harmless manner of trifling away his  (with his most innocent School-fellows)
choaking for a season the tender Seed in his soul, the reviving whereof (by especial grace, in an acceptable season) stood him in so much stead (as you will see) in the face of Death and Iudgment, whereunto none of his great natural parts nor School-attainments durst approach: Be pleased to peruse it therefore, and improve it unto the most special care of your Childrens eternal wel∣fare, and pursue your frequent prayers for their conversion in the paths thereof, so, as by all means to promote (and by no means to betray) your prayers, that the account of them may not be with grief, but joy; which is the earnest prayer indeed of Your and your Childrens wel∣wisher in the Gospel of Christ, I. V.
In Commemoration of our Friend and School-fellow, the truly virtuous and Religious Youth, CALEB VERNON. An ELEGY. CALEB! Ah peerless Caleb, art thou dead? No, no thou art not, but thy soul is fled To Heaven, thy better part shall never dye But shall survive, yes and thy memory Shall ever live; and though thy life expire, Yet shal all those that knew thee, thee admire, And honour thy remembrance. Worthy youth Whose chiefest love was Piety and Truth; Who tho so young and tender, yet didst chase Away the thoughts of sin, and didst embrace Sincerity, and with an upright heart Didst Gods Commands, to chuse the better part. A second Timothy I well may stile thee, Of which true title none can ere beguile thee: Which thou deserv'st, and hast an ample share In his perfections, although so rare. I'th Scriptures from a child he knowledg had, And stuck close to the good, shuning the bad;
Even so didst thou, whose chief & sole delight Was for to serve the Lord thy God, in spight Of all the opposition which was made By Satans instruments, to make to fade Thy hot love t'wards thy Lord, & fervent zeal Unto good works, which no vain thing could steal. He in the graces of his Parents dear, Enjoy'd a very large and ample share. So thou the virtues of thy Father, and Thy gracious mother, at the second hand Deriv'st: A rare example he did prove, Others for to provoke his God to love. So thou a holy pattern didst appear, Although so young, while that thou livest here. And though th'art dead, thy soul doth sore on high Death wher's thy sting? Grave wher's thy victory? Caleb! blest Child! the Victory is thine, Who like an other Sun in Heaven dost shine. O Child, belov'd of God, admir'd of men, For all thy virtues and thy graces! when Shall we again thy like behold, whose Spirit A beautious Crown of Glory dost inherit. O wonder of our iron age! wh'ast left, Something of which the world can't be bereft Let us lament our losse, whilst he above Sings holy praises to the God of Love. W. D.
Another. AH cruel Death, that no one dost regard, But unto all entreaties still art hard: It is thy sting that makes so many grieve, 'Cause mortals of their lives thou dost bereave. It is thy deadly Spear that doth divide Poor Children from their Parents, thou dost guide Thy piercing Iavlin to the mortals heart, Thou strik'st ev'n Youth it self by thy keen Dart. Couldst thou not stop thy hand, O greedy Death, But with thy mighty stroak must stop his breath, Who in his youthful dayes did flourish much! O Death, why didst thou rob the world of such A Iewel? which with few I might compare, One that in time might been the Son and Heir Of Learning; one beyond his age endu'd, Wisdom and Virtue were by him pursu'd. O Death, couldst thou not execute thy rage On other men that feeble be with age; Or on some other youth, in whom such rare And virtuous qualities did not appear? But must so soon deprive us of a Iewel, Oh envious Death! What i'st makes thee so cruel? Such a most pretious Iem all ought to prize, I'm sure they do who're virtuous and wise. We mourn, He doth rejoyce; Ours is the loss, His is the gain, He's free from every cross. S. D.
Another. I. WHat nought but grief! what nought but floods of tears? Pray tell me why This common Desolation appears? That also I May spend a tear. I hear with these mine ears A sad reply. Weep Rocks, weep Mountains, for all joys are fled, The finest Flower in the Field is dead. II. 'Tis true we all must die, but paled death With his sharp clawes Hath put a period to my dear friends breath, But for what caus He in his youthful sides his Sithe did sheath I yet must pause Weep Rocks, weep Mountains, for all joy is fled, The finest flower in the field is dead. III. Me thinks sweet Philomel begins to sing Her mournful not And prest with sorrow hangs her little wing, Whilest that her thro Proclaims her sorrow, look how every thing With grief is smo Weep Rocks, &c.
IV. When ere his person came into my sight, Me thought my eye Was ravisht with a suddain sweet delight, His modesty Was a fit copy any one might write After him by. But weep O Rocks for all our joyes are led, The finest Flower in the Field is dead. V. Me thinks the new-blown flowers hang their head And oft bemoan Their hapless lot, because their Friend is dead, They deeply groan And sigh, the sight of which might draw indeed Tears from a stone. Weep Rocks, &c. VI. Learning and Piety, Virtue and Wit, His portion was, Learning he had beyond his years, but yet Alas, alas, Deformed Death no notice took of it, But crackt his glass. Weep Rocks, &c.
VII. He saw the vanity of earthly things, Therefore made haste, Unto the Kingdom of the King of kings, That he might taste The blessed joyes that Heaven with it brings, That nought can blast. Weep Rocks, &c. N. P. An ACROSTICK. CAleb hath now attain'd the promis'd Land, After his journy through the Wilderness Living he tasted of its Clusters, and Espied its beauty, which tongue can't express Blest soul! he rests now after much distress. Val'rous though small he was, for he hid find Entrance, tho death did at the entrance stand Resisting him, his God strengthned his mind, Now he's victorious and enjoys the Land. Ocoward Death! thou set'st upon a Child, Nor could'st thou conquer, but by it wast foy'd. S. P.
ANAGRAM. CALEB VERNON. Once Venerable. ALL earthly glory posts away with speed, What Once was Venerable now is dead. W. D. CALEB VERNON. Cure! None able. ALL help in Man is vain, where shall I flee? Who'l Cure? None able. Lord I flee to thee. S. P. CALEB VERNON. No Rule can be. DEath varies oft, No certain Rule can be; He strikes Old Age, Youth, Manhood, Infancy. S. P.
EPITAPH. HE is inter'd whose soul (now fled away) Once took a Lease of this small house of clay. She had not long her house inhabited Before she was to her Redeemer wed; She brought forth Children (who do now inherit Her Husbands wealth) the graces of the Spirit. When as she saw her family increase, She did repent that she had tan'e a Lease, House-room was scant, therefore she sought about To find a larger habitation out. Her Husband did a Mansion prepare, An heavenly Mansion, very large and fair. Thither she did her houshould goods remove, And now she's left this House and dwels above. She with her Cottage twelve years was content, And now, tho worms dwell in't, doth not lament. S. P. Job 19. 25, 26, 27. For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And though after my skin worms de∣stroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be con∣sumed within me.
THE Life and latter End OF Caleb Vernon. CALEB was born in the Inns at Dublin in Ire∣land,Why cal∣led Ca∣leb. Anno 1653. and called by that name by agreement betwixt his Parents seriously, with desire he might follow God fully; be∣ing both then very sensible of Professors defection. This Child was brought up with them at least six years, before he was sent to School; he was of very great ca∣pacity but exceeding shame-fac'd, and small of stature, and so timerous, that hisHis apt∣ness at 4 & 6 years old; and obser∣vance of parents. Parents could scarce trust him abroad out of their sight. Howbeit he profited so under their care, as to read the Bible di∣stinctly at Four years old, and by six be∣came very apt in places of Scripture, the
Theory thereof, and moral regard there∣unto; exactly observant of his Parents, with ambition to serve and please them in love. He had his share early in afflictions, for being put to School when he was but seven years old, at Hillington he deeply re∣sented the troubles on many good people, at that time; and being visited with a vio∣lent Ague there he began first to have a deep sence of death, questioning whetherHis first sick-bed convicti∣ons at 7 years old. he should be saved, but recovering that sickness, came to see his Father then pri∣soner in New gate, for the worship of God, according to the Gospel of Christ, and sick at the same time, which was thought to affect the Child, together with the fears of Souldiers in the way, that the night he arrived at London he fell sick again, in which sickness further convictions of his undone condition by nature seized more on him, and his elder Brother who then fell sick also, but both of them with their Father recovering, went to the waters at Epsam, where his Father (finding his pra∣ctice in Physick as much as he desired to be imployed in, the Lord taking away his youngest Son there) was disposed to re∣tirement, and abode there all the Sum∣mer, after a short time, sent him with his brother again to School, taking for the
est of his family Lodgings at Ewel all Winter, supposing he might be less ob∣oxiousHis Fa∣thers way to avoid affliction, bringeth him aud his fami∣ly there∣into, and how. than at popular Meetings in London, and lived there in his practice peaceably. A School-Master coming to live in that Village, he brought his Sons thither also, determining to settle there for his Life, and to that end bought a piece of Ground with intention to plant it, and build; which when a malitious Chyrurgion (too notorious for all open prophaness) ob∣served to impair his Practice, he se∣cretly (with his Father-in-Law, and Allies of debauched dispositions) by slanders of many sorts to the Justices, sought his disturbance. Whereupon the said Vernon being civilly sent for by the Justices, repaired to some of the chief and gave so good satisfaction of his peace∣able deportment in his calling, and the falshood of their various reports, as he received an ingenious account of the slan∣derers and forgers of them, with assurance of safety in the like case if attempted for the future; which was his encouragement to go on in building for the conveniency of his Family there. And though this confederacy in vain attempted his disturbance with the Bi∣shop
and Justices for near two years more, yet at last prevailed by slanders to be countenanced; so by another in armes (who took not such notice of the private malignity under pretence of Loyal∣ty) that the Chyrurgeon was encouraged as one of the chief in ransacking the said Vernons House and Closet (which he had stored with Medicine for his Apothecary) at pleasure, with violence and dis-ingenu∣ityCaebs early share in unreason∣able af∣flictions under na∣tural fearful∣ness be∣fore. incredible (upon pretence of Armes where never was any) and bruitish∣ly frequented the house as he pleased, sometimes in company, sometimes alone in his drink, venting his threats very ab∣surdly, to the great terror of the poor fa∣mily. The said Child being timerous (and under a fit of sickness also at Ewel with more deep sence of sin) having thus early (to his care about his eternal estate) the additional fears of unreasonable men, so frequently, was so exposed (though na∣turallyInward and out∣ward tro∣bles toge∣ther carry him to prayer & christian correspon∣dency. very chearful) that his Father was enforced to remove the Family from thence to Newington, with respect to their Schooling, leaving them himself some weeks before. The Child began therefore, when his Father through these troubles left Ewel,
rst in good earnest to approach to his eavenly father in private, and to begin a orrespondency with his good friend Mr. R. D. in London, wherein were Christian expressions in such wisdome and know∣ledge, as made his friend question (being the first he had written) whether they could come from one so young, being then ut Ten years old; whereupon the said Mr. D. sent to him as followeth. Dear Caleb, I Received thine without date, but not with∣out serious desire of the best things, and of hy beginning to be instructed in them, which made thy Letter very acceptable and welcome to me, being willing to hope that what comes under thy hand is not only notions in thy head, but something of Truth in thy heart, whichThe wis∣dome of his first Letter at 10 years old admi∣red by his friend. I desire may be more and more really wrought in thee. Thy Lines savour of an honest heart, and seem to come from an older head than thy own; yet being informed, from such as I can credit, that it was thy own writing, I shall make no further inquiry than to have it con∣firmed from thy self, in thy next to me, whe∣ther indeed thou hadst not privately the help of any other, before the writing of thine above mentioned unto me. It is a large desire ex∣ressed in thine to be filled with the Love of
God, and my hearts desire for thee is, Th the Lord will fulfill that Petition for thee, t∣gether with that mentioned, Ephes. 3. 1 17, 18, 19. Which I desire thou mayest o ten peruse, ponder and be helped to pr in the same Spirit of Truth. The co∣ing of Christ is hastening indeed as t Letter expresses, 'Tis but a little whi and he that shall come will come and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 3▪ And it is a question worth all our inquir who may abide the day of his coming, Mal. 3 12. Many there are that shall not, and fe there are that will be found blameless, a harmless without rebuke, at that day, whic yet is and shall be the portion of some, Phil. 2 15, 16. I shall at present only desire thy an∣swer unto two or three brief Questions follow∣ing. First, What thou dost understand by th coming of Christ? Secondly, What thou understandest b his judging the Earth? Thirdly, What it is to be an outsid Professor? Fourthly, What the Traditions of me are? Fifthly, Whither the answer thou shal return to the abovesaid questions be th own apprehensions without any help from others?
A true and plaine answer to these things will be a further satisfaction about thy last Letter, and I hope no disadvantage to thee, ho by the serious thoughts of these things mayest be brought to a better understanding n them. Thus with my dear love to thee and hy brother J. V. and Cousin Deborah, and ll the rest, desiring you may be all taught and nstructed in the truths of Christ, as they are n him, whom to know aright is eternal life, John 17. I remain, Thy assured Friend that desires thy Spiritual and temporal welfare, R. D. London the 6th. of the 3d Moneth. 63. And in Answer received this following, which he wrote immediately without stu∣dy or prompting. Ewell May 12 1663.Dear Sir, I Received your kind Letter, wherein you have desired me to write unto you an An∣swer to some certain Questions which you have hinted in your Letter, which I shall an∣swer
as (I hope) the Spirit of Grace shall declare to me; for I know and am assu∣red that the Lord will declare his Spirit unto them that truly love him; which indeed I may truly say, I have not done, but have er∣redHis se∣cond Let∣ter at large in answer to his friend against his word, for which I have great cause to mourn for, but I hope he may be my God, who will be a God to them that truly seek after him in Spirit and in Truth, who did put them words into my mouth which you de∣sired me to send you word of, and no body else▪ But as for the coming of Christ, I understand it to be two diverse wayes, First, His com∣ing in the hearts of his People, to purge and purify them. Secondly, His coming o Earth when he shall set his People at liberty and shall destroy all Kingdomes that will n obey him, and he shall set up himself a King∣dome, Dan. 2. 44. And by his Iudgin the Earth I understand, when all both quic and dead shall stand before his presence, whe he shall sever the bad from the good, and sha say to them on his right hand, COME Y BLESSED OF MY FATHER; But un∣to them on his left hand, GO YE CURS∣ED into Hell fire, prepared for the De∣vil and his angels. And to be an outsid Professor, I understand it to be one, who make a shew of Christ, but they be not so in thei hearts. And I understand the Traditions
men, to be their following after the Lusts of the Devil rather than the Commands of God. Which things I have not been told of. I would desire you to excuse me for not dating my Letter, and desire you would write unto me to unfold them to me more than I can do, which I hope may be made of use unto my soul: So I remain, Your much obliged Friend, CALEB VERNON. ANd being removed to Newington (and now no more exposed to such private hostility) he went more chearfully to School, and profited exceedingly in the Latine tongue, making enterance also in∣to the Greek that Summer; but finding the opportunity of hearing the Word there uncertain in the Winter, for the sake of it, and his Fathers imployment in London, the Family was removed thither, where he was improved without more intermis∣sion, to great proficiency in the Greek and Latine, so as both his able Teachers, as all with whom he was, have said, they never had any more apt of his age, nor did any
with whom he was see cause to use cor∣rection unto him, who yet to his Parents trouble had lost much time by such re∣moves, and amongst more civil School∣fellows (having alwayes averseness to play with profane) grew too secure. But when the Child Caleb was as a ten∣derBeing at peace a∣mongst civil School∣fellows he was less seri∣ous, but revived under the Word at London. Scrupled Heathen School Authors seriously. plant now again more frequently wa∣tered with the living streams of the word of grace, by grace yet in London, he grew very considerate in his goings, and of his own accord so hesitated at the fictions he met with in the Heathen Authors at School (especially about God, and Hea∣ven, and Hell, &c. which were now on his mind) that though he dearly loved and highly reverenced his Master, he did very humbly acquaint his Father with his scruple herein, and found favour to have it much removed to his satisfaction and encouragement to further proficiency in Learning, which was his delight. Howbeit, sometime after being im∣ployed in an English Poetical Exercise on a solemn Subject, wherein he seriously used Scripture language pertinently; hiLove to Scripture allays his love to School, and why. learned Master (he said) observed to him he should not be so Scriptural, but would have him alter it for a more Poetical dia∣lect; whereupon indeed the Child (as it
were astonied and discouraged thereat) of his own accord so abated his delight in Learning, that he went to School then as under some load, which had been as his pastime or delight before. Hence did he earnestly entreat his Fa∣ther he might be brought up with him in his own calling, for which he had Learn∣ing enough, to which he was very enclin∣able, and in which he expressed great apt∣ness with delight, more than to play, upon all idle times. But being returned to School for a season, to attain the Hebrew reading, into which he was entring, it pleased God to visit him with sickness, to perfect his compleature for his Bride∣groom, as followeth. Being visited, through surfeit by heat, with a Feaver and Plurisie near unto death, in London, he had then a more effectual awakning towards Eternal Life, in such lively conviction, self—abase∣ment and savour, as made some about himMore sick bed con∣victions and the effects. admire the grace in which he spake, both of God and unto him, by Christ Jesus fervently; and his holy behaviour (being much in deep abasement when he was left alone) which encreased savourly in him in the Country, especially upon every so∣lemn opportunity in the Word and Pray∣er
with the Family; for finding some re∣covery at last in London, but very low, lean and consumptive (the weather and Sickness beginning to be very hot there) he was carried into the Country to a Gar∣den House in Battersey, where his Father fairly acquainted his Landlord with his judgement in Religion, and troubles therefore, and his determination yet to maintain meetings in the true Worship of God with his Family and Acquaintance where ever he came, which was not only agreed unto, but encouraged by the said Landlord, who with his Wife and ancient Father carried it with all seeming respect insomuch as (the place also agreeing with them) they were near agrement for a tearm of years, but in the mean time the said Landlord, privately boasted, that he hadProvi∣dence prevent∣ing Coun∣try set∣ling a∣gain. been at Ewel, and had been prompted to give the said Vernon, &c. disturbance (which yet he said he would not molest fo all this world) which saying of his being frequently repeated, caused some demu in the said Vernons settlement there, ye he came (as he could be spared from hi Patients in London) as at former time to his Children, but fearing the wea Child might be under the influence there∣of, he was seriously consulted, who de∣sired
earnestly to come to London for theHis de∣sire of return to London, and why. sake of the pretious Word (though the Plague was not much abated there) ra∣ther than expose his Father to come thi∣ther so oft, or be absent from him, or en∣gage his Father into any other parts, ha∣ving many sick under his Care; yea he was much more set on being at London, that he might sympathize, as he said, with the sufferings of the Lords poor visited People there. Hereupon (finding also his strength came not forwards towards the end of the Summer) they were again brought into London. Now it pleased God that the ho∣nest Waterman that brought the Children to London, and the Servant that brought this Child (being not able to go) in hisAfflicting Provi∣dences work stil for true good to him. armes to his Lodging, immediately fell sick and died of the Pestilence, which ad∣ed to the serious mind of the Child, though yet he would not endure to hear it called Melancholy, conducing much to his in∣ward rooting in that which could not be shaken. The first Lesson from the Scriptures in the Family was from Eccles. 9. 10. What∣soever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou goest. From which such grace, was through the Lords goodness granted to him, that he received more powerful in∣struction from it, with great thanksgiving for it, as that which had much helped and refreshed him, though his Sister and Bro∣ther especially (in addition to former grace to them) were awakened thereby with trembling, and in a few dayes after turned to the Lord with full purposeThe quicken∣ing effect of apply∣ing fami∣ly instru∣ction more par∣ticularly. of heart, being further helped, by being called upon to call on the Name of the Lord at their meat, which they had not formerly done, and were afraid to do formally; so also did Caleb refuse to do it publickly then, fearing, he said, he could not perform it acceptably: but im∣mediately his heart smote him, and in much humility voluntarily offered to do it as well as he could the next season, ar∣guing with himself, that it belonged to the Adoption to cry Abba, Father, and to a Christian not to be ashamed of Christ. This motion proved also to the great humbling of the other two, and wrought mightily to self-abasement, in serious sense also, that the first fruit of true Con∣version was to call on the Lord in truth and not to be ashamed to confess him and it was soon after manifested, that they
had through Grace received the Spirit of Adoption from him, and were help'd to witness unto him, unto their admission into his house with joy. Caleb then craved a little Closet for himself, that he might seek the Lord in secret more seriously; which was to his great satisfaction prepared, but by daily decay to his outward, grew more sensible now of the Winter approaching, but the Spring-time to his inward-man was daily made manifest; God was pleased to make his weak Bed his Closet, and the weari∣some nights his seasons of much serious consideration, brought to light daily in plenty of wisdom, imploying true turning to God most apparently, not recorded till the visible decay also of his weak outward tabernacle, daily made us fear it was the anointing with fresh Oyl for his Burial: And then his Mother (admiring the Wis∣domThe mo∣tives to his Mo∣thers wri∣ting his sayings at last. by which he spake) was minded to gather up what fragments she could in writing (without his observing it) as he daily dropt them in season with favour, declaring him to be wholly a new man to the Lord, on whom he now began more to see he believed to his support (though his seeming reserved and drooping po∣sture (after his first dayes rejoycing to see
his Parents in London) he would not own to be melancholy, but solemn meditation about his eternal estate, with hope and some joy (yet mixed at first with more fears and doubtings;) nor could any thing allure him into the Country again, though his Father offered his company (the Plague and number of his Patients be∣ginning to abate) because he prized (he said) the opportunities of the Word inSoul-in∣struction preferred before health or life, and the fruit which followed London above life, or hopes of more health elsewhere, saying sometimes with arden∣cy, A day in thy Courts is better than a thou∣sand elsewhere. And thus began, first, to open himself to his Mother: Mother, I now begin to see the vanity of all things in this life, and it is a troublesome world; if I were assured of the Love of God, I would chuse rather to dye than live. And having intermitting fits, with wea∣risom restless nights, he said to his Mo∣ther about the beginning of the ninth month, in the morning, with joy; Mo∣ther, I have seen the Face of God, and God hath as it were taken me into his Arms this night, and assured me of his Love; men∣tioning these Scriptures following as his refreshment: And him that cometh to meJohn 6. I will in no-wise cast out. And, why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou dis∣quietedPsa. 42. 5▪
within me? hope thou in God, &c. Cease ye from man whose breath is in his no∣strils;Isa. 2. saying, God had shewed him he might not trust to man for his healing, but look unto and trust in him; and whereas (said he) I was before very restless, that IGrace gi∣veth ease & begets abasemēt. could not lye still in one place, yet afterwards I was at great ease, and could lie very quiet though I had no sleep. Then cryed he out of his vileness also, most humbly, and said, I see now how I was by nature plunged in sin and iniquity, but my Lord Iesus Christ (which he uttered ardently) hath been a ransom for me: and spake particularly of the vanity of his mind before his sickness, and blessed the Lord for his Visitation. In the midst of one fit he spake affecti∣onately; This is my comfort in my afflicti∣on,Psal. 119. Thy Word hath quickned me. Upon the fifth of the ninth month he had many fainting fits, but his faith and hope was so maintained in the midst of hem, that he said joyfully, Mother, My flesh and my heart faileth me, but God is he strength of my life, and my portion for ver; joying in God, as his God, in va∣iety of pithy expressions, saying, How ad would it be with me now if God were not ny God? On the 7th of the ninth month his fit
came as formerly, which at first was grie∣vous, causing him to cry out once, What shall I do? but he checked himself pre∣sently and said, Why? I know God will help me, and I will trust in him; admi∣ring much his goodness to him. His Mo∣ther leaving him to lie quiet, sent the Maid, but he desired to be left alone: and sometime after sending to him again, he sent his Mother word, he was very sick, but God made it easie to him; and when his Mother came, he told her he was made so joyful through the light of Gods coun∣tenance, that though he was very weak as ever he was in his body, yet he could lie still, & magnified the Lord greatly for his Grace in chusing him, who was (he said) so very vile by nature; And now, MotherSolitary seasons sweet, & slavish fear sub∣dued. (saith he) God hath taken away all my slavis fear; and whereas it was so with me that I could not endure to be in a room by my self▪ now I care not how much I am alone. He di particularly complain then of a frothy frame before his Visitation, blessing the Lord again for bringing this Sickness up∣on him, saying, For these light affliction2 Cor. 4. 17. which are but for a moment, work for me  far more exceeding and eternal weight  Glory: and mentioned the words also i Rev. 7. 14. These are they which came o
of great tribulation, washing their robes in the blood of the Lamb. He said, one sin ofLitle sins lye heavy on a sin∣cere soul. his at Ewel had often lain heavy upon his heart, namely his disobedience to his Mother once, not going to bed when she had commanded it. She told him, she hoped God had pardoned it and all other his sins in Christ, by whose Blood all was done away, and she had both forgiven it him, and had forgotten it; which much satisfied him, saying, he hoped God would set him on the Rock that was higher than he; and if he pleased to spare him, he de∣sired to be found obedient to him, and desired to be joyned to his People, asking his Mother if I. S. (who had proposed himself, and he knew was suspended for further tryal) came forward, saying, It would be a sad thing if he should go backward in the things of God. And then much ad∣mired the goodness of God to him, say∣ing, How good is it to have an Interest in Christ now! and how miserable is the con∣trary in such a condition as I am in! and was much taken up with the consideration of Eternity, so that his Mother marvel∣led at his sweet discourse at this time, and thought his face even shined with theGreat re∣freshment by Grace. Grace of God that was on him: he con∣tinued in a very heavenly frame of heart
to the time of her going to bed; and de∣siring to restrain him from talking more, having had little rest: he answered, that talk about common things he found hurtful to him, and he wanted breath quickly; but to speak of the things of God was not weari∣some but refreshing. And the Maid of a worthy Acquain∣tance in Prison coming to see him, he sent her Master word, he loved him as heHis incou¦ragement to an ho∣nest pri∣soner. was the Lord's Prisoner; and he was sure God would deliver his Prisoners. Being asked how he knew that? he said he had his Word for it, which said, that he would bring them from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from all places whither they had been carried away captive; and he was sure not a tittle of his Word should fail till all was fulfilled; And that the enemies of the Lord he was sure should be destroyed, for the Word of the Lord had said it; repeating then some words of the 47th of Isa. to prove it, and desired the Maid to tell her Master also, that he was in the place where God would have him to be, and desired him to stand fast in the Lord, and not give way to the Adversary; and desire her Mistris to be content, and not to faint, but consider that God was able to make up all her Husbands losses unto her.
His Father making ready two Larks for him, he solemnly invited his Father, Mo∣ther,His love∣feast and entertain ment of friends. Brother, Sister and Cousin to sup with him, asking his Father, whether it was not Levi that made a Feast to invite his Kindred unto Christ, when he was converted? nd did in a gracious manner before them give thanks to the Lord, both before and after, in very heavenly and savoury ex∣pressions. His Father then conversed with him about the time and extent of his con∣viction of sin; he said he thought that work was never through till the time of this last coming to London; though he had prayed diverse times before, yet he thought it was not so right; but since by his Fathers speaking to him and praying with him of ate, he was throughly convinced of his ndone estate by Nature, and upheld much by that word, in Iohn 6. 37. And im that cometh to me I will in no-wise cast ut: and that, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me ll ye that are weary and heavy laden, and  will give you rest. Also from Psal. And sinners shall be converted unto thee; bserving that God had mercy for such as ad been transgressors & sinners. Thence∣orth he continued daily blessing the Lord rom day to day for his goodness, but hrough his Mothers occasions many per∣tinent
passages were omitted. He did of∣ten this week speak also of his faith in, and desire of the Ordinances of Baptism and Church-fellowship, as his duty, wish∣ing earnestly he might be baptized andHis desire of obedi∣ence. joyned to the Lord's Fold. His eldest Si∣ster, and Brother also, about this time propounded themselves, and were accep∣ted upon a satisfactory Confession of their Faith, in that Church were Caleb longed to come, lamenting that none would take him up, being perswaded that he hadHis im∣portunity to confess to Christ after he believed. strength to go to them, to witness to the Lord in his Congregation (though he could not sit up an hour for several dayes before:) but seeing that denied him, he prevailed with his Father to propose to the Congregation, that some might be imployed to hear him then in bed; and about twelve faithful Brethren being no∣minated, and a liberty left unto others, (not being too many to anoy the room by reason of his weakness) his Mother went up to see him before, to whom he said earnestly, Mother I pray you do not hinder me, for I know God will be with me, and en∣able me to be baptized; and I do not think I shall be the worse, but rather better in my body; for I am assured God will not suffer any to receive hurt in doing what he hat
commanded them; but however, if I should die in it, I would not omit it, for I would do what I could. And coming up to him a∣gain (before the Friends appointed were come) he said, Mother, I think I have seen a Vision since you went, and God hath ex∣ceedingly comforted me, and given in such strength, that if the Maid would have suffer∣ed me to rise, I am perswaded I could have come to the Congregation my self; and ex∣prest much longing for their coming to him, who were appointed; soon after a∣bove twenty came to him, to whom he af∣fectionately complained, and to his Fa∣ther,His com∣plaint & impati∣ence. that no body would help him up to come unto them, being perswaded of more strength for that, than for common occasions; and being set up in his Bed, though before his sickness the greatest contest with him, (both by Parents, Ma∣sters and Friends) was his shamefac'tness that he could scarce speak to a man; he was in this (under much holy modesty) ve∣ry undanted, not caring who or how ma∣ny heard him, and uttered himself to the Company (Candles being set on the bed, and they round about him) after this man∣ner following. God speaks once, yea twice, yet man regard∣eth it not: Thus it hath been with me in
two sicknesses; God spake to me first inHis Con∣fession of Faith. my sickness in London, about five years agoe, and afterwards at Ewel about two years ago, when I grew serious, and it stayed with me for some time, and I be∣took my self to Prayer in private, and think I had some Communion with God therein. But after I came to Newington and went☞ to School, I fell into company, and did☞ again lose those Convictions, falling to play among my School-fellows, as if those convictions had never been, and now you see that made good in Iob, The bones that were not seen stand out. Since which time God hath more than ever set me into a serious consideration of my condition, which began when I was in London at my Fathers house, before I went into the Country, but I had not so much the savour of it after in the Country, though I was not there without thoughts of it, and think I had some communion with God there, yet I lost much of that time; but since I came again to London, things were more powerfully revived upon my soul, and when I heard that word from my Father, speaking from that Scripture, What thou findest in thy hand to do, do it with all thy might, &c. It did afresh set me into a
pursute after God, and I have been seek∣ing after him, and desire to follow him fully (here he made a stand)▪ It was then asked him what he had to make out to us, that were to judge of his true faith in Jesus Christ, that might fit him for the Lords Ordinances? He said, God had said to him, He that cometh unto me, I will in no wise cast out. But it was asked what he intended by comming? He said, to Christ by believing. He was asked how he would come, and what need he saw of Christ? He answered, He knew he was lost and un∣done by nature; that Scripture had been much upon his heart, Eph. 2. And are by na∣ture the Children of wrath as well as others, and that in Adam all dyed. And that word, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; and he had been sensible ofPsal. 51. 13. this. And that word in the Psalms had been of great use to him, And sinners shall be converted unto thee. If sinners shall be con∣verted (said he) there is hope for such a one as I, and it is my encouragement to ex∣pect good from God. Then it was asked him what sin he was sensible of, that he should make use of that word, sinners should be con∣verted unto thee? His answer was, HE SAW HE WAS A SINNER IN A∣DAM BEFORE, AND HAD SPENT
HIS TIME VERY CHILDISHLY,☞ AND PLAID AWAY HIS CON∣VICTIONS, And had been frothy, which was his great sin. Then it was asked what he did when he saw himself such a sinner? He said he applied to God by prayer (as well as he could) as a poor soul that need∣ed Christ. It was asked then, what was the effect of that? He said, God did relieve him and direct to Christ. Then it was asked, how long he was under the sence of his sin, before he re∣ceived this satisfaction in Christ. He an∣swered, he had some comfort in his Fa∣thers house in London, when he lay sick before he went into the Country, but he thought he lost much by being in the Country; but being more serious in his mind since he came last up to London, con∣sidering also what is said in Iob 33. 21. The first Scripture that relieved him in his distressed condition was, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. And afterwards he laid hold on that word, He that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. Also two o∣ther words that had been of use to him for the confirmation of his hope in God. One was in Isaiah, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my name sake, I will
not remember thy sins. And that in the 73 Psal. My heart and my flesh faileth, but the Lord is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. And another in the 119 Psal. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word hath quickned me. Then he was asked how or to what extent he had recei∣ved Christ? He answered, as King, Priest and Prophet. Then it was asked, what he had and expected by Christ as a Priest? He said, he had been an acceptable Sacri∣fice for him, and interceded for him. Then it was asked, what he expected from him as King? he said, to rule him and defend him. Then it was asked, if he would be subject to him in all things? He answer∣ed, Yes, he desired to be so, for he was sure it was his reasonable service. He was asked, what he expected as a Prophet? He answered, That he should instruct and guide him, and none else. Then it was asked to what end he tendred his Faith to the Brethren? He answered that he might be baptized and joyned to Christs fold. Then he was asked what light he had in Baptism? He answered, that that Scrip∣ture had been of use to him, He that be∣lieveth and is baptized, shall be saved. Be∣sides Christs example as a pattern to us; nd Philip and the Eunuch, instancing
that in particular. If thou believest with all thy heart thou mayest. Besides he mention∣ed the case of the Jayler. Then he was asked, how he could adventure on such a work in such a condition? He said, he would trust God, and do what he could▪ Then it was said, it may be he might di in the water, what if he should die? He chearfully then said, Why Death is mine, if I die in it, and it is the work of God, and then it will be known that Christ hath some that will follow him in difficulties. But his Father replied, though Child, it be so easie to you, it will be a trouble to us, we cannot so easily part with you. Why Father (said he) If I should die, God can make it up to you, and I shall go to Hea∣ven. His Father then told him the Lord would accept a man according to what he hath, and not according to what▪ he hath not. He said he was sure he had strengt to be baptized, and God would give hi more. His Father told him, that the sam Promise that was made to them that pray∣ed in the Temple, when God gave the ability to be there, was made to them th had respect thereto when his hand hin∣dred. And that which might justifie Ti∣mothy, being a member, to be absent▪ Miletum, when he was sick, might excus
one from coming in being sick and unable to do what he would, wherein God would accept the will for the deed. To which he readily answered. But indeed Father I know I have strength, and could have come down to day if any one would have taken me up, and God will give me more strength. It was asked him, what he pro∣posed by Baptism? He answered, I would obey all the Commandments of Christ, re∣peating that Scripture, Repent and be bap∣tized every one of you, in the Name of Ie∣sus Christ for the remission of sins. Then it was asked him, do you expect righteous∣ness by Baptism? O no, said he. Then it was queried, what he intended by his being baptized? He said, to put on Christ and be obedient to him in all things: He spake also of being buried with Christ in Baptism, as dying to sin and his own righ∣teousness, &c. Then was inquiry made into his con∣versation, and he had not been known e∣verHis for∣mer Con∣versation to be addicted to any sort of vice, and seldom to play, being ever delighted in Learning and Knowledge (and on idle dayes pleased greatly to be imployed un∣der his Father;) onely the Maid thought that at Newington (when he was at School freed from his troubles at Ewel) about
the time he complains of himself, he was one time apt to be frothy in play, and somtimes to speak rashly, but never knew any intention to lie, or that he purposly made a lye at any time; but she was grie∣ved more at his lightness for a little time there, than ever before or since his coming from thence, and that he had often la∣mented it to her himself. Satisfaction being then declared by all that heard (in the point of his Faith) it was agreed to spread the difficult case of his Baptism before the Lord in solemn Prayer. The next day, being the 13th day of the ninth month, in the morning, he saidHis pur∣suit of convicti∣ons. he was something better, and God had more strengthened him in order to doing his duty; and once said, God bid him go forward; and though he seemed very weak, yet he desired to be taken and laid in the bed, where prayer was to be made all that day, and he attended with great reverence, bearing his fit with great pati∣ence then: and usually indeed when heHis pati∣ents and support. was sickest in body, he would forget the sence of it, by remembring how well he was made in his soul; admiring much that God was his God. Before the end of the day he was carried back to his own
Bed for repose, and his Father going to him at night, he said, Father, pray you haveHis in∣quiry af∣ter pray∣er. you come to any conclusion to day about my being baptized? which put his Father (be∣ing yet doubtful, and thinking his weak∣ness would quiet him therein) to some strait what to answer, seeing his earnest expectation (having omitted that day to debate it after Prayer) but (fearing to discourage him) instantly replyed, Child, we have not been, nor are not without serious thoughts of it, and some do more encline to it, and we shall yet consult it seriously, if you cannot be satisfied to de∣ferHe can∣not be sa∣tisfied to defer o∣bedience after Convicti∣on. it. I pray you Father do (saith he) for indeed I cannot be satisfied, and I would fain be in Christs Fold. The next day, being the fourteenth, he seemed much weaker, but still minded this (as his duty) with great desire to be doing it: but (having not been up in many dayes before, but as aforesaid, from one Bed into another) his Father asked him, how he could thiuk to go about such a work, seeing he was not able to be got up out of his bed for a moment (his thighHis thigh measured, not full 4. inches about. being then not full four inches about) and he not being able to endure so much as a Doubet or Gown upon him, his bones were so bare. He answered very chear∣fully,
He did believe God would help himChear∣fully sheweth all his strength to pre∣vail with his father that he might be obedient. to rise to do that his work, and give him strength; and he had some already, so that he was able to rise now, if his Father would have him. To which his Father (thinking it might convince or refresh him) consented, and he was taken up in warm Blankets, and sate by his Father on Pillows upright, well nigh two hours; in which time he had very gracious con∣verse, and with chearfulness said, Father,Boasteth in God, admired grace for temporal and eter∣nal mer∣cy. the Lord is my strength, of whom should I be afraid? Indeed you are my dear Father, but I have a dearer Father in Heaven. How great mercy have I that I should have such a tender Father in Earth, and in Heaven also! And seeing his little Sister by him (of five years old, which the rest used to call Mother) he said to her affectionately, Nancy, the Lord make you a Mother in Is∣rael;His holy converse. O how do I long to see Christ formed in you! And looking to his Father, he said, Why indeed, Father, she had many very good expressions in the Country, and would say to the Maid in a morning, What mercy is it that we are alive, and so many thousands taken away at London, and so many little Children. Then speaking of the Adversaries to the People of God, he said, their time is but short: And being asked,
how he knew that? said, the Word of God sayes it, mentioning that Scripture, Rev. 12. The Devil is come down with great wrath, because he knoweth he hath but a short time. Two Larks being roasted for Sup∣perHis usual meal, and chearful frame thereat. (whereof he used to eat but a leg and a wing at the most) He did then very fer∣vently give thanks unto God with highest praise for that meat that endureth to eter∣nal life, and humble thanks for his daily support, and mercies of every sort, with great enlargement both for his work be∣fore him, and in praise for what had been wrought for him and in him: and when he found he had sat up to his full strength, went to his bed blessing the Lord, depen∣ding upon his Father to come the next day to some conclusion about his further obe∣dience. On the fifteenth day his Father went into the Country, and meeting with some Christian Friends, improved that oppor∣tunity for their earnest advice, with prayer setting forth his great strait in theFriends advise his bap∣tisme. case; and taking their answer one by one, upon what they had heard, both for and against it, they unanimously advised the answering his desire therein, leaving the issue unto the Lord, whose Wisdom they judged had engaged the Child herein, be∣yond
any reasonable objection that could be brought to oppose it; only one of them desired that if he could be taken off by the perswasion of his Father he might; but the most of them (as his father had done) having used all Arguments they could to him before, declared they durst not fur∣ther object. His Father observing he had had nothing of it from man, but the con∣trary, and not expecting his life ordina∣rily a day, & observing the Childs oppres∣sionConside∣rations of his fa∣thers consent. also through delay herein, and chief revivings were alwayes in the hopes of obedience, (without vanity) counting of the worst, and exploding any thought of righteousness or expectation of certain healing by it, yet expressing he could not dye so comfortably in the neglect of it, and often saying, he would do what he could, and was perswaded God would enable him that he should not be the worse for it. His Father after many dayes revolving it in his mind, (the Child being but too dear unto him) did yeeld his judgment also, to trust God with the issue. And then imployed one to search dili∣gently for an House near a River, where it might most conveniently the next day be performed: but as he returned home, calling on a Christian Friend, (whose im∣ployment
in Physick was to be respected) and finding him of opinion he could notFurther objection. His im∣patience to obey. be carried thither alive, and sensible of the great reproach that would follow if he dyed in the attempt, it so far renewed his thoughtfulness, as to entreat that Friend to try if he could perswade the Child to defer it; and his Father then going before unto him, found he had been weaker that day, yet still more impatient to perform this, as his duty, before he dyed; having much longed for his Fathers return, saying often, O that I might see my dear Father! When will my Father come? And upon the coming of any up stairs, Me-thinks I hear the feet of my Father: which was much his frame in his absence at any time, but now much more by expecting resolution here∣in. His Father coming, he soon sollicitous∣ly enquired for his consent, and acquaint∣ing him with the concurrence of some friends to countenance it, he rejoyced greatly; and smiling upon his Mother, he said with great ardency and strength, Mo∣ther,His joy in con∣sent. to morrow I shall go abroad now to the glory of God, and I know he will strengthen me. But his Father telling him, that a worthy Friend yet dissented, who would come presently to confer with him: he
abated his rejoycing, but readily consent∣edHis joy abated, but the Objecter admitted he should come, and was impatient till he came. The Friend being come, exprest his joy in his faith, but gave the very rea∣sons he had often heard from his Father and others, why one so weak should be satisfied to forbear; and added, that it was said, all Iudea went out to be baptized, but he never heard that any were carried out. Caleb replyed, That Christ bid his Disciples go and teach all Nations, baptizing them; but never said, if they be sick and weak do not baptize them. And persisted in his perswasion of Gods assistance, although a good Gentlewoman then also sought to diswade him; but after several speeches to him, which seemed to weary him, he looked about him upon the Company, and seemed to suspect they spake but the mind of his father and others there silent, on which he lay down as weary and discou∣raged, and said (even weeping) Well, if my Father would not have me, I will not; ex∣plainingHis great discou∣ragement himself, if he was not thought a fit subject. The friend seeing his counte∣nance so changed, and supposing he grew weak beyond capacity of performing it, (the present day also being tempestuous, and like to be so the day following) said unto him, Well I see I trouble you, I shal
say no more to discourage you, but rest upon it and see to morrow if it be such weather, and you finde you have no strength to go you will be satisfied. To which he replyed, Yes, if I have notHis con∣fidence. strength; but I know God will give me strength. His Father observing his great dejection, added, It may be, Child, you think he spake in our name, and you may think we design to put thee off; but he only speaks his own mind in true love to thee and the Lord, as we did, and it is now left to a good issue, as you shall find your strength and the season to morrow, therefore if thou wilt, in a few words com∣mit it unto God. The Friend said, It may be he is too much spent: but he ac∣cepted of the motion of his Father, and sitting up again, prayed very pertinently toHis pra∣yer on the occasion. the occasion, beseeching the Lord to strengthen him, his poor unworthy Servant, in his Will, to his Honour, and help him against all the temptations of Satan; praying for Sion, the reviving the Cause of the Lord, and helping those who prosest him to maintain a good pro∣fession to his Honour; and if it were his Will to give him a Good Day to morrow to witness to him, and order it for his glory. At which the friend and all the company were well contented as a good conclusion of it.
The night continued tempestuous, and he called often betwixt his slumbers to know what weather? and the answer still seemed to daunt him; but the morning appearing calm and Sunshine beyond anyWeather favoreth. day long before, confirmed him, and he was willing to rise often, as impatient to go; but being deferred till noon, and finding his body but weak, he desired not to rise till the very instant of going, but would not yet be withheld by his weak∣ness, saying, I will lye still that I may have strength to serve God. One in his hearing, saying, The place for his Baptizing was very dangerous, where an Aunt of hers was stoned by the Souldiers upon the like occasion; it nothing terrified nor discom∣posed him, yet did not he manifest any vanity in his strength, but behaved it as one fully resolved to obey to the utter∣most,His un∣daunted∣ness with humility. waiting on the Lord, composed for assistance, with his mind very humbly and unmovedly set upon his will. The Coach of a certain friend being lent him, and two other hired for the com∣pany, some other friends going on foot; there was one went by to help in any oc∣casion of fainting expected; and he, with his Father, Mother and Gentlewoman, (who the night before endeavoured to dis∣swade)
and his Brother who was to be baptized with him, went in that Coach, where pillows were appointed for his ease on the laps of two of them, but in stead of ying down, or being weary, he desired toHis ex∣traordi∣nary as∣sistance & thank∣ful obser∣vance. sit up, and sat upright all the way chear∣fully; and as soon as he came out of the Gate, said heartily, Father, me thinks I begin to be very hungry, I would I had some∣thing to eat; His Father said, there was Cordial, or Sack, or Hartshorn-Jelly; but he refused those, and desired some bread if it could be got, which he had not eaten of a moneth before. And a rowl be∣ing obtained, he ate heartily and drank af∣ter it, calling for more of it again by the way, and found himself much strength∣ened, for which he praised God, as for fit∣ness to serve him fulfilling his hope. His fit came not that day visibly as it had done for many before, but being come to the place, as he sate by the fire, much company coming, his Father whilest he was making ready spake to them from Acts 21. 14. And when he would not be per∣swaded, we ceased, saying, THE WILL OF THE LORD BE DONE. Giving aThe pre∣paration. brief account of the occasion, with the Objestions, and the Answers, and Con∣clusion thereupon. Then desired now to
witness to it as the will of God, shewin the Commands for it, Signification of i and Ends that should be proposed in it desiring they might be in them, and tha▪ Presence which might make it to both hi Sons the Communion of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, to such a put∣ting him on (in the virtue of all his Offi∣ces) as might manifest their being as i were thenceforth new-died with, o tinged into Christ, to their savour o him in all things, in newness of Nature and Life. And then being carried down the Administrator (being ready) received him into his Arms, but feeling him so light (and such a parcel of dry bones in∣deed) it tried his faith unto some holy trembling; to whom the Child said, I amHis grace in and af∣ter the ordinance not afraid; and was very conveniently and speedily baptized, his Father stand∣ing ready with a warm Blanket to receive him, beheld him (going back) as of a well pleased and indeed shining counte∣nance, saying as soon as he could speak, I am very well Father. And being laid dry on a bed, but his breath very short through disturbance, in changing the clothes, he desired to lie a little season, being very cold, and it seems had a little spice of a cold fit, which began before whilst he was
making ready (though his Father heard not of it till after) and indeed a sentence ofAn hum∣bling sen∣tence of death. death seemed to be upon him in his Fa∣thers esteem, who whilest thanksgiving was returned by the brother who baptized him, spake often to the Child softly to ask how he did, who said, I can scarce take my breath it is so short, but I shall be better after I have lain a little; and in half an hour or thereabouts sate up cheerfully, and him∣selfHis emi∣nent re∣viving and reve∣rent pub∣lick thanks∣giving & prayer. returned publick praise solemnly be∣fore them all, for the assistance of such dry bones in his service; alluding to the dry bones of Israel. Prayed likewise earnestly for Zion, desiring the repairing her desolate and waste places, and earnestly for their standing fast, who had put on Christ that day, or lately, that they might never bring dishonour upon such a holy profession. And being again in the Coach, seeingHis joy in Gods as∣sistance and ex∣perience of  when he could▪ not ex∣press it. an old Friend there present, called to him, and entreated him to serve the Lord: And being on his way, rejoyced in the goodness of the Lord that had carried him (according as he believed) through his will. And now Father, it will be seen, said he, that God is greater than man. And by the way home called for warm Ale at an Inn, and con∣tinued better than in many dayes before, acquainting his Father and Mother, That
he had very great joy in Communion with God coming up out of the Water, when he could not express it, his breath failing through some water that went into his mouth (which he merrily said, he had forgot to shut) and being come home, and laid in his bed, after a little quiet he appeared more live∣ly than before (nor had he any longer any cold or hot fit that day, which had not missed to hold him several hours for many days before;) and said then again to some friends, whom he desired might sup in his room. Now I hope Mr. B. (mean∣ing the friend who last dissented) will beHis hope on the be∣half of God for the friend who last objected. convinced that the power of God is greater than the wisdom of man, saying, he was ne∣ver so well in his life (viz.) in his soul, and better in his body than before he was Bapti∣zed. He then desired he mightly with his dear Father and Mother that night. And did acquaint them again, He thought he saw the glory of God when he came up out of the Water, and was very sweetly re∣freshed though he was not able to ex∣press it. The next day, being before appointed for Thanksgiving in the Congregation, upon the choice accounts of healing above fifty of them of the Pestilence, and ad∣ding lately towards the repair of the
Breach upon them (by the death of twen∣ty eight) above twenty, such as is hoped shall be saved, and that some of them saw of their Children, through grace, walking in the Truth (then which, a great Apo∣stle2 Iohn 4. 3 John 4. had no greater joy) His Father went to attend the Lord in his Courts on that day, intending to revive the Lords afflict∣ed Remnant with the account of this gra∣cious addition to their causes of Joy; but his Mother stayed with him; on which day, it pleased God for the humbling ofAnother humbling provi∣dence, in his renew ed weak∣ness. them and his people (who might else per∣haps have been subject to have been lifted up) to renew a fresh sentence of death upon him, by general indisposedness, and subjectness to fainting, so that his Mother feared his dissolution that day; she thought e appeared weak in the morning after his Father was risen, and asked whether he hould stay with him? he said, No Mo∣ther, I had rather he should go about the work of the Lord; and he desired his Fa∣ther that he might be prayed for, that as he had put on Christ, so he might grow up in him among his People. But after his Father was gone, he lay in the forenoon as if he had een dying, and the Friend Mr. B. afore∣aid coming in, told his Mother he thought he was drawing on, and that
there would be little alteration seen in him till he died. She desired to know what she should give him? He said if he were his own, he should give him no∣thing more; but about noon he was a∣gain suddenly revived, to the great admi∣ration and refreshment of his Mother, to whom he said he was now pretty well, but troubled with shortness of breath, and desired to dine with her and his sisters, and then did eat more with them, with chearful∣ness, then he had done at once many days before. He took then occasion to say to her, He had resigned himself to the Lord,His ten∣der care of the Name of God, and his Pa∣rents, if he should die so soon after Ba∣ptisme. and Life or Death was alike to him, but my greatest trouble, if I should die now (said he) is, the scandal that, I am afraid, will be cast upon my Father and Mother, by the world, which, he said, did lie in wickedness, who would say, they had killed me by suffering me to be Baptized; whereas I am not the worse, and I know if I dy now, I should have died if I had not been Baptized, and afterwards he said, I am willing to live if it please the Lord that I might serve him among his people. But had afterward several faintings that day, and spake little; but towards the Even∣ing enquired for his Father, who had oc∣casion to stay later than he intended, hear∣ing he was better than when he left him,
by a Messenger he sent, who received the account of his chearful condition about noon, but not the alteration. But calling upon the Friend aforesaid, who had seen him in the Morning, was acquainted with his opinion, he was drawing near his end, when at he hasted to him, and found him very low indeed and cold, and understand∣ing his Mother had omitted (upon the ad∣vice of the friend) to use any thing, be∣ing tender of disturbing him, his Father (a little grieved thereat) applied to his Lips and palms of his Hands, the refresh∣ing he used to be relieved with, and in∣wardly a little of his usual inoffensive re∣vivers in a small quantity, and caused cherishing fumes to simper on coals in his Chamber, which with the Lords blessing (together with the content of his Fathers company) greatly restored him, and he was cheerful and disposed to converse. His Father asked him then whether he was not sorry he had been baptized now? HeHis sted∣fastness under weakness answered no, he would not but have been bapti∣zed for all this world, and said he was sure he had got no hurt by it, but told his Father he had been very ill that day. And when he could scarce speak, he was so weak, he heard his Sister Nancy say, Who shall have Calebs Bird when he is dead? But, said he,
Father, I shall not think of dying yet, but if I do, I will give it to my Sister Betty, who hath none, for Nancy hath one already. His Father asked him, whether he thought heHis fa∣miliarity with death by Grace. should live then? I know not, Father (said he) for I have resigned my self to God, but he is able to recover me. His Father having prayed once with him before, he desired him again at parting to recommend him to the Lord, and he left him chearful: He had but little rest, ; and in the morning said to his Mother, I have been dying twicc this night; and to his Sister, Tell my Fa∣ther I live still; who when he came to him, found him in a sweet composed frame, and disposed to converse, saying,His pitty for the World, and dis∣esteem of their glo∣ry. Father, how doth the World lie in wicked∣ness! And now Wisdom calls to her Chil∣dren, How long ye simple ones will you love simplicity, and fools hate knowledge? And speaking another time of the joy of the Wicked, he said, there will be shameful spuing upon all their glory. His Father having occasion to write in the room, did not presently entertain dis∣course with him, but after some time ofHis mo∣dest be∣speaking holy con∣verse to express his sence of mercy with joy∣fulness. silence, he said, Father will it not disturb you to talk with me? He said, No Child, I will come to thee. Then he said, Father,
I find my self greatly comforted in God; I was once without him, and now see what it was if God should have cut the thread of my life: and now I wish I might warn others, and do good whilest I live. His Father breakfasting with him, he did in a very lively sort enlarge upon the sure mercies of God to his soul, praising him much for his goodness in enabling him to do his Will, and for his Parents tenderness to him, begging the Lord would not suffer it to go unrewarded; and that if it might please him to spare his life, he might be helped to acknowledge it; and praised God, that he should have a tender Fa∣ther in Heaven, and tender Parents on Earth too, in such a condition. That day he gave all his toyes to hisHe puts away childish things. little Sisters, saying, if he should live he hoped he should never mind such things. His Father told him, the Congregation had condescended to appoint a Church-meet∣ing with him that evening, that he might have the priviledge of the Lord's Supper, wherein to the eye of Faith Christ would be evidently set forth, crucified before him, for his consolation; which he accepted thankfully, and said he would lye still to preserve his strength thereunto: and when
the time came his father spake briefly from Iohn 10. I am the door; by me if any man enter in he shall be saved. He attendedPaproach∣eth reve∣rently to the Lords Supper. with very great diligence, and partook with great reverence, sitting up in his bed to attend, and afterwards humbly desired thanks might be returned to the Congre∣gation for their love and care herein. The next day, being the first day of the week, his Father tarried at home with him, and enlarged upon the latter part of these words, (viz.) And shall go in and out, and find pasture: setting forth in more va∣riety what a soul (entring in by Christ as the door, and going out of himself, the World, &c.) found in God to feed upon, especially upon the new Covenant in Christ's Blood: and in the end he said, God hath comforted me greatly with whatHis com∣fort en∣creases in the Word & Prayr. hath been now spoke; And going to rest chearfully, intreated that company might not have recourse to him, saying, he would keep his strength now for the next day, to enjoy the benefit of some Friends who intend∣ed Prayer in his Chamber; and he had a good night. On the twentieth he was comfortable in the morning, and brake fast chearfully with his Father and a Friend, returning thanks very graciously, and then reve∣rently
attended in Prayer the most of that day, being filled with the sence of the love of God, and saying sometimes to his Mother fervently, God loves me Mo∣ther, and sometimes I love the Lord. But in the afternoon the Friends retired into another room, that he might take rest, but his little Sisters remaining in that room, he called to the eldest of them (being seven years old) and said unto her, Mary,His sea∣sonable and seri∣ous Que∣stions to his sister, and the successe through Grace. come hither, have you got any good by being prayed for to day? observing to her she had been particularly mentioned in pray∣er. She answered, I hope I have. Said he, Mary, if you should dye now, what do you think would become of you? She said, I do not know. He replyed, it is your great con∣cern to follow God that so you may know, with many other words inforcing it: and it is observable, that from that time she hath☜ been serious so as never before, and pon∣dred his sayings in her heart. At night his Father supped with him upon a small Bird, and afterward he re∣turned thanks; a Physician coming in whilst he was speaking, and looking in at the Beds feet with his hat on, he enlarged his desires, that God would strengthen himHis pray∣er after meat. his poor creature, that he might never be ashamed to confess him before men, who-ever
they were; and desired his Parents might be helped to resign him up to God, and that he might alwayes have refuge for rest unto Christ; being earnest for Sion, with sence of her low estate, (as he was almost in every prayer:) and that night he rested well. Some Friends had thoughts on the advice Iam. 5. 14. compared with Mark 6. 13. wherewith his Father acquainted him, and he desired time seriously to consider of it; and the next day, being the 21 of the ninth month, he seemed yet more hopeful, and then desired a dayes time longer to weigh it; but being told, a Friend that might be concerned about it, would not be in Town after that day, he then gave his thoughts by way of QueryHis ans∣wer about Jam. 5. 14. being doubtful therein. humbly, Whether it should be administred when one was mending before? being careful lest it should reflect on so solemn an Appoint∣ment; for he felt himself now mending, and therefore had the less clearness therein, but if he grew worse, he should have further thoughts of it. And after he invited that Friend and his Father to Breakfast, when he prayed and praised God, to the great refreshment of their souls. His Mother being gone down with his Father, and he feeling some weakness, de∣sired then to rest; but noise being made
among the little ones, to his disturbance, and his Mother coming up heard, him speak to the Maid and them with someHow he expressed his pro∣vocation: trouble, in these words; The Word of the Lord saith, To him that is in affliction pitty should be shewed by his Friends; but you take the ready way to hurt me: It is well for me I have such a tender Father and Mo∣ther, or else it might be worse; and com∣plained a little of them to his Mother, (which he never did before) and said, his strength failed him, but God would never fail him. His Mother reproving the di∣sturbers, left him to rest, which he did; but awakening towards night, exprestAdmires Grace, & signifieth his Assu∣rance. much admiration at the goodness of God to such an one as he, and said his bodily strength was little, he was upon the brink of the grave, and his breath almost gone if he spake but a little; but he knew if he should die, he should be received into the Arms of the Lord. And after a little time grew pretty chearful, and desiring to sit up inHis re∣concile∣ment and entertain ment of those he had repro ved for molesting him. his bed, called his Cousin and little Sisters about him (who had partly occasioned the noise of his disturbance) and with his own hand cut out some of his Jelly and gave unto them, intending himself to sup with his Father, but he being prevented of coming up to him, he gave some of his
small Bird also to them all, and then spake to them (when they had supped) in these words: O the sweetness of the Love of GodThe 2d course for their souls. did you experience it as I do, you would e∣steem it more than all the pleasures you can enjoy. And with vehemency (to his Mother, Servants, Cousins and Sisters admiration) said further, O my dear Sisters, I long to see you converted! O the damned in Hell! how would they improve it, but it is too late: O therefore whilst you have time, before the evil☞ day comes, take hold of the Righteousness of Iesus Christ, and make sure of the Love of God: What will you do upon a sick bed with∣out it? O my dear Sisters! my bowels yern for you: I hope I am sure of the Love of God;The sweet fruit of his own assurance humbly brought forth, to incourage them to feed. and if I dye this night, I shall go to the Lord, and be with him for ever. O that you knew the sweetness of the Love of God as I do! Christ will make you rare without compare. And now I call to minde some of Mr. Chares Verses, saith he, (whereof having many more in his memory, he repeated to them these) If comliness I want, His Beauty I may have,His whol some me∣lody at the end. I shall be fair beyond compare, Though cripled to my grave.
And if above it all To Christ I married be, My living Springs, O King of Kings, Will still run fresh in thee. His Mother then said, And do you re∣member, Child, what he saith of young saacs? Yea, Mother, said he; and then urther repeated some of these concern∣ng youth. Young Isaacks who lift up their eyes, And meditate in fields; Young Jacobs who the Blessing prize This Age but seldom yeelds. Few Samuels leaving youthful playes, To Temple-work resign'd; Few do as these, in youthful dayes Their great Creator mind. How precious Obadiahs be! That feared God in youth: How seldom Timothy's we see, Vers'd in the Word of Truth! Few Babes and Sucklings publish praise, Th' Avengers rage to bind! O then in these your youthful dayes Your great Creator mind. Few tender-hearted Youths, as was Josiah Iudahs King; Hosannah in the high'st alas How seldom Children sing!
Youths rarely ask for Zions ways, Th'had rather pleasure find; But O in these your youthful dayes, Your great Creator mind. What Children Pulse and Water choose Continually to eat, Rather than Conscience should accuse For tasting Royal meat? Should you not bow a King to please, Though tortures were behind? Oh then in these your youthful dayes Your great Creator mind. Much more with affection and ferven∣cy he uttered to them, and then (being weary) he lay down to rest, and said, Oh Mother, slighty Convictions are dangerous; temptations lead to sin, and sin bereaves of all good. And to the Maid (who had kept him from his Cradle, and instructed him till he came to his Latine tongue) HO∣NOUR, I hope God will work a work of Grace in you, and make you that you shall not be ashamed to confess him; and then bles∣sed the Lord for his own mercy in his Pa∣rents, with many endeared expressionsHis gra∣tious far∣wel at parting with his Guests. (especially for their care of his soul:) af∣terwards said unto them all, The Lord keep you, I desire that the Lord may keep you all. And his Mother staying by him, he
said, Mother, I love your company dearly, and so speedily fell asleep, and slept com∣fortably the greatest part of that night. The two and twentieth day he brake∣fast with his Father, and (as their man∣ner was of late) one of them began, and the other ended with blessing the Lord; wherein he very thankfully owned his great supports from God, and ardently desired if it pleased the Lord to spare him, it might be to serve him faithfully in his Generation. That day he was perswaded to rise a little in Blankets, whilst his Bed was made, when be said, I feel to my self like a peice of earth,When he was weak then he was strong▪ I am as nothing; and admired greatly the power of God keeping him alive. Being laid again in his bed, he said. I feel my self very weak, but I am kept alive by the mighty power of God; saying, Father, God is very good to me indeed: the Lord loves me I am sure. And to his Mother, Oh how am I refreshed, but if God were not my God, what should I do now. His Mother asking him how he had done to day, he said, Indeed Mother I have been supported very much to day; Oh this is a troublesome world, a vain world, nothing the eye beholds can stand us in stead; I can now triumph over death, God hath enabled me; I would not now be without what now I enjoy for all the world. Menti∣oning
that Scripture, Greater love can no man shew, than for a man to lay down his Life for his Friend, &c. And that, blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest from their labours, &c. And expressing his af∣fection to his Parents (which he did of∣ten) he asked his Father affectionately; the meaning of that Scripture, But for a good man, one would even dare to die; and so applied to sleep in much peace and joy. The twenty third day he complained of some weakness in his body, but said, He was strong in God, but desired some living creature might stand on the bed by him, to prevent Melancholly thoughts, when he could not rest, being asked, what? He said, a young Lamb, Pigeon, Rabbit or anyHis han∣cor after a living Creature and why. thing; but a Squerril being named, (ho∣ping it might easily be procured) he was earnest for that, having, he said, never seen any but once in the field. Some were im∣mediately imployed to procure one (at any rate) but all failed, and his mind seemed to run so much that day, and the next upon it; that his Father said, why dost thou so much desire it? He said, I find my self inclining to melancholy, and I think such a thing would be pretty company for me, and therein I may see the workmanship of God,
but I trust nothing shall evermore take off my heart from God. At breakfast with his Father he had sa∣voury discourse, some of which his Father set down, when he went out from him in his own words, whilst they were in me∣moryHis dis∣position suitable to true resignati∣on. (viz.) Oh Father, God greatly sup∣ports me, I would not be without the love of God now for all this world; if I die now I hope I shall meet with you in Heaven, which is best of all. His Father said, Dost thou think thou shalt die? He answered, I cannot tell Father, but I expect it, for I have resigned my self to God. His eldest Sister coming to him, he said, God hath done for us, what man could not do, (with his eyes lifted up with holy admiration) saying al∣so, Oh how said is it with those that have not God. That day being taken up a little, to have his bed made, and finding it trou∣blesome (all his bones being sharp as if they would pierce his skin, having no flesh to interpose in any part) he uttered a word savouring of more weariness andA little impati∣ence be∣getting speedy and deep abasment through grace. impatience than any before, namely, It is better for me now to dye than to live. His Father said, nay Child, be not weary of he Lords hand, who hath done so great hings for you. He accepted the Exhor∣ation, so as to be presently abased for it,
and did then (upon occasion of taking re∣freshment) solemnly pray for pardon o the rash word he had spoken (as he called it) humbly begging more patience that h might be kept from repining; and owning the great goodness of the Lord to him his poo unworthy servant. Being laid in Bed and asked how he did▪ he said, His Bones were sore, and he w weak in his outward man, but strong in God▪ and indeed he very seldom complained o sighed. And when at any time his Fa∣therHis usu∣al ease in paine. did remember him what God ha done for his soul, he presently forgot hi pain, and was refreshed with very sensi∣ble acknowledgement of the favour o God; so that sometimes when he would say his Bones were sore, his Father would reply, I Child but your soul is not; t which he would say, No Father, God  very good to me, and dwelt so thereon as t forget pain. And speaking of the Lov of God, would say often chearfully, now  experience it: He had a pretty good night▪ The 24th day in the morning he wa pretty chearful, and breakefast with his Fa∣ther, but eating little, he said, I do n live by bread only. His Mother asking hi consent to go abroad, he was very desi∣rous of her stay with him, but when
heard it was for prayer, he did more freely part with her. His Father sitting in the Room, he said, Father, God hath setled my mind greatly this day, and I have nothingHis setled minde in supposing dissoluti∣on. ow to hinder my joy in Christ Iesus. But Father (said he) Though God hath sweet∣ned death to them that he loves, yet do not you think that death is troublesome? His Father replied, Yes Child, a little to the flesh: to which he answered cheerfully, Yea Father, and was no more solicitous. He was willing in the Evening some Christi∣ans might meet in his Room, and (find∣ing himself weak) desired them to pray for him; being asked what, he desired, he said, That he might live in Gods sight. His Father asked him, if he did still free∣y resign up himself to the Lords dispose or Life or Death? he answered chearful∣ly, Yea Father. His Father further asked him if he had met with any assault against t? he answered, No, he had not: But shortly after he had a faint fit, in which he called to his Father to come quickly to him, and strove under short∣ess of breath; but as soon as he could ut∣er himself, He admired God as his God, who had dealt wonderfully with him; and aid, He would trust in him. Again re∣peating, Psal. 73. 26. My flesh and my
heart faileth, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. And being laid to rest by his Mother, he said, Good night Mother, I will go to sleep in Ie∣sus. The twenty fifth, having had little res in the night, he was weaker, and withou appetite to any thing, yet desired to ea something with his Father; and because he liked nothing but flesh, a Partridge was made ready, but when he sate up to eat, was seized with a violent tediou fit of Coughing, which wearied him, and disposed him to rest, labouring long un∣derSudainly grows weaker, yet strong in God. shortness of breath, making him sig (which he used not to do) but being ask∣ed often how he did? still answered Weak, or very weak in body, but strong i God. He was averse to taking any thing but his Father desiring him sometimes t take some pectoral refreshing, he would say, Yea, dear Father, I will never be disobe∣dient to you, nor my dear Mother (having indeed delighted to serve and please the before play at any time.) At night he desired to sup with his Fa∣ther, but finding his stomack fail, he ask∣ed, If he might not have a Sillabub; which was speedily made, and he drank of  warm to his relief, and his Father sate u
with him late, but having (at twice) too easily obtained some of the cold curd which he hankred after, (when his Father was gone to bed) it fell out that nightAn hum∣bling pro∣vidence by the hand of one who dearly lo∣ved him. proved very restless, and worse than any to him before; at which his Father being grieved, next morning (especially with the Maid that gave it) he observed it to his very great grief at himself for taking it; which his Father earnestly endeavoured to asswage, Expressing that it was not any thoughts of his disobedience that troubled him in the least, for he had been a pattern in dutifulness, but he was grieved that any thing should be hurt∣fully applied to him, so very low be∣fore; not (said he) but that others in Consumptions please themselves more in hankering after many things hurtful to them, but that he longed his pretious Tabernacle, redeemed of the Lord, (and so resigned to, and supported by him) might not by any means be ex∣posed (through the indiscretion of any) under his care; but exprest his hope, that if he would try to get rest, it would do him no hurt. At which he seemed to be quieted, and then his Father did, by his free consent (after short prayer with him, and affectionate expression of love to
him)▪ goe abroad, and retuing sooner then he intended, found the poor Child in his absence had been an hour much la∣menting himself, as having been disobe∣dient to his dear Father, disturbing him∣self greatly, that he should desire and take what he knew his Father (considering the toughness of his flegm, and weakness of his stomach) durst not allow him; andAn hour of temp∣tation. in this molestation of his mind, Satan came to discontent him, and cast in his fiery assault, causing him to say to his Mo∣ther, Mother, will God charge the Tempta∣tion of the Devil upon me? She answered, No, being not consented unto, they were not his sin, nor would they be charged upon him; and asked him what tempta∣tion he had had? He said, To curse God and die; but said he, I have resisted it. But lamented his disobedience, saying, He thought it would grieve him whilst he lived.A good provi∣dence to his and his Pa∣rents great sa∣tisfaction His Mother sought much to satisfy him, hut he was never so molested before, ag∣gravating it against himself, as it had been against his Father, so careful of him. But when he heard his Father was come so soon again (through violence) unex∣pectedly, he was very glad, and in haste to see him, at whose coming up he men∣tioned it again as his sin and trouble; but
having further full testimony of his Fa∣thers true freedom from either displeasure to the Maid, or grief more about it, he was very much eased, and fell into chearfull discourses, but often coveted and pleased himself in his Father's expressions of af∣fection to him; however he had but a weak day, and the next night also very restless and faint, but still acknowledged very sensibly the great goodness and mercy of God, as his God. On the 27th, in the morning, he wasHis fresh▪ revivings and hum∣ble desire for life to gracious ends. yet more revived, and did eat again with his Father, and then prayed after a holy sort, resigning himself to God, yet desiring with submission, he might live, and warn others to serve him; but however, that he might follow God fully so long as he lived; and was very thankfull for his supports, which he desired humbly might be continued, especially to his soul, to the praise of the Lord. But about three he had another violent and tedious fit of coughing, whichGreat pa∣tience. even spent him, under which he expressed admirable patience and great satisfaction in the Love of God, saying often (as his cough would admit him) the Lord loveth me, and sometime added, I am sure: but his Cough being over, he applied to slum∣ber,
therein groaning much, but in inter∣vals he said affectionately, Father, you be my dear Father. His Father asking him how he did? he said, Very ill, Father, in∣deed in my body, but well in God. His Fa∣ther said, Will you have a little Cordial, Child? he said, No, I thank you, Father, God is my Cordial. About eight at nightHis great Cordial. he had a very faint fit, his Mother asked then, how his faith in God was? he an∣swered, Strong, I hope, and desired his Father to pray for him; after which he seemed to get a little strength, but had a very bad night again. The 28th day in the morning he was weak, and not willing to eat as formerly, but desiring to lie still and endeavour sleep, rested a little; and being relieved, he was willing to have his head shaved again, (by which he formerly found bene∣fit) which was done without much trou∣ble to him, to his satisfaction; and then desiring rest, his Father sate by him till it was late, and left him better than in two dayes before: after some slumber (expressing his dear love to his Father) he desired the Maid that lay with him, might be hastned to bed, when he said to her, let us sleep together, but could not rest
till about two in the morning, and then slept quietly about an hour, and awaken∣ed, as it were refreshed, saying to her chearfully, now we have slept together in∣deed; but instantly a fit of coughing came on him, whereat he said (which he neverHis no∣tice of death af∣ter re∣freshing rest, and his beha∣viour in time of departure particu∣larly. had done before) Now I think I shall die: she said, No Child, I hope not yet: he answered, Yes, I am going; upon which he consented his Father might be called up: who coming instantly to him, about three in the morning, he said, Father, God be with you, I am going now. His Father (sup∣posing tough flegm arising almost choaked him, and slipt back) made as if he would be giving something to help; which he perceiving, earnestly said, Oh pray Fa∣ther, do not give me any thing; for indeed, Father, I cannot take any thing but it will stop my passage. The Maid said, he tryed, and could get nothing down, which he confirmed: his Father being not able to refrain (seeing his alteration in counte∣nance, and violent labour by cough) gush∣ed out into tears, which the Child seeing, cryed out also, and (looking towards him) said earnestly (with weeping) Pray Fa∣ther do not weep, but pray for me, I long to be with God; and desiring again his Fa∣ther might pray with him, he applyed to
it briefly (in too much trouble;) the Child strove much to refrain coughing, laid him∣self back a little, looked up, and seemed to joyn fervently; his Mother being al∣so then called, came in quickly, to whom he said, (looking upon her when even spent) Farewel, dear Mother, now I am going; and to a Friend coming in, Fare∣well, dear Sir: and the flegm (as it was thought) coming up into his mouth, but carried back again through the length and toughness thereof: his Father (contented with his Mother and the Friend's talking comfortably unto him) was in great care for him, and (unwilling to give the Oyl of Almonds and Syrups at hand, through his aversness to it) ran down for some∣thing inoffensive for his relief, and com∣ing up instantly, saw him thrusting, first, his finger, and then his whole hand into his mouth, to catch the flegm, and (hear∣ing or seeing his Father coming) cryed, quickly (as if he expected to take some∣thing) O Father, what shall I do! but im∣mediately (as his Father came to him) lay back, and looking up, said, God, God, en∣deavouring to have uttered more; but (without groan) his breath failing (as if choaked with flegm) he seemed as by consent, to yeeld up the Spirit, leaving
to the last a very living evidence of theHis Pa∣rents evi∣dence up∣on their experienc of him. most general change and lively turning to God wholly that his Parents have expe∣rienced, whereof these fragments (gather∣ed from him at last) are but a taste of the great Grace granted to him in all hea∣venly wisdom and knowledge, who being dead yet speaketh, to the great reproof of his Parents in their shortness to him (and of him) under so much longer profession, and for more full improvement of him, whose swift race (towards his latter end) is impartially set forth (uprightly) for the sake of Youth, and elder than he, that may not yet meet Death (with his ComfortThe true end of publish∣ing this after his death, be∣ing his own end of desiring life. and Composure) so considerately, hoping one good end of the Lords removing him may be for the more safe setting forth this part of an account of him (through grace) to the provoking of many to turn to the Lord, which was the greatest end of his desiring to live, beseeching all wisely to consider it, and duly ponder Eccles. 9. 10. What soever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no work, nor de∣vice, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou goest: which was through God of great advantage to him.
By his near Relation. An Acrostick. CAll to my Burial my Aquaintance young, And let them hear what Grace hath done for me; Let them allured be by my sweet Song, Eternal, through Unchangeable Decree, Because (through Grace) by Faith I am made free. Vnto the highest praise of God on high Exalt the Prince of Peace, in whom I rest; Redeeming Mercy made my soul desie, Not only Death, but ev'ry other test, Of my unfained Love, at twelve years old; No weakness, wit, nor fear could make it cold. In proof whereof bare bones did sacrifice Vnto my Lord the way this world despise. And had I liv'd Methusalem's long day, Vnto Him should my Soul subjection pay. Pro. 10. 7. The memory of the Just is blessed. I. V.
An Anagram. CALEB VERNON. Nue Noble Race. A New and Noble Race he ran so fast, That he o're-took the swiftest Saint at last. He ran in earnest to the Refuge City, And therein found escape, defence & pity; And underneath the Everlasting Arms, Which did support his Soul from fear of harms. Indeed he ran, as Caleb ran to find The promis'd Land, when Isr'el lagg'd behind. His Teachers wanted strength to keep him pace, He out-ran Parents in his Noble Race: As if the Angels had lent him a Wing To run with them in Love to Israels King. Like the young Lad which Zechary sets forth With measuring-Line, wherein did lie his worth: In which the Angels ever do retain Their glory, as their waiting doth remain, Inviron'd in the Word Psal. 130. 20 and Will of God, Which was indeed dear Caleb's choicest food. And seeing he so follow'd his dear Master, I would not faint although he ran much faster;
But for my Children and my Soul must weep, That we instead of running so, do creep. In twelve dayes and an half from Iordans joy, He did more than in twelve years ere did I. But grace perhaps did each day for a year Seal him a Pattent in return of Prayer For Life, chiefly, that Converts he might make, And took him hence for the Election sake; That safely this might be set forth of him, And he not hazarded hereby to sin. For few can bear his praise, and few reproof, But both, I trust, hereby shall now help Youth To their Conversion, like to Caleb's; then To this dispose of him I'le add, Amen. But until then excuse me if I weep, That yet I live, and Caleb fell asleep. For else I fear great evils yet to come, And such remov'd that Iudgment may have room. But may the Mouths of Babes Hosannahs fill, The Enemy and th' Avenger must be still. The Lord make Caleb's Cluster then in truth The first-fruits of his harvest amongst Youth, And stir up Aged too to swifter pace, By this Example in the Noble Race. J. V.
From a very dear Relation, An Acrostick. CAn Caleb stay when God will have him go Away to Caleb, and himself also? Loe, he a Child, yet Christian did become Er't pleas'd his Father for to call him home; But was no sooner new-born but he dies Unto the Lord a most sweet sacrifice; E'ne unto him, that made him twice to live, Render he did what er'e he had to give; Name, Spirit, Soul and Body, though but poor, Offerd up all, What could a Prince do more? Now to the Lord alone be praise therefore. W. A.
An Anagram. CALEB VERNON. An Noble Cure. THou Lord on him hast wrought A Noble Cure, From World, Flesh, Devil, thus to set him free, His Soul ful sweetly to thee to allure, To make him happy to Eternity. A Cure so Noble that it shall remain On days to come, to praise of thy rich grace, Who never undertook'st a Cure in vain Among the Seed of holy Jacob's Race. Physician of great value Lord art thou, And vertue also from thy Wings is found, For healing sin-sick-souls, none else knows how As thou, of every desperate mortal wound, Which to thy praise for ever shall redound. W. A.
From his own friend, & his Fathers friend. CALEB VERNON. Anagram. Bor'e unclean. Nue clean Robe. Through Adams nature I Unclean was bor'e; Through Grace (betimes) Christs Nue clean Robe I wore. BY Nature in my first estate A wretched Babe was I, In open field, deserving hate, In blood and filth did lie. And in that state I did delight, As in my sport and play, And therein would with all my might Have wallow'd night and day. And though from gross enormities I might by men be clear'd, Yet to my Maker's searching eyes Defil'd I all appear'd. Though Nature with a pregnant wit, And comliness adorn'd me,
And Education adds to it, To teach, restrain, reform me: What prov'd it but a feigned paint On much defiling sin? It did not kill, but lay restraint, Where outrage would begin. A pleasant picture to the eye I hereby might appear, By which, to close Idolatry Some might be drawn, I fear. But God (that faithful he might be) That deadly snare would break, And that right early unto me His Grace and Peace might speak. With tenderness, on these intents, He strips me of my Vail, My costly Cov'rings all he rents, My Countenance makes pale: My Comliness to rot he turns, My witty words to groans; My moisture up with drought he burns, Discloseth all my bones. And in a day of publick ire Me these rebukes did meet, When Pestilence, as burning fire, Slew thousands at his feet. I, who to blossom did begin With such fair paint before, Now, as the early fruit of sin, This character I wore.
Despised Idol, broke to earth, A potsherd, no way fit To take up fire out of the hearth, Or water from the pit. But though near corruptible dust This curious Frame was brought, By gracious pleasure stay I must Till noble works were wrought; Till deep convictions of my sin; Till Jesus form'd in me; Till, as my portion, I begin The Lord's dear Christ to see. Till all my sins were done away, Till terrors made to cease; Till heart and mind could sweetly stay In thought surpassing peace: Nay, till in an accepted day My homage I could bring, And in his instituted way Devote me to the King: Till Christ put on, his Truths allow'd, His dying marks imbrace; His Cause confest, his Works avow'd, His Sufferings boldly face. His Promises for a portion took, Saints for companions chose, And on him set a fixed look For future free dispose. Since then in an unusual way Rich Grace hath thus array'd me,
And in my young (yet dying) day With glory overlaid me. What properly could I desire, But now dissolv'd to be, And in this Marriage choice attire, My Bridegrooms face to see. In Kedar who would not bemoan, If there he must reside, Ah wretched man! who would not groan In sinful flesh to bide? Who 'ld lodg in such a nasty shade, As torturing tottering stands, That hath a Palace ready made Not with polluted hands, Where sin, temptation, suffring, strife shall fully be destroy'd, All dying swallow'd up of life, And God at full enjoyd. What aile my Parents then to weep, My friends to be dismayd, Relations such a do to keep, To see a Child unray'd? Its filthy garments layd in dust, It lay'd repose to take, Until the morning, when it must With Royal Robes awake? May this a witness be to Truth In this backsliding day, A Christal Mirrour unto Youth How to amend its way. A. C.
By an old and honorable Disciple of Christ (in the same Congregation) who dearly loved him, and is since also himself fallen asleep in Jesus, and in the Hope of the Resurrection to glory by him. I Cannot! I adorn thy Sable Hearse With any lofty straind Heroick Verse, Nor blaze thy praise with Heraldry Divine; This thou at chievd'st among the Saints betime, And left'st thy Name an Odour sweet to those That with Christ Iesus and his Truth did close. Thou likewise an Example wast to all That knew thee rightly, were they great or small. Christ gave thee grace, by grace thou didst conceive A saving Faith, by saving Faith didst live. At twelve years old indeed thou couldst dispute, And readily some learned ones confute. A truly Calebs Spirit was thee given, To follow Christ on Earth, and into Heaven. We now thy Heavenly glories may recite, Oh that in us might be the joyes we write: That what thou dost enjoy in full, a taste Have here we may, to stir us up to haste To be with thee, that so from troubles here In bliss we may be plac'd, where is no fear.
What lowder grief, with such an Emphasis Struck through some Ears, to hear, what Corps is this? What flocks of Saints were crowding, oh what storms Rest in their looks? Grief wandred through all Forms For thee, dear Soul: But seeing that the Loss Is only ours, let us the grief ingross, And fly to Christ, with whom is all relief, That by him stayd may be our flowing grief. Now judge Spectators, if you do believe, Whether all those that knew him, may not grieve? Parents and Brother, Sisters and Church Members, For this great loss, both sighs and sorrow tenders; There's cause enough, yet friends be all content, And make his Life and Death your President. John Symonds, Senior. Prov. 23. 23, 24, 25. Buy the Truth, and sell it not: also Wisdom and In∣struction and Understanding.The father of the Righteous shal greatly rejoyce: and he that begetteth a wise Child, shall have joy of him.Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoyce.
To all that love the Lord Iesus in sincerity: The Testimony of two or three Witnesses to the truth of the fore-going Treatise. THis that now comes to your hand, is a little part, as a few fragments of that full table those were entertained with that had the blessing of being nigh that little one, which is here pre∣sented to you: the truth of which for the most part we can testifie, having been eye and ear witnesses of these things. What it is, we truly desire it may be blest unto you to the ends designed by the Au∣thor of this little Book; It being the main, If not the only end why this little follower of God de∣sired to live. It may be the breathings from that heart that so much longed (being converted) to convert others, may be of use, though imparted at the second hand, we have seen made good, Pro. 14. 27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of Life, &c. And He that believeth in me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, John 7. 31. Some of us have been much convinced by what we saw, what bare conversions there are in the world, and how far short of belie∣ving as the Scripture hath said, most men and wo∣men are, that leaves them so short of the Spirit, hinted 1 Pet. 2. 7. We have been too much strangers to that Faith that worketh by love, and puts us under Gospel-constraints, To live to him that died for us, and rose again. God hath rebuked
this Generation in this little one, who served his Genera∣tion by the will of God, and fell asleep. He came to Christ as a poor miserable vile undone sinner, and to pass through the straight gate he wisely disburthened him∣self of what was gross and bulkie. He became indeed as a little Child, and was so fited to enter into the King∣dome of Heaven, having first unlearned what he attained in his Education and other accomplishments, like Phil. 3. 7. He learned of the Father to come to Christ, as John 6. 45. to a whole Christ, whom he embraced heartily, and fol∣lowed fully, and is upon the advantage of that good welcome, Mat. 25. 21, 23. Parents take then this en∣couragement, to train up your Children in the admoni∣tion and fear of the Lord, and observe what is said in the Preface to this Book for your help in this thing. And Children let this Example perswade you to remember your Creator in the dayes of your Youth. This Labour, on your behalf, as it hath our witness to the truth of it (above hinted) and our commendations to you, for the matter of it, as seasonable and useful; so it shall have our uest before the Throne of God, that it may not be, a further witness against you. Remembring Prov. 13. 13. but a special advantage in Gods hand unto your Salvation and furtherance in his will. To his grace we commit it and you, being alwayes willing to approve our selves Yours, truly longing for your souls present and eternal good, W. S. T. G. I. W. FINIS.
