V437 12238699 56727
FIRE AND BRIMSTONE From Heaven. From Earth. In Hell. OR, Three Discourses I. Concerning the burning of So∣dom and Gomorrah formerly, II. Concerning the burning of Aetna, or Mount Gibel more lately, III. Concerning the burning of the Wicked Eternally, with Fire and Brimstone. By Thomas Vincent, sometime Minister of Maudlins Milk-street, London. Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and Abo∣minable, and Murderers, and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Lyars shall have their part in the Lake, which burneth with Fire and Brimstone; which is the second Death. London, Printed for George Calvert, and Samuel Sprint, and are to be sold at the Golden Ball in Duck-Lane. 1670.
To the Reader. THe occasion of my Writting these few Sheets concerning these three great Burnings, was the breaking forth of such Flames and Streams of Fire the last Year at the Mouth and sides of Aetna, or Mount Gibel; being willing to take hold of any occasion, especially so sutable as this, to awaken Sinners, that they might endeavour their escape from the future and everlasting burnings of Hell; and this I thought the rather to do, because in the Relation given us of those stupendous burnings of Aetna, the hand of the Lord was not in the least minded, his Name not once mentioned, and no improvement thereof at all attempted by him, or them that drew up the Narrative; which to me seemed a shame, and quickned me (when others who might have done it better were silent) in my endeavours to make some advantage of this Providence for the good of Souls. The chief of what I had drawn up was several Months since, which I purposed to Preach upon in the course of my Ministry, as an Appendix unto the Doctrine of Contrition; but being diverted from that Subject by some sevearer and threatning Providences, I looked upon my self as called at that time rather to Preach upon such Subjects might tend to the support of Gods people under those sufferings which they were like to undergo, if they would perseveer in his ways. Thus my Papers were laid aside and laid asleep, and I did think to bury them in my Closet, and
never to suffer them to come forth into the light; But since the Fires which have broken forth of late in the City, and Suburbs, and Southwark; and the general impression of fear of Fire upon the Sptrits of London's Inhabitants, I thought it might be seasonable at this time to treat of Burnings; that so I might prevail with all in danger, especially the Inhabitants in and about London, that if they should not escape the burnings of their Houses here (for the preventing of which all di∣ligence should be used) yet that they would above all things endeavour to escape the burning of their Persons in the everlasting flames of Hell; If this little Book be made use of, by the Lord to keep any of you out of Hell give God all the praise, and be mindful at the Throne of Grace of him who prayeth for the Salvation of all your Souls. Thomas Vincent.
Fire and Brimstone from Hea∣ven, in the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah. Psalm 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain Snare Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; this shall be the portion of their Cup. CHAP. I. The Text opened, and a general Doctrine observed. THe Lord is known by the judge∣ments which He executeth, whereby he giveth Sinners to understand even in this World, that, as he is patient and long∣suffering, merciful and gracious, and ready to be reconciled: so that he is Holy and jealous, just and righteous, and that he can be angry, and ex∣presse his anger in furious rebukes, when by sin he is exceedingly provoked hereunto. And as the anger of the Lord, in the height and feirenesse of it, is compared unto Fire, unto a flaming Fire, which devoureth round about, Lam. 2. 3. So his
most dreadful judgements, the expressions of his an∣ger are by Fire, especially by Fire mingled with Brimstone. Such showers of Fire and Brimstone God doth threaten to rain upon the wicked in the Text: Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire, and Brim∣stone and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup. In this Psalm is set forth first (the hatred and in∣dignation of the wicked towards the righteous, which is expressed both in their scoffing at them, and their preparing the bow, and arrow to shoot and destroy them. Ver. 1. 2. 2. the hatred and indignation of God towards the wicked, which is expressed in his threatning to rain Snares, Fire, and mstone, and an horrible Tempest upon them to devour them. Ver. 5. 6. Upon the wicked,) that is, upon all the wicked who go on still in their tres∣passes, especially such as are haters and persecutors of the righteous. He shall rain Snares, that is, God will entangle and hold them so fast, even like Birds under the snares and nets of the Fowler, that they shall not be able to fie from and escape the de∣struction which he will bring upon them. Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest. No Tempest is more horrible, than a tempest of Fire and Brim∣stone, which God will rain on the wicked; this hath an allusion unto the real Fire and Brimstone, miraculously Created by God, and rained down from Heaven upon the wicked Cities of Sodom and Gemorrah: something like unto this God threat∣neth in his destructions of other places. Isa. 13. 19. And Babylon, the glory of Kingdoms, the beauty of the Caldees excellency, shall be, as when God over∣threw Sodom and Gomorrah. Amos 4. 11. I have
overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. And if the wicked do escape real Fire and Brimstone, and any temporal judgement, like it, on Earth; be sure the Lord will rain an horrible Tempest of fire and brimstone upon them in Hell. This shall be the portion of their Cup. The Lord hath received a portion, and prepared a Cup for all the children of Men; he hath a portion of good things for the righteous, and he will give them the Cup of blessing and Salvation; but he hath laid up a portion of evil things for the wicked, and will put into their hands the Cup of his Wrath and Curse, he hath reserved ruine and destruction for them by Fire and Brimstone. Hence observe: Doct. That an horrible Tempest of Fire and Brim∣stone God threatneth to rain on the wicked, as their deserved portion. I shall not here speak concerning all the dread∣full temporal judgements of God upon the wicked, which may have some similitude unto destruction by Fire and Brimstone. But treat concerning fire and brimstone it self, and the destructions of it, both what hath been, and what shall be. My chief design is as the Lord shall enable, to set forth Gods vengeance on the wicked, which shall be hereafter by Eternal fire and brimstone in Hell, in order to the awakening of sleepy sinners out of their carnal security, there being no greater a∣wakening consideration in the whole Christian Re∣ligion, than this of the certain danger, which all unbelieving sinners are in of Hell Fire; and be∣cause such as are most concern'd in the danger are
hardly brought to conceive, but most hardly in∣duc'd to consider this Fire, it being so far remov'd at present from sense; therefore by way of intro∣duction unto the discourse concerning the burn∣ing of Hell; I shall treat first of the fire and brim∣stone which formerly was rained from Heaven, up∣on the wicked Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah; Se∣condly, of the fire and brimstone, which more late∣ly issued forth of the bowels of the Earth, in the last years eruption of Mount Aetna; that hereby I may both facilitate the conception, and entice unto the consideration of the fire and brimstone in Hell, which eternally shall burn the wicked, whose portion that dreadful place is appointed to be. CHAP. II. The Historical Introduction unto the Iudgement of Sodom. DReadful were the showers of fire and brim∣stone, which came down from Heaven up∣on the wicked Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Ad∣mah and Zeboim, the History whereof we have re∣corded in the Scriptures (the most ancient, and most certain of all Histories,) where only this record is originally to be found. But before I speak of this judgement, I shall give the Historical Introduction to it, shewing what the Scripture relateth concern∣ing the places, and people, and some transactions be∣fore it's last ruine and desolation by Fire from Heaven. The first notice we have of Sodom is in the 13th. Chapter of Genesis. It was in the early yeers of
the World that Sodom flourished; the sinners of Sodom were coemporary with Abraham the Fa∣ther  the Faithful; none was like Abraham upon the Earth for goodness, and none were like the Sodomites on the Earth for wickedness, the Text saith▪ they re sinners before the Lord exceeding∣ly, . . We read that Abraham (had upon the  of , r saken his Fathers House and Kind∣red, d cam i Canaan with Lt, his Brother  Son, who so journed together for a while in  Land, which God promised to give unto t Psterity of Abraham for a possession; here the wealth and substance, the Flocks and Herds th of Abraham and Lot through God's blessings wre encreased greatly, insomuch as they could not longer live well together, because of the abun∣dance of their Cattel, and some strife which did arise between their Herdmen; therefore Abraham, that all occasions of contention might be avoided, desires Lot to devide and separate himself with his Cattel, and chuse either the right hand or the left, and himself would take that way which he should refuse: Lot complyeth with this motion and rea∣sonable proposition; and▪ lifting up his eyes, be∣holdeth the Plains of Iordan that they were well watered, even as the Garden of the Lord, and therefore, making choice of these Plains for his Cattel, he journeyeth East-ward towards Sodom, one of the Cities of the Plains, where himself did take up his habitation. It was not long after Lot's sojourning in the wicked City of Sodom, that Wars break forth, and they are invaded by four great Kings: namely, Amraphel, Arioch, Chedarlaomer, and Tidal, because
of their Rebellion against Chedarlaomer, whom they had served twelve yeers before. The history of which Wars with the event thereof, we have in the 14th. Chapter of Genesis. Against which Army of the four Kings were gathered together the five Kings of the Cities of the Plain and their people, who joyned together in battel with their enemies in the Vale of Siddim: But the four Kings were too mighty for the five, and smiting them, obtained Victory over them: Whether the Army of the four Kings were too numerous, or more Warlike and expert in battel; or whether the guilt of the people under the five Kings weakened their hands, and enfeebled their Spirits, it is not said: but this we may reasonably judge that their sins were the cause of their overthrow, and that God did hereby warn them to repent and turn from the evil of their do∣ings, lest a worse evil should overtake and utterly destroy them. The four Kings having conquered and dispersed the Army of the five Kings, they sack the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and amongst other captives they take Lot with his goods and depart. Abraham hath notice quickly by one that had escaped of these sad tidings, and what had befallen Lot; and though he could not muster up so great force as to match these four great Kings in number; yet because of the great love which he did bare un∣to Lot, who for his sake had come forth from a∣mongst their own Kindred into Canaan with him, and being filled with courage, having as little black guilt within to appale his spirit, as any man alive, he armeth his three hundred and eighteen trained ser∣vants, and without any other help, only Aner, Escol,
and Mamre, which were confederate with him, he pursueth these Kings laden with their rich booty, and in the night when they were drowned (it may be) with sleep and security, he devideth his little company and assaulteth them; which being so sud∣den and unexpected, and at such time, when the Host of these Kings were unready and unprepared, they are struck with dread and amazement, and without any great resistance which we read of, they confusedly flee before Abraham, who maketh a great slaughter amongst them, and pursueth them to Hoba. Thus Abraham rescueth Lot, and the other captives out of their Enemies hand, and re∣covereth all the goods which they had taken a∣way. In Abraham's return with the spoils of these great Kings, the King of Sodom, who had escaped in the battel, cometh forth to meet him, who maketh proffer unto him of all the goods which he had recovered, the persons only excepted; but A∣braham, what ever he had deserved, yet would not accept of so much as the worth of a thred or shoe∣latchet, of what had before belonged unto so wick∣ed a people as the Sodomits were; fearing possibly that such goods mingled with his own might prove like a Moth unto them; however, he would not give the King occasion to say, or any to think that Sodom's goods had made Abraham rich. This bringing back of the Sodomits from captivi∣ty and reinstalling the King of Sodom beyond what he could have lookt for, by such unlikely means, was a wonderful work of God, and laid a great obligation upon the Sodomites, not only to respect Lot, upon whose account Abraham had thus ven∣tured
himself, but  of heir sins a∣gainst God, who  Abraham for this work, and delivere   their enemies into his hands, as  King of Salem, and Priest of the High God, who came forth to meet Abra∣ham, acknowledgeth with praise and thanksgiving: how little the Sodomites did answer their obligation either unto God or Man, will appear in the 19th. Chapter of Genesis; where their sin and punishment is set forth. But before this in the 18th. Chapter we read that Abraham having entertained three Angels, he afterwards bringeth them forward on their way which lay towards Sodom: the Chief and most ho∣nourable of these Angels, being the Son of God, the Angel of the New-Covenant, staying behind the other two Angels who went onwards towards So∣dom, revealeth unto Abraham what he was about to do unto Sodom, giving him to understand that the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great, and their sins exceeding grievous, and that now he was go∣ing down to visit them for their sins: whether he revealed to him what manner of destruction he in∣tended to bring upon them we have no mention; but whatever it were Abraham is full of fears be∣cause of Lot, and therefore interceeds with the Lord in the behalf of the place, as wicked as it was, to prevent (if possible) the ruine and destruction thereof, which was threatned. Abraham knew of one righteous person, namely Lot, which was there, and he hoped that there might have been others besides him, if not of the City yet in Lot's Family; and therefore he maketh bold to plead with the Lord, that he would not
destroy the righteous with the wicked, because this would  eem just and right for the Judge of all the Earth to do; and first he prayeth, that if fifty righteous persons were found in Sodom, the place might be spared for their sakes, the Lord being very gracious, readily promiseth it should be ac∣cording to his request; Abraham having encora∣gement from one grant, and fearing what the num∣ber of righteous persons in Sodom might be, entreat∣eth further, that if five were wanting of the fifty the place might not be destroyed; and having ob∣tained his request herein, he doth not rest but pro∣ceeds to beg with expressions of low humility, that if but forty, and then if but thirty, and then if but twenty, and last of all if but ten righteous persons were found there, that the Lord would spare the place for their sakes. Abraham speeds in his whole desire, the Lord assuring him, that he would not destroy the place, if he found so many as ten righte∣ous persons therein; and Abraham leaves off asking, before the Lord giveth any denial unto his suit; and though Abraham did not request it, yet the Lord himself did resolve it, that not one righteous person should be consumed in the iniquity of the City, and therefore as he sent Angels thither to destroy the place: so they had a commission to save righteous Lot and his Family, as we may see in the 19th. Chapter. The two Angels were now come in the evening unto Sodom, whilst Lot providentially was sitting in the gate, who seeing them enter, riseth up from his seat and meeteth them, and bowing himself to∣ward the ground, entreateth the favour of them that they would be his guests that night, through his
importunate request (they refusing at first) he pre∣vaileth with them, and so bringeth them home to his house, where he entertaineth them with a feast. They had not been long in Lot's House, before the House was beset by the Men of the City, upon no∣tice of two extraordinary persons that were there; possibly the bodies which those Angels had assumed were very beautiful to the eye, and full of sparkling lustre, being inform'd by such glorious spirits; and this might entice the beastly, or rather worse than beastly lusts of the Sodomits, and enflame them with burning desires of committing that filthy sin with them, which is not fit to be nam'd; these desires bring the chief part of the City, old and young from every quarter unto Lot's house, who when they were come, they require him to bring forth those Men (as they supposed them to be) that they might satisfie their lusts upon them. Lot looking upon this as a piece of inhumanity and abominable wickednesse, to offer such injury unto strangers, that he got forth of his door, and with fair words endeavoureth to perswade them the forbearance of this wickedness; yea, he is so far transported with desire of saving his guests from the filthy lusts of the Sodomits, that inconsiderately he endeavours to divert them, by making proffer of both his Vir∣gin-daughters to them to be used, or mis-used by them as they pleased, so that his guests might be spared. But the Sodomits are fully bent upon their wicked∣ness, and deafning their ears against his proposal, they press in upon Lot; and threatning to deal worse with him than with them, they attempt to break open his door. The Angels seeing what dan∣ger
Lot was in amongst the furious and lustful mul∣titude, put forth their hands and pull Lot into his house; and withall, putting forth the power the Lord had given them, they smite the Sodomits with blindness, so that they could not find the door, which notwithstanding that judgement of blind∣ness upon their bodies, being pricked forward by their blind and impetuous lusts, they still seek after. And now the ruine of Sodom is not far off, the Angels reveal unto Lot who they were, and that they were sent by the Lord to destroy Sodom, and the Neighbouring Cities, because of the crying wickedness which was in them: therefore inquir∣ing concerning his relations in that City, they bid him bring forth all that belonged to him; accord∣ingly Lot goeth forth and calleth upon his Sons in Law, and giveth them to understand what he had heard of the Angels, concerning the near destru∣ction of the City, and therefore warneth them with all expedition to hasten out of the place; but Lot seemeth unto his Sons in Law as if he had mocked, and they give heed to none of his words. The day being come that Sodom and Gomorrah must be destroy'd, the Angels in the top of the morn∣ing hasten Lot to come forth, and whilst he linger∣eth they lay hold on his hands, and the hands of his Wife and Daughters, and (the Lord being merciful unto them) bring them forth, bidding him flee to the Mountain, and escape for his life, and not look back, lest he should be destroyed, which his Wife offering (notwithstanding the warning) to do, was turned into a Pillar of Salt; Lot being full of fears entreateth for Zoar, and for
his sake the Lord spared that City that Lot might retire unto it, whilst he brought destruction upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and the other Cities of the Plain. CHAP. III. A general description of Sodoms Iudgement, together with the efficient cause which was God, and the meritorious cause, Sodoms sins. BEing thus led by the clew or  story, we are at length come to  most tremendous and dreadful Judgment,  God executed upon Sodom & Gomorrah; namely, that horrible tempest of Fire and Brimstone, which the Lord rained upon those wicked Cities for their sins, the relation and description whereof we have Gen. 19. from the 23d. Ver. to the 30th. The Sun was risen upon the Earth, when Lot entered into Zoar. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of Heaven: And he overthrew those Cities, and all the Plain, and all the Inhabitants of the Cities, and that which grew upon the ground. And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord; and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and to∣ward all the Land of the Plain, and beheld, and lo the ke of the Countrey went up, as the smoke of a urnace. And it came to passe when God destroyed the Cities of the Plain, that God remembred Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the Cities wherein Lot dwelled. In treating of this subject concerning the burn∣ing
of Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and brimstone, I shall speak: First, Of the cause of this Judgement. Secondly, Of the Judgement it self. Thirdly, Of persons on whom it was inflicted, and how they were affcted. Fourthly, Of the persons that escaped. Fifthly, Of the Spectators. Lastly, Of the use and improvement which we may make of it. Concerning the cause of this Iudgement; The efficient cause was God; The meritorious cause was Sodoms sins. First, The efficient cause of the judgement of Sodom and Gomorrah was the Lord. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of Heaven. Every judge∣ment, whereof there are second causes in nature, is from the Lord; but this judgement was miraculous and therefore the hand of the Lord was in it more immediately; It was beyond the power of any second causes to effect this great thing, and there∣fore the Lord doth put forth his own great power, and stretcheth forth his mighty arm, that he might take vengeance on the wicked Sodomits, who had so highly provoked him by their sins. It is said Deut. 29. 23. The Lord overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim in his anger and in his wrath. The Lord heard the cry of Sodom's sins, and was wrath; a fire of anger was kindled in his breast, and fury came up into his face, therefore girding himself with his irresistible power, and clothing
himself with flaming vengeance, as with a garment he came done, to plead with this ungodly and wicked people for their sins, rendering his rebukes in such a way as never before was heard of. It was the day of the Lords recompence, the day of his wrath and fierce anger, a day of trouble and di∣stresse, of wasting and desolation: It was a day in which the Lord was revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire, to take vengeance upon the Sodomits, whom he punished with a most fearful destruction, devouring those wicked Cities by the fire of his jea∣lousie, that he might make a speedy riddance of all the sinners which dwelled in them. The Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of Heaven. By the Lord on Earth we are to understand the Son of God, the second most glorious Person in the Trinity; by the Lord in Heaven, we are to understand the Father, the first Person, who hath committed all Judgement unto the Son, Ioh. 5. 22. From whom he received power to execute the appointed vengeance on wicked So∣dom. Secondly, The miritorious cause of the Judge∣ment upon Sodom and Gomorrah was the sins of those wicked Cities, when the Lord ariseth from his place to take vengeance upon a Nation, espe∣cially in some notable and remarkable judgement, he is first exceedingly provoked hereunto by the sins of that people. It is said Gen. 13. 13. that the men of Sodom were wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly. They exceeded all other Nations in their sins, and therefore they exceeded all other Nations in their punishment. And Chap. 18. 20. We read the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great,
and their sin was very grievous. It was not their prayers which sent up such a cry unto Heaven, no they were wholly irreligious and Ungodly: but it was their sins, like the blood of Abel which cryed from the ground for vengeance on him that shed it; the cry of Sodoms sins was so loud, that it came up into Gods ears, and would give him no rest until he came down to punish: Their sin was very grie∣vous; not only grievous unto righteous Lot, who was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2. 7. But it was most grievous unto the most Holy and Righteous God, it was as a heavy load upon him grievous and hard to be boarn; it grieved God as it were to the heart, and therefore he doth ease himself of the burden of their Sin, by suffering it to fall down with a heavy weight upon themselves, so as to crush and destroy them together. There are five sins of Sodom spoken of together, Ezek. 16. 49, 50. Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Pride, fullness of Bread, and abun∣dance of Idleness was in her, and in her Daughters; that is her neighbour inferiour Cities, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me, therefore I took them away as I saw good. The Sins were: First, Pride and Haughtiness. Secondly, Fulness of Bread. Thirdly, Abundance of Idelness. Fourthly, Unmercifulness to the Poor. Fifthly, Abomination. The first Sin of Sodom was Pride and Haughtiness, Prov. 16. 18. Pride goeth before destruction, and a
haughty spirit before a fall. The Pride and haughti∣ness of the Sodomits did discover it self in their car∣riage towards Lot, Gen. 19. 7, 9. Lot is meek and humble, he speaketh fairly and kindly: I pray you Brethren do not so wickedly: But they are high rough and very haughty in their answer. And they said stand back, and they said again, this one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Iudge. As if they should have said: Pray who are you that take upon you to speak thus unto us? do you know whom you speak to? you are a bold and saucy fellow to tell us of wicked∣ness; Will you needs be our Iudge? shall we indeed be judg'd by such a fellow as you? pray stay untill we make choice of you and place you in that office: shall we submit our selves to be judged by one so contemptible? No, no, we will never endure it; it is below our birth and breeding to be curb'd by any one, especially by you, who are a stranger, and of such a low spirit as dare not join with us in the way and practice of our City: We will deal worse with you than with them, we will make you know that we are your betters, and that we have power in our bands to bring you to your knees, and to tread you under our feet, that we can do both with you and yours what we please: we have been often pro∣voked by you before, now we will forbear no longer, but make you to feel as well as to see in what disdain we have taken all your reproofs of our conversation. Pride was grown to a great heigth in Sodom, it was mon∣strously great and big-bellied, conceiving and bringing forth many Daughters, such as Hatred, Malice, Envie, Revenge, Wrath, Strife, Conten∣tion, Bitterness, evil speaking, Slanders, Backbiting, Whisperings, Tumults, Brawls, Blood, and the like; these and many other ins are the product of Pride
and haughtiness, all which we have reason to think did exceedingly abound in these exceeding wicked Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. The second sin of Sodom was Fulness of Bread. By Bread we are to understand all sort of food, and not only meat, but drink too, as Math. 6. 11. Give us this day our dayly Bread: By fulness of bread is not meant plenty of food, this being Gods gift, and none of mans sin to have it, and to make use of it moderately; but hereby we are to understand the Sodomits excessive filling themselves, their ex∣cessive eating unto gluttony, and excessive drink∣ing unto drunkenness: They pampered the flesh, and nourished themselves as the Ox is nourished against the day of slaughter, some resemblance of their Sin was in the Israelites spoken of, m, 6. 4, 5, 6. That lay upon Beds of Ivory, and stretched themselves on their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and Calves out of the midst of the Stall: That chanted to the sound of the Viol, that drank Wine in Bowls, and Anointed themselves with the chief Ointments, They were such as those against whom the wo is pronounced, Isa. 5. 11, 12. Wo unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, and continue untill night, till Wine enflame them: And the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe are in their Feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. It is likely the Sodomits had been Feasting and Re∣velling, drinking and carowsing that day which the Angels came into their City, and their lusts being enflamed with their excesses, they gather in troops unto the House of Lot, to commit their in∣tended
outrage. But God is provoked, to cut off all provisions for their flesh, which they had so much abused, and to cut them off too for their in∣temperance. The third Sin of Sodom was Abundance of Idle∣ness. Idle persons did abound in that City, and there was abundance of idleness in those persons: they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play; they were busie and active indeed in the ser∣vice of the Devil, but either they lived without any particular Calling many of them, or were very slothful and negligent therein. Had they been di∣ligently employed in their Callings that day as the Angels visited Lot, they would have had more minde to rest themselves in their own houses, than to disturb strangers in anothers House; but they being so generally idle, and an idle crew of them got together, upon notice of the strangers enter∣tainment in Lot's house, for want of better emploi∣ment, they attempt this wickedness. The Sodomits did not only wast their wealth and strength, but also their precious time in Luxury, and this pro∣voked the Lord to put an end to their time, which they made so little account of. The fourth Sin of Sodom was Unmercifulness to the Poor. They strengthned not the hands of the poor and needy; they had poor and needy persons amongst them, but they did neither strengthen their hands, nor comfort their hearts by distribu∣ting relief unto them; they consumed so much up∣on their lust, that they had nothing to spare for the poor, at least they had no heart to give anything for the supply of their necessities; the cry of the poor, it is likely, with their other sins came up into
Gods ears, and the Lord hath threatned, Iam. 2. 13. He shall have judgement without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy. The fifth and chief Sin of Sodom was Abomination. And they committed Abomination before me, therefore I took them away as I saw good. This word Abomination is a general word, and may be attributed to the fore mentioned Sins, which are an abomination in the sight of God; but ordinarily it is attributed in Scripture unto the greatest and most hainous Sins, and amongst others, yea above others to the sin of Idolatry: this Sin no doubt the Sodomits were guilty of, however it is not made mention of, neither do I think that Sin is implyed in the word Abomination here, insomuch as then the Earth was full of Idolatry, and the Sodomits were not worse herein (as we read of) than other Nations, but (I conceive) by Abomination we are to understand the abominable Filthiness of the So∣domits, for which they are branded by the Apostle Iud. ver, 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, in like manner giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, &c. They gave themselves over unto fornication, even as the Gentiles are said to do. Eph. 4. 19. Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. God had given them up, and they had given up themselves unto the ser∣vice of their Lusts, they were generally addicted unto uncleanness, and that not only to Fornicati∣on and Adultry, but it is said, they lusted after strange Flesh, such was their lust and uncleanness as we have described, Rom. 1. 24, 26, 27. Where∣in
they did dishonour their own bodies between themselves, the men through vile affections, lea∣ving the natural use of the Woman, burned in their lusts one towards another, men with men working that which is not only unseemly to be practised, but also unseemly to be named, or more particularly described. The Sin since that time hath obtained the name of Sodomy▪ it being so general in that place, insomuch as when the Angels came to Sodom, they would have been uncleen with the very Angels, this provoked the Lord to render to them the recom∣pence for such abominable Filthiness as was meet. Besides these Sins of the Sodomits, we may col∣lect from the History several aggrevations of their Sins, which did exceedingly ripen them for ruine. The first aggravation of the Sodomits Sins, was their Impenitency. Although Nineveh was threat∣ned with ruine, and that within forty days, yet up∣on their repentance at the Preaching of Ionah, God repented of the evil threatned, and destroyed them not, as in the Book of Ionah. And if Sodom had repented of their Sins, and turned from their evil ways, if they had washed and made themselves clean, and put away the evil of their doings from before Gods eyes, God would have turned from the feirceness of his displeasure, and though their Sins were of a Scarlet and Crimson dy, yet they should have been blotted out and washed away, and made like Snow or Wooll: but this was the aggravation of all their other wickedness, that they were insensible and hard-hearted, their consciences were seared as with a hot Iron, so that they had no feeling nor remorse. There was a Preacher of righ∣teousness amongst them, namely righteous Lot, who
reproved them so plainly and roundly for their Ungodly practices, and filthy conversation, that they tell him he would needs make himself a Judge; unto which he added his own blameless conversa∣tion, and forbearance from such intemperance and riot as they did run into; But the Sodomits slight all Lot's sayings, they deafen their ears against his reproofs, and will be led by none of his example; nothing prevails with them to repent. The second aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was thir Incorrigibleness; As it was said of the Jews aftrward, Ier. 5. 3. So it might have been said of the Sodomits then, Though God had stricken them, yet they did not grieve, though God had consumed them, yet they refused to receive correction. They did not take warning by lesser judgements, so as to be corrected and amended thereby; They were smitten before their enemies, their City not long before had been sackt, their goods taken away, and themselves were led into Captivity, with their Wives and Children; and yet they were insensible of their Sins, the cause of all this evil that came upon them, and were so far from being bettered hereby, that they grew worse than they were be∣fore. The third aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was their Ingratitude. They were not only ungrateful unto Lot, upon whose account Abraham did deliver them out of the hands of their enemies, which not only laid an obligation of respect to Lot upon them as long as they liv'd: but chiefly they were ungrateful unto God, the Author of this deliverance by Abra∣ham, and who moreover had been very bountiful unto them, in giving them such a place of plenty and
pleasure for their habitation, that it was like unto the Garden of the Lord for fruitfulness, the greater Gods Mercy and Bounty to them, the greater was their ingratitude, and the more highly aggravated were their Sins. The fourth aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was the Universality of their Sins. There were no righteous persons amongst them, except it were Lot and his Family; they were generally corrupt, they were all dross and no Gold, all Water and no Wine ▪ all wicked when Lot was departed; As the Earth of old was filled with violence; so Sodom then was filled with Filthiness, which was very of∣fensive unto the pure and Holy Eyes of God, and provoked him to destroy them. The fifth aggravation of the Sodomits Sins, was their Shamlesness. What was spoken of Israel, Ier. 6. 5. Might have been said of Sodom, were they ashamed, when they had committed abomination! nay they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush. When the Prophet would set forth the shamlesness of Iudah's Sins, he compareth them unto Sodom, Isa. 3. 9. The shew of their countenance doth witnesse against them, they declare their Sin like Sodom they hide it not. None had more reason to blush and be ashamed than such filthy Sinners as they, and yet none were so little ashamed: instead of being asha∣med of their Sins, they gloried in their shame. The sixth aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was their Security. They eat, they drank, they bought, they solde, they planted, they builded, until the the judgement did overtake them, Luke 17. 28. They were generally secure, though they had so greatly sinned, and by their Sins so highly pro∣voked
the Lord to take vengeance upon them. They put the evil day far from them; Lot's Sons in Law although foretold and forewarn'd by their Father, would not believe it was so near, much lesse did the rest of the Sodomits believe any such thing, who had no intimation thereof given unto them; they little thought what a day would bring forth; their impunity for a while did en∣crease their security, and their security under the guilt of such Heaven-dareing Sins, did aggravate their Sins exceedingly. And now the lusts of the Sodomits having con∣ceived and brought forth such Sins, and their Sins so aggravated, do arrive unto perfection, and they bring forth death; Their iniquities now are full, and the Viols of Gods wrath also are full, and he poureth them down upon their heads▪ which leadeth unto the next particular, to speak of the judgement it self inflicted upon Sodom and Gomorrah. CHAP. IV. A particular description of Sodom and Gomorrah's burning by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. COncerning the judgement it self which was in∣flicted on Sodom and Gomorrah. It was Fire and Brimstone which was rained down from Hea∣ven upon those Cities. The morning was clear when Lot went forth of Sodom, and the Sun was risen upon the Earth when he entered into Zoar: But then a strange darkness did quickly fill the face of the Heavens, and hide the Sun from the view we may conceive that the fashion of the Heaven:
was altered, and that the clouds, which carried this horrible Tempest of Fire and Brimstone in their Bowels, were of another shape, than those which carry in them ordinary storms of Rain or Hail, of Thunder and Lightning. It was over Sodom and Gomorrah that these dreadful clouds were ga∣thered, which upon the command of the Lord brake asunder, and it is likely with fearful lighten∣ing, accompained with great cracks and amazing noise, as if Heaven and Earth, and Hell had been coming together, let down these flaming showers, which strangely turned the Air into Fire, and with such irresistible violence beat upon the Houses of the Sodomits, that they were foreed to yield unto the fury of these devouring flames. This Rain probably was not in small drops, like that which falling upon the tender Grass, causeth it to spring forth and flourish; but in great flakes of of scalding Sulphurious matter enkindled by the breath of God: great sheets of Fire, it is likely, came down from Heaven, like the Flying Roll spoken of Zach. 5. 2, 3, 4. the length whereof was twenty Cubits, and the bredth thereof ten Cubits, which entered into the House of the Thief and False∣swearer, and consumed the Timber thereof, and the stones thereof. So did these sheets and rolls of fire fly about the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and entered into the houses of the unjust and profane, the filthy and unclean, smiting and consuming In∣habitants with their Habitations. This storm of Fire and Brimstone, coming down with a commis∣sion from God, to destroy the whole Place, doth arm it self with unexpressible rage and fury, and first smiting the heads and tops of all the houses in the
City, setteth them on fire together, which mounting a great flame upward, and that mingling with the sulphurious fire which came downward was exceed∣ingly the more enraged, and we may conceive that from thence came such horrid blazes to the eye, and such dreadful roarings to the ear, as awa∣kened all the wicked Inhabitans of the City out of their sleep and security, and filled them with un∣conceiveable horrour and perplexity, when they saw inevitable ruine so near unto them. Then the streets of the City were filled with flames, and the Rain from Heaven, likely did raise Floods and Streams of burning Brimstone, which poured into the houses on every side such fire as no Water could quench, no Stone Walls, nor Iron Bars or Gates could resist or defend any of the In∣habitans from being devoured thereby; thus Gods hand did find out all his enemies in these wicked Ci∣ties together, his right hand did lay hold on them that hated him, and took no heed to his Laws; and making Sodom and Gomorrah as a fiery Oven in the time of his anger, he swallowed up all the Sinners of those Places in his Wrath, and devoured them with this unquenchable fire; the Place now is like a fiery Oven, or like a great fiery Furnace, the smoke of whofe flame was so great, that far and near it might be seen; concerning the horror of the Sodomits when compassed about with Flames, I shall speak more under the third particular, only here add these things, which were remarkable in in this judgement. First, The strangeness of it. Secondly, The suddenness and unexpectedness of it.
Thirdly, The dreadfulness of it. First, This Judgement was very Strange. It is the nature of Fire to ascend towards Heaven, but here Fire and Brimstone together do descend from Heaven, this is very strange; the Sodomits had an unnatural Fire within them, and they have an unna∣tural Fire sent upon them; they lust after strange Flesh, Iud. 7. And God punished them with strange Fire, Iob 31. 3. Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment unto the workers of Iniquity? But of all strange punishments, this is one of the most strange, never such a thing was heard of before, or hath been known since; as I may apply what Moses speaketh on another occa∣sion, Deut. 4. 32. Aske now of the days which are past which were before, since God Created Man upon the Earth, and ask from one side of Heaven unto the other, whether there hath been such a thing as this great thing, or hath been like it, that God should Rain Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, to punish wicked Cities. We read of Fire sent down from Heaven by the Lord, upon the request of Elijah, which consumed his Sacrifice; although he had drenched it often, and surrounded it with Water, all which was licked up by the fire, unto the wonder and astonishment of the People, whereby the Lord discovered his power beyond Baal, whose Priests could not by all their prayers and cutting them∣selves prevail with their God to effect any such thing, 1 Kings 18. 26, 28, 37, 38. And we read of Fire sent down from Heaven, which destroyed two Captains and their fifty's, upon the request of the same Prophet: these things were exceeding strange; but the rain of Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven, which consumed several Cities, and all their Inbitants together was far more strange: Fire hath come from Heaven, but never so great Fire; Fire hath come down from Heaven, but ne∣ver Fire mingled with Brimstone; Fire and Brim∣stone hath come forth of the bowels of the Earth (of which in the second discourse) but never did Fire and Brimstone come down from Heaven, either before or since. Secondly, This judgement was sudden and unex∣pected: It was like the Flood to the old World, which was drowned, or like the coming of Christ to the Sinners on Earth, which shall be damned: when the greatest judgements are most near, the Sinners which shall be destroyed thereby are most secure; and thus it was with the Sinners of Sodom: the day before there was no appearance of any such destruction near, there was no sign in the Earth or in the Heavens of any such thing; the night be∣fore also was like other nights, no fire beginning in any place, only the fire of lust which burned and raged in the hearts of that wicked people, but they had no apprehension of danger from those flames: when the morning was come it was like other mornings, there were no fiery dews, or fore-drops▪ of the fiery rain, to give them warning of what would follow. The shaddows of the night were chased away by the beams of the morning Sun, there was no appearance of the shaddows of the night of Death, ready to stretch forth themselves upon all the Inhabitants of Sodom and Neighbour Cities together. But so soon as Lot was entered into Zear, the Lord rained Fire and Brimstone on
Sodom and Gomorrah, and brought such a sudden destruction upon them as they could not escape. Even as it will be ere long with Babylon, Rev. 18. 7, 8. So it was with Sodom; she lived deliciously and securely, and in one day death and mourning came up∣on her, and she was utterly burnt with Fire. Could the Sodomits have foreseen, and certainly fore∣known, what destruction would have befallen their City that day, they would have hastened out of the place the day before, at furthest they would have delayed no longer than that morning; when Lot did depart, they would have flocked about him old and young from every quarter, and have departed with him; they would not have vallued houses of goods, so that they might have but sav'd their lives: But the Sodomits did not in the least apprehend their destruction to be so near. The Angels knew it, but they discover the thing unto Lot only; if they had made it know unto the Sodomits, it is most likely they would not have believed it any more than Lot's Sons in Law did believe Lot, when from their mouth he did declare it. The Sodo∣mits are jovial and secure, as if their life and mirth should continue many a year, when neither of them were a days standing longer. Thirdly, This judgement was most dreadful; we read in the Scriptures and have seen with our eyes very great judgements, but none so dreadful, all things considered, as this of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. Indeed the Flood which devoured the whole old World together, Noah and his Fa∣mily excepted did strike the most universal dread upon the children of men, of any judgement that ever hath been since the Worlds Creation: yet the
Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, which devoured Sodom and Gomorrah with all their Inhabitants, Lot only and his Family excepted had more of particu∣lar dread in it, in as much as death by Fire is more painful than death by Water; especially such Fire as came down from Heaven. It was a terrible day to the old World, when they saw the Windows of Heaven opened, and Water to come forth from thence in such great abundance, as to swell into a Flood, and that so great a Flood as drowned all Man-kind which were not found in the Ark: But it was a more terrible day to the Sodomits, when they saw the Windows of Heaven opened, and Fire to come forth from thence, Fire mingled with Brim∣stone, and Gods fiery indignation, which falling upon their Houses and heads, put all into flames; this last judgement as it had more strangeness in it; so it did strike more terrour into the hearts of those which did endure it. When the ground clave asunder, and the Earth opening her mouth swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all that appertained to them, when they went thus down alive into the pit, and the Earth closing upon them again, they perished from the Congregation, Num. 16. vers. 32. 33. This was a very feaful judgement; but the opening of the Heavens, and it's showring down Fire and Brimstone, which swallowed up Sodom and Gomorrah with all the Sinners therein, this judgement was far more fearful. Death by the Sword, and death by the Pestilence, or by any other disease hath no∣thing of that dread in it, as death by Fire, especi∣ally by Fire from Heaven, by Fire mingled with Brimstone.
No Fire have we ever seen that carried so much dread in it, as the Fire that burnt down our City of London; but London's Fire was nothing in compa∣rison with Sodoms Fire: this will appear if we com∣pare them together. First, The Fire of London began only in one place, which awakened all the Inhabitants about to prepare, and secure themselves and their goods: but the Fire of Sodom began in all piaces together; there was fire without the City, and fire within, fire in every street, and in every house at the same time the Sodomits were compassed about with fire on all sides. Secondly, The Fire of London consumed but a part, although it were the greatest part of the City within the Walls: but the Fire of Sodom consumed the whole City, turned all into ashes, and not one house therein did escape the fury of the flames. Thirdly, The Fire of London, though it devoured the houses, yet much of the wealth and the best goods of the City were preserved; but Sodoms fire consumed all their Wealth, their Gold and Silver was melted, all their apparel and rich houshold furniture was burnt, and what ever provisions they had made for their flesh, what ever fuel they had laid up for their lusts became fuel for this Fire. Fourthly, The Fire of London, though it burnt much of the goods as well as houses, which could not so easily and quickly be removed, yet few, very few of the Inhabitants perished; they had time and warning to withdraw themselves before the fire, reached so far as their habitations: but Sodom's Fire burnt persons as well as houses, and not one person in the whole City escaped after the Fire was
begun; such as went forth of doors were consumed by the Fire from Heaven; such as remained with∣in were consumed by the Fire of their houses. Fifthly, The Fire of London, was an Earthly fire, although the contrivement of it might be first in Hell, and hellish Instruments made use of in the beginning and carrying of it on: but the Fire of Sodom and Gomorrah was from Heaven, and if the one did expresse more of the wrath of the Devil and Devilish men, the other did expresse more of the wrath of the Sin-revenging God, which is ten thousand times more dreadful. Sixthly, The Fire of London at length was extin∣guished, since which time the City is like to be re∣built, and doth now lift up it's head with more beauty and lustre than before it was turned into ashes: but Sodom's Fire did make an desolation of that place; and since the Conflagration of that City Sodom never was, and never will be again re∣built; neither is the place capable now of having any building erected upon it, inasmuch as the Mare mortuum, the dead Sea doth now cover the place where once the Sodomits had their habitation. CHAP. V. Concerning the Persons that were consumed and how they were affected. 3 COncerning the Persons on which this judgement was inflicted, and how they were affected. The persons were all the wicked Inhabitants of the Cities of Sodom, Gomorrah, Ad∣mah, and Zeboim, Great was the horrour (hinted
before) which we may imagine these persons were in when the Fire and Brimstone came down from Heaven upon them, and there was no way for them to escape. The noise and scorching heat of this dreadful Fire, we may conclude did quickly awaken some out of their sleep of Intemperance, and all out of their sleep of security. What tongue can utter the horrible perplexity of the Sodomits on this day! when they opened their doors and windows in the morning, and looking up to Heaven saw them open, and fire coming down thence to devour them; when the Tempest of Fire and Brimstone beat upon them so sorely, and suddenly, when there was such a dreadful burning heat by the Fire, and such a stink∣ing noisom suffocating smoke by the Brimstone; when there was a little kind of Hell in that place both for torment and Sin. O the dread of the So∣domits! O the confusion they were in! when such an unthought of, such an unheard of▪ and such an unavoidable ruine was come upon them; how were they amazed! how were they distressed! some it may be cursed the day of their birth, wishing that they had been abortive issues, that they had never liv'd to see the light of the Sun, that so they might not have liv'd to see and feel the fire of this day: others it may be cursed themselves and the Sinners of the place, who had provoked God to send this dreadful judgement upon them; others it may be cursed God, because of the Fire and great heat, like those, Rev. 16. 8, 9. Who being scorched with great heat blasphemed the name of God, who had sent down the Fire upon them. O what a horrible out-cry was there in Sodo
when the City began to be in flames: O what weeping and wailing, and wringing of hands! The men roar, the woman shreek, the children weep and cry and cling about their Parents, yea all of them weep and cry out most hideously. The Sodomits have tears now in abundance; but none of their tears could quench the Flames about them, or aswage the sorrow and anguish within them; tears before for their Sins might have prevented these flames, and their fruitless mourning in the midst of them: but none more impenitent than they in the time of their prosperity, and therefore their cries and tears are to no purpose in the time of their adversity; they weep and God laughs at their calamity; they are grieved and afflicted, and God is comforted in the execution of his vengeance upon them for their Sins. In this extremty, the Sodomits know not what to do, nor which way to turn▪ they dare not go forth, that they might con∣sult one another, because the air is all in a light fire abroad, and there are streams of Fire and Brim∣stone, which overflow in the streets; all the shel∣ter they have is for a little while in their houses, but the Fire invadeth them there, and hemmeth them in on all sides, and very quickly the Fire creepeth in at their windows, and breaketh thorow their doors, nothing being able to withstand it's force. We may conceive how the poor Sodomits, when the Fire was coming into their houses, did run from room to room, being pursued where ever they went by the devouring flames; and when the fire was come at their persons, and the flames began to seise on them, then they sweat and fry, their hair is sin∣ged, their cloths are set on fire about them, their
Sinneves shrink, their hands and feet loose their use and they are in horrible pain all over without any help or relief, refuge faileth them, and there is no escaping, no enduring of this pain, and yet they must endure it until extremity of pain doth take a∣way all sence of pain. The terrour of the Sodomits through apprehen∣sions of their present and unavoidable death before them was great, but surely the way and manner of it, namely▪ by Fire from Heaven did cause greater terrour: If it had been an ordinary Fire, of which some natural cause might have been assigned, it had not been so much; but when it was a miraculous fire from Heaven, created on purpose by the Lord to destroy those Cities, surely their dread was ex∣traordinary: they could not chuse but see the more immediate hand of God in it, and withall his frown and dreadful displeasure: with the Fire  Brimstone which fell down from Heaven upon their houses and bodies, they had scalding drops of Gods wrath, ch fell down upon their consciences: we may think what impressions they had of the wrath of the Sin-revenging God on their spirits, which caused a great horror within, than the bare apprehension of death in any shape could of it self effect; when the guilt of so great Sins, and the apprehensions of so great wrath did meet together in their conscien∣ces, and they had no time nor way to get the guilt of Sin removed, and the wrath of God appeased; when conscience before asleep, was awakened in the midst of flames; when there was a Fire above the Sodomits, the Fire of Gods anger; Fire about and upon the Sodomits, the fire which came down from Heaven; Fire beneath the Sodomits, the fire
of Hell; and fire within the Sodomits, the fire kindled in their consciences, O the horrour! when Hell was already begun within them in the flashes and sparks of it; words cannot utter the horrible anguish which then they had upon them. CHAP. VI. Concerning the Persons that escaped. 4 THe persons that escaped this dreadful judge∣ment were Lot and his Family. Like as it was in the Old World, Noah was an upright man in his generation, when the whole world besides were wicked; and God provided an Ark wherein he saved Noah and his Family, when all the kind∣reds and Nations of the world besides were drown∣ed in the Deluge of Waters, which was brought up∣on the Earth: so also Lot being the only upright and righteous man in Sodom, when all the City to∣gether with the neighbouring Cities were wicked, God provided a Zoar for Lot, whilst he brought a Deluge of fire upon those wicked Cities, which con∣sumed them and all the wicked together which dwelt in them. 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. When the de∣stroying Angels were sent unto Sodom, God re∣membred righteous Lot, and a mark for preserva∣tion was set upon his forehead, because he did sigh and cry out for the abominations which were com∣mitted in the midst of the City: And God remem∣bred Abraham his Friend, who had made intercessi∣on for Lot, therefore he sent him out of the midst
of the overthrow, when he overthrew the City wherein Lot dwelt. CHAP. VII. Concerning the Spectators of Sodom's burnings. 5 COncerning the Spectators of this Judge∣ment. Abraham, however remote his ha∣bitation was, had a plain prospect of this Fire and burning of Sodom. We read Gen. 19. 27, 28. And Abraham gat up early in the morning unto the place where he stood before the Lord; and he looked towards Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the Land of the Plain, and beheld, and lo the smoke of the Countrey went up as the smoke of a Furnace. Abrahams heart did misgive him that those wicked Cities would not escape destruction, what ever conditional promise the Lord had made unto him of their preservation; therefore, it is likely, he arose and came to this place, that he might see what became of the Cities, and quickly he  them to be all in flames, by the great smoke which mounted up from them; what his thoughts were is not mentioned, but it is likely he was more than ordinarily affected with this more than ordinary Judgement; such an ap∣pearance of God in the World, clothed with such wrath and vengeance, might well make even Abra∣ham himself, whatever Interest he had in God, to quake and be astonished: When he looked up to Heaven, he saw God all in flames of anger, when he looked down to the Earth, he saw Sodom and Go∣morrah all in flames of Fire: He knew that Lot did dwell there, and he did not know (it may be) but
that Lot with his Family might be burning there, and this might cause him to lift up his voice and weep: be sure he knew that the wickedness of the Sodomits was very great, and that the righteous of the place were very few, if any, when the Lord had promised him to spare the whole City for the sake of Ten righteous persons, could they there have been found. Ah Lord! thought he, what a wicked place is Sodom, that it should not yeild Ten righte∣ous persons? O what an evil thing and a bitter is it to Sin against God, and hereby to provoke him unto anger? and what a fearful thing is it to fall into the hands of the living God, when his anger is stirr'd up! and doth burn thus like fire. And if Abraham could so clearly discern the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, the Inhabitants of Zoar, who dwelt so near, might more clearly discern it. An allarm they have in the morning, which doth startle and awaken them; they are called forth out of their houses to see this dreadful and tremendous sight. The noise of Fire, Fire, Fire, doth sound in their ear, Fire from Heaven, Fire in the Air, Fire on the Earth, Sodom on Fire, Gomorrah on Fire, Admah and Zeboim on Fire, every place near them on Fire, this they hear, this they see; the flames all about are very visible, and very terrible: O with what ruful countenances do they look upwards to∣wards Heaven, from whence the Fire did come! and forwards towards Sodom and Gomorrah, where the Fire was kindled! they see all the Cities together in flames, which being all cituated upon the Plain, without any Mountain or Hill between, they might in the Fields, or on the tops of their houses have an easie prospect of. And surely the Sinners of Zoar
are now affraid, and fearfulness doth exceedingly surprize the guilt; surely their consciences now are awakened, nd do cause a trembling within them, when they see God's vengeance executed in flaming fire upon their fellow-sinners before them: Alas! wo be to us! who can endure such devouring fire? who can bear such horrible burnings? Hath So∣dom and Gomorrah provoked God to destroy them with Fire from Heaven? what then will become of us, who have shared with them in the same guilt, and have de∣served the same punishment? O whether can we flee to hide us from the wrath of God, and shelter us from his fiery indignation? Lot also, who though he did not look back, as his Wife did, before he got into Zoar, yet from thence no doubt but he looked with a sorrowful countenance, and more sorrowful heart upon the wretched Cities as they burned, especially on So∣dom the chief City, and where his habitation had been. O the tears that now run down his Cheeks! O the grief that doth fill his heart! when he seeth such a strange shower of Fire and Brimstone rained down from Heaven upon that sinfull, and now wo∣full place: he was vexed at the Sins of the Sodomits before, and now he is grieved at their misery; he thinks of his Sons-in-Law, and laments their folly that notwithstanding his warning would stay there to be burned▪ which he knew that now they la∣mented much more; he thinks of this Neighbour, and that Neighbour, how they are weeping and cry∣ing, whilst they are melting and frying in the flames. But Lot doth not abide long in Zoar, for such fear as well as grief did possesse him, that he did not think himself safe there, and therefore fleeth
to the Mountain▪ whither he was warned at first to go by the Angels, and there dwelleth in a Cave with his two Daughters, Gen. 19. 30. CHAP. VIII. Application to the Ungodly. WE have here set before us an example, and that both of the Sodomits burning, and of Lot's escaping. These things are recorded for our example. The former is an example to the Ungodly; the later is an example to the Righteous. I. The Sodomits burning is an example to the Ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 6. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live Ungodly. This example is set forth both to reprove the Un∣godly, and to warn the Ungodly. 1. It reproves the Udgodly, and that for the pra∣ctice of such Sins as were the cause of Sodom's ruine. Such as First, Pride and Haughtiness; I believe many in our age and Nation will vye with any of the Sodo∣mits of old for▪ Devilish Pride and haughty spirits▪ (if we may guesse at the pride of the heart by the garbs, the look and the speach,) there are some and those not a few, who seem to have outgone all former generations, and may well be stiled the First-born of the Devil for this Sin, although they have been brought forth at the later end of the World.
What shall we say, when men of the higher rank do so generally▪ without need disguise and hide their heads in others hair, and that of the womanish length, and for the most part of another colour than their own; and when woman disguise and hide the natural colour of their faces with pain and patches? what shall we think of the flanting apparel, the Antique and Apish fashions, of the ruffling Gallants in our Nation? not to speak of the excessive cost bestowed in their changeable rai∣ment, more being spent upon one suit worn by some but a few days, then would be sufficient to cloth the backs and fill the bellies of some scores of poor Christians, nor to insist upon the excessive time spent▪ or rather mispent in dressing, wherein some do consume near half the time, which they spare from the bed and sleep. What shall we say of the taunting language, the scornful and reproachful speeches, which some do fill their mouths withall, and which they spit forth upon the people of God, and that because of their holinesse and likenesse un∣to God, whereby they despise not only them, but also him whose image they bear? what shall we think of the stately building, the excessive showes and flourishes without, and expensive furniture within, and that when those houses are newly risen out of their ashes▪ and when the Church lyeth wast, and so many poor Families are brought to a morsel of Bread? what do these things with many more, which I might mention; signifie, but that pride doth compasse such persons about like a chain, whereby they are enthralled and captivated; and let me say this, that the Devil hath hold of the end of this chain, and is thereby dragging them down∣wards,
(as high as they look) towards the lowest Hell. And here I could wish that professors of Religion themselves, and many that in other regards do fear God, could acquit themselves from the guilt of many gross outward demonstrations of inward prevailing Pride; I will not say that all who have false hair, have false hearts, (some I know are true-hearted, and want a covering there,) and that all who are very curious in decking their out∣side according to the fashion, are wholly untrim'd and unadorn'd within▪ yet I could wish that the art of Periwig-making had never been found out, and that the French modes had never been brought into our Nation; and this I will say that plain ap∣parel and dresses do very well become persons of great honour, especially professors of Religion; that it is very unsutable to the times for any to bestow much cost on ornaments, when many of Christ members want necessaries, and it is very unsutable to the Christian profession, to bestow much time in adorning the body, when the soul hath more need, in the washing and adorning of which the time and pains will be best bestowed. But I retire to the reproof of the Ungodly, for other of their Sodoms Sins. Secondly, Fulness of Bread or intemperance in eating and drinking, was another sin which Sodom was charged withall: And how many are there in our days, which may be charged with the same, who come behind none in this Sin? we read of the Pro∣digal, Luke 15. 13. who wasted his substance with riotons living: If we look abroad we may find too, too many of these every where, whose belly is
their God, who pamper the flesh, indulge and enslave themselves unto their appetite, and give themselves leave to exceed all bounds in their rio∣tous practices, spending their whole time and sub∣stance in their profuse living. See how the Apostle setteth forth riotous persons, 2 Pet. 2. 12, 13. This reprove the excesse in drinking, a Sin more in use amongst us then that of excesse in eating. What is more common than this Sin of drunken∣ness both in City and Countrey? how many are there that guzzle, and swill in drink without mea∣sure? that drench and soak themselves with Ale, & other strong liquors, besot and drown their natu∣ral parts and gifte, wasts their time in rambling up and down to Taverns and Ale-houses, consume their wealth, distemper their bodies, and provoke God to destroy their souls. Wo be to such persons, Isa. 5. 11, 12, 13. Prov. 23. 29, 30. Thirdly, Abundance of Idleness was the third Sin of Sodom, and when did this Sin more prevail then in our licentious age? Idleness is a constant companion of intemperance, yea rather the Mo∣ther that brings it forth, at least the Nurse that brings it up; How many golden sands of time do the most suffer to run waste? how many golden seasons do they let slip, wherein they might make provision for eternity? did but they know the worth of time, especially of the harvest te, the Summer-day of the Gospel, they would not lavish their time as they do, they would not sleep in the Harvest, and waste the whole day in Idleness, and Sin until the night of death did overtake, and suddenly surprize them, when the least minute of time cannot be recalled; though they could and
would give ten thousand Worlds for it. Fourthly, Unmercifulness to the poor was ano∣ther of Sodoms sins, which the Ungodly are charge∣able with here, and shall be charged with and con∣demned for, at the day of Christs appearance, Math. 25. 41, 42. It is no wonder that those who have no pitty on their own souls, should have their bowels shut up against the poor; that those who spend so much on their lusts, should not spare any thing for the relief of other's wants. None have more marle bowels, than those who have the hard∣est hearts; and none more unmerciful than those which are most Ungodly and Sinful. Fifthly, Abominable Filthiness is the last and chief Sin of the Sodomits. And if the skirts of England were turned up, what filthiness would there appear under them? It is a shame to speak what is done of some in secreet, yea too many de∣clare their uncleanness like Sodom, and are not a∣shamed to practice it in the sight of the Sun. Whore∣dom and Adultrey, what more common in this de∣bauched generation? Yea, I wish that too many in England, as well as Italy be not guilty of the Sin of Sodom, properly so called, I mean the lusting after strange flesh, such vile affections some are given up unto, through the just Judgement of God. I might here further reprove the Ungodly of this generation, for some Sins which the Sodomits did fall short in; namely, the hideous Oaths and blas∣phemy of some profane wretches, who hereby blch out their professed enmity against the God of Hea∣ven, and offer so open indignity unto him, that we may wonder he is not provoked to rain down Fire and Brimstone upon them, or to cause the
Earth to open its mouth to devour them, unto which I might add the aggravation, which the Sins of nominal Christians receive from the Gospel light, which shineth about them, beyond what the Sodomits Sins were capable of, which rendereth their Sins the more inexcusable and abominable in the sight of God: but I hasten II. This example of Sodom's burning doth warn the ungodly to repent. Repent O all the ungodly ones, and turn from your evil ways, otherwise your iniquities like the Sodomits will be your ruine; otherwise Gods Judgement will overtake you, and surprize you, and you shall not be able to escape; otherwise you shall be destroyed suddenly, and that without remedy. You se in this instance the fruit of ungodlinesse, the wages of Sin, the bit∣ter issue and effect of flesh-pleasing and sensua∣lity, you see that God can be angry, and that his anger doth burn worse than fire, when it is kindled. If you repent not, God may bring some dread∣full temporal judgements upon you, you have seen much in your days, Plague, Fire, Sword; you have heard of more in former days. You know not what further calamities may be brought upon this City and Nation; God may bring Plague and Famine together, so that such who do not fall suddenly by the Plague, shall be consumed more leasurely by the Famine; he may bring a Famine of Bread, and Famine of hearing the Word toge∣ther, wherein the Body shall starve and dye, and the Soul starve and be damn'd, and perish ever∣lastingly; he may bring Fire and the Sword toge∣ther, your houses may be set on Fire, and your
persons Massacred at the same time. And alas what will you (that are Ungodly) do in a time of ge∣neral calamity? if the Pestilence should walk a∣bout your streets, if the evil Arrows of Famine should fly about your ears, if fire should consume your houses, if the Sword should be made drunk with your Blood, if Death should sit in your Windows, if all things should be turned into up∣roar and confusion; you that drink in iniquity like Water, and lade your selves with guilt dayly▪ you that are profane and ungodly▪ and spend your time in idlenesse, and all kind of luxury, sleeping in the Harvest, and shutting your ears against all the tenders of grace and mercy, which are made un∣to you; what wil become of you in the Winter of affliction? what comfort can you have upon a Bed of Sickness? what refuge in a time of trouble? A Godly Man hath his▪ God to fly to, in times of greatest danger and distress, and there he shall find entertainment and welcome; But whether will you fly? God is your enemy, who will laugh at your calamity, Prov. 1. 26. Sinners! what will you do in the evil day, which may overtake you here on Earth, when all refuge and support shall fail you, when your comforts and enjoyments shall be taken from you, or taking leave of you; when God shall smite you, and conscience bite you▪ and Friends forsake you; when the black Cata∣logue of your Sins shall be spread before you▪ and grimm Death shall appear unto you, bidding you come down into the Grave, and the Devil shall wait for you, to drag you down into Hell; O the confusion that then you will be in! when you
perceive that you cannot live, and you dare not dye; when you feel your eye strings crack, and your heart-strings break, and your souls are now coming forth of their ruinous habitation, where they will become a prey to Devils, and be imme∣diately conveyed to a place of torments; think, O think what your horrour is like to be here if a∣wakened in the evil day▪ through the apprehension of future Judgements? what then will your horrour e, if you do not repent, when the future and last Judgement is come, and Christ is come in flaming Fire, to take vengeance upon you, and he shall rain on you Fire and Brimstone, and a hor∣rible Tempest: but of this more, when I come to treat of the everlasting burnings of Hell, which the Lord Jesus will condemn all the Ungodly unto at the last day. I shall only say, that the burnings of Hell will not only exceed the burnings of Sodom and Gomorrah in feirceness and duration (as through Gods help I shall show in the third discourse) but also the Fire of Hell will be more intollerable by you, than by the Sodomits themselves, (however vile Sinners they were) Math. 11. 24. But I say unto you that it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomor∣rah in the day of Iudgement, than for thee. As your Sins, who have enjoyed the means of Grace, are aggravated beyond the Sins of the Sodomits in this respect: so your condemnation will be the greater, and your punishment the sorer and more intolera∣ble, if you do not now take warning to repent.
CHAP. IX. Application to the Righteous. 2 LOt's escaping out of the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, is an example for the encou∣ragement of the Righteous: what ever judgement the Lord bringeth upon the wicked and ungodly here, you that are righteous shall escape, God will hide you in the day of his anger; when a Deluge of Judgements shall break in upon the ungodly, God will provide an Ark for you; when God raineth a horrible Tempest of Fire and Brimstone upon the wicked, he will provide a Zoar for you. God will either keep you from the judgement it self which befalleth others, or else he will keep you in it, and from that fiery indignation, which is mingled with it; be sure you shall be kept from the horrible Tempest of Fire and Brimstone, which shall beat upon the head of the wicked at last, when the Heavens shall be on Fire, and pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall be on Fire, and melt with fervent hat, and the Earth shall be on Fire, and all things here below in flames; when the wrath of the Sin-revenging God shall break forth like a Deluge upon the Ungodly World, and they shall be cast together into the Lake, which burneth with Fire and Brimstone; Heaven shall be you Ark, your Zoar, where you shall be in safety, and made happy in the full enjoyment of God unto  eternity. Away then with fear and dread, whatever the fowns and threatnings of men be, though  o
the Ungodly may inveron you, though the wrath of wicked men like fire be kindled against you, yet being righteous you are safe, since God is for you, neither men nor Devils shall be permitted to do you real hurt: God is your dwelling place, and God is your hiding place, you are under his wing whilst you remain here, and you shall hereafter lye in his bosom for ever.
Fire and Brimstone from Earth, in the burning of Aetna, or Mount Gibel. CHAP. I▪ The Introduction. THe History of Sodom and Gomorrah's flames and destruction by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven may seem incredible unto some, who either are ignorant of the Infinite Power of God, whereby he can do whatever he pleaseth, as evidently ap∣peareth in the mighty works thereof, which could not be effected without the hand of Omnipoten∣cy; and know not how feirce and hot his anger is, which burneth in his breast against Sinners, espe∣cially such Sinners as the Sodomits were, which would quickly put the whole world into flames, did not his infinite Patience restrain it for a while from breaking forth in it's rage and fury: or wh give no credit unto the Divine Authority of the Scrip∣tures▪ (of whom there are too many in our age and Nation,) which doth relate this judgement on those wicked Cities; which however, being indeed
the Word of God, (as might be proved by many unaswerable Arguments,) the record of them is undoubtedly true, and may as firmly be believed, as any thing may certainly be known, which is the object of sence, or demonstrable by reason: Even as the future flames of Fire and Brimstone in Hell are discredited by such Atheists, and Antiscriptu∣rists, and little effectually believed of the most, as appeareth by their secure walking in the broad way of Sin, which leadeth to this place of most dreadful and eternal burning: Therefore by way of Appendix unto Sodom's burning, and by way of Introduction unto the burning of Hell, I shall treat of Aetna, or Mount Gibel's burning with Fire and Brimstone out of the bowels of the Earth; especially in the eruption of it the last year; which being a thing so late, and so nar, and so attested by eye-witniss, and so easily disproved, yet not disproved, as it would have been by this time, had it been false; I suppose will find credit with the most, and may be of greater use than hath as yet been made of it, from the relation we have had so barely of the thing without any mention made of the name of God, or his hand, or the end which he may have in such wonderful and stupendous burnings. It is from the soul that the body hath it's life and motion, it's beauty and lustre, when the soul is separated, the body becomes a carkasse breathless, lifeless, ghay, and subject to putrefaction: The whole world is full of God: Praesentem{que} refert quae∣libet herba Deum, every pile of Grasse, yea the meanest thing which is the object of our eye, or any  doth carry an Imprsse of God; especially
the greater works of Creation and Providence do bare large characters of the Deity, and have Praise unto the Lord, written more legibly upon them: and although God be not the Soul of the World as some have affirm'd; yet the whole Creation hath it's beauty from him, and so far are any work truly ad∣mirable and great, as God is taken notice of in them. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the whole frame of the Heavens, are most great and illustrious, as by their brightness and motion they declare the glory of the Lord their maker and ruler. The Earth and Sea, and all things in both, as they set forth Gods infinite power and wisdom and goodness, so far they are most worthy our observation and ad∣miration. All the good things we receive, are one∣ly so far truly good, to us, as we perceive them handed to us by God; and Gods hand in affli∣ctions also doth sweeten them to us, when we are perswaded of the Author, and God's love and de∣sign for our good in them. To leave out God there∣fore in the consideration of any work, is to leave out that which is chiefly remarkable; without him we see but the carkasse without the Soul, with∣out the the life and beauty. The design therefore of this Treatise concerning Aetna's late burning is to turn our eye upward to∣wards God, that we take notice of him, and give him the glory of this work, which is the wonder of all, unto whom the notice thereof hath come. There are six things under this subject, which . shall briefly creat of. First, Concerning the Mountain of Aetna or Gibel in the general.
Secondly, Concerning the Antecedents of the late Eruption of this Mountain. Thirdly, Corcerning the eruption of Fire and Brimstone it self from the Mountain. Fourthly, Concerning the concomitants of this eruption. Fifthly, Concerning the cause of this eruption. Sixthly, And lastly, concerning the use and im∣provement, which we should make of it. CHAP. II. Concerning the Mountain of Aetna or Gibel in the general. AETna is a Mountain in the Island of Sicily, which Island is inviron'd round by the Tyr∣ Sea, but a small distance from Italy, in one part of it, up to which ancient Writers think it was joyned by an  or neck of Land, (like as Pelepsus to Greece) unto the continent of Italy, but by the violent beating of the Sea upon that neck was devided asunder  i, so Iustin. lib. 4. cap. 1. and others are of the sme mind. The heigth and bigness of this Aetna or Mount Gb. is very great: some  it to be ten , others fifteen mles distant from the head and top above, to the foot and plain  nd perpendicular in a strait line to be three or four miles. Towards it's head it is rocky and steep, and some part of it is always co∣vered with Snow; towards the middle it is beauti∣fyed with Trees and Woods, towards the bottom it is enriched with Corn and Vines, and exceeding
fruitful. The Hill hath two shoulders Eastward, and between both an eminent head in the middle, which may be seen at the distance of fifty leagues (as some affirm) by Sailors on the Sea. But that which hath rendered this Mountain most famous, hath not been so much the height and bigness of it, as the smoking head and flaming mouth thereof, of which both ancient and modern Authors have written. I shall instance in some few. Dgenes Laertius in his 8th. Book de viris Philo∣sephorum maketh mention of Mout Aetna; into the  mouth of which Emedocles the Philoso∣pher (he sai) was am'd to have thrown himself, that not  found by his companions, they might think he was translated to Heaven, and made an immortal God; but the Fire of the Hill casting forth one of his brzen Sanls, the dceit was dis∣covered, and so instea of purchasing to himself the repute of a God, he discovered himself in that re∣spect to be beneath a man. Horae also recordeth the same, lib. de Arte l'e∣tica. —Deus immortalis hal eri Dum cupit Empedocles ardentem frigidus Aetnam Insiluit.— Empedocles, himself into the mouth doth thrw Of burning Aetna, that not being found below He might be fam'd a God immortal.— Pliny in his second Book of natural History doth discourse of this Hill. In montium  Aetna noctibus semper, tantoque aevo ignium materiae sufficit. Amongst the miracles of Mountains Aetna doth flame always by night, and doth afford matter for perpetual fire.
Iustins in his 4th. Book of History Chap. 1st. giveth the reason why Aetnae Montis per tot secula durat incendium, the burning of Mount Aetna hath lasted for so many ages. Strabo in his sixth Book of Geography telleth us of Aetna's open mouth, whereby it doth breath forth flames, and cast forth fiery stones. Ovid concerning Aetna saith: Flammam fero vomit ore. It vomits fire out of it's feirce mouth. Seneca in his Thyestes describeth Aetna Ignis aeternis resnans caminis. Resounding with eternal tunnels, or breathing holes of fire. Claudian de raptu Proserpinae lib. 1. Aetnaeos apis sols cognoscere visu Non aditu tentare licet— Quae tanta cavernas Vis glomerat, quo fonteruat Vulcanius igni. None may approach Mount Aetna's head to know With foot, 'tis only reacht with th'eye below. Great force within round caverns makes From whence rush forth Vulcanian flakes Of fire, as from a Fountain— But Virgil giveth the most notable decription of Aetna's burning in his third Book of Aeneids. —Sed horrificis juxta tonat Aetna ruinis; Intrdumque atram prorumpit ad aether a nubem, Turbine fumantem piceo, & candente favilla: Attollitque globos slammarum, & sidera lambit. Interdum scopulos, avulsaque viscera montis Erigit eructans, liquefactaque saxa per aur as Cum gemitu glomer at, fundoque exaestuat imo. Fama est, Enceladi semustum fuline corpus
Urgeri mole hâc, ingentemque insuper Aetnam Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis; Et fessum quoties mutat latus intremere omnem Murmure Trinacriam, & caelum subtexere fumo. In English thus: Through horrid falls within, like noise of thunde, Mount Aetna sounds as if 'twould break asunder. Thence first a cloud break forth as black as night, With pitchy curls, with sparks like stars to sight. Then follow globes of flames, which mount a loft, As if to kisse the Orbes of Heaven they sought. The bottom-fire like boiling furnace glowes, Which melts the hardest stones, and upward throwes Great Rocks through th'air with groans. The fame doth go That great Enceladus do lye below Who being thunder-struck, and on him thrown Huge Aetna Mount, with weight to keep him down; When weary he shifts sides, and turns about. He shakes the Mount, his breath in flames goes out As at a Furnace mouth, the Heavens above Are cloth'd with smoak. Trinacria trembles— I shall add but one Author more, and that is of a late Geographer, namely Varenius, who in his first Book of Geography, page 105. doth both describe this Mount, and giveth relation of one noable eruption of fire not much above a hundred years since. Celeberrimus est Aetna Siciliae Mons, hodie Gibel, e cujus vertice flammae & fumi longissima distantia in
Mari Mediterraneo cernuntur. Etsi continua sit flammarum & fumorm ejaculatio, tamen interdum majori impetu furit▪ Anno 1537▪ a primo die Maii ad duodecimum tremuit  Sicilia; deinde ingens & horrendus  & fragor auditus est, quasi magna tormenta bellica explodertur,  est multorum aedificiorum per totam insulm . Hae saeitia per undecim dies cum continasset,  fuit, vel hia∣tu se apruit hic ind terra, un magna vis samma & igis prrupit, qu intra quatuor dies omnia ab∣sumpta sunt & , quae  ultra quinque leuca∣rum distantia ab Aetna aberant. Plo pst crater qui est in vertice montis per tres intgros dies ingentem copiam Faillae & inerum ejecit, quae non tantum per totam inulam aispersa fuit, sed etiam trans Mare in Italiam dela: & Naves in Mari cum ducentis leucis a Sicilia abessent, & Venetias tenderent dam∣num passae sunt. That is Aetna in Sicily, now called Mount Gibel is most famous, from whose top the flames and smoak may be seen at a very great distance on the Mediterrane∣an Sea; and although the casting forth of fire and smoak be continual, yet sometimes it breatheth forth with more force and fury. In the year 1537. from the first day of May until the 12th. the whole Island of Sicily trembled, and then was heard a great roaring and cracking noise, as if great pieces of Ordinance had been discharged; after this fol∣lowed the ruine and overthrow of many buildings thorowout te whole Island. This raging conti∣nued for eleven whole days together, in which time the Earth [on the side of the Mount] was rent, and opened it self in wide clefts; from whence did issue forth flames of fire with such force and strength
that all things within 15. miles of Aetna were thereby consumed and burnt up. A little after the Cup which is on the top of the Mount for three whole days together did cast forth such a large quantity of burning coals and ashes, that they were dispersed not only throughout the whole Island, but they were also carried over Sea into Italy, yea some Ships two hundred leagues from Sicily received da∣mage hereby in their voyage to Venice. Thus Va∣renius. There have been other great eruptions of fire from this Mountain besides what is ordinary, which Writters record, but none that I ever read of like unto this last, of which the account followeth. CHAP. III. Concerning the Antecedents of the late eruption of Mount Aetna. IT was on Fryday night the eight of March 166. that a great noise and roaring was heard from the bowels and mouth of Mount Aet∣na, which sounded far and near, more loud and dreadful than that of great Guns, in the Camps or Ships of enemies; the roaring of the Sea in a storm when it lifteth up its Waves on high, and dasheth them with violence upon great Rocks, and lofty Shoars was nothing in comparison; and it may be questioned whether the loud cracks of thunder, when with the greatest fiercenesse it breaketh thorow the thickest cloud, did ever sound so terribly (although this hath some time caused great men full
of guilt to run under their beds for fear) as this roar∣ing and bellowing of Mount Aetna did that night: which, being in the silent night, when all things were hush, and other noises asleep, was heard with the greater plainnesse and astonishment. This awakened the Inhabitants of Catania, a City fifteen miles distant from the Mount, especially those who lived upon the Borders and sides thereof, whereby they were surprized with great fear, possi∣bly much as the wicked world shall be, when they shall hear the sound of the last Trumpet, summon∣ing them to Judgement. The roaring of the Mountain was accompained at the same time, with a shaking and trembling of the Earth, which must needs add to the trembling and horrour of the people who dwelt there about. The City of Catania it self did feel the earth quake, the houses whereof shok so and danced, as if they would immediately have tumbled from their foun∣dations: But the Earth-quake was most violent in the Countreys and Villages nearer unto, and upon the sides of the Mountain, where there was such a shaking and concussion, that people could not stand upon their legs without holding one by the other, but reeled and staggered too and fro, as if they had been overcome with Drink; and the houses of many were so cleft and torn, that first shaking out their Inhabitants, who with all speed hastned out of them, they quickly tumbled to the ground. The whole Town of Nicolosi was utterly ruin'd by the Earth-quake, the Towns of Padara and Tre-Castager were the greatest part of them ruin'd and destroyed. The sight of such ruines before the eye, the feeling
such motions and shakings under the feet, the found of such roarings from the Mountain in the ear, surely did strike those people with more ter∣rour and amazement, than was upon the Inhabi∣tants of London, when their houses were in flames before them, and they forced to seek their lodgings in the Fields. Besides this, the, fear of these perplexed people was encreased when they saw the ground to cleave in several places about them, and the Earth to open its mouth as if it would have devoured them, as for∣merly the Rebellions Corah, Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up. This put them upon the wing to fly with all hast from those parts, who in great amazement, with hair standing an end, joints trem∣bling, distracted looks, hardly able to speak, brought the tidings of these things to the City of Cantania. CHAP. IV. Concerning the Eruption it self of Fire and Brimstone from Mount Aetna. AFter warning given by the voice of the Mountain, and the shaking of the Earth un∣to people to fly from that place of danger and threatd ruine; on Munday the 11th. of March, there were three great eruptions on the side of the Mountain, besides the smoke and flames which is∣sued forth of the mouth at the top thereof: the breaches and clefts of the Earth were a half of a mile in compasse (as afterwards gsed) out of which an horrible burning flood  come forth,
and more fiercely than any floods of Water could do, ran down the sides of the Mount. It was the fire contained before within the bowels of the Mountain too big and great to vent it self at the top, that forced it's way thorow the sides, and making doors for it self, brak forth with such noise and rage as was terrible to hear and behold. This fire in its first vent, folding it self in great flames as if more than a thousand houses had been burning together, mounted up towards Heaven not lesse (as was judged) than a hundred Yards in height; which was accompained with such a roar∣ing noise, far beyond what was heard before at the mouth of the Hill, like as if more than a thou∣sand Canons or great pieces of Ordinance had been at once discharged; and there withall vast stones were shot forth, some of them three hundred pound weight, which were mounted aloft very high in the Air, and with great force were thrown many miles from the place: this grew into a furious Tempest, not of Rain or Hail, but which was far more dreadful, of burning coals and ashes, and suffocating smoke which beat down upon the Countrey all a∣bout, something like that rain of Fire and Brim∣stone, which fell upon Sodom. But that which was most notable in these erupti∣ons, was the stream and flood of fire, which in li∣qued melted matter, gushed forth at the breaches. We read Isa. 30. 33. Of a stream of Brimstone kindled by the breath of God, which runneth in burning Tophet: Such was the stream of Fire and Brimstone which came forth of this burning Moun∣tain, the flames of it were blew like burning brim∣stone, the coulour of it fiery red, like melted brasse,
the motion of it like Quick-silver; this stream (wherein great stones were seem to swim of the big∣ness of an ordinary Table) coming forth at the sides of the Mountain, ran down like a mighty torrent, and meeting with a Hill devided it self into two currents, which spread themselves, one of them in some places at least six miles in breadth, and was judged to be fifteen yards in depth. In its progresse this stream ran in, upon a Lake of four fathem Wa∣ter, and four miles in compass, which it both filled up, and raised a Hill of ragged Stones and Rocks upon it. The composition of this fiery stream was judged to be Sulphur, Nitre, Sal Armoniac, Lead, Iron, Brass, and other Metals, melted with the ve∣hement heat of the fire. We have read of a Deluge and Flood of Waters, which drowned the old World; and other lesser inundations which have drowned particular places; but I know not any History, which giveth relation of a Deluge and Flood of fire, such as this, which de∣voured and destroyed whatever lay in it's way. The late relation telleth us that wheresoever it passed, it left large heaps of it's congealed matter, with which it covered and burnt the Earth, melt∣ing the Walls of Castles and Houses, throwing down all before it, nothing being found able to resist it's force, or quench it's burning, Water being observed rather to add to it's fury: Where ever it hath passed, it hath left dreadful marks behind it, levelling some Hills, and raising others; so much changing the scituation, that not the least trace of any place or Town, which was in it's way, remains, nothing being to be seen, but con∣fused heaps of ragged stones, which yeilding a
noisom fume strick terrour and astonishment in all that behold it. The first breaking forth of this burning Flood of Fire, was on the Munday te 11th. of March, which in it's progress devided it self into several lesser streams, and filled the whole Countrey there∣bout with Fire and Brimstone, in many places where these streams did come great flames were seen to a∣rise together, with thick smoke as from the moths of so many great Furnaces. After the Flood of Fire was come down the Mountain, and towards the foot, which is not so steep, it did not move, with that swiftness as be∣fore; yet nothing could divert it's course, but it overturned and consumed all where ever it came. The first streams continued their course for twelve days together, and after hopes that the fury was now spent on Fryday the 22d. of March the Mountain Aetna roared and thundered, smoked and flamed again most hideously at the mouth, shook & trembled throughout most dreadfully un∣to the very foundations, and cast forth such heaps of scinders stones and ragged Rocks out of it's bo∣som and bowels, at those breaches before made in it's sides, that they grew together and were raised into two large and high Hills, and this acccompa∣nied with another stream of it's liquid melted mat∣ter, which overtook the former currents, and thrust them forward with great fury. But on the 25th. of March the Mountain bel∣lowed with a greater noise than ever before, and was shaken with such violence and force, that a large part of the head and top fell into the breast ad bowels, and that the depth of half a mie as some
do judge. And then issued forth fiery streams in so great abundance, that joyning forces with the former, they made great havock and desolation, de∣stroying the habitations of no lesse than seven and twenty thousand persons: the Towns of La Guar∣dia, Malpassa, Campo Rotundo, La Potielli, Antoni∣no, Pietro, Mosterbianco, Monpileri, Falicchi, Placchi, were wholy consum'd and ruin'd: Yea, the Image of the blessed Lady of the Annunciata, (o highly re∣verenced by the Superstitious Papists, unto which many resorted in Pilgrimage from remote parts) was not spared, whatever power the Intercession of that Virgin Lady hath with her Son in Heaven, for persons here upon the Earth, (as the Papists ri∣diculously fancy) yet nothing could now avail to secure her Image from being swallowed up by this devouring fiery stream; whereby all may see that there was no difference between the stones of that Image, and those of the other buildings in that place which equally felt the foce of the fire. Other places were ruin'd in part, as Macalucia, Giovanni de Galermo, with many other, and at length the burning streams do approach near unto Gates and Walls of the City Calania, in their course destroy∣ing Fields, Gardens, Orchards, and Vineards about it; which filled the Inhabitants with such fear, that far the greatest part of them removed themselves and their goods out of the City. Yet what ever the danger and fear was, the Lord preserved the City from being swallowed up by these devouring streams; part of these streams were congealed on the Land, one of them emptied it self under the Wals of the Castle into the Sea in four fathom Water: which held it's current in the Sea two
fathom high above it, and to the astonishment of all spectatours, burned in the Sea it self for a great while, and making progress into the Sea a mile in length, and a mile in bredth, was not quenched by the water of the Sea, until having spent it self, it did of it self congeal. CHAP. V. Concerning the Concomitants of the Eruption and burning of Aetna. WHilst the Mountain of Aetna or Gibel did thus vomit flames of fire at the top, and streams of fire at the side, accompained with such horrid noise and cracking in the Air, such dreadful trembling and shaking of the Earth; other things also were very observable at the same time; such as the swelling of the Sea unto a great and unaccustom∣ed height, with great raging and roaring Waves, the Floods of Water did seem to lift up their heads to see this dreadful spectacle of the Floods of fire, and the Waves of the Sea did lift their voice in great tumult, as being amazed at the horrid aspect of the Waves and Streams of Flames and Brimstone. The Winds also, which raised this Tempest in the Sea, were high, having broken loose from their ha∣bitation, and with great noise and blustring whirl∣ed about the Land, in fierce blasts beating upon the houses and unsheltred people in the Fields, as if they would contend for force with the raging and irresi∣stable fire. The Clouds were gathered thick in the Sky, and arrayed the Heavens with black attire, hiding the
comfortable and refreshing beams of the Sun, from the sight which if sometimes it deed peep thorow the Clouds, it was with a pale countenance, as if it had been struck with fear, and dared not to appear in such a dismal place. Storms of rain often powred down from the Clouds, which seemed in compassion to weep, to weep Floods of tears, endeavouring thereby to con∣tribute some help for the extinguishing of the flames; but all the Rain which fell was so far from quenching or allaying, that it did but the more en∣crease and exasperate the fury of the Fire, which hereby burned so much the more feircely. In the City there was danger of the Houses over∣throw by the Winds and Earth-quak, or their be∣ing devoured and swallowed up by the Deluge of Fire: In the Fields and Countreys there was dan∣ger of being destroyed by Thieves and Robbers, who took advantage of the peoples confusions to set upon them, murdering many, and spoiling them of their choicest things, which they had saved out of their ruin'd houses. Great was the dread and terrour, which now did possess the hearts of the people; Our Saviour fore∣tells, Luke 21. 25, 26. That on Earth there should be distresse of Nations with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring, and men hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things, which are coming upon the Earth. Such was the distresse and perplexity of these people. It is said in the Rela∣tion, That people ran with cryes and lamenta∣tions about the City and Countrey, expecting nothing but to be swallowed up, or consumed by the Fire, having no other apprehensions bu
of death, and a general Conflagration. Had the Christian religion taken place there in the purity and power thereof, it might have born up the spirits of the sincere, and established Christians against overwhelming fear and amazement in all those storms and danger; If of the vertuous Man much more may it be said of the truely Religions. Si fracitus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae, though the frame of the Earth and World should crack and be dissolved, yet such a one would be undaunted under it's ruines; such, when the Moun∣tain was dissolved and did melt with fervent heat into Floods of burning Fire, might look upon Death, (the utmost the fire could bring upon them) with an unappaled countenance; yea, with great considence and comfort, because of their well∣grounded hopes▪ of rest and happiness in Heaven, whose habitation prepared for them there is bey∣ond the reach of any Earthly Fire to consume. But no wonder if the blind Superstitious Papists, whose worship is mingled with such vanity and Indolatry, be filled with such dread and horrour, especially the more notorious Sinners amongst them: surely the consciences of the most are now awkened, the stings and lashes whereof (no doubt) above all other things did at this time encrease their terrour. But what course do they take for the diverting Gods anger, which so visibly did break sorth in these Flames and Fire from the burning Mountain, and for the prevention of the threatned ruine? they do not betake themselves to their knees, to Fasting and Prayer in any way of Gods prescribing; they do not apply themselves by Faith unto the Blood of
Christ, to appease the wrath of the angry God No. The Relation telleth us that The Religious appeared every where with much devotion, car∣rying in Procession their Reliques, especially those of St. Agatha, the famous Martyr of Cata∣nia, in which they reposed no small confidence, followed by a great multitude of people, mortify∣ing themselves with Whips, and other signs of penance. And at another time. The Bishop of the place followed by the Clergy, Secular, and Regular, and an infinite number of the people went in solemn Procession out of the City of Catania unto Monte de St. Sophia, carrying out with greatest Devotion, their choicest Reliques, and upon an Altar, erected in view of the Moun∣tain exposed them, where they celebrated Masse, and used exorcismes accustomed upon such extra∣ordinary occasions. Thus blind and sottishly Superstitions these peo∣ple are; But is the anger of the Lord hereby ap∣peased? No, it is so much the more encreased, and they cannot charm the noise and flames of the Mountain with all their Exorcismes. But all the while they continue in their Superstitious exercices. It is said, The Moantain ceased not as before with excessive roaring to throw up it's smoke and flames with extraordinary violence, and abun∣dance of great stones were carried thorow the air, some of them falling within their view, though as ten miles distant from the eruption. This was an open rebuke of them for their Superstition o odious and abominable in the ight of God.
CHAP. VI. Concerning the cause of the Eruption of Mount Aetna. THe Supreme cause of the flames and fiery streams, which brake forth from the Bowels of Mount Aetna, was the Lord, who is not only Ens Entium, the Being of Beings; but also Causa Causarum, the Cause of Causes; whatever was the second, God was the first cause all the works of Nature in the World, being effected by him who is the God of Nature, in and by him every thing hath as it's being, so also it's vertue and operation. It is said, Iob 9. 10. He doth great things past finding out, yea and wonders without number; amongst the Mirabilia Dei, the wonderful works of God, this is none of the least; In Miracles God doth work more immediately, and in wonders God doth work more remarkably than in ordinary works. Moreover this Eruption of Fire, which made such a dreadful devastation of houses carried with it the plain face of a Judgement, and every judgement it is from God, as the Judge of the World; God is in no wise the Author of Sin, but he is the Author of all penal evil: the anger of the Lord did not on∣ly smoke, but break forth into a Flame; it was the breath of the Lord that did kindle this Stream, which overturned and swallowed up so many Ha∣bitations. And surely, the Inhabitants of the place had been blowing up the Coals of Gods anger before by their Sins; It was not without cause from them∣selves
that this judgement was brought upon them. The distance of this Place from Rome is but little, and the difference between them in Idolatry, and all sort of wickedness is reported to be lesse; Sicily hath drunk deep of the Cup of Fornication, which is in the hand of the Romish Whore, and God made some of them drink something of the Cup of his Wrath and Indignation: yea, Sodomy it self is of frequent practice in those parts, and God brings ruine like unto that of Sodom upon their houses by Streams of Fire and Brimstone, though through infinite patience their persons were preserved. The cause under God of these dreadful Eruptions was the Fire in the Bowels of the Mountain, which meeting with a large quantity of combustible mat∣ter and kindling it, could not be contained in so streight room, but with such noise and violence brake forth in such flames and streams at the mouth and sides. When this Fire was first kindled is not known, the burning of the Mountain being more ancient than any History can remember. What the Poets feign concerning the War of the Gyants with the Gods and their casting down great Enceladus with Thunder, and keeping him down with vast Moun∣tains, and this of Aetna being thrown upon his head, that this Fire was kindled by his hot breath, is as ridiculous, as it is fabulous. Some are of the opinion that there are Fountains of Fire under ground as well as of Water; and that in the bosom and bowels of the Earth, God hath layd up Treasures of this Element, enclosing it in vast Caverns, as in so many Store-houses; which Subterranean Fire they assign to be the cause of hot
Bathes, and that Mount Aetna, as also Vesuvius with other flaming Mountains, which Geographers and Travellers tell us are to be seen in all the parts of the World, are the breathing holes of this Fire: but the Scripture is wholly silent of any such work of God there; we read of the Earth, and the gather∣ing together of the waters, and the Fountains of the great deep, but nothing of any Fountains of Fire mingled with either of these Elements; and the laying up of this Element in store, in a place so low, when naturally it tendeth upwards, is not easie to conceive; besides who ever hath descended into the depths of the Earth, to search and find out these depths of Fire? Iustin giveth other reasons of this Fire, Lib. 4. Ca. 1. Est antem terra tennis & fragilis, cavernis quibusdam▪ fistulisque ita penetrabilis, ut ventorum to∣ta ferme flatibus pateat; nec non & ignibus generan∣ds, ntriendisque soli ipsius naturalis materia: quippe intrinsecus stratum sulphure & bitumine traditur: quae res facit ut spiritu cum igne inter interior a luctan∣te, frequenter & compluribus lcis nunc flammas, nunc vaporem, nunc umum eructet. Indo denique Aetnae montis per tot socula durat incendium. The meaning in brief is this, The earth in that place being so thin and hollow, and penetrable by the Winds and the nature of the soil so Sulphurious, and so fit matter for the begetting and nourishing of Fire, the mo∣tion of the Wind closed in, doth kindle the Fire which belheth forth in smoke and flames, and hence it is that the burning of Aetna hath endured for so many ages. Unto which he addeth a little after, speaking of the fall of the Waters. Eade caus etiam Aetnae Montis erpetuos ignes fcit;
Nam aquarum ille conursus, rtum secum spiritum in imum sundum trahit, atqe ibi suffecat tam∣diutenet, donec per spiramenta Terrae diffsus nutri∣menta ignis incendat. The cause of Aetna's perpe∣tual Fire is from the great and perpetual fall of the Water, near at hand which carryeth down the Wind and Air, and suffoateth it at the bottom, whence it breatheth away through some crevices of the Earth, towards the Mountain, and this kind∣leth and bloweth up the Flames. Another assigneth the cause more clearly thus:  tnam constat ab a parte qua Eurus & Affricus flant, habere speluncas, & plenas Sulphuris, & ad Mare deduct as: Haespeluncae recipientes in se flctus ventum creant, qui agitatus ignem gignit ex Sulphu∣res. Mount Aetna, saith he, that way which the East and South wind do blow, hath Caverns and Vaults full of Sulphur, which reach so far as the Sa, which Vaults receiving into them the Waves of the Sea, Wind is begot hereby, which Winds being violently moved doth beget the Fire out of the Sul∣phur, and therefore afterward he telleth us, that as the East and South Wind do blow so this Moun∣tain doth more on lesser vomit up sparks and fire. Lucretius, Lib. 6. doth set forth the cause, —Primum totius subcava Montis Est natura fere, ilicum suffulta cavernis: Omnibus est porro in spelueis ventus & are, &c. The Mountain Aetna hollow is throughout, With stones of Flint it's Cave are lin'd about, Whereby it is held up; The wind is there In every Cave begot by moved Air▪ Through motion heat's engender'd i the Earth; Thence fire springs forth, and flames have birth.
Besides; against the Mountain's Roots the Main Break her swoln Waves and swallow them again; From whence unto the top of it's ascent The undermining Caves have their extent Through which the Bellows breath, and cast forth flames With showers of stones ashes.— Thus concerning the cause of Aetna's burning, which as to the second cause, may rather be guessed at then fully understood. CHAP. VII. The Use of the Burning of Aetna. THese late dreadful Eruption of Fire and Brimstone from Mount Aetna, should car∣ry our eyes upward unto God the Author hereof. The Lord hath been lately upon the Earth, he hath shown himself in great Majesty; a Fire hath devoured before him, and it hath been very tempestuous round about; a smoke hath gone out of his mouth and Coals have been under his feet; he hath clothed himself with flames, and of late ap∣peared very terribly in these Europaean parts; he hath not only kindled fires in houses and Cities, turning them into ashes and ruinous heaps, but he hath also kindled a fire in a great Mountain, which hath broken forth with a great flame. We read Psal. 27. The voice of the Lord is powerful, and full of Majesty; the voice of the Lord is upon the Waters, the God of Glory thunreth, the voice of the Lord upon many Waters; the voice of the Lord shaketh the Wilderness, and maketh Lebanon to Ship like a young
Unicorn. Such Majesty and Power hath been in Gods voice, which was heard from this Mount; the voice of the Lord hath sounded from the Earth, the God of Glory hath thundered out of the bowels of a great Mountain, whereby the foun∣dations thereof have been so shaken, as if he would have overturned it in his anger. Formerly the Lord brought forth streams of Water out of the hard Rock, and lately he hath brought forth streams of Fire out of the deep Earth. This is the Lord's do∣ing, and it should be marvellous in our eyes; If we wonder at the work, let us wonder more at the Worker; if we admire to hear of such floods of fire, we have more reason to admire Gods infinite Power who hath effected this. Use 2. The Relation of Aetna's burning should awaken impenitent Sinners out of their carnal secu∣rity, whilst they consider the hand of God herein, and that this God who kindled such a Fire in the Mountain, is highly incensed against them, so long as they allow and indulge themselves in any Sinful practices; and that the Fire of Gods anger which is kindled in his breast against them, is ten thou∣sand times more dreadful, than the Fire which was kindled in the bowels of the Mountain, yea that God is preparing the Fire of Hell for them, which shall burn them everlastingly, if they do not repent; that God who hath power to kindle a Fire in the Earth, hath power to kindle the Fire of Hell, and he that hath power to keep alive the fire of this mountain for some thousands of years, hath power to keep alive the Fire of Hell unto Eternity, this he can do, and this he will do, and oh how fearful a thing will it be, to be thrown into everlasting
flames! (of which more largely in the next dis∣course.) Awake then all ye Sons and Daughters of sleep and security, ye children of night and darkness, and all ye workers of iniquity! Look up and see how powerful and terrible the Lord is, and how unable you are to make resistance, when once his hand shall take hold on vengeance; Gods anger now doth but smoke against you, ere long it will break forth into a flame, which will burn to the lowest Hell, and never shall be extin∣guished. Let me therefore perswade you to break off your Sins by repentance, and apply your selves to Christ by Faith, that the anger of the Lord towards you may b appeased, and that being reconciled, you may escape the dreadful effects of his displeasure. CHAP. VIII. Concerning the burning of London that may be. Use. 3. THe Relation of Aetna's burning, should lead us unto the considera∣tion of the Burnings which may be, and the Burnings which will be. First, Consider the Burnings which may be: our dear and beloved City of London may be burnt a∣gain with fire, and that not only he Suburbs and Southwark, and remaining Timber houses, which the last Fire spared; but also the New-built Houses of Brick, many of them have been tryed that they can burn, for no Building on Earth is a sufficient de∣fence against Fire; I don't think we are in danger of any such Fire as that of Aetna, to break forth
from under our feet out of the bowels of the Earth; but we may be in danger of a Fire Forged in Hell, I mean some Develish wicked men may be contri∣ving again the burning of the City. It is not long since this our flourishing City was laid wast by de∣vouring flames. The Depositions given before Magistrates▪ con∣cerning the hands of the Papists set on work herein, are not forgotten; the principles of the Papists, which will allow them to murder Princes, blow up Parliaments, Massacre people, burn Cities, if they be Hereticks as they call them, are not altered. The attempts of late to set houses in the City on Fire in several places, have been made evident, and I wish that there be no cursed design now on foot, amongst such vile persons, to burn our City, and Massacre our persons together; it is not amiss for us to think what may be; the may be of a house's falling down upon our head in the street, and being crushed thereby to pieces, (as some have been)▪ should put us upon continual preparation for death, and much more when we are in danger of death ma∣ny other ways. If you should hear a cry at Mid∣night, the Papists are come, that Fire-balls are fly∣ing about the street, that Fires are kindled in seve∣ral parts of the City at the same time, and that bloody cut throats stand ready to Butcher a naked people, as they come forth of burning Houses with their goods. If you should hear the groans and shreeks of your Neighbours, whilst they are cruelly Massacred by the hands of merciless villains, and when they approach your doors, and you see no way of escaping, but inevitable 'ath is before you; if you should then be found unprepared for death,
when you have no time to prepare, how would you be surprized? how would you be affrighted? It is good to provide for the worst, that when ever death doth appear, in whatever shape it may not prove a King of Terrours. How happy are those who have made their Peace with God, when some men will not be at peace with them? how little reason have those to fear the wrath of any here, who are delivered from the wrath to come? how safe is that treasure, which is laid up in Heaven, far beyond the reach of Thief or Rust or Flames of Fire? get clear evidence of these things; if you be delivered out of the snare of the Devil, you need not be affraid of the snares of Men; if you be not in danger of Hell, ye need not be affraid of Death; if you have well-grounded hopes, to escape everlasting flames, and to attain evealasting joys through your Intrest in Christ and his purchase, you may smile at the flames of your Houses, and laugh at destruction when it cometh. But I hope (if there be such a design which I nei∣ther do, nor can affirm) that the Lord will prevent the effusion of our Blood and Destruction of our City, which too many may desire▪ and that if ever they should attempt such a Massacre as in Pa∣ris, or Ireland, and to mingle our Blood and Fire together, that the Lord will so spirit all true Pro∣testants and Englishman, to stand up so in their own defence, which the Law of God and Nature will allow, as by them to bring that Destruction upon themselves, which they may endeavour against against all Justice and Law, to bring upon Gods people. Secondly, Aetna's burning should lead us to the consideration of the Burnings which will be: There
are three great burnings, that certainly will be. 1. The Burning of Rome. 2. The Burning of the World. 3. The Burning of Hell. CHAP. IX. Concerning the burning of Rome. First, WE may be minded hereby of the Burning of Rome, which certainly will be, of which this Eruption of Aetna so near may be a Prognostick and Fore-runner; it being of common observation amongst them that the ex∣traordinary eruptions of this Mount are ominous, especially unto Rome. That Rome is the Babylon threatned with destruction and Fire, will be evident if you look into the Description. Rev▪ 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And there came one of the seven Angels, which had the seven Viols and talked with me, saying unto me come hither, I will shew unto thee the Iudge∣ment of the great Whore that sitteth upon many Waters, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, and the Inhabitants have been made drunk with the Wine of her Fornication. So he carried me away in the spirit into the Wilderness: And I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-coloured Beast, full of names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and ten Horns: And the Woman was arrayed in Purple and Scarlet colour, and deked with Gold and Precious Stones, and Pearls, having a Golden Cup in her hand, full of Abo∣mination and Filthiness of her Fornication. And upon her Fore-head was a name Written: Mystery Baby∣lon, The Great, The Mother of Harlots, and A∣bominatio
of the Earth. And I saw the Woman drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Iesus. That this Decription is applicable unto the Papacy of Rome▪ and to no other is evident from every part thereof, as it is explained by the Angel in this same Chapter, and fulfilled as to every particular in the Popedom. We are not to understand it of one particular Pope, but of the whole Race and Succession of them, who are called the great Whore, sitting upon many Waters, with whom the Kings of the Earth committed For∣nication, &c. signifying the spiritual Fornication, committed by them with her, or the Idolatry which she draweth them unto the practice of. The Waters are the People, which she hath under sub∣jection. The Scarlet-Coloured Beast she sitteth upon, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, is the great City of Rome, and the state thereof; the se∣ven Heads signifie seven Mountains on which Rome was built, therefore called Septi-collis Roma, Seven∣hill'd Rome. Moreover the City is described to be the City which then Reigned over the Kings of the Earth, which was the City of Rome the Emperial Seat at that time; the ten Horns signifie the Kings of the Earth, which give their power to the Pope for his support. This Whore is called Babylon, the great the Mother of Harlots; who maketh the Na∣tions drunk, with the Wine of her Fornication, and who her self is drunk with the Blood of Saints and Martyrs. And to whom can this be applyed? but unto the Pope, who doth intoxicate so many Nations as with Wine or potions, whence it cometh to pass that they wallow in the Filthiness of Spiri∣tual Fornication; and who hath shed so much of the
Blood of Saints, for the Testimony of Jesus, against the Romish Superstition and Idolatry. I should digress too far to apply all the parts of this descrip∣tion with other descriptions in the Revelations, and of Anti-Christ in the Thessalonians unto the Pope of Rome, as I might do and prove by unanswerable Ar∣guments, that the Pope is the Anti-Christ, and Rome Spiritual Babylon; That which here chiefly we should mind is the Judgement of this great Whore, It is said, Ver. 6. The ten Horns which thou sawest upon the Beast, shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her Flesh and burn her with Fre. And again Chap. 18. throwout we have the destruction and burning of Babylon, or Rome, set forth at large, Ver. 2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, Ver. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye pertake not of her Plagues, Ver. 7. As she hath glorifyed her self and lived deliciously, so much tor∣ment and sorrow give her. Ver. 8. Her plagues shall come in one day▪ and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her. The Kings of the Earth, that committed Fornication with her, and Merchants and Ship-masters shall be∣wail her, when they see the smoke of her burning, Ver. 9. But in Heaven there shall be joy. The Lord will rejoice, the Prophets and Apostles will rejoice, and all the Saints will rejoice, in the vengeance which shall then be taken upon Her. Ver. 20. Rome was standing and did rejoice when London was burning, and I hope London will be standing, and much more rejoice when Rome is burning; London was burnt but in part, Rome shall be utter∣ly burnt with Fire; London after it's burning is re∣built
in a great measure, but Rome shall never be rebuilt after this burning. This Babylon when it falleth, shall never rise more. Ver. 21. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great Mile-stone, and cast it into the Sea: saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. As a great Mile-stone thrown into the midst of the Sea is overwhelmed with Wa∣ter; so shall Rome be overwhelmed with Fire: and as a Mile-stone cannot be raised and drawn out of the Sea: so Rome when burnt shall never be raised again out of it's ashes and ruines. Dreadful will the destruction of Rome be, when the time of her barning is come; those which stand a far off, for fear of her torment, (who have been friends to her) shall lament; what lamenttions then will there be, by such as shall be found in the place it self, when it shall be set on Fire about their eares? when the Pope and Cardinals, and the other Inhabitants of that Filthy and Abominably wicked City, shall be consumed together, (as is likely) in the midst of the flames; O the hideous out-crys which then will be made in every street▪ when they are surrounded with Fire on all sides, and there is no way left for them to escape; when their Houses and Wealth, and Persons shall be consumed, together by the devouring flames; when God by such a dreadful fire on Earth shall convey them down to the more dreadful fire of Hell. Then the Lord will avenge all the blood of his Saints, which under the Anti-Christian tyranny hath been shed, for so many generations; then he will avenge all the Idolatry Pride, Covetousness. Oppression, Blasphemy, Filthiness, Cruelty, and
Wickedness of Rome together. When the Grape• of this Vine are fully ripe, the Angel with his sharp Sicle will cut it, and throw it into the Winepress of Gods wrath, where it shall be squiesed and crusht to pieces. When their iniquities are full, then their ruine shall come. And surely the time is not far off; I am much of the perswasion, that this generation shall not passe away before God will accomplish what he hath threatn'd concerning Rnes burning and destruction; the last Sands of the hour of Gods Patience seem to be running; the forty and two months seem to be expiring, and the two witnesses civilly slain, it may be, are arising, and then Rome will quickly be fa∣ling. CHAP. X. Concerning the burning of the World. 2 BY the burning of Mount Aetna, we may be minded also of the burning of the World, I mean the last general conslagration of the World at the end thereof: whether Aetna's burning be a Prognostick of Rome's burning is not so certain; but that it is a Prognostic of the Worlds burning and dissolution by Fire, may be proved from Scrip∣ture, as Luke 21. 11. Where our Saviour fore∣telling his Disciples what the signs should be of his coming, and the end of the World, amongst Wars, Pestilences Earth-quakes, doth reckon up fearful sights, as one Fore-runner, and I verily think there hath not been a more fearful sight, since the days of our Saviour, then this of the Eruption of Fir and
Brimstone from this flaming Mountain; the Inha∣bitant▪ of the place expected a general conflagra∣tion then, but we may well say, that this fearful sight is a Fore-runner of it foretold by Christ, and therefore should put us in mind of it. The notice of this great and universal burning of the World we have not from reason, but from the Scripture; the clearest and fullest place to prove this is 2 Pet. 3. 5, 6, 7. By the Word of God the Hea∣vens were of Old, and the Earth standing out of the Water and in the Water; Whereby the World that then was being overflowed with Water, perished: But the Heavers and Earth which are now by the same Word are kept in store, reserved unto Fire, against the day of Iudgement, and perdition of Ungodly men. And Ver. 10. The day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall passe away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fer∣vent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Here Note. First, That as the World of old was drowned by Water: so that the World that now is shall be consumed by Fire; as certainly as the former was; s certainly the later shall be, and as dreadful as the Flood was to Sinners on that day: so dreadful and much more dreadful will the Fire be to Sinners on the last day. Secondly, It is by the Word of the Lord that this general Conflagration shall be effected, by the Word of the Lord the World was made, and by the Word of the Lord the World was Drown'd, and
by the Word of the Lord the world shall be burn'd. In his word he hath foretold it, and by his Word he will effect it. Thirdly, The Heavens and Earth are said to be reserved in store for fire; when the Old World was drowned, it was only the Earth and Inhabitants thereof, the Heavens were untouch'd, and the Earth also did remain undissolved, and the same Earth did appear afterwards, when the Flood was drawn off by God: but at the last day the Heavens and Earth too shall be dissolved by Fire; not by sub∣terranean Fire as some imagine, and that, as when the World was drowned, the Fountains of the great deep were opened, and the Waters kept before in Store-houses were brought forth, which overwhel∣med the Earth: so that there are Fountains of Fire in the bowels of the Eatth, and that there it is kept in Store-houses, all which then shall be o∣pened, and that the fire shall break forth in a more dreadful flame then ever was seen at Mount Aetna, and set the whole Fabrick of the World on ire. For as was said before we read nothing of this in the Scripture; it is said, that the Heavens and Earth are kept in store for Fire, but it is not said that fire is kept in store for them. Bsides how can we con∣ceive that any Subterranean fire should have power to reach and dissolve the Heavens? Fourthly, The time of this burning of the World shall be at the day of Iudgement and perdition of the Ungodly, called Ver. 10. The day of the Lord, It will be at the day of Christ appearance to Judgement, when he shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire to take vengeance on the Ungodly World: having first raised up the
Righteous from the dead, and gathered them toge∣ther from the four Winds, and called them up in∣to the Clouds, and openly acknowledged and ac∣quitted them, and set them in a place of safty (for as Noah and his Family were hid from the Deluge of Water in the Ark: so the Lord will hide all the Righteous under his wing from the Fire,) and ha∣ving examined and Sentenced the wicked unto E∣ternal perdition; then most probably will the time be of his setting the World on fire, and that all the wicked of all Generations will remain in the midst of those flames▪ until the whole be consumed, except themselves, who will be then cast into a place of more dreadful burning, I mean the everlasting fire of Hell. The time cannot be far off, the Lord will come very shortly, Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 37. And the Lord will come suddenly, as a Thief in the night, Ver. 10. When the World is secure, and doth no more expect it, than the old World did the Flood▪ or the Sodomits did the fire, then the Lord will come. Fifthly, Here is a more particular description of the burning of the World. It is said Ver. 10. The Heavens shall  away with a great noise, and the Ele∣ments shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the the works that are therein shall be burnt up. And Ver, II. All these things than be dissolved. The Heavens shall be in flames, and the frame of them crack with a hideous noise, far beyond whatever be∣fore did ound in the ear of any mortal, and like a great scroll they shall be rolled together, and fly away out of sight; all the Elements also shall feel the force of this fire, and hereby be melted and con∣sumed
into nothing, the Elementary fire and air, and water, shall all melt with this fervent heat and evaporate, so as to be no more; but especially the earth and works thereof shall be the subject of these burnings, all the Buildings, all the houses and Towns and Cities of the world shall be on fire together, all the great and vast Mountains shall be in flames; yea and the great Woods, Plains, and Fields, and the whole Earth from the very bottom of it's founda∣tion shall be on fire, and be burnt up. O what a dreadful fire will this be! it will be dreadful to behold it, how dreadful will it be then to feel it! to be in the midst of it! as the wicked shall be in their passage to the eternal flames of Hell; when they shall see the Heavens on fire, and the air on fire, and the Water on fire, and the Earth on fire, Cities on fire, and Fields on fire, and themselves on fire, Head, Back, Breast, Belly, Hands, Arms, Legs, Feet, every part on fire, and that such a fire though it doth torment them, yet that shall not be able to consume them; when they see the Hea∣vens, which have endured so long to melt, stones to be broken, and the hardest mettals to be dissolved by the fervent heat of this fire, and yet their bodies made so strong, that their flesh shall not be consum∣ed hereby; O how fearful will this be! tongue cannot utter, thought cannot conceive, the anguish of the wicked on this day, and in this place of fire▪ Mr. Doolittle in his Book of Rebukes, doth Pathe∣ticplly set forth the wo of the Ungodly through this fire, from page 297. to p. 305 See the inference which the Apostle doth draw from the consideration of these flames, which shall burn the world. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all
these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? Unto which add the 14th. Vers. Wherefore (be loved) seeing ye look for these things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace without spot and blame∣less. 1. Look to your state, that you be Godly persons, that you be regenerate, and have the Image & like∣ness of God upon you, such will be safe and out of the reach of these flames at that day; but wo be to the Ungodly they cannot escape. 2. Look to your conversation, that it be Holy, that you be Holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. These great burnings and dissolution of all things, should take off your heart from the World, which ere long will be in flames, and quick∣en you unto a holy and circumspect walking; that when the Lord doth appear, you may be found of him in paece, without spot and blameless; and then you shall be taken to inhabit the new Heavens, and new Earth, those glorious mansions, which the Lord will prepare for his people, where you shall have the presence of the Lord with you for ever∣more. The third burning which will be, is the burning of Hell, of which in the next discourse.
Fire and Brimstone in Hell, to Burn the Wicked. Psal. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares▪ Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup. CHAP. I. The Introduction. THe flames and fiery Streams, which were rained down from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah formerly, and which issued forth from the Earth in the Eruptions of Mount Aetna lately, are but shaddows of the fu∣ture flames, and like painted fire in comparison, with the streams of Fire and Brimstone, which in Hell shall burn the wicked eternally. For as the Glory of Heaven (whilst we are in the dark Vale of this World) doth far exceed all conception, and therefore cannot be set forth in full by any descrip∣tion; but as one saith, whoever attempts to speak of an Heavenly state, while himself is upon the Earth, his discourse of that must needs be like the dark Dreams and Imaginations of a Child, concern∣ing
the affairs of this World, while it self is yet swadled and cradled in the Womb; and the Apostle Paul himself, though he had been rapt up unto the third Heaven, and had such discoveries made unto him there, that he wanted words to utter what they were, as 2 Cor. 12. 2, 3, 4. Yet acknowledgeth that he understood like a Child, and had but daak views of this Glory, even as thorow a glass, 1 Cor. 13. 11, 12. So also the torment of Hell through that Fire and Brimstone, which shall burn the wick∣ed, is beyond all thought to imagine, or words to express; and when we have strained our concep∣tions unto the highest pitch, when we have made use of the most dreadful and tremendous things that ever came to our eyes or eares, or any way to our understanding to help us in the forming notions to our selves of the horrible punishment, which the damned shall endure in the unquenchable flames of Hell fire; all doth fall beneath and far short of the thing, all our views hereof by any representations, being like our sight of colours in the night, which if not in whole, yet in the greatest part do fly from our sight and disappear. Yet since we are capable of understanding such fu∣ture things, only by shaddows and representations, and nothing can represent future burnings in Hell so well, as the greatest burnings that have been upon the Earth, therefore we may receive some help by the Relation of Sodom and Aetna's Storms and Streams of Fire and Brimstone, to conceive some∣thing of those, whereby the wicked in Hell shall eternally be tormented.
Doct. That an horrible Tempest of Fire and Brim∣stone, God will Rain upon the wicked in Hell, as their deserved Portion. In treating of this great subject, I shall show, First, That there is such a place as Hell, where the wicked shall be tormented. Secondly, That it is a place of Fire and Brim∣stone. Thirdly, What are the properties of this fire. Fourthly, Who are the persons that shall eter∣nally burn in these flames. Fifthly, The reason of the eternal torment of the wicked by these flames. Sixthly, And lastly, And chiefly I shall endea∣vour to improve this Doctrine in some Uses. CHAP. II. That there is such a place as Hell, where the wicked shall be tormented. THe blind Heathen were perswaded of this; for however they were ignorant of Christ, and his first coming to redeem the World, as also of the Resurrection, and his second coming to Judge the World; yet by the light of nature and reasonings from thence, they arrived to the understanding of a Deity, who was both just and good, as also that the soul was immortal, and that both rewards and pu∣nishment were prepared for the souls of men after this life, according as they were found, either ver∣tuous or vicious; and therefore as they did feign such a place as Elizean Fields, where the vertuous
should spend an eternity in pleasures: So al∣so a place called Tartarum, or Hell, where the vicious and impious should be eternally tor∣mented. This Tartarum the Poets did set forth with many fictions, to affright people from vicious practices▪ such as of the four Lakes of A∣cheron, Stx, Phlegethon, and Cocytus, over which Charon in his Boat did waft over the departed souls; of the three Judges Aeacus, Minos, and Rhadaman∣thus, who were to call the souls to an account. and judge them to their state; of the three furies Tiso∣phone, Megaera, and , who lashed guilty souls to extort confession from them: of Cerberus the Dog of Hell with three Heads, which would let none come forth, when once they were in; and of several sorts of punishment inflicted, Iron chains, horrid stripes, gnawing of vultures, wheels, rowling great stones, and the like. Take part of Virgil's Description of this place, which he feigneth Aeneas to have visited, Lib. 6. Hâc iter Elisium nobis: at leva malorum Exercet pnas, & ad impia Tartara mittit Respicit Aeneas subito, & sub rupe sinistr â Maenia lata vidit, triplici circundata muro: Quoe rapidus flammis ambit torrentibus amnis Tartarens Phlegethon, torquetque sonantia saxa: Tisiphoneque sidens, pal à succincta cruent à, Vestibulum insomnis servat nosttesque, diesque. Hinc exandiri gemitus, & sva sonare Verbera, tum stridor ferri, tractaeqe catenae. This way unto Elisium leads, where such do dwell As have liv'd vertuously, th'other leads to Hell, Where wickedness is punished. Aeneas's eye Turns quick unto the left-hand-Rock, and there
Great structures closed in with triple Wall about▪ This compass'd by Tartarian Plegethon throughout With feirce and fiery streams, with noise like stones on shore Rowled by Waves of Sea. On th'threehold of the or Which lets into the place Tisiphone doth sit Awake, both day and night to watch and look to it Girt with Red-pall. Here he did hear the noise of chains, The sound of cruel lashes, th'groans and cryes from pains Which they endur'd within— Although most of these things which we may find in many Poets, and other Heathen Authors are fictions of their own brain, yet that there is such a place as Hell is real, and the punishment real, and far beyond whatever any of the Heathens could imagine it to be: Therefore let us consult the Scrip∣ture, which will give clearer light in this thing, where God, who hath made and prepared Hell for the wicked, hath made known the thing, and threat∣ned to punish the wicked there everlastingly. Look into the Old Testament, Psal. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all Nations which forget God. I know that the Original word for Hell, namely  doth signifie the Grave; but here it must have a further signification than that of the Grave, since it is appropriated unto the wicked, and such as forget God, otherwise, it might as true∣ly be said, that the righteous shall be turned into Hell, and those that remember and fear, and love, and serve God, for they shall be turned into the Grave. So Isa. 14. 12, 13, 15. How art thou fallen
from Heaven (speaking of the King of Babylon,) O Lucifer Son of the morning, thou hast said in thine heart I will ascend into Heaven, and exalt my Throne above the Stars of God; yet thou shalt be brought to Hell, to the sides of the pit. That Hell here is not to be under∣stood of the Grave only, but of the place also where the wicked shall be tormented will appear, if you compare this pla with Isa. 30. 33. Where the Prophet speaking of the same King of Babylon saith. Tophet is ordained of Old, yea for the King it is pre∣pared▪  made it deep and large, the pile thereof is  much Wood, the breath of the Lord like a  of Brimstone doth kindle it. Which descrip∣ti is applicable unto no place, but that place of everlasting burnings, which the Lord hath prepared for the wicked. Indeed Tophet was a real place upon the Earth, where some Idolatrous Israelites did offer up their Children in sacrifice to Malec; but here Hell is called Tophet, in allusion to that place, because of the shreeks and cryes which the damned shall make there worse than the children did in Tophet, when they were Sacrificed by their cruel Parents. In the New Testament it is most clear, that there is such a place as Hell prepared both for the soul and body of the wicked, to be tormented in. Math. 5. 29, 30. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell; and if thy Right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee, for it is profita∣ble for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell. That this Hell is not meant of the Grave, into which the
body shall be thrown is evident, because those who do cut off the right hand, and pluck out the right eye which offend, (that is mortifie those offensive lusts, which are as dear and as hard to be parted withal as the members of the body) shall be exempted and delivered from this Hell, whereas none shall be exempted, though never so holy and mortifyed from the Grave. Yea, and in this Hell it is said that both soul and body shall be destroyed. Math. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the Soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. Now the soul is not destroyed with the body in the Grave, as they both shall be (if wicked) after the Resurrection in Hell. Moreover this Hell threatned by our Saviour to those that don't cut off right hands, &c. will appear plainly to be the place of tor∣ment prepared for the wicked, by the description of it repeated three times, Math. 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. To go into Hell into that fire which never shall be quenched, where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. By the unquenchable Fire we are to understand the fire which shall burn the body; by the never-dying worm, the worm of con∣science, which shall eternally gnaw the soul. This Hell is called a Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. By which also he went and Preached nto the Spirits in Prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah. By the spirits in Prison, we are to understand the Souls in Hell, the Souls of those wicked and disobe∣dient persons in the old World, who would not give ar to the Preaching of Christ by his spirit in Noah, and therefore a whole World on them were sent
into the Prison of Hell together, unto whom are gathered the souls of all that since have died in their Sins, where they are bound up in chains of dark∣ness, and reserved unto the judgement of the great day. Hell is also called a place of outer darkness, where there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Math. 25. 30. It is called a Furnace of fire, where all those that offend and do iniquity shall be thrown, Math. 13. 41, 42. It is called the great Wine-press of Gods Wrath, where all the wicked shall be crushed to pieces under the exceed∣ing and eternal weight of his wrath, Rev. 14. 19, 20. But especially it is set forth as a place of fire of which in the next particular. Many have been the conjectures of Divines, con∣cerning the place where Hell is. Some have thought it to be in the bowels of the Earth, because it is spoken of as a place below, and called by the ame of a pit, the bottemless pit, out of which the smoke and locusts did arise. Rev. 9. 2. And in which Sa∣than was bound and held as in a Prison, Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3, 7. And they have conceited the pit spoken of. Num. 16. 33, Into which Corah, Dathan, and Abiram went down alive, when the Earth clave asunder and swallowed them up, was the pit of Hell into which both their soul and body together were immediately conveyed; and that which hath the rather established such in this opinion hath been, the vast quantity of Subterranean Fire, which they imagine to be in the Bowels and Caverns of the Earth: others have rather conceited it to be bey∣ond this visible World▪ (which will pass away at the last day,) and removed at the greatest distance from the sedes batorum, the place where the righte∣ous
shall eternally Inhabit. But the Scripture being silent as to this, whatever is spoken on this subject where Hell is, must needs be only by conjecture, the Lord grant that none of us may know by experi∣ence: our chief care should be that we may escape the punishment, and not be inquisitive about that which the Lord hath not thought fit to reveal, let it suffice us to know that there is such a place as Hell, where the wicked shall be tormented. CHAP. III. That Hell is a place of Fire and Brimstone. THere is nothing that Hell is described by in the whole Book of the Scripture so much as by Fire, and sometimes by Fire mingled with Brim∣stone. It is called Fire, Math. 3. 10. Every Tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewen down and cast into the Fire. Hell-Fire, Mark. 9. 47. It is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast into Hell-fire. A Furnace of Fire, Math. 13. 42. And shall ast them into a Furnace of Fire. It is called a place where the wicked shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 14. 10. And he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, in the presence of the Holy Augels. A Lake which burneth Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. And shall have their part in the Lake which burneth with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second death. I know that it is a great question amongst Di∣vines, whether the fire of Hell, which shall burn the Wicked will be a Real fire, or a Metaphorica
fire. There are men of great name, who assert it to be a Mataphorical Fire only, and that because it is called a Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, who cannot be hurt by a real Fire; because the worm which never dyeth is Mataphorically taken for the everlasting gnawings of conscience; be∣cause the New Ierusalem, which is above is Meta∣phorically described to be of pure Gold, clear like Glass, the foundations to be garnished with all manner of precious Stones, and the Gates to be Pearls, Rev. 21. 18, 19. And by the same reason, they say the description of Hell in the Scripture is Metaphorical: those that thus affirm the Fire of Hell to be Metaphorical, are so far from lessening the torment hereby, which this Fire will inflict, that they so much the more aggravate it, because that Metaphorical fire, they say will afflict more than if it were Real fire; for as the glory of the New Ierusalem, that Building of God made without hands eternal in the Heaens, doth far surpass all Metaphores, whereby it is set forth, which are made use of only to help our understanding in the concei∣ving of it's Glory: so also the pain and torture of the damned in Hell, will be more horrible and in∣tollerable, than if they were to be cast into Nebe∣cadnezzars fiery Furnace, when it was heated seven times more than it was wont to be heat; insomuch as the Metaphor doth come far beneath the thing, which it is used to set forth. Others are of the judgement that Hell fire will be real Fire, it being so positively, so plainly, and so frequently asserted to be Fire, fire with flames, fire which shall burn, and because nothing will put to greater pain than fire, and because it is proper for the
body to be tormented with some real material sub∣stance, and when the Holy Ghost telleth us it shall be fire, why should he turn this fire into a Meta∣phor, which may tend rather to weaken our con∣ceptions of it's horrour than to highten them; and therefore in answer to that great Objection, that it is said to be prepared for Devils, they are ready to say, it shall be such fire as will not only torment the Soul, but also Devils too, God having power to make such a fire; the other Metaphors are made use of but once, this of fire is the almost constant expression in Scripture, where Hell is described. I confesse that I do not judge these answers to be fully satisfactory▪ for however the souls of wicked men and women may by sympathy with the body be tormented by real Fire, yet God having made Devils to be wholly Spirits which are wholly in∣corporeal, I don't apprehend how any fire or bo∣dyly substance can have any impression upon them, but that Fire, Air, Earth, or Water, are all the same things to them, and that they are incapable of suf∣fering by any of them, that as Water cannot drown them, so neither can fire burn them, that as Air cannot refresh them, so neither can Fire afflict them. Indeed were the opinion of some Ancients true that Devils have bodies, but more pure and resined, such as cannot be seen any more than the Air, a real Fire might be made so pure by God as to torment the Devils; but I am altogether of the Judgement that Devils are wholly Spirits, the Scripture asserting it, and many reasons I might give of it, but that it would be too large a digression; moreover the fire of Hell I believe will be such as immediately to afflict the souls of the wicked, and
not only by Sympathy with the body, because o∣therwise the torture of the body would be greater from it's immediate object, than the anguish of the soul by Sympathy▪ when the Souls desert of pu∣nishment is greater, being more highly guilty of Sin than the body which is made use of only as an in∣strument. Yet I cannot be of the opinion, that the fire of Hell wll wholly be Metaphorical for the reasons before given, therefore I judge that both the opini∣ons may be reconciled with themselves and the truth, by asserting that this fire of Hell will be part∣ly Metaphorical▪ and partly real. First▪ I conceive that the fire of Hell will be in part Metaphorical, and that this also will be the most grievous and tormenting, though not to the sense, yet to the soul & to the devils, who can be tormented by no other fire: my meaning is that the Fire which will be Metaphorical, is to be understood of the feirce anger and wrath of the Sin-revenging God, who himself is called a consuming Fire, Heb. 12. 19. And whose anger is often expressed by the Me∣taphor of fire in the Scripture, and so that ever∣lasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and for the souls of wicked men and women, (which will be accompained also with a real fire, prepared for their bodies, of which in the next particular) is the everlasting wrath of God, which he hath treasured up against the day of wrath, when he will open and bring forth those treasures, and make im∣mediate impressions thereof upon all damned spi∣rits, which shall burn worse than Fire, and cause greater anguish to the spirit, than any fire can do o the sense; hence it is said, Heb. 10. 31. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, and that because the immediate strokes of Gods vengeance, which damned Spirits shall fall under, when he takes them into his own hands to punish them in Hell, will above all things be most intoler∣able; The Apostle saith, 2 Thess. 1. 8. That the wicked shall be punished with everlasting destructi∣on from the presence of the Lord, ana from the Glory of his Power. This is to be understood causally; as if he should have said, that the destruction of the wicked shall arise from Gods Presence and glorious Power, which will pt forth it self so mightily, as to glorifie it self in the punishment of them in Hell. God will appear in Heaven to the Angels and Saints, in a flame of Love, and make immediate and most sweet impressions thereof upon them, which will be their chief happiness: and God will appear in Hell to Devils and damned Spirits in a flame of wrath▪ as a consuming fire, and make immediate impressions of his wrath upon them, which will be their chief misery; for Sinners to be taken thus into the hands of God, and punished by the fire of his wrath will be more dreadful, than if the most furious Creatures in the World were mustered up together, and let loose upon them to tar them in pieces and devour them; if they were tormented with the most exquisite torments, which can possi∣bly proceed from any second causes, it would be no more than the biting of a Flea, or the Prick of a Pin in comparison with these immediate strokes of Gods vengeance, and the burning under the fire of his indignation. Secondly, The Fire of Hell I believe will be in part real, I mean that fire whereby the body sha
be afflicted, I judge that as the torture will be real, so that the fire whereby it will be tortured will be real too; of all senses the feeling is most capable of being cruciated and afflicted, and of all the ob∣jects of this sense fire is most afflictive and painful, and therefore God hath appointed fire to be for the punishment of the body; indeed other senses will be afflicted too, the ear with hideous noises, shreeks, and yellings of fellow damned Sinners; the eye with fearful ghastly and horrible spectacles, the smell with suffocating odious and nasty stench, worse than of Carrion, or that which cometh out of an open sepulchre; but the feeling will be most afflicted by the devouring and eternally burning Fire, which the wicked shall be thrown into. I shall not dispute whether this real fire of Hell will be such as our culinary fire, (I mean that in our Chimneys) which sometime creeps into Houses, and is of so great force us to burn down Cities, and sei∣seth upon all combustible matter before it, and which will continue no longer than it is fed by such gross matter; or whether it will be more purely Elementary fire, such as Philosophers affirm to be between the upper Region of the Air, and the lower Orb of the Heavens; or whether it will be such fire as sometimes breaks forth out of the bosom of the Earth, at the mouth of flaming Mountains, of which some think there are vast treasure below, beyond whatever did ever appear to the eye; such as did send forth those aming and burning streams from Mount Aetna of late, which at least will help us to conceive something what the Lake of Fire and Brimstone will be; or whether it will be a fire created on purpose by God, Sulphrions and stincking like unto, but far
beyond that which was raised upon the wicked of Sodom and Gomorrah, which of all burnings that ever have been in the world, I conceive did most lively represent the burnings of Hell Fire; I shall not, I cannot determine in this case; but am most inclinable to think this fire will be immediately created by God, differing from all fires that ever have been in the feirceness of it, which by the word of Gods Power will be made, and by the breath of hi indignation will be kindled, and kept alive to eternity without any fuel to feed it, except the bo∣dies of the wicked, which though they shall be tor∣mented by it, shall never be consumed by it. CHAP. IV. Concerning the properties of Hell-fire. THere are seven properties of Hell-fire. First, It will be a great Fire. Secondly, It will be a dark fire. Thirdly, It will be a feirce fire. Fourthly, It will be an irresistible fire. Fifthly, It will be a continual fire. Sixthly, It will be an unquenchable fire. Seventhly, It will be an everlasting fire. First, The fire of Hell which shall burn the wicked will be a great Fire. We have seen some great fires, which have burned many Houses toge∣ther, such as that in 1666. which burned down the greater part of London; but this fire of Hell will be so great, as to burn all wicked persons together, all the wicked will be in flames at the same time, the greatness of this fire is set forth, Isa. 30. 33. Tophet
is prepared of Old, he hath made it deep and large, the pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, the breath of the Lord, lie a stream of Brimstone doth kindle it. To∣phet doth signifie Hell, the place where the damned shall be tormented, of which before, God hath made it deep and large, the depths of the Earth, or the depths of the Sea are nothing in comparison with the depths of Hell; for those depths have a bottom, but this is called the bottomless pi, Rev. 20. 1. It is deep and large, of vast capacity, it will be sufficient to contain all the Sinners of the Old World, and all the Sinners of this world, who have lived or shall live in every generation, until the time of the Worlds dissolution. The pile thereof is Fire and much Wood; as much Wood being kind∣led doth make a great Fire, so this Fire though it have no real Wood, but that which will be equiva∣lent, will be very great, especially being kindled by the breath of the Almighty, as the breath of the Lord kindled those showers of Fire and Brimstone, which came down from Heaven upon Sdom and Gomorrah, so the breath of the Lord will kindle those streams of Fire and Brimstone which shall be in Hell. Secondly, Hell Fire will be a dark Fire, there will not be the least glimmering of light in that doleful place, which will add to the horrour thereof, Hell is called by the name of utter darkness, Math. 25. 30. It is caled blackness of darkness for ever, Iude 13. There will be no light of Gods countenance, not the least smothing of his brow, his wrath will be poured orth without mixture into the cup of his indignation which thy must drink of▪ Rev. 14. 10. There will not be the least light of comfort, nothing
but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth; there will not be the light of the Sun, or the Moon, or the Candle, and the fire it self will give no light, all will be dark and black, black Devils, black Bodies, black Souls, and they may without light have perceivance one of another, as Devils have now unto whom light is of no use; or if there be a duskish light there, to represent one anothers ruful countenances, and other fright-ful spectacles, be sure there will be no refreshing light, thre the damned will be in a place and state of darkness for ever. Thirdly, Hell-fire will be a feirce Fire. The Fire of Sodom, of Aetna, yea, of London in the day of it's burning was feirce, but no Fire burnt so feirce as Hell Fire will do. The Fire of Gods an∣ger and wrath will burn feircely, now it doth but smoke against Sinners, then it will break forth into a flame; tongue cannot express how feircely the wrath of God will burn, when hereafter it shall seise upon the Ungodly, Psal. 90. 11. Wo know∣eth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear so is thy wrath. The power of the anger, which any creature may have may be known, it is finite, it is limited, it reacheth no further than the body▪ but who knoweth the power of Gods anger? it being infi∣nite, and unlimited, and such as will reach the soul, and most grieviously torment the Soul through it's immediate impressions. According to thy fear so is thy wrath, that is according to the fear which we may have of thee: the wrath of man is not propor∣tiable, unto the fear which we may have of it, we often fear that men can do more than they are realy able; but the wrath of God is commensurate and
proportionable unto the greatest fears thereof, yea doth far exceed; he can afflict more than our fears are able to conceive, and that because of the infinite power of his wrath, God will hereafter make the power of his wrath known, as Rom. 9. 22. and how feircely then will it burn? the fire also which will torment the bodies of the wicked will be very feirce, it will be so feirce, as to torment every part from the crown of the head unto the foot, and eve∣ry part in extremity, in the utmost extremity, and that beyond the present capacity. Fourthly, Hell-fire will be an irresistible fire, all the power of Hell with their combined forces, shall not be able to make the least resistance against the fire of Gods anger, Nah. 1. 6. Who can stand be∣fore his indignation? and who can abide in the feirce∣ness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. Isa. 27. 4. Who would set the Briers and Thorns against me in Battel? I would thorow them, I would burn them together. Briers, Thorns, dried Stuble, Chaff cannot re∣sist a consuming fire, so neither shall the wicked be able to resist the fire of Gods jealousie; and the real Fire prepared in Hell for the body, will burn with that feirceness that it will master and prevail over all, none shall be able to keep off it's force, it will pierce thorow and thorow every part of the body: we read of the three Children which were preserved in the midst of the fiery Furnace, so that not so much as the smel of the Fire was upon their Garments; but none shall be preserved from burn∣ing in this fiery Furnace, indeed the wicked shall not be burnt up and quite consumed, but they shall be always burning; For
Fifthly, Hell-fire will be a continual Fire; other firessometimes are in, and sometimes out, but this fire will be always in, always burning without any in∣termission, and always burning in the same high de∣gree of intension, there will be no aswagement of the Flames of Gods anger, no abatement of the Fire of Hell, this Fire will be always alike hot, and al∣ways hot in the highest degree. Sixthly, Hell-fire will be an unquenchable Fire. Math 3. 12. But will burn up the Chaff with un∣quenchable Fire. Mark. 9. 44. Where their worm dieth not and the Fire is not quenched. Now the fire of Gods anger before it break forth into so vehe∣ment a flame may be quenched by the Blood of Jesus Christ; and the Fire of Hell may be prevented, but hereafter it will be too late, no Sacrifice will be accepted then to appease Gods wrath, and if all the Waters of the Sea could be poured upon the flames of Hell-fire, they would not put them out; And therefore. Seventhly, Hell-fire will be an everlasting Fire. Math. 25. 42. Depart from me ye cursed into ever∣lasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Rev. 14. 11. And the smoke of their torment ascen∣deth up for ever and ever. This Fire will be ever burning, and the damned will be ever tormented therein: Extremity and Eternity are the two most bitter ingredients of the damned's torments, who can set forth the Eternity of the wicked's punish∣ment in Hell-fire? this Eternity is immeasurable, it is incomprehensible; all the Rays of the Sun may more easily be comprehended in a small room, and all the Waters of the Sea contained in a small nut∣shel, than boundless Eternity be conceived by
our finite and shallow understanding; none have shaddowed Eternity, and set it forth better than those who have shown how infinitely short all measures and numbers do fall, when they are ap∣plyed to the space of it's duration. One expresseth himself thus on this subject in another language: suppose ten thousand years past, after that an hundred thousand Millions of years past, after that ten hundred thousand Million of Millions of years past, and yet you are not come to the end of Eter∣nity, no nor to the middle of Eternity; yea, you are but at the beginning of it; add unto this the number of all the thoughts of Angels and Men, of all the motions in every Creature, of all the grains of sand which would fill ten thousand Worlds; ga∣ther all the minutes of time, from the beginning of the Creation of the World, all the numbers of A∣rithmetick that can possibly be conceived, and all this is but the beginning of Eternity. How long will Eternity last? Always. When will Eternity end? Never. As long as Heaven shall continue to be Heaven, and God shall continue to be God, and the Saints shall be happy in the enjoyment of God, so long shall the wicked be tormented in the Fire of Hell. We may apprehend the everlasting∣ness of this Fire of Hell, but we cannot compre∣hend it.
CHAP. V. Concerning the Persons that shall burn eternally in the Flames of Hell. IT is upon the wicked that the Lord will rain this horrible Tempest of Fire and Brimstone in Hell▪ all the workers of iniquitie, all that live and dye in their Sins must suffer the vengeance of Eternal fire. These are the Chaff which shall be cast into the un∣quenchable Fire. Math. 3. 12. These are the tares which shall be bound up in bundles to be burnt. Math. 13. 30. These are the Goats, which shall be condemned to everlasting fire. Math. 25. 41. Look into a few places where in the plain Letter of the Scriptures, the persons are described, that shall be the subject of everlasting torment in Hell-fire. Math. 13. 41, 42. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire, there shall be wailing and guashing of teeth. Rom. 2. 6, 8, 9. Who will render to every man according to his deeds, to them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of Man, that doth evil of the Iew first, and also of the Gentile. 2 Thess. 1. 7, 8, 9. The Lord Iesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his Power. Take one place more amongst many, Rev. 21. 8. But
the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers, and Where-mongers and Srceers, and Idolaters, and all Lyars shall have their part in the Lake, which burneth with Fire and Baimstone. I shall spake more of the persons, when I come to the application, which I would chiefly insist un, the Doctrine being so well known, and therefore I shall but briefly touch upon the reason, why the wicked shall be eternally tormented in the flame of Hell, and so come to the Use, which I mainly in∣tend. R. The torment of the wicked in Hell is a punish∣ment, and therefore hath a respect unto Sin, the guilt of which doth lay the wicked under an obliga∣tion hereunto, and layeth God under an Obliga∣tion to inflict this punishment upon them. Sin is the violation of a Holy and Righteous Law; and an offence of an Infinite Majesty, whose Justice requireth infinite satisfaction, which it can receive no other way from Sinners themselves, than by their undergoing the punishment of Hell, although this punishment be not infinite in regard of the quality, yet it is infinite in regard of it's duration, and therefore the torments of the wicked shall have no end.
CHAP. VI. Application. 1. Use of Examination. WHen you had the relation of Sodom and Gomorrah's burning, you might think this was done long ago, and look upon your selves as unconcern'd; when you had the Relation of Aetna's burnings, you might think this was done a far off, and look upon your selves as unconcern'd; but when we come to discourse of Hell-burnings, here you all are concern'd; those burnings are past, these are burnings to come, those were burnings for a while, these will be burnings for ever; the greatest part of the children of men will be cast into these burnings, and very few comparatively will escape: O what a vast number of all kindreds, and Nations, and Languages will there be tormented for ever in Hell! what a vast number of Christians, yea, of professours of the Gospel! you had need to look to it, that none of you be found in the number. The dreadfulness of these everlasting burnings, me thinks should stir you up with all sollicitousness and utmost diligence, to enquire whether you are in danger, and how you might do to escape. The most Men and Women that live this day up∣on the face of the Earth are in danger of being thrown into the flames of Hell; the whole World may be devided into two parts, they are either such as are in a state of nature, or such as are in a state of grace, the former are many thousand times the
greater number, and the Apostle telleth us expressely that such are Children of Wrath, Eph. 2. 3. And if children, then heirs; the children of God are heirs of Heaven; the children of wrath, who also are called the children of the Devil, are heirs of Hell. The later only (I mean such as are in a state of grace) are in a state of Salvation, they only are free from all obligation to the punishment of Hell, having Interest in Christ's satisfaction. There are two ways; in one of which all the Sons and Daugh∣ters of men may be found, Math, 7. 13. 14. One is a narrow way, which hath a strait Gate, and very few are to be found therein, and that is the way of Holiness of self-denial, of Mortification and Go∣spel-obedience, and although this be the way of Life and Salvation, the way to glory and honour and everlasting happiness, yet it hath but few pas∣sengers, few take this course: the other is a broad way, which hath the greatest crowd and throng although it lead unto destruction, and this is the way of Sin, the way of Profaness, Licentiousness, Unrightiousness, disobedience; this is the course of the World; this way hath a wide Gate, and many there be that go in thereat, and the reason our Sa∣viour giveth, because the other way hath so strait a Gate, because of the difficulty of it's passage; namely, the wicket of regeneration, few attempt to go thorow this strait passage, or if they do attempt they are quickly discouraged with the difficulty, and so let it alone, taking the broader, because the easier way of Sin, the steps of which will certainly take hold of Death and Hell. I beseech you all with the greatest seriousness to examine your selves, whether you be in a state of
Nature, or in a state of Grace? you have been all born once, have you been born again? you have been born of the Flesh, have you been born of the Spirit? you have born the Image of the Earthly Adam, do you bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam? you are partakers of the Humane Nature, are you partakers of the Divine Nature? have you new and clean hearts? are they changed? do you lead new and Holy lives? are they reformed? I beseech you examine which of the two ways you are walking in; is it the broad way of Sin and wickedness? or is it the narrow way of Faith and Holiness? these are questions of great moment to be resolved in, your everlasting weal or wo, your Salvation or Damnation doth depend upon them; if you be brought into a state of Grace, and are got in thorow the strait Gate, into the narrow way, you are made Men and Women, happy you that ever you were born, you not shall perish with the wicked, but most assuredly attain eternal Life and glory: but if you be in a state of Nature, if you be in the broad way, and continue therein to the end of your lives, you are undone Men & Women, wo be to you that ever you were born, Heaven will be shut upon you, and Hell will be opened unto you, where you shall be unconceivably and eternally tor∣mented in the flames of that unquenchable fire. Take heed that you do not mistake your state and way; thousands have gone to Hell through a mis∣take; it is very easie to mistake, it is difficult not to mistake, and no mistake is worse than▪ this mistake; all is not Gold that glisters, all is not grace, that hath the show of it, all are not in the way to Hea∣ven that pretend to it, many deceive others much &
deceive themselves much more. Nothing is likely to hinder you more effectually from attaining grace than ungrounded conceits that you already have it, if you should nourish in your selves a false Faith, and false Hope, they would be so far from saving you, that they would fasten you the more strongly in Sathans Chains, whereby he will the more unper∣ceivably and inevitably drag you unto Hell. And think if you should go out of the World, under a mistake with fair, but groundless hopes of Heaven, and shall find your selves unalterably judg'd by God unto Hell, how this will render the lose of Heaven the more bitter, and the pains of Hell the more grievous; the disappointment of happiness, especially so great happiness, and to be overtaken with misery, especially so great misery, and that when all means are cut off for ever, of attaining the one or avoiding the other, this will be unspeakable vexations. And let me tell you, that it is better to be mistake on the other hand than on this, it is bet∣ter to fear when you are gracious, than to hope when you are ungracious, a dangerless fear is better than a fearless danger, the former may cause you to go droopingly for a while towards Heaven, the later if it cause you to go merrily, it will also cause you to go securely and surely to Hell. I need not spend time (neither may I least this Volume swell to big) in telling you that Idolaters, and Adulterers, and Drunkards, and Swearers, and Blasphemers, and Scoffers of Religion, and Persecu∣ters of Gods People, and Thieves, and Murderers, and Lyars, and Apostates, and profane persons, and all the more notorious Workers of Iniquity shall have their part in the Lake, which burneth with
Fire and Brimstone; amongst whom if any of you who ast your eyes upon these lines be numbered▪ and your conscience with a slight reflection do ac∣cuse you herein, give me leave to hold you a little by the arm and ask you why so fast? what mean this hast? why so furious? what means this eager pursuance of lust? Do you know whom you serve? and do you think what your wages will be? do you know what is before you? do you see the end of a sinful course? do you know what Hell is? Is it desirable to dwell with devouring Fire? do you think to escape in this way? But the awakening Use is afterward But let me beseech you that are more sober, and although professors of Religion to examine your state, take heed you do not deceive your selves, and thereby undo your selves irrecoveably. Have you been under convictions of Sin? and these followed with contrition! and that backed with found hu∣mialiation, such as hath rendered Sin above all things most odious, and your selves of all other persons most vile in your own eyes? have you had conviction of Christ's Righteousness! and this working hungering desires after him, and these ac∣compained with Faith, and that bringing you to Christ, choosing him as ost precious and needful for you, casting your selves upon him, with a re∣nouncing of your own righteousness, accepting of him and his righteousness; resigning up your selve unto him, putting your neck under his Yoke? have you received the spirit enabling you to pray, mor∣tifying Sin, and quickning you unto all the duties of new obedience. Hereby you may know the change of your estate.
If your hearts remain unhumbled, unbroken for ; If you are strangers unto the work of Faith, nd never truely closed with Jesus Christ; if you re without the Spirit of Christ, and under the power, the reigning power of any Sin; if you live in the neglect of prayer secret and with others, and of the great Salvation, which the Lord Jesus hath purchased, if you have a form of Godliness, but are without the power thereof, you will be found foolish Virgins at last, which will have no admit∣tance into the Bride-chamber, you will be found hypocrites, whose portion is the burning Lake, and it will be impossible for you to escape the damna∣tion of Hell. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? CHAP. VII. 2. Use of admiration at the security the wicked, showing the cause thereof. ARe the burnings of Hell so certain, being threatned by God! are they so dreadful, beyond any burnings that ever have been, both in regard of feirceness and duration? and are they in∣deed prepared for the wicked, and all graceless, Christless persons as their deserved portion? and are the most of the children of Men wicked, ungraci∣ous, unrighteous, unregenerate, unbelievers, who are already condemned to this place of torment. Ioh. 3. 18. And by consequence every moment, while such, in danger of being drag'd sorth to exe∣cution? Here then we may sit down, and wonder at the senslesseness and carnal security of such per∣sons,
especially of those who sit under the light of the word, which doth make discovery of all thi most plainly unto them; what ever their danger be, what ever their Sins which have deserved Hell, what ever Gods threatnings of everlasting burn∣ings, what ever execution there is, and hath been upon other Sinners like themselves, yet they are without any fear, they are fast asleep in Sin and very secure: though their conscience be full of guilt, their hearts full of lust, their lives full of Sin; though their steps are carrying them forward in the broad way, which leadeth unto destruction; though death hath them upon the chase, and is at their heels, though the wrath of God pursueth them hard, and is at their backs, though the day, wherein they must give an account, and be punished for their ini∣quity, hasteneth greatly, and the Judge standeth at the door; yet they care not, they fear not, none of these things do move them, none of these things do trouble them; they eat and drink, and sleep, and buy and sell, and plant and build, and go on in a sinful course, as if they should live here eternally, or as if their Soul should perish with their body, and all these things foretold in the Word, concern∣ing future retributions were but meer fables. First, Some are thus secure, through an Athisti∣cal perswasion that there is no God; because they are enemies unto God, and live in a course of Rebel∣lion against him, and so it is their Interest and de∣sire that there should be no God, therefore they do what in them lyeth to work themselves unto this perswasion: there are too many in our age who endeavour to wear off all sentiments of a deity from their mind's that they might Sin freely with∣out
any check and control, that hereby they might arm themselves against the thrusts and wounds, which the Sword and Arrows of Gods threatnings would otherwise give unto them, and that by this means they might still the noise of their clamorous and accusing consciences, which otherwise would give them no rest under such Heaven-daring provo∣cations, as they daily are guilty of. But such per∣sons, if they will not believe the engravings of God, which are upon the face of the Universe, the impress of infinite power, and an invisible Deity on his works, which are visible unto the eye; they shall not remain long under their Atheistical apprehen∣sions, but he will make them to know and feel that there is a God by the immediate impressions of his wrath upon their Souls, and the dreadful flames of Hell-fire, which his breath will kindle to burn their bodies everlastingly. Secondly, Others are secure, notwithstanding their danger through a fond perswasion that there is no Hell, that there is no account to be given no judge∣ment to be passed, no punishment to be endured after this life, but that death puts a total end to their being, and that for ever. We read in the Book of Wisdom Chap. 2d. of the reasonings which such have: Our life is short, and in the death of a man there is no remedy, neither was there any man known to return from the Grave: For we are born at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter, as though we had never been; for the breath in our Nostrils is as smoke, and a little spark in the moving of our heart; which being extinguished our body shall be turned into ashes, and our spirit shall vanish as the soft Air: our life shall pass away as the trace of a Cloud, or like a
Mist driven by the Beams of the Sun; our time is a very shaddow that passeth away, and after our end there is no returning, for it is fast Sealed that no Man cometh again. Hence they are secure and encou∣rage themselves in wicked and licentious practices, Come on therefore let us enjoy the good things that are present, let us fill our selves with costly Wines and Ointments, and let no flower of the spring pass by us; let us crown our selves with Rosebuds before they be Withered, let none of us go without his part of our vo∣luptuousness, for this is our portion and our lot is this. Such persons they live like Beasts, and they would perswade themselves that they shall dye like beasts, that there is no immortality of the Soul, that there will be no resurrection of the body, and by conse∣quence no punishment of both in Hell; whereas right reason will evince, that the Soul being a spi∣ritual substance will survive the Body, which the wiser Heathens have acknowledged; and the Scripture doth clearly reveal this, and that the body shall be raised again at the last day, and both the soul and body of the wicked be eternally tormen∣ted in Hell; which Scripture being the Word of God, which no carnal reason could ever yet dis∣prove, these things are as certain as God as true. Thirdly, Others if they have not drunk in those Atheistical and Anti-Scriptural perswasions, which some are besotted and intoxicated withall, yet are secure and senseless of their danger, through their ignorance or misapprehensions of God; they con∣ceive him to be made up all of mercy, that there is no fury in him, that however sinful they are or have been, yet that God is more merciful, and no∣thing more easie than to obtain a Pardon, and if
they call on his name and cry for mercy, though at the last gasp (what ever their wicked lives have been) they shall be saved; not considering that God is Holy and jealous, just and righteous, as well as merciful and gracious; and that such as go on still in their trespasses have no share in his mercy or any of his promises. Fourthly, Others do lull themselves asleep upon the Bed of security, because of their own and others impunity, thus abusing Gods patience and long∣suffering, which should lead them to repentance, to grow more hardned and impenitent hereby, Rom. 2. 4, 5. Because Sentence against their evil works is not speedily executed, therefore their hearts are fully set in them to do evil and they are secure, Eccles. 8. 11. Not considering that though God be long-suffering, yet that he is not ever-suf∣fering; that patience long and much abused will at length break forth into fury; not considering that Gods vengeance, though it hath leaden heels, yet it hath Iron hands, and though the Fire of Gods an∣ger be long kindling, yet that it will be longer, yea for ever burning. Fifthly, Others quiet themselves for the present, and arm themselves against fears of Hell, through their intention of after repentance and reforma∣tion; however they indulge themselves for a while in their sinful course, yet they resolve shortly to become new Men and Women, to turn over a new leaf, and lead a new life, and to become as Holy and strict as the best; not considering that repen∣tance is not in their own power, and how they pro∣voke God hereby to deny the grace to them here∣after, and to remove from the means of working it;
not remembring how many thousands have perish∣ed with such intentions, which never have been put into execution. Sixthly, Others are quiet and secure through want of serious consideration, what their guilt and danger is; they fill and throng up their time so full with worldly business and secular employments▪ that they leave themselves no room or leasure for to think of Sin and their near-approaching death, and future wrath, and the eternal burnings of Hell, which they are in danger of. The cares of this world and the deceitfulness of riches do choke their Meditations in the first springing forth of them that no fruit doth come from them to perfection. Did but guilty Sinners sit down one quarter of an hour every day, and look upward to the angry God who frowns upon them, and down-ward to the flames of Hell, which are preparing for them▪ and forward to the last judgement, when they will be sentenced by the Judge to dwell with devouring Fire, and In∣habit everlasting burnings; and were perswaded that if they continue in Sin, they can by no means escape; surely the could not be so secure. Seventhly, Others are secure though they are going on in the way of Sin which leadeth to Death and Hell; because the most of the children of Men are going on in the same course, and they hope they shall fare as well as others; their Fore-Fathers trod in these steps, and their neighbours are their com∣panions in Sin, and if they be punished at last in Hell, they think they shall have company enough, and bear it as well as others; not considering how intollerable the wrath of God is by any, and that their company in Hell will be so far from alleviat∣ing,
that it will exceedingly heighten and aggra∣vate their pain and torment. Eightly, Others and the most are secure through their frequent practice of Sin, custom in Sin hath taken away the sense of Sin; their lusts have en∣thralled them, and their lusts have stupifyed them, however conscience did grumble at first, especially when they first ventured upon some more notori∣ous Sins, yet now they have shut the mouth of con∣science, they have charm'd and feared it as with a hot Iron, 1 Tim. 4. 2. Ninthly, Others are quiet and secure under their danger of Hell, because they are not so bad as o∣thers, because they do not run with others unto the same excesse of riot, and have escaped the more grosse pollutions, which are in the World through Iusts; especially if they carry some face of Religion too, if they have a form of Godliness, and employ themselves in all the ourward exercise of Devotion, and withal have had some inward flashy affections, and a counterfeit of all saving grace, though they never were truely humbled for Sin, emp∣tied of themselves, cut off the old stock, and truely by Faith engrafted into Christ, and from him draw vertue and spiritual influence, (which is proper to all those that are in Christ, and are freed from condemnation through him. Rom. 8. 1.) Thus the Devil and the deceitful hearts of men do be∣witch and befool the most, some of these ways, to sit still in peace and security, until destruction come upon them suddenly, and that without remedy; and they are not awakened out of their spiritual slumber until they are awakened in the midst of the flames of Hell.
CHAP. VIII. 3. Use of Reproof and Terrour for the awakening of the Wicked and Ungodly, out of their carnal security▪ HOw long will ye sleep O ye Sinners? How long will ye slumber in such imminent dan∣ger, ye Graceless and Christless persons? what sleep under the light? what sleep upon the brinks of the burning Lake? and will nothing rouze you, and awaken you out of this sleep? are you resolved it shall prove the sleep of death? shall it insensibly and effectually usher you to Hell before you are aware? have you been called already so long, so loud, so frequently, so fervently, and yet do you deafen your ear? have you been told so often of your guilt and danger, and yet harden your art? yet will you hold fast your sins, resolving not to let them go what ever they cost you? have your hearts been like so many brazen walls, beating back all the Arrows of reproof, and threatnings which have been shot at you? or are they like Cley and Mud, which groweth the more hard and obdurate under the Sun and Light of the Gospel which hath shined upon you? have no Heavenly dews and showers of the Word yet melted and softned you, no Fire and Hammer new-moulded and framed you? have you been threatned with Death, and Wrath, and Misery for ever, and yet not startled, yet stupid and senseless? O that yet at length you might be awakened, and by the Spirit of the Lord effectually perswaded
o lift up your eyes, and look a little before you, Younder, Younder! look Sinner younder! is a horrible burning Tempest driving towards thee, a dreadful burning Lake preparing for thee, but canst not thou see it; look thorow the perspective of So∣dom's burnings, when fire came down from Heaven, and Aetna's burnings when Fire came forth of the Earth, and this will discover something; but the perspective of the word will show it plain; if thou looest upwards with this perspective, thou maist see some glims of the Glory of Heaven, and if tho looest dowward wth it thou maist see some glimps of the Fire of Hell. Look doest thou not see a horrible deep and large pit filled with hor∣ribly burning Fire, and that Fire filled with damned Men and Women? Lay thy ear to the mouth of this pit, and har what the dolorous complaints, what the shreeks and yellings be of that cursed com∣pany! and doest thou not perceive thy self hastning forward in the way to this place of burning? and wilt thou go forward still? or wilt thou suffer thy self to be carried on furiously by thy impetuous lusts, until thou art fallen into this pit, and there be no posibility of ever getting forth again? But more particularly I shall lay before you some considerations for the awakening of the se∣cure. First, Think how doleful a day of trouble and adversity is like to be to you, if you be then in dan∣ger of Hell, where will the quiet and security which now you have appear on that day? possibly it may last and abide with you so long as the warm Sun of prosperity doth shine upon you, in the spring of youth and sensual delights, whilst you thrive and
flourish in the World, whilst your friends and flatterers are about you, your health and out∣ward peace doth remain with you; but you may live to see all your outward comforts lye dead be∣fore you, and hid in the Grave from your sight for ever: your Sun of prosperity may set at the noon∣day of your lives, and a black night of adversiry may come upon you; stormy Winds and a bitter cold Winter of trouble and affliction may assault you, & wither all your sensual pleasures like the herb and Flower of the Field: some unlooked-for-pro∣vidence may blast your estate, and your name, be∣reave you of your dearest Friends and Relations, and withdraw all the fewel and provisions which you have been storing, and laying up for your flesh and sensual satisfactions: how well and strong so ever you are for the present, an unexpected Sickness and Death-threatning distemper may suddenly in∣vade you, and bring you down to the sides of the pit, and fill you with such pain and grief as no out∣ward enjoyments shall be able in the least to aswage: And then think with your selves, you that are in danger of Hell, what dread is like then to seise upon you like an armed man, which you will not be able to resist; then your carnal security will fly away like a Bird or a Cloud, and vanish like smoke in the Air; then your false peace will be broken and torn to pieces, like the Spider Webs by the feirce Winds, as being utterly unable to resist the feirce blasts, and rougher assaults of an adverse estate. And oh how doleful and dismal is a day of trouble like to be to you, when all outward stays and comfort, and all nward quiet and peace shall fail together; when
there are storms abroad, and worser storms at home; great trouble without, and greater trouble within; when you shall fall under the scourge of outward affliction, and under the lashes of an ac∣cusing conscience; the fear of Hell and everlasting burnings is like to be more lively, and afflictive in a day of trouble, than when prosperity doth restrain conscience from doing it's Office. Secondly, Consider if you should escape the greater storms of outward affliction in your life, yet you cannot escape the stroke of death, and think how the apprehensions of future wrath and burnings are like to consume you with terrours at your later end, Psal. 73. 19. Death hath a grim aspect, and looks with a feirce countenance upon guilty Souls; and when this enemy shall assault and wound you, when your last sickness shall come & prove▪ mortal to you; when the Phisitian shall give you over and leave you, your friends shall mourn and stand weep∣ing about you, when death hath seised upon the extream parts of your body, and the cold clammy sweats are upon you, and then you apprehend the second death near yo, which will immediately fol∣low upon the first death, when you think that whilst Friends are conveying your body to your Grave, that Devils shall drag your Souls to Hell; how are you then like to awake in horrour, despair and ut∣ter confusion? the dying sobs and Goans of some guilty Sinners, when awakened at their entrance in at the port of death are dreadful, but the inward anguish of the heart is beyond all compass of con∣ceit, or expression of tongue. Thirdly, But think how fearful the seperation of your Souls and Bodies will be, think with what
dread your spirits will appear before God, when your consciences shall furiously charge you with guilt of all the Sins which ever you committed, and you have not one pardon to show, nor one word to answer for your selves; when being examined and accused and found guilty, you shall be condemned unto eternal punishment, think oh think what your horrour is like then to be. Fourthly, Think of the day of doom, when the Lord Jesus shall come. I mean when he shall come down from Heaven to judge the World; when the Graves shall be opened and you called forth to ap∣pear before him, and the Book of your conscience shall be opened, and all your Sins made manifest to the whole World, and having nothing to answer when you shall be Sentenced to everlasting Fire: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire pre∣pared for the Dvil and his Angels, and when the Lord shall then drive you out of his presence into Hell, O what will you shreeks and out-cryes be at that day? See my Book of Christ's certain and sud∣den appearance to Indgement. Fifthly, Think of the punishment of Hell it self, which you will be condemned unto; and that, First, What will there be taken from you. Secondly, What there will be denied unto you. Thirdly, What there will be inflicted upon you. First, Think what in Hell will be taken from you, all your riches will be taken away, riches will then take the wing and be gone, and you shall never set your eye upon them any more; you shall never buy and sell, and get gain any more, never purchase Houses and Lands, and Inheritance more, and not then have so much Land left, as whereon to set the
sole of your foot, all your money and estate wlil perish with your selves, and oh how poor and mi∣serable will you perceive your selves then to b when you are deprived of all your riches and trea∣sures on Earth, and instead thereof are made to pos∣sess treasures of wrath? your honour also will be taken away, and everlasting shame and contempt shall be poured upon you. Although you may be raised to a higher seat than the ordinary rank now, then you must stand upon even ground with the meanest, even such whom you would think scorn to set with the Dogs of your Flock, or to employ in the meanest office about you: the crown will then be pluckt from the Head, and the Robe be torn from the back, and all the honour of wicked great ones belaid in the dust; and they will find no more re∣spect in Hell than other men; wicked Princes and Noblemen, wicked Knights and Gentlemen will have none to bow to them there, and do them ho∣mage, and the most High-born Ladies that are not New-born (what ever they have here) will find no Courtship hereafter, but will be handled as rough∣ly ns meanest of their attendants. All your sensual delights and pleasures will then be at an end, they are now but for a season, Heb. 11. 25. Yea, but for a moment, Iob. 20. 5. Sometimes they fail be∣fore the life is at an end, be sure hereafter they shall have an eternal Period: In Hell there will be no Feasting and delicious fare to pamper the Flesh, no carowsing and drinking Wine in Bowles, no chant∣ing to the sound of the Viol, no singing, dancing and making merry; the glutton shall there have no sweet morsels, the drunkard no sweet draughts, no or so much as a drop of Water to cool and refresh
him: the wanton shall no more melt in laivious embraces, nothing will remain of all your sweet∣nesses and pleasures here, but the bitter remem∣brances accompained with unutterable grief and and grans, and the intollerable sting and bitings of the never dying-worm of conscience, what ever you have prized and pleased your selves withal here, you will then be stript of all, and oh how bitter will this be to lose all that which you now so much esteem and love, and place your chief happiness in? Secondly, Think what in Hell will be denied unto you; you shall be denied admission into the King∣dom of Heaven; when you see Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob, and many from the East, and West, and North, & South, come and sit down in the Kingdom of God; when you shall see all the Saints of all ages shine like the Sun, and be caught up in the Clouds to meet the Lord, and be crowned by him and received to inherit the Kingdom prepared for them, ye shall be shut out▪ no room will be found for you there; you could find no room for Christ in your hearts here, and he will find no room for you in his King∣dom hereafter, The loss of Heaven of that un∣speakable happiness, which the Angels and Saints shall have in the immediate Vision and Frition of God; when you come to understand what it is, will appear as many observe to be greater than the pu∣nishment of sense; especially this lsse will be most grievous unto you, who have had discoveries and proffers of it, but neglected and refused it, prefer∣ring some base lusts before it▪ O how will you then be ready to tear your selves to pices for madness and vexation!
Thirdly, Think what punishment in Hell will be inflicted upon you. First, The soreness and intollerableness of it. Secondly, The sureness and unavoidableness of it. Thirdly, The neerness of it. Fourthly, The everlastingness of it. First, Consider the soreness and intollerableness of Hell's torments, and that both of the pain, which there you shall feel in your bodies, and of the an∣guish which shall be put upon your souls; If you be found amongst the Wicked and Ungodly at the last, your bodies shall be tormented in every part in the flames of Hell-fire; no pain is more grievous now to the body, than the pain of Fire; but what is the extinguishable Fire on Earth, in comparison with the unquenchable Fire of Hell? what is the Fire of Mans kindling in comparison with the Fire of Gods kindling? what is Fire fed by Wood in comparison with Fire fed by the breath of God? no Fire here can torment like to the fire which God hath prepared for the bodies of the wicked here∣after. You have seen fiery Ovens, and you have heard of Nebecadnezzars fiery furnace, should your bodies now be thrown into such fires, you would find them horribly painful, but the pains of Hell∣fire will be ten thousand times more horrible and tormenting: your bodies now cannot endure much pain, without expiring which puts an end there∣unto; but hereafter God will strengthen your bo∣dies to endure, they shall have greater strength and quicker sense, and so more capacity for pain, and they shall be filled to the uttermost of their capa∣city;
your bodies shall never dye, and they sha be filled with pain in extremity, and that to eter∣nity; this will be very sore. All the tortures that ever were invented by the most mischievous mind, or executed by the most cruel Tyrant on any whom they have had the greatest spleen unto, are not so much as the least gentle touch in compa∣rison with the torture, which the least member of the damned shall endure in Hell. Some of you have had extream pain in your heads, others have had extream pain in your bowels, others have been extreamly afflicted with pain in your legs; others have felt much torture with the pain of your teeth; but if you live and dye in Sin, you shall be extreamly and eternally tortured with pain in every part, your eyes shall be full of pain, your tongues full of pain, your hands full of pain, your heads full of pain, your backs full of pain, your bellies full of pain, your feet full of pain, from the crown of your head unto the sole of your feet, no part shall be free; your bodies shall roul and tum∣ble in flames, and there burn with horrible pain, and yet never be consumed. But the anguish of your Soul will far exceed the tortures of your bodies, and here words fail, con∣ceptions fall short; who can tell how the worm of conscience will bite! how dreadful the lashes of your consciences will be, when they are let loose (as Gods executioners) with full rage upon you? who can utterthe anguish you shall endure under the immediate impressions of God's wrath upon your souls; this will exceed what ever can be inflicted by the means of any second causes: The punishment of Hell fire will be very sore and intollerable, such
as are tender cannot without unutterable fear and grief bear the thoughts of being burned alive here on Earth, and oh the shrekings of such persons, when they have been brought to the fire, and the flames have begun to seise upon them! O I cannot endure it! O I cannot endure it! how intollerable then will Hell-fire be! many Martyrs have endured great tortures in their bodies with much patience, some were slain with the Sword; some burnt with fire, some scourged with whips, some stabbed with Iron forks, some their skins pluckt off whilst alive, some their tongues cut out, some stoned to death, some starved with hunger & cold, some dismembred and naked to the shame of the World; and yet in the midst of all their pains they have had a com∣posed minde; yea, sometimes have been filled with joy; God hath not suffered man to inflict upon them more than he hath given them strength to bea; but there will be no patience to undergo the pains of Hell; the spirit will uttterly sink under the the heavy burden and pressure thereof, especially the pressure of that pure and weighty wrath, which shall be immediately upon the soul. The terrours of conscience here and foretasts of wrath, are in∣tollerable in this World, Prev. 18. 14. The spirit of man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear? If the body be infirm and weak, full of distemper and pain, yet whilst the spirit is whole and sound, whilst there is peace within, the spirit may sustain this, and bear up under it: but if the spirit be wounded by the Arrows of the Al∣mighty shot into it, who can bear it? if God let fall some scalding drops of his wrath upon the spirit, if he kindle a spark of Hell-fire in ye conscience, who
can endure it? no Balm nor Physitian on Earth can cure such wounds, no Earthly riches or sensual de∣lights can aswage these inward griefs and horrours, which by the hand of God are imprinted upon the Spirit: when the wicked are filled with dispairful agonies, through apprehension of future approach∣ing wrath, and there remaineth nothing but a fear∣full looking for of Judgement and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, Heb. 10. 26. this is enough to sink the heart of the stoutest under it's burden. And if the wounds of the Spirit herebe so intollerable, what will those be which the Lord with such mighty force and by his immediate hand shall give hereafter? if you cannot bear some drops of God's wrath now, what will you do when the full Viols of Gods wrath shall be poured out upon you, if you be found under the guilt of sin? if you cannot endure the sparks of Hell-fire, how will you endure the flames, and most burning heat thereof? If the foretasts of Hell affect ye heart with such hor∣rour, and the fears thereof fill the Spirit with such amazement, what will Hell it selfs do when the pains and anguish thereof is beyond the greatest fears, and highest conceptions thereof? Should you fall into the hands of the most cruel Men to torture and Massacre you, this would be fearful; should you fall under the power of Devils to tear and rend you, this would be more fearful; but to fall into the hands of God, this will be most fearful, this you cannot bear, and yet if wicked you must bear it, and that to eternity, and can you sleep still in Sin, under the thoughts of such danger? Secondly, Consider the sureness and unavoidabie∣ness of Hell-fire; nothing is more sure than what
God hath revealed in his Word, and nothing more unavoidable than what God hath threatned; and such is the tormenting of the wicked and Ungodly in the flames of Hell-fire. Whilst you are here up∣on the Earth, there is a possibility of escaping fu∣ture torments; Pardon, Pace, and Salvation are attainable: If you lay your Sins to heart, if you confess and forsake them, you may find mercy; if by faith you apply your selves unto the Lord Jesus you shall not perish▪ but obtain eternal life. But if go on still in your trespasse, if you live and dye in a state of impenitency and unbelief, it will be impossible for you to escape: Indeed could you make you party good against God, could you ga∣ther forces together, and wage War against Heaven and obtain the Victory▪ you might avoid the threat∣ned punishment; but alas God is infinite in power, and will not permit any such attempts, you will not be able to hold up head or hand against him: who can stand in his sight when once he is an∣gry? God will bind all the Devils and wicked men and women together in chains of darkness, stronger than any Iron chains, and none shall be able to make any resistance. Could you hide your selves at the last day from his eye; could you fly from his pre∣sence into some remote corner, could you creep un∣der some Rock or Mountain, and there be covered from his view you might think to escape; but this cannot be, Gods eye will follow you, and his hand will reach you whither soever you go: Could you by your Prayers and Tears move God to compassi∣on, and prevail for mercy as now you may do, there might be some hopes of avoiding this punishment, but  Gods ear will be shut, and the doors
of mercy shut against you for ever; your knock∣ing at the door will be in vain, it will never be open∣ed, your cryes and prayers will be no purpose▪ they will receive no answer. Hereafter the punishment of Hell will be unavoidable by the wicked. Thirdly, Consider the neerness of this punish∣ment of Hell. The sands of your life are running apace; the time of your abode here is wasting very fast, your bodies will quickly be in the Grave, and if you dye in your Sins, your soul will be as quick∣ly in Hell. You cannot long escape this punish∣ment; You may shuffle the thoughts of God and future wrath out of your minde for a time, you may busie your thoughts about other thing; whilst you▪ are here; but all these things will shortly shrink away from you, and leave you naked, and you must stand before God to be judg'd by him, and to be condemned by him, and to be punished by him; God will meet you as a Bear bereaved of her whelps, and rend the caul of your heart, or like a roaring Lion, and rear you in pieces; when there shall be none to deliver; God will take you into his hand, and throw you out of his presence into the bottomless gulph of unquenchable burnings: me thinks this should awaken you. Fourthly, And lastly, consider the everlasting∣ness of Hell-fire, and your torment which there you must endure, if you be found in the number of unbelievers. The wrath of God will never be at an end, the Worm of your conscience will never dye, and the Fire of Hell will never go out; but the smoke of your torment will ascend up for ever and ever, when you have been the space of as many Years in Hell, as there Stars in the Firmament, as
there are drops of dew upon the Earth in the morn∣ing, as there are spires of Grasse which spring out of the Earth, as there are drops of Water in the Ocean, as are there Sands upon the Sea shore, your torments will be as far from being aswaged, and as far from being ended, as at the first minute of your entrance into this dreadful place. As there is an infinite space of place (if I may so call it to help our apprehensions) beyond the circumference of the Heavens, and the visible World in comparison with which ten thousand Millions of worlds would not fill up the space of the least speck: so there is an in∣finite space of duration beyond the circumference and bounds of time in comparison with which the duration of ten thousand Millions of worlds for ten thousand Millions of years, would not be so much as a Minute, or the least imaginable instant; and this whole eternity you if wicked must spend in extremity of torment; the real length of eternal torment cannot be measured, and the imaginary length will be greater (if I may so say) because of your misery. If a short time of misery here on Earth seem long, what will an eternity of misery seem to be in Hell? when the body is in health, and the Soul is sweetned with delight, time steals away insensibly, Years seem Months, Months Weeks, Weeks Days, Days hours; but when the body is sick and the Soul imbittered with sorrow, a short time seemeth long, and it passeth away slowly in our ap∣prehension, Hours seem Days, Days Weeks, Weeks Months, Months Years; how do we count the Clock, and reckon the Sands that fall in the glasse, and time seem to have a Leaden heel; how long then will the eternity of misery in extremity seem
to be? I believe that the space of one quarter of an hour in Hell will seem longer to the damned than a whole life of misery in this World; yea I think I may add that a Minutes pains in Hell will seem lon∣ger to the wicked than a thousand years of pleasures in Heaven to the Righteous, who will sweetly passe forward in the infinite duration of joy, without the least trouble or tediousness: so that the ternity of misery in Hell will be as it were a double, treble, yea thousand-fold eternity. Me thinks these consideration should startle all you that are asleep in Sin, me thinks they should make your hearts to quake, and every joint to trem∣ble; me thinks the Sinners in Zion should be affraid and fearfulness should surprize the Hypocrites, and I should hear some of you cry out, as Isa. 33. 14. Who among us shall dwell with devouring Fire? who among us shall Inhabit everlasting burnings? And as the Jaylor, Act. 16. 29, 30. When awakened by the Earth-quake, and the impression of guilt made by God upon his conscience; Sirs, what shall we do to be saved?
CHAP. IX. 4. Use of Comfort to the Righteous. SUch of you as are Righteous through the perfect Righteousness of Chri made yours by Faith, without the imputation o which (what ever righ∣teosness you may have within you, because imper∣fect) it is impossible you should escape the damna∣tion of Hell; you that are clothed with the white Robes of Christ's Righteousness, under which all your iniquities are covered; and withall have the Spirit of Christ given unto you, to work you into a conformity unto the Image of Christ in your rege∣neration and Sanctification, which are inseparably joyned unto justification by Faith; you may take comfort in this Doctrine, which is matter of such terrour unto the wicked and Ungodly. As in Sampsons Riddle out of the strong and feirce Lion, came forth Honey and sweetness: So this Doctrine which looks with such a feirce aspect upon those which are out of Christ, yet will yeild sweetness unto you which are in him, because there is no condemna∣tion unto them which are in Christ Iesus, Rom. 8. 1. Be∣cause Iesus hath delivered you from the wrath to come. 1 Thes. 1. 10. Who shall lay any thing to your charge, when God hath justified you? who shall condemn you when God hath acquitted you? Need you value then the wrath of men, when you are delivered from the wrath of God? Need you fear mens threatnings of temporal punishment, which can reach no farther then the body, when you are delivered from condemnation to the eternal pu∣nishment of Soul and Body in the Lake, which
burneth with Fire and Brimstone? what though you should lose your estates? yet since you are not in danger of losing your Souls; what though you should be thrown into a Prison on Earth? yet since you are not in danger of being thrown into the Prison of Hell, you may take comfort and the con∣sideration hereof may alleviate all your fears and grief upon the account of any pains and afflictions, which in this life are upon you, or you are in danger of. You may say of them all, these are not the torments of Hell, there are light, the other heavy these short, the other eternal. Lift up then your heads with joy: yet a little while and you shall see what a difference the Lord will put between you and the wicked; when they shall weep, ye shall laugh; when they shall mourn, ye shall be glad; when they shall cry and howl, ye shall sing and leap for joy; when they shall go with fighing to Hell, and everlasting horrour in their hearts, and all mirth and joy shall flee away from them for ever; ye shall come with singing to Heaven, and ever∣lasting joy in your hearts, and all sorrow and mourning shall flee away and never any more be found.
CHAP. X. 5. Use of Exhortation both to the Wicked and Righteous. ANd now Sinners what will you do? will you dare to go on in that broad way of Sin, which ere long will open under you, and let you down into the horrible gulp of unquenchable burn∣ings? can you be contented with a portion in this Life, and to receive all your good things here, and that Fire and Brimstone, and everlasting burnings shall be the portion of your Cup hereafter? will any pleasure of the Flesh and Sin for a season coun∣tervail that everlasting pain and misery, which will be the bitter fruit and consequent of them? Let me therefore exhort you without any delay to come out of the broad way of Sin, It is the way of Hell, and will you proceed any further in it? You that are profane and unclean, you that are Swearers, Sab∣bath-breaker, Scoffers of Religion, Persecutors of Gods people, Drunkards, Covetous persons, yea all you that are Hypocrites, that are impenltent and unbelieving persons, give me leave to stop you in your course, or rather hearken unto the voice of God in his Word, who calleth you to turn from your evil ways, that iniquity may not be your ruine. Come out of the broad way, and get into the nar∣row way. It hath a strait Gate, namely the Gate of Regeneration, this you most pass thorow; you must become new Creatures, get new hearts, and lead new lives, you must walk in the narrow way of mortification, self denial, new obedience, other∣wise
you will certainly be numbred amongst the damned, who will be everlastingly burned in the Fire of Hell; the passage is difficult, and the way narrow, but both are necessary; it is the passage from Death to Life, and the way from Hell to Hea∣ven: Nothing in the World is so absolutely ne∣cessary, as that which is necessary unto Salvation; better the belly be without food, than the heart be without grace; better the back be without raiment, than the Soul be without Righteousness; better be starv'd, than damned; better be hang'd than burn'd; better dye the most painful temporal death, than endure the pains of eternal death. What you should do that you may be saved from the everlasting burnings of Hell. I refer you for direction in my Book of Words, whereby you may be saved; because I have not room for large direction here. [But ch of you which read these Lines, who have passed thorow the strait Gate of Regeneration, and are got into the narrow way; you are safe, you are in the way to Heaven. Learn to admire free grace, which hath made the difference between you and Vilest Sinners; use your endeavour to bring others into the same way, commend to them the ways of God, both by your Word and example; and per∣seveer in these ways to your lives end; be faithful unto the death, that you may receive the Crown of Life, I shall shut up all with the words of the Apo∣stle, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore my beloved Brethr be stedfast and unmoveable, always abounding the work of the Lord; for as much as ye know your labour is not in vain in the Lord. When the wicked are sted∣fast and unmoveable in the ways of Sin, and no ar∣gument can perswade them to forsake those ways,
when they abound always in the work of the Devil, and the wages which they shall reap will be death, and wrath, and everlasting burnings in Hell: be you stedfast and unmoveable in the ways of the Lord▪ be not allured by flatteries, not affrighted out of them by threatnings, but abound more and more in the work of the Lord, and your reward shall be everlasting life and Glory in Heaven. FINIS.
