W1732 R222005 99833244 37719
A PARAPHRASE AND COMMENTARY Upon all the EPISTLES OF THE New Testament. By DANIEL WHITBY, D. D. And CHANTOR of the Church of SARUM. LONDON, Printed by W. Bowyer, for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in Pater-Noster-Row. M.DCC.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SALISBƲRY, Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the GARTER, AND Praeceptor to his Highness the Duke of Glocester. MY LORD, THough since I had the Happiness to be admitted to an Acquaintance with a Person of your Character and Merit, and have had a large share of your Fa∣vour, I have had Obligations to make some publick Acknow∣ledgment of it; yet had I never so fair an Opportunity to do it as this Work, which now craves your Lordship's Accep∣tance, doth afford. For, such a particular Veneration and profound Affection for the sacred Records as your Lordship, upon all occasions, shews, may not only render this Attempt, to add some Light unto them, acceptable, but even cover the Imperfections that you must needs discover in it. Since therefore it is customary to dedicate Works of this na∣ture to Persons of great Eminence in Station and more raised Worth, I thought my self obliged to set forth these Labours under your Lordship's Patronage, not only to express my Grati∣tude, but also out of Justice to that Goodness which mov'd
your Lordship not only to peruse, but to approve this Work, and to suggest many things, which otherwise would have been wanting to it. I am here carried to say somewhat of the Pattern you set us in an unwearied Diligence in the Discharge of your high Fun∣ction; but I know you cannot bear it, and that you had much rather see your Clergy imitate you in this, than hear them com∣mend you for it. I will therefore rather study from your Ex∣ample, how to do my own Duty, than publish to the World how you do yours. That God would still continue your good Lordship as great a Blessing as you are an Honour to our Church, and give you a sure but late enjoyment of those celestial Blessings to which your Soul, by its devout Affections, and indefatigable Labours still aspires, is the continual Prayer of, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obliged, most humble, and obedient Servant, DANIEL WHITBY.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. BY way of Preface to this Work, some things there be of which I think fit to advertise the Reader, and some things in which I shall beg his fa∣vour. And, First, Because it may be useful to read the Epistles of St. Paul not in the order in which they are placed in our Bibles, but rather in that order of time in which they were written, I here think fit to place them according to that order, following the Chronology of Bishop Pearson. A. D. 52. The first Epistle to the Thessalonians. A. D. 53. The second Epistle to the Thessalonians. A. D. 57. The first Epistle to the Corinthians. The Epistle to the Galatians. The second Epistle to the Corinthians. The Epistle to the Romans. A. D. 62. The Epistle to the Ephesians. The Epistle to the Philippians. The Epistle to the Colossians. The Epistle to Philemon. A. D. 63. The Epistle to the Hebrews. A. D. 65. The first Epistle to Timothy. The Epistle to Titus. A. D. 67. The second Epistle to Timothy. I have in the Prefaces to these Epistles given the Reasons why I place the writing of them about the time assigned, only of the time of writing the Epistle to the Gala∣tians I have there said nothing: I therefore here subjoin the Reason why it is placed in the same Year with the first Epistle to the Corinthians, viz. because St. Paul, in his first coming to Galatia, converts them to the Christian Faith, Act. 16.6. at his se∣cond Advent, he strengthens the Brethren there, Act. 18.23. and in his Epistle to them, he marvels that they were so soon removed from him that called them to another
Gospel, Chap. 1.6. it therefore could not be written long after he had been with them to strengthen them, which yet was before he had begun his three Years abode at Ephesus, Act. 19.1.31. at the very close of which the first Epistle to the Corin∣thians is supposed to have been written. I desire the Reader to take an estimate of the true date of these Epistles, not from what may have slipt from me by the by in a Note, and hath been overlook'd in the review of my Papers, but from what is here set down, and is confirmed in the Prefaces to these Epistles. The Use that may be made of observing this order I shall exemplifie in two Instan∣ces; of which the 1st, Is that of Demas, concerning whom Dr. Lightfoot, Harm. p. 137. Beza, Est∣hius, and others, say, that though he left St. Paul for a season, yet after he return∣ed to him: Because, say they, in two Epistles written after that to Timothy, in which he is said to have forsaken him, having loved this present world, 2 Tim. 4.10. he is reckoned among the Co-workers with St. Paul, viz. Col. 4.14. Philem. 24. but I have destroyed the foundation of this Argument, by establishing the opinion of the Ancients, that the 2d Epistle to Timothy was the last that St. Paul writ; and therefore the opinion of Chrysostom, Theodoret, OEcumenius and Theophylact, that he did  afterwards become slothful, and, saith OEcumenius, returned again  to Heathenism, is the more probable. The 2d relates to that Opinion of Grotius, that St. Paul spake, for a time, as if he had believed that the day of Judgment might happen in his time, and that this is proved from, 1 Cor. 15.53. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3. Whereas in his second Epi∣stle to the Thessalonians, writ four Years before those to the Corinthians, he saith what is sufficient to shew he could not be of that opinion, or have declared any thing of that nature, and therefore could not afterwards say any thing to that purpose. See the Note on 1 Thess. 4.17. Secondly, I did intend to have examined all the various Readings which have so been industriously collected by Dr. Mills, as far as they concerned these Epistles, reducing them under these two Heads. 1st, Such as, though they should be granted to be various Readings, are yet of no concern as to any matter of our Faith or Practice, under which Head I think the greatest part of them may be safely ranked. 2dly, Such as though some manuscript Copies may have varied in transcribing the sacred Records, yet have we sufficient Reason to believe the reading we retain is genuine, and sutable to the original Copies. Now this sufficient Reason will arise from these Considerations; 1. When all the Ancient Scholiasts or Commentators, St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, St. Jerom, OEcumenius, Theophylact, agree in the common Reading with us, no va∣rious Reading being observed either by them, or any of the Ancients who have writ before them; I think we have sufficient reason to retain the common Rea∣ding, whatever Manuscripts may have varied from it. See an Instance of this Rule, 1 Tim. 3.16. 2. When all the ancient Versions, the Syriack, Arabick, and Vulgar, do ac∣cord with us in the common Reading, and no Ancients observe that there was any other Reading; I think we have sufficient Reason to retain that Reading, whatever Manuscripts do vary from it. Of this see an Instance, Romans 9.5. And, 3. Where the various Reading spoils the sense of the Words, or is not well consistent with the Context, there, I presume, we have sufficient Ground to reject it as the Errour of the Scribe, and not to look upon it as a Variation in the Original, or received Copies of the sacred Text. See an Instance, Note on 1 Cor. 15.51. These Rules, I verily believe, will be sufficient to reduce various Readings into a little compass.
And these Rules I would have exemplified at large, could I have procured a Copy of that learned Work, but being unable to obtain that favour, I must be content to leave tha work undone till the time come, if ever it will come in my Days, that his Book may see the Light. Thirdly, I advertise the Reader that this work hath been retarded by the Animad∣versions of Mr. le Clerk upon the Reverend and Learned Dr. Hammond; which ha∣ving perused, I found so many things said in favour of the Arians, and so many un∣worthy Reflexions upon the Writings of St. Paul, that I chose rather to review and transcribe a considerable part of this Work, than suffer those things to pass with∣out an Antidote. I acknowledge him to be a learned Person, and honour his Parts, and I hope he will not be offended with me for being concerned for what I Judge to be the Truth, and for the honour of St. Paul, who has been somewhat rudely handled by him. Fourthly, That I have been so often forced to differ for the same Reverend Per∣son he attacks sometimes so indecently, is to me matter of regret; but it hath truly been observed by others, that this great Man had two darling Opinions, viz. that the Heresie of the Gnosticks, and the destruction of Jerusalem, were the great things to which no little part of these Epistles had Relation; in which I have offer'd my Reasons why I dissent from him, retaining still a just Veneration for his Parts and Piety: And if God enable me to perfect my Notes upon the Gospels, I shall in them accord more with him. Lastly, I advertise him that I have, as exactly as I could, made Indexes (1st) of all the Greek Words and Particles, (2dly) of all the Scripture Phrases explained, and (3dly,) of all the material Doctrines handled in these Annotations. The things in which I beg the Readers favour are: 1st, That where he finds, or thinks, that I have erred either in point of Doctrine, or in the interpretation of the Scriptures, as doubtless in the latter I have sometimes done, he would be so kind as to let me know my Errours, which, upon conviction, I will not only own, but do it with all due Acknowledgements and Thankfulness to him who shall do that kind office to me. 2dly, That if in any thing I seem to him to differ from the received Doctrine of the Church of England, as some may haply conceive I do in the Annotations on the 5th Chapter to the Romans, he would do me the justice to believe, that as he thinks I do, so I conceive I do not, contradict her Doctrine; and also would consider that even the Church of Rome allows her Commentators to vary from the sense of any particular Scripture on which they build their Doctrines, provided they say nothing which doth expresly contradict them. 3dly, That if he should receive any advantage from this Work, especially if it should be so happy as to suggest to him any thing which may render him the better Man, he would give God the Glory of it, and pray for, His Friend, and Servant, Daniel Whitby.
This BOOK contains, besides the Paraphrase and Commentary upon all the EPISTLES, A General Pre∣face, proving The Truth and divine Authority of the Epistles, And the Truth and Certainty of Christian Faith. And 5 particular Prefaces, 1. To the first Epistle to the Corinthians, asserting the Resurrection of the same Body that dieth, and answering the Objections against it. 2. To the Epistle to the Galatians, concerning the Nature of Faith, and touching Justification by Faith. 3. To the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, concerning the Man of Sin. 4. To the Epistle to Titus, concerning the Episcopal Jurisdiction of Timothy and Titus, and the Succession of Bishops in all Christian Churches. 5. To the Epistle of St. John, enquiring whether this Proposition, that Jesus is the Christ, be all that is necessary to be believed to Justification, or to make a Man a Member of Christ's Church and Body. And 4 Appendixes, 1. To the eleventh Chapter to the Romans, proving that there will be a general Conversion of the Jewish Nation to the Christian Faith. 2. To the sixth Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, touching the ne∣cessity of divine Assistance for the due Performance of our Duty, and ex∣plaining the Reason and the Manner of it. 3. To the first Chapter of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, proving that the eternal Punishment of those who die in their Sins is well consistent both with the Justice and the Goodness of God. 4. To the whole, touching the true Sense of the Millennium mentioned Rev. 20.4. ERRORS in Printing, of weight, Correct thus. GEneral Preface, Page xxviii. Line 48. for Perfections read Persecutions. Paraphrase and Comment. p. 25. l. 43. ob∣noxious r. obvious. p. 48. ch. 2. l. 44. for ex read en. p. 52. l. 56. them r. then. c. 2. l. 17. perfection r. protection. p. 67. l. 27. Commentations r. Commentaries. p. 74. l. 26. Aelian r. Aelia. p. 85. l. 33. the r. that, and so elsewhere. p. 87. c. 2. l. 7. songs r. tongues. p. 88. l. 41. and p. 311. l. 41. you r. them. p. 89. c. 2. l. 20. meals r. meats. p. 92. l. 3. is r. in. ibid. l. 20. saith r. say. p. 93. l. 40. that r. the, and so elsewhere. p. 96. c. 2. l. 53. Christians r. Churches. p. 111. c. 2. l. 20. es r. est p. 112. c. 1. l. 34. c. 2. l. 17. this r. his. p. 122. l. 53. and p. 178. l. 21. their r. your. p. 129. l. 29. Photinus r. Photius. p. 137. c. 2. l. 49. so r. to. p. 141. l. 41. and r. but. p. 143. l. 27. the r. this. p. 149. l. 25. Butnan r. Buthan. p. 208. l. 36. him r. them p. 217. l. 19. duly r. only. p. 223. l. 23. excepted r. accepted. p. 225. l. 33. so r. see. p. 276. l. 30. would r. could. p. 298. l. 34. to r. by. p. 305. c. 2. l. 25. educated r. endued. p. 311. c. 2. l. 51. from r. for. p. 314. l. 58. Gr. r. your. p. 330. l. 26. discovering r. dissolving. ibid. l. 33. he r. ye. p. 337. c. 2. l. 16. his r. this. ibid. l. 34. Redemption r. Re∣mission. ibid. l. 36. Rights r. Riches. p. 342. l. 15. with r. what. ibid. l. 47. to r. of. p. 443. l. 6. Regal r. Roman. p. 473. l. 24. Argument 4th r. 4thly. p. 378. l. 35. when r. whence. p. 384. renewing r. removing. p. 393.  r. . p. 395. only r. souls. ibid. cunctis r. tantis. p. 405. l. 9. Churches r. Characters. ibid. l. 15. still he r. till his. p. 406. l. 33. your r. year. p. 407. l. 50. interfecit r. interficiet. p. 477. l. 15. new r. old. p. 485. l. 44. where r. vain. p. 630. l. 21. Apo∣stle  Epistle. p. 649. c. 2. l. 11. servile r. fervent. DELENDA. Pag. 53. lin. 36. del. for. p. 103. l. 8. del. and. p. 141. l. 26. del. that. p. 307. l. 15. del. of. p. 419. l. 7. del. all. p. 484. l. 11. del. of. ADDENDA. Pag. 128. l. 19. add saith. p. 248. l. 20. add works. p. 368. l. 3. add having. p. 375. l. 6. add and. p. 382. l. 13. add his. p. 527. c. 2. l. 5. add be. p. 566. c. 2. l. 27. add. not. p. 581. l. 11. add. five.
THE General PREFACE, CONCERNING The Divine Authority of these EPISTLES, and the Truth of Christian Faith. CONTENTS. The General Proposition, That the Apostles indited these Epistles by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost. This Proposition is explained by a Comparison of this Assistance with the Gift of Prophecy vouchsafed to the Pen-men of the Old Testament. §. I. How far this divine Assistance is asserted as to an Inspiration of Suggestion, and as to an Inten∣dance of Direction. §. II. No slips of Memory, no determination of matters of Pra∣ctice from Rules of Humane Prudence only without this direction, or intendance of the Holy Spirit, no Arguments that are unconclusive, must be admitted in these Wri∣tings. §. III. This divine Assistance is proved (1.) From what they do assert con∣cerning their own Doctrines and Directions. §. IV. (2.) Of the Holy Ghost ena∣bling them to indite them. And (3.) From our Saviour's Promise to send the Com∣forter to them, to teach them all things. § V. (4.) From the End for which they were indited, viz. to be a standing Rule of Faith and Manners to Christians of all future Ages. §. VI. (5.) From the Testimony of the Christians of the first Ages, who still owned, and therefore received them as such. §. VII. Corollary, That what is de∣livered in these Epistles as necessary to be believed or done, must be as necessary to be believed and done, as what is contained in the Gospels: That there are some things necessary to be believed and done contained in these Epistles, which are not clearly delivered in the Holy Gospels. §. VIII. The Truth of Christian Religion proved, (1.) From what our Saviour promised, and undertook, and what the Apostles de∣clared concerning the Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost. §. IX. (2.) From plain matter of Fact concerning this Effusion of the Holy Ghost, and his miraculous Gifts related in the Acts of the Apostles. §. X. (3.) From the like Assertions con∣cerning them in the Epistles. §. XI. (4.) From the confident Appeals of the Apo∣stles, and primitive Professors, to these Gifts, in their Contests and Debates with Friends and Adversaries, Believers and Rejecters of the Christian Faith. §. XII. (5.) From the Prayers and Thanksgivings made for them, the Exhortations and Directions given in these Epistles concerning these miraculous Gifts. §. XIII. (6.) From what is required to be done, and suffered by all Christians upon no other En∣ducements or Encouragements than what depended on the Truth and Certainty of those Gifts. §. XIV. That these Epistles were indited whilst the Apostles lived, and are proved genuine by more authentick Arguments than can be produced for any Book, Writing, Charter, Law, or Statute. The external Arguments to prove them
genuine. §. XV. The internal Arguments. §. XVI. The Truth of Christianity pro∣ved (7.) From a particular Consideration of these Gifts: As (1.) The Gift of healing. §. XVII. (2.) Of ejecting Devils out of Men, their Temples, and their Oracles. §. XVIII. (3.) From the Gift of Tongues. §. XIX. (4.) Of Prophecy. §. XX. (5.) Of discerning Spirits. §. XXI. That these extraordinary Gifts were conferr'd upon all other Churches not mentioned in these Epistles. §. XXII. That they continued in the two first Ages of the Church. §. XXIII. What Engagements the Truth of Christianity lays upon us to live sutably to the Rules delivered in these Sacred Records. §. XXIV. THAT the Things contain'd in these Epistles may have their due effect and influence upon us, I shall, as well as I am able, endeavour, 1. To establish their Divine Authority. Whence it will follow, 2. That the Doctrines and Instructions deliver'd in them are to be own'd as the Rules and Doctrines of our Lord, as truly as are any Doctrines delivered in the Gospels; and are as necessary to be believ'd and practis'd by all that bear the Name of Christians. My first Assertion therefore is, §. I. That the Apostles indited these Epistles by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost: and that as the immediate succeeding Ages did, so we at present securely may rely upon them as a Rule of Faith. And here I shall consider, 1. How this Assistance may fitly be explained. 2. How far it is necessary, or reasonable to assert it. 3. What Evidence may be offer'd to confirm it. For Explication of this Divine Assistance, let it be considered, 1. That Prophecy is sometimes represented as the Word of the Lord, and he is said to speak to the Prophet; and sutably to this Metaphor, some Illustration of the Assistance of the Ho∣ly Spirit may be made from the Analogy it bears to humane Conversation, thus: That as we convey our Thoughts one to another by such Words as by the Organs of Hearing make such a Motion on their Brain to whom we speak, as gives them an Idea of the Words we utter, and by them of the things which by those Words are signified; and so 'tis the Impression made upon their Brain which doth communicate our Thoughts unto them: so when it pleaseth God to reveal his Will to any Person, it seemeth only necessary that he talk inwardly with them, that is, that he make such a Motion on their Brains as giveth them a deep and clear Idea of that which he intendeth to make known unto them, only the Impression must be then made in such a manner and degree, and with such Circumstances, as may make it cer∣tain to the inspired Person, that it derives from God. Now seeing when we hear the Voice of any one, or receive a Letter from him, we may be certain from the Knowledge we have of his Voice or his Hand-writing, that it is he indeed who speaks or writeth to us; we may very well conceive that God can easily give such distinctive Marks of what he inwardly speaks to us, or writes upon the Tables of our Hearts, as shall enable us to discern what he imprints upon them, from any Impression that shall otherwise be made upon them. 2. Sometimes the Prophet is in Scripture styled a Seer, and his Word a Vision; and then the Parallel, or the Analogy, runs thus. As we see by virtue of a Light reflecting the Species of Things upon the Retina of the Eye, and thence deriving a peculiar Motion to, and ma∣king a distinct Impression on the Brain; so may the Prophet be supposed to see what God reveals unto him by a like Motion of the Holy Spirit made upon his Brain concerning it. And as it is as easie to propose a material Object to the View, as to describe it by our Words, so must it be as easie for God to dart such an Impression or inward Light upon the Brain of the Prophet, or spiritual Man, as shall give him a more bright and sensible Idea of things, than if he did perceive them by the Ear, or even view them by the Eye. And as we more ex∣actly discern a sensible Object by the View, than we know it by a description of it without that View; so the Jews say that Prophecy  in Vision, is more excellent than that which comes only  by Dream, or in a Dream, in which we seem to hear one talking with us. Now though this Impression may be sufficient to convince the Prophet, and inspired Per∣son, that his Revelation did indeed derive from God, yet since this Revelation was intended not for himself, but for the use of others; he, with the Revelation, must be enabled by some convincing Proof to evidence to those who were concerned to embrace it, that he was sent in∣deed by God with such a Message to them. Now of this they only could be satisfied by some outward Marks and Notes, of which they, by their Senses, were enabled to judge; viz. the Miracles wrought for Confirmation of his Testimony, or some Prophetical Prediction of
something future and contingent, exactly verified in the Event. And thus saith the Apostle, was their Preaching confirmed to the World; God bearing witness to them, both with Signs and Wonders, and with divers Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost according to his Will, Heb. 2.4. The ways of Prophecy under the Old Testament, seem to be comprehended under these four Heads, viz. either the Prophets received their Revelations in a Dream, or Trance, or in a Vision, or by a Voice from Heaven, or by the secret Suggestion of the Holy Ghost. Now some of the Apostles had their Visions, either by day, as Peter, for an extasie fell up∣on him, and he saw the Heavens opened, and he heard a Voice saying to him, Arise Peter, kill and eat, Act. 10.11. and this is called , a Vision, ver. 17. And by this, saith He, God taught me to call no Man common or unclean, ver. 28. Or by Night, thus a Vision of the Night was seen by Paul, and a Man speaking to him in the Vision of the Night, Act. 16.9. They had also the Spirit speaking to them; for the Spirit said to Peter, Behold, three Men seek thee; Arise therefore, and go with them, nothing doubting, for I have sent them, Act. 10.20, 21. And sometimes they had Visions and Revelations of the Lord, either by way of Rapture to him, 2 Cor. 12.2. or of Converse with him, as when Christ said to St. Paul, My Grace is suf∣ficient for thee, ver. 9. Here then are the three Kinds of Revelation granted to the Apostles; but then these things were mostly occasional and accidental to them, in respect of their A∣postolical Function. Only the case of the Apostle Paul must here admit of an Exception; for it being necessary for an Apostle, that is, a Witness of Christ's Resurrection, to have seen the Lord risen from the Dead, according to those Words, Am I not an Apostle? have I not seen the Lord? 1 Cor. 9.1. and for an Apostle, not of Man, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.1. to re∣ceive his Message immediately from the Lord Jesus, Christ speaks thus to him, I have ap∣peared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister and a Witness, both of those things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee, Acts 26.16. Which Words contain a Promise of an immediate Instruction from Christ in his Apostolical Function: Whence this Apostle declares, confirming that his Declaration with an Oath, The Gospel which was preached by me was not after Man; for I neither received it of Man, neither was I taught it (by Man,) but (only) by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.11, 12. He therefore had his Message from Christ, as Moses had from God, Christ speaking to him mouth to mouth, &c. Num. 12.7. But yet that which enabled them for the Inditing all their Epistles to th Churches, or Per∣sons to whom they were sent, was the internal and powerful Assistance of the Holy Spirit. §. II. To proceed then to the Second Enquiry, How far 'tis necessary or reasonable to as∣sert the Divine Assistance of the Holy Spirit, or his inspiration of these Sacred Writers. To this I shall Answer, by premising a distinction of the Jews, between those Sacred Writers who were Prophets properly so called, and the Cherubim or holy Writers, who penn'd their Compositions by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost. To the Prophets properly so called, they ascribe an immediate Suggestion and Represen∣tation in their fancy, and imaginations, of the things which they delivered as from the Mouth, and in the Name of God, he keeping still alive upon them the Images and the Re∣semblances of the Visions which they saw, till they were penn'd, and imprinting on their Me∣mories the Messages which they delivered by his Command to the People. Hence, when the Roll of Jeremy was burnt, he was enabled to dictate again to Baruch the same words, Chap. 36.32. And this I believe to be true concerning all the Visions they declare they saw, and all the Messages they deliver with this Preface, Thus saith the Lord, or The Word of the Lord came to N. N. saying; but I do not think it necessary, with reference to the Historical Things related in the Writings of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, which the Jews stile the former Prophets, or with respect to the Historical Relations contained in the Prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, &c. To the Cherubim, or Holy Writers who penn'd their Writings by the assistance of the Holy Spirit, they ascribe: First, An impulse from God to write, or to compose them, but such as left them to the use of their own Words, and to the exercise of their Reasons. 2dly, A superintendency of the Holy Spirit over them, and a Divine Assistance still cleaving to them in those Compositions, so that they should not be obnoxious to any Error or Mistake in what they did indite; that Assistance which they ascribe to their Prophets by later Writers, is called an Inspiration of Suggestion, the Second, or the Assistance of the Chetubim, an inspiration of Direction only. And this Assistance was thought inferior to that of Prophecy, not as to the certainty of the Revelation, or the subject Matter, but only as to the degree and measure of it; for be∣cause there was in these Compositions no visum Propheticum, i. e. no Vision exhibited, nor
did they speak in this high strain, Thus saith the Lord, therefore they thought they were not to be stiled Prophets in the proper acceptation of the Word. And I conjecture that it is for this latter Reason only, that they put the Prophet Daniel not among the Prophets, but the Hagiographi or Sacred Writers, because he never useth these Expressions, Thus saith the Lord, or saith, The Word of the Lord came unto me; since otherwise in Visions he was scarce inferior to any of the other Prophets. Nor is it easie to conjecture in what this way, whe∣ther of Revelation, or Divine Assistance, and Inspiration by the Holy Ghost, should be infe∣rior to the former. For, First, Sure it is no disparagement to this way, that Persons acted by it do not express themselves inDr. Smith of Prophecy, ch. 7. p. 231. Parables, Similitudes, and Riddles, but use a more familiar Language, and appear in a more simple undisguising Dress, and so more advantageously condescend to the capacity of the Reader. Nor, 2dly, That it doth not act so much on the Imagination and the Fancy,Ibid. but is princi∣pally seated in the higher and purer Faculties of the Soul, which is the second Difference assign'd between them. Nor, 3dly, That it chiefly moveth the Inspired PersonIbid. to dictate Matters of true Piety and Goodness, of Vertue, Wisdom, and of Prudence; these Differences, if assigned truly, seem to me to be advantages of this Assistance, above that which usually was afforded to the an∣cient Prophets, rather than Tokens that it was really inferiour to the Inspiration they enjoy'd. And this will be more evident, if we compare this Assistance of the Holy Spirit with that Gradus Mosaicus, which the Jews generally account the highest, or supreme Degree of Pro∣phecy, and is recorded in these Words, If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known to him in a Vision, and will speak to him in a Dream. My servant Mo∣ses is not so, who is faithful in all my House; with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even ap∣parently, and not in dark Speeches, and the Similitude of the Lord shall he behold, Matth. 12.6, 7. Whence the Jews gather these several Excellencies of the Prophetick Gift of Moses above what was vouchsafed to the other Prophets, viz. First, That all other Prophets prophesied by Dream, or by Vision,Dr. Smith, ch. xi. Maim. Fund. Leg. c. 7. but Moses prophe∣sied when he was waking, and standing. Now this also did the Spiritual Person, moved by the Holy Ghost. 2dly, That other Prophets prophesied by the Hand of an Angel,Ibid. and therefore saw what they saw in Parables, and dark Speeches; but Moses spake immediately from the Mouth of God, and without Parables, or dark Speeches; and so also did the Spiritual Per∣son speak under the Gospel Dispensation, not by an Angel, but by that Spirit which search∣eth the deep things of God, not in Parables and dark Riddles, but with great plainness of Speech. 3dly, That all the Prophets were afraid, and troubled, and fainted, but Moses was not so: Nor was it so with our Apostles. Moreover, There was Strength, say they, in Moses to un∣derstand the Words of the Prophecy, and so was there also in the Prophets to understand the Revelations of the Spirit. So that you see, this way of Assistance gave to the Pen-men of the New Testament all these Prerogatives of Moses above the other Prophets; and so I know not why it should be reckoned inferiour to their way of Prophecy upon those very accounts for which the way of Prophecy vouchsafed to Moses is preferred above them, espe∣cially if we consider that St. Peter lays this as the true Foundation of their Credibility, that they spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. But 'tis of no great moment to insist on this Comparison, since the Sacred Writers of the Second Order stiled Hagiographi, are said to be so far attended with the Divine Assistance in their Compositions, as that they could not be obnoxious in them to Errour or Mistake in what they writ, which is abundantly sufficient to render all their Compositions a certain and unerring Rule of Faith in what they have delivered as the Object of it. To proceed then to the consideration of the Distinction hinted before, viz. of Inspiration by Suggestion, and Inspiration of Direction only. I say then, First, That where there is no antecedent Idea, or Knowledge of the things written for the good of others, to be obtained from Reason or a former Revelation, an Inspiration of Sug∣gestion must be vouchsafed to the Apostles, to enable them to make them known unto the World. But where there is an antecedent Knowledge of the things to be Endited, it can be only necessary, that God should either immediately, or by some special Occasions, excite them to indite those things, and should so carefully preside over, and direct their Minds whilst Writing, as to Suggest, or bring into their Memories such things as his Wisdom thought fit to be written, and should not suffer them to err in the Delivery of what is thus
indited in his Name, or as Apostles of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore, 2dly, In all their Revelations of Mysteries, or things which could not otherwise be made known to them, either by natural Reason or antecedent Revelation, they must be acknow∣ledged to have had them by an immediate Suggestion of the Holy Spirit. Hence of these things the Apostle saith negatively, that the natural Man (who only judges of things by his natural Reason) cannot know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. i. e. they being Mysteries, can only be discerned by the Revelation of the Spirit, and positively that they spake the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the Wisdom hid from former Ages, which Eye had not seen, nor Ear heard, nor had it entred into the Heart of Man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.7. and that because God had revealed these things to them by his Spirit, ver. 9. they having received the Spirit of God, that they might know the things which are freely given to us of God, ver. 10. Thus was the Mystery of the Calling of the Gentiles into an equality of Priviledges with the believing Jews, made known unto them; for God by Revelation, saith St. Paul, made known to me the Mystery of Christ, which in other Ages was not made known as it is now revealed to his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, that the Gentiles should be fellow Heirs, and of the same Body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel, Eph. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. Chap. 1.9. — 6.19. Col. 1.26, 27. — 2.2. — 4.3, 4. So they knew the Mystery of the recalling the Jews, Rom. 11.25, 26. The Mystery of the Resurrection, i. e. the Quality of the Bodies to be raised, and the Order of it, with all the other special Cir∣cumstances mentioned 1 Cor. 15.1 Thessal. 4. and the Apostacy of the latter Times; for the Spirit speaketh expresly, saith the Apostle, That in the latter days Men shall depart from the Faith, 1 Tim. 4.1. This Inspiration of Suggestion must also be allowed St. John the Au∣thor of the Revelations, for he speaking only what was represented to him in Visions, or by Angelical Discourses or Apparitions, must have that Assistance which suggested these Ideas to him. But, 3dly, As for those things which they did know already, either by natural Reason, Educa∣tion, or antecedent Revelation, they needed only such an Assistance, or Direction as would secure them from Errour in their Reasonings, or in their Confirmation of their Doctrines by Passages contained in the Old Testament; and therefore a continual Suggestion must be here unnecessary. And indeed, one great Work they had upon their hands, both in preach∣ing the Gospel, and writing these Epistles, being to convince the unbelieving Jew, or to confirm the wavering Jew, or rectifie the Errours of the Judaizing Christian, the Gift of Knowledge of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, was very necessary to them, and there∣fore is deservedly reckoned among the primary Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and being so, we have reason to believe, that either the Holy Ghost suggested to their Memory those Scriptures which they used in these Epistles to convince them, or else presided so over them, as not to suffer them to make any Inferences from them which were not agreeable to the true intent and meaning of them; tho', at this distance of time, we may not always be able to discern the strength and clearness of the Consequence. And, 4thly, In writing the Historical Parts of the New Testament, or Matters of Fact relating to themselves, or others, 'tis only necessary, That what is there delivered as Matter of Fact, should truly be performed as it is said to have been done; but 'tis not necessary that these things should be related in that order of time in which they were performed, unless that also be affirmed of them; for this must be sufficient to assure us of the truth of what they thus delivered. Moreover, In writing the Discourses contained in these Books, it is not necessary that the very Words should be suggested or recorded in which they were first spoken, but only that the true intent and meaning of them should be related, tho' in diversity of Words. Tho' the Promise made to the Apostles by our Lord, That the Holy Spirit should bring to their re∣membrance , all things which he had said unto them, Joh. 14.26. doth fairly plead for this exactness in what they have delivered of our Saviour's Sermons; it being scarce ima∣ginable their Memory, without Divine Assistance, should exactly give us all that was spoken in such long Discourses. And hence we may account for the Objections against this Divine Assistance, arising from the 7th. of the Acts; for tho' I verily believe there is is no real Mistake in the Words of the Proto-Martyr, yet were it granted, That there is an Errour in his account of the Sepulchres of the Patriarchs, yet that affects not the Authority of St. Luke at all, provided he exactly hath related what was then said by St. Stephen, who was not chosen to be a Pen-man of the holy Scriptures. Lastly, From what is thus discoursed, it may appear, That I contend only for such an Intion or Divine Assistance of the Sacred Writers of the New Testament as will af∣f f the truth of what they writ, whether by Inspiration of Suggestion, or Direction o ut not for such an Inspiration as implies, That even their Words were dictated, or
their Phrases suggested to them by the Holy Ghost. This in some Matters of great moment might be so; St. Paul declaring, That they spake the things which were given them of God in the Words which the Holy Ghost teacheth, 1 Cor. 2.13. If that relate not to what the Holy Ghost had taught them out of the Old Testament. But that it was not always so, is evident both from the consideration that they were Hagiographers, who are supposed to be left to the use of their own Words, and from the variety of the Stile in which they write, and from the Solecisms which are sometimes visible in their Compositions; and more especially from their own Words, which manifestly shew, That in some Cases they had no such Suggestions from the Holy Ghost, as doth imply, that he had dictated those Words unto them. For instance, When St. Paul declar his Will or Purpose to do, what he was hindred by the Provi∣dence of God from doing, as when he saith to the Romans, When I go into Spain, I will come to you, chap. 15.24. I will come by you into Spain, ver. 28. For tho' he might, after his Enlargement, go into the West, where St. Clemens saith, Ep. ad. Cor. §. 6. He preached; and even into Spain, asCyril. Catechis. 17. p. 204. C. Cyril,Epiph. Haer. 27. p. 107. C. Epiphanius andTheodoret. in 2 Tim. 4.17. & Praefat. in Psalm 116. Theodoret say, He did; yet it is certain, he did not designedly go to Rome, in order to an intended Journey into Spain. And when he saith to the Corinthians, I will come to you when I pass thro' Macedonia, 1 Cor. 16.5. and yet confesseth in his Second Epistle, 2 Cor. 1.15, 16, 17. that he did not perform that Journey; for 'tis not to be thought the Holy Ghost should incite him to promise, or even purpose what he knew he would not perform. This also we learn from all those places in which they do express their Ignorance, or Doubtfulness of that which they are speaking of: As when St. Paul saith, I know not whether I Baptized any other, 1 Cor. 1.16. And again, , Perhaps I will abide, yea, and winter with you, 1 Cor. 16.6. And when St. Peter saith, By Sylvanus, a faithful Brother, as I suppose, have I written to you, 1 Pet. 5.12. For these Words plainly shew, That in all these things they had no Inspiration, or Divine Assistance. This lastly, may be gathered from all those places in which they only do express their Hope, and that conditionally, of doing this, or that, as in these Words, I hope to see you in my Jour∣ney, Rom. 15.24. I will come unto you quickly, if the Lord will, 1 Cor. 4.19. I hope to stay some time with you, if the Lord permit, 1 Cor. 16.7. I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy quickly to you, Phil. 2.19, 23. And, I trust that I my self also shall come quickly, ver. 24. These things I write, hoping to come to thee quickly, but if I should tarry that thou mayst know how to behave thy self in the Church of God, 1 Tim. 3.14, 15. I hope by your Prayers to be given to you, Philem. 22. This will we do if the Lord permit, Heb. 6.3. I hope to come to thee, St. John, Ep. 2.12. Ep. 3d. v. 14. For, 1. Spes est incertae rei nomen, The Word Hope, imply∣eth an uncertainty, whereas the Holy Spirit cannot be uncertain of any thing; nor can we think he would inspire Men to speak so uncertainly. And, 2dly, There can be no neces∣sity, or even use of a Divine Assistance to enable a Man to express his Hopes, seeing all Men do by natural Reflection know them. §. III. And having thus declared what I do allow, I now proceed to shew what in this Matter I cannot admit of. First then, I can by no means grant any slips of Memory in the Compilers of these Sacred Books of the New Testament; for, tho' these are allow'd by someMr. Lowth Vindic. p. 45. in Matters of small Consequence, as they are pleas'd to stile them, yet is it of great Consequence that we do not own them: For, if you grant they have thus slipt at all, by what Rules can we be assured they have not slipt above an hundred times, or even in most of their Historical Relations? For instance, If St. Matthew could slip in citing the Words of the Prophet Jeremiah by a Mistake, for the Words of Zechariah, Matth. 27.9. why not also in citing the Words of the Prophet Isaiah, or of any other Prophet? If one of those Sacred Writers might be sub∣ject to these Slips, why not all? if once, why not often? And can we think it no preju∣dice to the Divine Authority of these Sacred Writings, that they should oft be subject to false Citations, and produce false Stories, contradicting the truth of the Old Testament? Would not this yield a great Advantage against our Rule of Faith, both to the unbelieving Jews, and to the Scepticks, and Antiscripturists, which too much abound among us? Nor, 2dly, Can I grant that the Apostles determined any Matters of Practice meerly from Rules of humane Prudence, without the guidance and direction of the Holy Spirit; it is pretend∣ed, this is done by St. Paul in these Words, To the rest speak I, not the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.12. And again in these, concerning Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord, but I give my judgment, or advice, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be found faithful: I judge therefore this to be good for the present necessity, ver. 25, 26. And a third time, She is hap∣pier
if she so remain, after my Judgment, and I think also that I have the spirit of God, ver. 40. This is not, saithMr. Lowth's Vindic. p. 52. one, spoken with the Authority of a Teacher sent from God, or an Apo∣stle, but in such a style as implies only an ordinary Assistance, such as any pious skilful Pastor may expect. Answ. To this I answer, 1. That what the Apostle speaks of here, from ver. 12. to the 24th, seemeth to be no slight matter, but of great importance to the Good of Societies, and to the honour of Christianity: for sure it would have been a signal blemish to the Christian Faith, should it have tended to dissolve the Bonds of Matrimony, or given Men or Women license to quit that sacred Tye purely because they were turn'd Christians. And hence we find that the Apostle had taken especial care to prevent this Imputation every where, by or∣daining the very same thing in all other Churches which he here prescribes to the Corinthians, though then he who had said before To the married person speak not I, but the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.17. because that Case had been particularly decided by Christ, Matt. 19.9. says afterwards, To the rest say I, not the Lord. He says not this to intimate that this Direction was only given by him as a Man using his natural Reason, only to direct them to what he thought best, but not as delivering the Mind of Christ, for he had before declared the contrary, by saying, We have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. and after doth it in these words, If any man think himself a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord, Chap. 14.37. but only to declare our Lord, in his Discourse of Divorce, had not decided the case de imparibus conjugiis, of the Marriage of a Believer with an Infidel, but had left this to the Decision of those Apostles to whom he had promised the Assistance of the Holy Ghost to lead them into all Truth, Joh. 16.13. Answ. 2. In the Words cited with relation to the case of Virgins, though the Apostle owns he had no particular Commandment of the Lord, as he had in the case of married Persons, yet doth he say sufficient to convince us, that he advised in the matter not only as a Man assist∣ed by his natural Reason, but rather as one assisted by the Spirit of God; for, 1. Though, saith he, as to this I have no particular Command, I give my Advice in it as one who hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be found faithful (in the Discharge of my Apo∣stolical Office.) Now this, saith he, is all that is required of a Minister of Christ, and Stew∣ard of his Mysteries, that he be found faithful in administring the Grace of his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 4.12. And this Fidelity was still attended with the Power of Christ assisting them, as appears from these words, I thank Jesus Christ our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, 1 Tim. 1.12. So that this Phrase doth not imply that the Apostle had only an ordinary Assistance in this Advice, such as any pious skilful Pastor may still expect. And this is still more evident in those words, She is happier if she do so abide, after my Judgment; and I think I have the Spirit of God (enabling me to form that Judgment:) for they who say this is not spoken with the Authority of an Apostle, or a Teacher sent from God, seem not to have consider'd that the Apostle was writing to them who were apt to question his Apostleship, and required a proof of Christ speaking in him, 2 Cor. 13.3. and to them it was proper to say, Whatsoever you may conceive of me, I sup∣pose I have the spirit of God; i. e. the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge, to enable me to make this Advice. Moreover, the words  may be render'd, I have the spirit of God; so in this Epistle  is he that is contentious, Chap. 11.16. and  if any man be a Prophet. See the Note there. Nor, 3dly, Do I grant that St. Paul any where implies that he doth not always use the best Ar∣guments, but sometimes such as are best fitted to the Capacities and Notions of those he writes to; for if so, by what Rules shall we be able to distinguish betwixt his Arguments on which we safely may rely, as being absolutely true, and those which only are accommodated to the Notions of those with whom he had to do. St. Paul doth indeed say , I speak after the manner of Men, or what is common to Men, because of the infirmity of your flesh, Rom. 6.19. but he speaks not this by way of excuse for not using the best Argument he could in this Affair, but he speaks this by way of Illustration of his Argument, or Exhor∣tation. The sense which the Antients put upon these words is this, , I frame my Exhortation with a due Consideration of the infirmity of your flesh, requiring only that you should do that Service now to God which you have formerly done to Sin. I rather think the Apostle discourseth to this effect. In this Discourse of their being Servants former∣ly to Sin, and their Obligation now to be Servants to Righteousness, I speak that which all natural Men must have had experience of by reason of the infirmity of the Flesh, and of which they may thence take a just Idea, requiring only that as they have formerly yielded their Mem∣bers instruments to Sin, so they would now yield them instruments to Righteousness. As for the Arguments they use ad hominem, as they are very few, so is it only requisite
that they should truly be convincing upon the Principles which such Men owned and recei∣ved, there being nothing more intended by them than to convince them, that such an Infe∣rence doth naturally follow from their Principle, and that they must either quit the Sense or admit the Inference. For instance, When the Apostle saith; Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, 1 Cor. 15.29. he is there disputing against some of the Corinthians, who said there is no Resurrection of the dead. Now here he all along disputeth ad hominem, and on supposition; as v. g. Then is Christ not risen from the dead, ver. 13. Then are we false wit∣nesses of God, ver. 15. Then is their Faith vain, ver. 17. Then they that sleep in Christ are pe∣rished, ver. 18. Then are Christians, of all Men, the most miserable, ver. 19, &c. All which Sup∣positions are really false, but then they follow from the aforesaid Tenet of those Corinthians; so that all this Discourse is only an Argument ab absurdo. But, that the Apostles any where use such Arguments ad hominem as proceed only on such Principles as were generally admit∣ted in their Age, without considering whether they were true or false, I utterly deny. §. IV. Having thus premised these things for the right stating and Explication of the Con∣troversie, I proceed to lay down the Arguments which prove that in these Writings the Apostles were assisted and preserved from Errour by the Spirit of God, and therefore were enabled to deliver to us an unerring Rule of Faith. And 1st. I argue for the Divine Assistance of the Inditers of these Epistles, from what they do assert touching the Declarations made, the Doctrines delivered, and the Directions given in these Writings. For the Word spoken, and indited by them, is styled the Word of God. Men, saith the Apostle, could not believe the Gospel unless they heard it preach'd to them; nor could they hear it preach'd unless some were commissionated to preach the Gospel; for, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Rom. 10.14, 15, 16, 17. And, For this cause, saith he, thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the Word of Men, but as it is in truth, the Word of God, 1 Thess. 2.13. I am made a Minister of Christ, saith he, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me to fulfill (i. e. fully to preach) the Word of God, Coloss. 1.25. 2. It is called the Commandment of God. For my Gospel, saith St. Paul, and the Preaching of Jesus Christ, is made manifest, and according to the Commandment of the everlasting God, made known unto you for the obedience of Faith, Rom. 16.25, 26. which Faith, is always built on a divine Testimony. And again, If any man be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37. 3. It is declared to be the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. For, We preach Christ to you that are called, both Jews and Greeks, the power of God, and the wisdom of God; we speak the wisdom of God in a Mystery, even that wisdom which God hath revealed to us by his spirit, 1 Cor. 2.7, 10.4. It is the Testimony of God. For, I came not to you, saith he, in excellency of speech, de∣claring to you the Testimony of God, 1 Cor. 2.1. 5. It is the Gospel of God. For St. Paul styles himself the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministring the Gospel of God to them, Rom. 15.16. We preach, saith he, the Gospel of God freely, 2 Cor. 11.7. We were bold to preach to you the Gospel of God, we were willing to have imparted to you not the Gos∣pel of God only, but also our own Lives, 1 Thess. 2.2, 8, 9. even the glorious Gospel of the blessed God committed to my trust, 1 Tim. 1.10. 6. It is the Gospel of Christ; for I came, saith he, to Troas to preach Christ's Gospel, 2 Cor. 2.12. We sent Timotheus our fellow-labour∣er in the Gospel of Christ, 1 Thess. 3.2. 7. It is the Mystery of his will, Eph. 1.9. The Mystery of God the Father and of Christ, Col. 2.2. The Mind of Christ made known to the Apostles, 1 Cor. 2.16. And the Word of Christ which must dwell richly in Believers, Col. 3.16. Now sure it cannot rationally be conceived that the Apostles should be ignorant of that As∣sistance by which they were enabled to indite these Epistles. If then they were assured of the Assistance of the Holy Spirit which they challeng'd, then must the Gospel which they both preached and indited, be received as the Word of God and Christ, the Mind of Christ, the Gos∣pel of God and Christ, the Mystery of God the Father, and of Christ, the Commandment and the Testimony of God; which is the thing I am concerned to make good. If they had no such Assurance of the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, they grosly did impose upon the World in thus pretending that they preached the Gospel by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit sent down from Heaven. If they were not assured that in those Writings they delivered only those Doctrines which God required all Men to believe, those Precepts he required them to do, they must be very confident, in daring to make this the Preface to some of their Epistles, Paul an Apo∣stle according to the will and the commandment of God, 1 Cor. 1.1.2.1, 1. Eph. 1.1. Col. 1.1. 1 Tim. 1.1.2.1. and saying with so much Assurance, If any man be a Prophet, let him ac∣knowledge that the things I write unto you are the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 14.37. and much more in declaring to all Christians thus; We are of God, he that knoweth God heareth us, he that is not of God heareth not us; by this we know the spirit of Truth, and the spirit of Errour, 1 Joh. 4.6. For this seems equal to what their Master himself said in the like words,
Why do you not believe me? He that is of God heareth the words of God; you therefore hear them not, because you are not of God, Joh. 8.46, 47. Yea they must be false Witnesses of God, by styling humane Writings the Word, the Gospel, the Command, the Testimony, the Mind, the Mystery of God and Christ, and in requiring others to receive it not as the Word of Man, but as the Word of God, even that Word by which they must be judged at the last day, Rom. 2.16. which again runs as high as those Wdrds of Christ, The Word that I have spoken shall judge him that believes it not at the last day, Joh. 12.48. If here it be replied, that these things are rather said of the Gospel which they preach'd, than of the Epistles which they writ. I answer, 1st. That St. Peter saith of all St. Paul's Epistles, that they were written according to the Wisdom given to him, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. even that Wisdom which he styles the Wisdom of God, and ascribes to the Apostles in the General, saying, We speak the Wisdom of God, &c. 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. that St. Paul himself requires all spiritual Persons to acknowledge the things he writ unto them were the Commandments of the Lord. 2dly, I ask whether the Doctrines of Faith, and Rules of Life, delivered in these Epistles, be not as much a part of the Gospel, or the Law of Christ, as any thing they preach'd? If they be a part of it, all these Assertions must equally be true of their Epistles written, and their Sermons preach'd: If they be not, where shall we find, and how shall we be assured that we have the Gospel of our Lord, since we know nothing of it but from what is left on Record in that New Testament of which these Writings are a part, yea such a part as contains all we have left of their preaching after the Spirit promis'd to lead them into all truth was fall'n upon them? Or why did all Christians of that and the succeeding Ages depend upon them as their Rule of Faith? Moreover, That the Apostles were assisted as fully by the Holy Ghost in what they writ, as what they preach'd, will be apparent from the Consideration of their Of∣fice, they having this Assistance as being Christ's Apostles, his Embassadors, the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Now in the Preface to their Epistles they take care to let the Reader know they who sent these Epistles were Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, according to the Will and the Commandment of God, 2 Tim. 1.1. for (declaration of) the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus, for the faith of God's elect, and the acknow∣ledging the truth which is after godliness, Tit. 1.1. If therefore they had this Assistance be∣cause they were the Messengers of Christ, the Teachers of the Jew and Gentile in Faith and Verity; Men who received Grace and Apostleship from Christ to the obedience of Faith, and had the Word of God committed to them according to the Commandment of our God and Sa∣viour; and they were truly discharging their Office as well when they indited as when they preach'd the Gospel; they must be equally assisted in both. This, lastly, will be evident from the Consideration of the common End and Design both of their Writing and their Preaching; for, the reason why this Assistance attended them in Preaching, was, the Benefit and the Edification of the Church, the building her up in her most holy Faith, the perfecting the Saints, the edifying of the Body of Christ till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man; for to this end Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and Evangelists, Eph. 4.11, 12, 13. Now do not all these Reasons equally belong to their Writings? Were not they also intended and used for these very Ends in all succeeding Ages of the Church? Did they not in them write the same things which they had preach'd, because this was for their Safety? Philip. 3.1. that after their decease they might have these things always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.15. and that they might be mindful of the Commandment of the Apostles of the Lord? Chap. 3.1, 2. Had they not the Promise of the Spirit to assist them in their Preaching, that they might guide their Hearers into all Truth? And doth not the same Reason hold more strongly for their Writings, partly because they were to remain when the Apostles were dead, and could not be consulted as they might be whilst living, when any Scruple did arise touching their Doctrine, and serv'd for the instruction not of one Age only, as their Preaching did, but of all Ages of the Christian World? And indeed, their Preaching, without Writing, could not have an∣swer'd the design of propagating the Christian Faith to future Ages, Experience having taught us, that what is handed only by Tradition to us, is subject to the greatest Change and Inno∣vations, it being the pretended Traditions of the Jewish Church which corrupted, and made void the commandments of God, Matth. 15.6. and the pretended Traditions of the Romish Church which have turned their Christianity into a System of Superstition and Idolatry; for, as it truly is observed by. Dial. contra Marcion. p. 59. Origen, That which only is delivered by word of mouth quickly vanisheth, as being of no certainty. So that if our Blessed Lord designed the Continuance of his Gospel to the End of the World, he also must design the Assistance of his Apostles in the writing of it.
Now from this Argument we may return an Answer to that Cavil which some have made against the Inspiration of the Writings of the New Testament, that we meet not in them as we do frequently in the Old, Thus saith the Lord, or the Word of the Lord, by such or such a Prophet. For, 1. We meet not with these Words in all the Cherubim or the Hagiographa, which yet all the Jews acknowledge to be written by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost. 2. When we meet with it in the Prophets of the Old Testament, 'tis chiefly, if not only, when these Prophets have a Message from the Lord to the People: and when Christ sends his Message to the Seven Churches, we find Words of like import still repeated, viz. He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches, Apoc. 1.3.22.19. which whole Phrase occurs not elsewhere in the Revelations, or the words of the Prophecy of St. John. 3. 'Tis surely of like import to say, This I write to you by the Word of the Lord, 1 Thess. 4.15. The Word you received from us is not the Word of Man, but God, Chap. 2.13. And I who preach it am his Minister to fulfil the Word of God, Col. 1.25. The Word made known unto you for the obedience of Faith, is the Commandment of the everlasting God, Rom. 16.25, 26. The things I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37. For the Phrase  is the Phrase used by the Prophets of the Old Testament, viz. The Prophet said unto him,  by the Word of the Lord, Smite me, 1 Kings 20.35. See Chap. 13.1, 2, 5, 32. And equivalent to it are these Sayings. §. V. Arg. 2. They who inditing of these Writings were assisted by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, indited these Epistles by divine Assistance; but the Apostles were thus assist∣ed: this they in terms, or by just consequence, assert. For St. Peter saith of them all in ge∣neral, that they preach'd the Gospel by the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12. And is not this as much as he said of the Prophets of the Old Testament, when he declares they spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. St. Paul asserts in the same general Expressions, that those great things belonging to the Gospel, which neither Eye had seen, nor Ear had heard, nor Heart was able to conceive, God had revealed to them by the spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. That they had received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that they might know the things which were freely given to Christians of God; and that these things they taught not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, ver. 12, 13. In which place, the very Design of the Apostle is to prove against the Greek Philosophers, how unreasonable it was to reject the Gospel because it came not in the way of Demonstration to Humane Rea∣son, but by way of Revelation from God, and so required Faith; as of necessity it must do, since it contained such things concerning the Design of Christ's salutary Passion, his Resurre∣ction, Ascension, and a future Judgment at the general Resurrection, which no natural Man could know by the outmost Improvement of his humane Reason; and such Discoveries of the Council of God concerning Man's Justification, which depended upon his good Pleasure, which were known only to that Holy Spirit which searcheth all things, even the deep things of God. It is this Spirit, saith he, that we have received, and by this Spirit hath God re∣vealed these things unto us, and we accordingly do teach them to the World, not in the words which humane Wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing the Re∣velations made to us by this Spirit with the Revelations made to the Prophets in the Old Testament by the same Spirit, and finding that the Revelations made to us do far exceed what was discovered to them; for what the Eye of those Prophets had not seen in Vision, or their Ear heard in Dreams, nor can the heart of Man conceive without a Revelation; even these things God hath revealed to us by his Spirit. Thus did they speak the Word of God in demon∣stration of the Spirit: whence he declares, that if any Man despised their Testimony or In∣structions, he despised not Man only but God also, who had given them his Spirit, 1 Thess. 4.8. they being not sufficient for this Work of themselves, but their Sufficiency was of God, who, by this Ministration of the Spirit, had made them able Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. And thus, saith he, that God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness (and who illuminated the Prophets, by shining upon their Imaginations and their Understandings) hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. In his Epistle to the Ephesians he declares that the Mystery of Christ was made known to him by immediate Revelation, and not to him only, but to the rest of the Apostles and Prophets of the New Testament; for God, saith he, hath made known this Revelation to us the Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, Eph. 3.3, 5. And hence he speaks to the Corinthians in this Language, If any man be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him ac∣knowledge that the things I write unto you are the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 14.37. Here then the Argument runs thus:
They who had a like Assistance to that of the Prophets under the Old Testament, must write by the Direction of the Holy Ghost; for, Holy men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and the Scripture they indicted was of Divine Inspiration, and their Words are cied in the New Testament as spoken by the Holy Ghost. But the Apostles had a like Assistance; for in the Words now cited, they stile themselves Apostles and Prophets, they challenge a like Illumination, or shining of God upon their Hearts, a like Revelation of their Gospel by the Holy Spirit; and they pretend to teach it to others in words taught them by the Holy Ghost: In all which Sayings, they must be guilty of a false Testimony concerning God, and must impose upon the Church of Christ, if no such Assistance of the Holy Spirit was imparted to them. A Third Argument, for the infallible Assistance of the Apostles in delivering the Truth of the Gospel to Posterity, is taken from our Saviour's Promise to them: He having engaged, First, To send the Comforter to be for ever with them. I will ask the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter to be for ever with you, Joh. 14.16. And to be always with them when they were executing his Commission to make Disciples in all Nations, teaching them to observe whatever he had commanded them, Matth. 28.19, 20. You, saith he, shall be my Witnesses of these things; and that you may be qualified to be so, Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you, Luke 24.48, 49. Hence I infer, That they had always the Assistance of the Holy Spirit with them in the Discharge of their Apostleship. 2dly, He adds, That this Spirit that should thus abide with them, was the Spirit of truth, which the World could not receive, John 14.16, 17. Now why doth he chuse to characterize him by this Epithet, but to inform them, That they might expect from him the certain Knowledge of that whole Doctrine, they were as his Apostles to declare unto the World, and leave to future Generations as the Rule of Faith? That this is indeed the reason we learn from these following Words, ver. 26. But the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father shall send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring to your Remembrance all things which I have said unto you, i. e. the things I have commanded you to teach, he shall faithfully bring to your remembrance; and as for those many things I have to say unto you, which now you cannot bear, He shall teach them all. That this is the true import of this Promise, we learn from the ensuing Words, Chap. 16.12, 13. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye can∣not bear them now; but when He, the Spirit of Truth is come, he shall guide you into all Truth, and He shall shew you things to come. He shall guide you into, and therefore shall secure you from erring from, or going out of the way of Truth. He shall thus guide you into all Truth which it concerns you, as his Apostles, to deliver to the Christian Church, or any of her Members to know, in order to the performance of their Duty, or the obtaining the end of their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls. Hence then, First, We may be sure, that all the Sermons, or Discourses of our Lord to his Disciples recorded in the Evangelists, are faithful∣ly delivered by his Apostles as to the sense and genuine import of them; for otherwise the Holy Spirit did not bring to their remembrance all things which he had said unto them, but suffer'd them to record some of his Sayings otherwise than He delivered them; nor were they faithful in execution of the Charge committed to them, which was to teach all Nati∣ons all things which he had commanded them. 2dly, Hence also, we may rest assured, That what the Apostles taught in any of the Epistles directed to the Christian Churches, they taught by the direction and guidance of the Holy Spirit: for since they were indicted by them as the Apostles of the Lord, for the instruction of the Church, of that and the succeeding Ages, if the Spirit of Truth did not guide them into all Truth, but suffer'd them to err in the composing of them; then was not this Promise of our Lord fulfilled unto them? No, not then, when they undertook to be the Teachers of the Church in Faith and Verity; and so were more especially concern'd to have this Guidance of the Holy Spirit. Arg. 4. §. VI. These Epistles which were indicted, to be a standing Rule of Faith to Christians throughout all Ages of the World, the Gospel contained in these as well as other Scriptures, being made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith, Rom. 6.26. they must in all things propounded in them to our Faith, contain a Divine Testimony, or a Revelation of the Will of God. For as humane Faith depends upon the Testimony of Man, so divine Faith is that which depends upon the Testimony of God. And as Obedience to Men consists in doing the Will of Men, so our Obedience to God consists in our conformity to the Will of God. Again, if we must all be judged by this Law of Liberty, James 2.12. if Christ at the last day will judge the Secrets of Mens Hearts, according to the Gospel of St. Paul, Rom. 2.16. if he will come in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance of all that obey not his Gospel, then must this Go∣spel, and this Law of Liberty, be a Rule of Faith until Christ's second coming. For upon that account alone, can Men be bound under this dreadful Penalty, to yield Obedience to it, and be judged by it.
Arg. 5. §. VII. Lastly, That the Apostles, and Writers of the Books of the New Testa∣ment, were assisted both in their Preaching and Writing, by the Spirit of God, the Christians of all Ages from the beginning, do attest.. Sect. 42. . Sect. 45. . Sect. 47. St. Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians saith, That the Apostles delivered the Gospel to us from our Lord Jesus Christ, and Christ from God; and that being filled with the Spirit, and having the Word of God committed to them, they went out preaching the Kingdom of God: He adds, That the Scriptures are the true Words of the Holy Spirit: And that St. Paul writ to them by the Spirit touching him∣self, and Cephas and Apollo.. Sect. 3. Polycarp tells his Philippians, That none could attain to the Wisdom of St. Paul, who had writ Epistles to them; by looking into which, they might be built up in the Faith delivered to them. Dominus omnium dedit Apostolis suis potestatem Evangelii per quos & veritatem, hoc est dei filii doctrinam cognovimus; quibus & dixit Dominus qui vos audit me audit, l. 3. Praefat. Quod quidem Evangelium tunc preco∣niaverunt; postea vero per Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum & columnam fidei nostrae futuram. Cap. 1.Irenaeus informs us, That the Lord of all things gave to the Apostles Authority to preach the Gospel, and that by them we have known the Truth, that is, the Doctrine of the Son of God; to whom he said, He that heareth you heareth me: That this Gospel they preach∣ed, and after by the Will of God committed to Writing, to be the Foundation and Pillar of our Faith. Adds, ThatSicut ergo Paulus Apostolus non ab hominibus ne{que} per hominem, sed per Jesum & Deum Patrem, (sic illi) filio quidem adducente eos ad Patrem, Patre vero revelante eis filium. l. 3. c. 13. all the Apostles knew the truth by Revelation as well as Paul; for as St. Paul was an Apostle not of Men, neither by Men, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, so were they. . l. 3. p. 124, 125.Theophilus declares the consent there is betwixt the things spoken by the Prophets and in the Gospels, because they both spake by the same Spirit. Clemens of Alexandria speaking of the Woman who anointed our Saviour's Feet with Ointment, saith, This may be a Symbol , of our Lord's Doctrine; for the. Paedag. l. 2. c. 8. p. 175. . Strom. 1. p. 292. B. Feet anointed with sweet smelling Ointment, signifie , the Divine Doctrine; for the Apostles partaking of the Holy Spirit, betokened by the Ointment of sweet Odor, are the Feet of our Lord anointed. The Apostles are with him, The Disciples of the Spirit: And. Strom. 5. p. 565. A. B. . Strom. 1. p. 318. D. we may well call them Prophets, saith he, the Prophets and Apostles, being both acted by one and the same Spirit. And we who have the Scriptures are taught of God, be∣ing instructed by that Son of God. . Philocal. p. 7.Origen is most express, That the Sacred Books are not the Writings of Men, but pro∣ceed from the afflatus of the Holy Ghost, and came to us by the Will of the Father thro' Je∣sus Christ, to them, saith he, that believe this, and adhere to the Canon of the Heavenly Church of Jesus Christ by Succession from the Apostles, we shall shew the appearing ways, viz. of distinguishing betwixt the Spirit and the Letter.. Philocal. p. 19. . Ibid. p. 21. It becomes us, saith he, to believe, that in the Holy Scriptures there is not one title void of the Wisdom of God; for the Prophets speak, receiving from his Fulness; and there is nothing in Prophecy, or the Law, or the Go∣spel, or the Apostles, which is not from the Fulness. He adds, That. Philoc. c. 6. p. 30. there is nothing un∣equal or distorted in the Oracles of God, but a sweet Harmony of the Old Scriptures with the New, of the legal Scriptures with the Prophetical, the Evangelical with the Apostolical. He
adds, That. c. 12. p. 41. we must either say as the Infidels do, that because they are not useful, they are not Divinely Inspired; or as the Faithful do, that because they are profitable, they also are Divinely Inspired. But it is needless to cite more Passages from the Fathers of the first three Centuries, since by them they are constantly stiled,. Clem. Al. Strom. 1. p. 362. D. . Orig. Philocal. c. 6. p. 31. vide p. 23, 30, 37, 38, 43. Majestas Spiritus St. Tert. de Resur. c. 24. The Divine Scriptures, the Oracles of God, the Wisdom of God, the Voice of God, the Divine Oracles; that all the Scriptures are the perfect and well-tuned Organ of God, giving from different Sounds one saving Voice to those who are willing to learn. 2dly, They add,. Orig. Philocal. cap. 1. p. 12. , &c. p. 11. bis. That both the Prophets of the Old, and the Writers of the New Testament, spake by one and the same Spirit; the Holy Spirit by the Providence of God, thro' the Divine Word, enlightning these Ministers of the Truth, the Prophets and the Apostles. 3dly, They not only. Just. M. Ap. 2. p. 98. D. Just. M. Irenaeus, Melito in Apocal. Tatian. Catena Evang. Pantaenus. Clem. Alex. in Epistolas Canon. read those Writings from the Beginning, on the Lord's Day, for the Instruction of the People, but made their Inferences and Exhortations from them to all Christian Duties, and very early made their Comments on them. 4thly, They proved all their Doctrines from these Scriptures, and thence inferr'd, That they retained the true Rule of Faith, becauseCyprianus librum Testimoniorum ad Quirinum componit ex divinis magisteriis, ex Scripturis sanctis vet. & N. Test. ex divinae plenitudinis fntibus, ex universis Librorum spiritualium voluminibus, Praefat. & praecepta domi∣nica & magisteria divina, ex eisdem Praefat. ad lib. tertium. Aliunde scilicet, loqui possunt de rebus fidei nisi ex lite∣ris fidei? Tert. praescrip. c. 15. Iren. l. 3. per totum. they delivered only what was conso∣nant to the Doctrine contain'd in the Evangelists, and the Epistles of the Apostles; as is evi∣dent from all their Writings. 5thly, From these Scriptures of the New Testament they remonstrated against, and con∣futed all theIn tertio ex Scripturis inferemus ostensiones,—ita plenissimam habebis à nobis adversus omnes haereticos con∣tradictionem. Iren. Praef. ad lib. tertium, omnibus haeresib. unum deum ostendimus, . Clem. Alex. Strom. 4. p. 475. A. vide Strom. 7. p. 782. C. p. 784. C. Hereticks which arose in those times, declaring, That they were later than those Apostles who delivered to them the Rule of Faith, and that they taught things contrary to, or alien from the Doctrine delivered by the Apostles of our Lord. Lastly, That the Scriptures of the New Testament were Divinely Inspired, was a Truth so received by all Christians, that even some of the Hereticks durst not deny it; and they who did, were look'd upon as Infidels, say Origen and others. Thus speaking of the Disciples of Theodorus Coriarius, who corrupted the Scriptures,; Parv. labyr. apud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 28. p. 198. What Wickedness, saith an ancient Author, is this, For either they believe not the Holy Scriptures to be distinctly Inspired, and then they are Infidels; or they pretend to be wiser than the Holy Ghost, and then they are mad or possessed. Now if persons so near to the Times of the Apostles, that some of them conversed with them, some of them were themselves inspired with spiritual Gifts, some of them were ac∣quainted with the immediate Successors of the Apostles; if the Churches, which received these Writings from the very Hands of the Apostles, and kept still the Original, or the Au∣thentick Copies of them, did so unquestionably receive them as Inspired Writings, and own them as the Rule, Pillar, and the Ground of their whole Faith, if they read them together with those Writings of the Prophets, which were on all hands owned as the Word of God, prov'd from them all the Doctrines of the Christian Faith, receiv'd them as the perfect Rule of Christian Duty, confuted all Heresies and erroneous Doctrines from them, and represent∣ed those as Infidels, who question'd or deny'd their Inspiration by the Holy Ghost: They doubtless, must be well assured, they were delivered to them as such by the Apostles, or the Sacred Pen-men of them; and then, What reason can these latter Ages have to question what was so universally acknowledged by those who lived in that very Age in which those
Books were writ, and sent to the Churches of Christ, or who received them under that Character, from Men who in that very Age, had own'd them as written by the Conduct and Assistance of the Spirit of God? Corollary. §. VIII. Now hence it follows, That what the Apostles have delivered in these Epi∣stles, as necessary to be believ'd or done by Christians, must be as necessary to be believ'd and practis'd in order to Salvation, as what was personally taught by Christ himself, and is contain∣ed in the Gospels; they being in the writing these Epistles, the Servants, Apostles, Ambassa∣dors, and Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God; and the Doctrines and Precepts they deliver'd in them, being the Will, the Mind, the Truth, and the Command∣ments of God. Now evident it will be to any who judiciously read these Epistles, That they contain some∣things necessary to be believ'd, and done, which were not clearly taught by Christ whilst he was on Earth, nor are delivered clearly in the Gospels; as we may learn both from our Sa∣viour's Words to his Disciples, and from these Epistles. First, From our Saviour's Words; for thus he speaks to his Disciples: These things I have spoken to you, being with you, Joh. 14.25. But the Comforter the Holy Ghost, whom the Father shall send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, ver. 26. And again, I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them now, Joh. 16.12. But when He, the Spirit of Truth, shall come, He shall guide you into all Truth, ver. 13. These things have I spoken to you in Parables, but the Hour cometh when I will not speak to you still in Parables, but I will shew you plainly of the Father, ver. 25. 2dly, From the things contained in these Epistles: As, v. gr. That by the Deeds of the Law shall no Flesh be justified, Rom. 3.20. That both Jew and Gentile being under condemnation, were only to be justified freely by God's grace, thro' the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God had set forth to be a propitiation thro' Faith in his Blood, ver. 25. That if Righteous∣ness came by the Law, then Christ was dead in vain, Gal. 2.21. That as many as are of the Law are under the Curse, Ch. 3.16. That if we be circumcised, Christ shall profit us no∣thing, Christ is become of none effect to them that are under the Law, they are fallen from Grace, Ch. 5.2, 5. That the Law was to continue only to the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. and was then to be disannulled for the weakness and unprofitableness of it, Ch. 7.18. That Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, Ch. 5.5, 6. That he hath an unchangeable Priesthood; that he in Heaven is continually making intercession for us, and therefore is able to save us to the uttermost, Ch. 7.24, 25. Again, In these Epistles only have we Instructions about many great and necessary Duties, as v. g. That all our Thanksgivings are to be offer'd up to God in the Name of Christ, Eph. 5.8, 20. Thess. 5.18. Hebr. 13.14, 15. The Duties which we owe to our Civil Gover∣nours, are only hinted in those Words of Christ, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; but are enlarged upon in the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 13. to Titus, Tit. 3.1. and in the First Epistle of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.10. — 17. So also are the Duties which we owe to our Spiritual Superiours, taught more expresly in these Epistles, Gal. 6.6. 1 Thess. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.7. — 18. In fine, All the particular Duties belonging to the Relations of Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, are particularly handled in these Epistles, Eph. 5.28, 33. — 6.1. — 9. Col. 3.18. — 25. but are scarce ever mentioned in the Gospels. But it may be objected, Object. 1. That these Epistles were writ to those who were in the Faith already, and so could not be design'd to teach them the Fundamental Articles, and Points necessary to Sal∣vation, or to instruct them in what was necessary to make them Christians. Answ. It follows not from their being Christians already; That the Apostles design'd not to write to them in these Epistles of any Fundamental Articles, or Points necessary to Salva∣tion, for it is very plain, they do so, St. Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.3. writes of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of Christ's Death and Resurrection, as of Doctrines necessary to be believ'd; and in his Epistle to the Galatians, of seeking Justifica∣tion by the Works of the Law, as a thing opposite to, and destructive of the Grace of Christ. And since there were among them false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, who corrupted the Word, and handled the Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 2.17. — 4.2. corrupted their Minds from the simplicity of Christ, Ch. 11.3. turn'd them from him that called them to another Go∣spel, Gal. 1.6. sought to deprive them of their Reward, Col. 2.18, 19. and separate them from their Head Christ Jesus, who put away a good Conscience, and so made Shipwrack of the Faith, 1 Tim. 2.19. whose Doctrine did spread as a Gangreen, and overthrew the Faith of some, 2 Tim. 2.16. many Disputers of corrupt Minds turning from the Truth, 1 Tim. 6.5. many unruly and vain Talkers, and Deceivers, who subverted whole Houses, teaching things that they ought not, for filthy Lucres sake, Tit. 1.10, 11. Must not these things admi∣nister
occasion to these sacred Pen-men to endeavour to stablish and confirm them in the Faith, by letting them they wrote to know the moment of those Articles, the necessity of that Faith they had been taught, and the pernicious Consequences of those Practices to which they were seduc'd by these Deceivers? Again, Seeing these Writings were intended as a Rule not to them only to whom they were sent, but to all future Ages of the Church, and the Spirit expresly told them, that in the lat∣ter days some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of De∣vils, 1 Tim. 4.1, 2. that the time would come when they would not endure sound Doctrine, but would turn their ears from the Truth, 2 Tim. 4.3, 4. when false Prophets should arise among them bringing in damnable Doctrines, whose pernicious ways many should follow, 2 Pet. 2.1.2. Seeing they knew that after their Departure grievous Wolves would enter in, not sparing the flock, Acts 20.29, 30. Must not all these Considerations give just occasion to them to write of the great Articles of Christian Faith, and of the necessary points of Christian Conversation, to preserve them, and those that came after them, from those damnable Doctrines and perni∣cious Ways? Moreover, this Objection is therefore insignificant, because the Apostles do inform us, that they found it safe to write the same things to them they had heard, Philip. 3.1. though they knew the Truth, and were confirmed in it, 1 John 2.21. that they might have these things always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.12, 15. and that some who for the time of their Conversion might have been great Proficients in the Faith, had yet need to be taught again the first Prin∣ciples of the Oracles of God, Hebr. 5.12. Obj. 2. It also may be said, That these Epistles were writ upon particular Occasions, and without those Occasions had not been writ, and so cannot be thought necessary to Salvation. Answ. This Objection is neither exactly true of all the Epistles, nor of all that is contain∣ed in them; not of all the Epistles, for it appears not that five of the General Epistles, the Epistle to the Romans, to the Ephesians, and to the Hebrews, were writ upon particular Oc∣casions, unless the instructing Men in the Faith, and preserving them from Heresie, or Apo∣stacy, be called particular Occasions; and where this doth appear, it is very evident, that when the Apostles had writ what they thought proper upon those Occasions, they add many excellent Rules of Piety and Vertue. Answ. 2. 2dly, Were it exactly true, that all the Epistles were writ upon particular Oc∣casions, it will not follow hence, that they were not directed, in writing them, by the Holy Spirit; or, that they contain nothing necessary to be believ'd or done in order to Salvation. For the Book of Psalms was not only writ upon particular Occasions, but was also adapted to, and fitted for them. The Prophets were all sent by God, to testifie against, and call the Jews to Repentance for Sins committed in their time, to reform their Manners, or comfort them in their Distresses; that is, upon particular Occasions: but will it therefore follow, that they did not write by the Assistance of the Spirit of God, or that there is nothing in the Psalms, or in the Prophets, which was necessary to be believ'd or practis'd by the Jews? Moreover, The Gospel of St. Luke was writ on a particular Occasion, viz. to instruct Theo∣philus in the Certainty of the things he had been taught: and yet, Haer. 51. §. 7. Epiphanius informs us, that the Holy Ghost compell'd and stimulated him to the Work. The Gospel of St. Mark was writ, say the Ancients, at the Request of the Converts at Rome; and yet he writ it, saithIbid. §. 6. Euseb. l. 2. c. 15, 16. Epiphanius, , by the impulse of the Holy Ghost. They also say, That St. John was importuned by all the Asiaticks, to write his Gospel: and yet, saith, §. 6. 9. Epiphanius, The Holy Spirit did inwardly impel him to the writing of it. The Gospel of St. Matthew,Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 24. Chrys. Hom. 1. in Matth. say they, was indited at the Request of the Hebrews, that he might supply, by writing, the want of his Presence with them: so that we see the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists may be occasionally penn'd, and yet be the Products of the Holy Ghost, and contain things necessary to be believ'd and done. Answ. 3. 3dly, The particular Occasions of some of these Writings being the Errours or the Waverings of Christians in fundamental Points, as appears from the Epistles to the Co∣rinthians, Galatians, &c. and in others the busie industry of false Apostles and deceitful Workers, to pervert them from the Faith; that these Epistles were writ on such Occasions, is rather a Presumption that they were writ upon some fundamental Points, than that they could not be indited upon these Occasions. Moreover, Great Advantages arise from the occasional writing these Epistles, and such as might induce the Holy Spirit to excite them to the Work. For, 1. All the Occasions which they took to write, from the Disorders, Errours, Heresies,
Mistakes, which at first crept into the Church, render these Writings standing Rules for the Decision of like Cases through all future Ages. 2. The Deportment of the Apostles towards these erroneous Persons and disorderly Walkers, the Care they used to recover or inform them better, the Zeal and Tenderness they shew'd, and the Rules they laid down in those Cases, are excellent Precedents and Directions for all Church-Governours in Cases of like nature. 3dly, All the occasions which they had to write for the Direction of Church-Governours how to behave themselves in the Church of God, to give Rules for the Qualifications of those who were to be admitted to those Offices, and touching their Behaviour in them, for the Settlement of the Affairs of the Church, and the decent and regular Performance of Divine Service, afford us standing Rules of Government, and of admitting and ordaining a Successi∣on of those divers Orders in the Church. Lastly, These various occasions give us full Assurance that these Epistles must be written in those very times when these Disorders hapned, and these Errours crept into the Church, and so take off all Jealousie, or Suspicion that they were Writings contrived in the following Ages of the Church; whereas had their Writings been only Systems of Theological Doctrines, and Rules of Life, which equally concerned all Ages of the Church, it might have been more plausibly objected, that they were framed by some Christian Bishops assembled for that end. Obj. 3. But if all, or most of the Truths declared in the Epistles were to be received, and believed as fundamental Articles, what then became of those Christians who were fallen asleep before those things in the Epistles were revealed to them? Answ. 1. This Question equally concerns the Evangelists, and more especially the Gospel ofNovissimus omnium scripfit Evangelium. Hieron. Prefat. in Matth. St. John, which, say the Antients, was either the last Portion of Scripture which was written, or the last save his Epistles, it being written after his Return from his Exile in Patmos to Ephesus; and so if it contain fundamental Articles, or necessary Rules of Life, what became of those Christians who died before they were revealed in it. Answ. 2. We say not that all, or most of the Truths, declared either in the Epistles or Gospels, are to be accounted fundamental or necessary Articles; but only that some of them ought to be so accounted, especially those which have this Character of a necessary Article or Rule of Life, that the Denial or Non-practice of them is represented as that which will en∣danger our Salvation, or cut us off from the Communion of the Church. Answ. 3. 'Tis also a precarious Supposition, that they who died before these Epistles were writ by them, must die before the necessary things contained in them were revealed to them, seeing we know that the Apostles writ the same things which they had preach'd before, and St. Luke writ his Gospel that Theophilus might know the Certainty of the things he had been taught: and in those times of the Effusion of the Spirit of Wisdom and of Knowledge, they had an Unction which could teach them all things, 1 John 2.27. and so supply the unavoidable Defects of outward Teachers. Obj. 4. The Gospel was to be preached to the Poor: now they are not capable of sublime Notions, nor can they comprehend mysterious Reasonings. Answ. 1. Whether this Objection be intended against the Necessity of believing the Epi∣stles of St. Paul only, or also of the Gospel of St. John, is uncertain, the sublime Notions and mysterious Reasonings being common to both. Answ. 2. There seemeth no necessity of troubling the poor Common People with sublime Notions, or mysterious Reasonings, since both the Ancient Church and our own Catechism declare that all the Articles of Christian Faith common to all that bear that Name, are com∣prised in the Apostle's Creed. For when the Child saith, My Godfathers and Godmothers promised I should believe All the Articles of the Christian Faith, since it is evident they on∣ly stipulated for the Belief of the Apostles Creed in Baptism, and when he doth rehearse those Articles, he only doth rehearse the Apostles Creed, 'tis certain that, by our Catechism, must be supposed to contain All the Articles of Christian Faith. Moreover, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to make such persons have a right Con∣ception of the Spiritual Nature, and the Attributes of God, or to enable them, by Reason, to prove the Providence of God, or the Immortality of the Soul; but yet these things must be proposed to them as Articles, or Foundations of their Faith. And as it is not very diffi∣cult for them to learn from Scripture the Truth of these things; so neither is it difficult from the same Scripture to learn the Truth of all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, even in that sense in which all Christian Ages did receive them. In a word, Were these Mechanicks as much concern'd for Spirituals as they are for Tem∣porals, as many of them have attain'd to great Proficiency in their respective Arts, so might they also, by a Christian diligence, attain to a competent proficiency in all the necessary Ar∣ticles of Christian Faith, and in the Rules of Christian Piety, or of their Duty to God and
Man. Now Christianity being that Doctrine which is after Godliness, Tit. 1.1. I believe nothing is proposed in it as necessary to be believ'd to Salvation, which hath not some ten∣dency to the Promotion of true Piety. §. IX. Having thus stablish'd the Divine Authority of these Epistles, I shall endeavour to confirm the Truth of Christian Faith from what is copiously delivered in them, and in those Acts of the Apostles which contain the History of the Authors of them. This is of absolute necessity in this degenerate Age, in which all manner of Impiety ex∣ceedingly abounds, and Men are by their Lives disposed, and even concern'd to question the Truth of that Religion, and of those Writings which threaten the severest Punishments to their Enormities; and do industriously, and even impudently, persue this black Design both in their Discourses and their Writings. Now, to prove against these Enemies of reveal'd Religion the Truth and Certainty of Christian Faith, from what is copiously delivered in these Epistles, and in the Acts of the Apostles, it will be only requisite to shew that they contain a Declaration, of such things as could not possibly be true, but they must also be a full and a convincing Demonstration of the Truth of Christian Faith, and that we have great reason to believe the Truth of what is thus related by them. And, 1st. That they contain a Declaration of such things as could not possibly be true, but they must also be a full and a convincing Demonstration of the Truth of Christian Faith, the De∣claration will be sufficient to evince; for it was this: That the miraculous Gifts and powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost were plentifully afford∣ed to them who preach'd the Gospel to the World, and also to those Christian Churches which receiv'd that Gospel, and embrac'd the Faith they taught. By way of Preface to what I shall collect from these Acts and Epistles concerning these miraculous Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost, it may deserve to be considered, that as the Blessed Jesus spake as never Man spake, that is, delivered such just, holy, beneficial Commands as never were before made known to the World; and did, for Confirmation of his Doctrine, the Works that no other Man did; so was he pleased to lay the Truth of his Prophetick Office upon such future and miraculous Events, as no Impostor, that had any Wit, would undertake, or could be able to perform. For the Prophecies which he had undertaken to fulfil, and his own frequent Declarations, made it necessary; 1. That he should die a peculiar Death, i. e. by being lifted up upon the Cross: 2. That in three days he should rise again: 3. That after his Resurrection his Gospel should in the space of forty years, or before the Destruction of Jerusalem, be propagated throughout the World or the whole Roman Empire: 4. That in order to the propagating of it, the Holy Ghost should plentifully be vouchsafed to his Apostles, and should endue them with power from on high, and even enable them to do greater works than he himself hath done, John 14.12. At the great day of the Feast of Tabernacles, when all the Jews assembled at Jerusalem, were joyful in their Beth Haschoavah or House of drawing Water, and were, say their Tradi∣tions, in expectation that the Holy Ghost would fall upon them, Jesus stood and cried, say∣ing, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink; he that believeth in me, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living waters: this spake he of the Spirit which they that believed on him should receive, John 7.37, 38. And at the close of his Life on Earth, he comforts his Disciples with the Promise of this Holy Ghost, who should continue with them not on∣ly to teach them all things, and bring all things to their remembrance, but also to convince the World of Sin, because they believed not in him, and of his Righteousness, who was so glori∣ously exalted to the right-hand of God his Father, and of a future Judgment, because the Prince of this World being cast out from those he had possest, was judged, John 16.7, 11. And after his Resurrection, he speaks thus to them; Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you, for ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence, Luke 24.49. And ye shall receive power after the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses to me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth, Acts 1.8. And lastly, to encourage others to believe the Doctrine which they taught, he saith, These Signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. Now I desire to know whether any thing of this nature was ever undertaken, or laid as the foundation of their Credit by any other Author of any Doctrine, Religion, Sect, or He∣resie? Whether they ever made their own violent Death and Resurrection the foundation of their Veracity? or promised the like Powers and Assistances when they were risen to those who should promote, or should embrace their Doctrine? or, whether that which no Man else durst undertake, was not performed by the Holy Jesus so effectually, as that his Do∣ctrine
presently prevail'd, and was receiv'd throughout the World in spight of all the Opposi∣tion Men and Devils made against it, and wrought in Christians such a lasting Faith, as Time and Vice, though most concern'd to do it, was never able to deface. But though we have no Instances of any other Persons that made the like Attempts, yet do our Lord's Disciples tread exactly in their Master's Steps: For the first thing which they de∣clared to the World was this, that the Forerunner of their Lord, John the Baptist, when Je∣rusalem, and all Judea, and all the Regions about Jordan, and in particular the Pharisees and Sadducees, the Publicans and Soldiers, repaired to his Baptism, declared in the Audience of them all, There was one shortly to come after him, one that stood then among them, who would baptize them with the Holy Ghost and Fire, Matth. 3.11. They also add, That their Lord, both before and after his Resurrection, made a like Promise to them, That he would sud∣denly send down upon them the Spirit promised by the Father, that they should receive power from on high, and be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and so should be enabled to be the Wit∣nesses of his Resurrection and of his Doctrine. When these Apostles had themselves receiv'd the Holy Ghost, they declare, they only had received what God had promised by his Prophet Joel, saying, Chap. 2.28. It shall come to pass in the last days, I will pour my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophesie, and your Young-men shall see Visions, and your Old-men shall dream Dreams, Acts 2.16. Where note, That 'tis a receiv'd Rule among the Jews, that the last days, when used by the Prophets, do signifie the times of the Messiah. See the Note on 1 Tim. 4.1. Note also, That God of old revealed his Will to his People by Visions, Dreams, and by Pro∣phetick Revelations; so that this is a Promise, that in the days of the Messiah God would miraculously pour his Spirit upon Men, and by that Spirit would enable them to prophesie, and to reveal his Will to others. Yea they say boldly to all that stood amazed at it, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; for the Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Here then we see how fully they both claim a Promise of the Holy Ghost made by their Master to them, and also promise the like Gift to them who should believe, and be baptized in his Name. Now either these Promises were actually performed, and made good before they were in∣dited, and put into the Records of the Christian Faith, the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, or they were not; if all these Promises were fulfill'd before the Records which contain them were indited, then had Christ sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and given them the Promise of the Father; then the believing Jews and Gentiles were actually bapti∣zed with the Holy Ghost, and were enabled to speak with Tongues, and Prophecy; and so Christ must have given certain demonstration of the Truth both of his Resurrection and his Promises. But if these Promises were not made good before these Records were indited, then the whole Story of St. John, and of the Acts of the Apostles, might easily have been convinc'd of Falshood by many thousand living Witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all other places where they lay the Scene of this great Dispensation, because they had heard nothing of these things but from their Histories. Then by the Suffrage of our own Evangelists, our Lord's Forerunner must be a Deceiver when he declared the Messiah should baptize them with the Holy Ghost and Fire, whom he had then baptiz'd with Water. Yea, in those very Hi∣stories designed to convince others that Jesus was the Christ, they must leave on Record a Promise made not to them only, but to all Believers, which never was fulfill'd; the Apostles also must be falsly introduced, saying, This was that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, and with the greatest Impudence, promising that Holy Ghost to others which they themselves had not received; and surely then those Jews which after all Christ's Miracles required a Sign, would have enquired of the Apostles, where is that great Effusion of the Spirit promi∣sed by the Prophet Joel, which may assure us that the times of the Messiah are now come? Where is that fiery Baptism? Where are those Rivers of spiritual Water which their pre∣tended Christ, and his Forerunner, promised? Let us see them, that we may believe him. With what face could St. Peter promise that Holy Ghost to others upon Faith in Christ, which they themselves had not received? Or with what face could Luke declare he did this before such an Audience of which the greatest part must then be living, and so as with that Promise to convert three thousand Souls? Had neither these Converts, nor this Audience, any experience of that Affair? In fine, If these Apostles were not assisted with these miraculous Powers of the Holy Ghost, they must be well assured, that he who had so oft engaged whilst he lived, to send this Comforter to them, and at his Resurrection promised that in few days they should be all baptized with the Holy Ghost, was a Deceiver, and false Prophet, and then what Motive could they have, or how could they conceive it a thing possible to be his Wit∣nesses successfully to the uttermost parts of the earth? If by the coming of the Holy Ghost upon them they were indeed enabled to speak all Languages, this Gift was a sufficient Confir∣mation of the Resurrection and Ascension of that Jesus who thus made good his Promise to
them. If they had no such Gift, how was it possible that such unlearned Persons, who only undrstood their Mother-Tongue, should discourse in their several Languages to the Romans, Grecians, Egyptians, Persians, Armenians, Scythians, Indians, and all the barbarous Nations of the World? And to what purpose was it for them to travel to those Nations, to stand mute among them, or else to tell a story to them of which they could not understand one word? If, as the sacred Story doth inform us, they preach'd the Word with demonstration of the Spirit, and Power; if they went forth preaching every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with Signs following, God also bearing witness to them by Signs and Miracles, and by divers Powers and Distributions of the Holy Ghost; then might they boldly say, We are his witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Ghost, which God hath gi∣ven to those that obey him, Acts 5.32. But if no such Assistance was vouchsafed to them, what evidence could they give to the World that he had sent them on this Errand? Or how could they expect to reverse all the ancient Laws and Religions of the World, and to per∣suade all Nations to own and worship, as the great Saviour of the World, one who was late∣ly hanged on a Tree. Their Compliance therefore with this Mission, and their Continuance in this Testimony under those dreadful Miseries they suffer'd for it, as well as their incre∣dible success in Propagation of the Christian Faith to every Nation, will not suffer us to doubt that they were well assured of the Completion of this Promise to them, and so of Christ's miraculous Assistance of them. §. X. Moreover, one signal Evidence of the miraculous Powers and Distributions of the Holy Ghost, confer'd upon the first Promoters and Professors of the Christian Faith, ariseth from the plain Matters of Fact related in the Acts of the Apostle, and the Epistles of S. Paul, concerning the miraculous Effusion of these extraordinary Gifts, on them who owned this Faith, and were baptized in the Name of Christ. The Acts of the Apostles have left upon Record five remarkable Instances of this Affair; viz. 1st, That on the day of Pentecost the Apostles and Disciples of Christ Jesus being met to∣gether, cloven Tongues, like to fire, fell upon them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them Utterance: adding, that when this Miracle was wrought upon them, there were devout men of every Nation who heard them speak in their own Tongues the wondrous works of God; and upon this account did, with Amazement, ask, Are not all these which speak Galileans? and how hear we every man in our own Tongue wherein we were born! And that St. Peter, one of Christ's Disci∣ples, did then and there declare that the same Jesus whom the Jews had crucified, was by God raised up, and exalted to his own right-hand, and having receiv'd of the Father the Pro∣mise of the Holy Ghost, had shed forth this which they now saw and heard; and that he with these Sayings instantly converted three thousand Souls, and that God daily added to the Church such as should be saved, Acts 2. 2dly, That when St. Philip had converted many People of Samaria to the Christian Faith, and had baptized them, St. Peter and St. John laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost: and that Simon Magus seeing this, offer'd them Money to have this Power im∣parted to him, that on whomsoever he should lay his hands, they might receive the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 3dly, That whilst St. Paul, a zealous Pharisee, and a more zealous Persecutor, breathed out Threatnings and Slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, and had received Commission from the High Priest and Elders, to bring them bound unto Jerusalem to be punished, as he came nigh to Damascus, a light from Heaven above the brightness of the Sun, shone round about him, and struck him blind; and the Lord Jesus, by a Voice from Heaven, said unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And that one Ananias being sent by the same Jesus to lay his hands upon him, he presently receives his Sight, is filled with the Holy Ghost, and preacheth Christ, in the Jewish Synagogues erected in that famous City, Acts 9. 4thly, That whilst St. Peter was preaching to Cornelius, his Kinsmen, and near Friends, the Holy Ghost fell on all those that heard the word, and they spake with Tongues, and magni∣fied God in the Presence of the Jews, Acts 10.44, 45. 5thly, That St. Paul finding twelve Disciples of the Baptist who had not yet received the Holy Ghost, he baptizes them in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and when he had laid his hands upon them, they received the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, Acts 19.6. Now all these things were done, saith this Record, in populous and famous Cities. The first in Jerusalem, at the great Feast of Pentecost, immediately ensuing Christ's Ascen∣sion, and therefore at a time when all Jerusalem was met to celebrate that Feast, and when the fame of the Messiah, expected suddenly to appear, Luke 19.11. had brought great multi∣tudes of Jews and Proselites out of all Nations, to attend the issue of that Expectation; and so the Matter of Fact, if true, must be well known by all Judea so to be: nor could it
possibly be false, but all then present, and alive, when first the fact was publish'd to the World, must be so many living Witnesses of the falshood of it. The second populous City whose Converts received this effusion of the Holy Ghost, was the Metropolis of Samaria, according to our Lord's Prediction, You shall be my Witnesses in Sa∣maria, Acts 1.8. The Time when this was done, is noted by three Characters; viz. That it was done soon after the Death of Stephen, Acts 8.2. and before the Conversion of S. Paul, ver. 1. and when Simon the celebrated Magician was there, and had so gain'd upon the Peo∣ple of that City, that they all gave heed to him, and owned him as the great Power of God, ver. 9, 10. The third was done in Damascus, the Metropolis and noble Mart of Syria, where flourish∣ed many thousand Jews, upon a Person known by the whole Nation of the Jews to be a strict and celebrated Pharisee, and once a zealous Persecutor of the Christian Faith; one af∣ter his Conversion, which hapned the next year after our Lord's Ascension, was hated, and persecuted by his own Nation for preaching up that Faith he formerly endeavour'd to de∣stroy; and so not only they of Damascus, and they who journeyed with him, and saw and felt that glorious Appearance, which was the means of this Conversion, but even the whole Jewish Nation must be acquainted with, and even alarm'd at this miraculous and sudden Change. The fourth happen'd in the City of Caesarea, the Seat of the R. Governour of Judea, inhabited by Jews, Samaritans, and Gentiles, and well stock'd with Roman Souldiers, upon the Person and Kindred of Cornelius, a Centurion of the Roman Band, one well reported of by the whole Nation of the Jews, and so not only Caesarea, but all Judea and Rome also must be acquainted with the Conversion of a Man so eminent for his Post, so well approv'd by the whole Jewish Nation for his Piety. The Character of the time when this was done, we learn from these Circumstances, that before the Word was preached to the Jews only, and that this was the first Instance of their preaching to convert a Gentile to the Faith of Christ. The fifth was done in Ephesus, the Metropolis of the Proconsular Asia, about twelve years after the former, in a City where dwelt many Jews, who were Teachers of the Law in op∣position to the Gospel; and who had there a Synagogue: and after this, all Asia, both Jews and Greeks, heard the word of Christ, Acts 19.10, 17. Now when Times and Places, Circumstances and Events, are so particularly set down, and are of such a nature as seem to carry in them a conspicuous evidence of the notorious Falshood, or the clear Truth of the Narration, as it is a sign that the Historian intended no Deceit, so neither seems it easie to conceive, how such great Cities and Regions should be ignorant of the Truth, or Falshood of them, or be capable of being imposed upon by such Relations. All that can possibly be offer'd to impair the Credit of these Evidences of the miraculous Operations of the Holy Ghost, exercised by the Apostles, and conferr'd on such as did embrace the Christian Faith, must be comprised in these two Particulars; viz. Either that these things were not written and publish'd by St. Luke, or in his time; or, that they were not truly written, but contain false Stories invented for the Credit of Christianity. Now that this History was originally and universally received by the Tradition of the Church amongst her true undoubted Scriptures,Ponit nempe Actus Apostolorum , & inter . Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4. & 25. Eusebius sufficiently informs us. Clemens of Alexandria and Origen confirm the same Tradition. And as all agree that this History was written by St. Luke, and own'd as an unquestionable Record of Christianity; so do we find it cited byEp. ad Cor. §. 13. St. Clemens, St. Paul's Companion; byApud Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 39. Papias, who conversed with Men of the Apostles time; and byAd Philip. §. 1. Polycarp, who was St. John's Disciple: AndL. 3. c. 12. Irenaeus who flourished in the second Century, hath in a large Chapter almost epitomiz'd it. Nor do I read of any Jew or Gentile who did except against the Truth or the Sincerity of the Re∣lator of these things. Now if a Record so early, and so generally received and cited by the Christians, may be, without all proof, rejected, as not written by that Author whose Name it hath still born, if a Writing thus unanimously own'd among the Records of the Christian Faith, may be, without all reason, rejected, as a spurious or doubtful piece, the Truth and Credit of all History must be entirely subverted: and so there will be nothing certain left concerning any Records of Antiquity. But if, according to this General Tradition, this History was indeed writ and published by St. Luke, there must be many Myriads still living in Judea, Samaria, Damascus, Ephesus, Caesarea, and many other places mention'd in these Acts, who could be able to disprove these things, had they been false; which yet was either not at all, or unsuccessfully attempted, as the Issue, which concluded in its general Reception, testifies. We therefore may conclude,
that neither Jew or Gentile, Orthodox Christian or Apostate, though they were all concern'd to do it, found any cause to doubt the Certainty of what was thus recorded. But, to give Scepticism its utmost Scope, be it this History was not publish'd till an hun∣dred years after our Lord's Ascension, beyond which Infidelity cannot go, if we consider the Citations of it before that time, and the Abridgment of it made by Irenaeus not long after; either the Facts related in it were true, and then they are a signal Evidence of the miraculous Operations of the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to Christians; or they were false, and then how is it possible they should obtain so easie and so general Belief? Could they not know in Ju∣dea, Samaria, and Ephesus, by what means they were first converted to the Christian Faith? Must it not be sufficient prejudice to them against these Tales, that they had lived so long in the Profession of that Faith, and had heard nothing of these things, too wonderful, too much conducing to the Honour and Confirmation of that Faith to be so long conceal'd, had they been truly done by two such eminent Apostles as were St. Peter and St. Paul? §. XI. Having made this brief Collection of Instances respecting these spiritual Gifts from the Acts of the Apostles, I now proceed to these Epistles which almost severally contain suf∣ficient Proofs of the Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon Believers, and of his miraculous Assi∣stance of the Preachers of the Christian Faith, and jointly do concur to make this Evidence triumphant over Infidelity. For, 1st, St. Paul writes to the Romans thus; I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual Gift, to the end you may be established, Rom. 1.11. See the Note there. For I know, saith he, that when I come to see you, I shall come in the fulness  of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Chap. 15.29. i. e. that fulness of spiritual Gifts with which all Chri∣stians were blessed in Christ Jesus, according to that Promise of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 44.2, 3. Fear not, Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen, for I will put my Spirit on thy Seed, , and my Blessings on thy Children. Now that the Apostle came to Rome, both Scripture, and the whole Current of Antiquity attests; either then he came to them with the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, and did impart unto them those spi∣ritual Gifts which tended to confirm them in the Christian Faith, or he did not: if he did impart them, he gave them an assured Demonstration of the Certainty of Christian Faith; if he did not, he himself ministered to them a full Objection against his own Apostleship: for, this must render him a vain Boaster of things he was not able to perform, and a Deceiver of the Church of Rome. And why then doth he speak thus to them? I have whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those things which pertain to God; for I will not dare to speak of any thing which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient in word and deed, in the power of signs and wonders, and in the power of the spirit of God, Rom. 15.18, 19. These Powers, saith he, have accompanied my Preaching from Jerusalem, round about unto Illyri∣cum; and this Grace, saith he, was given to me of God, that I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God to them, that the offering up of the Gen∣tiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Where he compares himself, preaching the Gospel, to the Priest, conversant about his Sacrifice, to prepare and fit it to be offer'd; the Gentiles dedicated by him to the Service of God, are his Sacrifice or Oblation; the Holy Spirit confer'd upon them is the Libamen by which they are sanctified, and ren∣der'd acceptable to God. Moreover, the Epistle to the Romans must be false, or else it must be sent by the Apostle before he had seen Rome, for it containeth an intimation that he had not then seen them, a Desire to see them, and a Promise to come to them; for, saith he, I make it my Request to God, if by any means, now at length, I might have a prosperous Journey by the will of God, to come to you, for I long to see you, Rom. 1.10, 11, 13. And, I often purposed to come to you, but was let hitherto. And again, I have been much hinder'd from coming to you, having therefore a great desire these many years to come to you, when∣soever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you, Chap. 15.22, 23, 24. 'Tis also certain that he afterwards did see them; for after his Appeal to Caesar, he was sent to Rome, and lived there at least two years: he therefore must have sent this Epistle to them, and they must have receiv'd it, before that time. In a word, from those words in the Close of this Epistle, Chap. 15.25, 26. But now I go to Jerusalem to minister to the Saints; for it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain Contribution for the poor Saints that are at Jerusalem, it is evident he writ this Epistle before that Collection was carried by him to Jerusalem in the third year of Nero, and sent it from Corinth, as the Postscript faith. Note also, that this Epistle is often cited by St. Clemens and Polycarp. In his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, he declares, They were enriched in all Utterance, and Knowledge, or in Tongues and Prophecy, 1 Cor. 1.5. (See the Note there) That they a∣bounded in every thing, in Faith, in Utterance, and Knowledge, 2 Cor. 8.7. so that they came behind the other Churches in no Gift. His Twelfth Chapter begins thus: Now concerning Spiritual Gifts, I would not have you ignorant, that no Man speaking by the Spirit of God,
calleth Jesus accursed; and that no Man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. Now there are diversities of Gifs, but the same Spirit; and there are differences of Administra∣tions, (or Offices in the Church, to which these Gifts belong,) but (all proceeding from) the same Lord; and there are diversities of Operations, performed by these Gifted Men, but it is the same God who worketh all these Operations in them all, ver. 4, 5, 6. Then he pro∣ceeds to the Enumeration of the Gifts confer'd upon the Officers and Members of the Church, viz. The Gifts of Knowledge, Wisdom, Prophecy, and the discerning of Spirits; the Gift of Miracles, of Faith, of Healing, of divers Kinds of Tongues, and the Interpretation of them, saying, That God had placed in the Church, First, Apostles: Secondly, Prophets: Thirdly, Teachers: After that, Miracles, then Gifts of Healing; Helps, Governments, di∣versities of Tongues; concluding with this Question, Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all Workers of Miracles? have all the Gifts of Healing? do all speak with Tongues? do all Interpret? but covet earnestly the best Gifts, and yet shew I to you a more excellent Way, even that of Charity. For, tho' I have the Gift of Prophesie, and under∣stand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and tho' I have all Faith, so that I could remove Moun∣tains, and have no Charity, I am nothing, Chap. 13.1, 2. For Prophecys shall fail, and Tongues shall cease, and Knowledge shall be done away, but Charity never faileth, ver. 8. Now this Epistle must be endited and sent to them whilst their Schisms, Contentions and Disorders remained, because it was designed to correct them, and whilst St. Paul was in a capacity to come to them, and so before his Bonds, because he saith, The rest will I set in order when I come, Chap. 11.34. Hence, after notice given of their Schisms, Contentions and Divisions, he adds, These things have I in a Figure transfer'd to my self and Apollo for your sakes, that you might learn in us, not to think of Men above that which is written, That no one of you be puffed up, for one against another, Chap. 4.6. saying, I have also sent Timotheus to you, and I my self will come unto you shortly; and then he puts the Question to them thus, What will you that I come unto you with a Rod, or in Love, and in the Spirit of Meekness, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. Chap. 5. He commands them to put away from them, and to deliver up to Satan, the incestuous Person; and that accordingly they did so, his Se∣cond Epistle shews, in which he writes to them to forgive, and comfort him, 2 Cor. 2.7. Moreover, He writes part of this Epistle in Answer to some Questions they had sent to him, which required a speedy Answer, as being Cases of Conscience which concern'd their Conversation, their Freedom from Idolatry, and the Preservation of weak Christians. The rest of his Epistle is spent in endeavouring to correct their great Disorders about the Sacra∣ment, their Church Assemblies, and the use of their Spiritual Gifts, Chap. 11. and 14. and their great Errour touching the Resurrection, Chap. 15. and to give Directions touching their Charity, Chap. 16. All which things required speedy Instructions; and that this Epistle was sent accordingly, these Words do manifest, When I come, whomsoever you shall approve by your Letters, them will I send to bring your Liberality to Jerusalem, and if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me, Chap. 16.3, 4. Now I will come to you when I pass thro' Ma∣cedonia, and it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter with you, ver. 5, 6. I say, hence it is evident, That they soon received this Epistle; for they accordingly made their Collecti∣ons, with which he went up to Jerusalem; and in his Second Epistle, he Apologises for not coming to them, according to those Words, Chap. 1.16, 17. Moreover, the Second Epistle is a strong Confirmation of the First, in which he had pointed out unto them, those Disor∣ders which he would have remedied, those things he would have done before his coming; for in this he tells them their Obedience to his former Letter, had filled him with Joy and Comfort, that his Instructions concerning the incestuous Person, had found so good effect, that they approved themselves to be clear in this Matter, and caused him to rejoice, That he could have such confidence in them in all things, Chap. 7. Whence it is evident, They had not only then received, but in some measure had complyed with the Instructions given them in that Epistle. Add to this, That Clemens Romanus with the whole Church of Rome, in an Epistle sent to the Corinthians, not many Years after this of St. Paul's was written, declare, [§. 2.] That there was , a full effusion of the Holy Ghost upon them all; and that St. Paul had written to them an Epistle touching their Divisions about himself, [§. 47.] and Cephas, and Apollo; which is a great Confirmation, both of the ear∣ly Knowledge, and Use of this Epistle in the Church, as also of the truth of what St. Paul relateth in it, touching the Gifts of the Holy Ghost confer'd upon them. In his Epistle to the Galathians, he compares himself with the Chief of the Apostles, and the Pillars of the Church, declaring, That he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apo∣stleship of the Circumcision, was as efficacious in him towards the Gentiles; that these Pillars saw, and perceived by the Grace given to him, That the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was commit∣ted to him, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was to Peter, and therefore gave to him the right hand of Fellowship, that he with Barnabas should go to the Gentiles, and they to the Circum∣cision,
Chap. 2.7, 8, 9. adding for Consolation to the Gentiles, That Christ had redeem'd them from the Curse of the Law, that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, that they might receive the Promise of the Spirit, thro' Faith, Ch. 3.13. adding, That thro' the Spirit they did wait for the Hope of Righteousness by Faith, Ch. 5.5. Now in this Epistle, he mentions the Life that he now lived in the Flesh, Ch. 2.20. his fear of them, his desire to see them, and the desire of the false Brethren to exclude him from any Share in their Affections, and the Persecutions he yet suffer'd in the Flesh, Ch. 3.2. Ch. 4.11, 15, 17, 20. Ch. 5.11. And he concludes it thus; You see how large a Letter I have written to you with my own Hand; and from henceforth let no Man trouble me, for I bear in my Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus, Ch. 6.11, 17. Which Words demonstate, That this Epistle must be written, and sent to them whilst he lived, and after he had suffered greatly for the Name of Christ. Moreover, the occasion of it shews, it must be written by St. Paul himself; for it was writ upon occasion of some Judaizers, who preach'd up the necessity of circumcising the Gentiles, and requiring them to observe the Law of Moses, and who endeavoured to disparage this Apostle who had taught the contrary, as inferiour to other Apostles, and his Doctrine as contrary to what they taught: Now these Distempers requiring a speedy Remedy, we cannot doubt, but the Apostle sent this Epistle to them, as soon as he had heard, how they had been perverted from the Sincerity of the Faith. 'Tis al∣so cited by Polycarp ad Philip. §. 5. In his Epistle to the Ephesians, he tells them, He was made a Minister of the Gospel ac∣cording to the Gift of the Grace of God given to him, by the effectual working of his Power, Ch. 3.7. And, that to every one of us is given Grace according to the measure of the Gift of Christ. For, He ascending up on High, gave Gifts unto Men. And, He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers; and that all these had their Spiritual Gifts. See the Note on Chap. 4.7, 8, 11. and adds, That after they believ'd, they were sealed with the Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, till the Re∣demption of the purchased Possession, Ch. 1.13, 14. Now in this Epistle, he makes mention of his Bonds, and of his being then an Ambassa∣dor in Bonds, Ch. 6.20. saying, I Paul the Prisoner of Jesus Christ, for you Gentiles; I Paul the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, Ch. 3.1. Ch. 4.1. This Epistle therefore, must be sent unto them, whilst he was in Bonds at Rome; and so it must be sent unto them An∣no Christi 62. since Paul was set at liberty the next Year. He also adds, That it was sent by Tychicus, whom he sent to them on purpose to make known his Affairs whilst he abode at Rome, and begs their Prayers for Courage in making known the Mystery of the Gospel, whilst he was thus in Bonds, Chap. 6.19, 20, 21, 22. Moreover, This Epistle is cited by St. Clemens [Ep. ad Cor. §. 46.] about six Years after the writing of it. It is twice cited by Polycarp [§. 1. 12.] in his Epistle to the Philippians. Ignatius [§. 12.] in his Epistle to the Ephesians, saith, That St. Paul in his whole Epistle, made mention of them in Christ Jesus. So early was this Epistle known to, and read by the Christians. In his Epistle to the Colossians, he declares, That he had laboured in Preaching the Go∣spel to them, according to the Energy of him that wrought with him, , by a migh∣ty Power, Ch. 1.29. and saith, Let the Word of God dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, teach∣ing and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Ch. 3.16. Now in this Epistle, he saith, That he then rejoiced in the Afflictions which he suffered for them, Ch. 1.24. He also speaks of his Sollicitude for them, and those of Laodicea, and for as many as had not seen his Face in Christ, of his Salutation with his own hand, Ch. 4.18. and of his Bonds, and of his sending Tychicus and Onesimus, to give them an Account of his Affairs, and of the Salutations of many Brethren. He therefore, and they also, must be all alive when this Epistle was sent to them. In his Epistle to the Thessalonians, he testifies, His Gospel came unto them not in Word only, but in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance, and that they received the Word with much Affliction, but yet with Joy of the Holy Ghost, 1 Thess. 1.5, 6. and for this he appeals to their own Experience, adding these Words, Ye know what manner of Persons we were amongst you for your sakes; whence he infers, That he that despised his Admoniti∣ons, despised not Man, but God who also had given them his Holy Spirit, Ch. 4.8. Now in this Epistle, he speaks of his Absence from them, of his great desire to see them, 1 Thess. 2.17. of his Sollicitude for their stedfastness under their Sufferings, Ch. 3.5, 6. his sending Timothy to give him an account of it, his Comfort when he heard that they stood firm; and maketh Sylvanus and Timotheus his Associates in sending it. This Epistle there∣fore must be written whilst both they and he were living, and it is cited by Polycarp in his Epistle to the Philippians, §. 11. In his Epistle to Titus, he speaks thus, Chap. 3.5, 6. According to his Mercy, he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost which he shed on us a∣bundantly,
thro' Jesus Christ our Lord. Now, of Epistles thus written to particular Persons, I think it needless to prove, That they were written whilst both St. Paul and they were li∣ving, and were not sent unto them from, or in another World. Tho' that is here sufficient∣ly proved from these Words, Chap. 3.12. When I shall send Artemas to thee, or Tychicus, be di∣ligent to come to me to Nicopolis. Arg. 2. §. XII. 2dly, That God vouchsafed to the Professors and first Propagators of the Christian Faith, these admirable Powers, and various Distributions of the Holy Ghost, is farther evident from this Consideration, That the Apostles in all their Contests and Debates with Friends and Adversaries, Believers and Rejecters of the Christian Faith, false Apostles, Antichrists, Corrupters of it, and Apostates from it, appeal with greatest Confidence to these miraculous Operations and Distributions of the Holy Ghost. In their first Controversie, touching the Resurrection of our Lord, gain-said by the Rulers of the Jews, St. Peter speaks thus to them: The God of our Fathers hath raised up Jesus whom ye slew, and hanged on a Tree. Him hath God exalted to his right hand, to be a Prince, and a Saviour, to give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of Sins; And we are his Witnesses of these things, and so is also that Holy Ghost whom God hath given to them that o∣bey him, Act. 5.30, 31, 32. And again, This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are Witnesses; Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Fa∣ther the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear, Act. 2.32, 33. Now evident it is, this Plea could not be offer'd to convince these Rulers, by an Appeal to their own Senses, without the highest Impudence, and plain Confusion of their Cause, had there been no effusion of the Holy Ghost imparted to the Apostles who at∣tested, and the Believers which imbrac'd this Faith; nor could it have been publish'd in that Generation, and recorded by St. Luke, as made by the Apostles before so great an Au∣ditory, if it had been false, so many Witnesses being then living to confute his Story. 2dly, The next Dispute arose betwixt St. Peter and the Converts of the Circumcision, ac∣cusing him as a Transgressor, for Eating and Conversing with Cornelius, and other uncircum∣cised Persons; in which case his Apology runs thus: As I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as upon us at the beginning. Then remembred I the Word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost: Forasmuch then as God gave them the like Gift as he did to us, who believed on the Lord Je∣sus Christ, what was I that I could withstand God, Act. 11.15, 16, 17. And thus he puts to Silence the Zealots for the Circumcision, Men too tenacious of their Rites, too zealous for the Law to be satisfied with any thing that did not carry with it a convincing Evidence. 3dly, A third Contest arose at Antioch, where some believing Jews contended, That it was necessary to Circumcise the Gentile Converts, and to command them to observe the Law of Moses: This vain Pretension St. Peter baffles by this Argument, That God who knows the Hearts bare them witness, that whilst Uncircumcised, they were accepted with him, by giving them the Holy Ghost even as he did to us, and putting no Difference betwixt them and us, purifying their Hearts by Faith; and thence concluding, That by endeavour∣ing to put this Yoke on the believing Gentiles, they would tempt, that is, would disbelieve, and even oppose themselves, to that God who had vouchsafed so clear a Demonstration of his Acceptance of them, not being Circumcised, Acts 15.8, 9. Hence also, the whole Col∣lege of the Apostles write unto them thus: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, to lay upon you no such Burthen, ver. 28. 4thly, When the same Zealots had infected the Church of the Galatians with the perni∣tious Doctrine of the necessity of Circumcision, and of the observation of the Law of Mo∣ses, St. Paul writes thus to them: Oh foolish Galatians! who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the Truth? This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit (in his miraculous Gifts and Operations) by (Obedience to) the Works of the Law, or by the Hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.1, 2. If by the latter, as ye know ye did, this is a demonstration that their Justification and Acceptance with God, is the Fruit of Faith in Christ, not of O∣bedience to the Law of Moses; this the Apostle reassumes, saying, He that ministreth the Spirit to you, and worketh Miracles among you, doth he it by (virtue of your Obedience to) the Works of the Law, or by the Hearing of Faith. We see then, this was the chief Argu∣ment which carryed the Cause in the Council at Jerusalem, and which is urged by St. Paul to confirm the Galatians in the Truth, and Silence those who laboured to prevail upon them to admit of Circumcision, and the Observance of the Law of Moses: This confirma∣tion therefore of the truth of Christian Faith, was such, as none concern'd to do it then, were able to gainsay, much less can any now find reason to doubt of it. In the Epistle to the Church of Corinth, he is even forc'd to prove the Truth of his A∣postleship, against those false Apostles and deceitful Workers who had set up against him, and for the satisfaction of those Corinthians who sought a Proof of Jesus Christ speaking
in him, 2 Cor. 13.3. He therefore justifies and confirms it by declaring, that the signs of an Apostle had been wrought among them by him, in all patience, in signs and wonders, and in mighty deeds, 2 Cor. 12.12. that he was not a whit behind the very chief of the Apostles in these Gifts, Chap. 11.5, 6. that both he, and his fellow Labourers among them, approved themselves as the Ministers of Christ by the Holy Ghost, by the word of Truth, and by the power of God, Chap. 6.6, 7. that they to whom he writ were manifestly declared to be his Letters commendatory, as being the Epistle of Christ ministred by him, written not with ink, but by the Spirit of the living God, Chap. 3. and that they came behind the other Churches in no gift, Chap. 12.13. To the Galatians infected with the like Distemper, he declares that he who wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, was as efficacious in him towards the Gentiles; and that this was so manifest even to the chief of the Apostles, that they were by the Grace vouchsafed to him convinc'd that the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was by Christ committed to his charge. Some there seem to have been among the Members of the Church of Corinth who had not the knowledge of the truth, and who even question'd whether Christ were among them or not: To them he testifieth, that the Church of Corinth came behind the other Churches in no gift, and that by this the testimony of Christ was confirmed among them, 1 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7. See the Note there; that the Word he preached was not delivered in the enticing words of hu∣mane Wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, that their Faith might not seem to consist in the wisdom of Man, but in the power of the Holy Ghost, Chap. 2.4, 5. that God had established them in Christ by giving the earnest of his Spirit in their hearts, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Now for the truth of what he thus delivers, he makes a solemn and religious Ap∣peal to their own Hearts and Consciences, saying, We are made manifest to God, and we trust also we are made manifest in your own Consciences, 2 Cor. 5.11. for we are not as many who corrupt the Word, but as of Sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ, Chap. 2.17. We do by manifestation of the truth commend our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, Chap. 4.2. Yea he appeals to all the Prophets and spiritual Men among them, not only for the Truth, but also for the divine Authority of his Epistles, saying, If any man be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you are the com∣mandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.3, 7. Now evident it is, that Arguments of this nature neither could be urged by this Apostle without confusion to his Cause, and the impairing of his Cre∣dit; nor, being offer'd, could prevail upon the Churches of Achaia, and other Churches, to own him as a true Apostle, and his Epistles as the Commandments of the Lord, had not the matter of fact, on which they did entirely depend, been incontestible. For, had these things been false, or questionable, they whom he styleth false Apostles and deceitful Workers must have been able to reply, That he himself, in his Appeal to the miraculous Operations of the Holy Ghost for Confirmation of his Doctrine and Apostleship, must have been guilty of that very crime he laid to their charge; and all the Churches to which he had directed these Epi∣stles must rather be confirm'd in the Suspicions they had entertain'd against him, than wrought off from them by these vain Pretences, and false Surmises of those Distributions of the Holy Spirit of which they had found no Experience, and had received no convincing Evidence. The Believing Jews lay under two dangerous Distempers: The first was that which S. James takes notice of in his Epistle, viz. That Faith alone would be sufficient to save them without Works; and upon this the Hereticks mention'd byUt liberos agere quae velint, secundum enim ipsius Gratiam salvari homines, & non secundum-operas justas. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. Theodoret Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 1. Irenaeus and others grounded their licentious Doctrines, that they might live as they lifted, they being not to be saved by good Works, but by Faith only. The second was a Proneness to Apostacy, or falling back from the Faith to Judaism to avoid Persecution: And this the Hereticks also so far improved, as to declare it lawful, in times of Persecution,Orig. contra Celsum. l. 6. p. 282. to commit Idolatry, and to deny Christ with the mouth. Now in opposition to the first Assertion, St. Paul, in his second Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, shews the necessity of taking more abundant heed unto the Precepts of Christianity, as being all confirm'd by Signs, and Miracles, and Gifts of the Ho∣ly Ghost; and therefore puts the Question to them thus, If the word spoken by Angels was firm, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a just Recompence of Reward; how shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirm'd to us by them that heard it: God also bearing them witness both with signs and wonders, and divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will. In opposition to their proneness to Apostacy, he declares it a most dreadful thing to fall from the profession of the Christian Faith after they had received such strong Convictions of it by those Gifts of the Holy Ghost they had received with it: for, saith he, it is impossible for them who were once enlightned, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made par∣takers
of the Holy Ghost, and yet fall away, to be renewed to Repentance, seeing they crucifie again the Son of God, and put him to an open shame, Chap. 6.4, 5, 6. See the Note there. Again, to such there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, seeing they trample under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the covenant, by which they were sanctified an unholy thing, and reproached the spirit of grace, Chap. 10.26, 29, See the Note there. Now visible it is, that the foundation of both these Arguments depends upon the certainty of this matter, that God confirmed the Truth of the Doctrine delivered by Christ and his Apostles, by divers Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and that Christians then were made Partakers of those Gifts. Lastly, Against the Seductions of the Antichrists and the Deceivers which were then crept into the Church, St. John fortifies the Believers with these words; These things have I writ∣ten concerning them that deceive you. But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any one teach you, but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lye; and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him, 1 Joh. 2.26, 27. And again, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the World. By this shall ye know the spirit of God; every spirit that confesseth Jesus Christ coming in the flesh, is of God; and eve∣ry spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. See the strength of the Argument in the Note there. And it is the Spirit that witnesses that Jesus is the Son of God, because the spirit is truth, Chap, 5.6. He that believeth in the Son of God hath the witness in himself, ver. 10. Now when Men thus lay claim in their Epistles to their Converts, to the Power of God co-operating with them in the promotion of the Faith, declaring that he testified to the Truth of what they preach'd by divers Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost; when they confidently speak of an Unction of the Spirit of Truth abiding in them, of which they to whom they write were made Partakers, and by this very Argument endeavour to convince them what a dreadful thing it would be for them to despise the Admonitions they had given, or to neglect the great Salvation they had tendred to them; there can remain no cause of doubting of the Truth of these Assertions, especially when they to whom they write not only do continue stedfast in the Faith, but also do admit those Writings which assert these things, as divine Records, and the Word of God. And this Argument will be much strengthned from this Consideration, that the Primitive Professors, in all their Conflicts with Jews, Gentiles, Magicians, False Prophets, Hereticks, and false Pretenders to be the Successors of the Apostles, used still this Argument from the miraculous Operations the Christians then performed, and the Gifts of the Holy Ghost they still receiv'd and exercised, as an effectual confirmation of the Christian Faith, and a sufficient confutation of the Pretences of their Adversaries: v. g. 1st, From this they prove to the Jews, That God had deserted them, and was now graci∣ously present with the Christian Assemblies; that the Shechinah and. Just. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 308. B. & 315. Orig. contra Celsum, l. 2. p. 62. & l. 7. p. 337. prophetick Gifts which were long since departed from them, were still extant among Christians, and exercised both by Men and Women. 2dly, Hence they triumph over the. Just. M. Apol. 1. p. 45. Vide Theophil. ad Autolicum, l. 2. p. 87. C. Tertull. Apol. c. 23. Cypr. de Idol. Van. Ed. Ox. p. 14. ad Demetr. p. 191. Arnob. l. 1. p. 29. Lactant. l. 4. c. 27. Heathen Deities, that by the Name of Jesus such Cures were wrought on the diseased, as none of their supposed Deities could perform; and that they by this Name expell'd those Devils which their Conjurers could not expel, and forc'd them to confess they were evil Spirits. 3dly, They triumph over theSuper haec arguentur qui sunt à Simone, & Carpocrate, & si qui alii virtutes operari dicuntur — per magi∣cas elusiones, nec enim caecis possunt donare visum, neque surdis auditum, neque omnes Daemones effugare, &c. Iren. l. 2. c. 56, 57. Simonians and Gnosticks, the Magicians and Hereticks of their times, by the same Argument, that they could neither cure all Diseases, nor expel all kinds of Devils, as the Christians did. 4thly, By this they, after the example of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.3. and of St. John, 1 Joh. 4.1, 2, 3. taught Christians to distinguishHermas l. 2. c. 11, 12. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 17. See the Section of the Gift of Prophecy, §. 20. betwixt true and false Prophets; and by this they confuted the Montanists, because they left no Succession of Prophets, which yet continued in the true Church of Christ. Some Hereticks finding themselves unable even to pretend to such a Gift of Prophecy as the Gospel of St. John had promised, and the Epistles of St. Paul mentioned, rejected both that Gospel, and those Epistles. Now these, saithLib. 3. cap. 11. Irenaeus,
are unhappy Men, qui gratiam prophetiae repellunt ab Ecclesia, who go about to exclude the Grace of Prophecy from the Church, and thereby make themselves false Prophets, i. e. Assertors of things in God's Name which they have not received from him. Lastly, As for the true Successors of the Apostles,Lib. 4. cap. 43. Irenaeus informs us, that Cum successione Apostolatus charisma veritatis certum secundum beneplacitum patris acceperunt, with their Succession they receiv'd the gift of Truth; and hence infers, thatCap. 45. Ubi igitur cha∣rismata Domini posita sunt, ibi discere oportet veritatem, where therefore these gifts of the Lord are placed, there the Truth is to be learned. Arg. 3. §. 13. The Prayers and the Thanksgivings made for these divine Assistances, the Charges the Apostles give concerning them, the Exhortations and Directions which they send to Christian Governours, and Churches, touching these Gifts and Operations of the Ho∣ly Ghost; are a convincing Demonstration that they were frequent, and notoriously exercised in the Church of God. For instance; I thank my God, saith the Apostle to the Church of Corinth, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ, that in every thing ye are en∣riched by him in all utterance and all knowledge, (or in Tongues and Prophecy) so that we come behind the other Churches in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7. See the Note there. He begins his Epistle to the Church of Ephesus thus; Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, Eph. 1.3. See the Note there. Praying that the same God would give to them the Spirit of Wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him, ver. 17. He prays for the Romans, that they may abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, Chap. 15.13. And for his Colossians, that they may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual Understand∣ing, Chap. 1.9. Having convened the Asiatick Bishops, he requires them to take heed to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, Acts 20. 28. To the Church of Rome he speaks thus; Having therefore  different gifts, whether Prophecy, let us do it accor∣ding to the proportion of faith; or ministering, let us wait on our ministering; or he that teacheth, on teaching, Rom. 12.6, 7, 8. See the Note there. He exhorts the Ephesians and Colossians to be filled with the spirit, speaking to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spi∣ritual Songs, Eph. 5.18, 19. Coloss. 3.16. Two of his Admonitions to his Thessalonians are conceived in these words, Quench not the holy Spirit, despise not Prophecy, 1 Thess. 5.19, 20. To his Son Timothy he speaks thus; Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, 1 Tim. 4.14. And in his second Epistle, Stir up the gift that is in thee by the putting on of my hands, Chap. 1.6. for, saith he, God hath not given us the spirit of Fear, but of Power, Love, and Wisdom, ver. 7. He exhorts him also to Keep the good thing com∣mitted to him by the Holy Ghost that dwelleth in him, ver. 14. Now in these Epistles he speaks of himself as a Prisoner, and a Sufferer for the Cause of Christ, saying, Be not thou ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, nor of me his Prisoner; he tells him he was ready to be offered, and the time of his departure was at hand; informs him that Demas had forsaken him, and desires him when he came to him, to bring Mark with him, 2 Tim. 1.8.2.8, 10.4.6, 10, 11, 12. He speaks of Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom he had delivered up to Satan, and saith, These things I write unto thee, hoping to come to thee shortly, 1 Tim. 1.20.3.14. All which are evident Proofs that these Epistles must be sent to Timothy whilst St. Paul was living, and was a Prisoner at Rome. St. Peter advertiseth the converted Jews, that the Gos∣pel was preached to them by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; and he gives these In∣structions to them for the use of their extraordinary gifts: As every man hath received the gift, so let him minister, as good stewards of the manifold Grace of God; if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God giveth, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Now the Messenger by which he sent this Epistle, and the Salutations in the Close of it, shew that it was written whilst Mark and Sylvanus were living. But the great Scene of these Directions and Admonitions lies in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he exhorts them to covet earnestly spiritual gifts, but chiefly that of Pro∣phecy, 1 Cor. 14.1. to covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak with tongues, ver. 39. More∣over, he directs them in the due exercise of these spiritual Gifts, after this manner: Foras∣much as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church, ver. 12. Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown Tongue, pray that he may interpret, ver. 13. And again, If any man speak in an unknown Tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and let one interpret; but if there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church, ver. 27, 28. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the others judge, ver. 29.
If any thing be reveal'd to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace, for ye may all prophesie one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted, ver. 30, 31. In the same Chapter he chides them for using these spiritual gifts without profit to the Hearer, and so as to breed confusion in the Church. How is it, saith he, Brethren, that when you come toge∣ther, every one of you hath a Psalm, hath a Doctrine, hath a Tongue, hath a Revelation, hath an Interpretation? let all things be done to edifying, ver. 26. declaring that by using Tongues not understood in the Assembly, they would give to the Infidel and Unbeliever occasion to say they were mad, ver. 23. But if all prophesie, saith he, and there come in one that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all, and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth, ver. 24, 25. So notorious are these Gifts supposed to be, not on∣ly to the Saint, but to the Infidel, and so powerful for his Conversion. Now had these great Apostles given thanks for Gifts confer'd upon these Churches which they never had enjoy'd; had they exhorted them to desire, and earnestly to covet, to stir up, and excel in Gifts they never had, and which were not imparted to any Members of the Church; had they given these grave Directions, and solemn Charges touching those Gifts of Prophecy and Revelation, of Tongues and the Interpretation of them, which never had been exercised in that of Corinth, or any other Christian Church; had they severely chid them for abusing those Gifts they ne∣ver had, and shewed themselves so much concerned to correct an Abuse of which they were incapable, as having not the use of what they are supposed to abuse; had they condemned the Murmurings of them who had them in a less, the Boastings of them who had them in a higher measure, by such Enquiries as these, What hast thou which thou hast not received? And if thou hast receiv'd (them,) wherefore dost thou boast, as if thou hadst not received (them?) 1 Cor. 4.7. See the Note there; and shewing the necessity that there should be such a diversity of Gifts, and Operations in the Body, 1 Cor. 12.14-27. and done, and said, all this without a just foundation; this must have render'd those Epistles in which these Passages are contain'd, the matter of their Derision and Disdain, rather than worthy to be owned as the Oracles of God: And those Apostles which indited them must rather have been esteemed by them brain-sick Enthusiasts, than Men inspired by the Spirit of God. Since then these Writings generally were received as divine Records by all Christians, and by those very Churches to which they were indited, it must be certain, that in all these As∣sertions they contained matter of unquestionable Truth, and only spake of those spiritual Gifts of which these Churches had a full experience; there being, saith Clemens Romanus in his Epistle writ soon after to them, a full effusion of the Holy Ghost upon them all. Arg. 4. §. 14. This will be still more evident, if we consider what Christianity, the Au∣thor, and the Propogators of it, required of all that would embrace the Christian Faith, and what were the Encouragements they tendered as the chief Inducements so to hope, believe, and act, or suffer, as Christianity required. And, 1st, They call upon all Christians to take up the Cross of Christ daily, and for his sake to forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Goods and Relations, and even Life it self, declaring that without this they cannot be Christ's Disciples, Luke 14.26, 27. informing them that all that will live godly must suffer persecution, 2 Tim. 3.12. that through many tribulati∣ons they must enter into the kingdom of God, Acts 4.22. that they were called to suffer, and were appointed to this very thing, 1 Thes. 3.3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.21. Accordingly we find that the Corinthians were Partakers with them of their sufferings, 2 Cor. 1.7. that the Galatians had suffered many things, Gal. 3.4. that to the Philippians it was given, not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake, Philip. 1.29. that St. Paul commends the Colossians for their stedfastness in the faith under all their perfections, Chap. 1.11. and prays they may be strengthened with all might, according to his glorious Gospel to all patience, and long suffering, with joyfulness Chap. 2.5. He saith the Thessalonians suffered the same, from their Country∣men, as did the believing Jews from theirs, 1 Thess. 2.14. that he sent Timothy to stablish and to comfort them concerning their faith, and to exhort them not to be moved at those afflicti∣ons to which they were appointed, Chap. 3.34. adding, that he gloried in them in the Church∣es of God for their patience and faith in all their persecutions, 2 Thess. 1.4. In his Epistle to the Hebrews he saith, They suffered a great fight of afflictions, partly while they were made a gazing stock both by reproches and afflictions, and partly whilst they became companions of them who were so used, and that they took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods; and he exhorts them not to cast away their confidence, because they had need of Patience, Hebr. 10.32.36. and af∣ter the example of that cloud of witnesses which he had set before them, to run their Christi∣an race with patience, Chap. 12.1. St. Peter tells the same believing Jews they were in hea∣viness for a season through manifold Temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6. desiring them not to think it strange concerning the fiery trial which was come to try them, Chap. 4.12. These Tribulati∣ons they exhort them to endure with Faith and Courage, Patience and Perseverance, Joy and
Triumph; and yet the only thing they offer them to raise this Joy and Comfort, engage them to this Perseverance, and to support them under these fiery Trials, is the Promise or the actual Vouchsafement of the Holy Ghost helping their Infirmities, that as they were Partakers of the Sufferings of the Apostles, so should they be also of their consolations, 2 Cor. 1.7. that if they suffered for the name of Christ, happy were they, for the Spirit of Glory and of God should rest upon them, 1 Pet. 4.14. This, say they, ye have found, for you became Followers of the Lord, and of us, having received the word with much affliction, and with joy of the Holy Ghost, 1 Thes. 1.6. and may well suffer hardship as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, for God hath not Given us the Spirit of fear, but  of Courage to endure, of that Love which casts out Fear, and of that Prudence which will instruct us how to bear, or to escape them, 2 Tim. 1.7. Now if this promise was sensibly made good to them under these afflictions, they by it did receive an earnest of the truth of Christian Faith, and an assurance of God's concern to comfort and re∣ward their Christian Patience in his cause. But if under these fiery Trials they found no sensi∣ble Experience of the Holy Ghost thus helping their Infirmities, no inward Joys, Supports, and Consolations of the promised comforter, what reason had they to continue to take joyful∣ly the spoiling of their Goods, the loss of Credit, Life, and all their worldly comforts, for the profession of that Faith which had so palpably deceived them, in the chief Motive which it offer'd to engage them to suffer for the name of Christ, or for the Truth and the Divine Au∣thority of those Epistles which contained these apparent falshoods. This Argument may be enforced from the consideration of the Multitude of Christian Mar∣tyrs in the three first ages of the Church, all which could have no other Motive thus to suf∣fer, but this promised assistance of the Holy Ghost at present, and the assurance which this earnest of the Spirit gave them of an eternal state of Happiness hereafter; and so if they had no experience of this assistance under Sufferings and no assurance of such an earnest of the Spi∣rit in their hearts, must suffer all these dreadful things without just Ground, or Motive: which even an HeathenNullo igitur modo fieri potest ut quisquam tanti aestimet aequitatem, & fidem, ut ejus conservandae causâ nul∣lum supplicium recuset, nisi iis rebus assensus sit, quae falsae esse non possunt. Acad. Quaest. l. 2. n. 24, 25. Cicero doth represent as a thing impossible to be performed, the hardness of some Jewish Zealots, and some deluded Christian Sects, in suffering, being no instance to the contrary. For though they mistake in application of this future Happiness in prospect of which they thus endure; to themselves, the Principle upon which they suffer is indisputably true, and owned even by Epicurus himself, Ut voluptates omittantur majorum voluptatum adipiscendarum causâ, aut dolores suscipiantur majorum dolorum eftugiendorum gratia, that we should part with our temporal enjoyments for a season here, for a better and more enduring substance, and suffer these light afflictions which are for a moment, that we may escape more lasting and intolerable torments, this being only, saithItaque harum rerum hic tenetur à sapiente delectus, ut aut rejiciendis voluptatibus majores alias consequatur, aut perferendis doloribus asperiores repellat. De finibus bonorum, &c. l. 1. n. 27, 29. Torquatus, the choice which the Wise-man of Epicurus ought to make. In a word, the manner of their sufferings doth give us full assurance that the assistance of the Holy Ghost, which Christ and his Apostles promised to the true Believers, was accordingly vouchsafed to the Christian Martyrs, and Confessors, they being enabled to bear the greatest Sufferings not only with undaunted Cou∣rage, putting off the Body, saith. Contr. Cels. l. 7. p. 357. Origen, more cheerfully than a Philosopher would put off his Coat, despising Death, saith. Lucian. peregr. F. 338. Lucian, and willingly submitting to it; but with great Joy and Exultation, being strengthned to all long suffering with joyfulness, Colos. 2.5., Just. M. p. 265. Magisque damnati quam absoluti gaudemus, Tertul. ad Scap. c. 1.  solebant. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. cap. 9. re∣joycing in tribulations, counting it all joy when they fell into divers temptations, and happy when they did endure them, James 1, 3, 12. and rejoycing when they were in hea∣viness through manifold afflictions; 1 Peter 1.6. yea sometimes withSolebant etenim , immo . Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 9. miraculous experience of Consolations under all their Sufferings, causing this Joy and Gladness in them; yea sometimes with a perfect freedom from all sense of Pain under the most af∣flicting Torments; as in the case of theTertull. de prescript. cap. 36. Evangelist St. John, and of, Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 1. , l. 8. c. 10. p. 338, 339. Blan∣dina, these Sufferings not being able to extort from them one Complaint orQuot ex nostris non dexterum solum sed totum corpus uri, cremari, sine ullis ejulatibus pertulerant, Minutius p. 41. Tortores suos taciti vincunt, & exprimere illis gemitum nec ignis potest, Lact. l. 5. c. 13. Groan.
Now this being done as well byPueri nostri, & Mulierculae nostrae, cruces, & tormenta, feras, & omnes suppliciorum terriculas, inspiratâ pa∣tientiâ doloris illudunt, Minut. p. 42. Athenag. Legat. pro Christ. p. 12. A. Children and the weakest Sex, by the Ideot as well as by the Wisest Sages, gives a full demonstration of the Truth of that Assertion of. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 1 p. 160. C. Eusebi∣us, That the Love of Christ, the hopes of Immortality, and the Spirit of the Father, inspi∣red them with this Courage; for what else could create such Joys and Exultations, or suggest such Comforts, and Supports under the sharpest Trials. What could procure to them a free∣dom from the sense of Pain under the greatest Torments, and most intolerable Burthens to Flesh and Blood. 2dly, Again, they engage all Christians in the most difficult Acts of Self-denial, and Mor∣tification of all carnal Lusts, in the cutting off their right-hands, and the plucking out their eyes, in patience under, and the forgiveness of the greatest injuries, in Love and Charity to the worst of Enemies, in Temperance as to the Pleasures and Honours of this present Life, in a deadness to the World, and the enjoyments of it, in Piety and Purity and heavenly mind∣edness, because they cannot otherwise be Christ's Disciples, cannot be worthy of him, Matth. 10.37, 38. They cannot enter into his kingdom, Matth. 19.23, 24. but shall hereafter be denied, and rejected by him, Matth. 10.32, 33. Now what could such Threats signifie to them who were not by his Miracles, and by experience of the Holy Ghost sent down from hea∣ven, convinced that he was indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the World. The Encourage∣ment they gave them to be thus stedfast, immoveable, always abounding in the fear of the Lord, was only the Promise of a future and unseen Reward, chiefly to be enjoy'd after the Resurrection of the Body, which to the Sadducees among the Jews, and the whole Race of Heathen Sages, seem'd a thing incredible. 'Tis therefore not to be imagined that so many Myriads of Christian Converts should renounce all the Pleasures of the Flesh, all the Gratifi∣cations of this present World, all their old Rites, Religions, Customs, evil Habits, submit to all this Self-denial and Mortification, only to be Partakers of these unseen Blessings after the Resurrection, without a full Assurance that they hereafter should enjoy them. Now the only Assurance which the Apostles and Holy Scriptures did afford them of this blessed Resur∣rection, and eternal Happiness, was the Miracles by which their Doctrine was confirmed, the Powers, Gifts, and Distributions of the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to them. After the Disso∣lution of this Body we expect, say they, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Hea∣vens: we groan, desiring to be clothed with this house from Heaven, that Mortality may be swallowed up of Life. Now he that hath wrought this Hope within us, is that God who hath given us the earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.1-5. And again, The Promises of God are all yea and Amen, or sure and certain in Jesus Christ, and He who hath established us with you, in expectation of them, is that God who hath anointed us, and sealed us, and given the ear∣nest of his spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.20, 21. enabling us by the spirit to wait for the adoption, even the redemption of the body, Rom. 8.23. adding, that by the spirit of Adopti∣on they were enabled to cry Abba, Father, ver. 15, 16. that he bore witness with their spirits that they were the sons of God, the Love of God being shed abroad in their hearts by the Ho∣ly Ghost, which God had given them, Gal. 4.6. Hence they continually declare, that after they believed, they were sealed with the spirit of Promise, which was the earnest of their In∣heritance till the redemption of the purchased possession, Eph. 1.13, 14. that by him they were sealed up to the day of redemption, Chap. 4.30. that he was the earnest of their future inhe∣ritance, that they were not ashamed of their hope, they through the spirit waiting for the pe of righteousness, Gal. 5.5. and abounding in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15.13. Hence is he stiled by St. John, the witness of God within them, 1 John 5.10. and by this, saith he, do we Christians know, that God abideth in us, and we in him, even by the spirit that he hath given us, Chap. 4.13. By all which Sayings it appears, that if these things were true, they to whom this Assistance of the Holy Spirit was vouchsafed must be very sensible of his dwelling, and his acting in them, that they could plainly know they had this Unction from the holy one, and could be hence assured of the divine Affection to them, and of their future Hopes and Expectations, since otherwise he could be no such Seal, Pledge, and Earnest to them, and no such Witness of God within them, and no such Confir∣mation of their Faith, or Token of the Love of God: and if these things were false, and they had no such sensible experience of the good Spirit acting and abiding in them, if they found no such confirmation of their Hopes from any inward Testimony or outward Operations of the Holy Ghost, they must not only have no certain ground or motive to assure them of that future Recompence, which was the only reason which could induce them to embrace, and to continue stedfast in the Christian Faith, but must have a convincing demonstration that the
whole Doctrine of Christianity depended on a false Suggestion of such a sensible and certain Testimony of these future hopes, of which they neither had, nor could have any knowledge or Experience, and that the Apostles and first Asserters of this Faith had laid the whole foun∣dation of their hopes upon a false and a precarious Appeal to their own Consciences concern∣ing that of which they had no knowledge or experience. And being once assured of this, that the great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith were bottom'd on a confident Appeal to their Perception of those things of which they who embrac'd this Faith had not yet found the least experience, it is incredible to believe they should continue stedfast in, and endure such continual Persecutions for that Faith, and should receive those very Records as the Word of God which made these false Appeals unto their Conscience and Experience. §. 15. I think I have sufficiently made it appear, that these Epistles, which contain these things must be endited whilst the Apostles lived, and so they must be sent to those Churches and Persons to whom they are directed, at a time when all the Members of those Churches must be able to discern the Truth or Falshood of what is thus asserted in them: Yet because the pretence that it might be otherwise containeth the whole strength of Scepticism, let it be farther noted; 1st, That these Epistles from which these things are cited, one alone excepted, bear the Names of the Apostles by whom they are supposed to be written: Now had they not been really indited by them, this could not have been done by any, but he must put a cheat upon all Christians, and substitute his own inventions for the Word of God. 2dly, That all of them, excepting one, which yet is proved to be genuine in the Preface to the Epistle to the Hebrews, have been delivered down unto us by the perpetual and uncon∣trol'd Tradition of the whole Church of Christ, as the undoubted works of these Apostles, and as the Word of God. Moreover it is apparent from the Writings of St. Clement R. Ig∣natius, Polycarp, Justin M. Irenaeus, that even from the Apostles Days they have been cited, read, and generally received as such. Now this is a Tradition more general, and of a firmer credit than any other Book, Writing, Charter, Law, or Statute whatsoever, can pretend to. Consider, 3dly. That the Tradition which concerns these Books was a Tradition concerning things of the highest moment, and which it was the Interest of all Christians to be well assured of, these Writings being at present the chief ground of their Support under their sharpest Trials, and of their future hopes; they therefore must be Writings which they were concerned to get and keep, to hear and read, they were Books written to whole Churches and Nations, yea to all that called on the name of Christ Jesus in every place; who could not easily have receiv'd, and yielded such a firm Assent unto them, as we know they did, had the Apostles, by whom they were converted, given no Intimations of them. They were also Books of the greatest opposition to the vain Tradition of the Jews, and to the Superstition of the Heathens, to the false Apostles and deceitful Workers, and which denounc'd upon them the greatest Plagues, and Judgments, which must oblige them narrowly to search into the flaws that could be spy∣ed in them, and as much as possible, to labor to discover the falshood or imposture of them; and yet these works were not denied by them to be the Books of those Apostles whose names they bear, though the Apostles themselves, especially St. Paul, was persecuted by them with a restlest Malice, as an Apostate from the Law; and upon this account all his Epi∣stles were rejected by those Jewish Christians who maintained the necessity of the obser∣vance of the Law of Moses; most of them also are writ about that very Controversie, and against those very Men who pleaded the necessity of Circumcision, and of observing the whole Law of Moses; which yet could be no Controversie after the ruin of Jerusa∣lem, and the Destruction of the Temple, seeing that rendered the Observation of the Pre∣cepts of that Law, for the most part, impossible. They were Books which could not be spread abroad in the Apostles days, and in their Names, unless the Apostles had endited, and sent them to these Churches, or be esteemed as the great Charters of the Christians Faith, if the Apostles were so forgetful of them as not to let those Persons for whose sake they were written, know it. They were Books which pretended to a Commission from the Holy Jesus to leave a Rule of Life and Doctrine to Mankind, which was intrusted only in the Hands of the Apostles, all others still pretending to deliver only what they received from them. They also were indited partly to confirm the Christian Faith, and to engage Men to believe it; partly to put an end to the Contentions and rectifie the Errours which had crept into the Church in the Apostles Days, and needed speedy Reformation; partly to justifie themselves against false Brethren, and to assert the truth of their Apostleship; and partly to preserve their Proselytes from such as did pervert the Faith, and to instruct them how to bear up in fiery Trials, and to support the Souls of Christians under the miseries they suffer'd from a persecuting World: And therefore they were Written on such Grounds as did require a quick dispatch upon these Errands to the Churches for which they were intended; and so the
Apostles must be supposed to give early notice of them, and to divulge them to the Chri∣stian World whilst they to whom they were committed, were able to disprove them, if they had been false. Let us consider all the Writings which pass for true Authentick Records in the World, and we shall find there is not any reason to conceive them such, which is not with advantage ap∣plicable to these Books. The Arguments which can be offered to prove a Book or Writing genuine, are only of two kinds, external from the Testimony of Persons who lived near to the times of the Author; and internal from the things contained in, and asserted by those Writings; and the firm Faith they obtained among them to whom they were directed and committed. The external Testimonies have their force partly from the number and the eminence of the Testators, their nearness to the times when such a Book is said to be written, or such a Wri∣ting published by the original Copies, preserved by those to whom they were at first commit∣ted, and from the general Reception and Citation of them as such Writings and Records. Now as for these external Evidences, no Writings can compare with those Epistles I have mentioned, they having all the Circumstances by which any Writing can be proved genuine, and many others of great weight which are peculiar to them, and which no other Writing can pretend to. I say, they have all the Circumstances to prove them genuine which any other Writing can pretend to. For, 1st, Their Originals were preserved in their respective Churches till Tertullian's time; who speaks thus to the Hereticks of his Age, or of the third Century:Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas apud quas ipsae Authenticae Literae eorum recitantur, sonantes vocem & represen∣tantes faciem uni uscujusque. De Praescript. c. 36. Go to the Apostolical Churches, where their Authentick Epistles are still recited, representing the Voice and Face of each of them. 2dly, They were not doubted of, but as. Ita de Evangeliis, Orig. apud Euseb. l. 6. c. 25. , Euseb. de Epistolis, l. 3. c. 25. St. Clement and Origen say, all that I have cited, excepting only the Epistle to the Hebrews mention'd by S. Peter, were generally re∣ceiv'd by all Orthodox Christians throughout the World. 3dly, The Writers by whom they were cited lived either in those times when they were written, as St. Clemens Rom. or in the very next Age, as Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin Mart. Irenaeus, and were therefore stiled Apostolical Men. 4thly, They were very eminent both for their Learning, and for their Sufferings for the Faith contained in them, or for their opposition to it, as Celsus was: Now sure we have unquestionable Certainty of such Books as have been handed down to us by the Tradition of all Ages of the Church, inserted into all her Catalogues, cited by all her Writers as Books of a Divine Authority, and by her very Adversaries, preserved so long in their Originals, and of which never any doubt was made by any genuine Member of the Church of Christ. I add, 2dly, That there are many Circumstances of great weight to confirm these Testimonies, which are peculiar to these Writings: as, 1st, A general Dispersion of them through those places which were converted to that Faith which the Apostles preach'd: for the Apostles, saith Irenaeus, first preached the Gospel, and after, by the will of God, in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt; delivered it to us in the Scrip∣tures, to be hereafter the Pillar and Foundation of our Faith, lib. 3. cap. 1. Eusebius saith, that the first Successors of the Apostles, leaving their Countries, preach'd to them who had not yet heard of the Christian Faith, and then delivered to them, as the foundation of their Faith, , the Writings of the Holy Evangelists. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 37. 2dly, The Translation of them into other Languages, that of the Syriack being so Ancient that it leaves out the second Epistle of St. Peter and the second and third Epistle of St. John, and the Revelations, as being for a time controverted in some of the Eastern Churches. That of the Latin, stiled in Jerom's time the old Translation, and very probably made from the beginning of a settled Church among them. For the Latin Church could not be well with∣out a Latin Version, it being the Custom of all Churches to read these Scriptures on the Lord's day; which sure they would not do in a Language not understood by those that heard it. 3dly, The constant reading of them in publick, and in private, in their Assemblies, and in their Closets and Families. On Sunday,Apol. 2. p. 98. saith Justin M. all the Christians in the City or Country meet together, and then we have read unto us the Writings of the Prophets and  the Monuments of the Apostles; and having read them, they did
publicklyEuseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 19.  expound them to the People. That they were also read by the most eminent and pious Christians every day, thatOrig. Hom. 11. in Exod. F. 50. L. discat unusquisque ex Scripturis sanctis officium suum, every one might learn his duty from the holy Scriptures, we learn from the Question in theLib. 6. cap. 27. Constitutions of S. Clement, Whether a man ought the day after he had done the duties of Wedlock, or been subject to any unvoluntary defilement,  touch the Book; and the Declaration ofPaedag. l. 2. c. 10. p. 194. D. S. Clement, that the Matrimonial Duties should not be done  when was the time of Prayer, or reading of the Scriptures; and thatStrom. 7. p. 728. B. the Sacrifices of the true Gnostick were  Prayers and Praises, and the reading of the holy Scriptures before Meals. And seeingLib. 3. cap. 3. Irenaeus saith, that He who had a care of his Salvation might read the form of his Faith in the Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians; since thatSuidas in voce Polycarpus. Epistle and theEuseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 38. l. 4. c. 23. Epiph. Haer. 30. p. 15. Phot. Cod. 113. Epistle of St. Clement to the Church of Corinth, which were their genuine Works; yea, the EpistleHieron. vocibus Barnabas & Hermas. of St. Barnabas, and the Book ofEuseb. l. 3. c. 3. Athanas. Epist. Paschal. Tom. 2. pag. 39, 40. Hermas, which two were reckon'd as Apocryphal, were read publickly in many Churches, doubtless they must be more concern'd to read the undoubted Writings of the Apostles, which they esteem'd the Rule of Faith, which they styledCypr. de Elv. & Lib. & Ep. 52. pass. Sancti Foelicis passim. Libri deifici, Books which transform'd them into a divine na∣ture, which they look'd upon as the Records of their eternal Interests, as Books by which they must be judged at the last day, and according to which they should be punish'd, or re∣warded everlastingly. 4thly, The early Perusal of them both by Jews and Heathens, who writ against them, and did endeavour to destroy them, that so they might cause the Christian Faith to perish, but never did deny them to be indeed the Works of the Apostles whose Names they bore: by Jews, forApud Justin. Dial. pag. 227. C. Trypho speaks thus at least of the Gospels; The Precepts contained in your Gospels are so great, that I suspect no man can keep them, , for I took care to read them. TheIren. l. 1. c. 26. Orig. l. 5. p. 274. Euseb. l. 3. c. 27. Ebionites, who also were Jews, rejected all the Epistles of S. Paul, as gathering from them, that he was an Apostate from the Law of Moses. The Heathens, forApud Orig. p. 11. 227. &c. Celsus not only boasts that he knew all things belonging to the Christians, but often carps at the Writings of the Evangelists, and of St. Paul. And indeed the Christians freely offer'd them to be perused by them: For that we may not seem to impose upon you, saith Just. Mart. to the Roman Emperours, we offer to you some of the Doctrines of Christ; and you, be∣ingApol. 2. pag. 61. D. Emperours, may  search whether we truly have been taught, and teach these Doctrines. And again, The Prince of evil Spirits is by us called a Serpent, Satan, and the Devil,Pag. 71. B. , as you may learn by searching into our Writings. Thou who thinkest we are not concerned for the safety of Caesar, saithApol. cap. 31. Tertullian, look into the words of God, Quas neque ipsi supprimimus, & pleri{que} casus ad extraneos transferunt, which we do not suppress, and which many Accidents bring into the hands of Heathens. From their Endeavours to destroy the Christian Faith by burning these Books, came the Edicts ofEuseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 2. Dioclesian, , command∣ing that the Scriptures should be committed to the flames, and theScri∣peurae repertae incenduntur Lact. de Mort. Persec. §. 12. actual burning of them where they could be found, and the tormenting of the Christians to deliver up the Scrip∣tures. 5thly. The direful Torments which the Christians chose to suffer rather than they would desert the Faith contained in these Books, or deliver them up to their Tormentors, and the infamy of those that did so, they being branded with the odious name of Traditors. Now what Writings in the World have been so generally dispersed, and so much perused by all sorts of Persons, Friends, Foes, Assertors of, and Enemies to the Faith of Christians? What Laws, or Writings whatsoever have been so early translated into other Languages? Who were so much concerned to peruse them as were all Christians to peruse the Laws of Christ? Who suffered so much for them as the Christians did? since then this early reading of them in pub∣lick and in private by the Christian, this general dispersion of them through all Christian Churches, this quick translation of them into other Languages, this constant suffering for them, are all corroborating Circumstances of the unquestionable evidence all Christians had obtained that they were genuine works, and truly what they did pretend to be: 'tis also clear these Writings are more worthy to be received as genuine, and Writings of unquestionable truth, than any profane Writings in the World.
§. 16. The internal Arguments which usually are, or can be offered to prove other Wri∣tings genuine, are only taken from the things contained in them, that they were proper to the times in which the Author was suppos'd to write, and from the freedom of them from any thing which is not well consistent with those times, which are all mean, and trifling things compar'd to those internal Arguments which these Epistles do afford, that they are the Authen∣tick records of those Apostles whose names they bear, and that those things which they assert touching the Gifts and powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost, both exercised by them, and confer'd on other Churches, were unquestionably true. For, 1st. It is not once nor twice, it is not by the by, but it is frequently, professedly, and up∣on all occasions they refer to these miraculous Powers, and spiritual Gifts, as yielding a full Proof and Confirmation of the Testimony they gave of Christ, and that Christ was among them, and as a Demonstration of the truth of their Apostleship against all opposers, and of the preference of that Faith which was attended with them, above the Law which some de∣sired to observe, spending whole Chapters in discoursing of these spiritual Gifts, distinguish∣ing them somewhat nicely into Gifts, Administrations, and Operations, ranking them under nine several Heads, and specifying the very names of those who did by Office exercise them, and shewing the necessity there was of this variety of Gifts and Operations in the Body, ap∣pealing to the Senses, the Consciences, and the Experience of those to whom they wrote, touching the Truth and Certainty of what they had asserted touching those spiritual Gifts, by such enqui∣ries as these; what? know ye not that Christ is among you? 2 Cor. 13.5. am I not an Apostle? sure∣ly I am so to you, for the seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. 'Tis manifest you are the Epistle of Christ ministred by us, written not with ink, but with the spirit of the li∣ving God, 2 Cor. 3.3. Surely the signs of an Apostle have been wrought among you in all pati∣ence, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds, 2 Cor. 12.12. Have you received from the false Apostles another spirit which ye have not received from us? Chap. 11.4. This only would I learn of you, he that ministred to you the spirit, and wrought miracles among you, did he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? Are ye so foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye (desirous to be) made perfect in the flesh? Gal. 3.3, 4, 5. our Gospel came not to you in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of Persons we were among you, 1 Thess. 1.5. Which words are either plain Enquiries upbraiding the Doubtfulness, and Hesitation in so plain a case, or else Appeals unto their cer∣tain Knowledge of these things; nor is it to be wondred that they should make these confi∣dent Enquiries, and Appeals seeing the external Miracles, and the internal Gifts, and Distri∣butions of the Holy Ghost mentioned in those Epistles, were either such of which even Infi∣dels might from the nature of them be convinced, or such as from some outward and sensi∣ble Appearances and effects, or by their inward Operations, made themselves known to them who heard and saw them. For instance, the working of miracles, the casting out of Devils by the name of Jesus, and the healing the sick through faith in his name, the Gift of prophecy, or foretelling things future, the discerning of Spirits, the gift of Tongues, and the interpreta∣tion of them, if truly done, were things self evident, and could not well be exercised with∣out a sensible Demonstration to all that saw, perceived, heard, or felt them, that they were performed; and therefore God by assisting the Apostles, and by enabling others to perform them, must give full testimony to the word of his Grace: And the Apostles by this constant appeal to them as to things which their own Eyes had seen, and their consciences bore wit∣ness to, and they in Person had performed, must appeal to the Senses, and Experience of those to whom they writ in matters subject daily to their Experience, and to the Senses of the Mem∣bers of those respective Churches, touching the truth of their Apostleship, and of the Con∣firmation they pretended to have given of it. Now as it seemeth highly incredible that Per∣sons able to write the deepest Mysteries, and the exactest precepts of Morality, should be so foolish as to confirm them only by an appeal to the Senses, and experience of those very Men of whom they were assured that they had never seen or done, or found the least experience of any of the things they mentioned; so is it still far more incredible that an Appeal of such apparent falshood, made to the consciences of Men who never saw these Miracles, or found these comforts of the Holy Ghost, and never had these gifts of Tongues, Interpretation, Healing, Prophecy, which the Epistles tells us were their daily exercise, should embrace these very Epistles as Divine, these Records as the word of God. And yet we know both they, and other Churches, did thus actually esteem them, and receive them as such, and therefore must be well assured that what they thus asserted of the gifts of the Holy Ghost were things con∣firmed to them by their own Senses and Experience. 2dly, Add to this, that these Men, in these very Writings, confidently say, that this was their rejoycing, even the testimony of their conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, they had their conversation in the World, and more abundantly towards them, 2 Cor. 1.13. and that they writ no other things than what they did acknowledge, and they trusted would ac∣knowledge to the end, Chap. 5.11. We are, say they, made manifest to God, and we trust also
we are made manifest in your Consciences, Chap. 5.11. They represent it as a great Absurdi∣ty, that they should be found false witnesses of God, 1 Cor. 15.15. They distinguish them∣selves from others they call false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, by this very Character of their sincerity. For we, say they, are not as many who corrupt the word of God, but as of sin∣cerity, as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17. we have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, not handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, Chap. 4.2. Yea for this they appeal to the Searcher of all hearts, and to the Con∣sciences of those to whom they write, saying, Our exhortation was not of deceit or guile, for neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know; nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others; ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblame∣ably, we behav'd our selves among you that believe, 1 Thess. 2.3, 5, 6, 10. Now with what face could these things be asserted by Men who knew that they, in these Epistles, had told such things as even the Senses and Experience of those to whom they writ must know to be the greatest Falshoods? Or how could they to whom they writ give credit to such im∣pudent Untruths as these must be, if the Relations which they made of these miraculous Operations of the Holy Ghost had been fictitious things? This therefore is a farther Evidence of their sincerity and truth in these Relations. 3dly, Let us consider how the Apostle treats those Churches of Corinth and Galatia, in which he speaks most copiously of these Operations of the Holy Ghost, and how they stood affected to the Apostle Paul. The Corinthians, in his 1st Chapter, are represented as Schis∣matical; in his 3d, as Carnal; in the 5th, as glorying in an Incestuous Person; in the 6th, as Contentious, to their own shame, and to the Scandal of Christianity; in the 8th, as Mur∣therers of them for whom Christ died; in the 10th, as Murmurers, Tempters of Christ, For∣nicators, Idolaters, Partakers of the Table of Devils; in the 11th, as coming to the Lord's Supper not for the better, but the worse, offending in it both against the Rules of Charity, and Temperance, and Faith, in not discerning the Lord's body; in the 12th and 14th, as guilty of Emulations, Schisms, and Contentions, touching spiritual persons, and of Vain-glory, Scandal, and Confusion, in the exercise of their spiritual Gifts; and in the 15th, as Deny∣ers of that Resurrection which was the great Foundation of all the future Hopes of Christi∣ans. In his 2d Epistle he declares his fears that he might find among them Debates, Envy∣ings, Wrath, Strifes, Backbitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults; and that he should find among them many who had not yet repented of the Uncleanness, Fornication, and Lascivious∣ness which they had committed, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. And for these things, if not reform'd, he threatens he would use sharpness, and come to them with a rod, 2 Cor. 10.6.13.2. He char∣ges the Galatians with Apostacy, admiring that they were so soon removed from him that cal∣led them to another Gospel, Chap. 1.6. and represents them as foolish and bewitch'd for falling from that Gospel by which they had receiv'd these spiritual Gifts, to the beggarly Elements of the Law, Chap. 3.1 — 5. Now how could the Corinthians be guilty of such Emulations about spiritual Persons, or such Disorders in the exercise of their spiritual Gifts, provided there were among them no such Persons, and they had no such Gifts? How could they fear the Lashes of his Rod on the account of Crimes of which they neither were nor could be guil∣ty? Why should they not be rather for Cephas or Apollo than for Paul, if Paul imposed up∣on them with false Stories and sensible Untruths? Or why should not the Galatians even quit that Gospel in which he endeavour'd to confirm them only by an Appeal to that which they must know to be a Lye? Moreover, the affections of the Members of these Churches were not so firm to him, their Esteem of him was not so great as that he might securely lessen it by venturing on these arts of Falshood, for he found some of his Corinthians puffed up against him, and preferring others much before him, 1 Cor. 4.18. charging him with Lightness and Inconstancy, 2 Cor. 1.17. and walking acording to the Flesh, Chap. 10.2. looking upon him as a man too much tran∣sported, and almost besides himself, 2 Cor. 5.13. as base in Person, and in Speech contempti∣ble, Chap. 10.10. He complains that they were streightned in their bowels of affection towards him, and that the more he loved them, the less he was beloved by them, 2 Cor. 12.15. that they question'd his Apostleship, and even sought a proof of Christ speaking in him, Chap. 13.3. He represents the Galatians as Men who questioned his Apostleship and Doctrine, or at least thought him much inferior in both to others, Chap. 1. and the 2d, supposing he dissem∣bled with them, and elsewhere preached himself that Circumcision he condemn'd in them, Chap. 5.11. yea, who looked upon him as their Enemy, and were even ready to exclude him, Ch. 4.16, 17. Now under these Circumstances could he hope to repair his Credit with them, and to establish the Apostleship they question'd by an appeal to, and a relation of such things as both their Senses, and experience knew to be manifest Untruths? But, 4thly, Could it be supposed that these Churches were so stupid, and insensible, that they did not, or so partially affected to the Apostles that they would not take notice of these
things? these Epistles inform us of other Subtile and Industrious Adversaries, Men zealous to oppose, and to adulterate the Gospel which he Preached, and desirous to find occasions to depress and lesson the promoters of it, and to advance themselves above them, 2 Cor. 10.12 — 15.11.12. St. Paul complains that the Corinthians had among them false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, who transform'd themselves into the Apostles of Christ, when in truth they were Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.13, 15. Men who corrupted the word of God, Chap. 2.17. and sought to corrupt them from the simplicity that is in Christ, Chap. 11.3. That a∣mong the Galatians there were evil Agents who troubled them, and would pervert the Gos∣pel of Christ, Chap. 1.7. False Brethren who came in privily to spy out their liberty, Chap. 2.4. Men that desired to exclude the Apostles that they might be affected by them, Chap. 4.17. Men who constrained them to be circumcised, and observe the Law, and yet kept it not them∣selves, but only did this least they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ, Chap 6.12, 13. wishing they were cut off who did thus trouble them, Chap. 5.12. The like he saith, Philip. 1.15, 16. Chap. 3.18. Col. 2.4, 8, 19, 20. 1 Tim. 1.5, 6. Chap. 6.3, 4, 5. 2 Tim. 2.17, 18, 19. Chap. 3.5, 8. Tit. 1.10, 11. Now if he himself were a vain Talker, and de∣ceitful Worker, one who endeavour'd to impose upon them with false Tales, with what face could He object those things to others of which he was himself so guilty. Or how could they whom he so confidently doth accuse as guilty of these things, neglect this obvious Reply to such an Accusation that he himself, in his appeal to the miraculous operations of the Holy Ghost for Confirmation of his Doctrine and Apostleship, had done the very thing he laid to their charge. We have no reason to suspect that all, or any of these Adversaries neglected any Pains or Diligence to search into the Truth of what St. Paul thus offer'd to confirm his Doctrine, and magnifie his Office, and to vindicate himself from the Aspersions which they cast upon him. Since then we never find the Truth of these Relations question'd by any of those Jews who so insatiably thirsted for his Blood, or by those Judaizing Christians, those of the Circumcision, who so vehemently inveigh'd against his Doctrine, his Person, and his Office; and since we are assur'd by the event, that if they ever made any such attempts, they all proved ineffectual, and insufficient to impair the Credit of those Writings in the Christian World; it may be certainly concluded, that these Epistles could not be convinced of falshood but contain'd matter of unquestionable Truth in these assertions touching the powerful opera∣rations of the Holy Ghost. Lastly, Let us consider what the Apostles suffer'd for this Testimony, and what it cost them to propogate this Faith throughout the Christian World, and in what tragical Expressions they are set forth in Scripture; God saith St. Paul, hath set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to death, for we are made a spectacle to the world, to Angels, and to Men. Even to this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, are naked, and buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place. And labour working with our hands. Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it. Being defamed, we entreat; we are made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things to this very Day, 1 Cor. 4.9 — 13. that they died daily, or stood in Jeopardy of it every hour, 1 Cor. 15.31. that they approved themselves as Ministers of Christ in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tu∣mults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5. We were, saith he, pressed above measure, beyond strength, insomuch that we despair'd of life, 2 Cor. 1.8. And in the eleventh Chapter he gives such a dreadful Account of his own afflictions as can scarcely be read without trembling. Now by what motive could they be acted in the publication of that Faith, for which they suffered all that Wit and Malice could inflict upon them, but the conviction of the Truth of what they published; seeing they actually lost all in this, and could expect no Blessings in another World for calling God to witness to a Lye? The Moralists assure us that 'tis impossible for Men to act without appearance of some good to be persued by that Action; that love of Life, and a desire of self Preservation, is common to us with the Brutes, and 'tis as natural both for them, and us, to avoid Misery and Torments: If then the Apostles did actually abandon all the Enjoyments and Expectations both of this and of a better Life, and wilfully subject themselves unto the worst of Misery and Torments, in propogation of a Testimony from which they could expect no profit, or advantage, they must be even bereft of common Sense, renounce the natural instincts of Mankind, and be in love with Misery and Ruin. I confess tis possible for Men to lay down their lives for false opinions, provided they believe them true, but if the Apostles were guilty of any cheat at all in this matter, they must be guilty of a known imposture, and so must sacrifice their Lives for falshood, i. e. for that from which they could expect no Good at all, which seems so inconsistent with the common Principles of Reason and Self-love, that nothing can be more incredible. And this, I hope, may be sufficient to convince any reasonable Person that these Epistles must be written whilst the Apostles lived, and be their genuine Writings, and then the truth of what they do so copiously assert concerning the miraculous Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost, vouchsafed to the Believers of those times, cannot be reasonably contested.
§. 17. But yet I shall proceed to farther Confirmation of this Argument from these two Heads. 1st, From a particular Consideration of the Gifts they mention. 2dly, From the Reason we have to believe that these extraordinary Gifts were equally confer'd upon all other Christian Churches, as upon those which the Apostles mention in their Epistles, and also were of a lasting Continuance among them. 1st, From a particular Consideration of the miraculous operations, and the Gifts they men∣tion. Now they were of two sorts: The healing of the sick, and the curing of the lame, blind, and maimed, the raising of the dead, the ejecting devils out of Men, and from their oracles, and Temples; which being per∣formed by the Apostles and Primitive Professors of Christianity upon others, I stile outward Operations. Or else those inward gifts by which the understanding was enlightned, and was enabled to discern that which their natural Powers could not reach, as the gift of speaking with unknown tongues, of prophecy, of discerning Spirits. I begin with The gift of healing the sick, and the diseased. Of which let it be noted, 1st, That this Gift was not confin'd to the Apostles, but was confer'd on the Inferior Cler∣gy, and other members of the Church indifferently: For amongst the Gifts confer'd upon the Church, the Apostle mentions  those of healing, 1 Cor. 12.19. and verse 29. they who exercised those gifts are reckoned after Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, as being both distinct from them, and inferior to them; and verse 30. the Question is thus put have, all the gifts of healing? St. James directs the sick, and the diseased to the Rulers of the Church, with promise that the Prayer of Faith, joyned with the holy Oyl, should heal the sick, Jam. 5.14, 15. And this is by our Saviour promised as one of the signs that should follow them that believed in his Name. They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover, Mark 16.18. This being therefore made as well the matter of a promise, as of their frequent Prayers; had not these Prayers been answered, and this promise verifyed, Christianity would have, in pro∣bability, been blasted by it. 2dly, This Gift continued frequent and notorious in the three first Ages of the Church, and the salutary Influences of it were dispersed throughout the World. Soon after the Destru∣ction of Jerusalem, the Christians, saithDe Mens. & Ponder. §. 15. Epiphanius, return'd from Pella, , working great miracles of healing. Amongst the Operations of the Holy Ghost confer'd at Baptism upon the Converts of his time,Dial. cum Tryph. pag. 258. Justin M. enumerates  the gift of healing., l. 2. c. 57. . Ibid. c. 56. Irenaeus proves the Certainty of our Lord's Resurrection from those Miracles which his Disciples perform'd still in his Name; For some of them, saith he, cast out Devils, others heal those that are diseased, and even now the dead have been raised, and continued with us many years. The Spirit of many dead Men hath return'd again, and the Man hath oft been given to the Prayers of the Saints, the whole Church of that place requesting it with Prayer and Fasting. Even to this day, saithContr. Cels. l. 1. p. 34. Origen, there remain Footsteps of that holy Spirit who appeared in the shape of a Dove among the Christians, for , they cast out Devils, and perform many Cures. And again,Pag. 53. Even now the name of Christ exempts Men from Ecstasies, scares away  Devils and Diseases. Some footsteps and remainders of the Miracles which Christ performedIn Joh. Tom. 26. p. 328. C.  are to this day done in the Churches by the Name of Jesus. And lastly, to that Enquiry of Celsus, What magnificent Work hath your Jesus done? he an∣swers,Contr. Cels. l. 2. p. 80. This is one magnificent Work, that  even to this day his Name doth heal Diseases. Now of the Truth of what they thus deliver, they pretend, 1st, To be themselves Eye-witnesses. We can produce, saithLib. 3. pag. 124. Origen, a vast number of Greeks and Barbarians who believe in Christ; some of whom, as a token of the power of that Faith they have embraced, heal Diseases by invocation of the Name of God and Christ:  and we our selves have seen many delivered by these things from dangerous Symptoms, Ecstasies, and Madness, and ten thousand other Evils which neither Men nor De∣vils could exempt them from. 2dly, They call the God of Heaven to witness to the Truth of what they say: We have seen many such things, saithLib. 1. pag. 35. Origen, being present, and beholding them with our eyes,
which should we write, the Heathens would laugh at them as things feigned, , but God is witness to my Conscience, that I do not endeavour by false Testi∣monies to commend the Doctrine of Christ. 3dly, They appeal to the Testimonies of their very Enemies. For thusCap. 4. Tertullian speaks to Scapula, a Judge in Carthage: All these things may be suggested to thee from thy Of∣fice, and the Advocates of it, who have received these Advantages from Christians; for the Notary of one, the Child and Kinsman of another, have been freed by us from Devils. Et quanti honesti viri (de vulgaribus enim non dicimus) aut à Daemoniis, aut valetudinibus remediati sunt. And how many honourable Men (for we speak not of the vulgar) have been delivered from Devils or Diseases by the Christians. 'Twas Proculus, saith he, the Christian, that heal'd with oyl Evodus, which so ingratiated him to Severus, that he kept him in his Pa∣lace to his death. And, Lastly, By this very Argument they triumph over the like Attempts of Hereticks and Hea∣thens, who pretended to do these things by Magick, or that their Gods performed the same, 1. Over those Hereticks, who knowing these miraculous Cures were frequently performed by the Orthodox, were forced to pretend the like. Thus Irenaeus comparing the Miracles of Christians with the Magical Operations of Simon M, Carpocrates, and others of that Gang.Nec enim caecis possunt donare visum neque surdis auditum, neque debiles, aut claudos, aut paralyticos curare vel alia quadam parte corporis vexatos, quemadmodum saepe evenit fieri secundum corpora∣lem infirmitatem vel earum quae à foris accidunt, infirmitatum bonas valetudines restaurare. Lib. 2. cap. 56, 57. This, saith he, is sufficient to confute them that they can neither give sight to the blind, nor hearing to the deaf, nor cure the weak, the lame, the paralytick, nor those that are disea∣sed in any other part of the Body; which yet, saith he, was often done by Christians, to the benefit of the Heathens. 2. Over the like Pretences of the Heathens, who boasted thatCels. apud Orig. l. 8. p. 407, 416. , that their Gods did many Cures, that they gaveCecil. apud Minut. p. 9. morbis mede∣lam, spem afflictis, opem miseris, Medicine to the diseased, Hope to the afflicted, Help to the mi∣serable; and that their Gods had often curedArnob. l. 1. p. 28. multorum hominum morbos valetudines{que} the Diseases of many. For to this they do not only answer, by saying they had no Assurance that their Daemons, however courted by them, could heal the Infirmities of humane Bodies, asLib. 8. p. 418. Origen replies to Celsus; and that if they did any thing of this kind, 'twas only by ap∣plying Medicines, and directing them to such Meats, such Potions, and such juices of Herbs, that is, saith Arnobius, by shewing the skill of a Physitian rather than the power of a God. But that they could do nohting of this nature worthy to be named with that which Christ and his Apostles did, he, say they, with a word commanded the Blind to see, the Lame to walk, and cured all diseases with a touch of his hand. Now can you shew us any among all your Ma∣gicians,Arnob. lib. 1. pag. 25. consimile aliquid Christo millesima ex parte qui fecerit, who have done anything in the least resembling Christ? yeaPag. 28. quid simile dii omnes quibus opem dicitis aegris, & peric∣litantibus latam? what like to this have any of your Gods to whom you do ascribe the cure of the sick performed? That whereas their Gods could not transmit their supposed power to others, our Jesus derived this power to the meanest, to Rusticks, Fishermen, Day-Labourers,Neque quicquam est ab illo gestum, quod non omne donaverat faciendum parvulis illis, & rusticis, & eorum subjecerit potestati. Pag. 30, 31. and did himself nothing which he gave not them also power to do. And that the Name of Jesus re∣stored them to perfect health who were incurable by all the powers of humane Art, the assist∣ance of the Demons, or of Heathen Deities. Seeing you have the confidence, say they, to bring the cures of Heathen Deities into contest with those of Christ, how many thousands shall we instance in who have in vain repaired with supplications to all the Temples of the Gods; in vain have tried the ears of your admired Aesculapius?Ibid. pag. 29. quid ergo prodest ostendere unum aut alterum fortasse curatos, cum tot millibus subvenerit nemo? and what availeth it, to tell us of the good success of two or three, when the complaints of thousands receiving no help from them shew their want of power to assist the needy? Let it be then considered, that the Christians, for three whole Centuries together, heal'd many Miriads throughout the World, who laboured under those Diseases, which were incu∣rable by all the Arts of Men and Devils, that they made frequently the Lame to walk, the Deaf to hear, the Blind to see, and sometimes rais'd the Dead by Invocation of the Name of Jesus; and we shall find just reason to conclude this was the Lord's doings, and it is marvel∣lous in our eyes. §. 18. 2dly, Our Lord promised that they who believed in him should cast out Devils, which promise he perform'd with such a constant scene of glorious Instances, and such ama∣zing Circumstances, if in this matter we may credit the Primitive Professors of, and Mar∣tyrs
for Christianity, that 'tis not possible for any Man to doubt the truth and certainty of Christian Faith, who does not look upon them as impudent Untruths, and Lying Legends. For, 1st, Let us consider to whom this power was committed over this strong man armed, over these Principalities, and Rulers of the darkness of this World. Our blessed Saviour having said, behold I give you Authority over all the power of the Enemy, great Multitudes of Christians gave a continual Demonstration of the Truth of this Prediction. For, that our Lord was sent for the destruction of these evil Spirits, , you may now learn, saithApol. 1. p. 45. Justin M. from what is done before your Eyes, for many Christians, through∣out all the world, and in the very City of your empire, have healed many that were possessed of the Devil, and still do they eject them by invocation of the name of Jesus, whom none of your Inchan∣ters, Conjurers, or Sorcerers were able to expel. Those Christians are not few, saithContra Cels. l. 7. p. 334. Ori∣gen, who eject Devils from them that are possessed with them, and this they do without all curi∣ous Arts, or any Sorcery or Magick only by Prayers, and simple adjuration of them, , for mostly this is done even by the meanest Christians, the grace assistant to the word of Christ demonstrating by this the Devil's weakness, that to expel them from the Soul or Body of a Man there is no need of Men of wisdom, or powerful in demonstration of the Faith?, l. 3. p. 133. Now, saith he, were not Christ of a divine composition the Devils would not thus quit the bodies they possess at the bare invocation of his name, Fidelis quisque Daemonibus im∣perat, every Christian hath command over the Devils, saithRecogn. l. 4. c. 33. p. 461. Clemens, yea such is the effi∣cacy, of the name of Jesus, saithLib. 1. pag. 7. Origen, , that it sometimes profits when it is used by wicked Men, according to our Lord's prediction, that at the dreadful Audit, many should be rejected who could make this Plea, in thy name we have cast out Devils, Matth. 7.22. It was sometimes efficacious even when used by them who were no Followers of the Holy Jesus; as in the instance mention'd by St. John, Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, and we forbad him, because he followed not us, Mark 9.38. And this gave Courage to the Jewish Exorcists, the Sons of Sceva, to adjure evil Spirits by the name of Jesus, Act. 19.14. And not thePug. fid. p. 289, 290. Jews only, but other Inchanters also, saithIlli ipsi qui seducunt per ligaturas, perpraecantationes, per machinamenta inimici, miscent praecantationibus suis nomen Christi. Tract. 7. in Joh. Tom. 9. p. 63. St. Austin, mixed the name of Jesus with their Incantations. 2dly. This name was efficacious against all evil Spirits whatsoever, none of them being a∣ble to resist the Power of it. Even now, saithDial. cum Tryp. pag. 302. A. & 311. Justin M. we who believe in Jesus, , adjuring the whole herd of Devils and Malignant Spirits, have them all Subject to our power. And again, By the name of the Son of God,  all kind of Devils, being adjured, are overcome, and brought into subjection. Tis evidently seen, saithIn Celsum, l. 1. p. 20. Origen, that by the name of Jesus ten thousand Devils have been expell'd from the Souls and Bodies, of those who were possessed by them. On this account they triumphed over the Heathen Exorcists, that by the name of Jesus they expell'd those Devils which none of their Inchanters, Sorcerers, Magi∣cians saithApol. 1. pag. 45. Justin M. could expel; And over all the Heathen Deities: bring one possessed mad and raging, saithLib. 4. cap. 27. Lactantius, to your Jupiter, or because he is not skilful in those matters, bring him to Aesculapius, or Apollo, let both their priests adjure him, in the name of their supposed Deities, to quit his station, they in vain attempt it; but let the same Devils be adjured in the name of the true God, and instantly they fly. Quae ratio est ut timeant Chri∣stum, Jovem non timeant, were this Jove any better than themselves, why do they fear our Christ, and not their Jupiter? And on the same account they triumphed over those Hereticks which then appeared to corrupt the truth: for we by this, saithLib. 2. cap. 56. Irenaeus confound the Heresies of Simon M, Carpocrates, and the whole tribe of those deceitful Workers, that they cannot, omnes daemonas effugare, expel all kinds of Devils, but only such as are confederate with them, if they indeed do that. Consider, 3dly, That they expell'd them not only out of Men, but also from their Temples, Oracles, and Altars. We are so far, saithCont. Cels. l. 7. p. 376. Origen, from worshipping of Daemons, that we expel them  from the places where they are seated. Go no more, saithP. 9. A.B. Clemens of Alexandria in his Exhortation to the Greeks, to your Castalian, or other Fountains, all these prophetick Streams are now dried up, and they are pass'd away with their own Fables. Divination and Oracles, saith, l. 17. p. 813. Et de Phano Desphico, , l. 9. p. 419. Strabo, were by the Ancients much regarded, but
now they are as generally neglected and contemned, the Oracle at Delphos and at Hammon being wholly silent. Not above one or two remains, saith. De Defect. Orac. pag. 411. E. F. Plutarch, the rest are wholly silent, or entirely desolate. The Spirit of the Gods, saith theApud Cyrill. Al. l. 6. p. 198, 199. Apostate Julian, comes now  but rarely, and to very few. Thus are the very Heathens forced, withApud Euseb. praep. Ev. l. 5. c. 1. Porphyry, to confess the Triumphs of our Jesus over their supposed Deities. Nor did they only silence their Oracles, and stop the mouths both of their Priests and of those Dae∣mons that inspired them, but they did open them, at the same time, to force them to con∣fess, even before their Priests and Votaries, that they were evil Spirits. This most Men, saithHaec omnia sciunt plerique, pars vestrûm ipsos Daemonas de semetipsis confiteri, quoties à nobis tormentis verborum, & orationis incendiis de corporibus exiguntur, pag. 31. Minutius, know, and some of you, that all your Daemons, when they are forced out of Bodies by our Words and Prayers, do with grief confess what they are, not belying their own filthiness, even in your presence, ipsis testibus esse eos Daemonas de se verum confitentibus credite, believe their testimony when truly they confess themselves to be but Devils. All the Dominion we have over them, saithDe corporibus nostro imperio excedunt inviti, & dolentes, & vobis praesentibus erubescentes; credite illis quum verum de se loquuntur, qui mentientibus creditis. Nemo ad suum dedecus mentitur, &c. Apol. c. 23. Tertullian, proceedeth from the Name of Christ, and the Commemoration of those things they are to suffer from him as their Judge; this causeth them, at our Command, to come forth of the Bodies they possess with great reluctance, and grief and shame; when you are present, you who have credited their Lyes, believe them when they speak the truth of themselves, for none will lye to their disgrace, but for their honour; they are more to be believ'd who confess against themselves, than who deny for themselves. These Devils, saithDe Idol. van. Ed. Ox. p. 14. St. Cyprian, being adjured by the true God, do instantly confess, and are compell'd to come out of the Bodies they possess, you may see them by our voice, and by the pow∣er of the invisible Majesty, as it were whip'd and scorch'd, and as their torment doth encrease, you may hear them howling, groaning, deprecating, confessing even in the audience of their Votaries, whence they came, and when they will depart. In his Epistle toImmundos & erraticos spiritus, qui se expugnandis hominibus immerserint, ad confessionem minis increpanti∣bus cogere, ut recedant duris verberibus urgere. Ibid. p. 4. Donatus this is made one property of a Christian, to force impure Spirits to confess what they are, and to urge them by their powerful strokes to depart. Consider, 4thly, That this was done not in Rome and Carthage only, and other Cities of the chiefest note, but, as it is observed byApol. p. 45. Justin Martyr,  throughout all the world, not only for some Weeks or Months together, but, as these Records testifie, from the first rise of Christians to the days of Constantine; for even about that timeLib. 4. c. 27. Lactan∣tius speaks thus: As Christ himself, whilst he convers'd with Men, did with a word expel all kind of Devils, ita nunc sectatores ejus, so now his Followers expel these filthy Spirits by their Master's name, and by the sign of his Passion.Contr. Hierocl. p. 514. Eusebius adds, that , even now he shews the vertue of his divine Power, by expelling wicked and hurtful Devils from the Bodies and the Souls of Men, only by mention of his name, , as from experierce we have foumd. This they did Lastly, say these Authors, without the use of Medicines, or Magical Incantations, only by invocation of the Name of Jesus, or by reciting the sacred Books, saithLib. 3. p. 124. l. 7. p. 376. Origen, without deceit, or without gain, saithLib. 2. cap. 57. Irenaeus, sine premio, sine mercede, without advantage, or reward, saithApol. c. 37. Tertullian, it being then conceived criminal to gain by such spiritual Gifts, and contrary to that injunction of their Lord, Matth. 10.8. freely ye have received, freely give. And truly to conceive these things were done by any Medicines, or Magical Inchantments, is the greatest folly; for how should Multitudes of mean and simple Christians arrive at such a skill in any of those Arts, which neither Jew or Gentile, who had long exercised them, could attain unto, and which none of those numerous Apostates or Hereticks which fell off from them in the times of persecution, could discover, or instruct others to perform, or them∣selves exercise? And much less is it to be thought that Satan should assist them to build Christianity upon the Ruins of his own Kingdom, and to promote an interest as contrary both to his Nature and Designs, as is light to darkness. Moreover, that none might doubt the truth of these Particulars, 1st, They frequently appeal even to the senses of the very Infidels. If you are willing saithDial. cum Tryph. p. 311. Justin M, , it is easie for you even now
to be assured of these things with their own eyes. Dictis non stetis si oculi vestri & aures per∣miserint vobis, disbelieve these things, saithApol. c. 23. Tertullian, if your eyes and ears will suffer you to do so. Admirable are those words of Cyprian to Demetrianus a Persecutor of the Christians, veni & cognosce vera esse quae dicimus, Come and experiment the truth of what we say; and since thou sayest thou worshippest the Gods, believe the Gods thou worshippest;Si volueris—de te ipso loquetur, audiente te, videbis nos rogari ab iis quos tu rogas, timeri ab iis quos tu times, quos tu adoras videbis sub manu nostra stare vinctos, & tremere captivos quos tu suscipis & veneraris ut Dominos. Pag. 191. or if thou wilt, believe thy self; for he that now dwels in thy Breast, and holds thy Soul in igno∣rance, shall in thy audience speak of thee, thou shalt see them entreating us whom thou en∣treatest, them whom thou searest fearing us, thou shalt see them bound, and trembling under our hand, whom thou adorest as Gods; sure this must be sufficient to confound thee in thy er∣rors, when thou seest and hearest thy Gods, at our command, instantly confessing what they are, and not daring to conceal their cheats in thy presence. 2dly, They appeal also to their Consciences; we expel Devils out of Men, saithAd Scap. c. 2. Ter∣tullian, sicut plurimis notum est, as very many know. Most Men are very well acquainted with these things, saithPag. 31. Minucius, pars vestrûm, and so some of you Heathens are. They ap∣peal, 3dly, To the confessions of the very Devils, as hath been proved already from the Testi∣monies of Tertullian, Minucius, Cyprian; and by this very ArgumentAd Autol. l. 2. p. 87. C. Theophilus proves them to be evil Spirits, that , even at this day, being exorcised by the name of the true God, they confess themselves to be deceitful Spirits. And, 4thly, They appeal to the effects produced upon the Persons thus dispossess'd, even their conversion by this means to the Christian Faith. Some Christians, saithLib. 2. cap. 57. Irenaeus, have the gift of casting out Devils so firmly, and so certainly, , that many times they who are heal'd, and delivered from these evil Spirits, believe, and do continue in the Church. Haec denique testimonia Deorum vestrorum Christianos facere consueverunt, these testimonies of your Gods do oft make Christians, saithApol. cap. 23. Tertullian; believing them, we believe in Christ; they advance the credit of our writings, and build up our hope; for you worship them even with the blood of Christians, they therefore would not lose such profitable votaries, lest turning Christians you should, with us, expel them, si illis, sub Christiano volente vobis veritatem probare, mentiri liceret, if they durst lye to a Christian attempting to confirm you in the truth.Lib. 5. cap. 27. Lactantius accounting for the Multitude of Christians, saith this is no small reason of it, that the Devils being cast out by Christians, omnes qui resanati fuerint, adhaereant Religioni cujus potentiam senserunt, they who are healed, embrace that faith whose benefit and power they have felt. 5thly, They encourage others to embrace the Christian Faith, by promising to them this power of ejecting Devils, when they should cordially embrace it. Be you baptized, saithRecogn. lib. 4. §. 32, 33. Clemens, in the name of the most holy Trinity, and then, if you believe with an entire faith, and with true purity of Mind, etiam ex aliis vos malignos spiritus effugetis, & daemones, you shall expel impure Spirits and Devils out of others, and free men from diseases; for the Devils know and own those who have given up themselves to God, and sometimes at their very presence are cast out; we exhort you therefore to be of our Religion, and we assure you that when you do ad∣vance to the same faith and innocence of life with us, erit par vobis atque eadem etiam contra daemonas potestas, you shall obtain like power over the evil Spirits. Lastly, They offer upon pain of Death, and all that could be dear to them, to make this Experiment before the Eyes of Heathens, i. e. not only to eject those very Demons they invo∣ked, but even to force them to confess they were cheats, and own themselves to be but De∣vils. I come now, saithApol. cap. 23. Tertullian, to the Demonstration of the point, edatur hic aliquis coram tribunalibus vestris, let any one be placed before your tribunals who manifestly is possessed by the Devil, being commanded by any Christian to speak what he is, he shall as certainly tru∣ly confess himself to be a Devil, as elsewhere he doth falsly profess to be a God; produce any other of them who profess to be inspired by any of your Gods, nisi se Daemones confessi fuerint, Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem illius Christiani procacissimi sanguinem fundite, if they do not confess themselves to be Devils, not daring to lye to a Christian, let the blood of that Malepert Christian be shed before you in that very place. What is more manifest than this ex∣periment, more faithful than this proof? Here is plain evidence laid before you, whose virtue will assist it self, here can be no suspicion; even say that Magick, or some such fallacy is impo∣sed upon you, if your Eyes and Ears will permit you.
All this we have delivered upon certain Knowledge, and confirm'd to us with the highest Attestations, by Men of greatest Wisdom, to distinguish betwixt Truth and Falshood, and so discern matters of real Fact, from vain impostures; by Men of that sincerity, and di∣guis'd piety, as renders their veracity, in matters subject to their senses, and their ex∣perience, incontestable; by Men who suffer'd all that is terrible to humane Nature for the profession of a Faith whose Truth depended on the certainty of these events, and which in this World, call'd for continual Acts of Self-denial, and Austerity, and the renouncing all that tends to gratifie the sensual Appetite, only for the Enjoyment of inward and Spiritual Plea∣sures here, and of Celestial Joys hereafter. Again, all this is said in their Discourses directe to Heathen Emperors, and Judges, or to the Heathen World, partly to mitigate their hatred of them, and their severities against them, and partly to engage them to embrace the Christian Faith, which sure no Person of sincerity would, no Men of wisdom could attempt by sch untruths as might be easily detected by them; For could they boast of their continual Tri∣umphs over Satan's Kingdom throughout all the World, and send the Heathens to Rome and Carthage, and other Famous Cities, to be convinced of the Truth of what they said? Would they talk of the multitude of Converts they had made to the Christian Faith by dispossessing Men of Devils, or forcing evil Spirits in their presence to confess they were but Devils? Would they encourage others to embrace the Christian Faith by promise of like power when they did cordially believe, and practise sutably to it? Would they appeal to the Senses, to the Ears and Eyes, to the Conscience and Experience of their most subtile Adversaries? Would they provoke them to make the experiment of the Truth of what they said with the hazard of their Lives, and even encourage them to shed their Blood, if, upon Trial, they should fail of the Performance? Or could they by such means as these, prevail upon the World, and daily gain new Profelytes, had not the Evidence of Truth confirmed their say∣ings? And if in these Assertions they spake the words of Truth and Soberness, they gave the clearest evidence of the power of that Jesus whose name so mightily prevailed over the host of these infernal Legions. For is it reasonable to conceive these Devils, without constrain from a Superior power, should not only quit the power they so long had exercised over the Bodies and the Souls of them who worshipped them as Gods, but also should confess so oft even in the presence of their Votaries, at the Command of them who sought the ruin of their Kingdom, and used their confessions to that purpose, that they were evil Spirits? Or could the name of Jesus, without the power to which he pretended, have been so great a Terror and a Torment to them, or be thus efficacious even in the Mouths of wicked Men, and those who followed not him, had not this also tended to the Confirmation of his Power? Did ever any of the Heathen Juglers, with all their arts of Magick, extort such plain confessions from them? Did they thus force them to desert the Bodies and the Temples they possess'd, and to exert their Power to the ruin of themselves, and the amendment of those Souls they had en∣snared? This therefore being only done by our Jesus, or others in his name, demonstrates his divine Commission. Obj. Against this signal Demonstration of the truth of Christian Faith, the only Cavil which the Infidels and Scepticks raise, is this, That we find no mention of Persons thus possessed with the Devil among Jews or Gentiles, before our Saviour's Advent; nor have we now Experience of any such thing, either among Christians or in the Heathen World, and there∣fore cannot easily believe it was so then, but rather, that the Persons represented as Demo∣niacks were only Persons afflicted with some strange Diseases, Fits of the Mother, Convul∣sions, Falling Sickness, Madness, and the like. Answ. 1. To this I answer, That were this granted, yet must this be a Demonstration of the Power of Christ, and of the Truth of Christian Faith, that it enabled its Professors every where, by Virtue of the Name and Invocation of the Holy Jesus, thus to heal all manner of Distempers, which no Physicians could cure by their Art, much less by speaking of a Word. 2dly, Moreover, I have sufficiently confuted this Cavil, by shewing, That the Christians of those Times ejected Devils, not only out of Men, but also from their Temples, Oracles and Altars, and that so signally, that even the best Historians of those Ages, tho' by Reli∣gion Heathens, and some of them professed Enemies of Christianity, are forced to confess their Oracles were silent, and that Christianity had thus triumphed over their supposed Dei∣ties, and also by shewing, that they forc'd these Evil Spirits to confess they were but De∣vils. Besides, we find both in the Sacred Records and in the Writings of those Fathers, a constant and a plain Distinction betwixt these two things, the curing Diseases and the cast∣ing out of Devils; so Mark 1.34. He healed many that were sick of divers Diseases, and cast out many Devils, and suffered not the Devils to speak, because they knew him. Matth. 10.1. He gave to the Apostles Power against unclean Spirits, to cast them out, and to heal
all manner of Sickness and Diseases. The Christians, saithL. 2. c. 56, 57. Irenaeus, truly cast out De∣vils, and heal the Sick by Imposition of Hands. ; they cast out Devils, and heal many Diseases, saithContr. Celsum. l. 1. p. 34. Origen. How many honest Men have by us been healed, or freed from Devils? is the Enquiry ofAd Scap. c. 4. Tertullian. 3dly, The falshood of the Suggestion, that Men possess'd with Evil Spirits were not known among the Jews in former Ages, appears from the plain Testimonies of. Arch. l. 8. c. 2. p. 257. Jose∣phus, who saith, That God taught Solomon this Wisdom, for the benefit of Men; and that be left behind him those ways of exorcising Demons, which so effectually expel'd them, that they never entred into them more; and from that time to this, hath that way of curing those who were possess'd, been very powerful. He also talks of a strange Herb or Shrub, which being artificially pull'd up,De bello Jud. l. 7. c. 23. p. 981. , presently expels Devils. We also read in the Acts of Seven Sons of one Scaeva a Jew, who were Exorcists, Acts 19.13. and of their Children casting out of Devils, Matth. 12.25. And bothDial. p. 311. Justin Martyr andL. 2. c. 5. Irenaeus inform us, That they did this before the time of our Saviour, by Invocation of the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. That among the Heathens, there were Persons thus possess'd, appears sufficiently by this, that otherwise the Christians could not have pretended to cast them out; and from the Exor∣cists and Magicians in every Nation, of whom. Sympos. l. 7. q. 5. p. 706. Plutarch saith, That they advised those who were possess'd, to repeat the Ephesian Letters: And. Philops. Ed. Gr. p. 363, 364. Lucian mentions it as thing known to all, That they had those who did dispossess Demons.Dial. p. 311. Justin Martyr faith, The Jews exorcised them, , using that Art as the Heathens did. The Names of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are us'd, saithL. 4. p. 184, 185. & l. 1. p. 17. Origen, not only by the Jewish Exorcists, , but al∣most by all that practise the Art of Magick or Enchantment. So that 'tis certain, that the History of Christ and his Apostles, casting out Devils in Judea, and of Christians casting them out throughout the World, was therefore never question'd by Jew or Gentile, because they had among themselves in every place, pretenders to it. And if after the Triumphs of the Gospel, there now continue among Christians no foot∣steps of this Power of Satan, this is a Testimony of the Truth of what our Lord fore∣told, Now is the Prince of the World cast out, Joh. 12.31. §. XIX. Of those internal Gifts, which shew the Power of the Holy Ghost engaged to promote the Christian Faith. First, That of Tongues is most illustrious. This was a Gift exceeding requisite, to the speedy propagation of the Gospel, which in the space of Fourty Years was by our Lord's Prediction, Matth. 24.14. to spread it self throughout the World. And therefore, it was daily exercised among the Heathens to convert them, and by themselves, when they embra∣ced the Christian Faith; for the Family; the Friends, and Kindred of Cornelius, receiv'd the Holy Ghost; and, to the Amazement of the Jewish Converts, spake with Tongues, and magnified God, Acts. 10.46. Upon the twelve Disciples of the Baptist, the Apostle lays his hands, and they receive the Holy Ghost, and speak with Tongues, Acts 19.6. St. Paul in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, saith, They were enriched with, and they abounded , in all Tongues, Cor. 1.5. See the Note there. Among the Gifts imparted to them, he reckons divers Kinds of Tongues, and the Interpretation of them, 1 Cor. 12.9. and puts the Question to them thus, ver. 30. Do all speak with Tongues? This he objecteth as their Crime, That when they came together, every one had his Tongue, 1 Cor. 14.26. and adds, That if they thus continued to use this Gift, 'twould breed Confusion in their Churches, and cause their Auditors to say, That they were mad, ver. 23. Whence he advi∣seth them who used these Tongues, to pray they might Interpret, ver. 13. permitting only two or three to speak with Tongues in one Assembly, and that by course, and with Inter∣pretation, ver. 26, 27, 28. imposing Silence on them, when no Interpreter was present; and Order, saith he, being thus observed, Let no Man forbid to speak with Tongues, ver. 39. And if this Gift was so abundantly conferr'd upon that Church, in which the Apostle found so great Miscarriages, and of which he only saith, They came behind the other Churches in
no Gift; we reasonably may suppose others, and better Churches, had an equal Share in this Gift. Accordingly we have heard, saith Irenaeus, (l. 5. c. 6.) many Brethren who have recei∣ved the Spirit of God, , and by that Spirit spake all Languages. And now, what can the Unbeliever offer to invalidate the Strength of this convincing Demonstration? Will he ascribe this Gift to the Assistance of the Devil? Let him produce one Instance of like nature from any Heathen Writer, to shew, that ever this was done by any besides Christians: Or tell us, why that subtile Spirit should thus concern himself to propagate, and to confirm that Faith, which bears the clearest Opposition both to his Na∣ture and Designs. Will they ascribe it to some Fit of Melancholy, or some Distemper of the Brain? What can be more absurd, than to assert, That at the Preaching of a Sermon, the rushing of a mighty Wind, the laying on of an Apostle's Hands, or the Baptizing of a Person in the Name of Jesus, such unaccountable Diseases should cease on many Thou∣sands, and should enable them to speak a Language they had never learn'd? Or, is it rea∣sonable to think, this Distemper should be so peculiar to Christian Constitutions, as that no other Persons should pretend to it? And that it should wholly cease from them, when once the Christian Faith had spread it self over all Nations, Christians themselves never pretend∣ing, that it lasted beyond the Second Century. §. XX. The second internal Gift of which the Scripture maketh frequent mention, is that of Prophesie; of which let it be noted, That seeing the Jews from the Foundation of their Church to the completion of the Ca∣non of the Old Testament, had a continual Succession of Prophets to instruct them in the Mind of God, it seemeth highly requisite, that the like Gift should for some season be conferr'd upon the Church of Christ, which was not only to succeed, but highly to excel the Jewish Oeconomy. Especially, if we consider, that their own Prophet Joel had foretold, touching the Times of the Messiah promised to the Jews, God would then pour his Spirit upon all Flesh, and their Sons and Daughters should Prophesie, Joel 2.18. and also that our Lord had promised to send the Spirit of Truth to his Disciples, to lead them into all Truth, and to declare unto them things to come, Joh. 16.13. and to send to the Jewish Nation Pro∣phets and Wise Men, Matth. 23.34. and of these must he be supposed to speak, when he en∣gageth, That he that receiveth a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's Reward, Matth. 10.41. So that you see, the Christians had just reason to expect the Spirit of Prophesie should be again revived in their days, and plentifully conferr'd upon them; and that both Jew and Gentile must have had sufficient cause to question the whole Truth of Christian Faith, had not this Spirit of Prophesie been found among them: And therefore of the completion of this Promise, we are assured, First, From the Catalogue of Christian Prophets, mention'd in the New Testament and Antient Writers of the Church. For Acts 11.27, 28. mention is made of Christian Pro∣phets coming from Jerusalem; and of Agabus, who foretold the Famine that hapned in the days of Claudius Caesar, asAntiq. l. 20. c. 2. Josephus,C. 18. Suetonius andL. 60. Dion testifie. In the 13th. Chapter, we are told of five Prophets in the Church of Antioch, who whilst they were em∣ploy'd in the Publick Ministry, received a Divine Afflatus, commanding them to separate Barnabas and Saul, to some especial Work to which the Holy Spirit had designed them, ver. 3. And Chap. 15.32. we read of Judas and Silas, who being Prophets, exhorted the Brethren with many Words. And Chap. 19.6. of Twelve Disciples, who when St. Paul had laid his Hands upon them, spake with Tongues, and Prophesied. In the Revelations of St. John, mention is made of Christ's Servants the Prophets, Chap. 16.6. and of the Blood of the Pro∣phets slain by the Beast, Chap. 18.20, 24. and of the Prophets his Brethren, Chap. 19.10.H. Eccl. l. 9. c. 17. Eusebius cites an Antient Author, who speaks of Quadratus and others, as , Inspired Prophets, and who declared, That the Prophetick Gift continued still in the Church. Moreover, as Joel had foretold, that in those days their Daughters and their Hand-maids should Prophesie; so do we read in the History of the Acts, of four Daugh∣ters of Philip the Evangelist, who did Prophesie, Acts 21.9. In the Epistle to the Corinthi∣ans, of Women Prophesying, 1 Cor. 11.5. and in the Ecclesiastical History, ofIbid. l. 5. c. 17. Ammia of Philadelphia, a Prophetess. In a Word, there was not any Church in which this Gift of Prophesie was not frequent. We read of Prophets at Jerusalem, the Mother of all Churches, Acts 11.27. in the Church of Antioch, Acts 13.1. of the Gift of Prophesie in the Church of Rome, Rom. 12.6. in that of
Corinth and of Thessalonica, 1 Thess. 5.20. and of Spiritual Persons in the Church of Galatia, Chap. 6.1. They are said to be placed in the Church in General; for God, saith the Apostle, hath set some in the Church, First, Apostles; 2dly, Prophets; 3dly, Teachers; as therefore the Apostles and the Teachers, so did the Prophets exercise their Functions in all Churches. They were given to the Church for Ends which equally concern'd all their Assemblies, Christ having given some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, Eph. 4.11, 12. Now these are Ends in which all Churches must be equally con∣cerned, and therefore we have reason to believe, that as Apostles, Evangelists and Pastors, so Prophets also were vouchsafed to them all. Moreover, it seems evident, That at the first Foundation of a Christian Church among the Gentiles, there were no settled Pastors to perform the Publick Offices in their Assemblies, but they were generally performed by Prophets, or by Spiritual Men, who had the Gift of Prophesie, or were in the Assembly excited to that Work by an Afflatus of the Holy Spi∣rit. To clear up this, let it be noted: First, That as soon as any Persons then embraced the Christian Faith, they received with it the Gift of Prophesie, or of the Holy Ghost; so when Peter and John laid Hands on the Samaritan Converts, they received the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.15. When Peter preached to Cornelius and his Friends, the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the Word, and they spake with Tongues, and magnified God, Acts 10.44, 46. So also the Twelve Disciples of the Baptist, when St. Paul laid his Hands upon them, spake with Tongues and Prophesied, Acts 19.6. so that this Gift of Prophesie was still contemporary with a Christian Church or Family of Christian Converts. Note, Secondly, That the Apostles did not presently upon the Conversion of any number of Persons to the Christian Faith, ordain them Elders in every Church, but left them for a Season to the Conduct of those Prophets and Spiritual Men, the Holy Ghost had fitted for that Work. The Church of Antioch was converted, saith Dr. Lightfoot in the Fortieth Year of our Lord, and a great number of them turned to the Lord, Act. 11.21. and yet no Elders were ordained among them, till the Fiftieth Year, Acts 14.23. But in this interval, there were Prophets among them who ministred in their Assemblies to the Lord, Chap. 13.2. The Inhabitants of the Isle of Crete were converted for some considerable time before St. Paul sent Titus to them, to set in order the things which were lacking, and ordain Elders in every City, Chap. 1.5. How were they then in the mean time, supplyed with Teachers, and Men that ministred in their Assemblies, unless by Men assisted by that Spirit which was shed on them abundantly at their Conversion? Chap. 3.5, 6. And if we may take an Estimate of other Churches, by what was certainly performed in the Assemblies of the Church of Corinth, we cannot reasonably doubt the Truth of this Assertion. For, whereas all the Publick Offi∣ces performed then in the Church were Prayer and Psalmody, expounding or preaching of the Word, and Eucharistical Oblations; all these are in the Fourteenth Chapter of the First Epistle ascribed to the Prophets in that Church, or to the Men endowed with Spiritual Gifts among them: For when they came together, some of them prayed, others composed Sacred Hymns by their Spiritual Gift, ver. 15. their Prophets did then teach for Edification, Exhortation and Comfort, ver. 3. and 31. they also did then , Bless, which is the Word used for Consecration of the Eucharist, Chap. 10.16. and , Give Thanks, which is the Word used in our Lord's Institution of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.21. and at this Thanksgiving the People Answered, Amen,Just. M. Apol. 8. p. 97. Constit. Ap. l. 8. c. 12. as they were wont to do at the Celebration of the Sacrament, ver. 16, 17. That all, or any of these things were done by stated Pastors, we never read in the Epistles to that Church. And this seems yet more probable, touching the Church of Corinth, because there seems no Order observed among them in their Prophe∣sying, and no Subjection of the Prophets in their Assemblies, to any Ruler in that Church. When the incestuous Person was to be delivered up to Satan, this was done by the Authority of St. Paul, with the concurrence of the whole Assembly; When you are met together, saith he, deliver such a one to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.4. put away from your selves that wicked Person, ver. 13. And when he speaketh of this Act of Discipline, he calls it , the Punishment inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6. See the Note there. And when the same Person was to be absolved, there is no Direction sent to any Rulers of the Church to give him Absolution, but all seems immediately to be done by the Authority of St. Paul, and by the whole Assembly. And Lastly, In the Epistle sent from Corinth to the Church of Rome, we find not any Salutation sent to Rome, from any Bishop or Elder of the Church of Corinth, but only from the Kindred of St. Paul, from Gains the Host of that Church, E∣rastus
the Chamberlain of the City, and Quartus a Brother. Chap. 16.21, 22, 23. All which things put together, render it more than probable, that there were then no settled Pastors in the Church of Corinth, which makes it necessary that the Affairs of their Church Assem∣blies should be wholly managed by their Prophets, and Spiritual Persons. It seemeth also highly probable, this was the case of other Churches, since the Apostle directing his Epistles to many of them, maketh no mention of any Church Governours a∣mongst them, either in the beginning of them, as he doth in his Epistle to the Philippian, or in the Salutations at the close of them, as he doth in the Hebrews, saying, Salute all them who have the Rule over you, Chap. 13.24. For instance, there is no Direction of the Epistle writ to the Galatians to any Church Governours among them, no Salutation of them in the close of it, no charge against them for suffering those Great Disorders which had obtained in that Church, no Exhortation to them to take heed to their Ministry, or to oppose them∣selves to the Deceivers then crept in among them; but there are plain Directions given to the Spiritual Men, or to the Prophets then among them, in these Words, Brethren, if any Man be overtaken with a Fault, ye that are Spiritual, i. e. who are endow'd with those Spiritual Gifts which enable you for Publick Ministrations in the Church, restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, Chap. 6.1. (See the Note there.) which makes it highly probable, that Church was managed not by stated Pastors, but by Prophets, and Spiritual Teachers of the Word. Thus also seems it, to have been in the Church of Thessalonica. For, (First,) we find no notice taken of them in the front of the Epistles to them, no Salutation of them in the close; the Words of Salutation being only these, Salute all the Brethren, with an holy Kiss. (2dly,) We find no Directions given to them in particular, but only to the Brethren inge∣neral, touching such Matters as must have related to their Office only, or chiefly, had they been settled Rulers in that Church. The Charge, 1 Thess. 5.14. runs thus: We exhort you Brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the Feeble-minded, support the Weak. And, 2 Thess. 2 6. thus, We command you Brethren, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not according to the Tra∣dition which ye have received from us. And. ver. 13, 14. And ye Brethren, — if any Man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with him, that he may be ashamed; yet count him not as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. And lastly, to these Brethren the Adjuration mention'd, Chap. 5.27, is directed, charging them by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the holy Brethren. The same may be observed of the Epistle directed by the same Apostle to the Church of Rome; for 'tis directed in the General, To all that are in Rome, beloved of God, and Saints called; and among the numerous Salutations in the Close, we find not one directed to any stated Pastors of that Church; but this we find, that having finished his great Dispute con∣cerning Justification, and the Rejection of the Jews, he exhorts them to be wise to Sobriety, as God had distributed to every one the measure of Faith, Chap. 12.3. and adds, Having there∣fore Gifts differing according to the Grace given to us, whether it be Prophesie, let us Prophe∣sie according to the Proportion of Faith, ver. 6. or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministry, or he that teacheth on Teaching. Now evident it is, that both the Prophets and Teachers in those Times, are reckoned as Men who exercised those Offices by a Spiritual Afflatus, and were enabled to perform them by the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Spirit then vouchsafed to them; whence they are styled in the Words now cited , Spiritual Gifts. Hence therefore it is highly probable, these were the Men who then presided in their Assemblies, and exercised Sacred Offices in the Church of Rome. Now if these things were so, all Christian Churches at their first Conversion to Christianity, must have a sensibe and constant Demonstration of the Exercise of these Spiritual Gifts in their Assemblies, and so a certain Evi∣dence of the Divine Presence with them, and of the Truth of the Profession they embraced. This will be farther evident, if we consider what is ascribed to these Prophets, what De∣monstrations they afforded, that they were truly acted by a Divine Afflatus. In prosecution of this Head, I do acknowledge that Prophesie doth 1 Cor. 14. signifie, Expounding the Scriptures, for Exhortation, Edification and Comfort, but then it signifies the doing this by a Divine Afflatus; and when this Gift was exercised by Singing, or by Praising God, this was still done, as Holy Scripture doth inform us, , in Psalms, and Hymns, and Odes, composed by the immediate Impulse and Assistance of the Holy Ghost; for upon that account alone, could this be styled Praying, and Singing in the Holy Ghost, and mentioned as an instance of their Spiritual Gifts; and such a Manifesta∣tion of the Spirit did attend them in this Exercise, as made it easie for others to discern that they were Prophets; for either with the Gift of Prophesie they had the Gift of Tongues, as in the first Effusion of the Holy Ghost, when they spake with other Tongues the wonderful things of God, Acts 2.11. and thereby shew'd the Spirit of Prophesie which
God had promised by his Servant Joel, was fulfilled upon them, and on Cornelius and his Kinsmen, the first Gentile Converts; for by this were the Jews convinced, that God had shed on them also the Gift of the Holy Ghost, that they heard them speak with Tongues, and magnifie God, Act. 10.44, 45. Or, 2dly, They foretold things fuure and contingent, ac∣cording to our Saviour's Promise, That the Spirit he would send, should shew them things to come, Joh. 16.13. Thus we find mention in the Sacred Story, of the Prophet Agabus, who foretold the Year before, that Dearth which hapned in the Reign of Claudius, Acts 11.27. that other Christians might be moved by this Prediction, to send then Charity to their Brethren where the Famine pinched them most, as it did in Judaea, faith Josephus; and of Timothy, chosen to be an Evangelist, according to the foregoing Prophesies concern∣ing him; whence by the Antients this Gift was styled, , the Gift of Fore∣ledge. Moreover, in the Epistles of St. Paul, we find not only mention of Prophets settled in the Church, and of Prophesie reckoned among the Gifts of the good Spirit, but we find him comparing it with other Gifts; particularly, (First,) with that of Tongues, and pre∣ferring it before that Gift, as being such a Gift as rended more to the Edification of the Church; For greater is he that Prophesieth, than he that speaketh with Tongues, saith the Apostle; for he that speaketh with Tongues edifieth himself only, but he that Prophesieth edi∣fies the Church, 1 Cor. 14.2, 5. Hence he declareth his desire, that they should rather Pro∣phesie, than speak with Tongues. (2dly,) He compares it with that of Charity, declaring in that case, that Charity excels it, because, tho' we have the Gift of Prophesie, and under∣stand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, yet if we have not Charity we are nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2. and because Prophesies shall cease, but Charity never ceaseth, ver. 8. Moreover, he gives Directions to Prophesie, to Prophesie, according to the proportion of Faith, Rom. 12.6. to Pro∣phesie successively, or one by one, and let the other Prophets judge, 1 Cor. 14.29. and to hold their Peace when any thing is revealed to another Prophet, ver. 30. He also blames them for Prophesying all together, in a confused manner, and without Observation of due Order, and for suffering their Women to Prophesie in the Church, ver. 39. And yet after all these Directions, he exhorts them to covet Prophesie, and faith, quench not the Holy Spirit, despise not Prophesies, 1 Thess. 5.19, 20. Now these things give us an unquestionable Evidence, that this Gift was then plentifully conferr'd upon the Church of Christ; for could the Apo∣stle talk with so great confidence in his Epistles directed to Christian Churches, of Prophets and a Gift of Prophesie vouchsafed to them, and settled in the Church by God? Could he speak so much of the Edification, which the Church received by those who had the Gift of Prophesie, and of the Revelations which they made by Virtue of it, and of the effect it had on Unbelievers, to force them to acknowledge, that God was present with the Church? Could he compare it with other Gifts then extant in the Church, and give it the Preeminence a∣bove them, and with the grace of Charity, exalting that even above Tongues and Prophesie? Could he give Directions to the Prophets then among them, how to exercise this Gift, and chide them for abusing it? Could he say to them, covet and despise not Prophesies, and could he close those Sayings with these Words, If any Man be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things I write to you are the Commandments of God? 1 Cor. 14.37. I say, could he have written all these things in such Epistles as were embraced, as the Word of God, had it not been beyond Exception, that there was such a Gift of Prophe∣sie vouchsafed to, and exercised in the Church of God. Lastly, Of the continuance of this Gift of Prophesie, not only in the Age of the Apostles, but also in the Age succeeding, we have sufficient Evidence from the best Writers of the Christian Church. For, First, Hermas, contemporary with St. Paul, speaks of this Gift as still remaining, and usually practised in the Church of Christ: For he professedly gives Rules, by which all Christians might distinguish betwixt true and false Prophets, those who were acted by an evil Spirit, and those who were acted by the Holy Ghost, saying, That he who had the earth∣ly Spirit, came not into the Congregation of just Men; or if he came thither, (l. 2. c. 11.) obmutescit, nec quidquam potest loqui, He was presently struck dumb; and had no power to speak before them. ButCum ergo venerit homo, qui habet spiritum Dei, in Ecclesiam justorum habentium fidem Dei, & orano fic ad Deum, tunc muntius Sanctus Divinitatis implet hominem illum Spiritu Sancto, & loquitu in urba sicut u vu. when a Man comes, saith he, who hath the Spirit of God, into the Congregation of the Just, and prays to God, he is then filled with a Divine Afflatus, and speaketh as God will. Whence two things are evident:
(First;) That he supposeth there were then Men in the Church inspired with th Spirit of Prophesie. (2dly,) That this prophetical Afflatus came upon them, and was exerted by them in the Assemblies of the Church. Of the continuance of this Gift in the second Century, we have a signal Testimony of the Church of Smyrna, declaring, That Polycarp their Bishop, was , an Apostolical and Prophetical Teacher; for, say they,. Martyr. Polyc. §. 16. every Word he spake, hath been already fulfilled, and will be fulfilled. Eusebius makes mention ofH. Eccl. l. 3. c. 37. Quadratus, as an Apostolical Man, and one of the first Order of their Successors, who was, saith he, , celebrated for his Prophetical Gift. Justin Martyr speaks of himself, as a Disciple of the Apostles; and Methodius saith, He was not far from the Apostles; now he expresly saith toP. 308. B. Trypho, , we have still Prophetical Gifts among us. Irenaeus was also near to the Apostles times, saith Basil and St. Austin; and he not only declares, That some Christians had thenL. 2. c. 57. , the Knowledge of things future, and Visions, and Prophetical Predictions, but confirms this from what he and others had then heard; for, saith he, St. Paul calls them perfect, who had received the Spirit, and by him spake with all Tongues; ,L. 5. c. 6. as also we have heard many Bre∣thren in the Church, who had Prophetical Gifts, and by the Spirit spake with all Tongues, and discovered the Secrets of Men, and expounded the Mysteries of God. Moreover, three things are in this Matter very remarkable. First, That by this very Argument, the Christians of the second and third Century, en∣deavoured to convince the Jews, that their Religion was to give place to Christianity, that God had left their Synagogues, and was now efficaciously present with those Churches who had embraced the Christian Faith, because that Gift of Prophesie which formerly had been peculiar to the Jewish Church, had now entirely left them, and was translated to the As∣semblies of Christians, among whom they remained , to that present time, as hath been proved already by the Testimonies of Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue withP. 308. Try∣pho. Thus to Celsus, pleading in the Person of a Jew for that Religion against Christia∣nity, Origen declares, That the Divinity of Christ had transferr'd his Providence from the Jews, to the Converted Gentiles; for, saith he, we may see them after the coming of our Lord, entirely deserted, and having nothing venerable that remains among them, they having now no Prophets, and no Miracles,L. 2. p. 62. Vide l. 7. p. 337. , of which some considerable Footsteps have so long remained among Chri∣stians. 2dly, The Case of Montanus and his Followers, pretending to this Gift of Prophesie, hath in it many Circumstances, which plainly shew, this Gift did still continue in some measure in the Church. For, (First,) Eusebius informs us, That when Montanus, Alcibiades, and Theodotus in Phry∣gia, pretended to the Gift of Prophesie,. H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 3. many believed they might be Prophets, be∣cause many extraordinary Operations of the Divine Gift, were still performed in divers Churches. (2dly,) They confute the Montanists pretence to this Gift, by the Falshoods which they utter'd; Maximilla, one of his Prophetesses, having declared, That after her, there should be no Prophets, but the consummation of all things; and because they left no Pro∣phets to succeed them, whereas, say they,. Ibid. c. 17. the Prophetick Gift is to continue in all Churches; which shews, it did continue then; for otherwise, this Objection must have been as strong against the Church of Christ, as against the Sect of the Montanists. And, Lastly, they confute them from their way of Prophesying, they speaking still in Ecstasies and strange Emotions of their Minds; Whereas, say they,. Apud Euseb. l. 5. c. 17. the Prophets under the Old Testament, and ours under the New, Agabus, Judas, Silas, Quadratus, and many others, were never subject to such Ecstasies; whence they concluded, , that Prophets must not speak in Ecstasies.
Lastly, It farther is observable that some Hereticks denied the Gospel of St. John because he had so fully spoken of the promise which our Lord had made to his Disciples, that he would send the comforter to teach them all things, and shew them things to come. They reject∣ed also the Epistles of St. Paul, because in his Epistle to the Corinthians, he had so fully spoken de propheticis charismatibus of the prophetical Gifts. Now these, saithSimul Evangelium & Propheticum expellunt spiritum infelices veré qui pseudoprophetae quidem esse volunt, phetiae autem gratiam repellunt ab Ecclesia L. 3. c. 11. p. 259. Irenaeus, are unhappy Men who chuse themselves to be false Prophets, i. e. to speak in God's name, when they confess they are not taught of God, and who endeavour to repel the grace of Prophecy from the Church; which words suppose it was extant in the Church of God. §. XXI. There is one other divine Gift which beareth some affinity to that of Prophecy, which therefore I shall briefly handle, viz. that of discerning Spirits. Now this imports not only the skill of discerning betwixt true and false Prophets which he that had seems byEp. ad Cor. §. 42. St. Clemens to be stiled , a wise Man in discerning words, or in distin∣guishing betwixt the lying Wonders, and Magical Operations of evil Spirits, and the Powers of the Holy Ghost, which must be in some measure common to all Christians, they being all enjoyn∣ed to try the Spirits whether they be of God, 1 Thess. 5.20. 1 Joh. 4.1. But chiefly it signi∣fies the Power of discerning the inward Operations of the Soul, and of discovering the se∣crets of Mens hearts. Thus of the Prophets of the Church of Corinth; every one, saith St. Paul, hath his Revelation: and again, if ye all prophesie, and there come into your assembly, one who is an unbeliever, or unlearned, he is convinced of all,  his Actions are discerned by all the Prophets, and thus are the secrets of his heart laid open, and so falling down upon his face, he will worship God, and declare that God is in you of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.26, 30. So Peter discerned the Heart of Ananias and Saphira, saying to Ananias, why hath Satan filled thy heart to lye to the Holy Ghost? and to Saphira, why have you agreed to tempt the Holy Ghost, Act. 5.3, 9. i. e. having joyn'd your selves to the Assembly of Christians, where you have had so great experience of the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to declare the secrets of Men, why, after such experience, have you dared to lye in the Assemblies of those Men in which the Holy Spirit thus resides, and thereby shew you doubt his power to reveal what you have fraudulently conceal'd. He also knew the Heart of Simon Magus, for to him he speaks thus, Act. 8.22, 23. I perceive thy heart is not right before God, but thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. 'Twas by this Gift that St. Paul at Lystra looking up∣on a blind Man, saw that he had faith to be heal'd, Act. 14.9.Ep. ad Philad. §. 7. Ignatius also speaks of the Spirit in him that did  reprove things secret, andLib. 5. cap. 6. Irenaeus, that the Bre∣thren which had the spiritual Gift, did , discover the hid∣den things of Men. It was discovered in discerning Mens fitness, or qualifications for any Office in the Church; and accordingly in setting them apart for that Office. Thus the Holy Ghost, in the Prophets, said, seperate me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them. Thus is the Holy Ghost said to have made the Bishops and Presbyters in Asia the overseers of the Churches there, Act. 20.28. Because, asEp. ad Cor. §. 42. Clemens Romanus saith, the Apostles constituted Bishops, and Deacons  approving of them by the Spirit. AndApud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 23. Clemens of Al∣exandria, that St. John ordained to be of the Clergy, , them who were signified to him by the Spirit. AndProem. Ep. ad Philad. & §. 1. ad Eph. §. 1.3, 6. Ignatius saith of the Bishops of his time, that they were constituted not by Men, but , by the council of Christ Jesus. §. XXII. I proceed, lastly, to shew the reason we have to believe that these extraordinary Gifts were equally confer'd upon other Churches, as upon those which the Apostles mention in their Epistles. This we may gather, 1st, From these expressions of St. Paul to the Church of Corinth in which they were so plentifully exercised; for his Enquiry to them runs thus: What is it wherein you were inferior to other Churches? 2 Cor. 12.13. and his Assertion thus, In every thing you are enriched by him in all utterance, and in all knowledge, so that ye came behind the other Churches in no Gift, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7. which words plainly insinuate, that all other Churches were plentifully en∣dowed with these Gifts. 2dly, This also may be gathered from the Reason of the thing: For the operations of the Holy Ghost are said to be designed for these ends; 1. The confirmation of the testimony, and the faith of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.6. and their establishment in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. 2. The edification of the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.7. Eph. 4.11, 12.3. To be a pledge and earnest of their adoption, and their future happiness, Rom. 8.23. 2 Cor. 1.22. Gal. 4.6, 7. Eph.
1.13. 4. To be their comfort under Persecutions, Rom. 5.3, 5. 2 Cor. 1.7. 1 Pet. 4.14. Now these are ends as necessary for all, as for any Christian Churches, who must all equally need the confirmation of their Faith, the work of the ministry, the perfecting the Saints, and the edification of the Body of Christ, the Support and Comfort of the Spirit under Per∣secutions, the pledge and earnest of their future Hopes. 3dly, This also may be gathered from that account which the Apostle giveth of spiritual Gifts, and spiritual Persons in the Church. The Gifts given for the edification of the Church in general are these, the word of Wisdom, and of Knowledge, the Gifts of healing, the work∣ing of Miracles, Prophecy, diserning of Spirits, kinds of tongues, and the interpretation of them, 1 Cor. 12, 8, 9, 10. The Persons exercising them are mentioned thus; God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then the Gifts of healing, &c. v. 28. And in the Epistle to the Ephesians thus, He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, Eph. 4.11, 12. Which places evidently shew that these were Gifts designed for the benefit of all the Churches of Christ in general, and exercised by these Persons as they went about to plant, or to comfirm the Churches, the Power of Miracles, and the Gift of healing, being also exercised by them in Confirmation of that Faith they preached according to out Saviour's promise. So that some Gifts seem for some time constantly exercised by the Members of each Church in their As∣semblies, and others by those Persons who preached the Gospel first among them, or travel'd to confirm the Churches, and so all had experience more, or less, of these spiritual Operati∣ons done among them. Lastly, From the consideration of that Baptism which they all generally received; for as the promise ran to the Jews in general, that they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Matth. 3.11. to every one that would believe, and be baptized, that they should recieve the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.38. and that because the promise was to them, and to their Children , and to all that were afar off, even as many as the Lord should call; so was this promise signally fulfilled to the Belivers of the Jewish Nation, who being enlightned, , that is, baptized they also tasted of the spiritual Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and of the powers of the World to come, Hebr. 6.4, 5. See the Note there: and great Grace was upon them all, Act. 4.33. To the Believers in Samaria, for when the Apostles, Peter and John, laid their hands upon them, they received the holy Ghost, Acts 8.17. To the Converts of the Gentiles; for by one Spirit they were all baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12, 13. and after they believed, they were all sealed with the spirit of promise, Eph. 1.13. they being saved, by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which was shed on them abundantly through Jesus Christ, Tit. 3.5, 6. All Christians therefore being made Members of Christ's Body by Baptism, all Christian Churches, and Bodies must have these powerful Gifts confer'd upon, and exercised by some of the Members of those Churches to the edification of the rest. Accordingly it is declared by Justin M. of them who were converted to the Christian Faith, that being. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 258. baptized in the name of Christ they received, some the Spirit of Knowledge, some of Counsel, some of Fortitude, some of Healing, some of Fore-knowledge, some of Doctrine. §. XXIII. To conclude, the Primitive Professors, and Martyrs for the Christian Faith, afford us a full Testimony of the continuance of these Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost in the next Ages of the Church.§. 2. Clemens Romanus, in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, saith, There was  a full effusion of the Holy Spi∣rit upn them all.Proem. Ep. ad Smyrn. Ignatius saith of the Church of Smyrna, that she was , favoured with all Gifts, and was deficient in none.. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 315. D. Justin saith, that even their Men and Women had the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Eusebius, having mention'd the first Order of the Successors of the Apostles, he saith, that. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 37. even then they performed many drous works by the Holy Ghost. 'Tis needless, saith. Lib. 2. cap. 57. Irenaeus, to insist upon Particu∣lars, for the miraculous Gifts which the Church throughout the World enjoys, and the benefi∣cial Miracles she worketh for the good of Heathens, are innumerable. This he saith after he had enumerated among the Gifts then given to Believers the casting out of Devils, Prophecy,
the knowledge of things future, the healing the sick, and the raising the dead. And when Montanus appeared there was not only in the Church the Gift of Prophecy, but in divers Churches, &c. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 3. many other strange Works perform'd by the divine Gift. Here then we find, by all these early Testimonies, That in the two first Centuries many Gifts of the Holy Ghost were still continued in all Churches, that every one at their Baptism received some or other of them. These also are Relations not of things past, or of things done in a corner, but of things commonly performed in the face of the Assemblies, and so confirmed by the joint Testimonies of all Christian Churches; they were Miracles which their own Eyes had seen, Tongues and Prophetick Gifts which their own Ears had heard; Gifts which they used against the Jews and Hereticks for their Conviction; and beneficial Miracles so truly wrought upon the Heathen, that they were efficacious to engage them to espouse, and persevere to the end, in the Profession of the Christian Faith. This therefore is, saithContra Celsum, lib. 1. p. 5. Origen, , the proper demonstration of our Jesus, no other Pretender to the Power of doing Signs or Wonders, having ever derived that Power from himself to others, or engaged that Believers should so generally receive it, none ever pre∣tending to enable their Followers to speak with Tongues, discover the Secrets of Mens Hearts, or confer all, or any of these Gifts upon their Proselites. It also must be owned as a most convincing Demonstration of the Truth, and the divine Original of that Faith which ministred these Gifts so plentifully to its Professors. §. XXIV. And oh that all who by this Demonstration of the Spirit are convinced of the Truth of Christian Faith, would seriously consider how much it doth concern them, in point of Interest and Wisdom, to yield Obedience to all the Precepts of that Faith! For, if the Gentiles were given up to vile affections, and a reprobate mind, Rom. 1.24, 26. only for Sins committed against the dim and the imperfect Light of Nature; if the Jews received a just recompence for every Transgression of the Law delivered by Moses to them; how shall we escape if we neglect this great Salvation, which at the first was spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed by them that heard him, God bearing witness to it by divers signs and wonders, and distributions of the Holy Ghost? Hebr. 2.3, 4. And to this end, consider, 1st, That by our Disobedience to the Christian Precepts we contradict the great Design of all these Demonstrations of the Holy Spirit, they being all intended, saith St. Paul, to make the Gentiles obedient in word and deed, Rom. 15.18. 2dly, That all our Certainty of Christian Faith doth highly aggravate the Guilt of our Transgression of the Christian Precepts: for the stronger is the Motive to believe, the greater is the Guilt of Disobedience, because such Motives may be easily discerned, and so our Ignorance of them must be less excusable; and we cannot resist their Evidence, but we must offer violence to the Convictions of our Consciences, and so we have no cloak for our Sin. 3dly, That though we own the Christian Faith, and our Lord Jesus; yet whilst we live in Disobedience to his Precepts, God looks upon us as meer Infidels, such as in words profess to know him, but in works deny him, being disobedient, Titus 1.16. Our faith at least must be ir∣rational and absurd, for why call ye me Lord, Lord, saith Christ, and do not the things that I say? Luke 6.46. And 'twill be as unprofitable, as it is irrational; for though we know these things, we only can be happy if we do them, John 13.17. To conclude all, Our Convictions of the Truth of Christian Faith, add strength to those engagements and encouragements which that Religion offers towards a Virtuous and Holy Life; for if all that is delivered in these sacred Records be the revealed Will of God, then all the promises and comfortable Passages contained in them, will be assuredly made good to all obedient Christians, and the assurance of such inestimable blessings as the Gospel promiseth, must lay upon us strong engagements to be stedfast and unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, as knowing that our labour shall not be in vain in the Lord.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle to the ROMANS. IT is the general Note of the Ancient Com∣mentators, that though this Epistle be in place the first of all St. Paul's Epistles, yet was it not first written by him, but was. Chryst. Theodoret. the last of all he wrote from Asia, Macedonia, and Achaia, before he went to Rome: The Epistles to the Thessalonians, to the Corinthians, and the Epistle to the Galatians, being writ before it. They therefore think that it was placed first, either as being written. Theodoret. to the Imperial City, as some thought, or for the Excellency of the Doctrine contained in it, as others do conjecture. So saith Theodoret in his Preface. It was written from Corinth, as the same Ancients note, for he calleth Erastus the Cham∣berlain of the City from whence he writ it, Chap. 16.23. and he had his abode at Corinth, 2 Tim. 2.4. He calleth Gaius his Host, i. e. the Man with whom he lodged, Chap. 16.23. now he was a Corinthian, 1 Cor. 1.14. He commend∣eth to them Phaebe, a Servant of the Church at Chencraea, Chap. 16.1. now Chencraea was a Port of Corinth. Moreover it was written thence not when St. Paul travelled through Greece, Acts 20.2. for that then he came to Corinth is not said; nay, it is gainsaid by St. Paul himself, who in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians, writ the same Year with this, ex∣cuses himself for not coming to them, Chap. 1. and declares, that the third time he was ready to come to them, Chap. 13.1. Add to this, that when he writ this Epistle to the Romans, he knew the Contributions of the Church of Corinth were actually made, and even deposited in his hands, he being then going up with them to Jerusalem, Rom. 15.25-28. Whereas when he travelled Greece, and came to Macedonia, Acts 20.1, 3. they either indeed were not so, or at the least he knew not that they were so, and therefore sent first Titus, and then his Second Epistle to them, that they might be so, Chapters 8, 9. It was written to the Romans when he had not seen them, Chap. 1.11. and before he was gone up to Jerusalem, for he was but then go∣ing thither, Rom. 15.15. and purposed from thence to go by Rome to Spain, v. 28. And so it must be written, A. D. 57. for we find him at Jerusalem, Acts 21.6. and a Pri∣soner under Felix in the Fourth Year of Nero. See Dr. Pearson, Annal. Paulin. p. 15, 16. That the Church of Rome consisted partly of the Jews then dwelling there, we learn both from the 14th. Chapter, where the Gentiles are exhorted to bear with their Weakness. And from the 15th. Chapter, where he speaks thus, I have written unto you more boldly, , as to the Gentile part. See the Note there, v. 15, 16. And from the Salutations sent to them at Rome, they being chiefly sent to them of the Jewish Nation. The two Great Doctrines laid down in this Epistle, are (1.) That of Justification by Faith alone, without the Works of the Law. Of which see the Preface to the Epistle to the Galatians. And (2.) The Mystery of the Calling of the Gentiles, the Rejection at present of the Jews, and the recalling of them when the fulness of the Gentiles was to come in. Lastly, It is observable, that among all his Salutations to those of Rome, he hath not one directed to St. Peter, nor doth he give us any hint that St. Peter then had ever been at Rome, or planted any Church there, which, as it makes it highly probable he had not then been there at all, so doth it make it certain that St. Paul knew not of his being there when this Epistle was endited.
A Paraphrase and Comment UPON THE Epistle to the ROMANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. Paul, a Servant of Jesus Christ, cal∣led to be an Apostle, separated to the Gospel of God. , separated.] He in this word seems to allude to his former separa∣tion when he liv'd a Pharisee, i. e. one sepa∣rated from all Ceremonial defilement, and from the People of the Earth, i. e. the Com∣mon People, who observ'd not the exact Rules of Legal Purity, saying, that he was separa∣ted now not to a nicer Observation of the Jewish Rites and Customs, but to the Preach∣ing the Gospel of God; and the affinity be∣twixt this and the Epistle to the Galatians, both as to Matter and to Style, inclines me to interpret the Apostle not of the Separation mentioned, Acts 13.2. where the Holy Ghost saith, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work of the Ministry, to which I have appointed them, but of God's separating him from his Mothers womb to that Work, Gal. 1.15. [Ver. 2. Which [Gospel] he had promised afore by his Prophets in the Holy Scriptures [speaking in them.] Ver. 3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, [Acts 2.30. 2 Tim. 2.8. and] Ver. 4. Declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of Holiness by the Resurrection from the dead. , declared to be the Son of God.] Christ while he was on Earth declared that he was the Son of God, whom the Father had sanctified, and set apart to his Prophetick Office: Accordingly the Spirit of God descen∣ded on him at his Baptism, and a voice from Heaven said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; this he proved from the powerful Works wrought by him, that he was the Son of God, sanctified and con∣secrated to his Office by the Spirit of God abiding in him, and so was in the Father, and the Father in him, declaring that he did his Miracles by the power of the Holy Ghost, and by the Spirit of God did cast out Devils, Mat. 12.28. And thus St. Peter represents this Prophet to Cornelius, saying, God anointed Je∣sus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power, who [therefore] went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the De∣vil, for God was with him, Acts 10.38. And thus it seemeth necessary he should act in his Prophetick Office. A Prophet being a Person sent from God, and speaking in his Name, and acted by his Spirit in the delivery and confir∣mation of his Message, that our Great Pro∣phet Jesus was, as in a more sublime, so in this sense the Son of God, endowed with power of working Miracles by the Holy Ghost for confirmation of his Doctrine, God hath demonstrated, saith the Apostle here, by raising him from the Dead. Ver. 5. By whom [thus raised, and invested with all power, and acting now not as a Pro∣phet, but as Lord of all, by the whole ful∣ness of the Godhead] we have received Grace and Apostleship, [i. e. the Office of an Apostle, and the Grace belonging to it] for obedience to the Faith among [Gr. in] all Nations. , Grace and Apostleship.] That is, saith Oecumenius, , Grace for the Office of Apostles; the favour to be A∣postles, say some, because the Apostle calls this Office Grace, Rom. 15.15. Gal. 2.9. Eph. 3.2-7. but where he doth so, there is always some∣thing added of the Gifts and Powers by which they were enabled to exercise it. v. g. To me is this Grace given, that I may be the Mini∣ster of Christ to the Gentiles, Rom. 15.15, 16. In the power of Signs, and Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, v. 19. James, Cephas, and John knew the Grace given to me, Gal. 2.9. because God had wrought mightily with me towards the Gentiles, v. 8. And Eph. 3.2. there is mention of the Grace of God given
to St. Paul, but then 'tis added, that he is made a Minister, according to the gift of the Grace of God, given to him by the effectual working of his Power, v. 7. I therefore think fit to joyn both together, and give the sense of the words thus: By whom we have received the Office of Apostles, and Grace through his Name to call all Nations to the obedience of Faith in him; or to yield Obedience to the Faith preached through his Name. Ver. 6. Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ.] Ver. 7. [I Paul write] to all that be in Rome beloved of God, called to be Saints [Gr. Saints called. See Note on 1 Cor. 1.1. wishing] Grace [may] be [given] to you from God our Father, and [from] the Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 8. [And] first I thank my God through Jesus Christ [the Fountain of all our Blessings, Eph. 1.3.] for [the Conversion wrought in] you all [so visibly] that your Faith is spoken of throughout the World. Ver. 9. [This happy success of the Gospel being very grateful to me] for God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing [Gr. how uncessantly] I make mention of you. Ver. 10. Making request [Gr. requesting] always in my Prayers to come to you, if by any means, now at length, I might have a prospe∣rous Journey by the will of God. Ver. 11. For I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual Gift, to the end that you may be established. , that I might impart to you some spiritual Gift.] This is by most interpreted of the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge, by which St. Paul would In∣struct them; I rather chuse to refer it to some Spiritual Gift he at his coming would bestow upon them by the Imposition of his Hands upon some of them, as the Apostles used to do, Acts 8.17. & 19.6. 2 Tim. 1.6. For, (First) that is most agreeable to the Phrase , to give the Spirit, or a Spi∣ritual Gift. And (2ly.) to his words in the close of this Epistle, that he shall come to them in the fulness  of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, that Phrase being ap∣plyed to the giving of the Spirit, and his Gifts, Gal. 3.14. Eph. 1.3. And (3ly.) to the end here assigned of the imparting this Gift, viz. the establishment of the Romans in the Faith: For the vouchsafement of the Spirit and his Gifts unto the Churches, is still cal∣led  the confirmation of them in the Faith, 1 Cor. 1.5, 6.2 Cor. 1.21, 22. & 5.5. Gal. 5.5. Thes. 1.5. Ver. 12. That is, that I may be comforted together with you, by the mutual Faith both of you and me. , to be comforted together with you.] It being both a comfort, and establish∣ment of Faith in them to receive these Gifts of the Spirit, and in him to be able to im∣part them to them, and to find God so effe∣ctually working by him. Ver. 13. Now I would not have igno∣rant, Brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come to you, that I might have some fruit a∣mong you, also even as among other Gentiles, (though through many hindrances I have not yet been able to accomplish my purpose, Chap. 15.22.) Ver. 14. For (as) I am a Debtor both to the Greeks and the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the unwise (as having by God the di∣spensation of the Gospel committed to me for their sakes, 1 Cor. 9.6.) To the Greeks, and the Barbarians.] See Note on 1 Cor. 14.11. Ver. 15. So, as much as is in me, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at Rome also. , to Preach the Gospel to you at Rome.] St. Paul here plainly seems to challenge Rome as part of his Pro∣vince, as being the Apostle of the Gentiles. So again, Chap. 11.13. I speak to you, Gen∣tiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnifie my Office. And Chap. 15.15. I have written the more boldly to you in part, i. e. as to the Gentile part among you, as putting you in remembrance of the Grace given to me of God, v. 16. that I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles; and so on to v. 30. And here I purposed to come to you Gentiles, for I am a Debtor, &c. When therefore the Ancients tell us, that St. Peter was Bishop of Rome as well as St. Paul, this can be only true of Peter, as to the Jewish Converts there, whilst St. Paul was the Apostle and Bishop of the Gentiles at Rome, according to the Agree∣ment made between them, that Paul and Bar∣nabas should go unto the Gentiles, St. Peter and John to the Circumcision, Gal. 2.9. And so the Bishop of Rome, if he will be St. Peter's Successor, must only Preach unto the Jews, or be the Bishop of the Circumcision. Moreover it seems highly probable that St. Peter was not yet come to Rome, much less had settled his See there; for if so, why should St. Paul be so desirous, so often pur∣posing to come to them, that he might im∣part some spiritual Gift to them, to the end they might be established, unless St. Peter were either insufficient for, or very negligent in that Work. See the Preface to this Epistle. Ver. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is (attended with) the power of God to Salvation, to every one that believeth, to the Jew first (to whom it was by God's appointment to be first preached, Acts 3.26. & 13.46.) and also to the Gentile. Ver. 17. For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith (Gr. the Righteousness of God by Faith is revealed to beget in Men Faith) as it is written, but the just shall live by Faith.
, the Righteousness of God.] This Phrase, in St. Paul's style, doth always sig∣nifie the Righteousness of Faith in Jesus Christ dying, or shedding his ood for us. So Chap. 3.20, 21. The Righteousness of God without the Law is manifest, to wit, the Righteousness of God through Faith of Jesus Christ; the same Apostle having declared, that the Gentiles, who followed not after Righteousness, had obtained unto Righteousness, even the Righ∣teousness of Faith; but Israel not believing, had not attained to the Law of Righteousness, Rom. 9.30, 31. He proves the second Asser∣tion thus: For they being ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own Righteousness (which is of the Law) have not submitted , to the Righteousness of God, i. e. to the Righte∣ousness of Faith in Christ, to which the Gen∣tiles had submitted, Chap. 10.3. For Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believeth, v. 4. , for Righ∣teousness, i. e. for Justification through Faith in Christ, v. 10. See the Note on 2 Cor. 5.21. The Righteousness of God is therefore manifestly taken for Gospel-Righteousness, as Mr. Cl. notes on Rom. 3. p. 263. But when he adds, That is for sanctity of Life conse∣quent upon Repentance, he is miserably out; for this Righteousness consists not in our San∣ctification, but in our Justification or Absolu∣tion from our past Sins through Faith in the Blood of Christ, shed for the Remission of Sins. from, i. e. by Faith to Faith.]  being here put for , as in this very Verse, the just shall live  by his Faith. So Chap. 3.30. It is one God who will justifie the Circumcision  through Faith, and the uncircumcision  by the same Faith. So  is the Righteousness that is by Faith. Chap. 9.30. & 10.6. , and , the Righteous∣ness by Faith in Christ. Vain therefore is the descant of Mr. Le Clerk upon these words, That from the Faith whereby the Jews believed the Prophets, and the Gentiles their Ancestors, they might proceed to another Faith: For if he means they should proceed from the one Faith to the other, this is true of the Jews, who were to add to their Faith in God, and in his Prophets, Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, John 14.1. But it is false as to the Gentiles, who were to renounce and turn from the Faith of their Ancestors, that they might believe in Christ. If he means by proceeding from Faith to Faith, renouncing the one, to embrace the other, this is true of the Gentiles, but false when applyed to the Jews, who were not to renounce their Faith in the Prophets, but by vertue of it to embrace this Righteousness of God, testified by the Law, and the Prophets. The sense of these words seems plainly to be this: The Righteousness of God, which is by Faith, is revealed in the Gospel to beget Faith in Men. , the just shall live by his Faith.] In God's Promises, whence it appears that Faith doth not include Obedience, but only a firm belief of God's Promises ob∣liging to Obedience; hence the Apostle argues from this very place, Gal. 3.10, 11. that the Law is not of Faith, because it saith, The man that doth these things, shall live in them, making Obedience the Condition of Justifica∣tion by the Law. Ver. 18. (And this way of Justification, or obtaining Remission of Sins, is necessary to exempt all Men, whether Jew or Gentile, from the wrath of God) for (to begin first with the Gentile) the wrath of God is re∣vealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of (those) men who hold the Truth (they know by the Light of Nature) in unrighteousness. , the wrath of God.] This was be∣fore more expresly revealed against the un∣righteousness of the Jew, God in the mean time so far winking at the unrighteousness of the Gentiles, as to make no express denuntia∣tion of his Wrath against them; but now he calls all men every where to repent of their unrighteousness, because he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the World in righ∣teousness, Acts 17.30, 31. , against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men.] The ungodliness of Men signifies their Im∣piety in robbing God of his Honour, and gi∣ving it to graven Images, or to them which by Nature were no Gods, and so being ungrate∣ful to him, who was the Author of all their Blessings, v. 21, to 26. Their unrighteousness is their injustice to one another, from v. 26, to the 30th. And they are said to retain the Truth in unrighteousness, by acting contrary to the Notions of it they had, or might have learned from the Law of Nature, and by sup∣pressing, or corrupting the Dictates of their Natural Conscience. So of the Builders of the Tower of Babel,De Confus. ling. p. 267. F. Philo saith, That it sufficed them not , to confound the Laws of Justice among Men, but also they invaded Heaven, , sowing unrigh∣teousness, and reaping ungodliness. Ver. 19. Because that which may be known of God (by the Light of Nature) is mani∣fest in (or to) them, for God hath shewed it to them. Ver. 20. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, (or
are clearly seen (even) from the Creation of the World) being understood by the things that are made (i. e. by his works) even his eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse, (viz. who do not worship him alone as God, who is the Creator of all things, but rather give the Worship due unto him, to the works of his hands.) , from the Creation of the World.] This Phrase seems not to signifie the means by which they came to the knowledge of God, for that is afterwards expressed in these words, , being made known by his works, but rather to import that from the beginning of the World the Heathens had this means of knowing the true God from the Works of the Creation, so , is from the beginning of the World, Mat. 24.21. , from the Foundation of the World, Mat. 13.35. Luke 11.50. Heb. 4.3. & 9.26. Strange is the Conceit of a learned Person, who interprets these, and all the fol∣lowing words of this Chapter of the Gnosticks, for who ever heard that the Gnosticks changed the Glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to Birds and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things? Who of the Ancients ever said, Their Women changed the Natural use of the Body for that which is against Na∣ture? How is it possible that the Apostle should here accuse them of all this Idolatry, and Image Worship, and yet in the next Chapter say of the same Gnosticks, according o the Interpretation of the same Person, Thou that abhorrest Idols, dost thou commit Sacrilege? v. 22. Doubtless the Apostle speaks here of that knowledge of God which by the Light of Nature was in the heart of the Gentiles, and so was manifest in, and to them, even from the time of the Creation of the World, by his Works, because the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament sheweth his handy-work, Psal. 19.1. And therefore doth not here say, that his Mercy, and Grace, and Love to Mankind, but that his Eternal Power and Godhead, was shewed by these Works, which yet in reason he should have mentioned here, as he doth elsewhere, had he spoken of the Discoveries God made of himself by the Gospel-Revelation. Ver. 21. Because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God (by giving him the Honour due to the Deity) neither were thank∣ful (to him who giveth to all Men life, breath, and all things, Acts 17.28. & 14.17.) but became vain in their imaginations (of him) and their foolish heart was darkned. Ver. 22. Professing themselves to be wise, (and usurping that name, v. 14.1 Cor. 1.20, 21.) they became (in their actions) fools. Ver. 23. And changed the Glory of the in∣corruptible God into an Image made like to cor∣ruptible Man, and to Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things. , the Glory of the in∣corruptible God.] The description of God in the New Testament is this, That he dwelleth in Light inaccessible, 1 Tim. 1.16. That he is Light, 1 John 1.5, 6. And thus he always exhibited himself to Men in a mighty splen∣dor of Flame and Light, as a visible Token of his special, and Majestick Presence. Thus he appeared to the Antediluvians, to Adam, saith the Learned Bishop Ely, on Gen. 2.15. & 3.8. And to Cain and Abel, when they brought their Offerings to the Lord, i. e. to the Place where his Shechinah, or Glorious Presence used to appear; for God had respect to Abel and his Offering, i. e. saith Theodotion's Translation, , He set it on fire by a stream of Light, or Flame from the Shechinah, which then usually appeared at the Place of Worship: Why else doth Cain complain thus, From thy face shall I be hid? Or why is he said to go out from the presence of the Lord? Gen. 4.4, 14. So after the Flood, we may presume he appeared to Noah offering Burnt-offerings to him; for God accepting his Ob∣lation, as he did that of Abel's, 'tis reason∣able to conceive that he gave the like Token of that Acceptance. So he appeared to Abra∣ham, when he said unto him, Get thee out of thine own Country, in a lamp of Fire, con∣suming his Sacrifices, Gen. 15.17. Whence St. Stephen saith, , the God of Glory appeared to our Father Abraham, Acts 7.2. In this visible Majesty God appeared to him again, Chap. 17.1. For in the conclusion of that Chapter it is said, God went up from Abra∣ham, i. e. the Glory of the Lord ascended, saith the Chaldee Paraphrase, and B. Uziel. So he appeared to Moses in the Bush, Exod. 3.2. So to the People on Mount Sinai, Exod, 24.16, 17. where , the sight of the Glory of the Lord was like fire. This visible appearance of God in Light is above Thirty times in the Old Testament styled the Glory of the Lord; see Note on Phil. 2.8. and on Heb. 1.3. And this Shechi∣nah was not only given to the Jews after the Law, but to the Gentiles before the Law, as a Preservative from Idolatry, or to instruct them to make no other Resemblance of him, or Symbol of his Presence besides that he from the beginning had chosen to appear in; but this, saith the Apostle, they changed into the similitude of Men and Birds, &c. And of the Jews making the Golden Calf, God says, they changed  their Glory into the similitude of a Calf, Psal. 106.20. Ver. 24. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonour their bodies among them∣selves (as did the Sodomites and Canaanites of old, , Jude 7.) Ver. 25. (As being also Men) who changed the truth of God into a lie (worshipping as Gods them who by Nature were no Gods,
Gal. 4.8. or only Demons, 1 Cor. 10.20.) and (so) served the Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. , they served the Creature.] In the 23d. Verse they are charged only with false Representations of God, in this also with a false Object of their Worship, by gi∣ving the Divine Honour to a Creature. Ver. 26. For this cause God gave them (far∣ther) up to vile affections, for even their Wo∣men did change the natural use (of their Bo∣dies) into that which is against nature. See Lucian, .) Ver. 27. And also the Men, leaving the na∣tural use of the Women, burned in their lusts one towards another, men with men, working that which was unseemly (Gr. filthiness) and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet (i. e. being given up thus to dishonour their own Bodies. See Lu∣cian's , for the dishonour they did to God by their Idolatry.) Ver. 28. And as they liked not to retain God in their knowledge, (so) God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things which were not convenient. , to a reprobate mnd.] T a mind that could not be approved of by God or Men, to do , things not a∣greeable to Nature, or to Reason. Ver. 29. Being filled with all unrighteous∣ness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murther, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers. Ver. 30. Back-biters, haters of God, despite∣ful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to Parents. Ver. 31. Without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful. , God gave them up to a reprobate mind.] ver. 24. God gave them up in the lustings of their hearts to uncleanness. ver. 26. God gave them up to dishonourable af∣fections.] Here the Fathers carefully inform us that these Phrases cannot be so understood, as to lay upon them a necessity of being thus unclean, and unnatural in their Affections, or thus perverse in their Minds;Non enim vi res agitur neque necessitate in alteram partem anima declinatur, alioquin nec culpa ejus, nec virtus posset ascribi, nec boni-electio praemium nec declinatio mali supplicium mereretur, sed servatur ei in omnibus libertas arbitrii, ut in quodcunque voluerit, ipsa declinet. Orig. in locum. for then, say they, this would not be their fault, nor would it be blame-worthy in them to do all these things. Secondly, They positively tell us, that the Apostle here puts the Phrase,, Theodoret. . Chrysostom. Theophyl. He gave them up, for he permitted them to be given up. Thirdly, That this was done, first, by leaving them naked and, Theod. . Photius. . Theoph. destitute of his former Pro∣vidence and care towards them, not giving them any warning of his displeasure against them for these things by his Prophets, as he did to the old World, and Ninevch, or by his Judgments, in order to their Reformation. 2. By giving them up to. Phot. . Oecum. Satan, that un∣clean Spirit, who will not fail, when he hath permission, to provoke them to such unclean∣ness, and who is that God of the World who blinds mens Eyes, that they should not see the Truth, 2 Cor. 4.4. So the Lord moved David to say, Go number Israel and Judah, 2 Sam. 24.1. i. e. Satan provoked him to do it, 1 Chron. 21.1. And thus, say they, a Physician gives up his Patient to do what he will, when he finds he will not follow his Prescriptions. And, Lastly, They observe, that they were thus deserted, and given up by God, as the just Punishment of their Iniquities committed a∣gainst the Light of Nature, which they had ceived, because. Phot. they held the Truth re∣valed in unrighteousness, v. 18. Because when they knew God, they did not glorifie him as God, nor were they thankful, v. 21. and be∣cause knowing that they who did these things were worthy of Death, they not only did the same, but had pleasure in them that did them, and so indeed they were delivered up to do these things by their own wickedness. Thus on the contrary, we say, Such a Man's Money destroyed him, when it was not the Money, but his intemperate, and evil use of it that did so. And such a Man's Flatterers corrupted him, when it was his hearkning to them, and being perswaded by them which did it; whereas he had it in his power not to hearken to them. And in this permissive sense the word , he gave them up, is used almost an hundred times in the Old Testament: When God is said to give men up into the hands of their Enemies, to give them up to the Sword. Thus the three Children, , gave up their
Bodies to be burned, Dan. 3.20. Thus David prays he may not he given up into the hands of his Oppressors, i. e. that God would not leave him to their power, Psal. 119.121. And the Son of Syrach, That God would not give him up to a proud look, Ecclus. 23.4. And so God gave his People up to their own hearts lusts, i. e. He let them follow their own inven∣tions, Psal. 81.12. And this is farther evi∣dent from v. 32. where they are said, to have done all these things against their knowledge of the Judgment of God upon such evil doers. He that would see a larger Comment upon ver. 29, 30, 31. let him consult the learned Grotius; I only shall observe from the Greek Commentators, 1. That from these words, be∣ing filled with all unrighteousness, it seemeth reasonable to interpret almost all that follows as some Species of Unrighteousness, or In∣justice. 2. That  signifies that Wicked∣ness which causes Men to do Mischief against their Neighbour by Treachery, , to do it out of Malice; , to accustom them∣selves to do so. 3. That , are they that whisper things to the damage of others when they are present; , they that openly defame them being absent. 4. , is that Pride which puffs us up on the account of the things we do enjoy; , that boasting which we make of things which we have not. Ver. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (viz.) that they who do such things are wor∣thy of Death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. , worthy of Death.] That Mur∣ther, Adultery, and unnatural Lusts deserved Death, they knew not only by the Light of Nature, and of Conscience, but by their own Laws condemning them who did them, to Death. That all of them being Species of Injustice, condemned by the Law of Nature, rendred them obnoxious to the displeasure of that God who is the Governour of the World, and the Avenger of all unrighteousness; and so obnoxious to Death for violating the Laws he had given them to govern themselves by, they might know by the Light of Nature. , have pleasure in them that do them.] This, say the Greek Commen∣tators, is much worse than the bare doing of them; for a Man may do them through the power of Temptation, and by consideration may after become sensible of his folly, and repent of it; but when he is arrived at that height of Wickedness, that he not only ap∣proves, but delights in seeing the like things done by others, he demonstrates such a strong Affection to them as is incurable. CHAP. II. THE Apostle had in the former Chapter laid down this as the Foundation of his Discourse, That the Gospel of Christ was the power of God to the Salvation both of Jew and Gentile, v. 16. and that there only was re∣vealed that Righteousness of God through Faith, by which alone Life and Salvation was to be obtained. He also shewed the necessity of this Faith, because the Wrath of God was re∣vealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of men who held the truth in unrighteousness; and that this the Gentiles had done by acting against the Light of Nature; and that God had been angry with, and punished them for it, he had shewed from v. 19. to the end of that Chapter. These Gentiles were by the Jews reputed as unclean, great Sinners, and so uncapable of Salvation; and their great Quarrel against the Gospel was this, that it admitted such Men to the favour of God without Circum∣cision, and Obedience to the Law of Moses. To these Jews the Apostle in this Chapter di∣recteth his Discourse, proving here that they who lived under the Law wanted this Justi∣fication as much as others, being also great Sinners; and in the following Chapters, that neither they, nor the Gentiles could obtain this Justification by the Law. See v. 13. & 17. Verse 1. Therefore (since God hath shewed his displeasure thus against the Gentiles for sinning against the Law of Nature) thou art inexcusable, O Man, whoever thou art, that judgest (so severely of them) for wherein thou judgest another thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judgest doest the same things (of∣fending as much against the Law of Moses, as they have done against the Law of Nature.) , for thou doest the same things.] If to any one it seem strange that the Apostle should pronounce the Jews Guilty of the same Sins of which he had accused the Gentiles, Chap. 1. let him consider what their own Josephus hath recorded of them, and he will cease to wonder. For (1.) He assures us there. De Bell. Jud. l. 6. c. 27. p. 933. . Cap. 26. p. 930. C. was not a Nation under
Heaven more Wicked than they were. What, saith he, have you done of all the good things required by our Law-giver? What have ye not done of all those things which he pronoun∣ced accursed?. De Bello. Jud. l. 6. c. 37. So that had the Romans delayed to come against these execrable Persons, I believe, saith he, either the Earth would have swallowed up, or a Deluge would have swept away their City; or Fire from Heaven would have consumed it, as it did Sodom; for it brought forth a Generation of Men far more wicked than they who suffered such things. There is not a Sin mentioned Chap. 1. of which he doth not in that History accuse them, not excepting that of unnatural Lusts; for of their Zealòts he saith,. l. 5. c. 34. p. 897. . l. 7. c. 30. p. 986. E. It was Sport to them to force Women; they freely gave up themselves to the Passions of Women, exercising, and requiring unnatural Lusts, and filling the whole City with Impurities. And again, they committed all kinds of Wickedness, omitting none which ever came to the memory of Man; esteeming the worst of evils to be good, and finding that reward of their Iniquity which was meet, and a Judgment worthy of God. Ver. 2. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things (it being equitable that he should, and certain that he will deal with Men according to his Word.) Ver. 3. And (then) thinkest thou this, O Man, who judgest them who do such things (against the Law of Nature,) and doest the same (against the Law of Moses,) that thou shalt escape the judgment of God (which they have so severely felt?) Ver. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his Goodness (to thee above them, in giving the Law, Covenant, and Promises to thee, Chap. 9.4.) and forbearance and long-suffering (ex∣ercised hitherto to thee, who hast long de∣served his wrath, Chap. 9.22.) not knowing (or discerning) that the goodness of God (na∣turally) leadeth thee to repentance, (and is a powerful motive to engage thee to it, 2 Pet. 3.9, 15.) Ver. 5. But after the hardness and impeni∣tency of thy heart (which will not suffer thee to repent, and believe the Gospel) treasurest (yet) up (more) wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judg∣ment of God, (Rom. 9.22. 1 Thess. 2.16. & 5.9.) Ver. 6. Who will render to every man (Jew and Gentile) according to his deeds. Ver. 7. To them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honour, and immortality; eternal life. , by patient continu∣ance in well-doing.] This Good Work being put in the Singular Number, seems to inti∣mate some Work eminently so. Now when the Jews asked our Saviour, What shall we do that we may work the Works of God? His Answer was, This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he hath sent, John 6.28, 29. The Preaching of this Faith is styled emphatically the Work, Acts 5.38. & 13.2. & 14.26. & 15.38. and sometimes the Work of Christ, Philip. 2.30. the Work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 16.10. The Faith wrought by it is , the Work of Faith, 2 Thess. 1.2. And he that begets it in us, is said to begin in , the Good Work, Philip. 1.6. And in this sense it accords well with the scope of the Apostle, whether it be joyned with the word Patience, or with the following words; for the Apostle had said in the former Chap∣ter, That the Gospel of Christ was the power of God through Faith to Salvation to every-one that believeth, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, Rom. 1.16. This he here prosecutes, saying, That to them who by patience in the Faith of Christ, seek the Glory, Honour, and Im∣mortality promised by the Gospel, God will give Eternal Life. Ver. 8. But to them who are contentious (against) and obey not the Truth (of the Gospel, as generally you Jews do not,) but obey unrighteousness (or falshood,) Indigna∣tion, and Wrath. , and obey not the Truth.] The Gospel being styled the Truth of God, Rom. 3.7. & 15.8. The Word of Truth, Eph, 1.3. Coloss. 1.5. 2 Tim. 2.15. James 1.18. The Knowledge of it being , the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Tim. 2.4. & 4.3. 2 Tim. 2.25. Titus 1.1. Heb. 10.26. The belief of it being , the belief of the Truth, 2 Thess. 2.13. Obedience to it being Obedience to the Truth, Gal. 1.3. & 5.7. Walking accord∣ing to it being walking according to the Truth, 1 John 2.4. John 3.3. The Gospel it self being emphatically styled the Truth, Eph. 4.21. 2 Joh. v. 2. & 3 Joh. v. 12. To know it being to know the Truth, 1 John 2.21. To profess it, to be
of the Truth, 1 John 3.19. To reject it, not to believe the Truth, 2 Thess. 2.12. To err from it, to err from the Truth. Titus 1.14. James 5.19. I say, this being so, , they that are contentious here, and obey not the Truth, may be, first, the unbelieving Jews, or false Apostles coming from them who preached Christ, , out of contention against Paul, Philip. 1.16. And, 2dly, the Gentiles, which spake against the Truth, and rejected it; and both these obeyed, or gave up themselves to falshood; the Gentiles, by changing the truth of God into a lye, Chap. 1.25. The Jews, by adhering to their vain Traditions, which made void the Commands of God, and owning them as derived from Moses, when they were only the Doctrines of Men. Ver. 9. Tribulation and anguish (I say) shall be upon every soul that worketh evil, upon the Jew first (as being under greater Light, as having the Gospel first preached to them, Acts 13.46. and to whom Christ was first and in Person sent, Acts 3.26. And also upon the Gentile, (for though God winked at the times of their former Ignorance, Acts 17.30. yet now he hath revealed his wrath from Heaven against all unrighteousness, Chap. 1.17. they must expect his just displeasure who turn not from it to the way of Truth, as the Gospel is called, 2 Pet. 2.2.) Ver. 10. But glory, honour, and peace shall be to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, (as being the Church of God, and to whom the Promises of the Messiah chiefly did belong, Rom. 9.4.) And also to the (be∣lieving) Gentile, (they being by Faith Abra∣ham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Pro∣mise, Gal. 3.29.) Ver. 11. (I say, to the Gentiles also,) for there is no respect of Persons with God. , no respect of Persons.] i. e. He is not one who will connive at Men doing wickedly, because they are Jews, whilst he punisheth the like Wickedness in the Gentiles, or afford Justification and Salvation to the Jew believing, and working that which is Good, and not to the believing and obedient Gentile, Rom. 3.29, 30. Ver. 12. Tribulation and anguish (I say, shall be) on every soul that worketh evil, (whether Jew or Gentile,) for as many as have sinned without the (written) Law, (which is the case of the Gentiles,) shall also perish with∣out (that) Law, (being condemned by the Law written in their hearts;) and as many as have sinned in (or under) the Law, (which is the case of the Jews,) shall be judged (and condemned for their evil deeds) by the Law. Ver. 13. For (know this, oh thou Jew, that) not the hearers (only) of the Law, are (upon that account) just before God, but the doers of it (only) shall be justified, (i. e. accepted of God, as acting suitably to their Profes∣sion.) , not the hearers of the Law.] The Jewish Religion was very much corrupted at our Saviour's coming, so that they thought it sufficient to obtain God's Fa∣vour, and to secure them from his Judgments: 1. That they were of the Seed of Abraham: And hence the Baptist speaks thus to them, Bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and (think it not sufficient to) say within your selves, we have Abraham for our Father, Mat. 3.8, 9. The Chalde Paraphrasts do often men∣tion their expectation of being preserved for the Merits, or Good Works of their forefa∣thers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and their Writers add, thatPocock, Miscell. p. 172. 227. Hell-fire hath no power over the Sinners of Israel, because Abraham and Isaac descend thither to fetch them thence. 2. They held that Circumcision was of suf∣ficient Vertue to render them accepted of God, and to preserve them from Eternal Ruin; for they Teach, ThatPug. fid. Part. 3. Disc. 3. c. 16. § 36, 37. no circumcised Person goes to Hell, God having promised to deliver them  for the Merit of Circum∣cision, and having told Abraham, that when his Children fell into Transgression, and did wicked Works, he would remember the odour of their fore-skins, and would be satisfied with their Piety. And, 3. They taught, that allSee Smith's Jew. No∣tion of Legal Right. Ch. 3. Israelites had a Portion in the World to come, and that notwithstanding their Sins, yea, though they were condemned here for their Wickedness; this is the first Sentence in the Capitula Patrum. Whereas of all the Gen∣tiles, without exception, they pronouncePirk. Eliez. p. 69. § 4. that they are fuel for Hell-fire. 4. They teach, that to be employed in hearing, and studying the Law, was a thing sufficient to make them acceptable with God. To this St. James seems to refer in these words, And be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own souls, James 1.22. Now most of these van Opinions the Apostle in this Chapter, and throughout the Epistle, labours to confute. The first Chap. v. 9. the second here, v. 25. the third, from v. 2. to the 9th. and the fourth, in this verse. Ver. 14. (And say not, that the Gentiles therefore cannot be justified, or accepted with God, because they having not the Law, cannot be doers of it,) for when the Gentiles, who have not the Law (of Moses) do by na∣ture the things contained in the (Moral) Law, they having not the (written) Law, are a Law (a Rule of living) to themselves.
Ver. 15. (Doing those things) which shew the work of the Law written in their hearts, their Conscience also bearing Witness (to it,) and their thoughts mean-while, (or their Rea∣sonings with themselves) accusing, or else ex∣cusing one another, (and so the uncircumcision keeping the Righteousness of the Law, and fulfilling the Law, shall be by God accounted for Circumcision, and be as acceptable to him as the circumcised, v. 26, 27.) , for when the Gentiles.] Most Interpreters understand this of the believing Gentile, the Righteousness of the Law being fulfilled in them only, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.4. And he being only the inward Jew, who hath the Cir∣cumcision of the Heart in the Spirit, v. 29. But all the Ancient Commentators interpret these last six Verses not indeed of the Idolatrous Gentiles, but of such Gentiles as lived before the Law, as Melchisedeck and Job; or were worshippers of the True God, as Cornelius; or repented, as the Ninevites. These Ex∣amples, saith Chrysostom, he sets before the Jews, as being such as they could not contra∣dict: And in his Comment on the 15th. Verse he makes this Inference from the words:. By these things he shews that God made Man sufficient of himself to chuse Vertue, and avoid Vice; adding, that this was neces∣sary to be said to stop the Mouths of them who enquired , where were the foot-steps of such a Providence in former times? This the Apostle seems plainly to insinuate by arguing that God did, and will accept the Gentile, living according to the Law written in his Heart, and therefore owning him as the True God, and honouring or glorifying him as God, who made the Heaven and the Earth, because he is no respecter of Persons. This seems the obvious meaning of those words of St. Peter, in the case of Cornelius and all his Friends, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of Persons, (i. e. He affects them not barely because they are circumcised, or of such a Nation,) but in every Nation he that feareth him, and worketh Righteousness, is acceptable to him, Acts 10.34, 35. supposing that there might be such in every Nation. And the Ar∣gument of Origen seems here considerable: ThatSi enim videtur Apostolus condemnare Gentiles ex eò quod naturali intelligentiâ cum cognovissent Deum, non sicut Deum magnificaverunt, quomodo non putamus quod etiam collaudare eos possit, & debeat, si qui in his cognoscentes Deum, sicu Deum magnificent, dubitar igitur non puto quin is qui pro malo opere condemnari meruisset, idem, si operatur bonum, remu∣neratione boni operis dignus haberetur. if God condemned the Gentiles be∣cause they held the Truth in unrighteousness, and when they knew God, did not glorifie him as God, neither were thankful; it seems reason∣able to conceive, that had they done what they culpably neglected, and might have done; i. e. had they glorified him as God, and been thank∣ful, they would have done what had been ac∣ceptable to God, and fit to be rewarded by his Goodness; had they held the Truth in Rihteousness, and abstain'd from those Actions for which their Conscience did accuse them, and for which they knew they were worthy of Death, as they who were inexcusable for do∣ing of them, might have done, they would have escaped the Wrath of God revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness. But then these things may here be offered to Conside∣ration. 1. That this Acceptance may not reach so far, as to render them under the same Privi∣leges and Favours with his Church and Peo∣ple, but if they live in such Times and Places where an exacter Knowledge of his Will might be obtained, it may induce his Provi∣dence to find out means of imparting that also to them, as in the case of Cornelius, and his Friends, who was told things by which he and his House should be saved, Acts 11.14. 2. That though God may, and will reward such honest Heathens, because otherwise they could have no encouragement to own, or serve him as their God, since He that cometh to God, saith the Apostle, must believe that he is a re∣warder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.. Yet is he not obliged to give them the Glorious Reward which he hath promised to the Christian; for this being not due to their Works, they could not from the Light of Na∣ture be assured of it; and it being so pecu∣liarly assigned to Faith in Christ, both affirma∣tively and negatively, when the Apostle saith, God hath given us eternal life, and that life is in his Son.1 John 5.11, 12, 13.20. John 17.3. See John 1.4. &. 13.16.36. & 5.24. & 6.27. He that hath the Son, hath life, and he that hath not the Son, hath not life. This is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. This is the true God, and eternal life. It cannot well be said to belong to any other, and thereforeLicet alienus à vitâ videatur aeternâ, qui non credit Christo, videtur quod per haec quae dicuntur ab Apostolo bonorum operum gloriam, & honorem, & pacem perdere penitus non possit. Origen freely grants this, and yet thinks such Persons may not be utterly deprived of a Reward; especially it seems not equitable that they should be depri∣ved of all Reward, purely for want of an impossible Condition; i. e. because they
believed not in him, of whom they had not, and very often could not have heard. It may be added, 3. That if any of them did arrive to such a state, as made them indeed to fear God, and work Righteousness, they did this not meerly by the strength of Natural Light, for though some of them seem to say, that Nature, orNec est quisquam gentis ullius qui ducem naturam nactus ad virtutem venire non possit. Cic. de leg. l. 1. n. 3. Philosophy was a sufficient Guide to Ver∣tue, yet that they meant not this exclusively of the Divine Assistance, which they saw ne∣cessary to preserve them against the Infirmi∣ties of Humane Nature, their ownMultos & nostra civitas, & Graecia tulit singulares viros, quorum neminem, nisi juvante Deo, talem fuisse creden∣dum est— Nemo igitur vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu divino unquam fuit. Cic. de Nat. Deorum, lib. 2. n. 124, 125. . Max. Tyr. Dissert. 22. p. 218. words do fully testifie. And if God owned any of them as truly Righteous, it was by vertue of their Faith in God, i. e. that Faith by which they believed he was a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; which being as to kind the same with that which the Apostle so highly commends, Heb. 11. even the expectation of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, when it produced in them a sincere en∣deavour to serve and please him according to the Light of Nature, and cleave to their Duty, though they might suffer for it in this World, might be imputed unto them for Righteousness. I conclude these Conjectures with Origen on the same Place, Sed tamen in arbitrio legentis est probare quae dicta sunt, vel non. Ver. 16. (And these Rewards and Punish∣ments will be distributed to Jew and Gentile) in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men (s hearts) by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, (or as my Gospel testifies he will, for the Heathens are not to be judged according to the tenor of the Gospel, but according to the Light of Nature, v. 12.) Ver. 17. Behold (thou who gloriest in this, that) thou art called a Jew (one of that Na∣tion which God hath known above all the Fa∣milies of the Earth, Amos 3.2. to whom per∣taineth the Adoption, and the Covenants, Chap. 9.4.) and restest in (the outward per∣formances of) the Law, and makest thy boast of God (as the Author and Patron of thy Re∣ligion, and thy God in Covenant.) , thou art called a Jew.] The Apostle doth not here begin to speak to the Jew, but to prove farther, and illustrate what he had said before, as is evident from the words , behold thou (to whom I speak) art called a Jew; he therefore may be supposed to speak this farther to convince him that he, doing the same things, shall not escape the Judgment of God; and that the hearing of the Law he doth not practice, will be so far from justifying him before God, that 'twill add to his Condemnation. Ver. 18. And (that thou) knowest his will, and approvest the things that are most excel∣lent, being instucted out of the Law concern∣ing them. Ver. 19. And art confident that thou thy self art (able to be) a Guide to the blind (Gentile,) a light of them that sit in dark∣ness. , of the blind.] The blind, and them that sit in darkness, is a Periphrasis of the Gentiles. See Isa. 9.1. & 42.6, 7. & 49.9. Luke 1.79. Eph. 5.8. Ver. 20. An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of Babes, which hast the form of Know∣ledge, and of the Truth in the Law (i. e. a Scheme or Draught of the affirmative Pre∣cepts of the Law, which instruct thee what to do, and of the negative Precepts, which teach thee what to leave undone.) , of the foolish.] The Foolish, and the Babes, seem to be here the Proselytes to the Jewish Law, whom they accounted as In∣fants new born. Ver. 21. Thou therefore which teachest ano∣ther, (i. e. who undertakest to be a Guide unto, and Teacher of the Gentiles,) teachest thou not thy self? (to practice thine own Lessons.) Thou that preachest (or proclaimest) a man should not steal, doest thou steal? (and so condemnest thy self out of thine own mouth.) , thou that teachest ano∣ther.] This Verse may be illustrated out of the Jewish Writings: For they say, ThatSepher Hamaaloth. p. 87. He who teacheth others what he doth not himself, is like a blind Man who hath a Candle in his hand to give light to others, whilst he himself doth walk in darkness. So apposite is the first Question to convince those Jews who pretended to be Guides and Lights to the blind Gentiles, that they themselves were blind. And again, How can a Wise Man say in the Congregation, thou shalt not steal, when he steals? Whence it appears that in their own account this was sufficient to cut off their pretence to Wisdom. Ver. 22. Thou that sayest a man should not commit Adultery, doest thou commit Adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, doest thou commit Sacrilege? , thou that sayest a man should not commit Adultery, &c.] Of all these things the Jewish Doctors were notoriously Guilty, and of most of them they were ac∣cused by our Lord. As v. g. first, that they
said, and did not; that they laid heavy bur∣thens upon others, which they would not touch with their own fingers, Mat. 23.3, 4. That they made his Father's house a den of Thieves, Mat. 21.13. John 2.16. That they were guilty of Adultery by their unjust Divorces, Mat. 19.9. And their Poligamy so shameful, that they would Proclaim in any Place where they came,Leight. in Mat. 19.3. Quae nam erit mihi uxor in diem, Who will be my Wife for this day, or while I stay in this Place? And surely such a Wife was little better than a Whore. HenceDial. cum Tyrph. p. 363. D. 371. A. Justin Martyr tells the Jews, That where∣ever they travelled, or came, they did, with the permission of their Rabbins, , take Women, and use them as their Wives, under pretence of Marriage. And the Theft, and Merchandise of which they are accused, Mat. 21. and John 2. being about Holy things, may be well also styled Sacri∣lege; though of this they being accused in the times of the Prophet Malachy, doubtless they were more guilty of it in these worst of times. Accordingly De Bell. Jud. l. 6. c. 26. Josephus doth pro∣nounce them Guilty, not only of Theft, Trea∣chery, Adultery, Sacrilege, but of Rapins, and Murthers, and new ways of Wickedness invented by them, of all which the Temple was made the receptacle. Note also, from those words, thou that ab∣horrest Idols, the mistake of those who think the Gnosticks are here referr'd to, they being so far from abhorring Idols, that. l. 1. p. 26. D. Imagines quidem depictas quasdam autem & de reliquâ materia fabricatas habent, & has coronant, & propoment eas cum Imaginibus mundi Philosophorum, videlicet cum Imagine Pythagorae, Platonis, & Aristotelis. Et reliquorum, & religuam observationem circa eas ut Gentes faciunt. l. c. 24. Vide Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. Irenaeus informs us, they had their Images, they wor∣shipped Idols without fear, and went first to the Feasts celebrated in the Idol Temples.. Contra Celsum. l. 6. p. 282. Origen also assures us, that he taught his Disciples to count Idolatry as a thing indif∣ferent. Ver. 23. Thou that makest thy boast of (thy skill in) the Law, through breaking the Law (in those instances which the Conscience of the very Heathen doth condemn) dishonourest thou (the Name of) God (among the Gen∣tiles?) Ver. 24. For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you (Jews pre∣tending to be so dear to God, and so great Favourites of Heaven, and yet living so li∣centiously as you do, and so it hath happened to you according) as it is written (of you, Isa. 52.5. Ezek. 36.23.) , is blasphemed a∣mong the Gentiles.] Of this. De Bell. Jud. l. 6. p. 931. B. C. Josephus doth frequently accuse them, saying, What Wickedness do you conceal or hide, which is not knwon to your Enemies? You Triumph in your Wickedness, strive daily who shall be most vile, making a shew of your Wickedness, as if if it were Vertue. And thinkest thou this, O Man, that thou shalt escape the Judgment of God, who punisheth the Gentiles, when thou art as guilty as they of acting against thy Conscience, and doing that for which thine own Mouth condemns thee; or which is as bad as that which thou condemnest in them, and which doth also cause them to blaspheme that Holy Name by which thou art called? Surely after these things so scanda∣lously done, 'twill be of no Advantage to thee that thou art called a Jew, or hast re∣ceived the Sign of Circumcision. Ver. 25. For Circumcision verily profiteth if thou keep the Law (as Circumcision obligeth thee to do, Gal. 5.2.) but if thou art (still) a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made (of no more advantage to free thee from God's condemnation than) uncircumcision. Having thus proved that the Sins of the Jews must render them obnoxious to the Di∣vine Wrath, as well as those of the Gentiles, he proceeds to prove what he had said, v. 7. and 10th. That the Righteousness of the cir∣cumcised Gentile must also render him acce∣table to God, and rewardable by him, as well as the Righteousness of the Jew. Ver. 26. Therefore (on the other side) if the uncircumcision (i. e. the Gentile, though uncircumcised) keep the Righteousness of the Law, shall not his uncircumcision be accounted for Circumcision? (i. e. shall he not be as ac∣ceptable to God, as if he had been circum∣cised?) , the Righteousnesses, or Ordinances of the Law.] The word  is used sometimes for the Divine Judgments, which being always done in Equity, and ac∣cording to the deserts of Men, are fitly called , or righteous judgments, Rom. 1.32. Rev. 15.4. And sometimes it relates to the Ceremonial Institutions, which God thought for a season fit to prescribe to the Jews, and then it seems to be best rendred Ordinances, as Heb. 9.1, 10. And sometimes to the Moral
Precepts of the Law, as when the Apostle saith, , the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, which seems to be the sense of the Phrase here. Ver. 27. And shall not (the) uncircumci∣sion which is by nature, (i. e. the Gentile, who continues uncircumcised as he was by Nature,) if it fulfil the Law, judge (and condemn) thee, who by the letter (i. e. having the letter of the Law) and Circumcision, doest trans∣gress the Law. , the uncircumcision which is by Nature.] Most Interpreters think that the Apostle speaks in these two Verses of the believing Gentile, and only doth design to prove against the Jew, that his want of Cir∣cumcision, if he be a doer of Righteousness, will not hinder his acceptance with God, 1 Cor. 7.19. Gal. 5.6. & 6.15. and that be∣cause this Righteousness of the Law is said to be fulfilled by them who walk according to the Spirit, Chap. 8.4. i. e. by them who are in Christ Jesus, v. 1. But Grotius and Oecu∣menius seem to Interpret this of the Heathens, such as the Centurions in the Gospel were, be∣cause the Condemnation of the Jew seems to arise from this, that he who had the Letter of the Law, did not that which they who were without it, did. Ver. 28. For he is not (in God's account) a Jew (i. e. one beloved of him) who is one (only) outwardly (by profession,) neither is that (valued by him as true) Circumcision which is outward in the flesh (only.) Ver. 28. But he is a Jew (in God's esteem) who is one inwardly (by the purification of his heart from inward filth, and evil dispo∣sitions and affections,) and (the) Circumcision (valued by him) is that of the heart in the spirit (wrought in us by the Spirit) and not in (or by) the letter, whose praise is not of men, (who are not able to discern it,) but of God, (who is the searcher of the heart.) CHAP. III. Verse 1.(BuT you will say, if the un∣circumcised Person, keeping the Righteousness of the Law, is to be reckon'd as circumcised, Chap. 2.26. And if the inward Circumcision be that alone which is accepta∣ble to God, v. 28, 29.) what advantage then hath the Jew (above the Gentile) or what profit is there of (the) Circumcision (above uncircumcision?) Ver. 2. (I answer,) much every way, (Chap. 9.4. but) chiefly because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God, (in which the Covenants and Promises made to them, and chiefly that of the Messiah, and of Justifica∣tion by Faith in him, were contain'd.) Ver. 3. (Which Oracles must be made good, notwithstanding their infidelity,) for what if some of them (to whom these Oracles, and the Promise of a Messiah, or a Seed in whom the Nations of the Earth should be blessed were committed,) did not believe (in the promised Seed,) shall their unbelief make the Faith (or Fidelity) of God (in making this Promise to Abraham) of none effect? Ver. 4. God forbid (that such a thought should enter into our hearts,) yea, (Gr. but, on the contrary) let God be (acknowledged) true (and faithful to his word) but every man a lyar, (i. e. though all Men should prove Lyars) as it is written, (Psal. 51.4.) That thou mayest be justified in thy sayings, (or mayst appear just and faithful in performing them) and clear when thou art judged (i. e. when thou judgest and contendest with Man.) , that thou mayest be justi∣fied.] These words are a confession of King David, that how severely soever God should deal with him for his Sin, he could not ac∣cuse him of too much rigor, but must justifie him in his proceedings, and clear him from all imputations of Injustice; and so they can∣not be here brought to prove, as Esthius ima∣gines, that notwithstanding our Sins, God will be faithful to his Promises, but thus, though God should reject the Jews for their Infide∣lity, they would have no reason to complain of his Severity, or charge him with Injustice, or unfaithfulness on that account, they ha∣ving forfeited their Right to be the Seed of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, by their Infidelity, and the Gentiles, by imitating his Faith, being now become his Children. , Heb.  when thou judgest.] Or contendest with any Man, or enterest into Judgment with him, or indictest, or accusest him of Sin; so the word is very often used in the Old and New Testament. So Job 13.19. , who is he that will contend with me? Esa. 43.26. Put me in remembrance, , and let us plead together. Esa. 66.16. , by fire will the Lord plead with all flesh. Mat. 5.40. , to him that will contend with thee. 1 Cor. 6.1. , dares any one contend before the unjust? See Note on 1 Pet. 4.6. Ver. 5. But if our unrighteousness commends (illustrates and establishes) the righteousness of God, (that way of Justification by Faith which he alone approves of) what shall we say? is God unrighteous, who taketh venge∣ance? (on Jew and Gentile for these Sins which thus commend his Righteousness, and
shew the Wisdom and Grace of God in ad∣mitting this way of our Justification.) I speak as a man (i. e. as an Heathen, or an Unbe∣liever would be apt to conclude from our Doctrine of Justification by Faith.) , the Righteousness of God.] That this Phrase in the Epistles doth always signifie the Righteousness of Faith, or our Justification through Faith in Christ, hath been shewed Note on Rom. 1.17. and on 2 Cor. 5.21. and this seems to establish the Expo∣sition given in the Paraphrase. , what shall we say, is God unrighteous, who ta∣keth vengeance?] The Apostle had laid down the Proposition, which is the Foundation of this Discourse, and of the whole Epistle, in these words: The Gospel is the power of God to the Salvation of every one that believeth, Jew or Gentile, for therein is revealed the Righteousness of God by Faith, to beget Faith in both. The necessity of this Faith he shews, 1. With respect to the Gentile, because they being unrighteous, could not otherwise be ju∣stified before God, or escape his Wrath re∣vealed against all unrighteousness, by any other way than that of Faith; and this Proof he concludes Chapter the first. In the second Chapter he shews the same touching the Jews, by reason of their unrighteousness, and there∣fore saith here, v. 9. We have before proved both Jews and Gentiles to be under sin. Now this most plainly serves to commend and establish this way of Righteousness by Faith in Christ, from the necessity of it, to the Ju∣stification both of Jew and Gentile. This then must be the import of the Objection, if the unrighteousness both of Jew and Gentile tends so visibly to illustrate and recommend the Wisdom, and the Grace or Favour of God in appointing this way of Justification by Faith in Christ, is it righteous in God to punish both Jew and Gentile, as you say he did, Chap. 1.24, 26, 32. and will do, Chap. 1.18. Chap. 2.2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9. for that unrighteous∣ness that tends so highly to the glory of the Gospel-Grace? , I speak as a man.] i. e. As a meer Natural Man, not acquainted with the revealed Will of God, or not acted by his Spirit, so Chrysostom and Oecumenius, I speak , according to Hu∣mane Reason, : For it is not I that say these things, but I propose the Reasonings of others. That this is the constant import of the Phrase. See Note on 1 Cor. 9.8.15.32. Ver. 6. (For) God forbid (that I should have a thought that God can be unrighteous) for how then shall God judge the World (for their unrighteousness?) Ver. 7. (I speak, I say, their sense) for (say they) if the Truth of God hath more abounded to his glory through my lye, (if the Truth of his Promise to justifie the Gentile through Faith in Christ hath appeared more illustriously to the Glory of his Grace through my Idolatry, and changing his Truth into a Lye) why am I also judged as a sinner (as well as the Jew?) , by my Lye.] The Idols of the Heathen are called lying vanities, Psal. 31.7. Jonah 2.8. numina falsa, the ma∣kers of them are said to frame  a lye, Jer. 10.14. and to have, and frame a lye with their Right Hand, Esa. 44.20. They who worship them, are said to turn aside to lyes, Psal. 40.5. and to hearken to a Teacher of lyes, Hab. 2.18. and to turn the Truth of God into a lye, Rom. 1.25. Hence are the Hea∣then introduc'd making this Confession, Surely our Fathers did inherit Lyes, , Jer. 16.19. Now this being the very Argument by which the Apostle in the first Chapter proves the Gentiles to be Sinners, worthy of Condemnation, and so uncapable of Justification by any other way than that of Faith, this may reasonably be suppos'd to be the thing referr'd to in this Verse; their Argument goes on thus. Ver. 8. And (why will it) not rather (fol∣low) , that we should do evil that good may come, (or that God may be glorified) as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm, that (in effect) we say (by asserting the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, which yet we are so far from saying, that we de∣clare them who do so, men) whose damnation is just. , whose Damnation is just.] They by thus objecting against that Dispensation of Divine Grace and Wisdom, which they should thankfully embrace, and accept, and without which they cannot be justified; and so rejecting it as absurd in their Imaginations, rendring it just that they should still lie under the guilt of Sin, and under the wrath of God for it. Ver. 9. What then, (or wherefore) are we better than they? (do we Jews excel the Gen∣tiles) no, in no wise, (, not altogether) for we have before proved (touching) both Jews (Chapter the 2d.) and Gentiles, (Chapter the first) that they are all under sin, (and so all stand equally in need of Justification by Faith.) , that these words may be rendred not altogether, as well as  is rendred not all, 2 Thess. 3.2. Heb. 3.16. 1 John 2.19 we learn from Oecumenius, who Para∣phrases them, , not in every kind, and then the context will plainly force this rendring, as being that which answers to the following Reason, the words bearing this sense: We do indeed excel them, in ha∣ving the Promise of a Messiah, and the Salva∣tion tendred by him, first made to us, Chap. 2.10. In having the knowledge of the Law, v. 17.
and the Oracles of God mitted to as, Chap. 3.2. But we do no wholly, or in all things excel them, because not in the matter of Ju∣stification by Faith, which Jew and Gentile equally stand in need of. Ver. 10. (The Jews, I say, as well as the Gentiles) as it is written (of them) there is none righteous, no, not one. Ver. 11. There is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God. Ver. 12. They are all gone out of the wy, they are altogether become unprofitable, there is none that doeth good, no, not one. Ver. 13. Their thoat is an open Sepulchre, with their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips, (they are Men.) Ver. 14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Ver. 15. Their feet are swift to shed blood. Ver. 16. Destruction and misery are in their way. Ver. 17. And the way of peace have they not known. Ver. 18. There is no fear of God before their eyes. Ver. 19. (Which words of the Psalmist may justly be apply'd to them,) for we know that what things soever the Law saith (not applying the words to any others,) it saith to them that are under the Law, that (not only the mouths of the Gentiles, but) every mouth may be stopped, and all the World may become guilty before God. , as it is written.] These words are cited from the 14th. Psalm, accord∣ing to the Edition of the Septuagint; but I do not conceive it necessary to make good the Apostle's words or Argument, that they should be spoken of the Jews of that Age in gene∣ral, especially seeing they are there said to have devoured God's People, and to have sham'd the counsel of the poor. It is enough, 1. That they should generally agree to the Jews of the Age in which the Apostle writ, as both the Scriptures of the New Testament, and the Writings of Josephus fully testifie they do. And, 2. That the Law condemning any for thse Crimes, must more especially condemn those under the Law, who at any time are guilty of Crimes thus noted and condemn'd by the Law: And with this conclusion of the Apostle the Jews themselves accord, saying,Cart. Mellif. p. 3012. There is not a Man who is not obnoxious to God, (or might not justly be condemn'd by him) were it not for his Mercy and Clemency. Moreover, it is farther to be noted, that in the close of the Psalm there seems to be a Prayer for the Redemption of the Jews by the Messiah, in those words, Oh that the Sal∣vation of Israel were come out of Zion, v. 7. The Deliverer that was to come out of Zion, being the Messiah, as we learn from Isaiah, Chap. 59.20. and from this Apostle, Chap. 11.26. Note, 2dly, That according to the Do∣ctrine of the Jews, their Messiah was to come in those times when the Jewish Natin was most corrupt, and so most resembled the De∣scription here alledged. See the Note on Philip. 3.1. Ver. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sght, for by the Law is the knowledge of (that) sin (which rendreth us obnoxious to condemna∣tion.) , the knowledge of sin.] This knowledge of sin being chiefly by the Moral Law, Chap. 7.7. shews that the Apostle excludes as well that, as the Ceremonial Law from Justification; and evident it is that the Antithesis runs all along not between Ceremo∣nial and Moral Works, but between Works in general, and Faith, v. 20, 22. the Law of Works and Faith, v. 27. Chap. 4, 2.6. & 9.32. & 10.5, 6. Ver. 21. But now (in the dispensation of the Gospel) the Righteousness of God without (performing the works of) the Law is mani∣fested (to the World,) being witnessed (i. e. attested to) by the Law (giving us the know∣ledge of sin, v. 20.) and by the Prophets (de∣claring that the just shall live by Faith.) Ver. 22. Even the Righteousness of God which is by Faith in Jesus Christ to all, and upon all that believe, for (as to the way of Justification) there is no difference (betwixt Jew and Gentile.) Ver. 23. For all have sinned, and so come short of (attaining) the glory of God (with∣out a free act of Justification by Grace.) , the Glory of God.] i. e. The fruition of God in Glory; for being jus∣tified by Faith, we have peace with God, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Rom. 5.1, 2. Ver. 24. Being justified (i. e. absolved from the guilt and condemnation due to us for our past sins) freely by his grace, through the re∣demption that is in Jesus Christ. , through the Redemption.] Purchased by the Death and Blood of Christ shed for us, We having Redemption through his Blood the remission of sins, Eph. 17. Col. 1.14. Ver. 25. Whom God hath set forth (or pro∣posed) to be a Propitiation (a Propitiatory, or a Mercy-seat) through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness (i. e. the way of Justification by Faith, which God alone ad∣mits of) for the remission of sins that are past through the forbearance of God, (not im∣puting their Trespasses to them who believe in him, 2 Cor. 5.19.)
, of sins that are past.] For in this only consists our first Ju∣stification, which is by Faith alone; the re∣mission of our future sins committed against the New Covenant, established in the Blood of Jesus, being to be remitted, if they be wilful sins, which only violate the Covenant of Grace, by a sincere, and a particular Re∣pentance for them, which brings us again un∣der that Covenant, and so under the Promise of Forgiveness through the Blood of Jesus; the , or Mercy-seat, was so called, be∣cause God there shewed himself propitious by reason of the Blood of the Sacrifice sprinkled before it; the Apostle therefore, in allusion to it, saith, that God hath set forth Christ to be his Mercy-seat, (i. e.) the Person through whom he will be propitious to us through Faith in his Blood, styled the Blood of sprink∣ling, Heb. 12.24. and presented before him in the Heavens. Ver. 26. (I say, God hath now proposed him as our Propitiatory) to declare at this time his Righteousness (or the way of Justifi∣cation he allows of) that he (by justifying us only through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus) might (appear to) be just (in requiring this satisfaction for our sins) and yet the ju∣stifier of them that believe in Jesus. , to be a Propitiation.] In the Old Testament we find the Mercy-seat still styled , because it was the Place where God promised to be propitious to them, and where the High-Priest made Atonement for himself, and all the Congregation, by sprinkling the Blood of the Sin-Offering before the Mercy-seat. When therefore the Apostle saith, that God hath set forth Jesus Christ to be a Mercy-seat to us through Faith in his Blood, we have reason to believe the Blood of Christ, as our Sin-offering, doth make Atonement for, and render God propitious to us. And as under the Old Testament they who desired to have God propitious to them, were to come with the Blood of their Sin-Offering to the Mercy-seat; so under the Gospel-dispensation, they must expect to find God propitious to them through the Blood of Christ their Mercy-seat, by whom they coming to God as the Jews did by appearing before his Mercy-seat, should find him gracious in pardoning their Iniquities through the Redemption that is in Jesus; whence I argue against the Socinians for our Lord's satisfaction thus. What is it that we do obtain by this Redemption? It is, saith the Apostle, remission of sins. What is it that procures this Remission? It is the Blood of Christ, for we have redemption through his blood, even the remission of sins, Eph. 1.7. Col. 1.14. It is the Death of Christ, Heb. 9. Since then, by the Confession of Sclichtingius upon the Place, our Lord is mention'd here as a Piacular Victim, and seeing it is certain those Victims still suffer'd in the Sinners stead, and that whensoever in the Old Testament mention is made of the Remission of Sins, the Blood of these Sacrifi es was the thing that made Atonement for them, Remission of Sins, was the thing pr hsed by that Blood: Have we not reason from what is here said of Christ our Piacular Victim, to conceive he suffer'd in our stead, and that his Blood shed for us pro∣cur'd the Remission of our Sins, as it aton'd an offended God for our Transgressions? , that he might be just.] The Reverend Dr. Hammond saith, the word  is here to be rendred clement and mer∣ciful, and that 'tis commonly taken in that Notion, and seldom in that of Vindictive Ju∣stice; but in opposition to this, I assert, that the word  is used about Eighty times in the New Testament, and not once in that sense of Clemency and Mercy, in which he saith 'tis commoly taken; he himself pro∣duces but one Place, viz. Mat. 1.19. Joseph being a just man, and not willing to make Mary a publick Example, was minded to put her away privily; where, saith Dr. Lightfoot, Men torment the word , to make it sig∣nifie Clement and Merciful, when it bears clearly the ordinary sense, thus: Joseph being a just man, would not cohabit with an Adul∣teress, and yet being not willing to make her a publick Example, and no necessity, as he there shews, lying upon him so to do, he was minded to put her away privily. 2. It is in the New Testament distinguish'd from the good and merciful Man; as when Joseph of Arimathea is stiled , a good man, and a just, Luke 23.50. When the Law is called , just and good, Rom. 7.12. And when 'tis said, Chap. 5.7. that scarcely , for a righteous man will one die, though , for a good man one would even dare to die. And, 3ly, when it relates to God, as here, it always signifies either the equity and congruity of his dealings, as 2 Thess. 1.5, 6. or his faithfulness to his word, 1 John 1.9. Apoc. 15.3. or his Vindictive Justice, as Rev. 16.5, 6, 7.19.2. 2 Tim. 4.8. , to declare his Righteousness.] This Phrase, the Righteousness of God, as I have before observed, doth always in the Epistles signifie our Justification by Faith in Christ, as being the only Righteousness that he approves of, and is here stiled, v. 22. the Righteousness of God through Faith: And therefore this Righteousness cannot be demon∣strated as some conceive by winking at the Sins committed in former Ages, Acts 17.30. but by proposing by the Gospel the way of remitting mens past Sins through Faith in Christ, or his non-imputation of them. Ver. 27. (And if this be the only way of Justification, or being Righteous before God,) Where is (there any ground of) boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? (that) of Works? Nay, (for he that is justified by Works, hath whereof to boast) , Chap. 4.2.) but by the Law of Faith (only.)
Ver. 28. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by Faith (alone) without (respect to) the deeds of the Law, (given to the Jews, for) , by Faith.] Justification from our past Sins is by Faith alone, without respect to any of our Works. We being justified freely by his Grace, v. 23. Not by Works of Righteous∣ness which me have done, but through his mercy he saved us, Titus 3.5. (i. e.) he justified us by his Grace, and so put us in the way of Salvation. Ver. 29. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? (which have not the Law, hath he vouchsafed to them no means of Justification or acceptance with him?) Yes, (doubtless he is the God) of the Gentiles also. Ver. 30. Seeing it is one God who will ju∣stifie the Circumcision by Faith, and (the) un∣circumcision through (the same) Faith. Note, that so the Jews say, If a Man be∣lieve not as he ought, Circumcision will not make him a Jew; but if he believe as he ought, he is a Jew, though he be not circumcised. Nitzachon. Sect. 7. Subs. 21. Ver. 31. Do we then make void the Law through (this) Faith? (Do we contradict it, or say it is an useless thing, or against the Promises, Gal. 3.19, 21.) God forbid (that this should be affirm'd by us.) Nay, we esta∣blish the Law (by declaring that it gives the knowledge of sin, v. 20. gives witness to this way of Justification, v. 21. and so shews the necessity of Faith, and so is our School-Ma∣ster to bring us to Christ, who is the end of the Law, Rom. 10.4. Gal. 3.24.) CHAP. IV. Verse 1. WHat shall we say then? (Gr. What therefore do we say, as some of our Nation) that Abraham our Father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found? (Gr. hath found Justification, and Acceptance with God by vertue of his Circumcision in the Flesh?) , according to the flesh. (i. e.) By vertue of his Obedience to God's Command in Circumcising the flesh of his foreskin. So Israel , according to the flesh, 1 Cor. 10.18. is Israel according to the Circum∣cision of the Flesh. To know Christ accord∣ing to the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. is to know him according to his Circumcision, or being of the stock of Abraham. To glory , according to the flesh, is to glory in be∣ing circumcised, 2 Cor. 11.18. In this the Jews had the greatest confidence of being ac∣ceptable to God, and therefore are represented by St. Paul as , having confi∣dence in the flesh, Philip. 3.3, 4. declaring that no circumcised Person goes to Hell, God having promised to deliver them for the merit of Circumcision. See the Note on Chap. 2.13. Moreover that vain Opinion had obtained among the Jews that Abraham was not pure, or accepted with God, till after his Circum∣cision; this is hinted in the Targum of B. Uziel, who renders Gen. 17.1. thus: Walk before me, , i. e. and be thou perfect in thy flesh. But it is in express words asser∣ted, Pirk Eliezer, Cap. 29. p. 64. This Opi∣nion the Apostle here confutes, and then ver. 11. shews what his Circumcision signified. Mr. Cl. interprets this Phrase thus; according to the flesh, (i. e.) in the judgment of Man, or according to carnal judgement. But there can be nothing more alien from the mind of Paul than this Interpretation: For the Apostle had been before asserting, that the Circumcision acceptable to God was not that made in the Flesh, Chap. 2.28. In the beginning of the next Chapter he answers the enquiry of the Jews, if it doth not render us more acceptable to God, what then is the benefit of Circumci∣sion? It hath many other Advantages, saith he, but not that of Justification before God, that being the result of Faith, for it is one (and the same) God, who will justifie the Cir∣cumcision through Faith, and the uncircumci∣sion by Faith. What then, saith he, do we say in this affair? Do we say, as the Jews, that Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, found (Justification, the thing I now discourse of) , by that laborious Work of Circumcision perform'd upon himself when he was 99 Years old, and upon all his Family? On which account, say the Jews, God smeltPug. fid. p. 674. the sweet odour of their fore-skins, and said, when they transgress'd, he would remem∣ber this odour, and they should be replenish'd with his Mercies. Here is a Rational Account of the connexion and pertinence of the Apostle's Argument. But how comes in the Judgment of Men with a , What then do we say? When nothing at all had been said of their Judgment, nor was the Apostle discoursing of Justification according to Man's Carnal Judg∣ment. Is not the Apostle's Question a strong Negative, importing that Abraham had not found Justification according to the Flesh? Why then doth Mr. Cl. turn it into an Affir∣mative? He goes on, and says, If Abraham
was accounted just for his Works in the judg∣ment of Men, he hath whereof to glory, he hath  boasting, saith he, before Men; but is that the , or boasting which the Apostle said was excluded not by the Law of Works, but by the Law of Faith, Chap. 3.27? No sure; but boasting before God: This there∣fore must: be here repeated, it Abraham were justified by Works, (i. e.) the Works of Cir∣cumcision perform'd upon himself and his whole Family, he hath whereof to boast be∣fore God, but he hath not to boast before God of any Justification of this kind, for what saith the Scripture? &c. In fine,  never signifies in Scripture the Judgment of Man, but the fleshly lustings, desires, and motions of Men, John 8.15. to judge accord∣ing to the flesh, is to judge ex carnali affectu, from Carnal Affection; and 2 Cor. 1.17. to purpose according to the flesh, is to do it ac∣cording to Carnal Principles and Advantages, as to walk after the flesh, is to be govern'd, and acted by Carnal Principles, Rom. 8.1, 4, 5, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 10.2. Ver. 2. (Surely no) For if Abraham were justified by (his own) Works (i. e. his Obe∣dience to God's Command to Circumcise him∣self and his whole Family,) he hath whereof to glory (Gr. ground of boasting in those Works by which he was thus justified;) but (manifest it is he had) not (whereof to boast or glory) before God. Ver. 3. For what saith the Scripture? (even this) Abraham believed God, and it (viz. that Faith) was imputed to him for Righteous∣ness. , Abraham belie∣ved God.] We learn from the Author to the Hebrews, that Abraham had Faith before this was said unto him, for by Faith Abraham be∣ing called, obeyed, and went forth, &c. and that by a yet stronger Faith he offer'd up his Son Isaac, believing that God was able to raise him up from the dead, Heb. 11.8, 17. But neither of these Instances are pitch'd upon by the Apostle, as fit for his purpose, because in both Obedience was joyn'd with Faith; whereas here was a pure Act of Faith with∣out Works, and of this Act of Faith is said, what is not said of either of the other, it was imputed unto him for Righteousness; see v. 22. 2ly, God for this Act of Faith, and not upon the former, dealt with him as a Righteous Person, by entring into Covenant with him, which was a sign that he accepted him, and pardon'd all his sins past, for it is said, In that very day God entred into Covenant with Abra∣ham, Gen. 15.18. which he had not done be∣fore. Moreover this was spoken to Abraham before his Circumcision, and so is very proper to convince the Jews of the no necessity of Circumcision to Justification; but Abraham offer'd Isaac after his Circumcision, and so the Apostle could not alledge that instance of his Faith here, ver. 10, 11. and he therefore was accounted Righteous by vertue of that Faith which excludes boasting, Chap. 2.27. and only Justifies by Grace. Ver. 4. Now (or whereas) to him that worketh (and by that obtaineth Righteousness) is the reward reckon'd not of grace, but of debt, (he having perform'd all that was re∣quir'd in order to his being Righteous before God.) Ver. 5. But to him that worketh not, (i. e. who hath not done any thing on the account of which he can be deemed Righteous by vertue of his Works,) but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly (on the account of his Faith) his Faith is accounted for Righteous∣ness. , on him that ju∣stifies the ungodly.] Justification being only the non-imputation, or the pardon of their past Sins on the account of that Faith, which laid the highest Obligations upon all Believers to die unto Sin for the future, there is no ab∣surdity in saying that God thus justifies the ungodly, repenting of, and engaging to cease from their ungodliness. Ver. 6. (And this account of justification is) even (such) as David also (the other great Person to whom God had promised a Blessing to all Nations through his Seed, Esa. 11.10. Acts 2.30. & 13.23.) describeth (speaking of) the blessedness of the man to whom God imputeth Righteousness without Works. Ver. 7. Saying, blessed are they whose iniqui∣ties are forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Ver. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute (the) sin (he hath com∣mitted.) Ver. 9. Cometh this blessedness then (of Righteousness by not imputing sin) upon the Circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? (This Question may be decided by the Example of our Father Abraham,) for we say, that Faith was reckon'd to Abraham for Righ∣teousness. , Faith was reckon'd to Abraham for Righteousness.] The Gloss of R. Salomon on Gen. 15.6. is this: The blessed God reputed this to Abraham for Righteous∣ness and Merit, for the Faith by which he be∣liev'd in him. And the BookLib. 1. Cap. 21. Ikkarim saith thus: Our Father Abraham was praised for his Faith, as saith the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness. Ver. 10. How was it then reckon'd (to him for Righteousness, was it) when he was in
Circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not (when he was) in Circumcision, but in uncircumci∣sion; (he believing unto Righteousness before he was circumcised, Gen. 15.6.) Ver. 11. And he receiv'd (afterwards) the sign of Circumcision (as) a seal of the Righ∣teousness of the Faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised, (and so of his acceptance with that God who thus entred into Covenant with him, and own'd himself his God, Gen. 17.1.) that he might be the Father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that Righteousness might be imputed to them also, (which it could not be, were Circumcision the condition of Justification and Acceptance with God.) Ver. 12. And that he might be the Father of (the) Circumcision also (i. e. a Father) to them who are not of the Circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had being yet uncircum∣cised. , the Father.] i. e. that he might be the Father of all Nations, whether Jew or Gentile, and they might all be blessed in him, according to the Promise, In thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Gen. 12.3. Or as it is, Gen. 22.18. in thy Seed. Ver. 13. (I say, that he might be the Father of the uncircumcised through Faith, and of the Circumcision through the like Faith, Chap. 3.30.) For the Promise (made) to Abraham (Gen. 12.3.) or to his Seed (Gen. 22.18.) that he should be the Heir of the World, (i. e. of those Blessings which should be deriv'd from him to all the Families and Nations of the Earth,) was not (made to him, or his Seed) through (or by vertue of their Obedience to) the Law, but through (and by vertue of) the Righteousness of Faith. , that he should be the Heir of the World.] The whole difficulty of this Verse rests upon the true In∣terpretation of this Phrase, That he should be the Heir of the World. Some think that to be the Heir of the World here, is to be Heir of the Land of Canaan, and the Parts adja∣cent to it, Idumaea, &c. But this is not only impertinent to the purpose of the Apostle, who is here proving not that Temporal Pos∣sessions, but that Justification is not by the Law, but by Faith: But seemeth flatly con∣trary to the Apostle; for the Promise of the Land of Canaan was made to Abraham upon his Circumcision, and to his Seed, Gen. 17.7, 8. and the Possession of, and their continuance in it is still promised to the Jews upon con∣dition of their Obedience to the Law of Moses. Others think that to be Heir of the World, is to be Heir of the Spiritual and Heavenly Canaan; but then as it is hard to find where any such Promise was made to Abraham and his Seed, so is it as difficult to shew how this accords with the main scope of the Apostle, which is to establish our Ju∣stification by Faith. The Antient Greek Scho∣liasts interpret the words thus; that he should be the Heir of the World, , (i. e.) that all the Nations of the World should be blessed in him. So Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, Quod enim dicit, benedicentur in te omnes tri∣bus terroe hoc est haeredem factum esse totius mundi: So Origen. And this is confirm'd from the parallel place, Gal. 3.8. for the Promise mention'd here, must be the same with the Promise mention'd there, because the Argument is the same. Now, 1. The Pro∣mise there is plainly declar'd to be this: In thy Seed, that is Christ, shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed, v. 12. And, 2ly, He there speaks of a Promise made 430 Years before the Law, which term only agrees to the Promise made Gen. 12.3. 3ly, This is the Blessing of Abraham that was to come upon the Gentiles, Gal. 3.14. For saith he there, The Scripture foreseeing that God would justifie the Gentiles through Faith, (in the pro∣mised Seed) preached the Gospel before to Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. So then they that are of Faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. He first, as being the Father of the Faithful, and so the Heir of the believing World, and they after him, as being his Sons, and Seed, by walking in the steps of his Faith, and so becoming Heirs with him of the same Pro∣mise; for if you be Christ's, if by Faith you be interested in him, saith the Apostle, then are you Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3.29. So Heb. 11.7. Noah is said by his Faith to condemn the un∣believing World, and to be , the Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith, (i. e.) the Father of all that believed unto Justification, or Righteousness after him. Ver. 14. For if they which are of the Law be Heirs (according to the Promise upon that account) Faith is made void, (as being insuf∣ficient to justifie without the Law) and the Promise is made of none effect, (for then the Nations which are not under the Law, cannot be blessed in the Seed of Abraham.) , Faith is made void.] Then Faith is made void to them that are not of the Law, and it is also made void to them that are of the Law. Ver. 15. Because the Law worketh wrath (by condemning the Transgressor to that Death to which without the Law he would not be subject,) for where no Law is there is no trans∣gression, (and so no condemnation for it.) Ver. 16. (And) therefore is (the Inheri∣tance, Gal. 3.18.) of Faith, that it might be by Grace, (which both Jew and Gentile wanted as to Justification, Chap. 3.23, 24.) to the end
the Promise (of it) might be sure to all the Seed (of Abraham) not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all, (i. e. that it might be made good to the Gen∣tile also, believing as their Father Abraham did.) Ver. 17. (I say, the Father of us all,) as it is written, (Gen. 17.5.) I have made thee a Father of many Nations; (which words, tho' spoken then when Abraham had no Seed, yet were they certain) before (or in respect of) him whom he believed, even (that) God who quickneth the dead, (and so was able to quicken his Body now dead, and the deadness of Sa∣rah's Womb,) and calleth those things which be not, (i. e. the Gentiles, which were not then a People,) as if they were. , who quickneth the dead.] This being an instance of the Faith of Abraham, it seems most reasonable to refer it to the Object of his Faith, (viz.) that he should have a numerous Seed, yea, that he should have the promised Seed from Sarah, though her Womb was dead; and it ceased to be with her after the manner of Women: And so Hilary the Deacon doth interpret this Phrase. , and calleth things that be not, as if they were.] He that is far from God, saith Origen, as we Gentiles were before we came to the knowledge of the Truths, is said not to be; and therefore God designing to render them the Seed of Abra∣ham by Faith, is said to call those things which be not, as if they were; for , things which are not, both in the Language of the Old Testament, and of the Jews, and of the Primitive Christians, signifies the Gentiles, by converting whom, saithEp. 2. § 1. Clemens R. , God called us that were not, and would that of nothing we should have a Being, as I have shewed, Note on 1 Cor. 1.28. Ver. 18. Who I say against (all Natural grounds of) hope believed in hope, that he might (Gr. should) become the Father of many Nations, according to that which was spoken (to him, Gen. 15.5. as the Stars of Heaven) so shall thy Seed be. Note, That this Verse confirms the Expo∣sition of the former Verse, shewing that the Faith there mentioned hath reference to this promise. Ver. 19. And being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead, (or grown already dead, he being about 100 Years old) neither yet the deadness of Sarah's Womb (with whom it had ceased to be after the manner of Women, Gen. 18.11. , now dead.] It is here objected, that Abraham's Body could not be thus dead, since after the Death of Sarah, even Forty Years after, he had six Sons by Keturah, Gen. 25.1. They who here tell us, that A∣braham's Body was not simply dead, but only as to Sarah's Womb, and that by a young Woman he was able to have had Seed then, they speak expresly against the Text, which saith, his Body was grown dead, and against the Opinion of Abraham himself, Gen. 17.17. and of Sarah concerning him, Gen. 18.12. They who add that this need not seem strange, that Abraham should have Children by Ketu∣rah, considering the Age to which they then lived, since in our time Men have had Chil∣dren after they have been Seventy or Eighty Years old, they will not suffer that to be strange to us, which seemed strange to Abra∣ham himself, witness his Answer to the Pro∣mise of Almighty God, Shall a Child be born to him that is an hundred years old? Gen. 17.17. Oh that Ishmael might live before thee. And to Sarah, Gen. 18.12. they deny the Mi∣racle effected by the great Power of God, which therefore the Angel doth encourage Sarah to believe, because nothing can be too hard for God, Gen. 18.13. They lessen the Faith of Abraham, which is so highly mag∣nified here, as being hope against hope, v. 18. Believing in him that quickneth the dead, v. 17. Not staggering at the Promise, but being strong in Faith, v. 20. That therefore must be here acknowledg'd which the Jewish Doctors, and all the Christian Fathers say, that God gave a new Blessing to their Bodies, and by that ren∣dred them capable of getting, and of bear∣ing Children, when by Nature they were not so. This of Sarah the Targum of B. Uziel hints by Paraphrasing the words thus, Gen. 17.16. As for Sarah, I will bless her  in her Body; and the Apostle more plainly in these words, Through Faith also Sarah her self re∣ceived strength to conceive seed, Heb. 11.11. Ver. 20. He stagger'd not at (Gr. he doubted not of) the Promise through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving glory to God (by ac∣knowledging his Power to make it good.) , he doubted not through unbelief.] It seems his Faith was not with∣out some doubting from that Answer he re∣turns to God, Shall a Child be born to Abra∣ham, that is an hundred years old? And shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear? In which words he seems to consider both his own dead Body, and Sarah's dead Womb, which the A∣postle here denies, v. 19. and v. 18. he says to God, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee, as if he expected no other Off-spring. To the first Objection it is answer'd, That those words, Shall a Child be born to Abraham! are to be consider'd as words of admiration, not
of doubting, for he rejoiced at it, saith the Calde, and the Hebrew word, which we ren∣der laughed, hath this import, Chap. 21.6. Nor is Abram reprehended for it, as Sarah is, Chap. 18.13. John 8.56. To the second it is answered, that he only desires God to bless him also, as well as the Seed promised, which appears probable from God's Answer, v. 20. As for Ishmael, I have heard thee, be∣hold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful. Ver. 21. And being fully perswaded that what he had promised, he was able to per∣form. Ver. 22. And therefore it (viz. this strong Faith) was imputed to him for Righteous∣ness. Ver. 23. Now it was not written (thus of him) for his sake alone, that it (viz. his Faith) was imputed to him (for Righteousness.) Ver. 24. But for (the benefit of) us also, to whom it (viz. the like Faith) shall be impu∣ted (for Righteousness) if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, (that he can and will raise us also by Jesus from the dead, and crown us with him.) Ver. 25. Who was deliver'd (to the death) for our offences (to offer up himself a Piacu∣lar Victim for them) and rose again for our Justification, (i. e. to appear before God with the Blood of this Victim, to make Atonement before God for us, and thereby to procure our Justification, or our Absolution from the guilt of sin.) Note, That from these three last Verses many things may be observed which tend to the Illustration of the Doctrine of Faith, and of Justification by Faith. And, 1. From v. 3, 22, 23, 24. it is extreamly evident, that it is the very act of Faith, and not the object of it, viz. Christ's Righteous∣ness, which was imputed to Abraham, and is imputed to us for Righteousness, so that as the Faith of Abraham, which is here said to be imputed to him for Righteousness, was not the Obeying God in his Commands of walk∣ing before him, and being perfect, but as is here expresly said, his believing God's Power, and his relyance on it without any doubting, was the thing that was imputed to him for Righteousness, as well as that other Act of Faith, that in his Seed should all the Families of the Earth be blessed: So the Faith that shall be imputed to us for Justification, is not, saith the Apostle here, that which includeth the performance of sincere Obedience, nor only Faith in the Blood of Christ shed for the Remission of our Sins, but Faith in him that raised up Jesus from the dead, that he will raise us also from the dead, and glorifie us with him. See the Note on Ro. 10.9. So also is the Faith of Abraham and Sarah represented, Heb. 11.11. 2. Hence also, we learn that our Justifica∣tion depends not only on the Death of Christ, but on his Resurrection; so the Apostle doth again teach us, saying, Who is he that con∣demneth us, it is Christ that died, (as a Pacu∣lar Victim for our sins) yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of Gd, (presenting the blood of this Victim in his pre∣sence for us,) who (by it) also maketh inter∣cession for us. For the clearing up of this matter, let it be noted, 1. That as the Victim offer'd under the Old Testament was brought to the Altar, and there slain, so Christ offering himself for us, was also brought to the Altar of the Cross on which he suffer'd as a Piacular Victim for us, bearing our sins in his own body on the Tree. 2. As the Blood of the Beast thus slain, was to be brought before the Mercy-seat, or into the Holy of Holies, and there presented before God to make Atonement with, so was the Blood of Christ, thus slain also, to be carried into the Heavenly Sanctuary, and there presented before God to make Atonement for our Sins. 3. As the Beast when dead, could not offer up its own Blood, so Christ, being dead, could not, before his Resurrection, make an Offer∣ing of his owm Blood in the Heavens for this end; whence the Apostle tells us, that such an High-Priest became us who is higher than the Heavens, Heb. 7.26. And were the Opi∣nion of some true, that Christ appeared not with his Blood in the Heavens, he must be only a Metaphorical High-Priest, the offering, or presenting of the Blood before God being the only proper Office of the Priesthood; and the Parallel the Apostle makes betwixt him and the Aaronical Priests, must be wholly overthrown: For with what congruity could the Apostle insist so much on the comparison betwixt the Blood of Christ brought into the Heavenly Tabernacle, and the Blood of the Le∣gal Sacrifices brought into the Earthly Taber∣nacle, if indeed the Blood of Christ was not carried into the true Tabernacle, and there presented to God? When the Apostle saith so oft the Jewish High-Priest entred into the Holy Place with the blood of Bulls and Goats, doth he not mean, that he carried their Blood in thither? When then the same Apostle saith, Christ, not by the blood of Bulls and Goats, but , by his own proper blood entred into the Holy Place, must he not also mean that Christ carried his own Blood into the Heavenly Sanctuary?
CHAP. V. Verse 1. THerefore being justified by Faith, (and so absolv'd from those sins which rendred us obnoxious to the displeasure of God) we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 2. By whom also we have access by Faith into this (state of) Grace, (or favour with God) wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of (the fruition of) the glory of God. Ver. 3. And not only so, but we glory in tri∣bulation also, knowing that tribulation work∣eth patience, Ver. 4. And patience (gives) experience (of God's Power with us, enabling us to bear these Tribulations, and of our sincere affection to him for whose sake we suffer them,) and experience (of these things worketh in us) hope (of a Reward.) Ver. 5. And hope maketh us not ashamed (of our Faith in Christ, Rom. 1.16.) seeing the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, (given to us Believers as the earnest of our future Inheritance, Eph. 1.13. & 4.30. and the fruit of our Faith, Eph. 1.13. Gal. 3.14.) , the love of God,] to us thus believing. So Chap. 8.35, 39. 2 Cor. 5.14. & 13.13. 1 John 3.9, 10. , is shed abroad.] This is the word still used in the New Testament, when speak∣ing of the effusion of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.17, 18, 33. Titus 3.6. and it is taken from Joel 2.28, 29. and so this may refer to the  of the Holy Ghost so liberally im∣parted to them. Ver. 6. (Of which love to us, even before we believ'd, the Gospel gives us the highest demonstrations.) For when we were yet with∣out strength, in due time (Gr. we being fallen, at the appointed time) Christ died for the un∣godly (for us, who since our Fall had no Righteousness of our own.) , when we were weak.] It may here be noted that the words  in the Septuagint answer to the Hebrew , and signifie to fall, and stumble to our ruin. So Psal. 9.3. They shall fall and perish  at thy presence. 26.4. They stumbled and fell, . 106.12. , they fell down, and there was none to help them. Prov. 24.16. The wicked shall fall into mischief, . Jer. 6.21. I will lay stumbling-blocks before this People, and the Fathers and Sons shall fall together, , Chap. 18.15. 46. 6, 12. & V. 16. He made many to fall, , Chap. 50.32. Lam. 5.15. Dan, 11.14. Many shall stand up against the King of the South, but they shall fall, . So v. 19, 33, 34, 35. So Hosea 4.5.5.5.14.2, 10. And this import of the word suits well with the Text, and is so proper to represent our Fall by Sin, and the words following, v. 8. , even whilst we were sinners Christ died for us, do render it so probable, that I thought fit to mention it in the Para∣phrase. Ver. 7. (Which surely is an high degree of love, beyond all Humane Example) for scarcely for a righteous man will one die, (I say, for a righteous man only) for peradventure for a good (i. e. a highly kind and charitable) man some would even dare to die. is not only a vertuous, but an obli∣ging charitable Man, Mat. 20.15. Is thy Eye evil, because I am good; overcome evil  with kindness, Rom. 12.21.  Philem. v. 14. is thy kindness. So , is the liberal Eye, Eccles. 35.8. See Buxt. in voce, , p. 1601. Ver. 8. But God commendeth his love to∣wards us, in that whilst we were yet sinners Christ died for us. , but God commends his love to us.] The Death of Christ is usually in Scripture represented as an instance of the great love of God the Father to us, because his Wisdom did contrive this way of our Re∣demption, Eph. 1.4, 5. Upon the fall of Man he made the Promise of a Saviour, Gen. 3.15. He sent his Son into the World to be the propitiation for our sins, that we might live through him, 1 John 4.9, 10. He gra∣ciously accepted of his suffering in our stead, and justifies us freely by his graae through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Rom. 3.24. He spared not his own Son, but gave him up freely for us all, Rom. 8.32. Though it be also true that Christ loved us, and gave him∣self for us, Gal. 2.20. Eph. 5.2. and that this love of Christ ought to constrain us to Obedience, 2 Cor. 5.14. Ver. 9. (And if God shewed such kindness to us being sinners,) much more being justified by his blood, (and so made Righteous in his sight, and having peace with God, v. 1.) we shall be saved from (the) Wrath (of God) by him. Ver. 10. For if when we were enemies (to him) we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. , by his life.] He being able to save us to the uttermost, because he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. And having all Power committed to him, that he might give Eternal Life to them whom God hath given him, John 17.2. , we were reconciled to God.] Here are many Arguments to establish
the Doctrine of our Lord's Satisfaction by suf∣fering in our stead, to reconcile an offended God to us. For, 1. When it is here said, that Christ died for the ungodly, 1 Pet. 3.18. That when we were yet sinners Christ died for us, 1 Cor. 5.15. And elsewhere, That he suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust, Heb. 1.9. 1 Pet. 4.1. In these, and such like places, one of these two things is intimated, that our Lord suffered in our stead, or that he bore the Punishment of our Sin: This being the plain import of the like Expressions, when they are used in the Old or New Testament. For when we read in the Old Testament, The Fathers shall not be put to death for the Children, nor the Children for the Fathers; every man shall be put to death for his own sin, Deut. 24.17. Of A∣maziah, that he slew those Servants that had murther'd the King his Father, but the Chil∣dren of those Murthercrs he slew not, accord∣ing to those words of Moses, the Fathers shall not be put to death, , they shall not die for the Children, &c. 2 Kings 14.6. 2 Chron. 25.4. And in the Prophet Ezekiel, The soul that sinneth it shall die, the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father nor shall the Father bear the iniquity of the Son, Ezek. 18. In all these places it is plain no substitution is intended, because no exemption of the Fa∣ther, because the Son, or of the Son, because the Father suffers, but then 'tis plainly inti∣mated that the one in this case would hear the Punishment of the others sin. But when David saith concerning Absalom, Would God I had died jor thee, Oh Absalom, , 2 Sam. 18.33. Oh that my Death might have gone instead of thine. When here the Apostle saith, That scarcely for a righteous person one would die, but for a good man some would even dare to die; there evidently a Sub∣stitution is intended of the one to free the other from Death by the Death he suffers: When therefore he before, and after these words saith, Christ died for the ungodly and the sinner, must he not also signifie that our Lord died in their stead, to deliver them from Death? 'Tis evident beyond exception, that in all Piacular Sacrifices, both Jew and Gen∣tile always took this for granted, that the Victim suffer'd in their stead, and for their sins. Since then the Socinians own that our Lord suffer'd as victima piacularis, or an Ex∣piatory Sacrifice, surely both Jew and Gentile must conceive that all these Phrases did im∣port that our Lord suffer'd in our stead, and for our sins. 2. A Second Argument is taken from the Reconciliation mentioned as to the effect of our Lord's suffering for us; for seeing it is alone the guilt of sin, or sin unpardon'd, that maketh God displeased with us, the Death which is here said to procure our Peace, and Reconciliation to God, must make Atonement for the guilt of our Iniquities. Crellius replies, That by  here the Apostle intends not God's Reccilia¦tion to us, but ours to God, by that Conver∣sion to him, which maketh us at Friendship with him. But this may be refuted, 1. From the import of the words  and , for they do naturally import the Reconciliation of one that is angry or displeased with us, both in Profane and Jewish Writers; thus , in what shall David reconcile himself to his Lord? 1 Sam. 29.4. When Apae the famous Con∣cubine was angry with King Darius, he flat∣tered her , that she might e reconcil'd to him, 1 Esdr. 4.21. After the re∣viling, or the falling out of Friends, , there is, or may be reconciliation, saith the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 22.22. The Jews in Egypt pray for those in Judea, that the Lord would hear their Prayer, , and be reconciled to them, 2 Maccab. 1.5. Adding, that as Jerusalem was forsaken through the wrath of the Almighty, so , when the great God was reconciled, it was set up with glory, Chap. 5.20. And again, Though the Lord, say they, be angry with us a little while for our Chastisement and Correction, , he will again be reconciled to his Ser∣vants, Chap. 7.33. And they beseech the Lord  to be reconciled to his Servants for ever, Chap. 8.29. Whence we learn that Reconciliation always respect∣eth some preceding Anger, or Displeasure; and that the reconciling of God, was the appeasing of his Anger: When therefore we here read in the same words of Enemies reconciled to God, and so saved from his Wrath, what can we imagine, but that a God once angry, and offended with them, is now appeased. And when we further read that this Reconciliation was effected by the Death and Blood of Christ, is it not obnoxious to conceive his Wrath and Anger was averted by the shedding this Blood for us? 2. 'Tis evident that when we were sinners Chirst died for us, v. 8. And when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, v. 10. are words of the same import; for seeing these words, Christ died for us, and Christ shed his Blood for us, sig∣nifie the same thing; and by his Blood shed we are reconciled, 'tis evident that Christ dy∣ing for us, and Christ reconciling us by his death, or Blood shed for us, must be the same, now we are justified by his Blood, as it pro∣cures our Peace with God, v. 1. As it saves us from his Wrath, v. 9. Therefore we are reconciled to God by it on the same ac∣count. 3. We being here considered as sinners, un∣godly, enemies to God, as Persons who have upon that account fallen short of the Glory, that is, saith Crellius, of the approbation of
God, Rom. 3.23. Is there no need of recon∣ciling God unto such Persons? And when un∣der these Circumstances we are said to be ju∣stified through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Rom. 3.25, 26. And being justified, to have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, can we conceive that nothing was done by this Jesus to procure God's Reconciliation to the Sinner, or to purchase his Peace with an offended God? Especially if we consider that the Death of Christ here mention'd, as that by which we are reconciled to God, is the Death of him who suffer'd as a Sin-Offer∣ing for us, the Blood by which we are justi∣fied, is the Blood of Atonement, or Propiti∣ation, or the Blood shed to make reconcilia∣tion for the sins of the people, Heb. 2.17. Ver. 11. And not only so, (i. e. we are not only reconciled to) but we glory, (Gr. we are rejoycing) in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atone∣ment, (or reconciliation.) , we have received the atonement.] Crellius excepts against this Interpretation, alledging, that to receive, or obtain Reconciliation, is a Phrase unknown to Jew and Gentile, and would have the words rendred thus; By whom we have obtain'd this Conversion to God; but to obtain Reconcilia∣tion when it is the effect of Blood-shed for the Remission of Sins, is very proper; for it was the constant Practice under the Law to procure Reconciliation by shedding the Blood of the Sin-Offering; and all Nations by this means endeavour'd to reconcile God to them, and what Reconciliation the Priest, by offer∣ing this Blood, procur'd, the sinner received and obtain'd; and therefore to receive Atone∣ment, or obtain Reconciliation by an Expia∣tory Sacrifice, must be a thing well known to Jew and Gentile; but to receive Conversion by it, is indeed a Phrase unknown to them, and the whole Church of Christ. Moreover, this Note of Crellius shews his little skill in the Greek, for as  is to he cou∣ragious, Acts 28.15.  is to for∣get,  is to begin, Heb. 2.3.  to remember, 2 Tim. 1.5.  to experiment, Heb. 11.36.  to be edified, 1 Cor. 14.5. So  is to be reconciled, as noxam capere is to be hurt. Ver. 12. Wherefore (, by reason of this reconciliation life is procured to us by the second Adam, as Death came by the first, for) as by one man sin entred into the World, and death by sin, (or for sin) and so death passed upon all men, (through him) in whom all had (so far) sinned, (as to become equally obnoxious to Death with him.) , in whom.] The Criticks have been very industrious to find some other sense of those words than that which our Translation gives, some rendring this last clause for that, some because all have sinned. But our Expo∣sition is confirm'd beyond all contradiction from the following words, which declare, That by the sin of one man many die, and that by the sin of one death reigned by one, and that by one offence the sentence of death came upon all, v. 15, 16, 17, 18. All which are pa∣rallel to the expression here, that Death came upon all Men through Adam, in whom, saith the same Apostle, all men die, 1 Cor. 15.22. And the words following, That by the disobe∣dience of one many were made sinners, are plainly parallel to these, in whom all have sinned. 2. None of the other senses are true, or suitable to the scope and Argument of the Apostle here. v. g. It is not true that Death came upon all Men, for that, or because all have sinned. For the Apostle directly here asserts the contrary, viz. that the Death, and condemnation to it, which befel all Men, was for the sin of Adam only; for here it is ex∣presly said, That by the sin of one man, many died; that the Sentence was, from one, and by one man sinning to condemnation; that by the sin of one, death reigned by one: There∣fore the Apostle doth expresly teach us, that this Death, this condemnation to it, came not upon us for the sin of all, but only for the sin of one, (i. e.) of that one Adam, in whom all Men die, 1 Cor. 15.22. He also farther teacheth, that this Death and Condemnation came upon all for one sin of that one man, for it came , by one offence upon all Men; it came not therefore upon all Men for the sin of all: And this the comparison plainly requires, which saith, the opposite Justification and free Gift came upon all Men by one man, Je∣sus Christ, By the obedience of one, and , By one Righteousness, v. 16, 17, 18, 19. i. e. By the Obedience to the Death of that one Man, yea, the Apostle doth, 3. Not only thus plainly and frequently assert that Death came upon all Men for the sin of Adam, but he proves it by this Argu∣ment, that death reign'd from Adam to Moses over them that had not sinned after the simi∣litude of Adam's transgression; i. e. against a Law threatning Death to them for sin; they therefore, saith he, could not die for their own Sins, for though indeed they were then Sinners, yet being under no such Law as Adam was, their sin was not imputed to Death, and so they could not die on that account; Death therefore came upon them, as I asserted, through the sin of Adam, for the true sense of these words is this: Ver. 13. (Through him, I say,) For (it must be indeed confess'd that) until the Law sin was in the world, but (it must also be ac∣knowledged that) sin was not (generally then) imputed (to death) when there was no Law (condemning men to death for it.)
I add generally.] Because tho' all Men died after Adam, all were not punished with Death for their own Natural sin, but only the Ante∣diluvians, and the Sodomites. Ver. 14. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, (the giver of a new Law, threatning Death to the transgressors of it,) even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, (i. e. Men were all the while subject to Death, though they sinned not as Adam did against an express Law, threatning Death to them for it, and therefore Death must reign over them for the sin of Adam,) who (in this) is the figure (or resemblance) of him that was to come, (i. e. of the second Adam, Christ.) , sin was not impu∣ted.] The Apostle doth not mean that God did not account them sinners who transgress'd against the Law of Nature, or that he was not displeased with them for their Offences, but only that he did not so impute them, as to condemn them to Death for them; to make this out, and to give you the true import of Imputation, let it be observ'd, 1. That where ever the Phrase occurs affir∣matively, that such a thing was imputed to any one, it is some Personal Thing, or Action of our own, and not any thing of anothers, which is thus said to be imputed; as when 'tis said, Rom. 2.26. That if the uncircum∣cision keep the Righteousness of the Law, his uncircumcision on that account  shall be accounted for Circumcision; i. e. he shall be accepted as well as if he were cir∣cumcised. So Rom. 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it (that is his Faith) was imputed to him for Righteousness, for so it is explain'd, v. 5. To him that worketh not, but believeth, his Faith is imputed to him for Righteousness. And v. 9. We say, that Faith was imputed to Abraham for Righteousness. See Gal. 3.6. James 2.23. And of our Faith in him that raised Christ from the Dead, it is said, Rom. 4.24. that it shall be imputed to us for Righ∣teousness. 2. When the Phrase is used with a Nega∣tive, or when Sin is said to be imputed, or not to be imputed, it is not only a man's own Personal sin, but the non-imputation of it, is the not inflicting some condign Punishment upon him for it. So Rom. 4.8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth no sin; which being spoken on the account of God's Hand heavy on David for his sin, Psal. 32.2, 3, 4. shews that the import of it must be this: Blessed is the Man whom God doth not pu∣nish for his Iniquity. So 2 Tim. 4.16. In my first Answer no Man stood by me, , may it not he imputed to them; let them not suffer for it. So 2 Sam. 19.19. Shimei speaks to David thus, , let not my Lord impute to me mine iniquity; i. e. let him not remember it to punish it. When therefore it is said, 2 Cor. 5.19. That God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, , not imputing to them their iniquities; the meaning is, that for Christ's sake he was pleased to exempt them from the Punishment of their Trans∣gressions. So in like manner here sin is said not to be imputed, whilst there is no Law; not that God did not look upon Men then as sinners, but that he did not Punish them with Death for it. Hence note, that in the Scripture there is no mention of the imputation either of one man's sin, or of his Righteousness unto ano∣ther, but only of the imputation of his good deeds for Righteousness, or of his evil deeds for Punishment. 2. That the punishment of Adam's sin devolv'd upon his whole Posterity, is fully proved from this Chapter; but it is not here said, that they were truly, and for∣mally made Sinners by his sin. So likewise that for the Obedience of one unto the Death, many were made Righteous, i. e. were treated as Righteous Persons, and were deliver'd from that Death to which they were obnoxious, we are assured from this and other Scriptures; but that they were made formally Righteous by our Saviour's Righteousness imputed to them, the Scripture doth no where assert. Ver. 15. But (in this resemblance there are two advantagious dissimilitudes, for) not as the offence, so also is the free gift, for if through the offence of one man many be dead, (Gr. died) much more the grace of God, and the gift (of Justification procur'd) by (or through) the grace of one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded to many. , many were dead.] When God said to Adam, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die, he did not mean that he should then give up the Ghost, but that he should be subject to Mortality, and at the last return to the Dust from whence he came, as Experience shewed, and as the Fathers in∣terpret it. Now in this sense that of the Apostle is most true, that in Adam all die, (i. e.) became obnoxious to Mortality: But it is not true that all Men die only on the account of Adam's sin; the Old World was drown'd on the account of their own sins, and the Jews suffered both by the hand of God and Man for sins committed against the Law; and this perhaps might be the reason why the Apostle saith, not by the Offence of one all, but many died: The Advantage there∣fore here mentioned may consist in this, that all that die, die not purely for the sin of Adam, but many times bring Death upon themselves for their own sin; but all that are justified, and so freed from Death, are thus exempted from it only by vertue of the Death of Christ; this is the old Doctrine both of the Jews, and of the Church of Christ: Not that all formally finned in Adam, but that
all Men became obnoxious to Death for Adam's sin. God, saith the Author of the Book of Wisdom, created man to be immortal, but through the envy of the Devil, Death entred into the World, Wisd. 2.23, 24. By the Wo∣man was the beginning of sin, and by her we all die, saith the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 25.24. By the counsel which the Serpent gave to Eve, all the Inabitants of the Earth become ob∣noxious to Death, saith the Targum on Ruth 4. v. ult. And the same Chaldee Paraphrase upon Eccles. 7. the last Verse, saith, God made man pure and upright, but the Serpent and Eve se∣duced him to eat of the fruit of the Tree, and so they made Death to rush upon him, and upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth. Ver. 16. And (again) not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift, for the judgment, (Gr. the Sentence) was by one (sin) to con∣demnation, (we being all sentenced to Death on the account of Adam's sin) but the free gift is of many offences unto justification, (of which cometh Life.) , from many Offences.] This is the second advantageous difference, viz. That whereas we became obnoxious to Death for one sin of Adam, we by Faith in Christ are justified, and thereby freed not only from the Condemnation which came upon us for that sin, but also from the Con∣demnation due unto us for all our other Of∣fences against God. Note also, that the word , especially when it is joyn'd with Death, doth usually signifie a Sentence condemning any Person;  is the Sentence of Death, Deut. 21.22. So Luke 24.20. the High-Priests and Rulers deliver'd up Jesus  to the Sentence of Death. See Chap. 23.40. And Ecclus. 41.2. Oh Death, how acceptable is  thy Sentence to the needy? And v. 3. fear not  the Sentence of Death. Remember them that have been before thee, and that come after, , for this is the Sentence of the Lord over all flesh. Ver. 17. For if by one mans offence death reigned by (that) one (man over all his Po∣sterity,) much more they which receive (or are made partakers of) abundance of Grace, and (by it) of the gift of Righteousness (or Ju∣stification) shall reign in life, by (the Recon∣ciliation purchased for them by the death of) one Jesus Christ. Ver. 15. . Ver. 17. , the gift of Righteousness.] I have interpreted these Phrases of the Gift of Justi∣fication as others do; but it is very probable that they may import the Holy Spirit given in Baptism, and upon Faith to the Believers of those Times, who being made Sons by Faith in Christ, received the Spirit of Adop∣tion, Rom. 8.14, 15, 16. Gal. 4.6. and believing, were sealed with the Spirit of Promise, Eph. 1.13. for he is stiled emphatically , the Heavenly Gift, Heb. 6.4.  the gift, Acts 11.17. , the gift of God, Acts 8.20. The gift of the grace of God, Eph. 3.7. , the gift of Christ, Eph. 4.7. the gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.38. & 10.45. So the Holy Ghost given to the Prophets, and Holy Men of old, is by the Primitive Christians usually styled , Just. Mart. adm. Gr. p. 9. B. p. 11. D. p. 30. D. p. 31. C. Ver. 18. Therefore as by the offence of one (Gr. by one Offence) the judgment (Gr. Sen∣tence) came upon all men to (the) condemna∣tion (of Death,) even so by the righteousness of one (by one Righteous Act, the Obedience of Christ to the Death for us) the free gift came upon all men (believing in him) to ju∣stification of life. Ver. 19. For as by the disobedience of one many were made sinners, (being made subject to the Death which was inflicted upon Adam for sin, as much as if they themselves had violated the Law, which rendred him ob∣noxious to it,) so by the obedience of one, (suffering Death, the punishment of Sin, for them) shall many be made righteous (i. e. be as truly justified, and exempted from the Death which is the punishment of Sin, as if they had Personally suffered, and also accepted and treated by God, as if indeed they had been Righteous Persons. , many were made sinners.] In the Exposition of this, and of the Phrase in the 12th. Verse, in whom all have sinned, I follow the Greek Expositors Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theo∣phylact, upon the Place. And to make good the Interpretation, I shall shew first the in∣consistency of any other sense ascribed to them with the Text, with Scripture, and with Reason. And, 1. It cannot truly be affirm'd that we all actually, and formally sinned in Adam, and upon that account were made Sinners; for then it was not by the disobedience of one, but of many, that many were made Sinners. 2. Then Death, the Punishment of Sin, came upon all not for the sin of one, or for one sin of that one man, but for the sin of all; both which things I have plainly proved to be contrary to the express words of the Apostle. Then 3. All Men must have sinned after the simi∣litude of Adam's transgression; for if we all sinned in, or with him, we must all sin by the same Act, the same Will, and in the same Person, against the same Law; and surely they that thus sin, must sin after the similitude of Adam's transgression: For what dissimilitude can there be in sins committed by the same Act, and the same Will of one and the same Person, against the same Law? But of the Posterity of Adam, the Apostle here expresly saith, that they sinned not after the similitude of
Adam's transgression, therefore they were not sinners by the same Act, and Will of the same Person, against the same Law. Moreover, if all the Posterity of Adam sinned in Adam, they sinned against some Law given to them, for sin is the transgression of a Lave, and where there is no Law, there is no transgression; they could sin in Adam so as to deserve Death for their sin, only by sinning against the Law re∣quiring Adam not to eat of the forbidden Fruit, for Adam himself became guilty of Death only by transgressing that Law; but all the Posterity of Adam cannot be said to have sin∣ned against that Law, for when did they sin against it? If when Adam did so, then all his Posterity must be actually sinners from the beginning of the World, i. e. some thousands of Years before the greatest part of them had a Being; now seeing Action must be the Action of some Being, does it not seem absurd at first sight, to say, that so many Myriads were actually sinners, when they were not in being? If when they came into the World, they could not sin in Adam, or in his Action, for he did not then eat of the Forbidden Fruit in the midst of Paradise. Again, we cannot sin a∣gainst a Law which is not in being; since therefore there is now no Paradise, and no forbidden fruit in being, we cannot be obli∣ged by any Law of God now not to eat of the Fruit in the midst of Paradise, and so cannot be sinners by transgressing against such a Law. 2. It cannot truly be affirmed that we all sinned in Adam, and by his disobedience were made sinners, because his sin and disobedience was imputed to us; for I have shewed al∣ready that the Scripture no where maketh the least mention of any thing of anothers im∣puted to a Man for Reward, or Guilt, but only of some Personal thing, or action of our own: See Note on v. 14. Moreover, this Imputation either makes the sin of Adam truly ours, or it doth not; if it doth not, how can we be made sinners by it? If it doth, then Death came upon us for our sin; and so not for the sin of one, but for the sin of all, which is the thing disproved already, Note on v. 12.3. I ask, whether this Imputation made the Posterity of Adam sinners, or if it found them so before? If it found them so before, it was plainly needless, for they might have been condemn'd to Death without it; if it made them so, then since this Imputa∣tion is the Act of God, and not of Man, it plainly follows, that God must be the Author of that sin, which flows immediately from it, without the intervention of any Action on the part of any of those Men to whom it is im∣puted. Moreover, then the Imputation must be false, as charging them with sin whom he did not find sinners, but only by his arbitrary Imputation made them so. Now far be it fm any Christian to affirm, that God should falsly impute sin to any Man, in a word,  & imputare, is to reckon, to account a thing to any Man, to charge him with it, to lay the charge of it to him. This Action there∣fore on God's part must in the very Nature of it suppose some Action done by the Posterity of Adam which is blame-worthy, and may be justly charged upon them, before there can be any ground for imputation of it, and shews that it is impossible that the Imputation should be the very thing that renders them blame-worthy, or Persons worthy to be charged with Guilt. And yet if the sin of Adam becomes ours only by Imputation, it must be ours only because it is by God imputed to us, and not imputed because it is ours; that is, God by this Imputation must make us sinners, and not find us such, for this Imputation is the Action of the Judge, not of the supposed Criminal; remove, or take away this Action, and no Crime can be charged upon him. In fine, if the sin of Adam becomes ours only by Impu∣tation, it deserves Condemnation only by the same Imputation, (i. e.) by the Action of God; that therefore we deserve Condemnation for it, is to be ascribed directly to the Action of God, and only by accident to that of Adam: Whence therefore is our destruction, accord∣ing to this Opinion, but of God, who makes us worthy of Condemnation, by imputing to us that sin, which by his Imputation only we stand guilty of? These Interpretations being so inconsistent with the Apostle's words, and with the plainest evidence of Reason, I am forced to prefer before them that of the Greek Father, viz. That we all sinned in Adam, i. e. by becoming obnoxious to that Death which was the Pu∣nishment of his sin, and that by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, by be∣ing subject to the Death, and Temporal Ca∣lamities, and Miseries which came upon Man∣kind for Adam's sin; so that we become sin∣ners in him, or by his disobedience, by a Me∣tonymie of the effect, by suffering the Punish∣ment which God had threatned to him for it, as the Experience of all Men and Women shew we do in all the parts of the Threat; and this is a common sense of the word , which signifies both sin, and the punishment of it. So Gen. 4.7. If thou doest evil,  sin lieth at the door; that is, the punishment of sin, v. 13. So Gen. 19.15. Make hast, saith the Angel to Lot, and escape, lest thhe con∣sumed  in the sin of the City; i. e. in the punishment of the City, In plagâ de∣scendente propter culpam incolarum urbis. Arab. And Gen. 31.39. Jacob speaks to Laban thus: That which was torn of Beasts , poenas dabam, I suffer'd for it; the sin was upon me, saith Aben Ezra. Gen. 43.9. Judah speaks thus to Jacob, concerning Benjamin, if I bring him not again, , (i. e.) I will suffer
Punishment. See Chap. 42.37. let me bear the blame; so also Chap. 44.32. So Bathsheba ith to David, I and thy Son Solomn shall be , 1 Kings 1.21. That is, we shall be punished as sinners, and be in danger of our Life. So  impium non faciet, i. e. he will not condemn him. Psal. 37.33.  & sanguinem innocentem con∣demnabant, Psal. 94.21. So also Job 9.20. So the Lepers say one to another, we do not well, if we tarry till the Morning light,  we shall be found sinners, 2 Kings 7.9. i. e. we shall be punish'd by the King. And Zech. 14.19. This shll be  the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all Nations that come not up to keep the Feast of Tabernacles. The Phrase of bearing in is constantly used in this sense; as when 'tis said,  they shall bear their iniquity, they shall die, Lev. 20.20. , Lev. 20.17, 19. Numb. 14.34. , Lam. 5.7. . If therefore  in the Old Testament so often signifies the punishment of sin, and  doth constantly signifie to bear the punishment of sin, which in this case was Death, what Exception can be made against thse words of Chrysostom?. Chrysost. What is the meaning of these words, in whom all have sinned? 'Tis this, he falling, even they who did not eat of the Tree, were by him made Mortal,. Theoph. even as if they themselves had fallen, saith Theophylact, when he did. For, saith Theodoret, He being obnoxious to the De∣cree of Death, in that state he begat Cain, and Seth, and others: , all therefore became Mortal, as being begotten of one that was Mortal. And seeing it is said, , or , they shall be sinners, who are to suffer Punishment; why may not these words, by the disobedience of one many were made sinners, admit the sense which Chryso∣stom, Ocumenius, and Theophylact give them? , they shall for his Disobedience be subject unto Death and Punishment, the effects of sin; For, saith St. Chrysostom, 'tis no absurdity to say, that he sinning, and so being Mortal, they who proceed from him should be Mortal also; but how can it justly follow, that by his dis∣obedience another should be made a sinner, for such a one will be found to deserve no Punish∣ment, as not being Personally a sinner? . 'Tis true, we meet not with the words , and  in this sense else∣where in the New Testament; but then this may be because the comparison is not else∣where made betwixt the first Adam, and the effects of his Disobedience, and the second Adam, and the effects of his Obedience to the Death, and because the opposite Phrase , required that the words opposed to them should be used in the Metonymical sense. For when the Apostle saith, By the obedience of one many were made righteous, it is evident he speaks not of Christ's Active Obedience, but of his Passive Obedience, or suffering Death for us. For, 1. The whole Chapter is employ'd in setting forth the Be∣nefits accuing to us by his Death, v. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11. 2ly, The effect of this Obedience is our Justification, now that through the whole Scripture, and in this very Chapter, is con∣stantly ascribed to the Death of Christ, and his Blood shed for us, ver. 9, 10, 16, 17, 18. 3ly, The Disobedience by which many were made sinners, is plainly declared by the Apostle to be one single act of disobedience in Adam, and therefore the Obedience opposed to it, cannot in reason be the Active Obedience of Christ's whole Life, but that Obedience to the Death, which the Apostle mentions, Philip. 2.6, 8. Now by this Passive Obedience we can∣not be made formally Righteous, but only Metonymically, by being made partakers of that freedom from the condemnation, and the guilt of sin, and that reconciliation which Christ purchased by his meritorious Death and Passion. Dissolvens enim eam quae ab in∣itio in ligno facta fuerat hominis inobedien∣tiam, obediens factus est usque ad mortem, mortem autem crucis, eam quae in ligno facta fuerat inobedientiam per cam quae in ligno fu∣erat obedientiam sanans. Iren. l. 5. c. 56. Ver. 20. (I say, before the Law we became obnoxious to Death by one man's disobedience.) but the Law entred that the offence might a∣bound (unto death, and men might be found obnoxious to it also on the account of their Transgressions against the Law,) but where sin (thus) abounded (unto death,) Grace did much more abound (unto life.) , the Law entred, that sin might abound unto Death.] Hence it is stiled the Letter that killeth, the Ministry of Death, and of Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. and subjects all that are under it, to a Curse, Gal. 3.10. Ver. 21. That as sin hath reigned unto death, (seizing on all men for it,) so grace might reign through righteousness, (Gr. justi∣fication) to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
CHAP. VI. Verse 1. WHat shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, (Gr. what do we say then? (do we say this) let us (who have received this Grace) continue still in sin) that grace may abound (towards us?) That is, do we by declaring that we are justified freely by Grace through the Redemp∣tion that is in Christ Jesus, Chap. 3.24. and that as Sin abounded, Grace did more abound, Chap. 5.20. give occasion to this Inference?) Note here, that if the Faith, to which St. Paul in this Epistle doth ascribe Justification, did not only oblige us to, but even compre∣hend Evangelical, and constant Obedience, there could be no colour for this Objection, that therefore must be a mistake. Ver. 2. God forbid (we should make any such inference from, or any use of this Do∣ctrine, so contrary to that very Baptism by which we enter into the Christian Covenant, and put on Christ, for) how shall we who are dead, (Gr. have died) to sin (by our Baptism, or entrance into the Christian Covenant) live any longer therein? Ver. 3. For know ye not that as many (of us) as were baptized into (and by that Bap∣tism profess'd our selves Disciples of) Jesus Christ, were baptized into (the likeness of) his death, (and so engag'd to die unto sin, as he died for sin, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. and this must also consequently be an engagement to live to him that died for us, and rose again, 2 Cr. 5.15. Ver. 4. (For) therefore we are buried with him by Baptism, (plunging us under the Wa∣ter) into (a conformity to his) death, (which put his Body under the Earth) that like as Christ was raised up from the Grave by the glory (ous Power) of the Father, even so we also (thus dead in Baptism) should (rise with him, and) walk in newness of life. . we are buried with him in Baptism.] It being so expresly declared here, and Colos. 2.12. that we are buried with Christ in Baptism, by be∣ing buried under Water; and the Argument to oblige us to a Conformity to his Death, by dying to sin, being taken hence, and this immersion being religiously observed by all Christians for Thirteen Centuries, and ap∣proved by our Church, and the change of it into sprinkling, even without any allowance from the Author of this Institution, or any License from any Council of the Church, being that which the Romanist still urgeth to justifie his refusal of the Cup to the Laity, it were to be wish'd that this Custom might be again of general use, and aspersion only permitted, as of old, in case of the Clinici, or in pre∣sent danger of Death. Ver. 5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, (by dying unto sin) we shall be all in the likenss f his Re¦surrection, (by being so risen from our Death unto sin, as never to let sin have any more Dominion over us, but dying unto sin once for all, and henceforth living unto God, v. 9, 10.) Ver. 6. (And thus we stand engag'd to die to sin,) knowing this, that  (was) crucified with him, that the body of sin, (i. e. the appetites of the Body, which subject us to sin,) might be destryed, that henceforth we might not serve sin. (For he bre our sins in his own body on the Cross, that e beg dead to sin, might live unto righteousness. 1 Pet. 2.24. Ver. 7. (Which we shall not do if we be truly dead unto it,) for he that is dead is freed from sin. (1 Pet. 4.4. He sins no more.) Ver. 3. Now if we be (thus) dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live with him (not a spiritual only, but an happy and immortal Life.) , we shall live with him.] As being delivered by his Death, which was the Punishment of sin, and having that Spirit which is the Giver of Eternal Life, and the Pledge and Earnest of it, imparted to us, it is this Life which is the Object of our Faith, and of this the Apostle speaks, 2 Tim. 2.. saying, If we have been dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign together with him. Ver. 9. (And thus conform'd to his Death we should be, and therefore) knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, nw dth no more, death hath no more dominion ver him. Ver. 10. For in that he died he died once to sin, (or for sin, i. e. in that he died to the putting away of sin, Heb. 9.26, 28. he died thus once for all) but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God, (i. e. the life he liveth is an Eternal Life, wholly dedicated to the Glory of God.) , he died once for all.] That is, Christ so died for our sins once, as never to undergo Death again, and therefore his living to God seems to import his Resurrection to Eternal Life; and so the Phrase is used by St. Luke, where of the Children of the Re∣surrection, which can die no more, he saith, they live unto God, Luke 20.26, 28. And so the Phrase is used in Josephus, who saith, ThatDe Macab. p. 11. they who die for God , live to God, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs do;Pag. 1102. A. they live that Piety which brings them to Eternal Life.
Ver. 11. Likewise rekon ye your seles dead unto sin, but living to God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. , so also reckon ye your selves dead unto sin.] Once for all, so as never to have any need of dying to it again, but as still engag'd to live to God's Glory: For, say the Ancients, we can have but one Baptism, and this supposes we should so die to sin once, as never to have occasion to perform that work again. Hence therefore it appears how far they are from Conformity to the Death of Christ, who still suffer sin to revive in them after that by pious Resolutions and Repen∣tance they have begun to mortifie it, and so are still beginning again to die to it. And oh! that Christians would more carefully at∣tend to this Conformity to the Death of Christ. Ver. 12, (Being therefore thus engag'd to die unto sin,) let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that you should obey it in the lusts thereof. , to obey it.] For this Obe∣dience to it in the lustings of it, is a certain sign of the Dominion of sin in us, and of our being none of Christ's Servants; for they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. Ver. 13. Neither yield ye your Members (any longer) as instruments of unrighteous∣ness to sin, but yield (up) your selves (en∣tirely) to (the Service of) God, as those that are (with Christ) alive from the dead, and (yield) your Members instruments of righte∣ousness to God. Ver. 14. (And say not this is beyond your strength, seeing the Law in your Members leads you Captive to sin,) for sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the (Paedagogy of the) Law, (which gives the knowledge of sin, but not sufficient strength to mortifie it,) but under (that oeco∣nomy of) Grace, (which affords that Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which frees us from the Law of Sin and Death.) , for sin shall not have dominion.] This is a pious sense, but seems to some to give no place for the following Objection. Others therefore Paraphrase the words thus; For then sin shall not have Do∣minion over you, so as to condemn you for each Transgression, for you are not under the Law, (which pronounceth a Curse on them that do not perfectly obey it) but (under that Covenant of) Grace, which affords Pardon and Forgiveness of it. Ver. 15. What then? Shall we (go on in) sin, because we are not under the Law, (which condemns us for every Transgression,) but under (that Covenant of) Grace, (which allows the pardon, and promises the forgive∣ness of it, Heb. 8.12.) God forbid. (Shall we continue in the sins forbidden by the Law, because we are not under the Law?) Ver. 16. Know ye not (this) that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants you are to whom yea obey, (and from him you must expect your Wages) whether (you be the servants) of sin to (receive the wages of sin, which is) Death, or (the ser∣vants of God) by obedience to (the obtaining the fruits of) Righteousness. Ver. 17. But God be thanked that (and God be thanked that though formerly, v. 19.) ye were the servants of sin, but (yet, since your Conversion) you have obeyed from the heart that form of (Christian) Doctrine which was delivered to you. , but God be thanked.] He doth not here thank God that they had been the Servants of sin, but that they who had been Servants to it, were become obedient to the Precepts of Christianity, as our Lord thanks his Heavenly Father that he had hid these things from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them to Baes, Mat. 11.25. i. e. That having hid them from the one, he not∣withstanding had revealed them to the other. The Particle  is sometimes rendred and, as Luke 9.6.11.18. Acts 3.5.4.36.8.30. 9.17.11.12.13.15.15.6.21.14.23.9, 13. Sometimes then, Acts 6.2, 7.29.13, 16.12.3. Mat. 1.19. Luke 8.29, 35. Sometimes so, Acts 7.15. Rom. 8.8. Sometimes yea, 1 Cor. 9.16.13.21. Rom. 11.30.16.19. 1 Cor. 2.9. Sometimes but, in the sense of yet, Acts 28.22. 1 Cor. 14.1. and yet, Mat. 6.9. Sometimes for, ke 12.2, 48.23.14. Acts 7.25. 1 Thess. 2.16. Also, Luke 12.8.13.6. Moreover, 2 Pet. 1.15. Howbeit, 1 Cor. 2.9. And so accordingly the words may be here rendred and God be thanked, or God be thanked then, that though ye were the Servants of sin, yet, and in the Verse following, . Ver. 18. Being then (for being) made free from (the Law of) sin by the grace and as∣sistance of that Spirit of Life the Gospel Mi∣nisters, Rom. 8.2.) ye are become Servants un∣to Righteousness. Ver. 19. I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh, for as you have yielded your Members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, to (commit) ini∣quity, even so now yield your Members ser∣vants to righteousness unto holiness. .] The Apostle doth not here speak, as some unhappily imagine, by way of Excuse, for not using the best Argument he could use in this Affair, but such as was best fitted to the Capacities and Notions of those he writes to; for what inducements to yield their Members Instruments of Righteousness to that Holiness which will conclude in Life Eternal, could he use more rational and proper
than this, that they had formerly yielded them Servants to commit that sin, whose wa∣ges is Death; but he speaks this by way of Illustration of his Argument, or Exhortation; the sense which the Ancients put upon these words is this, , I frame my Exhortation with a due consideration of the infirmity of your flesh, requiring that only which even to Humane Reason must seem highly equitable, viz. that you should do that Service now to God, which you have formerly done to Sin. I rather think the Apostle discourseth to this effect: In this Dis∣course of your being Servants formerly to Sin, and your Obligation now to be Servants to Righteousness, I speak that which all Na∣tural Men must have had Experience of, by reason of the Infirmity of the Flesh, and of which they may thence take a just Idea, re∣quiring only, that as they have yielded their Members Instruments of Sin, so they would yield them Instruments of Righteousness. And that this is the genuine import of the words , may appear from the like use of it, 1 Cor. 10.10. No temptation hath happened to you but that which is  common to humane nature, and supportable by Men of Reason, and from the constant use of the Phrase , I speak after the manner of men, of which see Note on 1 Cor. 9.8. Ver. 20. (Now, I say, for before you could not do it) for when you were servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness, (doing then no service at all to it.) Ver. 21. (And that you may not be still enamour'd with your former Service unto sin, I ask) what fruit had you then in (from) those things, of which you are now ashamed? (Surely none worthy to be compared with the fruits of Righteousness,) for the end of these things is death. Ver. 22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, you have (at present) your fruit unto holiness, and the end thereof (will be) everlasting life. Ver. 23. For the wages of sin (to its Ser∣vants) is death, but the gift of God (to his) is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. , for the  a∣ges of sin is Death.] Hence Divines usually conclude, that even Infants must have sinned, because they are subject to Death; now tho' this be so far true, that Death came upon all Men, and so upon Infants, by that sin of Adam, which rendred him, and by him all his Off-spring subject to Mortality, yet this will no more follow from these words, than it will follow, that because the wages of Re∣bellion is Death, all that die must be guilty of Rebellion. Moreover, the intention of the Apostle is not here to teach us that Death is the Punishment due to every sin, but that that Death, which is in Scripture stiled the second Death, and stands oppos'd to Eternal Life, will be the certain issue of a Life spent in the service of sin. For the Apostle through∣out this Chapter speaks of that sin in which we continue, v. 1. and which we serve, v. 6, 20. and which so reigneth in our mortal Bo∣dies, that we obey it in the lusts thereof, v. 12. By which we yield our members instruments of unrighteousness to sin, v. 13.19. In which we so serve sin, as to obey its Commands, v. 16, 17. and live free from Righteousness, or in neglect of it, v. 20. The Wages, saith he, of sin thus reigning in, and served by us, is Eternal Death: 'Tis therefore manifest the Apostle speaks not here of sin imputed, but only of Personal sin, nor of each single Act, but of an habitual Practice, or a course of sin. CHAP. VII. Verse 1. (AND of the truth of what I told you, Chap. 6.14. that you are not under the Law, but under Grace, you cannot well be ignorant, for) know ye not, Brethren, for I speak to them that know the Law, (i. e. to the converted Proselytes, or Jews) that the Law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth. .] i. e. The Con∣jugal Law, which gives the Man Power over the Woman, is in force, and obtaineth whilst the Man liveth, this sense the Verse follow∣ing seems plainly to require. Ver. 2. For the Woman which hath an Hus∣band ( subvirilis) is bound by the Law to (cleave to, and be subject to) her Hus∣band as long as he liveth, but if the Husband be dead, she is (then) loosed from the Law of (subjection to) her Husband. Ver. 3. So then if while her Husband liveth she be married to another Man, she shall be (truly) called an Adulteress; but if her Hus∣band be dead, she is free from that Law, (which bound her to be in subjection to, and yield Conjugal Affection to him only,) so that she is no Adulteress though she be married to ano∣ther man. , she shall be called an Adulteress.] The Apostle, saith Theodoret, considers not here the permission given to the Woman divorced by the Law of Moses, to be married to another, as being taught by Christ not to approve of such Divorces: But the Apostle seems only to intimate that she
hath no Power to dissolve that Bond, by put∣ting away her Husband; or perhaps he speaks not of the Law of Moses, but of that given in Paradise, Gen. 2. Ver. 4. Wherefore, my Brethren, (as this Woman is become free from the Law of her Husband by his Death, even so) ye also are become dead to, (and therefore free from sub∣jection to) the Law by (the Obligation of) the Body of Christ, that ye should (or may) be married to another, even to him who is rai∣sed from the dead, that (by vertue of this Union to him) we should bring forth fruit unto God. .] This Phrase, Ye are dead to the Law, is, say Interpreters, the Law is put to Death to you; for to that, say they, the drift of the Discourse directs. But first, this Interpretation puts a plain force upon the words, without any instance that they are elsewhere used in this sense. 2. The parallel words, Gal. 2.19, 20. run thus: I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live to God: I am crucified together with Christ. Now those words seem to fix the proper sense of these, shewing it to be also this: Ye are dead to the Law, that is, you are as free from subjection to the Precepts of the Law, and from the motions of Sin which are by the Law, as if you were dead. To strengthen this Interpretation, let the Hebrew Phrase be noted;Nidda. Fol. 76. When a Man dies he is made free from the Commands, the Law  hath no dominion over him, no power to subject him to the motions of sin which are by the Law, for he that is dead is free from sin, Chap. 6.6, 7. So that he doth no longer  serve the motions of it, and hence the Apostle makes this Inference: That if we be dead with Christ, and buried with him, or crucified to∣gether with him, sin  shall not have Dominion over us, as it had whilst we were under the Jewish Dispensation, for we are not under the Law, but under Grace. And again, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not ful∣fil the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. & v. 18. For if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Wherefore the sense of these four last Verses seems to be this: The Law hath Do∣minion over a Man as long as he lives (under it,) for the case of a Man's subjection to the Law is in this like to the Woman's subjection to her Husband, it continues whilst he lives, but when he is once dead, she is free from any further subjection to him, seeing he being dead, can have no further Power over her, and so she must be free to be married to ano∣ther; in like manner you being dead to the Law, it can have no further Power over you, and the Law it self being also dead to you, through the Death of Christ abolishing it, and freeing Christians from the Power and Obligation of it, you are free to Marry to another Husband, even Christ. Ver. 5. (We are, I say, become thus dead to the Law, this being necessary, that we might bring forth Fruit unto God.) For when we were in the flesh, (i. e. when we lived under the Carnal Ordinances of the Law) the mo∣tions of sin which were (occasion'd) by that Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death, (rendring us obnoxious to Death, the Punishment threatned by the Law to the Transgressors of it.) Ver. 6. But now we are delivered from the Law, (and from the motions of sin caused by it) that being dead wherein we were held, (or being dead to that Law wherein we were held) that we might serve God in newness of (that) spirit (of Life in Christ Jesus which makes us free from the Law of Sin and Death) and not (as before) in the oldness of the let∣ter, (which killeth, or subjecteth us to Death, 2 Cor. 3.6, 9.) .] The Syriack and Arabick Ver∣sions, Origen, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theo∣phylact read , which, saith Origen, is undoubtedly the best Reading: And this Reading confirms the sense of the fourth Verse as to those words, Ye are dead to the Law, which I have offer'd in the Paraphrase; i. e. being freed from the Obligation and Com∣mands of it, and so from the lustings and motions it wrought in us. , that we might serve God in the newness of the Spirit.] The Law and the Gospel are by the Apostle in this distinguish'd; that the first is only the ministration of the Letter, the other of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. The mini∣stration of the Spirit is also declared to be the fruit, not of the Law, but of the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.3. Hence the Apostle here infers, that we must be dead unto, or free from sub∣jection to the Law, that we may be enabled to serve God in newness of Spirit. Whence it is evident, that to serve God in the Spirit, is not to enjoy the spiritual sense of the Law, as Mr. Le Cl. thinks. Ver. 7. What shall we say then? Is the Law (from which we must be delivered, and to which we must be dead, that we may not obey the lusts of the flesh) sin? (Is it the cause of that sin which worketh in our Mem∣bers, whilst we are under the Law?) God for∣bid, (that we should so affirm,) nay, (so far otherwise is it, that the Law instructs us what is to be avoided as sin, and under what Penalty) for I had not known lust, (i. e. the lustings, or covetous desires of the Heart to be things worthy Death,) except the Law had said, thou shalt not covet, (and so made him
that coveteth obnoxious to Death, as being a transgressor of the Law.) Ver. 8. But (or nevertheless) sin taking oc∣casion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence, (which became Mor∣tal to me by vertue of the Prohibition of the Law.) For (whilst I was) without the Law sin was dead, (i. e. unable to have this effect upon me,) for where there is no Law there is no transgression (imputed to death, Chap. 5.13.) Ver. 9. For I (the Seed of Abraham) was alive (or indeed lived) without the Law once, (before the Law was given, I being not ob∣noxious to death for that to which no Law had threatned death,) but when the Com∣mandment came, (forbidding it under that Penalty,) sin revived, and I died, (i. e. it got strength to condemn me to Death.) , I was alive without the Law.] , before the Law of Moses came. So Chrysost. Oecum. Theoph. Ver. 10. And the Commandment which was ordained to life, was found to me (trans∣gressing it, to be) unto death. Ordained.] This word is not in the Ori∣ginal, you may therefore Paraphrase the words thus; (the Commandment which was given for life, i. e. with this Promise, do this and live, was found to me unto death.) Ver. 11. For sin taking occasion by the Com∣mandment deceived me, (or enticed me to the commission of it,) and by it slew me. For the explication of these four last Verses, let it be noted, 1. That it is the Opinion of Judicious Commentators, that when the Apostle saith, Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in him all manner of Concupiscence, v. 8. and deceived him, v. 11. he means that it did this by saying only, thou shalt not covet, but as∣signing no Punishment to him that coveted. But this Interpretation cannot stand, for these two Reasons: For first, it plainly contradicts the words of the Law, which pronounceth a Curse upon every one who continues not in all things written in the Law to do them; and much more doth it contradict the drift of the Apo∣stle's Discourse in this, and the Epistle to the Galatians, viz. That the Law required per∣fect Obedience to its Precepts, condemning him to Death, or rendring him obnoxious to Condemnation, who in any thing transgress'd it, and so could be no means of Justification, as many as were under the Law, being under the Curse, because transgressors of it. 2. This agrees not with the following Rea∣son, or the Nature of the thing; for if the Law given encouraged them to covet, because it had no present Penalty annexed to it, they must be more free to covet, or follow their Natural and Carnal Inclinations, when there was no Law at all forbidding them to covet; and therefore sin could take no more occasion by a Law without Penalty, than by none at all, to work in us all manner of Concupi∣scence, nor could Concupiscence be dead with out the Law, more than with it. The old and common Interpretation is this, that the Prohibition of what we desire make us to think the enjoyment of it more sweet and valuable, or at least provokes the Carnal Mind, which is not subject to the Law of God, to a more servent lusting after it; dum pre∣hibita non refugit quam ardentius expetit, and this agrees very well with this expression, v. 8. Or, 3. Sin is in Scripture represented as an E∣nemy that seeks our ruine and destruction, and takes all occasions to effect it; it is here said to War against the Mind, v. 23. elsewhere to War against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. to sur∣round and beset us, Heb. 12.1. to bring us into bondage and subjection, and get the do∣minion over us, Rom. 6.12. to entice us, and so to work our death, James 1.14, 15. and to do all that Satan, the grand Enemy of Mankind, doth by tempting and solliciting us to the commission of it; when therefore it finds a Law which threatneth Death to the violation of it, it takes occasion thence more earnestly to tempt, and to allure us to the violation of it, that so it may more effectu∣ally subject us to Death and Condemnation upon that account, for the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, con∣demning us to Death upon the violation of it: Thus when God had forbidden under the pain of Death the eating the forbidden Fruit, Satan thence took occasion to tempt our first Parents to the breach of it, and so slew them, or made them subject to Death: , he deceived them, Gen. 3.13. 1 Tim. 2.14. which is the word here used, v. 11. 2ly. Observe the import of the Phrase, Without the Law sin was (or is) dead, which seems not to be this, that the inclinations of Men to sin were in their Nature less when they were unrestrain'd by a Law; But rather this, that sin was then comparatively dead as to its Power of condemning us to Death: And this, first, the Antithesis doth plainly hint, for thus it runs, Without the Law  sin was dead, but I was li∣ving, but when the Commandment came, sin re∣vived, and I died. How were Men living be∣fore the Law, but because then no Law con∣demned them? Sin therefore must be then dead as to its Power of Condemning. How did they die when the Law came but by the Law condemning them to Death? Sin there∣fore then revived as to its Condemning Power, which it received first from the sin of Adam, which brought Death into the World, and next from the Law of Moses, which entred that the offence might abound, and reign more unto death, Rom. 5.20, 21. For though sin was in the World from Adam unto Moses, or until the Law given, yet was it not imputed
unto Death, when there was no Law given, that did threaten Death unto it; so that Death reign'd, in that interval, by vertue of Adam's sin alone, even over them who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's trans∣gression; i. e. against a positive Law forbid∣ding it under the Penalty of Death, which Law being delivered by Moses, sin revived, (i. e.) it had again its force to condemn Men as before to death by vertue of a Law which threatned death to them; and in this sense doth the Apostle seem to say, that the Law was added because of transgressions, Gal. 3.19. to convince us of the Wrath and Punishment due to them; and that the Law therefore worketh wrath, because where no Law is, there is no transgression, Rom. 4.15. Subjecting us to Wrath, or no such sense of the Divine Wrath, as where a plain Divine Law threat∣ning death and condemnation is violated, upon the sense thus given of these two Phrases, doth our Exposition stand. Ver. 12. Wherefore the Law (forbidding sin) is holy, and the commandment (to abstain from it) is holy, just, and good, (as requiring only what is equitable in it self, and good for me to do.) Ver. 13. Was that then which is good made death to me? (Gr. hath that therefore which is good become death to me? (i. e.) Is that the sole and proper cause of bringing death to me?) God forbid (we should so say,) but (this charge is to be laid upon) sin, (which) that it might appear sin, (i. e. pernicious and destructive,) working death in (or to) me, by that which is good, (i. e. the Law, made me obnoxious to death) that sin by the com∣mandment (forbidding it) might become ex∣ceeding sinful. , exceeding sinful.] That it might appear , Chap. 5.20, 21. abounding unto death, and so exceeding vile and hateful to us, the end and wages of it being death and condemnation, Chap. 6.21, 23. Ver. 14. (And that sin should thus prevail over us in this state of lapsed Nature to transgress the Law, and so become obnoxious to death by it, will not seem strange, if every Natural Man considers the contrariety there is betwixt him and the Law,) for we know that the Law is spiritual, (and requires spi∣ritual things) but (every Natural Man hath cause to say of himself,) I am carnal, sold under sin, (i. e. enslaved by my corrupt Af∣fections.) , sold under sin.] i. e. In peccati potestatem libidinis & concu∣piscentiae pretio redactus, Origen; so enslav'd to it, saith Theophylact, , that he could not look up; a willing Slave, who had sold himself to it, saith Theodoret. And this is continually the import of the Phrase in the Old Testament, as when it is said of Ahab, 1 Kings 21.20. , thou hast sold thy self to do wicked∣ly; and v. 25. , he s himself to do wickedly. Of the Jews, Isa. 52 1. , you have s your selves to your iniquities. And of the Jews, who under Antiochus Epiphanes rev¦ted from their Religion to Heathenism, it is said, that , they sold themselves to do evil, 1 Maccab. 1.15. Ver. 15. (As may be easily discerned fro the workings of our own Conscience again the evil that we do.) For that which I do I allow not (in my own mind,) for what I would do, (in complyance with the Law) that (thro the prevalence of my corrupt Nature) I a not; but what (through the conviction of my Conscience) I hate (to do) that I do. , that which I hate.] . being allured with pleasure, we, say Theodores and Oecumenius, oft do those things which we abominate, as being opposite to the Law; for whilst the Law represents sin as pernicious, and destructive both to Soul and Body, it is as natural for all Men to hate it, as to love themselves; but then, as Photius saith, whe , the sweetnes or pleasure of the Action is proposed to i mind, the hatred goes off, and the Soul i wrought up to an affection to it; and thus  it with every enlightned Man, that sins against his Conscience, and doth the evil which he would not do. These words, saith Origen shew that the Carnal Man, of whom he speak resistere aliquantulum vitiis conatur, endea∣vours a little to resist his Vices, legis sc. natu∣ralis instinctu, by the instinct of the Law of Nature, but that at last he is overcome by the and oppressed with them. Ver. 16. If then (it be so with me) that I do that which I would not, (by this unwilling∣ness to act in contradiction to it,) I consent unto the Law that it is good, (and comman what is good for me to do.) Ver. 17. (Now then this being done by those corrupt Affections which over-power me against the approbation of my Mind, and the inclination of my Will,) it is no more I (ac∣cording to the better part from which I am denominated) that do it, but sin that dwellei in me, (i. e. in my flesh, v. 23. and captivates me to the obedience of it.) , sin that dwelie in me.] This he speaks, saith Theodoret, calling , the slavery of the mind, and the dominion, or, as Theophylact, the Tyranny of the Passions, sin, It is, saith Origen, lex, & voluntas carnis quae captivos nos ducit in lege peccati, the Law, and Will of the flesh, which leads us Captive in the Law of sin; hence this sin dwelling in us is so often stiled the Law of sin in our members, v. 20, 21, 22, 25. Chap. 8.2.
Here the Apostle seems to speak according to the Philosophy of the Heathen, with which the Jews began to be acquainted, that Man was not to be denominated from his Body, or his Sensual and Carnal Part, but from his Mind, his , or , which inDe profugis. p. 360. B. Philo's Phrasc is , the Man within us, ,Ibid. p. 3663. the true man, the man properly so called: Who saith moreover, , this saith the true man, the reprover in the soul. And of him∣self he speaks thus; Men may have power over my Body, but that is nothing to me, ,De Josepho. p. 42. for I am denominated from my mind, the better Part, according to which I design to live. Ver. 18. (And upon this I have just ground to charge it,) for I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing, for to will (that which is good) is present with me, (or to me) t to perform that which is good I find not (strength.) Ver. 19. For (in event I find that) the good that I would (do) I do not, but the evil which (the Law prohibits, and) I would not (do) that (being over-power'd by the flesh) I do. Ver. 20. Now if I (thus) do that I would not, it is no longer I (chusing and approving the action in my mind) that do this, but sin that dwelleth in me, (i. e. in my Flesh, that hurries me to the commission of it against the Law, and inclination of my Mind.) Ver. 21. (For so it is that) I find (Gr.  indeed) a Law (in my Members so thwart∣ing the inclinations and convictions of my Mind,) that when I would do (the) good (to which the Law directs me) evil is present with me, (to oppose and hinder me from do∣ing it.) Ver. 22. (I say, when I would do good,) for I delight in the Law of God in the inward man, (my mind approving for some time, and being pleased with its good and holy Pre∣cepts.) , according to the in∣ward man.] It is plain the inward Man here cannot signifie the ew man, which is created after God in righteousness and hliness, Eph. 4.24. and which is not put on, till all d things are past away, 2 Cor. 5.17. and all things are become now, and till we have put off the old man with his deeds, Colos. 3.9, 10. For sure this cannot be said of him, who is still car∣nal, sold under sin, and captivated to the Law of sin which is in his members; but only the Mind of Man, the , as the Apstle doth interpret himself, v. 25. So Origen informs us, that the Soul using the Body as its Instru∣ment, is called , the inward man. Contra Cels. l. 7. p. 357. . So Theodoret, Ocumenius, Theophylact. So the very next Verse shews the coherence, Seeing I delight in the Law of Gd in the in∣ward man, but I see another Law in my mem∣bers warring against the Law of my mind, (i. e.) of my inward Man. And so the Apostle useth the Phrase when he saith, 2 C. 4.16. that though , the outward Ma (i. e.) the Body, was corrupted, yet , the inward man was renewed day by dy. And that this delight is no Evidence of a regene∣rate Man is evident from the Example of the stony Ground, which heard the Word  with joy, Mat. 13.20. Of Herod, who heard John Baptist  with delight, Mark 6.20. Of the Jews, who rejoiced in his light, John 5.35. and heard our Saviour gladly, Mark 12.37. Ver. 23. But I see (or perceive) another Law (of the flesh) in my members wrring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my members, (for of what a man is overcome, of that is he brought into bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19. John 8.34. Rom. 6.16.) Ver. 24. (And being thus enslaved to that sin which renders me obnoxious to death, the wages of it, I am even forced to cry out) Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of (sin, which worketh) death? Ver. 25. (And so) I (have great reason to) thank God through Jesus Christ, (whom he hath sent to Redeem me from this death, to which I am obnoxious by sin.) So then (to shut up this Discourse, thus is it with me whilst under the Law only) with the mind I my self (or I the same man) serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the Law of sin. , I thank God.] The Latin Version, and one Greek Copy reads , the Grace of God; but the Syriack, Ara∣bick, and all the Greek Commentators agree with our Translation, which therefore is to be preferred before that Lection. , the same man.] Of whom he had before spoken, not I Paul now writing this Epistle. It hath been a Controversie since St. Austin's time, whether St. Paul here speak∣eth in his own Person, or in the Person of a Regenerate Man, or only in the Person of a Jew conflicting with the motions of his Lusts, only by the assistance of the letter of the Law, without the aids and powerful assistance of the Holy Spirit; which is as great an in∣stance of the force of Prejudice, and the heat of Opposition to pervert the plainest Truths, as can be haply produced; for I think no∣thing can be more evident and unquestionably true than this, that the Apostle doth not here
speak of himself in his own Person, or in the state he was then in, but as the Ancient Com∣mentators do interpret him, , by himself he repre∣sents man in common, and saith not as he might have done, you that are under the Law are Carnal, but , representing what belonged to them in his own Person, and so taking off the harshness, and mollifying the invidiousness of the Sentence, by speaking of it in his own Person, he saith, I am carnal, sold under sin. So Photius and Occumenius, Theodoret also doth inform us that the Apostle here intro∣duceth, v. 14. , a Man before Grace over∣come by his Passions, for he calls him Carnal, who had not yet obtained the assistance of the Holy Spirit. And again, v. 23. he adds, that the Apostle having discoursed all these things, , to shew what we were before Grace, and what we are made after Grace, and as it were taking upon him∣self the Person of those who before Grace were vanquish'd by sin, he groans, and laments as a Man set in the midst of his Enemies, enslav'd and constrain'd to serve, and seeing no help, and thus he shews the Law unable to help us. And so Origen also frequently in his Com∣mentary on the Place, and St. Austin saith expresly, and frequently, Describitur homo sub lege positus ante gratiam, liber expos. quar. propos. ex Epist. ad Rom. Quo loco videtur mihi Apostolus transfigurasse in se hominem sub lege positum ad simplic. Mediol. l. 1. Et in haec verba non ego operor illud, &c. loquitur adhuc ex personâ hominis sub lege constituti nondum sub gratiâ. Though he was pleased afterwards to change his Opinion, and so gave occasion to the perverting the plain sense of the Apostle. For confutation of this dangerous Opinion, I need not to say much after the Labours of Arminius, the Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond, Mr. Bull, and Mr. Kettlewell, who have made it manifest, 1. That it is usual with the Apostle to make this Metaschematism, or to speak espe∣cially of things that might be otherwise of∣fensive, or ungrateful, in his own Name, when indeed they belong not to him, but to other Men: As in these words, Rom. 3.7. If the truth of God hath more abounded through my lye, why am I also judged as a sinner, i. e. not I Paul, but I who make this Objection? So Galat. 2.16, 17. 1 Cor. 4.6. These things  I have in a figure transferred to my self, and to Apollos for your sakes. So 1 Cor. 6.12. 1 Cor. 13.2. 1 Cor. 10.22, 30. Eph. 2.3. 1 Thess. 4.17. 2ly. That such things are in this Chapter said of the Person spoken of, as can by no means agree to St. Paul, or to any regene∣rate Person; to which may be added, 1. That had St. Paul here spoken of him∣self, considered in the state in which he was at the enditing of this Epistle, he must have contradicted what he had said of himself in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, and to the Corinthians, which were writ before this E∣pistle. For (1.) In his Epistle to the Thessa∣lonians he saith, You are Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and righteously, and unblame∣ably we behaved our selves among you that be∣lieved, 1 Thess. 2.10. In his Second Epistle to the Corinthians he speaks thus; This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have conversed in this World, 2 Cor. 1.12. That he knew nothing by himself, for which to con∣demn himself, 1 Cor. 4.4. That he kept un∣der his Body, and brought it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. Now, can the Man who is car∣nal, and sold under sin, who hath no power in him to do any good, who finds a Law in his members warring against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in his members, call God and the Church to Witness to his holy and unblameable Life? Can he boast of keeping under his fleshly Body, and bringing that int subjection, which by his own confession bring∣eth him into captivity? Can he who does not what he would in his Mind and Conscience do, but what he hates; not the good which he would, but the evil which he would not; can he, I say, rejoice in the Testimony of his Conscience? Can he honestly declare he know nothing by himself, for which his Conscience can condemn him? 2. How oft doth the Apostle propose him∣self a Pattern to the Churches unto whom he writes, requiring them to be followers of him, as he was also of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. And again, What things you have learned, and re∣ceived, and heard, and seen in me, these d and the God of love and peace shall be with you, Philip. 4.8. i. e. be you carnal, sold un∣der sin, living in the commission of the things you hate, and your mind condemns, and do∣ing what you judge to be evil, and yielding your selves captive to the Law of sin, whic is in your members, and then the God of love and peace shall be with you? This sure is an absurd, if not blasphemous Exhortation, and yet, according to this Exposition, it must be suitable unto the mind of the Apostle. 3. With what indignation doth he reject the Accusations of them who look'd upon him as Walking after the Flesh, and how se∣verely doth he threaten them, how peremp∣torily doth he reject their scandalous imputa∣tion? Declaring, that though he walked in the flesh, yet did he not walk according to the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.2, 3. and yet if he were carnal, sold under sin, if with the flesh he served the Law of sin, if the Law of his fleshly Members
warred against the Law of his mind, and brought him into captivity to the Law of sin, he doth here in effect confess what there he peremp∣torily denies, and with such indignation doth reject. 4. This Exposition of the Seventh Chapter makes it entirely to confute the Chapter which immediately goes before, and follows after; it gives an invincible strength to the Objections he endeavours to answer in the Sixth Chapter. The first Objection there begins by way of Enquiry, What do we say then, shall we still continue in sin that grace may abound? His Second by way of like Enquiry, Shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace? v. 15. God forbid, saith he, that it should be thus with any Christian, and yet according to this Exposition it was thus with himself, one of the best of Christians; for sure he must continue in sin, who was still sold under sin, still serving the Law of sin with his flesh, still doing that evil he allowed not, the evil which he hated, and he would not do, and who was still brought into capti∣vity to the Law of sin which was in his mem∣bers. Again, In his Answer to these Enquiries he shews the Christian could not continue in sin, or live any longer in it, because he was dead to sin, his old man was crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth he might not serve sin, v. 2, 6. And because being dead to, he was freed from sin, v. 7. He was made free from sin, and become the servant of righteousness. But can he that is sold under sin, and is brought into Captivity to the Law of sin which is in his Members, be at the same time dead to sin, and free from sin? Can he who with his Flesh serves the Law of sin, be said to cease from sin, and not henceforth to serve sin? Not to obey it in the lusts thereof, v. 12. not to yield his mem∣bers instruments of sin unto unrighteousness, v. 13. Surely there is as clear an Opposition betwixt the Christian represented in the Sixth Chapter, as free from sin, and in the Seventh, as miserably enslaved to the Law of sin and death which was in his members, as betwixt Light and Darkness. Again, he saith expresly, Chap. 8.2. The Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the Law of sin and death. Whereas the Person mentioned in the 7th. is sold under sin, is brought into captivity to the Law of sin, and cryeth out under his Bondage, Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! He therefore cannot be the Person freed by the spirit from the Law of sin and death. In fine, this Exposition of the close of this Chapter contradicts the beginning of it, for there the Apostle saith of himself, and all his Christian Brethren, that this was only their state under the Law, from which they are delivered, that they might bring forth fruit unto God, and serve him in newness of spirit. For what else can be the meaning of these words, v. 5, 6. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the Law did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death, but now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead, wherein we were held, that we should serve God in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter. So that they who make the Apostle say of himself, that he was brought into captivity to the law of sin, which was in his members, and to cry out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! i. e. this body of sin which worketh Death; Make him also to confess that the motions of sin did still work in his members to bring forth fruit unto death, and therefore that he was still in the flesh. I therefore conclude this Discourse, in the words of Grotius on v. 19. Deo laus sit quod optimi, i. e. trium priorum saecalrum Christiani, hunc locum, sicut oportet, intellexerint, dictante illo spiritu per quem vita ipsorum regebatur. CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. (BEing then married to this other Husband, Christ, and so freed from the motions of sin which are by the Law, that we may serve God in the newness of the Spirit, Chap. 7.4, 5, 6.) There is there∣fore ( verily) no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, (by Faith they be∣ing such who now) walk not after the flesh, (as whilst they were under the Law they did) but after the spirit (conferred upon them by Faith in Christ.) .] The Phrase , saith Mr. le Cl. is often used by St. Paul for being a Christian, which Note he borrowed from Cstalio, who renders it Christiani facti; but if either of them mean only Christians by Profession, or by being only Members of the Christian Church, this will by no means agree with this Place, or any other of like Nature, since freedom from Condemnation, and other Benefits conferred upon us through Christ Jesus will not follow our being Christians in this sense, but upon a lively Faith in Christ, our Union to him by the Spirit, our being so in him, as to become new Creatures, according to these words, v. 9. If any man have not the spirit of Christ, dwelling in him, he is none of his, 2 Cor. 5.17. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with its affections and lusts. See 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 10.7. & 13.5. Gal. 3.28, 29. & 5.6. 1 Thess. 4.16. 1 John 5.20.
Ver. 2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me (believing in him) free from the law of sin and death. , for the law of the spirit of life.] i. e. The Spirit of Christ gi∣ving me a new Life, is now another Law, or Rule of my Actions, freeing me from the mo∣tions, and power of sin, to which I was sub∣ject whilst under the Law, and from the Death to which that subjected me, or the Gospel, attended with the Spirit, hath wrought this freedom in me, as Methodius interprets the words . Method. apud Phot. p. 918. Ver. 3. For what the law could not do, (i. e. that life, and that deliverance from Death it could not give) in that it was (made) weak through the flesh, (rendring us subject to the transgression of it, and so to Death) God sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, (did) and for sin, (Gr. , and by a Sacrifice for sin) condemned sin in the flesh, (i. e. took away its Power to condemn us, the Condemnation due unto us for it be∣ing inflicted on him.) .] This Phrase in the Old Testament is the usual Phrase for a Sin-Offer∣ing: So a Bullock for a Sin-Offering is , Lev. 4.3, 18.8.2, 14.9.2, 8.16.3, 6, 27. & v. 9.11. The Lamb for a Sin-Offering is , Lev. 4.32. or , Lev. 5.6, 7. Numb. 6.16. And in like manner the Goat for a Sin-Offer∣ing is , Lev. 5.6. or , Lev. 9.3, 15.10.6.16.5, 15, 27.23.19, &c. The Dove for a Sin-Offering is , Lev. 5 7.12.6, 8.14.22, 31.15.15, &c. The Sin-Offering is , Lev. 5.8, 9, 11.6.30.7.7, 37, &c. and so in many other places. This therefore is suf∣ficient to establish the sense of these words given in the Paraphrase; now the constant effect of this Sin Offering was this, To make an atonement for the sin committed, that it might be forgiven, and the guilt of it might be done away. It therefore seems most reasonable to interpret the effect of this Sacrifice deli∣vered in these words, And for sin condemned sin in the flesh, agreeably to the constant de∣sign of all Sacrifices for sin, and then these words must signifie, not that he gave us power to kill sin, or by this Example, of his Wrath against it, engaged us to forsake our sinful courses, but that he took away its condemn∣ing Power; he condemned that which before condemn'd us, enabling us to say, , Who is he that condemns us? It is Christ that died, Rom. 8.34. He killed sin, or made it dead by the death which caused it not to be imputed to us to Death, 2 Cor. 5.19. And this is the thing which the Law could not do, it could not give Life to a Person condemn'd to Death, Gal. 3.21. it could not justifie or free us from Condemnation. Ver. 4. That the righteousness of the lw, (i. e. that inward Purity and Righteousness the Law required) might be (performed and) fulfilled in (and by) us, who lk not after (the lusts of) the flesh, but after the (motions of the) spirit. Or, That the Justification which the Law pro∣mised by saying, Do this, and thou shalt live, Luke 10.28. Deut. 4.1.30.15, 19. Ezek. 20.11. And that this should be their Righteousness, Deut. 6.25. might be compleated in us, who walk according to the Spirit, and so are ab∣solved not only from Condemnation for our past sins by Faith, but from Condemnation by the new Covenant, by walking according to the Spirit, for to be spiritually minded is life, v. 6. , the Righteousness of the Law.] Is a Phrase which occurs only here and Rom. 2.26. where it plainly signifies the Righteousness contained in the Moral Law, or those internal Principles of Holiness, Justie, and Goodness, which are comprised in it, these being the weightier matters of the Law. Mat. 23.23. and the only things in which the uncircumcision, or the Gentiles could keep , the Righteousnesses of the Law; here therefore I conceive the Phrase bears the same sense, and confutes the vain Imaginations of the Antinomians. That which hath made most Commentators interpret the Third Verse otherwise than I have done, seems to be this, that they seem not sufficiently to have considered the double effect of our Lord's Death and Passion, and the Order in which they are placed in Scrip∣ture, viz. 1. freedom from Condemnation, Ju∣stification, and Reconciliation to God: And, 2. the vouchsafement of his Spirit as the con∣sequent of that Faith which rendreth us the Sons of God, God being first reconciled to us by Faith in his Sons Blood, and then giving us this Token of his Love, viz. his Spirit to dwell in our hearts; by the first of which we are justified, and by the second we are sanctified; by the first freed from the Law of Death, by the second from the Law of Sin. 1 Cor. 6.11. The first is the Grace of God, We being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Rom. 3.24. The second is, the gift through Grace; the first Justification, the second , the gift following upon our Justification, being justified freely by his grace, we have peace with God, Rom. 5.1. And then the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the spirit that he hath given us, v. 5. Ye are all Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, and be∣cause ye are Sons, God hath sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 4.6. Whence he is here stiled the Spirit of Adoption. v. 16. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, that the Blessing of Abraham, (i. e. Ju∣stification by Faith) might come upon the
Gentiles, that they might receive the promise of the Spirit, Gal. 3.14. For believing in him, we are sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, Eph. 1.14. Now these two being always connected, the Apostle goes frequently from the one to the other; first mentioning our freedom from Condemnation, then our walk∣ing the Spirit, v. 1, 2. Our freedom from the guilt of sin by the Death of Christ, v. 3. and then our fulfilling the Righteousness of the Law by the Spirit of Christ, v. 4. And because the Law could not justifie or free us from the Condemning Power of sin, therefore concluding that it could not give the Spirit of Christ to sanctifie us, and that we therefore must be freed from the Law, that we might serve God in the newness of the spirit, Rom. 7.6. Gal. 3.3. Ver. 5. (Not after the flesh, I say,) for they that are of the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh, (i. e. affect, and desire, and pur∣sue carnal things) but they that are after the spirit, (affect, desire, and pursue) the things of the spirit, (and so the one pursues the things which tend to Death, and the other those things which tend to Life.) Ver. 6. For to be carnally minded is (the way which tends to) death, but to be spiri∣tually minded is (the way that leads to) life and peace, v. 7. (which life and peace cannot be obtained by them that are carnally minded) because the carnal mind is (that which sets us at) enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be (sub∣ject to it whilst it continues such.) Ver. 8. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Ver. 9. But (tis not so with you Christians, for) ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be the spirit of God dwell in you; now if any man have not the spirit of Christ (dwel∣ling in him) he is none of his. Ver. 10. But if Christ be in you (by his Spirit,) the body is dead, (it is indeed still Mortal) because of sin, (which will never cease to be in us till we die,) but the spirit is life, (i. e. will give life to it again) because of Righteousness, (or of that Justification which is unto Life, Rom. 5.17, 18.) , the Body is dead because of sin.] That the Apostle speaks not here of the Moral, but of the Natural Death of the Body, appears from this Con¦sideration, that in the Verse following he speaks of this mortal Body, and of the raising it from the dead; and that by the Spirit he doth not understand the spirit of a Man, but the Holy Ghost is also evident, because this Spirit in the foregoing Verse is the spirit of Christ; in the following Verse, the spirit that raised Christ from the dead, and will raise us, in whom he doth inhabit, from it. Now the reason why after our freedom from Condemnation by the Death of Christ, our Bodies are still subject to Death, is thus assigned by the Fathers: BecauseDeus ejecit hominem de Paradiso, & à ligno vitae longe transtulit eum, non invidens ei lignum vitae, quemadmodum quidam dicunt sed miserans ejus, ut non perseveret semper transgressor, neque immortale esset, quod esset circa eum peccatum, & malum interminabile & infanabile, prohibuit autem ejus transgressionem interponens mortem, & cessare faciens peccatum. Iren. l. 3. Cap. 37. . Theoph. ad Autolicum. l. 2. p. 103. . Method. apud Epiph. Haer. 64. Sect. 60. . Basil. Tom. 1. Hom. quod Deus non sit author mali. p. 368. should we have lived for ever in this imperfect state, we should have sinned for ever, and there∣fore God permits good Men still to die, that sin might not live for ever in them; doing this not out of his displeasure to punish them for sin, but out of mercy to free them from it. Ver. 11. But (for) if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead (by the Spirit dwelling in him) shall also quicken your mortal bodies by the (same) spirit that dwelleth in you. , by the Spirit that dwelleth in you.] This is spoken according to the Opinion of the Jews, that the Resurrection shall be effected by vertue of the Holy Spirit, which they conclude from those words of the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 37.9, 10. Come, Oh Spirit, from the four Winds, and blow upon these dead, that they may live. Thus was our Lord raised from the Dead, 1 Pet. 3.18. Thus shall we be raised, who are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, saith this Verse: And with this agrees the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers.Deinde per spiritum surgentia fiunt corpora spiritualia uti per spiritum semper manentem habent vitam. Iren. l. 5. c. 7. Our Bodies rising by the Spirit, saith Irenaeus, shall be made spi∣ritual, and by the Spirit shall have Life.Sciant se per spiritum ejus qui suscitavit Jesum à mortuis vivificandos esse & ad Christi similitudinem resuscitandos à mortuis. Orig. in Rom. 8.11. They who are dead and buried with Christ, may know that by the Spirit which raised him up, they shall be raised. Origen. Ver. 12. Therefore Brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh (any longer, but rather to live after the Spirit.) Ver. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, (i. e. be subject to Death, as the Punishment of sin, or to the second Death,) but if ye through the spirit do mortifie the
deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, (and your Bodies shall be raised to Life Eternal.) Ver. 14. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. , Sons of God.] The strength of this Argument will be exceeding clear from these Considerations, That the adopted Sons of God are Heirs of God, Joint-heirs with Christ, and so must Reign with him, v. 17. which till they live again, and be raised from the dead, they cannot do. 1. That the A∣doption is the redemption of their Bodies from Corruption, ver. 23.2. That we are then compleatly the Sons of God when we are Sons of the Resurrection, Luke 20.37. When we have overcome, according to those words, Rev. 21.7. He that overcometh shall inherit all things, and I will be to him a God, and be shall be to me a Son. And something like this is that of the Jews on these words,Psal. 72.17. Midrash Tillim. in Psal. 93.2. filiabitur nomen ejus; for, say the, his Name is called Jinnon  quia ipse filiaturus est omnes dor∣mientes in pulvere, because he will raise, and so make Sons all that sleep in the dust. Ver. 15. For we have not received the spirit of bondage again to (the) fear (of Death, as they who were under the Law did, that threat∣ning Death to every one that continued not in all things written in the Law to do them, Deut. 27.26.) but we have received the spirit of Adoption, (given to us because we are Sons, Gal. 4.6.) whereby we cry, Abba, Father, (i. e. we are assured that God is our Father, and so that we are Heirs of God, and Sons of the Resurrection.) , the Spirit of Bondage.] That the Law was to the Jews a Yoke of Bondage, the Apostle doth inform us, Gal. 5.1. And that they who were under it were in bondage to the Elements of the World, Gal. 4.3, 8. that it gendred to Bondage, and subjected its Chil∣dren to Bondage, v. 24, 25, 31. That they were all their life time subject to Bondage through the fear of Death, he informs us, Heb. 2.15. And they had reason so to be, since, as the Apostle teacheth, the Law given by Moses did not exempt them from the Death which Adam's sin had brought upon them, but ra∣ther made that Death abound, and them ob∣noxious to it on many fresh accounts; for the Law entred that the offence might abound (un∣to Death) Rom. 5.21. And the Law coming, sin revived, and I died; and the Commandment was found to be unto death, the motions of sin which were by the Law working in their mem∣bers to bring forth fruit unto death, Chap. 7.4, 10. This therefore gives a clear Account of the Paraphrase of the first part of the Verse, but we, saith he, shall live a Life im∣mortal, and enjoy a happy Resurrection, as being the Sons of God, and in token of this, we have received the Spirit of Adoption, en∣abling us to call God Father, and assuring us we are his Children, and so he being our God, must have prepared for us a City, Heb. 11.16. Ver. 16. The spirit it self, (Gr. the same Spirit) beareth Witness with our spirit that we are the Children of God, (and this gives us a full assurance of that blessed Life, en∣abling us to conclude thus.) Ver. 17. And if we be Children, then (are we also) Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, (the Son of God, now reigning gloriously in Heaven,) if so be we suffer with him, (and so be conformed to his Image, v. 29.) that we may be also glorified together. , Heirs of God, joint-heirs with Christ.] All having our share in this Glorious Inheritance, though he, as the eldest Brother, hath the double Portion. Ver. 18. (Which sufferings we have reason to endure for the securing this glorious Estate.) For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time (we live in this World) are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be re∣vealed in us, (or to the Glory afterwards to be revealed to us.) often signifies to, or towards us, and is so rendred in this Epistle, Chap. 5.8. Or for us, as Chap. 16.6. See for the first sense, 1 Cor. 14.36. 2 Cor. 1.11.9.5, 8.10.1.13.3. Eph. 1.8, 19. Coloss. 1.6. 1 Thess. 4.8. Heb. 2.3. And for the second, 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 2.4. Eph. 3.2. Coloss. 1.25. 1 Thess. 5.18. Ver. 19. For (so desirable is it, that) the earnest expectation of the Creature (subject now to vanity) waiteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God, (i. e. the whole race of Mankind earnestly expects it.) , the earnest expecta∣tion of the Creature.] Here it is to be noted, that in the Sacred Dialect, desire and expecta∣tion is ascribed to Creatures, in reference to things they want, and which tend to their Advantage, though they explicitly know no∣thing of them. Thus the Messiah is called , the expectation of the Gen∣tiles, Gen. 49.10.  the desire of all Na∣tions, Hag. 2.4. Ver. 20. For the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that subjected it, (i. e. the  whole race of Men, , 1 Pet. 2.13. were made subject to Corruption, not of their own accord, but by reason of Adam, who by his sin subjected his Posterity to Death and Cor∣ruption, and the Earth to a Curse, Gen. 3.17. This Creature waiteth) Ver. 21. In hope, because (Gr.  that)
the Creature it self also shall be (then) deli∣vered from the ndage of corruption, into the glrious liberty of the Sons of God. , in hope.] So the Syriack and many Greek Commentators do begin this Verse. , from the bondage of Corruption.] That is, from the Mortality which all their lives long made them subject to Bondage, Heb. 2.15. Ver. 22. For we know that the whole Crea∣tion groaneth and travelleth in pain together (under this Bondage to Corruption) until now. , the whole Creation.] All the World under that sense of Mortality, which still subjects them to Bondage; for as Cicero confesses,Sit mors terribilis iis quorum cum vitâ omnia extinguuntur. Parad. 20. Death must be terrible to those, who with their life lose the enjoyment of all good things; andSi mors malum est sepiternum malum. Tusc. Qu. lib. 1. p. 1190. if it be an evil, must be an eternal evil, because it doth for ever deprive them of all good. ThatDe fin. bonrum. l. 1. p. 38. Mortis metu omnis quietae vitae status perturbatur, the fear of it disturbs all the tranquility of life. And that this renders our whole Life miserable,Tuscul. quaest. 1. 11. 13. Quae enim potest in vitâ esse jucunditas, cum dies & noctes cogitandum sit jam jamque esse moriendum? For what pleasure can there be in that Life which is perpetually perplex'd with the thoughts of Death? Ver. 23. And not only so, but our selves also, who have the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, (viz. the glorious Resurrection, and thereby) the redemption of the Body. , the Adoption.] I know there is a∣nother Exposition of these words to this ef∣fect: That by the Creature we are to under∣stand the Gentile World in opposition to the Christian, the word  among the Rabins, signifying the Gentiles, in opposition to the Jews, the People of God; that their waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God, is their waiting to see what the Jews will do, who of them will be true Sons of God, who not; who of them will embrace the Faith of Christ, who not; their Happiness depending punctually, upon the issue of this: Their be∣ing made subject to Vanity, is their being sub∣ject to the vanity of their Minds, Ignorance, and Idolatry, Rom. 1.21. Ephes. 3.20. Eph. 1.17. That to this Idolatry they were made subject, not willingly, but by the Devil's im∣posing it upon them as an act of Religion, saith the Reverend Dr. Hammond; in poenam in∣coepti Babylonici, in punishment of their at∣tempt to build the Tower of Babel, saith Dr. Lightfoot. That their hopes of being deli∣vered from this Bondage of Corruption, is their hopes of being rescued from this Idolatry, those filthy courses they were engaged in, and the Bondage they were in to Satan, and to be made Christ's Freemen, to have a Right to God's Favour, and the future Blessings con∣sequent upon it, the word  having that sense, Deut. 4.16. Wisd. 14.12. 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Pet. 2.12. 1 Cor. 15.33. 2 Cor. 11.3. But against every part of this Interpretation there lies this Objection, That it is not only new, but wholly contrary to all Antiquity, and also to the Text, and it is liable to many just Ex∣ceptions; as, v. gr. First, , saith this In∣terpretation, is the Gentile World, whereas  hath no such sense in Scripture. The Phrase  is used but three or four times more in the New Testament; twice in the Epistle to the Colssians, where Christ is stiled the first born  of the whole Creation, not of the Gentile World surely. And the Gospel is said to be preached , Col. 1.23. (i. e.) to Jew and Gentile, to the whole World, or to all Mankind, v. 6. Once in St. Peter, where Subjection is requi∣red  to all Magistrates a∣mong men, 1 Pet. 2.13. not only Heathen sure, but Jew and Christian, when the Government should be put into their hands. And once in St. Mark, where the Apostles are commanded to Preach the Gospel  to every Creature, Mark 16.15. Now because the same Disciples are commanded to Preach  to all Nations, Mat. 28.18. Hence it is argued, that  signifies the Hea∣then World, in opposition to the Jews, whereas it plainly signifies all Nations, both Jew and Gentile, as is evident from these words of Christ to them, That they should Preach in his Name repentance and remission of sins  to all Nations, beginning at Je∣rusalem, Luke 24.47. And so the whole of this Interpretation is destroyed, for in these Places  is equivalent to all Man∣kind. To wait for the manifestation of the Sons of God, is not to wait to see what the Jews would do, who had not received the Adop∣tion, and were not the Sons of God, as want∣ing that Faith by which Men become Sons, Gal. 3.26. but to expect  our perfection, , our advancement to a state of incorruption; , our future Glory; so Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylat: For it must (by reason of the connective Particle ) be the same with the glory that is to be revealed, v. 18. and with the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, ver. 21. they expect, saith Origen, that time when these things shall be revealed which are prepared for them that are the Sons of God.
To be made subject to Vanity, is not to be made subject to Idolatry, but to be made sub∣ject to Corruption, , so Chrysostom, Oecumeniu, Theophylact; for , he calls that mutability and Va∣nity, to which all things in the World are sub∣ject: Corruption, saith Theodoret, when the Apostle saith the Creature was made subject to Vanity, and in Bondage to Corruption,Origen in locum. Mihi videtur quod de hac materiali, & corruptibilis corporis substantiâ ista dicuntur, neque enim corruptio alicui quicquam dominatur nisi cor∣pori, as is apparent also from the thing they groan for, viz. the redemption of the Body from corruption, that this mortal might put on immortality, be cloathed with its house from Heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Secondly, It cannot truly be said that the Heathen were not wil∣lingly subject to Idolatry, for the Apostle saith, they subjected themselves to it against the Light of Nature, and so became without ex∣cuse, and that when they knew God, they did not glorifie him as God, Rom. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. And this sense of the word Vanity is very frequent in the Psalms, and in Ecclesiastes. David contemplating the frailty of Man, and how soon he vanisheth away, cries out, Every man therefore is but Vanity, , Psal. 39.5, 11. And a∣gain, , Man is like to vanity, his days pass away like a shadow, Psal. 144.4. And because all things here be∣low are so frail, so subject to change, and to vanish, and Man hath so short a time to pos∣sess them; therefore, saith the Preacher, Va∣nity of vanities are they, all is vanity, Eccles. 1.2. And when Adam became Mortal, he cal∣led his Son Abel Vanity, Gen. 4.2. The Vanity to which the whole Creation is subject does not therefore signifie the vain em∣ployments and distractions of this present life, but that state of Mortality from which the Psalmist infers every Man therefore is but Vanity; for it is thus subject to Vanity in hope of a de∣liverance from that Bondage of Corruption, which Mr. Cl. owns to be the Corruption to which our Body is naturally liable, and from which we Christians wait to be delivered by the Redemption of the Body from Corruption. See Note on ver. 23. And therefore he who subjected us to this state, is not God, who brought not Death into the World, but Adam, by whom sin entred into the World, and death by sin. To be delivered from this Bondage to Cor∣ruption, is not to be delivered from Idolatry, nor doth  ever bear this sense, but the sense is , the Creature shall not then be corruptible, , for as the Creature was made corruptible by us, so shall it be made incorruptible with us; Oecumniu Theodoret, Theophylact. For that which i groans for is its redemption from Corruption, v. 23. Having thus offered my Reasons a¦gainst this Interpretation, it will be very eas to confirm the Ancient and true Explication of the words from the Scope and Argumen of the Apostle here. For I have shewed from v. 11. that the Apostle is here treating of the Resurrection of the Body to Eternal Life; that v. 13. he declares this Life belongs to them alone, who through the spirit do mr∣tifie the deeds of the flesh; that v. 14. he proves they shall enjoy this Life, and Resur∣rection, because they are the Sons of God And v. 17. that being Sons, they must be Heir of God, joynt-heirs with Christ; first suffering and then reigning in Glory with him; that v. 18. to encourage Christians thus to suffer he shews the greatness of that Glory they shall then enjoy, stiling it , the glory to be revealed hereafter; i. e. after the sufferings of this present Life, to which it is opposed, are ended; for, as Chry∣sostom and Theophylact well note, he saith not , these sufferings are no worthy to be compared to our future ease from them in this life; but , to our future glory in the next, when they that have communicated with Christ i his sufferings, shall rejoyce , in the revelation of his glory, saith St. Peter, 1 Pet. 4.13. , shall be glorified with him; here v. 17. this Glory he stiles , the revelation of the Sons of God; i. e. say the Fathers, the time when they shall  become incorruptible, this corruptible putting on incorruption, when they shall appear to be the Sons of God, , be∣ing Sons of the Resurrection, v. 14. comfort∣ing them in the expectation of it, and their groaning after it with this Consideration, that it is the expectation of all the World, and that they groan together with them for it, de∣siring with them to be delivered from this Bondage to Corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; adding, that not only they, but even Christians also, who had the first fruits of that Spirit, who is the earnest of our Inheritance, , till the redemption of the purchased Possession. Eph. 1.14. and by whom we are sealed up  to the day of Redemption, Eph. 4.30. did groan, waiting for the Adoption, viz. , the redemp∣tion of our Bodies from Corruption, v. 23. For that this was the thing for which they groaned, the same Apostle informs us in these words, We that are in this Tabernacle groan,
being burthen'd, that we might be cloathed upon with our house from Heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up of Life, 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. And as here, they who have the first fruits of the Spirit, do thus groan, so there it is said, v. 5. He who hath wrought this expectation in us is God, who hath also given to us the earnest of his Spirit. That this was the Ancient, and almost Primitive Exposition of these words, we learn fromLib. 5. c. 32. &c. 36. p. 506. Irenaeus, in these words: Oportet ergo & ipsam conditionem reintegra∣tam ad pristinum, sine prohibitione servire jstis, & hoc Apostolus fecit manifestum in eâ quae est ad Romanos sic dicens, nam expectatio Creaturae revelationem filiorum Dei expectat. And fom these ofContra Hermog. c. 11. Tertullian, Tunc erit mali finis, cum praeses ejus Diabolus abierit in ignem-cum revelatio filiorum Dei redemèrit conditionem à malo utique vanitati subjectum. I differ only from the Fathers in this Interpre∣tation as to this single Circumstance, that I do not extend this desire of the redemption of the Body from Corruption to brute Beasts, and insensate Creatures, but only to Mankind in general, subject by Adam's Fall to Mortality. Ver. 24. (Waiting, I say, for it, though we do not see it,) for (as yet) we are saved only by hope, but hope (of a thing) that is seen, is not hope (truly so called,) for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? , we are saved by hope.] Of this Resurrection and Redemption of the Body, being begotten to a lively hope, through the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, of an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in the Heavens for us, 1 Pet. 1.5. And rejoycing in hope of the glory of God, Rom. 5.2. And through the spirit waiting for the hope of righteousness through Faith, Gal. 5.5. Ver. 25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. Ver. 26. (And as patience, so) likewise the spirit helpeth (to relieve us in) our infirmi∣ties, for (when we are burthen'd wirh them) we know not what to pray for as we ought, (whether for increase of patience under, or deliverance from them, or if so, whether by absence from the Body, or being cloathed upon) but the spirit it self, (or the same Spirit which testifies that we are the Sons of God, v. 16.) intercedeth for us with groanings that cannot be uttered, (Gr. with silent groanings after this Redemption, v. 23.2 Cor. 5.2, 4, 5.) Ver. 27. Now he that searcheth the hearts (of the Saints,) knoweth what is the mind (or the desire) of the spirit, for he maketh intercession for the Saints, according to the will (or purpose) of God (to give them this Redemption of the Body.) , the Spirit] Here cannot signifie the Spirit of a Man, for that cannot be said to help with us, being a constituent part of us; or to intercede for us, when we know not our selves what to pray for; but that Spirit of God who is said to intercede for us, not as an Advocate, or Mediator betwixt God and us, that being the Office of our great High-Priest, but as an exciter and director of us in our Addresses to God, and to render them for matter, according to the Will of God, and for manner, fervent and effectual, , in wrought Prayer, and to make our very sighs and groanings prevalent, for he is here said only to intercede for us with sighs and groanings, excited by him after that Re∣demption to which he sealeth us, and of which he being the Earnest and Pledge, we are hence moved with greater Faith and fervency to long for the enjoyment of it; and this is the rea∣son why I think not fit to interpret this Pas∣sage, with some of the Fathers of a publick Charisma, or Gift of Prayer, since that must spend it self in words for the Edification of the Church, and not in silent groanings. See Exod. 2.24. & 6.5. Judges 2.18. Psal. 38.9. & 102.20. Acts 7.34. Thus when our Lord had twice groaned in spirit, John 11.33, 38. he saith, I thank thee, O Father, that thou hast heard me, v. 41. Ver. 28. And (though we know not in our distresses what to pray for in particular, or when we shall obtain this Redemption of the Body, , yet) this we know, that all things shall work together for good (for the promotion of this Happiness) to them that love God, to them that are called (to the A∣doption of Sons) according to his purpose, (of bringing many Sons to glory by him, Heb. 2.10. He having predestinated us to the Adoption of Sons through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will, Eph. 1.5. or according to his purpose in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. 1.9. , all things.] That under all things, should be comprehended the sins of good Men, is the unreasonable suggestion of St. Austin, and some of the Schoolmen after him, confuted by the declaration of God by Ezekiel, That if the righteous man forsake his righte∣ousness, and commit iniquity, in the sin that he hath done shall he die, Ezek. 18. And by this Apostle declaring to the Hebrews, The just shall live by his Faith, but if he draws back, my soul, saith God, shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.37, 38. 2ly, The Test of love to God being keeping his Commandments, this Interpretation makes the sense of these words run thus: To them that keep his Command∣ments, even all their disobedience to them, shall work together for good. 3ly, If the word all things comprehend all the sins that
are, or can be committed by them that love God, they may as well rejoyce in all their Wickedness, as in all their Sufferings for the sake of Christ, seeing they may rejoyce in that which by God's designation tendeth to their good; and so all the Motives urged, Chap. 6. to engage them to die to sin, and live no longer in it, must be not only ener∣vated, but even esteemed motives designed to hinder them from that which is for their good, or, according to the descants of St. Au∣stin and St. Bernard, to hinder their profici∣ence in Caution and Humility. Ver. 29. For whom he did (thus) foreknow, he did predestinate (or appoint) to be con∣form'd to the Image of his Son, (by having their vile Bodies changed into the likeness of his glorious Body, Phil. 3.21.) that he might be the first-born (or chief) among many Bre∣thren, (who are to be co-heirs, and glorified together with him, v. 17.) , for whom he did foreknow.] This Particle  is connective, and this Verse giving the reason or confirmation of what was spoken in the former, it seems necessary to inter∣pret it thus, whom he foreknew to be Persons called according to his purpose, and therefore qualified for this Adoption. It therefore is to be observed, that the words know, and fore∣know, in the Scripture-language, imports an affectionate knowledge joyn'd with approba∣tion and affection. So Mat. 7.23. John 10.14. 1 Cor. 8.3. If any man love God, , he is known of God, Gal. 4.8. But now that ye know God, or rather are known of God, 2 Tim. 2.19. , the Lord know∣eth who are his. So is the word  used in this Epistle, Chap. 11.2. when the Apostle saith, the Lord hath not cast off his People ,Quos praescivit futuros sibi devotos, ipsos elegit ad praemissa praemia capessenda. whom he foreknew to be faithful, as were those Seven Thousand Persons who had not bowed the Knee to Baal, whom he thus fore∣knew. , he before appointed] to be con∣formed to the Image of his Son, that as they had born the Image of the earthly Adam, they might also bear the Image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. Having Glorious Bodies like to his, saith Theodoret; and this agrees well with the scope and subject matter of this Chapter, and with the following words, That he might be the first-born, or chief among many Bre∣thren; for as here these Brethren are said to be Co-heirs with him, the elder Brother, v. 17. so elsewhere he is stiled, the first-born from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, or that they might be changed into his Image by the participation of the same Spirit. See Note on 2 Cor. 3.18. Ver. 30. (And the method he used to bring those whom he had designed to be thus con∣form'd to the Image of his Son, was this, viz.) whom he thus predestinated, them be also called (first to the Profession of the Chri∣stian Faith,) and whom he called, (upon their cordial embracing of that Faith) them he also justified, (and so freed from condemnation to Death;) and whom he justified, them he also glorified. , them he also glorified.] At present in their Head Christ Jesus, (they being blessed with all spiritual blessings in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Eph. 1.3. They being quickned together with Christ, and raised up together, and made to sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Eph. 2.5, 6. And them he will hereafter glorifie, by making their vile Bodies like unto his glorious Body. Or, , them he hath also glorified.] By giving them that Spirit who is the Earnest of their Glory. , so Chrysostom and Oecumenius. , Theodoret & Theophylact. Magnificavit illos ut similes fiant filio Dei, Pseud. Ambrosius. And by reason of which Spirit given, with the Preaching of the Gospel, the ministration of Justification is said to be  in Glory, as being the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. And we by participation of this Spirit of the Lord, are said not only to be∣hold the glory of the Lord, but also to be changed into the same Image with him from glory to glory, v. 18. See the Note there, and John 17.22. So Origen on the Place; Be glorificatione possumus in praesenti saeculo illud intelligere quod dicit Apostolus, nos autem omne revelatâ facie gloriam domini speculantes e∣dem imagine transformamur à gloriâ in gloria tanquam à Domini spiritu. In favour of this Interpretation, let it be noted, that when the Apostle speaks of our final glorification in this Chapter, he still speaks of it as of a thing future, saying, we shall be glorified with him, v. 17, 18, 21. Whereas he here speaks of it as a thing past, saying, whom he hath justified, them he hath also glorified. So when a Miracle was wrought in his Name, , God glo∣rified him, Acts 3.13. See Luke 4.15. John 8.54.11.4.13.31, 32.16.14. 1 Cor. 12.26. See the Preface to the Epistle to the Galatians. Ver. 31. What shall we say then? (Gr. What say we then) to these things? (i. e. what fur∣ther ground of assurance, and so of patient waiting for these things can we want) for if God be for us who can (successfully) be a∣gainst us? (so as to frustrate, or deprive us of this glorious state.) Ver. 32. He that (in pursuance of this de∣sign) spared not his own Son, but freely gave him up for (the Redemption of) us all, how
shall he not together with him freely give us all things (belonging to that Glory and Hap∣piness he hath purchased for us?) Ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? (i. e. to them who are called by him to Christianity, to hinder their Redemption, by charging them with that guilt which rendreth them obnoxious to Death,) it is God that justifieth, (and who will there∣fore glorifie them.) Ver. 34. Who is he that condemneth them (to abide still under the Power of Death?) It is Christ that died (to redeem them from it;) yea rather that is risen again (for their Justification, Rom. 4.25. And if when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being recon∣ciled, we shall be saved by his life, Rom. 5.10.) who is even at the right hand of God (invested with all manner of Power, that he should give Eternal Life unto them, John 17.2.) who also maketh intercession for us, (and so is able to save us to the uttermost, , Heb. 7.25.) Ver. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? (that love which he hath shewed in procuring this Redemption for us, v. 37.) shall tribulation, or distress, or perse∣cution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Ver. 36. (Befalling us,) as it is written, (Psal. 44.22.) For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep (ap∣pointed) for the slaughter. Ver. 37. Nay, (as there it is said, all this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsly in thy Co∣venant, v. 17, 18. So may all this happen to us ) but in all these things we are (al∣ready) more than Conquerors through (the Grace and Spirit of) him that loved us. , we are more than Conquerors.] For we not only bear, but glory in tribulati∣ons, Rom. 5.3. We are in Deaths often, but still delivered from Death, 2 Cor. 1.10. And as the sufferings of Christ abound towards us, so also doth our consolation under them abound through Christ. Ver. 38. (And I trust after this happy Ex∣perience it will be so still,) for I am perswa∣ded that neither (fear of) Death, nor (hope of) life, nor (evil) Angels, nor Principali∣ties, nor Powers, (persecuting us for Christ's sake) nor (the) things (we endure at) pre∣sent, nor things to come, Ver. 39. Nor height (of Honour,) nor depth (of Ignominy,) nor any other Creature, (or thing) shall separate us from the love of God, which is (vouchsafed to us) in Christ Je∣sus. CHAP. IX. Verse 1. (AS for the unbelieving Jews, my Brethren in the flesh, that what I am to speak concerning them, may not seem to proceed from any disaffection to them,) I say the truth in Christ, I lye not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, (i. e. I call Christ and the Holy Ghost to bear Witness with my own Consci∣ence, that I only speak the Truth, when I say) , my Conscience bearing me witness in (or with) the Holy Ghost.] This Verse not only shews, that in cases of great moment, which cannot otherwise be sufficiently confirmed, a Chri∣stian may establish his saying by an Oath, but also that he may swear by Christ, and by the Holy Ghost, and call them to be Witnesses of the sincerity of his own Conscience in what he doth assert. SoDe Josepho. p. 439. E. Philo, , I call God to witness with my Conscience. Now an Oath being an Act of Religious Worship, in which God is called upon as a Witness to the Truth, or an Avenger of the Falshood of what we Testifie, or Promise, by swearing by our Lord Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the Apostle must perform an Act of Religious Worship to them, and by that agnise their Divinity, according to those words of Moses, Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his Name, Deut. 6.13. And by calling upon them to bear Witness to the secrets of his Heart and Conscience, he must ascribe to them the knowledge of the secrets of the Hearts of Men, which is the Property of God alone, 1 Sam. 16.7. 1 Kings 8.39. 1 Chron. 28.9. Psal. 7.9. Jer. 11.20.17.10.20.12. Ver. 2. That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart (on the account of their infidelity, the obduration, and Spirit of slumber, and the rejection of them, which are the dismal consequences of their un∣belief.) Ver. 3. For (so great is my concern for them, that were it proper, and could it avail to the procuring their Salvation) I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ for (these) my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the flesh. , for I could wish my self accursed.] The word Anathema being
still used in St. Paul's Epistles in the severest sense, 1 Cor. 16.22. Gal. 1.8, 9. And the words , to be Anathema from Christ, importing in their literal sense a separation from Christ himself, and not only from the external Communion of his Church, and being in the descants of the GreekOrigen, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Occumenius, Photius, Theophylact. Fa∣thers the same as , a salute separari, to be separated from the love of Christ, to be alienated from him, to fall from the Glory, and the Salvation purchased by him: I think it reasonable to interpret the Apostle's words in this sense. Nor is it a sufficient Objection against this Interpretation, that this can be no truly Christian Wish, for the Apostle doth not say, I wish, but as the Ancients do well in∣terpret him, , if it were proper to make such a wish, if it would avail to make so great a multitude for ever happy,  optarim equidem, I could even wish so great a Blessing to my Brethren, though with the loss of my own Happiness. Ver. 4. (And surely I have very great rea∣son to be highly concerned for them,) who are Israelites, (i. e. Persons descended from one whose Faith and Vertue were so eminent, that as a Prince he prevailed with God, and so had his Name changed from Jacob to Israel, as a mark of God's Affection to him, Gen. 32.28.) to whom pertaineth the Adoption, (God having owned them as his Sons, and his First-born, Exod. 4.22, 23. Hos. 11.1.) and the Glory, (the Shechinah, or Glorious Presence dwelling among them between the two Che∣rubims, and from thence shining forth upon them, Psal. 50.2. & 80.2.) and the Covenants (made with Abraham, Gal. 3.17. and with Moses, Exod. 24.8. the two Covenants, Gal. 4.24. the Old and New Covenant, Jer. 31.31. & 32.40.) and the giving of the Law, (that writ with his own Finger in Tables of Stone, Deut. 10.1.4. and many other excellent Ju∣dicial Laws,) and the promises, (not only of signal Blessings in the Land of Canaan to those that should observe his Laws, but the Promise of a Messiah, and of a New Covenant esta∣blished upon better Promises.) Ver. 5. Whose are the Fathers, (they being the Off-spring of those Patriarchs to whom the Promises were first made, Heb. 11.9, 13, 17. and confirmed with an Oath, Heb. 6.13.17.) and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ (the promised Messiah) came, (he be∣ing born of one of their Nation, and so ac∣cording to the Flesh their Off-spring, even he) who (according to his Divine Nature) is God over all, blessed for ever. Amen. , who is God over all, blessed for ever.] This Place galls the Arians, the Note of Le Cl. upon it is this, That Dr. Hammond should rather have examined the Animadversion of Grotius upon it, than copyed out Jewish Fables, which make little to the purpose, Erasmus having written enough to overthrow all that can be inferr'd from them, for if what Grotius and Erasmus have observed stand good, Dr. Hammond's Reasoning cannot be thought of any force. Now here I might refer him to the solid con∣futation of what Erasmus had said by Josue Placaeus, Part. 3. Disp. 25. Or to himself, Art. Crit. Part. 3. p. 102. 106. But to give him all possible Satisfaction in this matter, First, I assert, that the Reading we follow, is certainly the true Reading. 1. Because it is the Reading with which all the Versions agree, the Latin, the Arabick the Aethiopick, and the Syriack; for it is a mistake in Grotius, when he insinuates the contrary of the Syriack Version, which in Tre∣mellius runs thus; Qui est Deus qui est super omnia. 2. Because it hath the general consent om∣nium fermè Patrum, of almost all the Fathers, who have thus cited it from the Second to the Sixth Century, viz. the Testimony of Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 18. of Origen in locum, of Tertullian, contra Praxeam, Cap. 13. 15. No∣vatian, de Trin. Cap. 13. 20. Cyprian, l. 2. de Testim. contra Jud. Sect. 6. Quod Deus Christus, ubi Editio Oxoniensis haec habet, in∣terea agnoscere oportebit vocem Deus in Spi∣rensi veteri innominato Remboldi, & Erasmi Editionibus abesse, sed in sequentibus habetur, atque etiam in omnibus Editionibus qua cn∣sului, quamobrem defectus iste jure merito ab Erasmo librariis imputatur. Hilarius in Psalm 122. Unus Deus ex quo omnia— Et rursan ex quibus Christus qui est super omnia Deus Notat hic Erasmus, nescio ex quibus MSS. ad∣duxisse Hilarium hunc locum omissa Dei mentione quod tamen inquit incuriâ librariorum omissm videri potest, de quo ne quispiam ulterius d∣bitet, Erasmi, aut Grotii versutiis deceptus, ex locum parallelumLib. 8. p. 177. F. & l. 4. p. 75. A. de Trin. Sed non ignorat Paulus Christum Deum dicens quorum Patres, & ex quibus Christus qui est super omnia Deus non hic creatura in Deum depu∣tatur, sed creaturarum Deus est qui super omnia Deus est, verba haec etiam in Chrysostomi Textu occurrant, qui insuper verba sequentia , ab Apostolo dicta pronuntiat, pro omnibus gratiarum actionem unigenito Dei referente, agnoscente autem E∣rasmo non potest haec particula ad Christam pertinere nisi ad eundem, & illa referantur qui est super omnia Deus. His adde Testimo∣nia Athanasii, Orat. 2. & quinta contra Arian. Greg. Nysseni, l. 10. contra Eunom. Ambros. Apostolus de Christo dixit qui est super omnia Deus Benedictus in secula de Sp. Sancto, l. 1. c. 3.
p. 154. Hilarius Dioc. in lcum. Marius Victo¦rinus ntra Arium, l. prim. Theodoret in locum. Cyrill. l. 1. Ths. Augustin de Trin. l. 2. c. 13. Idacius contra varimadum, l. 1 Cassian. init. l. 3. de incarn. cap. 1. G. Magnus, Hm. 8. in Ezek. Isid. Hispal. l. de different. Num. 2. Vide Petav. Theol. dogm. de Trin. l. 2. c. 9. Sect. 2. Quid de hoc loco facient Ariani, in qu aperte Christus super omnia Deus esse perscribitur. Orig. in locum. Secondly, I assert, that the words will not admit of that interpunction, and Interpreta∣tion of Erasmus, which will do any Service to the Arians or Socinians, viz. that a Colon must be put after the words , after the flesh; and the words following must be an Ecphonema, and grateful Exclamation for the Blessings conferred upon the Jews, thus: God, who is over all, be blessed for ever. For this Exposition is so harsh, and without any like Example in the whole New Testament, that as none of the Orthodox ever thought upon it, so I find not that it ever came into the Head of any Arian; Socinus himself re∣jects it for this very good Reason, that , God be blessed, is an unusual, and unnatural construction; for where-ever else these words signifie blessed be God,  is put before God, as Luke 1.68. 2 Cor. 1.3. Eph. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3. and  hath an Article prefixed to it, nor are they ever immediately joyned together otherwise. The Phrase oc∣curs Twenty times in the Old Testament, but in every Place  goes before, and the Article is annexed to the word God, which is a Demonstration that this is a perversion of the sense of the Apostle's words. 2. The Apostle having said in the immediate prece∣ding words, that Christ came from the Fathers , according to the flesh, or as to his Humane Nature, is it not reasonable to con∣ceive he should proceed to say what he was according to his Divine Nature, especially when he was discoursing of, and to those Jews, who, as. Conrra Cels. l. 2. p. 79. & l. 4. p. 162. Trypho saith, andJudaei spem habent in hom ne in Christo vide∣licet suo, quem non filium Dei, sed parum hominem putant esse enturum. Hier. in Jer. 17. F. 135. F. Origen, andTryph. Apud Just. p. 267. B. Jerome testifie, held their Messiah was only to be a Man, and denyed his Divi∣nity? Is it not unreasonable to think he should say nothing of the , or the su∣periour Nature of Christ? Especially if we con∣sider that the limitation , accord∣ing to the flesh, plainly insinuated there was another Nature in him, according to which he came not from the Fathers. In a word, all the Ancient Versions render the words as we do, taking no notice of this Interpunction: All the Greek Scliasts, and the Ant Co∣mentators among the Latines, excepting  Chrys stom, here Triumph over Aris;  f them indeed hinting, thatSi quis autem non putat de Christo dictum quod est Deus, det personam de qua dictum est: de Patre enim Deo hoc loc mentio facta non est. Pecad. Ambros. there ight  Men who would be enclined to say, these thin were not spoken of Christ, but none  ¦ing that any did then actually asce  to any other Person. Hence from the gi¦ning these words have been used by the ¦thers as an Argument of Christ's Divinity. For, saithLib. 3. c. 18. p. 276. Irenaeus, Because he  ¦nuel, lest we should think him a Man only, th Apostle saith, of whom, a concerning the , Christ came; Qui est Deus super omnes ¦dictus in saecula. And in a like Expression to this of the Apostle, he saith, Secundum in quod verbum Dei homo erat ex Radice Jess filius Abrahae:Lib. 3. c. 10. According to that Nature in which the Word of God war Man, of t Root of Jesse, and the Son of Abraham.  Spirit of God rested upon him, secundum au∣tem quod Deus erat; but as to that Nature by which he was God, he judged not after the sight of his Eyes, for he knew what was in Man. And if these words are spoken by the Spirit of God concerning Christ, the Argu∣ments hence to prove him truly and properly God are invincible. For first, , is the Periphrasis by which all the Heathen Philosophers did usually represent the Supream God. And so is God the Father described both in the Old and the New Testament as , he that is over all, Eph. 4.6. Secondly, This is the constant Epithet and Periphrasis of the great God in the Old Testament, that he is , God blessed for evermore, 1 Chron. 16.36. Psal. 41.13. and 89.52. And also in the New, where he is styled the God , who is blessed for evermore. This was so evident to Enjedinus the Socinian, that he saith, This Epithite is so peculiar to God the Father, that it is never attributed in the New Testament to any other, but wheresoever we find this Phrase, God blessed for ever, it is always ascribed to the Father. Of the Custom of adding to the Name of God, Blessed for evermore, used by the Jews, the Reverend Doctor hath said sufficient; and why all that he here saith, should pass with Mr. Cl. for Jewish Fables, what Reason can be given, if not that of his averseness to the Doctrine the Doctor here endeavours to establish, especially when we find this very Phrase , or , Psal. 40.13. & 88.51.
105.48. and find St. Paul following his Ex∣ample, and Clemens Romanus in his Epistle, so often using the same Epithite when he makes mention of the God of Heaven. Edit. Jan. p. 29. 42. 50. 57. 59. 66. Ver. 6. But (we must) not (exaggerate this blindness and rejection of the Jews, whose were the Covenants, and the Promises in pre∣judice of the veracity of God) as though the Word of God had taken none effect, (i. e. the Promises of God concerning the Seed of Israel, and the Blessings to be conferred upon them  had failed, this doth by no means follow) for they are not all Israel, who are of Israel, (i. e. all that are descended from the Loyns of Israel by Carnal Generation, are not the Children of the Promise made to Jacob, Gen. 28.14. which yet are only to be accounted for the Seed, v. 8.) Ver. 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham (according to the flesh,) are they all Children (of the Promise made to Abra∣ham,) but (only they who are the Seed of Isaac, for thus the Promise runs,) in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Ver. 8. That is, they which are the Children (of Abraham) according to the flesh, (and have the sign of the Covenant in their flesh,) these are not (on that account alone) the Children of God, (of whom it is said, I will be a God u to thee, and thy Seed after thee, Gen. 17.7. but (they only who are) the Children of the Promise, (as Isaac was) are (to be) accounted for the Seed. Ver. 9. For this is the word of Promise, (Gen. 18.10.) At this time will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son, (which words confine the Children of the Promise to the Seed of Sarah, excluding that of Hagar from it.) , are accounted for the Seed.] That is, of this distinction of Seeds, to which the Promise belongs, you have a ma∣nifest instance in the Seed of Abraham, for before Abraham had any Seed at all, the Pro∣mise of Inheriting the Land of Canaan was made unto him thus: Unto thy Seed will I give this Land, Gen. 12.7. All the Land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed for ever, Gen. 13.15. Unto thy Seed have I given this Land, Gen. 15.18. But though Ishmael was his first-born, and had that Cir∣cumcision which was the Seal of the Cove∣nant made with Abraham, yet he and his Po∣sterity, those twelve Princes, and great Na∣tions which issued from him, were all ex∣cluded from the Covenant, and Isaac not yet circumcised, or born, and his Posterity are declared to be the Seed of Abraham, to whom the Promise should be made good, and with whom the Covenant should be esta∣blished. For when Abraham said to God, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee! God re¦turns him this Answer: As fr Ishmael, I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him ex∣ceedingly, twelve Princes shall be beget, and I will make him a great Nation; but my Cove∣nant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee, Gen. 17.18, 20.21. A∣gain, when Sarah had said of Ishmael, Cast out this bond-woman and her Son, for the Son of this bond-woman shall not be Heir with my Son, even with Isaac, Gen. 21.10. And Abraham thereupon was grieved because of his Son. v. 11. God speaks thus to him: Let it not be grievous in thine eyes because of the Ld, in all that Sarah hath said, hearken to her, for in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, v. 12. Which Instance shews it was not being of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, or having the sign of the Covenant in the Flesh, that rendred Men the Sons of God, or Children o the Promise then: For Ishmael was Abraham's first-born, and circumcised, and yet by God excluded from the Promise; Isaac not circum∣cised, not yet born, not having the Right of Primogeniture, and yet to him and his Seed alone belong the Adoption, and the Promise. Two things may here be added for Illustra∣tion of this Instance. First, That the Jews can make no just Ex∣ceptions against this Argument of the Apostle, it being suitable to their own Theology; for it is a Rule among them, ThatMaimon. of Vows. Chap. 9. § 21. whoso vows concerning Abraham's Seed, is free from Ishmael's and Esau's Sons, and is not bound but touching Israelites, for in Isaac shall Seed it called to thee. And so Isaac said of Jacob, And God give thee the Blessing of Abraham. Secondly, That there is a great Emphasis in these words, the Children of the Promise, for upon this account it was said of Isaac, that he was not born according to the Flesh, but according to the Promise, Gal. 4.23. That Ishmael was Abraham's Son according to the Flesh, but Isaac according to the Spirit; to be therefore Children of the Promise, seems to be Abraham's Spiritual Seed: Whence the A∣postle saith of those who believe in this Seed, that they are the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, and so are Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3.29. that they, according to Isaac's, are Children of the Pro∣mise, Gal. 4.28. That they are Children not of the bond-woman, but of the free, v. 31. Accordingly the Jews say,Pug. fid. Part. 2. Chap. 9. § 6. p. 303. A Proselyte is the Son of Abraham, who is the Father of the whole World, as it is said, A Father of many Nations have I made thee. And because the Jews might quarrel against the pertinence of this Instance, alledging this might be because Ishmael was only the Son of
Abraham's Bond-maid, whereas Isaac was the S of his own Wife; or that Ishmael had forfeited his Right by Idolatry, or denying the World to come, of which they accuse him; here fllows the instance of chusing Jacob and his Seed, excluding Esau and his Seed, against which no such Cavil could take place. For, sath he, Ver. 10. And not only this (instance is pro∣per to demonstrate the distinction of the Seed of Abraham according to Promise,) but (that) also (of) Rebeca, who conceived by one, even our Father Isaac, (two Children born of the same Father, and of the same Mother, and lying in the same Womb.) Ver. 11. For the Children (of her Womb) being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil (which might move God to dislike the one more than the other, as may be al∣ledged in the case of Ishmael) that the pur∣pose of God according to Election might stand, not of (Gr. from) works, but of him that calleth, (i. e. that the purpose of God in pre∣ferring one of these Seeds, and Nations before the other to be the promised Seed, and so his Church and People might appear to be not on consideration of their Works, but his free choice.) Ver. 12. It was (then) said unto her, the elder (in his Posterity) shall serve the younger, (i. e. shall be inferiour to him who had the Right of Primogeniture according to the flesh.) Ver. 13. (According to which preference it happened to their Posterity,) as it is written, Mal. 1.2, 3. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. , for the Children being yet unborn.] The Argument of the Apostle is to this effect, that though both Jacob and Esau had the same Father, and the same Mother, yet of these two, when they were yet unborn, and so were neither circumcised, nor had done any thing at all to oblige, or disoblige God, or to give any ground for any difference to be made betwixt them and their Off-spring, God speaks thus of them to Rebekah, Two manner of People shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one People shall be stronger than the other People, and the elder shall serve the younger, Gen. 25.23. i. e. Not he to whom by Birth-right it belonged, but he whom God was freely pleased to chuse should inherit the Land of Canaan, promised to the Seed of Abraham, and the other Privileges of his Seed. Which Instance seems plainly to in∣form us, that the choice which God makes of Men to the enjoyment of the Favour of be∣ing his People, and beloved by him above others, as to such things, is not according to their external Privileges, or Works, but ac∣cording to his free Choice. And this Prediction was fully verified in After-Ages, for Jacob and his Posterity were planted in the Land of Canaan, which flowed with Milk and Honey, and was the glory of all Lands; whereas the Edomites were planted in a barren Desart Land, and this gave ground for those words of the Prophet Malachi, I have loved you, saith the Lord to Israel, yet ye say, wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's Brother, saith the Lord? Yet I loved Jacob, and hated Esau, and laid his moun∣tains, and his heritage waste for the Dragons of the Wilderness. Now for farther explica∣tion of these words, let it be observed, 1. That this Instance of Esau's being re∣jected, and not owned by God as belonging to the promised Seed, is suitable to the Sen∣timents of the Jews, not only because he be∣ing anSee Targ. Jerus. and B. Ʋziel in Gen. 25.29.34. Idolater, and a denyer of the Re∣surrection, and of the Blessings of the World to come, was not, according to their fore∣mentioned Canon, to be accounted for the Seed, and their received Rule, That he who swears concerning the Seed of Abraham, is free from Ishmael and Esau's Sons, and is not bound but touching Israelites, but also from their Ob∣servation upon these words of Jacob,Beristh. Rabba minor. Parash. 76. in Gen. 32.9. The God of my Father Abraham, and of my Father Isaac, viz. that he saith not so of Esau, that Abraham and Isaac were his Father, because he chose not to walk in their ways, and to do their works. 2ly, Hence it is evident that the Apostle speaks not here of the Persons, but of the Nations and Posterity of Jacob and Esau, or not of them Personally, but Nationally con∣sidered, according to the Note of Irenaeus, Partum Rebeccae Prophetiam fuisse dorum po∣pulorum, l. 4. c. 38. This is plain, 1. From the words of God to Rebekah, Two Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of People shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one People shall be stronger than the other. 2. And from this Observation, that as to the Persons of Esau and Jacob, it was never true that the elder did serve the younger, but only as to their Posterity, when the Edomites be∣came Tributaries to David, 2 Sam. 8.14. And 3. Because what is here offered as a Proof, or Confirmation of the truth of this, is cited from the Prophet Malachi, who prophesied long after Jacob and Esau were personally dead, and so could only speak of their Po∣sterity the Israelites and Edomites, as he ex∣presly doth. And, 3ly, Hence it clearly follows, that the A∣postle cannot here discourse of any Personal Election of them to Eternal Life, or any abso∣lute love and hatred of them with respect to their Eternal Interests, for if so, seeing he ma∣nifestly speaks of the whole Nation of Israel,
they must, according to that Opinion, be all elected to Salvation; whereas the Apostle in∣forms us that God had no pleasure in many of them, 1 Cor. 10.5. and the whole Jewish History shews the contrary. Again, then must the whole Posterity of Esau be the Objects of God's hatred, and his Reprobation, which is so far from being true, that Job and all his Friends appear to have been of the Posterity of Esau. And 2ly, then it must follow, as Estius contends, that not only Election, but even Reprobation also must be without any respect to Works, and so God must adjudge Men to Eternal Perdition without respect to any evil done, or to be done by them; for the Children having done neither good nor evil, saith the Apostle, it happened to them as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. 'Tis certain then that the Apostle speaks here only of the Election of one Seed and Nation before another, to be accounted and treated by him as the Seed of Abraham, this only doth his Argument require, and his Instances prove, and this is sufficient to justi∣fie God's dealing with the unbelieving Jews, so as to reject them from being accounted for, or treated as the Seed of Abraham; and his raising up Children to Abraham out of those believing Gentiles, who imitating the Faith of Abraham, became his Spiritual Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise, that he would be a God to his Seed, and that he should be the Father of many Nations, and in him should all the Families of the Earth be blessed, and his calling them to the Faith, though sinners of the Gentiles; that depending not on Works, but his free Pleasure. Note also, that those words, The Children being not yet born, nor having done good or evil, being used as an Argument to prove that the Election, or the preference of the one a∣bove the other, could not be of Works, is a strong Argument against the pre-existence of Souls, and their being sent into Bodies by way of Punishment for their former sins; for, upon that Supposition, it could not be true, that the Children had done neither good or evil, before they were born; nor would the Argu∣ment be firm, that one could not be preferred before the other on the account of any Works done by them, seeing the one might have sinned more than the other in their state of pre-existence. Ver. 14. What shall we say then (after these instances?) is there (any cause to say there is) unrighteousness with God (in taking them for the Seed of Abraham, or for his Sons and People the Posterity of Isaac rather than of Ishmael, the Posterity of Jacob rather than the Edomites; or in calling now the Gentiles, and, upon their Faith, owning them for his Peo∣ple, the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; and re∣jecting the Jews from these Advantages and Privileges because of their unbelief,) God forbid (that we should accuse God of  righteous dealing upon this account.) Ver. 15. For (to begin with the freedom which God reserveth to himself in shewing acts of Grace and Favour to an offending People, in this he only doth what) he saith to Moses (he would do, making this Decla∣ration to him, Exod. 33.19.) I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have com∣passion. , I will have mercy on wh I will have mercy.] It is here to be noted, that God made this Declaration after Israel had committed Idolatry in making the Golden Calf, and so had made themselves naked, i. e. devested of the Divine Presence and Perfe∣ction, or of a Covenant-Relation to him, in∣somuch that God sent this dreadful Message to them, I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee, Exod. 33.5. and said to Moses, Let me alone, that I may destroy them in a moment. And though God suffered himself to be prevailed upon by Mo∣ses to adopt them again for his People, yet he lets him know this was part of his Glory, to be gracious to whom he will be gracious, and to shew mercy to whom he will shew mercy, Exod. 33.19. If therefore upon the Infide∣lity of the Jews, he will call the Idolatrous Gentiles, and receive them to be his People, as he did the Jews again after their Idolatry, who can accuse him of Injustice upon that account? Ver. 16. So then (these Instances shew that) it is not of him that willeth, (for Abraham willed that Ishmael might live to be partaker of the Blessings promised to his Seed, when he said, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee, Gen. 17.18. And when he was grieved at the saying of Sarah, the Son of the Bond-woman shall not be Heir with my Son Isaac, Gen. 21.11.) nor of him that runneth, (for when Esau ran to fetch Venison for his Fa∣ther, that he might receive the Blessing, Gen. 27.5. God's Wisdom saw it fit to have it other∣wise,) but of God that sheweth mercy (that any one is chosen to be the Seed to which the Promise made to Abraham belongs, and so to be his Church and People.) , 'tis not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth.] i. e. You see this is not to be obtained by the most passionate wishes of a faithful Abraham, nor by the fervent desires of an Esau, Heb. 12.17. nor by the greatest Zeal we can employ in such courses as seem best to our own Wis∣dom, but we must own it to be a Blessing which depends meerly upon the Divine Good∣ness, and therefore must seek it according to his pleasure in such ways as he appoints, and not in those which seem to us most proper to obtain it, though then you have a zeal for God, and follow after the Law, that you may
obtain Righteousness, it is not to be wondred you obtain not the Blessing of Justification promised to the Seed of Abraham, because you seek it not by Faith in the Meshab, which is the only way in which God hath declared he will confer it. Some of the Fathers interpret these words thus:. Oecum. Chrysost. Hom. 12. in Hebr. p. 498. G. Nazianz. Orat. 31. It is not of him that wills, or runs only, but of God that sheweth mercy, and crowns the Work by his assistance, for otherwise, say they, it cannot be our Duty either to will, or run, provided we neither can by willing, or running do any thing to encline God to shew mercy; and why then doth God blame us for not willing? Mat. 23.27. John 5.40. and re∣quire us o to run that we may obtain? 1 Cor. 9.24. Heb. 12.1. And whereas St. Astin objects, that according to this Interpretation, it mght be said, it is n t of God that sheweth mercy only, but of n that wills, and rans.Orig. de Princip. l. 3. c. 1. Orgen,Chrysost. Ibid. Chrysstom, and Theoph. in xum. Theo∣pyct aswer, That this follows not because man's willing and running would not avail without th Dvine did to enable him to run, and his Grace and Mercy to accept his run∣ning; and therefore, according to the Custom of the Scripture, the Effect is to be ascribed to the chief Agent only; as, except the Lord build the house, their labour is but vain that build it, &c. Psal. 127.1. So Paul that plants, and Apollo that waters is nothing, but God that giveth the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. I la∣boured, yet not I, but the Grace of God, 1 Cor. 15.10. To proceed now to the other part of the Objection, the seeming Injustice, or severity of rejecting, and reserving them to wrath, and giving them up to an obdurate heart, who wil not acept of the way God hath ap∣pointed for their Justification, viz. that of Faith in Christ, out rather will continue in their Inidelity, this will be cleared by ano∣ther Instace, to wi that of Pharaoh, who had so often dned his heart, refusing to let Isral go. Ver. 17. Fr the Scripture saith (upon that account) to Phara, even for this cause have I raised thee up, (i. e. have made thee stand in th Pgue of Boils, and prolonged thy Lie for some rther time,) that I might (the more illustriously) shew my power in thee, and tat my Name might be delared throughout all the earth (by that conspicuous Judgment I will execute upon thee in the sight of all the Nations of the Earth, Josh. 2.10. 1 Sam. 4.8.) Ver. 18. Therefore (from these Instances and Scriptures we may learn that) he (God) hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and (that) whom he will he hardened, (for reserv for punishment.) , He hath mercy on whom he will have mer y, and whom he will he hardeneth.] That is, n it ap∣pears that God shews Mercy ac ording to his own wise Pleasure, and not as we think t, and that he gives Men up to the hardness of their own hearts, and so reserveth them to be Examples of his Illustrious Judgments accord∣ing to the same good Pleasure, and not ac∣cording to the time and measures that he would prescribe; shewing Mercy to you few, when you deserved to have n cut off for your Idolatry in making, and whipping the Golden Calf, and reassuming you to  his People, and reserving the Execution of his Wrath upon Phara, who had before deser∣ved it for the hardness of his Heart, till his Destruction would minister to the greater Il∣lustration of his Power and Justice upon stub∣born Sinners. Execrable is the Note of Estus, that God is here said to harden whom he will, Quod induratio cujuspim in prima sua origine, quae est prima derelictio, seu peccati permi, non aliam habet causam, quam Dei voluntatem: Because the first rise of any man's indrn, which is God's dreliction of him, hath n other cause than the Will of God. For as this is contrary to the known saying even of St. Au∣stin, Deus non deserit nisi desrentem, God deserts no Man who leaves not him first; so it makes God alone the cause of all mens hardening, since causa causae est causa cauti; for if this dereliction be the cause of indu∣ration, and that hath no other cause but the Will of God, it also makes all God's Exhor∣tations to Men not to harden their Hr, and his Reproofs and Punishments of them for so doing, Exhortations to what his Will is the like cause of their not doing, and Reproofs and Punishments of that which his Will caused them to do. I have raised thee up.] Heb.  I have made thee to stand, Exod. 9.16. or have preserved thee, , for this cause hast thou been kpt, so the Seventy, from falling by the Plague of Boils. So Janius and Tremellius, feci ut sperstes maneres. I have kept thee aliue, saith the ar∣gum of Ben. ziel. See the Chace, the Sy∣riack, the Arabick Versions to the same sense and the connexion of this with the former Verse rightly rendred, makes this sense neces∣sary; for the Fifteenth Verse cannot be ren∣dred in the Future Tense, as our Translation doth, Now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy Peple with Pestilence,
and thou shalt be cut off from the Earth, for Pharaoh and his People did dot die by the Pe∣stilence. It is therefore to be rendred as the Jews agius, Amama, & Cartwright, and Ains∣worth translate it: ForSee the Bishop of Ely on the Place. now I had sent out my hand, and I had smitten thee and thy People with the Pestilence, and thou hadst been cut off from the Earth, but in very deed for this cause I have made thee stand up. So the Targum of B. Uziel, Quum jàm miserim pla∣gam sortitudinis meae, aequum erat ut percu∣terem te, & populum tuum morte, & perde∣rem te è terra, verum profecto non ut bene∣faciam tibi, in vita conservavi te, sed ut vi∣dere faciam te robur meum, &c. Whence we may learn how alien from the Truth, and from the import of the words is that Exposi∣tion which saith, For this cause have I created thee, or raised thee to be King of Aegypt. Observe further, that God hardened Pha∣raoh's Heart not by any positive influx upon it, which made it necessary for him to continue obstinate. This Origen observes from those words, If thou refuse to let my People go, I will do so and so, that Pharaoh's heart was not so hardened, as to take away  all Power from him to let the People go, for this he doth at last when God's Hand was strong upon him, according to these words, Ch. 3.19. I am sure that the King of Aegypt will not let you go,  nisi per manum fortem, vulg , if not by a strong hand, Septuagint; nisi cum manu valida, Samarit. but by a strong hand, so the Bi∣shop of Bath and Wells. This sense the words will bear, saith Ainsworth, being rendred si, Exod. 4.23. Numb. 12.14. And this sense is plain and certain from the words following, And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Aegypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof, and after that he will let you go, Exod. 3.20. And again, Chap. 6.1. Then said the Lord to Moses, now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh, for with a strong hand shall he let them go. Hence God is al∣ways said to have brought them out of Aegypt  with a strong hand, Exod. 32.11. Deut. 5.15.6.21.7.8.9.26. Dan. 9.15. Nor can they who think otherwise, shew any way how, or in what sense Pharaoh can be so often said to have hardened his own Heart, if God himself had hardened his Heart be∣fore; or why God doth so oft command him to let his People go, Chap. 7.16. & 8.1, 20. & 9.1, 13. i. e. to do what he had rendred him unable to do. Or why Moses should say, Let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more, in not letting the People go, Chap. 8.29. Or why God did reprove him because he had re∣fused hitherto to let them go, Chap. 7.16.8.29.9.17.10.3. Or why he threatens Judgments to him if he refuse to let them go, Chap. 8.2, 21.9.2, 3, 14, 15. and execute them on him upon that refusal, since nem tenetur ad impossibilia, no Man is obliged to do what he cannot, much less what he can∣not do by vertue of a disability that God hath laid upon him; and no Man justly can be blamed, and much less punished for not doing what he is not obliged to do. Nor can God command any Man to do, what he him∣self by his own influx restrains him from do∣ing, even when he doth command it; for what he thus restrains him from he is not wil∣ling he should do, whereas what he Com∣mands he is willing should be done; and when he punisheth any one for not obeying his Command, he punisheth him for not do∣ing his Will. Now it is impossible that God at the same time, and in reference to the same Action, should be both willing, and not wil∣ling that it should be done. This will be farther evident from a consideration of all the places where the Heart of Pharaoh is aid to be hardened. As Chap. 7.13. And he hardened Pharaoh': heart. Heb.  and the heart of Phara was hardened. So the same words are ren∣dred by us, v. 22. and so here by Ainswort, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the Bishop o Ely, and all the Versions on this Verse; not is there any Person mentioned in the Verse besides Pharaoh to whom this Action can be ascribed, his Heart was therefore hardened at this time, not by God, but by the Arts of his Sorcerers, for the Magicians did so with their Inchantments, and Pharaoh's heart was har∣dened, v. 22. Chap. 8.15. We read thus, When Phara saw there was respite, he hardened his heart. Whence the Fathers truly observe, that , that the Heart of Pharaoh was hardened by God's Mercy, in ta¦king off his Hand from him: Thus upon the removal of the Flies, Pharaoh hardened his heart, v. 31, 32. And when he saw that the Rain, and the Hail, and the Thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants. And then imme∣diately follow these words: And the Lor said to Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, for ( although) I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, Chap. 10.1. So v. 20. The Lord then hardened Pharaoh's heart only by taking away the Locusts. And v. 2. the Lord hardened Pharaoh's Heart by taking away the Darkness, the three days assigned to it being ended, as Aben-Ezra observes on v. 2. none rose from his place during those three days, but post triduum, they being ended, Pharaoh called unto Moses, and hence we read not as at other times, that Pharaoh asked
for the removal of this Plague; and therefore when it is said, Chap. 9.12. That the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he heark∣ened not unto them, i. e. not to Moses and Aaron, we have reason to conclude he did that also by removing the Plague of the Boils, for had the Boils continued upon the Aegyp∣tians, there was no reason for calling for the succeeding Plague of Hail, nor could the Servants of Pharaoh, with their Boils upon them, have gone into the Field to House their Cattel, v. 20-11. We read also, Chap. 14. v. 8.17. that the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart to follow the Israelites; and of this we may give the same account, that he did this by causing the Israelites to encamp so as to give occasion to Pharaoh to say, They are en∣tangled in the Land, the Wilderness hath shut them in, v. 3. and by causing him to see the Israelites walk safely through the midst of the Sea. But I am not concerned for these Places, the hardening of Pharaoh then being not for sin (God having not commanded Pharaoh not to pursue after them, or follow them into the Red-Sea) but for Punishment. When therefore God saith, Chap. 4.21. I will harden the heart of Pharaoh, that he shall not let the People go; his meaning may be only this, I will so order matters, by removing the Plagues inflicted on him and his People, to mollifie him, and engage him to permit them to go, that he shall be hardened, till I come with my strong Hand, and slay his Son, even his First-born, v. 23. after which he did let them go, Chap. 12.31.33. From these two Observations it is easie to discern how appo∣site this Example is to the case of the Jewish Nation. For, 1. Did God harden Pharaoh by his Lenity in removing his Plagues and Judgments from him? The same God saith of the Jews in this Epistle, when he speaks thus unto them, Chap. 2.4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance; but after thy hardness, and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and reve∣lation of God's righteous Judgment. 2. If they Object, that if God would have cast them off from being his People, and have cut them off from any share in the Promises made to the Seed of Abraham, why did he it not before, when they had so oft deserved it for their Idolatries, from which they were now free? The Answer is from the Example of Pharaoh preserved alive when he had long deserved to be cut off, that he might fall at last more to the Illustration of God's Power, Justice, and Glory; and this is the thing hin∣ted, v. 22. as you will see in the Exposition of it. Ver. 19. Thou wilt say then (against this account of the Divine Dispensations towards the unbelieving Jews, if God hardeneth us because he will, (why doth he yet nd  (with us for our impenitence) r who hath (at any time) resisted his will? (How there∣fore is it in our power to avoid being hard∣ned, if it be his Will we should be so?) Ver. 20. Nay, but O Man, who art thou that replyest (thus) against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why hast thou made me thus? Ver. 21. Hath not the Petter power ever the Clay, of the same lump to me one Vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour? , hath not the Potter power over the Clay?] That is, there is no more cause from God's Dispensa∣tion in this case, in taking away the means of Grace from, and rejecting such an hardned People, and shewing his Favour unto others, who submit to his terms of Mercy, to make this Objection, than for the Clay of Jeremy, when it was marred and broken, Jer. 18.4.6. to complain that he took one part of it, and made it a Vessel of dishonour, and another part of it, and made it a Vessel of honour. That this Example of the Clay in the hands of the Potter, relates to God's dealing with sinners according to his pleasure, is evident not only from the application of it there to the impenitent, v. 7, 8. but also from the like Passage in Ecclesiasticus, where we are taught from this very Instance that the ways of God are , according to his good pleasure, because as the Clay is in the hands of the Potter, so is Man in the hands of him that made him, to render to them as liketh him best, , according to his righteous judgment, Ecclus. 33.13. Ver. 22. What (therefore) if God (being) willing to shew his wrath, and make his power (more illustriously) known, endured with much long-suffering (you refractory Jews, which were so long ago) the Vessels of his wrath fitted for destruction, (or for breaking, Psal. 31.13.) Ver. 23. And (what if God) that he might make known the riches of his Glory, (shewed mercy) on the Vessels of his mercy, whom he had before, (by working Faith in them) pre∣pared for his Glory. Ver. 24. Even us whom he hath called, (us I say) not only of the Jews (the Natural Seed of Abraham,) but also of the Gentiles. , what if God, &c.] i. e. What Injustice therefore is it in God to deal with you as he dealt with an hardened Pha∣raoh, you having as oft refused to hearken to his voice as Pharaoh did? Or what if he long hath, and still at present bears with such Ves∣sels of his Wrath fitted for Destruction, till in a more illustrious manner, and with more signal marks of his displeasure, for thus re∣jecting the Gospel, and the promised Messiah, he swallow up their Nation, their People,
their Temple, and their Holy City in one ge∣neral De rction? Is it not for the Glory of the Divine Power and Wisdom to reserve the reiectrs o the Meh sent to bless them, and the Persecutors of the Christian Faith, to be at  cut off with such a Remarkable Destruction, as shall render it visible to the World that God's Indignation is incensed a∣gainst them for this sin, and so shall give to Jew and Gentile a farther motive to believe in Jesus? And again, what if God is pleased, upon their impenitence and obduration, to shew the Riches of his glorious Goodness and Mercy upon those Jews and Gentiles whom he hath called to the Faith of Christ, and so hath fitted and prepared to be the Vessels of his Mercy? Hath he not a just Right to shew his Mercy to such Persons who have submitted to the terms upon which he hath promised Favour and Acceptance, and so to own them as the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, and so as his peculiar People? , whom he hath prepa∣red for his Glory.] Thus the Apostle discour∣sing of the Day of the Lord, which was coming to execute his dreadful Judgments on the Jews, saith thus, God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thess. 5.9. Ver. 25. (And first, as for the called Gen∣tiles, is not this the very thing foretold by their own Prophet Hosea, when he introduceth God thus speaking,) as he saith in Ofee, I will call them my People, which were not my People; and her beloved, which (then) was not be∣loved. Ver. 26. And it shall come to pass that in the place (and Nation) where (formerly) it was said unto them, Ye are not my People, there shall they be called (i. e. there shall arise a People which shall be called) the Children of the living God. , there shall they be called the Children of the living God.] It must be ac∣knowledged that in these words the Prophet primarily speaketh of the Restoration of the Jews exiled and cast off from being his Peo∣ple, but yet that these words may not only be accommodated, but even extended to the Gentiles, who were emphatically not his Peo∣ple and yet by Faith became the Seed of A∣braham, and the true Israelites, being the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, v. 6, 8. may be argued from the Phrase  in the Place or Nation where it was said, ye are not my People; and so the Jews themselves inter∣pret these words in the Gloss upon the Talmud, saying, They who were not of my People shall adhere to the Lord, and be to me for a People, Gloss. Talmud. in Tract. de Paschate ad Cap. 8, according to that of the Prophet Zeria. And many Nations shall adhere to the Lrd in that day, and shall be my People. Zech. 2.11. Ver. 27. (And whereas but a small rem of Israel have believed, and so but few of them are fitted to be Vessels of his Mercy. Is not this also the very thing foretold by their own Prophet) Esaias also (when he) crieth concerning Israel, Chap. 10 22, 23.) though the number of the Children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, (yet) a remnant (only of them) shall be saved, (i. e. shall be con∣verted to good, saithSee the consent of the Jews to this Interpretation. Pug. fid. Part. 3. dist. 3. Cap. 23. § 5. R. Saomen, and so continue to enjoy the Name and Title of his People.) Ver. 28. For (saith he) he will finish the work, and cut it short in Righteousness, because a short work will the Lord make upon the Earth. (i. e. the Land of Judaea.) , a short work.] i. e. Such a Consumption and Decision is by God de∣signed upon that multitude of evil doers in the Land of Israel, as shall cut them very short, and lop them off, so that they shall be left as a Tree, of which only the stump re∣maineth; they shall be reduced, saith R. Sal∣mon, to a small remnant, and a remnant of that Remnant only shall be converted. Ver. 29. And (this hath happened accord∣ing) as Esaias said before, Chap. 1.9. viz. that there was a time when the sins of that People were so highly provoking, that) ex∣cept the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a Seed, (except his exceeding Goodness had redeemed us in mercy, there were sins in us, saith the Chaldee Paraphrast, for which) we had been as Sodom, and been made like unto Gomorrah. Ver. 30. What shall we say then? (Gr. , what do we say then? i e. What is there∣fore the substance of what I have intended in this Discourse? it is even this,) that the Gen∣tiles, which followed not after Righteousness, (i. e. who before the coming of Christ were not sollicitous touching Justification before God, as having no Idea, and no notice of it, or call to it, and so as little thought of being preferred before Israel, as Isaac, being not born, of being preferred before Ishmael, and Jacob in the Womb, of being chosen to be the promised Seed before Esau) have (yet through God's Grace and Favour through Faith) attained to Righteousness, even the Righteousness which is of Faith, (and so are made God's Sons, and his peculiar People.) , what do we then say?] From this recapitulation of the whole Dispute of the Apostle in this Chapter and Declaration, that this was the design of it, to justifie God in this proceeding and dealing with them both, it is exceeding evident that it was not at all designed to determine any thing touching
God's absolute Decrees of dealing with Man∣kind in general thus or thus, as to their final and eternal state, but only to justifie his deal∣ings▪ as in his Providence he had actually done with the unbelieving Jews, rejecting them upon their stubborn Infidelity, and the hardness of their hearts; and with the be∣lieving Gentiles admitting them to be his Church and People, and the Spiritual Seed of Abraham upon their Faith, and Submission to the terms he had proposed for their Justifica∣tion and Acceptance with him. Ver. 31. But Israel (to whom the Promises were first made, and) which followed after the Law of Righteousness, (i. e. earnestly pur∣sued after Righteousness and Acceptance by the works of the Law) have not attained to the Law of Righteousness, (or to the Righte∣ousness which God accepteth.) Ver. 32. (And) wherefore (is it so) because (they sought not this Justification) by (that) Faith (which alone God prescribeth for that end) but as (if) it were (to be obtained) by the works of the Law, (by which no flesh can be justified, Chap. 3.20. And the reason why they sought it not by Faith in Christ is this,) because they stumbled at the stubling∣stone, (and so it happened to them.) Ver. 33. As it is written, behold I lay in Zion a stumbling-stone, and a Rock of offence, and whosoever believeth in him, shall not be ashamed. , for they stumbled, &c.] They sought not Justification by Faith in Christ, because whereas God had pointed out to them this way of Salvation, by saying, Behold, I lay in Zion a Corner-stone, elect and precious, and whosoever believeth in him, shall not he ashamed, Esa. 28.16. this Corner stone he came to them of Israel, according to the word of the same Prophet, Chap. 8.14.  stone  stumbling, and a rock of offence, they being f∣fended at him because of his Poverty, Humi∣lity, and outward meanness, and the Spirit∣ality of his Kingdom; and so they stumbled, and fell off from being God's People, and ex¦cluded themselves from the Blessings procured for, and offered to them by the Messias pro∣mised to their Forefathers. See 1 Pet. 2.6.7, 8. , say Hesychius and Phavorinus, is used  as ב in the Hebrew is, or as an Expletive. So Mat. 14.5.21.26. John 1.14. 2 Cor. 2.17. Philip. 2.7. 1 Pet. 1.19. See Naldius Concord. Parti. p. 376, 377. and is, as the Greek Commenta∣tars often note, , a Particle not of similitude, but of confirmation, and so may here be ren∣dred but verily, or plainly by the works of the Law, or but indeed by the works of the Law. , a stone of stumbling, &c.] The Jews say, the Son of David, i. e. the Messias, cometh not till the two Houses of the Fathers of Israel shall be taken away, to wit, the Head of the Captivity of Babylon, and the Prince who is in Israel, as it is said, He shall be a stone of stumbling, and a rock of ruine to the two Houses of Israel, and many of them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken. And the Chaldee Paraphrast upon the place saith thus, &c. , and if they will not obey or receive (him,) my word shall be to them for scandal, and ruine to the Princes of the two Houses of Israel. CHAP. X. Verse 1. BRethren, my hearts desire, and Prayer for Israel is, that they may be saved. , my Prayer.] That the Apostle speaks not in the preceding Chapter of the absolute, and peremptory rejection, and repro∣bation of Israel, is evident from this Prayer and vehement desire of the Apostle; for on supposition of such a Decree of Reprobation, this must not only be a vain Prayer, but also an opposing of his Will and  to the good pleasure of Almighty God revealed to him; for it is evident he prays here for all Israel, for them whose Zeal to God was not according to knowledge, and who were igno∣rant of God's Righteousness, v. 2, 3. Not for those only, as Esthius descants, whom God had predestinated to be saved by the Prayers of the Saints. Ver. 2. For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, (being very desirous to do what they conceive well-pleasing to him, and acceptable in his sight,) but (this Zeal is) not according to knowledge, (i. e. not joined with the knowledge of those things which would render them truly acceptable to him.) , a zeal for God.] Hence were some of them called Zealots, taking that Name , from those who were zealous for that which was good, saithDe Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 30. p. 986. Josephus. Ver. 3. For they being ignorant (through unbelief, 1 Tim. 1.13.) of God's Righteous∣ness, (i. e. of that way of Justification which alone renders us righteous and acceptable in the sight of God. See Note on Rom. 1.17. 2 Cor. 5.21.) and going about to establish their own Righteousness (which is of the Law,
Philip. 3.9. and so a Righteousness peculiar to them who are Jews) have not submitted themseves to (that Righteousness which is through Faith in Christ, and is) the Righte∣ousness of God. Ver. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness (to be imputed) to every one that believeth (in him, the Law being our School-Master to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by Faith, Gal. 3.25.) Ver. 5. (Which Righteousness by Faith can never be obtained by the works of the Law,) for Moses describeth the Righteousness of the Law (thus,) that the man that doth these things shall live by them, (so that this Righ∣teousness is plainly not of Faith, but Works.) , shall live by them.] A Pro∣sperous and happy Life in the Land of Canaan, asNon dixit in aeternum, sed tantummodo vivet in eâ. Orig. in locum. Origen interprets the words, Eternal Life being not the Promise of the Law, but of the Gospel; and if Eternal Life was ob∣scurely hinted as the Reward of their Obe∣dience to the Law of Moses, it related not to their Obedience to the Ceremonial, but to the Moral Law, of which our Saviour saith, If thou wilt enter into life (Eternal, v. 16.) keep the Commandments, Mat. 19.18. And this do, and thou shalt live, Luke 10.28. O∣bedience to which includes Faith in his Word and Promises: And so Faith in Christ, when once that is revealed as the Condition of our Justification, and the Obedience they yielded to it availed to their Salvation only through that New Covenant of Grace which pardoned the Infirmities of that Obedience. Ver. 6. But the Righteousness which is of Faith speaketh (so as that we may accomo∣date the words of Moses to it) on this wise, say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven, that is, to bring down Christ from above (to be a teacher of it to us?) Ver. 7. Or, who shall descend into the deep? that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead, (to give us the Salvation purchased by his Death.) , who shall descend into the deep?] The words, Deut. 30.13. are these, Who shall go over the Sea? That is, say the Targum of Jerusalem, and B. Uziel, the great Sea, or the deep Sea; and the Je∣rusalem Targum renders the words thus, Oh that there were one like Jonas the Prophet who would descend  into the depth of the great Sea. Now we know Jonas descend∣ing into the Deep, was a Type of Christ, Mat. 12.40. Descending into the deep of the Earth, Psal. 71.20. And being brought again, saith the Seventy, , from the Abysses of the Earth; and this might give occasion to the Apostle to allude to this Traditional In∣terpretation, or Paraphrase of the words of Moses. Note also that the Apostle says not to bring Christ ab inferis, as Esthius hee doth, but only to bring him  from the de, this Place therefore concerns not Christ's de¦scent into Hell, in the sense of Esthius. Ver. 8. But what saith it? the Word is n thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart that is, the word of Faith which we preach. , nigh thee.] It is neither far from any man's hearing, for we Preach it every where, nor far from his Understanding, for in Preaching it we use great plainness of speech, 2 Cor. 3.12. It is in thy Mouth to profess and in thy Heart to believe it, and thus we Preach. Ver. 9. That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thy heart, that God hath raised him from the dead thou shalt be saved. , if thou shalt confess, &c.] Observe here, 1. That Justification is here expresly ascri∣bed to Faith, and that not as including Works, but only as being that Principle, which, were it cordial and sincere, will certainly produce them: I say, not as including all those Works which by the Gospel are required to Salva∣tion, for then the Righteousness of Faith must be described as is the Righteousness of the Law, viz. that the man who doth these things, shall live in them, which is contrary to the words of the Apostle, v. 5, 6. See the Pre∣face to the Epistle to the Galatians. 2. Observe, That the Faith to which Justi∣fication and Salvation is ascribed, is not here as elsewhere said to be Faith in his Blood, but a belief that God hath raised up Jesus from the dead. So St. Paul having discoursed of the Faith of Abraham, which was imputed to him for Righteousness, saith, This was n written for his sake alone, that it was impu∣ted to him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in him that raise up Jesus our Lord from the dead, Rom. 4.23, 24. Thus are we said to be risen with Christ through the Faith of the operation of God, w hath raised him from the dead, Coloss. 2.12. And in St. Peter the Christian is said to be∣lieve through Christ in God, who raised hi from the dead, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. Now this belief in God as raising our Lord Jesus from the Dead is therefore represented as Faith unto Salva∣tion, because it ministreth to us a full Assu∣rance of Salvation by Christ, and of our Re∣surrection also; for if we believe that Jesus Christ died, and rose again, even so them  that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, 1 Thess. 4.14. Knowing that he that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall also raise up us by Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.13, 14. And this belief of an happ
Resurrection to Eternal Life is a sufficient mo∣tive to be stedfast, immoveable, always abound∣ing in the fear of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. And where it hath not these Effects upon us, it is not in the Scripture sense duly believed and attended to. Note 3ly, That when the Apostle saith, If thou doest thus confess and believe, thou shalt be saved, we need not understand this of actual and compleat Salvation to be imparted at the Day of Judgment, but that this Faith, and this Confession will put us into the way of Salvation, and give us a Right to it, whilst we continue to act suitably to this Faith, which I have shewn to be the frequent import of the word Salvation, and Saved, when Salva∣tion is ascribed to Faith and Grace. See the Notes on Ephes. 2.8. Titus 3.5. Ver. 10. For with the heart man believeth unto Righteousness, (Gr. to Justification) and with the mouth confession is made (of that Faith) unto Salvation. , with the mouth con∣fession is made to Salvation.] For in those Times of Persecution for the sake of Christ, he that continued, under those fiery Tryals, to hold fast his Profession, could do it only through that lively Faith, and that sincere Affection to him above all Worldly Interests, which he hath promised to Reward with Life Eternal. Ver. 11. For the Scripture saith, whosoever believeth on him, shall not be ashamed (of his hope of Salvation by him, Rom. 5.5.) And Ver. 12. (It rightly saith whosoever) for there is no difference (as to the way of Ju∣stification and Salvation) between the Jew and the Greek, for the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him (for Salva∣tion.) Ver. 13. For (as the Prophet Joel saith, Chap. 2.32.) whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. , shall call upon the Name of the Lord.] The word in the O∣riginal is Jehovah, whence it is certain that the Prophet speaks these words of the true and only God, and yet it is as certain that the Apostle here ascribes them to our Lord Je∣sus Christ, both from the following words, How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? For the Apostle in this whole Chapter discourseth of Faith in Christ, and from the words forgoing, of which these are a Proof, and to which they are connected with the Particle , for those words, whosoever be∣lieveth in him, shall not be ashamed, are spoken by the Prophet Isaiah of Jesus Christ the Corner-stone, Isa. 28.16. And so they are in∣terpreted by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7. And in the Prophet Joel these words follow, , and the evange∣lized, whom the Lord shall call, shall be saved. Here then we have two Arguments for the Divinity of Christ. (1.) That what is spo∣ken of Jehovah, is ascribed to him. (2.) That he is made the Object of our Religious Invo∣cation. See Note on 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. Ver. 14. (Now this calling upon him sup∣poses God's intention that the Gentiles as well as Jews should hear, in order to their belie∣ving, for did they not believe,) How then shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? (Did they not hear,) and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And (this hearing supposeth some Preacher was to be sent unto the Gentiles, for) how shall they hear without a Preacher? Ver. 15. And (this Preacher must have a Commission from God, for) how shall they Preach unless they be sent? (now certainly we have been sent to you Jews, Preaching Peace to you by Jesus Christ, Acts 10.36.) as it is written (Isa. 52.7, 8.) how beautiful (upon the Mountains) are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things, (that say unto Zion, thy God reigneth, or as the Chaldee, the Kingdom of thy God is revealed.) , how beautiful, &c.] The Midrash Shir Hasschirim upon those words of Cant. 2.12. The voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land, saith thus, This is the voice of the King Messiah, crying out, and saying, how beauti∣ful, &c. Ver. 16. But (if the Apostles were sent to the Jews, how is it that) they have not all obeyed the Gospel? (I answer, this incredulity of the Jews is only that which was foretold by their own Prophets) for (so) Isaiah saith (of them, Chap. 53.1.) Lord, who hath be∣lieved our report? (.) Ver. 17. So then (these Testimonies shew that) Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by (the Preaching of) the Word of God. Ver. 18. But (Gr. moreover) I say (of the Gentiles,) have they not heard, (that of the Psalmist being true of us the Preachers of the Gospel) their sound went into all the Earth, and their words into the ends of the World, (Rom. 1.8. Col. 1.6, 23.) , their voice.] These words being spoken literally of the Preaching of the Heavens to the Gentiles, touching the Power, Wisdom, and the Goodness of God; and the Psalmist speaking immediately after of God's teaching his People by the Law, as a more glorious discovery of his Will to the Jews, the Apostle very appositely accomodates these words to the Revelation of his Power, Wis∣dom, Goodness, and Mercy in the Gospel to the Heathens. Ver. 19. But (yea, or also) I say, did not Israel know (of the Preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, and of their own Infidelity in rejecting it? this surely they might know from their own Scriptures, for) first, Moses saith, I will provoke you (refusing to believe)
to jealousie by them that are (yet) no People (of God,) and by a foolish Nation I will an∣ger you. , but.] That  signifies yea, see our Translation rendring it so five times, 2 Cor. 7.11. John 16.2. That it signifies quin etiam, quin immo, see Naldius and Luke 12.7. 1 Cor. 3.2.12.22. , by them that are no People.] That this is the Description of the Heathens, see Note on 1 Cor. 1.28. who are also stiled not only by the Jews, but by the Scriptures whilst Idolaters, a foolish People, Jer. 10.8. Rom. 1.21, 22. Titus 3.3. Ver. 20. But Isaias is very bold (in his ex∣pression) and saith (of the Gentiles,) I was found of them that (formerly) sought me n I was made manifest to them that asked not f∣ter me. Ver. 21. But to Israel (foretelling their In∣fidelity) he saith, all day long have I stretche forth my hands to a disobedient and gainsayin People. , all the day long.] These words are cited from Isa. 65.1, 2. and Aben-Ezra informs us thatVoisin de lege div. p. 594. R. Moses Hacohe said, the first Verse is to be understood of the Nations of the World, as if it had been said, I am found of the Nations which are not called by my Name, but to my People have I stretched out my hand: And so the Apostle interprets, and applies the words here. CHAP. XI. Verse 1. I Say then (that the generality of the Jews are hardened) and cast off, but what then?) hath God cast away his People (utterly, and without exception?) God forbid (we should so think,) for I also am an Israelite, of the Seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Benjamin, (and yet chosen to be an Apostle of Christ.) Ver. 2. God (therefore) hath not (thus) cast away his People whom he foreknew, (and to represent this in a like case well known to you) wot you not what the Scripture saith of Elias (, in the History of Elias) how he (in it) maketh intercession to God against (the King and People of) Israel, saying, Whom he foreknew, .] Concern∣ing the People of Israel, Moses speaks thus; Thou art an Holy People to the Lord thy God, the Lord thy God  hath chosen thee to be a special People to himself above (or be∣fore) all People that are upon the face of the Earth, Deut. 7.6.10.15. Now to be chosen, and to be known of God, are the same thing in Scripture, and therefore the Phrase is else∣where varied thus; You only have I known  before all the Families of the Earth, Amos 3.2. . So Numb. 16.5. To morrow  and the Lord will know who are his, and who is holy, even him whom he hath chosen. Seventy, , and v. 7. the man whom the Lord doth chuse, he shall be holy. And those words of Hosea, Judah yet ruleth with the Lord, and is faith∣ful with his Saints, Chap. 11.12. are by the Septuagint thus rendred, , so that the People whom he foreknew, may be here only a Periphrasis of the Jewish Nation, which God had chosen before all other Nations of the World, and therefore would not utterly cast off, because his gifts and callings are without repentance, v. 29. Or it may signifie those of them who believed in Christ, and so were such as he had purposed to save, or the Election according to Grace, v. 5, 7. which sense this Phrase bears, Rom. 8.29. 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. He maketh intercession to God against Israel, .] , is to intercede, or be an Advocate for a Per∣son, and he that doth so, is called , and this is the Office of our Blessed Lord, who ever lives to make intercession for us; but  is to accuse, or charge a Person with a Crime, and so to intercede a∣gainst him. So 1 Maccab. 8.32. If the Jews complain against thee, , e will do them Justice. And when wicked Men came to King Alexander to complain against Jonathan, the King commanded a Proclama∣tion to be made, , that no Man shll complain against him about any matters, 1 Maccab. 10.61, 63. And again, Chap. 11.25. some wicked Men complained against him, . So here , is to complain against Israel thus: Ver. 3. Lo, they have killed thy Prophets, and digged down thine Altars, and I am left alone (of all thy Prophets) and they seek my life. , thy Altars.] Not those which God approved of after the building of the Temple, they being then obliged to offer all their Sacrifices at the place which God had chosen to put his Name there, Deut. 12.5, . but those which had before been used by the Patriarchs and Prophets for the Service of God, as that of Samuel in Ramah, and in Mi∣pah, 1 Sam. 7.9.9.13. in Gilgal, Chap. 11.16. at Bethlehem, Chap. 16.2, 4. and the Altar
of the Lord at Carmel, 1 Kings 18.30. on which the pious People of the Ten Tribes sacrificed when they were not permitted to go up to Jerusalem, that Law, saith Kimchi, then ceasing as to them. Ver. 4. But what saith the answer of God to him? (in that History it speaks thus,) I have reserved to my self seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to Baal. To Baal, .] That is, to the Image of Baal. So Hos. 2.8. I gave her the Gold and Silver which she prepared for Baal, Gr. . But she pre∣pared this Gold and Silver for the Image of Baal, she made Idols of them, saith the Tar∣gum. So Tobit 1.5. , they sacrificed to the Heiser Baal, Jer. 2.28. accrding to the number of their streets in Je∣rusalem,  have they sacrificed to the Image of Baal, for sure they had not as many Baalims as they had Streets, and therefore where the Septuagint read , there the Chaldee adds Idols, or Images. I will blot out the names of Baal, ; reli∣quias Idolorum Baal, Targum. See Hos. 13.1. This I prefer before that Notion of the learned Selden, that Baal was , Male and Female. Ver. 5. Even so then (is it) at this present time also, (for even now) there is a remnant according to the Election of Grace. Ver. 6. And if (they who are chosen in Christ, Eph. 1.4. to be God's Church and People, are put into this state) by Grace, (be∣ing justified freely by his Grace, Rom. 3.24.) then it is no more of (the) works (of the Law that they are thus justified and accepted by him,) otherwise Grace is no more Grace, (for what need is there of Grace, where men have continued in all things written in the Law to do them? Moses having said, the man that doth these things shall live by them, Rom. 10.5.) but (on the other hand) if it be of works (that we are justified and accepted) then it is no more (of) Grace, otherwise work is no more work, (for Grace comes in only to supply the defect of Works, that is, to pro∣cure pardon for the non-performance of them according to the tenor of the Law.) Ver. 7. What then (must be said in this case but this, viz. that the whole Nation of) Israel hath not obtained that (Righteousness, or Justification, Rom. 9.30, 31.) which it seek∣eth for, but the Election (the chosen Genera∣tion of Believers, 1 Pet. 2.9.) hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded. The Election of Grace.] See Note on v. 28. Ver. 8. (And this blindness hath happened to them) according as it is written, God hath given them a spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, unto this day. Ver. 9. And (as) David saith, let their Table be (or their Table shall be) made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling  and a recompence unto them (of their evil deeds.) Ver. 10. Let their eyes be, (or their eyes shall be) darkened, that they may not see, and ever (shalt thou) how down their hath. God hath given them a spirit of slumber , &c.] The Hebrew  and the Greek , is often used to signifie a permission of that which we can hinder; as Gen. 31.7. , God, saith Jacob, permitted not Laan to hurt me. Deut. 18.14. , the Lord thy God hath not suf∣fered thee to do so. See also Judges 15.1. Acts 2.27.13.35. So again, 1 Kings 22.22, 23. The Lord hath put , a lying spirit in the mouth of all thy Prophets; i. e. he hath permitted him freely to go forth, and to deceive them, v. 22. Esh. 9.13. If it please the King, , let it be granted to the Jews to do so to morrow also. Of him that sat upon the Red Horse it is said, that , it was given him to take peace from the Earth, Rev. 6.4. And Chap. 9.3, 5. of the Beast it is said , there was given to him a mouth to speak great things, and blas∣phemies, and it was given him to make War with the Saints, and overcome them. See Hos. 13.11. Joel 2.17, 19. Rev. 6.8.9.14, 15. See the Note on Chap. 1.24, 26. And in this sense God is here said to have given the Jews a spirit of slumber, by permitting them to lie under those Prejudices against the true Messiah, which their Traditions concerning him, and the Doctrine and Authority of the Scribes and Pharisees had wrought within them. As also by delivering the things be∣longing to Christ's Kingdom obscurely to them, and in Parables, because they would not receive them when more plainly taught, Mat. 13.13. And by taking the Kingdom of God from them, and giving it to a Nation that would bring forth the fruits of it, be∣cause they contradicted and blasphemed the Doctrine of that Kingdom, and so caused the Apostles to turn from them to the Gentiles, Mat. 23.43. Acts 13.45, 46. And by refusing to walk in the light whilst they enjoyed it, they made it just that darkness should thus come upon them, or that they should have Eyes, and see not, Ears, and hear not; which is a mode of speaking used frequently in the Old Testament, and in Philo the Jew, and others, to represent Men who had contracted such Prejudices against God's Word, and such vi∣tious Habits, as made them not to discern, or to give ear to the voice of God, or Reason calling them to Reformation and Amendment. So God speaks by his Prophet Isaiah, Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, seeing many things, but thou observest not, opening the ears, but he heareth not, Isa. 42.18, 19, 20. And by the Prophet Jeremiah, Hear now this, O flish, People, and without understanding, which have
eyes, and see not, which have ears, and hear not, Jer. 5.21. By the Prophet Ezekiel, say∣ing, They have eyes to see, and see not; and ears to hear, and hear not, for they are a re∣bellious house, Ezek. 12.2. So Christ speaks to his own Disciples, Having eyes, do you not see? Mark 8.18. So Philo often saith of Men addicted to their sensual Pleasures, and pursuing them against the dictates of their Mind, ThatAlleg. leg. l. 2. p. 72. D. , this he saith, , of Persons satiated with Pleasure, or drunk with the love of Wine.Alleg. l. 3. p. 850. D. This, saith he, happens , when we indulge to Gluttony or Drunkenness, andl. de Joseph. p. 424. G. , in the Phantasms of our Dreams. Thus of those Heathens who worshipped the works of their own Hands,Dial. cum Tryph. p. 295. B. Justin Martyr saith, That , having eyes, they saw not, and having hearts, they did not understand. , their Table shall be, and their Eyes shall be.] They who are skilled in the He∣brew Tongue, know that these words are as capable of the Future, as the Imperative Mood and Tense; they are rendred in the Future by Arias Montanus, and the Seventy Interpreters sometime render them in the Imperative, as Psal. 109.6-15. and sometimes in the Fu∣ture, as v. 17. As he loved cursing, so let it come upon him, , as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him, , and v. 28. let them curse, but bless thou, . , &c. ever bow down their backs.] That is, let them be in Slavery and Bondage; the contrary, going upright, signi∣fying their freedom from Aegyptian Thraldom, by taking the Yoke of Bondage from them, which made them stoop under it. So Levit. 26.13. I have broken the bonds of your Yoke, and made you go upright. So the Midrash Tillim upon these words of the Psalmist, Psal. 146.8. the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down, saith, These are the Israelites carried Captive from their own Land, for since they were ba∣nished from Jerusalem, they have not been able to stand upright, but have bowed down their backs before their Enemies, who go over them. Having thus answered the first Question, he proceeds to enquire whether they of them who thus stumbled, have fallen so as that they shall never be recovered. Ver. 11. I say then (or moreover of those of the Jewish Nation which are thus blinded,) have they (so) stumbled, that they should (ir∣recoverably) fall? God forbid (we should so think of them) but (so hath it happened through the wise Counsel of God, that) through their fall Salvation is come unto the Gentiles, (whom God hath now chosen to be his Peo∣ple,) for to provoke them to jealousie, (or to an emulation of their Faith, that they also may be saved.) Ver. 12. Now ( and) if the fall of them (happened thus to) be the riches of the (Gentile) World, and the diminishing of them the riches (and increase) of the Gentiles, how much more (shall) their fulness (be the in∣crease of them?) , their fulness.] As  signifies the whole tract of time ap∣pointed for such an event, Gal. 4.4. Eph. 1.10. , the whole contents of the Earth, 1 Cor. 10.26, 28. and  is the full Perfection of the Deity, Col. 2.9. and , is the perfection, or the fulness of Grace and Wisdom with which he fills his Members, Eph. 4.13. and that , from that fulness of the Spi∣rit which is in him, John 1.16. and , is the same fulness derived from God, Eph. 3.19. So here , is the whole Heathen World, the time when God would shew Mercy to all, v. 25.32. and that , the fulness of the Jews, is the coming in of all Israel, v. 26. And so St. Paul himself all along interprets it, stiling it, v. 15. , the receiving of them into Grace and Favour by God, the engroffing them who were broken off, as were all the unbe∣lieving Jews, into their own Olive, v. 23, 24 the turning away iniquity from Jacob, v. 26. Ver. 13. (Of you Gentiles, I say,) for I speak (this) to you Gentiles, in as much as I am an Apostle of the Gentiles, (and by thus speaking) I magnifie my Office, (as declaring it to reach to the whole Body of the Gentiles, and to have been thus efficacious among them, Rom. 15.18, 19. Ver. 14. (And I speak of your being cho∣sen thus to be God's People,) if by any means I may provoke to (an) emulation (of their Faith) them which are my flesh, and (so) might (be a means to) save some of them. , if by any means I may provoke them, &c.] This seems to be said in allusion to those words of God, Deut. 32.21. They have moved me to jealousie with that which is not God, , and I will move them to jealousie with those that are not a People, v. 12. that seeing them who before were not the People of God, now chosen to be his People, and invested with all the Privileges which formerly be∣longed to them, viz. of being his Church, among whom he dwells, and to whom he gives his Spirit, his new Law, his Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, they might be indu∣ced to believe, and so might still share in all these Blessings.
Ver. 15. (And indeed their Salvation is de∣sirable, not only for their own, but for your sakes,) for if the casting away of them be (an occasion of) the reconciling of the World, what shall the receiving them (again into favour) be (to the Gentiles,) but (even as) life, (or a Resurrection) from the dead? Ver. 16. (Nor are you to imagine this is an improbable, and even desperate Supposition.) For if the (Patriarchs, who were the) first fruits (of them) be (were) holy, (called and separated to the service of God from all the People of the Earth,) the lump (of the whole Nation) is also (in God's designation) holy; and if the root (of them, viz. Abra∣ham) be (was) holy (and beloved of God,) so are the branches (also beloved still of God for the Father's sake, and so will be once more, in his good time, admitted to his Fa∣vour.) , if the first-fruits of them were holy.] It is generally known that the word Holy, when applyed to Persons, Fami∣lies, Churches, and Nations, signifies their be∣ing called, consecrated, and separated from the World, unto God's Service; in which sense in the Old Testament it is frequently applied to the Priests, Nu. 16.5. Psal. 106.16. to the Levites, Numb. 3.13.8.14, 15, 16, 17. to the whole Jewish Nation, Exod. 22.31.19.6. Deut. 7.6.14.2, 21.28.9. Isa. 62.12. Dan. 8.24.12.7. Hence then the Argument runs thus: If God so loved Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as to engage his Word that he would be their God, and the God of their Seed for ever, Gen. 17.7. and by thus entring into Covenant with them, hallowed to himself all their Posterity, even as the first-fruits of their dough, made an Offering, hallowed the whole lump, Numb. 15.20. then will he, in his good time, be so mindful of them, as to bring them again into his Covenant, so that they shall be his People, and he will be their God, for as touching that Election, they are still be∣loved for the Father's sake: If this Argu∣ment runs only upon the Supposition that they do believe, it saith that only which is as true of all Gentiles; it therefore seems to be an Argument that they will be received into fa∣vour, and therefore will believe. Ver. 17. And if (it hath so happened that) some of the branches (through infidelity) be broken off, and thou (Gentile) being a wild Olive-tree (or branch) wert graffed in among them, and with them (who believe) partakest (of the Privileges) of the Root, and the fat∣ness of the Olive-tree, (into which thou art graffed,) Ver. 18. Boast not against the branches (now cut off, as if they were utterly rejected from God's care and favour,) but if thou beastest, (consider) thou bearest not the Root, but the Root thee, (the Promises being not made to thee, but to Abraham their Root, and if thou becomest partaker of them only by being the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, by imitation of his Faith, how much more shall they who are by lineal descent the Seed of Abraham, and so the primary and direct Heirs of the Promise, Acts 3.25.12.26. in due time be graffed into their own Root? v. 24.) Ver. 19. Thou wilt say then, the (natural) branches were broken off (for their Infidelity) that I might be graffed in (i. e. received as God's People in their stead.) Ver. 20. Well, because of unbelief they  broken off, (i. e. rejected from being his Church and People, v. 15.) and thou standest, (Gr. hast stood) by Faith, be not high-minded, vaunt not thy self over them, v. 18, 25.) but fea (lest this should also be thy case.) Ver. 21. For if God spared not the natural branches, (thou hast cause to fear) lest he also spare not thee. Ver. 22. Behold therefore (in this dispen∣sation) the goodness and severity of God; on them which fell, severity, (in taking the King∣dom of God away from them, Mat. 21.43.) but to thee, goodness, (in admitting thee to be his Church and People, which goodness will be still shewed to thee) if thou continue in (or worthy of) his goodness, otherwise thou also shalt be cut off (for thy infidelity and dis∣obedience.) Ver. 23. And (as thou standest by Faith, so) they, if they abide not in unbelief, shall be graffed in, for God is able to (work in them that Faith which will) graff them in. , for God is able, &c.] From which Power we may reasonably conclude his Will to do so, for so the Apostle Argus, Chap. 14.4. He shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. 2 Cor. 9. 6, 8. He that soweth liberally, shall reap liberally, for God is able to make all Grace abound toward you. See Note on Chap. 14.4. Ver. 24. (And that he will thus graff them in we have just cause to think,) for if thou wert cut off (Gr. off from) the Olive-tree which is wild by nature, and wert graffed, con∣trary to nature, into a good Olive-tree, how much more shall these, which be natural branches, (though now cut off) be graffed (again) into their own Olive-tree? Note, That there should be a fulness of the fallen Jews, and a receiving them again into favour, whom God had now cast off, the Apostle plainly doth suppose, v. 12, 15. and now he sets himself to the Proof of it by an Argument à minori ad majus, viz. If they who had no such Relation to Abraham, and the Blessings promised to him, as the Jews had, were yet partakers of the Blessings pro∣mised to Abraham the Root of that Nation, how much more shall this Favour, in God's due time, be granted to them who are Chil∣dren of the stock of Abraham?
Ver. 25. (And this I now declare,) for I would not, Brethren, that you should be igno∣rant of this Mystery (of the intended calling of the now rejected Jews) lest you should be wise in your own conceits, (boasting over them, v. 18. as being Men of greater Wis∣dom, and more highly favoured of God,) that blindness is happened in part to Israel, (i. e. as to the greatest part of them, a rem∣nant only being now brought into the Faith, v. 5, 7. Chap. 9.27.) till the (time of) the fulness (or more compleat Conversion) of the Gentiles is come in. , this Mystery, &c.] See the confirmation of this Exposition in the follow∣ing Discourse. Ver. 26. And so all (the Nation of) Israel shall be saved, (i. e. called, and put into a state of Salvation, 1 Tim. 1.9.) as it is writ∣ten, (Isa. 59.20.) there shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn away un∣godliness from Jacob. Ver. 27. And again, he (God by Isaiah) saith, this is my Covenant with them, (Isa. 59.21.) when I shall take away their sins, (Chap. 27.9.) Hence the Second Argument for a General Conversion of the Jews runs thus: If that part of the Jews to which blindness hath hap∣pened, shall be delivered from that heavy Judgment, if there shall come to them out of Zion a deliverer to turn away their Iniquity, if God will accomplish his Covenant here∣after with them by taking away their sins, then they, who are now thus blinded, shall be converted to the Christian Faith. Where note, 1. That this Promise is made to that part of the Jews to which blindness had happened, v. 15. and so the Promise of Salvation to this Israel, cannot be interpreted of all the true Children of Abraham, Jews and Gentiles both. 2. It saith, That God will take away their sins, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob. Now if this signifie that God will send a Deliverer out of Zion to procure the Pardon of this Peoples sins, since Pardon only can be given to them through Faith in Christ, this Deliverer must be that Jesus who saves his People from their sins; if it import that God would take away the Punishment of their Iniquity, that being the blindness, and spiri∣tual slumber which was then, and is still upon them, the removal of it must signifie their Conversion, this blindness being only then to be taken away, when they shall turn to the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 16. Ver. 28. As concerning the Gospel (preached to them first, and, upon their rejection of it, to the Gentiles, Acts 13.45, 47.) they are (now) Enemies to it, (and by opposing it to God, and Christ) for your sakes, (being prejudiced against it because you are received to the Blessings of it, and that without Circumci∣sion, or being joyned to them, Acts 17.13 22.21, 22. 1 Thess. 2.16.) but as touching the Election (of that Nation to be an Holy Pe∣ple to himself,) they are (thus) beloved for the Father's sake. As touching the Election, . Here is in this Chapter mention of a double Election, viz. the , Election of Grace, v. 5. the Gospel-Election of Persons and Nations to be his Church and People which being purely on the account of th Faith which is the Gift of God, without con¦sideration of any other worthiness that w had, or any works that we had done, is stiled the Election of Grace; and thus a Remn only of the Jews were chosen, v. 7. for man of them were called by the Preaching of the Gospel to the Faith, it being preached to the first, Acts 13.45. but few of them were chosen to be Members of the Church of Christ, be¦cause few of them believed. And secondly there is an Election , to be God's People for their Fathers sake, in which sense the whole Nation of the Jews are styled the Elect; as in these words, Because he loved thy Fathers, viz. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Deut. 37.  therefore he chose you their seed after then, and brought you out of Aegypt by his mighty power, where it is evident that all that we brought out of Aegypt, were the Elect  chosen Seed. So Deut. 7.6, 7, 8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor chuse you , he did not fore-elect you, be∣cause you were more in number than any Peo∣ple, but because the Lord loved you, and be∣cause he would keep the Oath which he h sworn to your Fathers, hath he brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you  of the house of bondage. Where again evi∣dent it is, (1.) That their being chosen to be God's peculiar People before other Nations is their Election. And (2.) That all wh were brought out of Aegypt were thus bel∣ved, and thus chosen. And again, Chap. 1 14, 15. The Lord had a delight to thy Fathers to love them, , therefore he elected you their se after them above all People; circumcise there¦fore the foreskin of your heart, and be no m stiff-necked. Where again evident it is th the whole Seed of Abraham by Isaac, ever the stiff-necked of them, were the beloved, and the Elect of God; it being therefore no upon account of their Righteousness, Deut. . 5. but for the love he had to, and the Pro¦mises he made to their Fathers, that he  loved, and chose them for his People, and his love to these Fore-fathers being still the same, and his Promise to them being ths that he would be for ever a God to them, are their Seed after them, Gen. 17.7. He m have still that kind affection and regard:
them, which will engage him to chuse them again for his peculiar People, notwithstanding their present blindness; and all Israel being thus elected for the Father's sake, this calling must belong to them all. Ver 29. For (though they have rendred themselves unworthy of his favour, yet) the gifts and calling of God are without Repen∣tance. , for the gifts, &c.] The Par∣ticle for, shews that these words relate to what was said in the former Verse, viz. They are beloved for the Father's sake, to whom God gave this  this everlasting Covenant, to be the God of their Seed after them, Gen. 17.7. Now this Covenant made with the Fathers being absolute, and the cal∣ling of their Seed to be his peculiar People, being the effect of it, God will not repent for ever of his kindness to them; hence he en∣gageth to save them with an everlasting Sal∣vation, Isa. 45.17. with everlasting kindness to have mercy on them, Chap. 54.8.56.5.60.19, 20.61.7. and saith, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. If then God will not repent for ever of his Covenant made with their Fore-fathers, to be the God of their Seed after them for ever, or that he chose Jacob for himself, and Israel for his heritage, Psal. 135.4. then will he certainly restore them to that Privilege, and happy state; but God will not thus repent, for the gifts and callings of God are without repentance. Ergo, Ver. 30. (Nor will their present infidelity and disobedience be any obstacle to this Con∣version.) For as ye (Gentiles) in times past have not believed God, (Gr. were disobedient to God,) yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief, (God having received you Gen∣tiles to be his People because of their Infide∣lity.) Ver. 31. Even so have they also now not be∣lieved, (Gr. not obeyed,) that through your mercy, they also may obtain mercy. That through your mercy, Gr. .] i. e. Which unbelief hath happened not to your rejection, as it did t them, but to your mercy, that they also may obtain mercy together with you and you with them, the fulness of the Gentiles coming in with their Conversion. This Argument for calling the Jews runs thus: If God hath called the Gentiles to hi Grace after a long Idolatry and Infidelity, though they were not before ever admitted to those Privileges the Jews enjoyed, nor had God promised to be their God for ever, much more will he recall his chosen People from their In∣fidelity. Ver. 32. For God hath concluded all (h th Jew and Gentile,) in unbelief, that (at lt) he might have mercy upon all. Esthius's Note upon these three Verses is this, that the Apostle doth without Contro∣versie in these words speak of Israel acc rd¦ing to the flesh, and therefore in the preceding words must be supposed to speak of the same Israel; so that hence the Tradition of the Church concerning the Calling of the Jews, towards the end of the World is established. Ver. 33. Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of G d! (by which he is thus able to convert all things to the honour and glory of his Name, and make his severest Judgments to conclude at last in Mercy.) How unsearchable are his Judgments (to any humane understanding,) and his ways past finding out (by any wit of Man.) Ver. 34. For who hath (through his own Wisdom, without Revelation) known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been his Coun∣sellor (in thus ordering matters relating to Jew, or Gentile?) Ver. 35. Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again, (i. e. who hath laid any Obligations on him to re∣ward him? Surely no Man.) Ver. 36. For of him (as the Donor,) and through him (as the Director, and providen∣tial Orderer,) and to him (as the end) are all things, to whom be Glory for ever. Amen.
APPENDIX. CONTAINING A DISCOURSE OF THE Calling of the JEWS TO THE CHRISTIAN FAITH. TO strengthen the Arguments which I have offered from this Chapter for the Conversion of the Jewish Nation to the Christian Faith, let it be noted, 1. That this hath been the constant Doctrine of the Church of Christ, owned by the Greek and Latin Fathers, and by all Commentators I have met with on this Place. Among the Greek Fathers, by, in v. 11. St. Chrysostom, whose words are these: When the fulness of the Gen∣tiles is come in, then all Israel shall be saved, at the time of Christ's second coming, and the Consummation of all things. After the Gen∣tiles have received the Salutary Faith, they also shall receive the Faith, saith. in v. 25. Theodoret, when the great Elias shall come, and Preach it to them.. Apud Oecumen. in v. 25. Gennadius descants upon the words of the Apostle thus: They being blinded, and excluded from Salvation, God translated this Salvation to you. And again, all you being called, and come in, Grace shall again receive them all, for this the Prophet Isaiah testifies. Before, saith, apud Oecum. v. 31. Photius, the Heathens being disobedient, the Jews were saved. Again, the Jews becoming disobedient, the Gentiles are saved; and the Gentiles being saved, the Jews, emulating them, shall be also saved. Because, saith. in v. 26. Theophlact, the Jews being still blinded, have not obtained Salvation, that which see Apostle speaks of, shall happen to them after∣wards. They of the People of Israel who be∣lieved not, and for their unbelief were deser∣ted, that God's Mercy might be shewed to yea, shall not be always left in unbelief, saithNon usque quaque relinquentur in incredulitate sua, sed cum plenitudinis gentium fuerit impleta dispensatio, etiam, miscricordiam consequentur. Ori∣gen, but when the dispensation of the fulne of the Gentiles is compleated, they also s find mercy. And therefore, when Celsus had as it were, prophesied, That the Jews sh presently perish, this, saith Origen, he said, not knowing how present God was formers with them, and how that by their sin, Sa∣tion came to the Gentiles, and their fall brought Riches to the World,. in C sum. lib. 6. p. 331. till the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, that after this, all Israel which Celsus understands not, may be save In his Fifth Homily upon Jeremiah he exhort the Christian to live so as that he may  receive a Bill of Divorce,, apud. Huet. Tom. 1. p. 74. C. but may enter
into the holy Inheritance. And Israel may then also enter; for if the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, then all Israel shall be saved, and there shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd. In his Commentary on St. Matthew, he saith, ibid. p. 410. C. They that whip'd Christ were whipped, and shall be whipped till the fulness of the Gentiles is come in: That, p. 397. D. they were worthy to be deserted, either till the fulness of the Gentiles was come in, or till they had ful∣fill'd the punishment of their sins. Nor is this denied by him in the passage cited from his Book against Celsus; for he saith not there, They should never be converted to the Christian Faith, but that they should never be restored to their own Worship, or Country, that they had been long since cast  out from their venerable Service, and Ceremonies, or Purgations;, &c. Orig. c. Cels. l. 4. p. 174. and we confidently af∣firm  they they shall never be restored again to Jerusalem, or the Land of Promise, which before, saith he, they were, for then, being captivated, they returned to their own Land, and enjoy'd their Laws as be∣fore, which now they shall never be restored to. All the Latin Fathers who have left us any Commentations, or Notes on this Epistle, are plainly of the same mind, as you may see by consulting Hilary the Deacon, Primasius, Se∣dulius, and Haymo upon the 25th Verse of this Chapter. This also many of the Fathers do conclude, 1. From those words of the Prophet Hosea, The Children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and with∣out a Sacrifice, and wichout an Altar, and with∣out an Ephod, and without Teraphim. After∣ward shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter days, Hos. 3.4, 5. Which wordsIstos autem carnales Israelitas qui nunc nolunt credere in Christum postea creditures, id est, filis eorm. De Civ. Dei l. 18. c. 28. & l. de 8. quaest. Dulcitij, Tom. 4. p. 674. St. Austin having produced, to prove that the Carnal Israelites who now will not believe, shall hereafter do so, he saith, nothing is more ma∣nifest then that by David their King, the Pro∣phet here meaneth Jesus Christ, in whom they now believe not. This, saithHaec est caecitas quae ex parte accidit Israeli, ut subitraret plenitud Gentium, & tunc mnis Israel salvus feret, & mult post tempore revertentur, & quaerunt Dominum suum—alii, ut nos, in futurum differunt tempus. Comment. in locum. St. Jerom, is the blindness which hath hapned to Israel in part, that the fulness of the Gentiles might come in, and all Israel be saved, and after a long time might return, and seek the Lord. Some, saith he, do interpret this of the Cap∣tivity of Babylon, but others, saith he, with us, refer it to a time yet future. St. Cyril saith, here is a manifest declaration of what should hereafter happen to the Adulterous Synagogue, and that she should be received again, that. In locum. Israel should not always be rejected, but being recall'd, and converted to the Faith, should own Christ according to the flesh to be the King of all, and that this glorious Grace should be afforded to her at the end of the World. 2ly, That in which they universally agree, excepting only St. Jerom, is that Elias is to come, before the end of the World, to con∣vert the Jews to Christ; and this they gather from those words of Malachi, Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the great and terrible day of the Lord, and he shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, Mal. 4.5, 6. And those of Christ, Elias truly shall come first, and shall restore all things, Matth. 17.11. We know, saith Justin Martyr, Dial. cum Tryph. p. 268. & p. 259. c. 306. that Elias shall come before our Lord's second Advent, and that then the Jews shall know him whom they have dishonoured. Origen. In Matth. Tom. 13. & Huet. p. 307. D. says, That by those words of Malachi, it seemeth to appear that Elias shall come before Christ, and by his sacred words, and the dispositions they shall work in their souls, shall prepare them for the co∣ming of Christ. Theodoret paraphraseth the words of Malachy thus, Least at my second coming, finding you all in unbelief, I should sub∣ject you to eternal punishments,. In locum. Elias shall come first, and teach you of my Advent, and shall prevail upon you, O Jews, without doubting, to joyn your selves to the Churches of the Gen∣tiles, and to be made one. Yea even St. Jerom upon those words of St. Matthew, Elias indeed shall come, and restore all things, descants thus,Ipse qui venturus est in secundo saluatoris adventu juxta corporis fidem, nunc, per Johaem venit, in vitute, & spiritu. In Matth. 17. He who is to come in the body, at our Lord's second Advent, came now by John in virtue, and the Spirit. And in his Comment on the third of Habakuk, ver. 17. having cited those words of Christ spoken of the barren
Fig-tree. Let no fruit grow on thee for ever, Matth. 21.19. He bids usEt diligenter considera quid dixerit, non afferes fructum in seculum, non ait usque in secula seculorum, sed  illud pertransierit, & intraverit plenitudo Gentium, tunc etiam haec ficus afferet fructus suos, & omnis Israel  tit. 1. diligently con∣sider, that he saith not for ever and ever, but only in seculum for that Age; and when that Age is past, and the fulness of the Gentiles is come in, then shall this Fig-tree bring forth her fruits, and all Israel shall be saved. So gene∣rally did this Doctrine obtain among the An∣cients. Moreover, as this Doctrine hath the suf∣frage of all the Ancient Fathers, and Commen∣tators do thus generally agree in Exposition of this Chapter, so is it easie to confirm it by shewing the absurdity of other expositions, and the plain inconsistence of them both with truth, and with the words of the Apostle. For, 1st, The words of the Apostle cannot be ex∣pounded, asHarmony of the New Testament, p. 194, 195. Dr. Lightfoot, and others do interpret them, of the spiritual Israel, i. e. of all those Persons, whether Jew, or Gentile, which belong to God's Election. For, 1. The Text speaks of that which was a Mystery to the believing Gentiles, i. e. a Secret not obvi∣ous to their Understanding. Now that God's Elect, whether Jew, or Gentile, should be sa∣ved, could be no Mystery, but the first Article of Christian Faith; and so of this the Apostle could not say, I would not have you ignorant, least you should be wise in your own conceit, espe∣cially since the Apostle had before said of the believing Jews, there is now an election of Grace, v. 5. and v. 7. the Election hath ob∣tained. 2ly, The Jews, and Israelites here menti∣oned, are manifestly distinguished from the Elect of Israel, by this Character, that they were the blinded Israel, v. 7. who lay under a spiritual slumber, v. 8. whose eyes were blinded that they saw not, v. 10. who had stumbled at the stumbling stone, v. 11. they are that Israel whose casting away was the riches of the world, whose diminution was their fulness, v. 12. they are Israel according to the flesh, v. 14. the branches broken off for unbelief, v, 17, 19, 20. they who believed not, v. 23, 30, 31, 32. and who were enemies to the Gospel for the Gen∣tiles sake, v. 29. this is the Israel of whom the Apostle here asserts they shall be saved, of this blinded, this unbelieving, this Israel cut off, these branches broken from their own Olive-tree, these Enemies to the converted Gentiles, as there hath been, saith the Apostle, a dimi∣nution, so shall there be a fulness, as there hath been a casting them off, so shall there be a re∣ception of them, as there hath been a breaking them off from their own Olive-tree, so shall there be an inserting of them into it again, v. 24. as there hath been a time of their unbelief, and so of severity, v. 22. and of wrath to them Rom. 9.22. 1 Thess. 2.16. so shall there be a time of mercy, v. 31, 32. Now since the un∣belief, the diminution, the rejection, the break∣ing of the branches off, must necessarily be un¦derstood of Israel according to the flesh, of the natural branches of the stock of Abraham, v. 22, 24. Beloved for the Father's sake, v. 2 of the Seed of Jacob, whose sins were not ye taken away, v. 26. if you understand the f∣ness, the reception, the ingraffing of them, the salvation here mentioned of the spiritual Isra¦el, and of the elect opposed to Israel that was blinded, v. 7. the Antithesis is wholly lost, since then the diminution, and the fulness, the rejection and reception, the breaking off, and the insertion, the severity, and the mercy, will not relate to the same persons. Again, blind∣ness in part hath hapned to Israel, saith the Apostle, till the fulness of the Gentiles shall come in, and then all Israel shall be saved, now certainly the blindness hapned to Israel ac∣cording to the flesh, and must not the Antithe∣sis require that the salvation should belong to the same Israel? It hapned not to the Elect for the Election, saith the Apostle, hath obtain∣ed, and the rest were blinded, and therefore the Salvation cannot respect them only. Moreover, to whom did this blindness hap¦pen? was it not to the National Church, and body of the Jews? to them to whom our Sa∣viour had said, whilst you have the light, believe in the light, least darkness come upon you? Jo 12.35. Is it not of the Children of Israel that the Apostle saith, they could not see to the ei of that which was to be abolished 2 Cor. 3.13, 14 but their minds are blinded, for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away? was it not that very People who had eyes, and saw n, ears, and heard not; whose heart was waxed gross, their ears dull, and their eyes closed, Isa. 6.9. Acts 28.26, 27. v. 8, 10. and from whose eyes were hid the things which belonges to their peace, because they know not the  of their visitation? Luke 19.42, 44. To whom belonged this  rejection, or casting off doth it not respect the generality of th Church, and Nation? doth not our Sav say of them, the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness, Matth. 8.12. that there house should be left unto them de∣late, Matth. 23.38. that the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given t Na∣tion bringing forth the fruits thereof? Matth. 21.41. Who were the branches broken  are they not all the unbelieving Jews? wa i. e. the bulk, and body of that Church, and Nation? doth not our Saviour tell them that their vineyard should be let out to other H¦bandmen,
Matth. 21.41. are not they that barren Tree which was to be hewen down? Luke 13.7, 9. and must not then the recove∣ry of them from this blindness, the receiving of them again, the ingraffing them into their own Olive-tree, respect not some few stragling Converts of them only, but the chief bulk, or body of that Nation? 3ly, It is easie to observe two questions in this Chapter; the first is this, , &c. I say then hath God cast off his People, v. 1. to which the answer is, God hath not cast of his people whom he foreknew, or the rem∣nant according to the election of Grace, v. 5, 7. but only the obdurate Jew, v. 8, 9, 10. The second is this, , I say then have these unbelieving Jews, who stum∣bled at the stumbling stone, Chap. 9.32, 33. so stumbled, that they should fall entirely, or so as that they never rise again? and to this the A∣postle answers in the negative, from v. 11. to the 25th, and proves it from v. 25. to the 32d. 'Tis therefore evident, that his discourse from v 11. to the 32, respects not the spiritual Isra∣el i. e. the Gentile Converts, nor the Elect of Israel, but the obdurate, blinded Nation which God had then cast off. And 4ly, Here is evidently a time prefix'd for this Conversion of the Jews, viz. when the ful∣ness of the Gentiles is come in; here is a blind∣ness to continue on them till that time; whilst blindness doth continue on them, their salvati∣on is not to be expected, and when they shall be saved, that blindness, of necessity, must cease; but to the spiritual Israel, or the Elect converted at all times, nothing of this can be applied, for their Conversion is not limited to the time of the coming in of the fulness of the Gentiles, but they are converted in every Age, and at all times 2ly, The Opinion of the Revered Dr. Ham∣mond is to this effect: 1.Note D. in v. 11. That it is not necessary that this should still belong to any yet future return of the Jews in a visible, and remarkable manner, the circumstances of the Context applying it to the first times wherein the Epistle was writ. 2.Ibid. That the fulness of the Jews men∣tioned v. 12. is their being added to the Church, their coming in, and being gathered, and laying hold of the Faith, being provoked so to do by seeing the Gentiles believe, and so filling up the vacuities, as it were, which was formerly in the Church by their stand∣ing out impenitently; and the fulness of the Gentiles, is the Gentiles coming into the Church, receiving the Faith, they then be∣coming one part of the visible Church, as the Jews another. 3ly, That theParaphr. in v. 25. Mystery there mention∣ed is this, that a great part of the Jews are now become blind, and that that is made use of by God, that by occasion of that the Go∣spel may (by departing a while from them) be preached to, and received by the Genera∣lity of the Gentiles, and they compacted in∣to Christian Churches, and this in very mer∣cy to those Jews, that they, by seeing the Gentiles believe, might at length be provo∣ked to do so too, by way of Emulation v 11. and 31. 4ly, That soParaphr. in v. 26. all Israel shall be saved. i. e. all the true Children of Abrah, Jews, and Heathens both, but particularly the rem∣nant of the Jews shall come in, and repent, and believe in Christ. 5ly, That the addition ofParaphr. in v. 12. Jewish Be∣lievers shall be matter of confirmation of the Faith to the Gentiles, and a means to bring them all to receive it, to convert the Gentiles over all the World. 6ly, As for the truth of that, that as yet many more Jews should repent, and receive the Gospel, that, saith he, his been demon∣strated by the event; (1.) When the Jews saw Christ's Predictions, Matth. 24. mani¦festly fulfill'd in the Roman Armies sitting down before the City, for then many turned Christians, and went out of the City, and were delivered from the following Evils. And 2ly, After that, when the Temple and City were destroyed, and they brought into sub∣jection by the Romans, then many were hum∣bled, and turn'd Christians. And 3ly, After that also, in Justin Martyr's days, every day there were some that came in to be Christ's Disciples. Now to these things I Answer, 1st, That whereas this Reverend Person saith the Circumstances of the Con∣text apply this Conversion of the Jews to the times in which this Epistle was writ, i. e. about the Year of Christ 56. it seems extreamly evi∣dent, both from the Circumstances of the Context, and from many other Scriptures, that nothing could more unfitly be assigned as the time of the Conversion of the then hardened, and rejected Jews then this. For 1. In the 9th Chapter of this Epistle, the Apostle calls our Lord Christ, the Holy Gst, and his own Conscience to witness, that he had great heaviness, and continual sre in his heart, on the account of the infidelity of his Jewish Brethren, the spiritual slumber, and blindness which then was upon them, and their rejection by God, v. 1, 2, 3. And ver. 22. he plainly represents them as Vessels of wrath fit∣ted for destruction, and only reserved, as P¦roah was of old, for a more illustrious ruine, in which God's vengeance on them, and the causes of it, should be conspicuously seen.
And v. 27. he proceeds to shew, from the Pre∣dictions of the Prophets, that only a little Remnant of them should be saved; a Rem∣nant like to those Seven thousand men reser∣ved in the ten Tribes of Israel, when the whole visible Body of them had revolted to Baal: And v. 31. speaking of them in general, he saith, Israel hath not attained to justification, because they sought it not of faith, but stumbled at the Messiah, even at that Jesus who is the end of the Law for justification to every one that believeth. Chap. 10.4. He being to them a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offence. In the 10th Chapter, he declares that they had not submitted to the righteousness which was of God through faith, v. 2, 3. and from verse 16. to the end of that Chapter, he proves that the the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, and the incredulity of the Jews, was a thing long ago foretold in the Prophetick Writings. In this Chapter, he begins with the Enquiry to which his former Discourse, and the gene∣ral Infidelity of that People had given occasi∣on, viz. Hath God entirely cast off his People? and answers it by saying, That, as in the time of Elias, in that general Revolt of the ten Tribes, God still reserved seven thousand who had not bowed the knee to Baal, , so in this season also he had reserved a like Remnant according to the election of Grace, v. 5. confessing notwithstanding touching the Body of that Church, and People, that Israel had not attained to that Righteousness it sought for, but was, excepting this Election only, wholly blinded, that God had given them up to a spirit of slumber, had blinded their eyes, had broken them off for their infidelity, and had shewed his severity upon them. Wherefore the times when this Epistle was written, being the times of the Apostles heaviness, and his continual sorrow for their rejection; the times when they are represented by him as vessels of wrath fitted for destruction; when the Pro∣phets had foretold their Incredulity; when Israel had not attained to justification, but had stumbled at the Messiah; when they were igno∣rant of the Righteousness of God, and had not submitted to it; when to that very day they were blinded, and given up to a spiritual slum∣ber; Is it possible that these should be the ve∣ry times assigned by the Apostle for the ceasing of their blindness, and that so generally, that it might be truly said, all Israel were then sa∣ved, and God had mercy on them all? The same Apostle, Anno Christi 49. speaks to them of that Nation thus; It was necessary that the Word of God should be first spoken to you, but since you thrust it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, lowe turn (from you) to the Gentiles, Acts 13.46. In his first Epistle to the Thessalonians written A. D. 51. he declares of the Jews, that they killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophet and they persecuted the Apostles; that they pleased not God, and were contrary to all me. Chap. 2.14, 15, 16. Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill  their sins always, for the wrath is come up them to the uttermost. That is, saith Dr. Ha¦mond, By this they do so fill up the measure of their sins, that the wrath of God, to the utter destruction of them, is now come out upon the already denounced, and, within a very little while, most certain to overtake them. In his second Epistle to the Corinthians, written be∣fore that to the Romans, tho' perhaps in the same year, he saith, that even then their mind were blinded, and the veil still remained upo them. And when he came to Rome, abou three years after the writing this Epistle, and preached to some of the chief of them residing in that City, he declares that these words of Isaiah were fulfilled upon them, Acts 28.23, 28. viz. Hearing you shall hear, and shall not under∣stand, and seeing you shall see, and not perceive, for the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull or hearing; and they have closed their eyes, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them. Concluding thus, Be it kno therefore to you, that the Salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will hear it. Now after they had thus put away the Gospel fro them, and judged themselves unworthy of eter∣nal life, and the Apostles had thus turned from them to the Gentiles, after the wrath of God was thus determined to come upon them, , to the end, that is, say all the Ancient Commentators, not as in the times of the Judg∣es, for twenty or forty years, or, as in the time of their Captivity, for seventy years, but for many Generations, after their minds were thus blinded, their eyes thus shut, their hearts thus heardened, can we expect this blindness sud∣denly should cease, and this wrath presently give place to Mercy and Salvation? 2. That many of the Jews turned Christian. hen they saw Christ's prediction, Matth. 24. fulfiled, in the Roman Army sitting down before that City, and went out of the City with the Christians, and so were delivered from the fo∣lowing evils, is also said without all ground, or testimony of Writers of those times.De Mens. & Pond. c. 15. & Naz. Haer. 29. § 7. Epi∣phanius who lived in Palestine, andEccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. Eusebius who was born, and educated there, give us an accurate Relation of this matter, and careful∣ly inform us, that , the Disciples of Christ, , they that believed in Christ, being admonished by an Angel, or by an Oracle so to do, left Jerusalem, and went to Pella, where they were preserved, but of
one Convert of the Jews then made, they say not a word. How unlikely then is it that the same Epiphanius, who so particularly relates the conversion of one single Aquila from Ju∣daism to Christianity, when they returned to Jerusalem after the ruine of it, and his revolt again to Judaism, should never speak one word of these supposed Converts before their departure? Moreover, this was the time when there happened a great Apostacy of the Jewish Con∣verts, according to our Lord's Prediction, that because iniquity should then abound, the love of many should wax cold, Matth. 24.12. And there∣fore the Epistle to the Hebrews written in the 9th, the Epistle of St. James writ also in the 9th, and the Epistle of St. Peter writ in the 10th year of Nero, all near this very time, are very full of Exhortations to them that they would not be double minded, wavering, or un∣stable in the faith, James 1.6, 7, 8. that they would not count that fiery trial which was come to try them, a strange thing, 1 Pet. 4.12. that they would patiently, and with long-suffering endure it, as knowing they were happy who did thus endure, James 1.12.5.8, 10, 11. 1 Pet. 3.14.4.13, 14.5.9, 10. The Epistle to the Hebrews is full of Exhortations to them, to see to it that there be not in them an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, Hebr. 3.12. that they hold the beginning of their confidence firm to the end, v. 14. to fear least a promise being made of entring into rest, they should fall short of it through unbelief, Chap. 4.1, 11. there being no renewing them to repentance, who, after such miraculous evi∣dences of the truth, apostatized, Chap. 6.6. and no more sacrifice for sin for them, 10.25. that they would not cast away their confidence, God having said, Chap. 12.35, 38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him; and that they would diligently look to it, least any man fail'd of the Grace of God, Chap. 12.15. These, saith our Saviour, are the times of vengeance, and of wrath upon the people, Luke 21. v. 22, 23. the times when the things belonging to their peace being hid from their eyes, their house was to be left unto them desolate, Luke 19.42, 43, 44. And could the times of the Apostacy, even of the converted Jews, be the times of the Salvation of the un∣believing Jews? Was it to be expected they should then, more then ever, see the things be∣longing to their peace, when they were hidden from their eyes? or could the times of wrath, and vengeance upon that people, when the A∣venger came out of Zion to punish the iniqui∣ty of Zion with the forest Judgments, be the very times when the Deliverer came out of Zion to turn away iniquity from Jacob? 3ly, Whereas 'tis added, that after that, when the Temple and City was destroyed, and they brought into subjection by the Romans, then many were humbled, and turned Christians; and that after that, even in Justin Martyr's days, every day there were some who came in to be Christ's Disciples. I answer, 1. That as for their Conversion when the Temple and City was destroy'd, I cannot find one word in Church History concerning it, but much to the contrary: For 1st, Epiphanius speaks particularly of the Return of the Chri∣stians to Jerusalem after the ruine of it, and of the Miracles they then wrought, and yet he mentions only one Aquila a Jew converted to the Christian Faith; adding, that he soon af∣ter renounced that Faith, and turned to his former Judaism. And. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 335. Justin Martyr ob∣serves, in express contradiction to the Doctor, that after their Country was destroy'd, and their City laid wast, they repented not, but proceed∣ed still in their execrations of Christ, and of all that believed in him. AndCum tempus medium à Tiberio usque ad Vespasianum non poenitentiam intellexissent. facta est terra eorum de ea, Civitat eorum exustae igni. Adv. Marcion. l. 3. c. 23. Tertullian adds, that seeing from the time of Tiberius to Vespasian they repented not, their Land was made desolate, and their Cities burnt with fire. And indeed this was the very time when wrath came actually upon them to the uttermost, when this barren Tree was hewed down, and cast in∣to the fire, Luke 13.7, 9. when their house was left desolate, because they would not he gather∣ed; when all the righteous blood shed by them from Noah to that time, come upon them, and they had filled up the measure of their sins, Matth. 23.35, 37, 38. when the Kingdom was wholly taken from them; when the Son of Man came to take vengeance on them; and when he sent forth his Armies to destroy thse Murtherers, and to burn up their City, because they refused to come unto the marriage Feast, Matth. 22.7. And could this be the time of their Humiliation and Conversion? Was this a fit time to expect the completion of those words of St. Paul, concerning the sending the Deliverer out of Zion, to turn away iniquity from Jacob, and to take away their sins, and to shew mercy to them in such a signal manner, that all Israel should be saved? To proceed to the History of them in the following times: Justin Martyr in his Apl∣lgy writ in the Year of the Lord 140. saith of the Jews in all places, that they
were, p. 72. E. as great Enemies to the Christians in all places, as the Heathens were, and as ready to torment and kill them, when they could d; and that this was evident from the last Jewish War, in which their Captain, Barcho chebas, commanded only the Christians to be tormented, if they refused to deny, and to blaspheme the Lord Jesus Christ. Now this carries down the hatred of the Jews against Christians, and their impenitency, till after the times both of Trajan and Hadrian. Some years after this he writ his Dialogue with Trypho; and there he informs us, that the. B. 323. B. vide p. 266. p. 350. . p. 363. Jews still continued to curse those who believed in Jesus, and to lay violent hands upon them when they could do it, that even then their hand was high to do wickedness; they still ha∣ting and killing Christians as oft as it was in their power. But we are told that this very Justin Mar∣tyr saith, that every day there were some (of them) who came in to be Christ's Disciples. I Answer, That what Justin Martyr there saith relates not at all to any Jewish Converts, but to the Gentiles coming in from the Way of Deceit, to the Faith of Christ; and as he had told the Emperors in his Apology, p. 45. B. that the Consummation of the World was de∣ferr'd, , for the Seed of Christians which was then springing up; so he tells Trypho, p. 256. D. that the Day of Judgment, of which he had before spoken, and of which the Psalm he there citeth treats, was. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 257. E. 258. A. deferr'd by God, because he knew that some would come daily in to be Christ's Disciples, and would quit the Way of Deceit. Now that this cannot be spoken of the Jews is evident, because wrath was come upon them to the uttermost, as Justin Martyr often inti∣mates, not saying that God had not brought wrath and judgment upon them; but only, that he had not brought the General Judgment on the World for this Cause; he goes on and says, That every one of thse who thus belie∣ved, received Gifts from Christ as they were worthy: And this he proves, because it was prophesied, that. Ibid. B. after our Lord's ascent to Heaven, he should lead us captive from our Error, and should give us Gifts; where the word , used ordinarily of the Gentiles, deceived by Satan, and especially the word , us, shew that the Martyr speaks not of the Jews, but Gentile Converts; and so it follows, Therefore we Gentiles, who have re∣ceived these Gifts, shew you Jews to be Fools, &c. So that the good Doctor was utterly mi∣staken in applying this Passage to the Jews, as others, led by his Authority, have done. From this time to the Days of Constantine, the Period assigned by Mr. Calvert for the Conversion mentioned by St. Paul, the Father generally represent them, as a Nation whose. Just. p. 250. ears were shut, and their heart hardened, declaring that theSi cognovissent nos futuros, & usuros his testimoniis, quae sunt ex scripturis, nunquam dubitassent ipsi suas comburere  turas quae & reliquas omnes Gentes manifestant participare vitae, & eos, qui gloriantur domum se esse Jacob, & populum Israe exhaereditari ostendunt à Gratia Dei. Iren. l. 3. c. 24. Scripture had clearly foretold they should be disinherited, and fall of from the Grace of God. Origen, &c. Adv. Celsum, l. 2. p. 62. , l. 4. p. 183. testifies, that God had turn'd his Providence from the Jews to the Gentiles; that they were wholly deserted, and retained nothing of what before was venerable among them, nor any footsteps of the Divine Presence with them; that after the Crucifixion of our Lord they were perfectly de∣serted, and not to be converted till the end of the World. TertullianAbstulit enim Dominus Sabaoth à, Judaea, & ab Hierusalem inter caetera & Prophetam, & Sapientem Archite Spiritum sc. Sanctum, nam exinde apud illos destiit Dei Gratia. Adv. Marcion l. 3. c. 23. vide cap. 6, 7. saith, that from the time that they crucified their Lord, God had taken from them the Prophet, Wiseman, and the Holy Spirit, and had lest them destitute of his Grace; and that only at his second coming, he should be received by them who had thus reject∣ed him. And this seems most agreeable to our
Lord's Predictions, That the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given to ano∣ther Nation that would bring forth the fruit of it; that he would miserably destry those Hus∣band-men, and would let out his Vineyard to o∣ther Husband-men, who should render him the fruits in their season, Matth. 21.41, 43. that none of them who were bidden, and refused, should taste of his Supper, Luke 14.24. that many should come from the East, and West, and should sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, but the Chil∣dren of the Kingdom should be cast out into ou∣ter darkness, Matth. 8.11, 12. that they who were first (i. e. the Jews) should be the last, and they who were the last (i. e. the Gentiles) should be first; for that this is spoken of the Rejection of the Jews, and the Calling of the Gentiles, is evident from these words of S. Luke, Chap. 13. v. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Then shall ye (Jews) begin to say, we have eaten and drun∣ken in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our Streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence you are, depart from me all ye work∣ers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. And they shall come from the East, and the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God. And behold there are last which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last. Now if we do consi∣der that wrath was come upon this Nation  to the end, can we imagine either that this Kingdom taken from them, this Vineyard let out to ther Husband-men, these Children of the Kingdom cast out into outer darkness, should suddenly receive again this Kingdom, be re∣stored to this Vineyard, or admitted to the Light of the Gospel? or that all Israel should be saved, or iniquity should be taken a∣way from Jacb, whilst that Naon lay under these dreadful Judgments! or that when our Lord had so solemnly foretold there should be wrath upon this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the Sword, and shall be led away captive into all Nations; and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled, Luke 21.23, 24. this Wrath should not continue on them whilst they were Captives in all Nations, and Jeru∣salem was trodden down? Here, I confess, the Reverend Doctor (on Luke 21.23.) hath a peculiar Notion, That the tredding down of Jerusalem by the Gen∣tiles, is not particularly their Victory over it by Titus, but their consequent possessing of it, even till Adrian's rebuilding a part of it, and calling it by his own name Aela, and inhabiting it by Gentiles— Upon the doing of this, saith he, it followed, that as all the (unbelieving) Jews were utterly banished the City, so the believing Jews returned thither again from their Dispersions, and inhabited it again, and joyn'd, and made one Congre∣gation, one Church with the Gentiles, which had then, till that time, received the Faith also, and till then continued a distinct Church from the Jews. By which it appears how punctually this Prediction, in our Notion, was fulfilled, that Jerusalem should be in∣habited by the Gentiles, all the Jews in a manner excluded, till the time that the Go∣spel had been freely preach'd to the Gentiles, and by them in some eminent manner been received, and then it should be re-inhabited with the Jews again, i. e. the Christian Jews, who being wrought on by emulation of the Gentiles, were now, many of them brought to receive the Faith. In his Note on the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. B. he makes them to be the two Bishops of the Church in Jerusa∣lem, one of the Jewish, the other of the Gentile Converts; which state of that Church continued, saith he, till the time of Mar∣cus, a Gentile Bishop of that Church, i. e. from after the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, till that time. But here again are many things delivered, not only without all suffrage of History, but in perpect opposition to the Histories of those times. For 1 Eusebius and Sulpitius Severus do inform us, that till the time ofNamque tum Hierosolymae non nisi ex circumcisione habebat Ecclesia Sacerdotem. Sulpitius, l. 2. c. 45. . Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 6. Hadrian all the Bishops and Priests of Jerusalem were only of the Circumcision. Here therefore is no room for his two Bishops, one of the Jewish, the o∣ther of the Gentile Converts, till the time of Marcus. 2ly, They also do inform us, that all the Christians then at Jerusalem were of the Cir∣cumcision, and so not of the Gentiles; for Sulpitius observes that the Edict ofMilitum cohortem custodias in perpetuum agitare jussit, quae Judaes omnes Hiesolymae aditu aceret, quod quidem Chri∣stianae fidei proficiebat, quia tum penè omnes Christum Deum sub legis observatione credebant, nimirum id Demno rainnte disp∣situm, ut legis servitus à libertate fidei atque Ecclesiae tolleretur. Sulp. l. 2. c. 5. Ha∣drian, for banishing all the Jews from Jeru∣salem, happened for the advantage of the Chri∣stian Faith, because till then they almost all joyn'd the observation of the Law to the Faith of Christ. The Lord so ordering it, that, by this means, the servitude of tha Law might be removed from the Church. Esebius also saith,
that the whole Church of Jerusalem. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 5. con∣sisted of the faithful Hebrews, who from the times of the Apostles, had continued there till the siege of Bitter in the eighteenth year of Hadrian: So that here is no room for his sup∣posed Gentile Converts to be govern'd by a Bishop of the Gentiles. 3ly, They also do expresly say, not only that the unbelieving Jews, but that all the Jews in general, were by this Edict banished both from Jerusalem, and from the Region round about it. He placed a Band of Souldiers, which should banish all the Jews from Jerusalem, saith Sulpitius; and this he did, quia Chri∣stiani ex Judaeis potissimum putabantur, because the Christians were thought to have their rise chiefly from the Jews. Eusebius saith, that  the whole Nation was banished from Jerusalem, and the Country round about, and not permitted to set one foot in it. And then adds, that, &c. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 6. the City being after this manner emptied of the Jews, and wholly clear∣ed of its Inhabitants, and made up of Aliens flowing in thither, it was made a Roman City, and Colony, and in honour of the Emperor was named Aelian. The same is said by him in hisDemonstr. Evang. l. 8. p. 411. D. Evangelical Demonstrations; and byContr. Jud. c. 15. Apol. c. 16. Ter∣tullian, that not one Jew was permitted to stay there. Eusebius also adds, thatIbid. , the Church there consisting only of Gentiles, Marcus was the first Bishop of it. So that here is no place for the Doctor's supposed Church, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, or for the inhabiting of it by the Christian Jews, and much less for his feigned many of them brought now to receive the Faith by emulation of the Gentiles. In a word, Epiphanius saith, that Hadrian the Em∣peror, travelling to Jerusalem, found there only , one little Church and se∣ven Synagogues, standing like Cottages; and was this likely to be the Seat of two great Bi∣shops? So that I find nothing agreable to the truth of History in all which this Reve∣rend Person saith upon this Subject, and much less any thing confirmed, either by Scripture, or Authority. What hath been thus discoursed, is abun∣dantly sufficient to confute the Exposition of this Reverend and Learned Person, as being not agreable to matter of fact; for when was there any such Conversion made of the Jews at the times assigned by him, which can in any probability of construction answer to the Phrases used by the Apostle, that by it all Israel should be saved; ungodliness should be turn'd away from Jacob; God should bless them by taking away their sins; that they who now were blinded should have the vail taken away from before their eyes; they who now were diminished should have again their ful∣ness; and they who now were cast off, should be again received? This could not happen in the very times when this Epistle was first en∣dited: For though it be true that St. James mentions many thousands or myriads of Jewish Converts, all zealous of the Law, Acts 21.20. yet were they all converted at, or before the time of writing this Epistle, and so belonged only to the Remnant according to the Election of Grace here mentioned, not to the Residue that were blinded, of whose Conversion the Apostle here speaks from v. 12. to v. 32. Nor could their Conversion, and Salvation be a My∣stery to be then revealed to the Gentiles. That no such Conversion after the blindness menti∣on'd in this Chapter happened to them, upon their seeing the abomination of desolation stand∣ing in the holy place, or soon after the destru∣ction of Jerusalem, hath been already shew'd; and that Justin Martyr saith nothing of any such remarkable Conversion of them, hath been also proved. That there might be some Conversion of them in the Reign of Trajan, is by some ar∣gued from the words of Eusebius; That. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 35. Justus, then Bishop of Jerusalem, was one of the many Myriads or Thousands of the Circum∣cision which then had believed. Yet is this Te∣stimony of no force, as to this matter; For 1. Grammarians well know that  and , when put indefinitely, do only signifie many; now if the  the many Myriads men∣tioned by St. James, hindred not, but that the Jewish Converts might be only a little Rem∣nant, in respect to the blinded Jews, this may be as true of the , the so many My∣riads of Eusebius, especially if we consider that most of them might be the very Persons mention'd by St. James, he carefully inform∣ing us that the whole Church of Jerusalem, under her fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem, of which this Justus was the eleventh, was made up of. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 5. Believers who had continued from the Apostles time till the Wars and Siege under Hadrian. And speaking of these Persons, not
as Men believing then, but as  men who had before that time embraced the Christian Faith. And henceJustus quidam ex his qui de circumcisione ad fidem Christi venerunt Episcpatum suscepit. Ruffinus makes no mention of these supposed Myriads, but only saith, That Justus being one of those of the Circumcision who had embraced the Faith of Christ, was made their Bishop. In a word, this very Eusebius concurring so exactly with the Sentiments of all the other Fathers, that the Jews were then rejected, and lay under a Curse, and proving from this very Apostle, and from the words contained in the begin∣ning of this very Chapter, that they should generally fall and be rejected for their unbe∣lief, ,Demonstr. Evang. l. 2. p. 62. B. & passim. a very few of them only belie∣ving; and thatL. 9. p. 455. A. B. after the coming in of all Nations to the Christian Faith, they did not yet see, or understand; he cannot be supposed to mention any thing which answers to the Con∣version of the Jews intended in this Chapter, but must, with us, refer that to that glorious time when the. L. 9. p. 458. D. Prophecies shall more ful∣ly, saith he, be fulfilled, i. e. the time when the fulness mention'd by the Apostle shall come in. This being therefore all that hath been plead∣ed for the remarkable Conversion of the Jews, after the writing this Epistle; and this all be∣ing almost nothing, and far from bearing a∣ny Correspondence to the comprehensive words of the Apostle on that Subject; I con∣conclude that no Conversion of this Nature happened to them, between the writing this Epistle, and the times of Constantine. And whereas it is said that this Conversion should be wrought in them by way of Emu∣lation, and that they should lay hold of the Faith, being provoked so to do by seeing the Gentiles believe, it is confest that the Apostle represents this as a fit means to work this E∣mulation in them; but yet it is as certain that it hath not yet had the designed effect upon them, they being so far from being provoked to embrace the Christian Faith, by seeing the Gentiles admitted to it, that this was to them the great stumbling block, and they were Enemies to the Gospel for their sakes, v. 28. they being prejudiced against it, be∣cause the Gentiles were admitted to the Bles∣sings of it without Circumcision, and obser∣vance of the Law of Moses. See Note on Gal. 3.4.6.12. This is that Prejudice of the Jizing Christians which the Apostle la∣bours to remove in most of his Epistles, but more especially in that to the Galatians; and as for the unbelieving Jews, they could not endure to hear of any to be sent for the con∣verting of the Gentiles, Acts 22.21, 22. but persecuted the Ap stles upon this account, for∣bidding them to preach to the Gentiles that they might be saved, 1 Thess. 2.16. And the same Enmity to the Christians seems to conti∣nue to this day among them upon the same ac∣counts. Wherefore there having been as yet, so for as we are able to discern, no such remarkable Conversion of the Jews since the endiing this Epistle, and no such happy Emulation of the converted Gentiles, as did provoke them to embrace the Christian Faith, this could not be, as here the Doctor doth suggest, a confir∣mation of the Faith to the Gentiles, and much less a means to bring them all to receive it, or to convert the Gentiles over all the World. And what Records or Histories make the least mention of any such Conversion of the Gen∣tile World, on the account of the remarka∣ble Conversion of the Jews after the writing this Epistle? When came in such a fulness of the unbelieving Jews as was the Riches of the World, v. 12. or such a Reception of them to the Christian Faith as was unto them life from the dead, v. 15? or how can these Assertions be reconciled to the words of the Apostle; for if the coming in of the fulness of the Gen∣tiles be their receiving the Faith in those times, then the partial blindness of the Jews must cease in those times also; for blindness, saith the Apostle, hath happened to the Jews in part, and that blindness is to continue only till the fulness of the Gentiles shall come in: If then the blindness of the Jews is not yet ceased, but they have generally continued, even from the time of writing this Epistle, to this very moment, in as much blindness and obduracy, as they then lay under, and as much branches broken off, as now they are, it follows that the fulness of the Gentiles mentioned by the Apostle, is not yet come in. Lastly, The Mystery mentioned v. 25. can∣not be this, that by occasion of the infidelity of the Jews, the Gospel was preached to, and re∣ceived of Gentiles, for of this the Apostle in∣troduceth the believing Gentiles speaking thus, v. 19. Thou wilt say then, the branches were broken off that I might be grafed in, &c. this therefore could not be to them a Mystery. Nor could it be this, viz. that this was done in mercy to the Jews, viz. that tey by seeing the Gentiles believe might at length be provo∣ked to do so too. For of this the Apostle had spoken twice, declaring it to e foretold by Moses, saying, I w provoke you to jealousie by them that are no people. Chap. 10.19. And in this Chapter, saying, Through their fell, Salvation is come to the Gentiles to provoke
them to jealousie, v. 11. It remains then, as the Apostle and the primitive Church from him declare, that it be this, That when the time for the fulness, i. e. for the Conversion of the still Heathen Gentiles is come in, then shall the blindness of the Jews be removed, and so all Israel shall be saved, and then all Nations shall flow in unto them, and their reception shall be to the Gentiles as life from the dead. I think I have said what is sufficient to shew these words cannot admit the sense im∣posed upon them by the Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond, I proceed now more largely to discuss the proper import of that phrase, The fulness of the Gentiles shall come in. This is by some interpreted thus, Blindness hath happened to the Jews, till the full number of the Gentiles which God shall call be compleated. But this sense is contrary to the express words of the Apostle, who declares there shall be a greater and more glorious Conversion of the Gentiles, then that which happened by occasion of their fall, that their fulness should be much more the Riches of the Gentiles, then their fall was, v. 12. and that their coming in, should be un∣to the Gentiles, as life from the dead, and should much more enrich them then their cast∣ing off, v. 15. Note therefore that there is a double ful∣ness of the Gentiles mention'd in the Holy Scriptures: 1. That which is spoken of v. 12. in these words, If the diminution of them was the ful∣ness of the Gentiles, and this consisted in the Preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, and the imparting the glad tydings of Salvation to them, and was in a great measure to be accomplished before the destruction of Jeru∣salem, and the ruine of that Church and Na∣tion, according to our Lord's Prediction in these words, The Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preach'd in all the world for a witness to all Nations, and then shall the end come, Matth. 24.14. Mark 13.10. 2ly, There is to be another fulness of the Gentiles by a more glorious Conversion of them, and a coming in of those Nations which have not hitherto embraced the Gospel, or have relapsed into Heathenism or Mahome∣tism, to be effected when this rejection of the Jews shall cease, and God shall send the De∣liverer out of Zion to turn away iniquity from Jacob; and of this only can we understand those words of the Apostle, v. 12. If the fall of the Jews hath been (already) the Riches of the (Gentile) World, and the diminution of them the Riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall their fulness, i. e. the time of their Conversion be the encrease and fulness of the same Gentiles. And v. 15. If the casting a∣way of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving them again be (to the same World) but even as life from the dead And v. 25. Blindness in part hath happened  the Jews, till the fulness of the Gentile: sh come in. This blindness therefore still continu∣ing upon them, as much as ever, another fulness of the Gentiles is to be expected, when it en¦tirely shall be removed from them, and so  Israel shall be saved. 2ly, Jerusalem is yet trodden down of the Nations, and the Jews are yet Captives in all Nations, whereas the Captivity, and the treading down of Jerusalem is to cease when the times of the Gentiles are fulfill'd; ac∣cording to those words of Christ concerning the destruction of the Jews, They shall fall y the edge of the Sword, and shall be carried Cap¦tives into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down, till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, Luke 21.24. i. e. till the times when they shall have a plenary Conversion by the coming in of the Jews, and shall no me Lord it over them, as now they do, but sen them, and flow in unto them. And to this purpose let it be noted, 1. That if we consult Ancient Prophecie concerning the vast extent of our Saviour Kingdom over all Nations, we shall find r∣son to believe they have not yet had that full accomplishment upon them, for he h not yet had the uttermost parts of the earth  his possession, Psal. 2.8. God hath not yet ma all People, Nations, and Languages to ser him, and all Dominions to obey him, Dan. 4.27. he hath not yet filled the whole ear or broke in pieces, and consumed all othe Kingdoms, Dan. 2.34, 35. That seems  yet fulfilled which was foretold by Mi that the Lord should be King over all the ear Mich. 5.4. and by Zachariah, that there sho be but one Lord, and his name one, Zach. 1, and by David, that all Kings should fall d before him, and all Nations serve him; th all the ends of the earth should remember,  turn to the Lord, and all the kindreds of  Nations worship before him, Psal. 72.8. Th and sundry other such like Prophecies th are, which yet were never accomplish'd ¦cording to the full import of them. For Enquir. Chap. 14. p. 113 Brerewood observes, if we divie  known Regions of the World into thirty  parts, the Christians part is (only) as  the Mahumetans as six, the Idolaters as ¦teen; whence we have reason to conclude that there is yet a time to come, before  Consummation of all things, in which our S¦viour will yet once more display the victori Banner of his Cross; and like a mighty  of War march on conquering, and to conq till he hath confounded, or converted his e¦nemies; and finally, consummated his V∣ries
in a glorious Triumph over all the Powers of the Earth, and made all Nations, Tongues, and Languages to serve him. 2ly, That there is still to be a glorious Con∣version of the Jewish Nation, as it seems evi∣dent from the words of the Apostle here, who speaketh of a time when the partial blindness which then had happened to the Jews, and still continues upon them, should cease; when God would turn away ungodliness from Jaeob, and take away (the punishment of) their sins, which yet he hath not done; when not a little Remnant only, as at our Lord's first Advent, but all Israel should be saved; when that Israel, whose Minds were then, and still are blinded by the Vail that is upon them, shall have that Vail taken away by their turn∣ing to the Lord. But also from those Prophe∣cies of the Old Testament, which promise to that Nation such Kindness, Favour, and Sal∣vation, as either hath not been at all as yet, or but imperfectly fulfilled; as when he pro∣miseth to bless her with such Blessings as never should be taken from her, and to shew Mercy to her, so as never to forsake her more. To this effect are these Expressions; As I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the Earth, so I have sworn that I would not be wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee, (any more;) for the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not de∣part from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee, Isa. 54.9, 10. And the Redeem∣er shall come to Zion, and to them that turn from Transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord; My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds seed from henceforth and for ever, Isa. 59.20, 21. I will make thee an Eternal Excellency, a Joy of many Generations. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction within thy Borders, but thou shalt call thy Walls Salvation, and thy Gates Praise. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for bright∣ness shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended, Isa. 60.15, 18, 19, 20. Everlasting joy shall be unto them, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, Isa. 61.7, 8. Thou shalt no more be termed forsaken, neither shall thy Land any more be termed desolate, but thou shalt be called Hephzi-bah, and thy Land Beu∣ for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy Land shall be married, Isa. 62.4, 12. I will reioyce in Jerusalem, and joy in my People; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying, Isa. 65.19. For as the new Heavens, and new Earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed, and your Name re∣main, Isa. 66.22. And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their Chil∣dren after them. And I will make an ever∣lasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.39, 40. And they shall no more be a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the Beasts of the Land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid. And I will raise up for them a Plant of renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the Land, neither bear the shame of the Heathen any more, Ezek. 34.28, 29. And they shall dwell in the Land that I have given unto Jacob my Servant, where∣in your Fathers have deceit, and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their Children, and their Childrens children for ever; and my servant David shall be their Prince for ever. More∣over, I will make a Covenant of Peace with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant with them; and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my Sanctuary in the midt of them for evermore. My Tabernacle shall e with them; yea, I will be their God, and ty shall be my People, Ezek. 37.25, 26, 27. I have gathered them unto their own Land, and have left none of them any more there. Nei∣ther will I hide my face any more from them. Ezek. 39.28, 29. And I will plant them up∣on their Land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their Land which I have given them, saith the Lord thy God, Amos 9.15. Now it seems very evident, that scarcely any of these things can be applyed to the Re∣turn of the Jews from their Captivity in Ba∣bylon. For since that time his kindness hath departed from them, and his Covenant of Peace hath been removed for above 1600 years; Violence hath been heard in their Land, wast∣ing and destruction within their Borders, and their Land hath been made desolate; the days of wrath, of mourning, and of weeping have been long upon them; their Sun ath been, according to our Lord's Prediction, darkened, and their Moon hath not given her light; their Sanctuary and Tabernacle hath been consu∣med, and they have been a prey to the Hea∣then; they have long since ceased to be his People, and he to be their God. Nor can we reasonably confine these Pro∣mises to that little Remnant which believed in the times of the Apostles, for they were never gathered out of all Lands, nor did they inherit the Land for ever, but were banish thence, as well as the unbelieving Jew Hadrin; they can in no propriety of S be styled the House of Israel, the whle
of Israel. Nothing indeed seems more un∣likely, then that the time of the Casting them off, the breaking off the Branches, the leaving them under a Spiritual slumber, the taking the Kingdom from them, and casting them out into utter darkness, should be the time of the Completion of these glorious Promises; and that this Sense cannot accord with the Discourse of our Apostle here, hath been al∣ready shew'd. Nor 3ly, can we apply these Promises to the believing Gentiles; for sure they could not be a prey to the Heathens, or to bear their shame, or be the People whom God had led into Captivity, and after gathered into their own Land, and so planted there as never to be plucked up again; the Promise could not be made to them, that they should suck the breasts and eat the Riches of the Gentiles. 3ly, I have already shew'd from Scripture Prophecies, That after this Conversion the Nations generally shall flw in to them, and walk in their light, and so their fulness (wh signifies not their Incorporation into anothe Church, but as the opposite words, their f their diminution, their rejection, require, and as the Apostle doth himself interpret it, their reception to the Christian Faith, and so into the Favour of God) shall be the Riches of the Gentiles, and as life from the dead t them; then the Gentiles shall come to the light, and Kings to the brightness of their ri∣sing; and Nations that have not known the shall run in unto them, because God hath glori¦fied them. Then, saith God, I will gather all Nations, and Tongues, and they shall come and see my Glory, Isa. 55.5.56.8.66.18, 22 Then all Nations shall turn, and fear the Lord truly, saith Tobit, Chap. 13.10, 11. And this I conceive to be that fulness of the Genti of which the Apostle here speaketh. CHAP. XII: Verse 1. I Beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of (that) God (of whom, and through whom are all things, and to whose glory they are all designed, Chap. 11.36.) that ye present your Bodies a living Sa∣crifice, holy acceptable to God, which is your reasonable Service. , to present your bodies a living sacrifice.] Sin reigning in our mortal Bodies, and by obeying the mo∣tions of it in our outward actions, we being said  to present the Mem∣bers of our Bodies instruments of unrighteous∣ness to sin, Chap. 6.12, 13. The Apostle here doth appositely exhort us  to present the same Bodies now a living Sacrifice, in op∣position to the Legal Sacrifices which were first slain, and then offered up to God upon the Altar, viz. by being now dead unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord, An holy Sacrifice, as being consecrated to the Service of God, and having our fruit unto holiness, as the Servants of God still have, Rom. 6.22. And as the Sacrifices offered to God were to be free from any spot and ble∣mish, and so holy; so are our Bodies made an holy Sacrifice when they are kept in Sanctifica∣tion and Honour, and free from all filthiness of the Flesh, and so a Sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing to that God who desired not the Legal Sacrifices, nor delighted in Burnt-offer∣ings, Psal. 51.16. Hebr. 10.8. And this, saith he, is not as the Sacrifices of the Law, , of dead and unreasonable Beasts, which was bodily Service, or that in which the Bo∣dy chiefly was imployed; but it is , a Sacrifice of their Reason, devoting your selves, who are Rational Creatures, to his Service, and also is highly suitable to their Reason. Ver. 2. And be not conformed to (the ev Customs of) this (Heathen) World, but be ye transformed (into other men) by the re∣newing of your mind, (and judgment of things,) that ye may prove (Gr. discern, and approve, see Note on 1 Cor. 11.28. Gal. 6.4.) what is the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, (i. e. that will which under the Gospel requires only what is substantially good, and therefore always acceptable to him, and perfect∣ly instructs us in our whole Christian duty). , and be not conformed to this World.] It is the observatio of Grotius on the former Verse, that the Apo¦stle having shewed before that Justification could not be obtained by the Law, comes n to shew how the Gospel perfected and spir¦tualized the Law, as to the Ritual and the Judicial Parts of it, and engaged us more ex∣actly to fulfil the Moral Parts of it, beginning first with the Sacrifices, which by the Jew were esteemed one great and chief part of their Ritual Worship. And then he may here proceed to their Separations from Men of o∣ther Nations, or, as the Pharisees had impro∣ved it, even from the Vulgar sort, thinking it unlawful to eat, converse with, or even to  the People of the Earth, as they stiled them, and making their Holiness to consist chiely in such Niceties and Separations; shewing that we do most effectually comply with all that God designed by any Precepts of this Nature, when we keep our selves unspotted from the World, or free from any Conformity unto the sinful Customs of it, as Christianity especially
requires, Christ giving up himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil World, Gal. 1.4. Or he instructs them how to change their former Heathen, into a Christian Conversation; declaring, that where∣as formerly they walked , according to the course of this World, Eph. 2.2. and according to the will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4.3. they should no longer live the rest of their time to the lusts of Men, but to the will of God, v. 2. , by the renewal of your mind.] The whole new Creature doth consist in the renewal of the Mind the Will, the Affections and the Actions of the Man, 1 Thess. 5.23. But because this Renewal doth begin with the change of the Mind, discerning and approving what is acceptable to the Lord, and upon that follows the choice of what is so by the Will, and the inclination of the Af∣fections to what the Mind doth thus approve of, and the regulation of our outward Actions is according to what we thus approve, choose, and affect, this Renewal of the Mind is put for the Renovation of the whole Man, and we are said to be renewed in the spirit of our mind, and to put on the new man, Eph. 4.23, 24. and to put on the new man, which is re∣newed  in knowledge, according to the image of him that created him, Coloss. 3.10. , the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.] The Ritual Precepts of the Law had no internal Goodness in them antecedent to the Command; and God himself says of them, I gave them statutes which were not God, Ezek. 20.25. and in opposition to their costly Sacri∣fices and Burnt-offerings, saith, He hath shew∣ed thee, oh man, what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee, even to do justice, and lve mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God, Micah 6.6, 8. They were not pleasing to him in themselves, Psal. 51.14. Hebr. 10.8. but he declareth his delight in justice and mercy, Jer. 22.16. And the design of the Apostle, in the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, is to prove the imperfection of these Sacrifices, and of the old Covenant, and therefore the necessity of a better Sacrifice, and a new, and better Cove∣nant; and so in opposition to these Ritual In∣junctions, he may here stile the Gospel Insti∣tution, the good, and acceptable, and the perfect will of God. Ver. 3. (Which will of God you will the bet∣ter discern by your humility and diligence in the exercise of your spiritual Gifts) For this I say, through the Grace (of Apostleship, see Note on Chap. 1.5.) given to me, to every Man that is among you, (thus gifted) not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think, (on the account of those Ministerial Gifts conferred upon him, not for  but for the benefit of others, 1 Cor. 4.6.7.12.7. a did the Scribes, and Pr  Doctors of the Law, n the account of t ir ¦dom and knowledge of it. m. 2.1—23. but to think soberly (of himself, according  God hath dealt to every M the msure  Faith. , the measure of Faith.] Here the Greek Scholiasts agree in the Exposition of these words, that by the measure of Faith we are to understand the measure of Gifts pro∣ceeding from that miraculous Faith which was required to the exercise of them. , for Faith is the  of these Gifts, saith Chrysostom; and when they found this Faith raised in them, they exercised them; they being given, saith Theodoret, ac∣cording to the measure of their Faith. This Faith enabled them to rem ve Mntains, 1 Cor. 13.2. to heal the sick, James 5.15. to cast out Devils, Matth. 17.20. And hence St. Peter exhorts them who had received these Gifts, to minister them , as from the ability, or strength of Faith that God giveth, 1 Pet. 4.11. and this is else∣where stiled the measure of the Gift of Christ. Eph. 4.7. This they did, faithContra Cel. l. 3. p. 124. Origen, , by this faith; , as every one re∣ceived the Gift from Christ, saithL. 2. c. 57. Irenaeus. The Phrase occurs twice inMore Nech part. 3. c. 24. p. 426, 43. Maimonides, where he saith, God declared that he would try the Jews with false Prophets, to know mensu∣ram fidei vestrae in veritate legis the measure of their faith in the law, & ad mensuram fidei vestrae in lucem producendum, num firmiter, & constanter persistatis in e. Whence we learn, that the strength and firmness of Faith is the measure of it. Ver. 4. For as we have many Members in one Body (Natural,) and (Gr. but) all (the) Members (of it) have not the same Office, (but some are more feeble, some more vigorous, some imployed in more, some in less honourable Services, 1 Cor. 12. from v. 12. to the 2th.) Ver. 5. So we (Christians) being many, are one Body in Christ (our Head,) and every one (of us are different) Members of one ano∣ther. Ver. 6. Having then Gifts differing accord¦ing to the Grace (or favour of G d) given to us, whether (at be) Prophecy, let us pro∣phesie according to the propert of Faith. , according to the pro∣portion of Faith.] That is, say some, accord∣ing to those Principles of Faith and good Life, which are known among you; but surely they who prophesied by a Spiritual Gift, could not do otherwise; for no Man can by the Holy Spirit be excited to contradict the Doctrine o
Precepts of Christianity. Others, Let him do it according to the measure of the miraculous Faith imparted to him, enabling him now to reveal Mysteries, now to foretel things, now to disclose the secrets of men, according as God, upon his faith, shall grant ability to him to do it. And therefore. Chrysostom, Oecumeni∣us and Theophylact say, that though this was a Gift, yet it flowed in upon a Man accord∣ing, as by his Faith he made himself a Vessel fit to receive the gift of Prophecy. And this seemeth to be the better Exposition, not only because it hath the suffrage of the Ancient Expositors, but because it best answers to the measure of Faith mentioned v. 3. for , saith Origen here, is not ratio, as the Latins render it, but mensura competens, a competent measure; and , in Hesychius, is , according to the measure; and it agrees best with the Phrase of St. Peter, to exercise these Gifts according to the ability that God hath given them, and to be content with that, though others may enjoy it in higher measures. Ver. 7. Or (if it be) ministery (that of an Evangelist) let us wait on our Ministry; or, he that teacheth, on teaching. , Ministry.] This Charisma being reckoned here before that of Teaching, or Ex∣hortation, I think it best to interpret it of the Office of the Evangelist rank'd before that of the Pastor and Teacher, Eph. 4.11. and im∣mediately after that of the Prophets, as here, rather than to interpret it of the Office of a Deacon; all these four Offices of Apostle, Pro∣phet, Evangelist and Teacher, being designed, saith the Apostle there, v. 12. , for the work of the Ministry. Hence St. Paul writes thus to Timothy, do the work of an E∣vangelist; fulfil  thy Ministry, 2 Tim. 4.5. And of Mark the Evangelist, he saith, bring Mark with thee, for he is profita∣ble to me  to the Ministry, i. e. to be sent to preach the Gospel, or visit the Churches where I cannot come, v. 11. And in this sense, saith St. Peter, , if any man mini∣sters, let him do it as of the ability that God giveth, not as of the Charity of others, which was the proper Office of the Deacon. Of the Teachers, See note on 1 Cor. 12.28. Eph. 4.11. Acts 6.4.13.1.20.24. 2 Cor. 6.3. Coloss. 4.17. Ver. 8. Or, He that exhorteth, on Exhorta∣tion: He that giveth (or is imployed in distri∣bution of the Churches stock) let him do it with simplicity, (or liberality. See the Note on 2 Cor. 8.2.) He that ruleth, with dili∣gence. He that sheweth mercy (to the sick, impotent, strangers, orphans,) with chearful∣ness. , He that giveth, and He that sheweth mercy.] These two Expressions see to denote the same Persons who are calle Helps, 1 Cor. 12.28. See the Note there. He that ruleth may be the same with those wh are there stiled Governments, and elsewher , or , 1 Thess. 5.12. 1 Tim. 3.4.5.17. He that exhorteth is mention among the Spiritual Men, 1 Cor. 14.3.31. Ver. 9. Let Love be without dissimulation (not in word only, but in deed and in trut 1 John 3.18.) abhor that which is evil, clean to that which is good. Ver. 10. Be kindly affectioned to one ano¦ther in brotherly love, (not bearing only s a kindness to one another as common human calls for, but such as the Relation of Christia Brethren, and the Bonds of Consanguinity re∣quire,) in honour preferring one another (Through humility acting as if you conceive others more worthy of honour than your selve See Note on Philip. 2.3. and being well en∣tented that they should be placed in a more ∣nourable post.) Ver. 11. Not slothful in business, (in th concerns of God, and of one another) ferve in spirit, (ardently, and zealously engaging a the service of God, and of one another, as kno¦ing you are then) serving the Lord. , serving the Lord.] S the Syriack, Arabick, Aethiopick Versions, a all the Greek Scholiasts read. The other rea¦ing, , serving the time, me¦tioned by Ambrose, St. Jerom and Ruffinus seems to have had its rise from the abbreviat∣on of the word in MSS. they reading  though it hath a good sense thus, Temper servite, rebus praesentibus vos accommodan & si quid inciderit incommodorum vel declin¦tes, si liceat commode, vel tolerantes. See Ep 5.16. Coloss. 4.5. Ver. 12. Rejoycing in hope (of the G of God) Rom. 5.2. or of eternall life, Tit. 1 patient in tribulations (for the cause of Chri continuing instant in prayer, (that you  stand firm in the faith, and have a season deliverance from them.) Ver. 13. Distributing to the necessities of the (persecuted) Saints. Given to (or pursui hospitality (towards them when they come  you.) Ver. 14. And bless (i. e. wish well to,  pray for) them which persecute you; ye bless, and curse not, (whatever provocation you may have to do so.) Ver. 15. Rejoyce with them that do rejoyce and weep with them that weep, (as the R∣tion of Members of the same Body doth require 1 Cor. 12.26.) Ver. 16. Be of the same mind one towards another, (being concerned for the same good  them which you desire for your selves.) Mi
not high things, but condescend to Men of low estate, (to the meanest concerns of the meanest Christians.) Be not wise in your own conceits, (so as to think you need not the as∣sistance of Divine Wisdom, or the advise and counsel of your Christiam Brethren, Prov. 3.5, 7. Luke 12.53. or so as to neglect the concern of your Christian Brethren, Prov. 3.5, 7. Luke 12.53. or as to neglect the concerns of thy Christian Brother, Gal. 6.2, 3. Ver. 17. Recompense to no man evil for e∣vil; provide things honest (Gr. honourable) in the sight of all men. , honourable.] That there be Acti∣ons, which according to the voice of Nature, and antecedently to any positive Commands, are good, and evil, honourable and praise worthy, or matter of dishonour, or dispraise, in the general Opinion of the World; such as are , honourable before men, as well as in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 8.21. this E∣pistle doth abundantly demonstrate; for the Apostle in the first Chapter, having menti∣oned all the unrighteousness and impure acti∣ons of the Heathen World, he adds, That the Heathens knew, from the consideration of the Righteousness of God, that they who did such things were worthy of death, v. 32. In the se∣cond Chapter he inform us, that the Gentiles, having not a written Law, and notwithstand∣ing doing by Nature the things contained in the Moral Law, shew the work of the Law written in their hearts, their Conscience bearing witness to it, and their thoughts accusing, or else excu∣sing one another, v. 14, 15. That the Exercise of Righteousness and Peace renders us not only acceptable to God, but also approved of Men, Chap. 14.17. Accordingly the Wise∣man saith, that by observing Mercy and Truth we shall  provide things honourable in the sight of God and Men, Prov. 3.3, 4. Ver. 18. If it be possible, as much as lyeth in you, live peaceably with all men. Ver. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves (upon your enemies, v. 20.) but rather give place unto (the) wrath (of God a∣gainst them,) for it is written (Deut. 32.35.) Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, saith the Lord. , Give place unto wrath.] i. e. Refer it to the Punishment of God,  suffer him to come in with his wrath upon those who are your enemies, and persecute you for his sake, for this is the import of these words, Give place unto wrath; so Chrysostom, Occume∣nius, Theophylact: And this Exposition is con∣firmed by the ensuing reason, for vengeance is mine, I will repay it; and from the occasion of those words, Deut. 32.35. they being spo∣ken for the comfort of God's People, whose Cause he will plead, and for whose sakes he will repent of the evil brought upon them, v. 36. Ver. 20. Therefore if thine Enemy hunger (rather) feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire (the Divine vengeance) on his head. , thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.] I know that many good Interpreters conceive here is an Allusion to Artificers that melt Lead, or o∣ther Metals, by heaping Coals of fire upon them, and so imagine that the import of these words is this, Thou shalt melt him down, or work him, by this obliging kindness, into good affection to thee: But I believe the sense is ra∣ther this, That, if he persevere in his enmity to, his persecution of thee, and perversness to thee, after these kind offices, the event, though not sought by thee, will be this, thou by thy patience shall engage the wrath of God to fall upon him, and to maintain thy Cause against him; and so shall be more certainly and hap∣pily delivered from his Malice, then by aveng∣ing of thy self, thou wouldst be. For 1st, This suits best with the connexion of this with the foregoing Verse by the Particle Therefore, avenge not your selves, but rather give place to the wrath of God to fall upon your Enemies, or Persecutors, seeing he will repay vengeance to them. Therefore let not their Enmity hinder you from being kind to them; for that Kindness, if it do not mollifie them, will cause the Wrath of God to wax hot against them. 2ly, Because the words are plainly taken from Prov. 25.21. where they are exactly to be found, where, saith Grotius, apparet de poenâ divinâ agi, it is evident the Wiseman speaks of the Divine vengeance. And this is the continual import of the Phrase in the Old Testament, where only it incurs, and where it still signifies the Wrath and Indignation of the Lord. So Psal. 140.9, 10. As for the Head of them that compass me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them, let  coals of fire fall upon them. So Isa. 47.14. they shall not deliver themselves from the pow∣er of the flame, , for thou hast coals of fire to cause to sit upon them. So Ezek. 10.2. God commands the Angel to fill his hand  with coals of fire, to scatter them over the City, to burn the City with them. And 4 Esdr. 16.52, 53. Let not the sinner say he hath not sinned, for God shall heap coals of fire upon his head who said before the Lord God, and his Glory, he hath not sinned. Ver. 21. Be not overcome of evil, (let it not prevail upon thee to be impatient under, or a∣venge it) but overcome evil with good. , be not overcome of evil.] Vincitur a malo qui vult peccare in alium, quia ille peccavit in ipsum. Aquinas.
CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. LET every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, (or Supream A∣thority placed over them,) for there is no Pow∣er but of God, (the Fountain of it,) the Pow∣ers that be are ordained of God. , there is no Pow∣er but of God.] That this may rightly be un∣derstood, let it be noted, 1. That God doth not now, as in the case of Saul and David, by him∣self appoint and nominate the Person who shall sway the Scepter in any Nation of the World. The Roman Emperors, the Powers then in be∣ing when St. Paul writ this Epistle, had no such appointment, but were elected by the Ro∣man Armies, or chosen and confirmed by the Senate. Whence it appears, that an immedi∣ate appointment or designation of the Person by God, cannot be necessary to render any Prince God's Ordinance. 2ly, By virtue of God's general appointment or ordinance, whether in the fifth Command∣ment, or by a Law of Nature, requiring that all Nations should have some Government placed over them, no individual Person can claim a Right to be the higher Power in any Nation, more then others, nor are the People by it tied to yield Obedience to this Man, ra∣ther then to that. This therefore cannot be sufficient to make a Man the individual Person who is God's Ordinance, in reference to such a Nation: It remains therefore 3ly, That this Authority be conveyed to this or that individual Person or Family, by Compact, Consent, or Choice of the Persons governed, that such a Person, or Family, shall have the Supream Authority in such a Nation. It therefore must be such a Choice, Consent, or Contract that renders any Person the Ordi∣nance of God to such a Nation. And this is what Men call a Legal Right, or Title to the Crown; this is a Title by the Laws and Con∣stitutions of the Land. But then as mutual Consent and Contract make two Persons Man and Wife, and yet Matrimony is God's Ordinance, and the Power of the Man over the Wife, and of the Wife over the Body of the Husband, is from God; and as among us one becomes a Master, ano∣ther a Servant, by Consent and Covenant, and yet the Master hath from God authority over his Servant; so here, the individual Person becomes the higher Power by the Consent, the Choice, or Contract Original, or Actual of the Community, but yet the Power he ex∣ercises in that station is of God, the Fountain of all Power, and he acts in that station, not as the Minister of Man, but God. Ver. 2. Whosoever therefore resisteth the Power, resisteth the Ordinance of God, and he that resisteth (the Ordinance of God) shall receive to himself Damnation (Gr. Judg∣ment.) , whosoever resisteth the Power.] Origen having cited this and the preceding Verse in his Dissertation against Celsus, confesses it is a place. L. 8. p. 421. capable of much disquisition, by reason of such Princes as govern cruelly and tyrannically, or who by rea∣son of their power, fall into effiminacy and Car∣nal Pleasures; referring us to his Comment on that place for the farther Explication of the words. Now there he saith,Non hic de illis potestatibus dicit quae persecutiones inferunt fidei, ibi enim dicendum est, oportat Deo obtemperare mais quam hominibus, sed de istis potestatibus dicit quae non sunt timori boni operis, sed mali. This is not to be understood of Persecuting Powers; for in such Cases that of the Apostle takes place, we must obey God rather than Man; but of those Powers which are not a terrour to Good works, but to the evil; and it is a contradi∣ction to the Holiness, Justice, and Goodness of God, to say that he hath given Princes any Power to oppress, rob, spoil, murther, or do any injury to their Subjects. They cannot purely upon this account, that they are the Ordinance of God, have any Power or Autho∣rity to do evil to them; and so resisting, i. e. not being subject, or obedient to them in any such thing, cannot be that resisting of God's Ordinance to which the Penalty is here an∣nexed. Now this is the Non-resistance of which the Greek Commentators speak, even the Non-performance of Subjection and Obe∣dience to their Commands; and so the cohe∣rence seems to require, which saith, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, for who∣soever doth resist them (by not being subject) resisteth the Ordinance of God. Moreover, they only are the Ordinance of God, as they are the Ministers of God, v. 3, 4. now they are only the Ministers of God for good, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, v. 4. And 3ly, the Sub∣jection here required, to which the Resistance is opposed, is a Subjection due to them, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake; but we cannot be obliged from Conscience to∣wards God, to be subject to them in those things which they have no Authority from God to require, and for refusal of obedience to which we have God's Authority.
They who interpret this of Violent Resi∣stance by Force of Arms, speak the truth, but not the whole truth, that being not the only Resistance opposite to Subjection, and there∣fore not the only Resistance here forbidden: For, as Dr. Faulkner observes, , which we translate to resist, includes all pra∣ctising out of a Spirit of Aversness, Oppositi∣on, and Contradiction, and whatsoever is con∣trary to the  the being subject, v. 1. and 5. See Acts 13.8.18.6. , shall receive judgment to themselves.] i. e. They shall be sentenced, punish'd, and condemned for it by the Magi∣strate, who is a terrour to all Evil Works. So the word  signifies in these words, fearest not thou God, seeing thou art  under the same Sentence of Condemna∣tion by the Magistrate, Luke 23.40. See Note on Chap. 5.16. And to this Sense the Connexion inclines, He shall receive Sentence or Punishment (from the Rulers) for Rulers are a terrour to evil Works; if therefore thou doest evil be afraid, for he beareth not the Sword in vain, but is an Avenger of Wrath. Or, if he escape the Hand of the Magistrate, he shall be punished by that God whose Mi∣nister and Ordinance the Power he resisteth is; this follows from the obligation to be sub∣ject, not only out of Wrath, but also from Con∣science towards God; but hence it doth not follow that he must be damned, as that im∣ports his being sentenced by God to Eternal Torments, it follows not from the word , seeing that, in its literal import, signifies Judgment, and no more, and sometimes is applied to Humane Judgments; nor from the Obligation to be subject out of Conscience, for then all Men must be damned who neg∣lect what they, in Conscience toward God, stand bound to do, or do what they in Consci∣ence are obliged not to do, and then wo be to them who through weakness, or prejudice, mistake their duty, or are ignorant of it, and therefore do neglect it, or transgress against it. Seeing then the Resister of God's Ordi∣nance here is not only the wilful Rebel, but he also who is not subject and obedient to the Commands of lawful Authority, if the punish∣ment of this sin, without exception, be Eter∣nal Torments, all must be sentenced to them who out of ignorance and weakness, misun∣derstanding or prejudice, refuse in any lawful matter to yield obedience to the Commands of their Superiours, and so not only sins of wil∣fulness, but sins of ignorance and weakness, must be damnable. Now according to this double Notion of Resistance, let it be noted, 1. That the Resistance which consists in Non-subjection, or a Refusal to yield Actual Obedience to the Law of the Superiour, can only be allowed when the Matter of the Law is sinful, and so forbidden by the highest Pow∣er, not when 'tis judged inexpedient, or un∣profitable only, for of that Subjects are not to judge, but the Law giver only, in that they lawfully may; and therefore, to avoid Scan∣dal, and Punishment, and from respect to him, who is God's Vicegerent, ought to obey, even as Servants are to obey their froward Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18. and Children their Parents in all lawful things, Col. 3.20. not disputing their Authority in such matters, and this from Con∣science towards God. 2ly, That no Resistance of the higher Pow∣ers by force of Arms, or Violence, can be al∣lowed purely on the account of Religion, for if so, we could not be obliged to suffer wrong in such Cases from Conscience towards God, as the Apostle saith we are, 1 Pet. 2.19. or from the Example of our Lord, v. 21 — 24. because the Sufferings which God hath not obliged us to undergo, we cannot undergo from Conscience towards God. 3ly, That no violent Resistance, or no Re∣sistance of the Higher Powers by force, can be allowed to any who have not the Power of the Sword, and who are no Avengers of Wrath; for he that thus useth it, plainly takes the Sword without Authority from him to whom belongeth Vengeance, and the Power of Life and Death originally, i. e. God, and so with∣out Authority from him to whom this Power of the Sword originally belongs, and therefore by our Saviour's Aphorism, deserves to perish by it, Matth. 26.52. Hence there∣fore it must follow, 1. That in absolute Governments, there is no power of lifting up the Sword against the high∣er Powers, because there is none can claim a share in the Government, and so none can have any power of the Sword, or right to be an Avenger of Evil, but the Absolute Power. 2ly, That in mixt Governments, if any Per∣sons, or States can claim the Power, it must be either (1st.) upon Compact that such Per∣sons shall have this Power to defend their Laws. Or (2ly,) by virtue of that Rule of Gretius, ThatSi populus Regem fecerit non pleno jure, sed additis legibus, poterunt per eas leges contrarij actus irriti fieri aut ini, aut ex parte, quia eatenus populus jus sibi servavit. De jure Belli & Pacis. L. 14. § 2. where a People hath con∣ferr'd, not an abja Power, but a Govern∣ment according to Law, they must be supposed to have reserved to themselves a Power necessa∣ry to preserve their Laws. Or else by some Act done by the Superiour which is a virtual Abdication, or a Renunciation of his Govern∣ment; in all which Cases we can have no di∣rection from the words of the Apostle, who in general commands Subjection to the High∣er Power, but declares not how far any
Man is so, or when he ceaseth to be so. Ver. 3. For Rulers (if they act by the Au∣thority of God, and according to Law) cannot be a terrour to Good Works, (i. e. such as the Light of Nature pronounceth good) but to the Evil; wil'st thou then not be afraid of the Power (that it will do thee any harm,) do (then) that which is good, and thou shalt (rather) have praise of the same. Ver. 4. For he is (by his institution) the Minister of God to thee for good, (if thou beest a doer of what is good,) but if thou do∣est that which is evil (thou hast cause to) be afraid, for he beareth not the Sword (of Ju∣stice) in vain, for he is the Minister of God to execute wrath (Gr. for wrath) on him that doth evil. Ver. 5. Wherefore ye must needs (Gr. ye ought to) be subject (to this Minister of God,) not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Ver. 6. For, for this Cause pay ye Tribute also (to them) for (that) they are God's Ministers, attending continually on this very thing (the executing Judgment between Man and Man, to preserve every Man in his Right, and to punish the wrong doer.) for this cause pay ye tribute also.] Hence it appears that paying Tribute to, is an acknowledgment of the Right of Government in him to whom we pay it, it being payable only on this account, because he is the Minister of God, and rendred to Caesar, because it is Caesar's, i. e. because it doth belong to him as being Caesar, or the Power God hath set over us. Ver. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, (i. e. all legal impositions,) Fear to whom Fear, Honour to whom Honour (is due). , Render therefore to all their dues.] It is observable, that all that is said here, and Tit. 3.1. and 1 Pet. 2.11, 12. seems plainly to relate to those false Doctrines and Opinions which had obtained among the Jews, and were destructive of all Government, and which all Christians therefore were con∣cerned to shew their freedom from, and op∣position to them, that so they might stop the mouths of those Heathens, who looking upon Christians as the off-spring of the Jews, were apt to charge them with the same Principles of opposition to all Heathen Governments. Now their Principles were these: 1st, That they, being the People of God, God alone was to be owned as their Lord and Governour, in opposition to all Earthly Governours, at least in opposition to all Go∣vernours which were not of their own Nati∣on, and by him immediately chosen, and ru∣ling by his Laws. See this fully proved Note on 1 Pet. 2.16. 2ly, As a Consequent of this they refused to pay Tribute to Caesar, crying out to Agrip∣pa, ,, Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 1. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 1. p. 775. D. c. 12. p. 714. See the Note on James 4.2, 3. to take away their Tributes, looking upon them as a sign of Sub∣jection which they ought not to submit to. Ver. 8. Owe no Man any thing (which Ju∣stice obligeth you to render to him) but (be e∣specially concerned) to love one another, (which love, if ye observe its Precepts, will preserve you from doing any evil, or injustice to your Brother,) for he that (truly) loveth a∣nother, hath fulfilled the whole Law (rela∣ting to him). , another.] This being v. 10. , his Neighbour, shews that every Man is the Christian's Neighbour. Ver. 9. For this (that which the Law for∣biddeth in these words) thou shalt not com∣mit Adultery, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not covet, and if there be any o∣ther Commandment (of the Law relating to thy Neighbour,) is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self, (i. e. with the like love thou bearest to thy self, though not with love equal to it. See Note on Matth. 22.39, 40. Ver. 10. For (he that is acted by) love, worketh no ill to his Neighbour, (which is the thing required in these negative Precepts,) therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law. , worketh no evil.] Not that the Law is compleatly fulfill'd by doing no e∣vil to our Neighbour, but because, in Christ's interpretation, the neglect of doing any Good we are able, and have opportunity to do for him, is doing evil, Mark 3.4. Here therefore is a Meiosis, for Charity is also kind, 1 Cor. 13.4. and engageth us by love to serve another, Gal. 5.13, 14. , love therefore is the fulfilling of the Law.] The Apostle plainly here discourseth of the fullfilling of the Law, as it relateth to our Neighbour, but, as Estius here notes, Love is also the fulfilling of it, as it re∣spects our duty to God; for he that loves his Neighbour aright, loves him for God, and in obedience to God, and so must principally love God; he also loves his Neighbour as himself. Now no Man truly loves himself, who loves not him above all things, who is his chief Good; and in loving whom thus, his happiness consists. See Matth. 22.37. Ver. 11. And that (Gr. this, i. e. Exhorta∣tion to obey Authority, and walk in fervent Cha∣rity towards all Men, I recommend to you now is very seasonable) knowing the Season that
now it is high time (for all) to awake out of sleep, for now is our Salvation, (or the salvation of us Gentiles) nearer than when we (first) believed. , to awake out of sleep.] Is a Phrase importing two things; (1.) The Conversion of Heathens to Christianity, as in that call to them mentioned Eph. 5.14. Where∣fore he saith, awake thou that sleepest, arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life, or shine upon thee. 2ly, Our care to walk as becometh Converts with true Christian Vigi∣lance, as when the Apostle saith to the Corin∣thians, Awake to righteousness, and sin not, 1 Cor. 15.34. and to the Thessalonians thus, Let us not sleep as do others, 1 Thess. 5.6, 7. , for now is your salvation nearer.] i. e. Say some, the delive∣rance of you Christians from the Persecution of the Jews stirring up the Heathens against you. And I believe this Passage hath a Rela∣tion to the destruction of the Jewish Nation, and the dissolution of that Church, and of the Worship confined to the Temple, but chief∣ly upon this account, that then was the time when the Salvation of the Gentiles, was to be more fully and gloriously accomplished, that being the time when God would shew forth all his wrath upon the unbelieving Jews, the Crucifiers of our Lord, and their Messiah, and upon that account the Vessels of his Wrath, Rom. 9.22. Hence the Apostle exhorteth the believing Jews to constancy in the Faith, For∣asmuch as they saw this day approaching, Hebr. 10.25. and they being then, saving a little Remnant, entirely rejected, and cut off from being any more the Church of God, the Gen∣tiles were to be more fully called, and owned as the Church of God. The Apostle had be∣fore discoursed of this matter, telling the Ro∣mans, that by their rejection and fall, came  salvation to the Gentiles, Chap. 11.11. that their fall would be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, v. 12. and v. 13, 15. I speak, saith he, to you Gentiles, that their rejection will be the reconciling of the World. And of this Salvation of the Gentiles, he saith, it is now nearer then when they first believed, the time of the utter rejection of the Jews drawing nigh; and therefore he advises them, especi∣ally now at this Season to give no obstruction to their Conversion, and lay no obstacle in their way, by any disobedience against their Superiours, but, by their submission to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake; to put to silence all the Objections of ignorant Men against them, as Disturbers of Government; that they would diligently avoid all Works of Darkness; that they who spoke of them as evil doers, might by their good works which they beheld, be induced to glorifie God in the day of their visitation, 1 Pet. 2.12, 14. to a∣void all strife and envy, and to walk in love, as being that which rendred them so amiable in the eyes of the very Heathen. Ver. 12. The night (of Heathen ignorance, Acts 17.31.) is far spent, and the day (of Grace and Salvation to them) is at hand, let us therefore cast off the Works of Darkness, and let us put on the Armour of Light. , the night is far spent.] , he calls the night the time of the ignorance of the Gentiles, saith Theodoret; and so the day must be the ap∣pearance of the Gospel Light to them: And this is very sutable to the Language of the Holy Scripture, which speaketh of the Gen∣tiles thus, Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, Eph. 5.8. and as Men darkned and blinded in their minds, Eph. 4.18. and whose foolish hearts were darkned, Rom. 1.20. In the Old Testament they are still re∣presented as Men who sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Isa. 9.1. and when Christ was sent to be a Light to the Gentiles, he is said to be sent to give light to them that sat in darkness, Luke 1.78, 79. And when St. Paul was sent to Convert them, he is said to be sent to turn them from darkness to light, Acts 26.18. And when St. Peter mentions their Con∣version, he tells them, God had called them from darkness, into his marvellous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. , and the day is at hand.] i e. The Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. whence they to whom this Salvation was come by the receiving this Gospel Light, are said to be , men of the day, and , Chil∣dren of the day, 1 Thess. 5.5, 8. and bid here to walk honestly as in the day. Ver. 13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, (1 Pet. 4.3.) not in strife and envying, (things inconsistent with the Christian Charity, which is the Glory of their Profession). , honestly.] Decently, honoura∣bly, as becometh Christians both towards our Governours, having our Conversation  honourable, and decorous among the Gentiles, that they beholding our good Works may glorifie God, that is, may own him whom the Christians worship as a Good, and holy God, and so be gained to the Faith. , in chambering and wan∣tonness.] . Hesych. Phavor. Ver. 14. But put you on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof. , put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.] i. e. Be conform to his Doctrine and Holy Life. So Chrysostom saith it was a common Phrase, , such a one hath put on such a one; that
is, he is an imitator of him; so to put on the New Man, is to walk as New Men, in newness of Life and Conversation; Eph. 4.24. In holiness and righteousness, after the Image of him that hath created us anew, C 3.10. CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. (NOW to prevent these strifes and envyings) Him that is weak in faith, (and so not rightly grounded in it) receive ye (into Christian Communion) but not to doubtful Disputations (not respect∣ing the difference in their thoughts and reason∣ings from yours). , not to doubtful disputations.] Not discriminating them by their inward Thoughts or Reasonings, or re∣jecting any from Communion upon that ac∣count, because they are weak in Judgment; this sense the Antithesis seems to require; and this sense will be confirmed from our Note on v. 23. and from a like passage of St. James, If you say to the Man in gay clothing, sit thou here honourably, and to the poor, stand thou there, or sit down at my foot-stool, , do you not put a difference, or a dis∣crimination among your selves, and are become Judges  of evil reasonings. Ver. 2. For (such difference of Conceptions there is among the Jewish, and the Gentile Christians, that) one (i. e. the Gentile Chri∣stian,) believeth he may eat all things, ano∣ther who is weak, (Gr. but the weak, i. e. the Jewish Convert, who is mistaken in, and doth not rightly understand his Christian liberty, ab∣staineth from all meats, as fearing they may pollute him, and so) eateth (only) Herbs. , but the weak.] I have observed, Note on Chap. 5, 6. and on 1 Cor. 8.13. that the weak Person is not the Man of a doubting Conscience about a thing indiffe∣rent, but of an erronious Conscience about a thing unlawful; this is plain 1 Cor. 8.7. from these words, Some with Conscience of the Idol to this hour, eat it as a thing offered to an I∣dol, and their Conscience being weak is defiled. Now to eat with conscience of the Idol, must be to eat from an erronious Conscience; and the thing is as plain here from v. 14. which shews that the weak Person esteemeth that unclean which in it self was not so, and therefore acted from an erronious Conscience. I have obser∣ved there also, that  the weak, and  to be weak, and to be made weak, is to fall and stumble, or to be made to fall and stumble; and here it also signifies one that stumbleth at some Doctrine of Christianity viz. at that of Christian Liberty from Jewish observances, and who is scandalized at, or made to fall by the use of that liberty by o∣thers, as is evident also from these words v. 21. It is good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do any other thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. And v. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this therefore that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasi∣on to fall (Gr. a scandal) in his Brother way. , eateth herbs.] Why Herbs on∣ly? St. Chrysostom thinks it was , that it might not appear whether they did it out of observance of the Jewish Law, or only out of Temperance; but this the Apostle contradicts by saying not that he did this being cautious, but that he did it be∣ing weak; and v. 14. that he did it esteem∣ing that which he abstained from as unclean and this is supposed as a thing evident throughout this Chapter, that he abstained out of Conscience of eating that which he esteemed unlawful. Others say the word  Herbs, is taken synecdochically for all sorts of meat allowed by the Law; but then they ought in reason to shew us some example, or in∣stance where the word  is used in this sense. Let it be therefore noted, (1st,) That the Essens among the Jews. Apud Euseb. praepar. Evang. l. 8. c. 14. abstained from all flesh, using as victuals, with great delight green Herbs, and the fruits of Trees; and this they did, as judging Flesh  not to be natural Food, as there it followsDe vit. comtemp. p. 696. D. E. Philo saith they had , a Table pure from any from any thing that had blood in it, as being an incentive to Con∣piscence, and did eat only Bread, and Salt and Hyssop. See Note on Coloss. 2.21. here then is one instance of them, who being weak, did eat Herbs. Moreover, Joseph saith of some Priests of his acquaintance, sent bound to Rome from Judea, for some little Crime, that they were good Men,. De vitâ suâ, p. 999. C. w in their afflictions forgat not their Piety to God
nourishing themselves there with Figs and Nuts, yea teir Superstition would not permit them to use. Ibid. p. 1004. B. the Oil of Heathens, as being not clean, and so such as they, could not use the Mets of Gentiles, much less things offered to Idols, as sometimes all the Meat sold in the Shambles was, without transgressing their own Institutions and Traditions. They there∣fore might eat Herbs, either that they might avoid eating things sold in the Shambles, which had been offered to Idols, and which were therefore deemed  common, or un∣clean, by the wholeAbda. Zara Per. 2. 7. Maim. de Idol. c. 7. § 11, 20. Jewish Nation; or to avoid the eating things which they esteem∣ed polluted by the Gentiles, as the Jewish Pts mentioned by Josephus, did. More∣over, the Person who believeth all things here, is so like the Person who saith all things are lawful for me, 1 Cor. 10.23. where the Apo∣stle is speaking of things offered to Idols, and the Arguments, many of them, are so appa∣rently in sense the same here, and 1 Cor. 8. and Chap. 10. that I can see no reason whol∣ly to exclude this sense; or to say the Apostle doth t at all intend to speak here of things so of ve to the Jew, that in the other Epistle he concludes his discourse upon that Subject with these words, Give no Offence to Jew or Gentile; for what strength is there in this Argument. He cautions them there against things highly offensive, both to Jew or Gen∣tile, i. e. the eating things offered to Idols in the Idol Temple; therefore he cannot here speak of things so offensive to the Jew only, as is eat∣ing of things offered to Idols when sold in the Shambles. Does he not plainly declare in this very case against these Canons of the Jews, that he was perswaded by the Lord Jesus that there was nothing common of it self, but only unto him that so esteemed it, v. 14. and therefore allow, and even advise all Christians, what∣soever was sold in the Shambles, or set before them at a common Table to eat it, asking no question for conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.25, 27. Why therefore is it said, He cannot speak here of things so offensive to the Jew? Ver. 3. Let not him that (sutably to this belief) eateth (all kinds of meat,) despise him that (thorow weakness) eateth not (of any,) and let not him that eateth not, judge (and condemn) him that eateth (as unclean, for not observing these distinctions between meats clean, and unclean by the Law, or ac∣cording to their Traditions, by being offered to Idols, or polluted by the unclean) for God hath received him. , for God hath re∣ceived him.] This is St. Peter's Argument, Acts 15.9. God put no difference betwixt us Jews, and them, purifying their healy faith, and so making them clean in his sight, though they were not circumcised, nor abstained from those Meats we count unclean, he therefore received them without requiring this o them, and therefore so should we. Note here, that though God testified his reception o them by a visible and miraculous dispensation of the Gift of Songs and Prophecy, yet doth not the Apostle say, God hath thus testified his recep∣tion of them, but only he hath received them, i. e. into Communion with him, viz. by giving them that spirit which is the medium of our Union to, and Communion with him. Note also, that these words prove against Estius, that the Apostle here speaks not of the Jew, but of the Gentiles, whom the Jews always deemed unclean, till they became Proselytes to their Law, and so obliged to observe these differences between Meats. See Note on 1 Cor. 7.14. and therefore thought God would not receive them, whilst they did not observe this Law. Moreover, when the Apostle saith, v. 2. another believeth that he may eat all things, Is this other the Jew? Then the strong Jew believed not only that he might eat Swines Flesh, but even things offered to Idols, which yet Estius denies, v. 1. the reason is, because both these must be included in quibustibet iis, all kinds of meat. But if it be the Gentile, as is far more probable, then the Apostle speaks here of the Gentiles. Again, when the same Apostle saith, another esteemeth every day alike, does he mean the Jew? did the Jew think the obligation to observe the Sabbath was abolish∣ed? And if he meant the Gentile, the Apostle must here speak of them. But!, saith Estius, this Doctrine could not extend to the Gentile, to whom it was not lawful to comply with the legal observances, no not for the sake of the infirm Jews. To this I answer, 1st, That the Apostle says nothing in this whole Chap∣ter which doth oblige him so to do, but only not to judge, not to exclude from Communi∣on those Jews that did so, and not to eat of those Meats, when that would minister scan∣dal to the Jew; and doth he not prescribe the same Rule to the Gentile in the Case of Scan∣dal, in these words, But if any man say unto thee, this is offered to Idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.28. 2ly, St. Paul, who had the same perswasion that the Law was not bind∣ing to him, as any Gentile could have, yet to the Jew became as a Jew, that he might gain the Jew; why therefore might he not per∣mit the strong Gentile so to do, especially when this was not done out of respect to the Law of Moses, but purely to the higher law of Charity.
Ver. 4. (Since therefore God hath received, and owned him at his Servant,) who art thou that judgest another Man's Servant? to (God) his own Master, he standeth, or falleth, (and by him only he is to be judged, he is, at present weak indeed) yet he shall be holden up (, but he shall be established,) for God is able to make him stand (, to establish him). , he shall be stablished.] The Apostle seems plainly here to speak of the weak Jew, who through the Errour of his Judg∣ment, might be apt to stumble at the Liberty which the strong Christian used, and which the Christian Doctrine taught that Christ had purchased for him also, as thinking both him∣self, and others, obliged to observe the Law of Moses, and of him he saith he is now in∣deed weak, but he shall be established, i. e. the time will come when by the destruction of the Jewish Temple, to which their Service was annexed, and in which alone a great part of their Ceremonial Worship was to be perform∣ed, they should be better satisfied of the ces∣sation of their obligation to observe those Pre∣cepts. Thus also he saith, Philip. 3.5. As ma∣ny as are  fully instructed in their Chri∣stian Liberty, let them mind this thing, viz. that it is only the Circumcision of the Spirit that God now regardeth, v. 3. and if any one be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you; i. e. he will in his due time con∣vince you of this truth. See the Note there. Note also that the Effusion of the Spirit on the Jews, though circumcised, and zealous for the observation of the Law, was an Argu∣ment that God also had received the be∣lieving Jew to his favour, notwithstanding his weakness of Judgment in those Matters. , for God is able to make him stand.] The Apostle elsewhere argues from God's Power to his Will; so Chap. 11.23. If they abide not in unbelief, they shall be graffed in, for God is able to graff them in again. Chap. 16.25. To him that is able to confirm you. 2 Cor. 9.6, 8. He that soweth liberally shall reap liberally; for God is able to make all Grace abound toward you. Hebr. 2.18. le is able to succour them that are tempted. And this Argument is always good, where we put no obstruction to his Will by rendring our selves unworthy of his Illuminations and his Favours; he being otherwise always as ready as he is able to do what he sees needful, and truly conducing to our Spiritual Good. , who art thou that judgest another mans servant?] Some interpret these words thus, We are not to judge another man's Servant for doing what his own Master alloweth, or permitteth: but this is adding to the Text; for the Apostle doth not say, who art thou that judgest another Man's Servant wrongfully, or condemns in him what God allows; ay, he plainly supposeth him weak, and erronious, and yet allows not any condemning, and rejecting him, and excluding him, saith Dr. Hammond, out of the Church, because God hath received him to be his Ser∣vant. Ver. 5. One Man esteemeth one day above another, (i. e. as more fit to do God service in, as being set apart by him for that end) another esteemeth every day (alike fit for that purpose) let every Man be fully perswaded in his own mind, (or act with fulness of perswasion that he doth what is lawful). , let every one be fully perswaded in his own mind.] The Greek and Latin Fathers give this sense of these words, in Matters of this Nature touch∣ing the observation of a day to the Lord, or not, the abstaining from Meats, or not, let every Man abound in his own sense, i. e. let there be no condemning, no excluding any Man on the account of such different Senti∣ments; and this sense is very agreeable to the Context, if the word  will bear it, of which sure the Greek Interpreters must be sufficient Judges, especially when Phavorinus saith that  is the same with , fulfil, as in that of the Apostle, , fulfil the Ministry, 2 Tim. 4.5. and when this sense accords so well with the Hebrew Proverb,  Let a Man fulfil his heart, or do his pleasure. They who render the words, as we do, Let every Man be fully perswaded in his own Mind, as the word  doth import, Col. 2.2. Hebr. 6.9.10.22. 1 Thess. 1.5. and the Verb , Luke 1.1. Rom. 4.21. either refer it to the preceding words thus, Let every Man content himself with this, that he is fully per∣swaded he doth as he ought, and not search in∣to the Actions or Judgments of other Men about these Matters, to condemn you for them; and this also is a sense against which I know no exception, and is made probable from v. 14, 21, 22. or else give the sense thus, Let a Man have that perswasion of the lawful∣ness of what he doth, or abstains from, as will preserve him from sinning against Conscience in it. Ver. 6. (And to engage you to maintain friendship and communion without censuring and condemning one another for these Matters, consider that) He that regardeth a day, re∣gardeth it to the Lord, (or out of Conscience towards him,) and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it,) i. e. because his Lord hath freed him from any obli∣gation so to do). He that eateth (freely of all kind of Meats) eateth to the Lord, (or to his glory,) for he giveth God thanks (for his liberty thus to eat,) and he that eateth nor (s) to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks (even for those Herbs he eateth,  that he hath provided for him other food.)
, to the Lord.] If the Lord here sig∣nifies the Lord Christ, as we may gather from v. 7, 8, 9. 'tis evident from the reason follow∣ng, For he giveth God thanks, that Christ is God. If it signifie God the Father, yet the following Verses, which apply it to Christ, make it plain that the Argument is good from God the Father to our Lord Christ, and again from Christ, v. 10. to God the Father, v. 11. and consequently that they must equally be God. Here we are told, That no Man can be said to do any thing to the Lord, or out of Conscience towards God in such Cases wherein God has not interposed his Autho∣rity, nor is any Man in Scripture said to do any thing to the Lord, who cannot produce a plain Law for what he does; but when both contending Parties can produce a Di∣vine Authority for doing, or not doing the same thing, (i e. a Law forbidding, and yet commanding the same thing,) there is great reason for them to receive one another, be∣cause they both act out of Reverence to the Divine Authority. But this Assertion may be evidently disproved, 1. From the Example of St. Paul, who ser∣ved God from his Fore-fathers with a pure Con∣science, 2 Tim. 1.3. and convers'd before God in all good Conscience, Acts 23.1. and was zealous for God, even when he persecuted Christians to the death, Acts 22.3, 4. and hought himself bound in Conscience to do many things against the name of Jesus, Acts 26.9. He therefore, if he may be believed, did these things out of Conscience towards God, wherein God had not interposed his Autho∣rity. 2ly, This also is evident from the Instances related in this Verse; for a Law cancelled and disanulled by God himself, hath no Divine Authority; and he who only produceth such a Law, is so far from producing a plain Law for what he doth, that he produceth none at ll, nor doth he act out of Reverence to the Divine Authority, but only with respect to his own erronious Conceptions of a Divine Authority, when there is no such thing; nor can he produce any Divine Authority for what he doth. Oh! but God had once interposed his Authority in this case, and the Jews could not be satisfied that this Authority was repeal∣ed. I answer, And so it is with all the unbe∣lieving Jews unto this very day, who still ob∣serve the Law of Moses, as far as under their present Circumstances they can, as believing it was given them for an everlasting Covenant; and so being unsatisfied that the Authority of t is repealed, so far is it from being true that this Case hath no parallel; 'tis therefore evi∣dent, that in this sense it cannot be said, he that regardeth a day enjoyned by the Law of Mo∣ses, regardeth it to the Lord; and he that eat∣eth not, to the Lord he eateth not; for the Apostle in this very Chapter, declareth him∣self perswaded by the Faith of the Lord Jesus, that there was nothing now unclean of it self, but only through the mistaken estimation of the Jew, v. 14. and elsewhere, that the Jew∣ish Feasts, New-Moons, and Sabbaths, were on∣ly shadows of good things to come, and that Christ was the Body, or the Substance of them, Col. 2.17. and that there was made , a disannulling of the former Command, by reason of the weakness and unprofitableness of it, Hebr. 7.18. It could be therefore nothing but Prejudice and Errour which made the Jew conceive he observed those days, and abstain∣ed from those Meals by a Divine Authority, or that he could produce such an Authority for so doing; he therefore must be said to do this to the Lord, and out of Conscience towards God, because he, through the weakness and errour of his Judgment, thought the Law of Moses obliged him still in Conscience to the observance of these things. Now this is so far from being an unparallel'd Case, that it is the very Case of the Romanists using still the anointing of the sick; of the Anabaptists dip∣ping them who are baptized; of the Greek Church refusing to eat things strangled, and blood, out of Reverence to the Apostolical In∣junction; of the Dissenters using Prayer by the Spirit, or conceived Prayer, out of Reverence to the Command to pray in the Holy Ghost, and abstaining from Communion with that Church which observes no Church Discipline, out of respect to the Command to purge the Evil from among us; for all this is done by them out of a mistaken Reverence to a Di∣vine Authority which they conceive obliging to them. But then the Greek Expositors here note, that this Indulgence to Men of an er∣ronious Conscience, is not to be extended to Doctrines of Faith, and Matters of great mo∣ment, but only (g) to Cases of Meat, and Fasting, and the like; and that it is especial∣ly to be granted to those who are infirm, and want indulgence. Ver. 7. For none of us (who are Christians) liveth to himself, (but to him that died for him and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.16.) and none of us (dying) dyeth to himself, (so as to be exempted from the power and jurisdiction of the Lord, whose servants we are.) , for none of us li∣veth to himself.] This I conceive to be a rea∣son, not of that which is contained in the 6th . Chrysost. Theod. Phot. Oecam. Theoph.
verse, but of what was delivered v. 4. viz. that Christ was our Master, and we his Ser∣vants, and therefore by judging one another for these things, they took upon them to judge another Man's Servant. For (1st,) in the next Verse the Apostle re-assumes this Mat∣ter, enquiring who art thou that judgest thy Bro∣ther? And (2ly,) these words are a plain proof of this, that we are his Servants to whom we live, and to whom we must give an account of our Actions, and who is Lord both of the dead and of the living; but they seem not so applicable to what is delivered v. 6. or to give a clear reason why he that abstains from Swines flesh, or that religiously observes a Jewish Festival, doth this unto the Lord Christ, who came to take away, not to en∣force the obligation of those things. Ver. 8. For whether we live, we (Christi∣ans, if we act sutably to our duty, and our ob∣ligations,) live unto the Lord, (under his do∣minion, and under the government of his Laws,) or whether we dye, we dye, (and dying, are still subject) to the Lord, whether therefore we live or dye, we are the Lords. Ver. 9. For to this end Christ both died and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the dead, and of the living. , that he might be Lord.] He by his Resurrection being constituted Lord of all things, and having all power both in heaven and earth conferr'd upon him, must have power over all, we being all his Servants, and so obliged not to live unto our selves, but unto him that died for us, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.16. He being also the Rewarder of all those that serve him faithfully, he must be Lord over the dead, so as to be able to bring them to life again, that they may receive the promi∣sed reward. Ver. 10. But why (why then) doest thou judge thy Brother, or why doest thou set at nought thy Brother, (as if he were thy Ser∣vant, and thou his Master, and his Judge, see∣ing) we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, (and from him, who is our Lord and Master, shall receive the Sentence according to our works.) Ver. 11. For it is written (Isaiah 54.23.) as I live saith the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall confess to God. Ver. 12. So then every one of us shall give an account of himself (and of his behaviour in these matters) to God, (and it becomes not us to antidate his judgment). , shall give an ac∣count of himself to God.] Here Oecumenius notes that it is said of God the Father, that he judgeth no Man, but hath committed  Judgment to his Son, John 5.22. and there∣fore what the Apostle here saith, viz. Every Man shall confess to God, and bow the Knee to me, v. 11. and give an account of himself  God, v. 12. is manifestly spoken of Christ as Judge, , and therefore Christ is God. And this Argument was used before the Nicence Council byNeque enim si non & Deus esset, omne se nomine ejus Genuflecteret. Novat. c. 17. Vide Epist. Polycarp. § 6. Novation and o∣thers. It is a wonder that Socinus should dey that the Apostle says that every knee shall be to Christ, when citing the same place, Philip. 2.10, 11. the Apostle so expresly declares, th at the Name of Jesus every knee should b and every Tongue confess that Jesus is the Lord; and here from this place proves th Christ is Lord both of the dead and of the living, before whose Tribunal they must all stand, and so must own his Power and Au∣thority over them, which is the thing expres∣sed metaphorically by bending of the Knee and the confession of the Tongue. And if these words, which the Prophet certainly spake  Jehovah, the God of the Jews, be well ap∣plied by the Apostle to Christ, Christ must be also the Person intended by them; for how could the Apostle prove that every Knee m bow to Christ, from the words of God say∣ing, to me every knee shall bow, if Christ we in his whole Nature and Essence as differe from that God, who spake those words  himself, as is a Creature from his great Cre∣tor.Non quod Christus sit ipse Deus, sed quia id quod in hoc testimonio continetur, per Christum tanquam Deo subordinatu  Deo praestari & exhiberi debeat. Crellius here saith St. Paul acco∣modates this passage to Christ, not that he i God, but that what is contained in it, shall b Christ, as subordinate to God, be exhibited  performed to God himself. But this Subterf is confuted by the words of the Apostle, was saith expresly Philip. 2.10, 11. That to th Name of Jesus every knee should bow,  every Tongue confess that Jesus is the Lord and so declares these words are fulfilled by t honour exhibited, not to God the Father,  to our Lord Jesus Christ, and seeing he  Lord over the dead, by the power by which he is able to subdue all things to himself, Phi¦lip. 3.21. which doubtless is the power  God; and seeing, having raised all Men, he will bring to light the hidden things which they have done, and manifest the counsels  their hearts, 1 Cor. 4.5. and so must be Om∣niscient, and have the knowledge of the Se¦crets of the Heart; and 'tis the property  God alone to raise the dead by his own pw∣er, and be the searcher of all Hearts: These Properties ascribed to Christ, and elsewhere must shew that he is truly God. See the N on Philip. 2.10.
Ver. 13. Let us not therefore (take upon us to) judge one another any more, but let us judge this rather, that no Man (ought to) put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall (from the faith) in his Brother's way. , not to put a stumbling block.] Is, not to cause our Brother to stum∣ble at the Christian Faith, and fall off from it, or to perish; for what is here, do not put a stumbling block (by thy Meat) in thy Brothers way, is v. 15. destroy not him with thy Meat for whom Christ died; and to eat, , so as to put this stumbling block before him, is for meat to destroy the work of God. And that in this sense the phrase is still used in the Epistles, see Note on 1 Cor. 8.9. only let it be noted, that where there is the same danger of destroying my Brother, or dissolving the work of God, be it not by Infi∣delity, but Schism, or Idolatry, or loose Li∣ving, there is the same reason and obligation not to put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in our Brother's way: For the reason why the Apostle would not have us put this stumbling block, which makes our Brother fall from the Faith, in his way, is this, because he would not have us be instrumental to his pe∣rishing, to destroy him for whom Christ died. He therefore must equally forbid the doing a∣ny other thing which may be left undone with∣out sin; and being done, hath a like tendence to cause my weak Brother to perish. Ver. 14. I know and am perswaded by (the faith of) the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, but (notwithstanding this,) to him that esteemeth any thing unclean, to him (as to the use of it) it is unclean. , to him that esteemeth any thing unclean, &c.] Here is a plain de∣monstration that the Person here mentioned as weak in Faith, was also weak in Understand∣ing, i. e. one who understood not that Meat to be free from uncleanness, which indeed was so; and that he was therefore weak in the Faith, because he was so in his Understand∣ing, and so also is it plainly 1 Cor. 8.7, 10. 'Tis therefore without ground affirmed, That these two sorts of weak Persons must be used very differently; you must have a care of of∣fending those who are weak in Faith, but you must instruct and govern those who are weak in Understanding. 2. Here also is a plain Evidence that the weak Jew had no just matter of offence gi∣ven him by the Gentiles eating, that they did not take offence at the open violation of any express Law of God by the Gentiles eating, nor were they thus weak out of Reverence to an express positive Law, which all Men agreed was given by God to them, at whose eating they were scandalized. To make this very clear, consider that the weakness of the Jews consisted in two things: 1. That they were not convinced that the Law of Moses was out of date, and therefore durst not do any thing which was forbidden by that Law, nor omit doing what the Law commanded; and as to this, it is true, that they were weak out of Reverence to an ex∣press positive Law, which, through the weak∣ness of their Understanding, they thought to be still binding; but the Apostle here declares to be by Christ taken away. 2. That they could not endure to see others do what they themselves durst not do; i. e. they could not endure to see the Gentile Con∣verts eat those Meats which the Law of Mo∣ses forbad the Jews to eat: Now here, I say, they were not weak out of Reverence to any express positive Law; nor could they take of∣fence at the open violation of any express Law of God, for there was no such Law given to the Gentiles, to abstain from such Meats as unclean, nor to the Gentile Converts to Chri∣stianity to observe any such Law; they there∣fore by eating of these Meats, did violate no Law given by God to them, and so the Jews could take no offence at their violation of any such Law. And so much stronger is the case of eating things offered to Idols, in which yet the Apostle doth require this abstinence, with regard to the Conscience of the weak Jew, 1 Cor. 8.7, 10. and Chap. 10.28, 29. For the eating of things offered to Idols, (unless it were done in the Idol Temples, the place ap∣pointed for his Worship) was against no Law of God, but only against the Canons of the Jews; and so here the Jews could not be thus offended with that action, out of reve∣rence to any Law which God had made a∣gainst it, but only from the Jewish Canons, and Interpretations of the Law touching abstain∣ing from Idolatry; the imagination of the Jew, that such Meats bought in the Sham∣bles, or set before Christians at a friendly En∣tertainment, were unlawful, was a vain ima∣gination, and so they had only an imaginary Law which occasioned their offence. Nor doth the Apostolical Canon concern any other Meats offered to Idols, than those which were eaten in the Idol Temple; for sure the Apostle, who was a part of that Council, would not here freely allow what the whole College of Apostles thought it necessary, even for the Gentile Converts to abstain from. This Scan∣dal therfore of the weak Jews, was plainly Scandalum acceptum non datum, received, but not given; for they had no reason at all to believe that the Law of Moses was ever given to, or was in force among the Gentiles, and much less that their Jewish Canons could be so. Ver. 15. But (though nothing be unclean of it self, yet) if thy Brother be grieved (i. e. scandalized) with thy Meat, now walkest thou not charitably, (in eating it to his offence and ruine, wherefore) destroy not him with thy Meat for whom Christ died.
, if thy Brother be grieved.] The Greek imports such Sorrow as puts a Man in danger of his Life, and therefore is the meta∣phorical sense such Sorrow as endangereth his Christian Life. So Job 31.39. If I have caused the owners thereof to lose their life, , if I have grieved his soul, saith the Seventy;  If I have caused his life to expire, or break out. See Dr. Hammond on the place. Note also here, that the Apostle plainly doth suppose that he for whom Christ died, might perish. See the Note on 1 Cor. 8.11. Ver. 16. Let not then (any thing be done by you whereby) your good (i. e. your Christian Calling) may be evil spoken of, (Gr. blas∣phemed by them who are thus offended at this use of your Christian liberty.) , your good.] , he cal∣leth our faith our good, saith all the Greek Commentators, and that very appositely; for the Jews blasphemed, and fell off from Chri∣stianity upon this account. Ver. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not (a thing which consists in) Meat and Drink, but in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Ver. 18. For he that in these things serveth Christ, is both acceptable to God, and appro∣ved of Men. , And joy in the Holy Ghost.] This cannot here signifie delight to do Good, or rejoycing in Unanimity, for the Phrase hath no such sense in Scripture, but always signifies an inward Joy arising from the Consolations of the Holy Ghost; as when the Apostle saith the Thessolonians received the Word with much affliction, and with joy in the Holy Ghost, Thessal. 1.6. And when St. Luke informs us the Churches had peace, and walk∣ing in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost, were mul∣tiplied, Acts 9.31. Ver. 19. Let us therefore follow after those things which make for (the) peace (of the Church,) and whereby we may edifie, (and build up) one another (in Christian love and union into one spiritual Temple in the Lord.) Ver. 20. For Meat destroy not thou the Work of God, (i. e. the Christian Convert, 1 Cor. 3.9. for though) all things indeed are pure, but (yet) it is evil for that Man who eateth with offence (to do so). 21. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor (to do) any (other) thing (from which thou mayest abstain,) whereby thy Brother stum∣bleth, or is offended, or made weak. , stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.] I have shewed what it is to be made weak, Note on v. 1. what to stumble, Note on v. 13. to of∣fend or scandalize a weak Brother, is also to be an occasion of his ruine, by causing him to fall off from the Faith, or to be prejudi∣ced against it, as will appear from a brief view of the chief places where the phrases used. So Matth. 5.29, 30. If thy right eye hand, , offends ye, i. e. if it le thee to Hell, and to Perdition, cut it off. S Chap. 11.6. Blessed is he who is not offende in me, i. e. who is not by the meanness of m present Circumstances, or by the Doctrine I am sent to preach, diverted from believing i me. So Chap. 13.21. When Persecutio comes, the stony Ground  presently offended. So v. 57. and Chap. 15.1. Mark 6.3. Luke 7.23. the Jews were scan∣dalized at Christ; i. e. they were diverted fro owning him as their Messiah, either by reason of his words, or of the meanness of his ori∣ginal, and his appearance in the World. So were the Multitude and some of his Disciples scandalized at his Discourse about eating his Flesh, John 6.60, 61. So doth our Lord ad∣monish his Disciples, not to be scandalized a the Persecutions they should suffer, Joh. 16.1 So he foretels that many, who had once be∣lieved in him, would be scandalized, wh Tribulations should abound, Matth. 24.12 So he tells his own Disciples, that they woud be scandalized at his Sufferings, Matth. 26.31. And so both Peter, and the rest of them were offended, or scandalized, their Faith in hi failing for a season, Luke 24.21. So are we to understand those words, Wo to him that of¦fends, or scandalizeth one of these little ones, as appears from the reason following, v. 14. It is not the will of your heavenly Father, th one of these little ones should perish. So I have shew'd the word is used 1 Cor. 8.13. And so it may be well interpreted, when the Apostle saith 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is offended, i. e. in danger to fall off from the Christian Faith, and I burn not with a fervent zeal for his Recovery. Ver. 22. Hast thou (then) Faith, (or  perswasion that all Meats are clean, and law∣fully may be eaten,) have it to thy self before God, (and satisfie thy self with that,) happy is  that condemneth not himself (by acting un∣charitably) in that which he alloweth. Ver. 23. And he that doubteth (Gr. th puts a difference between Meats) is damned  he eats (against his Conscience making that dif∣ference) because he eateth not of faith, ( against his own perswasion,) for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. , happy is he th condemneth not himself, &c.] i. e. He is com∣paratively an happy Man that hath this f perswasion of the lawfulness of eating any thing that is set before him, without asking any question about it for Conscience sake, for he createth no trouble, or condemnation to himself about these matters, nor is he trou∣blesome to others by his niceness and scrupu∣losity; whereas he that puts a difference be¦twixt Meats, is not only troublesome to others with whom he doth converse, but condems
himself as oft as he is tempted to eat of that which his Conscience doth not allow of. , he that doubteth.] He that discerneth, and puts a difference between Meats lawful, and unlawful; this is the im∣port of this word elsewhere: So Matth. 16.3. you know how  to discern the face of the Heavens. Acts 10.28. and 11.12. Go with them , making no difference betwixt the Gentiles, and the Jews, the cir∣cumcised, and the uncircumcised, not count∣ing them unclean any longer, as St. Peter doth himself interpret it, v. 28. And again, Acts 15.9. , he put no diffe∣rence betwixt them and us, purifying their hearts by faith, 1 Cor. 4.7. , who put the difference betwixt thee, and others. Chap. 11.12. Not discerning the Lord's body, or not discriminating it from other Meats. So Jude 22. Of some have compassion  making a difference. , whatsoever is not of saith.] i. e. With a due perswasion of the lawfulness of the action; for that is the Faith spoken of in the foregoing Verse, when the Apostle saith, Hast thou faith, have it to thy self; and that is the Faith which stands op∣posed to doubting in this Verse; and to this Faith alone agree the preceding words, He that makes a discrimination between Meats lawful and unlawful, and yet eats of them without discrimination, is condemned by his own Conscience, if he eats, because he eateth not of faith, or with perswasion of the law∣fulness of eating what he doth partake of. CHAP. XV. Verse 1. WE then that are strong (and rightly understand our Christi∣an liberty and duty ought to bear the infirmi∣ties of the weak, (being careful to forbear the doing that which doth scandalize, and hurt the Souls of them who have not this knowledge) and not to (do things because they) please our selves (when our weak Brother is thus injured by them.) Verse 2. Let (therefore) every one (of us rather chuse to) please his Neighbour for his Good to (the) edification (of him in his Chri∣stian Faith. , to edification.] Edification in the Scripture sometimes signifies our encrease in the Knowledge of our Christian Duty, in which sense it is seven times used, 1 Cor. 14.3, 4, 5, 12, 16, 26, 29. Eph. 4.29. especially in that Knowledge which tends to our Advancement n Piety, and therefore is called , he Edification of God, 1 Tim. 1.4. Sometimes our growth, or confirmation in that Faith, Jude 20. Sometimes it refers to the whole Body, which is called , the build∣ng of God, 1 Cor. 3.9. 2 Eph. 21.4.12. And hen the Body is edified, (1.) By the mutual Love of its Members; in which sense, saith he Apostle; Charity edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. nd this is , Edification in love, Eph. 4.16. (2ly,) By the strict Union of the Members to, and their peaceable Conversati∣n with one another; and this is stiled , the edifying of the Church into ne; 1 Thess. 5.11. And thus we are bid to follow after the things which make for peace, nd  the edification of e of us unto another, Chap. 14.19. Now he edification which consists in Knowledge of our Christian Duty, cannot be here under∣stood, because our forbearance of that which scandalizes our Brother, tends not to the in∣formation of his Understanding, but, as it is an Act of Charity, it tends to the Edification of the Body in Love, as it is the avoiding that which may scandalize the weak, and so in∣duce him to stumble at, and fall off from Christianity, it tends to his Edification in the Faith; and as it is receiving the Weak into Fellowship and Communion, notwithstanding his different Conceptions from us, it tends to the edifying the Body in Union and Peace. Ver. 3. For even Christ (whose example we are called to imitate) pleased not himself, i. e. indulged not so to his own pleasure, ease, and quiet, as to neglect the Glory of God, or the good of others, but willingly here with the in∣firmities, and sustained the reproaches of men) as it is written (of him, Psal. 69.9.) the Re∣proaches of them that reproached thee tell on me; (i. e.) He was afflicted for them, his zeal for the Glory of God, and the Good of Souls, caused him patiently to endure the contradicti- of sinners. Hebr. 12.2, 3. To bear the Cross they laid, and despise the shame they cast upn him, which sre is much more then to  from a little meat on the account of others.) , as it is written.] That this Psalm was undoubtedly spoken of the Messiah, we learn from v. 22. applyed to Christ, Joh. 19.28, 29. and from the former part of the Verse cited here, viz. the zeal of thine house hath consumed me, applied to Christ, John 2.17. And the Jews them∣selves say, that the things contained in this Psalm, shall be accomplished in the days of David, Voisin. de Lege Div. p. 584. or in the days of
the Messiah; and that which is said in the close of the Psalm, thatPug. fid. part. 3. dist. 3. c. 16. § 25. God will save Zion, &c. that men may dwell therein, and have it in possession, shall be accomplish'd  in the days of the Messiah. Ver. 4. (Nor ought we to think our selves unconcerned in what was said so long ago by David of others) for (this, and) whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning: That we through patience (in bearing the like Censures, Reproaches, and Infirmities of others) and (through the) com∣fort of the Scriptures (promising a reward to that patience,) might have hope (of being re∣warded for it.) Ver. 5. Now the God of Patience and Con∣solation (who works this patience in us, and gives this consolation to us) grant you to be like-minded one towards another, (i. e. to have a like concern for others as for your selves,) according to (the example of) Christ Jesus. Ver. 6. That ye (thus bearing with the In∣firmities of the Weak, and thus receiving one another into Communion,) may with one mind and mouth (in their Assemblies) glorifie (and worship) God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, (or the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.) , with one mind and mouth.] i. e. Not only praising God with the same words in their Doxologies, but also joyn∣ing in those Praises with a Mind full of Chri∣stian love and sense of the Divine Good∣ness. , the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.] So 2 Cor. 1.3.11.31. Eph. 1.3. Coloss. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3. Apoc. 1.6, 12. On which words the Descants of the Fa∣thers is to this effect, That the first Person of the Sacred Trinity is the. Theoph. Deus hominis, p verbi. God of Jesus Christ, in respect of his Manhood, his Father in respect of his Divinity; or as he is the Word. Or the words may be rendred thus; God who is, or the God that is, or God, to wit, the Fa∣ther of our Lord Jesus Christ; for the Hebrew ו, and so the Greek , signifies sometimes id est, Noldius partic. Hebr. p. 280, 281. sometimes nempe, to wit, p. 287. and sometimes qui est, who is, p. 315. Ver. 7. Wherefore receive ye one another, (Jew and Gentile; into mutual love and fellow∣ship, without contention, about the things in which your judgments differ) as Christ also hath received us (both, reconciling both to God in one Body on the Cross, and to one ano∣ther, Coloss. 1.20. Eph. 2.14.) to the Glory of God the Father (which will be much promo∣ted by this Union.) Ver. 8. (As he hath received us, .) For I say, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision (or the Jews) for (the esta∣blishment of) the Truth of God, to confirm the Promises made to the Fathers (of that Na∣tion, and so he shewed his love and mercy to∣wards them.) Ver. 9. And (he was also the Saviour of the Gentiles) that the Gentiles (also) might glo∣rifie God for his mercy (to them,) as it is written (Psal. 18.49.) For this cause I will confess to thee (i. e. praise, and celebrate thee) among the Gentiles, (or, , with the Gentiles) and (will) sing to thy Name. , I will confess unto thee.] The very next words,Pug. fid. part. 2. c. 5. § 8. Great deliver∣ces giveth he unto his King, and sheweth mer to David  his Messiah, or Anoint are by the Jews interpreted of the King Me∣siah, that is, Christ; and so the preceding words are doubtless fitly applied to him. Ver. 10. And again, He (the same David) saith (Psal. 67.4.) rejoyce ye Gentiles with his People. Ver. 11. And again, (Psal. 118.1.) Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all  People. Ver. 12. And again Esaias saith, (Chap. 11 1, 10). There shall be a Root of Jesse,  he that shall rise to Reign over the Gentiles in him shall the Gentiles trust. , Esaias saith.] The Chaldy P∣raphrast interprets the first Verse of the Mes∣siah; and R. Chanina proves from the te Verse, thatVoisin. de lege Div. p. 595. the King Messiah is not  come, but to give Precepts to the Nations  the World. Ver. 13. Now (may) the God of Hope  you with Joy and Peace (the fruits of hope in believing (these things,) that ye may  bound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost (witnessing to your spirits, that  are the Sons of God, Chap. 8.16, 17. i shedding abroad the sense of his love in y hearts, Chap 5.5. and so sealing you up to the Day of Redemption, Eph. 4.30. Ver. 14. And (this I pray, not doubting  Assistance of this Good Spirit with you, for)  my self also am perswaded of you, my Bre∣thren, that ye also are full of Goodness, ¦led (by the Spirit) with all knowledge, ab also to admonish one another. Ver. 15. Nevertheless, I have written t more boldly to you in some sort, (Gr. , as to the Gentile part of y, See Note  2 Cor. 2.5.) as putting you in mind (of the favour of God to you Gentiles, and your  to him) because of the Grace that is given to me of God, (i. e. because of the Aposts
Office by him committed to me. See Note on Rom. 1.5.) Ver. 16. That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministring the Gospel of God, (i. e. exercising my self in the Offices of the Gospel, as the Priest in the Le∣gal Services,) that the offering up of the Gen∣tiles (by me) might be acceptable, being sanctified (not with salt, or any other such li∣amen, but) by (the effusion of) the Holy Ghost (upon them.) , ministring the Gospel.] Here is a plain allusion to the Jewish Sacrifi∣ces offered by the Priest, and sanctified, or made acceptable and savoury by the libamen offered with it; for he compares himself in the preaching of the Gospel to the Priest, Sa∣cris operanti, conversant about his Sacrifice, to prepare and fit it to be offered. The Gen∣tiles dedicated by him to the Service of God, are his Sacrifice or Oblation, the Holy Spirit is the Libamen poured on this Sacrifice, by which they are sanctified and rendred  acceptable to God. See Numb. 15.3, 10. Ver. 17. (And this I have so effectually per∣formed by his Grace, that) I have therefore whereof I may glory, through (the assistance of) Jesus Christ, in those things which per∣tain to (my service of) God (in his Go∣spel.) Ver. 18. (And here I shall only mention what I my self, by the assistance of this Grace, have done,) For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ hath not, (but only of those which he hath) wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word, and deed. Ver. 19. (Viz. That he hath assisted me in preaching the Gospel) through many (Gr. , with the power of) Signs, and Won∣ders, and by the Power of the Holy Ghost. So that from Jerusalem, and round about un∣to Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ. .] i. e. Confirming the Gospel by outward Miracles, and by the inward distributions of the Holy Ghost. See the difference between them, Note on Hebr. 2.4. Ver. 20. Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel (as to do it) not where Christ was named, (i. e. preached by others before me,) least I should build upon another Man's foun∣dation. Ver. 21. But (my preaching hath been) as it is written (Isa. 52.15.) to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see, and they that have not heard, shall understand. Ver. 22. For which cause (wherefore by go∣ing from one Region to another to preach the Gospel.) I have been much hindred from co∣ming to you. Ver. 23. But now having no more place(s) in these parts (unacquainted with the Gospel,) and having a Great desire these many years to come to you. Ver. 24. Whensoever I take my (intend∣ed) journey into Spain) I will (by God's as∣sistance) come to you, for I trust to see you in my Journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat filled (i. e. satisfied) with your Company. , I will come to you, &c] Here is an Evidence that St. Paul in purposes of this nature, was not assisted by the Holy Spirit, they being purposes, which by the Providence of God, he was hindred from ful∣filling. 'Tis also evident from Chap 1. 10, 11. and from this and the 28th Verse, that St. Paul writ this Epistle while he was at liberty and before Christ had told him be mst testifie of him at Rome, Acts 23.11. and before he was constrained to appeal to Caesar, Acts 25.11. for in this Epistle he speaks still of his Journey to Rome, and from thence to Spain, as of a vo∣luntary undertaking, hoping then that the unbelieving Jews would not have given him that disturbance when he went up to Jerusa∣lem with his Alms gathered for his Nation, which afterwards he found they did. Ver 25. But now I go to Jerusalem to minister to (the necessities) or the Saints (there.) Ver 26 For it hath pleased them of Macedo∣nia and Ac, to make a certain Contribution to the poor Saints which are at Jerusalem. Ver. 27. It hath pleased them (I say,) and (with good reason seeing) their Doctors they are, for if the Gentiles have been made parta∣kers of their spiritual things, (receiving the Gospel from Judea,) their duty is also (in Gratitude) to minister to them in carnal things. Ver. 28. When therefore I have performed this (charitable office) and have sealed (and secured) to them this fruit (of the Gentiles liberality,) I will come by you into Spain. Ver. 29. And I am sure, that when I come to you, I shall come in the fulness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ, (or with a full impartent of spiritual Gifts to you. See Note on Chap. 1.11.) Ver. 30. Now I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love (which is the fruit) of the Spirit, that you strive together in your Prayers to God for me. , in your prayers for me.] If Paul, n st , might desire the prayers of the Rms, y might  the Rmans de∣sire the Prayers  Paul I answer. They might desire his Prayers, as he did theirs, by an E∣pistle directed to him to pray for them He adds, If they might dire his prayers whilst li∣ving, why not when dead, and reigning with Christ? I answer, because then they could direct no Epistle to him, or any other way acquaint him with their mind. Hence Elisah, being to be taken up into Heaven, speaks to Elisha thus, As what I shall do for thee, before I am taken away from thee, 2 Kings 2.9.
Note also, that we say not that such desires of the Prayers of Saints departed, are injuri∣ous to the Intercession of Christ, but that they are Idolatrous, implying that Creatures are Omniscient, Omnipresent, and have the know∣ledge of the heart. Ver. 31. That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judea, and that the Ser∣vice which I have for (my Brethren in) Je∣rusalem, may be accepted of the Saints (there, though it come from the Churches of the Gentiles.) Ver. 32. That I may come to you with (the greater) joy, and may with you be re∣freshed. Ver. 33. Now the God of Peace be with you all. Amen. CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. I Commend to you (r care) Phaebe our sister (in the faith,) which is a Servant of (or one that Ministers to) the Church which is at Cenchrea, (or the assembly of Christians at the haven of Corinth. , Phoebe our sister.] This Phoebe was a Deaconess, chosen to that Office according to the Apostolical Prescription, 1 Tim. 5, 10. So Origen and Chrysostom. Ver. 2. That you receive her in the Lord (i. e. for the Lord's sake, or as being one that belongs to him, Matth. 10.42.) as becometh Saints, (i. e. Christians) and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you, for she hath been a succourer of many, and of my self also. , and of my self also.] Hence some infer that she was not a Deaconess, but one that ministred to the Apostles in their preaching of her Substance; but St. Paul had none such to minister to him, 1 Cor. 9.5, 15. and this is made one Condition of a Deaconess, 1 Tim. 5.10. , he saith, she has been a succourer of ma∣ny, by reason of her care of, and hospitality to∣wards them. Ver. 3. Greet Priscilla, and Aquila, my hel∣pers in (the work of) Christ Jesus. , Greet Priscilla.] Priscilla seems to be named first here, and 2 Tim. 4 19. as being first converted, say Interpreters; but she is named last Acts 18.2, 26. 1 Cor. 16.19. and therefore the Gloss saith she is here placed first, there being in Christ Jesus neither male nor female. Ver. 4. Who have for my life laid down their own necks, (i. e. exposed themselves to the hazard of their own lives,) to whom not only I give thanks (for my own preservation,) but also all the Churches of the Gentiles (for preservation of their Apostle.) Ver. 5. Likewise greet the Church which is in their House, (i. e. their Christian Family,) Salute my well-beloved Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia. , and the Church in their house.] They were so zealous in the faith, say Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Theo∣phylact, , that they converted their whole Families to the profession of it, for such Families he calls the Church. See this proved Note on 1 Cor. 16.19. , the first fruits of Achaia.] So Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theo∣phylact, the Syriac and Arabick Versions; but the Alexandrian Copy, the Aethiopick, the Vulgar, and almost all the Latin Commenta∣tors read , the first fruits of Asia minor. So doth Origen on this place, and Hom. 11. on Numbers F. 109. D. & G. and St. Jerom on Ezek. 43. F. 241. 1. and this reading is to be prefer'd before the other, because the same A∣postle saith expresly, that Stephanus was the first fruits of Achaia, 1 Cor. 16.15. that is, he was the first converted to the Faith there and Epenetus in Asia minor, for so the phrase the first fruits, is used by. Epist. 1. ad Corinth. § 42. St. Clemens. Ver. 6. Salute Mary, who bestowed much labour on us. Ver. 7. Salute Andronicus and Junia my Kinsmen, and my fellow Prisoners, who are of note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ (that is, converted to the Christian Faith) before me. , my Kinsmen.] So St. Paul stiles all the Jews, Rom. 9.3. , and fellow Prisoners. Before St. Paul went to Rome, He was , in Pri∣sons often, 2 Cor. 11.23. , bearing his Chain seven times, saithEpist. ad Cor. §. 5. St. Cle∣mens, and so might well have many fellow Prisoners. , of note among the Apostles.] That is, say some, men highly esteemed by them; Men eminent, says Chry∣sostom and Theodoret, not only among the Teachers, but the Apostles of the Churches For they who were Co-workers with the A∣postles in planting of the Christians, are stiled
, Apostles of the Churches, 2 Cor. 8.23. Philip. 2.25. In which sense Barnabas in Scripture is called an Apostle, Acts 14.14. and Philip the Deacon by the Ancients. See Coteler Not. in Constit. Apostol. p. 262. Ver. 8. Greet Amplias my Beloved in the Lord. Ver. 9. Greet Urban our helper in (the Ga∣spel of) Christ, and Stachys my Beloved. Ver. 10. Salute Appelles approved in Christ (by the sincerity of his faith, and the integrity of his life.) Salute them that are (in Christ) of Aristobulus houshold. Or , approved.] By suffering pati∣ently great Tribulations, saith Origen: for tribulation worketh patience, and patience  experience of our sincere affection to him for whose sake we suffer them, Rom. 5.4. Ver. 11. Salute Herodian my Kinsman: Greet them that be of the houshold of Nar∣cissus which are in the Lord. , which are in the Lord.] From these two Verses is confirm'd our obser∣vation, that when the whole Family was con∣verted, the Apostle writes to the Church in such a House; when not, the Salutation is direct∣ed to as many as were in the Lord in that Fa∣mily, according to the descant ofVidentur quidem plures fuisse ex domo, seu familâ Narcissi, sed non omnes in Domino fuisse, & ideo addit eos salutan∣dos qui sunt in Domino. Origen on the place. Ver. 12. Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord (s service.) Salute the beloved Persis which laboured much in the Lord. Ver. 13. Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his Mother, and mine, (she being one who shewed the affection of a Mother to me also.) , chosen in the Lord.] One of great excellency in Christianity, as we say a choice Man, so the word  often signifies, Psal. 78.31. They smote down  the chosen men that were of Israel. So , are choice Sepulchres, Gen. 23.6. , choice Gifts, Deut. 12.11. and , choice Men, Judges 20.16. See Acts 15.25, 26. Ver. 14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobus, Hermes, and the Brethren which are with them. Ver. 15. Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his Sister, and all the Saints that are with them. , all the Saints.] Not here that Saints, and Christian Brethren are all one. Ver. 16. Salute one another with an holy kiss; the Churches of Christ salute you. , with an holy kiss] Of the Kiss of Charity let it be observed. (1st) That it was used at the end of the Prayer before the Celebration of the Sacrament. SoApol. 2. p. 97. Justin Martyr saith expresly, , Prayers being ended, we salute one another with a kiss, and then the Bread and Cap is brought to the Pre∣sident. (2ly,) That this seems to have been done by the. Const. Apost. l. 2. c. 57. p. 203. Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 6. c. 14. p. 916. F. Phi de vita contempl. p. 691. F. Men apart, and the Women apart, as their separate places in the Church, or Synagogue, seemed to require. So the, L. 2 c 57. & L S. c. 11.  Vide Coleter. Not. in l. 2. c. 57. Apostolical Constitutions say, these things be∣ing done, let the Men apart, and the Women apart, salute one another with a kiss in the Lord. ThoughEx hoc Sermone mos Ecclesiis traditus est, ut post crationes osculo se invicem suscipiant Fratres. In locum. Origen seems to make this practise proper to the Men. Ver. 17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences, con∣trary to the Doctrine which you have learned (of the Apostles) and avoid them, (or, turn from them.) , mark them that cause divisions and scandals.] By Scandals the Greek Scholiasts understand Heresies, whereas, through the whole New Testament, this word seems rather to import such Actions as give occasion to others to stumble at, and fall off from the Christian Faith. See note on Matth. 18.6. Rom. 14.13. Estius here notes, (1st,) That unwritten Tra∣ditions may be hence proved, because the A∣postle saith, Mark them that cause offences contrary, not to the Scriptures, but to the Do∣ctrine they had received. But to make this Argument of any force, he must prove that the Doctrine they had received was not con∣tained in the Scriptures, either then, or after written. 2ly, The Apostle plainly speaks here of Doctrines received from the mouths of the Apostles by those very Men to whom he writ; and when he hath once proved the unwritten Traditions of the Church of Rome to be such, we shall be ready to receive them. (2ly,) He adds, that this place makes for a diligent in∣quisition after Hereticks, as if St. Paul was setting up an Inquisition here; whereas the word  doth only signifie to mark, or to look to them; as Luke 11.35. 2 Cor. 4.18. Gal. 6.1. Philip. 2.4. Nor doth he exhort the Romans to observe them in order to the ap∣prehending, or punishing, but, as he himself notes, in order to the declining of them. 3ly, He observes truly, that the Apostle here insinuates
that even the vulgar People may from some general Principles discern true Doctrine, and that which was delivered by the Apostles, from that which was false, and was not so delivered; but this was only then to be done by comparing that which was thus delivered from the mouth of the Apostles, who preached it by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, and confirmed their Doctrine by Miracles, with that which was delivered besides, or in oppo∣sition to it, and was not so confirmed; and this can only now be done by them, by com∣paring all Pretenders to the Apostles Do∣ctrine, with those Scriptures which they en∣dited by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, and confirmed by Miracles. Ver. 18. For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly, and by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple, (i. e. of innocent well-meaning persons.) , they that are such.] That is the Gnosticks, saith Dr. Hammond, to whom in∣deed these Characters do well agree. But Theodoret saith thus, , by these words he strikes at the evil defenders of the Law, or those who preached up Circumcision, and the observance of the Law, as necessary to the Salvation of the Gentiles. , he means the Jews, says Chrysostom, Oecume∣nius, and Theophylact, for he still taxes them with the love of their Bellies. And cer∣tain it is, that these Men caused Divisions and Separations from others, as unclean, and not fit to be eaten and conversed with, Acts 11.3. Gal. 2.12, 13. and Scandals subverting the Souls of the Gentiles, Acts 15 24. Evacuating the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 2.21. and causing Men to fall from Grace, Gal. 5.2, 4. that they did this , by flattering words, 1 Thess 2.5. and that in this they served not Christ, but their own Bellies, Philip. 3.19. do∣ing these things for filthy lucres sake, Tit 1.10, 11. Whence it appears there is no necessity of referring these words to the Gnosticks, or deserting the Opinion of the Ancients touch∣ing the Persons here intended. , of the Simple.]  in the Sep∣tuagint answers to the Hebrew  the up∣right, Job 8.20. Psal. 25.21. Prov. 13.6. and  to  integrity, Job 27.5.13.6. Psal. 7.9.26.1, 11.36.39.40.13.83.13.100.3. and so here it seems to signifie Men of upright and honest hearts. Ver. 19. (This Exhortation I direct to you to preserve you in the way in which hitherto you have walked to the credit of the Gospel) for (the fame of) your obedience (to it) is come abroad unto all men; I am glad there∣fore on your behalf (that ye are not yet in∣fected with these Judaizers,) but I would have you (still) wise to (discern and hold fast) that which is good, and simple concerning evil, 1 Cor. 14.20. i. e. as men who have  knowledge of it, and no skill to practice it. Ver. 20. And (to encourage you to continue such, know that) the God of Peace (who is an Enemy to these Divisions mentioned, v. 17.) will bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. , Satan.] By Satan we may understand those persecuting Jews, and J¦daizers, who are stiled the Messengers, and Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.15.12.7. the Persecutions being ascribed to Satan, who animates and provokes them to them, 1 The. 3.5. Rev. 2.9, 10. And then God's bruising him under their feet, must signifie his taking away their power thus to deceive, and perse∣cute, by the destruction of Jerusalem, and these Impostors with it. Ver. 21. Timotheus my Work-fellow in the Gospel, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipa my Kinsmen, salute you. Ver. 22. I Tertius, who wrote this Epistle, salute you (in the name of) the Lord. Ver. 23. Gaius mine Host, and (the Host) of the whole Church saluteth you. Erast the Chamberlain of the City saluteth you and Quartus a Brother. Ver. 24. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. Ver. 25. Now unto him that is of powe to establish you according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the Revelation of the Mystery which was kept secret since the World began (or fr former Ages.) , to him that hath power.] And will to execute that power. See Note o Chap. 14.4. , according to my Go¦spel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ.] Both these Expressions, say the Fathers, are of the same import, the Gospel which the Apostles preached being the same with tha which Christ preached whilst he was  Earth; and they, after his Ascension, preach¦ing in his Name, by his Authority, and  the Assistance of his Spirit, and so delivering his Laws and Doctrine, not their own. , kept secret si the World began.] The Greek may signifie from the beginning of Ages, the promise of the Messiah being obscurely made, or hi∣ed to Adam from the beginning; though the Fathers only render these words , before, as Theodoret, or , of old, as Chry¦sostom, Oecumenius, Theophylact. See th Notes on 2 Tim. 1.9. Tit. 2.2. Ver. 26. But now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, accord¦ing to the Commandment of the Everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith.
, By the Scriptures of the Prophets.] They of old foretold of the Messiah, and of the Calling of the Gen∣tiles, but yet as to many Circumstances, this was still a Mystery, till these Prophetick sayings were more clearly revealed by the Spirit given to the Apostles and Prophets, and by the actual accomplishment of what they foretold. See Note on Eph. 3.6. Ver. 27. (That is) To God only (essentially, and from himself) wise, be Glory through Jesus Christ (the Mediator of the New Co∣venant, the Authour and Finisher of our Faith) for ever. Amen. , to the only wise God.] This, as the Fathers note, cannot exclude the Di∣vine Nature of Jesus Christ, who is the Wisdom of the Father from this Title, any more than those words, who only hath im∣mortality, 1 Tim. 6.16. exclude Christ from being immortal.
THE PREFACE TO THE First Epistle to the Corinthians. § 1. THAT this was an Epistle written by St. Paul the Apostle, as is assert∣ted v. 1. was never doubted in the Church of God; but whether this was the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, hath been a matter of dispute, because he saith in it, I have written to you in an Epistle, Chap. 5.9. which seemeth plainly to relate to some Epistle formerly by him writ to them: For this, saith Pseud-Ambrosius, was spoken de praeteritâ E∣pistolâ quam ante hanc, quae prima dicitur, scripserat. But as I have observed in the Note upon that Verse, No Fathers ever ascribed to St. Paul more then Fourteen Epistles, including that to the Hebrews. Eusebius never mentions any third Epistle to the Corinthians, amongst the true, controverted, or spurious Writings which pass under his Name. No Christian Writer ever cited any thing from this supposed Epistle, all the Greek Scholiasts declare the Apostle speaketh in those words not of ano∣ther, but of this very Epistle, which is suffici∣ent to justifie the Version I have given of those words, I had written, or was writing in this Epistle. Moreover, his supposed Epistle to Laodicea is cited as a Book exploded byV. Paulus, in Catal. Script. Eccl. St. Jerom, his Epistles to Seneca, are in like man∣ner cited by St.v. Seneca, ibid. & St. Aust. Ep. ad Maced. 54. p. 254. B. Jerom and St. Austin, the Acts of Paul are cited, and rejected byOrig. , l. 1. c. 2. F. 114. D. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 3. &c. 25. O∣rigen and Eusebius, but none of them make any mention of more than two Epistles to the Church of Corinth. § 2. That this Epistle was written by him whilst St. Paul was at Ephesus, and before he went thence to Macedonia, is clear from the very words of this Epistle: For Chap. 16.8. he saith, I will tarry still at Ephesus till Pente∣cost; and adds, v. 19. The Churches of Asia, of which Ephesius was the Metropolis, salute you; Aquila and Priscilla salute you, with the Church which is in their House; now that they dwelt at Ephesus, we read Acts 18.25. That it was writ before he went thence in. Macedonia, those words inform us Chap. 16.. I will come to you when I pass through Ma∣cedonia; for I do pass through Macedonia It is therefore generally agreed, that it wa written in the 57th, as Dr. Pearson, or in the 55th Year of Christ, as Dr. Lightfoot hath  As also may be probably concluded thus: In t 9th Year of Claudius, saith Orosius, in the 10 say others, in the 12th saith Dr. Pearson, th Jews were banished from Rome, and St. Paul coming to Corinth, finds Aquila and Priscilla newly come from thence to Corinth upon tha occasion, Acts 18.2. He stays there a year and an half, v. 11. that is, till the 11th of Clau∣dius, at Ephesus three years, Acts 20.31. and at the close of these three years he writes this Epistle. If then you begin this Banishment  the Jews from Rome, as Valesius doth in the 10th of Claudius, these five years that Paul continued at Corinth and Ephesus will end  the first of Nero, A. D. 55. If with Dr. Per∣son, you begin them only at the 12th of Clau∣dius, they will end in the third of Ner. A. D. 57. § 3. That the Persons to whom it was wri¦ten, were chiefly Gentiles, is evident from the words, Ye know that ye were Gentiles, car∣ried away to these dumb Idols, even as y were led, Chap. 12.2. That it was also written to the Jewish Converts then at Corinth, Es conjectures, because he saith, Chap. 10.1. th all our Fathers were under the Cloud. B 'tis not necessary that should relate to their Fa¦thers according to the flesh, but only to the preceding Church of God called before them  of Aegypt, and partaking of like privilege with them: For the Apostle declares, that  they who are the Children of the Fleh are counted for the Seed, but they who are the
Children of the Promise, Rom. 9.8. And that the Prmise belonged not only to the Seed ac∣cording to the Law, but according to the faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all, Rom. 4.16. See Gal. 3, 14, 29. chap. 4.28. § 4. The occasions of writing this Epistle we may best learn from the Ancients, and from the Epistle it self. First then, The Ancients do inform us of this City, that it was full of. Chrysost. & Theop. Praef. in hanc Epist. Rhetoricians and Philosophers, and that they gave occasion to most of those Miscarriages which the Apostle reprehends in this Epistle. 2ly, That there were, Chrys. Praefat. in secundam Epist. . Theod. Praefat. in secundam Epist. Judaizers crept in among them who magnified themselves, and desed the Apostle as a great Boaster, but of little worth, stiling him an Apostate from the Law and commanding the observation of it to them. 3ly, They add, That the City of Corinth was very, Chrysost. Theodor. Theoph. , Theod. apud Oceum. rih, and that some of them chose themselves Teachers out of the rich, as being most able to support them, as others did out of the Philosophers, as being most able to teach them more than the Apostle could do. 4ly, They say that the Corinthians sent que∣stions to St. Paul, Oceum Theodoret. concerning Marriage and Virginity, by Stephanus, Fortunatus, and A∣chaicus, by whom the Apostle more fully was in∣formed of the state of their Church; and therefore sent this Answer to them concerning these several Heads. And sutably to these things mentioned by the Ancients, we find 1. That the Apostle spends the latter part of the first Chapter, from v. 20. to the end, in shewing the vanity of the Wisdom which the Philosophers pretended to, in comparison to the Wisdom discovered by the Gospel, preach'd by the Apostles. And Chapter the second, he shews the impossibility of knowing, or assenting to the things delivered by the Gospel, by those, who depending on Philosophy, and Humane Rea∣son, rejected what was taught purely by Revela∣tion, and consequently the necessity of admitting that Revelation of the Spirit they challenged to themselves, that the Doctrine of the Gospel might be made known to the World. And against both the Rhetoricians and Philosophers, he shews the necessity of Preaching the Gospel, not in the words of Humane Wisdom, Chap. 1.17, 18, 19. Chap. 2.1. Chap. 3.18, 19, 20. Chap. 4.20. 2ly, Because on the account of those Philoso∣phers and Rhetoricians, as well as of the Ju∣daizers, they broke out into Parties, and Fa∣ctions, he minds them of those Factions, be∣seeching them carefully to avoid them, Chap. 1.10. as tending to the dividing of Christ's Body, v. 13. and as Indications that they were yet Carnal, 1 Cor. 3.4. pursuing this under his own name, and that of Apollo, through the whole third Chapter, shewing that they ought not to glory in Men, or be puffed up for one against another, whatever were their Gifts, or Eloquence, but give the Glory of their Labours unto God alone, See Chap. 4.8. 3ly, Because they who declared they were of Cephas, seem to be those Judaizers who lk∣ed on the Apostle as unfaithful in his Office for rejecting Circumcision, and the Law. He de∣clares that he found no occasion thus to charge himself, nor was he much concerned for their Censures of him in that kind, Chap. 4.4, 5. shewing by his Sufferings, how great an E∣vidence he had given of his Fidelity in the dis∣charge of his Office, from v. 9. to the 14th, and that he had begotten them to that Faith in which they ought to stand, and follow his Example, from v. 14. to the 17th. And because he, ha∣ving sent Timothy to them, they imagined he either durst not, or would not come to them himself, He declares he would both come, and use his Apostolical Authority amongst them, and try the power of them who were thus puffed up against him by reason of their Humane Wis∣dom. 4ly, Because one of these Eloquent Persons had been guilty of a very heinous Crime, he com∣mands them to punish him by removing him from their Society, and delivering him up to Satan. And 5ly, Because, being rich and wealthy, Chap. 4.8. they were unwilling to part with their Wealth, and therefore went to Law, for pre∣servation of it, before Heathen Judges, to the
Scandal of Christianity, He reprehends this Vice in them, Chap. 6. from v. 1. to the 10th. And having said all this by way of Preface, he begins, Chap. 7. to return his Answer to the Questions they had sent unto him. § 5. There is one further Observation use∣ful for, and worthy to be pondered by the licen∣tious Persons of our Age, That because Forni∣cation and Lasciviousness were Vices to which the Heathens were generally addicted; and their Philosophers, and perhaps some Hereticks, viz. the Nicholaitans, which were amongst them, maintain'd this was a thing indifferent, there∣fore the Apostle, both in the Epistles to the Corinthians, and to most other Churches, is ve∣ry copious in shewing the destructive Nature of this Sin. It is to be observed that Corinth was, above all other Cities, even to a Proverb, infa∣mous for Fornication and Lasciviousness, so that , a Corinthian Woman is in the Language of the Ancients, a whorish Wo∣man, according to the Proverb, Vide Erasm. adag. Cent. 7. p. 633, 720., ut Corinthia videris corpore quaestum factura. And  is  scortationibus indulgere, Hesych. Phavorin. There was, saithL. 8. p. 378. D. Strabo, in it a Temple dedicated to Venus, which . These Vices reigned also in Galatia, the Worshippers of the Mother of the Gods: In Ephesus, (See Note on Eph. 5.5.) Thessalonica, Crete. (Athenaeus l. 12. p. 527. A. 528. C.) and generally in all Heathen Nations. Hence the Apostle is so frequent, and express in his condemning this Vice. 1. As a Sin contrary to Nature, as being a∣gainst our own Body, 1 Cor. 6.18. a Sin of Unrighteousness, to which God gave them up for their Idolatry, Rom. 1.28. and a Sin, which they who committed, were given up to a reprobate mind, and knew they did things wor∣thy of death, v. 29, 32. a sin contrary to the moral Law, or to the Law of Nature; for he declares that Law was given for the condemning Fornicators, 1 Tim. 1.10. 2ly, As a Sin contrary to the Christian Faith, and inconsistent with it. Know ye not, saith he, that your Bodies are the Members of Christ; shall I then take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot, God forbid! 1 Cor. 6.15. And again, But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, let it not be once named among you, as becometh Saints, Eph. 5.3. For God hath not called us to Uncleanness, but unto Holiness. He there∣fore that despiseth this his Call, despiseth not Man but God, who also hath given us of his Spirit, 1 Thess. 4.7, 8. Hence he declares it to be contrary to sound Doctrine of the Gospel, 1 Tim. 1.10, 11. and forbid Christians to e with any Brother who is a Fornicator, 1 Cor. 5.11. 3ly, As being a Sin which will exclude the Fornicator from the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, saith he, no Fornicator shall inheri the Kingdom of God, Gal. 6.10, 11. To the Galatians he speaks thus, The Works of the Flesh are manifest, Adultery, Fornication, Un∣cleanness, Lasciviousness, of which I tell you again, that they who do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. To the Ephesians thus, This know ye, that no Fornicator, or unclean Person, hath any Inhe∣ritance in the Kingdom of Christ, or of God. Psal. 5.5. They, saith St. John, shall be ex∣cluded from the New Jerusalem, Rev. 22.15. 4ly, As that which will assuredly expose them to the wrath of God. For thus he speaks to the Colossians: Mortifie your earthly Members. Fornication, Uncleanness; for which things cometh the wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience. Col. 3.5, 6. To the Ephesians thus, Be not deceived with vain words, for be∣cause of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience, Eph. 5.6. 5ly, As that which will subject them to eter∣nal Punishments. For Whoremongers and A∣dulterers  God will adjudge to Con∣demnation, Hebr. 13.4. The Portion of the Whoremonger shall be assigned him in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21.8. § 6. And this is all I at the first intended by way of Preface to this Epistle. But finding that the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the same Body which dieth, is now either questioned, or thought unnecessary to be be∣lieved, though anciently the very Heathens look'd upon it as a Fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, and the Ground of their most raised Hopes; And upon this account they burnt the very Bones of Christian Martyrs, and redu∣ced them to Ashes, and then threw those Ashes into the River Rhodanus, or Roan, that so they might defeat the. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 1. p. 165. hope of a Resurrection which enabled the Christians to suffer Death with alacrity, and to endure all kinds of Tor∣ments for their Religion; which sure had been a vain attempt, had not the Christian Do∣ctrine promised as the Foundation of their Hopes, the Resurrection of the same Body thus consumed, but only of some other Body in its stead; And seeing the fifteenth Chapter of this Epistle is the Seat of that Controversie, I shall therefore endeavour briefly to evince two things: 1. That it was certainly the recieved Doctrine of the Professors of the Christian Faith.
2. That it is truly grounded on the Scrip∣tures, and therefore ought to be owned as an Article of Christian Faith. And 1. That it was certainly the ancient and re∣ceived Doctrine of the Orthodox Professors of the Christian Faith, is evident 1. From the Epistle of, Clem. Ep. 2. § 9. Clemens Roma∣nus, and writ in the first Century: For there he doth expresly caution Christians against the denial of this Article, in these words, Let none of you say that this same Flesh shall not be judged, for as you were called in the Flesh, so shall you come in the Flesh to Judgment, and in this very Flesh shall you receive your Re∣ward. And in his first Epistle, to prove that God will raise them from the dead, who have served him in holiness, he cites these words from Job, § 36. Job 19.25, 26. , Thou wilt raise up this my Flesh which hath suffered all these things. 2ly, FromL. 1. c. 2, 3. Irenaeus, who in the second Century makes this one Article of Faith of the whole Church received from the Apostles, and kept, taught, and delivered in all places with the greatest care, and uniformity, viz. that Christ will come from Heaven in Glory, , to raise up all Flesh of all Mankind.Apol. c. 4. de Prae crip. c. 9, 13. de veland. virg. c. 1. Tertullian in the third Century, producing the Christians Creed as the Rule of Faith, which came from Christ, and was by his Companions handed down to the Church, the Institution of Christ, which all Nations ought to believe, makes this one Arti∣cle of it, That Christ will come to judge the quick and dead, facta utriusque partis resus∣citatione cum carnis restitutione, or, per carnis resurrectionem, by raising, and restoring of their Flesh. Accordingly the Article of the Resurrection of the Flesh, or as the Aquileian Symbol hath it, hujus Carnis, of this Flesh, Or as other Confessions have it, of their Bodies, hath been received in all Christian Churches. And they have been condemned as Hereticks from the beginning of the second Century, who deniedJust. in Dial. cum Trph. p. 307. B. , the Resurrection of the Flesh, & carnis (p) salutem, & regenerationem ejus, dicentes non eam ca∣pacem esse incorruptibilitatis, the life and reproduction of the Flesh, saying, it was inca∣pable of incorruption: As did theIren. l. 5 c. 2. Valen∣tinians, the Basilidians, and the Marcionites, say the Fathers. § 7. I proceed secondly to shew, that this Do∣ctrine of the Primitive Christians is truly grounded on the Scriptures, and therefore ought to be received, and owned as an Article of Christian Faith. This I prove 1. From all thse places which peak f the Resurrection of the Body, te place I shall produce, for their sakes w  remember in any place of the New Testament, any such Expression as the Resurrection of the Body, v. g. He that raised Jesus from the dead, , shall also make alive your Mortal Bodies, Rom. 8.11. that is, He shall raise them from the dead; for that  and , to quicken and raise up are with relation to th mtter, w rds of the same port, we learn from these words. As the Father, , raiseth up the dead, and quick∣neth them, so the Son  quickneth whom he will, John 5.21. Again, saith the Apostle, How are the dead raised up, i. e. the Bod of the dead; for so it ,  and with what kind of Bodies  they come forth of the Grave, 1 Cor. 15.35.  v. 44. It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised  a Spiritual Body. And sl  evidently, , This Corruptible (∣dy) must put on Incorruption, . and this Mortal (B dy) must put on Immor∣tality, v. 53. So when this Corruptible (B¦dy) shall have put on Incorruption, and this Mortal (Body) put on Immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory.  likes not my addition of  Body to the Pro∣noun, and Adjective, four times here menti∣oned, I desire him to find out, if he can, ano∣ther Substantive; if he cannot, he must con∣fess the Resurrection of the Body is here men∣tioned four times; for the Apostle argues thus, The dead shall be raised up, , for this Corruptible (Bdy) must put on Incorrupti∣on; and when this is dne, thn Death, wich only hapneth to this crrupible mrtal Bdy, shall be swallowed up in Victory. It is said, That he who reads with attenti∣on this Discourse of St. Paul, where he speak of the Resurrection, will see that he pl distinguisheth between the Dead, that shall he raised, and the Bodies of the Dead; fr it is  which are the Nominative Ca∣ses to  all a¦long, and not , Bodies which  my in reason think would some where or oher ve been expressed, if all this had been said  propose it as an Article of Faith, tt the same Bodies shall be raised. The same manner of speaking the Spirit of Gd oserves all thr the N. Testament, where it is said, rais the dead, quicken, or make alive the dead the resurrection of the dead, Joh. 5.28, 29. Rm. 4.1. Matth. 22 27, 52. 2 Cor. 1.9. 1 Thess. 4.16. Iren. l. 1. c. 23, 29. Tertul. de Prescript c. 33. Theodoret. Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 4, 7.
Answer. I h pe the Instances produced al∣ready are sufficient to confute this Observation. I shall therefore go on further to observe, and prove, that the Resurrection of the Dead is by the Apostle used with plain relation to the Bo∣dies of the Dead, so that he even proves the Resurrection of the Dead, because the Body is raised, and so doth not plainly distinguish be∣twixt the dead that shall be raised, and the Bodies of the dead. This is evident enough from what I have observed already, that the A∣postle proves , the dead shall be raised because the corruptible Body must put on Incorruption, &c. But it is still more evident from those words, So is also , the resurrection of the dead; for it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorrup∣tion, v. 42, 43. Where I desire to know, what is the Nominative Case to , it is raised, used three times here? If it be , Body, I have sufficiently confuted this Criticism: If it be not, why doth the Apostle so expound it in the immediate ensuing words, It is sown a Natural Body, , it is raised a Spiritual Body. I add that this appears almost from all the places cited, that the  and the  the dead, and the all dying, hath relation to the Body only, which being that alone which is by death bereft of life, must be that on∣ly which, in propriety of speech, is said to die. Thus when 'tis said, These very words urged for the resurrection of the same Body, run thus, , all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, , to the resurrection of Life, but they that have done evil, to the resurrection of Con∣demnation, And is then added, Would not a well meaning Searcher be apt to think, that if the thing here intended by our Saviour were to teach, and propose it as an Article of Faith, necessary to be believed by every one, that the very same Bodies of the dead should be raised, the words should rather have been , i. e. all the Bodies that are in the Graves, rather then all who are in the Graves; which must denote Per∣sons, and not precisely Bodies. To this I answer, (1st,) that the words , all that are in the Graves, and , all the Bodies that are in the Graves, are plainly words of the same import. For what is laid down in the Graves, or Sepulchres, is it not , the Bodies of them that sleep on∣ly? Matth. 27.52. And must it not then be these Bodies that come forth of them? May we not discern in the passage now cited, how the Holy Ghost passes immediately from the Bodies of the Saints that slept, to their Persons, say∣ing, the Bodies of the Saints that slept arose, , and they coming out of their Graves, after this Resurrection, went into the Holy City, and appeared unto ma v. 53. (2ly,) When God said to Adam, what was also true of his Posterity, In sorrow shalt th eat thy Bread until thou return to the ground for out of it wast thou taken; for dust tho art, and unto dust shalt thou return, Gen. 3.1, And the Psalmist of Man in general, His breath (or spirit) goeth forth, he returneth to his Earth, Psal. 146.5. Will any one be tempe from these personal, demonstrative Pron thou, and he, to say that these words must d¦note the Persons, and not precisely the Bodies of Men? and thence infer that the whole Per∣son of Adam was taken out of the Earth, and was but dust, and that the whole Persn  Man returneth to his Earth; if not, why is a argued that the like Pronoun , they, must here denote Persons, and not precisely Bodies? An we not told that the word Person stands for a thinking, intelligent Being that has Reas and Reflection, and can consider it self as it self? And can they who are in the Graves  this? if so, surely they are not dead in the but buried alive. If they cannot, why m these words  denote Persons? But it is said, That according to this Inter∣pretation of these words of our Saviour,  other Substance being raised but what hear his voice, and no other Substance hearing is voice, but what, being called, comes out of the Grave; and no other Substance coming out  the Grave, but what was in the Grave, any one must conclude that the Soul, unless it  in the Grave, will make no part of the Per∣son that is raised. Answer. To this I answer, That any one may reasonably hence conclude, that the Soul make no raised part of him that is raised, or that it a not called, or raised out of the Grave, as  Body is; but by what Logick can we hence con¦clude it makes no part of the raised Perso For instance; We profess in our Creed to ¦lieve that Jesus Christ died, and rose again i. e from the Grave: and, saith St. Peter, This Jesus hath God raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was impossible he should be holden of it, Acts 2.24, 32. N because nothing can be raised from the dead but that which died, nothing can be raised from the Grave, but what was laid in it, shall  hence infer, that the Soul of the Lord Jesus, or his Spirit, (which he commended into  Father's hands, and which went to Paradise unless it died, and was in the Grave, could m no part of the Person which was dead, and  raised from the dead, and out of the Grav When our Lord says, v. 28, 29. They that were in the Graves shall come forth to the Resur¦rection of Life; And v. 25. the dead shall live. What can live again, but that which was dead? What can have a Resurrection to Life, but that which had no Life, and was not that the Body only? Yea, are not these things said
pursuance of what went before; As the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth (or gives life) to them, even so the Son quickeneth whom he will. Now what can be raised from the dead, but that which was dead? What can be quickned, or have life given to it, but that which had no life? If then that were the Body only, must not the raising of the dead, and quickning them, import only the raising and quickning of the Body, although this be perform∣ed compleatly by the Union of the Soul to the raised Body. 2ly, That in our Saviour's Discourse against the Sadduces, ,Matth. 22. Mark 12. Luk. 20.35, 36. touching the Resurrection of the dead, he also speaks of rai∣sing that which was dead, i. e. the Body, is evident from this that he saith of them who partake of that Resurrection, , they can die no more; which can be only spoken of that Body which died before. 3ly, We read of God , quickning the dead, Rom. 4.17. Now what doth he quicken, but what was dead? what doth he give life to, but that which ceased to have life, that is, the Body? 4ly, St. Paul saith, We had in our selves the Sentence of Death, that we might not trust in our selves, but in God, , who raiseth the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. Now what was this Sentence of Death? Did St. Paul, and his Christian Companions, be∣lieve the whole Man should be kill'd by their Persecutors? or, as their Lord had taught them, that they could kill the Body, but could not kill the Soul, Matth. 10.26. Doth he not say in their names, that that which perish∣ed, or was corrupted, was only , our outward Man, 2 Cor. 4.16. in op∣position to the inward Man? that whilst they lived they were at home in the Body, and that at death they did  dwell out of the Body, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. or, as to the Sl, were absent from it? And must not then the Sentence of Death they had in themselves, be only this, that their Bodies might die by the hands of Persecutors, that their outward Man might perish by them? And must not then their trust in God that raiseth the dead, relate to his raising their dead Bodies? 5ly, The de in Christ that shall be raised, 1 Thess. 4.16. are they that sleep, v. 13, 15. that is, that sleep in the dust, Dan. 12.2. now is it not , the Bodies of the Saints that thus sleep, Matth. 27.52. and must not then the Apostle speak of them only? Is not this spoken to comfort the Thessalonians concerning them that were asleep, v. 13, 18. and were they trou∣bled for the Souls of them that slept in Jesus? v. 14. or doth the Apostle say any thing to com∣fort them, but that which relates to the Body only? And will it not hence follow, that what he here saith touching the Resurrection of the Dead, concerneth their dead Bodies only? Thus have I shew'd that all the places here cited, as speaking of the Resurrection of the Dead, refer to the Resurrection of their Bo∣dies. § 8. But further, had not the Scripture so expresly spoken of raising our Mortal Bodies, of raising that a Spiritual Body which was sown a Natural Body, and proved the dead shall be raised, because this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and could it not be pro∣ved, that raising of the dead, and of the bodies of the dead, were in import the same, this Ar∣ticle might be established from other passages of Scripture, speaking the same thing in effect, as v. g. 1st, We who have the first fruits of the Spirit groan within our selves, expecting  the Sonship, even the Redemption of our Body, Rom. 8.23. Now what is this Re∣demption  of our Body, but the delivery of it from the Bondage of Corruption? v. 21. What did they groan for? 'twas, saith the same Apostle, that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life, 2 Cor. 5.4, 5. which only is to be done when this Mortal Body shall put on Immortality, saith the same Apostle; this therefore was to be done to accomplish the redemption of the Body spoken of, and is not then the redemption, and the resurrection of the body in effect the same? 2. We expect that Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven, who shall change , our vile Body into the like∣ness of his glorious Body, Philip. 3.20, 21. The Body therefore to be changed is  our Body; the Body of our Humiliation, so styled as Methodius saith, because , 'tis humbled and made mortal by the fall; or as Irenaeus, l. 5. c. 13. quod & humilta∣tur cadens in terram, because it is humbled by falling into the Earth. This Body is to be thus changed when our Lord cometh down from Heaven, that is at the resurrection of it; for the Lord shall descend from Heaven, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Thess. 4.16. Is it not therefore manifest from these words, that our vile, mortal Bodies, fallen into the Earth, or laid in it, shall be raised, and by, or at the Resurrection, shall be changed into the likeness of Christ's glorious Body? Now hence I argue for the Resurrection of the same Body thus; If the Scripture teacheth that there shall be a quickning, by raising up our mortal Bodies, a Redemption, by the Resur∣rection of our Bodies, a changing of our Bodies at, and by the Resurrection, into the likeness of Christ's glorious Body, It seems sufficiently to say, there shall be a Resurrection of the same Body which before was mortal, and a change by it of the same Body which was vile, or humble; and a Redemption by it from cor∣ruption of the same Body which was formerly in bondage to corruption; for all this must be
said of the same Body, or not of the same Body; if of the same Body, then the same Body must be raised; if not of the same Body, then of a∣nother; and how then is it said of our Body? How are these other Bodies, , your mortal Bodies, Rom. 8.11. the Re∣demption of them; the Redemption, ; the change of them, the change, , of our mortal vile Bodies? 2ly, When the Apostle saith,Cum dicit istud corruptivum & istud mortale cutem ipsam tenens dicit. Certè istud nisi de comparenti pronuntia potuit, demonstrationis corporalis est verbum. Tertull. de Resurrect. Carn. c. 51. . Theodoret. ibi This cor∣ruptible, this mortal Body, does he mean this Body of ours, or does he not? If he does mean this mortal, corruptible Body of ours, then he asserts of that, that it shall be raised immortal and incorruptible; if he does not mean it of ours, he must mean it of some other Body then ours, and how then is that raised a spiritual Body, which was sown a natural Body? how doth this mortal put on immortality? how are we concerned in the Resurrection of another Bo∣dy? or what assurance doth it give us, that we shall rise from the dead, seeing when any of us departs this life, it is our Body that dies, and not anothers? Yea, why then doth he say, the dead shall rise, and we, that are living, shall be changed? we shall all be changed; i. e. our vile Bodies shall be changed into the likeness of Christ's glorious Body; our mortal Bodies into immortal; our natural Bodies shall be chan∣ged by being raised spiritual Bodies? Let any Man try his utmost skill, and see if he can find any Nominative Case to , it is sown, used here four times, but , Body, or understand this of any other Body then ours, seeing then the same word is the Nominative Case to , it is raised, which was so to , it is sown, the Apostle must be supposed to say, this Body of ours is raised in incorruption. § 9. Argument 2. To proceed to other Scrip∣tures of like import: All that are in their Graves shall come forth, saith Christ, , they shall come out of the Graves in which they were, John 5.28.29. Shall they come forth with the same Body which was laid in the Grave, or with another? If with the same, then the same Body must be raised; if with another, how come these Graves to be called their Graves, and how are the dead, and they that are in the Graves raised out of them, and not another? Again, when it is said the Sea gave up the dead  in it, and Death and Hades (the place of the dead) gave up the dead in them. Rev. 20.13. did they give up the same Bodies which were laid down in them, or some others? The first is the thing contended for; if they gave up some others, how did they give up the dead that were laid down in them? To say that a great part of these dead Bo∣dies possibly may have undergone variety of changes, and entred into other Concretions even in the Bodies of other Men, is to me  Objection against the raising of the same Body, if God hath engaged so to do; for then, at he is able, so is his Providence concerned to prevent the entring of one Body so into the Concretion o another, as to hinder it from being the same Body when raised, as it was when laid down in Se or Grave, and I know what he hath promise he is able to perform. Lastly, Even the PhraseResurrectionis vocabulum non aliam rem vendicat quam quae cecidit, surgere enim potest dici, & quod omnino non  sed semper retro jacuit, resurgere autem non est nisi ejus quod cecidit, iterum enim surgendo quia cedidit resurgere dicitr. Te¦tull. advers. Marc. l. 5. c. 9. . Epiph. Haer. 67. § 6. the Resurre∣ction of the dead, and especially the Resurre∣ction  from the dead, used Col. 1.1 Rev. 1.5. where Christ is stiled the first-born of those that arise from the dead, prove th For the proper notion of a Resurrection consists in this, that it is a substantial change, by whi that which was before, and died, or was or∣rupted, is reproduced the same thing again. I call it a change of that which died, or was cr∣rupted disjunctively, because in the Resurrecti∣on of our Lord, and of Lazarus, and othe whom he raised from the dead, the Body was  corrupted. Hence it follows, (1st.) That the Soul which is immortal and incorruptible, cannot be said to rise again, Re∣surrection implying a Reproduction; where that which after it was never ceased to be wh it was, cannot be reproduced; and so the Theodor. Haer. fab. l. 5. c. 19 p. 293. A. B. Resurrection of the Dead can only signifie te Resurrection of the Bodies of the Dead, w the re-union of them to those Souls to which th were before united, which makes this Resurr¦ction advance into a Resurrection of Life An seeing that which never fell, cannot be said  be raised up, that which did never dye can be restored from death; Men cannot prop be said to rise again from the dead, but in re∣spect to that part, or that state which had falles and was dead. And as for a Man to be  at first, signifies the production, and union
the essential parts of an individual Man, his Body and his Soul. So to be born again, or born from the dead, implies the restitution, and re-union of his Body and his Soul; a Man only by that becoming the same entire Person which he was before. Seeing therefore it is acknow∣ledged, that the same Persons shall be raised, yea, that there can be nothing plainer then that in the Scripture it is revealed, that the same Persons shall be raised, and appear be∣fore the Judgment Seat of Christ, to answer for what they have done in the Body; and the same Person cannot be raised without the raising of his Body to be united to his Soul, much less be raised from the dead, without rai∣sing that of him which was dead, which only was his own, and not another Body, which be∣fore was no part of him, it follows, that if the same Persons be raised from the dead, that of them which was dead, or their own Bodies must be raised; and so the meaning of the Scripture, when it saith, the same Persons shall be raised, must be this, that their Bodies, separated from their Souls by death, shall be raised from the dead. Moreover, By saying that the Resurrection is only of that which died, or was corrupted, it ap∣pears that I, with the Ancients, only assert the Resurrection of that Body which died, or was corrupted, and am not in the least concerned for any changes that it underwent before; and so the Scripture forces me to speak, when it stiles the Resurrection, the quickning the dead; the vivification of our mortal Bodies; the raising of those Bodies which were sown in corrup∣tion; the coming forth of them which were in their Graves; the awakening them that sleep in the dust of the Earth; and saith, that then the Sea, Death, and Hades shall give up their dead, allowing a Resurrection only to them that shall then be dead, and saying only of them that shall be found alive, they shall be changed. And if this only be the true sense of the Scrip∣ture in this matter, and this only the Resur∣rection there intended, it cannot be concerned in the least in what the Philosophers say touch∣ing the change the Body undergoes whilst li∣ving; though I am far from thinking, that to the raising of the same Bodies, it can be requi∣site that these Bodies should be made up whol∣ly of the same Particles which were once vi∣tally united to their Souls in their former Life, without the mixture of any other Parti∣cle of Matter; for were this necessary to the same living Body, we could not have the same Bodies for a day; and if it be not necessary to make the Body continue still the same while we live, it cannot be necessary to make the raised Body, the same with that which died. That which here seems to me of greatest mo∣men to be considered, is this, that the dead, be∣ing raised that they may be judged according to their works, Rev. 20.12. and that every one may receive , the things done by the Body, as the Instrument of the Soul, 'tis only requisite that the dying Body, which is to be raised to the Resurrection of Condemnation, should be then united to a Soul sentenced hereafter to Condemnation for the evils done whilst in the Body, and by the Body as its Instrument, and not repented of, and re∣formed before its separation from the Body. And that the Body should be raised to the Resurre∣ction of Life, 'tis only requisite that some time or other before its death, it should have been u∣nited to a Soul that truly repented of all its past sins, and did from thence forward do that which was lawful and right, whilst they were thus united: Now seeing this is the state of all Bodies which arise to the Resurrection of Life, or of Condemnation, 'ts only necessary to this last Resurrection, that it should be the raising the Bodies of Men dying in their sins, as in y Hypothesis it is; and that the Bodies raised to the Resurrection of Life, should be the Bodies of Men dying in the favour of God; 'tis thre∣fore only necessary their dying Bodies should a∣rise. And now the Argument arising from these Scriptures, which teach that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, and so of their dead Bodies, that every one may receive ac∣cording to what he hath done in or by the bo∣dy, will run thus: Either the Body is to be raised, and re-united to the Soul, to receive Rewards or Punishments with it, or to be the Instrument by which the Soul shall be rewarded, or punished, or it is not; if not to any of these ends, why is it rais∣ed at all? Why do good Men, by the direction of the Holy Spirit, expect the Resurrection of the Body? or why is it propounded as their great encouragement to he stedfast, immovea∣ble, always abounding in the fear of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Thess. 4.18. and as a comfort to them that mourn for the dead? Why are the wicked to be punished with everlasting fire, or said to go away after the Resurrection into e∣ternal Punishment? Matth. 25.41, 46. Or why doth our Saviour require us not to fear them who can kill the Body, but can do no more, in comparison of him who can destroy both Soul and Body in Hell fire, Matth. 10.28. and say that 'tis better one of thy Members perish, then that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell fire? Matth. 5.29, 30. If it be to be raised for these ends, 'tis necessary the same Body should be raised which sinn'd with, or was the Instrument of the Soul in doing good or evil, it being absurd to think that one Body should sin, another should be punished for it; or that one Body should suffer, another should be crowned for it. And, for any thing I can dis∣cern to the contrary, we might as well appear before Christ's Judgment Seat without any Body at all, as without that which we deposited. Let it now be remembred, that the Body in which the Impenitent is to suffer, is only the same Body which was laid down in the Grave,
And then the Arguments usually offered to invalidate his suffering in his own Body, or in the same Body in which he sinned, will be almost as strong to excuse a Murtherer from suffering in his Body for a Murther committed Twenty years ago, as to the purposes they are used in this Case. Nay, I have met with nothing said in this Affair, which does not prove as strongly that the Body of our Blessed Lord, born of the Virgin Mary, after he had sucked, and digested that Milk into Chyle, was not the same Body which was born of the Virgin, as not having all the same individual Particles, and that when he grew in stature, he grew into another Body, and so into a Body which came not from the loins of Abraham, and was not of the Seed of David according to the flesh; and that when the Jews destroy'd his Body, they destroy'd not that Body of which he spake, when he said, de∣stroy this Body, because the Body they destroy'd, had by Perspiration lost, and by Nutrition gain∣ed many Particles. § 10. I come now to answer the Objections a∣gainst this Article, viz. The Appellation the Apostle bestows on him that enters into this Enquiry, Whether the Dead shall have the very same Bodies, or no, seems not much to encourage him in that Enquiry; nor will he, by the remainder of St. Paul's answer, find the determination of the Apostle to be much in favour of the very same Body, unless the being told that the Body sown is not the Body that shall be; that the Body raised is as different from that which was laid down, as the Flesh of a Man is from the Flesh of Beasts, Fishes, and Birds, or as the Sun, Moon, and Stars are different from one another; or as different as a corruptible, weak, natural, mortal body, is from an incorruptible, powerful, spiritual, immortal Body; and lastly, as a Body that is Flesh and Blood, is from a Body that is not Flesh and Blood; for Flesh and Blood cannot, says St. Paul in this very place, inherit the Kingdom of God; unless, I say, all this which is contained in St. Paul's words, can be supposed to be the way to deliver this as an Article of Faith, which is required to be be∣lieved of every one. Now to this I answer, 1st, That it seems to me a great mistake, to say the Apostle in that Appellation thou Fool reflects upon him that enquires, whether the same Body which was dead should be raised, or no. He had already entirely dispatch'd that question against those Philosophers, who saidHinc dicit Plinius ne Deum quidem posse omnia, nec mortales aeternitate donare, nec revocare defunctos, Hist. Nat. l. 2. c. 7. Negant haec fieri posse. Lactant. l. 7. c. 22. there is no Resurrection, v. 12. and that the Resurre∣ction of the Body was a thing impossible. And v. 35. he begins the enquiry, not about the truth of the Resurrection, but about the manner in which it shall be made, and the qualities which the raised Bodies should have, asking the questi∣on ofƲtrum sine corpore, an cum corporibus? & corporibus quibus, ipsisne? an innovatis resurgatur? Caecil. apud Min. p. 11. Philosophers, , with wa kind of bodies, or with what qualified Bodies do they come; for they conceiving that the Body was the Prison of the Soul, and that it was her punishment to be tied to it, thought we could not be truly happy till by death we were deliver∣ed from it; they therefore judged it an unjust, and an unworthy thing for God to raise these Bodies to be united to the Souls of Good Men; and therefore Celsus saith the hope of the Re∣surrection of the Flesh is the hope of Worms a filthy, and abominable thing, and so a thing which God neither will, nor can do. See  this proved from their own words in the Note upon this Verse. Now to this Objection the A∣postle returns a full and satisfactory Answer, by shewing the happy change which will then pass upon the raised Body, and theNon considerat Apostolus in hac similitudine diversitatem rei, sed qualitatis & conditionis, quod & quaestio requirebat, qua corpore veniunt. Itaque falluntur, qui ex his Apostoli verbis, corpora non eadem secundum substantiam resuscitanda esse colligunt, quod qui dicunt, resurrectionem reverà tollunt, non enim resurgit nisi id ipsum quod cecidit. Esthius. excellent qua∣lities it shall then have, and which were want∣ing to it whilst it was on earth. 2ly, When the Apostle adds, v. 37. That which thou sowest, (when) thow sowest (it, is) not that Body which shall be (again produced,) but bare (or naked) Grain, it is evident he speak∣eth there, not of the Body of Man, but of the Body of Wheat, or of some other Grain, and s there still pursuing the same question, With what kind of Bodies do they come? Answer∣ing, as it was common with the Jews to do, by this very Similitude to a like question among them, viz.Pirk. Eliez. c. 33. p 8. Whether the Body should arise naked, or clothed upon? and therefore saith thou sowest not the Body which shall be, i. e. a Body cloathed with a shell as in Peas, Beans, and Lentils, or with an Hull, or Chaff, as in Wheat, Rye, Barley, but , naked Grain, whereas God raises it up cloathed, and so saith he, will it be with our Bodies at the Re∣surrection, they will not be raised , naked, but , cloathed upon, for this corrup∣tible Body must put on Incorruption, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4. this being then the whole intendment of this Similitude, it ought not to be urged any further. 3ly, The same is evidently the Apostle's pur∣pose in the following Verses, which in sense  thus. Ver. 39. (And as) all flesh is not the same (manner or kind of) flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of Men, another (kind of) flesh of Beasts, another of Fishes, and another of Birds. Ver. 40. (And as there is alike difference in
the qualities of Bodies, for (there are also Ce∣lestial Bodies, and Bodies Terrestrial; but the glory of the Celestial is one, and the glory of the Terrestrial is another. Ver. 41. (And in the Celestial Bodies) there is one Glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another of the Stars (among them∣selves) for one Star differeth from another Star in glory. Ver. 42. So also is (it as to) the Resurre∣ction of the Dead (the Body raised being in qualities much different from that Body we now have, for) it is sown in corruption, (frail, mor∣tal, subject to putrefaction) it is raised in incor∣ruption, &c. Now from the words thus para∣phrased, let it be noted, 1st, That the Apostle says not, That the Bo∣dy raised is as different from that which is laid down, as the Flesh of Man is from the Flesh of Beasts, Fishes, and Birds, or as the Sun, Moon, and Stars are different from one another, but only as the Flesh of Men differs in qualities from that of Beasts, Fishes, and Birds; and as the Sun, Moon, and Stars differ in their glorious qualities from one another, so do our raised Bodies differ in quality, from those earth∣ly Bodies we at present have, as is evident from the ensuing words, in which he mentions this difference betwixt them in qualities. Note 2ly, That in the instances of flesh of Man and Beasts, and of Celestial and Terrestrial Bo∣dies, and of Celestial Bodies among themselves here used by the Apostle, there is not only a difference as to qualities, but also as to the sub∣ject matter, that being in them only specifically, but not numerically the same, whereas it is not so as to our Bodies sown and raised, they differ∣ing only as to the qualities from the body sown, but not as to the subject matter, it being this corruptible Body which must put on incorrup∣tion. As therefore the different qualities of di∣vers Souls, good and bad, learned and unlearn∣ed, made glorious and miserable, infer a diffe∣rence in substance, because the subject of those qualities is not the same; but when the same Soul becomes vertuous, and learned, all this new Ornament of Grace and Knowledge, and even its advancement to a state of perfect Happiness and Glory, makes it not cease to be the same Soul still, so is it here as to the difference of glorious qualities the raised body hath above the Body sown. I therefore 3ly, Grant that the raised Body is as different from the earthly Body we at present have, as a corruptible, weak, natural, mortal Body is from an incorruptible, powerful, spiritual, im∣mortal Body; but then the subject of these dif∣ferent qualities being still the same, this diffe∣rence hinders not its being the same Body still, since otherwise Christ's Body being also raised an incorruptible, powerful, immortal Body, could not be the same with that in which he suffered; and if his Body is still the same that suffered and was raised from the dead, then a like change of our vile Bodies will not hinder their being still the same. But it is still objected, That the Body raised is as different from the Bodies we at present have, and lay down in the Grave, as a Body that is flesh and blood, is from a Body that is not flesh and blood; for flesh and blood, saith St. Paul, cannot inherit the Kingom of God. Answ. To this I answer (1.) ab absurdo, that if even this hinder the Body raised from being the same Body, our Saviour cannot now have the same Body with that in which he suf∣fered, or which was raised from the dead; for doubtless he is entred into, and doth inherit the Kingdom of God; if therefore flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and the Body which hath not flesh and blood cannot be the same Body with that which hath flesh and blood, our Saviour's glorified Body cannot be the same Body which was raised from the dead, or in which he suffered. 2ly, I answer, That flesh and blood doth in the Scripture language denote the weakness, and the frailty of that which is compounded of it, as when 'tis said, we wrestle not with flesh and blood, i. e. weak, frail men, Eph. 6.12. See Matth. 16.17. Gal. 1.16. Hebr. 2.14. Ecclus. 14.18. And thus it is true that flesh and blood, that is, such weak, frail Bodies as they are, which here consist of flesh and blood, unchanged into incorruptible Bodies, or uncloathed upon with their Celestial Bodies, which will keep them from mortality, or a possibility of corruption, v. 48, 49. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; and therefore the Apostle adds, That this mortal must put on immortality, this corruptible put on incorruption, and so it shall be changed, as to its qualities; but then I have shew'd, that this change from mortal and corruptible, to an immortal and incorruptible Body, hinders not its being still the same Body, that is, the same in substance as it was before. 3ly, I think it is evident from the Apostle's words, that the Bodies of good Men then living, shall have the same qualities with the Bodies of them who are raised from the dead, for they al∣so shall inherit the Kingdom of God, they shall have spiritual, powerful, immortal Bodies; their Bodies, saith he, shall be changed, for this cor∣ruptible must put on incorruption; and yet can it be thought that this change shall amount to the destruction of that Body they then had, and the production of another Body, as it must do, if they cease to have the same Body which they had be∣fore this change? If it do not, it is hence evident that the Body may be still the same body, notwith∣standing the great change which shall then pass upon it. In a word, what the Apostle says here evident∣ly concerns only the Bodies of good Men, and so gives us no cause to think the Bodies of the wick∣ed shall be changed at all; and if the wicked shall be raised with the same Bodies to the Resurrection of Condemnation, why not the good with the same Bodies to the Resurrection of Life?
A Paraphrase and Comment UPON THE First Epistle to the Corinthians. CHAP. I. Verse 1. PAUL called to be an Apostle (or the called Apostle) of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and Softhenes our Brother. Ver. 2. Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints (or the Saints called) with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, (yea) both theirs, and ours. , the Church of God.] The sanctified in Christ Jesus, the Saints called, seem here to be words of the same import, denoting such as are called out of the World, and sepa∣rated from others, through Faith in Christ, to be a peculiar People to God, as the Jews were before: All Christians being, by vertue of this calling a chosen Generation, a Royal Priest∣hood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.9. Though many Members of the Church of Corinth, and of other Churches, wanted the inward Sanctification of the Holy Spirit. So that the word Saints, in many places of the Epistles, is as large as the word Christians, and stands opposed, not to the unsound Chri∣stians, but to the Heathen World, 1 Cor. 6.1, 2. See here 1 Cor. 14.33.16.1, 15. 2 Cor. 8.4.9.1, 12.13.13. With all that in every place.] Hence it ap∣pears that St. Paul's Epistles, though occasi∣onally written, and directed to particular Churches, were designed for the use of all Christians. , that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus.] This in the New Testament is the Character of a Christian, that he is one that calleth on this name, Acts 9.14, 21.22.16. Rom. 10.12, 13. 2 Tim. 2.22. And that these words ought not to be rendred passively, viz. all that are called hy the name of Christ, is evident from the Septuagint, wh still translate the Phrase  which is active, by , or , i. e. he shall call on the name of the Lord See Gen. 4.26.12.8.13.4.21.33.25.25 Psal. 79.6.99.6.116.4. Isai. 65. 1. Lam. 3.55. Zech. 13.9. But when the Phrase  thus, , that is, thy name is called upon us, or we are called by thy name, it is rendred thus, , Deut. 28.10. 1 Kings 8.43. 2 Chron. 7.14. Isai. 4.1.63.19. Jer. 14.9.15.16. Dan. 9.18, 19. A∣mos 9.12. Secondly, We are expresly told that the Dis∣ciples were first called Christians at Anti, Acts 11.26. Now before this time we find not only Stephen  calling upon th name, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spi∣rit, Acts 7.59. and St. Paul bid to wash away his sins, calling upon the name of the Lord. , Acts 22.16. but we find this to have been the Character of a Dis∣ciple, or a Convert to the Faith of Christ, that he was one that called upon the name of the Lord. Thus Ananias speaks to the Lord Je∣sus of St. Paul, he is one who hath received power from the High Priest to bind  all that call upon thy name, Acts 9.14. and of St. Paul converted, it is said that he had destroyed  them that called upon this name in Jerusa∣lem, v. 21. Thirdly, The Reverend Dr. Hammond, who here translates this Phrase passively, doth else∣where translate it actively, the Context for∣cing him so to do. So Rom. 10.13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, i. e. pray and adhere to Christ, shall be saved. And Acts 9.14. He hath authority to bind all that  upon thy name, i. e. saith he, that publickly
avow the Worship of Christ, Acts 22.16. Yea, both theirs and ours.] All the Greek Interpreters, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumo∣nius, Theophylact, observe that the words, both theirs and ours, are to be connected with the word Lord,  and so the sense is this, The Lord, I say, both of me who write, and you to whom I write. Ver. 3. Grace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. , &c.] 'Tis unadvisedly said by some that this is a Wish, and not a Prayer. The full import of the Phrase is, as St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.2. and St. Jude, v. 2. andProemio Epist. ad Philip. Poly∣carp do cite it, viz. Grace and Peace be multi∣plied to you from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Now is not this to desire for them Grace and Peace from God the Fa∣ther, and consequently to pray for it? Why therefore is it not also to desire the same Bles∣sings from God the Son? Are they not both the Givers of Grace and Peace to the Church? Doth not Christ know all the Necessities of his Church in this kind? Doth not he who searcheth the heart and reins, Rev. 2.23. know the desires of his Servants? And why then should they only wish these things from I know not whom, and not pray to him who is the Giver of Grace and Peace for them? Especially when they have St. Paul's example for it, in these words, For this thing I besought the Lord (Christ, v. 9.) thrice, and he said un∣to me, my Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. And again, The Lord Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who hath loved us, and gi∣ven us eternal Consolation, and good hope through Grace, comfort your hearts, and con∣firm you in every good word and work, 2 Thess. 2.16. 1 Thess. 3.11, 12. Ver. 4. I thank my God always on your be∣half for the Grace of God, which is given you by (or in) Jesus Christ. Ver. 5. That in every thing ye are (or have been) enriched by him in all utterance (of tongues) and in all knowledge (of Divine Mysteries, or in the Gift of Prophecy) 1 Cor. 14. , for the Grace of God.] Here the Context seems to restrain this Phrase to the favour of God shew'd to the Corinthi∣ans, in vouchsafeing these Spiritual Gifts, which is a frequent import of this Phrase in Scripture. So Rom. 12.6. Having gifts dif∣fering according to the grace (of God) that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesie according to the proportion of faith, &c. Eph. 4.7, 8. To every one of us is given grace accord∣ing to the measure of the gift of Christ. Where∣fore he saith, when he ascended up on high he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, 1 Pet. 4.10. As every one hath received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God, 2 Cor. 1.12. Not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you wards. Our preaching to you being not in the words of Humane Wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and in Power, 1 Cor. 2.4. Thus, to sing with grace in the heart, Eph. 5.19. Col. 3.16. is, say the. Ancients, to sing using the spiritual gift vouchsafed to them by the Holy Ghost. Which interpretation is confirmed from the Spiritual Psalms, Hymns, and Songs there mentioned. See 1 Cor. 14.15. Eph. 6.18. And this is very sutable to the Language of the Jews, who when the Hebrew mentions  Grace, do render it the Spirit of Prophecy So Psal. 45.2. Grace is poured into thy lips, datu∣es Spiritus Prophetiae in labiis tuis, saith the Chaldee. .] Estius saith this ought not to be interpreted of the Gift of Tongues, be∣cause  in Scripture never bears that sense. But (1.) it is certain from Verse the seventh, that it is , a Gift; and it is joyn'd with Faith and Knowledge, which are Gifts, 2 Cor. 8.7. and cannot well be referred to any other Gift vouchsafed then to the Church. And 2ly, the word  relating to Prophecy, or the Knowledge of Mysteries, was usually attended with the Gift of Tongues. See Acts 19.6. and though we find not the word  absolutely put in this sense; yet , the word of wisdom, and , the word of knowledge, are reckoned among Spiritual Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.8. All this indeed with Mr. le Cl. passes for meer Niceties; and he saith it is more natural to understand by  the knowledge of Religion, though that, as he confesses, is the import of the following word  knowledge; so that according to this wise Exposition, the Apostle thanks God here, and 2 Cor. 8.7. commends them for abounding in the knowledge, and in the knowledge of Re∣ligion. Besides, the Knowledge of Religion cannot be called Grace in the sense given of that Phrase v 4. nor by that, but by the , Gifts of the Holy Spirit, was the te∣stimony of Christ confirmed to the Corinthians, v. 6. Ver. 6. Even as (by these gifts) the Testi∣mony of (or Doctrine concerning) Christ was confirmed in you (or established among you.) , even as.] This Particle signifies sometimes when, as Acts 7.17. , but when the time drew nigh. Ver. 7. So that ye come behind (the other Churches) in no gift, waiting for the coming (or revelation) of the Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 8. Who shall confirm you to the end,
that you may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. From these three Verses it is to be observed (1.) That the Corinthians were abundantly re∣plenished with the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, the Gifts of Tongues and Knowledge, v. 5. that they came behind the other Churches in no gift, v. 7. Secondly, That they obtained these Gifts by Jesus Christ, and through Faith in him, v. 4. Thirdly, That by these, the Doctrine of Christ, the Testimony of the Apostles concern∣ing him, that he was raised from the dead, and become the Authour of Salvation to them that believe, was confirmed to them, v. 6. Fourthly, That by these Gifts, and by this earnest of the Spirit they had encouragement to expect or wait for the second coming of the Lord. , who shall also confirm you to the end, &c.] These words are by the Anci∣ents thus interpreted, viz. who in that day of the Lord Jesus which you expect, will confirm you for ever blameless. And this is sutable to his Prayer, that Christians may be unblame∣able in the day of the Lord, Philip. 1, 9, 10. 1 Thess. 3.12, 13.5.23. for, say they, God is faithful, who hath promised to them that o∣bey the Gospel , the adoption, that is, the redemption of the body, Rom. 8.23. or that they shall be partakers of that Kingdom and Glory to which he hath called them, 1 Thess. 2.12. Others thus, He will do all that isQuod suarum est partium. Grot. requisite on this part to render you un∣blameable to the end; so that you shall not fail of it through any want of Divine Grace necessary to that end, or any unfaithfulness on God's part to his Promise, who hath already reconciled you to himself through the death of Christ, to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight; if ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.21, 22, 23. See Philip. 1.6. Hebr. 3.6, 14. That the Apostle speaks not here of any Promise of Perseverance made to the Elect only among the Corinthians, is evident, 1. Because he plainly speaks to the whole Body of the Church, to the Church of God which was in Corinth, to all that call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And 2ly, he speaks not only of their being preserved from falling away final∣ly, but of their being preserved unblameable; whereas it is certain, the Elect are not always so preserved. Ver. 9. (For) God is faithful by whom ye were called to the fellowship (or Communion) of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, (i. e. That God by whom you are called, is faithful to per∣form his part in preserving you blameless to that day, or to confer upon you the promised In∣heritance.) Ver. 10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, (owning and teaching the same Doctrine which you have received, 1 Cor. 11.2.15. 1. Rom. 16.17. in love, and unity,) and that there be no divisions (or Schisms) among you, but ye be perfectly joyn∣ed together in the same mind, and in the same judgment; (in the same belief, and in the same kind affections one towards another.) , that ye be perfectly joyned  the same mind and judgment.]Hoc ad effectus animi refertur. Sic  sumitur Apoc. 17.13. 2 M 9.20. Grot. This can be no further the Matter of an Exhortation then it is in our power to obey it: seeing th it is not in any Man's power to change this settled judgment, or to think otherwise upon our entreaty, because our Exhortation gives no conviction to the Understanding, it follows that this Exhortation must only be to do what was in the power of the Corinthians; viz. (1.) To prevail with them to lay aside their strife, envy, and divisions, 1 Cor. 3.3. and the sad consequents of them, debate, wrath, back∣biting, whispering, swelling, tumult, 2 Cor. 12.20. and to this the reason of this Exhor∣tation leads, Be of one mind and judgment; for I hear there be contentions among you, v. 11. And 2ly, to engage them unanimously to own the Doctrine which they had received, and he had preached to them, 1 Cor. 15.1. which if they were so minded, might easily be done, since they so lately had received it, the Heads of it were so few, 1 Cor. 15.3. and 'twas so easie for them to consult the Apostle in their doubtings of the sense of what he had deli∣vered. But at this distance of time from the first discovery of the Christian Faith, and afte it is become a System of very many, and thse disputable Opinions, for the truth of which we have now no Apostle, no living and infal∣lible Judge of Controversies to consult, if it be not sufficient to preserve unity in the Church, that Men heartily believe all the Articles o the Apostles Creed which are plainly delivered in Scripture, and live peaceably and quietly together, following after peace and charity with all that call upon the Lord Jesus out of a pure heart, 2 Tim. 2.22. and avoiding any Separations from their Brethren, where nothing sinful is enjoyned to be believed, or done, to hold Communion with them, I doubt there will be little Union in the Church of God. Ver. 11. For it hath been declared to me by them that are of the House of Cloe, that there are Contentions among you. Ver. 12. Now this I say (or mean by chang∣ing you with these Contentions) that every one of you saith (one) I am (a follower) of Pa.
and (another) I of Apollo, and (a third) I of Cephas, and (a fourth) I of Christ. , I am of Paul, &c.] Of the Gentile part of the Church of Corinth. Some preferred St. Paul, as being their Spiritual Fa∣ther, who in Christ Jesus had begotten them through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.14, 15. Others preferred Apollo, as being an Eloquent Man, and mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. the Jewish Christians preferring St. Peter, as the chief Apostle of the Circumcision out of the Territories of Judaea. That this is here said, not by a fiction of Names, or Persons, under which the Apostle taxed the Heads of the Sects among the Corinthians; but that they really divided upon these accounts, is evident, first, From St. Paul's thanking God that he baptized so few of them, least they should have occasion to say he baptized in his own Name, and so made Disciples to himself. 2ly, From those words, let no man glory in men, for all are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Ce∣phas, Chap. 3.21, 22. Ver. 13. (Why do you not all say the same thing, viz. I am of Christ, Chap. 3.23.) Is Christ divided (was it one Christ that sent, and enabled Paul, another that sent Peter, to preach the Gospel to you? Is not one and the same Christ preached to you by us all? or is his Body divided? 2 Cor. 11.4.) was Paul (or any other but Christ Jesus) crucified for you? (that you should be baptized into their death, as indeed Christians are into the death of Christ) or were you baptized in the name of Paul? (or any o∣ther but Christ Jesus, so as to be called the Disciples of Paul.) Ver. 14 I thank God (whose Providence so ordered it) that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius. Ver. 15. Least any should say that I had baptized in my own name. Ver. 16. And I baptized also the houshold of Stephanus: besides I know not whether I baptized any other. , I know not.] Therefore his Inspi∣ration or Divine Assistance in writing his Epi∣stles, did not reach to an Information in such things as these, but only to direct him into all Truth he was to teach unto the Churches. See Chap. 16.7. 1 Pet. 5.12. Ver. 17. For Christ (when he called me) sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel (to the Gentiles, and that) not with wisdom of words, least the Cross of Christ (i. e. the Doctrine of Christ crucified) should be made of none effect (by that means.) , Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach, &c.] i. e. When e appeared himself, and after sent Ananias o him, he expresly sent him to preach to the Gentiles, Acts 22.21.26.16, 17. to bear his Name before the Gentiles, Acts 9.15. to be the Witness of his Resurrection, Acts 22.15. But in that threefold rehearsal of his Com∣mission, there is no mention made of his be¦ing sent to baptize; nor was it needful, after the general Commission given to Christ's Apo∣stles for that end, Matth. 28.19. That was not, say the Greek Expositors, his great busi∣ness; for. Theod. August. contr. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 56. to baptize is easie to any who is admitted to Sacred Orders; but to preach the Gospel requires a Divine Revelation, and great Assistance of the Power of God. Hence Peter himself preaches to Cornelius and his Kinsmen, but commands them to be baptized by others, Acts 10.48. And this Gospel he sent me to preach (Not with the wisdom of words, least the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect.) Men not ascribing the prevailing of it to the pow∣er of God, but to the perswasion of Humane Wisdom, or as being not attended with Di∣vine Assistance, God not approving, v. 19. and therefore not assisting the preaching of the Gospel in that way. , Orig. Philocal. p. 25. Ver. 18. For the preaching of the Cross (or of a crucified Jesus in this plain manner) is only to them that perish (by rejecting it, because not attended with this Humane Wisdom) foolishness; but unto us who are saved (by it) it is (evidently) the power of God. Ver. 19. (Whereas the preaching of it in the words of Humane Wisdom would render it of none effect.) For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the Wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the Prudent, (Isai. 29.14. as he hath already done, for) Ver. 20. Where is (now the wisdom of) the wise (Philosopher among the Gentiles?) where is the (wisdom of) the Scribe (the In∣terpreter of the Law, or Teacher of Traditions among the Jews? (Where is the disputer of this world, (or the Searcher into the Secrets of Nature?) Hath not God (by this dispensa∣tion) made (or declared to be) foolish the wisdom of this world? .] That is, what hath been done by the wisdom of the Philosopher, or by the Jew∣ish Doctors, or by the Searcher into Natures Secrets, to bring Men to the true Knowledge of God, and of his Will? Hath not God dis∣covered their Wisdom to be but Folly, in com∣parison of this way which he hath chosen to bring Men to the Knowledge of himself? The Disputer of this World is by St. Jerom rendred Causarum Naturalium Scrutator, Com.
in Gal. 3. and so the Naturalists are stiled by the Jews Buxt. Lex. in voce . Sapientes Scrutationis, the Searchers into the Secrets of Nature. That the , i. e. the wise man mentioned here, refers not to the  or wise men of the Jews, but to the Philosophers among the Gen∣tiles, is evident, for that the wisdom of the wise, v. 19. is the wisdom of the Heathen World, appears from v. 21. where it is said, the world through wisdom knew not God; which is true only of the Gentiles, not of the Jews. 'Tis therefore reasonable to conceive the wise in the twentieth Verse should signifie the same Persons. So doth St. Paul interpret the wise in these words, I am a debtor to the Greek, and the Barbarian, to the wise, and the unwise, Rom. 1.14. So Chrysostom,. Theo∣doret, Oecumenius, Theophylact upon the place, saying, that by the wise the Apostle understands the Man adorned with the Verbosity, or Elo∣quence of the Greeks. Ver. 21. For (to begin with the Philosophers) after that in the wisdom of God (discernible in his Works of Creation, and Providence,) the world by (all its) wisdom knew not (the true) God, (so as to glorifie him as God, and to be thankful to him for his blessings, Rom. 1.21.) it pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching, (as they think fit to stile it,) to save them that believe (in a crucified Jesus thus preached to them.) Here two things are to be learnt, (1.) That from the Creation, Beauty, Order, and Gran∣deur of the World, and the direction of all things in it to an end, and the fitting them with Parts, and Instruments adapted best to the obtaining that end, it might be known that the Creator of the World was God alone, and so was only to be glorified as God, Psal. 19.1, 2. Rom. 1.19, 20. Psal. 104.24.136.5. Jer. 10.12.51.15. 2ly, That the Gospel was sent into the World, that they who did not know the true God acceptably by the Light of Nature, might do it by the Light of that Revelation which made such a bright and glorious manifestation of the Power, Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God, which they whom Satan had not blinded must discern, 2 Cor. 4.4. Ver. 22. (Which salvation thus tendered, the wise men of the world, and Jewish Doctors, will not accept) for the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after (profound) wisdom. , a sign.] From Heaven, such as was that of Moses giving them bread from Heaven, John 6.30, 31. that in the time of Joshua, when the Sun stood still, Chap. 10.13. or  Elijah, who brought down fire from He to consume the Offering, 1 Kings 18.38. an to consume the Captains, and their fifty, 2 Kings 1.10, 12. Luke 9.54. the Son of Man being to come in the clouds of heaven, as he did  the destruction of Jerusalem, Dan. 7.1 Matth. 24.30. and to give signs from heaven, Joel 2.30. as he did at the day of Pente Acts 2.2. and as God did by a voice fr Heaven at our Saviour's Baptism, Matth. 3.1 at his Transfiguration, Matth. 17.5. at  Preaching, John 12.28, 29. Ver. 23. But (or nevertheless) we preac Christ crucified, (though his Crucifixion be)  to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. , unto the Jews a stum∣bling block.] Your Jesus, saith. Dial. cum Just. p. 227, 249, 317. Tryp having by this fallen under the extreamest Curse of the Law of God, we cannot sufficiently adm that you should expect any good from God  place your hopes in a Man that was crucifi And again; We doubt of your Christ, w was so ignominiously crucified, for our La stiles every one that is crucified accursed. Here by way of ignominy they still call our Savio Buxt. Lex. Talm. in voce. suspensum, one hanged upon the T To the Greeks foolishness.] They count a mad, saith. Apol. 2. p. 60, 61. Justin Martyr, that after i immutable and eternal God, the Father of  things, we give the second place to a Man  was crucified. 'Tis wicked and abominab, saith. Apud Orig. l. 7. p. 340. Celsus, the wise men of the world ∣sult over us, saithQuale cor habetis, qui Deum colitis crucifixum? Serm. 8. de Verb. Apost. St. Austin, and  where is your understanding, who worship  for a God that was crucified. So M. Felix. p.  Arnob. l. 1. p. 20. Lact. l. 4. c. 16. Euseb. l. 3. de  Const. c. 1. Ver. 24. (For this he is to Infidels only. But unto them which are called, both Jews  Greeks, (he is) Christ the power of God  the signs and wonders which are wrought  Faith in Christ for confirmation of his Doctrine and so he gives the sign the Jews require. and the wisdom of God, (in the manifold  Divine wisdom discovered in this dispens for the saving lost man, v. 30. and so ans the Greeks request for wisdom. Ver. 25. (I say the power and the wisdom  God,) Because the foolishness of God ( the way of God, which is esteemed foolishness  the Greeks) is wiser then (all the wisdom  men; (and much to be preferred before it: and the weakness of God (That way of pr¦gating Man's salvation, which is weak in
eyes) is stronger then (the power of) men. (For the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, and confounding all the strength, policy, and wis∣dom of the world opposed against it, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4. Ver. 26. For you see (Gr. look upon) your calling, Brethren, (and you will discern how agreeably to these things the Divine Wisdom hath so ordered it) that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are (either) called (by, or made use of to propagate the Gospel.) , not many wise.] This seems to be spoken in a direct opposition to that ce∣lebrated Maxim of the Jews, That Prophecy resides not, but upon a wise, a strong, and a rich Man. Ver. 27. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the World (That simple way of in∣structing Mankind which they call foolishness, and those unlearned Apostles whom they repre∣sent as fools) to confound the wise (Philoso∣phers, so that they shall not be able to gainsay, or resist the wisdom with which they speak, Acts 6.10. Luke 21.15.) And God hath chosen the weak things of the world (unarmed fisher∣men, tent-makers, assisted with no humane force) to confound the things which are mighty, (to break through all the opposition that the Kings, and Rulers of the World do make against them, to pull down the strong holds, cast down the rea∣sonings, level the heights of the Philosophers, who do exalt themselves against the knowledge of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Ver. 28. And (he hath chosen the) base things of the world, and things which are not, (i. e. the Gentiles who are esteemed base, and looked upon as nothing by the Jews) to bring to nought (Gr. to abolish) things that are (to become God's Church and People, and so to cause the Jewish Church and Oeconomy to cease, Rom. 11, 15, 17. Philip. 3.3. , &c.] To confirm this expli∣cation of the words, let it be noted, 1. That the Apostle in this Chapter often speaks conjunctly of the Jew and Gentile, in∣terweaving them together in his Discourse. So v. 20. he speaks of the wise men of the Gentiles, and then of the Scribe among the Jews: v. 22. of the Jews requiring signs, and the Greeks wisdom; of Christ crucified being to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks folishness. So here v. 27. he seems to speak of the Gospel preached by the Apostles in a plain familiar way, by them deemed weakness, and stiled foolishness, as confound∣ing all the Wisdom, and the Power of the Greeks; and v. 28. of the Gentile Church suc∣ceeding, and abolishing that of the Jews. Note therefore 2. That the Jews looked upon themselves as the only  Persons of true Nobility; as being of the stock of Abraham. Even the porest Israelite, saith R. Akibah is to be looked upon as a Gentleman, as being the Son of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But the Gentiles they horribly despised as the base People of the Earth, not fit to be conversed with by them, they being in their Law stiled , not a Nation, Deut. 32.21. , not a People, Hos. 1.10. And it being said by the Prophet, that all the Heathen, are as nothing, and were accounted as nothing, Isai. 40.17. they still accounted them as such. Hence Mordecai is introduced praying thus, Lord give not thy Scepter. to them that are not, Esther 4.11. And Esdras speaking to God thus, As for the People which also came of Adam, thou hast said they are nothing, but be like unto spittle, and hast likened the abun∣dance of them to a drop that falleth from a Vessel. And now, O Lord, these Heathens who have ever been reputed as nothing, have begun to be Lords over us, 2 Esdr. 6.56, 57. Thus Abraham is said to be the Father of the Gen∣tiles before that God, who calleth. things which are not, as if they were, Rom. 4.17. And. Epist. 2. §. 1. Ʋt essemus, qui nondum eramus. Iren. l. 5. c. 1. Clemens Romanus saith of the Gentiles, He called us who were not, and would that of no being we should have a being. So fitly are the Gentiles represented here by , the things base, accounted as no∣thing, and the things which are not. See also 1 Cor. 6.4. And this is the ancient Exposition of Origen, who speaking of the Rejection of the Jews, and the Calling of the Gentiles, and God's provoking the Jews to jealousie by them, that were not a Nation, he confirms this from these words,. God hath chosen the base things of the World, and things which are not, that he might abolish the things which were before, that Israel according to the flesh might not glory before God. Ver. 29. That no flesh should (have cause to) glory in his sight (either of their Wisdom, Birth, or Privileges.) Ver. 30. (Not you who are advanced to this happy state.) For of him are you in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Re∣demption. , &c. Wisdom.] As being the Author of that Evangelical Wisdom which far excels the Wisdom of the Philosopher and Scribe,
and even that Legal Constitution which is called the Wisdom of the Jews, Deut. 4.6. The Authour of Justification, procuring for us that Remission of Sins which the Law could not give, Gal. 2.21.3.21. The Authour of Sanctification procuring for, and working in us, not only an External and Relative Holi∣ness, as was that of the Jews, but , true and internal Holiness, Eph. 4.24. wrought in us by the Holy Spirit. The Au∣thour of Redemption, not from Aegyptian Bon∣dage, or Babylonish Captivity, but from the Servitude of Satan, the Dominion of Sin and Death, and from the Bondage of Corruption, in to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, or the Redemption of the Body, Rom. 8.21, 23. They who say Christ is made our Righteous∣ness by his Righteousness imputed to us, have the same reason to say also, that he is made our Wisdom by his Wisdom, and our Sanctifica∣tion by his Holiness imputed to us. Ver. 31. That according as it is written (Isa. 65.16. viz.) he that glorieth let him glo∣ry in the Lord (so it may be done by us Chri∣stians.) CHAP. II. Verse 1. AND I brethren (have acted suta∣bly to what I told you, that Christ sent me not to preach the Gospel with wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1.17. for) when I came to you, I came not with excellency of Speech, or of (Humane) Wisdom, declaring to you the testi∣mony of God. , the testimony of God.] This is the Reading of Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theophylact, who intimate not in the least that they knew any Copies which read . The Testimony of the Apostles concerning the Mes∣siah, or the Son of God, his Death, his Resur∣rection, and Exaltation to be a Prince and a Saviour, is called the Testimony of God, 1 John 5.9. because God testified to the truth of these Doctrines by signs, and wonders, and divers miracles, and distributions of the Holy Ghost, Hebr. 2.4. Ver. 2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, (i. e. to discover any other knowledge to you) save (that of) Jesus Christ, and him crucified. , not to know any thing.] To act as one who knew nothing  of the Eloquence and Wisdom of the Greeks, but only to give you the Knowledge of a crucifi∣ed Saviour, which was to them foolishness, Chap. 1.23. So Chrysostom. Ver. 3. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling, (or in much fear and trembling.) , in weakness.] Of Body, and of Speech, his bodily presence being weak (and mean) and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.10. This infirmity of his flesh rendring him despicable in the eyes of others, Gal. 4.13, 14. , in fear and trembling.] By reason of the violent opposition which he found from the Jews, which made so deep impression on him when he was at Corinth, that Christ saw fit to appear to him, and en∣courage him by saying be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee, Acts 18.6, 9. Ver. 4. And my Speech and my Preaching was not with enticing words of Man's wis∣dom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and in power, (the power of God confirming what I preach'd with signs and wonders, Rom. 15.19. 2 Cor. 12.12. , in demonstration of the Spirit.] That is, saithContr. Celsum p 5. Origen, by demon∣stration of the truth of what I said concerning Christ out of the Prophets, who spake by the Spirit, and comparing spiritual things reveal∣ed to us, with spiritual things revealed  them, v. 13. Reasoning with the Jews o of the Scripture, as St. Paul's manner was. Acts 17.2. and saying no other things but those which Moses, and the Prophets said should c that Christ should suffer, and that he should rise from the dead, and should shew light to the Gentiles, Acts 26.22, 23. Others, as. Photius. Chrysostom, Theodoret, O∣cumenius, Theophylact understand by this Phrase the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost only it must be noted against Mr. le Cl. that neither the word  is to be restrained to the Gift of Tongues, but comprehends all the internal Gifts of the Holy Ghost; nor must the word  power be restrained to heal∣ing Diseases; but comprehend all the external Gifts shewed upon others, as casting out Death raising the dead. Ver. 5. That your Faith should not (se to) stand in the wisdom of Man, but in the power of God. Ver. 6. Howbeit, we speak the (highest) wisdom among them that are perfect (me Christ Jesus, i. e. fully instructed in the Prin∣ciples
of Christian Faith) yet not the wisdom of the (Heathen) world, nor of the Princes of the World, (the Jewish Magistrates and Do∣ctors) who come to nought (and are to be a∣bolished.) , among them that are perfect.] i. e. Fully instructed in the Principles of Chri∣stian Faith; that this is the sense of the word perfect here, appears from the opposition of those that are perfect to Babes in Christ, as in those words, You have need that one teach you which he the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong Drink, for every one that u∣seth Milk is unskilful in the word of righteous∣ness. Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, Hebr. 5.12, 13.6.1. . Thus to that question of the young Man, What lack I yet, Christ answereth, , if thou wilt be perfect, i. e. fully instructed in the Conditions of Life required by the Gospel, Go sell all, and follow me, Matth. 19.21. So Philip. 3.15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, i. e. fully instructed in our Christian Liberty, mind this. See 1 Cor. 13.10. Col. 1.28. Strong meat is for them that are perfect, Hebr. 5.14. Ver. 7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world (to be revealed in due time) to our glory, (i. e. to be the means of our happiness and glory.) , the hidden wisdom.] i. e. Be∣fore, not after the Revelation of it; for this Mystery, saith the Apostle, God hath revealed to us by his Spirit, v. 10. It is the Mystery which hath been hid from Ages and Generati∣ons but now is made manifest to the Saints, Rom. 16.25, 26. Eph. 1.9.3.3, 4, 9, 10.6.19. Col. 1.26, 27.2.2.4.3, 4. , before the world.] At the beginning of the Ages of the World, Gen. 3.15. and before any of them were compleated, or run out. Hence it is stiled the Mystery con∣cealed in the times of the preceding Ages, Rom. 16.25. as being not made known in other A∣ges to the sons of men, as now it is, Eph. 3.5. but being a Mystery hid from those Ages, v. 9. in this sense seemeth it to be that God hath promised us Eternal Life, , from ancient Generations, , from the be∣ginning, saith Photius, and this Grace, in the promise of it, is said to be given us in Christ, 1 Tim. 1: 9. , a long time ago, saith Dr. Hammond, , from the beginning, or of old, saith Theodoret. Ver. 8. Which none of the Princes of this world knew, for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. , none of the Princes.] Pilate, or the Jewish Rulers, for they only can be said to have crucified the Lord of Glo∣ry, they only are the Rulers which were to be abolished, v. 6. and they are stiled , Princes and Rulers, Luke 14.1.18.18. the Princes who stood up, and the Rulers which took counsel against the Lord, and against his anointed, Psal. 2.2. Acts 4.26. They were the Princes who delivered him to be condem∣ned to death, and crucified him, and this they did out of ignorance, Acts 3.17.13.27. Ver. 9. But (God hath dealt with us) as it is written, (Isa. 64.4.) eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. , eye hath not seen.] These words do not immediately respect the Bles∣sings of another World, but are spoken by the Prophet of the Gospel state, and the Blessings then to be enjoyed by them that love God, Rom. 8.28. For all the Prophets, say theLightf. in locum. Jews, prophesied only of the days of the Messiah, but as for the world to come, or the state of things then, (as it is written) eye hath not seen, O God, besides thee; where the Gloss adds, The eyes of the Prophets could not see these things. Hence the Apostle adds in the follow∣ing Verse, But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit; whereas our future Happiness is not yet revealed, saith St. John, 1 John 3.2. Ver. 10. But God hath revealed them to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep (and mysterious) things of God. Ver. 11. (And as it is among men, so is it here in reference to these things,) For what man knoweth the (secret) things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him, even so the (secret) things of God knoweth no man (Gr. none) but the Spirit of God (which is in him.) , but the Spirit of God.) These words accord with those of the Book of Wisdom, Thy counsel who hath known except thou give wisdom, and send thy Spirit from above, which knoweth and understandeth all things, Chap. 9.17. v. 11. Whence it plain∣ly seems to follow, 1. That the Holy Spirit is Omniscient, as Knowing all things, even the deep things of God. Wisdom is a loving Spirit, and will not acquit a Blasphemer of his words; for God is witness of his reins, and a beholder of his heart, and a hearer of his tongue: For the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world, and that which con∣taineth all things hath the knowledge of the voice, Wisd. 1.4, 5, 6, 7.
2ly, That the Holy Spirit is with God, and in God, even as intimately as the Soul is in the Body, according to those words of the Book of Wisdom, She is  with thee, an assessor of thy Throne, and was present with thee when thou madest the world, Wisd. 9.4.9. Ver. 12. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World, (which suggests worldly wisdom) but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely gi∣ven us of God. Ver. 13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which mans wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. , comparing spiritual things with spiritual.] That is, saith Mr. Cl. speaking spiritual things to spiritual men. But where doth  signifie to speak, or why doth he limit what is spoken to the spiritual man, since the Apostles spake as well to the unbelieving Jew and Gentile, as to the spiritual man? And how doth it appear that  Man is here to be understood, be∣cause it follows in the next Verse, rather than  things, which is understood in the immediate foregoing words? The interpreta∣tion of the Fathers is much more probable, viz. we speak these things in the words taught by the Holy Ghost,. Theodoret. comparing the things which were writ by the Spirit in the Old Te∣stament, with what is now revealed to us by the same Spirit, and confirming our Doctrines from them. Moreover from this, and the preceding Verses, as also from the following, it is exceeding evident that the Apostles spake and writ by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, as did the Prophets of old time, and delivered only those things as from God, which God revealed to them by the Holy Spirit, ac∣cording to those words of St. Peter, We preach the Gospel to you by the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12. Ver. 14. But the natural man (who acteth only by the Principles of Humane Reason, and of worldly Wisdom) receiveth not the things of the Spirit, for they are foolishness to him (as being destitute of his Humane Wisdom, Chap. 1.23.) neither can he know them (by any study of his own) because they are spiritu∣ally discerned, (i. e. by Scripture Prophecies, and by the Revelation of the Spirit, and there∣fore while he continues to reject this way of knowledge, he cannot receive them. . the natural man.] By the Natural Man, saith Mr. Cl. is not here me the man that makes use of nothing but Reason, but the man that is wholly devoted, and en¦ved to earthly things, and entirely, taken  with the Concernments of this Life, like a brute Creature. The opposition here made betwixt spi∣ritual and animal things, saith he, plai proves what I have said. Whereas there is n a word spoken of , animal things, in the whole Chapter, but only an opposition betwix , the natural or animal, and the  spiritual person, whom I shall prove to be a person endued with a spiritual Affan and by that confound his Notion. That the Natural Man here is the man who rejects Re∣velation, and admits of no higher Principle to judge of things by but Philosophy, and de¦monstration from the Principles of Natural Reason, or in the words ofDe Abst. l. 1. § 1. Porphyr. , of persua∣sion to be found out by rational deduction, is the express assertion of. Theodoret. Theodoret, St.. Chrysost. Chrysostom, Photius, Oecumenius, and Theophyla upon the place, they therefore thought the word would bear this sense, and evident i is to any one who considers the Chain of the Apostle's Discourse from Chap. 1.17. to the end of this Chapter, that this must be the sense; for v. 17. he begins to declare, he preached the Gospel  not in wis¦dom of words, or humane wisdom; here v. 1. that he did it not  with excellency of speech, or humane wisdom: there the Persons which reject the Gospel are , the wise men of the world; the 19, 20, 21 v. stiled  wise men according to the flesh; the Greeks, that seek for wisd v. 22. they who esteemed it foolishness a the same Greeks, v. 23. Here it is the  or the natural man who receives it not, and to whom it is foolishness. Who therefore sees not that the Natural Man, is the same wi the Wise man, the Disputer, the Philosopher. the Greek there? There the Gospel thus re∣jected by them, for want of this Wisdom, and accounted foolishness, is indeed the power  God, and the wisdom of God, v. 24. Here it is the wisdom of God in a mystery revealed  the Apostles by the Spirit, v. 7, 10. the Spirit, not of the World, or of Humane Wisdom, but by the Spirit they had received from Gd, that they might know it, v. 12. and therefore they delivered it not in the words of Humane Wisdom, in which the Greeks gloried, and which they sought for in the Gospel, but  Words taught them by the Holy Ghost, v. 13. when
then it follows, But the natural man receives not  the things of the Spirit; must he not be the Man who receives not the things taught by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost? The opposition which he bears to the , the Man who hath this wisdom re∣vealed to him by the Spirit of God, demonstrates this to be the sense. , &. He receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God.] But counts them foolish∣ness, Chap. 1.23. when propounded to him, because he doth not see them proved from Principles of Natural Reason, by Philosophi∣cal Deductions, which is the Wisdom he seeks after, v. 22. Hence again it is evi∣dent he is the Greek, and not the Sensual Per∣son. , he cannot know them.] Viz. By that Wisdom which he alone will be condu∣cted by, because they are spiritually discerned, or by the Revelation of the Spirit; for being Mysteries, they are not knowable by Hu∣mane Reason, till God is pleased to reveal them. Note also, that the Apostle doth not here discourse of the Inability of an Heathen to un∣derstand the sense of any Revelations disco∣covered to him, for how then are they to be dis∣covered to him, but only of his Inability to find out, and originally come to the knowledge of them by the meer Light of Reason; and from the denial of this he infers the necessity of a Supernatural Revelation, that the hidden Wis∣dom of God may be made known to the World: Nor doth he say, that the Natural Man cannot understand these Revelations, when discovered to him, because he wants further means to do it, but only that he can∣not know them, before they are discovered by the Revelation of the Spirit; and that he will not then receive them, because they are not taught him, as the Wisdom of the World is, by deductions from Principles of Humane Rea∣son. The Jew, saith he, admits of Revelati∣on, and so he only doth require a sign to prove this Revelation; but the Greek seeks after Humane Wisdom, and because he finds not that in our way of preaching he will not re∣receive the Revelation, though it be con∣firm'd by demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Ver 15. But he that is Spirtual (i. e. who hath the Revelation of the Spirit) judgeth (or discernti) all things (relating to this Myste∣y, v. 7.) yet he himself is judg'd of no man, or discerned by none who hath no higher Prin∣iple then that of Nature to discern things y.] , judgeth all things.] The Passive  is rendred discerned in the foregoing Verse, and so should have been rendred here; and the Active searcheth, or diserneth, as Acts 17.11. and here Chap. 10.23, 27.14.24. Ver. 16. For who (without a Reveltin hath known the mind of the Lord that he may instruct him, (or which will and can instruct  in these things? sure no man by natural Prin¦ciples;) but we (who are spiritual) have the mind of Christ, (and so are able to discern and instruct others in it.) here, and in other places of this Epistle, is not the Man who is adorned with the Fruits of the good Spirit, much less, as Mr. Cl. suggests, the Man who relishes, or is affected with the spiritual Doctrines of the Gospel; butTheod. , the Man who is endued with a spiritual affltus, and hath those Gifts of the Spirit which are stiled the Word of Wisdom, and of Knowledge, Chap 12.8. For, (1.) he is the Man who speaks in demonstra∣tion of the Spirit, v. 4. the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, v. 7. to whom God hath revealed it by the Holy Spirit, v. 10. that he might know the things that are freely given us of God, v. 12. and who speaks of them in words taught by the Holy Ghost, v. 13. and who by this Revelation of the Spirit hath the mind of Christ made known to him, v. 16. who speaks  by the Spirit of God, and by the Holy Ghost, Chap. 12.2. Such were the Prophets in the first Age of the Church, who by this Afflatus performed all Sacred Offices in the Church, before they had stated Church Offi∣cers among them. See Note on 1 Cor. 14.32. Whence the Apostle saith, If any man be a Prophet among you, or spiritual, let him know, (i. e. acknowledge and discern by his spiritual Afflatus) that the things which I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37. And to those Prophets he writes thus, Brethren, if any man be overtaken with a fault, you that are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. See the Note there This is the constant Notion of the Spi∣ritual Man inPerfectos dicit eos qui acceperunt Spiritum Dei, & omnibus linguis loquuntur per Spiritum Dei; quemadmdum, & mul∣s dimus praties in Ecclesiâ etica habentes charismata, & per Spiritum universis linguis loquentes, & abscon a homi∣m  mfeum producentes ad utilitatem, & mysteria Dei enarrantes, quos & spirituales Apostolus vocat, secundum partici∣ationem Spiritus existentes spirituales, l. 4. c. 75. Irenaeus, who speaking of those Men who had the Prophetical Gifts for the Edification of the Church, saith, they are the Men whom the Apostle stiles spiritual. When afterwards Church Governours were appointed, they seem to have been chosen out of these Spiritual Men, or to have had for a time, together with their Ordination, this Gift, which therefore he stiles the Gift of Truth. And from whom, saith he, the Truth is to be learned by others. If the Church of Rome would from
this Chapter gather the Infallibility of their Doctors met in Council, let them shew it by their Spiritual Gifts, or exhibit Charisma ve¦ritatis certum, asEis qui in Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obedire opertet, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, qui, cum Episcopatus succe∣sione, charisma veritatis certum, secundum beneplacitum Patris, acceperunt, l. 4. c. 43. Posuit Deus 1o in Ecclesiâ Apo∣los, 2o Prophetas, 3o Doctores; ubi igitur charismata Domini posita sunt ibi discere oportet veritatem. Ibid. c. 45. Irenaeus speaks. CHAP. III. Verse 1. AND I Brethren, (though I speak the highest wisdom among them that are perfect, yet) could (I) not speak to you as to spiritual (persons) but as unto carnal (by reason of those fruits of the flesh which still abide in you, v. 3. and your affecti∣on to those who are only wise according to the flesh, Chap. 1.28.) and even as to Babes in Christ. Ver. 2. I have fed you with Milk (the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Hebr. 5.12, 13.6.1. See 1 Cor. 15.2, 3.) and not with meat, (the higher Doctrines of Christianity) for hitherto (or then) ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. Ver. 3. For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is (yet) among you envying, and strife, and divisions, (which are the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20, 21.) are ye not carnal, and walk as men (who have little of the Spirit in you. See Note on Chap. 9.8.) Ver. 4. For while one saith (in opposition to each other) I am (the Disciple) of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, are ye not car∣nal? , carnal.] This word being here plainly applied to the Works of the Flesh, seems to imply that the Spiritual Man oppo∣sed to him, should signifie the Man endued with the Fruits of the Good Spirit, or who walketh in the spirit, not fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, Rom. 8.1, 4. Gal. 5.16. And thus the Greek Interpreters do understand these words; hence noting, that it is possible for Men to have great Gifts, as the Corinthians had, and yet be carnal. YetNondum autem Spiritus Patris requiescit super vos propter vestram infirmitatem. L. 4. c. 75. Irenaeus in∣terprets the words thus, that they were car∣nal, because the Spirit of the Father did not rest upon them; i. e. because he being the Spirit of Love and Union, would not abide with them when they indulged to Envy, and Divisions, or be unto them a Spirit of Instruction; and according to this Interpretation, he must deny them to be Spiritual, as the word signifies one who enjoys some Spiritual Gift, and receives some illumination from him. Whatever be the sense, it must be noted that the Apostle doth not here stile them Carnal, in that worst sense in which the Carnal Person is represented as one who is not subject to the Law of God, nei∣ther indeed can be, Rom. 8.7, 8. and therefore can do nothing pleasing to God; and as it wholly doth exclude us from any interest in Christ, Gal. 5.24. for he allows them to be babes in Christ, v. 1. But as it imports Men through the too great prevalency of their Car∣nal Appetites, lusting against the Spirit,  subject to such things as shew'd some strong Remainders in them of a Carnal Mind. But yet one great difficulty remains scarce observed by any Interpreter excepting Crellius, viz. how the same Corinthians could be such Babes in Christ, and have such need of milk. and not of meat, and yet be inriched in all utterance and knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.5. and a∣bound in faith, utterance, and knowledge, 2 Cor. 8.7. I answer, That these Encomiums must be re∣strained to some few of them who were their extraordinary Church Officers, and enjoyed this Faith and Knowledge for the Instruction of the rest; and then, notwithstanding this, it may be true that the Apostle could not write to the generality of them as such, but rather as to Babes in Christ. Or 2ly, this Faith, Ut∣terance, and Knowledge must be restrained to the Gift of Miracles, of Songs, and Prophecy. which might be given for the Confirmation of the Gospel, and the Good of others, to them who were not Spiritual in the best sense, but of very small proficiency in the saving Fruits of that good Spirit. Hence we find them puf∣fed up on the account of these Gifts, envying others who had them in an higher measure; and abusing them to vain oftentation and con∣fusion in the Church, and not to Edificati which things sufficiently evidence they were but Babes in Christ, Ver. 5. Who then is Paul, or who is Apo (not Authors of your Faith) but (only) Min∣sters by whom ye believed, (which Faith  they wrought in you) even as the Lord g (his Gifts) to every man (of you, and his ¦sing on their labours.) Ver. 6. I have planted (the Gospel  you) Apollos watered (the Seed s) ut God (only) gave the encrease (of it.) Ver. 7. So then neither is he that plnte (to be esteemed as) any thing, nor he  watereth, but (the glory of all must be  bed to) God that giveth the encrease. , to God, &c.] Whence it is evid
that there can be no cause why you should run into factions about, or desire to be named from them, who have no excellency but from God, and do nothing but by his assistance. Ver. 8. Now he that planteth, and he that watereth are one [in their design and ministry] and every man (of them) shall receive his own reward (from that God whose Workmen they are;) according to his own labour. , are one.] , ac∣cording to their Ministry, saithStrom. 1. p. 272. D. Clemens Alex. as being God's Ministers in this Dispen∣sation, or , as having both received their different Gifts from the same Spirit, it being one, and the same Spirit who divideth to every man as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. Ver. 9. (I say according to his labour) For we are Labourers together with God, (his grace assisting us;) ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building. Ver. 10. According to the grace of God gi∣ven to me as a wise Master builder, (assisted by Divine Wisdom,) I have laid the foundati∣on Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2.) and another (coming after me) buildeth there∣on, but let every man take heed how he build∣eth thereupon. , a Master builder.] So the Jews call their wise men  Architecti. See Buxtorf. Lex. Talm. p. 318. which Metaphor the Apostle here uses. Ver. 11. For other (true) foundation can no man lay then that (which) is laid (already by me) which is (faith in) Jesus Christ. Ver. 12. Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, (i. e. sound Doctrine, which will bear the trial of the fire) wood, hay, stubble, (Humane Eloquence and Wisdom, Legal Rites, and Judaical Tradi∣tions, which will be abolished, and vanish a∣way.) Ver. 13. Every mans work shall be made manifest; for the day (of Christ's Advent to de∣stroy the Jewish Temple, Church, and Nation) shall declare it, because it shall be (Gr. it is) revealed by fire, (i. e. to be attended with great tribulation, Matth. 24.21. , with burning for trial, 1 Pet. 4.12.) and the fire shall try every mans work of what sort it is (whether it be gold or silver, to abide the fire, or hay and stubble to be consumed by it.) Ver. 14. If any mans work abide which he hath built thereupon, (as sound Evan∣gelical Doctrine will, suffering nothing by, but being confirmed by the conflagration which shall burn up the Jewish Oeconomy) he shall receive a reward, (be approved as a wise builder, and shall be eminently preserved from the evils of that day of trial, Matth. 24.13.) Ver. 15. If any mans work shall be burnt, (as theirs must be who build upon the foundation Legal Observances, and Judaical Rites, for they must perish with that Church and Temple which is the foundation of them) he shall suf∣fer (the) loss (of all his labour) but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire (i. e. not with∣out great hazard and difficulty, as one snatch'd out of the fire.) , as out of the fire.] To be sa∣ved out of the fire, is a Proverbial Speech con∣cerning them that escape with great danger out of a Calamity, so it is used in the Old Te∣stament, I have pluck'd them as a fire-brand out of the fire, Amos 4.11. Is not this a brand pluck'd out of the fire, Zach. 3.2. And in the New, Others save with fear, plucking them out of the fire, Jude 23. So L. Aemilius inL. 22. c. 40. Livy saith, He escaped the popular flame half burnt. The interpretation of Sir Norton Knatchbull, He shall be saved, but so as that he pass through the fire of Persecution with constancy to the faith, accords well with Christ's words, but not with the use of this Proverbi∣al Expression. Now hence 'tis evident, that the Apostle speaks not of the Gnosticks, who denied the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.14, 17. and so believed in vain, and taught that Christ might be denied with the mouth in the time of Persecution, and so were then ashamed of him, and also were abominably filthy, both in Doctrine, and Manners; for of such the A∣postle would not say, they should be saved, yet so as by fire; but so as Jude and Peter do, they are of old ordained to condemnation, their judgment lingreth not, and their damnation doth not slumber, Jude 4, 13. 2 Pet. 2, 3. , for the day will declare it.] Here observe 1st, That a day absolutely put, doth often signifie a day, or a time of punishment; so they that come after him shall be astonished at his day, Job 18.21. The Lord shall laugh at him, for he seeth that his day is coming, Psal. 37.13. Remember, O Lord, the Children of Edom, what they did in the day of Jerusalem, Psal. 137.7. So the day of Midian, Isa. 9.4. Wo unto them for their day is come, the time of their Visitation, Jer. 50.27. 2ly, That in like manner the day here men∣tioned is the day of our Lord's coming to de∣stroy the unbelieving Jews to burn their Tem∣ple, and to destroy the Jewish Oeconomy, will appear probable from the description of that day, as a Refiners fire, Mal. 3.2, 3.4.1, 2. Joel 2.1, 13, 30, 31. And as the fire of an O∣ven, burning up the Chaff and Stubble; for, behold, the day of the Lord cometh that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as stubble, and the day that cometh shall burn them up. But whether ye understand these words of that day, or any other day of Judgment, this
is certain, that the Apostle cannot be here sup∣posed to speak of the R. Purgatory fire, (1st,) because the fire the Apostle speaks of, asIn Celsum l. 4. p. 168. O∣rigen hath noted, is not , fire properly, but metaphorically so called, as appears from these words, he shall escape as by fire. 2ly, Because this fire is to try every mans work, Paul's and Apollo's, as well as theirs who built on the Foundation hay, and stubble; and sure they will not say Paul and Apollos went to Purgatory. 3ly, This fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is; now. Purgatory fire doth not try mens works, but punish them for them. Ver. 16. (Moreover, to pass from their false Doctrines, to the evil effects of them in your di∣visions.) Know ye not that ye (Christians) are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you (the Christian Church, as the Shechinah did in the Temple.) Ver. 17. If (then) any man corrupt the Tem∣ple of God (by dividing that Church, which is his Temple, and in which one and the same Spirit dwells, into parts and factions) him shall God destroy, for the Temple of the Lord is holy, (and therefore not to be prophaned by those Divisions which render you carnal, 1 Cor. 3.1, 3.) which Temple ye are. , if any man corrupt the Temple of God.] I have in the Paraphrase followed the common Interpretation of these words, but the like words used Chap. 6. from v. 15-19. by way of dehortation from Forni∣cation, and 2 Cor. 6.16. from Communion with Heathens in their Idolatrous Rites, and evil Practises, and by way of Inducement to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, Chap. 7.1. more naturally incline us to refer these Verses to the corrupting the Temple of God by filthiness of the Flesh, Uncleanness, and Fornication, or by filthiness of the Spirit, i. e. Idolatrous Practises, both which the Corinthians did. See the Note on 2 Cor. 7.1. and then the Connexion will run thus, I have declared you to be a building of God, v. 9. as being built up together for an ha∣bitation of God through the Spirit, Eph. 2.22. If therefore you do not keep this Temple of God holy, but corrupt it by joyning the Tem∣ple of God with Idols, 2 Cor. 6.16. or prophane and defile it, with Uncleanness and Fornica∣tion, you may expect that these sins by which God's Temple is destroyed, should end in their own ruine and destruction. Ver. 18. (And because you break into these divisions on the account of, or are taught these practises by the Philosophers of this Age, Men in whom you glory for their Eloquence and Wis∣dom,) Let no man deceive himself, if any man among you seemeth to be wise in (the wisdom and learning of) this world, let him (embrace that Gospel and Doctrine of Christ which i World calls foolishness, and so) become a Fs (to them) that he may be wise (according to the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 25.) , to be wise in the wisdom of this World.] That the Corinthi were induced to eat things offered to Idols  the Idol Temples by Men pretending to gr knowledge. See Chap. 8.1, 2. That they  so introduced among them the Doctrine of  lawfulness of Fornication. See Note on Chap 5.1. on Chap. 6.16. on Chap. 7.1. And  this sense of these two last Verses agree  descants of the Ancients, who say the Apoe v. 17. begins to speak  of  that had committed Fornication, Chap. 5.1. a against them qui turpiter viventes corpora s violando corruperunt, who by filthy practises had corrupted their Bodies, and violated the Temple of the Holy Ghost: These Teaches seem to have been the Nicolaitans, who recei∣ved their Doctrines from the Philosophers. Ver. 19. For the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God; for it is written (Job 5.13.) He taketh the wise in their own crafti∣ness, (causing one Sect of Philosophers to destroy what another stablished, and so shewing the un∣certainty and vanity of their pretended wis∣dom.) Ver. 20. And again (Psal. 94.11.) the Lord knoweth the thoughts (and machinations) of the wise that they are vain. Ver. 21. Therefore let no man (so) glory in men (as to be induced by their esteem of them to rend or divide the Church, or to indulge to those vile practises which corrupt the Temple of God,) for all things (or persons) are yours (as being appointed for your service.) Ver. 22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Ce∣phas, they have received their Apostleship for your sakes) or the world, (as being made for you) or life, or death, or things present, o things to come, all are yours, (as being all de∣signed for your good.) , all are yours.] The Jews believed that the World was made for them, and that God despised the Gentiles, and look∣ed upon them as nothing when he made it, 2 Esdras 6.55, 59. The Apostle on the contra∣ry affirms, the World was made for the Gen∣tiles converted to the Christian Faith: And adds, that the Apostles had received their Gifts and Authority for their sakes, that if Life were continued to them under continual Perils,  was for their furtherance and joy in the faith. Philip. 1.25. or if we be always given up to death, so that death worketh in us, it is that life may work in you, 2 Cor. 4.11, 12. for  suffer all things for you, v. 15.2 Tim. 2.1. that things present, the Pressures they now suffered; and things to come, the Prosperity,
or Adversity they might afterwards be subject to, were for their sakes; for whether we be afflicted it is for your consolation and salvation; or whether we be comforted it is for your consola∣tion and salvation, 2 Cor. 1.6. Ver. 23. And you are (only) Christs, (who is your head) and Christ is Gods, (or of God, having as Mediator, his Commission and his Power from him, and acting all things to his glory.) , and Christ is Gods.] Here the Socinians cry out, Vide hic discrimen inter Deum & Christum: See here the difference be∣twixt God and Christ. Hence it appears, saith Crellius, that Christ is in no wise God most high, as having another above him, as his Head, on whom he depends, and from whom he is here manifestly distinguished. But the Fathers thought not so, who say Christ is of God, , as being begotten by him before all Ages, and having him for hs Father, , a receiving the Divine Nature from him. Others grant this of Christ as Mediator betwixt us and God, in which sense he performing that Office, as Man, or by virtue of his Humane Nature, in which alone he could be a Prophet sent from God, or offer up himself to the death for us, or inter∣cede in our behalf, or be exalted to the right hand of God, to be a Prince and a Saviour, He therefore was exalted thus to the Glory of God the Father, and so depended on him in the exercise of that Office. See Note on 1 Cor. 11.3. CHAP. IV. Verse 1. (WE are yours, I say, yet) let a man (also) so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, (i. e. of those Revela∣tions of the Gospel which are stiled Mysteries, as being not before revealed to the World. See Note on Chap. 2.2, 7. Ver. 2. Moreover it (chiefly) is required in Stewards, that a man (taking that office upon him) be found faithful. Ver. 3. But (whether it be thus, or not) with me it is a very small thing that I should be judg'd of you, or of mans judgment, yea, I judge not my own self, (so as to acquiesce in that judgment.) , that I should be judged of you.] Not that he was unconcerned, whe∣ther the Corinthians had a good esteem of him, or not, the contrary is evident from the whole drift of his Epistles, in which he labours to convince them of the truth of his Doctrine, and of his sincerity in the discharge of his Office, and rejoyceth greatly in their affection to him, 2 Cor. 6.13.7.14, 15.18.24. His meaning only is, that their judgment is little to him, in comparison of the final and uner∣ring Judgment of the Lord. Ver. 4. For I know nothing (of unfaithful∣ness) by my self, yet am I not thereby justi∣fied (at God's Tribunal) but he that (further) judgeth me is the Lord. , yet am I not thereby justified.] Here also the Apostle doth not in∣tend to say that he, and others, could have no good assurance of their present Justification, and Favour with God, from the testimony of an upright Conscience, which, saith St. John, gives confidence with God, 1 John 3.21. for then farewel all Joy and Comfort in this World. He doth himself assure us, that their rejoycing was this, even the testimony of their Conscience, that in simplicity and gdly sincerity they had their conversation in this world, 2 Cor. 1.12. He adviseth all Men to approve their acti∣ons to themselves, and then, saith he, they shall have rejoycement in themselves, and not in another, Gal. 6.4. His meaning therefore is, that our fi∣nal Justification, or Absolution from Condem∣nation, depends not on that Judgment which we pass upon our selves, but upon that which God, the righteous Judge, will pass upon us at the last. Here also Note in St. Paul ano∣ther sense of Justification, as it relates to our Absolution from Condemnation, and our ap∣probation as Righteous at the last day, which will be, saith he, according to our Works, 2 Cor. 5.10. and our fidelity in execution of the Trusts committed to us, v. 2. Ver. 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart, and then shall every man have praise of God. , judge nothing before the time.] The Apostle doth not here condemn all Judgment, Civil or Ecclesiastical, of any Persons, Deeds, or Words, or bid us suspend our judgment of things occurring to our Sen∣ses, till the Day of Judgment, but only for∣bid our Censures of things uncertain, of which no righteous Judgment can be passed, because we cannot be certain of the truth of that Judgment, and of things which it belongs not to us to judge of. , who will make manifest the counsels of the heart.] Hence note, that Jesus Christ must have the know∣ledge of the secrets of the hearts of all Men subject to his Judgment, and so must be that God who alone knows the hearts of all Men, 1 Kings 8.39. and is alone the searcher of all
hearts, 1 Chron. 28.9. to give every man a¦cording to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings, Jer. 17.10. and therefore Christ expresly ascribes this knowledge to himself, by saying, All the Churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts, and I will give to every one of you according to your wors, Rev. 2.23. Ver. 6. And these things, Brethren, I have in a figure transferred to my self, (one rude in speeh, but not in knwledge, 2 Co. 11.6.) and to Apollos (a man of eloquence and wisdom, Acts 18 24.) or your sakes, that you might learn (in the example of us) not to think of (other) men above that which is written, (viz. that we are only Ministers of Christ by which ye believed, Chap. 3.5.) that no one of you be puffed up for one against another, (because of the different Gifts vouchsafed to them.) , I have in a figure transferred.] This seems not to refer, as most Interpreters conceive, to what the Apostle had said Chap. 1.10. viz. their saying I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I of Cephas, for here is nothing said of Cephas, but it refers to what he had said Chap. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. that Paul and Apollo were only Ministers by whom they believed; that therefore neither Paul nor Apollo were to be look'd upon as any thing, they doing nothing but by the Grace given them by that God to whom therefore the whole praise was due for the success of all their Labours; and this Scheme of Speech I have used, saith he, touch∣ing my self and Apollo, instructing you not to think highly of other Doctors among you, who have done less for the promoting your Faith than we have done. Ver. 7. For who maketh thee (what Doctor soever thou art) to differ from another, or what (Gift) hast thou which thou hast not re∣ceived (from God?) Now if thou didst re∣ceive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it (from him?) , who maketh thee to differ.] The Apostle manifestly speaking here of those Gifts of the Spirit which were immediately infused without Humane industry, and were dispensed by God, and by his Spirit, according to his good pleasure, 1 Cor. 3.5.12.11. it cannot be hence argued that no Man doth any thing to make himself differ from another in any Ver∣tue, or pious Dispositions. For to what pur∣pose are Men continually exhorted, and stirred up by powerful Motives to all Christian Du∣ties, and particularly to excel in Vertue, if these Exhortations and Motives are not pro∣posed to engage them to exercise these Chri∣stian Vertues, to chuse the good, and refuse the evil; and if one Man, upon consideration of these Motives, doth chuse to live a pls Life, whereas another is not by the same Mo∣tives prevailed on so to do, doth he not di from another by virtue of that choice▪ And though the Grace of God by way of Excit on worketh in us thus to will, yet since our Faculties do first deliberate upon, and then comply, and chuse to do that thing to which this Grace excites us, if to consider be to differ from him that doth not so, and to comply with, and embrace the Call of God, be to dif∣fer from him who complies not with the same Call, it must be certain, that as God's Grace preventing and exciting, so my Faculties co-operating, tend to make me differ from ano∣ther, though having also these Faculties from God, the Action may be well ascribed, and the whole Glory of it must be due to him. Seeing then no Act of Vertue, and no good Habit is produced in us without a frequent and manifold co-operation of our own Facul∣ties to the same Action and Habit, whereas these Gifts of Tongues, Interpretation, Pro∣phecy, were Gifts conferred upon Christians in the Primitive times, without any such co-operation of their Faculties, it cannot with like reason be enquired of the former, as it may be of these Gifts, Who made thee to dif∣fer from another in them? and though all ground, and even pretense of glorying by this immediate infusion of these Gifts, is evident∣ly excluded, yet the Apostles do themselves glory in those good Actions which they chose to do, 1 Cor. 9.15, 16. 2 Cor. 1.12.11.20. and say to others thus, Let every man try and approve his own work, and then shall be have  rejoycing, or glorying in himself. Gal. 6.4. Ver. 8. Now ye Corinthians are full (of se∣cular wisdom) now ye are rich (both in weal and in spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14.26.) ye have reigned as Kings, (flourishing in the enjoyment of these things in all tranquillity and honour) without (any want of) us; and I would to God ye did reign (indeed, and not in con only) that we poor persecuted and despised A∣postles) also might reign with you. , ye are filled, ye are rich.] All the ancient Commentators having noted in their Prefaces to this Epistle, that. Corinth was a City which abounded in wealth, and was full of Rhetoricians, and  Philosophers, and that hence arose their dis∣orders, pride, and vain-glory, as well as from their Gifts, I thought fit in the Paraphrase to take notice of both. Ver. 9. For I think that God hath sent forth us, the Apostles, last, (i. e. as the last, or the Meridian Gladiators) as it were men appoint∣ed
unto death; for we are made a Spectacle to the World, to Angels, and to Men. , as men appointed unto death.] Here the Apostle seems to allude to the Ro∣man Spectacles, , that of theIren. l. 1. p. 26. Bestiarij, and the Gladiators, where in the morning Men were brought upon the Theater to fight with wild Beasts, and to them was allow'd Armour to defend themselves, and smite the Beast that did assail them: But in the Meridian Specta∣cle were brought forth the Gladiators naked, and without any thing to defend them from the Sword of the Assailant; and he that then escaped, was only reserved for slaughter to another day; so that these Men might be well called , Men appointed for death; and this being the last appearance on the The∣ater for that day, they are said here to be set forth  the last. Of these two SpectaclesMarè Leonibus & Ʋrsis homines, meridie spectatoribus suis objiciuntur. Interfectores inter se jubentur objici, & victo∣rem in alium detinet caedem: exitus pugnantium mors est.—quicquid ante pugnatum est misericorda fuit, nunc, amissis nugis, mera hmicidia sunt, nihil habent quo tegantur, ad ictum totis corporibus expositi, nunquam frustra manum mittunt. Epist. 7. Seneca speaks thus: In the Morning Men are exposed to Lions, and to Bears; at Mid-day to their Spectators; those that kill are ex∣posed to one another; the Victor is detained for another slaughter; the conclusion of this fight is death. The former fighting compared to this was Mercy; here is only butchery; they have nothing to cover them, their whole Body is exposed to every stroke, &c. HenceDe Pudicitia, c. 14. p. 566. Tertullian cites the words thus, Puto nos Deus Apostolos novissimos elegit velut Besti∣arios; I think God hath chosen us Apostles last, as Men to be exposed to wild Beasts. Ver. 10. We are (counted as) fools for Christ's sake, but ye (who flourish in your elo∣quence and wisdom, are accounted) wise in Christ; we are weak (as to bodily presence, 2 Cor. 10.10. and bodily infirmities, 1 Cor. 2.3. 2 Cor. 12.9. and made still weaker by our continual wnts and persecutions,) but ye are strong, (and lastly;) ye are honourable, (for your gifts and wisdom, which have gotten you a great name and reputation among others,) we are despised (or in disgrace every where.) Ver. 11. Even to this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place, (or are in no certain condition.) Ver. 12. And labour, working with our own hands; being reviled, we bless; being perse∣cuted, we suffer it, (or we bear, as weak per¦sons, who know not how to escape, or help or selves.) Ver. 13. Being defamed, we intreat; we are made as the filth of the world, and the off-scouring (or refuse) of all things to th day. .] These words which we render filth and off-scouring, do probably relate to the Sacrifices which the Heathen used for the lustration of a City. The Athe∣nians, saith. Phavr. , &c. Aristoph. Plut. p. 24. & in Equit. p. 249. Phavorinus, nourished some very base and refuse People, and when any Calamity or Plague befel them, they sacrificed them for the purgation of the City, and these they called . And Suida, Suid. Vide Outram de Sacrif. l. 1. c. 22. saith, they said of such a Man, be thou our  our Redemption, or Propitiation; and then flng him into the Sea, as a Sacrifice to Neptune. Hence, saithCom. in Jh. Tom. 13. p. 363. D. E. Origen, that our Lord gi∣ving up himself for the Propitiation of our Sins, was made much more than his Apostles, , the lu∣stration of the World, and the peculiar Sacri∣fice of all Men. Ver. 14. But though I thus speak of your glorying in these things with the neglect of us, v. 8.] I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved Sons I warn you (to be∣have your selves hereafter more like dutiful Children towards me.) Ver. 15. For though you have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have you not many Fathers, (indeed not any besides me) for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. , not many Fathers.] TheGalat. l. 1. c. 2. p. 5. Masters of Tradition among the Jews, called them Children, whom they instructed in thir Traditions; and the Targum upon Numb. 3.1. observes that Nadab and Abihu are called the Sons of Moses) because he had instructed them; for he who teacheth another, is, as it were, his Father. Thus the Disciples of the Pro∣phets are called the Sons of the Prophets. So Jonathan, These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the Disciples of Moses, the sons of Is∣rael, who were called by his name. And so bothQui enim est ab aliquo edoctus verbo filius docentis dicitur, & ille ejus Pater. Iren. l. 4. c. 29. Irenaeus and. Clem. Strom. 1. p. 1. Clemens Alexandrinus do observe, that they were called Fathers, who
taught and catechised others, and they Sons who were taught by them. Ver. 16. Wherefore I beseech you, be you followers of me, (adhering to the Doctrine re∣ceived from me, and walking as I do, and teach, v. 17.) Ver. 17. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved Son, and faith∣ful in the Lord, who will bring you into, re∣membrance of my ways which are in Christ, as I teach every where in every Church. Ver. 18. Now some (among you) are puffed up as though (because I have sent Timothy to you) I would not (my self) come unto you. Ver. 19. But I will come unto you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know (and examine) not the speech (and eloquence) of them that are puffed up, but the power (and spiritual Authority which attends their preaching, whe∣ther that be equal to the power God hath given us for edification.) Ver. 20. For the Kingdom of God is (con∣firm'd and propagated) not in (and by the wis∣dom of) words, but in (and by the power of the) Spirit, (which if they want, they cannot be sent from God as we are.) , not in word, but in power.] It is propagated, saith Theophylact, , by Miracles done by the power of the Spirit; for to convince Men of the truth of it, saith Chry∣sostom, 'tis not enough to use fine words, but the dead must be raised, the Devils cast out, and other mighty wonders must be wrought, for by these things the Gospel is established. Ver. 21. What will you? shall I come unto you with a rod, (inflicting punishments upon you) or (will you so reform that I may come un∣to you) in love, and in the spirit of meek∣ness? , with a Rod.] That the Apostle had a power of inflicting Corporal Punish∣ments on some: who did oppose the progress of, or who notoriously offended against the Rules of the Gospel, is the opinion of all the ancient Commentators, who instance in the death inflicted by St. Peter on Ananias and Sa∣phira, Acts 5 5, 10. the blindness inflicted by St. Paul on Elimas, 13.11. the delivery of Hymenaeus and Philetus, and the incestuous person unto Satan, 1 Tim. 1.20. , so as to chastise the body of them, saith, Theodoret. , that he might macerate him with some Disease, say Chry∣sostom, Oecumenius, and Theophylact; and so they interpret these words, shall I come unto you with a rod, that is, , with punishments and chastisements. And this sense will appear highly probable, if we consider these words of the Apostle, I write unto you being absent, least being present, I should use sharpness, according to the power God hath gi∣ven me for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. For that these words cannot be understood only of the power of Excommunica∣tion common to him with others, we may learn from the same words, 2 Cor. 10.8. where the migh¦ty Weapons of his warfare able to remove e∣very height exalting it self against, and to cap∣tivate every mind to the obedience of Christ, and to avenge all disobedience, being premised, it follows, For should I boast exceedingly of the power God hath given me for edification, and not for destruction, I should not be a∣shamed. CHAP. V. Verse 1. IT is reported commonly that there is Fornication among you, and such Fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, (viz.) that one should have his fathers wife, (i. e. his step-mother.) , not named.] i. e. Not coun∣tenanced among civilized Heathens, but for∣bidden by their Laws; by the Laws of the Greeks, sayQui inter  enumerant,  vita Pyth. c. 31. p. 180. Ocell. Ocellus Lucanus and, cap. 4. Plato de Republ. l. 5. p. 657. E. F. Jam∣blycus; and by the Romans, it being, saith Cicero, Scelus inauditum, an unheard of wickedness, of which the Persians only are accused byPhilo de leg. special. p. 600. F. Philo,Tertull. Apol. cap. 9. Tertullian,Minut. p. 35. Minutus Felix; and therefore this was one of the three great Infamies with which the. Just. Apol. 2. p. 70. Athenag. p. 4. 34. Theophil. l. 3. p. 119. Tertu Apol. cap. 9. Minut. p. 34. Heathens loaded the Primitive Christians, that they had incest convivia among them; and practised the very Crime here censured by St. Paul, d the words , it is every where heard of, do make it not improbable that this very thing might give the rise to that vile Objection against Christianity, especially if the Corinthians had the foundation of this practise from the Jews, from whom the Christians for some time were not distinguished.
, that one should have his Fathers wife.] Either as his Wife, or so as to commit Fornication with her. Now this, saith Dr. Lightfoot, was done by them agreably to the Jewish Doctrine con∣cerning Proselytes, viz. That they were as persons new born, and had lost all their kindred they had before: So that by the Law, as thePer legem licitum est Ethnico ducere in Ʋxorem, Matrem suam, aut Sororem ex Matre quae Proselytae fiunt. Maimon. in Issurei biah, c. 14. Lightf. in Joh. 3.3. Seld. Uxor. Hebr. l. 2. c. 18. De Jure Nat. & Gent. l. 2. c. 4. Rabbins expounded it, they might marry their Mother and Sister. And to thisHist. l. 5. ab initio. Ta∣citus seems to refer in his account of the Jews, when he saith, All things are by them deemed prophane, which to us are sacred, rurium con∣cessa apud illos quae nobis incesta; and what we account incestuous is with them lawful; and that they are first of all taught to contemn the Gods, Parentes, liberos, fratres vilia habere, and to have no regard to Parents, Children, and Brethren. But considering that Corinth abounded with Philosophers, and that. De Stoic. repugn. p. 1044. F. Sext. Empyr. l. c. c. 24, 25. Chrysippus the Stoick reckons the enjoyment of a Mother, Sister, or Daughter, as things blamed without reason; and that hence the, De Carpocr. Cl. Alex. Strom. 3. p. 430. D. , p. 431. Immo Persarum more , ibid. Et de Nicolaitanis , p. 436. D. Nicolaitans and Carpocratians had their Doctrine of the Community of all Women, not excepting Mother, and Daughters, and Sisters. I think it probable that this Corrup∣tion might have had its rise from them; and that upon one or other of these accounts they so tamely indured him who had done this in∣famous thing; yea, they were puffed up, say the Greek Interpreters, on the account of the Eloquence and Wisdom of this very Man. Ver. 2. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, (for the scandal of this great offence, and taken care) that he that hath done this deed (so reproachful to the Society of Christians) may be taken away (and cast out from among you as he ought to be.) , ye are puffed up.] Either in your conceit, that you have got such a pro∣found and Eloquent Teacher; or on the ac∣count of some high Wisdom which makes you look on these things as indifferent. , and have not rather mourned.] It was the custom both of the Jews and Christians, when any one was to be cut off from the Church, as a dead Member, to do it with Fasting, and Humiliation, to shew their Sympathy with him, and to demonstrate their Sorrow for the Scandal brought upon the Society. The School of Pythagoras, saith. Contr. Celsum l. 3. p. 142, 143. Origen, put Coffins in the room of them who deserted the Society, looking upon them a dead men; and the Christians lament them who have been guilty of lasciviousness, or any other ab∣surd action, as persons lost and dead to God. And among the, l. 2. c. 41. p. 190. Apostolical Constitutions this is one, with sorrow and mourning cut off from the Church that incurable Person; for, saith the Apostle, you shall put away from a∣mong you the evil person; and to this custom the Apostle seemeth to allude, 2 Cor. 2.1, 3.12.21. Ver. 3. For I verily, as being absent in bo∣dy, but present (with you, Col. 2.5.) in (and by the) spirit, (exciting me so to do) have judg'd already, as if I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed, (that he ought to be removed from your body, and delivered up to Satan.) Ver. 4. (And therefore do command you) in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together (in your Christian Assem∣blies,) and my spirit (supplying my absence) with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ (is present with you.) Ver. 5. To deliver such a one to (the buf∣fetings of) Satan for the destruction of the flesh (so lascivient in him,) that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. , present in spirit.] That is, say the Fathers, not only with mind and consent, butTheodor. , by the gift of the Spirit, by which I am inabled to discern what is fit to be done in this case, by the Spi∣rit by which I am inabled, , to discern things done at a distance, as Elisha did the actions of Giezi by his Prophetick Spi∣rit, 2 Kings 5.26. So Chrysostom and Theophy∣lact. And so the Phrase seems to be used in these words; For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying, and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith, Col. 2.5. since in his abs he could not behold their order, and the sted∣fastness of their Faith by his own Spirit, but only by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit. So also do they interpret  my spi∣rit, v. 4. by my Spiritual Gift; so that the sense of these words v. 3, 4. seems to run thus
I by the Spirit of Discerning, and the Authori∣ty God hath given me, have already judged that this Person ought to be delivered up to Satan; and therefore when you are gathered together in the Name of Christ, and have my spirit, who also presides in your Assemblies, and there assists you in the performance of your Christian Offices, and have the Power of Christ ready to confirm and execute your Sentence, do you in his Name deliver such a one to Sa∣tan. , with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ.] The word , power, hath still reference to some miraculous and extraor∣dinary Power, and is not used, that I know of, concerning any simple Act of Discipline, as when Christ answers St. Paul thus, , my power is perfected in weakness; and the Apostle on that account; most gladly will I re∣joyce in my weakness, , that the power of Christ may rest upon me, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. i. e. say the Ancients, that in the midst of my manifold Infirmities, the Power of Christ enabling me to do all kind of Miracles, may more conspicuously reside in me. This miraculous Assistance is by the Apo∣stle sometime called simply the power, 1 Cor. 2.4 4.19, 20.12.28, 29. Sometime the pow∣er of God, 1 Cor. 1.18, 24.2.5.6.14. 2 Cor. 4.7.13 4. and sometimes the power of Christ, as in the place now cited. Now a∣mong the Powers of Christ which attended the preaching of the Gospel, this was one of de∣livering Men for their Offences up to Satan, to inflict Corporal Distempers on them for the destruction of the Flesh. This Power seems to have been peculiar to the Apostles, and there∣fore here St. Paul prescribes the doing of it, the Authority or Power of his Spirit being present with them. That this is indeed the import of delivering up to Satan for the de∣struction of the flesh, is evident not only from the concurring Exposition of the Ancients, who all interpret it of some Disease to be in∣flicted on him byHic traditur Satanae in interitum carnis, ut serpens terram ejus lingeret, animae non noeret. Ambros. de Pan. l. 1. c 1 See Note on Chap. 4.21. Satan, but also from the end of that Delivery to him, which is, saith the Apostle here, for the destruction of the flesh; and in the case of Hymenaeus and Philetus, that they might learn not to blaspheme. Now bodily Afflictions plainly tend to mortifie the Flesh, and to awaken Men, as oft as they come thus from a miraculous Power, to consi∣der of their ways, and quit those courses which thus subject them to the Hand of God; where∣as Excommunication hath no apparent ten∣dance to those ends, when no such dreadful issue follows from it; and therefore seems not to be all that is intended by this delivery up to Satan: Though I confess, the Jews ex∣pected some like effect of their Excommu¦cation called Cherem, which saithLex. Talm. in voce Cherem. Buxt ran in this form of words, Sint super ips plagae magnae, & fideles morbi magni & horr∣biles, let his strokes be great, and his diseas horrible. Moreover, the Apostle speaks  of this as of a common Act of Discipline which every Presbyter might exercise, but s that which required his extraordinary Presenc in the Spirit, and the Power of Christ ass¦ing them; and therefore seems to speak of  as an act which was to be attended with some miraculous effect. Yer. 6. Your glorying (in such a Doctor  such Wisdom) is not good. Know ye  (as) a little leaven leaventh (and sowreth) the whole lump. (So such a Member contin among you, will defile the whole Body or Socie¦ty.) Ver. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven that ye may be a new lump, (forasmuch) as y are (by your Christianity obliged to be) unle∣vened, for even Christ our Passover is sacrifi∣ced for us (Christians). , purge out the old leaven.] Here the Apostle speaks of cutting off the incestuous Person, according to the Metaphor of the Jews, whose saying is, th as a little leaven leavens the whole lump,  concupiscence corrupts the whole Man; and that by the command to abstain from leaven, Ad∣tery is forbidden, this impurity he calls the  leaven to be purged out, because the Corin∣thians were infamous for it to a Proverb, asVerbo , Hesych. Phavor. Corinthiari adag p. 720 ut Corinthia videris  Phavorinus, Hesychius, and Eras shew. He alludes also to the command to p away leaven out of their house, in commanding to put away the evil Person, and to the P¦chal Feast, in giving this reason why the  leaven should be put away, because Christ  Passover is sacrificed for us, which being done once for all, we Christians must ever keep the Feast, by being always a new lump, pure from Hypocrisie, which is the leaven of the Phar¦sees, Luke 12.1. from the leaven of false D¦ctrine, and corrupting of the Word of God which is the leaven of the Pharisees and S¦duces, Matth. 16.6, 12. and from the leave of wickedness, and wicked men, according  those words of the Psalmist, Deliver me  of the hands of the wicked, from the hand  the cruel  and the leavened, Psal.  i. e. the sowre, and the angry Man, who c¦rupts and depraves others. Ver. 8. Therefore let us keep the Feast  with (the) old leaven (of our former uncean¦ness) nor with the (Pharisaical) leaven of m¦lice and (deceitful) wickedness, but with  unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
, not with the leaven of that malice] Which is usually carried on with dis∣simulation of affection and concern for Piety, and so is Pharisaical, nor with the wickedness which prompts us to deceive another to his hurt. Thus Theophylact here saith, he is  an evil man, who doth evil things; but he is  who doth them with profound subtilty, and deceitful, or hurtful, counsel. Thus  evil men and deceitful are joyned to∣gether, as deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Tim. 3.13. And so this is an Exhortation to re∣ject such false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, as this Doctor was, and others in the Church of Corinth, who transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13. and yet were not  men of sincerity, 2 Cor. 2.17. but Corrupters of the Truth, who walked in craftiness, handling the word of God deceit∣fully, 2 Cor. 4.2. and by their subtilty seduced them from the simplicity which was in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. Ver. 9. I writ unto you in an Epistle (or I had writ to you in this Epistle before I was fully ac∣quainted with the state of your affairs by the co∣ming of Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, 1 Cor. 16.17.) not to company with Fornicators. , I had written to you in this Epistle. All the Greek Interpreters upon this place conclude he wrote this, , not in another, but in this E∣pistle, so Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Photinus, and Theophylact on the place. And who ever heard among the Ancients of more then fourteen Epistles of St. Paul? or of one word cited from an Epistle of his to the Co∣rinthians supposed to be lost; it cannot there∣fore be concluded hence, that any Epistle of St. Paul writ and sent to the Church of Co∣rinth is lost; but only that some things in this Epistle were changed by him, before he sent it to them. But saith Mr. Cl. there is a contra∣riety in this interpretation to all the Rules of Grammar, which it seems none of the Greek Scholiasts understood as well as he. Moreover it is the common observation of Grammarians, that the Arist is so called, because it is of an indefinite signification, and is sometimes used for the perfect, sometimes for the plusquam perfect tense. So Herod laying hold of John  had bound him, Matth. 14.3. He commanded his Servants to be called , to whom he had given the silver, Luke 19.25. Jesus  had testified, John 4.44. , he had withdrawn himself, John 5.13. Annas  had sent him bound to Caiaphas, John 18.24. 2ly, That , as Phavo∣rinus saith, is put  instead of this, he both confesses and proves from Coloss. 4.16. 1 Thess. 5.27. and where then is the contra∣riety of this Interpretation to the Rules of Grammar? Ver. 10. Yet not (intending) altogether (to forbid you any conversation) with the Fornica∣tors of this World, or with the Covetous, or Extortioners, or with Idolaters, fr then must ye needs go out of the World. Ver. 11. But now (since I heard of this great miscarriage, and have been more exactly inform∣ed of the state of your Church) I have (chang∣ed my stile, and written to you not to keep Company, if any man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idlater, or a Railer, (a contumeious person) o n Ex∣tortioner, (and that so strictly as to charge you) with such a one no not to eat. , but now I have written to you.] Object. 1. This shews, saith Mr. Cler, that the Apostle here speaks of this Epistle, and in v. 9. of another? Answ. This only shews that he speks of this Epistle sent, and v. 9. of what he had writ in it, before he saw this Cause to change his stile. Object. 2. But, saith he, he had no where in the former part of this admnished his Corin∣thians not to associate with Fornicators. Answ. Nor is it to be wonder'd that he should no where say that which he had chan∣ged into these words, v. 11. And secondly, ac∣cording to my Exposition, what he before had written is contained in the immediate prece¦ding words, v. 10. , called a Brother.] Some think the word  refers to the words following, and imports, that if any man be defamed, and noted for the Vices following, he is by the Apostle's direction to be avoided: But the word plainly refers to the Brother, and imports, that if any one who hath pro∣fessed himself a Christian, be found guilty of these Crimes, he is to be avoided. Now of all these sins some among the Corinthians were still guilty, of Fornication, 2 Cor. 12.21. of Covetousness, and Extortion, 1 Cor. 6.8. 2 Cor. 11.20. they were Idolaters, 1 Co. 10.7, 14, 20. Railers, or contumelious persons, 2 Cor. 10.2.11.19. Drunkards, 1 Cor. 11.21. , no not to eat.] According to the Jewish Canons it was not lawful to eat, or drink with one that was under their Cherem. Tertullian and Theodoret carry this farther, and say, Cum talibus non vult nos cibum sume∣re, nedum Eucharistiam, with such we must not eat at our own, much less at the Lord's Table. But this being a matter of Discipline, can concern only those who are entrusted with the Government of the Church, not private Communicants. Ver. 12. For what have I to do to judge (or censure) them that are without (the Church as heathen Fornicators, and the Stepmother of this incestuous Fornicator are) do not ye (and all other Churches and Societies) judge them that are within their body?) Ver. 13. But them that are without God judgeth, therefore (leaving them to the judg∣ment
of God, censure them that thus offend within your Body, and you will by so doing) put away from among your selves that wicked Person. , for what have I to do to judge them that are without.] Here our Critick, Mr. le Cl. is too bold; 1st. When he quarrels with St. Paul's Greek, asking what Construction this is, ? I answer none at all; but , what concerns it me to judge them that are without, is both good sense, and good Greek. As in Latine, quid mea refert? in English, what is it to me? so , what profit (is it) to me? 1 Cor. 15.32. , what is it to the truth of God, Rom. 3.3. , quid enim refert, Philip. 1.18. 2ly, 'Tis horribly bold to add, without any, yea against all Copies,  in∣stead of , which have no affinity, ei∣ther in letters, or in sense; the words need none of these Criticisms; they are taken from Deut. 13.5.22.21. and there they run th , so shall you put away the evil from among you; and the Greek Commentators read them thus , and you will put away the eil: So the whole sense runs thus,  I have judg∣ed already of the incestuous person, v. 3.  I judge concerning all other persons in profesi¦on Christians, but in practice Fernicators, &c. that you ought not to communicate with them, but I say nothing of the Stepmother of this per∣son, who hath not own'd the Christian Faith; for what belongs it to me to judge of them who are without the Church? do not you in your Church, and Civil Assemblies, judge them on y which are of your Body, but them who are with∣out the Church, God, who is the Governour f all Men, judgeth; and by thus judging thse that are within your Body, you will put away the evil, or this evil person from among you. CHAP. VI. Verse 1. DAre any of you, having a matter (of complaint, suit, or action) against another, go to Law before the unjust, (the Heathen Tribunals) and not (rather sub∣mit it to be heard) before the Saints. , Go to Law before the unjust.] The saying of the Jews is this, That ThatBuxt. Lex. Talm. p. 1666. He who goes to Law before the Tri∣bunal of the Gentiles, prophanes the Name of God, and gives honour to an Idol; that he is to be accounted as a wicked man, as one that hath reproached and blasphemed, and lifted up his hand against the Law of Moses. Accord∣ingly the Apostle here represents this action in the Christian, as a reproach to the Society, and to the Spirit of Wisdom which was poured out upon the Church, v. 5, 6. and as that which gave occasion to the Heathen to observe in the Christians a contentious Spirit. Ver. 2. Do you not know (from Daniel) that the Saints (of the most high shall receive the kingdom, Dan. 7.27. and so) shall judge the world. And if the world shall be judged by you (Christians, and by Christian Magi∣strates) are ye unworthy (of the smallest Ju∣dicatures, or) to judge the smallest matters. , the smallest matters.] This word  here, and v. 4. saith Grotius, doth not signifie Tribunals, but Controversies and Judicial Causes. Accordingly the  Judgments concerning things of this Life, v 4. are by Photius rendred , their Controver∣sies, Contentions, and judicial Causes against each other about these matters. 3. Know ye not (from Christ) that we (en∣dowed with the Holy Spirit) shall judge (con∣demn, and cast out the Prince of this World, and his evil) Angels, how much more (worthy are we by the assistance of the same Spirit to judge of) the things pertaining to this Life. , the Saints shall judge the world.] We often read, that even the best of Saints shall stand before the judgment Seat of Christ;Matth. 25.33. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 20.12. that they shall be Assessors with Christ then, we read not; the words of Christ, Matth. 19.28. in what sense soever taken, prove it not; they being spoken not of all Saints, as the A∣postle here speaks, but of the twelve Apostles only, these words must therefore admit of one of these two senses, viz. that there shall be Christian Magistrates who shall be gover∣nours, and so the Judges of the World, accord∣ing to the Prophecy of Isaiah, That Kings shall be their nursing Fathers, and Queens their nur∣sing Mothers, Isa. 49.23. and that of Daniel, ch. 7.18.Matth. 10.18.24.14. Luke 21.13. 1 Cor. 1.6.2.1. 2 Thess. 2.10. 1 Tim. 2.6. 2 Tim. 1.8. The Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom, or that they shall judge and condemn the world by the Faith preached for a te∣stimony to them, as Noah did Hebr. 11.7. whence is the Go∣spel so often called the testimo∣ny of Christ, and by the Spirit given to con∣vince the world of sin, of righteousness, and judg∣ment, Joh. 16.8. in which sense our Lord saith. Now is the judgment of the world, Joh. 12.31.
, we shall judge Angels.] i. e. Evil Angels say all the Greek Scholiasts; and this the Christians gloriously did by expelling them from their Seats, and their Dominions, and forcing them to confess before their Vota∣ries, they were only Devils. See Note on Mark 16.17. in which sense saith our Savi∣our, Now is the Prince of the World cast out; the Prince of the World is judged, John 12.31.16.11. Ver. 4. If then ye have judgments (Contro∣versies, or Judicial Causes) of things pertain∣ing to this life, (do ye) set them to judge who are lead esteemed in (and by) the Church, (i. e. the Heathen Magistrates.) , them who are least esteemed.]   are the Heathens, hath  wed Note on 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. More∣over it is manifest, that these words are to be read by way of question, as in the Paraphrase; or by y of charge against them thus, If you  your Secular Judicatures, or Tribu∣nals, you set them to be Judges over you who are despised in the Church. For the Apostle doth  he command them to do this, but sharply  rbuke them for it; saying, I spek this to your shame: and this he doth, by shewing that this in effect signified, that there was not a wise man  hem. For, saith he, Ver. 5. I sp this to your shame; is it so that (by this action you should even confess be∣fore the Heathen) that there is not one wise man among you, no not one that shall be able to judge between his Brethren. Ver. 6. But Brother goeth to Law with (his Christian) Brother, and that before the Unbelievers, (as if there were not among them one Believer sufficient to decide their Contro∣versies) Ver. 7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault (or a defect) among you, because ye go to Law (about these matters) one with ano∣ther; why do ye not (rather) take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? , there is utterly a defect] Among you, that you go to Law at all, it being either, on the one side, want of Patience and Christi∣an Contentment, that you do not rather bear some Injuries, then thus seek to redress them; or, on the other, Covetousness and Injustice, which moves you to do wrong to, and defraud your Brethren. Ver. 8. Nay (so far are you from this Chri∣stian temper of bearing Injuries with patience, that) you do wrong, and defraud, and that your Brethren. Ver. 9. (And what will be the issue of these evil practises?) Know ye not that the unrigh∣teous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Ido∣lators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor A∣busers of themselves with Mankind. Ver. 10. Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Ver. 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed (by Baptism,) but ye are san∣ctified, but ye are justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God. , &c. but ye are justified in the name of our Lord.] Here is the figure call'd Hyperbaton, for we are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and san∣ctified by the Spirit of our God. So Philem. 5. Hearing of thy love and faith which thou hast towards the Lord Jesus Christ, and towards all Saints; i. e. which Faith thou hast towards Christ, and Love to his Saints. Moreover, whereas Mr. Cl. here saith, that to be justified is the same thing with being wash'd, or sanctified, and that to be so by the name of the Lord, is to be so by taking upon them the profession of the Christian Religion in Baptism, he is utterly out in both; for sure I am, he cannot produce one passage in all St. Paul's Epistles, where , to be justified, bears any such sense; but it still signifies to be absolved from the Guilt of Sin, and approved as Righteous, ei∣ther at present, or before God's Tribunal. And so the Name of Christ, when we are said to be justified by it, must signifie not the Pro∣fession of Christianity, but Faith in Christ dy∣ing for us, and be the same with , in him, for in him shall all that believe be justified, &c. Acts 13.39. Moreover, Justification here is ascribed to the Name of Christ, i. e. to Faith in him, Sanctification to the Spirit of God, which shews they cannot signifie the same thing; for where the Cause is different, the Effect must be so also. Ver. 12. (And whereas your false Teachers encourage you to eat things offered to Idols in the Idol Temples, Chap. 10.23. and to indulge unto excess, because all Meats are lawful, I grant that) All (these) things are lawful, but all things (lawful) are not expedi∣ent (to be done, especially when tending to my Brothers ruine or my own) all things (of this nature) are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any (so as that I cannot refrain from them in such Cases.) Ver. 13 Meats (indeed) are for the belly, and the belly for meats, (nor have either of them any other use) but (this is only for this present life, the time will come when) God shall destroy both it, and them. , God shall destroy both it and them. From these words that opinion, not of Origen only, but ofOrat. 3. contr. Arian. Athanasius, St.In Psal. 114. Ba∣sil,
Can. 23. in Matth. Hilary,In locum. Vide Huet. Orig. l. 2. q. 9. § 8. Theodoret, and others, seems to be confirm'd, that at the Resurrection, when we shall neither eat, nor drink, marry, nor be given in marriage, Matth. 22.30. there will be as no Meats, the World being then burnt up, so no Belly, nec quae sunt sub ventre, nor any difference of Sexes. Ver. 16. Now (whereas some extend these words, All things are lawful for me, to forni∣cation also, know ye that) the Body is not (at all) for fornication, but for (the service of) the Lord, (the Head of the Body) and the Lord for (the Resurrection, and the Glorification of) the Body. , the body is not for for∣nication.] The Heresie of the Nicholaitans held, that it was lawful to eat things offered to Idols, and to commit Fornication, Rev. 2.14, 15. as Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandr. Theodo∣ret, and St. Austin testifie. See the Notes on 2 Pet. 2. and the Epistle of St. Jude. And therefore Theodoret introduces the words thus, , this thou sayest in defence of thy eating thus, and of thy fornication all things are lawful for me. Ver. 14. And (accordingly) God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise us up by his power. Ver. 15. Know ye not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ (your Head, 1 Cor. 12.12, 27.) shall I then take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot, (as I by fornicatton shall most surely do.) .] Taking them then from Christ, shall I make them the Members of an Harlot; for, saith Hilary, here Membra adherentia me∣ritrici desinunt esse Membra Christi, The Mem∣bers which cleave to an Harlot, cease to be∣long to Christ. 16. What? know ye not that he who is joyned to an Harlot is one body (with her,) for two, saith he, shall (by that action) be one flesh, (as doing that, by which, according to God's institution, two are made one flesh.) Ver. 17. But he that is joyned to the Lord is one Spirit (with him, as being partaker of his Spirit, for by one Spirit we Christians are all united to this Head, Rom. 8.11. 1 Cor. 12.13.) Ver. 18. Flee (therefore) Fornication, (for) every (other) sin that a man doth is without the (pollution of) the Body; but he that com∣mitteth Fornication sinneth against (and pollu∣teth) his own Body. , against his own body.] O∣ther Sins pollute the Heart, and the Soul; but those of Fornication and Uncleanness on∣ly do properly pollute the Body. Hence are those Actions still in the Scripture stiled Pol∣lutions; for though all sins, saith Hilary, r∣der a man carnal, yet is this more especially, desiderium carnis quod sordibus maculata animam cum corpore tradit Gehennae, Carn Concupiscence which exposes to Hell the So together with the Body, defiled by its filth∣ness. Ver. 19. Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is i you, (and) which you have of God, and yo are not your own, (He having by his Spirit ∣ken possession of you, and sealed you up as  own proper goods.) Ver. 20. (You, I say, are not your own.) For you are bought with a price, (even the precious Blood of Christ) therefore glorifie Go in your Body and in your Spirit, which are Gods (by right of purchase, and the possessi of his Spirit.) , &c. Your Body is the Tem∣ple of the Holy Ghost.] Two things conc to make up the notion of a Temple. 1st, That the Divinity should either dwell in, or give some signal tokens of his especial Presence there. Hence was the Temple of Jerusalem called the House of God's habitation, and the Tabernacle the House where the Di∣vinity or the Shechinah dwelt in the midst of them. Accordingly I am with you, Hag 2.4 is thus interpreted v. 5. My Spirit is in te midst of you, or among you. Hence is the T∣bernacle stiled, the place of the habitation f God's glory, Psal. 26.8. and from thence he is said to shine forth, when he gave them a testimony of his gracious Presence. Now the Holy Spirit being that in the New Testa∣ment which answers to the Shechinah in the old, he dwelling in the Bodies, and being pre∣sent in the Assemblies of the Saints, doth make them a Spiritual Temple or Habitation of the Lord, Eph. 2.22. 2ly, That it be a place dedicated and ap∣propriated to his use: Hence were the Taber¦nacle and Temple so often stiled the House and Temple of the Lord, and by him my Ho, according to those words of Christ, Wst  not that I must be  in my Father house; for as to beApud Joseph. l. 1. contr. Apion. p. 1043. A. , is to be in the Temple of Jupiter, so to be , must signifie to be in my Father's Tm∣ple; and therefore, saith the Apostle, you are not your own, as being dedicated and appro∣priated to God's use and Service. He also saith, If any man corrupt, or de∣crate, the Temple of God, him will God destr, for the Temple of God is holy, 1 Cor. 3.1. i. e. appropriated, and consecrated to his se And he Exhorts all Christians to abstain from all idolatrous and prophane Actions by tis Enquiry, What communion hath the Temple f
God with Idols? proving all Christians to be the Temple of God, and so appropriated to him by these words, You are the Temple of God; as God hath said, I will dwell, and walk in them; I will be their God, and they shall be to me a People, 2 Cor. 6.16. Excellent therefore is the Inference ofCum omnes Templum simus Dei, illato in nos & consecrato Spiritu Sancto, ejus Templi aed. tua & atistita pud citia est, quae nihil immundum nec profanum inferri sinat, ne Deus ille qui inhabitat, inquinatam Sedem offensas dereliqut. De cutu foemin. l. 2. c. 1. Tertullian, That since all Christians are be∣come the Temple of God, by virtue of his Holy Spirit sent into their hearts, and consecrating their Bodies to his Service, we should make Cha∣stity the Keeper of this Sacred House, and suf∣fer nothing unclean or prophane to enter into it, least that God who dwelleth in it, being offend∣ed, should desert his House thus defiled. CHAP. VII. Verse 1. NOW (to speak) concerning the things whereof you wrote unto me, (viz.) it is good for a man not to touch a woman, (i. e. to live unmarried, or without the use of a woman, or it is not good to marry, Matth. 19.10. This I grant, as Christ did to him, who having the Gift of Continency, can re∣ceive this saying.) , it is good for a man not to touch a woman.] It was an old Philosophical question, An uxor ducenda esset, whether a Man should marry? in which many of them held the Negative, asLaert. in Bion. p. 108. in Antist. l. 6. p. 138. Bion and Antisthenes, who said, An handsome Wife would be common, one deformed a punishment, , therefore we should have none. Hence that ofAthen. l. 13. p. 559. Menander, , if thou be wise thou wilt not marry. This some held out of different Sentiments, as v. g. either out of good liking to that cele∣brated Doctrine of Plato, , that Women and Children should be common; and this Doctrine was im∣proved by the Nicolaitans into all manner of impurity, who therefore did  commit whoredom without shame. But others, chiefly of the School of Pythagoras, refused to touch a Woman, as being an impediment to Philosophy, and that which defiled that Pu∣rity they aimed at. HenceEuseb. contr. Her. p. 520. Apollonius the Magician is represented as a Man of so great Chastity, , that he lived ever free from con∣verse with Women. And, de abst. l. 1. § 41. p. 34. , l. 2 § 52. p. 92. , l. 4. § 20. p. 173. , p. 174. Porphyry saith, that a Philosopher must not marry. That to live the intellectual Life, we must abstain from Women, all use of them being a defile∣ment. The word  which in this Chapter still signifies a Wife, seems to refer this que∣stion to the first Opinion, but the Phrase , inclines us to refer it to the latter; the first question being too gross to be propounded by the Corinthians to the Apostle, the second being a question then in vogue, on the account of which Apollonius and the Py∣thagoreans obtained great repute. Ver. 2. Nevertheless, to avoid (that) Forni∣cation (which is so common at Corinth, and so freely practised by the Nicolaitans, under the pretence that Matrimony was a thing indiffe∣rent) let every man have (, retain) his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. Ver. 3. Let (also) the husband render to the wife due benevolence, (i. e. the conjugal duty,) and likewise also the wife to the husband. Ver. 4. (For) the wife hath not power over her own body, but the husband; and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife. , hath not power.] Here is a plain Argument against Polygamy; for if the Man hath not power over his own body, he cannot give the power of it to another, and so he cannot marry another; nor could the Wife, exclusively to him, have the power of his body, if he could give his to another. Ver. 5. Defraud ye not (therefore) one ano∣ther (of this benevolence,) except it be with (mutual) consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and (then) come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. , to fasting and Pray∣er.] The Apostle speaks not here of ordinary Prayer, which is the daily work of Christians, but of extraordinary Devotions on some spe∣cial occasions; for daily Prayers, publick or private, needed no such consent of Parties; nor by them could either of them be defraud∣ed of their due Benevolence: Vain therefore are the questions of St. Jerom, Quale illud bo∣num
est quod orare prohibet, quare non ingre∣diuntur Ecclesias, as if the Bed undefiled could hinder Mens prayers, or their going to Church? Vain is his Inference, Si Sacerdoti semper randum est, ergo semper carendum Matrimonio, if the Priest must always pray, he must never marry; for to pray always, and without ceasing, is also the duty of the Laity, Luke 18.1. Eph. 6.18. 1 Thess. 5.17. , and come toge∣ther again.] This Chapter affords many Ar∣guments against the Vow of Continence, and those perpetual Divorces from the Bed, which are so commonly practised by the Pa∣pists, on pretense of Religion: For (1.) the Apostle here admits of no Separation of the Wife and Husband, but only with Con∣dition that they come together again to per∣form Conjugal Duties, as the word  doth import, not allowing a perpetual Sepa∣ration, no not that they may give themselves to Prayer and Fasting; and that for a perpe∣tual reason, at least whilst an Age capable of temptation, and which may be subject to In∣continence, remains. (2.) He declares the Gift of Continence not to be common to all, but proper to some only, as being the proper Gift of God, and therefore not to be gotten by our Industry: I would, saith he, that all men were unmarried, even as I my self am; but every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that. He then that can receive it, Matth. 19.12. saith our Saviour, let him receive it. Whence it is natural to conclude, that all Men cannot. (3.) Notwithstanding the present necessity which rendred it so desirable, that they might serve the Lord without distraction, and which made their Condition better, and more hap∣py, who had the gift of Continence, he ab∣stains from laying any Obligation to Celibacy upon them, least he should lay a Snare upon their Consciences, v. 35. and bring them un∣der a necessity of burning, v. 9. much less would have urg'd young Men and Women to that vow, which lays a greater Snare up∣on them, and lays an absolute Necessity upon them, rather to burn then marry. And last∣ly, He supposes that some cannot contain, v. 9. some have a necessity to marry, and need so requires them to do, v. 36, 37. Ver. 6. But I speak this (of marriage, v. 2.) by permission, not by commandment (of the Lord, v. 12.) , by permission, &c.] i. e. I intend not by this to lay a commandment up∣on all to marry; but only do permit it to all, as being a sure remedy against Fornication. Yea, far am I from the first, Ver. 7. For I would that all Men were (unmarried) even as I my self (am,) but every man hath his proper gift of God, o after this manner, and another after that. Ver. 8. I say therefore to the unmarried and (to the) widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I (do). , the unmarried.] The Apostle be∣gins his Discourse concerning the Virgin M and Woman, v. 25. here therefore he must speak of the unmarried, as comprehending the Widower, or the Man loosed from a Wife, as v. 11.  is the Woman, who must not embrace a second Marriage. And per∣haps this only was St. Paul's case, as may, saith Grotius, be probably collected from this place, and may be argued from the Testimo∣ny ofStrom. 7. p. 736, 741. Clemens of Alexandria, and the interpolated Ignatius, who both reckon St. Paul among the Apostles that were married, and from the strictness of the Jewish Canons, which obliged all Jews to marry at Twenty. Ver. 9. But if they cannot contain, let them marry, for it is better to marry then to burn, (or be inquieted with filthy lustings.) , if they con∣tain not, let them marry.] Had the Apostle then known of any Vow of Continence, or any Ecclesiastical Law rendring it a damnable sin, and a renouncing their first Faith to mar∣ry, though they burned, he could not so ge∣nerally have propounded, and prescribed Mar∣riage as the Remedy of that Disease, but would have restrained his words as Estius here doth, Iis quibus conjugij contrahendi po∣testas esset, id est, qui à lege & voto continen∣tiae sunt liberi, to those who were free from the Law, and Vow of Celibacy. But I be∣lieve he knew of none whom God's Law had placed under a Necessity of burning; that is, say the Greek Commentators, of being sub∣ject to the insults of Lust. Ver. 10. And to the married I command, yet not I (only) but the Lord (also, Matth. 19.9.) let not the Wife depart (or separate her self) from her Husband. Ver. 11. But if she depart (Gr. , but if she be separated.] Let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her Husband; and let not the Husband put away (or divorce) his Wife. , let not the wife depart from her husband.] Note that the Apostle speaks here of the married Per∣sons, who had mutually embraced the Chri∣stian Faith, forbidding them to divorce them∣selves, except for cause of Fornication, as it was customary for Women, as well as Men to do, both amongst the Jews and Romans. Dr. Lightfoot on this place cites this Canon from R. Juchanan, the wife hath power to put away her husband; and he gives Instances of
it in Herod  divorcing her self from Phi∣lip, and D ll from Aziza; and our Lord supposes this was practised in these words, If a woman put away her husband, and merry another, she  adultery. That this was common among the Heathens, is apparent from that saying ofNunquam jam ulla repudio erubescit, postquam illustres quaedam & nobiles foeminae, non Consulum numero, sed maritorum annos suos computant, & exeunt matrimonij causâ, nubunt repudij. Tamdiu istud timebatur, quamdiu rarum erat. Quid vero nulla sine divortio acta sunt, quod saepe audiebant, facere didicerunt. De Benef. l. 3. c. 16. Seneca, That none blushes at it, because there was scarce a marri∣age without it. s lence had they divers names for the Divorce of both kinds; for the Wife being, after marriage, carried to the House of her Husband, her Divorce was called. Plato in Alcib. p. 195. C. Vide Jul. Pollux. l. 3. c. 5. Alex. ab Alex. Gen. Dier. l. 4. c. 8. S. Petit. Comment. in Leges Attic. l. 6. p. 4, . Seld. de Jure Natural. &c. l. 5. c. 7. p. 591. , a sending her away from his House; and because the Woman, being not Mistress of the House, could not do this to the Man, but only leave his House, her Divorce was called , a leaving of the House, tho it was conceived in the usual form, Res tuas tibi habeto. See Note on 1 Tim. 3.2, 12. That here the Apostle condemns these Divorces, with our Saviour, is evident, because he saith, he speaks this by commandment of the Lord. Ver. 12. But to the rest (you mention to me who are coupled with unbelievers) speak I, not the Lord (by any decision he hath made, or any precept he hath given in this case, v. 25. as in the former instance) if any brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her a∣way. Ver. 13. And the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and he be plea∣sed to dwell with her, let her not leave him. , not the Lord.] St. Paul doth not say this, to intimate that this direction was given by him only as a Man using his na∣tural Reason, to direct them to what he thought best, but not as delivering the mind of Christ, for he had before declared the con∣trary, by saying, We have the mind of Christ, Chap. 2.16. And after doth it in these words, If any man think himself a Prophet, or Spiri∣tual let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord, Chap. 14.37. But he speaks thus, to declare our Lord in his Discourse touching Divorce, had not decided the Case de imparibus Conju∣giis, of the Marriage of a Believer with an Infidel, but left this to the decision of the A∣postles, by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, promised to lead them into all Truth. , let her not leave him.] This caution was needful, because the Primitive Christians were sometimes in doubt of this, as finding that the Jews did null all Marriage of the Holy Seed with Infidels; and hence conjecturing, that they also might be obliged to do so, and thinking it , an impious thing to cohabit with an Heathen, especially if he were addicted also to unnatural Lusts, and that by being  bed follows to such a one, they communicated with him in his Iniquity and Idolatry; and concluding, that as he who was joyned to an Harlot, was one Body with her, so she that was joyned to an Idolater was one Body with him. Hence Justin Martyr saith of one of these Christian Women, not without seeming approbation of the Fact, thatApol. 1. p. 42. A. B. , Giving him a Bill of Divorce, she was separa∣ted from him. Ver. 14. For the unbelieving husband is (Gr. hath been) sanctified by the (believing) wife, and the unbelieving wife is (hath been) sanctified by the (believing) husband, else were your Children (seminally) unclean, (and so not to be admitted to the Christian Covenant) but now they are holy. , by the wife.] Uxoris gratiâ, because of the Wife; i. e. he is to be reputed as sanctified, because he is one Flesh with her who is holy. So , Israel served for a Wife, and for a Wife he kept sheep, Hos. 12.12. I desire that you saint not  by rea∣son of my tribulations, Eph. 3.13. and that no man be shaken  by reason of these tribulations, 1 Thess. 3.3. See Naldius in the 23d signification of the Particle Beth. Or we may take these words in the sense of the Greek Interpreters, viz. the unbelieving Husband hath been sanctified to the believing Wife by his Consent to cohable with her, and to have Seed by her. , else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy.] He doth not say, else were your Children Bastards, but now they are le∣gitimate; but else were they unclean, i. e. Hea∣then Children, not to be owned as an Holy Seed, and therefore not be admitted into Co∣venant with God, as belonging to his Holy People. That this is the true import of the words  and  will be apparent from the Scriptures, in which the Heathens are sti∣led the unclean, in opposition to the Jews in covenant with God, and therefore stiled an holy People. So Isa. 35.8. , an high-way shall be there,
and it shall be called the way of holiness, , the unclean shall not pass over it; but the redeemed of the Lord shall walk therein, v. 9. And Chap. 52.1. God saith of Jerusalem the Holy City, There shall no more come into thee, , the uncircumcised, and unclean. So Acts 10.28. You know that it is unlawful for a Jew to keep company with a man of another Nation; but God hath shewed me that I should call no man common, or  unclean Whence it is evident that the Jews look'd upon themselves as , the clean Servants of God, Neh. 2.20. and upon all Heathens, and their Off-spring, as unclean, by reason of their want of Cir∣cumcision, the sign of the Covenant. Hence, whereas it is said that Joshua circumcised the People, Chap. 5.4. the Septuagint say, , he cleansed them. Moreover of Heathen Children, and such as are not Circumcised, they say they are not born in holiness; but they on the contrary are stiled , an holy Seed, Isa. 6.13. Ezra 9.2. and the Off-spring from them, and from those Pro∣selytes which had embraced their Religion, are said to be born  in holiness, and so thought fit to be admitted to Circumcision, or Baptism, or whatsoever might initiate them into the Jewish Church; and therefore to this sense of the words holy, and unclean, the Apo∣stle may be here most rationally supposed to allude, declaring that the Seed of holy Per∣sons, the Off-spring born  of Saints, asSee Note on Chap. 1, 2. Christians are still called in the New Testament, are also holy. And though one of the Parents be still Heathens, yet is the denomination to be taken from the better, and so their Off-spring are to be esteemed not as Heathens, i. e. unclean, but holy, as all Chri∣stians by denomination are. So, Strom. l. 3. p. 445. D. Clemens Alexandrinus infers, saying, I suppose the Seed of those that are holy is holy, according to that saying of the Apostle Paul, the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, &c. Hence then the Argument for Infant Baptism runs thus, If the holy Seed among the Jews was therefore to be Circumcised, and be made federally holy by receiving the Sign of the Covenant, and being admitted into the number of God's holy People, because they were born in San∣ctity, or were seminally Holy; for the Root being holy, so are the Branches also; then by like reason the holy Seed of Christians ought to be admitted to Baptism, and receive the Sign of the Christian Covenant, the Laver of Regeneration, and so be entred into the Socie∣ty of the Christian Church. The Substance of this Argument is in Tertullian de Anima, cap 39. and in the Authour of the Questions ad Antiochum, qu. 114. Ver. 15. But if the unbelieving person (will) depart, (and so break off the Matrimonial duty) let him depart; a Brother or Sister is not un∣der bondage (Gr. is not enslaved) in such ca∣ses, but God hath called us to peace, (and therefore we must give no occasion of quarrel with, or separation from so near a Relative, or of disturbance of the Family.) , is not under bondage.] That is, saithLiberum habet arbitrium nubere Legis suae viro. Pseud. Ambr. Hilary, The Christian in this case is free to marry to another Christian. He is free, saith. Photius. Photius, to depart, because the other hath dissolved the Marriage. If he depart, say. Chrys. Theoph. Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, because thou wilt not communicate with him in his infidelity, be thou divorced, or quit the yoke; for it is better that thy Marriage should be dis∣solved, than thy Piety. These Fathers there∣fore plainly supposed, that the Laws which say, He that marries her which is put away committeth Adultery, Matth. 5.22. and that the wife is bound to the husband as long as he liveth, v. 39. Rom. 7.1, 2, 3. concerned only equal Marriages, partly because the Apostle saith, He had no commandment of the Lord to produce for the decision of this case; and partly because he doth not here say, as in the case of equal Marriages, v. 11. , if she be separated, let her remain unmarried. It is the opinion ofLaws of the Church, p. 117. Mr. Thorndike, that the Apostle look'd upon Marriage, made by Persons before they were Christians, to lay no stricter Obligations on them, then the Laws which they were under when the Marriage was contracted design'd to lay upon them. But this seems not consistent with our Lord's deci∣sions touching Divorce and Polygamy; for tho' they were allowed both by Jews and Gentiles, our Saviour pronounces them disagreeable to the first Institution of Matrimony by God; and these Laws binding all that were Christi∣ans, no Christian Convert could, after his or her Conversion, do any thing on their parts opposite to them; and whatsoever liberty of Divorce the Laws of Jew or Gentile might allow of, the Apostle will not permit the be∣lieving Wife or Husband to make use of them, by beginning the Separation, v. 12, 13, 15. If then these words, a Brother or Sister is not in bondage in these cases, do import, they are
not obliged to live unmarried, such a total and perpetual desertion must dissolve the Ma∣trimony, and render the deserting Person as dead unto the other. But though all the Roma∣nists, and many of the Reformed allow of this Interpretation of the Fathers, it must be dan∣gerous to admit of it without this Restriction, A Brother or a Sister is not enslaved, after all means of Peace and Reconciliation have been in vain attempted, and the Unbeliever hath entred into another Marriage, or rather hath dissolved the former by Adultery, as may well be supposed of those Heathens who thus sepa∣rated from their Christian Mates. And this Interpretation seems to be confirmed from the former words relating to the Case of the believing Wives and Husbands, if they depart, let them remain unmarried; it being not to be supposed that Believers would dissolve the Bond of Matrimony by Adultery. Therefore the Astle seems to grant this in the case of Unbelievers, departing from Christians on the account of their Faith, and for this there is good reason. Ver. 16. For what knowest thou, oh wife, whether (by dwelling with him) thou shalt (not be a means to) save thy husband? or how knowest thou, oh man, whether thou shalt (not by thus dwelling with her, be a means to) save thy wife? Ver. 17. But (whether this be so, or not) as God hath distributed the gift (of Conti∣nence) to every man, (or not) as the Lord hath called every one (to the Faith, married to an Unbeliever, or Servant to them, or not) so let him walk, (doing nothing on his part contrary to those Relations) and so order I in all Chur∣ches (which I have converted.) , but.] Or rather, if not. So  and  Gen. 18.21. , and if it be not so. See Chap. 24.8.42.16, 37. Job 9.24. , and if it be not so, who will make me a liar; and Chap. 24.25. John 14.2. , if it were not so, I would have told you. See Naldius de partic. Hebr. p. 92. To others  seems to be misplaced, as being added to the beginning of this Verse, when indeed it belongs to the close of the former, thus; How knowest thou, oh man, , whether thou shalt save thy wife, or not. And so the seventeenth Verse will begin with , as the twentieth and the four and twentieth Verses, which answer to it, do. Ver. 18. Is any man called, being circumci∣sed, let him not (endeavour to) become (as one) uncircumcised: is any man called in un∣circumcision, let him not be circumcised. , let him not be uncircumcised.] . Epiph. de Ponder. & Mensur. p. 172. Ver. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and un∣circumcision is nothing, (that renders us more, or less acceptable in the sight of God) but the keeping of the Commandments of God (is all in all.) Ver. 20. Let every man (still) abide in the same calling in which he was called (to the Faith, not thinking himself obliged by it to quit his calling.) Ver. 21. Art thou called, being a Servant, care not for it; but if thou canst (lawfully) be made free, use it rather. (Care not I say;) Ver. 22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a Servant, is the Lords Freeman, (being delivered by him from his bondage to sin, John 8.36.) Likewise he that is called, being free, (nevertheless) is Christs servant. Ver. 23. Ye are bought with a price, (Gr. have you been bought with a price from your slavery) be ye not (again) the servants of men (who are unbelievers, 1 Tim. 6.2.) , have ye been bought with a price.] That the Charity of Christians was employed to buy their Brethren out of slavery, We learn from the Apologies of. Apol. 2 p. 99. Justin M. andHaec quasi deposita pietatis sunt; nam inde non Epulis, nec potaculis dispensatur, sed egenis alendis, humandisque & pu∣is & puellis e ac parentibus distitutis—Et si qui in Metallis, & si qui in Insulis, vel in Custodiis, &c. Apol. c. 39. Tertullian, who tell us, That the Of∣ferings of Christians at the Sacrament, were, amongst others, employed for that use; and that these words ought to be rendred by way of Interrogation, is evident from the precedent Discourse, which is still by way of question, Is any man called, being uncircumcised, v. 18. Art thou called being a servant, v. 21. And that they are to be thus interpreted, the design of the Apostle shews, which is to inform them that their Christianity did not exempt them from their Secular Relations to Heathens, the Believer still continuing in his Conjugal Re∣lation, and in the same Relation of a Servant to his Heathen Master. Now to tell them they were bought with a price by Christ, and therefore ought not to be the servants of men, is plainly to contradict this design; but it is well consistent with the foregoing advice, If thou canst be made free, use it rather; so add, Are ye then bought out of Servitude by the Chari∣ty of Christians, return not again to the Ser∣vice of Unbelievers. Ver. 24. (Otherwise) Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God. Ver. 25. Now concerning Virgins I have no particular commandment of the Lord, yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be found faithful (in my Apostolical Function, by advising still what
is best and most expedient in those cases to be done.) , concern∣ing Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord.] To produce touching their continuance in, or change of that state. Here Estius takes care to add, that the Apostle must be under∣stood only de Virginibus quae nondum Deo vo∣verint continentiam, of such Virgins which were not under the Vow of Continence. And when the Apostle saith without exception, If a Virgin marry she hath not sinned, v. 28. he adds, Nisi sit virgo Christo dicata, i. e. unless she be a Virgin consecrated to Christ by such a Vow; both which Exceptions seeing St. Paul, assisted by the Holy Spirit, thought not fit to add, we may presume that he knew nothing of that matter. , &c. but I give my judgment as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be found faithful.] This, saith the Apostle, is all that is required of a Minister of God, and a Steward of his Mysteries, that he be sound faithful in administring the Grace of his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. And this fidelity was still attended with the power of Christ assisting them, as appears from these words, I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, 1 Tim. 1.12. So that this Phrase doth not imply, as some imagine, that the Apostle had only an ordinary assistance in this advice, such as any pious skilful Pastor may still expect, much less that this is a counsel which might be disregarded without sin. Ver. 26. I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress (of Christians dai∣ly subject to persecution) I say, that it is good for a man so to be (i. e. a Virgin still.) , for the present di∣stress.] This Phrase plainly shews this can∣not relate ad pacata Ecclesiae tempora, to the peaceable times of the Church, for they are not times of Tribulation, as the word  often signifies. So Luke 21.23. there shall be , great tribulation, , in afflictions, necessities, distresses, 2 Cor. 6.4. , in necessi∣ties, in persecutions, 2 Cor. 12.10. Nor can it signifie the Troubles common to this Life, for they are not always instant, or present. See v. 28. where the Phrase is , trouble in the flesh. Ver. 27. Art thou (then) bound to a wife, seek not to be losed; art thou loosed from a wife, seek not a wife. Ver. 28. But if thou marry thou hast not sinned, and if a Virgin marry she hath not sinned, nevertheless such (in these times of persecution) shall have (more) trouble in the flesh; but I spare you, (not thinking it there∣fore fit to lay the yoke of Celebacy upon you.) Ver. 29. But this, I say Brethren, that the time (of this life) is short, it remains then that both they that have wives be as though they had none. Ver. 30. And they that weep as though they wept not; and they that rejoyce as if they re∣joiced not, and they that buy as if they pos∣sessed not. Ver. 31. And they that use the world as not abusing it, (or as those that use it not) for the fashion of the world passeth away. , as not abusing it.] So this expression is used in. De Josepho, p. 428. Philo, This is anothers, do not covet it; this is thy own, use it so as not abusing it; hast thou abundance, give to others, for the excellency of wealth consists not in thy purses, but in helping those that want. Note also, That they who interpret these words, the time is short, with relation to the Troubles shortly to come at the Destruction of Jerusalem; and the fashion of the world pas∣sing away, of a new scene of things beginning to appear, seem not to give the true import of the Apostle's words: For (1) it is not easie to perceive what concernment the Corinthians then had in the destruction of Jerusalem; what peculiar Troubles hapned; what loss of Wives or of Possessions they did then sustain; or indeed, what Persecution they then lay under from which the destruction of Jerusa∣lem might free them. 2ly, The fashion of the worlds passing away seems plainly to refer to the dissolution of it or at least to our passing out of it in a short time, according to those words of St. John, Love not the world, nor the things of the world, for the fashion of the world passeth away, and the lusts thereof, 1 John 2.15, 17. Again, to have, and use these things, as if we had them not, or did not use them, is to be mode∣rate in the enjoyment of them; not to be much affected with them when we have, or much afflicted when we want or lose them. Ver. 32. But (this advice I give, because) I would have you without carefulness (for the things of the world; now so it is that) he that is unmarried careth (only) for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord. Ver. 33. But he that is married careth (al∣so) for the things of the world, (and is sol∣licitous) how he may please his wife. Ver. 34. There is (the same) difference also between a wife and a virgin, (for) the un∣married woman careth (only) for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit; but she that is married careth (also) for the things of the
world, how she may please her husband. , there is diffe∣rence between a wife and a virgin.] The Reading of the King's Manuscript is this, , and is distracted. And then begins the 34th Verse thus, , and the unmarried woman, i. e. the widow, and the virgin careth for the things of the Lord: But though this Reading makes a good sense, it is not found in any of the Greek or Latin Interpreters. 2ly, It makes too great a variation from the ordinary Read∣ing, by adding  before , and by joyn∣ing , which in all printed Co∣pies, and ancient Interpreters are separated. And 3ly, it makes  here to signifie the Sex only, and to be indeed a Virgin or unmar∣ried Woman; whereas in this Chapter it above twenty times signifies a Wife, and always stands opposed to the Virgin or unmarried Person. So v. 1, 2. v. 3. twice; v. 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 twice; 16 twice; 27 thrice; 29, 39. which observation is sufficient to destroy this Read∣ing; especially seeing the common Reading gives a good sense, and may be rendred thus, the Virgin, and the Wife are divided, or drawn several ways; the first looking only after puri∣ty, the second after the pleasure of her husband also. Ver. 35. And (of) this (difference) I speak for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare upon you, (by restraining you wholly from mar∣riage) but for that which is comely, and that you may attend upon the Lord without distra∣ction. Ver. 36. But if any man think that he be∣haveth himself uncomely towards his Virgin, if she pass the flower of her Age, (Gr. if it be over-aged) and need so require, (or he thinks this ought to be done) let him do what he will, he sinneth not; let them (who so think) marry. , if it be over-aged.] TheSeld. de Jure Natural, &c. l. 5. c. 3. Jews from the Precept to increase and mul∣tiply, thought themselves obliged to marry at Twenty, and that they offended against the Law, if they did not so; declaring that who∣soever neglected this Precept was guilty of Homicide. The Philosophers say with. Plato de leg. l. 6. p. 877. He∣siod, that , marriage was seasonable to the Woman about thirty, to the Male from thirty to thirty five. By the Law ofAlexand. ab Alex. Genial. dier. l. 4. c. 8. Ly∣curgus, they who continued unmarried were prohibited to see the Games; by the Laws of the Spartans they were punished; and by Plato they are declared unworthy of any Honour: To either of these Opinions the Discourse of the Apostle may relate. Ver. 37. Nevertheless, he that stands fast in his heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath so decreed (or determined) in his heart that he will keep his Virgin, (i. e. Virginity) doth well. Ver. 38. So then, he that giveth (her) in marriage doth well, but he that giveth (her) not in marriage doth better, (or thus, so that both he that marrieth doth well, and he that marrieth not doth better.) Note, It is generally supposed that these three Verses relate to Virgins under the power of Parents, and Guardians; and hence the usual Inference is this, Children are to be dispo∣sed of in marriage by their Parents. Now this may be true, but it hath no foundation in this Text; for , is not to keep his Daughters, but his own Virginity, of rather his purpose of Virginity; for as. Phavorinus informs us, He is called a Virgin, who freely gives himself up to the Lord, re∣nouncing Matrimony, and preferring a Life spent in Continency. And that this must be the true import of these words, appears from this consideration, that this depends upon the purpose of his own heart, and the power he hath over his own will, and that no necessity arising from himself to change this purpose; whereas the keeping a Daughter unmarried depends not on these Conditions on her Fa∣thers part, but on her own; for let her have a necessity, surely the Apostle would not advise the Father to keep her a Virgin, because he had determined so to do; nor could there be any doubt, whether the Father had power o∣ver his own will, or not, when no necessity lay upon him to betroth his Virgin. The Greek runs to this sense, If he had stood already firm in his heart, finding no necessity, to wit, to change his purpose, and hath power over his own will not to marry, finding himself able to persist in the Resolution he hath made to keep his Virginity, he doth well to continue a Vir∣gin; and then the Phrase, If any man thinks he behaves himself unseemly towards his Virgin, if it be over-aged, and thinks he ought rather to joyn in Marriage, refers to the aforesaid Opinions of Jew and Gentile, that all ought to marry at such an Age; if any think thus, saith the Apostle, let them do what they will, let them marry, for in doing so they do not sin: and then he conludes with those words applied to both Cases, So then both he that marries doth well, and he that marries not doth better.
Ver. 39. The wife is bound by the Law, so long as her husband liveth; but if her hus∣band be dead, she is at liberty to marry to whom she will, only (she ought to do it) in the Lord. , in the Lord.] That is , to one of the same faith, say Theodoret, Tertulli∣an, St. Cyprian, and St. Jerom, declaring that all marriage with Heathens is forbid to Chri∣stians. Hence also it is evident, that second Marriages are allowable. See Rom. 7.3. 1 Tim. 5.14. Ver. 40. But she is happier if she (can, and therefore) doth so abide, after my judgment, and I think also I have the Spirit of God (to direct me even in this judgment, , I think that I also have the Spirit of God.) This, say some, is not spoken with the Authority of an Apostle, or a Teacher sent from God, but in such a stile as implies an ordinary as∣sistance, such as any skilful Pastor may still expect. But these Men did not well consi∣der that the Apostle was writing to them, who were apt to question his Apostleship, and requi∣red a proof of Christ speaking in him, 2 Cor. 13.3. to whom it was proper to say, Whatso∣ever you may conceive of me, I suppose I have the Spirit of God. Or 2ly, that  is fre∣quently an Expletive, and so  may be here rendred, I have the Spirit of God. So , that which he seems to have, Luke 8.18. is , that which he hath, Matth. 13.12. , they which are accounted to rule, Mark 10.42. is , they which rule, Matth. 20.25. So in this Epistle, , is, he that stands, Chap. 10.12. , he that is contentious, Chap. 11.16. and , if any Man be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him know that the things I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord, Chap. 14.37. CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. NOW as (for the Plea mentioned in your Letter) touching (the lawfulness of eating) things offered to Idols, we (who abstain from eating these things to the scandal of others) know (as well as others) that (an Idol is nothing, for) we all have (this) knowledge, but knowledge (when it is not joyned with charity) puffeth up (against) but charity edifieth (our brother.) , now as touching things offered to Idols.] This is that other Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, Nullam differentiam esse docentes Idolothyton edere, that things offered to Idols might be eaten without discrimination, which the Apostle here sets himself to confute, speaking of these things both in the general, Chap. 10.23. to the end; and in particular, as they were eaten with Relation to the Idols in the Idol Temple. Ver. 2. And (therefore) if any man think he knoweth any thing (and by reason of that knowledge despiseth others, not regarding their welfare) he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know. , as he ought to know.] To know thus, saithIn Cant. Cantic. c. 36. p. 151. St. Bernard, is to know in what order, with what study and endea∣vour, and to what end we ought to know all things. In what order, as desiring to know that first which is most necessary to Salvation. With what study, as desiring most ardently to know that which is most vehemently to be loved, and most tends to produce love in us. To what end, viz. not out of Curiosity, Vain-glory, or filthy Lucre; but for the edifi∣cation of thy self, or of thy Brother. Ver. 3. But if any man love God (and for his sake his Brother, 1 John 4.17. using his knowledge to the glory of God, and the benefit of his Brother) he is known (and accepted) of God. Ver. 4. As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in Sacrifice to Idols, we (also generally) know that an Idol is nothing in the world (of that it is esteemed by them that worship it, i. e. no Deity) and that there is no other God but one. , an Idol is nothing.] This A∣phorism, that an Idol was nothing, was usual among the Jews, who were taught by the Old Testament, that the Heathen Deities were  and  Vanities and Nothings. Thus inF. 56. col. 1. Echa Rabboth, or the old Com∣ment on the Lamentations, Rachel speaks thus to God, Why enviest thou an Idol, which is no∣thing. And in theSect. 30. Elle Shemoth Rabb, we have this Aphorism, There is nothing so∣lid in an Idol. And hence their Rabbins con∣cluded, saith Dr. Lightfoot, that it could have no power to pollute, and that whatsoever Worship was paid to it, if it were not wor∣shipped under the Notion of a God, it was nothing; but whatever they meant by an I∣dols being nothing, 'tis certain the Apostle only means that it is nothing of a God; for he proves that it is nothing, because there is no God but one; and so all the Criticisms about the word , Idol, are impertinent.
Ver. 5. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth, as (to the Heathens) there are Gods many, and Lords many, (they having their Celestial and Terrestrial Gods and Lords.) , as there are Gods ma∣ny, and Lords many.]Vid. Art. Crit. part. 2. c. 5. § 8. p. 77. Here Mr. Cl. translates the words thus, as really as there are Gods many, &c. and Magisterally saith, the Apostle hath no reference to the Gods, or Idols of the Heathens; but by Gods in Hea∣ven, are meant God and the Angels; in the Earth Magistrates, who are also called the Lords of the World. But he proves not a word of all this. Yea, the contrary is not only asserted, by all the A paganis Ambrosius. , Theodoret. , Chrysost. Photius, Oecumen. Theoph. Ancient Fa∣thers, and Commentators on the place, who both assert, and prove the contrary, but also is evident from the words themselves: For first, when the Apostle had said expresly, We Christians know there is no God but one; would he immediately add, there are really Gods many; what would this have been, but as Chrysostom and Theophylact say, , to speak things repugnant, which to avoid, the Apostle adds, That though there be , those that are called Gods, to separate them from him that truly is so; or to shew that they are only so in name, but not in reality; not in truth, but in word on∣ly. And this is evident from the words following; though (to them) there be Gods many, and Lords many, , yet to us (Christians) there is but one God, and one Lord. Lastly, Whereas he saith, By Gods in Heaven are meant God and the Angels, let him shew any Instance in the New Testament where  is put for God and the Angels, or where both are thus mention∣ed under that one name: Here to be sure it cannot be so; for the Apostle had not only said before, We Christians know there is no other God but one; and saith after, this is he of whom are all things, i. e. whose Crea∣tures the Angels are, could he then say, in the intermediate words, there really are ma∣ny Gods in Heaven, God and the Angels? But Mr. Cl. cares not how he contradicts ei∣ther all the Ancients, or St. Paul himself, so he may serve the Arians. 6. But (or yet) to us (Christians) there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in (or for) him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. , one God the Father.] Hence the Arians and Socinians argue thus against the Deity of Christ; viz. As he who saith there is one Emperor, to wit, Caesar, saith in effect there is no other Emperor but Caesar; so he that saith there is one God the Father, saith in effect there is no other God besides the Father. Again, He who having separately spoken of one God, proceeds distinctly to speak of one Lord, to wit, Jesus Christ, doth by that distinct Title sufficiently shew Jesus Christ is not that God. Answ. To the second Argument the Reply is obvious, by retorting the Argument, as do the Ancient Commentators against this Arian Objection thus, That as the Apostle, by say∣ing there is one Lord, to wit, Jesus Christ, cannot be reasonably supposed to exclude the Father from being also the Lord of Christi∣ans, as he is often stiled in the New Testa∣ment; so neither by saying there is one God the Father, ought he to be supposed to exclude Jesus Christ from being also the God of Chri∣stians. SoMiror quomodo quidam legentes unus Deus Pater ex quo omnia, & unus Dominus Iesus Christus per quem omnia negent filium Dei, Deum debere profiteri, ne duos Deos dicere videantur. Sed non advertunt qui haec ita sentiunt quod sicut Dominum Ieum Christum non it a unum esse Dominum dixit, ut ex hoc Deus Pater non Dominus dicatur, ita & Deum Patrem non dixit ta esse unum Deum, ut Deus filius non credatur. Orig. in Rom. c. 9. v. 5. Origen andSi non putant aliquâ ratione offici posse ei, quod unus Dominus est, per illud quod est Dominus & Christus, aut illi quod nus est bonus, per illud quod bonus sit nuncupatus & Christus, eadem ratione intelligant offici non posse ab illo quod unus est Deus, ei quod Deus pronuntiatus est Christus. Novatian. cap. 30, Novatian. Especially if we consider (1st.) That he is here stiled that one Lord, by whom are all things, i. e. by whom all things are created, Eph. 3.9. all things which are in Heaven, or in Earth, Coloss. 1.16. for he that made all things is God, Hebr. 3.4. and by the Work of the Creation is the Godhead known, Rom. 1.20. And this is elsewhere made the very descrip∣tion of God the Father, that it is he by whom are all things, Rom. 11.35. Hebr. 2.10. (2ly,) That all things were created, not on∣ly by this Lord, but  for him also, Col. 1.16. Now this is the very thing which the Apostle here ascribes to God the Fa∣ther. 2ly, To the other Argument I answer, That we, and all the Ancients assert, as truly as they can do, the Unity of the Godhead; and that Christ Jesus is not another God, but only another Person from the Father; and that the application of the word God here to the Fa∣ther, doth not necessarily exclude the SonDixit enim & separavit eos, qui dicuntur quidem, non sunt autem Dij, ab uno Deo Patre. Iren. l. 3. cap. . Theodoret. . Chysost Theoph. . Phot.
from being God also, but only from being the Fountain of the Deity, as the Father is. Thus when these words, I am Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, Rev. 1.17.2.8.22.13. are by St. John applied to Christ, it cannot be concluded hence that the Father is not also Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, as he is often called in the Old Testament; and though our Saviour be the proper Title of our Lord Jesus, as his very Name informs us, yet is the Father in Scripture stiled our Savi∣our, 1 Tim. 1.1.2.3. and the Saviour of all men, Chap. 4.10. The Primitive Fathers therefore considering God the Father as the Fountain of the Deity, and Jesus Christ as God of God, do frequently assert two things, which may serve to illu∣strate this passage, viz. First, That Christians acknowledg'd one God only, even the Father, and yet that Jesus Christ was truly God of the Substance of the FatherHeretici . Iren. l. 1. p. 18. Et tamen fidem ab Ecclesi ceptam hanc esse tradit, , cap. 2. p. . Prophetis quidem & Apostolis patrem & filium confitentibus, & ipso Domino Patrem tantùm Deum, & Dominum eum qui∣lus est Deus, & Dominator omnium tradente Discipulis, sequi nos oportet, l. 3. c. 9. Et tamen c. 10. secundum d qui bum Dei homo erat —requiescebat Spiritus Dei super eum,—secundum autem quod Deus erat, non secundum Gloriam jud Vide c. 11. Apostoli autem secundum eos transgressores praecepti ostenduntur Demiurgum Deum & Dominum & Patrem  tes.—Si non hic solus est Deus & Pater, l. 4. c. 2. Et tamen cap. 11. ipse igitur Christus cum Patre vivorum est  Itaque Deos omnino non dicam, nec Dominos, sed Apostolum sequar, ut si pariter nominandi fuerint Pater & Filius, Deum Pa appellem, & Iesum Christum Dominum nominem, solum autem Christum potero Deum dicere, sicut idem Apostolus, ex quibus e Christus qui est Deus super omnia Benedictus in omne aevum. Tertull. adv. prax. c. 31. Est ergo Deus Pater omnium Institutor, & Creator, solus originem nesciens—unus Deus. Novatian c. 31. Et tamen ex  processit substantia illa divina cujus nomen est Verbum per quod facta sunt omnia—Deus utique procedens ex Deo, sec personam efficiens, sed non eripiens illud Patri quod unus est Deus. Ibid.. Secondly, That God the Father was the Creator of all things, and yet that all things were created by the Word. Ver. 7. Howbeit there is not in every man this knowledge, for some with conscience of the Idols (being something) unto this hour eat (what is offered to) it, as a thing offer∣ed to an Idol, (i. e. not as common Meat, but as a sacred Banquet in honour of the Idol) and their Conscience being weak, (i. e. erronious, subiect to stumble and fall) is defiled. , there is not in all this knowledge.] This contradicts not what is said v. 1. We all have knowledge, that be∣ing spoken of them who abstained from eat∣ing things offered to Idols, out of scandal to others only, this of them who through weak∣ness did eat of them; the first being well in∣formed Christians, knew there was but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ to be worshipped; the weak thought there might be some Deastri, or Inferiour Lords, to whom some Reverence was due. Ver. 8. But (it is to be considered by us that) meat commended us not to God, for neither if we eat are we the better (for so do∣ing in the sight of God) neither if we eat not are we the worse, (you therefore ought  to eat, as to give occasion to the fall of  weak Brother.) Ver. 9. But (rather to) take heed,  by any means this liberty of yours becom stumbling block to them that are weak,  as to provoke them to fall from Christianity,  to defile themselves with Idolatry.) Ver. 10. For if any man (who with this ¦ronious Conscience goes to these Feasts) see th who hast knowledge sit at meat in the l Temple, shall not the Conscience of him th is weak be (the more) emboldned (by thy ex∣ample) to eat things which are offered to I∣dols, (in honour of the Idol, or as thinking a no hurt to worship Idols.) , sitting at meat in the Idols Temple.] The Gentiles, saithContr. Apion. l. 2. p. 1069. A. ∣phus, offer Hecatombs to their Gods, , and use their Temples  their Banqueting-house; so we read Judg.  Amos 2.7. and in prophane Authors very ∣quently; when therefore, saith the Apos the weak Jew who abhorreth Idols, or the Gentile newly converted from the worship  them, shall see thee doing the same thing which Heathens do in honour of their I and that in places appropriated to their Wor∣ship, will they not be tempted by the Exam∣ple of such a strong and knowing Christian, to conclude that either Idolatry is by Christian accounted no sin, or that the Idol defen some honour, and so comply with them from these erronious Principles in eating things of∣fered to Idols. Ver. 11. And (so) through thy knowledge shall thy weak Brother perish for whom Chr died. Ver. 12. But (surely it deserves well t considered, that) when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Consciences ye sin against Christ (wounding, and murther∣ing the Members of his Body, defeating the gr end of his death, and destroying them whom  designed to save.) , for whom Christ died.] From this, and the like place, Rom. 14. it is strongly argued, that Christ intention died for those that may for ever perish;
here the Apostle disswades the Corinthians from scandalizing their weak Brethren, by an Argu∣ment taken from the irreparable Mischief they do to them, the eternal Ruine they may bring upon them by this Scandal; where∣as, if it be as some assert, that all things, even the sins of the Elect, shall work together for their good, and that they can never perish. If the Apostle knew, and taught this Doctrine to them, why doth he go about to fright them from this Scandal, by telling them, it might have that effect which he before had told them was impossible? If you interpret his words thus, So shall he perish for whom in cha∣rity you ought to judge Christ died, 'tis certain from this Doctrine, that they must be assured this Judgment of Charity must be false, or that their Brother could not perish. In the first case they could not be obliged to act by it; and in the second, they could not ration∣ally be moved by it to abstain from giving Scandal on that impossible Supposition. If you interpret him thus, So shalt thou do that which in its nature tends to make thy Brother perish, and might have that effect, had not God determined to preserve all for whom Christ died from perishing, since the determination ren∣ders it sure to me, who know it, that they cannot actually perish, it must assure me there can be no cause of abstaining from this Scan∣dal, least they should perish by it. Moreover, by thus offending them, saith the Apostle, you sin against Christ, viz. by sinning against them whom he hath purchased with his Blood, and destroying them for whose Salvation he hath suffered, deny now this intent of Christ's Death, and shew, if you can, in what Christ hath demonstrated his great Love to them that perish; how they can ever sin against Re∣deeming Love; or how by thus offending them, who neither do, nor can belong to him as Members of his Body Mystical, we are inju∣rious to Christ. Ver. 13. Wherefore, if meat make my Bro∣ther to offend (and so to perish) I will eat no flesh whilst the world stands, least I make my Brother to offend (and perish.) , I will eat no flesh.] It being customary for the Heathens to consecrate all the Flesh they used to eat to someSee Dr. Spenc. de Rit. Hebr. p. 500, 501. Dae∣mon or Idol, and the weak Jews being so nice in matters of that nature, this necessity might sometimes lye upon the Christian to abstain from all Flesh to avoid the offence of the weak Brother; and the Apostle here engageth rather to submit to it, then to be an occasion of his ruine. See Theodor. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 15. and Note on Rom. 14.2. Note also, That there is nothing in this Chapter which intimates that the Apostle dis∣courseth of Conscience doubting about things in∣different, but rather that he all along discour∣seth of an erronious Conscience, which from a false Perswasion falleth into sin; for, saith he, some with conscience of the Idol to this hour eat it as a thing offered to the Idol, v. 7. Now so to do, is to act plainly, not from a doubt∣ing Conscience about a thing indifferent, but from an erronious Conscience about a thing unlawful; and yet, this is the Man whose Con∣science being weak is defiled. And in this sense are the words , to be weak and weakness commonly used in the Septua∣gint, as answering to the Hebrew  which signifies to fall and stumble. See Note on Rom. 5.6. , to be a stumbling∣block to the weak.] V. 9. is not barely to of∣fend them, or to induce them to do any thing with a doubting Conscience, but to make them stumble at the Christian Faith, or fall off from it, or perish by Idolatry. For thus it follows, and so shall thy weak brother perish. So Rom. 9.32, 33. Israel stumbled at the stone of stumbling, as it is written, behold, I lay in Zion  a stone of stumbling, 1 Pet. 2.8. to them that be disobedient; the stone which the builders disallowed is made  a stone of stumbling. To scandalize, or offend this weak Brother v. 13.] Is not only to do a thing ungrateful to him, or to cause him to sin by acting with a doubting Conscience, but to divert him from the Faith, or cause him to dislike it, because he sees that Christians so freely do communi∣cate with Idols, or to encourage him to joyn Idolatry with the Profession of it: That this is the constant sense of the word , see Note on Rom. 14.13, 21. Hence evident it is, that what Dissenters say from hence against our Ceremonies, that they offend or grieve them, that they cannot comply with them by reason of those doubts which they lye under, touching the lawful∣ness of the use of them, is impertinent to the Apostle's Argument; if they would have the Apostle here to patronize them, they must confess that they are acted herein by a false Judg∣ment, and erronious Conscience, as the weak Person mentioned by him was. Nevertheless this seemeth to press hard on them who believe the Schism of such weak Persons, will finally tend to their ruine, and render them Exiles from the Flock of Christ, and yet for things indifferent, will in this dreadful sense cause their weak Brother to of∣fend, or to be scandalized, since this they do for that which commends them not to God, which doing, they are not the better; or omit∣ting, they are not the worse, v. 8. For if Schism and Idolatry be equally damning sins, and equal∣ly cause my Brother to offend, and him to perish
for whom Christ died, we are equally to take heed in both Cases, least , our pow∣er to do the thing indifferent, become a stum∣bling block to the weak, or the erronious in their judgment of these things: For let Men imagine what other differences they please in the Case, whilst the sad issue or event is in the general the same, to wit, the perishing of my Brother, and my power to have abstained from that which through his erronious Conscience gave occasion to it, is the same, I fear the guilt will be the same. CHAP. IX. Verse 1. AM not I (who thus abstain from what is offensive to the weak) an Apostle (as well as others?) am I not free (to do what they may?) have I not seen the Lord Jesus Christ (as well as they?) and are not you my work in the Lord? (and so if others have a power to live upon your temporal things, have not I rather? v. 11, 12.] ; am not I an Apostle?] The Apostle here from his own example in abstain∣ing from the power which the Lord had given him to receive the Necessaries and Conveni∣encies of Life from them to whom he preach∣ed the Gospel, shews how much it concerned them in a matter unnecessary to abstain from the exercise  of their rightful power granted by Christ, to avoid the Scandal of the weak, and to promote Mens spiritual welfare. So Estius. This Condescension indeed was not in the exercise of his Apostolical Authority, but it was in that which he might have challeng∣ed as an Apostle of Christ, 1 Thess. 2.6. Hence he speaks thus, Am not I an Apostle? and therefore have I not  power to eat and to drink? yea, it was that he might have chal∣lenged by the Nature of his Office, v. 7. by the Prescriptions of the Law, v. 8. and by the ordinance of Christ, v. 14. And this Absti∣nence he used not only in Achaia, but in Thes∣salonica, 1 Thess. 2.9. 2 Thess. 3.8. that he might be an Example for their imitation, v. 9. It was not therefore any private or personal Right which he here waved, but a Right of Office belonging to all who did officiate in things Sacred. See Note on 2 Cor. 9.2. ; have I not seen Christ?] The Apostles being chosen to be witnesses of the Resurrection, it was requisite that St. Paul, being called to that Office, should also see him risen. Hence Ananias speaks thus to him, The God of our Fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldst see the just one, and should hear the words of his mouth, for thou shalt be his witness to all men of what thou hast seen and heard, Acts 22.14, 15.26.26. accordingly we find that Christ was seen of him, 1 Cor. 15.8. yea, oft appeared to him after his Resur∣rection, Acts 18.9.22.18. and that he was taught the Gospel by the immediate Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. The Syriack, A∣rabick, and some MSS. read thus, Am I not free? Am I not an Apostle? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Ver. 2. If I be not (so visibly and demon∣stratively) an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am (so) to you, for the seal (and testimony) of my Apostleship are you in the Lord, (as being converted by me, exercising the signs of an Apostle among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and in mighty deeds, 2 Cor. 12.12. Ver. 3. My answer (or Apology) to them that do examine me (why I, and my Compani∣ons use not the same freedom as other Apostles and Evangelists) is this. Ver. 4. Have I not power to eat and drink (without using so much abstinence, or at the charge of the Church as well as they?) Ver. 5. Have we not power to lead (or car∣ry) about a sister, a wife, as well as other A∣postles, and as the Brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? , to lead about a sister, a wife.] It is the observation of Hilary, Oe∣cumenius, and Theophylact, that as some Wo∣men attended on the Lord when he was on Earth to minister Necessaries to him and his Disciples, so some rich Women converted by them, followed the Apostles to provide Diet, and other Necessaries for them; and they who so interpret these words translate them a a Sister Woman. This Exposition Theodoret mentions, but seems not to approve; and in∣deed it seems to have had its rise fromNon Ʋxores demonstrat ab Apostolo circumductas, sed simpliciter Mulieres. De Monag. cap. 8. Tertullian, when he was a Montanist. ForStrom. 7. p. 736, 741. Clemens of Alexandria not only saith that he that marrieth,  hath the Apostles for examples; and that St. Peter carried his wife with him till her martyr∣dom; but confutes the Enemies of Matrimony from these very words, Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other A∣postles; adding that Strom. 3. p. 448. they carried their wives about, not as wives, but as sisters, to minister to those that were Mistresses of Families, that so the Doctrine of the Lord might, without any
reprehension, or evil suspicion, enter into the Apartments of the Women. This Exposition seemeth (1st,) Most agreeable to the words, which are not , but , which cannot well be rendred a Sister wo∣man, there being no Sister which is not a Wo∣man. (2ly,) It is most agreeable to the Con∣text, which plainly seems to speak not of such wealthy Women which could nourish the A∣postles out of their Abundance, but of such which were to be nourished with them by o∣thers. And (3ly,) to the Language of the Jews, who called their Wives Sisters. Thus Tobit saith to his Wife, , take no care my sister, Tob. 5.20. And Clemens in the words now cited, saith they were carried with them, not as Wives, but Sisters. And lastly, This seems best to consult the credit and esteem of the Apostles, who could not without evil suspicion, carry about with them single Women, or the Wives of other Men. As for the Women who are said to have fol∣lowed Christ, they were none of his Retinue, they attended not upon his Person, but upon his Doctrine, and so they ministred no such ground of Suspicion. But hence I think it doth not follow, as Mr. Cl. saith, that St. Paul then had a Wife, but only that he, or Barna∣bas had one, or at least might have had one, no law then forbidding it. Tertullian say∣ing, if not in his own sense, yet in the Per∣son of the Orthodox, licebat Apostolis nubere, & uxores circumducere. De Exhort. Castit. cap. 8. Ver. 6. Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? (and to receive maintenance of the Church as others do.) Ver. 7. Who goeth a warfare at any time at his own charge? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock? (And shall we the Souldiers of Jesus Christ, 2 Tim. 2.2. the Planters of his Spiri∣tual Vineyard, the Pastors of his Flock, Acts 20.28. be debarred of this priviledge? , who goeth a warfare.] The per∣tinency of this Instance will be more visible, if we consider that both in the Old and New Testament, the Ministerial Function is repre∣sented as a warfare. See Note on 1 Tim. 1.18. And the Levite, who was consecrated to do the Service of the Tabernacle, is said to en∣ter into the Host, Num. 4.3. , to offi∣ciate, saith the Septuagint, to serve the service, saith the Chaldee. The Church of God is also represented as his Vineyard, Isa. 5.1-5. Mat. 20.1.21.18, 33-40, 41. Luke 13.6, 7. and as his flock, Isa. 40.11.63.11. Mat. 26.31. Luke 12.32. Acts 20.28, 29. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. But then. St. Chrysostom and Theophylact observe that he saith not who goeth to warfare, and is not rich, who plants a Vineyard, and heaps not up Gold of the fruits of it; who seeds a stock and makes not a merchandize of the sheep; teaching us that the Spiritual Pastor should be content with little, and seek only what is neces∣sary, not what is superfluous. Ver. 8. Say I these things as a man, (only from principles of natural reason and equity) saith not the Law the same also. , as a man.] This Phrase in the New Testament doth always signifie to speak, act, and live after the manner of a meer Natural Man, not yet acquainted with the Mind of God, not acting by the Guidance of Divine Wisdom, or not assisted by the Ho∣ly Spirit. So Rom. 3.5. I speak  as a man by meer strength of reason would be apt to argue, 1 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not carnal, and walk as men, i. e. as Natural, and not Spiritual Men, v. 1. 1 Cor. 15.32. If  after the manner of men, i. e. the Hea∣then manner, I have fought with Beasts at E∣phesus, Gal. 1.11. The Gospel which was preached by me, was not  after man, i. e. it was not the product of Humane Wisdom, but received from the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.15. Brethren, I speak af∣ter the manner of men, i. e. what is acknow∣ledged in all civilized Nations. See Note on 1 Pet. 4.6. Ver. 9. For it is written in the Law of Mo∣ses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the Corn; doth God (say this only to shew he) take (eth) care for Oxen? Ver. 10. Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes, no doubt, this is writ∣ten, that (in this Spiritual Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9.) he that ploughs should plough in hope (of reaping some advantage by it,) and (that) he that thresheth in hope, should be partakers of his hope. , for our sakes this was written.] A like expression occurs inMore Nevoch. part. 3. c. 48. p. 497. Maimonides, who having cited these words, Thou shalt not take the dam with the young, saith, If God took such care for Beasts and Birds, how much more for Men. So that these words do not import, that God takes no care for Beasts, for he saveth Man and Beast, Psal. 36.6. and giveth to the Beasts their food, Ps. 147.9 but only that the commands he gives us to shew mercy and kindness to our Beasts are especially designed to teach us greater kindness to our Brother Man. Thus the High Priest. Apud Arist. p. 17.
Eleazar saith to Aristaeas, that all the Pre∣cepts of this Nature delivered by Moses, had  a profound sense; and that God did not make them, as being concerned about Mice, or Weasels, or such like Beasts; but that all these Laws were made for Righteousness sake, and the information of our manners. Ver. 11. If then we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap (some of) your carnal things, (Rom. 15.27.) Ver. 12. If others be partakers of this pow∣er over you, are not we rather (who laid the Foundation of a Christian Church among you, 1 Cor. 3.10. and have begotten you through the Gospel? 1 Cor. 4.15.) nevertheless, we have not used this power (among you, 2 Cor. 11.7, 8, 9.) but (chuse rather to) suffer (the want of) all things, least we should hinder the (ad∣vancement of the) Gospel of Christ. , power over you.] So  is power over unclean spirits, Matth. 10.1. , power over all flesh, John 17.2. Ver. 13. And not to insist only on mystical interpretations of the Law.] Do you not know that they who minister about holy things (excoriating, washing and preparing the Sacri∣fice for the Altar, as do the Levites) live of the (holy) things of the Temple, and (that) they which wait at the Altar are (according to the institution of the Law) partakers with the Altar, (for that consumes not always the whole Sacrifice, but leaves some portion to be eaten by the Priests.) Ver. 14. Even so hath the Lord (Jesus in the Gospel, Matth. 10.10. Luke 10.7.) or∣dain'd that they who preach'd the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Ver. 15. But yet I have used none of these things, neither have I written these things, that it should be so done unto me; for it were better for me to dye (for want of food) then that any man should make my glorying (in thus advancing the Gospel) void. Ver. 16. (I say my glorying) For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of (upon that account,) for a necessity is laid up∣on me (by the command and special call of our Lord Jesus Christ so to do) yea, wo is to me if I preach not the Gospel, (because then I shall be guilty of disobedience to the heavenly vision, Acts 26.9. Ver. 17. For if I do this willingly (if I chuse to take nothing for preaching the Gospel, when I am under no obligation so to do) I have a (special) reward (and may glory in it) but if unwillingly I preach the Gospel, (yet am I under a necessity of doing this, and therefore cannot glory in it, or expect any special reward above others for it, since) a dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me, (and so in that I only can discharge my trust.) , if I do this willingly.] This is the Interpretation of Oecumenius, and it seems best to suit with the Scope of the A∣postle: The other sense mentioned by the An∣cients, and followed by most Interpreters, is this, If I preached the Gospel as a Volunteer, having no command from Christ to do it, I might expect a peculiar Reward; but having th command from Christ, I execute it only in obe∣dience to the trust committed to me, and s cannot glory in, or expect a reward for that a∣bove others. Ver. 18. What then is my reward (or wh is matter of special reward and glory to me) verily (this) that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not (or use not, See 1 Cor. 7.31.) my power (which is given me) in the Gospel, (and this matter of rejoycing I have.) Note first, From v. 12, 15, 18. that our power in things indifferent, and uncommanded, is not to be used to the hindrance of the Go∣spel of Christ, and the scandal of the Weak. 2ly, That there is , or matter of glo∣rying in things done by the assistance of the Grace of God, and it is for the Glory of a Man to do them, v. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 11.10. , our rejoycing, or our glorying, is this, even the testimony of our Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. And again, Let every man approve himself to his own Conscience, and then shall he have  rejoycing in himself, and not in another, Gal. 6.4. The glorying therefore, or the  which the Apostle elsewhere doth reject, and exclude, is only that of the Merit of our Works, or their sufficiency to procure the Justification of a Sinner, Rom. 3.27.4.2. or that which doth exclude the help, or the assistance of the Grace of God in Christ, 1 Cor. 1.29, 31. 3ly, That there may be some actions emi∣nently good which fall under no particular command, I say particular command; for I be∣lieve this very action of St. Paul, in which he glories, was done according to that Charity which seeketh not her own, but the good of o∣thers, that they might be saved; that Christian Charity which mindeth not her own, but the things of Jesus Christ, Philip. 2.5. and that it was in the general his duty to take care not to hinder the Gospel of Christ, v. 12. and to cut off occasion from others to glory, to the im∣pairing of the Truth, 2 Cor. 11.12. to per∣form that which rendred him instrumental to gain the more, v. 19. and therefore he saith, v. 27. All this I do for the Gospels sake, that I may be partaker of it with you. I think eve-very good Work, which respects our duty to∣wards God, falls under the general command of loving God with all our heart, our mind, and soul; and all the kindness we shew to our Brother under the command of loving him a our own selves, and think no action eminently good, can be done by any Christian which is not coprehended under the general Precept
of doing whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report, if there be any vertue, any praise, Philip. 4.8. But yet this action, as to the substance of it, be∣ing under no Precept, but being a refusal to use the power God had granted to him as much as others, and this refusal being done out of respect unto God's Glory, and the good of Souls, was that of which he justly gloried, and for which, though he did not merit any thing, yet he might reasonably expect from God, whose Glory he promoted by it, an e∣special recompence, according to the Rule of his own Nation,Maimon. More Nevoch. l. 3. c. 17. p. 381. To him a Reward is gi∣ven who doth any thing uncommanded. Ver. 19. For though I be free from all men (as being a servant to none) yet have I made my self (as) a servant to all, that I might gain the more. Ver. 20. To the (unconverted) Jews I be∣came as a Jew, (circumcising Timothy for their sakes, Acts 16.3.) that I might gain the Jew, to them that (in their opinion) are (yet) un∣der the (obligation of the) Law, as under the Law, (purifying my self in the Temple, because they were zealous of the Law, Acts 21.20-26.) that I might gain them that are under the Law. Ver. 21. To them that are without Law (the unbelieving Gentiles) I became as with∣out Law, (discoursing to them from those Na∣tural Principles which they owned, Acts 17. rather then from the Law and the Prophets,) being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, (or obedient to the Law of Christ, and taking care notwithstanding that I did nothing contrary to the Moral Law of God, and to the Rules of Christianity) that I might gain them that are without the Law. Ver. 22. To the weak (Convert among the Gentiles) I became as weak, (by condescending to abstain from what might hurt their weak Consciences) that I might gain the weak, I am made all things to all men, (by my compliance with them in all lawful matters) that I might by all means save some. Ver. 23. And all this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might be a partaker of (the Pro∣mises and Rewards of) it with you. Ver. 24. (Which neither you nor I shall ob∣tain by the bare profession or knowledge of it without Charity, and a life suitable to the Pre∣cepts of it, for) know ye not (among whom the Istmian Games are acted) that they who run in a race run all, but one (of them only) receiveth the prize, so (therefore) run (your Christian race) that ye may obtain (the re∣ward of it.) Ver. 25. (And then you will be moved to abstain, as I do, from what may cause your weak Brother to fall, and perish; for) every one that striveth for mastery (or is a Wrestler in those Games) is temperate in all things, (i. e. observeth a strict abstinence) now they (who thus abstain that they may prevail in wrest∣ling) do it (only) to obtain a corruptible Crown, (of Bays, or Olive) but we (Christi∣ans, by using this temperance, shall obtain) an incorruptible (Crown.) Ver. 26. I therefore so run (this race) not as uncertainly, (or not regarding whe∣ther I am within the Lines, or come first to the Goal, or not,) so fight I not as he that beateth the air, (i. e. not vainly, as you seem to do; for what advantage have you by going to the Idol Temples, or eating things offered to Idols, to the destruction of your Bro∣ther?) Ver. 27. But I keep under my Body, and subdue it, (by denying my self these liberties in things indifferent) least while I preach to others, I my self should be a cast∣away. (As being not partaker of the Blessings of the Gospel, v. 23.) , Least I my self should be a cast∣away] i. e. One disapproved of by God at the last. Excellent here is the Note of the ancient Commentators, ; If Paul, so great a Man, one who had preach'd and laboured so much, dreaded this, what cause have we to fear least this should be∣fal us? Note also, That the Agonistical Phrases, mentioned in these four last Verses, are fully and excellently explained by the Reverend Dr. Hammond, who informs us, First, That theIn Istmo ludi quinquennales Istmiachi. Solin. c. 13. In eo est oppidum Cenchreae ludis quos Istmicos vocant celebre. Mel l. 2. c. 3. lin. 75. Istmian Games were cele∣brated among the Corinthians, and therefore the Apostle speaks thus to them, Know ye not. Secondly, That of the five Games there used, the Apostle alludes only to two or three, Running, v. 24, 26. Wrestling, v. 25. Cuffing, v. 26, 27. Thirdly, That he who won the Race by running, was to observe the Laws of Racing, keeping within the white Line, which marked out the Path, or Compass in which they were to run; and was al∣so to out-run the rest, and come first to the Goal, otherwise he ran uncertainly, v. 24, 26. and was , one to whom the prize would not be adjudged by the , or Judges of the Games. Fourthly, That the Athletae Combatants, or
Wresters, observed. Epict. c. 35. a set Diet, both for the quantity and quality of their Meat, and carefully abstained from all things that might render them less able for the Combat, whence they are here said to be temperate in all things, v. 25. Fifthly, That he who cuff'd used to prepare himself for the Exercise by a. Eustath. . Idem in haec verba . Il. γ p. 1215. Ed. Rom. , or thrusting out his Arms into the Air. And this is stiled, so fighting as to beat the Air, v. 26. But when he came to the Combat, then his Fist strove to hit the Face and Eyes of his Ad∣versaries and this is v. 27. , to strike under the eye, or give his Adversary a blue Eye, and applied to the Body, is so to keep it under, by beating it black and blue, as these Combatants did one another. Sixthly, That the Reward of all these Ex∣ercises was only a Crown made of the Leaves of some Plant, or Boughs of some Tree, the. Porphyr. de antro Nymph. p. 270. Olive, Bays, or Laurel, which therefore the Apostle here calls a corruptible Crown, v. 25. CHAP. X. Verse 1. (AND to make you the more di∣ligent in running your Chri∣stian Race, and to avoid those sins which will cause you to fail of the prize you run for, I shall lay before you the Case of the Israelites, your Fore-runners, shewing what Priviledges, and what Advantages they had, and by what means most of them so unhappily miscarried; for to be∣gin with their Priviledges,) I would not that ye should be ignorant how that all our Fa∣thers (the Church of Israel) were under (the protection of) the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea. Ver. 2. And (so) were all baptized into (the Covenant made with God, and the Doctrine taught by) Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. , were under the Cloud.] To understand the allusion here, note that to be under the Cloud, is to be under the Pro∣tection or Covert of the Cloud. For the Cloud of Glory, saith theBuxt. de arc faed. c. 14. p. 126, 127. Tradition of the Jews, signified the Care and Providence of God, and his Presence with them day and night; and that accordingly it compassed their Camp as a Wall doth a City. And therefore of the Feast of Ta∣bernacles, which in the Hebrew is  the Feast of Coverings, theBuxt. Synag. Jud. c. 21. p. 447. Jews say it was especially appointed to admonish them of the Divine Protection exhibited to them by the Cloud. And the Chaldy Paraphrast saith this Feast was instituted, that their Posterity might know that I made the Children of Israel to dwell under the shadow of the Cloud. And thereforeQuis Rer. div. Hr. p. 397. G. Philo stiles it , a Covering. And so the Psalmist represents it, when he says, He spread out the cloud for a covering to them, and a fire to enlighten them by night, Psal. 105.39. And the Prophet, when he says, The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies a cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of flaming fire by night, for upon all their glory shall be a covering, Isa. 4.5, 6. , the Cloud shall over-shado all her Circuits, saith the Septuagint. He was to them as a covering by day, and a light of Stars in the night season, saith the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 10.17. By these things Mr. Cl. may see we have good warrant for say∣ing, the Cloud was a covering to them, and that they were under the Cloud, because it was over them; not only because it went before them, which indeed is a greater impropriety▪ then that which he charges upon others, that being indeed none at all; for what hinders the same Cloud from being at one time contract∣ed into the Figure of a Pillar, and at another expanded as a Covering; for do we not read that the Cloud covered the Mount, Exod. 24.15. that it covered the Seat of the Congrega∣tion, Exod. 40.34. that it covered the Taber∣nacle, Numb. 9.15, 16. The learned Bishop of Ely notes, that there were three several uses of the Cloud, (1.) To guide them in their Journeys; and this it did as a Pillar going be∣fore them. (2.) To preserve them from the heat of the Sun in the Wilderness; and then it was spread out as a Covering, Psal. 105.39. and was a Cloud shadowing the Camp, Wisd. 19.7. (3.) To defend them from their Ene∣mies, that they might not assault them; and so it stood betwixt the whole whole Host of Israel, and the Egyptians, and was a Cloud of dark∣ness
to the latter, so that they came not near the Israelites, Exod. 14.20. it therefore must be large enough to darken their whole Camp. 2ly, That they all passed through the Sea, so as to come to the opposite Shore, saith. Antiq. l. 2. c. 7. Jo∣sephus; they went through it, saith, Hebr. 11.29. St. Paul, elsewhere; through the middle of it, say the, Jos. 4.23. , Neh. 9.11. Septuagint. I confess the Rahbins, and many Commentators say, they only fetch'd a Compass like to an half Circle in the Sea, and came out again on the same side; because be∣fore they entred into the Sea, they were in the edge of the Wilderness of Aetham, Num. 33.6. And after they had passed the Sea, they Go three days journey in the wilderness of Aetham Exod 15.22. But to this it is answered, That the Wilderness on each part of that Arm of the Sea, was called the Wilderness of Aetham, and beyond the Red Sea was the same with Shar, Exod. 15.22. for the Hebrew word  which we render edge, is by the Septua∣gint forty times rendred , a part. And here, say they, they came to Butnn, , which is some part of the wil∣derness, Numb. 33.6. intimating that beyond the Sea there was another part of the same Wilderness. 3ly, They were baptized into Moses in the cloud.] i. e. Into the Doctrine taught by Mo∣ses; for the Cloud was not only for directi∣on, but for a covering over them; according to the words of the Psalmist, He spread out the Cloud for a covering, Psal. 105.39. (And in the Sea) for they were covered with the Sea on both sides, Exod. 14.22. So that both the Cloud and the Sea had some resemblance to our being covered with Water in Baptism. And this theMaim ex Sifra in Seder Kodash. Ed. Pocock p. 27. Jews do so far own, that they say they were baptized in the Desart, and ad∣mitted into Covenant with God before the Law was given. Note fourthly, That the Cloud had a bright shining side, as well as a dark side, so that their Baptism in the Sea, answered to that of Water, and their Baptism in the Cloud, to Baptism by Fire, or by the Holy Ghost, which say theVid. Masium in Josh. 1. Jews, was represented by the Shechinah, or the Cloud of Glory. Ver. 3. And did all eat the same spiritual meat, (that Manna which was a Type of Christ, the true Bread which came down from Heaven, John 6.) Ver. 4. And did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that (spiritual) rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ, (as typifying him, and the spiritual Waters to be received from him, John 7.37, 39.) , the same meat, and the same drink.] For though some Manu∣scripts omit , the same, in both thse Verses, yet is that word to be retained in both places, for so readL. 4. c. 45. Irenaeus, and all the Greek Expositors. And whereas Estius inter∣prets the words thus, They at the same mong themselves, not the same with us. This Expo¦sition is contrary not only to whtAliud illi, aliud nos, sed specie visibili, quod tamen hoc idem significaret virtute spirituali—Sacramenta illa fuerunt, in signis diversa sunt, sed in re quae significatur paria sunt. August. Tr. 26. in Joh. To. 9. p. 228. B.C. St. Au∣stin and all the Greek Fathers teach, but also, to the scope of the Apostle, which is to shew that they had the like spiritual Advantages and Priviledges with us, which yet he doth not do, unless their spiritual Meat and Drink signified, or typified to them Christ, as ours doth to us; that all of them were not Be∣lievers in Christ by Faith, but some of them were Unbelievers, is no objection against this sense; for so it is with Christians now; the Wicked not partaking of the Benefit of Christ by Faith, as the Fathers speak, though they receive the Sacrament of his Body and Blood with their Mouths. Note also, That St Paul represents Man∣na as Spiritual Food, and the Rock as being Spiritual, and affording them Spiritual Drink, agreeably to the descants of the Jews: For Manna, saith. L. de Profugis, p. 367. B. , &c. Alleg. l. 1. p. 69. B. Philo, is the food of the Soul; it signifies the Law of God, and the Di∣vine Logos, whence all permanent Instruction and Knowledge flows. And this is the heaven∣ly Food, of which Moses in the Person of God speaketh, saying, Behold, I rain down for you Bread from Heaven. The Food of the Soul, saith the same Philo, is heavenly, not earthly, as the holy Scripture testifieth, saying, I rain down for you Bread from Heaven. He calls theDe Congr. quaer. erud. Grati. p. 343. A. Manna put into the Ark, , the Memorial of the Divine and Heavenly Food; and saith that. Quis rer. Divin. Haer. p. 384. D. Man∣na
is the Divine Logos, the Celestial and In∣corruptible Nourishment of a Soul desirous of Knowledge. The Jews also declare thatBuxt. Hist. Man. p. 336, 339, 352. Manna was a Type of the Eternal Happiness of Man; that it had its rise from Heaven, and thence descended on the Earth, by open∣ing the Gates of Heaven; that it is the Di∣vine Light incorporated; the Splendor of the Glory of the Majesty of God; the Bread of which Angels feed, and by which the Sons of the World to come are to subsist. And with these Representations of it, agree the words of the Apostle, saying, The Jews by eating of it did eat , the same spiritual food with us. But here Mr. Cl. saith,  The word , spiritual, is here oppo∣sed to , natural, not to , corpo∣real; for Manna was a corporeal Food, which could not be spiritual in any other respect, then as it was prepared, not by sensible Causes, but by Spirits, viz. Angels, whose Bread therefore it is said to be, Psal. 78.2. (R. 25.) I answer here is nothing true, or at least no∣thing certain; For 1. the Chaldee Paraphrast saith, it is called the Bread of Angels in the Psalmist, because it came from Heaven, the Habitation of the Angels, as the Psalmist him∣self interprets it, saying, He opened the Gates of Heaven; he rained upon them Manna for to eat, and gave them Bread from Heaven, Bread of the Mighty did man eat. 2ly, Why does he say, It could not be called spiritual Food in any other sense, then as it was prepared by Spirits? Is it because it was corporeal Food? and might it not be also the Food of the Soul? Are not Bread and Wine corporeal Food? and yet may they not be also spiritual? yea, doth not the Apostle's Argument plainly require that the Manna should be spiritual? for how else did they eat the same spiritual food with us. And 3ly, how absurd is it to say, It is called spiritual Food, because prepared by Spi∣rits. Can he give one instance of any corpo∣real thing called spiritual upon that account? Was it not spiritual Meat, as the Water issu∣ing from the Rock was spiritual Drink, and was that so because prepared by Spirits? And this Rock was Christ.] i. e. It typified Christ; for as the Rock, being smitten, gave forth Waters, so our Lord being smitten, Wa∣ter came forth out of his side; and the Holy Ghost, signified by this effusion of Waters from the Rock, was poured forth as a River. By the solid Rock, saith. Quod deter. pot. p. 137. A.C. . ¦gis Alleg. l. 3. p. 853. A. B. Philo, Moses under∣stands the Wisdom of God, which is the Nurse, and the Instructor of all that desire the incor∣ruptible Life. He by a Synonumous word calls the Rock Manna, that is, the most Ancient of Beings, the Divine Logos. And again, The Rock cleft in the top, is the Wisdom of which he makes the Souls that love him to drink; and being thus made to drink, they are also filled with the universal Manna; for Manna is cal∣led π, which is the progeny of all things; nw the most general Cause of all things is God, and the second, the word of God. By these things Mr. Cl. may be convinced that the Jews might understand these Types by Tra∣dition; and seeing them thus accomplished, might be induced to believe. And as for Christians, the Apostle here shews the influ∣ence they ought to have on them, viz. to pre∣serve them from the like offences, least they be∣came subject to the like judgments to which the Jews were obnoxious, v. 5, 6. But Mr. Cl. de∣nies that the words bear this sense, the Rock signified Christ, or represented him, and saith the import of those words, that Rock was Christ, is only this, that which might be said of that Rock in a carnal sense, may in a spiritual be affirmed of Christ: which is not to expound, but ridicule the Apostle, as speaking thus, They all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the Rock that followed them: Now what may be said of that Rock in a carnal sense, may be said of Christ in a spiri∣tual, i. e. they all drank the same spiritual drink, because they drank what was carnal. Moreover, we find many Phrases of the like nature, both in the Old and the New Te∣stament; as when 'tis said,Gen. 40 12.43.26. Ez. 5.5. Dan. 7.17. & 2.38. Mat. 13.38, 39.26.26, 27. Luke 8.11. the three branches are three days; the seven kine, and seven ears of corn, are seven years; the four great beasts are four kingdoms; thou art the golden head; the seed is the word, the field is the world; the reapers are the Angels; the harvest is the end of the world; the hair is Je¦rusalem; this bread is my body; this cup is my blood. Now in all these Instances doth not  import typifies, signifies, represents? why therefore should it not do so in the like pro∣position, this Rock is Christ? Or what one in∣stance can Mr. Cl. produce, that any thing was ever said to be another thing, because wh might be said of it in a carnal sense, might in  spiritual sense be said of the other? And is it n sufficient prejudice against this ,  uncouth interpretation, that it hath no paralle example; whereas our Exposition is confirmed from numerous Examples of like nature.
Ver. 5. But notwithstanding (these Privi∣ledges and Favours common to them with us) with many of them God was not well plea∣sed, for they were overthrown (by him) in the Wilderness, (Hebr. 3.17.) Ver. 6. Now these things were our examples, (who succeed them in like Priviledges and Fa∣vours) to the intent that we lust not after evil things as they also lusted (after flesh, when they had Manna, food sufficient for them, Num. 11.4.) , our examples.] The Examples he here puts, saith Theodoret, exactly answer to the sins of the Corinthians; for as the Jews lusted to eat Flesh, when God had given them food enough, so the Corinthians lusted to eat things offered to Idols, when they had other Meat provided plentifully by God for them; for the earth is the Lords, and the fulness there∣of, v. 28. Ver. 7. Neither be ye Idolaters (by eating things offered to Idols, and partaking of the Table of Devils) as were some of them, as it is written, the People sat down to eat and drink (of the Sacrifices offered to the golden Calf) and rose up to play. , &c. the People sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.] When the Heathens had offered upon the Altar, and consumed that part which belonged to the God they worshipped, they banquetted in the Idol Temple upon the remains, and so did epulis accumbere divum, asAen. 1. v. 83. Vide Turneb. l. 30. c. 5. Virgil speaks, at long Tables prepared for that purpose, whence this is by the Apostle called partaking of the Table of Devils; and used very appo∣sitely, say the Fathers, to convince the Corin∣thians that by eating things offered to the Idols in the Idol Temple, they must be guilty of Hea∣thenish Idolatry. Rse up to play.] Here almost all the Cri∣ticks observe, that , to play, bears an im∣pure sense, importing their fornication with one another; as when we say, such a one hath play'd the whore; but this Criticism seems here to be without foundation: For (1.) the Scrip∣ture often mentions their Idolatry, but never chargeth them with Whoredom then commit∣ted when they made the golden Calf; all that God himself charges upon them is, that they hd made them a molten Calf, and had worship∣ped and sacrificed to it, and said these be thy Gds; Exod. 32.8, 35. Neh. 9.18. Psal. 106.19, 20. Acts 7.41. (2.) The Apostle speaks of Whoredom in the Verse following, as a di∣stinct sin, and therefore cannot reasonably be supposed to charge them with it here. (3.) The Exposition of the Ancients, that they rose up to dance before the Calf, is confirmed by these words, and when Moses sa the Cf, and the dancing, he was wrath, Exod. 32.19. And because this was done after the manner of theInter vescendum diis laudes canebant, pedibusque circum Aras complodentes ad numeros psallebant. Rosin. Antiq. l. 3. c. 33. Virgil. Eclog. 5. v. 73. Heathen, and was one of the Rites by which they honoured their Gods, the Apo∣stle useth it as a confirmation of their Idola∣try. And this is all the Fathers seem to mean by saying, that to play is used , for committing Idolatry; and the Jersalem Targum when it saith, they did lde ultu peregrino, play after the Heathen manner. Ver. 8. Neither let us commit fornication as some of them committed (fornication at the Sacrifices of Baal Peor, Num. 25.16, 17, 18.) and (upon that account there) fell in one day three and twenty thousand (of them.) , neither let us commit forni∣cation.] How prone the Christians of the Church of Corinth was to this sin, which made the Heathen Corinth infamous to a Proverb, we learn from these words of the Apostle, I fear when I come I shall bewail many who have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they have committed, 2 Cor. 12.23. See 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.5.11.6.9, 13, 15, 16. , three and twenty thousand.] The number of the slain was four and twenty thousand, Num. 25.9. and so Oecumenius saith some ancient Copies read here; but of this number one thousand was slain by the Judges, and that probably the day before the Plague, three and twenty thousand by the im∣mediate hand of God. Now the design of the Apostle here is only to mention them who fell in one day by the hand of God. See ∣chart. Hieroz. l. 2. c. 34. Ver. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ (our Lord) as some of them tempted (him,) and were destroyed of Serpents, (Num. 21.5, 6.) , Christ.] This reading ought not to be questioned, for we find it not only in Hi∣lary the Deacon, St. Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theophylact, but inl. 4. c. 45. Irenaeus; hence Pri∣masius of old proved the Divinity of Christ, as being that God whom they tempted, Psal. 106.14. and others his Prae-existence before the birth of the Blessed Virgin against the Sci∣nians. Ver. 10. Neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured, (Num. 14.2.) and were de∣stroyed of the Destroyer, (v. 37.) , of the Destroyer.] i. e. By a Plague sent by the hand of Samuel, the Angel of Death, called , the Destroyer, Hebr. 11.28. Wisd. 18.25. and him that had the power of Death, Hebr. 2.14. Now the Corin∣thians murmured, saith Theodoret, because some of them had received only inferior Gifts;
say others, by reason of the Persecutions they suffered for the Christian Faith. Ver. 11. Now all these things hapned to them for examples (to posterity,) and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world (the last of Ages, or the Christian Age) is come. , the end of the Ages] This Phrase either signifies the end of the Jewish Age, as if the Apostle did intend to say, These things which hapned in the beginning of the Jewish Age, were recorded for caution and ex∣ample to us, who are come to the conclusion of it, or the last of the Ages of the World, i. e. the Christian Age; for the Jews, according to the Tradition of Elias, divide the duration of the world into three Ages, the Age before the Law, the Age of the Law, and that Age after the Law, or that of the Messiah, Talmud. in San∣hedr. cap. Chelek. Ver. 12. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, (and is in high favour with God, as they once were, and still think they are) take heed least he fall. Ver. 13. (And whereas the great inducement to symbolize with Jew or Gentile in their Rites, is this, that you may avoid Persecutions, you have no cause to doubt of Christ's protection un∣der them, for he hath so preserved you hitherto, that) there hath no Temptation taken you, but such as is common to man, (, suppor∣table by the strength and resolution of a man,) but (moreover) God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted (at any time) above that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way (so far) to escape it, that you may be able to bear it. , who will not suffer you.) i. e. Any of you, who do what in you lyes to arm your selves against them, to be tempted a∣bove what you are able, this therefore ought not to be restrained to the Elect; for the pre∣ceding words, no temptation hath hapned to you, are spoken to all the Members of the Church of Corinth; and God hath doubtless engaged to all that enter into Covenant with him, to enable them to perform the Conditi∣ons of that Covenant; since a Covenant upon an impossible Condition, he knows, cannot be performed; and all are bound to pray in faith, that God would not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able, by his strength, to bear. Ver. 14. Wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from (the) Idolatry (committed by participation of things offered to Idols in the Idol Tem∣ple.) Ver. 15. I speak as to wise men (in what I am now offering to shew the Idolatry of this pra∣ctice) judge ye (the reasonableness of) what I say. Ver. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless (or receive with thanksgiving to God for it) is it not the communion of the blood of Christ, (or that Rite by which we Christians do profess to hold Communion with, and own him as our Lord and Saviour, who shed his Blood for us?) the Bread which we break, is it not (also) the Communion of the Body of Christ? (i. e. do we not by eating it at his Table, declare our fel∣lowship with, and own him as our Lord, whose Body was thus broken for us?) , the Communion.] This word Com∣munion hath two significations; 1st, When the Subject spoken of may be distributed into parts, so that each Man may have a share of it; it denotes a distribution, and communion of those Parts to the Community, or Body men∣tioned. Thus in the case of Alms, seeing there is a distribution of our Substance to those that want, this is in Scripture stiled , and is sometimes rendred Contribution, Rom. 15.26. sometimes Distribution, 2 Cor. 9.13. Heb. 13.16. and since there were , divisions, and diversities of Gifts, Ministrations, and Opera∣tions vouchsafed to the Church; all which the Holy Spirit wrought, dividing to every Mem∣ber of it severally as he would, 2 Cor. 12.11. The giving these Gifts, and several Opera∣tions to them, is called the Communion of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 13.13. Philip. 2.1. Thus be∣cause one consecrated Loaf was anciently di∣stributed among all the Communicants, and they all drank their share of the same Cup of Blessing, therefore the Bread thus broken, and shared out, may be said to be the Communi∣on, or Communication of the Body of Christ, as being the Communication of the Bread which represented his broken Body; and the Cup they severally drank of may be stiled the Communication of the Blood of Christ, as being the Communication of that Wine which represented his Blood shed; and to this im∣port lead the following words, because the Bread or Loaf is one, of which we all par∣take, we being many are one Body, for we are all partakers of one Loaf, according to the old proverbial expression, . But where the Subject mentioned is not capable of such division, or distribution, but every one is to have the whole, or the same with another, it imports a Fellowship and Communion in the same thing; in which sense we are said to be called by God , to the fellowship of the Son, 1 Cor. 1.9. to have  a Fellowship in his Sufferings, to have  Communion with God the Father, and the Son, 1 John 1.5. and in the Apostles Symbol, to believe the Communion of Saints; and in this import of the word the sense ru thus, Do we not by partaking of this Bread and Wine consecrated in memorial of Christ, giving his Body broken, and his Blood shed for us, hold Communion, or declare our Fel∣lowship with Christ. Both these senses seem agreeable to the scope of the Apostle, and the first infers the second.
, the Cup of Blessing.] The Paschal Cup being stiled by the Jews, the Cup of lessing, because they sanctified it, i. e. they gave thanks for it in these words, Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, the King of the World, who hast created the fruit of the Vine, and being also stiled the Cup of Blessing of the Table, it cannot reasonably be doubted that the Eucharistical Cup was so called for the same reason, and that it was sanctified, or consecrated by Thanksgiving to God for it. Ver. 17. For we being many, are one Bread and one Body, (or because the Bread is one, one Loaf being broken for us all) we (who partake of it) being many, are one Body, owning our selves thereby all Members of that Body of which Christ Jesus is the Head,) for we are all partakers of one Bread, (and thus you see that, by partaking of this Christian Sacri∣fice, we own our selves to have communion with the Lord Jesus, and with the whole So∣ciety of Christians) , because the Bread is one, we being many, are one Body.] These words, the Bread which we break, the Loaf or Bread is one, and we all partake of one Loaf, and therefore are one Body, shew how grosly the Church of Rome hath varied from Christ's Institution, in distributing to the Communicants severally an unbroken Wafer, so that they neither are partakers of one Bread, or Loaf, or a Bread Broken, as the custom both of Jews and Christians was to do. Ver. 18. Behold Israel according to the flesh, (and see if it be not so there also, for) are not all they who eat of the Sacrifices (the Peace-offerings, for of these only did the Peo∣ple eat) partakers of the Altar. , Partakers of the Altar.] i. e. Do they not by partaking of the Gift con∣secrated by the Altar, and of which one part is consumed upon it, partake with the Altar, and own that they communicate with, and worship that God at whose Altar or Table the Meat was offered in honour of him, Mal. 1.7. For as swearing by the Altar, is swearing also by him whose altar it is, Matth. 23.20. so having communion with the Altar, is ha∣ving communion with him whose Altar it is. To illustrate this, let it be noted, (1st,) That in these  or Peace-offerings, there was a threefold Participation; (1.) God had his part offered to him upon his Altar, viz. the Blood, and the Entrails; part was given to the Priest, viz. the Breast and the Shoulder; and part to the Offerer, viz. the Skin, and the rest of the Flesh; and this in token, say the Jews, of Friendship, and Communion of the Party offering them, with God, and the Priest. And he by eiting the remainder, and feasting on it in the Temple, or the Holy City, became partaker with the Altar, or with God, who had received his share upon the Altar. Note 2ly, that these Peace-offerings were offered ei∣ther by way of Thanksgiving for Mercies ob∣tained, or by way of Vow, or of free Devoti∣on; for this division of Peace offerings we find Lev. 7. Moreover, these being offered to the God of Israel, signified the owning him as that God from whom they recived and ex∣pected all their Mercies. Ver. 19. What say I then (i. e. what need I then to say) that the Idol is any thing, or that which is offered to the Idol is any thing? (which can of its own nature pollute.) Ver. 20. But this I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice to Devils, and I would not that ye should have fellow∣ship with Devils, (or do service to them by partaking of things offered to them in the Idol Temples, for) , to Devils] Here, Mr. Cl. saith, the word  doth not necessarily signifie Devils, or evil Spirits, for the Heathens did not always sacrifice to evil Spirits, if we consider what were their true thoughts. But the Wisdom of God did not think fit to consider the Specula∣tions of some of their Philosophers; but what was indeed their Practise, and what the Ob∣jects, and Directors of their Worship were, and who was gratified by it; they pretended to own a Supream Deity; but the Spirits which spake in the Oracles they consulted, moved their Idols, and resided in them, and set up and promoted their whole Idolatrous Worship, were doubtless evil Spirits, and so the Primitive Christians engaged to force them toQuicquid Daemonum colitis, victi dolore, quid sunt eloquuntur, ipsis testibus esse eos Doemones de se verum confitentibus credi∣te. Minucius p. 31. Tertull. Apol. c. 23. Cyprian Ep. ad Donatum p. 4. de Van. Idol. p. 14. confess themselves to be, even before them who paid homage to them. The pul∣ling down of this Idolatrous Worship is in our Saviour's Language the casting out the Prince of this World, John 12.31.16.11. The converting of the Gentiles from this Idolatry to the Worship of the true God, is the turn∣ing them from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. The delivering them from the power of darkness, Coloss. 1.13. who before walked according to the Prince of the power of darkness, Eph. 2.2. and were led captive by Satan at his will, 2 Tim. 2.26. The Psal∣mist according to the Septuagint, saith, , that all the Gods of the Heathens are Devils, Psal. 96.5. And of the Jews who sacrificed to them, it is said they sacrificed to Devils, and not to God,  to evil, wasting, and destroying Spirits. And so they are also stiled, 2 Chron. 11.15. Rev. 9.20. And so all Christians ever did expound
this place, and with good reason, it being ab∣surd to think St. Paul is here disswading Christians from having fellowship with good Angels. Ver. 21. You cannot drink the Cup of the Lord (and thereby declare your fellowship with him, and that you own him as your Lord in opposition to all others) and (yet) drink the Cup of Devils, (and so make the like acknow∣ledgment concerning them) ye cannot be parta∣kers of the Lords Table, and (of) the Table of Devils. , and of the Table of De∣vils.] This being the design of the Apostle, to shew that the Corinthians could not partake of the Idol Sacrifices in the Idol Temples, with∣out being , Men who held communion with Devils; and the proof of this being taken from the practise of Christians in partaking of the Eucharist, and of the Jews in partaking of Sacrifices offered at the Altar, it is evident that the sixteenth Verse must be interpreted suitably to this design, and so as to be a fit Medium to prove this conclusion. 'Tis therefore evident, 1. That  Communion cannot here sig∣nifie the real, and substantial Communication of the Body and the Blood of Christ, since that sense renders the Apostle's Argument in∣firm; for how doth it hence follow, that be∣cause Christians eat substantially the Body, and drink the Blood of Christ, therefore they who eat of the Idol Sacrifices are guilty of Idolatry, and hold Communion with Devils. Moreover, the eating of things offered to Idols, could not in this sense make them that did it Communicators of Devils, for sure they did not eat the Substance of the Devils: This there∣fore cannot be the import of the words. Nor 2ly, Can the sense of them be to this effect, the Cup and Bread communicate to us the Spiritual Effects of Christ's broken Body, or his Blood shed for us; though this be in it self a certain Truth. For 1. These Spiritual Effects cannot be shared among Believers, so that every one shall have a part of them only; but the same Benefits are wholly communicated to every due Recei∣ver. See Note on v. 16. 2. The Apostle here attempts to prove, not that the Corinthians, by eating things offered to Idols in the Idol Temple, received any spi∣ritual influence from Devils, but only that, by that action, they did partake of what was offered to them, and was a solemn part of their Religious Worship, as the eating these Sacri¦fices was still reputed, and so that by it they must own themselves to be Worshippers of I¦dols, and then, by parity of reason, he must by the example of the Eucharist intend to prove, not that the Christian did partake of the Spiritual Effects of our Lord's Passion, b that he did partake of what was consecrated in honour of him, and received as a solemn Act of Religious Worship, and Communion with him. And this appears yet farther, from the words which the Apostle useth, as the close of this Argument, and as the thing which an∣swers to the two preceding Instances; for they do not run thus, By the things which the Gen∣tiles offer, they receive spiritual Influences from evil Spirits; but thus, this I say to com∣pleat this Argument, and to render the Sacri∣fice offer'd to Idols, parallel to those of Chri∣stians, and of Jews, that as these are offered to the honour of Christ, and of the God of Israel, so the things which the Gentiles sacri∣fice they sacrifice to Devils, and I would n that ye should be partakers with Devils; viz by feasting of the Sacrifices thus offered to them, and of which the Devils had a part; and that it was by the act of eating and drink∣ing of these Idol Sacrifices, that they became partakers of the Cup and Table of Devils, and thereby guilty of Idolatry, as theQuae autem animam simul & corpus polluunt, ista sunt: participare daemonum mensae, hoc est immolata degustare, & si quid aliud est quod doemonibus oblatum est. Clem. Recog. l. 4. § 36. . Const. A∣post. l. 7. c. 21. . Orig. contr. Celsum l. 8. p. 396, 397. Fathers declare; so it is evident from these words, Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils; it was therefore by these actions that they held com¦munion with them, and committed Idolatry. Ver. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jea∣lousie (by bringing Devils into competition with him) are we stronger then he? (so that we need not fear the punishments he may inflict on them who give his honour to another.) Ver. 23. (And whereas you plead thus for your selves,) All things are lawful for me, (i. e. all meats may lawfully be eaten, be it so) but (yet) all (lawful) things are not expedient (to be done;) all things are lawful for me, but all things edifie not (as Charity doth, Chap 8.1.) Ver. 24. (For the Rule of Charity is this,) Let no man seek his own (only,) but every man anothers wealth, (preferring the publick to his private good, and the good of Souls to that of his own Body.) Ver. 25. (Concerning then the eating of things offered to Idols in the general, and with∣out relation to the Idol Temple, in which to eat
them is Idolatry, I thus determine.) Whatso∣ever is sold in the Shambles that eat (ye,) asking no question for Conscience sake, (as if you thought it matter of Conscience whether you might eat it, if offered to Idols, or not.) Ver. 26. For the Earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof, (and therefore you may eat of any Creature the Earth provideth for your food, without scruple of Conscience, when others are not scandalized at it.) Ver. 27. (And again I say) If any of them that believe not, bid (or invite) you to a Feast, and you be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you eat, asking no question for Con∣science sake. , whatsoever is set before you eat.] The Apostle had before discoursed of eating things offered to Idols in the Idol Temple, and shew'd (1st,) The scan∣dal it might give to the weak Gentile Chri∣stian: And (2ly) that it was indeed an Idola∣trous action. Here he begins his discourse of eating at all, things offered to Idols, with re∣spect chiefly to the weak Jewish Convert. And (1.) whereas by their CanonsMaim. Idol c. 7. § 2. & 11. an Idol, and all things appertaining to it, and whatever was offered to it, was wholly forbidden, the Rab∣bins pronouncing the eating, or possessing any thing of it forbidden, in these words, Thou shalt not bring an abomination into thine house, Deut. 7.26. the Apostle relieves the Consci∣ence of the Christian in this case, letting him know that he might eat these things, when sold in the Shambles, without scruple of Con∣science, v. 25. (2.) Whereas their Canons teach, ThatMaim. ibid. c. 9. § 12. if an Heathen make a Banquet for his Son or Daughter, a Jew is forbidden to eat of his meat, because he is forbidden, if called, to eat of his Sacrifice, Exod. 34.15. the Apostle exempts the Conscience of the Christi∣an from this obligation also, v. 27. Ver. 28. But if a man say unto you this is offered to Idols, (thinking that by thus parta∣king in such meat, you own the Idol, or concur in the Worship of it) eat not for his sake that shew'd it, and for Conscience sake; the earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof; (who therefore can replenish thee out of other meats provided for thy food.) Ver. 29. Conscience I say (meaning) not thy own, but (that) of others (who shew'd thee this was offered to Idols,) for why is my liber∣ty (so used by me, as that I be) judged of (and condemned by) another mans Consci∣ence? Ver. 30. For if I by grace be a partaker (of God's good Creatures) why (do I use them so as that) I am evil spoken of (by others) for that for which I give thanks, (because of the benefit received by it?) ; why am I evil spoken of?] This is the Exposition of all the Greek Sch∣liasts, and it is confirmed by the parallel place, Let not your good be evil spoken of, Rom 14.16. i. e. Let not your Faith, or the Liberty you take by reason of it, be used so as to Minister occasion to others to speak evil of that Faith, as the Jews did of Christianity up∣on occasion of this liberty, for they held the eating of things offered to Idols to beMaim. ibid. c. 2. § 3, 8. Ido∣latry, and pronounced all Idolaters to be Apo∣states from the Law and the Prophets; and this was one of their great Objections against Christians, that. Tryph. apud Justin. p. 253. they did eat things offer∣ed to Idols, and thought not themselves defiled by doing so; though in truth this was done chiefly by the Hereticks of those times, theNicolaitae indiscrete vivunt, nullam differentiam esse dicentes in Maechando & Idolothyton edere. Iren. l. 1. c. 27. Nicolaitans, theDe Gnosticis idem. , l. 1. p. 26. De Basilid. ibid. c. 23. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 7. Gnosticks, the Followers of Basilides; but the true Christians, saith. Justin. M. Dial. p. 253. Justin Martyr, will rather suffer death, then be guilty of Idolatry, or eating things offered to Idols. Ver. 31. Therefore whether ye eat, or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. , do all to the glory of God.] In things capable of honouring God positively, or proper to give glory to him, have always a general intention of glorifying God in the doing of them, that in the virtue of that intention you may proceed to particu∣lar actions. In things not capable of honouring God po¦sitively, be careful that you act so, as that the Name of God be not blasphemed, or his Do∣ctrine evil thought, or evil spoken of by rea∣son of your actions. Yea do, and abstain from all things so, as to satisfie your own Consci∣ence, and discover to others that the honour of God, and the advancement of the interests of his Kingdom, are much dearer to you then any Gratifications of your Carnal Appetites, or any Temporal Concern. Ver. 32. Give no offence to the (unbelieving) Jew, or to the Gentile, or to the (weak Mem∣bers of the) Church of God. No offence.] As by thus eating things of∣fered to Idols in the Idol Temple, or elsewhere, being thus admonished of it, v. 28. you are like to do; for the Jew will be apt hence to con∣clude,
that Christianity renders you Enemies to the Law and the Prophets; the Gentiles, that your professed abhorrence of Idols is not real; and that the practise in which you com∣ply with them is not sinful, and the weak Christian will be tempted by your example to eat these things with conscience of the Idol, Chap. 8.7. or to fly off from the Christian Faith. Ver. 33. (But walk) Even as I (do, who) please all men in all (lawful) things, not seek∣ing my own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. CHAP. XI. Verse 1. BE ye (therefore) followers of me (in this condescension for the good of others) as I also am of Christ (in it, Rom. 15.2, 3. Gal. 6.2. Philip. 2.5, 6. 2 Cor. 8.9. Ver. 2. Now I praise you Brethren, that you remember me in all things (I have taught you) and keep the ordinances (Gr. Traditions) as I delivered them to you. , that you keep the Traditions, as I delivered them to you.] This Commendation must be restrain∣ed to the generality, or sounder part of the Church of Corinth, or must understood, as such general Expressions use to be, , as for the most part, or excepting those few things in which afterwards I find reason to complain of your neglect, Chap. 15.3. and here v. 23. Vain is the Note of Estius on this Text, That it makes plainly for unwritten Traditions. For (1.) the word Tradition is common to things written and unwritten, to things deli∣vered by word, and by Epistle, 2 Thess. 2.15. The whole Christian Faith is a Tradition, Jude 3. The Doctrine of Christ's Death, Bu∣rial, and Resurrection is a Tradition, , for I delivered to you these Doctrines, saith, St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.3. And will the Ro∣manists say that these things are not written in the New Testament? 2. To prove Tradi∣tions extra-Scriptural, 'tis not sufficient to cite a passage out of Scripture speaking of Tradi∣tions not then writ by one Apostle, but it must be proved that these Traditions were neither then when mentioned, in writing, nor after∣wards committed to writing by himself, or any other inspired Person. 3. The Traditions mentioned here, and 2 Thess. 2.15. were Tra∣ditions immediately delivered to those Chur∣ches from the mouth of an Apostle; and when the Romanists can make good this from like authentick Testimony of any of their fardle of Traditions, we shall be ready to receive them. Ver. 3. But (I must further advertise you of some things which I had no occasion, when pre∣sent, to take notice of, and therefore) I would have you know that the Head of every man is Christ, and the Head of the Woman is the Man, and the Head of Christ is God, (and so as Christ, as Mediator, acts in subordination to the Father, so must the Woman act in subor∣dination to the Man.) , and the Head of Christ is God.] We are hence taught, saith Sclihtin∣gius, that the Head of Christ is God, whereas the most High God can have no Head above him; so that Christ, who hath this Head above him, cannot be God most High. Answ. To this some of the Fathers answer, That God is here said to be the Head of Christ, as being the. Theod. Theoph.  Oecumen. Father of the Son, and so the Cause of him: but yet as Woman is of the same Nature with the Man who is her Head, so is Christ of the same Nature with God the Father. They also add, That the word Head is here used as a note of. Theodoret. Principality, or Causality in the Father, but not of Subjection in the Son, which wholly enervates the Argu∣ment of Crellius from this place. And though the Schools seem not to allow of this Language, yet it is used by Irenaeus in these wordsSuper omnia quidem Pater, & ipse est Caput Christi; per omnia autem verbum, et ipse est Caput Ecclesiae. L. 5. c. 1, The Father is above all things, and he is the Head of Christ; the Word is through all things, and he is the Head of the Church. Others answer, That the Father is here sti∣led the Head of Christ, considered as Mediator, in which Relation he received his Kingdom and Dominion from him, John 17.2. 1 Cor. 15.27. Hebr. 2.8. and exercises it wholly to his glory, Philip. 2.9, 10, 11. in which sense the Father may be stiled his Head, because he doth all things according to his Fathers will, to his glory, and by Authority derived from him: And this Interpretation is confirmed from those words, the Head of every man is Christ. He being Mans Head by virtue of the Power and Dominion given him over all Flesh. Chap. 15.27. John 17.2. Eph. 1.19-22. and that Power being given to the Man Christ Jesus Ver. 4. Every Man (therefore) praying
or prophesying (in the Church) having his Head covered, dishonoured his Head (Christ, as acting unsuitably to that Relation which he bears to God and Christ, for Man ought not to cover his Head, because he is the image and glory of God, v. 7.) In the Church.] For that the Apostle speaks not of prophesying at home, as Mr. Cl. ima∣gines; but in the Church, is evident from the Apostle's Argument, v. 16. against this practice in these words, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God: His Argument to the contrary is answered in the Note on v. 6. , his Head.] That is. Theoph. Christ, for 1. He is the Head of the Man, v. 3.2. This seemeth most agreeable to the Reason assigned, why he should be uncovered when he doth Service in the Church, viz. because he is the Image, and the Glory of God. And 3ly, did he dishonour his own Head by covering it, he ought never to be covered; whereas if this only re∣spects his Head Christ, whom he represents in praying and prophesying in the Church, it is sufficient that he is thus uncovered, when he thus acteth as his Minister. Lastly, The Head the Woman dishonoureth is the Man, stiled her Head; and so the Head the Man dishonoureth is Christ the Man, stiled his Head, v. 3. Ver. 5. But every Woman that prayeth or prophesyeth with her Head uncovered, disho∣noureth (the Man) her Head, (whose glory she is, as being put in subjection to him) for this is even all one as if she were shaved, (and so had removed the token of subjection to the Man which Nature gave her.) , with his Head covered; , with her head uncovered] For explication of these words, let it be noted from. Theodoret. Theodoret, That the Men of Corinth, according to the custom of the Greeks, both wore long hair, and prayed to God with their Heads covered in the Publick Assemblies. So also saith. Plutarch. . p. 266. D. Plutarch, did the Romans. So saithIn loc. Lightfoot did the Jews. So did, saithSamè sciendum est Sacrificantes diis omnibus capita velare consuetos ob hoc, ne se inter Religionem vagis offeret ali∣id obtutibus, excepto tantum Saturno. Serv. in Virg. Aen. 3. v. 405. Servius, All that sacrificed to any God, excepting Saturn. But the Heathen Woman paid her Devotion to the Gods, resoluta comas seu capillos, with er Hair loose, and hanging down; or in the Language of the Poets, Crine jacente, aut de∣misso. Note 2ly, That the Jews judged it , a shameful and indecent thing for a Woman to be shaved, and permitted this only in the case ofNeque radat illud nisi propter scortationem. Pirk. Eliez. c. 14. p. 31. Whoredom, as a Token of their shame. And among the Heathens it was indicium ulti∣mi luctus, a Token of the highest Grief. It is customary, saith. Plut. Quaest. Rom. p. 267. A. B. Plutarch, for Men to be shorn, and for Women to wear long hair; and therefore in times of mourning, the Men let their hair grow, and the Women are shaved; this being contrary to custom among the Greeks and Romans. It was also customary for theApud Judaeos tam solenne est faeminis eorum valamen Capitis, ut inde noscantur. Tertull. de Coron. c. 4. Jewish Woman to go veil'd. Note 3ly, That the Apostle doth not here approve of the Woman's praying or prophesying in the Church, as is evident from 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Tim. 2.11, 12. though here he says nothing to the contrary, as intending to rectifie that dis∣order, when he spake of other disorders in the case of Prophesying, Chap. 14.34. Ver. 6. For if the Woman be not covered, let her also be shorn; but if it be a shame for a Woman to be shorn, or shaven, let her be covered. (See Note on v. 5.) Ver. 7. For the Man indeed ought not to cover his Head (as a sign of subjection) foras∣much as he is the Image and Glory of God, (as having the Government of the World com∣mitted by God to him) but the Woman (ought to cover her Head, forasmuch as she) is the glory of the Man (as being taken from, made for him, and put into subjection to him.) , the Image and Glory of God.] True here is the Note of Theodore, that Man is here stiled the Image and Glory of God, neither as to his Body, nor his Soul; for in respect of the Soul, the Woman is e∣qually the Glory of God as to Spirituality and Immortality, and so is equally said to be made after his Image, Gen. 1.27. but , only as to Rule and Government, which is the proper Glory of a Man, according to the Psalmist's words, Thou hast crowned him  with Glory and Honour, and hast set him over the Works of thy Hands, and hast put all things in subjection under his feet, Psal. 8.5, 6. Ver. 8. For the Man is not of the Woman, but the Woman of the Man.
Ver. 9. Neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man. Ver. 10. (Moreover) For this cause ought the woman to have power (a veil) upon her head, because of the (evil) Angels, (she being tempted by the Prince of them to do that which is perpetual cause of shame to her, and which increased her subjection to the man, Gen. 3.16. ought therefore to use this token of shamefaced∣ness and subjection.) , a veil upon her head because of the Angels.] Here let it be noted, (1st,) That all the Ancient Interpreters agree in this, that , which we render power, doth signifie a veil or cover∣ing, which being put over her Head, compels her to hang down her Eye-lids; and 'tis here, say they, called power, as being , the token of the power and Dominion of the Man over her. Note 2ly, That the reading , by reason of her revelations, as Mr. Cl. doth, instead of , without consent of any Copy, or Version, is not to be endured. Moreover,  signifies barely by mes∣sage, not by reason of her Revelations, that being properly in Greek . Note 3ly, That the evil Angels are abso∣lutely stiled Angels in these words of this E∣pistle, Know ye not that ye shall judge Angels, 1 Cor. 6.3. and elsewhere, the Angels that sinned, 2 Pet. 2.4. or that kept not their first station, Jude 6. Note 4ly, That among the Nine Maledictions of the Women which the Jews reckon up, this is one, thatP. Eliez. c. 14. p. 31. she is to have caput velatum in∣star lugentis, her head covered like one that mourneth, and this, they say, she is to wear, not so much as a Token of Subjection, as of Shame; whenceDe Special. Leg. p. 606. D. Philo calls the  cover of the Womans head, , the Symbol of her shame; and this shame, say they, is due to herBerisch. Rab. § 17. f. 12. col. 1., because she brought the first sin into the world: It is with her, say they, as when one transgresseth, and is ashamed, and therefore she comes forth with her head co∣vered: She ought, saithDe  Tertullian, by her habit to resemble Eve, a Mourner, and a Pe∣nitent, ob ignominiam primi delicti, for the shame of the first sin; hence he often interprets this Text ofPropter Angelos quos legimus à Coelis excidisse. De Veland. Virg. cap. 7. Propter Angelos Apostatas. Cor. Maon  3. evil Angels. Moreover, in the judgment both of Jews and Christians, the Serpent which deceived Eve acted by the suggestion of theP. Eliez. c. 13. Buxt. in voce Sammael. Devil, or of Samael, whom the Jews stile the Prince of Devils. That therefore these words may be inter∣preted as in the Paraphrase, is evident not on∣ly from these observations, but especially from a place parallel to this, Let the Woman  in silence with all subjection: For I suffer n t  Woman to usurp Authority; for Adam  formed, and then Eve, (as here v. 8, 9.) and Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived, was in the transgression, 1 Tim 2.11, 12, 13. where the same reason is assigned for her subjection, which I offer for explication of these words. Others interpret the words thus, The Wo¦man ought to act decently in the Church, and therefore to be covered, because of the Ang who are present in the Assemblies of the Saints, it being the opinion both ofSee Dr. Hammond. & Synopsis in locum. Jew and Christians, that the ministring Angels are there present. Ver. 11. Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the (wisdom of) the Lord (ordain∣ing that one should come out of the other.) Ver. 12. For as the Woman is (taken out) of the man, even so is the man also (propaga¦ted) by the woman, but all (these) things are of God, (who made Woman out of the Man, and by his benediction encreaseth Men by  Woman.) Ver. 13. Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray (publickly) to God unco∣vered, (when God himself hath given her: covering by Nature, to intimate to her, that she should be veil'd.) Ver. 14. Doth not even Nature it self (which hath made Man the Image and Glory of God, created him before the Woman, and given hi dominion over her) teach you, that if a man have long hair, (the covering and token of subiec∣on of the other Sex) it is a shame to him. (See Note on v. 5.) Ver. 15. But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her, (she being fitted by it to re∣present the condition of her Sex) for her hair was given her for a covering, (i. e. in token f subjection to her husband.) , doth not even Nature it self.] The Exposition given in the Paraphra is so natural, and so well founded in the words and argument of the Apostle, and so agreeable to the Sentiments of all the Ancient Commen∣tators on the place, that we seem not here  need the industry and learning the Critics have so liberally spent upon this place, the Apostle here by Nature understanding not any inward Principle implanted in the heart and reason of a Man, but the first rise and consti∣tution which Man and Woman have receivd from the God of Nature. It is against Natur say the Fathers, for a Man to wear long ha for by it he assumes the habit of a Woman
and being made by God to rule, he takes upon him the symbol of subjection. Of the Criticisms upon the word  they say not a word. Ver. 16. But if (after what hath been thus said) any man seem (still) to be contentious, (I shall add only this, that) we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God, (it be∣ing only customary in the Assembles of Heathens for Women to pay their Devotions to the Gods thus. See Note on v. 5.) , nor the Churches of God.] Hence it is manifest, 1st, That the Apostle here cannot be thought to have respect only to the custom of the Greeks, as Mr. Cl. imagines, for then why doth he plead the custom of all the Churches of God against this practice? 2ly, Hence note, That in things only respect∣ing decency, and in conforming to which there is no violation of the Command of God, the Custom of the Church should be our Rule, it being an Argument of Pride, and a Contenti∣ous Spirit, in Matters of so little moment, to be singular, and to create disturbance to the Church of God. Ver. 17. Now in this (other thing) that I (am about to) declare unto you, I praise you not, (viz.) that you come together (so as is) not for the better, but for the worse. Ver. 18. For first of all when you come to∣gether in the Church, I hear that there be di∣visions (Gr. Schisms) among you, and I partly believe it, (or I believe it true, , of some part of you.) , Schisms.] Here the word Schisms is used not of Men separating from the Church, but of them coming together in the Church, but yet eating the Lord's Supper separately, and so as not to joyn with the whole Assem∣bly in that Ordinance; so the word also is u∣sed Chap. 1.10. not of a separation from the unity of the Catholick Church, saith Estius, but of Sects and Divisions in the Church. Ver. 19. For (according to our Lord's say∣ing, Matth. 18.7.) there must be Heresies (or Sects) among you, (the Flesh, the World, and the Devil tempting to it, and the Wisdom of God permitting it) that they who are appro∣ved (of him) may be made manifest among you. , for there must be Heresies, &c.] This necessity of Heresies is not abso∣lute, or of God's making, but only on suppo∣sition of the Pride, and Vain-glory, Strife, En∣vyings, and Contentions which were already in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.3. and God's permission that Men so affected should act ac∣cording to the corrupt affections and disposi∣tions of their hearts, as the necessity of Disea∣ses in the Body arises from Mens intemperance; nor is the reason here assigned of them proper∣ly causal, as if the Wisdom of God designed there should be Heresies for this end, that they who are approved of him might be made mani∣fest, but rather. Chrysost. in locum. eventual; as if the Apostle had said, whence it will come to pass that they who are approved will be manifest. Ver. 20. When you come together there∣fore (thus) to one place, this is not (acting as if you came) to eat the Lord's Supper, (the Feast of Christian Charity and Communion.) Ver. 21. For in (your way of) eating eve∣ry one taketh before (the) other his own Sup∣per, (not tarrying for, or regarding others, v. 33.) and (so it falls out that) one (who had nothing to bring) is (still) hungry, and another (with his plenty) is drunken. , and another is drunken.] This may either refer to the Gentile Converts a∣mong the Corinthians, retaining still their Hea∣then custom of drinking liberally after their Sacrifices, whence , to be drunk, is by Grammarians thought to have its original from , because of the free drinking they indulged to after their Sacrifices; or to the Judaizing Converts, who thought themselves obliged to drink plentifully at their Festivals, four large Cups of Wine, saithTemple Se. p. 146. Dr. Light foot, at the Paschal Supper, and to be quite drunk, saithLex. Talm. p. 324. Buxtorf in the Feast of Pu∣rim. Ver. 22. What, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in (if need be before you come? v. 34.) or despise ye (those poor Christians who are Members of) the Church of Christ (as well as you?) and (put to) shame them that have not (what to eat, or drink?) what shall I say? shall I praise you in (doing) this? I praise you not. , every one takes before his own Supper.] It is the opini∣on of Dr. Lightfoot, that the Apostle speaks not here of the Agapae, or Love Feasts which accompanied the Eucharist, as the Tradition of the Ancient Church supposed, but of the Paschal Supper which these Judaizers did eat before the Eucharist, as thinking that the Eu∣charist, which our Lord instituted after that Supper, was only an Appendix of it, and that it was not instituted for the commemoration of the death of Christ, but as a new form of their commemoration of their Deliverance out of E∣gypt, and that on this account the Apostle here repeats the institution of that Sacrament by our Lord, and so oft tells them that Christ ap∣pointed this Supper for the Commemoration of his Death, and that we might shew it forth till he come, and charges them with not dis∣cerning it to be the Lord's Body, v. 29. But he seems to be mistaken in both these Conjectures. For,
1. It is very unlikely they should mistake the Lord's Supper celebrated then every Week at least, for that Paschal Supper which was only to be celebrated once a Year, and was then rather to be celebrated at home, in every Man's Family, then in the Church, and which, according to the Jewish Canons, could not be observed at all in Corinth, or out of Judea whilst the Temple stood. 2ly, Those words of the Apostle in the pre∣ceding Chapter, viz. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? the Bread we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? And those that follow, Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; ye cannot be par∣takers of the Lord's Table, and of the Table of Devils, do plainly shew that the Apostle there supposes, they well knew that in that Supper they were partakers of the Cup and Table of the Lord, and had Communion with his Body and Blood. Dr. Lightfoot adds, That those words one is hungry, and another is drunken, refer not to the Poor, and the Rich, but to the Gentile who came fasting to the Lord's Supper, where∣as the Judaizing Christian, according to his custom, drank eely at his Paschal Supper; and he concludes that the Apostle doth not here reprehend their manner of coming to these Suppers, but that he reprehends them for the very use of them. But here again he seems much mistaken. For, 1st, 'Tis evident the Apostle reprehends them not for the Supper it self, i. e. the eat∣ing and the drinking, but because they did , take their meat and drink before o∣thers, not staying till they came, v. 21, 33. Hence, for a remedy of this disorder, he saith not, abstain from these Suppers, but only when ye come together, tarry one for ano∣ther. 2ly, That the hungry here were the Gentile Converts, who chose to eat the Eucharist fast∣ing, is very improbable, not only because it was then generally received at night, but be∣cause the Apostle both here, and v. 34. allows all to eat and drink before they come, not ta∣king notice of any that scrupled the doing this. Moreover, the , the hungry here are not Men who have no Houses, but who have nothing to eat, or drink; for they were put to shame by this, that they had nothing to eat, or drink, as others had, nor were thought worthy to partake with them that had in the Assembly of which they were a part; it being not the place where they assembled which is called the Church of God, but the Persons who assembled, for by the same action was the Church despised, and they that had nothing put to shame: Now 'tis not easie to conceive how by this separate meeting in a Church they should despise a Church, whereas by de∣nying their poor Brethren any share in their Banquet, they visibly despised them. And 3ly, These Agapae, or Feasts of Charity, be∣ing mentioned by St. Jude v. 12. by Ignatius, Ep. ad Smyrn. § 8. by Clemens Alex. paedag. l 2. c. 1. p. 41. by Tertullian. Apol. c. 39. by the Apostolical Constitutions, l. 2. c 28. and byIn fine Fragm. Julian the Apostate, it is very unreasonable to call this custom in question, or to imagine that St. Paul here rather referr'd to a Paschal Sup∣per, then to this Appendix of the Supper  the Lord. When I call it an Appendix, I do not mean that it was eaten by them after the Lord's Supper, for the word , to take before his own Supper, shews the contrary, viz. that this Banquet was celebrated before the Lord's Supper, but only that it was joyn'd to the Lord's Supper in imitation of our Lord who celebrated the Sacrament after the Pas∣chal Supper. Ver. 23. (To come together thus, I say, is not to come as they ought to do, who assemble to eat the Lord's Supper;) For I have received of the Lord that which I also (as I received) deli∣vered to you, that the Lord Jesus in the same night in which he was betrayed took bread. Ver. 24. And when he had given thanks he brake it, and said (to them all) take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me, (Giving my Body to be broken for you all.) , took bread, &c.] The Argu∣ment lyes thus; Christ gave an equal distri∣bution of the Sacramental Bread to every one at the Table, in token that he died equally for all; and he appointed them all to eat to∣gether of it at one common Table, in remem∣brance of his Love to them all, can you then eat every one separately his own Supper, ex∣cluding those to whom he equally distributed the Sacred Bread from any share of yours, leaving them hungry, and in want of Bread, and yet conceive you worthily eat the Lord's Supper, and duly participate of, and thank∣fully commemorate this great Feast of Love. But farther observe 1st, That this Bread, is called in the Pre∣sent Tense, , Christ's body broken, his body given, Luke 22.19. even whilst he was alive, and so his Body was not actually broken, or given for us, it therefore could not be literally and naturally his broken body, but only by way of representation, as being then instituted to represent that Body which was shortly to be given, and broken on the Cross for us,Matth. 26.28. Mark 14.2. Luke 22.20. so also is it said of his blood yet in his Veins, that it is , his blood shed,
and this according to the usual Sacramental Phrase. Thus, before the Paschal Sacrament was celebrated, it was said, this , is the Passover to the Lord, Exod. 12.11, 13. i. e. this is that which is instituted to re∣present it; for this night I will smite all the first-born of Aegypt, and will pass over you: And of Circumcision it is said, This is my Co∣venant, Gen. 17.10. before that Abraham was actually circumcised, v. 23, 24. 2ly, Observe that St. Paul calleth that five times Bread which they did eat of, which was to them the Communion of the Body of Christ; and by eating of which unworthily, they be∣came guilty of the Body of Christ, not discern∣ing the Lord's Body, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.11.26, 27, 28. He therefore five times calls that Bread which was consecrated, and by our Saviour called his Body: Now is it not a wonder that one single passage, mentioned by our Saviour whilst he was alive, should be deemed suffici∣ent to make us all believe that his whole Bo∣dy, and so his Hand, was in his Hand, and that this living Christ was at the same time dead, and sacrificed, and that the same Body which was whole before the Eyes of his Disciples, was also broken for them at the same time, with many thousand Contradictions more, and and yet that what the Holy Ghost, who knew the meaning of our Saviour's words better than any Romanist, hath said so oft to inform us that this Element is, after Consecration, Bread, should not be thought sufficient to make us think it Bread, though it appears to all our Senses so to be. Ver. 25. After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, this Cup (i. e. the Wine contained in it) is the (memori∣al of the) New Testament (or Covenant ratifi∣ed) in my blood, this do as often as you drink it in remembrance of me, (confirming this Co∣venant with my Blood.) , the Cup.] Note here two Reasons for the participating of the Cup by the whole Body of the Church of Corinth: 1. Because it is the Blood of the New Covenant, which belongs as much to the Laity as to the Priests; the Blood shed for the remission of the sins, not only of the Priests, but of the Laity. 2. Because by the drinking of this Cup they remembred Christ's Blood shed for them, and shew'd forth his death. Now since these Reasons do equal∣ly concern all Christians, the drinking of the Cup, by which this Commemoration, by our Lord's institution, is to be made, must equally concern them; for sure the means which Christ appointed for such an end, ought to be used by all who are obliged to pursue that end; and if the Apostle here reprehends the Corin∣thians for varying from the Tradition recei∣ved from the Lord in Celebration of the Sacra∣ment, he would have reprehended them much more, had they so varied from it as to neg∣lect the distribution of that Cup which he had instituted for these sacred ends. Ver. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do shew (by this me∣morial of it) the Lord's death till he come (to judgment.) , ye shew the Lords death.] If then this be the end and use of this Sacrament, to be a Solemn Commemo∣ration of the Death of Christ during his ab∣sence from us; if it was designed to be a standing Memorial of his Sufferings till he came again to Judgment; the obligation that lyes upon all Christians to observe it is perpe∣tual, and ought not to cease till the World ends. Indeed, saith (x) Theodoret, after his Presence there will be no more need of the Sym∣bols of his Body, because the Body it self will then appear. Which words are a full Confu∣tation of the Doctrine of Transubstantion. Ver. 27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and (or) drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, (as they must do who by this practise thwart the great design of this Institu∣tion, which was to shew his equal Love to all to whom he equally gave these Elements, and to oblige us to live in a continual remembrance of it) shall be guilty of (violating the Sacrament of) the Body and Blood of the Lord. , or drink.] Here Walker's Note is this, the Greek , or, that he might lead you to think there was something in the Popish Argument taken hence to prove that whole Christ was contained in either Species, because either by eating or drinking unworthily, Men become guilty of prophaning both the Body and the Blood of Christ, but for justification of our Version And, it may be noted that the Syriack, Arabick, and Aethiopick Versions read , and so does Clemens Alex. Strom. 1. p. 271. 2ly, That according to Phavorinus, , that is,  is often put for and; so what is in the Hebrew  or, is in the Seven∣ty rendred , and, Lev. 4.23, 28. Num. 15.8. Mal. 2.17. So what is  Luke 20.2. is  Mat. 21.23. Mark 11.28. So the Promise made to Abraham, , Gen. 17.8. is the Promise made to him, , or to his Seed, Rom. 4.13. and yet again, and to his Seed, Gal. 3.16. and eating and drinking going here before v. 26. and following after v. 28, 29. this intermediate Verse must bear the same sense. Ver. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. , let him examine himself.] .
is to discern, or approve; so , thou approvest the things which are most excellent, Rom. 2.18. Happy is the Man that condemneth not himself, , in that which he approves, Rom. 14.22.  is to approve himself to himself, or dis∣cern how it is with himself. So 2 Cor. 13.5. , prove your own selves; Know ye not that Jesus Christ is among you, except ye be Reprobates? Gal. 6.4. , Let every man approve his own work. And so here the sense is, Let a man approve himself to his own heart, as a good Christian, and one that comes to celebrate this Ordinance with a grate∣ful Commemoration of the Love of Christ dying for him, and with true Charity and unfeigned Kindness to all those for whom he equally did shed his Blood, and give his Body to be broken, And so he may repair unto it with a true Chri∣stian Spirit, and in acceptable manner. Ver. 29. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, (as they who make these divisions, and distinctions, and commit these disorders when they come together to eat the Lord's Sup∣per, do) eateth and drinketh damnation (Gr. judgment) to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body, (to be given as an indication of his equal kindness to all his Members, without any dif∣ference, or distinction, and as a Symbol of their mutual Communion with one another, Chap. 10.16, 17.) , unworthily.] i. e. Not discerning the Lords Body; which words plainly teach us what it is to eat and drink unworthily, viz. to do it so as in that action not to discern the Lords Body. Now this, as hath already been observed, cannot signifie not to apprehend the Sacrament to represent Christ's Body broken, and his Blood shed for us; for of this igno∣rance had the Corinthians been guilty, the A∣postle would have argued ex non concessis from things not granted by them, Chap. 10.16, 21. It therefore signifies their behaving themselves as if they had not considered that this Sacra∣ment was instituted in thankful and practical remembrance of Christ dying for them, and ratifying by his Blood the Covenant in which he promised to be merciful to their iniquities, and remember their sins no more; and as a Feast of Love designed equally for the benefit of all his Members, and to knit them in the closest Bonds of Unity and Friendship to each other; when this was wanting, they did not discern aright the Lord's Body, or the Sacra∣ment of it, and so did eat and drink unwor∣thily. In the Talmud, saithIn Hos. 14.9. p. 814. Dr. Pocock, there is a distinction betwixt a Man who eats the Passover  in obedience to the Command, (which was that they should do it as a memorial of God's passing over them when he destroyed the Aegyptians, by reso of the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, Exod. 12.13, 14.) and he that thus did eat it, wa  just man that walketh in the ways of the e mentioned Hos. 14.9. and betwixt another who did eat it only as common Food, i. e. with∣out respect to the Commandment, or the ends of its Institution; and he is compared to the transgressor there mentioned that shall fell therein. So here, he that eateth this Holy Sacrament with a thankful memorial of the Benefits conferr'd upon us, the Death from which we are delivered by the Blood of Christ, the true Paschal Lamb sacrificed for us, he  it worthily; but he that partakes of it only as common Bread and Wine, not considering the ends for which it was designed, and the Benefits of Christ's Death it represented and consigned, he discerns not the Lord's Body. i. e. he putteth no sufficient difference betwixt that and common Food, as the word  doth import. See Note on Rom. 14.23. , damnation.] The word imports Tem∣poral Judgments; as when St. Peter saith, the time is come  that judgment must begin at the House of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. not damnation surely; and this is certainly the import of the word here, (1.) Because the Corinthians did thus eat unworthily, and yet the Judgments inflicted on them for so doing were only Temporal, viz. Weakness, Sickness, and Death, v. 30.2. Because the reason as∣signed of those Judgments is, that they might not be condemned in the other world, or that they might not be obnoxious to damnation. Ver. 30. For this cause (the not discerning the Lords Body, is it that) many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep Ver. 31. For if we would (thus) judge (and discern) our selves, we should not be judged, (or thus punished by God). Ver. 32. But when (neglecting this) we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World, (but awakned by those Chastisements to refo those evil practises which render us obnoxius to condemnation.) Ver. 33. Wherefore my Brethren (that t miscarriage may be rectified) when ye come to∣gether to eat (the Lord's Supper) tarry one for another, (that ye may all eat of that, and y Love Feasts together.) Ver. 34. And if any man (pretend to  out of) hunger, let him eat at home (befr come) that you come not together to condem∣nation, and the rest will I set in order whl come, (or as for the other things relating  Ordinance, or your Letter, I will se  order when I come.)
CHAP. XII. Verse 1. NOW concerning spiritual gifts (or persons, v. 3.) Brethren, (which is another thing in, and about the exer∣cise of which you offend, making them matter of contention, emulation, and vain glory,] I would not have you ignorant (of what it concerns you to know of them, and your selves that ex∣ercise them.) Ver. 2. Ye know that (before your conver∣sion to that Faith by which ye received these gifts) ye were Gentiles carried away to (the service of) those dumb Idols (which could not speak themselves, much less enable you to speak) even as you were lead (by seducing Guides.) , to dumb Idols.] For though the Priests told them they were only the Receptacles of those Deities they worship∣ped, that they resided in the Image, and gave Answers by it, as theArb. l. 6. p. 203. Lact. l. 2. c. 2. Christian Writers own; yet both the Prophets, and Writers of the New Testament, and all the Fathers in their Apologies, still represent them as they were in themselves, saying, they have mouths but speak not, Psal. 115.5.135.16. and dumb stones, Hab. 2.19. and muta simulacra, and such as only gave Answers, when they gave any, by the means of Evil Spirits. Ver. 3. Wherefore I give you to understand that no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed, (or Anathema,) and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, (and confirm the Doctrine with supernatural Gifts and Miracles,) but by the Holy Ghost. , accursed.] This the Jews did as we learn, not only from the words of. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 363. Justin Martyr, but also from their nineteenth Prayer againstIn qua aeternum exitium illis imprecantur qui à lege Judaicâ deficiunt ad Christianos. Buxt. Lex. Talm. voce Min. p. 1201. Hereticks, made by Samuel the younger in the days of Gamaliel: Their Exorcists and Diviners therefore, though they pretend to it, saith the Apostle, cannot be act∣ed by the Spirit of God. Nor can they who confirm the Doctrine of Christ by Miracles, be acted by any other but the Holy Ghost; for no evil Spirit would assist them to confirm a Doctrine so opposite to, and destructive of their Kingdom and Designs. Ver. 4. Now there are diversities of (these spiritual) gifts, but (it is) the same Spirit (which enables us to exercise any of them.) Ver. 5. And there are differences of admi∣nistrations (or offices in the Church, to which this diversity of Gifts belongs,) but (it is) the same Lord (who hath appointed all these Offices, Eph. 4.12.) Ver. 6. And there are diversities of opera∣tions (performed by these Officers in the Church by virtue of these Gifts) but it is the same God who (by giving them this spirit) worketh (them) all in all. , there are diversities of Gifts.] These Gifts being in the nature of Spiritual Faculties, or Habits, are very pro∣perly ascribed to that Spirit who animates the Christian, and by whom he lives the new Life; and these ministries, as properly to the Lord Christ, whose Ministers and Servants the Apo∣stles, Prophets, Teachers, &c. are in the pro∣pagation of the Gospel. These Operations be∣ing miraculous, and far exceeding the power of any Creature, as fitly are ascribed to the Creator of all things. But whereas Crellius hence infers, That this third Person being di∣stinguished from the other two by the Title of the same God, he only must be truly and pro∣perly so called, He might as well have argu∣ed, that because the second Person mentioned here is stiled the same Lord, he must be only so exclusively to the same God; and because the first is called the same Spirit, he must be so exclusively of the same God, and Lord, who yet are equally Spirits. Ver. 7. But the manifestation of the Spirit (in the exercise of these Gifts) is given to eve∣ry man (not for his own private use, but) to profit (others) withal. Ver. 8. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, (to reveal the Faith to others, which is the wisdom of God,) to ano∣ther the word of knowledge (to reveal myste∣ries, 1 Cor. 13.2. and understand the mind of God in the Old Testament for confirmation of that Faith) by the same Spirit. Ver. 9. To another faith (to enable him to believe firmly that he shall be empowered to do things most difficult) by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing (all manner of dis∣eases) by the same Spirit. Ver. 10. To another the working of Mira∣cles, (or powers, such as the raising the dead to life) to another prophecy, (enabling him to foretel things future, and speak by a divine afflatus,) to another discerning of (the) spirits (of others,) to another divers kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. , diversities of Gifts.] It is exceeding difficult to fix the true import of all these Gifts, I therefore shall only pro∣pose what follows by way of Conjecture, till I receive better information from more a∣ble Hands.
1st, Then by the word of wisdom, I under∣stand the wisdom given to the Apostles to re∣veal the Gospel to the World; for that, in this Epistle, is stiled the wisdom of God in a myste∣ry, the hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. and else∣where the manifold wisdom of God, Eph. 3.10. Christ, the great Teacher of it is also stiled the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. and in him are said to be contained all the treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.3. The Apostles, to whom this Gospel was committed, are called , wise men. Behold I send unto you Prophets and Apo∣stles, Luke 11.49. and wise men, Matth. 23.34. and they are said to teach this Gospel ac∣cording to the wisdom given to them, 2 Pet. 3.15. 2ly, The word of knowledge being distin∣guished from that of Revelation, and of Pro∣phecy, 1 Cor. 14.6.13.8. and being set by way of apposition, or explication with the knowledge of all mysteries, 1 Cor. 13.2. seems to signifie the Gift of understanding Mysteries, or Things concealed; such was the Mystery of the Calling the Gentiles before it was revealed, Rom. 16.25. Eph. 1.9.3.9. the Mystery of recalling the Jews, Rom. 11.25. the Mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thess. 2.7. the Mystery of the Beast, Rev. 10.7. And in this sense St. Barnaby seems to speak of it, when he saith, Sect. 6. Blessed be God, , who hath given us the wisdom and knowledge of his Secrets; and so it agrees with that Gift which the Fathers call , as when. L. 2. c. 57. . Epist. ad Cor. § 48. Irenaeus saith, Some have the knowledge of things to come, and visi∣ons, and prophetical sayings; and the Man thus gifted seems to be in St. Clemens R. the power∣ful man to utter knowledge. 3ly, That by Faith we are to understand a miraculous Faith, enabling them to do things most difficult, seems highly probable from these words, Though I have all Faith, so as to remove Mountains, 1 Cor. 13.2. But chiefly I would understand by it a peculiar impulse that came upon them when any difficult mat∣ter was to be performed, which inwardly as∣sured them God's power would assist them in performance of it. See Note on James 5.15. whence it is often mentioned as a preparatory disposition to the working such Miracles, and is sometimes stiled the Faith of God, Mark 11.22. sometimes Faith without doubting, Mat. 21.21. and so it was a prae-requisite to the cast∣ing out stubborn Devils, Matth. 17.20. and to the ensuing Gifts of healing and working Miracles; and hence perhaps it is that in the following enumeration of them, v. 28, 29, 30. we find no mention of it. 4ly, , the working of Mi∣racles is by the Fathers referred to the power residing in the Apostles to inflict Diseases, and even Death it self upon Offenders, as in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5.5, 12 and of Eymas the Sorcerer, Acts 13.11. and of the Incestuous Person, 1 Cor. 5.4. where the Apostle makes mention  of the power of Christ. And where he speaks of his Rod, he calls it the power that God had given him, 1 Cor. 4.19, 20. 2 Cor. 10 8.13.10. But yet I doubt not but these words are truly rendred the working of Miracles, for to them the word , power, generally relates in the New Testament: As when men∣tion is made of the Miracles done by Christ himself, Matth. 11.20, 23.13.54, 58.14.2. Mark 5.30. Luke 4.36.5.17.6.19.19.3. Acts 2.22.10.38. and of the Miracles done by others in name of Christ, Matth. 7.22 Mark 9.39. Luke 9.1. Acts 1.8.4.33.6.8.8.13.19.11. 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 12.12. Gal. 3.5. 1 Thess. 1.5. Hence is it frequently men∣tioned in conjunction with Signs and Won∣ders, Acts 2.22.8.13. Rom. 15.19. Hebr. 2.4. It is also here plainly distinguished from the Gift of Healing; and it as plainly is distin∣guished from the power of Casting out Devils in those words, In thy Name have we prophe∣sied, and cast out Devils, and done  many mighty works, Mark 7.22. It there∣fore rightly seemeth in the Paraphrase to be restrained to the doing things beyond the course of Nature, and wrought by an imme∣diate Divine Hand; such as the supplying a defective Member, or the raising the Dead. Thus to the first order of the Successors of the Apostles. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 17. Eusebius ascribes many strange powers of the Holy Ghost; and. Dial. p. 254. Justin Martyr speaks of the powers done in his time by the Name of Christ. 5ly, The Gift of Prophecy is not to be re∣strained, as some seem to do, to teaching, and the Interpretation of the Scripture, which it importeth only as that was done by a parti∣cular Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; for o∣therwise, as here the Prophets, and the Teach∣ers, are two distinct Offices in the Church, so also are they reckoned as such in the Church of Antioch, Acts 13.1. and they are reckoned as distinct  in these words, Having Gifts different, whether Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of Faith, or ministry, let us wait on our ministry; or be that teacheth on teaching, Rom. 12.6, 7. And so they are reckoned byDial. p. 250. A. Justin Martyr, when he saith, one Man receives at Baptism the Spirit of Understanding, ,
, another of fore-knowledge, or prophecy, and another of teaching; and this discovers to us another sense of Prophecy, viz. that it imports, as Irenaeus saith, , the foreknowledge or prediction of things future, and that in order to the Exhor∣tation to some duty. Thus Agabus foretold by the Spirit the dearth that was to come on all Judea, Acts 11.28, 29, 30. that other Chri∣stians might be moved, as they were, to send their Charity to them. Thus Judas and Silas being Prophets, , with many words they comforted the Brethren, and established them, Acts 16.32. This Gift was exercised also by foretelling who would be fit Persons to do good service in the Church. Thus St. Paul commits a Charge to Timothy, according to the foregoing Prophesies concerning him, 1 Tim. 1.18. and saith, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, that was given thee by prophecy, Chap. 4.14. And that in this sense the Fathers un∣derstood it, is evident not only from the word , foreknowledge, by which they do express it, but from the Argument they use against the Jews to convince them that God had left their Church, and had own'd, and em∣braced the Societies of Christians, because he had left them no Prophets, but had transferred that Gift to the Christians. And these Predicti∣ons being made by Revelatton of the Spirit, , or Revelation, is accounted a part of this Gift; for to the Prophet is ascribed his Revelation, 1 Cor. 14.26, 30. and the Re∣velation of St. John is the Book of his Pro∣phecy; and to the Prophet is ascribed the ma∣nifestation of the Secrets of Mens hearts, as in those words, If all Prophecy, and there come in an unbeliever, or one unlearned, he is con∣vinced of all, he is judged of all, and thus are the secrets of his heart laid open, 1 Cor. 14.24. Thus of those Prophets, Irenaeus l. 5. c. 6. saith, that they did not only explain the Mysteries of God, but also , manifest the secret things of men, when it was needful, or profitable for them, or the Church. See Origen against Cel∣sus, l. 1. p. 34. 6ly, The  discerning of Spi∣rits, not only imports the faculty of discern∣ing betwixt the impulse of false and true Pro∣phets, which he that hath, seems to be stiled by St. Clemens, , a wise man in discerning words, and betwixt the lying wonders and magical operations of evil Spirits, and the powers of the Holy Ghost, as 1 Cor. 14.29. 1 Thess. 5.20, 21. 1 John 4.1. but also a judgment of discerning the Spi∣rits of other Men, whether they be qualified for such an Office in the Church, and accord∣ingly chusing them out for that work. So the Spirit in the Prophets said, Separate me Bar∣nabas and Paul for the work whereunto I have called them, Acts 13.2, 3. And thus the Ho∣ly Ghost is said to have constituted the Bishops and Presbyters in Asia, Acts 10.28. because, asEp. ad Cor. § 42. Clemens R. saith, they constituted Bi∣shiops and Deacons, , ma∣king trial of them by the Holy Ghost. AndApud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 23. Clemens of Alexandria, that St. John or∣dained to be of the Clergy, , such as were signified to him by the Spirit.Proem. Ep. ad Philad. & § 1. Ep. ad Eph. § 1, 3, 6. Ignatius saith of the Bishops of his time, that they were constituted not by men, but  by the counsel of Christ Jesus.Ed. Ox. Ep. 55. & 69. St. Cyprian, that they were constituted, not only by the consent of the Peo∣ple, and the suffrage of their fellow Bishops, but also Judicio Divino & Dei testimonio, by the judgment and testimony of God. And lastly, this Gift seems also to imply a disco∣very of what was done inwardly, or in the Spirit of a Man: So Peter discerned the heart of Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.3, 9. and of Symon Magus, Acts 8.21, 23. St. Paul of E∣lymas, Acts 13.10. and of the lame man, see∣ing he had faith to be healed, Acts 14.9. AndAd Philad. § 7. Ignatius speaks of the Spirit in him that did fortel, and  reprove things secret. Ver. 11. But all these (Gifts) worketh one and the same Spirit, dividing (them) several∣ly to every man as he will. , as he will.] Here seems to be a plain Argument for the Personality of the Holy Ghost, because a will is here ascribed to him. 2ly, Hence it is evident that he is no Creature, because no Creature can enable other to perform these works. 3ly, That he is God; for as all this diversity of o∣perations is ascribed to the same God, v. 6. so is it here said,. Chrys. Theod. Oecum. Theoph. All these worketh one and the same Spirit. Ver. 12. For as the natural body is one, and (yet) hath many members, and (Gr. but) all the members of that one body, being many, are one body, (the body is one still:) so is (it in the body of) Christ, (all whose members, though they be many, and adorned with diffe∣rent Gifts, make but one Body mystical, united by the Spirit to their head Christ Jesus.) Ver. 13. For by one Spirit we are all bapti∣zed into (this) one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and (by receiving of that living water) we have been all made to drink into (or of) one Spi∣rit.
, we were baptized into one body.] Vain here is the Note of Mr. Cl. viz. That we are baptized that we might be called by one Name, be of one Society, the Church of Christ: For 'tis not by partaking of one Spi∣rit that we are called Christians, but by pro∣fessing Faith in Christ. The Apostle is plain∣ly proving, that as the Natural Body is one, so is the Mystical: Now the Natural Body is one, as being informed by one Soul and Spirit united to it, and animating all the parts of it, so is it, saith he, in the Mystical Body united together by one and the same Spirit re∣ceived in Baptism, and from our Spiritual Head Christ Jesus, communicated to all the living Members of his Body, to give them Spiritual Life and Motion. See Eph. 4.16. , were made to drink of one Spirit.] So our Lord represents the par∣ticipation of the Holy Spirit, saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believeth, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. This spake he of the Spirit which they that believed in him should receive, John 7.37, 38, 39. And the Apostle calls the Water, which was a Symbol of the Spirit, Spiritual Drink, 1 Cor. 10.4. Ver. 14. (All I say) for (as) the (Natural, so the Mystical) body is not one member, but many. Ver. 15. If the foot shall say because I am not the hand, I am not of the Body, is it therefore not of the Body? Ver. 16. And if the ear shall say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the body? Ver. 17. If the whole Body were anSed neque oculos toto corpore esse velim, nè caetera membra suum officium perdant. Quintill. instit. l. 8. c. 5. ad fin eye, where were the hearing; if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? Ver. 18. But now hath God set the Mem∣bers every one of them in the Body, as it hath pleased him. Ver. 19. And if they were all one Member, where were the Body? Ver. 20. But now are they many Members, yet but one Body. Ver. 21. And the eye (the man endowed with the word of wisdom, or knowledge) cannot say to the hand (the person employed in lesser mi∣nisteries) I have no need of you; nor again the head (the person placed in the highest dig∣nities in the Church) to the feet, (the Deacon, or Man imployed in the lowest Offices of the Church) I have no need of you. Ver. 22. Nay much more those members of the body which seem to be weak are ne∣cessary, (Gr. but the Members of the Body which seem more weak, are more necessary, viz. the Brain, the Stomach, and the Guts.) Ver. 23. And those members of the body which we think to be less honourable, (Gr. more dishonourable) upon these we bestow (Gr. put) more abundant honour, and our un∣comely parts have more abundant comeli∣ness. , more abundant honour.] The Clothes God made to cover the nakedness of Adam and Eve, are stiled by Onkelos, Clothes of Honour: And the word  here rendred Honour, is in the Septuagint put to signifie a Cover, so behold, he is to thee a covering of thy eye, Gen. 20.16. is in the Septuagint , for an honour of thy face. Ver. 24. For our comely parts have no need, but God hath tempered the body together, (agreeably to the condition of each Member,) giving more abundant honour (or covering) to that part that lacked, (placing them so, that even Nature may be a covering to them.) , hath so tempered the Body.] Agreeable to this is that ofDe Officiis, l. 1. n. 177. Cicero, Prin∣cipio corporis nostri magnam natura ipsa vide∣tur habuisse rationem, quae formam nostram, re∣liquamque figuram in quâ esset species honest, eam posuit in promptu, quae autem partes cor∣poris ad necessitatem datae, aspectum essent de∣formem habiturae, atque turpem, eas contexit, atque abdidit, hanc naturae tam diligentem fa∣bricam imitata est hominum verecundia, quae enim natura occultavit, eadem omnes, qui sa∣nâ mente sunt, removent ab oculis. Ver. 25. (And so hath he dealt also with the Body mystical, making the meaner offices of then who attend upon the Poor more necessary, and to them more honoured, who need their help) That there should be no Schism in the Body, but that the Members should have the same care for (and regard to) one another. , that there may be no Schism in the Body.] Of this Schism of the Mem∣bers against the Belly, see Menenius apud Livi∣um, l. 2. c. 32. Max. Tyr. diss. 5. p. 50. Ver. 26. And whether one member (of the natural body) suffer, all the members suffer with it (by sympathy,) or one member be ho∣noured (or adorned,) all the members rejoyce with it, (i. e. if being indisposed, it becomes sound, being weak it recovers strength; all the Members are eased, and so may be said to re∣joyce with it.) Ver. 27. Now ye are the body of Christ and Members in particular, (or severally are Members of that Body, and so ought to act in the mystical Body, as do the Members in the natu∣ral, rejoycing with them that do rejoyce, and mourning with them that weep, Rom. 12.15.) Note: For illustration of this long Compa∣rison betwixt the Body Natural and Mystical, observe (1st.) That this Comparison is taken from the Jews, who teach, that such order
ought to be observed betwixt the Priesthood, and the People, as in the Humane Body, in which there are Members superiour, and others serving to the rest, for all of them serve the Heart from whence Life proceeds; and so it is meet that the Levites should serve the Priests, and the People the Levites; Paulus Fagius in Levit. 3.7. The Argument which the Apostle useth from the Comparison of the Natural with the Mystical Body, seems to consist in these particulars: 1st, That the most inferiour Members of the Natural Body, are as much the Members of that Body as the most noble, and so are the most inferiour Christians as much the Mem∣bers of Christ's Body. 2ly, That there would be no perfect Natu∣ral Body without the diversity of Members; and in like manner no Mystical Body without such diversity of Gifts and Offices as God has ordered in his Church, v. 17, 19. 3ly, That the Members are placed in the Body according to the Wisdom, and the good Pleasure of God, v. 18, 24. and so it is in the Members of the Mystical Body, which there∣fore ought to acquiesce in the good Pleasure of his Will, in whatsoever station and condition his Wisdom doth see fit to place them. 4ly, That the Members which seem the weakest, and the meanest, are as necessary and serviceable to the Body, as the other. Humane Life could not continue, nor Humane Kind subsist without them, v. 22. so in the Mystical Body, they that are imployed in Works of Charity and Mercy to the Poor, and the Sick, those that serve Tables, are in their Kind as necessary and serviceable, as other Members of the Church; and had their  or Spiritual Gifts, as well as others, Rom. 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 4, 10, 11. 5ly, That as Nature had provided a Cover∣ing for the less honourable Parts, and taught us to imploy our care in Covering, and adorn∣ing them; so was it also with respect to the less honourable Members of the Ecclesiastical Body, there were Helps, and Ministers parti∣cularly appointed to take care of them, to co∣ver their Nakedness, and supply their Wants, and that Promises were made to those who imployed themselves in such Acts of Charity, v. 23, 24. 6ly, That as there was no division in the Members of that Natural Body, but all the Members took care of, and were imployed for the good of the whole, so God had ordered matters thus in the Body Mystical, that there should be no divisions, no separate interests in it; but they should mutually regard the inte∣rests of one another, sympathizing, and re∣joycing together, v. 25, 26. Ver. 28. And God hath set some in the (bo∣dy of the) Church, first Apostles (to exercise the Gifts of Wisdom;) secondarily Prophets, (to exert those of Knowledge and Prophecy,) thirdly Teachers, (to labour in the Word and Doctrine) after them, (Workers of) Miracles, then (they that have the) Gifts of Healing, helps (to take care of the Poor) Governments, (Rulers of the Church) diversities of Tongues. Ver. 29. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all Workers of Mira∣cles? Ver. 30. Have all the Gifts of Healing? do all speak with Tongues? do all Interpret? Note, For Explication of these Offices, 1st, That to Prophets I ascribe the Gift of Knowledge and of Prophecy, from these words, If I have prophecy, and know all mysteries, and all knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.2. And as the first Gift, the word of Wisdom, belongs especially to the Apostles, so it seems probable that the second, the word of Knowledge, should belong to the second Office, that of Prophets. But whereas Mr. Cl. saith, that the Prophets did not teach by Inspiration, but only had been fit∣ted to teach by inspiration; that they spake as they saw fit themselves; and those things which they received from Christ, and his Apostles, they interpreted after their own manner. This seems to be confuted by these words of the A∣postle, If any thing be revealed to him that sit∣teth by, let the first Prophet be silent, for the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Pro∣phets. 2ly, The Teachers seem to be Men, who having received the Doctrine of Faith from the Apostles, preached it to others for their Conversion to the Faith, and so they are the Men who laboured in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Tim. 5 17. They were, saithEccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 37. Eusebius, , the Disciples of the Apostles who built up the Churches in the Faith which the Apostles had planted, promoting the preach∣ing of the Gospel more and more, and spreading among them the Salutary Seed of the heavenly Kingdom. And they of them who preached the Gospel to them who had not heard it, were called Evangelists, and sometimes Apo∣stles. So Andronicus and Junia are called , Men of esteem among the Apostles, Rom. 16.7. and of these St. John saith, For his Names sake they went forth, ta∣king nothing of the Gentiles, we therefore ought to receive such, that we may be fellow-helpers to the Truth, Eph. 3.7, 8. But where∣as Theophylact and Mr. Cl. say that the Pro∣phets indeed spake by the Holy Ghost, but these Teachers from themselves; this I cannot assent to, for , teaching, is numbred among the Spiritual Gifts, Rom. 12.6. and , Teachers among them to whom Christ had given these Gifts. See the Note on Eph. 4.11.
3ly, The Helps seem to be the Deacons and other Officers, who ministred not only to the Poor, but in holy Things also, in baptizing and distributing the Eucharist; for , whence comes the word Helps, signifies to take care of others; and these also, as be∣fore I noted, had their Spiritual Gifts. As then the Talmudists, saith Dr. Lightfoot, call the Levites the Helps of the Priests, so may the Apostle call the Deacons, which answered to them, the Helps of the Apostles and Bishops of the Church. 4ly, Governments are almost generally sup∣posed to denote the Rulers of the Churches planted by the Apostles, and who are some∣times stiled Bishops, Acts 20.28. sometimes , Guides or Rulers, Hebr. 13.7, 17. and sometimes , Presidents or Prelates, Rom. 12.8. 1 Thess. 5.12. But Dr. Light∣foot conjectures they were the Men who had the Gift of Discerning Spirits, because , which we here render Governments, sig∣nifies in the Old Testament wise counsels, and skill in giving judgment of things. Thus , a Man of understanding shall attain to wise counsels, Prov. 1.5. , where no counsel is the peo∣ple fall, but in much counsel there is safety, Prov. 11.14. and , by wise coun∣sel thou shalt make war, Prov. 14.6. It is not reasonable, saith he, to suppose no Office should be appointed for the exercise of this so neces∣sary Gift, and yet no other is here mentioned to which we can apply it. Let the Reader chuse which of these Interpretations he likes best. Ver. 31. But covet earnestly the best (and the most useful) Gifts, and yet shew I to yo a more excellent way (of ministring to the welfare of the Church, and of your own Souls, even that of Charity.) CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. FOR though I speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels (the Languages of all Nations, or knew how to con∣verse with Angels) and have not Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cym∣bal, (benefiting no man by my empty, and con∣fused, and pleasing no man with my shrill and noisy sound.) Ver. 2. And though I have the gift of pro∣phecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing (worth in the sight of God.) Ver. 3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my Body to be burnt (for the Faith,) and have not charity (to Man, but do this rather out of vain-glory, or to be admired, and praised of Men) it profiteth me nothing (as to my eter∣nal state.) Note. Here is to be noted that the Apostle in these Verses reckons up the things which were of highest value with the Jews, and which rendred their wise men the most cele∣brated. Thus ofBava Bathra, F. 134. 1. R. Jochanan Ben Zacchai they say that he understood the Language of Angels; ofBuxt. Lex. in voce . R. Azai, that there was not in his days a rooter up of Mountains like to him, or one that could do so great things as he did. The Man on whom the Spirit of Pro∣phecy did rest, or who was fit to receive him must, say they, beMaim. Praef. in Seder zeraim, Poc. p. 18. a wise man, a religi∣ous man, a temperate man, and one that is en∣dued with all probity of manners. Of Als they say, thatBz. Floril. p. 89, 90. whosoever diminisheth an thing of his substance to bestow in Alms, shal be delivered from Hell. And as for Martyr∣dom for the Law, they thought it sufficient to expiate, not only for their own sins, but e∣ven for the sins of the whole Nation: Thus. Maccab. cap. 6. p. 1090. Josephus brings in Eleazer praying thus for the Jews, Let my blood be an expiation for them, and receive my life for their lives. And he saith of the Martyrs that suffered under Antiochus Epiphanes, that. Ibid. p. 1101. B. the Divine Providence saved all Israel from the evils they suffered by the blood, and the propitiatory death of those pious men. But here is raised a dispute, whether the Gifts here mentioned were at any time, or could be exercised by them who wanted Chari∣ty? or such profuse Alms, and constancy in suffering to the Death, were ever, or could be separted from that Grace? To which I answer; It is true that the Apostle here speak∣eth only hypothetically, that were these things performed without Charity, they would not
profit to Salvation; but then that Supposition eems fairly to imply the thing it self was not mpossible, or that there was no necessary onnexion betwixt these Gifts and Actions, and he Grace of Charity. Moreover, our Saviour seems plainly to inform us that Men might prophecy, and cast out Devils, and do mighty works in his Name, Matth. 7.22, 23. and yet e workers of iniquity, and persons whom he would not own at the last day. He also teach∣eth that some may do their Alms to be ap∣plauded by Men, Matth. 6.2. and therefore do them, so as to receive no reward from God, and so informs us that Alms may be given without true love to God, or to our Neighbour for his sake. And lastly, all the Fathers teach that it is not the suffering, but the reason of it that makes the Martyr; and thatEsse Martyr non potest qui in Ecclesiâ non est, exhibere se non potest Martyrem, qui fraternam non tenuit Charitatem, do∣cet hoc, & contestatur Paulus dicens etsi tradidero Corpus meum ut ardeam. Cypr. de Unit. Eccl. Ed. Ox. p. 113. L. de Orat. Dom. p. 150. De Zelo & Livore p. 225. Ep. 55. p. 114. Ep. 73. p. 207. Chrys. in Eph. Serm. 11. To. 3. p. 822. August. de Verbis Dom. To. 10. p. 192. when Men in Schism or Heresie, thus give their Bo∣dies to be burnt, they are not to be deemed true Martyrs, by reason of the want of Charity. And he same they say of them who suffer for Vain-glory, viz. thatTimeo dicere, sed dicendum est Martyrium ipsum si ideo fiat ut admirationi & laudi habeamur à fratribus frustra Sanguis effusus est. Hieron. ad Gal. 5.26. they shed their blood in ain. Ver. 4. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up. Ver. 5. Doth not behave it self unseemly; seeketh not her own; is not easily provoked; thinketh no evil. Ver. 6. Rejoyceth not in iniquity (or false∣hood,) but rejoyceth in the truth. , in iniquity.] That  here signifies falshood, the truth to which it is op∣posed, shews; so it signifies in the Old Testa∣ment above an hundred times, and the word  which in the Hebrew signifies a lie, is as often by the Septuagint translated , as , so a right hand of falshood , Psal. 144.11. The way of lying is , Psal. 119.29. And he that telleth lies is , see Psal. 101.7.119.69, 78, 86, 118, 128, 163. Psal. 63.11. Exod. 22.7. Now false∣hood, and a lie in the Old and New Testament, do often signifie a false Religion, or a Religi∣on containing a false object of Worship. Thus the molten Image is a teacher of Lies, Hagg. 2.18. and he that maketh it, is said to have a lie in his right hand, Isa. 44.20. he that goes after them walketh in lies, Jer. 23.14. and in∣herits lies, , turns the truth of God into a lie, Rom. 1.25. believes a lie, 2 Thess. 2.10, 11. See the Note on Rom. 3.7. And the Truth in the New Te∣stament is emphatically put to signifie the Go∣spel, or the Christian Faith. So 2 Epist. of St. John v. 3, 4. I rejoyced greatly to find thy children walking in the truth. And Epist. 3. v. 3, 4. I have no greater joy then to hear that my children walk in the truth. So that the import of these words may be this, Charity will not permit us to rejoyce; but rather cause us to be troubled to find Men still continue in their false Worship, as the Gentiles, or in opposition to the Gospel delivered to them, as the Jews do; but it rejoyceth to see Men walking according to the truth of the Go∣spel. Ver. 7. Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. Note. From these four comprehensive Ver∣ses we learn the Properties and Fruits of Ch∣rity: (1.) What it requires us to do to all. (2.) What it will not permit us to do to any. (3.) What it requires us to do, or will not permit us to do, to our offending Brother. 1st, What Deportment it requires towards all Men, viz. 1. It is good, kind, and tender hearted to∣wards all; v. 4. The Lord make your Charity to abound to one another, and to all men, 1 Thess. 3.12. For Charity requiring us to love our Brother as our selves, it must engage us to consider him as we do our selves, and so ex∣tend the same kindness to him, when he needs it, as we shew to our selves, Gal. 6.10. 2. It is active, and laborious, engaging us by love to serve one another, Gal. 5.13, 14. to do them any Service we are able with good will, and without grudging; for there must be in us , the labour of love, 1 Thess. 1.3. Hebr. 6.10. 3. It rejoyceth in the truth, v. 6. that is, in Mens doing righteously, and living according to the Gospel, which is called by way of e∣minence the Truth; it begets in us a compla∣cency and inward pleasure to behold Truth and Righteousness, Piety and Goodness, pre∣vailing in the World. 4. It makes us ready to believe all things, v. 7. that is, all the good it hears, or can have any charitable ground to think of o∣thers. 5. It hopeth all things, v. 7. i. e. It inclines us to hope still the best concerning Mens in∣tentions and actions liable to doubt; and if our Brother be at present bad, to hope, and not despair of his amendment, and so still to endeavour his Reformation by all proper means. 2ly, The things which Charity will not per∣mit us to do to any, are these, viz. 1. Charity worketh no evil to our Neighbour, in his Person, Estate, Good Name, Relations,
Rom. 13.10. much less in reference to his Soul: And therefore 2. It will not suffer us to scandalize, or to offend our Brother, by doing any thing which either may embolden him to sin, or disaffect him to Religion, or discourage him in the pra∣ctice of his Duty; for if thy brother be grie∣ved with thy meat, now walkest thou not chari∣tably, Rom. 14.15. 3. , v. 5. It will not permit us to surmise, or to suspect the evil of others which we do not know, it imputes not evil to them, nor puts it to any Mans account be∣yond absolute necessity. It doth not censure their Miscarriages as done out of Malice, or with ill Intentions. So Theodoret. 4. It rejoyceth not in iniquity, v. 6. in any evil done to, much less by others; it permits no Man to be pleased with any deceit or fals∣hood spoken of, or done to others, or with a∣ny ill stories, or malicious insinuations con∣cerning them. 5. It envies not the Happiness, or the Pro∣sperity of others, but is well pleased with it, v. 4. 6. , it behaveth not it self un∣seemly towards any, in words or gestures; it refuseth not to do the meanest offices of kind∣ness to them, as if it were unseemly, or below us to be employed in them, v. 5. So Chryso∣stom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact. 7. , it vaunteth not it self, v. 4. it is not puffed up against our Brethren; it roots out of us all Elation of Mind, Ambition, Ostentation, Pride in over-valuing our selves, and despising others, Eph. 4.2. , 'tis not rash, heady, or precipitate in speaking of, or acting towards others. So Chrysostom and Oecumenius. It doth not curiously search into other Mens matters which belong not to us. So Theodoret. 8. It seeketh not her own Praise, Pro∣fit, Pleasure to the hurt of others; but inclines Men to seek the Good of others, 1 Cor. 10.24. 9. , It bites not with the Tongue, Gal. 5.14, 15. but cuts off all Strife, Conten∣tions, bitter Zeal, Animosities, v. 21, 22. all Bitterness, Wrath, Clamour, Evil Speaking, Eph. 4.31, 32. 3ly, The Deportment Charity requires to our offending Brother, is expressed in these Particulars: 1. Charity beareth long, and causeth us to endure Provocations with much patience, be∣fore we do conceive any displeasure against o∣thers. 2. It endureth all things, though grievous to be born, without returning Evil for Evil; enabling us to forbear one another in love, Eph 4.2. Coloss. 3.13. and will not cease from being kind, and well affected to our Bro∣ther, by reason of any provocation whatso∣ever. 3. It covers all things, i. e. inclines us to conceal the evil that we know of others; and thus it covers a multitude of sins, James 5.20. 4. , v. 5. It is not highly ex∣asperated, and breaks not forth into violent ungovernable Passions on any provocati∣on. 5. 'Tis easie to be intreated, ready to for∣give, and full of Mercy, Coloss. 3.13. Eph. 4.32. James 3.17. Ver. 8. Charity never faileth (as to the proper and elicit acts of it) but (as for other Gifts) whether there be Prophesies, they shall fail; whether there be Tongues, they shall cease; whether there be (the Gift of) Knowledge, it shall vanish away. Ver. 9. For (with all our Gifts) we know (still but) in part, and prophecy but in part (knowing but few things in comparison to our future knowledge) Ver. 10. But when that (state of know∣ledge) which is perfect is come, then that (knowledge) which is in part, shall be done away. Ver. 11. When I was a child I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put a∣way childish things, (and the like difference will there be betwixt us now and then.) Ver. 12. For now we see (only as) through a glass darkly, but then we shall see face to face, (with the greatest nearness and perspi∣cuity which now we cannot; for no man saith, God shall see my face and live, Exod. 33.20, 23. John Ep. 2. v. 12. Ep. 3. v. 14.) Now I know but in part, but then shall I know even as I am known, (more fully and compleatly, see∣ing God as he is, 1 John 3.2.) Ver. 13. And now abideth Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, (all great and ex∣cellent Vertues, and superiour to the Gifts now mentioned,) but the greatest of these is Charity, (both for duration, as continuing when Faith shall end in vision, 2 Cor 5.. and Hope in enjoyment, Rom. 8.23, 24. and for Perfection, (as rendring us more like to God, and beneficial to men.)
CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. FOllow (therefore) after Charity (above all things) and desire (also) spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophe∣cy, (i. e. expound the Scripture, or reveal some mystery to the edification of the Church.) Ver. 2. For he that speaketh in an unknown Tongue (not understood, nor explain'd) speak∣eth not to (the understanding of) men, for no man understands him, but to (the vnderstand∣ing of) God (only,) howbeit (though) in the Spirit he speaketh mysteries, (the profound things of God.) , for he that speaketh with an unknown tongue.] That what is said in this Verse is spoken only by way of concession, as Mr. Cl. imagines, cannot be true, because it is expresly said, that in the Spirit he speaketh Mysteries; for Mysteries, when the Apostle speaketh of Spiritual Gifts, hath still relation to some profound secret Things, as 1 Cor. 2.7.13.2. And  cannot here signifie, as Mr. Cl. vainly conceives, He speaketh to his own understanding; since the Apostle, through this whole Chapter, is speaking of Spiritual Gifts, which also he expresly calleth Spirits, saying, Seeing you are zealous  of Spi∣rits, i. e. of Spiritual Gifts; and the Afflatus or Inspiration here was to enable the Man to speak the Mystery, and not to use the un∣known Tongue. For Explication of this whole Matter, let it be noted, 1st, That the Gifts of Tongues and Prophe∣cy, in their original Donation, did still go to∣gether; and they who spake with Tongues, spake , the great things of God, Acts 2.11.10.46. they spake with tongues, and prophesied, Acts 19.6. Now these two being thus joyned by God, should not have been used separately by these gifted Men, ex∣cept only when they were to speak to Gentiles in their own Language, which was one great design of the Gift of Tongues, v. 22. Nor should they have used the Gift of Tongues when an Afflatus came upon them, and some Mystery was imparted to them by which the Church was to be edified, unless they knew there was one present who had the Gift of In∣terpretation of Tongues: This therefore was a great abuse of this Gift, that, when they had a Mystery revealed to them, they did not ut∣ter it in a Language understood by the Assem∣bly, but only by themselves, and so they did not edifie the Church by it, though it was gi∣ven, as all the other Gifts were, for edificati∣on, Chap. 12.7. Note, 2ly, That the Gift of Tongues be∣ing imparted per modum habitus, as a perma∣nent Gift, like to a Habit, they who had recei∣ved this Gift could always use it at their plea∣sure, and so could also use it when a Prophe∣tical Afflatus came upon them; but the Gift of Prophecy being an Afflatus in manner of a Revelation, could be only used when the Af∣flatus came upon them; so that the first Gift might at any time be used without any fresh Operation of the Holy Ghost, whereas the se∣cond Gift always required that Afflatus. Ver. 3. But he that prophesieth (in plain intelligible words) speaketh to (the profit of) Men, (viz.) to their edification, (by the Scrip∣ture he expounds,) their exhortation (by what he teacheth,) and (to their) comfort (by his Revelation.) Ver. 4. He that speaketh in an unknown Tongue edifieth himself (only,) but he that prophesieth edifieth the Church. , edifieth himself.] He there∣fore understood himself, as the Church did him that prophesied. And indeed, by speak∣ing what he himself understood not, he would have been as much a Barbarian, and as unpro∣fitable to himself as he was to others. To say with Cajetan, The words were pious which he uttered, and he had pious Affections when he uttered them, is unsatisfactory; for what if the Matter of them was so, since if he un∣derstood them no more then a Parrot, his Piety in speaking them could be no more then that of a Parrot; he neither could know they were pious, nor receive any bene∣fit by them, supposing they were so, whilst he understood nothing of them; nor could any pious Affections be raised in him by words not understood. To say with Grotius, Sentit in se vim Christi, He perceives the Gift of Christ operating in him, if he perceived not the meaning of his own words, is to talk as un∣intelligibly as he spake, for that can only sig∣nifie, he knew he had the Gift of Tongues, which sure could not much edifie him who for∣merly had used that Gift, and so could not be ignorant he had the Gift. Moreover, doth not the Apostle bid him, who speaks with Tongues, not interpreted, speak only to him∣self, and to God, v. 28. and can he speak to himself more then to others, who understand∣eth not himself? or is it fit that he should speak to God he knows not what? However it is certain, that the Apostle not only dislikes, but plainly forbids this way of speaking in the Church, v. 28. and so, by parity of Rea∣son, forbids the like way of speaking to others in the Church of Rome. Ver. 5. I would that ye all spake with Tongues, but rather that ye prophesied; for greater (because more beneficial) is he that prophesies, then he that speaketh with Tongues, except he interpret (his Tongue, and the My∣stery he utters in it) that the Church may re∣ceive edifying (by it.) , that the Church may receive edification.] Hence I gather, that
in this unknown Tongue he uttered something tending to, and by God designed for the Edi∣fication of the Church, though by uttering his Mystery, v. 2. in an unknown Tongue, he frustrated that design. Ver. 6. Now therefore Brethren, if I come unto you speaking with (strange) Tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you (also) either by revelation (of some se∣cret,) or by knowledge (of some Mystery,) or by prophesying, (i. e. foretelling of something to come,) or by doctrine, (instructing you what to believe, or practice.) , or in prophesying.] Though Prophesying being in this Verse distinguished from Revelation, Knowledge, Doctrine, seems only to import the foretelling of something to come, yet doth the Apostle in this, and the foregoing Chapter, manifestly speak of it in the whole Latitude of the word, as compre∣hending all these other things. As v. g. Reve∣lation; so v. 24. If all prophesie, and there come in an unbeliever, and one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged by all, and so the secrets of his heart shall be made manifest; According to that other sense we have given of this Gift, Chap. 12. that it was that which enabled them to manifest the secret things of Men. Hence to the Prophet is assigned his Re∣velation, v. 30. 2ly, , here rendred Knowledge, viz. of the Will and Mind of God. So Chap. 13.2. If I have prophesie, and know all Mysteries, , and all know∣ledge. Whence to the Prophet belongs the , the word of Knowledge, menti∣oned Chap. 12.8. And this is the ordinary Notion of it, viz. that it imports a Gift by which the Mind of God, or his Will, is by the Divine Afflatus discovered, for the good of others. And 3ly, Doctrine, whence the Pro∣phet is said to speak to the edifying of the Church, v. 3. and so that all may learn of him, be exhorted, and comforted by him, v. 3, 31. And whereas Prophesie in the Old Testament doth often signifie a Divine Afflatus, inabling to compose Hymns, or Psalms of Praise to God, 1 Sam. 10.5. 1 Chron. 25.1. Accord∣ingly the Psalm here mentioned v. 26. and the singing with the Spirit, v. 15, 16. are the ef∣fects of the Prophetical Afflatus by which the Christians of those times taught, and admo¦nished one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Col. 3.16. Eph. 5.20. And the praying in the Spirit, v. 15. or in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. seems to be praying by a like Afflatus of the Holy Ghost helping their Infir∣mities, and teaching them what was proper to be asked for the good of the Church. See Note on Rom. 8.26, 27. And therefore though when they came together, every Man had a Psalm, a Doctrine, a Tongue, a Revelation, an Interpretation, for the correcting their mis∣carriage in all these things, the Apostle giv only Rules concerning Tongues and Proph¦sying. Ver. 7. And thus it is even (in) things with out life, giving sound, whether (it be) pie or harp, (for) except they give a distinction in the sound (to render it intelligible) ho shall it be known what is piped or harped? Ver. 8. For if the trumpet (for example) give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for the Battel (at the hearing of it?) Ver. 9. So likewise you, except you utter by the tongue words easie to be understood (by your Auditors) how shall it be known what is spoken (by you?) for (by speaking what they know not) ye shall (be as men who) speak only to the air, (vain and unprofitable words, lost in the speaking, as the voice is in the air.) Ver. 10. There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices, (Languages and Idioms, as there be Nations, or as the Jews compute to the number Seventy) in the world, and none of them are without signification, (but this signification they have only to them that understand them.) Ver. 11. Therefore, if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be to him that speaketh (as) a Barbarian, (or one that under∣standeth not what he saith,) and he that speak∣eth shall be (as) a Barbarian to me. , a Barbarian.] It was not only the Greeks that called all other Nations Bar∣barians, according to that of the Apostle, I am a debtor to the Greek, and the Barbarian. In which senseL. 2. c. 4. p. 96. Julius Pollux reckons up , the Tongue of the Greeks, and the Barbarians. But almost eve∣ry other Nation called Strangers, who under∣stood not their Language, by that name, as the sameL. 1. c. 10. p. 40. Pollux noteth in these words, . So the Jews upon those words, When Israel came out of Aegypt, and the house of Jacob , from a strange People, say all Language that is not the holy Language, is barbarous. So theBuxt. Lex. Tal. p. 1151. Chaldaeans stiled those who spake not Chal∣dee, and the Romans those who spake not Latin. HenceOrat. 6. in Ver. n. 12. Verres is in Cicero's stile, Linguâ & Natione barbarus, by Language and by Nation Barbarian. Ver. 12. Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, (Gr. of Spirits) (that you may not be Barbarians and unprofitable in the use of them) seek that ye may excel (in them which tend) to the edification of the Church. Ver. 13. Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown Tongue, (in which he cannot edifie) pray that he may interpret, (i. e. pray so as to interpret what he prays.)
, let him pray that he ay interpret] Seeing it is evident from v. 4. nd the 28th, that he who spake with Tongues nderstood the meaning of his own Tongue; or can he be said to have the Gift of Tongues, who only hath the Gift of Talking he knows ot what, as the Phanatici did among the Heathens; nor can it be supposed, the Spirit of God should assist Men in that useless man∣er; these words cannot be here understood as n Exhortation to this Linguist, that he should pray that he might understand, and so be able o interpret his own words, which he already could do, had he been as willing as he was ble, and had not more regarded the vain o∣tentation of his Gift, then the edification of he Church. Some therefore give the sense of he words thus: Let him rather pray that he ay have the Gift of Interpretation, then that f Tongues; for covet, saith the Apostle, the best Gifts, Chap. 12.31. Seek to excel in those which tend to the edification of the Church, v. 12. now this doth the Gift of Interpretation more then that of Tongues. But I rather chuse to interpret them thus: Let him (so) pray (with his Gift, as) that he may (by the words used in his prayer, or by explaining it in a known Language) interpret, and impart to others, what the Afflatus hath imparted to him, and not out of vain ostentation utter it in a Tongue unknown. To strengthen this sense, let it be observed first, That the Apostle here plainly discourseth of speaking with an unknown Tongue in Prayer, and of praying also by the Afflatus of the Spirit, as is appa∣rent from the illative words, For if I pray in an unknown Tongue, my spirit prayeth, &c. 2ly, Observe from Budaeus, that the Particle  is sometimes elegantly deficient, of which he gives two instances from Aristotle, to which add these from the New Testament, as in Hea∣ven,  (pro , so also upon earth, Matth. 6.10. Luke 11.2. , for , and so if Satan, Mark 3.26. As my Fa∣ther sent me,  for , so send I you; and with this Ellipsis the word runs thus, , let him so pray, as that he also may interpret. Or observe from Noldius and Pasor, that  signifies adeo ut, so as that: So the word was hidden from them, , so as that they perceived it not, Luke 9.45. He will do greater works then these, , so that you may mar∣vel at the greatness of them. John 5.20. Did I purpose according to the Flesh, , so as that there should be with me yea, yea, nay, nay. 2 Cor. 1.17. I rejoyced that you sorrowed according to God, , so as that you might be damaged by us in nothing. So Rev. 8.12.9.20.13.13. and then the words may be rendred thus, Let him pray  so as that he may interpret. Ver. 14. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, (i. e. my spiritual gift is ex∣ercised) but my understanding is unfruitful (to others.) , my Spirit prayeth.] Here Mr. Cl. asks, What Mortal would have rendred  by my Gift? I answer, eve∣ry one who knows that the Apostle is here speaking of Spiritual Gifts: And 2ly, he not only warrants, but constrains them to do so; by saying, v. 12. seeing you are , zealous of spiritual gifts: and v. 32. , the spiritual aflatuses of the Pro∣phets are subject to the Prophets: and v. 2. , he by the spirit speaketh mysteries. And 3ly, that the word  never signifies the Mind in all this Discourse or the Under∣standing, that being in the very next Verse , the word opposed to , Spirit: He adds, what intolerable Language is to say, my Gift prays? I answer, Just such intolerable Language as the Spirit intercedeth, Rom. 8.26. for that is only the Gift of the Spirit inter∣cedeth; and though that may pass for a Cata∣chresis, to say my Gift is exercised in prayer; or as v. 15. I pray with my Gift, is to give the true meaning of St. Paul's words; when he adds, That nothing is more ordinary then for the spirit and the body to be opposed to one ano∣ther. This is 1st, Impertinent, here being no opposition betwixt the Spirit and the Body, but only betwixt the Spirit and the Mind, i. e. according to Mr. Cl. betwixt my mind, and my mind, and what Mortal would have so inter∣preted ? 2ly, The thing it self is not proved by him. See, saith he, Rom. 8.23. Where yet there is no such opposition at all, but only an assertion that they who have the first fruits of the Spirit wait for the redemption of the Body. Now what Mortal would have in∣terpreted these words thus, We that have the first fruits of the Mind groan, waiting for the Body opposed to it? See, says he, Gal. 6.15. Where again is no opposition betwixt the Spirit and the Body, but only betwixt the Spirit and the Flesh, or rather betwixt walking in the Spirit; that is, according to the conduct of the Holy Spirit, and fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh. See 1 Cor. 3.1, 3. Rom. 8.1, 4, 5, 13, 14, 15 He might more pertinently have cited 1 Cor. 7.34. James 2.26. Ver. 15. What is it then? (i. e. what then is to be done?) I will pray with the spirit, (i. e. with my spiritual gift,) I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the spi∣rit, I will sing with the understanding also; (i. e. so using my spiritual gift in prayer, and psalmody in the publick, as that I may be under∣stood by others.) , with the Spirit.] I do not think that this Phrase, with the spirit, relates here to the Gift of Tongues, but to an Afflatus inabling them to pray and sing by the impulse of the Holy Ghost; the uttering what this Afflatus suggested in an unknown Tongue they had before received, was the great fault the
Apostle in this Chapter endeavours to correct, the Person speaking with an unknown Tongue, is  the Person speaking with an Afflatus, whether Mysteries, v. 2. Prayer, or Psalmody, is . Ver. 16. Else when thou shalt bless (i. e. give thanks to God.) with the spirit-(ual Af∣flatus not understood by others,) how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned, (i. e. the Laick, or the Man who only knows his Mothers Tongue) say Amen, (or give his As∣sent) at thy giving of Thanks, seeing he un∣understands not what thou sayest? , who fills up the place of the Idiot.] That is, , the Laick, say Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact.Lex. Talm. p. 2001. Buxtorf informs us this is a Phrase frequent among the Jews. AndMore Mevoch. part. 1. c. 8. Maimonides teacheth, that the word place is used to denote the dignity, or estimation of any Man; it being frequent with their Rab∣bins to say, such a one fills up the place of his Fathers in such a thing, that is, he resembles them. SoEnchir. c. 37. Epictetus in his Enchiridion saith, , Thou must either hold the place of a Philosopher, or one Unlearned: So that to fill up the place of an Idiot or Unlearned Person, is to be one of them, or to be like them in want of under∣standing of strange Tongues. Ridiculous there∣fore are those Popish Commentators, who inter∣pret this of the Clerk of the Congregation, there being no such Office then, either among Jews or Christians. But when theR. Eliez. c. 44. p. 118. Minister of the Synagogue said Prayers, all the People of the Synagogue answered Amen after him. It was the custom in the Jewish Church, saithLex. Talm. p. 11. Bux∣torf, to say Amen to the Blessings, or Cursings of the Priest. To his Curses; so the Woman suspected of Adultery, was to confirm his Im∣precation by saying Amen, Amen, Numb. 5.22. So all the People answered Amen to the Cur∣ses pronounced from Mount Ebal, Deut. 17.15-26. And to the Oath and Imprecation imposed upon them by Nehemiah, Neh. 5.12, 13. To his Blessings; so when Ezra blessed the Congregation, all the People answered Amen, Amen, Neh. 8.6. And this practise was from them translated to the Primitive Church. Ver. 17. For thou verily givest thanks well (with thy spiritual gift, i. e. piously) but the o∣ther is not edified (by it.) Ver. 18. I thank my God, I speak with Tongues more then you all. Ver. 19. Yet in the Church of God I had rather speak five words with my understand∣ing (so imploy'd,) that by my voice I may teach others also, then ten thousand words in an un∣known tongue. Ver. 20. Brethren be not (like) Children in understaning, (chusing what pleaseth you, bef what profits others:) howbeit in (freed from) malice be you (as) Children, but in un¦derstanding be (and act as) men (as persons  maturity of judgment to know what is fitting i be spoken.) Ver. 21. In the Law it is written (by way  a sign to a disobedient and unbelieving People thus,) with Men of other tongues, and other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord. , in the Law it is writ∣ten.] All Interpreters I have met with ref this to the saying of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 28.11. telling us, it is there mentioned as  Miracle shew'd to the People, that God would send Prophets to them in a Language that they understood not; but I find no mention of any Miracle there; wherefore it may be not that in the Law, properly so called, among the Curses threatned to them. LXXII. Deut. 28.46.49.58. for a sign  a wonder, this is one, that the Lord shall bring against them a Nation, whose tongue they under¦stood not; and then 'tis intimated, that y they would not hear: to both these places the Apostle may here refer. Ver. 22. Wherefore tongues are for a sign not to them that believe, (and so not to be used in their Assemblies) but for them that believe not, (they being designed for the more speey and effectual propagation of the Gospel by the Gift, among those Nations whose Languages they understood not) but prophesying (by teach∣ing the Doctrines of the New, or expounding the Mysteries of the Old Testament) serveth not for them that believe not (that Faith, or those Scriptures,) but for them that believe (them.) Ver. 23. If therefore the whole Church come together into some place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are un∣learned, or unbelievers, will they not (be tempted by hearing you thus speaking to one a∣nother in unknown Languages, to) say that you are mad. .] Here Grotius notes, that Hea∣thens and Unbelievers then used to come to the Assemblies of the Christians; and so we read they did Acts 13.44, 48. and whilst they assembled in the Jewish Synagogue it could not be otherwise. Ver. 24. But if all prophesie (one after ano∣ther, v. 31.) and there come in one that belie∣veth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced (or discovered) of all, he is judged (or discern∣ed) of all (that prophesie.) Ver. 25. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest (by the Prophets revela∣tion of them,) and so falling down upon his
face, he will worship God (the Searcher of the heart) and report (from his own experience) that God is in (or among) you of a truth. , the se∣crets of his heart are made manifest. For as Theophylact notes, , Revelation is one Species of Prophesie; and though it be taken in a restrained sense, and so distinguished from Prophesy, v. 6. yet v. 30. 'tis supposed that Revelation belongeth to a Prophet, and the Doctrine, the Revelation, the Psalm, v. 26. do all seem to belong to the Pro∣phet, the Speaker with Tongues, the Interpre∣ter of them, and the Prophet, being the only Persons mentioned in the ensuing words, and in this whole Chapter; so that what cannot be ascribed to the one, must belong to the o∣ther. See Note on Chap. 12. v. 10. Ver. 26. How is it then (or what is then to be done) brethren? (since) when you come to∣gether, every one (that is a spiritual, or gifted person) hath a Psalm, (or) hath a Doctrine, (or) hath a Tongue, (or) hath a Revelation, (or) hath an Interpretation (of Tongues,) let all (these) things be done to edifying, (let them be managed so as best conduceth to the end for which they were designed, Chap. 12.7.) Ver. 27. If any Man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be (used) only by two, or at the most by three (at one meeting,) and that by course (i. e. successively;) and let one (who hath the Gift) interpret (what is spoken.) Ver. 28. But if there be no Interpreter (present,) let him (that only speaks with tongues) keep silence in the Church, and let him (only) speak (mentally) to himself, and to God (in Prayer and Thanksgiving, v. 15, 16.) , But if there be not an Interpreter, let him be silent.] The Apostle permits him to use his Tongue in the presence of one who had the Gift of Interpre∣ting Tongues, because then the Church was not only edified by the Interpretation, but the Faith of the Hearers was confirmed by the ex∣ercise of two miraculous Gifts; but the Apo∣stle permits him not to be his own Interpreter, though he could do it; because his speaking that first in an unknown Tongue, which he himself must afterward interpret in a known Language, served only for oftentation, not for edification; nor could it be known whether his Tongue was supernatural, or acquired only. Ver. 29. Let the Prophets speak two or three (successively,) and let the other (Pro∣phets) judge or discern. , and let the rest dis∣cern.] Since 'tis impossible that the Afflatus of the Holy Spirit should suggest any falshood to him that had it, there can be no ground to judge him that had it, asMultum aberrant qui putant dona prophetica aliis prophetis esse subjecta, non pugnant inter se Dei dona, nec sententiae ex quirendae sunt, ubi Deum loqui constat. Grotius hath well observed upon this place. But, saith Theodoret, as the Devil raised up false Apostles to oppose the true Apostles, 1 Tim. 4.1. so did he also false Prophets, 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 John 4.1. in opposition to those who truly were inspired, and of these, say the Greek Interpreters, the true Prophets were to judge. Or else , let them discern the Agreement of what they utter, with the dictates of the same Spi∣rit in the Old Testament, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.13. So in the Conference Acts 15. when Peter had given his judgment in that matter, St. James adds, With this agree the words of the Prophets, as it is written v. 15. Ver. 30. (And) if whilst one prophesies any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace, (or cease, before the other utter his Revelation.) Ver. 31. For (so) ye (that have the Gift) may all prophesie one by one, that (by your mu∣tual discourses) all may learn, and all be com∣forted, (or exhorted to good works.) Ver. 32. And (this is not difficult for you to do, since) the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to (therefore may be restrained by) the Pro∣phets, , the Spirits of the Pro∣phets are subject to the Prophets.] The com∣mon Interpretation of these words, that the Spirits of the true Prophets are subject to the Judgment, Examination, and Regulation of other Prophets, seems not agreeable to the A∣postles Affirmation, that he that is spiritual is judged of none, 1 Cor. 2.13, 15. nor is there any ground for judging his Doctrine, who speaks by the impulse of the Holy Ghost; nor doth the Apostle say the Spirit of the Prophets ought to be, but  it actually is subject to the Prophets. I prefer therefore the Inter∣pretation of. Oecumenius and Theaphylact, that this is spoken in opposition to the Hea∣then Prophets; for the Prophets among the Greeks receiving an Afflatus from the Evil Spirit, could not be silent if they would; but it was not so with the Holy Prophets; they had it in their power to speak, or to be silent: and to this the Apostle refers, by saying the Spirits of the Prophets, that is, their spiritual Gifts are subject to the Prophets; that is, 'tis in their power to restrain them, and consequent∣ly they may prophesie the one after the other.
And upon this account the Church rejected the Extatick Prophets of the Montanists, that they had an ungovernable Impetus; for, say they,. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 17. they can shew no truly inspired Pro∣phet in the Old, or the New Testament, who was moved after this manner. Moreover, it is the opinion of Persons eminently Learned and Judicious, that in Corinth, and some o∣ther Churches, there were then no settled Pa∣stors to perform the Publick Offices, but they were all performed by Prophets, and by gift∣ed Men excited to that work in the Assembly, Christ being thus in the midst of them, Matth. 18.20. according to his promise. And this they judge more probable touching the Church of Corinth, because there seems no order to be observed among them, and no subjection of their Prophets to any Ruler of the Church, no direction of the Sentence to them when the Incestuous Person was to be delivered up to Satan, or when he was to be Absolved; but all seems to be done by the immediate Au∣thority of St. Paul. They also from this Chap∣ter do observe, that whereas all the publick Offices then performed in the Church were Prayer and Psalmody, Expounding or Preach∣ing the Word, and Thanksgiving, all these are here ascribed to Men endowed with these Spiritual Gifts; for that when they came to∣gether, some of them prayed, others compo∣sed Sacred Hymns by their Spiritual Gifts, we plainly read v. 15. that their Prophets did then teach for Edification, Instruction and Com∣fort, v. 3, 31. That they did also  bless, and  give thanks, we learn from v. 16, 17. that all, or any of these things, were done by stated Pastors, we never read in these Epi∣stles: Now if this were so, the occasional Prophets might be subject to the standing Pro∣phets, mentioned Chap. 12. And thus these words may be interpreted by them who like not the Exposition given in the Paraphrase. Ver. 33. (And God doubtless in this case would have the first to be silent.] For God is not the Author of Confusion, (which yet would follow upon all the Prophets speaking together, so that one should confound the other,) but of Peace, as (may be seen by the Regular Exercise of these Gifts) in all the Churches of the Saints. , of Confusion.] This also con∣firms the Interpretation given of the preceding words; for the prophesying of many toge∣ther would necessarily breed Confusion; where∣as the neglect of judging of their Prophesies could only be supposed to breed Error. Ver. 34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted to them to speak, (by way of teaching, or prophesying, but only by joyning with the Church in Prayer and Psalmody,) but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the Law, (Gen. 3.16.) , Let your Women be silent in the Church.] In that of Corinth, the Women not only prophesied in the Church, but they did eat with the Head uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.5. The latter Indecency he corrects there, and the first here, see 1 Tim. 2.12. Ver. 35. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home, for it is a shame (i. e. a thing indecent) for Women to speak in the Church. , to speak in the Church.] So theDr. Lightf. in locum. Hebrew Canon saith a Woman must not read in the Synagogue for the Honour due to that Assembly. Ver. 36. (And whereas in this matter you think fit to practise contrary to all the Churches of the Saints, even those in Judea, I ask) What? came the word of God out from you (to all other Churches?) or came it only to you, (and not to other Churches, that you th differ in your practise from them.) Ver. 37. If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I (now) write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. (See Note on Chap. 2.15.) Ver. 38. But if any man (pretends to) be ignorant (whether they be so or not) let him be ignorant, (at his peril be it, I shall not con∣tend farther with him, or  let him not be acknowledged as a true Prophet, or Spiritual Person.) Ver. 39. Wherefore, brethren, covet to pro∣phesie, and forbid not to speak with tongues, (provided these directions be observed, but) Ver. 40. Let all (these) things be done decent∣ly, and in order. , decently, and in or∣der.] This order, saith Theodoret, he had taught in the words foregoing, Let all things be done decently; not like Children, v. 20. not so as to give occasion to others to say you are mad, v. 23. not so as to breed Confusion, v. 33. not indecently, by Women speaking in the Church, v. 34, 35. in order, that is, one after another; or by course, v. 27, 31. See Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and Theophylact dis∣canting upon these words to this effect.
CHAP. XV. Verse 1. MOreover, Brethren, I declare to you the Gospel which I preach∣ed to you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand. (Gr. have stood) Ver. 2. By which also ye are (in the way to e) saved, if ye keep in memory what (i. e. retain the Gospel as) I preach'd (it) to you, (which you will do) unless ye have believed in vain. , by which also ye are saved.] That they who by imbracing the Christian Faith were brought into that way which lead∣eth to Salvation, and in which, if they perse∣vere, they will assuredly be saved, are stiled n Scripture, , the saved, Acts 2.47. 1 Cor. 1.28. and are said , to be saved, Rom. 8.24. 2 Tim. 1.9. 1 Pet. 3.21. See Note on Eph. 2.5, 8. and on Titus 3.5. So ere it signifies you are at present in a state of Salvation, and will assuredly enjoy it, if you etain, and live suitably to the Faith delivered to you. Ver. 3. (I declare, I say, the Gospel which I preached) For I delivered to you first of all (or among the principal Doctrines of Faith) hat which I also received, how that Christ ied for our sins according to the Scripture. Ver. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures. Ver. 5. And that he was seen (after his Re∣surrection) of Cephas, (Luke 24.34.) then of he twelve, (v. 36. John 20.19, 26.) , of the twelve.] i. e. Of the So∣ciety of the Apostles, consisting formerly of twelve Persons, and therefore so called still, John 20.24. though in strictness of Speech they were but eleven when Thomas was with them, and ten in his absence, Matth. 28.16. Luke 24.33. Ver. 6. And that you may not depend upon their testimony only,) After that he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain unto this day (to testifie it) though some are fallen a∣sleep. , to five hundred Brethren.] Of whom he was seen in Galilee, where he had many Disciples; for before his Resurrection he told his Disciples, that being risen, he would go before them into Galilee, Matth. 26.32. af∣ter his Resurrection the Angel sends this Mes∣age to them, Behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there you shall see him, as he said unto you, Mark 16.7. Now it may reasonably be thought that the eleven, who went themselves into Galilee, to the Mountain which Jesus had appointed, even after they had seen him at Jerusalem, Luke 24.33, 36. would acquaint the Seventy, and others who believed in Jesus, where it was he had appointed to be seen of them; and then no doubt their Curiosity, as well as their Affection to him, would induce them to repair unto the place. Now that they who had believed in Jesus, were very many, will be evident, if we consider how often it is said in the Gospels, that many be∣lieved on his name, John 2.23.7.31.8.30.10.42. and that great multitudes believed on him, John 12.42.4.1. That many of the Ru∣lers believed on him, that he baptized more Disciples then John, and that the Pharisees complained that the world was gone after him. If you say we read only of the eleven going to Galilee, Matth. 28.16. I answer that others might go with them, though no mention be made of them: or that the rest might be in∣habitants of Galilee, where most of Christs Disciples dwelt. If you still object, That the number of the names of Christ's Disciples af∣ter his Ascension, are reckoned only one hun∣dred and twenty, Acts 1.15. it is answered by Dr. Lightfoot, that the number of One hun∣dred and twenty are not to be accounted the whole number of Believers at that time, but only were those who had followed Christ continually, v. 21. to be sure they were not all the Disciples in Judea, but only in Jeru∣salem. That this Appearance of Christ to them was before his Ascension, is evident, because this was in Galilee, Luke 24.50. and saith Tradition on Mount Tabor, his Ascension was nigh to Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives, Acts 1.12. And Christ and his Angel gi∣ving them such timely notice of his going be∣fore them to the place, it is probable it was some considerable time before his Ascen∣sion. As for the note of some, that Christ was seen of these Five hundred Brethren in the Air, because the Greek word is , up∣wards, it seems very light, for that word joyned with numbers still signifies plusquam, or more then, as doth our English word up∣wards, and the Hebrew  so Mark 14.5. , is more then Three hundred pieces of silver; , from five and twenty years and upwards, Numb. 4.3, 23, 30, 35, 39, 43, 47. Chap. 8.25. , from twenty years and up∣ward, Numb. 1.3, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28. Chap. 14.29. 1 Chron. 23.24. 2 Chron. 31.17. Ezr. 3.8. , from a month and up∣wards, Numb. 3.15, 22, 28, 34, 39, 43. Chap. 26.62. Ver. 7. After that he was seen of James, then of all the twelve (at his Ascension.) , of James] The just, the Brother of the Lord, saith the Tradition of the Church,
and the Gospel of the Nazarens. See Dr. Hammond and Jerom in Catal. Script. Eccles. Ver. 8. Afterwards he was seen of me also, (Acts 9.17.) as of one born out of due time (or shape.) , as of one born out of due time.] , say Hesychius, Phrynicus and Phavorinus, is , a dead Child born out of due time, , one whom the Woman casts forth. St. Paul there∣fore having not seen Christ, of whom he was to testifie, till after his Conversion, and our Lord's Ascension, as the rest of the Apostles had, John 15.27. Acts 1.21, 22. speaks of him∣self as a Witness born out of due time. Ver. 9. For I am the least of the Apostles, (and one) that am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God. Ver. 10. But by the grace (and favour) of God (notwithstanding) I am what (now) I am, and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain; but I laboured more abun∣dantly then they all, yet (is it) not I, but the grace of God that was with me, (to which the fruit of all my labour is to be ascribed.) Ver. 11. Therefore whether it were I or they (who preach the Gospel,) so we preach, and so ye (also) believed. Ver. 12. Now if Christ be (so) preached that (all unanimously affirm) he rose from the dead, how say some among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? , how say some among you?] That there were some in the Apostles time who taught that the Resurrection was past already, we learn from 2 Tim. 2.18. but that they were Jews, who of Sadduces had embra∣ced the Christian Religion, asSuppl. to Dr. Hammond, p. 363. Mr. le Clerk with confidence enough, but no proof asserts, I find no reason to believe. TheSee Note on 2 Tim. 2.18. Gnosticks taught not that the Resurrection was past al∣ready, but only that the flesh was not fit to rise, and that it was incapable of salvation, and of incorruption, and therefore they are generally said by the Ancients to deny the Resurrection, but none of them insinuate that it was past al∣ready. The. Strom. 3. p. 446. B. Marcionites are by Clemens Alex said to have held this Doctrine, and to have renounced Matrimony, because in the Resurre∣ction saith Christ, they do not marry. But he be∣gan his Heresie in the second Century, and there∣fore could not infect the Church of Corinth with it in St. Paul's time. Menander indeed taught, that they who received his Baptism, were made Partakers by it of the Resurrection, and that they should not die. And he, accord∣ing to many of the Ancients, was contempora∣ry with St. Paul. See Note on 2 Tim. 2.18. But haply St. Paul refers here to none of these, but only to the Philosophers among them, as S Chrysostom thinks. For Corinth being an eminen City of Achaia, where the Philosophers and wise Men of the World abounded, who look'd upon the Resurrection of the Flesh as a thing both impossible and absurd, (See here Note on v. 35.) and placed their future Happiness in their Exemption from the Clog and Prison of the Body, they might put a new Constructi∣on upon the Doctrine of the Resurrection saying, it only did import a Renovation of our Manners, or a Resurrection from the Death of Sin unto a Life of Righteousness, and so it was performed already in that Baptism in which we are raised with Christ from the Dead, Coloss. 2.12. Ver. 13. But (or for) if (it be so that) there is no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. Ver. 14. And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching (in) vain, and their faith is vain. Ver. 15. Yea; and we are (then) found false witnesses of God, because we have testified of (or by) God, that he raised up Christ, whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not (at all). , we have testified of God.] It being very rare that  with a Ge∣nitive Case signifies de, of, these words may be rendred per Deum, by God; as because he could swear , by none greater, he hath sworn  by himself, Hebr. 6.13. and v. 16. Men swear , by  greater. So Matth. 26.63. I adjure ye  by God. And then the sense runs thus, We have pretended to be  Gods Witnes∣ses in this Matter, Acts 5.32. and by the Pow∣er of Miracles, and of the Holy Ghost derived from him, to bear witness to the Resurrection of Christ, and so must be false Witnesses of God, if he hath not raised him from the dead. Ver. 16. For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised. Ver. 17. And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. (Not ju∣stified, not absolved from them, seeing he died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, Rom. 4.21.) Ver. 18. Then they also who have falle asleep in Christ, (and suffered for his Name) are perished, (so as never to rise up out of that sleep, and so were truly miserable.) Ver. 19. (For) if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we (Christian Sufferers) are of all men the most miserable. , if in this life only we have hope.] The Apostle seems not here to say, that if there should be no Resurrection of the
ody, the Christian could have only hope in is Life; for if the Soul be immortal, and ay be happy after its separation from the ody, this seems not to follow: But he argues us, If Christ is not risen for our Justification, e are yet under the Guilt of Sin, v. 17. and  so, both Soul and Body must perish after eath, v. 18. and then the Hope of Christians ust terminate with this Life, which being ore especially to them a Life of Misery, by ason of the Sufferings to which their Faith oth here expose them, they would of all Men e most miserable. Ver. 20. But now is Christ risen from the ead, and become the first fruits of them that ept, (who therefore shall follow after him thus sen, as the whole Harvest follows the first uits, v. 23.) Ver. 21. For since by man came death, by an also came the resurrection of the dead, the wisdom of God so ordering it, that the me nature which had lost Life and Immortality, ould regain it.) Ver. 22. For as in (the Man) Adam (and r his sin in eating the forbidden fruit) all en (proceeding naturally from him) die, so  (and by the Man) Christ shall all (partakers  his Nature, and his Spirit) be made a∣ve. , in Christ.] The opinion of the ews was this, That the Messias was the se∣ond Adam who should raise the dead;Buxt. Lex. Talm. p. 961. His Name, say they, is called  Psal. 72.17. for e shall raise them that sleep in the dust. And he last Man, or Adam, is theNeve Shallom l. 9. c. 5, 8. Messiah, ho shall be above Moses, and above the mini∣tring Angels; He shall take away the old Sin from whence Death came, and in his days shall e the Resurrection of the dead; and this God ntended in the Creation of Adam, that he should e immortal, but sin brought death upon him; herefore the Divine Intention, which was not ulfilled in the first Adam, was fulfilled in the King Messiah. Thus is the Doctrine of the Church delivered byƲt quemadmodum in animali omnes mortui sumus, sic in spirituali omnes vivificemur. L. 5. c. 1. Ʋt quemadmodum per ominem vctum descendit in mortem Genus humanum, sic etiam per hominem victorem ascendamus in vitam. Cap. 11. Irenaeus, that Christ ook our Nature upon him, and suffered Death n it; That as by Man vanquished Death fell pon all Mankind, so by Man conquering we may ascend to Life. That whereas we are all dead in the animal Adam, we may be quickned n the spiritual. Ver. 23. But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterwards they that are Christs at his coming (to judgment.) , at his coming.] This Chapter contains many Arguments against the Doctrine of the Resurrection of some Saints before the rest, to reign with Christ on Earth a Thousand years: For (1st,) from these words, Every man in his own order, it might have reasonably been expected that some men∣tion should have been made, as of Christ the first Fruits, so of the first and second Resurre∣ction; but yet we see, that when the Apostle is professedly speaking of the order in which we shall arise, he hath nothing to say of this first Resurrection, which it seems is to happen a Thousand years before the General Resurrecti∣on, and nothing of a first and second Advent of our Lord; one to Reign on Earth a Thou∣sand years, a second to Judge all the World; and yet this double Advent is as necessary, as is Christ's Reign on Earth. Moreover the end, and the delivery up of his Kingdom, are here made contemporary with his Advent; and the Resurrection of all that are Christ's, is to be at this very Advent: But how can he deliver up his Kingdom, and yet Reign on Earth a Thousand years? In a word, if all that are his must be raised at his coming to the final Judgment, their none be∣fore that coming? and then they must all be raised together, not some a Thousand years be∣fore the rest. Ver. 24. Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up (Gr. deliver up) the (Mediatory) Kingdom to God, even the Fa∣ther, when he shall have put down all (other) rule, and all authority and power, (both of Men and Devils, which opposed his Church.) Ver. 25. (Which Kingdom till then he cannot deliver up,) For he must reign (according to the promise, Psal. 110.1.) till he (who made this promise) hath put all things under his feet. Ver. 26. The last Enemy which shall be de∣stroyed (by him) is death. Ver. 27. For he (namely the Father) hath (saith the Psalmist) put all things under his feet: but when he saith all things are put un∣der him, it is manifest that he is excepted (from this subjection) who did put all things under him. (See the Note on Hebr. 2.8.) Ver. 28. And when all things shall be sub∣dued unto him, then shall the Son also himself (lay down his Kingly Office in governing his Church, and as Man) be subject to him that put all things under him, that God (the Fa∣ther, Son, and Holy Ghost) may be (immedi∣ately) all in all, (by a full communication of him∣self to, and an intimate union with all his Saints.) , that God may be all in all.] He saith not that the Father, menti∣oned v. 24. but that God may be all in all, and so he seems to lead us to this Interpretation of the Godhead, which comprehends Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and then the import of
the Phrase, That God may be all in all, will be this, That the Godhead may govern all things immediately by himself, without the interven∣tion of a Mediator between him and us, to ex∣act our obedience in his Name, and convey to us his Favours and Rewards, we being then to render all our Duty immediately to him, and derive all our Happiness immediately from him. So that as now Christ, Theanthropos, God Man, is all in all, Col. 3.11. because the Father hath put all things into his hands, does all things, and governs all things by him, when this Oeconomy ceases, the Godhead alone will be all in all, as governing and influen∣cing all things by himself immediately. Moreover, the Jews say thatPirk. Eliezer. c. 12. p. 26. the King∣dom of the Messiah shall return to its first Au∣thor, and so saith the Apostle here; for though it shall have no such end as the preceding Mo∣narchys had, Luke 1.32, 33. by giving place to a succeeding Kingdom, for till the world lasts, , it shall not pass away, or be dissolved by any other Kingdom, Dan. 7.14. but shall be an eternal Kingdom in the sense in which he is a Priest for ever, and hath , a Priesthood that doth not pass away, Hebr. 7.17, 24, 25. and so he is able to intercede for ever for us. Yet as that Priesthood must needs cease, when the subject of it ceaseth, and he hath none to intercede for, so must his Kingly Office cease, when all his Friends have that Eternal Life conferred upon them, for which this Power was committed to him, Joh. 17.2. and all his Enemies are become his foot∣stool, Psal. 110.1. when there is no more an House of Jacob to reign over, or a Throne of David to sit on, Luke 1.32, 33. Rev. 11.15. And the whole Office of a Mediator must then cease, when God and Man are made compleat∣ly and indissolubly one. For farther Explication of this Matter, let it be observed, 1. That this Mediatory Kingdom was given to our Lord by the Father; for he hath put all things in subjection to him, v. 27. and that af∣ter his Resurrection; for it was given as the Reward of his Sufferings, and so could not be given till they were accomplished; He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore God hath highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and on Earth, and under the Earth. And that every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father, Philip. 2.8, 10, 11. Ac∣cordingly after his Resurrection, he speaks to his Disciples thus, all power is given me in heaven and in earth, Matth. 28.18. But why this Reward should not cease when the work is done; Why v. g. his Dominion over death should not cease, when death is destroyed; his power of giving Eeternal Life, or judging when all are judged, and none are left to be crowned, I confess I do not understand. 2. Seeing the Humane Nature only suffer∣ed, and seeing the Divine Nature is capable of no such Exaltation, or new Dominion, 'tis cer∣tain that this Kingdom could be given to Christ only according to his Humane Nature; for though the Godhead could alone enable him to execute his Kingly Office, yet was in thus exalted, this Power and Judgment was conferred upon him, because he was the Son of Man, John 5.27. He intercedeth still in Hea∣ven by virtue of his Blood, all Favours are granted to the Church through him, and God will judge the World by the Man Christ Jesus. 3. During this Reign of Christ, God the Father immediately judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son, that all Men might honour the Son (by owning his Authori∣ty) even as they honoured the Father, John 5.22, 23. (by owning his Authority over them) He made him Lord of all things, to punish and reward according to his Wisdom, Will, and Pleasure. And so his Humane Nature, or Christ as Man, though subject to the Father, as his Vice-Roy, acting by the Authority of him who put all things into his hands, and set him over the works of his hands, Hebr. 2.7, 8. and doing all to the glory of God the Father, yet seems not now to be in the same order of subjection to the Father, as are other Creatures; i. e. so as to act by his immediate command in all par∣ticular Transactions, as the holy Angels do, obeying his commands, and hearkning to the voice of his word, Psal. 103.20. They are all mi∣nistring Spirits, Hebr. 1.13, 14. but he is set down at the right hand of God in full possession of his mediatory Kingdom. Whil'st he continued on Earth, and acted only as a Prophet sent from God, He always owned that he could do no∣thing of himself, but as the Father gave him com∣mandment, so he did, and so he spake, John 5.30.8.38.12.49. But being once exalted to be Lord of all things, he acteth as a Lord in all things which relate to his Kingly Office o∣ver his Church, giving Laws to all, as being Lord of all, and rewarding and punishing ac∣cording to his Will. 4. The Exercise of this Authority he shall then lay down when all things are subdued to him, no other Kingdom or Dominion being to be exercised in the Celestial State, but what is essential to the whole Godhead. And though he shall ever so far Reign as to be still at the right hand of God, highly exalted in Honour, Dignity, and Beatitude, and to have still re∣ligious Respect and Veneration from all Saints, who then are to Reign with him, 2 Tim. 2.12.
and be owned by them as their King; and though the effects of this Kingly Power shall continue for ever, his Enemies being destroyed, and his Saints reigning in bliss forever, yet the exercise of that Kingly Power shall then cease, and he as Man shall be then subject to the Fa∣ther, as other Saints and Angels will be, that so as Christ before was all in all, Col. 3.13. with reference to his Church, and from his fatness did they all receive, so now the God∣head may be all in all, and fill all things imme∣diately by himself. This is only my conje∣cture of the sense of this obscure place, which upon better information I shall willingly re∣ce from. Ver. 29. (I say in opposition to them, among you who say there is no Resurrection from the dead, that Christ is risen, and become the first fruits of them that sleep,) Else what shall (will) they do who are baptized for the dead, (as they must be, if he in whose name they are bap∣tized be still dead) if the dead rise not at all, (and so Christ himself is not risen) why are they then (who hold this Doctrine) baptized for the dead? Ver. 30. And why stand we in jeopardy eve∣ry hour (for a dead Jesus?) , who are bapti∣zed for the dead.] For that Jesus who, ac∣cording to their Doctrine, must be still dead. To strengthen this Exposition, let it be no∣ted 1. That it is absolutely certain, that all who received Christian Baptism were baptized in the Name of Jesus; but it is very uncer∣tain whether any in the Apostles time were baptized for them who died without Baptism, or to fill up the place of those Christians who died after Baptism? There is no intimation of any such thing in Scripture, or in Primitive Antiquity. 2. That the Apostle doth not say, What do they that baptize for the dead? but , what will they do who are bapti∣zed already, if the dead arise not again?  why are they also baptized for the dead? we who believe otherwise of him, may well be baptized in the Name of Christ; but why are they so, who believe him dead? what will they do? what motive can they have to stand to their Baptismal Covenant, and own a dead Man as their Lord and Saviour? what in∣ducement can they have to continue faithful to him to the end but this, that if they suffer they shall also reign together with him? What will they do for comfort against the fear of death, if when they fall asleep they perish, and shall not rise again? Must they not be as well the worst of Fools, as the most miserable of Men, to suffer thus for a dead Man, who could not help himself, and therefore is not likely to give them any help in Life, or hope in Death? Note 3ly, That  often signifies in gratiam, on the account, or for the sake: So Rom. 1.5. We have received Grace and Apostleship, &c. , for his Names sake, Eph. 3.13. I desire that you faint not at my Tribula∣tions  which I suffer for your sake, Col. 3.24. , for the sake of his Body, 2 Thess. 1.5. That you may be ac∣counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, , for the sake of which ye also suffer. See more Examples, both Sacred and Prophane, in Scmidius on the place, and Dr. Edwards in his Preface to the Authority, &c. of the Holy Scripture. 4ly, Observe that  is used in Scripture when speaking of one single Person. Thus when Christ had raised the Widows Son, he bids John's Disciples tell him that , the dead are raised, Luke 7.15, 22. And so here v. 12, 13. If there be no  resurrecti∣on of one single Person from the dead, then is not Christ risen; yea, the resurrection  of the dead in general is thrice mentioned by this Apostle, when speaking of the Resurrecti∣on of Christ alone, thus, when he saith, God will judge the world by Christ, of which he hath given us a demonstration, having raised him  from the dead, Acts 17.30.31. It fol∣lows, that when they heard him asserting the resurrection of the dead  they mocked; whereas he only had asserted the Re∣surrection of Christ from the dead. Thus St. Paul saith twice, , for the hope, and the resurrection of the dead, I am called in question, Acts 23.7.24.21. and yet he was not called in question about the Resurrection of the Dead in general, for that the Pharisees believed as well as he, but only concerning one Jesus who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive, Acts 25.19. or risen from the dead. And so the Apostle saith Christ was declared to be the Son of God with power, , by his rising from the dead, Rom. 1.4. And here if Christ be risen, how say some among you, that , there is no resurrection of the dead. And this import of the Phrase seems to be confirmed by the word , viz. if it be wholly and entire∣ly true of all that are dead, that they rise not, and so Christ is not risen, what avails it any, that they are baptized for the dead? Ver. 31. I protest by your rejoycing (i. e. by that rejoycing) which I have (common with you under all our sufferings, Rom. 5.3.) in Christ Jesus, I (run the hazard to) die daily, (or by that rejoycing I have in you, as my Children, and the fruit of my labours in Christ, 1 Cor. 9.16. 2 Cor. 1.14.7.4.9.2. Phil. 2.16. 1 Thess. 2.19.) Ver. 32. If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advan∣tageth it me if the dead rise not? (it will be then more reasonable to say) let us eat and drink for to morrow we die. , after the manner of men] i. e. After the usual manner of Heathens, that St.
Paul thus fought with Beasts indeed, and that they would not touch him, they, saithHist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 25. Ni∣cepherus, who writ the Life of this Apostle, do affirm. Theodoret seems plainly to hint the same thing in these words,. In locum. In humane opi∣nion I was made the food of Beasts, but I was wonderfully preserved from them. And this sense will appear the more probable, 1. From the Phrase , which sig∣nifies as men use to do, but never according to mens purposes, or to speak after the manner of men. See the Note on 1 Cor. 9.8. 2. From the place here particularly menti∣oned Ephesus, which cannot refer to the Tu∣mult there caused by Demetrius, for the Apo∣stle suffered nothing in it, had he intended a Combat with Metaphorical Beasts, or Salvage Men, that at Lystra where he was stoned, and left for dead, Acts 14.19. had been more pro∣perly mentioned. See the Note 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. where he speaks of such Troubles that be∣fel him in Asia, as made him to despair even of Life; though as we read nothing in the Acts of this fight with Beasts, so we read no∣thing of that trouble. 'Tis therefore no obje∣ction against this Interpretation, that this fight with Beasts is not recorded by St. Luke, or that St. Paul speaks not expresly of it in the Catalogue of his Afflictions, 2 Cor. 11. it is sufficient that there he tells us, he was in deaths often, v. 23. Ver. 33. (But) be not deceived (with such discourses, rather avoid them, for) evil com∣munications corrupt good manners. Ver. 34. Awake to righteousness, and sin not, (which advertisement is very needful,) for some (among you) have not the knowledge of (that righteousness of) God, (which doth ob∣lige him to render to Men according to their works, 2 Thess. 1.6, 7. Hebr. 6.10.) I speak this to your shame. Ver. 35. But some Men will (yet) say, How are the dead raised up (again?) and with what (kind of) Bodie do they come? ; with what kind of body?] This was the question of theƲtrum sine corpore, an cum corporibus, & Corporibus quibus, ipsisne? an innovatis resurgatur. Cecil. apud Minut. p. 1. Philosophers, whose chief Objection against the Resurrection of the Flesh, and of the Body, was this, That the Body was. Jambl. Protrept. adh. c. 17. . Plato in Cratylo, p. 275. E. Cor hoc animi pondus, & poena est, permanente illo urgetur, in vinculis est. Sen. Ep. 65. . Jamb. de vita Pyth. p. 220. . Jamb. Protr. c. 13. p. 73. Plat. Phaed. p. 49, 50. the Prison and Sepulchre  the Soul, and that it was her Punishment to be tied to it; that the Body was the great ¦derance to the knowledge of the truth, and that we could not be truly happy, till by death we are delivered from it. It was therefore judged by them not only an impossible thing, but even an unjust, unworthy thing for God to raise these Bodies, to be united to those Souls whose happiness consisted in being delivered from the Body, and whose Punishment it was to be confined to it, that being according to thUt semel defuncti denuo existerent . M. Anton. l. 12. § 5 . Apud Orig. l. 5. p. 240. Philosophy, not to make them live, but die again; and therefore Celsus saith, The hope of the Resurrection of the Flesh is the hope  Worms, a filthy, an abominable, and an imp∣ble thing, which God neither will, nor can do. Now to this Objection the Apostle here returns a full and satisfactory Answer, by shewing the happy change which shall then pass upon the raised Body, and this he seems to do with some resemblance to the ancient Philosophy of the Pythagoraeans and Platonists, and to the Sentiments of the Jews. Ver. 36. Thou fool (who makest an enquiry about a matter of which thou hast an instance in the very seed thou sowest, for) that which thou sowest is not quickned except (first) it die, (and lye buried in the Earth.) Ver. 37. And (again) that which thou sow∣est, (when) thou sowest (it is) not that body which shall be (again produced,) but bare (or naked) grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. Ver. 38. But God giveth it a body (cloathed) as it hath pleased him, and (yet) to every seed (he giveth with the clothing) his own (kind ) Body. , naked grain.] Note here, tha thePirk. Eliezer. c. 33. p. 80. Jewish Rabbins use the same similitude of Grain in the Affair of the Resurrection, and speak also of a cloathing of the body raised, from the example of Grain raised with a covering. See the Note on 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4. Note also that St. Paul is not discoursing of the Identity of the raised Body, but only of the Qualities with which it is raised. Ver. 39. (And as) all flesh is not the same
(ind of) flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of man, another (kind of) flesh of beasts, ano∣ther of fishes, and another of birds. Ver. 40. And (as there is like difference in the qualities of bodies, for) there are also cele∣stial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. Ver. 41. (And in the Celestial Bodies) there is one Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another glory of the Stars; for one Star differ∣eth from another Star in glory. Ver. 42. So also is (it as to) the Resurrecti∣on of the dead, (the Body raised being in qua∣lities much different from the earthly Body we at present have, for) it is sown in corruption, (frail, mortal, subject to death and putrefaction) it is raised in incorruption, (not subject any more to death or dissolution.) Ver. 43. It is sown in dishonour, (with some dishonourable parts, 1 Cor. 12.23. a vile Body, Philip. 3.21. subject to filth ad deformity) it is raised in glory, (in clarity, and splendor, shining like the Sun, Matth. 13.43. and like Christ's glorious Body, Philip. 3.21. free from all defect, or deformity of its Members, and from any dishonourable parts, 1 Cor. 6.13.) it is sown in weakness, (subject to weakness by labour, to decays by age, to impotency, and wast∣ing by diseases,) it is raised in power, (nimble, strong, active, and that without renitency, or mo∣lestation, grief, pain, or lassitude. Ver. 44. It is sown a natural (Gr. an animal) body, (having multiplicity of Organs, Muscles, Tendons, Arteries, Veins, Nerves, by which, by the assistance of the animal and vital Spirits, it perceives, moves, and conveys nourishment to all its parts, and so wanting continual re∣cruits of Meat and Drink,) it is raised a spiri∣tual body, (possessed and acted by the Holy Spi∣rit, and advanced so far to the perfection of Spirits, as to be free from grosness, ponderosity, from needing rest, sleep, or sustenance;) there is a natural (Gr. animal) body, and there is a spiritual body. , an animal body.] It seems hence probable that the word sown doth not relate to the Bodies being laid in the Earth, but rather to its production into the World; for when it is interred, it is no more an animal body, but a Body void of Life; it is not only weak, but wholly destitute of power: And this appears yet further, from the following proof of these words, It is sown an animal Bo∣dy, for so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living Soul. The Apostle doth indeed, v. 36, 37. speak of Seed sown in the Earth. but then he speaks of it as still alive, and having its seminal virtue, or animal spirit in it, and after dying there; whereas our Bodies first die, and then are cast into the Earth. 2ly, Hence it is also probable that the Apo∣stle discourseth not here of the different de∣grees of Glory which the Saints hereafter shall enjoy; for he speaks only of what is raised, that is, the Body, and of the qualities belong∣ing to all Bodies that are raised. 3ly, Certain it is that the Apostle in thi Chapter discourseth only of the Resurrection of the Just, since 'tis alone their Bodies that shall undergo this happy change. 4ly, Observe that there is another sense of the 44th Verse, as good as that which I have given in the Paraphrase, viz. There is an ani∣mal Body, i. e. a Body fitted for this lower sensi∣ble state in which we live at present; and there is a spiritual Body, that is, a Body fitted for our spiritual and celestial state; in this state we are forced to serve our Bodies, and to attend their leisure, and mightily depend upon them in the operations of the Mind; in the other, our Bo∣dies shall wholly serve our Spirits, and minister to them, and depend upon them, and therefore may be stiled spiritual. But 5ly, That our Bodies shall be then spi∣ritual, thin, and aerial, is neither a new Doctrine, nor proper to the Followers of Origen, for so both St. Chrysostom and Theophylact upon the place allow it to be. What incredible thing assert we, saithL. 2. Ep. 42. Isidore Pleusiot, if we say the Body is small and aerial? for by this we do not deny it to be the same Body. And again the Apostle calls our Bodies spiritual, ,L. 3. Ep. 77. because they shall hereafter be light and etherial. And this which the Apostle here says, is suitable to the Philosophy of the Pythagoraeans and Platonists, who taught that good and pure Souls were by death delivered from those gross and earthly Bodies which press down the Soul, Wisd. 9.15. and were after the dissolution of the Body, said they, will be at the resurrection of the Body, saith he,. Procl. in Tim. l. 5. p. 250. . Hier. in Carm. Pyth. p. 306, 313. . Philopo∣nus. . Idem. Vide Testimonia Galeni, Pselli, Suidae, &c. apud D. Cudw. Syst. Intellect. l. 1. c. 5. p. 783-806. invested with thin and aerial, with active and spiritual, with bright and shining; and lastly, with Celestial and Eternal Bodies. Now to this plainly answers the Description of our raised Bodies here given by St. Paul, in answer to the second Question of the Philosophers at Corinth, with what Bodies do they come forth out of the Grave, declaring in their very terms, that this Body will be , a Spiritual and Celestial Body, v. 44, 46, 48, 49
2 Cor. 5.1. that it will be , an eter∣nal House, , an incor∣ruptible and immortal Body, v. 53, 54. that it will be raised , in glory, and so be , a shining body; the just, saith Christ, shall then shine as the Sun, as the brightness of the Fir∣mament, Matth. 13.43. and as the Stars, saith Daniel, Dan. 12.3. And this answers to the  which these Philosophers mention as the same with their , shining body. Lastly, it is raised in power, and this is in sense the same with their , agile bo∣dy, and of quick motion. Indeed the Parallel is so exact, that seeing I find nothing of this nature in the Life of Pythagoras writ by Dio∣genes aertius, or in Plato, but only in those Writers who lived since Christ's time, and were professed Enemies of Christianity, Hierocles, Porphyry, Proclus and Jamblicus, I am apt to suspect, that as in other things they apparent∣ly dressed up their Philosophy and Morality a∣new, to accommodate it the better to the Christian Philosophy, that so there might seem less need of Christianity, and particularly made the Felicity of Souls hereafter much like the Christian Doctrine, so that they might destroy, or render needless the Doctrine of the Resur∣rection; so they gave to the dying Souls of good Men this , or vehicle of a spi∣ritual, immortal, shining, heavenly body also, from the Christian Notion of the Change our raised Bodies should then undergo. Ver. 45. And so it is written, The first man Adam (from whom we all derive our Bodies, and our animal Life) was made a living soul, (Gen. 2 7. whereas) the last Adam (i. e. Christ) was made a quickning Spirit, (as having power to quicken, and confer eternal life on all his Members; or, as being the Giver of that quick∣ning Spirit by which we shall be raised from the dead, and made spiritual, as his body is.) , a quickning Spirit.] All the Ancients, till St. Austin, by a Spiritual Body, seem to understand a Body possessed, and acted by the Holy Spirit, as the Natural Body is by the animal and vital Spirits, and say that Christ was made a quickning Spirit by the Seed of the Holy Spirit, which unites him to all his Members, and confers on them a new Life and Immortality.Sic in fine verbum Patris & Spiritus Dei adunitus antiquae substantiae plasmationis Adae, viventem & perfectum efficit hominem capientem perfectum Patrem, ut quemadmodum in animali omnes mortui sumus, sic in spirituali omnes vivisma, L. 5. c. 1. Per Spiritum fnt corpora spiritualia, uti per Spiritum semper manentem habent vitam. Ibid. c. 7. & cap. 12. Irenaeus is very express and copious in this matter, saying, That as from the beginning of our frame in Adam, that inspi∣ration of Life which proceeded from God, united to the Body, animated Man, and made him a reasonable Creature; so in the end, the Word of the Father, and the Spirit of God, united to the old Substance of the frame of Adam, m a living and perfect Man, receiving the perfect Father; that as we all died in the animal, we may be all quickned in the spiritual Adam; and that by the Spirit the Bodies rising are made spiritual, as by the Spirit they have Life Eter∣nal. It is called spiritual, as putting on the Spirit, saithSicut ergo ante animale corpus caro recipiens animam, ita & postea spirituale induens spiritum. Tertullian. As receiving the whole energy and communion of the Spirit, saith. Methodius apud Oe∣cum. vide Chrysost. Hilarium Diaconum, Oecumenium & Theophylact. in locum. Methodius. And that the Resurrection of the Just shall be effected by the Spirit of God, seems to be plainly taught by the Apostle in these words, If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in yea, Rom. 8.10. And this agrees with the Opini∣on of the Jews, who ascribe the Resurrection to the Spirit from Ezek. 37.10. and in parti∣cular to the Spirit of the Messiah. And from this differs not much the Opinion of Theodoret and others, That Christ is made a quickning Spirit, because he himself being quickned by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. hath in himself the power to quicken, and raise the Bodies of his Servants to Eternal Life; for as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickneth them, so the Son quickneth whom he will, John 5.21. and as the Father hath life himself, so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself, v. 26. Ver. 46. (I say there is an animal body, and there is a spiritual body) Howbeit that (Body) was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, (Gr. animal) and afterwards that which is spiritual. Ver. 47. (For) the first man (Adam) is (was) of the earth, earthy, (having a Body formed of it, and so the animal Body derived from him must be earthy) the second man is the Lord (descending) from Heaven (to raise our Bodies, and advance them to that place.) , from Heaven.] Not as some phan∣cy, because Christ's Body was from Heaven, and not from the Virgin Mary; for the Scrip∣ture expresly teacheth, that he was begotten  from her Body, Matth. 1.16. Luke 1.35. and was the fruit of her Womb, Luke 1.42. that he was made , out of a Woman, and came from the Fathers  ac∣cording to the flesh, Rom. 9.5. And had his Body been derived from Heaven, it must have been immortal, as our Bodies will be when we bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam; both which things make it necessary to inter∣pret the Lord from Heaven, as I have done in the Paraphrase.
Ver. 48. As is (was) the earthy, such are they that are earthy, (and live in the animal Body as he did,) and as is the heavenly, such are they (to be) that are (to have) heavenly, (immortal and shining bodies.) Ver. 49. And as we have born the Image of the earthy (Adam, being begotten, after his fall, in his own likeness, with earthy mortal bo∣dies, Gen. 5.3.) so shall we also bear the i∣mage of the heavenly, (partaking in our bodies of his heavenly glory, he changing our vile bo∣dies into the likeness of his glorious body, Philip. 3.21.) , we shall bear.] Iraeneus l. 5. c. 9. Tertullian. de resur. carnis, cap. 49. & advers. Marcion. l. 5. c. 10. Cyprian. adv. Jud. l. 2. § 10. & l. 3. § 11. de Habitu Virg. Ed. Ox. p. 103. de Zelo & Livore, p. 226. Hilar. Dial. in locum. Hieron. in Isa. 52. F. 84. 1. read Portemus, which answers to the Greek , as reads St. Chrysostom, and as the Alexandrian and o∣ther Copies read. The other reading is own∣ed by Origen against Celsus twice, l. 5. p. 243. by Methodius; and Theodoret and Theophylact well note, that the words are not to be read by way of Exhortation,  let us bear, but , as a prediction of what we shall be; for the Apostle from v. 42. to this Verse, still passeth on from what we were, to what we shall be; and having said, as is the heavenly, such are (i. e. shall be) they that are heavenly; he proves this, because as we have born the image of the earthy Adam, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly. Note also that Philo speaks much like the Apostle; for he saith. Lib. 3. Alleg. ab initio. . De Mundi opif. p. 5. there are two kinds of Men, one made after the Image of God, and another made out of the Earth. The last he proves from the very words the Apostle useth to prove there is a natural or animal Body; the first from this, That God made Man after his own Image; which Image he stiles the Di∣vine Word, and says he is the , the heavenly Star, the Fountain of all sensible Stars. The last he calls the. Leg. alleg. l. 1. p. 43. . ib. p. 35. . De Opif. Mundi p. 23. earthy and corruptible Adam; the first the Adam made after the Image which is not, saith he, earthy, but heavenly. The one is heavenly, as being made after the Image of God, and so uncapable of any corruptible, or earthy Substance; the o∣ther out of Seminal Matter, which the Scrip∣ture calleth Earth. But then he saith, that the heavenly Man was formed first, and after him the earthy; and perhaps, for the correction of that Error, the Apostle might here say, That was not first which is spiritual, but that which was natural. Ver. 50. Now this I say, Brethren, that flesh and blood (such as ours is) cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither doth (or can) cor∣ruption inherit incorruption. , flesh and blood, &c.] Most of the Fathers interpret these words of Flesh and Blood not naturally, but morally taken for the corrupt Affections of the Flesh. But 1. Though Flesh it self in Scripture some∣times bears this sense, yet Flesh and Blood joyntly, never seems to have this import in the Scripture. 2. It is plain, and confessed byNon de operibus, sed de modo resurrectionis. Ep. 146. ad Consent. St. Au∣stin, that the Apostle is not here speaking of the requisites to make our Souls meet to inhe∣rit this Kingdom, but of the manner of the Resurrection of the Body. 3. The Apostle speaks of Flesh and Blood as subject to corruption here, v. 52. or of such Flesh and Blood as must be changed, and put on Incorruption, and so of Flesh and Blood naturally taken. 4. 'Tis evident to sense that Flesh may be cut, and divided, and Blood let out, and so must, whilst they continue such, be subject to Corruption; and also that an heavenly, and a spiritual Body, an House from Heaven, can∣not consist of such Flesh and Blood as we have at present. It therefore must be said, that though the same Flesh and Blood may rise from the Grave, it will then, or afterwards, receive such a change as will render it spiritual and incorrup∣tible, and so perhaps, when it comes to Hea∣ven, will not be Flesh and Blood; or that it will be clothed with such an heavenly Body as will keep it from a possibility of Corruption; and so the import of these words may be this, That Flesh and Blood unchanged, and unclothed with its heavenly Body, cannot inherit the King∣dom of God. Ver. 51. Behold, I shew you a mystery, (i. e. a thing not known to you before,) we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed (in our Bodies, before they enter into this Kingdom.) , we shall not all sleep, &c.] This reading is
much to be preferred before either of the other two, viz. we shall all rise, or we shall all sleep, but shall not all be changed. As being 1. Not only the reading of Chrysostom, Theodoret and Theophylact on the place, but al∣so ofContra Marcion, § 5. p. 143. Origen, Theodotus, Apollinarius, St. Jerom, and of Pseudo Justin, qu. 61. and 109. 2. As being inforced from the next words repeated thus, and we shall be changed, from the like words 1 Thess. 4.17. and from the ob∣servation of almost all the Commentators on the place, that the Apostle in this Chapter speaks only of the Resurrection of the Just; from the falshood of the other words, we shall not all be changed, seeing the Bodies of the wicked will certainly be changed by the fire they go into; and lastly from the sense, for what sense is it to say, we shall not be changed in a moment, and to add this reason of that saying, viz. for the dead shall be raised incor∣ruptible, and we shall be changed, Note also that it cannot be hence conclu∣ded, that he, and the rest of the Apostles, should live to the general Resurrection. No, he else∣where discovers his Expectation, that the same God who raised up Jesus, should raise them also from the dead, 2 Cor. 4.14. He speaks this therefore, not in his own, but in the person of all pious Christians that should then live. See the Note on 1 Thess. 4.15, 17. Ver. 52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead (in Christ) shall be raised incorruptible, and we (Christians that are then alive) shall be changed (as to this mortal body.) , in a moment.] It is the observa∣tion ofEp. 20. To. 3. F. 66. A. St. Jerom, that by these words the Apostle, Cunctam primae, & secundae resur∣rectionis excludit fabulam, destroys the Fable of the First and second Resurrection. He doth it sufficiently in the description of the state of all the raised Bodies of the Just. For, though the Patrons of this opinion would avoid it, 'tis certain that the old Assertors of it held, that they should be raised to enjoy the plea∣sures of Meat and Drink, asEt adjacentem habebunt paratam mensam à Deo pascentem eos epulis. L. 5. c. 33. Irenaeus speaks. Now can thin, spiritual, glorious, heavenly bodies, and such as are made like to Christ's glorious body, eat, and drink, and enjoy these Sensual Pleasures? Moreover, who shall be changed? those that already have been raised a thousand years? if not, they must not be a∣live, for Christians then alive shall be changed; but if they must be changed, then must their Bodies be raised corruptible, and they must twice bear the image of the earthy, or the a∣mal Adam. Ver. 53. For this corruptible (Body) must put on incorruption, and this mortal (Body) must put on immortality. Ver. 54. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swal∣lowed up in victory; (i. e. is overcome for e∣ver, so as never to have any strength or power over our Bodies any more.) , shall put on incorruption.] The Scripture, and all the Ancients, speak of a cloathing which our raised Bodies shall put on. Thus. Psellus in his Commentary on the Chaldaick Oracles, saith the Chaldees give the Soul two cloathings; one of the spiritual Body, weaved out of that which is subject to sense; the other a shining thin Body, not sub∣ject to the touch, which they call the Superficies; and the Conjecture of the Jews is this, that it shall be a cloathing of light, or of a pure flame. So the ancient BookVoisin in pug. fid. part. 3. dist. 2. c. 8. p. 491. Zohar saith, That the Bodies of the Just shall be cloathed with the light of Glory. R. Phineas saith, the blessed God will give to the Bodies of the Just  an ornament, according to that of Isai∣ah, chap. 58.11. He shall satisfie the Soul  with white or splended things. And R. Levi, that the soul, in the state of its glory, sustains it self by the superiour light; and when it returns to the body, it shall come with this light; and and then the Body shall shine as with the bright∣ness of the Heavens. And this agrees with the Transfiguration of our Lord's Body, Matth. 17.2. and with his Appearance to St. Paul, Acts 9.3. and to St. John, Rev. 1.14, 15. and to the Descriptions made in the Old Testa∣ment of the Just rising from their Graves, that they shall shine as the brightness of the Firma∣ment, and as the Stars for ever, Dan. 12.3. Wisd. 3.7. And in the New, That they shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father, Matth. 13.43. And thus may they be salted and preserved from corruption by fire, Mar. 9.49. , Death is swal∣lowed up in victory.] Or for ever, as  often signifies. So, shall the sword devour  for ever? 2 Sam. 2.26. Job 36.7. He will set them upon the throne  for ever, Jer. 3.5. Will he keep his Anger  for ever, Lam. 3.20. Why dost thou forget us  for ever, Amos 1.11. His anger did tear for ever, . And Chap. 8.7. He will not forget their works  for ever. Nor is
the Phrase  used in any other sense in the Septuagint. Though therefore Death is re∣presented as the last Enemy to be vanquished, v. 26. And the Apostle asks, O Grave where is thy Victory; and gives thanks to God, who giveth us the victory, v. 55, 57. yet seeing he hath given us this victory by swallowing death up for ever, by swallowing up death of life e∣ternal, 2 Cor. 5.4. I see no reason by Mr. Clerks good leave, why we should think the Apostle had not here respect to the constant use of this Phrase in the Septuagint. Ver. 55. (So that Christians may sing trium∣phantly in the words of the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 13.14.) O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is (now) thy victory? (It is for ever swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. Ver. 56. The sting of death,  caused death) is (was) sin, and  sin (to subject us to it) is (w)  (threatning death for it.) Ver. 57. But thanks be to God  us the victory (over it) through  resurrection of) our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 58. Wherefore my beloved Brethren, be ye stedfast (and) unmoveable, (by any temp∣tations from this faith, and be ye) always a∣bounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know, your labour is not in vain in the Lord, (but shall be plentifully recompenced by him at the resurrection of the just.) CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. NOW concerning the Collection for the Saints, (i. e. the suffer∣ing Christians in Judea) as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Ver. 2. Upon the first day of the week, (the day of your Christian Assemblies) let every one of you lay by him in store, (on this ac∣count, according) as God hath prospered him, that there be no (farther need of) gatherings when I come. , upon the first day of the week.] So we read in St. Matthew, that our Lord rose from the dead , upon the first day of the week, Matth. 28.1. in St. Mark, that the Sabbath being over, Mary Magdalen, and others came early , the first day of the week, Mark 16.9. and found Christ risen from the dead; and in St. Luke, that they rested on the Sabbath day, according to the Commandment, and that they came to the Sepulchre , on the first day of the week, Luke 23.56.24.1. and so accordingly saith St. John, John 20.1. So that this Phrase doth certainly import the first day of the week, the day of our Lord's Resurrection from the dead. Moreover  may be rendred every first day, asLex. Constant. , in every City; , in every Family; , viritim, man by man; , every month; and , sigillatim. 2ly, Observe that the Jews in every City where they dwelt had theirBuxt. Lex. Talmud. voce  p. 375. voce  p. 2096. Collectors of Alms, who in the Week days went about the City collecting Alms, according to the quali∣ty and wealth of every Jew; and in the even∣ing of the Sabbath distributed to the Poor a∣mong the Jews, as much as was needful for the following Week: And after this Example the Apostle seems to have ordained, that the Christians should lay up for the Poor, or make provisions for them on the Lord's day. 3ly, Observe, that from the beginning the Christians did assemble on the first day of the Week, called by them the Lord's day, to per∣form their Religious Worship,. Apud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 23. to read the Scriptures, to preach, and celebrate the Lord's Supper. This day being the Lord's day, we keep it holy, saith. Dionysius Bishop of Co∣rinth. On Sunday,Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 96, 99. Vide Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. § 9. Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. p. 744. Orig. contr. Celsum. l. 8. p. 392. Melito Sard. apud Euseb. l. 4. c. 26. Iren. apud Author. qu. & resp. qu. 115. saith Justin, all Christians in the City or Country meet together, because that is the day of our Lord's Resurrecti∣on, and then we read the Writings of the Pro∣phets, and Apostles; this being done, the Presi∣dent makes an Oration to the Assembly, to ex∣hort them to imitate, and do the things they heard; then we all joyn in prayer; and after that we celebrate the Sacrament. 4ly, Observe, that the Apostle gave order that here, and in the Churches of Galatia, Collections should be made for the Poor on that day; and that all Christians, in comply∣ance with that Precept, still offered their Alms upon that day. So. Ibid. Justin Martyr; Then they that are able and willing give what they think fit, and what is thus collected is laid up
in the hands of the President, who distributes it to Orphans and Widows, and other Christians, as their wants require. 5ly, Observe, that no good Reason can be given why the Apostle should limit the Col∣lections of the Churches of Corinth and Gala∣tia to the first day of the week, but this, that this Day was appointed for the Worship of our Lord, and so more fit for the performance of those Duties which concerned his distressed Members in those times; for as the Works of Charity and Mercy are proper Duties of this Day, so doth the Day contain a special Mo∣tive in it to enlarge their Charity, as being the Day in which they were begotten to a live∣ly hope through the Resurrection of Christ Jesus from the dead, of an Inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.3. and in which they constantly par∣ticipated of his precious Body and Blood; and therefore having received Spiritual Things so plentifully from Christ, must be more ready to impart somewhat of their Temporals to his needy Servants. Ver. 3. And when I come, whosoever you shall approve by Letters, them will I send (or them will I with my Letters send) to bring your Liberality to Jerusalem. Ver. 4. And if it be (thought) meet that I go also, they shall go with me (to be wit∣nesses of the distribution of your Charity.) Ver. 5. Now I will come unto you when I pass (or shall have passed) through Macedo∣nia; for I do (intend shortly to remove hence, and to) pass through Macedonia. , I do pass through Macedo∣nia.] Not presently, but after I have finish∣ed my stay at Ephesus, v. 8. For that St. Paul writ this Epistle from Ephesus, and not from Philippi, may be gathered from the Salutati∣ons in the close of it, not from the Churches of Macedonia, but of Ephesus. In this second Epistle, he saith, He passed from Troas to Ma∣cedonia, and that there Titus came to him, 2 Cor. 2.13.7.5, 6. who was not come to him when he writ his first Epistle. Ver. 6. And it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter with you, that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I go. Ver. 7. For I will not see you now by the way, but I trust (hereafter) to tarry a while with you, if the Lord permit. Ver. 8. But I will tarry (still) at Ephesus till Pentecost. , till Pentecost.] It there∣fore was the following Pentecost that he hast∣ned to be at Jerusalem, Acts 20.16. Ver. 9. For a great door and effectual is o∣pened to me (for propagation of the Gospel there;) and there are many Adversaries (of the truth, especially those of the Circumcision, which makes my stay there necessary.) Ver. 10. Now if Timotheus come to you, see that he may be with you without fear (of disturbance from the Factious) for he work∣eth the work of the Lord, as I also do. , if Timothy come to y Hence it appears that this Epistle was  sent by Timothy, for then he must have co to them. Ver. 11. Let no man therefore despise h (because of his youth, 1 Tim. 4.12.) but co∣duct (ye) him forth in peace that he may come to me, for I look for him with th Brethren, (or I, and the Brethren, look for him.) , conduct him forth.] It is the observation of the Reverend and Lear: Dr. Hammond, that the word  signi∣fies not only to accompany one, and bring him on his way, as v. 6. but also to provide for the Necessaries of his Journey. But this seems not suitable to the inquiry of the Apo∣stle, Did I make again of you by any of  whom I sent to you? Did Titus make a gain of you? 2 Cor. 12.17. Ver. 12. As touching our Brother Apolls, I greatly desired him to come to you, b his will was not at all to come to you at this time: but he will come when he shall have convenient time. , he was not ∣ling to come now.] Perhaps because he would not countenance a Faction that was begun un∣der his name, by his presence with them; which, saith Aquinas, shews he was not their Bishop, as some of the Ancients have represented him; for then he ought not to have left his Flock under so great dis∣ders. Ver. 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith quit ye (your selves) like men, be strong. Ver. 14. Let all your things be done with Charity, (or a sincere desire of your Brethren weal.) Ver. 15. I beseech you Brethren, (seeing) ye know the house of Stephanas, that it s the first fruits of (the Gospel in) Achaia, and that they have (ever since) addicted themselves to the ministry of the Saints. Ver. 16. That you submit your selves to such, (giving reverence and honour to them) and to every one that helpeth with us, and la∣boureth. Ver. 17. I am glad of the coming of Ste∣phanas, Fortunatus and Achaius, (whom y sent with your Letters of Enquiry to me)  that (account of your Affairs) which was lacking on your part (in your Letter) they have supplied. Ver. 18. (I am glad, I say,) For they have refreshed my Spirit (with their presence  discourse) and (will at their return refr yours, therefore acknowledge ye them  are such. Ver. 19. The Churches of Asia salute you Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the Church that is in their House, (i. e. their Christian Family.)
, with the Church in their House.] This Phrase doth not im∣port that the whole Church of Corinth, &c. met in such a Family; for then the Salutati∣on would be the Salutation of all the Christi∣ans in that place; but that this is not so, is e∣vident from so many Salutations directed to other Persons and Families in the same place. So Rom. 16.5. Salute Aquila and Priscilla, and the Church in their House. See the Note there. And then follow Salutations to many other Persons, and Brethren of the Church. So Coloss. 4.15. Salute the Brethren in Laodi∣cea, and Nymphas, with the Church in his House. See the Note there. So Philemon 2. we read thus, Paul a prisoner to Philemon— to Appia, to Archippus our fellow Soldier, and to the Church in thy House: And here, after this Salutation, follows the words, All the Brethren greet you. It rather seems to signifie, as all the Greek Scholiasts, and Grotius say, a Family consist∣ing wholly of Christian Converts, as was the Jaylor's House, Acts 16.31, 32. and that of Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue at Corinth, Acts 18.8. For when it was other∣wise, and the Family was not entirely con∣verted, the Apostle alters his style, and saith only, Salute them which are of Aristobulus houshold, and of the houshold of Narcissus in the Lord, Rom. 16.10, 11. Salute Asyncre∣tus, Phlegon, &c. and the Brethren that are with them, v. 14, 15. The Saints that are with them. They of the House of Caesar salute you, Coloss. 4.22. Ver. 20. All the Brethren greet you: Greet ye one another with an holy kiss (See Note on Rom. 16.16.) Ver. 21. The Salutation of me Paul with my own hand. , with my own hand.] He wri∣ting by an Amanuensis, Rom. 16.22. still closed his Epistle with his own Hand, as a Token that it came from him, 2 Thess. 3.17. Ver. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Marana tha; (i. e. Accursed when the Lord comes to judgment.) .] That Maranatha is a Syriack word, and signifiesMaran Atha magis Syrum est quam Hebraeum, & interpretatur, Dominus venit. Hieron. Ep. 137. ad Marcellam. Pseud. Amb. in locum. Theodoret in locum. Ita Philo, Carabas quidam insanus ab Alexandrinis in ludibrium Agrippae  vocabatur, . Contra Flaccum. p. 751. F. Vox ista Syra in Novo Testamento  Dominus venit, occurrit 1 Cor. 16.22. quâ extremum Anathema indica∣bant, quo ex omni societate homo exclusus, & omnibus paenis humanis major committebatur judicio severissimo Anathematis Divini, & exitio aeterno, quasi dicere voluissent prisci illi pij veniat Dominus, & eum aeterno exitio feriat, commissus sit Christi totius mundi judicis adventui, ut aeternâ ipsius maledictione pereat. In voce  p. 1248. the Lord comes, most of the ancient Interpreters inform us. Buxtorf gives us the full sense of it, saying, It is a Syrian word, by which they signified the outmost Anathema, by which a Man, being ex∣cluded from all Humane Society, and obnoxious to greater Punishments then Man could inflict, was committed to the severest Judgment of the Divine Anathema, and to Eternal Destruction: As if those pious Men of old would have said, Let the Lord come, and smite him with Eter∣nal Perdition; Let him be reserved to the coming of the Judge of the whole World, that he may perish by his Everlasting Curse. Ver. 23. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Ver. 24. My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE Second Epistle of St. PAƲL TO THE CORINTHIANS. THAT this Epistle was writ a year after the first, is probably collected from these words, Chap. 9.2. Achaia was ready a year ago; for he ha∣ving given Instructions for the Collection only at the Close of his first Epistle, they could not have the forwardness here mentioned before that time. Now that the first Epistle was written early in the Year 55. or 57. appears from these words in it, I will stay at Ephesus till Pentecost, Chap. 16.8. For he staid some considerable time in Asia; after his purpose to leave Ephesus, and go to Macedonia, Acts 19.21, 22. and yet making here his Apology for not wintering at Corinth, as he thought to do, 1 Cor. 16.6. this Epistle must be writ after Winter, and so when a new Year was begun. It therefore seems to be written after his se∣cond coming to Macedonia mentioned, Acts 20.3. For (1.) 'twas written after he had been at Troas, and had left the place to return to Macedonia; now that was at his second going thither. See Note on Chap. 2.12. (2.) 'Twas written when Timothy was with him; now when he left Ephesus to go into Macedonia, Timothy went not with him, but was sent be∣fore him, Acts 19.22. but at his second going through Macedonia, Timothy was with hi Acts 20.4. (3.) He speaks of some Macedo∣nians that were like to come with him, Chap. 9.4. Now at his second going from Macedo∣nia, there accompanied him Aristarchus, Se∣cundus, and Gaius of Thessalonica the Me∣tropolis of Macedonia, Acts 20.4. And (4.) the Postscript saith this Epistle was wr∣ten from Philippi, as we find it in Theodor and Oecumenius, where St. Paul was till the days of Unleavened Bread, Acts 20.6. It there∣fore seems to be sent from thence to them by Titus, and some other Person, not long before Paul's coming to them, which he speaks of  instant, Chap. 13.1. and that which he  now ready to do, Chap. 12.14. and did, saith Dr. Lightfoot, in his Journey from Philipp to Troas; he sailing about from Philippi to Corinth, to make good his promise; whilest the rest that were with him, Acts 20.4. went di∣rectly the next Cut to Troas, and there w for him.
A Paraphrase and Comment UPON THE Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle TO THE CORINTHIANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. PAUL an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timothy our Brother, to the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints which are in all Achaia. All the Saints.] i. e. Christians. See Note on 1 Cor. 1.1. Ver. 2. Grace be (given) to you, and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Je∣sus Christ. , Grace and Peace.] May that Grace and Favour of God, on which your Sal∣vation and Happiness depends, Tit. 2.11. and that Peace which passeth understanding, Phi∣lip. 4.7. and is the Effect of the Divine Fa∣vour, be continually with you, and derived from God the Father the Fountain of all Bles∣sings, and from Jesus Christ the Procurer and Dispenser of them, 1 Cor. 1.4. Eph. 1.3. And from our Lord Jesus Christ.] See Note on 1 Cor. 1.3. Ver. 3. Blessed be God, even (our God, and) the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Fa∣ther of Mercies, and the God of all Com∣fort. , the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.] Why, saith Schihtingius, should God be stiled thus, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, if Christ be God equally with the Fa∣ther, seeing by being thus distinguished from God, he seems to be denied to be God. I answer, He is by these words denied to be God the Father, since that would render him Father to himself; but his being thus di∣stinguished from God the Father, hinders not his being God of God the Father, who by way of Eminency is sometimes absolutely stiled God, because he is the Fountain of the Deity. For as the words our Lord, ascribed here to Christ, do not exclude the Father from being our Lord, so the word God ascribed to God the Father, excludes not Christ from being what St. Thomas stiles him, our Lord and our God, John 20.28. And as God was under the Old Testament stiled the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to confirm the Faith of the Jews in the Promises made to them, and their Seed, so is he usually in the New Testament stiled the Fa∣ther of our Lord Jesus Christ, to confirm to us his Love in Christ Jesus, his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased; and to assure us that he is, as here it follows, the Father of Mer∣cies in the Plural, to signifie, according to the Hebrew way of speaking, the Greatness, and Multitude of his Mercies, and the God of all Consolation, as being the Giver of that Para∣clyte, or Holy Spirit, whence all our Com∣forts are derived. Ver. 4. Who comforteth us in all our Tri∣bulations, (by that inward peace and earnest of the Spirit, he gives under them,) that we may be able to comfort them which are in trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. In all our tribulations.] God's Servants
never wanting his Comforts in all their Suffer∣ings for his sake. Ver. 5. For as the Sufferings of Christ a∣bound in us, so our Consolation also abound∣eth by Christ. , the Sufferings of Christ.] The Sufferings of Christ's Members for his sake are stiled his Sufferings, because they are Evils inflicted on his Members out of Enmity to him, and by reason of their Mystical Uni∣on to him, and the Sympathy he has with them in their Sufferings, Luke 10.16. Acts 9.4. Isa. 63.9. Hence is he said  to suffer with us in our Infirmities, Hebr. 4.15. But when the Greek Fathers add here, That. Chrysost. . Oecum Theoph. Christ suffered more in his Members then he did in his own Person; this sounds harsh in the Ears of most Divines, and shews they had not those thoughts of our Lord's Sufferings and Satisfaction which we have. , our Consolation.] Abounds by Christ, because as he promised, so he con∣fer'd the Spirit of Consolation on those who suffer'd for his ae; so that though they re∣ceived the Word with much Affliction, they did it also with joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thess. 1.6. having the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. of Glory, and of God resting on them, 2 Tim. 1.7. 1 Pet. 4.14. See here v. 21, 22. Ver. 6. And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual (Gr. wrought) in (or by) the enduring the same sufferings which we also suffer, (and which by our Example you are encouraged to endure;) or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation, (which is accomplished by your patient perseverance un∣der all your Sufferings, Matth. 5.12.24.13. 2 Cor. 4.17. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. James 1.12.) Ver. 7. And our hope of you is stedfast, knowing that as you are partakers of the sufferings (we endure, 1 Cor. 10.13.) so shall ye be also of the consolation (we enjoy in all our sufferings). Ver. 8. (Our Sufferings, I say,) For we would not, Brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength, inso∣much that we despaired even of life. Ver. 9. But we (therefore) had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God that raiseth the dead. Ver. 10. Who (then) delivered us from so great a death, and (daily) doth deliver us, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. , from so great a death.] Most Interpreters refer what is said in these three last Verses to the Commotion raised a∣gainst Paul by Demetrius at Ephesus, Acts 1. from v. 26. to the end of that Chapter. But we read not that in that Commotion any Has were laid upon St. Paul, or that he suffered any thing. He therefore had no occasion  it to say, that he was pressed above mea, and above strength, so as to despair of ; that he had the Sentence of Death within ; and that he was delivered from so great a de, and as it were raised from the dead; thse high Expressions rather seem to signfie that he indeed was put to flight with Beasts at E∣phesus, (as he speaks 1 Cor. 15.32. See the Note there,) and was by God delivered from them. Ver. 11. You also helping together by Pray∣er for us, that for the gift bestowed upon s (or the favour confer'd on us) by the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many on our behalf. , you also helping together by prayer for us.] Hence note, That the more Publick Prayers are, the more prevailing they will be; and also that God will be more glorified by the Thanks∣givings rendred for the success of them. But whereas Estius hence pleads for Prayers to the Souls of Saints departed, the practice of the Apostle here, and elsewhere, is a strong Argument against them. For he passionately intreats the Christians living at Rome, to strie together with him in their prayers to God, Rom. 15.30. the Corinthians to help together with him in prayer, 2 Cor. 1.11. the Ephesians to pray for him with all perseverance, Eph. 6 18, 19. the Colossians to continue in prayer for him, Coloss. 4.1, 2, 3. the Thessalonians to pray for him that the Word of the Lord might have free course, and be glorified, 1 Thess. 5.25. and that he may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, 2 Thess. 3.1, 2. and the believing Jews to pray for him that he might sooner be restored to them, Hebr. 13, 18, 19. But in all his Epistles we have not one Petition of like nature directed unto any Saint departed; whereas had he thought them capable of hear∣ing him, and their Addresses more effectual for the same ends, we may reasonably think his Zeal would have prompted him to put up his Requests unto them, and leave us some Examples of this nature. , the gift bestowed upon us.] The word  in the New Testament always importing a Spiritual Gift, must be interpreted here of the Gifts bestowed on St. Paul for the discharge of his Apostolical Fun∣ction; and if the right reading here be , on our behalf, the sense of this Verse may run thus, We trust that he will still deli∣ver us for the furtherance of the Gospel, through
the assistance of your Prayers, that so the Gift being exercised by us through the joynt suffrage of many persons for the benefit of many, thanks may be returned by many for us. If  on your behalf, as other Copies have it, be the right reading, the sense runs thus, I hope to be still preserved by your prayers for the benefit of the Church, that so the Gift bestowed upon us, being made useful to the benefit of others by the prayers of so many, thanks may be given to God by many on your behalf. Which soever be the true reading, that he speaks of the Spi∣ritual Gift confer'd upon him, will be evident from the following words. Ver. 12. For (in all our afflictions) our re∣joycing is this, the testimony of our consci∣ence, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in this world, and more abundantly to you wards. , in the grace of God.] ,Cum multis donis spiritualibus. Grot. i. e. by Signs and Miracles; that is, according to the Wisdom of the Spirit, and the miraculous Power given us by the Grace of God for the Propagation of the Gospel; So St. Chryso∣stom. Which Exposition, saith he, is confirmed from those words, and more abundantly to you wrd; for the Apostle's sincerity and care to walk according to the Rules of the Gospel, was every where the same, but the powerful Operations and Gifts of the Holy Ghost seem to have been more abundantly exercised by him in, and vouchsafed by him to the Church in which he staid so long, and of which he had so particular a Promise that Christ would be with him in his preaching to them, Acts 18.10, 11. Ver. 13. (And of the truth of this you may rest assured,) For we write no other things unto you (of it) then what you read (Gr. know, remember) or acknowledge; and I trust you shall acknowledge, even to the end. , which you your selves know, Chrys. , which you remember, Oecum. Theoph. Ver. 14. As also you have acknowledged us in part, (i. e. as to the sounder part of the Church. See Note on Chap. 2.5. Though some have represented us as walking according to the flesh, Chap. 10.2. that we are (just matter of) your rejoycing, as ye also are (at present, and much more will be) ours in the day of the Lord Jesus. Ver. 15. And in this confidence (of you) I was minded to come to you before (this time,) that you might have a second benefit (or grace.) , a second benefit, or grace.] I coming to establish you, Rom. 1.11. and to promote your joy, v. 24. Hence it appears that the Apostle had been only once with them, when he writ this Ver. 16. And to pass by you (though not so as to see you in that passage, 1 Cor. 16.7.) into Macedonia, and to come again (Gr. and again to come) out of Macedonia to you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judae. , and to pass by you into Macedonia.] Interpreters Ancient and Modern, are much troubled how to re∣concile these words with what the Apostle had said in his former Epistle, I will come unto you when I have passed through Macedonia, 1 Cor. 16.5. For there he expresly declares, his pur∣pose was to go first to Macedonia, and then to come to Corinth from thence: Here, say they, he declares he purposed first to come to Co∣rinth, and then to Macedonia, and return back again from Macedonia to Corinth; but the A∣postle seems to say no more here, then he did there. There he declares that he would first go to Macedonia; but he adds also, that he would go from Ephesus, passing by them into Macedonia; saying also, that he would not then see them, , in his passage by them, v. 7. and here he only saith, he purposed  to pass by them into Macedonia; but saith not that he would call upon them in that pas∣sage, but only when he came again from Ma∣cedonia, and intended to go to Syria; which he did not, partly by reason of Titus his ab∣sence, who was not yet returned to him to give him an account of their Affairs, but went again from Troas to Macedonia, 2 Cor. 2.12. where he met Titus, Chap. 7.5, 6. and part∣ly by reason of the Jews, who way laid him in his passage to Syria, Acts 20.3. And for this delay, and non-performance of his pur∣pose, that he came not from Macedonia the first time he went thither, to winter with them, he makes this Apology. See the Pre∣face to this Epistle. Ver. 17. When therefore I was thus mind∣ed, (or resolved thus) did I (afterwards) use lightness (in changing this resolution,) or the things that I purpose, do I purpose (them) according to the flesh (or carnal interests,) that with me there should be yea, yea, and (again) nay, nay, (i. e. inconstancy and mutabi∣lity to serve my carnal interests, so that you should hence gather that in preaching the Go∣spel of Christ, I walk according to the flesh? Chap. 10.2. , according to the flesh.] Perhaps the Judaizers might object this, because be∣ing in Greece, Acts 20.2. and so near to Co∣rinth, and having passed through Macedonia, he came not to go by them into Syria, because the Jews laid wait for him by the way, but returned back to Macedonia without seeing them, v. 3. This, I say, they might inter∣pret
a consulting of his Carnal Interests. Ver. 18. (No surely) But as (sure as) God is true, our word towards you was not yea, and nay, (i. e. our preaching was not variable, we now saying one thing, anon another.) , but as God is true.] The Phrase , God is faithful, is used where there is no Oath intended, as 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom we are called; and Chap. 10.13. , but God is faith∣ful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able. But here the Phrase being used absolutely, seems rather to be a form of swearing. , was not yea and nay.] i. e. It was not with any variance, but by his assistance, we all said still the same thing, and promised the same advantages to those that should believe in Christ; or it was not the preaching of what was uncertain, but fully confirmed to you by the power we received from him. That this is the true import of this Phrase, yea, yea, nay, nay, we learn from the Jews, from whom it is taken; for they say,Buxt. Lex. Talm. in the word  p. 642. Et there is a yea which is as nay, and a nay which is as yea; viz. when a man asserts or denies a thing Ironically; butFlorileg. p. 329. the just mans yea is yea, and his nay is nay; that is, whatever he affirms, or denies, is true, and cer∣tain. When a man gives a Bill of divorce to his Wife, we try him, say they, three times,Cartwright. Mellif. Hebr. in hunc locum. whether his nay be nay, and his yea, yea, that is, whether he continue firm in his reso∣lution to divorce her. And whereas the He∣brew saith, that when Elijah said to the Jews, How long will you halt betwixt two Opinions? if God be God, follow him; if Baal, follow him; the people answered him not a word, 1 Kings 18.21. The Jewish Gloss runs thus, They would not say unto him yea or nay, because they were doubtful. And whereas Exod. 20.1. we read thus, And God spake all these words, saying, R. Solomon notes that the word  teacheth that they answered to every yea yea, and to e∣very no no; i. e. they engaged to do the affir∣mative, and not to do the negative Pre∣cepts. Ver. 20. For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, (i. e. are true and certain through him,) to the glory of God (de∣monstrated in the confirmation of them) by us. Or all the Promises of God made to you, are true and certain through Christ the Au∣thor of the New Covenant established upon better promises, to the glory of that God who made them by us. Ver. 21. Now he that stablisheth us with you in (the doctrine of) Christ, and who hath anointed us (with the Holy Ghost) is God. Ver. 22. Who hath also (thus) sealed us (up to the day of redemption, Eph. 4.30.) and given us the earnest of the Spirit (to be the pledge and assurance of it, 2 Cor. 5.5. Eph. 1.13, 14.) See Note on 1 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. , who hath sealed us.] Sealing was used not only as a mark of Distin∣ction of what belongs to us, from what is o∣thers, but also for Confirmation; as when we set our Seal to a Bond, Indenture, Will, Co∣venant, or Ordinance; to a Covenant, Neh. 9.38. to an Evidence, Jer. 32.10. to an Or∣dinance, that it may not be reversed, 1 Kings 21.8. Esth. 8.8. Isa. 8.16. In which sense the Circumcision of Abraham is stiled a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Rom. 4.11. and the Corinthians, The Seal of St. Pauls Apostle∣ship. For Preservation and Security, as when we seal up our Treasures, Deut. 32.34. so the Servants of God were sealed in their foreheads, Rev. 7.3.9.4. so the foundation of God stand∣eth sure, having the seal; the Lord knoweth who are his, 2 Tim. 2.19. and so the Jews made the Sepulchre secure, sealing the stones, Matth. 27.66. In all which senses was the Holy Spirit given to Believers, as a Mark that they belonged to Christ, Rom. 8.9. and were the Sons of God, Gal. 4.6. As a Confirmation of the Covenant God had made with them, and of the Blessings promised, he being the Earnest and Pledge of them, and so a Securi∣ty to them against doubting of them; and al∣so a Preserver of them in the Faith against all Temptations, 2 Tim. 1.7. 1 Pet. 4.14. Ver. 23. (It was not therefore out of light∣ness,) But I call God for a record upon my soul, that (it was meerly) to spare you, (that) I came not yet unto Corinth. , I call God to record upon my soul.] The Apostle swears so oft in this Epistle, that I think it not amiss to give an account of the reason of his doing so; which may be best done from the consideration of the Occasion, the Reason, and the End of Assertory Oaths, which are the only Oaths he useth. 1st, Then, there must be some , i. e. some doubting of, or contradiction to the thing asserted, which must give occasion to an assertory Oath, Hebr. 6.16. there being no need to confirm what no body doubts of in this solemn manner. Now in the Church of Corinth, the Authority and the Sincerity of the Apostle was much doubted of, he being acknowledged of them but in part, v. 14. some seeking still a proof of Christ speaking by him, Chap. 13.3. and others looking on him as one that walked after the flesh, Chap. 10.2. this therefore gave occasion to the assertory Oaths so frequent in this Epistle.
2ly, The end of an Oath is , for confirmation of the thing asserted, Hebr. 6.16. and if Oaths were allowed, and thought ne∣cessary in Civil Matters for this end, they must be more allowable in Sacred and Spiritual Matters, which concerned the Truth of the Gospel, and the Salvation of Souls for the same end, which manifestly was here the Case. 3ly, The Matter thus confirmed by an Oath must be such, as could not be sufficiently con∣firmed by other Witnesses of the Fact, he be∣ing only privy to them who doth thus con∣firm them; for where sufficient Testimonies of the Matter of Fact can be produced, an Oath seems the less needful in the case. And that this was so in all the Instances in which the A∣postle thus confirms his sayings, will be easily discerned from the perusal of the places in which the Apostle thus asserts the Truth of what he had affirmed, viz. Chap. 1.18, 23.11.10, 11, 31.12.19. Ver. 24. (Yet this I say) Not as we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy, for by faith you stand, (, for ye have stood in the faith.) , for you have stood in the saith.] , Theodoret. that is, I do not by this Threat challenge to my self a power to exercise any dominion over you on the account of your Faith, as I did upon Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Tim. 1.10. and intend to do upon some of your false Teach∣ers, when your obedience is fulfilled, Chap. 10.6. For I acknowledge you have generally stood firm in the Profession of the Christian Faith, (though some among you once que∣stioned the great Article of the Resurrection of the Body, 1 Cor. 15.12.) but I desire by it to excite you to cure your Divisions, and Con∣tentions, and reform your gross Miscarriages, Chap. 12.20, 21. that so I may not be found towards you such as you would not, nor create to you any farther trouble, but may be a pro∣moter of that joy which you will find in such a Reformation of your selves. CHAP. II. Verse 1. (AND indeed an helper of your joy I would gladly be,) but I determined this with my self, that I would not come again to you in heaviness, (i. e. so as to make you sad, if possibly I could avoid it.) Ver. 2. For if I (be constrained by your dis∣orders to) make you sorry, who is it then that maketh me glad, but he that is made sorry by me; i. e. what can make me glad but the Reformation, and so the Joy of the same Per∣sons: Whence note, that the Apostles chiefest Joy was in the welfare of his Converts, Chap. 1.14. Philip. 2.2, 16.4.1. 1 Thess. 2.19, 20. , who is it then.] The Hebrew Vau, rendred by , is very often in our Translation then, See Gen. 13.16.24.41.28.21.31.8.42.34, 38. Exod. 6.1.7.9, 11. Lev. 4.3, 14, 23, 28.5.5.6.4. Numb. 5.15, 21. Deut. 6.21.8.10. Jos. 1.15.24.12. 1 Sam. 1.11.6.9. And thus also is  translated by us in the New Testament, Matth. 23.32. Mark 7.1. Matth. 25.27. John 4.35.7.33.14.9. Acts 26.20. Rom. 8.17.11.5. 1 Cor. 15.29. James 2.4. Rev. 22.9. Ver. 3. And I wrote the same to you, (or this very thing have I written to you before my coming, to excite you to this Reformation,) least when I came I should have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoyce, having confi∣dence in you all, that (you stand so affected to me, that) my joy, is the joy of you all. Ver. 4. (I say, least I should have sorrow,) For out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote unto you (my former Epistle,) with many tears, (which yet I say) not that you should be grieved (or made sorry,) but that you may know the love which I have more abundantly to you. , with much affliction, &c.] As the Apostles zeal for the Good of Souls made him rejoyce at their welfare, v. 2. so al∣so did it cause him to weep for their Miscar∣riages, Acts 20.19, 31. 2 Cor. 12.21. Philip. 3.18. Ver. 5. But if any hath caused grief, (as the incestuous person hath already done) he hath not grieved me (only,) but in part, that I may not overcharge (or be too heavy upon him) you all. , in part.] This Phrase is com∣monly used by St. Paul for the distinction of one sort of Persons from another. So Rom. 11.25. Blindness hath happened to Israel, , as to the unbelieving part of them, Rom. 15.15. I have written the more boldly to you  in part, i. e. as to that part of you who are Gentiles, declaring that I was called by Jesus Christ to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, 2 Cor. 1.14. You have acknowledged me  in part; i. e. as to the sound part of you; and according to this use of the Phrase the words may be paraphrased thus, He hath not only grieved me, but as to the sound part, you all; for there were some among them who grieved not for this Crime, but were puffed up, 1 Cor.
5.2. I therefore say in part, that I may not too much load that miserable person. Ver. 6. Sufficient to such a man is this pu∣nishment which was inflicted by many. , this punish∣ment, &c.] Some learned Persons, who ex∣clude the Laity from having any share in the Excommunication, or Absolution of publick Offenders, tell us this Punishment was inflict∣ed only by the Clergy, or the Presbytery of Corinth in the presence of the Laity. But it seems clear in both these Epistles that the A∣postle writes to the Church of Corinth, in the general. When he commands that the ince∣stuous Person should be excluded from their Society, and be delivered up to Satan, he speaks to all that were to assemble together, 1 Cor. 5.4. to all that ought to have mourned for that Fact, v. 2. to all that were obliged to abstain from eating with him, v. 11. and asserts the power they had of judging those that were within the Church, v. 12. And here, speaking of the Execution of that Sentence, he saith, it was  a punishment inflicted, not  be∣fore only, but , by the Commu∣nity. Hence he exhorts them all to forgive, and comfort him, v. 8. adding v. 10. That to whomsover you forgive any thing, I forgive also; but there is not in this whole Affair the least mention of any of the Clergy separately from the Church either executing, or relaxing this Censure. Indeed, St. Paul here carries the matter so high, that he alone, by his Apostoli∣cal Authority, passeth the Sentence, saying, , I have already judged him, 1 Cor. 5.3. and also that of Absolution, saying here v. 10. , I have forgiven him, commit∣ting only the Execution of each Sentence to them; so that this Instance gives no colour to the Pretences of the Independants and other Sectaries, especially if we add, what is high∣ly probable, that the Corinthian Church had then no ordinary or settled Governours or Pa∣stors, but all their Offices were performed by Prophets, or Men enabled to perform them by the Gift of Prophesy. See Note on 1 Cor. 14.29. And if so, it cannot be expected that the same practise should continue when these ex∣traordinary Prophets ceased, and Bishops and Pastors were every where appointed to Rule over their respective Flocks. In the Primitive Church, when any Person was to be Excom∣municated, the Laity were first consulted about the Fact, the guilty Person pleaded in their presence, they Judged of the Matter of Fact, as do our Juries in Criminal Causes, and by their Suffrage they consented to his Condem∣nation, asPraesentibus & judicantibus Laicis. Ed. Ox. Ep. 14. p. 33. Ep. 16. p. 34. Ep. 17. p. 39. Ep. 30. p. 59. Ep. 31. p. 63. Ep. 43. p. 32. Ep. 52. p. 97. Ep. 55. p. 102. Vide Albaspin. observ. l. 2. c. 22. Du Pin. de Antiq. Eccl. Discipl. p. 247. Dodwel. de jure Laiceram Sa∣cerd. p. 130. St. Cyprian doth oft inform us; but then he still asserts that neither they, nor the inferiour Clergy, could pass the Sentence of Excommunication without theInde per temporum, & successionum vices Episcoporum ordinatio, & Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcapus constituatur, & omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem praepositos Gubernetur. Ep. 33. Bishop, who, as the President of the Assembly, still pronoun∣ced the Sentence. They also consented to the Re-admission of them into favour, and to the Communion of the Church; but then their actual admission was performed by thePer manus impositionem Episcopi & Cleri jus communicationis accipiunt, Ep. 16. p. 37. Nec ad communicationem quis  possit, nisi prius illi ab Episcopo & Clero manus fuerit imposita, Ep. 17. p. 39. im∣position of the hands of the Bishop and Clergy, the Power of the Keys, saith he, being given to them by Christ, saying, Thou art Peter. Ver. 7. So that contrariwise, you ought ra∣ther now to forgive him, and comfort him, (by receiving him again into the Church, which is the proper consolation of one cast out, then con∣tinue your aversation to him,) lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, (and so fall into despair.) Note. Hence it appears that in notorious Crimes, which give great cause of Scandal to the Church, and to Christianity, the consola∣tion of the Offender depends not only on his inward Grief, and Repentance towards God, but also on the Relaxation of his Censures by the Church; for it is certain that the Apostle is here speaking, not as Grotius thinks, of the ta∣king off the Disease which Satan had inflicted on the incestuous Person, but of restoring him to Communion by Relaxation of the Churches Censures. For 1. the word , punishment, v. 6. refers to the Canonical Censures of the Church. 2. He commands them not only , to forgive, v. 7, 10. but also to con∣firm their love to him; both which Expressi∣ons plainly seem to intimate that he would have him restored to Communion, and this he would have performed according to the Dis∣cipline now mentioned from St. Cyprian, with the consent of the pious Laity. Ver. 8. Wherefore I (who commanded the in∣flicting of this Censure on him, do now) be∣seech you to confirm your Love towards him, (by re-admitting him, thus penitent, to your So∣ciety, for the Church ought, after the example of God, to do so.) Ver. 9. For to this end also did I write, (, have I written this) that I might know the proof of you, whether ye be obe∣dient (to me) in all things. Ver. 10. (And be assured of this, that) To whom you forgive any thing, I forgive (it,) for if I forgive (Gr. have forgiven heretofore) to whom I forgave it, for your sakes I forgave it, (though I did it) in the Person
(i. e. by the Authority) of Jesus Christ. , in the Person of Christ.] That is, saith Theodoret, Christ beholding and approving what was done, for as he delivered the incestuous Person to Satan in the name of the Lord Christ, 1 Cor. 5.4. so in his Person and by his Authority he relaxes the Sentence. This place teaches us, saith Slictingius, That the Providence of Christ reacheth to, and inspe∣cteth not only our actions, but even our minds and thoughts. Hence then I argue for his God∣head, God alone being the Searcher of the Heart, and of the Secrets of it, 1 Kings 8.39. Ver. 11. (And this forgiveness of the ince∣stuous person I therefore press) Lest Satan should get an advantage of us, (by hurrying him into despair, or representing the Church Discipline as that which tendeth to mens ruine, and so tempting him to Apostacy,) for we are not ignorant of his devises. Note. Vain here is all the discourse of Esthius concerning Indulgences, or the Remis∣sion of the Satisfaction required by the Church, for the Apostle here speaks only of the Remis∣sion of his Excommunication, and hath not one word of any Satisfaction the incestuous Person had voluntarily undertaken on the ac∣count of his Offence, or any thing imposed on him to do on that account, but only of a delivery of him to Satan, and an Exclusion of him from the Church, in both which he was passive. Ver. 12. Furthermore (that ye may know my great concernment for you) when I came to Troas to preach Christs Gospel, and a door was opened to me of the Lord, (for the pro∣pagation of it there.) Ver. 13. I had (notwithstanding) no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my bro∣ther, (whom I had sent to know the state of your affairs, returned,) but taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia, (hoping to find him there, where he arrived, and gave me a very comfortable account of you.) , but coming to Troas.] That this was not the first time of St. Paul's coming to Troas is plain, seeing we find him there long before, Acts 16.8. though then he seems to have staid there but a Night; it was not the time mentioned Acts 20.6. for then he came from Macedonia to Troas, here he goes from Troas to Macedonia. It remains then that it was some intermediate time, which all In∣terpreters I meet with, think was in his way from Ephesus to Macedonia, Acts 20.1. but at his first journey from Ephesus to Macedonia he sailed not by Troas, but by Corinth, though not touching there. See Note on Chap. 1.16. It was then after, passing through those parts, he came by Troas into Greece, and if so, this Epistle could not be written till after St. Paul's coming the second time to Macedonia. See the Preface. Ver. 14. Now thanks (therefore) be to God who always causeth us to triumph in (and through) Christ, and maketh manifest by us the savour of his knowledge in every place (where we come). Ver. 15. For we are unto God a sweet sa∣vour (in our preaching) of Christ, (both) in them that are saved, and in them that pe∣rish. Ver. 16. To the one (viz. to them that pe∣rish for rejecting Christ preached to them) we are the savour of death unto death, and to the other (who believe in him) the favour of life unto life: and who is sufficient for these (great and weighty) things? , a savour of life and death.] Here is a continual allusion to the Phraseology of the Jews, who speak from the Prophets of a Buxtorf. in voce  p. 1494. a mortal savour, or as the Chaldee saith  Esth. 2.21. Jer. 11.19. and of  a savour of life, or a vital unguent, and saying of the Law, that it is to Israel a savour of life, but to the Nations of the world a savour of death, of which the Apostle seemeth here to give the reverse, saying the Gospel was to them, as be∣ing the Rejecters of it, the savour of death; but to the Gentiles, who embraced it, the sa∣vour of life. Ver. 17. (We are, I say, very acceptable to God in this work,) For we are not as many, who corrupt the word of God, but (act) as (men) of sincerity, as (commissionated) of God, (and as) in the sight of God speak we (in preaching) Christ (unto you.) , who corrupt the word.] Here is an allusion to those Hucksters of whom the Prophet Isaiah speaks, saying , thy Vintners mix wine with water, Isai. 1.22. and so the meaning of the words is this, We do not adulterate the Sin∣cerity of the Word, as your false Apostles do. Who these Corrupters of the Word of God were, we learn from Chap. 11.22. where it is evident that they were not Samaritans, but Jews, not Pretenders to be the Christ, or Mi∣nisters of S. Magus, but Ministers of Christ, or such as own'd our Jesus, not S. Magus, or Dositheus, to be Christ; notwithstanding a Reverend Person asserts that they were Gno∣sticks; and to this Opinion he is inclined by two Passages in the Epistles of Ignatius: The first is in the Epistle to the Magnesians, where, saith he, speaking of the Gnostick Judaizers, as Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose God is their Belly, who mind earthly things, Philip. 3.18, 19. who were lovers of pleasures, and
not lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power of it, he adds, that they were , Merchants of Christ, huckstering the Word, selling Jesus. But 1. The Gnosticks were so far from being Judaizers, that they denied the God of the Jews, declared that he was not the Supreme God, and taught Men to despise the Law and the Prophets. See Note on Coloss. 2.12. 2. All these Epithets or Characteristicks a∣gree perfectly to the Jewish false Teachers; they were the Men of whom the Apostle saith, their God is their belly, &c. as both. Theodoret. & Chrys. in Rom. 16.17. Ex quibus quidam zelum habentes tradi∣tionis Judaicae, nec de Christo ben docebant. Pseud. Ambr. hic. St. Chrysostom and Theodoret inform us. They were the Men who were lovers of Pleasures more then God, and who had a form of godliness, which the impure Gnosticks had not. See Note on 2 Tim. 3.5. The Jews also were the Per∣sons who bought Christ for thirty pieces of Silver; they corrupted the Word here, by mixing the Law and their Traditions with the Gospel, and they made a Gain of Christ. See Note on 1 Tim. 6.5. So that what is here ci∣ted from the Ninth Section of this Epistle, a∣grees exactly to them. 3. It chiefly is to be observed, that these words are not in the true Ignatius, but are the Additions of his Interpolator. And 2ly, that there is not one word in this place to shew that they belonged to the Gnosticks, or to a∣ny other Persons who owning the profession of the Christian Faith corrupted it; but are ex∣presly said to belong. Ibid. § 9. to such Enemies of Christ as denied him. Whereas the true Igna∣tius is plainly in this place speaking of the. § 8. Ep. ad Magnes. § 8, 9. Jews, of whom we interpret this, and the same is also evident from the Interpolator. The second passage is cited from the Epistle ad Trallianos, where he saith, There are some vain Speakers and Impostors, not Christians, but Merchants of Christ, , carrying the Name of Christ for deceit, huckster∣ing the word of the Gospel; and who these were he specifies in the process of the Epistle, viz. Simon the first-born of Satan, Menander, Basilides, the unclean Nicolaitans, , those that are falsly named, that is, the Gnosticks. But here again, 1. We have not the true Ignatius, but his Interpolator imposed upon us. 2. This Interpolator doth not say those Per∣sons falsly named were the Gnosticks; No, that is the Doctors Interpretation against the true sense of the Greek; and the manifest words of the old Interpreter, who says they were theFugite quoque illos immandissimos falsi nominis Nicolaitas, amatores libidinis, malos Calumniatores, nec enim tal f Apostolorum Minister Nicholaus. § 11. Nicolaitans, so called, because they falsly bore his Name, he being no such Person as they represented him. And indeed this is the common Epithete of the. Const. Apost. l. 6. c. 8. Vide Ep. interp. ad Philadelph. § 6. Theodoret. Haer. Fab. l. 3. c. 1. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 29. Ni∣colaitans; he himself byClem. Strom. 3. p. 436. Steph. Gobar. apud Phot. p. 902, 903. Clemens Alex∣andrinus and others, being declared free from the Doctrines these Hereticks vented in his Name. And 3. This Interpolator plainly insinuates, that in the Section cited by the Doctor, he meant theIta & Judaïzantes , idem Interpolator in Epistola ad Magnesianos nominaveros, & , Usher. ib. n. 26. Judaizers, as using the same words which he had used in the Epistle to the Mag∣nesians concerning them. CHAP. III. Verse 1. DO we (by speaking thus of our sincerity, Chap. 2.17.) begin again to commend our selves, or need we as some others (have) Epistles of commendation to you, or Letters of commendation from you (to others?) , Do we need.] These Par∣ticles  often signifie num in the Old Testament; , hast thou eaten of the Tree, Gen. 3.11. See Gen. 4.9.18.4, 17, 23, 27, 38.30.15.31.14.41.38.43.7. So  also signifies, 1 Cor. 9.4. , have we not power; and v. 8. , Letters of Commen∣dation.] That Commendatory Epistles were ancient in the Church we learn fromHaeretici nullum jus capiunt Christianarum literarum. Prescript. c. 37. Vide c. 20. Ter∣tullian,
andCypr. Ep. 4. § 1. Vide Dodw. Diss. Cypr. 2. St. Cyprian. And that they had their rise from the Tesserae hospitalitatis among the Heathens, is the Opinion of the Reverend Dr. Hammond on the place. Ver. 2. Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, (you being always in our minds, and e∣vidently appearing to us so to be, and) known, and read of all men (who have heard the fame of your Conversion.) , written in our hearts.] This is a frequent Phrase in the Old Testament, and among the Jewish Doctors, im∣porting (1.) The clearness and perspicuity of what is said to be thus in our hearts, Deut. 30.11, 14, 15. Rom. 10.8, 9. And (2.) our care to have it continually in our hearts, and upon our spirits, Deut. 6.6. Prov. 3.3.7.2. See this proved Note on Hebr. 8.10. And thus the Phrase is commonly used in Prophane Authors, both Greek and Latine: Thus Antisthenes saith to one that had lost his Register or Note-Book, Thou shouldstApud Laert. l. 6 p. 139. , write these things in thy Soul, and not in thy Papers. SoPrafat. Lib. primi Controer. Seneca saith of Portius Latro, who made no use of Books, or Notes, ajebat se scribere in animo, he said he wrote all things in his mind. SoAndr. Act. 1. Sc. 5. Terence, Scripta illa dicta sunt in animo Chrysidis: which in10 Olymp. Pindar is, , these words are written in the mind of Chrysis. So that these words may be thus paraphra∣sed, We need no Letters of Commendation to you, for we well know, and have continu∣ally in remembrance, how powerfully God wrought with us for your Conversion, so that the Seal of our Apostleship are you in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.2. The signs of an Apostle being wrought among you in all patience, in signs, wonders, and in mighty deeds, 2 Cor. 12.12. So that you are our best Letters commendato∣ry to your selves. Nor need we Letters of Commendation from you to others, the Fame of your Conversion by us, and of the Gifts we, with the Gospel, have imparted to you, being spread throughout the World. Ver. 3. Forasmuch as ye are (by this Con∣version) manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ ministred (or penn'd) written not with the Spirit of the living God; not in ta∣bles of stone, (as was the Ten Commandments) but in the fleshly tables of your hearts. , the Epistle of Christ.] His commendatory Epistle declaring and commend∣ing his power in their Conversion by such signs and gifts of the Holy Ghost imparted to you, and exercised by us among you, as he enabled us to do. And this Epistle is written in the fleshly Tables of your Hearts, i. e. in your Hearts made soft, pliable, and ready to obey the Word by the operation of the Holy Spi∣rit, according to the promise, I will take away the stony heart from you, and give you an heart of flesh, Ezek. 11.19.36.26. Ver. 4. And such (confidence, or) trust have we through (the grace and favour of) Christ to God-ward, (viz. that he will still thus effi¦caciously assist our ministry.] Ver. 5. Not (having any confidence in  selves) that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, (to bring mn to the faith of Christ by our own reasonings, without the power and assistance of the Spirit of God,) but our sufficiency (as to the matter) is of God (alone.) , to reason any thing as of our selves.] The Apostle in the Second Chapter of his first Epistle, contends that there was a necessity of a Divine Revelation to enable them to make known to us the Truth con∣tained in the Gospel, because Humane Reason, without it, was not able to know, or to dis∣cern them, and therefore here also he disclaims the sufficiency as of themselves without Di∣vine assistance for this work; that is, without those illuminations and powerful operations of the Holy Spirit, which made them able Ministers of the New Testament. This Text therefore is impertinently cited to shew that no Man is sufficient of himself to think a good thought, and might as well have been produ∣ced to prove him not sufficient of himself to think at all. Ver. 6. Who hath also made us able Mini∣sters of the New Testament (promised in oppo∣sition to the Old, Jer. 31.33. and so) not of the letter only, (as was that of Moses) but of the Spirit (promised, Ezek. 36.27.) for the letter (of the Law condemns the disobedient, and so) killeth, but the Spirit (ministred by the Go∣spel) giveth life, for if the Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quick∣en your mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwel∣leth in you, Rom. 8.11.) , the Letter killeth.] From the Exposition of these words given in the Pa∣raphrase, it appears how vain are the im gi∣nations of those Men, who by the killing Let∣ter understand not the Law condemning to death, but the literal and historical sense of the Scriptures in general; and by the life gi∣ving Spirit, the mystical and spiritual sense of it. Vain also is Mr. Cl. who by the Letter un∣derstands the Law as it was understood by the Jewish Doctors in a literal or grammatical sense, by the Spirit the Mind of the Law-giver; it being evident from the whole Chap∣ter, that by the Letter the Apostle understands the Law engraven in stones, v. 3, 7. the Law
as delivered by Moses, and as at first admini∣stred with an appearance of the Glory of the Lord, and by the Spirit the Spirit of Christ, v. 17. or the Holy Spirit given to the Apostles to enable them to preach the Gospel, and con∣ferr'd on those that believed it. Ver. 7. But (then) if (that Law which is) the ministration of death (and was) written, and engraven in stones was glorious, (in the Minister of it) so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which glory (yet was only such as) was to be done away, (or vanish, as the Law was to do.) Ver. 8. How shall not (that Gospel which is) the ministration of the spirit, be rather glori∣ous (both in it self, and its Ambassadors.) Ver. 9. For if (that Law which was) the ministration of condemnation (by pronouncing the sentence of death upon all that did not per∣fectly obey it,) be (or was attended with) glory, much more doth (the Gospel which is) the mi∣nistration of righteousness (or of justification to life, Rom. 5.18.) exceed in glory. Ver. 10. For even that (Law) which was (made) glorious (at the first administration of it, may be said to have) had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory (of the Gospel) which excelleth (and so eclipseth it.) Ver. 11. For if that which is (now) done away (and abolished) were glorious, much more that which remaineth (for ever) is (to be) glorious. That the allusion here from Verse the 7th, to the 11th, may be the better understood, let it be noted 1st, That the glory of God, or of the Lord in the Old Testament, imports a bright light, or flame included in a Cloud, stiled the Cloud of Glory, and because this, whenever it appear∣ed, was a Symbol of God's glorious Presence, it is stiled by the JewsSee Buxt. Lex. p. 2398. Shechinah, the Ha∣bitation. So Exod. 16.7. In the morning ye shall see the glory of God; and v. 10. The glory of God abode upon mount Sinai, and the Cloud covered it six days, and the sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire. Exod. 40.34. A Cloud covered the Tent of the Congrega∣tian, and the Glory of the Lord filled the Ta∣bernacle,  the Habitation of God. This Glory, saith the Author ofPart. 2. § 8. Cosri, is the Divine Light which God vouchsafeth to his Peo∣ple. By the Shechinah, saith Elias, we under∣stand the Holy Spirit, as it is evident they do in these sayings, The Shechinah will not dwell with sorrowful or melancholy men. The She∣chinah will only dwell with a strong, rich, wise, and humble man. The Shechinah dwells with the Meek. When ten sit, and study the Law, the Shechinah dwells, among them. See many other Instances in Buxtorf's Lexicon, p. 2396. &c. 2ly, Observe, that after the Covenant made with God at Sinai, Exod. 24.7, 8. was bro∣ken, and the Law given from Mount Sinai violated by the Idolatry of the Jews, in ma¦king and worshipping the Golden Calf, Exod. 32. Moses is again call'd up into Mount Sina to renew it, Exod. 34.27. and God there de¦scends to him again in the Cloud of Glory v. 5. and then was it that the skin of his face shone, to the terror of those that saw him, so that he was forced to put a vail over his face, v. 29, 30. And the allusion here is chiefly to this Glory, or shining Brightness of the Face of Moses, when he received the Law the se∣cond time, as is evident from v. 7. and from the words here used by St. Paul, , that which was made glorious was not glorious; for they are the very words used by the Septuagint, concerning the shine∣ing of the face of Moses,  Exod. 34.29. , v. 30. 3ly, Observe, that as the Glory of the Lord descended on the Mount at the delivery of the Law, so to enable the Apostles to be able Mi∣nisters of the New Testament, the Spirit of God descended on the Apostles at the Day of Pentecost, in the likeness of Cloven Tongues or Tongues of Fire, sitting upon them, Act: 2.3. and as the Tabernacle and Temple were filled with the Glory of God, so were they all filled with the Holy Ghost, v. 4. And as the shining of the Face of Moses signified the Glo∣ry of that Law which he delivered to the Jews, so the Gifts of the Holy Ghost shining forth in these Ambassadors of Christ, signified the Glory of his Gospel. Now, saith the A∣postle, this Glory is more excellent then that which attended the Law given by Moses. 1. Because the Glory appearing on Mount Sinai made the People afraid of Death, saying. Let not God speak to us any more lest we die, Ex. 20.19. neither let us see this great fire any more, that we die not, Deut. 18.16. And when the Face of Moses shone, the People were afraid to come nigh him, Exod. 34.30. for the Law being the Ministration of Death and Condem∣nation, even the Glory of it struck a terrour into their hearts, and left a fear of Death up∣on their Spirits, and thus received they the Spirit of bondage unto fear, Rom. 8.15. whilst we have given to us the Spirit of Power and Love, 2 Tim. 1.7. and the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. And to this dif∣ference the Author to the Hebrews alludes Chap. 12.18-24. 2ly, Moses with all his glory was only the Minister of the Law, written in Tables of Stone; the Apostles of the Gospel writ∣ten in the Hearts of Believers: He only gave to the Jews the killing Letter of the Law.
they with the Gospel gave the quickning Spirit. 3ly, The Glory which Moses received at the giving of the Law, did more and more dimi∣nish, because his Law was to vanish away; but the Glory which they received from Christ did increase from glory to glory, v. 18. the Do∣ctrine they delivered by it being to remain for ever. Ver. 12. Having therefore such hope (of the glorious efficacy of our Ministry, and of the power of God so illustriously shining forth in it) we use great plainness (or boldness) of speech. .] This word seems to import o∣penness and plainness of speech. So he spake the saying  openly, Mark 8.32. If thou rt the Christ tell us  plainly, John 10.24. Having spoiled principalities and powers, be triumphed over them  openly, Co∣loss. 2.15. See John 7.4, 13.11.14.16.25, 29.18.20. And to this sense the opposition in these words, We use great plainness of speech, and do not put a vail before our face, as Moses did, seems to lead. Ver. 13. And (act) not as Moses (the Mini∣ster of the Law) who put a vail over his face, (even that of types and shadows, so) that the Children of Jsrael could not look to the end (or the accomplishment) of that which is (now) abolished. , to the end of that which was to be abolished.] i. e. Either to Christ and his Gospel, as the Body vailed un∣der these Types and Shadows, Col. 2.16, 17. or that they could not look unto that Christ, who is the End of the Law for Justification, Rom. 10.4. that being only our Schoolmaster to being us to Christ, Gal. 3.24, 25. And here is the 4ly, Excellency of the Gospel above the Law, that whereas that was vailed under Types and Shadows, the Gospel was delivered with great perspicuity and plainness of speech, which is a great confirmation of the perspicui∣ty of the New Testament in all things neces∣sary. Ver. 14. But their minds were (then, and still are) blinded; for until this day remain∣eth the same vail untaken away in the read∣ing of the Old Testament, which vail is (only) done away by (saith in) Christ. Ver. 15. But (or whereas) they (not belie∣ving in him) even to this day, when Moses is read, the vail is (still) upon their hearts. Ver. 16. Nevertheless (as when Moses turn∣ed to the Lord the vail was taken from his face, Exod. 34.34. so) when it (the Jewish Nation) shall turn to the Lord (Jesus,) the vail shall be taken away (from them.) , when it shall turn to the Lord.] The Apostle discoursing v. 13. of the Sons of Israel, of those to whom belonged the old Covenant, and to whom the Law of Moses was read, v. 14, 15. must be supposed to speak here of the same Person▪ and then the Apostle here plainly taketh it for granted, that there will come a time when the Jewish Nation shall turn unto the Lord, or be converted to the Christian Faith. And so look∣ing on Christ as the End of the Law, and be∣ing enlightned by his Spirit, shall clearly dis∣cern the Spiritual Sense of the Law, and the true meaning of their own Prophesies concern∣ing the Messiah. Nor is it any Objection a∣gainst this Exposition, that the word is  in the singular, for as that answers well to Israel, or the Jewish Nation, so is it a knownGloss. l. 3. tr. 3. Can. 52. p. 397. Rule, that in the Hebrew Tongue a Verb of the Singular Number is joyned to a Noun or Participle Plural. Ver. 17. Now the Lord is (the Giver of) that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty, (and so the Law, which is  yoke of Bondage, Acts 15.10. Gal. 5.1. is taken away, and we obtain our Christian liberty.) , now the Lord is that Spirit.] The Aethiopick Version reads not , but , where the Lord is, there is the Spirit, which makes the sense of these words clear; but this reading hath no Autho∣rity from any ancient Copy, or Christian Wri∣ter. Origen cites the words according to the common readingContr. Celsum l. 5. p. 271. in Matth. Ed. Huet. p. 219 & p. 253. thrice; nor is it suita∣ble to the Greek, which should have been, ac∣cording to that reading, . I therefore prefer the other Interpretati∣on, which saith the Lord is the Spirit, as he is the Way, the Life, John 14.6. the resurrection and the Life, John 11.15. as being the Author and the Giver of them. He it is who bapti∣zeth with the Spirit and Fire, Matth. 3.11. who giveth this good Spirit to all Believers, and sends him to them from the Father, John 7.38, 39.15.26.16.7. He is , the Lord who ministers to his Church all the Gifts and Operations of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.5. Eph. 4.8. And this Interpretation is favoured by the last words of the Chapter, , from the Lord of the Spirit; for through the New Testament wherever the Spi∣rit of the Lord is mentioned  is put before, but never follows the word , as according to the common Interpretation here it doth. Ver. 18. (And it is not with us as it was with the Jews, for they only saw the face of Moses shining through the vail, but received no impression from, or derivation of his glory upon themselves,) But we all (under the G∣spel) with open (and unvailed) face, behold∣ing the glory of the Lord (Jesus) are changed into the same Image (with him) from (his)
glory to glory (derived on us,) as by the Spi∣rit of the Lord, (or as receiving it from the Lord, and giver of the Spirit.) Here are two farther Excellencies of the glory of the Gospel above that of the Law, viz. 5ly, That the Jews only saw the shining of the Face of Moses through a vail; but we be∣held the glory of the Gospel of Christ in the Person of Christ our Law-giver with open face. 6ly, They saw it through a vail, which hin∣dred the reflection or shining of it upon them, and so this Glory shone only on the Face of Moses, but not at all upon them; whereas the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ, shines as in a Glass, which reflects the Image upon us Christians, so that we all are trans∣formed into the same Image, deriving the glorious Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, with the Gospel, from Christ the Lord and great distributer of them, 1 Cor. 12.5. and so the Glory which the Father gave to him, he  given us, John 17.22. It is therefore rather with us, as it was with Moses himself, con∣cerning whom God speaketh thus, To h will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude▪ , the Glory of the Lord shall he be∣hold, Numb. 12.8. For as he saw the Glory of God apparently, so we with open Face be hold the Glory of the Lord, as he by seeing of this Glory was changed into the likeness of it, and his Face shone, or was  made glorious, so we beholding the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, Chap. 4.6. are chang∣ed into the same glory. But then, though this may in some measure be enlarged to the Church in general, in which these Gifts were exercised, I think it chiefly and more emi∣nently refers to the Apostles mentioned v. 12. CHAP. IV. Verse 1. THerefore seeing we have this (glorious) Ministry, as we have received mercy (from God in committing it to us, 1 Tim. 1.11, 12.) so we faint not (under the pressures to which it doth expose us.) .] Is not to slacken in, or cease from the performance of an Enterprize, Luke 18.1. Gal. 6.9. 2 Thess. 3.13. particularly , not to faint under tribulati∣ons, Eph. 3.13. and here v. 16. And this sense is confirmed by the words following, from v. 7. to the 16th. Ver. 2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty (or shame,) not walking in craftiness (and guile,) nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, (as do your false A∣postles and deceitful Workers, 2 Cor. 11.13.) but by manifestation of the truth commend∣ing our selves to every mans conscience (as persons acting) in the sight of God. , the hidden things of shame.] The Apostle often speaks of some Deceivers crept into the Church, whose glory was in their shame, Philip. 3.19. whose Exhortation was attended with uncleanness, deceit, and guile, 1 Thess. 2.3. and here, who did the hidden things of shame. Now these, say all the Greek Scholiasts, were the false Apostles , who corrup∣ted the Gospel by mixing it with the Law, as is apparent from the Apostle's words; for speaking of these false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, Chap. 11.13. he saith, v. 20. Are they Hebrews? so am I; are they Israelites? so am I; are they the seed of Abraham? so  I. And that the Jewish Doctors were proe to Fornication, Uncleanness and Adultery, we learn from the Apostle's question, Thou th sayest a man should not commit adultery, doest thou commit adultery? Rom. 2.22. and from the Testimony of their Josephus concerning their Zealots who professed great Sanctity, but were indeed. De Bell. Jud. l c. c. 26. p. 930. C. guilty of Theft, Treachery, Adul∣tery, the hidden things of Sin. From the Ex∣hortation of St. Paul to them to look diligent∣ly, lest there be among them any Fornicator,  prophane Person, Hebr. 12.16. And agn, Let marriage be honourable among all, and the bed undefiled; for whoremungers and adue∣rers God will judge, Hebr. 13.4. See the Note there. But this is still more evident from these Epistles to the Corinthians, among wh these Deceivers had taught that Fornication was a thing lawful, 1 Cor. 6.12. and so had taught them to corrupt the Temple of God. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. whence he says to them, L no man deceive you, v. 18. and demonstrates to them, by many Arguments, that Fornication was a sin inconsistent with the Profession of Christianity, 1 Cor. 6.13-20. that it exclu∣ded Persons from the Kingdom of God, v. 9, 1 and should exclude them from the Society of Christians, Chap. 5.11. Upon all which ac∣counts he saith, Neither let us commit fornica∣tion as some of the Jews did, 1 Cor. 10.8. And in his second Epistle, and twelfth Chap∣ter, he expresses his Fears, lest when he came among them, he should find many who, through
Seduction of these Men, had sinned, and d not repented of the uncleanness, fornicati∣on, and lasciviousness, which they had commit∣ted. That these Men might be followers of Corinthus, or of the Ebionites, see Note on Chap. 11.22. But these things do more plain∣ly agree to the Sect of Nicholas, one of the Seven Deacons resident at Jerusalem, Acts 6.5. they being, saith St. Peter, men walking after the flesh, in the lusts of the flesh, 2 Pet. 2.10. and alluring others through the lusts of the flesh, v. 18. and saith St. Jude, Men walking after their own lusts, and foaming out their own shame, v. 13. that these Men were at Perga∣us, teaching men to commit fornication. We earn from Revel. 2.14, 15. that they were also at Ephesus, and so near to Corinth, from Rev. 2.6. and so might probably be the Per∣sons noted by St. Paul, saying Eph. 5.11, 12. It is a shame to speak of  the things done by them in secret; and that they were at Corinth, see Note on 1 Cor. 6.13, 14, 15. Ver. 3. But if (notwithstanding this mani∣festation of the truth,) our Gospel be hid (from any to whom it is preach'd) it is hid on∣ly to them that are lost. , if our Gospel be hid.] Hence we learn that the Apo∣stles delivered the Gospel, in all things neces∣sary to be believed, or done, with sufficient plainness and perspicuity, for otherwise they could not truly be said to have manifested the truth to every mans conscience. The Apostle also, by declaring that if this Gospel was hid from any to whom it was preach'd, it was on∣ly hid to them whose minds the God of this world had blinded, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine in upon them, doth plainly teach that the Gospel was not hid from them for want of clearness on the part of the who preach'd it, but only by reason of that blind∣ness which Satan had wrought in them that heard it: So that if it were not manifest to all. Oecum. . Theoph. in locum. the fault is not in us, or in the obscurity of the Gospel, but in their own blindness, for we hide nothing from them. So the Fathers. But here, saith Esthius, the Apostle speaks not of the Scriptures to be read or understood by us, but of the Gospel preached by him. Answ. To this I answer, That the Scriptures writ and read to them, contain the same Go∣spel of Christ which they preached; and as the reading of the Law of Moses is stiled the preaching Moses every Sabbath-day, Acts 15 21. so is the publick reading the Scriptures of the New Testament the preaching Christ, and his Gospel; what reason then can be assigned why they, who confessedly preached the Go∣spel plainly, should write the same things to the same Persons obscurely, esplly if we consider that they did  the same things to them for their ty. P 3.1. to put them in remembr of  things which they know, and in which they w established, by their preaching, 2 Pet. 1.1,  and to stir up their pure minds by way of r¦membrance, that they might be mindful of te Commandments of the Apostl of our L, Chap. 3.1, 2. that by reading them, ey m understand their knowledge in the mystery of Christ, Eph. 3.4. And were these ends st prosecuted, or to be obtained by writing that obscurely which they had plainly preached to them? Moreover, whatsoever things were writ¦ten aforetime, saith the Apostle, were written for our learning, Rom. 15.4. And surely they who writ after by the same Spirit, writ to the same end, that they to whom they we might be wise to that which is good, Rom. 16.. that they might understand what the will of the Lord is, Eph. 5.17. or might prove wh is the good and acceptable and perfect w  God, Rom. 12.2. And if they writ for  Learning and Instruction in these things, to e sure they writ plainly and clearly as to these things, since otherwise they writ not so as to instruct or teach, but to confound the Reader. Seeing therefore the great end of writing the Scripture was to instruct the World in the Will and Mind of God, and the great things of Christian Faith, either we must say that both the Writers of the Scripture, and the Holy Ghost that inspired them, were defective in skill, or in care, so to write as to abtain this end, or that their Writings are an effectual means to obtain it, which yet they cannot be unless they are plain and clear, as to the great things of Religion. In short, every wise Agent pursues his end by the most proper and effectual means: Now surely to write plainly, and not obscurely, is the most proper means to instruct Men by writing, and so the Apostles must have used this means of instructing in their Writings, or else they cannot be esteemed wise A∣gents. Ver. 4. In (or among) whom the God f this World hath blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine into them. , the God of this world, &c.] Here observe (1.) an Hyperton, the true sense and position of the words being thus, Among whom are the Unbelievers, whose eyes the God of the world hath blinded, &c. Note 2ly, that Satan here is called by St. Pul the God of this world; and Ephes. 6.12. The Ruler of the darkness of this world, agreeably
both to the Jewish and the Christian Notion; the first ascribing to him the dominion over all that were not of the Religion of the Jews, and introducing God speaking to the Angel of Death or Satan thus,Buxt Lex. p. 200. Though I have made thee  a Ruler among the Creatures of the Nations, thou shalt have nothing to do with this people, because they are my sons; where also it presently follows, This is the Angel of Death which is called Darkness. And the Christians allowing him to be Ruler over all that were not converted to Christianity, and speaking of that as of the dispensation which delivered them from the power of darkness into the Kingdom of Christ, Col. 1.13. 1 Pet. 2 9. and turned them from Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. And of the Gentle World, as walking before according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that worketh in the Chil∣dren of Disobedience, Eph. 2.2. Which had the Fathers considered, they would not have con∣tended so stifly against the Marcionites and Manichees, that the God of the World here mentioned was the true God, as bothDeus excaevit mentes infidelium hujus seculi. Iren. l. 3. c. 7. I∣renaeus andTertull.  Marcion. l. 5. c. 11. Tertullian, and asQuam quidem sententiam plerique nostrum ita distinguunt, ut Deum verum dicant excaecasse infedelium mentes. C Faust. Manich. l. 21. c. 2. St. Au∣stin testifies, almost all the Ancients did; whereas indeed the true God is never repre∣sented in Scripture as the God of this World, but as the God of them who are called out of the World; nor is it the design of God, but of the Devil, to hide the glorious Light of the Go∣spel from he World. , who is the Image of God.] Christ seems here to be stiled the Image of God, not in the sense of Theodoret, as being God of God, but rather, as the Text insinuates, with relation to the Gospel, and his Mediato∣ry Office, in which he hath given us such glorious demonstrations of the Power, Wisdom, the Holiness, Purity, and Justice, the Mercy, Goodness, and Philanthropy of God, Tit. 3.4. Ver. 6. (I say the Gospel of Christ,) For we preach not our selves, (as aiming at our own glory, or profit in this work,) but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus sake. Ver. 7. (And this Gospel I stile the Gospel of the glory of Christ,) For God who (by saying, Let there be light, and there was light) command∣ed the light to shine out of darkness, hath al∣so shined in our hearts, to give (us) the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face (or person) of Jesus Christ; (or into the hearts of us Apostles, to give us, and enable us to give to others, the light of the knowledge of God through Christ, whose Ambassadors we are. See v. 7.) , the light of the knowledge of the glory of God.]  seems to be an allusion to the shining o  Face of Moses, after he had obtained his de∣sire of seeing the glory of God, Exod. 33. 19. upon which  his face w made glorious, Exod. 34.29, 30. by reason  the glory of God that he had seen. This  saith St. Paul, belongs to us Apostles, the glo∣ry of God shining more gloriously in the Face, or Person of Jesus Christ, then ever it did  Moses, and we beholding with open face the glory of the Lord, Chap. 3.18. whereas the Children of Israel could not stedfastly be the glory of the face of Moses. Note also   is the constant reading of the Greek Scholiasts. Ver. 7. But we have this (glorious) treasure in earthen vessels, (i. e. in Bodies subject to be broken with continual pressures) that the ex∣cellency of the power (which preserves s frail Creatures under them, and enables en to do such great things in them) might (ap∣pear to) be of God, and not of us. Ver. 8. (For though) we are troubled ( griped) on every side, yet are we not (so) distressed (as to be brought unto extremities) we are perplexed, but not (brought) in (to) de∣spair (of help from God.) Ver. 9. We are persecuted (or pursued,) b not forsaken (or cast behind, so as to lose the crown we run for,) cast down, but not destroy∣ed (or killed by the fall.) See these Agon∣cal terms explained by Dr. Hammond. Ver. 10. Always bearing about in the body (a Resemblance to) the dying of the Lord Je∣sus, that the Life also of Christ Jesus might be made manifest in our body. , that the life of Jes might be made manifest.] It being a certain demonstration that Christ is risen, and still lives; that we, who perswade others to be∣lieve this, are enabled to do such mighty wonders in his Name, and patiently and ∣stantly to suffer such fiery Trials by his Grace. Ver. 11. For we who (yet) live, are al∣ways delivered up to death for Jesus sake (dying daily, or standing in jeopardy of is eve∣ry hour, whilst we are ministring the Gospe to you, 1 Cor. 15.30, 31.) that the life also if Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh, (still exposed to death by our Enem, but still preserved in life by the power f Christ.) Ver. 12. So then (the) death (of Christ) worketh (Gr. is wrought) in us (who fill  that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ in our flesh, Coloss. 1.24. but
(the) life (of Christ only) in you. , in you.] As being made partakers of the vital efficacy of Christ in his Spiritual Gifts, and of an assimulation to his Resur∣rection by a Life of Holiness, but not of the like Sufferings with us, 1 Cor. 4.8, 10. Ver. 13. (Yet) we having the same spirit of aith, (i. e. the same Faith wrought by the Spi∣rit) according to what is written (in the Psalms, viz.) I believed and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore (con∣tinue still under all these Sufferings to) speak (and preach the Gospel of Christ.) , I believed, therefore have I spoken.] These words of David were spoken when the sorrows of death compassed him round about, and the pangs of Sheol caught hold upon him, and yet he believed he should walk before God in the land of the living, Psal. 116.3, 9, 10. and therefore are applied by the Apostle in the spiritual sense of them to the Resurrecti∣on thus, That as David, notwithstanding all the Persecutions which he suffered from the hands of Saul, firmly believed he should be preserved, and raised to a Temporal Kingdom, so we Apostles believe that, after all our Suf∣ferings for the Gospel, we shall be raised and advanced to an Heavenly Kingdom. Ver. 14. Knowing that he who raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and shall present us with you (to enjoy his hea∣venly kingdom together.) , he that raised up the Lord Jesus.] Here Schlictingius observes two things, (1st,) That our Lord Jesus did not raise up himself, but was raised from the dead by the Father. (2ly,) That though Christ Jesus shall raise us up, yet shall he do this not by his own power, but by the power received from the Father. Now here 1st, I acknowledge that the Resurrection of our Lord is frequently ascribed in Scripture to God the Father, Acts 3.26.13.32.17.31. Rom. 4.24.10.9. 1 Cor. 6.14.15.15. Gal. 1.1. Eph. 1.20. Col. 2.12. 1 Thess. 1.9, 10. Hebr. 13.20. 1 Pet. 1.3, 21. And the reason of the Christian Dispensation requires it should be so, this being a Demonstration that God the Father was satisfied with his Performances and Sufferings for us, and that he owned him as a true Prophet, and his beloved Son, in that he raised him from the dead; but then this is not so to be understood, as to exclude Christ wholly from the same action, for he himself promised to do this, when he said of the Temple of his Body, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up, John 2.19, 22. And that he did so we learn from this, that after his Resurrection his Disciples believed the word which Jesus spake, whereas, had he not raised up himself, they could not have belie∣ved his word. Let it then be noted, that our Lord was quickned by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. even by the Spirit by which he offered up himself, Hebr. 9.15. Sice then this Spirit of God dwelt in Christ, and is by him communicated to all Believers, it is easie to be understood how Christ raised up himself, and yet was raised up by the power of God, as the Holy Ghost is stiled, Luke 1.35. Thus also the Re∣surrection of the Just is ascribed to God the Father, Acts 26.8. 1 Cor. 6.14. Hebr. 11.19. 2 Pet. 1.3. and yet the same Resurrection is frequently ascribed to Christ, John 5 28.6.39, 40.11.27. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22, 25, 26. Rom. 14.19. Rev. 3.18. and this he will effect by the power he hath in himself, John 5.26. by him∣self, John 6.47, 54. I will raise him up at the last day, by his word, The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and live, John 5.28. by the power by which he is able to subdue all things to himself, Philip. 3.21. Now to raise the dead being a thing proper to God himslf. Rom. 4.7. Acts 26.8. an instance of the pow∣er of God, Matth. 22.29. and the belief of it being faith in God, Hebr. 11.19. 1 Pet. 1. Whosoever hath the power of raising all Men from the dead, must have the power of God, the Godhead, the energy of the power of  might of God, Eph. 1.19. and the whole ful¦ness of the Godhead dwelling in him; and if Christ did receive this power from the Fater, he must receive it from him by the Communi∣cation of the Godhead to him. Ver. 15. For (or and) all (these) things we (preach, and suffer) are for your sakes, that the abundant grace (conferr'd upon you by our ministry) might, through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God. Ver. 16. For which cause we faint not (un∣der the tribulations we thus suffer,) but though our outward man perish, our inward is re∣newed (with vigour and alacrity in the perfor∣mance of our duty) every day. , the inward man] Hence we learn, that the distinction betwixt the out∣ward and the inward Man, is not of the same import with that of the old and the new Man, Rom. 6.6. which is renewed after the image of God in righteousness and holiness, Eph. 4.22. Col. 3.9, 10. but the outward man that perish∣eth signifies only the Body, the inward is on∣ly the Mind or Spirit which is in Man; so that when the Apostle saith in the Person of a Man under the Law, I delight in the Law of God after the inward man, Rom. 7.22. He saith nothing which intimates that the Person speaking was renewed in the spirit of his mind, but only that his mind was inclined to obey the Law of God, though through the Law in his Members warring against it, he was led captive to the Law of Sin. Ver. 17. For (we know that) our light affli∣ction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. , weight of glory.] The Hebrew
word  which answers to , weight, signi not only Multitude, but Greatness; and i the Fins, as well as Scripture, ho∣nourable. So Gen. 18.20. Their sin was  very great. See Gen. 50.11. Exod. 9.3.  urle, So Exod. 20.12.  Honour thy Father and thy Mother. See Deut. 28.58. So that this word may signifie the Magnificence, the Abundance, and the Honour of the future Glory which is prepared for the Christian Sufferer. Ver. 18. (We faint not I say,) While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Note hence, That it is not only lawful, but even laudable, after the Example of the Apo∣stles, in our Actions and Sufferings, to have respect to the Recompence of Reward, that being by the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost pro∣pounded as our Encouragement to do, and suf∣fer these things. CHAP. V. Verse 1. FOR we know, that if our earth∣ly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have (provided for us at the re∣storing of it) a building of God, an house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. , we have a building of God.] It was the Doctrine of the. Method. apud Phot. p. 930. Plato∣nists, that the Soul was a kind of Being which could not well subsist, or act without a Body, and therefore after her separation from the Body, wanted some Vehicle or Cloathing, by which she might subsist and act; and this Notion was embraced by Origen; and this Text was accordingly interpreted by him. See the Note on 1 Cor. 15.44, 45. And according to this Notion good Christians, as soon as they depart this Life, are not found naked, but cloathed, with their house from heaven, which at the Resurrection shall be the , or cloathing of their raised Bodies, which render them immortal. But the Apostle cannot here be supposed to mean, that as soon as ever good Christians die, they shall be cloathed upon with this House which is from Heaven, but only that they shall be so at the Resurre∣ction. For (1.) we Christians, saith he, groan earnestly, desiring to be cloathed upon with this house, v. 2. Now, saith the same Apostle, we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, that is, the redemption of the bo∣dy, Rom. 8.23. (2ly,) They groaned to be cloathed upon, that mortality might be swallow∣ed up of life, v. 4. Now when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality, then only shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up of victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. Ver. 2. For in this (tabernacle) we groan earnestly, desiring to be cloathed upon with our house which is from heaven. , to be cloathed upon.] By putting over this mortal Body an incorruptible and e∣ternal house. The Jews say that Adam in his first Creation being made  for incor∣ruption, Wisd. 1.23. his Body was covered from Corruption, Veste Onychina, with a cloa∣thing like in colour to a Nail of the Hand Accordingly the Apostle represents the future Bodies raised incorruptible, as cloathed with an immortal covering, 1 Cor. 15.53, 54. Ver. 3. (We are, I say, desirous of this,) If so be that (or seeing that we shall at the resur∣rection) be found cloathed, and not naked (or with a body uncloathed, as we have here.) , if so be.) That these words may be also rendred since, and seeing that is evi∣dent from Scripture, and good Authors. Thus here v. 14.  signifies quandoquidem, so , seeing ye have heard, Eph. 3.2. See the Note there. And again, Eph. 4.21. Or else, retaining our own Version, we may give this sense to the words, If so be that (then) we shall be found cloathed (with our Celestial Bodies, and so fitted for a blessed immortality) and not (as the wicked) naked, (and without this heavenly) building.) , naked.] i. e. Not cloathed upon with another Body. So 1 Cor. 15.37. Thou sowest  naked grain, not covered with a blade, or cover of chaff, as when it riseth up out of the Earth it is, or with a Cod, as in Beans, Peas, and Lintels. And ac∣cordingly the (c) Rabbins introduce a Sama∣ritan, or Gentile, enquiring of R. Meir, Whe∣ther the dead rise naked, or cloathed? and him answering thus, That Peas which are sown na∣ked, arise cloathed, or covered with a Cod, and much more the dead. But then they seem to restrain this to the Just, saying, that the Just shall rise cloathed. Ver. 4. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burthened, not for that Pirk. Elieser. c. 30. p. 80. Midras Chohel. c. 5, 11.
(through impatience under our sufferings,) we would be uncloathed, (by putting off the bo∣) but (as desiring v. 2. to be) cloathed upon (with our coelestial body) that mortality might be swallowed up of life. Ver. 5. Now he that hath wrought us for the self same thing (i. e. hath wrought in us this earnest desire) is God, who hath also gi∣ven us the earnest of the Spirit, (whereby we are sealed up to the Day of Redemption, Eph. 4.30. and wait for the Redemption of the Body, Rom. 8.23.) , He that hath wrought us for the self same thing.] Hence it appears there is no ground for that danger∣ous Opinion, that the Apostle here speaks as one that believed the General Resurrection and Advent of our Lord to Judgment would be suddenly; for this perswasion being false, the Apostle could not in this sense say, We know that if this earthly tabernacle were dissolved, we have (immediately) a building of God, i. e. an heavenly Body to put on. God could not work them up to this desire that they might not be uncloathed, i. e. not die, but live to the Resurrection to be then cloathed upon; nor could the Apostle, consistently with this per∣swasion, introduce the same Christians willing to be absent from the Body, that they might be present with the Lord. Moreover in the pre∣ceding Chapter, v. 14. he plainly says that they expected to be raised up by Jesus from the dead, and therefore must expect to die. See the Note on 1 Thess. 4.15. Ver. 6. Therefore (having this earnest of the spirit) we are always confident, knowing (Gr. being therefore always confident, and knowing) that whilst we were at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. [Ver. 7. For (whilst it is thus with us) we walk by faith (only,) not by sight.] Ver. 8. We are confident I say, and willing (we in this confidence are willing) rather to be absent from (or travel out of) the body, and to be present with the Lord, (or at home with him.) , we are confident.] i. e. We have not only confidence at his appearance, John 2.28. but always even in death it self, that though it render us absent from the body, it will bring us home to Christ, and to a nearer fruition of him. Only here note, that accord∣ing to the Doctrine of all the Ancients, the Souls of pious Men are not assumed into the highest Heavens, or the immediate Presence of God and Christ, instantly upon their depar∣ture hence, for thus only we shall be ever pre∣sent with the Lord, 1 Thess. 4.16, 17. when by the power of God, at the last Trump, we shall be raised up to meet him in the Air, his promise being at his second coming to receive his Disciples to himself, that where he is, they may be also, John 14.3. But yet, according to all Antiquity, the Souls of pious Men, in the mean time, are are in the place appointed for them  with the Lord, that is, with him in Paradise, where they enjoy the sight and conversation of their Saviour by way of Vision: For Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, saith. Ep. § 9. Polycarp, are in the place appointed for them with the Lord. Not only in Heaven, saith. Iren. l. 5. c. 36. Irenaeus, but in Paradise also our Saviour shall be seen, as Men are worthy to behold him. And this doth. Pseuo-Justin Qu. & Resp. 75. Peudo-Justin gather from this very place, That the Souls of the just go to Paradise, and converse there with Christ by vision. Ver. 9. Wherefore we labour that whether (we be) present (in) or absent (from the body) we may be accepted of him (at his appear∣ance.) Ver. 10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may (then) receive the things done in his body, (or by the body) according to what he hath done, whether it be good, or evil. , the things done by the bo∣dy.] Some Manuscripts read , propria corporis, the things proper to the body; so the vulgar Latin: both readings do suffici∣ently confute the Doctrine of the R. Purgatory, and their Prayers for the Dead, as teaching Men shall receive hereafter, not according to the Prayers of others for them, when they are out of the Body, but according to what they themselves have done in the Body. Now it is sure, that what the living do of this kind for them after death, they themselves do not in the Body, and so no account will be had of it in the Great Day. And why should they suffer before such dreadful Pains in Purgatory, who afterwards must receive Rewards or Punish∣ments according, not to what they have suf∣fered there, but according to what they have done in the Flesh? The Fathers here do far∣ther note, 1. That the same Body which was dissol∣ved, shall be raised again, and not another; it being absurd to think that one Body should sin, and yet another should be punished for it, one Body suffer, another should be crowned for it. So Methodus, Chrysostom, Theophy∣lact. 2ly, That the Soul is to receive its Retribu∣tions with the Body, and not without it, ac∣cording to. Method. apud Oecum. in locum. Methodius,. Theodor. Theodoret, and
Si judicante Christo unusquisque nostrum facta corporis recipiet, n n utique sine corpore adjudicabitur bono, aut a. H. Hilary the Deacon, who passeth under the Name of St. Ambrose. Ver. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we perswade men (to believe we act in all sincerity and truth, when we propound these things to them,) but (in this) we are made ma∣nifest to God, and I trust also (we) are made manifest in your consciences, (and have given you good assurance that we act sincerely.) Ver. 12. For we commend not our selves un∣to you, (as if we doubted of your good opinion of us,) but (we say these things to) give you occasion to glory on our behalf, that you may have somewhat to answer them which glory in appearance, and not in heart, (or truth and sincerity, but either of other mens labours, 2 Cor. 10.15. or of things not really done by them, 2 Cor. 11.12-21.) Ver. 13. For whether we be besides our selves (transported in speaking of our Raptures, Ex∣tasies, and Visions) it is to (do service to) God, or whether we be sober (in our discourses, not desiring that others should think of us above what they see in us, 2 Cor. 12.6.) it is for your sakes. Ver. 14. For the love of Christ constraineth us (thus to promote his glory, and to seek your good) because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead, (i. e. obnoxious, and condemned to it for sin.) Ver. 15. And that he died for all, that they who live (by his death) should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died (for him, (i. e. for their sins) and rose again (for their justification, Rom. 4.24, 25.) , and he died for all.] Here observe 1st, That Christ died for all, all that were dead, all who are by his death engaged to live to him; as all to whom the knowledge of the Gospel is vouchsafed, are. 2ly, That they do certainly mistake the meaning of these words, then were all dead, who thus interpret themEsthius. Schlich., then were all obliged to be dead to sin: For (1.) in these two Verses the word , dead, is four times used once before, and twice after these words, then were all dead, and both before, and after, it undeniably signifies death in the proper acceptation of the word. Who then can think that in the second time, in the same sentence, it should import only an obligation to die to sin, or to our selves? Whensoever in the Scrip∣ture it hears a Metaphorical Sense, some other word is joyned to it which doth inforce the sense; as when we are said to die to sin, Rom. 6.2. to die with Christ, Rom. 6.8. Col. 2.20. to die to the Law, Gal. 2.19. to die to the World, Gal. 6.14. Col. 3.3. Here therefore nothing being added to it to inforce the sese it must be deemed alien from the Text. Ver. 16. Wherefore henceforth know  no man after the flesh, (i. e. according to ca interests, the Riches, Honours, Pleasures, and Advantages of this World, 2 Cor. 1.17.10. yea, though we have known Christ after  flesh, (expecting him as a Temporal King, and hoping for great Advancements in his Kingdom as being his Disciples,) yet now hencefort know we him so no more. , we know him so no more. It is manifest that the Disciples, whilst Christ was with them, were much addicted to those Temporal Interests, still striving, and conten∣ing who among them should be the greatest a Christ's Kingdom, Luke 9.46.22.24. asking to sit one at his right, the other on his left hand in his Kingdom, Mark 10.37. and saying, are have left all and followed thee, what shall we have therefore, Matth. 19.27. and presently af∣ter his Resurrection enquiring, Wilt thou o Lord restore the Kingdom to Israel, Acts 1.6. These Expectations, saith the Apostle, we have now laid aside, and serve Christ only for Spi∣ritual and Eternal Advantages. Or we may interpret these words thus: We know (i. e. re∣spect) no Man according to the flesh, (i. e. ac∣cording to his Circumcision, or his Nation, as being an Israelite, or of the stock of Abraham, as knowing that in Christ Jesus neither Circum∣cision availeth any thing—but a new Cre∣ture, Gal. 6.15. and though we Jews at first knew Christ according to the flesh, adhering to Circumcision, and the Law, even after Faith in Christ, yet now we do not so; but all these old things are now passed away, we being dead to the Law, that we might live to God, Gal. 2.20. and serving him now in ne¦ness of spirit, not in the oldness of the letter, Rom. 7.5. Ver. 17. (And so it is with all his sincere Votaries,) Therefore if any man is in Christ, he is (become) a new Creature, old things are passed away, (his affection to all temporal and carnal things,) behold all things are become new (in him.) Ver. 18. Now all (these) things (belonging to the new Creation, this change of our Affecti∣ons, this constraining Love) are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given (or committed) to us the mini∣stry of Reconciliation. Ver. 19. To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, (and) not imputing their former trespasses unto them, and hath committed to us the word of Recon∣ciliation.
Ver. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead, be ye reconciled to God. , be ye reconciled to God] Here is observable, against the Socinians, a double Reconciliation; 1st, A Reconciliation of God to us; for God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself through him, and that not by renewing our Natures, but by not imputing our trespasses to us. This Reconciliation was effected, saith the next Verse, by making Christ a Sin offering for us, that we might be made the righteous∣ness of God in him, and this Reconciliation is followed with an Exhortation on our parts to be reconciled to God. Object. But Crollius objects, That the Re∣conciliation here mentioned is ascribed to God, and so it cannot be the appeasing of his Anger by making any Satisfaction to him; for can it be supposed, saith he, that God, being angry, should appease himself, and that by making Satisfaction by another to himself. Answ. I Answer that the Text doth not barely say, God reconciled us to himself, but that he was reconciling the World to himself in Christ, that is, by Christ, as the means of our Reconciliation, or as the Sin-offering by which this Reconciliation was procured. It therefore is not necessary that these words should import, that God being angry, should appease himself, but only that he should de∣clare himself so far appeased by Christ's Suf∣ferings for us, and so well satisfied with his Blood shed for the Remission of our Sins, that he would not impute those Sins to any that believed in him. The Blood of Christ made a Sin-offering, making Atonement for us, as the Blood of the Sin-offering under the Law made Atonement for the Sinner, and procured the forgiveness of his sins; and if under the Law satisfaction was made by the Sinner to God, by a Beast of his own appointing, why may it not be made under the Gospel by a Sa∣viour of his own sending? Ver. 21. For he hath made him to be (a) sin (offering) for us, who (himself) knew no sin, that we might be made (righteous with) the righteousness of God in him. , he made him sin for us.] The words here being sacrifical, must be explained by their use in the Old Law, when applied to Legal Sacrifices. Now the word , which we render sin, is used there cu∣stomarily for a Sin-offering, so the Law of the Sin-offering is , Lev. 6.25. The Bullock appointed for a Sin-offering, is , the Bullock of sin, Exod. 29.36. Lev. 4.8, 20. The Goat to be sacrificed for sin, is , the Goat of sin, Lev. 4.29. To make such a Beast a Sin offering for the Peo∣ple, is in the sacrifical Phras, , to make it sin, Lev. 4.20.9.7.14.18.15.19. Numb. 6.11, 16.8.13. It cannot therefore be doubted, but that , doth signifie here to make Christ a Sin offering, or Sarifice fr sn for us. The end for which he was thus made a Sacrifice is this, that we might be made te Righteousness of God in him; i. e. tht we might be justified by God, or might obtin forgiveness of sins through Faith in the Blo of this Sin offering. For , the Righteousness, or the Justification of God, in St. Paul's stile, still signifies the Righteousnes of Faith in Christ dying, or shedding his Blod for us; as in these words,  for the righteousness of God in him is revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the ust shall live by his faith, Rom. 1.17. Again, , the righteousness of God without the Law is manifest—to wit, the Righteous¦ness of God through faith of Jesus Christ, Rom. 3.20, 21. And Chap. 10.3, 4. For they nt knowing , the righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted  to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, that is, justification, to everyone that believeth, Philip. 3.9. That I may be sound in him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is by the faith of Christ, , the righteousness of God by faith. The Interpretation therefore given in the Paraphrase is very agreeable to Scripture, whereas the Gloss of the Socinians puts a con∣tinual force upon the words; for where in Scripture doth  signifie to treat an innocent person as a sinner? where is it that to be made the righteousness of God in Christ, doth signifie our being made new Creatures, or our being sanctified? where doth God's re∣conciling us to Jesus Christ, import his con∣verting the World to himself by Christ as his Ambassadors? Why is God said not to impute to men their trespasses by the preaching of Christ, who preached only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, rather then by the preach∣ing of the Apostles to the whole Gentile world? How was he made sin more then they, if he were only treated as a sinner on the account of the same Doctrine which they equally preached and suffered for? And why may not Mn be said to be made the righteousness of God in the Apostles, as well as in Christ, if this only im∣port our being converted, and so made righteous by the Doctrine they, as well as he, deliver'd?
CHAP. VI. Verse 1. WE then, as workers together with him (1 Cor. 3.9. and his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20.) beseech you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. , the grace of God.] The grace of God in the Old Testament imports his fa∣vour and kind affection to us; and in this sense it is said in general, a good man obtaineth , favour of the Lord, Prov. 3.34.12 2. or in particular, that such a pious Man found ,Gen. 39.4.43.14.47.25. Exod. 3.21.11.3.12.36. grace in the sight of God, 2 Sam. 15.25. Gen. 6.8. for as when it is said, that Joseph found grace in his Masters sight, the meaning is, his Master shew'd favour to him; and when 'tis added, that the Aegyp∣tians found grace in the sight of Joseph, the meaning is, he was enclined to shew favour to them, and grant them Corn for their Sub∣sistance. So when the Scripture saith, that pi∣ous Persons found grace in the sight of God, the Phrase must signifie God's inclination to shew Mercy, and bear a kind Affection to them. The Grace of God in the New Testament, when it is not used to signifie the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, bears generally the same sense; as when the Angel saith to Mary, Thou hast found grace with God, Luke 1.30. St. Stephen of King David, that he found grace with God, Acts 7.46. St. Luke, that Jesus increased  in grace with God and Man, Luke 2.52. when Paul and Silas are said to be commended to the grace of God for the work of the Ministry, Acts 13.3.14.26.15.40. this being done by their Prayers to God for his Favour and Assistance in that Work. When Men are said to be justified by the grace of God, Acts 15.11. Rom. 3.24. Eph. 1.7. and to have forgiveness of their sins, ac∣cording to the riches of his grace, it must im∣port the same; for justification, and forgive∣ness of sin are acts of God's free grace and fa∣vour to the sinner. When it is said that we are saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus, Acts 1.11. by grace ye are saved, not of works, by gace we are saved through saith, Eph. 2.8, 9. Seeing this is spoken to Men yet alive, and so oblig'd to workout their salvation with fear and trembling, it cannot mean that they were actual∣ly saved, but only that they were called to a state of Salvation, enjoy'd the means, and were put in the way of Salvation by grace, according to those words of the same Apostle, He hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not accord∣ing to our works, but the grace given us in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. 1.9. And to be thus sa∣ved by grace, is to be saved by the mercy and favour of God to us, according to those words of the Apostle, When the kindness and love of God our Saviour to man appeared, not by wor of righteousness which we have done, but by in mercy he saved us, Tit. 3.4, 5. it being purely of the mercy and the grace of God that any Nati¦on is called to the knowledge of Salvation by Christ. When the grace of God is said to have abounded towards us, Rom. 5.15.20.15.16. that grace is stiled the free gift of God. When St. Paul saith, that by the grace of God I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15.10. that he was called by his grace, Gal. 1.15. and that the grace of God was abundant to him, 1 Tim. 1.13, 14. he himself interprets this of God's great mercy to so great a sinner. When he saith I do not frustrate the grace of God, Gal. 2.21. this he interprets to be God's favour to Man∣kind, in sending his Son to die for us. The exceeding riches of his grace, Eph. 2.7. is God's great kindness to us in Christ Jesus; and by the grace of God it is that Christ tasted death for every man, 2 Tim. 1.9. Hebr. 2.9. Hence is this Gospel stiled the grace of God which brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. The grace of God which  able to build us up, and procure us an inheri∣tance among them that are sanctified, Acts 20.32. This also must be the import of the word, when the Apostles exhort their Converts to con¦tinue in the grace of God, Acts 13.43. and when they inform us, that God confirmed the word of his grace by doing signs and wonders, Acts 14.3. and that the Law came by Moses, but grace by Jesus Christ, John 1.17. See the Notes on Hebr. 12.28.13.9. James 4.6. , not to receive th grace in vain.] This we do (1.) When we do not obtain the end for which it was de¦signed, viz. to teach us, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world. Thus those Oblations which are not acceptable to God, are stiled vain oblations, Isa. 1.13. and the Worship which is not according to his will, vain wor∣ship, Mat. 15.9. because this Worship, and these Oblations, though designed to procure God's favour, will not do it. (2.) When we receive no benefit by the grace received, and it con∣veys no pardon or salvation to us, so, upon supposition that there will be no Resurrection, your saith is in vain, 1 Cor. 15.17. and if you retain it not, ye have believed in vain, v. 2. So to labour in vain, and run in vain, Gal 2.2.4.11. is to do these things without profit to them for whose sakes they are done: And those are called vain questions, Tit. 3.9. and vain words, Matth. 12.36. which are unprofi∣table. Ver. 2. For he saith (Isa. 49.8.) I have heard thee in a time accepted, (i. e. of favour and acceptance,) and in the day of Salvation have I succoured thee: behold, now is the (w)
apted time, now is the day of salvation, (n Gd sends his Ministers to preach, and  to you, 2 Cor. 5.20.) , I have heard thee in a tme accepted.] These are the words of God the Father to Christ, signifying that he had accepted his Intercession for the Conversion of the Gentiles, and declaring that he had given him , for a Covenant to the Nations, a Light to the Gentiles, and his sal∣vation to the ends of the earth, Isa. 49.6, 8. And so thePug. fid. part. 2. c. 11. § 21. Jews interpret them. That Sal∣vation either in the Prophet speaking of Christ, as the salvation of the ends of the earth, or in the Apostle, speaking of the day of salvation, should mean the deliverance of the Christians from the persecuting Jews is very improbable in it self, and is confuted by those words, now is the day of salvation, for Christians then grned under Persecution, both from Jew and Gentile, and the destruction of Jerusalem, which is supposed to have brought the delive∣rance to the Christians from the persecuting Jews, was fourteen years after the writing this Epistle. Ver. 3. (Which we are careful so to preach as becomes workers with God, v. 1.) Giving no (just) offence in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed. Ver. 4. But in all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses. ] Say some, imports Afflictions in the general.  more grievous Troubles.  such pressures as reduce us to the greatest streights. See Chap. 4.8, 9. Ver. 5. In stripes, in imprisonments, in tu∣mults (raised against us for preaching the Go∣spel,) in labours, in watchings in fastings, (i. e. n constant induring all sorts of sufferings, and exercising all kinds of self-denial for the Gospels sake.) Ver. 6. By pureness (of conversation,) by knowledge (of the divine mysteries,) by long suffering (under all provocations,) by kindness (towards all men,) by the (various gifts of the) Holy Ghost by love unfeigned. Ver. 7. By the word of truth (preach'd) by the power of God, (confirming it, Rom. 15.19.) by the armour of righteousness (which covers and protects us, when assaulted) on the right hand (by prosperous,) and on the left (by ad∣erse events.) Ver. 8. By (going through the various condi∣ions of) honour and dishonour, by (going hrough) evil report and good report, (being ooked upon by the wise men of the world) as deceiver, and yet (being) true (dispensers of he word of life to them.) Ver. 9. As unknown (and obscure persons,) and yet well known (by the powerful works we perform) as dying daily (by our continual perse∣cutions,) and (yet) behold we live: as chast∣ned, and (yet) not killed. Ver. 10. As sorrowful (in outward appear∣ance,) yet always (inwardly) rejoycing, as poor (in the concernments of the world) yet making many (truly and spiritually) rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things: (in contentedness of mind, Philip. 4.18. in the fa∣vour of that God who giveth all things richly to enjoy, 1 Tim. 6.17. in Christ Jesus who is all in all, Col. 3.11. and in whom we are blessed with all spiritual blessings, Eph. 1.3. and in the promise to inherit all things, Rev. 21.7.) Ver. 11. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is (freely) opened to you, (in speaking well of you, Chap. 7.4.) our heart (and our affection) is enlarged to you. Ver. 12. Ye are not straitned in us, (you have a large room in our hearts,) but you are straitned (rather) in your own bowels (of affe∣ction to us.) Ver. 13. Now for a recompence in the same (kind,) I speak as to my children, be ye also enlarged (in your affections to me your spiritual Father.) Ver. 14. Be ye not unequally yoked with unbelievers, (do not joyn with them in their I∣dol Feasts, and Heathenish Rites, or in the Ma∣trimonial yoke;) for what fellowship hath righ∣teousness with unrighteousness? and what com∣munion hath light with darkness? Ver. 15. And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that be∣lieveth with an Infidel? , be not unequally yoked with unbelievers.] Here note that these words cannot be duly brought to prove that Christians must not communicate with vicious persons at the Table of the Lord, though they be Christians in profession, since the Apostle only speaks of Unbelievers. 2ly, The Apostle here useth the very words by which the Pro∣phet Isaiah, Chap. 52.11. exhorts the Jews to preserve themselves in Babylon from the conta∣gion of their Idolatry, and by which St. John exhorts all Christians not to parake of the sins or the spiritual whoredoms of the Beast, Rev. 18.4. He therefore cannot be supposed to for∣bid all Christians all converse even with the Unbeliever, for he permits the believing Hus∣band to live with the unbelieving Wife, and will not suffer the believing Wife to depart from her unbelieving Husband, 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. he therefore only doth forbid communion with them in actions proper to them as Heathens, and alien from the Profession of Christianity, viz. their Feastings and Sacrifices in the Idol Temples, 1 Cor. 8.10.10.21. And, by Ana∣logy, he also may be supposed to forbid Chri∣stians
to marry with an Unbeliever, for this was always held unlawful for the Jews to marry wih anBuxt. Lex. p. 403. Heathen, till they became Proselytes to their Religion. For they looking upn themselves as the pure servants of God, Nh. 2.20. See Note on 1 Cor. 7.14. thought it a corruption of the holy Seed to marry with the People of the Earth; and hence, when this was done, Ezra complains that , the holy Seed was mixed with the people of the earth, Ezra 9.9. Now the Christians being made an holy Nation, a peculiar People, the Holy Temple in which God by his Spirit dwelt, it seemeth as unfit that they should marry with heathenish Idola∣ters, and therefore to such of them as were free, the Apostles speaks thus, Let them marry only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. i. e. to one of their own Religion: the marriage with an Infidel being the closest conjunction with them, sub∣jecting them many times to a necessary absti∣nence from Christian Assemblies, and to con∣tinual temptations to Apostacy, or compliance with their evil manners. V 16. And what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? (you therefore must have none with them,) for ye are the Temple of the living God, as God hath said I will dwell in them, and walk in (i. e. among) them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Ver. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive (and accept) you. Ver. 18. And I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. , I will be to you a Fa∣ther.] These words are not to be found in Jer. 31.1, 9. but they are the words of God to Solomon the Ruler of his People, , a judge over his sons and daugh∣ters, Wisd. 9.7. and they begin thus, , thus saith the Lord Al∣mighty, 2 Sam. 7.8. and v. 14. , I will be to  a Father, and he shall be to me a Son, when words are by the Apostle ascribed to Christ, Hebr. 1.4, 5. and here to all Christians, as be¦ing Members of his Body, and joynt Hei with him. Moreover, theTarg. in Cant. 1.4, 5. Jews boasted the the Divine Majesty dwelt among them. After the days of Jacob, saith the BookPart. 3. § 17. p. 179. Cosri, holy men increased into a great Assembly, and the Shechinah, or Divine Majesty rested up∣on them by love to be their God. This favr God here promises to pious Christians, as being the true Israelites. Again, they also thought that purity from Uncleanness was a necessary requisite to obtain this presence of God.Cosri ibid. p. 178. B bar Rab. § 9. in Deut. 23.14. for God, say they, doth not appropriate his name to Israel to be called their God, but when th Camps are holy; but at that very moment th they are so, he makes his presence to dwell a∣mong them, and becomes their God; and these things the Apostle, according to the Scripture Language, here applies to the Society of Chri∣stians. And oh! what a powerful Argument do they minister to all Christians, to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, as they desire this Almighty Lord and Protector to be still present with them, and would not be ob∣noxious to the dreadful woe which certainly will follow upon his departure, Hosea 9.12 as they would have this God to be their God, which is a state of present bliss, for blessed are the people who have the Lord for their God, as they would have been related to them as an heavenly Father, which relation secures the enjoyment of all Blessings to them, which they duly ask, Matth. 7.12. Lastly, as they desire to be his Sons and Daughters, and by that glo∣rious Relation to be made heirs of God, joy Heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.17. and to have the Spirit of his Son in their hearts, crying Ab Father, Gal. 4.6.
AN APPENDIX TO THE Sixth Chapter of the Second Epistle TO THE CORINTHIANS. MOnsieur le Clerk hath observed in his Arts Critica, part 1. c. 8. p. 110. That since the time of St. Austin, scarce any word hath been used more frequently in speaking concerning the Conver∣sion of a Sinner, then is that of Grace; and yet if you ask them that use it what they mean by it, they can give you no clear Answer: So that a Jesuite said, not unpleasantly, That it was no∣thing but a Nescio quid, and that the Grace of God in Scripture doth always signifie not any secret Afflatus, but his Mercy and his Kindness to us. Now that I may not seem, with his witty Jesuite, to ridicule, or with the Pelagi∣ans to deny that Grace, because my Note in this Chapter, partly accordeth with his Cri∣ticks, I shall here briefly shew two things: 1st, That it seems necessary to assert that God, vouchsafes to Men, not only the outward Dispensations of his Word to be the ordinary means of their Conversion and Sanctification, but also some inward Assistances and Operati∣s of his holy Spirit. 2ly, I shall endeavour to shew that these Assistances may be so explained, as to be no more unintelligible, then are all the Influences of God upon the Soul, or the Temptations of the Evil Spirit. First, That it is necessary to assert that God vouchsafes to Men some inward Operations or Assistances of his Holy Spirit, to encline them to what is good, convert, and sanctifie them. For 1. Why else is it expresly said, That God works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Philip. 2.13. and doth within us what is acceptable in his sight, Hebr. 13.21. for sure he cannot properly be said . t act, and work within us, who does, and worketh nothing in us. Yea, how doth the Word of God it self, when heard, or read, work on us but by making impressions on our Minds? and shall that be deny'd to God him∣self which we allow to his Word? or shall he not be believed, when he saith, He doth work in us both to will and do, He doth n u what is acceptable in his sight? Again, Does it not seem unrasonble to deny that influence to God, and the Good Spirit to excite Men to goodness, which ge∣nerally is, and must according to the Scrip∣ture, be allowed to the Evil Spirit tempting Men to wickedness. Now, though this Evil Spirit cannot lay us under a necessity of doing wickedly, yet is he frequently in Scripture t presented as a Tempter to sin, which he can only be immediately by raising some Ideas in our Brain which do excite, dispose, and move us, as our own thoughts or inward sentiments, at other times, are wont to do, to what is e¦vil. He also is in Scripture stiled that Spirit which  works inwardly in the Children of Disobedience, Eph. 2.2. and ls them captive , to do his will, 2 Tim. 2.2. which words seem plainly to import some in∣ward energy of Satan to excite them to this disobedience to the will of God and this com∣plyance with his own will, since the strnger is he that is in us, the h tt is in te wd, 1 John 4.4. i. e. that good Spirit which dwell, in pious Men, is  pwerful in them then Satan is in wicked Men, we must al  good Spirit  t wr in the  f Obedience, as Satan is allowed to work in his own Children. Moreover the evil Spirit is representd as a lying Spirit in the mth , 1 Kings 22.21. He
the People, 1 Chron. 21.1. He entred into Judas, Luke 22.3. He fill'd the heart of A∣nanias to lie to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. All which Expressions can never be accounted for without allowing him some power to work upon the Spirits of these Persons, so as to raise within them some such Ideas as would excite, and stir them up to the performance of those actions. Nor can we otherwise give any ra∣tional account of the Snares, Methods, Wiles, and Devises of Satan mentioned 2 Cor. 2.11. Eph. 6.11. or tell how he comes, and takes a∣way the word out of the heart, Luke 8.12. or how he takes advantage over us when we are overwhelm'd with grief, 2 Cor. 2.10. When therefore, on the other hand, God is said to put his fear, and his law in our hearts, Jer. 32.40. Hebr. 8.10. and his spirit within us, Exek. 36.27. to create in us a clean heart, and renew in us a right spirit, ibid. to give us a new heart, Ezek. 11.9. to circumcise, and to con∣vert the heart, Deut. 30.6. Jer. 31.18. If he by his good Spirit raiseth no good Motions, or I∣deas in us, which may dispose us to his fear, and by attention to them may convert and cleanse our hearts, if he vouchsafes unto us no inward Illuminations, by attending to which we may discern the wondrous things of his Law, what can these Words or Metaphors import? Or why is his Spirit put within us, if he hath nothing to do there? yea, why are we said to be strengthned with might through the Spirit in the inward man to do his will? Eph. 3.16. to be enabled through the Spirit to mortifie the deeds of the flesh, Rom. 8.13. Why is this Spirit said to help our infirmities, v. 26. to pu∣rifie our hearts, 1 Pet. 1.22. to be unto us a Spirit of Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6.11. the Com∣forter, the Spirit of Power, Love, and of a sound Mind, 2 Tim. 1.7. For how is it possible he should be all, or any of these things to us, or should do all, or any of these things for us, by doing nothing in us? And seeing Consola∣tion ariseth only from the inward testimony of the Conscience; seeing Sanctification consists in the renewing of the inward Man, and hath the Soul for its Subject; seeing the Heart is purified by an inward change, and temper, which renders it averse from sin, and sets the Affections, Desires, and Inclinations of the Soul against it; seeing the Deeds of the Flesh are only mortified by such a Renovation of the Mind as makes us to discern the pernici∣ous Effects and dreadful Consequences of li∣ving still according to our fleshly Appetites, and so begetteth a dread and hatred of them, a Resolution to forsake them, a vehement De∣sire to be freed from them, a sincere Endea∣vour to resist the Motions of the Flesh, and a Care that we do not for the future yield Obe∣dience to it in the lustings of it; if then there be no Renovation wrought in us by the Spi∣rit, no Testimony of him with our spirits that we are the Sons of God, how can a Man con∣ceive that all this should be done by the Spirit without any energy on the Mind, and the Af∣fections of a Man, and by that consequently on the Will? Moreover, if the holy Spirit hath no hand in producing, and carrying on the new Life, why is he stiled , a quickning or life-giving Spirit, seeing all Vital Operations issue from a Spirit acting in us, why are we said to live in the Spirit, Gal. 5.15. and to walk in the Spirit, Rom. 8.14. and  to be lead, or conducted by the Spirit of God. For as in natural and moral actions, we cannot be said to live, or walk, without an inward Principle of Life and Motion, or to be lead or guided in those Actions, but by the Light of Reason, so neither can we properly be said to live, and walk in the Spirit, or to be gui∣ded by him, if he imparts no inward Light to guide us in the ways of Piety, no inward mo∣tions to excite us to walk in them, no inward strength or vital efficacy for the performance of them. And were it otherwise, why are all those inward habits and dispositions which adorn the Soul, and make it meet for the in∣heritance of Saints in light, stiled the Fruits, not of the preaching of the Word, or of our own Consideration, but of the holy Spirit? For how are they his Fruits, if he doth nothing to produce them? why are they still ascribed, according to this Doctrine, never to that which only doth, but to that only which doth not produce them? To say these things, and these expressions concern only the times in which the extraor∣dinary Gifts and Operations of the Holy Spi∣rit were vouchsafed, is to make future Ages, since the ceasing of these Gifts, despair of be∣ing quickned, sanctified, or comforted, or even enabled to purifie the heart, or to mortifie the deeds of the flesh, to live or walk in the Spirit, and consequently to despair of being now the Sons of God, united to Christ Jesus, or having any of the Fruits of the Spirit wrought within them. And were it only then that no Man could be regenerate, or born again without Water and the Holy Ghost, by what are we now regenerated? Why are we now baptized? or why is Baptism administred still in the name of the Holy Ghost? In fine, it seems not possible, according to this Hypothesis, to explain how, or to what end the Holy Spirit is so often said to dwell, or to abide within us; how we are made an habitation of God through the Spirit; How we are made the Temples of God through the Holy Ghost which is in us, or united to Christ by the Spirit, or to what end the Holy Ghost thus dwells, or takes up his abode in them, in whom he acteth nothing, or rests upon those Christian Sufferers whom he doth not inspire with inward courage. And yet this abode of the good Spirit with us, is represented not on∣ly as the highest Priviledge, but as the inesti∣mable advantage of the Christian. By this Christ,
doth encourage his Disciples to demonstrate their love to him by keeping his Command∣ments, that then the Father will love them, and u, saith he, will take up our abode with them, John 14.23. By this, saith the Apostle, God becomes our God, and we his People, our Fa∣ther, we his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6.16. And from our union by this Spirit to our Head Christ Jesus, such an , or inward work∣ing, is said to be diffused through every part of his mystical Body, as causeth the whole Bo∣dy to encrease, and edifie it self in love, Eph. 4 16. Coloss. 2.19. Now what account can be offered of these things, without allowing some inward Operations of the Holy Spirit, as the consequence of this Spiritual Union, and this inhabitation of the Holy Spirit in us? yea, who can tell what is the advantage of these promises, I will put my spirit in you, or pour him upon you, Prov. 1.23. Jer. 36.27.37.14. Zach. 12.10. John 7.37, 38. if we receive no influx from him thus put into our hearts? What, lastly, is it for the Holy Spirit to depart, or to be taken from us? or what can be the dreadful misery and woe denounced upon us when he doth so? For if he did nothing in us whilst he continued to be with us, what can we lose by his departure? or why did David so importunately beg God would not take his holy Spirit from him? Psal. 51.12. To say here the holy Spirit only dwelt in Christians, whilst the extraordinary Gifts and Afflatus of the holy Spirit were continued to the Church, and they lay under Persecution from the Heathen Emperours, is not only to contradict the tenor of the Scriptures, which declare that all Christ's living Members are thus united by the Spirit to their Head, 1 Cor. 12.13. and that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, dwelling in him, he is none of his, Rom. 8.9. He cannot be the Son of God, for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, v. 14. He hath no right to call God Father, v. 15. no interest in the adoption, and the inheritance of Sons, v. 17. but it is also to enervate the virtue of the Promises of Christ, and the consolation of Christians of all future Ages under their Suffer∣ings for the sake of Christ; yea, it is in ef∣fect to make the dispensation of the Gospel cease, the difference betwixt that, and the Law, being by the Apostle placed in this, that the one is the ministration of the Letter only, the other also of the Spirit. And if this were so only whilst these extraordinary Operations of the holy Spirit lasted, then from the time that they have ceased, the Gospel doth not in this differ from the Law, or deserve to be preferr'd above it on that account. Argument 2. This Doctrine seems to take off from the energy of Prayer in general, and from the virtue of Prayer for the Holy Spirit in particular, and so to make Men slight and neglect that Duty of which the Scripture speaketh so magnificently, and to which it so frequently exhorts us, at least, it seems not well consistent with the tenor of those inspi∣red Prayers, or those Prescriptions for it re∣corded in the Holy Scripture. For who can reconcile it with those Expressions in which holy Men of God so often beg God would en∣cline their hearts unto him, since this he can∣not do without some Operation on their hearts, that he would draw them, that they might run after him, that he would open their eyes, and give them understanding to discern his Law, that he would lead them in the right way, in the way everlasting, and guide them by his eye? For if God by his Spirit hath no influence upon the Heart, or Soul, how doth he encline, or draw it? if none upon the un∣derstanding, how doth he enlighten or instruct it? if this be done duly by the Word read, preach'd, and pondered in the heart, we may as well apply our selves to that work with∣out, as with Prayer, unless we in these cases pray for some new external Revelations, or for some Motives not contain'd in Scrip∣ture. Moreover, according to this Doctrine, it seems both fruitless and absurd to pray for the assistance of the holy Spirit, or to expect we should enjoy it. And so that passage of St. Luke, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you; for if evil parents give good gifts to their children, how much more will your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.9, 13. must be of no use or virtue to us. For what in these Expressions can we pray for, but the assistance of the holy Spirit? and what assistance can he afford us, if he doth not operate at all upon our Souls? To say this Promise is to be confined to the Apostles days, seems not agreeable to reason; for why then do we hear of it in the Ser∣mon on the Mount, which certainly was spo∣ken , in the audience of the mul∣titude? Why doth it run in words so general , for every one than asks receives? Moreover, those spiritual and ordinary Effects for which the holy Spirit was then given, those Fruits of the Spirit they produced in them, are as needful, and as spiritually good for Christians now, as when our Saviour spake these words; for as the holy Spirit was need∣ful then to strengthen Christ's Servants in the inward man to do his will, Eph. 3.16. to com∣fort them in Tribulations, and support them under fiery Trials, and to preserve them from the Subtilties of Satan, and the Temptations of the wicked World, so is there the same need of his assistance now for all these graci∣ous ends, and therefore the same reason to expect him still to all these purposes. More∣over, the Conditions of this Promise may be performed by us now, as well as then; we may be now sincerely desirous to obey the holy
Will of God, and with true fervency and im∣portunity may beg the holy Spirit to this end. And if we may acceptably perform those Du∣ties to which this Promise is annexed, why may we not as confidently expect the Blessing promised from the God of Truth? For the encouragement here given to expect the assi∣stance of the holy Spirit is this, that we ask him of our heavenly Father. Now this most comfortable relation God bears to all his Chil∣dren of what Age soever, he is the same yester∣day, to day, and for ever; and therefore there is now, and ever will be, the same benignity in God, the same good will and readiness in him to give his holy Spirit now unto this Chil∣dren for all needful purposes, as in all former Ages. If therefore in like manner we do ask, we must have equal reason to expect we should receive him. To proceed therefore 2ly, To explain, as far as I am able, and think it needful so to do, how those Fruits of the Spirit, which the Schools call Graces, are wrought in us by the Spirit of God. 1st, I assert that the manner in which the holy Spirit acts upon the Minds and Hearts of Men, for the production of these Fruits or Graces, and the preparatory Dispositions of the Soul towards them, may reasonably be conceived to be such as is sutable to the Rea∣son and Faculties of Men, viz. the Under∣standing and the Will. Now it is certain, that what naturally makes the Understanding to perceive is Evidence proposed and appre∣hended, considered or adverted to, for nothing further can be requisite to make me come unto the knowledge of the truth, and understand what the will of the Lord is, and so be wise unto salvation. Hence the Apostle prays that his Philippians might abound more and more in knowledge, and in all wisdom, , in all perception, that so they may approve the things that are most excellent, Philip. 1.9, 10. Hence he speaks to the Romans thus, Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, , that you may discern and approve what is according to the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Rom. 12.2. and saith to the Ephesians, Be ye not unwise, but under∣standing what the will of the Lord is, Eph. 5.17. and v. 8, 10. Walk as children of the light, ap∣proving what is acceptable to the Lord. Again, what makes the Will chuse, is something ap∣proved by the Understanding, and consequent∣ly appearing to the Soul as good, and what∣soever it refuseth is something represented by the Understanding, and so appearing to the Will as evil, whence all that God requires of us is, and can be only this, to refuse the evil, and to chuse the good. Wherefore to say that Evidence proposed, apprehended, and consi∣dered is not sufficient to make the Under∣standing to approve; or that the greatest Good proposed, the greatest Evil threatned, when equally believed, and reflected on, is not sufficient to engage the Will to chuse that Good, and to refuse that Evil, is in effect  say, that which alone doth move the Will to chuse, or to refuse, is not sufficient to engage it so to do; that which alone is requisite to make me understand and approve, is not suf∣ficient so to do. Now this being contradictory to it self, must of necessity be false. Be it then that we have naturally an aver∣sion to the Truths proposed to us in the Go∣spel, that only can make us indisposed to at∣tend to them, but cannot hinder our convicti∣on when we apprehend them, and attend to them. Whence for removal of it, the Apostle only prays that the eyes of our understanding may be enlightned, that we may know them, Eph. 18 adding, that where the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in Christ Jesus was revealed, if after this their Gospel was hid from any, it was only so, because the God of this world had blinded the conceptions of their minds, that the light of the Gospel might n shine into them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Be it that there is in us a renitency to the Good we are to chuse; that only can indispose us to believe, and to approve it as our chiefest Good. Be it that we are prone to the Evil which we should decline; that only can render it the more dif∣ficult for us to believe it is the worst of Evils. But yet, what we do really conceive to be our chiefest Good will still be chosen, and wh we apprehend to be the worst of Evils, will whilst we do continue under that convicti, be refused by us. It therefore can be only re∣quisite, in order to these ends, that the good Spirit should so illuminate our Understand∣ings, that we attending to, and considering what lyes before us, should apprehend, and be convinced of our Duty, and that the Bles∣sings of the Gospel should be so propounded to us, as that we may discern them to be our chiefest Good, and the Miseries it threatens, so as we may be convinced they are the w of Evils, that we may chuse the one, and ∣fuse the other. Now to consider in order to approbation and conviction, to chuse in order to our good, and refuse that we may avil misery, must be the actions not of God, bt Man, though the Light that doth convince, and the Motives which engage him thus  chuse, and to refuse, are certainly fr God. To illustrate this more familiarly by an I∣stance taken from our selves, or our deprt∣ment towards others: When a Man, in words plain and intelligible, speaks to another,  he will hearken to what he says, he must un∣derstand his mind; for by that very impressi the words make upon his Brain, he immedi∣ately perceives his meaning. And cannot the Divine Impression on the Brain, which is God's speaking inwardly to Man, do the same thing? This action is indeed so necessary, that as it is, not virtuous, or praise-worthy in any Man
to understand the mind of him who doth thus speak to him, so neither seemeth it praise-worthy in us, purely to understand the Mind f God thus speaking to us. Again, these words of Man contain some exhortation to me to do what he desires I would do, backt with incouragements to do so, taken from the pro∣posal of some advantage, the promise of some good I shall receive by complying with his Exhortation; or they contain some dehorta∣tion from doing what he would not have me do, because it will be hurtful to me, or will be certainly attended with some evil conse∣quences: Is not this the method used by all the World in dealing with one another? and do they not do all this with hopes and expe∣ctation of success? And is it not a great dis∣paragement to the Word of God to think that his Perswasions, Admonitions, Exhortations, Promises, and Threats should be all insuffici∣ent to prevail with us to turn from our sinful Courses, and turn to him, when all Men who do use these methods towards their Children, Servants, Friends, or Relations do it in hopes that they shall be successful by these means? Moreover, if the Person they address to be slow of understanding, do they not hope to o∣vercome that difficulty by the clearness of their discourse, and by reiterating the same thing by such variety of Expressions as he is best able to perceive? if he be averse from do∣ing that which is desired, do they not hope to overcome that aversion by repeated exhor∣tations, and vigorous impressions of those in∣couragements they tender to prevail upon him to comply with their desire? If he strongly be inclin'd to that from which they vehemently dehort him, do they not endeavour to turn the bent and current of his Inclinations by the like repeated Exhortations, and lively Repre∣sentations of the Evils he will be certainly ex∣posed to by so doing? All Men are therefore of this opinion in their practise, that acting with Men by convincing Reason, and by Mo∣tives, and Perswasions, is acting with them suitably unto their Faculties. And is not God himself of the same mind? hath he not re∣vealed his will on purpose that we may know it? hath he not directed his Letters and Epi∣stles to us, that by reading we may understand them, and know the things which do belong to our peace? Did not our Saviour utter all his discourses to the same end? why else doth he enquire so oft, Why is it that ye do not under∣stand my speech? John 8.43. How is it that ye do not understand? Mark 8.21. why doth he preface them with this instruction, hear and understand, Matth. 15.10. Doth not God call upon us to consider of our ways, and lay to heart his sayings, and his dispensations, Hg. 1.5, 7. Doth he not prescribe this as the Remedy for preventing his Judgments, when he says, Oh consider this ye that forget God, Psal. 50 21. and of being wise, by saying, Oh tht  were wise, that they would consider their latter end, Deut. 32.29. doth he not represent this as the source of all the wickedness and idola∣try of his own People, that they would not con∣sider in their heart? Isa. 1.3.44.19. Doth he not make Conversion the effect of this Consideration, when he saith, Because  ∣sidereth and turneth away from all the trn∣gressions that he hath committed, e shall su∣ly live, Ezek. 18.29. Psal. 119.59. Yea do he not represent this as a just ground of hop that even the most stubborn sinners may be ¦formed, when he saith to the Prophet, R by day in their sight, it may be they wl ∣der, though they be a rebellious people, Ezek.  2, 3. Does not the Apostle pray that his Cs∣sians may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom, that (so) they might  worthy of the Lord to all well pleasing, being fruitful in every good work? Coloss. 1.9, 10. that his Philippians might discern and approve the things that are most excllent, that thy might be sincere, and without offence, being fil∣led with all the fruits of righteousness, &c. Philip. 1.10, 11. And must not then this knowledge and approbation of his Will e a means of rendring us fruitful in all Works of Righteousness? Does not God require his People to chuse life, Deut. 30.19. pronouncing a Blessing on them that chuse the things that please him, Isa. 56.4. and threatning destru∣ction ro them that would not chuse the fear of the Lord, Prov. 1.29. but chose the things in which he delighted not, Isa. 56.4. Now doth he any thing more to prevail with them who do not chuse the fear of the Lord, do not the things that please him, to engage them so to do, or not to do the contrary, but teach them his ways, and to perswade them to walk in them? Must it not then be certain, that either he transacts with them, as Men who might by these things be induced to chuse to fear him, and do the things that please him, and abstain from the contrary, or threatens to de∣stroy them for doing what they could not help, and had no means sufficient to avoid, and for not doing what it was impossible for them to do? Again, doth he not exhort Men to be willing and obedient, promising a full pardon, and a blessing unto them that do so? Isa. 1.18, 19. Doth not Christ resolve the destruction of the Jews into this, You will nt come unto me that you may have life, John 5.40. declaring this to be the reason why they were not Gathered, because he often would have ga∣thered them, but they would not be gathered, Luke 13.34. because being so graciously invi∣ted to the Marriage Feast, they would not come? Matth. 22.3. Now what did he to engage them to come unto him to gather them, to pre∣vail upon them to come unto the Marrige Feast, but shew them the way of Life, exhort and invite them to come unto the Feast? Ei∣ther then he transacted with them, as one
who knew this was sufficient for these ends, and that these things might have prevail'd up∣on them to be willing, or else he resolved on their exclusion from the Marriage Feast, and their not tasting his Supper, for not doing what they could not do, and condemned them for not coming when they could not, because the Father did not draw them, or give them to him, John 6.37, 44. and for not being ga∣thered when indeed he would not, whatever he said to the contrary, seeing he would not do that for them without which they could not be gathered. Moreover, doth he not ear∣nestly exhort and perswade Men to repent, and turn from the evil of their ways? dorh he not say, Oh that my people would have heark∣ned to me, that Israel would have walked in my ways? Psal. 81.13. Oh that they were wise, that they would understand this! Deut. 32.29. Oh Jerusalem, wilt thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? Jer. 13.27. Oh that thou hadst known in this thy day the things which belong unto thy peace! Luke 19.42. Now ei∣ther in these Exhortations and Perswasions he acts with Men suitably to their Faculties, ex∣horting them to do, and pathetically wishing they had done, what they might have done, though they did it not; or called them to re∣pent that they did not do what they never could do, that they did not avoid what it was impossible they should avoid, and even to re∣pent that God had not irresistably done this for them, and seriously wished they them∣selves would have done what, if it ever had been done, must have been done by himself, and therefore was not done, because he would not irresistably work the change in them. In fine, doth not God encourage Men to repent and believe, to be willing and obedient, by great and precious Promises of the most ex∣cellent, and lasting Blessings? Hath he not threatned eternal Damnation to them that do not believe? Mark 16.15, 16. hath not he said, He will come in flaming fire, taking ven∣geance on all that obey not the Gospel? 2 Thess. 1.7. And must not all these things sufficient∣ly convince us, that God acts with Men as one who doth indeed suppose that Men may hearken to his Exhortations, and comply with his Perswasions to believe, and to obey his Gospel? may be prevail'd on by his Promises to the performance of their Duty, and terrified by the consideration of the Judgments threat∣ned from their Disobedience? Why else is it said, that God hath given us these great and precious promises, that by them we may be made partakers of a divine nature? 2 Pet. 1.2. or why are we exhorted, having these promises, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God? 2 Cor. 7.1. or why doth the Apostle say, Knowing then the terror of the Lord, we perswade men? 2 Cor. 5.11. if beyond all this, there be some physical and irresistable operati∣on on God's part, necessary to make Men know, and knowing chuse the Good, and refuse the Evil? this being not wrought in them who are not born anew, why is the want of this New Birth, and this Spiritual Regeneration, so oft imputed to the want of their Confde∣ration, and their not laying to heart the things propounded to them, to their not enclining their ear to wisdom, and not applying the hearts to understanding; and their not fr¦ming their doings to turn unto the Lord? Prov. 1.24 — 30. Hos. 5.4. If it be said, this may be done because they had grace and strength sufficient in their first Parents so to do, I an∣swer, Admit that vain imagination that we had, what never we indeed had, or could have, because 'twas lost long before we had a being yea, what Adam never had, because then he must have had power to repent after his Fall, and then we must have it still, for what pow∣er he had to repent after his fall, he could not lose by his fall; I say, admit this Suppositi∣on, what is it to the import of all the Exhor∣tations, Perswasions, and Motives contained in the Gospel, which are all directed to fal∣len Man, and so, if God be serious in them, declare his great unwillingness that fallen Man should perish, his passionate desire that he should be saved, and if he speaketh i them suitably to the Capacities and Faculties of fallen Man, plainly suppose him still in a Capacity by these Assistances and Motives to understand his Duty, and to chuse the Good, and refuse the Evil? Prop. 2. I add, that this is not ordinarily, and needs not at all to be done now, by pro∣pounding to the Understanding any Truths, or to the Will any Motives or Inducements which are not contain'd in Holy Scripture. For if the Word of God be a perspicuous and perfect Rule, able to make us wise to salvation, and furnished for every good work, sure the good Spirit may, by suggesting the Truths contain∣ed in it, and bringing them to our remem∣brance, and opening our Understandings to per∣ceive the Scriptures, sufficiently remove the darkness that is in our Minds; if it be a light shining in darkness, 2 Pet. 1.19. and , all Errors to be corrected, all Vices to be reproved, are made manifest by the light, Eph. 5.13. then must it be sufficient to illu∣minate our Understandings, and direct our Paths, or lead our feet into the way of truth. Again, seeing the Motives contained in the Scripture, to engage us to turn from those evil ways which tend to our disquiet, torment, and misery at present, and will hereafter subject us to eternal Miseries, must be sufficient to turn us from the evil of our ways, or else the highest Motives that can be offered must be insufficient to that end, all other Motives to deter us from any action as pernicious and dis∣advantagious to us, being as nothing, when compared to that, depart from me ye wicked into
eternal fire; all Evils we can dread, or suffer from the hand of Man, as little in respect of that we must have cause to fear from him who can destry both soul and body in hell fire. Since, on the other hand, the promise of e∣verlasting Happiness, recorded in the same Scriptures, as the result of our sincere Obedi∣ence, must be sufficient to engage us in a sin∣cere endeavour to yield that obedience to the good and holy will of God, or no Inducements can be sufficient to that end, seeing this Mo∣tive eminently contains all other Motives in it, there being more in those two words, the enoyment of God, and everlasting happiness, then Kingdoms, Thrones, and Treasures, Joy, Pleasures, Honours, and all that can express the good things of this World, imports, and therefore a more vehement constraining power in them, to the performance of our Duty, than in the united strength of worldly Greatness, Honour, Pleasures, and that which represent∣eth to our hopes and our desires, that which incomparably excels all we can hope for, or desire besides; I say, this being so, the holy Spirit, by making deep impressions on the Mind of the Advantages and Rewards promi∣sed to our Conversion and sincere Obedience, and of the dreadful Evils threatned to the Dis∣obedient, and bringing these things oft to our remembrance, which in the Scripture phrase is putting these laws in our minds, and writing them upon our hearts; see Note on Hebr. 8.10. must do what is sufficient to work in us Con∣version and sincere Obedience. For what rea∣son can be given why the Spirit of Wisdom, having enlightned the eyes of our understanding to know what is the hope of our calling, and the glorious riches of the inheritance of the Saints, Eph. 1.18. And these things being thus made present to our Minds, should not have greater prevalence upon our Wills to obedience, than any Temporal Concerns to yield obedience to the Laws of Man? 'Tis certain, Satan can only tempt us by suggesting some Temporal Allurements and Advantages, or some Tem∣poral Losses or Affrightments to us. Since then the Scripture doth assure us, this is our victory over the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4. i. e. our expectation of things hoped for, our e∣vidence of things not seen, Hebr 11.1. these Objects of our Faith contained in the Scrip∣tures, being presented to us, and impressed upon us by the holy Spirit, must be sufficient to baffle all the Temptations of Sin, Satan, and the World. In fine, of this we may be suf∣ficiently convinced from the Experience of Mankind: For since the apprehension of Good or Evil is the sole Motive to make us under∣take, or decline any Action, the greater the Good or Evil is, the stronger Motive it must be. Now, do nor many Millions in the World forego their present Ease and Pleasure, encoun∣ter Difficulties, adventure upon Dangers, and undergo most toilsome Labours, in expectati∣on of some finite Temporal Advantage, of which they cannot have assurance? do they not oft abstain from what they passionately love, only for fear of Dangers which possibly might not ensue upon the Satisfaction of their Appetites? do they not sow, and plant, and trade only in hopes of an increase? and should not then the hopes of infinite eternal Happiness, and the dread of endless Miseries, more power∣fully engage us to obey God's Precepts, and to resist all the Temptations which Flesh and Blood suggests against them? But then, because the Blessings and Mise∣ries of another World are things invisible, and only are discerned by the Eye of Faith, they being only Moral and Spiritual Motives, which only work upon us as they are present to our Minds by actual consideration and reflection on them, and this they are not always, when the Temptations of the World, the Devil, and the Flesh, by sensual Objects, are thus present with us; 'tis therefore necessary that at all times, when they are not thus present with us, and therefore cannot operate upon us, the holy Spirit should either, by representing to us from the Scriptures those Divine Truths with which our Understandings have not been sufficiently enlightned, instruct, and guide us; or else by reviving, and impressing on our Spi∣rits those Motives and Inducements to resist those Temptations, and to perform those Du∣ties which are required at our hands, assist us so to do. Prop. 3. I therefore humbly conceive this inward operation of the holy Spirit to consist in these two things. 1st, In representing Divine Truths more clearly to our Understandings, that we may have a fuller Evidence, stronger Conviction and Assurance of them, which is in Scripture stiled the illumination of the mind. 2ly, In bringing of thee Truths to our re∣membrance, that so they may be present with us, when this is requisite to enable us to resist Temptations, and to encourage us to the per∣formance of our Duty. And upon suppositi∣on of these two things, that God acts with us suitably to the nature of our Faculties, on our Understanding, by representing the Light to it, and on our Wills by Motives to chuse the Good and refuse the Evil, and that the highest Motives and Inducements possible, when firmly believed, and present to the Mind, must be sufficient to produce their ends, it can be only requisite to our Conversion and sincere Obedience, that the good Spirit should assist us in this work, by that illumination which is sufficient to produce this strong Con∣viction and Plerophory of Faith, and should present those Motives to our Memories, and make a deep impression of them there, which being present, will move our Wills and our Affections to prosecute the ends for which they are sufficient.
I am not ignorant that there be many, who beyond all this, require a physical and irre∣sistable Motion of the holy Spirit, in which we are wholly passive to the Conversion of a Sinner, and I shall not dispute with them, that Controversie being so fully handled by Dr. Clegat, but shall endeavour briefly to com∣pound and state the matter. First then, I say it must be granted, that in raising an Idea in my Brain by the holy Spirit, and the Impression made upon it there, the action is properly physical. 2ly, That in these Actions I am purely pas∣sive; that is, I my self do nothing formally to produce these Ideas, but the good Spirit, without my operation, doth produce them in me. And 3ly, That these Operations must be irresista∣ble in their production, because they are im∣mediately produced in me without my know∣ledge of them, and without my will, and so without those Faculties by which I am ena∣bled to act. But then I add, that as far as they are so, they cannot be imputable to me, i. e. it can∣not be praise-worthy in me, or rewardable, that I have such Ideas raised in me; but on∣ly that, when they are thus raised in me, I at∣tend to them, comply with, and improve them to the ends for which they were designed by the holy Spirit. To make this evident by an Example, it is on all hands granted, that Satan can so work upon the Brain, as to raise up in it impure and blasphemous Ideas, but then it is as generally held, that the Thoughts they im∣mediately produced, will never be imputed to us as our sins, nor will God be displeased with us for them, if we do not after shew any good liking of them, or consent unto them, but manfully resist, and rise up into detestation and abhorrence of them; and that because the raising these Ideas is the Devil's action, not our own; we are purely passive in them till we consent unto, or shew some liking of them; and they are also inevitable and irresi∣stable, it being in the power of no Man to prevent or resist them; i. e. to hinder them from being raised in his Brain, or any ways to suppress them, till he doth first perceive them raised there. And therefore for the same reasons those Ideas which are objectively good, being thus raised in us, cannot be imputed to us for reward, nor can God be well pleased with us for them, till we co operate with them; because the raising of them is properly God's, not our own action, and we are pure∣ly passive in it; nor is it in our power to pre∣vent, or to resist them; but then, God having planted in us a Principle of Reason and Dis∣cretion, we can attend to them being raised, and so improve them to the illumination of our Understandings, and to the Approbation of them in our Minds. He also having given us a Will to chuse the Good, and refuse the Evil, we may consent unto the good Sgge¦stions, and pursue the good Motions rais thus in us; for to what other ends can they be raised in us by the holy Spirit? As there¦fore our attendance and consent to the Sug∣gestions of the evil Spirit being free, and what we may avoid is culpable, so our attendance to, and compliance with these Motions and Ideas of the holy Spirit, being things in which we are free and active, and that upon de¦liberation, and so in them we do perform the proper and free actions of a Man, doing that which we might not do, and refusing to do that we have both power and temp¦tations to perform, therefore these things must be praise-worthy and acceptable in the sight of God. I also add, that these Ideas being thus raised up in us by God alone, and even the power of attending and consenting to them, being, together with our Nature, entirely derived from God; and all the Inducements which we have to attend to them, and com∣ply with them, being properly of Divine external Revelation, or such Divine inter∣nal operation as if they had not intervened, we should have had none of these good Effects produced upon us, these Effects are properly to be ascribed to God, and all the Praise and Glory of them must be de to him alone, because the Principle of act∣ing, and the Inducement thus to act is solely from him. To conclude, the greatest Instance of powerful Conversion I can call to mind, is that of persecuting Saul. He is confound∣ed by a light shining round about him bright∣er than the Sun; by this he is struck down into the earth, and hears a dreadful voice from Heaven, saying, Saul, Soul, why perse∣cutest thou me? Now in all this he was purely passive, and the Action done upon him was physical and irresistable; and there∣fore this Action being wholly Christ's, not his, there could be nothing in it on his part praise-worthy, or rendring him a bet∣ter Man. But then, when he enquires of the holy Jesus, Lord, what wouldst thou have me to do? when he prays earnestly for the forgiveness of his sins, Acts 9.11. when he submits to that Baptism which was appointed by the Holy Jesus for that end, and for the dedication of himself unto his Service, when, being told what grievous things he was to suffer for the Name of Jesus, he notwithstanding was not disobedient to the heavenly Vision, but went, and preached up that Faith which e had formerly opposed; these being Actions of deliberation and free choice, proceeding from Reflections on the heavenly Vision, and the Conviction it had wrought upon
him, must be praise worthy and acceptable in the sight of God. Though, being the Results of what our Lord had done upon him, he very properly ascribeth the whole Glry of them to the Grace and Favour of our Lord towards him. Hence say St. Chrysostom and Oecumenius, He doth so magnifie the Grace of God in this matter, as , not to invli∣date man's free-will. See Note on 1 Tim. 1.12. And that there is a perfect Har∣mony betwixt the operation of God's Grace, and the co-operation of our Wills, we learn from two Examples recorded in one Chap∣ter, viz. 2 Cor. 8.1, 3. where the Apostle advertiseth the Corinthians of the Grace of Gd given to them of Macedonia; for saith the Apostle, they were according to their power, yea, and above their power  of themselves willing to contribute to the Necessities of the Saints, viz. the Contribu∣tion was an act of their own free-wills, proceeding from their choice; but the Grace and Favour of God given to them, was the Spring and Motive of it. So again, v. 16, 17. Thanks be to God , to him that gave this care in the heart of Ti∣tus, for he excepted the exhortation, and be∣ing more forward , he went to you of his own accord; i. e. the Exhorta∣tion was from St. Paul, that which gave the weight and vigour to it, and rendred him more forward in it, was the Grace and Favour of God to him; the reflection on both made this Journey the matter of his own choice, and so he became willing on his own accord: yea, this is evident e∣ven from the very words, by some thought to assert the contrary, Philip. 2.12, 13. Wherefore, beloved—not only as in my pre∣sence, (when you had me to be your Mo∣nitor) but much mre now in my absence, (which God by the workings nd inward teachings of his Spirit supplies  ot your salvation with fear and tremling, . 13. For it is God that wrke in yu, both to will and to do of his o gd pleasure; (i. e. sometimes by outward,  sometimes by inward means ) for i be¦yond these inward Suggestions and Per∣swasions, some physical and irrsisable O∣perations be required on Gd's part, which make it necessary for us, both to will and do, why are we then commanded to work out our own salvation; for can we act where we are purely passive? or can that be a reason why we our selves should work, that another will effectually do that very thing without our co-operation? Is it not rather a manifest reason why we should neither will, or work at all, since both is, and will be irresistably performed without us? Why 2ly, are we bid to rk t our Salvation with fear and trembling; fr can there be any cause of fear and trem∣bling least that Salvation should not be wrought our, which God works in us ir∣resistably? Surely if God works in us ir∣resistably both to will and do, there can be no possibility of Miscarrying, and so no ground for fear and trembling. Why 3ly, are the Philippians exhorted to do this much more in St. Paul's absence, than in his presence, if when he was present, God wrought in them irresistably to will and do, and could do no more in his absence. 'Tis therefore evident, from thse Conside∣rations, that God works in us both to will and do, by giving us our Wills and Faculties, and then stirring them up to put forth their own Acts. CHAP. VII. Verse 1. HAving therefore these promises, dearly beloved, (of a God thus related to, and dwelling with us,) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh (all un∣cleanness and intemperance) and spirit, (all ido∣latry) perfecting (or still making progress in) holiness, in the fear of (that holy) God (who dwelleth in, and stands so near related to us.) , from all filthiness of flesh and spirit.] The sins of the Corinthians being Uncleanness and Idolatry, (See the Preface to the first Epistle, and the Notes on Chap. 10.) they seem to be here more especially intend∣ed. Ver. 2. (And) receive us (into your kind af∣fections, for) we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man (from the truth,) we have defrauded no man, (as your false Apostles have done, 2 Cor. 11.3, 20.) Ver. 3. I speak not this (with an evil mind) to condemn you (as suspecting such things of us,) for I have said before that you are in our hearts, (Chap. 3.2. so that we are ready) to die, and live with you, (i. e. we love you so
affectionately, that we could even die for the pro∣motion of your welfare.) Ver. 4. (And therefore) Great is my bold∣ness (or freedom) of speech toward you; great (also) is my glorying of you, (for your obedience, v. 14. and your liberality, 2 Cor. 9.2.) I am exceeding joyful (on that account) in all our tribulations.) , under all our tribu∣lations.] As  signfies, Mark 2.26. Luke 3.2.4.17. Acts 11.28.1 1 Cor. 6.1, 6. or a∣midst them, as Luke 12.14. or after them, as Philip. 2.27. Hebr. 9.15. Ver. 5. (I say our tribulations.) For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest (from them,) but we were troubled (and pressed) on every side; without were fightings (with the Opposers of the Gospel,) within were fears, (lest the false Apostles should have perverted you from the simplicity which is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3.) Ver. 6. Nevertheless (that) God that com∣forteth those that are cast down, comforted us also by the coming of Titus (with good tydings from you, v. 13.) Ver. 7. And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you, (which he discovered to us) when he told us your earnest desire (to rectifie what was amiss in the matter of the incestuous person,) your mourning (for your miscarriage in it,) your servent mind towards me, (and zeal a∣gainst my Adversaries,) so that I rejoyced the more (for his consolation, then for his coming.) Ver. 8. For (therefore) though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, (Gr. I am not sorry,) though I did repent, (Gr. though I was sorry, viz. that I was forced to make you so, Chap. 2.4.) for I perceive that the same Epistle hath made you sorry, though it were but for a (little) season. , I do not repent.] It seems in∣congruous to think the Apostle should repent of what he writ by the direction of the Holy Spirit, and to this very end to stir up a godly sorrow in them; and therefore it seems better to render the Original  with Grotius, and others, Non doleo quan∣quam doluit mihi, I am not sorrow now, though I was sorry when I writ this Epistle, doing it with many tears, Chap. 2.4. Or thus, I do not repent, though I should have repented, viz. if it had not found this good effect upon you. Ver. 9. Now I rejoyce, not (barely) that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to re∣pentance; for ye were made sorry after a god∣ly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. Ver. 10. For godly sorrow worketh repen∣tance to salvation not to be repented of, (Gr. not repented of,) but the sorrow of the world worketh death. , not repented of.] That is, such a change from the service of sin, to the Service of God, as we do not revoke, or repent of by relapsing again into the sins once left off. N also that godly sorrow is not it self repentance but that which tends to work it in us by pre∣serving us from relapsing into that offence which created so much bitterness and anguish to us: The sorrow of the world worketh death, it dries up the moisture of the Body, Prov. 17.22. and hath killed many, Ecclus. 30.23. Ver. 11. For behold, this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you (of obeying m directions, v. 15.) yea what clearing of your selves (from guilt by inflicting censures on te guilty person, and putting away evil from ¦mong you, 1 Cor. 15.13.) yea, what indigna∣tion (against him who had so dishonoured his pr∣fession, and defiled the Church,) yea what fear (of my displeasure, or the Rod I threated, 1 Cor. 4.21.) yea what vehement desire (to rectifie what was amiss in this matter, v. 7.) yea what zeal (for me,) yea, what revenge (in punish∣ing the delinquent, so that) in all things (by this deportment) you have approved your selves to be clear (from guilt) in this mat∣ter. , to be clear.] Note here that true repentance for sin clears us from the guilt of it, not only in the sight of God, but Man, so that it is both uncharitable, and unchristian to stig∣matize, or reproach any person for the sin we know, or believe he truly hath repented of. Ver. 12. Wherefore though I wrote (so severely) to you, I did it not for his cause that had done the wrong (as delighting in his punishment,) nor for his cause that had suffered wrong (i. e. out of particular kindness to the Father of the incestuous person,) but (chiefly) that our care for you in the sight of God might appear to you. Ver. 13. Therefore we are comforted in your comfort; (i. e. in the comfort we received from your deportment in this matter,) yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus (in you,) because his spirit was refresh∣ed by you all. Ver. 14. For (now) if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not ashamed; but as we speak all things to you in truth (and sincerity,) even so our boasting which I have made before Titus is found a truth. Ver. 15. And his inward affection (Gr. his bowels) is yet more abundant towards you, whilst he remembreth the obedience of you all, how you received him with fear and trembling, (lest there should be any thing found in you that might offend him, or require my rod.) Ver. 16. I rejoyce therefore that I (can) have (this) confidence in you in all things.
CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. MOreover, brethren, we do you to wit (Gr. we make known to you) the grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia, (Philippi, Thessalonica, Beraea, &c.) , the grace of God beswd on.] Or the charitable Contribution gven in the Churches of Macedonia, to which they were excited by God's rich grace towards thm, for that  signifies liberality, appears from v. 6. I exhrted Titus to finish in you  this charitable contribution. And v. 7. that ye also may abound  in this liberal contribution. And v. 19. Who w chosen of the Churches to travel with us  with this Charity to be di∣spensed by us. So Chap. 9.8. God is able to  all liberality abound among you. And 1 Cor. 16.3 To bring  your liberality to the poor Christians. Hence  is by Hesychius and Phavorinus interpreted a Gift, as it is here by the Apostle saying of this abounding Charity, Thanks be to God for this unspeakable gift, Chap. 9.14, 15. This Charity is stiled the grace of God, either for its exceed∣ing greatness, as Cedars of God, and Mountains of God, signifie great Mountains, and Cedars, Psal. 36.7.80.11. See Note on Acts 7.20. Gen. 23.6.30.5. Jon. 3.3. or rather as pro∣ceeding from God, as the giver of this dispo∣sition, and the motive to this Charity, as the zeal of God, 2 Cor. 11.2. the love of God, 2 Cor. 5.14. the grace of God, Tit. 2.11. Ver. 2. How that in a great trial of afflicti∣ons, the abundance of their joy (in the Holy Ghost appeared, 1 Thess. 1.6.) and their deep Poverty abounded to the riches of their Libe∣rality, (or how they being very poor, and much afflicted, Acts 16.20.17.5, 13. did notwith∣standing with great chearfulness and joy make a rich contribution towards the relief of their poor Brethren in Judaea.) , to the riches of their liberality.] So the word  usu∣ally signifies both in the Old and the New Te∣stament. So Prov. 11.25. , the libe∣ral soul shall be made fat. Rom. 12.8. He that giveth, let him do it  with liberality. 2 Cor. 9.11. Being enriched in all things  to all liberality. And again v. 13. James 1.5. If any mn lack wisdom, let him ask it of God who giveth  liberally. Ver. 3. For to their power I bear record, yea, and beyond their power (or abilities,) they (unsolicited by us,) were willing of themselves (to contribute to the necessities of the pr Saints in Judaea.) , beyond their power.] ThusL. quis Rer. div. Haeres, p. 377. B. C. Philo notes it as the excellency of a Ser∣vant to engage in his Matters Service, not on∣ly readily, and laboriously, but even  beyond his strength. Ver. 4. (Not being intreated by us, but) Praying us with much intreaty that we would receive the gift, and take upon us the fellow∣ship of ministring to the Saints, (or be one of those who should take care for the administrati∣on on and conveyance of it to them, v. 19, 20, 21. Chap. 9.12, 13. 1 Cor. 16.4. Acts 24.17.) Ver. 5. And this they did, not as we hoped, (or thought the event would be, wh could ex∣pect only a small collection from men so poor, and so exhausted,) but first (they) gave themselves unto the Lord (i. e. to his service in it,) and unto us (to be imployed in the promotion of this Charity, or the distribution of it to others) by the will of God (moving them so to do, or ac∣cording to his will, 2 Cor. 9.4.) , not as we hoped.] The word , hoping, is used by the. Suidas. Atticks, say Grammarians, not only touching good things, but simply touching the event of what is fu∣ture. Ver. 6. Insomuch that (seeing this forward∣ness in others) we desired Titus, that as he had (in his last visit of you) began, so he would (now) finish in you the same grace (or charity) also, (and so that ye be not defective in it.) Ver. 7. Therefore (Gr. , but) as ye a∣bound in every (other) thing (or gift,) in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, (1 Cor. 1.5.) and in all diligence (to amend what I had bla∣med you for, 2 Cor. 7.11.) and in your love to me, (ibid. v. 7. so) see that ye abound (or, I pray that ye would abound) in this grace al∣so. Ver. 8. I speak not this by way of com∣mandment, but (of advice only, v. 10.) by oc∣casion of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity ofAll the Greek Scholiasts here read . your love to Christ and his Saints. , not by way of commandment, or injunction.] i. e. The Apostle commands not how much they should confer, much less that they should give all their Substance, and live upon a common Stock, leaving nothing to themselves which they could call their own; for where no man hath any thing of his own, there is no place for liberality.
Vr. 9. (And command you I need not,) For ye know the grace (r kindness) of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich (Gr. that being rh,) yet for your sakes he became poor, that () ye through his poverty might be rich. (Or, as Chrysostom and Oecumenius read, that () we through his poverty might be rich, which is the same in sense with the other reading.) , being rich, he be∣came poor for you.] These words the Socinians interpret thus, That Christ being the only Son of God, conceived by the Holy Ghost, and en∣dued with the power of the Holy Ghost, and being one to whose power all things in the Earth did yield, was therefore stiled rich; and that he became poor when he was bound, led away, exposed to contempt, spit upon, smit∣ten on the face, whip'd, crucified. But this Interpretation seems not well consistent with the words of the Apostle. For 1. All these Sufferings are indeed proper in∣dications of Infamy cast upon him, and seem∣ing Infirmity in him, but not of Poverty, see∣ing the richest Man may be exposed to all, or any of these things. 2. The words seem to imply some change in the Person of whom it is here said, that being rich, he became poor; whereas Christ was not less the Son of God, or less endued with power, when he thus suffered, as appears by the great Miracles he then did. Others of them say, that he became poor by leading a poor life on earth: But (1.) it is not by his Poverty on Earth that we are made rich, but by the Humiliation of himself. And (2ly,) he was thus poor from his Birth and Cradle, even before the Holy Spirit descended on him at his Baptism. How much more na∣turally therefore are these words interpreted by that of the same Apostle, that being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, he emptied himself of all his gory, when he came to take our Nature on him, taking together with it the form of a Ser∣vant, and humbling himself unto the death, even the death of the Cross? Philip. 2.7, 8. See the Note there. Which death, saith Irenaeus, he could only suffer  the Divine Nature being then quiescent, and not active in him, this is that Glory which he had with the Father before the World was, and which he, after his Ascension, re-assumed, John 17.5. Now it Christ thus emptied himself of his Glory, that we might be spiritually rich, it becomes us in imitation of his great Example, to part with our Temporals to supply the Exi∣gencies of his needy and afflicted Members. Ver. 10. And herein I give my advice; for this is expedient for you, who have begun not only to do, but also to be forward a year a∣go. , not only to do, but to be willing, or forward.] It is known that the Will goes before the Deed, and there¦fore  here cannot barely signifie to wil, but either to do it  with re∣ness and zeal, as the following Verse interprs it, or, with delight, as the word often sig∣nifies; so 1 Sam. 18.22. , the King delights in thee. See 2 Sam. 15.2 Psal. 5.4.21.8.40.12. Esth. 6.6, 7.8.11. Mal. 3.1. Matth. 27.43. in all which places i answers to the Hebrew word Chaphets. , a year ago.] The Apostle had exhorted them in his Epistle writ a year ago to this contribution, 1 Cor. 16.2. and then, in obedience to his directions, had begun to lay up in store willingly, this Charity he now ex∣horts them to consummate; and this he sa to shew they were not only moved to it by the example of the Macedonians, but rather we Examples to them, Chap. 9.2. Ver. 11. Now therefore perform (or com∣pleat) the doing it, that as there was a readi∣ness to will, so there may be a performane (of that will) also, out of that which ye have. Ver. 12. For if there be first a willing mind, (whatsoever is given) it is accepted, according to that a man hath, and not (expected be should give) according to that he hath not. , not according to what he b not.] What is due to another, either by debt, or duty of making provision for those of his own Family, cannot be charitably given, as be¦ing not our own. Ver. 13. For I mean not that other men be eased, (or by your Charity should live at ease.) and you (in the mean time) burthened (with want.) Ver. 14. But (that Christian Charity should be managed) by an equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want, that (another time) their abundance also, may be a supply for your want, that there may be an equality. , an equality.] So far Christianity seems to require this equality, as that we should not suffer others to lack the necessities of this present life, whilst we abound in them. Ver. 15. (That in your peregrination it my be) As it is written (of the Jews travelling in the wilderness, where) He that gathered much (Manna) had nothing over, and he that gather∣ed little had no lack (Exod. 16.18.) Ver. 16. But thanks be to God, which put the same care into the heart of Titus for you. Ver. 17. For indeed he (not only) accepted the Exhortation (I made to him concerning th imployment,) but being more forward (then I thought to find him) of his own accord, he went unto you. .] Here we see the sweet Harmo∣ny there is betwixt the Gifts of God, and o
Perswasion, and Free-will. Titus was moved to this work by St. Paul's Exhortation, and was also willing of his own accord, and yet God, saith the Apostle, put this earnest care into his heart. Ver. 18. And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the Gospel, through∣out all the Churches. , whose praise is in the Gospel, &c] Who this Brother was is much contested; Antiqui∣ty hath carried it for St. Luke, worthy of praise in all Churches for the Gospel he writ. Though the authority of this Assertion seems to rest upon the words of the interpolated. Ep. ad Eph. § 15. Ignatius andScripsit Evangelium de quo idem Paulus, misimus cum illo Fratrem cujus laus est in Evangelio per omnes Ecclesiae Verbo Lucas. Ita Titus Bostrensis in Luc. 1. p. 763. St. Jerom. And this dif∣ficulty lyes against it, that this Brother is sent before St. Paul to Corinth with Titus, whereas St. Luke went with him to Troas, and from thence to Corinth, Acts 20.4, 6. So Dr. Light∣foot. To which it may be answered, That it is not certain that St. Paul went from Troas to Corinth; perhaps he rather went from Phi∣lippi to Corinth, and so to Troas. See the Preface. And so this Person being chosen by the Churches to travel with this Charity, v. 19. might be both sent before to prepare it, and be∣ing returned to give notice to St. Paul that it was ready, might go back with him to receive it. Ver. 19. And not that (or so) only, but who was also chosen of the Churches to travel with us with this Grace (or Charity,) which is administred (or dispensed) by us to the glory of the same Lord, and to the declaration of your ready mind (to relieve your poor Brethren, or of our ready mind to perform this charitable office, for Theodoret and Oecumenius read .) Ver. 20. (We by taking such faithful Compa∣nions with us) Avoiding (or taking care of) this, that no man should blame us (or charge us with insincerity) in this abundance (of your liberality) which is administred by us. Ver. 21. (And so) providing for honest (Gr. creditable) things not only in the sight of the Lord, but (also) in the sight of men. Ver. 22. And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have often times proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent (in this imployment,) upon the great confidence that I have in you. , our Brother] Apollo, say some of the Ancients, viz. Theodoret and Oecu∣menius, who before doubted of them, and so was not disposed to come to them, 1 Cor. 16.12. but now, upon St. Paul's confidence of their readiness to obey his Precepts, was pre∣vailed upon to come. Ver. 23. Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner, and fellow helper concern∣ing you, (in promoting your welfare and refor∣mation, 2 Cor. 2.13.7.6.7.) or whether our brethren be enquired of, they are the Messen∣gers of the Churches, and (the Promoters of) the glory of Christ. Ver. 24. Wherefore shew ye to them, and before the Churches, the proof of your love (to me) and of our boasting on your behalf, (i. e. that we did not vainly boast of your rea∣diness to perform such works of Charity.) CHAP. IX. Verse 1. (TO me I say, and to these Mes∣sengers of the Church,) For as touching the ministry to the Saints (in Judea,) it is superfluous for me to write to you (a∣gain.) Ver. 2. For I know the forwardness of your minds (in that affair,) for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago, and (the fame and example of) your zeal hath provoked many. , your forwardness.] Some tell us that St. Paul preached the Gospel free∣ly at Corinth for two reasons: (1.) Because he observed in them such a saving temper as would hinder the progress of the Gospel, if it should prove matter of charge to them. But this cannot be a true account of the matter, 1. Because he doth the same at Thessalonica the Metropolis of Macedonia, labouring night and day, because he would not become chargeable to any of them, 1 Thess. 2.6, 9. 2 Thess. 3.8. and throughout all Asia, saying thus to them, You know that these hands have ministred to my necessities, and to those that were with me, Acts 20.33. And it seems plain from his own words, that no Church communicated any thing to him but that of Philippi, Philip. 4, 15, 16. 2ly, Because he commends them for their readiness and willing mind here, and Chap. 8.11, 19. and mentions the liberality of their Contribution, and their unspeakable Gift, with thanks to God, v. 13, 14, 15. in this Chapter, in which he doth exhort them to compleat it. 3ly, Be∣cause they contributed to others who were false Apostles, and suffered them to take of them; so he insinuates in these words, If others are partakers of this power over you, are not we much more. This he speaks, says Chrysostom and the Greek Scholiasts, not of Peter, or the other Apostles; for then he would not have said are not we much more partakers of this power then they? , but of
some false Apostles, and corrupters of them, of whom he saith, 2 Cor. 11.20. You suffer if a man devour you, if he take of you, which also is a confutation of the second pretended rea∣son of this abstinence, that the Apostle did this to disappoint the Arts of these false Teachers who preached the Gospel freely, and gloried in so doing. See the Note on 2 Cor. 11.12, 13. The Apostle himself gives another reason of the doing this both here, and elsewhere, viz. not because we have not power, but to make our selves an example to you to follow us, 2 Thess. 3.9. And again, Acts 20.34. I have shewed you all things, how that so doing you ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said it is better to give then to receive. Ver. 3. Yet have I sent the brethren (men∣tioned Chap. 8.17, 18.) lest our boasting of you should be in vain in this behalf, that as I said (Chap. 8.11.) you may be found ready. Ver. 4. Lest haply if they of Macedonia (who gave themselves up to us, chap. 8.5.) come with me, we, that we say not you, should be ashamed of this same confident boasting. Ver. 5. Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the (aforesaid) brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up be∣fore hand your bounty, whereof you had no∣tice (or declared) before, that the same might be ready as a matter of (free) bounty, and not (extorted from you with difficulty,) as a matter of covetousness. , and not as a matter of covetousness.] The Corinthians abounded, saithPreface in Epist. primum. St. Chrysostom, , in wealth above all other Cities, as being a very famous Mart, and so the Apo∣stle is concerned to stir them up to an abun∣dant Charity, as he did v. 14. and because Riches beget Covetousness, he here arms them against that Vice. Note also that to give Alms out of shame, or to satisfie the impor∣tunity of others, rather then out of love and good will, is a symptom of a covetous tem∣per. Ver. 6. But (to preserve you from this tem∣per) this I say, he which soweth sparingly shall reap sparingly; and he who soweth bountifully, shall reap bountifully (from God again, Prov. 11.24, 25.) Ver. 7. Every man (then) as he purposeth in his heart so let him give, not grudgingly, or (as) of necessity (to avoid shame, or only to comply with the example, or importunity of others,) for God loveth a chearful giver. , not of necessity.] Note that Necessity in Scripture stands opposed, not to coction, but to the free election of the Will. See the Note on Philem. 14. and on 1 Pet. 5.2. Ver. 8. And (to this end consider that) God is able to make all grace abound towards you, that ye always, having all sufficiency, may ∣bound in every good (and charitable) work. , God is able.] Here note that not only the promise, but the power of that God, who is good to all, is a motive to ex∣pect his grace and favour. See the Note on Rom. 11.23. Hebr. 2.18. Note 2ly, that  here signifies to make, or cause to ¦bound, so Matth. 13.22.25.29. Whosoev hath, to him shall be given, , and he shall be made to abound, 1 Thess. 3.12. the Lord make you to encrease, , and to abound in love. Ver. 9. (According) as it is written (Psal. 112.9.) He hath dispersed abroad; he hath given to the poor; his righteousness (i. e. his liberality) remaineth for ever, (in remembrance before God.) , his righteousness.] That is, his Liberality, as the word often signifies in the Septuagint; so Gen. 19.19. Thou hast mag∣nified  thy mercy, or kindness to me. Chap. 20.13. , This kindness shalt thou shew me. Chap. 24.27. He hath not left  his kindness to Abraham. See v. 49. Chap. 32.10. Exod. 15.13.34.7. Prov. 20.28. Isa. 63.7. Ver. 10. Now (may) he that ministreth seed to the sower, both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness. (Note that all the Greek Scholia read , not  ministry.) Ver. 11. (That you may still make progress in them.] Being enrich'd in every thing to all bountifulness, which causeth through is (who dispense it) thanksgivings to God. Ver. 12. For the administration of this s∣vice not only supplieth the want of the Saints but is also abundant by many thanksgivings to (the glory of) God. Ver. 13. Whilst by the experiment of ts ministration (men) glorifie God for your pro¦fessed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution to them, and to all men. .]  in the New Testament still signifies the Confession of Faith, 1 Tim. 6.12, 13. Hebr. 3.1.4.14.10.23.  subjection to the Precepts of that Faith. So the Apostle signifies, that Men see∣ing in them, by this Charity, the sincerity of their love, Chap. 8.8. and so of their obedi¦ence to the Gospel, will be induced to glo∣rifie God, and own the excellency of that Religion which produceth such Fruits of Righteousness. Ver. 14. And (you also will receive ad¦tage) by their prayers for you, which  (and earnestly desire your welfare) for the
exceeding grace of God (they see) in you. Ver. 15. Thanks be to God for (this) un∣unspeakable gift, (i. e. this admirable Charity by which God is so much glorified, the Gospel receives such credit, others are so much bene∣fited, and you will be so plentifully by God re∣warded. CHAP. X. Verse 1. NOW I Paul my self (who would not deal severely with you) be∣seech you by the meekness of Christ (which I desire to imitate, even I) who in (or as to my) presence am (esteemed) base among you, but being absent, am (accounted) bold towards you (v. 10.) Ver. 2. But (whatsoever you esteem me) I beseech you that I may not (find reason to) be bold when I am present, with that confi∣dence wherewith I think (meet) to be bold a∣gainst some, who think of us as walking ac∣cording to the flesh. (Now saying one thing, and then another, according to our carnal in∣terests, 2 Cor. 1.17.) Ver. 3. For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh, (exercising our authority in weakness.) Ver. 4. For the weapons of our warfare are not (weak, Isa. 31.3. and) carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of (the) strong holds (of the Gen∣tiles.) , the weapons of our warfare.] That these include the Censures of the Apostolical Authority is certain; but that they are to be restrained to them, I do not think, but rather that they chiefly do refer to the miraculous powers God had given them for the Conversion of the Gentiles to the Christian Faith. Moreover, the Apostolical Rod seems not to relate to the power of Ex∣communication, but of inflicting Corporal Diseases on Persons refractory and disorderly, and seemeth not to have been continued after the death of the Apostles. Ver. 5. Casting down (their) imaginations (and reasonings,) and every high thought that exalteth it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of (the Gospel of) Christ; (i. e. making the Gentiles obedient to it, in word and deed, by mighty signs and wonders, and by the power of the Spirit of God, Rom. 15.18, 19.) , captivating every thought.] The Apostle speaks not here of cap∣tivating the reason of a Christian to the Arti∣cles of Faith, by his belief of any thing pro∣posed as such, though never so absurd, or con∣trary to the reason of all Mankind, as some Popish Dctors lewdly talk; but of captiva∣ting the reasonings of Jew and Gentile against the Christian Faith, by the demonstration of the Spirit and Power, 1 Cor. 2.4. Captivat intellectum, dum contradicentem ratione vincit. Ambr. Ver. 6. And having in a readiness to revenge all (the) disobedience (of their dissolute Mem∣bers, Chap. 12.20, 21. and of these deceiul workers, by punishing them with our spiritual Rod, 1 Cor. 4.21.) when your obedience is (or shall have been) fulfilled. , when your obedi∣ence is fulfilled.] His love to the Corinthians, whom he desired to spare and the infirm state of their Church at present, made him chuse to defer the punishment of these Offenders, till he had wrought off the Affections of the Corinthians from their false Apostles, and made them more unanimous in their regards to him; and this is the best Excuse that can be made for the neglect of Christian Discipline in any Church, viz. ThatNeque enim duris remediis locus est, ubi tota Ecclesia in mrbo cubt. Grot. Nque p tet esse salutaris correptis, ism ile cripitur qui non habet sociam multitudinem. Cum autem idem morbus plurims ccupaverit, nhil aliud bonis etat quam do∣lor & gemitus. August. contr. Epist. Parmen. l. 3. p. 61. B. D. necessitate tempum cubt, Cypr. Ed. O. Ep. 55. § 3, 6, 9, 10. there is no place for severe remedies, when the Disease hath infect∣ed the whole Church; the Apostle being here forced to yield to this necessity, because the Offenders in the Church of Corinth being ma∣ny, they could not easily be punished. Ac∣cordingly the Primitive Church relaxed the Severity of its Discipline, when great Multi∣tudes were concerned, or such as were like to draw great Multitudes after them. Ver. 7. Do ye look on things after the out∣ward appearance, (judging of me from my out∣ward person, and the infirmities of my body, v. 1, 2. and not from the power of Christ rest∣ing upon me, 2 Cor. 12.9. and working by me.) But if any Man (on the account of his gifts) trust to himself that he is Christs, a Minister of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.23. an Apostle of Christ, v. 13.) let him of himself think (or conclude) this again, that as he is Christs, so are we Christs: (For the proofs of Christ eaking in me are not weak, but mighty, 2 Cor. 13.3. and in nothing are we behind the very chiefest Apostles, Chap. 12.11.) Ver. 8. For though I should boast somewhat more (then I do, or they can d) of our Au∣thority,
which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not for (your) destruction, I should not be ashamed. , of our Authority.] The Apostle seems to refer to the Authority pecu∣liar to the Apostles of inflicting Corporal Pe∣nalties on refractory Persons, and delivering them up to Satan; see Note on 1 Cor. 4.21.5.5. which power none of these false Teach∣ers could pretend to, 1 Cor. 4.19, 20. And this, saith he, the Lord hath given me for E∣dification, and not for Destruction, it being designed for the revenging mens disobedience, v. 6. for the saving of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 5.5. and to teach Men, by what they suffer, not to blaspheme the Truth, 1 Tim. 1.20. Ver. 9. (And this I say) That I may not seem (only) to terrifie you by Letters (as you say I do) Ver. 10. For his Letters, say they, are weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible. , Letters.] It cannot be hence con∣cluded, that St. Paul writ more than one Epi∣stle to them, for nothing is more common than this enallage of number. So Polycarp writing to the Philippians, saith, that St. Paul being absent , writ Epistles to you. See Cotelerius there. , his bodily presence is mean.] Seems plainly to refer to that which. Chrys. Tom. 5. p. 992. lin. 40. Chrysostom, Nicephorus, and Lucian re∣late of St. Paul, That his stature was low, his body crooked, his head bald; and so he was li∣terally , low in person, v. 1. When it is added that his Speech was contemp∣tible, this cannot be understood as if it were so for want of Eloquence, or the floridness of the Greeks, for that was as much wanting in his Letters, as his Speech or Sermons; it therefore seemeth to refer to some infirmity of his Speech in teaching. See Note on 2 Cor. 12.7. Ver. 11. (But) Let such a one think (or conclude) this, that such as we are in word by Letters when we are absent, such will we be also in deed when we are present, (for if I come again I will not spare, Chap. 13.2. but punish all disobedience.) Ver. 12. (This I say only) For we dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with some (among you) who com∣mend themselves (for their own performances above measure, not considering how much they fall short of the performances of them they vi∣lifie,) but they (thus) measuring themselves (only) by themselves, and comparing them¦selves (only) among themselves, (one false A∣postle with another) are not wise. Ver. 13. But we will not boast (Gr. ¦ther will we boast) of things without our m∣sure, (or the Commission given us by Christ  unto the Gentiles, Rom. 15.16. Gal. 2.7, . but according to the measure of the rule w God hath distributed to us, a measure to te unto you (Gentiles, we having preached thrg all the interjacent Provinces from Judea to y of Corinth, Rom. 15 19.) Ver. 14. For we stretch not our selves be∣yond our measure, as if we reached not to you, for we are come (before any others) as far as to you also in preaching the Gospel of Christ. Ver. 15. Not boasting of things with our measure, that is, of other mens labours, but having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you, (giving te∣stimony to our labours) according to our rule (Gr. in respect of our line) abundantly. Ver. 16. To preach the Gospel in the Reg∣ons beyond you, and not to boast of another mans line, of things made ready to our hand. In these four Verses the Apostle seems to advance himself above the false Apostles in these things. (1.) That whereas they could shew no Commission to preach to the Corin∣thians, no measure by which God had distri∣buted the Corinthians to them as their Pro∣vince, he could do so, v. 13. (2.) That where∣as they went out of their Line, leaping from one Church to another, he went on orderly in the Conversion of Churches to the Faith, from Judea through all the interjacent Provinces, till he came to Corinth. (3.) That whereas they only came to, and perverted those Chur∣ches where the Gospel had been already preached, and so could only boast of things made ready to their hands, v. 16. He had stil striven to preach the Gospel where Christ was not named, lest he should build upon another mans foundation, Rom. 15.20. Ver. 17. But he (of us) that glorieth (of  Apostleship, or Ministry,) let him glory in the (power or assistance the) Lord (affordeth to ren∣der it successful.) Ver. 18. For not he who commendeth him∣self is (an) approved (Minister, or Apte f Christ,) but (he) whom the Lord commendeth (by his gifts vouchsafed to, and by the power of Christ attending on him in that Ministry.)
CHAP. XI. Verse 1. WOuld to God you could bear with me a little in (this) my (seeming) folly (in boasting of my own perfor∣mances,) and indeed bear with me. , my folly.] Though the ne∣cessity which lay on the Apostle thus to com∣mend himself for vindication of his Apostle∣ship, made him free from folly in this mat∣ter, yet because Self-commendation usually proceeds from vanity and folly, and they who knew not the necessity which lay upon him so to speak, would be apt to impute this to him, he useth this word here, though saying, v. 16. Let no man think me a fool in this my boasting. And Chap. 12.6. Though I did glory, I should not be a fool. Ver. 2. For (I therefore do it because) I am jealous over you with a godly jealousie; for I have espoused you to one Husband, (and de∣sire) that I may present you a chast Virgin un∣to Christ (your Husband.) , a chast Virgin.] Here is thought to be an allusion to the  of the Lacedaemonians, who formed the Lives and Manners of the Virgins, and made them Re∣gular, and so prepared them for their Hus∣bands. But the Greek Commentators agree with our Translation, rendring the word  by , I have espoused you: So. Phavorinus doth interpret these very words. And so the word is used frequently by. Herod. l. 3. c. 138. . 5. 47. . Ibid. He∣rodotus, and it bears the same sense in the Septuagint, , the Wife is espoused to the Husband of the Lord, Prov. 19.14. As therefore the Jews say, thatDevorim Rabba, c. 7. col. 4. Moses espoused Israel to God in Mount Si∣nai, when he made them enter into Covenant with him; So saith the Apostle here, by con∣verting you to the Christian Faith, I have espoused you to one Husband, even Christ. Ver. 3. But I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve by his subtilty, so your minds should (by the subtilty of deceitful wor∣kers) be corrupted from the simplicity (of the faith) that is in Christ, (by mixing the obser∣vation of the Law with the Gospel, as these Judaizers did.) , Eve.] He mentions Eve, not Adam, because she only was personally deceived by the Serpent, and was first in the transgression, 1 Tim. 2.14. Ver. 4. For if he that cometh (after me) preacheth another Jesus, (i. e. hath another Sa∣viour to propound to you) whom we have not preached; or if ye receive (from him) ano∣ther Spirit (affording such spiritual gifts) which ye have not received (from us,) or ano∣ther Gospel which ye have not accepted (or received already,) ye might well bear with him (in his pretensions to exceed us, but this cannot be said,) Ver. 5. For I suppose (in these things) I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apo∣stles, (Peter, James, and John, from whom these false Teachers from Judea may pretend to come, 1 Cor. 1.12.) Ver. 6. For though I be rude in speech, yet (am I) not (so) in knowledge (of Christ and his Gospel,) but we have been throughly made manifest among you in all things (of this na∣ture, Chap. 12.11, 12.) , rude in speech.] This can∣not refer to his want of Eloquence, or Rheto∣rical Artifice in his Compositions, for this seems equally wanting in the Epistles of St. Peter and St. James; it therefore must refer to some imperfection in his Speech, which they had not. Ver. 7. Have I committed an offence in abasing my self (so far, as to labour with my own hands) that you might be exalted (by the spiritual riches and advantages of the Gospel, and in having an Apostle more regardful of you than of other Churches,) because (being charge∣able to some of them) I have preached to you the Gospel of God freely. , that you might be exalted.] So St. James useth the word, saying, Let the brother of low degree rejoyce  in his exaltation to the Riches and Priviledges of the Christian Faith, Chap. 1.9. So the Song of the Virgin Mother saith, that God by sending the Messiah  hath exalted them that were low, Luke 1.52. And Capernaum is said to be  exalted to Heaven by our Savi∣our's frequent preaching to them, Luke 10.15. Ver. 8. I robbed (i. e. made naked) other Churches, taking wages (or a stipend) from them to do you service. , I robbed.] , the word signifies to make naked, saith Phavorinus; to spoil, say others: For the Churches of Mace∣donia, from whom he received his Gifts, being poorer than that of Corinth, 2 Cor. 8.2. might comparatively seem by this to
be spoiled of what was necessary for them. Ver. 9. And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man; for that which was lacking to me the Brethren which came from (Philippi, Philip. 4.15, 16. in) Macedonia supplied, and in all things have I kept my self from being burthensome to you, and so will I keep my self. , I stun'd no body with com∣plaints.] I importun'd none of them to sup∣ply my wants. Ver. 10. As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in the Re∣gions of Achaia. Ver. 11. (And) wherefore (do I thus resolve? is it) because I love you not? God knows (the contrary.) Ver. 12. But what I do (of this kind) I will (still) do, that I may cut off occasion (of boasting) from them which desire occasion, that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we. , that in what they glory.] This most Interpreters thus gloss, That where∣as the false Apostles glory in preaching the Gospel freely, they may be found even in that, to do only what we still have done a∣mong you. But this Exposition is liable to this great Objection, That the Apostle speak∣ing to the Corinthians of the same Persons, saith, Ye suffer if a man devour you, if a man take of you, v. 20. and 1 Cor. 9.12. If others are partakers of this power, are not we much more. And elsewhere still represents these Jewish Teachers as counting gain godliness, and doing all things for filthy lucre, Philip. 3.19. 1 Tim. 6.5. 2 Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.11. Others therefore interpret the words thus, This I will do, that I may cut off occasion of glorying from them who seek occasion, that they may be found even as us. In which thing they would glory, but now cannot do it, because they are known to receive of you. Ver. 13. For such are (your) false Apostles, deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, (seeming to do as we do, or desiring to be thought equal to us in all things.) Ver. 14. And no marvel, for Satan himself is (sometimes) transformed into an Angel of Light, (pretending to do their work, and be a ministring spirit to them whom he intendeth to destroy.) Ver. 15. Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Mini∣sters of Righteousness, whose end shall be ac∣cording (not to their specious and hypocritical pretences, but) their works, (Philip. 3.18.) Ver. 16. I say again, let no man think me a fool (in boasting thus of my self,) if other∣wise, yet as a fool receive (i. e. suffer me,) that I may boast my self a little. Ver. 17. That which I speak (thus) I speak it not after the Lord, (as commanded by him so to speak,) but as it were foolishly in this c¦fidence of boasting, (though the false Aposte have made it necessary, and so a part of Chri∣stian wisdom so to do, Chap. 12.11. to vindi∣cate my Apostleship, and to confirm you in the truth.) Ver. 18. Seeing that many glory in the flesh (as being the Seed of Abraham according to the flesh) I will glory (as to that) also. Ver. 19. (Nor can my seeming folly offend you, if you be indeed what you pretend,) For yo (will) suffer fools gladly, seeing you your selves are wise (in your own conceits; or being wise, you must suffer fools gladly.) Ver. 20. (And sure I am you can bear with greater matters.) For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage (to the Jewish Rites, Gal. 4.9.5.1.) if a man devour you, (as did the Pharisees widows houses, living deliciously upon your substance,) if a man take of you, (if he take away what is yours,) if a man exal himself (above you,) if a man smite you on the face, (or use you contumeliously) , if a man exalts himself.] The Jews had a very high opinion of themselves, as being the Seed of Abraham, and so of Noble Birth; (see Note on 1 Cor. 1.26.) the People of God, and so holy and beloved of him; his first born, and only begotten, for whom the world was made; 2 Esd. 6.59, 60. and had as mean and despicable thoughts of all other men, whom therefore they insulted over, calling themSee Buxt. Lex. voce  p. 1626. the people of the earth, the prophane, yea, likening them to dogs, (see Note on Philip. 3.2.) and spittle. 2 Esdr. 6.56, 57. And from this opinion, that the world was made for the, see Note on 1 Cor. 3.22. they might easily conclude, that it was lawful for them to take it away from others, as being Usurpers of it. HenceVoce  p. 1345. Buxtorf cites this passage from the Talmud, That all the Possessions of the Gentiles are as common, he that first seizes on them i Lord of them. Ver. 21. (That which I said of smiting y upon the face,) I speak as to (your) reproach (they cast upon you as prophane, uncircumcised, whereas they are an holy Nation) as if we ha been weak, (i. e. inferiour to them in thee things, not able to ascribe to our selves the advantages as well as they,) howbeit wherein soever any is bold (in this kind,) I speak foo∣lishly, I am bold also. Ver. 22. (For) Are they Hebrews (speaking the Jewish language? Philip. 3.5.) so am I. Are they Israelites, (descended from beloved Jacob, Mal. 1.2. not from Esau?) so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham (and not Pre∣lytes?) so am I.
; Are they Hebrews? are hey Israelites?] Here is a certain indication hat these false Apostles and deceitful Workers were not originally Samaritans, as S. Magus, ositheus, and their Followers were, but of he Jewish extract. 2ly, That they were Jews onverted to, and still owning and preaching p the Faith of Christ, is as evident from the words following, Are they Ministers of Christ? o am I; as also from Chap. 10.7. It there∣ore seems that they must be of the Sect ofIren. l 3. . 11. Euseb. l. 3. c. 28. Epiph. Haer. 28. § 2. Theodr. Haer. Fab. l 2. c. 3. Cerinthus that great stickler against St. Paul, for the necessity of circumcising the Gen∣iles, and the observation by them of the Law of Moses; or the Nazarens or Ebionites. For hese are not the names of Persons who were he Authors of any Sects, but of the. Orig. in Celsum l. 2. p. 5. Jews hich believed in Jesus, and yet were zealous bservers of the Law of Moses. Now these Jews, before they believed, were of two sorts, uch as admitted other Nations to live quiet∣y among them, and even to embrace their Religion without circumcision, and such as by o means would permit them so to do. Thus when Izates the Son of Helen Queen of Adia∣ene, embraced the Jews Religion,Ananias . Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 20. c. 2. p. 685. E. Ana∣ias declared, he might do it without Circum∣cision; butIbid Elieazar maintained that it was , great impiety to remain uncircum∣cised. And when two eminent Persons of Traconitis fled to Josephus the, Vit. Joseph. p. 1007. B. . Ib. p. 1010. C. Zealots mong the Jews, were urgent for their Cir∣umcision, if they would abide with them; ut Josephus perswaded the Multitude against t. And this Controvesie continued after they embraced Christianity, some allowing them to embrace Christianity without submitting to Circumcision and the Jewish Law, others contending, that without Circumcision, and the observance of the Law, they could not be saved. And these were the false Apostles which troubled the Churches of Corinth, Ga∣latia, Philippi, and were great Enemies to St. Paul who taught the contrary. So Epipha∣nius informs us of the, &c. . Haer. 28. § 4. . Haer 29. §. 1. p. 117. Cerinthians, adding also of the Nazarens, that they in all things accorded with the Doctrines of the Corinthi∣ans. And certain it is, that such Persons went from Judea, and gave great distur∣bance in all Christian Churches, especially in those which had been planted by St. Paul; for in the first Epistle to Timothy, and that to Titus, we have mention of those of the Circumcision who were vain Talkers and Deceivers, Tit. 1.10, 11. 1 Tim. 1.4, 6. Chap. 6.4, 5. See Gal. 4.9, 10.6.12, 13. Philip. 3.2. Col. 2.16, 20. Ver. 23. Are they Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more (so,) in labours more abundantly (then any f them.) in stripes above measure, (Acts 16.22, 23.) in prisons more frequent, (v. 24.) in deaths oft. (1 Cor 15.31.2 Cor. 4.11.) Note here that the Apostle proves the truth of his Ministry and Apostleship, not, as elsewhere, from the Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which accompanied his preach∣ing, but from his sufferings, as being the things these false Apostles could not pretend to, Gal. 5.11.6.12. and so could not glory that they were like unto him in them, v. 13. Ver. 24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. , save one.] The Law assigned forty stripes to them that were worthy to be beaten, but forbad them to exceed that num∣ber, Deut. 25.3. But it being their custom to beat them with a whip that had three Cords, and so every stroke with it going for three, they could only give them thirty nine, or forty two, which would have exceeded the number appointed by the Law; and there∣fore. Antiq. l. 4 c. 8. p. 124. E. Josephus says, He that did contrary to the Law, received by a publick whip frty str ps save ne. Ver. 25. Thrice (by the Gentiles) was I beaten with Rods, (Acts 16.23.) once was I stoned, (Acts 14.19.) thrice I suffered ship∣wrack, a night and a day I was in the deep. , in the deep.] This cannot well be understood of the Prison at Cyzicum; for we never read that St. Paul preached there, nor of the Shipwrack mentioned Acts 27. for that hapned after the writing this Epistle; but
probably of some of the other shipwracks mentioned here, in which he might be so long tossed to and fro in the Sea upon some bro∣ken piece of the Ship, before he got to Land, as. Joseph. de vita s, p. 999. Josephus saith he was. Ver. 26. In journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils or robbers, in perils by my own country-men, (Acts 20.3.) in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city (Damascus, Jerusalem, Ephesus,) in perils in the wilder∣ness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren. Ver. 27. In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, (2 Thess. 3.8.) in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness, (1 Cor. 4.11. 2 Cor. 6.5.) Ver. 28. (And) besides these things which are without, that which cometh upon me dai∣ly, (is) the care of all the Churches (planted by me, 2 Cor. 7.5. or by others among the Gentiles, Coloss. 2.1.) Ver. 29. (For) who (of them) is weak, and I am not (as) weak (in compassionating them, and complying with their weakness? 1 Cor. 9.22.) who is offended or ready to fall from his profession,) and I burn not (with zeal to reco∣ver him?) Ver. 30. If I must needs glory, I will glory in the things which concern mine infirmities (i. e. rather in my sufferings for Christ, th in the great things he hath done by me.) Ver. 31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not (in any thing I have n said of my sufferings.) Ver. 32. In Damascus the Governour under Aretas the King, kept the City with a gari∣son, desirous to apprehend me (in complyance with the Jews.) Ver. 33. And through a window in a bask was I let down by the wall, and escaped his hands. .] Of such a flight as only is de∣signed to preserve us still in a capacity of preaching the Gospel, especially where o Charge is not any settled Church, but the Church in general, or, as St. Paul's was, the whole Gentile World,Ep. 80. ad Honoratum. St. Austin speaks well thus, Quicunque isto modo fugit, ut Ec∣clesiae necessarium ministerium, eo fugiente,  desit, facit quod Dominus praecepit, sive per∣sit; qui autem sio fugit ut gregi Christi ea qui∣bus spiritualiter vivit alimenta, subtrahant, Mercenarius ille est, qui vidit Lupum veni∣tem & fugit, quoniam non est ei cura de ovibus. CHAP. XII. Verse 1. IT is not expedient for me, doubt∣less, to glory, (but since it may be so to you,) I will come to visions and reve∣lations of the Lord. All the Greek Scholiasts own our reading of these words, which may from the Greek be rendred, Surely it profiteth (or it advantageth) not me to glory, for I shall come to visions; and then the sense may be supplied thus, But it may be so to you; for I shall come to Visions and Revelations of the Lord, in which I shall give such an Evidence of the favour of Christ to me, such a Testimony of my Mission from Heaven, as none of these false Apostles or De∣ceitful Workers can pretend to. Ver. 2. I knew a man in Christ above four∣teen years ago, whether in the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body I cannot tell, God knoweth, I say, I knew such a one caught up to the third Heavens, (the habitation of the blessed Angels, and of the Majesty of God.) Ver. 3. And (again) I knew such a man, whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, God knoweth. Ver. 4. How that he was (at another time) caught up into Paradise, and there heard un∣speakable words, which it is not lawful (or pos∣sible) for a man to utter. .] Here (1.) it is enquired, Whe∣ther St. Paul was either, as to Soul only, or as to Soul and Body joyntly, wrapt into Heaven, or Paradise, as the Spirit  caught up Phi∣lip, Acts 8.39. or whether he only had a Vi∣sion of these things on Earth, as the Spirit took up Ezekiel in a Vision, Ezek. 11.. and as St. John was carried away into the wil∣derness. I encline to the opinion that this was a real Rapture, as being most agreeable, (1.) To the words , he was snatcht as far as to the third Heaven, and , he was snatcht up into Paradise: for these words do not well agree to a Vision, or an Extasie. As for the seeming Raptures of Ezekiel, and St. John, the Text plainly in∣forms us that they were not real, by saying, The Spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldaea, Ezek. 11.24. And again, The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midt of the valley that was full of bones, Chap. 3.1. And of St. John, He carried me away in the
Spirit into the wilderness, Rev. 17.3. And Chap. 21.10. He carried me in the spirit to a great and high Mountain. In these two In∣tances all i expresly said to be done , in the spirit; but nothing of this nature is intimated in St. Paul's rapture. If you say he owns that this was done , in a vi∣sion; I answer, He seems not to say so, but only that in this Rapture he had a Visi∣on of the Lord. 2ly, He says, he cannot tell whether he was then in the body, or out of the body; whereas in all imaginary Visions the Soul continues in the body. 3ly, He adds, that he heard there unspeakable words, which intimates that he was really in Paradise. Q. 2. A second Enquiry is, Whether St. Paul here speaks of one Vision or Rapture only, or of more. I answer, The opinion of all the Ancients seems to have been this, that he was wrapt at several times, into several places, and consequently that he speaks of more Raptures than one.Ʋ ad tertium Coelum raptum se esse significans, & rursum delatum esse in Paradisum—quid illi podest aut in Pa∣arm trus, aut in tertium Coelum assumptio. L. 2. c. 54. Trenaeus saith that he was caught up into the third heavens, and again was carried into Paradise. So also sayTel de Prescript. c. 24. Ambros. in locum. Ter∣tullian and Pseud-Ambrosius.Qus audat in tertio Coelo dnantem nobis Orgenem Paradisum. Ep. ad Joh. Hieros. c. 3. Epiphanius speaks thus, Who can hear the Opinion of Ori∣gen, which placeth Paradise in the third Hea∣ens. And this appears highly probable, 1. From these words, I will proceed to visions and revelations of the Lord; which intimate that he would speak of more than one: And from v. 7. Lest he should be exalted , with this multitude of Revela∣tions. 2ly, Methodius of old did well infer this from the repetition of those words, Whe∣ther in the body, &c. for such a repetition must have been needless concerning one and the same Vision; For. Apud Epiph. Haer. 64. § 47. p. 572. C. D. hence, saith he, he inti∣ates that he had seen two great Visions, being twice assumed, first into the third Heaven, and then into Paradise. Hence therefore it doth not follow that Paradise is in the third Hea∣ven, as later Writers have hence gathered, a∣gainst the opinion of all the Ancient Christi∣ans: And thereforeƲb supra apud Hieron. Tom. 2. F. 57. K. Epiphanius answers thus to this Text produced by Origen, by say∣ing e was wrapt into the third Heaven, and after adding into Paradise, he shews Heaven to e in one place, and Paradise in another. Though therefore the third Heaven here, ac∣cording to the Language and Distinction of the Jews, doth signifie the Angelick Heaven, it doth not follow hence that Paradise, into which the Apostle was caught up at ano∣thr time, and in another Vision, must import the same. 3ly, Hence we may strongly argue for the distinction of the Soul from the Body, and its Capacity to perceive and understand Caele∣stial things in separation from the Body; for if the Soul be not distinguish'd from the Bo∣dy, nor is capable of any Vision or Revelation when out of the Body, there remains no foun∣dation for the Apostle's doubt, whether he had these Visions in the Body, or out of the Body, there being a necessity, upon that Sup∣position, to have them in the Body, or not at all. Ver. 5. Of such a one [thus rapt out of himself) I will glory, yet (or but) of my self (as I appear to you in my own person,) I will not glory (willingly,) but in mine infirmi∣ties. Ver. 6. (Not that I really esteem it a folly so to do, though in compliance with you I do stile it foolishness, 2 Cor. 11.1, 16, 17.12.11.) for though I could desire to glory (of these things,) I shall not be a fool, for I will (shall only) say the truth; but now I forbear (even to speak of that,) lest any man should think of me above that which he sees me to be, or heareth of me, (above what my constant words and actions testifie of me.) Ver. 7. And lest I should be exalted above mea∣sure through the abundance of the revelations (vouchsafed to me,) there was given me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me, (or, that the Messenger of Satan might buffet me,) lest I should be exalted above mea∣sure. Ver. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord (Christ, v. 9.) thrice, that it might depart from me, (i. e. that I might be delivered from this thorn in my flesh.) .] Here, saith Slictingius, is an instance of prayer directed to Christ. Ergo, say I, here is an instance of his Divinity, Prayer made to Christ by all Christians in all times and places, and for all things, being an Evi∣dence of his Omniscience, Omnipotence, and Omnipresence. Note also, That though this Thorn in the Flesh was not removed upon the Prayer of the Apostle, yet was that granted for which he desired that it might be removed, viz. that he might preach the Gospel more effectually, and to the honour of his Lord; and therefore he not only rests satisfied under this Infirmity, but even glories in it on this account, that it tended to demonstrate the power of Christ re∣siding in him. Thus doth God truly answer our Requests, when he gives not what we
would, but what he sees to be more for his glory, and our good. Ver. 9. And he said unto me, My grace (or savour) is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect (and shew'd more illustriously) in (this thy) weakness, most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ (may more conspicuously appear to) rest upon me. .] They who interpret this Messenger of Satan, and Thorn in the Flesh, of the Motions of Concupiscence, and the Sug∣gestions of Lust arising in Paul, are guilty of a great mistake; for this Thorn in the Flesh was given him of God, who raiseth in us no impure Lustings, James 1.13, 14, 15. and never cures one sin by another; nor would St. Paul have wished that all Men should have been as he, if he had felt these burnings, nor would he have refused that Remedy against them he prescribed to others, 1 Cor. 7.7, 9. nor could he have gloried, and much less took pleasure in these infirmities, as here v. 9, 10. he doth in this Thorn in the Flesh. In a word, by confessing such impure Motions lodged in his Breast, he would not have defended his Reputation against his Adversaries, but rather given them fresh occasion to reproach him, and would have rendred his threats against the Unclean, Chap. 12.21. less prevalent. Let it be then observed, 1. That this Thorn in the Flesh was surely some infirmity in the Flesh or Body of St. Paul. So doth St. Paul himself inform us, by saying, , You did not count me as nothing, nor spit upon me, because of my temptation which was in my flesh, Gal. 4.14. but received me (notwithstanding) as an Angel or Messenger of God. Whence two things are observable, 1st, That this Thorn, or this Temptation was in his Flesh, or Body: And 2ly, that it was such as rendred him in his preaching obnoxi∣ous to great contempt, and made him despica∣ble in the eyes of others. 2ly, 'Tis highly probable that this infirmity in the Flesh hapned to him after these Visions and Revelations of which here he speaks, for he saith it was sent to, or befel him, That he might not be exalted through the multitude of his Revelations; and therefore must be given him after he had that temptation they afford∣ed to exalt himself. 3ly, 'Tis certain that it was some infirmity of the Flesh which naturally tended to ob∣struct the efficacy of his preaching, and ren∣dred his Ministry less grateful and acceptable to others, and made him subject to reproach and to contempt in the discharge of this his Function. This is extreamly evident from the place cited from Gal. 4.14. where, saith Theo∣doret, , though I brought with me great ignominy in my Body, you did not reject me; and also from Christ's answer to him, that his power was perfected in St. Paul's weakness, i. e. the greater is thy infirmity in preaching the Go∣spel, the greater is my power in rendring  efficacious, when preached by one subject  so great infirmity. 4ly, 'Tis also certain that this was object∣ed by the Corinthians, and the false Apostles, to the disparagement of St. Paul, and rendred him contemptible in their eyes, that he was  rude in speech, 2 Cor. 10.10. (which, as I have observed upon that place, cannot refer to his want of Eloquence, that being as much wanting in his Epistles, which they allowed to be powerful and weighty, as in his Sermons to them,) that in presence  was base among them, ibid. v. 1. that the pre∣sence of his Body was weak and mean,  his Speech such as rendred him contemptible, where the Apostle useth that ¦ry word which he had applyed to the infirmi∣ty of his Flesh, Gal. 4.14. 5ly, It cannot be denied but that an , a stammering in speech, or a squeeg shrilness in the voice, joyn'd with a low de∣formed stature, do naturally tend to render a Man contemptible in his preaching. And there∣fore Moses declines the Message God sent him upon to Pharaoh, because he was slow of speech, and of a stammering Tongue, Exod. 4.10. . 6ly, These words, a Thorn in the Flesh, a Messenger of Satan, being here put by way of apposition, must signifie the same thing, and so he must be buffeted by Satan, when by these false Apostles and Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.15. he was contemn'd, and made the subject of their scorn and laughter for this infirmity in his Speech. But 'tis observa∣ble, that these words may be rendred tha, There was given me a Thorn in the Flesh, , that the Angel of Sa∣tan might buffet me. Since then he calls the false Apostles Ministers of Satan, it is not to be wondred that he here stiles them, or the chief of them who thus reviled and contem∣ned him for this infirmity, and therefore la∣boured to take off the Affections of the Corin∣thians from him, an Angel of Satan buffeting him. Ver. 10. Therefore I take pleasure in (these) infirmities (of the flesh,) in (the) reproaches (I suffer upon that account,) in necessities, in per∣secutions, in distresses; for when I am (this) weak (in my self,) then am I strong in the pow∣er of Christ. This latter Clause is in all the Greek Scholiasts.) Ver. 11. I am become (as) a fool in glory∣ing (thus, but) ye have compell'd me (to it,) for I ought (rather) to have been commended of you; for in nothing am I behind the very chief of the Apostles, though I be nothing  my self, but through the grace of God I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15.10.)
Ver. 12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were rought among you (by me) in all patience, in ign, and wonders, and in mighty deeds. (See he Note on Hebr. 2.4) Ver. 13. For what is it wherein you were nferiour to other Churches, except (it were in his) that I my self was not burthensome to  you? forgive me this wrong. Ver. 14. Behold the third time I am ready o come to you, and I will (still continue) not ) be burthensome to you? for I seek not ours, but you; for the Children ought not to ay up for the Fathers, but the Father for the Children. If Fathers of the Flesh, they ought to lay p for them Temporals; if Spiritual Fathers, as t. Paul was 1 Cor. 4.15. to provide Spirituals or them, good Instructions, and Advice for he welfare of their Souls. , the third time.] Most Interpreters ay that St. Paul had made two Resolutions be∣fore to come to them, for proof of which they te 1 Cor. 16.5. 2 Cor. 1.16. But both these Texts seem plainly to refer to one and the ame Resolution, and the last to be only an Apology for Non-performance of the first: His eaning therefore may be this, I have once actually been with you, I was ready once more to come, though your disorders unre∣framed hindred the performing that intended ourney, 2 Cor. 1.23. and I am now ready the hird time. Ver. 15. And I (like a good spiritual Father) will very gladly spend (my spiritual Treasures n you) and be spent (my self) for you, though he more abundantly I love you, the less I be eloved. Ver. 16. But be it so; I did not burthen ou (my self:) Nevertheless (it may be sug∣ested by some, that) being crafty, I caught you with guile, (getting much from you by the means f others.) Ver. 17. I ask therefore.) Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I s  you? Ver. 18. I desired Titus (to go t y) and with him I sent a Brother: Did Titu  a gain of you? walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps▪ Ver. 19. Again, think you that we excuse our selves unto you (by specious prete when we say that we deferred our cg th we might spare you, and be helpers f y  2 Cor. 1.23, 24.) we speak as before  Christ, (calling him again to red that  use no such Arts,) but we do all things, dr∣ly beloved, (as we did that,) for your edify¦ing. Ver. 20. (And too much reason had we s do) For (yet) I fear lest when I come I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you, (by inflicting necessary ¦sures and Punishments upon you,) such as  would not, lest there be debates, , wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults, (the usual, and almost ne∣cessary consequence of Schisms and Factions in a Church.) Ver. 21. And lest when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall (find reason to) bewail many who have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lascivious∣ness which they have committed, (after the example, and by the instigation of their false Teachers, who themselves practise the  things of shame, 2 Cor. 4.2. and we ex∣hortation is of uncleanness, 1 Thess. 2.3.) .] Hence it is evident, against Novatian, that the Christian dispensation ad∣mits Sinners to repentance, though they have, after Baptism, committed great offences, and lapsed into the Sins of the Flesh, mentioned Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. THis is the third time I am co∣ming to you; in the mouth of wo or three witnesses shall every Word be stablished. , this is the third time.] Of his oming the third time, see the Note on Chap. 2.14. These Witnesses, saith Dr. Lightfoot, were Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus sent o assure them of his coming. Say others, his wn reiterated testimony by Letters to them, hat if these Admonitions did not prevail on hem who had sinned to reform, he would not pare them. For Ver. 2. I have told you before (in my first Epistle, Chap. 4.19, 20, 21. being then ab∣ent in body, but present in spirit, Chap. .3.) and (I still continue in my reso∣lution) foretel (ling) you as if I were pre∣sent the second time, (or I foretel you as present in spirit the second time,) and being absent (in body,) I now write to them which heretofore have sinned, (and have not repeated, Chap. 12.21.) and to all others (who shall said into the like sins,) that if I come again, (which I now fully am resolved upon,) I will not spare you. Ver. 3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in (and by) me, (even that Christ) who is not weak towards you, but is mighty in, (and among) you, (you shall find  exerting the power he hath given us to se such offenders) , among you.] Christ shew'd his power among them, by enabling St. Paul to
preach the Gospel to them in demonstration of the spirit and power so efficaciously, as to con∣vert them to the Faith, 1 Cor. 2.4. In that variety of Gifts conferr'd on them, together with the Gospel, by which their testimony of Christ was confirmed, 1 Cor. 1.6. By his Pow∣er conspicuous in seconding St. Paul's delive∣ry of the incestuous Person up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. By the Chastisements they suffered for communicating in the Lord's Supper un∣worthily. Ver. 4. For though he was crucified through (the) weakness (of that humane nature which he took upon him, and in that appeared to o∣thers as weak,) yet he liveth, (and discovers efficaciously that he doth so) by the power of God (so gloriously attending the invocation of his Name, and faith in him, for we also (Gr. and so we also) are (as yet in your apprehensi∣ons) weak in him, but we shall (appear to) live by the power of God (exerting it self by us) towards you. , and so we also.] These Particles signifie atque ita, even so, and so, and in like manner, and accordingly are rendred by Pasor sic & nos, as in this Paraphrase. Again, It is evident from Scripture, that though Christ ap∣peared to the World as weak, and unable to escape his Sufferings by permitting himself to be taken, and carried bound before the High-Priest, and Pilate, and at last to be lifted up upon the Cross, and there die, yet was he only in appearance then weak; for he permitted not himself to be taken till he had with a word struck them down to the ground who came to apprehend him, John 18.6. and had de∣clared that he was able to deliver himself out of their hands, Matth. 26.53. Even so saith the Apostle, we seem weak in him to you Co∣rinthians, because we do not exercise that power among you which God hath given us, 2 Cor. 10.10.11.21. and here v. 9. But we shall shew our selves to live by the power of God exercised upon the Offenders in your Church. Ver. 5. (And for a farther evidence that Christ preached by me hath not been weak, but mighty towards you,) Examine your own selves, prove your own selves, whether ye be in the faith, Know ye not (of) your own selves (by the Miracles done among you, and the vari∣ety of Gifts conferred upon you) that Jesus Christ is in (among) you, except ye be repro∣bates, (i. e. disapproved by God, and so he hath withdrawn these Gifts from you.) , that Christ is in you.] i. e. With or among you. The words seem to allude to those spoken by the tempting contumacious Israelites, who after all the Signs and Wonders God had shew'd to them, remain'd still doubtful of his Presence with them, enquiring ; is the Lord among us, or not? Exod. 17.7. So saith the Apstle, seeing after all the Miracles done a∣mong you, and the miraculous Gifts recei by you, you still seek a proof of Christ sp¦ing in, or by me, ask your own selves know you not by the Gifts still exercised among you, except ye he rejected of God, that  Spirit, conveyed by my Ministry, is still a¦mong you? But then let it be noted h, that this place speaks not of their being  Christ, but of Christ's being in them; not  his being in, but among them; not of  being in them by their faith in him, but  miraculous Presence with them; not of his be¦ing in any private Person, but in the Ch of Corinth in general. , if ye be not reprob i. e. Christians in name only, not in deeds,  Grotius; stupid and hardned, Dr Ha; wicked and unfit for the faith, Vorstius;  worthy of the name of Christians, Dicson; ¦prived of faith, light, grace and knowledge, Menochius; unless you by your crimes have a off Christ, So Calvin. Ver. 6. But (however it may be with you) I trust you shall know that we are not rep¦bates, (i. e. not disapproved of, but owned by God and Christ.) Ver. 7. Now I pray to God that ye do  evil, (which may force us to exercise and  our power among you, as desiring) not that we should appear approved (by our power in ¦nishing your offences.) but (rather) that you should do that which is honest, though we e (in shew) as reprobates, (i. e. as destit  the power of Christ in your eyes.) , as Reprobates.] It is to be ¦served that the word , which we ¦der Reprobate, hath no relation in Script to any decree of God, either absolutely e¦ding Men from a capacity of Salvatio  doing it conditionally on the account of the i of Adam, but only doth denote such Me  have made themselves unworthy, by the ¦ruption of their Faith or Manners, to be ap¦proved and owned by God. Thus they  when they knew God, did not glorifie hi  God, neither were thankful, but chang  truth of God into a lie, and worshippe  Creature more than the Creator, and  to retain God in their hearts, Rom. 1. fr  21-28. are the Men given up by God  to a reprobate mind, which pro them to do those things God could  ¦prove of, but abhor. And they wh re the Truth through the corruption of  Minds, are stiled  Reprobates concerning the Faith, 2 Tim. 3 i. e. Men whose Faith cannot be own  approved of. They also are in Script  to their Manners, stiled Reprobates,  Mind and Conscience is defiled, so that th in wrds they profess to knw Gd  they deny him, being abominable,  and to every good work  repro  void not of Judgment only to discern
Affctin to approve of it. Thus the Earth is stiled  reprobate, or rejected, which, after all the showers which fall upon it, brings forth only Thorns and Briars, Hebr. 6.8. The Sver , reprobate silver, which being false stamp'd, or coyned, will not be received, but rejected, Prov. 25.4. Isa. 1.22. And in this sense St. Paul saith, He kept under his Body, lest whilst he preached t thers, he himself should be , dis∣owned and rejected by God, 1 Cor. 9.27. Ver. 8. (And then you will be secure from our Chastisements,) For we can do nothing a∣gainst the truth, but (only) for the truth, (ha∣ving our power given for edification only, and not for destruction, v. 10.) Ver. 9. (Nor have we any desire to use our power thus,) For we are (rather) glad, when we are weak, (as having no occasion to mani∣fest our power,) and ye are strong (in faith, and good works) and this also we wish, even your perfection (in them.) Ver. 10. (And) therefore I write these things being absent, (to warn and reform you) lest being present I should (be constrained to) use sharpness (towards the unreformed among you,) according to the power which the Lord hath given me to edification, and not to destruction. Ver. 11. Finally, brethren, ; be perfect (ly knit together.) be of good  (under all Calamities,) live in p, ad the God of love and pace shll  w you. Ver. 12. Greet one another with an holy kiss. , with an hly kiss.] As Brethren; for this seems to be the Jws osculum propinquitatis, of which see Buxtrs's Lexicon, p. 1404, 1405. Ver. 13. All the Saints (here) salute you. Ver. 14. The grace of our Lord Jesus. Christ, and the love of God (the Fter,) and the Communion of the Holy Ghst, be with you all. Amen. Note that here plainly, as in the form of Baptism, Mat. 28.19. we have the names of the Sacred Trinity, and the Father and Son in both places being mentioned as distinct Persons, we have no reason to doubt of the personality of the Holy Ghost thus mentioned with them.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle to the GALATHIANS. § 1. THough in the Pure and Primitive Ages of the Church I find no Con∣troversie touching the Nature of Faith, or of Justification, they saying nothing of Justification, but as it is included in the Article of Remission of Sins, yet seeing both this Faith, and the Justi∣fication which is ascribed to it, have, in these latter Ages, ministred occasion to many Questi∣ons and Disputes, canvased with much Conten∣tion, and proseeuted with the greatest Zeal, as being judged Matters of very high importance, and the Epistles to the Romans and Gala∣tians are the Epistles which treat chiefly of this Subject, I therefore shall, by way of Preface to this Epistle, endeavour to shew 1. What is the import of the word Faith in Scripture, especially as it relates unto the Mat∣ter of Justification, or what the Scripture re∣presenteth as true Christian Faith. 2. What it is to be justified in St. Paul's ac∣ceptation of that word. 3. That this Justification is by St. Paul as∣cribed to Faith alone, in opposition to Works of Righteousness done either by the Jew or Gen∣tile. 4. That it seems necessary, from the nature of the thing, and the state and condition of the Persons to whom the Gospel was then preached, that it should be so. 5. That though this Faith doth not include sincere Obedience, and much less Perseverance in it to the end, which yet are necessary and es∣sential Conditions, even of the New Covenant. Yet 1. It lays the highest Obligations on us to per∣form them, under the penalty of forfeiting the Blessings of it. And 2. It tendreth sufficient Motives to this Obedience, and, where it is sincere and asting, it will most certainly produce it. § 2. And (1) as for the import of the word Faith in Scripture, I think scarce any thing is more evidt throughout the whole New Testa∣ment, then that the Faith there mentioned  only a cordial and firm belief that Jesus is  Christ, the Lord, the true Messiah or Proph sent from God to reveal his Will to the W the Son of God, the Saviour of the Wor To make this manifest Consider (1.) That Divine Faith in gene is only a firm assent unto, or full persecusion  mind concerning the truth of what is testi revealed, or reported by God himself, o Per∣sons commissionated by God to reveal, or to  record to it. For seeing Humane Faith is  a perswasion of the truth of what is told us,  testified by Man, Divine Faith must be a  perswasion of the truth of what is testifies,  revealed to us by God. And this descript of Faith is clearly taught us by St. John, 1  who having declared v. 4, 5. that the Faith  which we overcome the World, is the  that Jesus is the Son of God, proceeds to  we have great reason to believe this prpsit that Jesus is the Son of God; 1. Becaue e Holy Spirit beareth witness to it, and  the Spirit of Truth, v. 6.2. Because  are three that bear record in Heaven to  the Father, the Son, and the Holy Gho  Now saith he, If we receive the witness  Men; if we rely upon their testimony  Courts of Judicature; if by the mouth  or three humane witnesses our weightiest ¦ters are determined, shall not the witness  God be greater? i. e shall it not be  validity for confirmation of our Faith  particular, that Jesus is the Son of God  Surely we cannot disbelieve the truth,  must give the lie to him, saith the Aposte  Because we believe not the record w  hath given of his Son; but if we  this testimony on his authority, we s  Seal that God is true, John 3.33. This being then the nature of D  in general, Faith in our Lord Jesus Ch  be a full assent unto or firm persec
cncerning the truth of what is testified, reveal∣ed or reported by God himself, or by Persons mmissnated by him to reveal his Will con∣cerning ur Lord Jesus Christ. Or briefly thus; It is a firm perswasion that he who suf∣fered at Jerusalem was the true Messiah, the Saviour of the World, the Prophet who was for to come, that Person who was constituted Lord of all things; or, which amounts to the same thing, that he was Christ the Son of God. For explication of this Proposition Consider (1.) That the Scripture mentions th as the great thing testified concerning him, by all the Witnesses of the Messiah; as v. g. 1. By St. John the Baptist, who came for a Witness to testifie of the Light, John 1.7. and  saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God, v. 34. Hence do St. John's Disciples say. He to whom thou barest witness bapti∣zeth, John 3.25. And Christ speaks thus un∣to the Jews, You sent unto John, and he bore witness to the truth, John 5.33. 2. God the Father bore him record, and te∣stified by divers methods, that he was the Son of God; so do we read expresly, John 5.32. There is another that beareth witness of me, and I know that the witness which he wit∣nesseth of me is true, the Father himself who hath sent me, beareth witness of me. And again, Chap. 8.17, 18. It is written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true; i. e. it is to be received as such: I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father which sent me beareth witness of me. Now God the Father bore witness to his Son, 1. By a voice from Heaven, saying, Thou art my be∣loved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mark 1.11. This voice was personally directed to Christ himself, as being that Commission which was sent him from Heaven to exercise the Of∣fice of God's Supream Minister, or Legate in the World; but it was also prefaced with an i, Behold, directing the People to attend to it, Matth. 3.17. 2ly, By giving him the power of working Miracles for confirmation of his Do∣ctrine, and his own testimony; and therefore he speaks thus to the People, I have a greater testimony than that of John, the works which my Father hath given me to do, they bear wit∣ness of me that the Father hath sent me, Joh. 5.36. 3ly, The Holy Spirit beareth witness that Jesus is the Son of God, 1 John 5.6. and this he did not only by his descent upon our Saviour of his Baptism, and by raising him from the dead, he being put to death in the flesh, but quickned by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18, but by enabling him to cast out Devils, and to perform such works as never any other Person did, or could do. Whence he thus argues, If by the Spirit of God I cast out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God come to you; i. e. then is it clear that I am the Messiah sent from God to preach the Doctrine of his Kingdom to you, Matth. 12.28. Since my Commission is confirm∣ed by these Operations of his Spirit, and testi∣fied to by the Finger of God, as the phrase is varied, Luke 11.20. and th, ater t Lord s Ascension, this Spirit was to  For when, saith Christ, the Comfort  even the Spirit of Truth, he shall t  me, John 15.26. and this he actually did,  Christ is said to be justified by the Spirit, 1 Tim. 3.16. i. e. freed by his testimony from the suspicion of being an Impo r e Pre∣tender, when he declared he was Christ the Son of God. 4ly, The Apostles were men chosen for this very end, Ye shall bear witness of me, saith Christ, because ye have been with me from the beginning, John 15.27. Ye shall be wit∣nesses to me both in Jerusalem and Jde:, and in Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth. Hence are they stiled witnesses chosen of God, Acts 10.41. eye witnesses of what he did and suffered, Luke 1.2. Eye wit∣nesses of his glory, 2 Pet. 1.16. That which we have heard, and seen, and looked upon  we witness, and declare unto you, saith St. John, 1 John 1.2. 5ly, Moses also, and the Prophets, are pro∣duced as his witnesses, for unto him give all the Prophets witness, Acts 10.43. All the Scriptures, Search the Scriptures, saith Christ, for they are they which testifie of me, John 5.39. And Moses in particular; For if you believed Moses you would believe me, for h wrote of me, v. 46. Consider 2ly, The things for which these Witnesses are produced, the Evidence they give in concerning the Messiah, and that will teach us what is Faith in Christ. Sometimes 'tis said that they bore record that he is the Son of God, John 1.34. 1 John 5.5-10. Somtimes they testifie that he was the Christ. Thus St. Paul confounded the Jews, testifying that he was the Christ, Acts 9.20, 22. St. Peter testifying to all the House of Israel, that God had made him Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. Sometimes they testifie that he was the Saviour of the World. So 1 John 4.14. We have seen, and do testifie that God hath sent his Son to be the Saviour of the World; or that he was the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world, John 1.29. that him had God exalted to be a Saviour, to give re∣pentance and remission of sins to them that believed in his Name, Acts 5.31.13.38. Sometimes they testifie that he is Lord of all things, Acts 10.36. and as a consequent  this, that he by God's appointment was  Judge of all Men; for he commanded s, saith Peter, to preach to the People,  to testifie that it was he who was ordained to be the Judge of the quick and the dead, Acts 10.42. Sometimes they are said to bear witness of his Resurrection, Acts 1.22. saying, This Jesus hath God raised up whereof we are
witnesses, Acts 2.32. for we have testified of God that he raised up Christ, 1 Cor. 15.15. 3ly, Observe that all these several Testimo∣ni, tugh they differ in expressions, they differ little in reality, and in effect do only sig∣nifie that he is Jesus Christ our Lord. For 1. to say he is the Son of God, is in effect to say he is the Christ, that Person by God a∣nointed to be our Prophet. St. Matthew gives us the Confession of St. Peter thus, Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God, Matth. 16.16. St. Mark thus, Thou art the Christ Chap. 8.29. St. Luke, Thou art the Christ of God, Chap. 9.10. And when our Lord forbids them to divulge this to the World, b ony saith, Tell no man that I am Jesus the Christ, Matth. 16.20. Art thou the Christ, the Son of God, saith the High-Priest to him, Matth. 26.63. whereas St. Luke re∣lates the question only thus, Art thou the Christ, Chap. 22.67. 2ly, To be the Son of God, is in effect to be the Lord of all things, the Person to whom all Power is given in Hea∣ven and Earth; that every Knee should bow unto him, as their Soveraign Lord and King. And therefore, whereas Pilate is, in the other Evangelists, said only to ask, Art thou the Christ, the Son of God; St. John relates the question thus, Art thou the King of the Jews? 3ly, To be the Son of God, must also signifie to be the Saviour of the World; the Testimony of the Apostles being this, that God had sent his Son to be the Saviour of the World, 1 Joh. 4.14. to testifie that he was risen from the dead, was in effect to testifie he was the Son of God; for he was declared to be the Son of God with power by the Resurrection from the dead, Rom. 1.4. 'Twas in effect to testifie that he was made both Lord and Christ; and there∣fore Peter having proved Christ's Resurrection and Exaltation to the right hand of God, infers that we may all be hence assured, that God hath made him Lord, Acts 2.36. and St. Paul tells us, it was a demonstration that God by him would judge the World, Acts 17.31. And since his Resurrection was performed by the Almighty power of God, it must be a sufficient demonstration of the truth of what Christ testi∣fied of himself, viz. that he was Christ, the Sa∣viour of the World, and that he should here∣after sit at the right hand of Power, it being impossible that God should have employ'd so great power in raising him from the dead, had he not been his well-beloved Son, or that Messiah he declared himself to be. This being then the thing which all these Witnesses were so concerned to attest, and to engage Men to believe, we may be sure this is, accrding to the tenor of the Holy Scripture, Faith in Christ; and that by heartily believing that Christ is the Messiah sent into the World to instruct us in the Will of God, the Saviour of the World, sent to redeem us by his Death from Death and Misery, and give Salvation to all his faithful Servants; that he is our L and King, by whose Laws we are to be gover and by whose Laws we shall be judged and ¦warded at the last day. Wee truly d  in Christ; which yet will further be app¦rent, 1st, From plain Texts which seem exp to assert the same. We find Nathaniel saying Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God, Thou  the King of Israel, John 1.49. And  thus answering to him, Because I saw thee un∣der the Fig-tree, believest thou? Whence it is evident, that to acknowledge Jesus to be t e S of God, the King of Israel, was to believe  him. This was the Faith of the Samari Woman, and her fellow Citizens, John 4.. for to this Woman our Saviour testifies he was the true Messiah, saying, I that speak  thee am he, v. 29. Then the Woman goes  the City, and saith to the Men of it, Come see a man that told me all things that ever I d is not this the Christ? This being said, many of the Samaritans believed on him, because of the saying of the woman; and many  believed, because of his own words,  that is, they were perswaded, partly by who they heard her testifie, partly by what they  our Saviour speak, to acknowledge he was the true Messiah, or the Saviour of the World;  so they do themselves explain the meaning of believing on him, saying to the Woman, Now we believe not because of thy word, for we our selves have heard, and know, that this is verily the Christ, the Saviour of the World, v. 42. This was the Faith of Martha;  Jesus having said to her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believeth on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; Believed thou this? She answers, Yea Lord, I believe thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who wast to come into the World, John 11.25.26. To believe this was therefore to believe in Christ, if Martha did so. We find St. Paul opening, and alledging that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead Acts 17.3. and that this Jesus, whom he pr¦ed, was the Christ; and then it flles, t some of them believed, v. 4. , they were perswaded of the truth of what St. Paul had testified. Again it follows, that ths  Beraea searching the Scriptures, and finding that these things were so believed, v. 11. i. e. they were perswaded of the truth of what St. Paul had taught, that Jesus was the Christ, that he had suffered, and was risen from the dead: This therefore must be t believe. A∣gain, St. Paul was pressed in spirit, and testi∣fies to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ Acts 18.5. whereupon Chrispus a chief Rule of the Synagogue, and many of the Corin∣thians believed; i. e. they acknowledged the truth of St. Paul's testimony, that Jesus was the Christ. The word of faith which we preach, saith the same Paul, is this, that if th
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and in thine heart believest that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved, Rom. 10.8.9. And this he proves, because the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth in him shall not be ashamed, v. 10. To confess therefore, and acknowledge that Jesus is the Lord, and that God raised him from the dead, is to believe on him. Lastly, This saith St. John, is the vi∣ctory over the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4. and then it follows, Who is he that over∣cometh the World, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God; to believe therefore that Jesus is the Son of God, is Christian Faith. 3ly. This was the Faith which the Apostles did require in order to Baptism; and where there was a due appearance of it, there Persons were admitted into the number of Believers. For instance; St. Peter saith to the Jews, Let all the house of Israel know that God hath made this Jesus, whom ye crucified, Lord, and Christ, Acts 2.36. This pricks them to the heart, and makes them to enquire what shall we do? St. Peter answers, Repent you, and believe every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, v. 38. and then it follows, that they who glad∣ly received his word, were baptized; and there were added to the Church three thou∣sand souls, v. 41. and v. 47. The Lord daily added to the Church  the saved, i. e. such who were by this faith put into the way of Salvation; and, if they persevered in it, would obtain it. Again, Philip went down to the City of Samaria, and preached to them Christ, Acts 8.5. and when they believed Phi∣lip preaching the things concerning the King∣dom of God, v. 12. i. e. when they did hearti∣ly assent to them, they were baptized, both Men and Women. And when the Eunuch puts the question to him, What hindreth me to be bap∣tized? Philip returns this answer, If thou be∣lievest with all thy heart, thou mayest, v. 37. And when the Eunuch answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, then was he in∣stently baptized; so that the Faith required to Baptism, was only an hearty acknowledgment that Jesus Christ was the Son of God. § 3. And because there be many false; and in my apprehension dangerous descriptions of true Faith, which have obtained in these latter Ages, I will hear briefly lay them down, and then proceed to other Confirmations of the Scrip∣ture notion of true Faith, by which we may a∣bundantly discern the falshood of them. Now they are such as these, viz. 1. ThatSynops. purior. Theol. Disp 31. § 1. Hanc fidem justificantem sic nimus; nempe, esse firmum assensum  vange, qu fidelis non tantum credit eas esse ver is, sed etiam ad se peciartr pertinere. Thes. Sedan. vol. 1. p.  §  Nunc iusta fidei denitio nobis constabit, si aamus esse dv nae ega nos benevolence i mn certanque cgnitia, C l.  l. 3. c. 2. § 7, & 28. Faith is a firm assent, by which every true Believer is perswaded, not only that Remission of Sins is promised in the g¦neral, but to him in particular. So Calvin; and after him the generality of the French and Dutch Divines. 2ly, That Faith consists inThe principal Acts of Saving Faith are accepting, receiving, and resting upon Christ alone for Justification. Asembl. Catch. c. 14. § 2. Quo homo electus promissiones gratuits de Christo sib applicat iique  vissiè acqui it. Wolleb. Christ. Theol. l. 1. c. 2  igitur isla prpè dicitur justifica, quà rembmus: Christum ad em siem pecat  d  Am. Theol. l. 1. c.  3. . application of Christ's Merits to our selves, in casting our selves upon the Merits of Christ, in appre¦hending, relying, or laying hold upon Christ for Salvation; or, as others say, 'tis a e¦bency on Christ for Salvation. Of all  Notions of justifying, or true Christian Faith this is a full confutation, that they are perfe¦ly unscriptural: For the first cannot be continu∣ed in Scripture, it being certain to a demonstra∣tion, that Scripture no where saith, that Dani∣el, John, or Thomas, &c. have remissn of sins. This therefore cannot be Divine Faith, or Faith built immediately on a Divine Revelation, or Record, but rests upon our own Experience, or Knowledge of our selves; for the Argument must run thus, He that repenteth and believeth shall be saved, I Daniel and Thomas have done this; which may indeed be matter of their Knowledge, but not of Divine Faith, as being not revealed in Scripture. Nor are the other Opinions less unscriptural, for we do not once read in Scripture any com∣mand to apply Christ's Merits to our selves, or to apprehend his Merits, or to lean and roll our selves upon him for Salvation; we find no Exhortation in Scripture so to do; no Reprehension of any Person for not resting on, or not applying Christ's Merits to themselves; no Promise made to any upon the application of Christ's Merits: In a word, the Scriptures  wholly unacquainted with these Phrases. And is that likely to be the duty on which our Justifica∣tion, Adoption, and all our Happiness depends, which hath no Precept, Promise, or Example in the Holy Scripture? But I shall add some far∣ther Confirmations of the Scripture Na of true Faith, by which all these unscriptural O∣pinions will be at once confuted. And therefore 4ly. The Scripture frequently informs us, that the Miracles done by Christ are propound∣ed as the great Motive to believe on him, and as the aggravation of their sin, who still conti∣nued in their infidelity, and also that the con∣sideration of them caused many to believe. On this account he requires to be believed; If you believe not me, believe the works, Joh 10  14.11. for the works that I do bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me, John 5.3.10.25. On this account he pronounces the Infi¦delity of the Jews inexcusable, saying. If I had not done among them the works that no
man did, they had had no sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin, John 15.22, 24. 'Twas this Consideration which induced many of them to believe; for many believed on his Name when they saw the Miracles which he did, John 2.23.7.30. Now what were all his Miracles designed to produce in them, but a firm belief that he was Christ the Son of God; so doth St. John expresly teach us, saying, There be many other Miracles which Jesus did that are not written in this Book; but these are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Son of God, John 20.30. If you imagine that Faith is a firm assent that Christ died for you in particular, and that you have re∣mission of sins by him, that 'tis an application of Christ, or of his Merits to your selves, or a rolling your selves upon him for Salvation, How do his Miracles convince you that you should thus believe on him? But if you say it is a firm perswasion that he is the Christ, the Son of God, nothing can be more proper to convince us of the truth of what he thus decla∣red, than these Miracles; then may you say with Nicodemus, We know thou art a Tea∣cher sent from God, for no man can do such Miracles as thou doest, except God were with him, John 3.2. 5ly, This will be yet more evident from all those places which ascribe our Justification and Salvation to Faith in God, or in him that sent this Jesus into the World. So doth our Lord himself in these words, Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and be∣lieveth on him that sent me, hath ever∣lasting life, and shall not come into condem∣nation, but is passed from death unto life, John 5.24.12.44. The Faith of Abraham is thus described, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, Rom. 4.3. i. e. this Faith in God was imputed to him for righteousness; when therefore the Apostle adds, that he is the Father of them that be∣lieve that Righteousness might be imputed to them also, v. 9. must it not be imputed upon their believing in God, as he did? Doth not the Apostle hence infer, that unto him that worketh not, but believeth in him that justi∣fieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, v. 5. Now to believe in him that justifieth the ungodly, is certainly to be∣lieve in God the Father, for it is God that ju∣stifieth, Rom. 8.33. To be justified by this Faith, must therefore signifie to be justified by Faith in God the Father, according to those words of St. Peter, We through him believe in God, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. Now if Faith be supposed to consist in be∣lieving that our own sins are pardoned, in ap∣plication of Christ's merits to our selves, or in rolling our selves upon the Person of Christ, what affinity or connexion is there be∣twixt believing in God, believing the truth of his Promises, as Abraham did, and was justifi∣ed, and believing that our own sins are par∣doned, applying the Merits of Christ to  selves, or rolling our selves upon him for Sal∣vation? But then if justifying Faith doth pri∣marily consist in a firm perswasion that Jesus is the Son of God, the Saviour of the World, the Prophet sent of God to shew us the way of Salvation, the Lord and King, by whose La we are to be governed if we would obtain it, the Faith in Christ, and Faith in God are one thing; for God having testified all this concerning  Son Jesus Christ, and also promised that every one that hath seen the Son, and believed on him, shall have eternal life, John 6.40. By thus belie∣ving we receive his Testimony, and set to  Seal that God is true. 6ly, This may be argued from all those pla∣ces which ascribe our Justification and Salvati∣on to the belief of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, or of God's power exercised in raising him from the dead. Thus doth St. Paul in that very Chapter in which he professedly disputes of Justification by Faith; for he expresly de∣clares, that to them that believe in him who raised Jesus from the dead, that Faith shall be imputed unto Righteousness, Rom. 4.24. as Abraham's Faith in him that quickned the dead, was imputed unto him for Righteousness. And again, If we believe with the heart, that God hath raised up the Lord Jesus from the dead we shall be saved, for with the he man believeth unto justification, Rom. 10.9. Now what agreement is there betwixt my be∣lieving my own sins are pardoned, or my ap∣plying Christ's merits to my self, or rolling my self upon him, and Christ's resurrection from the dead by the power of God. But then if  say that Faith is a firm perswasion that Jesus was the Son of God, the Saviour of the World, the Prophet that was to come into the World, the Lord and Ruler over all, this, as he testified of himself whilst living, and God the Father al∣so testified, so was he declared to be the Son of God with power by this resurrection from the dead, Rom. 1.4. By this all Israel mg know that God had made him Lord, and Christ, Acts 2.24-36. and that God had ex∣alted him to his right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance unto Israel, and remission of sins, Acts 5.31. Hence the Apostle teacheth that Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, Rom. 4.25. and puts the question, Who is he that condem∣neth us? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, Chap. 34. 7ly, This appears farther from this conside∣ration, that in all the Scriptures of the New Testament there is not to be found one Ex∣tation to any Christian to believe in Christ,  to act Faith on Christ. When the Apostles preached to Jews, or Gentiles, Men not ∣verted to the Christian Faith, they still ex them to believe that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God, the Saviour of the World,
believe in the Lord Jesus. And this was ne∣esary to be preached to them, to perswade them o believe in, and to obey him; for till they did elieve he was a Person sent from God, and hat they should receive some benefit by doing so, he could have no inducement to own, and no ncouragement to obey him. It was therefore ecessary that this should be first preached to  and Gentile, that Christ was a Person sent from God to preach the Doctrine which he ought, and that remission of sins, and ever∣ating life was to be obtained by his Name, and y obedience to this Teacher. But then, I say, he same Apostles in their Epistles directed to hose Persons who were already Christians, and  had testified their Faith by being baptized n the Name of Jesus, have not one Exhortation o any of them to believe in Christ; but only o be stedfast in the Faith, to encrease and grow  Faith, and to repent of what they had done ontrary to the Faith they had received. The Exhortations of our Lord to the seven Church∣s, and more particularly to that of Sardis, in which there were but very few who had not efiled themselves, Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. and that of aodicea which he threatned to spew out of is mouth for her luke-warmness, Luke 16.18. s only to repent, and renew their first works, et to believe in him, or to apply his Merits to themselves. Now what account can be given f this thing by those who are so zealous in their Sermons to exhort Christians to believe in Christ, to roll themselves upon him, and ap∣ly his Merits to themselves, and are so full f Motives to perswade them so to do, I say, at reason can they give why Men, assisted by the Holy Ghost, never exhorted any Christian o believe, but only to shew forth their faith y their works, James 2.18. and to add un∣o their faith vertue, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. &c. But hen if Christian Faith be only a firm perswa∣ion that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, the Saviour of the World, the reason is ex∣eeding manifest why no Christian should be ex∣orted to believe, because whosoever is a Chri∣stian, not only doth believe all this already, but h professed his belief of it by being baptized  the Name of Jesus. There therefore needs o Exhortation to any Christian to believe in Christ, but only to walk answerable to that Faith, o be stedfast in it, and to add unto his faith vertue, knowledge, temperance, godliness, rotherly kindness, charity, 2 Pet. 1.5-8. hat they may not be slothful, and unfruitful in he knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Object. If it be here objected that St. John aith, These things have I written to you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that e may know ye have eternal life  and that ye may believe in the Name of the Son of God, 1 John 5.13. I ans 1. That the Alexandrian, and other  Manuscripts, read not , but , that ye may know ye have eternal life who believe in the Name of the Son  And this reading is confirmed by the Vl the Syriac, and Aethiopick Versns. 2ly, They who retain our Version interpret the words thus, That ye may cntinue to be∣lieve in the Name of the Son  God;  that ye mayƲt certius, & firmius credant. Calv. Ʋt in fide perseveretis. Vorst. Episcop. That ye may be encouraged to continue in the Faith. Dr. Hammond. . Oecum. more firmly, and certainly be¦lieve. Nor will the wors er any ther meaning, unless you will supp se St. John  seriously exhort Believers  he had told them in the immediate  words, was so effectually d ne by them already, that they might know they had eternal life. In a word, either it is true before we actu∣ally believe it, that our sins we pard ned that we have a right to apply Chrts Merits to us, and to roll our selves upon his Person for Sl∣vation, or it is not: If it be true before we have believed, we must have Faith before, since nothing can procure this pardon of our sins, or give us any right to apply his Merits to our selves, or depend on him for Salvation, but Faith in Christ: If it be not true, we must obtain the pardon of our sins, and an interest in Christ's merits by believing a lie? And so much for the first Particular. To the next E∣quiry, § 4. 2ly, What is it to be justified in St. Paul's acceptation of the word? I answer, 1. That this Justification which St. Paul speaks of, is an act of God terminated upon Man. This the Ap stle expresly doth delive in these words, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is God that justi∣fies, Rom. 8.33. And again, It is one God who justifies the circumcision by faith and the uncircumcision through faith, Rom. 3.30. It is God that justifieth the ungodly, Rom. 4.5. He is just, and the Justifier of him that belie∣veth in Jesus, Rom. 3.26. Now according to the clear tenor of the Scripture, 2ly, God justifies the sinner by absolving him from the guilt of his past sins, by a free act of grace, in pardoning his iniquities, or not imputing his sins to him, and so his justification must import his absolution from the guilt of sin, and as a necessary and immediate consequence of that, his being reconciled unto God, and recei∣ved into favour with him. This will be evi∣dent if we consider, 1. What the Baptist testified concerning  that all Men might believe, viz. that he was the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world, John 1.29. and what Christ testi∣fied of himself, viz. that he that believeth in him should not come into condemnation, John
3.16. that his blood was the blood of the new Covenant, which was shed for the remission of sins, Matth. 26.28. even of that Covenant in which God promises to be merciful to our unrighteousness, and to remember our iniqui∣ties no more, Hebr. 8.13.10.17. As also from what his Apostles promised to win Men to the Faith of Jesus, viz. remission of sins. Thus when the Jews were pricked to the heart, and said, What shall we do? St. Peter answers, Repent ye, and be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, Acts 2.37. And a∣gain, Repent you, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3.19. For him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Savi∣our to give repentance, and remission of sins, Acts 5 31. St. Peter begins his Sermon to Cornelius thus, The word which God hath sent us to preach is Peace by Jesus Christ, Acts 10.36. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believeth on him shall receive remission of sins, Act. 13.23 St. Paul declares, that God had raised up to Israel a Saviour Jesus; and then he adds, Known therefore be it, saith he, to you, that through this Man is preached to you remission of sins; and in him every believer on him shall be justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Mo∣ses, Hebr. 10.1, 4. that Law being not able to take away sins, Rom. 3.23. i. e. to free Men from the guilt of sin. Seeing then the benefit proposed to the Believer is the remission of sins to be obtained through Christ, through his Name, seeing we are said to be justified through Christ, Chap. 5.9. through Faith in his Blood, Eph. 1.7. that Blood which is so often said to be shed for the remission of our sins, Col. 1.14, 20. to procure our Peace, and our Redemption. Since lastly, we are said by believing in Christ to be justified from sin, Acts 13.39. which Phrase can only signifie exemption from the condemna∣tion of it; I say, from these expressions it ap∣pears, that God's justification of a sinner by Faith, or through Faith in the Blood of Jesus, is chiefly the remission of the Believers sins, and the exemption of him from the condemnation of the Law by virtue of Christ's Blood shed for the remission of sins. 2ly, This we may learn from the Reasonings by which the Apostle confirms his Conclusion, or the Arguments by which he proves, that both Jew and Gentile are to be justified by Faith, without the works of the Law, or without works. His Conclusion is laid down Chap. 1.17. thus, The righteousness of God (which pro∣ceeds) from faith, is revealed in the Gospel, to (beget) faith in Jew and Gentile, v. 16. (See the Note there.) And this way of obtain∣ing Righteousness or Justification, he proves to be absolutely necessary to them both, beginning first with the Gentile, whom he pronounces sub∣ject to the wrath of God, for holding the truth (they by the Light of Nature knew) in unrigh∣teousness, v. 18. And this he proves to  end of that Chapter, which concludes  That they knowing the judgment or G that they who did such things were worthy a death, not only did the same, but had p∣sure in them that did them. In the second Chapter he declares the Jews guilty of the same things the Heathens did, and so obnoxious  the same Condemnation, and also guilty of ∣lating the Law of Moses; and thence concludes that as to this matter there was no difference between them, he having proved both Jews and Gentiles to be all under sin, Chap. 3.9. and  both equally needing to be justified by Faith,  to be justified freely by an Act of Grace, par∣ing their sins through faith in Christ, v. 24 His Argument then is plainly this, both Jew and Gentile lye under the guilt of sin, there∣ing none of them that is righteous, Rom. 3. i. e free from sin, no not one. v. 10. Neither of them can be justified by the Law, bece they by the Sentence of it are  guilty before God, v. 19, 20. and obnox punishment, as being both Transgressors of it. Therefore, saith he, by the Law can no  be justified, for by the Law is the knowledg of sin, rendring us obnoxious to condemna, where then there remains the guilt of sin, the can be no justification; where therefore the is remission of sin, and so a freedom from being guilty of it before God, there is justification Again, All have sinned, saith he, and fall short of the glory of God, v. 23. that is  of his approbation, as that phrase signifies Jo. 12.43. or of the fruition of the glory of God as it imports Rom. 5.1, 2. Therefore obje¦tion from this sin must be sufficient to  a obtain this glory of God. We who have this sinned, saith he, are justified freely by his Grace through the redemption that is a Christ Jesus, v. 24. Now what is this Redemp∣tion? it is, saith the same Apostle twice, Re¦mission of our sins, Eph. 1.7. Col. 1.14. The Apostle argues to the same effect in the Epi to the Galathians, That justification cannot  by the Law, because the Law cannot give  and this it cannot do, because the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, Gal. 3.21. and so shut out of that way of being justifie. Our freedom therefore from the gu of  must be sufficient for our justification is . In his fourth Chapter to the Romans he den justification by the not imputing sin, and the for∣giveness of it, in these words. To him  worketh not, but believeth in him that j∣fieth the ungodly, his faith is counted  righteousness, v. 4. As David speaks of  blessedness of the man to whom the Lord im¦puteth righteousness without works. v 5.. saying, Blessed are they whose unrighteous¦ness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered  Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imp¦teth not sin, v. 8. Since then the bles of which the Apostle was discoursing.
of justification, the justification of the ungodly, and since the blessedness is said to consist in the remission, covering, the not imputing his sins to him, it cannot reasonably be denied that the blessedness of a justified person is here described by the Blessedness of a pardoned person, as being one and the same thing. 3ly, This will be farther evident from the consideration of the phrases the Apostle useth as equivalent to justification, and interpretative of it. As 1. Reconciliation to God, that this is the same with justification, appears by these words, much more being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him; for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more be∣ing reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Rom. 5.9, 10. where to be justified by his blood, and reconciled by his death, seem plain∣ly the same thing. Now that reconciliation is effected by the remission of sins, is evident from these words, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. and there∣fore justification also must be so obtained; for if upon the not imputing sin unto us, God did not account us as righteous, he could not be re∣conciled to us, because he cannot be reconciled to any man continuing unrighteous, or under the notion of a sinner. 2ly, Justification stands directly opposed to condemnation, in these words, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, or to Believers; , who shall object a crime against them, it is God that justifieth, who is he that condemneth them, Rom. 8.33, 34. And again, If the ministration of condemna∣tion, i. e. the Law which chargeth us with guilt, and so rendreth us obnoxious to condem∣nation, was glorious, much more the mini∣stration  of justification doth ex∣ceed in glory, 2 Cor. 3.9. Now what is it that mankind is accused of, and charged with by the Law, but sin? What is it that they stand condemned for at God's Bar, but the trans∣gression of his Law? Justification therefore, which stands opposed to it, must be a clearing and discharging of them from the guilt, or the condemning power of sin. 3ly, Justification is said to be from sin; By him all that believe are justified  from all those sins from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39. And again, The judgment was from one sin to condemnation, but the free gift to justification  from many sins, Rom. 5.16. Now what can justification from sin signifie, be∣sides our absolution from the guilt of sin? 4ly, The justifying the Believer, and the re∣mission of his sins, are divers expressions of the same thing, as is apparent from these words, God hath set forth Christ Jesus to be a pro∣pitiation through faith in his blood: This he hath done, saith the Apostle, to declare his righteousness in the remission of sins, Rom. 3.25. viz. to those that have this faith, i. e. to mani∣fest the way of justification by faith, which he alone admits of for the remission of sins. He did this, saith the next verse, to declare his righteousness, that he might be just, in requi∣ring this propitiation for our sins, and the ju∣stifier of him that believeth in Jesus, v. 26. Is it not therefore manifest, that to justifie the Blie∣ver, and to remit his sins, must be the same thing? 5ly, We are justified, saith the Apostle, through the redemption that is in Jesus, through Faith in his blood, Rom. 3.24, 25. through his blood, Rom. 5.9. Now what doth this Blood procure for us? forgiveness of sins, Eph. 1.7. Col. 1.14. saith the Apostle, it being shed for the remission of sins, Matth. 26.28. He appearing in the end of the world to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Hebr. 9.26. What benefit have believers by it? He hath loved them, and washed them from their sins in his blood, Rev. 1.5. He hath made peace for them by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. with a God only angry for sin. He hath ob∣tained eternal redemption from transgressions by it, Hebr. 9.12, 15. By all these equivalent Expressions it appears, that God's justifying the sinner, in St. Paul's sense of the expression, is his absolving him from the guilt of his past sins, from punishment, and condemnation by the Law for them, by an act of grace and free pardon of them through the blood of Jesus, his being as fully reconciled to us, as if we never had of∣fended against the former Covenant we were all under, till the new Covenant was established in the blood of Jesus. § 5. 3ly, I add, that this justification is, by St. Paul, ascribed to faith alone, in opposition to works of righteousness done, either by the Jew or Gentile. This plainly follows from that notion of Justification which I have established as the true sense of the expression in St. Paul; for how could Jew or Gentile be justified by the works of that Law, whether Mosaical, or Na∣tural, which rendred them both obnoxious to condemnation for sin, and guilty before God? Could they receive remission of sins by comply∣ance with that Law which left them under con∣demnation for it? Can any Man imagine, after the charge he lays against the Gentiles, Chap. 1. and against the Jews, Chap. 2. & 3. He could have any inclination to assert they should be ju∣stified, or absolved from the guilt of those of∣fences by their Works, and not by Faith only? The mistake in this matter seems to e here, that Men look upon justification, not as looking backward only, and procuring an absolution from our past sins, but as looking forward to our whole Christian conversation, and import∣ing our absolution from all our sins committed against the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, or the New Covenant; whereas it only doth con∣sist , in the remission of our past sins, Rom. 3.25. in
the redemption of us from , the sins committed against our former Covenant, Hebr. 9.15. in the purgati∣on of the Believer  from his old sins, 2 Pet. 1.9. And leaves us after∣ward to be absolved, or condemned as we obey, perform, or violate the Conditions of the New Covenant, and so to be judged hereafter, not according to our Faith, but Works. See the Note on Rom. 3.25. 2ly, This is exceeding evident from the plain words of the Apostle, and by the Arguments by which he proves we must be justified by Faith, and not by Works. For, saith he, by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of (that) sin, (which renders us obnoxious to con∣demnation.) Now this knowledge of sin, being chiefly produced by the Moral Law, Rom. 7.7. shews the Apostle excludes as well that, as the Ceremonial Law, from justification. And evi∣dent it is, that the Antithesis runs all along not between Ceremonial and Moral Works, or be∣tween done by the Law of Moses, or by the tenour of the Law of Nature, but be∣tween Works in general, and Faith, the Law of Works, and the Law of Faith. Again, We are, saith he, justified freely by his Grace, Rom. 3.24. i. e. by a free act of Grace in pardoning our past sins, by which we had fallen short of the glory of God. Now a free act of Grace is still opposed to Works. Thus if our Election or Calling to the Faith of Christ, be of Grace, then is it not of Works, Rom. 11.6. By Grace ye are saved through Faith, not of Works, 2 Eph. 8.9. See the Note there. Not by works of righteousness which we had done (before the goodness and loving kindness of God our Sa∣viour appeared to us) but according to his mercy he saved us, Tit. 3.5. See the Note there. Moreover we reckon, saith he, that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law, v. 28. where 'tis on all sides granted, that the works of the Law of Moses are entirely excluded from justification by Faith, and then much more the works of the Gentiles; it being the same God who justifies the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith, v. 30. In the next Chapter he saith, To him that worketh not, but believeth in him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is rec∣koned for righteousness, Rom. 4.5. Now how can the ungodly be justified by Works, and by what words can Works be more entirely exclu∣ded, then by not working. 3ly, That Evangelical Obedience, or Works of Righteousness done by us after faith in Christ are excluded from that Faith which justifies, is evi∣dent, because they follow the faith which justifies, i. e procures the pardon of our past sins. For, saith the Apostle, we are saved (from the wrath due unto us for our past sins, Rom. 5.9. or we are put into the way and state of salvation) by grace through faith, not of works; for we are crea∣ted in Christ Jesus to good works, which God hath ordained that we should walk in, Eph. 2.8, 9, 10. So that we must be first in Christ by virtue of this Faith, before we can be fitted to do works of Evangelical Righteousness. And this Argument may be confirmed from many in∣stances of Persons who believed, and were im∣mediately baptized the same day; for being bap∣tized for the remission of sins, they must be ju∣stified. Thus at St. Peter's Sermon, three thou∣sand believed, and were baptized the same day, Acts 2.41. Thus the Samaritans, upon the hearing Philip preach concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of the Lord Jesus, were immediately baptized, Acts 8.12. So also  the Eunuch upon his preaching to him, v. 3. So was Cornelius and all that heard St. Peter's Sermon, Acts 10.48. So was the Jaylor, and all his house straitway, Acts 16.33. See Acts 9.35, 42.11.21.13.12, 48, 49.14.1.174. 12, 34.19.18. Now what Evangelical Obedi∣ence could these Men perform to render then justified by works? 4ly, This may be fairly argued from the ex∣ample of Abraham's justification; and the pas∣sage whence St. Paul concludes it. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. For it deserves to be observed that Abraham had faith, or was a Believer be∣fore this was said unto him, for by faith Abra∣ham being called obeyed, and went forth, Hebr. 11.8. And after by a stronger faith he offered up his Son Isaac, believing that God was able to raise him from the dead, v. 17. but neither of these instances are pitcht upon by the Apo∣stle, as fit for his purpose, because in bo Obedience was joyned with Faith, whereas here was a pure act of faith without works; and of this act of faith it is said, what is not said of o∣ther of the other, It was imputed unto him for righteousness. If therefore thus it not in the example of the father of the faithful, we may hence conclude, it was so also in the Children of faithful Abraham. Lastly, The Scripture is express and fre∣quent in this assertion, That Believers are ju∣stified by Faith; in which expression either Faith must include Works, or Evangelical Obe∣dience, or it doth not; if it doth not; if it doth not, we  be justified by Faith alone. And that it doth not formally include Works of Evangelical Righ∣teousness, appears 1. From the plain distinction which the Scrip∣ture puts between them, when it informs us that Faith works by love; acts with our works,Gal. 5.6. Jam. 2.18, 22. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. Ro 16.26. 1 Thess. 1.3. and is made perfect by them, when it calls upon us to shew forth our faith by our works; and to add to our faith vertue, knowledge, godliness, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, charity; and when it speaks of the work of faith, and the obedience of faith. 2ly, Faith in the nature of it is only an as∣sent unto a Testimony, Divine Faith an as∣sent
to a Divine Testimony, Faith in Christ an as∣sent to the Testimony given by God of Christ. Now 'tis not reasonable to conceive that Christ, and his Apostles, making use of a word which had this known and fixed import, should mean more by the word, than what is signified in com∣mon use, as sure they must have done, had they included in the meaning of the word the whole of our Evangelical Righteousness, though there∣fore Faith is the spring, and the foundation of that righteousness; and, where 'tis cordial and lasting, will most assuredly produce it; yet is not that righteousness included in the very na∣ture, or contained in the import of it. Object. But doth not St. James say expresly, That a man is justified by works, and not by faith only, Chap. 2.24. Answ. In answer to this capital Objection, I shall first produce the words of the Apostle James, with a short Paraphrase, and then return a po∣sitive Answer to the Objection. The words I paraphrase thus: Ver. 14. And let (not any Jew or Christian think his faith sufficient to justifie and save him without those works of charity and mercy here spoken of, v. 8-13. for) what doth it pro∣fit, my brethren, if a man say he hath faith, (i. e. in words profess to have faith in God, v. 19. or in Christ, v. 1.) and have not works (to evidence the truth of that profession) can (such a naked, fruitless) faith save him? Ver. 15. If a brother or sister be naked, or destitute of daily food, Ver. 16. And one of you say unto him, de∣part in peace, be you warmed and filled, (ma∣king profession of compassion for, and good will to him in your words, t) notwithstanding ye give them not those things which be needful for (the cloathing or feeding of) the body, what doth it profit (him to hear your kind words.) Ver. 17. Even so faith (professed with the mouth) if it hath not works (answerable to that profession, or consequent upon it) is dead (and fruitless as those words) being alone, (i. e. without works shewing the truth of it.) Ver. 18. Yea a man may say (to such a So∣lifidian,) thou hast (in profession) faith, and I have (real) works, shew me thy faith (which thou professest,) without thy works (which thou canst never do, faith being seated in the heart, and only discoverable by its effects) and I will shew thee by my works my faith, (as the cause is demonstrated by the effect.) Ver. 19. Thou (being a Jew) believest there is one God, thou (in this) doest well, (but doest no more than the very Devils, for) the Devils also believe and tremble, (and if thou hast no better faith than they, thou hast the same reason to tremble which they have.) Ver. 20. But wilst thou know, oh vain man, (who makest profession of such a naked faith,) that faith without works is dead, (and so una∣ble to justifie or save thee; see it in the exam∣ple of that very Abraham, in thy Relation to whom thou so confidest.) Ver. 21. (For) was not Abraham (whom we style) our Father, justified by works (proceed∣ing from his faith) when he had offered his son Isaac upon the Altar? (counting that God was able to raise him from the dead, Hebr. 11.17, 19.) Ver. 22. Seest thou how (Gr. thou seest by this example that) faith wrought with his works (to produce them?) and by works was faith made perfect, (and advanced in him to the greatest height.) Ver. 23. And the Scripture was (again) ful∣filled which saith Abraham believed in God, and it (viz. that faith which produced these works) was accounted to him for righteous∣ness, and (upon that account) he was called the friend of God. Ver. 24. Ye see then how that by works (proceeding from faith) a man is justified, and not by faith only, (i. e. being alone, and with∣out them.) Now in answer to the Objection from these words, I say, That when St. Paul saith, we are justified by faith without the works of the Law, and that to him that worketh not, but believeth in him that justifieth the ungodly, faith is imputed for righteousness, or to justification, Justifi∣cation there ascribed to faith without works, im∣ports only our absolution from condemnation by reason of our past sins committed before faith in Christ, and our reconciliation to God by the pardon of them, or the not imputing them to those who believe in him. This I have shewed already, and 'tis apparent from the chief Argu∣ment the Apostle useth to prove, that both Jew and Gentile should be justified freely by his grace, and not by works, because they were all under sin, all become guilty before God, all ha∣ving sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Rom. 3.9, 19, 23. whereas, saith he, be∣ing justified by faith, we have peace with God, and rejoyce in the hope of the glory of God, Rom. 5.1, 2. Therefore, Chap. 3. he must be speaking of the condition both of Jew and Gen∣tile before faith in Christ. So again, when the Apostle saith, The Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise (of justification) by (the) faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe (in him.) Wherefore the Law was (then) our School-master to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith (in him) But now, after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a School-master, (i. e. under the paedagogy of the Law.) For ye are all the Children of God through Faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. He plainly insinuates that we cannot be justified by the works of the Law, because the Law leads us to Christ for justification. And again,
We are justified by grace, not of works; for we are God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, Eph. 2.10. Where the Argument seems plainly to run thus, we cannot be justified by works preceding faith, because we do no good works till by faith we are interested in Christ Jesus. Whereas St. James speaks plainly of those works which follow faith, are wrought by it, and are the effects of it, and of their necessity in order to our continuance in a state of justification, and our freedom from fi∣nal condemnation. St. James speaks of a meer profession of faith with the mouth, St. Paul of believing from the heart, St. James of a faith dead and fruitless, when we have it, St. Paul of a faith working by love when we have it, and of a person only justified without works, because he had no faith to produce them. § 6. 4ly, It seemeth necessary from the na∣ture of the thing, and the state and condition of the persons to whom the Gospel was first preached, that they should be justified, or absol∣ved from the guilt of their past sins, without new obedience, or without actual obedience to all the Commandments of Christ; though not without that faith which did engage them to it, and was sufficient to produce it. For 1. This was all that could be done by the convinced Jew or Gentile, who at one Sermon or Discourse believed, and were baptized for the remission of sins. 'Tis manifest they then knew but little of the Commandments of Christ, and so could not be doers of them. Either then they were not justified, and then faith was not imputed to them for righteousness, nor did Baptism consign to them remission of sins; or they were justified by that faith which did not include actual obedience to all the Command∣ments of Christ, as the condition of that justifi∣cation. And seeing perseverance to the end, and being faithful to the death, are by our Lord himself made the Conditions of Salvation, and of receiving from his hands the Crown of Life; if these be also the Conditions of the Ju∣stification promised to faith in Christ, no person is, or can be justified by faith till he dies. This faith therefore in Jew and Gentile thus con∣verted, could only import three things: (1.) By way of preparation for it, an owning the true God who gave this testimony to his Son, and so a turning from dumb Idols to serve the living God, and a sorrow for the sins commit∣ted against him in the time of their ignorance; and in the Jew a sorrow for their past sins, and in particular for having crucified the Lord of Life; and in this sense repentance goes before faith: And Christ's Apostles preached to the Jews repentance for the remission of sins through faith in his Name, Acts 14.15. and to the Gentiles to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made Heaven and Earth; and to both, repentance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.21. (2.) As a means to obtain this remission of sins, faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. (3.) An engagement for the future to cease from sin, and to gi up themselves to the Service of God, according to the Rules and Precepts delivered to them by his Son. Now this engagement was virtu  contained in their repentance, and their fa in Christ, and was solemnly made by them  their Baptism, as will be proved hereafter. Now this being all that they could then do,  must be all they were obliged to do in order  their justification; and yet 'tis certain that  promise of obedience, is not obedience; and t even the New Covenant requires, in order  salvation, a sincere and constant performance of the obedience thus promised. So that the C¦ditions of Salvation, and of Justification fr our past offences, can never be the same. 2ly, This will be farther evident, if we c¦sider that no Man can enter into Covenant with God, be reconciled to him, be admitted  his grace and favour, or be enabled to se him acceptably, till his sins be pardoned; so God cannot be reconciled to sinners whilst they continue under the guilt of sin unpardoned; nor can he enter into Covenant with them,  receive them to his grace and favour, or accept their services, till he be reconciled to the. When God entred into Covenant with his  People, a Sacrifice was first offered to  atonement for their sins, and the Blood of  was sprinkled upon all the People, Hebr. 9.13 And the New Covenant, in which he prosed to be merciful to our iniquities, and to re∣member our sins no more, was stablished in t Blood of Jesus shed for the remission of  sins. So that the sins of a Believer must be i¦mediately pardoned upon his faith in Christ,  he can have no peace with God, no reconce¦ment to him, no interest in the New Cove, and be in no capacity to do him any accept service. This is the import of those wrds Christ suffered for our sins, , that he might bring us to God, 1 P. 3.18. For to bring us to God in all the places of the New Testament, in which th phrase is used, with respect to Christ, is to gi us freedom of access to God, who by our  were formerly excluded from it, and banis from his gracious presence by him, saith the A∣postle; we have  mission to the Father, Eph. 2.18. by him we  obtain a freedom  of access to God with confidence, Eph. 3.12. This is ¦tained, saith the same Apostle, by virtue of Christ's Blood; for we who sometimes were afar off, are by the Blood of Christ brought nigh unto him, for he is our peace, v. 13, 14 and he hath reconciled both Jew and Gentile  God by his Cross. If then the Blood of  procured this freedom of access to God, 'tis ∣tain we had no freedom of access to him  it; and 'tis as certain we must have it by  faith which giveth us an interest in the pp¦ation purchased by it.
To set this matter in the clearest light, and shew the reason why it was necessary that such an act of grace in pardoning our past sins upon our faith in Christ should be vouchsafed, that so we might be reconciled to God, capacitated for his friendship, and fitted for his service, let it be observed, 1. That to come to God, is to approach him in the way of worship, as in those words,See Psal 42.2.65.2.86.9.95.26. Isa. 1.12. He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Hebr. 11.6. 2ly, That God being an holy God, none were to come into his presence who had any pollution or defilement upon them, upon pain of death, till they were sanctified, or cleansed from it by some purification or atonement made for them to God. He dwelt in the whole Camp of Israel, and so those Lepers, who were so unclean as to pollute the Camp, were driven from it, Lev. 13.46. Numb. 5.2, 3. 2 Kings 15.5. And those Sin-offerings which were polluted with the sins of the whole Congregation, were carried out of the Camp, Lev. 16.21, 22, 27. Hebr. 13.11. God dwelt more especially in the Temple, and therefore they who had lesser impurities, i. e. who were defiled by the dead, or by an issue, and all menstruous women, were not to come thither till they were cleansed from those defilements, Lev. 12.4.15.31. Moreover, he being a God of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, they who had committed any sin of ignorance, or lay un∣der the guilt of it, were not permitted to come into the Court of the Men of Israel, till they had brought their Offering of Atonement. See Ainsworth on Numb. 5.3. 3ly, They who had no Ceremonial Defilement to be purged away, and no known sin to make atonement for, they were admitted to come near to God, as being holy, they had , a freedom of access to God in his Ta∣bernacle, and in his Temple; whence they are stiled , the people that draw near to God, Psal. 65.4.148.14. Lev. 10.3. And God is said to be , a God near to them, Deut. 7.4. both by relation, as having owned them as his Children, and en∣tred into Covenant to be their God, and by his more especial presence with them, for the She∣chinah, or the glorious Presence dwelt among them in the holy place, and so to them belonged  the priviledge of coming to his Court to worship him, and a promise of his blessing if they sincerely did it. Whereas the Heathens, who by reason of their Idolatry were not per∣mitted to serve him, are said to be afar off, and so far without God in the World, as to have no freedom of access to his Service, no such con∣verse with him, or relation to him, Eph. 2.12, 13, 17, 19. Now God being still as holy a God as ever, and still of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, the Scriptures of the New Testament seem as plainly to make our freedom of access to God to depend upon our being sanctified in the sacri∣fical sense, i. e. our being purged, and delive¦ed from the guilt of sin by an atonement made for us by the Blood of Christ, that our sins being thus pardoned through faith in his Blood, w may have peace with God, and an access unto his Favour. This plainly seems to be the im¦port of those words, If the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the Flesh, (and by so doing procureth an admis∣sion of the person cleansed to serve God in the Sanctuary,) How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit of∣fered himself without spot to God (for us, purge your Conscience from dead works. Hebr. 9.12. (or works exposing you to death, the pu∣nishment of the person who came unclean into God's presence, that so you may be admitted: to serve the living God? See the Notes there. So again, the Apostle having said that the ∣venant established in the Blood of Christ, ws this, that he would be merciful to our iniqui∣ties, and remember our sins no more; and ha∣ving thence inferr'd, that having thus obtain'd remission for us, there was no need that he should make himself again an offering for sin, he adds, that therefore we may draw near to God with full assurance of Faith, that we shall be accepted through the beloved, as having our hearts sprinkled by his Blood, and there∣fore cleansed from all guilt of Conscience, and our Bodies washed. (by Baptism) with pure water, Hebr. 10.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Two things observed by the judicious Dr. Bar∣row, seem here considerable, 1. That the Apostle in this discourse im∣plies, that no precedent dispensations had ex∣hibited any manifest overture, or promise of pardon, and upon that account were in a main point defective; for the Light of Na∣ture doth only direct to duty, condemning eve∣ry man in his own judgment, and conscience, who transgresseth; but as to pardon, in case of transgression, it is blind, and silent; and the Law of Moses rigorously exacteth punctual o∣bedience, denouncing in express terms a con∣demnation, and curse to the transgressors of it in any part; and so it was a Law , not able to give Life, Gal. 3.21. or save us from death. Hence doth the Apo∣stle lay down this as the foundation of this whole Dispute, that the Gospel alone was the power of God through Faith to the Salvati∣on both of Jew and Gentile, Rom. 1, 16, 17. because in that alone was the righteousness of God by faith revealed to beget faith in th, even the faith by which the just shall live, declaring that no precedent dispensation could justifie any man, and that a man is justified by faith, or hath an absolute need of such a justi∣fication as that which the Gospel tendere
, We therefore collect, saith he, that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law, whether Natural or Mosaical, which justification must therefore import their receiving that free pardon which the criminal and guilty world did stand in need of, and without which no man could have any comfort in his mind, or peace with God: For if the state of Man was a state of Rebel∣lion, and of so heinous Guilt, of having for∣feited God's favour, and of obnoxiousness to his wrath, then that justification which he needed must be a dispensation of Mercy removing that Guilt, and restoring him to the favour of God. And this may also strongly be argued from the Objections which the Jew and Gentile made against this Doctrine of Justification by a free Act of Grace, that it seemed to render it un∣just in God to take vengeance on those sins which tended so highly to the glory of God's grace; see the Note on Rom. 3.5. and to en∣courage us to do evil that good may come. See the Note on v. 8. And more especially from the Objections which he answers, Chap. 6.1, 15. For thus they run, ; what do we say then? (do we say this) Let us (who have recei∣ved this grace) continue (still) in sin, that grace may abound (towards us.) And v. 15. What then shall we (go on in) sin, because we are not under the Law, (which condemns us to death for every transgression,) but under (that Covenant of) Grace (which allows the pardon, and promises the forgiveness of it?) That is, do we by declaring that we are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Chap. 3.24. and that as sin a∣bounded grace did more abound, give just oc∣casion for these Inferences? Now if the Faith to which St. Paul, in this Discourse ascribed our Justification, did not only oblige us to, but even comprehend and include Evangelical and constant Obedience, what colour could there be for these Objections? And therefore 2ly, The Doctor (p. 83.) proposes it as his Conjecture, That the Apostle in this Discourse designedly sets himself to answer this Objection of the Jew and Gentile against this Doctrine of Christianity, viz. that it did upon so slender a Condition or Performance as that of Faith, ten∣der to all Persons indifferently, howsoever cul∣pable their former lives had been, a plenary remission of their sins, and reception into God's favour. The Jews could not conceive or relish, that any Man so easily should be translated into a state equal, or superiour to that which they supposed they did enjoy. The Gentiles them∣selves could hardly digest it, that the Christians said, Believe, and , thy Faith shall save thee; this is one of the Excepti∣ons which Celsus makes against it. And. Hist. l. 2. p. 61. Zozimus having said, that the Heathen Priests having told Constantine that their Religion af∣forded no purgation for his Crimes, he was perswaded to embrace Christianity, as being told the Christian Doctrine would take away all sin; and had this promise annexed to it, That the ungodly, who would embrace it, should presently be absolved from all sins, intimates that he looked on this as a just Exception against the Christian Faith. This prejudice against the Gospel, saith he, St. Paul removes, by shewing that because of all Mens guilt and sinfulness, such an exhibition of mercy, such an overture of acceptance and remission of sins was neces∣sary in order to salvation, so that without it no Man could be exempted from wrath and misery, and that consequently all other Reli∣gions, as not exhibiting such a remission, must be esteemed in a main point defe∣ctive. § 7. Object. 1. But against this it may be objected, That our Justification seems to be con∣nected with our Glorification, for whom he justifies them he also glorifies, Rom. 8.30. Now it is certain that our future state of Glo∣ry, depends not only on our Faith, but Works; And by the same Apostle, in the same Epistle, is promised to him that worketh good, Rom. 2.6, 7, 10. we being all to be hereafter recompen∣sed according to our works? Answ. 1. To this it may be answered in the words of the Reverend Dr. Hammond, (Pr. C¦tech. p. 89.) That whom God justifies, if they pass out of this Life in a justified state, them he will certainly glorifie. Or as in his Para∣phrase, Whom he called to suffer after the example of his Son, them upon patience and perseverance under those Sufferings, he justi∣fies, i. e. he approves of as sincere, and wor∣thy, as they suffer for, so to be glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.13. and whom he thus justifies, them he will also glorifie. And according to this import of the words, Justification doth not signifie, as in the great dispute of the Apostle, the remission of our past sins committed before Faith in Christ, but rather our Justification at the great Day of our Accounts, as his sincere and faithful Servants. As it seems to import most clearly in those words of the same Apostle, I know nothing of my self (whereby to condemn my self of unfaithfulness on the discharge of my office) yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judgeth me is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.4. And in those words of the Epistle to the Romans, Not the. Ibid.
hearers of the Law only shall be  just before God, but the doers of the Law  shall be justified, Rom. 2.13. And so St. James, Abraham was justified by works, and he was called the Friend of God. Answ. 2. But 2ly, there is another ancient Interpretation of these words, which cuts off the whole force of this Argument, viz. Those he glorified, by giving them that Spirit of Glory, and of God, who is the earnest of their future Inheritance. He glorified them, say. Chrys. Oecum. . Theodor. Theoph. St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecu∣menius, and Theophylact, by the Spirit of A∣doption, calling them Sons, and giving them the Grace of the Holy Spirit. To strengthen this Interpretation, let it be considered that our Sa∣viour is said, whilst he was on Earth, to have wrought his Miracles by the Spirit of God; and by these Miracles he is said sometimes to be  glorified, Luke 4.15. sometimes to shew forth  his glory, John 2.11. and sometimes it is said that God  glo∣rified him, John 8.54.11.4.13.31, 32.16.14. And when Christ gave to his Apostles and Be∣lievers the Holy Spirit to enable them to work the like Miracles, he expresses himself thus to his Father, The glory which thou gavest me I have given them, that the world may know that thou hast sent me, John 17.22, 23. Moreover, by reason of this Spirit given with the Gospel, the ministration of Justifica∣tion is said to be  with or in glory, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. as being the ministration of the Spirit; and Believers, by participation of this Spirit of the Lord, are said not only to behold the glory of the Lord, but also to be changed into the same Image with him, from glory to glory, v. 18. and so to be conformed to the mage of his Son. And thus, saith Origen on this place,De glorificatione in praesenti saeculo possumus illud intelligare quod dicit Apostolus, nos autem omnes revelatá facit gloriam Domini speculantes eadem imagine transformamur à Gloria in Gloriam. they may be said to be glo∣rified in this Life. Note also that when the Apostle speaks of our final Glorification in this Chapter, he still speaks of it as a thing future, saying, We shall be glorified with him; v. 17, 18, 21. whereas here he speaks of it as a thing ast already, saying, , whom he hath justified, them he hath also glorified; which confirms this Interpreta∣tion. And lastly, thus it connects well with he foregoing words, The Spirit which helpeth our infirmities, intercedeth according to the mind of God for the Saints. , we know therefore that all things shall work together for good to them who love God, who are called according to his purpose (of making hem the Sons of God by adoption, and giving hem the Spirit of his Son in their hearts, Gal. .6. Eph. 1.5, 13.) For whom he (thus) fore∣knew, them he predestinated (or appointed) to be thus conformed to the image of his Son, and whom he (thus) predestinated, them he also called (to the Christian Faith,) and whom he called (upon their cordial embracing of that faith) he justified, (we being made the Sons of God through Faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26.) and whom he (hath thus) justified, them he hath also glorified. § 8. Object. 2ly, It may be said, that not only our Justification, but Salvation is by the Apostle ascribed to Faith: As when he says, by grace ye are saved through faith, Eph. 2.8, 9. and if thou believest with the heart thou shalt be saved, Rom 10.9. Tit. 3.5. whereas doubt∣less Salvation dependeth on our Works, which therefore must be included in this Faith. Answ. To this Objection I answer, That Sal∣vation may very well in Scripture be ascribed to Faith, upon these two accounts: 1. Because Faith puts us in the way of Sal∣vation; that way of owning the Saviour of the World, and subjecting our selves to his Govern∣ment, which gives us a present right to Salva∣tion, should God take us hence soon after Bap∣tism into this Faith, or a sincere belief in Christ, as in the case of those many Martyrs who be∣lieved, and suffered the same day; and if we live by, and suitably to this Faith, still owning the Lord Jesus, and still subjecting our selves to his Laws and Government, will keep us in the state of Salvation; for he that thus belie∣veth in the Son hath eternal Life, John 3.36. See v. 16. i e. he hath a present right to it, and may rejoyce in the hope of the glory of God, and by continuing so to do, he shall receive the end of his faith in the salvation of his soul. It puts us in a present state of freedom from condemnation, by procuring the pardon of all our past sins; for he that thus believeth, shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life, John 5.24.3.18. It doth at present save us from the wrath of God, he being only angry with us on the account of sin unpardoned; for being justified, saith the Apostle, by faith in his blood, we shall be sa∣ved from wrath by him, Rom. 5.9. Now this is all which very frequently is signified by the words Saved and Salvation: As when it is said of Zacchaeus, This day is salvation come unto this house; and the Lord daily added to the Church  the saved, Acts 2 47. And again, The word of the Cross is  to us the saved, the power of God, 2 Cor. 1.18. See this farther proved in the Notes on Eph. 2.8. Tit. 3.5. 2ly, Salvation may be well ascribed to Faith, not indeed in opposition to, or exclusion of w,
but rather as the cause, and the producer of all Works of Piety and Righteousness, and both the Wisdom and the Excellency of this method for the procuring the great ends of Christian Piety, of purity of Life, and of sincere Obedience to the whole Will of God, will be extreamly evi∣dent from these Consideratians: 1. That this Faith, consigned by Baptism, doth lay the highest Obligations on us to a Life of Holiness and Obedience, under the pain of forfeiting all the Blessings of the New Cove∣nant, or all the Priviledges of Christianity. For (1.) Faith in him as the true Messiah, the Prophet sent from God to declare his Will, and make known his Precepts, and to lay down the terms on which we may expect Salvation from him, must surely oblige us to perform the Will, and to submit unto the terms on which alone Salvation is thus tendred to us, not only that we may not miss of that Salvation, but that we may not be condemned as Despisers of so great Salvation. Again, Faith in him as our Saviour, one who hath by his death purchased deliverance to us from death, and from the wrath to come, must sure oblige us, as well in point of Duty, as of Gratitude, to live to him who died for us, 2 Cor. 5.15. and being bought with such a price to glorifie him with our Souls and Bo∣dies which are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. especially when we consider that this was one great end of these his Sufferings; he having died for all, that they who live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, that he might redeem us from this pre∣sent evil world, Gal. 1.4. and purifie us to himself a people zealous of good works, Eph. 5.25, 26. and that we being dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. And surely they cannot expect the Blessings of his Salutary Passion, who defeat the design, and frustrate the purpose of it. Faith in him as our Lord and King, as it doth presuppose his right to require Service from, and prescribe Laws to us, so must it en∣gage us to the Honour and Service of this Lord; (for why, saith he, call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say? Luke 6.46.) to fear and to obey this King of Saints, as know∣ing he will say to all his disobedient Subjects, Bring these mine enemies, which would not I should reign over them, and slay them be∣fore me, Luke 19.27. Faith, lastly, in him as our Judge and our Rewarder, must cause us herein to exercise our selves always to have Consciences void of offence towards God and Man, Acts 24.16. as we desire to be found blameless at that day, and to be stedfast and abounding in the work of the Lord, which will so plentifully be rewarded, 1 Cor. 15.58. In a word, to what other end can we think an holy God was so concerned that we should firmly be perswaded of, and yield a firm assent unto these things? Can it be only this, that be should fill our heads with Notions, but leave  still at liberty to disobey the Message sent  from Heaven by his only Son? why then said he, This is my beloved Son, hear him? Matth. 17.5. Can he suffer us to slight the terms n which alone Salvation is thus tendred to us? Why then were they at all propounded? can be permit us to be disobedient to this Lord, or Re∣bels to this King of Saints? why then was this Authority conferred upon him? Hath he made him the Judge, and the Rewarder of all Men at the great Day? and will he not reward then all according to their works? But then if we consider farther, this Faith, as it hath Baptism annexed to it, according to those words of Christ, He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; our obligation to O∣bedience by it will be still more evident. For i not our Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost an entire dedication of our selves to the Service of the blessed Trinity, a solemn entrance into Covenant that we will own no other God, will serve no other Lord, will not be lead by the unclean, but by the conduct of the good and holy Spirit? Did not Christ com∣mand his Disciples to teach them whom they baptized, to observe all things which he com∣manded? Matth. 28.20. and must they not be obliged to obey what they were to be taught in his Name? What is it to baptize, but to  make Disciples to the holy Jesus; and hath he not said, Then only are you my Disciples in∣deed when you continue in my word? John 8.31. What is it to be baptized, but to make the stipulation of a good Conscience towards God? 1 Pet. 3.21. and are we not obliged to be true unto this solemn Promise made to God? or can we neglect to do so without mocking hi, and taking his sacred Name in vain? Are we not baptized into the Name of Christ? and are not they who name that Name engaged to de∣part from all iniquity? 2 Tim. 2.19. H not St. Paul informed us, that as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death, Rom. 6.3. and so are by that Baptism obliged to die to sin, v. 6, 11. not to obey it in the lusts thereof, not to yield their Members instruments of sin unto unrighteousness, but to walk in newness of life, v. 12, 13. to live to God, and to present their Members instruments of righteousness to God, v. 4, 10, 13. and to have their fruit unto holiness, that the end may be eternal life, v. 22. And that upon th conformity to Christ's death and resurrection depends our hope that we shall live with him, v. 8. So that 'tis evident to a demonstration, that both our Faith and Baptism do lay  the strictest Obligations to depart from all ∣quity, and yield sincere Obedience to the Law of God and Christ, as we expect the B purchased by him for, or promised to B. As then St. Peter saith on this account,  Baptism now saveth us, 1 Pet. 3.21.
Salvation be on the same account ascribed to our Faith in Christ. 2ly, Faith is the Spring and the Foundation of all the Obedience we afterward perform, and therefore may be well said to save as many as obtain Salvation, because it worketh in them that Obedience by which they are saved, and moves them to perform those Conditions on which their actual Salvation doth depend. Thus of Faith in God, the Apostle teacheth that it must be necessarily laid as the Foundation of all the Service we perform unto him; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek (to please) him, Hebr. 11.6. And thus he shews it was with all the Patriarchs and holy People of God before the Revelation of the Go∣spel; they by that Faith which was the expecta∣tion of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, obtained testimony that they were righteous, Hebr. 11.4. and that they plea∣sed God, v. 5, 8, 18, 19. obeyed his call in the most difficult instances; chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to en∣joy the pleasures of sin for a season; wrought righteousness, and suffered death, not accep∣ting a deliverance, v. 25, 26, 33, 35. And so it is with Faith in Christ, 'tis the foundation of all our Obedience, which therefore is in Scripture stiled the obedience of Faith, Rom. 1.5.16.26. and of all our good Works, they being all the work of Faith, 2 Thess. 1.11. It is by virtue of this Faith that we are enabled to over∣come the world,1 Joh. 5.5. 1 Pet. 5.9. Eph. 6.16. to resist the De∣vil, and to quench all the fiery darts of Satan. 'Tis faith that works by love to God, and to our Brother, which love we testifie to God by keeping his Com∣mandments, and to our Neighbour by fulfilling the Laws of Justice and Charity. And this is very evident even from the nature of Faith; for can any Man obey the Precepts this Prophet hath delivered in his Fathers name, unless he believes he was that Prophet which was sent by him to reveal his will? and that King by whose Laws we must be governed? Can he submit to the terms of Salvation propounded by him, till he believes he is the Author of Salvation to all that obey him? Can he herein exercise himself to have always a Conscience void of offence towards God and man, but by that Faith which doth assure him, that he will judge all men by these Laws, awarding glory and immortality to every man that worketh righteousness, Rom. 2.8. and punishing them with everlasting de∣struction from his presence that obey not his Gospel? 2 Thess. 1.8. And is not then this Faith the true Foundation of all Christian Pie∣ty? Thus doth the just man live by his faith, and doing so believeth to the salvation of his soul. As therefore we are said to be saved by hope, Rom. 8.24. because it is the motive to sted∣fastness in our obedience, so may we be said to be saved by faith upon the same account. And 3ly, We may be well said to be saved by Faith, because where faith is hearty and constant, it will produce sincere Obedience; and Holiness will follow in the Life. And when it doth not follow, this is to be ascribed to the want of Faith. This will be evident if we consider the material Objects of our Faith, the Blessings promised to the obedient, and the Evils threatned to the Disobedient; for it is certain, that the Bles∣sings promised in the Gospel, do far exceed all other Blessings that we can enjoy; and that the Evils threatned there are far more lasting and intolerable than any other Evils we can suffer; and it is no less certain that these Blessings are by our Lord confined to the obedient; for not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter, saith he, into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matth. 7.21. And 'tis as sure that these tremendous Evils are entailed upon the wicked, Christ having solemnly declared he will say to them at the great day, Depart from me, I know ye not, ye workers of iniquity, v. 23. And if we do believe our Saviour was a Prophet sent from God, we must believe those Revelati∣ons he hath made concerning both our future Happiness and Misery, and the Conditions up∣on which alone the one can be obtained, the o∣ther is to be avoided. Now can a Man at the same time believe these are the greatest Bles∣sings which he can enjoy, and yet prefer a les∣ser Good before them? if not, whenever he doth this, he ceases in effect to have this Faith. Can a Man fully be perswaded, that what he is about to do will render him obnoxious to the worst of Evils, and yet be moved to do it to avoid a lesser evil? if not, when ever he doth chuse to do what renders him obnoxious to the worst of evils, he ceaseth to believe they are so. When therefore we neglect to do that which is by our Lord declared absolutely necessary to obtain, and to secure our Eternal Interests, and ven∣ture upon that to which he threatneth ever∣lasting Misery, 'tis certain that we have no lively, full perswasion of these Truths then present to our Minds, and therefore do not actually believe them then. So that although we may have still such an habitual assent to all that this great Prophet hath delivered, as that we do not doubt the truth of what he taught, yet doth not Christ dwell in our hearts by faith, nor have we any living sense, or perma∣nent perswasion of those Truths upon our Souls, but Faith is at the present dead, and so no more deserves the name of Faith, then a dead Man can properly be called a Man. Thus for ex∣ample, when Christ saith to his Disciples, fear∣ing to perish in the storm, how is it that ye have no faith, Mark 4.40. He lays this to their charge, not that they disbelieved his power to save them, for this they testifie, by saying Ma∣ster, save us; but that they did not actually exert this Trust by an entire Commission of themselves to the protection of his Providence.
As therefore when we do what is contrary to our love to God, or to our hope, and our affiance in him, there always is a want of love, and hope, and trust in God; so when we do what is op∣posite to the great Objects of our Faith, there must be in us a like want of Faith, and so when this is customarily done, there must be a defect as to the habit, or the grace of faith. 2ly, This will be still more evident, if we consider all the glorious things which are ascri∣bed in Scripture to this Faith, and do compare them with other passages of the same Scripture: For instance, Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, 1 John 5.1. saith the Apostle John. But then he adds in the same Chapter, Whosoever is born of God over∣cometh the world, v. 5. by virtue of this faith. And again, We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and the wicked one toucheth him not, v. 18. ch. 3. 9. Whence it must follow, that he believeth not in the Apo∣stle's sense, that Jesus is the Christ, who over∣cometh not by virtue of that Faith, the Temp∣tations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Whosoever confesseth, saith the same Apostle, that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God, 1 John 4.15. But then he also saith, He that abideth in him, ought also to walk as he walked, 1 John 2.6. that we do hereby know that we are in him, by keeping of his word, v. 5. that whosoever abideth in him sinneth not; and he that sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him; that if we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie. So that if this Faith doth not preserve us from sin, and engage us  walk in the light, and as he walked, 'tis n that Faith in the Son of God the Apostle speaks of. We are not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus, saith St. Paul to the Galatians, Gal. 5.6.6.15. But then it is, saith he, that Faith which works by love, and renders us new Creatures. The same be saith in the Epistle to the Romans, declaring that his Gospel was the power of God through Faith unto salvation, Rom. 1.16. v. 5. But the 'tis the obedience of Faith in the same Chapter, Obedience in word and deed, Chap. 15.18. O∣beying from the heart the Form of Doctrine delivered to them, Chap. 6.16. which makes this Faith become the power of God to salvation. Whence it is evident that he esteemed that  true Faith which was productive of Obedience; and so doth virtually, although not formally, in∣clude Obedience, as the effect is virtually con∣tained in the cause. So that the difference be∣twixt Men of Judgment, as to saving Faith, is more in words than sense, they all designing the same thing, that we cannot be saved by it Faith which doth not produce in us a sincere O∣bedience to the Laws of Christ.
A Paraphrase and Comment ON THE Epistle to the GALATHIANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. I) Paul (who am) an Apostle not of man, neither by man, (for I re∣ceived not my Call, or my Commis∣sion to that Office from Man, nor was I chosen to it by Man, as Matthias was) but by Jesus Christ (appearing to me in person for that end, that he might send me to the Gentiles, Acts 22.21.26.16, 17. and God the Father (who chose me that I should know his will, and see that just one, and be his witness to all men, of what I had seen and heard, Acts 22.14, 15. and re∣vealed his Son to me, v. 13. even that God) who raised him from the dead. , not of man, neither by man.] It is no objection against the truth of these words, that the Holy Ghost saying by the Prophets at Antioch, Separate me Barnabas and Saul to the work of the Mi∣nistry to which I have called them, they fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, and sent them away; Acts 13.2, 3. for that this was not a Mission to the Apostolical Office ap∣pears, because St. Paul, at least nine years be∣fore, was immediately called to it by God, and sent to exercise it by Jesus Christ; and because Barnabas is here equally separated to this Office, and sent with him, who yet was never an Apostle properly so called. This se∣paration and mission therefore of them, was only by way of Prayer and Benediction of them in their Ministry, or by way of special Commission to preach in the Synagogues of the Jews, v. 5. And this Mission they presently compleated, and then returned to Antioch, de∣claring to them what they had done in pursu∣ance of it, Acts 14.26, 27. Ver. 2. And all the Brethren which are with me, (and own the Doctrine which I preach, send greeting) unto the Churches of Gala∣tia. , and all the Bre∣thren that are with me.] It is the Conjecture of the Reverend Dr. Hammond, that the word Brethren here denotes those that accompanied St. Paul in his travels, and assisted him in preach∣ing the Gospel, in which sense Sosthenes is called a Brother, 1 Cor. 1.1. as also Apollo, 1 Cor. 16.12. Timothy, 2 Cor. 1.1. Titus, Chap. 2.12. Tychicus, Eph. 6.23. Epaphrodi∣tus, Philip. 2.25. Onesimus, Coloss. 4.9. Syl∣vanus, 1 Pet. 5.12. St. Paul, 2 Pet. 3, 15. And in this sense the word Brethren seems to be distinguished from that of Saints, Philip. 4.21. and mention is made of the Brother whose praise is in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 8.18. of Titus, Paul's fellow-worker, and of the Brethren who are the Apostles of the Church, v. 25. and of the Brethren, who for his Names sake, went forth to preach the Gospel, taking nothing of the Gentiles, 3 John 3-7. Or else it may be said that the Apostle writes according to the form of Epistles used in the beginning of Christianity, when Bishops sent to other Chur∣ches, not in their own names only, but in the name of the whole Church where they resided. So Clemens begins his Epistle to the Church of Corinth thus,. The Church of God in Rome to the Church of God at Corinth; and so this
Epistle, being writ from Rome, shews the con∣sent of that Church with him in his Do∣ctrine. Ver. 3. (Wishing that) Grace (may be) to you, and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 4. Who gave himself (an expiatory Sa∣crifice) for our sins, that he might deliver us from (the wrath and condemnation of) this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father, (Gr. of our God and Father.) , according to the will of God.] These words may refer to our delive∣rance from the evil manners of this World, this being the will of God even our sanctifica∣tion, 1 Thess. 4.3, and the great end of our Lord's salutary Passion, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, and bore our sins in his own bo∣dy on the Tree, that we being dead to sin, might live to righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. 2 Cor. 5.15. Eph. 5.25, 26. Whence it is evident that Christ's inherent Righteousness is not imputed to us; for sure he died not to this end, that we might do our selves what he already had done for us, and so what he had made it need∣less for us to do. Or else these words may be connected thus, Christ gave himself for us ac∣cording to the will of God, viz. that he should die for our sins; and then the Apostle here as∣serts, in opposition to the Judaizing Christians, that our Justification by Faith in Christ's death is according to the will of God, and that he died in pursuance of his decree to establish that New Covenant in his Blood by Faith, by which we are translated from that wrath, and state of alienation from God in which the World lyes, and have obtained peace with God, and are become his Church and Peo∣ple. Ver. 5. To whom be glory for ever and e∣ver. Amen. Ver. 6. I marvel that ye are so soon remo∣ved from him that called you to the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. , from him that called you.] i. e. from God: For the Apostle scarce ever ascribes this work to himself, but con∣stantly to God the Father. See Rom. 9.24. 1 Cor. 7.15. Gal. 1.15. 1 Thess. 2.12.4.7.5.24. 2 Thess. 2.14. 2 Tim. 1.9. , to the grace of Christ.] Or rather by, or through the grace of Christ of∣fered you in the Gospel. For though  be often put for , yet , where it is else∣where used, doth either signifie in the grace, or through grace, as Rom. 5.15. 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 Thess. 2.16. 2 Tim. 2.1. nor do I find where it is ever used in the Epistles for . Ver. 7. Which (whatsoever some may sug∣gest, who preach another thing under the spa∣cious title of the Gospel,) is not (indeed) ano¦ther (Gospel, nor would be so esteemed by ay of you) but (that) there be some who trouble you (with false stories) and would pervert the Gospel of Christ, (by mixing with it the neces∣sary observance of the Law of Moses.) Ver. 8. But (whatsoever they suggest to you of another Gospel aught by St. Peter, James, and John) though we Apostles,) or (even) a Angel from heaven (should) preach any other Gospel to you than that which we (Paul and Barnabas) have preached to you, let him be accursed. Ver. 9. (And that ye may not think this pro∣ceeds rashly from me, but may the more regard it,) As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other Gospel to you than that ye have received (from us) let him be accursed. ] Hence it follows, (1.) That the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, as it stands opposed to the contrary Doctrine of the necessity of the observance of the Mosaical Law to Justification, is a fundamental Doctrine, to which he that opposeth himself, maintain∣ing the necessity of observing the Law of Mo∣ses to that end, deserveth an Anathema, as introducing another Gospel. Whence Commen∣tators here observe, that the Apostle calls not the Galatians Saints, because they had beg to decline from the Gospel, by seeking th to be justified by the Law; but speaks of them as those who had Christ yet to be formed i them, and who were to be born again, Chap. 4.19. 2ly, Hence it appears that a man may  fundamentally, not only by rejecting a fun∣damental Article of Faith, but also by main¦taining, and teaching in the Name of Christ, things unnecessary to be necessary, so as to say Salvation cannot be obtained without them And herein consists the great guilt of the Church of Rome, and particularly of the Trent Council, that they have added many necessary Articles to the true Christian Creed, and have defined them to be so necessary to be believed by all Christians, that no Salva∣tion can be obtained without the belief of them; and so they seem plainly to have fallen under the Anathema of St. Paul, more dreadful than all the vain Anathemas they have thundred out against the Protestants. Mr. Walker and Grotius note, that the A∣postle speaks here only of Doctrines contrary to his Gospel. But this Exposition is (1.) con∣trary to the very words of the Apostle, who saith not against, but , besides what I have delivered. And it is contrary to the Ex∣position of the Fathers,. St Chrysostom, O∣menius,
Theophylact among the Greeks, andRestat ergo, ut non ex divinis Scripturis, sed ex vobis ista dicatis. Proinde dignissimè respendebitur anathema siis.  enim Ecclesiae Apostolico labore fundatae, cum quantâ curâ sibi praedictum sit; si quis vobis Evangelizaverit praeterquam q ∣pistis Anathema sit. De unitate Eccl contr. Epist. Petil. To. 7. c. 15. p. 542. Sive de Christo, sive de eus Eccleiâ, ve de quacunque aliâ re quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram, si Angelus de Coelo nobis Evangelizaverit praeterquam quod in Scriptus Legalibus & Evangelicis accepistis Anathema sit. L. 3. contr. Lit. Petil. c. 6. p. 167. St. Austin among the Latins, whose Note s this, He saith not if they preach things con∣trary, but if they preach things never so little different from the Gospel which I have preach∣ed to you. 'Tis very true, as Esthius suggests, that the Apostle doth not pretend to propound an Ana∣ema against any Man who shall suggest any thing farther in confirmation of Christ's Go∣spel, as St. John after did, or give any fur∣ther Rules pursuant to the Precepts of it, by the suggestion of that Spirit by which the Go∣spel was endited, for then he would have pronounced an Anathema upon all that writ after him, and even upon himself who writ many Epistles after this; but yet he pronoun∣ceth an Anathema upon all those who preach a Gospel which differed from the Gospel which they preached, to whom alone it was by Christ committed to propound the terms of Salvation, and this is that of which we do ac∣cuse the Church of Rome, that they propound terms of Salvation no where delivered by Christ or his Apostles. 2ly, This Exposition of Mr. Walker will not free them from the Anathema of the Apostle; for by this very thing, that they add any thing to the Gospel of Christ as necessary to be be∣lieved, or done unto salvation, they do no less oppose the Doctrine of the Apostle, than they did who joyned the observation of the Law of Moses, as necessary to the Faith of Christ; for therefore did they oppose his Do∣ctrine, because they teaching this was needful to salvation, did thereby teach that what the Apostle had taught as sufficient to Salvation, was not so without their additions, which is the very thing the Papists do by their New Articles and Traditionary Doctrines; for if they be indeed necessary to Salvation, what is delivered in the Gospel, in which confessedly some of their Doctrines are not, cannot be sufficient to salvation. Moreover, it is ex∣treamly evident, that Prayer in an unknown tongue is plainly contrary to the Apostles Do∣ctrine, 1 Cor. 14. and that Communion in one kind is opposite both to Christ's Institution, and to St. Paul's Discourse upon the Sacra∣ment, 1 Cor. 11. Ver. 10. (But this you cannot reasonably su∣spect concerning me.] For do I now (in the execution of my Apostleship) perswade (obey, or seek to appease) men, or God. Or do I seek to please men? (no sure,) for if I yet pleased men (if I made that my business) I should not be the servant of Christ (in that work of the Gospel which creates me so much hazard from them.) , To perswade.] The Criticks here observe, that the word  signifies to paci∣fie, and appease any one incensed against us. So when David's Souldiers hunted and ha∣rassed by Saul, were earnest, when they found Saul in the Cave, that they might have liber∣ty to slay him, , David pacified his men with words, 1 Sam. 24.7. So to induce the Soldiers to own that Christ was stolen away by his Disciples from the Sepulchre whilst they slept, the Chief Priests and Elders promise, that if this come to the Governours ear, , we will ap∣pease him, Matth. 28.14. And Mnlas promised Ptolemy to give him much money, , if he would pacifie the King towards him, 2 Macc. 4.5. Or 2ly, the word may signifie to obey, for so the word is used by St. Paul in this Epistle, who hath be∣witched you, , that you should not obey the truth? Chap. 3.1. ye did run well, who hindred you, , that you should not obey the truth? Chap. 5.7. and elsewhere. So , to thse that obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, Rom. 2.8. , obey your Governours, Hebr. 13.17. See also Acts 5.36, 37. James 3.3. And so is the word often used by Hea∣then Authours when they treat of Moral Sub∣jects: So Plato saith,. Tim. locr. p. 1096. C. Philosophy compels the irrational Affections to obey Reason; and introducethApol. p. 23. B. Socrates saying, , I will obey God rather than you.De audit. p. 37. Plutarch saith it is the same thing , to follw God, and obey Reason. SoArrian. l. 3. c. 24. p. 343. l. 4. c. 3, 12. Arrian; This is to be placed among thy highest pleasures, , that thou obeyest God, I am free, and the friend of God, , that I might willingly obey him. I know to whom I ought to be subject, , and to obey, God, and those that are next to him. So then the import of these words is this, Do I in preaching the Gospel act in obe∣dience to Men, who every where persecute me, and oppose me for it, or in obedience to that God who called me to be an Apostle of the Gen∣tiles? v. 15, 16. And this sense is confirmed by the Verse following. Mr. Cl. here is positive that  signifies only to perswade; whereas theConstantine. Lexico∣graphers say expresly, tria significat parc, mo∣rem
gero, suadeo, persuadeo. And he fancies an Ellipsis of , not to be dis∣pleased with me; making the sense to run thus, For do I now perswade Men, or God, not to be displeased with me. But he is still out; for who can see either any connection of these with the former words, or any force in the Apostles reason, according to this strained sense, If any man, saith he, preach any other Gospel then that which ye have received from us, let him be anathema, v. 9. for do I in preaching this Gospel obey Men, or God, saith our Inter∣pretation, making both the connection clear, and the reason strong, seeing God could not command him to preach one Gospel, and o∣thers another, let him be anathema, saith Mr. Cl. for do I now perswade God not to be dis∣pleased with me; where let him that can, shew either reason, or connection. 2ly, How could St. Paul say, he did not perswade Men not to be displeased with him, when in this Epistle he so often doth it, saying, Brethren, I be∣seech you be as I am, Chap. 4.12. am I there∣fore become your enemy because I tell you the truth, v. 16. From henceforth let no man trou∣ble me, Chap. 6.17. See Chap. 5.11. And 3ly, why should he tell the Galathians, He perswaded God not to be displeased with him, when he was so honestly discharging his Of∣fice, that he knew nothing of insincerity by himself in the execution of it, 1 Cor. 4.4. and surely had no mind to give them any reason to suspect he had displeased him. , I should not be the Servant of Christ.] That is, say the Greek Commentators, I should not have left Judaism to embrace Christianity, i. e. I should not have quitted Honour, Friends, and Kindred for Dangers, Persecutions and Dishonours, which I continually suffer for the Cause of Christ. And this Exposition is confirmed from those words, If I preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer Persecution, since then is the offence of the Cross ceased? Chap. 5.11. and from his ac∣count that others preached up Circumcision only, lest they should suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ, Chap. 6.12. Ver. 11. But (howsoever others may lessen my Gospel) I certifie you Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, (i. e. by me to you, and others) was not after Man. Ver. 12. For I neither received it of men (as the Jews do their Traditions from their Fathers) neither was I taught it, but by the (immediate) revelation of Jesus Christ. , I received it not by man.] In the first Verse he saith, He was not an A∣postle by Man, but by Jesus Christ. Here, that he was not taught his Gospel by Man, but by Jesus Christ; whence Chrysostom, Theo∣doret, St. Jerom, Oecumenius, Theophylact con∣clude that our Lord was not only Man, but God; and so Novatian (cap. 13.) argued be∣fore the Nicene Council, if St. Paul was not constituted an Apostle of, or by Man, and yet was constituted such by Jesus Christ, Mer Christus est Deus, Christ must be God; for though the Scriptures sometimes calleth M¦gistrates and Judges God, as Crellius here not, it never saith that what was done by them, was not done by man. Crellius adds further, that our Lord being the only begotten Son of God, and having now obtained his Celestial King∣dom, was exempted from the common rank of Men; from the state of mortal Men, saith Grotius. And so the Apostle might speak of him not as a Man, as Sampson saith of him∣self, If they bind me with wreaths, I shall be as a Man, Judges 16.7, 11, 17. But there it is not said, I shall be as a man, but  as one man, i. e. as weak as one Man only, or having no more strength than another Man. Crellius therefore hath not said any thing ap∣posite in answer to this Argument. Nor doth the Apostle here oppose Man to Man, or Mor∣tal Man to those blessed Spirits who are Im∣mortal, but only to Jesus Christ, and God the Father. , by Revelation.] At what time this Revelation was made to him is un∣certain, but it is probable it must be before he went to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles; for the words following, I consulted not with flesh and blood, but preached at Damascus, seem plainly to imply this Revelation was made to him before he preached there, or wt to Jerusalem. Ver. 13. (And of this you may be further sa∣tisfied from my former conversation, and my de∣portment since I began to preach the Faith of Christ.) For (doubtless) ye have heard of my Conversation in times past in the Jews Reli∣gion (which was such) that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it, Acts 8.3.9.1, 13, 14.22.4.26.10, 11. Ver. 14. And profited in the Jews Religion above many my equals in mine own Nation, (or above many Jews of the same Age with me) being more exceeding zealous (then they were) of the Traditions of my Fathers. , of the Traditions of my Fathers.] He being a Pharisee, and speak∣ing of the Traditions not of the Law, but of the Fathers, seems to mean the Oral Traditi∣ons, that Sect so highly magnified even above the Law, and the Prophets. See note on Mark 7.3. Acts 28.17. Now there is rea∣son to believe, that a Man so exceeding zea∣lous for the Religion of the Jews, and so full of hatred to that of Christians, would not have renounced the Religion he had so great a Re∣verance for, to embrace that he was so incen∣sed against, without some more than Humane motive. Ver. 15. (Thus I say was my Conversation in times past.) But when it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers womb, (as he had formerly done Jeremiah to be a Prophet of
the Nations, Chap. 1.5.) and (after) called me by his grace (to preach the Gospel, Acts 22.14.) Ver. 16. To reveal his Son in (to) me, that I might preach him among the Heathen, im∣mediately I consulted not with flesh and blood (i. e. with any Man, so as to receive any Mis∣sion from them to that work, or any Instructions how to perform it.) , to me] So , He that speaketh to me shall be a Barbarian, 1 Cor. 14.11. See Mark 1.15. Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 9.15. 2 Cor. 4.3.8.1. , with flesh and blood.] This Phrase in Scripture, and among Jewish Wri∣ters, is only a periphrasis for Man, as Matth. 16.17. 1 Cor. 15.20. Eph. 6.12. Hebr. 2.14. and so all other Interpretations of it must be alien from the scope of the Apostle. Ver. 17. Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them that were Apostles before me (as if I had wanted either authority or instruction, I should have done,) but I went from Damascus (the place of my conversion) to Arabia, and re∣turned again to Damascus (preaching the Go∣spel there.) , into Arabia.] Of this Journey into Arabia, St. Luke, not being with him, saith nothing. Ver. 18. Then after three years (of my con∣version) I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. Ver. 19. But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords Brother, (and therefore could not learn my Gospel from them.) , other of the Apostles.] Hence it appears 1. That only Peter and James were then at Jerusalem, for Barnabas brought him to the A∣postles that were there. 2ly, That James the Lords Brother was an Apostle in the strict and proper sense of the word, since Peter who is mentioned with him, was doubtless so, and Barnabas who brought him to Peter and James, is said to bring him to the Apostles, Acts 9.27. and Peter, James and John, who are here called the Men of Re∣putation, and Pillars of the Church, Chap. 2.6, 9. seem plainly to be the same Persons, who in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, are called , the chief of the Apostles. And, &c. Hom. 13. in Matth. Ed. Huet. p. 223. C. & l. 1. contr. Celsum, p. 35. Origen saith expresly of James the Just, This is that James whom Paul in his Epi∣stle to the Galathians saith he saw, citing those very words for the proof of it. See this con∣firmed in the Preface to the Epistle of St. James. Note 3ly, That the Apostle's Argument is to this effect, Having therefore preached the Gospel so long before I saw them, and staying so lit∣tle while with them, and going then only to see, not to learn of them, it cannot be con∣ceived I should receive my Instructions how to preach the Gospel from them. Ver. 20. Now (of the truth of) the things which I write to you (you may rest assured, for) behold, before God I lie not. , behold before God.] Hence it is evident that the Apostle, when it was necessary to confirm the truth of the Gospel, or of his Commission to, or his Sincerity in preaching it, i. e. when the benefit of Souls required him thus to attest to Men, what o∣therwise they could not be assured of, refused not to swear, and so esteemed not our Saviour's prohibition of an Oath to be absolute. See Rom. 1.2.9.1. 2 Cor. 1.23.11.31. 1 Thess. 2.5. See the Note on 2 Cor. 1.23. Ver. 21. Afterwards I came into the Regi∣ons of Syria, (i. e. to Caesarea, Acts 22.17, 18.) and (to Troas, Acts 9.30.22.3. in) Ci∣licia. Ver. 22. And was (all the while) unknown by face to the Churches of Judea which were in Christ. Ver. 23. But they had heard only that he which persecuted us (Christians) in times past, now preacheth the Faith which once he de∣stroyed. Ver. 24. And they glorified God (for the conversion he had wrought) in me. This Testimony of the Jewish Christians was a Confirmation of his Doctrine; for if they could have found any just Exceptions a∣gainst it, they would not have glorified God for his preaching it.
CHAP. II. Verse 1. THen fourteen years after (my first journey thither,) I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with me (though uncircumcised, to shew the li∣berty I took of conversing with persons not cir∣cumcised.) , fourteen years after.] I cannot assent to those Criticks, who for  fourteen, would read  four years after; for not only all the Manuscript Copies and Versions read fourteen, but Irenaeus l. 3. c. 13. doth confirm this reading in these words, Then after fourteen years I went up to Jerusalem, &c. if any Man carefully examine by the Acts of the Apostles, the time mentioned of his as∣cent to Jerusalem for the question aforesaid, he will find the years agreeing with those mention∣ed by St. Paul. Now these years must be rec∣koned from the time of his Conversion, men∣tioned here Chap. 1.18. which hapned in the Year of our Lord 35. and then between that and the Council of Jerusalem assembled Anno Christi 49. will be fourteen intervening years; for whereas some reckon these fourteen years from the third year of his Conversion, to the Council met at Jerusalem, and so make that Council meet A.D. 52. because it is said here  afterwards, and , I went up again, it may be answered, that the word  afterwards, doth not connect these words with the three years mentioned Chap. 1.18. as is e∣vident, because there follows another  afterwards, v. 21. nor doth , I went up again, relate to his first Journey to Jerusa∣lem mentioned Chap. 1.18. for he had been twice at Jerusalem; three years after his Con∣version to see Peter, and nine years after that to carry Alms to the Brethren at Jerusalem, Acts 11.30. though, seeing then none of the Apostles, he makes no mention of that Jour∣ney here, as being nothing to his purpose. See Dr. Pearson Annal. Paulin. p. 8, 9. So that whereas he had said Chap. 1.18. that three years after my Conversion I went up to Jeru∣salem to see Peter; he saith here, and fourteen years after it, I went up again. Now that the Apostle here speaks of the Journey to Je∣rusalem mentioned Acts 15. will appear 1. From the agreement of what he here re∣lates with what then hapned, as that he com∣municated to them the Gospel which he preached among the Gentiles, v. 2. as he then did Acts 15.4. That Circumcision was not then judg∣ed necessary to the Gentiles, v. 3. as we find Acts 15.24. That when they saw the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed to him, they gave to him and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, v. 9. as then they did, sending their very Decree with one consent to the Gentiles, by the hands of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15.22, 25. who were received by the whole Church, v. 4. and stiled beloved, v. 25. 2ly, It seems not likely that the Apostle, writing this Epistle about nine years after the Decree of the Council, should make no men∣tion of a thing so advantagious to the Cause he is pleading here, and so proper to confute the pretences of the Adversaries he disputes a∣gainst. And 3ly, James, Peter, and John being all the Apostles that were present at the Council then held at Jerusalem, the mention of their con∣sent to his Doctrine and Practise, was all that was necessary to his purpose to be mentioned concerning that Council. It is no Objection against this Opinion, that we find no mention Acts 15. of Titus's being with him, for he is not mentioned in the whole Book of the Acts, during which inter∣val this Journey must have hapned. Ver. 2. And I went up by revelation, and communicated to them (at Jerusalem) the Gospel which I preach (every where) among the Gentiles, but (this I did) privately to them which were of reputation, (or the chief Men there, not that I distrusted my Doctrine,  needed their Instructions, but) lest by any means (or false suggestions of the Judaizers that my Doctrine was contrary to what they who were call'd before me preached, and such as they would not own) I should run (hereafter,) or had run (hitherto) in vain. , I went up by Revela∣tion.] Made to the Apostle, saith Dr. Ham∣mond, to comply with this determination of the Church of Antioch, made to the Prophets of the Church of Antioch to send them, saith Dr. Lightfoot, which I do not gainsay. But the Apostle doth not say he went up  by revelation, but , accord∣ing to revelation. Now he had said before he received not his Doctrine or Gospel by Men, or of Men, but by the Revelation of Christ Je∣sus; and here he may be supposed to add, that in his Journey he acted suitably to the Revelation which constituted him the Apostle of the Gentiles, telling the Church of Jerusa∣lem what things he had done among the Gen∣tiles in pursuance of it, not enquiring what they did, but declaring what God did by him; not permitting Titus a Greek to be circumci∣sed; not giving place for an hour to the  Brethren, &c. , privately to them of re∣putation.] Not that his Doctrine might be confirmed by the concurrence of St. Peter, or others with him in it, as Esthius from St Je∣rom, and St. Austin here suggects; for se that Doctrine which he received by immedi∣ate Revelation from Jesus Christ, and God the
Father, needed no farther confirmation from the Authority of Man, but only to obviate the Cavils of those who laboured to hinder the effect of his Gospel, by suggesting that it was contrary to, or disowned by those Apo∣stles who were called before him. Ver. 3. But (even then was nothing done by me which shewed any change in my Doctrine or Practise, or any opposition made by them to it, for (neither Titus who was (then) with me, being a Greek, was (upon that account) com∣pelled to be circumcised, (as they would have contended he should, had they thought Circumci∣sion necessary to the Gentiles.) Ver. 4. And that (which concerns the bring∣ing, and retaining Titus with me uncircum∣cised was done) because of false Brethren (who came down to Antioch, Acts 15.1.) unawares brought in (Gr. introduced into the Assembly, Acts 15.5. or insinuating themselves into the Church of Antioch, v. 1.) who came in pri∣vily to spy out (Gr. to ensnare us in) our liberty (from the observance of the Jewish Law) which we have in (and through) Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage (to it, they pleading for the necessity of circum∣cising the Gentiles, and commanding them to keep the Law, Acts 15.1.) , because of false Brethren.] These false Brethren, saith, &c. Haer. 28. § 4. p. 112. Epiphanius, were Cerinthus, and those of his party. Ver. 5. To whom we gave place by subje∣ction, no not for an hour (by submission to their demands, but continued firm to our resolution, not to subject the Gentiles to this yoke of bon∣dage,) that the truth of the Gospel (of Christ, which frees the Gentiles from the obligation of the Law,) might continue with (or among) you. Ver. 6. But of those who seemed to be somewhat, whatsoever they were (or but whatsoever they were who seemed to be some∣what) it maketh no matter to me, (their seem∣ing, or their real greatness affects not my Do∣ctrine,) God accepteth no mans person; for they who seemed to be somewhat in confe∣rence added nothing to me, (or to my Doctrine, nor corrected any thing in it, and so neither am I concerned for their greatness, nor doth God respect them the more upon that account.) Ver. 7. (They added, I say, nothing to my Doctrine,) But contrariwise (they approved of it, for) when they saw the Gospel of the Un∣circumcision was committed to me, (and I was authorised to preach to the Gentiles) as the Go∣spel of the Circumcision was to Peter, (he be∣ing appointed to preach to the Jews.) Ver. 8. (As evidently it was.) For he who wrought effectually in (with) Peter towards the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same was mighty in me (Gr. wrought also with me) towards the Gentiles, (Rom. 15.19.) Ver. 9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars (of the Church,) per∣ceived the grace (of God) that was given to me (for the Apostolick Office,) they gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, (con∣cluding) that we should (still) go (on to preach) to the Heathen, and they (should still continue preaching) to the Circumcision. Note. The beginning of this Verse from the Greek runs thus, And James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars of the Church, knowing the grace, &c. Ver. 10. Only they would that we should remember the poor (Christians in Judea,) the same which (Gr. which same thing) I also was forward to do. Note, That from these four Verses the Su∣premacy of Peter over the rest of the Apostles, and the whole Church, may be by many Argu∣ments refuted. For 1. James is here mentioned first among the Apostles of the Circumcision, according to the common Doctrine of the Ancients, who stile himHesych. apud Phot. Cod. 275. p. 1525. See Cotel. Not. in Barnab. p. 6. the first Bishop, Archbishop, Prince, and Bishop of Bishops, , The Chieftain of the Nero Jerusalem, the Leader of the Priests, the Prince of the Apostles, and the top of the Heads. And this agrees with the Ecclesiastical Tradition mentioned byEccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 1. l. 3. c. 11. l. 4. c. 20. & 32. Eusebius, That the Brethren and Kinsmen of our Lord, whilst they lived, were preferred before other Apostles and Bi∣shops, and that therefore Peter and John con∣tended not with James the Lord's Brother, but chose him Bishop of Jerusalem, and after his death judged Symeon his Cosin German worthy of that See, , as being of the Kindred of our Lord. 2ly, He puts no difference betwixt these Pillars, or chief of the Apostles, which no more agrees with the supposed Supremacy of Peter, then it would with the Pope's Supremacy to be reckoned among, or after some of the Car∣dinals, which as it is never done by them who own the Pope's Supremacy, so neither would this have been done by St. Paul, had he own∣ed the Supremacy of Peter. 3ly, He says the Gospel of the Uncircumci∣sion was committed to him, as was that of the Circumcision to Peter; by which words. Chrysost. Oecumer. Theopylact. he shews himself equal to Peter, say the Scho∣liasts.
By these words saith Hilary the Deacon, Plena Authoritas Petri in praedicatione Juda∣ismi data dignoscitur, & Pauli perfecta Authori∣tas in praedicatione Gentilium invenitur. Lastly, It makes no matter to me, saith he, what they were, which sure could not fitly be said of him whom Christ had constituted to be his Head and Judge. Ver. 11. But when Peter was come to Anti∣och, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. , I withstood him, &c.]Hilar. in locum. Quis ergo auderet Petro, primo Apostolo—resistere, nisi alius talis qui fiduciâ suae electionis sciens se non esse imparem, constanter improbaret, quod ille sine consilio fecerat. Ver. 12. For before that certain Brethren (of the Jews) came from James, he did (free∣ly) eat with the Gentiles, but when they were come he withdrew, and separated him∣self (from them) fearing (to exasperate, or scandalize) them which were of the Circum∣cision. Ver. 13. And the other Jews dissembled like∣wise with him, insomuch that (even) Barna∣bas also was carried away with their dissimu∣lation. Ver. 14. But when I saw that (in this mat∣ter) they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, I said to Peter be∣fore them all, If thou being a Jew, (one of that Nation to which alone the Law of Moses was given,) livest after the manner of the Gentiles, (conversing freely with them, and eating of their meats, as, since the vision which thou sawest, thou hast done,) and not as do the Jews, (abstaining from their meats, and per∣sons as unclean,) why (now) compellest thou the Gentiles (by thy example) to live as do the Jews? , they walked not uprightly.] By this action Peter is charged with sinful fear, v. 13. not walking uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, v. 14. with hypocrisie and dissimulation against his own knowledge and practice elsewhere, v. 13. with building again what he had pull'd down, v. 18. and with compelling the Gentiles to live as do the Jews, v. 14. Where observe, that he is said to compel in Scripture, not only who doth violently force, but, who being of Au∣thority, provokes by his example, as here: As also they who lay a necessity on others to do any thing, either by their deportment, as the Corinthians who compell'd St. Paul to glo∣ry, 2 Cor. 12.11. or by their Doctrine, as did the Judaizers compelling the Gentiles to be cir∣cumcised, Gal. 6.12. And in this sense our Sa∣viour says to his Disciples, compel them to come in, Luke 14.23. Ver. 15. We who are Jews (by birth, or) nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, (as idolatrous Heathens.) , sinners of the Gentiles.] This word in the Scripture phrase signifies a great and habitual sinner; and because the Gentiles were by the Jewish Nation still esteemed such, and generally were so, therefore the word  used to denote the Gentiles that knew not God. So what is , the Heathens, in many Cop, Matth. 5.46, 47. is , sinners, Luke .32, 33, 34. And to be delivered , into the hands of sinners, Matth. 26.45. Mark 14.41. is to be delivered , to the Gentiles, Matth. 20.19. Ma 10.33. Luke 18.32. Ver. 16. Knowing that a man is not justi∣fied by the works of the Law, but (only) by the faith of Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and (thereby have testified  own conviction that we could) not (be justified) by the works of the Law, (as indeed we can∣not be) for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. Ver. 17. But if while we (thus) seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves be found sinners, (as we must be, if we be still obliged to observe that Law we have renounced as un∣able to justifie us,) is therefore Christ (who taught us thus to renounce the Law, and to seek justification by faith in him) the Minister of sin? God forbid (that we should charge th on him.) Ver. 18. And yet we by asserting the neces∣sity that the Gentiles should observe the Law, and so much more the Jews, do in effect say that Christ hath taught us to be sinners,) for if I (thus) build again the things that I de∣stroyed, (urging the necessity of observing th Law to justification, which I declared unable to justifie, and therefore renounced for faith as Christ,) I make my self a transgressor (y not observing it to that end.) Note. This Exposition of these two Verses which I have taken from Hilary, and all the Greek Scholiasts, seems much better than that of late Commentators, who make the seven∣teenth Verse to be an Objection against St. Paul's Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and the eighteenth an answer to it; for which I see no ground in the Apostle's words. Ver. 19. (But whatsoever others may think fit to do, far be it from me to imitate them) for I through the Law (teaching me that a condemns all Men to death, and bearing  to the justification which is of God by faith Rom. 3.21.) am (become) dead to (the obser¦vance of) the Law, that I might (for the future) live to God, (Rom. 7.4.) Ver. 20. I am crucified with Christ, (and  dead to the Law, Rom. 6.4.) nevertheless I
live, yet not I (as formerly a Jew, and an ob∣server of the Law,) but Christ liveth in me (and I am acted by his Spirit; Rom. 7.6.) and the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Ver. 21. I do not frustrate the Grace of God (as I should do, did I seek for righteousness by the Law,) for if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, (there being then no necessity that he should dye to purchase justification for us, and no sufficient virtue in his death to procure it.) CHAP. III. Verse 1. O Foolish Galatians, who hath be∣witched you (or envied your happiness, and so endeavoured) that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you. , O foolish, &c.] The Apostle by calling the Galatians foolish, doth not contra∣dict our Saviour's Precept, because he doth not do it  rashly, and without cause, saith Theo∣phylact, nor out of anger and ill will to them, but from an ardent desire to make them sensi∣ble of their folly. , who hath bewitched you.] , who hath looked upon you with an evil, or envious eye, as envying you the Bles∣sings of the Gospel; so the Greek Scholiasts. The word also signifies oculis praestigia impo∣nere, to put delusions, or as we say, mists be∣fore the eyes, which import suits best with the following words. The Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond observes here, that this Seduction may refer to the Ebionites, if the time would per∣mit, as doubtless it will, for they were only a Branch of the Nazarens, or Cerinthians, who were contemporary with St. Paul; and all his Epistles shew that then there were ma∣ny who maintain'd, and eagerly promoted a∣mong the Gentile Converts, the chief Doctrine of those Sects, viz. That they were obliged to observe the Legal Constitutions. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 27., as being not capable of Salvation only by Faith in Christ, and a Life agreeable to it. And if this once be granted, there will be no need of his Gno∣sticks in this, and perhaps not in any other of St. Paul's Epistles. I cannot sufficiently wonder at Mr. le Clerk's wild Conjecture, That the Ebionites were Sa∣maritans, especially after he had given us the words of Origen, in which he twice saith, they were , those of the Jews that believed in Jesus, l. 2. contr. Cels. p. 56. Had he not read in Irenaeus that they did prophetica curiosius exponere, & judaico charactere vitae uti, & Hierosolymam adorare, quasi domus sit Dei. Lib. 1. c. 26. And could the Samaritans do this? Doth not St. Jerom say of them, Dum volunt Judaei esse & Chri∣stiani, nec Judaei sunt, nec Christiani, Ep. ad August. yea even his own Epiphanius informs us (Haer. 10. Anaceph. p. 240.) that , being Jews, they used the Gospel. .] These words may hear this con∣struction, Before whose eyes Jesus Christ cruci∣fied, hath been evidently set forth to, or among you, viz. in, and from the Scriptures of the Old Testament; for the words  are not in the Alexandrian Manuscripts, and so may be here omitted, or construed with the word , and so they accord both with the Context, and with the way of preaching used by the Apostles, whose custom it was to prove out of the Old Testament, that Jesus was the Christ, and that Christ ought to have suffered for us according to the Scriptures, Acts 17.3. And then the Argument runs thus, If he died to procure the pardon of our sins, and so our justification, why do you render his Death upon the Cross vain, by seeking to be justified by the Law: He having by his Sufferings blt∣ted out the hand-writing which was against us, and nailed these Ordinances to the Cross, why is it that you who are dead with Christ from these Elements of the World, are still subject to Ordinances? Eph. 2.15, 16. Col. 2.14, 20. Ver. 2. This only would I learn of you, received you the Spirit (in his gifts and pow∣erful operations) by (obedience to) the (works of the) Law, or by the hearing of faith? (i. e. the belief of the Gospel; if by the latter, this is a manifest token that your justification, and acceptance with God, was the fruit of your Faith, and not of your Obedience to the Law, since God, by giving you his Spirit whilst uncir∣cumcised, as well as to believing Jews, bre witness to this very thing, that he put no diffe∣rence betwixt you and them on that account, Acts 15.8, 9.) Ver. 3. Are ye (then) so foolish? having thus begun in the Spirit, (as to receive his mi∣raculous gifts by faith, without the works of the Law,) are ye now (seeking to be) made per∣fect in the flesh by circumcision, and observing the carnal Ordinances of the Law?) Ver. 4. Have ye suffered so many things (from the persecuting Jews,) in vain? if it be yet (or even) in vain.
, if it be in vain.] As it must be upon your Hypothesis of the necessity of the observance of the Law, for then is the scandal of the Cross ceased, Chap. 5.11. and all neces∣sity of suffering Persecution is removed; these Deceivers themselves doing, and urging others to these things only, lest they should suffer per∣secution for the Cross of Christ, Chap. 6.12. For the first Persecutions which the Church suffered,Acts 1.1. 1 Thess. 2.14, 15, 16. Acts 13.15.14.19.17.5.13. were either from the Jews in Person, or by the incitation of the Jews, who being every where dispersed, sent chosen men from Jerusalem to all places where the Christians were, to stir up the heathen Governours against them, asDial. cum Tryph. p. 234. Justin Martyr testifies. Note also, that they were chiefly scandalized at the Doctrine of the Cross, 1 Cor. 1.23. not only as it contradicted their pleasant Dream of a Temporal Messiah, under whom they should live gloriously and triumphantly, but as being that which put an end to the Jewish Ceremonies, and taught Men to expect Justi∣fication not by observance of the Law, but by Faith in the Blood of Christ shed for us, up∣on which account they were incensed against all who thus thought, or thus believed it. Note also hence, that all the good Actions we have done, will be done in vain, if we persevere not in well doing to the end. Ver. 5. (To re assume my Argument) He therefore that ministreth the Spirit to you (in his extraordinary gifts) and worketh miracles among you, (doth he it by virtue of your obe∣dience to) the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? (i. e. which taught them to believe in a crucified Saviour.) , he that worketh miracles a∣mong you.] This is the Observation of all the Ancients that comment upon this, and the se∣cond Verse, ThatAd Rudimenta Fidei commendanda, Hilar. in locum. . Theodoret. Chrys. Oecum. Theophylact. to commend the begin∣nings of the Christian Faith, the gift of Tongues, Prophesie, and working of Miracles were vouch∣safed to Believers, as to the Apostles at the be∣ginning, according to our Lord's prediction, Mark 16, 17, 18. And let those that question the Truth of Christianity observe, that this was the chief Argument which carried the Cause in the Council at Jerusalem, that the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost were equally vouch∣safed to the uncircumcised Gentile, and the Jews, Acts 15.8, 9. and that this here is ur∣ged by St. Paul, as a thing undeniable to con∣firm the Galatians, and to confute those who endeavoured to prevail on them to admit of Circumcision, and the observance of other Le∣gal Rites. This Confirmation therefore of the Truth of Christian Faith, was such as  concerned to do it then, were able to gainsay, much less can any now find reason to doubt of it. Ver. 6. (For we must be justified) Even as Abraham (the Father of the faithful was, who) believed in God, and that was accounted to him for righteousness. , believed God.] Hence it is evident that 'tis the Act of Faith, and not the Object of it, which doth justifie, for Abraham believed God,  & imputavit eam fiden, and he imputed that faith to him for righteous∣ness, Gen. 15.6. The blessed God, saith R. Sa∣lom, imputed this to Abraham for righteousness for the faith by which he believed in him. Ver. 7. Know ye therefore that they who are of faith, (and seek justification by it,) the same are the (true) children of (faithful) A∣braham. Ver. 8. And the (Holy Ghost in) Scripture foreseeing that God would justifie the Heathen through faith, preached before (the giving of the Law, and before his Circumcision) the Go∣spel to Abraham, (by) saying, (Gen. 12.3.) in thee shall all Nations be blessed. , in thee.] That is, in thy Seed, v. 15. So Acts 3.25. Ye are the Sons of the Prophet, and of the Covenant which God made with your Fathers, saying, And in tby Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed; that is, i Christ; for so it follows, v. 26. To you first, God having raised up his Child Jesus, sent his to bless you. And this confutes them who, with the Jews, interpret these words as a form of Benediction thus, God make thee like to A∣braham. Ver. 9. So then they which are of faith, (and seek justification by it, Rom. 9.32.) e blessed with faithful Abraham, (and as be was.) Ver. 10. (And not by the works of the Law) For as many as are of the works of the Law, (and seek to be justified by them,) are under the curse (of it, and so uncapable of justifica∣tion by it,) for it is written (there,) Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them, (Deut. 27.26. Now this being perfectly done by none, all that are under the Law are under the Curse of it.) Ver. 11. But that no man is justified by (ob∣servance of) the Law in the sight of God, it is (farther) evident, for (the Prophet Ha∣bakkuk saith, Chap. 2.4.) The just shall live by faith.
, &c. the just shall live by faith.] Thus do the Jews themselves expound these words of Habakkuk, Faith is the cause of bles∣sedness, as it is the cause of eternal life, accord∣ing to these words, the just shall live by his faith, Sepher Ikkarim. l. 1. c. 21. Ver. 12. Now (or whereas) the law is not of faith; but (saith) the man that doth them, (i. e. that perfectly observes what is required by the law,) shall live in (or by) them. Ver. 13. (This being so) Christ hath redeem∣ed us from the curse of the law, (by) being made according to the Sentence of the Law) a curse for us; for (there) it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a Tree, (as you know he did upon the Cross.) , cursed is every one.] When all were obnoxious to the Curse of the Law, saith Theodoret, he undertook that Death, which by the Law was accursed, to free us from the Curse. To restrain the words, He redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, to the Jews only, is in effect to say, Christ only suf∣fered for the Jews, seeing he only suffered by hanging on the Cross, the Tree on which he did expire. The Gentiles were not indeed subject to the particular Maledictions contain∣ed in the Law of Moses, because that Law was not given to them, but only to the Jews. But they were subject to that Death which was the general Punishment threatned to the Violaters of the Law, and was the Curse de∣nounced against Adam, and his Seed. And since it was by virtue of Christ's hanging on the Cross, that the blessing of Abraham came upon the Gentiles, he must have been thus made a Curse for them also, and not for the Jews only. Now here seems to be a plain evidence that our Lord suffered in our stead, by way of surrogation, the Punishment the Law denoun∣ced against us for sin, for we were obnoxious by the Law to a Curse, he, that he might re∣deem us from it, did for our sakes, and in our stead, willingly submit himself unto the Death which by the Sentence of the Law did render any Man accursed, for be bore our sins in his own body on the Tree. Now the Law expresly saith, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a Tree; and Crellius here is forced to own a double commutation, both of the Person suffering, and of the Evils suffered; for where∣as we ought to have suffered, Christ, saith he, suffered for us; and whereas we ought to have suffered a Curse, Christ suffered a Curse for us. But then he adds, that we ought to have suffered a real Curse, Christ only suffer∣ed a Curse improperly so called for us. The Curse threatned by the Law to us was Death eternal, the Curse Christ suffered for us was only temporal Death. But 1. If the Curse threatned to us was only the Curse of the Law, and Christ suffered the Curse of the Law, both which things the A∣postle here affirms, what ground hath Crellius to put these Differences betwixt the Curse Christ suffered, and the Curse threatned by the Law? or does he not hereby seem to make the Apostle's Argument sophistical and unconcluding? 2ly, The sins to which the curse is threatned Deut. 27. were either such to which God else∣where threatned death, or cutting off, or such as he required them to abstain from, that they might live, and not dye. Now seeing the So∣cinians so stiffly do contend that the Life pro∣mised to the Observers of the Law, was only Temporal, why should they say that the Death threatned to the Violation of it is Eternal Death? 'Tis true, all Death must be eternal to them that cannot raise themselves, and have no promise of a Resurrection; upon which two accounts our Saviour's death was not e∣ternal, because he had power to revive him∣self, and had a promise that he should not see corruption; but the death threatned by the Law, in its own nature, being only the sepa∣ration of the Soul and Body, this our Lord did as truly suffer as they could do who should never live again. The distinction therefore which the Case requires, is only that which results necessarily from the difference of the Persons, i. e. we should have suffered the Curse of the Law for our own sins, and consequently should also have been accursed in the sight of God. Christ actually suffered the Legal Curse to obtain pardon for the sins of others, and therefore only was accursed in the Eye of the Law, and in the sight of Men; but being in his own Person wholly innocent, he could not be ac∣cursed in the sight of God. And thus it is, and must be in all vicarial Sufferings, the Person sinning, and he that undertakes to suf∣fer for him, are both guilty in the Eye of the Law, and suffer the Punishment the Law re∣quires, but one of them alone is guilty in the sight of God. Christ therefore was so made a Curse, as he was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.20. not by contracting the Guilt, but by suf∣fering the Punishment of our Sins, by being numbred with transgressors, and condemned with them to the death which the Law stiles accursed. Ver. 14. (And this be suffered) That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gen∣tiles through (faith in) Jesus Christ, that we (Gentiles believing in him) might receive the promise of the Spirit thro' faith, (for we are all the sons of God through saith in Christ Je∣sus; and because we are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, Gal. 4.5. , through faith.] It seems to fol∣low from these, and from 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. that the ministration of the Spirit belonged not to the Law, but to the Gospel, the Law being rather the ministration of death. Hence the
Apostle here opposes to the Curse of the Law, the blessing of Abraham, which, saith he, is the promise of the Spirit through faith. Ver. 15. Brethren, I speak after the man∣ner of men, (using an example taken from the common practise of men, and speaking what is owned in all civilized Nations. See Note on 1 Cor. 9.8.) though it be but a mans cove∣nant (that is made,) yet if it be (legally) con∣firmed, no man disanulleth it, or addeth any thing thereto. Ver. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He (God) saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but (as speaking of one) and to thy seed, which is Christ. , the promises.] Made to Abra∣ham, Gen. 12.3. and repeated Gen. 22.18. and to Isaac Gen. 26.4. , and to thy Seed, which is Christ.] This Interpretation is owned by the Moses Haddarsan. ad Gen. 19.34. Jews, who observe that it is not written here thy Son, but thy Seed, that is the King Messiah. And, as Theodoret observes, the words are capable of no other sense; for by Christ only was the Promise fulfill'd, and in him alone the Gentiles did receive this Blessing. He therefore in whom alone this Promise was verified, must be the Person of whom it was chiefly, if not only intended. And so St. Peter, assisted by the Holy Ghost, interprets these words, saying, You are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God hath made to your Fathers, saying, And in thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. To you first God having rais∣ed up his Child Jesus, sent him to bless you. The Child therefore is the Seed: Away then with the corrupt Gloss of Mr. Cl. that St. Paul here argues according to the Allegorical Inter∣pretation of the Age; but if it be considered in it self, it cannot be thought of any force by those who have other Sentiments, because the Hebrew Zerah is a collective name. Away with his corrupt Gloss, that by Christ is meant Christ's Disciples; for is this sense, In thy Seed, i. e. in Christ's Disciples, shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed? Is not this to ascribe that to Christ's Disciples which belongs to him alone, and to make them the Saviours of the World? And why does he say that nothing was promised to Christ, when the Apostle tells us, that in thee, and in thy Seed signifies Christ, who was to be the Blessing both of Jew and Gentile? though indeed the Promise was to Abraham. The first Subject of it was Christ, which is all the Apostle here intends. Ver. 17. And this I (farther) say, that the Covenant which was confirmed before of God in Christ, (i. e. the Covenant made in Christ the promised Seed, and confirmed by God to Abra∣ham before the Law was given) the Law which was (given) four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul (so) that it should make the promise (be) of none effect, (as it must  done, were justification to be obtained by the Law; for then none could be blessed in and by the promised Seed.) , four hundred and thirty years after.] Hence it is evident, that the Apostle here refers primarily to the Promise made Gen. 12.3. since from that on∣ly are the Four hundred and thirty years to be computed, for then Abraham was Seventy five years old, Gen. 12.4. from thence to the Birth of Isaac, which hapned when Abraham was a hundred years old, Gen 21.5. is Five and twenty years; from his Birth to the Birth of Jacob was Sixty years; for Isaac was Sixty years old when Rebekkah bore him, Gen. 25.26. from Jacob's Birth to his descent into Egypt, were One hundred and thirty years, as he saith to Pharaoh, Gen. 47.9. the abode of him and his Posterity in Egypt was Two hundred and fif∣teen years; for that, with their sojourning in Canaan, was Four hundred and thirty years, Exod. 12.40. according to the Septuagint. Ver. 18. For if the inheritance (of the bles∣sing promised to Abraham) be (to be obtained by observance) of the Law, it is no more (the effect) of (the) promise, but (that cannot be said, for) God gave it to Abraham by pro∣mise. Ver. 19. (But you will enquire) Wherefore then serveth the Law? (I answer,) it was ad∣ded (after the Promise made) because of trans∣gressions, until the Seed should come to whom the Promise was made, and it was ordained (or delivered not as the Promise immediately by God himself to Abraham, but) by Angels (it being the word spoken by Angels, Hebr. 2.2. not as the Promise without a Mediator betwixt God giving, and Abraham receiving it, but) in the hand of a Mediator, (even Moses, who stood between them and the Lord at that time, to shew them the word of the Lord, Deut. 5.5. and ratifie the Covenant on the Peoples part.) , because of transgresi∣ons.] Maimonides in hisPart 3. c. 32. p. 432, 435. More Nevochi acknowledges, that the Ceremonial Law was given for the extirpation of Idolatry. For, saith he, when God sent Moses to redeem his People out of Egypt, it was the usual custom of the World, and the Worship in which all Nations were bred up to build Temples in honour of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and to offer divers kinds of Animals to them, and to have Priests appointed for that end, therefore God knowing that it is beyond the strength of Humane Nature in∣stantly to quit that which it hath been long accustomed to, and so is powerfully en∣clined to, would not command that all
that Worship should be abo∣lished, and he should be wor∣shipped only in Spirit,Exod 20.24.25.24. Lev. 1.2. Exod 22.19.34.14. Exod. 22.41. but that he only should be the object of this outward Worship, that these Temples and Altars should be built to him alone, these Sa∣crifices offered to him only, and these Priests should be consecrated to his Service. And the like is said byComp. Hist. p. 239. Ce∣drenus of their Festivals, Separations, Purga∣tions, Oblations, Decimations that God en∣joyned them, that , be∣ing imployed in doing these things to the true God, they might abstain from Idolatry. And thus, saith Dr. Spencer, were they kept, or guarded under the Discipline of the Law, and shut up from the Idolatrous Rites and Customs of the Heathen World, by the strictness of these Legal Observations, and the Penalties denounced against the Violaters of them. And it is well known that all the Ancient Fathers were of this opinion, That God gave the Jews only the Decalogue, till they had made the Golden Calf, and that afterwards he laid this yoke of Ceremonies upon them, to restrain them from Idolatry. Thus when God first brought them out of Egypt, and commanded them not to defile themselves with the Idols of Egypt, Ezek. 20.7. he is said to have given them his Statutes, and shewed them his Judg∣ments, which if a Man do, he shall live in them, v. 11. But, saith he, still their hearts were after their Fathers Idols, the Egyptian Apis, &c. wherefore I gave them statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live, v. 24, 25. that is, that Law of Carnal Commandments which, saith the Apo∣stle, was abolished for the weakness and un∣profitableness of it, Hebr. 7.16, 18. And those words of Maimonides give us a clear reason why these Rituals were called by St. Paul , the Rudiments of the World, Gal. 4.3. Col. 2.20. namely, because for mat∣ter they were the same which Heathens used before to their false Gods. This is a very an∣cient Exposition, and is partly true, but it containeth not the whole truth. For the A∣postle in the Epistle to the Romans, which is the best Expositor of this, informs us that the Law entred that sin might abound, Rom. 5.20. i. e. might appear to abound unto death, that sin might appear sin working death in us, ch. 7.13. and that the Law worketh wrath, ch. 4.15.3.20. by giving us the knowledge of that sin which deserveth it: And this answers to that which the Apostle here saith, that the Law was added because of transgressions, viz. to dis∣cover them and their punishment, that the Scripture hath concluded all men under sin, viz. by virtue of the Law, that as many a are under the Law, are under the Curse, v. 10. and that upon these accounts the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we may be justified through faith in him, who are con∣demned by the Law, v. 24. Christ being the end of the Law for justification to every one that believeth, Rom. 10.3. Ver. 20. (But the Promise required no M∣diator, for) A Mediator is not of one (party only,) but God (who made the promise to A∣braham) is one (only.) .] Perhaps these words may bet∣ter be expounded thus: But this, Gennadius in locum. Mediator, (viz. Moses,) was only the Mediator of the Jews, and so was only the Mediator of one par¦ty, to whom belonged the Blessing of Abraham, v. 8, 14. But God who made the promise, that in one should all the Families of the Earth be blessed, is One, the God of the one Party, the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews, and so as ready to justifie the one as the other, , seeing it is one God who will justifie the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith, Rom. 3.30. Ver. 21. Is then the Law against the Pro∣mises of God? (as it must be, if it condemn them to whom the promise doth assign a blessing: or is it against those promises which say the just shall live by his faith; and the blessing of Abra∣ham shall come upon us by Faith? as it must be provided we are to be justified not by faith, but by the works of the Law. But) God forbid (it should be thought he had given a Law which disanulled his promises, as it must have done, had justification to life depended on the obser∣vance of it:) for if there had been such a Law as could have given life, verily righteousness (i. e. justification to life, Rom. 5.18.) should have been by the Law, (whereas it subjecting us to death, we may be sure God never did in∣tend it for that end.) Ver. 22. But the Scripture hath concluded all (Men of all Nations) under sin, (and so under condemnation by the Law Moral and Ce∣remonial, and sentenced not to life, but death by it, and thereby shewed the necessity) that the promise (of justification by faith in Christ the promised Seed) should be given to them that believe (in him; and thus the Law is not con∣trary, but subservient to the promises of living by faith.) Ver. 23. But before faith came (to be reveal∣ed,) we were kept up under (the Discipline of) the Law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
.] The Apostle having said in the foregoing Verse, , the Scripture hath shut up all, both Jew and Gentile, under sin, it seems most reasonable to interpret the word here of Men shut up as Prisoners con∣demned by the Law to death, the punishment of sin, till that Faith came to be revealed by which we obtain an happy freedom from con∣demnation to death. Ver. 24. Wherefore the Law was (then) our School-master to bring us to Christ, (and cause us, thus condemned by the Law, to fly to him who is the end of the Law for righteous∣ness, Rom. 10.3.) that we might be justified by faith (in him.) Note. For the right explication of these words, from v. 21. to this Verse, 1. That it cannot be denied that good and holy Men under the Law were justified, and obtained the pardon of their sins; since other∣wise they could not be accepted by God here, or saved hereafter. 2ly, It also seemeth evident from the Dis∣course of the Apostle in this; and the Epistle to the Romans, that they could not be justified by the observance of the Law; for he lays down this as the foundation of his Discourse, that by the works of the Law no man is justifi∣ed, Rom. 3.20. and no flesh shall be justified, Gal. 2.16. The proofs he offers to confirm this Position, do equally concern all Times and Persons, from the giving of the Law to the revealing of the Gospel: As v.g. (1.) Be∣cause by the Law is the knowledge of sin, con∣demning us to death, Rom. 3.20.7.9, 10, 11, 13. Gal. 3.22. (2ly.) Because the Just, saith the Prophet Habakkuk, shall live by his faith, Rom. 1.17. whereas the Law is not of faith; whence he infers, that no Man is justified in the sight of God by the works of the Law, Gal. 3.11. (3ly.) Because as many as are under the Law are under the Curse, v. 10. (4ly.) Be∣cause it was impossible, through the weakness of the flesh, that the Law should justifie, Rom. 8.3. or that it should give life, Gal. 3.21. and so it never was designed for that end. It had indeed its expiatory Sacrifices, but they procured only pardon of that guilt which ren∣dred them obnoxious to the violent death threatned by the Law to such and such Offen∣ders, but gave no remedy against Natural Death by the promise of a Resurrection to E∣ternal Life, and so exempted no Man from the punishment of Adam's sin. Or they only released Offenders from the obligation to Ci∣vil and Ecclesiastical Punishments, but could not free them from the Punishments of the other Life; for the Apostle assures us, that the blood of Bulls and Goats could not take away sin, Hebr. 10.4. and that they did only sanctifie to the purifying of the flesh, Hebr. 7.13. See the Note there. Now 3ly, Hence it follows, that they also must be justified by faith from all those sins by which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39. Object. But are not the Jews stiled Righte∣ous before God, by virtue of their Obedience to the Law of Moses? as in these words of David, The Lord rewarded me according to my Righteousness, Psal. 18.20. for I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly de∣parted from my God, v. 21. For all his judg∣ments were before me, and I did not put away his statutes from me, v. 22. I was also upright before him, and kept my self from mine iniqui∣ty, v. 23. Therefore hath the Lord recompen∣sed me according to my righteousness, v. 24. Is it not said of Zachariah and Elizabeth, that they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. Yea, doth not our Apostle say, Not the hearers of the Law are  just before God, but the doers of the Law  shall be justified, Rom. 2.13. Now to this I answer, That there is a dou∣ble Justification of which the Scripture speaks, (1.) That which consists in the Absolution of a Sinner from the guilt of Sin, by God's free pardon or remission of it, or his not imputing it to the Sinner. And thus no Man is, or can be justified by the Law, either Ceremonial or Moral, since neither of them do contain any promise of the pardon of it. Now all Men being Sinners, this Justification must be neces∣sary to all Men to put, and keep them in a state of favour with God. And this is that Justification which St. Paul ascribes to Faith, and which, saith he, could never be obtained by the works of the Law. But 2ly, There is a Justification to be undergooe by all Men at the great Day of their Ac∣counts, and this is only the pronouncing them sincere in the performance of their Covenants Legal or Evangelical, or in compliance with the Laws of Nature, of Moses, or of Grace the Providence of God had placed them under; and in this sense we find mention of Men working righteousness under the Law of Na∣ture, Job 1.1. Acts 10.35. under the Law of Moses, Luke 1.6. Psal. 18.20, 24. and under the Law of Grace, 1 John 3.7. Rev. 22.11. And thus all pious Persons, who made it the sincere endeavour to obey the Law of Moses, were righteous before God; though still the Imperfections which cleaved to their Obedi∣ence, were pardoned through Faith. To ex∣plain this, Note 1. That the whole Nation of the Jews be∣lieved in the promised Messias, or the Messiah that was to come, and that in the Seed of Abraham should all the Families of the Earth be blessed; this being one of their Fundamental Articles. 2ly, They believed that this Messiah should confer upon them not only Temporal but Spi∣ritual, yea Eternal Blessings; they expected Spiritual Blessings from him, even Remiso
of Sins. So Zacharias speaks of the Baptist, That he should go before the Lord to prepare his way, to give knowledge to his people of sal∣vation through the remission of sins, Luke 1.76, 77. To him, saith Peter, give all the Pro∣phets witness, that through his Name all that believe in him should receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43. So the Jews say, that theVoisin. de lege Div. l. 1. c. 8. p. 6, 66, 67, 68. Messias was to remove  the general sin of Mankind, or the sin of the first Man. 2ly, They expected by him Justification, he being stiled by the Prophet, The Lord our Righteousness, and by the Jews  Messiah our Justification. Now this, say the ancient Fathers, might be a justifying Faith in them without explicitely believing that Christ should die for their sins; though we have no reason to think that they who were so plain∣ly taught this by the Prophet Isaiah, by the Type of Isaac, the lifting up of the Serpent, and by their Sacrifices, should be wholly ig∣norant of it. Ver. 25. But (now) after that faith is come, we are no longer under a School-master, (be∣ing no longer Children in minority, Rom. 7.3.) Ver. 26. For ye are all the (adult) Children of God (and so heirs of God) by faith in Christ Jesus. Ver. 27. For as many of you as have (belie∣ved in Christ, and upon that faith have) been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, (and so are become Sons of God; for to as many as believed in him, he gave power to be the Sons of God, John 1.12. , the Sons of God through faith.] Hence, saith the Antipaedobaptist, it appears that Infants cannot be made the Sons of God by Baptism, because we are all made the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus; now Infants have no Faith. Answ. They might as well argue thus, By grace you are saved through faith, Eph. 2.7. but Infants have no Faith, therefore they cannot be saved. Or thus, He that believeth not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. No Infants do believe, ergo all Infants shall be damned. The Apostle plainly speaks here of Persons converted from Heathenism to Christianity, and who were therefore baptized being adult Persons, as he doth in the Gospel of St. Mark, and the Epistle to the Ephesians. This place can therefore, with no more reason, be applied to the Case of Infants, than the places cited from St. Mark, and that Epistle. Ver. 28. There is (under the Gospel dispen∣sation) neither (distinction made of) Jew, nor Greek, neither (of) bond nor free, neither (of) male nor female, (as under the Jewish Oeconomy, the Male only bearing the sign of the Covenant,) for ye are all one (as to the privi∣ledges of the Gospel) in Christ Jesus. Ver. 29. And if ye be Christs then are ye (indeed) Abrahams seed, (not from Ismael, but Isaac,) and (therefore) heirs according to the promise. , Heirs according to the promise.] It is to be observed for expli∣cation of many places in these Epistle, that there is frequent mention in the New Testa∣ment of the Promises in the Plural Number. To the Israelites belong the promises. Rom. 9.4. Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcisi∣on to confirm the promises, Rom. 15.8. To Abraham and his Seed were the promises made, Gal. 3.16. and v. 21. Is the Law then against the promises. Those all died in faith, not ha∣ving received the promises, Hebr. 11.13, 17. and v. 39. They all having obtained a good re∣port through faith, received not the promises. Now there is mention made in the New Te∣stament of three sorts of Promises. 1st, The Promise of a Seed in which all the Families of the Earth should be blessed, viz. in Christ, Acts 3.25.13.23, 33.26.6. Rom. 4.13, 14, 20.9.9. Gal. 3.21, 22. See the Note there. 2ly, The Promise of the Holy Spirit in his extraordinary Gifts and Operations, Acts 2.33, 39. by which Believers were then sealed up to the day of redemption, Eph. 1.13. and this is called the promise of the Father, Luke 24.49. Acts 1.4. And this Promise was not immediately made to Abraham, but was the consequent of the Blessing which God had pro∣mised to his Seed, the Blessing of Abraham be∣ing first to come upon the Gentiles, that they might receive the promise of the Spirit; i. e. that being made the Sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus, the Seed promised, God might send the Spirit of his Son into their hearts, crying Abba, Father, Chap. 4.6. 3ly, The Promise of a future rest, and an eternal Inheritance; there being a Promise made of entring into Rest, Hebr. 4.3, 9. (See the Note there.) peculiar to Believers, and to the People of God, after the Rest which Jo∣shuah had given them in Canaan, and a Promise of an Eternal Inheritance, Hebr. 9.15.10.36. For that the Patriarchs did by Faith expect a City having Foundations whose Builder and Ma∣ker was God, and an heavenly Country, we learn from Hebr. 11.9, 14, 15. yea, they ex∣pected to obtain a better resurrection, v. 35. viz. by virtue of their Messiah, this being their common saying,Maim. expl. cap. 10. tract. Sanhed. p. 136. Pecock. Not. p. 109, 110. The Messiah shall raise up those that sleep in the dust; and one of their Fundamental Articles is this, That the Mes∣siah will come  and will raise the dead, and bring them into Paradise. This Faith generally obtained among them before our Saviour's Advent, as we learn not only from the Book of the Maccabees, but from St. Paul's plain words, Acts 24.15.26.7, 8.
If you enquire where any such Promise was made to Abraham, or others? I answer, That such a Promise was made to him, and to the Patriarchs, we are assured from this, that they by Faith expected these things, all Faith being built upon a Promise; this Promise therefore might be made to Abraham, Gen. 17.7. where God saith, I will establish my Cove∣nant betwixt thee and thy Seed after thee in their Generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be thy God, and the God of thy Seed after thee; for that to be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is to be the God that will raise them up from the dead, we learn from our Saviour's Argument, Matth. 22.32. See the Note there And that he therefore was called their God, be∣cause he had prepared for them a City, from Hebr. 11.15. And in reference to this future Recompense it is that the Apostle saith, These all died in faith, not having received the pro∣mise, God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect, Hebr. 11.39, 40. See the Note there. Now this seems to be the Promise mentioned here of which Christians are said to be the Heirs, they being heirs of God, joynt heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.15. Gal. 4.7. APPENDIX. IT seems necessary a little to consider what Mr. le Clerk here offers in his Notes upon this Chapter, from v. 10. to the end. 1. Therefore, when he says, It was very dif∣ficult indeed to observe all the Rites of Moses, yet he supposes his Law might be observed, and that it did not require a degree of holiness above humane strength. I answer with the distincti∣on mentioned Note on v. 24. This is all true, as to such a sincere performance of it as God would accept of; but 'tis not true as to the most exact, perfect, and unsinning observation of it in the highest import of the words. Object. But doth then God command what is impossible? Is it not absurd to make Laws that cannot be kept, and to punish Men for what they cannot do? Answ. God never commands what is natu∣rally impossible, and which when we offend against, we can justly plead, that had we u∣sed our outmost strength and diligence, we could not have avoided the doing what was forbid, or leaving undone what was command∣ed; for of what is so impossible, no Man can rationally repent, nor can his Conscience con∣demn him for it; but he may require what, through the weakness of the flesh, is morally impossible to be always done, or avoided; v.g. an infinitely holy God cannot but command, that we should not sin against him, sin being a transgression of his Law. But though there be no particular sin of which we can truly say it is impossible we should have avoided it, yet, through the infirmity of Humane Na∣ture, we have too much cause to say, that it is morally impossible we should live without, or always free from sin. 2ly, When he says, The Laws of Moses are not so severe, as not to pardon the least sin, God having instituted Sacrifices for some sins. This also I grant according to the distinction mentioned, viz. That God for the sake of those Sacrifices cleansed them from Ceremo∣nial Defilements, and freed them from the Civil and Ecclesiastical Punishments, which by the Law of Moses they would have been subject to, had no such Sacrifice been offered for them. God also fully pardoned the sins of upright Jews, and freed them from the Pu∣nishments of the other Life, but not by vir∣tue of the Blood of Bulls and Goats, for the rea∣sons there alledged, but by virtue of their Faith in the Messiah owned by them to be Messiah their Righteousness. 3ly, When he says, That the Jews in St. Paul's time had got quite another Notion of it, than the Law of Moses, as it is set down in the Pentateuch had, and boasted it to be the most compleat and perfect Pattern of Sanctity imaginable, as appears by several places in Jo∣sephus, and particularly in his Books against Appio. I answer, That neither is Josephus in this matter of much credit; neither saith he any more than Moses had said before him in these words, What Nation is there so great that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all this Law which I set before you this day, Deut. 4.8. and much less than David, when he saith, The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psal. 19.8. Besides, our Saviour seems to give us a con∣trary account of this matter in his Sermon on the Mount, where, though it be disputed whether he added to the Law it self, yet no Man questions but that he added to the grass senses the Jews had then of it, and had put upon it. 4ly, When he adds, That the Rabbins used (as appears by the Version of the Septuagint, and the Citations of St. Paul in this place) to interpret Deut. 27.26. as if the meaning of Moses was there, that God required of them the most perfect holiness, which if they did not perform, they were to expect to be cursed by
him; but in reality all that Moses says is only, that the People were to curse him that did not confirm the words of the Law to do them. Answ. In all this there is scarce one word of truth; for 1. The Rabbins were so far from thus expounding this, or any other Text of Moses in so high a sense, that they thought it sufficient to exempt them from God's Curse, that they were of the Seed of Abraham, and had him for their Father, Matth. 3.8, 9. that they should be accepted for the merit of Cir∣cumcision, that 'twas enough to be hearers of the Law, though they were not doers of it, James 1.22. and that the observation of some Precepts of the Law, would excuse their neg∣lect of the rest. See Note on Rom. 2.13. and James 2.10, 11. and the Note there. 2ly, Whereas he saith, This appears by the Version of the Septuagint; if that way of ar∣guing be of any force, then the contrary ap∣pears from the Targum of Onkelos, and Ben Uziel, who have added nothing to the words. Moreover, what hath the Septuagint here ad∣ded, which is not necessarily contained in the sense of the words as they lye in the Hebrew? For 1st, whereas they add, , eve∣ry man, do not all Interpreters add He, and is not that the same in sense; ought not every Man, who committed the sins against which any of these Curses were denounced, to think himself subject to these Curses? 2ly, Where∣as they add  to the Hebrew, doth not the Context plainly lead them to that addi∣tion? When it saith v. 3. and v. 8. Thou shalt write  all the words of this Law, were not the Jews obliged to do all the words of the Law, i. e. all things commanded by the Law of Moses, Deut. 19.9. Yea, are not the Bles∣sings in the next Chapter, promised to them only who observe to do all the Command∣ments, v. 1. and the Curses denounced a∣gainst them who do not observe to do all his Com∣mandments and Statutes, v. 15. Doth not the Holy Ghost, assisting the Sacred Pen-men, war∣rant this Addition in other places, See that thou make according to the pattern, saith the Hebrew and the Septuagint, Exod. 25.40. See that thou make  all things according to the pattern, saith St. Paul, Hebr. 8.5. At the mouth of two or three Witnesses shall a word be established, saith the Hebrew, , shall every word be established, say the Septua∣gint, and St. Paul. Nor 3ly, Hath St. Paul added any thing to the sense of the words; for all the words of the Law being written by Moses in the Book of the Law, it is plainly the same thing to say, All the words of the Law, and all the words written in the Book of the Law. 4ly, When he saith, Doubtless St. Paul would never have altered any thing in the words of Moses, nor followed the Septuagint at all, but rendred the Hebrew himself exactly, if he had reasoned from the bare Authority of the Pro∣phet, and not from the Opinion of the Jews. I answer, 1st, That he casts the vilest imputation on St. Paul, by saying here, that he argues only upon the false supposition of the Jews: For St. Paul lays down this general Propositi∣on, As many as are under the Law are under the Curse; this is false, saith Mr. Cl. For in reality all that Moses says is only, that the People were to curse him that did not confirm the words of the Law to do them. It is so, saith St. Paul, , for it is written. By your good leave, St. Paul, you are out a∣gain, there is no such thing; but you are guilty of adding to the Word of God; if you understand your self you do not, and if you understand the words of Moses you cannot in this Argument depend upon what is written, but only on the false and rotten Notion of the Jews touching these words. 2ly, Through the sides of St. Paul here he wounds our Blessed Saviour, and all the Sacred Penmen; for if it be true of St. Paul, it must be also true of them; that if they had reason'd from the bare Authority of the Pro∣phets, and not from the Opinion of the Jews, (not grounded on the true sense of the Pro∣phets,) they would have rendred the Hebrew exactly, and never have altered any thing in the words of Moses, nor followed the Septu∣agint at all; which seeing Ocular demonstra∣tion shews, that both our Lord and his Apo∣stles have often done, you must not think, saith Mr. Cl. that they have given us the true sense of the Prophets, but only some corrupt Opi∣nions which the Jews had of them. And let Mr. Cl. say as dogmatically as he pleases, that it is common with St. Paul to cite the Old Te∣stament, so as it was usually alledged by the Doctors of the Jews, whom they called Dars∣chanim, that is to say, With little regard to the Circumstances of the place, or the proper signification of the words, and to argue from them so alledged, I cannot but look upon it as a false and detestable Suggestion.
CHAP. IV. Verse 1. NOw I say (for illustration how you, who are heirs of the pro∣mises, should be kept in bondage under a School-master, Chap. 3.23, 25.) that the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing (as to the possession, and free use of his estate) from a servant, though he be (by right of inheritance) Lord of all (his Father left.) Ver. 2. But is under Tutors and Governours until the time appointed by the Father (in his last Will and Testament.) Ver. 3. Even so we (the Seed of Abraham) when we were children, (as till faith came we were,) were in bondage under the elements of the world. , the Elements of the World.] i. e. The Jewish Rites so called, because, as was observed Chap. 3.19. they were for mat∣ter mostly the same which had before obtain∣ed in the World, only they were directed to a better object, and a better end. Ver. 4. But when the fulness of time (ap∣pointed for the appearance of the Messiah for the benefit of Jew and Gentile, that they might be made Sons by him) was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman, made under (sub∣jection to) the law. Ver. 5. To redeem us that were under the law (from the bondage of it,) that we (toge∣ther with them) might receive the adoption of sons. Ver. 6. And because ye are (now made) sons (of God by faith, chap. 3.25.) God hath sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father, (i. e. witnessing to our Spirits that we are the Sons of God, and that he is our Father, Rom. 8.15, 16. and enabling us to use the language, not of Servants, but of Sons.) Ver. 7. Wherefore thou art (after this re∣demption wrought) no more a servant, but a son, and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ. , but a Son.] That the Notion of Adoption includes a state of Immortality, and that the Sons of God were to be Sons of the Resurrection, I have shewed upon the parallel place Rom. 8.16-23. And that the Jews were not ignorant of this import of the phrase, we learn from the Author of the Book of Wis∣dom, Chap. 2.12. who introduceth the wick∣ed Atheists speaking thus, Let us lay in wait for the righteous, for he calleth himself a child of God. He maketh his boast that God is his Father. Let us see if his words be true — for if the just man be the Son of God, he will help him.—Let us condemn him to a shameful death, for by his own saying he shall be respect∣ed. Thus, saith he, were they deceived, nei∣ther hoped they for the wages of righteousness, nor discerned a reward for blameless souls. For God created man to be immortal, and made him an image of his own eternity.—The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and their hope is full of immortality. Having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded for God tried them, and found them worthy of himself. And Chapter the fifth, he introduceth the same wicked Persons saying, We fools counted his life madness, and his end to be with∣out honour; how is he numbred among the Chil∣dren of God, and his lot is among the Saints. Where 1. The Righteous are represented as the Sons and Children of God. 2. That as such, they are to be rewarded in their Souls, which are to be received into the hands of God, and to be at rest, and in their Bodies, which are to be immortal. 3. That, at the Day of Recompence, they shall stand in great boldness, and shall, as being the Sons of God, have their Lot and Portion with the Saints, , that is, He shall be , and Heir with the Saints. Ver. 8. (I say thou art no more a Servant,) Howbeit, then when ye knew not God, ye did service to them which by nature were no gods. , ye did Service.] Hence we learn how frivolous is the distinction of the Papists, that Latria is indeed Service proper to God, but Dulia is such Worship as may be paid to Saints and Angels; for seeing Saints and An∣gels are by Nature no Gods, the giving Dulia to them must be the thing condemned here in the Heathen, that being only this, that they did , give Dulia to them which by Na∣ture were no gods. , to them which are not gods by nature,] Hence we learn the conse∣quence of the Socinian Hypothesis, That Jesus Christ is not by nature God, and yet is to be honoured with the same Worship which all Christians give to him who is by nature God, seeing it teacheth us to do what St. Paul here condemneth in the very Heathens. And sure∣ly it must be absurd to make that an Article of Christian Faith; and a part of Christian Worship, which the Apostle here makes the great Crime of the Heathen World, and a cer∣tain Evidence of their Ignorance of the true God. That the Socinians cannot answer this Objection, appears from what they here re∣turn to it, viz. ThatNaturâ Dij non opponuntur Diis ex Gratia, qui Divinitatem habent ab illo uno Deo acceptam. Tali enim Deo, pere imperij quod à Deo accepit, servire, eumque colore non est profanum & impium, sed pium, & necessarium. Gods by Nature is not here opposed to Gods by grace, or to
ho have received their Divinity from the one rue God, for to serve and woiship such a God  reason of the Empire which he hath received rom God is not prophane, and wicked, but pious d necessary. Now in answer to this, I say, 1. That it is very evident from the Text, hat those who are not Gods by Nature, are pposed to him who is God by Nature, viz. o him whom the Heathens knew not, and to im whom the Galatians, being Christians, new, and by whom they were known. Since then the Socinians God by Grace is not a God by Nature; since he is not the God intended in these words, ye knew not God; he must be ranked among those which are here opposed to him. 2ly, I have elsewhere shew'd that the Hea∣thens had the very same Sentiments with the Socinians, as to the Worship of their inferi∣our Deities; and it is wonderful to see how they concur in sense, and almost in words. Sociniani. Ethnici. 1. Qui Divinitatem habet ab illo uno Deo accep∣tum. Crell. 1. Dij minores ab uno illo facti & sublimiter Collocati. Apud Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 6. cap. 1. 2. Christum pro ratione Imperij quod à Deo ac∣cepit Colendum sentiunt. Crell. 2. ; Cels. apud Orig. l. 7. p. 377. 3. Eum sic colere pium & necessarium est. Crell. Christi enim honor & adoratio spectat ad Glo∣riam Dei Patris. Wolf. 3. . Cels. ibid. l. 8. p. 381. Indeed there is scarce any Plea they use for the Worship of Jesus Christ as a made God, which was not before used by theVide Tract. de vera Christi Deit. Philo∣sophers for the Worship of their Inferiour Deities. Ver. 9. But now after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, (being made his Sons by adoption,) how (after this freedom purchased by Christ,) turn ye again to the weak and beggerly elements (of the Law,) whereunto you desire again to be in bon∣dage. , again to weak and beggarly Elements.] Here Interpre∣ters find great difficulty to shew how the Ga∣latians, who were never under the Law, can be said to be again, anew in bondage to them. But the observation made on Chap. 3.19. that the Rites of the Jews and Heathens were for the Matter mostly the same, removes that dif∣ficulty. These Rites are weak and beggarly Elements in comparison of the Riches of the Gospel, and the power of the Holy Ghost; they are weak, as having no power to cleanse the Soul; and beggarly, as not being able to confer upon us the Spiritual Riches of the Gospel, Pardon of Sins, Adoption, the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, Eternal Redemp∣tion. Ver. 10. (For) ye observe (the Jewish Sab∣bath) days, and months (the new Moons) and times (of their solemn Festivals) and (Sabbati∣cal) years. , days and months.] That this Verse is to be interpreted of the Jewish So∣lemn Times and Festivals observed by them, as far as they could be observed out of Judea, the whole drift of this Epistle shews, which is to bring off the Galatians from thinking they were obliged to observe the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law. For that the Jews did  keep their Feasts in Egypt and A∣lexandria, and where-ever they were settled among the Heathens, we learn fromP. 760. A. B. Philo in his Oration against Flaccus. That they were very numerous in Asia minor, of which Galatia was a part, See the Note on James 1.1. That in those places where they dwelt, they had converted a great many to the Jew∣ish Worship, and made them as it were a part of themselves, Josephus testifies. See Note on 1 Pet. 1.1. And if it were so at Galatia, this might make them so ready to relapse to their old Jewish Rites. Ver. 11. I am afraid of you, lest I have be∣stowed on you labour in vain, (in preaching the Gospel to you.) , I am afraid of you.] As well he might, for by this practice they must revolt again from Christ to the Jewish Synagogue; for it belonged only to the greatMechilta: Parasch.  Sanhedrim to state the certain times of their New Moons, and other Festivals; so that for the due observation of them, they must entirely depend upon the Jewish Sanhedrim. Ver. 12. Brethren, I beseech you be as I am, for I am as you are, ye have not injured me at all. , I am as you are.] That is, say the Fathers, I was once zealous for the Law, as you are; but now I live as do the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews; do you who art not Jews, but Gentiles, live in like manner as Men exempted from the Law. But this Exposition seems not to cohere with these words, ye have not injured me at all. They
may therefore be thus interpreted: Brethren, be still as affectionate to me as I am to you, and count me not your enemy, because I tell you the truth; for I am still as affectionate to you, as ever you were to me, v. 14. I do not look upon you as Persons who have done any thing with an intent to injure me. And though your False Teachers have done you this injury by their pernitious Doctrines, yet have they not prevailed on you to speak evil of me, or act injuriously towards me. Ver. 13. Ye know how that through infir∣mity of the flesh I preached the Gospel to you at the first. Ver. 14. And (notwithstanding) my temp∣tation which was in my flesh, ye despised (me) not, nor rejected (me,) but received me (rather) as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, (thinking your selves very happy in having such an Apostle.) , my temptation which was in the flesh.] It is the Opinion of the Greek Commentators, and of the Reverend Dr. Hammond, that the , the in∣firmity of the flesh, v. 13. and the temptation in the flesh here, only signifie the Persecutions the Apostle suffer'd for preaching the Gospel. But that this cannot be the full import of the words, is evident from these Considerations, (1.) That the Persecutions which he suffered for the Cause of Christ, would minister no reason to the Galatians , to contemn, vilifie, despise him as nothing, and even to spit upon him who preached the Go∣spel with such great demonstration of the Spi∣rit, and such power of Miracles under all his Persecutions. The Apostle in the Epistles to the Corinthians, represents these Sufferings as a vindication of the truth of his Apostleship, an Argument of the life and power of that Je∣sus who did such mighty things by his Apostles under all their Sufferings, and as that which should create the greater respect to him, and gives them a large Catalogue of them, confirm∣ing it with an Oath, 2 Cor. 11.31. which shews, that though he sometimes feared the greatness of his Tribulations might make them faint, or shake them who were taught that they must also be partakers of the like Sufferings, yet did he not conceive himself the more contempti∣ble or vile in his own Person for his Persecu∣tions. And therefore as he mentions this to the Thessalonians as a proof of his sincerity, that having before suffered, and been shameful∣ly entreated at Philippi, he was still bold to preach the Gospel to them, 1 Thess. 2.2. As he mentions his Sufferings to the Ephesians as their glory, Chap. 3.13. so here he declares to his Galatians that he still suffered Persecution; and he concludes his Epistle thus, From hence∣forth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 5.11. Insinuating that these Sufferings were so far from giving any Person a just reason to despie him, that they were rather an Inducement to a more honourable treating of him. (2.) Though  and , inform and temptation, absolutely put, do sometimes signifie Afflictions, or Persecutions; yet do e never elsewhere read that , an infirmity, temp∣tation, or thorn in the flesh is used in that sense. Nor was it only the Sufferings he endured in his Body, but the very presence of his Body which was weak. See Note on 2 Cor. 12.7.. 9. Having therefore provedNote on 2 Cor. 12.7. that besides his Persecutions, he had a weakness and im∣perfection in his Body, which rendred bo his Person and his Speech contemptible, I think it reasonable to refer these words unto it. Ver. 15. Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? (in having me for your Apostle, who taught you no such thing as this, that you were to be justified by the observance of the Law,) for I bear you record (you had once such a great af∣fection to me) that, if it had been possible, you would have pluckt out your own eyes, and given them to me. Ver. 16. (And after this) Am I now become your Enemy (or look'd upon as such) because I tell you the truth? Ver. 17. They (who seduce you do indeed) zealously affect you, but not well, (and in  due manner,) yea, they would exclude us (from your affection) that you might affect them (only.) Ver. 18. But it is good (for you) to be zealously affected always in a good thing, (as your affection to me, and to the truth I preach∣ed is,) and not only when I am present with you. Ver. 19. My little Children, of whom I travel in birth again, (to renew in you the faith from whence ye are fallen,) till Christ be (ful∣ly) formed in you, (as the Child is in the Womb.) Ver. 20. I desire to be present with you, and to change my voice, for I stand in doubt of you. .] To temper my voice to you as your affairs require, lamenting the fall of some,) and striving to recover them, and commending the stedfastness of others in the Faith. Ver. 21. Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear (what is contained in the Pentateuch, the Book of) the Law? Ver. 22. For it is (there) written, that A∣braham had two Sons, the one (to wit, Ismae) by (Hagar) a Bond-woman, the other, (to wit, Isaac,) by (Sarah) a Free-woman, (a Lady or
Princess, as her Name imports, saith Philo.) Ver. 23. But he that was of the Bond-woman was born after the flesh, (and so was not to be accounted for the Seed,) but (whereas) he of the Free-woman was by promise, (and so was only to be accounted for the promised Seed, Rom. 9.8.) , was born after the flesh.] i. e. By natural Generation, and the strength of the Flesh, before Abraham's Body became dead, Rom. 4.19. The other by virtue of the Promise of God made to him, when his Body and Sarah's Womb were both dead, v. 20. and only quickned by that Spirit which is the pow∣er of God. Ver. 24. Which things are an Allegory, (ex∣pressing one thing, and by that hinting another to us,) for these (two, Hagar and Sarah,) are (intended typically to represent to us) the two Covenants, the one (viz. that of the Law gi∣ven) from Mount Sinai (is that Covenant) which gendereth to bondage, (i. e. subjects its Children to bondage, and is the Covenant) which is (typified by) Hagar (the Bond-woman.) Ver. 25. For this Hagar (whose name signi∣fies a Rock,) is (in the Allegory) Mount Si∣nai in Arabia (whence the Law was given,) and (so she) answereth to that Jerusalem which now is, (they living long in that Wil∣derness, and receiving the Law from Mount Sinai in Arabia) and is in bondage with her Children (to the Law given there.) , for this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia.] i. e. She represents it (1.) in her Name; for  in the Arabian Language signifies a Rock, as Mount Sinai is called. (2.) By her flight, she flying twice into Arabia from her Mistress, Gen. 16.7. into the Wilderness of Shur, called by the Chaldee Chagra there, and Gen. 25.18. and after fly∣ing again into the same Wilderness. And (3.) by her station, for there dwelt the Poste∣rity of Ismael, called from her Name Hagarens, as the Oriental Writers witness. See Bochart. Geogr. Sacr. l. 4. c. 11. p. 255. cap. 27. p. 312. and Grotius here. Ver. 26. (Thus it was, and is with the ter∣restrial Jerusalem,) but (the) Jerusalem which s (from) above, (and is signified by Sarah, the Type of the second Covenant) is free, (Gr. is the free-woman, and so her Children cannot e in bondage to the Law, as the Jews were, and it is this Jerusalem,) which is the Mother of us all. , the Jerusalem which is a∣bove.] As the state of the Church under the Gospel is stiled by the Evangelists, the King∣dom of Heaven, so here the Jerusalem which is from above; this Gospel State, or New Kingdom being erected by the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven, and leading us to it. Note also that theVoisin de Lege, p. 369. Jews tell us, that the inferiour Jerusalem is a Type of that which is above. Ver. 27. For (of this Jerusalem, Isa. 54.1.) it is written, Rejoyce thou barren which bear∣est not, break forth and cry, thou that travel∣lest not, (and so in this art like to Sarah,) for (now) the desolate hath many more Children than she that hath an Husband, (the Gentile than the Jewish Church.) Note that the Jews themselves interpret these words cited from Isa. 54.1. of the times of the Messiah. Midrash shir Hashirim ad Cant. 1.5. Ver. 28. Now (to apply these things to us,) we Brethren, as Isaac was, are the Children of the promise (as being born, not of the flesh, but of the Spirit by virtue of the promise in thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be bles∣sed.) Ver. 29. But as then he that was born after the Flesh (i. e. Ismael,) persecuted him that was born of the Spirit, (i. e. Isaac, the Seed produced by the Spirit of God, and the Repre∣sentative of us who are born of the Spirit, John 3.3, 5.) even so it is now, (the Jews the Seed of Abraham according to the flesh, every where persecuting us Christians, 1 Thess. 2.14, 15, 16.) , persecuted.] St. Jerom here saith Ismael struck Isaac, but the Text Gen. 21.9. saith only that he mocked him. This Derision therefore must be reputed as a persecuting him with the Tongue. Ver. 30. Nevertheless, what saith the Scrip∣ture? (i. e. What is contained in the Scripture, even these words approved by God, Gen 21.12.) cast out the Bond-woman and her Son; for the Son of the Bond-woman shall not be Heir with the Son of the Free-woman. , shall not be Heir.] Hence we may learn what that Persecution was, even a derision of Isaac's pretensions to be the Heir of Abraham. So among theR. Sal. ait, Ismaelum cum Isaaco de Haereditate contendisse dicentem, ego sum ptimogenitus & duplex portio ad me pertinet. Jews, Rabbi Salom cited by Cartwright on Gen. 21.9. andDupliciter hoc ab Hebraeis exponitur sive quod Idola ludo fecerit sive quod adversum Isaac quasi majoris aetatis jico sibi & do primagenita vendicaret. Tom. ult. F. 73. L. St. Jerom in his Questions and Traditions upon Genesis, even as the Carnal Jews con∣tended with the Believing Gentiles, that they must be the true Heirs of the Promise made to Abraham, who were his Seed according to the Flesh. Ver. 31. So then Brethren, we (being Chil∣dren of the Promise, v. 28.) are not Children of the Bond-woman, (and so in subjection to the Law,) but of the Free-(woman, and therefore at liberty from the Obligation or Bondage of it.)
APPENDIX. THis being written before I saw Mr. Clerk's Annotations, I think it necessary, by way of Appendix, to confute that vile Interpreta∣tion, or rather Corruption of the Apostle's words, he here so confidently suggests. And 1st, 'Tis a mistake that the Galatians, to whom the Apostle here writes, before they re∣ceived the Gospel, were as to the greatest part of them, Proselytes of the Gate, or also of Righ∣teousness: 'Tis plain that they were Hea∣thens, not knowing the true God, but serving them which by nature were no gods, Chap. 4.8, 9. and by the Gospel were to be delivered , from the present evil Age, Chap. 1.4. from which they who were made Proselytes of the Gate, and worshipped the true God, were already in a great measure delivered. 2ly, The great endeavour of the Judaizers then crept in among them, was to perswade them to be circumcised, Gal. 5.2.6.12. where∣as all the Proselytes of Righteousness, all the Gentiles which had before been subject to the Jewish Rites, must be circumcised when they were admitted to be Proselytes of Righteous∣ness, they being made such by Circumcision, and a Promise of Obedience to the Law of Moses. Object. It is the Jewish Law which is stiled the Elements of the World to which they were in bondage, Chap. 4.3. Answ. The Jewish Law is indeed so called, but it was for this reason, that it was made up of Ceremonies, which for the Matter were the same with those which had been used by other Nations of the World, the Object of them only being changed. See the Note on Chap. 3.19. and they are no where called E∣lements of Piety, as he supposes. Object. 2. They are said to return again to these weak and beggarly Elements of the World, v. 9. Answ. Not because they before observed the Jewish Ceremonies, but because the Ceremo∣nies of the Law being for the Matter mostly the same with those the Gentiles used to their Heathen Deities, by returning to them, they are said to return to those Elements. See Note on v. 9. Ver. 21. ; Do not you hear the Law?] i. e. Do not you Christians, to whom the Law and Prophets are read every Lord's Day, and which you have the liberty to read at all times, hear what the Law speaks. Here, saith Mr. Cl. it is to be noted, that St. Paul argues from some received Midrasch vul∣garly known; for if that Allegory, whereof he here speaks, had not been before heard of, he would have had no reason to wonder that the Galatians had never collected any such thing from the story which he refers to. Answ. 1. To this I answer, That no such Interpretation of this passage was vulgarly known among the Jews, is apparent from the Silence of all the Jewish Paraphrasts up∣on the place, and of all those Interpreters who have conversed most in the Writings of the Jewish Rabbins, and yet produce not the least hint of any such thing, nor can Mr. Cl do it. 2ly, This supposed Midrasch is contrary to their known and avowed Principle, That their Law was to be eternal, and so that there was no New Covenant to succeed for the abolish∣ing of it, as is plain from the Apostle's dispute against them both here, and in the Epistle to the Romans, and in that to the Hebrews. More over, doth not Mr. Cl. tell us in his Annotati∣ons on the former Chapter, that the Law, and a perfect pattern of Holiness, was the same in the opinion of the Jews? and must this perfect pattern of Holiness here, in the opinion of the same Jews, be only a Covenant gendring to bondage, and represented by Hagar a Bond-woman? 3ly, The Apostle doth not wonder that the Galatians had collected no such Allegory from the story referred to, but only asks if they had not heard the words he doth thus alle∣gorically expound to them. He proceeds thus: Farther, Seeing this Interpretation could not be urged against those who might deny that the Scripture ought to be so understood, and the Apostle doth not make use of his Authority to confirm it, it is evident that he argues here from what was generally allowed, which kind of things it is not material should be true, or well grounded, as long as they contain nothing prejudicial to true Piety, and are believed by those against whom we dispute. So that from St. Paul's using such an Allegory against the Ja∣daizing Galatians, it does not follow that we in this Age are bound to admit it as a secret revealed from Heaven to the Apostle. Answ. To this I answer, (1st,) That it is too confidently said, that the Apostle doth  make use of his Authority to confirm this In∣terpretation, for is it not Paul an Apostle,  of Man, but of Jesus Christ, and of God the Father, Chap. 1.1. who writes thus to the Galatians; and had not the Apostles from the Holy Ghost the word of Wisdom, and of Know∣ledge, to direct them in understanding the Mysteries of the Old Testament? Does be not declare they spake the Wisdom of God e
Mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7. that Wisdom which God had revealed to them by his Spirit, v. 10. that they had received the Spirit which is of God, that they might know the things which are free∣ly given us of God; which things they also spake, not in the words which mans wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. See the Note on v. 12, 13. there. And is not this sufficient confirmation of all which they de∣clared they writ as the Apostles of Jesus Christ? 2ly, I add, that it cannot reasonably be said he argues here from what was generally allow∣ed, not only because I have proved, that no∣thing of this nature either was, or could be allowed by the Jews, but also because no one Instance can be produced where the Apostle u∣seth any such Argument ad hominem, or from their own mistaken Principles, but where it is evident from his own words and declarations that he doth so. Had the Apostle said, as he is forced in his Paraphrase to make him speak, These things use to be allegorically explained by the Jews, and may be interpreted so as to sig∣nifie what I a little before said; or as he begins his Christian Allegorist, We take you at your word, O Jews: There might have been some plausibility in this phansie, but the Apostle ha∣ving not given us the least hint of any thing of this nature, it must pass for meer Romance. And the other things he adds, can be no better than a base and ignominious reflection on the Au∣thority and Writings of the Apostle, for do you not hear the Law, saith the Apostle? No, saith Mr. le Cl. that they do not, yea, they cannot in this case, it being not at all necessary that the words of Scripture should have any such al∣legorical interpretation, as that which is sup∣posed (here) to belong to them. Do you not hear the Law For it is written, saith the Apostle? What then, saith Mr. Clerk, you grosly impose upon us in these words, connecting them to the former by a  for, and saying gravely it is written; when indeed you argue not from what is written, but from some Whimseys of the Jews, perhaps neither true nor well-ground∣ed. These things are an Allegory, saith the Apostle. So you say, St. Paul, quoth this Cri∣tick; but if we throughly consider it, we shall find that most that hath ever been said by learn∣ed Men against this way of interpreting Scrip∣ture in the general, may be objected against this particular Allegory. These are the two Testa∣ments, saith St. Paul. You are very dogmati∣cal St Paul, saith Mr. Cl. but we of this Age are not bound to admit this as a Secret revealed from Heaven to you; and by your good leave, this Interpretation cannot be urged against those who deny that the Scripture ought to be so un∣stood. To conclude, what shall we say to the un∣believing Jew objecting thus from this Inter∣pretation? Finding that your Apostle hath produced against us a weak Argument, false and ill grounded, you pretend to help him out by saying, 'tis a Jewish Midrash vulgarly known. This we must take for an officious lie, till you can shew that either we, or our Fathers, or Philo the Allegorist, who speaks of Hagar and Sarah in a quite different way of Allegory, had any such Sentiments. And if your Apostle hath imposed upon you here with such ill grounded Arguments and In∣terpretations, without giving you the least hint that he was arguing only from our con∣cessions, how know you that he hath not of∣ten done the like in all his other Writings? CHAP. V. Verse 1. STand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us (Christians) free, and be not again entangled with the yoke of bondage (to the Law, Acts 15.10.) Ver. 2. Behold, I Paul say unto you (Gala∣tians,) that if ye be circumcised (in order to your justification,) Christ shall profit you no∣thing, (Chap. 2.1, 3, 4.) Ver. 3. For I testifie again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor (by virtue of that Circumcision) to do the whole Law. Ver. 4. Christ is become of none effect to you, whosoever of you are (seeking to be) justified by the Law, (and not by faith in him only,) ye are fallen from (justification by) Grace. , I testifie again.] These words must not be thought to import that he had testified this before in this Epistle, and now did it again, there being nothing said be∣fore of this matter, but thus I Paul say to you, that if ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing. And again, I testifie that you are Debtors by admitting this Circumcision to yield obedience to the whole Law of Moses. For as by Baptism we Christians do oblige our selves to observe all the Institutions of the Christian-Faith, so did the Jews by Circumcision ob∣lige themselves to yield obedience to the whole Law of Moses. This the Apostle elsewhere intimates by saying to the Jew, Circumcision verily profiteth if thou keep the Law, Rom. 2.25. to which thou art obliged by it; and by objecting to them, who were so zealous for the Circumcision of others, that they acted insincerely in that zeal, because they them∣selves did not keep the Law, Gal. 6.13. when
any one became a Proselyte of Justice, or turn∣ed from Heathenism to Judaism, they first in∣structed him in the Law of Moses, and when he declared himself resolved to obey it, then they circumcised him, and so admitted him into the Congregation, and he became as one of them. For Circumcision being the sign by which they entred into Covenant with God, when the Mosaical Law became the Covenant betwixt God and the Seed of Abraham, that Circumcision by which they entred into Co∣venant with him, must lay an Obligation on them to observe the Law of Moses. And hence the Judaizing Christians, who held that the Law of Moses was an everlasting Cove∣nant, thought that the Believing Gentiles were to be dealt with as their Proselytes, that is, that unless they were circumcised, and obser∣ved the Law, they could not be saved, Acts 15.1. But still it remains a great Enquiry, Whe∣ther the words contained in the second, third, and fourth Verses, are to be taken generally, so as to exclude all believing Jews from any benefit by Christ, or by the Covenant of Grace, who sought for Justification by the Works of the Law? or whether they are to be restrain∣ed only to the believing Gentiles? Now in answer to this Question, let it be noted 1. That it is not the being circumcised which is here said to exclude from Grace and Salva∣tion, but the being circumcised to obtain Justi∣fication, and Salvation by it, as is apparent from these words, Christ is become of none ef∣fect to you whosoever of you are justified by the Law. Had the bare use of Circumcision ren∣dred Christ unprofitable to the Jew and Gen∣tile, or put them under the Curse of the Law, St. Paul would not have circumcised Timothy, nor have owned the Believing Jews as Chri∣stian Brethren, who were still zealous for the Law. 2ly, Observe that the Law of Moses being given to the Jews, and some of its Precepts being stiled everlasting Covenants, and Com∣mandments, and they having all engaged to observe it, might think themselves obliged still to be circumcised, and observe the Law by virtue of God's Precept, till it was more solemnly by God declared to be abrogated, though they expected not to be justified by it; for so we find it was with the Believing Jews, they all continued zealous of the Law, Acts 21.20. and thought all Jews obliged to ob∣serve it, v. 24. but then they thought to be saved, not by the Law, but by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 15.11. as the Be∣lieving Gentiles were, and they believed in Christ that they might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law, Gal. 2.16. But now the Gentiles being not under the Obligation of the Law of Moses, they ha∣ving first believed in Christ, and received upon that Faith, the Holy Ghost, they could not af∣terwards submit to the observance of the Law, but by so doing, they must testifie they though not Faith in Christ sufficient to Justification, or Acceptance with God without the observa∣tion of the Law, and therefore must submit  it for these ends, and so must in effect deep that Faith in Christ would justifie them; or that the Giving of the Holy Ghost was a suf∣ficient Evidence of their Acceptance with God, which was a tempting, or distrusting of God after so full a demonstration of his Grace and Favour to them, Acts 15 8, 9, 10. I therefore think these words concern as well those Jews as Gentiles, who sought for Justification still not by their Faith in Christ, but through the Works of the Law, Rome 9, 31, 32. and held Circumcision necessary to all, not by way of Precept only, but as a necessary means of Salvation; for by these things, saith the Apostle, they in effect declared that Christ was dead in vain, and frustrated the Grace of Christ, Gal. 2.21. and so fell from it. Not is it easie to perceive how they should have Justification and Salvation from him, from whom, after the Revelation of him, they did not expect it, or have faith in him to Justifi∣cation, by whom they thought not that they should be justified. Ver. 5. For we (Christians) through the Spi∣rit (which we have received) by faith, expect the hope of righteousness. , the hope of righteousness.] Or Justification, i. e. the hope of Glory; for being justified by faith we have peace with God,Rom. 5.1, 2. Eph. 1.14 2 Cor. 1.22. Eph. 4.33. 2 Cor. 5.5. Rom. 5.5. and rejoyce in hope of the glory of God; 'tis thro' this Spirit that we wait for, and expect this glory, for he is the pledge and earnest of it, by him we are sealed up to the day of Re∣demption, and wrought up to the expectation of it, and therefore are not ashamed of our hope, because the love of God is shed abroad into our hearts by the Spirit that he hath given us; and thus do we, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, wait for the redemption of our Bodies, or the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Rom. 8.21, 23 Ver. 6. (We expect it, I say, by that Faith which ministers this Spirit, and not by Circum∣cision,) For in (the Oeconomy of) Christ Jesus neither Circumcision availeth any thing, not Uncircumcision (as to our acceptance with God, and our reward from him,) but faith which worketh by love. , faith working by low.] There be great Disputes about, and divers In∣terpretations of these words, which I think may be rendred, Faith working or made active by love, or excited to perform our Duty to God, and to our Neighbour for his sake, by that love which we bear to him, or from con∣siderations of his great love to us, according to those words of the Apostle, the love of Christ
constraineth us, 2 Cor. 5.14. And here, the life I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave him∣self for me, Gal. 2.20. Ver. 7. Ye did run well (in the beginning of your Christian race,) who did hinder you that ye should not (continue to) obey the truth? Ver. 8. This perswasion (of the necessity of your being circumcised, and obeying the Law of Moses) cometh not of him (i. e. that God) that calleth (Gr. called) you (to the faith of Christ.) Ver. 9. (Nor ought this Circumcision to seem a little thing to you, nor are these Judaizers to be disregarded, because they are few, for they are like to leaven; now ye know) A little lea∣ven leaveneth (and so corrupteth) the whole lump. (See the Note on 1 Cor. 5.6.) Ver. 10. But I have confidence in you through the Lord, that (after consideration of what I have written,) you will be no other∣wise minded (then I exhort you to be,) but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment, (, the condemnation due to him on that account,) whosoever he be. Ver. 11. And (whereas some of these Judai∣zers have suggested that) I (elsewhere preach up that Circumcision I oppose in you) Brethren, (you may learn the falshood of that suggestion from my sufferings, for) if I yet preach Cir∣cumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution (from the Jews, since) then is the offence (they take at preaching) of the Cross ceased. , if I yet preach Circum∣cision.] All the Greek Interpreters say this Verse returns an Answer to the Suggestions of the Patrons of the Law, viz. that. Theodor. He was an Hypocrite in some places, preaching up Cir∣cumcision, and in others not. See the Note on Chap. 3.4. Ver. 12. I wish they were even cut off (from the Communion of the Church) that (do thus) trouble (and unsettle) you. , cut off.] The Inter∣pretation of all the Greek Fathers, and of St. Ambrose, Austin, and Jerom on this place, is this, tinam non solum circumcidantur, sed e∣tiam abscindantur, I wish not only they were circumcised, but even made like the Priests of the Mother of the Gods worshipped formerly by you of Galatia, who had that Member cut off. But if this Interpretation seem too light to be affixed to the words of the Apostle, I rather chuse to interpret them as a wish, that they were cut off from the Com∣munion of the Church, because this seems a∣greeable to a like passage 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. where having said, as here, a little leaven leavens the whole lump, he adds, purge out therefore the old leaven, i. e. put away from your selves the wicked person, which he himself here would not do alone, because he saw his Authority among them was impaired, and he feared this rather might exasperate than cure their Di∣stemper. See Note on 2 Cor. 10.6. that  is joyned with an Aorist, and sometimes with an Imperfect of the Indicative Mood, we learn from these Examples, , I wish thou wouldst hide me in the Grave, Job 14.13. , I wish you did reign, 1 Cor. 4.8. Ver. 13. For, Brethren, ye have been called (by Christianity) to liberty (from the Jewish yoke,) only (be careful that ye) use not (your) liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. , for an occasion to the flesh.] This is done (1.) By a Carnal use of it to gratifie the Motions of the Flesh, as they who turn'd the grace of God into lasciviousness, and thought they might sin more freely, be∣cause they were not under the Law, but under Grace, Rom. 6.1, 15. Or 2ly, by an uncha∣ritable use of it, to the Scandal of their weak Brethren, or the Contempt of those who did not fully understand their liberty, or by con∣tending with, or biting one another, v. 16. which was an evidence that they were carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3. Or lastly, by refusing Obedience to their Masters, (See Note on 1 Tim. 6.1, 2.) and Subjection to Superiours; See Note on 1 Pet. 2.16. the Remedy of which Distem∣pers is true Christian Love; for. Theoph. he that loves sincerely, will not refuse to serve him whom he loves. Ver. 14. For all the (Moral) Law (respect∣ing our Neighbour) is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self. Ver. 15. But if you (in contradiction to this Law) bite (calumniate) and devour one ano∣ther (as the false Teachers did those they sedu∣ced, 2 Cor. 11.12.) take heed that ye be not (in the issue) consumed one of another. , if ye bite, &c.] Theo∣doret here notes, that the Contentions and Quarrels which arose betwixt them that stood firm, and those who warped to the Legal ob∣servances, gave occasion to these words. And as I have observed, that the Zeal of the Jews would not suffer an uncircumcised Person to live among them, so might it be also with these zealous Judaizers. Ver. 16. This therefore I say (to prevent these miscarriages,) walk in the Spirit, (i. e. according to the motions of the Holy Spirit, Rom. 8.1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 14.) and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh, (i. e. these carnal
motions, v. 13. and these uncharitable contenti∣ons, v. 15.) Ver. 17. For the flesh (indeed) lusteth a∣gainst the spirit, (and so incites you to these things,) and (but) the spirit lusteth against the flesh, and these two (Principles) are contrary one to the other; so that ye (who are lead by the spirit) cannot do the things ye would) according to the flesh, nor ye who are lead by the flesh, the things you would ac∣cording to the spirit.) Note that I have interpreted these Verses as most Commentators do; but I conceive they may be best interpreted from Romans 7. thus, v. 16. But this I say (to take you off from this bondage to the Law,) walk in the spirit, (in newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, Rom. 7.6.) and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh, (the motions of the flesh shall not have dominion over you, and bring you captive to the Law of Sin, as it doth in them, because ye are not un∣der the Law, but under Grace, Rom. 6.14.1. 17. For (in them) the flesh lusteth against the spirit, (or the inward man not renewed, v. 23, 25.) and the spirit lusteth against the flesh, (v. 19-22.) and these two are contrary; so that ye (who are under the Law, and walk not in newness of Spirit,) cannot do the things that ye would; (For the good that ye would ye do not, v. 19.) Ver. 18. But if ye are led by the (conduct of the Holy) Spirit, ye are not under the Law, (and so Sin shall not have dominion over you, Rom. 6.14.) Ver. 19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornica∣tion, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Ver. 20. Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresie. Ver. 21. Envyings, Murthers, Drunken∣ness, Revellings, and such like; of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they who do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. , the works of the flesh.] That some of these may very properly be called Works of the Flesh, cannot be doubt∣ed; but seeing some of these Sins seem chiefly to consist in Errors of the Mind, as Heresie, and Idolatry, and others of them to derive from evil dispositions of the Spirit, as Envy, Malice, Witchcraft, it seems not ea∣sie to perceive with what propriety they are here called the Works of the Flesh. But 1. That Strife, Contentions, bitter Zeal and Envy, are indeed Works of the Flesh, we may discern from a Reflection on the usu∣al Objects of them; for we do not use to contend with, or envy Men on the account of things truly Spiritual, because they bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, or have the Pleasures of an upright Conscience; but our Contentions generally are about Worldly, Carnal Things, the Pleasures, Honours, or Enjoyments of the present World: For whence come Zeal and Envy, saith St. James, come they not from your Lusts which war in your Members, James 4.1, 2. Moreover, Murther and Witchcrafts, or , as that word imports, those poison∣ous Ingredients which are used to destroy Humane Life, are the Fruits of Hatred, Envy, Malice, and so must have their rise from the same Sensual Lusts. The Idolatry of the Heathens, not only as it was attended with Revellings and Un∣cleanness, but as it represented God to Cor∣poreal Eyes in Images, and brought him down unto the Senses, may well be deemed a Sen∣sual Crime. And lastly, Heresie, according to the Scrip∣ture Notion, being not a pure Mistake of Judgment, but an espousing a false Doctrine out of Disgust, Pride, or Envy, or from worldly Principles, or to avoid Persecution or Trouble in the Flesh, may well be ranked among Carnal Lusts. Hence are such Men said, Not to serve God, but their own Belly, Rom. 16.17, 18. to teach what they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1.11. to account gain for godliness, 1 Tim. 6.5. and through covetousness, with feigned words, to make Mer∣chandise of others, 2 Pet. 2.3. And there∣fore the Apostle doth not advise us to Con∣vince, but only to Admonish, and Reject the Heretick, as knowing that he sins, being convinced of his own Conscience. See Note on Tit. 3.10. Ver. 22. But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Good∣ness, Faith, Ver. 23. Meekness, Temperance; against such there is no Law (that can condemn, or render them obnoxious to the wrath of God.) , there is no Law.] The Ex∣position of those who say such Persons need no Law, is not to be approved, because it suits not with the words, , against such there is no Law. Moreover, the Law of Liberty they are under, was given to ob∣lige them to the practice of these Vertues, and so was needful to that end. Ver. 24. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts (of it.) Ver. 25. If (then) we (pretend to) live in (and by) the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit, (according to the Motions, not of the Flesh, but of the Spirit.) Ver. 26. Let us not be desirous of Vain-glory, (Gr. vain-glorious,) provoking one a¦nother, envying one another.
, provoking one another, &c.] Theodoret here observes, that they who stood firm in the Faith, and so enjoyed their Spiritual Gifts, might be apt to con∣temn, and glory over the weak on that account, and others might envy their Gifts. And this shews the seasonableness of this Exhortation, and connects these words with the beginning of the following Chapter, where the Apostle condemns them who had high thoughts of themselves, and upon that account were apt to overlook, and to neglect their fallen Brother. CHAP. VI. Verse 1. BRethren, if any man be overtaken with a fault, you that are spi∣ritual, (endowed with those Spiritual Gifts which enable you for the Publick Ministrati∣ons in the Church,) restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, (to a right understand∣ing of his Duty, and a suitable practice) con∣sidering thy self, lest thou also be tempted (and so fall as he did.) , with a fault.] They seem not well to have considered the use of this word in Scripture, who say it is Lapsus ho∣minis ex improviso impingentis, a Fault com∣mitted unawares, or for want of circumspe∣ction, since the Apostle applies it to all the Sins of the Heathen World, styling them , dead in trespasses, Eph. 2.1, 5. Col. 2.13. and to all the sins forgiven us through Faith in Christ, Rom. 4.25. 5.16. 2 Cor. 5.19. Eph. 1.7. the word  seems rather to import such a Sur∣prize. , you that are spiritual.] I have noted on 1 Cor. 14.32. that in the beginnings of Christianity, when Churches were first converted, they had for a time no settled Church Governours, but all their Church Offices were performed by Men who had Spiritual Gifts, and by them are said to Pro∣phecy in the Church to their Edification, Ex∣hortation, and Comfort, v. 2. So I conceive it was when St. Paul writ to the Galatians; for here is no direction of this Epistle to any stated Church Governours, no Salutation of any in the Close, no Charge against any for suffering these Great Miscarriages in the Church; no Exhortation to them to take heed to their Ministry, and to oppose themselves to these Deceivers; and then the Spiritual Men here mentioned, must be the Prophets who then performed all Spiritual Offices a∣mong them. , in the Spirit of Meek∣ness.] 2 Tim. 2.24. That so they may not provoke them to fly off to Judaism, Chap. 5.26. whom they should restore to a right understanding of their Christian Liberty, and to a Freedom from that Yoke of Bon∣dage. , lest thou also be tempted.] i. e. Lest thou fall by Temptation; for to stand firm against Temptation, when it as∣saults us, is not a proper Consideration to engage us to pity those that fall by it. This is the import of the word, when we are taught to pray, that we enter not into Temp∣tation, Matth. 6.13. when the Apostle bids the married Persons live together, that Satan tempt them not for their Incontinence, 1 Cor. 7.5. when he is sollicitous for the Thessalo∣nians, lest the Tempter should have tempted them, and rendred his labours vain, 1 Thess. 3.3. and when St. James saith, Every Man is tempted when he is led away by his own lusts, James 1.14. Ver. 2. Bear ye one anothers Burthens, (In∣firmities in Judgment, or in Manners,) and so fulfil the Law of Christ,) which requires you by love to serve one another, Chap. 5.13. Ver. 3. For if a man think himself to be something, when (wanting Charity, 1 Cor. 13.2, 3.) he is nothing, he deceiveth him∣self. , if a man thinks himself something, being nothing.] Of himself, but by the Grace of God being what he is, 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 12.11. So some truly, but not so pertinently to the Scope of the Text; say others, Being nothing in the sight of God; who regards him not for his Knowledge, but his Charity, 1 Cor. 13.2, 3. i. e. If upon this account he overlooks, and despiseth his weak offending Brother, not sympathising with him, v. 2. or endeavour∣ing to restore him, v. 1. but rather glorying in this, that he is a strong Christian in com∣parison of others, he is then nothing in the sight of God. Ver. 4. But (to avoid this deceit) let e∣very man prove his own Work, and then shall he have rejoycing in himself, and not (only) in (comparing himself with) ano∣ther. , let every man prove.] i. e. Let him approve his Actions to God, and his own Conscience, and then he may take comfort simply in himself, that he is a Good Man, and not in this only, that he is better than others. So the word signifies Rom. 1.28. , they approved not of God, Rom. 2.18. , thou approvest
the things which are most excellent, Rom. 12.2. Be transformed by the renewing of your mind, , that you may approve the good, and acceptable, and per∣fect Will of God. And Chap. 14.22. Happy is the man who doth not condemn, or act a∣gainst his Conscience, , in that which by his actions he approves of. See Eph. 5.10. Philip. 1.10. 1 Thess. 2.4. 1 Tim 3.10. and Note on 1 Cor. 11.28. Ver. 5. For every Man shall bear his own burthen. , his own Burthen.] i. e. This every Man is concern'd to do, viz. to make his own Work good, and approved in the sight of God; for another Man's greater sins, will not excuse thee from bearing the burthen of thine own. The Apostle having thus instructed their Teachers, or Spiritual Men, not to despise, or under value their Christian Brethren, pro∣ceeds now to instruct these Brethren, how to behave themselves towards their Teachers. Saying, Ver. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teacheth, in all good things, (he stands in need of, as God's Blessing may enable him.) , let him communicate.] This he elsewhere stiles Communication, , by giving their good things, and receiving his good Instructions, Philip. 4.15. by sowing Spirituals, and reaping of them Carnal things, 1 Cor. 9.11. And if this was their Duty towards such Teachers as had no need of Books, or study to fit themselves for the Work, they being ena∣bled for it by the immediate Assistance and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, how much more towards them who spend much Time and Money to fit themselves for that Work, and must be still employed in studying and read∣ing, to make themselves such Workmen as need not to be ashamed? The following words are by most Inter∣preters referred to the same subject, thus, Make no vain Excuses in this Case, God will not be mocked with false Pretences. But I rather think the Apostle proceeds to a new general Exhortation against the Carnal Doctrines of their Deceivers, the hidden things of dishonesty which he charges them with, 2 Cor. 4.2.7.1, 2.12.21. whose Exhor∣tation was attended with Uncleanness, 1 Thess. 2.3. See Note on 2 Cor. 4.2. Against which Doctrines this is his usual Preface, Let no man deceive you with vain words, Eph. 5.6. 1 Cor. 6.9. James 1.16. I therefore thus in∣terpret them, Ver. 7. Be not deceived (by your false Teachers) for whatsoever a man soweth (of) that (kind) shall he also reap. Ver. 8. For he that soweth to the flesh, (by doing the works of the flesh, mentioned Chap. 5.20, 21.) shall of the flesh reap Corruption; but he that soweth to the Spi∣rit, (by bringing forth the fruits of the Spi∣rit, mentioned v. 22, 23.) shall of the Spirit (raising him up to it, Rom. 8.11.) reap life everlasting. Ver. 9. But (then) let us not be weary of well-doing, (or of exercising these fruits of the Spirit,) for in due season we shall reap (the rewards of them) if we faint not, (but hold out unto the end.) , in due season.] i. e. in the pro∣per time of Recompence; for the Encou∣ragement Christ gives unto the Works of Charity is this, Thou shalt be Recompen∣sed at the Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14.14. Ver. 10. As we have therefore opportu∣nity (and ability,) let us do good (and cha∣ritable offices) to all Men, especially to the houshold of faith. Ver. 12. As many as desire to make a fair shew in (things concerning) the flesh, (en∣deavouring to gratifie Men, and avoid their displeasure,) they (would) constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution (from their hands) for the Cross of Christ. , &c. for the Cross of Christ.] I have shewed, Note on Chap. 5.11. this was the great stumbling block of the Jews, partly because their Law pronounced a Curse on those that hanged on a Tree, See Note on 1 Cor. 1.23. partly because the Cross, and Sufferings of Christ on it, was the Foundation of the Doctrine of Ju∣stification by Faith in his Blood, of the Cessation of the Ceremonial Law, and the Removal of the Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile, Col. 2.14, 16. on which account chiefly they were scandalized at it, and persecuted those who taught that this was the Result of our Lord's Death and Sufferings. Ver. 13. (I say, 'tis upon this account, and not out of regard to the Law, that they so zealously plead for Circumcision, and the ob∣servation of it,) For neither do they them∣selves who are circumcised, keep the Law, but desire to have you circumcised; that they may glory in your flesh. , for neither do they keep the Law.] This was unquestionably true of these Judaizing Christians: For how, saith Theodoret, could they in Gala∣tia regularly observe the Jewish Feasts, or offer Sacrifice, or cleanse themselves from their Defilements, by touching any thing that was unclean?
, that they might glory in your flesh.] i. e. Might boast of this among the Jews, that they pro∣moted Circumcision even among the Gentiles, and by that pretence might avoid Persecution from them. Ver. 14. But (whatsoever they may glory in) God forbid that I should glory, save in the (knowledge and profession of the) Cross of Christ, by which the World is crucified to me, and I unto the World, (Chap. 2.20. being dead to sin, Rom. 6.3, 4. to the flesh, Gal. 5.24. to the Law by the Body of Christ, and separated from the World to live unto God.) Ver. 15. For in (the Oeconomy of) Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision availeth any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Crea∣ture, (one dead to Sin, the Flesh, and the World, but living unto God.) Ver. 16. And as many as walk accord∣ing to this Rule, (being chiefly concerned that the new Creature may be framed in them,) Peace (shall) be upon them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel (not of the Flesh, but) of God. Ver. 17. From henceforth let no Man trouble me (with their Contentions against my Office, because I renounce Circumcision, and my legal Righteousness) for I bear in my Body the marks of (a Servant, not of the Law, but of) Christ Jesus, (those Wounds and Stripes which testifie me to be a faithful Ser∣vant of that Jesus for whose sake I suffer them.) Ver. 18. Brethren, the Grace (Favour and Good will) of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. , with your spi∣rit.] That is, with you; for in other Epi∣stles it is , with you, 1 Cor. 16.23. Col. 4.18. 1 Thess. 5.28. or , with you all, Rom. 16.24. 2 Cor. 13.13. Philip. 4.23. 2 Thess. 3.18. Tit. 3.15. Hebr. 13.25.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle of PAƲL the Apostle TO THE EPHESIANS. § 1. THAT this Epistle to the E∣phesians was indeed written by St. Paul, and directed to them, and not to any other Church, we cannot doubt, if we believe either the Epistle, or St. Paul himself. For 1. It begins thus, Paul an Apostle (wri∣teth these things) to the Saints that are at Ephesus. And in this Reading all the Versi∣ons and all the Manuscripts agree. 2. In the Close of this Epistle he speaks thus to them, That you may know my Af∣fairs, and how I do, Tychicus a beloved Brother, and faithful Minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things, whom I have sent unto you, Chap. 6.21, 22. And in the second Epistle to Timothy, he saith, Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus, 2 Tim. 4.12. Moreover, all Antiquity agree in this, that this Epistle was written by St. Paul:. Ep. ad Eph. § 12. Ignatius is express for it in his Epistle to the Ephesians.Apostolus Ephesiis ait, Lib. 5. c. 8, 14. Quemadmodum Beatus Apostolus in ea quae est ad Ephesies Epistali. 2.2 Paulus l. 1. p. 16. A. p. 37. A. D. l. 3. c. 20. Apostolus Paulus, l. 4. c. 55. Irenaeus, Clemens of Alexandria,Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas—apud quas ipsae adhuc Authenticae literae eorum recitantur—si potes in  dere habes Ephesum. De prscript. c. 36. Tertullian, and. Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 1. c. 5. p. 88. C. Paulus Strom.  p. 466. . Orig. adv. Cels. l. 4. p. 197.  p. 211. Ori∣gen in divers places of their Works. We learn indeed from the Argument of this Epi∣stle in Oecumenius, and more fully from. Theodoret, that some of the Ancients thought this Epistle was writ by St. Paul before he had seen the Ephesians, or at least before his Three years converse with then: But not any of the Ancients, excepting Ma∣cion, ever thought that this Epistle was not written, among other Churches, to that of Ephesus, but of Laodicea; and thereforeIn Epistolà quam nos ad Ephesios praescriptam habemus, Haeretici vero ad Laodicenos. Adv. Marc. l. 5. c. 11. Tertullian takes notice of it, as a thing proper to those Hereticks, though indeed both might be true; for this Epistle being writ, not  to the Saints at Ephesus, but also to the Faithful in Christ Jesus, might be writ also to the Colossians, the Laodiceans, and others, who had not seen his Face, Coloss. 2.1. See Note on Coloss. 4.16. And this Observation gives a sufficient Answer to the Arguments, from Chap. 1.15. chap. 3.2. from which s have conjectured, that this Epistle could not be writ to them after St. Paul had staid Three years in Asia, though they more fully are con∣sidered in their respective places. § 2. That this Epistle was written
St. Paul was Prisoner at Rome, is evident from Chap. 3.1. where he is stiled, Paul the Prisoner of Jesus Christ; and Chap. 4.1. a Prisoner in the Lord. Now it must be at soonest in the Third year of Nero that he was sent Prisoner to Rome: For Felix was made Procurator of Judea by Nero in his First year, saith. De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 22. . Antiq. l. 20. c. 5. vel 11. p. 694. F. Josephus; and after Two years, he left Paul Prisoner at Caesarea, Acts 24.27. Portius Fests succeeds him, and after some time bears him twice at Caesarea, and sends him afterwards to Rome, which Interval, if we con∣sider how long it was e're he reached Rome, may very well be supposed to take up another year. He therefore could not write this Epi∣stle till the Fourth or Fifth of Nero. He did not write it, saith Bishop Pearson, till the Eighth of Nero, A. D. 62. § 3. That this Epistle was writ against Simon Magus and his Followers, as Esthius hints, none of the Ancients say. More pro∣bable is the conjecture of Grotius, That the Apostle rather designed by it to Arm them a∣gainst the Doctrines of the Philosophers, and of those Jews who endeavoured to bring them to the observation of their Rites; for that there were then many Jews at Ephesus, and throughout Asia, we learn both from the Acts of the Apostles, which inform us that Paul being at Ephesus, entred into a Synagogue of the Jews, Acts 18.19.19.8, 9, 10. and dis∣coursed with them, till by their perversness be was forced to separate from them; and that by his preaching, all that were in Asia heard the Word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks. And also from. In Flaccum. p. 752. & Leg. ad Cajum. p. 798. C. Philo. who in∣forms us that the Jews inhabited the most, and best Cities in the Provinces and Islands both of Europe and Asia. And that these Jews were disturbers of the Churches of Asia, and of Ephesus in particular, and sticklers to introduce a Mixture of Judaism with Chri∣stianity, we learn from both the Epistles t St. Timothy. Against their Doctrine of the Necessity of the Observance of the Law of Moses to Justification and Salvation, e seem∣eth to oppose these words, By Grace ye are saved, not of Works, lest any man should boast, Chap. 2.8, 9. which manifestly answer to his Discourse upon that Subject, Rom. 3. where he asserts, that we are justified freely by his Grace, v. 24. and not by the Works of the Law, v. 20. and that all boasting is excluded, not by the Law of Works, but of FaithSee also the Note on Chap. 3.15, 16.. Against that other Notion of theirs depending on the former, That the Gentiles should be admitted into the Church only as Proselytes, and not assumed to the same Privi∣ledges with the Jews, he declares himself more largely Chap. 2. from v. 12. to the 20th. Chap. 3.6-10.
A Paraphrase and Comment ON THE Epistle to the EPHESIANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. PAUL an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God (cal∣ling me to that Office,) to the Saints that are at Ephesus, and (that is) to the faithful in Christ Jesus (throughout all Asia). , to the Saints.] See the Note on 1 Cor. 1.1. , and, that is.] See Note on Coloss. 1.3. Ver. 2. Grace be (given) to you, and peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. , Grace.] This Grace is given by the Communication of the Holy Ghost from the Father, and the Son to the Church, John 14.23. which is the reason that the Holy Ghost is not mentioned in these Salutations. Ver. 3. Blessed be (that) God (who is) the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in hea∣venly places (or things) in (and through) Christ Jesus. .] These words , in heavenly pla∣ces, may probably refer to the Gifts of the Holy Ghost then conferr'd upon the Church, and stiled by the Prophet , the bles∣sings of God; Fear not Jacob my Servant, and Israel whom I have chosen, for I will put my spirit on thy seed, , and my blessings on thy Children, Isa. 44.2, 3. Where the word in the Hebrew and Chaldee is  and my Benedictions, and so well correspond∣eth with the words of the Apostle, God hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings. The same Apostle stiles these gifts , the blessing of the Gospel; for having said to the Romans, I long to see you that I may im∣part unto you  some spiri∣tual gift to the end you may be established, Chap. 1.11. he adds, When I come to see you, I shall come in the fulness  of the blessing of the Gospel, Chap. 15.29. And the promise of the Spirit is stiled , the blessing of that Abraham in whom all the Families of the Earth were to be blessed, in these words, That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith, Gal. 3.14. These Gifts are also called  heavenly things; thus when our Saviour had discoursed of the Spirit to be received in Baptism, he saith, he had told them  heavenly things, John 3.12. and they who were made partakers of these Gifts, were said to have tasted , of the heaven∣ly gift, Hebr. 6.4. Or 2ly, God's blessing us , with heavenly things in Christ Je∣sus, may signifie his exalting us to a blessed state of Immortality in the Heavens through him, his giving us an house not made with hands eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. and putting upon us an house from Heaven, his gi∣ving us an inheritance incorruptible, undefied reserved in the heavens for us, on the account of which incorruptible and immortal Bodies we are stiled  heavenly, as Christ is 1 Cor. 15.48. and the Apostle saith, that as we have born the image of the earthy Ada by our mortal Bodies, so by our Bodies made immortal, we shall bear , the Image of the heavenly Adam. v. 49. and hence we are said to be partakers ,  our heavenly Calling. In a word, Christ ha∣ving delivered us from that death and morta∣lity which came upon us by the sin of Adam, hath blessed us with this heavenly blessing having made us sit together with him in heaven∣ly places, Eph. 2.6. And this is the hope of our Calling, v. 18. of this Chapter. Ver. 4. According as he hath chosen as (Gentiles, Chap. 3.6) in him before the foundation of the world, (Chap. 3.11. desig
that we (thus chosen) should be holy, and without blame before him in love, (by virtue of our faith in Christ, and love to one another) Chap. 3.17. Gal. 5.6. .] It was the opinion of the Jews, that God in framing the World had a particular regard for them; and that the World was made for their sakes, Esdr. 2.55, 59. and that the Messiah being created before the World, God entred into Covenant with him that he should redeem the World, and them especially.Cartw. Mellif. l. 1. Crit. Sacr. Tom. 9. p. 2974. The holy blessed God, say they, began to covenant with the Messiah when he created him, and said unto him, the sins of those who are laid up in secret with thee, will make thee to come under an Iron yoke, and make thee like to this young Heifer, whose Eyes are dim, and fill thy Spirit with anguish; and because of their iniquity thy tongue shall cleave to the roof of thy mouth; Wil'st thou undergo their condition for them? The Messiah said, I undertake it with joy, and exultation of my heart, on this condition, that not one of Israel may perish; and that not only they may be sa∣ved who live in my days, but also they who are dead from the days of the first Man to this very day. And again,Cartw. ibid. p. 2975. Huls. de Jud. Mess. Part. 2. p. 309. When God created the World, he held forth his hand under the Throne of Glory, and created the Soul of the Messiah, and his Company, and said to him, Wil'st thou heal and redeem my Sons after Six thou∣sand years? He answered, Yes. God said to him, If so, wil'st thou bear Chastisement to ex∣piate their iniquities? according to what is written Isa. 53.4. Surely he bore our griefs. He answered, I will endure them with joy. Now because the Jews held that God thus elected them from the beginning of the World, and sent the Messiah that none of them should perish. The Apostle, to take from them all cause of boasting against the Gentiles up∣on that account, declares the Gentiles were thus elected in Christ Jesus, even before the foundations of the World; (i. e.) that he designed then to chuse them to be his Church and People, i. e. an holy People to the Lord. , to the Adoption of Children.] This in the Scripture Phrase imports Adoption to a blessed Resurrection, and a state of im∣mortality both of Soul and Body; for being Sons of God, saith St. Luke, Chap. 20.36. we are Sons of the Resurrection, and if Sons, faith the Apostle, then Heirs of God, Joynt heirs of Christ, Rom. 8.16, 17. The Revelation of the Sons of God is their future glory to be reveal∣ed at Christ's appearing, v. 18, 19. See Col. 3.4. Their Adoption is the Redemption of their Bo∣dies from Corruption, v. 23. This being so, God's electing us in Christ before the foundati∣on of the World, is his purpose before the World was made: Or from the fall, to give to those that should believe in Christ this A∣doption, (i. e.) the Redemption of their Bo∣dies from that Mortality to which the fall of Adam had subjected them, Gen. 3.15. whence he is here said to have elected us, , fore-ordaining us to this Adoption, , according to the good pleasure of his will, or his free grace and favour, there being nothing in us, or even in our faith, that could deserve this glorious Adoption. Ver. 6. (And this he hath done) To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted, (or with which he hath fa∣voured us ) in (and through) the beloved. Ver. 7. In whom we have redemption (from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. and from the con∣demnation due to us for sin, Rom. 3.24, 25.) through his blood, (the blood of Atonement shed for) the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his grace. , Redemption.] All Mankind lying under a Sentence of Condemnation on the account of sin, all having sinned, and fal∣len short of the glory of God upon that account, Rom. 3.23. 'Twas necessary that something should be done to take away the guilt of sin, and reconcile us to a God displeased with us for it, that so we, our persons, and performances might find acceptance with him: This could not be done by any Righteousness of our own before Faith in Christ, we being in Christ Je∣sus created to good works, Eph. 2.10. and there∣fore was necessary to be done by an Act of Grace on God's part, accepting us as Righte∣ous through Faith in Christ, and justifying us freely through Faith in his Blood. Hence do the Scriptures of the New Testament seem plainly to make our Reconciliation, and so our Access to God depend on our being pur∣ged from the guilt of Sin by an Atonement made by the Blood of Christ for our Iniqui∣ties, that so, they being pardoned, we may have peace with God, and freedom of access to him. Christ suffered, saith St. Peter, , that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. (i. e.) to give us freedom of access to God, for by him we have  admission to the Father, Eph. 2.18. See the Note there. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them, 2 Cor. 5.18, 21. and this Reconcilia∣tion was effected by making Christ  a Sin offering for us though he knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God (or righteous with that Righteousness which God only will accept through faith) in him. See the Note on that Verse. And the Author to the Hebrews having said, that the Covenant established in the Blood of Christ was this,
that he would be merciful to our iniquities, and remember our sins no more, Hebr. 10.16, 17. and having thence inferr'd, that having thus obtain'd remission for us by his Blood, there was no need that he should again make him∣self an Offering for Sin, v. 18. he adds, that therefore we may draw near with full assurance of faith that we shall be accepted through this beloved, as having our hearts sprinkled by his blood, v. 19, 20, 21, 22. and therefore clean∣sed from any guilt of Conscience on that ac∣count. And this Remission was also necessary that we might obtain that Adoption of Sons to which Believers were fore-appointed, be∣cause into the New Jerusalem can nothing en∣ter that is defiled, or unclean; nor can there be any enjoyment of God till the Blood of Christ hath cleansed us from all sin, and there∣fore, saith the Apostle, he became the Mediator of the New Covenant, that having suffered death for the Redemption of us from the Sins we formerly had committed under the Old Covenant; they that were called might receive the promise of an eternal Inheritance, Hebr. 9.15. Ver. 8. Wherein (or in which dispensation) he hath abounded to us in all wisdom and prudence. , in all wisdom and pru∣dence.] That is, say some, in the Spiritual Gifts of Wisdom and Prudence; but though  be reckon'd among Spiritual Gifts, I find not that  is so. Moreover, he hath thus abounded towards us in all wisdom and pru∣dence, saith the Apostle, by making known to us the riches of his will, which leads to the o∣ther Exposition, which refers this to the mani∣fold Wisdom of God shew'd in contriving this dispensation, Chap. 3.10. and his Prudence in executing the counsel of his Will by this means, viz. by sending of his Son to be our Saviour. And whereas the Deists seem to side with the Socinians, in denying the Wisdom of this Dispensation of God, in sending his Son into the World to suffer for our Sins, and by his Sufferings to make an Atonement for them, it seemeth easie to demonstrate, as well the manifold Wisdom, as the rich Grace and Fa∣vour of God to us in this Dispensation. For 1. It seemeth absolutely requisite, either that the substitution of another to suffer in our stead should be admitted, or that we our selves should suffer the reward of our Iniquities, or that a full Remission and free Pardon of our Sins should be vouchsafed us without any Suf∣fering; now the admission of another to suf∣fer in our stead, is the thing pleaded for; if therefore that be granted, the Wisdom of that God who acteth all things according to the counsel of his will, must also be acknowledged in this Dispensation, if we our selves must suffer the reward of our Iniquity, that being Death eternal, or Death without recovery from it by a blessed Resurrection, all Mankind must inevitably be subject to that Punishment, all having sinned, and fallen short of the glory of God, Rom. 3.23. And 3dly, should God have issued out a free Pardon, and given us a full Remission of our Sin, without any thing required by way of Reparation for the Viola∣tion of his Law, he must have pardoned Sin∣ners without any thing required to shew his hatred of sin, and his resolution not to let it go unpunished, and so without sufficient mo∣tive to deter us from it for the future, which seems not well consistent with his Holiness and Justice, and the Relation of a Governour, which seemeth plainly to require the Vindica∣tion of his Honour, and the Preservation of the Laws he hath established from Contempt. 'Twas then an Act of Grace not to require we should personally suffer the Reward of our I∣niquities; it was an Act of Wisdom not to afford a full Remission of our Sin, without re∣quiring any thing by way of Reparation for the Violation of his Law; it must be therefore an Act of Wisdom also to admit another to suffer in our stead, especially if we consi∣der 2ly, That by the Obedience of our Lord Christ unto death in our stead, all the great Ends of Punishment designed by Governours were very signally obtained, and that with more advantage to God's glory, then if the punishment of our Offences had been infli∣cted upon us; and so God by it may be truly said to have been satisfied; seeing that Justice which consists in punishing for the Transgres∣sion of a Law, is truly satisfied, when all those Ends for which the Punishment of the Offen∣der could be desired, are obtained. Now the Ends of Punishment are 1. , that they who suffer may be ex∣emplary to others, and may by what they do endure, deter others from the commission of the Offences for which they suffer. 2. , that the Offender may learn Wis∣dom by the Rod; that the Remembrance of what he suffered for it, might prevent the re∣petition of his Sin, and that he may be fitted to embrace the Counsel of our Saviour, Sinne more, lest a worse thing come upon you. 3. , the Vindication of the Prince's Honour, and the Preservation of the Laws he hath established from contempt. Now (1.) God by this Dispensation hath given us the most effectual Example to deter us from sin. For (1.) by what our Saviour suffered in our stead, we see that God is cer∣tainly in earnest when he threatneth Death to Sinners; that he is thorowly resolved upon the Punishment of Sin, since he inflicted so great Punishment on the beloved of his Soul, when he became our Surety; for if on this ac∣count God spared not his only Son, Rom. 8 32. we may be sure he will not spare his stubborn Enemies. But let us say, with the Socinians,
that Christ suffered all his bitter Agonies, his ignominious and painful Death, not as the Punishment of Sin, or to make an Atonement for it, but from a pure Act of God's Domini∣on, how will it follow hence, that God will surely punish Sin, and with Severity avenge the Transgressions of his Law, if he laid none of these Sufferings on Christ for the Punish∣ment of Sin? Seems it not strange to say, that Severities laid on Christ without respect to Sin, should be designed as an Instance of God's Severity against Sin. This shews, saithNam si Deus Christo licet innocentissimo, & unigenito filio suo non pepercit, sed tam dirae tamque ignominiosae morti eum subjecit, quanta censemus, quamque acerba supplicia Deum sumpturum de hominibus impiis. Resp. ad Grot. c. 1. partic. 57. Crellius, that he who laid such bitter Suf∣ferings on his innocent and well-beloved Son, will inflict the severest Punishments on wicked Men. I answer; This will indeed follow in re∣spect to Sufferings for the same Cause; for if the Righteous be recompenced upon Earth, much more the Sinner, and the wicked, Prov. 11.31. If good Eli, and holy David, suffer∣ed so great Punishments for their Sins, much more shall a wicked Cain and prophane Esau. But will it follow, that because holy Job suf∣fered so much by way of Trial, or St. Paul for propagation of the Christian Faith, that there∣fore Sinners shall be obnoxious to greater Pu∣nishments? Crellius himself saith, Christ's Suffering's cannot be an exemplary Punish∣ment, becauseIbid. abunde fuerint à Deo com∣pensatae, they were so abundantly rewarded by God; and doth not the same Reason shew they could not be a warning to us, if he only suffered with respect to the Recompence of Re∣ward? for are the light Afflictions which Chri∣stians suffer here in prospect of an Eternal Recompence, ever made an Instance of God's Severity against Sin? Moreover, this Exam∣ple shews how insupportable the Punishment will be which Justice will inflict upon the Sinner; for if the apprehension of it produced such Agonies and Consternations in the Soul of Christ, that God saw need to send an An∣gel to support him, Luke 22.43. how must the Sinner sink under the Burthen when it is laid upon his shoulders? If he who was the well-beloved Son of God, found it so dreadful to lye under the Burthen for some hours, to lye exposed for ever to it must be far more intole∣rable. 2ly, Whereas inevitable ruine must have followed upon the Execution of the deserved Punishment on the offending Person, God by this method hath taken a fit way for Refor∣mation of the Sinner, which was the second end of Punishment; for what can be a more effectual Motive to abstain from Sin than this Example, which represents the greatness of the Provocation in the greatness of the Punishment, and shews that 'tis impossible the guilty Per∣son should avoid the stroke of God's vindi∣ctive Justice, or bear the weight of his Al∣mighty Arm. But the Sci T, which denies that God was angry with  on the account of Sin, or that he did require any Pu∣nishment, or Satisfaction in order to the pardon of it, so far obstructs this Reformation, as it affords the Sinner hopes that he may not here∣after be angry with him on that account, or require any Punishment, or Satisfaction in or∣der to the pardon of his future Sins. 3ly, God by this Dispensation hath suffici∣ently consulted the preservation of his Honour, and secured the Reverence and Observation of his Laws; which was the third great End of Punishment: He by declaring that he would not pardon our Offences without a Satisfaction made for the Violations of his Law, hath ful∣ly vindicated his Institutions from Contempt, seeing by this Example he hath let all Men know, That though he be a God of Mercy and Long-suffering, he will by no means clear the guilty, or let the Transgressor of them go unpunished. Again, God by this Dispensation hath vin∣dicated his Honour more than if he had de∣stroyed the Sinner, having more evidently shewed his hatred of, and great displeasure a∣gainst Sin, by punishing it so severely in his only Son; for the greater is the inducement to remit the punishment of Sin, the greater must be his hatred of it who inflists it; that there∣fore this consideration, that he who suffered was his only well-beloved Son, would not in∣duce him to remit the Punishment, must be the strongest Demonstration of his most perfect ha∣tred of all Iniquity. But now remove this Supposition, and say, with the Socinians, That God pardoned all Mens Sins against him without any valuable Consideration, and with an absolute freedom forgave Men all the Punishments his Law had threatned to them, and ceased from all his Anger and Displeasure against Sinners without any Atonement made unto, or required by him, and how will it appear God was at all con∣cerned to vindicate the Honour of his Laws, or shew his hatred against Sin? Hence Crelli∣us saw it necessary to own thatHinc enim manifestissimè apparet summum Dei adversus peccatum Odium, siquidem Deus, ut ab illis nos penitus abstra∣terit unigenito filio suo non pepercit. Ibid. the Suffer∣ings of Christ are a demonstration of God's ha∣tred of iniquity, because our sins were the cause of them; but then he means not that they were the meritorious, but only that they were the final cause of his Sufferings; not that he suffered to prevail with God to pardon Sin∣ners, but only to prevail with Sinners to break off their Sins. Now hence indeed we
may conclude that God is very desirous that Sinners should desist from sin; but it fol∣lows not hence, that they must certainly expect the most heavy Punishments if they do not; for if God could freely pardon the sins of the whole World without any Satisfaction made to his offended Justice, if there be no∣thing in God, as Rector of the Universe, that requires he should punish sin, or shew his dis∣pleasure against it, if the punishment of sin depends purely upon his Arbitrary Will, why may not Sinners hope, notwithstanding all that Christ hath suffered for their good, for a like act of his free Grace hereafter in the re∣mission of their sins without a Reformation, and that God may be reconciled to them again whilst they continue in their sins? Since then no Laws require the punishment of the Offender himself, rather than of ano∣ther who is willing to be his Surety, or suffer for him, on any other account but this, that the punishment of the Offender, and not a∣nother for him, will only Answer the foremen∣tioned Ends of punishment, when that can e∣qually be done by what another suffers, the Law it self must equally be satisfied, because the Ends of the Law are equally obtained. Ver. 9. Having made known to us the my∣stery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he hath purposed in himself, (viz. his secret purpose to chuse us Gentiles to be fellow Heirs of the same Body, Chap. 3.6.) Ver. 10. That (so) in the dispensation (which was to be accomplished by sending of Christ) in the fulness of time, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in him. , to gather together in one.] i. e. God hath now by the Gospel accomplish∣ed the secret purpose of his Will, to make the Gentiles fellow Heirs of the same Body, and Priviledges with the Jews; having reconciled both Jew and Gentile to him in one Body on the Cross, Eph. 2.14, 16. and so gathered to∣gether in one all things on Earth, and by pro∣curing for us that Adoption which is the Re∣demption of the Body from Mortality, Rom. 8.23. and making us like to the Angels by being Children of the Resurrection, he hath summed up in one all things in Heaven; for they being stiled the Sons of God, Job 1.6. 2.1.38.7. because they live already in their Fathers House, and are an Image of his Immor∣tality, when the Resurrection hath put us in∣to that happy state that we can die no more, but are equal to the Angels, and are the Chil∣dren of God, being the Children of the Resur∣rection, Luke 20.35, 36. then shall we be made one with them. The Interpretation of the Ancient Fathers seems to give this sense, That God hath by this Dispensation gathered under one Head, viz. Corist, the Head of the Church, all things on Earth; i. e. Jews and Gentiles, and all things in Heaven, Christ being the Hea over Angels and Principalities, they being a Ministring Spirits to him. And this Sense seems agreeable to the like words, Coloss. 1.22. See the Note there. Ver. 11. In whom also we (believing Jews) have obtained an Inheritance (or are be his portion,) being predestinated (or fore-ordain∣ed to it) according to the purpose of him who worketh all things according to the counsel of his own will. Ver 12. That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ, (the glorious gifts he hath bestowed upon us, and the eminent Graces he hath wrought in us, tending highly to the glory of his Grace, v. 6. and Philip. 1.11. .] The Jews were before chosen of God to be a People of Inheritance, Deut. 4.20. and a peculiar People, Exod. 19.5. and as such God provided for them an Habitation, and Inheritance in the Land of Canaan; but the Jewish Church being now to be dissolved, the Jews being to be banish'd from their own Land, and the unbelieving Jews cut off from their Relation to God as his People, the belie∣ving Jews were through Faith in Christ to be chosen again to be God's Portion and Inheri∣tance, and his peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.5. Tit. 2.14. and to be admitted to a better In∣heritance, , viz. to the portion of the inheritance of Saints in light, Coloss. 1.12. And to this, saith the Apostle, they believing were appointed, God having fore-ordained that this Inheritance should be the Portion of Believers, and the Consequent of Faith in Christ, by virtue of which we become the Sons of God. Ver. 13. In whom ye also (trusted) after that ye heard (or hearing) the Word of Truth, the Gospel of Salvation, in whom ye also, af∣ter ye believed (or believing) were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise, (i. e. the Spirit pro∣mised to the Sons of God; for because ye are Sons God hath sent the Spirit of his Son into year hearts, Gal. 4.6.) Ver. 14. Who is the earnest of our Inheri∣tance, until the redemption of the purchased Possession (for the procuring the salutary re∣demption) to the praise of his glory. , till the redempti∣on of life.] There is a twofold , redemption mentioned here, and in other places of the New Testament: The first consists in the Remission of Sins, or our Redemption from the Guilt of it; and of this we have mention v. 7. Rom. 3.24. Col. 1.14. The second in the Re∣demption of the Body from Corruption, and making it partaker of Eternal Life. And or this the Apostle speaks Rom. 8.23. calling it the Adop∣tion, and , the redemption of the Body, or the glorious deliverance of the Sons of God from the Bondage of Corruption, v. 21. Thus 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made to us Justifica∣tion.
, and Redemption; where Re∣demption being distinguish'd from, and follow∣ing Justification and Sanctification, it must im∣port the Redemption of the Body from Cor∣ruption. And Ephes. 4.30. where we are said to be sealed by the Spirit, , to the day of Redemption; the first de∣livers us from the Guilt which condemns us to Death; the second confers the Promise of E∣ternal Life on them who are thus delivered. Hebr. 9.15.  is to save alive, and  is preservation. So Gen. 12.12. they will kill me, , but they will save thee alive. Numb. 22.33. I had killed thee, , but him I had saved alive. Josh. 6.17. As for Raab, , ye shall save her alive. Go slay Amalek, , you shall save none of them alive; 1 Sam. 15.3. but , Saul saved Agag alive, v. 9, 15. 2 Chron. 14.13. The Aethiopi∣ans were overthrown, , so that none of them were left alive. So Phavorinus, . Whence it appears that  is fitly rendred the Redemption of Life, or the Redemption of those who are to be preser∣ved from Death. Ver. 15. Wherefore I also, after I heard (Gr. having heard) of your (stedfast) faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and your (encreasing) love to all the Saints, (i. e. that the faith and love wrought in you continues stedfast, and a∣boundeth.) Ver. 16. Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my Prayers. Ver. 17. (Praying) That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you (in greater measures) the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge (or to the farther acknowledgment) of him. , having heard.] Hence some infer that St. Paul could not write this to the Church of Ephesus, where he abode about three years, Acts 20.31. and had converted many to the Faith throughout most parts of Asia, Acts 19.26. He therefore could not need to hear of their Faith. To this 'tis answered by the Reverend Dr. Hammond, that the word , as the Hebrew  not only signifies to hear, but to under∣stand, and know, and therefore should be ren∣dred here cum sciverim, knowing, or having know your faith. And indeed, the word bears the sense undoubtedly in those words, 1 Cor. 14.2. He that speaketh in an unknown tongue, speaketh not to man, , for no man understand him. So Gen. 11.7. Let us con∣found their Language, , that they may not understand one anothers speech. And Chap. 42.23. They knew not, , that Jo∣seph understood them, for he spake to them by an Interpreter. See Deut. 28.49. 2 Kings 18. 26. Jer. 5.15. Ezek. 3.6. But 2ly, I answer, that this Epistle was writ, not only to the Metropolis of Ephesus, but to the faithful in Christ Jesus in the general, and more especially to those of the lesser Asia, a∣mong whom many might have been convert∣ed by Apollo, and others, and Sr. Paul might have only heard of it; yea, he insinuates that this Epistle was read at Laodicea, and gives order for the reading it at Coloss, Col. 4.16. See the Note there; at both which places he had never been, Coloss. 2.1. And 3ly, From the Epistle of St. Paul to Timo∣thy it appears, that a dangerous and almost epidemical Apostacy from the Purity of the Christian Faith hapned among the Jewish Churches in Asia, which verified St. Paul's Prediction concerning them, that after his de∣parture, not only grievous Wolves should enter in among them, but that among themselves should arise men speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, Acts 20.29, 30. and made it proper for him to give Thanks to God for the stedfastness in the Faith which he had heard of in the rest. See 1 Thess. 3.6. , the Spirit of Wisdom.] St Paul having asserted the Necessity of the Revelation of the Spirit, that we may know the things that are freely given us of God, they being not na∣turally to be perceived, 1 Cor. 6.2-12. doth therefore pray that the Spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge, and Revelation may be imparted to Christians for that end. Ver. 18. The Eyes of your understanding being enlightned, (or that he would give you understandings enlightned) that you may know what (i. e. how glorious) is the hope of his Calling, (i. e. to which he hath called you,) and what the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, (i. e. how great is the Inheritance he hath designed for the Saints.) Ver. 19. And what is the exceeding great∣ness of his power (which he will exert) to∣wards us who believe (by raising us up to the enjoyment of this Inheritance,) according to the working of his mighty power. Ver. 20. Which (power) he (hath already) wrought in Christ (our head) when he raised (Gr. raising) him up from the dead, and set him (whom he hath set) at his own right hand in heavenly places. , the exceed∣ing greatness of his power.] Some Interpret these two Verses of the power of God work∣ing faith in Believers, making it equal to that which effected the Resurrection of our Lord, and thence concluding that we are meerly pas∣sive in the whole work of our Conversion; but as this power is not consistent with per∣swasion, and a rational choice, and if it were exerted, would not render it praise worthy in us to turn to God, not could it truly, and properly be said that we turned, but only that we were turned to God, so is not this Exposi∣tion agreeable to the words; for the Apostle speaks not of the power exercised on us to
render us Believers, but of the power which shall be exercised upon us who believe alrea∣dy, not of the power exercised upon our Souls to raise them from a death in sin, but of the power to be exercised upon our Bodies, to give them a glorious Resurrection to Eternal Life. Ver. 21. Far above all Principalities and powers, and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to come. , not only in this world.] By comparing these words with Co∣loss. 2.10. where Christ is said to be the Head of all Principality and Power; and with Phi∣lip. 2.9. where God is said to have given him a Name above every name. I am enclined to think that these words only signifie that our Lord Christ is exalted above all Power that is or ever shall be; for not to be done in this world, nor in the world to come, Matth. 12.32. is never to be done, Luke 12.32. See Note on Matth. 12.32. Ver. 22. And (he) hath also put all things under his feet, and hath given him to be Head over all things to (the benefit of) his Church. Ver. 23. Which is the Body, (and so) the fulness of him, (even that Jesus) who filleth all in all. , all in all.] For he ascended up on high, that he might fill the Members of his Church with all Gifts necessary for the edification of the Saints, till they came to the fulness of the measure of the stature of Christ, Chap. 4.10, 11, 12. In him all fulness dwells, and we are , filled full in him who as the Head of Principalitities and Powers, Coloss. 2.9, 10. CHAP. II. Verse 1. AND you (also) hath he (raised and) quickened (with, and by Christ, Chap. 1.20.2.5.) who were dead in trespasses and sins. , dead in sins.] They who interpret this Phrase thus, you who are dead to sins by baptism, seem not to have looked to the fifth Verse, where they who are here said to be dead in trespasses and sins, are said to be quickned; or to the parallel place, Col. 2.13. where it is said, you who were dead in sins, and the circumcision of the flesh, he hath quick∣ned; nor indeed to the Phrase which is never used in the Plural Number in that sense, but only in the Singular, viz. Rom. 6.2, 10, 11. Ver. 2. Wherein (in which sins) in times past ye walked, living according to the course (and fashion) of the (evil) world, according to (the suggestions of) the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit which (even) now work∣eth in the Children of Disobedience (the hea∣then world.) , according to the course of this World.] That is, according to the Life which Men of this World, destitute of Faith in Christ, do live; for as Phavorinus saith , the word Age is , the life of man, or , the measure of humane life. Thus  in Isocrates and Zenophon, is to pass the time of life,  in Herodotus and Sophocles, is to end this life, or to die. , according to the Prince of the Power of the Air.] It was the Opinion both of Jews and Heathens, , that the Air was full of Spirits, called Demons, asLib. 8. p. 221. Diogenes saith in the Life of Pythagoras. And the Jews in the Pirke Avoth teach, à terra usque ad fi∣mamentum omnia esse plena turmis, & praefe∣ctis, that from the Earth to the Firmament all things were full of these Companies and Rulers; and that there was a Prince over them who was called , the Go∣vernour of the World, or of the Darkness of it. See Note on Chapter the sixth, v. 12. This evil Spirit is here said , inwardly to work in the Children of Disobedience; and elsewhere to lead them captive at his will, 2 Tim. 2.26. and their Conversion is stiled a Recovery of them from the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. And hence we may rationally conclude, that the Good Spirit doth also in∣wardly work in pious Persons, enabling them to will, and to do, it being unreasonable to conceive the Evil Spirit should have more power over those wicked Men in whom he dwells, than the Good Spirit hath in those pious Persons in whose hearts he is said to dwell. Ver. 3. Among whom also we all (who are Gentiles) had our conversation in times part in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, (or of our hearts) and were by nature (indeed, by birth among Heathens, and in our Natural Estate before Grace) the Children of Wrath, as well as o∣thers (of the Gentiles were.) , and were by Nature
Children of Wrath.] The Ancient Fathers ge∣nerally affirm, that Sin cannot owe its origi∣nal purely to that Nature in which we were born, but only , i. e. to the Choice or Consent of the Will, and that they who make us to be sinners, meerly by the derivati∣on of our Natures from our Progenitors, do make God, the Authour of our Nature, to be the Authour of our sin. The same they seem to do, who say that sin is propagated by Ge∣neration, and that an Infant is therefore pro∣perly by birth a sinner it being God who hath established that order in the Generation of Mankind, which neither he that begets, nor he that is begotten, can correct, and by whose Benediction Mankind encrease and multiply, and reason will instruct us, that to be born or not, is not in our power; and that what 'tis not in our power to avoid, can never be our Crime, nor render us obnoxious to the Wrath of God. Moreover, the Circumstances of the Text demonstrate that the Apostle here intendeth no such thing, because he speaks of Persons dead in (actual) trespasses and sins, in which in times past they had walked, according to the course of the (Heathen) World, and the sug∣gestions of Satan, of Men who had their con∣versation in times past in the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were, on that account, the Children of Wrath, as well as other Heathens. And therefore Suidas, agreeably to the Context, saith, That Nature is here put for Customary Practice, according to the frequent import of that word in prophane Authours; in Philo,De temul. p. 205. C. in whom Custom is , a Nature opposite to Truth; and in our common Proverb, That Custom is a second Nature. His words are these; intelligit. When the Apostle saith, We are by Nature the Children of Wrath, he saith not this according to the proper acceptation of the word Nature, for then he had cast the blame upon the Authour of Nature; but he understands by it a long, and evil Custom. AndApud Combef. Didymus Alexandrinus saith, the Apostle intends by it , not that which is according to Nature, but which is ac∣cessory to it. 2. The Fathers do more generally say, That to be by Nature the Children of Wrath, is here the same as to be, Oecum. Theoph. Prorsus & omnino, apud Hieron. vel . Chrysost. Theodoret. Hieron. truly and indeed so. And that the Ephesians, and orher Nations, are here stiled such, because, in that estate, they continually provoked God to wrath by their Idolatries, and fleshly Lusts; and so they are here stiled, say they, Children of Wrath, partly as being born in Heathenism, and there∣fore indole Idololatrae,See Cl. Art. Crit. part. 2. c. 7. § 6. p. 104. and so out of Co∣venant with God, (in which estate the whole Body of the Heathens are represented as having no hope of the Blessings promised to those who were in Covenant with God,) and without (the favour and protection of) God in the world. And Persons so abandoned by him, are in Scripture stiled the Objects of his Hatred, comparatively to those who are in Covenant with him; as in these words, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated, Mal. 1.2. And when God determined to re∣ject, and to forsake his People, he stiles them the Generation of his Wrath, Jer. 7.29. partly as being worthy of his wrath, as wicked Per∣sons are stiled Sons of Death, and of Perdition, as having done those things which rendred them worthy of Death and Destruction, i. e. not for Original Sin, but for a long series of Actual and Habitual Transgressions. And whereas Esthius saith that the word , Children, shews that this Phrase relates to what they were from their Nativity, this may be easily confuted from these following Ex∣pressions, some of them frequent in the Holy Scripture, viz. , the Children of God, John 1.12. , the Children of wisdom, Matth. 11.19. , Children of obe∣dience, 1 Pet. 1.14. , Children of the promise, opposed to Children of the flesh, Rom. 9.8. Gal. 4 28. , accur∣sed Children, 2 Pet. 2.14. for we are not Sons of God, of Wisdom, of Obedience, of the Pro∣mise, or the Curse by Nativity, but by our own Good, or Evil Actions. And whereas he adds, that the Apostle writes this in the Per∣son of the Jews, this is most plainly false, the Jews being not under the Prince of the Power of the Air, i. e. the Conduct and the Go∣vernment of Satan, as were those Heathens whose Gods were Demons, and who sacrificed to Devils, not to God. Moreover, they who are here said to be quickned, when they were dead in trespasses, are said Coloss. 2.13. to be quickned when dead in trespasses, and the un∣circumcision of the flesh, which cannot possibly agree unto the Jews. We all here therefore, is only all the Gentiles, whatsoever Mr. Cl. says to the contrary; nor is there any thing more common than for St. Paul to speak thus.
So Tit. 3.3. We our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another; not we Apo∣stles, or we Jews, but we Gentiles. And this is here evident to a demonstration; for what is here we v. 2. and 5. is ye v. 8. what is we v. 10. is again yee v. 11, 12, 13. what is we v. 18. is ye v. 19. Ver. 4. (This, I say, was our former state,) But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved us (Gentiles,) Ver. 5. Even when we were (thus) dead in sins, hath quickned us together with Christ (through his rich grace, for) by Grace ye are saved, (i. e. are brought into a state of salva∣tion. , hath quickned us toge∣ther with Christ.] Not only by giving us a new Birth, or renovation of Life, but an as∣surance also of eternal Life; for because I live, saith Christ, you shall live also, John 14.19. we shall be saved by his life, Rom. 5.10. Ver. 6. And hath raised us up together (not only by a spiritual conformity to his resurrecti∣on, Rom. 6.5, 11. but also by an assurance of a like resurrection, 1 Pet. 1.3. he being risen as the first fruits, 1 Cor. 15.20. and the first born from the dead, Coloss. 1.18.) and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Je∣sus (our Head thus raised and exalted, and thus ascended into Heaven as our fore-runner, Hebr. 6.20.10.13, 14.) Ver. 7. That in (and through) all Ages to come he might (by this means) shew the ex∣ceeding riches of his grace, in (this) his kind∣ness to us through Christ Jesus. Ver. 8. (I say the riches of his grace,) For by grace are ye saved through faith (in Christ,) and that (faith is) not of (and from) your selves, it is the gift of God, (the objects of our faith being only made known by Divine Revela∣tion, 1 Cor. 2. and only confirmed, and so made credible to us, by the testimony which God hath given to them.) Ver. 9. Not of works (done before faith by us,) lest any man should boast, (as doing any thing which might antecedently deserve, or make him meet to be acquainted with, and made parta∣ker of this saving grace.) Ver. 10. (Not of works, for this reason also,) For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God hath before ordained ( (Sub ) , to which God hath before prepared) us, that we should walk therein. , he hath before prepared us.] i. e. Before we do them, by giving us the knowledge of his will, and the assistance of his Spirit to perform them; i e. our entire Renovation, or new Creation, by which alone we are enabled to do works good and accep∣table in his sight, is from God, who by Christ Jesus hath given us the knowledge of our Du∣ty, and by his Grace and Spirit hath enabled us for the performance of it. They mislead Men who extend all this to our whole Salta∣tion, from the beginning to the end, which though it be so of Grace, as to be carried on from the beginning of the new Nature, to the end of our Life, by the assistance of Gods Grace and Holy Spirit, yet is it not so of Grace, as to exclude those Works of Righte∣ousness God hath prepared us to walk in they being the Conditions requisite to make Faith saving, the terms on which alone we are to enter into life, Matth. 7.21. Luke 10.25.2. Rom. 2.6, 7, 10. 2 Pet. 1.5-11. Rom. 22.14. and according to which we shall re∣ceive our future Recompence, Rom. 26.10. 3.8. 2 Cor. 5.10. Gal. 6.4, 5. , for by grace ye are sa∣ved.] That we may understand aright h we are here, and in other places, said to  saved by Grace, and Mercy, and not by Works, it may deserve to be observed, 1. That though the Apostle here saith by Grace ye are saved, not of Works, lest any man should hence be tempted to inter, that Chri∣stians may be saved without doing Works of Righteousness, when they have time and op∣portunity to do them, he expresly adds, and that by way of reason of what he had assert∣ed, That We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God hath or∣dained that we should walk in them. Since then to walk in Righteousness, according to the import of that phrase in Scripture, implies, that the tenor of our lives be spent in Works of Righteousness, surely we cannot reasonably hope to be accepted by God, if we neglect the very end for which we are created in Christ Jesus, or decline that way in which God hath ordained us to walk. Hence the Apostle tells the same Ephesians, that if they had been taught the Christian Faith, as the truth was in Jesus, they knew themselves obliged to put off the old man, and to put on the new, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, and that it was their duty to  as Children of the light, proving what is accep∣table to the Lord, and bringing forth those Fruits of the Spirit, which are in all goodness, righteousness, and truth, Chap. 4.21, 22. Chap. 5.8, 9. Note 2ly, That when the Apostle saith we are saved not by works, his meaning is not to exclude all Works from having any influence on our Salvation, but only to exclude those Works which are done antecedently to Faith. and to the Renovation of the Holy Ghost, o antecedently to their being call'd by the Go∣spel to Salvation; this is apparent from the reason here assigned, why we are not saved by Works, viz. because we were not fitted or pre∣pared to do good Works till we were first in Christ; which as it does exclude good Works performed before Faith in Christ, so doth it is
effectually establish those which are afterwards to be performed by virtue of the New Nature given to us, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Object. And whereas some object against this Answer, That the Apostle saith we are saved by grace, not of works, lest any man should beast; which boasting doth not seem to be ex∣cluded, if our Salvation doth any way depend on Works done by us, whether they be Legal, or Evangelical, done before, or after Faith. Answ. To this I answer, That though Sal∣vation doth depend upon good Works, or on sincere Obedience to be performed by us after Faith, yet is all boasting utterly excluded, (1) Because the good Works we do, proceed not from our selves, but purely from the Grace and Spirit of God; for it is God that worketh in us both to will, and to do of his good pleasure, Philip. 2.13. He giveth that new Nature by which we are disposed, and that good Spirit by which we are enabled to do them. As therefore the Apostle saith of the Gift of Tongues, and Healing, and the like, which were so frequent in the Church of Co∣rinth, and were occasions of their boasting, who maketh thee to differ in these things from others? or what Gift hast thou which thou hast not received? and if thou hast received it, wherefore doest thou boast as if it were thine own, and thou hadst not received it? 1 Cor. 4.7. So may we here: What good Work doest thou which thou hast not received Grace, and the good Spirit to perform? and if thou hast received strength from God for the perform∣ance of them, wherefore doest thou boast? This being the Apostle's Rule, that we can boast of nothing but that which we have not received, or which is purely from our selves. (2ly.) Though God is pleased to make the doing good Works a necessary Condition of Salvation, so that without them we shall not obtain it, yet is all boasting utterly excluded, because it is of Grace that our imperfect Works are counted good, and that they are at all re∣warded by God. For 'tis alone through that New Covenant which God hath stablished in Christ Jesus, that all the Imperfections which adhere to our best Performances are pardoned, seeing the Covenant of Works requires perfect Obedience, and tendreth no pardon to the least Offence. Now upon what account can any of us boast of doing that which in it self de∣serveth Condemnation, though through Grace it doth find acceptance? Boasting, saith the Apostle, is not excluded by the Law of Works, Rom. 3.27.4.4. because to him that worketh the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of Debt, Rom. 11.6. Grace and Works that de∣serve Justification and Salvation, being per∣fectly opposite to one another. Where there∣fore the Reward is still of Grace, and not of Debt; where it is given on the account of Works imperfect, which deserve nothing from God, there boasting is excluded. Note 3ly, That when the Apostle saith  are saved by Grace, there the word save a dn not signifie the final and compleat Salvati which we shall enioy in Heaven, but only  being placed in the way of Salvation, and put into that estate, in which, if we continue grond∣ed and settled in the Faith, and be not moved from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. we shall undoubtedly be saved. That this may be the sense of these Expressions, We are saved  Grace, and According to his Mercy he saved  Tit. 3.5. cannot be doubted, if we cond that this is frequently the import of th Phrase in other places; as when 'tis said  the Conversion of Nacchaeus, This day Sav: on is come to this House, Luke 19.3. that Baptism doth save us, 1. Pet. 3.21. that  were added to the church, . the saved, Acts 2.47. See John 4.22. Rom. 8.25. 1 C 1.18. that this must be the proper import of it in these places, is evident from this Cons∣deration, That the Persons to whom the Apo∣stle here speaks, were not actually and com∣pleatly saved, but only by embracing the Go∣spel, which is stiled the Word, the Gospel of Salvation, the power of God through faith  Salvation, were placed in that way which leadeth to Eternal Life, and which is called the way of Salvation It being therefore of God's free Grace and Mercy, that any Church or Nation is called to the knowledge of Sal∣vation, and hath the Word of Life revealed to them, it being by that Faith, which is the Gift of God, that they are justified, and o placed in the way of Salvation, and by his free Gift that they enjoy that Holy Spirit by which they are enabled to work out their Sal∣vation, they may well be said to be saved by Grace through Faith, according to those words of the same Apostle, 2 Tim. 1.9. He hath sa∣ved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our works, but according to his purpose and grace which was given us in Christ. But then this hinders not our compleat Salva∣tion at the Great Day, from being conferr'd upon us, with respect to our Works, by him who hath declared he will render to every one according to his works: Glory, honour, and im∣mortality to every one that worketh good, and that by patient continuance in well-doing seek∣eth for it, Rom. 2.6, 7. Ver. 11. Wherefore remember that ye being (were) in times past Gentiles in the flesh, cal∣led the Uncircumcision, by that (Nation of the Jews) which is called the Circumcision, (by reason of their Circumcision) made with hands, Ver. 12. (And) That at that time ye were without (the knowledge of) Christ, being ali∣ens from the Commonwealth of Israel, (to whom the Messiah primarily belonged.) and stran∣gers from the Covenants of Promise (made to their Forefathers,) having no (firm and lively)
hope (of spiritual and future blessings,) and (be∣ing) without (the knowledge of the true) God in the world. , having no hope.] After this Life, 1 Thess. 4.13. I would not have you sor∣rowful for them that sleep, as , the re∣sidue of the world, who have no hope. See Note on 2 Tim. 1.10. , without the true God.] For then not knowing God, they served , those which by nature were not gods, Gal. 4.8. even their Wise-men changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped the vulgar Deities, Rom. 1.25. they were Heathens, carried about to dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 12.2. Hence at their Conversion they are said to turn from Idols to serve the living and true God, 1 Thess. 1.9. Ver. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were afar off (from God, and from the blessings imparted to the Jews,) are made nigh (to God, as they were) by the blood of Christ. , nigh, Those Jews who had no Cere∣monial Defilement to be purged away, and who had made Atonement for their known Sins, were admitted to come near to God, as being holy, they had a freedom of access to God, in his Tabernacle and Temple, whence they are stiled , the People that draw near to God, Lev. 10.3. Psal. 65.4.148.14. and God is said to be , a God near to them, Deut. 7.4. both by Relation, as having owned them as his Children and Fami∣ly, and entred into Covenant to be their God, and by his more especial Presence with them; for the Shechinah, or the glorious Presence, dwelt among them in the Holy Place. Now all these Priviledges, saith the Apostle, are e∣qually conferr'd upon the Gentiles, they are now made near to God, v. 13. have access to him, v. 18. are fellow Citizens of the Saints, and of the family of God, v. 19. The Shechinah dwells in them as in the Temple, and they are made an habitation of God through the Spirit, v. 21, 22. Ver. 14. For he is our peace-(maker,) who hath made made both (Jew and Gentile) one (as to the priviledges of the Gospel, Joh. 10.16. Gal. 4.28.) and hath broken down the middle wall of partition betwixt us, (i. e. abolished the Ceremonial Law, which was a partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile.) , the middle wall.] This refers to that Partition Wall in the Temple, which separated the Court of the Gentiles from that into which the Jews entred, on which was written that no Alien might go into it; it being saithAntiq. l. 12. c. 3. de Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 14. Josephus, a Sanction of Antiochus, , that no A∣lien should enter into the Court of the Sanctuary which was enclosed with the Sept. And this Inscription was writ in Greek and Latin. Ver. 15. Having abolished in, (or by)  (own) flesh, (that which made) the enmity (be∣twixt Jew and Gentile,) even the Law of Com∣mandments (consisting) in Ordinances, (peca∣ar to the Jews,) that he might make of (e create these) two (into) one man in himself, (to whom as their Head, they are both united into one Body,) thus making peace (betwixt both.) , into one new man.] As being both to walk in newness of Life, and by the new Law of Christianity, and Christ's new Commandment of Love. , peace.] This Peace Christ hath made between Jew and Gentile, by abolishing the Ceremonial Law which made the Entity, and with God, by reconciling both to him by his death. Ver. 16. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one Body by the Cross, having slain the enmity (betwixt both to God) thereby, (or upon it,) for when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Rom. 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.18. Col. 1.21.) Ver. 17. And (having procured this reconci∣liation, he) came and (, he c∣coming to his Apostles) preached peace to you (Gentiles) which were afar off, and to then that were near (i. e. the Jews.) Ver. 18. For through him, (thus reconciling us to God,) we both (Jew and Gentile) have access, by one Spirit (of Adoption conferred up on us,) to the Father, (and are enabled to co unto him as our Father, Rom. 8.15.) , we both.] Hence we learn (1st,) That Christ not only reconciled Jew and Gentile to one another, but that he reconciled both to God, for by him we have  access to the Father, a freedom of access to God, v. 18. and Chap. 3.12. Now where this Phrase in the New Testament is used, with re∣spect to Christ, it still imports the freedom of access, vouchsafed to them who formerly were by their sins excluded from God's gracious Presence; this is obtained, say these words, by virtue of his Blood making our peace by him, reconciling us to God by his Cross, and bring∣ing them near to God who were afar off. How is he our peace? because the Chastisement which procured our peace was upon him, Isa. 53.5. How did he reconcile us to God? but by the Cross, i. e. by bearing our sins in his one Body on the Cross, 1 Pet. 2.24. By virtue of this Blood the Gentiles, who formerly were Aliens, are made near to God; they who were Strangers, are made God's Domesticks; they who emphatically were Sinners, Gal. 2.15 are made fellow Citizens of the Saints; they who were Children of Wrath, v. 2. to them is God reconciled; and after all this, can it be rea∣sonably denied, that Christ hath pacified God
o the Gentiles by his Blood? or doth not all his import a Reconciliation on God's part to them? To shew the Reason of this Reconciliation, et it be noted, That God being an holy God, one were to come into his Presence who had my Pollution or Defilement upon them on ain of death, till they were sanctified or cleansed from it by some Purification or A∣tonement made for them to God. He dwelt in the Camp of Israel; and so those Lepers which were so unclean as to pollute the Camp, were driven from it, Lev. 13.46. Num. 5.2, 3. 2 Kings 15.5. and those Sin-offerings which were polluted with the Sins of the whole Congregation, were carried out of the Camp, Lev. 16.21, 22. Hebr. 13.11. God dwelt more especially in the Temple, and therefore they who had lesser Impurities, i. e. who were defiled by the Dead, or by an Issue, or a menstruous Woman, were not to come thither, till they were cleansed from those Defilements, Lev. 124.15.31. Moreover, he being a God of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, they who had commit∣ted any sin of Ignorance, and lay under the guilt of it, were not permitted to come into the Court of the Men of Israel, till they had brought their Offering of Atonement. Ains∣worth on Numb. 5.3. Now God being still the same holy God, of purer Eyes then to behold iniquity, the Scriptures of the New Testament seem as plainly to make our freedom of access to God to depend upon our being sanctified, or purg'd from our Defilement, and our being delivered from the guilt of sin by an Atonement made by the Blood of Christ for our Iniquities, that so they being pardoned, we may have peace with God, and an access unto his favour. This plainly seems to be the import of these words, Hebr. 9.12. If the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the un∣clean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh, and by so doing, procureth an admission of the Person cleansed to serve God in the San∣ctuary, Numb. 19.9, 12, 17. how much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eter∣nal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works, or Works exposing you to Death, the punishment of the Person who came unclean into God's Presence, that so you may be admitted) to serve the living God. Ver. 19. Now therefore ye (Gentiles) are no more (to be reckoned as) strangers and fo∣reigners, but (as) fellow Citizens of the Saints, and of the houshold of God. , Strangers.] The Proselytes who joyn'd themselves to the God of Israel, were by the Jews, and by the Scriptures stiled Strangers. He that only took upon him to worship the true God, and observe the Pre∣cepts of Noah, was Ger Toshab, a Stranger permitted to dwell among them, and to wor∣ship in the Court of the Gentiles: He that was Circumcised, and became Obedient to the Law of Moses, was Ger Tzedek, a Proselyte of Righteousness, but both were called Stran∣gers, according to that Maxim of the Jews, All the Nations of the. World are called  Strangers before the God of Israel; but the Jews are said to be  near to him. But now, saith the Apostle, there is no such diffe∣rence, the believing Gentile being equally ad∣mitted with believing Jews to the Priviledges of the New Jerusalem, and equally related to God as part of his Family. Ver. 20. And are built upon the foundati∣ons of the Apostles (of the New,) and the Prophets (of the Old Covenant,) Jesus Christ himself being the Corner-stone, (who supports and cements the whole Building both of believ∣ing Jews and Gentiles, and unites both into one Body by his Spirit, Psal. 117.22.) Ver. 21. In whom all the building (being thus) fitly framed (or compacted,) increaseth into one holy Temple in the Lord. (They then belong not to this building, whose Bodies are not an holy Temple to the Lord.) Ver. 22. In whom ye (Ephesians) also are builded together for an habitation of God, through the Spirit. (ThusLib. de Somniis, p. 456. E. Philo saith, That good Men are , God's House and Holy Temple. See Note on 1 Cor. 6.20.) CHAP. III. Verse 1. FOR this cause I Paul (am) the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles. , for this cause.] i. e. Because I as∣sert that these Priviledges belong equally to the believing, Gentiles, though they be not Circumcised, this being the Reason why the Jews so fiercely persecuted him, and forced him to Appeal to Caesar, Acts 22.22.25.11, 12. 26.17. and why, after he came to Rome, the Jews preached Christ not sincerely, but out of envy to him, to add affliction to his bonds, Philip. 1.15, 16. Ver. 2. (I am, I say, a Prisoner for you Gen∣tiles, as you must know,) If (since) ye have heard of the dispensation of the Grace of God which was given me to you-ward, (or for you Gentiles.)
, if ye have heard.] Hence some raise a second Objection against this Epistle's being written by St. Paul to the Ephesians; for, say they, to them with whom he had so long conversed, there could be no doubt whe∣ther they had heard of the dispensation of the Grace of God given him towards them. But indeed, this is no Objection to them who will consider that this Epistle was not written to the Ephesians only, but also to all the faithful in Christ Jesus, many of whom had never seen his Face, or heard his Voice. And 2ly, if we consider that he speaks here particularly of the manner of his receceiving this Dispensati∣on, vis. by immediate Revelation from Christ Jesus, of which the Galatians, among whom he had also preached, were ignorant; and therefore the Apostle, in his Epistle to them saith, , of this I certifie you, confirming his Assertion with an Oath, Gal. 1.11, 12, 16. Add to this, 3ly, that the Particle  is not here a Particle of Doubting, bur of Affirma∣tion, and is to be rendred as Theophylact doth,  since; so the Hebrew  is often ren∣dred quandoquidem; and so Philo uses the Par∣ticle in these words,Alleg. l. 1. p. 35. G. , see∣ing some say of things done involuntarily, and out of ignorance, that they are not to be account∣ed sins; and when he says, Abel yet lives,L. quod Deter. p. 130. E. , seeing that he had still a voice to cry to God. And that Sarah is represented by Moses both as batren, and very fruitful,De congressu quaer. p. 332. E. , since he confesses that from her should proceed the most populous of Nations. See also the Note on Chap. 1.15. Ver. 3. How that he (, for he) by (parti∣cular) revelation made known to me the my∣stery (of the calling of the Gentiles, Gal. 1.16. Acts 9.15. (22.21.) as I wrote before in few words, (viz. Chap. 1.9, 10, 11, 2.19.) Ver. 4. Whereby when you read (, to which attending) you may under∣stand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ, (touching the calling of the Gentiles.) Ver. 5. Which in other ages was not made known to the Sons of Men, as it is now re∣vealed to his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit (of wisdom and of knowledge given to them to discern all mysteries, 1 Cor. 12.8. 13.2.) Ver. 6. (It being not before revealed, as now it is) That the Gentiles should be fellow Heirs (of God with the believing Jews,) and of the same Body with them, and partakers of his promise, (the promise of the Spirit, Gal. 3.14. in (and through) Christ (only) by (virtue of) the Gospel (preached to them, and believed by them.) , as it hath been now re∣ed.) It was in the general made known, the in Abraham should all the Families of the Earth be blessed; and that Christ should be a Light to the Gentiles; of which see Note  v. 10. But it was not made known to the Jews that the Gentiles should he fellow He with them of the same Salvation, and Cele∣al Inheritance. For that this was matter of ad∣miration to the first Jewish Converts, we learn from these words, Then hath God also given to the Gentiles repentance unto life, Acts 11.11 They did not know, or believe, that the Gen∣tiles should be made Members of the same Body, and admitted to the same Priviledges, and made Partakers of the same Spirit with them. Hence the believing Jews , were in an extasie, when they saw that the Gift of the Holy Ghost was poured on the Gentiles, Acts 10.45. Gal. 3.14. And much less did they know that the Partition Wall which made the Distance and Enmity between them, should be taken away by the Messiah, as the Apostle here teacheth v. 14, 15. that the hand-writing of Ordinances was to be bla∣ted out on this account, Coloss. 2.14. and that these Priviledges were to be conferr'd upon them without Circumcision, or Observation of the Law of Moses. They rather thought they were either first to be made Jews, and then Christians, or only were to come as Slaves and Drudges to them who were the Children of the Kingdom. And hence the Apostle speaks a great part of the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, to assert this Priviledge of the Gen∣tiles against the Judaizing Christians. In a word, to the Jews anciently belonged , the Sonship, and so the Inheritance, for if Sa then Heirs, Rom. 8.17. and the Promises. Rom. 9.4. and they conceived that none wee ever to be admitted into their Body, or to par∣take of those Priviledges unless they we Circumcised, and became obedient to the Law of Moses, Acts 15.1. which they thought ri∣ver was to cease, or to be antiquated. And there∣fore, say the Greek Fathers, the Apostle here declares that God now under the Gospel Di∣spensation equally admitted the believing Gen∣tiles to these Priviledges by Faith without Circumcision, or obedience to the Law of Mo∣ses. , and to the Prophets.] That the Apostle here understands the Prophets of the New Testament, or those who in the first Ages of the Church received the Prophetical Grace, and by it understood all Mysteries, 1 Cor. 13.2. the words , as now it is revealed under the Gospel to the Prophets, will not suffer us to doubt. And this fully answers all the Objections of Estius against the Exposition I have given of the former words
Ver. 7. Of which (Gospel) I was made a Minister, according to the Gift of the Grace of God given to me, (to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, for which work I was enabled) by the effectual working of his power, (in signs and wonders, &c. Rom. 15.19.) , according to the gift of Grace.] That the Apostolate is by St. Paul oft stiled Grace, see the Note on Rom. 1.5. and that in this sense he understands the Gift of Grace here, is evident from the following words. Ver. 8. Unto me (I say,) who (by reason of my former persecutions of the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.9.) am less then the lest of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ, (i. e. the exceeding Blessings to be obtained by faith in him.) Ver. 9. And that I should let all men (Jews and Gentiles) see, what is the fellowship of the Mystery (of the Calling of the Gentiles to be thus fellow heirs with the Jews,) which hath been hid from the beginning of the World, (, from former Ages,) in (the pur∣pose of) God, who created all things (belong∣ing to the old and new Creation) by Jesus Christ. , who created all things.] The Ancients commonly say that God the Father is , the Prince, and chief Creator of the World, as being the Ori∣ginal of all creating Power, and he as it were commanding, and the Son executing his Com∣mand, who is hence stiled,Orig. in Cels. l. 6. p. 317. , the immediate Creator, or , the Artificer of the World. HenceL. 2. c. 2. l. 3. c. 8, 11. Irenae∣us so often faith, Patrem omnia fecisse per verbum, or verbo virtutis, and that the Son and Holy Spirit areL. 3. Praefat. &c. 17. quasi manus, as it were the hands of God, by which he made all things, and to both which all the Angels are subject. Ver. 10. To the intent that (Gr. , that) now the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principalities and powers in heavenly places, by the (things done in and for the) Church. , to the Principalities and Powers.] This Phrase, though used of evil Spirits, Chap. 6.12. may be understood of good Angels, the Mystery of Godliness being then seen of Angels, 1 Tim. 3.16. and the things which the Apostles preached by the Holy Ghost, being such as the Angels desired to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. But whereas from those words v. 6. was not made known, &c. Mr. le Clerk saith thus, The same thing which is there said in other Ages not to have been made known to the Sons of Men, is said here to have been unknown also to Angels; which being so, I confess I do not well understand, how they who are neither Prophets, nor Angels, can find ut so many places in the Prophets, in which the Calling of the Gentiles is manifestly and direct¦ly foretold, for certainly if it was revealed to the Prophets, they understood it; and if it could be gathered from the literal sense of any Prophecies, the Angels might have understood it by those Prophecies. Whereas I say he de∣scants thus, What would he have? would he deny, against the plain and frequent sayings of St. Paul, That the Calling of the Gentiles was revealed to, and plainly foretold by the Prophets, as his words do import? Let him if he can, confute St. Paul proving it against him, That the Lord had commanded the Gentiles should he called in these words of the Prophet Isaiah, I have set thee to be a Light to the Gentiles, and to be for Salvation to the ends of the Earth, Acts 13.46, 47. And his four other Proofs from the Prophets, Mo∣ses, David, and Esaias, That the Gentiles were to glorifie God for his Mercy to them in Christ Jesus that Root of Jo, who was to rise up to govern the Gentiles, and in whom the Gentiles were to trust, Rom. 15.9.10, 11, 12. Yea, let him confute the Apostle James, saying, Symeon hath declared how God at first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a People for his Name; and to this agree the words of the Prophets. After this I will build again the Tabernacle of David, &c. that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Nations upon whom my Name is called. Acts 15.14-17. Nor doth the Apostle any where hint, that the Calling of the Gentiles was not revealed to, or by the Prophets, but only that it was not so made known in all the Particularities of it, , as it is now disc∣vered by the Apostles and Prophets of the N. Testament. See the Note on v 6. 2ly, It was also known to, and preached by the Angels, declaring the glad Tydings of great Joy which should be to allo Nations through Christ, Luke 2.10, 11. He being as well a light to enligh∣ten the Gentiles, as the glory of his People Is∣rael. Nor does the Apostle here say, as he suggests, that this was unknown to the An∣gels, but only that what was before made known to them by Prophecies, was now made known to them by the Church, i. e. the Gentiles actually called; though all the Circumstances mentioned Note on v. 6. might not fully be known before even to them. Ver. 11. According to the eternal purpose which he purposed (or made) in Christ Je¦sus. , according to the sing disposing of the Ages.] In the first of the A∣ges his Wisdom seeing fit to give the Promise of a Saviour to a fallen Adam, in the seemed
Age to typifie and represent him to the Jews in Sacred Persons, Rites, and Sacrifices, and in the Age of the Messiah, or the last Age, to reveal him to the Jews, and preach him to the Gentiles. Ver. 12. In whom we have boldness (or freedom,) and access with confidence (to God the father,) by the faith of him, (i. e. the saith we have in him, as our Mediator, see Note on Chap. 2. v. 18.) Ver. 13. Wherefore I (Paul the Prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, v. 1.) desire that you faint not, (that you be not disheartned,) at my tribulations for you, which is (rather matter of) your glory, (you having cause to glory, that I your Apostle suffer so much for the Gospel I preach to you, this being to you a confirmation of the truth of it.) Ver. 14. (And) For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, (praying to him.) Ver. 15. Of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, (the Angels in Heaven, and Saints on Earth, being stiled the Sons of God.) , the whole Family.] It is fre∣quent with the Jews to make mention of the Angels as the Family in Heaven, and of Men, especially those that are in Covenant with God, as his Family on Earth; as when they say, God doth nothing but he first con∣sults with his Family  above, that is, with the Angels. And that he that addicts himself to the study of the Divine Law for the sake of the Law, conciliates to himself peace with the Family above, and with the Family be∣low, that is, with Angels in Heaven, and Men on Earth. They are also called  the Saints above, Car. in Job 15.15. and the Sons of God, as in those words of Job 1.6.2.1. And on a day came , the Sons of God; and Chap. 38.7. Where wast thou when  all the Sons of God shouted for joy; and so are all true Believers stiled; for to as many as believed he gave power to be called the Sons of God, 1 John 1.12. and they at the Resurrection shall be like the Angels, and be the Sons of God, Luke 20.36. Ver. 16. That he would grant unto you ac∣cording to the riches of his glory, (i. e. ac∣cording to his glorious riches,) to be (still more) strengthened with might by his Holy Spirit in the inward man. Ver. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that you being (firmly) rooted, and grounded in love (to him who sent his Son to die for you.) Ver. 18. May be able to comprehend (toge∣ther) with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height (of this mysterious love towards you). Ver. 19. And may (be able to) know the love of Christ, which (in its full extent, e∣ven) passeth knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fulness of God. , &c. the breadth, length, depth, and height.] By the breadth of this love, some of the Fathers understand the great extent and generality of Christ's Affe∣ction, his Death being designed for the bene∣fit of all Persons, Jew and Gentile, through all Ages from Adam to the end of the World, and in all places, he having by it reconciled things in Heaven, and things in the Earth, Chap. 1.10. By the depth of it, say they, is signified the greatness of his Humiliation love to Mankind having induced him to change the form of God, for that of a Servant, humbled the Lord of Life to an ignominious and painful Death, and brought him from the highest Heavens to the lowest Hell, into which they conceive he descended for our sakes. The length of it imports, say they, his love to us from the beginning of the World, we being chosen in Christ from the beginning, Chap. 1.3. 11. The Height of his affection is mani∣fested, say they, in that being now exalted to the right hand of Majesty; he is still there employed in Acts of greatest Kindness to us, using his whole power in Heaven, and in Earth, for the benefit of his Church. But it seems more natural to say, that the Apostle by emu∣merating these Dimensions, only intends to signifie the exceeding greatness of the Love of Christ, which passeth knowledge. Ths Job speaking of the unsearchable Wisdom of God, and his unfathomable Perfections, puts these Enquiries, Canst thou search him out to perfection? It is higher then the Heaven; what canst thou do? deeper then Hell, what canst thou know? the measure of it is longer then the Earth, and the breadth of it then the Sea, Job 11.7, 8. And the Son of Syrac saith, The eight of Heaven, and the breadth of the Earth, the abyss and wisdom, who can search  Ecclus. 1.3. And the Apostle cries out, O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God have unsearchable are his judgments, &c. Rom. 11.33. And in this sense these four Dimensions will chiefly be designed to import what the Apostle stiles, v. 8. the unsearchable riches of the love of Christ. It therefore seems unreasonable to think, that the love of Christ passing know∣ledge should import only the love of Christ passing, i. e. excelling the knowledge, or skill in mystical interpretations, which the Gnostic pretended to. For as the word  put ab∣solutely, hath no such import, that I know of, in the Holy Scripture; so after the men∣tion of all these Dimensions, and the un∣searchable riches of it, v. 8. it seems a very faint expression, to say it surpassed that vain and insignificant Knowledge to which the Gnosticks pretended, their mysti∣cal Interpretations recorded by Irenaeus, being above measure vain and impious, even a Mystery of Iniquity. And as for the Phrase , it is justified
byPolit. l. 3. c. 13. p. 447, 448. Aristotle, who hath it twice in one Chapter, viz. , to exceed the measure, , to excel o∣ther Navigators. , with all the fulness of God.] , see Note on 1 Coloss. 20. that is, say some, with the highest degrees of Faith and Love; or with all fulness of Spi∣ritual Gifts, especially those of Knowledge and Wisdom, which might enable them to comprehend the greatness of this Love. Thus Chap. 4.10. He ascended up on high, that he might fill all things with Spiritual Gifts men∣tioned v. 10. that he might give gifts unto men, v. 1. and Chap. 1.23. his Church is sti∣led the fulness of him that filleth all in all; i. e. who filleth all his Members with his Gifts. Ver. 20. Now unto him that is able to do exceedingly, above all that we ask or think, according to the power (of the Holy Ghost) that worketh in us, (and so miraculously con∣firms his Doctrine to the World.) Ver. 21. Unto him (I say) be ascribed all glory in the (Assemblies of the) Church by (and through) Jesus Christ, (through whom we offer up all our Prayers and Praises, Hebr. 13.15. Eph. 5.20.) throughout all Ages, world without end. Amen. CHAP. IV. Verse 1. I Therefore the prisoner of the Lord (, in bonds for Christ,) beseech you that you would walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called. Ver. 2. With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, (and so) forbearing one another in love. Ver. 3. Endeavouring (thus) to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Note here from the Fathers, That , where love is re∣tained, there will be mutual forbearance. And from Zanchy, That Peace cannot be preser∣ved without that mutual forbearance, and that Humility which excludes, and that Meekness which is opposite to Anger and Contention. Ver. 4. (For you know that) There is one body (of the whole Church,) and one Spirit (which animates the whole Body,) even as you have been called in one hope of your Calling (i. e. and you know also, that you are all cal∣led to the same hope of Eternal Life.) , one Spirit.] From these, and the former words, the unity of the Spirit, it seems plain to me that the union of the My∣stical Body of the Church Catholick consists in this that they all have the same Spirit com∣municated to them from their Head Christ Je∣sus. For the whole Body of Christians is here said to have one Spirit, and their Unity is stiled the Unity of the Spirit. The Body is one, saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.12. for by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, v. 13. And to the whole Body of the Church of Co∣rinth, he speaks thus, Know ye not that you are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost that is in you, Chap. 6.19. Christ, saith the Apostle here, Chap. 2.16, 17, 18. hath reconci∣led both Jew and Gentile in one Body unto God, and hath made peace between them, for by him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father: , and therefore having thus one Spirit, by which we are made one Body, and Sons of the same Father, we are all fel∣low Citizens of the Saints, and of the Family of God: and are all built up together into an habitation of God through the Spirit. Now hence it follows, 1st, That only sincere Christians are truly Members of that Church Catholick of which Christ Jesus is the Head, since the whole Bo∣dy is united to him by the Communication of the Holy Spirit, whom the wicked of the World cannot receive, John 14.17. they be∣ing sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 19. 2ly, That nothing can unite any Professor of Christianity to this one Body, but the participa∣tion of the Spirit of Christ; and therefore no∣thing else can make him a true Member of that Church which is his Body. Hence the Apostle doth inform us negatively, That if any man have not the Spirit of Christ dwelling in him, he is none of his, Rom. 8.9, 11. and affir∣matively, That by this we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit that he hath given us, 1 Joh. 3.24. And again, by this we know that he abi∣deth in us, and we in him, because he hath gi∣ven us of his Spirit, Chap. 4.13. for as many as are lead by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Rom. 8.14. and because we are Sons, God hath sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, Gal. 4.6. It therefore must be owned as a certain Truth, that nothing can unite us to that Church and Body of which Christ Jesus is the Head, but the participation of the Spirit. 3ly, That no Error in Judgment, or Mistake in Practice, which doth not tend to deprive a Christian of the Spirit of Christ, can separate him from the Church of Christ.
4ly, Hence it demonstratively follows, That no Church Governours jointly, or severally, can be by God appointed to be the living Judges, or the infallible Directors of our Faith. For since in Matters of Faith we must have a Judgment of Certainty, we cannot own them as such by virtue of that assistance of the Holy Ghost, which alone can make them such, till we are certain that they belong to that Church of which Christ Jesus is Head, and to which only the Promise of the Spirit doth belong; i. e. till we are certain they are sincere and upright Christians. Since therefore God hath given us no certain Rule to know this by, we may rest satisfied that he designed no such Magisterial Guides should be continued in his Church. Ver. 5. (There is also to us Christians) One Lord, one Faith (in the Lord,) one Baptism, (by which we do profess this Faith.) , one Faith.] It plainly is asserted in the Holy Scriptures, that there is one com∣mon Faith, Tit. 1.4. one like precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. of all that bear the Name of Christians. An unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to which we must all arrive, Eph. 4.13. A Faith once deli∣vered to the Saints, Jude 3. for which we must strive earnestly, and in which we must build up our selves; a Faith of the Gospel, for which we are exhorted to contend as with one Soul, Philip. 1.27. But vain is here the In∣ference of the Papists, That this one Faith must be either theirs, and then we cannot be saved without it; or ours, and then they cannot be saved; for this one Faith, into which all Christians were baptized, contains neither the Doctrines, in which they differ from us, nor we from them, but only the Apostles Creed, which the whole Church of Christ for many Centuries, received as a perfect System of all things necessarily to be believed in order to Salvation; as I have fully proved, Treatise of Tradition, Part the Second, Chapter VII. Sect. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ver. 6. One God and Father of us all, who is above all (by his Essence,) and through all (by his Providence,) and in you all (by his Spirit.) , one God.] Here say, the Socinians that God who is stiled one, is also stiled the Father, and to him is ascribed this Epithete so common among the Philosophers, to de∣note the Supream Deity, that he is , God over all. But to this it is answer∣ed, 1st, That we deny not that God the fa∣ther is one God over all, or that there is one who is both one God, and the Father, only we add that there is also one who is one God of the same Essence, and the Son, and so al∣so say we of the Holy Spirit; and that as the one Lord, and the one Spirit, do not ex∣clude the Father from being both Lord, and Spirit, so neither doth the one God and Father, exclude the Son or Holy Spirit from being God, but only from being God the Father. It also is to be noted, that the Primitive Fa∣thers before the Nicene Council, did not scru∣ple to distinguish Christ from God the Fa∣ther, by stiling him another God from the Maker of all things, , above whom there is no other God.Dial. cum Tryph. p. 275. C. 276. D. Justin Martyr twice describes the Father by this di∣stinctive Character, that he is God , above whom there is no other God, saying, that Christ did nothing but what , the Ma∣ker of the World, above whom there is no other God would have him do; and yet he at least twenty times asserts that Christ is God, and Lord, and that he is the PersonP. 340. , by whom he made the Heaven and the Earth, and by whom he will renew them; the Word of God, , by whom he made the Heaven and the Earth, and the whole Creation was made. SoNemo igitur alius Deus nominatur, aut Dominus appellatur nisi qui est omnium Deus & Dominus—& hujus Fil J. Christus Dominus noster, l. 3. c. 6.—qui & solus Deus super quem alius Deus non est, &c. 9. ipsum Dominum sepi  oportet, Patrem tantum Deum & Dominum eum qui solus est Deus, & Dominator omnium, tradentem Discipulis, & tamen haec dcta esse pronuntiat de Prophetis quidem, & Apostolis Patrem, & Filium confitentibus, alterum autem , net Deum nominantibus, neque Dominum confitentibus, l. 3. c. 6. Filius est in Patre, & habet in se Patrem, & in omnibus P patum ejus habet. Irenaeus often saith, that the Father is only to be called God and Lord; and yet he adds, that this is not said to exclude the Sea who is in the Father, and hath the Father in him, and hath his Principality in all things. Ver. 7. But (though the Body is but one yet) unto every one of us (who are Members of this Body) is given Grace (enabling us to serve this Body) according to the measure of the Gift of Christ. , is given Grace.] These Gra∣ces being therefore the Gift of Christ, and not our own, no one should be puffed up, or de∣spise others on the account of them; nor should any envy others to whom he thinks fit to give them in an higher measure. Ver.8. Wherefore (to manifest this) he (the Psalmist) saith, when he (Christ) ascended up on high, he lead captivity (Satan and Death) captive, (Hebr. 2.14. Judg. 5.12.) and gave gifts unto men, (i. e. received them, Psal. 68.19. to give to them.) , wherefore he saith.] That this Psalm relates to the Messiah, we learn from the Jews themselves, who interpret this Psalm
of him, for the words v. 32. are by them thus paraphrased, All Nations shall bring Gifts o the King Messiah, Schemoth Rabbah, Sect. 5. Let it be also noted, that Christ trium∣hed over Death and Satan on the Cross, Coloss. .15. but he led Satan captive more glorious∣, when after his Ascension he poured his Holy Spirit in his Apostles and Disciples, and y that Spirit enabled them to cast out De∣vils in his Name, and turn Men from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. He also then triumphed over Death most signal∣ when thus ascending he became Lord over the Dead, and had the Keys of Death and Ha∣es in his hands, Rom. 14.9. Rev. 1.18. , and gave Gifts.] That is, faith Dr. Hammond, He received Gifts to give to Men, from the Nature of the Hebrew  which signifies both to give, and to receive. But saith Mr. Cl. When the word signifies to give, there follows a Dative Case, Exod. 25.2. whereas the Hebrew here hath  which has made Learned Men conjecture that St. Paul read  to man. But first this is not al∣ways true, for Hos. 14.2. we read thus take may iniquity  and give good; and where a Dative Case is added, an Accusative either goes before it, as, thou hast received  Gifts for Men; and Judg. 14.2.  Give her to me; and v. 3. or else follows after it, as 1 Kings 3.  Give me a Sword. See Chap. 17.10. Exod. 18. 12.25.2. and as for  in  who knows not that it sometimes signifies pro, for, and sometimes only is the sign of the Dative Case. See Naldius de Partic. Hebr. p. 158, 163. Ver. 9. Now that he ascended, what is it but (a demonstration) that he descended first into the lower parts of the Earth. , into the lower parts of the Earth.] That is, into the Grave. So Psal. 63.9. They that seek my Soul to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the Earth: i. e. they shall fall by the Sword, v. 10. Isa. 44.23. Sing O Heavens, shout the lower parts of the Earth. Ver. 10. He that descended (thus into the lower parts of the Earth) is the same who (after his Resurrection) ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things (with his Gifts, according to his promise, that when he was ascended, he would send the Spirit upon his Apostles and Disciples, John 14.17. 15.26.16.7. Luke 24.49. , far above all Hea∣vens.] He being made higher than the Hea∣vens, Hebr. 7.26. that is, then the Airy and the Starry Heavens, and ascending above them into the Presence of God, who hath set his Glory above the Heavens, Psal. 8.1. and is exalted above them, Psal. 57.5, 11.108.4, 5. Ver. 11. And (accordingly) he gave some Apostles (to reveal his will,) some Prophets (to explain the Mysteries of Faith,) and some Evangelists (to propagate this Faith to other Nations, and some Pastors and Teachers (to instruct others in it.) , and some Pastors and Teachers.] That these Pastors and Teach∣ers were in the first Ages Men of extraordi∣nary Gifts, is evident from this very place; for the preceding words, He gave Gifts unto Men, some Apostles, some Prophets, &c. shew that all the Persons mentioned here were Par∣takers of the Gifts which Christ, ascending up on high, and sending down the Holy Spi∣rit, gave to Men. Hence, among the diffe∣rent  Gifts of the Holy Ghost, are reckoned  teaching, Rom. 12.6, 7. and among the Gifts exercised in their Assem∣blies  Doctrine, 1 Cor. 14.6, 26. among the Persons who had received the , diversities of Gifts, are reckoned af∣ter Prophets  Teachers, 1 Cor. 12.28. Rom. 12.6, 7. and here. And soEst itaque frater aliquis Doctor Gratia scientiae donatus. De Praescript. c. 3. Tertul∣lian makes mention of them as Persons educa∣ted with the Grace of Knowledge. The Pastors seem probably the same with the  Governments, 1 Cor. 12.28. and the , Rom. 12.8. And it is evident from both those places, that they were also Men indued with those Spiritual Gifts there mentioned. Hence it is observable of these Doctors, that when the extraordinary Gifts to the Church ceased, their very Names grew out of use, they being very rarely mentioned in the succeeding Ages of the Church. Ver. 12. (And this variety of Gifs was con∣ferred upon them) For the perfecting (Gr. compacting) of the Saints (into one Body) for the work of the Ministry, (that they who had them might minister to the Temporal Necessi∣ties, as did the Deacons; and the Spiritual Concerns of others, as did the Apostles, Pr∣phets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors) for the edifying of the Body of Christ (in Faith, and Love.) Ver. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and knowledge (or acknowledg∣ment) of the Son of God unto a perfect Man, (i. e. to perfection in knowledge of the Faith and of the will of God, Coloss. 1.28.) unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; (i. e. so as to be Christians of a full maturity, and ripeness in all the Graces deri∣ved from Christ Jesus to the Body.) Ver. 14. That (so arriving to this perfe∣ction in faith and knowledge) we henceforth (may) be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Do∣ctrine by the slight of Men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lye in wait to de∣ceive,
(Gr. by the subtilty of Men, through their craftiness for the managing of deceit.) Ver. 15. But speaking (or keeping) the truth in love, may grow up into (or increase in) him in all things, who is the Head even (into) Christ. Note. From these five Verses the Papists argue for an Infallible Guide thus: Christ gave Apostles, Pastors, and Teachers, that Christians might not be tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine; this end could not be compassed by giving us such Guides and Instructors in Belief, as were meerly fallible, and who might lead us into Circumvention of Error. Moreover, God gave such Pastors to his Church, till we all come to the Unity of the Faith, which will not be till the last days of all, wherefore till the end of the World, the World shall be provided of them, and by them be secu∣red from being like Children tossed too and fro. Answ. I answer, That this Text is so far from proving a Succession of Infallible Guides in Matters of Faith to the Worlds end, that it seems rather to establish the Doctrine of the Protestants touching the fulness and perspi∣cuity of the Holy Scripture in all necessary Articles of Christian Faith, and to overthrow the pretended Necessity of Infallible Guides in order to that end. For, 1. To come to a perfect Man, as to the U∣nity of Faith, and Knowledge of the Son of God, is in the Scripture Language to be suffi∣ciently instructed in the Articles of the Chri∣stian Faith and Knowledge. Thus when our Lord saith to the young Man, If thou wilt be perfect sell all that thou hast, Matth. 19.21. by comparing these words with those in St. Mark and St. Luke, Mark 10.21. one thing is lacking, or is wanting to thee, Luke 18.22. It is evident that to be perfect there, is, not to be wanting in the Knowledge or Practise of any thing to be done, that this young Man might have Eternal Life. When St. Paul saith, We speak Wisdom,  among them that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6. the meaning is, say the Greek Commen∣tatorsTheodoret. , among those who are perfectly instructed in the Faith; and when he saith, As many as are perfect let us mind the same thing, he speaks of Persons fully instructed in their Christian Liberty; and when he saith, Leaving the Principles of the Oracles of Christ, let us go on to perfection, he calls us to advance to a more full Instruction in the Faith and Know∣ledge of Christ. See Note on 1 Cor. 2.6. 2ly, Note that the Apostles and first Preach∣ers of the Gospel, were made Ministers of his Church, , to teach fa the word of God, Col. 1.25, 26. To teach ∣ry Man in all wisdom, that they might presen every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, v. 28. and accordingly, departing from the Churches planted by them, they commended them ca to the Word of Grace which was able to bu them up, and give them an Inheritance  all that are sanctified, Acts 20.32. 3ly, Observe that the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers here name were given at our Lord's Ascension for these ends; for when he ascended up on high,  he actually gave some Apostles, &c. and that even those Pastors and Teachers had their , or Supernatural Gifts of the Holy Spi∣rit to fit them for that end. Whence it de∣monstratively follows, that those Gifts ceasing soon after, a succession of such Persons was neither promised, nor was necessary to this end; for if so, Christ must be charged with breach of Promise, and being wanting to the Church in what was necessary for the obtain∣ment of those ends. 4ly, Observe that these Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, indued with these Supernatural Gifts for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ into a perfect Man, not doing all, or any of these things in Person since their death, and yet being given for the accomplishing thee ends, must be acknowledged to have done all these things, as far as they were needful, by some other way. Now thee being no other way in which they could do it, but by their Writings left behind them as a Rule of Faith, and by which, they being dead, yet speak, it follows that thee Writings, duly attended to, must be sufficient for these ends, and consequently they must both with sufficient fulness and perspicuity, instruct us in all the necessary Articles of Chri∣stian Faith and Knowledge. HenceTheodoret. Chry∣sostom informs us, that they writ the Gospel , for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. In a word, is evident this Text doth as much prove a Ne∣cessity of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, in all future Ages of the Church, to keep  Members fixed in the Truth, as of Pastors and Doctors, these Apostles, Prophets, and Evan∣gelists being here placed in the first rank of those whom God had given for this end: Since therefore these Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists were only given in the first Ages of the Church, it evidently follows that the Persons mentioned in this Text, were not give them to do this to the Worlds end.
Ver. 16. From whom the whole Body fitly joyned together, and compacted by that which every joynt supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, (Gr. compacted and cemented together by every joynt of supply, according to its power in proportion of every part,) maketh increase of the Body to the edifying of it self in love. , from whom.] That is, from which Head, the whole Body of Christians duly compacted together, some sustaining the Of∣fice of an Inferiour Head, some of an Eye, some of an Hand, some of a Foot, 1 Cor. 12.15, 16, 17. by the Assistance of which every of these Parts thus united gives to the whole, according to the particular Proportion of its Gifts, increaseth, or grows in love, and so each Member edifies one another. Ver. 17. This I say therefore, and testifie that ye (who have these assistances in Faith, and Piety,) walk not henceforth as other (un∣converted) Gentiles, in the vanity of their (own) mind. Ver. 18. Having the understanding dark∣ned, (and) being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them. Ver. 19. Who being past feeling, (insensi∣ble of the vileness of their actions,) have gi∣ven themselves up to work all uncleanness with greediness. , in the vanity of the mind.] The Heathen Idols are frequently in the Old Testament stiled , vain things, and the Apostles preached to the Gen∣tiles to abstain, and turn  from those vain things, Acts 14.15. by compliance with which they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkned, Rom. 1.22. And this seems to be the vain conversation from which, saith St. Peter, they were redeemed, 1 Pet. 1.18. and the vanity of the mind here mention∣ed. , alienated from the life of God.] i. e. Not only from that way of Life which God approves of, but which resem∣bles him in Purity, Righteousness, Truth and Goodness. , by the igno∣rance that is in them.] This seems to refer to their Ignorance of the Nature, the Attri∣butes, and the Providence of God, and of a future state of Happiness and Misery. The hardness of their hearts here mentioned, they had contracted by wicked Habits and Cu∣stoms, the frequency of vile Examples, and by those corrupt Principles which made them insensible of their Impurity and Lascivious∣ness, for they committed Whoredom and A∣dultery, saithContr. Celsum l. 4. p. 177. & Hom. 5. in Joh. p. 79. Origen, , teaching that in these things they did nothing contrary to good man∣ners. , with greediness.] Hoc totum fecerunt in avaritia, dum nunquam luxurian∣do saturantur, nec eorum terminum habet vo∣luptas. Hieronymus in locum. Ver. 20. But ye have not so learned (the Doctrine of) Christ. Ver. 21. If so be (or since) that ye have heard him (by our preaching,) and have been taught by him, (Gr. instructed in him,) as the truth is in Jesus. Ver. 22. (To wit) That ye put off con∣cerning your former conversation (in Hea∣thenism) the old man, (i. e. the habits of sin you then contracted,) which is corrupt accord∣ing to the deceitful lusts, (i. e. the Lusts which deceive you, promising that Pleasure and Sa∣tisfaction which they cannot yield, or which you practised whilst Heathens, being deceived by your Heathen Priests, declaring they were acceptable to the Gods, and the Philosophy and vain deceit of those wise Men who allowed them. Ver. 23. And be renewed in the Spirit of your mind. Ver. 24. And that ye (may) put on the new man, which after (the Image of) God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. , the old man.] Signifies those evil Habits they so long practised in the state of Heathenism, the New Man, that Divine Life, that Life of Righteousness and Holiness which Christianity requires, and it is called Holiness of Truth, or Inward Holi∣ness, in opposition to the Outward and Cere∣monial Holiness of the Jews. Ver. 25. Wherefore putting away lying, (a Vice too common among Heathens, and op∣posite to Truth and Righteousness,) speak eve∣ry man truth with his neighbour; for we are members one of another; (now lying tends to dissolve Societies, and hurt the Members of the same Body.) , lying.] Which the Heathen Philosophers thought lawful when it was good, or profitable for them; as owning that Rule of Menander, , a Lie is better than an hurtful Truth; and that of Proclus, , Good is better than Truth; and that of Darius in L. 3. p. 191 Herodotus, , when a Lie will profit, let it be used; and that ofApud Stob. Serm 12. Plato, He may lie who knows how to do it . in a fit season: For there is nothing decorous in Truth, saithDiss. 3. p. 29. Maximus
Tyrius, but when it is profitable; yea, some∣times, saith he, , truth hurts, and a lie profits Men. And to countenance this practice, both. Plato de Rep. l. 2. p. 607. Plato and the. Stob. de Stoicis, To. 1. l. 2. Tit. 4. § 4. Stoicks, seem to have framed a Jesuitical Distinction between lying in Words, and with assent to an Un∣truth, which they called, Lying in the Soul: The first they allowed to an Enemy in pro∣spect of Advantage, and for many other Dispen∣sations of this Life: That is, their wise Man may tell a lie craftily, and for gain, but he must not embrace a Falshood through igno∣rance, or assent to an untruth. Ver. 26. (If you) Be angry (take heed) and sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. , be angry and sin not.] These words, though spoken impera∣tively, are not a Command to be Angry, but a Caution to avoid sinful Anger; as when the Prophet saith to Nineveh, Fortifie thy strong holds, the Sword shall cut thee off, Nah. 3.14. i. e. though thou dost fortifie them, it shall do so: And the Son of Syrach, Cocker thy Child, and he shall make thee afraid, Chap. 30.9. i. e. this will be the Issue of it. So Isa. 8.9, 10. , Let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath.] This Precept, saithDe fratr. amor. p. 488. Plutarch, the Scholars of Pythagoras ob∣served, who, when they had been Angry, and reproached one another, , before the Sun went down, they shook hands and embrac'd one another. This must the Christian do before he offers up to God his Evening Sacrifice, that so he may lift up to God pure hands without wrath, 1 Tim. 2.8. Ver. 27. Neither give place to the (temp∣tations of the) Devil. Note. Let a Man be always careful that he be not Angry, say the Jews; for whoso is angryBuxt. floril. p. 135. omnes species Gehennae ei dominan∣tur, is subject to the Dominion of the Infernal Fiends. Ver. 28. Let him that stole (before his con∣version) steal no more, but rather let him labour, working with his hands that which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth. , let him that stole, &c.] This Exhortation was needful, because in many Nations it was not counted a sin to steal, saith. Nyr. Hypot. l. 3. c. 24. Bessi C Medi quidam ac Danthelitae . Strabo l. 7. p. 318. C. Sextus Empyricus, nor were they much ashamed at it, when it was objected to them, saith. Apud Euseb. Praepar. Ev. l. 6. c. 10. Bardesanes. , that he may have to give.] This Charity the Primitive Christians ex∣pected even from them that laboured with their hands. So. L. 2. Mand. 2. p. 45. Hermas saith, It is good to give liberally to all that are in need, out of the labours of our own hands. Ver. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good for the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. , that it may minister Grace.] That is, saith Theodoret, that it may be accep∣table to, as well as good for the Hearers. See the Note on Coloss. 3.16. Ver. 30. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed up to the day of redemption. (Chap. 1.13, 14.) , and grieve not the Holy Spirit.] The Holy Spirit being a Divine Person, it is certain that he cannot proper∣ly be grieved, or vexed as we are. We there∣fore must remove from this Expression, when it is applied to him, all turbulent Motions, all real Pain, Disquiet, Discontent, and look upon it as spoken , i. e. so as to intimate we do that to him, which, when 'tis done to Men, creates Grief to them As 1st, when we refuse to hearken to his Counsels, rebel against his Government, and do that which is opposite to his Holy Nature 2ly, He is said to be grieved by a Metonyny of the Effect, when he acts so towards us, as Men are wont to do when they are grie∣ved by us, and displeased at us, withdraw∣ing their wonted Kindness, flying our Compa∣ny, and abandoning us to our Enemies. Ver. 31. And (to this end) let all bitter∣ness and wrath, and anger, and clamor be put away from you, with all malice. Ver. 32. And be ye kind one towards ano∣ther, tender, hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you.
CHAP. V. Verse 1. BE ye therefore followers of (this love of) God, as (becomes his) dear Children. Ver. 2. And walk in love, as Christ also (hath given an example, who) hath loved us, and given himself for us an offering and a sa∣crifice to God, for a sweet smelling savour. , an Offering and Oblation.] That the Death of Christ is here stiled an Oblation offered up to God for us, cannot be denied: But Crellius saith that the Apostle speaks not here of any Expiatory Oblation, because the Oblation here mentioned is said to be offered for a sweet smelling Savour, which Phrase is scarce ever used concerning Expiatory Sacrifices, but chiefly of Burnt-offerings, which were not of themselves Ex∣piatory, and are by Moses distinguished from Sacrifices for Sin. But (1.) That Sacrifices of a sweet smel∣ling Savour were used to make Atonement for, and to Expiate the Sin of Men, is pro∣ved from the Sacrifices of Noah. For where∣as in the Greek we read, that when that Sa∣crifice was offered God smelled , a Sacrifice of a sweet Savour, in the Hebrew he is said to smell  a Savour of Rest, that is, which made God's Anger to rest, saith the Jewish Writers,. Antiq. Judaic l. 1. c. 4. Josephus informs us, That Noah by this Sacrifice en∣treated that God would now be atoned, and would no more conceive such displeasure against the Earth, i. e. the Inhabitants of it. And by the Syriac Version it is rendred an Odor of Placability, because, as Vatablus and Munster on the place observe, God then ceased from his Anger, and was appeased: So that the first time that this Phrase is used, it is taken for an Expiatory Sacrifice, and is designed to appease the Wrath of God. The Sacrifices which Job offered for his Sons and Daugh∣ters, and for his three Friends, were Burnt-offerings, as the Phrase  shews, and yet they were offered, the one to expiate for the Sin of his Children, Job 1.5. the o∣ther to appease the Wrath of God kindled a∣gainst his three Friends, Chap. 42.7. More∣over, it is evident from Scripture, that this Phrase , a sweet savour, is used not only of Burnt-offerings, but of Sacrifices for Sin; thus, If any People of the Land sin through ignorance—when his Sin comes to his knowledge, the Text saith, he shall bring his offering, a Kid of the Goats, a Female with∣out blemish, , a Sacrifice for the Sin that be hath sinned, and the Priest shall burn it upon the Altar, , for a sweet Savour to the Lord; and the Priest shall make Atonement for him, and it shall be forgi∣ven him. To this importance of the Phrase doth David manifestly allude, when he saith to Saul, If the Lord hath stirred ye up against me, , let him smell an Offering. And when this  Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savour is applied to Burnt-offerings, they are declared to be favourably accepted to make Atonement for him that offers them. This the Son of Syrach seems plainly to say of their Sacrifices of sweet Savour in the general, when he speaks thus of Aaron,. Ecclus. 45.16. He chose him out of all the People to offer Sacrifices to the Lord, Incense, and a sweet Savour for a Memorial, to make Reconciliation for his Peo∣ple. Thus of the Burnt-offerings in Leviti∣cus it is said, That he that brings them shall put his hand upon the head of the Burnt-offer∣ing, and it shall be accepted for him to make Atonement for him, Lev. 1.4. Now as theVide Outram l. 1. c. 15. § 8, 9, 10, 11. Hebrew Doctors tell us, That this Impo∣sition of Hands was always joyn'd with Con∣fession of Sins over the Sacrifice, which Con∣fession still concluded with a Prayer, that the Sacrifice might be an Expiation for them; so the Phrase, It shall be accepted to make Atone∣ment for him, Lev. 14.20. used here and else∣where concerning Holy Things, is as much as is ever said of Expiatory Sacrifices. Nor is it any Objection to the contrary, that Burnt-offerings are usually distinguished from Sin-offerings; the Reason of that being this, saithIn Lev. 1.4. Ainsworth, that Burnt-offerings were for the Atonement of General Sins, and such as often were unknown to Men, whereas for Special Sins there was appointed a Special Sacrifice and Sin-offering. This, saithIbid. Dr. Outram, was the Opinion of the Jews, that Burnt-offerings were intended for the Ex∣piation of Sin. And this saithDe Jure Nat. & Gent. l. 3. c. a. &c. 6. Mr. Sel∣den, was their practice, to offer these as Ex∣piatory Sacrifices for Strangers. Ver. 3. But Fornication and all Unclean∣ness, or Covetousness, (inordinate desire,) let it not be once named among you (that you may walk) as becometh Saints. , as becometh Saints.] Wor∣thy of Observation is the Note of St. Jerom here, Ex quo Sanctus non potest appellari qui∣cunque extra fornicationem in aliquâ, immun∣ditiá,
& avaritià voluptatum qua se delectave∣rit, invenitur. Ver. 4. Neither (Gr. , and let not) filthi∣ness, nor (and) foolish talking, or jesting, which are (things) not convenient (to your Calling, be used among you,) but rather (let your employment be that of) giving thanks. Ver. 5. For this ye know that no Whore-monger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God (the Father.) That the words  and , are to be interpreted to an impure sense, may pro∣bably be gathered from the words joyned with them, Fornication, Uncleanness, Filthi∣ness, and more probably from the Reason rendred for the abandoning them all, viz. That no fornicator, or unclean person, hath any in∣heritance in the Kingdom of God, or of Christ.  is in the Rabbinical Phrase  turpitudo oris, of which theyBuxt. Lex. in voce  proverbial∣ly say  quicunque foede loquitur perinde est, ac si introduceret porcum in San∣ctuarium. To commit  folly in Israel, is to commit Whoredom, or Adultery. And the word by the Septuagint is sometimes rendred , sometimes , sometimes , and sometimes . And the solliciting a Woman to Fornication by filthy words, is in the Targum expressed thus,  non deturbabis verbum oris, Thou shalt not speak impurely with thy mouth, to cause thy flesh to sin, Eccles. 5.5. is by Suidas rendred , scurrility, levity, by Phavorinus . Now  is a filthy scurrilous man, and in Aristophanes , is to be pleased with filthy scurrilous words. Hence Oecumenius and Theophylact reckon them both as , the fore-runners or incentives to fornication. As for the word , that it hath some∣times an impure sense, see Note on 1 Thess. 4.6. though being here stiled Idolatry, it seems more naturally to relate to the love of Riches, which renders us most truly guilty of that sin. Though it be also true, that he who loveth Pleasures more than God, is guilty of that sin; and this impurity was a frequent, and almost general Appendix of Idol Worship. That the Ephesians stood in need of these Instructions, we learn fromAthenaeus l. 1 a. p. 585. Democritus Ephesius, who speaking of the Temple of the Ephesian Diana, hath much  of the softness and luxury of the Ephesians; and fromIdem l. 13. p. 573. Eualces in his Book de Ephesia∣cis, who saith, , In Ephesus they built Temples to Venus the Mistress of the Whores; and from Strabo, who informs us, That in their anci∣ent Temples there were old Images, but in their new  vile Works were done, Lib. 14 p. 640. Ver. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words, (as if these things might be consistent with the favour of God,) for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. , let no man deceive you.] A∣mong the Heathens, simple Fornication was held a thing indifferent, the Laws allowed, and provided for it in many Nations; whence the graveEnchir. c. 47. Epictetus counsels his Scholars only to whore , according to Law. And in all places they connived at it. He that blames young men for their meritricious amours, saithAbhorret non modo à licentia hujus Seculi, verum etiam à majorum consuetudine atque concessis; quando enim hoc non fa∣ctum est? quando reprehensum? quando non permissum; quando denique fuit ut quod licet non liceret. Orat. pro Coelio, p. 503. n. 37. Cicero, does what's repugnant to the Custom and Concessions of our Ancestors, for when was not this done? when was it not per∣mitted? This was suitable both to the Prin∣ciples and Practises of many of their grave Philosophers, especially of the. Sext. Empir. Pyr Hypot. l. 3. c. 24. Stoicks; who held it lawful for others to use Whores, and for them to get their living by such pra∣ctises. Hence, even in the Church of Corinth, some had taught this Doctrine. See Note on 1. Cor. 6.13. Ver. 7. Be ye not therefore partakers of (with) them (in these sins.) Ver. 8. For ye were sometimes (Children of) darkness, (being subject to these deeds of dark∣ness, Chap. 2.1, 2, 3. Chap. 4.18, 19.) but now are ye (Children of the) light, (by your faith) in the Lord; walk (therefore) as Chil∣dren of the light. , sometimes darkness.] That the state of the Gentile World, both in the Old and the New Testament, is represented by a state of darkness, and that of Christians by a state of light, See Note on Rom. 13.12. Ver. 9. For the fruit of the (Holy) Spirit, (by which you are enlightned,) is in all good∣ness, righteousness, and truth, (and so in∣structs you to avoid those deeds of wicked∣ness.) , of the Spirit.] Many Greek Copies, and all the Latin and the Syriack, read , the fruits of the light, with which you are enlightned. And so doth St. Jerom here, taking no notice of the other reading.
Ver. 10. (Walk then as Children of the Light,) Proving (, approving) what is acceptable to the Lord. Ver. 11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness (committed by the Heathens) but rather reprove them. .] Refute them, make them asha∣med of them, by bringing them to the light. . Phavorinus. Ver. 12. (They being such as deserve to be refuted,) For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in se∣cret. , done of them in secret.] In their Mysteries, which therefore were sti∣led , none being permitted to di∣vulge them upon pain of death. Hence even the word  hath its name, say Gramma∣rians, from , to stop the mouth. The Eleusinia Sacra were performed in the Night, agreeably to the deeds of darkness committed in them; so were the Bacchanalia, hence called Nyctelia; and they were both full of detestable iniquity, and upon that ac∣count, saithLib. 39. Dec. 4. Livy, were banish'd by the Roman Senate out of Rome and Italy. Ver. 13. But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light, (or being dis∣covered by the light, are made manifest,) for whatsoever doth make (any thing) manifest is light. Ver. 14. Wherefore (to shew that Christians are light, and so obliged to avoid these deeds of darkness,) he (the Lord) saith, Awake thou that sleepest, arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life. , he saith.]Haer. 42. p. 372. Epiphanius saith these words were spoken by Elias, and Georgius Syncellus that they were taken from the Apo∣cryphal Books of Jeremiah; others think they are cited from Isa. 60.1, 19, 20. Ver. 15. See then that ye walk circumspect∣ly, (or how exactly you walk,) not as fools, (running your selves into unnecessary dangers by an indiscreet Zeal,) but as wise, (to ma∣nage your Affairs so as to avoid them by all lawful means.) Ver. 16. Redeeming the time, (i. e. using all prudent means to prolong your lives,) be∣cause the days (in which you live) are evil, (and therefore perillous, and such as will re∣quire much wisdom to preserve you from dan∣gers.) , Redeeming the time.] Here Note 1st, That the Times of Peril and Sadness are stiled evil days; In this sense Ja∣cob saith his days were evil, , by reason of the Troubles he met with from La∣ban, and his Brother Esau, Gen. 47.9. The Psalmist, that the Righteous shall not be a∣shamed , in the evil day, Ps. 77.19. The wise man shall be silent, saith Amoz, in that time, for it is , an evil time, Amoz 5.13. i. e. a time of Lamentation, v. 16. of darkness, v. 18. and that is by the Prophet Micah stiled , an evil time, Mi∣cah 2.2. which brought those Judgments on them which they could not escape. And in the close of this Epistle, to stand , is to stand in the times of fiery Trials and severe Persecutions by the Instruments of Satan, Chap. 6.13. , to redeem the time.] Is by all honest ways and prudent Methods to endeavour to avoid the Dangers, and to e∣scape the Persecutions to which these peril∣lous Times may render us obnoxious. So when King Nebuchadnezzar had threatned that the Chaldaeans and Magicians should be cut in pieces if they declared not his Dream, and they still put him off with this Answer, Let the King tell the Dream, and we will tell him the interpretation; the King replies, Of a truth I know , that you would gain the time; you hope by these An∣swers to delay the time of your Punishment, and to contrive some way to escape it. So the Scholiast upon the place expounds it; , You hunt after delays, seeking by the protract∣ing of the time to make me forget what I asked of you. And Theodoret expounds it thus, You prolong the time , hoping for time to escape. So also Col. 4.5. Walk in wisdom towards those that are without, i. e. your Heathen Governours and Magistrates, Redeeming the time, i. e. endeavouring by all true Christian Prudence to avoid the Calami∣ties they are still ready to bring upon them, answering them with as much wisdom and gentleness of Speech as you are able; for, walking among Wolves, it concerns you to be wise as Serpents. Ver. 17. Wherefore be ye not unwise (in managing this, and other affairs,) but (act as) un∣derstanding what the will of the Lord is, (viz. that in such cases he requires you to be wise as Serpents, and not to cast Pearls before Swine, who will tear you from them; and semblably not to sacrifice your lives by an indiscreet Zeal in discovering those Mysteries, but to shew the vileness of them with such prudence as may preserve you from perishing by the Disco∣very.) Ver. 18. And be not drunk with Wine, (as the Heathens used to be in the Festivals of their Gods, and especially in their Bacchanalia,) wherein is excess (Gr. , dissoluteness,) but be ye filled with the Holy Spirit, as Chri∣stians
use to be in their Assemblies. See Prov. 23.30.20.1.) , be not drunk with Wine.] The Heathens, who held Drunkenness unlaw∣ful at other times, thought it a Duty at the Solemnities of Bacchus, and of other Gods.. De Leg. l. 6. p. 870. F. . Ibid. l. 1. p. 777. Plato saith, That no Man should be allow∣ed to be drunk but at the Solemnities of the Gods that gave them Wine. And when Me∣gillus the Lacedemonian had told the Atheni∣ans, That he saw their whole Cities drunk at the Solemnities of Bacchus, and that the Inhabitants of Tarentum did the same, Mar∣vel not at that, saith the Athenian, for the Law with us requires it. AndNon posse suaviter vivi. Secund. Epic. p. 1101. F. Plutarch saith, That , when they celebrated the Orgia of Bac∣chus, or were present at their Sacrifices, or Sacred Mysteries, they allowed themselves to be delighted , even to drunkenness. This was the usual Appendix of their Sacri∣fices, they thinking this a Duty, saith. Athen. l. 2. p. 40. C. A∣thenaeus, in the Service of their Gods. Hence Aristotle and others say, that Drunkenness had its Name from the Intemperance they used after they had offered Sacrifice. , in which is excess.] That  signifies luxury, is proved from the Prodigal, of whom it being said that he lived , Luke 15.13. this is interpreted v. 30. by devouring his Living with Harlots, and from Hesychius, who interprets  by the word , filthy. Phavorinus saith the  is the , lustful, and un∣chast person, and hence  signifies a Stew, or Brothel House. Now that this Drunken∣ness ministers to this Lasciviousness, as the Poets often teach, so the Practice and Experi∣ence of the Heathens found it true, their Com∣potation and Banquetings seldom concluding without the Introduction of lewd Women, and their Bacchanalia ending in Whoredom and Adultery, , Prov. 20.1. Ver 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; (with which the Christians were inspired in their Assem∣blies, 1 Cor. 14.15, 26.) singing, (them with the mouth,) and (also) making melody in your hearts to the Lord. , in Psalms and Hymns, &c.] In their Bacchanalia they sung their drunken Hymns to Bacchus, saying, , and had their . In opposi∣tion to which drunken and impure Songs, the Apostle here exhorts the Christians to sing the Psalms of David, or the Hymns composed by Spiritual Men, such as Zacharias and Symeon, or by the Afflatus of the Spirit vouchsafed to them, 1 Cor. 14.15. Ver. 20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God, and (or who is) the Father (of us all, Chap. 4.6.) in the Name of out Lord Jesus Christ. , always.] See Note on 1 Thess. 5.17. , for all things; for his sparing Mer∣cies, Psal. 103.3, 4. his preventing Mercies, Eph. 1.4. Tit. 1.2. his distinguishing and pe∣culiar Mercies, Hebr. 2.16. for his common Mercies and Benefits daily bestowed upon us, as well as his extraordinary Favours; for past Mercies to be celebrated by Annual Festivals, Exod. 12.14, 17, 24. Lev. 23.21. for the Mercies we hope for, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. for ad∣verse, as well as prosperous Events, blessing him who doth thus give us warning, Psal. 16.7. but chiefly for Spiritual Blessings. Ver. 21. Submitting your selves one to a∣nother, (according to the Divine Ordinance,) in the fear of God, (who is the Author of that order.) Ver. 22. (And therefore) Wives submit your selves to your own Husbands as unto the (Ordinance of the) Lord, (the Husband of his Spouse the Church.) Ver. 23. For the Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church; and (this) he is (as being) the Savi∣our of the Body. Ver. 24. Therefore, as the Church is sub∣ject to Christ, so let the Wives be to their own Husband in every (lawful) thing. Ver. 25. (And ye) Husbands (also, see that you) love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself (up to the death) for it. Ver. 26. That he might sanctifie it, (or con∣secrate and fit it for his service,) and cleanse it, (Gr. having cleansed it) by the washing of water, (i. e. by that Baptism which is the La∣var of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.) and (by) the word (of his Grace, which is able to sanctifie us, Acts 20.32. John 17.17.) Ver. 27. That (so) he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it might be holy, and without blemish. , not having spot or wrinkle.] This seems to refer to the Acoura∣cy of the Jewish Baptism, who thought not the Person well baptized if there were any wrinkle which kept the Flesh from the Wa∣ter,
or any Spot or Dirt which was not tho∣rowly washed by it. And thus the Church is cleansed at present from the Guilt of Sin by the Blood of Christ, 1 John 1.7. 2 Cor. 11.2. Coloss. 1.22. Ver. 28. So ought Men to love their Wives as their own Bodies, (they two being made one flesh, so that) he that loveth his Wife, loveth himself. , as their own Bodies.] The Jews say, He that loveth his Wife as his own Body, and honoureth her more than his own Body, of him the Scripture saith, Peace shall be in his Tabernacle, and he shall visit his Tabernacle, and shall not sin. Talmud. Sanh. Fol. 76.2. Ver. 29. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it even as (doth) the Lord the Church, (which is his Spouse.) Ver. 30. For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. , of his flesh, and of his bones.] This Phrase being not only used to express an intimate Relation, Gen. 29.14. Judg. 9.2. but being the very words which Adam used concerning Eve, made out of his rib, Gen. 2.23. shews that the Apostle had his eye upon the mystical Sense of the production of the Woman from the Man, of which the Jews speak. Ver. 31. For this cause (was it said at the production of Eve, and her being given for a meet help to Adam, Gen. 2.24. that) a man shall leave his Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Ver. 32. This is a great mystery, but (when I represent it as such) I speak (chiefly of the my∣stical sense of it) concerning Christ, and his Church. , this is a great my∣stery.] He doth not say, as Mr. Cl. interprets the words, But I speak concerning the love of Christ to his Church; nor was that any My∣stery at all, as being long ago revealed, and a thing known to all Christians. But this was indeed a Mystery, till the Apostle here revealed it to the Ephesians, that as the Learn∣edThe Judgment of the Jewish Church. Dr. Alix saith, The first Match be∣tween Adam and Eve was a Type of that be∣tween Christ and his Church. And in this, saith he, the Apostle followed the Jewish Notions; for theTzeror hamor SS. Derischitz. Jews say, according to Voisin,  and the my∣stery of Adam is the mystery of the Messiah, who is the Bridegroom of the Church. These two great Persons therefore confirm the obser∣vation of Munster, That the Creation of the Woman from the rib of the Man, was made by the Jews to signifie the Marriage of the Cele∣stial Man who is blessed, or of the Messiah with the Church; whence the Apostle applies the very words which Adam said concerning Eve his Spouse, to those Christians who are the Spouse of Christ, saying, We are Members of his Body, and of his Flesh, and of his Bones, v. 30. Ver. 33. Nevertheless (on the other account also) let every one of you so love his Wife as himself, and (let) the Wife see that she reverence her Husband. CHAP. VI. Verse 1. CHildren, obey your Parents in (complyance with the Command∣ment of) the Lord, for this is just (that you should yield obedience to them who gave you life.) , in the Lord.] That is, say Oecu∣nenius and Theophylact, as far as their Com∣mands are consistent with the Will of God. Ver. 2. (For) Honour thy Father and thy Mother, (with Reverence, Obedience, and Maintenance, faith the fifth Commandment,) which is the first Commandment (in the De∣calogue,) with (a) promise (annexed to it.) , with promise.] i. e. A Special Promise; for that which is annexed to the se∣cond Commandment, is rather a General As∣sertion, than a Special Promise. Ver. 3. (And the Promise is this,) That it may be well with thee, and (that) thou maist live long upon the Earth. The Apostle doth not add these words, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, because they par∣ticularly belonged to the Israelites, who were to be excluded from their own Land, and he would give them no ground to think they should continue in it. Note also hence, that the Gospel hath its Temporal Promises as well as Spiritual, Matth. 6.33. 1 Tim. 4.8. 1 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. That this Promise did not at all concern the Ephesians, is Mr. Cl.'s mi∣stake; for God is not the God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, and will re∣ward Moral Duties performed by them, as well as by the Jews. Ver. 4. And ye Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath (by severe treatments and rigid injunctions, See Col. 3.21.) but (rather) bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, (instructing them in the Princi∣ples of Piety towards God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus.) , bring them up in the nurture.] This, saith Oecumenius, is the way to make them obedient; and if you furnish them with
Spirituals, Temporal things will follow. Make them read the Scripture, saith Theophy∣lact, which is the duty of all Christians; for is it not a shame to instruct them in Heathen Au∣thors, whence they may learn bad things, and not to instruct them in the Oracles of God? Ver. 5. Servants bo obedient to your Ma∣sters, (though they be only so) according to the flesh, (the spirit being immediately subject to God alone,) with fear (of displeasing them,) and trembling, (lest you justly should incur their anger, serving them) in simplicity of heart, as (knowing that in thus serving them, you do service) to the Lord, (who requires this of you, whose Gospel you will credit by your sincere obedience to your Masters for his sake, Tit. 2.2. and whose Doctrine you will bla∣spheme by your disobedience, under pretence of any Christian Liberty from the observance of your duty to them, 1 Tim. 6.1, 2.) Ver 6. (Serve them therefore) Not with eye service, (and whilst they behold you,) as men-pleasers (use to do,) but as (becomes) the ser∣vants of Christ, (in this relation) doing the will of God (who requires this obedience to them, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20.) from the heart. Ver. 7. With good will doing (them) ser∣vice, as (considering you do it) to the Lord (himself,) and not to men (only.) Ver. 8. (And) knowing that whatever good any man doth (out of obedience to the Lord, a reward of) the same he shall receive of the Lord, whether he be (a) bond (s-man) or free. Ver. 9. And ye Masters do the same to them, (shew the like good will to, and concern for them,) forbearing threatnings, (Gr. , re∣mitting oft the evils which you threaten to them) knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is their respect of Persons (or Conditi∣ons) with him. , knowing.] (1.) That you with re∣spect to God, are Servants, and that as you mete to your Servants, he will mete to you. (2ly,) That his compassion and readiness to forgive their Trespasses, should make you al∣so ready to remit the Trespasses of your Ser∣vants. (3ly,) That the Relation of Servants doth not make God less ready to shew kind∣ness to them, and own them as his Children, and therefore should not induce you to de∣spise, and deal severely with them. Ver. 10. Finally Brethren, be all of you strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Ver. 11. And (to this end) put on the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand (Gr. ground) against all the wiles of the De∣vil. , the wiles.] That is, saith Pha∣vorinus, , the Deceits he puts upon us, the Snares he lays for us, the Machinations he contrives against us. Ver. 12. For we wrestle not (only) against flesh and blood, (i. e. Men who are compound∣ed of them, see Note on Gal. 1.16.) but (also) against (evil) principalities and powers, (sa as Christ triumphed over, Col. 2.15.) against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, (i. e. those evil Spirits which still rule in those His then Nations which are yet in darkness, Chap. 5.8. 1 Thess. 5.5. See Note on Rom. 13.12) and against spiritual wickednesses in high pla∣ces, (i. e. against those evil Spirits which have their stations in the Regions of the Air. See Note on Chap. 2.2.) Ver. 13. Wherefore (I again exhort you to) take unto you the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand (these dangerous Enemies) in the evil day (of trial, persecution, and temptation,) and having done all, to stand (firm against them.) That the Evil Day is the Day of Trial and Persecution, see Note on Chap. 7.16. , the whole Armour of God.] Here, and v. 10, 11. which makes us strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, consists of such things as either are in us, as Truth, Faith, Righteousness, Peace, the hopes of Salvation; or are to be used by us as Prayer, and Attendance on the Word of God, and not in any immediate Influx of the Power of God without the use of these. Yea, this is here stiled the whole Armour of God, nothing more being requisite to enable us to come off Victors in this Combat; so that in these things doth consist the power of his might; or by these it is certainly to be ob∣tained. Ver. 14. Stand therefore, having your Ioins girt about with truth, and having on the breast-plate of righteousness. , with truth.] That the Gospel is throughout the Epistles emphatically stiled the Truth, see Note on Rom. 2.8. And this seems to be the Truth here mentioned, viz. 2 full perswasion of the Truth of that Religion we profess, or that stedfastness in the Faith by which we are enabled to resist the roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. See 1 Thess. 3.5. James 1.6. The Breast-plate of Righteousness, is an exact observance of our Duty to God, and a righteous Deportment towards Men in all the Offices of Justice, Truth, and Charity, which will beget in us that good Conscience which will support us in the Day of Temptation, and procure Honour and Esteem, Love and Compassion, from Men. Ver. 15. And your feet shod with the pre∣parations of the Gospel of Peace. , and your feet shod, &c.] For Explication of this Phrase, observe first, That Shoes were anciently a part of Military Armour; for in the story of Goliah there is mention of his Greaves of brass upon his legs, 1 Sam. 17.6. and in the story of the Trojan Wars, , the Graecians which were shod with Greaves of brass, are the armed
Graecians. Note secondly, That to be shod doth signifie our being ready for the work we go about; thus the Israelites were commanded to eat the Passover shod; i. e. ready for their Journey out of Egypt; and the Apostles are required to he shod with Sandals, that they night be ready to go whether their Master should be pleased to send them, Mark 6.8. The Gospel of Peace is either that Gospel which proclaims Peace with God through Faith in Christ, or which lays upon us the highest Obligations to live peaceably with all Men: So that the meaning of these words seems to be this, that ye may be ready for the Combat, be ye shod with the Gospel of Peace, i. e. endeavour after that peaceable and quiet mind the Gospel calls for, be not easily pro∣voked, or prone to quarrel, but shew all gentleness, and all long-suffering to all Men, and this will as certainly preserve you from many great Temptations and Persecutions, as did those Shoes of Brass the Soldiers from those sharp Sticks and Gall-traps which were wont to be laid privily in the ways to abstruct the marching of the Enemy. Ver. 16. Above all (the rest) take the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked (one.) , the shield of faith.] That Faith which is the confident expectation of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Hebr. 11.1. for this is the Victory over the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4. Ver. 17. And take the Helmet of Salvati∣on, (for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation, 1 Thess. 5.8.) and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, (by hiding which in your hearts you will be preserved from sin, Psal. 119.11.) , the Helmet of Sal∣vation.] i. e. We must be well assured, that if we fight the good fight, of Faith, there will be laid up for us an immortal Crown of Glory, which God the righteous Judge will give us, 2 Tim. 4.8. That he who cannot lye hath promised to him that overcometh to eat of the Tree of Life, Rev. 2.7. To taste the hidden Manna, v. 17. To be a Pillar in the New Je∣rusalem, Rev. 3.12. That you strive and fight for an incorruptible Crown that fadeth not away, 1 Cor. 9.25. And this Hope will be as an Helmet to defend your Heads from all the strokes of a Temptation. Ver. 18. Praying always (See 1 Thess. 5.17.) with all Prayer and Supplication (1 Tim. 2.1.) in the Spirit, (See Note on 1 Cor. 14.6.) and watching thereunto with all perseverance and (with) supplication, (not for your selves only, but) for all Saints, (your Charity to others, being a means to procure God's favour to your selves.) Ver. 19. And for me (in particular) that (a door of) utterance may be given to me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel. Ver. 20. For which I am an Ambassador in bonds, that therein I may speak boldly as I ought to speak. , that utterance may be given to me.] A door of utterance, Coloss. 4.6. this is aBuxt. Lex. Talm. p. 1872. Rabbinical Phrase,  the opening of the mouth signifying an occasion of speaking, and confidence in speaking. So that the Apostle here requests their Prayers, that he, being loosed from his Bonds, may have again an opportunity of preaching the Gospel, and also that he may do it publick∣ly and plainly, , with due confi∣dence and boldness. Ver. 21. But (and) that ye also may know my affairs, (and) what I do (at Rome,) Tychi∣cus a beloved Brother, and faithful Minister in (the things of) the Lord, shall make known to you all things. Ver. 22. Whom I have sent to you for the same purpose, that ye might know our af∣fairs, and that he might comfort your hearts. Ver. 23. Peace be to the Brethren, and love with faith from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 24. Grace be with all them that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen. , in sincerity.] i. e. Not only with a sincere love, uncorrupted by the opposite love of any Lust forbidden by him, but with a constant and perpetual love, which no temp∣tation can abate, or cause to cease, or to wax cold.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle TO THE PHILIPPIANS. IT is the observation of Theodoret, Oecu∣menius, and others, that Philippi was a City of Macedonia, under the Metropo∣lis of Thessalonica, which is confirmed Note on Verse the first. This Epistle is by the same Greek Scholiasts said to be written by St. Paul when he was in bonds at Rome. That he had been in bonds some time before, we may gather from Chap. 1.12, 14. from the Philippians sending. Epaphroditus to him with relief, and his return to them with this Epistle after a dangerous sickness, and from his hopes to come quickly to them, Chap. 2.24. and therefore he is supposed by the most exact Chronologers to have writ this Epistle in the eighth year of Nero, and the sixty second of our Lord. That the Apostle here warns them against the Gnosticks, or that these Gnosticks joyned with the Judaizing Christians to perswade the Gentiles to Judaize, I have not read in any of the Ancients; but the Greek Scholiasts agree in this, that he warns them againstTheodoret. Chrys. Theoph. , the deceit of the believing Jews, who endeavoured to corrupt them , by im∣posing on them Circumcision, and the Sha∣dows of the Law, and saying that without these they could not be justified, and stiling them the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, Chap. 3.18, 19. And this is abundantly confirmed from the whole third Chapter, where the Apostle declares he judges it for their safety to write to them to beware of Dogs, of evil Workers, and of the Concision. See Note on v. 2, 3, 15, 16. And lastly, It is noted by Theodoret, and o∣thers of the Fathers, that Epaphroditus men∣tioned in this Epistle as their Messenger, Chap. 2.15.4.18. was also their Bishop,Theod. Chrysost. Theoph. , or the Person to whom the Care of their Souls had been com∣mitted; though, I confess, the words , your Apostle, doth not prove it.
A Paraphrase and Comment ON THE Epistle to the PHILIPPIANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. PAul and Timotheus the Servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at (Gr. in) Philip∣pi, with the Bishops and Deacons (there). Note that Timothy is here joyn'd with Paul in the Salutation, not in the writing this E∣pistle. See v. 3. Ver. 2. (I wish) Grace to you, and Peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Je∣sus Christ. , with the Bishops and Deacons.] Various are the Expositions of these words, and great are the Contentions about the true import of them. For, 1. Some, with the Pseud-Ambrosius, inter∣pret these words thus, Paul and Timothy the Servants of Jesus Christ, with the Bishops and Deacons that are with us, to the Saints in Phi∣lippi. But as none of the Greek Fathers thought fit to take any notice of this strained Exposition, so may the harshness of it appear by comparing it with the like Prefaces to some of the other Epistles; v. g. 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the Church of God that is in Corinth, , with all that call upon the Name of the Lord. 2 Cor. 1.1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the Church of God that is at Corinth, , with all the Saints that are in all Achaia, are places exactly parallel to these words, Paul and Ti∣mothy the Servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints that are in Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons: and yet can any Man think that Paul the Apostle, with all that called upon the Name of the Lord Christ, or with all the Saints that were in all Achaia, writ to the Church of Corinth, which was part of that Achaia? 2ly, When the Apostle takes in those that were with him, as Copartners in writing to another Church, he doth it thus, Paul an Apostle, , and all the Brethren that are with me, write to the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1.1, 3. Had he then intended to greet the Philippians in the like manner, he would have writ in the like stile; Paul and Timothy, , and the Bishops and Deacons that are with me, to the Church in Philippi. The learned Dr. Hammond saith, That Philippi was a Metropolis which had many Bishops under it, on which account it is stiled , the chief City of that part of Macedonia, Acts 16.12. and by Photius, , the Me∣tropolis of the Province of the Macedonians. And by this, saith he, it appears that in Phi∣lippi there might be more Bishops than one, even as many as there were Cities under that Metropolis. But this Solution was First, Unknown to the Ancient Fathers, Chrysostom, Theodoret, St. Jerom, who all con∣tend that Bishops here must signifie Presbyters, because there could not be more Bishops than one, properly so called, in one City; whereas had they known this to have been a Metropolis, they must have known that this had been a satisfactory Answer to that Objection. 2ly, They tell us that Philippi was then un∣der the Metropolis of Thessalonica, which was the Metropolis of all Macedonia. ThusApud Oecum. Theodoret in his Preface to this Epistle, saith, , the Philippians were Inhabitants
of Macedonia under the Metropolis of Thessa∣lonica: and Theophylact, that they were , then, when the Apostle writ this to them, under the Me∣tropolis of Thessalonica. That Thessalonica was then the Metropolis of Macedonia, is plain from Antipater the Thessalonian Poet, who flourished in the times of Augustus Caesar, who calleth Thessalonica. Authol. l. 1. the Mother of all Ma∣cedonia. It is called also the Metropolis of Macedonia by Socrates; and in the Ecclesiasti∣cal sense it is so called byCap. 16. Aetius the Bi∣shop thereof, in the Councel of Sardica. And so say all the Notitiae Antiquae, at the end of Carolus Paulus. Who saith that Philippi was no Metropolis for the first six Centuries, but after that Macedonia was divided into prima, and secunda, it came to have the Honorary Title of a Metropolitan, and therefore might be stiled so by Photius, who lived in the Ninth Century; but by St. Luke 'tis not called the first City  of the Province, but , of that part of Macedonia, which they that came from Thrace thither, touch'd at, as appears byLib. 47. p. 397. Dion's description of it, and chiefly fromLib. 16. p. 514. al. 412. Diodorus Siculus, who saith, , that this Ci∣ty, being taken by Philip, was very service∣able to him, as lying near Thrace, and other places very conveniently. 3ly, The Greek and Latin Fathers do with one consent declare, that , the Apostle here calls their Presbyters their Bishops. So Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oe∣cumenius, and Theophylact among the Greeks, and among the Latins,Ep. 89. ad Evagr. & Ep. i Tit. 1.9. St. Jerom,Com. in Ep. ad Ephes. Pseud-Ambrosius, Pelagius, and Primasius; and that not only for the fore-mentioned Rea∣son, that there could be but one Bishop, proper∣ly so called, in one City; but for another al∣ledged by them all, viz. that , then the Names were common to both orders, the Bishops being called Presby∣ters, and the Presbyters, Bishops. And this saith Theodoret, is manifest in this place, be∣cause he adds here. Deacons to the Bishops, making no mention of their Presbyters. The Learned Dr. Pearson therefore seems  too much to favour his own Hypo∣thesis, when against all these Testimonies both of Greek and Latin Fathers, he saith, 'tis not yet proved that there were then at Philippi any Presbyters of the second Order, for surely this is proved from the Authority of all these Fathers. He therefore saith, (1.) That before the converted Jews and Gen∣tiles did unite into one Church, there were two Bishops of the same Church. This he proves from those words ofEpiph. Haer. 68. § 6. p. 722. Epiphanius, Alexandria never had two Bishops at a time, , as other Churches had; but if I am not much mistaken, this relates not to the Primitive and Apostolick Times, but to the Times of the Meletians, who found∣ed Bishops, Presbyters; and Deacons, and by them , prte Churches, ca ling them Churches of the Martyrs; whereas those of Peter's Party called theirs Catholick Chur∣ches. But though this Schism continued long and even in the time of Theodoret prevailed in Egypt, and, as Dancus notes, infected al∣most all Christian Regions; yet, saith Epipha∣nius, it never so prevail'd in Alexandria as in other Churches, there being never there two Bishops, one of the Catholick, another of the Meletian Churches, as there were in many other places: And if this be the true import of these words, 'tis easie to discern how impertinent they are to the true Exposi∣tion of this place. He adds also from  same Epiphanius, that Paul and Peter both Apostles and Bishops of Rome, as doubt∣less they also were at Antioch, and wherever they met, but they were only Bishops there, because Apostles there, one of the Jews, the other of the Gentiles, and in this they had no Successors.Ac ne quis una Ecclesia contentiose plures Episcopos fuisse contendat. Epist. ad Evagrium. St. Jerom indeed takes notice of this Evasion; but then he lays the Cen∣sure of contentious Persons upon them that made it. The same Learned Bishop adds, That were it true that there were but one Bishop in one City, it would not follow that the word Bi∣shops here could not be taken in the proper sense, because the Apostle doth not here call them Bishops of the Church, or City of Phi∣lippi, but only saith they were then at Phi∣lippi, he might write therefore to them whom he knew to be then at Philippi, though they were Bishops of other Churches. But (1.) as none of the Ancients have ever said one word of any other Bishops then met at Philippi, so the words seem not well consistent with this Evasion; for writing , he doubtless writes to the Saints dwelling in Philippi, writing therefore to them with the Bishops and Deacons, he must be supposed to write also to the Bishops and Deacons dwelling at Philippi. I therefore acquiesce in the Opinion of
Theodoret, who says that St. Paul then writ to the Presbyters and Deacons of that City, because their Bishop Epaphroditus, whom he stiles his Brother and Companion in labour, and fellow Soldier, and their Apostle, was then with him at Rome, Chap. 2.25. and that he therefore mentions them, because they were so instrumental in sending the Contributions to him mentioned Chap. 4.15. Ver. 3. (And) I (Paul) thank my God up∣on every remembrance of you (in my Pray∣ers.) Ver. 4. Always in every prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy. Ver. 5. (Which joy I have) For your Fellow∣ship in the Gospel, from the first day until now: (i. e. for your continuance in the faith, and the profession of the Gospel.) .] That fellowship, or  here doth not signifie their Liberality towards the Propagation of the Gospel, but their Com∣munion with the Apostles in the Gospel, as it doth 1 John 1.3, 7. I gather (1.) From the Phrase , which is emphatically put to signifie , the work of faith; as when we are said , by patient continuance in the good work to seek for glory, Rom. 2.7. that being the work of God that we should believe in his Son, Joh. 6.29. 2ly, From the Phrase, he that hath begun the good work in you, will perform it to the day of the Lord Jesus Christ, that being still used by the Apostle, to testifie his hopes that they would continue stedfast in Faith and Obedi∣ence, till they receive their Crown, 1 Cor. 1.8. 1 Thess. 3.13.5.23. Ver. 6. Being confident of this very thing, that he who hath begun a good work (the good work of faith) in (or among) you, will per∣form it to the day of Jesus Christ. , being confident, &c.] This the Apostle speaks, not out of any opinion of the Election of all the Philippians to Eternal life, or of the certainty of their Perseverance to the End by virtue of that Election, for why then doth he exhort them to work out their salvation with fear and trembling, Chap. 2.12. to stand fast in the Lord, Chap. 4.1. and to retain the word of life, that he might have joy in the day of Christ, that he had not run in vain, or laboured in vain among them? Chap. 2.16. He speaks this therefore from a Judg∣ment of Charity, because, saith he, it seems just, or fit for me to conceive this good hope of you, by reason of that great Affection you retain to me, and your Patience in enduring the like Afflictions: Now he that only gives these Reasons of his Confidence, gives us just reason to conceive he knew nothing of the Necessity of their Perseverance by virtue of a∣ny absolute Election to Salvation. Ver. 7. Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, (Gr. , to have this care for you all, which I shew in my prayers, and my continual remembrance of you, v. 4.) because I have you in my heart, (or you have me in your heart,) inasmuch as in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the Gospel, you all are partakers of my grace; (Gr. as those that are all my Copartners of grace in my bonds, &c.) Because you have had your hearts upon me in my Bonds, sending Epaphroditus to mini∣ster to me in my Necessities, Chap. 2.25. and contributing of your own Substance to me, Chap. 4.14. sending once and again to me, whilst I was in Bonds for the Defence of the Faith, v. 15, 16. those things, which being a sweet savour, a Sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing to God, v. 18. confirm my hope con∣cerning you, especially when I find you yet standing firm under the like Afflictions, having the same conflict which you saw in me, when I was among you, Acts 16. and new hear to be in me, Chap. 1.30. Ver. 8. (And of this my care for you I can call God to witness,) For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ, (or the most passionate degree of Christian love.) Ver. 9. And this I pray (for you,) that your love may abound more and more in know∣ledge, and all judgment. Ver. 10. That ye may approve (the) things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without offence till the day of Christ. .] The outward Senses being the Instruments by which we discern and di∣stinguish material Objects; the word , which is here rendred judgement, is from them derived to the Mind, discerning and passing Judgment on Spiritual Things; and is by Phavorinus stiled , the exact taste of things that differ, or are to be discerned by the mind; in which sense the word is often used by the Seventy, especi∣ally in the Book of Proverbs, where it is twenty times so used; and hence it bears the like sense in the Apostle; and they who have this exactness of judgment, are said to have  senses exercised, to discern betwixt good and evil, Hebr. 5.14. Ver. 11. Being filled with the fruits of righ∣teousness, which are (taught) by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God. For all that Christ does as a Prophet sent from God, or as assuming the Person of a Mediator, must refer ultimately to the glory of the Father, Chap. 2.11. Ver. 12. But (to proceed to my own Affairs, about which you have been so sollicitous, v. 7.) Brethren, I would have you know, that the things which have hapned to me, (through the Malice of my Adversaries) have fallen out rather to the furtherance (than the hindrance) of the Gospel. Ver. 13. So that my bonds in (and for the cause of) Christ are manifest in the Palace,
and in all other places, (i. e. 'tis manifest not only in the Palace, but throughout all Rome, that I am in bonds for the Faith of Christ.) Ver. 14. And many of the Brethren of the Lord waxing confident by my (patience, and courage in) my bonds, are (become) much more bold to speak the word of God without fear. Ver. 15. Some indeed (there are who) preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some al∣so of good will (and kind affection to me, and to the Gospel.) Ver. 16. The one (party) preach Christ out of contention, not sincerely, (not from love to to him, but disaffection towards me,) supposing (by this means) to add affliction to my bonds, (or to bring further tribulation on me now in bonds.) Ver. 17. But the other (party) preach Christ out of love (to him, and me his Servant,) knowing that I am set up (or lye in bonds) for the defence of the Gospel. Ver. 18. What then (shall this afflict me? no, since) nevertheless, whether in pretence, or truth, Christ is (still) preached, and I there∣in do rejoyce, yea and will rejoyce. For Explication of these four Verses, let it be noted in the general, that they who preach∣ed Christ , out of contention, did not preach Christ, or the Gospel in truth, and out of love to it, v. 17, 18. but only in pretence, or upon this occasion, from strife and envy a∣gainst St. Paul; and also that they did not acknowledge St. Paul to be set up, or by God appointed for the defence and propagation of the Gospel. Whence it appears that they could not be Persons, who only did contend with St. Paul for the glory of being the most diligent & successful Promoters of the Gospel, or such as, envying the Apostles Glory, set up for themselves, boasting as if they were the only Publishers of the Gospel. But yet 'tis difficult to assign the Persons here intended by St. Paul. Oecumenius and Theophylect say they were the unbelieving Jews, who by di∣vulging every where about Rome, what was the Doctrine of Christianity which Paul preached; how opposite it was to the Roman Gods, and their Worship; what Tumults it had caused; how many it had turned from their old Religion to the Faith of Christ; and who he was in whom the Christians did be∣lieve; thought to enrage the Emperor against St. Paul the great Promoter of this Doctrine. And in this, say, they, might St. Paul rejoice, as giving occasion to others to enquire into the Christian Faith, and so to come unto it; for, saith Tertullian, desinunt odisse, quod de∣finunt ignorare, when they once know, they cease to hate it; but such cannot be said to preach Christ, without an intolerable Cata∣chresis; nor can St. Paul be supposed to re∣joice in such a representation of it as they made. Others therefore say, with greater likelyhood, these were the Judaizing Christi∣ans, who with the Gospel taught the Obser∣vation of the Law, for from these arose , strife and dissentions, 1 Cor. 1.11.3. 3. Zeal, Animosities, and Contentions, 2 Cor. 12.20. and that on the account of this Apo∣stle, whom they would scarce own as an Apo∣stle of Christ, 2 Cor. 7.2. but rather look'd upon as one that walked according to the flesh, Chap. 10.2. and would have excluded but from the Churches, Gal. 4.16, 17. and yet at their preaching Christ, though not sincerely, the Apostle may be supposed to rejoyce, be∣cause he knew the time was near when the Hay and Stubble they built on the foundation, should be reveal'd, and the destruction of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, would suffi∣ciently confute their vain Additions to the Faith. Ver. 19. For I know that this shall (be so far from accomplishing their end of adding tri∣bulation to my bonds, that it shall) turn to my salvation, (i. e. my deliverance) through your prayers (for me,) and the supply of the Spi∣rit of Christ, (enabling me to plead so as shall tend to my enlargement, v. 25.) Ver. 20. According to my earnest expecta∣tion, and my hope, that (through the as∣sistance of the Spirit of Courage which God hath promised and given to us, 2 Tim. 1.7,) in no∣thing I shall be ashamed, but (that) with all boldness, as always (hitherto,) so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whe∣ther it be by my life (now,) or by my death (hereafter.) , Christ shall be magnified by me in my body.] For if I live in the body, the power of Christ will be magnified deli∣vering me out of so great danger. But if I be put to death for his sake, that power will be magnified, which enables me so chearful∣ly to die for the Faith, as I am ready to do. Ver. 21. For (the motive) to me to live is (the service of) Christ, and to die (for him) is (my greatest) gain. Ver. 22. But if (it happen that) I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour, (Gr. is worth my labour,) and what I shall chuse I know not; (i. e. were it left to my choice, I should be in a strait, which of the two Conditi∣ons to chuse.) Ver. 23. For I am constrained between (these) two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better (for me then continuing here, were I only to respect my own interest. 24. Nevertheless (for me) to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. , to depart, and to be with Christ, which is much better.] Because, saith Crellius, the time betwixt Death and the Re∣surrection is not to be reckoned, therefore the Apostle might speak thus, tho the Soul hath no
sense of any thing after death: But could St. Paul think a state of Insensibility much bet∣ter than a Life tending so much as his did to the Glory of God, to the Propagation of the Gospel, and the furtherance of the Joy of Christians? Could he call such an insensate state, a being with Christ, and a walking by sight, in opposition to the Life of Faith, 2 Cor. 5.7, 8. Others say, the Apostle speak∣eth thus, because he expected that the gene∣ral Resurrection, and this Day of Judgment should be in his time. But the words will not bear this sense: for, the Apostle saith he is in a constraint betwixt these two, whether he should chuse that Life which would enable him to gain many to Christ, and minister greatly to the Necessities of his Church, or that which would cause him to live with Christ, viz. as to his better part, i. e. whe∣ther his Body and Soul should be dissolved, ot he should still live in the Flesh? Now 'tis impossible that the same Man, at the same time, should expect the Resurrection, and the Day of Judgment, and yet expect to live in the Flesh, to abide with me Church in the Flesh, and yet expect that none of the Mem∣bers of the Church should abide in the Flesh, but should enjoy that Resurrection, which would place them with Christ as well as him∣self; that he should desire that his Soul should be dissolved, or separated from the Bo∣dy, that it should be absent from the Body, that he might be present with the Lord, and yet at the same time expect that Day when he should be clothed upon with his Celestial Body. Moreover, he himself informs us, that the Apostles expected only the Resur∣rection when other Christians should arise at the Great Day; for thus he speaks, He that raised up the Lord Jesus from the dead, will raise us also by him, and will present us with you, 2 Cor. 4.14. And this confutes their Gloss, who say the Apostle expected to be with Christ as an especial Priviledge belong∣ing to him as an Apostle, or a Martyr for Christ. See the Note on 2 Cor. 5.8. Ver. 25. And having this confidence (that you will receive this advantage by my abiding in the flesh,) I know that I shall abide, and continue with you all for your furtherance (in,) and joy of Faith. Ver. 26. That your rejoycing may be more abundant in Christ Jesus for (or through) me, coming to you again. Ver. 27. Only let (this be your care, that) your conversation be as becometh the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear (a comfortable account) of your affairs, that you stand fast in one Spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the Gospel. In one spirit with one mind. That is, with love and concord, saith Oecamenius. See Note on 1 Cor. 1.10, 11. Ver. 28. And (being) in nothing terrified by (the threats or persecutions of) your Adversa∣ries, (which is to them an evident token of (your) perdition, (viz. that you are an obsti∣nate people, bent on your own ruine,) but to you (it is a token) of salvation, and that of God, (it being righteous with God to recom∣pence tribulation to them that trouble you, but to you rest, 2 Thess. 1.5.) Ver. 29. For unto you it is given (by God as an especial favour) in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his Name. Ver. 30. Having the same conflict (with the enemies of the faith) which you saw in me, (when I was among you, Acts 16.23. 1 Thess. 2.2.) and now hear to be in me. CHAP. II. Verse 1. IF there be therefore any consola∣tion (, any force of ex∣hertation) in (beseeching you in the Name of) Christ; if (there be) any comfort in (mutu∣al) love, if (there be) any fellowship of the Spirit (of Love exciting you to it,) if (ye have) any bowels and mercies (for me the Prisoner of Christ.) Ver. 2. Fulfil ye my joy (in this) that ye be (all) like minded, having the same love (one to another) being of one accord, of one mind (or minding the same thing.) Ver. 3. Let nothing be done (among you) through strife, (who shall be the greatest,) or (through desire of) vain glory, but in lowli∣ness of mind, let each each esteem (an) other bet∣ter then himself. Let each esteem, &c.] This refers not to Judgment, it being not in out power always thus to esteem of others, but to Practise; as if he should have said, Be as ready to assist and help others, as if you were their Sub∣jects and Inferiours, so the Example of Christ requires, and so his Precept runs, That he who is the greatest should be at a Servant to o∣thers. Ver. 4. Look not every man on his own things, (or concernaments only,) but every man also on the things of others, (being concerned for their welfare.) Ver. 5. Let the same mind be in you (with respect to these matters) which was in Christ Jesus. Ver. 6. Who being in the form of God
(when he appeared to the Patriarchs,) thought it no robbery to be equal with God, (Gr. did not covet to appear as God.) Ver. 7. But emptied himself (of his former glory,) and took upon him the form of a Ser∣vant, (by ministring to others,) and was made in the likeness of Man, (Gr. being in the like∣ness of Man.) Ver. 8. And being found in fashion as a (n ordinary) Man, he humbled himself (yet more,) and became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross. , in the form of God.] By this Expression most Interpreters do understand, that the Apostle doth intend Christ was essen∣tially and truly God; but though this be a certain Truth, yet I conceive this cannot be the import of this Expression in this place. 1. Because the Apostle exhorteth his Phi∣lippians to Humility after the Example of our Lord; now Humility consists not in the change of Nature, but of Condition; and therefore this exinanition of the form of God, seems rather to respect our Lord's Condition, than his Nature. 2ly, There is no more reason to say the form of God signifies the Essence of God, than that the form of a Servant signifies the Es∣sence of a Servant; but evident it is that the form of a Servant doth not signifie the Essence, but the State, and the Condition of a Ser∣vant, which is a meer Relation; nor doth his Manumission change his Nature, but his State. 3ly, According to this import of the Phrase, it cannot well be shew'd how he did empty him∣self of, or lay aside this form; for though by taking of a Body he conceal'd, yet could he not be said to empty himself of, or lay a∣side the Godhead; especially when in that Body he gave such numerous and signal de∣monstrations of Divine Power and Wisdom, both in his Miracles, his Doctrine, and Know∣ledge of the Hearts of Men. 4ly, This word , form, both in the Old and New Testament, doth often signifie the External Shape: As when 'tis said of. Bel∣tashasar, Dan. 5.6, 10. and of Daniel, Chap. 7.28. that their. forms were changed; of Ne∣buchadnezzar, that. his form returned to him, Dan. 4.36. of Christ, that he appeared to two of his Disciples, , in ano∣ther form, Mark 16.12. and that , he was transfigured before three of them, Matth. 17.2. but it no where seems to signi∣fie the Essence of a Man, either in the Old, or the New Testament. Grotius and the Socinians say, That Christ is said to be in the form of God, by reason of the Miracles he wrought on Earth, they being Indications of the Power of God resi∣ding in him. But this Interpretation cannot stand: For (1.) Christ is here plainly said to have been in the form of God, before he took upon him the form of a Servant, or the similitude of Man; for as these words, being found in the fashion of a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, do shew that be was found in the fashion of a man before he humbled himself to become obedient to the death; so, by parity of Reason, these words, being in the form of God, &c. he emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a Servant, being found in the likeness of man, do shew that he was first in the form of God, before that be∣ing found in the likeness of Man, he took up∣on on him the form of a Servant. 2ly, 'Tis plainly here asserted, that Christ emptied himself of this form of God at his Humiliation; whereas he never laid aside his power of working Miracles, but did conti∣nue to exert it to his death. 3ly, This Power of Miracles is never in the Scripture stiled the form of God; and were this all that was intended by that Phrase, both Moses and Elias, and our Lord's Apo∣stles, might upon that account be said to have been in the form of God, seeing both Moses and Elias wrought many Miracle on Earth, and Christ declared concerning his Disciples, that they should work greater Miracles that those which he had done, John 14.12. I therefore by this form of God do under∣stand that glorious form in which God on his Throne is represented, that Majesty, in which he is said to appear in Scripture, and in which the , or the Word did shew himself of old to Moses and the Patriarchs. For expli∣cation of this sense, I shall shew, 1. How God in the Old Testament is represented as appearing, shewing his Form and Glory to the Sons of Men. 2ly, That Christ did in this form appear to Moses and the Patriarchs of old. 3ly, That since our Lord's Ascension, he hath been invested with this form of God, he hath appeared in it, and hath declared it belongs to him, though for the time of his Hu∣milation, he was pleased to depose, or put it off. And 1. The Appearance or Similitude of God is represented in the Old Testament in a bright shining Cloud, or Light, a Flame of Fire, o the Attendance of an Host of Angels. Thus in that Vision of the Prophet Daniel, the An∣cient of Days did sit; his Throne was like the fiery Flame, and his Wheels as burning Fire. A stream of Fire did issue from before him, thou∣sands of thousands ministred unto him. And ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, Dan. 7.9, 10. Thus God appeared on Mount Sinai, where his Presence was attend∣ed
with an Host of Angels, according to that aying of the Psalmist, The Chariots of God re twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, nd the Lord is among them as in Sinai; where he Targum adds, The word of the Lord desi∣red to place his Majesty upon it; Jehovah dwelleth  only in the Heaven of Hea∣ens for ever. He appeared there also in a right shining Cloud, or flame of Fire; for he Glory abode upon Mount Sinai, and the Cloud covered it six days, and the sight of the Glory of the Lord was like devouring fire, Ex∣od. 24.16, 17. And seeing of these Majestick Symbols is to see God, v. 12. to see the God of srael, v. 10. that is, say Onkelos and Jona∣han, the Glory of God. And when Moses oth again repeat the Decalogue, he adds these words, Deut. 5.22, 24. The Lord spake to all your Assembly in the Mount, out of the idst of the fire of the Cloud: And you said, Behold, the Lord God hath shewed us his Glo∣ry, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire. We have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth. The word f the Lord our God shewed the Divine Maje∣ty of his Glory, saith the Targum of Jona∣han; and we heard the voice of his word, saith Onkelos. And the Prophet Habakkuk n his Song of God, saith thus, His Glory co∣ered the Heavens, his brightness was as the ight, and bright beams came out of his side, Hab. 3.3, 4. There he discovered  his Shechinah, i. e. his glorious Majesty, saith the Targum. When Jacob had a Vision of Angels ascending and descending, he present∣ly cries out, This is no other then the House of God, this is the Gate of Heaven, surely Jeho∣vah is in this place, and I knew it not, Gen. 28.17.  The Glory of the Lord is here, say the Targums. And when God shew'd himself to the People in the Cloud, then did the Glory, or the Similitude of God appear, as the expression is Numb. 12.8. , the Glory of the Lord, saith the Septuagint. Thus doth the Scripture represent that God who dwelleth in Light inaccessible, before whose Face the Angels do continually stand as ministring Spirits: And this also is the Rabbinical exposition of the Cosri part. 2. § 2. p. 81. part 4. p. 277, 278. the Glory of the Lord, that is, either a Ray of Divine Light, or a Guard of Angels. 2ly, That Christ was in the form of God, even before he took upon him Humane Na∣ture, will be apparent, if we consider that even before he purged our sins, he was the brightness of his Fathers Glory, Light of Light, Hebr. 1.3. and in the Language of the Book of Wisdom, A pure stream flowing from the Glory of the Almighty, the brightness of the everlasting Light, Wisd. 7.25, 26. And that he; at the Conclusion of his Humiliati∣on, prays, that God would glorifie him with the glory which he had with him before the foun∣dation of the world, John 17.3. That it was the Opinion, both of the Ancient Jews, and of the Christians from the beginning, that it was the , or the Messiah, who appear∣ed to the Patriarchs of old in Light and Splendor, and sometimes with the Attendance of Holy Angels. And that we have great E∣vidence of this Matter, both in the Old and New Testament: in the Book of Exodus and Numbers, we read that the Children of Israel tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not? Exod. 17.7. Numb. 21.6. and that the Lord sent therefore fiery Ser∣pents among them. But in the Tenth Chap∣ter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, we are informed that they tempted Christ, and were destroyed of Serpents. See this Reading justified Note on 1 Cor. 10.9. Christ there∣fore, as to his Divine Nature, was then pre∣sent with, and tempted by them. God also saith to his People thus, Exod. 23.20, 23. Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in thy way, and to bring thee to the place which I prepared; beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; he will not par∣don your Transgressions, for my Name is in him. Now, the ancientSee Ambr. in locum. & Cartw. Rabbins say, this was the Angel, the Redeemer; or an uncrea∣ted Angel, in whom was Jehovah: so the words plainly seem to intimate this to us, seeing the power of Remitting Sins, ascribed here to him, belongeth only to that God a∣gainst whom they are committed. More∣over, when God being incensed against Israel for making the Golden Calf, had threatned to withdraw himself, and only send an An∣gel before them to drive out the Inhabitants of Canaan before them, Exod. 33.2. this seems an evil word to the People, and they mourn because of it, viz. of those words, I will not go up in the midst of thee; that is, say Onkelos and Jonathan, I will not cause  my glorious Presence to go up with thee. Nor doth Moses himself rest in this Answer, but speaks thus to God, If thy Pre∣sence go not with me, carry us not up hence, v. 15. If the Shechinah go not with us, saith Onkelos, , If thou thy self go not with us, say the Septuagint, R. Salomon, and Aben Ezra: which sense the following words require, viz. For wherein shall it be known that I and thy People have found grace in thy sight, is it not in that thou goest with us, v. 16. Whence it is evident, that they were not con∣tented with the Promise of a created Angel, but required God's Presence to go with them, and that God granted this Request,
v. 17. Thus. De Migrat. Abrah. p. 324. C. . Ibid. lit. F. Philo Judaeus often informs us, That the Angel who went before them was no created Angel, but the Divine Word, or God himself; for, saith he, Moses prays to God himself to be his Governour in the way that leadeth to himself, saying, If thou go not with us, carry us not up hence. And again, He uses the Divine Word for a Guide, for so speaks the Oracle, Behold, I will send my An∣gel before thy face to lead thee in the way, Ex∣od. 23.20, &c. 3ly, That after his Ascension to the right hand of Majesty and Glory, the Lord Christ did again reassume this form, and appear in this Majestick Splendor, is evident from the New Testament; Thus he appeared to Ste∣phen, who looking up stedfastly to Heaven, saw the glory of God, and the Son of Man stand∣ing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.55. Thus he appeared to a persecuting Saul, in a Light from Heaven above the brightness of the Sun, saying to him, I am Jesus whom thou persecu∣test, Acts 26.13. Thus in the Vision of St. John, Rev. 1.14, 16. His Eyes were as a fla∣ming fire, and his Countenance as the Sun shi∣ning in his strength. Thus he declared he would appear at the destruction of Jerusa∣lem to punish that rebellious People; The Son of Man, saith he, will come in the glory of his Father with his holy Angels, Matth. 16.27. Luke 9.26, 28. And his second Advent shall be with the same tremendous Glory, for he shall be then revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, 2 Thess. 1.7. 8. 4ly, Seeing then this Splendor, and this Attendance of Holy Angels, is represented in the Scripture as the Similitude, the Shape, the Face, and the Majectick Presence of God; seeing it is evident, that before the Incarnati∣on the  or Divine Word had this Glo∣ry, and in it did appear to Moses and the Patriarchs, and that in order to the exercise of a Regal Power over his Church; seeing it is certain from the New Testament, that af∣ter his Ascension he again re-assumed this form and power, 'tis highly probable this was the form of God here mentioned; this was the likeness to God in which at his Humiliation he did not covet to appear, but rather chose to lay aside, that so he might appear amongst us, not as the Lord of Heaven, attended with an Host of Angels, nor in the dazling bright∣ness of his Father's Glory, but in the fashion of a Man. , he thought it no robery to be equal with God.] This Greek Phrase is only to be met with in Plutarch, and in Heliodorus; in both which Writers it plan∣ly signifies to covet earnestly, or look upon a thing as much to be desired, and snatched a. Thus when Cybele went about to allure The∣genes to the lustful Embraces of Arsace, find∣ing him out of the Temple, in a by Apart∣ment, she didHeliodor. l. 7. p. 322.  it she snatch'd at the occasion, or look'd upon it as a thing desirable for her purpose; and when none of her Proposals or Allurements would prevail with Theagenes to gratifie the Queens desires, she brake forth into this Admiration,p. 340. What aversness from Love is this! A young Man in the flower of his Age thrusts from him, or refuses a Woman like unto him∣self, and desirous of him, , and does not look upon this as a great offer, and a thing very desirable. And when she had found out that his Affecti∣on to Chariclea was the cause of this Aversness, she proposes to Arsace the death of Charicles as an Expedient to gain his Affection, andp. 337. ; Arsace embraces the motion as a thing very disirable, or to be coveted. So that , saith Scmidius, is rem optatam persequi, & stu∣sissime occupare. .] Is to be, or to appe God, or in the likeness of God. So the   is adverbially used frequently in t Sep∣tuagint, answering to the Hebrew Caph, Job 5.14. They grope in the noon day, , at in the night, Chap. 10.10. Hast thou  cruddled me  as Cheese, Chap. 11.12. Man is born  like a will Asser colt, Chap. 13.12. your remembrance is  like unto Ashes; and v. 28. he cons∣meth  as a Bottle, Chap. 15.16. Man drinketh in iniquity  as drink, Chap. 24.20. Wickedness shall be broken  as a Tree, Chap. 27.16. He prepareth Ra∣ment  as the Clay, Chap. 28.2. Brass is molten out of the Stone  as the Stone, Chap. 29.14. I put on Judgments  as a Robe, Chap. 40.15. He eateth Grass  as an Ox, Isa. 51.23. Thou hast laid thy body  as the earth, Wisd 7.1. I my self am a mortal Man  like to all men. And the first voice I utter'd was  weeping as all others do, v. 3. So that the sense of these words seems to me to be this, That though Christ in his former Ap∣pearances still represented himself in the form and likeness of God, yet coming now into the World for the Salvation of Mankind, he did not covet or desire to appear in that Ma∣jestick Splendor and Authority, but rather chose to come in the Similitude of a Man,
and in the Form of a Servant. Nor doth this Exposition give any advantage to the So∣cinians, but equally confutes their Heresie, and gives a better Answer to their Arguments, than the usual Exposition can give, For, 1. Hence the Prae-existence of Christ be∣fore his being born of the Blessed Virgin, is proved to a demonstration. 2. Hence also is it evident, that there must be two Natures in Christ; that of the , which appeared from the beginning to the Patriarchs; and that which he received when as Man he was conceived in the Virgins Womb. 3. Hence it appears that this Nature, in which he appeared before his Conception in the Virgins Womb must be Divine. For what other Nature could appear in the form of God, and challenge to it self the Glory which by the Jews was still esteemed a certain in∣dication of the Divine Presence, and in the New Testament is stiled the Glory of the Fa∣ther? Especially if we consider, that he who thus appeared hath the incommunicable Name Jehovah so oft ascribed to him, is stiled the Judge of the whole Earth, and either chal∣lengeth to himself the Divine Attributes, and Offices, or never doth refuse them, when they are offered to him by Men. Moreover, where is the Humiliation, or the Exinanition here mentioned, in that Christ would not be, or ap∣pear as God in the World, if, having only an Human Nature, he could not do so without being Guilty of the Blasphemy the Jews laid to his Charge, that he being a Man made him∣self God? whereas he differ'd in nothing from an ordinary Man, but only in the ex∣traordinary Gifts conferred by God upon him. And if his Nature was Divine, it of necessity must be Eternal, since the Divine Nature can have no beginning of Existence. , and being in the likeness of Man.] That our Lord had the Real Nature, and not only the outward Shape or Resemblance of a Man; that he had a Body consisting of Flesh, Blood, and Bones; a Soul and Spirit; and so all the constituent Parts of a Man, the Scripture plainly testifies. Nor doth this Phrase, , in the likeness of Man, contradict it, it being used of a real Likeness by the participation of the same Nature as to kind. Thus Adam is said to beget a Son, , in his own likeness, who yet was certain∣ly of the same Nature with him. And Christ is said  to be made like to his Bre∣thren by the participation of the Nature of Abraham, and his communion with them in the same Flesh and Blood, Hebr. 2.14, 16, 17. And 'twas both proper and elegant for the A∣postle to use this expression here, by reason of the opposition he designed to shew, betwixt Christ's former glorious, and his then present humble state, he being then , in the form of God, now , in the likeness of a Man. , he took upon him the form of a Servant.] This Phrase cannot import only his taking of the Human Nature, that being sufficiently expressed, by saying that he was made in the likeness of Man; besides, he still retains the Humane Nature, but doth not now retain the form of a Servant, but of the Lord of all things. Nor are we to under∣stand by it his outward Poverty which equall'd him to Servants, saith the Learned Grotius, as having nothing of his own; for that is not the state of a Servant only, but of a Son in his minority, and of many unfortunate Persons who were never Servants. Nor 3ly, must we understand by it, with the Socinians, his Sub∣mission to be used as a Slave or Servant, by being whipt, and bound, and crucified; for that is the Humiliation which he suffered af∣ter he had taken upon him the form of a Ser∣vant, as these words plainly shew, He took upon him the form, of a Servant, and being found in the fashion of a Man, he became obe∣dient to the death. Nor is this proper to a Servant, but to a Malefactor; for a Servant is not less a Servant when he is not whip'd, or scourged. He therefore may be rather said to have taken upon him the form of a Servant, by ministring to Men, and being among them as one that served, for as the business of a Servant is to do nothing for him∣self, but for the good of others, and to spend himself in ministring to their advantage; so the Son of Man came not to be ministred to, but to minister; and, at the close of that Mi∣nistry, to give his Life a Ransom for ma∣ny. Ver. 9. Wherefore God hath exalted him, (even as to his manhood,) and given him a Name (a Dignity and Majesty which is) above every Name (of Majesty, Eph. 1.21. Hebr. 1.4.) , God hath exalted him.] The Fathers on this place advise us,, to refer these things, not to the Divine, but Human Nature, the Apostle not speaking here of the exaltati∣on of the Divine Nature of Christ by the manifestation of his concealed Glory and Power, but of the Exaltation of that Nature which had suffered; for this Exaltation is in Scripture represented as the Reward of our Lord's Salutary Passion; for we see him, saith the Apostle, who was made a little lower than the Angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour, Hebr. 2.9. And again, The Elders about the Throne say, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and Glory, Apoc. 5.12.4.11. Moreover, St. John declares that this Domi∣nion and Power was given to the Son of Man, because he was so, John 5.27. though it was
given to the Man, Christ Jesus, because the fulness of the Godhead dwelled in him. Ver. 10. That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, (humbly acknowledging his Authority; even those) of things in Heaven, (i. e. the holy Angels,) and things in Earth, (i. e. Men,) and things under the Earth, (the dead, who being raised by him, shall acknowledge his power; for to them the Apostle doth apply these very words of the Prophet Isaiah, Rom. 14.11, 12. Rev. 5.13. Ver. 11. And that every tongue, (i e. Men of all Nations and Languages, Rev. 7.13.) should confess that Jesus is the Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. , to the glory.] He does not say, as the Socinians contend, that Christ is ex∣alted, to the Glory of God the Father, though that be true of the advancement of his Hu∣man Nature; but he saith, that being thus exalted, he is to be acknowledged of all Tongues and Nations as their Lord, to the Glory of the Father; nothing more tending to his Glory, then that all Persons owning Christ as their Lord, and yielding Obedience to him, should abound in these Works of Righteousness which are through Jesus Christ to the Glory of God the Father, Chap. 1.11. Eph. 1.12. Moreover, seeing the Father thus exalted the Humanity of Christ, since he united the  to the Human Nature, for it pleased the Father, that in him should all ful∣ness dwell, what hinders that this Exaltation should be said to be to the Glory of God the Father, from whom he received even the Di∣vine Nature? Ver. 12. Wherefore beloved, (remembring the Dignity of Christ, and your Subjection to him,) as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, (when you had me to be your Monitor,) but much more now in my absence, (which God by the workings of his holy Spirit supplies,) work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. Ver. 13. For it is God who (in my absence, by his inward teachings) worketh in you, both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. , in my absence.] i. e. When I was present with you, I by my Counsels and Exhortations stirred you up to desire, and do what was according to the Mind of God. He, in my absence is more immediately pre∣sent with you by the inward Motions of his Holy Spirit, to excite you both to will, and do what is well pleasing to him. Having therefore now all things administred more im∣mediately by God, which are requisite to make you willing, and able to perform your Duty, it doth more highly concern you to work out your Salvation. Thus, Ep. ad Rom. § 9. Ignatius saith, That he being now in Chains, and going to Rome to receive the Crown of Martyrdo, the Church of Syria had God, instead of him is be her Pastor, and that Christ alone was Bishop over her; this sense, I gather from these words, much more in my absence; for what∣ther reason can be offer'd of those words then that which this Interpretation gives. Hence it is evident that God worketh in as to will and to do, not by a Physical Operation, which makes, it necessary for us to will, and to do what he would have us do; for why then doth the Apostle admonish his Philippians to work out their Salvation with fear and tr∣bling? for what is more absurd then to ex∣hort another to do himself, what God doth for him without his concurrence; or to re∣quire him to will, what he cannot but will and do, for this reason, because another rea∣ders it necessary for him so to will? and what ground of fear can there be, least God should fail in his work? That the word  doth not require this sense, is evident, because in Scripture it occurs very often, where it must be understood, not of a Physical, but only of a Moral operation; as when Satan is said , to work in the Children of Disobedi∣ence, Eph. 2.2. and of the Mystery of Ini∣quity that  it now works, 2 Thess. 2.7. 2ly, When it is attributed to those Causes which produce not their Effects by any Physi∣cal, but only by a Moral Operation, as when the word is said to be , powerful, Hebr. 4.12. The Word, , which effectually works in them that believe, 1 Thess. 2.13. that faith worketh by love, Gal. 5.6. that Cha∣rity is  effectual, Philem. 6. and of Con∣cupiscence that  it worketh in our Mem∣bers, Rom. 7.5. 3ly, When it is ascribed to God sending upon Men , the efficacy of deceit, for surely God worketh no evil Physically. In a word, Did God thus work in us to to will and do, the Work would be no more ascribed to us, than the Motion which was impress'd on the Body of Laza∣rus when he came out of the Grave, or upon Paul when wrapt up to the third Heavens, could be ascribed to them; and the Will would not deserve that Name, as being nei∣ther free, nor praise-worthy. Ver. 14 (And) Do all things without mur∣murings and disputings; (i. e. obey the Pre∣cepts of the Christian Faith, and of your Spi∣ritual Monitors chearfully, and without grudg∣ing, and readily, without exacting a reason of every Command they lay upon you.) Ver. 15. That ye may be blameless, and harmless, (as becomes) the Sons of God, (be∣ing) without rebuke, in the midst of a crook∣ed and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as Lights in the World. Ver. 16. Holding forth (, holding
fast) the word of life (under all Persecutions and Temptations,) that I may rejoyce in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, nei∣ther laboured in vain. Ver. 17. And as for me a Prisoner, if I not only should continue absent from, ) But if I be (also) offered upon the Sacrifice and Service of your Faith, (i. e. that I may present you Gentiles an acceptable Sacrifice to God through Faith, and the Sanctification of the Holy Spirit, Rom. 15.16.) I joy and rejoyce with you all, (I count these Sufferings the mat∣ter, not of my sorrow, but my joy.) , if I be offered.] The Apo∣stle here hath an elegant Allusion to the Jew∣ish Sacrifices: They were prepared for the Altar on which they were to be offered by the Levites and the Priests, and this was their  Service, and there was poured upon the Sacrifice Oil or Wine, which was the  or libation; if then, saith the Apostle, whilst I am thus , wholly employed in rendring you Gentiles an acceptable Sacrifice to the Lord, my Blood should be the libation to be poured out upon this Sacrifice, I should rejoyce even thus to die in your Service, and for the confirmation of your Faith. See Rom. 15.16. Ver. 18. (And if this come to pass,) For the same cause (or in the like manner) also do ye joy, and rejoyce with me. Ver. 19. But (though I speak thus) I trust in the Lord Jesus, (that he will work such a deliverance for me, Chap. 1.19, 25. as that not needing him so much here, I may be able) to send Timotheus shortly to you, that (what∣ever be my condition here) I also may, (or I may yet) be of good comfort, when I know your state, (i. e. your stedfastness in the Faith, and your Charity to one another.) Ver. 20. (To send Timothy, I say,) For I have no man (with me) like-minded, who will (so) naturally (and with like affection) care for your estate. Ver. 21. For all (here) seek their own (in∣terests and safety,) and not the things which are Jesus Christ; (that is, comparatively to Ti∣mothy and Epaphroditus, mentioned v. 25. for I find others too generally more concerned for their own safety, then for advancing the King∣dom of Christ with the hazard of their own lives and fortunes.) Ver. 22. But ye know the proof, (ye have had experience) of him, that as a Son with the Father, he hath served with me in the Gospel; (yielding honour and obedience to me, and with the like spirit labouring to promote the affairs of the Gospel.) Ver. 23. Him therefore I hope to send (to you) presently, so soon as I shall see how it will go with me, (i. e. what will be the issue of my bonds.) Ver. 24. But I trust (or I trust also) in the Lord, that I my self (being set at liberty) shall come shortly (to you.) Ver. 25. Yet (being not hitherto able either to come my self, or to send Timothy;) I suppo∣sed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus my Brother and Companion in labour, and fellow Souldier, but your Messenger, and he that ministred to my wants. , your Apostle.] So they were usually stiled who gathered Sacred Mo∣ney, and carried it up to Jerusalem. And so, say some, he calls Epaphroditus, because he brought the Contributions of the Philippians to him at Rome. But the word Apostle is ne∣ver used in the New Testament, but either of those who were in the strict sense Apostles of the Lord, or else were eminent Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel; thus Titus, and the Brother of St. Paul, (which is the usual Ap∣pellation of St. Timothy, see Note on Hebr. 13.23.) are , the Apostles of the Chur∣ches, 2 Cor. 8.22, 23. and Andronicus and Junia, who had long preached the Gospel, are stiled , eminent a∣mong the Apostles of Christ. I therefore con∣clude with Theodoret upon the place, and up∣on Chap. 1.1. That, the Episcopal care of this Church was committed to him, And that this is the import of the word Apostle here. Ver. 26. For he longed after you all, (i. e. desired much to see you,) and was full of hea∣viness, because that ye had heard that he had been sick, (as knowing your affection to him would render you full of sorrow upon his ac∣count.) Ver. 27. For (And) indeed he was sick, nigh unto death, but God had mercy upon him, and not on him only, but on me also, lest by his death I should have sorrow upon sorrow. Note. Here we find that Epaphroditus was not recovered by the Gift of Healing, then fre∣quent in the Church, that Gift being not exer∣cised, by them to whom it was imparted, at their own pleasure; but as God was pleased by a special Instinct, and a strong Faith to ex∣cite them to the exercise of it; these Gifts be∣ing therefore given for the sake of Unbelie∣vers, to convince them of the truth of the Chri∣stian Faith, God thought not fit that it should be ordinarily exercised upon Believers, lest it should be look'd upon not as a Gift, but as the Effect of Art or Skill, or a thing done a∣mong them by Confederacy. Ver. 28. I sent him therefore the more care∣fully, that when you see him again (recover∣ed,) ye may rejoyce (on the account of it,) and
that I also may be the less sorrowful, (finding your sorrow for him turned into joy.) Ver. 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord (and for his sake) with great gladness, and hold such (as stand thus affected to his Ser∣vice) in reputation. Ver. 30. Because for the work of Christ (i. e. the promotion of his Gospel, and the mi∣nistration to me the Prisoner of the Lord,) he was nigh unto death, not regarding (but free∣ly hazarding) his own life, to supply your lack of service towards me. , not regarding his life.] Or as others read, , or , hazarding his life; that is, say the Greek Commentators, , he brought himself in danger of death; not by venturing on the Emperor's displeasure, but by labouring so as to contract a dangerous Di∣sease, (which he did, saith the Apostle, to sup∣ply your lack of service towards me.) Which is not so to be understood, as if he charged them with any want of Service or Affection to him, (see Chap. 4.10.) but thus, that Ep∣phroditus did this, being present with him, to supply that Service, which they, being absent, were not in a capacity to perform. CHAP. III. Verse 1. FInally (, henceforth) my Brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things (which I have deli∣vered to you by word of mouth) to me is not grievous, but (for) to you it is safe. , it is safe.] Viz. Because things only delivered by word of mouth may slip out of memory, Litera scripta manet. Here is St. Paul's judgment against Oral Tradi∣tion. Ver. 2. (I therefore exhort you again, to) Be∣ware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. , Dogs.] It is the observation of the. Theodoret. Chrysost. Oecum. Theoph. Fathers, that the name of Dogs was anciently given to the Gentiles, as being without the Covenant, according to those words of Christ, It is not meet to take the Childrens bread, and give it to dogs; but with the Things the Names are now changed, they being now without the Covenant, Apoc. 22.15. and the believing Gentiles admitted to it, and therefore they are called the Children, but the Jews Dogs. And 'tis well noted byHarm. p. 136. Dr. Lightfoot, that our Lord used this Language, Matth. 15.26. not to express his own Senti∣ments of the Gentiles, but in compliance with the common Language of the Jews, who pro∣verbially said the Gentiles are likened to Dogs, whereas we are God's peculiar People, even his Sons and Daughters. Where also is observed by the same worthy Person, That even the Talmudists say of the Generation in which the Messiah, or the Son of David should come, that the Synagogues should become Stews, and the faces of that Generation shall be as Dogs. Evil workers.] For they labour only to pull down God's Building, and to destroy the Church of Christ. Elsewhere he stiles then deceitful Workers, 2 Cor. 11.13. not speak∣ing of the Gnosticks, as some imagine, but of the Jews; for so it follows, Are they He∣brews? are they Israelites? so am I, v. 22. , the Concision.] For Circum∣cision being no longer a Rite of entring into Covenant with God, it is no better then  cutting off the Flesh; and they who still in∣sisted on it as a thing necessary to Justificati∣on and Salvation, cut themselves off from Christ, Gal. 5.2, 3. Ver. 3. For we are the (true and spiritual) Circumcision, which worship God in the Spi∣rit (of our mind, Eph. 4.23.) and rejoyce in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the (Circumcision of) the flesh, (as if that would commend us to God.) No confidence in the flesh.] That the Jews had a great confidence in the Merit of Cir∣cumcision, see Note on Rom. 2.13. Ver. 4. Though, (were this any proper ground of confidence,) I might have also con∣fidence in the flesh, (as well as they who beast of this; for) if any other man think that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I (have) more (reason so to do.) Ver. 5. (For I was) Circumcised the eighth day, (the very day prescribed by the Law, Gen. 17.12.) of the stock of Israel, (my Parents and Ancestors being all of Israel,) of the Tribe of Benjamin, (that Tribe which cleaved to Ja∣dah, and revolted not with Jeroboam to the Worship of the Calves, 1 Kings 12.21.) an Hebrew of the Hebrews, (both by Nation and Language,) 2 Cor. 11.22. Acts 21.40.) as touching (the observance of) the Law, a Pha∣risee,
(one of the strictest Sects of our Religi∣on, Acts 26.5.) , circumcised the eighth day.] The Jews themselves say, that Circum∣cision before that time was no Circumcision, and that after the time it was of lesser value. See Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. cap. 4. p. 109. And, Contr. Cels. l. 5. p. 263. Origen informs us, that the Jews held that the Circumcision performed on the eighth day was that which was chiefly intended, and that the performing it on any other day was only allowed in case of sickness: Hence they thought it necessary to circumcise a Child on the Sabbath day, though all manner of Work was forbidden on that day, rather then de∣fer Circumcision a day beyond the time, John 7.12. and made it a Rule, thatBuxt. ibid. cap. 16. p. 366. the Rest of the Sabbath gives place to Circumcision. And this Opinion, as it agrees with the Text Gen. 17.12. so it seems to have obtained long be∣fore our Saviour's time; for the Septuagint and the Samaritan Version read thus, The un∣circumcised Male, who is not circumcised, , the eighth day, shall be cut off, he hath broken my Covenant, Gen. 17.14 Ver. 6. Concerning zeal (for the Jewish Religion, I have shewed that above others, in) persecuting the Church (of Christ; Acts 22.3, 4.26.11.) touching the righteousness which is in (and by) the Law, (I have lived) blame∣less (as to that, Acts 23.1.) Ver. 7. But what things (of this nature) were (then reputed) gain to me, those I (have) accounted (as) loss, for Christ (s sake.) Ver. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things (of this world) but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, (i. e. obtain an interest in him, and the blessings purchased by him.) Ver. 9. And be found in him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, (which cannot justifie me, but leaves me still under the Curse of it, Rom. 3.20. Gal. 3.10) but that which is of the Faith of Christ, (viz.) the righteousness which is (approved) of God, (i. e. the righteousness which is) by faith (in Christ.) , the righteousness of God] That the Righteousness of God in St. Paul's stile, doth always signifie the Righte∣ousness by Faith in Jesus Christ dying for us, See Note on Rom. 1.17. And hence it is e∣vident that the Apostle cannot here speak of the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us: For 1. he does not oppose to his own Righ∣teousness, which is of the Law, the Righte∣ousness of Christ imputed to him, but his own faith in Christ imputed unto him for righte∣ousness, Rom. 4.5. 2ly, He speaks of his Faith in Christ dying, and shedding his Blood for him, and therefore not of his Active O∣bedience, constituting us righteous as Christ was, but of his Passive Obedience, procuring for us Justification, or the Remission of Sin. Ver. 10. That I may know him, (to be the Messiah, and the Saviour of the World, which knowledge is necessary to Life Eternal, John 17.3. 1 Cor. 2.2.) and the power of his re∣surrection, and the fellowship of his suffer∣ings, being made conformable to his death. , &c. the power of his Resur∣rection.] i. e. The power exercised in his Re∣surrection, by which we are begotten to a live∣ly hope of an inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. and are assured of our own Resurre∣ction, 2 Cor. 4.14. Col. 2.12. this being that knowledge he so earnestly requests for his E∣phesians, Chap. 1.19, 20. And also the pow∣er of it to assure us of our Justification through Faith in him, Rom. 4.24, 25. and of our free∣dom from Condemnation. Rom. 8.34. , &c. the fellowship of his Suf∣ferings.] By being conformed to his death; (1.) Spiritually by dying unto sin, as know∣ing that if we be thus conformed to him in the likeness of his death, we shall be like unto him in his Resurrection, and shall live with him, Rom. 6.5, 8. And 2ly, by suffering and ta∣king up the Cross for his sake, as knowing that if we thus suffer with him, we shall be al∣so glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.13. Ver. 11. If by (these, or) any (other) means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead, (promised by him to all his faithful Servants and Sufferers.) Ver. 12. (For I can) not (look upon my self) as though I had already attained, (or caught hold of the prize of my high calling, v. 14. the resurrection of the dead, ver. 11.) or were al∣ready perfect, (i. e. crowned with it,) but I follow after, (or pursue it,) if that I may ap∣prehend, (or reach) that (prize,) for (the ob∣taining of) which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. (For when I fled from him he caught hold on me, converted me to the faith, that believing in him I might obtain life ever∣lasting, 1 Tim. 1.15, 16. , if that, or that also. See Note on 1 Tim. 5.10.) Ver. 13. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended, (i. e. caught hold of the prize,) but this one thing I do, forgetting (not looking after) those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before, Ver. 14. I press toward the mark (the Goal)
for the (obtaining the) prize of the high cal∣ling of God in Christ Jesus. .] He in these Verses makes a continual allusion to the race run in the Olympian Games, where he that ran was still  upon the stretch, and pressing forwards, without look∣ing back to those whom he had left behind, and pursuing the Goal, that coming first to it, he might catch hold of the Prize, and so be crowned with it. And two things are here noted by the Fathers worthy of our Observa∣tion, 1. That if this great Apostle, who had suffered so many things, and was in death often, and who had laboured so abundantly, , was not yet confident of a blessed resurrection, but only stri∣ving, if so be he might attain unto it, such as we must have less ground of confidence. 2ly, What continual diligence and labour this pursuit requires; for you know, saith Chry∣sostom, with what great stretch the pursuer runs, he looks upon no Man, he throws out of the way every thing that might hinder him; he imploys his Body, Eye, Strength, Soul and Mind upon the work, , looking to no∣thing else, but only to the prize. Ver. 15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, (or throughly instructed in our Chri∣stian duty,) be thus minded (as I have told you I am, i. e. so as to believe the Circumcision of the Spirit, not that of the Flesh, and the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, are the things especially to be regarded for the ob∣taining of this prize;) and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, (imagining the Judaical performances may also commend you to God,) God shall (in due time) reveal even this unto you, (i. e. he will convince you of the no ne∣cessity of these things in order to his fa∣vour.) Ver. 16. Nevertheless (in the mean time) whereto we have already attained, (i. e. as far as we have attained to the knowledge of it,) let us walk by the same rule, (viz. that Cir∣cumcision availeth nothing, but a new Creature, Gal. 6.15, 16.) let us mind the same thing. , perfect.] That to be perfect, is to be sufficiently instructed in the true Grounds and Principles of Christian Faith, hath been shewed, Note on 1 Cor. 2.6. and on Matth. 19.21. And by comparing this Passage with the Discourse of the same Apostle in his fifth and sixth Chapters to the Galatians, we may learn what it is , to walk by the same rule; for as there he sharply in∣veighs against the Galatians, for hearkning to the Teachers of the Necessity of Circumcision, so here he warns his Philippians to beware of them and their Doctrine, from v. 2. to the 7th; us there he opposeth to Circumcision the Cross of Christ, in which alone he gloried, Gal. 6.14. so here he opposeth to it the fellowship of his Sufferings, v. 8, 9. As there he says he is per∣swaded of his Galatians, that , they will be no otherwise minded, Gal. 5.1. so here he exhorts his Philippians , to mind the same thing, v. 16. As there he teaches them by his own example not to yield to those who urged upon them Circumcision, Gal. 2.14, 20. so here he exhorts the Philip∣pians to walk in this case, as they had him for an example, v. 17. which example he had laid before them, v. 4-9. And as there he p∣miseth Mercy and Peace, , to them that walked by the Rule, or Canon, he had there laid down, Gal. 6.15, 16. so here he admonisheth the Philippians , to walk by the same Rule; this Rule must therefore be that which he there lays down, That in Christ Jesus neither Circumci∣sion availeth any thing, nor Uncircumsion, be a new Creature. Those who are fully per∣swaded of this, he stiles the perfect, requiring of them a Life exactly conformed to this Rule; from others only as far as they had attained to the knowledge of it, informing them that the time was at hand when God, by destroy∣ing the Jewish Temple, and discovering the Jewish Church and Oeconomy, would farther reveal this truly to them, and convince then of the vanity of these Judaical Performances Ver. 17. Brethren, be ye followers of me (in this matter, who have renounced all my Jewish Priviledges, and mark them (for your Patterns) who walk so as he have us for an example, (of the spiritual Circumcision,  of minding the prize of our high calling.) Ver. 18. For many (Zealots for the La, so) walk as I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the E∣nemies of the Cross of Christ. Ver. 19. Whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things. , whose end is destruction.] That the description here given of these Men a∣grees well with the manners of the Gnosticks, cannot be denied; but yet that the Apostle speaketh not of them, but of the Jews, most Ancient and Modern Commentators do assert. And there seems reason to prefer this latter Exposition, (1.) Because he saith he had told his Philippians often of these Men; now v. 1. he informs them that he then writ to them of the same things which he had before spoken to them by word of mouth, viz. that they should beware of those Jews whom he there stiles Dogs, evil Workers, the Concision. 2ly, He opposes his own Example, who had renounced all his Jewish Priviledges, and the example of those who worshipped God in the Spirit, and rejoyced in Christ Jesus, and had no confidence in the Flesh, v. 3, 17. to the example of these Men. And (3ly,) the de∣scription he gives of them is agreeable to what he elsewhere saith of the same Jews. For,
1. They were Enemies to the Cross of Christ. That being not only a stumbling block to the unbelieving Jews, 1 Cor. 1.23. but being al∣so overthrown by them who preached up the Necessity of Circumcision, and of Legal Ob∣servations to Salvation; for hence, saith the Apostle, it follows, that Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21. that then the scandal of the Cross is ceased, Gal. 5.10. and that Christ would profit them nothing who were upon this account circumcised, Gal. 5.2. and that they were fallen from grace, v. 4. And from the Apo∣stle's discourse in the beginning of this Chap∣ter, it appears, saith Esthius, that he here speaketh of these Men. 2. That their end was to be destruction, the Apostle teacheth in these words, Such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, whose end shall be according to their works, 2 Cor. 11.13, 15. and this he speaks of them who were He∣brews and Israelites, v. 22. as also here v. 4. 3. That their god was their belly; i. e. that they chiefly had regard to that, as we learn from the same Apostle, saying, These serve not the Lord, but their own belly; which, saith Theo∣doret, he speaks of the evil defenders of the Law. See Note on Rom. 16.18. that they were , slow bellies, or luxurious People, Tit. 1.12. see Note there; they devoured those they perverted, 2 Cor. 11.20. Their glory was in their shame; that is, say the An∣cient Fathers, in the Circumcision of the shameful Member; say others, in those evil works, v. 2. which ought to be the matter of their shame, they being such as blasphemed the Name of God among the Gentiles, Rom. 2.24. they minded earthly things, counting gain godliness, 1 Tim. 6.5. Tit. 1.11. Ver. 20. (Imitate us, I say,) For our con∣versation (or our City) is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ. , our Conver∣sation is in Heaven.] SoLibro de Gigant. p. 227. E. Philo represents God's Priests and Prophets; for having said of Men, , some are of the Earth, some of Heaven, he adds, that of the latter sort are the Priests and Prophets, who transcending all sensual things, would not be called , Citizens of the World, but translating themselves into the intellectual World dwell there, , being enrolled in the polity of incorporeal and incorruptible beings. They, saith the Apostle, mind earthly things, and so are , Men who have this World for their City,So Bud. renders these words. Nos autem Civitatem Coe∣lum habemus, but we have Heaven for our City, as living in expectation of a City whose builder and maker is God, Hebr. 11.10. Ver. 21. Who shall change our vile Body (now subject to corruption, passions, and sor∣rows,) that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things to himself. , our vile Body.] The Body of our Humiliation; that is, saith Methodius, our Body which , is humbled by the fall, and become mortal. That Body, saithQuid est humilitatis corpus manifestum est, quod est corpus, quod est caro, quod & humiliatur cadens in terra, trans∣figuratio autem ejus, quoniam cum sit mortalis & corruptibilis, immortalis fit, & incorruptibilis. L. 5. c. 13. Irenaeus, which is humbled by falling into the Earth, and which shall be transformed from a mortal and corrup∣tible, into an immortal and incorruptible Bo∣dy. Note here, (1.) What a value is put up∣on the Resurrection, and Redemption of the Body from Corruption, as if it were the chief thing which Christians waited for, and expected from our Saviour at his coming, Rom. 8.23. 2. Note the Divine Power in Christ, to whom is here ascribed that Resurrection which is frequently made an Indication of the Godhead, it being God who raiseth from the dead, Rom. 4.17. Acts 26.8. and which is ascribed to the exceeding greatness, and to the energy of his mighty Power, Eph. 1.19. and yet is here ascribed to the energy of Christ. And 3ly, Note the pious observation of the Fathers, That their Folly can never be suffici∣ently lamented who deprive themselves of such a glorious Resurrection; so Oecumenius and Theophylact. Note 4ly, ThatQuis Rer. Div. Haeres. p. 405. C. Philo and the Plato∣nists so call these Bodies, , because these earthly Tabernacles do humble and depress the Soul.
CHAP. IV. Verse 1. WHerefore my Brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, my joy and my crown, so stand fast in the Lord; (as those who do expect his coming to confer these blessings on you, 1 Cor. 15.58. or so stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, as I have taught you, Gal. 5.1.) Ver. 2. I beseech Euodius, and beseech Syn∣tyche, to mind the same thing in (the concerns of) the Lord. , to mind the same thing] here, is not to be of the same Judgment in all things, for no Man can become of the same Judgment with another by entreaty, but only by conviction: The Exhortation therefore is, (1.) to have the same Love to one another, Chap. 2.2. with the same Soul and Spirit to promote the Gospel of Christ, Chap. 1.27. to walk by the same Rule, as far as they have attained to the knowledge of it, Chap. 3.16. Ver. 3. And I entreat thee also, true yoke-fellow, help those Women who labour'd with me in the (promotion of) the Gospel, with Clemens also, and other my fellow labourers, whose names are written in the Book of Life. , yoke-fellow.] That this yoke-fellow cannot be St. Paul's Wife, is certain; (1.) Be∣cause he declares himself an unmarried Man, 1 Cor. 7.7. i. e. either a Virgin, or a Widow∣er. (2ly,) Because a Woman cannot be sti∣led , but . It is unlikely he should mean Epaphroditus, he being not then at Philippi, but with him at Rome. v. 18. It may be therefore one of those Rulers of the Church whom he saluted in the front of this Epistle. , whose Names are written in the Book of Life.] This is a Judaical Phrase, viz. They shall not be written in the Book of Eternal Life, which is written for the just of the House of Israel, Targum in Ezek. 13.9. and it doth not signifie the absolute Election of a∣ny to Eternal Life, but only their present right to that Inheritance by virtue of the Obedience of Faith, Rev. 20.15.21.27. For (1.) the Apostle declares of all the Jews to whom he writ, that they were come to the General As∣sembly of the First-born, who were written in Heaven, Hebr. 12.23. and yet he in the fol∣lowing Verse saith to them, See that ye re∣fuse not him that speaketh. (2.) Christ threat∣neth to some, that he would blot out their Names out of the Book of Life, Rev. 22.19. and promiseth to him that overcometh, that he would not blot his Name out of the Book of Life, Rev. 3.5. and God himself saith to Moses, Whosoever hath sinn'd against me, him will I blot out of the Book which I have written, Exod. 32.32, 33. that is, out of the Book of the Just saith the Targum of Jonathan. Ver. 4. Rejoyce in the Lord always, and again, I say, rejoyce. Ver. 5. Let your moderation be known un∣to all men, (for) the Lord is at hand. , your Moderation.] Your Meek∣ness and Patience under all your Trials. Be ye patient, saith St. James, for the coming of the Lord is at hand, Chap. 5.8. See Hebr. 10.36, 37. This is almost the constant sense of the Greek word in the Septuagint, where it answers to the  and  and signifies to be gracious and propitious, 1 Sam. 12.12. Ez 9.4. Psal. 85.4. , Thou hast dealt with u according to all thy goodness, and thy great mercy. So Ca∣puer. v. 18. Let us torture the just man, that we may know , his meekness, Wisd. 2.19. Thou judgest , with wild∣ness, Chap. 12.18. He will yield to your de∣sires, , favourably and kind∣ly, 2 Mac. 9.27. So the Syriac and Arabick, who render it mansuetudo vestra. So Phaa∣rinus, . , the Lord is at hand.] So the Apostles thought, saith Grotius upon th place; tacitly insinuating that they were mi∣staken in this matter: But this Exposition re∣flecting very injuriously upon the Authority of the Apostles, and the Spirit by which they spake, and that of the Fathers, , the Day of Judgment is at hand, being found by Experience false, we of necessity must have recourse to some other Exposition of their words, when they so often tell the Christians to whom they write, That the Lord is at hand; that he stands even at the door, James 5.9. that the coming of the Lord dr∣eth nigh, v. 8. that the end of all things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7. that the day of the Lord i near, Hebr. 10.25. that it is but a little while and , he that is coming will come, and will not tarry. I say, we must of necessity, for Exposition of these places, have recourse to some other Advent of our Lord, for it is by no means to be granted, that the Apostles were mistaken m their apprehensions of this matter, and that they confidently asserted that the great Day of Judgment was then at hand, when after Sixteen hundred years it is yet far off, the Destruction of Antichrist, the Calling of the Jews, and the Millenium succeeding these great Epochas being to precede that day. For this bold Conjecture shakes the Founda∣tions of the Christian Faith, it imputes not only Fallibility, but actual Falshood to the Writers of these Epistles, and makes them guilty of Falshood in the Promises of the New Testament, and in the Motives which
they used to encourage Believers to a Chri∣stian Patience under the pressures they endu∣red, and renders them Deceivers of their Hopes. Let it be therefore noted, 1. That these Expressions are chiefly used in the Catholick Epistles, and the Epistle, to the Hebrews, that is, in the Epistles directed to the Jewish Churches, who were no Stran∣gers to these Phrases, and who were well acquainted with a tremendous Advent of the Lord to punish the Rebellions and Infidelity of that Nation: So for instance, Joel 2.1. All the Inhabitants of the Land (of Judah) shall be confounded, , because the Day of the Lord is at hand, a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of Clouds, and of thick Darkness. And v. 11. The Day of the Lord is great and very terrible, who can abide it? And v. 31. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the great and terrible Day of the Lord come. Zach. 14.1, 2. Behold, the Day of the Lord cometh, and I will gather all Nations against Jerusalem to battle. Mal. 3.2. Who may a∣bide in the Day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appeareth? And Chap. 4.1. Behold, the Day cometh that shall burn as an Oven. 2ly, There is also frequent mention of this Time and Day in the New Testament, when the Lord would come to destroy the unbe∣lieving Jews, and also of the nearness of that Time; for the Baptist calls them to Repen∣tance from this very Motive, that the Ax was then laid to the Root of the Tree, Matth. 3.10. That one was coming whose Fan was in his hand, v. 12. Our Saviour spends a whole Chapter in speaking  of that Day, Matth. 24.36. and of the coming of the Son of Man to the destruction of that Nation, v. 27, 37. of the coming of the Lord, v. 42. of the Age in which he would thus come, v. 34. of the signs when his coming was  near at hand, , at the door, (which are the very words, both of St. Paul and of St. James,) when there would be a , an end of all things belonging to the Jewish Temple and Constitution, v. 14. Now to this coming of the Lord, foretold by his own self in the ve∣ry Expressions of the Prophets, and in the words used here by the Apostles in their wri∣tings to the Jewish Converts, we may very well refer the words fore-cited, and if there be any other of like nature. And the fitness of these Exhortations to Meekness and Patience, on the account of the nearness of this Day, and Advent of the Lord to punish the Unbelieving Jews, will be apparent from this Consideration, that they were the chief Persecutors of those of their own Nation who embraced the Christian Faith, Rom. 15.31. 1 Thess. 2.14. And they also sent out their Messengers to other Nati∣ons to represent the Christians to them as the worst of Men, and to excite them to joyn with them in the Persecution of them, as Ju∣stin M. doth inform us; and therefore it must be very acceptable to the poor persecuted Christian Jews, to hear that these Enemies of the Cross of Christ, these Instigators of the Heathen to persecute them, should by the coming of our Lord to destroy their Church and Nation, be disabled from doing them any farther Mischief; and also that those deceit∣ful Workers of the same Nation, who trou∣bled the Churches with preaching the Neces∣sity of Circumcision, and the observing the Law of Moses, should not be able long to in∣stil those Doctrines, their Church and Tem∣ple being to be shortly ruined, and they them∣selves being no longer able to observe the Law. Ver. 6. Be careful (anxiously sollicitous) for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication (Gr. deprecation) with Thanks∣giving, let your requests be made known (i. e. presented) unto God. Ver. 7. And the Peace of God which pas∣seth understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds (stedfast) in Christ Jesus. , the peace of God.] As , and , do generally signifie the Love and Favour of God to us, so , the peace of God most naturally imports the Peace and Reconciliation which we have with God thro' Faith in Christ, for being justified by Faith we have peace with God. Hence is the Gospel, which proclaims this Pardon and Justification to Believers, stiled the Gospel of Peace, Eph. 6.15. the preaching peace by Jesus Christ, Acts 10.30. Eph. 2.17. who is our peace, v. 14. and in the Preface to all the Epistles, the A∣postle wisheth to the Christians , Grace and Peace through God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. So that the sense of these words seemeth to be this, the Sense and Experience of the Divine Favour, and the inward Peace and Security which ariseth from it, shall be sufficient to keep you sted∣fast in the Faith of Christ. He promiseth not deliverance from Calamities, but inward peace and tranquility of Mind under them, and that as the effect of constant Prayer, and a sense of the Divine Favour to them. Ver. 8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, what∣soever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatso∣ever things are of good report: if there be any vertue, if there be any (thing) praise (worthy,) think on these things (to do them.) Hence two things may be noted, 1. That there are things naturally honest, just, lovely, and praise-worthy. 2. That there is no ver∣tue, nothing praise-worthy, but what falls un∣der the compass of this General Precept. Ver. 9. Those things which you have both learned, and received, and heard (from me,)
and seen in me, do; and the God of peace, (the giver of internal peace,) shall be with you. Ver. 10. But I rejoyced (, for this cause I rejoyced) in the Lord greatly, that your care of me (i. e. to supply my wants,) hath flourished again, wherein you were also careful, but you lacked opportunity. I rejoyced in the Lord.] i. e. In your Libe∣tality, not as a thing tending only to supply my Wants, but as a thing highly acceptable to the Lord, v. 8. and as a fruit of your Affe∣ction to him, which he will reward, v. 17. , of which thing you were still mindful, but you wanted ability.] , you had it not in your hands, you were not in a condition to help me, Theodoret, Chrysostom, Theophy∣lact; though Oecumenius and Phavorinus ren∣der it, with our Translation, , you lacked opportunity. Ver. 11. I speak not this in respect of (any desire in me that you, or others should supply my) wants, for I have learnt in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. Ver. 12. I know how to be abased, and how to abound; every where, and in all things I am instructed both to be full, and to be hun∣gry, both to abound, and to suffer need. Ver. 13. I can do all (these, and other) things (required by Christianity) through Christ that strengthens me. Hence the Fathers observe three things, (1.) That the Art of Contentment requires much Learning, Exercise, and Meditation. (2.) That it is as difficult to learn how to be full, as to be hungry; Abundance having de∣stroyed more then Penury, and exposed them to more pernicious Lusts. (3.) That our Pro∣ficience in this, or any other Vertue, is to be ascribed, not to our selves, but to the Divine Assistance. Ver. 14. (But) notwithstanding (this my pro∣ficiency) ye have done well, that ye did (thus) communicate with (me in) my affliction. Ver. 15. Now, ye Philippians, know also, (for your honour,) that in the beginning of (y preaching) the Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me, as concerning giving and receiving, but you only, (i. e. I have received supplies from no other Church but yours.) Ver. 16. (You indeed kindly did it,) For even when I was in Thessalonica ye sent once and again to (supply) my necessities. Ver. 17. (And of this I remind you,) Not that I desire a (further) gift (for my own be∣nefit,) but (because) I desire fruit that may a∣bound to your account (in the day of the Lord, who will not then forget your labour of love, in ministring to his Saints, Hebr. 6.10.) Ver. 18. (I say, not that I desire any more,) For I have received all (that can be needful for me,) and abound, I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, (which are) an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, and well pleasing to God. There were two Altars, saith Dr. Hammond, in the Temple of the Jews, the Altar of In∣cense within the Temple, and that of Sacri∣fice without in the Court; on these two were offered all things that were offered to God; and under these two Heads, an Odor of Incense, and a Sacrifice, are Works of Charity here re∣presented, as being the prime things now under the Gospel to obtain God's favour and accep∣tation. Ver. 19. But (and) my God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory (i. e. his glorious riches) in Christ Jesus, (i. e. he shall return you a supply of your spiritual wants for your charity to me in temporals.) Ver. 20. Now unto God, and (i. e. who is) our Father, be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Ver. 21. Salute every Saint in Christ Jesus: the Brethren which are with me greet you. Ver. 22. All the Saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Cesars houshold. Ver. 23. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle to the COLOSSIANS. THAT St. Paul writ this Epistle to the Colossians, when he had, not yet seen them, is the Opinion of most of the Ancient Scholiasts; This is con∣fessed even by Theodoret, though he saith this doth not follow from the words cited to con∣firm this Opinion, but the contrary. The words are these; I would have you know what great sollicitude I have for you, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh, Col. 2.1. which he ren∣ders thus, Not for you only, and for them of Laodicea, but also for them that have not seen my face in the flesh: But the connective Particle being not , or , but also, but only , and, seems to favour our Transla∣tion, and the Opinion of theChrysost. Oecum. Theoph. , his quos in Carne minime vidit. Ambros. Ancients. He adds that the Apostle went from Phrygia, of which Coloss was the Metropolis, whence he collects he must have preached there. But this will not follow; since the first time he only went through Phrygia en passant, Acts 16.6. and the second time, Chap. 18.23. he only staid to confirm the Brethren already converted, but that he came to Coloss is not said. The Arguments offered to prove he had not then seen them, seem stronger, as appears not only from the words now cited, but from other expressions in the same Epistle; for he intimates Chap. 1.4. that he had only heard of their Faith in Christ; and v. 7. that they had learned the Faith, not from him, but Epaphras, whom he stiles to them a faith∣ful Minister of Jesus Christ. Note also, That this Epistle was writ at the same time with that to the Philippians, and so A. D. 62. As for the occasion of it. Theodoret in∣forms us, that it was writ against those Jew∣ish Christians who endeavoured to impose the Observation of the Law upon the Gentile Con∣verts, as is apparent from his Caution to them to beware of them who spoiled them after the Rudiments of the World, Chap. 2. v. 8. and that because they were Circumcised in Christ, v. 11. and he had blotted out the hand writing of or∣dinances which was against them, v. 14. and from the Inference thence made, Let no Man judge you therefore in Meat, or in Drink, or in respect of an Holy day, or of the new Moons, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow, v. 16, 17. The rest say that it was written a∣gainst them who sow'd among them. Chrys. . Oecum. Jewish and Heathenish Doctrines; and in particular against them who endeavoured to bring in. Theoph. the Worship of Angels; of the Gnosticks here mentioned by Esthius they have not one word to say.
A Paraphrase and Comment ON THE Epistle to the COLOSSIANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. PAul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timo∣theus our Brother. Ver. 2. To the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ, which are at Coloss (writeth thus,) Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. To the Saints.] See Note on 1 Cor. 1.1. Note that the Holy Ghost is not mention'd in these places, because he is the Fountain of this Grace, and by him God the Father, and the Son dwelleth in us, John 14.23. So that praying for this Grace, is praying for the Communion of the Holy Ghost. Ver. 3. We give thanks to God, and (who is) the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, pray∣ing always for you. .] As the Hebrew , hath oft the im∣port of id est in the Old Testament; see Nol∣dius, p. 280. 27. so Matth. 23.5. Thy King cometh sitting upon an Ass, , i. e. a Colt the foal of an Ass; see Matth. 11.2, 7. Luke 19.30, 35. John 12.14, 15. and frequently it signifies nempe, to wit; so that Mountain,  to wit, Lebanon, Deut. 3.26. So Judg. 6.25. 2 Sam. 20.14. Jer. 21.7. so John 12.23. We stone thee for Blasphemy, , to wit, because thou being a Man, makest thy self God, 1 Cor. 15.24. That with one mouth ye may glo∣rifie God, , who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. So Gal. 1.4. Phil. 4.20. Co∣loss. 2.2. James 7.3, 9. As therefore God, who is the God of Israel, was the Characteristick of the true God to the Jewish Nation: So God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Characteristick of the same God to the Christians, who worship him under that Ti∣tle, as being the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our Father, we being the Sons of God through Faith in him, and deri∣ving all our Blessings from the Father through him. Ver. 4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the Saints, (which love is still the fruit of a true faith, 1 Cor. 13.2. Gal. 5.6.) , hearing.] From this verse, and from Chap. 2.1. it is evident that St. Paul did not in person preach to the Colossians, and indeed that he never had seen them, they be∣ing converted by Epaphras, Chap. 1.7, 23 and perhaps also by the means of Timothy, who therefore is mention'd in the beginning of this Epistle as saluting them together with Paul. Ver. 5. (We give thanks, I say,) for the hope (of an eternal Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3.) which is laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye heard before (from Epaphras) in the word of the truth of the Gospel (preached by him.) Ver. 6. Which (Gospel) is come to you, as it is (also heard of) in all the world, and bring∣eth forth fruit (in them,) as it doth also in you, since the day ye (first) heard of it, and knew (, acknowledg'd,) the grace (and favour) of God (to you,) in truth (and sincerity.) , In all the World.] And which is preached to every Creature under Hea∣ven, v. 23. This by an usual Hyperbole is to be understood of the most noted Parts of the World, from which the rest might hear of it In which sense Cyrus saith, that God had gi∣ven him all the Kingdoms of the Earth, Ezra 1.2. And God, saith Jeremiah, will call for a Sword upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth; Jer. 25.29. i. e. of the whole Kingdom of Babylon, and the slain of the Lord shall be from one end of the Earth to the other, v. 26. over all the Kingdoms of the World, v. 26. And the Romans, Asiaticks, and Egyptians, &c. are sti∣led
devout men out of every Nation under Hea∣ven, Acts 2.5. Ver. 7. As ye (have) also learned of Epa∣phras our dear fellow servant, who is for you a faithful Minister of Christ. Ver. 8. Who also declared to us your love (to me) in the Spirit: (your spiritual and af∣fectionate love to me, wrought in you by that Spirit, whose fruit is love.) Ver. 9. For this cause we also, since the day we heard of it, (i. e. this your affection to us,) do not cease to pray for you, and to desire (of God,) that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will, (advancing) in all (the gifts of) wisdom, and spiritual under∣standing.) , in all wisdom.] Among the Spiritual Gifts vouchsafed for the Edification of the Church, are reckoned the Word of Wis∣dom, and of Knowledge, 1 Cor. 12.8. whereby they are enabled through the Spirit to know the things which were given them of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. and to compare Spiritual Things with Spiritual, v. 13. For the abundance of these Gifts vouchsafed to the Churches, he sometimes gives thanks, as 1 Cor. 1.4, 5, 7. Eph. 1.3. And for the increase of them he sometimes prays, as here, and Eph. 1.17. Ver. 10. That (having thus attain'd to the knowledge of the things of God,) ye might walk worthy of the Lord to all well-pleasing, (i. e. so as to please him in all things,) being fruitful in every good work, and increasing (still more) in the knowledge of God. Ver. 11. (That knowing the hope of the Cal∣ling, and the rights of the Glory of the Inheri∣tance of the Saints, Eph. 1.19. Rom. 15.13. ye may be) Strengthened with all might, accord∣ing to his glorious power, unto all patience, and long suffering with joyfulness, (Eph. 3.16.) (i. e. that through the spirit of glory and power, 1 Pet. 4.14. 2 Tim. 1.7. given to you, you may be enabled constantly to suffer all afflictions you endure for the sake of Christ, and of the glory he hath promised, with patience and joy.) Ver. 12. Giving thanks to the Father, who hath (thus prepared, and) made us meet, to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Sains in light, (for which we suffer, 2 Thess. 1.5.) , who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.] The other reading, viz. , who hath called you, for , who hath made you meet, is con∣trary to all the old Versions, the Syriack, A∣rabick, and Vulgar, and all the Greek Scholi∣sts, and therefore not to be admitted as a va∣rious Lection, but only as the Mistake of some Copyest. Note also that here is an Al∣lusion to the Inheritance of the Jews in Ca∣naan, stiled so oft the Land of their Inheri∣tance, for it was divided into so many , or places measured out by Line, to be posses∣sed by the several Tribes, excepting that of Levi, and then by Lot assigned to every re∣spective Tribe, Josh. 13. according to God's Commandment, Numb. 26.55.33.54 and that Division which thus came to any of them by Lot, was his , the Portion which by Lot befel him; but saith the Apostle, we are made meet not for an earthly Inheritance, as that was in Canaan, but for that heavenly Portion God hath allotted us in Heaven, the Region of Light and Happiness, we being al∣ready translated into the Kingdom of his Son Christ, become his Subjects, and so under his Care, and Conduct, and Protection, Ruled by his Word, which is the Word of Life, and by his Spirit, the earnest of his Inheritance, and shall hereafter be advanced by him into his heavenly Kingdom. Ver. 13. Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us in∣to the Kingdom of his dear Son, (or the Son of his love.) , the power of darkness.] That Darkness signifies the state of Heathen Ignorance, see Note on Rom. 12.2. The Pow∣er of it is that power which Satan the Prince of Darkness had over the Heathen World to keep them in Idolatry, and brutish Lusts, Eph. 2.2. Hence the Apostle saith he was sent unto the Gentiles, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.17. See Luke 22.53. Ver. 14. In whom we have redemption through his Blood, even the redemption of (our) sins. (See Note on Eph. 1.7.) Ver. 15. Who is the image (and represen∣tation to us) of the invisible God, the first-born (or Lord) of every Creature. , the Image of the invisible God.] The Socinians contend that Christ is here stiled the Image of the Invisible God, because he by his Gospel hath made known the Will of God unto us; in this sense, say they, he is stiled the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4.3. and in this sense he saith to Philip, He that hath seen me hath seen the Father. Schlictingius notes that he is called the Image of God, now that he is in Heaven, and so not accord∣ing to any thing appertaining to him which is invisible, but according to something by which he may be seen and known, i. e. saith he, as he hath made himself known to us in the Gospel. But the more natural import of the Phrase seems to be this, That Christ is the Image of God, as making him who is invisible in his Essence, conspicuous to us by the Divine Works he wrought, they being such as plain∣ly shewed, that in him dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily; for an invisible God can only be seen by his Effects of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, by which, saith the Apostle, from the Creation of the World the invisible things of God, to wit, his Power and God
head, have been made known by the things that are made, Rom. 1.20. He therefore, who in the Works both of the Old and New Creati∣on, hath given us such clear declarations of the Divine Power, and Wisdom, and Good∣ness, is upon this account as much an Image of God as any thing can be; to this sense the Image of God here seems necessarily restrain∣ed by the connective Particle , he is the I∣mage of God, for by him all things were crea∣ted. Moreover, that this place is parallel to that in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the words sufficiently declare; here he is the image of God, there the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his Person; here he is the first-born, or Lord of every Creature, there the heir of all things; here it is said that all things were created by him, there that he made the World; here that by him all things do con∣sist, and there that he supporteth all things by the word of his power; now that there he is stiled the image of Gods Glory, and the Cha∣racter of his Person, by reason of that Di∣vine Power, Wisdom, and Majesty which shin'd forth in his Actions, Schlictingius is forc'd to confess. It is not therefore to be doubted that he is here stiled the image of God in the same sense. And it is highly pro∣bable that he is called the Image of the invi∣sible God, as appearing to the Patriarchs, and representing to them that God, who lives in light inaccessible, to which no mortal Eye can approach, according to these frequent Descants of theIren. l. 4. c. 37. p. 372. vide c. 26. Tertull. adv. prax. c. 16. Novatian c. 26. Euseb. demonstr. Evang. l. 1. c. 5. p. 11. D. Anti-Nicene Fathers, That God the Father being invisible, one whom no Man hath seen, or can see, he appear'd to the Patriarchs by his Son. And that in this sense Christ saith to Philip, He that hath seen me hath seen the Father, he himself intimates, by adding, That the Father abiding in him did the works he performed, John 14.9, 10, 11. and that they ought to believe that he was in the Father, and the Father in him for the works sake. And in the Epistle to the Corinthians he is plainly stiled the image of God for the like reason, viz. because that God, who at first created light out of darkness, had shin'd upon the Gentiles, to make known to them the glory of God, in the Person of Jesus Christ. Now this Glory of God is Chap. 3. those miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, by which the Gospel was con∣firm'd, and Chap. 4.7. , the excellency of the Power of God. , the first-born of every Creature.] Since therefore, say the Socinians, the First-born is of the order and number of those things of which he is the First-born, therefore Christ being here stiled the First-born of every Creature, must be in the order, and of the number of Creatures. But this Inference is neither consistent with their own Principles, nor with the words of the Apo∣stle: Not with their own Principles, for in what rank of Creatures will they place Christ, if among the old, then they must allow him an Existence before the beginning of the World, which yet they peremptorily deny: if among the new, they must confess he had a Nature which wanted to be renew'd, chang'd and reform'd; that in him, as well as in us, though in him before us, all old things possed away, and all things became new; since other∣wise he cannot be of the order and number of them who underwent this change. 2ly, This Opinion cannot consist with the words of the Apostle, who stiles Christ the first-born of every Creature, because by him all things were created, . Now he who is therefore the First-born of the whole Crea∣tion, because he created all things, cannot himself be any part of the Creation, either in Heaven or Earth, or be numbred amongst his Creatures; Christ therefore, saith our excel∣lent Primate, is here stiled , as being the Lord of all things. For first, 'tis reason∣able to conceive that , the first-born of every Creature, should be the same in sense with that of the same Apostle in the parallel place, where he is stiled , Heir of all things. Now thus it will signifie in this sense, according to that of Justinian, To act as an Heir, is to act as a Lord; for the Ancients used the word Heir for a Lord. Pro Haerede se gerere est pro Do∣mino gerere; veteres enim Haeredes pro Do∣minis appellabant. Instit. l. 2. Tit. 19. § 6. 2. In this sense is the word primogenitus used in the Scriptures, for because the Domi∣nion and Principality anciently followed the primogeniture, according to those words, He gave the dominion to Joram, , because he was the first-born, 2 Chron. 21.5. it came in common use to signifie that Do∣minion. So of David, saith God, I will give him to be , the first-born, high above the Kings of the Earth. I will give him  power over all Kings, saithSee Theodoret. in locum. Aquilus. I will set him , the Supream over the Kings of the Earth; So Symmachus. No, saith Mr. Cl. this doth not signifie a Lord over other Kings, but a most excellent and glorious King. But for this we shall not acquiesce in his bare word against the Opinion of all the Ancient Commentators on the place, seeing the fore∣going words, v. 26. I will set his hand in the Sea, and his right hand in the River, are equi∣valent to these, I will give him power over the Kings of the Philistins, on the one hand, See
2 Sam. 8.12 and over the Syrians on the o∣ther, v. 6. He shall have, saith the Chaldee, , his Empire over the Kings of the Earth. I will elevate him over them, saith the Syriack; and so accordingly we find he did, exalting him over the Syrians, who were Tri∣butaries to him, 2 Sam. 8.6. and over all the Kings which were Servants to Hadareser, 2 Sam. 10.19. And this was necessary to be done, to render him a fit Type of that Son of David, who was to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And thus he is also , the first born from the dead, v. 18. as being Lord over the dead, since for this cause he died, and rose again, , that he might be Lord over the dead, and over the living, Rom. 14.9. and so might be , primus tenens p. imperium habens in omnibus, prae-eminent in all things. Since then the First-born is naturally the Heir, and so the Lord of the Family, and therefore the word Heir amongst the Ancients did signifie Lord; seeing St. Paul, who here stiles him the first-born, doth in a place parallel to this, stile him the Heir of all things, why may we not conceive the Person of whom David was a Type, may be also here stiled the first-born, as being Prince over, and high above all Crea∣tures, they being all the work of his hands? For so the Reason follows: Ver. 16. For by him (who is the first-born of every Creature) were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, vi∣sible (the Sun, Moon, and Stars,) and invisible, (the whole Host of Angels,) whether they be (named) Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him, (as the Cause,) and for him, (as the end of their Creation.) , all things were created by him that are in Heaven, and that are in the Earth.] The Gloss of theRectius est  interpretari ordinata sunt, novum quendam statum sunt consecuta-Angeli hominibus, homines inter se reconciliati sunt sub Christo. Grot. Socinians, and ofQuia ex Christi exaltatione, & divino qoud accepit imperio, consecuta est haec Angelorum, hominumque reformatio, ac renovatio, per illum, & in illo facta esse dicitur, seu illi creati, id est renovati dicuntur. Crellius in locum. Gro∣tius who here follows them, runs thus; That to Christ is here ascribed, not the Creation of the old World, and all things that are in it; but only the Creation, that is, the Renovation of all things under the Gospel state, or the Refor∣mation of Mankind by Jesus Christ, and the Gospel preached to them, and the Reconcilia∣tion of Angels to Men. But this Interpreta∣tion is so forced, and remote from the most usual sense of the words; and 'tis so flat and mean, to say that Jesus Christ was before every new Creature, that is to say, before the Renovation made by himself, or rather by his Apostles after his Exaltation, and to prove this by that very Renovation, that even Mr. Cl. is forced to reject it as evidently false, which it will certainly appear to be from these Considerations. 1st, That the Apostle speaks here of the Creation of such things as are not capable of this Moral Creation, viz. the Creation , of all things visible upon Earth: Now the , Rom. 1.20. and the , Hebr. 11.3. i. e. the things which are made, and seen, comprise the whole visi∣ble Creation, all things without Life, Metals, Stones, Elements, all Vegetables, and all Beasts, and did the Gospel come to make a Moral Renovation among these? Did Christ, and his Apostles preach to Stones or Trees? 2ly, Un∣der all things in Heaven, and all things invi∣sible, must be comprised all the good Angels, which are therefore elsewhere stiled , Eph. 1.21.3.10. 1 Pet. 3.22. Now they cannot be proper Subjects of this new Creation, or Moral Renovation; for of this new Creation the Scripture never speaks but in relation to an old, which was to be a∣bolished, changed, and done away by it; for in them who are made , a new Crea∣tion, all old things are past away, and all things are become new in them, 2 Cor. 5.17. They put off the old Man, and put on the new, which is created after God in righteousness and holi∣ness, Eph. 4.22, 24. Col. 3.9, 10. Now it is manifest that nothing of all this can agree to the good Angels, and much less to the evil Angels, who are still Creatures, and therefore not to be excluded from Expressions so gene∣ral as these are. 2ly, The words in this sense were far from being true when the Apostle spake them, for a very small Remnant of the Jews were then converted to the Christian Faith, and of the Gentiles few, in comparison of those multi∣tudes which afterwards embraced the Faith; and yet the Apostle plainly speaks of a Creati∣on wholly past already, using the Aorist in those words, , by him have all things been created; and the Perfect Tense in these words , by him all things were created. 3ly, Though the Socinians may be able to produce some few Instances where the word  and  are to be taken in a Moral Sense, yet cannot they shew one Instance where the Creation of all things in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible, is ever used in a Moral Sense, or concerning any other Creation then that of which Moses speaks, saying, Thus the Heaven and the Earth were made, and all the Host of them, Gen. 2.1. 4ly, The Apostle afterwards begins his Dis∣course
of this Moral Creation or Reconcilia∣tion of the World to God by Christ, and the Renovation of his Church in these words, v. 18, 19, 20 And he is the Head of the Body the Church, &c. For it pleased the Father— by him to reconcile all things to himself, whe∣ther they be things in Earth, or things in Hea∣ven. Ver. 21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by wick∣ed works, yet now hath he reconciled in the Body of his Flesh by death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight. Now these things being thus connected by the Particle , to what he had before said of the Creation of all things by Christ, demonstra∣tively shew that he was not then speaking of that Renovation, which he begins to speak of in these following words. 5ly, This Exposition of this place touching a true, a proper Creation of all things by Jesus Christ, is by theCum teneamus autem nos Regulam veritatis, id est, quia sit unus Deus Omnipotens qui omnia condidit per verbum s, nam omnia per ipsum facta sunt, & sine ipso factum est nihil, ex omnibus autem nihil subtractum est, sed omnia per ipsm se∣cit Pater, sive visibilia, sive invisibilia, sive invisibilia, sive sensibilia, sive intelligibilia, sive temporalia propter quandam dispositionem, se aeterna, & ea omnia non per Angelos—Sed per Verbum & Spiritum suum omnia faciens, & disponens, & gubernans, & n∣nibus, esse praestans,—hanc ergo tenentes Regulam, licet valde varia, & multa dicant, facile eos deviasse à veritate argains. Iren. l. 1. c. 19. Fathers, from the beginning, laid down as a Rule to which the Orthodox keeping close, might easily shew that the Hereticks, who held the World was created by Angels, deviated from the Truth. Now this was the Heresie ofEa quibus & mundum hunc factum dicit. c. 20. de Cerintho c. 25. Simon Magus and Ce∣rinthus, as Irenaeus there informs us. Ver. 17. And he is before all things (as to his being,) and by him all things consist. Ver. 18. And he is the Head of the Body the Church, (Gr. of the Church as to govern∣ment and causal influence,) who is the begin∣ning (of the Christian Church,) the first-born from the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence. Ver. 19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness (of Divine Power) dwell, (all fulness of power to create, redeem, preserve and raise the Church, which is his Body). For Explication of these words it is to be noted, That the great end of our Saviour's Sufferings was to rescue our Bodies, condem∣ned for Sin to death, from that mortality, and to bestow on all, whom God should give him, Eternal Life, by raising of their Bodies to a state of Incorruption; for because the Chil∣dren were partakers of Flesh and Blood, and thereby subject to Mortality, he also took part of the same, that through death he might de∣stroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, and might deliver them, who through the fear of death, were all their lives time sub∣ject to bondage, Hebr. 2.14, 15. That therefore the Church, which is his Body, is represented as the Church of the first-born, enrolled in the Heavens, Hebr. 12.23. a Church against which the Gates of Ha∣des, or of Death, shall not prevail to hinder their Enjoyment of this Resurrection to a Life of Happiness; they are the Sons of God, and therefore Children of the Resurrection, Luke 21.36. therefore Heirs of God, joynt Heirs with Christ, who shall be glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. shall be delivered from the E∣dage of Coruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, v. 21. shall have the Adop∣tion, to wit the Redemption of the Body, v. 23. and they are also represented as Persons fore-ordained to be conformed to the Image of Christ, by having their vile Bodies changed into the likeness of Christ's glorious Body, v. 29. Note 2ly, That to this end was Christ raised, that he the first-born from the dead, might raise up his whole Body from the dead, he being raised from the dead as the first-fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. for to this end Christ both died and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the dead, and of the living, Rom. 14.9. and God hath there∣fore exalted him, that at the Name (i. e. the power) of Jesus, every Knee shoud been, of things in Heaven, in the Earth, and under the Earth, Philip. 2.10. that is, the Bodies of the dead; for by this Argument, and from these very words, the Apostle proves the Resurrection, and a future Judgment, Rom. 14.10, 11, 12. He is therefore so the first-born of the dead, as to be the Lord of them, according to our former Interpretation of the word first-born, and as to have power to raise them up who sleep in him, and bring them with him, 1 Thess. 4.14. to give Eter∣nal Life unto them, and raise then up at the last day, John 5.28, 29.17.2. And thus hath he the preeminence in all things, being Lord of all Creatures, dead and living, and giving both their first and their new Being to them, and rendring his Members conforma∣ble to his glorious Image, that so they may be joynt Heirs with him in Glory. And this is the constant Doctrine ofƲsque ad mortem pervenit ut sit primogenitus ex mortuis, ipse primatum tenens in omnibus, princeps vitae, prior on, & praecedens omnes. L. 2. c. 39. Irenaeus, who informs us that Christ died, that he might be the first-born from the dead, and the Prince of
Life.Verbum caro factum est, ut quemadmodum in Coelis principatum habuit Verbum Dei, sic et in terra haberet principatum, qaeniam homo justus, qui peccatum non fecit, principatum autem habeat eorum quae sunt sub terrâ, ipse primogenitus mortuorum factus. L 4. 37. Quaecunque enim cum gravitate summâ dixerunt Haeretici, in ultimum ad hoc deveniunt, ut blasphement Fabricatorem, & caontradicunt saluti Plasmatis Dei, quod quidem est caro, propter quam omnem dispositionem fecisse filium Dei mulis modis ostendimus. Lib. 4. Praefat. Ipse moriens ut exiliatus homo exiret de condemnatione et reverteretur intrepidè ad suam haereditatem. Ibid. cap. 19. That the death of this just Man gave him the principality of things under the Earth, he having before the principality in hea∣venly things, that they who denied the Resur∣rection of the Flesh, contradicted the salvation of that for which the whole dispensation of the Son of God was design'd, that he died that ex∣iled Man might be deliver'd from condemnati∣on, and might return without fear to his Inhe∣ritance. Ver. 20. And having made peace through the blood of his Cross by him who reconciled all things to himself, (Gr. and by him to make all things friendly in him, making peace betwixt them by the Blood of his Cross,) by him, I say, (did he thus reconcile all things,) whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. , to reconcile.] This word, say Hesychius, Suidas, and Phavorinus, signifies , to make friends, or to reduce Per∣sons to their former amity. This by the Fa∣thers is thus explain'd, That whilst Man con∣tinued in his Obedience to God, Angels and Men were in a perfect Friendship, but when Men became disobedient to their Sovereign Lord, the Angels became averse to them. Theod., because their Lord was dishonoured by them: But God being reconciled unto us by the death of his Son, they also became Friends and mi∣nistring Spirits to us, and we became of the same Church and Body with them, under the same head Christ Jesus, Hebr. 12.22. And so all things in Heaven and Earth were gathered into one Christ. Eph. 1.10. , to himself.] This I would render in him, for so the parallel place requires, where it is said, that God did recapulate all things  in Christ, Eph. 1.10. and so  frequently imports, it being usually put with an Accusative Case, instead of  with a Da∣tive; so Psal. 16.10. Thou wilt not leave my Soul  in Hell. Matth. 2.23. He dwelt  in a City. Chap. 10.14. , in the name of a Prophet. So , he that is in the field, Mark 13.16. is Mat. 24.18. Luke 17.31. . So Luke 11.7. My Children are with me, , in the Bed. John 1.18. He that is  in the bosom of the Father. Acts 23.11. As thou hast been witness of me  in Jerusa∣lem, so must thou do also  in Rome. Ver. 21. And you (Gentiles) that were some∣times alienated (from the life of God, Eph. 4.18.) and enemies in your mind (to him) by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled (to the Father.) Ver. 22. In the body of his flesh through death, to present you (to the Father) holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, Eph. 1.4.5.27. Ver. 23. (As you will be) if you continue in the faith grounded and settled (in it,) and be not moved away (by the floods of affliction, or by the blasts of persecution which may come upon you, Matth. 7.24, 25.) from the hope of the Gospel, (i. e. the hope laid up for you in heaven, v. 5) which you have heard (of from Epaphras, viz. the hope) preached to every Creature under Heaven, (i. e. Gentile at well as Jew,) whereof I Paul am a Minister. Note. Hence it follows, that they who have true faith, and just ground of hope, may fall away from them. Ver. 24. Who now rejoyce in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bo∣dies sake which is the Church. , the afflictions of Christ.] Christ having told us, that what is done to his Members is done to him, Matth. 25.40, 45. The Afflictions of his Members are stiled the Persecutions and Afflictions of Christ, Acts 9.4, 5. Now the Jews speak much of the Af∣flictions of Christ, and his Disciples, compre∣hending both under the name of Midrash Tehillim. in Psal. 2.7. & Sanhedrin. c. 10. Vide Buxtorf Lex. Talm. p. 700. the afflictions of the Messiah, dividing them into three parts, of which, say they, the Fa∣thers and the preceding Generation suffered one part; another part was suffered by the Generation of destruction, or by the Jews de∣stroy'd by Titus; and a third by the Genera∣tion of the Messiah, or by his Disciples. Of these Afflictions of Christ, I, saith the Apostle, have already had a share, and I go on to fill up the residue of these my Sufferings in the Flesh, which I am to bear in the discharge of my Ministry for the benefit of his Church. And sutable to this Interpretation is that of Lyra∣nus on the place, Passiones Christi dupliciter accipiuntur, uno modo pro illis, quas sustinuit in corpore proprio, & sic nihil ibi restat adim∣plendum, alio modo pro illis quas in finem us∣que seculi patietur in corpore mystico, & sic re∣stant multarum passionum reliquae adimplen∣dae. Ver. 25. Whereof I am made a Minister ac∣cording to the dispensation of God, which is given to me for you (Gentiles,) to fulfil (, fully to preach) the word of God. Ver. 26. Even the mystery (of the calling of
the Gentiles to the same hopes and priviledges with the believing Jew, Eph. 3.3, 4, 5, 6.) which hath been hid from (past) Ages, and (from former) Generations, (v. 5.) but now is made manifest (by the Apostles and Prophets, v. 5.) to the Saints. Ver. 27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, (Eph. 3.8, 9.) which is Christ (preached to, and received) in (i. e. a∣mong) you, (as) the hope of glory. Ver. 28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all (spiritual) wisdom, that (so) we may present every man perfect: (i. e. fully instructed, See Note on Eph. 4.13.) in Christ Jesus. Ver. 29. Whereunto (, for which thing) I also labour (earnestly,) striving according to his working, who worketh in me mightily, (i. e. according to the mighty power of God as∣sisting me, to confirm the Doctrine of Christ by signs and miracles and mighty deeds, Rom. 15.19.) CHAP. II. Verse 1. (I Say, I labour  striving to make every man perfect in Christ Jesus,) For I would have you know what conflict (, with contention in prayer, Chap. 4.2.) I have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh. Ver. 2. (Praying) that their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in (mutual) love, and (that they may advance) unto all ri∣ches of full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and (i. e.) of the Father, and of Christ. , for , in the knowledge.] See Note on Chap. 1.20. , the mystery of God even the Father, and of Christ.] i. e. The Dispensation of the Divine Grace of God in offering Salva∣tion to the Gentiles by Christ, and conferring on them, equally with the Jews, the Blessings of the Gospel. This is the Mystery which, saith he, in the former Ages was hid, but now is manifested to the Saints, to whom God would make known what was the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ (preached) among you (as) the hope of glory, v. 26, 27. This, saith he, is the mystery which from the beginning hath been hid in God, Eph. 3.9. the mystery of God, and of Christ, v. 3, 4, 5. That the Gentiles should be fellow heirs (with the believing Jews,) and of the same body, and partakers (with them) of his promises in Christ by the Gospel, v. 6. See also Rom 16.25, 26. Col, 4.3. And that the Gen∣tiles might have a perfect knowledge of this Mystery, and to the Riches of Divine Grace, and Love to them in it, is the Apostle's Pray∣er, Eph. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. But whereas Crel∣lius and Schlictingius here note, that the Ar∣ticle  and, added to the word Christ, distin∣guishes him as well from God, as from the Father. It doth no such matter; but only distinguisheth the Mystery of the Father send∣ing his Son into the World to be a Saviour to the Gentiles, from the mystery of Christ procuring this Salvation for them by his Blood. The Ecclesiastical Tradition, saith. L. 1. c. 2. Irenaeus, teacheth us to believe in God the Father Omnipotent, who made Heaven and Earth, and in one Jesus Christ the Son of God, incarnate for our Salvation, our Lord, God, Sa∣viour, and King. And so these words may be construed the Mystery of both the Father and Christ. See Note on Chap. 1.3. Ver. 3. In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. .] Some make these words relate to the Mystery mention'd in the foregoing Verse. But it seems rather to respect the Person of Christ as Mediator, the knowledge of whom, saith the Apostle, hath an excellency beyond all other knowledge, Philip. 3.8. for  in whom you are circumcised, v. 11. and  in whom you are risen again, v. 12. plain∣ly relate to Christ's Person and his Performan∣ces as Mediator; and the whole following Chapter speaketh of him, and of the Benefits we have received  by him. The Apostle also doth apply this to him by saying, v. 6. as you have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk in him; and by warning us against the deceit of vain Philosophy, because in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead. But yet seeing these hid Treasures of Christ's Wis∣dom are reveal'd to us by his Gospel only, and thence alone we obtain all our know∣ledge of him as our Mediator, and of all the Offices he sustains as such, there seemeth to be no great difference betwixt referring this to his Person, and referring it to his Doctrine. Ver. 4. And this I say, lest any Man should beguile you with enticing words. (See Note on v. 8.) Ver. 5. For though I be absent (from you) in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the Spirit, (by which I discern your affairs, as Elisha
did his Servant, 2 Kings 5.26. See 1 Cor. 5.3.) joying, and beholding (beholding with joy) your order, and stedfastness in the faith of Christ. , your order.] As to walk disorderly in the Apostle's stile, is not to walk according to the Traditions they had received from the Apostles, or Preachers of the Gospel, 2 Thess. 3.6. So their order may import their compliance with them in Manners, Discipline, and Union. And therefore it follows, Ver. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, (by the teaching of Epaphras, Chap. 1.7.) so walk ye (stedfastly) in him. Ver. 7. Rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving (to him who called you to it.) Ver. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you (or make a prey of you) through (Heathen) Philo∣sophy and vain deceit, (leading you) after the traditions of men, (or) after the rudiments of the world, (the Jewish Rudiments and Tradi∣tions, Gal. 4.3.) and not after (the Doctrine) of Christ. , by Philosophy, &c.] What is the , the enticing speech, v. 4. and the Philosophy, and vain deceit, which the Apostle warns them against, is not so easie to determine. Some good Interpreters refer what follows in this Chapter to the Heresie of Si∣mon Magus and the Gnosticks, to which many passages in this Chapter may be well apply∣ed. Others refer them to the Jewish Doctors, who had then mixed the Philosophy of the Heathens with their Ceremonial Worship, and had thence learned to allegorize it, and others do divide the matter betwixt Jew and Gentile. For that the Jewish Doctors are very much concerned in this Chapter, we learn from v. 14, 15, 16. and the Rudiments of the World relate to their Legal Observations, as being common to them with the Gentile World, see Note on Gal. 4.8. The Command∣ments of Men, or their Traditions, may also have respect to them who were the zealous Assertors of them, Matth. 15. Acts 21.21. And indeed this Verse seems to be the Key to, or the Foundation of all that follows in this Chapter. Ranking the Discourse of the Apo∣stle under these two Heads, viz. Cautions a∣gainst the Seductions of the Jews zealous for observation of their Rites and Ceremonies, and against the Seductions of Heathens by their vain Philosophy dress'd up by them anew, both as to its Doctrines and Morals, and set off with the most specious pretences, stiled here , enticing speech. Ver. 9. (Of which Philosophy you can have no need,) For in him, dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. , all the fulness of the Godhead.] This fulness, according to the Gnosticks, was made up of their thirty Aeones. The Heathens, besides the Supream God, owned many other local Gods presiding over Nations, and so made up the plenitude of the Godhead of them all, as of so many partial Deities. Against such Opinions the Apostle here asserts that the whole fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ, and that bodily, i. e. in his Body, as its Temple. And, say the Fathers, as the Soul dwelleth in the Body; say others, bodily, that is, essentially. The Apostle doth not roundly say that Christ is God, but expresses his Divine Nature thus, partly to represent to the Jews the Divinity of Christ, with allusion to the God of Israel dwelling in the Temple, partly to oppose him to the  of the Gnosticks, and to the partial Deities of the Heathens. Here there∣fore it is to be observed, 1. That the Apostle doth not here say that the Divinity is assistant to Christ, but that the fulness of it doth  reside in him, which is never said in Scripture of any other Person, but of him alone, who having stiled his Body a Temple, John 2.19, 21. the fulness of the Deity may be properly said to dwell in him bodily, as it dwelt symbolically in the Ark. Note 2ly, That Christ is not here said to be fil∣led with the fulness of God, as the Church is by reason of the Gifts with which she was replenished, and the Doctrine she had recei∣ved from God, Eph. 1.23. But the whole ful∣ness of the Godhead is here said to reside in him. Now  and  doth never sig∣nifie the Gifts of God, or the Doctrine of the Gospel, but the Divine Nature only; nor can the Will, or Revelation of God, be said to dwell bodily in any Person. I conclude therefore that. Concil. Antioch. ad Paulum Samosat, o 1. p. 848. the Body born of the Vir∣gin, receiving the whole fulness of the God∣head bodily, was immutably united to the Di∣vinity, and deified, which made the same Per∣son, Jesus Christ, both God and Man. Ver. 10. And ye are compleat in him, (as to all saving knowledge and vertue, 1 Cor. 1.30.) who is the Head of all Principality and Power, (Eph. 1.20.) , the Head of all
Principality and Power.]. Haer. 21. § 4. p. 58. Epiphanius in∣forms us that Simon Magus devised some Names of Principalities and Powers, saying, That none could be saved who learnt not the Sacred Discipline, and how to offer his Sacri∣fices to the Father of all things, by these Prin∣cipalities and Powers. In opposition to these things, say some, the Apostle asserts that Christ created all these Principalities and Powers, Chap. 1.15. and was the Head, and Lord of them, and so in him, without their assistance, the Colossians were compleat, and fully instructed to Salvation. Or else these things may be refer'd to Ce∣rinthus and his Followers. For 1. He lived in the Apostle's times, and was a great Opposer of the Truth of the Gospel, and particularly an Enemy to. Haer. 28. § 4, 5, 8. St. Paul, be∣cause he contended it was not necessary for the Jews, nor lawful for the Gentiles to ob∣serve the Law of Moses, for which Cerinthus was a Zealot. And he, saith the same. Haer. 28. § 2. Epiphanius, reprov'd St. Peter for going in to the Uncircumcised, and raised the Tumult in Antioch about Circumcision. 2ly, He liv'd long in. Haer. fab. l. 2. c. 3. Egypt, and was instructed in Philosophical Sciences; and from thence went and set up his Sect in Asia the less, and Syria, say. Haer. 28. Theodoret and Epipha∣nius. Being therefore skill'd in Philosophy, and setting up his Heresie in Asia minor, where Coloss was, he may well be here refle∣cted on by St. Paul, especially if we consider how much his Opinions agreed with those which are here censured by him. For 3ly, He was zealous for Circumcision, and other Observances of the Law of Moses, and so concern'd in what is here said v. 11, 14, 15 16, 17. 2ly, He saidCerinthiani à Cerintho mundum ab Angelis factum esse dicentes, & carne circumcidi oportere, atque alia hujusmodi legis praeepta servare. August. de Haer. cap. 8. Epiph. Haer. 28. § 1. . Cajus apud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 28. Illi dicunt alterum quidem fabricatorem mundi, alium autem Patrem Domini, et alium quidem fabricatoris filium, alter vero de superioribus Christum, quem et impassibilem perseverasse descendentem in Iesum filium Fabricatoris, et iterum re in suum pleroma, et eam conditionem quae est secundum nos non à primo Deo factam, sed à virtute aliquà valdè esum  et abscissa ab eorum communicatione quae sunt invisibilia et innominabilia. Iren. l. 1. c. 25. l. 3. c. 11. p. 257., the World was made by Angels, or inferiour Virtues, and not by the Supream God; and that he himself received his Doctrine by the Revelation of Angels. 3ly, He held Jesus to be born of Joseph and Mary as other Men, and Christ to have descended upon him, and at his Passion to have return'd to his Pleroma. And. St. John refuted him, saith Irenae∣us, by establishing the Principle of one God Om∣nipotent, who made all things visible and invi∣sible by his word, which is the very thing the Apostle in this Chapter doth assert. Ver. 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision not made with hands, (as that of the Jews is, but consisting) in put∣ting off the body of the sins of the flesh, (which is done) by the (spiritual) Circumcisi∣on of Christ, (and so ye need not any Legal Rites to make you compleat Christians.) Ver. 12. (We being) buried with him is Baptism, (the outward Symbol of our Spiritual Circumcision, and so dead unto Sin, Rom. 6.2, 3, 4) wherein we are also risen with him ( newness of life, Rom. 6.4. and to the expecta∣tion of a future life with him, v. 8.) through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead, (by which faith we believe that he will raise us also from the dead, Eph. 1.19, 20. 1 Thess. 4.14. 1 Pet. 1.3. , &c. the putting off the body of the sins of the flesh.] Thus. De Migrat. Abr. p. 315. A. B. de Circumcis. p. 626. Philo informs us, That Circumcision imports the cutting off our sinful pleasures and passions, and our impi∣ous opinions. See Rom. 2.28, 29. The Apostle here plainly discourseth against those Hereticks, or false Apostles, who la∣boured to introduce the Necessity of Circum∣cision. Now that Cerinthus was one who pleaded for the Necessity of it, Epiphanius, St. Austin, and others do inform us; but that Simon Magus did so, I find not in Church History. TheLib. 1. cap. 1. Apostolical Constitutions speak of some false Apostles who held it ne∣necessary  to circumcise Men
according to the Law, but then they are distin∣guished from the impure Heresie of Simon Magus, who was so far from contending for the observation of the Law and Prophets, that he taught his FollowersIbid. , not to regard them;Haer. fab. l. 1. c. 1. , nor to fear the threats of the Law, as being not the Law of God, , of some evil power, saith Theodoret; and declaring, saithHaer. 21. § 4. Epiphanius, that whosoever believed the Old Testament incurred death. Note 2ly, That the Apostle speaking here of the Circumcision made without hands, and of the Circumcision made in Baptism, and consisting in the putting off the Sins of the Flesh, can∣not by the Circumcision of Christ, mean his own Personal Circumcision which was made with hands, but that which he hath institu∣ted in the room of it, viz. Baptism. Note 3ly, That Baptism therefore is a Rite of Initiation to the Christians, as Circumcision was to the Jews; for by virtue of our Spiritual Circumcision in Baptism, he proves we have no need of the outward Circumcision to be a Type of the Purity obtained by Baptism. 3ly, Hence I infer that Baptism is Christ's Ordinance for Infants of believing Parents, as Circumcision was of old for the Infants of the Jews; for if it had been otherwise, and Infants under Christianity had not been recei∣ved by any foederal Rite into Covenant with God, the objection of the Necessity of Cir∣cumcision as to them, would have still held, they entring into Covenant by no other Rite, and so remaining Strangers from the Church of Christ, and as much alien from the Adop∣tion, the Covenant, and Promises, as the Gen∣tiles were; which sure the Jews would have objected, if truly they could have done it, to the reproach of Christianity. That Instituti∣on therefore must, for the Comfort and Satis∣faction of their Parents, afford some way of Sanctifying these Infants, or of Admitting them among the number of God's Children, which being confessedly no other then that of Baptism, it must be supposed to allow that to them, that by it, in the Phrase ofLib. 2. cap. 39. Ire∣naeus, Infantes & parvuli renascantur in De∣um, Infants and little Children may be rege∣nerated. Ver. 13. And you (Gentiles) being dead (before) in your sins, and (by reason of) the uncircumcision of the flesh, hath he (God, v. 12. quickned together with him (by his Spirit,) having forgiven you (through faith) all (your former) trespasses. , and the Circumcision of the flesh.] By the defect of Circumcision they being, saith the parallel place on that account without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenant of Promise, Eph. 2.11, 12. Ver. 14. (And) blotting out the hand wri∣ting of (Legal) Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and (doing this, so that he) took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. , the hand-writing of Ordinances]  is a Rescript or Ordi∣nance concerning any thing, a Royal or Im∣perial Decree, Dan. 2.13.3.10, 12, 29.68, 10, 13, 15, 26. Luke 2.1. Acts 17.7. Hence Ritual Prescriptions ars called , Ezek. 20.26. The hand-writing of Ordinances, in the parallel Epistle, Eph. 2.15. is the Law of Com∣mandments  in Ritual Ordinances, or the Ceremonial Law; and it is said here to be against, and contrary to the Gentiles, as being a middle wall of partition, hindring them from coming to God, and putting an enmity betwixt them and God's People, v. 14, 15. which Christ hath taken away by abolishing and dissolving the Obligation of it, and ad∣mitting the Gentiles fellow-heirs of the same Promises and Blessings with the Jews without it; or it is contrary to us, as being the mini∣stration of death and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. Ver. 15. And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a shew of them openly (thus despoiled of their Authority,) triumph∣ing over them in it, (i. e. by virtue of the same Cross.) , in it.] 'Tis certain thatHom. in Mat. p. 283, 288, 289, in Joh. p. 144. Ori∣gen, and others of the Ancients, read , on the wood; so did the Arabick Version; o∣thers read , in himself; but seeing that Reading, as St. Jerom testifies, is only of the Latin Copies, and since Chrysostom, Theodo∣ret, Oecumenius, Theophylact read as we, and most Copies do, without taking notice of any other Reading, we may rely securely on it. .] The Principalities and Powers here mentioned, are the Powers of Wickedness, the Spirits of Satan, who is sti∣led , the power of darkness, Luke 22.53. and of the air, Eph. 2.2. , the Prince of this World, John 12.31.14.30. whose Emissaries are the the Princi∣palities and Powers, the Rulers of the dark∣ness of this World, the spiritual wickednesses in high places against which we wrestle, Eph. 6.12. These Powers Christ destroyed by his Cross, because, as the Apostle saith, through death he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and delivered them who, through the fear of death, were all their lives subject to bondage, Hebr. 2.14, 15. More∣over, the Heathens lay under two great Infe∣licities, (1.) That they were Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenant of Promise, and without God in the World; the Remedy which Divine Wis∣dom found out, and our Lord's Salutary Pas∣sion effected with respect to this, is discour∣sed of in the preceding Verse. 2ly, That they were subject to the power and delusions of E∣vil and Apostate Spirits, walking according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that now worketh in the Children of Disobedi∣ence. These Principalities and Powers Christ dispoiled on the Cross, by the Name of a crucified Jesus, and by the very sign of the Cross, casting out the Prince of the World from his Dominions, Temples, Oracles, and from those Humane Bodies he possessed, and so openly convincing the Heathens that the Deities they so long worshipped, were evil Spirits, and by the Miracles wrought in his Name, drawing them from their Heathen Worship to him: And this Exposition is con∣firmed from these words, He made a shew of them openly, which plainly seemeth to refer to this conquest over them. Moreover, it may be noted that Simon and Cerinthus heldEpiph. Haer. 21. § 4., , that the World was made by these evil Spirits, and Men were subject to the power of them; and wereIren. l. 1. c. 20. Tert. de an. c. 34. Theod. Haer. fab. l. 1. c 1. per eum & Helenam suam ex illis Angelicis potestatibus liberandos, to be delivered by Simon and his Hellen from them. This, saith our Apostle, our Lord hath fully done upon the Cross, and so we need no assistance of Simon or Ce∣rinthus to perform this work; and much less need we the assistance of those Daemons which the Heathens worshipped as good Angels, who had the government of the inferiour World committed to them, Christ having triumphed over them, and wholly spoiled them of that power. And from these Heathen Deities he passes on again to the Rudiments of the Jews, making this Inference from what had been discoursed from v. 11. to the 14th. Ver. 16. Let no man therefore judge (or con∣demn) you in (not observing a distinction in) meat, or in drink, or in respect of (your neg∣lect of) a (Jewish) holy day, or of the new Moons, or of the Sabbath days (observed by them). Ver. 17. Which are (all but) a shadow of things to come, but the body (and substance of those shadows) is of Christ, (and exhibited by him.) , a shadow of things to come.] Dr. Spencer well observes, that there is no necessity from these words of asserting that these, and all the Ritual Constitutions of the Law of Moses, shadowed forth some Christi∣an Mystery, but only that they were but as meer shadows, compared to that solid and sub∣stantial Truth Christ by his Gospel hath dis∣covered to us; as Josephus, speaking of Ar∣chelaus, who exercised the Kingly Power with∣out the Title of it, saith, , He came to request of Caesar the shadow of th Kingdom, the Body of which he had usurped, or snatched to himself before, De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 4. p. 777. Note 2ly, That  is well rendred in respect, or on account of a Feast; as when the Apostle saith, That which was made glo∣rious, was not glorious  in this re∣spect, 2 Cor. 3.10. and I have sent the Bre∣thren, lest our boasting of you should be found vain  in this respect, Chap. 9.3. And when St. Peter saith, If any man suffer as a Christian, let him glorifie God  on this account. So 2 Maccab. 15.18. The care they took for their Wives and Children  was in least account with them, their chief care being for the Temple. How hence to make out the Argument against the Sabbatari∣ans, Note 1. That the hand-writing of Ordinances here mentioned respecteth Ceremonial Ordi∣nances; for of them only can it be truly said, they were against us, and were contrary to us, they were blotted out, and nailed to the Cross of Christ, and were shadows of, or in respect of things to come. 2ly, That when it is said, Let no man judge you in respect of these things; the meaning is, let no Man censure or condemn the Christian for not observing these New Moons, Feasts, or Sabbaths. 3ly, That the Apostle here by Sabbath does not mean the first and last days of the great Jewish Feasts which were by them observed as Sabbaths, or the Sabbath of the seventh Year, or of the Year of Jubilee, but only, or chiefly the weekly Sabbaths of the Jews. 1st, Because the Apostle having said before, Let no man condemn you for not observing the Jewish Festivals, or any part of them, can∣not be rationally supposed in the words fol∣lowing to condemn only the same thing. 2ly, In the New Testament the word Sab∣bath, or Sabbaths, is used above sixty times; and in fifty six of those places, it doth un∣questionably signifie the Jewish weekly Sab∣baths, and in the other, the whole Week. Since then the Sabbath in the New Testament is never used for the first or last days of the Jewish Feasts, but is there ordinarily used for their weekly Sabbath, we ought in reason to conclude it here imports that Seventh-day Sabbath which it doth usually import in other places, and not those Solemn days of the Jewish Feasts, those Jubilees or Seven years Sabbaths, which it doth never elsewhere
signifie in the New Testament. 3ly, Wherever the word Sabbath is menti∣oned in the Old Testament in conjunction with New Moons or Jewish Feasts, it doth import the Seventh-day Sabbath distinctly from all others, as will appear from the perusal of all the places where these things are jointly men∣tioned, as 2 Kings 4.23. Isa. 1.13.66.23. Iam. 2.6. Ezek. 45.17.46. 1. Hos. 2.2. Amos 8.5. being then here mentioned with new Moons and Jewish Feasts, it is reasona∣ble to conceive it signifies the Seventh-day Sabbath. 4ly, The Sabbath Day in the Old Testament is often contra-distinguish'd to all other So∣lemn Feasts, and more particularly to New Moons and Anniversary Feasts, and therefore being here mentioned with them, we may pre∣sume it cannot signifie them, or any portion of them, but rather that it doth import that Jewish Sabbath, which in other places is put in opposition to them, as 1 Chron. 23.31. 2 Chron. 2.4.31.3. Neh. 10.32, 33. Seeing then the word Sabbath, wherever it is used in conjunction with New Moons or Feasts in Scripture, still signifies the Jewish weekly Sabbath, we cannot doubt but in conjunction with them here it signifies the same, seeing the word is often put in opposition to New Moons and Solemn Feasts indefinitely taken, what reason have we to conceive that in this place it should be taken for any part or por∣tion of them? Hence then I argue thus, No Man ought to condemn the Christian for not observing the Jewish Sabbath, because Christ hath blotted out the hand-writing of Ce∣remonial Ordinances which was against them; therefore the Jewish Sabbath was a Ceremo∣nial Ordinance, therefore 'tis blotted out, there∣fore the Christian is not obliged to observe it. Again, that which is joyned with Meats and Drinks, and with New Moons, which are things confessedly Ceremonial, no difference at all being observed by the Apostle, as to their being named hand-writings, things can∣cell'd, shadows, and the like, that must be Ceremonial: Lastly, that which is a shadow of, or in respect of things to come, of which Christ by his Advent exhibited the Body, that must be Ceremonial, that must be cancell'd, and abolished by Christ, and then the Jewish Sabbath must be so. Ver. 18. Let no man beguile you of (dam¦nifie you as to) your reward in a voluntary hu∣mility, (Gr. pleasing himself in, or affecting humility,) and upon that account) worshipping of Angels, intruding (or searching) into those things (by the strength of his natural reason,) which he hath not seen, (being) vainly puffed up by his fleshy mind, (as if he were able by it to know the nature, and the offices of Angels.) .] Let no man beguile you of your reward.] So Suidas. , Let no man put a cheat upon you, so Phavorinus. , Let no man damage you, so Chryso∣stom and Theophylact. , pleasing himself in his humility.] Or affecting it, and so not ad∣dressing to God immediately, but by Angels; for the word  answers to the Hebrew Chaphetz, which imports pleasing or delight∣ing our selves in any thing. So 1 Sam. 18.12. , the King is pleased with thee. 2 Sam. 15.26. If he say , I am not pleased with thee. Matth. 20.26.27. , Who among you affects to be great, or first. And Chap. 27.43. Let him de∣liver him  if he delighteth in him. As for the Persons here referred to, Note 1. That the Greek Commentators affirm generally that the Apostle doth through this whole Epistle oppose himself to some false Christians, who held , that we ought to address to the Father by the holy Angels. But then some of them add, That the pretence of Humility was this,. Chrysost. Photius, Oecum. Theoph. in locum. that it was too much for us to come to God immediately by Christ, this being above our infirmity. But this, though it agrees well with the Humility here menti∣oned, it seems not to accord either with the Principles of Simon Magus, who held himself to be both the Father, and the Son; or of Cerinthus, who held Christ was only a Man, born after the common way of Generation, and so could not exalt him thus above the Angels; and much less doth it accord with the Sentiments of the Heathens. Oecumenius saith the Apostle speaketh here of them who did  mix Legal observances with the Gospel; and Theophylact, that he speaks  of the Judaizers. And Theodoret. In locum. explains this more fully thus, They who were zealous for the Law, perswaded men to worship An∣gels, because, say they, the Law was given by them; this they advised men to do, pretending humility, and saying, That the God of all things was invisible, and inaccessible, and incom∣prehensible, and that it was fit we should procure the Divine Favour by the means of An∣gels. Now if this be so, this passage cannot well agree to Simon Magus and his Followers; for though they worshipped Angels, as
Simonianae Disciplinae Magia Angelis inserviens. Tertul. de Praescript. cap. 33. p. 214. Irenaeus,Iren. l. 1. c. 23. l. 2. c. 57. Tertullian,Epiphan. Haer. 21. § 4. Epiphanius, andTheodoret. Haer. fab. l. 1. c. 5. p. 12. . Iren. l. 1. p. 10, 12, 14. Theodoret note, and held that their Proarche or Propater was so inaccessible and incomprehensible, yet did they not seem to worship God by Angels, but rather to per∣form their Magical Operations by invoking them. He also, and his Followers, as hath been shewn, were great Enemies to the Law, and so could not introduce the Worship of good Angels upon this account that the Law was given by them. But then as for Cerinthus, and other false Apostles of the Jews, they owned Christ Je∣sus as the Messiah, and yet were stiff Asser∣tors of the Obligation of the Law, and they by their Philosophy had introduced the wor∣ship of Angels after the Heathen manner. For E∣piphanius informs us of Cerinthus, that he said,. Haer. 28. § 1. p. 110. The Law and the Prophets came from the Angels, and that he who gave the Law was one of the Angels that made the World. They had imbibed the Philosophy of. Conviv. p. 1194. A.B. . Ibid. . Epin. p. 1010, 1011. Plato, which saith, The Demons are of a middle Nature be∣twixt the Gods and Mortals, that they brought our Prayers and Offerings to them, and their Commands to us, and were to be worshipped and invoked upon that account. That God had no immediate Commerce with Men, but all his Converse with us was by the mediation of these Demons. And sutably to this Philoso∣phy we find the Angel, Tobit. 12.12, 15. saying that he was one of the seven Angels , who offered up the Prayers of the Saints. And that when Tobit and Sarah prayed, he brought the Me∣morial of their Prayer before the holy One. AndLib. de Plant. Noae. p. 168. Philo in several places declares, that as the Philosophers said of their Demons and Heroes, so Moses introduces the Angels  doing the office of Ambassadors, , and being Messengers of good things from God to his Sub∣jects, and carrying back to God their . In his Book of theP. 222. F. Gyants, he stiles then Ambassadors of good Communications of Men  God, and of God again to Men. And in his Book. P. 455, 456. de Somniis, he represents them as the Ears and Eyes of the great King, seeing and hearing all things; for, saith he, they bring the Commands of the Father to his Children, and the Needs of the Children to the Father; not that God needs their ministry, but that  is very needful and beneficial for us frail Men, to have such Mediators, as being unable,  only to receive God's Chastisements, but eve his very Benefits, should he immediately confer them on us by himself. If Cerinthus had im∣bibed this Philosophy, which had then ob∣tained among the Jews, and was so well known in the World, that one so much in∣structed in it as Theodoret saith he was, could not well be ignorant of it, here is a sufficient Foundation for his introducing the Worship of those Angels which gave the Law under pretence of Humility.. Ibid. Philo decla∣ring that when the Law was first given, the People desired it might be so, and requested of God these Mediators; saying, Speak thou to us, and let not God speak to us, least we die. , intruding into those things he hath not seen.] This did the Philo∣sophers and those Christians which embraced their Sentiments, in all their Inducements to worship these Angels and inferiour Spirits: As v. g. 1st, In their pretence that. Plutarch. de Orac. defect. p. 414. . P. 416. E. the Divine Nature could not immediately be conversed with, but that all the intercourse betwixt God and Men was by the intermediation of these Demons, it being a debasing of the Divine Na∣ture to think we could converse with him with∣out their intervention. 2ly, In saying that they were to be wor∣shipped , for their la∣dable
intercession, andEuseb. Praepar. Evang. l. 5. c. 3. p. 128. D. , for the benefits of common life we receive from them. 3ly, As having from the Supream Deity their Power and Authority, and presiding o∣ver us, , according to the order appointed to them, and being there∣fore worshipped , by the Divine Law and Counsel; and only, saith Cel∣sus, as he will have them to be honoured. Plato in Phaedro p. 246. Hierocles in Carm. Py∣thag. p. 9. 18. Celsus apud Orig. l. 8. p. 381. 4ly, Because by worshipping these Ministers of his, we do a thing  grateful to him, saithIbid. p. 381, 321. Celsus. Now in all these things they did manifestly  intrude into things of which they neither had, nor could have any knowledge from the Light of Nature. And so do also the Romanists, in say∣ing that Saints and Angels see all things, or perceive our Prayers by seeing him who seeth all things; that they are worshipped by the Divine Law and Counsel; and that by invo∣king them, we do a thing grateful ro him, it being certain that nothing of this nature can be proved from Scripture, or from Primitive Tradition. Moreover, Theodoret and Oecumenius here observe, that this Worship of Angels continu∣ed long in Pisidia, Phrygia, and Laodicea near to Coloss, where they hadOecum. apud Haeschel. Not. in Orig. p. 233. , Oratories of St. Michael, the Captain of the Lords Host, as he is called Josh. 5.14. which leads us to the very rise of this Wor∣ship both among Jews and Christians. For the Jews generally held, that he who is sti∣led the Captain of the Lords Host was the An∣gel Michael. See Note on Hebr. 2.. and his Office, saith. L. 1. c. 8. in Matth. Ed. Huet. p. 361. D. Origen is, Morttum preces supplicationesque curare, to presnt the Pray∣ers of Men. And in the Book of the Pastor, we read, saith he, that Christians , as soon as they be∣lieve, are unde  Government of Michael.Lib. 3. Sim. 8. § 3. The good Messenger saith Hermes, being Michael, qui Populi bujus habet potestatem, & gubernat , who hath the government over this People. Whence byHist. l. 7. c. 50. Nicephorus, he is stiled , the President or Overseer of the Christian Faith. Ver. 19. And (so) not holding the Head, (Christ) from which all the Body by joints and bads having nourishment ministred, and being knit together, encreaseth with the in∣crease of God. , and not holding the ead.] Hence it appeareth, (1.) That the Apostle here speaks of such Persons as had embraced Christianity, owning Christ Jesus to be the Head of the Church, and being by profession dead with Christ from the rudiments of the World, v. 20. 2ly, That the fault they were guilty of was not the worshipping Angels, as Mediators of Redemption, but of Intercession only, i. e. as Mediators to bring us to God, and to present our Prayers to him, as appears from the fore∣going Note. 3ly, That Jesus Christ is represented in the Holy Scripture, as he by whom we have  access to God in Prayer with confidence, Eph. 2.18.3.12. Hebr. 10.19-22. And so having access to him by Pray∣er through any other Mediator of Intercession, must be intrenching on the Office of the Head of the Church, and so not holding the Head. And that the practise of the Church of Rome in praying to Angels is here condemned, I have fully proved in a full Discourse of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, Chap. 11. , by joints and bands having nourishment ministred.] i. e. From which Head communicating the Gifts of the Spirit to his Mystical, as the Head doth its vital Spirits to the Natural Body, the whole Body of Christians duly compacted together by the as∣sistance which every part of it gives to the whole; some sustaining the Office of inferi∣our Heads, some of an Eye, some of an Hand or a Foot, 1 Cor. 12.15, 16, 17. increaseth in that Love which proceedeth from the God of Love which he requires and approves, and which tends to his glory, and is therefore sti∣led the increase of God, as that Righteous∣ness which he approves, and accepts of, is cal∣led the Righteousness of God, Rom. 1.17. 2 Cor. 5.21. Philip. 3.9. Jam. 1.20. See Note on Eph. 4.15, 16. Ver. 20. Wherefore if ye (by your professi∣on) be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, (which he hath nailed to his Cross, and took out of the way, v. 14.) why as men living (yet) in (conformity to) the world, are ye subject to (the) ordinances (and decrees of men?) Ver. 21. (Such as these are) touch not (what is offered to an Idol, or a Woman, 1 Cor. 7.1.) taste not (forbidden meats,) handle not (an unclean thing.) Ver. 22. Which all are to perish with the using, (or tend to corruption by the using, or a∣busing them) according to the Doctrines and Commandments of men. Ver. 23. (Though they are) things which have indeed a shew of wisdom in will-worship and humility, (v. 18.) and neglecting the bo∣dy,
(v. 21.) (and) not in (giving) any honour to it,) to the satisfying of the flesh. , from the rudiments of the World.] That these Rudiments signi∣fie the Mosaical Institutions, as being for mat∣ter mostly the same with the Rites used by the Heathens, is proved Note on Gal. 4.3. And this is also evident from the Argument here used to restrain the Colossians from being still in Bondage to them, viz. that they are blotted out, cancell'd, and done away by the death of Christ, to which we profess to be conformed, v. 14. to live in the world, is to live after the Prescripts of the Men of the World, by whom these Rites were used. , are ye subject to Ordinances.]  is to make Rules and Constituti∣ons touching these things. Thus of the Feast of Dedication of the Temple purged from de∣filement, , they ordained by a common statute and decree, that every year those days should be kept, 2 Macc. 10.8. So when Judas had slain Nicanor, , they or∣dained all with a common decree, in no case to let that day pass without solemnity, Chap. 15.36. See Esth. 3.9. 3 Esdr. 6.34. And so it may be rendred here, Why, as living yet in conformity to the world, are ye subject to the Constitutions and Decrees about them? Such as are , touch not.] This may refer either to what is mentioned by St. Paul as the A∣phorism of some Philosophers, or Hereticks, It is good, for a Man , not to touch a Woman. Or it may be referr'd to things suf∣focated, or dead of themselves, or offered to Idols, which as. Paedag. l. 2. c. 1. p. 149. Clemens of Alexandria saith, the Jews were not allowed to touch. , taste not.] This doubtless re∣fers to Meats and Drinks, either Flesh and Wine, which some of the Philosophers, parti∣cularly the Pythagoraeans, would not taste of. And some false Apostles mentioned by the. Constit. Apost. l. 6. c. 10. Apostolical Constitutions, forbad Marriage, and required men to abstain from flesh and wine, representing Marriage, and the procreation of Children, and the eating of Flesh, as things a∣bominable. , handle not.] Any thing which may pollute you by touching it. , all  things perish in the using.] The word  is used often by St. Peter speaking of such Men, not for a Natural, but a Moral Co∣ruption; as when he saith they were parta∣kers of the Divine Nature, who have escaped  the pollution which is in the will through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. and that they as na∣tural brute Beasts, made to be taken and des∣ed, speak evil of the things they understand not, and shall perish  in their own corruption, 2 Pet. 2.12. and v. 19 Whilst they promise them liberty, they themselves are the Servants  of Corruption. And so the meaning of these words may be, that when these things are observed in compliance with the Commands and Doctrines of Men, as things necessary, they corrupt Men who use them thus; but I prefer the other sense, which saith, that these Meats perish in the using according to thatCicero Top. n. 8. Pandect. l. 7. Tit. 5. Aphorism of the  Law, We use those things which remain after the use of them, his verò abutimur quae nobis utentibus pereunt. , which things have a shew of wisdom.] These words plainly refer to the former Verses; the  Will-worship, to the , pleasing themselves in the worshipping of Angels; and so it must be as bad as that, the shew of humility, to the doing this from a pre∣tence of humility, v. 18. the neglecting of the bo∣dy, and making no provisions for it, to the sa∣tisfying of the flesh, to the abstinence from Flesh, Wine, and Women, and from things offered to Idols. It remains only to consider who were the Persons here intended; That they were not the Gnosticks, or Followers of Simon Magus, is evident; for they, saith. Iren. l. 1. c. 1. p. 28. A. . Ibid. Irenaeus, were men who indulged to the flesh, and who privily corrupted the women whom they taught, they were carefully to meditate upon the mystery of Wedlock, and upon that account enticed other mens wives to themselves. And. Epiph. Haer. 26. § 4, 5, 9. Epipha∣nius adds, that they participated of all manner of flesh, that they indulged to drkenness and venery, execrating them who  sed to ∣ings; they therefore could no  the Men who neglected the Body by abg from Meats, and made no provision for  Flesh.
They therefore seem to me to have been part∣ly the Essens, and partly the Pythagoraean Phi∣losophers. For, 1. Of the Essens, Josephus saith, that , &c. theyAntiq. l. 18. c. 2. p. 618. A.B. neither would have Wives, nor Servants, as thinking Servi∣tude an injury to our common Nature, or tending to Injustice, and Marriage to Sedition. And again,De Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 12. p. 785. A.B. , they contemn Marriage, not because they would have Marriage taken away, or the Succession of Mankind to cease; but to avoid the intem∣perance of Women, and because they think none of them can keep their Faith to one.De vita Contemp. p. 695. F. Philo says they have Women with them, but they are only such as are  old Women, or , Virgins as to their Chastity, not out of Necessity, but , from their Zeal to, and desire of Wisdom. He adds, , &c.P. 692. B. They eat nothing that is delicate, ha∣ving only mean Bread and Salt for their Meat, and if they be delicate, Hyssop for their Sauce, and River-water for their Drink.P. 696. D. They use no Wine in their Feasts, , for Wine, say they, is the incen∣tive to madness. He goes on, , their Table is pure from all things that have blood in them, or from the flesh of living Creatures; for such things, say they, irritate Concupiscence. And of this Absti∣nence from certain Meats they are so tenaci∣ous, saithDe Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 12. p. 787. F. Josephus, that they will rather endure all sorts of Torments, , then eat any thing they were not ac∣customed to eat. Moreover, there were some things they must not touch,P. 785. C. as Oyl, for , they took on Oyl as a defilement; so that if any of them be un∣willingly anointed with it, he must wash it off from his Body. The younger among them must not touch the EldersP. 787. D., , and if they touched them the Elders washed them∣selves, as if they had touched an Alien. They were such strict Observers of the Sabbath, that they would provide no Meat for themselves, nor go to stool on that day. They had alsoP. 786. F.G. , certain Names of Angels which they held in veneration; and al∣so proper  Opinions or Decrees which they swore never to deliver to others o∣therwise then as they had received them. And thus they dogmatized. And lastly, all this was the effect , of their Passion for Philosophy, of whichDe vita Contem. p. 690. B. 695. F. 698. D. Philo so often speaks in his description of them. So great reason is there to conceive they may be concerned in this Chapter. 2ly, These things being introduced as the Rudiments of the World, and living accord∣ing to these  Prescriptions, being living as in the World, I chiefly incline to refer these things to the abstinence from Touching, and Tasting, Flesh, and Wine, and handling Wo∣men, and from all the Objects which gratifie the Senses, the Taste, the Eye, the Touch, taught by the Followers of Pythagoras and Em∣pedocles, and defended with such variety of Learning by Porphyry, the very title of whose Book is De abstinentia ab esu animalium, of abstinence from eating the Flesh of any living Creature. This he founds upon this Principle, that ,. L. 1. § 57. to live the intel∣lectual life, and to enjoy the Contemplation of the most perfect Being, it is necessary that we should abstract our Minds, as much as is possible, from all sensual Objects; from the Pleasures which arise  from the taste, parti∣cularly of Wine; and from the touch, for, saith he, , the sensual Objects which we touch are not only  such as transform the Soul into the Body, but also such as stir up swarms of Passions and Lusts in it. Hence he infers, that all these things are , filthy and polluting, and such as hinder , the pure Operations of the Soul, therefore he that would have the in∣tellectual Life, must abstain. L. 1. §. 41. . P. 173, 174. & L. 1. p. 44. § 52. not only from the use of Women, but from all Sensual things, they being such as do defile the Soul. More∣over, what the Apostle speaks of the deceit of Philosophy, exactly agrees with the Senti∣ments of those Men. Doth he say that it is , i. e. according to the Tradition of Men? This Abstinence is stiled by PorphyryL. 1. § 28. , a Divine, but unwritten Law. Doth he say of them, , they make Decrees and Ordinances? this Opinion is by Porphyry stiledL. 1. § 3. , an ancient Decree, and ac∣ceptable to the Gods, and , a Con∣stitution, or a thing defined? Does the Apo∣stle stile it  will-worship? 'tis also byL. 1. § 6. Heraclides Ponticus stiled  Superstition, and said by Porphyry especially to be done on the account of Wisdom, and the subduing of the Body; so full an Agreement is there betwixt this Philosophy, and that which the Apostle hath here said concerning it.
CHAP. III. Verse 1. IF ye then be risen with Christ (through Faith, Chap. 2.12. and by newness of life, Rom. 6.4, 5.) seek those things which are above, where Christ (now raised from the dead,) sitteth on the right hand of God. Ver. 2. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth. , v. 1. , v. 2.] These Phrases seem to import, 1. That we should put the highest estimate and value upon things above. 2. That we should have them fixed on our Spirits, and familiarly occurring to our thoughts by fervent Meditations, and seri∣ous Reflections on them. 3. That we should have our Wills inclin'd to them, and our Af∣fections possess'd with frequent Love, and pas∣sionate Desires of them; for  is, saith Phavorinus, . 4. That we should employ our Fa∣culties and Members in pursuit of them with diligence and constancy; for  is niti, cu∣rare, summo studio quaerere, as  in Demosthenes,  nitor auferre. Plu∣tarch. Ver. 3. For ye are dead with Christ (to sin, Rom. 6.6, 7, 8. and to the world, Gal. 6.14. and from the rudiments of it, Chap. 2.20.) and your (future) life is hid with Christ in God. .] i. e. Your true Life, which consists in fruition of God, and which you shall live for ever with him, is hid with Christ, who is now removed from your sight, and plac'd at the right hand of God; for it doth not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3.2. Ver. 4. When Christ, who is (the Author and Purchaser of) our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Note. Hence we learn that Christians are not to expect to reign with Christ on Earth a thousand years, because they are not to mind, or seek  the things upon Earth, but only those above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God. Whereas, were this Life on Earth a Blessing and Reward which God had promised to them for their Sufferings, they might mind it, and set their Affections on it; as also from all those places where the Hope, Reward, Inheritance of Christians is said to be reserv'd in the Heavens for them; for as Oecumenius notes, , if our in∣heritance be in Heaven, the supposed Millenni∣um on Earth must be but a Fable. Great is your reward in Heaven, saith Christ to the Christian Sufferer, Matth. 5.12. Luke 6.23. Your hope is laid up for you in Heaven, Coloss. 1.5. See 1 Pet. 1.4. Ver. 5. Mortifie therefore (in order to the injoyment of this Life with God) your Mem∣bers that are upon the Earth, (i. e. your earth∣ly carnal Members, viz.) Fornication, Unclean∣ness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness which is Idolatry. , mortifie therefore your earthly Members.] There being in us naturally the old man, v. 9. Eph. 4.22. and the body of sin, the inordinate affections, and lustings of it, are stiled the Members of that Body; partly because they exert themselves by the Mem∣bers of the Natural Body; and partly be∣cause, as the Members of the Body are em∣ploy'd to fulfil and accomplish the Desires of the Natural Body, so these Affections are employ'd to gratifie the Desires of the Body of Sin, these Members are stiled Earthly Members, because they respect only earthly things; they fix our hearts upon, and em∣ploy our minds about them; to mortifie them is to resist, and to suppress their motions, that we do not obey them, or gratifie them in their inordinate desires and affections, but carefully shun all the occasions of sin, and use those means which tend to the subduing of it. And this Exhortation being directed to Belie∣vers, shews, that as they are by Profession and by Baptismal Obligation dead to sin, so have they continual need to proceed in the pra∣ctice of this Duty, that they be not overcome by the deceitfulness of sin, by their fleshly Lusts, which tend to Fornication and Un∣cleanness; their desires of worldly Honour and vain Glory, which are evil Concups∣cences, and by the inordinate Love of the World, which is stiled Covetousness. , Covetousness which is Idolatry.] Because as Heathens place their confidence in Idols, even so the Avaritious Man doth place his confidence in Gold and Silver, which are the Matter of their Idols, he chiefly doth pursue them, and for their sakes only doth other matters. And that such Actions do partake of the true Nature of I∣dolatry, Reason as well as Scripture will e∣vince; for Reason shews that Love, Hope, Trust, Obedience, are parts of that Internal Worship which we owe to God in the most excellent degrees, and which he more regards than building Temples, or erecting Altars, the bending of the Knee or Body, or any o∣ther Act of outward Worship, and therefore in those Acts doth more especially consist God's Worship; and therefore he that doth confer them upon any Creature in that de∣gree, or in those actions in which they only ought to be ascribed to God, must be as tru∣ly an Idolater, as he that payeth to a Crea∣ture any outward Act of Religious and Di∣vine
Worship; and as the covetous Person, tho' he doth not indeed believe his Money or his Riches to be a God, yet by loving, and so trusting in them, as God only ought to be loved and trusted in, he is as truly guilty of Idolatry, as if he so believed; so though the Roman Catholicks do not believe theirQui dicit stultum esse (Sanctis) in Coelo regnantibus voce vel mente supplicare Anathema sit. Concil. Trid. Sess. 25. cap. 1. Saints and Angels to be God, yet by addres∣sing to them even Mental Prayers, and giving the inward Worship of the Soul, which, asDivine & singulariter in Ecclesiâ Catholicâ traditur nullam Creaturam colendam esse animae, (libentius enim loquor his verbis, quibus haec mihi insinuata sunt) sed ipsum tantummodo rerum quae sunt omnium Creatorem. De quantit. Animae. cap. 34. St. Austin well observes, The Catholick Church always reserv'd to God, they are as guilty of Idolatry as if they did believe them to be Gods, since thereby they ascribe to them the knowledge of the heart, and of the in∣ward motions of the Soul, which only doth belong to God. Ver. 6. For which things (done by them) the wrath of God cometh upon (men, as being) the children of disobedience, (or upon those who obey not the commands of God, to abstain from them.) Ver. 7. In the which you (of Coloss) also walked sometimes when ye lived in them. The Colossians dwelling in Phrygia celebra∣ted the Sacra ofStrabo l. 10. p. 469, 470, 471. Bacchus, and of the Mo∣ther of the Gods, called therefore Phrygia Mater, and doubtless comply'd with all the Luxury of Asia minor, of which they were a part. Ver. 8. But now you also put off all these (following Vices, viz.) Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, (i. e. evil speaking,) and filthy Communication (or reproachful words which arise from wrath) out of your mouth. , filthy Communication.] This is usually referr'd to obscene and impure words. But Hesychius, Phavorinus, and J. Pollux l. 2. c. 4. have inform'd us that the word signifies reproachful words, such as tend to put a Man to shame; and to this sense the words pre∣ceding make it most proper to refer it, Wrath, Anger, and Malice, or evil Machinations of the heart, being the inward dispositions which render us disaffected to, and prone to do evil to others; railing and opprobrious Speeches, which tend to render our Brother infamous to others, being the usual Effects of these evil dispositions. Ver. 9. (And) lie not one to another, see∣ing ye have put off the old man with his deeds. (See Note on Eph. 4.21.) Hence it appears, that to be addicted to lying, is an evidence that we have not yet put off the old man. Ver. 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, (or by the acknowledgment of the truth, Eph. 4.22.) af∣ter the image of him that created him, (in righteousness and holiness of truth, Eph. 4.24.) , in knowledge.] The Christian Faith being the knowledge of the truth which is after godliness, Tit. 1.1. it being that by which we escape the pollutions of the world through lust, 2 Pet. 2.20. and recover out of the snare of Satan, 2 Tim. 2.25, 26. that by which we have all things given us which ap∣pertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. and that, saith the Apostle here, by which we are enabled to walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in them, as we increase  in the knowledge of God. The being renewed in this knowledge, may well import our being renewed in righteous∣ness and true holiness, as the Apostle speaks, Eph. 4.24. especially if we consider that whilst the Judgment still continues to approve the things which are most excellent, the Will still chuses, and the inferiour Faculties will be imploy'd in prosecution of them. Ver. 11. Where (or under which 0economy) there is neither (respect had to any man, as being) Greek or Jew, (of the) Circumcision or Uncircumcision, (as being) Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free, but (his belonging to) Christ is all in all. Ver. 12. Put on therefore, as (becometh new Creatures, and) the elect of God, (or persons chosen to be his Church and People,) holy and beloved (of him,) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffer∣ing. , as the elect of God.] That the Apostle speaks not here of any absolute Election of some particular Persons to Eternal Life, but of their being chosen out of the Heathen World to be his Church and Peo∣ple, is evident, because he speaks to the whole Church in general; and yet to these Elect he promiseth the Blessings of Christianity only, if they continue in the faith rooted and ground∣ed, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, Chap. 1.23. Chap. 2.2, 4, 18. expres∣sing his care and fear, lest they should be de∣ceived, and rob'd of their Rewards. Ver. 13. Forbearing one another, and for∣giving one another, if any of you have (ground of) quarrel against any, even as Christ (free∣ly) forgave you (the greatest sins out of meer grace and mercy,) so also do ye (to others.) Ver. 14. And above all these things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness,
(i. e. the most perfect bond of union among Chri∣stians, Eph. 4.15, 16. the end and the perfe∣ction of the Commandment, 1 Tit. 1.5. that which fulfils the rest, Rom. 13.8. Gal. 5.14. and that which renders us perfect, and un∣blameable in holiness before God, 1 Thess. 2.12, 13.) Ver. 15. And let the peace of God, to which also you are called in one body, (by being all made Members of one Body, Eph. 4.4.) rule (or be the Umpire) in your hearts, and be ye thankful (unto him that hath called you to peace, 1 Cor. 7.15.) , rule.] , saith Phavorinus, i. e. Let that peaceable dispositi∣on, which God requires from all Christians, be the Umpire and Director to compose all Differences among you, for Peace hath God for its Author. He hath called us to it, he hath made us all one Body, and nothing is more unseemly or pernicious, then that the Members should be at discord with each o∣ther. InArch. Lib. 9. cap. 1. Josephus it signifies, let him have the chief place; thus of Jehosaphat he saith, he did  excel, as being equal to them all. Ver. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, in all wisdom, (so that you may be employ'd in your Assemblies by virtue of this Gift of Wisdom, (this word of wisdom and of knowledge) in) teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiri∣tual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. , the word of Christ.] The Word dictated by the Holy Spirit, is there∣fore the Word of Christ, because the Spirit is the Spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.11. as proceed∣ing both from the Father and the Son. , singing with grace.] That is, say some Interpreters, , so as that their Hymns may be grateful to others, and be received by them with spiritual delight; which is, say they, the import of the Phrase. Eph. 4.29. Col. 4.6. But this seems rather to depend on others, than our selves: Say o∣thers, he exhorts them to sing with a grate∣ful mind, full of the sense of Divine Good∣ness, in which sense  is often used, see 1 Cor. 15.27. 2 Cor. 2.14. But according to the Ancients, hs exhorts them  to sing by the Gifts given them by the Ho∣ly Ghost, of which one is the Word of Wis∣dom; and this Exposition is confirmed by the parallel place, Eph. 5.18, 19. Be ye fil∣led with the Spirit, speaking to one another in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs. Now these Gifts being chiefly exercised in their Assemblies, where especially they did , sing in the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14, 15, 16. and every one had his Psalm, and his  v. 26. I conceive these Spiritual Songs, in which they were to teach and to admonish one another, may refer chiefly to their Assem∣blies, then managed by their Prophets, in which they met together for that end. So Pliny doth inform us, that the Christians used to meet together on a certain day, Car∣menque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invice, Lib. 10. Ep. 97. Ver. 17. And whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Je∣sus, giving Thanks to God and (or who is) the Father by him. , in the Name of the Lord.] To do all in the Name of the Lord, is, first, To have respect in all things to his Will, as knowing we are obliged to live to him, 2 Cor. 5.14. to the honour of his Name and Do∣ctrine. 2. To be desirous that our Actions may be well-pleasing to him, 2 Cor. 5.8, 9.3. To expect acceptance of our Actions, Pray∣ers, John 14.13, 14, 15, 16. and Praises through him, Hebr. 13.15. and a Recompence of them from him hereafter, Eph. 6.8. (here v. 24.) , to the Father by him.] It is the manner of the Scripture, saith Bishop Davenant, to refer our Prayers and Praises to the Person of the Father, because he is the Fountain of the Deity; add, And because they are to find acceptance through the Intercessi∣on of, and the presenting of them by the Son, Rev. 8.3, 4. Our Prayers must be of∣fered up to the Father in his Name, John 16.23. and yet the Blessing asked to be given by him, John 15.16. that the Father may be glorified in the Son, John 14.13, 14. Our Praises must be offered up to the Father in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Eph. 5.20. by him we must offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, Hebr. 13.15. These Spiritual Sacrifices being acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. And 'tis very frequent in these Epistles to pray as well to our Lord Jesus Christ, as to God the Fa∣ther. See Note on Rom. 10.13. and in the Revelations to give Praise and Glory to him, Chap. 4.9, 11.5.12, 13. But 'tis especi∣ally to be noted, that all the Greek Inter∣preters here observe, that this is spoken against the Worship of Angels, or Demons, which the Philosophers, and especially the Plato∣nists, had introduced, as thinking them the Persons who carried up all our Prayers and Praises to God, and convey'd down all his Blessings to us. Because they, saith Theodo∣ret, commanded us to worship Angels, he on the contrary commands us to adorn all our Words and Actions with the Memory of our
Lord Christ, and to offer up our. Theod. . Oecum. Thanks∣givings by him to God the Father, and not by the Angels. It is the Devil that brought in the Worship of Angels, saithChryst. in Col. Hom. 9. St. Chryso. Ver. 18. Wives submit your selves (or be subject) to your own Husbands, (in the Offi∣ces belonging to that Relation,) as it is fit (for them to do that are) in the Lord, (that the Name of the Lord may not be blasphemed by our pretending a Christian Liberty from the Observances of the Duty of a Wife, Tit. 2.5. ut that by the greater exactness in it you may commend Christianity to others, 1 Pet. 3.5.  in obedience to the Lords requiring this sub∣mission, Eph. 6.6. Ver. 19. Husbands love your Wives, and e not bitter against them, (in the asperity of ords, the severity of your actions, the aliena∣tion of your affections from them.) , love your Wives.] Delighting in their Conversation, Prov. 5.18, 19. desiring o promote their welfare, both temporal and Eternal; for this is surely comprehended in oving her as we do our selves, Eph. 5.33. providing for her all things necessary to the appiness and comfort of her life; for this is oving her as Christ did love his Church, v. 25. This, say the very Heathens, is the property or a. Arist. Rhetor. l. 2. c. 8. sincere Affection in the general, and herefore much more of that Affection which we are to bear to our own Flesh and Body, as the Wife is to be esteemed, Eph. 5.28, 29. , and be not bit∣er against them.] For as St. Ambrose saith, Non es Dominus sed Maritus, non Ancillam ortitus es, sed Uxorem, Gubernatorem voluit e esse Deus sexus inferioris, non Tyrannum. Hexam. 5.7. Hence they who sacrificed to Juno Nuptialis, saithPraecepta Conjugalia, p. 141. Plutarch, did sepa∣rate the Gall from the Sacrifice, and throw it away; signifying , that there should be no bitter∣ness or wrath betwixt those that were mar∣ried. Ver. 20. Children obey your Parents in all (lawful) things, for this is well pleasing to the Lord. (And in all things to which the power of the Parent reaches; for if he com∣mands him not to marry when he cannot con∣tain, or to marry one he cannot love, he ex∣ceeds his Paternal Authority. Ver. 21. Fathers (whose names speaks cle∣mency and kindness) provoke not your Chil∣dren, (irritate them not with sowerness and hard usage, immoderate or undeserved stripes,) lest they be discouraged, (i. e. despair of plea∣sing you.) Ver. 22. Servants obey in allIn omnibus ad quae jus Domini quod in Servum habet extenditur, & in quibus Dominus carnis Domino spiritus contra∣rius non est. Hieron. (lawful) things (those who are) your Masters according to the flesh, not only (as those who do business) with eye-service, as (being) men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart (as persons) fearing God. (See the reason of this Precept, Note on v. 25.) Ver. 23. And whatsoever you do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men, (having respect to his glory, and his recompence; See Notes on Eph. 6. from v. 1. to v. 9.) Ver. 24. Knowing that of the Lord you shall receive the reward, for ye serve the Lord Christ. Note. We are, saith Schlictingius a Socini∣an, to serve Christ as our heavenly Lord, which, saith he,Quod servitium & fidem in ipsum, & obedientiam, & cultum, adorationem, honorem ei convenientem, & invocatio∣nem complectitur. comprehends faith in him, obedience to him, and worship and adoration of him, the gi∣ving him the honour which agrees to him, and the invocation of him. Now saith Christ, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve, Matth. 4.10. and God alone is worthy of religious Invocation from all Christians, as being only Omniscient, Omni∣present, and the Searcher of all Hearts; Christ therefore must be truly God. More∣over, the Apostle reckons it part of the Idola∣try of the Heathen, that they served or paid Religious Worship to them which by nature were no Gods, Gal. 4.8. The Socinians therefore, either must confess Christ is by Nature, as well as by Office, God, or else acknowledge that they are guilty of Idolatry in giving this Religious Worship to him. Ver. 25. But he (of you) that doth wrong (to his Master,) shall receive (of the Lord punishment) for the wrong he hath done, and (, for) there is no respect of pons with him. ] Christ in judging Men at the last Day, will have no respect to the Quality or External Condition of any Mans Person; but whether he be bond or free, he shall receive recompence for the good that he hath done in obedience to him, whether he be Master or Servant, he shall be punished for the wrong that he doth in those relations.
It being certain from the second Chapter; that the Judaizers were got into the Church of Coloss, and that many of them denied that Jews ought to be Servants to any, and that the Essenes thought all Servitude unlaw∣ful. (See Note on 1 Pet. 2.15. 1 Tim. 6.1.2.) This might be the reason why here,  Titus 2. the Apostle is so large in charging this Duty upon Servants. CHAP. IV. Verse 1. MAsters give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that you also have a Master in Hea∣ven, (who with what measure you mete to o∣thers, will mete to you again, Matth. 7.2. and deal with you his Servants as you deal with yours.) , what is just and equal.] Hence it is evident, that Justice is to be observed towards Servants, and that there be Offices of Humanity and Charity which are due to them: As, (1.) That we do not look upon them as vile Persons, but as partakers of the same Grace and Nature with us; and so not only as Servants, but as Brethren, Philem. 16. (2.) That we do not always punish all their Miscarriages, but sometimes do remit the Pu∣nishments which in our Anger we threatned to inflict, Eph. 6.9. (3.) That we do not make them serve with rigour; Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour, , Thou shalt not oppress, afflict, or wear him out with labour, but shalt fear the Lord, Lev. 25.43. (4.) That we permit them to plead their Cause, and to defend their Right, pro∣vided they do it with Humility, not contra∣dicting or speaking against the Commands of their Masters, Tit. 2.9. If I did despise the cause of my Man-servant, or Maid-servant, when they contended with me, what then shall I do when God riseth up, and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him? Job 31.13, 14. (5.) That to well deserving Servants, we give something even above their Wages, and after a long and profitable Service, we do not suf∣fer them to go empty from us: When thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty; thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy Flock, and out of thy Floor; and out of thy Wine-press, of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee, thou shalt give unto him, Deut. 15.13, 14. These things the Lord commanded under the Old Testament, because their Servants were his Servants also, redeemed by him out of Egypt, Lev. 25.15. Deut. 15.15. And therefore they seem as strongly to oblige under that Oeconomy, where we are all the Servants of Christ, our com∣mon Lord, and redeemed by his precious Blood, Eph. 6.6. 1 Cor. 7.22, 23. Ver. 2. Continue (instant) in Prayer, and watch in the same (, being vigilant in it) with Thansgiving, (for the Mercies you have already received.) Ver. 3. Withal praying for us, that God would open to us a door of utterance (by en∣abling us) to speak (with freedom) the mystery of Christ, for which I am also (now) in bonds. (See Note on Eph. 6.19, 20.) Ver. 4. That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak it. , praying for us.] That this Apostle, who so passionately writes to Christians, desiring that they would strive to∣gether with him in their prayers to God, Rom. 15.30, 31. that they would always with all per∣severance pray for him; that they would con∣tinue in prayer that God would open to him door of utterance to speak the mystery of Christ. Eph. 6.18, 19, Col. 4.2, 3. and that he might be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, 1 Thess. 5.25. 2 Thess. 3.1, 2. should never pray to the Virgin Mary, and to Angels, or to Saints departed; for any of these things is an evidence that he approved not of those Prayers. Ver. 5. Walk in wisdom (or discretion) to∣wards them that are without (the Church that is, the Heathens, 1 Thess. 4.12.) redeeming the time, (i. e. endeavouring to avoid as much as you are able, by careful circumspection, and in∣offensive carriage, the dangers you may be ex∣posed to from them. See Note on Eph. 5.15.) Ver. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, (mild and courteous,) seasoned with Salt, (wise and discreet,) that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man, (so as conduceth to the credit of Christianity, 1 Pet. 3.15. and to your own safety in these evil times, Eph. 5.16, 17.) , with grace.] i. e. With sweetness and courteousness, saith Theodoret, that it may be acceptable to the hearers. , that it may render you gracious to, and favour'd by them; So Theophylact, Season'd with Salt. Salt is the Symbol of Wisdom; and in this sense the word is used Matth. 5.13. Mark 9.15. Have, saith Theodoret, , spiritual wisdom, that ye may know, &c. Ver. 7. And as for what concerns me,) all my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved Brother, and faithful Minister, and fellow-servant in the (work of) the Lord.
.] That this Epistle was writ at the same time with that to the Ephesians, is pleaded from this, that it was sent by the same person Tychicus, with the very same words contained in this, and the following Verse, Eph. 6.21, 22. Ver. 8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your state, and comfort your hearts (under your pressures.) Ver. 9 (And) with him (I have sent) One∣simus a faithful and beloved Brother, who is one of you, (being servant to Philemon a chief man in Coloss,) they shall make known unto you all things (that are done here at Rome.) Onesimus.] Of whomLegimus Onesimum inter Pauli renatum vincula Diaconum esse caepisse de servo. Contr. Error. Joh. Hieros. St. Jerom saith, we read that of a Servant he was made a Dea∣con. Ver. 10. Aristarchus my fellow Prisoner sa∣luteth you, and Marcus sisters son to Barnabas, concerning whom (i. e. which Marcus) you re∣ceived commands, if he come to you (to) re∣ceive him (kindly.) .] It seems hence that St. Paul's dis∣pleasure against him, mentioned Acts 15.38. lasted not long; for he desires Timothy to bring him with him, as being profitable to him for the Ministry, 2 Tim. 4.11. and stiles him his fellow labourer, Philem. 24. Ver. 11. And Jesus, who is called Justus, (Acts 18.5, 6, 7.) who are of the Circumci∣sion. These only (of the Jews) are my fel∣low-workers to (the promotion of) the King∣dom of God, which have been a comfort to me. Ver. 12. Epaphras, who is one of you, (a Citizen of Coloss, see v. 9.) a Servant of Christ, saluteth you, always labouring fer∣vently for you in Prayers, that ye may stand perfect and compleat in all the will of God. Ver. 13. For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and for them that are in Laodicea and in Hierapolis, (two other Cities of Phrygia.) .] That Epaphras was about this time Prisoner at Rome, is concluded very pro∣bably by Philemon 23. where he is stiled by St Paul his fellow Prisoner, for that the E∣pistle to Philemon and this were written at the same time, may be conjectur'd by the naming Timothy at the beginning; and all the same Persons, save only Justus, viz. Epaphras, Mar∣cus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas at the end of both of them; but that he was Bishop of Co∣loss is not said by any of the Greek Commenta∣tors on the place, he might have this zeal for them mention'd in these two Verses, either as being one of them, v. 12. or as being em∣ploy'd in preaching the Gospel to them. Ver. 14. Luke the beloved Physitian, and Demas greet you. Ver. 15. Salute the Brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his house, (i. e. his Christian houshold, for all the Brethren are mention'd before. (So Theodoret, Oecumenius, St. Chrysostom and Theophylact note, that , he had made his whole Family Christians, so as to be called a Church.) Ver. 16. And when this Epistle is read a∣mongst you, cause it to be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and (see) that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea. , and that from Laodicea.] Some conjecture that the Epistle here menti∣oned as from Laodicea, was the first Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy, because the Postscript saith it was written from Laodicea; but that Subscription is easily confuted, both from this consideration, that the first Epistle to Timothy was two or three years after this; see the Pre∣face to it; and from this very Epistle, in which the Apostle mentions them of Laodicea among those who had not seen his face in the flesh, Chap. 2.1. St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecu∣menius, and Theophylact understood by it some Epistle writ by them of Laodicea to St. Paul. But the Apostle doth not say, read the Epistle sent to me from Laodicea; nor doth he men∣tion one word of such an Epistle sent from them to him here, or elsewhere; nor is it to be doubted but he would have answer'd their Epistle, had they sent any, as he did that which the Church of Corinth sent to him. Others understand this of an Epistle sent by St. Paul to them, which is now lost; but all the Ancients are not only silent in this mat∣ter, but some of them expresly do explode this imagination, observing that the Apostle proposes to their reading, not , an Epistle writ to the Laodiceans, but only from Laodicea to be sent to Coloss. I therefore acquiesce in their Opinion, who understand this of the Epistle to the Ephesians, sent by the admonition of St. Paul, from Ephesus the Metropolis of Lao∣dicea subject to it, as the Epistles to the Church of Corinth belong'd to all the Churches of Achaia, 2 Cor. 1.1. ForPraetereo hic de Aliâ Epistolâ quam nos ad Ephesios praescriptam habemus, Haeretici vero ad Laodicenos adv. Marcion l. 5. c. 11. p 476. & cap. 17. p. 481. Ecclesiae veritate Epistolam istam ad Ephesios habemus emissam, sed Marcion ei titulum in∣terpolare gestit. Tertullian wit∣nesseth that this Epistle to the Ephesians was by Marcion stiled the Epistle to the Laodiceans; and the place which Marcion cites from, &c. E∣piph. Haer. 42. p. 374. B.
Epiphanius, as from the Epistle to the Laodi∣ceans, is in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Chap. 4, 5, 6. viz. There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. More∣over, the Epistle to the Colossians, as I have shew'd, and Theodoret notes, was writ soon after that to the Ephesians, and sent to them both by the hands of Tychicus; and there is a great resemblance observable betwixt them both in the Doctrines and Exhortations, and in the very Expressions; so that it is not to be wondred that the Apostle would have that E∣pistle also read to the Colossians, to let them see that he writ the same Doctrine, and gave the same Instructions to other Churches of the Saints. Ver. 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which thou hast recei  the Lord, that thou fulfil it. , Archippus.] That this ∣pus should be then Bishop of Coloss, as St. Je∣rom on the Epistle to Philemon thinks,  that St. Paul should not write one word, a∣send one Salutation to him, but send to the People of Coloss to admonish him of his ∣ty, is not very credible in it self, nor do the Ancients testifie that he bore that Character. Ver. 18. The Salutation (written) by the hand of me Paul, (is in token that this is my Epistle, 2 Thess. 3.17.) remember my (being in) bonds, (so as to pray for my deliverance, ver. 3. and to prepare for patient Suffering by my Example.) Grace be with you. A∣men.
THE PREFACE TO THE First Epistle of St. PAƲL TO THE THESSALONIANS. THAT St. Paul laid the foundation of the Gospel among the Thessaloni∣ans,Theodoret in Act. 17.5. , the Jews contradicting, and openly con∣tending against it, we learn from the History of the Acts; and this Church consisting, as, in c. 1. v. 1. Oecumenius notes, partly of Jews, and partly of Gentiles, they were persecuted both by the un∣believing Jews and Gentiles; the Jews exci∣ting the Gentiles to this Persecution, Acts 17.5. The Apostle therefore writes to confirm them in the Faith, and to prevent their being shaken by these Persecutions, informing them that it was nothing strange they should thus suffer from these Jews, who had killed the Lord Jesus, and had persecuted both the Apostles, and their own Prophets, or that they should suffer from their own Country-men, as the Jews in Judea did from theirs, Chap. 2.14. Moreover, concerning this Epistle, the first note of the Fathers is this,.. Thessalonica was the Metropolis of Macedonia, whence we may certainly conclude that Philippi was not so. This Epistle must be written after the Coun∣cil held at Jerusalem, A.D. 49. from thence Paul goes to Antioch, Acts 15.30. stays there some considerable time, v. 35. from thence goes thro' Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Brethren, v. 41. thence to Derbe and Lystra, Chap. 16.1. thro' Phrygia and Galatia, v. 6. then to Troas, v. 8. to Samothracia and Neapolis, v. 11. and so to Philippi, v. 12. then to Amphipolis and Apollo∣nia, and so to Thessalonica, Chap. 17.1. there planting the Gospel; thence they are expell'd by the Jews and Gentiles, and go to Beraea, v. 10. thence to Athens, v. 15. and from thence to Co∣rinth, Chap. 18.1. where Timotheus coming to him, and giving him a comfortable account of their Faith and Constancy, he writes this Epistle to them, Chap. 3.6. Whence it appears that it could not be written in less time then a year or two after that Council, and that the Inscripti∣on of it running thus, Paul and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, to the Church of the Thessaloni∣ans, it must be written after their return to him, and so not from Athens, as the Subscription hath it, but from Corinth, Acts 18.1, 5. A. D. 51. or 52. for it was written after he had been se∣parated from them but a little while, Chap. 1.17.
A Paraphrase and Comment ON THE First Epistle of St. PAƲL TO THE THESSALONIANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. (I) Paul (the Apostle of Jesus Christ) and Sylvanus, and Timotheus (my fellow Labourers, write) to the Church of the Thessalonians, (established) in (the knowledge and worship of) God the Fa∣ther, and our Lord Jesus Christ. (Wishing) Grace to you, and peace from God our Fa∣ther, and (from) the Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 2. (And advertising you that) we give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers. , to the Church of the Thessalonians.] He names not the Presbyters and Deacons, saith Grotius, because the Church was newly planted, and had not received its full form. And yet in his Note on those words, Chap. 5.12. I entreat you, Brethren, know them that labour among you, and are o∣ver you in the Lord. He saith, , the Labourers, are the Princes of the Assembly cal∣led Bishops; , they that are over you, are the Presbyters. But against this see the Note there. Ver. 3. Remembring without ceasing your work of faith, your labour of love, and pa∣tience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, (v. 10. when we appear) before God, and (even) our Father. , remembring without ceasing.] i. e. As often as we appear before God our Father, thankfully remembring your faith fruitful in good works, your love to the Saints, making you laborious to promote their good, and your hope in the Lord Jesus, v. 10. rendring you patient in all your tribulations for his sake, Chap. 5.17. See the Note there. , from God the Father, v. 1. and before God even our Father, v. 3.] The Spirit of God vouchsafed under the Gospel, enables us to cry Abba, Father, i. e. to come to God with the assurance of his Fatherly Affe∣ction to us, as being now the Sons of God through Faith in Christ Jesus, on which ac∣count is God our Father, or ths Father of us Christians, Eph. 3.15. so often mentioned for their Consolation in those Times of Peril. Ver. 4. (As) knowing, Brethren, beloved, (by your proficiency in these Christian vertues.) your election of God. Ver. 5. For our Gospel came not to you in word only, but also in (the) power (of mira∣cles,) and in (or with) the (distributions of) the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance, (or full conviction both to you of the truth of our Doctrine, and to us, that God hath chosen you to be his Church and People,) as you know what manner of Men we were among you for your sakes, (or how we were enabled by these things to give full proof of our Ministry.) , your election of God.] The Gospel came to some in word only, i. e. they heard the sound of it, but did not believe, and obey it, and so the Word did not prone them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it, Hebr. 4.2. and these were on∣ly  called, but not  chosen. Matth.
2.14. To others the preaching of the Apo∣stles was attended with a greater power of Miracles, and extraordinary Effusions of the Holy Ghost prevailing on many to embrace it as the Word of God; so that from hence the Apostles had full assurance that it was the good pleasure of God to gather a Church of Be∣lievers and faithful People there; and these were called the Elect, , the Election of God, the Election of Grace, i. e. Men cho∣sen to be partakers of the Blessings of the Gospel, and to be God's peculiar Church and People. For the Apostle doth not here speak of any absolute Election of the whole Church of the Thessalonians to Eternal Life, because he could have no certain knowledge of it; or, if he had, he could not have been under any just grounds of Fear, as we find he was, Left by some means the Tempter should have tempted them, and his labour be in vain among them, Chap. 3.5. Moreover, the reason of his Knowledge here assigned, viz. the Mira∣cles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, with which his preaching was attended, gave him a cer∣tain knowledge that God design'd to gather there a Church of Christians; but 'twas no certain Indication of their Election to Eternal Life, seeing the Apostle informs us that they who had tasted of these powers of the world to come, and received these Gifts of the Holy Ghost, might fall away, so as not to be re∣newed to repentance, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. and many of the converted Jews actually did so after∣wards. Ver. 6. And ye became Followers of us, and of the (Lord, in your Sufferings for his sake,) having received the word in much af∣fliction, (Acts 17.5. and yet) with joy of the Holy Ghost. , with joy of the Holy Ghost.] In the foregoing Verse he lays before them the outward Testimonies of the Truth of Christi∣anity from the Miracles wrought, and the Gifts of the Holy Ghost exercised among them; here he appeals also to the inward te∣stimonies they had received of it, even a strong Spiritual Joy wrought in them by the Holy Ghost, under the sharpest Sufferings, according to those words of St. Peter, If ye suffer for the sake of righteousness, and be re∣proached for Christ's sake, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4.14. Ver. 7. So that ye were Examples (of Faith and Patience) to all that believe in Macedo∣nia and Achaia. Ver. 8. For from you sounded out the word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and A∣chaia, (and so they could not be ignorant of your faith and good works,) but also in every place (the fame of) your faith to God-ward is spread abroad, (or hath gone forth,) so that we need not speak any thing (to others of the Grace of God given us towards you, Eph. 3.7. Col. 1.25.) Ver. 9. For they themselves shew of us what manner of entring in we had unto you, (i. e. with what power and assistance of the Ho∣ly Ghost we preached the Gospel to you, v. 5.) and how (thereupon) ye turned from Idols to serve the living and true God. These words, saith. Theodoret, teach us how to expound our Saviour's words, This is Life eternal, to know thee the only true God, teaching us that he is so stiled, in opposition not to Jesus Christ, but to Idols only. Ver. 10. And to wait for (the coming of) his Son from Heaven, (to be glorified in his Saints, 2 Thess. 1.10.) whom he hath (al∣ready) raised from the dead, even Jesus, who (by his death hath) delivered us from the wrath to come. CHAP. II. Verse 1. WE need not, I say, speak any thing farther of the effectual working of God with us in our entrance in un∣to you,) For your selves, Brethren, know that our entrance in to you was not in vain, (i. e. not without demonstration of Divine assistance, Chap. 1.5.) , not vain.] I grant that the Apostle doth not intend to signifie by this Phrase only that his word was not ineffectual among them, but also to declare the reason why it was not so; to wit, because it wanted not a demon∣stration of Divine Authority, and Power to confirm them in the Faith that heard it, and those that preach'd it in their Expectations of Success, and their Assurance that the Thessa∣lonians were by God designed to receive the Faith; as it would have been, had it come to them in word only, and not in Power, and the Holy Ghost, and much Assurance. For the word vain, when it is applied to God's Message, signifies the not accomplishing the great Ends for which it was designed. So Isa. 55.11. The Word that goeth out of my mouth shall not return to me in vain, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. And Jer. 8.8. How do ye say we are wise, and the Law of the Lord
is with us? no certainly in vain made be it, the Pen of the Scribes is in vain. And Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your Children, they have received no correction. Our entrance therefore to you was not in vain; that is, it was not without such Divine Assistance as was sufficient to work Conviction in you, and to engage you to embrace the Truth delivered to you. Ver. 2. But (we had such assurance of God's call to preach to you, that) even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully en∣treated, as ye know at Philippi, (Acts 16.23.) we were (still) bold in (the strength of) our God, to speak unto you the Gospel of God (though this we did) with much contention, (and opposition from the unbelieving Jews, Acts 17.5.) Ver. 3. For our Exhortation (made to you to embrace the Gospel,) was not of deceit, or of covetousness, or in guile, (as are the Exhor∣tations of the Philosophers among you, and the deceitful Workers of the Jewish Nation which endeavour to corrupt you.) Ver. 4. But as we were allowed (Gr. have been approved) of God (as Persons fit) to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak (the truth sincerely,) not as pleasing men, but (as approving our selves to that) God who trieth our hearts, (Gal. 1.10.) Ver. 5. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a Cloak of Covetousness, God is witness, (2 Cor. 2.17.) .] Here signifies flattering words, or words that are flattery, as , v. 13. is the word heard, and , the Word which is the Truth, 2 Cor. 6.7. Col. 1.5. and  is a pretence to gratifie their covetousness; for that the Apo∣stles never were under a defamation, or ac∣cusation of these things, neither could the Thessalonians know, nor was it a thing pro∣per to call God to witness to; but that no such guilt could truly be charged upon them, the Thessalonians might know, and that they inwardly designed no such thing, God only could be witness, as being alone the Searcher of the Heart. Ver. 6. Nor of men sought we glory, (or high estimation,) neither of you, nor yet of others (provisions,) though we might (not only with a fair pretence, but with just rea∣son) have been (thus) burthensome, as being the Apostles of Christ. , be burthensome.] This seems not to refer to the Censures of the Church, but to the Apostles living at the charge of their Converts; for he saith v. 9. that he, and his Companions, laboured night and day, , that they might burthen none of them. So 2 Cor. 11.9. other Churches sup∣plied my wants, so that in all things I have kept my self , unburthensome to you. And 1 Tim. 5.16. if any man or woman that belie∣veth hath widows, let them relieve them, , and let not the Church be burthened with them. Ver. 7. (I say we sought not high esteem,  rich provisions,) But we were gentle, (meek and unburthensome) among you, even as a Nurse cherisheth her Children, (bearing her∣self the burthen of them, and giving them her milk, as we dispence to you the sincere  of the Word freely.) , meek.] If the various Lection no∣ted by Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophylact, who here read  Children, were the origi∣nal, the sense would run thus, But e, O Children, were among you as a Nurse that cherisheth her Children. See v. 11. Ver. 8. So (and) being (thus) affectionately desirous of you ( good,) we were willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own Souls, (i. e. to  spent our lives in your service,) because ye were dear to us. , our own Souls.] i. e. Our own lives; as when Christ is said to give, , his Life a ransome for many. Matth. 20.28. to lay down, , his Life for the Sheep, John 10.11, 15, 17.15.13. 1 John 3.16. And when we are bid to lay down, , our lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. to lose, or gain, , our life, Luke 9.24. John. 12.25. See Acts 20.10. Rom. 11.3.16.4. 2 Cor. 12.15. Philip. 2.13. 1 Pet. 4.19. Ver. 9. (And of this affection you cannot well be ignorant,) For ye remember, Brethren, our labour and travel; for labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you, we preached to you (freely) the Gospel of God. It is the Opinion of Dr. Hammond, that the Apostle here from the third to the fourth Verse, refers to the Gnosticks, and clears him∣self from the vile Arts they used, and ill de∣signs they had in promoting their Deusions. But this Epistle being writ, saith the same Reverend Person, about the year Fifty, and whilst Simon Magus was yet living, it can∣not be proved that these Gnosticks were then in being, much less that they ever were at Thessalonica. We read in Scripture of some Teachers of the Law, who gave heed to Fables, 1 Tim. 1.4, 7. and who counted gain godings, Chap. 6.5. of some Jews who were deceit∣ful Workers, 2 Cor. 11.13, 22. 1 Cor. 4.2. and had their , subtilties, 2 Cor. 11.3. and who were given to Uncleanness. Rom. 2.22. and taught unclean Doctrines. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.8. Chap. 6.13-19. 2  12.21. See the Note there. And it is likely the Apostle might in these words respect those Deceivers. Or we may refer these things to the P∣sophers of those times, who did  make a prey of Men by Philosophy
Deceit, Coloss. 2.8. who were, saith the Po∣et, inLib. 4. p. 162. Athanaeus, , deceivers of young men, and , desirous of vain glory, whose business it wasIbid. p. 165. , to speak to please men, who taught only for stipends, or , asHist. l. 2. p. 115, 116. Dio∣dorus Siculus saith, of the Graecian Philsophers, and , Philo∣sophized, saithMen. p. 422. Phaedr. p. 1245, 1246. Plato, out of love of gain, and who are every where represented asPlutarch. de lib. Educ. p. 11. given to impurity, and exercising the vilest Practises with those they taught their vain Philosophy. Whence they were sometimes banished from the places of their abode, saithL. 13. p. 610, 611. l. 4. p. 162. Athanaeus, , as Cor∣rupters of the Youth, and did , lead the lives of Cynicks. AndDe Rep. l. 6. p. 675. B. Plato himself confesseth, that one reason why they were so generally decried, was this, that most of them were , the worst of men. Ver. 10. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily (towards God,) and how justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves, (whilst we conversed) among you that believe. Ver. 11. As (and likewise) how we exhort∣ed, and comforted, and charged every one of you, as a Father doth his Children, (Gr. how we loved every one of you as a Father doth his Children,) exhorting (you to the performance of your duty,) comforting (you under your tri∣bulations,) and testifying. Ver. 12. That ye would (ought to) walk worthy of God, who hath called you to his Kingdom and Glory. , worthy of God.] i. e. That you would walk 1. so as is best pleasing to him; 2. as becomes them who are called to enjoy a glorious Kingdom, 3. as most conduceth to his glory, and 4. so as to resemble his imita∣ble Perfections in your Conversation. Ver. 13. For this cause also (or, and for this thing) thank we God without ceasing, that when you received the word of God, (which you heard from us,) ye received it, not as the word of men, (speaking from their own hu∣mane wisdom,) but, as it is in truth, the word of God which effectually also worketh in you that believe (the Fruits of Christian Pai∣tience.) , which effectually worketh in you.] For, saith Theodoret, , They parta∣king of the Prophetical Grace, both prophesied, and spake with tongues, and did great mira∣cles; for to those who in those times embra∣ced the Gospel, were granted , the Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.6, 10, 11. Eph. 3.20. For as Satan was , a Spirit working in the Children of Disobedience, Eph. 2.2. and they that were possessed by him, were stiled ; so they who had the afflts of the Holy Spirit, found him effectually working in them, James 5.16. And as the Antichrists, or Adversaries of the Truth wrought lying wonders, , according to the deceitful working of Satan in, and by them, 2 Thess. 2.9, 11. so had the Christians from the Holy Spirit their , mira∣culous operations by which they were enabled to confirm the Faith, and these Spiritual Gifts were to them strong Confirmations of the Faith, the Seals and Earnest of the Blessings promised, and that which did enable them not only to suffer patiently, but also to rejoyce in tribulations, Rom. 5.3, 4, 5. 1 Thess. 1.6. 2 Tim. 1.7, 8. 1 Pet. 4.14. Ver. 14. For ye, Brethren, (in this) became Followers of the Churches of God, which in Judea are in Christ Jesus, for ye also have suf∣fered (patiently) like things of your own Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews, (their Countrymen.) Ver. 15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and (before him) their own Prophets, and have (since) persecuted us (his Apostles,) and are contrary to all men (who are not of their own Nation or Religion.) Ver. 16. (And this they shew in) forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, (by the preaching of the Gospel,) to fill up their sins always, (i. e. which they are given up to do, to fill up the measure of their sins, which being thus disposed, and thus de∣serted by God, they will do;) for (the) wrath (of God) is come upon them to the uttermost. Contrary to all Men.] ThusHist. l. 5. p. 616. Tacitus saith of them, Apud ipsos fides obstinata, mi∣sericordia in promptu, sed adversus omnes ali∣os hostile odium; They have great fidelity and kindness to Men of their own Nation, but as great hatred to all others. But that which the Apostle chiefly here respects, was their fond imagination that God would grant no Salva∣tion to the Gentiles upon any other terms than their being Circumcised, and Obedient to the Law of Moses; Acts 15.1. on which account they became Enemies to the Gospel, and the Preachers of it, because they offered Salvation to the Gentiles through Faith in Christ, without observance of their Law, Rom. 11.28. Gal. 4.16. Hence also note, That none are greater Enemies to the good of Mankind, than they who do obstruct the preaching, and the propagating the Gospel thro' the World. , to fill up the measure of their sins.] Our Lord had said to them, Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers, by adding to the Murther of the Prophets, the Murther of me,
and of those Prophets, and wise Men I shall send to you, Matth. 23.32-35. that upon you of this Generation may come all the Blood shed from Abel to this present time, Luke 11.49, 51. This Prediction, saith the Apostle, is now ful∣filled, and they by fulfilling it, have filled up the measure of their sins, and God's Wrath is so incensed against them, that it will now destroy their Church and Nation, , to the uttermost; so that it shall not be now as formerly, when they were sometimes in Bon∣dage, and again in freedom from their Ene∣mies; sometimes were Captives, and then re∣turn'd again after Seventy years to their own Land; found God for a while Angry, and anon reconciled to them, but this Wrath shall now remain upon them to the uttermost, till the times of the Gentiles are come in, Luke 21.24. See Note on Rom. 11.25. or , till they be consumed; so the Phrase is used often in the Old Testament, as , shall we be consumed with dying, Numb. 17.13. They fell by the Sword, , till they were consumed, Jos. 8.24. slaying them, , till they were consumed, Chap. 10.20. i. e. God's Wrath hath begun to fall upon them, and they will still continue under it till they be consumed by it. Ver. 17. But we, Brethren, being (by their impatient malice) taken from you for a short time, (Acts 17.5, 10. and this) in presence only, not in heart, endeavoured the more a∣bundantly to see your face again with great desire. Ver. 18. Wherefore we would have come to you once and again, but Satan (by his Mi∣nisters still) hindred us. , Satan.] Hence note, That they who obstruct the Progress of the Gospel, and persecute the Promoters of it, are the Mini∣sters of Satan, and therefore bear his Name. So Chap. 3.5. 2 Cor. 11.15. Rev. 2.10. Ver. 19. For what is our hope, or joy, and crown of rejoycing, are not even ye (Gr. , will it not among others be you also, when we stand) in the presence of our Lord Jes∣sus at his coming. Ver. 20. For ye are (even at present) our glory and joy. CHAP. III. Verse 1. WHerefore when we could no longer forbear, (, no longer enduring to want the certain know∣ledge of your Affairs, though we had given commandment to Timothy to come quickly to us to Athens, Acts 17.15. yet as for me and Silas,) we thought it good to be left at A∣thens alone, (rather than to continue ignorant of the state of your faith, v. 5.) Ver. 2. And (therefore) sent Timotheus our Brother (in Christ, Philem. 16. Hebr. 13.23.) and (the) Minister of God, and our Fellow-labourer in (advancing) the Gospel of Christ, to stablish you (in,) and to comfort you con∣cerning your faith. , to stablish you.] In it by con∣sideration of that miraculous Power, and those Gifts of the Holy Ghost which accompanied our preaching, and your receiving of it, 1 Thess. 1.5, 6. and which are still exercised among you, Chap. 5.19, 20. to comfort you concern∣ing it, by the consideration of the Joys of the Holy Ghost, which you have found already under your Afflictions, Chap. 1.6. by the Sal∣vation you are to obtain by Christ, the Life you shall for ever live with him in glory, Chap. 4.17, 18. Chap. 5.9, 10, 11. the Eternal Rest you shall have, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and of which your Constancy in the Faith under these Sufferings will make you be ac∣counted worthy, 2 Thess. 1.5, 6, 7, 10. Ver. 3. That (so) no man should (might) be moved (from his stedfastness in the Faith) by these Afflictions, (and not you especially,) for you know (from us) that we (Christians) are appointed thereunto, (for hereunto are we called, 1 Pet. 2.21.) Ver. 4. For verily, when we were with you, we told you before (it came to pass,) that we should suffer tribulation, even as it (shortly after) came to pass, (Acts 17.5-10. and ye know (it did so.) Ver. 5. For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent (, I also not bearing any longer the uncertainty of your affairs, have sent) to know (the stedfast∣ness of) your faith, lest by some means the Tempter (may) have tempted you, and (so) our labour (among you should) be in vain. .] Here note, 1. That the Per∣secutions of the Saints are ascribed to Satan the Tempter, who by his Ministers endeavours to hinder the progress of the Gospel, Chap. 2.18. and by their Persecutions to terrifie Men, and seduce them from the Profession of it. See Rev. 2.10. 2ly, That  here doth signifie not barely to tempt, but to succeed in his Temp∣tation, for otherwise the labour of the Apo∣stle could not be rendred vain among them. See the Note on Gal. 6.1. Note 3ly, That it is hence evident that the Apostle did not think them secure from falling
so as that his labour might have been in vain among them, by the Election of them men∣tioned Chap. 1. v. 4. Note, 4ly, From Estius, That a faithful Person truly justified, may so fall from the Faith, as that it shall become in vain to him. Ver. 6. But now when Timotheus came from you to us, and brought us good tidings of your Faith and Charity, and (in particu∣lar) that you have (still a) good remem∣brance of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also (do to see) you. Ver. 7. Therefore (, by this) Bre∣thren, we were comforted over you, (, concerning you, or in you,) in all our affliction and distress, by (reason of) your (constancy in the) faith. Ver. 8. For now we live (joyfully,) if ye stand fast in the Lord. , now we live.] , saith Suidas, is to live , with delight, and magnificence, according to that of Horace, vivendum hodie, which is the frequent import of the Hebrew word Chajah; as in that wish, Let the King live, 1 Sam. 10.24. 1 Kings 1.25. 2 Kings 11.12. i. e. let him have a pro∣sperous and happy Reign: And in the words of the Psalmist, Psal. 16.11. Thou wilst shew me the way of life, in thy presence is fulness of joy. Psal. 34.13. He that would live, i. e. see good days. So Psal. 22.26.38.19. Eccles. 6.8.7.12. Our Masters teach, saithMore Nevoch. l. 1. c. 42. Mai∣monides, that the just are called living even in their death, the wicked dead while they live; because the first are happy in their death, the second miserable in their life. Ver. 9. For what (sufficient) thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God. Ver. 10. Night and day (also) praying ex∣ceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is (yet) lacking in your faith, (by reason of our very small stay with you, Acts 17.1-10.) Estius observes from the ninth Verse, that both the Apostles joy, and their Faith and Constancy were the Gift of God, Nam gra∣tiarum actio non est nisi de beneficiis acceptis; He might also have observed with others, the excellent Pattern the Apostle here gives to all the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, to be continually sollicitous to know of the welfare of their Flocks, incessantly praying for it, blessing God daily for it, and looking upon it as the v ry Felicity of their own lives. Ver. 11. Now God himself, and (or, who is) our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you. Here the Note of Schlictingius runs thus, You see that our Lord Jesus takes care of our Affairs and Actions, and therefore we deser∣vedly invoke him in our Necessities, as the Apostle again doth v. 12. But since this In∣vocation of him by all Christians, in all pla∣ces, must suppose him Omniscient, Omni∣present, and the Searcher of the Heart; and these are Properties of God alone; it also must suppose him to be truly God. Ver. 12. And the Lord make you to en∣crease, and abound in love one towards ano∣ther, and towards all Men, even as we do (abound in love) towards you. Ver. 13. To the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, (, our God and Father,) at the (glorious) coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. .] These are optative Aorists, which signifie transitively; , say the Grammari∣ans; and therefore are well rendred by our Translation, the Lord make you to encrease, and make you to abound. See Note on 2 Cor. 9.8. Ecclus. 45.5. And towards all Men] This, saith. Theophylact, is the Character of Divine Love to comprehend all; whereas Humane Love hath respect to one Man, and not to another. , That he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness.] Hence note, That a general and abounding Charity to all Men, being that by which we become most like to God, and that which tends to cover our own sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. especially if it be Charity to the Souls of Men, James 5.20. tends to stablish your hearts unblameable before God in Love, and to procure our acceptance with him, at the Great Day of our Accounts, Matth. 25.35, 36. Note also, That to establish our Hearts un∣blameable in holiness at Christ's coming, is so to confirm us in holy living, that we may be found unblameable by him at that Day. See Note on 1 Cor. 1.8. 1 Thess. 5.23. 2 Pet. 3.14
CHAP. IV. Verse 1. FUrthermore then we beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as you have received of us (directions) how ye ought to walk, and to please God, so ye would abound more and more (in your care to conform your selves to them.) Ver. 2. (In which thing you need no farther Instructions,) for ye know what (holy) Com∣mandments we gave you by the Lord Je∣sus. .] Note hence, That the Instru∣ctions and Commandments which the Apostles gave to the Churches, are to be look'd upon as the Commandments of the Lord, and as the Will of God, they being dictated by his Spirit, v. 8. and delivered by his Authority, who said, He that heareth you heareth me; and he that heareth me, heareth him that sent me, Luke 10.16. Ver. 3. For (we have already told you, that) this is the will of God, even your sanctifica∣tion, (and this sanctification requires) that ye should abstain from Fornication. Ver. 4. (And) that every one of you should know, how (much it is your duty) to possess his (body, which is the) vessel (of the Holy Spi∣rit,) in sanctification and in honour, (i. e. free from those lusts which are , Rom. 1.26. dishonourable passions.) Ver. 5. Not in the lusts of Concupiscence, even as the Gentiles (do) which know not God. Here note, 1. That these Instructions were very necessary for the Thessalonians, , for there was all manner of disorder and impurity, saithApud Plat. So∣crates. AndLib. 14. p. 663. vid. eundem L. 12. p. 527. Athenaeus inform us, , that their Luxury invited the Persians into Greece; that it was their custom in their Banquets to bring in theirLib. 13. p. 607. L. 6. p. 206. Wenches dancing naked, and afterwards they enjoyed them at their pleasure. 2. Note also, That having mentioned For∣nication, v. 3. he seems v. 4. and the 5th, to advance to other Heathenish Lusts, desiring them to keep their Vessels in Sanctification and Honour; 1. By preserving their Bodies from unnatural Lusts, which are by the Apo∣stle stiled , dishonourable Passions; and their Matrimonial Bed from defilement by the use of other Women, Hebr. 13.4. Ac∣cordingly these things in Scripture are expres∣sed by Ignominy and Vileness, by the Septua∣gint, by , things indecorous and disho∣nourable; which word the Apostle applies to unnatural lusts, Rom. 1.26. and in the Lan∣guage of the Targum, and the Rabbins, they are stiled  ignominy and vileness. Thus Sychem is said to have wrought,  saith the Chaldee, , the Septuagint, i. e. ig∣nomy in Israel, by knowing Dinah. This is the Name the Chaldee gives to the Adultery com∣mitted by the Men of Benjamin upon the Le∣vite's Concubine, Judg. 19.24. the Incest com∣mitted by Amnon upon his Sister Thamar, 2 Sam. 13.12. and in theBt. in voce  p. 2035. Rabbinical Lan∣guage to abuse Boys , is to use them to the satisfying of unnatural Lusts. , even as the Gentiles.] Among whom these Lusts abounded, and by whom they were allowed. For Whoredom was esteemed no Crime;Orig. in Celsum. p. 177. they taught . TheirOrat. pro Coelio. O∣rator speak thus, Si quis est qui etiam mere∣triciis amoribus interdictum juventuti putet— abborret non modo ab hujus seculi licentia, ve∣rum etiam à majorum consuetudine atque con∣cessis, quando enim hoc non factum est? quan∣do reprehensum! quando non permissius! quando denique fuit, ut quod licet, non liceret.Cap. 47. Epictetus advises them who cannot ab∣stain to use it only , as the Law allowed it. Now that, saithCom. p. 1180. de Leg. l. 8. p. 914. A.B. Plato, was , but only Liber∣tines and Servants, and those that sold them∣selves to it. AndOrat. contra Neraeam apud Athen. p. 573. Demosthenes declares of all the Graecians thus, . The , as Plato stiles it, obtain'd in Greece without blame, saithApud Euseb. praepar. Evang. l. 6. c. 10. p. 276. B. Bardesanes, amonst the Grecians and ma∣ny Barbarians, saithDe Leg. l. 8. p. 913. D. Ibid. p. 910. D.E. & l. 1. p. 776. E. Plato; amongst the Cretians and the Lacedaemonians, saith the same Plato. How prone the Romans, and other Nations were to it, Plautus, Petronius Arbi∣ter, Aristophanes, andAthen. l. 13. p. 605. D. Athenaeus, suffici∣ently informs us, as also that it was the Sin of the Philosophers especially. Ver. 6. That no man go beyond (the bounds of Matrimony,) or defraud his Brother in any matter, (Gr. or exceed towards his Brother in this matter,) because the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we have also forewarned you, and testifie. , not to go beyond or defraud.] It is the Opinion of all the Greek
Scholiasts, that this Verse contains a Prohibi∣tion of Adultery, . By the word  he denotes A∣dultery, say Theodoret and Theophylact. God hath put bounds to this Appetite, say Oecu∣menius and Theophylact, by tying us to one Wife, : so that to be familiar with another, is excess and covetousness, and when this is done to another Man's Wife, it is to exceed to the injury of his Brother. And asDiligenter observa quia ad castitatem nos provocans, & volens uxoribus tantum esse contentos, dixerit, ne quis super∣grediatur, & circumscribat in negotio fratrem suum, id est, ne suam conjugeni derelinquens, alterius polluere queat uxorem. In Eph. 4.19. St. Jerom hath observed, the words preceding, which speak of abstaining from Fornication, and keeping our Vessels in Sanctification and Honour, and not in the Lusts of Concupis∣cence, and the words following, which give this Reason of the Precept, that God hath not called us to uncleanness, but to holiness, seem also plainly to inforce this sense, which the Greek, in the Judgment of the forecited Fa∣thers, will well bear. For 1. The words  and , bear this sense in other Authors. ThusDe Abrahamo p. 289. B. Philo speaking of unnatural Lusts committed by Men, saith, . And. De Iside & Osir. p. 366. A. B. Plutarch saith of the Egyptians, that they call that Land which Nile ascends, mixing, and engendring with it, the body of Isis. And that when Nile is thus , filling and ascending, they call this the joyning of O∣siris with Nephthe. So the Hebrew word , from which  and , and from them  is derived, hath this signification, as Josh. 23.12. If you contract affinity with the Hea∣thens,  and go in unto them. , if you marry, and mix with them, saith the Septua∣gint, the Lord will not drive them out. And in the Misnah  is, He that reveals the nakedness of his sister, and may be rendred . 2. The word  bears the same sense in that Verse, in which Venus promises to him that finds, and brings her Cupid to her, Not a bare kiss, but something more; saying, . And whenApud Platon. Gregor. p. 346. C.D. Socrates tells Callicles, pleading for those Pleasures, That Men ought not to be , of unbounded Lusts, , but thou, saith he, thinkest that a Man may exceed in these matters. And in the Scholiast of. p. 757. Aristophanes, these are put as words equivalent . And whereas against this Interpretation it is objected, That the words following, viz. in any matter, being general, will not admit of this restrained sense. I answer, That in the Greek the words are , and may be rendred in this matter, or in the matter, viz. forementioned, or absolutely in the matter, it being observed by. Phav. Phavorinus and Suidas, that the word  is used by the Ancients in an evil sense; as when the young Man saith in. Arist. Plut. Aristophanes to the old Hag that fed him with Meat and Money for her Lust, that he loved all her matters. And the Apostolical Con∣stitutions complain that the younger Widows marrying again, under pretence that they. Lib. 3. cap. 2. could not contain, were engaged in an evil matter. So that I hope I have sufficiently vindicated this Interpretation of Dr. Ham∣mond, and the Ancients, from the Exceptions of Mr. Le Cl. Ver. 7. (He is, I say, the Avenger of all such Christians, as acting oppositely to their holy Calling,) for God hath not called us (Chri∣stians) to uncleanness, but unto holiness. Ver. 8. He therefore that despiseth (this Commandment,) despiseth not Man (only,) but God, who hath also given to us his holy Spi∣rit. , to us.] To us Apostles, to enable us to give you these Commandments; and to us Christians, to render us the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which Temple we corrupt by our uncleanness, 1 Cor. 3.15, 16. Chap. 6.15, 16, 17, 11, 19. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ver. 9 This I thought necessary to say to warn you against that uncleanness which so reigneth in the Heathen World, and to which you so strongly were addicted, whilst you were without knowledge of God in the World.] But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write (so fully) to you, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. .] Taught of God.] By this new Commandment, that we love one another, 1 John 3.11, 23.4.21. Matth. 22.39.
, saithStrom. 1. p. 318. Lit. D. Clemens of Alexan∣dria, We are taught by God the Holy Scrip∣tures; and by the Example of that God who loved us, and gave his Son for us, Eph. 5.2. Hence they who are taught of God are said to hear (his Commands,) and learn (by his Ex∣amples,) John 6.45. Ver. 10. And indeed ye do it to all the Brethren which are in all Macedonia; but we beseech you Brethren, that ye encrease more and more (in this Christian vertue.) Ver. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, (not medling with other mens matters,) and to work with your own hands, as we have commanded you. , to do your business.] I follow here the sense of Dr. Hammond, and other In∣terpreters; though the following words, to work with your own hands, seems to lead to the doing their own business themselves, and not to leave all to Slaves and Servants, as the Idle and Luxurious of old were went to do. See Athenaeus l. 12. Ver. 12. That (so) ye may walk honestly (, decently, and in good behaviour,) towards them that are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing. , and that ye may have lack of nothing.] i. e. From the Heathens. So the Greek Scholiasts: For, say they, if Christi∣ans, seeing a Christian beg when he is able to live by his work, are scandalized, how much more will Heathens be so. And indeed, this was one Objection of the Heathens against Christians, that they wereTertul. Apol. c. 42. infructuosi in negotiis, useless Creatures. The Apostle there∣fore doth exhort them so to provide for their Necessities by their honest Labour, that they may not need the help of Infidels, and never may be forced by their Wants to ask it of them. Ver. 13. But (especially) I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning (the state of) them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not for them, even as others, (other Gentiles do,) which have no hope (of a Resurrection of the Body.) Ver. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, (as the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20.) even so (are we to be∣lieve that) them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, (when he comes to judge the World, and reward all his faithful Servants.) , as do others.] Though ma∣ny Heathens believed the Mortality of the Soul, none of them had any expectation of the Resurrection of the Body. This the Phi∣losophers, who stiled the Body the Prison of the Soul, and thought it the great hinderance of Knowledge and of Vertue, represented as a very despicable thingApud. Orig. p. 240., . So Celsus; 'Tis vile, saith he, abominable, and impossible, , a hope fitter for Worms then Men. And he confutes the possibility of it, not only from the repugnancy of the thing to Nature, but also from the vileness of it, declaring God therefore cannot do it,. Ibid. because as he will not do what is against Nature, so he cannot do what is vile Plotinus saith, that such a Re∣surrection would only be , a Resurrection to another sleep. And all the other Heathens held it a thing impossible, and without example, and therefore made it mat∣ter of their sport; it being, saith Origen, . See Justin Mart. Apol. 2. p. 57. C. D. Theophilus ad Autol. l. 1. p. 77. D. Minuc. p. 11. Arnob. l. 2. p. 51. Laet. l. 7. c. 22. , those that sleep in or through Jesus.] That the Martyrs are not here excluded, is certain; but I see no reason to grant that this Expression should peculiar∣ly respect them. All the Greek Scholiasts in∣terpret the words generally; Chrysostom and Theophylact say, that they who sleep in Jesus are the Faithful in general; Oecumenius, Those that sleep in the Faith of Jesus. The Apostle treating of this Subject, calls all the dead , those that sleep in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.18. and the Context here requires this sense; for the Apostle speaks, v. 13. of them that sleep in general, and of the hope of the Resurrection in the general. And when Christ comes to Judgment, he will not bring the Martyrs only, but all the Faithful with him. See v. 15, 16. where the same Persons are the dead in Christ. Ver. 15. For this we say unto you, (not from our selves, but) by the Word of the Lord, that we who are (then) alive, and re∣main unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep, (so as to receive our happy change before their resurrection.) Ver. 16. For the Lord himself shall de∣scend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and (then) the dead in Christ shall rise first. Ver. 17. Then we which are alive and re∣main (on the earth,) shall be caught up toge∣ther with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Ver. 18. Wherefore comfort one another (concerning your deceased Friends) with these words. , we who are alive.] 'Tis well
observed by the Greek Scholiasts, that the A∣postle speaks these words, , not of himself, but of the Christians that were to remain alive at the Day of Judgment; So Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact; for he well knew he was not personally to live till the Resurrection; yea, he himself expected a Resurrection; saying to the Corinthians, He that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you, 2 Cor. 4.14. He labou∣red, that he might attain to the resurrection of the dead, Philip. 3.11. Yet there are some Divines who from this, and some other places in the Epistles, conceive that the Apostles sometimes thought, and declared to other Christians, that they themselves might live until the Resurrection; and that St. Paul af∣terward chang'd this Opinion, and admonish∣ed the Thessalonians of it, 2 Thess. 2. This I conceive to be a dangerous mistake, and high∣ly prejudicial to the Christian Faith, and the Authority of the Apostles; for if the Church∣es of Christ had once received this Doctrine from them, and afterwards had understood, even from their own Confession, that it was a Mistake, this would have naturally led them to conceive, that they might be mistaken also in any other Doctrine contained in their Epi∣stles, and to suspect the Certainty and Truth of all that was contained in their Epistles. And this the Apostle seemeth to insinuate in these words, 2 Thess. 2.1, 2. I beseech you, Brethren, that you be not soon shaken in mind, or troubled either by word, or letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand: For these words seem plainly to import, that in the Apostle's own judgment, the Belief that the Apostles had taught by word, or by Epi∣stle, this Doctrine, would tend to the unset∣ling of their Minds in the Faith. But that St. Paul taught no such Doctrine in any of his Epistles to the Thessalonians, will be exceeding evident, 1. From the following words in that Chap∣ter. For there, saith he, v. 3. Let no Man deceive you by any means; declaring them De∣ceivers, who either taught this Doctrine, or imposed it on them, as spoken or indited by them there, having said, in opposition to that vain Imagination, that Day was not to come till there was a falling away first, and the man of sin was revealed. He adds, Remem∣ber you not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things, v. 5. He therefore had taught them the contrary, before he had en∣dited either of these Epistles, and therefore in them cannot be rationally supposed to con∣tradict himself. 2ly, From the very words used for proof of this Opinion; for they are introduced with this Solemnity, This we say unto you by the word of the the Lord, that we that are alive; in which words he most plainly voucheth the Authority of Christ Jesus for the Truth of what he saith; and therefore if he were mi∣staken, either our Lord himself must err with him, or the Apostle must vouch Christ's word, and his Authority, when Christ had spoken no such word, and given him no Authority to speak this Doctrine in his Name; both which Assertions overthrow the Certainty and Truth of all St. Paul's Epistles. Now hence it fol∣lows that the Apostle could not deliver this Assertion in any other of his Epistles; for all the Learned do agree in this, That these Epi∣stles to the Thessalonians were the first Epi∣stles St. Paul wrote; whence it must follow that he could not deliver in his following Writings to the Church of Corinth, or any other Churches, that Doctrine which he had so industriously before confuted, and decla∣red very dangerous in his Epistle to the Church of Thessalonica. The Truth seems therefore to be this, That as our Lord had told them, it was not for them to know the times and seasons, Acts 1.7. so were they left still in the dark touching the time of the General Judgment; and therefore they continually speak of it as a Day that was to come upon Men as a Thief in the night, ipsis insciis, as here, Chap. 5.1. They perhaps did not know the contrary; but it might happen in an Age or two, but they say nothing at any time dogmatically, but only , and disjunctly, if we shall be found cloathed, and not naked; and here Chap. 5.10. whether we sleep, or wake. Nor are these Sayings to be taken personally, as meant of the Apostles, but rather as spoken by them in the person of Christians in the general, some of which would be then surviving. , And so shall we be ever with the Lord.] From which words it may probably be collected, that even the Souls of the Faith∣ful were not ever with the Lord, or in his Ce∣lestial Presence before the Resurrection.
CHAP. V. Verse 1. BUT of the (exact) times and (critical) seasons (when this co∣ming of the Lord shall happen) you have no need that I should write unto you. Ver. 2. For you your selves know perfect∣ly, (from what I taught when present with you,) that the day of the Lord cometh as a thief in the night, (of the time of whose co∣ming the master of the house can have no cer∣tain knowledge,) Matth. 24.42, 43.25.13. Mark 13.33. Luke 12.39, 40.21.36. That all this, to the Twelfth Verse, doth e∣vidently belong only to the destruction of the persecuting Jews, and Gnosticks, at the time of Christ's coming to destroy the Jewish Church and Nation, is confidently asserted by a Re∣verend and Learned Commentator on this place, but is not once hinted by the Ancients, who all interpret these words, , of Christ's general Advent. Nor do his Arguments prove his Assertion. For, Argument 1. First, Whereas he saith , the day of Christ, here mentioned, is without question the same which is so often cal∣led the Coming of Christ for the destroying of the Enemies of Christianity. Answer. 'Tis certain that this day of Christ in the Epistles doth almost generally signifie the day of our Lord's coming to the final Judgment, as in the following words; He shall confirm you, to the end that you may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.8. That the Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. You are our rejoycing in the Day of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 1.14. He that hath begun a good work in you, shall perfect it to the Day of the Lord Jesus, Philip. 1.6. That ye may be sincere, and blameless, until the day of Jesus Christ, v. 10. That I may rejoyce in the Day of Christ, Philip. 2.16. See 2 Tim. 1.12, 18.4.8. Arg. 2. Secondly, Whereas he adds, That this cannot belong to the last coming of Christ to judgment, because the Apostle had made that the subject of his former Discourse, Chap. 4. and enters upon this as a distinct matter with a , &c. Answ. It is granted that the time when this Judgment shall be, is a distinct Matter from the Judgment it self, which is all that this Argument proves. Arg. 3. Thirdly, Whereas he argues this from the end of this Discourse, which is to comfort the Christians which were under per∣secution, and give them patience and constan∣cy, for which this was a fit consideration, that this Judgment of God would come suddenly, and when it was least expected, and so would surprize them if they were not watchful, all which belong'd peculiarly to this doom upon the Jews, and not to the General Judgment which those who then lived were not concerned in. Answ. First, It is certain that the Apostle, both in this Epistle, Chap. 4.18. and in his other Epistle, Chap. 1. doth comfort his Thes∣salonians under their Persecutions from the consideration of Christ's coming to reward them at the Day of Judgment. Secondly, It is also certain that Christ, and his Apostles, exhort Christians to be watchful, that they may not be surprized at the Day of Judgment; so doth Christ, Matth. 25.13. Luke 12.35-40. so doth St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. so doth St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 14. as being that which all Men, who must die, and after that be judged according to what they have done in the flesh, must be as well concerned to prepare for by watchfulness, as if it were to come while they were living; and upon this account it is that the Apostle in this Chapter, v. 23. and in the forecited places, prays so oft that Christians may be con∣firmed, and kept blameless to the Day of the Lord Jesus. Let it be then observed, That the Apostle had spoken, Chap. 1.10. of their waiting for the coming of the Lord from Heaven, Chap. 3.13. Of his coming with all his Saints, Chap. 4.16. Of his coming with the voice of the Arch-Angel, and of the Trump of God. He had al∣so hinted, Chap. 2.16. that the unbelieving Jews were, by their opposition to the Gospel preached to the Gentiles, and by their Perse∣cutions of them who had embraced it, filling up the measure of their sins, and drawing down that Day of Wrath upon them which is mentioned, Matth. 24. I therefore shall de∣scant on these words, as relating to both these Days of Judgment. Ver. 3. For when they (they of the Jew∣ish Nation then, and the wicked at the great Day of Wrath,) shall say peace and safety, (expecting no such thing as Wrath and Judg∣ment,) then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape (it.) De Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 22. p. 796.Josephus informs us, That when the Tumults foretold by our Saviour were begun, the Jews were expecting  Signs from God of their Liberty; and that after all the clear Signs God had given of their ap∣proaching ruine, and when it was even accom∣plished, they were confidently expectingLib. 7. c. 30. p. 960. , the Divine Aid: And which
is more remarkable, that the promise of a Messiah, which their Sacred Books declared, was to come , about that time, wasCap. 61. p. 961. F. , that which chiefly incited them to the War. Ver. 4. But ye, Brethren, are not (as for∣merly) in (a state of) darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief, or come upon you unexpected, or unprepared for it.) Ver. 5. Ye are all (by virtue of your Faith, and Knowledge, and your Profession of Chri∣stianity,) the Children of light, as having the Light, and believing in it, John 12.36. Eph. 5.8.) and the Children of the day (of Grace, Rom. 13.12, 13. and of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.) we are not of the night, nor of darkness, (as the Jewish Nation at present is, upon whom the darkness is come, John 12.35. and who are cast out into outer darkness. See Note on Matth. 8.12. and as the Hea∣thens always were. See Note on Rom. 13.12.) Ver. 6. Therefore let us not sleep as do o∣thers, (securely in their sins, without ex∣pecting judgment, or preparing for it, Matth. 24.38. Luke 17.26-30.) but let us watch, and be sober, (that that day do not come up∣on us unawares, nor find us overcharged with surfetting and drunkenness, Luke 21, 34, 36. this being only proper to them who are of the night.) Ver. 7. For they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that are drunken are drunken in the night. Note. O the sad dissoluteness of the man∣ners of the Christians of our Age, who fre∣quently are guilty of that Drunkenness in the day time, which Heathens only practised in the night. Ver. 8. But let us, who are (Children) of the day, be sober (and vigilant, 1 Pet. 4.7.5.8.) putting on the Breast-plate of Faith and love, (that firm assurance of Faith, which will not suffer us to doubt of the Divine Assi∣stance, and that Love which casts out fear of any thing we may suffer for the Cause of Christ,) and for an Helmet (to your Head,) the hope of Salvation. , the breast-plate of faith, &c.] This Metaphor, relating to our Christian Warfare, is taken from Souldiers who anciently watch∣ed, or kept sentinel in their Armour, having especially their Helmet and Breast-plate on; for, asLib. 44. Livy notes, Scuto prae se erecto stabant Galeati, they stood with their Shield before them, and their Helmet on their Heads. Whence he says of Paulus Aemilius, that Mi∣lites novo more scutum in vigiliam ferre ve∣tuit. Now the Head and Heart being the two chief Fountains of Life and Sensation, the preserving them safe, is in effect the pre∣serving the whole Man. Ver. 9. (Which hope of Salvation we Chri∣stians have,) for God hath not appointed us to wrath, (as he hath done the Heathen World, who are Children of Wrath, Eph. 2.3. and the unbelieving Jews, who are Vessels of wrath, fitted for destruction, Rom. 9.22. and upon whom Wrath is coming to the end, 1 Thess. 2.16.) but to obtain Salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 10. Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, (i. e. whether he come in the night, and so find us taking our natural rest; or in the day, when we are waking,) we may live together with him (when he comes.) .] That is, say some, Whether we live, or die. And true it is, that Christians dying are said to fall a∣sleep: So 1 Cor. 11.30. , some are fallen asleep, Chap. 15.51. , we shall not all sleep. So here Chap. 4.13. I would not have you ignorant, , concerning them that are fallen asleep; and v. 14. , them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. But because in all these places the Greek word is never , but always , I pre∣fer the Exposition of the Paraphrase. But then that the hope of Salvation, v. 8. the , the obtainment of Salva∣tion by Christ Jesus, v. 9. the living with him, v. 10. should refer chiefly to the Purchase of Deliverance from Jewish Persecutions, and the enjoyment of this present Life, I can by no means grant; for the Christians hope is the hope of the glory of God, Rom. 5.3. the hope of the Redemption of the Body from Cor∣ruption, Chap. 8.23, 24. the hope which is laid up for us in Heaven, Col. 1.5. the hope of glory, v. 27. a blessed hope, Tit. 2.13. the hope of eternal life, Chap. 3.7. The Salvation purchased for us by Christ's Death, is not Deliverance from Persecutions, for all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecutions, 2 Tim. 3.12. In these we are to be conformed to his death, Rom. 8.17. 2 Tim. 2.12. he having suffered, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. And to live with Christ, is to live in a state of Glory with him, and be conformed to his Resurrection, Rom. 6.8. 2 Tim. 2.12. Col. 3.3, 4. 1 Pet. 4.13. And this is the Com∣fort which the Apostle had given them, Chap. 4.18. and to which he now proceeds, saying, Ver. 11. Wherefore comfort your selves together (with this hope,) and edifie one a∣nother, as also you do. .] Edifie your selves in∣to one Body, by your mutual Love to one ano∣ther,
as being Members of the same Body, Eph. 4.16. and by their strict Union, and peaceable Conversation with one another, which is the Edification of one of us unto another commanded, Rom. 14.19. See Note on Rom. 15.2. Ver. 12. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know, (and reverence) them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you. Ver. 13. And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and be at peace among your selves. .] That the Persons here mentioned as labouring among them, and be∣ing over them in the Lord in the Plural, should be the Bishops of the Metropolis of Thessalonica, seems very improbable, there being scarsly any ordinary fixed Officers then placed in the Church, Anno Christi 49. or 51. when this Epistle was written; and there∣fore the LearnedLib. de Jure Laic. Sacerdotali, cap. 3. § 18. p. 232. Mr. Dodwell, notwith∣standing these words, saith, Quod nulla sit Rectorum mentio in utravis Epistolá ad Thessa∣lonicenses, That there is no mention of any fixed Rulers in either of the Epistles to the Thessalonians. And (1.) we find no notice taken of them in the front of these Epistles, as there is of the Bishops and Deacons, Philip. 1.1. No Salutation of them in the Close of these Epistles; the words of Salutation be∣ing only these, Salute all the Brethren with an holy kiss. (2.) We find no Directions given to them in particular, but only to the Brethren in general, touching such Matters as must have related to their Office only, or chiefly, had they been setled Rulers in the Church. The Charge in the very next Verse runs thus; We exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble mind∣ed, support the weak. In the Second Epistle, Chap. 3.6. thus, We command you, Bre∣thren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Bro∣ther that walks disorderly, and not according to the Tradition which ye received from us. And v. 13 and 14. And ye, Btethren,—if any Man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed; yet count him not as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. And lastly, to these Brethren the Adjuration is here directed, v. 27. charging them by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the holy Brethren. 'Tis therefore to be noted, that the Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Evangelists, who were all extraordinary Offices, are rec∣koned among those whom God had settled in the Church, 1. Cor. 12.24. and Christ as∣cending up on high, had given for the Edi∣fication of his Body. Eph. 4.11, 12. Some of these Prophets, and Teachers, were in most Churches, as at Antioch, Acts 13.1. and of∣ficiated in them, v. 3. at Rome, Chap. 12.6, 7. at Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. at Galatia. See Note on Chap. 6.1. Some of them were Itinerants, sent by the Apostles, or Prophets, to teach other Churches, and by the Holy Spirit separated to that work, Acts 13.2, 3, 4. Exhorting and Confirming the Christians where they came, as being Prophets authori∣sed so to do, Acts 16.32. and travelling up and down for the Converting and Establish∣ing of the Gentiles, 3 Epistle of St. John, v. 7, 8. See Note on 1 Cor. 12.28. Of one of these two kinds of Prophets, and Teachers, and Spiritual Men, the Apostle may here be un∣derstood. Ver. 14. Now (, and) we ex∣hort you, Brethren, warn them that are un∣ruly, (as walking not according to the Do∣ctrine they have received from us, 2 Thess. 3.6, 14.) comfort the feeble minded, (who are of a wounded Spirit under Afflictions, , Prov. 18.14. that are of a fearful spirit un∣der them, Isa. 35.4. of a grieved spirit, Isa. 54.6. whose spirit fails under them, Isa. 57.16. whose hands hang down, and whose knees are feeble, Hebr. 12.12.) support the weak (in Faith, who are soon scandalized, and apt to perish by it, Rom. 14.1, 2, 21. 1 Cor. 8.7, 9, 10, 11, 12.) be patient to all Men. Ver. 15. See that none render evil for evil unto any man, (whatever may the provoca∣tion be, Rom. 12.27.) but ever follow that which is good, both among your selves, and to all men, (even them that hate you,) Matth. 5.44. Ver. 16. Rejoice evermore. , Oecum. Though you fall into manifold Temptations, and Afflictions, James 1.2. be brought into a very low Condition in this World, yet re∣joice in the Lord always, Philip. 4.4. Re∣joice in the hope of the glory of God, Rom. 5.3. and of that great Reward you shall re∣ceive for all your Sufferings, Matth. 5.11, 12. Hebr. 10.34. and in the Spiritual Fruits they work in you, Rom. 5.4. James 1.3. Ver. 17. Pray without ceasing. .] To give once for all the true sense of those Injunctions, so frequent in the Scripture, to pray, and to give thanks always, and without ceasing, Observe 1. That these Phrases do in the mildest sense import, that these should be the Employ∣ment of every Day, our Morning and our Evening Sacrifice, that so beginning, and ending the Day with them, we may be, in the Scripture Language, said to do them al∣ways. Thus St. Luke tells us, Chap. 24.53. that the Apostles were continually in the Tem∣ple,
, praising God; that is, they were , daily in the Temple, Acts 2.46, 47. resorting thither at the third hour of the Morning, and at the ninth in the Evening Sacrifice, Acts 3.1. The Sacrifice which was appointed to be thus offered daily at Morn∣ing and Evening, is in the Hebrew  the continual Sacrifice, Dan. 8.11. and ac∣cordingly is rendred by the Septuagint . Thus the Minchah which the High-Priest offered every day, half of it in the Morning, and half in the Evening, is stiled by them , the continual Sacri∣fice, Lev. 6.20. The Burnt offering which was offered without intermission twice a day, is in the Hebrew , and in the Se∣venty, , the continual Sa∣crifice, Numb. 28.24, 31. And in allusion to it, the Author to the Hebrews saith of our High-Priest, By him let us offer up the Sa∣crifice of Praise to God continually. This therefore is the prime import of the Phrase. 2ly, These Phrases do import, that we should be employed in the performance of these Duties as Providence doth minister oc∣casion for them. In this sense is the word always used twice, when our Lord saith, I was always in the Temple, whether the Jews always resort, John 18.20. for neither did the Jews always resort unto the Temple, but only at the hours of Prayer; nor did Christ always teach in it, but only when he went up to Jerusalem. And thus the Holy Ghost in Scripture leads us to expound these Phra∣ses, enjoyning us to abound always to every good work, 2 Cor. 9.8. and elsewhere, to do good , as we have occasion, Gal. 6.10. So to pray always, Luke 18.1. is to pray , in every season, Chap. 21.36. and to pray without ceasing here, is to pray , in every opportunity, Eph. 6.18. So 1 Maccab. 12.11. , we at all times, without cea∣sing, both in our Feasts, and other convenient days, do remember you in the Sacrifices which we offer; i. e. we do it as oft as we have oc∣casion to offer Sacrifice. 3ly, In reference to our Prayers particu∣larly, it imports that we should not grow faint, and weary, when Providence seems for a season to defer the Blessing we implore, Luke 18.1. but should still  continue instant, and hold out in prayer, Rom. 12.12. Col. 4.2. , abide in Supplication, 1 Tim. 5.5. and , watch unto it with all perseverance, Eph. 6.18. Ver. 18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concern∣ing you. , in every thing.] For sparing and preventing, for common and extraordinary, general and special, past and present, tempo∣ral and spiritual Mercies; not only for pro∣sperous and grateful, but also for afflicting Providences, for Chastisements and seasona∣ble Corrections, , for God designs them all for our good, though we at present see not how they tend unto it. Ver. 19. Quench not the Spirit. , that is, Hinder not the Gifts of the Spirit, by turning away from them that have them, and not suffering them to speak. These Gifts were signified by Strife, Emulation, Schisms, and Contention about them, 1 Cor. 3.1, 3. 2ly, By a disorderly use of them, not to the Edification of the Church, but to vain Ostentation, Confusion in the Church, and the Scandal of Heathens, 1 Cor. 14. by a neglect to exercise them, 1 Tim. 4.14. and by the Prohibition of them; For∣bid not to speak with Tongues, 1 Cor. 15.39. Ver. 20. Despise not Prophesies. . Oecum. Some of these false Prophets had crept into the Church of Thessalonica, as is hinted in those words, Be not troubled by (them who pretend a Revelation from the) Spirit, as if the Day of Christ were at hand. 2 Thess. 2.2. Which made them less regard∣ful of what was delivered by Men pretend∣ing to this Gift, and made it necessary for St. John to say, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they be of God; for many false Prophets are gone out into the World. 1 John 4.1. And to prevent the Mis∣chief the Thessalonians might receive from them, the Apostle here adds, Ver. 21. Try all things (by the Spirit of Discretion which is in the Church, and the con∣sonancy of their pretended Prophesies and In∣terpretations, with what we have delivered to you,) and (then) hold fast that which is good. .] Note that the Apostle doth not here bid the Guides of the Church try all things, and the People hold fast that which they delivered to them; but gives an Injun∣ction common to all Christians, having their Senses exercised to discern betwixt Good and Evil, to all who are obliged to hold fast that which is good, and not to believe false Pro∣phets; which is a strong Argument for the perspicuity, and the sufficiency of Holy Scrip∣ture for this Work, and against the necessity of a living Judge; for he that must try all things, must also try the Doctrine of this li∣ving Judge; and therefore, till he hath made this trial, must not admit his Doctrine as an Article of Christian Faith, for these words plainly teach, that what we must hold fast, must be first tried. Those Hearers, saith St. Basil, who are instructed in the Scriptures, ought to try the things spoken by their Teachers. , and receive those Doctrines which
are consonant to, and reject those which are a∣lien from the Holy Scriptures, because St. Paul hath said, Try all things, hold fast that which is good. See Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. p. 354. Strom. 6. p. 655. Origen in Joh. Tom. 19. Ed. Huet. p. 268. & Hom. 2. in Ezek. F. 135. G. St. Jerom. in Ep. ad Eph. l. 3. c. 5. p. 101. Cyril of Alex. in Joh. l. 4 p. 374, 407. & l. 1. adv. Nestor. p. 2. Ver. 22. And abstain from all appearance of evil. , from all kinds, or sorts of evil.] So the Syriack doth render these words. So Chrysostom and Theophylact upon this place. St. Basil and Leontius cited by Dr. Hammond, who descants thus upon the words, Fly not from this or that only, but from every sin. Or 2ly, If the Apostle here exhorts us to abstain from all appearance of evil, his meaning cannot be this, That we should ab∣stain from what appears evil to others, it be∣ing in many Cases, impossible to know what appears so, and impracticable to act by such a Rule, because it would destroy our Chri∣stian Liberty in things indifferent, and create in our Minds continual Perplexities, there be∣ing scarcely any thing which may not appear evil to some or other of those numerous Sects which swarm among us; he therefore only must enjoyn us to abstain from that which, after trial, seems evil to our selves, and is judged by us so to be; for the Apostle makes these two things the holding that which is Good, and the abstaining from all appearance of Evil, the Consequent of trying all things. Now we try all things, that after trial we may hold what seemeth to us good, and ab∣stain from that which seemeth to us evil, not to abstain from that which seemeth so to o∣thers only. Ver. 23. And the very God of Peace san∣ctifie you throughout; and I pray God that your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. , your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body.] Here the Apostle justifies the ancient and true Phi∣losophy, That Man is, as Nemesius stiles him, , a compound of three differing parts. This was the Doctrine of the Pythago∣raeans, as we learn from. Protrept. p. 34, 35. Jamblycus, who having told us that Man consists of Soul and Body; adds, That the Soul consists of two parts, one indued with Reason, and one with∣out Reason. This also was the Philosophy of the Platonists, as we learn from Nemesius and. De Diis, &c. c. 8. Salust, who informs us that there is in Man a Soul irrational, which follows the Af∣fections of the Body, and a Mind which useth the Body as its Instrument, and fights against it. This also was the Doctrine of the Sticks, whence Antoninus saith, the three constituent parts of Man are , the Body, Soul, and Mind. Of the same Opinion are the An∣cient Fathers; A perfect Man, saithPerfectus homo constat Carne, Animo, & Spiritu. Iren. l. 5. c. 9. p. 446. Ire∣naeus, consists of Flesh, Soul, and Body. And. Strom. 3. p. 454. D. Clemens of Alexandria and. Origen. Philocal. p. 8. Origen say the same. Mr. Cl. here is very positive, that this Philosophy is false, and that there is nothing in Man but his Body, and his rea∣sonable Soul. But he saith nothing to sustain this Confidence, against those two excellent PhilosophersPhys. l. 9. c. 11. § 3. Gassendus andDe Anima Brut. cap. 7. Dr. Wil∣lis, who have established this Philosophy be∣yond all reasonable contradiction: Nor can the Conflict betwixt the Mind and Spirit and the Flesh, mentioned Rom. 7. from v. 14. to the 25th, and Gal. 5.16, 17. be explained, nor can any Man tell what the , or ruling Principle in us, is to govern, without admitting this inferiour Soul as the Fountain of all our sensual Appetites, or even tell us what it is to die, unless it be to make this in∣feriour Soul, which consists in the Motion of the Animal Spirits, and the Sensitive Appe∣tites they produce in us, to cease to act, or move as formerly. He will have  here to signifie Life, as indeed it doth in other places, but never where the constituent parts of Man are enumerated, as here it is; and seeing the Spirit, and the Body, are unquesti∣onably the constituent parts of a Man, 'tis reasonable to conceive that the  mention∣ed here must be so also, especially since 'tis divided from the Spirit and the Body by the Particle . Moreover, by following the Motions of this brutish Appetite, is a Man stiled , the Animal Man, and by being animated and informed by this , is the Bo∣dy called , an Animal Body, 1 Cor. 15.44, 45. and by conveying of this , or inferiour Soul, to his Posterity, is the first A∣dam said to be made , to convey this Animal Life to his Posterity; though this at last may be only a strife about words, the Animal Spirits being included in the Body. Ver. 24. Faithful is he who calleth you (to this holiness) who also will do (his part to∣wards) it
, faithful is he that calleth you.] Who therefore will not be wanting in what is requisite on his part towards it; I say his part, for if the Fidelity of God required that he should sanctifie and preserve us blame∣less to the end, without our care and industry, should work in us absolutely and certainly that care, and the Apostle believed this, how could he fear lest the Thessalonians should be so overcome by Satan's Temptations, as that his labour with them might have been in vain, 1 Thess. 3.5. this being in effect to fear that God might be unfaithful to his promise. Ver. 25. Brethren, pray for us. (See Note on Coloss. 4.4.) Ver. 26. Greet all the Brethren with an ho∣ly kiss. Ver. 27. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the holy Brethren. , I adjure you by the Lord.] In Judicial Oaths the custom among the Jews was, not for the Person who came under the obligation of an Oath to pronounce the words of Swearing with his own Mouth, but an Oath was exacted from him by the Magistrate, or Superiour, and so he became bound to answer upon Oath, by hearing the voice of Adjuration, , so the Septuagint, Lev. 5.1. So Gen. 50.15. Thy Father  made us secure before he died. Josh. 6.26. , Joshua adjured them, saying, Cursed be the Man before the Lord that riseth up and buildeth Jerico. 1 Sam. 14.24. Saul had adju∣red the People, , saying, Cur∣sed be the Man that eateth any food; that is, he charged the People with an Oath. 1 Kings 22.16. , How ot shall I adjure thee. So in the New Testament, the High Priest saith to Christ, , I adjure thee by the living God. Now hence two things are evident, (1.) That St. Paul did not judge all Judicial Oaths unlawful, for then he would not have laid this Oath upon his Thessaloni∣ans. (2.) That Christ did not forbid Judici∣al, but only voluntary Oaths, because it was not in the power of ths Jews, to whom he spake, to avoid Judicial Oaths; nor would he then have answered to the Adjuration of the High-Priest. Ver. 28. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE Second Epistle of St. PAƲL TO THE THESSALONIANS. HAving offered a new Interpretation of the Second Chapter of this Epi∣stle, which treateth of the Man of Sin, commonly called Antichrist, there mentioned, I shall hear give the Reasons why I could not acquiesce in any of the Exposi∣tions already given either by Protestants, or Pa∣pists, and answer some Objections against the Exposition I have put upon the words of the Apostle in that Chapter. And § 1. First, Whereas Mr. Obadiah Walker hath taken a great deal of pains to apply all that the Apostle saith to Mahomet and his Followers, that vain Conceit will be demonstra∣tively confuted from these Considerations. 1. That the Apostle here exhorts the Thes∣salonians, Not to be shaken in mind, or trou∣bled either by Spirit, or by Letter, or by Word, as from us, (the Apostles,) as if the Day of the Lord were at hand, v. 2. Now what day doth the Apostle mean? Surely that Day when the Lord should consume the wicked one by the breath of his mouth, and by the brightness of his coming, v. 8. Now sure it is that Maho∣met came not till 567. years after the writing this Epistle, viz. A. D. 608. nor is our Lord yet come to consume him with the breath of his mouth, nor know we when he will do so. How therefore could it be, that they who were foretold so punctually of the Apostacy which should introduce the Man of Sin, and what yet hindred the Revelation of him in his Season, as the Thessalonians were, v. 5, 6. should think the Day of the Lord's coming to destroy Maho∣met and his Followers was at hand? or that they should be led into this apprehension by any Word, Epistle, or Revelation, made, spoken, or written by the Apostles or Prophetick Men concerning him? Could they then know from the mouth of St. Paul, that this Man of Sin was one Mahomet, who was not to appear till 567. years after his speaking of him; and when he did appear was to continue above a thousand years before the coming of our Lord to consume him, and yet by any of his words be induced to conceive the Day of the Lord was at hand? Moreover, If the coming of our Lord, here mentioned, was to consume the Beast, or Ro∣man Antichrist, seeing this Beast was to arise out of the Ruins of the Roman Empire, and if St. Paul had told them any thing from Daniel of this matter, He must have let them know that this was so; and also that this Antichrist, when risen out of the Ruins of the Empire, was to continue for a time and times, and half a time, that is, 1260 years before the coming of our Saviour to destroy him. It is as difficult to con∣ceive how, after this, the Thessalonians could think Christ's coming to consume the Beast could be then instant when this Epistle was endi∣ted. § 2. Arg. 2. I argue, secondly, against this Opinion, from those words, Remember ye not that when I was with you, I told you of these things, v. 5, 6, 7. that is, I told you of the A∣postacy that was to precede the Man of Sin; how he should exalt himself above all that is called God, &c. and what it was that hindred his being revealed in his Season? Now can a∣ny one believe that the Apostle, who was not with the Thessalonians long enough to perfect what was lacking in their Faith, 1 Thess. 3.10. should yet employ his time in telling them a long story of the Apostacy of the Arians and
Nestorians, saith Mr. W. and of one Mahomet who should thus exalt himself, and what then hindred his being revealed? Could he say that very Mystery of Iniquity, this Mahomet was to bring into the World, then wrought, only because there were some Hereticks already come, who confessed not that Jesus Christ was come in the flesh, though Mahomet confessed this very freely? As well may it be said, That the Mystery of Quakerism, wrought in the se∣cond and third Centuries, because some Here∣ticks of those times, taught Doctrines like those they now profess. And since 'tis equally improbable the Apostle, in that little time, should speak to them of the Apostacy of the Church of Rome from the Faith, and how the Bishop of Rome should Lord it o∣ver Christian Emperours, and over the Laws of God and Christ, and wear out the Saints of the most High for 1260 years? and is still more improbable, that he should say all this then to them, and here again bring the same thing to their remembrance, and yet that not the least intimation of any thing of this nature should appear in any Christian Writers, on this Subject, for six following Centuries. This Ar∣gument must be of equal strength against those who conceive the Papal Antichrist should pri∣marily and chiefly be intended here. § 3. Arg. 3. Thirdly, I argue against this Opinion from those words, And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his Mouth, &c. v. 8. For hence it seems plain, this wicked one was to be destroyed by the coming of our Lord soon after the time of his Revelation, and not above a thousand years after; as both the Opi∣nion of those Papists, who say that he is Maho∣met, and of those Protestants who say he is the Pope and his Clergy, must make the interval betwixt his Revelation, and Destruction be; for the same thing that hindred his Revelation, hindred the coming of our Lord to destroy him thus revealed; and these two things seem to be thus connected, The Day of the Lord will not come, till there come first an Apostacy, and by that a Revelation of the Man of Sin; when therefore this Apostacy, and this Revelation of the Man of Sin hapneth, then will Christ come to consume him. And otherwise the Christians of after Ages might have been subject, from the Apostle's words, to a like Mistake to that here mentioned, seeing, to tell them they had no rea∣son yet to expect this Day of the Lord, because it was not to come till the Man of Sin was re∣vealed, and to add, when that which hindred the Revelation of him in his Season, was once taken away, then should he also be revealed, whom the Lord should consume with the brightness of his coming, must fairly lead them to expect this Day soon after his Revelation, and not after he had been thus revealed above a thousand years. § 4. These Arguments are such as equally confute the Opinion of those Protestants who conceive the Apostle primarily to characterise the Pope and his Clergy, and of those who ap∣ply these words to Mahomet. Arg 4. But fourthly, I argue against them who suppose Mahomet to be the Man here in∣tended, from these words of the Apostle, That the coming of this wicked one shall be accord∣ing to the working of Satan in all power, signs, and lying wonders, v. 9. for the words , powers, signs, and wonders, are never used in Scripture for any wonderful things done by God upon Men or any Extasies or Conferences of Angels with them, but always for outward signs done by them upon other Things, or Persons; such as were the healing of the Sick, and Lame, the casting out of Devils, the raising the Dead. See Note on Hebr. 2.4. Now Mahomet every where profes∣seth that he came not with any such Miracles, and therefore he could not be the Person here designed. For his Opposers demanded of him such Miracles, saying, Moses and Jesus, ac∣cording to thy own Doctrine, wrought Mira∣cles to prove their Mission from God; and therefore if thou be a Prophet, and greater then any that were ever sent before thee, as thou boastest thy self to be, do thou the like Miracles to manifest it to us; do thou make the Dead to rise, the Deaf to speak, the Dumb to hear, &c. and then we will believe in thy Word. 'This Objection, saithLife of Mahomet, p. 30, 31, 32. Dr. Pri∣deaux, he endeavoured to evade by several Answers; One while he tells them, he is on∣ly a Man sent to preach to them the Rewards of Paradise, and the Punishments of Hell: At another time, that their Predecessors con∣temned the Miracles of Saleh, and the other Prophets, and that for this reason God would work no more among them: And a while af∣ter, that those whom God had ordained to be∣lieve, should believe without Miracles; and those whom he had not ordained to believe, should not be convinced, though all these Mi∣racles should be wrought in their sight, which they required. But this not satisfying, as be∣ing a plain Confession that he wanted that pow∣er of Miracles which all other Prophets had to prove their Mission, several of those that were his Followers departed from him. Ha∣ving therefore got the Sword into his Hand, and an Army to back his Cause, his Doctrine then was, that God had sent Moses and Je∣sus with Miracles, and yet Men would not be obedient to their Word, and therefore he had now sent him in the last place without Miracles, to force them by the power of the Sword to do his Will.
However, saith he, it is not to be denied that there are several Miracles reckon'd up, which Mahomet is said to have wrought; as that he did cleave the Moon in two; that the Trees went forth to meet him; and that the Stones saluted him; which are the Miracles here mentioned by Mr. Walker. But then he adds, That they who relate them are only such as are reckoned among their fabulous, and le∣gendary Writers; their learned Doctors re∣nounce them all, as doth Mahomet himself, who in several places of his Alchoran, owns that he wrought no Miracles. § 5. Against the Opinion of Grotius, that Cajus Caligula was the Man of Sin, it is su∣perfluous to say much, it being grounded upon an Error in Chronology, that St. Paul writ this Epistle A. D. 40 when Cajus appeared; whereas 'tis certain from 1 Thess. 1.5. that Paul had been at Thessalonica before this Epi∣stle was writ; for St. Paul went up to Jerusa∣lem, say the best Chronologers, A. D. 49. and it is evident that then he had not been at Thes∣salonica, and so had writ no Epistle to them, it being writ after his entrance in to them, v. 9. after he had spoken to them the Gospel of God, Chap. 2.2. after he had been taken from them for a short time, v. 17. Now that he had not been at Thessalonica before his going up to the Council at Jerusalem, appears from the History of the Acts, which saith, that after this Council he went to Antioch, Chap. 15.30. then through Syria and Cilicia, v. 41. then to Derbe and Lystria, Chap. 16.1, 2. then through Phrygia, Galatia, and Mysia, and so to Troas, v. 6, 7, 8. then to Samothracia, Neapolis, and Philippi, v. 11, 12. and having passed through Amphiolis and Apollonia, he came to Thessa∣lonica, Chap. 17.1. He therefore coming only thither eight years after the death of Cajus, and not writing this Epistle till after he had left them, could not then write of Cajus as the Man of Sin to be yet revealed. § 6. I pass on to the Interpretation of Dr. Hammond, which is this, 1. That the Man of Sin, the Son of Perditi∣on, was Simon Magus, together with his Fol∣lowers the Gnosticks, designed for destruction. Paraph. on. v. 3. 2. That Simon Magus setting himself in the head of them, Christ should destroy him by extraordinary means, the Preaching, and the Miracles of St. Peter, and the Gnosticks that adhered to him at the destruction of the un∣believing Jews. Paraph. on v. 8. 3. That the falling away first, must be a great departure, or defection from the Faith to the Heresie of the Gnosticks, or the Christi∣ans breaking off their compliance with the im∣penitent Jews, leaving them as obdurate, and departing avowedly to the Gentiles. Paraph. on v. 3. 4. That which witholdeth, and he that let∣teth, was the Apostles not giving over preach∣ing to the Jews as hopeless and refractory, and going to the Gentiles, Paraph. on v. 6. and the Christians walking warily, and doing no∣thing contrary to the Mosaical Law. 5. That the Mystery already working was this sort of Men already formed into a Sect, under their Ring-leaders Simon and Carpo∣crates. Paraph. on v. 7. Now against this Opinion I argue, 1. From the Day of the Lord here mention∣ed v. 1, 2. for that indeed doth often signifie in Scripture the Day of the Lord's coming to the destruction of the Temple, City, and Nation of the Jews, which, saith the Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond, is the true import of the Phrase here, but it never signifies his coming to destroy Si∣mon Magus. Moreover, It's plain from the eighth Verse, that this coming of the Lord is to destroy the Man of Sin, he being to be destroy∣ed by the brightness of his coming; how then can this Day be the time appointed for the de∣struction of Simon Magus, who perished some years before Christ's coming to the destruction of Jerusalem? For according to Valesius,Eusebium secutus Symeon Metaphrastes Symonis interitum Claudij temporibus accidisse scribit. Not. in Euseb. l 2. c. 15. Eusebius, and Symeon Metaphrastes, Simon perished in the Reign of Claudius; he coming then to Rome, and St. Peter then also coming after him, to detect his Frauds, when he well argues, thatEgo Eusebij sententiam veriorem esse puto cum enim constet ex Justino (Apol. 2. p. 69 E. & p. 91. B.) & Irenaeo (l. 1. c. 20.) Simonem sub Claudio Romam venisse, & fraudulenta edidisse miracula, cumque etiam constet Petrum ejusdem Claudij temporibus Romam se contulisse, ad Simonis fraudes confutandas, verisimile non est—Simonem tam diu prae ente, & adstante Petr, insultasse fidei Christianae. Ibid. it is not probable he should long there insult over the Christian Faith, St. Peter being then present to oppose him. Now if this be true, he perished at the least 16 years before the destruction of Jerusalem, and Christ came to destroy him within four years after the writing this Epistle. If he perished, as others will have it, in the fourth of Nero, he must die twelve years before Christ came to destroy Je∣rusalem; or if he continued till the twelfth of Nero, opposing Christianity twelve years at Rome, under the very Nose of the two chief Apostles, which is not very probable, yet must he die four years before Christ's coming to the destruction of Jerusalem, and therefore could not be destroyed by the brightness of his co∣ming. Must we refer this then only to the destru∣ction of his Followers the Gnosticks? That they were then in being, I could never yet see pro∣ved, and much less that any of them perished at the destruction of Jerusalem. I know the
Lib. 3. cap. 29. Eusebius, as saying that the Gnosticks, , in a moment were utterly extinct; whereas it is manifest Eusebius says this not of the Gnosticks, but the Nicolaitans; nor could he say it of them who flourished chiefly in the se∣cond Century, whence it is stiled Saeculum Gnosticum. Moreover, It is a plain flaw in this, or any like Interpretation, to make the Head of any Party, with his Followers, to be the Man of Sin to be consumed by the coming of our Lord, and yet to make the Ante-signanus perish before his coming, and his Followers only at it. All to this, that the whole Foundation of this Opinion depends upon theHae. fabula ab Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis passim inculcatur. Heraldus ad Arnob. l. 2. p. 50. tale of Si∣mon Magus's flying in the Air at Rome, and his falling down and breaking his bones at the Prayer ofViderant enim carrum Simonis Magi & quadrigas igneas, Petri ore difflatas, & nominato Christo evanuisse, viderant inquam fidentem diis falsis, & ab eisdem metuentibus proditum, pondere praecipitatum suo, cruribus jacuisse perfractis. Arnob. p. 50. Tum illustris illa adversus Simonem Petri ac Pauli congressio fuit, qui cum Magicis artibus, ut se Deum probaret, duo∣b suffultus Daemoniis evolasset, Orationibus Apostolorum fugatis Daemonibus, delapsus in Terram populo inspectante disruptus est. Sulp. l. 2. c. 41. Petrus Simonem, alta Coeli magico volatu petentem, dissoluta carminum potestate dejecit & stravit. St. Peter, which is a thing not only uncertain, but in the judgment of many learned Persons, absolutely false. Cotelerius, a Romanist, is forced  to suspend his judgment about it; 1. By reason of the Origi∣nal of the Story, which, saith he, had its rise è libris Apocryphis & Pseudepigraphis, fromConstit. Apost. l. 6. c. 9. Abdias Hist. Apost. l. 1. c. 15. Hegesip. de de Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 2. Author Actorum Petri & Pauli. Apocryphal and Spurious Authours. 2ly, By reason of the great discrepancy to be found among them in their Relations of divers Circumstances of this Story. Some of them saying, that Simon Magus made himselfHegesippus, Abdias. Patres 6 Syn. act. 18. Wings to fly; some that he was held up by. Const. Apost.  Cyril. Cat. 6. p. 54. A. Sulpitius. two Devils; others that he made him∣self aArnobius. Magicis Artibus volare, caepit. August. Tom. 10. Serm. 3. de Petro & Paulo Apostolis. Chariot, or ascended in a fiery Chariot, drawn by four Horses; and all that he did this by the Art of Magick. Again, They differ equally as to the Ef∣fects this fall had upon this Magician; some saying that he died by it, and was. Cyril. Hieros. ib. seen dead upon the spot, that itIn caput collapsus cerebro viam dispersit. Nicet, Thes. l. 4. c. 1. dasht out his Brains,. Metaphrast. broke his whole Body, yea, brake it into. Act. Petri & Pauli apud Cotel. Not. in Lib. 6. Const. Apost. p. 269. four parts. Others, that. Const. Apost. Peter prayed he might not die, and so he only broke his thigh, say some; or his hands and feet, as o∣thers. Some tell us this was done in the Reign of Claudius; and others, that it was done in the Reign of Nero; some that it was done byArnobius. Constit. Apost. St. Ambros. St. Austin. Peter only, others, that it was done bySulpitius. Sev. Cyrillus. Hieros. Pride cum ejusdem urbis Ecclesia jejunaverit. August. Ep. ad Casul. . Cyril. Hieros. &c Peter and St. Paul; some that it was done bySulpitius. Sev. Cyrillus. Hieros. Pride cum ejusdem urbis Ecclesia jejunaverit. August. Ep. ad Casul. . Cyril. Hieros. &c Prayer, and others that they added Fasting to their Prayers; so little Agreement is there amongst them in any Circumstance of this Acti∣on. And 3ly, The Story may deserve to be suspected, by reason of the silence of all the Ancients of the three first Centuries, who speak much of his being at Rome, and of his being honoured with a Statue there, but say nothing of his flight or fall, by virtue of the Prayers of St. Peter, though they had just occasion to speak of it, had they believed the Story. For. P. 91. B.C. Justin Martyr, in his Apology, speaks twice of this Statue, and desires the Emperour and Senate, that, learning the truth, they would abolish that Statue; but he saith not one word of this illustrious Combat, which was so admirable a conviction of his fraud. Clemens of. Strom. 7. p. 764. D. Alex∣andria saith, that Simon heard St. Peter preach a little while, but addeth not one word of what
he suffered by St. Peter's Prayers,Post Evangelium nusquam invenies Magos nisi planè punitos, Simon M. jam fidelis—maledictus ab Apostolis de fide ejectus est, alter Magus qui cum Sergio Paulo, quoniam iisdem adversatur Apostolis, luminum amissione multatus est. De Ido. cap. 9. Tertul∣lian having noted, that after the coming of the Gospel Magicians were always punished, speaks only of Simon Magus, as ejected out of the Church, though he observes that Elymas was struck blind. And that in the Acts of the A∣postlesEx quibus est primus S. Magus qui in Actis Apostolorum, condignam meruit ab Apostolo Petro justamque Sententiae De Praescript. Adv. Haer. c. 46. he received a just Sentence, and worthy of himself, from the Apostle Peter, but addeth not one word of what he suffered from St. Peter at Rome.. L. 1. contr. Celsum, p. 45. . L. 6. p. 282. . Com. in Johan. p. 36. D. Origen proves that there was , nothing Divine in Simon from the Nature of his Doctrine which made Idolatry a thing indifferent, and from the Suc∣cess of it, it being in his time almost extinct, and that he perished with his Silver; but adds not a hint of his perishing by the Prayers of the Apostles, which was the strongest proof a∣gainst his pretensions that he was the power of God., &c. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 14. Eusebius declares how the Devil raised up Simon as the great Adversary to the Apostles, and how the Divine Grace, by their appearance and presence, extinguished that flame; and how the Providence of God sent Peter after him to Rome in the days of Clau∣dius, to set himself against him, and how he prevailed by causing the Light of the Gospel to shine there; but gives not the least hint of his being thus overcome, or thrown down by the Prayers of Peter. The Bishops of Rome, who, saith Cotelerius, sua tacere non solent, use not to be silent in matters relating to them∣selves. say nothing of it. Nor is it credible, saithNot. in Sulpitium. p. 369. Hornius, Scriptores Romanos tam me∣morabilem rem praeterituros fuisse, that all the Roman Writers of those times, Suetonius, Tacitus, Pliny, &c. should pass over so me∣morable a thing in silence; especially if Simon was so honoured by Claudius, and beloved by Nero, as some Authors of this Story say he was. It seems inconsistent, saith Valesius, with that other Story of Simon's being honoured at Rome as a God by the Emperor, Senate, and the People, and the continuance of his Statue there in Justin Martyr's days; which sure it would not have done, had he been so remarka∣bly defeated or destroyed before their eyes. And lastly,Est quidem haec opinio plurimorum, quamvis eam perhibeant esse falsam plerique Romani. Ep. 86. ad . p. 387. St. Austin freely owns, that at Rome this Story was by most People deemed false. And is such a Tale fit to be laid as the Foun∣dation of the Interpretation of this Chap∣ter? § 7. Arg. 2. This Opinion may also be con∣futed from those words, This day shall not come unless there be an Apostacy first, and the Man of Sin be revealed. For, 1. It is intolerable to think that Act, which was so necessary for the promotion of the Go∣spel among the Gentiles, viz. the not imposing on them Circumcision, and the Jewish yoke, and the ceasing to preach in their Synagogues, was the Apostacy intended by the Apostle in these words. The Zealots among the Jews might say of Paul, Thou teachest Apostacy from the Law of Moses; for afterwards theEuseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. cap. 27. Ebio∣nites rejected all his Epistles, , calling him an Apostate from the Law; but that St. Paul himself, speaking to the Gentiles, should call this his own practice, an Apostacy is incredible. Moreover, What advantage would it do then in this matter, to tell them of an Apostacy which had hapned before their Conversion, Acts 13.46. Lo we turn unto the Gentiles, for so hath the Lord commanded us, and hap∣ned again about the time of writing this Epi∣stle, Acts 19.9. and finally, saith the Doctor, was compleated when St. Paul came to Rome, about five or seven years after at the most? might not the coming of the Lord be at hand, though an Apostacy so near to be compleated, were to go before it? See James 5.8, 9. 1 Pet. 4.7. 2ly, As for the Apostacy of a considerable part of Christians to the abominable impiety of the Gnosticks, I have all along in the Inter∣pretation of these Epistles considered that, and find no reason to assert it, nor any thing that favours it, till we come to the 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. 'Tis true indeed, asJust. Mart. Ap. 2. p. 69. E. Justin Martyr and Eusebius testifie, that most of the Samaritans worshipped Simon as the chief God; but , few in other Nations, say they, did it; but that one single Person fell off from Christianity to him they say not,
. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 14.Eusebius is express, that neither the He∣resie of Simon Magus, nor of others, had any prevalency in the times of the Apostles. The great Apostacy which after the writing this Epistle first appeared, and against which the Catholick Epistles of St. James, Peter, and St. John, and especially the Epistle to the He∣brews, was written, was that of the convert∣ed Jews to Judaism again; and to this Dr. Lightfoot probably refers the Apostacy here mentioned; our Lord having foretold that the Devil once cast out of them by the Gospel, should return to them with seven more evil Spirits than himself; and concluding that Pa∣rable with those words, so shall it be with this present Generation, Matth. 12.43, 44, 45. Which Opinion is well consistent with my Interpreta∣tion of this Chapter, and may be embraced by them who like not my Notion of this Apo∣stacy. 2ly, This Man of Sin was yet to be reveal∣ed, v. 3. and there was yet a season to come in which he was to be revealed, v. 6, 8. whereas by the Confession of Dr. Hammond, Simon Magus was revealed as an Opposer of Christ, and an , or Antagonist, to the Apo∣stles long before? for, he saith, thatNote E. being denied the power of working Miracles, which he would have bought of the Apostles, soon after he set up, and opposed himself against Christ, and accordingly is here called , the Adversary, or he that opposeth himself. Now the time when he would have bought of them this power of working Miracles was A. D. 35. that is, fourteen years before S. Paul writ this Epistle; if then soon after he set up, and opposed himself against Christ, he must dis∣cover himself soon after the Year 35, and so be∣fore the writing this Epistle. He adds in the same Note, That Simon Magus came to Rome in the beginning of Claudius his Reign, and there did such Miracles by the help of the Devils, that he was taken for a God, and ac∣cordingly had a Statue erected to him with this Inscription, Simoni Deo Sancto. Eusebius there adds, That the Devil had set him up as the Great and Equal Antagonist of the Divine Apostles.. In Petro. St. Jerom also saith, That in the second year of Claudius St. Peter came to Rome to oppose him. He therefore who was then set up as the great Adversary of the A∣postles, and as such opposed by them in the se∣cond Year of Claudius, that is A. D. 42. must be discovered then, that is, 9 years before the writing this Epistle. Eusebius there adds, that the flame he had there raised, by the appear∣ance and presence of the Apostles, i. e. of Pe∣ter, as the words following shew, , was soon extinguished; which seems to prove that Simon Magus his opposition to Christ was not only discovered, but even extinguished with his Person before the writing this Epistle. And indeed Irenaeus, and almost all the Ancients a∣gree in this, with Dr. Hammond, that Simon Magus having suffered this repulse from Peter at Samaria, beganCupidius intendit contendere adversus Apostolos, uti & ipse gloriosus videretur esse, & universam Magiam adhuc am∣plius inscrutans, ita ut in stuporem cogeret multos hominum, quippe eum esset sub Claudio Caesare, à quo etiam statua honoratus esse dicitur propter Magiam, hic igitur à multis quasi Deus glorificatus est. Lib. 1. cap. 20. to search still more in∣to the depths of Magick, that he might be more able to contend with the Apostles; and that by this means he astonished many, was ho∣noured by Claudius with a Statue, and glorified by many as a God: He soon returned, saith Theodoret, to his former Arts. Now, can we think that a Man, who designed to be reckoned , some great one, and to seem glorious in the World, should pursue that design, by hi∣ding, and not discovering himself about fifteen years. In a word, It cannot reasonably be thought that almost all Samaria should worship him; that he should be honoured in the days of Clau∣dius as a God at Rome, by the Emperor, the Senate, and the People; and that the Devil should set him up as the Great Adversary of the Apostles long before this time; and that the season of his being revealed should be yet to come. § 8. Arg. 3. 3ly, I argue against this Opi∣nion from these words, he sitteth in the Tem∣ple of God, v. 4. for whether we interpret this of the Temple of Jerusalem, or of the Church of God, which are all the Interpretati∣ons known to the Ancient Fathers, or applied by them to these words, it is certain that nei∣ther Simon Magus, nor his Followers, sat in any of them. TheNote E. & G. Doctor therefore is forced to say, this agrees to Simon, as being worshipped at Samaria, in those places which had been set apart to the worship of the True God, they worshipping him there , with all sorts of Sacrifices. But would St. Paul stile the Samaritan Tem∣ple, had it been then standing, as it was not, the Temple of God? Would he have done this after our Lord's declaration made against them that they worshipped they knew not what? The truth is, that the Temple built upon their. Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 1.
holy Mountain, was long before destroyed by Hirenus, and that which Herod built them, they regarded not, as standing not upon that Mountain. Where therefore was the Temple in which they offered all kind of Sacrifices to this Magician? Indeed, the Doctor useth too much Artifice in thus connecting these things; for that almost all the Samaritans did worship Si∣mon Magus as the first or principal God, Euse∣bius doth say from Justin Martyr Hist. Eccl. 2.13. but that they then worshipped him with a∣ny kind of Sacrifices, he doth not say: But on∣ly that some of his Followers, who. Ibid. pretend∣ed to embrace the Christian Religion, (which Simon Magus then professedly opposed,) fell back to the worship of Daemons, and had got Images of Simon and Helen, which they thus worshipped with Sacrifices. § 9. Arg. 4. Remember you not, saith the Apostle, that I told you of these things? Now is it probable, that in the short time he stayed with them, he should tell them how Simon Ma∣gus sat in the Temple of God, and that Christ's coming was to destroy him; and that so soon as S. Paul should leave off preaching in the Jewish Synagogues, S. Magus and his Followers would be revealed? Credat. Judaeus Apella; For the Mystery of Iniquity doth already work, v. 7. that is, saith Dr. H. this sort of Men are already formed into a Sect under their Ring-leaders, Simon and Carpocrates. Wonderful that Car∣pocrates, who, say. Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 6. . Clem. Strom. 7. p. 764. Euseb. Hist. Eccl l. 4. c. 7. Clemens of Alexandria, Eusebius, and Theodoret, appeared only in the time of Hadrian, that is, A. D. 107. at the soonest, should be the Ring-leader of a Sect at the writing of this Epistle, that is, at least, 56 years before he began his Heresie. It follows, v. 8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, &c. that is, saith D. Hammond, then immediately shall ye see the Sect of the Gnosticks shew it self, joyn with, and stir up the Jews, and bring heavy Persecu∣tions upon the Christians, and having this op∣portunity to calumniate them to the Jews, behave themselves as their professed Opposers. And Simon Magus shall set himself forth in the Head of them, whom, as a Profest Ene∣my of Christ, Christ shall destroy by extraor∣dinary means, by the Preaching and Miracles of St. Peter; and for all the Apostatizing Gno∣sticks that adhere to him, they shall be invol∣ved in the destruction of the Unbelieving Jews, with whom they have joyned against the Christians. In which long Paraphrase there is nothing certain, and nothing which can be confirmed, either from Scripture or Antiquity. That there were then any Gnosticks in being, that they ever then did, or were in a capacity to persecute the Christians, that any single Person of them perished at the fatal time of the destruction of the unnbelieving Jews, I ne∣ver yet saw proved. That Simon Magus should set himself in the Head of these Gnosticks, or of any other of his Followers, who was extinct before they bore that Name, tis not credible That Followers, who pretended that Simon himself was the chief, or principal God, who worship∣ped him, and the very Images of Simon and Helena, with all kind of Sacrifices, who held the Law and Prophets were not to be regard∣ed, should ingratiate themselves, and joyn with the Jews, is still more incredible. And lastly, that Simon Magus perished by the Miracles of St. Peter, I have shewed to be improbable. And this I think sufficient to be offered against this Interpretation. § 10. I should proceed to those Considerati∣ons which seem to lye against that Opinion, which holds that the Apost e primarily intends the Papal Antichrist, but I have already done this, both in this Preface, and in the following An∣notations; and therefore shall at present only add, that this Man of Sin is to sit in the Tem∣ple of God, and probably to do it then when the Apostle writ; for he gives it as a Chara∣cter, by which the Thessalonians, to whom he writ, might know him, and then he could be no other than the Jewish Doctors. Moreover, this Temple of God must either be the Temple of God, properly so called, which was destroy∣ed by Titus, A. D. 70. and then again, The Man of Sin, who was to sit in it, must denote the same Persons, or as some of the most Anci∣ent Fathers;In Templo Dei sedebit, seducens eos qui adorant eum, quasi sit Christus. L. 5. p. 475. Irenaeus,Templum construet Hierosolymis, quod consestim excitatum tradet Judaeis. P. 27. & 33. Hippolitus,. Catech. 15. p. 164, 165. St. Cyril, andErgo sedebit in Templo interiori Judaeorum, qui Christum negant. In Luc. 21. St. Ambrose thought, either the Ruins of that Temple, or another to be built by Antichrist in behalf of the Jews, and then as it is not reasonable to think the Apostle would absolutely stile that the Temple of God which had never been so, and which was only built by one who magnified himself against, and openly blasphemed the true God; so is it more unreasonable to think the Pope and his Clergy should sit in it. They therefore who think that they are here especially intended, embrace the
Sentiments of the Fathers of the Fifth, and the following Centuries, viz. of. Theod. . Chrys. Hierosolymis ut quidam putant, vel in Ecclesia, quod verius Arbitramur. Hieron. ad Algas. qu. 11. F. 60. D. August. de Civ. Dei. l. 20. c. 19. Chrysostom, Theodoret, St. Austin, and St. Jerom, that by the Temple of God, we are to understand the Christian Church. But this Interpretation is liable to this Objection, That 'tis not reasonable to conceive the Holy Spirit, without any mark of distinction, would give that name to the A∣postate Church, in which the Beast and the false Prophet did preside, she being by the same Spirit, when he speaks more unquestionably of her, still represented as Spiritual Sodom and Aegypt, Mystical Babylon, and the Mother of Fornications and Abominations, Rev. 11.8.17.5. HenceLib. 3. de R. Pont. cap. 13. Bellarmine makes this Inference from the Interpretation of the Prote∣stants, That, if it be true, the Roman Church, in which the Pope presides, must be the Church of God. To this our Writers answer, That this Name was given to the Church of Rome because she once was so. But when was that? Was it not before the Man of Sin sate in her, and exalted himself above God and Christ? and can he properly be said to sit in the Church of God, who whilst he sitteth in it, is not the Man of Sin, nor does those things which be∣long to him; and when he is the Man of Sin, sitteth no longer in the Church of God, but in Spiritual Egypt, the Oppressor of God's People, in Mystical Babylon the Mother of Idolatry, and the Great Enemy of the Church of God, and in the Synagogue of Satan? But that I may not wholly differ from my Brethren in this matter, I grant these words may, in a secondary sense, be attributed to the Papal Antichrist, or Man of Sin, and may be signally fulfilled in him, in the destruction of him by the Spirit of Christ's Mouth, he being the Successor to the Apostate Jewish Church, to whom these Characters agree, as well as to her; and therefore in the Annotations I have still given a place to this Interpretation al∣so. § 11. Lastly, As for the Objections which may be raised against the sense which I have put upon these words, I have already answered most of them in the Annotations, only two still remain to be more fully answered, viz. Object. 1. That all the Fathers and ancient Interpreters, seem not only silent as to the im∣port of these words, but generally seem to re∣fer the , that which witheld this Re∣velation of the Man of Sin to the Roman Em∣pire. Answ. To this I answer, (1.) That this Ob∣jection may be retorted upon all the other Opini∣ons with equal strength; for what is there said by any of the Fathers, or Ecclesiastical Wri∣ters, for six hundred years, whence it may be concluded that either Mahomet, or the Pope of Rome, were the Man of Sin here mention∣ed? What hint hath any Commentator, Greek or Latin, in his Notes upon this Chapter, for a thousand years, given, that the Pope and his Clergy were the Persons here intended? If it be here replied, That they do conse∣quentially overthrow this Opinion, by making the Roman Empire to be the , that which witheld. I answer, That they more fully overthrow the Opinion, which saith the Papal Government is Antichrist, or the Man of Sin. 1. By saying thatAntichristo jam instante. Tertul. de fuga, &c. Antichristi tempus infestum appropinquare nunc caepit. Cyprian. Ex∣licet. ad Martyr. Scire debitis, & pro certo tenere, & credere Antichristi tempus appropinquasse. Ep. 58. p. 120. 59. p. 139. Et de Jud Euseb. . Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 7. Antichrist was coming, and at hand, long before the appearance of the little Horn, which sprung up only from the Ruins of the Roman Empire, which hapned A. D. 475. 2ly, By teaching, so generally as they did, that Antichrist being once revealed, was to con∣tinue not 1260 years, but only three years and an half. See Note on v. 8. 3ly, That he was to be of the Jewish Extract, oneHieremias tribum ex quâ veniet manifestavit dicens ex Dan, &c. Iren. l. 5. c. 30. Hippol. p. 24, 25. Ambros. de Be∣nedict. Patriarch. c. 7. Aug. Tom. 4. qu. 22. in Jos. p. 295. Prosper. dimid. Temp. c. 9. Theodor. in Gen. qu. 110. p. 75. of the Tribe of Dan, who also was to be Circumcised. And 4ly, That he should be an Enemy toIdola quidem seponens. Iren. l. 5. c. 25. Idolatriam non admittet. Hippolyt. p. 33. . p. 164. Chrysost. in 2 Thess. 2.4. Theod. ibid. & Com. in Dan. 11.36. Ido∣latry and Image Worship, as Irenaeus, Hippo∣lytus, Cyrillus Hieros. St. Chrysostom, and Theodoret say. In a word, they generally held, as I have shewed Note on v. 10. that Antichrist was to come with Signs and Wonders to deceive the Jews, that they might be punished for their In∣fidelity. All which things must be manifestly inconsistent with the common Notion, that the Pope's Hierarchy must be the Man of Sin here primarily intended by St. Paul. 3ly, I answer, that though the Fathers do not expresly say the Jewish Nation was the Man of Sin which the Apostle here intended, yet many of them have said those things on
which this our Interpretation doth depend; as v. g. that this Man of Sin was to be of Jewish Extract, that he was to sit in the Temple of Jerusalem, and that he was to come chiefly to deceive the unbelieving Jews, that so they might be punished for their Infidelity. And Lastly, As to the , or rather , he that letteth, I only in this differ from them, that whereas they refer this to the Ro∣man Empire, I do refer it to a Roman Empe∣ror; and as some of them held thatOpinione multorum receptum est ipsum Antichristum venturum. Sulp. Hist. S. l. 2. c. 40. Nero was this Antichrist, and Man of Sin, and others that he wasMulti nostrorum putant ob saevitiae ac turpitudinis magnitudinem Domitianum Neronem Antichristum fore. Hieron. in Dan. 11. F. 267. M. Domitian, so do I hold that Claudius, the Predecessor of that Nero, was the Person that witheld. § 12. Object. 2. It farther is objected, That the Jews were long before revealed to be the great Opposers of Christianity, and the Scribes and Pharisees had long sate in the Temple of God; wherefore the Revelation of the Man of Sin, being only to take place for some considera∣ble time after the writing this Epistle, the Jew∣ish Nation cannot be reasonably deemed the Man of Sin. Answ. I have already answered this Objection in the Paraphrase, by shewing that these are the Descriptions of the Man of Sin, by which the Thessalonians, and others, might then know him; and that they were all spoken in the Present Tense; shewing what he already did, and that he was yet more fully to be revealed, either by his actual Apostacy from the Roman Govern∣ment, which hapned in the Twelfth of Nero, or by the great Apostacy of the Believers of that Nation from the Faith. 2ly, I add, That the Jewish Nation not on∣ly had a great Opinion of their dearness to the God of Heaven, but were also look'd upon by their Proselytes, and others, as God's peculiar and beloved People, and therefore such a change of Providence as made it appear to all Men they were become the Generation of his Wrath, must also be a Revelation of them as the greatest of Sinners. And since this came upon them after they had rejected our Messiah, and crucified the Lord of Life, it must be a discovery that they be∣came Sons of Perdition upon this account; and in this sense the renewing that which letted, must make way for the Revelation of that wick∣ed one whom the Lord would consume with the breath of his Mouth. As then the Roman Church, though she is thought by us to be the Antichrist here spoken of, and the Beast menti∣oned in the Revelations, is yet by many other Christian Churches in the West, thought to be the true Catholick Church of Christ, and her Bi∣shop to be the Vicar of Christ, the Successor of Peter, and the Head of the Universal Church, and so will only be revealed to them to be what we now deem her, when she shall go into de∣struction, and be destroyed by the Sword of Christ, and by the Breath of his Mouth, so was the Church of Jerusalem then only fully re∣vealed to Jew and Gentile, and to the Judai∣zing Christians, to be not what they did erro∣niously think her, but what the Apostle here doth represent her, when our Lord did thus consume her by the Breath of his Mouth, and God so signally demonstrated she was a Vessel of his Wrath fitted for destruction. This Epistle seems to be written soon after the first, and as Bishop Pearson probably conjectures, in the same year, Sylvanus and Timotheus be∣ing still with him when he writ it, as they were at the writing of the first Epistle, 2 Thess. 1.1. Now St. Paul staid at Corinth only a year and six months, Acts 18.11. and there he had preach∣ed a considerable time, every Sabbath day, be∣fore they came to him, Acts 18.45. and so before he writ his first Epistle, it being written after that Timothy was come to him, 1 Thess. 3.6. and they seem to be gone from him before he left Corinth, to go to Syria, for then he had on∣ly with him Priscilla and Aquila, Acts 18.18. so that the Interval betwixt these two Epistles could not be above a year.
A Paraphrase & Comment ON THE Second Epistle of St. PAƲL TO THE THESSALONIANS. CHAP. I. Verse 1. PAUL and Silvanus, and Ti∣motheus (write) to the Church of the Thessalonians, (established) in (the know∣ledge and worship of) God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 2. Wishing.] Grace to you, and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 3. We are bound to thank God always for you, Brethren, as it is meet (for us to do,) because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all to∣wards each other aboundeth. Ver. 4. So that we our selves glory in you, (or boast of you,) in the Churches of God, for your patience, and (for your) faith (which produceth this patience,) in all your persecuti∣ons and tribulations which you endure. Ver. 5. Which (dispensation of Divine Wis∣dom appointing you to suffer, 1 Thess. 3.3. and permitting others thus to persecute you,) is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, (these Sufferings befalling you,) that you may be accounted worthy of the (Celestial) Kingdom of God, for which you also suffer, (and so are an assurance of a day when God will thus reward you.) Ver. 6. Seeing it is a righteous thing, with (that) God (to whom belongeth recompense, Rom. 12.19. and who will avenge his Elect that cry unto him day and night, Luke 18.7.) to recompense tribulation to them that trou∣ble you. Ver. 7. And to you who are troubled, (as we are) rest with us, (which rest we both com∣pleatly shall enjoy,) when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, (attended) with his mighty Angels, (as he shall be at the last day, 1 Thess. 4.16. when he will come to give every one according to his works, Matth. 16.27. Mark 8.38. and gather all the Nations of the World before him, Matth. 25.32. Jude 14, 15.) , of the righteous judgment of God, &c.] This place, saithMonstrat hic locus contra Haereticos, vitam aeternam quae in regno Dei intelligitur, non ita gratiae dei tribuendam esse, ut non etiam dignitati, & meritis hominum à gratia Dei profectis, retribuatur. Aestius, proves against the Hereticks, that Life Eternal is not so to be ascribed to the Grace of God, as not to be attributed also to the worth and me∣rits of Men proceeding from the Grace of God. But the true import of these words will be sufficiently contained in these following Par∣ticulars: 1. That the Justice of God obligeth him to recompense the Obedience and Sufferings of his faithful Servants, either in this, or in the Life to come; since were it otherwise, we could have no sufficient Motive to Perseve∣rance
in Obedience to him, or Suffering for his sake; and therefore this, by the Apostle, is laid as the Foundation of all the Service which we pay unto him, even the firm belief that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Hebr. 11.6. 2. That since God doth not, and according to the nature of the thing he cannot recom∣pense them in this Life, who suffer all Cala∣mities and Loses they can endure here, and e∣ven Death it self for his sake, his Justice will oblige him to do it in the next. Hence the Apostle saith of himself, and all his fellow Sufferers, If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. and puts the question thus, If the dead rise not at all—why stand we in jeo∣pardy every hour? v. 29, 30. But 3ly, That this Reward should be for kind so excellent, as is the Beatifick Vision, the be∣ing Heirs of God, joynt Heirs with Christ, the being like to him in glory; and for duration should be eternal; can never be on the ac∣count of that strict Justice which rendreth to every one his due, seeing there can be no pro∣portion betwixt a finite Action, or Passion, and an infinite Reward; and therefore the same Apostle who saith here, , we for these Sufferings are accounted worthy of this Kingdom, doth elsewhere positively declare the Sufferings of this present Life, , not worthy of the Glory which shall hereafter be revealed, Rom. 8.18. Nor can the Grace of God vouchsafed to enable us thus to perse∣verance in Sufferings, enhance the Merit of those Sufferings, or make the Reward in ju∣stice due unto us; since if it be of Grace that we thus suffer, then is it not of Debt that we are thus rewarded; God being not in a strict justice obliged to reward his own free Gifts and Graces he confers upon us. But 4ly, Even this Eternal Recompense being promised to those who suffer for the sake of Christ, by him who hath said, Be thou faith∣ful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10. and propounded this as the chief Encouragement, thus to endure with pa∣tience to the end, because great is our reward in Heaven, Matth. 5.12. it may be said, by virtue of that Promise to be in justice due to them who do thus suffer for it, it being a part of justice to perform our Promises, and to be faithful to our Words. This therefore is a faithful saying, If we suffer with him, if we endure, we shall live, and reign with him. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. And we may rest assured, that God the righteous Judge wil give this Crown of Righteousness to us at that day, 2 Tim. 4.8. that being approved, we shall receive that Crown of Life which the Lord hath promised to them that love him, James 1.12. But then God being not obliged in strict justice to pro∣mise so great a Recompense, he cannot be said to confer it ex dignitate, merito, aut aequalita∣te Rei, by reason of the dignity or worth of these our Sufferings, or because the Reward is only equal to the Merit of them, but only ex justitia pacti, because his Promise hath made it just and equal for him so to do. Ver. 8. (When he shall come, I say,) in fla∣ming fire, taking vengeance on them (among the Heathens) who know not God, and (of those Jews and Gentiles) who (having heard) obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 9. Who shall be punished with ever∣lasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, (from whose blissful presence they shall for ever be excluded, Matth. 25.41, 46.) and (and shall find that destruction inflicted on them) by the glory of his power, (this being the time when God will make known his power, upon the Vessels of Wrath fitted for destruction. Rom. 9.23. Ver. 10. (And it is also a righteous thing with him then to recompense to you eternal rest,) when he shall come to be glorified in (his dealings with) his Saints, and to be admi∣red (for his great love) in (and by) all them that believe, (and particularly by you,) because our testimony was believed by you in that day. Ver. 11. Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count you wor∣thy (, would make you worthy. v. 5.) of this calling (to his Kingdom and Glory,) and fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness (in you,) and the work of faith with power. Ver. 12. That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, (by your conti∣nuance in your faith,) and ye in him, (or by him,) according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, (by which you are ena∣bled to continue in the faith, and fulfil the good pleasure of his will.)
A DISCOURSE BY WAY OF APPENDIX TO THIS CHAPTER, SHEWING That the Endless Miseries or Torments of the Wicked is well consistent, both with the Justice, and the Goodness of God. THE Apostle in this Chapter seems plainly to assert that wicked Per∣sons shall be punished with everlast∣ing Destruction, and also to resolve this Punishment into the , or just Judgment of God. Whereas it is pretended, That it is contrary to the Justice of God to punish Temporary Crimes with Eternal Punishments, because Justice always observes a proportion be∣tween Offences and Punishments; but be∣tween Temporary Sins and Eternal Punish∣ments there is no proportion. And if it be hard to reconcile this with Divine Justice, it will be much more so to shew how it com∣ports with that great Goodness we suppose to be in God. They who assert the Eternity of Future Torments inflicted on the Wicked, abiding in a state of Misery, attempt by several ways to answer this Objection. I shall begin with those Answers, which to me seem not satis∣factory, and briefly shew the Reasons why I think they are not so, and then return that Answer which I think fully clears the Justice and the Goodness of God in this Dispensation from the strength of this Objection. And § 1. 1st, Some make out the proportion thus, That because Sin is infinite in respect of the Object against which it is committed, therefore it deserves an infinite Punishment, now because a finite Creature cannot suffer a Punishment which is infinite as to intention, therefore he suffers that which is infinite as to Extension or Duration. But to this it is replied, That if all Sins be for this reason infinite as to demerit, then the demerit of all sins must necessarily be e∣qual, and so there must be equal reason for the pardon of all Sins; for the demerit of no Sin can be more then infinite. 2. Hence it will follow that God cannot render unto eve∣ry Man according as his works shall be, because though they commit innumerable sins, he can only lay upon them the Punishment due to one only, because he cannot lay upon them a Punishment which is more than infinite. § 2. 2ly, Others say, That if wicked Men lived for ever in this World, they would sin for ever, and therefore they deserve to be punished for ever. But 1. Who can be certain of this, since, whilst we live in this World, we are in a state of a trial, and so may be in a possibility of repent∣ing and growing better. 2. God hath expresly declared that Men
shall be judged hereafter, not according to what they would have done had they lived longer, but according to what they actually have done in this present Life, according to their Works done in the Body; and so he hath sufficiently declared, he doth not punish them for what they would have done had they li∣ved longer, but for what they actually had done whilst they lived. So that this Answer recoils thus, Wicked men, by God's declara∣ration, are only to be punished for what they did whilst they lived here; now they did not live here for ever in a state of Sin, therefore they are not to live for ever hereafter in a state of Punishment. § 3. 3ly, Others say, That God having set before the Sinner Life and Death; and having so expresly forewarned him, this would be the certain Consequence of his Ini∣quity, he cannot charge God with Injustice in allotting to him the portion which he chose, and would incur after ail Admonitions to the contrary. But though this may be sufficient to stop the Sinner's mouth, it will do little to stop the mouth of Infidels, because it seem∣eth not to answer the Objection arising from the disproportion between the Fault and the Punishment, for it renders not the Fault less finite, or the Punishment less infinite, and so it doth not render it less inconsistent with Di∣vine Equity and Goodness to threaten so to punish finite Crimes, and execute that Pu∣nishment upon the Sinner. § 4. A very great and learned Person hath attempted a Solution to this Objection from these Considerations. First, That the measure of Penalties is not to be taken from any strict proportion be∣twixt Crimes and Punishments, but from one great end and design of Government, which is to secure the Observation of whole∣some and necessary Laws, and consequently whatever Penalties are proper and necessary to this end, are not unjust. Secondly, That whosoever considers how ineffectual the threatning, even of Eternal Torments, is to the greatest part of Sinners, will soon be satisfied that a less Penalty then that of Eternal Suffering would, to the far greatest part of Mankind, have been, in all probability, of little or no force, and that if any thing more terrible could have been threatned to the Workers of Iniquity, it had not been unreasonable, because it would all have been little enough to deter Men effe∣ctually from sin. But then he adds, Thirdly, That after all, he that threatneth hath still the power of Execution in his own hands; for there is this remarkable diffe∣rence betwixt Promises and Threatnings, that he who promiseth passeth over a Right to another, and thereby stands obliged to him in justice and faithfulness to make good his Promise; but in Threatnings it is quite o∣therwise, he that threatens keeps the Right of Punishing in his own hand, and is not obliged to execute what he hath threatned, any farther than the Reasons and Ends of Government do require; and he may with∣out any injury to the Party threatned, remit and abate as much as he pleaseth of the Pu∣nishment that he hath threatned; and be∣cause in so doing he is not worse, but better than his word, no body can find fault, or complain of any wrong or injustice thereby done to him. Nor is this any impeachment of God's Truth and Faithfulness, any more than it is esteemed among Men a piece of Falshood not to do what they have threatned. But here, with submission to better Judg∣ments, I conceive are many things propound∣ed which are not exactly true, or reach not the Objection, since that relates not to Gods Threats of Punishment, but to his Execution of the threatned Punishment. And 1st, When it is said that what pro∣portion ought to be appointed betwixt Crimes and Penalties, is not so properly a considerati∣on of Justice, as of Prudence in the Law-giver; and thence inferr'd, that whatever the dispro∣portion may be between Temporary Sins, and Eternal Punishments, Justice cannot be said to be concerned in it; It is owned, That by the Sanctions annex∣ed to his Laws, the Law-giver designs the preservation of his Laws from being violated, which is an effect of Prudence, but still of Prudence tempered with Equity, not unregard∣less of it, since it cannot be Prudence to threa∣ten what I know I cannot justly execute; for this in Humane Laws doth null the Penalty; and could it be supposed in Divine, would even frustrate the end of all God's Threats, since every Body would rest assured that a just God would never execute them. But 2ly, The Execution of the threatned Judgment, which is the only thing against which the Objection lies, is certainly an act of distributive Justice, and is so represented in the Holy Scriptures, when it is said to be done according to our works, and according to our works shall be, Rom. 2.16. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 22.12. Matth. 16.27. And when it is declared to be , the just Judg∣ment of God, and  just with God to render this vengeance to those that obey not the Gospel, which consists in their everlasting destruction, 2 Thess. 1.6, 8, 9. So that though Prudence was properly con∣cerned in promulging the Penalty, because 'tis Prudence which directs us to choose the Means most proper to the End we aim at, yet seeing the primary end of the Law-giver, i. e. the preventing the transgressing of his
Law is wholly lost, and entirely defeated be∣fore this Punishment comes to be executed, Justice alone can be concerned in the Executi∣on of it; and if the continuance of the Sin∣ner under Misery for ever, be the Execution of the threatned Punishment, Justice a∣lone can be concerned in the subjection of the Sinner to that Punishment; so far is it from being true, that if Prudence be requi∣site for the proportioning Penalties to Crimes, Justice cannot be concerned in the dispropor∣tion that may be between them, and much less that it cannot be concerned in executing a Penalty which bears so great a disproportion to the Crime. I confess also, that in Humane Govern∣ments, Prudence may fitly be call'd in to de∣liberate, not whether it be lawful, but whe∣ther it be expedient to execute the threatned Penalty; as when the Government is feeble, and the Multitude, or Power of Offenders, may render it hazardous to do Justice on them; but nothing of this nature can hap∣pen in Theocracy, where there can neither be a want of Wisdom in appointing, or E∣quity in proportionating the Penalty to the Offences, and much less want of Power to execute what in his Equity and Wisdom he saw fit to threaten. 2ly, When it is said, That a less Penalty then Eternal Sufferings would not have been sufficient to deter Men from sin, and therefore it could not be unreasonable, but rather suta∣ble to Divine Prudence to threaten these E∣ternal Miseries. I am not willing to admit that God should threaten what he knows he cannot, with con∣sistence to his Justice, or his Goodness, Exe∣cute; this being in effect to threaten in this wise, If you will do to me what you in justice ought not to do, I will execute upon you what I in justice ought not to do to you. 'Tis also to insinuate, that an All-wise God could not so well provide for Humane Government, or carry on his great Designs without abusing Mens credulity, and scaring them with dread∣ful Expectations of what he never did in∣tend to execute. Lastly, This seemeth even to insinuate, that Prudence in God may act without regard to Equity and Goodness, and even be separated from them, as it must be in appointing, and even proportionating those Penalties to Crimes, which it is not consistent with his Equity or Goodness to in∣flict. 3ly, When it is added, That God is not ob∣liged to execute what he hath threatned, any farther than the Reasons and the Ends of Go∣vernment do require, and that he may, with∣out any injury to the Party threatned, remit and abate as much as he pleaseth of the Pu∣nishment that he hath threatned, and that without any Impeachment of his Truth and Faithfulness. This I allow of in the Case of Temporal Punishments in this World designed not for Excision, but the Amendment of the Sinner, because there may be a just ground for the Remission of such threatned Penalties, even the Repentance and Reformation of the Sin∣ner, by which the primary end of all God's Threats in some good measure is obtained. And also because these Threats, in what Ex∣pressions soever they are made, if they be only Threats, are still conditional, the mean∣ing of them being only this, I will inflict this Judgment if you repent not of your evil ways; For at what instant I shall speak, saith God, against a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, to pull down, and to destroy it, if that Nation against which I have pronounced these things, turn from their evil ways, I will repent me of the evil which I thought to do unto them, Jer. 18.7, 8. And again, When I say unto the Wicked, O wicked Man, thou shalt surely die, if he do not turn from his way he shall die in his iniquity. Say therefore, to them, as I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; wherefore turn your selves, and live ye, Ezek. 18.32. 33.8, 9, 11. 3ly, Because God threatneth Judgments, not that he takes any pleasure in his Punish∣ments, but rather to awaken and reform the Sinner: When therefore by his Comminati∣ons he hath wrought this good Effect upon him, it is not to be wondred that he doth not proceed to execute that Judgment which hath already done its work by being threat∣ned. And all this well comports, not only with Divine Justice, but also with his Im∣mutability and Truth, because this Refor∣mation and Repentance changes the subject of the Threat; the change in every instance of this nature being not in God, but Man. Thus v. g. we cannot charge God with Mu∣tability, because he doth not execute the threatned Judgment on repenting Nineveh, because it was impenitent, and not repent∣ing Niniveh he threatned; nor with Inju∣stice, because 'twas only her Impenitence which rendred her the proper Object of vin∣dictive Justice. But then this Notion seems to be stretched too far when 'tis extended to God's Threats of Future and Eternal Punishments to be inflicted upon those who die in an impenitent and unreformed estate. For 1st. In all these Cases the Evil threatned hath entirely lost its first and salutary end upon them, and therefore must be threat∣ned to such Persons to no end, or else to shew the Justice of God in punishing thse Vessels of his Wrath thus fitted for destruction. Thus v. g. when Christ saith, Except ye re∣pent, ye shall all perish, Luke 13.3, 5. that in the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of his
righteous Judgment, God will give to every one according to his works; to them that obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, in∣dignation, and wrath, Rom. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. to them that obey not the Gospel, everlasting destruction. These Threats are plainly made to those who die in their impenitence and disobedience, by that God who will judge e∣very Man according to his works, declaring that in the Day of the Revelation of his Wrath and righteous Judgment, they shall perish everlastingly, because through the hardness and impenitency of their hearts they have treasured up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and rendred themselves Vessels of his Wrath, fitted for destruction. Can it be rea∣sonably said then, because God does them no injury if he do not execute this Wrath upon them, that though they do not repent, they may not perish; that Indignation and Wrath may not be the Portion of the Diso∣bedient, and that this righteous Judge may not give to them according to their Works? May we not rather say unto them, as doth this very Person in another place,Sermon of the Truth of God, Vol. 6. p. 361. If thou continuest impenitent, however he may defer the execution of Temporal Evils, his Truth and Veracity is concerned to inflict Eternal Punishments upon thee? 2ly, God's Threats of Everlasting Miseries have for their Object the Impenitent, and therefore do exclude the Supposition of any change in them, which may induce God to remit, or to rebate the threatned Judgment: If then this Punishment may be remitted to them, either in part, or in whole, it must be either by a change in God, or by a secret in∣tention in him, not to inflict what he thus threatneth. That there was in God no such secret Intention, this learned Person thus de∣clares, by saying,Sermon on the Unchangeableness of God, Vol. 6. p. 110. When God did threa∣ten, he spake what he did really purpose and intend, if something did not intervene to pre∣vent the Judgment threatned. And indeed, these Threats declaring what the righteous God will do, and what they who are finally impenitent and disobedient shall suffer, such a Secret will must plainly be repugnant to his revealed Will, and therefore must sup∣pose in God two contrary Wills. Moreover, to say that such a Secret Intention may be in God, notwithstanding these Declarations to the contrary, is in great measure to ener∣vate even the primary Intention of these Threats, viz. the deterring the Sinner, by the greatness and duration of them, from a continuance in his Sin; for this Intention, if it may be in God, it follows that it may be his Will not to inflict what he hath threat∣ned to the Sinner; now so much hopes as you give the impenitent Sinner that he may escape Eternal Punishment, so much encou∣ragement you give him to continue still in his Impenitence. NowSerm. p. 4. the belief of the Threatnings of God in their utmost extent, is of so great moment to a good Life, and so great a discouragement to Sin, saith this Reverend Person, that if Men were once set free from the fear and belief of this, the most pow∣erful Restraint from Sin would be taken a∣away. That this cannot be expected by reason of any change in God, this excellent Person thus declares, and evinceth:Sermon of God's Unchangeableness, p. 112, 113, 114, 115. Let but the Sinner consider what God is, and his unchangeable Nature must needs terrifie him; he is an Holy God, who therefore hateth all the Workers of Iniquity, A just God, who will by no means clear the guilty, nor let the Sinner go unpunished. He is also Omnipotent, and able to execute the Ven∣geance threatned against Sinners. And, which gives a sad Accent to all this, he that is thus Holy, and Just, and Powerful, continues ever the same; he will never cease to hate Iniquity, and to be an impla∣cable Enemy to all Impenitent Sinners.— Let (then) all obstinate Sinners hear this, and tremble; you cannot be more obsti∣nately bent to continue in your ways, than God is peremptorily resolved to make you miserable; if you be determined on a sin∣ful Course, God is also determined how he will deal with you; that he will not spare, but that his Anger and Jealousie shall smoke against you; and that all the Curses which are written in tlm Book shall light upon you. 'He hath sworn in his Wrath, that unbelieving and impenitent Sinners shall not enter into his Rest; and for the greater assurance of the thing, and that we may not think that there is any Condition implied in these Threatnings, he hath con∣firmed them by an Oath, that by this im∣mutable Sign, in which it is impossible for God to lie, Sinners might have strong Ter∣rors, and not be able to flie to any hopes of Refuge. 3ly, Either God may in Justice inflict upon the Wicked these Punishments which he hath threatned, or else it is unjust in God to ex∣ecute upon them the Judgment written, i e. the Punishment which he hath threatned to them in the Word of Truth. If it be said it is unjust in God to execute them on the Sinner dying in his Impenitence, either we cannot be
obliged to believe that Word in which these Threats are contained; or else an Obligation must lie upon us to believe that God will act unjustly. I, to avoid this, it be said these Threats do not discover certainly what God will do, but only what the Sinner doth de∣serve to suffer, read them once more, and you will find that they expresly say of those who shall be at the Great Day condemned, That they shall go away into Eternal Punish∣ment, Matth. 25.46. That, they shall be pu∣nished with Eternal Destruction from the Pre∣sence of the Lord, 2 Thess. 1.8. And that they shall be tormented Day and Night for ever and ever, Rev. 14.10, 11.20.10. Moreover, when our Saviour argues thus to induce Men to cut off their offending Hands, and pluck out their offending Eyes; 'tis better to enter into Life halt, and maim∣ed, then to be cast into Eternal Fire, or into Hell, where the Worm dieth not, and where the Fire is not quenched, Matth. 18.8, 9. doth he not sufficiently inform us there is an absolute necessity of doing the one, or suffer∣ing the other? When he saith, He that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, shall ne∣ver be forgiven in this, or in the World to come, but shall be obnoxious to Eternal Judg∣ment, Matth. 12.32. Mark 3.29. doth he not insinuate, that he who never is forgiven, must be for ever subject to this Judgment? It is therefore certain, that our Judge hath expresly taught us, not only that the impeni∣tent Sinner doth deserve, but that he shall actually suffer the Worm that never dies, the Fire that shall not be quenched. If God in justice may inflict upon the Wicked these Punishments which he hath threatned, then the Objection cannot need this Answer; yea, what can move him not to inflict what he by Threatning hath enga∣ged his Truth to do? what, I say, can move him to do it, but an Act of Mercy ex∣ercised to them, of whom the Scripture saith, they shall have Judgment without Mercy, Jam. 2.13. what but remission of that Sin, which, saith the Scripture, shall never be remitted? What but Mercy in the Day of Wrath and Judgment? What but Remission exercised to the impenitent without an Interest in the Blood of our Redemption? to which Imagi∣nations I conceive the Scripture give but little countenance. Nor are we to conclude, That the Non-execution of these Threats lays no impeach∣ment on God's Truth and Faithfulness, because it is not esteemed among Men a piece of fals∣hood not to do what they have threatned. For Men may reasonably be moved to remit their Threatnings, because they oft are made in Passion, or may exceed the Rules of Justice; but these are things not incident to an All-perfect God; or because the Person threat∣ned repents, begs pardon, and returns unto his Duty, which the damned cannot be sup∣posed to do. § 5. It is farther said, in answer to this Objection, that macula peccati est aeterna, the stain of them who die in their Impeni∣tence, will be perpetual, and he that dies thus filthy, will be filthy still; now it seems equitable, that, is qui nunquam desinit esse malus, nunquam desineret esse miser, he who never ceases to be wicked, should never cease to be miserable. Now this, rightly explain∣ed, affords a clear and satisfactory Answer to the Objection, as shewing that the Sinner becomes for ever miserable, not by any posi∣tive Act of God inflicting everlasting Stripes upon him, or loading him perpetually with fresh Torments, but wholly from his own Sin, which renders him uncapable of the en∣joyment of an holy God, and so perpetually excluded from his blissful Presence, which to a Soul that is immortal, and can never die, must be the Source of Everlasting Tor∣ment, and, from the natural workings of its Faculties, will necessarily subject it to the Worm that never dies. I own, and really believe, that positive Torments, such as the Schools call Poena sen∣sus, shall be inflicted on the Body; but then I have insinuated my present Notion of them to be this: 1st, That these Positive Torments on the Body are not to begin until the raising of the Body, when Christ shall come in flaming Fire to take vengeance on them who would not obey his Gospel, the World that now is being reserved to be set on fire, for the Day of Judg∣ment, and Perdition of ungodly Men. At which time I conceive the Righteous shall be snatch∣ed up into the Air, and be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thess. 4.17. and the Wicked shall be left to the devouring Flames. See for this, the Note on 2 Pet. 3.7. 2ly, I also do conjecture that this Fire may be called Eternal, not that the Bodies of the Wicked shall be for ever burning in it, and never be consumed by it, since this cannot be done without a constant Miracle; but be∣cause it shall so entirely consume their Bo∣dies, as that they never shall subsist again, but shall perish, and be destroyed for ever by it. In which sense Sodom and Gomorrah were set forth for an Example, suffering the Venge∣ance of Eternal Fire. See the Note on Jude v. 7. And if so, this Punishment being only temporary, the Objection doth not lye against it, God being no more obliged either in ju∣stice, or in goodness, to snatch the Wicked out of these Flames when they thus kindle on them, then he was to snatch the Wicked of the old World out of that Deluge which over∣whelm'd them. These I call my Conjectures, or my private Sentiments. But then I add, as certain matter of my faith,
1st, That the Soul, even from the time of its separation from the Body, in its impeni∣tency, shall find it self in such a dismal state, as shall then fill it with perpetual horror, and dreadful expectation of the Punishment which God hath threatned to the Wicked. And thus it shall be like those Devils which be∣lieve and tremble, James 2.19. as knowing that there is reserved for them a time of Tor∣ment, Matth. 8.29. 2ly, That when the final Sentance shall be past upon the Wicked, and they shall be for ever separated from the Presence of the Lord, their Souls shall be perpetually subject to the height of Misery, or to that Worm which never dies; and that this Misery will be the natural, and the perpetual result of such a Separation. To explain this let it be considered, 1. That there is scarce any thing in which the Heathen Moralists so universally accord, as in this fixed Rule, , that an impure Soul can have no commerce with a pure God; and that it is not congruous to his Nature to admit such Souls into his Presence. And this Assertion is built upon a sure and incontestible Foundati∣on; for seeing God is absolute in Holiness, he cannot but retain the greatest hatred to, and abhorrence of all Actions, and Persons that are unrighteous, and impure; and since his Nature is immutable, his Holiness un∣changeable, he must for ever hate, with a most perfect hatred, whatsoever is unholy, and im∣pure; and therefore to suppose an interrupti∣on of his hatred of evil doers, is to imagine he can cease to be a pure and holy God. Con∣sider 2. That the Soul of wicked Men being immortal, must abide for ever, if it be not annihilated, and that God neither is obliged to annihilate it, nor hath he any where decla∣red that he will do so. I say, he is not obliged to annihilate the Souls of wicked men, for then it must be so on this account, because he is obliged to put them out of that Misery which they have more brought upon themselves by their own folly, and rebellions; and if so, since this must cer∣tainly be an act, not of strict Justice, but of Grace and Favour, God must be bound to shew an act of Grace and Favour towards Men, purely because they have provoked and rebell'd against him, i. e. because they have done that which renders them the pro∣per Objects of his hatred, and his indignation, and be obliged to save Men from that Misery which by their stubborn disobedience to all his Calls, and Admonitions, his Exhotrations, and all the gracious Methods his Providence had used to preserve them from it, they wil∣fully have brought upon themselves. Where∣as indeed the riches of his goodness being de∣signed to lead Men to Repentance, or to en∣courage them in ways of Holiness and Piety, hath only for its proper Object such as are capable of being made the better by it, it can∣not therefore be the Goodness and Mercy of a God to shew kindness to Persons obstinately and incorrigibly wicked, because it cannot be the Goodness and Mercy of a Being infinitely just and holy; for seeing all the Divine Per∣fections must agree together, that cannot be a Divine Perfection which contradicts any o∣ther Perfection. The original of our Mistakes in Matters of this Nature, seems to arise from our own Imperfection, which naturally leads us to consider of the Divine Attributes apart, and as it were in separation from each other, and by so doing, to frame such wide and large Notions of the one, as to exclude the other. Whereas indeed they ought to be considered as really they are in God himself, i. e Good∣ness and Mercy joyned with infinite Holiness and Justice; and as it is the Goodness and Mercy of a Law-giver, Governour, and Righ∣teous Judge, which never regularly can be ex∣ercised without some prospect of reclaiming, or doing good unto the Object of it. And thus 'tis well consistent with the Prayer of David, Be not thou mercifull to them that of∣fend of malicious wickedness, Psal. 59.5. § 6. I add, that God hath not declared in Scripture that he will annihilate the Souls of wicked Men, or that this is the Punishment which he designeth to inflict upon them; this is generally said to be the Doctrine of the Socinians; thoughSolut. Problem. Tom. 4 p. 533. Crellius expresly says, Animas impiorum Deum post judicium annihilaturum nec Scriptura asserit, nec ratis evincit, That neither Reason doth evince, or Scripture assert it will be so. And Object. 1. 'Tis certain that this follows not from any of those places of the Old Testa∣ment in which the Dead are said to be no more, or not to be; as v. g. Let the Sinners be consumed out of the Earth, and let the wick∣ed be no more, Psal. 104.35. Our Fathers have sinned, and are not, Lam. 5.7. I have made Esau bare—his Seed is spoiled, and he is not, Jer. 49.10. See Chap. 10.20.35.15. For (1.) If any of these places speak of Annihilation, they must speak of such a one as was then pass'd already, and so is incon∣sistent with the future Judgment of those Per∣sons, because it is not said they shall not be, but they are not; they therefore cannot refer to any future Annihilation at the Day of Judgment. 2. Then must the Righteous be annihilated
as well as the Wicked; for of righteous E∣noch it is said, He walked before God, and was not, Gen. 5.24. of Joseph, One is not, Gen. 42.13. and David, prays thus for him∣self, O spare me a little that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and be not, Psal. 39.13. 'Tis therefore evident these places only were intended to import, those Persons were not in the Land of the Living. Object. 2. But, 'tis objected, That the Wick∣ed after the Resurrection shall be punish'd with the second Death, wherefore they cannot in any proper sense be said to live, and to subsist, and to have sense of Pain, this being not consistent with a state of Death. Answ. I answer, 1. That this second Death cannot consist in the annihilation of the Wick∣ed, or in their exemption from all sense of Punishment, because 'tis promised that He who overcometh shall not be hurt by the second Death, Rev. 2.11. whence it is manifest that they who die this second Death, shall be hurt by it; but were it to the Wicked, con∣demned to an Eternal Separation from God, and from all hopes of Happiness, a Conclusi∣on of their Being, and of all sense of Mise∣ry, it would be no more hurtful, but highly beneficial to them, as being a Conclusion of that Life which they must otherwise have spent in endless Misery. Moreover, those very Torments which the Damned suffer are declared to be the second Death, and wicked Men are therefore said to die the second Death, because they do endure Eternal Tor∣ments; for the fearful and unbelievers, &c. shall have their part in that Lake of Fire and Brimstone which is the second Death, Rev. 21.8. This Death then, when it is threatned as the final Punishment of the Wicked, cannnot import a State of Non existence, or Insensi∣bility, but only an unhappy miserable State, a Separation of the Soul from him who is the Fountain of our Life, and all our Com∣forts; an absolute Exclusion from that Feli∣city which only renders Life a Blessing, and a Life of Infelicity and Misery. To make this still more evident, Consider 2ly, That this is a Jewish Phrase, used often by, and borrowed from the Anci∣ent Hebrews, with whom it doth import the Punishment of damned Persons in the Life to come. So Deut. 33.6. Let Reuben live, and not die the second death, saith the Targum of Onkelos; i. e. let him not die the death with the wicked: Die in the Age to come, saith the Targum of B. Uziel. Let him not die the se∣cond death which the wicked die in the Age to come, saith the Jerusalem Targum. Now that the death of the Wicked, in the Age to come, did really subject them to Eternal Tor∣ments, the Jews still thought, as is apparent not only from the plain Testimony ofAntiq. l. 18. c. 2. Jo∣sephus, who saith the Pharisees assigned to the wicked , an Eternal Prison, in which they were to be tormented,De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 12. p. 788. F. , with Eternal Punishment; and from Philo, who saith, that some conceive Death to be the last of Punishments, whereas it scarce∣ly deserveth to be named the beginning of them, seeing the Punishment reserved for the wicked Person is , to live for ever in a dying state, and suffer such a death as hath no end; but also from the Apocryphal Books, which say, , they shall feel them, and weep for ever, Judith 16.17. So again, Isa. 22.14. This sin shall not be forgiven till the second death; that is, saith Kimchi, till the Soul dieth in the World to come. And Chap. 65.5, 6, 15. of the same Persons it is said, God will kill them with the second death, and he will deliver them up to the punishment of Hell, where the fire burneth all the day. Object. It further is objected, That Eternal Life is said to be peculiar to the Saints in Bliss, whereas unto the Wicked it is threat∣ned that they shall not see Life, John 3.36. Answ. To this I answer, That Life in Scrip∣ture, when it is mentioned as the End of our Faith, and the Reward of our Obedience, is not intended only to signifie our permanence in Being, but to assure us of our advancement to a state of Happiness, and is equivalent to Everlasting Life. So to the Lawyer asking, What good thing shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? our Saviour answers, Do this, and thou shalt live, Luke 10.25, 28. So Christ saith, He that eateth me shall live by me, John 6.57. i. e He shall live for ever, v. 58. I came that my sleep might have Life, John 10.10. I give unto them life eternal, v. 28. And that this is the Life denied to the Wicked, John 3.36 is evident from the precedent words of the same Verse, He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; but he that believeth not the Son, shall not see life. This is a Phrase so known, and this use of it is so frequent, saith Maimonides, that hence our Masters say, The just are stiled living in their death, because they then are happy. And that the Phrase, Not to see Life, cannot import a state of Non-existence, or Insensibility, is evident, because 'tis said of them who do not see Life, that the Wrath of God abideth on them, they therefore must a∣bide under a sense of it. Obj. 4. Lastly, It is objected, That the Wicked are in Scripture said to perish utterly, 2 Pet. 2.12. and to be punished with everlast∣ing destruction, now these Expressions seem to signifie a deprivation of all sense and being. De Praem. & Poenis, p. 713. D.
Answ. But nothing is more common, both in Greek and Latin, and in other Languages then to say, when we conceive our future Life is likely to be miserable, , perij, I am undone, I perish. See the Note ofCaptiv. Act. 3. § 5. v. 32. Taubman up∣on those words of Plautus, Qui per virtutem periit, is non interit. That only in this mo∣ral sense the damned are in Scripture said to perish, viz. by having all their hopes of fu∣ture Happiness destroyed, and being senten∣ced to those Torments which are exceedingly more heavy than the loss of Being, is evident, first, from the Scripture, which inform us, that to cast the Soul and Body into Hell fire, is to destroy them, as is apparent from these two Expressions, Fear him who can destroy both Soul and Body in Hell fire, Matth. 10.28. who after he hath killed, hath power to cast into Hell, saith St. Luke, Chap. 12.5. that is, into that place where the Worm dieth not, and where the Fire is not quenched. More∣over, the Devils put the question to our Sa∣viour thus, , art thou come to destroy us before the time, Luke 4.34. and yet that to destroy is only  to torment them, is evident from the same question re∣cited by St. Matthew thus, Art thou come to torment us before the time, Chap. 8.29. And had the Devils thought, that at Christ's co∣ming they might have been reduced into the state of Non-existence, or Insensibility, they could have had no reason to dread, or depre∣cate so vehemently that Perdition which would so long ago have freed them from that Horror which they still endure. Moreover, this Opinion is so far from be∣ing contained in the Holy Scripture, that it is plainly contrary to many things contained in Scripture: For, (1.) The Scripture plainly intimates, some in the other World shall suffer more, some less; for it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment then for Capernaum, Matth. 11.21-25. that some shall be be beaten with fewer, some with many stripes, Luke 12.47, 48. some shall receive greater damnation than others, Matth. 23.14. But if Annihilation only be the second Death, the Punishment, and Perdition threatned to Sinners in the o∣ther World, they must all suffer equally, be∣cause there no degrees of Annihalation, or not Being, then all will equally not be, or lose their Being, and nothing by Annihilati∣on can lose more. 2ly, It is said of the Wicked, that they shall be cast into the place where their Worm dieth not; of them that shall not see Life, that the wrath of God abi∣deth on them; of them that are cast out into utter Darkness, that there is weeping and wailing. Now that of the Schools is abso∣lutely true, that non entis nullae sunt affecti∣ones, that which is not, cannot be in Misery; that which abides not, cannot abide under the wrath of God, that which so dieth, as to cease to be, cannot be subject to a Worm that dieth not, whatever be the import of that Phrase. Consider § 7. 2ly, That we have two Passions of the Soul which are still conversant about Good present, and to come, viz. desire of the Good we want, and joy in that which we at pre∣sent have. When therefore we are in a state in which we cannot possibly enjoy the Good we above all things want, and naturally de∣sire, we must for ever lye under the torment of Dissatisfaction and Despair; and when we fall into that state in which we can enjoy no comfortable, or real Good, we never can have any joy. Again, we have two other Passions which are imployed about a present, or a future Evil; Fear that it may befal us, and Grief when it hath actually taken hold upon us. It therefore being natural to all Men to desire to be freed from an afflictive Evil, when they lye under it without all hopes or prospect of any end of, or delive∣rance from the worst of Evils, they must be swallowed up of Grief; and when their Guilt hath rendred them still obnoxious to the Di∣vine Displeasure, they must be subject to E∣ternal Fears. Consider 3ly, That the proper Action of the Soul is Thought, and that whilst she continues, she must be conscious to her self of her own A∣ctions; when then the Soul hath nothing comfortable to imploy its Thoughts upon, but an Eternal Scene of Misery, to which her wilful Sin and Folly hath everlastingly confi∣ned her, to be the doleful Subject of her con∣tinual Reflections, when she hath nothing to divert her from these rueful Thoughts, she must become an endless Torment to her self. Now from these three Considerations it will demonstrably follow, that the Soul which in this Life hath not been purged from the Dominion, or the Guilt of Sin, and there∣fore is execluded from a State of of Happi∣ness, and from Enjoyment of that God in whom its Happiness consists must be for ever miserable. For it must be perpetually tormented with the Thoughts of its Eternal Separation from God's blissful Presence, and it's Exclusion from the State of Happiness which Saints made perfect do enjoy. Now, as an Heathen. L. non posse Sua riter, &c. p. 1106. D. Plutarch puts the question, Must it not be very sad to be deprived of the hope of ever∣lasting
Blessings, and be excluded from the com∣pleatest Happiness? Were the damned obnoxi∣ous to no other Punishments besides this loss, even this would beget in them such a Worm of Conscience, as would perpetually subject them to the worst of Miseries: As will be evident if we consider, 1. That the earnest and impetuous desire which is in all Men to be happy, is rooted in their very Nature, and therefore must conti∣nue as long as they retain that Nature, and yet it is impossible that this desire should in the least be gratified, when we are once con∣demned to an Eternal Separation from the Place and Object of our Happiness, there be∣ing no hopes that they should ever see his ace, who at the coming of their Judge shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord. Now the Wise∣man tells us, that even hope deferr'd makes the heart sick, Prov. 13.12. Hope therefore irrecoverably disappointed must create in it an excess of torment. A wicked Cain ac∣counted it an unsupportable Calamity to be excluded from God's gracious Presence here on Earth; My punishment, saith he, is great∣er than I am able to bear, for from thy face shall I be hid, Gen. 4.13, 14. How dreadful therefore must that Sentence be, which doth eternally exclude us from his blissfui Presence, and force us to a continual despair of that which we most ardently desire? For as it is one great Ingredient of our future Happiness, that it is that which never can be lost, so must it be a signal aggravation of our future Mi∣sery, and loss of Happiness, to know it is ir∣reparable. 2. This loss will be enhansed from the great Change the other World will make in our Condition. The Terrors of an awake∣ned and guilty Conscience, even in this Life, are very grievous; but here we may be able to mitigate the gripings of it by the Society of others, or by the Pleasures of the World; we may deceive it with false Opinions, and flatter it with false Hopes and Promises of Reformation and Amendment; but when we are passed hence into another World, our vain Imaginations will be all confuted, our Hopes of Reformation will be at an end, and we shall be eternally deprived of all those Enjoyments in which we once placed our Happiness, and shall have nothing to divert us from our sad∣dest Thoughts: Now, what Condition can be more deplorable than this, viz. to be de∣prived of all those Comforts in which we placed our former Happiness, and find it ut∣uterly impossible to purchase the least glimpse of real Happiness, or to divert our Thoughts from a continual Remorse for our irreparable loss. For 3ly, The Sinner's memory reflecting on this Punishment of loss, will create fresh and never ceasing Torments to him. It will tor∣ment him to remember what an inestimable Blessing he hath lost, in losing the Enjoyment of that God who is the chiefest Good, and of that Happiness which passeth Understand∣ing; for the greater still we apprehend the Good to be, the greater will the Trouble we endure be, when we have wholly lost the hopes of its Enjoyment. Again, It will add still to the Torment of the Sinner, to consider that he hath exchanged this exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory, for things of no in-intrinsick value and duration; that for the Pleasures of a moment, which are now turn∣ed into Sadness, he should forego those Pleasures which run at God's right hand for ever; that for a little fading Earth, which he soon left behind him, he should deprive himself of an Inheritance incorruptible, reser∣ved in the Heavens for him. It also will Tor∣ment him to consider in what a fair Capacity he was once placed of being happy; what frequent Calls and Invitations he hath had to be for ever so; what Importunity the God of Heaven used to bring him thither; and with what stiftness he resisted all these gracious Motions; These, and such like Considerati∣ons, will fill the miserable Soul with constant Matter of most sad Reflections. Now, saith theStatue aliquem confectum cunctis animi corporisque doloribus, quanti in hominem cadere maximi possunt, nullâ spe propo∣sità fore levius aliquando, nullâ praeteritâ, nec praesenti, nec expectatâ voluptate, quid eo miserius dici aut fingi potest? Tor∣quat. apud Cic. de finibus, L. 1. n. 33. Heathen Orator, suppose a Person subject to the extreamest  be incident to Soul and Body,  of the alleviation of this  of any future Good, and what can be ima∣gined farther to compleat his Misery? And now to answer the Objection, by re∣moving the foundation of it: Hence it is ea∣sie to demonstrate, that all these Evils which the Soul suffers after Death, may rather be esteemed the necessary Consequents, than po∣sitive and formal Punishments of Sin by an immediate Hand of God. For instance, that Souls departed are deprived of the Love of God, are Objects of his Wrath, and are ex∣cluded from his Presence, hapneth not meer∣ly because they are Souls separated from the Body; for pious Souls, after their Separati∣on, are entirely exempted from these Evils; but this ariseth from the natural Purity and Holiness of God, which renders it incon∣gruous to him to admit such only into his Presence, and the defilement and impurity which these unhappy Souls lye under, and by which they are rendred unable to converse with the God of Holiness. The Worm of
Conscience, the Desparation, the direful Ex∣pectations which follow from this sense of Loss, and the Divine Displeasure are also the natural Results of the Soul's Separation in an impure and unsanctified Condition, and therefore being filthy still. Moreover, it being natural to all Men, say the very. Pythag. apud Jamblyc. c. 48. p. 89. Heathens, to give good things to them they love, and in whom they delight, and to inflict evil things on those to whom they stand affect∣ed contrariwise, How can it be, but that the Soul thus conscious of those abominable things which the Lord hates, and which most justly have incensed this righteous Judge, should live under most dreadful Expectations of his Wrath? Now, true is that of the Tragae∣dian, Poenas dat qui expectat, qui autem me∣ruit expectat; He suffers whose Conscience tells him he deserves, and therefore cannot but expect to suffer. Lastly, That he is thus to be eternally a Torment to himself, ariseth from the Immortality of the Soul, which cannot cease to be without an immediate Dissolution from the Hand of God, and whilst it doth continue, cannot cease to be desirous of that Happiness from which it will for e∣ver be excluded, or cease to be tormented with the Thoughts of that stupendious Fol∣ly which did subject it to this heavy Doom. And now what a poor comfort is it to the Sinner to laugh at what is said touching Hell fire, and a Lake of Brimstone, as unphiloso∣phical, and say that these are things impro∣per to torment a Spiritual Soul, if undenia∣bly it may be subject to the loss of all that is desirable to make it happy, to endless Grief, to remediless Remorse, and dreadful Expectations of the Wrath of God, and a perpetual Despair of being ever freed from these tormenting Evils, which, as the Hea∣then hath observed, are , more violent and insupportable than any Pu∣nishment by Fire and Sword? What if the Fire in which the Bodies of the Wicked are to be tormented, should not be kindled till our Saviour come in flaming Fire to take ven∣geance on them? what Comfort will this yield the Sinner, if, from the Day of its de∣parture from the Body, his Soul will be ob∣noxious to this greater Misery? What, last∣ly, if that Fire of the damned, in which their Bodies are to be tormented, should only be Eternal in that sense in which St. Jude in∣form us that Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities round about them, have been set forth for an Example, suffering the vengeance of E∣ternal Fire, If this amazing Torment of the Soul, which in propriety of Speech is only capable of feeling torment, will be eternal in the highest and most entensive impo of that word? If it be still objected, That it seems  consistent with Divine Goodness to have f∣med Man so, as that he should be miserable from himself, this at one blow cuts off both Heaven, and Hell; for it is to find fault with God, and represent him as less Good, for ma∣king any Beings capable of Vice, and Vertue. For all our Vertue in a state of Trial, conf in chusing well when we had freedom, and some temptations to do otherwise; and all our Vice in chusing to do ill, when we had Laws directing us to avoid the Evil, and to chuse the Good, and had the highest Mo∣tives so to do. To say then, a good God could not create a Creature capable of Vice and Vertue, is in effect to say, 'tis inconsist with Divine Goodness to create such Crea∣tures as should be subject unto Government, since Government supposes Laws, and Laws must be attended with the Sanctions of Re∣wards and Punishments. Here then again the Mistake lyes in separating the Divine Goodness from his Holiness and Justice, whereas Justice and Holiness are as essential to the Notion of a God as Goodness; for 'tis impossible that Justice should belong to the Idea of God, if it were irreconcileable with the Divine Goodness to make such Creatures as may deserve well or ill, i. e. to be reward∣ed, or punished. And seeing the Holiness of God renders it necessary for him to retain the greatest hatred to, and abhorrence of in∣gible Sinners, if it be inconsistent with Di∣vine Goodness to make any Creature which may deserve to be the Object of his hed, Goodness and Holiness cannot both belong to the Idea of God. If lastly, it be still enquired why Divine Goodness and Mercy doth not still leave co∣demned Sinners in a Capacity of that Repen∣tance and Reformation which might after  season fit them for the Enjoyment of himself and thereby put an happy end to all their Mi¦sery? I answer, That both the Christians and H¦thens do accord in this, that these Eternal Pu∣nishments shall only be inflictedOrig. contr. Cels. p. 403., , on thse that are incurably wicked. And they who shall hereafter be found thus confirmed in wicked∣ness, are by the. Plat. Georg. p. 357, 358. Heathens given up to Tor∣ments
without end. Yea,Apud Orig. l. 8. p. 409. Celsus dog∣matically says, That they judge rightly, who say, the just shall be happy, , But the unjust shall be cays subject to eternal Evils. That this was the Opinion of the Heathens, as well as of the Christians, and that no Man ought ever to depart from it. Now that which ply may render their state incurable, may be 1. That their Day of Grace is past, and turn'd into a Day of Wrath; their Time of Trial and Probation is expired, and they are come to the time of Retribution. For as the Christians teach that a Man cannot be truly good and holy without the assistance of the Holy Spirit, so did the. Jambl. . p. 11. See the Note on Rom. 2.15. Heathens teach, That there was an absolute need of a Divine Afflatus or Good assisting Genius to preserve them from Sin, and to advance them to a vertuous Life. Now, why is it unjust with God to say, his Spirit shall not always strive with them who have so long resisted all his Motions, and hardned their Hearts a∣gainst him? whom all the riches of his Goodness could not lead unto Repentance, or preserve from treasuring up Wrath against the Day of Wrath. Either the Day of Grace must never end, or there must be a time when they that are filthy will be filthy still. Moreover, To assert it is unjust with God, or inconsistent with his Goodness, to appoint a Day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, and render to Men according to their Works; as it seems plainly to border on a Contradiction in the Terms, so it cuts off all future Judgment, it being certain God neither will nor can do what is inconsistent with his Goodness to do so; and, according to this Hypothesis, he must never pass the final and decretory Sentence upon wicked Men. 2ly, The Place and Company to which the Damned shall be sentenced, sems to render them incapable of growing btter; for when they are once given up to the Tormentor, and kept in Chains of Darkness, what expecta∣tion can there be they should grow better under this Enemy of God and Goodness? and yet that this is one Ingredient of their future state, is not the Sentiment of Jews and Christians only from the Holy Scripture, but also of the Heathens from the Tradition they had received, as is evident both. Salust. de Diis, &c. c. 14. , c. 18. from their own words, and from their Adra∣stia, Nemesis, Alastores, Furies, their hurtful Daemons, and their Evil Genus's. 3ly, The Alteration of their Condition, and their State seems to exclude all place for Reformation, and for the exercise of Piety and Vertue. For the Sentence of Condem∣nation and Exclusion from God's blissful Pre∣sence being past upon them, they have no hope of being bappy, or of escaping the Misery to which they are exposed, and so can have no Motive to be better, nor can they be in a capacity to love that God from whom they can expect no good. There also seems to be no place for Vertue in a future State; no room for Temperance, where there is no capacity of enjoying Meats, or Drinks, or any Pleasures of the Flesh; no place for Justice, where there is no Meum and Tuum; no possibility to kill, or maim, or to be cru∣el to another, when none can be defamed to their prejudice and hurt in their Concerns. Lastly, No place for Charity, where there is either none that can want any thing, or none that can receive advantage by us.
CHAP. II. Verse 1. NOW we beseech you, Brethren, by (or concerning) the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together to him, (mentioned Matth. 24.31.) .] That  with a Genitive Case signifies de, or circa, about, or concerning, cannot be doubted. It is ren∣dred concerning, Rom. 9.27. see 2 Cor. 12.5, 8. It is thrice rendred of in the same import, as 2 Cor. 1.8. our hope  of you is certain. Chap. 8.23, Whether any enquire  of Titus. And v. 24. Our boasting , i. e. concerning you. Philip. 1.7. It is meet for me think thus  of you all. Hence Phavorinus saith 'tis used , See 2 Cor. 7.4.9.3. The coming of Christ is by the Reverend Dr. Hammond referred to Christ's coming to destroy the unbelieving Jews, and throw down their Temple, and their Worship which de∣pended on it. This is the , the coming of Christ, or of the Son of Man so often mentioned in our Lord's Pre∣diction of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple, Matth. 24.3, 27, 37, 39. This is most certainly the import of the Phrase in St. James twice, when he exhorts the Bre∣thren to be patient, , till the coming of the Lord; adding that this , coming of our Lord was at hand, and the Judge stood before the door, James 5.7, 8, 9. As for the Phrase, Our gathering together to him, it seems parallel to the words of Christ, Matth. 24.31. , his Angels shall then gather his Elect. And to apply it to the Thessalonians, let it be noted, that they were partly Converts of the Jews and Proselytes. For the Converts made by St. Paul's preaching to them, were of the believing Jews, and the devout Greeks, Acts 17.4. who, in expectation of our Lord's Prediction, as well as from their Observa∣tion of the Jewish Festivals, might be encli∣ned to go up to Jerusalem. Moreover, till the writing of this Epistle, if not long after, even till the destruction of Jerusalem, the Jewish Converts kept up their Synagogue Worship, and many Proselytes, and other Christians, did not scruple to assemble with them; the Jewish Converts thought them∣selves obliged to do it, they being all zea∣lous of the Law, Acts 21.20. and many of the Gentile Christians complied with it at Corinth, Galatia, and Philippi; but after the destruction of Jerusalem, there was an end of this Synagogue-Worship, the Day having revealed that God was no longer pleased with it, and then they met together still as Churches of Christ; and this might be their , the gathering together to him here spoken of. But yet, considering that this , o coming of Christ in the former Epistle is u∣sed four times, with relation to Christ's co∣ming at the Day of Judgment, viz. Chap. 2.19.3.13.4.15.5.23. it may be thought more reasonable to refer this Passage to the same Advent, and Paraphrase it thus, I be∣seech you, Brethren, by (the Blessing you ex∣pect at) the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and at our gathering together to him. Ver. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, (, from the Sentence you for∣merly received from me,) or be troubled ei∣ther by spirit, (i. e. by any pretended Revela∣tion,) or by word (spoken by us, and by o∣thers misunderstood, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16.) or by letter, (i. e. by any thing contained in our former Epistle, Chap. 4.15.5.2. or rather in those words, Chap. 2.16. Wrath is come up∣on them  to the uttermost, so) as (to conceive) that the day of the Lord is at hand. , is, or hath been instant.] To con∣ceive that signal Day of the destruction of their Enemies the Jews, and the deliverance of the Christians mentioned Joel 2.31, 32 Mal. 4.1, 2. come, and find themselves de∣ceived in that Conception, might cause great trouble to them, and even shake their sted∣fastness in the Faith. Ver. 3. Let no man deceive you (with these pretences) by any means, for that day shall not come, except there be a falling away first (of the Jews from the Roman Empire, or from the Faith,) and (by that means) the Man of Sin be revealed, (who is) the Son of Perdition. , a falling away first.] The Rebellion of the Jews against the Chaldaeans was always stiled Apostacy, and the Jews upon that account Apostates. So Jerusalem is represented as , a City that rebell'd against Kings, and in which , Rebellions were found, Ezra 4.12, 15, 19. Thus Ezra 3.2, 18, 22. they are sti∣led , Rebellious Jews; and v. 27. it is said that they were given to Re∣bellion and War; See Neh. 2.19.6.6. 1 Maccab. 13.16. 2 Maccab. 5 11. And in
like manner their Revolt from the Roman Government, is by Josephus generally ex∣pressed by the same word. Coming from Rome, saith he, in the time of Nero, when Felix was Procurator of Judea, I found then the beginnings of Innovations,De vitâ suâ, p. 999. E. , and many much addicted to Apostacy from the Roman Government. One Justus, saith he, provo∣ked the PeopleP. 1001. B.  to Rebellion, but John the Son of Levi seeing some of them , prone to Apostacy from the Roman Govern∣ment, endeavoured to keep them to their Day. But if any like not this Notion of Aposta∣cy, they may understand these words of the great Apostacy of the Jews foretold by Christ, Matth. 24.11, 12. and which hapned not only in Judea and Palestine, but throughout Asia, 2 Tim. 1.15. and in all other places where they had embraced the Gospel. Of which Apostacy, Note 1st, That when the Apostle writ this E∣pistle it was yet to come; for though the My∣stery of Iniquity was already working in the Seductions of the false Apostles, and deceit∣ful Workers of the Jewish Nation, endea∣vouring to corrupt the minds of the Gentile Converts from the Simplicity that was in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. and to bring them into Bondage to the Jewish Law, Gal. 2.4. and so deprive them of that Liberty wherewith Christ had made them free, yet the great defection of the Jewish Converts to their old Judaism, seems to have had its rise about Ten years after the writing this Epistle; for it is cer∣tain that A. D. 63. when the Apostle writ the Epistle to the Hebrews it was begun al∣ready, and many of the Jewish Converts then were in great danger of falling back unto Perdition, as appears from the vehement Ad∣monitions and Exhortations of the Apostle to them to beware, lest there should be in any of them an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, and to exhort one ano∣ther daily to this stedfastness, as knowing we are only made partakers of Christ, if we hld the beginning of our confidence firm to the end, Chap. 3.12, 13, 14. To labour to enter into that rest Christ had prepared for them, lest any man fail after the same exam∣ple of unbelief, Chap. 4.11. Not to forsake the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some was, Chap. 10.25. Nor to cast away their confidence, v. 35. To lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make strait Paths for their feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, and to look diligently lest any mn sail from the grace of God, Chap. 12.12, 13, 15. As also from the Representation of the dread∣ful state of all who should Apostatize after this manner: That 'twas impossible to renew them to repentance, Chap. 6.4, 6. that they were nigh to cursing, and their end was to be burned, v. 8. that there was no more Sa∣crifice for their sin, but a fearful looking for of destruction and fiery indignation, Chap. 10.26, 27. and vengeance from the Living God, v. 30, 31. that it would certainly be a fal∣ling back to perdition, v. 38, 39. that there would be no escaping for them who turned away from him that spake to them from Hea∣ven, Chap. 12.25. The same we learn from the like Exhortations of St. James, to Joy and Patience under their Afflictions, Chap. 1.1. to the 12th. Chap. 5.7. to the 12th. of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.14, 15. Chap. 4.12. to the 19th. Chap. 5.8, 9, 10. and from St. John's frequent Exhortation, to hold to that which they had received from the beginning, and to continue walking in the truth. Now the oc∣casions of this great Apostacy seem to have been these three: 1. Their Zeal for the observation of the Law, which they conceived to be of Eternal Obligation, especially to the Jews to whom particularly it was given, and for the Cove∣vant of Circumcision, which they esteemed highly meritorious, (See Note on Rom. 2.13.) that which made them Perfect, gave them Life, and delivered them from Hell, accord∣ing to these sayings of theirs;Tanchum in Gen. 17.18. He that is Circumcised is perfect; He that is Circum∣cised shall not go to Gehinnom: And I said unto thee in thy Blood, live, Ezek. 16 6. This is the Blood of the Circumcision. This they endeavour'd to impose upon the Gentile Con∣verts. And all the Myriads of Jewish Con∣verts were all zealous for the observation of it. by the Jews, and look'd upon it as down∣right Apostacy for them to forsake Moses, or not to Circumcise their Children, and walk according to their Customs received from Mo∣ses, or from their Traditions, , Acts 21.21. And this seems to be the Reason why St. Paul, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, discourseth so largely o the Necessity of the Change of the Law, viz. that by establishing that Truth, he might put a stop to the Apostacy occasioned by their con∣trary Perswasion. 2ly, Their beloved Dream of a Temporal Kingdom to be erected by their Messiah at his coming, the Halcyon days that were then to
be expected by them, and the Dominion they should then have over the Nations, who were not, according to their Sentiments, to come in to the Messiah, otherwise then as their Slaves, or Servants. How deeply this ima∣gination was fixed, even in the hearts of Christ's Apostles, we learn, as from many o∣ther things, so especially from their question to him after his Resurrection, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore the Kingdom unto Israel? Acts 1.7. And because our Lord gave this Answer to it, viz. It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father hath put in his own hands, but ye shall receive power, the Holy Spirit coming upon you, and ye shall be my Witnesses in Jerusalem, and all Judea, and Samaria, and to the ends of the Earth, v. 7, 8. They were prone to think that at least, after the Apostles had done this, they might expect our Lord should come in the Clouds of Heaven to set up this Kingdom, they therefore believed in him rather as a Temporal, then a Spiritual King; they own∣ed him rather as a true Prophet, to perswade them to be Righteous, then as a Saviour to procure to them Remission of Sins, and a New Covenant established in his Blood. Hence. Vide Euseb. l. 3. c. 24. O∣rig. contr. Celsum, l. 5 p. 272. Origen speaking of these words of Christ, If I say the truth, why do you not believe? which he conceives were spoken to those Jews which believed, he saith, they might be said to believe in one sense, and not to believe in another. So v. g. they that be∣lieve in Jesus Christ crucified in the days of Pontius Pilate, but believe him not to be born of the Virgin Mary, (i. e. the Ebionites,) be∣lieve in him, and do not believe in him. And again, To. . in Joh. p. 322. A. B. They who believe in Jesus, who did in Judea the Signs and Wonders which were written of him, but believe him not to be the Son of that God who made Heaven and Earth, believe in him, and believe not in him; and this relateth to others of the Jews. And hence it seems to be, that the Apostle is so large in treating of the Sacerdotal Office of our Lord, and of the New Covenant esta∣blished in his Blood. Moreover, the Jews were generally possessed with this Opinion, that about that time their. Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 31. Messiah should set up this Temporal Kingdom, and they gene∣rally expected not a Messiah to suffer for their Sins, of whom they seem then to have had no notion, John 12.34. but a. Tryph. ad Just. p. 249. B. . P. 336. C. . Orig. contr. Cels. l. 2. p. 78. great King to subdue their Enemies under them. And this was their great stumbling block, that our Jesus appeared not to be such a one; and this was the great thing that animated them to the War. When therefore the Gospel had been preached to the World, and there was no appearance of Christ's coming in the Clouds to be their King, and their Deliverer, but rather to destroy their Temple, and their Nation, they began to fall off from him, as not answering their Expectation, or the Pre∣dictions of their Prophets, and to give ear to their false Prophets, saying to them, Lo, here is Christ, and there is Christ, according to our Lord's Prediction, Matth. 24.22. and pro∣mising freedom and deliverance, saith. De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 30. p. 9. & l. 2. c. 2. c. 23. Jo∣sephus, to as many as should follow them. And lastly, The great Cause of this Apo∣stacy of which the Scriptures take a mo especial notice, was the grievous Persecuti∣ons they suffered in all places from their fel∣low Jews, and from those Heathens they had instigated against them; this by St. Paul is stiled a great fight of Afflictions, against which he desires them to arm themselves by Faith and Patience, and the Consideration of the coming of their Lord, and by the Example of that Cloud of Witnesses which he had set before them, Hebr. 10.11, 12. by St. Peter it is stiled, The fiery trial which was come to try the, 1 Pet. 4.12. and by which they were in hea∣viness through manifold Tribulations, 1 Pet. 1.6. and against which St. James endeavours to strengthen them by the consideration of the blessed Fruits and glorious Recompense their Patience under them would produce,
Chap. 1. and of the Presence of their Lord, who would shortly come to rescue them, and give a happy Issue of them Chap 5. By reason of which Persecutions some began to use great Compliances with the Jews to avoid their Rage; others to fall away from the Christian Faith, hoping, perhaps, that they might still obtain Salvation in that Religion in which they expected to find it before they embraced Christianity. And 3ly, Others, who refer this to the Church of Rome, understand by this Apostacy a falling away from the Doctrine, and the true Worship of God and Christ, by Idolatry in the Worship of a consecrated Wafer, of Angels, Saints, and Images, and Reliques, on which account that Church is represented un∣der the Characters of Spiritual Egypt, of Mystical Babylon, and the Mother of Fornica∣tions, Rev. 11.8.17.5. , the Man of Sin.] If you read here , the Man of Disobedience, who will not submit to Law and Government, as do the Manuscripts of Stephanus and Lincoln, nothing can more ex∣actly agree to the Jewish Nation, which, in the times ofDe Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 8. p. 782. F. Josephus, had this Character, that it was , a Nation naturally averse from subjection to Kings. If we retain the common Reading, no Nation under Heaven more de∣served to be stiled the Man of Sin then did the Jewish Nation, after the Spirit of Slum∣ber and Blindness was come upon them, Rom. 11.8. for the Rejection of the promised Mes∣siah. Their own Josephus saith, It is impossi∣ble to recount severally the Particulars of their Wickedness; but in the general it may be said, that never any City suffered such Calamities, , nor was ever any Generation since the memory of Man, more fruitful in Iniquity. See this more fully proved, Note on Rom. 2.1. Then therefore more especially was this Man of Sin revealed to be so. This Character doth also very well agree to the Beast mentioned in the Revelations, which being Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11.8. the Mother of Fornicati∣ons, and the Abominations of the Earth, Chap. 17.5. may very well deserve the Title of the Man of Sin. Object. If here it be objected against the application of this Character to the Jewish Nation, that the Man of Sin seems to relate to some single Person, and therefore cannot be interpreted of a whole Nation, especially if they act not under some Head or other. Answ. I answer, that I have for this the Authority of the Prophet, cited here v. 8. who saith, He shall smite the Land, (Cal the Si¦ners of the Land,) with the Word of his Mouth, and with the Breath of his Lips, , He shall consume the wicked One. Which wicked one, whether we understand it with the Fathers of Antichrist, or with the Jews of Armillus the Romans, or with the Protestants of the Papal Plity, under the name of One, must comprehend all his Associates and Followers, though they be many Nations. Thus also doth the Pro∣phet Jeremiah speak in the Person of the whole Jewish Nation, saying, I am the Man that have seen Affliction, Lam. 3.1. and so on to v. 22. So in the Parable Matth. 22.11. our Saviour represents the Jewish Nati n from whom the Kingdom of God was to be taken away, and who were to be cast out into outer darkness, v. 13. by the Man that had not his wedding Garment. So the two Witnesses, Rev. 11.3. and the Woman clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12.1. represent the whole Body of true Christians. And the Beast, Chap. 13.1. the Woman arayed in Purple and Scarlet, Chap. 17.4. and the great Whore, Chap. 19.2. in∣clude all the Members of the Roman Church. And therefore it is evident, that this Objecti∣on of a single Person seems equally to lye against all the other Hypotheses. And as they had their Heads in which they were united, so had the Jewish Nation their High Priest and Sanhedrim, their Rulers of the People, their Scribes and Pharisees. , the Son of Perdition.] This also perfectly agrees to the Jews, not only because Christ was to smite them with the Breath of his Mouth, See Note on v. 8. and to smite the Land with a Curse, Mal. 4.. but because they are set forth as Vessels of Wrath fitted  for destruction, Rom. 9.22. as Men appointed to wrath, 1 Thess. 5.9. to sudden destruction, v. 4. as Men whose end is  destruction, Philip. 3.19. Note also that this agrees exactly to the Great Whore which is to go  into destructi∣on, Rev. 17.8, 11. Ver. 4. Who opposeth himself (now to the Christian Church,) and exalteth himslf ave all that is called God, or is worshipped, (Gr. , or worship;) so that he, as God, sitteth in the Temple of God, shwing him∣self that he is God. , who opposeth himself.] This word in the Old Testament represents the Ad∣versaries of God, and his Church. So Isa.
66.6. The voice of the Lord rendring recom∣pense  to his Enemies. And Esth. 9.2. they who sought the hurt of the Jews are . And in like manner in the New Testament,  is in the general the Adversary of Christ, and of Christianity; as in those words, Give no occasion  to the Adversa∣ry to blaspheme, 1 Tim. 5.14. In particular the Jews, as they were , the Adversaries of Christ, Luke 13.17. So in our Lord's Discourse on the Destruction of Jerusalem, they are stiled the Adversaries of the Apostles in these words, I will give you a mouth, and wisdom, which  your Adversaries shall not be able to resist, or gainsay, Luke 21.15. They are the , of which St. Paul speaks, saying, A great door, and effectual is opened to me, in Ephesus; and there be many Adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.9. as you may learn from Acts 19.9. where we find them speaking evil of the way of Christianity before the Multitude, and St. Paul separating from them upon that account. And in those words of St. Paul to the Philippians, Chap. 1.28. In nothing be ye terrified by (the Malice and Persecution of) your Adversaries, , which Malice and Persecution is to them, , an evident token of Perdition, but to you of Salvation. See 2 Thess. 1.5. And with good reason is this Name given to them espe∣cially, they being the Men who killed the Lord Jesus, and persecuted his Apostles; who pleased not God, and were Adversaries to all Men; forbidding the Apostles to preach to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, 2 Thess. 2.15, 16. When they began to preach the Word of Life, the High-Priest, the Captain of the Temple, and the Sadducees, Acts 4.1. the whole Order of Priesthood, v. 6. stiled , the Sanhedrim, v. 15. Command them not to speak at all in the Name of Jesus, v. 18. on which account these Rulers are said to be assembled against the Lord, and against his Christ, v. 26. And the Apostles answer to them is, That God was rather to be obeyed than Man. After this, the High-Priest, and all his Associates, place the Apo∣stles  in the Sanhedrim, Acts 5.17, 27. calling them to an account for dis∣obeying their Commands; and having recei∣ved this Answer from the Apostles, That God must be obeyed rather than Man, they beat them in the Sanhedrim, and again command them not to speak in the Name of Jesus, v. 40, 41. Soon after we find Stephen brought be∣fore the Scribes, and Elders, , into the Sanhedrim, Chap. 6.12. and the High-Priest, Chap. 7.1. and they who   in the Sanhedrim, having e∣amined him, and the Witnesses against him▪ they stoned Stephen, v. 59. which Death could only be inflicted on him by the Sanhe∣drim. After this Saul receives Letters from the High-Priest, Chap. 9.1. and from all the Elders, Chap. 22.5. to bind all Christians, he could find in any of their Synagogues, and bring them to Jerusalem, Acts 9.2, 14. Ye, in the second, or as Bishop Pearson saith, in the fourth Year of Nero, the High-Priests, , and the whole Sanhedrim meet, Acts 22.30. and Paul is brought be∣fore them, Chap. 23.1. By all which Passa∣ges, as we see how they are still shewing themselves Adversaries to Christ and his Dis∣ciples, so we learn the falshood of that Jew∣ish Story, That Forty years before the Destr∣ction of Jerusalem the Sanhedrim removed from thence to Joppa; which, saithSeld. de Syn. l. 2. c. 15. p. 629. Non ejusmodi quid apud Veteres Legi. p. 745. Mr. Sel∣den, as I have never read any such thing i the Ancients, so may it be confuted from the Life of Josephus. It was this Sanhedri that admitted that Publick Prayer against the Christians, called  the Cursing of the Heretick. They therefore called Je∣sus accursed, 1 Cor. 12.2. and so asDial. cum Tryph. p. 234. & p. 323. C. Ju∣stin Martyr saith, they dishonoured Christ as much as they could, , Cursing in their Synagogues those that believe in him. Ths did they Crucifie afresh the Son of God, and put him to an open shame; yea, saith the sameP. 234. D. Justin, , they sent cho∣sen Men from Jerusalem throughout the whole Earth, representing the Christians as an Athe∣istical Heresie: Now this could be done on∣ly by the Sanhedrim. It was, lastly, by the High-Priest and his Sanhedrim assembled at Jerusalem, that. Joseph. Antiq l. 20 c. 8. p. 68. B. James the Brother of our Lord, with some other Christians, is con∣demned to be stoned for Blasphemy against the Law. Yea, when the War was begun, Af∣fairs seem still to be ordered by the High-Priest and Sanhedrim: For it was after the Flight of Cestius Gallius from Jerusalem thatDe Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 32. Josephus was made Governour of Ga∣lilee, and thence he writesDe vita sua. p. 1003. B.  to the Sanhedrim of Jerusa∣lem for Instruction. And Ananias the High-Priest acknowledges that they had engaged in
the War against the Romans only. De Bello Jud. l. 4. c. 13. p. 874. for their Liberty. So that things seem to have been managed to that time by the High-Priest and Sanhedrim, who appearing thus upon all occasions with the utmost Rage against Christ and Christians, might well be deemed not on∣ly , their Adversaries, but even An∣tichrists. But then the Roman Antichrist be∣ing also to wear out the Saints of the most High, Dan. 7.25. and cast down some of the Host of Heaven, Dan. 8.10. the Beast being to slay the Witnesses, Rev. 11.7. to make War with the Saints, and overcome them, Chap. 13.7. and even to be drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus, Chap. 17.6, 18, 24. She doubtless must em∣phatically deserve this Title. , exalting himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped.] The word , called, shews the Apostle here speaks of Magistrates who are called Gods in Scripture, Psal. 82.6. and particularly of the Roman Emperor, whose Title was , Augustus, and who are here signified by , as God is by the word . And how the Jews exalted themselves against every thing that is called God, or the Magistracy, we may observe, saith Dr. Lightfoot, in such Passages as these, 2 Pet. 2.10. They despise Government. Jude 8. They despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dig∣nities, and in their own Stories to endless Ex∣amples. How they stood affected to them, we may learn from the question they put to our Saviour, Shall we pay Tribute to Caesar, or not? Matth. 22.17. For had he answered No, they then thought they should have ground to represent him as an Enemy to Cae∣sar; If Yea, to represent him to the People as a Betrayer of his Country's Liberty and Freedom;Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 1. , they looking on the payment of this Tribute-Money as a Sign of Slavery. And from their Talmudical saying, We have no King but God; and from their Imagination that it was a wicked thingDe Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 12. & 32. , to own any Mortal Governor under God. See Note on 1 Pet. 2.16. And that the Pope and his Church have thus exalted themselves above Kings, and Emperors, Church History and their own Canon Law will not suffer us to doubt. See Downham de Antichristo, Lib. 4. Cap. 2, 3. , so that he sitteth in the Temple of God, as God, shewing himself that he is God.] Only the Jewish Sanhedrim, their Priests and High-Priests, and Doctors or Expounders of the Law, sat in the Temple of God then proper∣ly so called, and there the High-Priest and the Sanhedrim took upon them the power of judging them in Capital Causes: Thus they stoned Stephen, thus also they stoned James the Brother of our Lord, and others with him; and St. Paul prosecuted the Christians, even to death, by their Authority, Acts 22.4, 5. and thus they sat in the Temple of God, as Gods. The Scribes and Pharisees also shewed themselves as God, by setting up their Traditions above the Commandments of God, pretending to dispense with them; and by so doing, saith our Saviour, , to lay aside, reject, and to make void the Commandments of God, Matth. 15.6. Mark 7.8, 9, 10, 13. to stablish their Traditi∣ons. And secondly, by preferring them to, and requiring greater Reverence to be given to their Traditions, and their Doctrines, than to the written Word of God; saying, That the Words of the Scribes are more amiable than the Words of the Law, and more weighty; that a prophet was not to be believed without a Sign, or a Miracle; but they were to be be∣lieved without them; with other blasphemous sayings, cited by Dr. Lighfoot on Mat. 15.2. and byP. 415. Dr. Pocock, who shews that they held their Vows so Sacred, that they were obliged to violate the Laws of God to keep them; and that in such Cases they could not ob∣serve God's Precepts without great Sin. And thirdly, this they did by taking to themselves the Titles of Guide, and Father, which in our Saviour's Interpretation, belonged only to God, and Christ, Matth. 23.8, 9, 10. And here let it be noted, 1st, That these are the Descriptions of the Man of Sin, by which the Thessalonians might then know him, and they run all in the Pre∣sent Tense, shewing what he already did; and therefore it is no Objection against my Interpretation of these words, that the San∣hedrim, the Scribes and Pharisees, had long sat in the Temple of God, and done the things here attributed to the Man of Sin. 2ly, Let it be noted, that it is prophesied Dan. 11.35, 36. that a King shall do accord∣ing to his will, and shall exalt himself, and shall magnifie himself above every God; an d that this, by St. Jerom and Theodoret upon the place, is interpreted concerning Antichrist. And that the Pope of Rome hath manifestly, not only thus exalted himself above all that is called God, by usurping a Power over
Kings and Emperors, as in the former Note; but also shewed himself in the Church as God, by claiming that Infallibility which is the Property of God, and by dispensin with his Laws, but also by equalling him elf to Christ, who is God. See Downham de Anti∣christo, l. 4. c. 5. And therefore, according to the Sentiments of all those Fathers, who by the Temple do understand the Church of God, he hath by these things shew'd himself that he is God. Ver. 5. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you of these things, (viz. of the Man of Sin to be revealed, and of these Characters of him.) , I told you of these things.] These are the words which seem to me to set∣tle my Interpretation of this Chapter. For of the Jews, and their opposing of them∣selves to the Doctrine of Christianity, and the Professors of it, he told them in his first E∣pistle, Chap. 2.15, 16. and when he was with them, the Persecutions that both he and they suffered from them, Acts 17.15, 16. gave him a just occasion to speak both of their Opposition to the Gospel, and of the Deliverance they shortly might expect from such enraged Persecutors; this being hinted for the encouragement of Christians in most of his epistles; but that he should tell them any thing of Mahomet, or of the Papal Anti∣christ, who were not then in being, or to be known then to the Thessalonians by any of the Characters here mentioned, is not so ea∣sie to conceive. Though since the Characters here referr'd to, are partly to be found Dan. 11.35, 36. and that place by theAb hoc loco Judaei dici de Antichristo putant—quod quidem & nos de Antichristo intelligimus. Hieron. in  & Theodoret. Anci∣ents is thought to relate to Antichrist, and to be here referred to by St. Paul, this is by some Expositors thought to refer to some∣thing the Apostle might have taught them from the Prophet Daniel touching Antichrist. See the Preface, Sect 1, 2, 3. Ver. 6. And now ye know what with∣holdeth, that he might be revealed in his own season. , and now ye know what withholdeth.] Or rather, and ye know what now withholdeth; and according to this sense of the words, that which hindred the full Revelation of this Man of Sin must be in being, and actually withholding when this Epistle was endited. Some of th thers have conjectured that the  hat which hindred was. Theod. Chrysost. the Gifts of the Ho∣ly Spirit then given to Believers, and exer∣cised in the Assemblies of Christians: bt they more generally do refer this to the R∣man Empire, saying, That the Apostle here teacheth that,Nisi inquit fuerit Romanum Imperium ante desolatum, & Antichristus praecesserit, Christus non veniet. Hieron Ep. ad Algas. qu. 11. F. 60. D. Post defectum Regni Romani appariturum Antichristum dicit Ambros. in locum. Ita Chrysost. Oe Theoph. in locum, Severianus apud Oecum. Iren. l. 5. c. 26. till that be taken away Antichrist shall not come. This, say they, the Apostle here expresseth so covertly and obscurely, that he might notSi enim aperte, & audacter dixisset non veniet Antichristus nisi prius Romanum deleatur Imperium, justa c  cutionis in Orientem tunc Ecclesiam consurgere videbatur. Hieron. ibid. Chrysost. in locum. incense the Roman Emperors against the Christians, as he must have done, had he openly and bold∣ly said, Antichrist shall not come till the Ro∣man Empire be destroyed. See Note o 1 Pet. 5.13. What I conceive to be the , see Note on the Verse following. , in his season.] i. e. I the time prefixed for the false Christs, and Antichrists to come, Matth. 24.5, 24. in the last hour of the Jewish Church and Oeconem, according to these words of St. John, 1 John 2.18. Little Children, it is the last hour, and as ye have heard (from Christ) that Anti∣christ shall come, so now are there many Anti∣christs, by which ye may know that this is the last hour. They who refer this to the Papal Anti∣christ, say that this season relates to the tempus statutum, the time prefixed, Dan. 1.35. For Antichrist, saith he, shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished, or till God's indignation against the Jewish Nation ceaseth. And to the time, times, and half a time, men∣tioned Dan. 7.25. During which time the little Horn was to wear out the Saints of the most High; and to the 1260 days in which the Beast should triumph, and the Witnesses should be clothed in Sackcloth, Rev. 11.3. or to the time, times, and half a time, mention∣ed Rev. 12.6, 14. Ver. 7. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work, (i. e. the Jews are already ∣king some efforts towards this Apostacy,) only he who now letteth will let, (or only there is that withholdeth as yet, and will continue
so to do,) until he (or it) be taken away. , for the Mystery of Iniquity doth already work.] That is, the Jews have already imbibed their per∣icious Principles, that 'tis not lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar, or to be subject to any o∣ther Government under God: They have al∣ready made some seditious Attempts, not on∣ly in Babylon, but in Judea, under Theudas Glonites, and also have been incited fur∣ther so to do by oneJoseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 5. p. 692. Dortus, and his As¦sociates, who perswaded the Multitude , to revolt from the Romans.De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 6. Josephus also doth inform us, That be∣fore that time there were many Tumults in Judaea, , and that the time prevailed with many to usurp the Kingdom. This Mystery was also work∣ing by the False Apostles, and Deceitful Work∣ers of the Jews, causing some of the Gen∣tile Christians to warp from the Simplicity of the the Faith to the Jewish Rites, to mix Judaism with Christianity, and so to turn fr him that called them to another Gospel. The Fathers, Theodoret alone excepted, say this Mystery of Iniquity was already work∣ing inMultis malis—quibus Nero impurissimus Caesarum mundum premit. Antichristi parturitur adventus, & quod ilie pera∣ est postea, in isto ex parte completur. Hieron. Ep. ad Algas. ibid. Mysterium iniquitatis à Nerone inceptum est, qui zelo Idlam Apostolos interfecit, &c. Ambros. . Chrysost. Oecum. Theoph. Digs extitit qui persecutionem in Christianos primus incperet, nescio an & postremus explaret, siquidem Opinione Mltrum receptum sit, ipsum Antichristum venturum. Sulpitius de Nerone, l. 2 c. 40. Nero the Fore-runner of Antichrist, and the Calamities he brought upon the Chri∣stians. On which account some of them taught that he was Antichrist; and others, that he was to be raised again to be so. But this is an Extravagancy sufficiently confuted from this one Observation, That these words were written in the Reign of Claudius, where∣as the Persecution of the Christians hap∣pened only Twelve years after in the Reign of Nero. Others, who say this Mystery was working in the false Prophets then in being, till they can shew us any false Prophets then in being, which were not of the Jewish Na∣tion, do not contradict, but rather stablish our Assertion. And lastly, others, though they do zealously contend against Dr. Ham∣mond, that Simon Magus could not be the Man of Sin here mentioned, yet say, 'tis pro∣bable he was the Mystery of Iniquity then working, and the Fore-runner of Antichrist, because he did set himself up as the Supream God, brought in the Invocation of Angels, and the Worship of Images, and taught Ido∣latry to be a thing indifferent, and was the Father, as the Beast is stiled the Mother of Abominations; but thus they seem to me to build up again what they had so industrious∣ly pulled down. For it is highly reasonable to conceive the Mystery of Iniquity then work∣ing, should be that very Mystery which after was to be compleated by a more full appear∣ance of the Man of Sin, as will appear from the connexion of the words. Remember ye not, that when I was with you, I told you these things (who was the Man of Sin to be revealed, and what were his Churches, v. 3, 4. and what it was that hindred at present the Revealing of him) For the Mystery of Iniquity is already working, (i. e. he is doing that covertly, which when he is reveal'd he will do more openly,) only he that hinders (his full appearance,) will do so still, he being taken away, and then shall this wicked one be reveal'd? Who sees not now that all those Interpretations must be false, which make the Mystery of Iniquity to be one Person, or one kind of Persons, and the Man of Sin, or Antichrist another, as they must do who make the Mystery of Iniquity to be Simon Magus, or the False Prophets, or Hereticks in being when this Epistle was endited, and the Man of Sin the Pope of Rome, and his Clergy. This Mystery of Iniquity, saith Dr. Lightfoot, cannot be understood but of the Jewish Nation; and so it is explained again and again by St. John, saying, This is the last hour, and as you have heard that Antichrist cometh, so now are there many Antichrists, by which we know this is the last hour, 1 John 2.18. And Chap. 43. Every spirit that con∣fesseth not Jesus Christ, who is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is the Spirit of Antichrist; this is the Deceiver and the Anti∣christ, Eph. 2.7. Here therefore is a plain account of the working of the Mystery of Iniquity in the false Christs and Prophets of the Jewish Nation, who also were the great Incendiaries to, and Agents in the Apostacy of that Nation from the Roman Government. See Note on v. 10. , he that letteth.] Quis nisi Ro∣manus Status? Who but the Roman State? saithDe Resur. Carnis, cap. 24. Tertullian; so many of the Fa∣thers, as hath been noted on the foregoing Verse. And whereas it may be objected a∣gainst this sense, that it seems plain from the word , that he must be a Person, rather than a State; they who are of this Opinion answer, He is here spoken of as one single Person, though the Government con∣sisted
of a Succession of Emperors, because one of them only reigned at a time, and the Government was dissolved by the taking away of the last Governour. My Conjecture is this, He who now letteth, i. e. the Emperour Claudius will let till he be taken away; i. e. he will hinder the Jews from breaking out into an open Rebellion in his time, they be∣ing so signally, and so particularly obliged by him, that they cannot for shame think of revolting from his Government; for he had made two Edicts in their favour; the one concerning the Alexandrian Jews to this ef∣fect, That. Joseph. Antiq. l. 19. c. 4. p 678. the just Jews should suffer nothing, because of the madness of Cajus who would be worshipped as a God, and that they should have liberty to observe their own Laws and Customs. And that other Edict, in which he gives them liberty over his whole Em∣pire, without molestation,. Joseph. ibid. to observe their own Laws and Customs, declaring that he did it because he judged them worthy of that Fa∣vour, for their Affection and Fidelity to the Roman Government. After his death the Affairs of the Jews, saith Josephus, became worse and worse, not only by reason , of those Magicians who deceived the Peo∣ple, and of those Thieves who stirred them up to the War against the (h) Romans, , perswading them not to be subject to them, but because Néro in his Third ye sends his Letter to Porcius Festus, Governour of Judea, by which the Jews are deprived of their , equal share of Government in Caesarea; whence, saith Jose∣phus, was the rise of all our Calamities, the Jews persisting still in Sedition, , till they broke out into the War. In the Seventh of Nero, Albinus succeeds Festus then dead, who, saithAntiq. l. 20. c. 6. p. 69 G. Josephus, was  one who exceedingly wasted the Country, and laid the Seeds of their future Captivity. In the Tenth of Nero, Gessius Florus succeeds him, whoIbid. c. . p. 6, 6, 7. , brought many Calamities upon the Jews, saith Jose∣phus, which having Tragically represented, he concludes thus, What shall I say more, , for it was this Florus who com∣pell'd us to the War against the Romans, which began in the Twelfth of Nero. , till he be taken away.] i. e. Say some, till the Roman Government be taken away, as it was by the Exile of Augustulus, A. D. 475. say I; till Clauda be taken away, as he was by Poyson, saith Suetonius; for as tolli de medio among the Latins, so in the Greek , ∣ports, one to be taken away by death, and oft times by a violent death; so  is, to destroy them out of the middle of the Camp till they were consed: So of Core and his Company, it is said, , they were destroyed from the midst of the Congregation, Numb. 16.33. Thus of the Righteous, saith the Prophet, , he is taken away, be rests in his Grave, Isa. 57.2. So Jeremiah, , The Lord hath taken away all my mighty Men from the midst of me, Iam. 1.15. And so God saith of the false Pro∣phet, Ezek. 4, 8, 9. , I will cut him off from the midst of my People. Ver. 8. And then shall the wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume by the Spirit (or Breath) of his Mouth, and shall destroy by the brightness of his co∣ming. , the wicked.] Who will not be subject to the Laws to which their Fore∣fathers from the time of Pompey have sub∣mitted. , shall be revealed.] Either by his actual Apostacy from the Roman Go∣vernment, or by the great Apostacy of the Be¦lievers of that Nation, of which see Note on v. 3. , whom the Lord shall consume by the Spi∣rit of his Mouth.] That the Apostle here re¦fers to Isaiah 10.4. appears by his using the very words of the Prophet, which run ths, He shall smite the Land with the Rd of his Mouth, and with the Breath of his Lips shall he slay the wicked one. Now what is the Land there, is well expounded by Malachi in these words, Chap. 4.6. Lest he smite the Earth with a Curse. Where both the Hebrew and the Greek use the same words. Now in Malachi it is evident, and confessed, that by the Earth, the Land of Judea must be meant, as it is usually in the Book of Psalms, Psal. 16.3.25.13.37.3, 9, 11, 22, 29, 34. See∣ing to them alone the Prophet was then sent to Prophecy, 'tis therefore reasonable to con∣ceive that the same Phrase should have the same import in the Prophet Isaiah; to smite this Land with the Breath, or Spirit of hisL. 2. c. 24.
Mouth, is to smite it in his Wrath and Indig∣nation. So Job 4.9. By the blast of God, by the breath of his Nostrils, , or of his Anger, are they consumed, and to consume with his fiery Indignation: Thus Tophet is ordained of old, the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, the Breath of the Lord, , the Indignation of the Lord, like a Stream of Brimstone, doth kindle. So Psal. 18.8. A smoke ascended in his anger, and fire out of his mouth devoured. And v. 15. At thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils, , by the breath of the wind of thine an∣ger. This therefore again answers to the words of Malachi, Chap. 4.1. Behold, the day meth that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stub∣ble, and the day that cometh shall burn them up. And to that of the Baptist, Matth. 3.10. And now the Ax is laid to the root of the Trees, every Tree therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewed down, and cast into the fire, which also evidently belongs to the Jewish Nation, which said, We have A∣braham for our Father, v. 9. and to whom a∣lone the Baptist is there speaking. And again, v. 12. he saith of Christ, His fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his floor—and burn the chaff with unquenchable fire, plainly alluding to the words of Malachi, that all the World should be as chaff, or stubble. This being so, the Earth to be smitten with the Rod of his Mouth, must be the People or Inhabitants of the Land, or as the Chaldee, the Sinners of the Earth; the Unbelievers and Wicked of Judea to be consumed by that Indignation and Fire of the Lord, Mal. 4.1. So saith Procopius on the place, Doth the Lord threaten to Judea, , for her contumely against him, saying, thy House is left unto thee desolate, and , being left desolate is consumed by Sword and Fire. That these words may have a more full com∣pletion, in the destruction of the Beast, or My∣stical Babylon, which is also to be slain by the Sword proceeding from the mouth of Christ, and destroyed by the fierceness of his Wrath, and with the false Prophet to be cast alive in∣to the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, I deny not; but that this should be the primary in∣tent of the words of Isaiah, and that he should be there prophesying of the destructi∣on of the Church of Rome, seems to me a Rabbinical Gloss, not much to be insisted on, especially since the Apostle, Rom. 15.12. ap∣plies the tenth Verse of this Chapter to the first Calling of the Gentiles. , and shall consume with the brightness of his coming.] The Day of the Lord's Coming to destroy Jerusalem, is stiled by Joel, Chap. 2.31. , the great and bright day of the Lord; and Mal. 4.5. Behold, I send you Elias the Prophet▪ (i. e. the Baptist in the Spirit and Power of Elias, Luke 1.17.) , before the coming of the great and bright day of the Lord. And that our Lord's coming in his Day, after he had suffered, and been rejected of that Age or Generation in which he suffered, should be as Lightning shining from one end of the Heaven to the other, he expresly tells his Dis∣ciples, Luke 17.24, 25. And when this , brightness, and appearance of the Son of Man was to happen, he suffi∣ciently instructs them in these words, As the Lightning  shineth from the East to the West, , so shall the coming of the Son of Man be, , for wheresoever the Carcass is, there shall the Eagles be gathered together, Luke 17.24, 37. which sensibly applies the Mat∣ter to the destruction of the Jews by the Roman Army, whose Ensign was the Eagle. This therefore is a farther Confirmation of our Exposition. Lastly, Observe the Connexion of these Verses, there is a , some Thing, or Person, that withholdeth now, and , He that now withholdeth will do so till he be taken away, , and then shall the wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall destroy. Now, would not any one here think, that if the Roman Government were that which withheld, Antichrist should pre∣sently be revealed, and appear to the World to be so, (as all the. Cyril. Catech. 15. p. 163. Ambros. & Chrysost. in 2 Thess. 2. Hieron. qu. 11. ad Algas. August. de Civ. C. l. 20. c. 19. Fathers, who were of that Opininion, held) soon after the dis∣solution of that Government, according to those words ofEpist. ad Geront. F. 33. L. H. St. Jerom, Qui tene∣bat, de medio fit, & non intelligimus Anti∣christum appropinquare, quem Dominus Iesus Christus interfecit Spiritu ris sui. He that withheld is taken away, and do we not understand that Antichrist is at hand? And again, would not any one hence be prone to think that the Lord should be as quick to consume him, when he was revealed,
as all theƲsque ad Tempus temporum & dimidium tempus, hoc est triennium & sex menses, in quibus veniens regnabis  terram. Iren. l. 5. c. 25. Dimidium Hebdomadae, hoc est, tres Annos cum dimidio, regnabit Antichristus super terram, post ae∣feretur regnum illius & gloria. Hippol. de Consum. Mundi, p. 36. . Cyril. Hie∣ros. Catech. 15. p. 165. & p. 163. D. Hieron. & Theodoret. in Dan. c. 7. 25. August. de Civ. l. 20. c. 23. Fathers thought, allowing but Three years and an half for the whole Reign of Antichrist, and declaring they had this not from Apocryphal Writings, but from the Holy Scriptures. And were it otherwise, those Christians which saw the Dissolution of the Roman Empire, A. D. 475. might lye un∣der the same Doubts as did the Thessalonians here, touching the Man of Sin; for then they saw no Roman Antichrist appearing, nor that Mystery of Iniquity yet working, for the Pope and Clergy of Rome were then Or∣thodox, free from exalting themselves above all that is called God, or from wearing out the Saints with Persecution, till some Hun∣dred years after. And if, after his appearing thus, he were to continue 1260 years before our Saviour's coming to destroy him, as he must do according to that Hypothesis, might not the Christians be tempted in that long Interval, to say, Where is the promise of his coming? This therefore seems to lye as a strong Bar against that as the primary sense and meaning of these words. Ver 9. Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. , with all power and signs.] This our Lord foretold, that be∣fore his Advent to destroy Jerusalem, there should appear false Prophets, and false Christs, who should deceive many, Matth. 24.11. who should shew signs and wonders to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect, v. 24. Now that these false Prophets, v. 11. and 24. were the same we learn from St. Luke, who sums both up in one, Chap. 21.8. and from the work of both, which was to deceive many, that they were all to appear in the same Age in which his Disciples, to whom he spake these words, lived, is also evident from Christ's caution to them in respect of both; See to it, lest any Man deceive you, Matth. 24.4. See to it, behold, I have fore∣told you all things, Mark 13.23. Matth. 24.25. It cannot then be doubted, but that there were such Persons as are here mention∣ed, which then arose among the Jews. Such were the Jews of whom St. Paul speaks, comparing them to Jannes and Jambres, the celebrated Magicians of Egypt, because of their Resistance of the Truth of the Gospel, as those Magicians resisted Moses, and whom he stiles , wicked Men and Juglers, 2 Tim. 3, 8, 13. or those who did strange things by Invocation of Devils, as the word imports, say Phavorinus and Suidas; the Magicians were Men of the same Art and Tricks. Now to these Josephus doth ascribe the beginning of the Apostacy from the Roman Government, and by them he inform us that it was carried on to the last, The Affairs of the Jews, saith he, became worse daily, by reasonAntiq. Lib. 20. cap. 6. , of these Impostors who de∣ceive the People, of which he immediately gives an Instance in the Egyptian who set up for a Prophet. He adds, That. De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 23. in the beginning of the Reign of Nero Impostors and Deceivers, under a Divine Impulse, indea∣vouring Innovations and Changes, made the People mad, and led them into the Wilderness, promising there to them Signs of Liberty from God. And thatIbid. p. 797. , the Impostors prevailed with many to Re∣volt. And even when their Temple was in flames, he saith,Lib. 7. c. 30, 31. There were many Pro∣phets who encouraged them to expect  help from God, and that they gave credit to them. Accordingly of the Dra∣gon it is said, That the unclean Spirits which went out of his mouth, were the Spirits of Devils working Miracles, Rev. 16.13, 14 That the false Prophet wrought signs before the Beast, Rev. 19.20. and that the Beast wrought great signs, so as to make Fire de∣scend from Heaven, Rev. 13.13. and that by these things they did  deceive the In∣habitants of the Earth, Rev. 13.13.19.20.20.10. Of which Miracles done by the Mem∣bers of the Roman Church, to stablish their Idolatry, and Superstitions, see Do. de Antichristo, lib. 6. cap. 1. Ver. 10. And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved.
, they recei∣ved not the love of the Truth.] From these words some conceive that Antichrist, or the Man of Sin, must in Profession be a Christi∣an, because he is said not to receive the love of the Truth only. But all the. Chrysost. Theodor. Oecum. Theoph. Spiritum Dei per Christum, Hieron. Ep. ad Algas. qu. 11. Fathers, and many others say, not to receive the love of the Truth, is, not to receive the Truth which is worthy to be loved, and which would have taught them Charity to those they persecu∣ted, it being the same with not believing the Truth, v. 12. And this emphatically belong∣eth to those unbelieving Jews to whom St. Paul speaks thus, It was necessary that the Word of God should be first spoken to you, but since you thrust it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of Eternal Life, lo we turn unto the Gentiles, Acts 13.46. and to whom he applieth that of the Prophet, Behold, ye Despisers and perish, for I will work a work in your days which you will in no wise believe, 1.41. See Acts 28.27. Hebr. 4.2, 12. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. And all theApud eos omnes signa edet & horrenda miracula—ad seducendos sui similes impios. Hippol. p. 32. & 34. Iren. l. 5. c. 25. facet haec omnia propter Judaeos, ut qui noluerunt charitatem recipere veritatis. Hieron. Ep. ad Algas. qu. 11. August. Tom. 9. tr. 29. p. 246. C. . Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 15. p. 163. B. 164. D. . Theodoret. Chrysost. Oecumenius, Theoph. in locum. Ad quem fugiet vidua oblita Dei, i. e. terrena Ierusalem. Iren l. 5. c. 25. Cum autem alius venerit in nomine meo, illum recipietis, alium dicens Antichristum. Ibid. Fathers which speak of Antichrist, and the Man of Sin, not one of them excepted, declare that this, and the two following Verses, belong to the unbelieving Jews, that he is thus to come with signs and wonders to deceive them, and that they who would not receive Christ confirming his Doctrine with true Miracles, shall be decei∣ved by the lying Miracles of Antichrist. And if this be so, that these things are intended of the unbelieving Jews, they can agree in the primary import of them to them only. Ver. 11. And for this cause God shall send among them strong delusions, (which will have th effect upon them,) that they should (shall) believe a lye. (What strong Delusions the Jews then, and the Roman Catholicks do now lye un∣der, the preceding Notes shew.) , God shall send.] As he sent a lying Spirit into the mouths of Ahab's Pro∣phets, 1 Kings 22.21, 22. by permitting the evil Spirit to go forth for that end, as he is said to deceive his People, Jer. 4.10. because he suffered them to be deceived by false Pro∣phets, Jer. 6.14. And as he deceived the false Prophets, by giving them up unto a Spirit of Delusion, Ezek. 14.9. this must be the true Interpretation of all such Passages as these. For 1st, God cannot secretly inspire into us any Evil, or infuse any evil Principle into our hearts; for Evil can never proceed immedi∣ately from him who hath an absolute, and entire freedom from it; were it his off-spring it must cease to bear that Name, his Works be∣ing all very good, and wrought in Righteous∣ness. Nor 2ly, Can he encline, excite, encourage, or entice to Sin; for then he must excite Men to perform the abominable thing which his Soul hates, to do that which is what is infi∣nitely displeasing to him, and must incline them secretly to that which he openly deters all persons from; and then he cannot truly be offended with such persons, he cannot pu∣nish them for their Iniquities; or else he must be angry with them because they do o∣bey his Motions, and Sentence them to end∣less Misery, because they do comply with his own Inclinations. Nor 3ly, Can he necessitate any Man to sin, for then he must by force compel them to it, and then the Action done by virtue of that Force cannot be theirs, but Gods; nor would our Consciences condemn us for sin, were we as∣sured we could not help it. Ver. 12. That they all might be damned (Gr. judged, and condemned,) who believed not the Truth, (the Gospel preached to them; See Note on Rom. 2.8.) but had pleasure in unrighteousness, (or falshood, See Note on 1 Cor. 13.6.) Ver. 13. But we are bound to give thanks to God alway for you Brethren, because God hath from the beginning (of our preaching to you shew'd, 1 Thess. 1.4, 5. that he had) cho∣sen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, (which gives the earnest of it, and makes us meet for it,) and belief of the Truth (which promiseth it.) Ver. 15. Therefore, Brethren, stand fast (in the Faith,) and hold the Traditions which you have been taught, whether by word, v. 5, 6.) or by (this) our Epistle.
Ver. 16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, (through him) who hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through Grace. Ver. 17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. , hold the Traditions which ye have been taught.] This Passage proves not in the least that in the Judgment of St. Paul, there were any Traditions whol∣ly extrascriptural, that is, such as were nei∣ther then committed, nor after to be commit∣ted to writing, by himself, or any other inspi∣red Person, but only that he himself had not writ all things to them by Epistle, being ab∣sent, but had preached many things to them being present. Now that the word which St. Paul preached orally, was after written by St. Luke hisLucas autem Sectatur Pauli, quod ab illo praedicabatur Evangelium, in libro condidit. Iren. l. 3. c. 1. Amanuensis and Compani∣on, we learn from the Tradition of the Church of Christ, recorded by. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 8. Irenaeus and Eu∣sebius. 2. All that the Apostle here exhorts his Thes∣salonians to do, is to retain the Traditions they had immediately received from the mouth of an Apostle, and which he personally had deli∣vered to them, of which Traditions, when we know them to be such, there is no doubt but they ought with all reverence to be re∣ceived; when therefore the Church of Rome hath proved that the Traditions that she ob∣trudes upon us were immediately received from the Mouth of an Apostle, then, and not till then, will this Text oblige us to receive them. 3ly, This Text is so far from being an Ar∣gument for receiving Doctrinal Traditions no where writ in Scripture upon the sole Autho∣rity of the Church of Rome, or even of the Church Catholick, that it is rather a Demon∣stration that she is no sure Preserver of them, she having actually lost those very Traditi∣ons touching the Man of Sin which are men∣tioned in this Chapter, and particularly re∣ferred to in this Text; I told you these things when I was with you, v. 8. and now ye knew what letteth, v. 6 wherefore stand fast, hold∣ing the Traditions (touching his coming, which when I was with you I delivered by words, and now hint to you by Epistle,) and which, as it appeareth by this Epistle, and his Exhortation, were of great moment to be known. Ne hath this Tradition been preserved by the Roman, or by the Catholick Church? Or must she not confess withNos nescimus quod illi sciebant. Anselm. Anselm, and their ownNoverant utique Thessalonicenses, at nos nescimus. Esth. Estius on the place, Truly the Thes∣salonians knew what letted, but we know it not. So that the Tradition which the Church received from the Apostles touching this mat∣ter, is wholly lost; how therefore can she be relied on as a sure Preserver, and a true Teach∣er of Traditions, which hath confessedly let one of great moment, deposited with the Thes∣salonians, and the Primitive Church?
CHAP. III. Verse 1. FInally, (, furthermore, I entreat you Brethren to) pray for us (Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel,) that the word of the Lord (preached by us) may have free course, (, may run on free∣ly too,) and be glorified (among other Gen∣tiles.) even as (it hath been) among you. Ver. 2. And (pray also) that we may be delive∣red from unreasonable and wicked men, (such as the unbelieving Jews, the great Opposers of our preaching to the Gentiles, are, 1 Thess. 2.15, 16.) for all men have not faith. Note. It is well known, and hath been of∣ten observed, That the unbelieving Jews were in all places bitter Enemies to the Preachers of the Gospel, and sent their Emissaries into all places to incite the Governours against them, and therefore, as here, so Rom. 15.31. the Apostle intreats Christians to contend with him in Prayer, that he might be delivered from the unbelievers in Judea; whereas Si∣mon Magus and his Followers were a despica∣ble Crew at the writing of this Epistle, and could have no power to persecute the Apo∣stles or Preachers of the Gospel upon this ac∣count. And therefore. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 15. Vide c. 14. Eusebius informs us that his Heresie prevailed little in the Apo∣stles days, and that his power presently was extinguished with his person. Ver. 3. But (though men may prove unfaith∣ful,) the Lord is (always) faithful (to his pro∣mises,) who (therefore) shall (or will do all things requisite on his part, to) stablish you, and keep you from evil. Ver. 4. And (therefore) we are confident in the Lord, that ye (through his assistance) both do (at present,) and will (still) do the things which we (by his authority) command you. Ver. 5. And (that we may not be mistaken in this confidence, we pray that) the Lord (would) direct your hearts into the love of God, (which will constrain you to this obedi∣ence, 2 Cor. 5.14. and from which nothing shall separate you, Rom. 8.35-39. and into the patient waiting for of Christ (mentioned 1 Thess. 1.10. 2 Thess. 1.10. Philip. 3.20.) Or , into the patience of Christ.] i. e. Into an imitation of his Patience, in suffering the contradiction of sinners against himself, that ye may run with patience the race which is set before you, looking unto Je∣sus, &c. Hebr. 12.1, . Ver 6. Now we (being thus confident of your obedience) commnd you, Brethren, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the Tradi∣tion which he hath received of (i. e. from) us. .] The Tradition here mentioned is, say Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecu∣menius and Theophylact, the Tradition which he delivered  by his works, in which he was an Example to them of Indu∣stry, and therefore he adds, Ver. 7. For you your selves know how you ought to follow us; for we behaved not our selves disorderly among you. Ver. 8. Neither did we eat any mans bread for nought; but wrought with labour and tra∣vel, (weariness and toil,) night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you. , we behaved not our selves disorderly.] That is, saith Theophylact, we were not idle; for God having ordered Man to labour, and fitted him with Members for that end, he that will not do so, , deserts the Order in which God hath pla∣ced him, and so the Apostle expounds him∣self, v. 11. Ver. 9. Not because we have not power (to live of the Gospel, for the Labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10.7. and so hath the Lord appointed that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor 9.14.) but to make our selves an ensample for you to follow us (in this our industry; for if we, who might law∣fully live upon other mens labours, chuse rather to work for our own living, how much more ought you to do so?) Ver. 10. (And this we formerly have taught.) For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any (being able) would not work, neither should he eat. Ver. 11. And of this we have cause to re∣mind
you,) For we hear that there are some who walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busie bodies, (medling with that which belongs not to them.) Ver. 12. Now them that are such, we com∣mand and exhort, by (the Authority, and in the Name of) the Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and (so) eat their own bread. Ver. 13. (Thus I hear it is with them,) But ye, Brethren, be not weary of well-doing, (let not their Example make you neglect your industry.) Note. The Fathers interpret these words thus, Let not their Sloth hinder your Charity in giving them what is necessary to preserve Life. But this Exposition suits not with v. 10. Ver. 14. And if any man (among you) obey not our word by this Epistle, (in which we ex∣hort, and command them thus to work,) note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, (being thus shun'd as unworthy of the Society of Christians.) Ver. 15. Yet count him not as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. .] Most Interpreters say that the Apostle, v. 6. and here, requires the Church Go∣vernours to use the Censures of the Church upon these disorderly walkers; but I have shewed it to be highly probable, that when this Epistle was writ, there were no such Go∣vernours settled in this Church, See Note on 1 Thess. 5.12. 2ly, These Exhortations plainly are directed to all the Brethren in general; if therefore they relate to Excommunication, and such like Censures, it will hence follow that the Power of the Keys belong to all the Brethren in ge∣neral. 3ly, The Apostle exhorts them still to own them as Christian Brethren, which they at pre∣sent are not who by Excommunication are ex∣cluded from the Church, and the Society of Christians. Ver. 16. Now the Lord of Peace himself give you Peace always, by all means. The Lord be with you all. , the Lord.] Both here, and Chap. 2. v. 16. the Apostle prays to the Lord Jesus Christ for peace, which in the Hebrew Phrase, imports all Happiness, and for esta∣blishment in every good word and work, which is a strong Argument for his Divinity, especially considering that every good Work derives from God. Ver. 17. The Salutation of (me) Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle, (that it comes from me.) , which is the to∣ken in every Epistle.] Hence Grotius con∣cludes that this must be the first of his Epi∣stles; for had he, saith he, writ any Epistle before, this Admonition had been needless. I should rather think that this supposes he had writ some Epistle before, because he saith not, this shall be, but this is the sign in every Epistle. And this is evident, almost to a de∣monstration, from these words, Chap. 2.2. be not troubled by Epistle as from us, as if the Day of the Lord were at hand. See the Note there; and from these words, v. 15. Hold the Traditions you have (formerly) received, we¦ther by Word, or by our Epistle. To which words Grotius hath nothing to answer. Add to this the Note of the LearnedEx quo intelligimus, salutationem in Epistolis Apostoli propriâ ejus manu subscribi solitam, eamque notam in omnibus  ∣postolis (excipias forsan eam quae ad Galatas propriâ manu integra sit scripta, cap. 6.11.) adhibitam, ut proindè quae il  carerent commentitiae haberentur. Dissert. Cypr. 2. in Ep. 4. Mr. Dod∣well, cited in the Margin. Note, That the Salutation with his  Hand, respects his own writing, by which his Epistles were distinguished from any Coun∣terfeits. Ver. 18. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE First Epistle of St. PAUL to TIMOTHY. THAT this Epistle was written after St. Paul's Departure from Ephesus to Macedonia, some gather from these Words, When I went into Macedo∣nia I besought thee to abide at Ephesus, Ch. 1.. and that it was writ when he was in expe∣tion of returning shortly thither, they con∣lude from these Words, I write to thee, ho∣ing to come unto thee quickly, Chap. 3.14.  therefore, say they, must be writ before he came to Miletus, Acts 20.17. For then he, sending for the Bishops of Ephesus thither, speaks thus to them, And now I know that all you, among whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my Face no more, v. 25. For then he must have laid aside all Thoughts of returning any more to Ephesus. It therefore must, say they, be written while he was in Macedonia, or thereabouts; and so A. D. 55. and the first of Nero, so Dr. Light∣foot. Bishop Pearson grants that it was written after St. Paul was gone into Macedonia; but then he adds, that it was writ after his Enlarge∣ment from his Bonds at Rome, A. D. 65. that it could not be writ at any time of St. Paul's going to Macedonia, before his Jouney to Je∣rusalem, he proves, because before that time, St. Paul could not have exhorted him to abide at Ephesus; for the first time he went to Ma∣cedonia by the Direction of the Holy Ghost, Acts 16.9, 10. He had not seen Ephesus, for he came not thither till a long time after, Acts 19.1. The second time he came to Mace∣donia was after the Tumult which forc'd him to leave Ephesus, Acts 20.1. when he could not exhort him to abide at Ephesus, for he had sent him thence to Macedonia at that very time when that Tumult began, Acts 19.22, 23. This Argument, I confess, is not very strong, it being plain from his first Epistle writ to Corinth, while he was at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 16.8, 10, 11. that he expected then his Return to him: But then it appears that Timothy was with him when he went first from Macedonia to Achaia, and at Corinth writ his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 16.21. and also when he returned from Achaia to Mace∣donia, for then he accompanied him from Achaia to Macedonia, and so to Asia, and so he abode not then at Ephesus, Acts 20.4. Now from thence St. Paul goes to Jerusalem, and from thence bound to Rome, and so he could not after go to Macedonia till he was set at Liberty. This therefore, saith he, was done afterwards in the 10th. Year of Nero, A. D. 65. and soon after he writ this Epistle to him. And whereas against this it is objected, that in this Epistle he speaks twice of his coming to Ephesus, saying, I write unto thee, hoping to come to thee shortly, Chap. 3.14. and till I come, give thy diligence to reading, Chap. 4.13. whereas before his going up to Jerusalem, he had expresly said to them of Ephesus, I know that all you shall see my face no more; whence it is gathered that this Epistle must be writ be∣fore that time. To this I answer, That St. Paul saith plain∣ly in this Epistle, that he purposed to come to him; but he saith not, that he purposed to come to him to Ephesus. If you reply, that in this Epistle he commands him to stay at Ephe∣sus, and so must be supposed to speak of coming thither to him, Ch. 1.3. this I confess is true, ac∣cording to our Version, which adds unto the Words so do; but if you read the Words thus, As I ex∣horted thee to abide (some time) at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, (so I did it) that thou mightest admonish some to teach no other Doctrine, it will be left uncertain whe∣ther he were at Ephesus, at the indting this Epistle; for then having done the Work for which he was hid to stay at Ephesus, he might go on to other Places, doing the Work of an E∣vangelist, and settling ordinary Church Gover∣nors, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, where they were wanting, and doing all the other things mentioned in this Epistle, as things to be performed in the Church of God. For▪
1st. 'Tis certain that when the second Epi∣stle was writ to Timothy, he was not at Ephe∣sus, as I have there proved, Note on Chap. 4.12. He therefore might have been gone thence also at the writing of this Epistle, to settle the Affairs of other Churches. 2dly, It is certain that this first Epistle was writ to him, that in St. Paul's Absence he might know how to deport himself in the Church of God, especially in reference to the Prescriptions here laid down, Chap. 3.15. Now there was little need that he should stay there, to do the Great Work prescribed in this Epistle, touching Bishops and Deacons, they being settled among them by St. Paul himself be∣fore he left Ephesus; and they being after, in his Journey to Jerusalem, summoned to Mile∣tus, and taught how to demean themselves in the respective Provinces committed to their Trust, 'tis therefore highly probable that these Directions were given him in reference to other Churches to which this Evangelist was to tra∣vel, and in some of which he might then be. If this Conjecture may take place, the Difficul∣ty is fully answered; if not, I must confess my self unable to return any satisfactory An∣swer to it, and so leave the Reader to his Choice, whether he will follow the Opinion of Dr. Lightfoot, or Bishop Pearson, in this Matter. But tho' there be so great a Difference as to the time of writing this Epistle; the Ancient Commentators all agree in this,Obsecrat Episcopus Coepiscopum suum, ne pateretur Judaeos aliter populum quam ab Apostolo tradebatur decere, re ∣ctarentur fabulis quas narrare consueti sunt Judaei de generatione suarum originum, de Abraham, & de circumcise,  quae postea tradita sunt a Moyse, Ambros. in locum. . Chrysost. in Cap. 1. v. 3. . Oecum & Theoph. proleg. & in locum. That St. Timothy was left at Ephesus to preserve that Church from the Endeavours of the Ju∣daizing Christians to introduce Circumcision, and the Observance of the Law, and to amuse them with their Talmudical Fables, and with their Genealogies from Abraham, and the Pa∣triarchs. A Reverend Person saith, It is evi∣dent the Gnosticks were now scattered in Asia, and so characterized by the Apostle, Chap. 4. and 6. and there distinctly specified under the Title of , Science falsly so called, v. 20. they being the Men who assumed to themselves the Names of Gnosticks, or Knowing Men. And it must be confessed that. Theodor. Theodoret accords with him in this Matter, saying, That the Apostle stiles the pretended Knowledge of the Gno∣sticks, Science, falsly so called. And. Chrys. Saint Chrysostom saith, Perhaps this was spoken by reason of some who were then called Gno∣sticks. And. Theophylact, I think the Apostle speaks this concerning some then cal∣led Gnosticks. But yet there lies this strong Objection against this Exposition of this Phrase, or the ascribing of it to the Gnosticks, That, ac∣cording to all the Accounts we receive from the Ancients, these Gnosticks were not then in Being, at least under that Name; for whether, with Irenaeus, we derive their Original fromSee Note on Chap. 6.20. Valentinus, or Carpocrates; or, with Cle∣mens Alexandrinus, from Epiphanes, the Au∣thor of the Sect of the Carpocratians; or,  St. Jerom saith, fromMortuus est autem Basilides, a quo Gnostici, temporibus Hadriani. Hieron. in voce Agrippa. . Euseb. Chr. A. D. 134. Valentinus venit Romam sub Hygino, increvit sub it, & p∣gvit tempus usque ad Anicetum. Iren. l. 5. c. 4. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 11. & Chron. ad An. Christi 141. de Carpo∣crate & Epiphane Theodoretus haec bahet, . Hr. ad. l. 1. c. 5. De Menandro. Vide Dodwell. Diss. 4. in Iren. Sect. 10. p. 308. Basilides. It is evident, and confess'd by all these Authors, That a these, and even Menander, whom Irenaeus some∣times makes the Father of the Gnosticks, were long after the writing of this Epistle. Where∣as the Judaizing Christians were, saith Theo∣doret, , Great Bo∣ers of their Knowledge of the Law; and yet that their pretended Knowledge was false Knowledge, we learn from those Words of the Apostle, That these Teachers of the Law knew not what they said, or whereof they affirmed, 1 Tim. 1.7. Hence is their Doctrine stiled, , vain talking, v. 6. and here, , empty babling; as also, 2 Tim. 2.1. , foolishness, 2 Tim. 3.9. and they are said to be , vain talkers, Tit. 1.10. Men puffed up, and knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strife of words, 1 Tim. 6.. See the Note on Chap. 6.20. So that I can see no Objection against that Opinion which refers this Phrase to those Judaizers, whom the Apo∣stle elsewhere stileth false Apostles and deceit∣ful Workers.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE First Epistle of St. PAUL to TIMOTHY. CHAP. I. Verse 1. PAUL, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the Commandment (, according to the Appointment) of God our Saviour, (who called me to this Office by his Grace, Gal. 1.15.) and (by the Appointment) of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Hope (of Glory, Coloss. 1.27.) , an Apostle, &c.] Thus he writes to Timothy and Titus, not to assert his Apo∣stolical Authority to them who doubted not of it, but for their sakes over whom they were to preside, that they might not despise what they did, and enjoin'd by so great Au∣thority. , &c.] Some construe these Words thus, According to the Commandment of Jesus Christ, who is God our Saviour; but the Words , our Hope, must be construed with the Words Jesus Christ: And this sufficiently confutes that Ver∣sion, which as none of the Ancients follow∣ed, so is it not supported by the Word Saviour added to God, that Epithete being twice ap∣plied to God the Father in this Epistle, viz. Ch. 2.3. and 4.10. and twice in the Epistle to Titus, viz. Ch. 1.3. and 2.10. Moreover some ancient Copies read , of God our Father. Ver. 2. To Timothy my own Son in the Faith (do I wish) Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father, and (from) the Lord Jesus Christ. , my own Son in the Faith.] This Phrase compared with 1 Cor. 4.14, 15. seems plainly to import, That Timothy was converted to the Christian Faith by St. Paul; as also he seems to intimate when he saith, He served with him in the Gospel as a Son with the Father, Phil. 2.22. and again calls him his beloved Son, 2 Tim. 1.2. Nor find I any thing in Scripture to the contrary; for tho' it is said that he had learned the Scriptures of the Old Testament from his Youth, 2 Tim. 3.15. yet is that true also of St. Paul, when yet he was no Convert to the Christian Faith, but a zealous Persecutor of it. And tho' he was a Disciple when Paul circumcised him, and took him with him from Lystra, Act. 16.1. that hinders not but that he might be made so by St. Paul himself. Ver. 3. (Declaring that) As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Ma∣cedonia, (Act. 20.1. So I did it to this end) that thou mightest charge some (Judaizers there) to teach no other Doctrine (than that which is according to Godliness, Ch. 6.3.) Ver. 4. Neither give heed (or incline) to (Jewish) Fables and endless Genealogies, which minister Questions (or Disquisitions into Pedi∣grees) rather than godly edifying, which is in Faith, so do. , rather than godly edifying which is in Faith.] Here first the Grammarians note, That compara∣tive Particles, and especially this of , rather, are often in Sense negative, as Luke 18.14. He went to his House justified, , rather than the other; i. e. the Pub∣lican, and not the Pharisee; 1 Pet. 3.17. It is better to suffer for well doing than for evil doing; Joh. 3.19. Men loved , Darkness and not Light; 2 Tim. 3.4. , i. e. Lovers of Plea∣sures and not of God: See Joh. 12.43. Heb. 11.25. The Edification in the Faith here men∣tioned is stiled the Edification of God, because it hath God for its Object, and its End, as tending to the true Knowledge and right Wor∣ship of God; it is efficiently from him, (on which account Justification by Faith is stiled the Righteousness of God,) and tendeth high∣ly to his Glory. Ver. 5. Now (for) the end of the Command∣ment is Charity out of a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned. , The Scope of the Commandment.] This some refer to the Law,
which, saith the Apostle, is fulfill'd by Love, Rom. 13.10. but , 1 Joh. 3.11. , 1 Thess. 4.2. and v. 18. of this Chap∣ter, and  being in the Epistles always used of the Gospel, and the latter Word spo∣ken of it in opposition to the Law, which, saith the Apostle, was not , of Pro∣mise, Rom. 4.13. Gal. 3.18. I rather think it here refers unto the Gospel, or to that Dispensation in which nothing availeth but Faith working by Love, Gal. 5.6. and which requires fervent and unfeigned Love out of a pure Heart from all that do obey the Truth, 1 Pet. 1.22. Ver. 6. From which (Commandment) some having swerved, have turned unto vain jang∣lings: (vain Discourses of Talmudical Fables and endless Genealogies.) Ver. 7. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, (and yet) understanding neither what they say (of it,) nor whereof they affirm, (i. e. neither the Sense, Scope, or the true Meaning of that Law of which they speak, nor having any Certainty of the Traditions of which they talk so confidently.) , desiring to be Teachers of the Law.] That these Persons were not Gnosticks, but , the Jews, is manifest, say the Greek Commentators, from these Words. For the Gnosticks were the greatest Adversaries of the Law and the Pro∣phets; and even Rejecters of that God who gave the one, and inspired the other. Simon Magus taught, That theProphetas autem a Mundi fabricatoribus Angelis inspiratos, dixisse Prophetias; quapropter nec ulteris cer eos hi qui in eum, & in Selenen ejus spem habeant, l. 1. c. 20. Prophets received their Prophesies only from Angels; and that therefore they that believed in him and his Se∣lene, should not regard them. Saturninus, That Christ cameAdvenisse Christum ad destructionem Judaeorum Dei, c. 22. to destroy the God of the Jews; which God Simon himself denied, saith the, Ep. ad Philadelph. Sect. 6. Pseud-Ignatius. They taught Men not, Constit. Apost. l. 6. c. 10. . Theo∣doret. Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 1. to use the Law and the Prophets, nor to fear their Threats. Now they who held and taught these things must be the greatest Ad∣versaries to, and not the Teachers of the Law. Hence it follows, 1. That the Fables and Genealogies men∣tioned, v. 4. and the vain Janglings, v. 6. can∣not relate to the Aeones of the Gnosticks, which seem not then to be hatch'd; but that the Apostle rather here respects, as Theodoret observes, , the vain Traditions, or tal∣mudical Fables of the Jews, as the Apostle explains himself, when he instructs Titus to teach the Cretians  not to give heed to the Jewish Fables of Men who turn from the Truth, Ch. 1.14. especi∣ally those Traditions and Fables they had re∣ceived of a Messiah B. Joseph that was to suffer, and a Messiah B. David that was to triumph gloriously, and abide for ever, J. 12.34. and of the Golden Days, they were to have at the Coming of this Messiah; of which, Trypho, in his Dialogue with  speaks, p. 249. B. saying, That their  taught them , to expect a great and glorious Messiah who should have an end∣less Kingdom; and p. 306, 307. of the Halcy∣on Days they were to enjoy in Jerusalem re∣built at his Coming. The endless Genealo∣gies are, say the Fathers, , their Genealogies from Abra∣ham and David, which they were concerned for, that they might know they came from the promised Seed, or their Title to the Pri∣vileges belonging to the Children of Abraham. They were, saith Dr. Lightf. the long and in∣tricate Pedigrees they stood upon to prove themselves Priests, or Levites; for, as Jose∣phus, l. 1. contra Appian. p. 1036. A. , Ibid. D. notes, they thought themselves obliged to be very exact in that Affair, and therefore had Genealogies of them preserved two thou∣sand Years. To these we may add the Ge∣nealogy and Pedigree of their Traditions which they derived from Joshua in a long Line of Succession to their Times. That they were Genealogies belonging to the Jews, we learn from Tit. 3.9. where they are join'd with Strifes about the Law. Ver. 8. But (tho' they are thus ignorant) we know that the Law (in it self) is good, if a Man use it lawfully, (not as a Means of Justification, but as a Restraint from Sin, Gal. 3.19. and as a Schoolmaster, to bring him to Christ, the end of the Law, Gal. 3.24. Rom. 10.4.) Ver. 9. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a Righteous Person, (to condemn, or work Wrath to him, Rom. 4.15. as failing in the strict Observance of it;) but for (restrain∣ing and condemning) the Lawless and Disobe∣dient, for the Ungodly and for Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, for Murtheres of Fathers, and Murtherers of Mothers, for Manslayers. Ver. 10. For Whoremongers, for those that de∣file themselves with Mankind, for Menstealers, for Liars, for Perjur'd Persons, and if there
be any other thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine. Ver. 11. (That is the Doctrine which is) According to the Glorious Gospel of the Bles∣sed God which was committed to my Trust. ,] i. e. The Law was not made to condemn the just Man, for against such there is no Law, condemning them, Gal. 5.23. , but it lies against the Law∣less, &c. to condemn them. , &c.] From this enumeration of Of∣fenders against the Law, we learn that the Apostle is here speaking of the Moral Law contained in the Ten Commandments; for the Sins here mentioned respect them, the un∣godly being Sinners against the first Command∣ment. The , Sinners, (as that Word signifies the Idolatrous Gentiles, Gal. 2.15.) the Transgressors of the second, the perjured Persons, of the third, the unholy and profane, of the fourth, the Murtherers of Fathers and Mothers, of the fifth, the Manslayers, of the sixth, the Fornicators and Defilers of them∣selves with Mankind, of the seventh, Men∣stealers, of the eighth, Liars, of the ninth, as also from the following Words, if there be any other thing contrary to the sound Doctrine of the Gospel. Note, 3dly, That Fornication is here reckoned among Sins committed against the Law of Nature, or the Moral Law; as it is also, Rom. 1.2. and among the manifest Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5.19▪ yea among the things for which the Wrath of God comes upon the Chil∣dren of Disobedience or Unbelief, that is, the Heathens, Eph. 5.5, 6. for which Men are to be excluded from the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. Rev. 22.15. and to be cast in∣to the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21.8. Whence it is to be wondred that this Sin should be so generally committed by some, and pleaded for by others, who are called Christians. Ver. 12. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me (by the Assistance of the Spirit of Power and Wisdom, who of my self was insufficient for this Work, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.) because he accounted me (one that would be) faithful (in the discharge of it,) putting me (therefore) into the Ministry. , He accounted me faith∣ful.] That St. Paul was a Vessel of Ele∣ction to bear Christ's Name before the Gen∣tiles, see Act. 9.15. that in order thereunto he was by him to be filled with the Holy Ghost, v. 17. and so enabled to perform this Work with the Power of Signs and Wonders, and of the Spirit of God, see Rom. 15.19. Christ also appeared to him for this very end, , to constitute him first, and set him apart, as it were, by laying Hands upon him, to make him a Minister and Wit∣ness of what he had seen and heard, Act. 26.16.22.14, 15. and accordingly he sent him to the Gentiles, Act. 26.17. and thus he put him into the Ministry. Christ did this be∣cause he accounted him one that would be faith∣ful in the Discharge of his Duty, 1 Cor. 4.2. and 7.25. i. e. such a one, who, by the Con∣sideration of so great Mercy, and abundant Grace, vouchsafed to one so unworthy, would patiently suffer for, Act. 9.16. and labour more abundantly in Propagation of the Go∣spel, when thus assisted by the Grace and Spi∣rit of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.10. Whence 'tis ob∣served by the Fathers here, That. Oecum. , &c. . Chrysost. there was not only something of God, but also something of himself, for which he was chosen to this Ministery; and that he so magnifies the Grace of God, as not to invalidate Man's Free Will. Ver. 13. (Me, I say,) who was before (this gracious Call) a Blasphemer (o Christ, Act. 26.11.) and a Persecutor (of his Servants, Act. 8.3.) and injurious (to them;) but I obtained Mercy (from him) because I did it (not a∣gainst Knowledge,) for I verily thought I ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus, (Act. 26.9. but) ignorantly in unbelief. , I did it ignorantly.] Being an Unbeliever, as he might be under those many Prejudices the Learned Jews and zealous Assertors of their Traditions laboured under; for to this St. Peter doth ascribe their Crucifixion of our Lord, saying, I know you did it, , through Ignorance, Act. 3.17. and St. Paul saying they did it, , not knowing him, Act. 13.27. 1 Cor. 2.8. and Christ himself, when he prays thus, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do, Luk 23.34. giving the same Reason of his Prayer for their Forgiveness, as St. Paul here doth of his own actual Forgiveness; so that 'tis needless to endeavour, as some do, to wrest these Words to another Sense. Ver. 14. And this Grace of God was ex∣ceedingly abundant (in its Power to enable me to promote the Faith, Rom. 15.19.) through (that) Faith (in) and Love (I had) towards Christ Jesus. , through Faith and Love.] Love constraining him to labour more abun∣dantly, 2 Cor. 5.14. and his strong Faith en∣abling him to do it in the Power of Signs and Wonders, and of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15.19. Ver. 15. This (therefore) is a faithful Say∣ing, and worthy of all Acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief, (and so a great Example of this Truth.) , to save sinners.] Hence Divines have well observed that if Man had not sinned, Christ had not come into the world. , I am.] He saith not I was, but I am, because even when Sin is pardon'd, we ought to have the prospect of it still before our Eyes, to keep us humble and sensible of the great Grace of God to us. Ver. 16. Howbeit for this cause (even) I (the chief of sinners) obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pattern (of it) to them which should hereafter believe on him to life ever∣lasting. Ver. 17. Now to the King eternal, immor∣tal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen. Ver. 18. This charge (of remaining at E∣phesus, for the benefit of the Churches there, v. 3.) I commit unto thee, son Timothy, ac∣cording to the Prophecies that went before of thee, that thou, (encouraged and excited) by them mightest war a good warfare, (even that of Faith, Chap. 6.12. fighting and suffering as a good Souldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Tim. 2.3.) , according to the foregoing Prophecies concerning thee.] So Chap. 4. v. 14. neglect not , the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which was given thee, , according to Pro∣phecy. I have shew'd, Note on 1 Cor. 12.10. that among the Gifts of Prophecy, and discerning of Spirits, this was one, to fore∣tel, and chuse out Persons meet to do God Service in the Ministery. Hence St. Paul charges the Bishops of Ephesus to feed the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, or Bishops, Acts 20.28. And Clemens Romanus saith, the Apostles chose Bishops and Deacons, with full assurance of the Holy Ghost, , Ep. ad Cor. §. 42, 44. having a perfect Knowledge of them, and making tryal of them by the Spi∣rit. So was it in the case of Timothy, say all the Greek Scholiasts on the place.. Chrysost. in locum. St. Chrysostom saith he was chosen by Prophecy, that is, by the Spirit of God.. Theod. Theodoret, that He received Imposition of Hands, not by Man's Calling, but by Divine Revelation.. Oec. Oecumenius, that by the Revelation of the Spirit he was both chosen by St. Paul to be a Disciple, and was circumcised, and ordained a Bishop; and. Theoph. Theophylact affirms the same. Being thus design'd and notified by the Spirit of Prophecy, they were by Prayer and Impo∣sition of Hands consecrated to their Office. Thus when the Spirit in the Prophets had said▪ separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Wor of the Ministery, to which I have called them. Acts 13.2, 3, 4. they prayed, and laid their Hands upon them, and sent them away; and they are said to be sent forth by the Holy Ghost. And with this Imposition of Hands they who had them not before, received , Gifts answerable to their Calling. Thus St. Paul charges Timothy to stir up , the Gift of God that was in him, by the laying on of his Hands, 2 Tim. 1.6. and Irenaeus saith, l. 4. c. 33. that the Bishops who succeeded the Apostles, with their Succession into their Bi∣shopricks, received a certain Charisma of Truth, according to the good pleasure of the Father. See Note on 1 Cor. 2.16. and on Chap. 12.10. Vain therefore are they who pretending to an internal Call of the Spirit, which they cannot prove to others, think Imposition of Hands, and Consecration to the Work of the Ministery, unnecessary to the performance of the Ministerial Office. , that thou mayst war a good warfare,] i. e. perform the Office of an Evangelist well, 2 Tim. 4.5. so as to be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, 1 Tim. 4.6. Thus in the Old Testament the Levite that en∣tred upon the Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, is in the Hebrew one that enters into the Host, Num. 4.3, 23, 30, 35, 39, 43. Chap. 8.24. and goes , to war the warfare, i. e. to serve the service, saith the Chaldee; and so the following words explain it; and to be superannuated, and so to cease from the work, is to return from the warfare, Ch. 8.25. thus also in the New Te∣stament, the Christian Minister is a Souldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Tim. 2.3. , a Warriour; ver. 4. He hath the Weapons of his Warfare, 2 Cor. 10.4. and ought to have his Wages, because no Man goeth to warfare at his own Charge, 1. Cor. 9.7. Ver. 19. Holding faith and a good consci∣ence, which (last) some having put away, con∣cerning the faith have made shipwrack. Ver. 20. Of whom is Hymenaeus (2 Tim. 2.17.) and Alexander, (2 Tim. 4.14.) wh I have delivered to Satan, (for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5.) that they (by what they suffer) may learn not to blaspheme, (or speak evil of the Faith.) , whom I have deli∣vered to Satan.] I have shewed, Note on 1 Cor. 5.5. that the Ancients say the Phrase signified that some Disease was to be inflicted on them by Satan. Thus Theodoret, Chry∣sostom,
and Oecumenius here say of these Men,. Theod. that being separated from the Church, they were cruelly chastised by the Adversary,  into Diseases, and grievous Afflictions, and other Damages and Calamities; and this, is the forementioned place, is argued from the ends of this dlivery to Satan, viz. for the destruction of the flesh there, that they ght learn not to blespheme that Doctrine which could so severely punish them that did so here. Note also, that Hymenaeus and A∣lexander made shipwrack of the Faith, not by renouncing Christianity, for what have I to do, saith the Apostle, to dge them that are with∣out, 1 Cor. 5.12. but by maintaining such Doctrines as overthrew the Faith, i. e. by de∣nying the Resurrection of the Body, as Hy∣menaeus did, 2 Tim. 2.18. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. I Exhort therefore, (in pursuance of the Design of Christ's coming to  Sinners, Ch. 1.15. and here, v. 3, 4.) the first of all (Gr. first that) Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, he made for all Men. Ver. 2. (Particularly) For Kings, and (for) all that are in Authority, that we (under their Government) may lead a peaceable and quiet Life, in all Godliness and Honesty. , Prayers, Suppli∣cations, Intercessions.] , are Depreca∣s for the Pardon of Sin, and the averting Divine Judgments. , Prayers for the obtaining of all spiritual and temporal Bles∣sings; and in this we have the Suffrage of the Greek Scholiasts, and Lexicographers: But as for the Word , they almost unani∣mously say it is a Complaint or Accusation made to God against those who deal injuri∣ously with them; and a Desire that he would avenge their Injuries; to which I cannot think the Apostle would so passionately exhort them. I therefore prefer the other Import of the Word mention'd in Pharvorinus, that it is , an Address presented to God for the Salvation of others. And by this Rule were the Devotions of the Church continually di∣rected; For, saith the Author of the Book, De Vocatione Gentiam,Quam legem Supplicationis, ita omium sacerdtum, & mnium p  diter tenet, t nulla pars mundi sit in quae hujusmodi erationes non celebrentur a populis Christianis, supplicat erg uique Ecclesia De , & in C jm regeneratis, sed etiam pro omnibus infidelibus, & inimis crucis Christi, pro omnibus Idelom culterib pro  qui Christum in membris ipsius prosequuntur, pro Judae, quum caetari lumen evangelij nn refger, pro Hreticis, & Smaticis, qui ab unitate fidei, & charitatis alieni sunt. L. 1. c. 4. the Devotion of all the Priests, and all the Faithful, doth so unani∣mously observe this Rule of Prayer, that there is no Part of the World in which the Christian People do not put up such Prayers as these; praying to God, not only for the Saints, but for Infidels, Idolaters, the Enemies of the Cross, and the Persecutors of Christ's Mem∣bers, for Jews, Hereticks, and Schismaticks. , &c. For Kings and all that are in Authority.] So the Jews pray'd and offer'd Sacrifices for the Persian Kings,. Darius apud Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 4. and the Welfare of their Government, Ezra 6.10. Thus Jeremy sends to them in their Captivity, to pray for the Peace of the City whher God had caused them to be carried Captive, Chap. 29.7. and the Jews in Babylon send to those in Judaea to pray for the Life of Nebuchadene∣sr, King of Babylon; and for the Life of Belthasar his Son, that their Days may be upon Earth as the Days of Heaven, Baruch 1.11. When they came under the Government of the Kings of Egypt, Eleazer their High Priest writes to King Ptolemy thus: We continually of∣fer Sacrifice. Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 2. p. 392. . Ibid. c. 17. for thee, thy Sister, thy Children, and Friends; and the People pray for thy hap∣py Success in all things, and for the peaceable State of thy Kingdom. And so when they were under the Seleucidae. And▪ lastly, when they came under the. Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 17. &c. 3, per totum. Roman Government, this was their constant Practice, till they be∣gan that Rebellion under which their City, Country, Religion, and Nation was destroy'd. This being, saith Josephus, the Cause of the War, that the Seditions did , reject the Sacrifice ofer'd for Caesar, tho' the Priests and Nobles earnestly entreated them , not to desert the Cstom concerning their Rulers, which always had obtain'd among them.
And that the Christians, following their Examples, thus pray'd continually from the beginning, for their. Oecum. Kings, we learn fromOrate pro Regibus & Ptefi & Principibus, Polyc. Sect. 12. Polycarp,P. 52. & 363. Justin Martyr,Apol. c. 30, 31, 32. Tertulli∣an,Ad proconsulem. St. Cyprian,Ctra C l. 8. p. 427. Origen,In fine Theophil. ad Autol. p. 76. Dionys. Alex. apud Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 11. p. 25.  Apost. l. 2. c. 57. Lactantius, and from all the Ancient Liturgies. And this it became them to do, that the Heathen Em∣perors finding them thus solicitous for the Welfare and Prosperity of their Government, might permit 'em quietly and peaceably to enjoy their Religion. Ver. 3. For this (Prayer for them, and for all Men) is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour. Ver. 4. Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come (Gr. who wills that all Men should be saved, and come) unto the Knowledge of the Truth. Ver. 5. For there is one God, (who is the God of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews, Rom. 2.29, 30. The Creator, Eph. 3.9. The Father, Mat. 2.10. The Lord, Acts 17.24. The Saviour of all Men, Chap. 4.10.) and one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. , Mediator.] That is, saith Suidas, , a Peace-maker. This, say the Soci∣nians, is not necessary that a Mediator should appease or reconcile Parties at variance, but only that he should deliver the Mind of one to the other, and strike a Covenant or League betwixt them, as in the Case of Moses, Gal. 3.19. To this I answer, (1.) That tho' this be not necessarily contained in the Signification of the Word, yet is it evidently implied in that which is annexed to our Mediator, where∣ever he is mentioned in the New Testament, viz. here, and in the Epistle to the Hebrews; for here he is such a Mediator as gave himself a Ransom to God for us, v. 6. and there he is a Mediator of the New Covenant in his Blood, the Covenant made by Intervention of his Death, , for the Redemption of the Transgressions of the former Covenant, Chap. 9.15.8.6.12.24. (2dly,) This seemeth to have been the Jewish Notion both of a Mediator in the general, and of our Me∣diator, or the Divine Logos in particular. Thus. Lib. quis Rerum div. Haeres. p. 397, G. 398, A. Philo saith, That the Father of all things hath granted to his most Ancient Word an ex¦cellent Gift, viz. That standing in the Co¦fines of Both, he should put a difference b¦twixt the Maker and the Thing made, as b¦ing an Intercessor for mortal Man to the i¦mortal God, and an Ambassador from the King  his Subject; in which Gift he rejoiceth, saying , And I st betwixt God and you, being neither unbego¦ten as God, , nor made  we are, but a Middle of the Extremes,  a Pledge to Both; to the Creator, engaging that all Mankind shall not corrupt it self, and apostatize, chusing Disorder before Or¦der; to the Creature, that he may have go Hope that the merciful God will not wholly overlook his own Work; for I denounce, , peaceable Things to the Creature fro the God of Peace. And, speaking of thei High Priest, who was a Type of Christ, he saith,. l. 2. de Monarch. p. 369. E. The Law will have him raised above Human Nature, and coming near to the Di∣vine; and, if I may say the Truth, a Middle betwixt Both, that Men may atone God by a Mediator, and God may reach forth and distri∣bute his Favours to Men by a certain Mini∣ster. And again,. De vita Msis, lib. 3. p. 521. B. It was necessary th he who performs the Office of a Priest to the Father of the World, should have for his Ad¦vocate his Son most perfect in Vertue to obtain the Pardon of Sins, and the Participation of the greatest Blessings. So that here it is made the Office of a Mediator to procure Peace to the Creature from God, to make atonement to God, and to be an Advocate to obtain the Pardon of Sins; and if Christ our Mediator and Advocate with the Father, was, by vir∣tue of his Office, to do this, surely it must be part of his Office to appease and reconcile God to us. Ver. 6. Who gave himself (up to Death as) a Ransom for all (Men) to be testified in due time, (Gr. for a Testimony in due time of God's Love to all, Tit. 3.4.) , a Ransom for all.] And Mat. 20.28. , a Ransom in the stead of many. Hence then 'tis evident, beyond Contradiction, that our Lord Jesus suffered in our stead. For when the Scri∣pture
saith, , ye shall admit no Satisfaction for the life of the Murtherer who is worthy of Death,  35.31, 32. but he shall surely be put to death; for, , the Land cannot be cleansed, or expiated, from the Blood that is shed therein, but by the Blood of him that shed it, is not this the plain port of these Words, that no Price shall be admitted instead of his Life? Again, when Ahb pass'd this Judgment on the disguised Prophet, , thy Life shall go for his Life whom thou hast let go, 1 Kings 20.39, 42; And when the Pro∣phet thus returns upon him, Thus saith the Lord, Because thou hast let go out of thy hand a Man whom I have appointed to utter destru∣ct, , there∣fore thy Life shall go for his Life; And when John saith to the Men appointed to slay the Priests of Baal, If any of them escape, he that letteth him go, , his Life shall be for his Life that esca∣peth of them, 2 Kings 10.24; Do not all these Expressions plainly signifie thou shalt die instead of him? When therefore Christ elsewhere declares, That he would give his Flesh for the Life of the World; That he gave his Life a Ransom for many, a Ransom for all, Must he not signifie, by these Expressions, that he would give up his Life to the Death, instead of them who had deserved Death? Which sure he could not do, but he must suf∣fer in their stead. Moreover, by the Jewish law, the First-born of every Beast was to die; or, to rescue him from it, the Owner was to pay, , a Price to redeem his Life, Numb. 18.15; and the pushing Ox, pro∣ided the Owner did not pay, , a Price or Ransom for his Life, Ex∣od. 21.31. Every Israelite was also to bring in yearly his half Shekel, , to be the Ransom of his Life, that he die not, Exod. 30.12, 15, 16. And this Money was appointed to buy the daily Sacrifice which was to expiate or make Atonement for their Lives. When therefore, in Allusion to these things, 'tis said, Christ gave himself, , or , a Ransom for many, can we put any other Sense upon these Words, than this, That he gave his Life instead of ours, to expiate and atone for those Lives which we by Sin had forfeited? , For all.] These Verses contain several convincing Arguments, That God wills the Salvation of all Men in particular, and that Christ thus died for all: For, 1. The Apostle here enjoins us to pray for all Men, because God will have all Men to be saved. Now 'tis unquestionably the Christian's Duty, and was the constant Practice of the Church, to pray for all Men in Particular; and there∣fore the Reason here assigned, of this Duty, must reach to all Men in particular. 2. The Apostle reasons thus: God would have all Men to be saved, because he is the God of all, the common Father, Creator, Governour, Pre∣server of all Men. Now thus he is the God of all Men in particular, and so this Argu∣ment must shew he would have all Men in particular to be saved. For, as the Apostle argues for God's readiness to justifie the Gen∣tiles by Faith, as freely as the Jews, by ask∣ing, Is he the God of the Jews only, is he not also of the Gentiles? Rom. 3.30, and answer∣ing, that there is no difference betwixt them, the same God being rich unto all that call up∣on him, Rom. 10.12; so may we argue in this Case by a like Enquiry, Is he the God of a small Remnant of the Jews and Gentiles on∣ly, is he not the God and Saviour of them all? Chap. 4.10.3. He would have all Men to be saved, saith the Apostle, for there is one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all. Now if the Argument from one God was, as we have proved, designed to shew he was the God of all Men in particular, the Argument from this one Mediator must also prove Christ the Mediator of all Men in par∣ticular. Hence is he here emphatically stiled the Man Christ Jesus, to intimate unto us, that having taken upon him the Nature com∣mon to us all, to fit him for this Office, he must design it for the good of all who were Partakers of that Nature; for as he was a Man, he surely was endued with the best of Human Affections, Universal Charity, which would excite him to promote the Welfare of all. As he was a Man, he was subject to the common Law of Humanity, which obliges us to endeavour the common Benefit of Men. Ver. 7. Whereunto (i. e. for the accomplish∣ing of which Will of God,) I am ordained (appointed of Christ) a Preacher, and an A∣postle; I speak the Truth in Christ, I lye not, a Doctor of the Gentiles in Faith and Ve∣rity. , I speak the Truth in Christ.] This Oath, or vehement Affirmation, could not be necessary to confirm Timothy in the Belief of this Matter. But this Epistle being sent to Ephesus, where there were many Jews, who either denied that Salvation was to be preached to the Gentiles, or only on the Terms of being also circumcised, which this Apostle so stoutly did oppose, it might be necessary for their sakes Ver. 8. I will therefore that Men pray eve∣ry where, lifting up pure (holy) hands, with∣out wrath, or doubting. , Holy Hands.] 'Tis certain that 'twas the Custom of the Heathens to wash sometimes their Heads, sometimes their whole Bodies, but generally their Hands, before they come to the Temple, to pay their Homage to their Gods. And to this purpose they had
their , or , Basons, or Lavers placed before the Temples, which they were to use before they sacrificed; it being thought so great a Crime to come to the Gods with Hands unwashed, illotis manibus libare, that 'tisVid. Eras. Adag. Chil. 1. Cent. 9. p. 246. proverbial with them, to signifie by that Phrase those who come irreverently and unprepared to their Service, say Diogenianus and St. Gre∣gory; and to come reverently to the Gods, isJ. Poll. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 24. , to come cleans'd, and wash'd, and therefore holy. As for the Jews, the Learned Dr. Pocock saith, that this is a Law among them, That every one must wash his Hands when he rises from his Bed, that he may be pure when he offers up his Prayers to God, not thinking any Man , Prov. 22.11.) pure, till he hath wash'd his Hands. This they were to do, say theirBuxt. Syn. Jud. cap. 8. p. 156, 157, 158. Rabbins, least God, seeing his Creature defiled, should be angry; and because Prayer succeeded to those Sacrifices which were not to be touched by the Priest till he had wash'd his Hands, Ex∣od. 30.27, 28. This they look'd upon as a part of Sanctification, and therefore pray thus, Blessed be thou, O Lord God,  who hast sanctified us by thy Precepts, and com∣mandest us to wash our Hands. This washing was to signifie three things: 1. That the Hands should be innocent and pure from all Blood and Cruelty, Injustice and Bribery, all Filthiness and Impurity, before we come to this sacred Majesty, as David saith, I will wash my Hands in Innocency, and so will I compass thine Altar, Psal. 26.6. and Philo of theDe vita contemplat. p. 695. Essens, that they lifted up pure Hands to Hea∣ven, that is, Hands, , pure from Gifts, and slain'd with no unjust Gain; and so, saith he, must the Person, who lays his Hand upon his Offering, be able to say,De vict. p. 649. , These Hands have received no Gifts to do Injustice, are not polluted with innocent Blood; they have maimed, wounded, done Violence to no Man; they have been imploy'd in no culpable Action, but have ministred to all good and pro∣fitable things. 2dly, That our Hearts should much more be purified from all Lusts, and Filthiness of Spirit, Pride, Hatred, Malice, Covetousness, &c. so clean Hands, and a pure Heart, in the Psalmist, go together, Psal. 24.4. He that offers Sacrifices, saithDe vict. offer. ab init. Philo, must be, , pure in Body, from whatsoever defileth that; and in Soul, from all evil Passions and Vices. For it is Fol∣ly to think we may not come to the Temple till we have wash'd the Body, and yet may pray, and offer Sacrifice with a spotted and defiled Mind, see Jam. 4.8. 3dly, That we be puri∣fied from all worldly and distracting Thoughts, that the Mind may be at leisure to attend pure∣ly to heavenly things, that we may bring to God, saith Philo,De vita coemp. p. 691. B. , a Soul cosed of all the Weight of the Senses and Sensible Objects. These are the things which the Apo∣stle here enjoins, when he commands us to lift up holy Hands, not that we should wash them with Water, whichDe orat. c. 12. Tertullian reck∣ons, among things, vacuae Observationis, of vain Observation, superstitious, and rather cu∣rious and affected, than reasonable Devotion, when introduced by some Christians from the Heathen or the Jewish Practice, as a Preface to Prayer. , without Wrath.] As being con∣trary to that Charity, and Forgiveness, and that Sedateness of Spirit we ought to have when we address to God in Prayer, and is the Fore-runner of that Cruelty which defiles the Hands. , and doubting.] I find not that the Greek ever bears this Sense of doubt∣ing, but always imports, in the New Testa∣ment, either inward Reasonings, or tumultu∣ating Thoughts, , evil Thoughts in the Heart, Mat. 15.19. Mark 7.21. Jam. 2.4. , the Thoughts of Mens Hearts, Luk. 2.35.9.46. , their Thoughts, Luke 5.22.6.8. or their Ima∣ginations, Rom. 1.21. Luke 24.28. or Con∣tention and Disceptation among them, Luke 9.46. or inward Murmurings, Phil. 2.14. all which are plainly opposite to that Peace, Con∣cord, and Sedateness of Spirit we should bring to our Devotions, and apt to distract us in them, especially evil Imaginations. Ver. 9. In like manner also, (I will) that (Christian) Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with Shamefacedness, and Sobriety, not (setting out themselves) with broidred Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array. Ver. 10. But (with that Ornamnt) which (best) becometh Women, professing Godliness, (that is) with Good Works. , with Samefacedness, and Sobriety, or Chastity.] It seems impossible to fix a certain Rule for the Attire of Wo∣men of all States and Conditions, at all Times, and in all Places, but from what the Apostle saith here, and 1 Pet. 3.3. see the Note there, it seems evident, 1. That , that all Attire which su∣spected Women used, either to provoke Lust in others, or to shew any Inclination to it in themselves; and all Attire, which hath any tendency to any thing of this nature, or to
raise a Suspicion of it, must be here forbid∣den, as being contrary to the Modesty and chast Behaviour of a godly Matron. And, 2dly, all Attire, which by the Richness and the Costliness of it, shews any Pride, or Vanity of Spirit, or an Ambition to excel others. And, 3dly, all great Concernment, Care, and Sdy, to appear in such Attire, as if it were indeed our truest Ornament, and that which made us truly to excel, and be more honour∣able than others; this Vanity and Pride, this Esteem of, and Concern for these Things, be∣ing not well consistent with Sobriety, and much less with the Profession of True God∣liness. And here it is worthy to be noted by the Women, (1.) That this Precept ought not to be slighted by them, as of little moment, seeing it is so carefully inculcated by the two chief Apostles of the Jew and Gentile, St. Pe∣ter and St. Paul; and the contrary is represen∣ted as a Practice opposite to Godliness. 2dly, Let them especially mark the Character here given of a Christian Woman, viz. that she is one who doth not only profess and declare, that she serves and worships God, but also doth, , shew forth Godliness in her Life and Conversation. And, 2dly, let the Men note hence that of Esthius, that if it be so unbecoming a Christian Woman, to be thus concerned in adorning and tricking up her Body, it must be much more unbecoming a Christian Man, and that which makes him truly to deserve the Name of Fop. Ver. 11. Let the Women learn in silence with all Subjection (to the better Sex.) Ver. 12. But (for) I suffer not a Woman to teach, (publickly,) or to usurp Authority over the Man, (to whom she was subjected by God's Precept, Gen. 3.16.) but (I command her rather) to be in silence. , &c. I suffer not a Woman to teach,] i. e. publickly, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. see the Note there. They may privately instruct, as Priscilla did Apollo, Act. 18.26. and as a believing Wife may instruct her unbelieving Husband, when he enquires a Reason of her Faith; but then she must not challenge any Authority to do this, this being to usurp an Authority not due unto her. Ver. 13. For Adam was first formed, (and) then Eve (after him, and out of him, to de∣note her Subjection to him; and for him, to shew she was to serve him, 1 Cor. 11.8.) Ver. 14. And Adam was not (immediately) deceived, (by the Serpent, as Eve was,) but the Woman being deceived, was (first) in the Transgression. , He was not deceived,] i. e. by the Serpent, who never attempted him; but was only seduced by the Woman: She therefore was both guilty of her own, and of her Hus∣band's Sin. Ver. 15. Notwithstanding she (i. e. the Fe¦male Sex) shall be saved in Child-bearing, (, through Child-bearing; i. e. they shall go through the Sorrow threatned to her Sex for that Sin with safety.) if they continue in Faith, (i. e. trusting in God,) in Charity, (to others, especially in the like Con∣dition,) in Holiness, (Gr. in Sanctification, i. e. in Chastity of Manners, and Freedom from Uncleanness,) and in Purity, (, in Temperance, or Freedom from Excess.) , in Child-bearing.] That is, say some, by bearing the Messiah, the promi∣sed Seed; but there is no Instance that can be produced, where this Phrase is used in this Sense. Say others, by Education of her Chil∣dren; but neither is there any Instance of this Signification of the Word, nor is it fit that her Salvation should depend on the Faith, and Charity, and Holiness of her Children, these being things it is not in her Power to pro∣duce in them. And, 2dly, what then shall become of barren Women, and those that live and die Virgins. To establish therefore the Sense given in the Text, let it be noted, 1st. That this enallage Numeri, or Change of the Number in Words that comprehend all of the same kind, is very common, both in the Old and the Ch. 5.4. New Testament, and in profane Authors; so Gen. 33.13. Mrien∣tier totus Grex, the whole Flock will die; Gen. 41.57. Universa terra venerunt, the whole Land came into Egypt; Psal. 140. Grant not the De∣sires of the Wicked, further not his wicked Device, least they exalt themselves; Prov. 2.12, 13. The evil Man, who leaves the Paths of Uprightness. See Numb. 10.3. 1 Kings 1.40. 1 Chron. 10.6. Ezra 10.12. Psal. 68.1. Es. 25.3. and 34.10. Mark. 3.7, 8. Note, 2dly, That the Preposition, , doth not always signifie a Means, or a Con∣dition, but sometimes a Term to be pass'd through, as when it is said, , through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. He shall be saved, , as one passing through the Fire; 1 Cor. 3.15. Let us behave our selves as the Ministers of God, passing inoffensively, , through Honour and Dishonour, through good and evil Report, 2 Cor. 6.8. in which Sense we are said, ambulare per viam, per plateam. But against the Interpretation given in the Para∣phrase, it is objected, that the following Words, If they continue in the Faith, &c. can∣not be mentioned here as a Condition of their safe Deliverance in Child-bed, since that De∣liverance is common to the Believer, and the Pagan, the Charitable and Temperate, and the Uncharitable and Intemperate, the Chast and the Unchast Woman.
Answ. Now to this I answer, That this Objection seems to be of no Force against the Sense there given; for though Health, Riches, a good Name and other temporal Blessings, be common to the Pagan and Believer, to the Good and Bad, that hinders not but Godli∣ness may have the Promise of this Life, as Health, Riches, a good Name, and other outward Blessings are promised to those that fear God; it being sufficient to make good this Promise, that God is pleased sometimes to vouchsafe this safe Deliverance from the Dangers of Child-birth, to Women, by vir∣tue of their Trust in God, their Charity to others, especially in the like Condition, their Temperance, Sobriety and Chastity, as to the Observation of the Matrimonial Vow, and that others sometimes may miscarry through Want, or the Neglect of these Duties. In a word, seeing it cannot be denied, that these Things are likely to engage God's Providence to be with them in that needful Hour, and the Neglect of them may provoke him to abandon others, they must be deem'd fit Mat∣ter of a temporal Promise. CHAP. III. Ver. 1. IT is a true Saying, If any Man de∣sires the Office of a Bishop, he desi∣reth a good Work; (i. e. a Work that is ho∣nourable in it self, and so requires such Dis∣positions and Qualifications in the Person who desireth it, as may render him worthy of that Honour.) Note, Concerning the Import of the Word Bishop here, I find three different Opinions among the Ancients, viz. That of Theodoret, that the Apostle here calls the. In locum. Presbyter Bishop, which he thus proves; because, af∣ter the Rules prescribed concerning Bishops, he descends to those concerning Deacons, omit∣ting Presbyters: Because, saith he, anciently the same Persons were stiled Presbyters, and Bishops, the Name of Apostles being then gi∣ven to them who are now called Bishops; but in process of Time they left the Name of Apo∣stle to them who were Apostles indeed, and gave this Name of Bishop peculiarly to them who anciently were stiled Apostles. And though, saith he, these Rules are given to the Presby∣ters by Name, it is clear that they more emi∣nently belong to Bishops, , as being of an higher Dignity. And this Opinion, if true, is a full Confuta∣tion of the Presbyterian Hypothesis; for it de∣clares, that there were three distinct Orders from the beginning of the Church, Apostles or Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, and that the Bishops were of an higher Dignity th the Presbyters. 2. The second Opinion is that of Epipha∣nius, That the. Epiphan. Har. 75. Sect. 5. Apostles could not order all things at one time, there being then a Necessi∣ty of Presbyters and Deacons, by both which Ecclesiastical Matters were to be administred, they placed no Bishops there, where they found no Person worthy of that Office; in other Pla∣ces where they found Persons worthy of it, but, by Reason of the Paucity of Converts, found scarce any fit to be Presbyters, they consted only Bishops and Deacons. And this Account, saith he, is taken, , from the most Ancient Histories of the Church; I sup∣pose, from the known Passage of Clemens Romanus, to this effect. And this also yields a full Confutation of the Presbyterian hypo∣thesis; for it declares, That it was the Design of the Apostles to institute three several Or∣ders in the Church, viz. of Bishops, Presby∣ters, and Deacons; and where this was not done, it was only through want of Persons in to compleat these Orders, and only during that Defect; and this being writ in answer to Aerius his Heresie, That, a Bishop dif∣fer'd not from a Presbyter, they being bth of one Order, Dignity and Honour, shews that Opinion was then counted not only false, and novel, but heretical.
3. The Third Opinion is that of. Chyrsost. in locum. Chry∣som,. Oecum. Oecumenius, andPost Episcopum tamen Diaconatus ordinationem subjecit, quare? Nisi quia Episcopi & Presbyteri na orinatio est, ter qe enim Sacerdos est, sed Episcopus primus est. Hilar. in locum. Hilary the Deacon, on the Place, that the Apostle in∣cludes Presbyters under the Name of Bishops, because there is no great difference between them, they being appointed as well as Bishops, to teach and to preside over the Church; and being only inferiour to Bishops, as to the Power of Ordination, which belongs alone to Bishops, and not to Presbyters. Now even, according to this Opinion, the Bishop is above the Pres∣byter; and all Ordinations which are not per∣formed by the Bishop, are irregular, and per∣formed by them who have no Power to Or∣dain. Ver. 2. A Bishop therefore must be blame∣less, (i. e. free from just Ground of Blame,) the Husband of one Wife, (i. e not guilty of Polygamy, or of divorcing one Woman, and marrying another, as many of the Jews and Greeks then were;) vigilant, (in his Functi∣on;) sober, (governing this Passions;) of good Behaviour, (in Words, in Habit, or in Aspect,) iven to hospitality, (or the Entertainment of Strangers;) apt to teach, (not so much for his Eloquence, as for his Skill in divine Things, and Knowledge of what is fitting to be taught. So Theodoret.) , Blameless.] For the Life of a Bishop, saith Chrysostom, should shine so bright, and be so free from spot, that others may not only behold it, but live by his Example. , the Husband of one Wife.] For. the Jews and Greeks, saith Theodoret, were ont to be married to two or three Wives to∣gether. The Apostle therefore doth not say this to depreciate Second Marriages, which he else∣where allows, 1 Cor. 7.8.39. and from which it may not be in a Man's Power to abstain. If then a Man, , rejecting his former Wife, be join'd to another, be deserveth blame; but if Death have dis∣join'd him from his former, and Nature ur∣ging, doth necessitate him to take another, 'tis otherwise. Considering these, and other things, I approve of this Interpretation of some of the Ancients, which is also mentioned byCom. in 1 Tit. 1. St. Jerom and by Chrysostom, declaring, that the Apostle doth not here oblige the Bishop to be married, but only corrects the Immoderate∣ness of some, because among the Jews 'twas lawful both to marry twice, , and to have two Wives together; and 'twas more common with them to divorce one, and take another; and whereas, against this Interpretation, it is objected, That the Apostle requires also, that the Widow should be the Wife of one Husband, whereas it never was permitted among any but Barbarians, for Women to have more than one Husband at once; this Objection hath some strength a∣gainst the interpreting that Passage of Polyga∣my, but none against that Interpretation which relates to Marriage, after dismission of the former Husband, the Law allowing this in Greece, and the Practise having made it common among the Romans, and not unusual among the Jews. See Note on Chap. 5.9. , Given to Hospitality.] Not in our common Sense, of keeping a good Table, or an open House, for all Comers; but, , an Entertainer of Stran∣gers, as the Fathers say, and the Word  signifies. Ver. 3. Not given to (much) Wine, (V. 9.) no Striker, not greedy of filthy Lucre, but pa∣tient, not a Braeler, (or contentious Person,) not covetous. , Patient or Gentle.] i. e. saith Theo∣doret, in reference to Offences committed a∣gainst himself; for it is no part of Meekness or Patience, when others are injured, to over∣look the Injury. , Not covetous, or a Lover of Money.] Theodoret here notes that the Apostle doth not say he must be, , one who possesseth none; for a Man may possess these things, and yet distribute them as he ought, so as not to be a Slave to them, but a Lord over them. Ver. 4. One that ruleth well (in) his own House, having his Children in (due) Subje∣ction, (and behaving himself in it) with all gravity. Ver. 5. For if a Man know not how to rule (well in) his own House, how shall he (be able to) take care of the Church of God? (which is a larger Family, and so requires greater Skill in Government.) Ver. 6. Not a Novice, (in Religion,) least being lifted up with Pride, (, by Reason of his high Advancement) he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. , Not a Novice.] This, say Chry∣sostom and Theodoret, is not spoken with Re∣spect to Age; for Timothy himself, to whom he writes, was a Youth, Chap. 4.12. but in respect to his Knowledge of the Faith. .] That the Devil fell by Pride, Theodoret here notes; but yet both he
and Chrysostom say, That by Condemnation here, the Apostle means not his Sin, but his Punishment for it. Ver. 7. Moreover he must have a good Re∣port from them that are without, (i. e. the un∣believing Jew or Gentile, with whom he for∣merly conversed,) least he fall into reproach, (from them,) and into the snare of the De∣vil. , and the Snare of the Devil.] i. e. saith Theodoret, least being tempted by Satan, he relapse into his former Sins; or lest, being reproached by those he is set over, for his former Life, Satan tempt him to Apo∣stacy, Chap. 5.15. Ver. 8. Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not double-tongu'd, (not fraudulent, and de∣ceitful, Chrysostom; not saying one thing to one, another to another, Theodoret.) not greedy of filthy Lucre, (i. e. of Lucre gain'd by sor∣did and filthy Arts.) Ver. 9. Holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, (i. e. in a Life so pre that Conscience may not smite him; for when a good Conscience is once put away, the loss of Faith will follow, Chap. 1.19.) Ver. 10. And let these also first be proved, (by the Examination of the Soundness of their Faith, and the Purity of their former Lives,) and then let them (be admitted to) use the Of∣fice of a Deacon, being (thus) sound blame∣less. .] These Words, , shew, that this Trial belong'd also to the higher Orders; and so it seems to have been from the beginning, where the Holy Ghost did not immediately interpose in Desig∣nation of the Person. TheƲbi aliquos voluisset vel rectores provinciis dare, vel procuratores, id est rationales ordinare, nomina erum prp¦bat, hortans populum, ut si qus quia haberet criminis, probaret manifestis rebus.— Dicebatque grave esse quam id Christiani, & Judaei facerent in praedicandis Sacerdotibus qui ordinandi sunt, non fieri in provinciarum rectoribus, quibus & fae ∣num committerentur, & capita. Lmprid. in vita Severi, c. 45. Emperor Seve∣rus takes notice of it, as of a Practise obser∣ved both by Jews and Christians, in order to the Ordination of their Priests, and fit to be imitated in chusing a Rector, or Procurator of the Provinces subject to the Roman Govern∣ment. TheCoram mni Synagoga jubet Deus constitui Sacerdotem, id est, instruit, & ostendit ordinationes Sacerdotales n  sub populi assistentis conscientia fieri oportere, ut plebe praesente, vel detegantur malorum crimina, vel benrm merita prae∣tur, & sit ordinatio justa, & legitima quae omnium suffragio, & judicio fuerit ordinata— Quod postea secundum divina Ma∣gisteria observatur in Acts Apostolorum— Nec hoc in Episcoporum tantum, & Sacerdotum ordinibus observasse Apostolos ∣mavertimus, de quo & ipso in actu eorum Scriptum est— Propter quod diligenter de Traditione divina, & Apostolica ober∣vatione, servanam est, & tenendum, quod apud nos quoque, & fere per Pr vincias universas tenetur, ut ad ordinaties rite cel das, ad em pleem cui praep situs ordinatur Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae prximi quque conveniant, & Episcop deligtur, plebe praesente, quae singulrum vitam plenissime novit, & uniuscujusque actum de ejus conversatie pspeit. Ed. O. F. 67. Se. . p. 172. Epistles of St. Cyprian make frequent mention of this Practice observed in the Church, in Imitation of the Jews. This, saith he, was observed in the Acts of the Apostles, in the Ordination both of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And therefore this, saith he, is derived from a Divine and Apo∣stolical Tradition observed almost throughout all Provinces, that the Bishops of that Province where the Bishop is to be placed, should me thither, and chuse the Bishop, the People be∣ing present who were acquainted with his  and Conversation. Ver. 11. Even so must their Wives be (, the Women in like manner must be) grave, not Slanderers, sober, faithful  all things. , the Women also.] i. e. that are admitted to be Deaconesses, Tit. 2 2. , Chryso∣stom, Theodoret. Ver. 12. Let the Deacons be the Husbands of one Wife, (see v. 2.) ruling their Children, and their own Houses well. Ver. 13. For they that have used the Office of a Deacon well, (i. e. according to these Rules, do by so doing) purchase to themselves a good Degree, (or higher Office in the Church.) and great boldness in (preaching) the Faith (which is) in Christ Jesus. , a good Degree.] It being the Custom to choose Presbyters out of the Dea∣cons, and Bishops out of the best Presbyters; and therefore at his Ordination they pray'd, That he using the Office of a Deacon unbla∣mably, might,Const. Apost. L. 8. c. 18. ,  held worthy of an higher Degree. , Boldness, or Freedom.] The Dea¦cons sometimes preached and converted Men to the Faith, as St. Stephen, and Philip; and this they could more freely and more success∣fully perform, when they lived sutably to the Qualifications of their Function, and to the Rules of the Gospel they professed and taught. Ver. 14. These things write I (now) unto thee, hoping to come to thee shortly, (and fur∣nish thee with other Instructions, Chap. 4.13.) Ver. 15. But if I tarry long, (they will be the more needful) that thou mayest kn  thou oughtest to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the living God, the Pillar and the Ground of Truth. , But if I tarry long.] Here Theodoret well notes, That neither the Holy Prophets, nor Apostles, knew all things, the Grace of the Spirit dictating to them only
the things which were expedient, as appears from these Expressions, hoping to come shortly, and but if I tarry. , the Pillar and the Ground of Truth.] Here, say the Roma∣nists, the Church is stiled the Pillar and the Grand of Truth, surely from her Teachers being so, they being elsewhere stiled Pillars, Gal. 2.9. and Foundations, Eph. 2.20. Now, say they, may not all securely rely in their Faith on the Pillar of Truth? May they not securely ground their Faith upon the Ground of Truth? The Church therefore being the Pillar and the Ground of Truth, we may without Fear of ever erring, rely upon her. Answ. 1. Whereas the Objection represents it as certain, that the Church is here stiled the Pillar and Ground of Truth, in respect of its Teachers, the Text seems clearly to inti∣mate the contrary: For whether we supply the Sense of the Words thus,  how thou oughtest; or, with Theophylact, , how a Bishop ought to behave himself in the House of God, which is the Church, it is evident that theSee Const. Ap. l. 3. c. 15. Church here mentioned is put in Opposition to the Bishop of it, and is, according to Theodoret on the Place, , the Collection of Believers, and therefore not the Church representative; which is only, , an As∣sembly of Bishops, according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and therefore the Infallibility of the Church Representative can never be concluded from these Words, which so expresly do relate to the whole System of Beievers, in distinction from their Bishops. Answ. 2. The Church here is the Church of the living God, not as it comprehends the major part of her visible Members, but only as it comprehends the true and living Mem∣bers of Christ's Body, they being only the Church of the living God; so that we must first know who they are, before we can be guided by them, Now, because this is im∣possible to be known with any Assurance, it is impossible that we should be obliged to rely on her Judgment in deciding what is Truth. Answ. 3. There is nothing more com∣mon in the Language of the Writers of the Church, than to stile any eminent Father of the Church, or Assertor of her Faith, the Pil∣lar and the Ground of Faith. This Title is byEpist. 62, 6, 70, 349. St. Basil given to Musonius, Bishop of Caesarea, to Athanasius, and to the Orthodox Bishops, banish'd for the Truth; byOrat. 19, 21, 23, 29. Na∣zianzen, to Basil, to Athanasius, and to Euse∣bius Bishop of Samosata; by Lanfranc, and Rupertus Tuitiensis, it is given to St. Austin; and yet sure they were far from thinking that any of these single Fathers were infallible: Whence it must follow, that, according to the Judgment of the Church, this Phrase did not import Infallibility. Answ. 4. The Church cannot here be stiled the Pillar and the Ground of Truth, as be∣ing the Foundation on which Truth is built, and which giveth it Authority, Truth being,In Locum. saith St. Chrys stom, , the Pillar and the Ground of the Church, which is, saith the Apostle, built on the Foundation of the Apstles and the Pro∣phets, Eph. 2.19, 2. She therefore is the Church of Christ, because she holds the Truth, as is demonstrative from this, that purely by ceasing so to do, her Members cease to be the Members of the Church; she therefore can∣not by me be known to be the Church, until I know she holds the Truth, and doth not cease to make Profession of it: And when I first know this, what need have I of her in∣fallible Direction to find out the Truth? She therefore may be rather said to be the Pillar and the Ground of Truth cause it is essen∣tial to her Being to maiin and teach all ne∣cessary Truths; and becse her living Mem∣bers do and will maintain  when con∣cealed, denied, misrepresent by Hypocriti∣cal Professors; and because she doth preserve and own those Oracles in which the saving Truth of Christ is fully and perspicuously maintained, and doth baptize her Children into that Symbol, which was always held to be a perfect Summary of Christian Faith. Lastly, The Church of that Age might well be said to be the Pillar and the Ground of Truth, because then the Apostles presided in it, who were the Pillars and Foundations of the Christian Faith, according to the Scri∣ptures and the Ancient Fathers. ThusOrat. de Provid. Tm. 4. p. 441. Theod ret stiles St. Peter and St. John, , the Pillars of Truth; andIn Gal. 2.9. Oecumenius, , i. e. the Pillars of the Faith. Then also did the Apostles and Evangelists deliver, and the Church receive, those Scriptures which were to be the Stan∣dard of the Christian Faith, and which were written, saithLib. 3. cap. 1. Irenaeus, by the Will of God, to be hereafter, Columnam & fundamen∣tum Fidei nostrae, the Pillar and Foundation of our Faith; and which are saithTm. 2. p. 61. Atha∣nasius, , the An∣chors and Stabiliments of our Faith. Then did her Members confirm the Christian Faith by Miracles, which, byFirmamentum veritats hujus  signa & prodigia. St. Hilary upon this Place, are stiled the Confirmation of this Truth; and by their Sufferings for it, on which Account the Martyrs are peculiarly sti∣led by the Fathers, the steady Pillars and the
Grounds of Christians. Now seeing none of these Reasons can be applied to the present Church, it will not follow that she can in like manner claim this Title. Ver. 16. And without Controversie (or con∣fessedly) great is the Mystery of Godliness, (consisting in these Articles,) God manifested in the Flesh, justified in (or by) the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, be∣lieved on in the World, received up into Glory. , God was manifested in the Flesh.] Here Grotius saith, Suspectam nobis hanc lectionem faciunt Interpretes veteres, La∣tinus, Syrus, Arabs, & Ambrosius, qui omnes legunt, , i. e. the Latin, Syriack, Arabick Versions, and St. Ambrose, all read the Mystery which was revealed in the Flesh; which gives us reason to suspect the other reading, viz. God manifested in the Flesh. But (1.) this is a great Mistake, as to the Arabick Version; for that reads thus, quod Deus, that God was manifested in the Flesh; and so doth the Syriack, according to the Version of Tre∣mellius, in the Polyglott, it runs thus, Magnum est arcanum justitiae quod justificatus est carne, which cannot refer to Mystery, but must re∣fer to God, or Christ; and tho' the vulgar Latin, and the Commentator under the Name of Ambrose, read quod manifestum est in carne, yet he adds, agreeably to the Opinion of the Latins, that this Mystery is Christus in carne, Christ manifested in the Flesh, but concealed in the Spirit, or as to his Godhead. See Dr. Pear∣son's Vindication of this Place against Grotius, Creed, p. 128. In a word the Reading our Tran∣slation follows, is owned by all the Greek Scho∣liasts, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, and is found in all the Manuscripts, excepting that of Clermont, and Lincoln Col∣lege; and the Phrases here used do make it necessary to expound the Words, not of the Gospel, but of Christ the Subject of it. For, 1. That Exposition which refers these Words unto the Gospel, puts such a strained Sense on some of these Expressions, of which we meet with no Example in the whole New Testa∣ment: For where doth Manifestation in the Flesh signifie the Manifestation of a thing by weak and mortal Men? And where is the Gospel said to be manifested in the Flesh? Where doth  signifie the Exaltation of the Gospel? Or where is it said that the Gospel was received into Glory? 2. It turns many of those Expressions into a metaphorical Sense, which are literally true of Christ; for, according to this Exposition, Flesh signifies weak Men; to be justified, to be owned and approved; to be seen, is to be known or revealed; to be taken up, is to be exalted in the Minds of Men. 3. This strained Exposition reduces three of these Articles into one; it being in effect the same to be believed on in the World, by reason of those glorious Miracles by which it was confirmed; and to be owned and approved, by reason of the Operations of the Holy Spirit, which did assist the Preachers of it, and by the Approbation, gloriously exalted in the Minds of Men. These are the Inconveniencies which attend that Exposition, whereas the other Interpreta∣tion, which refers this Mystery to Christ, af∣fords a very plain and literal Exposition of the Words, confirmed by parallel Expressions frequent in the Holy Scripture. For, 1. Tbe Word, saith St. John, was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. and we have seen his Glory. , he was manifested, 1 Joh. 3.5.8.1.4.2. and came in the Flesh, who was the Son of God. He who was in the Form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, was found in the likeness of a Man, Phil. 2.6, 7. He that was God, bles∣sed for evermore, was also of the Seed of Da∣vid, according to the Flesh, Rom. 9.5. 2. He was justified by the Spirit, as doing those Miracles on Earth, by which he justified his Mission against all the Accusations of the Jews, by the Spirit of God, Mat. 12.28. be∣ing declared to be the Son of God with Power, by the Spirit of Holiness, Rom. 1.3, 4. by sending that Spirit after his Ascension into Heaven, Act. 2.33. which he had promised to his Disciples upon Earth, and by which the World was convinced, , of his Righteousness, Joh. 16.10. 3. He was seen of the Angels, who at his Entrance into the World did worship him, Heb. 1.6. who celebrated his Birth, and gave notice of it to the World, Luke 2.9, 13. who ministred to him in the Desart, Mat. 4.11. and in his Agonies, Luke 22.43.24.4. who were present at his Resurrection, and attend∣ed him at his Ascension into Heaven, Acts 1.10. 4. The whole History of the Gospel shews, that he was preached to the Gentiles, and be∣lieved on in the World. 5. And, Lastly, he was received up into Heaven, , he was taken, he was carried up into Heaven, and sat at the Right Hand of Majesty in Glory, Mat. 16.19. Luke 24.51. Acts 1.2, 11. And sure so plain, so full, and literal an Exposition of these Ar∣ticles, deserves to be preferred before the strain'd and metaphorical Interpretations of Grotius, Erasmus and the Socinians.
CHAP. IV. Ver. 1. BUT (though the Mystery of God∣liness be so fully confirmed) the Spirit (in the Scripture) speaketh expresly, that in the latter Times some shall depart from the Faith, (once embraced by them,) giving heed a seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. Ver. 2. Speaking Lyes in Hypocrisie, (Gr. , through the Hypocrisie of Lyars, and of Men,) having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron, (i. e. of corrupt and prostigated Consciences.) 2. (Of Men,) Forbidding (those whom they have seduced) to marry, and (commanding them) to abstain from Meats, which God hath created to be received with Thanksgiving of them that believe, and know the Truth, (i. e. who are instructed aright in their Christian Liberty; for tho' nothing be unclean of it self, yet to him who, through Weakness, esteemeth any thing unclean, to him it is un∣clean, Rom. 14.14.) , the Spirit saith expresly.] Hence Mr. Mede concludes, that the Apostle must refer to some Prophecy of these things, recorded in the Scriptures, (for tho' the Spi∣rit in the Apostles advertised them of many things, for the Spirit said to Peter, Behold, three Men seek thee, Acts 10.19. the Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the Work of the Ministry, Acts 13.2. See Acts 16.6.21.11. yet he did this only, , in a Vision, Acts 10.19. or by secret Inspira∣tions, and so not , or expresly.) But to this the Fathers answer, That the Word  here signifies only, , clearly, and perspicuously; to which it may be added, that in those Times of Prophecy, when the Pro∣phets had the Government of the Churches, and spake still in the Publick Assemblies, it might reasonably be said the Spirit speaketh expresly what they taught expresly in the Church. And whereas hence he infers, that this Prophecy must be found somewhere in the Old Testament: The Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond thinks that unnecessary, this Apostacy be∣ing foretold by our Prophet, who had the Spirit without measure, saying, Mat. 24.11, 12. Then many shall be scandalized, and ma∣ny false Prophets shall arise, , and shall deceive many; and because Iniquity shall bound, the Love of many shall wax cold. I confess, Mr. Mede seems to have found this Prophecy, Dan. 11.36, 37, 38, 39. But to omit all other Objections against his Interpre∣tation of the Words, I can by no means think that Daniel, so well acquainted with the Im∣port of strange Gods, both in the Law and the Prophets, should give that infamous Name,  a strange God, to our Blessed Savi∣our; or that he should at the same time pro∣phesie, that Antichrist should acknowledge and increase Christ with Honour, and yet divest Christ of his Glory and Honour, by setting up Mahuzzims in Opposition to his Offices. But considering that this Epistle, according to Bi∣shop Pearson, was writ in the 11th. of Nero, A. D. 64. why may we not refer this Predi∣ction either to the Apostacy, , expresly mention'd, 2 Thess. 2.3, 9. or to the Predi∣ctions of the Apostles mention'd by St. Jude, v. 17, 18, 19. , in the latter Times.] The Jew∣ish Doctors lay this down as a Rule, that where∣ever we find this Phrase  in the latter Days, we are to understand it of the Age or Times of the Messiah. So Gen. 49.1. Gather your selves together, saith Jacob to his Sons, that I may tell you what will befall you, , in the last Times; i. e. the Days when the Scepter shall depart from Judah, and Shilo the Messiah shall come. Numb. 24.14. Come, saith Balaam, and I will tell thee what shall befal thy People, , in the latter Days; i. e. when the Star comes out of Jacob, and the Scepter ari∣seth out of Israel; i. e. when the Messiah comes, saith the Targum of Onkelos, on v. 17. Isa. 2.2. In the last Days the Mountain of the Lord shall be established on the top of the Moun∣tains, and all Nations shall flow in to it; in the Times of the Messiah, say R. Salomo, and other Jews. Jer. 23.20. In the latter Days ye shall understand this, in the Days of the Messiah, Targ. on v. 5. Dan. 2.28. There is a God of Heaven who maketh known to the King what shall come to pass, , from his Times, till the Kingdom of the Messiah be set up, v. 44. See also Chap. 10.14. Hos. 3.5. Afterwards they shall return, and shall seek the Lord, and David their King, Targ. Messiah their King, the Son of David, in the latter Days. Micah 4.1. In the last Days shall the Mountain of the Lord be esta∣blish'd upon the top of the Mountains. Where Dr. Pecock saith, that by the last Days are meant the Days or Time of Messiah, or Christ, is agreed on by some Jews, and most Christians. And where ever we meet with this Phrase in the New Testament, it manifestly▪ referrs to the Beginnings of Christianity, and signifies the last Times of the Jewish State, or Oecono∣my, concurring with the Times of the Messiah, and the erecting of his Kingdom, by calling the Gentiles, and settling a Christian Church to succeed that of the Jews. Thus when the Holy Ghost fell down on the Apostles and Disciples, This is that, saith St. Peter, which was spoken of the Prophet Joel, saying, In the last Days I will pour my Spirit upon all Flesh; Acts 2.17. So Heb. 1.1. God who of old spake
to our Fathers by the Prophets, , in these last Days hath spoken to us by his Son; i. e. by him, who, saith St. Peter, was fore ordain'd from the Beginning of the World, but was manifested, , in the last Times; where the Times of Christ's Manifestation to the World, and of his preaching to the Jews, are manifestly sti∣led the last Times. So Jam. 5.3. You have treasured up your Gold and Silver as Fire which shall eat your Flesh, , in the last Days; 2 Pet. 3.3. This know ye, , in the last Times there shall come Mockers, &c. And that they were then come, we learn from v. 5. This they are ignorant of; and Jude 17, 18. Remember the Words spoken before by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they said unto you, that, , in the last Time there should be Mockers, walk∣ing after their own Lusts: And that they were then come, is evident from the following Words, These are they who separate themselves, &c. v. 19. And 1 Joh. 2.18. Little Children, , 'tis now the last Hour, and as you have heard that Antichrist shall (then) come, so now are there many Antichrists, whereby you may know that this is the last Hour. So 2 Tim. 3.1, 2. This know, that in the last Days, , there shall be perillous Times, for Men shall be lovers of themselves; and that those Times, or Days, and Persons, were then come, is evident from his Exhortation, to turn away from them, v. 5. and his Character of them, v. 6. , of these are they that creep into Houses, &c. And that the last Times here mention'd were already come, we learn from his Admonition to Timothy, to put the Brethren in mind of these things, v. 4. Here then is another Defect in Mr. Mede's Ingeni∣ous Interpretation of these Words, that he hath not made it out, that the last Times are to be extended beyond the first Century, or the Age of the Apostles. Mr. Mede saith, these Words are not a Narration of things present, but a Prediction of what shall betide the Christian Faith in After-times. I answer, They are indeed a Narrative of what the Spi∣rit had foretold should happen in the latter Times, by an Apostasie from the Faith; but the Determination of the Time, when what was thus foretold, should be accomplished, depends on the fix'd Import of the latter Times: For these last Times, saith Mr. Mede, being mention'd as the Indication when this Apostasie should take place, must therefore be sufficient to determine the Time of this Aposta∣sie: And so they plainly do, according to my Interpretation. But if, with others, you re∣fer these last Times to the whole Times of An∣tichrist, they began not till above 400 Years after the writing this Epistle: And why then is the Apostle so concerned, that Timothy then should put the Brethren in remembrance of these things, v. 6. and they contain 1260 Years, and so cannot inform us in what Period or precise Portion of that Time this Apostacy should have its Rise? , Some shall depart from the Faith.] Here seems another Defect of Mr. Mede's Hypothesis, that he makes these Words to signifie only a partial declining from the Faith, and that again only Virtual and Consequential, by setting up Doctrines oppo∣site to, or inconsistent with it, tho' not own'd to be so by them that embrace them; whereas Apostasie from the Faith seems plainly to im∣port a falling off from it wholly, or at least an actual and profess'd renouncing of some es∣sential part of it. , Giving heed to seducing Spirits, and to Doctrines of Devils.] These Words, by all the Ancient Commentators, seem to be taken active∣ly for those Doctrines which are introduced by Men, led by the Suggestions of Satan, and of evil Spirits; these Doctrines being, saith Theodoret, , the Productions of those evil Spirits; and they who vent them, are, saith Chrysostom, , Men acted by them. The false Prophets, and false Apostles, saith the Author of the Inter∣polated Epistle to the Philadelphians, had, , (Sect. 5.) a Spirit that deceived the People; they preach'd, , Deceit, and Error, and had dwelling in them, , the Apostate Dragn. These false Prophets had, saith St. John, , a Spirit of Error, as the Apostles had, , the Spirit of Truth, 1 John 4.1, 6. So far is it from being true, that the Word Spirit signifies Doctrines, and not those deluding Spirits which taught them; yet because the Prince of Devils, Mat. 9.24▪ the Spirit of the Devil, Luke 4.33. Rev. 1.14. the Sacrifice, the Table, the Cup of De∣vils, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. the Habitation of De∣vils, Rev. 18.2. are Phrases where, , Devils, are still taken objectively, I admit that Sense also here: And then the Apostasie procu∣red by the Spirits of Deceit is that of the Judaizers, relapsing from the Profession of the Christian Faith, through those false Christs and false Prophets, of which our Saviour foretold they should deceive many, Mat. 2.11, 24. whereas they who apostatized by fal∣ling back to Heathenism, are they who give heed to the Doctrines of Demons: For, Di Gentium Daemonia, the Gods of the Heathens are Demons. , through the Hypocrisie of false Speakers.] , through, is ve∣ry common; so, , through all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness, 2 Thes. 2.9, 10. See Mark 9.29. Luke 1.17. Acts 1.31. Rom. 12.21. Tit. 1.9. 2 Pet. 3.1. , of seared Consciences, i. e. of Consciences which have lost the Sense of Good or Evil, and do no longer do their
Office: For this Expression, saith Theodoret, signifies, , the extreme Stpor of their Consciences: for the Member feared, , be∣ing mortified, hath lost its former Sensation. , Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from all Meats.] It is here to be noted from Theophy∣lact, that in construing these Words, , we must not repeat the Word forbidding, but add in lieu of it counselling to abstain from Meats; so all the Antients have interpreted these Words.Strom. l. 3. p. 462. Clemens Alexandrinus, when he saith, , we must not forbid to marry, nor yet to eat Flesh. The A∣postle, saithNotat Apostolus eos qui in totum nubere prohibebant, qui & de cibis interdicebant ques Deus condidit. De Monog. c. 15. Tertullian, notes them who wholly forbd Marriage, and interdicted Meats. AndHaer. 48. p. 410. sect. 8. Epiphanius saith, This of the Apostle is fulfilled in the Cataphrygae, and other Hereticks, for most of them, , forbid Marriage, and command to abstain from Meat. This, in effect, is the Interpretation of all the Ancient Commentators on the Place, who give us the same Sense of the Words, as do the Fathers cited, and of all the Translations, who, tho' they do not add the Word Com∣manding, yet they add a Copulative, and change the Infinitive into a Participle thus, Prohibentes nubere & abstinentes a cibis. Syr. Prohibentes matrimonium, & amoventes cibos. Arab. That all these things happened in the Apo∣stles Times, and many of them were to hap∣pen before the Destruction of Jerusalem, is evident: That there was to be a great Apostacy before that Time carried on by False Prophets and False Christs, our Lord expresly had fore∣told; and that it, in great measure, had ob∣tain'd, especially among the Jews, we learn from the Epistle to the Hebrews, writ pur∣posely to put a stop to it; that the great Pro∣moters of it were Deceitful Workers, False Apostles, and that they carried on that Work in hypocrisie, esteeming Gain Godliness, this Apostle often doth inform us, see 2 Cor. 2.17.11.13, 14, 15. That they were Men whose Minds and Consciences were defiled, see Tit. 1.15. That their Doctrine was this, It is good for a Man not to touch a Woman, 1 Cor. 7.1. Their vain Philosophy this, Tast not (forbid∣den Meats,) handle not (an unclean thing,) see Coloss. 2.21. It remains only to consider who they should be: That they could not be the Gnosticks, the Followers of Simon Magus, I have proved against Dr. Hammond, note on Coloss. 2.21. Moreover, according to his Ex∣position, they were to appear before the De∣struction of Jerusalem; for he interprets those Words, the Spirit speaketh, expresly of our Lord's Prediction, Matth. 24. Now there were no such Hereticks among the Gnosticks till the Second Century. Saturninus, saith. Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 3. Theodoret, was the first who named Matri∣mony the Doctrine of Devils, and taught Men to abstain from living Creatures. Now this Saturninus was beforeMertuus est autem Basilides, a quo Gnostici in Alexandria, temporibus Hadriani in Agrippa. Basilides, who by. Euseb. Chr. ad An. 134. a quo Gnostici Hieron. St. Jerom is often call'd The Father of the Gnosticks; whereas that these Men were in the Apostles Times, we learn, saithQuae sub Apostolis fuisse ab ipsis Apostolis discimus. De Praescr. c. 33, 34. Ter∣tullian from the Apostles themselves. I have, Note on 1 Cor. 7.1. and on Coloss. 2.21. con∣jectured that they were the Essaeans among the Jews; and that with them agreed the Ma∣gicians, and Idolaters among the Heathens, we learn from Clemens of Alexandria, who, speak∣ing of those Hereticks, who said the Resur∣rection had pass'd on them already, , and therefore rejected Matri∣mony; he saith; this was not peculiar to these Menandrians;. Strom. 3. p. 446. B. C. but they who worshipped Idols, did also abstain from Meats and Venery; and the Magicians, who worshipped Angels and Daemons, did also carefully abstain from Wine, from living Creatures, and from Venery. And if Saturninus, who succeeded Menan∣der, who flourished in the Time of Domitian and Trajan, did in this, as in most other things, , agree in Sentiments with Menander, asHist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 7. Eusebius saith he did, the Apostle may reasonably be conceived to include him: For Epiphanius, saith of him, in the very Words ofNubere & generare a Satana dicunt esse, multi autem ex iis qui sunt ab eo & ab animalibus abstinent per fictam hujus∣di continentiam seducentes multos. Iren. l. 1. c. 22. Irenae∣us, that. Haer. 23. sect. 2. he affirmed, that to marry, and beget
Children, was from Satan; and that hence ma∣ny of them abstain'd from living Creatures, and by this feigned Continence seduced many to their Heresie. And this is the more likely, because 'tis noted of this Menander, that he proceed∣ed, , to the height of that Ma∣gick which was attended with that Abstinence. Iren. l. 1. c. 21. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 26. It is no Objection against this Interpretation, that the Essens, mentioned by Philo and Josephus, were not Christians, and so could not depart from the Faith; for who can prove that none of them embraced the Faith of Christ, or that they could not do it, and yet retain their old Sentiments concerning Meats and Marriage? It may be also true, that the Menandrians were not yet formed into a Sect when this E∣pistle was endited; but that affects not my In∣terpretation, since it is certain from 1 Cor. 7.1. and Coloss. 2.16, 21. (See the Notes there) that their Doctrines obtained before. And that the Persons here intended must be Judaizers, is fairly gathered from v. 7. and from these Words, commanding to abstain from Meats which God hath created to be received with Thanksgiving, of them that believe and know the Truth; for those last Words shew, that these Persons were such as had no right Faith, or Knowledge of that Christian Truth, that every Creature of God was good (for Food,) and nothing was to be refused, as polluted or unclean, v. 4. Thus have I given my own Opinion concerning the true and primary Im∣port of these Words. Others, I know, con∣ceive that they refer to the Apostacy of the Church of Rome, and therefore descant on them thus: Ver. 1. But (in Opposition to this Mystery of Godliness mention'd Chap. 3.15, 16. there is another Mystery of Iniquity of which) the Spirit speaketh expresly, (Dan. 11.36, 37, 38, 39. saying) that in the latter Times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to errone∣ous Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. , in the latter Days.] That is, in the Times of Antichrist, 1 Joh. 2.18. Dan. 2.44. See Hos. 3.5. Micah 4.1. , Some shall depart from the Faith.] Idolatry being represented in the Old Testament as Apostacy, from the Law of Moses, and the God of Israel; the like Idola∣try in the Church of Rome may well be coun∣ted an Apostacy from the Christian Faith. , Giving heed to se∣ducing Spirits.] i. e. to Men acted by seducing Spirits, for  doth often signifie the Im∣pulses, or Afflatus of good or evil Spirits; of Good, so 1 Cor. 14.12. you are zealous, , of Spiritual Gifts, or Afflatus's; and so throughout the Chapter; of evil Spirits, as 1 Joh. 4.1. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits. Accordingly the Coming of the Man of Sin is to be,  according to the Energy of Satan, with all ly∣ing Wonders, 2 Thess. 2.9. So was the Idola∣trous Worship of the Gentiles promoted, sayApol. c. 21. Tertullian,Praepar. Ev. l. 5. c. 2. Eusebius, andOrat. contra Judaiz. Tm. 6. p. 375. St. Chry∣sostom; so also was the Worship of Sain promoted in the Church of Rome. See Mr. Mede, l. 3. c. 3, 4. , and to Doctrines of Devils.] i. e. to the Heathen Theology concern∣ing Daemons, or giving heed to the Doctrine concerning the Worship of dead Men, or de∣parted Saints, brought in by their pretended Apparitions, and Wonders wrought at thei Tombs, after Death, which were indeed, if at all done, wrought by the Illusions of De∣vils. Ver. 2. (Which Apostacy shall be promoted) by the Hypocrisie of Lyars which have their Conscience seared. , through the Hypocrisie, &c.] Hence it is argued, that they who thus pro∣mote and carry on this Apostacy, must not be open Desertes, but Hypocritical Professors of that Faith from which they, by their Actions, virtually depart. Ver. 3. (And the Men I speak of may be discerned by these Marks, that they are) of those who forbid to marry, and command to ab∣stain from Meats which God hath created to be received with Thanksgiving, of them which be∣lieve and know the Truth. , Forbidding to marry.] As is done in the Roman Church to Monks and Nuns, see Mr. Mede, l. 3. c. 7. and to the Clergy; and that, saith Pope Siricius, Quoniam qui i carne sunt Deo placere non possunt, because they that are in the Flesh cannot please God. , to abstain from Meats.] That this is done in the Roman Church, by a Law obliging some Orders of Monks to ab∣stain from all Flesh, see Mr. Mede, Ibid. And this may well be reckoned as a Character of Apostacy from the Christian Faith, because it seems to be a reducing of them back from their Christian Liberty to a Conformity to the legal Rites. Ver. 4. For every Creature of God is good (for Food,) and nothing (is) to be refused, (as polluted,) if it be (Gr. being) received with Thanksgiving. Ver. 5. For it is sanctified by the Word, (gi∣ving us Commission to eat of all things, Gen. .2, 3. or by the Gospel, taking off the Diffe∣rence betwixt things clean and unclean. Rom. 1.14.) and by Prayer (for a Blessing on it, and Thanksgiving for it.) Ver. 6. If thou put the Brethren in remem∣brance of these things, (to preserve them from these Impostors,) thou shalt be a good Minister
of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the Words of Truth, and of good Doctrine, whereunto thou best attained, (or which thou hast followed hitherto.) Ver. 7. But refuse (avoid) profane and old Wives Fables (such as the Jewish Doctors tell, Chap. 1.4, 6. Tit. 1.14.3.9.) and ex∣ercise thy self rather (in those things which ted, not as they do, to endless Questions, and Law-Strifes, and the Perversion of the Faith, but) unto Godliness. Ver. 8. For bodily Exercise profiteth little; but Godliness is profitable to all things, ha∣ving the Promise of this Life, and that which is to come. , Bodily Exercise.] The A∣postle, in the former Verse, exhorted Timo∣thy, , to exercise himself unto Godli∣ness, as the Athleticks did in the Olympick Games exercise themselves for their Combats, adding here, that their Exercises, tho' they were very hard and difficult, tended to little Profit, they striving for the Mastery, only that they might obtain a corruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9.25. whereas that Piety in which he did advise him to exercise himself, was pro∣fitable for all things: Or, because Philo makes mention, , of the continual Labours of theDe Vita Cont. p. 692. B. Essens, andDe Bello Jud. p. 785, 786. Josephus of their , or Exercises Morning and Evening; he perhaps may oppose unto them this Exercise of Piety. Ver. 9. This is a faithful Saying, and wor∣thy of all Acceptation, (a Truth most worthy to be relied on, viz. that Godliness hath the Promise of that Life which is to come,) for therefore we labour, and suffer Reproach, be∣cause we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all Men, but especially of those that believe. , who is the Sa∣viour of all Men.] The Author of the Book, De Vocatione Gentium, expounds this very well, telling us, That, by saying l. 2. c. 31. he is the Saviour of all Men, he confirms the general Goodness of God towards all Men, and by adding, especially of them that believe, he shews there is one part of Mankind, which, through the Benefit of divinely inspired Faith, is by special Benefits advanced to the highest and eternal Felicity. He is the Saviour of all Men, (1st.) leaving none of them without some Testimonies of his Goodness, Act. 14.17. sufficient to engage and to direct them so to seek the Lord, that they might find him, Act. 17.27. Lib. 2.5. Nulli nationi hominum bonitatis suae dona subtraxit, saith the same Author. (2dly,) Shewing to them so much of himself, i. e. of his eternal Power and God∣head, as might render them inexcusable, in that they did not glorifie him as God, neither were they thankful, Rom. 1.20, 21. and wri∣ting in their Hearts the Law of Nature, which enabled them by Nature to do the things of the Law, and made their Consciences accuse them when they neglected so to do, Rom. 2.14, 15. they knowing so far the Righteous∣ness of God, that they who did those things, which were contrary to the Law of Nature, were worthy of Death, Rom. 1.32. For adhi∣bita est semper universis hominibus quaedam su∣pernae mensura doctrinae, quae etsi occultioris parciorisque Gratiae fuit, suffecit tamen qui∣busdam ad remedium, omnibus ad testimoni∣um. (3dly,) Accepting every where him that worked Righteousness, of what Nation so∣ever he might be, Act. 10.35. and account∣ing him as circumcised who kept the Righte∣ousness of the Law, Rom. 2.26. And, Lastly, Rewarding the Good Deeds of all that dili∣gently sought him, Heb 11.6. Mr. Cl. un∣derstands this Salvation of Deliverance from Temporal Dangers, in which Sense it is also true; but that cannot be the entire Sense of the Apostle, who had said before, v. 8. that Godliness had the Promise of this Life, and that which is to come, i. e. both of Tempo∣ral and Eternal Salvation; and adds, v. 9. This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptation; i. e. that not Temporal only, but Eternal Blessings are to be expected from him, and that therefore they, the Apostles, labour'd and suffer'd Reproach, because they trusted in the living God who is the Saviour of all Men; whereas, doubtless, they did this, not only with respect to Temporal, but especially to Eternal Salvation, 2 Cor. 4.17. Ver. 11. These things command, (Gr. ex∣hort,) and teach (Men to believe.) Ver. 12. Let no Man (have Occasion to) despise thy Youth, (or thy Function, by reason of it) but be thou an Example of (and to) Believers, in Word (of Doctrine,) in (Gravi∣ty of) Conversation, in Charity (to all,) in (Fervency of) Spirit, in Faith, in Purity (of Life.) , thy Youth.] The Presbyters were generally in those Times aged, as their Name imports; but Timothy, because the Gift of Prophecy had pointed him out for that Work, v. 14. and because the Gifts of the Spirit had rendred him fit, was made an Evangelist in his younger Age; and therefore the Apo∣stle doth exhort him to make up in the Ex∣cellency of his Doctrine, and in the Gravity of his Conversation, what was wanting in his Age. Ver. 13. Till I came (to thee,) give Atten∣dance to reading (the Holy Scriptures, whence thou may'st learn to teach others,) to Exhor∣tation (to what they ought to do, and to avoid,) to Doctrine, (teaching them what to believe.)
Here (1st.) it is well noted by the Fathers, and by Estius, that if St. Timothy, who had Spiritual Gifts, was yet by St. Paul command∣ed to be thus diligent in reading the Scri∣ptures, that in his Exhortations he might pro∣fit others, then much more should other Bi∣shops and Ministers be so, quos omnes Paulus in Timotheo instruit; then also should they not depend upon extemporary Effusions, with∣out Attendance unto reading. 2dly, That the Illumination or Gifts of the Holy Spirit should not hinder our Diligence in reading, and studying what we are to ex∣hort others to, and instruct them in. Ver. 14. Neglect not (to stir up) the Gift that is in thee, (see Note on 2 Tim. 1.6.) which was given thee by Prophecy, (according to the foregoing Prophecies concerning thee, see Note on 1 Tim. 1.18.) with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. , with the Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery.] The , or spiritual Gift, here mentioned, is expresly said to be given, , by the laying on of the Hands of St. Paul, 2 Tim. 1.6. the giving of the spiri∣tual Gifts seeming to be peculiar to this or some other Act of an Apostle, Act. 8.17.19.6. But other Seniors, or Presbyters, as Iraene∣us, L. 4. c. 43. calls them, qui cum Episcopa∣tus Successione Charisma Veritatis certum ac∣ceperunt, Who with their Succession received the certain Charisma of Truth, might, and did lay on their Hands together with him. This Ceremony of Imposition of Hands in Ordi∣nation, is confirmed from the Practice of the Apostles, and Apostolical Men, thus ordaining Deacons, Acts 6.6. Pastors or Teachers of the Word, Acts 13.3. Elders, whether Bishops or Presbyters in every City, Acts 14.23. and Evan∣gelists here: And this Practice they certainly de∣rived from the Jews, who created Governours of Criminal Causes, or Ruling Elders, and Masters, Doctors, and Rabbins, to be Teachers of the Law, i. e. to labour in the Word and Do∣ctrine, by that Imposition of Hands which they called  as Moses did to Joshua▪ Numb. 27.43. Deut. 34.9. and asSanhedr. c. 4. Mai∣monides saith he did, when he assumed the Se∣venty to assist him; and as the First-born,See Chaskuni on the Place. laid their Hands upon the Levites, Numb. 8.10. who were chosen to serve in their stead, and so consecrated them to God in their Name. And this way of Consecration, by Imposition of Hands, say they, came down fromMorin. de Sacr. Ordin. Part. 3. Ex. 7. Sect. 3. Joshua by a perpetual Succession to their Rabbins. Tho' therefore I scarce find any Footsteps of it in the first Century, or second; yet Cyprian, in the third, speaks of it as that which, de Traditione Divina & Apostolica Ob∣servatione servandum est & tenendum, Wa to be observed and held from Divine Tradition, and Apostolical Observation, in the Collation of the Episcopal Office, and as that which theyQuod & apud vos factum videmus in Sabini Collegae nostri Ordinatione, ut de universae fraternitatis Suffragia, &  Episcoporum qui in praesentia convenerant judicio, Episcopatus ei deferretur, & manus ei in locum Basilidis imponeretur. Ed. Ox. Ep. 67. p. 172. practised in the Ordination of Sabi∣nus to that Office. Eusebius, saith. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 23. Origen, also was thus advanced to the Presbytery by the Bishops of Caesarea. And the Apostolical Constitutions give us this as an Ordinance of. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 23. p. 92. . Const. Apost. l. 8. c. 16. Vid. De Di¦conis, Cap. 17. St. John the Apostle, who, doubtless, when he return'd from Patmos to Ephesus, regula∣ting the Churches, and constituting Bishops, did it according to the Rites of the Jews, and Practice of the other Apostles; whence I con∣clude this is no Accidental but a necessary Ri of the due Ordination of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. Ver. 15. Meditate on these things (which thou readest in the Holy Scriptures, and in which thou instructest others, v. 15.) give thy self wholly to them, (to Exhortation and Do∣ctrine, v. 11, 12.) that (so thou may'st per∣form them with such readiness and exactness, that) thy profiting may appear unto all. Ver. 16. Take heed to thy self, (that thou livest exemplarily, v. 12.) and to thy Doctrine, (that it be sound and edifying, v. 6.) continue in them, (in the Exercises mention'd, v. 12, 13.) for in doing this thou shalt both save thy self, (by doing faithfully thy Duty,) and then that hear thee, (by engaging them to perform theirs.)
CHAP. V. Ver. 1. REbuke not an Elder (with Severity,) but intreat him as a Father, and the younger as Brethren, (in respect of thy Youth, Chap. 4.12.) , an Elder.] In the Judgment of Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theo∣phylact, the Elder here signifies, , not a Priest, but a grave ancient Man, such being in all Ages and Nations sty∣led Fathers; and this Sense the Distinction here of Ages, and of Sexes, seems to plead for. , Rebuke not.] The Word signi∣fies to chastise, or rebuke with Severity, and sometimes with Stripes. Ver. 2. The elder Women, as Mothers; the younger, as Sisters, (being careful to converse with them, when Necessity requires it,) with all Purity, (with Gravity in your Words and Countenance, Observance of your Eyes and Heart, at Times and Places which can mini∣ster no Suspicion of undue Behaviour towards them.) , the Elder Women.] The Widows of the Church, saith Dr. H. very improbably, they being mention'd particularly in the Sequel of the Chapter. Ver. 3. Honour Widows, that are Widows indeed. , Honour.] i. e. Yield them Reverence and Alimony; for that Provision is for them inclu∣ded in this Honour, is evident from v. 4. and the 8th. Thus not to give Parents what is needful for them, is to transgress the Precept which commands us to Honour our Father and our Mother, Mark 7.10, 11, 12. So Acts 28.10. , they honoured us with many Honours, giving us, , such things as were necessary. Hence, in theIn Deut. 15.14. Jerusalem Targum, Honorare est viaticum providere, to Honour is to make Provisions for any Person; so here, Honour Widows, that is, saith Theophylact, , pro∣vide them Necessaries; see Note on Mark 7.10. , that are Widows indeed.] An∣swering that Name by being, , desolate, and destitute of any other to relieve them, and being also exemplarily pious, v. 5. Wi∣dows, saith Cotelerius, hath divers Significati∣ons; it signifies, 1. Any Woman that survives her Husband. 2. Poor Women, who, after the Death of their Husbands, need the Alms of the Church, (as here.) 3. Such as conse∣crated themselves to God, professing perpetual Widowhood, (v. 5.) 4. Such as were cho∣sen into the Ecclesiastical Ministery, or made Deaconesses, v. 9. That there should be any , or Persons that were always Vir∣gins, called, , Widows; tho' the Passage of Ignatius, ac∣cording to Vossius's Reading, seems to make for it, yet, according to the Reading of Bi∣shop Usher, (,) it makes a∣gainst it; and Virgo-Vidua, a Virgin-Widow, that is admitted to the Degree of a Deaconess among the Widows, is, in Tertullian's Lan∣guageNe tale nunc Miraculum, ne dierim menstrum, in Ecclesia denotaretur, virgo vidua. De Vir∣gin. Veland. Cap. 9. a Miracle or Monster in the Church. 'Tis certain such a one could be none of the Apostle's Widows here, for he supposeth his Widows may have Children, v. 4. and ex∣presly forbids any to be chosen into the Num∣ber of Widows that hath not nourished or brought up her Children, v. 9, 10. and 'tis not reasonable to conceive the Church of Smyr∣na should so soon transgress against this Rule of the Apostle, or that this Famous Martyr should approve such a Violation of the Apo∣stle's Precept. Ver. 4. But if any Widow have Children, or Nephews, let them, (i. e. those Children or Grandchildren,) learn first (or chiefly) to shew Piety at home, (i. e. to their own Family, or Houshold,) and to require their Parents, (who have bred them up, v. 10.) for that is good and acceptable before God, (and then, if they be able, extend their Charity to others.) , Let them learn first to shew Piety at home.] The Apostle here speaks of the Care the Children should take to nourish their Parents, which are Widows, , before they suffer them to be Burthensome to the Church, as it is evi∣dent from v. 16. which saith, If any Man or Woman have Widows (belonging to their Fa∣mily,) let them relieve them, and let not the Church be charged with them; and also from the following Words here, and to requite their Parents, which only can belong unto the Children, and was always reckoned an Act of Piety towards them,. as, after God, the Authors of our Being, whence anciently they were so reverenced, saith. Simpl. in Epict. c. 3 p. 178, 179. Simplicius▪ as to be called Gods.
Ver. 5. Now she that is a Widow indeed, and desolate, (being left quite alone, without any Children to relieve her,) trusteth in God, and continueth in Supplication Night and Day. , Solitary.] So Philo saith, the Widow of the Priest, which has no Children, must return to her Father's House, as, , ha∣ving no other Refuge, when destitute of Hus∣band, and of Children, but her Father: But if she have Sons, or Daughters, 'tis necessary that the Mother should be placed with her Children, ,L. 2. de Mon. p. 641. in fine. for Sons and Daughters being of the House of their Parents, draw the Mother to it; whence also we learn what it is to shew Piety to their own House, v. 4. viz. to do it to their Parents. , trusteth in God.] i. e. Ha∣ving no other Helper, she reposeth her self on him alone, committing her self to him by constant Prayer for his Help. This is Cotele∣rius's third kind of Widows, compared by the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, Lib. 3. c. 1. to the Widow of Sarepta, and to Anna the Daughter of Phanuel, mention'd Luke 2.36. who does not oblige her self by Vow, or Promise, so to do, but only remains single, , as having the Gift of Wi∣dowhood. So St. Jerom describes these Wi∣dows, in these Words, Honora Viduas quae ve∣re Viduae sunt, hoc est quae omni suorum auxi∣lio destitutae sunt, quae manibus suis laborare non possunt, quas paupertas debilitat, aetasque conficit, quibus Deus spes est, & omne opus Oratio. Ep. ad Gerontiam. Ver. 6. But she that liveth in Pleasure (Li∣centiously), is dead (to God,) whilst she (thus) liveth, (and so is not to be respected as a vi∣tal Member of the Church, or nourished by her.) , she that liveth in Pleasure.] This Word properly signifies to feed delici∣ously, and drink choice Liquors; , to live only for the Belly, saith St. Chry∣sostom. So Ezek. 16.49. This was the Sin of thy Sister Sodom, in Pride, Fulness of Bread, , and in Abundance, she and her Daughters rioted. Amos 6.4. They lie upon Beds of Ivory, , and abounding with Superfluities, they eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall; and because such eating and drinking provokes to carnal Pleasures, it is joined with them, as when the Apostle saith, ye have lived in Pleasure, and been wanton, Gr. , Jam. 5.5. Such a Woman is dead whilst she liveth, according to that of the Jews,More Nev. l. 1. c. 41. the Just in their Death are styled living, the Wicked whilst they live are styled dead. Maimonides. Ver. 7. And these things give in charge, that they, (i. e. the Widows,) may be blame∣less. Ver. 8. But if any (having Ability) pro∣vide not for his own (Kindred,) and especially for those of his own House, he hath (in Works) denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. , He is worse than an Infidel.] For they put this among the first and most in∣dissoluble Principles of Nature, requiring us, ,Hieroc in haec verba Pythag. . first to Ho∣nour the Gods, and then our Parents placing among the things, in which they are to be ho∣noured, , the making Provisions for them, and serving them with our Bodies. SoDe Mor. l. 9. c. 2. Aristotle saith, we must rather make Provisions for them than for our selves, and yield them, , Honour, as they do unto the Gods.. De Fraterno Amore. p. 479. E. F. Plu∣tarch saith, That all Men, tho' some may think otherwise, say, that Nature, and the Law of Nature, requires that Parents should have the highest Honour next the Gods: That Men can do nothing more acceptable to the Gods, thn by readily heaping Favours upon their Pa∣rents; and nothing that is a greater Evidence of Atheism, or Impiety, than to despise them. Ver. 9. Let not a Widow be taken into the Number (of Widows to be maintained by the Church,) under threescore Year old, having been the Wife of one Husband, (not one that hath divorc'd her self from one Husband, and married again.) Ver. 10. Being also well reported of, for Good Works; if (, that) she hath brought up Children, if (that) she hath lodged Strangers, if she hath washed the Saints Feet, if she hath relieved the Afflicted, if she hath diligently fol∣lowed every Good Work. , Let not a Widow be taken into the Number.] The Apostle now comes to speak of such Widows as were not only to be maintained by the Church, for they were, doubtless, to receive her Alms, if really they were poor, without these Qualifications, but of such as were to be admitted into the Num∣ber of Deaconesses, whose Office it was to in∣struct the younger Women, to attend the Women when Sick and in Labour, and to assist at the Baptism of the Female Sex.
, not less than Sixty Years old.] 'Tis the Mistake of Zonaras, Balsamon, and Blastares, to think to reconcile this with the 15th. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and the 14th. of Trullo, by say∣ing, That Widows might only be admitted Deaconesses at Sixty, but Virgins at Forty. This last was done in After-Ages, and after that Apostolical Constitution, which, agreeably to St. Paul, saith, L. 3. c. 1. , let not the Widows be constituted under Sixty Years: and they who first began to alter the Time, did at last take away the Office. , Being the Wife of one Husband.] That is, one who had not divor∣ced her self from one, and married another Husband; for otherwise the younger Widows, whom St. Paul bids to marry, could never be admitted Deaconesses, though they had all the other Qualifications. That such Divorces were then common on the Wives side, both among Jews and Gentiles, we learn concern∣ing the Romans, from the Complaint ofDesinit esse probri loco commune maledictum. Nunquid jam ulla repudio crubescit, postquam illustres quaedam ac nobiles faminae non consulum numero sed maritorum annos computant, & exeunt Matrimonii causa, nubunt repudii? Tamdiu istud time∣batur, quamdiu rarum erat; quia vero nulla sine divortio acta sunt, quod saepe audiebant, id facere didicerunt. De Benef. l. 3. c. 16. Seneca, That none in his Time blushed at it, their Noble Women marrying, that they might divorce themselves, and there being scarce any Marriages without Divorces.Paula Valeria, Soror Triarii, divertium sine causa, quo die vir e provincia venturus erat, fecit, nuptura est D. Bruto.—Multa in hoc genere incredibilia, te absente, acciderunt. Cic. Epist. Famil. L. 8. Ep. 7. Cicero com∣plains of many things of this kind which happened in his Time. Plutarch mentions it as a thing common and. De Praecept. Conjug. p. 144. A. customarily done by any Women that were Jealous; and the Law among the. Loquens de uxore Alcibiadis. Plut. de Alcib. p. 195. C. Athenians allowed it; In∣stances we have of it inƲbi Mulier Christiana viro, . Apol. 1. p. 42. B. Justin Martyr, andRepudium vero in faeminis jam & votum est, quasi matrimonii fructus. Ap. c. 6. Tertullian: And that this also was frequent in the Practice of the Jews, and al∣low'd by their Rabbins, see Note on 1 Cor. 7.11. , if she hath brought up Chil∣dren.] That  signifies that, as well as if, see Note on Act. 26.23. , &c. that Christ hath suffer'd, and that he was the first that rose from the dead; and that so it should be rendred here, the Word , testified, seems to require: For a Testimony of the good Works of others, is, that they have done such and such laudable Actions. Ver. 11. But the younger Widows refuse; for when they have begun to wax wanton a∣gainst (or grow weary of) Christ, they will marry. Ver. 12. Having Condemnation, because they have cast off their first Faith. , when they have waxed wanton against Christ.] That is, say Chrysostom, and Oecumenius, , when they have cast off, or fastidiously refused and rejected Christ; , when they have contemn'd and made light of him; when they do, , bear Christ's Yoke grievously, and cast off his Reins. So Hesychius, and Phavorinus. So that this Phrase signifies to cast off Christ, and Christi∣anity; and as the Apostle afterwards explains it, , to turn from him after Satan, or to fall off from him to Heathenism, or Ju∣daism, and then, , to violate their first Faith, cannot be to violate the Pro∣mise made when chosen into the Order of Widows, not to marry, but their Faith given unto Christ at Baptism; the other, if any such Promise were then made, being not their first, but second Faith. So Chrysostom, and Oecumenius, expound it from those Words of the Apostle to the Corinthians: I have espou∣sed you to one Husband, that I may present you as a chast Virgin unto Christ. Ver. 13. And withal, they learn to be idle, wandring about from House to House; and not only idle, but Tatlers also, and Busie-bodies, speaking things which they ought not. Ver. 14. I will therefore that the younger Women (rather) marry, bear Children, guide the House, (and so) give none Occasion to the Adversary (of Christianity,) to speak reproach∣fully (of it.) Ver. 15. (The Necessity of which Precept is too great,) For some (of these young Wi∣dows) are already turn'd aside after Satan. , have turned aside after Satan.] The converting Men to the Chri∣stian Faith being the turning Men from the Power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. the rescuing Men from the Snare of the il, who were taken captive by him at his Will, 2 Tim. 2.26. and who walk'd according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, Eph. 2.2. the casting off the Faith may well be styled the turning aside after Satan. Ver. 16. If any Man or Woman that belie∣veth, have Widows, (belonging to their Family,) let them relieve them, and let not the Church be charged (with them,) that (being freed from
that Charge,) it may (the better) be able to re∣lieve them that are Widows indeed, (that is, are wholly destitute of Help, v. 5.) Ver. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honour, (i. e. of a more liberal Maintenance,) especially those that labour in the Word and Doctrine. ,] the double Honour, is that, , of a liberal Maintenance out of the Publick Stock; it signifies, saith Chryso∣stom, , Provision of things necessary, as is evident from the Reason fol∣lowing, v. 18. The Labourer is worthy of his Hire. , espe∣cially those who labour in the Word and Doctrine.] , the Elders among the Jews, were of two sorts: 1. Such as governed in the Synagogue; and, 2dly, such as ministred in Reading and Expounding their Scriptures and Traditions, and from them pronouncing what did bind or loose, or what was forbid∣den, and what was lawful to be doneMorin. de Ordin. Part. 3. Exer. 7. Chap. 4. Buxt. in voce. : For when, partly by their Captivity, and part∣ly through Increase and Traffick, they were dispersed in considerable Bodies through di∣vers Regions of the World, 'twas necessary they should have Governours or Magistrates to keep them in their Duty, and judge of Criminal Causes, and also Rabbins to teach them the Law, and the Traditions of their Fathers. The first were ordain'd, ad judican∣dum, sed non ad docendum de licitis & vetitis, to judge and govern, but not to teach; the se∣cond, ad docendum, sed non ad judicandum, to teach, but not to judge or govern, and these the Apostle here declares to be the most ho∣nourable, and worthy of the chiefest Reward. Accordingly the Apostle, reckoning up the Of∣fices God had appointed in the Church, places Teachers before Governments, 1 Cor. 12. Ver. 18. For the Scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the Ox that treadeth out the Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward. , For the Scripture saith.] The former Words, Thou shalt not muzzle the Ox that treadeth out the Corn, being expresly found in Deut. 25.4. and the latter expresly in the Gospel of St. Luke, Ch. 10.7. and with a little Variation, Mat. 10.10. and in no other Place in Scripture, (for in Lev. 19.13. and Deut. 24.14. there is nothing to this purpose,) it follows that St. Paul must here reckon the Gospel of St. Luke among the Ho∣ly Scriptures, from which such Doctrines as he is now teaching, may be infallibly con∣firmed. Note, 2dly, That the Apostle, both here, and 1 Cor. 9.9. proves this from what was written in the Law of Moses, applying in both Places that which primarily must belong to the Jewish Priesthood, to the Preachers of the Gospel, and hence allowing us to argue for the Maintenance of the latter, by Analogy to what was appointed for the former, as the Apostle himself doth in this very Case, in these Words, Do you not know that they who minister about (legally) holy things, eat of the things of the Temple; and that they which wait a the Altar, are Partakers with the Altar; i. e. are fed, and liberally maintain'd by the Por∣tions God allow'd them of what was offer'd at his Altar. Even so hath the Lord Christ appointed, that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.12, 13. Whence, 3dly, Note, That this is a standing Ordi∣nance of Christ, to continue as long as the preaching of the Gospel doth, built upon Rea∣sons of equal Obligation at all times, the La∣bourer being always worthy of his Hire, the Shepherd to eat of the Milk of the Flock, and he that soweth Spirituals to reap Carnals, 1 Cor. 9.7, 10, 11. 4thly, Note from whom this Reward is to be received; from them amongst whom these Pastors labour, to whom they sow spiritual things, and who are taught by them: For let him, saith the Apostle, that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teacheth, in all good things, Gal. 6.7. So that he is to have a Supply of all things needful for the Discharge of his Function, here double Honour, i. e. a liberal Maintenance. 5thly, Note, That as the Command of be∣ing Charitable to the Poor gives just Occasion to those Laws which are made in all Commu∣nities, to oblige Men, according to their Abi∣lities, to distribute to the Necessities of the Poor, because otherwise the General Rules of Scripture would not be obey'd, nor the Poor provided for. So the standing Ordinance of Christ, and his Apostles, concerning the ∣ble Honour due to them who labour in the Word and Doctrine, and the communicating to them in all good things, justifies those Laws which ascertain what shall be communicated to them, since otherwise it is much to be fear∣ed the General Rules of Scripture concerning this Matter, would not be obey'd, nor the Clergy sufficiently provided for. Ver. 19. Against an Elder receive not a Accusation, but before (, upon the Testi∣mony of) two or three Witnesses. .] The Elder here seems to relate not to one who was such by Age, but by Office, because the Apostle was before speak∣ing, v. 17. of Elders which ruled well, or la∣boured in the Word and Doctrine: And where∣as the Law had taken care that no Man should be condemned, but by the Mouth of two or three Witnesses, the Apostle knowing how
much the Church would suffer by the rash Accusations of her Governours, Bishops, and Presbyters, seems to rise higher, not suffering  Accusation to be admitted against them, without the like Number of Witnesses. Ver. 20. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear. , i. e. them that Sin] Grie∣vously and scandalously, and are convinced of their Offences by two or three Witnesses, were to be rebuked, saith Theodoret, , i the Presence of all; such publick Censures, being, according to the Custom of the Church, done by the Presidents or Rulers of the Church, , before, and with the Consent of all, and in the Assemblies, asSummum futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit ut à communione orationis, & conventus & omnis Sancti Commercii relegetur, praesident probati quique Seniores. Tertull. Apol. c. 39. Tertullian saith. See Note on 2 Cor. 2.6. Ver. 21. I charge thee before God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, (whom thou servest, and by whose Authority thou actest in this Mini∣stery,) and the Elect Angels, (who are Inspe∣ctors and Observers of what is done in the Church, 1 Cor. 11.10.) that thou observe these things, without preferring one before ano∣ther, (out of Favour to their Persons,) doing nothing by Partiality. Ver. 22. Lay Hands suddenly on no Man, neither be thou Partaker of other Mens Sins, keep thy self pure (from them.) , Lay Hands sud∣denly on no Man.] This, saith the Reverend Dr. Hammond, belongs to the laying on of the Bishops Hands in absolving Penitents: Saith the Reverend Bishop of Worcester, to the lay∣ing on of Hands of Bishops, Priests, and Dea∣cons: 1. Because St. Paul had not mention'd laying on of Hands in Relation to Penitents in this Epistle, but he had done it with respect to Ordination, and that in Timothy's own Case, Chap. 4.14. 2dly, Because the Apostle in this Epistle gives no Rules concerning the Qualifi∣cations of Penitents, saying nothing, what Penitents were to be reconciled, and after what Time, and under what Conditions they were to have Hands laid on them in Token of Reconciliation; nor is there a concurrent Evi∣dence of such a Practice so early in the Church; but he had given Rules, touching Bishops and Deacons, and their Qualifications; and there∣fore we have more Cause to apply it, accord∣ing to the chief Intention and Design of this Epistle. 3dly, Because the great use of lay∣ing on of Hands in the New Testament, is for the setting Persons apart for the Discharge of a Sacred Office, so was it in the first Instituti∣on of Deacons, Acts 6.6. and of Paul and Barnabas to a particular Charge, Acts 13.2, 3. This was an Ancient Ceremony among the Jews, in the solemn Designation of Persons to Sacred Offices, Numb. 27.18, 23. Deut. 34.9. either to be Rulers or Teachers in their Syna∣gogues; and from thence it was brought into the Church, in the solemn Designation of Per∣sons to the Ministery. And, 4thly, If these Words do not relate to Ordination, St. Paul would have given Timothy no particular Di∣rection about that which was one main Part of his Office; wherefore, as he left Titus at Crete, to ordain Elders in every City; so doubt∣less Timothy had the same Commission, which yet is no where intimated but in these Words: And according to this Sense, the following Words are capable of a very good Meaning, thus, Be not Partaker of the Sins of them who rashly, and without due Qualifications, rush upon Sacred Offices; for, by want of due Examination, and Trial of them, thou wilt become Partaker of their Guilt. Ver. 23. Drink no longer Water (only,) but use a little Wine (together with it,) for thy Stomach's sake, and for thy often Infirmities. So Justin Martyr saith, That Wine is to be used for. Ep. ad Zen. p. 512. A. the Help of the Body, and the Cure of inward Distempers. And. De Leg. p. 800. D. Plato saith it was given for the Health and Strength of the Body. The Essens abstained wholly from Wine, see Note on Coloss. 2.21. but theIren. l. 1. p. 26. D. Epiph. Haer. 26. §. 5. Gnosticks freely used it when they went to the Heathen Feasts, and otherwise. Ver. 24. (And to preserve thee from Mistake, or rash proceeding, either in Ordination, v. 22. or in rebuking the scandalous Offender, consi∣der, that) Some Mens Sins are open (and dis∣cernable) before-hand, (i. e. before any Witnes∣ses come in against them,) going before to (or for) Judgment, (or to bring the Censures of the Church upon them;) but (in) some Men, they follow after, (i. e. their evil Dispositions appear afterward.) Ver. 25. Likewise also the good Works of some are manifest before-hand, (and so less Exa∣mination is needful concerning them,) and they that (i. e. whose Works) are otherwise, cannot be (long) hid, (their Vices will, by Informa∣tion of others they converse with, or by Temp∣tation, and their own evil Inclinations, be at last discovered.) I find three Expositions of these Words: The first is that of St. Basil, and St. Austin, which refers them to the Judgment of God thus: The Good and Evil Works of some Men are so manifest, that they may be discern∣ed of all Men before the Day of Judgment, and so in discerning them thou canst not err;
but if they be latent here, and so escape thy Examination and Censure, they will be mani∣fested at the great Day of their Accounts. 2dly, Others referring this to the Censures of the Church, the  mention'd, v. 20. make the Sense run thus: Some Mens Sins are so open and notorious, as to bring them under the Censures of the Church, by way of precedent Merit; others appear more Crimi∣nal, after the Censures pass'd upon them, and so less fit to be absolved; and some Mens Re∣formation, or Good Works, are so manifest, after Censure, as to evidence they deserve Ab∣solution; and if they continue evil, or do but few good Works, that also will be in time dis∣cernable: So that thou may'st know who are fit to be absolved, who not. But against this Exposition there lies this Objection, That no Man should incurr the Censures of the Church, but by way of precedent Merit; and so no Man's evil Works, for which he is to be cen∣sured, should follow after that Act of Disci∣pline. And, 2dly, the last Clause of the last Verse seems, by the Antithesis, to refer not to evil, but to good Works, though done as the Works of Charity ought to be, so as not to be observed by Men. 3dly, The Ancient Greek Expositors, with Grotius, refer these Words to Ordination, thus: When I said, Lay Hands suddenly on no Man, I spake not of Men whose good or bad Works are manifest before-hand; for they, without further Discussion, or Examination, may be admitted, or are to be rejected; but of those whose Vices, or good Works, are latent; for they; after Examination and Enquiry, cannot be long hid: And so, if thou be not hasty in laying on of Hands, thou timely may'st disco∣ver them; or if by this means thou canst not do it, thou wilt not be Partaker with the Sin∣ner, as having done as much as was in thy Power to discover them. CHAP. VI. Ver. 1. LEt as many Servants as are under the Yoke (of Bondage to the Hea∣thens,) count their own Masters worthy of all (due) Honour, that the Name of God, and his Doctrine, be not blasphemed, (or evil spoken of, as tending to dissolve these civil Obliga∣tions, but rather honoured in all Estates of Men, as tending to make them better in their several Relations, Tit. 2.10. and more sub∣ject even to hard and froward Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18.) Ver. 2. And they that have believing Ma∣sters, let them not despise them because they are (advanced to be) Brethren, (and so equal to them in Christ,) but rather let them do them Service, because they are Faithful, (of the Houshold of Faith,) and beloved (of God,) Par∣takers of the Benefit, these things teach and exhort. .] These Words be∣ing not connected to the preceding, by , and the Article  shewing that they relate not to the Predicate, but to the Subject, will be best ren∣dred thus, Because they who Partake of the Benefit of their Service, are Faithful, and Be∣loved, and therefore more worthy of their Ser∣vice, the more they are honoured of God, and of the Number of them whom we stand bound to serve in Love. That the Gnosticks taught any such Do∣ctrine, That Christian Servants were not obli∣ged to obey their Heathen, or their Christian Masters, there is not the least Hint in any of the Commentators on this Place, or in any of the Fathers, who have given us the largest Account of their Doctrines. I find in the E∣pistle of Ignatius to Polycarp, these Words:. §. 4. See Coteler. in locum. Despise not Men and Maid-Servants, nor let them be puffed up, but let them serve the more, for the Glory of God, that they may ob∣tain a better Liberty; let them not covet to be free from their Masters. But neither doth the Martyr, nor any of his Commentators, inti∣mate, that this relates to any Doctrine of the Gnosticks: And considering how much he en∣deavoured to imitate St. Paul, we may more probably conjecture it hath relation to this ve∣ry Place. Moreover, though I have given you the Words, as Dr. Hammond translates them, yet I think the true Meaning of these Words, , is this, Let them not be importunate to be delivered, or made free by the Church, or by her Common Stock; for  signifies the Community; and so , inHist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. . Eusebius, is the Community, or Body of the Church; and also inChristiani mittebant Peregrino. . Lucian. Lucian, where he speaks of the Christians; and , in Aristophanes, De∣mosthenes, and Lucian, signifies the Common Stock. Now it is evident, from Justin Mar∣tyr, and Tertullian, that the Common Stock of Christians was imploy'd to buy their Bre∣thren out of Bonds and Servitude. See Note on 1 Cor. 7.23. & Lucian de Pereg. Ed. Gr. p. 594, 595.
But that many of the Jews were of this Opinion, and might be apt to introduce it in∣to Christianity, we find just Reason to believe; for they thought themselves privileged, by their Relation to God, from being the Ser∣vants of Men. Some of them, saith Jose∣phus, thought it a wicked thing, , to own, besides God, any mortal Lords, or Masters. Their Rabbins thought it unbecoming any Jew to be a Bond Slave to an Heathen or Idolater; for that was, say they, to be Servi Servorum, Servants of Ser∣vants, which the Servants of the Lord must not be. See Dr. Lightf. in 1 Cor. 7.23. Ver. 3. If any Man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholsome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, (Mat. 20.27. he that would be first among you, let him be your Servant, or Servant of all, Mark 10.44.) and to the Doctrine which is after Godli∣ness. , the Words of our Lord Jesus.] This Phrase being often used, of the very Words which Christ spake, as Mat. 26.75. Act. 10.16.20.35. I thought fit to refer it to those Words which might, most likely, be aimed at by the Apostle; tho' seeing they also may refer to the Doctrine of Christ, preached by the Apostle, this Phrase being so used, Act. 19.10. and the Doctrine of the Lord very often, 1 Thess. 1.8. 2 Thess. 3.1. in this Sense it affords this useful Obser∣vation, That the Words written by St. Paul, in these Epistles, are the Words of the Lord Jesus. Ver. 4. He is proud, (Gr. puffed up,) know∣ing nothing, but doting (sick) about Questions, and strife of Words; whereof cometh Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmises, Ver. 5. Perverse Disputings of Men of corrupt Minds, and destitute of the Truth, supposing that Gain is Godliness, from such withdraw thy self. , from such withdraw thy self.] From these Words it is plain that the Apostle speaketh here of Persons then in being. That they were Jews, seems evident from the foregoing Note, shewing, that they were in this Matter, , Men that taught otherwise; that these , were Men knowing nothing, or not knowing what they said, or whereof they affirmed. See 1 Tim. 1.9. That they did, , teach otherwise than the Doctrine which is after Godliness, v. 3. That they had their Fables which ministred , Questions, v. 4. That they had their , vain wrang∣lings about Words, v. 6. That they had their foolish Questions which begat Strifes and Contentions about the Law, see Tit. 3.9. That they of the Circumcision were vain Talkers, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy Lucre's sake, see Tit. 1.10, 11. and so accoun∣ted Gain for Godliness. That their Minds and Consciences were defiled and perverted, see Tit. 1.14. That they turned aside from the Faith to vain Janglings, see 1 Tim. 1.6. how they were puffed up, see Note on 2 Tim. 3.4. Ver. 6. But (whatsoever they esteeem so, we know, that) Godliness with that (Con∣tentment which attends it) is great Gain. Ver. 7. (I say with Contentment, which it becometh us to have:) For we brought nothing into the World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out (of it.) Ver. 8. And having (, having there∣fore) Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content. Ver. 9. But (for) they that will be rich, fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. Ver. 10. For the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierc'd themselves through with many Sorrows. , Contentment.] This the Apostle well explains, by being satisfied , in the Condition we are in, Phil. 4.11. and , with the things we have at present, with Food and Raiment, v. 8. i. e. with those things which are needful for this present Life, Mat. 6.31, 32. in Opposition to Anxiety, Distrust, or Murmuring; and it is never separable from true Piety, but is the natural Result of that Love to, and that Value the good Man hath for God, and the Things of God; that Trust he hath in God, and the entire Resignation of his Will in all Affairs to the Conduct of his Providence. , they that will be rich.] i. e. On whom the Love of Money so pre∣vails, that they are resolved they will be rich, if by any means they can compass Wealth, are in the ready way to yield to any Lust which will gratifie their greedy Humours; , abstaining, saith. p. 524. Plutarch, from no∣thing that is base or impious, that tends to en∣rich them: Whence the Ancients, agreeably to the Apostle here, avaritiam omnia vitia ha∣bere putabant, thought Covetousness to com∣prehend all Vices; as Agellius, l. 11. c. 2. from Cato, and Cicero, N. 45. in his Oration, pro Rscio Amerino have observed. It also causeth us to make shipwrack of Faith, and a good Conscience, and whatsoever else is sacred, when they cannot be held without the Loss of that Wealth we so love and admire. Whence Cicero notes,Pro P. Quintio, N. 13. Nullum esse officium tam Sanctum atque scienne, quod non avaritia
comminuere, atque violare soleat: That there is no Duty so holy, or solemn, which Covetous∣ness is not wont to impair and violate. Ver. 11. But thou, (thou therefore,) O Man of God, flee these things, and follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness. , &c.] That Godliness which gives Contentment with Food and Rayment, and what at present we enjoy: That Faith which assures us of a better, and a more endu∣ring Substance, reserved in the Heavens for us, Heb. 10.34. That Justice which requires us to injure no Man, but to let every Man en∣joy his own: That Love, or Charity, which makes us ready to distribute, and willing to communicate of these things to others, v. 18. That Patience which makes us with Tranqui∣lity and Equanimity, submit to a low Fortune, and Adversity: That Meekness which sup∣presses our Wrath and Indignation against them who are injurious to us in Temporals, and take away that which is ours. All these are proper Preservatives against, or Indications of a Mind free from Covetousness. Ver. 12. Fight the good Fight of Faith, (and so) lay hold of Eternal Life, whereunto thou art (both) called, and (according to that Calling) hast professed a good Profession, (by enduring Persecutions for it,) before many Witnesses. , Fight the good Fight.] These Words are plainly Agonistical, relating to the Olympick Games, and particularly to that of Racing, to which the Apostle doth so oft allude, where the Crown being hung up at the End of the Goal, he that came first did , lay hold of it, and take it to him∣self: And because these Games were perform∣ed in the Presence of many Spectators, the Apostle continues the Allusion, saying, that Timothy had, in the Presence of many Witnes∣ses, shew'd his Readiness to suffer for the Faith. Ver. 13. I give thee charge in the Sight of (that) God who quickeneth all things, (and therefore is able to raise them that suffer for him, from the Dead,) and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Con∣fession, (confirming the Truth to the Death, Joh. 18.37.) Ver. 14. That thou keep the Commandment (given to thee, v. 11, 12.) without Spot, un∣rebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Je∣sus Christ. Ver. 15. Which (Appearance) in his Times (or in the proper Season) he shall shew (forth) who is the Blessed, and the only (Absolute) Po∣tentate; the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; (who therefore is more to be fear'd than all Earthly Potentates, and will more assuredly punish those who submit not to his Laws and Government.) Ver. 16. Who only hath (of himself) Im∣mortality, (and so only can confer it upon others, and only lives for ever to reward and punish,) dwelling in that Light which no Ma can approach unto, (and live; and so, who no Man fully can enjoy in this Life,) wh no Man hath seen: To whom (be ascribed) Honour, and Power everlasting. Amen. , Till the ap∣pearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.] Here, saith Grotius, it appears that Paul speaks to Timo∣thy, as one who might live to the last Judg∣ment: But this vain Conceit hath been suffi∣ciently confuted, Note on 1 Thes. 4.15. No doth this Exhortation prove it, it being used rather than that until Death, saith Theophy∣lact, to mind us of that glorious Appearance: And because, saithEpist. 80. ad Hes. p. 350. St. Austin, the Day of our Death is to us as that Day; Tunc eni unicuique veniet dies ille, cum venerit ei dies ut talis hinc exeat, qualis judicandus est ill die. In quo enim quemque invenerit suus n∣vissimus Dies, in hoc eum comprehendet mund novissimus Dies. , &c. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.] This Title the great Empires took to themselves: The King of Babylon is so sti∣led by Daniel, chap. 2.37. by Jeremiah, chap. 27.6. Of Persia, Ezr. 7.12. See Brisson. de Regno Pers. lib. 1. pag. 3, 4. And therefore the Apostle saith here, that it truly belongs to God only, and to our Lord Jesus Christ, Rev. 17.14.19.16. Ver. 17. Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, (the two Diseases of rich Men; for the rich Man's Wealth is his strong City, and a high Wall in his own Conceit, Prov. 10.15.18.11. and Riches and Strength lift up the Heart, Ecclus. 40.26.) but in the Living God, who giveth us all things richly to enjoy; (and in whom therefore we may safe∣ly trust.) Ver. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to distribute, toilling to communicate (to others of their Wealth.) That they do good. See Note on Tit. 3.8. Ver. 19. Laying up for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that (when these things fail) they may lay hold of Eternal Life. , A good Foundation.] , The Enjoyment of good things to come, he calls, an immoveable Foundation, say the Greek Com∣mentators. So the Doctrine of the Resurre∣ction is stiled the Foundation of God, 2 Tim. 2.19. And the Heavenly Jerusalem, a City that hath Foundations, Heb. 11.10. And the
good Foundation here being in the Words fol∣lowing Eternal Life, confirms their Interpre∣tation, they who think the Word  sig∣nifies here a Treasure, or an Obligation on the Part of God to give them Life Eternal, ean the same thing, though they give us no ust Evidence that the Word hath any such Signification. Ver. 20. O Timothy, keep that (Truth) which is committed to thy Trust, avoiding pro∣phane and vain Bablings, and Oppositions of Science, falsly so called. Ver. 21. Which some professing, have erred from the Faith. Grace be with thee. Amen. , have erred from the Faith.] These, in all Reason, must be the same with the , those who erred from the Faith, Ch. 1.5, 6. And that they were the , the Asserters and Teachers of the Law, and so the Opposites to the Gnosticks, who were, saith Irenaeus, Legis Adversarii, the Adversaries of the Law, the 7th. Verse demonstrates, as. Theodoret well observes upon the Place: Of them it is also certain, that they pretended above all Men to be , skill'd in the Know∣ledge of the Will of God, and , Men that had the Scheme or Form of Knowledge, Rom. 2.18, 19, 20. They were the great Assertors and Promoters of the Cab∣bala, or Cabbalistical Doctrine, which was in their Account, Scientia arcana divinitus accep∣ta,Buxtorf in voce  a secret mystical Knowledge of divine things received from God, and equal in their Opinion to the Scriptures, according to their Rule, Verba cabbalae aequiparantur verbis legis. And they doubtless opposed this their Know∣ledge of the Law, and of these Cabbalistical Traditions, to the Gospel taught by St. Paul, which opposed and slighted them; and their stiff Adherence to them, caused them,  to shoot off from the Faith of the Messiah, which was the Mark they aimed at; that therefore the , the falsly named Know∣ledge, mentioned here,Quaestiones Judaeorum quae videntur quaestiones esse Scientiae. Haymo in locum. may agree to them as well as to the Gnosticks, is manifest from these things; that it cannot agree to the Gnosticks, if these Persons were Teachers of the Law, as it is very probable they were, see Note on Chap. 1.7. That it cannot be attributed to Simon Magus, the Father of the Gnosticks, of whom alone the Apostle can be supposed here to speak, appears from this, that he cannot properly be said to err, concerning the Faith, who was so far from being then of it, that he himself set up for the Christ, and opposed the Profession of the Gospel with all his Might. As for the Gnosticks, it is agreed among the Learned, that though they conspired with former Hereticks, yet were they not known by that Name, nor had they taken it upon them till the Time of Anicetus Bishop of Rome, and the Reign of M. Aurelius Antoninus, and L. Verus, that is, not till the Year 129. Hence Dr. Cave makes them an Heresie of the Second Century. Eusebius says, that; H. Eccl. l. 4. c. 7. p. 120. B. See the Note on Chap. 4.3. Gnosticos se vocant de Carpocr. Iren. l. 1. c. 24. Car∣pocrates, who flourished in the Time of Ha∣drian, gave the Rise to the Sect of the Gno∣sticks: But Clemens Alexandrinus seems to affirm, that one. Strom. l. 3. p. 428. C. Epiphanes, the Author of the Sect of the Carpocratians, gave the Birth to this Name and Sect: And if it were so, it is improbable that the Knowledge falsly so cal∣led, here mentioned, should have Relation to the Gnosticks.
THE PREFACE TO THE Second Epistle of St. PAUL to TIMOTHY. THE AncientsChrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius. Theophylact, &c. from these Words of this Epistle, I am ready to be offer'd and the Time of my Departure is at hand, Chap. 4.6. do generally con∣clude this was the last of St. Paul's Epistles, he being , near the End of his Life, when he writ it. And truly the Words of the Apostle are not well capable of any other Sense, for he says expresly, , I am now offer'd, and the Time of my Dis∣solution, , is instant, v. 6. I have finished my Course, v. 7. and, v. 8. , from hence∣forth there is laid up for me a Crown of Glo∣ry; whereas he not only expected to be deli∣vered from his first Bonds, but saith expresly, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all, for your Furtherance and Joy of Faith, that your rejoycing may be more abun∣dant in Christ Jesus, for my coming to you again, Philip. 1.25, 26. see Chap. 2.24. Phi∣lemon 22. Yea, he was actually delivered, and ready to go to Judaea, when he writ the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 13.23. 2dly, This Epistle, saith Bishop Pearson, was writ from Rome, Chap. 1.17. by St. Paul in Bonds, Chap. 1.8.2.9. Now these Bonds could not be his first Bonds, for then he was in Libera Custodia, in his own hired House, receiving all that came to him, none forbidding it, Acts 28.30, 31. yea his Bonds were known throughout Caesar's Palace, and to all others, Philip. 1.13. Here he is in arcta Custodia; so that Onesiphorus was forced to enquire more diligently after him, that he might find him out, Chap. 1.17. Again, in his first Bonds, saith he, Many of the Brethren of the Lord being encouraged by my Bonds, were bold to speak the Word more abundantly without Fear, Philip. 1.14. Here all Men forsake him, Chap. 4.16. See a thrd Argument for this Opinion, Chap. 4.13. a fourth, v. 16. a fifth and sixth, v. 20. So that I conclude with the Postscript, that this Epistle , was writ from Rome, when St. Paul stood the se∣cond time before Nero. That this Epistle was writ to stir up Timo∣ty to Caution, Diligence, and Discharge of his Office on Occasion of the creeping Here∣sie of the Gnosticks, Chap. 2.17. stolen in among them, which had much debauched the Asiaticks, Chap. 1.15. and made use of Magick to oppose the Truth of the Gospel, Chap. 3.8. is said by a Reverend and Learned Person: But there is nothing in any of the Ancient Commentators of this nature, which speak here only of the Heresies arising from the Jewish Doctors,. Chrysost. Praefat. as that which gave Oc∣casion to the writing this Epistle. And (2dly,) the Places cited by this Reverend Person do not prove that the Apostle speaketh of the Gno∣sticks, for Chap. 1.15. he only says all those that were in Asia had forsaken him; which they might do, by cleaving to the Cerithians and Ebionites, rather than to the Gnosticks See the Note there. That they who taught the Resurrection was past already, were not Gno∣sticks, is proved, Note on Chap. 2.17. and that the Words, Chap. 3.8, 9. agree not to the Gnostick Hereticks, but to the Jewish False Teachers, who were also great Magicians, is there shewed; see Note on 2 Thess. 2.10.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE Second Epistle of St. PAUL to TIMOTHY. CHAP. I. Ver. 1. PAUL, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the Will of God, according to the Promise (for Declaration of the Pro∣mise) of (Eternal) Life which is (made to us) in Christ Jesus. .] , That I might declare that Eternal Life which is promised to Men; So Theodoret. So Tit. 1.1. Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, , for the Promotion or Declaration of the Faith of God's Elect; so , for every Cause, Mat. 19.3. Philip. 4.11. I speak not , for want of any thing. , Life which is in Christ Jesus.] Adam brought the Sentence of Death upon us all, and the Promise of Deliverance from that Death is only made to us in and through Christ Jesus, by virtue of that Death he suf∣fer'd in our stead. Ver. 2. (Writeth) To Timothy my dearly be∣loved Son (wishing to him) Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord, (by whom all Mercies are derived to us from the Father, through the Spirit.) Ver. 3. I thank God, whom I serve from my Fore-fathers with a pure Conscience, that with∣out ceasing, I have remembrance of thee in my Prayers Night and Day. , with a pure Conscience.] So Acts 23.1. I have lived in all good Con∣science to this Day before God, i. e. a Consci∣ence free from Insincerity, or wilful Disobe∣dience to the Dictates of his Mind, or the Rule by which he thought himself obliged to walk; for, as touching the Righteousness which was required by the Law, he was blame∣less, and as for his Blasphemies against Christ, and his Persecutions of his Church, that he did ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Tim. 1.13. think∣ing he ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus, Act. 26.9. But yet he was not free from Sin; for he confesses, that up∣on this Account he was the chief of Sinners, 1 Tim. 1.15. , without ceasing Day and Night.] To pray Morning and Evening, is to pray continually, or without ceasing: Thus Zadok and his Brethren offer'd Burnt-offerings before the Lord continually, , Morning and Evening, 1 Chron. 16.42, 43. See Note on 1 Thess. 5.17, 18. Ver. 4. Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy Tears (shed when thou de∣partedst from me,) that (as then I was filled with Sorrow, so by seeing thee again) I may be filled with Joy. Ver. 5. (I thank God, I say,) When I call to remembrance the unfeigned Faith which is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and (in) thy Mother Eunice, (converted to the Faith before thee, Acts 16.1.) and I am persuaded that (it dwells) in tee also. Ver. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my Hands. , by the laying on of my Hands.] The Presbytery also laid their Hands upon him, 1 Tim. 4.14. But the , or Gift, here mentioned, being the Gift of the Holy Ghost, was usually conferr'd by laying on of the Hands of an Apostle, Acts 8.17.19.6. Vain therefore is the Inference of Esthius, from these Places, that Ordination is a Sacrament, seeing the Grace here mentioned is no ordinary Grace, but an extraordinary Gift, conferr'd only at those Times by the Hands of an Apostle, and now wholly cea∣sed.
.] Philo saith, that. Lib. de Joseph. p. 424. F. & p. 318. D. Where there is any Spark of true Probity, being ven∣tilated, it will shine, and break forth into a Flame. And this is also true, as well of Spi∣ritual Gifts as Graces; even the Gifts of Mi∣racles, of Healing, and Casting out of Devils, were strengthen'd and increased by Prayer, Matth. 17.21. and by Faith, v. 20. and the Internal Gifts of Wisdom and Knowledge, by Reading, and Meditating on the Word; the Illumination of the Holy Spirit coming then upon Gifted Persons when they were so em∣ploy'd, 1 Cor. 14.23, 24, 25, 26. 1 Tim. 4.13, 14, 15. How they may be extinguish'd, see Ephes. 4.30. 1 Thess. 5.19. Thus Pythago∣ras, saithDe Vit. Pythag. p. 76. Jamblicus; purg'd the Soul of his Scholars from Ignorance and Sensual Passions, and then, , cap. 16. Ver. 7. For God hath not given us the Spirit of Fear, (as under the Mosaical Dispensation, Rom. 8.15.) but the Spirit of Power, (used Luk. 24.49. Act. 1.8. partly to assist us in the Preaching of the Gospel, , in the Power of Miracles, and in the Power of the Spirit of God, Rom. 15.19. and to render it effectual to the Hearers, it being the Power of God, through Faith, to their Salvation, Rom. 1.16. and preach'd by the Apostles with great Power, Act. 4.33. 1 Thess. 1.5. Col. 2.9. and partly to enable us to endure Afflictions for the sake of Christ, , the Spirit of Power resting upon us for that end, 1 Pet. 4.14. and here, v. 8.) and the Spirit of Love (to Christ, which constrains us to our Duty, 2 Cor. 5.14. and casteth out the Fear of any thing which we may suffer for Perfor∣mance of it, 1 John 4.18.) and of a sound Mind, (Gr. , of Wisdom to discharge that Duty, so as either to avoid Dangers, E∣phes. 5.15, 16. Colos. 4.5. by giving no Of∣fence to the Heathens, or else to speak the Word with a convincing Power, Luk. 21.15. and to walk so exactly that they may be asha∣med to speak Evil of us, or do Evil to us, who behold our good Conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16. All these were Spiritual Gifts, not now conferr'd in Ordination, as Esthius vainly conceives.) Ver. 8. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord, (i. e. of giving Testi∣mony to the Death and Resurrection of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.6. which were the great things they chiefly were to testifie, Acts 1.8, 22.4.33.5.32.) nor of me, (though I am now) his Prisoner (for that Testimony;) but be thou Partaker of (, suffer thou Evil with) the Afflictions of the Gospel, (i. e. the Preachers of it,) according to the Power of God, (given to thee for this End, v. 7.) Ver. 9. (Even that God) who hath saved us, (i. e. design'd us for Salvation, 1 Thes. 5.9. See Note on Ephes. 2.7, 8.) and (in pur∣suance of that Design, hath) called us with n holy Calling; not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, (See Note on Tit. 3.5, 6.) which was given (i. e. determin'd to be given) us in Christ, before the World began. .] Before any Age had pas∣sed, the Promise that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's Head, being made at the Beginning of the World, the Promise of that Life to which we were to be restored by this Seed, and had lost by the Subtilty and Malice of the Serpent, is said to be given , Tit. 1.3. See Note there. Ver. 10. But is now made manifest by the ap∣pearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, (the Lord and Giver of Life,) who (by his Death) hath abolished Death, and hath brought (this) Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel. , Hath brought Life and Im∣mortality to light.] It is to be acknowledg'd that the Heathens had, by Tradition, and the Light of Nature, conceiv'd some Hope of some future good Things to be received after this Life was ended; that being absolutely ne∣cessary, saith the Apostle, that they might come to God, or do him any acceptable Ser∣vice: For He that cometh to God, must believe that he is; and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. But yet this Hope was very weak, and feeble in them, and scarce credited by their Philosophers. It is stiled by Cicero, Tusc. Q. 1. Futurorum quod∣dam Augurium Seculorum, A Surmise of fu∣ture Ages. It is, saithCredebam opinionibus magnorum virorum rem gratissimam promittentium, magis quam probantium. Epist. 102. Seneca, that which our Wise Men do promise, but they do not prove. Socrates, even at his Death, speaks thus;, Phoed. p. 48. B. C. . Ibid. p. 84. F. . Apol. in fine. I hope to go hence to good Men; but of this I am not very confident; nor doth it become any wise Man to be positive that so it will be. I, saith he, must now die, and you shall live; but which of us is in the better State, the Living, or the Dead, God only knows. Both he and Cebes do ingenuously confess, that. In Phoed. p. 53. A. these things relating to the
Soul were disbelieved by the greatest part of Mankind. Aristotle held, that Death was therefore , the most terrible, as putting an end to all things;, Moral l. 3. c. 9. . Neither Good nor Evil happening to any Man after his Death. Yea, he says, It is absurd to say that any Man can be happy after Death, since Happiness con∣sists in Operation. HenceApud Euseb. Praep. Evang. l. 15. c. 5. Atticus reckons him among those who held that Souls could not remain after their Bodies. AndContr. Celsum. l. 2. p. 67. Origen saith, that he did , condemn the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality. Phys. Stoic. l. 3. diss. 11. Lipsius confesseth, that amongst the Stoicks this was a controverted Point, and was not received by them with any full Con∣sent; and whosoever reads them will find them still at their ifs and ands, not knowing whether there were any thing after Death, , or nothing; as So∣crates, in Phoed. speaks. Whether their Souls should beAnton. l. 3. §. 3. Si est aliquis defunctis sensus, Sen. Consol. ad Polyb. c. 27. Ep. 63. 71. 76. Valer. Mak. l. 4. c. 6. Si supremus ille dies non extinctionem, sed commutationem affert lci, Cic. Tusc. qu. 1. n. 105, 106. extinguished, or only changed their Place: Whether they were in a State of Sense, or , without Sense: Whe∣ther Soul and Body were extinguished toge∣ther, or not; as Cicero, Seneca, and others; or else were still at their Disjunctives, , fluctuating still betwixtAntoninus, l. 4. 14. 6. 24. 7. 32. 10. 7. Aut beatus, aut nullus, Polyb. apud Sen. Consol. c. 27. Aut finit, t transfert, Sen. Cur bonis mala, c. 6. Cic. Tusc. qu. 1. n. 22. Plut. de Consol. ad Apolln. p. 127. D. Ex∣tinction, or Translation, a profound Sleep, a long Peregrination, or an utter Dissolution. Caesar declares that Death removes all our Evils, and our Torments, asƲltra reque curae, neque gaudio locum esse. Apud Sallust. in Catilina. leaving no farther place for Joy or Fear. AndOmnibus a suprema die eadem quae ante primam, nec magis a mrte sensus ullus aut corpori aut animae, quam ante nata∣lem. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 7. c. 55. Pliny, That neither Soul or Body hath any more Sense after Death, than before it was born. Cicero begins his Discourse upon this Subject with a Profession, ThatEt quae vis, ut potere, explicabo, nec tamen quasi Pythius Apollo certae ut sint, & fixa quae dixero, sed ut hununculus unus e multu, prebabilia conjecturà sequens; ultra enim que progrediar quam ut verisimilia videam, non habeo. Tusc. qu. l. 1. n. 15, 16. he intended to deliver no∣thing as fixed and certain, but only as pro∣bable, and having some Likelihood of Truth: And having reckon'd up the different Senti∣ments of the Philosophers about it, he con∣cludes thus,Harum Sententiarum quae vera est, Deus aliquis viderit; quae verisimillima est, magna quaesti est. N. 20. Which of these Opinions is true, some God must tell us; which is most like to Truth, is a great Question. And when he had confirm'd, as much as he was able, the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality, he inge∣nuously confesses, Catervae veniunt contradi∣centium, that his Opinion was contradicted, not only by whole Troops of the Sect of Epi∣curus, but alsoNescio quomodo doctissimus quisque contemnit. Ibid. N. 63. by the most Learned of the other Sects. Plutarch saith, That if Men will be re∣strain'd from their evil Courses by Fear, they must be keptNon posse uaviter vivi, p. 1104. B. under the Superstition of the Dread of Hades; but to them who have cast off these Fears, must be propounded , the fabulous Hope of Immortality. And this, saith he, is one great Benefit of Philosophy, that it hath taught us to look upon that Death which others fear, , as nothing to us. Now the Philosophers themselves saw the evil Effects that the Denial, or Doubting of these things, would have upon the Lives of Men, viz. 1. That it would yield a great Encourage∣ment to Men to go on in their evil Ways: For, If Death, saith Socrates, in Phoed. p. 80. A. be the Extinction of the whole, or a Freedom from all Evils, , this will be good News to the Wicked, that they have nothing to suffer. 2. That it tended to discourage Men from leading vertuous and pious Lives, as cramp∣ing all their Hopes of Happiness: For, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus well observes,. l. 8. p. 529. If the Soul, when separated from the Body, pe∣risheth, it is not easie to discern how good Men can be happy, who receive no Fruit of their Vertue here, but often perish by it. 3. That it very much staggers our Patience and Perseverance in Vertue, and our Concern for Fidelity and Equity, when we must suffer for them in this World: For it is truly said by Cicero, ThatNullo igitur modo fieri potest ut quisquam tanti aestimet aequitatem & dem, ut ejus conservandae causa nullum suppli∣cim recuet, nisi iis rebus assensus sit quae falsae esse non possunt. Acad. quaest. l. 1. n. 25. it is not possible for any one to have that Esteem for Faith and Equity, as to endure the most dreadful Punishments to preserve them, unless he be assured that the
Things he hath assented to cannot be false. See Note on Heb. 11.6. As for that Immortality the Body shall ob∣tain at the Resurrection, the Heathens knew and believed nothing of it; they laughed at it, and looked upon it as a thing impossible, and unworthy of God to do, and without any Example to convince them that it might be done. Hence then we see the Necessity that this Life and Immortality should be brought to light by the Gospel; and what continual Thanks we owe to the Blessed Jesus, who hath by his Death not only remov'd the Fear and Sting, but even the Being of Death; and hath procur'd a blessed Immortality, not only for the Soul, but the Body also. Ver. 11. Whereunto (, for which thing) I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles. Ver. 12. For which Cause also I suffer these things; but (though I suffer thus) I am not ashamed (of my Hope,) for I know (in) whom I have believed; and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him, (i. e. my Soul and Life, 1 Pet. 4.19.) against (or to) that Day (of Recompence.) .] My Soul, which Persons dying used to commit into the Hands of God. So Josephus, de Bello Jud. lib. 3. pag. 852. The immortal Soul, which hath its Original from God, dwells in the Body: Now, if any one imbezels or evilly intreats that which is committed to him by Man, he is accounted a wicked and perfidious Man; ; but if any one cast the Depositum of God out of his Body by Self-Murther, can he hope to conceal him∣self from him that is injur'd?, quae ita conservanda sunt, ut . Lib. quis Rer. Div. Haeres. p. 387. B. Philo, in like manner, saith, That God hath given to Man a Soul, Speech and Sense, which he must endeavour so to keep, that he who committed them to him may find no Cause to blame him for his Custody. And again;. Ibid. p. 389. F. G. This is the Praise of the wise Man, to keep the sacred De∣positum of the Soul, Speech, Sense, the Divine Wisdom, and Humane Understanding purely, and without Deceit, not to himself, but only to him who committed them to him. And again, Lib. de Abr. p. 302. No wise Man, saith he, is offended that any one calls for , his Depositum: Why therefore should he be offended that God or Nature call for that which they have intrusted with us? And Her∣mas saith, Lib. 2. Mandat. 2. They that lye, defraud the Lord, not rendring to him , the Depositum they received from him; for they received a Spirit free from Falshood, and therefore by lying, , they have defiled God's Depo∣situm. TheIn Elle Haddaebarim Rabba. Jews, make mention of two Depositums of God; the Lamp which is in us, or the Soul; and the Lamp without us, which is the Law; and introduce God speaking to Man thus; My Light, or Lamp, is in thy hand; and thy Lamp, which is thy Soul, is in mine: If thou shalt diligently keep my Lamp, I will keep thine; if thou extinguish mine, I will put out thine. This Depositum they dying, did commit into the Hands of God; as you may see,Vide Cartw. in locum. Sepher Tephiloth Lusitanorum. The Apostle seems to have respect to both these Depositums in his Epistles to Timothy; to the Light of the Gospel, when he saith, , Keep that which is com∣mitted to thee, 1 Tim. 6.20. and here. v. 14. to the Lamp within us, in these Words: Ver. 13. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou hast heard of me in Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus; (i. e. with a firm Faith, and true Christian Love. See Note on Chap. 2. v. 2.) Ver. 14. The good thing which was commit∣ted to thee, (i. e. the Doctrine of the Gospel, 1 Tim. 6.20.) keep by the Holy Spirit which dwelleth in us, (and confirms it to us, 1 Joh. 2.20, 27.) Ver. 15. This thou knowest, (by Messen∣gers from Rome, or those who travel from thence to Rome,) that all they which are in Asia be turned away from (Gr. have forsaken) me; of whom is Phygellus, and Hermogenes. , Which are in Asia.] This Oe∣cumenius and Theophylact expound thus, , those of Asia that either went with him to Rome, or came to him there, or were found there at his Coming, in the Time of his Distress, forsook all Con∣verse with him, for fear of Nero. But this Exposition seems not consistent with the Words. For, 1. He saith, , This thou knowest. Now Timothy, being not at Rome, could not well know what was done there; and therefore the Apostle gives him an Account how all Men had deserted him in his first Defence, chap. 4.16. But being then in Asia, or Achaia, he might know what happen'd there. 2. The Words , have been averse from me, seem to import a Departure from St. Paul, and his Doctrine; and may be render'd, they have turn'd me off. He having therefore told them long before, that after his Departure, grievous Wolves should enter in, not sparing the Flock: And
that from themselves should arise Men speak∣ing perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, Act. 20.29, 30. and charging Ti∣mothy to stay some Time at Ephesus, to op∣pose himself to the False Teachers of the Jewish Nation, and to exhort the Ephesians not to give heed to these Teachers of the Law, 1 Tim. 1.7. It seems most proper to refer these Words to the rejecting St. Paul, as an Adversary to the Law, by the Persuasions of the Corinthians and Ebionites, who laid this Charge against him. Ver. 16. The Lord give (i. e. shew) Mercy to the Houshold of Onesiphorus (the Ephesian, ch. 4.19.) for he oft refreshed me (with his Presence, and Relief,) and was not ashamed of my Chain, (as the rest of the Asiaticks were.) Ver. 17. But when he was (Gr. Being) at Rome, he sought me out diligently, and found me. Ver. 18. The Lord (therefore) grant unto him, (who shew'd such Mercy to me,) that he may find Mercy in that Day (of Recom∣pence we Christians expect.) And in how ma∣ny things he minister'd to me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well. , The Houshold of Onesipho∣rus.] Onesiphorus seemeth to be dead when Paul writ this, saith Grotius, on the place: And if so, saith Estius, here is a strong Con∣firmation of the Practice of praying for the Saints deceased. I answer, 1. That it follows not that Onesiphorus was dead, because St. Paul here mentions, and in the Close of this Epistle salutes his Family, without mention of him; the Reason of that being this, because Onesi∣phorus was not yet return'd from Rome to E∣phesus, where his Family was. 2. The A∣postle here only prays that he might find Mercy at the Great Day of Recompence, as doth our Liturgy, and all the Antient Litur∣gies, for Deliverance in the Hour of Death, and at the Day of Judgment; which is per∣fectly exclusive of Prayers supposed to be made for Souls in Purgatory, which if they do them any good, must be supposed to do it before that Day. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. THou therefore, my Son, (follow not the Example of those that turn from me, but) be (thou) strong in (and through) the Grace which is (given thee) in Christ Jesus. (See ch. 1. v. 6, 7, 8.) Ver. 2. And the things which thou hast heard of (from) me, (establish'd,) by many Wit∣nesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. , The Things which thou hast learnt from me.] That Depositum, ch. 1.14. which I committed to thee, in the pub∣lick Assembly, at thine Ordination, do thou al∣so in like manner deposite with other faithful Men, that the Truth may be continued in an uninterrupted Succession of such Persons: So Mr. Walker. The Things agreed on, and con∣sented to by all the other Apostles, do thou com∣mit to able Men, and appoint them as Bishops of the several Churches under thee: So Dr. Ham∣mond. I think there is no Foundation for all this in the Text, no Intimation that these things were taught him at his Ordination, or that they were Things agreed on, and con∣sented to by all the Apostles, as if they had met and consulted about a System of Articles of Faith and good Life, to be held by all that taught the Christian Faith; or that God chose this Way to continue down the Faith in an uninterrupted Succession, from Age to Age, of such Persons; or that this was a Commission to St. Timothy to appoint Bishops under him in the several Churches of Asia; for he doth not appoint him, as he did Titus, to ordain Elders in every City, chap. 1.5. the Bishops of Ephesus and the adjacent Cities being be∣fore not only appointed, but convened by himself, Acts 20.17, 28. The Things which Timothy had heard confirm'd by many Witnes∣ses, seem to refer to Christ's Death, his Re∣surrection and Ascension, which were Mat∣ters of Testimony, and contain'd the prime Doctrines which St. Paul deliver'd to the Churches, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. and which were confirm'd by the Testimony of St. Paul, the Twelve Apostles, and Five Hundred Brethren, ibid. v. 5, 6, 7, 8. Luc. 24.50, 51, 52. Or to the Mystery of Godliness mention'd, 1 Tim. 3.16. and testified in every part of it by Men and Angels. I grant also, that the Apostle seems to refer to some Form of Doctrine de∣liver'd to them who receiv'd the Christian Faith, when he speaks of the Mystery of Faith, and the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Tim. 3.9, 15, 16. of the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. and of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, chap. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. enume∣rating them in the Epistle to the Hebrews; there being a Faith once, and at once deli∣vered to the Saints, Jude 2. in which they were to stand fast, and for which they were to contend, Philip. 1.27. And that there was also a , or Depositum of Christian Doctrine deliver'd to them who were to preach, and instruct others in the Faith; and which he commands Timothy to keep, 1 Tim. 6.20, 21. as being intrusted with it, in oppo∣sition to those who had erred from the Faith, which he calls the Form of sound Words, which he had been taught, and which he was
to keep in Faith, and Love of the Truth, 2 Tim. 1.13. and that good thing committed to him, v. 14. which he was to keep by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit which leadeth into all Truth, the Unction which taught them all things belonging to their Office, 1 John 2.20, 27. the things in which he was to continue, knowing of whom he had learnt them, 2 Tim. 3.14. I lastly grant, that all the Fathers, from Irenaeus downwards, speak of such a Symbol of Faith delivered to the Church by the Apostles and their Disciples, which the Church received from them, and distributed to her Sons, being the one and the same Faith which the Church retain'd throughout the World, than which they believed neither less nor more, and which for Substance was the same with the Apostle's Creed. This I haveTreat. of Trad. Part 2. Chap. 7.8. elsewhere largely proved, and thence de∣monstrated the Falshood of the whole Do∣ctrine of the Church of Rome, and of her new Creed, deliver'd as necessary to be be∣liev'd unto Salvation: And if Obadiah Wal∣ker means no more, I shall not contend with him. Ver. 3. Thou therefore (assisted by this Grace) endure Hardship as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Ver. 4. (Not loving this present World, or entangling thy self with the Affairs of it, for) No Man that warreth, entangleth himself with (any other of) the Affairs of this Life, (but quits all these Concerns) that he may (be more at leisure to) please him who hath chosen him to be a Soldier. Ver. 5. And (it is in this Militia, as in the wrestling at the Olympick Games, where) if a Man also strive (with another) for Mastery, yet is he not crown'd unless he strive lawfully, (according to the Rules of Wrestling; i. e. unless he wrestle naked, and have put off all the Cloaths which might hinder him in wrest∣ling, or give another Advantage to take hold of him.) , entangleth himself with the Affairs of this World.] The Apostle here, by two plain Similitudes, re∣quires Timothy, as a good Soldier, and Bishop of the Church of Christ, and an Evangelist, not to engage himself in any temporal Af∣fairs, or secular Negotiations; of which the first is taken from the Comparison of a Sol∣dier, who was by theMilitares viros civiles curas arripere prohibemus. Cod. l. 12. Tit. 36. § 13, 15, 16. Ambros. Offic. l. 1. c. 36. Roman Laws, ar∣mis, non privatis negotiis occupari, to be im∣ploy'd wholly at his Arms, and not in any pri∣vate Business. The second is taken from the Similitude ofSee Faber's Agonist. l. 1. c. 3. p. 118, 119. Wrestlers, who did not strive according to the Laws, unless they wrestled naked, and put off all their Gar∣ments, and therefore could not win the Crown of Laurel. Hence is that Enquiry of St. Ba∣sil, , who crowns him who comes not naked to his Adversary? And those Words of St. Chry∣sostom,. 3. Tom. 6. p. 475, 476. If thou art a Wrestler, thou must come naked to the Combat, thou must put off the Affairs of this Life, and be made a Wrestler; divest thy self of worldly Cares, for it is the Time of Conflict. Hence the Apostolical Can∣nons declare, Can. 4. the Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, ought to be deposed, who do, , immerse themselves in worldly Affairs. AndDe Lapsis, Ed. Oxon. p. 123. Cyprian repre∣sents it as a thing worthy of the Divine Judg∣ments, that Bishops, contemning the Divine Office, became Proctors for Secular Affairs. And this Practice was condemned by the Ge∣neral Council of Chalcedon, Can. 2.12. and by a Council of. Can. 16. Carthage, as repugnant to these Words of the Apostle; and by the Council of Sardica, Can. 8. And even before St. Cyprian was Bishop, this was establish'd inCum jampridem in Concilio Episcoporum statutum sit ne quis de Clericis, & Dei Ministris tutorem vel curatorem testa∣mento suo constituat, quando singuli divino Sacerdotio honorati, & in clerico ministerio constituti, non nisi altari, & Sacris deservire, & precibus, atque orationibus vacare debeant: Scriptum est enim, Nemo militans Deo obligat se molestiis secula∣ribus, &c. Ed. Oxon. Ep. 1. Africa by Council, from this very Text, No Man that warreth, entangleth him∣self with the Affairs of this Life. Ver. 6. (Nor let it discourage thee, that thou dost not receive thy Wages presently, as other Soldiers do, for) The Husbandman that laboureth, first, (Gr. first labouring.) must be (afterwards) Partaker of the Fruits of his Labour. Ver. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things (belong∣ing to thy Duty.) ,] Other Manuscripts read , For the Lord will give thee Understanding, &c. Ver. 8. (And to fortifie thee under thy Suf∣ferings) Remember, that Jesus Christ, of the Seed of David, (after all his Sufferings,) was raised from the Dead, according to (the Testi∣mony of) my Gospel.
Or, , Remember] to maintain this against the unbelieving Jews, that Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah, of the Seed of David, not of Joseph, was raised from the dead, according to the Gospel that I preach, 1 Cor. 15. Of the Seed of David.] It is certain that the Jews, before our Saviour's Time, thought the Messiah, the Son of David, was not to die; and therefore, when Christ had told them he was to be lifted up, they answer, We have heard out of the Law, that the Messiah bideth for ever, and how sayest thou that he must be lifted up? John 12.34. And when first he tells his Disciples of it, Peter began to rebuke him with an Absit, This shall not be unto thee; Matth. 16.22. When he tells them again of it, They understood not the Word, saith St. Mark, Chap. 9.32. It was hid from them, that they perceived it not, saith St. Luke, Chap. 9.45. And again, They un∣derstood none of these things, and this Saying was hid from them; neither knew they the things which were spoken, 18.34. Surely Christ's Words were plain, They shall put him to death; but they knew not how to reconcile them with their received Doctrine, that he was to abide for ever, John 12.34. And therefore, because Isaiah speaks so plain∣ly of a Messiah who was to suffer Death, they invented aIn Maseechel Succa. Dist. 5. Distinction betwixt Mes∣siah of the Tribe of Ephraim, the Son of Jo∣seph, who was to die, and Messiah of the Tribe of Judah, the Son of David, who was to reign, and conquer, and never die. This Distinction is to be found in their Talmud, in the Targum upon the Canticles, Cap. 4.5. Cap. 7.3. in Bereschit Rabba, in Gen. 49.14. in R. Salomon, and Kimchi, on Zach. 12.10. Now if this Invention, obtain'd in the Times of St. Paul, he might here have respect unto it; if not, because in the Dialogue of Justin with Trypho we read nothing of it, their Notion, the Messiah of the Seed of Da∣vid could not die, must be confuted by his Resurrection from the Dead. Ver. 9. Wherein (for which Gospel) I suf∣fer (from the Jews, Acts 25.19.26.6, 7. and others,) as an evil doer, even unto Bonds; but (tho' I am bound) the Word of God (which I preach) is not bound, (but hath its free Course.) Wherein, .] Pro , cujus causa, mo∣re Hebraeo, Grotius. So Matth. 6.7. They think to be heard, , for their much speaking. So , a Prisoner for the Lord, Heb. 11.2. , For this the Elders received a good Report. See Nold. Concord. p. 158. See in the 70. Gen. 31.41. 2 Sam. 24.24. 1 Reg. 10.28. Lam. 1.11.5.4. Hos. 12.12, 13. Amos 8.6. See here v. 10. Ver. 10. (And) Therefore (for this Cause) I suffer all (these) things (chearfully) for the Elects sake, (Col. 1.24.) that they (being con∣firm'd, by my Example in suffering, 2 Cor. 1.6.4.15.) may also obtain the Salvation which is (tendred) in (and through) Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory. , For the Elects sake,] i. e. for the sake of Christians, who are all,  a Chosen Generation. See the Note on 1 Pet. 2.9. and who may be confirmed in their Faith by the Example of my patient Sufferings, and continuing in it, may obtain that Salvation to which they are called. Vain therefore are these following Notes of Esthi∣us, 1. That there is a certain Election of God which hath infallibly chosen us to Salvation, un∣less he means this of a Conditional Election, God having infallibly determined to save them who make their Calling and Election sure, by perseverance in Good Works, 2 Pet. 1.10. 2dly, That as Paul suffer'd these things only for the Elect, so Christ died only for them; for he tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 1.9. He died for all, 1 Tim. 2.6. Not for our Sins only, but for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. For them that perish, Rom. 14.15. 3dly, That neither Christ did, nor ought we to do, any thing that the Repro∣bates may obtain Salvation; which is horri∣bly false, Christ's preaching to the unbeliev∣ing Jews being intended for their Salvation, John 3.17.12.47.5.34, 40. For the blind∣ed Jews the Apostle prays, and labours that they might be saved, Rom. 9.1.11.14. Ver. 11. It is a faithful Saying, (that by Christ Jesus we shall obtain this Salvation:) For if we be dead (Gr. have died) with him, (in Baptism, by dying unto Sin,) we shall al∣so live with him, (in conformity to his Resur∣rection, Rom. 6.8.) Ver. 12. If we suffer (as he did,) we shall also reign with him; (but) if (through Per∣secutions) we deny him, he also will deny us, (Matth. 10.33.) Ver. 13. If we believe not (these Promises of Salvation to his faithful Sufferers,) yet he abideth faithful; he cannot deny (what he) himself (hath promised.) Ver. 14. Of these things put them in remem∣brance, (in the Churches of Christ,) charg∣ing them before the Lord, that they strive not about Words (which tend) to no profit, (but rather) to the subverting of the Hearers. , that they strive not about Words.] Here we learn, 1. what are the things which ought not to be Matters of Contention among Christians: 1. Such things in which we differ
from each other, rather in Words than Sense, mean the same thing, but differ only in the way of expressing our Sentiments. Which Rule observed, would put an end to many of our Controversies. 2. Such things as tend to little or no Profit, either as to Edification in the Faith, or edifying of the Body in Love, Eph. 4.16. See Note on 1 Tim. 1.4. 1 Tim. 6.3. Tit. 3.9. Or by knowing which, we may be the more Learned, but not the better Chri∣stians. Again, hence we learn why we should not contend about such things, viz. 1. Be∣cause they tend to beget Strife, and Con∣tentions, v. 23. 1 Tim. 1.4. which divide Christians into Parties, and dissolve or ob∣struct Christian Charity. 2dly, Because they tend to the Disturbance of the Hearers, they not knowing to which Party to adhere, and also to their Subversion, causing them to doubt of the Truth of the Faith about which the contending Parties cannot agree. Ver. 15. Study to shew thy self approved unto God, a Workman, that needeth not to be asham'd, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. , Rightly dividing, or hand∣ling the Word, &c.] This Word  is a sacrifical Word, relating to the right divi∣ding of the Sacrifice which was to be laid upon the Altar, by cutting off and laying aside those Parts which were not to be of∣fer'd, and severing them from those that were; and to this Sense St. Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and Theopylact, refer the Word here, saying, That he requires Timothy to separate from the preaching of the Word, all noxious and idle Questions, , all superfluous things, and give his Hearers only the sincere Milk of the Word; and this Sense agrees well with the preceding and the following Words. Others think it referrs to the cut∣ting out a straight Path to walk in; and so it is an Admonition, saith Theodoret, to keep close to the Truth of the Gospel, in all his Exhortations, , following the Canon of the Holy Scriptures. Ver. 16. But shun profane and vain bablings; for they encrease to more ungodliness, (rendring Men more and more profane.) Ver. 17. And their Word will eat, as doth a Canker, (or Gangreen, infecting the whole Body,) of whom (i. e. of the Number of which profane Talkers) are Hymenaeus, and Philetus. Ver. 18. Who concerning the Truth, have erred, saying, that the Resurrection is pass'd already, and (by that Doctrine) overthrow the Faith of some. , &c. Hymenaeus and Philetus.] That these two were Gnostick Teachers, none of the Ancients do insinuate; nor did the Gnosticks teach, that the Resurrection was pass'd already, but that the Flesh was not fit to rise; and that it was incapable of Salva∣tion and of Incorruption. So Irenaeus often doth inform us, by saying,Carnis salutem negant, dicentes non eam capacem esse incorruptibilitatis. L. 5. c. 2. they deny the Salvation of the Flesh, denying it to be capa∣ble of Incorruption; and with him, Pseud-Ignatius, theDocent . Apost. Const. l. 6. c. 10. Vid. c. 26. De Simone & Cleobio. Docent non esse fu∣turam corporis resurrectionem. Epist. Corinth. ad D. Paulum Usher. Not. in Ep. ad Trall. p. 29. . Pseud-Ignat. Ep. ad Tars. §. 2. ad Smyrn. §. 7. Apostolical Constitutions, and others.Vani igitur qui a Valentino sunt hoc dogmatizantes uti excludent salutem carnis. Iren. l. 5. c. 1. Epiph. Haer. 31. p. 171. D. . Theodor. Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 7. p. 200. August. adv. Haer. c. 11. Carnis Resurrectionem negat. . Damasc. de Haer. §. 31. . Timoth. Presb. Ep. apud Coteler. Tom. 3. p. 381. Valentinus, who flourish'd only A. D. 145, and so could not be touch'd at in these Words, was of the same Opinion, say all the Ancients. So that Tertullian must either be mistaken, when, speaking of them who held the Resurrection was past already, he adds, Id de se Valentiniani adseverant, or mean this not of Valentinus himself, whom he there numbers with those qui Resurrectio∣nem carnis infringunt, deny the Resurrection of the Flesh, but of some of his Followers. But then Irenaeus informs us, that this was part of the Heresie ofEt ultra mori non posse, sed perseverare non senescentes, & immortales. Iren. l. 1. c. 21. Menander, who taught, Resurrectionem per id quod est in eum Baptisma accipere ejus Disciplos, that his Disciples obtain'd the Resurrection by his Baptism, and so could die no more, but were to persevere immortal.Apud Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 26. Justin Martyr al∣so saith, he persuaded his Disciples, , that they should not die. He taught, saithApud Cotel. Tom. 3. p. 386. Timothy, Priest of Constantinople, That they who received his Baptism, should be immortal, , and should never die. Now he was Contemporary to Simon Magus, and so might be also with St. Paul. See Note on 1 Cor. 15.12, 44. Ver. 19. Nevertheless, the Foundation of God, (the Hope and Promise of the Resur∣rection,) standeth sure, having this (as the) Seal (of it,) the Lord knoweth who are his, and (therefore) let every one that nameth the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity. , the Foundation of God.] The Fundamental Doctrine of the Resurre∣ction to Life Eternal, is so styled in these Words, Let us not lay again,  the Foundation of the Resurrection of the Dead, Heb. 6.1, 2. This is the faithful Saying men∣tion'd,
v. 11. which he exhorts Timothy to bring to their Remembrance, v. 14. and by denying which, saith he, the Christian Faith is overturn'd, v. 18. But notwithstanding all the vain Bablings of Hymenaeus and Philetus, this Foundation, saith the Apostle, standeth sure. , having this Seal] Seal∣ing seems always mentioned in the New Testa∣ment, for Confirmation and Assurance, as when the Apostle saith, The Seal of my Apo∣stleship are you in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.2. i. e. the Effects I have wrought upon you, and the Gifts of the Spirit imparted to you: And when he tells his Converts, that by this Spi∣rit they were sealed up to the Day of Redemp∣tion, 2 Cor. 1.22.5.5. Eph. 1.13.4.30. and were establish'd in the Truth of the Go∣spel; the Gifts of the Spirit they had alrea∣dy received, according to Christ's Promise, being a Confirmation of that Glorious Re∣demption he had farther promised. , The Lord knoweth who are his.] i. e. He owns and approves those he hath commissioned to reveal his Mind to others; for this Expression is taken from Numb. 16.5. where Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, rise up against Moses and Aaron, declaring, they took too much upon them, in pretending, the one to be their Prophet, and the Mouth of God to them; the other to be the High-Priest, whom God had consecrated to his peculiar Service above all others of the Tribe of Levi. Now to this Imputation, Moses replies, according to the Septuagint, , God knoweth who are his, and by him separated to his Service, and will maintain their Cause and Calling against all Opposers, as in that Instance he did in a wonderful manner, causing the Earth to open and swallow them up: So also will God own us his Apostles against Hymenaeus and Phi∣letus, and all that set up against us, and our Doctrine; as therefore Moses said then to the Israelites, Depart you from the Tents of those Men, , and they departed. So say I now to all Christians, Let them depart from this Impiety, i. e. from these pernicious Do∣ctrines which increase to Ungodliness, and cause Men to make shipwrack of Faith and a good Conscience. .] Justum pro vero, & inju∣stum pro falso frequentes tam nos quam Atti∣ci ponimus, saith Priscian: Both Greeks and Latins frequently use the Word Injustice to de∣note Falshood. See Note on 1 Cor. 13.6. So that these Words may thus be rendred, Let every one that names the Name of Christ de∣part from Falshood; i. e. Let him preserve himself from the pernicious Errors of these Apostates from the Truth. Ver. 20. (And be not disturbed that such Hereticks as these arise out of the Members of the Church:) But (, for) in a great House, (such as the Church is) are not only Vessels of Gold and Silver, but also of Wood and of Earth, and some (viz. those Vessels of Gold and Silver representing the Orthodox Christian, 1 Cor. 3.12. are ,) for Ho∣nour, and some (viz. those of Wood and Earth, representing the Heterodox,) for (Uses of) Dishonour. Ver. 21. If a Man therefore purge himself from these (false Doctrines, and the Teach∣ers of them,) he shall be a Vessel unto Ho∣nour, sanctified, and meet for the Master's Use, (serviceable to Christ, the Master of the Family,) and prepared for every good Work. , sanctified.] The Vessels of the Sanctuary were consecrated to the Service of God, and were also, saith the Apostle, puri∣fied by the sprinkling of the Blood upon them, Heb. 9.21. And so are Christians sprinkled by the Blood of Jesus from their Sins, and consecrated by Baptism to his Ser∣vice, and so made meet for the Service of God. Ver. 22. (Avoid these therefore, and) Flee also youthful Lusts, but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure Heart. Note, That hence it follows, that we must maintain Peace with, and therefore must not separate from our Communion any Person who serves Christ with a pure Heart. Ver. 23. But (the) foolish and unlearned Questions (of the Jews, see Note on 1 Tim. 1.4, 7. Tit. 3.9.) avoid, knowing that they do gender Strifes. Ver. 24. And (for) the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all Men, apt to teach, patient. Ver. 25. In meekness instructing them that oppose themselves (to the Gospel,) if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the Acknowledgment of the Truth (they contend now against.) Ver. 26. And that they may recover them∣selves (or awake) out of the Snare of the De∣vil, who are (now) taken captive by him at his Will, (Gr. , to the Per∣formance of the Will of God, Penitents be∣ing turn'd from the Power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. Col. 1.13.) , if peradventure.] This Word in the Septuagint, answers to the Hebrew Particle  si forte, or fortasse. So Gen. 24.5, 39. , Perhaps the Woman will not come with me; Ch. 27.12. , Perhaps my Father will handle me; 1 Kings 18.27. , if per∣haps he be busie, or perhaps sleepeth. See al∣so Job 1.5. SoAlleg. l. 2. p. 52. B. Philo, , perhaps that which he saith is to this Effect. And again,Cherub. p. 85. G. 86. E. ,
, perhaps he signifies the Circum∣ference of the whole Heaven, or perhaps by another Interpretation, either Hemisphere. Et p. 88. F. , perhaps fitly, p. 110. D. , perhaps for this Cause. De Abrahamo, , perhaps fitly; and again, p. 285. E. CHAP. III. Ver. 1. THIS know also, that in the last Days (of the Jewish Oeconomy, and in the Days of the Messiah, and the ere∣cting of his Kingdom. See Note on 1 Tim. 4.1.) perillous Times shall come. Ver. 2. For Men shall be lovers of their own selves, (i. e. their own temporal Pleasures and Profits,) covetous, boasters, proud, blasphe∣mers, (evil speakers,) disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, (or profane.) Ver. 3. Without natural Affection, Truce-breakers, false Accusers, incontinent, fierce, (or cruel) Despisers of those that are good. Ver. 4. Traytors, heady, high-minded, lo∣vers of Pleasures more than lovers of God. Ver. 5. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof. .] That the Apostle here speaks of such Persons as were in Being when this Epistle was indited, is evident from his Command to Timothy, to turn away from them, and from the following Description of them. That they were not the Gnosticks, or the Followers of Simon Magus, seems apparent: 1. Because Simon Magus could not make the Times perillous by any Opposition he could make to Christianity, he being a despicable and beggarly Magician, of whose Power or Endeavour to persecute the Christians, I re∣member not one Word in Church History ap∣plicable to the Times of this Epistle; but that the Jews were zealous Persecutors of them, not only in Judea, but through all Parts of the World, where they were disper∣sed, both Scripture, and Justin Martyr, ful∣ly testifie; and the supposed Combination be∣twixt the Jews and Gnosticks is not only groundless, but incredible: For what Accord could there be betwixt him who set up for a God, yea, for a Father over all, and them who were zealous for the true God, and ha∣ted Idolatry with a perfect Hatred; or between them who had the highest Veneration for the Law and the Prophets, and him who taught they were not to be at all regarded. 2dly, Because the Jews had a Form of Knowledge, Rom. 2.20. and a Zeal for God, Rom. 9.1. and a settled Form of worshipping the true God, they were great Zealots for the Obser∣vation of the Sabbath, and all the Sacrifices, and Institutions required by the Law of Mo∣ses, and serv'd God fervently Day and Night, Acts 26.7. and so they had a Form of God∣liness, tho' not worshipping God in the Spi∣rit, Philip. 3.3. but only with these carnal Ordinances they denied the Power thereof: But what Form of Godliness do we find in Simon Magus, and his Followers, in the Times of the Apostles? What Profession of Christianity could he make, who set himself to oppose the Apostles, and the Doctrine which they taught? See a Third Argument against this Exposition, v. 9. But that these Characters agree to the Jews, and particularly to the Judaizing Christians, and false Teachers, is evident from Scripture and Church History, and from the Writings of Josephus; for Rom. 1.29, 30, 31. we have mention of Gentiles that were covetous, proud, boasters, disobedient to Parents, with∣out natural Affection, Truce-breakers, cruel, unclean, unthankful, v. 21. And Chap. 2.1. the Jew is condemned as doing the same things, and v. 22.24. as guilty of Adultery and Blasphemy. They were Blasphemers, and false Accusers of the Apostles, as if they walk'd after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 10.2. contra∣dicting and blaspheming Christianity, Acts 13.45. they represented it to all the World, when it was first preach'd, as an Atheistical. Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryph. p. 234. E. 235. A. Sect, and were the Authors of all the vile Stories which the Heathens objected against it: And in despising of the Apostles and Chri∣stians, they were Despisers of those that were Good. They were great Lovers and Admirers of themselves, proud, Boasters, and high-minded, boasting of God as their Father, and of their Knowledge of the Law, Rom. 2.17, 23. Mag∣nifying themselves above others, see Note on 2 Cor. 11.12, 20. Glorying in their Circumci∣sion, v. 18. and in their being of the Seed of Abraham, v. 22. Philip. 3.5. and exalting themselves upon these Accounts above the Gentiles, whom they stiled Dogs, and Sons of the Earth, and uncircumcised, whilst they were the Noble, the Sons of God, and his beloved People. They were , conten∣tious, and obey'd not the Truth, Rom. 2.8. Philip. 1.15, 16. They were covetous, per∣verting others for filthy Lucre's sake, Tit. 1.11.
counting Gain Godliness, 1 Tim. 6.5. mind∣ing earthly things, Philip. 3.19. They were feare, heady, cruel in their Persecutions of the Christians, 1 Thess. 2.15, 16. They were Traytors, and Truce-breakers, in their Revoltings from the Regal Government. They were disobedient to their Parents in their Cor∣ban, Matth. 15.5. and without natural Af∣fection, not in that only, but in their Persecution of Christians of their own Family and Blood, Luke 21.16. They were unholy, and incon∣tinent, defiled, and abominable, Tit. 1.14, 15. in their Adulteries and continual Divor∣ces: Lovers of Pleasures, making their Bel∣ly their God, Philip. 3.19. feasting luxuri∣ously on their Sabbaths, and to Drunkenness in their Feast of Purim. Ver. 6. For of this sort are they which creep into Houses, and lead captive silly Women la∣den with Sins. Ver. 7. Ever learning (of new Teachers,) but never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. That these Perverters of Men from the Truth, and Creepers into Houses, were of the Circumcision, and addicted to Jewish Fa∣bles, see Tit. 1.10, 11, 14. Ver. 8. Now as Jannes and Jambres with∣stood Moses, (when working his Miracles in Egypt, before Pharaoh,) so do these also resist the Truth, being Men of corrupt Minds, re∣probate concerning the Faith, (Tit. 1.14, 15, 16.) Jannes and Jambres.] Tho' we have no mention of the Names of these Magicians in the Old Testament, yet were their Names ce∣lebrated both among the Heathens, asHist. Nat. l. 30. c. 1. Pliny andApud Euseb. Praepar. Ev. l. 9. c. 8. Numenius inform us, who represent them as Egyptians skill'd in the Art of Magick; and in theBuxt. Lex. Tal. Col. 945, 946. Jewish Writings, who do not only say that they were Principes Praestigiatorum,Targ. Jon. in Ex. 1. 15. 7. 11. the Chief of the Magici∣ans, but also that they were the two Sons of Balaam.Sicut Jamnes & Mambres restiterunt Moisi non invenitur in publicis Scripturis, sed in libro secreto qui supra scribi∣tur Jamnes & Mambres liber. Tract. 35. in Matth. Origen informs us, that there was a Book writ of them bearing this Title, Jamnes & Mambres liber. , Reprobate concerning the Faith.] So they are styled in Scripture, who, through their Resistance of, and Contentions against the Truth, are unworthy to have the Faith made known to them, or indisposed to receive it. Thus the Heathens, who, when they knew God, did not glorifie him as God, neither were thankful, Rom. 1.21, 25. are therefore delivered up, , to a re∣probate Mind; and they here who resist the Truth, being Men of corrupt Minds, are there∣fore reprobate concerning the Faith. See Note on 2 Cor. 13.5. Ver. 9. But they shall proceed no farther, (Gr. not much farther,) for their Folly shall be manifest to all Men, as theirs also was, (i. e. the Folly of Jannes and Jambres.) , They shall proceed no farther.] This agrees well with the Jewish false Do∣ctors, who were soon disabled from carrying on their false Doctrines by the Destruction of Jerusalem, but not so well with the Gnostick Hereticks, who spread themselves wide in the Second Century. The Fancy of a Reve∣rend Person, that St. Paul here prophesies, that as Jannes and Jambres perish'd in the Red Sea, so should Simon Magus at Rome, falling down headlong, when he was flying in the Air, perish at the Prayers of St. Peter and St. Paul, is in every part of it uncertain. For, 1st. Tho' the Jews tell us Jannes and Jam∣bres were with Pharaoh at the Red Sea, they say not that they perished there, but say they rode with Balaam to meet Balak, and lived to the making of the Golden Calf, and then pe∣rished. Targ. Jon. in Numb. 22.22. 2dly, I have shewed in the Preface to the Epistle to the Thessalonians, That the Story of Simon Magus's flying in the Air, in a fiery Chariot, and thrown down by the Prayers of these two Apostles, in the Sight of the Peo∣ple at Rome, is of no Credit among Learned Men. Ver. 10. But (be not troubled at such Times, or Persons, having in me good Expe∣rience of the Power and Readiness of God to deliver them who suffer for his sake, for) thou hast fully known my Doctrine, (my) man∣ner of Life, (my) Purpose (to adhere to Christ, seeking his Glory, not my own, and to pro∣mote his Gospel to the utmost, my) Faith, Long-suffering, (2 Cor. 6.6.) Charity, (1 Cor. 8.13. and 9.22. 2 Cor. 11.29. my) Pa∣tience. Ver. 11. (The) Persecutions and Afflictions which came unto me at Antioch, (Act. 13.50.) at Iconium, (Chap. 14.2.) at Lystra, (where he was stoned, v. 19.) what Persecutions I endured (from the Jews,) but out of them all the Lord delivered me. , thou hast fully known.] , Relatum ad animum est , saith Constantine. So the Greek Commentators thought it here signified, rendring it , thou hast known, thou hast learnt exactly, as the Word imports, Luke 1.4. The primary Sense of it, thou hast followed, or resembled me in my Persecutions, may al∣so be applied to Timothy, who was in Bonds at Rome also, Hebr. 13.23. See the Note on 1 Tim. 6.12.
Ver. 12. Yea, and all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution, (espe∣cially in such perillous Times; and at all Times, either openly or secretly, from the Hatred and Malice of wicked Men, or from their Taunts and Calumnies, which are stiled Persecutions, Gal. 4.29. Nor is it to be expected that it should be otherwise.) Ver. 13. But (, for) wicked Men and De∣ceivers (Impostors) will (till the Wrath of God takes hold upon them) wax worse and worse; deceiving, and being deceived. , Impostors.] That the Impostors among the Jews continued till the very Time of the Destruction of Jerusalem, more and more deceiving the People; and that the whole Na∣tion of the Unbelieving Jews grew then to the highest pitch of Wickedness, Josephus fully testifies. See Notes on Rom. 2.2. and 2 Thes. 2.10. Ver. 14. But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned (from me,) and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them. Ver. And that from a Child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. Ver. 16. All Scripture is given by Inspira∣tion of God, and is (Gr. being inspired by God, is also) profitable for Doctrine, (to teach us what we are to believe,) for Reproof, (or Conviction of Errour,) for Correction, (and Reformation of Vice,) and for Instruction in (the Way of) Righteousness. Ver. 17. That the Man of God (or Teacher of it) may be perfect, both as to his own Pra∣ctice, and his teaching others, and so) through∣ly furnished (not to this, or that only, but) to all good Works (belonging to his Office.) , All Scripture.] Here note, 1. That the Scriptures of the Old Testa∣ment, not of the New, must be the Scrip∣tures here intended, they only being the Scrip∣tures which Timothy had known from a Youth; that is, before the Scriptures of the New Testament were written; and so he could not speak of the Scriptures, as interpreted by them who were then the Guides of the Church, viz. the Jewish Sanhedrim, or the Scribes and Pharisees; seeing they so inter∣preted them as to make void the Command∣ments of God, and to deny our Saviour to be the promised Messiah. 2. Observe, that the Apostle doth not say that these Scriptures were of themselves suf∣ficient to make Timothy wise to Salvation, but only that with Faith in Christ Jesus they were sufficient for that End. Now Faith in Christ Jesus doth only signifie a firm Belief that Jesus was the Christ, the true Messiah, the Son of God, the Saviour of the World; as is evident from these Words, This is the Victory over the World, even our Faith, 1 Joh. 5.4. i. e. our Belief that Jesus is the Son of God, v. 5. See the Preface to the Epistle to the Galatians, §. 2. Hence then I argue for the Perfection of the Scriptures thus: If the Scriptures of the Old Testament were suffi∣cient to make a Man wise unto Salvation, provided only that he believed that Jesus was the Christ, the Scriptures of the Old and the New Testament must much more be so, because the Scriptures of the New Testament must needs more plainly and fully contain the Faith and Duty of all Christians, than the Scrip∣tures of the Old only, can be supposed to do. Object. But, saith Esthius, if the Scriptures of the Old Testament were sufficient to make Men wise to Salvation, then is there no need of the Gospels, or of the Epistles of the New Testament. Answ. I answer, Yes, there was need of them, both to beget in Men, and to confirm this Faith in Christ, they being written that we might believe; and believing, might have Life through his Name, Joh. 20.31. and also to give the Christians of succeeding Ages a more full, plain and perspicuous Knowledge of those Things which were not so fully and plainly, to the Capacity of the meanest, to be learnt in the Old Testament. Thus, though the Five Books of Moses sufficiently contain∣ed the whole Jewish Law, it follows not that the Historical and Prophetick Books, or the Hagiographa, were superfluous. 3. Observe that the Apostle saith, these Scriptures were therefore able to make Timo∣thy, a Christian Bishop, wise to Salvation, be∣cause they were profitable for Doctrine, to teach the Christian all that he was to believe; , for the Conviction of every Er∣rour in the Faith, for the Correction of eve∣ry Vice they were obliged to eschew, and for their Instruction in every Way of Righteous∣ness; even so profitable to these Ends, as to make the Man of God perfect; i. e. wanting in nothing he ought to practise or believe himself, or teach to others, for the Edifica∣tion of the Christian into a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, and to make him throughly fur∣nished to every good Work. So Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophylact, upon the Place. False therefore here is the Note of Esthius, That the Scriptures are here said to be profi∣table, but not sufficient to these Ends. Vain is his Subterfuge, that the Apostle, by every good Work, understands only Singula gene∣rum, every kind of good Works, but not every good Work of that kind, i. e. every Work of Faith, and Instruction in Righteousness: For if these good Works be requisite to make the Man of God perfect, and throughly furnish'd for his Office, they must be here included; if they be not, they must be needless in order to the Discharge of it.
CHAP. IV. Ver. 1. I Charge thee therefore before God (the Father,) and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the Quick and the Dead at his Appearance, and his Kingdom. , At his Appearance and his Kingdom.] This Appearance, saith Mr. Mede, is the Ap∣pearance of Christ; the Word  al∣ways importing Christ's Advent, who after the Resurrection, and the Judgment of the Quick and Dead, must give up his Media∣tory Kingdom to the Father, it therefore must signifie some other Kingdom, proper to Christ's Second Coming; and what can that be, but the Kingdom of the Millen∣nium.  But, 1. This Appearance of Christ is his Glo∣rious Appearance, when we shall receive the Blessed Hope, i. e. the Eternal Happiness we hope for, Tit. 2.13. when we shall appear with him in Glory, Colos. 3.4. when we shall be made like unto him, and see him as he is, 1 Joh. 3.2. Which cannot be expected till af∣ter this supposed Millennium. It is the same with the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven, 2 Thes. 1.7. his glorious Reve∣lation, 1 Pet. 4.13. and with his , or Second Coming, which is a Coming with all his Saints, 2 Thes. 3.13. a Coming of our Lord from Heaven, 1 Thes. 4.15, 16. Now Mr. Mede himself confesses, that he dares not so much as imagine that the Presence of Christ in the Millennary Kingdom should be visible up∣on Earth; For the Kingdom of Christ, saith he, p. 603. ever hath, and shall be Regnum Coe∣lorum, a Kingdom whose Throne and Kingly Residence is in Heaven. And Thirdly, At this Appearance, and this Kingdom, saith the Apostle, he shall judge the Quick and Dead; not the Dead only, but the Quick and Dead; not some of them only, but all of them, without Exception. Now the Judg∣ment of the Dead is to be after the Con∣clusion of the supposed Millennium, Rev. 20.12. 2. Though Christ will, after the Judg∣ment of the Quick and Dead is compleated, give up his Mediatory Kingdom, yet since that very Judgment consists in Retribution of his final Punishments upon his Enemies, and Crowning of his Loyal Subjects with Eter∣nal Glory, which are the two chief Acts of Kingly Government, and the very End for which all Power was committed to him, Joh. 17.2. it very properly is stiled his Kingdom. And though he shall then deliver up this King∣dom, as it is a Kingdom which respects the rewarding his Servants, and the Punishment of his Enemies, when the first shall be crown∣ed with Eternal Glory, and the last doom'd to endless Punishments; yet shall he still con∣tinue to be King of Saints, highly exalted above them in Honour and Dignity, and ho∣nour'd still by them with Religious Respect and Veneration. Ver. 2. Preach the Word, be instant (in that Work) in Season, and out of Season, (publickly and privately, by Day and Night, in Times of Peace, and of Danger;) reprove, (, refel false Teachers,) rebuke (evil Livers,) exhort with all Long-suffering, (though they long seem not to regard thy Exhortations,) and Doctrine, (i. e. all man∣ner of Instructions.) , Preach, &c.] In Timotheo omnes Pastores officii sui commonitos esse voluit Spiri∣tus Sanctus. Esthius. Ver. 3. (Thus it becomes thee to be in∣stant now,) for the Time will (shortly) come when they will not endure sound Doctrine; but after their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears. Ver. 4. And they shall turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned un∣to Fables. , To Fables.] To the fabu∣lous Divinity of the Gnosticks, made up of Gentilism and Judaism, say some; but it doth not appear that the fabulous Divinity of the Gnosticks, mention'd by Irenaeus, was then hatch'd; 'tis far more probable that he here speaks of the Jewish Doctors, and their fabulous Traditions; for in his First Epistle he saith he left Timothy at Ephesus, that he might charge some among them not to teach other Doctrines, nor to give heed to Fables, and endless Genealogies, 1 Tim. 1.3, 4. Which, as it relates to the Genealogies of the Jews, touching their Tribes, their Rela∣tion to the House of David, and their Tradi∣tionary Men, see the Note there. So, v. 7. the Apostle plainly tells us they were Teach∣ers of the Law; which Simon and his Fol∣lowers said, was not to be regarded. And in his Epistle to Titus, he sends a like Exhorta∣tion to him, to preserve the Cretians from giving heed to Jewish Fables, Tit. 1.14. and Doctrines of Men that turn from the Truth; which the Gnosticks, who never sincerely em∣braced the Truth, could not do; and to a∣void foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions, , and Quarrels a∣bout the Law, as being unprofitable and vain, chap. 3.9. Ver. 5. But watch thou in all things (which respect thy Office;) endure Affliction (pa∣tiently,) do the Work of an Evangelist, (See the Note on Ephes. 4.11.) make a full Proof of (Gr. fulfil) thy Ministery.
Ver. 6. For I am now ready to be offered, (Gr. I am already pour'd out,) and the Time of my Departure (or Dissolution) is at hand. (See the Preface.) Ver. 7. (But, be it so, this is my Com∣fort, that) I have fought a good Fight, (suf∣fering Hardship, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ,) I have finished (or run) my Course, I have kept the Faith. Ver. 8. (So that) from henceforth (I may be confident) there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord (Jesus,) the righ∣teous Judge, shall give me at that Day; and not to me only, but to all them also that love (Gr. have loved) his Appearing, (and shewed that Love by patient suffering for his sake.) , At that Day.] The Coun∣cil of Florence hath defined, That pure and cleansed Souls, when they quit the Body, are presently received into Heaven, and there have a clear Vision of the Holy Trinity. And the Trent-Council, Sess. 25. hath laid this as the Foundation of the Invocation of Saints departed, That they do now cum Christo reg∣nare, & aeterna foelicitate in Coelo frui. But in this they seem to deviate from Scripture, and the Primitive Antiquity. I say, from Scripture: For, 1. Charity is represented by St. Paul as the most excellent of Christian Vertues, and therefore that which will obtain the highest Recompence; and yet the Motive by which our Lord excites us to perform it runneth thus, Thou shalt be recompensed at the Resur∣rection of the Just, Luk. 14.14. 2. To those who suffer Death and Perse∣cution for the Name of Christ, our Lord hath promised a great Reward in Heaven, Matth. 5.12. But this Reward will only be conferr'd upon them at the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, 2 Thes. 1.7. The Trial of their Faith shall be found, to Praise, Glory and Honour, , at the Revela∣lation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.17. Then they who communicate with him in Suffer∣ings, shall rejoice with him, , at the Revelation of his Glory, 1 Pet. 4.13. Till then, the Souls of them who were slain for the Word of God, are represented as un∣der the Altar, Rev. 6.9. 3. To those who feed the Flock of Christ, a great Reward is promised, even a never-fading Crown of Glory; but it is to be re∣ceived then only, when the great Shepherd doth appear, 1 Pet. 5.4. A Reward is to be render'd to the Servants of God, the Saints and Prophets; but it is to be render'd when the Time comes that the Dead shall be judged, Rev. 11.18. The Apostles are to have their Mansions in Heaven with Christ, but not till he comes again from Heaven; for then, saith he, I will receive you to my self, that where I am, you may be also, Joh. 14.2, 3. 4. The Retribution to every Man accord∣ing to his Works is also to be made at the same time; for the Son of Man will come in the Glory of his Father, with his holy An∣gels; and then will he render to every Man according to his Works, Matth. 16.27. At the End of the World shall the Righteous shine as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, Matth. 13.40, 43. This shall be done in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of Men's Hearts, Rom. 2.15. and when we shall appear before the Judgment-Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.12. Apoc. 22.10. 5. Hence, in the Scripture, the Time of Recompence, and the Time of Judgment, are represented as the same; as in these Words, The Time is come that the Dead should be judged, and that thou shouldest give Rewards to thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, Rev. 11.18. The Time of Glory, and of the Apparition of our Lord; as in these Words, When Christ, who is your Life, shall appear, then shall you appear with him in Glory, Colos. 3.4. The Time of Christ's Appearance, and of our Salvation; for, He shall appear a second time without Sin, unto Salvation, Heb. 9.28. The Time of his Ap∣pearing, and of our Beatifick Vision; for, When he doth appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 Joh. 3.2. 6. Hence Christians are so often said to expect the Adoption of the Sons of God, viz. the Redemption of the Body from Cor∣ruption, Rom. 8.23. To expect the Revela∣tion of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1 7. To expect the Son of God from Heaven, 1 Thes. 1.10. To expect the blessed Hope, and glorious Appearance of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.14. To hope for the Grace that shall be given them at the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Now let it be observ'd, that the Body, compared to the Soul, is the vilest, and least considerable Part of Man; and there∣fore the Hope, the Glory, the Reward, In∣heritance, Adoption, Bliss and Happiness re∣served to the Time of the Resurrection, can∣not respect the Body only. Moreover, the Apostle saith of the Incestuous Person, That his Body was delivered up to Satan, for the Destruction of the Flesh, that his Soul might be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. Which shews, that the compleat Salva∣tion of the Soul is then to be expected. As for the Judgment of Primitive Anti∣quity in this Matter, it may be learnt from these Considerations. 1st. That they ascribed this Opinion of the Soul's immediate Ascent to Heaven, and its Enjoyment of God's immediate Presence af∣ter Death, to the Hereticks of those Times, representing it as proper to the Followers of Valentinus, Basilides, and Marcion, and after
them as a part of the Heresie of the Mani∣chees. Thus Justin Martyr speaking of those who were called Christians, but blasphemed the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he saith, in his Dialogue with Trypho, p. 307. 253. they denied the Resurrection, and held , that as soon as they died, their Souls were received into Heaven.Adv. Haer. l. 5. c. 31. p. 491. Irenae∣us in like manner, that the Hereticks despi∣sing the Formation of God, i. e. the Body form∣ed by him, and not receiving (the Doctrine of) the Salvation of the Flesh, simulatque mor∣tui fuerint dicunt se supergredi Coelos & De∣niurgum, & ire ad matrem, vel ad eum qui ab ipsis ffingitur Patrem, say, that as soon as they are dead, they ascend above the Heavens, and go to him whom they call their Father: And having said, that our Lord's Soul went not to Heaven, but continued in the Place of the Dead till the Resurrection, he saith, This is sufficient to confound those Men, qui dicunt imeriorem hominem ipsorum derelinquentem  Corpus in supercoelestem ascendere locum, who say, that their inward Man, leaving the Body here, ascends to the supercelestial Man∣sions. And then he gives us the Orthodox Opinion, thus,Manifestum est quia Discipulorum ejus animae abibunt in invisibilem locum definitum eis à Deo, & ibi usque ad resur∣rectionem commorabuntur, sustinentes resurrectionem, post recipientes corpora, & perfecte resurgentes, hoc est corporaliter, quem∣adum & dominus resurrexit, sic venient ad conspectum Dei. Ibid. It is manifest that the Souls of the Disciples of our Lord shall go into the invisible Place appointed for them by God, expecting the Resurrection, and then receiving their Bodies, and rising with them, as our Lord did, shall come into the Presence of God. Tertullian having pro∣duced the same Instance of the Death of Christ, and the Continuance of his Soul, apud inferos, till the Resurrection of the Body, he positively concludes, thatDe anima, c. 55. Nulli patet celum, terra adhuc salva, cum transactioneenim mundi reserabuntur regna Coelorum, Heaven is opened to none, whilst the Earth remains, the Kingdom of Heaven being only to be open'd at the Dissolution of the World. And in his Fourth Book against Marcion,Sinum dico Abrahae, etsi non coelestem, superiorem tamen Inferis, interim refrigerium praebiturum animabus justorum, do∣ec consummatio rerum, resurrectionem omnium plenitudine mercedis expugnat. Cap. 34. he saith, The Bosom of Abraham, which is higher than the Inferi, but not so high as Heaven, is that which gives Refreshment to the Souls of the Just, till the Consummation of all things, pro∣duce the Resurrection of all with a full Re∣ward. The Manichees, who also denied the Re∣surrection of the Body, contended, that good Souls had their whole Reward immediately after Death, because Christ promised to the Thief, that he should be that Day with him in Paradise. To which Objection St. Chrysostom answers by Concession, That the Thief was indeed admitted to Paradise; but then he adds, that Paradise was not the same with Heaven, , for it contains not the good things which God hath promised to us; and then con∣cludes, That if God promised the Kingdom of Heaven, and only brought the Thief into Paradise, , he hath not yet given to him the good things promi∣sed. 2. That they expresly teach, that the Souls of good Men remain till the Day of Judg∣ment, in a certain Place, extra coelum beato∣rum, expecting the Day of Judgment, and of Retribution. Thus Justin Martyr saith, that no Souls die, butDial. cum Tryph. p. 223. B. , that the Souls of good Men remain in a better Place, the Souls of bad Men in a worse, expecting the Day of Judgment. Irenaeus gives us the Tradition of the Church, touching this Mat∣ter thus,Quapropter dicunt Presbyteri qui sunt Apostolorum Discipuli, eos qui translati sunt illic translatos esse, justis enim ho∣minibus, & spiritum habentibus praeparatus est paradisus.—Et ibi manere eos qui translati sunt usque ad consummationem, spicantes incorruptelam, L. 5. c. 5. The Presbyters, who were the Disciples of the Apostles, say those that were translated, were carried into Paradise; for that Place is prepar'd for just Men, and such as have the Spirit, and there they remain till the Consummation, expecting or beginning Im∣mortality; and that there shall be new Hea∣vens, and new Earth, and then, , they that are worthy of the Celestial Mansions shall go thither. Tertullian having cited those Words of the Apostle, And the God of Peace sancti∣fie you throughout, in Body, Soul, and Spirit, and keep you unblameable to the Coming of the Lord, 1 Thess. 5.23. saith thus,De Resur. Car. c. 47. Habes omnem substantiam hominis saluti destinatam, nec alio tempore quam in adventu Domini, qui clavis est resurrectionis, Here you see the whole Substance of Man designed for Salvati∣on, nor at any other time but the Appearance of our Lord, who is the Key of the Resurre∣ction. There is a Place, saithDe Trin. c. 1. Novatian, quo piorum animae, impiorumque ducuntur fu∣turi judicii praejudicia sentientes, whether the Souls of good and wicked Men are carried,
having some Foretasts of their future Judg∣ment. And Caius, a Presbyter of the Church of Rome, saith, That just Souls, being cele∣brated by the Angels placed over them, , are led by them into a Place of Light, called the Bosom of Abraham, where the Just from the beginning have been, where they are de∣lighted with the Vision of the just Fathers; expectingApud Haeschel. Not. in Phot. p. 10. , after this Place, their Rest, and everlasting Habitation in Heaven. Let no Man think, saithDe vit. Beat. L. 7. c. 21. p. 717. Lactantius, ani∣mas post mortem protinus judicari, that Souls are forthwith judged after Death, they are all held in one common Custody, till the Time may come, that the great Judge shall make a Trial of their Merits. See Dally de Poen. & Sa∣tisf. l. 5. c. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ver. 9. Give thy Diligence to come to me shortly. Ver. 10. For Demas hath forsaken me, ha∣ving loved this present World, (i. e. the Safe∣ty of his Life,) and is departed unto Thessa∣lonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalma∣tia, (these two not deserting St. Paul as De∣mas did, but going thither for the Promotion of the Gospel.) , having loved this pre∣sent World.] He doth not say, that Demas had forsaken the Christian Religion, or that he betook himself to his own secular Affairs, forsaking his Attendance on the Service of God in the Church, or preferr'd the things of this Life before those of a future; but, as the Ancients do expound the Words, he left the Apostle in this Time of Danger, consult∣ing the Safety of his own Life; for , in the Scripture Phrase, still signifies this pre∣sent Life; so , are those that are rich in this Life, 1 Tim. 6.17. to live soberly, righteously, and godly, , is to do it in this present Life, see Mark 10.30. 1 Tim. 4.8. He seems there∣fore only to say of him here what he says of others, v. 16. In my first Apology no Man stood by me, but all left me. Ver. 11. Only Luke is with me, take Mark and bring him with thee, for he is profitable for the Ministry, (Mark therefore was not then in Egypt.) Luke.] Hence it appears that Luke must be alive at the Twelfth or Thirteenth of Ne∣ro, when this Epistle was endited. , He is profitable for the Ministry.] i. e. For the Work of an Evange∣list, v. 5. As St. Peter, being shortly to put off his Tabernacle, was the more diligent in giving Instructions to the Churches of the Jews, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. so was St. Paul, now in Bonds, in sending his Messengers to the Churches of the Gentiles, v. 10.12. Ver. 12. (I say, Only Luke is with me,) And (Gr. for) Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. To Ephesus.] Hence it is evident, that Ti∣mothy, at the writing of this Epistle, was not at Ephesus: For if so, why should the Apo∣stle advertise him, that he had sent Tychicus thither? Ver. 13. The Cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus bring with thee, and the Books, but espe∣cially the Parchments. , the Cloak.] Or rather, the Roll; for , saith Phavorinus, is , a Parchment rolled up, , a folded Vellum or Parchment. And Hesychius saith the same. , which I left at Troas.] Not when he went from Troas to Assos, in his Journey to Jerusalem; for then, saith Bishop Pearson, he could have no Cause to leave any thing of moment with him, having so many that accompanied him in that Jour∣ney, Acts 20.4, 6. and a Ship still attending on them, v. 13. but in his Travels, after he was set at Liberty, and had left Rome. , Coming.] Probably from thence; for he does not bid him send thither for them, or go thither to fetch them. Whence it follows, that St. Timothy was then at Troas when this Epistle was directed to him. Ver. 14. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much evil, the Lord (shall) reward him ac∣cording to his Works. .] The King's Manuscript reads, , will, or shall reward him: And all the Ancients note, that this is not an Imprecation, but , a Prediction becoming an Apostle. So Pseudo-Justin Qu. & Resp. 125. So Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecu∣menius, Theophylact, on the Place. Who this Alexander was, or where he lived, is uncer∣tain, as also whether he were a Christian, but zealous for the Jewish Rites, as he must be, if he were the Alexander delivered up to Satan, 1 Tim. 1.20. or an Heathen, zealous, as Demetrius was, for his Trade, and upon that Account opposing the Apostle. Ver. 15. Of whom be thou aware also, for he hath greatly withstood our Words. Ver. 16. At my first Answer no Man stood with me, but all Men (of my Acquaintance at Rome) forsook me; I pray God that it may not be laid to their Charge. , In my first Apology.] If the Date of this Epistle, contended for in the Preface, stand good, this could not be his first Defence of the Gospel, of which he speaks, Philip. 1.17. For after that, he was set at Liberty, whereas after this, he is still a Prisoner, Chap. 1.8. Chap. 2.9. More∣over Timothy was then with him at Rome, as appears from the Salutations then sent him to the Churches of Philippi, Chap. 1.1. and
Coloss. 1.1. from St. Paul and Timothy, yea he was a Prisoner there even after that St. Paul was set at Liberty, and so needed not to be taught how things went with the Apostle then. He therefore calls this his first Apology, or Defence, because, after he had made it, he was still kept in Bonds, Chap. 1.8. and 2.9. and so reserved for another Hearing. He escaped then, say Chrysostom and Oecumeni∣us;. Chrysost. But when he instructed his Butler, or Cup-bearer, in the Faith, he was cut off. Ver. 17. Notwithstanding, the Lord (Je∣sus) stood with me, and strengthen'd me, that by me (thus standing up in Defence of the Gospel) the preaching (of it) might be fully known, (Gr. fulfill'd,) and that all the Gen∣tiles might hear (my Defence of it,) and I was then delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion. , stood by me] in a Vision to comfort and support me, as Acts 18.9. So  is used, Acts 23.11. and , Acts 27.23. or to give me a Mouth and Wisdom according to his Promise, Luke 12.12. and 21.14, 15. , from the Mouth of the Lion,] i. e. of Nero, or of Helius Caesarea∣nus. So when Tiberius died,Joseph. Antiq. L. 18. c. 8. Mansyas said to Agrippa, , the Lion is dead. And so speaks Esther, touching Artaxerxes, Put a meet Word into my Mouth, , before the Lion, Esth. 14.13. Ver. 18. And the Lord shall (will) deliver me from every evil Work, and will preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom, to whom (there∣fore) be Glory for ever and ever. Amen. , and will deliver me.] If he will deliver him, saith Chrysostom, why saith he, I am now offered? Mark therefore his Words, he saith not he will again deliver me out of the Mouth of the Lion, but only that he will preserve me from every evil Work, and to his heavenly Kingdom. Ver. 19. Salute Priscilla, and Aquila, and the Houshold of Onesiphorus. (See Note on Chap. 1.18.) Ver. 20. Erastus abode at Corinth, but Tro∣phimus have I left at Miletum, sick. That St. Paul was in Bonds when he writ this Epistle, and that at Rome, he himself saith, Chap. 1.8, 17. Now this Verse af∣fords two Arguments, to prove he could not be then in his first Bonds. 1. From these Words, Erastus abode at Corinth. When was it, when St. Paul went from Corinth to go to Jerusalem? Then Timothy accompa∣nied him at least as far as Asia, and so need∣ed not to be told that from Rome so long af∣ter: It therefore must refer to the Time when, saith the Reverend Bishop Pearson, St. Paul went from Nicopolis to Corinth, A. D. 65. and the 12th. of Nero. 2dly, From these Words, Trophimus have I left at Mile∣tum, sick. Now this cannot relate to the Time when St. Paul went to Miletus, near Ephesus, Acts 20.17. For as Timothy was then with him, Acts 20.4.15. so was not Trophimus then left at Miletum, but carried up thence with St. Paul to Jerusalem, Acts 21.29. Nor did St. Paul ever return thither, Acts 20.25. He must be therefore left at Mi∣letus in Crete, where St. Paul was, saith Bishop Pearson, after his first Bonds, A. D. 64. Ner. 10. Ver. 21. Do thy Diligence to come before Winter: Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the Bre∣thren. Ver. 22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit. Grace be with you. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle of St. PAUL to TITUS. Sect. 1. THAT St. Paul was at Crete, we learn from these Words of this Epistle to Titus, I left thee in Crete: When he went thither is uncertain. Dr. Lightfoot conjectures that he touched there when he went from Ma∣cedonia to Greece, Acts 20.2. For, saith he, if we consider, that after their parting at E∣phesus, when Titus was sent to Corinth with his First Epistle to them, they never met till Titus cometh up to him, when he was come from Ephesus to Macedonia, 2 Cor. 7.5, 6. We may thence learn, that in that first Journey to Macedonia, he left him not at Crete, because Titus and he were not yet met again after their parting at Ephesus; and yet, at his se∣cond Return thither, he had not only left him there, but writes to him to come thence to Nicopolis, bordering on Macedonia, Chap. 3.12. So that this Epistle, saith he, must be writ in his Return, or at his Coming thither, A. D. 55. and not from Nicopolis, as the Post∣script dates it; for he saith not, I have deter∣mined to winter , here, but , there; which shews he was not yet come thither. Sect. 2. But that it could not be written at that time, the Learned Bishop Pearson proves, not only from the Silence of St. Luke in that very Chapter, where he so particularly enu∣merates all St. Paul's Journeys, after he came from Ephesus, till his Arrival at Jerusalem, without the least mention of his being at Crete; but saith expresly, that, , passing through those Parts, (viz. of Macedonia,) and ex∣horting them with many Words, he came to Achaia, representing him still in transitu, and as passing immediately from Macedonia to Greece, not going from Macedonia farther beyond it than was to it, and then returning back to Greece, as he must have done had he gone from Macedonia to Crete, and so to Achaia. 2dly, This Opinion he more demon∣stratively confutes from these Words, Chap. 3 12. When I send to thee Artemas, or Tychi∣cus, make hast to come unto me, to Nicopo∣lis, for I have determined there to winter; for besides that, Artemas, before his going to Jerusalem, seems not to have join'd St. Paul, and Tychicus then was part of his Retinue, there is not any mention of St. Paul's going to Nicopolis, in the whole History of his Journey to Jerusalem; nor is it possible he should then determine to winter at Nicopolis, who being at Philippi, in the Days of unleavened Bread, made all the hast he could to be at Jerusalem before Pentecost, Acts 20.6, 16. See more to this purpose, Dissert. 1. de Success. prim. Romae Episc. c. 9. §. 7. He therefore places St. Paul's Journey to Crete after his Freedom from his Bonds at Rome, A. D. 63. and the 10th. of Nero, and saith that this Epistle was written the Year following: That it was writ after his Freedom from the Bonds, in which he was, from his going to Jerusalem, till his Freedom at Rome, he gathers from this Note of. Proem. Chrysostom, and Theophylact, that the Apostle seemeth to have been then at ease, as making no mention in it of his Bonds, or his Temptations, as he doth in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Chap. 3.1. and 4.1. to the Philippians, Chap. 1.7, 13, 14. to the Co∣lossians, Chap. 4.18. to Philemon, v. 1, 9. and in his Second Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 1.8. and 2.9. That after his Freedom he determined to go to Philippi in Macedonia, he himself intimates, Philip. 1.26. and 2.24. And this, saith Bishop Pearson, he did in the 12th. of Nero, in which Year he wrote this Epistle. And that a little before he had been at Crete, may be gathered from those Words, 2 Tim. 4.20. Trophimus have I left at Mile∣tum, sick; which cannot be understood of Miletus
near Ephesus, mention'd Acts 20.17. for from thence he carried him to Jerusalem, Acts 21.29. never returning thither, Acts 20.25. He must be therefore left sick at Miletus in Crete, mentioned by. Il. B. Homer and byStrabo L. 14. p. 634. Strabo. Sect. 2. It is the Opinion of all the Ancient Commentators upon this Epistle, that Titus was left in Crete, not only to ordain Bishops in every City, and Deacons to minister to them, and rebuke sharply, and with Authority, unruly Walkers; but this Epistle was writ to him, say the (a) Ancients, to make him watch∣ful over, and to oppose himself against the Jews and Judaizers in that Island, as many Passages in this Epistle do sufficiently demon∣strate. Sect. 4. But the great Controversie concern∣ing this, and the Epistle to Timothy, is, whe∣ther Timothy and Titus were indeed made Bishops, the one of Ephesus and the Procon∣sular Asia, the other of Crete, having Authority to makeChrysost. Praefat. , and Juris∣diction over so many Bishops as were in those Precincts. Now of this Matter, I confess I can find nothing in any Writer of the first three Centuries, nor any Intimation that they bore that Name: But this Defect is abundant∣ly supplied by the concurrent Suffrage of the Fourth and the Fifth Centuries. For, 1st. As for St. Timothy, he is styled Bishop of Ephesus by. Eccl. Hist. L. 3. c. 4. Eusebius, and that with a Respect to former Histories; and the same he saith of Titus. And the Council ofAct. 11. Tom. 4. Col. 600. Chal∣cedon reckons from Timothy to their Time twenty seven Bishops. The. Phot. Bibl. Num. 254. p. 1403. Anonymous Author of his Life, in Photius, makes him Bishop of the Metropolis of Ephesus, with seven Assistants; and either he, or Photius, say, that he was constituted Bishop by St. Paul; and theLib. 7. c. 46. Apostolical Constitutions say the same, as do alsoVerbo Timotheus. St. Jerom, and all the An∣cient Commentators on his Epistles. 2dly, That Titus had , the whole Island of Crete committed to his Care, is testified not only by Eusebius, but also by St. Jerom in his Catalogue, by St. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, in the Preface to this Epistle, to omit many others cited by Dr. Cave in the Life of Titus, p. 58, 59. Now to pass my Judgment in this Case. 1st. I assert, that if by saying Timothy and Titus were Bishops, the one of Ephesus, the other of Crete, we understand that they took upon them those Churches or Dioceses, as their fixed and peculiar Charge, in which they were to preside for Term of Life, I believe that Timothy and Titus were not thus Bishops. For, 1st. Both Timothy and Titus were Evange∣lists, and therefore were to do the Work of an Evangelist: Now the Work of an Evangelist, saith. Eusebius, was this, to lay the Foun∣dations of the Faith in barbarous Nations, to constitute them Pastors, and having commit∣ted to them the Cultivating of those new Plantations, they pass'd on to other Countries and Nations. 2dly, As for Titus, he was only left at Crete to ordain Elders in every City, and to set in order the things that were wanting; having therefore done that Work, he had done all that was assign'd him in that Station: And therefore St. Paul sends for him the very next Year to Nicopolis, Tit. 3.12. And so, ac∣cording to Bishop Pearson's Chronology, he was left at Crete only, A. D. 64. and sent for thence, A. D. 65. and returned thither, as the Ancients conjecture, after the Death of St. Paul: For,Sophronius apud Hieron. in Tito. Isidor. de vita & obitu S. S. p. 542. they say, he died in the 94th. Year of his Age, and was buried in Crete. As for Timothy, St. Paul saith, he exhor∣ted him to abide at Ephesus when he went in∣to Macedonia: Now, as he writes to the Church of Philippi in Macedonia, A. D. 62. and the 9th. of Nero, that he hoped to be shortly with them, Philip. 1.25, 26. and 2.24. So, saith Bishop Pearson, he went thither, A. D. 64. and the 11th. of Nero, and writ his first Epistle to him, A. D. 65. Two Years after this, he sends for him to Rome, 2 Tim. 4.9, 21. and there he continued, as the Ancients conje∣cture, till the Martyrdom of St. Paul; after which . Chrysost. Theod. Oecumenius. . Oecum. Theoph. Hi sunt de circumcisione Judaei qui tunc temporis nascentem Christi Ec∣clesiam subvertere nitebantur, & introducere praecepta legalia. Hieron. in Cap. 1. v. 10.
time he must, as they suppose, return to Ephe∣sus: For they tell us, that in the Reign of Domitian he was martyr'd in that City, and lay buried there. But since we read not any thing in Scripture of their Return to either of these Places afterwards, and the Authori∣ties on which this Return dependeth are not very Ancient, we cannot much depend upon them. Prop. 2. But if by Bishops we only under∣stand Persons who had Authority to ordain, and to govern the Clergy of their Province, and to exercise Acts of Discipline, and Cen∣sure, over more than one single Congregation, I believe both Timothy and Titus had this E∣piscopal Jurisdiction, and so might properly be stiled Bishops. For, 1st. That the Jurisdiction of Titus extend∣ed to all the Christians in the whole Island of Crete, is apparent from these Words, For this Cause left I thee in Crete, that thou mightest set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, Titus 1.5. Hence is he said to have received the Episcopal Care, , and to have had the whole Island committed to him. And if the Church of Ephesus, committed to the Care of Timothy, did not exceed the Com∣pass of one particular Congregation, St. Paul had very little Success in the great Pains he took for three whole Years to teach them publickly, and from House to House, exhorting every one of them Night and Day, Acts 20.20, 31. whereas St. Paul himself informs us, that at Ephesus a great Door, and effectual, was open'd to him, 1 Cor. 16.8, 9. St. Luke, that all that dwelt in Asia heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Gentiles; that the Word of God prevailed, and grew migh∣tily, and that Fear fell upon them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified, Acts 19.10, 17, 20. But that which puts this Matter beyond doubt, is the Observation of the Learned Bishop Stillingfleet, That the Elders St. Paul sends for to Miletus, were all of Ephesus, and to them he commits not only the Church of Ephesus, but all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them Over∣seers, i. e. all that had been converted in Asia, through his means, during his Abode there three Years. Irenaeus indeed saith, he sum∣mon'd them from the neighbouring Cities as well as Ephesus: But, saith he, St. Paul was in so great hast, that he would not so much as go to Ephesus, nor send any whither but to that City; and yet those to whom he committed the whole Flock, then in Asia, came from Ephesus to Miletus: Which makes it probable, that there St. Paul had rai∣sed a Nursery for the Churches thereabout, as Clemens observes the Apostles were wont to do in fruitful Soils, with a Prospect of such Churches as were to be formed, , of those that should after believe; and the same St. Clement observing that they did this, , making Trial of them by their spiritual Gifts, he very proba∣bly conjectures, that the twelve Persons, who, when he laid his Hands upon them, received the Holy Ghost, and spake with Tongues, and prophesied, Acts 19.6, 7. being thus qualified in an extraordinary manner, to be Teachers of others, might be in the Number of those El∣ders whom St. Paul charges to take heed to themselves, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, v. 28. As to the Jurisdiction belonging to them in their several Districts, it is also manifest con∣cerning Timothy, that he was set over the House of God, 1 Tim. 3.14, 15. That in that House he was to ordain, and lay Hands on the Elders to be chosen to that Office, Chap. 5.22. to chuse such to the Episcopal Office, or to the Office of Elders, who were duly quali∣fied for that Work, Chap. 3.2, 7. to admit and consecrate others to the Office of Deacons, v. 8. to take Widows into the Number of Dea∣connesses, under such Qualifications, and to refuse others, Chap. 5.9, 11. to receive Ac∣cusations against the Elders, Chap. 5.19. and to rebuke them, v. 20. Which plainly shews there was a Right of Judging and Censuring Offenders in Timothy, by virtue of his Of∣fice. He had Power also to order the Mainte∣nance of the Elders, v. 17. to take care that the Publick Offices of Divine Worship were performed regularly, Chap. 2.1, 8. to charge others not to teach any other Doctrine than what they had received, Chap. 1.3. to com∣mand and teach with Authority, Chap. 4.11. and not to suffer others to despise his Autho∣rity, v. 12. And all these things seem plainly to belong to the Trust committed to him, Ch. 6.20. And as for Titus, 'tis certain he was left in Crete, by St. Paul, to set in order the things which were wanting, Chap. 1.5. and in order to this end, to inspect the Qualifications of them who were to be admitted to the Episco∣pal Office, v. 7. and so to ordain Elders in eve∣ry City. And he was also to admonish and re∣ject Hereticks, Chap. 3.10. Now I confess, that these two Instances, ab∣solutely taken, afford us no convincing Argu∣ments for a settled Diocesan Episcopacy, be∣cause there is nothing which proves they did, or were to exercise these Acts of Government, rather as Bishops than Evangelists; for it is certain that the Order of Evangelists was su∣periour to that of Governments, and so inclu∣ded an Authority to do those Acts of Govern∣ment. Accordingly, in those Places where these Evangelists preached, they didEuseb. H. Eccl. L. 3. c. 37. ,
, constitute Pastors, and then went on to preach in other places. Yet these Things evidently follow hence. 1. That such Superiority over other Pa∣stors cannot be contrary to the Gospel-Rule; or that the Nature of Church-Government doth not imply on Equality among the Gover∣s of it: And that the Apostles, if they pleased, might have fixed Persons in any other Churches, to exercise these Acts of Ecclesia∣stical Authority and Jurisdiction, as well as St. Paul placed these two Persons, the one at Ephesus, the other at Crete, for these Ends. 2. That it is not repugnant to the Constitu∣tions of Churches in the Apostolical Times, for Men to have Jurisdiction over more than one particular Congregation; for such a Power Titus had over all Crete, and Timothy over many Elders; which had it been contrary to the Nature of Church-Government, would not have been permitted, and much less ordained, by St. Paul, in any of the Churches planted by him. 3. Hence also it appears, that the Apo∣stolical Power of Governing Churches, and Ordaining Elders in them, was not so limit∣ed to the Persons of the Apostles, but that it might be communicated to others whom the Apostles would intrust with it; and there∣fore might be continued in the Church after their Decease: And if it be granted that such an Apostolical Power of Governing Churches might be committed to others, and was actually so by the Apostles, it remains only to enquire whether, upon their Remove, or Departure, they did intrust any Persons in such a manner as it is certain from Scripture, St. Paul did Timothy, as to the Churches of Asia: Of which we shall discourse hereafter. 4. From those Words, The Things which thou hast heard from me, confirm'd by many Witnesses, commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also, it may be fairly argued, that the Apostle here appoints St. Timothy to, Theoph. constitute a Succession of Men vested with Ecclesiastical Authority to teach them, and command others to observe them. And from those Words to Titus, I left thee in Crete to ordain Elders, , in every City, as I order'd thee, Tit. 1.5. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God, v. 7. 'Tis also fairly gather'd, that a Succession of Bishops was to be constituted in every City, as Persons that were to take care of the Church of God there, 1 Tim. 3.5. And my Conjecture is, that St. Paul, after his Liberty from his first Bonds, having tra∣vell'd into Spain and Judea, and from thence to Macedonia, began to settle this Church-Go∣vernment in all the Churches where they be∣fore were wanting; that so, after his Death, they might be all provided with them. That upon this Account Titus was sent by him to Crete, chap. 1.5. and afterwards to Dal∣matia, 2 Tim. 4.11. And that the First Epistle to Timothy was not writ to him to require him to stay at Ephesus, where Bi∣shops had been settled long before, but to instruct him how to behave himself in the Church of God in general, chap. 3.15. do∣ing the Office of an Evangelist, by ordain∣ing Church-Governors where he found them wanting, and ordering other Matters, as he saw them needful, in any of those Places to which he resorted. But then, if we take in the Suffrage of Antiquity, and consult them who were nearest to the Fountain of Church-Government, we shall find still greater Rea∣son to believe that it was , an Apostolical Ordinance to appoint Bishops, with the chief Jurisdiction over Cities: For we find plainly, by the fore-mention'd In∣stances, that the Apostles had this Power in themselves, and did convey it to some others; but whether they did this universally, and with a Design to continue this Order, being an Enquiry about Matter of Fact, must be prov'd by the best Means we can use in a Matter of Fact of so great Antiquity. Now there can be no stronger Proof of such a Matter of Fact, than the general Sense, and concurring Practice of the Christian Church in the Ages next succeeding the Apostles. And this general Sense of the Christian Church may be demonstrated, 1. From undoubted Testimonies affording a clear Evidence of this Succession in the most conspicuous Churches. And as for the undoubt∣ed Testimonies of this Succession in the most con∣spicuous Churches, I shall first appeal, saith the learned Bishop of Worcester, to Irenaeus and Tertullian, as least liable to Exception. The former not only mentions a Succession of Per∣sons to the Apostles, but he saith,Habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, & Successores eorum usque ad nos, quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant, quos & Successores relinquebant, suum ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes, lib. 3. cap. 3. Lino Episcopatum administrandae Ecclesiae tradebant, ibid. the A∣postles committed the Care of the Churches to them, and left them to succeed in their Places. Which implies, that as the Apostles had themselves the Care of Administring the Church, and the Power of Governing, and Presiding over it, so they committed it to the Bishops whom they chose to succeed them. Tertullian not only mentions them in general
who succeeded theEvolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum, (Haeretici,) ita per Successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille Episp aliquem ex Apostolis, vel Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apostolis perseveraverit, habuerit Auctorem, & Antecesserem; hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt, sicut Smyrnorum Ecclesia Polycarpum ab Joanne conlocatum refert, sicut Ra∣norum Clementem a Petro ordinatum itidem: perinde, utique & caeterae exhibent quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutis Apostolici seminis traduces habeant, De Praescript. Haeret. c. 32. Apostles, but particu∣larly instances in Polycarp, placed by St. John at Smyrna; and Clemens, by St. Peter at Rome; and then adds, That the other Churches had Bishops placed in them, like to these. So that what Authority St. Clemens had at Rome, and Polycarp at Smyrna, that Tertul∣lian affirms the Bishops had in other Churches. Now Irenaeus saith, that Linus and Clemens had the Episcopal Power of governing the Church. And as for Polycarp, he, even by theDe Martyr. Polycarp. §. 12. Jews, and Gentiles, was stiled , the Master, or Teacher of A∣sia: ByCatal. St. Jerome, , the Governor of all Asia: And byEpist. ad Polyc. §. 2. Igna∣tius, , the Governor of the Church of Smyrna. Add to this, those Words of Mr. Dodwell, to those who deny'd the Presidency of Bishops over the Church in those Ages: What can they say to the Angels in the Revelations? What to the Testimony of Irenaeus, concerning St. Po∣lycarp? What to the Testimony of, apud Euseb. l. 3. c. 23. p. 92. Cle∣mens Alexandrinus, who mentions Bishops, among other Officers of the Church, settled by St. John? What to the Testimony ofApud Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 20. Hegesippus, who makes the Kinsmen of our Saviour, , to have been Governors of the Churches, from Domitian's Time to that of Trajan? What to those who mentionEuseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 24. p. 192. St. James as made Bishop of Je∣rusalem by the Apostles themselves? What of the Seven Polycrates mentions as Bishops in his own See, before himself? Nay, What to all those Catalogues of Bishops succeeding in the Four Patriarchal Sees; particularly, the Fifteen in Jerusalem, from St. James, to the Destruction of the Jews under Hadrian? Nay, What to the Succession of all the Apostolical Sees, to which the Fathers of the Second Century do so solemnly appeal, to prove their own Doctrine Apostolical in opposition to the contrary Pretences of the Hereticks? Can they think them all to have been either wil∣ful Forgeries, or general Mistakes in a Matter of Fact so near their own Time, without so much as any likely Ground in History? How will they then assure us that they were not mistaken in delivering to us the Books of the Apostles, which were not more notorious to them than their Government. 2. This general Sense of the Church may be demonstrated from the Unreasonableness of the Supposition, that the Form of Government left to the Churches by the Apostles, should be so quickly changed as they suppose who do con∣ceive that the Apostles left no Governors su∣periour to Presbyters, or Pastors of one Con∣gregation, in the Church: For it is clearly pro∣ved by the learned Bishop of Chester, that the Writers of the Second Century distinctly men∣tion the several Orders of Bishops, and their inferiour Presbyters in the same Church, and thereby give us Reason to conclude that Disp∣rity was settled in that Age, and therefore it is very improbable it should be otherwise in the preceeding Age of the Apostles; for that in the Frame and Substance of the establish'd Go∣vernment of the Church, a thing always in Use and Practice, there should be so sudden a Change, so universal a Corruption in so short a Time: And that all Christians, all the degra∣ded Clergy, without the least Degree of Oppo∣sition that we meet with, or we read of, should conspire in, or consent to this Innovation, and Corruption, is a thing morally impossible: For, as Tertullian argues in like Case,Variasse debuerat error doctrinae Ecclesiarum, quod autem apud omnes unum est, non est erratum, sed traditum, De Praescript. c. 28. What all Christian Churches did so early agree in practising uniformly, came not by Errour, but by Tradition. The Improbability of this sudden and general Innovation will be further evident, if we consider, 1. The Subjects of this Constitution, viz. the Persons appointed by the Apostles, or Aposto∣lical Men, to govern and preside in every Church, they being constant Objects of every Person's Common Sense, seen in every Assem∣bly, employ'd in every Ecclesiastical Affair, publick or private, in which Christians, sick or well, living or dying, were concern'd. Now in a Matter of this kind, which was the daily Object of the Senses of all Christians, we cannot easily conceive how they could possi∣bly mistake, and not perceive that such a Change was made, if really it was done. Again, We shall be more convinc'd that this was not perform'd by Conspiracy, or by a joint Consent of Christians, to make this Al∣teration in that Form of Government which the Apostles had establish'd, if we consider, 1. The general Agreement of all Churches in this Matter, since not one single Church can be produced in which this Government did not obtain. For how can we imagine that in a Time when no General Council could meet to appoint it, and when there were no Christian
Princes to set it forward on a political Ac∣count; and when by reason of the Heat of Persecution, and the Distance of Christian Churches, there was so little Commerce and Intercourse between them, from the Churches of Armenia and Persia in the East, to those of Spain in the West; from the African Churches in the South, to our British Churches in the North, this Constitution should universally be received, and submitted to, if it had not been establish'd by the Apostles, or the first Founders of those Churches? 2. If we consider how much it did concern all Churches, that such an Innovation should not obtain amongst them, and tamely be sub∣mitted to; for all the People were oblig'd to know the Governors to which they were by Scripture oblig'd to submit, and so they could not yield to this Innovation without the great∣est Danger to their Souls; the Presbyters, if they had by the Apostles been advanced to the highest Power, would not so meekly have sub∣mitted to an Authority usurp'd over them; but either out of a just Zeal to assert their Freedom, or out of Indignation at the Inso∣lence of the usurping Bishops, or out of that Unwillingness to submit and obey, which is natural to all Men, would have asserted their Equality. 3. This will be further evident if we consi∣der, that even the Persons then exalted could have no Motive or Temptation to accept of this Advancement; for Men do not easily de∣sire a Change, but upon prospect of some Ease, or Temporal Advantage; much less when they perceive the Change is like to add to their Trouble, and increase their Danger. Now this was really the Case of the first Christian Bishops, they being still exposed to the sharpest Fury of their Persecutors, and commonly begun with first when any Storm was rais'd against the Church: Their Labours also were very great, for the Care of the Flock lay on them, and they were unweary'd in the Discharge of the Pasto∣ral Care. Can we then reasonably think that they could be so fond of so much Toil and Pe∣ril, as to violate the Institution of the Blessed Jesus, or his Apostles, to obtain it?
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE Epistle of St. PAUL to TITUS. CHAP. I. Ver. 1. PAul a Servant of God, and an A∣postle of Jesus Christ, according to (, for the Promotion of) the Faith of God's Elect, and the Acknowledgment of the Truth which is after Godliness. , A Servant of God.] He writes not this to confirm his Authority to Titus, who doubted not at all of it; but to confirm it to others with whom he did converse, or to whom this Epistle might come; it being of use, not only to direct Titus then, but all Bishops and Rulers of the Church for ever. , For the Promotion of the Faith of God's Elect;] i. e. the Faith of Christians in the general, they being all , an elect Generation, 1 Pet. 2.9. and St. Paul, be∣ing an Apostle, in reference to them all, to them to whom he was a Savour of Death, as well as to them to whom he was a Savour of Life, 2 Cor. 2.16. , The Truth which is after Godliness;] The Mystery of Godli∣ness, 1 Tim. 3.16. The Doctrine which is af∣ter Godliness, 1 Tim. 6.3. This Truth is therefore only necessary to be believ'd so far as that Belief is necessary to an holy Life. Ver. 2. In (, with that) Hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lye (hath) pro∣mised before the World began. Ver. 3. But hath in due times manifested (, and hath in its proper Sea∣son manifested this) his Word (of Promise,) through preaching (of it to the Gentiles,) which (Office) was committed to me, accord∣ing to the Commandment of God our Saviour. Note, By comparing these two Verses with those Words in Timothy, He hath saved us, and called us with an holy Calling; not ac∣cording to our Works, but according to his own purpose, and Grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, , before the World began; but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Christ, who hath abolished Death, and hath brought Life and Immortality to light, through the Gospel: Whereunto I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles, 2 Tim. 1.9, 10, 11. I say, from these Words com∣par'd together, it may be inferr'd, 1. That the Promise of Eternal Life, men∣tion'd in both places, is the Promise of Call∣ing those Gentiles to whom St. Paul was an Apostle, to the Faith which had the Promise of Eternal Life annexed to it: For this Pro∣mise God is said to have perform'd by St. Paul's preaching this Word of Life to the Gentiles. 2. That this Hope of Eternal Life was not made manifest till the appearing of our Sa∣viour, and the preaching of his Gospel to the World; he having brought Life and Immor∣tality to light by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1.10. and manifested the Hope of it by the preaching of the Word of Faith. 3. Seeing no such Promise could be made to Men, no such Grace given to them before there were any Men in the World, those Words, , cannot properly be render'd, before the World began; but as Chrysostom, Theodoret and Oecumenius render them, , of old Time, or from the Beginning. So the Revelation of the Calling of the Gentiles is stiled the Revelation of the Mystery, , kept secret from Men since the World began, Rom. 16.25. but now manifested by the Scriptures of the Prophets. This Promise therefore was con∣tain'd in the Writings of the Prophets, and ei∣ther must relate to the Promise made to Adam immediately after the Fall, that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's Head, which was a Promise made from the Begin∣ning, and , before any of the three Ages of the World were pass'd; or to the Promise made to Abraham, that in his Seed should all the Families of the Earth be blessed, which was a Promise made a long time ago, and before the first Age of the World expir'd. So Zacharias speaks of the Promise of the Messias, made , by the holy Prophets, from the Beginning, Luk. 1.70. Ver. 4. (I Paul write this) to Titus, mine own Son after the common Faith (wishing to him) Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and (from) our Lord Jesus Christ.
Ver. 5. (Advertising thee, that) For this Cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldst set in order the things that (as yet) are want∣ing, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. .] Hence it appears, that at the first Conversion of the Cretians to the Faith, they had no Bishops or Presbyters set over them, but had all their Church-Offices per∣formed by Men assisted by that Holy Spirit which God shed on them abundantly, through Faith in Christ, Chap. 3.6. tho' out of these Bishops and Deacons usually were chosen. Ver. 6. If any be blameless, the Husband of  Wife, (neither guilty of Polygamy, nor married again, after divorce from his former Wife. See Note on 1 Tim. 3.2.) having faithful Children, not accused of Riot, or un∣ruly. .] Here Chrysostom, Oecu∣menius, Theophylact, have well observed, a∣gainst the Hereticks and Papists, that Marri∣age is so honourable, that any Clergy-man may ascend to the Episcopal Throne with it, , Chrysost. Theoph. Yea, that he may do the Office of a Bishop, and retain the Nuptial Bed, . Oecum. Ver. 7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as (being) the Steward of God, not self-will'd, not soon angry, not given to Wine, no Striker, not given to filthy Lucre. , I left thee in Crete to or∣dain Elders, if any be blameless, for a Bishop must be blameless.] Hence, say the Greek and Latin Commentators, it is manifest that the same Person is called a Presbyter in the 5th. and a Bishop in the 7th. Verse, , Theodoret. When he had said, I left thee in Crete, that thou mightest ordain Presbyters in every City,Hieronymus in locum. Postea intulit, oportet enim episcopum sine crimine esse tanquan Dei dispensatorem, idem est ergo Presbyter qui Episcopus. The Reve∣rend and Learned Bishop Pearson proves from St. Clemens of Alexandria, Tertullian, and Origen, that in their Judgment the Apostle speaks of Presbyters properly so called; as doth also Theodoret from this Argument, That the Apostle requires Presbyters in the Plural to be ordain'd in every City, whereas there was to be only one single Bishop in a City. But I find no Answer to the Argument, that the same Person is a Presbyter in the 5th. who is a Bishop in the 7th. Verse; and therefore I still incline to the Opinion of Chrysostom, Theodoret, St. Jerom, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, that the Names were then common. Ver. 8. A Lover of Hospitality, a Lover of good Men, (or things,) sober, (or prudent,) just, holy, temperate. , a Lover of Hospitality.] Not in the modern Sense of keeping Hospitality, that is, a great Table for Persons of Qua∣lity to come to, but, say St. Chrysostom and Theophylact, , one so far from filthy Lucre, that he spends what he has upon the Stranger, and the Poor. , He saith, Sober, i. e. not one that is much in fasting, but an exact Governor of his Passions, his Tongue, Hands, and Eyes. Ver. 9. Holding fast the faithful Word, as he hath been taught, (, accord∣ing to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apo∣stles,) that he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, (both to admonish, or instruct in sound Doctrine,) and to convince the Gain∣sayer. .] i. e. , Theoph. See Rom. 12.8. , The chief Character of a Bishop is , his Ability to teach, say Chry∣sostom and Theophylact. Ver. 10. For there are many unruly and vain Talkers (in Crete,) and Deceivers (of Mens Minds,) especially those of the Circum∣cision. .] He does not say, especially those Gentiles or Samaritans, who are Advocates for the Observation of the Jewish Law, but , they of the Circumcision, which throughout the New Te∣stament, signifies the Jews, Men of that Na∣tion and Religion, so Acts 10.45. And , the Jews which came with Peter were amazed when they saw the Gift of the Holy Ghost poured out upon the Gentiles, Acts 11.2. , the Jews contended with Pe∣ter, saying, Thou wentest in to Men uncir∣cumcised, and didst eat with them. See Rom. 4.12.15.8. Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. Eph. 2.11. Col. 4.11. Moreover, the Gnosticks and Simo∣nians were so far from being Advocates for the Observation of the Jewish Law, that it was one part of their Doctrine, ,Const. Apost. l. 6. c. 8. 10. That no Man should observe the Law or the Prophets. See Note on 1 Tim. 1.7. They therefore cannot be the Men here intended. Ver. 11. Whose Mouths must be stopt, who subvert whole Houses, teaching things which they ought not (to teach,) for filthy Lucre's sake. .] That the Jews were , vain Talkers, and , Teachers of things which they ought not, we learn 1 Tim.
1.3, 4, 6. and that they were desirous of filthy Lucre, robbing and devouring those they taught, see 2 Cor. 11.20. Of the Co∣vetousness of the Pharisees, the great Stick∣lers for the Necessity of Circumcision, and of the Observation of the Law of Moses by all Christians, Acts 15.5. our Saviour gives a large Account, Matth. 23.14, 25. Luke 16.14. Their Mouths must be stopp'd, not with Force, but with Conviction, v. 9. by such Strength of Conviction, say the Fathers, as will not suffer them to speak any thing by way of Answer, or gainsaying the Truth. Ver. 12. One of themselves, (even Epimeni∣des,) a Prophet of their own, said, The Cre∣tians are always Liars, evil Beasts, slow Bel∣lies, (i. e. Gluttons.) .] , Suidas. , Hesyc. , Clem. Al. Paed. L. 2. c. 1. p. 146. C. Vide Jul. Polluc. L. 2. c. 4. p. 109. 37. c. 111. 26. Ver. 13. This Testimony is true (of them who inhabit Crete, whether Natives, or Jews,) wherefore rebuke them sharply, (, convince them powerfully,) that they may be sound in the Faith. , a Prophet of their own.] Theodo∣ret expresly says this Poet was Callima∣chus; Oecumenius and Theophylact cite the Words of Callimachus, and so doth Chrysostom, tho' he confesses the Poet was Epimenides. Callimachus it could not be; for he was no Cretian, but a Cyrenian, nor hath he this whole Verse, but only the beginning of it, , which, saith St. Jerom, he borrowed from Epimenides, who byDe Leg. L. 1. p. 780. E. Pla∣to is styled , byL. 5. p. 239. Diodorus Siculus, , the Divine; byL. 1. p. 29, 30. Diogenes La∣ertius, , and , one skil∣ful in Divination; byDe Divin. L. 1. Cicero, futura prae∣sentiens & vaticinans per furorem, one that foretold things future by Extasie; byIn Solone. Plu∣tarch, , a wise Man concern∣ing divine things; byFlorid. L. 2. Apuleius, Fatidicus, a Sooth-sayer; by Maximus Tyrius, , one skill'd in divine things; byDissert. 22. p. 213. Dion Prusaeensis, and the Apostle here, one of their Prophets. , Rebuke them sharply.] If these Words relate to the Cretians, deceived by the Jews, as the Verse following seems to hint, they are fitly translated, Rebuke them sharply: To be sound in the Faith, is, say Oecumenius and Theophylact, to retain it so as it was delivered by the Apostles, without ad∣ding any thing to it from Judaism or Genti∣lism, and especially without adding to it the Necessity of observing the Jewish Law or Rites by the Gentiles. Ver. 14. Not giving heed to Jewish Fables or Commandments of Men who turn from the Faith. .] By Jewish Fables some here understand the Gnosticks Cabbalistical Interpre∣tations of the Old Testament; but, 1st. if we look into Irenaeus we shall find their senseless Interpretations chiefly related to the New Testament. Their 30 Aeones they gathered from the 30 Years our Saviour spent in Si∣lence, before he preached, and from the Pa∣rable of those who wrought in the Vine∣yard, and from St. Paul, from whom he shews, L. 1. c. 1. p. 16. 18. they gathered most of their wild Fancies, and so they must in time be after the writing of his Epistles. 2dly, It does not appear that the Cabbalistick Jews had any such Interpretations as favour'd the mad Doctrine of the Gnosticks. The Fa∣thers therefore generally interpret these Words of the vain Traditions of the Jews, especial∣ly concerning Meats, and other things, to be abstain'd from as unclean, which our Lord al∣so styles the Doctrine of Men, Matth. 15.9. and of the Teachers of them, St. Paul, in his Epistle to Timothy, saith, that they were turned from the Faith, 1 Tim. 1.5, 6. And this, saith Oecumenius, is evident from the ensuing Words. Ver. 15. (For whatsoever they may say, or think, concerning unclean Meats, Persons, or Things,) To the pure (the Gentile, whose Heart is purify'd by Faith,) all things are pure (in their use;) but unto them that (though they count themselves the only pure Persons,) are defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing (truly) pure, (or lawfully and acceptably performed,) but even their Mind and Conscience is defiled, (and by that their Actions.) Ver. 16. They profess that they know God, (above others, Rom. 2.17.) but in Works they (practically) deny him, being abominable (now to him, to whom they were once belo∣ved,) and disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate. It is the Opinion of all the Ancient Com∣mentators upon this Place, That the Apostle speaks this Adversus Judaeos against the Jews, nor is there any thing said in these two Ver∣ses which may not be applied to them. For, 1. We have observ'd already how the Scri∣pture gives those very Names to the unbe∣lieving Jews which they were wont to give unto the Gentiles, styling them Dogs, Philip. 3.2. as they styled the Gentiles, and Vessels of Wrath, Rom. 9.22, 1 Thess. 2.16. who thought themselves the only Vessels of Mer∣cy, and here defiled, who counted themselves the only pure Servants of God, Nehem. 2.20.
2 Of their Profession to know God, when in Works they denied him, the Apostle gives a large Account, Rom. 2. from v. 17, to v. 25. and again, Chap. 3. from v. 10, to v. 19. That they were abominable in the Sight of God, our Lord not only saith of the Phari∣sees, Luke 16.15. but St. Paul of the Jews in general, declaring, that they pleas'd not God; yea, they were so displeasing to him, that Wrath was come upon them to the utter∣most, 1 Thess. 2.15, 16. Of their Disobedi∣ence to the Law, we read in the fore-cited Places of the Romans, and of their evil Works, Philip. 3.2. 2 Cor. 11, 13, 15. And, Lastly, that a defiled Mind and Conscience defiled all their Actions, even those that were done according to the Will and the Com∣mand of God, see Isa. 1.11, 16.66.3. Jer. 6.20. Amos 5.21, 22. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. BUT (howsoever they live and teach) speak thou the things which become sound Doctrine. Ver. 2. (To wit,) That the aged Men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in Faith, (sin∣cere) in Charity, and (constant in) Patience. , the Aged.] See the Note on Phi∣lemon 9. So the Word signifies in all the o∣ther Places of the New Testament, where it is found; so , I am aged, saith Zacharias, Luke 1.18. and , is Paul the aged, Philemon 9. And in this Sense, the true St. Jerom, and all the Greek Commentators on the Place, expound it. The Reverend Dr. Hammond thinks it here signifies Church-Officers, and in particular the Deacons mentioned by Timothy, after the Bishops, 1 Tim. 3. But of five Qualifications there required of the Deacons, v. 8. the A∣postle here mentions only one, that of Gra∣vity; nor is it necessary that these  should be Church-Officers, because the Apostle here enumerates their Qualifications: For, as St. Jerom on the Place observes, he reckons up the Qualifications of the younger Women, v. 4, 5. and of the younger Men, v. 6. and of the Servants, v. 9, 10. But hence it will not follow that they were Church-Officers; nor, 2dly, Because Titus was sent to ordain such. For we find not that he was sent to ordain any but Presbyters or Bishops, Chap. 1.5, 7. though doubtless he did ordain Deacons to attend them. Ver. 3. That the aged Women likewise be in Behaviour, (in Habit and Gesture,) as be∣cometh Holiness; not false Accusers, not gi∣ven to much Wine, Teachers of good things, (of Piety, Charity, Chastity to those with whom they do converse.) Ver. 4. That they may teach the young Wo∣men to be sober, to love their Husbands, to love their Children. Ver. 5. To be discreet, chast, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own Husbands, that the Word of God be not blasphemed, (by reason of their Crimes.) .] That the aged Women here import the Deaconesses of the Church, some of the Commentators say was the Opinion of some Ancients; and indeed they were so ne∣cessary, 1. For the Baptism of Women, when that was performed by dipping, as in the Apostle's Days it was: And, 2dly, for the converting some young Women to, and the instructing others in the Faith they had already own'd; which aged Women, tho' not permitted to speak in the Church, might do in private Houses, without Scandal, but the Apostles, and a young Timothy, could scarce∣ly do without Suspicion: That for these Rea∣sons I doubt not but this Office obtain'd in the first Preaching of the Gospel. Ver. 6. Young Men likewise exhort to be sober-minded, (Gr. , to govern not on∣ly their concupiscible but their irascible Pas∣sions.) Ver. 7. In all things shewing thy self a Pat∣tern of Good Works, in Doctrines shewing Un∣corruptness, Gravity, Sincerity. , Sincerity.] This Word is not to be found in Chrysostom, Theophylact, nor in many Copies. Ver. 8. Sound Speech that cannot be con∣demned, that he that is of the contrary part (whether Jew or Gentile,) may be ashamed (of their Opposition to you,) having no evil thing to say of you. The Doctrine to be preach'd must be pure, and free from all corrupt Mixtures; it must be entire, so as to want nothing necessary to be known; it must be such as is , whol∣some, and beneficial to the Hearer; it must be delivered with Gravity, and with Care, that there be nothing spoken which may be subject to Reprehension. Ver. 9. Exhort Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, and to please them in all (lawful) things, not answering again. .] Not murmuring against their Commands, nor contradicting them, but only with Submission pleading their own Cause, for that even Nature doth allow. Ver. 10. Not purloining (or filching from their Masters,) but shewing all good Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Saviour in all things (belonging to their Station.)
Ver. 12. For the Grace of God which brings Salvation, hath appeared to all Men (as well Servants as Masters, yea to Men of all Na∣tions.) Ver. 13. Teaching us, that denying (all) un∣godliness, and worldly Lusts, we should live so∣berly, righteously, and godly in this present World. The first thing Christianity requires of them who would enjoy this Saving Grace, is to deny all practical Ungodliness, by carefully abstain∣ing from all Idolatry, Superstition, and false Worship, and to discard all those Principles which tend to cherish in us a prophane and irreligious Conversation, viz. all Principles of Atheism, and Infidelity, all Denial of Pro∣vidence, and of a future Recompence; for as our false Worship will render our whole Service vain, and our pretended Piety a Pro∣vocation, so these pernicious Principles will render our Religion none at all: For how can he be seriously imploy'd in Religious Actions, who questions the very Object of Religion, denies the Motives to it, and reck∣ons it a vain thing to serve the Lord? 2dly, To deny all worldly Lusts, i. e. All inordinate Affections to the Enjoyments of this present World, as knowing, that the Friendship of this World is Enmity to God, all the Pollutions which are in the World through Lust, 2 Pet. 2.20. walking not in Riot, and Drunkenness, in Banquettings, and Revel∣lings, in Lasciviousness, and Uncleanness, in Strife and Envy, but putting on the Lord Je∣sus Christ, and making no Provisions for the Flesh to fulfil the Lusts thereof, Rom. 13.13, 14. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. 3dly, To live soberly, in the due Modera∣tion of all our Appetites, the exact Govern∣ment of all our Passions, and in the regular Exercise of our Affections and Desires; i. e. We must so far restrain our angry Passions, that they do never indecently boil up within us, or break forth into opprobrious Words, or rancorous Expressions, or proceed to malici∣ous and spiteful Actions, and that we never do exert them, but upon Occasion of some∣thing which is truly evil and displeasing to God, or when it may be for the Benefit of others: We must so moderate our Affections to, and our Desires of all worldly things, as to sit down contented with our present Portion, not being anxiously sollicitous about them, not pursu∣ing them by unlawful Means, not much cast down when we lose them, nor much delight∣ed with them when we do enjoy them; but living still as Men whose Conversation is in Heaven, and whose Hearts are chiefly set on things above. We must so temper our De∣sires of Applause and Reputation in this World, as only to pursue it by exact Regards to what is Vertuous and Praise-worthy, and for vertuous Ends, the doing good to others, never endeavouring to obtain or to preserve it by any sinister Attempts, sinful Compliances, or by Neglect of Duty. We must so regu∣late the Cravings of the Throat, and the Gra∣tifications of the Palate, as not to eat or drink to the impairing of our Health, or Rea∣son, to the inflaming of our Lusts, or Pas∣sions, or to the rendering our selves unfit for the Performance of that Duty which we owe to God. We must be so moderate, in refe∣rence to the Pleasures of the World, that all the Pleasures in which we do allow our selves, may be still , such as call for no Repentance; we must pursue them with such Indifference, as that we freely can deny our selves in the Enjoyment of them, when the Concernments of God's Glory, or the Welfare of our own, or other Mens Souls is prejudiced by them, preferring still the Plea∣sures of Religion much above them. 4thly, We must live Righteously, i. e. in all the Offices of exact Truth and Justice be∣twixt Man and Man, being true in our Words, exact to the Performance of our Promises, doing no Injury to any in his good Name, Estate or Person, much less in the Concern∣ments of his Soul, but dealing still with others as we would be dealt with. We must live , Charitably, preserving an unfeigned Good Will, an affectionate Kindness to, and having a sincere Concern∣ment for the Good of all Men; and this Af∣fection must restrain us not only from biting them with the Tongue, suspecting evil of them, or doing evil to them, but must en∣gage us to hope well, and believe well of them, where we know nothing to the con∣trary; to rejoyce in their Prosperity, to be ready to promote it, to sympathize with them in their Afflictions, and, as far as we are able, to supply their Wants, relieve their Miseries, and contribute to the Ease and Com∣fort of their Lives, and more especially to labour to prevent the Ruine, and further the eternal Interests of their precious Souls; to conceal the evil that we know of others, where no Necessity, i. e. no Duty to our selves, our Brother, or the Publick, requires us to di∣vulge it; to endure all things, without re∣turning evil for evil; to be long-suffering, and bear with Patience the Infirmities of others. That, Lastly, upon any reasonable Submission, any fair Acknowledgement of the Offence, any Desire of Reconciliation, we be easie to be entreated, and ready to for∣give: In a word, That in all Cases of the same kind, we prefer the Publick before our Private Interests. 5thly, To teach us to live godly: 1. By keeping up an high Esteem, and Admiration of God in our Minds, acknowledging his Excellencies by our repairing to, and our con∣tinual Dependence on his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, in our Addresses to the Throne of Grace; by ascribing all the Mercies we enjoy, to his sole, free, and undeserved Good∣ness,
and therefore highly esteeming them, paying the Tribute of our Praises, and suit∣able Returns of Duty for them, and by per∣forming that publick and external Homage to the Author of them which may best testi∣fie to others the inward Veneration we have for him. 2. By yielding a firm Assent to all his Revelations, depending on his All-suffici∣ency and Goodness to order all things for us to the best, and hoping in his Mercy for Pre∣servation from, or Support under, and a good Issue from the Troubles of this present Life, and a Supply of all those Blessings which he sees needful for us, or most conducing to our Good. 3. By valuing him as our Chief, and All-sufficient Good, the only proper Object of our Happiness, and upon that account pre∣ferring him before whatever stands in com∣petition with him, having none in Heaven but him, and none on Earth that we desire in comparison with him, doing all things to his Glory, and for Promotion of his Honour, and being zealous to remove whatsoever doth obstruct or oppose it. 4. By being in the Fear of the Lord all the Day long, and herein ex∣ercising our selves to have always Consciences void of Offence towards God, so that we ne∣ver wilfully do any thing which argues a Con∣tempt of him, or is a Provocation to the pure Eyes of his Glory. 5. By acquainting our selves with his sacred Will, that we may do it, esteeming all his Commandments concern∣ing all things to be right, yielding a chear∣ful, constant, and sincere Obedience to them, labouring to walk before him to all well-pleasing; and when we are convinced, that we have deviated from his good and holy Laws, returning by a speedy and sincere Re∣pentance, and Reformation of our evil Ways. 6. By an humble Submission to his Chastise∣ments, a contented Acquiescence in all the Dispensations of his Providence, and an en∣tire Resignation of our selves and our Con∣cernments to the Pleasure of his good and holy Will. Thus Philo doth inform us, That he that would be truly vertuous, must, in the first place, , become an Exile from the Enjoyments of the Body, so far as not to be enslaved , to the impor∣tunate Desires of worldly things, or to the Pleasures of the World, , nor to the Fears of losing them, nor to excess of Grief that he doth not enjoy them; that being thus prepared, he must govern his whole Life by these Three Rules or Canons, , the Love of God, the Love of Vertue, and the Love of Man. Ver. 13. Looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearance of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ. .] Here it deserveth to be no∣ted, that it is highly probable that Jesus Christ is here styled the Great God: 1. Be∣cause in the Original the Article is prefix'd only before the Great God, and therefore seems to require this Construction, the Ap∣pearance of Jesus Christ the Great God and our Saviour. 2dly, Because as God the Fa∣ther is not said properly to appear, so the Word  never occurs in the New Te∣stament but when it is apply'd to Jesus Christ, and to some Coming of his; the Places in which it is to be found, being only these, 2 Thess. 2.8. 1 Tim. 6.14. 2 Tim. 1.10.4.1, 8. 3dly, Because Christ is emphatical∣ly styled our Hope, the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.23. 1 Tim. 1.1. And, Lastly, Because not only all the Ancient Commentators on the Place, do so interpret this Text, but the An∣te-Nicene Fathers also;De Antichrist. §. 64. Hippolytus speak∣ing of the Appearance of our God and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, andAdmon. ad Gent. p. 5, 6. Clemens of Alex∣andria proving Christ to be both God and Man, our Creator, and the Author of all our good things, from these very Words ofVid. Tract. de vera Christi Deitate. p. 44, 45. St. Paul. Ver. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and (so might) purifie to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. , that he might redeem, and pu∣rifie.] The Words  and , here used, being Sacrifical, the first signifying Re∣demption by paying a Price, here said to be the giving himself; the second, to purifie from the Guilt of Sin, by an Atonement of∣fer'd for it, Heb. 9.22. 1 Joh. 1.7, 9. I con∣ceive the Import of them to be this, That Christ our Saviour gave himself a Ransom for us to redeem us from the Guilt and Pu∣nishment of our Sins, that being by this A∣tonement thus purified, and reconciled to God, we might become, as the Jews were before, a peculiar People to him, and upon that ac∣count, zealous of good Works. , a peculiar People.] So  is rendred by the Septuagint, Exod. 19.5. you shall be to me , a peculiar Peo∣ple above all People, Deut. 7.6. Jehovah thy God hath chosen thee to be unto him , a peculiar People above all the People of the Earth; so Chap. 14, 2.26.18. This by the Chaldee, is always rendred  a belo∣ved People. This Title belonged to all Is∣rael in general, Psal. 135.4. Jehovah hath chosen Jacob for himself, and Israel for his peculiar People. As therefore all Israel, be∣ing sanctified to the Lord, became to him a peculiar Treasure, and a beloved People above all other Nations, or Religions in the World; so are now all Christians, God having purified their Hearts by Faith, Acts 15.9. 2dly, As
then Salvation was of the Jews, John 4.22. and belonged to others only by being Prose∣lytes so far as to own their God, or their Religion; so now that Salvation which is pro∣mised in the Gospel, and which consists in Life Eternal, is promised only to them who own the God and Saviour of the Christians, or embrace their Religion: For this is the Te∣stimony, that God hath given to us, eternal Life; and that Life is in his Son: He that hath the Son hath Life, he that hath not the Son hath not Life, 1 Joh. 5.11, 12. Ver. 15. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke (the Opposers of this Doctrine) with all Authority: let no Man despise thee, (but use the Censures of the Church, and deliver up to Satan those Jews who gainsay this Doctrine.) CHAP. III. Ver. 1. PUT them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to (Gr. for) every good Work. , to be subject to Principalities.] Besides the turbulent Spirit of the Jews, then in Crete, Suidas hath left upon Record, concerning them, that. Voce . the Cretians, fearing they should suffer Punish∣ment from their Superiors, stirred up the Peo∣ple, exhorting them to maintain the Liberty which they always had enjoy'd. By which we see how needful this Instruction was. Ver. 2. To speak evil of no Man, to be no Brawlers, (Gr. no Fighters,) but gentle, shew∣ing all Meekness to all Men (with whom they do converse.) , Meekness.] This is that Vertue which enclines us to be easie and merciful to Offenders, kind in interpreting the Actions of others, and yielding in Matters of our own Concern for Peace sake; and we shew all Meekness, not by being never severe, for Se∣verity at some times, towards some Persons, is necessary; but by being mild in all Cases, in which the Circumstances of Time, Place, and Persons, will admit of it. Ver. 3. For we our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice and Envy, hateful (to,) and hating one another. (See Chap. 1.10, 11, 12.) , For we our selves were some∣times.] That these were the Vices that reign∣ed in the Heathen World, see Rom. 1.26, 31. and 13.13. Coloss. 3.5, 8. That the Cretians were prone to Disobedience, we have proved from Suidas: That they were foolish and de∣ceived, is evident from their multitude of false Gods mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, Lib. 5. and their vain Imagination in thinking that their Gods were mortal, with which Callimachus charges them. The Lusts and Pleasures they served were unnatural Lusts, say Oecumenius and Theophylact: Of which the Athenian in Plato speaketh thus to Clinias of Crete,. Plato de Leg. l. 1. p. 776. E. Of unnatural Lusts your Cities are chiefly guilty; for taking up your Laws from Jupiter, and retaining the Fable of his Ganymede, they committed this unnatural Lust in Imitation of their Jupiter. , We our selves.] I cannot think, as St. Jerom doth, that St. Paul here condemns himself as one formerly guilty of all these Vices, for then he could not have said that he had lived before his Conversion in all good Conscience towards God, Acts 23.1. That he had served God from his Progenitors with a pure Conscience, 2 Tim. 1.3. And that as to the Righteousness which was by the Law, he was blameless, Philip. 3.6. Nor is any thing more common with St. Paul, than to speak thus in the Person of those to whom he writes. See the Note on Eph. 2.3. Ver. 4. But after that the Kindness and Love of God our Saviour towards Man ap∣peared. Ver. 5. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his Mer∣cy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration (in Baptism,) and (by the) renewing of the Holy Ghost, (given then to the Baptized.) Ver. 6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Saviour. Ver. 7. That being (thus) justified by his (free) Grace, we should be made Heirs accord∣ing to the Hope of Eternal Life. For Explication of these Four Verses let it be observed, 1st. That the Apostle, in the very next Verse, saith, This is a faithful Saying, and of this I will that thou affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God should be care∣ful to maintain good Works; and as he saith,
that we are justified by Grace, so doth he teach us, that this Grace hath appeared, for this very End, to teach us denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, to live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present World, looking for this blessed Hope; clearly insinuating, that without living godly, righteously, and sober∣ly, we cannot reasonably hope for Happiness at our Lord's Second Coming. Wherefore these Words could never be intended to ex∣cuse Christians from a Necessity of being ho∣ly, in order to their being happy. 2dly, That the Apostle only saith we are not saved by Works of Righteousness which we have done before Faith, before the Laver of Regeneration, but doth not in the least ex∣clude the Works of Righteousness they should hereafter do, by virtue of the new Nature given to them, and the renewing of the Ho∣ly Ghost, from being Conditions of their fu∣ture Happiness; and therefore hence it doth not follow, as Esthius suggests, that God hath predestinated us to Salvation of his meer Mer∣cy without any respect to our Works, but only, that he hath thus freely called any Nation to the Knowledge of that Faith that will in the End bring Salvation to them that obey the Prescripts of it. 3dly, That when the Apostle saith, by his Mercy he saved us, his Meaning is, that by his free Mercy he brought us from a State of Wrath and Condemnation, into the Way of Salvation, in which if we walk, and conti∣nue, we shall assuredly obtain Salvation. See Note on Eph. 2.8, 9. 4thly, Some by the Laver of Regeneration understand that inward Renovation which cleanseth the Soul, as washing doth the Bo∣dy; but that the Apostle, by the Laver of Re∣generation, understands that Baptism by which Christians, coming then from Heathenism, engaged to renounce Idolatry, the Works of the Flesh, and of the World, and dedicated themselves to the Service of the Sacred Tri∣nity, and testified their Faith in Christ, can∣not reasonably be doubted, if we consider, 1st. How expresly our Saviour saith, we must be born again of Water, and of the Ho∣ly Ghost, that we may enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.5. How he commissionated his Apostles to make Disciples in all Nations, by baptizing them, Matth. 28.16. And how from the Beginning, the Word , Regeneration, used here, was used to denote Baptism, asJustin Martyr. Ap. 2. p. 93, 94. Justin Martyr,Iren. L. 1. c. 18. L. 2. c. 39. L. 3. c. 19. Irenaeus, andClem. Alex. Pad. L. 1. c. 6. p. 93. , Theoph. L. 2. p. 95. B. Clemens of Alexandria do inform us. 2dly, That the same Apostle elsewhere ascribes this Virtue to Baptism, saying, that Christ doth purifie and cleanse his Body by the washing of Water, Eph. 5.26. And that St. Peter saith, that Baptism now saves us, 1 Pet. 3.21. And that Baptism at the first was still attended with the Vouchsafement of the Holy Ghost, here joined unto this La∣ver of Regeneration, John 3.5. So that all Christians are said to be baptized into one Spi∣rit, 1 Cor. 12.13. who is here said to be plentifully poured out upon Believers. 5thly, That being justified by Faith, we become the Sons of God, John 1.12. and be∣ing Sons of God, are Heirs of Glory, Rom. 8.17. and Sons of the Resurrection, or such as, if we do continue in the Faith and our Baptismal Covenant, shall enjoy an happy Resurrection, Luke 20.36. See Note upon that Place, and upon Rom. 8.17. Ver. 8. This is a faithful Saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God might be care∣ful to maintain good Works; these things are good, and profitable unto Men. , to maintain good Works.] That is, say some, to imploy themselves in honest Trades and Professions: But all the Ancient Commentators on this, and the 14th. Verse, interpret these Words of Alms-deeds, or Charity, to supply the necessary Wants of Orphans, Widows, &c. And they are follow∣ed by the Learned Dr. Barrow, who observes, that as in every kind that which is most ex∣cellent doth commonly assume the Name of the whole kind, so are these Works of Cha∣rity, by way of Excellency, styled Good Works. Thus Dorcas was full of good Works, i. e. of Alms-deeds which she did, Acts 9.36. See you abound in every good Work, that is, in all charitable Offices, 2 Cor. 9.8. Let a Widow be well reported of for good Works, 1 Tim. 5.10. i. e. for bringing up Children, lodging Strangers, washing the Saints feet, relieving the Afflicted, and following every good Work. Charge them who are rich in this World, that they be rich in good Works, 1 Tim. 6.18. See Heb. 10.24. And this Sense may be confirmed, 1. From the Phrase it self; for it is not , but . Now  signifies to excel and outstrip others in good Works, which, as to Works of Chari∣ty, is certainly the Christian's Duty, and was the thing by which the primitive Ages gain'd great Credit to Christianity: But it is not the Christian's Duty to labour more than others at their Trades or Callings. 2dly, From the Reason here assigned, why they must excel in good Works, because they were not only pro∣fitable, but  creditable in the Sight of Men, as are such Works of Charity more conspicuously than labouring in our Profes∣sions, and, v. 14. that they be not unfruitful;
i. e. saith Dr. Hammond, that they may have to give to others; these Acts of Charity being styled Fruit abounding to their Account, Phi∣lip. 4.17. Good Fruits, Jam. 3.17. The Fruits of Righteousness, v. 18. Ver. 9. But avoid foolish Questions and Ge∣nealogies, and Contentions, and Strivings a∣bout the Law, for they are unprofitable, and vain. See Note on 1 Tim. 1.4. And note here, and from that Place, this excellent Rule: That Disputes about Matters which only serve to beget Strife and Contention, but tend little to Edification in the Faith, or to the edifying of the Body in Love, Eph. 4.16. or the promoting that Doctrine which is after God∣liness, 1 Tim. 6.3. are vain talking, and un∣profitable Disputes. Ver. 10. A Man that is an Heretick, after the first and second Admonition, reject. Ver. 11. Knowing that he who is such, is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself. Hence may we learn who is an Heretick in the Apostle's Sense, 1st. He is one who , is perverted from the true Faith, holding some Doctrine or Opinion which sub∣verteth the Foundation of it, 2 Tim. 2.18. and 1 Tim. 1.19, 20. 2dly, He is , a Man condemned by his own Consci∣ence, and who, in what he doth maintain, or practise, sins against his own Convictions: For, 1st. The Apostle saith not to Titus, Do thou convince or inform him of his Error, but do thou admonish him of his Fault; which shews the Crime lay not in his Head, or his mistaken Judgment, for that can never be corrected by Admonition, but only by Instru∣ction, but that it lay in the Irregularity of his Affections, and the Perverseness of his Will; and, 2dly, Because otherwise he could not condemn himself by maintaining his He∣resie: For no Man who acts according to his Judgment, how erroneous soever it may be, is self-condemned in that Action. Obj. 1. Against this Exposition it is obje∣cted, 1. That he who oppugns a Doctrine which he knows to be true, is indeed very perverse, but he is no Heretick. Answ. 1. Yes, he is properly an Heretick, according to St. Austin, because he follows or starts a new Opinion, not from regard to Truth, but to Vain Glory, or temporal Advantage. Whence, saith he, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo, I may err, but I will not be an Heretick; placing Heresie not in the Judgment, but the Will. 2dly, He is so also, according to the proper Import of the Word, because he pro∣perly doth chuse to be of his Opinion: Where∣as the Judgment of the erroneous Person doth oblige him to hold his Error, it being not in our Power to believe otherwise than our Mind and Judgment doth inform us; so that in this Case we do not properly , chuse what Opinion we will hold. And, 3dly, He is most properly an Heretick in the Scri∣pture Sense, which still ascribeth to such Men something relating not to the Error of their Judgments, but the Perverseness of their Wills, or the Corruption of their Affections, as that they design'd not to serve the Lord, but their own Bellies, Rom. 16.18. That they turn'd away from the Truth, supposing that Gain was Godliness, 1 Tim. 6.5. That they taught things which they ought not, for filthy Lucre's sake, Tit. 1.11. That through Covetousness, with feigned Words, they made Merchandise of them whom they deceived, 2 Pet. 2.3, 14. Having Hearts exercised with covetous Practices, and that they went greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, Jude 11. Matth. 24.11. 1 John 4.1. 2 Cor. 11.13. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Tim. 4.2. Hence are they often styled false Prophets, false Christs, false Apostles, false Teachers, deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; Men who insi∣nuate their Doctrines,  by hypocritical Falshoods, who preach'd up the Necessity of Circumcision, not that they themselves observed the Law, or thought it necessary so to do, but that they might avoid Persecution, Gal. 6.12, 13. That they were Men risen up among Christians, speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after them, Acts 20.30. Wolves in Sheeps cloath∣ing, Matth. 7.15. Men that went out from them, when indeed they were not of them, 1 Joh. 2.19. Obj. 2. 2dly, It is objected, that there be few who oppose the Truth wittingly, and they are only known to God, not to the Church; which therefore cannot admonish, avoid, or excommunicate them. He there∣fore must be self-condemned, not because he maintains what himself thinks to be false, but because he inflicts upon himself that Pu∣nishment and Condemnation which the Bishop and the Church useth to do upon Malefactors, by separating himself from the Communion of the Faithful. Answ. To this I answer, 1st. That I do not find that the Word  beats any other Sense than this, viz. one condemn'd by his own Mind or inward Sentence, , saith Oecu∣menius. 2dly, Nor is it true that Hereticks did always cut themselves off from the Church; for then what need was there of their Excommunication? The Scripture shews the contrary, declaring, that these false Teachers, that brought in damnable Doctrines, were , lurking among Christians, 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 John 2.19. 2 Pet. 2.13. Jude 12, 19. Yea, saith the Apostle, there must be Heresies, , among you, 1 Cor. 11.19. they kept their Love-Feasts with them, were with them till for Fear of Persecution, they departed from
them, Gal. 6.12. They were inwardly Wolves but in Sheeps clothing, , making a fair Shew among them. Moreover, what need was there of avoiding Men alrea∣dy separated and gone out from them? Or to what End should the Apostle give them any Admonitions, or excommunicate them who had already excluded themselves from the Church's Communion? This Exposition there∣fore agrees not with the Words of the Apo∣stle. And whereas it is said such Hereticks are only known to God, I hope they might be known also to Titus, the only Person here  either to admonish or avoid them, espe∣cially if we consider that to him belonged in those Time, , the discerning of Spirits. Moreover, the Church of those Times, in which the Apostles were still preaching, could easily know whether the Doctrines which others taught in Opposition to them, were indeed Doctrines receiv'd from the Apostles, or not; if they were not, they who taught them must know they re∣ceiv'd no such Doctrine from them, and so must be self-condemn'd in teaching it as re∣ceived from them, or as the Faith once deli∣vered to the Saints; and they who heard them must know they wilfully opposed the Do∣ctrine of those Apostles who had confirmed the Faith with such Authentick Testimonies, as their Opposers could not question. More∣over, they being then bid to try the Spirits, whether they were of God, 1 John 4.1. and the Gift of discerning Spirits being then gi∣ven to the Prophets who managed the Church Affairs, they might then very well be able to judge of these Deceivers and false Teachers. Ver. 12. When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, (to supply thy Absence, say the Ancients,) be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis, for I have determined there to winter. These Words made the Author of the Post∣script date this Epistle from Nicopolis of Ma∣cedonia, whereas they rather prove the con∣trary; for he saith not, I have determined to winter here, but there, which shews he was not yet come thither. Ver. 13. Bring Zenas the Lawyer, and Apollos, on their Journey, diligently, (and see) that nothing be lacking to them. Ver. 14. And let ours (i. e. Christians) learn to maintain good Works, for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful. (See Note on v. 8.) Ver. 15. All that are with me, salute thee. Greet them that love us in (and for) the Faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle of St. PAUL to PHILEMON. SOME have thought this Epistle was not worthy to be rank'd among the Epistles of St. Paul, as being writ upon an Occa∣sion of no great moment: But it con∣tains Instructions sufficient for so short an E∣pistle, as v. g. 1st. That no Christian, though of the mean∣est sort, is to be contemn'd: That Christianity makes the vilest Servant both profitable and worthy to be highly loved, and honoured by Per∣sons in the highest Dignity; Onesimus being by the Apostle styled his Son, and his Bowels. 2dly, That Christianity doth not impair the Power of Masters over their Servants, or give any Authority to them who convert them, to use them as their Servants, without Leave granted from their Masters. 3dly, That Servants ought to make Satisfa∣ction for any Wrong or Injury they have done to their Masters. 4thly, That there is an Affection due from the Master to a profitable Servant. Who then, say the. Praefat. Oecum. Chrysost. Theoph. Greek Interpreters, would refuse to number an Epistle so profi∣table with the rest? The. L. 7. c. 46. Apostolical Constitutions have made this Philemon Bishop of Coloss, and St. Je∣rom seems to encline to that Opinion; butPhilemon nulla erat Ecclesiasticae ordinationis praeditus Dignitate, sed vir laudabilis unus ex plebe. In locum. Hilary the Deacon, saith expresly, that he was of no Ecclesiastical Dignity, but one of the Laity. Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophy∣lact, seem also of the same Opinion. This Epistle was writ in the same Year with that to the Philippians, viz. the 8th. of Nero, A. D. 62. when St. Paul expected to be deli∣vered from his Bonds, v. 22.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE Epistle of St. PAUL to PHILEMON. Ver. 1. (I) Paul, a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our Brother, (write) to Philemon, our dearly Beloved, and Fellow-Labourer. , Our Fellow-Labourer.] Hence Chrysostom conjectures that he must be one of the Clergy: But this is no good Argu∣ment, seeing Christians in general that pro∣moted the Interests of Christianity, and even Women, are by the Apostle stiled , his Fellow-Labourers. For the first, see 3 John, v. 8. For the second, Rom. 16.3. Moreover, these Fellow-Labourers might be Persons en∣dow'd with Spiritual and Prophetick Gifts, though not ordain'd to any standing Function in the Church. Ver. 2. And to our beloved Appia and Ar∣chippus, our Fellow-Soldiers; and to the Church in thy House. .] He salutes also Appia, the Wife of Philemon, as Oecumenius and Theophylact conjecture, and Theodoret posi∣tively asserts, and that very probably, she be∣ing here rank'd before Archippus. And this he doth that he might obtain her good Will also in behalf of Onesimus. , Our Fellow-Soldier.] So also he calls Epaphroditus Fellow-Prisoner with him at Rome, Philip. 2.23, 25. either because they suffer'd with him as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, 2 Tim. 2.3. Or, asCommilitoni quod in eodem certamine belloque superaverit. Hieron. in locum. St. Jerome saith, because being Ministers with him in the Work of the Gospel, Philip. 2.25. Colos. 4.17. they were more particularly engaged in fighting the good Fight of Faith: See Note on 1 Tim. 1.18. , And to the Church in thy House.] He calls his House a Church, saith Theodoret, , as be∣ing illustrious for the Piety of all its Mem∣bers. See Note on 1 Cor. 16.19. Ver. 3. (I wish) Grace to you, and Peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. , From God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.] Ex quo ostenditur unam filii, patrisque esse natu∣ram, cum id potest filius praestare quod pater, & dicitur id pater praestare quod filius. Hie∣ronymus in locum. Ver. 4. I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my Prayers; (or, I thank my God always when I mention thee in my Prayers.) Ver. 5. Hearing of thy Love and Faith which (Faith) thou hast toward the Lord Jesus Christ, and (Love) to all his Saints. , Thy Love and Faith.] Here the Apostle useth the Figure Synthesis; for Faith is to be referr'd to Christ, and Love to the Saints, according to those Words of the same Apostle, We give Thanks for you, since we heard of your Faith in Christ Jesus, and of the Love which you have to all the Saints, Colos. 1.4. So Matth. 12.22. The Blind and Dumb both spake and saw; i. e. the Blind saw, and the Dumb spake. 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; i. e. Ye are sanctified by the Spirit, and justified by the Name of Je∣sus. And so Theodoret interprets these Words. Hence therefore Papists vainly gather, that we may place our Faith in Saints departed; for even their ownCredere in aliquem Ecclesiastica Phrasi e scripturis desumpta professio divinitatis est: In locum. Esthius declares, that in the Ecclesiastical Phrase, to believe in any one, is a Profession of Divinity. 'Tis also further to be noted from these Words, That we ought to render Thanks to God, not only for the Blessings vouchsafed to our selves, but to others also, Rom. 1.8. 1 Cor. 1.4. Eph. 1.16. Ver. 6. (And my Prayer is,) that the Com∣munication of thy Faith (or thy Liberality to the Saints, which is the Fruit of thy Faith) may become effectual, (to bring others to it,) by the Acknowledgment of every good thing which is in you, (or may become effectual to the Acknowledgment of thy good Works, by
other Christians who have such Instances of thy Charity.) , The Communication.] , Theoph. Oecumenius and Theophylact expound these Words thus, I pray that the Faith in Christ, which thou hast common with us, may be operative in thee to make thee know how to perform every good Work. Ver. 7. (And I have reason thus to give Thanks to God for thee,) for we have great Joy and Consolation in thy Love (to the Saints,) because (hereby) the Bowels of the Saints, (yearning for Relief,) are refreshed by thee, Brother. Ver. 8. Wherefore, though I might be much bold (or having great Power) in Christ, to en∣join thee that which is convenient: Ver. 9. Yet, for Love's sake, I rather be∣seech thee, (or, I rather beseech thee, for Love's sake,) as being such an one as Paul (the Apostle of Christ,) the Aged, (and up∣on that Account worthy of Reverence,) and now also a Prisoner of Christ, (and therefore worthy of Respect, Gal. 6.17. Ephes. 4.1. Colos. 4.18.) , The Aged.] This Epistle being writ, at the furthest, but twenty eight Years from his Conversion, when he is stiled , a young Man, Acts 7.58. it is enquir'd how he could be now , Paul the Aged? I answer, that both the Word , Young, and , Aged, are of that large Signification, as is sufficient to remove this seeming Difficulty.In Vocibus, , & . Favorinus, from Hip∣pocrates, saith, a Man is stiled , a young Man, till Twenty eight; and , Aged, from Forty nine to Fifty six; making but twenty one Years difference betwixt them. Elsewhere he saith, that Old Age begins , from Sixty nine Years: But then he saith, a Man is , young, from Twenty three, , till For∣ty one Years; making the Difference between them twenty eight Years. Varro, in Coelius Rodiginus, lib. 29. cap. 21. says, a Man is ju∣venis, young, till Forty five; and aged at Six∣ty. And thus St. Paul, according to the Com∣putation of. Orat. de Petro & Paulo, To. 5. p. 994. lin. 28. St. Chrysostom, might be a young Man, of Thirty five Years, at his Con∣version; an old Man at the writing this E∣pistle, as being then Sixty three, and suffer∣ing Martyrdom in the 14th Year of Nero. Ver. 10. I beseech thee, (I say,) for my Son Onesimus, whom I have begotten (i. e. convert∣ed to the Faith while I was) in my Bonds. Ver. 11. Who in Times past was to thee (an) unprofitable (Servant, v. 18, 19.) but now (if receiv'd, will be) profitable to thee, and (if sent back) to me. .] Not only an unprofitable, but an injurious Servant, having not only run away from his Master, but purloin'd some of his Goods, and spent what he had thus purloin'd: For had it not been thus, saithNec sponsor fieret rei ablatae, nisi esset id quod ablatum fuerat dissipatum. St. Jerom, the Apostle needed not to have stipulated for Satisfaction of the Injury, v. 18, 19. Ver. 12. Whom I have sent again (unto thee, he being in Duty thine, and not to be employ'd by others, or detain'd without thy Leave;) thou therefore receive him, (him, I say,) that is mine own Bowels; (he being as dear to me, as if he had proceeded from mine own Bowels.) Ver. 13. Whom I would (willingly) have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have minister'd to me, (being) in the Bonds of the Gospel. , In thy stead.] A Ministery seems due from all that are able, towards those that suffer and are in Bonds for Christ's sake; and when it is not perform'd, there seems to to be a Lack of Service due to them, espe∣cially to the Ambassadors of Christ, Philip. 2.30. Ver. 14. But without thy Mind I would do nothing (of this nature,) that thy Benefit (or the Advantage I receive from him who is thy Servant) might not be (on thy part) as (a Matter) of Necessity, (because thou couldst not have him return'd to thee,) but willingly, (by thy own Grant.) , As of Necessity.] Here again Freedom of Will is put in Opposition to Necessity. See Note on 2 Cor. 9.7. ac∣cording to those Words of Seneca, De Benef. lib. 2. cap. 4. Si vis scire an velim, effice ut possim nolle. Ver. 15. For perhaps he therefore departed from thee for a Season, that thou shouldest re∣ceive him again for ever, (i. e. to serve thee during Life.) , That thou mightest have him during Life.] So , He shall serve him during Life. Exod. 21.6. , He shall be thy Servant whilst he lives, Deut. 15.17. , He shall abide for ever there, 1 Sam. 1.22. that is, , Till the Day of his Death, v. 11. All the Days of his Life, v. 28. Ver. 16. (That thou shouldst receive him, I say,) not now as a Servant (only.) but above a Servant, (as being also in Christ,) a Brother, beloved especially (or particularly)
to me; how much more to thee, both in the Flesh, and in the Lord! (i. e. as being of thy Family, and of thy Faith!) , Beloved.] Note here that Love is due even to Bond-Servants from their Ma∣sters, when they are useful and profitable to them; for where Advantage is receiv'd from the Labours of another, there Love is due. Ver. 17. If thou count me therefore a Part∣ner (in thy Friendship,) receive him as my self. Ver. 18. If he hath wrong'd thee in any thing, or oweth thee ought, put that on my Account. Ver. 19. I Paul have written it with my own Hand, (and so have enter'd into a solemn Obligation, that) I will re-pay it; albeit, I do not say unto thee, (i. e. I insist not upon it,) that thou owest to me (by whom thou wast converted) even thy own self (or the Well-being of thy Soul) besides. Ver. 20. Yea, (Gr. , I pray thee there∣fore,) let me (from thy Compliance with me in this Matter) have Joy of thee in the Lord, refresh my Bowels in the Lord. .] As the Hebrew  is verbum obse∣crandi, a Word of Intreating, so is the Greek  very frequently. See Note on Matth. 15.27. , Refresh my Bowels:] Ei∣ther meaning Onesimus, whom he calls his Bowels, ver. 12. or rather himself, whose Bowels would be refreshed by Philemon's receiving Onesimus kindly, for the Lord's sake. Ver. 21. Having Confidence in thy Obedience, I wrote (thus) to thee, knowing thou wiltst also do more than I say. Ver. 22. But withal, prepare me also a Lodging, (wherefore prepare me a Lodging also,) for I trust that through your Prayers I shall be given to you. , By your Prayers.] The Apostle knew the Efficacy of the Prayers of the Church, for Preservation of Christ's eminent Servants from impendent Dangers; as in the Case of Peter, Acts 12. and there∣fore, in most of his Epistles he doth most earnestly intreat them, that he might be en∣abled to preach the Gospel with Freedom and Success, Ephes. 6.19. Colos. 4.3. 2 Thes. 3.1. and for Deliverance from the Malice of his Persecutors, Rom. 15.30, 31. 2 Thes. 3.2. or else express his Confidence that their Prayers will be effectual to that End; as here, and 2 Cor. 1.10, 11. and 4.14, 15. Philip. 1.19. And had he thus conceiv'd of Prayers directed to Angels and departed Saints, why doth he not afford one Instance of them in all his Epistles? Ver. 23. There salute thee Epaphras, my Fellow-Prisoner in Christ Jesus. Ver. 24. Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, my Fellow-Labourers. Ver. 25. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirit. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE Epistle to the HEBREWS. BY Way of Preface to this excellent E∣pistle, I shall enquire, 1. Concerning the Author of it. 2. Touching the Canonical Authority of this Epistle. 3. Concerning the Language in which it was originally written. 4. To whom it was indicted, and sent; and when. 5. Of the Occasion and Design of writing this Epistle. And, I. That St. Paul was the Author of this Epistle, I prove, 1. From these Words of St. Peter, As our dear Brother Paul, according to the Wisdom given to him, hath written unto you, as in all his Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. Whence it is evident, 1. That the Apostle Paul had writ to them to whom St. Peter was then writing; i. e. to the Believing Jews in general, 2 Pet. 1.1. to those of the Dispersion, mention'd, 1 Pet. 1.1. 2. That he writ to them some certain Letter, distinct from all his other E∣pistolary Writings; as appears from those Words, As also in all his Epistles, i. e. his other Epistles. Since then none of the An∣tients say that this Epistle was lost, it must be that which bears the Name of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Obj. To this 'tis answer'd, That the Epistle intended by St. Peter, may be that written to the Romans, in which he speaketh to the Jews by Name, chap. 2.17. and in which is an Ex∣hortation found to count the Long-suffering of God Salvation, or that which leadeth to Re∣pentance, v. 4. Answ. But, 1. That which is written there, is plainly written to the Unbelieving Jews, and concerns them only: Whereas St. Peter writes to the Brethren, chap. 3.12. the Be∣loved, ver. 1, 14, 17. to them who had re∣ceiv'd like precious Faith, chap. 1.1. He therefore could not mean the Jews of whom Paul speaks in the Epistle to the Romans; Nor can that Epistle be properly said to be writ to the dispersed Jews, it being writ to those at Rome only, chap. 1.7. and chiefly to the Gentiles there, ch. 1.13.11.13.15.15, 16. 3. The Words, ch. 2.4. are not an Ex∣hortation, to count the Long-suffering of God Salvation; but a Reproof, for despising this Long-suffering: Whereas in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 10. he commends their Pa∣tience under Sufferings, and assures them it would find Salvation; and that if they lived by Faith, their Lord would come, and would not tarry. Arg. 2. A second Argument to prove St. Paul the Author of this Epistle, is taken from these Words, Know ye that our Brother Timothy is set at liberty? With whom, if he come quickly, I will see you. They of Italy sa∣lute you, chap. 13.23, 24. And from those al∣so, Pray for us; and, Do this now the ra∣ther, that I may be restored to you the sooner, v. 18, 19. For, 1. It is customary with St. Paul, when he writes to others, to call St. Timothy his Brother: So, Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our Brother, 2 Cor. 1.1. And again, Colos. 1.1. in the same Words: We sent Timothy, our Brother, 1 Thes. 3.2. And, Paul a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Ti∣mothy our Brother, Philem. v. 1. This Ti∣mothy was a Prisoner at Rome, in the 7th Year of Nero; and set at liberty the 8th, saith Dr. Lightfoot, Harm. p. 139, 140. Of which here the Author of this Epistle gives notice, and saith, he would come with him to them; i. e. to the Jews in Judea, to whom I shall prove anon that this Epistle was indicted. Now Timothy, we know, was still the Compa∣nion of St. Paul. Lastly, He desires them to pray for him; which is frequently done by St. Paul, in most of his Epistles, viz. In that directed to the Romans, Rom. 15.30. to the Ephesians, Ephes. 6.19. to the Philippians, Philip. 1.19. to the Colossians, Colos. 4.2. and to the Thessalonians, 2 Thes. 3.1. and is never done in any of the Catholick Epistles. Pray for me, saith he, that I may be restor'd to you the sooner. Now Paul was sent bound from Judea to Rome; and therefore, his Re∣turn
from Rome to Judea was properly a Re∣storing of him to them. And that he was thus restor'd to them, we learn from. Chrys. Praefat. See Theophyl. ibid. St. Chry∣sostom, declaring, that being at liberty, he went to Spain, thence to Judaea, and so back to Rome. Arg. 3. That this Epistle was written or com∣posed by St. Paul, may yet more strongly be con∣cluded from the Authority of the Ancients, for that they did deliver this as the Epistle of St. Paul: And that they were not rash in so doing, we learn from the Words of. Apud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 25. p. 227. C. D. Ori∣gen. Among which Ancients, we may reckon, 1. Clemens Romanus, the Companion of, and Co-worker with St. Paul; who, as. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 38. See Epist. Clem. ad Corinth. §. 12, 17, 36, 43. Eu∣sebius andCatal. Script. Eccl. St. Jerom note, hath many No∣tions which are in that Epistle; and used ma∣ny Expressions, Word for Word, taken thence. Which shew that Epistle not to be new, and to be duly reckon'd among the Writings of that Apostle. 2. Irenaeus, in the Second Century; by whom whom this Epistle is supposed to be cited as a Book written by the Spirit, Adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 6. But not to insist on that, as being uncertain, 3.Strom. 2. p. 362. B. Clemens Alexandrinus cites those Words of St. Paul, without Faith it is impos∣sible to please God, Heb. 11.6. adding, that Faith is the Substance of Things hoped for, the Evidence of Things not seen, ibid. v. 1. , according to the Divine Apostle. And again, he saith,Strom. 4. p. 514. C. D. 515. A. B. , The Divine Apostle fears not to say, Remember the former Days, in which ye being enlighten'd, suffer'd a great Fight of Affliction, Heb. 10.32. And so he cites him on to the End of that Chapter, then gives the Substance of the 11th Chapter, and the Ex∣hortation in the Beginning of the 12th, v. 1, 2. And that this Divine Apostle was St. Paul, we are assur'd from these Words,Strom. 6. p. 645. D. , Paul also writing to the He∣brews, relapsing from Faith, unto the Law, saith, Ye have need that one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Ora∣cles of God, and are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong Meat, Heb. 5.12. 4. In the Third Century,Adv. Celsum, l. 3. p. 143. Origen citing the very Words now mention'd, and the follow∣ing Words, v. 13, 14. For every one that useth Milk is unskilful in the Word of Righteous∣ness; he saith, He that writ this, was the same Paul who said to the Corinthians, I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, &c. 1 Cor. 3.2. In hisPhilocal. p. 10. Philocalia he saith, The Apostle Paul, who said to the Corin∣thians, These things happen'd in a Figure, and they were written for us on whom the Ends of the Ages are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. doth also in another Epistle use these Words, relating to the Tabernacle, Thou shalt make all things according to the Pattern shewed thee in the Mount, Heb. 8.5. And that thePhiloc. p. 17. & Adv. Celsum, l. 7. p. 351. Apostle, who said, Jerusalem which is above, is free; and is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. said also in another Epistle, Ye are come to Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem; and to My∣riads of Angels, &c. Heb. 12.22, 23. In hisPag. 209, 210. Exhortation to Martyrdom, he hath these Words, , St. Paul speaking somewhere to them who had suffer'd from the Beginning, and exhorting them to suffer patiently the Trials which afterwards fell up∣on them for the Word, saith, Call to remem∣brance the former Days, in which ye being en∣lighten'd, suffer'd a great Fight of Afflictions—Cast not away therefore your Confidence, which hath great Recompence of Reward; for ye have need of Patience, Heb. 10.32, 33, 34, 35, 36. And in his Answer to Africanus, having cited these Words from this Epistle, They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were slain with the Sword, Heb. 11.37. he saith,, Pag. 232. If any Person, being pressed with these Words, should fall into the Opinion of them who re∣reject this Epistle, as none of St. Paul's, he would use other Words, to demonstrate to him that it was the Epistle of St. Paul. He also adds, That. Apud Euseb. l. 6. c. 23. p. 227. C. the Sentences contain'd in it are admirable, and no whit inferiour to the Writings of the Apostles; as he who diligent∣ly reads them must confess. In a Word, when this Epistle was denied by the Arrians in the Fourth Century, because they were not able to resist the Conviction it affords
us, of our Lord's Divinity,. Praef. in Epist. ad Hebr. Theodoret saith, they ought at least to revere the Length of Time, in which the Children of the Church have read this Epistle in the Churches, viz. as long as they have read the Apostolick Wri∣tings: Or if this be not sufficient to persuade them, they should hearken to. Praef. Ibid. Eusebius, of whom they boast, as of the Patron of their Doctrine; for he confesses this was St. Paul's Epistle, and he declares that all the Ancients had this Opinion of it. That they of Rome, and other Latins, did for a while reject this Epistle, will not much weaken this Tradition, if we consider, 1. That this Epistle was not writ to them, but to the Hebrews, who, as Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. L. 3. c. 25. p. 97. testifies, delighted much in it. 2dly, That it was rejected by them, not that they had any thing to say against it, but be∣cause they could not answer the Arguments which the Novatian Schismaticks among them produced from the 6th. and 10th. Chapters of this Epistle, against receiving lapsed Penitents into the Church; whence, as Philastrius in∣forms us, they rejected it, as thinking it was depraved by the Hereticks. Or, 3dly, Because it wants his Name, which he conceal'd, not as St. Jerom conjectures, , to avoid the Offence of those who li∣ked not his Person, by reason of his Doctrine concerning the Non-observation of their Law; for it is evident, from his Desire of their Pray∣ers, and from his Intimation that he designed shortly to be with them, that he must be well known unto them, but, as Theodoret observes, because he was made an Apostle, not of the Circumcision, but of the Gentiles. Lastly, The Difference in Style some mention, is so nice a thing, and may happen upon so many Accounts, that it deserves not to be look'd on as an Argument of any Force against plain Testimonies of the Ancients, that St. Paul was the Author of this Work. 2dly, That this Epistle was written, and di∣rected to the Jews dwelling in Judaea and Pa∣lestine, is the Opinion of the. Chrysost. & Theodoret. Praefat. Ancients, tho' not so as to exclude the believing Jews of the Dispersion. This may be argued from the Endorsement of it, To the Hebrews, rather than To the Jews. It cannot be imagined but that he sends it to be delivered at a certain Place, within some reasonable Compass, seeing the Bearer of it, whoever he was, could not deliver it to all the Jews dispers'd through the whole World, and because he directs them to pray, that he might be restored to them, and promiseth to come and see them. The Ti∣tle therefore, To the Hebrews, must deter∣mine the Place, and point out the Jews that dwelt in Judaea, or the Land of Israel; and this Sense doth the Holy Ghost put upon the Title, The Hebrews, when it is said, There was a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, Acts 6.1. By the Hellenists, mean∣ing the Jews that dwelt in Foreign Countries, among the Greeks; and by the Hebrews, those that dwelt in Judaea. So again, 2 Cor. 11.22. Are they Hebrews? so am I: Are they Israelites? so am I. And, Philip. 3.5. Of the Stock of Israel, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, i. e. an Hebrew not only by Descent, as were all of the Stock of Israel, but by Language which some of them had lost, and by Habita∣tion in the Holy Land, and not among the un∣circumcised Gentiles, he being bred up at the Feet of Gamaliel. And so it is most proper to understand the Inscription of this Epistle, namely, that St. Paul directs and sends it to the believing Jews of Judaea, which he styles his own Nation, Acts 24.17. For though be, doubtless, did intend it also for the Benefit of the believing Jews dispers'd, yet might he send it first and chiefly to those in Judaea, the prin∣cipal Seat of the Circumcision, from whence it might in time diffuse through the whole Cir∣cumference of the Circumcision. But hence it cannot reasonably be concluded that this Epistle was writ in Hebrew, or in Syriack: For the Gospel of St. John, and his First Epistle, the Catholick Epistles of St. James, Peter, and St. Jude, were also written to the Jews, and yet were writ in Greek, that being a Tongue so well known to the Jews, that they call it the vulgar Tongue; and therefore in all the Discourses of the Jews with the Roman Governours, who understood the Greek Tongue, we never read, either in Scripture, or Josephus, that the Jews spake to them, or they unto the Jews, by an Inter∣preter; nor is there any of the Ancients who pretends to have seen any Hebrew Copy of this Epistle. That it was writ in Greek, ap∣pears not only from the Passages of Scripture, so often cited in it from the Septuagint, even where they differ from the Hebrew, Chap. 1.6.3.8, 9, 10.8.9.10.5, 37, 38. but also from Chap 7.2. where we read thus,  first being interpreted King of Righteousness, and after∣wards King of Salem, which is King of Peace; for both the Word Melchisedeck, and King of Salem, being in the first Verse, should have
been there interpreted, had this been the Ad∣dition of the Interpreter; for so we find it is throughout the New Testament, where the In∣terpretation immediately follows the Hebrew Word, or Phrase, as Mark 5.41. Talitha cumi, which is by Interpretation, Daughter arise. Golgotha, which is by Interpretation, the Place of a Skull, Mark 15.22. So Matth. 27.46. Mark 15.34. John 1.39. Rabbi, which is, being interpreted, Master; and v. 42. Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. So Ch. 9.7.19.37. Acts 4.36.9.36.13.8. whereas here the Word Melchi∣sedeck is in the beginning of the first Verse, and the supposed Addition of the Interpreter is added where the Word is not; so King of Salem is in the first Verse not interpreted, and when it is repeated, then comes the Interpre∣tation, which plainly shews, that it is made not to give the Sense, but the Mystery contained in the Words, viz. That Christ was our Peace, Eph. 2.14. and his Scepter was a Scepter of Righteousness, Chap. 1.8. Arg. 4. As for the Time when this Epistle was endited, (1.) It seems evident that it was written after that to the Colossians and Phi∣lemon; for there he is Paul, the Prisoner, here he is set at Liberty, and hoping to come quick∣ly to them to whom he writes: Those Epistles therefore being writ in the 62d. Year of Christ, and the 8th. of Nero, this must at least be written in the following Year. Again, in the Epistle to the Colossians we have mention of St. Timothy, but nothing of his Bonds; here we have mention both of his Imprisonment and his ensuing Liberty, which may well cast this Epistle into the 8th. of Nero, where it is pla∣ced by Dr. Lightfoot, or into the 9th, as Bishop Pearson. Lastly, To speak a little of the Occasion of it, I have shewed in the Preface to the 2d. E∣pistle to the Thessalonians, and in the Preface to the Epistl to St. James, that it was writ∣ten chiefly to prevent the Epidemical Aposta∣cy, which the believing Jews were then too prone to from Christ to Moses. But we learn also from the Matter of the Epistle, that it was written to prove that Jesus was the Son of God: Now in what Sense this chiefly was denied by the Jews, we learn from the Gospel of St. John, where, when our Lord had said, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work, John 5.17. The Jews seek to kill him, because , he said, God was his own Father, making himself equal to God, v. 18. And again, We stone thee, say they, for Blasphemy, because thou, being a Man, makest thy self God, John 10.33. What was this Blasphemy of which they thus accuse him? It was only this, that he said, I am the Son of God, v. 36. 'Tis therefore plain they judged it the same thing to say he was the Son of God, and to say that he was God; whence we may rationally conclude, 'twas also in this Sense that the Apostle here asserts, and doth endeavour to confirm this Truth. And, Lastly, this Epistle being written to Persons now relapsing from Christ to Moses, and to the Law given, said they, by Angels, this seems to be the Reason why the Apostle is so large in shewing that Christ was greater than the Angels, a greater Law-giver than Moses, a greater Priest than Aaron, and that the Levitical Priesthood, Covenant, and Law, were to give Place to Christ our great High-Priest, to his new Law of Liberty, and that new Covenant he had establish'd upon better Promises.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE Epistle to the HEBREWS. CHAP. I. Ver. 1. GOD who at sundry Times, and in divers manners, spake in Time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets. , at sundry Times,] Before the Flood by Enoch, Jude 14. and Noah, 2 Pet. 2.5. After the Flood by Abraham the Prophet, Gen. 20.7. who gave to his Children, and Houshold after him, the Commandments of the Lord, Gen. 18.19. By Jacob prophesying to his Sons of Things to come in the last Days, Gen. 49.1. By Moses, during their Abode in the Wilderness; by Deborah, Samuel, and o∣ther Prophets, in the Time of the Judges, Judg. 6.8. By Nathan in the Time of Da∣vid and Solomon; by Isaiah, Jeremy, and E∣zekiel, in the Time of the Kings; by Daniel, Haggai, Zachariah, Malachy, in, and after the Captivity. , in divers manners.] In a Cloud, Fire, a still Breath, by Visions, Dreams, a Voice from Heaven, and by the Holy Spirit, speaking in the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.21. Ver. 2. Hath in these last Days, (the Times of the Messiah, see Note on 2 Tim. 3.1.) spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath ap∣pointed, (, constituted,) Heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds. , Heir of all things.] As it were by Succession to his Father, who now judgeth no Man, but hath given all Judgment to his Son, John 5.22. Hebr. 3.6. we cannot desire a fairer Comment on these Words than that of the Socinians on the Place,Christus solus omnium plane rerum haereditate gaudet, & summo in omnes, tam Angelos, quam homines imperi ac d∣minatu pollet— Licet autem istis verbis significata sit summa Christi praestantia ac Divinitas & veluti cum Deo unis, tamen simul significata est etiam Christi à Deo diversitas. Crell. in locum. that Christ is made Heir of all things in Heaven and Earth, yea of Heaven and Earth it self, that he is Heir and Lord of all Angels, and of all Men living and dead, Rom. 14.8, 9. That he is absolutely the Heir of all things, and hath the highest Empire and Dominion over all Angels, and Men; by which Words is sig∣nified the highest Excellency, and Divinity, and, as it were, the Unity of Christ with God, tho' with Diversity, in that he is his Son, and Heir, and receiv'd this Dominion from ano∣ther. And I believe 'tis as impossible to un∣derstand how a Man should have this Empire over all things in Heaven and Earth, and over Death it self, and yet be a mere Man, as it is to understand any Mystery of the Sacred Trinity. , by whom also he made the Worlds.] That is, saith Grotius, propter quem, for whom he made them, ac∣cording to the Doctrine of the Rabbins, that the World was made for the Messiah. But this Exposition is contrary to the Rule of thePhavorinus. Grammarians, that , that Pre∣position , when it is joined with a Genitive Case, signifies the Means by which, and the final Cause only when it is joined with an Accusa∣tive Cause. 'Tis contrary to the Exposition of all the Greek Fathers, who unanimously say, , this shews the Di∣vinity of Christ. It also is without Example in the New Testament; for , Rom. 6.4. which is the only Place he cites, signifies by the Glory, or Power of the Father, by which Christ was raised from the Dead, Eph. 1.19. Coloss. 2.12. The Soci∣nians by the Worlds here understand the new Creation, or the Church begun by Christ's Ministry upon Earth, begotten, and renewed by the Evangelical Dispensation. But nei∣ther
can this Exposition stand: For, 1st. Tho' Christ be styled in some of the Greek Ver∣sions,  Isa. 9.6. the Father of the Age to come, yet  abso∣lutely put, doth never signifie the Church, or Evangelical State; nor doth the Scripture ever speak of the World to come, in the Plu∣ral, but in the Singular Number only, preser∣ving the Phrase, Holam Habba, as they re∣ceived it from the Jews. 2dly, Were this the Import of the Words, the Worlds might as well have been said to have been created, or made by Christ's Apostles, they being the great Converters of the World; or at the least, this being done by them, assisted by the Power of Christ, after he had been thus made Heir of all things, it must have properly been said that Christ made the Worlds by his Apo∣stles, which yet the Holy Ghost never thinks fit to intimate. Moreover, whereas this ma∣king of the World by Jesus Christ is done by his Prophetick Office, i. e. his speaking to us in the last Days, the Apostle had mention'd this already, and makes a plain Gradation from it to his Kingly Office, in saying he was constituted Lord of all Things, not speaking of the making of the World by way of Con∣secution, thus, , and by whom, but by way of farther Gradation, , by whom al∣so he made the World; as if he should have said, Nor is it to be wondred, that he should be constituted Lord of the whole World, seeing he made the Whole. And that the A∣postle here doth speak not of the Reforming of the New, but of the Forming of the Old World, he himself sufficiently instructs us by saying in this same Epistle, By Faith we un∣derstand, , that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, Chap. 11.3. For that by  we are to understand the material World, the Socinian Commentator grants, and the parallel Place in St. Peter doth inforce, when he saith, that the Heavens were of old, and the Earth, , consisting out of Water by the Word of God, 2 Pet. 3.3. and this World is mention'd in both Places in the Plural Number agreeably to the Phrase and Doctrine of the Jews, whoBuxt. voce  speak of  the Worlds in the Plural, and di∣vide them into  or  this Inferior and Habitable World, called by St. Peter, , the then World which perished by Water, v. 6. and the  Superior World, that is, the Heavens. And it is no improbable Conjecture, that when St. Peter saith the Heavens and Earth con∣sisted by the Word of God, and St. Paul, that by Faith we learn that the Worlds were framed, , by the Word of God, they mean this substantial Word of which the Apostle is here speaking; for the Word  seems plainly to be used in this Sense, when we read in the Targum of Jerusalem, on Gen. 28.11.  For his Word, i. e. the Word of God, desired to speak with Jacob; and in that of Jonathan, , the Word would speak with him, which in Bereschith Rabba, §. 68. runs thus, God would speak with him; and the Word  seems also to be either used in this Sense, or applied to the  oft by Philo, as when he saith, thatDe Sacrif. Abel. p. 102. C. D. Moses was translated, , by the Word of the first Cause by which the whole World was made; and that God. Leg. Alleg. L. 1. p. 33. G. made both the Heavens and the Earth by a Word, by his most illustrious and splen∣dent . And to be sure, Philo was of the same Opinion with St. Paul, that the Word made and fashioned the World, whence he so often mentions. De Opif. p. 3. F. , p. 4. C. . De Cherub. p. 100. B. . All. 2. p. 60. C. . De Profugis, p. 362. F. , L. 2. De Monar. p. 636. B. . Lib. quod Deus sit immutab. p. 235. G. the Divine Word adorn∣ing all things, the Word of God that maketh the World, the Word by which the World is fashioned, and made, and by which, as his Organ, God gave Being to it, and saith, in Words like those of the Apostle, that God possesseth all things, using that Word as the Dispenser of his Gifts, by which also he made the World. And this was also the Doctrine of all the Primitive Fathers from the Beginning, as well as of all the Commentators on this Text, St. BarnabasOrbis terrarum Dominus, Antiq. Vers. §. 5. . Ab init. & §. 12. declares, That he is the Lord of the World, the Maker of the Sun, the Per∣son by whom, and to whom are all things. He is, saith Justin Martyr, (h) the Word by which the Heaven, the Earth, and every Creature was made, by whom God at the Beginning made and adorned all things, viz. the Heavens and the Earth, and by whom he will renew . Cohort. ad Graec. p. 16. B. . Apol. 1. p. 44. . Dial. cum Tryph. p. 340. D.
them. ThisCum autem teneamus nos Regulam veritatis, id est quia sit unus Deus omnipotens qui omnia condidit per verbum suum, & aptavit, & fecit, ex eo quod non erat ad hoc ut sint omnia, quemadmodum Scriptura dicit, Psal. 32.6. John 1.3. Col. 1.16.— Hanc ergo tenentes Regulam, licet valde varia, & multa dicunt (Haeretici) facile eos deviasse à verita∣te arguimus. L. 1. c. 19. Cui ordinationi assentiunt multae Gentes Barbarorum—veterem traditionem diligenter custodientes, & credentes in unum Deum Fabricatorem coeli, & terrae, & omnium quae in eis sunt per Jesum Christum filium Dei. l. 3. c. 4. Vide L. 2. c. 2. L. 3. c. 8, 10, 11. p. 257, 259. L. 4. Praefat. c. 37. p. 369, 370. & c. 75. L. 5. c. 15, 18. Irenaeus delivers as the Rule of Faith contained in the Scriptures, which they who hold to may easily prove, that the Heretick had deviated from the Truth. He adds, that the Barbarians, who held the An∣cient Tradition, did believe in one God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things therein by Christ Jesus the Son of God; and this Doctrine he repeats almost an hundred times elsewhere.. p. 5. C. . p. 10. C. Our Doctrine, saith Athe∣nagoras, celebrates one God the Creator of all things, who made all things by Jesus Christ, from whom and by whom all things were made. God, saith. Ad Autol. 2. p. 88. C. . p. 92. B. . p. 96. D. . p. 100. A. Theophilus, made all things by him, and he is called the Beginning, because he is the Principal and Ruler of all things made by him. He adds, That by this Princi∣ple God made the Heavens: That God said to him, Let us make Man, he being his Word by which he made all things. Him, saith. p. 145. B. C. . p. 146. B. C. Ta∣tian, we know to have been the Author of the World, for that which was begotten in the Be∣ginning, gave beginning to the things made. He made Man the Image of his Immortality, and before Man he made the Angels. We ra∣tional Creatures, saith. Adm. p. 5. C. D. . p. 6. B. . p. 69. A. . Paed. L. 1. c. 2. p. 81. B. . c. 11. p. 133. A. . Strom. 5. p. 553. A. Clemens of Alex∣andria, are the Work of God, the Word, for he was and is the Divine Principle of all things, by whom all things were made, and who, as the Framer of all things in the Be∣ginning, gave also Life to us; by whom are all things, who made Man, our God and Ma∣ker, the Cause of the Creation. In the third Century we learn the same fromOrig. contra Celsum. L. 2. p. 63. L. 6. p. 308, 317. Origen,Tertull. adv. Marcion. L. 5. c. 19. Adv. Hermog. 45. Adv. Praxeam. c. 19. Tertullian,Novatian. c. 13. M. Novatian, andCyprian Test. L. 2. c. 1. St. Cy∣prian, and others cited by the Learned Dr. Bull. So that in these two Verses there be visible these Gradations, one from Christ's Prophe∣tick Office to his Kingly Office conferr'd on him as Heir of all things, the other from his Kingly Office, to the Foundation of it laid in his Divine Nature, and in the Work of the Creation, it being, say Irenaeus, and the An∣cient Fathers, fit that he should reform and govern the World, by whom 'twas formed; that he should give new Life to Man, who gave him his Being, and first Breath. Ver. 3. Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, (or Character of his Subsistence,) and uphold∣ing all things by the Word of his Power, when he had (Gr. having) by himself purged our Sins, sate down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on high. , i. e. the Resplendence or shining forth of his Glory.] This Metaphor some of the Fathers think is taken from the Sun, whenceDial. cum Tryph. p. 358. B. Justin Martyr saith he pro∣ceedeth from the Father as, , the Light of the Sun, without division or separa∣tion from him. Others with him, , for Example's sake, say,. Athen. p. 27. he pro∣ceedeth. ,Just. Ibid. D. E. & p. 284. C. p. 145. as Fire is kindled from Fire without the Dimin∣tion of the Fire that kindles it, or as , as one Torch is lighted from another; which is the Metaphor of Tatian, p. 145. which Metaphors they have borrowed from Philo, who speaking of the Spirit in Moses, derived upon the Seventy Elders, cautions us not to understand this to be doneLib. de Gigant. p. 223. F. , by abscision or disjunction, , but as Light from Fire, at which if you light a thousand Torches, it is not diminished; accordingly the Nicene Council style him Light of Light, and hence they argue his Consubstantiality with the Fa∣ther, who produces not another Essence or Substance in the Son, but communicates the same Essence to him. The like Notions the Jews seem to have had of their , or Wisdom, which is with them the same: For the Book of Wisdom saith of her, that she is ,
, an efflux of the sincere Glory of the Al∣mighty, and the Splendor of Eternal Light, chap. 7.25, 26. And Philo saith of theDe Somn. p. 448. D. , That he is , the most illu∣strious and splendid Light of the invisible and highest God. And this the Jews might better understand, if it were taken, as probably it was, from the Glory that conducted them out of Egypt, led them through the Wilderness, and dwelt among them first in the Ark and Taber∣nacle, and afterwards in the Temple. For 'tis observable, 1. That this , Glory, or Shechinah so often mention'd in the New Testament, and in the Writings of the Jews, was not the Cloud it self, that being only the cover of it, but the Light, Fire, or Splendor that issued from it. So Exod. 24.16. And the Glory of the Lord dwelt upon Mount Sinai, and the Cloud covered it, (viz. the Glory of the Lord,) six days; and the sight of the Glory of the Lord (when it broke out of the Cloud after six Days) was as burning Fire on the top of the Mount, in the sight of the people Israel. And Exod. 40.34. Then a Cloud covered the Tent of the Congregation, and the Glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle: And ver. 35. Moses was not able to enter into the Tent of the Congregation, because the Cloud abode thereon, and the Glory of the Lord filled the House. 1 Kings 8.10, 11. when the Priests were come out of the Holy Place, the Cloud filled the House of the Lord, so that the Priest could not stand to minister because of the Cloud; for the Glory of the Lord had filled the House of the Lord. Ezek. 10.4. And the House was fill∣ed with the Cloud, and the Court was full of the brightness of the Glory of the Lord. Note, 2. That this Glory is stiled the Glory of the Lord, not as being it self a Divine Thing, or a Ray of Divinity, but as being the Sym∣bol of God's glorious Presence, and abode where it appeared, and resided. Thus the Cloud which consisted of a dark part to cover the Fire, or Light, and a bright side by the appearance of the Light, is called the Cloud of Jehovah, Exod. 40.38. Numb. 10.34. be∣cause God was gloriously present in it; or, as Rabbi Moses Ben-Nachman, on Exod. 40.34. saith, , because the Glory dwelt in the midst of it; whence God said, Lo I come to thee in a thick Cloud, Exod. 19.9. I will appear in the Cloud upon the Mercy-seat, Lev. 16.2. He spake to Moses out of the Cloud, Numb. 7.89. And when he went to receive his Commands, it is said, And Moses drew near to the thick Darkness where God was, Exod. 20.21. And lastly, God is said to go before them by day in a pillar of Cloud, and by night in the pillar of Fire, Exod. 13.21. Numb. 14.14. Again; the Ark in which this Glory dwelt between the Cherubims is called, , the Glory of the Lord, i. e. of that Glorious Ma∣jesty who dwelt in it. Whence the God of Israel is often stiled the God that sitteth be∣tween the Cherubims, because here, say theBuxt. Hist. Arcae. p. 109. Jews, he fixed his Residence, and Pre∣sence, notwithstanding that he fills Heaven and Earth, and his Majesty is in Heaven and in all the Earth. And when the Ark was to be taken up and carried any whither, they sung thus, Arise Jehovah, and let thine Enemies be scattered, Numb. 10.35. Psal. 68.2. And when it rested, thus, Give rest, Jehovah, to the many thousands of Israel; not stiling the Ark Jehovah, but the Glorious Majesty that dwelt in it, or him, and the ark of his strength, Psal. 132.8. Where also it may be noted, That the Targum of Jerusalem and Jonathan read thus, Rise up O word of the Lord, and Return O word of the Lord. And Psalm 24. when the Ark was brought from the House of Obed-Edom, and setled in Mount Zion, and placed in the Holy of Holies, they sung thus, Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, that the King of Glory may come in; i. e. the Lord of Hosts, who dwelt in the Ark. Accordingly our Lord Jesus after his Ascen∣sion, appeared still in or with the Glory of the Lord. When he was Transfigured on Mount Tabor he was in this Splendor, Matth. 17.2. stiled by St. Peter, , The Magnificent Glory, 2 Pet. 1.17. So he appeared to Stephen, who saw the Glory of the Lord, and Jesus standing at the right Hand of God, Acts 7.55. So to Saul, when a light brighter than the Sun shone round about him, and he heard a voice out of it saying to him, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Acts 9.5.26.13. He being, , the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. See Rev. 1.14, 15.2.18.18.1.19.12. And because of God's Resi∣dence in this Glory, the word Glory doth often signifie God himself; as when we read of the Throne, and the House of Glory, i. e. of the Glorious God. So RabbiBuxt. Hist. Arcae. p. 7. Joseph Albo, It is the manner of the Scripture to call the visible Glory and Splendor of the Divine Majesty by the Name of God. So Psal. 106.20. They turned their Glory into the similitude of a Calf, Jer. 2.11. My people have changed their Glory for that which doth not profit. And so the Fathers seem to take the word Glory here for the Divine Majesty. Note, 3. That from this Glory, when God did any wondrous Works of Power, Mercy and Judgment, there is said to be an Emanation or shining forth of Glory; as when Fire went forth from the Glory of the Lord to consume
their Sacrifices, in token of his favourable acceptance of them. So Lev. 9.23, 24. The Glory of the Lord appeared, and there came a Fire out from before the Lord, and consumed upon the Altar the burnt-offering and the fat. So 2 Chron. 7.1, 2, 3. accordingly they beg∣ged his Favour in these Words, Thou that dwellest between the Cherubims shine forth, Psal. 80.1. See Psal. 50.2. Deut. 33.3. And to consume Transgressors, viz. Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.2. and the two hundred and fifty Men that offered Incense, Numb. 16.35. See Exod. 14.24, 25. And in like manner may the Son be said to be , an Emanation or shining forth from the Glory of the Father; as being before all things, (l. 2. c. 48.4, 28.) Prolatus a patre sive gene∣ratus, begotton or brought forth by the Fa∣ther, saith Irenaeus, being always in him, but , coming forth before all things, to be the Idea and active Power of all material Be∣ings. So p. 10. D. Athenagoras, the Word whom the Father begot, , sending him forth before all things, who was always in God, and became, , when he would create the World. SoAd Autol. l. 2. P. 88. B. p. 100. B. Theophilus, whom he made, , to leap from him. SayJust. Dial. p. 359. B. & Tat. p. 145. B. Justin Martyr and Tatian, He being in him before all Ages, , the Word coming forth, which is the cause of the Creation, , and forebegotten, by which all things were made, saithClem. Alex. Strom. 5. p. 553. B. Strom. 6. p. 644. A. Clemens Alexandrinus. The Word brought forth by the Father, and by the Prolation generated, and therefore the Son of God, saithTert. Apol. c. 21. Ter∣tullian. , The Impression or Represention of his Subsistence.] The Phrase signifies, saith Theodoret, That he sub∣sists by himself, , and in himself represents the Cha∣racters of his Father. , saith Phavo∣rinus, is , a form or draught manifesting the Substance whence it was taken. , saith he, is the Substance with the Properties; , or , a concourse of all the Properties of any Being; so that the Character of his Subsistence here, is, accord∣ing to him, a Draught manifesting, or exhibi∣ting the Substance and the Properties of God. According to the Greek Commentators on the Place, it is the same with our Lord's being in the form of God, before he took our Nature on him, Phil. 2.5. Accordingly Wisdom is by the Author of the Book that bears that Name stiled, , the unspotted Mirrour of the Power or Activity of God, and the Image of his Goodness, chap. 7.26. The Logos is, saithDe Confus. ling. p. 267. B. de Monarch. p. 363. B. Philo, , the Eternal Image of God. The Image of God, , by which the whole World was made. And of the Angel which God sent before Israel, in whom God's Name was, Exod. 23.22. the Jews say he was , the Angel of his Face; because saithMasius in Jos. 5.14. R. M. Gerundensis, God's Face, or Glory, might be seen in him, or he exactly represent∣ed him; yea, the Government of the whole World was committed to him, and God had made him Lord over his whole House, and had made things subject to him. Now these things so exactly agree with what the Apostle here ascribes to Christ, that I could not think them unworthy to be noted here. , and upholding all things by the Word of his Power.] The Hebrew word  is sometimes rendred , sustineo; as when 'tis said of Moses, Numb. 11.14, 17. I cannot, , sustain or bear all this people. And Deut. 1.9, 12. How can I alone, , bear the labour of all this people? And of Christ, That, , he bears the burthen of our sins, Isa. 53.4. Some∣times it signifies to Govern, whence  is sometimes rendred , a King, Gen. 23.6. sometimes , a Prince, as it is rendred above sixty times: Sometimes , in the same sense, Numb. 13.3. and 16.2. and sometimes , a Governour, Jos. 13.22. 2 Chron. 5.1. And the Greek , signifies not only to sustain, but also suo arbitratu moderari, to govern at his Will: Now which of these two senses you put upon the Words, it is not much material, since it is equally the effect of a Divine Power to sustain, and govern all things. Whence this is by the Jews made the Description of God himself, That he is a God, ,Targ. in 2 Chron. 2.6. sustaining all things, the Heavens, the Earth, and the Abyss, and beating all People, , by the Spirit of his Word. Accordingly of the  Philo often saith,De Cherub. p. 88. D. That he is , he that sits at the Helm, and governs all things: That he is,L. de Vita Mos. 521. B. , he that containeth and dis∣penseth all things. ThatDe Agricult. p. 152. B. God as a King and Shepherd, Rules according to Law and Right, placing over us his First-begotten Son; , Who, as the Prorex of the Great King, takes care of the sacred Flock. It remains yet to be enquired, Whether these things are spoken of our Lord, as act∣ing
here on Earth, or purely of the Divine Nature he had before the World was made. The Socinians and some others think all this relates to our Saviour, as acting here on Earth. That he was the Splendour of his Fa∣ther's Glory, because God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, hath shined into our Hearts to give the light of the Know∣ledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. On which account the Apostle saith, We have seen his Glory, the Glory as of the only-begotten Son of God, John 1.14. That he was the Character of his Sub∣stance, or his Attributes, as he was the Image of the invisible God, Col. 1.15. in which his Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Love, and Mercy shined forth conspicuously: That he did , praestare, perform all things by the Word of his Power; as he made the Winds and Seas calm, rebuked Diseases, and cast out Devils by his Word. And Mr. Clarke is positive, That it must be the Humane Nature which this Sacred Writer spake of, that the Jews might under∣stand what he said was true; for that alone i visible, and nothing but what is such can be called the Image, or brightness of any thing among Men. On the other hand it is certain, that all the Fathers were of another Mind; that when Philo and the Ancient Jews spake thus of Wisdom, the Logos, the Angel of God's Face, they understood all that they said of the Logos, and Wisdom subsisting long before our Saviour's Incarnation, and so thought this Logos the Splendour and Image of the Father, when he was not visible a∣mong Men; as the Apostle saith he was, when he was taken from them into Heaven: And the like conceptions had the Jews of Wisdom, and of the Angel of his Face. 'Tis certain also, that the preceding words, by whom also he made the Worlds, cannot be spoken of Christ incarnate; and the words, upholding all things by the word of his Power, seem to im∣port the same with that Expression of the Apostle, Col. 1.17. By him all things consist. Moreover could these things be attributed to our Lord Christ as acting in the Flesh, yet have I proved, Note on Col. 1.15. that they must be ascribed to a Divine Nature residing in him, or to God manifested in the Flesh; and so what Mr. Clarke says must be the Hu∣mane Nature, must, say I, be the Divine Nature. , when he had by himself purged our Sins.] i. e. When he had made himself an Expiatory Sacrifice, to purge us from the Guilt and Punishment of our Transgressions. To confirm this let it be Noted, 1. That this was the Opinion of all Na∣tions, that their Expiatory Sacrifices were designed to take away the Guilt of Sin, and make Atonement for it to an offended Ma∣jesty. For why are they still said , purgare, lustrare, to purge, and to make clean, but from their supposed Virtue to pu∣rifie them from the Guilt of Sin? And be∣cause Sin is often represented in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, under the Me∣taphors of Uncleanness, Filthiness, Defilement, and Pollution; therefore their Sacrifices also are still represented as cleansing them from the Guilt, and the Defilement of Sin, and so making the Pollution to pass from them. Hence the Blood which made the Atonement is stiled , the Blood of cleansing, or Purgation. So Exod. 30.10. And Aaron shall make an Atonement upon the Horns of the Incense-offering once a Year, , with the Blood of the Sin-offering shall he make Atonement upon it. And the Sacrifice offered for Sin is said to be offered , to purifie them from it by an Atonement. So Lev. 9.15. And he brought the peoples Offering, and took the Goat which was the Sin-offering, and slew it, , and offered it for Sin. And Lev. 16.30. In the great day of Atonement the Priest shall make an Atonement for you, , to cleanse you, that you may be clean from all your Sins before the Lord, , and you shall be cleansed. So Job is said, , to cleanse his Sons from their supposed Sins by a Burnt-offering, Chap. 1.5. Since therefore it is very reasonable to conceive that the word  used in an Epistle written to the Jews touching the Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, is used in the sense in which they always took it when applied in the Old Te∣stament, to Sacrifices which made Atonement for their Sins; it follows, that when the A∣postle here said Christ made , a pur∣gation of our Sins by himself: And when he adds, That whereas the Blood of the legal Sa∣crifices did expiate , to the purification of the Flesh, the Blood of Christ, , shall much more expiate to the pu∣rification of the Conscience from the Guilt of Sin, chap. 9.13. When he proceeds to say, That whereas under the Law almost all things, , were purified by Blood, and without shedding of Blood there was no Re∣mission, ver. 22.23. And thence argues, That the heavenly things must be purged with better Sacrifices. He in these Cases must speak of the Blood of Christ, as making Atonement for our Sins, by purging away the Guilt of them, and averting the Punishment due to us for them. Ver. 4. Being made (Gr. being) so much bet∣ter than the Angels, (and Superiour to them by this Exaltation to the Right-hand of Ma∣jesty,) as (by it) he hath obtained a more ex∣cellent Name (Title, and Authority) than they. , a more excellent Name.] i. e. Not only Title, but Authority, and su∣periour Excellency. So Phil. 2.9. God hath
highly exalted him, and given him, , a Name above every Name; i. e. the highest Dignity and Power, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow; i. e. that all Creatures in Heaven, in Earth, or under it, should own his Power and Domi∣nion, v. 10. Eph. 1.21. He hath set him at his right hand, above all Principality, Power, Might, and Dominion, , and every Name. In both these Senses, Christ hath a more excellent Name, viz. the Name of his only Son, v. 5. the Name of God, v. 8. and a more excellent Authority and Dignity, viz. that of sitting at the right hand of Ma∣jesty, v. 13. and ruling all things by the Word of his Power; and this Excellency he hath upon a better Foundation, as being the Ma∣ker of the World, &c. v. 2, 3. Ver. 5. For to which of the Angels, said he at any time, (as he did to Christ,) Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee? And again, (to Solomon the Son of David, what did more eminently belong to this Son and Lord of David,) I will be to him a Fa∣ther, and he shall be to me a Son, (2 Sam. 7.14. 1 Chron. 22.10.) , thou art my Son.] R. SolomonIn Dan. 7.13. here saith our Masters have interpreted all that is written in this Psalm of the King Messiah: And R. Saadias GaonVide Cartw. Mell. Hebr. l. 1. c. 5. doth from these very Words prove the Dominion and Kingdom of the Messiah, because it is here said, I have set thee, my King, upon the Holy Hill of Sion. I will declare the Command, Jeho∣vah hath said unto me, Thou art my Son, &c. which also is apparent from the following Words, I will give the Heathen for thine In∣ritance, &c. v. 8. and from the Exhortation to all Kings to submit to him. And that this was the Ancient and received Exposition of these Words, confirmed by the Holy Ghost, we learn from this Apostle, who disputing with the Jews, touching our Saviour's Re∣surrection, when all Power in Heaven and Earth was given to him, Matth. 28.18. He proves it from these very Words, Acts 13.33. And again, speaking of his Priesthood, which he was to exercise in Heaven after his Resurrection and Ascension, he proves it to the same Jews from these very Words, Heb. 5.5. , I will be to him a Fa∣ther, &c.] These Words are cited from 2 Sam. 7.14. and they do promise to Solomon, the Type of Christ, a Kingdom to be establish'd for ever, v. 13, 16. and so to Christ, the An∣titype, and eminently the Son of David, an everlasting Kingdom and Dominion. See The Judgment of the Jewish Church, p. 61. Note also, That tho' the Angels be some∣times in Scripture called the Sons of God, Job 1.6.2.1.38.7. God never said to any of them, I will be to him a Father, to protect him in his Kingdom, much less, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee to a Kingdom: And so these Passages, in the true and full Extent of them, cannot agree to any of the Angels. Ver. 6. And again, when he bringeth in (, and when he brings again) the first begotten (from the Dead, Col. 1.18.) in∣to the World, he saith, And let all the Angels of God worship him. (Establishing thus his Dominion over them, and their Subjection to him, and also the Divine Excellence of him who was thus to be worshipped by the highest of created Beings.) .] 'Tis generally thought these Words are cited from Psal. 97.7. where, in the Septuag. we have Words very like them, viz. , worship him all his Angels; in the Hebrew it is indeed  all ye Elohim, but then Aben Ezra's Note, is, That some think  the word Elohim always denotes the Angels: AndPug. fid. p. 133. Kimchi saith the Hebrews did expound this Psalm of what was to come to pass in the Days of the Messiah. In the Septuagint it is styled a Psalm of David, , when the Land was establish'd to him, or when he was made Master of all those Countries which God designed to be the Inheritance of Israel, and therefore may very properly be referr'd to the Son of David, at his Resur∣rection, or his coming again into the World, that being the Time when all Power in Hea∣ven and Earth was given to him, when he was solemnly inaugurized, and instated in his Spi∣ritual and heavenly Kingdom, and the Go∣vernment was upon his Shoulders, and he sate down on the right Hand of the Majesty on high, v. 3. But it is observable, that these Words are expresly to be found, Deut. 32.43. as here they are cited: And it is certain, from St. Paul, that God there speaks of the Times when the Messiah was to be preach'd unto the Gentiles, for that the Gentiles should glorifie God for his Mercy, he proves from these Words of the same Verse, Rejoyce ye Gentiles with his Peo∣ple, Rom. 15.9, 10. Accordingly the Jews expound many of the Words of Moses here recorded. Thus Jonathan on v. 39. saith thus, When  the Word of the Lord shall reveal himself to redeem his People; he shall say to all People, See I am he that am, and have been, and shall be, (see Heb. 13.8.) I by my Word kill and make alive, I smite the People Israel, and I will heal them in the End of the Days. On v. 40. the Targum of Je∣rusalem saith thus, I live  by my Word
for ever; that of Jonathan, I have prepa∣red in the Heavens  the House of my Majesty; that is, saith R. Solomo  the Place of my Majesty; Expressions often used by Philo to signifie the , as when he saith, ,De Migr. Abr. ab initio. God hath his House, viz. his own Word, and that ,De Somn. p. 447. C. the Divine Word is his Place; ad upon v. 43. Jonathan B. Uziel paraphra∣ses thus, He with his Word will expiate for the Land, and for his People, viz. as the High Priest did on the great Day of Expiation. The other Words, He will render Vengeance to his Enemies, and make his Arrows drunk with the Blood of the slain, are fit Expressions of Christ's Exercise of his Kingly Govern∣ment over his Enemies, by which he was to break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them i pieces as a Potter's Vessel, Psal. 2.9. The Import of these Words therefore may be this, when God was to introduce his First-born again into the World by the Resurrection, and give his Power and Dominion over all things in Heaven and Earth, he said, Let all the Angels of God worship him, and own him as their Lord and Maker. Ver. 7. And (moreover, speaking) of the Angels, he (i. e. David only) saith, (he is that God,) who maketh his Angels Spirits, (or Winds,) and his Ministers a flaming Fire; (giving them no higher Titles than those of his Messengers and Ministers, and shewing their Efficacy and Swiftness in doing his Commandments, and hearkening to the Voice of his Words, by comparing them to the Winds and Fire, Psal. 123.20, 21.) .] The Psalmist speaking, Psal. 124.4. not to, but of the Angels, it is necessary to translate these Words as our Ver∣sion doth, Of the Angels he saith; and as the Hebrew , so the Greek  is oft of the same Import with de and . He spake this Parable, , concerning them, Luk. 20.19. Mark 12.12. , But of Is∣rael he saith, Rom. 10.21. , Of whom we speak, Heb. 4.13. Of the Particle , see Noldius, p. 458. Ver. 8. But (speaking) to (of) the Son, he (i. e. David, moved by the Holy Ghost,) saith, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a Sceptre of Righteousness is the Sceptre of thy Kingdom, (Psal. 45.7.) Ver. 9. Thou hast loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness, (i. e. advanced thee in Eminence and Digni∣ty) above thy Fellows; (stiling him in these Words God, and an Eternal King; ascribing to him a Throne and Kingdom, and a Righ∣teous Government, to reward his Righteous Servants, whom he loves; and to punish his Obdurate Enemies, whose Iniquities render them hateful to him. So that these Words again prove both his Divine Nature, and his Exaltation to the Government of the whole World.) , God, even thy God:] For Christ is God of God, according to the Ni∣cene Symbol. Hence do the Primitive Fathers thus distinguish betwixt him and the Father; That God the Father is that God, above whom there is no other God: Whereas Christ is God of God; and as to that, inferiour to God the Father. So, Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 275. Et p. 276. , Et p. 284. . Justin Martyr, andInvoco te, Domine Deus, qui es solus & verus Deus, super quem alius Deus non est; lib. 3. Lib. 6. Ʋbi filium sae∣ps Deum vocat. Ire∣naeus. That this Psalm was spoken of the Messiah, is evident from the Targum on the place, which saith, Because thou, O King Messiah, hast loved Justice, &c. And on ver. 3. Thy Fairness, O King Messiah, exceeds the Sons of Men. To this purpose, see R. Solomon, and Aben Ezra, on this Psalm. Ver. 10. And (that also by him he made the Heavens, is testified in these Words spo∣ken of him,) thou, Lord, in the Beginning, hast laid the Foundation of the Earth; and the Heavens are the Works of thy Hands. Ver. 11. They shall perish, but thou remain∣est; and they shall all wax old, as doth a Gar∣ment: Ver. 12. And as a Vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy Years shall not fail, (Psal. 102.) That this Psalm hath relation to the Times of the Messiah, we learn from the Chaldee Pa∣raphrast, which saith on v. 16. Zion is build∣ed by the Word of the Lord: And from the Creation of a new People to praise the Lord, v. 18. which the Jews themselves expound of the World to come, or the State of the Church under the Messiah: And 3dly, From the Calling of the Gentiles, mention'd v. 15. So the Heathens shall fear the Name of the Lord; and all the Kings of the Earth, thy Glory. And v. 22. When the People are ga∣ther'd together, and the Kingdoms, to serve the Lord. See The Judgment of the Jewish Church, p. 38. That these things are here spoken of, and applied to Christ, is also evident, 1. From the Connexive Particle , which knits this to the former Citation, and makes it to run thus: Of the Son it is said, Thy Throne, O God,
is for ever: , And of him it is also said, Thou, Lord, in the Beginning, hast laid the Foundations of the Earth. 2. From the Scope of the Apostle, which, both before and after, is, to bring Testimonies to prove the Excel∣lency of the Messiah, and the Truth of what he had asserted of him, v. 2, 3. and there∣fore he must pursue the same Design here. And, 3dly, From the Concession of the Soci∣nians upon the place, That the latter Words, which speak of the Destruction of the Heavens and the Earth, belong to Christ. Now these Words, They shall perish, but thou remainest, are plainly spoken of the same Person who founded the Earth in the Beginning; and therefore must equally belong to Christ. But here it is objected. Obj. That if the Author of this Epistle had indeed believed that Christ was the Creator of the World, to what purpose doth he spend so much Time to prove him more excellent than the Angels? For who can doubt that the Creator is more excellent than his Crea∣tures? Answ. 1. He doth not absolutely go about to prove him more excellent than the Angels, but comparatively, so far more excellent as the Titles given him in Scripture shew'd that he exceeded them; and that was, as much as the Creator doth exceed his Creatures. 2. I have shew'd, Note on the 2d and 3d Verses, that the Apostle had asserted not only Christ's Dignity, as Heir of all things, and so succeeding in his Father's Kingdom; but also that he was therefore Lord of all things, be∣cause he made the World, and therefore was obliged in his Testimonies to prove both these things; as he doth in most of the Testimo∣nies produced. 3. As there were then divers Hereticks who ascribed the Creation of this visible World to Angels, and not to Christ; so also were there divers Jews who held that they were God's Ministers, or , Co-workers in the Crea∣tion of the World; and that God said to them, Let us make Man, Gen. 1.26. Now against these Jews and Hereticks, the Apostle very appositely proves, that the Creation of the World was not to be ascribed to those Angels who, say they, gave the Law, chap. 2.2. but to that Jesus from whom we have receiv'd the Gospel. Of the Sayings of the Jews, concerning the Assistance of the Angels in framing Man, see Note on chap. 2.5. And Maimonides more Nevochim, Part 2. Chap. 6. Of Simon Magus Irenaeus doth inform us, l. 1. c. 20. that he held that his Ennoia pro∣duced Angelos & Potestates, a quibus & Mundum hunc factum esse dixit; Angels and Powers, by whom this World was made: That Menander also, ibid. cap. 21. held, Mundum factum ab Angelis, That the World was made by Angels: That Cerinthus, ibid. cap. 22, 23, 24. held that the World was made by some separate Virtues, much inferiour to God; that the World was not made by Christ, but that he rather came ad dissolvenda omnia ope∣ra ejus Dei qui mundum fecit, to dissolve all the Works of that God who made the World: And Lastly, , That the Angels were of the same Rank with Christ, and produced together with him. All which vain Fancies gave just Occasion to the Apostle to assert that Christ was thus supe∣riour to the Angels, and the Creator both of them, and of the World. Accordingly, the Targum of Jerusalem gives this Description of the Word of the Lord, That it is be who said to the World, Be, and it was; and who will say unto it, Be, and it shall be. Which Words the Targum of B. Vziel, (in Exod. 3.14.) apply to the Lord himself. Ver. 13. And, (yea,) to which of the An∣gels said he at any time, (as he did to Christ, Psal. 110.1.) Sit thou on my Right Hand till I make thine Enemies thy Foot-stool. Ver. 14. Are they not all (declared, Psal. 103.20, 21. and 104.4. to be) ministring Spirits, sent forth (not for Government and Dominion, but) to minister to them who (be∣ing Sons by Adoption) shall be (also) Heirs of Salvation. , Sit thou on my Right Hand.] That these Words were spoken of the Mes∣siah, appears, 1. From the two Targums on this Psalm, who both declare that this was spoken,  in, or to his Word. This is, saith R. Saadias Gaon, on Dan. 7.13. The Messiah, our Righteousness; as it is written, Psal. 110.1. The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my Right Hand. R. Moseh Haddarsan says, (Beresch. Rabba, in Gen. 18.1.) Hereafter God will cause the Messiah to sit on his Right Hand; as it is said, Psal. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, &c. Midrash Tebilli, in Psal. 2.7. saith, The Affairs of the Mes∣siah are set forth in the Hagiographa, in these Words, Psal. 110. The Lord said. And again, R. Joden, in Psal. 18.35. in the Name of R. Chija, said, That in the Age of the Mes∣siah, the blessed God will set the King Mes∣siah on his Right Hand; as it is written, The Lord said to my Lord. And though on this Psalm he expounds the Words first of Abra∣ham, whom they introduce complaining that God has placed his Son on his Right Hand, and him only on his Left; yet presently fol∣low these Words, And so he saith to the Messiah. And R. Obadiah not only saith, the Psalmist composed this Psalm of the Messiah, but adds what illustrates v. 14. That God further said, Thou shalt sit on my Right Hand, and the Ministring Angels on my Left. See more in Cartwright's Mellificium, p. 2969. And since our Blessed Saviour confounded the Scribes and Pharisees with this Enquiry, How the Messiah could be the Son of Da∣vid, since David here in Spirit calls him Lord?
Matth. 22.42. 'tis evident this was then the received Exposition of these Words. , who shall be Heirs of Salvation.] i. e. By Right of Son∣ship, for if Sons then Heirs, Rom. 8.17. If a Son then, , an Heir of God through Christ, Gal. 4.7. Heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3.29. For to as many as believed he gave power to be the Sons of God, John 1.12. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. THerefore we (knowing the Excel∣lency of the Person speaking now to us in the Gospel above all other Prophets, and above those Angels which were employ∣ed in delivering the Law of Moses,) ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard (from the Son of God,) lest at any time we should let them slip (out of our Memory.) , lest we fall off from them; so Oecumenius, Theo∣phylact, and Phavorinus. Which Sense agrees well with the Scope of this Epistle, but the Sense given by our Translation is also very good and proper; for in this Sense  is used in those words of Solomon, My Son, , be not forget∣ful of, but keep in mind, or lay up in thy Heart my Counsel, Prov. 3.21. So the Wise∣man interprets himself in the beginning of that Chapter, My Son, , forget not my Precepts, but let thy Heart keep my words, ver. 1. So Origen speaking of the Festivals of the Church, the Lord's day, Easter, Pen∣tecost, saith, The common People had need of these sensible Admonitions, or Memo∣rials of the Blessings then celebrated;In Cels. l. 8. p. 393.  that they may not entirely slip out of their Memo∣ries: And this Translation and Interpretation is confirm'd from the word, , ver. 3. which signifies, to be unmindful of this great Salvation. Ver. 2. For if the word spoken by Angels (from Sinai) was stedfast, (and by God's dealing with the Jews confirmed,) and every (wilful) Transgression and Disobedience (of it) received a just Recompence of Reward: (The Atonements of the Law being only for Sins of Ignorance and Errour, chap. 5.2. and cutting off being the Punishment for wilful Sins, as being acts of Rebellion against God their Governour.) , the word spoken by Angels.]More Nevoc. l. 2. c. 6. p. 200. Maimonides saith ex∣presly, Non invenies Deum ullum opus fecisse nisi per manum alicujus Angeli, God did no work but by the Hand of some Angel. To confirm this, he cites that Passage of their Wisemen, ThatP. 201. God does nothing without consulting before the Family above. And that in Bereschith Rabba, Wheresoever it is said in Scripture,  and Jehovah did this or that, ibi intelligitur ipse & domus Judicii ejus; by which, saith he, they declare, That all things are done by him, mediantibus Angelis, by the Mediation of Angels.Antiq. l. 3. c. 4. p. 78. F. Josephus saith, The Law was given, , by God, declaring to them what they ought to do. And yet he introduces Herod, proving that Legates, or Ambassadors, were Sacred, from this, That. Antiq. l. 15. c. 8. p. 522. B. the Jews had received the choicest of their Laws from God by Angels; i. e. by Messengers, of Legates, as that Name imports.Lib. de Decal. p. 576. Philo is express, That God spake the Law, , by himself, using no other; but yet, saith the sameP. 577. lin. penult. Philo, he did this, , com∣manding an invisible sound to be formed in the Air. And to whom could this Command be directed, but to some of the Angels then at∣tending on him? He therefore seems only to mean, that the Decalogue was administred by God himself speaking to the People, and not by Moses the Mediator betwixt God and them, as the residue of his Laws were. For in his Book de Somniis, he doth not only ob∣serve that the Holy Scripture speaks of those Dreams as, , sent from God; not only which come immediately from him, but which proceed, p. 461. , from his Ministers and Attendants the Angels: But he adds, That these Messengers are employed in bringing, , the Com∣mands of the Father to his Sons. And that this is done, p. 455. F. because we cannot bear his immediate Chastisements, nor yet his excellent Benefits. As for the Fathers, they seem universally to conspire in this Doctrine that the Apostle speaks here, and Gal. 3.19.
, of the Angels mini∣string to the delivery of the Law. SoIn Matth. Ed. Huet. p. 454. E. Ori∣gen. So Chrysostom on this place, Theodoret on Gal. 3.19. Oecumenius, and Theophylact.Hom. 13. in Jer. Ed. Huet. p. 129. D. Origen speaking of Jerusalem, saith, The Angels have now deserted her, who before were always helpful to her: , By whom also the Law of Moses was ordained; it being, saith the Apostle, or∣dained by Angels. The same is the Opinion of St. Jerom on Gal. 3.19. And though Jehovah speaks to Moses in and from Mount Sinai, and from him the Jews received the Law. Yet that he used the Ministry of Angels in the dispensing of it, is evident from many Passages of the New Testament. For, 1. St. Stephen speaketh thus unto the Jews, You have received the Law,  ( Oecum.) , by the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it, Acts 7.53. Now when he was aggravating their Guilt in violating this Law, from the consideration of the Dignity of the Persons, who were by God imployed in giving it to them, he would not have omitted the Son of God, or the , the principal Actor, and spoken only of these inferiour ministring Spirits, could he both truly, and according to the then pre∣sent Notion of the Jews, have said, it was the , who by his Father was imploy'd in giving the Law. For though most of the Fathers say the , or the Son of God, ap∣peared to Moses and the Patriarchs, and o∣thers under the Old Testament,. Just. M. Dial. p. 279. A. D. p. 280. B. 283. A. B. 284. A. 293, 299, 311. Et passim. they all agree in this, That he appeared then as , one that sustained another Person, or as the Legate, the Ambassador, or as , i. e. the Minister of God the Father, as alsoPhilo, . De Nom. Mutat. p. 819. C. Alleg. l. 2. p. 60. , C. p. 100. B. Philo still does. 2. When the Apostle Paul affirms after St. Stephen, That the Law was, , administred by Angels, Gal. 3.19. he cannot reasonably be supposed to mean only that 'twas deliver'd inter Angelos, between Angels, or by God attended with his Angels. For, (1.) as by, is the proper import of the Word , so is it very rarely, if at all, that it is rendred inter, between, or among; it is so rendred indeed by our Translators, 2 Tim. 2.2. but with the Note in the Margin by, to shew they thought it might there bear the Sense, as it doth thus, The things which thou hast heard from me, (and which have been confirm'd) , by many Wit∣nesses, commit to faithful Men. (2.) Seeing here the word spoken, , being put in opposition to the word spoken, . by Christ, shews that  retains its proper Sense, and must be rendred, by Angels; why should we put another Sense on the same Particle used Gal. 3.19. by the same Apostle, with respect to the same Subject? 3. That the word spoken by Angels here respects the Law in general, and not only of the Threatnings made by the Prophets, to whom the  sent his Angels to bring back the people of Israel from their Wickedness; is also evident from the Words. For, (1.) the Word spoken by Angels here, seems to be the same with the word, Administred by Angels, Acts 7.53. Gal. 3.19. Now that was the Law, say both St. Stephen and St. Paul. (2.) It was , the Word made firm, by the Miracles done by Moses to esta∣blish it, as was the Gospel by more glorious Miracles; the Miracles done by Moses being only, , Signs and Wonders, whereas the Gospel was confirm'd also by divers Powers, and Distributions of the Holy Ghost, ver. 4. (3.) As the Apostle saith here, Every Transgression of this Word received a just Re∣compence of Reward. He saith, chap. 10.28. He that despised Moses Law died without Mercy; where the Argument being in sense the same, demonstrates that the word spoken here must be the Law of Moses. (4.) We are properly said to Transgress, and Disobey a Law, but as for Threatnings, though we may disregard, we are not properly said to Transgress them. In fine, I can Answer the Argument of Slichtingius on the place, That God in Person could not give the Law from Mount Sinai, since were it given by God himself, it must on that account be prefer'd before the Gospel: By saying the Compa∣rison is here made only betwixt God speak∣ing to the Jews by the Ministery of Angels, and the same God speaking to us by his Son, which supposes God the Father to be the Su∣preme Author both of the Law and the Go∣spel, asserting only that his Ambassadors or Ministers in the one were much inferiour to his Ambassador and his Great Prophet, by whom the other was revealed. But I am not able to resist the Evidence of his Second Ar∣gument, That the Opposition put between the Word spoken byNam si lex per Dei filium, quomodo D. Autor per Angelos eam traditam fuisse affirmare, & hac in parte eam Evan∣gelio quod hoc per Dei filium & Dominum ipsum annunciatum sit opponere, eoque nomine Evangelio postponere poenit, si non minus lex quam Evangelium ipsum Dei filium, & necdum in statu humiliationis constitutum, laterem, & praefica∣torem habuit. Angels to them, and
the Gospel delivered to us by the Son of God, will not permit us to own that the Law was given to the Jews by the same Son of God, seeing that supposition wholly destroys the force of the Apostle's Argument in this place. But then I do not think that any Angel was so imployed in the delivery of the Law, as to take upon him the Person of God; or that any Creature said, I am the Lord thy God, &c. but only that the Divine Majesty there pre∣sent with his Thousands of Angels, Deut. 33.2. Psal. 68.17. made some of them his Ministers to form the Voice by which he said, I am the Lord thy God, &c. And it may pro∣bably be conjectured, that where-ever there is mention of an Angel and Jehovah together, or any Worship or Excellency specified which is proper to God, there was an appearance of the Shechinah or Divine Majesty conjunct with the Angel. Ver. 3. How shall we escape (the Divine Wrath) if we (Christians) neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord (Christ himself,) and (after) was confirmed to us by them that heard him. , so great Salvation.] That under the Dispensation of the Gospel the deliverance of the Faithful from Persecu∣tions at or after the Destruction of Jerusalem, should here be represented as that great Sal∣vation which began to be spoken of the Lord, was testified to by the Apostles, and even by God himself, by so great Miracles, is incredible. No sure, our Saviour brought Life and immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 2.11. his Apostles testified to us eter∣nal Life, 1 John 1.2. And this is the testi∣mony of God himself, That he hath given us eternal Life, and that Life is in his Son, 1 John 5.11. See Note on chap. 4.3. , was confirmed to us.] Jews, not to us Apostles, by whom it was confirmed: Where therefore is the Argument taken from these Words, to prove St. Paul was not the Author of this Epistle, because the Gospel was not confirmed to him by them that heard Christ, he receiving it by immediate Revelation from him, Gal. 1.12. And usual is it with St. Paul in this and other Epistles to say we, when not he himself but only they he speaks to, or of, must be under∣stood. So Chap. 6.1. Let us go on to perfection. See Chap. 10.25.12.1. Rom. 3.5, 7. 1 Cor. 10.8, 9. 2 Cor. 7.1. Eph. 2.3. 1 Thes. 4.15. Tit. 3.3. Ver. 4. God also bearing them witness both with Signs and Wonders (as he did to Moses delivering the Law to the Jews,) and with divers Miracles and Gifts (or Distributions) of the Holy Ghost, (performed) according to his own Will. , with divers Miracles.] Because, saith Theodoret, the Law was con∣firmed by Miracles, the Apostle thought it necessary to shew the Gospel was in this Su∣periour to it, as it was in these two re∣spects. 1. That the Apostles and the Disciples of our Lord abounded in these miraculous Dis∣pensations, which confirmed the Gospel, as well as Christ himself. 2. That Moses chief∣ly wrought, , Signs and Won∣ders; whereas the , Powers and Di∣stributions of the Holy Ghost here mentioned, were the proper Confirmations of the Gospel Dispensation. For here are four things men∣tioned, which will admit of a distinct Con∣sideration; The first and second are, , Signs and Wonders, which refer to por∣tentous Actions done in the Heavens, as when the Sun stood still; in the Earth, as when it opened to swallow up Dathan and Abiram; in the Air, as when it was turned into Darkness; in the Waters, as when they were turned in∣to Blood: And these were often wrought by Moses, and others under the Old Testament, and still are stiled, , Exod. 7.3. , I will multi∣tiply my Signs and my Wonders in the Land of Egypt. And again, ver. 9. Deut. 4.32. He took his People out of that Nation, , by Signs and Wonders. Shewing, , Signs and great Won∣ders upon Pharaoh, and all his House, Chap. 6.22.7.19.11.3.26.8.29.3. And there arose not a Prophet like unto Moses, , in all the Signs and Wonders which God sent him to do in the Land of Egypt. Deut. 34.11. See Neh. 9.10. Psal. 134.9. Jer. 32.20. Thus Nebuchadonosor declares, , the Signs and Wonders which the most High God had shewed to him, Dan. 4.2. And Darius saith of him, chap. 6.27. , He doth Signs and Wonders in the Heavens and on the Earth. 2.  and  are used in the New Testament, with Relation to the Miracles wrought by the Apostles upon others, in cast∣ing out Devils, making the Blind to see, and the Lame to walk, and healing all manner of Diseases; now none of these things were done by Moses, and very rarely by any of the Prophets. And lastly, as for the Distributi∣ons of the Holy Ghost, consisting in the internal Gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith, the Gifts of Tongues, and the Interpretation of them. These were peculiar to the later Days, that is, the Times of the Messiah, Ver. 5. For unto the Angels hath he not put into Subjection the World to come, whereof we speak, (but unto Christ now Crowned with Honour and Glory, ver. 9. to whom all Power both in Heaven and Earth is given.) For Explication of these Words let it be observed, 1. That both the Scriptures, the Jewish Records, and the Primitive Fathers do repre∣sent
the State preceding our Lord's Advent, and his Advancement to the Right Hand of Majesty in the Heavens, as a State subject to Angels, or in which God dealt with them by the Ministery of his Angels; this of the Jews has partly been confirm'd already, by shew∣ing, That their Law was the Word spoken by Angels. That they were brought out of Egypt by the Ministery of an Angel, Moses himself declares in his Message to the King of Edom, When we cried to the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an Angel, and hath brought us forth out of the Land of Egypt, Numb. 20.16. This Angel, saith the Targum of Jonathan, was a Ministering Angel. Nor is it to be thought the King of Edom, who had no No∣tion of the Logos, could understand him other∣wise. And hence the Note of Paulus Fa∣gius runs thus, Omnis Israelitici Populi salus, & ductio per Angelos administrata est, The whole Conduct and Preservation of the People of Israel was administered by Angels. That they were led through the Wilderness by an Angel, and that an Angel drave out the Inha∣bitants of the Land of Canaan before them, we learn from these Words of God himself; Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and bring thee into the Land I have prepared for thee, Exod. 23.20. He shall go, saith the Greek, , as thy Guide and Captain. And ver. 23. My Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee to the Amorites and Hittites, &c. and I will cut them off. Now that here he speaks of a Mini∣stering Angel, may be argued from these Words, My Name is in him, that is, as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan well ex∣pound the Phrase, His word is in my Name, by him do I declare my will and pleasure. So Maimonides, in More Nevoch. part. 1. c. 64. Some think this Angel was the Eternal Son of God; but this I am afraid to assert, saith the Bishop of Ely, because it seems dangerous to me to call him simply an Angel, i. e. a Mi∣nister, or Messenger, without any such ad∣dition as that in Mal. 3.3. That Angel of the Covenant, for so he was at his Incarna∣tion, of which he there speaks, before which I dare not ascribe to him such ministerial Works as these, of bringing the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and going before them to lead them in the way to Canaan; this was properly the work of an Angel, to whom Moses ascribes it. But though we thus understand it, this excludes not the Presence of God him∣self, but rather proves it; for this Angel was sent from the Shechinah, or Majestick Pre∣sence of God which was in the Cloud, and is therefore stiled the Angel of his Presence, Isa. 63.9. because, saith the Targum, he was an Angel sent,  from before him, or from before his Face: And thus it was true which the Lord said to Moses, My Presence shall go with thee, Exod. 33.14. in the Cloud, and my Angel shall go before thee, Exod. 23.23. as being sent from before me to conduct thee. And again, Exod. 33.2. I will send an Angel before thee, and will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, &c. for I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a stiff-necked Peo∣ple, lest I consume thee in the way. He there∣fore who was to be sent could not be God himself, or the Divine Logos equal to him, for then he would have had the same reason to consume them for their Disobedience. Accordingly we find Masius on Josh. 5.14. confessing that the Jews generally thought this was the Angel Michael. And partly from them, and partly from Daniel, who styles him Michael their Prince, chap. 10.21. and Michael the Prince which standeth for the Children of thy People, chap. 12.1. It seems to be that many Christian Fathers and Ancient Commentators have so expresly said,. Theodoret. in Gal. 3.19. That God over all placed over them the Angel Mi∣chael, as Daniel hath taught us; and God also promised Moses that he would send an Angel with his People. And both Theodoret and St. Jerom in their Comments on Dan. 11.21. say, that Michael, est Archangelus cui creditus est Populus Judaeorum, he is that Archangel to whom was committed the care of the People of the Jews. And the Author of the Recogni∣tions speaking of God's dividing of the Na∣tions to AngelsƲni vero, qui in Archangelis erat maximus, sorte data est dispositio eorum qui prae caeteris omnibus excelsi Dei cultum & scientiam receperant. Recogn. Lib. 2. §. 42. p. 428., adds, That the Govern∣ment of the Jews themselves, and the disposal of their Affairs, were by God committed to an Archangel. Now if this Supposition be admitted, and the World to come, according to the Jewish import of that Phrase, be taken for the Go∣spel State, then the Apostle's Argument runs thus, You have greater reason to take heed to the things taught by Christ under the Go∣spel Dispensation, than had the Jews to take heed to the things taught by the Mosaical Dis∣pensation; for unto the Angels God hath not subjected the Gospel State, but unto Christ: i. e. To him who is more able to reward his Obedient Servants, and bring them into the Celestial Canaan, and more able to consume and punish them who do neglect the great Salvation tendred in this Dispensation. As to the Gentile World, the Doctrine of the Jews in relation to them is evident from those words of the Septuagint, when the Al∣mighty
divided the Nations, he set the borders of them, , according to the number of the Angels of God, Deut. 32.8. that is, saith R. Menachem, He placed Seventy Angels over the Seventy Nations. For saith the Son of Syrach, , In the division of the Nations of the whole Earth, he set a Ruler over every People, Ecclus. 17.17. Accordingly in Da∣niel we find mention of the Prince of Persia and of Greece, i. e. of the Angels which presided over those places.. Euseb. demonstr. Ev. l. 4. c. 10. p. 162. D. 163. A. Eusebius doth frequently inform us, That all the Nations of the Earth were formerly by Lot divided to many Angels, and this was the Doctrine of. Just. M. Apol. 1. p. 44. Justin Martyr, ofEt quando divisit Altissimus Gentes, statuit terminos Gentium secundum numerum Angelorum Dei, Populum autem qui credit Deo jam non esse sub Angelorum potestate, sed sub Domini. Iren. l. 3. c. 12. p. 266. Vide Fevardentium in locum. Irenaeus,. Athenag. Legat: p. 27. C. Athe∣agoras, and the two. Clem. Al. Strom. 7. p. 702. C. D. Est enim uniuscujusque Gentis Angelus, cui credita Gentis ipsius dispensatio a Deo: Clem. R. Recog. l. 2. §. 42. Clements. So that in the Judgment of the Jews, and of the Pri∣mitive Fathers, all the whole Heathen World were subject to the Government of Angels. And then the Argument of the Apostle is to this Effect, That now the world of Believers gathered from the Heathens, is put under Christ's immediate Power, and subject not to Angels, but to him who will come in flaming Fire to execute Vengeance upon all that obey t his Gospel; and that therefore it concerns them to give more diligent heed to the Words spoken by him, and not to neglect that great Salvation which he tenders. , the World to come.] This I conceive imports primarily the Chri∣stian State, and in order to the Government of that, the whole World subjected to Christ from the time of his Resurrection and Ascen∣sion; (When he sat down on the Right hand of the Majesty on high, and had all power in Heaven and Earth committed to him; for when God brought him by his Resurrection again, , into the Earth, he said, Let all the Angels of God worship him, i. e. let them all how and be subject to his Autho∣rity, chap. 1.6.) to the time when he shall abolish Death, the last Enemy of his Subjects, and put the Crown upon their Heads, and condemn all his Enemies to endless Punish∣ments, and so give up his mediatory King∣dom to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.28. And this I gather from the following Proof of this subjection of the World to Christ, taken from Psalm the Eighth; for the Apostle plainly doth insinuate, that it is begun already, in that this Jesus is already Crowned with Glory and Honour, ver. 9. and he as plainly testifies that it must continue till the day of Judgment, and only will be then compleated by saying, That he must Reign till all his Enemies be put under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.25. and proving this from those words of the Psalmist, For he hath put all things under his Feet, ver. 27. So then the Argument runs thus, How shall they escape who neglect that great Salvation tendred by him, who hath all the World, and all things in it subject to him, and to continue so till he hath put all his Enemies under his Feet. It may be also noted, That when this World to come doth respect only the Christian State, from the Resurrection of Christ, to the final Judgment, then it is stiled,  the Age to come, which is the frequent import of the World to come, in the Jewish Writers; and in this Sense is Christ stiled, , the Father of the World to come, Isa. 9.6. and the Gifts vouchsafed to Believers, and exercised by them in the first Ages of the Church, are stiled in this Epistle, , the Powers of the World to come; but when it also doth include that Earth in which they dwell, and in which they are to continue to the Day of Judgment, then is it stiled, , the World to come after the other Four Kingdoms, which are stiled , the Earth, and are said to have Dominion over all the Earth. Thus of the Kingdom of Assyria and Babylon, Daniel saith to Nebuchodonosor, that God had made him Lord of all things, and setled his Kingdom where-ever the Sons of Men dwell, Dan. 2.37, 38. and his Kingdom is by Isaiah often stiled , and the fall of it is represented as the Desolation of the whole Earth. Thus in his Vision against Babylon he saith, Behold the day of the Lord comes cruel, and with fierce anger, , to lay the land (of Babylon) desolate, chap. 13.9. and ver. 11. , I will pronounce evil to the whole Earth. Cyrus the King of Persia speaks thus, The Lord hath given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, Ezra 1.2. and Artaxerxes in his Epistle for the Destruction of the Jews writes thus, being Lord over many
Nations, , and ha∣ving Dominion over all the World, &c. Esth. 13.2. As for the Third, that is, the Grecian Mo∣narchy, the Prophet Daniel saith expresly of it, It shall bear Rule over all the Earth, Dan. 2.39. Accordingly Alexander is celebrated in all Historians and Poets which speak of him, as the Conqueror of the World; when he came to Babylon Ambassadors were sent unto him, , from almost the whole World, saith Diodorus Siculus, Hist. l. 17. p. 579. and when he died this Inscription was writ upon his Tomb, . And lastly, as for the Roman Monarchy, as it was stiled by the Poets, , the Universal Kingdom, and by the Historians Orbis terrarum; so is it in the Scripture represented as the Government, , of the whole Earth, Luke 2.1. for, saithVide Lipsium de Magn. Rom. l. 1. c. 3. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, , Rome presides over the whole habitable Earth: Now this Kingdom of Christ being Prophesied of by Daniel, as that which was to be set up after these Kingdoms which bore that Name, and to break in pieces all other Kingdoms, is therefore stiled , the Kingdom of the World to come; and if, (as we we may probably conjecture from the Angel, the Prince of Persia, and the Angel, the Prince of Greece, Dan. 10.13, 20.) Angels were by God appointed to preside over those Monarchies, then hence ariseth another Reason why the Apostle might say, Unto the Angels hath he not subjected the World to come, of which we speak. Ver. 6. But one in a certain place (viz. David, Psal. 8.4.) testifieth, saying, Lord, what is Man, that thou art (so) mindful of him; or the Son of Man, that thou (so) visit∣est him? Ver. 7. Thou madest him (but) a little lower than the Angels, thou crownedst him with Glory and Honour, and (hast) set him over the works of thine Hands, (Psal. 8.) Ver. 8. Thou hast put all things (and so the World to come) in subjection under his Feet; for in (saying) that he (hath) put all (things) in subjection under him, (it is manifest that) he left nothing that is not put under him; but now (as for Adam, and his Posterity, of whom these things were primarily spoken) we see not yet all things put under him. Ver. 9. But we see Jesus (the second Adam) who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death, that he by the Grace of God might taste Death for every Man, (already) crowned with Glory and Honour, (and therefore know that all things are, and shall be subjected to him.) Here note, 1. That though these words of the Psalmist may be allowed in their first and obvious Sense, to relate to the first Adam, created after God in his Similitude and Like∣ness, with respect to his Dominion, yet doth not this hinder that they be expounded in the mystical Sense of Christ the second A∣dam; for the Jews acknowledge that the first Adam was a Type of the second Adam, that is, of Christ, who is by them stiled  the last, or second Adam. Moreover the Mystery of Adam is, say they, the Mystery of the Messiah, and the Man created the sixth Day signifies the Messiah. For thus they speak,Tzeron Hammor. Sect. Berischith. Our Redemption i signified by the six Days of the Creation, espe∣cially by the sixth in which Man was crea∣ted, by whom we are not to understand the Nations of the World, but  the Mystery of Man is the Mystery of the Messiah, as it is said Dan. 7.13. he came like to the Son of Man. And this lays a Foundation for the inference of the Apostle, that what was spoken of Man in general, and more particularly related to the first Adam, was only punctually fulfilled in the second Adam taking the Nature of Man on him; for, saith he, we see it not in any measure fulfilled in any other Man; but as for Christ, we do already see it actually fulfilled, as to the first Clause of it, he being now crowned with Glory and Honour, and so as all things are al∣ready subject to his Feet, as far as the present Necessities of the Church require, Eph. 1.22. so will they compleatly and actually be so when Death, the last Enemy, shall be destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.25, 26, 27. , crowned with Glory and Honour.] That these words are in con∣struction to follow the ensuing Words, That he by the Grace of God might taste Death for every Man. See Note on Chap. 7. ver. 20. but the Apostle puts these words last, as be∣ing to discourse of our Lord's Sufferings for us. Ver. 10. (This Jesus, I say, who by the Grace of God tasted Death for every Man.) For it became him from whom are (were) all all things, and by whom are (were) all things (ordered) in (his design of) bringing many Sons to Glory, to (effect this by) make (ing) the Captain of their Salvation perfect by Suf∣ferings; (, to consecrate him to that work by Sufferings.) , to sanctifie, to con∣secrate, and dedicate him to that work by his Sufferings.] That this is the true import of these words will appear, 1. From the like words used by this Apostle, Chap. 5.8, 9, 10. Though he were a Son, yet learned he Obe∣dience by the things that he suffered, and being
made Perfect; [,] i. e. being consecra∣ted to his Priestly Office, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him, being called of him an High Priest after the Order of Melchisedek. And again, Chap. 7.27, 28. The Law maketh them High Priests which have Infirmity, but the Word of the Oath, which is after the Law, maketh the Son so, , who is consecrated an High Priest for evermore. 2dly, From the Collation made betwixt the Call of Aaron to his Priest∣hood, and of Christ to his: For as Aaron took t this Honour to himself, but was called of God to it; so Christ glorified not himself to be de an High Priest, but was constituted so by him, who said, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedek. Now the Consecration of Aaron, and the Legal Priests, is continually express'd by this Word: For what is in the Hebrew, thou shalt fill the Hands of Aaron, and his Sons, and is by us transla∣ted, thou shalt consecrate them, is by the Sep∣tuagint thus rendred, . So Numb. 3.3. , they consecrated them to the Priesthood. Accordingly the Priest con∣secrated, is in the Greek, , Lev. 21.10. the Day of his Consecration is , Lev. 8.33. the Sacrifice then of∣fered for Sin, is , the Burnt-offering, , v. 28. the Ram offer'd, is , v. 22. the Flesh of Consecration, , Exod. 29.34. This also will be farther evident from the next Verse, By these Sufferings he became an High Priest for ever, after the Order of Mel∣chisedek, Chap. 7.28. And the Author of Salvation to all that obey him, Chap. 7.28. For appearing with this Sacrifice before God in Heaven for ever, He is able to save for ever them that come unto God by him. .] Conveniens hoc fuit Dei sapien∣tiae, saith Grotius. He thought fit to do this, saith Dr. Hammond; 1. Because thus the same Nature suffer'd which had sinned, and there∣fore purged us from the Guilt we in that Na∣ture had contracted, and so dissolv'd that Death to which we became subject by the Sin of Adam. This is the Reason of Christ's Sufferings which all the Primitive Fathers do suggest, and on which they especially in∣sist; assigning this Reason of our Lord's Death, , that our Obnoxious∣ness to Death might be expiated: SoApud Theodoret. Dial. 1. Ig∣natius. He died, saithJust. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. pag. 316. A. Justin Martyr, for Mankind, , which, from Adam, be∣came subject to Death, and the Deceit of the Serpent. IrenaeusIren. lib. 5. cap. 21, 23. lib. 3. cap. 20, 31. & passim. saith, That as Man∣kind, by Man overcome, was obnoxious to Death; sic etiam per hominem victorem, a∣scendamus in vitam; so by a Man conquering Death, we may rise to Life: And as Death prevail'd against us by Man, sic iterum nos adversus mortem per hominem accipiamus palmam, so we may prevail against it by Man, that as in the Animal Adam we all died, so in the Spiritual we might all be made alive. AndAthan. Orat. Incarn. p. 60. , p. 66. C. Athanasius, in his Oration of the Incarna∣tion, is very copious on this Subject; decla∣ring that Christ took our Nature on him, , to reduce again our Corruptible to Incorruption; that our Lord seeing Mankind lost by Death exercising the Dominion of Corruption over them, seeing the Punishment threaten'd to our Transgression,Ibid. C. , prevailing over us to Corruption, and seeing the whole Race of Men subject to Death, he, in Compas∣sion to them,Ib. D. , and not enduring this Dominion of Death, that what he had created might not perish, he took a Body to himself, not alien from ours; and, because we were all subject to Corruption,P. 61. A. , delivering it to the Death for us all, he offer'd it to the Father, that, as it were, all Men dying in him; the Law of the Corruption of Mankind might be dissolv'd, and he might translate them again to Incorruption. AndP. 63. B. this, saith he, is the first Cause of his Incarnation. HenceChrys. Oecum. Theoph. in Col. 3.14. ma∣ny of them say, that the Hand-writing which was blotted out by the Death of Christ, was the Threat made to Adam, In the Day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt die the Death. Here then is one Reason why the Death or Blood of Bulls and Goats could not take away Sin; viz. they did not partake of the same Nature that had sinned, and therefore could not in that Nature dissolve the Debt we had contracted, and so translate us to Incorrup∣tion. 2. It became him thus to suffer, be∣cause these Sufferings fitted him to be a mer∣ciful High Priest to them that suffer as he did; and also to be a faithful High Priest, to make Atonement for our Sins, v. 17. Ob∣serve here, that the Apostle doth not say, Christ's Sufferings were absolutely necessary to satisfie Divine Justice; that Infinite Mer∣cy could not pardon Sin, without a Satis∣faction made to Justice; and that Infinite Wisdom could contrive no other Way for the Atonement of our Sins, but that Divine Wis∣dom saw it fit that Christ should suffer for
the Ends fore-mentioned: And why then may not others be permitted to think and speak with the Apostle, without adding that which the Apostle, in all this long and excellent Dis∣course concerning the Ends, the Reason, and Necessity of our Saviour's Sufferings, thought not once fit to mention. Ver. 11. For both he (our Priest) who san∣ctifieth, (i. e. by his Oblation purgeth us from Sin,) and we that are sanctified, (or purged from it,) are all of one (Original and Nature;) for which Cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren. Ver. 12. Saying, (Psal. 22.22.) I will de∣clare thy Name unto (among) my Brethren: In the midst of the Church (or Congregation) will I praise thee. Ver. 13. And again, (Isa. 8.17.) I will put my Trust in him. And again, (ver. 18.) Be∣hold, I and the Children which God hath giv∣en me. , He that sanctifies, &c.] I have shewed, Note on Chap. 9.13. that the Word , in this Epistle, is used in the Sacrifi∣cal Sense, or with relation to the Expiation of Sin: In the Old Testament, when it re∣specteth Sacrifices, it sometimes signifies to devote, consecrate and offer them to God. So Lev. 22.3. The holy things which the Chil∣dren of Israel hallow to the Lord; , which they shall offer to the Lord; for, Numb. 18.9. these holy Things are thus enu∣merated, every Heave-Offering, ver. 8. every Meat-Offering, every Sin-Offering, every Tres∣pass-Offering; Deut. 15.19. All the First∣lings of thy Flock thou shalt sanctifie to the Lord thy God, . For if they were clean, they were to be offer'd to God, and their Blood was to be sprinkled on the Altar, and their Fat burnt for an Offering made by Fire, Numb. 18.19. But if they were unclean, , thou shalt not sacrifice it to the Lord, saith the Text, Deut. 15.21. And, 1 Chron. 23.13. Aaron was separated, that he might sanctifie the most Holy Things, , that he might of∣fer them in Sacrifice, and to burn Incense; for he was separated to execute the Priest∣hood, Exod. 28.1. And that was to be per∣formed by offering Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin, Hebr. 5.1. And in this Sense our Savi∣our saith, , for their sakes I sanctifie my self, i. e. I offer my self a piacular Victim, that they may be sanctified in the Truth, John 17.19. i. e. that they may be consecrated to their Office, or set apart for my Service: For as Aaron and his Sons were hallowed, and set apart for God's Service by a Sacrifice, to expiate them from their Sins; and this was done , to sanctifie them to the Priesthood, Exod. 29.1, 14, 21. as well as by the Holy Anointing: Exod. 30.30, 31.40.13. So Christ's Apostles were san∣ctified and set apart to their Office, not only by the Unction of the Holy Ghost, but also by that piacular Victim Christ offer'd for their Sins: And accordingly, in these Words, he that sanctifies is Christ that offers himself, that he might sanctifie , i. e. purge them from their Sins by his own Blood, Heb. 13.12. and they that are sanctified are they that by this Blood are purged from their Sins, and so are fitted to draw nigh to God, and made a Royal Priesthood, to shew forth his Praises, and offer up Spiritual Sacrifices ac∣ceptable to God, through Jesus Christ. 2dly, The Word doth also signifie to purge, purifie, and make clean, by Sacrifice, both in the Scripture, and profane Authors. Ths of the Altar it is said, he shall sprinkle the Blood upon it with his Finger, seven times, and he shall cleanse it, and hallow it, , from the Uncleannesses of the Children of Israel, Lev. 16.19. So Exod. 29.33. And they shall eat those things , by which or for whom the Atonement was made to conse∣crate, , and to sanctifie them; and, v. 36. thou shalt cleanse the Altar, , when thou hast made an Atonement for it. In profane Authors, to purge by Sacrifices from Guilt or Uncleanness, is sometimes , some∣times , and the Sacrifices that did this, are styled , Sacrifices of Purgation; and according to this Sense of the Word, he that sanctifieth is he that purgeth, and they that are sanctified are they who are purged from the Guilt of Sin. Psal. 22.22. This Psalm being interpreted by the Jews themselves, concerning the Mes∣siah, the Apostle might well apply this Pas∣sage of it to him. I will put my Trust in him; and again, I and the Children which God hath given me.] These two Citations being from the same Place, Isa. 8.17. make but one Proof, that he who sanctifies, and they who were sanctified, have the same Nature, shewing that he who said, I will put my Trust in him, called them whom God had given him, his Children, or Off-spring, and so declared them to be of the same Nature or Original with him. Now that these Words were anciently adapted to Christ, we learn from the Words of Simeon, who applies the Words following to him, Luke 2.34. and from the Jews who expound the Words, he shall be a Stumbling Stone, and a Rock of Offence, of our Saviour, Pug. Fid. Part 2. c. 5. §. 2. to whom they are applied by St. Paul, Rom. 9.33. and by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.7. Ver. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also him∣self likewise took part of the same, that through (the) Death (they had deserved, and he suf∣fer'd in their stead,) he might destroy (evacuate
and frustrate) him who had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil. Ver. 15. And (might) deliver them (from the Sting of it) who, through the Fear of (the) Death (threatned to the Posterity of A∣dam, without any Promise of a Resurrection) were all their Lives time subject unto Bon∣dage. , that had the Power of Death.] That by seducing Adam to eat of the Forbidden Fruit, the Devil, whom the Jews call Sammael, had Power to accuse Men, and to demand that they might die, according to the Threat denounced a∣gainst them, is the constant Opinion of theMaim. duct. dub. l. 3. c. 22. p. 398. Jews, Our Wise Men say, it is a Tradi∣tion, that Satan the Adversary, the Angel of Death, descendeth and seduceth, ascendeth, and accuseth, receives Power, and takes away the Soul or Life. Hence they say of him, ThatBuxt. in voce Sammael. he caused Death to the whole World. , is to frustrate and bring to naught his Design of subjecting all Men to the Power of Death, and keeping them un∣der the Dominion of it, to render it of no Effect, Rom 3.3, 31. Rom. 4.14. 1 Cor. 1.28.2.6.6.13.13.8, 10, 11.15.24, 26. 2 Cor. 3.7, 11, 13, 14. Gal. 3.17.5.11. 2 Thess. 2.8. And thus Christ is said , to abolish Death, 2 Tim. 1.10. That therefore we are still subject to Death, is, say the Fathers, not that we are now pu∣nish'd with it, but out of Mercy, that Sin might not be immortal in us, the Time of our Resurrection being that in which Death shall be totally abolish'd, 1 Cor. 15.26. , the Fear of Death.] That the whole Heathen World was subject to this Fear, and that it was the King of Terrors to them, see Note on Rom. 8.22. From this Fear we are delivered at present by our De∣liverance from that Guilt of Sin which alone makes it truly terrible, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. and by the Promise of a Glorious Resurrection, when Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, v. 54. Ver. 16. For verily he took not on him the Nature of (, he laid not hold of, he helped not the fallen) Angels, but he took on him (Gr. he laid hold of) the Seed of Abraham. .] This Word, say the Glos∣saries, signifies manum injicere, to lay hold upon, manu prehendere, to hold with the Hand. So Ecclus. 4.11. Wisdom, , layeth hold of them that seek her: Sus. 39, 40. The Man we could not hold, being too strong for us, , but laying hold of her, we asked her, &c. And so in the Septuagint it signifies almost continually, , take hold of his Tail, Exod. 4.4. See Kircher in the Words The Seed of Abraham.] The Note of the best Commentators here, is this, That the Apostle writing to the Jews, thought it suffi∣cient to mention only the Mercies designed by the Messiah for the Jews. And true it is that they confined the Seed of Abraham to themselves; but the Apostle reckons all Be∣lievers as the Seed of Abraham, Rom. 4.12, 16, 17. Gal. 3.14, 29. tho' Christ is here said to have taken upon him the Seed of Abraham, because he derived his Flesh from his Poste∣rity. Ver. 17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like (these) his Brethren, that he might be a merciful (High Priest to them under all their Sufferings,) and (a) faithful High Priest, (exactly performing his Priestly Office,) in things pertaining to God, (so as) to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People. , to make Atonement for the Sins of the People.] i. e. , to make Atonement to God for their Sins. So inDe Abstinentia, &c. l. 4. §. 5. p. 148. Porphyry, , to propitiate for the Sins of many, is in the same Place, , to propitiate the Deity for them. This Sense the Words require, for Christ is here said to be a faithful High-Priest , in things pertain∣ing to God, that he might make Atonement, surely, to him. This Reconciliation there∣fore must respect God. Again, this Phrase, when it respects the Jewish Sacrifices, hath still Relation to the Guilt of Sin to be expi∣ated, and taken away by them; and every Sin-offering, offer'd by the Priest, is said to be offer'd by the Priest, , to make Atonement for their Sins, Lev. 4.35.5.6, 10.13.44. Ezek. 44.27. And of the piacular Victim it is still said, , the Priest shall make Atonement for them, and the Sin shall be forgiven, Lev. 4.20, 31.5.6, 10, 13, 16, 18.12.7, 8, 14.18, 19, 29, 31.15.30.19.22. Numb. 6.11, 15, 28. The Apostle therefore here speaking to the Jews in the Phrase always used by them, of such Sacrifices as suffer'd in their stead, to expi∣ate the Guilt of their Sin, must be supposed to teach them that the like was done for them by our Saviour's Sacrifice. Ver. 18. For in that he himself (actually) suffered being tempted, he is (become) able (and willing) to succour them who (at any time) are tempted; (i. e. exposed to Suffer∣ings.) , being tempted.] i. e. exposed to Agonies and Sufferings; for  in the
Epistles, signifies to be exposed to such Af∣flictions, as subject us to great Temptations to desist from our Duty and Obedience; as when the Apostle saith, No Temptation hath befallen you, but what is, , support∣able by Man; for the Lord is faithful, who will not suffer you, , to be tempted above what you are able (or exposed to Suf∣ferings beyond your strength) but will with the Temptation make a way (so far) to escape, that you may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. So the Apostle finding his Thessalonians, , in great Afflictions from their Per∣secutors, sends to know their Faith, , lest the Tempter might have prevailed on them by reason of these Tri∣bulations, to desert it, 1 Thes. 3.3, 4, 5. Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things which thou art to suffer: behold, Satan shall cast some of you into Prison, , that you may be tempted; i. e. be tried by Temptations. See Jam. 1.2, 12. 1 Pet. 1.6. 2 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 3.10. So here, our Saviour tried by these Agonies, he suffered in his hour of Darkness, when the Tempter fell upon him with all his Fury, is become experimentally able to succour us under those Sufferings, which render Obedience so hard to Flesh and Blood. , he is able.] He hath, , a power joined with a Sympathy to∣wards us, and a propensity to succour us. So Rom. 11.23. They shall be grafted in, , for God is able. And Chap. 14.4. The weak shall stand, , for God is able to make him stand. Thus to encourage us to Charity the Apostle saith, , God is able to make all Grace abound towards us, 2 Cor. 9.8. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, , that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him to that day, 2 Tim. 1.12. CHAP. III. V. 1. WHerefore, holy Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly Calling, (i. e. the cal∣ling to celestial Blessings) consider the Apostle, and High-Priest of our Profession Christ Jesus, (who, as our Apostle, taught these things, and, as our High-Priest, suffered to obtain these Bles∣sings for us, and confirm them to us.) Ver. 2. Who was faithful to him that ap∣pointed him (to be an Apostle and High-Priest) as also (it is said of) Moses (that he) was faith∣ful in all his House, (i. e. in all the House of God, Numb. 12.7.) , who was faithful, &c.] That is, as Moses faithfully discharged all that the Lord commanded him to say, or do for the Church of Israel; so Christ was faithful in the Discharge of his Prophetick Office, doing and speaking as the Father had given him com∣mandment, John 12.49, 50.14.10. And in his Priestly Office, in laying down his Life for the Sheep, according to the Commandment he had received from the Father, John 10.18. and doing all things requisite to make Atone∣ment for the Sins of the People, Chap. 2.17. I know indeed the Criticks say, that  and , signifie one established in his Office, as in those words, , Samuel was established a Prophet to the Lord; but this Criticism is here needless, and the word , Chap. 2.17. bearing not this Sense, I chuse rather to follow the ordinary import of the word. Ver. 3. For this Man (this Jesus) was count∣ed worthy of (or dignified with) more Honour than Moses, inasmuch as he who hath builded (Gr. , who orders or governs) the House, hath more honour than the House, (of which Moses only was a part.) ] Is he that orders, and go∣verns, and provides, or prepares all things. So Phavorinus, , ordino, guberno, moderor. And thus, , in Plato, Epist. 11. is to have Cities and Polities well ordered. So Wisd. 9.2. Thou in thy Wisdom, , hast ordered Man to have Dominion over thy Creatures. Thus Philo, De Cherub. p. 100. saith, God is the Cause of the World, , by which it was made, and the , by which it was ordered, or put into that Frame and Order in which it is. The words preceding, , he was dignified with more Honour, seem plainly to refer unto Christ's Regal Of∣fice, by which all Power in Heaven and Earth was given to him, and he was made Head over all things for his Church, which is his Body, and in which he dwells as in his House, Ephes. 1.21, 22. And this to me seems to esta∣blish this Sense of the Word. Ver. 4. For every House is builded (, ordered and governed) by some Man, but he that built (, that orders and governs) all things is God. , he that built all things is God.] The Apostle, say the Socinians on the place, proves Christum tanto praestantiorem esse Mose, quanto Deus praestan∣tior est suo Populo, qui Dei Domus est, idque merito, that Christ is as much more excellent than Moses, as God is more excellent than his own People. And this they had just cause to say; and if so, Christ must be properly and truly God, for nothing else can so far excel Moses, the chiefest of that People, as God himself excels them; by this Interpretation
therefore they do not avoid, but confirm the Argument for our Saviour's Deity from this Text. The Argument seems plainly to run thus; He that governs all things is God, but Christ, as Pater Familias, Father of his Fa∣mily, governs all things in his House, that is, the Church dispersed throughout all the World, and hath in order thereunto all Judgment, and all Power in Heaven and Earth commit∣ted to him: He therefore must be God, that is, the Exercise of his Kingly Office shews that he must be God as well as Man. Thus Philo, De Victim. Offer. p. 661. C. often saith of that Power, , to which the Government of all things is com∣mitted, that, , he is God, not only of Men but Angels, a great Being, who truly doth exist, both strong and mighty. Ver. 5. And Moses verily was faithful in (the Administration of) all (things in) his House, (but this he was only) as a Servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken (by God to them). Ver. 6. But Christ as a Son (is placed) over his own House, (i. e. he enters upon the Go∣vernment of it as an Heir, and Successor into the Rights of his Father, the Father now judging to Man, but having committed all Judgment to the Son, John 5.22.) whose House we (Christians) are (and shall continue to be) if we hold fast our Confidence, and the rejoycing of our Hope stedfast to the end. , as a Servant.] The Govern∣ment of Israel was a Theocrasy, where God gave all the Laws and Precepts, and Mo∣ses, only as his Servant and Minister, told them what things God thought fit to com∣mand them; but the Government of the Christian Church is entirely committed to our Lord Jesus, and he, as Supreme Head and Lord of all things, governs both it and all things in Earth and Heaven for the good of it; and therefore, if he be not truly God, God doth not now govern the World as formerly, but hath given up the Administration of it to a Creature, whose House we are, Christ living in our Hearts by Faith, Gal. 2.20. Eph. 3.17. abiding in us by his Spirit, John 14.23. Rom. 8.9, 10, 11. and dwelling in our Bodies, and in the Body of the Church, as in his Temple, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.6.17. 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. Eph. 2.20, 21, 22.4.16. , the Confidence,] Or the free Pro∣fession of the Faith; for  is a Liberty or Freedom of speaking; as when 'tis said of Christ, that he spake, , freely, Mark 8.32. John 7.13.18.20. and of his Apostles, that they spake, , with all Freedom and Courage, Acts 2.29.4.13, 29, 31.28.31. 2 Cor. 3.12.7.14. Eph. 6.19. Phil. 1.20. 1 Tim. 3.13. Heb. 4.16. So Phavorinus, . , the rejoicing of Hope.] i. e. the Hope which causes us to rejoice in expectation of the Glory of God, Rom. 5.2. 2 Cor. 1.14. Gal. 6.4. if we hold this firm unto the end. Which supposes that they who were partakers of this Heavenly Calling, and had at present this cause of Rejoycing, might not hold it firm unto the End, but might fall off from it, ver. 14. might depart from the living God, ver. 11. Chap. 4.11. Yea, the Apostle in this Epistle plainly doth suppose that they who had tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, &c. might fall away, chap. 6.4, 5, 6. That the Just who lives by his Faith might draw back unto Perdition, chap. 10.38, 39. that they might fall from the Grace of God, chap. 12.15. Ver. 7. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost saith (by David, Psal. 95.8.) to day if you will hear his voice. , the Holy Ghost saith.] Hence it appears that David writ his Psalms by the Afflatus, or Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. See Note on Matth. 23.43. , to day.] At present, for now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. We must do God's Commandments to day, say the Jews, from Deut. 7.11. and receive the Reward to mor∣row. We must repent to day, lest e die to morrow, before we have repented. See Cartw. in locum. And again, If Israel would repent but one day, the Messiah would come; and this they prove from these words of the Psal∣mist,  when you hear his voice, speaking in the Prophets; or as the Tar∣gum,  when you hear him speak∣ing by the Logos, the Word, proceeding from the Father, harden not your Hearts; that this is the frequent sense of the Particle  See Noldius, p. 89. §. 18. and it is also the sense of the Greek, . So , when he said thus, Gen. 31.8. , when the Daugh∣ters of Shiloh come forth, Judg. 21.21. , when I lie down, Job 7.4. , when thou sittest; , when thou liest down, Prov. 3.24, 25. , when thou goest; , when thou runnest, Prov. 4.12. So also in the New Testament, , when I shall be lifted up, John 12.32. , when I shall go, John 14.3.16.7. , when he shall appear, 1 John 3.2. These words are therefore to be extended to the whole time of their hearing God, speaking to them by his Prophets, and especially to the time of God's speaking to them by his Son, who was to bring them into a better Rest than that of Canaan, into which Joshua led them. Ver. 8. Harden not your Hearts, as (your Forefathers did) in the (time of) provocation in the day of Temptation in the Wilderness; (hence learn that 'twas in their power to pre∣vent the hardness of their Hearts.)
Ver. 9. When (where) your Fathers tempted me, (i. e. doubted of my Presence with them, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not? Exod. 17.7. Numb. 14.11, 21.) proved me, and saw my Works forty years. When, , where.] So the Hebrew  is rendred, Numb. 22.26. Deut. 8.15. Psal. 84.3. Eccles. 8.10. So Numb. 20.13. These are the Waters of Contention,  where the Chil∣dren of Israel contended. , tempted me.] That to tempt God in the Scripture Phrase is always to di∣strust his Power, or Goodness, after sufficient Demonstrations given of it. See Note on Matth. 4.7. and Note here that the Apostle saith they tempted Christ, 1. Cor. 10.9. which shews that these words may truly be applied to him. , proved me.] The Hebrew  which is here rendred proved me, is, Mal. 3.16. rendred by the Greek , they resisted God; and by the Chaldee, the Syriac, and by our Version, they who tempted God; that is, saith Dr. Pocock, who went about to try and prove him whether he could or would punish Sin∣ners, and to provoke and dare him to do his worst, to execute his Judgments, if he were a God of Judgment; and then to see his Works forty Years, must be to see his Judgments ex∣ecuted uon them forty Years. , forty Years.] If this be the right Connexion of the words, then to see God's Works forty Years must be to see his Punishments so long upon them, as he plain∣ly threatned they should, saying, You shall bear your Iniquities forty Years, Numb. 14.33. and that so visibly, that all the Nations should discern his Judgments on them; For surely, as I live, saith he, all the Earth shall be filled with the Glory of God, ver. 21. But if, ac∣cording to the Reading of the Hebrew, and the Septuagint, the forty Years should be added to the following Verse thus, Wherefore I was angry with that Generation forty Years, as the Apostle doth intimate by that Enquiry, ver. 17. with whom was he angry forty Years? Then the  and , will be best rendred, though they saw my Works; as  signifies. Noldius, p. 220. And , Luke 18.7. John 16.32. Acts 7.5. According as God speaks to them, Numb. 14.22. For all these Men which have seen my Glory, and my Signs which I did in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and yet have tempted me these ten times, and have not hearkned to my voice, surely they shall not see the Land. And ver. 11. How long will it be ere they believe me after all the Signs? &c. Ver. 10. Wherefore I was grieved with that Generation, and said, They do always err in their Heart, (not with the Heart believing, ver. 11.) and they have not known my ways, (i. e. not hearken'd to me, to walk in them, ver. 22.) Ver. 11. So I sware in my Wrath, ver. 21. they shall not enter (Gr. if they shall enter) into my Rest. , if they shall enter.] i. e. let me not be God, or let me not be true, if they enter. This is a form of Swearing very frequent in the Old Testament. So Deut. 1.35. The Lord was wroth, and swore, say∣ing, , if any of these Men shall see that good Land of Promise. Psal. 95.11. So 1 Sam. 3.14. , if the Iniquity of the House of Eli shall be purged with Sacrifice, Psal. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my Holiness, , if I fail David, Psal. 132.2, 3. Lord, remember David, how he sware, , if I go into my Ta∣bernacle, , if I climb up into my Bed, , if I give sleep to my eyes. So Mark 8.12. Verily I say unto you, , let me not be true, if a Sign be given to this Ge∣neration, where Christ himself swears, and therefore cannot be supposed absolutely to forbid all swearing, Matth. 5.34. Ver. 12. Take heed (therefore) Brethren, lest there be in you (as there was in them) an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. .] The Jews that tempted God, Numb. 14. are said , to depart from the Land of Canaan, ver. 31. They said one to another, Come let us make us a Cap∣tain, , and let us turn back into Egypt, ver. 4. and are said, , not to believe God, ver. 11. The living God.] So stiled, to shew that he is always able to punish Unbelievers. Note also, That as he who believeth in Christ, be∣lieveth in God the Father also, John 12.44. so he that deserts him, doth also desert the Father who sent him, and makes him a Lyar, 1 John 5.9, 10. for he that denies the Son, hath not the Father, 1 John 3.23. Ver. 13. But exhort one another (to sted∣fastness in the Faith) daily, whilst it is called to day, (before the night come upon you, John 12.35.) lest any of you be hardned through the deceitfulness of Sin. , lest any Man be hard∣ned.] To be hardned, in the New Testament, imports Infidelity, and want of Faith. Thus Christ upbraids to his Disciples their unbelief, , and hardness of Heart, that they believed not, Mark 16.14. and the Jews that believed not are said to be hardned, Acts 19.9. And so it will be evident, that here it signifies to him that compares ver. 15. with ver. 19. Ver. 14. For we are made partakers of (the Blessings purchased by) Christ, if we hold the beginning of our Confidence stedfast to the end.
, the Beginning of their Hope.] That Hope to which we have fled for Refuge, Chap. 6.18. That Hope which causeth us to rejoyce, v. 6. Faith be∣ing, , the firm Expectation of things hoped for, Ch. 11.1. See the Note there. Ver. 15. While it is said, (Gr. , in that it is said) to Day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as in the Pro∣vocation. (You may discern the Mischief of Unbelief, and Hardness of Heart, and the Necessity of the Exhortation tendred, v. 12, 13.) Ver. 16. For some when they heard, did pro∣voke howbeit not all that came out of Egypt (Not Caleb and Joshua.) , &c.] I would render these Words thus, For who were they, that hearing, did provoke? Were they not all that came forth out of Egyyt? For, 1.  signifies as well who as some. So Acts 19.15. , who are ye? Rev. 7.13. , who are they that are cloathed with white Robes? Isa. 60.8. , who are these? So Heb. 1.5. , for to whom of the Angels said he? And here, v. 18. , to whom did he swear? So Josephus, Cap. 17. of his Maccabees, ; who did not admire? who were not astonish'd at the Champions of the Divine Law? And then the Answer to this Enquiry must be this, Were they a few? Yea, were they not all? &c. As if it had been . 'Tis also evident, that  and  are often Interrogatives, as 1 Cor. 12.15. Joh. 8.42. See Noldius, p. 487. And if the Greek will bear this Construction, it answers best, (1st.) to the Story, as it is repre∣sented, Numb. 14. For notwithstanding the Exception made, v. 38. of Joshua and Caleb, it is said, v. 12. that , all the Congregation, , and all the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron; that , all the Congregation spake of stoning Joshua and Caleb, v. 10. and , all the Men, v. 22. are the , Provokers, v. 23. the , evil Congregation, and the Murmurers, v. 27.35. Jos. 5.6. And (2dly,) it agrees best with the following Verses, which are plainly Interrogatives and Answers, With whom was he grieved? Was it not with them? To whom sware he? Was it not to them that believ'd not? And, Lastly, with the Close of the Argument, which saith generally, they could not enter in. Ver. 17. But (And) with whom was he grieved Forty Years? Was it not with them that had sinn'd (by Unbelief,) whose Carcas∣ses fell in the Wilderness? Ver. 18. And to whom sware he, that they should not enter into his Rest, but to them that believed not? Ver. 19. So we see (, we see therefore) they could not enter in, because of Unbelief. here signifies idcirco, therefore, as the Hebrew  often does. See Noldius, p. 279. So Josh. 23.11.  take good heed therefore, Psal. 2.10. , be wise now therefore. See Psalm 7.7.18.42. CHAP. IV. Ver. 1. LET us therefore fear, least a Pro∣mise being left us of entring into his Rest (in the Celestial Canaan, as to them in the Terrestrial,) any of you should seem to come short of it, (i. e. should fail of it.) , should seem to come short.] That the Word  signifies to fail of, or fall from any thing, see Note on Chap. 12.13. and that  is oft an Expletive, all Criticks do acknowledge; so , say not, Matth. 3.9. , they who rule, Mark 10.42.  that which he hath, Luke 8.18. Matth. 25.29. , he that standeth, 1 Cor. 10.12. See the Note on 1 Cor. 7.40. Ver. 2. For unto us was the Gospel preach'd, as well as unto them, (Gr. , for we have (now) the Gospel preach'd to us, as they had then the Law to them) but the Word preach'd, (Gr. heard) did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. as well as they.] This by some is referr'd to their hearing of the Law, as in the Paraphrase, by others as probably to the Gospel-Blessings then typified to them, for the Apostle informs us, that they all ate the same Spiritual Meat, and drank the same Spiritual Drink; for they drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. This sounds flat to them only who are averse to this Doctrine, that the Blessings of the Gospel were typified to the Jews. Ver. 3. For we which have believed (, who are Believers,) do enter into Rest, as (may be gathered from what) he said, (viz.) as I have sworn, (or so I swear) in my Wrath, if they shall enter into my Rest, altho' the Works (of God in the Creation) were finished (Gr. had been done) from the Foun∣dation of the World. , into my Rest.] Upon the true Interpretation of these Words here, and, v. 1. , depends the true Sense of this Chapter. Now some referr this to that Deliverance from their Persecutors, and the peaceable Days of professing the Gospel, the Christians in Judea, and elsewhere, should enjoy after the Destruction of Jerusalem;
but to this I can by no means consent: For, (1.) the bearing of the Cross, the suffering Persecution being so often hinted as the Por∣tion of all that will live godly, I cannot be∣lieve that a Promise of Deliverance from them should be so often represented by the Holy Ghost, as the great Gospel-Blessing promis'd to Believers, the , Evangelical Pro∣mise made to Christians by God, that they should enter into his Rest, v. 1. the Sabba∣tism remaining for the People of God, v. 9. the Rest which they should strive to enter in∣to, v. 11. and be affraid lest they should fail of, v. 1. (2dly,) I know of no such happy. Change of the Affairs of Christians in all other Parts of the World, that the Apostle should here, and almost in all his other Epistles, speak of it as this Interpretation maketh him to do, as of one of the greatest Blessings of Christianity; nor were there any such Halcyon Days enjoy'd by Christians after the Desola∣tion of Jerusalem. This will be evident from Christ's Message to the Asiatick Churches after the Times of Domitian; for there he speaks to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Fear none of those things which thou art about to suffer: Behold, Satan is about to cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried ten Days. Be thou faithful to the Death, and I will give thee the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. To the Church of Pergamus, thus, I know thy Works, and where thou dwellest, where is the Throne of Satan, and thou holdest my Name, and hast not denied the Faith in the Days in which Antipas my faithful Martyr suffer'd who was slain among you where Satan dwells. Ibid. v. 13. To the Church of Phila∣delphia, thus, Because thou hast kept the Word of my Patience, I will also keep thee from the Hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth, Chap. 3.10. This Argument a Reverend Per∣son endeavours to evade, by saying that John writ his Revelations in the 9th. Year of Clau∣dius. But, 1st. This is contrary to the Te∣stimony of all Antiquity, excepting only the single Testimony of Epiphanius, which also is fully answered by Dr. Moor: For it is ge∣nerally agreed that he writ his Revelation in the Isle of Patmos, as may be proved from Chap. 1.9, 10, 11. Now all the Ancients say, that John was banish'd thither by Domi∣tian, and writ his Revelations about that time. So. Apud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 18. Irenaeus speaks expresly, say∣ing, If the Name of Antichrist had been to be divulged, it would have been mentioned by him who saw the Revelation; for it was not seen long ago, but almost in our Age, at the End of the Reign of Domitian; which Pas∣sage cannot be understood of the Name only of the Beast, but of the whole Revelation, as is evident, (1.) Because Eusebius, who cites this Passage, must understand him so; for he saith, that he returned from his Exile in this Island, , c. 23. after the Death of Domitian, and so he must have writ his Revelation while he lived. And, 2dly, Because the Name of the Beast is not said to be revealed to the Evangelist, but only the Number of his Name. And, 3dly, The Words, , even force this Sense; for they are properly rendred, who saw also the Revelation, distinguishing the Revelation from the Name. And, Lastly, a Name cannot properly be said to be seen, nor doth St. John ever use such an Expression about it; but a Revelation is properly said to be seen, and St. John often saith he saw them. Again, in this Persecution of Domi∣tian, saith. Ibid. c. 18. Eusebius, , the Tra∣dition runs, that John the Evangelist was ba∣nished to the Isle of Patmos, for the Testimo∣ny he gave to the Divine Word. And in hisAd An. 14. Dom. Chronicon he adds, that under him the A∣postle John being banish'd to the Isle of Pat∣mos, , there saw his Revelation, as Irenaeus testifies; which both confirms the Tradition, and gives the true Sense of the Words of Irenaeus, ci∣ted by him. So alsoVerbo Joan. St. Jerom saith, that St. John being banish'd into the Isle of Patmos, in the 14th. Year of Domitian, Scripsit Apoca∣lypsin, composed the Book of the Revelation. So almost all the Greek and Latin Writers saith, Huetius in Orig. Com. p. 72. Vide Oros. l. 7. c. 10, 11. Martyr. Timoth. apud Phot. Cod. 254. p. 1403. l. 1. Aret. in Apoc. 1.9. 2dly, 'Tis certain, from the second Text here cited, that Antipas had suffer'd Martyrdom before the writing of these Epistles to the Churches. Now that Antipas suffer'd Mar∣tyrdom under Domitian, the old R. Martyro∣logy assures us; and Dr. Hammond on the Place confesses, 'tis therefore evident that St. John, speaking of this Martyrdom which hapned in the Days of Domitian, as a thing past, must write the Revelations in, or after the Reign of Domitian. This the Doctor saw, and therefore interprets these Words, Thou hast not denied my Faith, , even in those Days (of fiery Trial) in which Anti∣pas, , was, or hath been slain: Thus the Time is approaching wherein Antipas, I foresee, will be cruelly Martyr'd; that is, (if this was written in the 9th. of Claudius, and Antipas slain in the 10th. of Domitian.)
I foresee he will be slain Forty Years hence: Which Descant, to speak in his own Words, is too vain to be seriously repeated or con∣sidered. Lastly, The Christians had no such Halcyon Days for any considerable time after the De∣struction of Jerusalem; for Jerusalem was destroy'd, Anno Christi 70, and the Second Persecution began under Domitian, Anno Do∣mini 96. They had therefore only Rest for twenty Years, and then comes the Second Persecution, in which. many Christians were exiled, and some suffer'd Martyrdom; for even Heathen Writers, saithHist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 18. Euse∣bius, mention , the Persecution and the Martyrdoms of our Men. And in his Chronicon he saith, that Brutius, in his History, affirms, that , many Christians suffer'd Martyrdom under Domitian. Ten Years af∣ter the End of this Persecution, comes on a third Persecution under Trajan, in which, saith.— Eusebius, so great and heavy was the Persecution in most Places, that Pliny, one of the celebrated Presidents of the Provinces, being moved with the Multitude of Martyrs, writ to the Emperor concerning the Multitude of Martyrs that had suffer'd, and receiv'd this Answer from him, That they should not be enquired after, but only punish'd as they fell into their Hands. And,. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 33. that tho' hereupon the open Persecutions ceased, yet in divers Provinces they continued, and exerci∣sed many of the Christians with divers kinds of Martyrdom. In the 17th. Year of Trajan, the Jews in Mesopotamia rebel, and many Myriads of them perish. In the 2d. of Hadrian they rebel again, and are overcome. In the 17th. of Hadrian, Barchochebas set up for their Messiah, and drew an infinite Multitude of Jews after him. Now all these, and espe∣cially the last, were severe Persecutors of the Christians of those Places. For. Apol. 2. p. 72. E. Dial. p. 234. , &c. B. C. p. 335. D. . p. 363. D. Justin Martyr oft informs us, That even after the Destruction of Jerusalem, they retained still the same Hatred to the Christians, and cut them off where ever they had Power and Op∣portunity; and in the Days of Barchochebas, put those Christians to exquisite Torments, who would not deny Christ. And could these be the Times of Quiet and Safety to the Christians from their Persecutors, and of prosperous and peaceable Days for the Pub∣lick Worship and Service of God? Is this the , Gospel-Promise of a Rest and Sabbatism to the People of God? The Re∣ward which it is just with God to render them for all their Sufferings for his sake, 2 Thess. 1.7. See Dr. Hammond on that Place. To come then to the true Import of this Phrase, let it be noted, that there is a double Rest mentioned in this and the former Chap∣ter, viz. 1st. The Rest promised to the Jews in the Land of Canaan, Chap. 3.11. And this, saith the Apostle, could not be the Rest of God; for if Joshua had given them (such) Rest, David would not have spoken of another Day, v. 8. Why not? saith Mr. Cl. Answer, Because then, by entring into that, they would have already entred into the Rest of God. 2dly, A Rest after the Example of God, ceasing from his Labours when he had finish'd the Creation, which is the Rest of the Bles∣sed that die in the Lord. , that they may rest from their Labours, Rev. 14.13. And that this is the Rest which the Apostle now begins to speak of, is evident from these Words, v. 10. He that is entred into Rest, he hath also ceased from his own Works, as God did from his: For what can we understand by resting from his own Works, but, as theChrys. Theod. Oecum. Theoph. Fathers do interpret it, , from his Persecutions, Temptations, and Afflictions, to which he is obnoxious in this present World? The Phrase seems plainly to be taken from Isa. 57.1. where it is said of the Righteous taken away from the Evil to come, they shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their Beds. Of this Rest, that of Canaan, and the Sabbatisms, there observed, were a Type, as the Jews themselves inform us; and therefore it seems reasonable to interpret these Words agreeably to that Sense. Ver. 4. For he spake in a certain Place of the Seventh Day, (from the Creation, saying,) And God did rest the Seventh Day from all his Works. Ver. 5. And in this Place (he saith) again; (long after) If they shall enter into my Rest. (i. e. if they shall have a Rest from their
Labours and Travels, resembling that of mine from the Creation of the World.) Ver. 6. Seeing therefore it remains that some must enter in (to this Rest of God, it being not a Rest provided in vain, or to be enjoy'd by none,) and they to whom it was first preach'd, (i. e. to whom the Promise of a Rest was first made,) entred not in, because of Unbelief. Ver. 7. Again, he (God) limiteth a certain Day, saying, in (these Words of) David, To Day, after so long a time (of their Continu∣ance in the Rest of Canaan) as it is (there) said, To Day if you will hear his Voice, har∣den not your Hearts, &c. (speaking not of the Rest of Canaan, of which they were posses∣sed in the Days of Joshua, as he saith to the Reubenites and Gadites, And now the Lord hath given Rest unto your Brethren, as he pro∣mised them, Josh. 22.4.) Here Mr. le Cl. with his usual Confidence, speaks thus, I say again, There is no mention in the Psalmist of any future Rest; which, if true, there is no Sense in the Apostle's Words, nor any Strength in his Argument; for it doth evidently run thus, There must be a Rest to the People of God besides, i. e. succeeding that which Joshua procured them in the Land of Canaan, because the Psalmist, so long after their Rest in Canaan, makes mention of a future Rest; so the Apostle, There is no mention in the Psalmist of a future Rest, saith M. le Cl. in flat Contradiction to the Apostle. He had spoken in one Place of the Rest of God, saith the Apostle, v. 4. and he speaks again, , in this Place of the Psalmist, of this Rest, v. 5. into which the Unbelievers not entring, in this Passage of David, he again, , sets, or defines a certain Day, by say∣ing to them, who lived so long after these Unbelievers miscarried, to Day if you will hear his Voice, (and so enjoy this Rest, ch. 3.18, 19.) harden not your Hearts, speaking there of a Rest not already enjoy'd, but here∣after to be enjoy'd by them, and so not of the Rest procured to them by Joshua, , for if Joshua had given them the Rest called the Rest of God, David would not have here spoken of another Day of Rest; but having done so, , certo, utique, we conclude, that there remains yet a Rest to be enjoy'd by the Peo∣ple of God. Ver. 8. For if Jesus, (i. e. Joshua) had gi∣ven them (a) Rest, (like to that of God,) then would not he, (i. e. God by David,) af∣terward have spoken of another Day (of Rest, after their Rest in Canaan.) .] For Explication of the Apo∣stle's Argument, here let it be noted, That all the Greek Commentators on this Place, concurr in this, that the Apostle here speak∣eth of a three-fold Rest. 1st. Of the Rest of God, mention'd Gen. 2.2. in these Words, And God rested on the Seventh Day from all his Works that he had done. Which Rest, say the Ancients, was the Symbol of the Rest of the Just from all their Labours. SoHaec sunt in Regni temporibus, hoc est in septima die quae est sanctificata, in qua requievit Deus ab omnibus operibus quae fecit, quae est verum justorum Sabbathum in qua non facient omne terrenum opus. L. 5. c. 33. Irenaeus saith, the Seventh Day which was sanctified, and in which God rested from all his Works, is the true Sabbath of the Just, in which they shall do no earthly Labour. And. L. 6. p. 317. Origen saith, Celsus understood not the Mystery of the Se∣venth Day, and the Rest of God, in which, all that had done their Works in Six, and had left nothing undone which belonged to them, should feast with God, ascending to the Vision of him, and in that to the General Festivity of the Just and Blessed. And again,Si altius repetamus quae sint vera Sabbata, ultra hunc mundum est veri Sabbati observatio— Erit ergo verum Sa tum in quo requiescet Deus ab omnibus operibus suis, seculum futurum, tunc cum aufugiet dolor, & tristitia, & gemitus, & erit omnia, & in omnibus Deus. Hom. 23. in Num. F. 136. A. See Clem. Alex. Strom. 6. p. 682, 683. Barnab. Ep. §. 15. & Coteler. Ibid. If we farther enquire which are the true Sabbaths, we shall find, that the Observation of the true Sabbath reaches beyond the World; the true Sabbath, in which God will rest from all his Works, being the World to come, then when all Grief, Sorrow, and Sighing shall fly away, and God shall be All in All. 2dly, Of the Rest of the Jews in Canaan: Which is the Rest God sware the murmur∣ing and unbelieving Jews should not enjoy, perhaps, as well in the Spiritual Sense, as in the Natural. For theJoseph. L. 3. c. 13. Jews themselves represent their Sin as that in which they made bold, , to charge God with a Lye. And the Jerusalem Targum saith, God threatned to remember it in the Day of Judgment. InIn Psal. 39.2. Midrash Tillim, an evil Tongue is said to be worse than Idolatry: And this is proved from what these Rebels spake against God, , the Sentence of Judgment being-pass'd upon them for their evil Words, Numb. 14.28. Now Idolatry is still reckon'd by them a Sin exclusive from the Heavenly Canaan, they shall not enter into the Rest of the House of my Sanctuary, saith the Chaldee on Psalm 95.11. However, those Jews who entred into Canaan, when they were to have Rest from all their Enemies round about, so
as to dwell safely, Deut. 12.9, 10. did so far disobey the Voice of the Lord, that he said he would not drive their Enemies out from before them, but would leave them to be as Thorns in their Sides, and Pricks in their Eyes, to vex them in the Land where they dwelt, Judg. 2.2, 3. Josh. 23.13. Numb. 33.55. So that the Jews themselves expected a farther Completion of that Promise, in the Times of the Messiah, as we learn from those Words of Zacharias, the Father of the Bap∣tist, Blessed be the God of Israel, who hath vi∣sited and redeemed his People, and hath raised up a mighty Salvation for us in the House of his Servant David, as he spake by the Mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the World began, that we should be saved from our Enemies, and from the Hands of all that hate us: That we being delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, might serve him with∣out Fear, Luke 1.68, 74. And hence the Apostle here concludes, that Joshua gave them not the Rest emphatically styled, the Rest of God, as resembling his Rest from all his Works, when he had finished the World; and so there must be yet another Rest remain∣ing to the People of God, as it follows. Ver. 9. There remaineth therefore (yet) a (more Glorious and Complete) Rest for the People of God. Ver. 10. For he that is (thus) entred into Rest, he also hath ceased from his own Works, (i. e. from the Labours and Travails of this Life, Rev. 14.13.) as God (after he had fi∣nished the Creation) did from his. A Rest, .] The Apostle, by thus changing the Word , Rest, into Sab∣batism, and by comparing of this Sabbatism with the Rest of God on the Sabbath, or Se∣venth Day, clearly leads us to the Interpre∣tation of all the Ancient Christians, that our glorious and complete Rest hereafter with God, is that of which God's resting on the Seventh Day was a Symbol, and to the Spiri∣tual Sabbath, of which the Jewish Doctors speak so generally, as the great thing signified by their Sabbath, as when they sayBuxt. Flor. p. 299. the Sabbath was given to be , a Sign or Exemplar of the World to come. The Sabbath Day, what is it?Zohar. in Gen. Fol. 5. Col. 2. A Figure of the Land of the Living, to wit, of the World or Age to come, the Age of Souls, the Age of Consolations. Thus in their De∣scants upon the 92d. Psalm, which bears this Title both in the Hebrew and the Greek, a Song, , up∣on the Sabbath Day. They sayMidrash Tillim. in v. 15. this is the Age to come, , which is all Sabbath. The Psalmist, saith R. Solomon Jarchi, in locum, speaks of the Business of the World to come, which is all Sabbath. A Psalm upon the Sabbath Day, saith R. Eliezer, Cap. 19. p. 42. that is, upon the Day which is all Sabbath, and Rest, in the Life of the World to come. And again, Cap. 18. p. 41. The Blessed Lord created Seven Worlds, (i. e. Ages,) but one of them is all Sabbath and Rest in Life Eternal: Where he referrs to their common Opinion, That the World should continue Six thousand Years, and then a perpetual Sabbath should begin, typified by God's resting the Seventh Day, and blessing it. So Bereschith Rabba, If we expound the Seventh Day of the Seventh thou∣sand Years, which is the World to come, the Exposition is, And he blessed; because in the Seventh Thousand all Souls shall be bound in the Bundle of Life, for there shall be there the Augmentation of the Holy Ghost, wherein we shall delight our selves. And so our Rabbins, of Blessed Memory, have said in their Com∣mentaries, God blessed the Seventh Day, the holy God blessed the World to come, which be∣ginneth in the Seventh thousand of Years.. De Migr. Abr. p. 314. E. 315. A. Philo is very copious in this Allegory, who disputing against those, who, having learn'd that the written Laws were , Symbols of intellectual things, did upon that account neglect them, saith, That tho' the Seventh Day was a Document of the Power of God, and of the Rest of the Creature, yet was not the outward Rest to be cast off. And again, 'Tis fitly said, , by Allegories, or Figurative Expressions, the Sabbaths of the Land shall be Meat for you, Lev. 25.6.. Lib. de Profug. p. 371. D. For Rest in God producing the greatest Good, Peace secure from War, is only that which truly nou∣risheth, and is to be enjoy'd with Pleasure. And a third time,. Lib. quod Deus sit immut. p. 230. F. This is the Reason of the Seventh Day, or the Septenary, i. e. of the Soul resting in God, and performing no more mortal Works. Ver. 11. Let us labour therefore to enter into that Rest, (which yet remaineth for the People of God,) lest any Man fall (Gr. that we may not fall from it,) after the same Ex∣ample of Unbelief, (by our Infidelity, as they did.) Ver. 12. For the Word of God (mention'd v. 1, 2.) is quick, and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged Sword, and piercing even to the dividing asunder the Soul and the Spirit, and of the Joints, and the Marrow, and is a Dis∣cerner
(or Censurer) of the Thoughts and In∣tents of the Heart. .] The Apostle seems not to speak here of the Essential Word of God, the Second Person of the Trinity, 1st. Be∣cause St. Paul, in all his Writings, never ap∣plies this Phrase to our Lord Christ, it being peculiar to St. John. 2dly, The Apostle must have very abruptly spoken here of him under this Metaphor, of whom nothing went before, but very appositely of the Gospel, to which these Attributes do well agree; for, 1st, the Word is quick and vital, not only promising Life to the Obedient, but threatning Death to the Disobedient from the living God, who can quickly execute it, Chap. 3.12. 2dly, 'tis powerful, being the Power of God for the de∣struction of strong holds, and every thing that exalts its self against the Knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 7. 3dly, 'Tis sharper than a two-edged Sword, and piercing even to the di∣viding asunder of the Soul and Spirit, the Joints and the Marrow; slaying Ananias and Sapphira, and delivering up others to Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Tim. 1.20. 'Tis 4thly, a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, there be∣ing then a Gift of discerning Spirits attending the Preachers of it, by which they were judg∣ed and discerned of them; and so the secrets of their Hearts were made manifest, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. And, which makes this extreme∣ly pertinent to the present Exhortation, all this was very visible in the instance of the Unbelievers here mentioned, to terrifie the Jews from falling by the same Example of Unbelief. For, 1st, the word of Threatning was so quick upon those Spies who brought up the evil Report upon the Land, that they died immediately by the hand of God, or by the Plague before the Lord, Numb. 14.37. And as for the rest of the Unbelievers they were consumed, saith Moses, by God's An∣ger, and by his Wrath were troubled: They were carried away as with a Flood, they va∣nish'd as a Dream, or as the morning Grass which in the evening is cut down, and wither∣eth, Psal. 90.5, 6. And thus they found the weight of that Threat, , ye shall know the vehemency of my Wrath, Numb. 14.34. They were also thus punish'd for the evil Intentions of their Hearts; for, saith St. Stephen, in their Hearts they turned back into Egypt, Acts 7.38. So that by the Word of God I am inclined to understand his Threats denounced against Un∣believers, Numb. 14. Psal. 95.11. It also may deserve to be noted, that Philo, Lib. de Cherub. p. 86. G. ascribes most of these Epi∣thets unto the , saying, The flaming Sword was a Symbol of the Word, especially of the first Cause, , for his Word is quick and fervent. And again,. Lib. quis Rer. divin. Haeres. p. 391. A. God, saith he, whetting his Word, the dissector of all things, divides the inform Essence of all things, and cuts them in the middle. Ver. 13. Neither is there any Creature which is not manifest in his sight, (whose Word this is) but all things are open and naked to the Eyes of him, with whom we have to do; (Gr. to whom we must give an Account, and so there is no hope these Unbelievers should escape his Judgments.) , to whom we must render an account.] So Matth. 12.36. of every idle word that Men shall speak, , they shall give an account in the Day of Judg∣ment. Matth. 18.23. The Kingdom of Hea∣ven is like to a certain King, who would, , make up an Account with his Ser∣vants. Luke 16.2. , Give up an Account of thy Stewardship. Rom. 14.12. Every one, , shall give an account of himself to God. Philip. 4.17. I desire Fruit that may abound, , to your account. Hebr. 13.17. , as they that must give an account. 1 Pet. 3.15. Being always ready to give to every one that asks you, , an account of the hope that is in you. And Chap. 4.5. , who shall give an account to him that is ready to judge the quick and dead. Ver. 14. Seeing then we have a great High-Priest, (merciful, and faithful to make reconciliation for our sins, Chap. 2.17.) that is passed into the Heavens, (to appear for ever there to make intercession, and to prepare this resting place for us, John 14.2.) even Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession (without wavering.) Ver. 15. For we have not an High-Priest who cannot be touched with the sense of our Infirmities, but (one who) was in all things tempted (i. e. exposed to Sufferings) like as we are, (and this) without sin, (to deserve the least of them.) See the Note on Chap. 2.18. Ver. 16. Let us therefore (depending on his Power, his Intercession for, and Sympa∣thy with us) come boldly to the Throne of Grace, (this , or Mercy-seat, Rom. 3.25.) that we may obtain Mercy (in the par∣don of our Sins,) and Grace (or Favour) for (a) suitable help in time of need (Gr. , for seasonable help in all our Sufferings for his sake.) The Jews say God hath a double Throne, one of Judgment, and the other of Mercy; and that when he beholds the World obnoxi∣ous to Condemnation, he rises from his Throne
of Judgment, and places himself on that of Mercy. This Throne of Mercy is our blessed Jesus, stiled by this Apostle, , the true Propitiatory, or Mercy-seat: By this High-Priest, and Intercessor, must we come unto God, he being able to save to the utter∣most them that come unto God by him, Chap. 7.25. Note also, That some great Men think the Rest and Sabbatism discoursed of Chapter the Third and the Fourth, refers to the Millen∣nium, or the time of the Conversion of the Jewish Nation, and the New Heavens, and New Earth then promised, but I am not able to assent to that Opinion, for this Reason, that the Apostle writes to the believing Jews of the present Age, warning them, That there be not in them an evil Heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, and exhorting them to continue to the end in the Faith, Chap. 3.13, 14. that so they might not fail of this Rest of God; and to fear lest a promise being made of entring into this Rest, any of them should fall short of it, Chap. 4.1, 2. And again, ver. 11. Let us give diligence to enter into this Rest, that we fall not by the same Ex∣ample of unbelief. Now these Exhortations could not be properly directed to the Belie∣ving Jews of that Age, concerning the Mil∣lennium, or the Glorious Times which were to happen at the Conversion of the Jewish Na∣tion, they being to die 1700 Years before that Conversion, which is not yet accomplished, and before those Glorious Days which are not yet come; for what advantage, in reference to that, could they receive by this Diligence, who were to die so long before it happened, and, being once in Heaven or Paradise, could neither expect nor desire to come down thence to be partakers of any Enjoyments, or better Company here on Earth. But these Exhor∣tations are very properly directed to them, to take care they fail not of their Rest in the Celestial Canaan, typified by their Rest in the Earthly Canaan, the time when they should rest with God, saith Origen, ascending to the Vision of him, the Rest of Souls in the Land of the Living, the Rest in the Life and the World to come, and in Life eternal. See Note on ver. 8, 10. Seeing these Blessings only can belong to, and at the time of Retribution will only be conferred upon them who use this Diligence. And hitherto the Apostle seems plainly to refer it, when he speaks of so great Salvation, Chap. 2.3. of bringing many Sons to Glory, ver. 10. Of their being partakers, , of an heavenly Calling, Chap. 3.1. The Hope and Confidence of which he exhorts them to hold fast unto the end, ver. 6. and then immediately begins his Discourse of this Rest. CHAP. V. LET us come, saith he, to God's Throne of Grace with freedom, as having there such an High-Priest, in whom are all things by way of Excellency to be found, for which the Levitical Priesthood was ordained, and repaired to, as having, 1. A better Priesthood, viz. after the Order of Melchisedech, Chap. 7. 2. A better Consecration to it, viz. by an Oath. 3. A better Tabernacle in which to Mini∣ster. 4. A better Sacrifice to offer there. 5. A better Covenant to establish in his Blood. Ver. 1. For every High-Priest taken from among Men, is ordained for (the service) of Men in things pertaining to (the Worship and Propitiation of) God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins. .] To procure, and perform those things which relate to the Worship, and the Propitiation of the Deity. So Crellius. , Gifts and Sacrifices.] Both these may relate to Sacrifices for Sin, for not only Peace-Offerings but Gifts of any kind are called, , Matth. 5.23. and  is by the Seventy Interpreters often rendred , Gen. 4.3, 5. Exod. 29.41.30.9.40.26. Levit. and Numb. Centies. Ver. 2. And he is one who can have com∣passion on the Ignorant, and on them that are out of (Gr. err from) the way, (offering wil∣lingly, and interceding affectionately on their behalf;) for that he himself also is compassed with (the like) Infirmities. ,] He refers to the Sins which go under the Names of , for the word , belongs properly to the thing in doing which we err from the way, and an expiatory Sacrifice was therefore required from them that did so, be∣cause he knew, , that he had erred and gone from the way: But , was a Sin committed out of Ignorance of the Command of God. So Abarbinel. For Sins committed, , wittingly, and with an high Hand, or from a Will set in opposition to the Law of God, there was no Sacrifice appointed by the Law, and to this the Apo∣stle alludes Chap. 10.26. saying to them that sin wilfully, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin. Ver. 3. By reason whereof (of which Infir∣mities) he ought (by God's command, and
from the nature of the thing) as for the peo∣ple, so also for himself to offer (Sacrifices) for Sins. , for himself.] Here Grotius notes, that this being spoken generally of every Priest taken from among Men, Christ also must have offer'd for himself a Sacrifice for Sin, i. e. that he might be deliver'd from those Sorrows which were the Punishments of Sin, and were inflicted on him upon occa∣sion of our Sins. But in this he seems Guil∣ty of great and manifold Mistakes; for, 1. the Apostle plainly speaks of the sinful Infirmities of these Priests, who therefore were to offer for their own Sins, Chap. 7.27. Whereas of Christ he declares, That though he was in all other things made like to us, yet, , without sin, Chap. 4.15. That he offer'd himself to God a Lamb without spot, Chap. 9.14. That being thus Holy, free from evil, undefiled, and separate from Sinners, he needed not, upon a day, as those High-Priests, to offer up Sacrifice first for his own Sins, and then for the Peoples, Chap. 7.26, 27.2. He was not, nor could he, after he became our Surety, be deliver'd from those Sorrows which were the Punishment of our Sins, he being, as our Expiatory Sacrifice, not only on occasion of our Sins, but in our stead to bear the Punishment of our Iniquity. Ver. 4. And no man taketh this honour to himself, but he (only enjoys it) who is called of God, as was Aaron (and his Po∣sterity.) , no Man.] i. e. according to the Law, say most Interpreters, but I see no necessity of this limitation, it being true, that no Man can promise to himself, God will ac∣cept his Offerings, who hath no Commission from God to make such Offerings, whence doth arise a good Argument, to shew that Sa∣crifices are of Divine, and not of Humane In∣stitution only. Ver. 5. (And) so also (was it with our Lord) Christ (for he) glorified not himself to be made an High-Priest, but he (appointed him to be so) who said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. This day.] I have shew'd, Note on Chap. 2.10. that Christ was by his Death consecrated to his Priesthood; whence it must follow, that he could not exercise his Sacerdotal Function till after Death. And this the Apo∣stle sheweth here, by saying, He was made an High-Priest by the Father, saying, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; for that this relates unto the Resurrection of our Lord is evident, because we find the same Apostle proving his Resurrection from these words, Acts 13.33. which he could not have done, had they not been intended as a predi∣ction of his Resurrection. Ver. 6. As he saith also (of him) in ano∣ther place, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedek, (as being raised up to appear for ever in the Heavens, and there of∣ficiate as a Priest for us.) Ver. 7. Who in the days of his (continuance in the) Flesh, when he had offered up (Gr. of∣fering up) Prayers and Supplications, with strong cryings and tears to him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he fear'd; (and being heard so far as to obtain deliverance from his fears, which he did by an Angel sent to strengthen him, Luke 22.43.) , he was heard.] i. e. Deliver'd from his fear. So the word doth and must signifie, when it relates to Prayer for Deliverance from Evils. So Psal. 22.22. , save me from the mouth of the Lion, , and hear me from the horns of the Unicorn. Psal. 34.6. This poor man cryed, , and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. And ver. 4. I sought the Lord, , and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. Psal. 55.2. Attend unto me, , and hear me, , from the voice of the enemy, and from the vexation of the wicked. And ver. 16. I cried to the Lord, and the Lord, , heard me. Ver. 18. He delivered my life, , from those that drew nigh to me. Ecclus. 51.10, 11. , My Prayer was heard, for thou sa∣vedst me from destruction. .] Some would have this rendred so, He was heard by reason of his Reverence of God; but it is truly rendred, from his fear; and so the word continually signifies both in the Old and the New Testa∣ment, and when 'tis used, as it very often is, by Philo. So Josh. 22.24. , We did this out of fear. And Wisd. 17.8. , they were affected with a ridiculous fear. Hebr. 12.28. Let us serve God acceptably, , with reverence and godly fear. Acts 23.10. , the Captain fearing. Hebr. 11.7. Noah, , fearing, prepared an Ark. So Josephus saith of the King, Esther's Husband, That, , he held forth the Scepter, de∣livering her from her fear. And in the Septua∣gint, , is to fear before God. Exod. 3.6. Jer. 5.22. Hab. 2.20. Zeph. 1.7.3.13. Zach. 2.13. And , is to fear before Man, or be afraid of Men. 1 Sam. 18.15. Job 19.29. Isa. 57.11. Jer. 22.25. Ecclus. 7.7. This sense also the Particle  doth require, which rarely doth import the meri∣torious Cause; His Prayers and Tears also do express the greatness of his Fears; and last∣ly, the scope of the Apostle requires this sense, he being here representing our Lord as one of like Passions with us, that he might shew
he was a merciful High-Priest. This fear he became subject to, say Grotius and the Fa∣thers, because the Divinity for a season as it were withdrew its influence from the Hu∣mane Nature, , for the Deity permitted the Humanity thus to suffer, saith Theodoret. And this doubtless all those Fathers intended, who followed that Reading, Chap. 2.9. that he tasted Death for every Man, ; for that this was no depravation of the Nestori∣ans, as Oecumenius and Theophylact phansied, is evident from this, that it is cited by. Orig. Com in Joh. Ed. Huet. Tom. 2. p. 38. D. Origen and byƲt sine Deo pro omnibus gustaret mortem de fide. Ad Grat. l. 2. c. 4. Theodoret in locum. St. Ambrose, who lived be∣fore Nestorius. Ver. 8. Though he were a Son, yet learned be (the difficulty of) Obedience, (to the Death) by the things which he suffered; (i. e. by the Agonies and Terrors which he suffer'd at the apprehension and approach of the Death he was to suffer, and so was the more fitted to be to us a compassionate High-Priest under our Sufferings for his sake.) Ver. 9. And being (by these Sufferings) made perfect, (, consecrated to his Priesthood,) he became the Author of Salva∣tion to all that obey him. Ver 10. (Being) called (or constituted) of God an High-Priest after the Order of Melchi∣sedek, (i. e. for ever.) Made perfect, .] That this word is taken here in the notion of Consecration, may appear, saith the Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond, by the words following, as the Appli∣cation of it, being pronounced or declared an High-Priest, which belongs to Christ after his Resurrection, and not before, that being the time when he entred into his Heavenly Tabernacle, living there for ever to appear before God, and exercise that Function in his Presence for us; and so he became an High-Priest for ever. Ver. 11. Of which (Priesthood) we have many things to say, and (those) hard to be ut∣tered (or explained, not from the nature of the things themselves, but) seeing (, be∣cause) ye are dull of hearing. , hard to be uttered.] See here what are St. Paul's , things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. viz. those things which were not so in themselves, or through the difficulty of the matter reveal∣ed, but through the imbecillity and weakness of them to whom they were spoken. Ver. 12. For when for the time (you have professed the Faith) you ought to have been (able to be) teachers (of it to others,) you need that one teach you again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of Milk, (the Food of Babes) and not of strong Meat (the Food of Men.) .] It is the descant of all the. Ita Theodoretus, Chry∣sost. Oecum. Theophylact. in locum. Ancient Commentators on this place, that by these first Principles the Apostle understands the Humanity of Christ, because the Preachers of the Gospel spake of that only to them who were not yet perfect in the Faith: And yet this seemeth neither to be true nor safe; not true, be∣cause the Apostle had in the First and Second Chapters of this Epistle, as all these Com∣mentators teach, spoken to these rude Jews of the Deity of Christ; and because he men∣tions not Christ's Humane Nature among the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, reckon∣ed up Chap. 6.1, 2. not safe, because it seems to intimate that Christians might be perfect in the Faith, before they had knowledge of the Divinity of Christ, and consequently that this was no necessary part of Christian Faith. Note Secondly, That hence we may fairly guess who were in the Epistles to St. Timothy, the Teachers of the Law, who neither under∣stood what they said, nor whereof they af∣firm'd, 1 Tim. 1.7. and the , the false Teachers, who were proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of words, men of corrupt minds, and desti∣tute of the truth, Chap. 5.3, 4, 5. and who they were who were always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Tim. 3.7. viz. not the Gnosticks, but in all likelihood the Jewish false Teach∣ers, and such as were perverted by them. Note Thirdly, That this seems not to be spoken of all the Jews, but only of the greatest part of them; that therefore which is spoken of the Deity of Christ, the Melchisedechian Priesthood, the Change of the Law, the Vir∣tue of Christ's Priesthood, belong'd to the more perfect, who were not to be debar'd of the knowledge of these things, by reason of the imbecillity of their Brethren. Ver. 13. For every one that useth milk is (as yet) unskilful in the word of Righteousness, for he is (but) a Babe (in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.2.14.20. Gal. 4.19. Eph. 4.14.) Ver. 14. But strong meat belongeth to them (only) who are of full age, (i. e. perfect Men) even (to) those who by reason of use have
their Senses exercised to discern betwixt good and evil. .] See the sense of the word Per∣fect, Note on 1 Cor. 2.6. This Metaphor seems to be taken from the digestion of the Stomach; that which is light of Digestion, and needs not much Concoction, as solid Food and strong Meat doth, being here re∣presented by the name of Milk; and so in reference to the Judgment, that which can easily be learned and apprehended aright, and in which we are in no great danger of mista∣king, as are the first Principles of Religion, mentioned Chap. 6. is compared to Milk; but that we cannot easily discern, and about which we are subject to Mistakes, and wrong Conceptions, as the things mentioned in the former Note were to the Jews, is called strong Meat. CHAP. VI. Ver. 1. THerefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ (tho' your small proficiency in them makes it seem al∣most necessary to discourse a-new of them to you,) let us go on unto perfection; (i. e. to the Doctrines which will render you perfect Men in the knowledge of Christ,) not lay∣ing again the foundation of (Christianity in the Doctrines of) Repentance from dead works, (i. e. from Works deserving death, Rom. 6.23.8.13.) and Faith towards God. , to perfection.] That to be perfect, signifies to be fully instructed in the Principles of Christian Faith, see Note on 1 Cor. 2.6. Ver. 2. (And) the Doctrine of Baptisms, (that of Water, and of the Spirit, by which they that repent and believe, are initiated in∣to the Church of Christ,) and of laying on of Hands (after Baptism, for the receiving of the Holy Ghost,) and of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal Judgment; (the great Motives to engage all Christians, here∣in to exercise themselves, to have always Consciences void of Offence towards God, and towards all Men, Acts 34.15, 16.) , the Doctrine of Baptisms.] He speaks not of the Baptism of John, and of Christ, for the Baptism of John was pre∣paratory to Repentance and Faith in Christ; nor of the Baptism of Martyrdom, that being not ordinarily known to the Jews by that name, but of the double Baptism, of which the Baptist spake in these words, I Baptize you with Water, but there is one that cometh after me, he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and Fire, Matth. 3.12. and of which our Saviour speaks to Nicodemus, saying, Ex∣cept a Man be born again of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5. For this in order follows the Doctrine of Repentance, and Faith in God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. , imposition of Hands.] Imposition of Hands was used in Ordination, healing of the Sick, and Absolution of Peni∣tents; but this Imposition of Hands was not common to all Christians, nor joined with Baptism, nor was it to be reckoned among the Principles, or initiatory Doctrines of Christian Faith. It remains therefore that we understand this of the Imposition of the Apo∣stle's Hands used after Baptism for the re∣ceiving of the Holy Ghost, mentioned Acts 8.17. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. See Chap. 19.6. , of eternal Judgment.] Hence Interpreters observe, that the Doctrine of Origen, touching the Period of the Tor∣ments of the Damn'd, is here condemned: And indeed the Primitive Fathers, not Origen himself excepted, taught the contrary. If we do not the Will of Christ, saithFrag. Ep. 2. Clemens Romanus, , nothing will deliver us from eternal Pu∣nishment: The black Way, inSect. 20. Barnabas, is, , the Way of eternal Death with Punishment. The Punish∣ment of the Damned, saithAp. 1. p. 41, 46. Ap. 2. p. 57, 64, 71, 87. Justin M. is, , end∣less Punishment, and Torment in eternal Fire. InAd Autol. p. 79. Theophylus, it is, , eternal Punishment.L. 1. c. 2. l. 2. c. 6. l. 3. c. 4. Ire∣naeus in his Symbol of Faith, makes this one Article, That , Christ would send the Ungodly and Unjust into everlasting Fire. De Test. animae cap. 4. & de Resur. carnis, cap. 35. Tertullian declares, Omnes homines, aut cruciatui destinari, aut refrigerio, utroque sempiterno, that all Men are appointed to eter∣nal Torments, or Refreshments. And if any Man, saith he, thinks the Wicked are to be consumed, and not punish'd, let him remember, ignem Gehennae aeternum praedicari in poenam aeternam, that Hell Fire is stiled Eternal, be∣cause designed for eternal Punishment, and thence concludes their substance will remain
for ever, whose Punishment doth so.Ep. 3. l. de laude Mart. & libr. contr. Demetr. St. Cyprian saith, Servantur cum corporibus suis animae infinitis cruciatibus ad dolorem, that the Souls of the Wicked are kept with their Bodies to be grieved with endless Torments. Tormentis nec modus ullus aut terminus, There is no measure or end of their Torments, saithP. 39. Minutius. Lastly,Proem. . Origen reck∣ons this among the Doctrines defined by the Church, That every Soul, when it goes out of this World, shall either enjoy the Inheritance of eternal Life and Bliss, if its Deeds have ren∣dred it fit for Life, sive igni aeterno, ac sup∣pliciis mancipanda est, or is to be delivered up to eternal Fire and Punishment, if its sins have deserved that state. Ver. 3. And this we will do if God per∣mit. .] This Verse by Grotius and Dr. Hamond is thus interpreted, We pur∣pose some other time to instruct you farther in these Rudiments of Christianity, if you do not in the mean time fall from the Christian Faith, Chap. 2.1, 3. If there be not in you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. Chap. 3.12. If you fall not after the same Example of Unbelief which your Forefathers gave, Chap. 4.11. Others put this Verse in a Parenthesis, and make it to relate to these words, ver. 1. Let us go on unto perfection, or to the higher Do∣ctrines of Christianity, as God willing we now intend to do. So Acts 18.21. God willing I will return unto you: I will come to you spee∣dily, if God will, 1 Cor. 4.19. And this Inter∣pretation I like best. Ver. 4. (I say, let us not attempt wholly to lay again the Foundation of Christianity, in those who have quite fallen from it;) for it is impossible for those who were once en∣lightned (in Baptism) and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, (sent down from Heaven, and conferred on them by the Imposition of Hands,) Ver. 5. And have tasted the good Word of God, (preach'd among them with such variety of Tongues, and confirm'd by so many Mi∣racles) and (have seen and felt) the Powers of the World to come, Ver. 6. If they shall fall away (from Chri∣stianity) to renew them to Repentance, seeing they (by so doing) crucifie to themselves (or by themselves) the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. , enlightned.] That Baptism from the beginning was called , illuminati∣on, we learn from the concurrent Testimonies of. Just. Dial. 2. p. 94. Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and. Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 1. c. 6. p. 93. A. Cle∣mens Alexandrinus, which makes it very pro∣bable, that this Phrase obtained from the beginning of Christianity, and so this answers to the Doctrine of Baptisms, ver. 2. , and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift.] i. e. The Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, stiled by our Saviour, , the Gift of God, John 4.10. Thus our Saviour discoursing of Bap∣tism by Water and the Holy Ghost, and of Regeneration, , from above, by virtue of this Spirit, saith, he discoursed, , of Heavenly Things, John 3.12. and they who were sealed with the Spirit of Pro∣mise, Eph. 1.13. are said to be blessed with Spirituals, , in heavenly Things; and this Gift was imparted by Imposition of Hands, Acts 8.17.19.6. , and have ta∣sted the good Word of God.] i. e. And have been acquainted with the Gospel, which af∣fords the Promise of Remission of Sins, and of Justification here, and of a Resurrection to eternal Life hereafter, ver. 2. So the Promise of bringing the Children of Israel into the Land of Canaan is stiled, , a good Word, Jos. 21.45.23.15. the word of God for bringing his People out of Captivity is, , my good Word, Jer. 29.10. The words of Consolation which the Angel spake to Jerusalem, are , good Words, Zach. 1.13. The Promise made to God's People of Remission of Sins, and Peace and Truth in the Days of the Messiah, is , a good Word. And the Prophet speaking of the Messiah, saith, My heart me∣ditateth a good Word, , Psal. 45.1. This word they saw confirm'd by the Gift of Tongues, and Prophecy vouchsafed to the first Preachers of it, and daily experi∣mented in their Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14. and so they could not but be convinced of the truth of it. , the Powers of the World to come.] The World to come doth in the Language of the Prophets, and the Jewish Doctors, signifie the Times of the Mes∣siah, who in the Prophet Isaiah is called, , The Father of the World to come. See Note on Chap. 2.5. The Powers therefore of the World to come, ac∣cording to the Scripture Idiotism, must be the external Operation of the Holy Ghost, viz. the Gifts of Faith, of Healing, of casting out Devils, , 1 Cor. 12.8, 9. the Working of Miracles, or the Operations of Powers. Or Secondly, This fourth parti∣cular
may answer to the Day of Judgment, which is the fourth thing mention'd, v. 2. as the three former seem to do, to the three other things there mention'd, and then the Powers of the World to come may signifie the powerful Persuasions the Doctrine of a future Judgment administers to Repentance, and a new Life, Acts 17.30, 31. 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. tho' of this Import of the Phrase I find no Example. , it is impossible to renew these to Repentance.] For these being all the Means, internal and external, by which God gave Testimony to the Truth of Christian Faith, and the Prophe∣tick Office and Glorious Resurrection of our Lord, they, saith the Apostle, who, after full Experience of them, do of their own accord renounce that Faith, cannot be renewed to Repentance; because they have already re∣sisted all that Evidence which God saw fit to give Men of the Truth of that Faith, and of this Messiah, and so they become guilty of that Sin against the Holy Ghost, which, saith our Saviour, shall never be forgiven, Matth. 12.32. But then the , Men that thus fall away, are not those who lapse in the Times of Persecution, and much less those who, through the Temptations of the Flesh, may sometimes fall into great Sins, for to such the Apostle grants Place for Repentance, 2 Cor. 12.21. and one of these he delivers to Satan, for the Destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. Exhorting his Corin∣thians, upon his Repentance, to receive him into their Communion, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8. But such as, after all these Experiences of the Truth of Christian Faith, have voluntarily renounced it, relapsing either to Heathenism or Judaism; for they are such as apostatize from the living God, Chap. 3.12. such as fall through Unbelief, Chap. 4.11. such as hold not the Profession of the Faith, Chap. 10.23. such as draw back from the Faith, v. 38. 2dly, This will be farther evident from the Description of these Persons, they being here said, , by themselves to crucifie Christ afresh, and, , to put him to an open Shame, as one that deser∣ved the Punishment which the Jews inflicted on him, and being apostate Jews, to crucifie Christ again. Ver. 7. For (as) the Earth which drinketh in the Rain which cometh oft (from Heaven) upon it, (and so) brings forth Herbs meet for them, by whom it is dress'd, receiveth (farther) Blessing from God, so is it with them who be∣come fruitful under the Dew, and Showers of Divine Grace. Ver. 8. But that (Earth) which (being thus dress'd and water'd,) beareth only Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose End is to be burnt. .] It is rejected of the Husband∣man, who will spend no more Labour upon it, but leave it to be scorched by the Heat, and so to be like the Heath, which is the Em∣blem of the cursed Man, Jer. 17.5, 6. or like the barren Fig-tree which the Lord cur∣sed, saying, Never Fruit grow on thee more, Matth. 21.19. Accordingly they, on whom the Showers of Divine Grace fall down from Heaven, if they bring forth no good Fruit, shall be , rejected by God, continue under the Curse of the Law, and their End shall be Destruction. Ver. 9. But, Beloved, we hope better things of you, and things which accompany Salvation, though we thus speak, (to warn you of the Danger of falling from the Christian Faith.) Ver. 10. For (if you be not wanting to your selves) God is not unrighteous to forget your Work (of Faith,) and (your) Labour of Love which you have shewed to his Name, in that you have ministred to the (Necessities of the) Saints, and yet do minister (to them.) , your Work.] This seems to be the , work of Faith, mention'd 1 Thess. 1.3. 2 Thess. 1.11. and join'd with , the Labour of Love, as here; and which is styled, , the Good Work, Philip. 1.6. Rom. 2.7. See Note on that Verse, the following Exhortation being this, That they would continue in the Faith to the end, and be Imitators of them who through Faith and Patience did inherit the Promises. Ver. 11. And we desire (, we de∣sire therefore) every one of you to shew the same Diligence (which hitherto you have done) to the (Intent that you may retain a) full As∣surance of Hope to the End. Ver. 12. That ye be not slothful, (Gr. may not be slothful,) but Followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherited the Pro∣mises. .] i. e. God being so engaged on his Part, to let nothing be wanting which is requisite to enable you to persevere, and so to enjoy the Fruits of your Faith in the Sal∣vation of your Souls, see that you be not slothful, or faint-hearted, but still continuing the same Christian Diligence to the end, that so you may at last enjoy the Blessings promised by this Gospel, and live in an assured Hope of them, as your Father Abraham did. Ver. 13. For when God (upon his Faith in offering his Son Isaac) made a Promise to A∣braham, because he could swear by no (ne) greater, he sware by himself. Ver. 14. Saying, surely, blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying, I will multiply thee. Ver. 15. And so (accordingly) after he had patiently endured, he inherited the Promise (of a Seed multiplied greatly to him, Gen. 22.17.)
, the Promise.] This cannot be understood of Isaac, the promised Seed, he being not only born, but offer'd, when God made this Promise to Abraham; nor can it be said that he inherited the Promise, because he saw it afar off, that being a Sign he did not yet inherit it, or that he did this in his Posterity; for the Apostle saith he himself inherited the Promise; which is exactly true, of the Words cited here by the Apostle, Sure∣ly, blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee; for the Book of Genesis assures us this Promise was exactly fulfilled in his Life, for the Lord blessed him in all things, Gen. 24.1. He had a numerous Seed by his Wife Keturah, Gen. 25. to whom he gave Gifts, v 6. From Ismael arose twelve Sons which were Princes of their Tribes, v. 13, 16. He lived Fifteen Years after the Birth of Jacob and Esau, by Rebekah, of whom the Oracle de∣clared, that there were two Nations in her Womb; for Isaac was Sixty Years old when they were born to him, v. 23, 26. He himself was born when Abraham was a Hundred Years old, Gen. 21.5. Abraham was 175 Years old when he died, Gen. 25.7. He therefore lived Fifteen Years after the Birth of Jacob and Esau, and Ninety Years after the Birth of Ismael, and so lived to see this Promise veri∣fied to him. Ver. 16. (God confirming his Faith in the Promises made to him after the manner of Men:) For Men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an End of all Strife, (or Contradiction.) , an End of Contradiction.]. Philo de Somn. p. 441, 442. Diodorus Siculus informs us, that the Egyp∣tians styled an Oath, , the greatest Confirmation. It is, saith D. Halicarnassensis, , the last, or utmost Assurance. 'Tis, in the Language of Procopius, , the last, and firmest Pledge of Faith and Truth. That the Apostle here speaks of Promissory Oaths, is evident from the Occasion of this Discourse, viz. his Promise made to Abraham. Now these Oaths being equally conducing to this good End, in all Ages, we have just Reason to believe that Christianity allows of them for these Ends. Ver. 17. Wherein (, in which thing accordingly) God being willing more abundant∣ly to shew (not only to Abraham, but also) to the Heirs of Promise, the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath. Ver. 18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lye, (viz. his Promise, and his Oath,) we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge to the Hope set before us. (Who, to escape the Wrath impendent on the unbelieving Jews here, and hereafter, have fled to the Hope of Glory set before us in Christ Jesus, the lively Hope of an Inheritance incorrupti∣ble, to which we are begotten by Christ Je∣sus, 1 Pet. 1.3.) Ver. 19. Which Hope we have as an An∣chor of the Soul, sure, and stedfast, (in all the Storms and Billows of the World,) and that which entreth into that within (Gr. the inward part of) the Veil. .] Which be∣ing the Hope of the Heavenly Mansions typi∣fied by the Sanctum Sanctorum, within the Veil, carries our Expectations thither: The Jews had the highest Expectations from the Service of the High-Priest entring into the Holy of Holies;Gemar. tit. Joma. if on the Day of Expiation he came out alive, there was great Joy, for then they thought they were accepted. How then may we rejoice in Contemplation of that Heavenly Sanctuary. Ver. 20. Whither the Fore-runner is for us entred, even Jesus, (who is) made an High-Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchise∣dek. (And so can never die, or miscarry in his Office, but lives for ever, there to appear in the Presence of God for us, Chap. 7.24, 25.) CHAP. VII. Ver. 1. (WHich Order, sure, was very ex∣cellent, and therefore fit to re∣present the Priesthood of the Holy Jesus, the King of Saints, and Prince of Peace.) For this Melchisedek, King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, who met Abraham return∣ing from the Slaughter of the (Four) Kings, (mentioned Gen. 14.9.) and blessed him, (v. 18.) Ver. 2. To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all (the Spoils taken by him,) first being, by Interpretation (of the Word Mel∣chisedek,) King of Righteousness, and after that also (styled) King of Salem, which (by Interpretation) is King of Peace. Ver. 3. Without Father, or without Mother, (of any Priestly Order,) without Descent (from any of the Pedigree of Abraham, v. 7.) ha∣ving neither beginning of Days, (from which his Priestly Office was to commence,) nor end
of Life, (in which it terminated,) but (being) made like unto the Son (a Son) of God, abi∣deth a Priest continually. , King of Salem.] They seem mistaken who think this Salem was the same with Jerusalem, for it is plain from this very Place, Gen. 14.15, 16, 17. that Salem was in the way which led from the Valley of Da∣mascus unto Sodom.Ep. ad Evagrium. Tom. 3. F. 14. C. St. Jerom also saith, that he learned, ab eruditissimis Gentis illius, from the most Learned of the Jews, that Sa∣lem was not Jerusalem, but a Town near Scythopolis, which till then was called Sa∣lem. And it retain'd its Name in our Savi∣our's Days, as appears by the Evangelist, say∣ing, that St. John baptized near Salem, John 3.23. Now of this Melchisedek, King of Salem, let it be noted, 1. That he must be a Man, not an Angel, not the Holy Spirit: For, 1st. Every High-Priest, saith the Apostle, is taken from among Men, Chap. 5.1. 2dly, The Scripture still speaks of him as a Man, describing him by his proper Name, his Kingly Dignity, and the City where he dwelt, and by his personal Actions, proper to a Man, his bringing forth Bread and Wine, and his receiving the Tythes of the Spoils. And, 3dly, From those Words consider, , what an eminent Per∣son this Melchisedek was, to whom Abraham gave the Tenth of the Spoils; things, surely, which neither Angel nor the Holy Spirit would receive, nor was it necessary to prove their Dignity. AccordinglyAntiq. L. 1. c. 11. Josephus saith expresly, that he was a King of the City of Salem. AndL. 2. De Legis Alleg. p. 57. Philo, that he was a King, and not a Tyrant. 2dly, He could not be Sem, as the Jews vainly imagine; for the Apostle saith here expresly, that Melchisedek was not , i. e. one who had his Pedigree or Descent from them; which is not true of Sem, nor could he be said to be without Fa∣ther, or Mother, whose Genealogy is evident from Adam, Gen. 5.32.10.1. and who was the Son of Noah. Nor was Sem's Priesthood, if he had any, of a different Order from Le∣vi's, who was in his Loins, as well as Levi was in the Loins of Abraham; and therefore it could not be said, that Levi paid him Tythes in the Loins of Abraham; but it would be as true, that he received Tythes in the Loins of Sem; for, according to this Interpretation, he was in the Loins both of him that received Tythes, and of him that pay'd them, which destroys the whole Argument of the Apostle here. Moreover, there is no visible Cause why Moses should call Sem, whom he so of∣ten mentions, by any other Name than his own, by which he doth so oft make mention of him; nor is it likely that Sem reign'd in the Land of Canaan, which now was in the Possession of his Brother's Son, nor could Abraham be said to sojourn there, as in a strange Country, if his Noble Ancestor Sem had been King there. 3dly, Much less could he be the Eternal , or the Son of God himself; for as he only was a Priest, according to his Humane Nature, i. e. that Nature in which he was inferiour to God, and which he had not yet assumed, and was then constituted an High-Priest, when God said to him, at his Resur∣rection, This Day have I begotten thee, Ch. 5.5. so could he not be an High-Priest after his own Order, or made like unto himself. But Melchisedek was in this like to him, that he was both a Priest of the most high God, and a King also in that Country, those two Offices being anciently in the same Person; whence the Hebrew  a Priest, is by the Targum often rendred  a Prince; see Gen. 41.45. Exod. 2.16.3.1. 2 Sam. 8.18.20.26. 1 Kings 4.6. Job 12.19. and on those Words, Psalm 110.4. Thou art a Priest for ever, thou shalt be a great Prince for ever, as the De∣scant of the Targum. Note also, that here again, M. le Clerk is insufferable, when he says, Because the Al∣legorical Writers of the Jews at that time accommodated innumerable Places to the Messiah, not relying upon any Grammatical Interpretation, but a certain old Custom of explaining the Scripture after this manner; and because they interpreted Psal. 110. of the Messiah, the sacred Writer makes use of that Interpretation, to his Purpose; and because they acknowledged the Messiah ought to be like Melchisedek, he reasons against them from their own Concessions, not against other Men, who might have denied what he affirmed; otherwise, if the thing be considered in it self, no Strong or Gramma∣tical Argument can be drawn against others from that History; and therefore such things are not too much to be urged now, because that way of explaining Scripture is grown out of use: That is, the Apostle proceeds all along upon weak Grounds, and urges Ar∣guments that in themselves depend on Fal∣shoods only, only because some silly Jews had said the same things before him. I read indeed in a profane Celsus, this vile Reflexion on the sacred Penmen, That. Orig. l. 7. p. 338. they produce things unknown, phanatical, uncertain, and which no wise Man thinks to be of any strength. But I am sorry to find a Christian Writer thus exposing them to the Contempt and Scorn of
Antiscripturists. Christ is a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedek, saith the A∣postle, Chap. 6.20. So indeed you tell us out of the idle Tales and allegorical Interpreta∣tions of some Brain-sick Jews, saith M. le Cl. but without all ground. It is , exceeding manifest, saith the Apostle, that another Priest should arise after the Or∣der of Melchisedek, Chap. 7.15. 'Tis no such thing, saith M. le Cl. this follows only from the vain Concessions of the Jews, another Man may deny what you thus confidently af∣firm. It is exceeding manifest, saith the A∣postle; for the Scripture testifies this, by say∣ing, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedek, v. 17. And God hath confirmed this by an Oath, in these Words, the Lord sware, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever. You make use of a Rabbinical Interpretation, saith M. le Clerk, and call that falsly a Scripture Testimony, but another Man may deny what you thus assume, for no Strong or Grammatical Argument can be drawn from these Words. , &c. without Father, and without Mother, &c.] It being certain that these things cannot be properly spoken of a Man, it is necessary to interpret them as I have done in the Paraphrase; and to this Interpretation the Apostle leads us, by styling him , without Pedigree, as being , not of the Genealogy of the People of Abraham. , but made like to a Son of God.] All the Interpreters I have met with, refer this to Christ, of whom Mel∣chisedek was a Type, he being the Antitype, as being emphatically a King of Righteous∣ness, and a Prince of Peace, without earthly Father, and as to his Divinity, without Mo∣ther, not of the Genealogy of the Aaronical Priesthood; without Beginning of Days, as to his Divine Nature; and without End of Life, as to his Priesthood. But the Apostle is not here speaking of Melchisedek's Like∣ness to Christ, but of Christ's Likeness to him, as being a Priest after the Order of Mel∣chisedek. Nor do these things well suit with our Lord Christ, who, as to his Humane Na∣ture, was not without Mother; nor as to his Priesthood, without Beginning of Days, Luke 3.23. I therefore rather think, that as in all the former Characters, so here the Apostle speaks of Melchisedek, and saith, he was in this like to a Son of God, or to one of the Angels, who are immortal, and never cease to be: For it is certain that the Angels are often styled the Sons of God, so Job 1.6. , the Sons of God, are in the Septuagint, . So also Chap. 2.1. and Chap. 38.7. and Psal. 29.1. Chald. So Dan. 3.25. the Vision of the fourth is like , a Son of God, i. e. an Angel of God: For so it follows, v. 28. He sent his Angel, and delivered them. It is the Obser∣vation of the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 2.3. that Man was made to be immortal, and to be an Image of God's Eternity; and at their Resurrection, saith St. Luke, they shall die no more, but shall be like unto the Angels, , and are the Sons of God, be∣ing Sons of the Resurrection; and our , or Sonship, is by this Apostle made to consist in the Redemption of the Body from Corrup∣tion, see Note on Rom. 8.23. Melchisedek therefore being here represented as one who had no End of his Life; and upon that ac∣count, one who abides a Priest for ever, is in this said to be like to a Son of God, whence, v. 8. the Apostle opposes him to Priests that die, saying, there he received Tythes, of whom it is testified that he liveth, viz. Psalm 110.4. Ver. 4. Now consider how great this Man (Gr. he) was, unto whom the Patriarch A∣braham gave the Tenth of the Spoils, (which anciently were given to Kings and Priests, as belonging to God, whom they served, or re∣presented.) , the Tenths of the Spoils.] , saith Phavorinus, are , the Spoils of War; they are, saith Hesychius and Suidas, , the First-Fruits of the Prey; or, asAntiq. l. 1. c. 11. p. 18. Josephus saith, , the Tenths of what was gotten by War, it being a very ancient Custom to give partly to the Gods, and partly to Kings, the Tenths or First-fruits of these Spoils: And so Mel∣chisedek might here receive them both as a King and as a Priest. That they were gi∣ven to the Gods, we learn from those Words ofL. 5. c. 77. Arrian, We ought in hunting to begin from the Gods, and to present to them the First-fruits of what we have taken, , no less than in a Victory in War, the Chief of the Spoils. Thus did the Athenians, saith Herodotus, who , consecrated the Tenth of their Prize to the Gods.Hist. l. 9. p. 543. Diodorus Siculus saith all the Greeks did it. See this, as to both Parts, largely proved by Dr. Spen∣cerL. 3. c. 10. §. 1, 2.. And evident it is, that Abraham here pay'd not the Tythes of all he had, but only of the Tenths of the Spoils: 1st. Because he had nothing else there, the Remainder of his Estate being at Mamre. 2dly, The man∣ner of paying Tythes being not this, that a Man shall pay the Tenth of all he hath, but only that he pay the Tenths of his Encrease, and that not when ever he meets the Priest, but at the Time of Harvest only, or when he receives from God's Hands the Encrease of it,
It cannot then be thought reasonable, that Abraham should give to Melchisedek the Tythes of any other Spoils than those he had now reap'd by way of Harvest. Ver. 5. And verily, they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of Priest∣hood, have a Commandment to take Tythes of the People, according to the Law, that is, of their Brethren, though they come out of the Loins of Abraham; (i. e. they receive Tythes only by virtue of the Law, and that from them only who come out of the Loins of Abraham, as well as they, Numb. 18.21, 26.) Ver. 6. But he whose Descent is not counted from them, (being no Kin to Abraham) re∣ceived Tythes of Abraham (himself,) and bles∣sed him who had the Promises, (that in him should all the Families of the Earth be bles∣sed.) , whose De∣scent, &c.] ThusL. 2. Alleg. p. 57. E. Philo saith, That , God made him his Priest, having not mentioned any Work that he did before: And elsewhere he saith, ThatL. de Congress. p. 342. G. he received, , a Priesthood taught and learn'd by himself. Ver. 7. And without Contradiction, (in all solemn Benedictions, ex officio,) the less is blessed of the greater, (and so he that blessed Abraham must be greater than he was.) Ver. 8. And there (under the Levitical Priesthood) Men that die receive Tythes, but here (in the Instance of Melchisedek) he (re∣ceiv'd them) of whom it is testified (Psalm 110.4.) that he liveth. He.] They seem to be mistaken who think this belongs only to Christ, and not at all to Melchisedek: The contrary is manifest, 1st. From the Particle , which shews that the Apostle is still speaking of the same Per∣son, i. e. Melchisedek, and from the three fol∣lowing Verses, which all speak of him; nor is here more said of him than v. 3. where 'tis affirmed he had neither Beginning of Days, nor End of Life. And by the Opposition be∣twixt the Aaronical Priests as dying, and Him as living, and by the Word , which respects a Testimony of this thing, it is evident that the Apostle inferrs this from the Words of the Psalmist, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedek. Ver. 9. And as I may so say, (the Family of) Levi also, who receiveth Tythes, paid Tythes in Abraham. Ver. 10. For he was yet in the Loins of his Father (Abraham,) when Melchisedek met him. ,] is not here to speak briefly, and as in a Word, but , as a Man may say, or , that I may so say; because, saith Theophylact, it was , a harsh Figure: For in such manner, saithEt si quid periculosius finxisse videmur quibusdam remediis praemuniendum est, ut itae dicam, si licet dicere, quodam∣modo. L. 8. 3. . Oecum. hic. Quinctilian, we use to mollifie harsh Expres∣sions: Which is enough to guard us against the Inference which some make from these Words, that in like manner we may be said to have sinn'd in Adam, as being in the Loins of Adam, when he sinn'd. Which may be granted, , in a manner, because we derived from him that Death which was the Punish∣ment of his Sin, as coming from the Loins of one mortal, and deriving from him a Nature subject to that Sin which deserveth Death; and more cannot be inferr'd from these Words, because the Apostle here says no more of Levi, but that he in a manner pay'd Tythes in Abraham. 2dly, Because, by the like Argument, it may be proved, that Jesus Christ himself, as Man, pay'd Tythes to Mel∣chisedek; for he also was in the Loins of A∣braham, when Melchisedek met him, and consequently that he was also inferiour to Melchisedek; which perhaps was the very Reason why this Apostle thus mollifies his Words, and is so careful to let us know he useth here a Form of Speech which is not proper and exact, but such as ought not to be press'd too far: And therefore, 3dly, The Subject-Matter fairly shews the Difference; for Tythes are pay'd out of such things which are the Father's Goods, and so would have descended by the Laws of Nature, and Na∣tions, to their Posterity, had they not been thus given to another; but good and evil A∣ctions are merely Personal, and therefore, tho' the Effects of both may, and often do descend unto Posterity, the good Actions of the Parents bringing temporal Blessings on their Off-spring, and their evil Actions subje∣cting them to temporal Calamities and Dis∣eases, yet their Merit or Demerit cannot be properly derived or propagated to their Poste∣rity; for as no Man is a good Man, in the Account of God, purely because his Father, or some of his Progenitors were so; so nei∣ther is any Man properly a Sinner, or evil in the Sight of God, merely because his Parents were so before he was born. Ver. 11. If therefore Perfection, (i. e. full Expiation of Sins,) were (to be obtained) by the Levitical Priesthood, (as it must have been had it come by the Law, v. 18, 19.) (for un∣der (Gr. about) that, the People received the Law,) what farther need was there, that ano∣ther Priest should arise (as the Psalmist saith) after the Order of Melchisedek, and not be
(rather) called (a Priest) after the Order of Aaron. , for about that the People received the Law.] i. e. The Law appointed that the People under all their De∣filements which needed any Expiation and Purgation, should repair to the Levitical Priests: Or under that Priesthood the People received the Law concerning Sacrifices, the Priesthood being first instituted, and then the Laws concerning Sacrifice and Expiation. .] That this word relating to Priests and Oblations, signifies Expiation and Purifi∣cation, see Note on Chap. 10.1. Ver. 12. (And yet you see this need there was) for the Priesthood being changed (i. e. translated from the Order of Aaron to that of Melchisedek,) there is made of necessity a change of the Law (concerning Priesthood, ver. 14. or touching Priests to be repaired to for Expiation.) Ver. 13. (And this change is signified by these words, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedek;) for he (i. e. Christ) of whom these things (words) are spoken, pertaineth to another Tribe (than that of Levi) of which (Tribe) no Man gave at∣tendance at the Altar. Ver. 14. For it is evident, that our Lord (to whom these words belong) sprang out of (the Tribe of) Judah, of which Tribe Moses spake nothing concerning Priesthood. Ver. 15. And it is yet far more evident (by saying) for that (Gr. , that) after the simi∣litude of Melchisedek (not of Aaron, ver. 11.) there ariseth another Priest. , for that.] The Particle  often signi∣fies quod, that, in Scripture, as doth the Hebrew . So Acts 26.8. Why should it be thought impossible, , that God should raise the dead. And ver. 23. , &c. That Christ hath suffered, and that he is the first that arose from the dead. So Jer. 2.28. Where are thy Gods, , that they may arise and save thee? See 1 Tim. 5.10. 2 Paral. 6.18. Ver. 16. Who is made (a Priest) not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, (relating to Men that are Flesh and Blood, and so in∣firm and subject to Mortality; for all Flesh is grass, Isa. 40.6. and therefore must be suc∣ceeded by others) but after the power of an endless (or indissoluble) Life. Ver. 17. For (thus) he testifieth, (by say∣ing) Thou art a Priest for ever after the Or∣der of Melchisedek. Ver. 18. (I say not after the Law of a carnal Commandment) for there is verily (indeed in these words) a disannulling of the Commandment going before (the preceding Commandment concerning the Levitical Priest∣hood, and Sacrifices,) for the weakness (of it as to Justification) and the unprofitableness of it (as to the Expiation of Sin.) , for the weakness of it.] For what the Law could not do; i. e. that De∣liverance from Death, that Justification to Life it could not give, , in that it was weak through the Flesh, ren∣dring us subject to the Transgression of it, and so to Death by the Sentence of it, Christ by his Sacrifice for Sin did, Rom. 8.3. , the unprofitableness] of the Law here mentioned must not be taken abso∣lutely, for that the Apostle denies, declaring in his Answer to that question, What advan∣tage then hath the Jew (above the Gentile)? or, , what is the profit of the Cir∣cumcision? that it is much every way; Rom. 3.1, 2. And reckoning among their Advan∣tages the giving of the Law, Rom. 9.4. and shewing the Uses of it, and the Reasons which moved God to give it, Rom. 7.8. Gal. 3.19, 24. but the Precepts of the Ceremonial Law were, , weak and beggarly Elements compared to those of the Gospel, Gal. 4.9. and wholly unprofitable as to Justification, or the Absolution of the Sin∣ner, or Transgressor of it from the Guilt of Sin, as the Apostle testifies in these words, Rom. 3.9. What then are we (Jews) better than they (the Gentiles)? , not alto∣gether: for we have before proved (touching) both Jews (Chapter the Second) and Gentiles (Chapter the First) that they are all under Sin, (and so both equally stand in need of Justification by Faith.) Ver. 19. For (thus) the Law made nothing perfect, but the introduction of a better hope, by which we draw nigh unto God (did it.) .] Nor is it to be wondred that the Law, of which the Levi∣tical Priesthood was the chiefest part, and that only which concern'd the Expiation of Sin, should be thus disannulled, since it was thus weak and unprofitable as to the Absolution of the Sinner from the Guilt of Sin, and could not by its Sacrifices, , procure an Ab∣solution as to Conscience to those that came unto God by them, from the Guilt of Sin, Chap. 10.1, 2. They could not make the Worshipper of God by them perfect, as ap∣pertaining to Conscience, Chap. 9.9. i. e. so as to have no more Conscience of the Guilt of Sin. This made it necessary that they should give place to, , the Introdu∣ction of a better hope.] i. e. The Introduction of that Sacrifice which gives a better hope, a hope of entring, not into an Earthly Taber∣nacle, which was all the Jewish Sacrifices could procure; (the way of entring into the Holy of Holies being not yet made manifest, Chap. 9.8.) but of entring within the Veil, Chap. 6.19. The hope of good things to come by a better and more perfect Tabernacle, Chap. 9.11. The hope not of an annual, but of an eternal Redemption, ver. 12. not of an Inhe∣ritance
to be continued for a little in the Land of Canaan, but of an eternal Inheritance, ver. 15. Christ being entred, not into that Earthly Tabernacle, as the Aaronical Priests only did, which was the Figure of the true, but into Heaven it self, there to appear in the presence of God for us, Chap. 9.24. and so procuring to us freedom to enter into the Ho∣liest by the Blood of Jesus. , by which we draw nigh to God.] Having our Consciences purged from dead Works by the Blood of Christ, to serve the living God, Chap. 9.14. and having through him freedom to come unto him with full assurance of Faith, Chap. 10.22. and by which we are made, , nigh to God through the Blood of Jesus, Eph. 2.13. and have ac∣cess unto the Father, ver. 18. Ver. 20. And (by so much is Jesus made the Mediator of a better Covenant) inasmuch as (his Priesthood, by vertue of which he became this Mediator, was) not without an Oath (as was that of the Tribe of Levi.) Ver. 21. For those Priests were made such without an Oath, but this with an Oath by him that said unto him, (Psal. 110.4.) The Lord sware, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedek. Ver. 22. (I say) by so much is Jesus made the Mediator of a better Covenant, (establish∣ed upon better Promises, Chap. 8.6.) .] Here is plainly the Figure called , or , ver∣borum, that which is put last, being to be construed first, as is manifest from the , but he, relating to the Mediator of the better Covenant in the following Verse. So Mark 14.23, 24. And taking the Cup, he gave thanks, and gave it to them, and they all drank of it, and he said unto them, This is the Blood of the New Testament, &c. For it is manifest from Matth. 26.27, 28. that Christ first said, This is my Blood of the New Testa∣ment, before they drank of it. And so those words, ver. 23. And they all drank of it, must in Construction follow those of ver. 24. This is the Blood of the New Testament. So Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great standing before the Throne of God, and they were judged, &c. And ver. 13. And the Sea gave up her dead, and Death and Hades gave up their dead, and they were judg∣ed according to their Works: And yet 'tis cer∣tain, that the Sea and Hades must give up their dead before they could stand before the Throne of God, or be judged. So Hebr. 2.9. We see Jesus made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honour; that he, by the Grace of God, might taste death for every Man: i. e. for the suffering Death, that so by the Grace of God he might taste death for every Man, crown∣ed with Glory and Honour. Ver. 23. And (to proceed in the Compari∣son) they truly were many Priests (succes∣sively) because they were not permitted to con∣tinue, by reason of Death. Ver. 24. But this Man (Gr. but he, i. e. Jesus, ver. 22.) because he continueth ever, hath an unchangable High Priesthood, (which passeth not away, and so admits of no suc∣cession to it.) Ver. 25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost (Gr. for ever) that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make Inter∣cession for them, (and by that Intercession to become the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2.2.) Ver. 26. (And thus was he an High-Priest suited to our Condition) for such an High-Priest became us (Sinners) who is Holy (i. e. consecrated to his Office, and so Holiness to the Lord, Exod. 28.36.) harmless, (, free from evil in himself) undefiled (by the impurities of others,) separate from Sinners, (and so not liable to any Defilement by dwel∣ling among them) and (therefore) made higher than the Heavens, (he being ascended far a∣bove the Heavens, Eph. 4.10. and passed through the Heavens, Hebr. 4.14. into the Presence of God, there to appear for ever for us.) , harmless.] , the word imports, one free from Sin. So Chrysostom and Theophylact; and this, saithDe Victimis, p. 652. E. Philo, must be the Property of a true High-Priest, for, , he that truly, and not improperly, bears that Name, is free from sin: And of him that was to enter once a Year into the Holy of Holies, he saith, He must be,Lib. de Temul. p. 202. D. , entire, perfect in all things, not taint∣ed at all with any Passion, great or small, but of a nature sound, whole, and every way per∣fect, , separate from Sinners. This must signifie something different from , free from evil, and un∣defiled by sin. And what can that be, be∣sides what I have hinted in the Paraphrase? Now, to clear up this, let it be noted, That though the Holy of Holies was the place in∣to which none entred but the High-Priest, and he only once a Year, after a Sin-offering, had been first offered for him, yet God Commands that an Atonement should be made for the Holy Place, because of the Uncleannesses of the Children of Israel, and because of their Transgressions in all their sins, Lev. 16.16. i. e. because it was seated among an unclean
People, it needed an Atonement. That there∣fore our High-Priest might be every way clean and undefiled, he was to be not only free from Sin, but also separate from Sinners, as theSee Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c. 11. & Codex Joma, cap. 1. High-Priest was seven days before the Expiation, and when he made the Expiation, Lev. 16.17. Ver. 27. (And so one) who needeth not daily as those High-Priests (under the Law did), to offer up Sacrifice first for his own Sins, (which he, being free from evil, ver. 26. could not do,) and then for (the Sins of) the People; for this (last) he did once when he offered up himself. , for this he did once for all.] Grotius, and the Socinians contend, That Christ is here said to have offer'd up himself for his own Sins, but then by Sins, they say, is improperly signified his natural Infirmities and Sufferings. But where hath the word Sin any such import? it is indeed sometimes implied to Impurities not moral, but only legal: As in the Case of menstruous Women, Lev. 12.8.15.30. and to Leprosies sent by the Hand of God, for the Punishment of Sin, Lev. 14.13. but never to any thing which by the Law of Moses was accounted no Defilement. And how improper is it to make the same words used but once signifie properly Sin when respecting the People, and only Sufferings with respect to Christ. More∣over, how did he offer up himself for his own Sufferings? did he suffer that he might not suffer? or that he might not be obnoxious to them? The Interpretation therefore of all the Ancient Commentators, which I have given in the Paraphrase, ought to stand in oppo∣sition to this vain Invention. Ver. 28. For the Law maketh Men High-Priests which have Infirmity, (subjecting them to Sin, and by that to Mortality, whence they have need to offer, as well for them∣selves as for the People, ver. 27.) but the Word of the Oath, which is since the Law, ma∣keth the Son (our High-Priest) who was con∣secrated (to this Office) for ever; (he being not subject to those Infirmities which brought Mortality upon others.) CHAP. VIII. Ver. 1. NOW (, for) of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum, (i. e. to give you a summary of the things spoken in the former Chapters, touching our High-Priest Christ Jesus;) We have (in him) such an high-Priest, who is set on the Right-hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Hea∣vens, (there to officiate for us.) Ver. 2. (And who is therefore) a Minister of the (Heavenly) Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not Man; (for by the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, Psalm 32.) , The Sanctuary which the Lord pitched, and not Man.] That is, of Heaven it self. For, 1st, , in this E∣pistle being put absolutely, oft signifies the Heavenly Sanctuary, the Holy Mansion in which the Divine Majesty resides Gloriously, in opposition to the , Earthly Holy, mention'd Chap. 9.1. and the true Ta∣bernacle which the Lord pitched, and not Man, is the Heavenly Tabernacle, set in opposition to the , or that of Moses which was made with hands. So Chap. 9.11. Christ be∣ing come an High-Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, , not made with hands, that is to say, not of this Building, but by his own Blood he entred in once into the Holy Place, (, once for all into the Holy Places.) Chap. 10.19. Having freedom of access into the Holy Place, and having an High-Priest over the House of God. And Chap. 9.23, 24. It was necessary that the Examples of the things in the Heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifices than these. For Christ entred not into the Holy Places made with hands, , which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, to appear now in the Presence of God for us. And this is suitable to the old Notions of the Jews, who oft de∣clare, that the chief Intention of making of the Tabernacle, and other Things, was, That they might be a Book of Wisdom to instruct them in the things above, which they respected; and that, when Moses made one Tabernacle on Earth, another was made by the Angels in Heaven, Buxt. Hist. Arcae, p. 83, 84. It also was their Opinion, That the second part of the Tabernacle was made to be an Image of the visible World; and the Holy of Holies to be a resemblance, Mundi supercoelestis, of the Celestial World. So Philo often calls the Tabernacle of the Jews, , and says, it was the shadow, or resemblance, , of the Archetypal, or Original in Heaven.Legis Alleg. l. 2. p. 61. B. Moses, says he, framed , the Archetypal Plan of the Taberna∣cle, Bezeleel only, , the resem∣blance of things; and this he proves by the Apostle's Argument, used ver. 5. For Moses, saith he, used God for his Guide, who said to
him, See thou make all things according to the Pattern shew'd thee in the Mount. Bezeleel, saith he, signifies one,L. de Plan. Noae, p. 170. B. , em∣ploy'd in making Shadows; whereas Moses was appointed not to frame the Shadows, but, , the Arche∣typal Natures of the things themselves. Else∣where he distinguisheth betwixt theL. de Temul. p. 202. A B. , visible things of the Tabernacle made of inani∣mate and corruptible Matter, and, , the invisible and intel∣lectual Ideas, of which the other were the I∣mages: The first he callsL. de Vita Mosis, p. 515, 516. , of which Moses had the Incorporeal Ideas. And. Antiq. Ju∣daic. l. 3. c. 8. p. 86. G. Josephus saith, That the second Part of the Tabernacle signified that Earth in which Men conversed, but the third Part was appropriated to God, Heaven being inaccessible to Men; which seems to be the very thing the Apostle intendeth by those words, The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the Holiest of all was not yet ma∣nifested, whilst the first Tabernacle was yet standing, Hebr. 9.8. Ver. 3. (An High-Priest, I say, of the Hea∣venly Sanctuary, and therefore one who must have something to offer in that Sanctuary,) for every High-Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices (in that Sanctuary in which he executes that Office); wherefore it is of ne∣cessity that this Man (the High-Priest in Hea∣ven) have also somewhat to offer (there.) Ver. 4. (I say there, and not on Earth:) for if he were on Earth he should not be a Priest, (or had he been (still) on Earth he had not been a Priest at all,) seeing that there are (other) Priests that (are appointed to) offer Gifts according to the Law. Ver. 5. Who serve to the Example and Sha∣dow of heavenly Things, (or in the holy Place and Tabernacle, which is an Example and Shadow of the heavenly,) as (we learn from what) Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle. For see, saith he, (Exod. 25.40.) that thou make all things according to the Pattern shewed thee in the Mount. (For calling it, , a Type or Pattern he shews that it was only a Resem∣blance of the Things in Heaven, and not the heavenly Things themselves, Chap. 9.23.) .] These Words, saith Mr. le Cl. can by no means signifie a prefigu∣ration of something future, for Heaven was a great while before the Tabernacle and Tem∣ple; but this Argument is of no force, for tho Heaven be older than the Tabernacle, yet that considered as a place in which the Jews then Worshipped, and enjoy'd Communion with God, might be a Type of that place in which they were hereafter to Worship and enjoy him. The Argument of the Apostle is to this Effect, Christ could not be a Priest on Earth, because he could have there no Tabernacle in which to offer Sacrifice; the only place God had appointed upon Earth to offer Sa∣crifices in, being the Mosaical Tabernacle and the Temple, in which no other Sacrifices could be offer'd but those appointed by the Law; no Oblation made, or to be made, but by the Levitical Priesthood. Moreover this Tabernacle being the Shadow of the Heaven∣ly one, that must succeed it as the Substance, and therefore the Oblation to be made by this High-Priest, after the Order of Melchisedek, must be made in that Tabernacle which was to succeed and follow this, as being the Substance of that Shadow. Ver. 6. But now he (Christ) hath obtained a more excellent Ministery (viz. that of offi∣ciating in the Heavenly Sanctuary,) by how much also (Gr. , in as much as also) he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is established upon better Promises. Better Promises.] Those of the Law be∣ing only Temporal Promises, relating to Bles∣sings to be confer'd upon them in the Land of Canaan; this Covenant had the promise of an Eternal Inheritance, to be confer'd upon them in the Celestial Canaan, Chap. 9.15. These Spiritual Promises were indeed made to the Fathers also of old, before the Law, whence they are said by Faith to look for a better Country, that is an Heavenly, and to have expected a City that hath Foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Hebr. 11.10, 16. But then these Promises of a Sa∣viour, and of such Salvation by him, were not made in, and by the Law, but long be∣fore it, Rom. 4.13. Gal. 3.15, 17. as they must be if made to them who lived and died long before it. Under the Law also they had Spiritual Promises, and Types of the Mes∣siah in it, who was the promised Seed in whom all these Promises were made, and by whom they were purchased; but then they had not these Promises by the Law, nor these Blessings by the Levitical Priesthood, but by virtue of the Lamb slain from the begin∣ning. Ver. 7. (A better Covenant I say) for if that first Covenant (made by Moses with the Jews) had been faultless, (so that God should have found no cause of blaming them who lived under it) then should no place have been sought for (the introduction of) the second.
Ver. 8. (But so it was not) for finding fault with them, (for the breach of it,) he (i. e. the Prophet) saith, Behold the Days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of Judah. Ver. 9. Not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, because they continued not in (the observance of) that Covenant, and I (therefore) regarded them not, saith the Lord. (Jer. 31.31, 32, 33.) , If the first Covenant had been faultless.] That is, say the Fathers, , if it could have made them blameless that were under it. So Theodoret, Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theophylact; and so the words following do force us to interpret this Clause, for the Apostle and the Prophet plainly charge the breach of the Old Covenant upon the Jews themselves, blaming them for it, ver. 9. I know some Interpreters render the Words, , blaming it he saith to them; but the Observation of the Ancient Fathers is this, , he said not blaming it, but blaming them, and the words following, be∣cause they continued not in that Covenant, do justifie that Exposition. Object. But you will say, How doth it fol∣low that the Covenant was faulty, because the Jews continued not in it, any more than that the New Covenant is also faulty, be∣cause many Christians do not observe the Conditions of it? I Answer, That the word faulty doth not here signifie sinful in it self, for so this Apostle denies it to be faulty, Rom. 7.7. but only imperfect, and defe∣ctive as to the great end of the Covenant, do this and live, it being a Law that could not give Life, Gal. 3.21. and as to the preser∣ving those that were under it from Offending, and so becoming blame-worthy, and obnoxi∣ous before God, Rom. 3.19. This being pre∣mised, I say, two things shew that the Pro∣phet and the Apostle so lay the fault on them, as plainly to insinuate there was also an Im∣perfection and Deficiency in the Law they were under, which ministred occasion to it. 1st. Because he lays the blame not on some refractory Persons only, but on the whole House of Israel and Judah. Now where all, good and bad, come under blame, there must be some Defect and Imperfection in that Law, with reference to the two great Ends fore∣mentioned. 2dly, Because for the prevention of this blame, God by his Prophet doth not call them to a more exact observance of that Law and Covenant, but promiseth a New Covenant, plainly insinuating thereby, that there was need of a New and better Cove∣nant to prevent their Transgression, and render them fit Objects of his Grace and Favour for the future. Accordingly this weakness of the Law is by St. Paul resolved partly into such Causes as respect the Offenders, and partly into such as do respect the Law it self. Into such as respect the Offenders, as v. g. the weakness of the Flesh, which made them un∣able to perform the exact Obedience the Law required, and so it became unable to justifie them; for this the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, Rom. 8.3. and their carnal Inclinations which made them averse to the Spiritual Precepts of the Law, Rom. 7.14. And this the New Covenant re∣medied by requiring not perfect, but only sin∣cere Obedience as the Condition of those Blessings which it promiseth, and giving the assistance of the Holy Spirit to perform that Obedience. For, to come to the Imperfecti∣ons of the Law it self, compared with this New Covenant. First, The first is this, That the Law re∣quired exact Obedience, but gave no inward Spiritual Assistance for the performance of that Duty. Hence the Apostle puts this difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel, that the first is only the ministration of the Letter, the second is the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. That under the Law the Jews served God in the oldness of the Letter, whereas under the Gospel we serve him in the newness of the Spirit, Rom. 7.5. That then the Inclinati∣ons and Desires of the Things forbidden by the Law wrought in our Members to bring forth Fruit unto death; whereas if we through the Spirit do mortifie the Deeds of the Flesh, we shall live, Rom. 8.13. Then the good which they would they did not, Rom. 7.19. But now the Righteousness of the Law is ful∣filled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.4. Secondly, The Law not only made all that were subject to it obnoxious to Condemnation for the guilt of Sin, but also was unable to remove that Guilt, and clear the Conscience from the sense and terrour of it. It could not justifie us, saith the Apostle, for by the deeds of the Law shall no Flesh be justified, Rom. 3.20. Gal. 2.16. That is, it could not absolve us from Condemnation on the account of Sin, it could not by the Sacrifices it offer'd daily take away the Guilt of Sin, Hebr. 10.4, 11. and so could not make the Worshipper perfect as pertaining to Conscience, Hebr. 9.9. whereas by virtue of the Blood of Christ a full remis∣sion of them was procur'd, so that God would remember them no more, Hebr. 10.17, 18. and so the Conscience was by it purified from dead Works, Hebr. 9.14. Thirdly, The Law consider'd not as Moral, that being the Law common to all Mankind, but as purely Mosaical, contained in it only Ceremonial Precepts, which had no real and intrinsick Goodness in them to commend them to our Practice, whence by the Apostle it is
said to consist of outward and carnal Ordi∣nances, imposed on them only till the time of Reformation, Hebr. 9.10. and to contain only the Elements of the World, Gal. 4.3. weak and beggarly Elements, v. 9. whereas the New Covenant is a Law written in the Heart, v. 10. Lastly, As the Mosaical Law had no in∣ward Goodness to commend it, so also was it wanting in the Promise of those Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, which are the Sove∣reign Motives to Obedience, and to Purifica∣tion of our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; whereas, by virtue of the Death of Christ, a Promise of an eternal Inheritance is procured for us, Hebr. 9.15. and an en∣trance into the Holy of Holies through the Blood of Jesus, Chap. 10.19. On which ac∣count the Apostle saith, The Law made no∣thing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope, did, Hebr. 7.19. And I regarded them not.] , so the Septuagint, and from them the Apostle; whereas the Hebrew runs thus, , and, or though I was an Husband to them: But the Learned Dr. Po∣cock hath shew'd that the Hebrew , not only signifies in the Arabick to govern, and be a Husband, but also to refuse, despise, and nauseate. And so it well accords with the words of the Septuagint. Ver. 10. (I say not according to that Cove∣nant,) For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after those Days, saith the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write them in their Hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People. Ver. 11. And they shall not (have need to) teach every Man his Neighbour, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the least to the greatest. Ver. 12. (I say, I will be their God,) For I will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and their Iniquities will I remember no more. Ver. 13. In that he saith, A New Covenant, he hath made, (a declaration that) the first (is) old. Now that which is old is ready to vanish away. For Explication of this new Covenant let it be considered, First, That is expresly promised to be made with the whole House of Israel, with them to whom the old Covenant was made, with them who were brought out of the Land of Egypt; it therefore is not a Promise made to, or a Covenant made with some few E∣lect, and chosen People out of Israel and Judah, but with those who abode not in their former Covenant, and so were not re∣garded by God. Now hence it is manifest, That this can be no Promise of absolute Election, or vouchsafing irresistible Grace to any of the Jews, because then the whole Nation of the Jews must have been conver∣ted. 2. Because this is a Promise of some∣thing to be done in the last Times, or in the Times of the Messiah, whereas God hath at all times his Elect, and doth at all times vouchsafe them his effectual Grace. 3. Be∣cause this is here called a Covenant, which implies two Parties covenanting, or stipula∣ting, the one Obedience, the other Blessings on the performance of it; whereas an abso∣lute Promise admits of no Conditions. 4. The Elect always persisted in their Covenant with God, and were always regarded by him, they always were his People, and he always was their God; this therefore can be no new Covenant with them. Secondly, This being a Promise of a new Covenant, of which new Covenant Christ is declared here to be the Mediator through his Blood, it cannot properly be said to be ful∣filled in the compleat import of it before our Saviour's Sufferings, and the Preaching of Justification through Faith in his Blood. Nor seems it to have been yet accomplished in the extent and the full meaning of it, as it will be when the blindness of the Jews shall be removed, and so all Israel shall be saved, Rom. 11.25, 26. For this is God's Covenant with them, when he shall take away their Sins, ver. 28. Which though he did make good at the first Preaching of the Gospel to as many as believed in Jesus, yet since that was the time of the falling and casting off the Generality of that Nation, a Remnant only being then preserved from Judicial Blind∣ness. I believe there will be a time when this, and other like Promises made to them in the Old Testament, shall have a more com∣pleat Accomplishment. But to proceed to the proper import of the Words; First, I conceive that the Phrase, I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write them on their Hearts, imports, That he would clear∣ly and perspicuously make known his Will to them, and by his Holy Spirit make such a deep Impression of it on their Spirits, and so continually bring it to their remembrance, that it shall be as powerful upon them, and as present to them, as if it were writ upon their Hearts. For these two Metaphors, both in the Scripture and the Jewish Writers, chiefly signifie two things. 1. A clear and a perspicuous Revelation of the Mind and Will of God, so that we need not be at much pains to search it out: As in these Words, The Commandment which I command thee this day is not hidden from thee, neither is it far from thee; the Word is near unto thee in thy mouth, , and in thy Heart, and in thy Hands, that th shouldst do it. See I have set before thee Life and Death, Deut. 30.11, 14. And so, saith the Apostle, is it with that Word of Faith which we preach, 'tis nigh to the Christian
his Mouth to confess, and in his Heart to be∣lieve it, Rom. 10.8, 9. And the Law writ∣ten in the Hearts of Heathens, is the Law so plainly taught them, that their own Con∣sciences do inwardly condemn them when they do Transgress it, Rom. 2.15. This also is apparent from the consequent Effect of writing this Law in the Christian's Heart, and putting it in their inward parts, viz. that they shall have no need to teach every one his Neighbour, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know him from the least to the great∣est. This Law must therefore be plain to the Capacities of, and easie to be perceived by them all. And to this Interpretation theSt. Jerom. in Jer. 31.31. Chrysostom on Rom. 10.8. Theod. in locum. Cyril. of Alex. Com. in Joh. l. 12. p. 1071. Chrysost. in Hebr. Hom. 14. To. 4. p. 509. Fathers give a general Consent. 2. An efficacious Impression of them on the Soul, and on the Memory, so that we do not let them slip out of our Minds. So Deut. 6.6. These Words which I command thee this day shall be in thy Heart, they shall be, , writ upon the Table of thy Heart, saith Jonathan B. Uziel, and thou shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine House, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up, v. 7. They shall be, , in thy Heart and Soul, saith the Septuagint. As the Expression is, Deut. 11.18. by which Ex∣pressions he requires, , that the Law should not depart from their Hearts, 2 Maccab. 2.3. So Prov. 3.1. My Son forget not my Law, but let thy Heart keep my Commandments, ver. 3. write them upon the Table of thy Heart. And again Chap. 7.1. My Son keep my Words, and lay up my Commandments with thee: Bind them upon thy finger, write them upon the table of thy heart, v. 3. So the Targum on Cant. 8.9. saith, God will remember them for the sake of the Law, which is written, , upon the Table of the Heart of his Children. And Jer. 17.1. The Sin of Judah is said to be written on the Table of their Hearts, as if the Me∣mory of, and Affection to it, could never be obliterated. And the Targum on Job 30.4. saith, They who let the Law slip, , from the Table of their Hearts, burning Coals shall be their Meat. So frequent is this Phrase to this Sense, both in the Scripture and the Jewish Writers. That the words in which this new Covenant are framed, Jer. 31.33, 34, 35. may have a more exact and full Completion at the second Calling of the Jewish Nation, this Apostle seems to intimate Rom. 11.27. but that they also were fulfilled by the first Ad∣vent of our Lord, can only be denied by them who think with Mr. le Cl. that the Apostle argues upon unsound Foundations, for he most clearly saith, That the old Covenant was on∣ly to continue till the new Covenant, in which God promised to be merciful to our Iniqui∣ties, took place, and also that this new Co∣venant was established in the Blood of Jesus the Mediator of a better Covenant, ver. 6. and proves that Christ had by his Sufferings perfectly procured the Remission of the Sins of them that were Sanctified, or cleansed from the Guilt of Sin by Faith in his Blood, by the words of this new Covenant, Chap. 10.14, 15, 16, 17. Secondly, He says, That the old Covenant, there mentioned, was to vanish away at the coming of this new Covenant, ver. 13. and thereby intimates that this new Covenant, mentioned Jer. 31.33. began to take place even from the Abolition of the old Covenant, consisting in Ordinances which was only to continue till the time of Reformation, Hebr. 9.10. and which was taken away by the Death of Christ: This therefore seems to be one of those places which prove there will be a double Completion of the Promises and Predictions contained in the Old, and, perhaps, in the New Testament, and thereby shew they may admit of a double Sense, the one relating to the first, the other to the se∣cond Coming of our Lord. CHAP. IX. Ver. 1. (THE Apostle had declared, Chap. 8. ver. 5. That the Tabernacle had only a Shadow of the Heavenly things, this he now proceeds to shew in the following words,) Then verily the first Covenant had (, the first Tabernacle therefore had) also Ordinances of Divine Ser∣vice, and a worldly Sanctuary, (or Rights of Worship, and a worldly Sanctuary in which that Worship was performed.) , the first Covenant.] Some of the Ancients, as Chrysostom, read only , but none of them read , but many of them , as Theodoret, and Oecu∣menius; and this I believe to be the true reading. For 'tis well observed by the Fa∣thers who do, and who do not, read the word ; that the Apostle having before proved from the Enallage of the Priest and Priesthood, and of the former Covenant; that an End was put unto the Jewish Constitutions; proceeds now to prove the same from the
Consideration of that Tabernacle which was a shadow of good things to come. Secondly, be∣cause the thred or the contexture of the Apo∣stle's Argument seems plainly to require this Reading. For the Tabernacle consisting of two Parts, an outward House called the Holy Place, and an inward House called the Holy of Holies; the Apostle here calleth the out∣ward House the first Tabernacle, and Dis∣courses of it as such, ver. 1, 2. and then, v. 3. proceeds to the Holy of Holies, or the second Tabernacle, saying, the first or outward Ta∣bernacle had a worldly Sanctuary, in which the Rites of the Jewish Worship were perform∣ed; for a first Tabernacle was prepared by Moses, containing such and such things; and then a second, containing other things; now this first Tabernacle is said to comprize or consist of a worldly Tabernacle, for both the Jews and Fathers say it was designed to represent this lower World; the Earth and the Sea, saithAntiq. l. 3. c. 8. Josephus; It was, , a Symbol of the sensitive World, saithStrom. 5. p. 562. B. Clemens Alexandrinus. See Dr. Spencer de legibus Hebraeorum, p. 188. The , are the Constitu∣tions, or the Rights and Rules of Worship prescribed to be used in the Service of the Tabernacle; , Ordinances, that is, Symbols, Con∣stitutions, Laws. So Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theophylact. Ver. 2. For there was a Tabernacle made, the first (Gr. , for a first Tabernacle was prepared) wherein was the Candlestick, and the Table, and the Shew-Bread, which (first Tabernacle) is called the Sanctuary, (or Holy.) , which is called the Sanctua∣ry.] Or, as other Copies read, , which is called Holy. Vain therefore is the Argument of Mr. le Cl. That the Writer of this Epistle did not well understand He∣brew, and therefore cannot be thought to have been St. Paul, but rather some Grecian; to wit, because he calls the Sanctuary only , Ho∣lies, whereas, according to the constant usage of the Hebrew, he should have called it, , Holy of Holies. For (1st.) all this depends on an uncertain Reading, and an uncertain Accent; read but , and there is no Foundation for this Argument: Seeing then the Apostle speaks not of the Sanctuary, but of the first Tabernacle, which was only called Holy. And so Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and Theophylact read, and Theodoret observes, that the Tabernacle was divided into two Parts by the Veil, the one was called Holy, the other the Holy of Holies; and that, , the Apostle calls this the first Tabernacle, to distinguish it from the Sanctuary, as it is evident he doth from the Verse following, which demonstrates that  is the true Reading in this Verse. (2dly,) It depends upon a false Criticism, for , 1 Kings 8.8. signifies ex Adyto, or from the most holy Place, where the Ark was, as appears from 2 Chron. 5.8. See Dr. Lightfoot's Treatise of the Temple, Chap. 15. Sect. 4. Ver. 3. And after the second Veil the (other) Tabernacle (was prepared, ver. 2, 6.) which is called the Holiest of all; Ver. 4. Which had (for its use) the Golden Censer, (used only on the day of Expiation) and the Ark of the Covenant overlaid round about with Gold, in which was the golden Pot that had Manna, and Aaron's Rod that budded, (Numb. 17.10. Exod. 16.33, 34.) and the Tables of the Covenant, (1 Kings 8.9.) , the golden Censer.] Of this golden Censer the Jews inform us, that it was only used on the great Day of Expia∣tion, when the High-Priest entred into the Holy of Holies; and that on other Days they offer'd Incense in a Silver Censer. So Mai∣monides, and Abarbinel. See Buxt. Hist. Arcae. p. 76. , in which, &c.] Of the Ark the Scri∣pture saith expresly, That there was nothing in it but the Tables of the Covenant, 1 Kings 8.9. 2 Chron 5.10. Whereas the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod, are here said to have been also in it. To solve this Difficulty some Interpreters say, That, as ver. 2. the Apostle tells us what was in the first Taber∣nacle, viz. the Candlestick, the Table, and the Shew-bread: So here he seems to tell us not what was strictly in the Ark, but in the Holy of Holies, saying, it had for its use the Golden Censer and the Ark, and in it the Tables of the Covenant, the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod. But the words over it were the Cherubims, relating not to the Holy of Ho∣lies, but only to the Ark, confute that Expo∣sition. Others say, That the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod are said to be in the Ark, as be∣ing placed in the Receptacles of the Ark, or Coffers in the side of it, mention'd Deut. 31.26. 1 Sam. 6.8. Hence they are said to be laid up not in, but before the Ark of the Testi∣mony, Exod. 16.34. Numb. 17.10. or with the Ark, as Beth, which answers to , here signifies, viz, cum, ad, prope, juxta. See Noldius de partic. p. 144, 145. And this Ex∣position solves the Difficulty, and agrees ful∣ly with the Tradition of the Jews, for that there were such Capsula's to the Ark for this use is owned, saithBuxt. Hist. Arcae. p. 72. Buxtorf, both by the Talmud of Jerusalem and Babylon.Buxt. ibid. c. 5. p. 69, 70. Mai∣monides saith, there was a Stone in the West
part of the Holy of Holies, on which the Ark was placed, and before it the Pot of Manna, and the Rod of Aaron.In 1 Reg. 8.9. Moses Mikkotsi says the same, and Abarbinel adds, That our Interpreters write that this place does not deny that the Pot of Manna, and the Rod of Aaron were kept there for the Children of Israel, as it is said in a certain Tradition of our Rabbins. Ver. 5. And over it (the Ark) were the Cherubims of Glory shadowing the Mercy-seat, of which we cannot now speak particularly, (so as to give the Mystical Signification of them.) Cherubims of Glory.] So called, because the Glory of the Lord dwelt between the Che∣rubims, and shined forth from them, Psal. 80.1. Thou that dwellest between the Cheru∣bims shine forth: And they being Emblems of the Angelical Nature, were also Emblems of the Divine Presence, before which the Angels stood continually. Ver. 6. Now when these things were thus ordained, (or these things being thus prepa∣red,) the Priests went always into the first Ta∣bernacle, accomplishing the Service of God. Ver. 7. But into the second went the High-Priest alone once every year, (i. e. one day only in the Year, and then) not without Blood, which he offered for himself (first), and (then) for the Errors of (Gr. Sins of Ignorance com∣mitted by) the People. , once every Year.] The Priest entred into the Holy of Holies on the great Day of Expiation thrice, to offer In∣cense, Lev. 16.12. to offer the Blood of the Goat, ver. 15. and to make an Atonement for himself, ver. 17. which makes it necessary to Paraphrase the Words as I have done. , and for the Igno∣rances of the People.] 'Tis certain that the Law allow'd of Sacrifices for Sins committed not out of mere Ignorance, i. e. for Lying, and false Swearing, Lev. 6.1-6. We there∣fore must either say with Vatablus and Mun∣ster, in locum, That Sins committed through the Violence of our Passions and Affections, are called Sins of Ignorance, and so they stand opposed to Sins of Presumption, Numb. 15.27, 28, 30. or that the Sins of the People are here so stiled, because they were mostly such. Ver. 8. The Holy Ghost (by whose Afflatus Moses was directed to prepare the Tabernacle) this signifying (by this admission of the High-Priest alone, and that but once a Year, and that then only when all the People were gone out of the Tabernacle of the Congregation) that the way into the (true) Holy of Holies was not yet made manifest, whilst the first Ta∣bernacle was standing. , the Way into the Holy of Holies.] i. e. Into the Heavens, was not yet revealed, or opened. Thus did the Jews themselves interpret this Symbol, saying, That theJoseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 8. Adytum, , which was inaccessible to the Priests, re∣presented the Heaven where God dwelt. This Interpretation all the Ancient Commen∣tators give us of this place, viz. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, saying, These things were so prepar'd that they might learn, , that is, that Heaven represented by the Holy of Holies was as yet inaccessible, for Christ first entred into Heaven, , and so rendred it acccessible to us: And therefore, as the Apostle saith here, , the way into this Holy of Holies was not yet manifested. So he saith in the next Chapter, that we Christians have, , an entrance into Heaven by the Blood of Jesus, and, , a new Way which he hath made new through his Flesh: i. e. our Fore∣runner being thus entred into Heaven with his Blood to appear before God, and so to pre∣pare these Mansions for us, the Way of our entrance into Heaven is now made mani∣fest. Ver. 9. Which was a Figure for the time then present, (, which figure continues till this present time, viz. in the like Service performed in the Temple,) in which were (, are) offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, which could not (, which (Sacrifies) cannot) make him who did the Service (i. e. who brings these Gifts and Offerings) perfect, as pertain∣ing to the Conscience. Ver. 10. (As being conversant) only in Meats and Drinks, (to be abstained from by these Worshippers, Lev. 10.9.) and in divers Washings, (to be then used by the Priests of∣ficiating, Exod. 29.4. by the Levites, Numb. 8.7. and by the People defiled, Lev. 15.8. before they might enter into the Temple,) and (in other) carnal Ordinances, (which on∣ly sanctified to the purifying of the Flesh, ver. 13. and were therefore) imposed on them (only) until the time of Reformation (of all things by this new High-Priest.) (These car∣nal Ordinances include all the Sacrifices and other Services perform'd in the Tabernacle.) , to perfect according to the Conscience.] The best account of this Phrase, relating to what the Law and its Sa∣crifices could not do, may be learn'd from what the new Covenant and the Blood of Christ, in which it was established, is said to do. 1. Then that Blood offer'd in the Presence of God is said to take away Sins, ,
so as that there shall be no return of them upon the Conscience; no need of any more Oblation for the Sins of such a Person, there being in him no more Consciousness of Guilt after his Justification by Faith in the Blood of Jesus. For where Remission of Sins is, there is no more offering for Sins, because the Tenour of the New Covenant runs thus, Their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more, Chap. 10.17, 18. Hence the Apostle argues thus, That the Law with those Sacrifices which were offered every Year could not, , perfect for ever them that came to God with them, because if they could have done that, the Worshippers once purged by them would have had no more Conscience of Sin, Hebr. 10.1, 2. i. e. they would not have been still conscious of the Guilt of Sin, and so could have no need yearly to repeat the same Sacrifices. And of our Saviour's Sacrifice he speaketh thus, That by one Offering, , he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified, i. e. are purged by it from the Guilt of Sin, Heb. 10.14. Wherefore, to perfect according to the Conscience, is so fully to expiate from the Guilt of Sin, that it shall be no more remembred by God, and we shall have no more Conscience of the Guilt of it. Now the Consequents of this full Remission are these two, 1st. A coming unto God with freedom, and full assurance of Acceptance with him. This the Apostle frequently ascribes unto the Death of Christ, who suf∣fered for our Sins, that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. saying, by him who hath reconciled us to God by the Cross, We have freedom and access with confidence to the Father by Faith in him, Eph. 2.16, 18.3.12. and upon that account exhorts us to come to him in full assurance of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22. 2dly, A Right of Entrance into Heaven. This, saith the Apostle, could not be obtain∣ed by the Service of the Tabernacle, ver. 8. but only by the Death of Christ, by which the Way into the Holy of Holies is laid open, Chap. 10.19, 20. Eternal Redemption is ob∣tained for us, Chap. 9.12. and we receive the Promise of an Eternal Inheritance; and so it consequentially signifies to have a full assu∣rance of Acceptance with God here, and of Happiness with him hereafter. , till the time of Refor∣mation.] That is, as the next Verse expounds it, till the coming of Christ, the Messiah of the Jews, when they themselves expected a Reformation of the Law, saying, That the Law which was learned in that Age was Va∣nity, in respect of the Law of the Age to come; that is, saith thePug. fid. part. 3. dest. 3. c. 11. p. 608, 611. Gloss on Eccles. 11.8. , In respect of the Law of the Messiah, and that then the Law will be renewed. For our Doctors, saith the Author ofVoisin. ibid. p. 123. Sepher Ikkarim, declare, That all Is∣rael shall receive a second Law from the Mouth of God immediately as formerly; and this they all prove, as the Apostle doth Chap. 8. from Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. Ver. 11. But Christ being come (, made) an High-Priest (not of present tempo∣ral Blessings in the Land of Canaan, but) of good things to come, (not by the Service of the Ta∣bernacle made with hands, ver. 23. but) by (a service performed in) a greater and more per∣fect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this Building, (i. e. the Building of this worldly Sanctuary, v. 1.) That the Tabernacle here mentioned is not the Body of Christ, but Heaven it self. See Note on Chap. 8.2. Ver. 12. Nor (yet to be procured as the Mosaical Blessings were) by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood; (He to pro∣cure these good things for us) hath entred (not as the High-Priests did yearly into the Earthly Tabernacle, but, ) once for all into the (Heavenly) holy Place, (with this Blood) having obtained (for us by it not an annual, but an) eternal Redemption. , eternal Redemption.] Here it is evident, 1. That this our High-Priest hath procured for us a perfect and perpetual Ex∣piation from the Guilt of Sin, and this Slich∣tingius on the place fully grants. 2. That this , or Redemption, was procured by the Blood of Christ, we having, , Redemption through his Blood, even the Remission of Sin, Eph. 1.7. That therefore was the , or Price paid to procure this Redemption. That this , Redemption from Transgressions was made, , by the Death of Christ, suffer∣ing as a piacular Victim for us, there being no other way of procuring this Remission under the Law, ver. 22. and so no other known to, or heard of by the Jews. And lastly, That suffering thus he also must suffer in our stead, as all piacular Victims did. Whence he is said to give his Life, , a Ran∣som for many, Matth. 20.28. , a Ransom for all, 1 Tim. 2.5. See the Note there. Ver. 13. For if the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the un∣clean, (Numb. 9.2, 4.) Sanctifieth to the Pu∣rifying of the Flesh, (from ceremonial De∣filements, and so procures a free admission to the Service of the Tabernacle.) , sanctifies to the Purifying of the Flesh.] It is truly ob∣served by the Reverend Dr. Hammond, That to sanctifie to the purifying of the Flesh, is to
make legally clean, i. e. so as that they might come into the Congregation again, it being the San∣ctification, , of the Unclean, but still in a Metaphorical Signification, as clean∣sing signifies Expiation, and obtaining Pardon of Sin, and when this is done by a Sacrifice, , signifies to expiate and cleanse from Guilt by virtue of it. In which sense it is used throughout this Epistle, and that agree∣ably to the import of it, when it relates to Sacrifices in the Old Testament. So Ch. 10.10. , we are Sanctified, i. e. are Pur∣ged from the Guilt of Sin, by the Body, or, as other Copies read, by the Blood of Christ offered once for all. And ver. 15. By one of∣fering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified, i. e. hath entirely purged them who by this Offering are cleansed from the Guilt of Sin; He being Offer'd once, , to bear, or take away the Sins of many; and, , for the putting away Sin by the sacrifice of himself, Chap. 9.26, 27. and ver. 29. where it is stiled the Blood of the Covenant, , by which he, who now counted it as common, was sanctified, or cleansed from the Guilt of Sin, it being the Blood shed for the Remission of Sin, the Blood of that New Co∣venant which said, I will be merciful to their Iniquities, and their Sins and their Transgres∣sions will I remember no more, ver. 17, 18. So Chap. 13.12. Therefore Jesus, that he might sanctifie the People by his own Blood, suffer'd without the Camp: Where both the Blood sanctifying, and, , the Sacrifice for Sin, ver. 11. to which it answers, shew that Christ sanctified the People by the Ob∣lation of himself as a Sin-offering, to cleanse them from the Guilt of Sin. See the Note on Hebr. 2.11. Ver. 14. How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who (being quickned) by the eternal Spirit, (Rom. 8.11. 1 Pet. 3.18.) offered himself, (as a Lamb) without spot to God, (John 1.29. 1 Pet. 1.19.) purge your Con∣sciences from dead Works, (i. e. from Works deserving Death, Rom. 6.23. that so you may be admitted) to serve the living God (in his Church here, and in his Heavenly Sanctuary hereafter, Chap. 10.19, 20, 21.) , offered himself without spot to God] In Heaven, saith Dr. Hammond; for that Oblation, saith Grotius, must be here understood, which answers to the legal Ob∣lation made in the Holy of Holies, which the Oblation of Christ upon the Cross doth not, but his Oblation in the Heavens. Against this Interpretation some object, That Christ's presenting himself with his Blood in the Hea∣vens, is never stiled an Oblation; but that is a plain mistake, see Note on Chap. 8.3, 4. and of evil Consequence; for, if Christ had no Oblation to offer in Heaven, he could not be an High-Priest there, since every High-Priest must have something to offer in that Sanctuary in which he exercises his Priestly Office. But yet it being said not that he offered his Blood, but that, , he offered up himself, which he did upon the Cross, Eph. 5.2. Hebr. 9.25, 28. And the , or Oblation of the Sacrifice, be∣ing properly the giving it up to the Death, or to be a piacular Victim in the Sinners stead, these words may very well be thus inter∣preted, Who through the Holy Spirit by which he was sanctified from the very Womb, offered himself a piacular Victim without spot to God. But then the Blood of Christ, here mention∣ed as purging the Conscience from dead Works, must be his Blood presented before God in the Heavenly Sanctuary; for the Apostle had spoken before, ver. 7. of the Blood brought into the Holy of Holies by the Aaronical High-Priest, and declared that it could not perfectly expiate the Con∣science from the Guilt of Sin, ver. 10. and therefore here the Analogy requires that he should speak of the Blood of Christ brought by our High-Priest into the Heavenly San∣ctuary. Moreover he had said before, that he entred with this Blood into the Holy of Ho∣lies, ver. 12. and therefore ver. 14. must be still speaking of the Effect or Influence of this Blood there presented for us. , purge the Conscience from dead Works.]  here, as the Comparison clearly shews, being in sense the same with  in the Verse preceding, must signifie the cleansing of the Conscience, not from the Inclinations to Sin by the Holy Spirit, but from the Guilt of Sin by the Blood shed for the Remission of it. And 2dly, this is the constant sense of the word  in the Old Testament, when join'd with . So Lev. 14.19. The Priest shall make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his Uncleanness, . And Chap. 16.30. The Priest shall make an Atonement for you, to cleanse you, , from all your Sins. So Josh. 22.17. Psal. 51.3. Jer. 33.8. Ezek. 24.13. Hence then it fol∣lows that the dead Works from which their Conscience was to be thus cleansed, must sig∣nifie Works which deserved Death by the Tenour of the Old Covenant. , to serve the living God.] God being an holy God, can enter into Co∣venant with none, or admit them to his Ser∣vice whilst they lie under the Guilt of Sin unpardon'd, and so have not found Grace in his sight. Noah found Grace in the Eyes of God, and with him he establisheth his Cove∣nant, Gen. 6.8, 18. Abraham believes in God, and this was counted to him for Righte∣ousness, and then the Lord makes a Covenant with him by Sacrifice, Gen. 15.10, 18. So
Exod. 24.6. the Jews offer Burnt Offerings, and sacrifice Peace Offerings to the Lord, and the Blood is sprinkled upon all the Peo∣ple, and then he enters into Covenant with them. Hence the Apostle saith, Let us draw nigh to God with full assurance of Faith, ha∣ving our Hearts sprinkled from an evil (or condemning) Conscience, Hebr. 10.22. And adds in the Words following; Ver. 15. And for this cause (, or by this Blood) he is (become) the Mediator of the new Covenant, (in which he promises to be merciful to our Iniquities,) that by means of his Death for the Remission of Sins (com∣mitted by us) under the Old Testament, (and not by that fully expiated) they which are called (to be God's Church and People) might receive the Promise of an eternal Inhe∣ritance. , may either relate to the end of Christ's Mediatory Office, and so be rendred for this End, or, for this Cause, or to the Means by which that New Covenant, of which he is the Mediator, was established, and then it will be best rendred, by this Blood; his Blood being stiled, The Blood of the New Covenant, Matth. 26.28. Mark 14.24. and the Covenant being stiled, The New Covenant in his Blood, Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. , for the Redemption of Sins under the first Covenant.] St. Paul's design in the E∣pistles to the Romans and the Galatians, is to shew that the Law could not justifie any Man, i. e. that it could not procure his Absolution from the Guilt of Sin, but rather left all Guilty before God; and his design in this Epistle is to shew, that the Sacrifices offer'd under the Law could never take away Sin, Chap. 10.4. And hence ariseth the necessity that Christ should shed his Blood for the Re∣demption, i. e. for the Remission of Sins committed under the Old Covenant, before we could be capable of entring into the New, or have a Right to the Blessings of it. , the Promise of an eternal Inheritance.] The immediate Promise of the New Covenant establish'd in the Blood of Christ is Remission of Sins, Chap. 10.17. but then this being an eternal Redemption from them, ver. 12. and such as perfects for ever them that are sanctified, Chap. 10.14. upon it necessarily follows the Promise of an Eternal Inheritance, there being nothing to exclude us from it, but the Guilt of Sin. Hence is there a close Connexion betwixt Christ's overcoming Death, and bringing Life and Immortality to light, and this emphati∣cally is stiled the Promise of the Gospel, Tit. 1.2. 1 John 1.2. and 5.11. Ver. 16. (I say by the means of Death,) For where a Testament is (that is unchanga∣ble,) there must of necessity be the Death of the Testator. , there must be.] There must be produced, saith Dr. Hammond, as the word  signifies, John 18.28. Acts 25.7. there must intervene. So Semidius and Budaeus. Ver. 17. For a Testament is of force (only) after Men are dead, otherwise it is of no strength at all while the Testator liveth, (and so hath power to revoke his Testament. Ver. 18. Whereupon (, whence it is that) neither the first Testament (made with the Jews, Exod. 24.8.) was dedicated with∣out Blood (which Blood shew'd the Death of the Sacrifice was necessary to the making that Testament.) Ver. 19. For when Moses had spoken every Precept to the People according to the Law, (given at Mount Sinai,) he took the Blood of Calves and Goats with Water (mixed with the Blood to keep it from congealing,) and with scarlet Wooll and Hyssop, (the Wooll to receive and imbibe the Blood, and the Hyssop to sprinkle it, Exod. 12.22. Lev. 14.49, 50. Psalm 51.7.) and sprinkled (the Blood) both (upon) the Book (of the Covenant) and (up∣on) all the People. , &c. the Blood of Calves and Goats.] There seems no need of the Conjecture of Bishop Usher and others, that besides the Burnt Offerings, and Peace Offer∣ings mentioned by Moses, Exod. 24.5. there were then offer'd Sin Offerings, the Holo∣causts themselves being expiatory Sacrifices, as is evident from these Words, Lev. 1.4. He shall put his hand on the head of the Burnt Offering, and it shall be accepted for him to make Atonement for him. Now theDr. Outram de Sacrif. l. 1. c. 15. §. 8, 9, 10. Jew∣ish Doctors tell us, That this Imposition of Hands was always joined with Confession of Sins over the Sacrifice, which Confession still concluded with a Prayer, that the Sacrifice might be an Expiation for them. And the Phrase, It shall be accepted, , to make an Atonement for him, used here, and Lev. 14.20. concerning Holocausts is as much as ever is said of Expiatory Sacrifices 2dly, This may be farther argued from the Word Kepher, used concerning Holocausts. Lev. 1.3. That being the Word used to im∣port Expiation for Sin; on which account the Syriac Version saith, That the Burnt Of∣fering was design'd, ad placationem obtinen∣dam a Deo, to appease God: And theJon. in Lev. 6.7. Chaldee Paraphrast, That the Burnt Offering came, ad expiandum pro cogitationibus cordis, to expiate for the thoughts of the Heart. And 'twas the general Opinion of the Jews, saithIbid. p. 111. §. 7. Dr. Outram, That some kind of Sins were expiated by Holocausts. And 3dly, All the
Sacrifices of living Creatures before the Law were Holocausts, and yet 'tis certain that ma∣ny of them were offer'd to appease God, and expiate for Sin. Thus Noah, after the Flood, offered Burnt Offerings, Gen. 8.20. and yet Josephus, Antiq. l. 1. c. 4. hath in∣formed us, That he offer'd a Sacrifice to atone God, and appease his Displeasure. The Sa∣crifices which Job offer'd for his Children were Burnt Offerings, yet were they also Offerings for Sin, Job 1.5. the Reason of their Oblation being thus assign'd, It may be that my Sons have sinned. The Oblation which God commanded his Friends to make was a Burnt Offering, Job 42.7. and yet it was offer'd to appease God's Wrath, and pre∣vailed with the Prayer of Job, , to procure Absolution from their Sin. Ver. 20. Saying, This is the Blood of the Testament which God hath enjoined unto you. , Covenant, or Testament.] This Discourse, saith Mr. le Clerk, is to be look'd upon merely as the Play of an Hellenistical Writer, who, because he saw that  was used for that Covenant whereof Christ is the Mediator, and signified also a Testament, and Christ was dead, thence deduced Consecta∣ries which are true indeed, considered in them∣selves, but here rely upon weak Principles, rather to set off his Discourse, according to the Custom of that Age, than to Convert the Jews to the Faith by the force of Reasoning. Thus is the Great Apostle of the Gentiles turn'd into a Jewish Rabbin, setting off his Discourse by weak Reasonings, because it was customary for the Jews to do so. Our Word and Preaching is, saith the Apostle, not in the words of Man's Wisdom, but in demon∣stration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. By your leave, saith Mr. le Clerk, you sometimes speak not in the Words of Man's Wisdom, but of Jewish Folly, talking plainly like an Allegorical Philo, making often such Accom∣modations of Scripture, and such Consequences deduced from them, in which no regard at all is had to Grammar. We speak the Wisdom of God, saith the Apostle, ibid. v. 7. No, saith Mr. le Clerk, your Discourse is to be look'd upon merely as the Play of an Hellenistical Writer. We speak the things which God hath revealed unto us by his Spirit, and have received this Spirit, that we may know the things which are freely given us of God; which things we speak not in words taught by humane Wisdom, but in words taught us by the Holy Ghost. No, saith Mr. le Clerk, even in things relating to the New Covenant established in the Blood of Christ, your Discourse relies upon weak Principles, and is no better than playing with the Ambiguity of Words, and deducing Conse∣quences without any regard to Grammar. For true it is indeed, That a Testament is rati∣fied by the Death of the Testator, and Christ is dead, but Christ was not the Mediator of a Testament, for Testaments do not want Me∣diators: And if it should be granted that he was, he could not be thought at once a Me∣diator and a Testator, by whose Death a∣lone a Testament was confirmed. The Te∣stator here is God the Father, whose Heirs Men are in Conjunction with Christ, but God the Father can in no sense be said to die. Thus Mr. le Clerk confutes the Author, and yet says he does not lessen the Authority of this Epistle, though others think he plainly overthrows it, but, God be thanked, he does it still without just ground. For, 1st. 'Tis plainly false that God can be the Testator here, and that for his own Reason, because God the Father can in no sense be said to die: For a Testator must have his Testa∣ment, and where there is a valid Testament, there, saith the Apostle, must of necessity be the Death of the Testator. A Testament, saith Mr. le Clerk, being ratified by the Death of the Testator. 2dly. I grant, that Christ was not the Me∣diator of a Testament, but then he was the Mediator of a Covenant, which, as it was sealed with, and was confirmed by his Blood, procuring for us such Blessings as he by his Will designed for, and declared should be conferred upon Believers, through Faith in his Blood, became also a Testament. Thus when he said, For their sakes, , John 17.19. i. e I offer up my self as a pia∣cular Victim, that they might be sanctified, or truly purged from their Sins; he adds as his last Will and Testament,. Theophyl. in locum. Father, I will that those whom thou hast given me be with me where I am. So here he is become an High-Priest of good things to come, purchasing Eternal Redemption for us by his Blood. And ver. 15. He became the Mediator of that new Covenant in which God promised to be mer∣ciful to our Transgressions, and to remember our Sins no more, procuring the Remission of them by the intervention of his Death, that we that believe in him might receive the pro∣mise of an eternal Inheritance, which he died to entitle us to, and confer upon us; whence it is stiled the Purchased Possession. This therefore was his Will and Testament, that they for whom he died should live through him, and this Testament could not be confirmed but by his Death; He therefore was at once the Mediator in whom the new Covenant, promising to us Remission of Sins, was made, and the Testator, by whose Death the Testament, That they who be∣lieved in him should have Eternal Life, was ratified.
Moreover, what if after all here should be nothing said of a Testator, but only of a Mediator of such a Covenant as was to be ratified in the Blood of Jesus, this sure would confound all that Mr. le Clerk here offers; and yet I think, with Submission to better Judg∣ments, that even this may be maintained a∣gainst him. For though there be here mention, ver. 16, 17. , yet is it not necessary that word should signifie a Testator properly so called, but only a Promiser, and one that confirms his Promise with his own Blood. For , in Phavorinus, is , I Promise, I Covenant, and , is very commonly in Prophane Au∣thors, to enter into Covenant; and so the Phrase, , and , is constantly used in theSee Kircher's Conc. v. 1. p. 2139. Old Testa∣ment, and therefore the Participle , derived from the same Verb, must probably have the same signification here, in which it is still used by the Septuagint, and which it always bears in the New Testament. Thus Acts 3.25. You are the Children, , of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers. Luke 22.29. , And I appoint to you a Kingdom, , as my Father hath appointed me. So here, Chap. 8.10. and 10.16. , this is the Covenant which I will make with the House of Israel. And because Covenants were usually made, victimas cae∣dendo, by Sacrifices, and established in Blood, as both the Hebrew, Berith, the Latin, Foedus, and the Greek, , whence the Word spondeo is derived, shew; and the Phrases, , foedus ferire, & percu∣tere. Accordingly it was in the New Cove∣nant established in the Blood of Jesus. Hence the Apostle speaks thus of this Covenant, and the Appointer, Disposer, or the Maker of it. Ver. 15. That by virtue of this Blood he is become the Mediator of a better Covenant. Ver. 16. For where there is a Covenant, (, made by Death, or ratified by the Blood of him that makes it, v. 15.) there of necessity must intervene the Death, , of him that makes the Covenant, or Promise. Ver. 17. For a Covenant (of this nature) is only firm, (, in the Death of them who make it, as other Covenants were rati∣fied by the Death of the Sacrifices used at the making of them,) and is of no force whilst (,) the maker of the Covenant lives. Ver. 18. Whence (i. e. because without shedding of Blood there is no Remission; so it was also in) the first Covenant, (for it) was not dedicated without Blood. To this Sense the Contexture of the Apo∣stle's Argument doth plainly lead; for, Chap∣ter the 8th, he introduceth the Promise of a New Covenant, in which God engageth to be merciful to our Iniquities, and to remember our Sins no more, ver. 12. and so by remo∣ving our Guilt made us fit to be made par∣takers of an Eternal Inheritance. This Re∣mission of Sins, saith he, could not be pur∣chased by the Gifts and Sacrifices under the Law, for they could not fully purge the Con∣science from the Guilt of Sin, Chap. 9.9. but Christ, by his own Blood, hath purchased Eternal Redemption for us, ver. 12. and by this Blood he is become the Mediator of a better Covenant; He having suffered Death for the Remission of Sins committed under the old Covenant, that we might receive the pro∣mise of an Eternal Inheritance, ver. 15. And this Death was necessary for him to suffer, for the obtaining of these Ends. For where there is such a Covenant, there is a necessity that the Death of him who ratifies this Covenant with his Blood, should inter∣vene; for such a Covenant is only ratified upon the Death of them by whom it is made, and is of no force whilst he lives that makes the Covenant, because this Remission of Sins is not to be procured without shedding of Blood. Which was a thing so absolutely necessary under the Law, that neither was the first Covenant dedicated or established without Blood. Now, if this be so, here is no playing with the ambiguity of the word , nor any intimation of an Hellenist, but rather of an Hebrew, using the Word in the Sense which both the Hebrew, Berith, usually bears, and in which  answers to it in the Septuagint. And so there was no just occasion for the dan∣gerous Reflections which Mr. le Clerk hath made on this Discourse of the Apostle. Ver. 21. Moreover he sprinkled with Blood both the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of the Ministery. , &c.] Of this sprinkling of the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels, we read no∣thing in the place of Exodus forcited, or in any other part of the Law, butAntiq. l. 3. c. 9. p. 89. B. Josephus saith, That Moses did, , consecrate for God's Service the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of it, by anointing them with Oil, and with the Blood of Bulls and Rams. Ver. 22. And almost all things are by the Law purged (purified) with Blood, and with∣out shedding of Blood is no Remission. Almost all things.] He saith almost, because some things which could abide the Fire, were
purified by Fire, Numb. 21.23. and others by Water, Lev. 16.28. Ver. 23. It was therefore necessary (by virtue of the Mosaick Institution) that the pat∣terns of the things in the Heavens should be purified with these (Sacrifices,) but the hea∣venly things themselves with better Sacrifices than these. Ver. 24. (I say, the Heavenly things them∣selves,) For Christ is not entred into the Holy Places (of the Tabernacle) made with hands, which are the Figures of the true (Holy Place,) but into Heaven it self, there to appear in the Presence of God (and so prepare and conse∣crate those Mansions) for us. , the Heavenly things.] For Explication of these Words let it be ob∣served, 1st. That the Apostle here speaketh all along not of the Purification of Persons, but of things, of the Tabernacle, and the Vessels of it, ver. 21. of the , all other things which were to be purified; of the , the Patterns of the things in Heaven, ver. 23. that is, the Taber∣nacle, and the Utensils of it. Chap. 8.5. The Heavenly things themselves, opposed to them, cannot therefore signifie Men in general, viz. the Church Triumphant or Mi∣litant, or in particular our Souls or Consci∣ences, but the Heavenly Places, stiled, ver. 24. Heaven it self, the Place into which Christ, entred, in which he appears before God, the place of which the Tabernacle made with hands was a Figure. 2dly, Observe, That by God's Appoint∣ment an Atonement was to be made for the Holy Place, by the Blood of a Sin-offering sprinkled upon and before the Mercy-Seat seven times, Because of the Uncleanness of the Children of Israel, and because of their Trans∣gressions and their Sins, Lev. 16.16. Now these could not defile that Holy Place into which they never entred, but yet they ren∣dred them and their Services unworthy to ap∣pear, and to be tendred before it, as they still did, worshipping towards, or before this Foot∣stool of the Divine Majesty. An Atonement was also to be made for the Tabernacle of the Congregation in which God dwelt among them, because of their Uncleannesses, which rendred them unwortny to come into that Tabernacle where he was present; whence 'tis observable, that no Man was permitted to be in the Tabernacle, till the Atonement was made for it; so that the Purification of the Holy of Holies was only the preparing of it to be still a Mercy-Seat, to which they might repair with their Prayers, Praises, and Adorations, and from which God might gra∣ciously shine forth upon them, when purified by this Atonement from the Defilements of their Sins. And the Purification of the Ta∣bernacle was only to prepare it to be a Place in which they might present their Persons be∣fore God, thus cleansed by this Atonement from the Guilt of Sin. And in like manner was Heaven it self to be prepared, or purified for us by our Lord's Entrance into it with his own Atonement or Propitiatory Sacrifice. 1st. That our Prayers and Praises might ascend up thither, and be accepted at God's Mercy-Seat, as being of∣fer'd to God by our High-Priest, and rendred acceptable by the Atonement he had made for the Pollutions cleaving to them. Hence is he represented as having a Golden Censer and much Incense to offer, with the Prayers of all Saints, Rev. 8.3, 4. 2dly. That our Persons might be admitted into this Heavenly Taber∣nacle, as being cleansed by his Blood from those Defilements which they had contracted. Accordingly our Lord tells his Disciples, In my Fathers House are many Mansions; I go to prepare a place for you, John 14.2, 3. And here he is said to purifie and prepare these Hea∣venly Mansions for us, by entring into Hea∣ven, there to appear with his Blood of sprink∣ling in the Presence of God for us. Ver. 25. (It was not necessary, I say, that he should enter with his Blood, as the High-Priests did into the Earthly Tabernacle,) Nor yet that he should offer himself often as the High-Priest (did,) who entred into the Holy Place every Year with the Blood of others, (to make an annual Atonement for the Guilt of Sin.) Ver. 26. For then must he have often suf∣fer'd since the Foundation of the World (his offering himself before God with his Blood, being the consequent of his Suffering,) but now once in the End of the World (, in the End of the Ages) hath he appeared to put away (the Guilt of) Sin by the Sacrifice of himself. , from the Foundation of the World.] This Phrase is used six times elsewhere in the New Testament. viz. Matth. 13.35.25.34. Luke 11.50. Rev. 13.8.17.8. and in this Epistle; God's Works were finished from the Foundation of the World, Hebr. 4.3. And in all these Places it mani∣festly signifies from the beginning of the World. See Psal. 78.2. Matth. 13.35. and there∣fore must in Reason bear the same import in this Text; and then it proves, against Crellius, that the Sufferings of Christ had respect to all preceding Generations: For if his Suffe∣rings had not respected the Sins of the whole World, where is the necessity, upon the Sup∣position here made, of the reiteration of his Sacrifice, that he should have suffered from the beginning of the World? .] Dangerous here is the Note of Grotius, That St. Paul, in id propendebat ut crederet de propinquo immi∣nere mundi ruinam. See this confuted, Note on 1 Thes. 4.15. and that , and , signifies not the end of the
World, but the last of the Three celebrated Ages of the World. See Note on 1 Cor. 10.11. Ver. 27. And (in this the Death of Christ resembles that of all other Men, for) as it is appointed for all Men once to die, and after that (comes) the Judgment, (when they shall die no more.) Ver. 28. So Christ was (Gr. being) once offered to bear the Sins of many, and unto them that look for him he shall appear (Gr. shall appear to them that look for him) with∣out (any more Sacrifice for) Sin unto Salva∣tion, (i. e. for their Salvation.) , without a Sin-offering.] See Note on 2 Cor. 5.20. CHAP. X. THE legal High-Priest, I say, went year∣ly into the Holy of Holies, ver. 25. as it was necessary for him to do in that imperfect Dispensation. Ver. 1. For the Law having (only) a shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the things themselves, can never with those Sacrifices which they (who officiated under it) offered year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect, (or, make the co∣mers thereunto perfect for ever.) , a shadow of good things to come.] i. e. Of those good things to come, of which Christ is the High-Priest; their Tabernacle being only a Shadow or Fi∣gure of that Celestial Tabernacle into which he, as our Forerunner, hath already entred, Chap. 9.11. the Purgation they obtain'd by their Sacrifices from the Defilements of the Flesh, of the Purification of our Consciences from dead Works, ver. 13, 14. their annual Redemption, of the eternal Redemption ob∣tained by Christ, ver. 12. their Freedom of Entrance, being cleansed by their Sacrifices, into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, of our Freedom to enter into the Holy of Ho∣lies. , not the ve∣ry Image of the things.] The Apostle here distinguishing betwixt the things, and the Image of them. I think the word Image cannot properly be rendred Substance, but we under the Gospel do enjoy such lively Re∣presentations of the good things to come, as are both assurances, and foretasts, and begin∣nings of them, the earnests of our future Glory, in the enjoyment of the Holy Spirit, who is the earnest of it, Eph. 1.14. and by whom we are changed into the Image of our Glorious Lord. 2 Cor. 3.18. the Image of our Enjoyment of God, and dwelling for ever with him, by being made an Habitation of God through the Spirit, Eph. 2.22. the Image of our Entrance into his Presence, in that freedom of Access we have already to the Fa∣ther through Christ, Eph. 2.18.3.12. The Image of our final Absolution, in that Justification which is attended with that Peace of God which passeth Understanding. And this sufficiently Answers the Objection of Esthius against this Sense, viz. that a more express signification of these future good Things would not more efficaciously avail to∣wards the Exhibition of them. For such an Image of them, as is also an earnest, fore∣tast, assurance, and an inchoation of them, is sufficient to make the comers to God perfect for ever, as far as we are capable of being so in this Life; as being fully assured of the entire Pardon of our past Sins, so as that they shall not be remembred any more, and of the Enjoyment of those future Blessings, of which they have received already the Earnest, First-fruits, and Assurance. , could never make the comers to them perfect for ever.] All Interpreters al∣low a , or Trajection of the Words in this Verse. Now this which I make in the Translation seems to be confirmed by the effect of our Lord's Sacrifice opposed to these, for that saith the Apostle,  hath perfected for ever them that were San∣ctified, i. e. hath cleansed them for ever from the Guilt of Sin, ver. 14. That therefore which he here denies to the Legal Sacrifices, must be also this, that they could, , expiate sins for ever; or so as that they who were once purged by them, should have no more Conscience of Sin, ver. 2. and to this Sense the following Argument inclines, The Words , and , have two Significations; the one is Agonistical, and then it signifies to Reward and Crown. As in those words, That they without us, , might not be made perfect, i. e. be Crowned, or have their full Reward, Heb. 11.40. See the Note there. The other is Sacrifical; for when it is joined with Sacri∣fices, or hath relation to them, it signifies , to sanctifie, and purge from the Guilt of Sin. Whence  is rendred by Hesychius, and Phavorinus, . So the Sin-offering, by which Aaron and his Sons were Sanctified, and set apart for the Priesthood, is stiled, , Exod. 29.34. And the Sacrifice by which the Temple was Sanctified, or purged from its Defilements, is stiled, , 2 Mac. 2.9. And therefore what is here cannot be perfect, is, v. 4. cannot, , take
away Sin; and, ver. 2. , is to purge from the Conscience of Sin. See Chap. 9.9, 12, 14. And lastly, the word  here seems not to signifie the comers to it, i. e. the Law, but the comers to God for Pardon by these Legal Sacrifices; for the word in this whole Epistle, still relates to coming to God, as the Phrase is expresly, Chap. 7.25.11.6. The coming to the Throne of Grace, Chap. 4.16. and in this Chapter, ver. 22. , Let us come (to God) with a true Heart. Ver. 2. For then they would not have ceased to be offer'd, because that the Worshippers once purged by them, (, for ever) would have had no more Conscience of Sin, (i. e. would not have been after conscious of the Guilt of Sin.) , for then they would not have ceased to be offered.] Some leaving out the , translate the Words thus, For then sure they would have ceased to e offered; but the  is found in Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, and the Alexandrian Manuscript, and therefore ought not to be omitted: Others, with the Arabick Version, read the Words interrogatively; For then would they not have ceased to be offered? Which gives a very good Sense. But yet there seems to be another Sense of them very agreeable to the Context, viz. for then they would not have ceased, or been taken away, to give place to another Sacrifice for Sin, as th Apostle proves they were, from ver. 5. to the 9th. Ver. 3. But (so far are they from procu∣ring this perpetual Remission, or freeing those that offer'd them from being any more conscious of Sin, that) in those Sacrifices there is a remembrance of Sin every year, (viz. in the great Day of Expiation, where∣as where there is full remission of Sins, there is no remembrance of them any more, and so no more offering for sin needful, ver. 16, 17.) Ver. 4. (They could not, I say, expiate for ever, or clear them from all Conscience of Sin,) For it is impossible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin (for ever, so that no farther Sacrifice should be needful to that end.) , to take away sin.] Is not as Grotius here notes, efficere ne ultra pec∣cetur, to make us sin no more; for neither is that the effect of Christ's Blood, but as far as in this imperfect State we are enabled so to do, of his sanctifying Spirit. For the Apostle speaks, ver. 1. of Expiation of the Conscience from the Guilt of Sin, of Expia∣tion by the Legal Sacrifices which did not in∣wardly Sanctifie, of Purgation by the Obla∣tion of them, ver. 2. from that Sin of which there was a yearly Remembrance in the Ob∣lation of those Sacrifices to make Atonement for them, ver. 3. and therefore the , which connects this Verse with the former, and shews that to be impossible to effect∣ed which he had said before was not effe∣cted by those Sacrifices, must confine this Phrase to the taking away the Guilt of Sin bySee Grot. de Satis. contr. Soc. c. 10. Expiation and Atonement for them; not to the removal of the Power and Domi∣nion of it by internal Sanctification. And so  always signifies, either to take away Sin by a mere Act of Grace, ab∣solving from the Punishment due to it, as when Nathan saith to David, , The Lord hath taken away thy Sin, thou shalt not die, 2 Sam. 12.13. And the Seraphim to Isaiah, This hath touched thy Lips, , and he will take away thy Sins, Isa. 6.7. And Isa. 27.9. By this, , shall the Iniqui∣ty of Jacob be forgiven; and this is his Bles∣sing, , when I shall take away his Sins. And when God saith to Joshua, , Behold I have taken away thy sins, Zach. 3.4. Or when this Phrase hath relation to a Sacrifice, as when 'tis said, Lev. 10.17. Wherefore have you not eaten the sin-offering in the Holy Place, seeing it is most holy, and God hath given it you, , that you might bear (away) the Iniquity of the Congregation, to make an Atonement for them before the Lord. See ver. 11. Ver. 5. Wherefore when he (the Lamb of God that taketh away the Sins of the World) cometh into the World, he (in the Psalmist) saith, Sacrifice and Burnt-offering thou would∣est not, but a Body hast thou prepared (for) me, (i. e. thou wouldest not have them to continue after my coming into the World to offer my self a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, they being only to continue till the time of Reformation, Chap. 9.10. and here ver. 9.) Ver. 6. In Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for Sin thou hast had no pleasure. Ver. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come, (as) (in the Volume (or Roll) of the Book it is written of me) to do (, that I may do) thy Will, O God. Ver. 8. Above when he said (, when he had said before, Psal. 40.6.) Sacri∣fice and Offering, and Burnt offering, and Of∣fering for Sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure therein, (speaking of the Sacrifices) which are offered by the Law. Ver. 9. Then said he (afterwards, ver. 7.) Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God: (and thus) he taketh away the first (the legal Sacrifices) that
he may stablish the latter, (the Oblation of his Body, ver. 10.) , coming into the World.] The Socinian Gloss here, de ingressu Christi in mundum futurum, i. e. of Christ's going out of this World into the next, or into Heaven, is so absurd, that it needs no Refu∣tation; his coming into the World in the Scripture Phrase being his descending from Heaven to be with us, John 16.28. I came down from the Father, and came into the World, and his going hence to Heaven being stiled his leaving of the World, John 13.1.16.28.17.11. And though the Phrase of entring into the World may sometimes, in St. John, import Christ's entring on his Prophetick Of∣fice, or his appearing publickly in the World, as  is that Prophet which was to come into the World; yet the Connexion of it here with the time when a Body was prepared for him, will not suffer us to doubt that it importeth here his Assumption of the Humane Nature, and his being born into the World in it. And so this Phrase is used when Christ is stiled the true Light that enlightneth every Man that cometh into the World, John 1.9. For though the Grammatical Construction doth not hinder but that, , may be construed with Light thus, Which coming into the World enlightneth every Man, yet, , all that come into the World, being the constant Phrase by which the Jews express all Men living, as Dr. Light∣foot on the place observes; and the Jews themselves speaking of God himself after this manner, ,Vaijkra Rabba, Sect. 31. Thou art he that illuminates every Man that comes into the World; this is a plain confir∣mation of our Translation of these Words. , a Body hast thou prepa∣red, or framed for me.] The Words in the Hebrew are, , my Ears hast thou bored, in plain allusion to the Ceremony used to a Slave that would not have his Liberty, but would continue in his Obedience to his Master, and would not go free, Exod. 21.6. Deut. 15.17. Which being done out of love to his Master, the boring of his Ear seems not to be commanded as a note of Infamy, but as a solemn devoting of him to his Ma∣ster's Service; though, were it used as a mark of Servitude, it Answers still exactly to our Saviour, who took upon him, saith the Apostle, , the form of a Ser∣vant, or of a Slave, and became obedient to the Death for us, when he might have been free from it, out of love to his Father, and us his Children, Hebr. 2.14. And because he only could appear in this Form, and per∣form'd this Obedience in the Body he assu∣med for this purpose, the Seventy Inter∣preters, perhaps by the internal Motion of the Holy Spirit, translated the Phrase thus, A Body hast thou prepared, or framed for me; for that the Apostle did not change the Translation of the Septuagint, but find it thus, his Words declare, when he saith he taketh away the first, viz. Sacrifice and Of∣fering according to the Law, that he might establish the latter, i. e. the Oblation of his Body, or his Obedience to the Death in the Body thus prepared for him. So read Theo∣doret, St. Austin, Euthymius, St. Chrysostom, Apollinarius, and Ambrosius; so read the Arabick and Aethiopick Versions; and they who read otherwise may be supposed to have followed not the Greek, but the Hebrew. And this reading the Apostle approves and fol∣lows, as the true meaning of the Hebrew Phrase, and that which so fitly doth express our Saviour's Oblation of himself, as that Sacrifice which was to put an end to those which only were the Types and Shadows of it: And his giving up himself entirely as a Servant to do the Will of God, on which account Slaves and Servants, who were alto∣gether at the Beck and Will of their Lords, were both by Jews and Heathens called, , Bodies. Thus Raguel gave to Tobias half his Goods, , Servants, and Cattel, and Money, Tobit. 10.10. The sale of the Captive Jews by Nicanor is in the Greek thus, , 2 Maccab. 8.11. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 12. c. 2. p. 390. F. So all the Servants of the Men of Sychem are, , Gen. 34.29. And  is by our Translation rendred Slaves, Rev. 18.13. So Aristotle, Strabo, Demosthenes▪ and J. Pollux use the word. See Constantin. I do not find that the Ancient Jews inter∣preted these words of Christ in express terms, but they say enough to justifie the Apostle's Argument from this Text. For hence they conclude, thatMaim. More Nev. part. 3. c. 32. God had no principal Re∣gard to Sacrifices, and that Obedience and Praise was better than Sacrifice; and thatPug. fid. part. 3. dist. 3. c. 12. §. 14. a farther Salvation was to be expected, even the Salvation of God, Psalm 50.23. Ezra 45.17. which was, , an eter∣nal Salvation; or, in the Language of the A∣postle here, Salvation,  for ever, Hebr. 7.25. , Chap. 10.14. Ver. 10. By the which Will we are sanctified through the Offering (Gr. , who are sanctified by the Offering) of the Body of Jesus Christ () once for all, (not as the legal Sacrifices, once every Year, Chap. 9.25, 26.) Note, Though perhaps the Article  should be left out, it being not read by Chrysostom and Theodoret, or by the Syriack Version, yet
because it is in the Alexandrian Copy, in Oecumenius, Theophylact, the Arabick Ver∣sion, and in many Manuscript Copies, I thought fit to give it a place in the Para∣phrase, and then 'tis easie to perceive that  must be repeated to compleat the sense. , by the which Will.] God had said by the Psalmist, that he would not have the Sacrifices and Oblations of the Law conti∣nued, but that his Will was that Christ should once for all suffer for the sin of Man, by the Execution of which Will, perform'd by Christ's Oblation of his Body for us, we are sancti∣fied: Where , or , doth not signifie to be freed from the Power and Do∣minion of Sin, but from the Guilt of it, as is proved, Note on Chap. 9.13. and this is far∣ther proved from the means of this Sancti∣fication, viz. the Oblation of Christ's Body, that being offer'd as a piacular Victim, to purge us from the Guilt of Sin, and from the Condemnation due unto us for it; nor doth the Apostle here understand the Oblation of Christ's Body in the Heavens for us, that be∣ing properly his intercession, but the Obla∣tion of his Body on the Cross, and by his Sufferings, Heb. 2.10, 11. and Chap. 13.12. And lastly, this being effected by the Oblation of Christ's Body, , once for all, as it re∣strains the word to his Oblation on the Cross, which was but once performed, and is past, whereas his appearance in the Heavens for us is still present, and perpetual, so doth it per∣fectly overthrow the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass; for if by this one Oblation he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified, what efficacy can there be in this vain Repetiti∣on of it? nay, must it not import that Remis∣sion of Sins is not fully obtained for us by our Lord's Sacrifice on the Cross? For, saith the Apostle, where Remission of these is, there is no more offering for Sin, ver. 18. Ver. 11. And every High-Priest (according to the Law) standeth (Gr. stood) daily Mi∣nistering and Offering oftentimes the same Sa∣crifices, which can never take away (the Guilt of) Sin. Ver. 12. But this Man (Christ Jesus) after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins, (by which the Guilt of them hath been fully taken a∣way, Heb. 1.3.) is for ever sate down on the Right hand of God, (and so is placed over all his Works, according to Psalm 8.6.) , for ever.] By comparing this with ver. 14. By one Offering he hath perfected, , for ever them that are sanctified; and with ver. 1. where it is denied that the legal Sacrifices could, , expiate Sins for ever; and from the stress the Apostle here, ver. 10. and elsewhere lays upon this, , Oblation once for all, I imagine that these words may be better rendred thus, This Man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sin for ever, is sate down. Ver. 13. From henceforth expecting till all his Enemies be made his footstool, (till the Devil, Antichrist, Death the Wages of Sin, and the last Enemy be abolish'd, 1 Cor. 15.25. and so the following Words of the Psalmist, Thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet, be fully accomplished.) Ver. 14. For by (this) one offering (of him∣self to the death for us) he hath perfected for ever (i. e. completely expiated the sins of) them that are sanctified (through faith in his Blood procuring the Remission of sins, Acts 26.18.) That , is to expiate sin for ever, see Note on ver. 1. And that the Apostle here speaks of them who are san∣ctified by this Expiation, hath been observed, Note on Chap. 9.13. and is apparent from the Testimony of the Holy Ghost produced here to confirm this, viz. That God would re∣member their sins no more, ver. 17. A Question ariseth from ver. 4, and 11. upon what Ground it is here asserted that the legal Sacrifices could never take away sin? Wherein lies the difference in point or Expi∣ation between the Sacrifices of the Law, and the Oblation of the Body of Christ, that one could purge the Conscience from the sense of Guilt, and take away sin for ever, and the other could not? If all must be resolved into Divine Appointment, and Divine Ac∣ceptation, how is it impossible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin? Was it not possible that God might have appointed and accepted of the Life of a Beast, instead of that of the greatest Malefactor, who thereby might be freed not only from a temporal, but like∣wise from the obligation to eternal Death? Now in Answer to this Question, I conceive that Divine Acceptation must neither wholly be excluded, nor wholly be assigned as the cause that the Oblation of our Saviour's Body was thus available for that Expiation of the Guilt of sin, which could not be obtained by the legal Sacrifices. And, First, I say, Divine Acceptation must not, yea cannot wholly be excluded, for that would render the Oblation of our Lord's Body, of what virtue soever it might be in it self, wholly unable to procure the Pardon of our sin, and exclude all true remission and forgiveness of sin. For, 1st. The Punishment of another being not the thing threatned, or required, but only the Death of the Offender, it can be of no avail to free the Criminal from Punishment, tho' he that is the substitute be never so able, or so well enclined to suffer it, unless the Go∣vernour, or he to whom the Execution of the Law belongs, be willing to accept of his vi∣carious Punishment, and whensoever he is
pleased, and sees just cause to do so, it is an Act or Grace and Favour to the Criminal, and a Remission of his personal Obligation to bear the Punishment he had deserv'd. In Pu∣nishments inflicted on the Criminal it is true, that so far as he suffers what the Law ex∣acts, so far doth he dissolve the Obligation to farther Punishment, and so far must his Pu∣nishment be inconsistent with Remission; for as far as any Man is punish'd, he is not for∣given. But by admission of another to suffer in our stead, we are as much forgiven as we could be, did he not suffer in our stead, be∣cause we are as much exempted from suffe∣ring any Punishment on the account of our Offences, and how can we be more forgiven than we are by such an act as removes from us the whole Punishment, as much as if we never had offended? The vicarious Punish∣ment is indeed the motive, and the procuring cause of this Forgiveness, as it renders it con∣sistent with the Governour's Honour, and with the ends of Government to grant it, but it takes off nothing from the freedom of the Pardon. Secondly, I add, That Divine Acceptation must not be assigned as the only cause that the Oblation of our Saviour's Body was thus available for the Expiation of the Guilt of sin, for then no reason can be given why he might not have accepted of the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and much more of the Suf∣ferings of any ordinary Man for the procuring our Exemption from the Guilt of sin, where∣as two Reasons have been already offered in the Note on Chap. 2.14. why the Blood of Bulls and Goats could never take away sin; viz. 1st. Because they were not of the same Nature and Original with Man, who sinned, and so could not dissolve the Debt that Na∣ture had contracted. 2dly, They never could procure for us a Resurrection, and so they could not free us from that eternal Death our sins deserved, nor could any mortal Man do it, because he never could have power to raise his own Body, only that Jesus who had power to lay down his Life, and take it up again; who hath Life in himself, and who can make the dead hear the Voice of the Son of Man, and live, can do this. Indeed they could do nothing of that which was requisite, saith this Epistle, and the whole Scripture for that end. But the great reason why the Blood of Bulls or Goats could never take away Sins, is this, that they could never Answer the great Ends of Punishment, and thereby render it consistent with the Honour of the Governour, and with the Ends of Govern∣ment to admit the substitution of them in our stead. Now the Ends which wise Men do assign of Punishments are these. 1st. , That they who suffer may be exemplary to others, and may, by wh they suffer, deter others from the Commission of the like Offences, by letting them, in their Example, know what they must suffer when the Guilt of their own Sins is laid upon them. 2dly, , That the Offender may learn Wisdom by the Rod, that the Remembrance of what was suffered for it might prevent the Repetition of his sin, and that he may be fitted to embrace that Counsel of our Savi∣our, Sin no more, lest a worse thing come up∣on thee. 3dly, , The Vindication of the Prin∣ces Honour, and the Preservation of the Laws he hath established from Contempt. Now to apply this to our purpose, I say, 1. That by the Obedience of our Lord Christ unto the Death in our stead, these Ends of Punishment are very signally obtain∣ed, and that with more Advantage to God's Glory, than if the Punishment of our Of∣fences had been inflicted upon us, and so God by it may be truly said to have been sa∣tisfied, seeing that Justice which consists in punishing for the Transgression of a Law is truly satisfied, when all those Ends for which the Punishment of the Offender could be de∣sired, are obtain'd. 2. I add, That none of these Ends could be at all obtain'd by the Suffering of Bulls and Goats, and not comparatively by the Suffe∣rings of any other mortal Man whatsoever. And, 1st. God by this Dispensation hath given us the best and most effectual Example to deter us from sin. For three things only can be requisite to this End, that the Punish∣ment of sin be insupportable when we suffer it, inevitable when we by our Rebellions have made our selves the Vessels of God's Wrath; and that we have a lively sense and deep impression of all this upon our Spirits▪ Now, The Example of our Saviour's Sufferings shew how insupportable the Punishment will be, which Justice will inflict upon the Sin∣ner; for if the apprehension of it produced such Agonies and Consternations in the Soul of Christ, that God saw need to send an Angel to support him under them, how must the Sinner sink under that Burthen when it is laid upon his Shoulders? If he, who was the well-beloved Son of God, found it so dreadful to lie under the Burthen for some Hours, to lie exposed for ever to it, must be far more intolerable; if the consideration of God's paternal Love, and of the glorious Issues of his Sufferings, was scarce sufficient to support our Lord under the Terrours of that Cup, what will support the Sinner when he shall know himself to be the everlasting Object of God's Wrath. This Example also shews, That impeni∣tent Sinners cannot escape this Wrath of God, since he inflicted so great Punishment on the Beloved of his Soul, when he became
our Surety. For if on this account God spa∣red not his only Son, we may be sure he will not spare his stubborn Enemies. With what strong Crys and with what Earnestness did our Lord pray to be delivered from this Cup? And yet when he had made his Soul an Of∣fering for sin, thus did it please the Lord to bruise him. If then his Ears were shut against the Crys of his beloved Son, can they be open to the howlings of Rebellious Sinners? If God was pleased to lay so great a load on him who was but Sponsor for our Sins, their Punishment cannot be milder who commit them. And, Lastly, This Example gives us the most live∣ly sense, and deep impression of these things, as being the most sensible demonstration of God's Indignation against Sin, which is re∣corded in the Sacred Writings. To find God drowning the whole World, and raining Fire and Brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrha for Sin; to see the darling Objects of his Love, the Jewish Nation, become for above 1600 Years the Objects of his sorest Wrath, are Instances sufficient to deterr Men from Sin: But then to see God mix a Cup so bitter, so full of Gall and Wormwood, for his own Innocent and Well-beloved Son, and make him drink it off, only because he undertook to be our Surety; to see him lifted up upon the Cross, the Earth trembling under him, as if unable to bear his Weight; the Heavens darkned over him, as if shut against his Cry, and all this because our Sins did meet upon him, is sure an eminent demonstration of God's Indignation against Sin. 2dly, Whereas inevitable Ruin must have followed upon the Execution of the deserv'd Punishment on the Offender's Person, God, by this method, hath taken a most excellent way for Reformation of the Sinner, which was the second End of Punishment. For what can be a more effectual Motive to ab∣stain from Sin than this Example, which so clearly represents the greatness of the Provo∣cation in the greatness of the Punishment, and shews it is impossible that guilty Persons should avoid the stroke of God's vindictive Justice, or bear the weight of his Almighty Arm. 3dly, God, by this Dispensation, hath suf∣ficiently consulted the preservation of his Ho∣nour, and secured the Reverence and Obser∣vation of his Laws, which was the third great End of Punishment. For, God by declaring thus he would not par∣don our Offences without this Satisfaction made for the Violation of his Law, hath ful∣ly vindicated his Institutions from Con∣tempt, seeing by this Example he hath let all Men know, that though he be a God of great Long-suffering and Mercy, he will by no means clear the Sinner, or suffer Sin to go unpunished. Again, God by this Dispensation hath vin∣dicated his Honour more than if e had de∣stroyed the Sinner, having more evidently shew'd his Hatred of, and great Displeasure against Sin, by punishing it so severely in his only Son, when he became our Surety. For the greater is the inducement to remit the Punishment of Sin, the greater must be his hatred of it who inflicts it; that therefore this Consideration, that he who suffer'd was his Well-beloved Son, would not induce him to remit the Punishment, must be the highest demonstration of his most perfect hatred of all Iniquity. But that none of these Ends could be at all obtained by the substitution of a Bull, or Goat, or Ram to suffer in our stead, must be extremely evident, this being a substitu∣tion very supportable, especially by the Rich, who very freely spend much more upon the Satisfaction of their Lusts, and who would therefore gladly buy a Freedom to commit them at so small Expence. This then would be so far from tending to reform the Sinner, that it would rather be a great Encouragement to him to continue in his evil Courses, when he thus knew the damage could be very little to him; this also could not tend unto the Honour of the Law-giver, but rather would tempt Men to conceive that his Displeasure against Sin could not be great, since he requi∣red so little to repair his Honour; and that he was not much concerned for any satisfa∣ction for the Violations of his Law, when such flight Matters were by him thought suf∣ficient Expiations for them. Moreover, the Oblation of any ordinary Man could not procure this Expiation for us; 1. Because he only could suffer that Punish∣ment he had deserved by his own Sins: Now evident it is, no satisfaction can be made by me for others, by suffering only that which Justice doth require me to suffer for my own Offences. 2. Because he could not overcome Death, he never could raise up himself from the Grave, and so could not procure that Redemption from it to another, which he could not obtain for his own self. Nor, 3. Is it visible how he can serve the Ends of Justice, or of Government, by doing so, more than the Criminal himself would do by his own sufferings. For, 1. What great Indication would it be of Divine hatred to Sin, that he required only the Death of a mortal Man to expiate the Sins of the whole World? Or, 2. What discouragement could this afford to Sinners from continuing in their evil Courses, or what great dread of Divine Vengeance? For if, as 'twas conjectured by most Nations, the Death of a Malefactor might be sufficient for this purpose, what Nation could ever want such Expiations for their Sins? Or, if it were to be a good Man, seeing they bore so great a love unto Man∣kind
in general, and to their Country in par∣ticular, some of them would still be ready to offer their own Lives for Preservation of their Nation; or how by this would God con∣sult either the Honour of his Government, or secure the Reverence and Observation of his Laws, by thus requiring only one Criminal to suffer less than he himself deserved, to make Atonement for the continual Violations of his Sacred Laws by a whole Nation, or even the whole Race of Men? Ver. 15. Wherefore (and of this) the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us; for after he had said before, Ver. 16. This is my Covenant that I will make with them after these days, saith the Lord: I will put my Laws into their Hearts, and in (or upon) their Minds will I write them, (Jer. 31.33.) Ver. 17. He adds, (as a farther Promise, or part of the new Covenant) And their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. Ver. 18. Now where (such a) Remission of these is, (as cuts off the remembrance of them any more,) there is no more (need of) Offe∣ring for Sin. (See v. 2, 3.) , no more Offering for Sin.] From these, and many other Passages of this Epistle, the Sacrifice of the Mass declared by the Trent Council, Sess. 22. Can. 2, 3. to be a true and proper propitiatory Sacrifice for Sins, is utterly overthrown. For, 1st. from these words of the Apostle, It was not need∣ful that he should offer himself often, for then must he have often suffered, Chap. 9.24, 25, 26. it is very evident that Christ cannot offer himself, but he must suffer. Since then they dare not say that Christ suffers in the Mass, neither can they say that Christ offers himself there. 2dly, From those words, Without shedding of Blood there is no Remis∣sion, Chap. 9.22. it follows, either that the Sacrifice of the Mass must be a bloody Sacri∣fice, and so Christ's Blood must be as often shed, as he is offer'd in the Mass, or else that it obtaineth no Remission of Sin. 3dly, This follows from those words, By one Oblation he hath perfected (i. e. hath perfectly and fully expiated, and that) for ever them that are sanctified; for what necessity of, what virtue can there be in doing that again which is perfectly and fully done already, and that for ever? And lastly, where Remission of Sins is so obtained by Christ's one Oblation, that God will remember them no more, there is, saith the Apostle, no more need of Offering for Sin; but by the Blood of Christ, the Blood of the New Testament, such Remission is ob∣tained, saith the same Apostle, ver. 15, 17. Ergo, Ver. 19. Having therefore, Brethren, bold∣ness (or Liberty) (See Note on Chap. 3.6.) to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Je∣sus, (from which the Jews were typically de∣barr'd, the way into the Holiest being not then revealed, Chap. 9.8.) by (virtue of) a new and living way, which he hath consecra∣ted (or made new for us) through the Veil, that is to say, (through) his Flesh (offer'd for our Sins upon the Cross.) , a new way.] The way into the Highest Heaven being before , im∣passable, saith Josephus. See Note on Chap. 9.8. there being no entrance for us into that place, till our Forerunner had entred into it, Chap. 7.20. till he had purified and prepared it for us by his better Sacrifice, Chap. 9.23. John. 14.2. This was the Doctrine of all the Primitive Christians, That Christ by his Death opened this Veil for the Just that were from Adam,Cyril. Hieros. Cat. 4. p. 27. , excluded from those blissful Regions: ThatThadd. apud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 13. p. 35. , that he rent open the inclosure which from the beginning had not been laid open. HenceDe Anima, c. 55. See Petav. de Incarn. To. 2. l. 13. c. 16, 17. 18. Tertullian saith, the Patriarchs were, Dominicae Resur∣rectionis appendices, the Appendants of our Lord's Resurrection. , and living Way.] That is, , leading to, and giving Life, saith Grotius. He dying for us, that we might live through him, 1 John 4.9. Thus the Bread of Life, John 6. and the Word of Life, Acts 5.20. Philip. 2.16. is the Bread and Word giving Life. In opposition to the dead Sha∣dows of the Law, saith Dr. Hammond, or the Sacrifices prescribed by it, all whose virtue was in their Death, we being reconciled by the Death of Christ, but saved by his Life, Rom. 5.10. Our access to these Mansions being obtained by this Forerunner made higher than the Heavens, Chap. 7.26. made a Priest there after the Power of an endless Life, v. 16. and therefore able to save us to the uttermost, because he lives for ever, there to make Inter∣cession for us, v. 25. Ver. 21. And having (such) an High Priest over the House of God, (i. e. the Church, Chap. 3.6. 1 Tim. 3.15.) i. e. An High Priest so merciful, and able to help us when tempted, and so faithful in the performance of his Office, Chap. 2.14. Ver. 22. Let us (who are of this House, Chap. 3.6. for whom this freedom is procu∣red by this High Priest) draw near (to God) with a true (upright) heart, in full assurance of Faith, (that our Services shall be accepted now, and our Persons hereafter admitted into his Presence, as) having our hearts sprinkled
(by the Blood of Jesus) from (the accusations of) an evil Conscience, and our Bodies wash∣ed with pure Water, (viz. the Laver of Re∣generation.) , having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, &c.] Here is a manifest allusion to the things requisite to procure to a defiled Jew admittance to God's Sacred Presence in the Temple, or the Tabernacle. The Jewish Maxim saith, That the very Root and Essence of the Sacrifice was the sprinkling of the Blood: And therefore on the great Day of Expiation the Bullock for the Sin-offering, and the Goat for the Sin-offering, which was brought in to make A∣tonement in the Holy Place for the People, was sprinkled before the Mercy-seat seven times, Lev. 16.14, 15, 27. and so they were made clean from all their Sins before the Lord, ver. 30. and admitted again into the Taber∣nacle of the Congregation from which they were excluded, till this sprinkling was per∣formed, ver. 17. Again, when the Israelites were in a great fear that by coming near the Tabernacle they should be consumed, saying, Behold, we die, we perish, whosoever cometh any thing near unto the Tabernacle of the Lord shall die, Numb. 17.12, 13. God appoints the Water made of the Ashes of the Red Heifer, to cleanse them from those legal Im∣purities which rendred them unfit to come in∣to his Tabernacle, and made it dangerous for them to approach unto it, stiling it on that account a Purification from Sin, ver. 9. and this Water was to be sprinkled on the Un∣clean, and he was to wash his Clothes, and bath himself in Water, and being thus puri∣fied might come into the Sanctuary, ver. 19, 20. This sprinkling of the Blood and Water sanctifying to the Purification of the Flesh, Hebr. 9.13. Let us therefore, saith the Apostle, who have (not our Flesh only, but) our Consciences purified from the Guilt of Sin, by the sprinkling (not of the Blood of Bulls and Goats, but) of the Blood of Christ, and have our High Priest still presenting this Blood before the Mercy-seat, and who have our Bodies washed with the pure Water of Baptism, the Laver of Regeneration (as the Clothes and Bodies of the Unclean were with Fountain Water,) draw near to God with greater Freedom than they could. Yea, Ver. 23. Let us hold fast the Profession of the Faith (Gr. the Hope we profess) without wavering, (or being moved from the hope of our Calling, Col. 2.23. that hope which causeth us to rejoice, Chap. 3.6. which en∣treth within the Veil, Chap. 7.27.) for he is faithful who hath promised (this entrance in∣to it). Ver. 24. And let us consider one another (as Members of the same Body) to provoke (one another) to Love and to good Works (or Works of Charity. See Note on Tit. 3.8.) Ver. 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together (i. e. not drawing back from Christianity to Judaism, ver. 26, 38.) as the manner of some is (who for fear of persecution from the Jews, return to the Wor∣ship of the Synagogue, ver. 32, 36.) but ex∣horting one another (to perseverance in the Faith,) and (that) so much the more as you see the day (of Vengeance upon the Unbe∣lieving and Apostatizing Jews) approaching. , the day approaching.] i. e. The day of the Lord's coming to destroy the Unbe∣lieving Jews, and to execute his Vengeance on them for rejecting and crucifying their Messiah, stiled by St. Luke the days of Ven∣geance, Chap. 21.22. , the day of the Lord's coming, which who can bear? saith the Prophet, Mal. 3.2. , the day burning like an Oven, , the day coming that shall so burn up them that do wickedly, as not to leave them Root or Branch; , the day of the Lord drawing near, when all the Inha∣bitants of the Land should tremble, Joel 2.1. , the great and terrible day of the Lord, ver. 11, 31. , the day of the Son of Man. That this is the meaning of the place will appear from the scope of the Apostle, which is to terrify them he Writes to by the consideration of that dreadful Day of Vengeance threatned to the unbelieving Jews, not only by our Lord, but their own Prophets, and now near at hand; as it follows from ver. 26. to ver. 32. Ver. 26. For if we sin wilfully (by renouncing and falling off from Christianity) after that we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, (, there is not yet left any other Sacrifice besides that which you reject, to purge you from the Guilt of Sin, and therefore nothing can re∣main for such Apostates.) Ver. 27. But a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries (of Christ the Son of God, v. 29.) Ver. 28. (And of this you may be assured from what befel those who revolted from the Law of Moses, for) He that despised Moses's Law died without mercy, under (the Testimony of) two or three Witnesses (of that Apostacy, Numb. 15.30, 31. Deut. 17.2-7.) Ver. 29. Of how much sorer Punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, (using him with the greatest Contempt imaginable) and hath counted the Blood of the (new) Co∣venant, wherewith he was sanctified, an un∣holy thing, (such as pollutes, rather than purges, as being the Blood of a Malefa∣ctor,) and hath done despight to the Spirit of Grace, (by refusing to own him as the Spi∣rit of God, yea, rejecting him as a Lying
Spirit, and his Gifts and Miracles as Illu∣sions.) , for if we. sin wilfully.] That these words do not concern every sin committed knowingly against the Laws of Christ, but only such as do consist in Apostatizing from the Faith after we have received the Knowledge of it, and rejecting him as our Prophet and Law-giver, will ap∣pear, 1. From the Parallel place, Chap. 6.4, 5, 6. for they who there cannot be renew∣ed unto Repentance, are they who fall away from the Faith after they have been enlight∣ned, &c. which plainly Answers to these words here, who sin wilfully after they have received the Knowledge of the Truth; they are there said to crucifie afresh the Lord of Life, and to put him to an open shame; yea, to fall away after they have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, which also answers to the tram∣pling under foot the Son of God, and the do∣ing despight to the Spirit of Grace. 2. From the Instances produced out of the Old Testa∣ment for the Argument used ver. 28. from the Comparison of him who despised Moses's Law, and therefore was to die without Mercy, under the hand of two or three Witnesses, Deut. 17.6. plainly concerns them only who trans∣gress God's Covenant, by going and serving other Gods, ver. 2, 3. And as for those who sinned voluntarily, or with an high Hand un∣der the Law, and so were to be cut off, and have no Sacrifice allowed to expiate their sin, Numb. 15.30, 31. they were such as blas∣phemed, or reproached the Lord, i. e. re∣volted from him, and would not own him as their Governour; they despised the Word of the Lord, they made the Commandment given in Sinai void, by contemning the Au∣thority by which it was enjoined, as the He∣brew signifies, and so they were indeed Apo∣states from God. 3. From the preceding Exhortation, ver. 25. not to fall off from the Assemblies of Christians, and the following, not to cast away their Confidence, ver. 35. not to draw back from the Faith, ver. 38. it being better not to have known the way of Righte∣ousness, than having known it to depart from the holy Commandment delivered to them, 2 Pet. 2.21. And lastly, From the Expressi∣ons used ver. 29. which can agree to none be∣sides Apostates from the Christian Faith, for to tread the Son of God under our feet, must surely signifie the extremest Contempt that can be cast upon him; to count the Blood of the Covenant, by which we are purified, it self, , unclean; and polluting, can be only done by him who looks on Christ not as the Saviour of the World by it, but as one who deserv'd to suffer what from the Jews he did: And to do despite to the Spirit of Grace, cannot well signifie less than that which our Lord stiles the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which Men cannot commit, and in their Hearts continue Christians. Ver. 30. For we know him that saith (i. e. who introduceth God thus speaking) Ven∣geance belongeth to me, I will recompense, saith the Lord; (Deut. 32.35.) And again, (in the same place, ver. 36. saith of him) The Lord shall judge his People. Saith the Lord, .] These words are not to be found in many Manuscripts; they are not in the Vulgar, Syriack, or Aethi∣opick Version; not in the Original, or in the Septuagint, and therefore seem to have crept in here from Rom. 12.19. where instead of , we know him that speak∣eth, we find, , for it is written; which reading Chrysostom here hath, and without these words the Sense runs better. And again.] Not Psalm 135.14. the words there being taken from Deut. 32.36. but in the same place, or in the following Verse. So Chap. 2.13. I will put my trust in him, Isa. 8.17. , And again, ver. 18. behold I, and the Children which God hath given me. Ver. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, (who ever lives to punish those who revolt from him. See Chap. 3.12.) Ver. 32. But call to remembrance (, remember therefore) the former days in which after ye were illuminated, (i. e. baptized into the Christian Faith, Chap. 6.4.) you endured (couragiously) a great fight (Gr. conflict) of Afflictions. (For a great Persecu∣tion then befel the Church which was at Je∣rusalem, Acts 8.2. 1 Thes. 2.14.) Ver. 33. Partly while you were made a gazing Stock (or Spectacle,) both by Reproaches and Afflictions, and partly while ye became Companions of them that were so used, (Acts 5.41. the Apostles, especially Paul and Bar∣nabas, Acts 14.5, 19, 20.17.10, 14, 15.) Ver. 34. For ye had Compassion of me in my Bonds, (Acts 20.23.21.4, 11, 12, 13.) and took joyfully the spoiling of your Gods, knowing in your selves (by the testimony of that Spirit who is the earnest of our future Inheritance, Ephes. 1.14.4.30.) that you have in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance. , my Bonds.] Were this cer∣tainly the true Reading, it would fairly prove St. Paul the Author of this Epistle, but the other Reading, , you had compassion of them that were bound, is more likely to be the true Reading; for so reads the Alexandrian and two other Manu∣scripts, the Syriack, the Vulgar Latin, and St. Chrysostom. Ver. 35. Cast not away therefore your Con∣fidence, (, your freedom in Pro∣fession of the Faith,) which hath great Re∣compense of Reward; (for with the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation, Rom. 10.10.) Ver. 36. For ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God, (i. e. have suffered according to his Will, 1 Pet. 4.19.) ye may inherit the promise (d Reward.) , the Promise.] That is pri∣marily the Recompence of Reward mention∣ed, ver. 35. So Chap. 11.39. , the Promise is the same with the Recompence of Reward, ver. 26. the things not seen but ho∣ped for, which are the Objects of our Faith, ver. 1. But then this Epistle being directed to the believing Jews, who had both from their Prophets and from our Lord, a Pro∣mise, that in the great and terrible Day of the Lord, whosoever should call upon the name of the Lord should be saved, Joel 2.32. and that the , i. e. they whom the Lord had called by his Gospel should be delivered, ibid. That when the Day was to come that burned like an Oven, then was the Sun of Righteousness to rise on them that feared him, with Healing on his Wings, Mal. 4.1, 2. that he who endured to the end shall be saved, Matth. 24.13. and Hab. 2.3, 4. The Vision is, , yet for a time then, now for a very little time, , with Patience wait for him (theSee Pug. fid. p. 212, 742. Messiah, say the Jews,) for he that cometh will come, and will not tarry. Wait for him, say the Jews, , to receive your Reward. Christ also having taught them by a Parable, that God would come, , speedily to avenge his Elect, who cried unto him under Persecutions Day and Night, Luke 18. I believe that the receiving this Promise verified to them, which tended so exceeding∣ly to confirm their Faith, might be here in∣tended, especially if we consider that the Apostle could not properly affirm of our Lord's coming to Judgment, that it was, , a very very little while, and he would come, and would not tarry. Ver. 37. For (the Vision of Habakkuk re∣specting the coming of Christ, and exhorting you to wait for him, said then, Yet for a time, as I do now) yet a little while, and he that shall come, (Gr. , he that co∣meth to Reward your Patience) will come, and will not tarry. .] This is the peculiar Title given to the Messiah by the Jews, as we learn from the Baptist's Question to him, ; Art thou he that should come, or look we for another? Matth. 11.3. and from the Hosannas of the Jews, sung to him in these Words, Blessed be, , he that cometh in the Name of the Lord, Matth. 21.9. And the Jews do not only interpret this Passage of him, but also encourage themselves to wait for him, by this very Argument of the Apo¦stle, ,See Pug. fid. p. 212, 354, 742. That they may receive their Reward; for Blessed, say they; are all that hope in him, Isa. 30.18. Ver. 38. (It also adds these words of Com∣fort to the Faithful, and Terrour to the Re∣volter, expect him, ,) For the Just shall live by his Faith; but if any Man draw back (, and if he draw back from it) my Soul (saith God) shall have no pleasure in him. Ver. 39. But we (I hope, Chap. 6.9.) are not of them that draw back to Perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul. .] The Reverend Dr. Hammond hath shew'd from Phavorinus, and from Acts 20.20, 27. Gal. 2.12. that this word signi∣fies to draw back, refuse, and fly from a thing; and so the object of it being here Faith, must signifie his flying from, and drawing back from the Faith, or refusing still to profess it; and so, as it follows, must be his draw∣ing back unto Perdition; and because this is done usually from fear of Persecutions, hence is it joined with Fear, Gal. 2.12. Peter, , withdrew himself, fearing the Circumcision; and sometimes is put to signifie Fear, so Deut. 1.17. , you shall not be afraid of the Face of Man; and because Mens cowardly Fears make them to hide, dissemble, and play the Hypocrite, hence is it reckon'd byLib. 6. c. 53. p. 323. lin. 41. Julius Pollux among the words which signifie to conceal and hide, and by Hesychius and Sui∣das is rendred, , he plays the Hypocrite, and deals deceitfully; all which, in things which do respect our God, and our Religion, are pernicious to the Soul, especially if we consider, that he that draws back, stands opposed, ver. 39. to him that Believeth, and therefore is an Unbeliever; and, ver. 38. to him that liveth by his Faith, and therefore can have none, or only a dead Faith: And lastly, that God here solemnly declares, his Soul shall have no pleasure in him, and then he must still lie under his sad Displeasure. Note 2dly, That , refers plain∣ly to the Just Man, the Man who lives by his Faith; and, in the Prophet, to him that is with Faith and Patience to wait for the accomplishment of the Vision; and ver. 39. the , the drawer back, stands op∣posed to him that believeth to the Salvation of his Soul. The Words do therefore plain∣ly suppose that the Just Man who lives by that Faith in which, if he persisted, he would save his Soul, may draw back unto Perdition. And this is also evident from the ensuing Words, My Soul shall take no pleasure in
him; for they do plainly intimate, that God took pleasure in him before his drawing back, for otherwise this threat would signifie no∣thing, the Lord taking pleasure in no Man but in just Men only, and such as live by Faith. Note 3dly, That  may be rendred not Hypothetically, and if, but cum vero semet sub∣traxerit, but when he shall draw back, which I have shewn to be the common import of the Greek . Note on Chap. 3.15. But if we read them Hypothetically, the supposi∣tion cannot be of a thing impossible, for then God must be supposed to speak thus, If the Just Man do that which I know it is impossible for him to do, and which I am obliged by Promise to preserve him from doing, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him; which is to make God se∣riously to threaten Men for such a Sin, of which they are not capable, and of which they are engaged to believe they are not ca∣pable, if they believe the Doctrine of Per∣severance, and so to threaten them to none effect. CHAP. XI. Ver. 1. NOW (the) Faith (by which the Just Man lives, Chap. 10.38.) is the substance (or the firm expectation) of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, (i. e. by which we are confirmed in the truth of them.) .] The word  in the Old Testament answers either to the Hebrew, , which signifies Expecta∣tion, as Ruth 1.12. ; have I any expectation of an Husband? Ezek. 19.5. , her expectation was lost; or to the word, , which is of the same import as Psal. 39.7. , my expectation is from thee. It also bears the same sense in the New Testament, signifying there a confidence of expectation, as 2 Cor. 9.4. least we should be ashamed, , in this confidence of boasting. And Chap. 11.17. That which I speak, I speak not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, , in this confidence of boasting: And in this E∣pistle, Chap. 3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold, , the be∣ginning of our Confidence firm to the end. And this import of the Word accords best with the Instances of this Faith that follow, they being such as generally consisted in the expectation of some future good, which, saith the Apostle, they have not yet received compleatly, ver. 39. hence is it that I render the words thus, Faith is the confidence or firm expectation of things hoped for. Ver. 2. For by this the Elders (i. e. the Fathers before and since the Flood) obtained a good report, (or Testimony from God left on Record in Holy Scriptures.) Ver. 3. Through (that) Faith (which is the Evidence of things not seen) we understand that the Worlds (the lower, middle, and su∣periour World. See Note on Chap. 1.2.) were fram'd by the Word of God, so that (the) things (of it) which are seen were not made of things which do (did then) appear, (but, , of things not then visible, Gen. 1.2. Ver. 4. By Faith Abel offered to God a more excellent Sacrifice than (that of) Cain, by which (Faith) he obtained Witness, (i. e. a Testimony from God) that he was Righteous, (or accepted by him,) God testifying (his ac∣ceptance) of his Gifts, and by it he being dead yet speaketh, (i. e. declareth by this Faith that God is a rewarder of the Righteous though they die.) , a more excellent Sacrifice.] Philo in his Discourse on this Subject, (De Sacr. Cain & Abel, p. 107.) makes the de∣fect of Cain's Sacrifice to consist in two things; 1st. That he did not offer it soon enough, but, , after certain Days. 2dly. That he did not offer of the first Fruits of the Earth, as did Abel of the first Fruits of his Sheep, but only of the Fruits; but there is no ground for either of these things in the Text, which seems to intimate that they both offered at the same time; nor doth it say that Cain offered not of the first Fruits of the Earth: The Apostle here plainly discovers that the thing which gave the preference to Abel's Sacrifice above that of Cain's, was his Faith, (viz.) that Faith which is the sub∣stance of things hoped for, or his expectation, or persuasion, that God would certainly re∣ward those who diligently endeavour to please him, in this, or in the other World. Accord∣ingly the Targum of Jerusalem, and Jona∣than B. Uziel upon the place declare, That Cain denied there would be any future Judg∣ment, or Rewards hereafter to the Just, and that Abel did maintain the contrary, that there should be a future Recompense for the Righteous: And this he, being dead, yet preaches by his Faith; for this Faith which God so signally approved of, and confirmed with so great a Testimony, he will not suffer to go unrewarded, as he must do in one so quickly slain, because God thus preferred his Sacrifice before his Brother's, if he did not Reward him in the other World. And there∣fore Philo says, that seeming to die as to this corruptible Life, , he lived the incorruptible and
blessed Life in God. L. Quod Deter. &c. p. 127. C. D. To say, as do the Fathers, he yet speaketh because he is still celebrated in the World, is to say nothing proper to Abel, that being also true of all the other Patriarchs; and to refer this to the Cry of his Blood for Vengeance, is to refer it to that which seemeth not to be the commendation of his Faith, by which the Apostle here declares he speaketh. , God testified upon his Gifts.] That is, saith Theodotion, , he caused Fire to descend from Heaven, and consume his Sacrifice, and thereby testified his accep∣tance of it; so he discover'd his acceptance of the Sacrifice of Abraham, Gen. 15.17. and of the Sacrifices of Aaron, Lev. 9.24. of Gi∣deon, Judg. 6.21. of David, 1 Chron. 21.26. of Solomon, 2 Chron. 7.1. and of Elijah. 1 Kings 18.38. And accordingly the Prayer of the Israelites for their King, runs thus, The Lord remember all thy Offerings, and turn to Ashes thy Burnt-sacrifice, Psalm 20.3. To this agrees the Interpretation of R. Solomon, and Eben-Ezra among the Jews, of Oecu∣menius, and Theophylact on the place; andTrad. Hebr. Super Genesin, To. 3. F. 70. lit. K. St. Jerom confirms it, by this Inquiry, Whence could Cain know that God accepted the Sacrifice of Abel, and rejected his, if the Interpretation of Theodotion was not true? Ver. 5. By (virtue of this) Faith (that God would Reward those that serve him, though in this World he might not do it) Enoch was translated, that he should not see Death, and was not found (on Earth,) because God had translated him (from it;) for before his Tran∣slation, he had this Testimony (from God, Gen. 5.22, 24.) that he pleased God. Ver. 6. But without (this) Faith it is im∣possible to please him; for he that cometh to God (in way of Duty) must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that di∣ligently seek (to please) him. (To believe that he is, relates to that Faith which is the Evi∣dence of things not seen, for God is invi∣sible; to believe that he is a Rewarder, to that Faith which is the Expectation of things hoped for). , was not found on Earth, because God had translated him.] God killed him not, saith Onkelos: And this we may sufficiently learn from the Story, Gen. 5. for of all the rest mention'd in that Chapter, it is said they died, but of him this is not said, but only that he was not, because God took him, , because God translated him, say the Septuagint, the Book of Wisdom, and the Son of Syrac, Wisd. 4.10. Ecclus. 44.14. Moreover it is said of Noah, and of Abraham, that they walked with God, Gen. 6.9.17.1. but it is not said that they were not, because God took them; this Phrase must therefore import something which happen'd not to them. Many of the Hebrew Doctors say, That he was taken into Heaven, or into Paradise: He was taken into Heaven by the Word of the Lord; saith the Targum of Jona∣than; He was translated into Paradise, say the Arabick and Aethiopick Versions; God shew'd him the Tree of Life, say R. Mene∣chem, and Zoar in 2 Kings 2.1. He transla∣ted him into Paradise, say Kimchi andDe Fragil. Humana, §. 12. Manasseh Ben Israel. Hence Munster on the place speaks thus, Asserunt nostri hunc Enoch cum corpore & anima translatum esse in Pa∣radisum. To be translated, saithDe Nom. Mui. p. 813. B. Philo, is, , to go from this mortal to immortal Life. The same was the Opinion of the Ancient Fa∣thers, ofP. 4. c. 30. l. 5. c. 5. Irenaeus, ofResp. ad qu. 85. Pseudo Justin, who saith, That they who rose with Christ are with Enoch and Elias, , in Pa∣radise. See others cited for this Opinion by Feuardentius upon Irenaeus. Note lastly, that this Translation into Paradise was the fruit of his Faith, that Faith which was the Expectation of things hoped for, and that God would Reward his Diligence in seeking him; for since he by this Faith obtained this Te∣stimony, that he pleased God, God could not take him hence in Displeasure, but out of Favour to him. In the 6th Verse we have the Heathens Creed, That God is, and that he is the Re∣warder of them that diligently seek him, with∣out which the Apostle declares, 1st. That it was impossible for them to please God, and so God must either have laid upon them no Obligations to please him, or required what he knew to be impossible 2dly, That they could have no sufficient Motives to serve him, or to come unto him in expectation of his Blessing upon them that did so, and there∣fore the Heathens embraced this as a Prin∣ciple of Natural Religion, That God could not suffer it to go ill with good Men, either in Life or Death, but would be sure to take care of, and provide good things for them. ThusApol. p. 31. D. Socrates requests his Judges to re∣ceive this as a certain Truth, That a good Man living or dying, can be subject to no Evil, because the Gods never neglect his Af∣fairs; and this is commended byTuscul. qu. 1. §. 82. Cicero and byProtrep. c. 13. p. 84. Jamblicus, as the great Principle which Philosophy suggests, as an encou∣ragement to Virtue. And if we believe that nothing is concealed from God, we must believe that which happens to the Friend of God, happens for the best, and that
what seeming Evils happen to him, will do him good, in this, or in the other Life.Apud Platon. de Repb. l. 10. V. 760. C. D. For he can never be neglected by the Gods, who is desirous to be a vertuous and good Man, and as like to God as he is able; but, , of the Wicked and Unjust Man we are to believe just the contrary. And thus again Jamblicus delivers as a great Principle of Philosophy,De Vita Pyth. c. 18. p. 89. That if we believe there is a God, who is Lord of all Things, we must own that what∣soever is good and honest must be asked of him, for all Men give good things to them they love and rejoice in, and the contrary to them, to whom they are disaffected, and therefore much more will the Gods do so. Another Principle also founded in the Nature of Man, and laid down by them as the Foundation of all Religion, was this, That if Piety were not advantageous to them, no Man would em∣brace it, it being natural to all Men to pur∣sue their Advantage, and to decline the con∣trary. So. L. 1. c. 27. p. 53. . L. 2. c. 22. p. 243. & L. 3. c. 3. p. 269. Arrian upon Epictetus, lays down this for an Axiom, That if Piety and Profit do not go together, Piety would be pre∣served in none. His Reason is, because no-nothing is so natural to us as to affect and pursue our own Advantage, so that if you place what is Holy and Just in that which profits, you preserve them; but if you sepa∣rate what is Honest from what is Advanta∣geous, you destroy what is Just and Honest, as being weighed down by Profit.. In Epict. p. 80. Sim∣plicius adds, That where is Profit there we place our Piety; and thence infers, That we cannot Love, Honour, Worship the Deity, whatsoever Reasons may be alledged for so do∣ing, if we conceive him hurtful and not pro∣fitable to us, because every living Creature flies what is hurtful, and the Causes of them, and affects, and follows what is profitable: And this they learn'd from their Master, &c. . Enchir. c. 38. Epictetus, who lays the Foundation of all Re∣ligion upon this Principle, That where Profit is there is Piety. Ver. 7. By Faith Noah being warned (by God) of things not seen as yet (i. e. of a fu∣ture Deluge) moved with fear (of what God threatned,) prepared an Ark to the saving of his House (from that Deluge,) by which he condemned the (old) World, (which would not believe his Prediction of this Deluge,) and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. , &c. Heir of the Righteousness.] i. e. Of the Happiness promised to them who are justified by Faith, or to Persons who by Faith had an Hereditary Right to it, viz. not only to the Temporal Salvation the Ark af∣forded, but to that Spiritual and Celestial Salvation which the Ark typified, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. For being justified through Faith, we are made Heirs through hope of Eternal Life, Tit. 3.7. Heirs of Salvation, Hebr. 1.14. Heirs of the Kingdom, James 2.5. See Note on Gal. 3.29. and on Hebr. 1.14. Ver. 8. By Faith (in God's Promise) Abra∣ham when he was called to go out into a place which he should afterwards receive for an In∣heritance, obeyed, and he went out, not know∣ing whither he went, (no not so much as what the Land of Promise was, God's first Command unto him being only this, Get thee into a Land which I shall tell thee of, Gen. 12.1.) Ver. 9. By Faith, (Gen. 12.7, 13, 15.) he sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, Heirs with him of the same Promise, (it being renew'd to Isaac, Gen. 26.3. and to Jacob, Gen. 28.13.) Ver. 10. For (God having said unto him, I am thy Shield, and thy Reward shall be ex∣ceeding great, Gen. 15.1.) he looked for a City which hath Foundations, (an Heavenly one, ver. 16. which cannot be shaken, Hebr. 12.28.) whose builder and maker is God. (It being not a Building made with Hands, as those on Earth, but eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Hebr. 9.11.) Thy exceeding great Reward.] Thus the Jerusalem Targum and that of Jonathan in∣terpret this Phrase, Fear not, the Reward  thy good Works shall be great in the World come. So ought we, saith Theophylact, to look to things above, and make no great ac∣count of those on Earth. Ver. 11. By Faith also Sarah her self (who at first believed not, Gen. 18.12. after that the Lord had renewed the Promise to her,
saying, At the time appointed I will return unto thee according to the time of Life, and Sarah shall have a Son, ver. 14.) received strength to conceive Seed, and was delivered of a Child, when she was past the (ordinary) Age (of bearing Children,) because she judged him faithful that had promised. Ver. 12. Therefore sprung there even of one, and him as good as dead, (his Body be∣ing dead, and the Womb of Sarah dead, as to the Procreation of Children, Rom. 4.19.) so many as the Stars in the Sky in multitude, and as the Sand which is on the Sea shore in∣numerable (according to God's Promise, Gen. 15.5.22.17.) Ver. 13. All these (forementioned that died, o all these Patriarchs) died in Faith, not having received the Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them (as certain,) and confessed that they (themselves) were (only) Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth. .] Here note, that these words, , and were persuaded, are neither to be found in the Ancient Versions, nor the Greek Commentators. 2. That the Promises here mentioned as not received by these Patriarchs, cannot be temporal Promises, for, , all these, as it cannot be re∣ferred to the whole Jewish Off-spring, since many of them, as the Apostle hath observed, Chap. 3.18, 19. Chap. 4.2, 6, 11. died in un∣belief, so neither to Abraham, Isaac and Ja∣cob only; for, 1st. they are not all that died in Faith; and, 2dly, the same is said of all in general, ver. 39. , these all died in Faith, not having received the Promise. Now we find no temporal Promise made to Abel, and to Enoch, and that temporal Pro∣mise which God made to Noah he fulfilled. 2. The Text saith, They embraced them, con∣fessing they were Strangers, and Pilgrims upon Earth; where the Apostle makes this in∣ference, that they sought another Country, that is an Heavenly, which makes it necessary to conceive that the Promises here mention∣ed, as not received, were as Oecumenius saith, , Heavenly Promises, , the Promise of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Resurrection, saith Theophylact. ThusDe Confus. Ling. p. 259, 260. Philo saith, , All the wise Men are introduced by Moses as Strangers, their Souls coming from Heaven to travel here on Earth, and that they desire to return thither, , looking upon Heaven as the City where they dwell, and the Earth in which they travel as their place of Pilgrimage. And again, , the Soul of every wise Man looks on Heaven as his Country, the Earth as the place of his Pilgrimage. De Agric. p. 153. So did A∣braham, saying, I am a Stranger and Sojourner with you, Gen. 23.4. And Jacob calling the time he lived here the Years of his Pilgrimage, Gen. 47.9. So David, saying, I am a Stran∣ger with thee, and a Sojourner as all my Fa∣thers were, Psalm 39.12. The same he speaks of the whole Jewish Nation, saying, 1 Chron. 29.15. We are Strangers before thee, and Sojourners as were all our Fathers. And this he learn'd out of the Law, where God speaks thus to them. Lev. 25.23. The Land is mine, for ye are Strangers and Sojourners with me, , saith the Septuagint. Ac∣cordingly the Philosophers taught that to die was to go into our Country, , to the true Country whence we came. Simpl. in Epict. p: 77. Ver. 14. (I say, they died in Faith, or in firm Expectation not only of these Temporal, but of Spiritual and Heavenly Promises,) For they that say such things (viz. that they even in the Land of Promise are Pilgrims and Strangers) declare plainly, that they seek a Country, (where they may rest and dwell when this their Pilgrimage on Earth is end∣ed.) Ver. 15. And truly, if they had been (on∣ly) mindful of that Country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned, (to it, i. e. from Canaan and Egypt to Ur of the Chaldeans.) Ver. 16. But now (by this professing them∣selves Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth, they declare) that they desire a better Coun∣try, that is (not on Earth, where they pro∣fess they are but Strangers, but) an Heaven∣ly; wherefore (the) God (of Heaven) is not ashamed to be called their God (and to own them as his Sons and Children,) for he hath prepared for them a (n Heavenly) City. , they desire a better Coun∣try.] The Ancient Jews declare, That the Earthly Canaan was a Type of the Spiritual Canaan; and the Promise of living in it for ever, was a Parable representing their future Happiness in the World to come.Talm. Babyl. in Sanhad. C. Chelek. It is written, all Israelites have their Portion in the World to come, as it is said, and thy Peo∣ple shall be all just, they shall inherit the Land for ever, Isa. 60.21. This Land, saithTreat▪ of Repnt. c. 3. §. 5. Maimonides, is a Parable, as if he should say, the Land of the Living, and that is the World to come. And R. Menachen in Gen. 12. refers it to the Land which is above, water'd with Waters which are above. If they received this Parabolical Interpretation from the Patriarchs, here is the reason of their Faith, and Expectation of this better
Country. Vain here is the Interpretation of Mr. le Clerk, both upon the 10th and the 16th Verse; for, 1st. A City which has Foun∣dations is, saith he, Jerusalem, whereas in A∣braham's time there was no such City that he could expect; nor was that a City which could not be shaken, Hebr. 12.28. it having been long since destroyed; nor was it a City whose Builder and Maker was God, but Man. Again, he expected a better Country, that is an Heavenly; i. e. the Land of Canaan which was an Antitype of Heaven; so Mr. le Clerk in flat Contradiction to the Apostle, saying the Country they expected was not that from whence they came out, ver. 14, 15. i. e. was not Canaan but an Heavenly Country; and he adds, God had provided for them a City, not Jerusalem sure, but an Heavenly City. , God is not ashamed to be cal∣led their God.] i. e. The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. To be their God and their Father is the same thing. Thus Jer. 31.1. I will be the God of all the Families of Israel, ver. 9. is thus varied, I am a Father to Israel. I will be their God, and they shall be my Peo∣ple, 2 Cor. 6.16. is ver. 18. I will be a Fa∣ther to you, and you shall be my Sons and my Daughters. To be Sons of God is to be Heirs of God, Rom. 8.17. to be Sons of the Resur∣rection, Luke 20.36. to inherit all things, Apoc. 20.7. And the , or Adoption promised by God, is the Redemption of the Body from Corruption. See Note on Matth. 22.31, 32. and on Rom. 8.17, 23. and this is the reason why God taking upon himself the Title of their God and Father, answers this Title, by preparing for them a City. Ver. 17. By Faith (in God's Power, v. 19.) Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac (laying him upon the Wood which was on the Altar, Gen. 22.9.) and he that had re∣ceived the Promises (of a numerous Seed to issue from him) offered up his only begotten Son. Ver. 18. (Even him) Of whom it was said (by God) that in Isaac shall thy Seed be cal∣led. Ver. 19. Accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the Dead, from whence also be received him in a Figure, (i. e. from his own dead Body, and the dead Womb of Sarah, Rom. 4.19.) , he offered up Isaac.] So speaks the New Testament twice, here, and James 2.21. So the Jews constantly.. De Ab. p. 293. Philo informs us, That though the Fact was not per∣fected, yet was it preserv'd in the Minds of the Readers, and mention'd in the Sacred Vo∣lumes as a thing entire, and absolutely done. And to this day they pray, ThatVid. Clem. R. Ep. ad Cor. §. 10. God would be gracious to them for the Merit of the Sacrifice of Isaac; according to the Prayer which both the Targum of Jerusalem and Jonathan mention on Gen. 22.14. as made by Abraham, to this effect, viz. I beseech thee, O God, by thy Mercies, that when the Sons of Isaac shall offer to thee in the time of their Necessity, thou wiltst be mindful of this bind∣ing of Isaac. Hence have they framed this Story, ThatPirk. Eliez. c. 31. p. 74. when the Knife touch∣ed the Throat of Isaac his Soul departed, and that when God said, Lay not thy Hand upon the Lad, it return'd, and so he being dead re∣vived. And truly, Abraham having done all that belong'd to him to do towards this of∣fering his Son, and being fully resolved to have gone through the Work, had not God's Call restrain'd him, may well be said, in the Divine Construction, to have actually done it; and to this some refer Abraham's receiving Isaac from the dead in a Figure, he being thus snatch'd from the Jaws of Death, and re∣stored to him, when he expected nothing but his Death. Ver. 20. By Faith (or a firm Expectation that God would make good his Benediction) Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come, (Gen. 27.) , blessed Jacob.] It may be enquired how he could bless Jacob by Faith, when he knew not that it was Jacob? To this I Answer, That to the Blessing him by Faith, it was not necessary that he should know him to be the Person he intended thus to Bless, but only that he should feel the Divine Afflutus, or the Spirit of Prophecy upon him when he blessed him, that being sufficient to confirm him, that his Benedicti∣on should be established by that God before whom he blessed him, and who guided his Lips and his Heart in it: And though we have translated it as a Prayer, it mostly runs in the Future Tense, and may wholly be tran∣slated as a Prophecy, and so it must be ut∣ter'd in Faith; and whereas it is objected far∣ther, that Isaac thought he was Blessing Esau, now so to bless him, as to make him Lord over his Brother, ver. 29. could not be spo∣ken in Faith, because the Oracle had before declar'd to Rebecca, that the Elder should serve the Younger. I Answer, 1st. That this is rather an Argument against the truth of his Benediction, than the Faith of it; it rather proves that Isaac should not thus have blessed Esau, than that he believed not what he said: But indeed it proves neither, for Isaac might feel such a strong Afflatus upon him, as might convince him that his Bene∣diction
derived from the Gift of Prophecy, and so would certainly be accomplish'd whom∣soever it concern'd. 2d. The Learned Bishop of Ely on ver. 4. Answers, that either Re∣becca had not acquainted Isaac with the Ora∣cle, or it seems he did not understand it as Rebecca did. Ver. 21. By (the like) Faith Jacob when he was dying blessed both the Sons of Joseph, and worshipped God (leaning) upon the top of his Staff (by which he was supported from illing.) , and worshipped] God, for the assurance he had of being buried in the Land of Promise, which he desired out of Faith in the Promise God had made to him, Gen. 28.13. Ver. 22. By Faith Joseph when he died made mention of the departing of the Children of Israel) out of Egypt, saying, God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this Land, Gen. 50.24.) and gave commandment con∣cerning his Bones, (that they should be carri∣d with them when they return'd to Canaan, ver. 25. which was an evidence of his Faith is the Promise of God.) Ver. 23. By (the) Faith (of his Parents, that God would send them a Deliverer) Moses when he was born was hid three Months of his Pa∣rents, because they saw he was a proper (Gr. comely) Child, (and therefore hoped he might be that Deliverer God had promised,) and (therefore) they were not (so) afraid of the King's Commandment, (as to deliver him up to be slain.) , a comely Child.] He was, saith St. Stephen, , of a very excel∣lent Beauty, Acts 7.20. , of a di∣vine Form, saithAntiq. l. 2. c. 5. Josephus; of anPirk. Eliez. c. 48. Angelick Form, say the Jews; He was, saith Justin, one, quem formae pulchritudo commen∣dabat, renowned for his Beauty. Josephus also adds, that an Egyptian Scribe, to whose Predictions they gave great Credit, had fore∣told,. Antiq. l. 2. c. 5. one should be born of Israel, who if be came to Age should grievously afflict the Egyptians, and bring out the Israelites from among them; and that God had by a Vision de∣clar'd to Amram, that this Child to be born to him should deliver the Israelites out of Egypt; which, if true, gives a farther ground of their Faith. Ver. 24. By Faith (in God's Promise of a De∣liverance out of Egypt) Moses when he was come to years of (discretion,) refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. Ibid.Josephus informs us, That when Pha∣raoh had put the Crown upon his Head, adopt∣ing him, as the Son of his Daughter, to be his Successor, he let the Crown fall upon the ground, and stamped upon it with his Feet. But the words , being the very words used Exod. 2.11. where it is said, It came to pass that when Moses was grown, he went out unto his Brethren; the Apostle doubtless had relation to them, and interpreted his going out unto them, to be his owning himself to be one of them, It came into his Heart, saith Stephen, to visit his Brethren, Acts 7.23. i. e. to join himself to the afflicted Jews. Ver. 25. Chusing rather (by this owning himself to be one of them) to suffer Afflicti∣on with the People of God, than to enjoy (in Pharaoh's Court) the pleasures of Sin for a season. Ver. 26. Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than all the Treasures of E∣gypt, for he had respect unto the Recompence of Reward. , &c. the Reproach of Christ.] The Seed of Abraham, even before they went down to Egypt, are stiled the Christs of God, Psalm 105.15. , touch not my Christs. And the Prophet Habakkuk speaking of God's Judgments upon Pharaoh, and God's Deliverance of them from him, saith, , thou wentest forth for the Salvation of thy People to preserve thy Christ, Hab. 3.13. So that the Reproach of Christ, may be the Reproach of the People of God, ver. 15. Moreover the Reproach which he and they suffer'd, was for their Faith in the promised Seed, and that was Christ, Gal. 3.16. on which account it might be truly stiled the Reproach of Christ, as the Afflictions of the Apostle are stiled the Afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. and he himself the Prisoner of Christ, Ephes. 3.1. as being the Reproach he suffer'd for his Faith in the promised Seed, which was Christ. , the Recompence of Re∣ward] here mentioned, could not be Tem∣poral, for Moses came not into the Land of Canaan, nor could he expect any greater Blessings of that kind, than he might have had in Egypt. He therefore must have respect to some Spiritual and Heavenly Recompence. Ver. 27. By Faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King (when he pur∣sued after him, Exod. 14.13.) for he endured as seeing him (present with them) who is in∣visible (and therefore said unto the People, v. 30. Fear ye not, stand still, and see the Sal∣vation of God, Exod. 14.14.) , not fearing.] It is expresly said that Moses when he fled from the Face of Pharaoh, feared, Exod. 2.14. and it is far∣ther evident from these Words of God to him, Go, return into Egypt, for all the Men
are dead that sought thy Life, Chap. 4.19. And therefore they who refer this to that flight, say, he did not so fear his Wrath as to distrust the Providence of God, in work∣ing a Deliverance to his People by his Hand. But his unwillingness when God commanded him to go back to Egypt, confutes this Gloss. Others say, he feared not the Wrath of the King when he said unto him, take heed to thy self, see my Face no more, for in that day thou seest my Face thou shalt die, Exod. 10.28. But then he had not forsook Egypt, and when he went from it, he did so by the Command of Pharaoh, Exod. 12.31. and so needed not to fear him. Against the Exposition given in the Paraphrase, it is objected, that it agrees not with the Order of the Words, because the Passover mention'd ver. 28. was kept in Egypt. But this Objection will be of little force, if we consider that other things are mention'd in this Chapter out of the Order in which they were perform'd: Thus ver. 32. Gideon is mention'd before Barak, and Samp∣son before Jephtha, as also ver. 33, 34, 35, 36. Ver. 28. By Faith (in God's Promise, that upon seeing the Blood of the Paschal Lamb upon the upper Door Posts, and the two side Posts of the Houses of the Israelites, he would pass over them, when he slew the first-Born of the Egyptians, Exod. 12.13, 23.) he kept the Passover, and (observed) the sprinkling of (the) Blood (of it, and this he did) lest he that destroyed the first-Born (See Note on 1 Cor. 10.10). should touch them. Ver. 29. By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry Land, which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned. Through the Red Sea.] That this they truly did, see Note on 1 Cor. 10.1. Ver. 30. By Faith (in God's Promise, Josh. 6.5.) the Walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days. Ver. 31. By Faith the Harlot Rahab perish∣ed not with them that believed not, (which Faith she testified) when she received the Spies with Peace. She testified her Faith, not only by preserving thus the Spies, but by saying to them, I know that the Lord hath given you this Land, Josh. 2.9. and again, The Lord your God he is God in Heaven above, and on Earth beneath, ver. 11. Ver. 32. And what shall I more say, for the time would fail me (should I proceed) to tell of Gideon, (who through Faith overthrew the Madianites, Judges 7.) and of Barak, (who slew the Canaanites, Judges 4.) and of Sampson, (who vexed the Philistines,) and of Jephtha, (who slew the Ammonites, Judg. 11.) and of David also, and Samuel, and of the Pro∣phets. Ver. 33. Who through Faith subdued King∣doms, (as Joshua and David did,) wrought Righteousness (as Abraham, Gen. 15.6. Phi∣neas, Psalm 106.30. or turned the People from Idolatry into the way of Righteousness, as Samuel, 1 Sam. 12. Elijah, 1 Kings 18.39.) obtained Promises, (as Abraham and David▪) stopped the Mouths of Lions (as Daniel.) Ver. 34. Quenched the violence of Fire (as the three Children, Dan. 3.17.) escaped the edge of the Sword, (as David the Sword of Go∣liah, 1 Sam. 17.46, 47. and of Saul, the Jews the Sword of Haman, Esth. 4.14. Elijah the Sword of Ahaziah, 2 Kings 1.15.) out of weakness were made strong (as Gideon with his Three hundred Men, Judges 7.15. Sampson, Judges 16.28. Jehosaphat, 2 Chron. 20.12. Jonathan, 1 Sam. 14.12. Job, and Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19.) waxed valiant in fight, (Jo∣shua, Gideon, Sampson, David,) turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens (the Macca∣bees.) Ver. 35. Women received their dead raised to Life again (the Widow of Zarephath, 1 Kings 17.20.) the Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.36.) Others were tortured, (Eleazer, 2 Maccab. 6.28.) not accepting a deliverance (ver. 26.30.) that they might obtain a better Resurrection, (2 Maccab. 7.9, 11, 14, 23, 29, 36.) Ver. 36. And others had tryal of cruel Mockings, (2 Maccab. 7.7, 10.) and Scour∣gings (, Joseph 12.7. 2 Maccab. 6.30.7.1, 37.) yea moreover of Bonds and im∣prisonment (as Joseph, Sampson, Jeremiah.) Ver. 37. They were stoned, (as Zachariah, 2 Chron. 24.21.) they were sawn asunder, (, Jos. ibid. Isaiah by Ma∣nasseh. See Buxt. Lex. p. 1360.) were tempt∣ed (or, , they were scorched and fryed, 2 Maccab. 7.5.) were slain with the Sword, (1 Maccab. 2.38.) they wandred about in Sheep skins and Goat skins, (Elijah, 1 Kings 19.13, 19. 2 Kings 2.8, 14.) being destitute, (as Elijah when fed by Crows, 1 Kings 17.4.) afflicted, tormented, (Gr. evil∣ly entreated, 1 Kings 19.10.) .] That this is not the right Reading, may easily be gather'd from this one Consideration, that after two such great Pu∣nishments, as Stoning and being Sawn asunder, it is very improper to introduce their being tempted, which signifies no certain kind of Punishment at all, and is included in all the other Punishments here mentioned. Some therefore read , some , some , all signifying they were burnt; which Reading agrees well with the Story of the Maccabees, where they bring Eleazer and the Young Men, , to the Fire and burnt their Flesh, so that, Jo∣sephus (from c. 6. to c. 12.) saith they were, , as one might say, translated in the Fire to incorrup∣tion. But yet I prefer the Opinion of those who think this was an Errour arising, ,
, from writing the same Word twice, or rather that some who knew not what  meant, writ for it , and so in time they came to be both written, because the Syriack Version hath not .Prap. Ev. l. 12. c. 10. p. 583. Eusebius cites St. Paul's Words thus, .Scorp. c. 8. Tertullian Paraphrases them thus, Hie∣remias lapidatur, Esaias secatur, Zacharias inter Altare & Aedem trucidatur.Strom. 4. p. 515. A. Cle∣mens of Alexandria reads thus, , &c. which gives just ground to conjecture that some ignorant Writer put  for . This fault is very visible in the Transcriber ofEd. Huet. To. 1. p. 141. D. Origen, for in his Fourth Homily on Jeremy we read in the Greek, , but in the old Translation there is only secti, occisione gladii ccubuerunt. And in the Fifteenth Homily,P. 147. , which shews that Origen did not own the word ; and though we find the word again in his Homilies onTo. 1. p. 225. St. Mat∣thew, yet whosoever reads the place will find that Origen takes no notice of it, but pro∣ceeds immediately from  to , saying, the word  refers to Isaias, and the words , to Zacharias. In his Fourth Dia∣logue against Marcion, p. 125. he proves that the Prophets were not Phantoms, but Men consisting of Flesh and Blood, because, , one of them was sawn asun∣der, another was ston'd, and the rest were killed by the Sword: And in his Exhortation to Martyrdom, p. 232. he adds, The Writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews saith, , they were ston'd, they were sawn asunder, they were slain with the Sword, from all which places it is evident, that  was the reading follow∣ed by the Ancients. Ver. 38. (And though they were Men) Of whom the World was not worthy, (yet) they wandred in Deserts (1 Maccab. 2.29.) and in Mountains (ver. 28.) and in Dens and Caves of the Earth, (2 Maccab. 6.11.) Ver. 39. And these all having obtain'd a good Report through Faith, (, ha∣ving obtain'd a Testimony from God, or from his Word that they pleased him through Faith, notwithstanding) received not the Pro∣mises (of an Heavenly Country, ver. 13, 16. not the Recompence of Reward, ver. 26. not the better Resurrection, ver. 35.) Ver. 40. God having provided (Gr. fore∣seen) some better thing for us, (and so defer∣ring the completion of that Promise, till we also should be made partakers of it,) that so they without us should not be made perfect. , or as some Co∣pies read, , received not the Pro∣mises.] These words being the same with those in ver. 13. of this Chapter, all these died in Faith, , not having received the Promises, it is reasonable to interpret them to the same sense, viz. of their not having receiv'd the Heavenly King∣dom, and blessed Resurrection they expected. And so the whole current of this Epistle will force us to interpret them; for 'tis the Pro∣mise of entring into rest after we have ceased from our Labour here on Earth, Chap. 4.1, 10. the Promise of an eternal Inheritance, Chap. 9.15. the Promise we are to receive after we have patiently done the Will of God, Chap. 10.36. , some better thing concern∣ing us.] Our hope entring into the Veil by reason of our Forerunner entring in thither first, Chap. 6.19, 20. we having an High-Priest made higher than the Heavens, Chap. 7.26. set on the Throne of Majesty in the Heavens, Chap. 8.1. who by his Death hath procured, that they which are called might receive the Promise of an eternal Inheritance, Chap. 9.15. and who hath by his entrance into this Holy Place with his Blood, purified and prepared these Holy Places for us, ver. 23, 24. the way into which was not before opened, ver. 8. and given us freedom of entrance into the Holiest through the Blood of Jesus, by this new way which he hath consecrated through his Flesh, Chap. 10.20. We being therefore come to that Mount Sion, the City of the living God, to the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, Chap. 12.22. , that they with∣out us may not be made perfect.] This all the Fathers interpret of their receiving their Crowns, or their Rewards hereafter. Thus of Abel and Noah, St. Chrysostom saith, That they might not be crowned before us, , God hath appointed one time of Coronation for them all. , they have not yet obtained their Crowns, saith Theodoret, God expecting still those that are to combat, that he may pro∣claim them Victors all together.Vides ergo quia expectat adhuc Abraham ut quae perfecta sunt consequatur, expectat, & Isaac & Jacob, & omnes Prophetae expectant nos, ut nobiscum perfectam beatitudinm capiant. In Lev. Hom. 7. f. 71. D. Origen having cited this place, saith thus, You see that Abraham yet expects to obtain Perfection, yea Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets ex∣pect us, that with us they may obtain perfect Bliss. Yea, he says the same not only of all the Saints of the New Testament, but even
of the Blessed Apostles, saying,Nondum enim receperunt laetitiam suam, ne Apostoli quidem, sed & ipsi expectant ut & ego laetitiae eorum particeps fiam, neque enim decedentes hinc sancti continuo integra meritorum suorum praemia consequuntur, sed expectant etiam nos licet morantes. Ibid. Even the Apostles have not yet received their Joy, but wait that I might be partaker with them; nor do the Saints departed obtain the full Re∣ward of their good Actions, but still wait for us. Nor did the Primitive Fathers mean this only of their Bodies, but also of their Souls, which they conceived not to be exalted to the highest Heavens, or that they had not yet received their full Reward, yea that they were not to expect it till the Day of Judg∣ment, see Note on 2 Tim. 4.8. and therefore I cannot but wonder to hear a very learned Person in his Note on this place, saying, It will be acknowledged by all that then, i. e. at our Saviour's Resurrection, the Patriarchs re∣ceived this Promise, or that the Sufferers here mentioned then received it, especially when the Apostle here saith, They were tortured not accepting a deliverance, that they might ob∣tain a better Resurrection, ver. 35. which sure they have not yet obtained: And more ad∣mire that this should by him be interpreted of deliverance from their Persecutors, and rest from Persecutions, for is this Promise fulfilled to Christians? to them who if they will live Godly must suffer Persecutions? and through many Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God? and do they who were thus Tortured find this Perfection with us? or had they any other Rest or Freedom from them, than what Death gave them? Surely the Exposi∣tion of all the Ancient Fathers, is much to be preferred before this new and singular Inven∣tion; as also before the New Doctrine of the Florentine Council, That the Souls of Saints departed do already behold the Face of God in Heaven. CHAP. XII. Ver. 1. WHerefore we also being compassed about with such a Cloud (i. e. a multitude) of Witnesses, let us (who are to run our Christian Race) lay aside every weight (of worldly Cares and Affections,) and the Sin which easily besets (and circumvents) us, (and so hinders our Feet from making a due Progress in it,) and let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us. , a Cloud] for a Multitude is a Phrase used by Homer, who calls a multitude of Footmen , whichAen. 7. ver. 793. and Note in L. 4. Georg. ver. 60. Virgil thus translates, Insequitur nimbus peditum; this Cloud of Witnesses therefore contains all the Worthies mentioned in the former Chapter, who by their Words and Actions have testi∣fied how much the Objects of their Faith were valued before all worldly Things, and how equitable it was to endure Afflictions, not ac∣cepting a deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. , the Sin that easily besets us.] The Apostle being here speaking of the Christians Race, this Phrase is best in∣terpreted with relation to it, and so it must respect the Sin which cleaves to our Affecti∣ons, which are the Feet of the Soul, like a long Garment wrapt about us, and so hinders the running of our Christian Race; for it is either our Affection to, and our desire of what we ought not to desire, or affect at all, or which we ought not comparatively to affect, or de∣sire, which gives the rise and prevalence to all Temptations to Sin, and renders self-denial so exceeding difficult. Ver. 2. Looking unto Jesus (who by his Prophetick Office was) the Author and (by his Regal Office will be) the finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him (as the Reward of his Sufferings) endu∣red the Cross, despising the Shame (of it,) and (therefore) is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God. , &c. looking to Jesus,] as an Ex∣ample of Patience under Sufferings, fit to be imitated by his Disciples, and as one glori∣ously recompensed in his humane Nature for the Sufferings he sustained in it, and as one who will give to us the same happy Repose af∣ter our Sufferings; He having, as the Author of our Faith, promised, and being able, as the Finisher of our Faith, to confer that glo∣rious Recompence, Chap. 10.35, 36. , for the Joy set before him.] That  is used for the final Cause appears from these Examples in the New Testament; He gave himself a Ransom, , for many, Matth. 20.28. Render not evil, , for evil, Rom. 12.17. Her Hair was given, , for a co∣vering, 1 Cor. 11.15. , For this cause shall a Man leave Father and Mother. And here, ver. 16. , for one morsel of Bread he sold his Birthright. See 1 Thes. 5.15. 1 Pet. 3.9. Note also, that the Apostle goes on in his Agonistical terms,
and having spoken, ver. 1. of the , the Race set before us to run, he here speaks in the same Language of the Joy set before our Saviour in his Race, that is, of the , the Prize, or Crown placed in his view for his Encouragement to run it. It be∣ing the Custom in those GamesHe did, saith Plutarch, , p. 523. And I run, saith the Apostle, , Philip. 3.14. See Fab. Agonist. l. 2. c. 27. to hang the Crown at the end of the Goal, that he who came first to it might snatch it, or lay hold of it: The Joy set before him must there∣fore be the Prospect of that Majesty and Glory, Power and Dominion he, in his Hu∣mane Nature, was to be invested with, as the Reward of these his Sufferings. He for the suffering of Death being crowned with Ma∣jesty and Honour, Hebr. 2.9. God having therefore highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name, Philip. 2.9. And thus we have just cause to look upon him as an Example of Faith and Patience, and of God's especial Favour to them that suffer for his sake. Ver. 3. For consider you him, who (being so excellent a Person, and so dear to God, yet) endured (patiently) such contradiction of Sinners against himself, (such Blasphemies against his Doctrine, such Calumnies against his Person, such malicious and unwearied Attempts against his Life) lest ye be wearied and faint in your mind, (under the conflict of Afflictions ye endure.) .] These also are two Agonistical Terms; the one signifies to be weary, as in those words ofPlutarch. in vita C. Marc. p. 218. C. Marcius, , Conquerours must not be weary, and so give over the Fight; the other to faint and be dispirited, so that we can run, or fight no longer: And because in those Combats they fought, , stand∣ing upright, and, , stretching out their Hands, therefore the Apostle exhorts them in their Spiritual Combat to stretch out the Hands that hang down, and, , to erect their feeble Knees, v. 12. Faber. Agon. l. 1. c. 8. Ver. 4. (For which Fainting you have no such cause as this Captain of Salvation, and this Cloud of Witnesses had,) For ye have not yet resisted unto Blood (as they did) striving against sin. .] This is an∣other Agonistical Expression belonging to the Pugiles, who were oft besmeared with Blood, and sometimes died under the Blows they received from the Clubs of their Adversary. Faber. Agon. l. 1. c. 7. Ver. 5. And (by your proneness to grow weary, and even faint under the Combat) you seem to have forgotten the Exhortation which speaketh to you as to Children, (thus) My Son despise not (be not slothful and di∣spirited under) the Chastning of the Lord, nor faint when thou art Rebuked of him, (Prov. 3.11, 12.) .]  is, say Phavorinus and Hesychius, , to be unre∣gardful of, to be slothful, , to be Crest fallen, , animo concidere, to faint and be dispirited. . Athen. Deipnos. l. 1. p. 23. B. Ver. 6. For whom the Lord loveth he Chast∣neth, and Scourgeth every. Son whom he re∣ceiveth (into that Relation.) Ver. 7. If ye (then) endure Chastning, God dealeth with you as (a Father) with (his) Sons, for what Son is there whom the Father Chast∣neth not (for his Offences)? Ver. 8. For if (, but if) ye be without (such) Chastisements, whereof all (Sons) are partakers, then are you (treated as) Bastards (whom the reputed Parent disregards) and not (as) Sons (whom he loves, ver. 6.) Hence the Jews speak thus, Wo to the Man who goeth out of the World without Tribulations. Buxt. Lex. p. 1528. Ver. 9. Furthermore (, and if) we have had Fathers of our Flesh which corrected us, and (yet) we gave them Reverence, (and Honour, in expectation of the long Life promised to them that do so, Exod. 20.12.) shall we not much more be in subjection to the Father of our Spirits, (who gives, and who recalls our Spi∣rits at pleasure,) and (so) live (everlasting∣ly)? , the Father of Spirits.] This Phrase is not here put to signifie the Au∣thor of our new spiritual Birth, for spiritual Graces and Dispositions are never called, , Spirits in Scripture; nor is the Holy Spirit, who produceth them, ever mention'd in the Plural, when they are spoken of. It plainly is an Hebrew Phrase, used twice by Moses when he speaks thus to God, Oh God of the Spirits of all Flesh, Numb. 16.22. and again, Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, set a Man over the Congregation, Numb. 27.16. And he is so stiled both as the Creator of them, or that God who form∣eth the Spirit of Man within him, Zach. 12.1. and the Preserver and Governor of them; the God in whose Hand is the Soul of all living, and the Spirit of all Flesh of Man, Job 12.10. and into whose Hands they do return at Death, Eccles. 12.7. according to that old Tradition of the Heathens preserved inPlutarch. de Consol. ad Apoll. p. 110. A. Epicharmus, That Man dying, , returns
from whence he came, his earthly part to the Earth, his Spirit upwards. And the Tradi∣tion of the Hebrews, ThatMidrash Cohel. in cap. 5. v. 11. in the time of our Dissolution God comes and takes away his Part, and leaves the Part of our Father and Mother, stiled here the Fathers of the Flesh.. Antiq. L. 1. c. 2. p. 5. A. Josephus saith, That at the Formation of Adam God made Man out of the Earth, and sent into him a Soul and Spirit., &c. Lib. de Mundi Opificio, p. 23. C. D. Philo saith, That his Body was indeed made of Earth, shaped into Humane Form, but his Soul was only derived from the Maker and Governour of all Things, and this was signi∣fied by these Words, He breathed into him the Breath of Life; so that, though according to his visible Part he was Mortal, as to his in∣visible he was Immortal. Hence saith the Targum of Jonathan on Numb. 16.22.27.16. It is God that putteth the Spirit of the Soul in the Bodies of all Men. And the Targum of Jerusalem, It is God who ruleth over the Souls of all Flesh. See Pug. Fid. p. 401. Ver. 10. For▪ they verily for a few days chastned us after their own pleasure, (Gr. as seemed best to them) but he (our Heavenly Father) doth it for our own Profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness. ,] seems not here to refer to the Days of Childrens Minority, for that makes nothing to the purpose of the Apostle's Argument, and the motive to suffer Divine Chastisements used by the Scripture, is not that they are long, but that they are but for a very little while, Hebr. 10.37. momentary, 2 Cor. 4.17. , but for a little, 1 Pet. 1.6. nor is , after their plea∣sure, but as it seemed good to them: This therefore seems to be the meaning of the Words, That earthly Parents Chastise their Children, aiming at that which seems best for them in this present Life, consisting of few Days, or for their Temporal Good in this Life, but God doth it for their Spiritual and Eternal Benefit, to make them here partakers of his Holiness, and so to fit them for the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness hereafter. Ver. 11. (Nor let it discourage you that these Afflictions seem grievous to the Flesh, ,) For no Temptation for the present seemeth joyous, but grievous (to it); never∣theless afterward it yieldeth the comfortable Fruits of Righteousness to them that are exer∣cised thereby, (i. e. Those Fruits of Righte∣ousness which end in Peace.) The word  used here, shews that the Phrase is Agonistical, and taken from the Exercises performed by them Naked in the Olympick Games, where one of the Crowns given to the Victors being, ▪ of Olive, the Symbol of Peace, hence Faber conceives the Christians Crown is here re∣presented by the peaceable Fruit of Righteous∣ness. Ver. 12. Wherefore lift up the Hands which hang down (as if wearied with, and giving over the Combat) and (strengthen) the feeble Knees (which seen unable to stand firm, or run on this Race with Patience. See Note on ver. 3.) Ver. 13. And (so) make (, ye will make) streight Paths for your Feet (to walk in,) lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed, (Gr. , that that which is Lame may not be turn∣ed out of the way, but rather may be heal∣ed.) .] i. e. Make streight Paths in the Way of Christianity, not stepping out of it to avoid Persecution, that they who are already Lame and Feeble may not be moved by your Example to go out of it, but rather by your Constancy in it may be confirm'd. Ver. 14. (And in order thereto) Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. i. e. Be of a pure and peaceable Conversa∣tion towards all with whom you do converse; for as this is necessary in order to your living with God, so will it tend much to prevent the Persecutions of Men. Ver. 15. Looking diligently lest any Man fail of the Grace, (Gr. , fall from the Grace of God) lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. That , is the same with , to depart from the Grace of God which brings Salvation, or to depart from the Faith, and by so doing fall short of the pro∣mised Rest, Hebr. 4.1. The Words of the Apostle, and his Scope, which is to preserve the Jews from Backsliding from Christianity to Judaism, and the following Exhorta∣tion, not to refuse him that speaketh now, ver. 25. And, , to retain and hold fast the Grace of God, ver. 28. sufficiently shew. But this is still more clear from the Words of Deut. 29.18. whence this whole Verse is taken, which runs thus, , lest there be among you any Man or Woman— whose Heart turneth away from the Lord our God, to go and serve the gods of the Nations, , lest there should be among you a Root springing with Gall and Wormwood. Which
makes it probable that the true Reading here should be not , but . Ver. 16. Lest there be any Fornicator or Profane Person (among you, such) as was Esau, who for one morsel of Meat sold his Birthright. , the Birthright] which Esau sold contain'd these Privileges, 1. A double Por∣tion of his Father's Goods, Deut. 21.17. 2 Power and Dominion over the Younger, for he succeeded in the Government of the Family, or Kingdom. Reuben thou art my first-born, the Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of Power, Gen. 49.3. The Kingdom gave he to Jehoram, because he was the first-born, 2 Chron. 21.3. This Isaac gave to Jacob in these words, Be thou a Master to thy Brethren, and let thy Mother's Sons bow down to thee, Gen. 27.29. 3. The Honour of Priesthood in their own Family at least. So Exod. 24.5. He sent the young Men (Chald. the first-born) of the Sons of Israel, and they offered Burnt Offerings, and sacri∣ficed Sacrifices, to Jehovah. Afterwards the Levites were taken into the Service of God, instead of all the first-born among the Chil∣dren of Israel, Numb. 3.41. consecrated be∣fore to God, Exod 22.29. Numb. 8.17. Gen. 25.29. This Birthright Esau sold when he was faint, , and this shews how pro∣per this instance is to preserve them from be∣ing wearied and faint in their Mind. The Targum of B. Uziel saith, That he was made faint by committing Idolatry, shed∣ding innocent Blood, and going in to a Dam∣sel betrothed that day, and this shews him a Fornicator both in the Spiritual and Carnal Sense, and a profane Person. And lastly, Mercer saith, Primogenituram Haereditatem celestem adumbrasse, that the Primogeni∣ture was a Type of their Celestial Inheritance; which also seems to be hinted by the Para∣phrases on the Place, for that of Uziel saith, He denied the Life of the World to come, and contemn'd his Birthright: And the Targum of Jerusalem, That he contemn'd his Birth∣right, and despised his part in the Life to come, and denied the Resurrection; and as this shews his Profaneness, so also doth it shew the appositeness of this Example to the Apo∣stle's purpose. Ver. 17. For ye know that afterwards when he would have inherited the Blessing (he had lost.) he was rejected by his Father, (saying of Jacob, I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed,) for he found no place of Repentance, (no change of the Blessing pronounced by his Father,) though he sought it carefully with Tears, (crying with an exceeding great and bitter cry, Gen. 27.34.) .] Though these words thus expounded do not immediately prove that true Repentance may find no ac∣ceptance with God, yet are they design'd to insinuate that Men may so despise the Bles∣sings of Christianity, as to be after thought unworthy to enjoy them; that by their Apo∣stacy they may fall so entirely from God, as that he will not be prevailed on by their Tears to restore them to their lost and despised Privileges upon their Tears and Fastings; as is apparent in the Case of the Jews, who have large times of Penance and Humiliation, but are not, to this day, restored to the Grace and Favour of God, and to the Privilege of being his peculiar People, and First-born as once they were. Ver. 18. For ye (believing Jews) are not come, (as your Forefathers when they entred into the old Covenant with God,) unto the Mount that might be touch'd, (and so you might die, Exod. 19.12.) and that burn'd with fire, (Gr. to the burning Fire, Deut. 5.23.) and to the blackness and darkness (caused by the Cloud stiled, , Exod. 19.16.) and to the Tempest (of Thun∣der and Lightning, Deut. 5.22.) Ver. 19. And the sound of a (the) Trumpet (exceeding loud, which made the People trem∣ble, Exod. 19.16.) and the (great) voice of Words, which (was so terrible that) they that heard (it) entreated that the Word should not be spoken to them any more (lest they died for it, Exod. 20.19. Deut. 5.25.18.16.) Ver. 20. For they could not endure that which was commanded, (that severe cautionary Command which runs thus) That if so much as a Beast touched the Mountain it should be stoned, or thrust thorow with a Dart. .]  signifies to Command with Vehemence or Severity, Matth. 16.20. Mark 5.43.8.15. Ver. 21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly quake and tremble. , Moses said.] This Interpreters think St. Paul received by Tradition of his Ancestors, though no Footsteps of this Tra∣dition have been found among them. But doubtless the Apostle had respect to Deut. 9. where, ver. 15. Moses sees the Mount burn∣ing up to Heaven; and ver. 19. saith, , I exceedingly fear. Ver. 22. But ye are come (under the Gospel Dispensation to things of a more excellent Nature, not apt to terrifie and discourage, but create Joy and Comfort to you, not as then to Mount Sinai, but) to Mount Zion, (whence you expect all your Spiritual Bles∣sings, not to the Terrestrial Jerusalem which is in Bondage with her Children, Gal. 4.25. but) to the City of the living God, the heaven∣ly Jerusalem, not to thousands of Angels at∣tending on God as at Mount Sinai, Psalm 68.17. but) to an innumerable Company of Angels, (ministring to them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Hebr. 1.14.) , to Mount Zion.] All the good Things, Blessings and Comforts which God
will give to Israel, are only out of Zion, say the Jews, Vajikra Rabba, Sect. 24. Midrash Tillim ad Psalm 14. Hence came their Strength, Psal. 110.2. and Help, Psal. 20.2. Blessings, Psal. 128.5. and Life, Psal. 133.3. and Salvation, Psal. 14.7. , to the Heavenly Jeru∣salem.] Which is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. where our City is, Philip. 3.20. This the Rabbins call the Jerusalem, le Holam habba, of the Age to come, to be built in the Days of the Messiah, saying also, That the inferiour Jerusalem is a Figure of that which is above. See Note on Gal. 4.26. And 'tis here stiled the Heavenly Jerusalem. Not that Heaven is primarily intended by it; and not the Church of Christ on Earth, but propter originem & finem, as having its rise from Heaven, and as leading to it, on which ac∣count the Gospel State is stiled so oft the Kingdom of Heaven. , to myriads of Angels.] The Glorious Citizens of Heaven who attend at the Throne of God, to whom we are united, they being made one with us in Christ, Ephes. 1.10. and to whom we are reconciled by him, Colos. 1.20. Ver. 23. And to the General Assembly, and Church (not of the Jews, and the First-born Registred among them, Numb. 1.16. but) of the First-born who are written in Heaven, and to God (now declared to be) the Judge of all, (Acts 17.30, 31.) and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, (who have run their Race, and are to be Crowned at the great Day, 2 Tim. 4.8.) , of the First-born.] i. e. Of the Apostles who received the first Fruits of the Spirit, Rom. 8.23. and of the Churches which received first the Christian Faith, Ephes. 1.12. (whose Names are written in Heaven) i. e. who are enrolled among the Citizens of the New and Heavenly Jerusalem, or among the Just, for whom the Kingdom is prepared. In this rejoice, saith Christ, that your Names are writ∣ten in Heaven, Luke 10.20. Thus Exod. 32.32. Moses is by the Targum introduced speaking thus, I know thou hast writ my Name in the Book of the Just. And of the False Prophets the Targum on Ezek. 13.9. saith, They shall not be written in the Book of eter∣nal Life, which is written for the Just of the House of Israel; and into this Kingdom they only are to enter, whose Names are thus en∣rolled in the Book of Life, Rev. 21.27. , and to God the Judge of all.] Who will adjudge the Crown of Glory to those who have fought the good fight of Faith, 2 Tim. 4.8. who run this Race with Patience, 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. and will give them the King∣dom prepared for them, Matth. 25.34. Luke 12.32. And to the Spirits of Just Men, , made perfect.] This word here cannot well signifie them who are crowned in the A∣gonistical Sense, because the Apostle in the former Chapter had asserted of those Wit∣nesses which died in Faith, That they had not yet received the Promise, and were not to be Crowned before us Christians; and saith, that he himself expected to receive his Crown only at the Great Day, 2 Tim. 4.8. But it signifies either that they had fulfilled their Course, and so rested from their Labours and Conflicts, as Chrysostom here saith, and so have nothing more to do but to receive their Crown: Or in the other Sense of the Word, , to be made perfect in Holiness, or to be perfectly Purged from all Guilt of Sin, and so fit to be admitted to this Kingdom. In which Sense the Apostle here denies that there was any , or perfect Expiation made by the Levitical Priesthood, the Law making nothing perfect, Hebr. 7.11, 16. And that the Offerings prescribed by it could not, , make perfect the Worshipper as to his Conscience, Hebr. 9.9. that they could not, , perfect him for ever, so as that he should need no farther Expiation for Sin, Hebr. 10.1. and that Christ by one Offering, , had perfectly expiated for ever them that were sanctified, ver. 14. Ver. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator (not of the old Covenant, which promised only the Land of Canaan, but) of the new Cove∣nant, (established in his Blood, by which we receive the Promise of an eternal Inheritance, Hebr. 9.15.) and to the Blood of sprinkling which speaketh better things than that of Abel. , the Blood of sprinkling.] Not that of Bulls and Goats with which Mo∣ses sprinkled the People, when they entred into the Old Covenant, Exod. 24.8. and the Tabernacle, and the Vessels of the Ministery to sanctifie them for the Levitical Service, but the Blood of Christ, by which the Hea∣venly Places are purified and prepared for us, Chap. 9.23, 24. and by which we have en∣trance into the Holiest, Chap. 10.19, 20. or, .] Than the Blood of Abel, not because that cal∣led for Vengeance, this for Mercy; but than the Blood of the Sacrifice of Abel offer'd by Faith, of which God testified his Acceptance, and by which he being dead yet speaks, Hebr. 11.4. that procuring Acceptance for himself alone, this for all Believers; that speaking only for him, and declaring him Righteous, this interceding to God for the Justification of all Men through Faith in his Blood. Ver. 25. See therefore that you refuse not him that speaketh (now by his Son to you,) for if they escaped not (God's severe Judgments) who refused him that spake on Earth (from Mount Sinai,) much more shall
we escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh (by his Son coming down, and by his Spirit sent down) from Heaven, (1 Pet. 1.12.) .] This word both in the Old and New Testament signifies speaking as from God, or words proceeding from him. See Jer. 25.30.26.3.29.23.30.2.36.4. Matth. 2.22. Luke 2.26. Acts 10.22. Rom. 11.4. Hebr. 8.5.11.7. so 2 Maccab. 2.4. , the Prophet being warn∣ed of God, commanded that the Ark should go with him. , refuse not.] As they did, saith Theodoret, , desiring instead of God to have Moses, by saying, Speak thou to us, and let not God speak to us, Exod. 20.19. desiring not God, but an Angel, saith Philo on those Words. De Som∣iis, p. 455. F. See Note on Colos. 2.19. Ver. 26. Whose Voice then shoke the Earth, (when the Law was given, Exod. 19.18. Psalm 68.8.) but now (under this Dispensa∣tion) he hath promised (yet a farther shaking) saying, Yet once more (at the making my new Covenant) I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven, (Hag. 2.7, 8.) Ver. 27. And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of those things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain. , whose Voice.] He speaks here not of the Voice of Christ, but of the God of Israel, who at his Appearance on Sinai shook the Earth; of his Voice who made the Promise, that Christ the desire of all Nations should come. Nor can the Apostle, or the Prophet speak of Christ's second Coming, to give new Heavens and new Earth by the Con∣version of the Jewish Nation; For, 1st. This shaking was to be the Forerunner of the coming of the desire of all Nations, or contemporary with it, now he was to come to fill that very House then built with Glory, and to make the Glory of it greater than the Glory of the House built by Solomon. The Prophet must therefore speak of a shaking antecedent to the Destruction of the Temple. And therefore the Apostle, speaking of the very thing pro∣mised in the words of the Prophet Haggai, must also speak of the first Advent of our Lord. 2dly, The Prophet speaks of a shaking which was to happen after a little time, Hag. 2.7. and therefore not of an Advent of our Saviour after Two thousand Years expired, yet to come. And, 3dly, The Apostle says plainly, That Christians had then received that Kingdom which could not be shaken, to give place to another, and upon that grounds his Exhortation to them, to retain or hold fast the Grace received, ver. 28. Which shews it was not a Kingdom yet to come after One thousand seven hundred Years, but that which throughout the Gospel is stiled the Kingdom of God, and of Heaven, and is said to be then come to them, Matth. 12.28. , yet once more.] The word yet signifies that there was yet to be another sha∣king for the Introduction of another Cove∣nant, and consequently for the abolishing the first; and the word once only, that there should be no more shaking after the Intro∣duction of the second Covenant. , I shake not the Earth only, but the Heavens, Hag. 2.7.] The Ancient Jews speak of this place thus, I will give a short Glory to the Israelites, and afterward shall the Messiah come. Talm. Tr. Sanhedr. c. 11. expounding this place of the coming of the Messiah, they add, That the first Tabernacle and Temple were built and destroyed, so was the second Temple, but the Messiah should build a Temple, and God had built a Taber∣nacle and Temple in the Heavens, which should never be destroy'd. Pug. Fid. p. 304-309. Now this shaking of the Heaven and Earth being to be accomplished at the coming of the Messiah, or the desire of all Nations, cannot signifie the Removal and Subversion of the material Heavens and Earth, they being not thus shaken at Christ's coming, but this is a Metaphor frequently used in the Prophets, to signifie the Subversion of a State and Kingdom, and of the Government which obtains amongst them; as when the Pro∣phet, speaking of the Destruction of Babylon, saith, I will make the Heavens shake, and the Earth shall be removed out of its place, Isa. 13.13. See Judges 5.4. Psalm 77.18. Isa. 24.19, 20. Thus at our Lord's coming to destroy Jerusalem say some Interpreters, to destroy Antichrist as others think, the Pow∣ers of Heaven shall be shaken, Matth. 24.30. Mark 13, 25. and Luke 21.26. which im∣port of this Phrase being not understood by Esthius, he, without cause, rejecteth this In∣terpretation of the words. 2dly. This shaking being for the removal of things which were shaken, and they be∣ing not the material Earth, must signifie the things which were then introduced with the shaking of the Earth, i. e. the Covenant made, and the Worship, and Tabernacle, and other Materials then appointed to be made with Hands for God's Service, which, as the Apo∣stle, throughout this whole Epistle contends, were to be abolish'd, and to continue only till the time of Reformation, Chap. 9.10. and then to give place to that new Covenant, and Dispensation, which procured for us an Eternal Redemption, and an Entrance not in∣to the Holy Places made with Hands, but in∣to Heaven it self; and therefore it fol∣lows, Ver. 28. Wherefore we receiving (the Pro∣mise of) a Kingdom that cannot be moved,
(or shaken, to give place to another,) let us have (or retain that) Grace whereby (alone) we may serve God acceptably in Reverence and Godly Fear. .] It is the Observation of Criticks here, and elsewhere, that, , to have, is often put for , to retain, or hold fast: So, , is to hold Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Tim. 1.19. , to hold the Mystery of Faith; , to hold fast the form of sound Words, 2 Tim. 1.13.  throughout the whole New Testament, doth signifie the Favour and the Grace of God so free∣ly tendred to us in the Gospel; see Note on 2 Cor. 6.1. So that the import of these Words seems to be this, Let us continue sted∣fast in that Faith and Dispensation delivered in the Gospel, as being that alone which ren∣ders both our Persons and our Services accep∣table to God, let us not fall from the Grace of God, ver. 15. let us not cast off our Confidence, Chap. 10.35. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Hope without wavering, ver. 23. con∣tinuing to serve God with an Holy Reve∣rence. Ver. 29. For our God is (to the Disobedient and Rebellious among us, as he was to them, Deut. 4.24.9.3.) a consuming Fire. , a consuming fire.] To con∣sume thine Enemies if thou obey him, and to bring them down before thy Face, Deut. 9.3. but to consume thee, if thou forget the Cove∣nant thou hast made with him, Deut. 4.24. This hath relation to the Shechinah, or Glorious Presence of God, the sight of which was like devouring Fire, Exod. 24.17. and from which went out Fire to consume Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.2. and those Two hundred and fifty Persons which burned Incense, Numb. 16.35. and of which the Psalmist speaketh in these words, A fire burned in their Congregations; the flame burnt up the Wicked, Psalm 106.18. CHAP. XIII. Ver. 1. LET brotherly Love continue. Ver. 2. Be not forgetful to enter∣tain Strangers, for thereby some (viz. Abra∣ham, Gen. 18. and Lot, Gen. 19.) have en∣tertained Angels unawares. , Angels.] It follows not hence, say the Commentators here, that all the three Persons which appear'd to Abraham were created Angels, for one of them being styled by Abraham the Judge of all the Earth, Gen. 18.24. Jehovah, ver. 22. and Abraham pray∣ing to him with so great Humility, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak unto him, who am but Dust and Ashes, ver. 27, 31. It seems more proper with the Ancients to conceive he at least should be the Son of God, the Angel of the Covenant; for the Word of God, saith Justin Martyr, . Yet since in the Opinion of the Jews they were three An∣gels, as Ainsworth and Cartwright note up∣on the Place, the Apostle writing to them, saith no more of them. I rather think with the Reverend Bishop of Ely, that it may be granted that the three that appeared to A∣braham were created Angels; but then they appeared only as the Retinue of the Shechi∣nah, or Divine Majesty, stiled the Lord, ver. 1. and ver. 13. For after the same Men who came in, and did eat with Abraham, and rose from the Table, were departed, ver. 16. and 22. Abraham stands yet before the Lord, that is, before the Divine Majesty who appear'd to him, ver. 1. and stiles him the Judge of the whole Earth. And this a∣grees well with the Opinion of the Jews, who, as they acknowledge that the three Men whom Abraham entertained were crea∣ted Angels, so also do they own that there was then a separate Appearance, or Divine Majesty which talked with Abraham. And this takes off the Observation of Crellius and others on this Place, That the Name Jeho∣vah is given to Angels; for, according to this Interpretation, the Name Jehovah is not given to any of the Three Angels which were entertain'd by Abraham, but only to the Shechinah, or Divine Majesty which appear∣ed with them, and spake to Abraham, from Verse the 10th to the 17th, and to whom, after the departure of these three, one into Heaven, and two to Sodom, Abraham still speaks to the end of that Chapter. Ver. 3. Remember those that are in Bonds as (affectionately as if you were) bound with them, and them that suffer Adversity, as being also in the Body, (and so as being sub∣ject to the like Afflictions.) Ver. 4. Marriage is Honourable in all (Per∣sons,) and (so is) the Bed undefiled, but (or wherefore) Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge, (i. e. adjudge to Condem∣nation.) .] It is not worth disputing whether these Words should be rendred as a Precept thus, Let honourable Marriage, and the Bed undefiled obtain among all; or as our Version renders them by way of Assertion. The Observation of the Ancients upon the
place is this, That Theoph.  Oecum. Marriage is honoura∣e in all Persons, Old and Young, and in all things. , God will judge.] i. e. , he will Condemn them: So John 3.16. God sent not his Son into the World, , that he might Condemn the World. He that resisteth shall receive to himself, , Punishment, or Condemnation, Rom. 13.3. So Matth. 23.14. 1 Cor. 11.29. 1 Tim. 3.6. Jde 4. Mark 3.29. Luke 23.40. , by condemning Christ they fulfilled the Voice of the Prophets. Acts 13.27. That the Apostle here should give these Cautions against the Gnosticks among the Jews, is gratis dictum, for no Man can prove that any Gnosticks had been then among them, but they had then the Sect of theEuseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 29. Nicholai∣ts among them, mentioned Rev. 2.6, 15. who did,Iren. l. 1. c. 27. , holding Whoredom and Adultery to be things indiffe∣rent. MoreoverDial. p. 371. B. Justin Martyr saith, That where-ever they travelled they multipli∣ed to themselves Wives, , under pretence of Marriage. See Note on Rom. 2.22. On which account there was ground sufficient for this Exhortation. Note hence that Whoredom is a mortal Sin. Ver. 5. Let your Conversation be without Co∣vetousness, and be content with such things as ye have (at present), for he hath said, (Deut. 31.6. Jos. 1.5.) I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Note, Hence we learn, 1st. That we are then covetously minded when we are not content with the Things we enjoy at present, but are impatiently desirous of having more. 2dly, That what God promises to any of his Servants, may in like Circumstances be applied to them all, for this Promise which the Apostle here makes, and applies to all good Christians, was particularly made to Joshua, Chap. 1.5. Ver. 6. So that we may boldly say, (as the Psalmist doth, Psalm 56.4. The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what Man shall do unto me. Ver. 7. Remember them which have the Rule ver you, (Gr. be mindful of your Gover∣nours, or Guides,) who have spoken to you the Word of God, whose Faith follow, consi∣dering the end (or close) of their Conversa∣tion, (with what Constancy and Perseverance they continued in the Faith, and sealed it with their Blood, in hopes of that Crown of Glory Christ had promised to them that were faithful to the Death.) Ver. 8. (Even that) Jesus Christ who (both as to his Doctrine, and his Promises) is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever. i. e. Through all Times and Ages; for, asDe Sacr. Abel & Cain, p. 106. C. Philo observes, , Time con∣sists of three Parts, the past, present, and to come, and these three signifie, , all Time, or the whole compass of it; so that as the same Doctrine of Christianity must always be professed by all Christians, so the same Jesus is always ready to assist and re∣ward the sincere Professors of it. That the Apostle speaks here not of their living, but dead Guides, will appear partly from his Exhortation to remember them, the living Guides being the Objects not of their Memory, but Sense, partly from the Phrase, , who have spoken, which inti∣mates they had now left off speaking, and partly from the , the close, or period of their Conversation here on Earth, they are exhorted to look back unto; their living Bi∣shops they are commanded to obey, ver. 17. their dead Bishops to remember, ver. 7. Ver. 9. Be not carried about with divers and strange Doctrines (i. e. Doctrines divers from, and new, i. e. not taught by those Guides who spake to you the Word of God, ver. 7.) for it is good that the Heart be esta∣blished, (i. e. comforted and strengthned) with Grace, (i. e. the sense of the Divine Fa∣vour, and the Grace brought to us by the Gospel,) and not with Meats (eaten at the Jewish Festivals, and their Peace-offerings) which have not profited (to the purifying of the Conscience from Guilt, Hebr. 9.9.) them that have been occupied therein. ,] I render new Doctrines, and therefore strange to the Ears of them that hear them first, so , are new Dae∣mons, Acts 17.18. and the Apostle saith, they were not to look upon their fiery Tryal, , as if some new thing had happened to them, 1 Pet. 4.12. ,] Is an Hebrew Phrase, signifying to comfort, strengthen, and refresh the Heart. So Gen. 18.5. I will fetch a mor∣sel of Bread, , and comfort their Hearts, Judges 19.5, 8. , comfort thy Heart with a morsel of Bread, of which the Psalmist saith, That, , it strengthens Man's Heart, Psal. 104.15. whence it is often stiled, , Psalm 105.16. Ezek. 4.16.5.16.14.13. the Staff of Bread. The Grace here mention'd, is, say the An∣cients, , the Doctrine of the Gospel, or of the Grace of God tender'd
in it. The Meats here mentioned, are the Meats eaten in the Jewish Festivals, New Moons, and Sabbaths, Col. 2.16. or their Peace-Offerings and Oblations, stiled, , Meats, Hebr. 9.10. which Feasts some Jewish Zealots would have observed with the Christian Festivals, viz. their Passoever and Pentecost, 1 Cor. 11. and in the same riotous Manner, ver. 21. And these Sacri∣fices or Peace Offerings they would have still retain'd, perhaps as being not Sacrifices for Sin, but Free-Will Offerings, and only Sa∣crifices of Praise, so that the import of these Words is this, 'Tis good the Soul, or Heart, be established, refreshed, and comforted not with Meats eaten in the Jewish Festivals, or at their Eucharistical Oblations, which profit or avail nothing to the Peace and Quiet of the Conscience, but with the Divine Favour, and that Gospel Grace by which Justification and Remission of Sins is obtained through the Blood of Jesus, of which they cannot be partakers who still cleave to the legal Obser∣vations. For, Ver. 10. We (Christians) have (a Sacrifice upon) an Altar, (that of the Cross) of which they have no right to eat (or to partake) who serve Tabernacles, (i. e. cleave still to the Worship appointed for the Jewish Taber∣nacle.) , an Altar.] That the Altar here signifies the Sacrifice offer'd up upon the Altar, is plain from this, that of this Altar they were to eat: So they that ate of the Jewish Sacrifices, are said to be, , partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 10.18. i. e. of the Things offered at the Altar, and then it must import the Body of our Lord offered and broken on the Cross, by partaking the Memorials of which Body, we testifie our Communion with Christ, and his Church, ibid. ver. 16, 17. and of this, saith the Apostle, they have no Right to partake, who adhere still to the Mosaical Ob∣lations. Ver. 11. (The Truth of this they may learn from their own Institutions concerning Sacrifices,) For the Bodies of those Beasts, whose Blood was brought into the Sanctuary for (a) Sin (offering,) are (by the Law of Moses not to be eaten, but) burnt without the Camp, (Exod. 29.14. Lev. 4.21.6.30.16.27. .] That  signifies a Sacrifice for Sin, or a Sin-Offering, see Note on 2 Cor. 5. ult. Ver. 12. Wherefore Jesus also (our Sin-Offering, the Person typified by theirs offer∣ed on the great Day of Expiation, Lev. 16.) that he might Sanctifie the People with his own Blood, (carried into the Heavenly Sanctuary) suffered without the Gate. (He therefore thus answering the Type of that Sin-Offer∣ing, of which neither Priest nor People were to eat; they who do still adhere to the legal Institutions, are by that Law excluded from partaking of this Sacrifice.) Without the Gate.] That Sin-Offering which was carried without the Camp, whilst they were in the Wilderness, when the Tem∣ple was seated at Jerusalem, was carried without the Gate of the City. Maimon. de Rat. Sacrif. Faciend. cap. 7. §. 4. Ainsw. in Lev. 6.30. And this is the reason of the Va∣riation of the Phrase here. Ver. 13. Let us therefore go forth to him without the Camp, (the Terrestrial Jerusalem, the Jewish Church and Service,) bearing his Reproach. His Reproach.] i. e. his Cross and Suffer∣ings, which the persecuting Jews inflict up∣on his Followers, as they did upon him, persecuting them even to strange Cities, Acts 26.11. and from City to City. Ver. 14. For here we (especially who are thus Persecuted) have no abiding City, but we seek one to come, (even the City of the li∣ving God, Chap. 12.22.) Ver. 15. By him therefore (our High Priest) let us offer the (Christian) Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that is (in the Language of the Prophet Hosea, 14.2.) the Fruit of our Lips, giving Thanks to his Name. , The Sacrifice of Praise.] The Jews say that, in saeculo futuro, in the Age to come, (which often signifies the Age of the MessiahPug. Fid. part. 3. dist. 3. c. 12. §. 14, 15, 16, 17. All Oblations shall cease, but the Oblation of Thanksgiving, which shall never cease; and that Praise is more acceptable to God than all Sacrifices; which they prove from those Words of the Psalmist, I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, because they were not always before me: offer unto God Thanksgiving, Psalm 50.23. He that offers Praise honoureth me. And the Greek Com∣mentators observe, That the Sacrifices God now requires are unbloody Sacrifices, to wit, those of Praise and Thanksgiving, and imi∣tation of Christ. So Chrysostom, and Oecu∣menius. , the Calves of our Lips, Hos. 14.2.] So the JewsPug. Fid. ibid. §. 20. themselves in∣terpret these Words, what shall we render for the Calves of our Lips, and the Scape-Goat that was sent out into the Wilder∣ness, , i. e. the Praises and Thanksgivings of our Lips. Dr. Pocock notes, That  is here taken for , which in the Septuagint signifies an Holo∣caust, which being usually of young Bullocks, corresponds to the Calves of our Lips, in Hebrew.
Ver. 16. But (and for the other Christian Sacrifices, those of Alms) to do good and com∣municate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is (still) pleased. Ver. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, (your Bishops and Pastors, ver. 24.) and submit your selves (to their Godly Ad∣monitions,) for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account (to God for them,) that they may do it with joy (in the presence of Christ, that they have gained you to him, and built you up in your Faith, 1 Thes. 2.19.) and not with sorrow, (that they could not prevail upon you to live suitably to their good Instructions,) for that is unprofitable for you, (and pernicious to you.) .] , he speaks of Bishops, say Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and Theophylact:Epist. ad Roman. §. 1. Clemens Romanus places them before the Presbyters, saying, , ye walked in the Laws of God, being subject to your Guides, or Rulers, and giving convenient Honour to your Presbyters, or Elders. , with joy.] That is, say others, that they may go on with their Work joy∣fully, which they can only execute with Trou∣ble and Sadness, when they find you refracto∣ry to their Admonitions; but those words, That they may do it, seem plainly to relate to the account they must give up hereafter to God. Ver. 18. Pray for us (for our Freedom and Success in Preaching the Gospel, Ephes. 6.19. Col. 4.3. and our Deliverance from the Ene∣mies of the Faith, 1 Thes. 3.1, 2.) for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all things being willing to live honestly. .] In all Times, Circumstances, Things and Places. Here is the true Test of an upright Conscience, that in all Times, Things and Cases, it renders us industrious to walk exactly according to the Rules of Righteousness. Ver. 19. But I beseech you the rather to do this (now,) that I may be restored to you the sooner. Ver. 20. Now the God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through (with) the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, (to be offer'd by him in the Heavenly Sanctua∣ry.) These words seem to express all the three Offices of our Great Mediator, which are the Foundations of all our Prayers and Praises directed to God, and of all the Blessings we receive, or expect from him; his Prophetick Office, in that he is stiled the grea Shep∣herd of the Sheep; His Priestly Office, in that he is said to be brought again from the dead with the Blood of the everlasting Cove∣nant; and his Kingly Office, in that he is stiled our Lord Jesus. Ver. 21. Make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you (by his Grace given to, and his Spirit residing in you) that which is well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen. , make you perfect.] Here is the Duty of every good Christian, to be ready for every good Work, Tit. 3.1. doing the Will of God from the Heart, Ephes. 6.6. , working in you, &c.] Here is the Power by which we are enabled so to do, and moved to the performance of our Duty, viz. the Grace of God teaching us, de∣nying all Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, to live Righteously, Soberly, and Godly in this present World, and the expectation of the blessed Hope and glorious Appearance of our Lord to reward our Services, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. The Love of God the Father in giving up his Son to the Death for us, and of Jesus Christ who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purifie to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works, ver. 14. And who died for all, that they who live might not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, 2 Cor. 5.15. And, lastly, the inward As∣sistances of the Holy Spirit, bringing these things to our remembrance, exciting us to the performance of our Duty, strengthning us against our Temptations, and comforting and supporting us under our Sufferings. .] Here Schlictingius saith, That he who is a Christian cannot be ignorant that Glory for ever and ever, is to be ascribed to Christ, as well as to the Father, as it is Rev. 5.12, 13. and 2 Pet. 3.18. And how then can he be ignorant that Christ is to be owned as the true God? This being the Doxology ascribed in the New Testa∣ment to him, of whom, and by whom, and to whom are all things, Rom. 11.36. to God the Father, Gal. 1.5. to the Omnipotent God, Ephes. 3.20, 21. to him who dwelleth in light inaccessible, 2 Tim. 4.15, 16. to the God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10, 11. to the only wise God our Saviour, Jude 25. InSect. 33, 38, 43, 45, 50. & 29. St. Clemens it is frequently ascribed, , to Almighty God, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen, as a Character peculiarly belonging to him. And in theIn Gen. 49.2. Exod. 15.18. Deut. 3.2.6.4. Jerusa∣lem Targum this is the frequent Appendix to the mention of the Great God, Let his Name
be Blessed (i. e. Glorified) for ever and ever, Amen. So that both in the Opinion of Jews and Christians, this was a Doxology proper to the True God. Ver. 22. And I beseech you, Brethren, suf∣fer the word of Exhortation (to perseverance with Patience in the Christian Faith,) for I have written a Letter to you (of this Subject) in (as) few words (as the importance of the Matter, and my Affection to you would per∣mit.) Ver. 23. Know ye that our Brother Timothy (see the Preface) is set at Liberty, with whom, if he comes (hither again) shortly I will (God willing) see you. Ver. 24. Salute all them that have the Rule over you, and all the Saints: they of Italy sa∣lute you. , that have the Rule over you.] Hence it seems evident that this Epistle was not sent to tht Bishops, or Rulers of the Church, but to the whole Church, or to the Laity. Ver. 25. Grace be with you all. Amen.
ANNOTATIONS ON THE Seven Catholick Epistles. The General PREFACE. OF these Epistles in the General I have only this to Note, that from the Fourth Century they have both obtained the Name of Catholick Epistles, and also have been ranked in the same Order in which they now stand in our Bibles, viz. by the Council of. Concil. Laod. Can. 59. Laodicea, by. Cyril. Hier. Ca∣tech. 4. p. 38. Cyril of Jerusalem, by. Festiv. Ep. Athanasius, and. In Jamb. apud Bals. , p. 1082. Vide ibid. Greg. Nazianzen; byAmph. . p. 1084. Amphi∣lochius, and by others. Only it is not easie to assign the Reason why they in a particular manner were so called, it could not be because they were, passim recep∣tae ab omnibus, & ubique; generally received by all; for we learn from the Testimonies ofApud. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 25. p. 227. . Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 23. de Petri Ep. 2. Origen,Vide Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3. & de Joannis secunda & tertia, c. 24. p. 96. Eusebius,Amphiloch. ibid. Amphilochius, andHieron. Catal. St. Jerom, That the Ancients doubt∣ed of Four of the Seven, or Five of them. Oecumenius, and others, say, they were so stiled, because they were written not to one Nation, as were generally those of St. Paul, , but generally to the Faithful, or to the Jews of the dispersion. Which last expression seems to hint the true reason of the Name, viz. because, excepting the two brief Epistles of St. John, they were written to the Jews dis∣persed throughout the World. Which though it be true also of the Epistle to the Hebrews, yet hath that no Inscription, and for a long time was also questioned, nor was it written to the dispersed Jews, but to the Inhabitants of Judea, Chap. 13. and upon these accounts might not come into the number.
THE PREFACE TO THE General Epistle of St. JAMES. §. 1. THAT the Author of this Epi∣stle was an Apostle, hath been proved, Note on ver. 1. whence it must follow, that he could not be James the Son of Zebedee, because that James was slain by Herod, A. D. 44. Twen∣ty-eight Years before the Destruction of Jeru∣salem, which yet was nigh at hand, and even at the Door when this Epistle was endited. See Note on Chap. 5.8, 9. Nor could he be James the Just, Bishop of Jerusalem, for he was no Apostle, if he was not the same Person with James the Less. It seemeth therefore that he was James the Son of Alphaeus, Apostle, and Brother of our Lord, stiled James the Less, in distinction from James the Son of Zebedee, stiled the Greater, by reason of his Age. For that the James mentioned by St. Paul, Gal. 1.19. was an Apostle in the strict Accepta∣tion of the Word, is evident from this, that having spoken of St. Peter, who doubtless was an Apostle in that sense, he adds, Others of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's Brother; and Chap. 2.6. he reckons him with Peter and John among the , or the chief Pillars of the Church, and to me he seems to be the same with James the Bishop of Jerusalem. For, 1st. Of this James the Bishop of Jerusalem, who was stiled the Just,Jacobus qui appellatur Frater Domini, cognomento Justus, ut nonnulli existimant Joseph ex alia Ʋxore, ut autem mihi videtur Mariae sororis Matris Domini cujus Joannes in libro suo meminit, Filius, post passionem Domini ab Apostlis Hier∣solymorum Episcopus ordinatus, unam tantum scripsit Epistolam, quae de septem Catholicis est. Verbo Jacobus. St. Jerom saith, That he was the Son of Mary, the Sister of the Mo∣ther of our Lord, of whom St. John makes men∣tion, Chap. 19.29. where she is stiled the Wife of Cleophas, or Alphaeus; and by St. Mark, Chap. 15.40. the Mother of James the Less. 2dly, It seems highly probable, that the James mentioned Acts 15. was strictly an A∣postle; for Paul and Barnabas were sent up to the Apostles and Elders, ver. 2. they were received by the Apostles and Elders, ver. 4. the Apostles and Elders were gathered toge∣ther to decide the Question touching the Cir∣cumcision of the Gentiles, ver. 6. The first Person that speaks to it is Peter the Apostle, the second James, who having determined, the Question, it seemed good to the Apostles and Brethren to send Letters to the Churches, ver. 22. And these they send with this In∣scription, The Apostles, Elders and Brethren. In all which places it is evident, that the word Apostles must be taken in the proper sense, they being still distinguished from all the El∣ders or Bishops which were not Apostles; nor can it be thought reasonable that St. James here should be ranked among the Elders or the Inferiour sort of the Clergy, it remains then that he was in the strict sense an Apostle. There being therefore no other of that Name then living, but James the Son of Alphaeus, who also was the Brother of our Lord, i. e. his Mother's Sister's Son, (i. e. his Cousin) he, in all likelihood, must be the Bishop of Je∣rusalem. 3dly, The Story of Three that were cal∣led James, viz. James the Great, James the Less, and James Bishop of Jerusalem, is, saithLife of James the Less, p. 144. Dr. Cave, a great mistake, and built up∣on a sandy bottom; For besides, that the Scripture mentions no more than two of this Name, and both Apostles, nothing can be plainer than that St. James the Apostle, whom St. Paul calls the Brother of our Lord, was the same that presided among the Apostles, and determined in the Synod at Jerusalem. Nor do either. Clem. apud Euseb. l. 2. c. 1. p. 38. Clemens Alexandrinus, or Eusebius out of him, mention any more than
two, St. James put to death by Herod, and St. James the Just, Bishop of Jerusalem, whom they expresly affirm to be the same with him whom St. Paul calls the Brother of our Lord. Once indeed Eusebius makes our St. James one of the Seventy, though else∣where quoting a place ofHist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 12. p. 31. l. 2. c. 1. p. 38. Clemens of Ale∣xandria, he numbers him with the chief of the Apostles, and expresly distinguishes him from the Seventy Disciples. And thoughComment. on Es. 17. f. 60. St. Jerom, when he represents the Opinion of others, sties him the 13th Apostle, yet elsewhere, when speaking his own Sense, he sufficient∣ly proves that there were but two,Adv. Helvid. f. 8. B. C. James the Son of Zebedee, and the other the Son of Alphaeus, the one sirnamed the Greater, the other the Less; and he frequenly stiles the Author of this Epistle writ to the Twelve Tribes, James the Apostle: Besides, saith he, the main support of the other Opinion is built upon the Authority of Clemens his Recogni∣tions, a Book, in doubtful Cases, of no Esteem and Value. §. 2. And having thus shew'd that James the Apostle, and, Brother of our Lord, was the Author of this Epistle, we cannot reason∣ably doubt the Authority of it; especially if we consider that it is cited byEp. Epiph. ad Joh. Hieros. f. 57. in l. 58. C. Adv. Pelag. l. 1. f. 96. c. 2. f. 101. E. 13. C. Clemens Romanus four several times, and bySect. 10, 12, 17, 30. Ig∣natius in his Genuine Epistle to the Ephesians, bySect. 5. Origen in his Thirteenth Homily upon Genesis.Lib. 2. c. 22. l. 3. c. 25. Eusebius saith it was known to most, and publickly read in most Christian Churches;Verb. Jacob. St. Jerom, that in process of Time it obtained Authority.Esthius in Epist. Jacob. Esthius tes, That they who before doubted of it, in the Fourth Century embraced the Opinion of them who received it, and that from thence no Church, no Ecclesiastical Writer is found who ever doubted of it, but on the contrary all the Catalogues of the Books of Holy Scri∣pture publish'd by General or Provincial Councils, Roman Bishops, or other Ortho∣dox Writers, number it among Canonical Scriptures; quae probatio ad certam fidem faciendam cuique Catholico sufficere debet, which Proof must give sufficient certainty of it to any Catholick. As for the seeming Con∣tradiction of this Epistle, to the Doctrine of St. Paul in the matter of Justification by Faith, see it sufficiently cleared in the Close of the Annotations on the Second Chapter. §. 3. 4thly, That this Epistle was directed to the Twelve Tribes which were scattered abroad, the Words of this Epistle shew; but whether the Twelve Tribes import only those of them which returned into Judea, or those of them also who were carried away by the Assyrians, and never return'd to their own Nation, so as to make any more a distinct People, or a Body Politick under their own Governours, is uncertain: That God had abso∣lutely determined, that the Ten Tribes should never more return to such a State, the Pro∣phet Hosea in many places doth inform us, as when God by him saith, I will no more have Mercy on the House of Israel, but I will ut∣terly take them away, Chap. 1.6. That they should be among the Gentiles as a Vessel where∣in is no pleasure, Chap. 8.8. That they should not dwell in the Lord's Land, Chap. 9.3. And again, I will drive them out of my House, I will love them no more: My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken to him, and they shall be Wanderers among the Nations, ver. 15, 17. And yet that God designed not to exclude them from the Blessings promised in the Days of the Messiah, or from being called into the Church of Christ, is as evident from many Expressions, and gracious Promises of God re∣corded in that Prophet concerning the same Tribes of Israel; as, v. g. That the number of the Children of Israel shall be as the Sand of the Sea which cannot be measured, nor numbred: And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my People, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the Sons of the living God, Chap. 1.10, 11, &c. And again, I will be∣troth thee unto me for ever, yea I will be∣troth thee unto me in Righteousness and Judg∣ment, and in loving Kindness, and in Mer∣cies; I will even betroth thee unto me in Faithfulness, and thou shalt know the Lord, Chap. 2.19, 20. I will have Mercy on her which had not obtained Mercy, and I will say to them which were not my People, Thou art my People, and they shall say, Thou art my God, ver. 23. And again, Afterwards shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his Goodness in the latter days, Chap. 3.5. See Chap. 14.4, 8. Now these Prophecies being not to be fulfilled upon them, by bringing them into their own Land, it seemeth reasonable to conceive they might be fulfilled by calling them to embrace the Gospel, and that by doing so were those words fulfilled, I will call them my People who were not my People, not only towards the Gentiles, Rom. 9.24, 25, 26. but also to∣wards those Israelites of whom they primarily were spoken, 1 Pet. 2.10. And to this the
Inscription seems to lead us, it being, , to the Twelve Tribes, to those who are in the Dispersion. That the Places whither these Ten Tribes were carried by the Assyrians were well known to the other Jews, see proved by Dr. Light∣foot, that in Mesopotamia, Media, and Ba∣bylon, where they were placed, the Jews a∣bounded in a very great measure.Antiq. l. 18. c. 16. Jose∣phus testifies, they had there three Famous Universities, Neerda, Sorana, and Pombe∣ditha. We therefore have great reason to be∣lieve the Gospel was then Preached among them by the Apostles of the Circumcision. See the Preface to the First Epistle of St. John. There is one farther Observation taken no∣tice of by Grotius and Dr. Hammond, That some part of this Epistle seems to be directed not only to Believers, but even to the unbe∣lieving Jews, especially the six first Verses of the Fifth Chapter, where he saith, Ye have killed the Just, and he doth not resist you; which cannot well agree to the Converted Jews, to whom he seems to turn his Speech in these following Words, Be patient therefore, Bre∣thren, ver. 7. Yea, the whole Third and Fourth Chapters may be equally directed to both, the name of Brethren suiting to both, when used by a Jew writing to them, Rom. 9.2. §. 4. As for the Occasion of the Epistle, it seemeth to be written upon two Accounts, 1st. To Correct the pernicious Errours both in Doctrine and Manners, which had crept in∣to the Theology of the Jews, and had an evil Influence on their Practice. See Note on Chap. 2. v. 11. and v. 14. to the end of the Chapter. 2dly. To Comfort and Establish the sincere Believers under the pressures which they then suffered, or were shortly to expect from the Unbelieving Jews, or their false Brethren. Where note, 1. That though the Jews, from the begin∣ning of the Apostles Preaching, were still in∣censed against the Christians, yet seeing Chri∣stianity, whilst they continued Preaching to the Jews, did not spread much among other Nations, and since the Jews were under re∣straints in the Time of Caius, who had no good Affection to them, they could not proceed far in shewing their Hatred to the Christian Faith. What Persecutions therefore happened in those early Times, concern'd only the Churches of Judaea, or thereabouts, or spent themselves on the chief Leaders and Asserters of the Chri∣stian Faith, St. Stephen, St. James, St. Peter, and St. Paul, or on the Churches converted from the Jewish Synagogues, and reach'd no farther than the Places where they were con∣verted; and though they were begun by Insti∣gation of the Jews, yet were they chiefly ma∣naged by the Heathen Powers, or by their own Country-men. For about the 39th Year of Christ, then had the Churches Peace through∣out all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, Acts 9.31. and so they seem to have continued till after the Council of Jerusalem, the Churches being then established in the Faith, and en∣creasing in number daily, Acts 16.5. Yea, when Paul comes to Rome he receives all that came unto him for two whole Years, preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching the things which concerned the Lord Jesus Christ with all confidence, no Man forbidding him, Acts 28.30, 31. So that at least till the Fourth or Fifth Year of Nero, the Gospel was freely preach'd at Rome without any Contradiction either of the Romans or the Jews. But then in his Sixth Year, afflicti suppliciis Christiani, the Christians were subjected to Punishment by him, saithIn Neron. c. 16. Suetonius; and it seems very probable, saith Dr. Lightfoot, that even then Nero had by some Act or Edict suppressed Christianity, not only at Rome, but also at Judea, as he gathers from that Clause in Ta∣citus, Repressaque in praesens exitiabilis su∣perstitio, rursus erumpebat non modo per Ju∣daeam originem ejus mali, sed per urbem etiam, which shews that before the Persecu∣tion began, in the Tenth of Nero, of which Tacitus there speaks, Christianity had been by him suppressed not at Rome only, but Judea. Here then I place St. Peter's , burning for Tryal, which forwarded the Defection which was so general in the Churches of the Jews that had received the Gospel, they falling to Moses again, or join∣ing the Adhesion to the Law with the Profes∣sion of the Gospel, that so they might retain their Liberty, the Religion of the Jews not be∣ing at all suppressed by him, and that they might escape the Rage of the Jews, who doubt∣less, by his Example, would be induced to ex∣press that Hatred they had still born against the Christians. The same Nero in his Tenth Year renews this Persecution of the Christians, and this he did, saithNam primus Romae Christianos suppliciis & mr∣tibus affecit, ac per omnes Provincias pari persecutione excruciari imperavit. Lib. 7. c. 7. Orosius, not only at Rome, but by his Edict through all the Provinces of his Empire; and this encourag'd the Jews every where to shew their utmost Rage against all those of their Religion, whe∣ther Jews or Proselytes, who had embrac'd the Faith of Christ sincerely; and the more they drew nigh to their final Desolation, the more did Satan inhance their Fury against these Christians, whom he found the fatal Ene∣mies and Overthrowers of his Kingdom.
§. 5. Note, lastly, That whereas Mr. le Clerk saith, Note on Chap. 5.3. That St. James doth not speak here to the Jews who had embrac'd the Faith in Palestine, but to those who were scattered abroad, seeing he speaks to the whole Twelve Tribes, I doubt not but those of Palestine must be included; but when be adds, that those Jews only who lived in Palestine, and the neighbouring Countries, and had risen up in Arms against the Romans, were destroyed by them, suggesting that the Jews, dispersed throughout the other Parts of the Roman Empire, received no harm; this is a great mistake; for these being the Days of Vengeance upon the Unbelievers of that Na∣tion, God's severe Judgments reached them every where, as we may fully learn from the reful AccountLib. 7. c. 36. p. 995. A. c. 37. c. 38. p. 996. Josephus gives us of their Calamities throughout all their Dispersions; for, saith he, when the Romans had no Ene∣mies left in Judea, the danger reach'd, , to many of them li∣ving the remotest from it, for many of them perished at Alexandria, and Cyrene, and in other Cities of Egypt, and throughout all Syria. And Eliazer inCap. 34. p. 992. Josephus having reckon'd up many places where they were cru∣elly slaughter'd, concludes thus, , 'twould be too long to speak of all these Places in particular. We know fromHist. l. 5. ab initio; Tacitus and others, that the Jews were a Nation generally hated by all about them, and by those among whom they ed, partly because they used, Ritus con∣trarios caeteris mortalibus, Rites contrary to all other Nations; and spake, and thought Contemptuously of their Deities and Worship; partly because they bore, adversus omnes alios hostile odium, the greatest Hatred to Men of other Nations, and shewed the greatest Con∣tempt of them, calling them Dogs, and think∣ing it unlawful to converse with them, and a Pollution even to touch them. All Nations therefore where they lived must, upon all Oc∣casions, be ready to rise up against them, as we may learn from the Slaughter of them inDe Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 30. p. 813, 814. c. 41. p. 822. Caesarea, Damascus, Scythopolis, and throughout all the Cities of Syria about the be∣ginning of the War, of which Josephus gives us the Account. When therefore the Romans were very much incensed against them, be∣cause when other Nations had submitted to their Empire, soli Judaei non cessissent, they dared to Rebel, must they not be sure to suf∣fer in every Province where they dwelt, not only from the Roman Governours, but also from those People in every Nation who bore so great Hatred to them. And hence. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 5. Eu∣sebius informs us, That they did thus suffer in all other Places. 2dly,Proem. de Bello. Jud. Josephus doth confess that the Jews in Judea did expect, , that all of their own Nation, even beyond Euphrates, should be assistant to them in this War; and doubt∣less they were not wholly disappointed in their Expectation, for in their War commenced un∣der Hadrian,. In vita Adrian. p. 263. Dion expresly says, That the Jews out of all Nations came to their help. We therefore reasonably may conceive this also was so in the former War under Vespasian and Titus, and then we cannot doubt that they who shared in the War, must also bear a share in the Calamities it brought upon that Nation in those Days of Vengeance which befel them for their Infidelity, and the Re∣jection of the true Messiah, of which the Jews who lived in other Nations, were as guilty as those who lived in Judea. §. 6. And hence also I return an Answer to an Objection which I foresee may be made against my Interpretation of some Passages in the Fourth and Fifth Chapters of this Epistle, viz. that I restrain them to what was done to and by the Jews in Judea; whereas this Epi∣stle is written to the Twelve Tribes which were scattered abroad, ver. 1. For, 1st. As all the Jews of the Dispersion were under the Government of the Sanhe∣drim, and after of the Patriarch of the Jews residing in Judea, and obey'd his Pleasure; so many, both of Jews and Proselytes, went up out of all Nations to their Feasts, when the Holy Ghost fell down on the Apostles at the day of Pentecost we find them there, Acts 2. and when Jerusalem was besieged at theirEuseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 5. Paschal Feast; and so, even upon that ac∣count, they must be somewhat concern'd in what was done and suffer'd in Judea; and if they sided with them in that War, as I have shew'd it probable they did, they must be more concern'd in these Matters. But, 2dly, Josephus tells us that they had Wars about the same time in many Places of their Dispersions with the Gentiles; that when the Alexandrians, in the Reign of Nero, had im∣peach'd Three of their Brethren as Enemies and Spies,De Bello. Jud. l. 2. c. 36. , all the Jews there rose up to their Aid; and that Tiberius Alexander, the Governour of the City, commanded the Roman Legions to slay
them, , and to seize upon their Goods, and burn their Houses, which they did, killing Fifty thousand of them on the spot. That the Jews invading the Cities and Villages of Sy∣ria, the Syrians fell upon them in all their Cities, and were especially moved thereunto by Covetousness, , for they fell boldly upon the Substance of the Slain: And in these and all the other Places mentioned by Josephus, the Jews were as forward to take up Arms a∣gainst the Gentiles, as they were to suppress the Jews. Here then is a sufficient Account of their Wars and Tumults mention'd Chapter the Fourth, and of their Riches being Cor∣rupted, and their Flesh eaten by Fire, Chap∣ter the Fifth.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE General Epistle of St. JAMES. CHAP. I. Ver. 1. JAMES a Servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ (sendeth) to the twelve Tribes which are scat∣tered abroad, Greeting. James.] That this was James an Apostle, is confirm'd from the Testimony ofEccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 23. Euse∣bius, who declares of that James to whom the Ancients ascribed this Epistle, that he was the Brother of the Lord. The same we learn from the Syriack, Arabick, Vulgar, and Ethi∣pick Versions, by all which he is stiled James the Apostle. , to the twelve Tribes.] That some of the ten Tribes remained in, and some of them returned to the Land of Israel, we are assured from the Cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even unto Nep∣thali, purg'd by Josiah from their Idols; 2 Chr. 34.6. from the Money sent in to repair the House of the Lord, from Manasseh, Ephraim, and the Remnant of Israel; ver. 9. from the mention made of the Children of Israel that were come again out of the Captivity, Esdr. 6.21. and the Sin-offering made by Ezra at the Dedication of the Temple of twelve Goats according to the number of the Tribes of Is∣rael ver. 17. and from these following words, Ch 3.55. The children of those which had be arried away, which were come out of the , offer'd twelve Goats for a Sin-offer∣  nd lastly, from the mention of the  Tribes by the Apostle Paul, who in∣ ly served God day and night, Act. 26.7. , which are scattered abroad) That the Jews were dispersed throughout the World, we learn from the words of Agrippa in his Oration to them; who tells them, That. Jos. de Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 20. p. 808. G. there was not a Nation upon Earth where some part of them were not seated: and, That if they of Judea should Rebel, all of them that resided in other places would be destroyed, and every City would be filled with the blood of them. From the words of Strabo cited by. Antiq. l. 14. c. 12. Josephus, that it was not easie to find an eminent place in the whole World where the Jews did not reside. From Philo in his Ora∣tion against Flaccus, where he makes mention P. 752. F. of the Jews dispersed throughout all the World; adding, that one Region could not contain the Jews, but, Ibid. E. . Ad Cajum, p. 791. F. they dwelt in most of the flourishing Cities in Asia, and in Europe, in the Islands and in the Continents, not much less in number than the Inhabitants; And introducingIbid. p. 798. C. Agrippa interceding to Cajus for them as in∣habiting in the most celebrated Parts of Afri∣ca, Asia, and Europe. And even Cicero, in his Oration for another Flaccus, declares thatCum aurum Judaeorum nomine quotannis ex Italia, & ex omnibus vestris provinciis exportari silcret. Orat. 24. n. 52. p. 367. the Gold which the Jews sent to their Temple at Jerusalem was sent from Italy and all the other Provinces of the Roman Empire. Ver. 2. My Brethren, count it (matter not of Sorrow, but of) all Joy when (through the Divine Permission) ye fall into divers Temp∣tations (i. e. Afflictions from the World.) , into divers Temptations.] Temptations, saith OEcumenius, are of two Kinds; 1. Such as lead to Sin, which the
Lusts of the Flesh, and the Love of Riches, produce in us, 1 Tim. 6.9. against which our Lord instructs us to pray that we enter not in∣to them, and of these the Apostle begins to discourse ver. 13. Or such as are sent for the Trial of our Constancy, and Sincerity in the Faith: and to our Patience and Perseverance under them is promised a great Reward in Heaven. And of these the Apostle speaketh here, and ver. 12. See Luke 22.28. Hebr. 4.15. Ver. 3. Knowing this, that (this outward Trouble sent for) the Trial of your Faith (by the help of God's over-ruling Grace, and the Aid of his Holy Spirit then especially re∣siding on you, 1 Pet. 4.14.) worketh (in you) Patience. , the trial of our Faith] Being at∣tended with these Assistances and Consolations of the Holy Ghost, and these firm Hopes of a most glorious Reward of all our Sufferings, tends naturally to make us bear them patient∣ly; as the Apostle speaketh here. But then it is as true, that , Rom. 5.4. i. e. that this Patience worketh the Trial, and by that, in good Christians, the Experience of their Sincerity, and Constancy in the Faith: and therefore it concerns you not to faint under these Tribulations. Ver. 4. But (to) let Patience have its per∣fect work (in you) that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing (to make you perfect in Christ Jesus, and entire as to all Christian Graces.) , that you may be perfect and entire.] For where there is this perfect work of Pati∣ence, there must be a strong Faith as the foun∣dation of it, a steddy Virtue or Christian For∣titude, enabling us thus to sustain these firy Trials; an exact Knowledge of our Duty, to bear these Afflictions, with a meek and quiet Spirit, with Forgiveness of, Love to, and Prayer for them that persecute us, which in∣cludes the height of Charity under the high∣est Provocations; a great Love to God for whose sake we suffer, and a strong Affection to his Service; a greater Fear of his Displea∣sure, than of the Wrath of Man; an entire Trust and Dependance on him, and a full Resignation to his Will of Providence, in which consists the Life of Godliness; an ex∣act Temperance as to the Honours, Pleasures, and temporal Concernments of this present Life we lose by these our Sufferings; and a true Charity to our Christian Brethren, for whose Example and Encouragement we do thus suffer. Now these are all the Graces which the Apo∣stle Peter doth require to make us fruitful and perfect Christians, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. ver. 5. ( and) if any of you lack Wisdo (how to exercise and preserve this Patienc under the various Temptations he may be sub¦ject to) let him ask it of (that) God who gi¦veth liberally (whatsoever he sees needful fo us) and upbraideth (us) not (for want of thi Wisdom) and (if he duly ask) it shall b given him. , it shall be given.] Hence it ap∣pears, that this Wisdom depends not on ou own Skill or Strength; nor can it be obtain∣ed without divine Assistance. Ver. 6. But (then) let him (take care to) ask in Faith, nothing wavering, for he that wavereth (in the time of Temptation) is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind, and tossed (to and fro by every Temptation.) Ver. 7. For let not (, let not then) that man think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Ver. 8. (For) a double-minded man is unstable in all his ways (and therefore cannot pray in Faith, as he that would be heard must do.) .] What is the , the double-minded and the wavering Man, we may learn from Hermas, who informs us, that Vi∣sions and Revelations are Lib. 1. Vis. 3. §. 4. for the double-minded, i. e. , that is, for them who reason in their hearts whether these things will be, or not. And again,Vis. 4. §. 2. Credite Deo qui estis dubii, Believe in God you that are doubtful, for he can do all things. Woe to the doubtful, who have heard these things, and contemned them. And again. They that doubt of God, they are the double-minded, who shall receive none of their Requests. See the whole Mandate to the same effect. And from that ofSect. 19. Barnabas touching him that walketh in the way of Light, that , he will not be doubtful whether a thing will be so or not, from the like Precept of theLib. 7. c. 11. Apostolical Constitutions, , be not doubtful in thy Prayer whether thy Pe∣tition will be heard or not; and fromEp. ad Cor. §. 11. El. 23. St. Clement, with whom  the doubtful, are , the Dis∣trusters of the Power of God. This Faith therefore relates to Prayer, and is a firm Be∣lief that God will afford to his sincere Ser∣vants, under all their Sufferings for his s such Aid as will enable them to bear  with true Christian Patience, 1 Cor. 10 and such Wisdom as will direct them to  prove these Sufferings to his Glory and tir Good. He that doubts of this, will be no  hoping, and anon desponding, apt to quit his Dependance on God, and lean on his own
Wisdom, and ready to cast off that Religion which subjects him to these Temptations from which he expects no good issue; and therefore wanting that Faith in God which is here, made the Condition of an acceptable Prayer, &c. he cannot hope to obtain any thing of him. Ver. 9. (And if Temptations be matter of the Christians joy) Let the Brother of low de∣gree (impoverish'd by them) rejoyce (still) in that he is exalted (to be rich in Faith, and an Heir of the Kingdom of God, Chap. 2.5. Luke 6.20.) , the man of low degree] in the Old Testament is the poor and afflicted Man. So  is in the Septuagint  the poor, the afflicted, , Pover∣ty, or Lowness of State: and the sense here is confirmed from the opposition of the Rich to him. Ver. 10. But let the Rich rejoyce in that he is made low, for as the flower of the Grass he shall pass away; (Gr. For as the flower of the Grass shall pass away when it is scorched with the Sun.) Ver. 11. (For the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the Grass, and the Grace of the fashion of it perisheth,) so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways. , the Rich.] Let God, saithDe victimas offerent. p. 661. E. F. Philo, be the matter of thy chief Joy, not Rich∣es, Honour, Strength, or Beauty, these being  things which wither before they are fully grown up. Let then the Christian consider, that the things he loseth for the sake of Christ are only things of such a fading nature, whereas he doth se∣cure by his Perseverance an everlasting Trea∣sure reserved for him in the Heavens; and then he may rejoyce in his Humiliation. Note also an Ellipsis of the Verb  let him re∣joyce, ver. 10. to be taken from ver. 9. So Joh. 15.4. 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 2.7. Eph. 1.12. Ver. 12. Blessed is the man that (thus) en∣dureth Temptation (for the sake of Christ) for when he is tried (Gr. , being ap∣proved) he shall receive the Crown of life which the Lord hath promised to them that love him, (i. e. being by his patient enduring of these Afflictions for the sake of Christ approved as one that loves him more than the World, he shall receive the Reward promised to them that do so.) Ver. 13. (As for the other sort of Tempta∣tions unto Sin) Let no man say when he is (thus) tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man (to it.) Ver. 14. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own Lust, and enticed, (Gr. being drawn and enticed by his own Lust.) Note here, That the Desires or Lustings of the sensual Appetite put us only under a state of Temptation, not of actual Sin; they are indeed the root of Sin, but so is Temptation to Sin, and the Suggestions of Satan, but they are not our Sins till we consent to them: they are not a Transgression of the Law, for there is no Law given to the sensual Appetite alone, but to the whole Man, who cannot hinder sensual Appetites from arising in him before he perceives them, but he can restrain the Will from consenting to them as soon as he per∣ceives them, and can refuse to admit of them, or suffer them to make stay in, or gain upon his Mind to contemplate them with delight, or assent to them: and this being all he can do, must be all he is oblig'd by the Law to do. There be many Scriptures urged against this Opinion in the Synopsis, but they are too impertinent to be insisted on. Ver. 15. Then when Lust hath conceived (i. e. obtained any consent to, or approbation and good-liking to the desire of the sensual Appetite) it bringeth forth (and engageth the Soul in) Sin. And Sin, when it is finished, (in the deliberate outward action, or such en∣deavours to perform and execute it as want no∣thing on the part of the Will to the completion of it, and much more when by a customary practice it becomes habitual) bringeth forth Death (the Wages of Sin.) , bringeth forth Death.] i. e. Not only deserveth Death, for so doth the consent of the Will, but it renders us obnoxi∣ous to Death, and will end in it, without Repentance. Hence therefore note, that not only the Soul harden'd in Sin, and given up to the frequent practice of the same Sin, is guilty of mortal Sin, but every deliberate sinful Action, done against the Convictions and the Checks of Conscience, till by Repentance it is retracted, puts us under that state, as be∣ing a breach of the Gospel-Covenant of sincere and impartial Obedience, a departing of the Heart from God, and a wilful and presumptu∣ous Sin; and therefore David, after his Adul∣tery and Murder, prays that God would create in him the clean Heart, and renew in him the right Spirit. Though therefore God in mer∣cy may and will deal with such Men not ac∣cording to their particular Failures, but ac∣cording to the general Tenure of their Lives, yet can they claim no Covenant-Right to such Favour till they have throughly repented of such wilful Sins, and return'd to the sincere Performance of their Duty. Ver. 16. Do not err, my beloved Brethren (by ascribing your Sin, or your Temptations to it, unto God.) Ver. 17. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the
Father of lights (the Light of Nature and of Grace) with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning (from Good to Evil; he therefore never will deny those Gifts to them that duly ask them, nor will he ever be want∣ing in his Grace and Favour to them that love him, and much less will he tempt any one to depart from him.) Ver. 18. For of his own Will begat he us (Jews) by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of First-fruits of his (new) Creatures. (We therefore have little cause to think he will do any thing to destroy that Life, or de∣ny us any thing which he sees necessary to pre∣serve that Life which he so freely gave.) .] Here is a plain Evidence that the Word of God is the ordinary means of our Regeneration, it being the Word preach∣ed, the Word we are to hear, ver. 19, 22. and to receive with meekness, by which the new Birth is by God wrought in us, and which saith the Apostle, is able to save the Soul: and it is surely a great Disparagement to the Word of God, to think that his Persuasions, Admonitions, Exhortations, and Threats, should be all insufficient to prevail with us to turn from our sinful Courses, and to turn unto him, when all Men who do use these Methods to∣wards their Children, Servants, Friends, or Relations, do it in hopes that they shall be successful by these means; only this is not so to be understood, as to exclude the Blessing and Co-operation of God with the Word preach'd, or the Assistance or his Holy Spirit, setting it home upon our Hearts: provided this be not by way of Physical, but Moral Ope∣ration, by that Illumination of the Under∣standing from the Word which produceth that Renovation in the Spirit of the Mind, by which we are enabled to discern and to ap∣prove the good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God, Rom. 12.2. Eph. 4.23. to discern what is acceptable to the Lord, Eph. 5.10. to understand what the Will of the Lord is, v. 17. the things that are most excellent. And if the Word of God be a perfect Rule, able to make us wise unto Salvation, and furnish us for eve∣ry good work, sure the Good Spirit may by his Suggestion of the Truths deliver'd in it, by bringing them to our Remembrance, and opening our Understanding to perceive the Scriptures, remove that Darkness which is in our Minds either by natural Corruption, or by the Mists which Satan casts upon them; whence the Apostle doth inform us, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. that if the Gospel be hidden from any to whom it is preach'd, it is because the God of the World hath blinded the conceptions of their minds, that the Light of the glorious Gospel should not shine into them. And, 2dly, by making deep Impressions on the Mind, of the Advantages and Rewards promised to our Conversion and sincere Obedience, and the tre∣mendous Evils threatned to the Disobedient, and bringing these things oft to our Remem∣brance, which in the Scripture Phrase is put∣ting these Laws in our minds, and writing them upon our hearts, that we may not depart from him, Hebr. 8.10. See Note on Hebr. 8.10. For, what Reason can be given why the Spirit of Wisdom, having enlightned the eyes of our Understanding, to know what is the hope of our Calling, and the Glorious Riches of the Inheritance of the Saints, Eph. 1.18. and these things being as firmly believed, and made thus present to our Minds, should not have greater prevalence upon our Wills to Obedience, than any temporal Concerns to yield Obedience to the Laws of Sin? 'Tis certain Satan can tempt us no other way than by suggesting some temporal Allurements and Advantages, or some temporal Losses and Af∣frightments to us: Since then the Scripture doth assure us this is our Victory over the World, even our Faith, 1 Joh. 5.4. even that Faith which is the firm Expectation of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen, Hebr. 11.1. Why should not these Objects of our Faith, presented to us and impressed up∣on us by the Holy Spirit, be more powerful to baffle all the Temptations of Sin, Satan, and the World? If beyond this there be some Physical and irresistible Operation on God's part requisite to make Men know the things which belong to their Peace, and knowing, to chuse the Good, and refuse the Evil, this being not wrought in them who are not born anew; why is the want of this New-birth, and this spiritual Renovation, so oft imputed to Mens want of Consideration, and of laying to heart the things propounded to them? their not inclining their Ear to Wisdom, and apply∣ing their Heart to Understanding? their Ha∣tred of Knowledge, their rejecting the Counsel of God, and not chusing the Fear of the Lord? Prov. 1.24, 25, 29, 30. Why is it said that they continue thus unreformed, because they would have none of God's Counsel, but despi∣sed all his Reproofs, because they would not frame their Doings to turn unto the Lord? to omit innumerable Expressions of the like Import. See Note on Rom. 10.17. 1 Pet. 1.23. Ver. 19. Wherefore my beloved Brethren (being regenerated by this Word of Truth) let every Man be swift to hear (it) slow to speak (ver. 26. or be a Teacher of it, ch. 3.1.) slow to Wrath (or Contention about it.) Ver. 20. For the wrath of Man worketh not the Righteousness of God (i. e. it tends not to beget, or to improve that Faith by which we are righteous before God, but rather to hinder it in our selves, and others.) Ver. 21. Wherefore lay apart all Filthiness (all evil Lustings, ver. 14.) and all super∣fluity of Naughtiness (all the Distempers of your Tongue, and of your angry Passions, ver. 19.) and receive with meekness the in∣grafted
Word, which (being thus received) is able to save your Souls. Slow to speak.] It was the Imputation which theHaec nostra sapientia quam tanquam stultitiam derident, quia non defendere hanc publicè, atque asserere nos sole∣us, &c. Lact. l. 7. c. 26. Heathens cast upon the Chri∣stians, that they were in publico muti, not being enclined, palam loqui, to speak openly of their Religion; and this is confessed by Christians to be true of the Laity, who were not by Office engaged to preach it to the World; that it was not their Custom to as∣sert and defend their Religion publickly, but only to give an Answer to them who requir'd a reason of the hope that was in them; and in this sense good Commentators do expound these Words, viz. as an admonition to be slow to speak of Divine Things, and much more to be Teachers of them. , slow to Wrath.] This was an admonition needful for the Jewish Zealots, who were, , of contentious Spirits, see Note on Rom. 2.8. filled with Wrath a∣gainst the Preachers of Christianity, and espe∣cially against those who denied the necessity of Circumcising the Gentiles, or requiring them to observe the Law of Moses, Acts 13.45.17.5. they. Vita Joseph. p. 1007. B. Et Antiq. Judaic. l. 2. c. 2. p. 685. B. compelling all Men to be Circumcised if they would abide with them, and looking upon this as a thing of absolute Necessity, without which nothing else would satisfie them. Now these Disputes naturally tended to ob∣struct that Faith by which Men were justi∣fied, and not by Circumcision, or the Works of the Law, and which in the Epistles of St. Paul is still stiled the Righteousness of God, see Note on Rom. 1.17. 2. They were very prone to set up for Teachers of the Law, tho' they understood not aright those things of which they spake, 1 Tim. 1.7. Rom. 2.18. and this might give occasion to the other Ad∣monition here, to be slow to speak. And Chap. 3.1. they also were incontinent, and very prone to Lustings, and to Fornications; see Note on Rom. 2.22. 2 Tim. 3.5. Hebr. 12.16. and therefore fitly are admonished to lay a∣side all Filthiness, and superfluity of Naughti∣ness. , the ingrafted Word,] saith Oecumenius, is that Principle of Reason by which we are enabled to discern Good from Evil; but of that the Apostle would not say, that it is able to save our Souls. But the A∣postles, or Preachers of the Christian Faith being said, , to plant the Word among their Hearers, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. The ingrafted Word seems to be the Word planted in the Heart of Believers by the Ministers of Christ, which St. Barnabas stiles, , the ingrafted Gift of his Do∣ctrine. §. 9. p. 6. Ver. 22. And (that it may have this effect upon you) be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves, (by thinking that sufficient to procure Favour with God.) That many of the Jews had conceived an Opinion, that even the Study and Knowledge of the Law would procure them a Reward in Heaven, see Note on Rom. 2.13. Ver. 23. For if any Man be a hearer of the Word (only,) and not a doer (of it,) he is like unto a Man beholding his own natural Face (which he was born with) in a Glass. Ver. 24. For he beholdeth himself, and goeth (presently) away, and streightway forgets what manner of Man he was. Ver. 25. But he that looketh into the per∣fect Law of Liberty, (i. e. the Gospel which gives the Spirit of Liberty and Freedom from the Power of Sin and Death, and from the Spirit of Bondage, Rom. 8.2, 15. 2 Cor. 3.17.) he being not a forgetful Hearer, but a Doer of the Word, he shall be blessed in his Deed. Ver. 26. If any Man seems to be Religious among you, and bridleth not his Tongue (from bitter Zeal, Contentions, and Imprecations, Chap. 3.10, 14) but deceiveth (Gr. decei∣ving) his own Heart, (thinks his Zeal for God will bear him out in all this) that Man's Religion is vain, (Chap. 3.14, 15.) , &c. deceiving his own Heart.] That the unbelieving Jews had a Zeal for God, the Apostle bears them record, Rom. 10.2. but then that Zeal wrought so great bitter∣ness of Spirit in them, that in those very Syna∣gogues in which they met to Bless God, they imprecated a Curse upon the Christians created anew after his Image, Chap. 3.10. I being zealous for God, as all you are this day, saith he, persecuted this way unto the death, Acts 22.3, 4. and in thus doing they thought they did God service, John 16.2. The Zealots among them, saith their own. De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 30. p. 986. D. E. Josephus, who gave themselves that name from their Zeal to what was good, committed all manner of Wickedness, and accounted the worst of Evils good. And yet Eleazer, the Ring-leader of them, represents them as Persons who had. Lib. 7. c. 34. p. 990. B. cause to hope they should be by God pre∣served,
as having not offended against him, and being Guilty of no fault, and who were Teachers of others. That the believing Jews, who urged upon the Gentiles the necessity of Circumcision had a Zeal for God, we learn from Gal. 4.17, 18. yet that they had the Spirit of Contention and Envy, Philip. 1.15, 16. and were deceitful Workers; the Apostle doth inform us; so that neither of them were truly Religious, and to these lat∣ter the Apostle seems chiefly to speak in these words, If ye have bitter Zeal and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lye not against the Truth, &c. Ver. 27. Pure Religion, and undefiled be∣fore God and (i. e. who is) the Father, is (visible in) this, (that it engages the Christi∣an) to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World. , to visit the Fatherless and Wi∣dows.] It is very true that Ignatius saith of some, who maintain'd Opinions contrary to the Grace of God come unto us, That. Epist. ad Smyrn. §. 6. they had no regard to Charity, to the Widow, and the Orphan, to the Oppressed, to those that were in Bonds, to the Hungry and Thirsty. But then it is not manifest from his Words that these were the Gnosticks; nothing hinders but what the Apostle here speaks of may be also true of the Jews, who, asDe Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 22. Josephus notes, were great Enemies one to another, and want∣ed Mercy most of all; or to those Zealots who spared none who would not be of their Opi∣nions, and their bitter Zeal. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. MY Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, with respect of Persons. , the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory.] This Version seems obnoxious to this Exception, that the Pronoun  will not suffer the word Lord to be join'd with Glory, therefore that which renders the words thus, The Faith of the Glory of the Lord Je∣sus Christ, or, Hold not the glorious Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Persons, seems to be the better and more agreeable to the design of the Apostle, as giving the best Reason against the accepting Persons on the account of their Riches, or their gay Attire, because their Faith hath clothed them with a greater and more valuable Glory, which ren∣ders them more Honourable than any Riches or gay Clothing could do. For this Faith, saith the Apostle, is the Ministration of Glo∣ry, and by it we all beholding the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.8, 18. See the Note there. And whom God hath justified by Faith, he hath also Glorified, by giving them this Spirit of Glory, Rom. 8.30. See the Note there. , with respect of Persons.]  is the respect of Persons in Judg∣ment, not purely according to the Merits of the Cause, but according to external respects which relate not to it. As for Instance, the dread of any Man's Power, or the fear of what he may do to us if we judge against him. So Lev. 19.15. Thou shalt not Honour the Person of the Great, or respect the Person of the Poor; in Justice shalt thou judge thy Neigh∣bour. And Deut. 1.17. Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment, ye shall hear alike the Small and the Great; ye shall not be afraid of the Face of Man, for the Judgment is the Lord's. Or, 2dly, the Poverty of any Man, which renders him less able to suffer the Pu∣nishment of his Injustice. Thou shalt not re∣spect a Poor Man in his Cause, Exod. 23.3. 3dly, By reason of any Gift, or hope of Gain by favouring any Cause: Thou shalt not wrest Judgment, thou shalt respect Persons, neither take a Gift, Deut. 16.19. 4thly, By reason of Relation, Affinity, Friendship, or Affection. In Spiritual or Evangelical Matters, it is to have regard to Men in reference to things which render them neither better nor worse, more or less acceptable in the sight of God. As for Instance, to regard them, 1st. In respect to their Nation, and their Off-spring; Of a truth, I perceive that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that feareth him, and worketh Righteousness is accepted of him, Acts 10.31. He will have no respect to Nations, or external Professions in his future Recom∣pences, Rom. 2.6-10. Or, 2dly, With re∣gard to their Condition, as being Masters or Servants. Hence Masters are bid to deal with their Servants, as knowing they have a Ma∣ster in Heaven, with whom is no respect of Persons, Ephes. 6.9. And Servants to be just to their Masters, because he that is unjust shall receive for the wrong that he hath done, and there is no respect of Persons with God, Col. 3.25. 1 Pet▪ 1.17. Or, 3dly, To their Qua∣lity, for God accepteth not the Persons of Princes, nor regardeth the Rich more than the
Poor, for they are all the Work of his Hands, Job 34.39. And this is the thing here cen∣sured. Ver. 2. For if there come into your Assem∣blies (or Consistories for Judicature) a Man with a gold Ring and goodly Apparel, and there come in also a poor Man in vile Rayment, Ver. 3. And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay Clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the Poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my Footstool; Ver. 4. Are ye not then partial in your selves, (do you not both put a difference a∣mong your selves on these accounts,) and (al∣so are) become Judges of evil Thoughts, (in thinking that the Rich is to be preferred in Judgment, and the Poor despised, ver 6. on these accounts)? , into your Assembly.] That the word  respects not only Places of Assembly for the Publick Worship of God, but also Consistories for Judicature, we learn from those words of St. Matthew, Beware of Men, for they bring you into the Sanhedrim, and in their Synagogues chastise you. Chap. 10.17. Chap. 23.34. And that here the Apo∣stle speaketh of such Consistories, is probable, 1st. From the accepting of Persons mention∣ed ver. 1. which in the Old Testament and in the New, as oft as 'tis apply'd to Men, al∣ways respecteth humane Judicatures. 2dly, From the Footstool mention'd ver. 3. which obtain'd in their Judicial Consistories, and which was proper to Princes on their Thrones, and Judges on their Tribunals. 3dly, From the Judges mention'd ver. 4. and the , or Judgment Seats, ver. 6. 4thly, From the Law violated by this respect of Persons, ver. 8, 9. And lastly, From the Canon of the Jews, by which it is provided, That when the Rich and Poor have a Suit together in their Consistories, either both must sit or both stand, to avoid all marks of Partiality. R. Levi Bar∣cinon. l. 142. Juris Hebraici. Note also, That the Jewish Christians still assembled in the Jewish Synagogues, and both the Judges and the Judgment Seats might belong to the Rulers of the Synagogues; nor do I think there were then any other Church Assemblies among the Jews: Yea, the Jews living among the Gentiles, retain'd still a Ju∣risdiction over Men of their own Nation and Religion, even as to Matrimonial and Pecu∣riary, as well as to Religious Causes, and so the Jewish Christians might be drawn before their Judgment Seats on those accounts, v. 6. this being long after forbidden by a Law of Honorius and Theodosius. 16. Cod. Theodos. Tit. 8. Leg. 22. Vid. Not. on Gothfr. p. 240. ;] Do you not both put a difference or discrimination among your selves on those accounts, which are alien from the Cause. That this is the frequent sense of the Word  and , see Acts 15.9. where  is rendred, he put no difference betwixt us and them. And Jude 22. where we read thus, Of some have compassion, , making a difference. See Note on Rom. 14.23. , Judges of evil Thoughts.] i. e. Who pass Judgment from your own evil Thoughts, as judging the Rich worthy of Respect in Judgment for his Gor∣geous Attire, and outward Appearance, and the Poor fit to be despised for his outward Meanness. Ver. 5. Hearken, my beloved Brethren; hath not God chosen the Poor of this World rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him? (and are they fit to be despised by you who are so highly honoured and enriched by him?) Ver. 6. But (so it is, that) ye have despi∣sed the Poor, (and had a partial respect to the Rich, and yet) do not (these) rich Men oppress you, and draw you before the Judg∣ment Seats, (on the account of your Christian Profession?) Ver. 7. Do not they Blaspheme that worthy Name by which you are called? Ver. 8. If (in this matter) you fulfil the Royal Law (which is) according to the Scri∣pture, (saying,) Thou shalt love thy Neigh∣bour as thy self, ye do well; (for then you will not be Guilty of that respect of Persons, for you would not be despised because you are Poor, or have a rich Man preferred before you in Judgment) , the Royal Law.] Not so much because it is the Law of Christ our King, it being a Law of the Old Testament, as because it is the Law which is of all the Laws, which concern our Neighbour, the most Excellent, and which governs and moderates other Laws, especially the ceremonial and positive Laws, which are to give place to that of Charity and Mercy. Moreover, the Jews themselves so interpret this Law, as to forbid the contempt of our Brother, as you may see in Dr. Cartwright's Mellificium on this place. Ver. 9. But if ye have (such) respect of Persons (as to honour the Rich, and despise the Poor in Judicial Causes) ye commit Sin, and are convinced of (or by) the Law (now mention'd) as Transgressors (of God's Law in the General; this Law comprehending all the Duties of the Second Table, Rom. 13.9. Matth. 22.39.) Ver. 10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law (in other matters,) and yet (knowingly) offend in one point, is guilty of all. Ver. 11. For he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not Kill. Now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou Kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the Law (of Love, mention'd ver. 8. which comprehends all the
Duties of the Second Table in which here the Apostle instanceth.) .] Or because the Authority of the Lawgiver is as much despised by the breaking any one of his Laws, as by the Vio∣lation of them all; and he that by it will not be restrain'd from the Violation of it in one point, under the like Temptations, will do it in another. Note farther, that these words seem to be directly levell'd against that loose Doctrine of the Jewish Doctors, mention'd byIn Hosea 14.2. p. 774. Dr. Pocock, That God gave so many Commandments to them, that by doing any of them they might be saved. So Kimchi expounds those words of Hosea, Take away Iniquity, , and receive Good; i. e. saith he, receive in lieu of them any Good, , any Command∣ment that we have done. It was a vulgar Rule among them, saithP. 354. Dr. Smith, That Men should single out some one Commandment out of God's Law, and therein especially exercise themselves, that so they might make God their Friend by that, lest in others they should too much displease him. And he cites from them this Rule,P. 300. He that observes any one Pre∣cept, it shall be well with him, and his Days shall be prolong'd, and he shall possess the Earth. And this Precept was with them usually that of the Sabbath, of Sacrifices, or of Tythes; for these they look'd upon as the great Com∣mandments of the Law, not those of Mercy and Judgment, which in our Saviour's account were so. Ver. 12. So (therefore) speak ye, and so do, as they that (know they) shall be judged by the Law of Liberty. .] i. e. By that Law of Love which makes all Men our Neighbours, and frees us from those restraints the ceremo∣nial Law, and the Traditions of the Jewish Doctors lay upon us, of confining our Love and freedom of Converse to those that were of their own Nation, or were Circumcised. The Jews had great need of these Instructions, for as they held it unlawful to converse with Publicans and Sinners, Luke 15.1, 2. though to instruct them in the way of Life, so much more to come to, or converse with one of another Nation, Acts 10.28. Yea,. In vita Jos. p. 1007. B. they would not suffer them to be among them, who would not be Circumcised. Ver. 13. For he shall have Judgment with∣out Mercy, who hath shewed no Mercy, (and so hath highly thwarted the great Law of Love;) and Mercy rejoiceth against (or trium∣pheth over) Judgment, (i. e. it enables the merciful Man to rejoice, as being free from the Judgment of Condemnation.) And of this Mercy the Jews were so mind∣ful, thatDe Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 22. p. 886. Josephus having said they vio∣lated the Laws of Nature, and polluted the Divinity with their Injustice towards Men, he adds, That no good Affection was so en∣tirely lost among them, , as that of Mercy. Ver. 14. (And let not any Jew or Christian think his Faith sufficient to justifie and save him, without these Works of Charity and Mercy, for) What doth it profit, my Brethren, if a Man say he hath Faith (in God, ver. 19. or in Christ,) and have not Works (to evidence his Faith?) can (such a naked, fruitless) Faith save him? Ver. 15. If a Brother or Sister be naked, or destitute of daily Food, Ver. 16. And one of you say unto him, De∣part in peace, be you warmed and filled (wish∣ing only that he may be so,) notwithstanding ye give them not those things which be needful for (the clothing or feeding) the Body, what doth it profit (him to hear your kind Wishes?) Ver. 17. Even so Faith, if it hath not Works, is dead, (fruitless, and lifeless as those words) being alone, (without Works shewing the truth of it.) Ver. 18. Yea, a Man may say (to such a Solifidian,) Thou hast (in thy Pretensions) Faith, and I have (real) Works, shew me thy Faith (of which thou boastest) without thy Works, (which thou canst never do, since Faith being sealed in the Heart can only be discovered by its Effects) and I will shew thee by my Works my Faith, (as the Cause is de∣monstrated by the Effect.) Ver. 19. Thou (being a Jew) believest there is one God, thou (in that) dost well, (but dost no more than the very Devils, for) the De∣vils also believe andGigantes contremiscunt Targ. in Job 26.4. tremble: (And if thou hast no better Faith than they, thou hast the same reason to tremble which they have.) Ver. 20. But wiltst thou know, O vain Man, (who boastest of a Faith destitute of Works) that Faith without Works is dead, (and so un∣able to justifie and save thee. See it in the Example of that very Abraham, in thy Rela∣tion to whom thou so confidest.) Ver. 21. (For) Was not Abraham (whom we stile) our Father, justified by Works (pro∣ceeding from his Faith,) when he had offered his Son Isaac upon the Altar, (counting that God was able to raise him from the dead, Hebr. 11.17, 19.) Ver. 22. Seest thou how (Gr. thou seest (by this Example) that) Faith wrought with his Works (to produce them) and by Works was Faith made perfect (in him.)
, &c. when he offered his Son Isa∣] This being a greater Act of Faith than  by which he was at first justified, for  was only Faith in God's Promise, that e would raise up Seed from his dead Body, and the dead Womb of Sarah, Rom. 4.20. This was a belief that he would raise up this my Seed consumed to Ashes from the dead, and therefore by this Work was his Faith de perfect, i. e. advanced to the greatest ight, there being no more noble Act of Faith than this of the Resurrection of the Dead consumed to Ashes, and none by which e give more Glory to God. See Ecclus. .20. Ver. 23. And the Scripture was (again) fulfilled, which saith, Abraham believed God, and it (viz. that Faith which produc'd these Works) was accounted to him for Righteous∣ness, and (upon that account) he was called  friend of God. , was accounted  him for Righteousness.] That is it engaged God to own him as a truly Righteous Person,  one that did sincerely fear him, by saying,  I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou  not withheld thy only Son from me, Gen. 22▪15. or as one who upon tryal had been found faithful; so Mattathias, Was not A∣braham found faithful in Temptation, and  was accounted to him for Righteousness, 1 Maccab. 2.52. and also to deal with him as a righteous Person, so as to renew the Cove∣nt made with him, and to establish it with n Oath, Gen. 22.16, 17, 18. and to give him the high Title not only of his Servant but his Friend, 2 Chron. 20.7. Isa. 41.8. Ver. 24. Ye see then how that by Works (proceeding from Faith) a Man is justified, and not by Faith only (alone without them.) Ver. 25. Likewise also was not Raab the Harlot, justified by Works (proceeding from her Faith,) when she had received the Mes∣sengers, and had sent them out another way? , Raab the Harlot.] That Raab had a strong Faith in God the Apostle testi∣fies by saying, By Faith Raab the Harlot pe∣rish'd not with those that believed not, re∣ceiving the Spies in peace, Hebr. 11.31. And this she shew'd by saying, The Lord your God he is God in Heaven above, and in Earth be∣neath, Josh. 2.11. And this she testified by being so industrious to preserve the Messen∣gers, and to do all things agreed on betwixt them and her, for her safety. Ver. 26. (And so it must be in all other Persons who would be saved, they must shew their Faith by their Works,) For as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also, (and therefore cannot save us, or give Life unto us.) There have been many ways invented how to reconcile these words of St. James with the Apostle Paul, asserting, That a Man is justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law, Rom. 3.28. As, 1st. That when St. Paul saith, We are ju∣stified by Faith without the Works of the Law, and that to him that worketh not, but believeth Faith is imputed unto him for Righteousness, Rom. 4.5. or to Justification. Justification there ascribed to Faith only, imports only our Absolution from Condemnation by reason of our past Offences, committed before Faith, and our Reconciliation to God by the Pardon, or the not imputing them to Believers. It consists, saith the Apostle, in the remission of Sins that are past, Rom. 3.25. it is, saith Peter, the Purgation of us from our old Sins, 2 Pet. 1.9. It is effected by the Death of Christ procuring Redemption for Sins commit∣ted under the Old Covenant, Heb. 9.15. This is apparent from the chief Argument the A∣postle useth to prove the necessity that both Jew and Gentile should be justified freely by his Grace, and not by the Works of the Law, because they were all under Sin, all become Guilty before God, all having sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, Rom. 3.9, 19, 23. Whereas, saith he, being justified by Faith we have peace with God, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, Rom. 5.1, 2. Therefore Chapter the 3d he must be speaking of the Condition of Jew and Gentile before Faith. So again, when the Apostle saith, the Scrip∣ture hath concluded all under Sin, that the pro∣mise (of Justification) by (the) Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe (in him), Gal. 3.22, 23, 24. Wherefore the Law was (then) our School-Master to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by Faith (in him,) ver. 25. But now after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a School-Master, (i. e. under the Paedagogy of the Law) v. 26. For ye are all the Children of God through Faith in Christ Jesus, He plainly insinuates that we cannot be justified by the Works of the Law, because the Law leads us to Christ for Justification; and ceaseth now the way of Justification by Faith in Christ is made known. And again, we are justified by Grace, not of Works. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good Works, Ephes. 2.8, 9, 10. where the Argument seems plain∣ly to run thus, We cannot be justified by Works preceding Faith, because we do no good Works till by Faith we are interested in Christ Jesus. Whereas St. James speaks plainly of those Works which follow Faith, are wrought by it, and are the Fruits of it, and of their necessity in order to our continu∣ance in a State of Justification, and freedom from our final Condemnation. 2dly, That St. Paul excludes from Justifi∣cation only those Works which are opposed to Justification by an Act of Grace, and make it to be of Debt, and so give occasion to our Glorying in our being Righteous in the
sight of God, purely by reason of our Works, as in these words, If it be of Grace it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work, Rom. 11.6. And again, to him that worketh the Reward is reckoned, not of Grace, but of Debt; but to him that worketh not, but be∣lieveth, Faith is accounted unto him for Righ∣teousness, Rom. 4.4, 5. And again, Where then is Glorying? it is excluded: by what Law? by that of Works? no; but by the Law of Faith, Rom. 3.27. Whereas St. James re∣quires only those Works to our Salvation, and our continuance in a State of Justifica∣tion, which proceed from, and are accepted through Grace, and so can never render our Justification of Debt, or give us a just Ground of boasting. 3dly, That St. Paul is arguing against the Jews, who sought for Justification by virtue of the Law of Moses, and sought it not by Faith, Rom. 9.32. nor ever conceived that sufficient for that end, declaring against that way of Justification, because it would con∣fie the Blessing of Abraham to the Circum∣cision only, Rom. 4.9. And because the Law of Moses was four hundred and thirty Years after the Promise made to Abraham, speaking of that Law which said, Do this and live, Gal. 3.17. which was our School-Master t bring us to Christ, and which was then t cease, as to the Obligation of it, whereas S James speaks of Justification by Works per¦formed under the Covenant of Grace, and a Conditions even of that new Covenant. No I except not against any of these ways of Re¦conciling these two Apostles in their Dis¦course upon this Subject; but then I also think that we may add this other to them. 4thly, That St. Paul plainly speaks to Christians only, concerning their Justification from their past Offences by Faith in the Blood of Jesus; but St. James speaks as well to the unbelieving as believing Jews, touching Faith in God, such as Abraham had when he believed God's Promise, ver. 23. and such as Raab the Harlot had, ver. 25. saying, Tho believest there is one God, ver. 19. without the least mention of Faith in Christ, and who perhaps thought it sufficient to keep them in the Favour of God, and render them his Friends, that they had cast off all Idolatry, and only owned the true God; proving this not to be sufficient to procure the Divine Fa∣vour, unless by the Obedience of their Lives they Glorified him as God, since other∣wise they only did in words profess to own him, but in Works deny him, being Disobe∣dient. CHAP. III. Ver. 1. MY Brethren, be not many Masters, (i. e. , Teachers of the Law) knowing that (thereby) we shall re∣ceive the greater Condemnation, (for our Offences against the Law we teach to o∣thers.) , be not many Teachers.] The Jews had not only in Judea, but in their several Dispersions, their , or Doctors of the Law, who being created Doctors, Masters or Rabbins by Imposition of Hands, were authorized to teach the Law to others. This Office the Jews much affected, , affecting to be Teach∣ers of the Law, 1 Tim. 1.7. and being con∣fident of their Abilities to be Guides to the Blind, a Light to them that sat in Darkness, Instructors of the Foolish, and, , Teachers of Babes. Rom. 2.19, 20. And such especially were the Zealots among them. Whence Eleazer the chief of them saith, they had especial reason to expect a share in the Divine Favour, as being. Apud Joseph de Bello Jud. lib. 7. cap. 34. p. 990. C. blameless as to the Observation of the Law, and also Teach∣ers of it to others. This Affectation of that Office the Apostle here warns them to avoid, as that which would expose them to greater Condemnation for their Offences against that Law they taught to others, and so confess'd they knew themselves. Ver. 2. (And this we ought the rather to beware of) For in many things we offend all (against the Law, and more especially in that Member we employ in teaching of others, for) if any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle (curb, and di∣rect the motions of) the whole Body. , a perfect man.] Is a Person fully instructed in his Duty. See Note on 1 Cor. 2.6. Ver. 3. (I use the Metaphor of a Bridle as apposite in this case, for) Behold, we put Bits (or Bridles) in the Horses mouths that they may obey us, and with them we turn about their whole Bodies (even so, if we by any means can bridle, and thereby govern the Tongue, by the like means we may govern the whole Man.) Ver. 4. Behold also the Ships, which though they be so great (in Bulk) and are driven
with fierce Winds, yet are they turned about with a very small Helm whithersoever the Go∣vernour (or Pilot of the Ship) listeth. Ver. 5. Even so (is it with) the Tongue (as with this Bit and Helm, it) is a little Member, and boasteth great things () but it mightily exalts it self by its great Performances,) Behold how great a mat∣ter (how much Wood) a little Fire kindleth. .] This Word signifies not on∣ly to vaunt of, but also to do great things: , it works great Good and Evil, saith OEcumenius: Magnificatrix est, it is a doer of great things; so Faber: it answers to the Hebrew , which signifies to be valid, and move it self violently, to be haughty, and exalt it self, Psal. 9.19. Ezek. 16.50. Zeph. 3.11. Ecclus. 48.18. And this Signification both the Text and the Resem∣blance of the Tongue to Fire, seem plainly to require. Ver. 6. And the Tongue is (as) a Fire, a world of Iniquity (is kindled by it) so is the Tongue amongst our Members (as Fire among Wood) that it defileth (Gr. spotting, or blackning) the whole Body, and setteth (Gr. inflaming or setting) on fire the Course of Na∣ture (or the Succession of Men in the World) and is set on fire of hell (Gr. being set on fire by Hell.) .] The Comparison of the Tongue to a Fire, first blackning, and then wasting the whole World (or Wood) is taken from the Scripture, and from the Sayings of the Hebrew Doctors. The froward man bring∣eth Destruction, in his mouth there is a burn∣ing Fire, Prov. 16.27. And Ver. 28. , He kindles a firebrand of Deceit to the Wicked. As the matter of Fire, , according to the Wood of the Fire so it burneth, and the stronger they are that contend, the more they will be enflamed, Ecclus. 28.10. A hasty Contention kindleth a Fire, the Fire burning kindles great heaps, saith Ben Syra; which is thus explain'd: As a little Fire consumes great heaps of Wood, so no∣thing more wastes the World than an evil tongue. Note, 2dly, If the Original was as our Translation hath it, a world of Iniquity, some∣thing must be added to it to make the Sense compleat, as I have done in the Paraphrase, or as the Aethiopick, a world of Iniquity is contained in it. But the Syriack reads thus, And the wicked World is as the Wood. And this makes both the Sense and the Similitude run clear. Ver. 7. And it resembles Fire in this also, that when it hath once got the Mastery, it can∣not easily be subdued and extinguished.) For every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Ser∣pents, and of things in the Sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed, by Mankind. , by Mankind] is the He∣brew Phrase for Man; as  is a Man, 1 Pet. 2.13: Ver. 8. But the Tongue (of others) can no man tame; it is an unruly evil (and like the Serpents mention'd ver. 7.) full of deadly Poison. Ver. 9. Therewith bless we God, even the Father (of us all) and therewith curse we Men which are made after the similitude of God, (and upon that account are to be reve∣renced by us.) , Curse we Men.] This the Unbe∣lieving, Dial. cum Tryph. p. 234. B. , P. 323. B. See p. 335. D. p. 363. C. Jews did towards the Christians, Cursing and Anathematizing them in their Sy∣nagogues; as Justin Martyr often testifieth to the Face of Trypho the Jew. .] From this 9th Verse it ap∣pears, that Man lost not the Image of God by the Fall; and thence 'tis probable that it consists not primarily in Holiness, but in Do∣minion, Gen. 1.26. Ver. 10. Out of the same mouth proceedeth Blessing and Cursing: My Brethren, these things ought not so to be. Ver. 11. Doth a Fountain send forth, at the same place, sweet Water and bitter? Ver. 12. Can the Fig-tree, my Brethren, bear Olive-berries, or a Vine Figs? (surely no, even) so no Fountain (can) both yield Salt-water and Fresh. (And if Nature produceth no such con∣trary Fruits, much less should Grace produce things so extremely opposite as are Blessing and Cursing.) Ver. 13. Whoso (then) is a Wise-man, and endued with Knowledge among you, (to which you are great Pretenders,) le thim shew out of a good conversation his Works with meekness of Wisdom, (or the Works of Wisdom with meek∣ness, i. e. let him, by his Charity and Meek∣ness towards his Brethren, shew forth his Wisdom.) .] That the Jews were great Pretenders to Knowledge, see Rom. 2.18. That they Gloried in the Title of Chachamim or Wise-men, see Note on 1 Cor. 1.20.3.18. Hence their Divines are stiled  Wise-men as to the Truth, saith Buxtorf. Ver 14. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not (of your Wis∣dom) and lye not against the Truth (in pre∣tending to be wise as to it.) , bitter Envy and Strife.] The unbelieving Jews are represented still as , Men of Contention, who obey'd not the Truth, Rom. 2.8. Men who were fil∣led with bitter Zeal against the Preachers of the Gospel, Acts 13.45.17.5. and very mad
against them. And some of them who own'd the Gospel, did yet preach Christ  out of Contention, and Envy against St. Paul, Phil. 1.15. and the effect of their Disputes were, saith the Apostle,  Envy and Strife, 1 Tim. 6.4.  Conten∣tions and Fightings about the Law: And where they were mix'd with the Converted Gentiles, we find especial Cautions against Strife and Envy, as at Rome, Rom. 3.13. against provo∣king one another, and envying one another, Gal. 5.26. against doing things through strife and vain-glory, Philip. 2.3. or Complaints of the abounding of these Vices, 1 Cor. 1.11.3.3. See especially 2 Cor. 12.20. Ver. 15. This Wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly (from the love of earth∣ly things) sensual (proceeding from the Lusts of the Flesh, among which Strife and Envy are reckon'd, Gal. 5.20.) devilish (coming from Satan the Promoter of Strife and Envy, and from Pride and Ambition, by which he fell, 1 Tim. 3.6. Ver. 16. For where envying and Strife is (as the Root) there is confusion and every evil work (as the Fruit.) , confusion.] i. e. Tumult, Sedi∣tion, and Disturbance of Peace and Order; for Contention naturally tends to fighting, and Envy to the Destruction of him we hate. , you are envious and zea∣lous against one another, Chap. 4.2. and then it follows, , ye fight and war. Ver. 17. But the Wisdom which is from above is first pure (from Sensuality and Earthly-mindedness, ver. 15.) then peaceable (and) gentle (in opposition to Contention, ver. 14.) easie to be entreated (or persuaded, in oppo∣sition to the Inflexibility of the Jews,) full of mercy and good works, (wanting in them, ver. 13.) without Partiality, without Hypo∣crisie, (of which things the Jews were high∣ly guilty.) , full of mercy.] Which, saith. De Bell. Jud. l. 4. c. 22. p. 886. G. Josephus, of all good Passions was most of all lost among the Jews. , without Partiality.] Or, as the Word signifies, without putting a Difference betwixt Men of their own and other Nations, as the Jews did, counting all other Nations Dogs, unclean, not fit to be convers'd with, and dealing with them accordingly: for, asHist. l. 5. Ed. Lips. p. 616. Tacitus hath observed of them, Apud ip∣sos fides obstinata, misericordia in promptu, ad∣versus omnes alios hostile odium; They would be merciful to Men of their own Religion and Country, but hated all Mankind besides: con∣fining Brotherly Love to the Men of their own Nation, as we learn from our Saviour's Parable of the Good Samaritan. When they broke into Sects and Parties, they had the same Hatred to those of their own Nation who would not think and do as they did. The Zealots, and those that were for War,. De Bell. Jud. l. 4. c. 10. p. 871. Vid. p. 797. C. D. set themselves against, and even threatned Death to them who were for Peace, looking up∣on them as no better than Heathens, saith Jo∣sephus; whereas true Christian Wisdom re∣quires us to live peaceably with, and to do Good to all. , and without Hypocrisie.] For which our Saviour so severely inveighs against the Scribes and Pharisees, the Leaders of the Jews. Ver. 18. And the fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of (for or to) them that make Peace. .] i. e. The Reward of Righteousness to them who make it their bu∣siness to live peaceably themselves, and incline others to it, is here sown happily and quietly by the Preachers of the Gospel of Peace de∣claring it to the World, and shall hereafter assuredly be reaped by them. Or thus: these Fruits of Righteousness now sown by the Christian endued with this heavenly Wisdom, will yield a plentiful and happy Crop to them who are Promoters of Peace. CHAP. IV. Ver. 1. FRom whence come Wars and Fight∣ings among you (Jews?) come they not hence, even of your Lusts, (or Pleasures,) that war in your Members (against the Soul? 1 Pet. 2.11.) .] This Epistle seems to have been writ about the 8th Year of Nero, and the 62d of Christ, the Year before the Death of James, before which time the Jews had great Wars and Fightings, not only with their Neighbours, see Note on Matth. 24.6. but even among themselves in every City and Fa∣mily, saith. De Bello Jud. l. 4. c. 10. p. 871. Vide reliqua. Josephus, nor only in Judea, but in Alexandria, Syria, and many other pla∣ces. See the Preface, §. 5, 6. Ver. 2. Ye lust and have not; ye kill and de∣sire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight, and war, yet ye have not because ye ask not.
Ver. 3. Ye ask, and receive not because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts. , &c.] For Explication of these Words, we are to note that the Jews were then vehemently lusting after two things: 1. Liberty and Freedom from Tribute; which was, say they, the Token of Subjection., De Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 1.  Antiq. l. 18. c. 1. Vide de Bello Jud. Josephus saith, they were continually cla∣mouring to have the Tributes took away, and that upon this very account; and that the. L. 2. c. 23. p. 797. C. Zelotes, the Band of Thieves, and their Magicians, were still pressing the People to fight for their Liberty from the Roman Yoke. 2. Dominion over other Nations; for ha∣ving got this Fancy into their Heads, that their Messiah was to be a. Jud. apud Orig. contr. Cels. l. 2. p. 78. Temporal Prince, who should enable them to Lord it over the Heathens, they were zealous to have these pre∣tended Prophecies accomplished; and the. Jos. de Bello Jud. l. . c. 31. p. 961. F. Vid▪ l. 1. p. 705. D. Tryph. apud Just. p. 249. hopes of it encouraged them to fight. Whence we may Paraphrase on these two Verses thus. You lust for Liberty and Dominion, and you have it not; ye in pursuit and desire of them kill, and yet you cannot obtain them, because you ask not whether that be according to the Will of God which you so greedily de∣sire: ye ask these things, and receive them not because ye ask amiss, that you may con∣sume it upon your Lusts; viz. That having this Liberty and Empire, you may possess the good things of this World you lust after, and may Lord it over the Heathen World. Ver. 4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the Friendship of this World (which stands in competition with, and indisposeth you to believe and obey God's Will) is En∣mity to God, (and so Idolatry, which in the Language of the Scripture is Adultery?) Who∣soever therefore will be (thus) a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God (having renoun∣ced him to have Mammon for his Lord, Mat. 6.24.) Ver. 5. Do you think that the Scripture saith (Gr. speaks) in vain (against this world∣ly-mindedness) the Spirit that dwelleth in us (Christians,) lusteth (he) to Envy (as yours doth? ver. 2. Is he not rather the Spirit of Love and Goodness, engaging us to love all Men, and especially our Christian Brethren? 1 Pet. 1.22.) Ver. 6. But (so far is he from this Envy, that where he dwells) he giveth more Grace (or Favour,) wherefore he (or it, the Scrip∣ture) saith, God resisteth the proud, but gi∣veth Grace (or sheweth Favour) to the hum∣ble (Prov. 3.34. , Do you think that the Scripture saith in vain, &c.) They who make this whole Verse one Sentence, are obliged to shew where the Scripture hath these Words, The Spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to Envy; which no In∣terpreter hath yet successfully attempted. But in the Exposition given in the Paraphrase, which makes the whole to consist of two Questions; this is needless. Now in favour of this Exposition, let it be noted, 1. That nothing is more ordinary than for Particles to be repeated from the precedent Member. So Psal. 9.19. The needy shall not alway be forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall (not) perish for ever. See Psal. 38.1.44.19. 1 Sam. 2.3. Job 30.25.31.20. Prov. 25.27.30.3. So  if Psal. 139.8. Prov. 6.1.9.12. See Glassius de Ellipsi partic. l. 4. tr. 2. observat. 10. p. 721. So here the Par∣ticle  may be repeated thus, Or doth the Spi∣rit that is in you lust to Envy? Though the Sense be full only by reading the words by way of Interrogation. Note, 2dly, That not to speak in vain, is not to do it without Cause or just Reason; as Ezek. 6.10. And God, or the Scripture, is said to speak in vain to them who attend not to, or receive no benefit by his words, Jer. 8.8. So then the Sense runs thus; Doth the Scripture speak without just cause against this worldly-mindedness? would it not have you attend to, and receive advantage by what it saith against it? , but he giveth more Grace.] That  and  throughout the Scripture signifie Favour and Good-will, see Note on 2 Cor. 6.1. And this Sense the Op∣position here requires, God being displeased with, and opposing himself to the Proud, but shewing Favour to the Humble, and causing them to find Favour among Men, Prov. 3.34. What Monsieur Le Clerk here saith, that in those times the Jews used to produce as out of Scripture, not only the sense of places without regarding the words, but also a Jewish Tradi∣tion or Interpretation of Scripture, and so we are not to look for what is here said in the Old Testament, is intolerable: for, is it fit to make an Apostle giving us those Scriptures
which are to be our Rule of Faith, speak thus; Do you think the Scripture speaks in vain what it speaks not at all? and to call a Jewish Tradition the Scripture? Ver. 7. (Be ye then humble, and) Submit your selves to (that) God (who giveth Grace to the humble:) resist the Devil (the Author of those Wars, Envyings, and Lustings which are among you,) and (then) he will fly from you. Ver. 8. Draw nigh to God (by Prayer, Hu∣miliation, Repentance, and Obedience) and he will draw nigh to you (in mercy;) cleanse your hands (from Rapine and Injustice) ye Sinners, and purifie your hearts (from the love of the World) ye double-minded (whose hearts are divided betwixt God and Mam∣mon.) , draw nigh to God.] The way of drawing nigh to God being now, un∣der the Gospel Dispensation, through Faith in Christ, and in his Blood, shed for the Pro∣pitiation of our Sins, we being made nigh to him through the Blood of Christ, Eph. 2.13. and through the Introduction of that better Hope by which  we draw nigh to God, Hebr. 7.19. it being Christ alone by whom we have an Introduction to the Father through Faith in him, Eph. 2.18.3.12. and who hath suffer'd for us that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. This may be look'd on as an Exhortation to the  the unbe∣lieving Jews to believe in Christ, and to the  the wavering Jews (see Note on Chap. 1. ver. 8.) to cleave stedfastly to the Faith. , cleanse your hands.] That the hands of the Jews, and especially of the Zealots among them, were full of Blood and Rapine, we learn from, &c. De Bell. Jud. l. 5. c. 34. p. 897. C. Josephus, who makes very often sad Complaints of the Mur∣ders and Rapines committed by them. (See Chap. 5.4, 6.) And so this Exhortation must be very properly directed to them. True also is the Note of Estius here; Porro si jubentur homines emundare manus, & purificare corda, nec jubetur quid impossibile, consequens est eos posse haec praestare. Ver. 9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your Laughter be turned to Mourning, and your Joy to Heaviness. .] For now the day of Vengeance upon the unbelieving and backsliding Jews approacheth, Luke 21.22. Now the Coming of the Lord to execute Vengeance on them draweth near, Chap. 5.8. when Wrath shall come upon them to the uttermost, Thess. 2.16. 10. Humble your selves (therefore) in the sight of the Lord (and under his mighty hand that is upon you, 1 Pet. 5.6.) and he will exalt you (that he may exalt you  in that season of his Visitation, as he did then his faithful Servants by a wonderful Delive∣rance, according to his Promise. See Note on Matth. 24.31.) Ver. 11. Speak not evil one of (or against) another, Brethren. He that speaketh evil of (or against) his Brother, speaketh evil of the Law, and judgeth the Law, (or speaketh a∣gainst the Law, as being evil or imperfect, in that it doth not command or condemn those things which thou dost command or condemn;) but if thou (take upon thee to) judge the Law, thou art not (in thy behavi∣our as) a Doer of the Law, but a Judge (of it.) Ver. 12. (Whereas indeed) There is (only) one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to de∣stroy; who (therefore) art thou that judgest another? .] For Explication of these Words, let it be noted, that the great Excep∣tion which both the Unbelieving Jews and the Judaizing Christians among them had a∣gainst the Believing Gentiles, was this,. Tryph. apud Just. p. 227. That they observed not their Feasts or Sab∣baths, and that they were not circumcised; whence they concluded they differ'd little from the Heathens. This was the thing for which the Christian Fathers did contend a∣gainst them; viz. That the Ancient Patri∣archs. Just. M. p. 240, D. 241, B. 245. B. Iren. l. 4. c. 30. Tertull. adv. Jud. cap. 2. of old were acceptable to God, and consequently the Christians, and especially the Converted Gentiles, might be acceptable to God without the Observation of these Feasts, and Sabbaths, or of Circumcision. Hence the Apostle is so concerned that they should not judge one another on the account of Days, or Meats, Rom. 14.4, 5, 6. Hence he inveighs against the Galatians, as being brought in Bondage by the Judaizers to the Observation of Circumcision, Chap. 5.3. and of Days, Months, Times, and Years, Chap. 4.10. and warns his Colossians not to be indu∣ced to follow these Rudiments of the World, as being circumcis'd in Christ, Coloss. 2.11. And saith, Let no Man judge you in respect of Feasts, or new Moons, or of the Sabbaths, ver. 16. So that the Argument of the Apostle here seems to run thus. Let no Man speak
against his Christian Brethren the Gentiles, for not observing these things; for, the Law it self requiring these things not of the Gen∣tiles that even dwelt among them, but only of the Jews, he that speaks against them, and judgeth them for the Non-observation of these things, he in effect speaks against, and judgeth this Law as deficient which required not these things. And thou who takest upon thee to say they cannot be saved, Act. 15.1. and so judgest them to Destruction without the Observation of them, thou even takest upon thee the Office of this Great Lawgiver, who alone is able to save and to destroy, and who, by not requriing these things of the Gentiles, shews he will save them without them, and not destroy them for Neglect of them. So the Targum on Ezek. 13.18. brings in God speaking to the False Prophets thus, Can you kill or make alive the Souls of my Peo∣ple? Others indeed refer this to the Law of Christian Love, but that is still stiled the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. or the Law of Liberty, Chap. 2.12. but never absolutely the Law, as here; and therefore I prefer the former Inter∣pretation. Ver. 13. Go to now ye that (presume to) say, to day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a Year, and buy and sell, and get Gain (as if both Life, and the Advantages of Life, depended wholly on your selves, and not at all on Divine Providence.) 14. Whereas ye (who speak with such con∣fidence of the Future) know not what shall be on the morrow; for, what is your Life? it is even (as) a Vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away. Ver. 15. (Thus you are wont to speak) For that (Gr. whereas) ye ought to say, If the Lord will we shall live, and do this or that. , if the Lord will.] It was a Rule of Ben Syra, [Buxt. Flor. p. 4.] Let no Man say he will do any thing, unless he first say, if the Lord will. Who also adds, that one died before night for refusing to add this. And whenPlat. Alcib. 1. in fine. Alcibiades had said to Socra∣tes, I will do so if you will; Socrates tells him he ought to have said, , if God will: Not that we are obliged always to say thus, Rom. 15.28. but only still to own our Dependence on Divine Providence. Ver. 16. But now you rejoyce in your Boast∣ings (of the future;) all such rejoycing is evil, (as being an assuming to your selves what be∣longs to God only, and so an evidence that you do not subject your own Will to the Will of God. For since this Life is so short and uncertain, and thereby teacheth you to think humbly, and speak modestly, and with due Dependence on the Divine Providence, with respect both to your Lives and future Actions, you, by thus pleasing of your selves in these vain Boastings, and talking as if you were immortal, and independent upon Providence, are guilty of an evil Exultation, and vain Boasting.) Ver. 17. Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is Sin. (If after my Admonition to avoid this and other Crimes, you continue in them, you will be inexcusably guilty of Sin, Joh. 15.22. and the Guilt of it will abide upon you, Joh. 9.41. as it will also in all other things done against Knowledge and the Convictions of your Conscience; for in such things the heart departs from, and rebels against the Lord: He that thus sins despiseth the Word of the Lord, and reproacheth him that commanded it, Num. 15.30, 31.) CHAP. V. Ver. 1. GO to now, ye rich men (of the Jewish Nation, you will have cause to) weep and howl for the miseries that shall come (Gr. are coming) upon you. , go to now.] This is only a form of Transition, Chap. 4.13. and converting of Speech to any Person; as if he should have said, And now to speak to you that are rich, I call upon you to weep, &c. That this Prediction was exactly fulfill'd by the Slaughter and Spoiling of the Rich Jews throughout Galilee and Judea,De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 20, 34. l. 4. c. 19. Jo∣sephus will not suffer us to doubt. For he in∣forms us that the Zealots spared none but those who were , poor and low in Fortune; and that they were so insatiably rapacious, that they search'd all the houses of the Rich, killing the Men, and abusing the Women. And that it also was fulfill'd touch∣ing those of the Dispersion, see the Preface, §. 5, 6. Ver. 2. Your Riches are corrupted (or as things putrified by being kept too long) and your Garments (are become) moth-eaten. (They being laid up in your Wardrobes, and not used to cloath your naked Brother, shall be as useless to you as if they were devoured by the Moth.) Ver. 3. Your Gold and Silver is canker'd (or eaten out with rust) and the rust of them shall be a witness against you (of your covetous and worldly Minds) and shall eat your Flesh
as it were fire; ye have heaped Treasure to∣gether for the last days, (Gr. it shall eat your Flesh as fire, you have treasured it up for the last days.) It shall eat your Flesh as fire, , in the last days.] As the Rust eats into Gold and Silver, so shall your Flesh and Substance be eaten up as with Fire, as if you had trea∣sured up Fire in the midst of it. For, 1st. This is a frequent Metaphor among the Prophets who often speak of the fire eat∣ing up the Wicked, and devouring their Flesh, Thou shalt make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thy Wrath, , and the fire shall eat them up, Psalm 21.9. The Light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy One for a flame, and it shall burn, , and eat up his Thorns and Briars in one day, , and it shall eat up from the Soul to the Flesh, Isa. 10.16, 17. , the fire shall eat up the Adversaries, Chap. 27.11. Behold the Name of the Lord cometh forth from far, burning with Anger, , and the Anger of his Fury shall eat as the fire, Chap. 30.11. Behold I will make my Word in thy mouth fire, and this People wood, , and it shall eat them up, Jer. 5.14. They shall go out from one fire, , and another fire shall eat them up, Ezek. 15.7. I will bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, and the fire, , shall eat thee up. See Amos 5.6. 2dly, This was punctually fulfilled in the Destruction of that Nation by their own Se∣ditions, and the Roman Wars. For amongst the Sicarii, and the Zealots, the Ring-leaders of all their Seditions, it was Crime enough to be Rich, and their insatiable Avarice in∣duced them still to make, , a search into the Houses of the Rich. For them to remain among these Tyrants was Destruction.. De Bello. Jud. l. 6. c. 27. F. . Ibid. p. 931, 932. F. For by false Accusations they were slain as Deserters, for their Sub∣stance. Yea, both their Substance and their Flesh were. Lib. . c. 29. p. 959. G. Vide cap. 32. p. 962. B. B. Cap. 37. p. 964. F. Cap. 46. p. 969. B. Cap. 34. p. 990. E. devour'd by the Flames which burnt up the City and the Temple, and so consumed both their dead Bodies and their Substance, and their Wardrobes; and that which remained became a prey to the Army of the Romans. See the like done in their Dispersions, Preface §. 6. Ver. 4. Behold, the Hire of the Labourers which have reaped down your Fields, which is of you kept back by Fraud, crieth; and the Cries of them that have reaped (and are thus defrauded of their Wages by you) are entred into the Ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. , the Hire.] The Precept in the Law touching this matter running thus, Thou shalt not defraud thy Neighbour—The Wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning, Lev. 19.13. This keeping of it back is truly stiled Fraud and Oppression, and all Sins of that nature cry to Heaven for Vengeance on the fraudulent Op∣pressor. So the Cry of the Israelites under their Oppression in the Land of Egypt came up to God, Exod. 2.23.3.7. The Cry of the afflicted Widow and the Fatherless, Exod. 22.23. The Cry of the Poor and the Afflicted, Job 34.28. Psalm 9.12. The Cry of him that wants his Pledge to cover him, Exod. 22.27. And the Cry of him whose Wages is kept back. Thou shalt not oppress an hired Servant that is poor and needy; at his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it—lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be Sin unto thee, Deut. 24.14, 15. Ver. 5. Ye have lived in pleasure upon Earth, and been wanton, yea, have nourished your Hearts as in (or for) a day of slaughter. , ye have lived in pleasure, and been wanton.] The first word, , say Criticks, refers to their luxuri∣ous Eating. The second, , to their carnal Lustings and Lasciviousness, 1 Tim. 5.6. Ezek. 16.49. both which were Vices the Jews then were very subject to, eating and Drinking to excess in their Feasts. See Note on 1 Cor. 11.21. and were, saithHist. lib. 5. ab initio. Tacitus, Projectissima ad libidinem gens, a Nation very prone to Lust. Ver. 6. Ye have condemned and killed the Just, and he doth not resist you. , &c.] Here Oecumenius saith, ; this is undoubtedly to be referred to Christ, who is emphatically stiled the Just one, Acts 3.14.7.52.22.14. SoDial. cum Tryph. p. 234. Ju∣stin Martyr, , ye have kil∣led the Just one, and before him the Prophets. But against this Interpretation it is objected by Esthius, 1. That the Apostle here speaks by way of distinction to the Rich, who drag'd the Christians before the Tribunals, whereas the Death of Christ is imputed to the Princes and Rulers of the Jews, and to the People in the General, Acts 3.14.7.52.13.27, 28.
2. Because 'tis said in the present Tense, and he dth not resist you, whereas had this been spoken of Christ it should have been said, he did not resist you; and therefore Oecumenius doth acknowledge this is to be extended also to all these Just Men, St, Stephen and others who suffer'd in like manner from the Jews according to our Lord's Prediction, Matth. 24.9. and St. Paul's Confession, That before his Conversion he Persecuted this way unto the Death, Acts 22 4. Hence this Passage is conne∣cted to the ensuing words directed to the Chri∣stians in General by this Particle therefore. Ver. 7. Be patient therefore, Brethren, un∣to the coming of our Lord (to avenge you of these Murtherers;) behold, the Husbandman waiteth for the precious Fruit of the Earth, and hath long patience for it till he receive the former and the latter Rain, (the first to make the Corn sown, swell and grow up, the lat∣ter to make the Ear plump before Harvest.) The Husbandman waiteth, &c.] So the Targum of Jonathan, in 2 Sam. 23.4. com∣pareth those who expect the Years of Conso∣lation, to the Husbandman, who in a Year of drought waiteth for Rain upon the Earth. Ver. 8. Be ye also patient, stablish your Hearts (in expectation of this advent,) for the coming of the Lord is at hand. , the coming of the Lord is at hand.] He speaks, saith. 21. v. 22. Oecu∣menius, of the coming of the Romans to capti∣vate the Jews, which he calls the coming of our Lord, as St. John does, Chap. 21.22. And this Exposition is confirm'd, 1st. From the constant use of the like Phrase, , the day of the Lord is at hand, Isa. 13.6. Ezek. 30.3. Joel 1.15.3.14. Obad. 15. Zeph. 1.7, 14. from the Evils which he saith are coming on the Rich, ver. 1. and which then especially came upon them. 2dly, From his saying this coming is at hand, and the Judge standeth at the door, ver. 9. which in St. Peter's Phrase is, , the end is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7. which answer exactly to the words of Christ touching the Destru∣ction of Jerusalem, then shall, , the end come, Matth. 24.14. it is near, , even at the door, ver. 33. Her Desolation, , draweth nigh, Luke 21.20. See Note on Philip. 4.5. And this was a true ground for Patience, and answers the Objection of Esthius against this Exposition. Ver. 9. Grudge not (Gr. groan not) one a∣gainst another, Brethren, (as Men impatient and desiring Vengeance, use to do,) lest ye be condemned, (as wanting in that Patience which ought to have its perfect Work in you, and in that Christian Charity which requires you to pray for Mercy, and not to cry for Ven∣geance on your Enemies;) behold the Judge (who will plead your Cause against your per∣secuting Brethren) standeth at the dor. , groan not.] These Groanings in the Scripture have a Voice and Cry, and God is said to hear them. Thus the Children of Israel groaned by reason of their hard Bondage, , and their cry came up to God, Exod. 2.23. and the Spirit is said to inter∣cede in Christ's Suffering Members with groans unuttered, Rom. 8.26. Thus David prays, That God would hear the voice of his Groan∣ings, and the Groaning of the Prisoners, Psalm 102.5, 20. These Groanings, when they are only the natural Issues of an afflicted Soul, move God to pity, Judges 2.18. and remem∣ber us in Mercy, Exod. 6.5. but when they are the Fruits of Impatience under Troubles, and a desire of Revenge upon our Enemies, they tend to our Condemnation; and the persecuting Jews being of the same Stock with the converted Jews, their groaning against them is stiled Groaning against one another. It is the Observation of. Apol. 2. p. 88. B. Justin, That the Converts among the Gentiles were not only more than those among the Jews, and the Samaritans, but also that they were better Christians, and more truly so, for these Jew∣ish Converts were still leavened with an ex∣pectation of a temporal Kingdom, and with expectations of Liberty from the Roman Yoke, and the Dominion over all Heathen Gover∣nours. Whence the Apostles do so frequent∣ly enjoin them to be subject to the Higher Powers, Rom. 13.1. to be subject to Princi∣palities and Powers, Tit. 3.1. to be subject to every humane Ordinance, and not to use the Liberty to which they were called, as a Cloak of Maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.13-16. Now these, as Dr. Hammond well observes, lived intermixed with the unconverted Jews and Zealots, who were still grudging and con∣tending against all that would not stand up for Liberty, and fight for this temporal King∣dom, accounting them. Joseph. de Bello. Jud. Lib. 7. c. 30. p. 985. F. no better than the very Heathens upon that account, and these may be the Grudgers here intended. Ver. 10. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets who have spoken (to you Jews) in the Name of the Lord, for an Example of suffering Af∣flictions, and of Patience, (i. e. of patient Suf∣fering; for they had experience of cruel Mockings, and of Death, and yet they suf∣fered
these things patiently, Heb. 11.36, 37.) Ver. 11. Behold we count them happy that endure (Afflictions for Righteousness sake, and for the tryal of their Faith, Matth. 5.12. 1. Pet. 4.14.) ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen (i. e. known) the end of the Lord, that the Lord is pitiful and of tender Mercy, (as then he was to him a De∣liverer, and a Rewarder of his Patience, so will he be to you.) The Patience of Job.] Hence may we very probably conclude, that what is written in the Book of Job, is truly an History of what appened to him, and not, as some conceive, a Parable or Fiction of a thing not truly done. For feigned things contain no serious Motives nor just Examples to Patience. 2. We find this Holy Man numbred with Noah and Da∣niel, as Persons very prevalent in Prayer, Ezek. 14.14, 20. as therefore Noah and Da∣niel were Persons truly prevalent in their Supplications, Gen. 8.21. Dan. 9.23. so also Job must be, as he is represented, Chap. 42.8, 10, Ver. 12. But above all things swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, (i. e. let your Actions be agree∣able to your Words. See Note on 2 Cor. 1.17.) lest ye fall into Condemnation. , swear not.] i. e. Let not your Afflictions move you to use rash Oaths, as Men are wont to do when much provoked: That rash Oaths are only forbidden here and Matth. 5.34. See the Note there. The Oaths here forbid being such as our Impatience un∣der Sufferings, and our unbridled Passions do produce. , that ye fall not in∣to Condemnation.] Some Copies read, , into Hypocrisie; but, 1. This Read∣ing is not found in many Copies. 2. The Apostle, ver. 9. puts them in mind of the Judge standing at the Door, requiring them not to grudge against one another, lest they be Condemned by him; 'tis therefore far more probable he speaketh also here of Con∣demnation by the Judge. 3. To be false un∣to the Oath of God is Perjury in the proper sense, for which God threatens he will not hold the Offender guiltless, but is not pro∣perly Hypocrisie. If therefore this had been the meaning of St. James, Swear not, lest you be tempted to the violation of your Oaths, he should have called that Perjury, and not Hy∣pocrisie. Ver. 13. Is any Man afflicted among you, let him pray (to God to alleviate and sanctifie his Affliction;) is any merry, let him sing (Praises to that God who hath given him this chearfulness of Spirit.) Ver. 14. Is any Man sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord. Ver. 15. And the Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord (in Answer to this Prayer of Faith) shall raise him up; and if he hath committed (such) Sins (as brought this Sickness on him) they shall be forgiven him (upon this Prayer of Faith.) , the Elders of the Church.] That was the Office of the Presbyters, , to visit all the sick, we learn from the Epistle of Polycarp, ad Philip. §. 6. But that these Presbyters should be Bishops properly so cal∣led, as some conceive, seems not very pro∣bable; for then it must not only be the Of∣fice of the Bishop personally to visit the Sick, but the Duty of every sick Person to send to him, and to no other. Yea, there must be more than one Bishop in the Church of which the sick Man is a Member, and he must be obliged to send to more, for the Text runs wholly in the Plural, let him call for the El∣ders of the Church, , and let them (not one of them) pray over him, and therefore the sick Man must be obliged by this Text to call for more than one of them, where more were to be had, as we know there were in the Primitive Constitution of the Church. Anointing him with Oil.] This was agree∣able to the Practice of the (p) Jews, who a∣nointed the Sick, pro more, customarily, saith their Tradition, hence, though our Lord only commissioned his Disciples to heal the Sick, Matth. 10.8. Luke 9.2. yet St. Mark in∣forms us, that they added their usual Cere∣mony in doing this, for they anointed many that were sick with Oil, and healed them, Mark 6.13. And St. James speaking to the Elders of the Jews, bids them use this Unction in the Name of the Lord, as doubtless the Apo∣stles did, as in casting out of Devils, Luke 10.17. so in healing the Sick, Acts 3.16.4, 10, 30. And this addition made the Cure miraculous. , and the Prayer of Faith shall save the sick.] Among the , or the miraculous and extraordinary Gifts vouch∣safed at first to the Preachers of the Gospel, and to the Rulers or Elders of the Churches, was the Gift of Faith, as in those words, to another is given Faith by the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.9. i. e. by a strong impulse of the Spirit, fully persuading them that God would enable them to do this or that. This seems to be that Faith which is stiled, , the Faith of God, to which even the removing of Mountains, or the performing things mostSee Light. in Matth. 6.17.
difficult and extraordinary is promised, Mark 11.22, 23. Matth. 21.21. and of which the Apostle speaks, saying, If I had all Faith so as to remove Mountains, 1 Cor. 13.2. and by which they healed the Sick, even by Faith in his Name, Acts 3.16. and therefore this is here promised, that where the Prayer of the Elders was attended with such a Faith, it should be still successful for the healing the Sick, or the raising him up again from the Bed of Sickness; for, , will save, is , he will raise him up. And if he hath committed Sins.] i. e. Such Sins for which God was pleased to inflict this bodily Disease upon him, as he did on the Members of the Church of Corinth for their disorderly celebrating the Lord's Supper, for which cause, saith the Apostle, many are weak and sickly among you, 1 Cor. 11.30. they being thus chostned of the Lord. ver. 32. And where the Sickness is by way of Chastisement, the healing it is a testimony of God's Forgive∣ness of it. Hence thy sins be forgiven, is our Lord's usual Expression when he healed the Sick, Matth. 9.2, 6, 7. See the Note there. According to those Words of the Prophet Isaiah, The Inhabitants shall not say they are sick, the People shall be forgiven their Iniquity, Chap. 33.24. Hence it is evident, that here is no Foundation for the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, called by the Roman Church the Sa∣crament of the dying, and administred for the Purgation of their Sins, when they seem past hopes of Recovery; for how can they gather a Sacrament of Extreme Unction from an Un∣ction that is not Extreme, or a perpetual Or∣nance from an action that was not extraor∣dinary and miraculous, and is long since cea∣sed? How can they prove a Sacrament that is proper to dying Persons, from a Rite used only upon Persons who were not to die, but to be raised up from Sickness? or promise to him Forgiveness of his Sins, to whom they cannot promise that Recovery which was the token of it? Moreover, the things observ'd already afford us a sufficient Answer to the Objections of Esthius against our Exposition, which are these: Object. 1. First, That the Grace of Miracles extended not to Spiritual Effects, as the For∣giveness of Sins, but Temporal. Answ. This is said in flat contradiction to our Lord, who doth so often Preface his mi∣raculous Cures of the Sick with this Expres∣sion, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, Matth. 9.2. Nor was this Forgiveness so much a Spiri∣tual Effect as Temporal, it being only the Remission of a Temporal Punishment of Sin, viz. Sickness inflicted for it. Obj. 2. Had the Apostle spoke of miracu∣lous Cures, he would only have advised them to call those who had the Gift of Healing, whether Presbyters or not, not all the Pres∣byters, and them only. Answ. He reasonably adviseth to call them, and them only to pray over the Sick, who were by Office appointed for that Work, and doth here only tell them what they might expect from it, when that miraculous Faith was raised in them, which often, in those Times of Miracles, accompanied their Pray∣ers. Obj. 3. The Apostle speaks of a sick Chri∣stian Brother to be anointed by a Faithful Presbyter, whereas the use of Miracles was chiefly for converting Infidels, and hence this Unction was not used towards Trophimus left at Miletum sick, 2 Tim. 4.20. or to Epaphro∣ditus, sick near unto Death, Philip. 2.27. Answ. If it were not used by St. Paul to them, and especially to Epaphroditus, 'tis cer∣tain that he knew nothing of this Sacrament. 2. Esthius hath no cause to assert that of Mi∣racles in General, which the Apstle saith on∣ly of the Gift of Tongues, that they were only for Believers; the Gift of Healing, for ought he knows to the contrary, might be still exercised upon Believers, but only under the Conduct of the Spirit, raising up this mi∣raculous Faith which assured them of it in respect to some, and not to others, as he saw fit. See Note on Philip. 2 27. Obj. 4. That had the Apostle intended mi∣raculous Healing, Oil had not been prescri∣bed, Christ having said, they should lay their hands on the sick only, Mark 16.18. Answ. One Ceremony excludes not the o∣ther; moreover laying on of Hands is there prescribed in Preaching to the Gentiles, anoin∣ting with Oil here to the Jews as being cu∣stomary in case of Sickness. Obj. 5. All the other things delivered in this Epistle belong the Christians of all Ages, this therefore must do so too. Answ. As if this hindred the Apostles, as they had occasion, to give Rules touching the Spiritual Gifts proper to their own Times, that, when they spake of other Mat∣ters not to cease, their Precepts reach unto all Times. St. Peter in his following Epi∣stle hath one direction concerning those Spi∣ritual Gifts, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. though the o∣ther Precepts contained in that Epistle do con∣cern all Ages. Ver. 16. Confess (therefore) your sins one to another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed, the effectual fervent (Gr. the inspired) Prayer of a Righteous Man availeth much. Ver. 17. Elias was a Man subject to like Passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not Rain, and it rained not upon the Earth by the space of three Years and six Months. Ver. 18. And he prayed again, and the Heaven gave Rain, and the Earth brought forth her Fruit. , the inspired Prayer.] As
they who were inwardly acted by an evil Spi∣rit were stiled , so they that were acted by the Holy Spirit, and inwardly moved by his Impulses, were also , in the good Sense, and therefore it seems most pro∣per to apply these Words not to the Prayer of every Righteous Person, but to the Prayer offer'd up by such an extraordinary impulse, not only from the force of this Expression, but, 2dly, from the same thing here mention∣ed, as the subject of this Prayer, that our Sick Brother may be healed, which was to be done by the Prayer of Faith, ver. 15. 3dly, From the Example of Elias, for his Prayer was the Prayer of Faith in the sense now mentioned, for he absolutely foretold, and confirm'd it with an Oath, that there should be no Rain those Years, but according to his word, 1 Kings 18.1. And his Prayer for Rain was upon God's Promise to send Rain upon the Earth, Chap. 19.1. Three Years and six Months.] So Luke 4.35. when therefore it is said, that Elijah came to Ahab in the third Year, and the Lord said, I will send Rain upon the Earth. Note, that Elias tarried before a Year at the Brook Ke∣rith, and then in the middle of the third Year came to Ahab. Ver. 19. Brethren, if any of you do err from the Faith, and one convert him, Ver. 20. Let him know that he who con∣verteth the Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins. This seemeth to be meant not of the Sins of the Person thus converted, for the saving of his Soul includes the Remission of his Sins, but of the Sins of him that converts him, i. e, this charitable Work shall be so pleasing to God, as to prevail with him to cover many of his Sins.
THE PREFACE TO THE First Epistle of St. PETER. COncerning this Epistle, allow'd by the Church of all Ages to be the Ge∣nuine Work of the Apostle Peter, it may be enquir'd, 1. When, 2. Whence, 3. To whom, 4. On what Account it was writ∣ten. And, Quest. 1. 1st. Whereas it is ordinarily af∣firm'd by the Romanists, that this Epistle was written in the Forty-fourth Year of Christ, as that Opinion seems to have been taken up by them in favour of their avowed Tenet that St. Peter was Twenty-Years in that See, and there∣fore he dying in the Year of our Lord 69. must have come thither in the Year 44. So is it easily confuted both from this Epistle, and by many other cogent Arguments. 1. From these words of this Epistle, Ch. 4.8. , the end of all things is at hand; that is, saith Dr. Hammond, who also follows this Opinion, the great fatal De∣struction to the Obdurate Jews so often spo∣ken of by Christ, and his Apostles, is now near at hand; which could not have been said in the Forty-fourth Year of Christ, that is about Twenty-six Years before it happened, seeing the Apostle St. Paul in his Second Epistle to the Thessalonians writ, saith the Reverend Dr. Hammond, A. D. 51. warneth the Thes∣salonians not to be shaken by any Word or Epistle as coming from the Apostles, which intimated that the coming of the Lord was at hand, and so he must have contradicted St. Peter, had he delivered this positively Seven Years before. 2dly, the Apostle James hath the like Expressions, saying, , the coming of the Lord draweth near, Chap. 5.8. Behold the Judge stands, , before the Door; whence Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Lightfoot well conclude, That this Epistle could not be written long be∣fore the Death of St. James, which happened in the Year 63. And this Argument concludes as strongly for this Epistle's being indicted after the same time. Add to this that these Expressions, , and , the end, the coming of the Lord is at hand, and, , before the Door, are plainly taken from our Saviour's Words in his Prediction of the Destruction of Jerusalem; where also the Time is fixed by two remark∣able Characters, 1. When you shall see Jeru∣salem compassed about with Armies, then know ye, , that her Desolation draweth near, Luke 21.20. That is, saith Dr. Hammond, when you see Jeru∣salem besieged by the Romans, then know the Destruction of the City is near. Now this happened not at all till the Twelfth of Nero, and the Sixty-sixth Year of our Lord, whenJoseph. De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 39. Cestius besieged Jerusalem; it happened not, say the best Interpreters, according to the Words of the Evangelist, till the Year 68. when Vespasian coming thither, his Army. Ibid. L. 5. c. 28. p. 893. B. compassed the City round about. These, saith St. Luke, are the days of Vengeance, when all things which are written shall be fulfilled, ver. 22. and then shall they see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds, ver. 27. Again, our Lord having foretold all the Signs of his coming, , and of the end of the Jewish Age, adds, when you see all these things come to pass, then know that this Desolation, , is nigh, even at the Door, Matth. 24.33. Mark 13.29. clearly shewing that Phrase importeth still a nearer approach of that great Desolation. 2dly, That St. Peter was not at Rome, nor departed from Judea, till a long time after the Forty-fourth Year of Christ, is so evident from the History of the Acts, and the Epistles of St. Paul, that he that runs may read it. For, That St. Luke in an History design'd
especially to record the Acts of St. Peter and St. Paul, should omit a matter of such vast Moment and Importance to the whole Christian World, happening within that very time in which he speaketh of St. Peter; that speaking of him Chap. 12.17. He departed, and went to another place, he should not say as Bellar∣min and Baronius, that place was Rome, but in flat Contradiction to them, that he went down from Judea to Caesarea, and there a∣bode, ver. 19. That he should tell us how Aquilla and Priscilla came from Italy, because Claudius had commanded that all the Jews should depart from Rome, but should not tell us, as they do, that St. Peter came thence to Jerusalem on the same account, and therefore was found present at the Counsel of Jerusalem about Six Years after, but speak of him there, as if he never had left Jerusalem; That in this Council he should urge against the Neces∣sity of imposing Circumcision on the Gentiles, only the Example of Cornelius, and his Kins∣men, converted and not circumcised, and say not one word of the Church of Rome, the Seat of all spiritual Power and Infallibility, and to which all other Churches were to veil and do Homage, converted by him in like manner, and free also from the Yoke of Circumcision; Nay, that he should not mention that ever he was there, in an History continued till the fifth Year of Nero, though he mentions his Travels to his Preaching, and abode at several other places; these sure are things sufficient to convince all unprejudiced Persons, that St. Peter was not then at Rome. 3dly, The same may strongly be concluded from the Epistles of St. Paul. For about the Year 57, saith Bishop Pearson, he writ his Epi∣stle to the Romans, in which he spends the greatest part of one Chapter in saluting parti∣cular Persons that were there; but yet we find no Salutation to St. Peter. Who, had he been then at Rome, would doubtless have been men∣tion'd in the first place; and yet in so large an Epistle, he neither is directly, nor indirectly taken notice of. Moreover, St. Paul himself, in the beginning, intimates his earnest desire to come thither, that he might impart unto them some spiritual Gifts, to the end they might be establish'd in the Faith; for which there could be no apparent Cause had the Apostle Peter been there so long before him. St. Paul himself soon after comes to Rome, which when the Brethren heard of, they came to meet him as far as Appii Forum, Act. 28.15. but not a word of St. Peter either coming or sending to him. When he is come, he goes not to sojourn with, or so much as to salute St. Pe∣ter, which sure he would have done if he had been there, but dwells in his own hired House. Being come, he calls the chief of the Jews to∣gether, who desire to hear of him what he thought of the Sect of the Christians, they knowing this only of it, that it was everywhere spoken against, ver. 22. And what then had St. Peter, the Apostle of the Circumcision, been doing all this while among them? And how un∣likely is it that there should be then, asPreface to the Epistle to the Romans. Dr. Hammond saith, a Church consisting much of the Jews residing there? And how reflecting on the supposed Labours of St. Peter among the Jews there, are the following words, ver. 26, 27, 28. that because they would not hear, or be converted, he would not leave them to St. Peter, but turn unto the Gentiles, who would hear, After his-coming to Rome, he writes Epistles to several Churches, to the Ephesians, Philippians; Colossians, and one to Philemon; in which two last we have sent from Rome the Salutations of Aristarchus, Marcus, Justus, Epaphras, Luke, and De∣mas, Colos. 4.10-14. Philem. 23, 24. but not a word from St. Peter. In that to the Co∣lossians, he tells them he had no other Helpers, or Fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God among the Jews, which had been a Comfort to him, but Aristarchus, Marcus, and Justus, Chap. 4.10, 11. which evidently excludes St. Peter. In his Epistle to Timothy he saith, that at his first Answer at Rome, all Men forsook him, 2 Tim. 4.16. which we can hardly believe, had St. Peter been there. He adds, that only Luke was with him, that Crescens was gone to this place, Titus to that, and Tychicus was left at another. Strange therefore is it, that if St. Peter were then gone from Rome, St. Paul should take no notice of it. Was he a Person so inconsiderable, as not to deserve to be remembred? Or was he gone upon a sleeveless Errand, not worthy of the Notice of St. Paul? Or was he not rather one who being not at Rome, could give St. Paul no reason to take notice of him when he writ from thence. But this Subject is so fully han∣dled, and the Hypothesis of Baronius so learn∣edly confuted byIn the Life of St. Peter. Dr. Cave, that 'tis super∣fluous to insist longer on this Subject. Quest. 2. To the Second Enquiry, Whence this Epistle was Indited? I have returned a sufficient Answer in the Note upon these words, Chap. 5.13. The Church which is at Babylon saluteth you, by shewing that by Baby∣lon Rome is to be understood; whence this Epistle must be therefore written. And then it must be written after the Persecution in the 10th of Nero, when neither Paul nor Peter were at Rome. Quest. 3. That it was written to the Jews dispers'd through Pontus, Galatia, Cappado∣cia, Asia (minor) and Bithynia, the InscriptionWhence by Tertullian in Scorp. and by St. Cyprian, l. 3. Test. §. 39. it is stiled, Epistola Petri ad Ponticos. shews; but that it must be also written ei∣ther to the Gentiles proselyted to the Jewish
Religion, of whom see the Note on 1 Pet. 1.1. or to the Converts of the twelve Tribes scat∣ter'd among the Heathens, and there serving their Gods, according to the Threat denounced upon them Deut. 28.36, 64. that they should serve other Gods which neither they nor their Fathers had known, seems evident from these words, that they were deliver'd, from their vain Conversation delivered to them from their Fathers, Chap. 1.18. See the Note there, that in times past they were not the People, but now are the People of God; that they had not obtained mercy, but now had obtained mer∣cy, Chap. 2.10. which words were spoken of the Ten Tribes; Hos. 1.10.2.23. and that the time past might suffice them to have done the Will of the Gentiles, when they walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Re∣vengs, Banquettings, and ahominable Ido∣latries, Chap. 4.3. To imagine that the Apostle is here speak∣ing of the Dispersion mention'd Acts 8.1. is to speak what is very improbable, they being dispersed only into the Countries of Judea and Samaria, saith the Text there; nor is it said that any of them travell'd any farther than Phoenice, Cyprus, and Antioch, Chap. 11.19. Nor is it likely that many of them travell'd so far, the Churches of Judea and Samaria having Peace soon after this Disper∣sion, Act. 9.31. That any of them went to all, or any of the Places here mention'd by St. Peter, we have no reason to imagine, but that there was long before a great Dispersion of the Jews throughout these Parts of Asia. See the Note on Jam. 1.1. Lastly, Upon what Account this Epistle was written, we may best learn from the Epistle it self; which informs us, 1st. That it was written to encourage them to persevere, and to continue constant under those manifold Temptations, Chap. 1.6. those fiery Trials, Chap. 4.12. and Persecutions, Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5. they were then subject to. 2dly, To preserve them from being concern'd in the Jewish Wars, or bearing any part in that Rebellion against Caesar and his Officers, which was then beginning among the Jews, Chap. 2. from ver. 12. to the 23d, and Chap. 3.16, 17, 18. And 3dly, To engage them to lead a Christian Conversation, that so they might bring over others to the Christian Faith, Chap. 2.12. Chap. 3.1. and might stop the mouths of those who spake against them as Evil-doers, Chap. 3.16.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE First Epistle of St. PETER. CHAP. I. Ver. 1. PETER an Apostle of Jesus Christ (writeth) to the Strangers scatter'd throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia (mi∣nor) and Bithynia. , to the Strangers.] He writes especially to the Dispersion of the Jews to whom the word Strangers or Foreigners here chiefly doth belong; but not them only, for he speaks to them also, Who in time past had walk'd according to the will of the Gentiles in abominable Idolatries, Chap. 4.3. and of them who formerly were not the People of God, and had not found mercy; We therefore are to un∣derstand that among them were many devout Greeks and Proselytes of the Gentiles conver∣ted with them to the Christian Faith: Thus when St. Paul and Barnabas preached in a Sy∣nagogue of the Jews at Iconum a great multi∣tude both of Jews and Greeks believed, Act. 14.1. and Paul Preaching at Ephesus, and thereabout, two years, prevailed so, that all that dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus both Jews and Greeks, Act. 19.10. See Chap. 17.4, 12.18.4. In the Acts of the Apostles we read of Proselytes of all Nations. They were reckoned in the days of David and Solomon 153600 Persons, 2 Chron. 2.17. In the days of Artaxarxes, we are told that , many of the Heathens were circumcised, and turn'd Jews, v. 8.17. And so it was also in the suc∣ceeding Ages; for Josephus informs us, that after the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, the Jews in Antioch, and other places,, De Bell. Jud. l. 7. p. 973. B. al∣ways converting to their Worship, a Great many Greeks, made them as it were a part of themselves and at Damascus he saith they would have destroy'd the Jews among them, but that they feared their own Wives, L. 2. c. 41. p. 822. B. who all except some few, were Converts to the Religi∣on of the Jews. , of the Dispersion.] i. e. dispers'd through Pontus, &c. The Apostle speaks not of the Dispersion made by the Persecution mention'd Act. 8.1. for that scattered the Christians only through Judaea, and Samaria, ibid. Nor were they afterwards dispersed far∣ther by the malice of the Jews, but went themselves to preach the word, not in Asia, but in the parts of Syria in Phoenice, Cyprus, and Antioch, Act. 11.19. Of their Disper∣sion thence into Asia we read not one word, but that there were before Great Dispersions of the Jews through the places here menti∣oned from the time of the Captivity under Salmanasser, we learn from Agrippa's Address to Caius where he informs him that they possess'd, Phil. legat. ad Calum, p. 798. C. most parts of Asia, to the outmost borders of Bithynia and Pontus. Ver. 2. (That is to those of them who are) Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience and (to the) sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus, (wishing that) Grace to you and Peace be multiplied. , Elect.] i. e. to the converted Jews stiled the Elect Mat. 24.22. See Note on Chap. 2.9. , according to the foreknowledge of God.] Discovered in the Prophetical Wri∣tings which foretold of these Blessings to be conveyed to them by the Messiah, who also is said to be foreknown before the Foundations
of the World; i. e. prophesied of from the beginning, Gen. 3.15. but manifested in the last times for them, ver. 20. , through Sanctification of the Spi∣rit.] The great Principle of all true Obedi∣ence; so ver. 22. having sanctified your Souls or Lives to the Obedience of the Truth through the Spirit. , and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus.] By way of Obsignation of that Cove∣nant by which we are engaged to that Obedi∣ence; for so it was in the Delivery of the Old Law. For upon reading of that Covenant in the Audience of all the People, and upon their professing, All that the Lord hath said we will d, and be obedient; Moses took the Blood, and sprinkled it upon the People, and said, Behold the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words, Exod. 24.7, 8. So Dr. Hammond. Or to that sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ which cleanseth us from all Sin, 1 Joh. 1.7. i. e. from all the sinful Imperfections which cleave to our Obedience, and by which the full Pardon of our past Sins is obtained, and we obtain an Entrance into the Holiest of all, Hebr. 10.19, 20. and which procures for us not only Acceptance upon Earth, but an In∣heritance in Heaven, Hebr. 9.15.12.24. Ver. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abun∣dant mercy hath begotten us again into a lively (Gr. living) hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Ver. 4. (We being begotten by his Resurre∣ction, as the first-fruits of ours, 1 Cor. 15.20.23.) to (the hope of) an inheritance in∣corruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not a∣way, reserved in Heaven for you (Believers.) , the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.] Here, saith Schlictingius, as formerly the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob distinguished the one true God from any other, so now this Phrase distinguisheth him from Jesus Christ, whose God and Father he is called. But yet the Primitive Fathers thought otherwise; for they stiffly maintain∣ed, against the Gnosticks, who held there was another God above the God of Abraham, &c. or the God of the Jews, thatJustin M. de Angelo Domini Mosae apparente, . Dial. cum Tryph. p. 284. A. & p. 275. D. , p. 251. D. 287. B. 354. A. 355. B. Solus & verus Deus super quem ali∣us Deus non est, Iren. l. 3. c. 6. neminem alium Deum vel dominum vocaverunt Apostoli nisi solum Deum verum pa∣trem & verbum ejus qui in omnibus principatum ejus habet, l. 3. c. 16. He was the God and Father of all, supra quem non est ali∣us, and yet that Jesus Christ was God, as be∣ing in the Father from all Eternity, and recei∣ving the Divine Nature from him. , to a living Hope.] i. e. Ei∣ther Hope that giveth Life, as  living Water, Joh. 4.10, 11, 14.  the li∣ving Bread which came down from Heaven, of which if a man eat, he shall live for ever, Joh. 6.51.7.38.  the living Ora∣cles, Act. 7.38. which if a Man observe, saith Moses, he shall live by them, Levit. 18 4.  a living way, Heb. 10.20. as lead∣ing to Life eternal. And  living fountains of Waters, Rev. 7.17. for by Hope we are saved, Rom. 8.24. Or a Hope that makes us active and lively, joyful and com∣fortable in our Lives, rejoycing in hope of the glory of God, Rom. 5.2. In which sense it is said of the Word of God, that it is  living and active, Hebr. 4.12. of the Members of Christ's spiritual House, that they are , i. e. living Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. And we are bid to offer our Bodies, , a living Sacrifice, Rom. 12.1. Hence it seems to fol∣low, that the Jews before had not this lively Hope, which our Lord's Resurrection mini∣sters. , undefiled.] The Land in which Men who are Sinners dwell on Earth, is said to be defiled by their Sins. Lev. 18.28. Num. 5.3.35, 34. Deut. 21.23. Isa. 24.5. Jer. 2.7.16.18. Heaven, into which no unclean thing can enter, being the only Inheritance undefiled. Ver. 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto (the) Salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. , who are kept by the power of God through Faith.] Not that all who have true Faith are kept by the power of God, so as that they certainly shall continue in the Faith; but, that they shall be thus preserved, if they continue in the Faith rooted and setled, and are not removed from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. If they keep the beginning of their confidence firm unto the end, Hebr. 3.14. , the Salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.] i. e. Say some, the Deliverance ready to be vouchsafed to the Christians at the De∣struction of the Church and Polity of Jeru∣salem, this being the Salvation then ready to be revealed. But this seems not very proba∣ble; 1. Because in this Salvation Christians are said to rejoyce greatly, or to exult for joy, Ver. 6. which it becomes not them to do for temporal but for spiritual Blessings. 2ly, Be∣cause 'tis the Salvation not of our Bodies but our Souls, even that Salvation which is the end of Faith, ver. 9. See the Note there. To the Argument produced for that sense from the words, I Answer, 1. That though the last Times, and
Days in the Plural, do mostly signifie the times of the Gospel-Dispensation concur∣ring with the last Times of the Jewish State; yet in the Singular, it often signifies the time of the Resurrection, or the last Judg∣ment, especially when it is joyned with the Resurrection of the Body mentioned here, ver. 3. So John 6.39. I will raise him up,  in the last day. See ver. 40, 44, 45. Chap. 11.24. I know that he shall rise in the last day, and Chap. 12.48. the word that I have spoken shall judge him in the last day. 2ly. As there is mention of a double Reve∣lation of Jesus Christ; one when he appeared as a Prophet to the World, stiled usually  the manifestation of Jesus Christ, another at the Day of Judgment, stiled  the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.7. the Revelation of Jesus Christ from Heaven, 2 Thes. 1.7. his Glorious Re∣velation, 1 Pet. 4.13. and here emphatically the Revelation of Christ, ver. 7.13. So is there a double Revelation of the Salvation promised in the Gospel, one by the Preaching of the Gospel which brought Life and Salva∣tion to light, 2 Tim. 1.10. and a farther Re∣velation of it to be made hereafter, when Christ who is our Life shall appear, Col. 3.3, 4. 1 Joh. 3.2. stiled the Glory ready to be re∣vealed when the great Shepherd shall appear, 1 Pet. 5.4. the Glory ready to be revealed at the Redemption of our Bodies, Rom. 8.18, 23. to which this Passage may refer. Ver. 6. Wherein (i. e. on the account of which) you Greatly rejoyce, though for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. , if need be.] This is great conso∣lation under all the Afflictions of God's Ser∣vants, that they then only shall befall them when God sees them needful for the promotion of his Glory, or for the furtherance of our Sal∣vation, as when they tend to make us Parta∣kers of his Holiness, and to work in us the comfortable fruits of Righteousness, Hebr. 12.10, 11. or work for us an eternal and exceed∣ing weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. by con∣forming us to him in Sufferings to whom we shall be like in Glory, 1 Pet. 4.13. Rom. 8.17.2 Tim. 2.11. Ver. 7. That the trial of your faith being (which is) much more precious (and advan∣tageous to you) than the trial of Gold that perisheth, though it be tryed by fire (or, though upon trial it endure the fire) might be found to your praise, honour, and Glory, at the appearance of Jesus Christ (in Glo∣ry.) .] Proved to be Ge∣nuine by the Fire it endures, as your Faith is by patiently enduring fiery Trials. See Note on Chap. 4.12. Ver. 8. Whom, having not seen, ye love, in whom, though now you see him not, yet (Gr. not now seeing but) believing, ye re∣joyce with joy unspeakable and full of Glory. .] If this reading be true, it is most proper to translate the words thus, Whom having not known; if , as other Copies have it, and all the Versions do tran∣slate it, be the true reading then our Transla∣tion is right also. Ver. 9. Receiving the end of your Faith, even the Salvation of (your) Souls. .] The preservation of your Lives, so Dr. Hammond, but there is no  in the Greek, to Answer to the word your in the English, and the Salvation of Lives seems not so properly assigned as the end of our Faith, as the Salvation of Souls, as we may learn also from the following words. Ver. 10. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you (i. e. of the Grace to be brought unto us at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, ver. 13. Mat. 13.17.) Ver. 11. Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signifie, (or to what time he did relate,) when he testified, before hand the Sufferings of Christ (in Himself, and his Members) and the Glories that should follow (them, Dan. 9.24.) .] The particle  is oft redundant. See Nald. p. 66, 67. and p. 464. or it may here be rendred de, of what time, as 2 Cor. 12.6. let no Man think  of me, more than he ought to think, Eph. 5.32. I speak  of Christ and the Church, Act. 2.25. David spake  of him. So Act. 25.20. Hebr. 7.14.  of which Tribe. the Spirit of Christ which was in them.] That is, say the Socinians, the Spirit in them which spake of Christ; as the Word of Life, and of Salvation, is the Word which speaks of Life, and of Salvation. But in this sense he might as well have been stiled the Spirit of Antichrist, or the False Prophets, because he also spake of them. All the An∣cients agree in the other Sense, that Christ spake by his Spirit in the, Ign. Ep. ad Magnes. §. 8, 9. Spiritus Prophetarum, , Barnab. §. 9. , Just. M. Ap. 1. p. 49. A. Ap. 2. P. 76. D. . Clem. Al. adm. ad Gent. p. 7. B. & Strom. 6. p. 642. B. Theoph. ad Autol. l. 2. p. 88. Iren. l. 4. 2. 9. Hippol. de Antichristo, §. 2. Tertull. adv. Mat. cion, l. 2. c. 27. adv. Prax. c. 16. Prophets, they
being inspired with his Grace, and taught by his Spirit, their words proceeded from the Divine Word moving them, and by him they prophesied; he spake in Isaiah, in Elias and in the mouth of the Prophets. So the Fa∣thers. Ver. 12. To whom it was revealed; yet not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the (same) things which are now reproved, (or have been now declared) to you, by them who have preach'd the Gospel to you, by the Ho∣ly Spirit sent down from heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into. , by the Holy Spirit sent down from Heaven.] Hence it is evident that the Apostles, in all those Writings in which they declared the Gospel of Christ were  Men assisted by the Holy Ghost, and that they in preaching, and enditing the Gos∣pel were acted by the same Spirit who moved formerly the Prophets. See the General Pre∣face to the Epistles. , Angels desire to look into.] And shall holy Prophets be so desirous to know the time when these things should happen, and holy Angels so diligent to look into these Glo∣rious Revelations: and shall we to whom, and for whose happiness this Gospel was re∣vealed, neglect not only to obtain, but even to know this Great Salvation? Some refer this to Dan. 8.13. , the Sufferings of Christ.] Not only in himself, but in his Mem∣bers, and the Glories which should be after as well to them, as to their Saviour, Rom. 8.18. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.13. as appears from ver. 13. where this Glory is stiled the Grace to be brought to us at the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Ver. 13. Wherefore Girding up the loins of your mind, be sober (Gr. Vigilant,) and hope to the end, for the Grace that is to be brought (Gr. that is brought) to you at (by) the Revelation of Jesus Christ, (who hath brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1.10.) Note, that from this and the foregoing Verse we have several Arguments, to prove these things relate not to the temporal De∣liverance of Christians from the Persecutions of the Jews, but to their Deliverance from the guilt of Sin by the Blood of Christ, ver. 19. and that eternal Deliverance which is the the Object of the Christians hope. For, 1st. that cannot properly be stiled the Grace which is to come to us by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, that being the Grace which brings Sal∣vation, Tit. 2.11, 13. 2ly. That was not the thing which they who preached the Gospel did , declare unto us; but as St. John informs us, they did , shew unto us eternal life, 1 John 1.2. 3ly, They could not be the things the Angels did desire to look into. 4ly, The motive to Per∣severance to the end is not a temporal Deli∣verance from the Jews, but a Spiritual and Eternal Deliverance, Rom. 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. Hebr. 10.35, 36. Ver. 14. As (it becometh) Children of obedience, not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts (you practis'd) in your ig∣norance. Ver. 15. But as he (God the Father, ver. 17.) who hath called you is holy, so be ye ho∣ly in all manner of conversation. Ver. 16. Because it is written (thus,) be ye holy for I (the Lord your God) am holy (Lev. 11.44.19.2.) .] The Holiness of God in Scripture, hath respect unto a double Object, viz. Sin; and so it doth import his perfect freedom from, his hatred of, and opposi∣tion to all Impiety. 1. His entire freedom from all Impurity, for God is light, saith the Apostle, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 Joh. 1.5. He is a just God, and without iniquity, Deut. 32.4. A God of purer Eyes than to be∣hold evil, Hab. 1.13. i. e. without the great∣est Detestation. 2ly, His perfect hatred of it; whence he is said to loath, detest, and to abhor it, and the Workers of it; and it is sti∣led the abominable thing which his Soul hateth, Jer. 44.4. And since God's Nature is immu∣table, his Holiness unchangeable, he must for ever hate with a most perfect hatred whatso∣ever is unholy, and impure; and to suppose an Interruption in his Hatred of evil Doers, is to imagine he can cease to be a pure and holy God. And, 3ly, From this Hatred naturally flows a just assurance of his Opposition to all Impiety and Unholiness that he by no means will clear the Guilty, Exod. 34.7. or let the Sinner always go unpunished, Nah. 1.3. And this seems to be the Import of the Holiness of God we are here called to imitate, because it stands in Opposition to the former lusts of their ignorance: or 2ly, God's Holiness re∣spects such Persons as are by Consecration, or by Resemblance of him, holy; and so it inti∣mates his Great Affection to them, and Con∣cernment for them. Ver. 17. And if ye call upon the Father, who without respect of Persons judgeth according to every mans works, pass the time of your socurn∣ing here in fear (of condemnation from this impartial judge at that day) .] i. e. without difference of Nations, whether Jew or Gentile, or with∣out respect had to any mans Progenitors in the Great day of his Account, Act. 10.34, 35. Rom. 2.58. See Note on James 2.1. Ver. 18. For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, (such) as (are) Silver and Gold, (such as the Jews brought up to Jerusalem to buy their offerings,) from (the demerit of) your vain conversation received by tradition from your Elders (Gr. Forefathers;)
Ver. 19. But with the precious blood of Christ (who was delivered up to Death for you) as a lamb without blemish, and without spot. , from your vain Conversation.] Two Expressions in this Chap∣ter seem to intimate that the Apostle speaks here not only to the native Jews but also to the converted Gentiles. 1st. His Exhortati∣on to them not to fashion themselves accor∣ding to their former lusts  in your ignorance, which Phrase in the New Testament hath still relation to the times of Ignorance in which the Gentiles lay before the preaching of the Gospel to them. So Act. 17.30. , the times of igno∣rance God winked at, Eph. 4.18. being dark∣ned in your mind , by the igno∣rance that is in you. 2ly, This of their Con∣versation received by tradition from their Fore-fathers, for though the Scribes and Pharisees had delivered traditions to the People, which rendred the Worship of God vain, Mat. 15.9. yet a vain Conversation received by Tradition from their Forefathers, seems rather to respect the Conversation of the Heathens,  be∣ing the word by which the Conversation of the Gentiles is designed, Ephes. 2.3.4.22. 2 Pet. 2.7, 18. and  here added to it determining the Conversation to the Worship of vain Gods, Act. 14.15. Eph. 4.17. Their Plea for their Religion and vain Worship be∣ing also this, that they received it from their Fathers. Their great Plea for it being this, theyPlato Tim. p. 1053. E. Cicero de Natur. Deorum, l. 3. n. 3. 6. were not to be moved by any perswa∣sions from the Religion which they had receiv'd from their Forefathers. But yet I confess these things may relate to the Gentile Proselytes among the Jews which were very numerous. See Note on ver. 1. , a lamb without blemish.] Christ being perfect, and without spot of Sin, was typifyed by the Lamb offer'd daily for their Sins; and that Lamb being bought with the half Shekel, every one gave for the buying of the daily Sacrifice, Exod. 30.14, 15, 16. and which was therefore stiled Keseph Kippurim, the money of Expiations, and was sent up to Jerusalem from every City of Judea, and all the Provinces where the Jews liv'd, in Silver, and Gold, the Apostle may here allude to this when he saith, you were not redeem'd with Sil∣ver and Gold by which the daily Sacrifice was bought which made atonement for your Souls, but with the precious Blood of Jesus, who shed his Blood for our Redemption from that Death which by our Sin we had contracted. Others refer this to the Paschal Lamb, by the sprinkling of whose Blood, they were deli∣vered from Destruction when the first born of the Aegyptians perished, Exod. 12.11, 17. Both these Lambs were to be perfect, and without Spot that they might be accepted, Exod. 12.5. Lev. 22.21. Ver. 20. Who verily was foreordained (Gr. foreknown, i. e. designed as the Messiah) before the foundation of the world, but was manifested in these last times for you (1. sakes.) , foreknown.] TheCartw. Mellif. l. 1. p. 2974, 2975. Jews say, that When God created the World he held forth his hand under the Throne of Glory, and created the Soul of the Messiah, and his Company, and said to him, wilt thou heal, and redeem my Sons after six thousand years? He answered Yes. God said to him, if so, wilt thou bear Chastise∣ments to expiate their Iniquity, according to what is written Isa. 53.4. Surely he here our Griefs? He answered, I will endure them with joy. And to this Representation of this Covenant made with the Messiah before the Creation of the World, it may be the Apostle here refers. See the Note on Eph. 1.4. In the Stile ofDe Plant. Noc. p. 169. D. . De Con∣fus. Ling. p. 258. A. B. Philo, he is , the eternal word, the first-born and the most ancient Son of the Father, by whom all the Species were framed. This therefore is according to the received opi∣non of the Jews. Ver. 21. Who by (Faith in) him (thus risen) do believe in God which raised him up from the dead, that your Faith and Hope (of a blessed Resurrection) might be in God. , by him do believe in God.] Here the Socinians object thus, He by whom we believe in God, is not that God in whom we believe, for the means of faith can never be the object of it, but Christ is he by whom we believe in God, ergo, Christ is not God. To this I Answer, That Christ according to the Nature which dyed for us, and which was raised from the dead, is he by whom we believe in God, i. e. own him to be able to raise us also from the dead; and accor∣ding to the same Nature we acknowledge him not to be God, but that hinders not his being God according to that Nature by which he had Power to, and did actually raise himself from the Dead, Joh. 10.18.2.19. But still they object, that by him we believe in him that raised him from the dead, that our Faith and Hope might be in God, to wit, the Father; Faith therefore and Hope in Christ, is not Faith and Hope in God. Answ. 1. It only follows hence that it is not Faith and Hope in God the Father; but 2ly, The Apo∣stle
here saith, that by believing in him who raised up Christ from the Dead we believe in God, because we believe in that divine Pow∣er which can raise us also from the Dead; since therefore the Holy Scripture expresly and frequently asserts that we shall be raised up from the dead by the voice of the Son of God, Joh. 5.25, 28. and that because as the Father hath life in himself, and so is able to give Life to the Dead, so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself, ver. 26. Seeing Christ often saith of him that believeth in him, I will raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6.39, 40, 44, 54. for I am the resurrection and the life, Joh. 11.24, 25. Since the Apo∣stle saith he hath dominion over the dead and over the living, Rom. 14.9. that by him all men shall be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. and that he will change our vile bodies into the likeness of his Glorious body according to the mighty power whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, it rather follows hence that our Faith and Hope in Christ thus raising us from the Dead, as his Father did him, is Faith and Hope in God. Ver. 22. Seeing ye have purified your Souls, in (by) obeying the truth through the Spirit, (by whom you are enabled to perform this Obedience,) to unfeigned love of the Brethren (which is one part of that Obedience,) see that you love (Gr. ye will love) one another from a pure heart fervently. Ver. 23. Being born again not of corrup∣tible seed (as is that from which you had your first Nativity, whence you also who are thus begotten are corruptible,) but of incor∣ruptible, (as being born again) by the word of God which liveth, and abideth for ever. Ver 24. For all flesh is as Grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of Grass, (as then) the Grass withereth and the flower of it falleth away, (so will it be with our Bo∣dy of Flesh.) Ver. 25. But the word of the Lord (saith the Prophet, Isa. 40.8.) abideth for ever (in its self as being of eternal Truth, and in its Effects upon us as nourishing us to Life eternal) and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached to you. , being born again of incorrup∣tible seed.] Here is a farther Evidence, that the word of God is the ordinary means of our new Birth. For 'tis , the word preached, (not any inward word infused) which is here stiled that incorruptible seed from which this new Birth is derived. , the word of God liveth.] This Epithete is ascribed to the word of God, Hebr. 4.12. and that this is not spoken of the living God, is evident, because in the Greek it is not , but . i. e. not by the word of the living God but by the living word of God. 2ly, That it is to be understood of the word preached is clear, because the Epithete living and abiding forever, agrees to the same thing. Now the Apostle saith it is the word preached which abideth for ever, and so the Prophet Isaiah had said before him. Chap. 40.8. . CHAP. II. Ver. 1. WHerefore laying aside all malice, and all guide and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speaking, (Vices to which the Jewish Nation was then very prone, and for which they are severely taxed by their own Josephus; See the parallel place Jam. 1.21. and which are contrary to the great Chri∣stian command of Love and obstructive of the Word of Truth by which we are born a∣gain.) Ver. 2. As new born Babes, desire the sin∣cere milk of the word, that (as you were be∣gotten, Chap. 1.23. so) you may grow there∣by (unto a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, Eph. 4.13.) .] The Milk which rational Creatures feed on; so  is the Service performed by Men of Reason, Rom. 12.1. It seems to be the same in sence with the same ingrafted word, Jam. 1.21. Ver. 3. If so be ( since) ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious, (as having pardoned them who crucified him, and pro∣cured the favour of God to them. That  sig∣nifies since, see Note on Eph. 3.2.) Ver. 4. To whom coming as to a living stone, disallow'd (Gr. rejected) indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, , disallowed or rejected of men.] i. e. Of the Jewish Sanhedrim, the Builders mentioned Psal. 118.22. So R. Solomo Jarchi on those words of Mich. 5.2. out of thee shall come a Governour that shall rule my people Is∣rael, i. e. the Messiah, the Son of David, shall come from thee, as it is written Psal. 118.22. the Stone which the Builders refused is become the head Stone in the Corner. And so our Lord expounds these words of the High Priests Scribes, and Pharisees, Mat. 21.42, 45. Luk. 20.17, 19. So Peter full of the Holy Ghost, Act. 4.11. Ver. 5. Ye also as lively (Gr. living) Stones, are built up a spiritual house, and are an holy Priest hood, to affer up spiritual sacrifices ac∣ceptable to God by Jesus Christ. , a living Stone ver. 4. living
Stones.] The Christian Church being not a Building made up of Materials without Life, as was the Temple of Jerusalem, but a spi∣ritual Building consisting of the Members of Christs Body living by the Spirit communica∣ted from Christ their head, and the fountain of Life to them, Eph. 4.16. Col. 2.19. He who Communicates this Life to them is there∣fore stiled a living Stone, and they who re∣ceive it from him are also living Stones; and being by this Spirit thus fitly put together, compacted, and edified into one building, Rom. 14.19. 1 Thes. 5.11. are said to be built up a Spiritual House. , an holy Priesthood.] The le∣gal Sacrifices were to be offer'd by the Priests alone, and only in the Temple; accordingly the Christian Church is here represented as God's Temple; the Praises they offer up to God in their Assemblies are stiled spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ, Hebr. 13.15. the Persons who offer them an holy Priesthood. See ver. 9. , spiritual Sacrifices.] Thus Philo having said, agreeably to the Psalmist, that God delights not in Hecatombs, since the whole World is his, and he can want nothing, addsDe Vict. Offer. p. 657. F. that Men , then offer the best Sacrifice when they honour their Benefactor and Saviour with Hymns. He adds, that the Al∣tar for burnt offerings was made of stone, and placed in the Court before the Tabernacle, but the Altar of Incense was of Gold, and in the holy place within the Veil. Whence he infers, that as much as Gold is better than Stone, and the Holy Place more sacred than the Court,P. 638. B. , so much is the Thanksgiving offer'd up with Incense better than that of Sa∣crifices. And lastly, he saith, that the Fire always burning on the Altar was ,Ibid. F. a Symbol of Thanksgiving. And this Thanksgiving sent up to God, with the Oblation of Bread and Wine in the Eucharist in Commemoration of our Saviour's Passion, and with Prayer for our Acceptance through this beloved, is by the Primitive Christians stiled their spiritual Sacrifice, and that pure Incense which, according to the Prophet Ma∣lachi, chap. 1.11. the Gentiles were to offer to God throughout the World. Ver. 6. Wherefore it is contain'd in Scrip∣ture, Isa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, elect, and precious; and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded (Gr. ashamed.) (And it is also written in the same Scripture, Behold I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, Isa. 8.14, 15. Rom. 9.33.) That both these Stones relate to the Mes∣siah, see Voysin in Rom. 9.33. and Pug. Fid. part 2. c. 5. §. 2. p. 274. Ver. 7. To you therefore that believe he is precious (Gr. , belongs the honour of being thus built upon the corner-stone to a spiritual house;) but to them who are disobe∣dient (belongs what is written, Psal. 118.22.) the stone which the Builders disallowed the same is made the head of the corner. Ver. 8. And (also what is written Isa. 8.14, 15.) a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence (or falling,) even to them who stumble at the word being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed. , whereunto also they were ap∣pointed.] That is, saith the Reverend Dr. Ham∣mond, they that disobey the Gospel, that stand out obstinately against it, were appointed by God to stumble and fall at that Stone, i. e. to be bruis'd, and ruin'd by that means, to be destroy'd among the Crucifiers of the Messiah, and condemn'd with them hereafter, it being just with God, that they who will not reform and amend at the preaching of the Gospel, and so receive benefit by it, should for their Obstinacy be condemn'd, and so the worse for it, Christ being sent for the falling as well as the rising of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. and the Gospel being a savour of death to them that perish, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. And they being those whom , God hath appointed for wrath, 1 Thess. 5.9. And to be sure it cannot signifie that God absolutely ordained the unbelieving Jews , for then the Disobedience would be a compliance with the Divine Ordinance, or Will, and so could not deserve the Name of Disobedience; nor could this Disobedience be objected to them as their Crime, unless Compliance with his Ordinance and Will be so, and it be a Fault to be such as God by his immutable Counsel and Decree hath ordain'd we should be, or that should render Men criminal and obnoxious to Pu∣nishment, that they have not made void God's absolute Decree, or done what that made it impossible for them to do. Wherefore this Passage cannot signifie that the unbelieving Jews were appointed to Disobedience, but only that being disobedient to the Gospel so clearly revealed, and by so many Miracles and Distributions of the Holy Ghost confirmed, they were appointed to the Punishment of that Disobedience, to fall and perish: for so the Hebrew , and the Greek  and  import, viz. the Ruin and Fall of them who stumble at this Stone, as hath been proved Note on Rom. 14.13. See Prov. 16.19. Isa. 8.14, 15. Jer. 6.21. Ezek. 3.20.21. 15. Zech. 12.3. Matth. 21.41. Luke 20.18. So OEcumenius on the place, This is not spoken as if they were by God appointed
to this; . Or, 2dly, The Words may be thus construed to them who are disobedient, and through that Disobedi∣ence stumble at the Word, this other Chara∣cter of the Stone belongs, of a Stone of stum∣bling, whereunto these Stones were put, one for Honour to the Believer, the other for a Stone of stumbling to the Unbeliever, and disobedient, for to both these Stones the A∣postle Paul, Rom. 9.33. and St. Peter here, do put this Preface, Behold, I lay in Zion a Stone. And this agrees with that of Simeon, Behold, the Child is placed for the fall and ri∣sing of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. Ver. 9. But ye (who are built upon him) are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should shew forth the Praises of him that hath called you out of Darkness into his marvellous light. , his Praises] or Glory, , is so rendred by the Septuagint, Isa. 42.8. I will not give my Glory to another, , nor my Praise to graven Images. And ver. 12. Let them give Glory to the Lord, , let them shew forth his Praises in the Islands. And Chap. 43.21. he stiles Israel my Elect, as here my peculiar People , to shew forth my Praise. See also Chap. 63.7. Habb. 3.3. Zech. 6.13. The Titles here given to the Christians, are the same which formerly were given to the whole Jewish Nation, and are accordingly to be interpreted. , a chosen or elected Nation.] Not only the righteous and obedient Persons among them, but the whole Nation of the Jews, are stiled the elect of God, throughout the old Testament; thus Deut. 4.37. because he loved thy Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Ja∣cob, therefore , he chose you their seed after them, and brought you out of Aegypt by his mighty power. Where it is evident that their whole Seed, even all that came out of Aegypt, were the elect, Deut. 7.6, 7. Jehovah thy God hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people to himself, above all people that are on the face of the Earth. The Lord did not set his love upon you because you were more in number than any people; but because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn to your Fathers, hath he brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen. Where evident it is, 1st. That their being chosen before other Nations to be God's peculiar People, is their Election. 2ly, That all that were brought out of Aegypt were thus beloved, and thus elected. 3ly, That to these elect and cho∣sen People God only promiseth to keep Cove∣nant and Mercy, provided they would love him and obey him, and that he threatneth to destroy them and to repay them to their Face, if they neglected so to do. In the tenth Chap∣ter, ver. 14, 15, 16. he speaks thus, The Lord hath a delight in thy Fathers to love them , and he elected you their seed after them above all people; circumcise therefore the fore-skin of your hearts, and be no more stiff-necked. Where, again, evident it is, that the whole Seed of Abraham by Isaac, even the stiff-necked of them, were the beloved and elect of God. Chapter the 14. he saith to all to whom the following Precepts did belong, and therefore doubtless to all Is∣rael, Thou art an holy people to the Lord thy God, , and the Lord hath chosen thee out to be a peculiar people above all Nations. And with this Notion of the Words ac∣cords the constant use of the same Phrase in all the Prophets, and sacred Writers of the Old Testament. Thus Solomon saith, 1 Kings 3.8. Thy Servant is in the midst of thy people or  which thou hast elected, a great peo∣ple that cannot be numbred, nor counted for multitude, Psal. 105.6.43. In the Book of Psalms the Jews in general are stiled the seed of Israel his Servant, the Children of Jacob , his Elect. Psal. 135.4. There doth he say , the Lord hath chosen Jacob to himself, and Israel for his own inheritance, Psal. 106.5. There doth he tell us, that the Lord brought forth his People with joy, , and his elect with gladness- There he desires of God,  the Good of his elect, to rejoyce in the gladness of his Nation, so that throughout the Psalms God's Ser∣vants, his People, his Nation, his Inheri∣tance, and his Elect, are the same Per∣sons. In the Evangelical Prophet we read God speaking of Jacob  whom I have elected, and Israel whom I have loved, Isa. 41.8, 9. and to whom he speaks thus, Thou art my Child whom I have chosen, Chap. 43.20, 21. There God declares he will make Waters in the Wilderness and Rivers in the Desarts,  to give Drink to my chosen Generation, my People whom I have chosen to shew forth my Praise, Chap. 45.4. There we read of Jacob my Servant, and Israel mine Elect, Chap. 65.9. and of a Mountain which his Elect shall inherit, and in which his Servants shall dwell. In the Prophet Jeremy we find God is dis∣pleas'd with them who said, the two Fami∣lies  whom the Lord had chosen, he hath even cast them off, Jer. 33.24. The Prophet Ezekiel speaks of the Day when the Lord chose Israel, and lifted up his hand to the Seed of the House of Jacob, Ezek. 20.5. The Prophet Zechariah stiles God, the Lord who hath chosen Jerusalem, Zech. 3.2. And
Daniel speaks of a time when  his Elect should not be able to stand before their enemies, Dan. 11.15. And, to carry on this Phrase even to the Times of the New Testament; In the Book of Esther we are told of a Time in which  the chosen Generation should have perished, Esth. 16.21. i. e. in which the wicked Haman designed to cut off the Jews. In the Book of Ecclesiasticus we are informed that Joshua was made great  for saving the Elect of God, and taking vengeance on their Enemies that rose up against them, Eccl. 46.1. that he might set Israel in their Inheritance. Thus have I traced this Phrase throughout the whole Old Testament, and shew'd, that it belongs not to particular Persons, but the whole Jewish Church and People in the Gene∣ral, to the Bad as well as to the Good among them, to them to whom God threatneth the worst of Evils, as well as them to whom he promised the greatest Blessings. When in the New Testament this Phrase is applied to the Jews, it plainly signifies as ma∣ny of them as were converted to the Christian Faith, though afterwards too many of them fell off from it, or brought not forth those Fruits of Righteousness which Christianity re∣quired, and is applied to them all in general, and without distinction. And it is highly rea∣sonable to conceive it should be so, for the Apostles writing to that Nation, who had been still accustomed to this Notion of the Word, and were all stiled the Elect, they must be supposed to use the Words of the Old Testament in that sense in which they al∣ways understood them: That the Apostle doth here so use the Word, is evident from this Consideration, that the Holy Nation, the Pe∣culiar People, the Royal Priesthood, joined with it, are Expressions belonging primarily to that Nation, and from them derived to the Christians. 2dly, That this Epistle is writ to the Elect, that is, the Strangers of the Disper∣sion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, they all being stiled the Elect, i. e. such as professed Christianity, and so were vi∣sible Members of the Church of Christ, where∣as too many of them were not so according to that Meaning of the Word Elect, which makes it to import Men absolutely designed for eter∣nal Happiness, as this and the second Epistle may inform us. 3dly, That the second Epistle sent to the same Persons, writes only to them who had obtained like precious Faith with us, and so informs us that the Faithful and Elect are in St. Peter's Phrase the same: and that this is the Notion of the Word in all the other places of the New Testament, see proved in the Notes upon them; and that it is ap∣ply'd to whole Churches, and scarce ever to any private individual Person in that sense in which it hath so generally been used by some late Divines. , a Royal Priesthood.] Exod. 19.6. A Kingdom of Priests: Kings and Priests, saith the Chaldee. And so St. John declares, that Christ hath made us Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1.6.5.10. Kings to reign with him, Chap. 20.6. and Priests to offer up unto him our spiritual Sacrifices. See here ver. 5. , an Holy Nation.] i. e. a People separated to God from all other Nations, and from their Idolatry and false or antiquated Worship, to serve him in an acceptable man∣ner. On which account all Christian Churches being called out of the World, and dedicated to the Service of God by Jesus Christ, are in the Preface to St. Paul's Epistles stiled Saints. See Note on 1 Cor. 1.2. , a peculiar People.] A Trea∣sure, as the word Segullah signifies, a People in Covenant with God, and so become his Peculium, whom he will be careful to protect and preserve, and to whom belong his pecu∣liar Favours and Privileges. Ver. 10. Who in times past were not the people, but now are the people of God; who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. .] These Words plainly relate to God's dealing with the Ten Tribes of Israel, when he had given them a Bill of Divorce, Jer. 3.8. and sent his Prophet Hosea to say unto them, You are not my People, neither will I be your God, Hos. 1.6, 9. And again, I will no more have mercy on the house of Is∣rael, but will utterly cast them away. And indeed, God having so expresly said that the Children of Judah and Israel should be ga∣thered together, and appoint themselves one Head, that he would have mercy upon her who had not obtained mercy, and would say to them who were not his People thou art my People, Hos. 1.11.2.23. and that they should say thou art my God, and that the House of Judah should walk with the House of Israel, I doubt not but that there was a considerable Return of the Ten Tribes, or at the least a considerable Conversion of them in the places where they were: and though they being mix∣ed with the Heathen, did many of them serve their Gods, as he threatned they should, Deut. 28.36, 64. and so may also be said to be called from darkness unto this marvel∣lous light; yet since the Apostle Paul applies this Passage to the Gentiles, Rom. 9.25. I doubt not but that in the mystical sense it must relate to them also. Ver. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims (to) abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the Soul. , as Strangers and Pilgrims.] They whose Citizenship is in Heaven, and whose Names are written in Heaven, Philip. 3.20. Hebr. 12.23. must be Pilgrims and Strangers upon Earth. See Note on Hebr. 11.13.
, war against the Soul.] For whereas the natural motion of that Spiritual Being is towards spiritual and heavenly things, these Lusts, saith OEcumenius, draw down and captivate the Soul to sensual and worldly things: as therefore Strangers and Pilgrims are not wont to be affected much with the Objects which they see in their Travels, so neither should we, who profess to be Pilgrims in this World, be much affected with sensual Objects. Ver. 12. Having your Conversation honest (Gr. honourable) among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may by your Good Works which they shall behold (be induced to) glorify God in the day of Visitation. , speak Evil of you as of evil doers.] Here OEcumenius gives this Re∣lation from Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons concern∣ing the Martyrs, Sactus and Blandina; that the Heathens apprehending the Servants of some Christians, and compelling them to de∣clare what Evil they knew of them, these Servants having heard from the Christians that the Holy Sacrament was the Body and Blood of Christ, and thinking that it was , verily and substantially his Flesh and Blood, related this to these Enquirers, and they thinking , that this was done in very deed by Christians, told this to other Heathens, and compell'd the Martyrs, Sactus and Blandina, by Torments to confess it. To which Blandina answered, How can they be guilty of such things, who by Exercise (i. e. through Temperance) permit not themselves to enjoy lawful Flesh. , in the day of Visitation.] That is, when they afflict and persecute you, so , and  often signify in the Septuagint, Isa. 10.3. What will you do, , in the day of Visitati∣on, when your Affliction shall come from far? Jer. 6.15. , in the time of their Visitation they shall perish, and again, Chap. 10.15. Wisd. 3.7. , in the time of their Visitation they shall shine. Ecclus. 2.14. Woe to them who have lost Pati∣ence, what will they do, , when the Lord visits. And Chap. 18.20. Before the Judgment examine thy self, , and in the hour of Visitation thou shalt find Propitiation. Ver. 13. Submit your selves (Gr. be subject therefore) to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme. Ver. 14. Or unto Governors as to them who are sent by him for the Punishment of evil doers, and for the Praise of them that do well. , by him.] That is by God, saith Esthius, because these Governors were not al∣ways sent by Caesar for these Good Ends, but it is sufficient that this was the general End of Government, to be for the Punishment of evil doers, &c. and therefore they in Charity must be supposed to be sent by Kings and Empe∣rors for those Ends. Ver. 15. For this is the Will of God (con∣cerning you) that (so) with well doing you may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men. (i. e. of those Gentiles which estimating you by the turbulent Jews, are apt to represent you also, as , a People naturally averse from Subjection to Kings. Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 8. p. 782. F. Ver. 16. As free men and (but) not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness (as the Jews do,) but as (those who are) the Ser∣vants of God, (and so for Conscience towards him are subject to his Ordinance.) .] That the Gnostoicks pretended to any such Liberty as exempted them from Subjection to Superiors I find not in Church-History, but that the Jews to whom St. Peter writes, and especially the Zealots among them, were notorious for this Doctrine, and were practising it at the writing of this Epistle is evident. For, 1st. They held themselves obliged to own. Eleazar. apud Joseph. l. 7. c. 34. p. 989. G. . Cap. 37. p. 995. B. Vide D, E, F. & Notas in 2 Thes. 2.4. God alone as their only Lord and Governor in Opposition to Caesar, and all Kings which were not of their own Nation, and did not govern them by their own Laws, or his imme∣diate Appointment. 2dly. They, many of them, rebell'd against the Romans, and against the Governors sent by them upon this very Pretence, That. Ib. l. 2. c. 23. p. 797. C. D. Vid. l. 2. c. 28. p. 804. E. l. 3. c. 25. p. 851. F. l. 4. c. 13. p. 874. C. l. 7. C. 30. p. 985. F. they were a Free People, and ought to preserve their Liberty. And thus they used their Li∣berty for a Cloak of Maliciousness. Ver. 17. Honour (therefore) all Men (even Heathens), love the Brotherhood, fear God, ho∣nour the King. (Who then was Nero the worst of Kings, and the Persecutor of Chri∣stians.) Ver. 18. Servants (also) be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. , Servants be subject.] This also was a Lesson needful for the Jews, because
the Essens among them, say Philo and Jose∣phus, thought it against the Law of Nature to be Servants to any; and their Rabbins al∣low'd not a Jew to be a Servant to an Hea∣then. See Note on 1 Tim. 6.1, 2. Ver. 19. For this is thankworthy, if a Man for Conscience towards God endure Grief, suf∣fering wrongfully. .] This will procure the Di∣vine Favour and Reward. So what is, , What thank have you? Luke 6.32, 33. is , What Reward have you? Matth. 5.46. and in the following Verse this Phrase is rendred, this is acceptable. Ver. 20. For what (Ground) of Glory is it (to you), if when ye be buffeted for your Faults, you do take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and (yet) suffer for it, ye do take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. Note 1st. From comparing this and the preceding Verse, that to suffer, V. 19. and to take our Sufferings patiently, V. 20. in the Scripture Import is the same thing. 2ly. That to do that which is truly accep∣table to God, is also Matter of our Glory. See Note on 1 Cor. 9.16. Jer. 9.24. Rom. 2.7, 10. Ver. 21. (And it is also sutable to their Profession) For hereunto were ye called: be∣cause Christ also (whose Followers ye profess to be) suffered for us, leaving us an Example, (both of well doing and patient suffering) that that ye should follow his Steps: Ver. 22. (For he was one) Who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, (and so he could not suffer for evil doing.) Ver. 23. (And also one) Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatned not, but committed himself to him that judgeth Righteously, (and so was an Ex∣ample of perfect Patience. Ver. 24. Who (was not only to us an Ex∣ample of Sufferings, but) his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteous∣ness, by whose Stripes ye were healed. , bare our Sins.] If these Words be truly render'd, he bare our Sins, 'tis cer∣tain that an innocent Person can only bear them by bearing the Punishment due to them. And that this is the proper import of those Words, , is evident both from the Prophet's Exposition of them, when he saith of the same Person, , he bore the Sins of many, Isa. 53.12. and expounds this thus, , he was delivered up to Death for their Iniquities; and from the usual import of the Phrase in the Old Testament, as when we read in the Book of Leviticus, Chap. 7.18. He that eateth of the Peace Of∣fering in the third day it shall not be favoura∣bly accepted, , he shall bear his Iniquity. And again, Thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thy Heart; thou shalt in any wise reprove him, , and not bear Sin for him, Lev. 19.17. And in the Book of Numbers thus, Your Children shall wander in the Wilderness Forty Years, , and shall bear your Whoredoms—Ye shall bear your Iniquities Forty Years, Numb. 14.33, 44. When we hear the Prophet Jeremy complaining, Our Fathers have sinned and are not, usabaln; , and we have born their Iniquities, Lam. 5.7. When we hear God saying to Ezekiel, Lie thou upon thy left side, and lay the Iniquity of the House of Isra∣el upon it, according to the Number of the Days that thou shalt lie upon it, , thou shalt bear their Iniquities, Ezek. 4.4, 5, 6. When it is farther said, The Soul that sinneth it shall die; the Son, , shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son, Ezek. 18.20. When we read so often in the Law of Moses, that such Persons have been Guilty, and, Lev. 5.1.7.18.24.15. Numb. 9.13. Ezek. 23.49. , Lev. 20.17. , Ver. 19, 20. shall bear their Iniquity, they shall die for it; and find so many Cautions there given to the Jews that they offend not in such a Kind,, Lev. 22.9. , Numb. 18.22, 32. that they bear not Iniqui∣ty, and die; or, least they bear Iniquity and die; in all these Places neither Socinians, or any other Persons do fancy any other Import of these Words, but that by bearing of Ini∣quity, and Sin, is meant bearing the Punish∣ment of Sin: And in these latter Places be∣ing punish'd with Death for it, when there∣fore the same Jews found it foretold of their Messiah, by their own Prophet, that he should bear their Iniquity, that he should bear the Sin of many, what could they understand by these Expressions but that he was to suffer the Punishment, and bear upon him the Bur∣then of their Sins. When the Apostle informs those very Jews who were so well acquainted with the import of this Phrase, that Christ was once offered, or given up to Death to bear the Sins of many; and when St. Peter writing to the same Jews, informs them, that he bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, how can we think otherwise than that they both apprehended, and that the Blessed Apo∣stles did design to teach them, that he suffer∣ed this Death as the Punishment of their Ini∣quities? Let Mr. le Clerk continue if he
please, to be confident that it is not so much the Expiation of Sins, as the Mortification of them that is here signified; whilst we poor Mortals rather think our Sins must be morti∣fied in us, than on a Tree, and in our own Bodies, than in Christ's, or in the Sufferings of his Body; and that 'tis not very good Sense to say, he mortified our Sins, that we might die unto them. Ver. 25. For ye were as Sheep going astray (from), but are now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls. These and the former Words are taken from Isa. 53.7. where the Words are, We as Sheep have gone astray, and the Lord hath laid on him the Iniquity of us all. Hence are both Jews and Gentiles represented as lost Sheep, and Christ as the good Shepherd who goes af∣ter them, and brings them Home upon his Shoulders. See Isa. 40.11. Ezek. 34.23. Here then is a farther Confutation of the So∣cinian Gloss upon the former Verse, viz. That Christ took away our Sins by his own Body Crucified upon the Cross, procuring our Ab∣solution from them by his Sufferings,Neque enim Christus perpessionibus suis iram Dei in nos conceptam exsatiavit, aut debita nostra propriè loquendo exsolvit, sed tantâ suâ & tam gratâ Deo obedientiâ, & sibi coelestem Gloriam, & suis omnibus peccatorum remissionem, Regni coelestis haereditate conjunctam, Dei beneficio, comparavit. Schlictingius in locum. Not that He underwent the Punishment of our Transgressions, but because his voluntary Death prevail'd with God to give him Power to ab∣solve his Servants at the last, and to reward them with eternal Glory. For were this the whole Import of the Words, why is it added, in plain Allusion to those emphatical Words of the Prophet Isaiah, He bare our Sins, the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes we are healed? Why is it so emphatically noted, That He who did no Sin, V. 22. yet bore our Sins? Doth not this lead us to this Sense, That He thus suffered not for his own, but for our Sins? Why is he said to take away our Sins in his own Body? Doth not that seem to intimate that the Pu∣nishment of our Sins was laid upon his Body? Why is he said to do this upon the Tree? Must not that intimate that what he did to take away our Sins was done upon the Cross? especially if we consider that the Cross was the Altar upon which he suffered, and that , to carry up upon the Altar, is the usualLev. 3.5, 11, 17.4.10, 26.6.10, 15.8.16. Numb. 5.25, 26. Phrase for offering the Sin-Offering, or the Burnt-Offering upon the Altar. And so the Import of this whole Sentence seems to be this; He bore, or took away our Sins in his own Body offered upon the Altar for us. Moreover, if this be chiefly done after Christ's Resurrection, and the great Day of Recompence, and only by Christ's Death, as it prevail'd with God to give him Power then to absolve us from our Sins, why doth the Author to the Hebrews make such a plain Distinction, if not an Op∣position, betwixt Christ's bearing our Sins, and his second Coming to give a final Absolu∣tion from them, saying, Heb. 9.27, 28. Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many, and to them that look for him, he will appear a se∣cond time, , without a Sacrifice for Sin, unto Salvation? Crellius allows that  signifies, without a Sin-Offering; and doth it not hence follow, that his First Coming to bear our Sins was his coming with a Sin-Offering for them? Since then the Sin-Offering still suffered in the Sinner's stead, and bore the Punishment of his Iniquity, it follows that he who came to be a Sin-Of∣fering for us, must come to suffer in our stead, and bear the Punishment of our Ini∣quities. Lastly, Admit the Words may be translated thus, He took away our Sins, it is most rea∣sonable so to interpret them as this Phrase is used in Scripture, when 'tis applied to the same Purpose. Now when it is there used of taking away Sin by a Sacrifice offered up to God for Sin, it always hath Relation to an Atonement made by the Sacrifice for that Ini∣quity; and that Sin-Offering is said to bear away the Iniquity, by taking it upon himself. So when 'tis said that the Sin-Offering is given, , to take away the Iniquity of the Congregation, it is there said to do it by making an Atonement for them before the Lord, Lev. 10.17. So it is said of the Scape Goat, That he shall bear away all their Iniqui∣ties; but then he must be presented before the Lord, , to make Atone∣ment with, or upon him, Lev. 16.10. i. e. Aaron must confess their Iniquities upon his Head, and he shall bear upon him all their Iniquities, , he shall take their Iniquities upon himself, and shall bear them away into the Wilderness. So Deut. 21.9. Thou shalt take away innocent Blood from among you; but this is to be done by making an Atonement for the innocent Blood shed. When therefore it is said that Christ was manifested to take away Sin, 1 Joh. 3.5. and that He took away our Sins on his own Body, and was offered to take away the Sins of many, Heb. 9.28. is it not reasona∣ble to suppose he did this by taking the Pu∣nishment of them upon himself, and making Atonement for them before God? especially if we consider that he is speaking to those Jews to whom these Phrases were familiar.
CHAP. III. Ver. 1. (AND to proceed to the other Re∣lations of Man and Wife) Like∣wise ye Wives, be in Subjection to your own Husbands, that if they (be such as) obey not the Word, they also without the Word (i. e. without attending to the other Demonstrati∣ons of the Truth of it) may be won (to the Faith) by the Conversation of the Wives: Ver. 2. Whilst they behold your Chast Con∣versation coupled with Fear. .] i. e. That they observing that the Fear and Reverence of that God you serve produceth in you all due Subjection and Obedience to them, great Chastity and Freedom from all Suspicion of Lust, great Meekness and Quietness of Spi∣rit in the Family, Sobriety in your Apparel, and Care of their Concerns, you may by these things commend to them, not only your own Persons, but that Faith which produces in you these good Fruits. Ver. 3. Whose Adorning, let it not be that outward Adorning, of plaiting the Hair, and wearing of Gold (Chains), or of putting on (gorgeous) Apparel. Ver. 4. But let it be (that of) the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not cor∣ruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which in the sight of God is of great Price. , not the outward Adorning, &c.] These in the Words ofPaedag. l. 2. c. 12. Clemens of A∣lexandria are, , the Or∣nament of Whores; and such as demonstrate , their Ar∣rogance, Softness, and Lasciviousness; the Plaiting of the Hair was, saith he, a Sign of corrupt Women,L. 3. c. 11. p. 248. ; And they that use them, saith he, were , attired like Whores. And as for the wearing of Gold,L. 1. c. 31. p. 165. Jambli∣chus in the Life of Pythagoras saith, , that no free Women wore Gold, but Whores only. The precious Apparel is the thing which all the Comedians mention as the Attire which such Women sought after, and gloried in. These things therefore, when they are used as such Marks of Distinction, are absolutely forbid chast Women. But when they cease to be so, they may be worn by Christian Wo∣men, provided they do it without Pride, or much concern about them; and still remem∣bring that Gravity in Apparel is still more honourable, and becoming Christian Matrons; and that the Ornaments of the Mind, which are not subject to Corruption, are much to be preferred before them. Ver. 5. For after this manner the holy Wo∣men also who trusted in God, adorn'd them∣selves, (with Chastity and Subjection,) being in Subjection to their own Husbands; Ver. 6. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham (in token of that Subjection,) calling him Lord: whose Daughters ye are as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement. (i. e. And be not moved by your Fears to deny the Truth, as she was, , for she was afraid, Gen. 18.15.) Ver. 7. Likewise also ye Husbands, dwell with them according to (the) Knowledge (of your Christian Duty, which requires you to love and cleave to your Wives, forsaking all other, and to render them due Benevolence,) giving Honour (or Conjugal Affection) to the Wife as to the weaker Vessel, (and so less able to contain, and more liable to Temptations,) and as being Heirs together of the Grace of Life; that your Prayers be not hindred (as they must be if you refuse to cohabit with them.) .] I am very uncertain what is the true Sense of these Words. The Reve∣rend Dr. Hammond interprets them thus; Let the Husbands in like manner live conju∣gally with their Wives, as Christianity re∣quires of them; giving them Maintenance, as Persons less able to provide for them∣selves, and considering that they are by God's Appointment Co-partners with them of the good Things of this Life; that so they may not be disturbed in their Prayers by their Di∣stractions and Sollicitudes for this World. Which Interpretation I should acquiesce in, could I find that the Phrase , being Heirs together of the Grace of Life, was ever used, only with respect unto the Good Things of this present Life: or that , signified only to be distracted in Prayers, and not ra∣ther to have them wholly hindred. Others interpret them thus, Let the Hus∣bands live with their Wives as Christianity requires, not irritating or provoking them, Col. 3.19. nor despising their Company; but giving Honour to them as most needing it, and as considering that they are equal to them in respect of Spirituals, that by their discon∣tents, Displeasure against, and Separation from one another, your Prayers be not hin∣dred. Others, as in the Paraphrase, refer this to Conjugal Relation, and to Conjugal Duties; as all the Ancients who have spoken of these Words interpret them. Oecumenius saith, he thinks they are to be interpreted, ,
, of the Conjugal Use of one ano∣ther; and the Word  seems to plead for this Sense; but then I find not that the Word  beareth any such Sense. Only to this it may be answered, That Origen seems to Point the Words thus; Let the Husband dwell with the Wife according to Knowledge, as being more infirm, giving Honour to them also, as being Heirs of the Grace of Life. And seeing  signifies to Marry, or contract Matrimony, the Words may be thus paraphra∣sed, Likewise ye Men, be ye joined in Mar∣riage with the Women as you find them en∣dued with the Knowledge of Christianity, they being the weaker Vessel, and so more subject without this Knowledge to miscarry: Giving Preference in your Choice to such as be Heirs together with you of the Grace of Life, that through Difference in Religion your Prayers be not cut off. Ver. 8. Finally, be ye all of one Mind, (mind∣ing the same Things,) having Compassion one of another (under all your Afflictions), love as Brethren, be pitiful, (as being the inter∣nal Motive to) be Courteous, (that being an Effect of Love.) Ver. 9. Not rendring Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing, (things contrary to Love, as shewing Rancour in the Heart and Tongue): but contrariwise, Blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, (i. e. for this very End) that you might inherit a Blessing (and so by blessing, others will imitate your Gracious God, and show how willing you are the same Mercies may be conferred on others). Ver. 10. For he that will love Life, (i. e. who is desirous of a quiet pleasant Life,) and (would) see good (i. e. prosperous) Days; let him refrain his Tongue from Evil (speaking, that so Men may refrain from speaking Evil of him again), and his Lips that they speak no Guile. Ver. 11. Let him eschew Evil, and do Good; let him seek Peace, and ensue it. (That so Men may be disposed to speak Uprightly, and do Good to you, and live Peaceably with you, and you may live under the Protection of the Divine Providence.) Ver. 12. For the Eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, (to protect them from Evil), and his Ears are open to their Prayers: but the Face of the Lord is against them that do Evil, (to return it upon their own Heads.) Ver. 13. And (this Deportment doth also naturally tend to preserve you from Evil, for) who is he that will (be so unnatural and un∣grateful as to) harm you, if ye be Followers of that which is good (and obliging to them)? Ver. 14. But if (it should so happen, that notwithstanding) ye (should) suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye; (Chap. 4.14.) and (therefore) be not afraid of their Terror, (i. e. of what they threaten,) neither be ye troubled, (for what they can inflict upon you), Ver. 15. But sanctifie the Lord God in your Hearts: and be ready always to give an An∣swer (or Account) to every Man that asketh you a Reason of the Hope that is in you, with Meekness and Fear. , fear not their Fear.] These and the following Words, Sanctifie the Lord God in your Hearts, are plainly taken from Isaiah 8.12. and they there are an Exhortation not to fear the Assy∣rians, nor to be dismayed, as those Jews were, who out of Fear were desirous to con∣federate with them: and so accordingly they must here signifie, that Christians were not so to dread those by whom they suffered for the sake of Righteousness, nor any that out of Fear conspired with them to avoid Persecution, as too many of the Jews did, Gal. 6.12, 13. , but sanctifie the Lord God in your Hearts.] This Phrase in Scripture seems to import these things: 1st, That we should always have upon our Spirits such an Holy Fear and Reverence of God as will prevail upon us to dread more his Displeasure, than any thing which we can suffer from the Hand of Man, Matth. 10.28. and so enable us to stick close to our Duty, and to endeavour to secure his Favour, what∣soever we may suffer by so doing. So Isa. 8.12, 13. Fear not their Fear; but sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himself: and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread. So Chap. 29.23. They shall sanctifie the Holy One of Ja∣cob, and shall fear the God of Israel. 2ly, To Sanctifie the Lord God in our Hearts, is from the Heart to own and to believe the Truth of all that God delivers by his Word and Promise: as when God saith to Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not to sanctifie me in the Eyes of the Children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this Con∣gregation into the Land which I have given them, Numb. 20.12. Hence the Apostle, ha∣ving told the Christians he writeth to them of the Engagements God had made, that his Eyes should be over the Righteous, and his Ears open to their Prayers, and minded them of the Hope that was in them, requires them thus to sanctifie the Lord God in their Hearts. 3ly. This Phrase imports a firm Belief of his Almighty Power, which makes him able to protect his People against all their Ene∣mies; and an Affiance in his Goodness and especial Providence towards them: Sanctifie the Lord God in your Hearts, and he shall be for a Sanctuary, Isaiah 8.13. So Ezek. 36.22, 23, 24. 4ly, To Sanctifie the Lord, is to acknow∣ledge and believe his Justice, and that he is a God who will be sure to execute his Judg∣ments on the Wicked, and more especially upon the Persecutors of his People. So when he executed his Judgments on Nadab and Abi∣hu, Moses declares; This is the thing the Lord
had spoken, I will be sanctified in those that come nigh me. So Numb. 20.13. This is the Water of Meribah because the Children of Israel contended with the Lord, and he was sanctified in them, by punishing their Rebelli∣on, saith the Targum. So God declares he would be sanctified upon Sidon, which had been to the House of Israel a pricking Briar, and a grieving Thorn, Ezek. 28.24. And up∣on Gog, the great Enemy of Israel, Chap. 38.3. So the Rabbins say, That when God doth Judgment, he sanctifies himself before his Crea∣tures; according to these Words of the Pro∣phet Isaiah, The Lord of Hosts shall be exal∣ted in Judgment, and God that is Holy shall be sanctified in Righteousness, Chap. 5.16. .] This Apology for the Hope that was in them, seems rather such as should be made by Works, than Words, against them who accuse the Professors of it as evil doers, rather than against them who only doubt of the Truth of it. And Ver. 16. Having (or retaining) a good Con∣science; that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers, (and consequently represent your Faith as instigating you to evil Practices,) they may be ashamed (of such false Accusati∣ons,) when they behold your good Conversation in (the Faith of) Christ. Ver. 17. (This care of retaining a good Concience is necessary, that you may have Comfort in your Sufferings, and be conform∣ed to Christ by them.) For it is better, if the Will of God be so, (and he sees fit to permit it,) that you suffer for well doing, than for evil doing. Ver. 18. For Christ also hath once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the Flesh, but quickned in the Spirit. , hath suffered for Sins.] Here note that Christ is not only said to suf∣fer for us, but to suffer for our Sins. Now was ever any Man said to suffer for his own Sins, who did not suffer the Punishment of his Iniquity? Why therefore should our Lord be said to suffer for our Sins, if he did not some way suffer the Punishment of our Ini∣quity? Again, is not the Sin-Offering in the Old Testament stiled, above sixty times, , and , the Offering for Sin; when therefore the Oblation of our Lord is also called, , an Offering for Sin, Rom. 8.3. when he is said to suffer, , for Sins, 2 Cor. 5.21. what could the Jews, to whom the Apostle writes, conceive to be the proper import of these Words, but that he suffer'd to make Atone∣ment for their Sins, as did all their Sin-Of∣ferings, by suffering in their stead, the Punish∣ment of their Iniquity? See the Notes on Rom. 8.3. 2 Cor. 5.21. , the Just for the Un∣just.] That is, saithNe injusti paterentur mortem aeternam, & suorum peccatorum poenas darent, victima enim patitur ne reus puniatur. Schlictingius, That the Unjust might not suffer Death, nor bear the Punishment of their Iniquities; for the Victim suffers least the Guilty should be punished. , that he might bring us to God.] This Phrase in all other places of the New Testament, where it is used with respect to Christ, imports his procuring to us Free∣dom of Access to God, who by our Sins were formerly excluded from him, and banished from his gracious Presence. By him we have, saith the Apostle Paul, . &, Admission to the Father; by him we do obtain , a Freedom of Access to God with Confidence. Eph. 2.18.3. 12. This is obtained, saith the same Apo∣stle, by Virtue of his Blood; for we, who sometimes were afar off, are by the Blood of Christ brought nigh unto him. We are brought nigh to him, saith St. Peter here, by his suffering for our Sins. Must not then we who were excluded and banish'd from him by our Sins, be brought nigh to and reconciled to him by the Blood of Christ, and by his Suf∣ferings for us on the Cross? Ver. 19. By which (Spirit) also he went and preached to the Spirits in Prison; Ver. 20. Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the Days of Noah, while the Ark was prepa∣ring, wherein few, that is eight Persons, were saved by Water. , to the Spirits in Pri∣son.] Or as other Copies read, , by which Spirit going he preached to those in Pri∣son. For Explication of which Words, note, 1st, That by those in Prison we may un∣derstand the Gentile World in Bondage and Captivity to Sin and Satan, held in the Chains of their own Lusts, and in the Bonds of their Iniquity. For by this Phrase the Evangelical Prophet doth thrice Express the Preaching of the Gospel by our Lord Christ: As in those Words, I gave thee for a Covenant to the Peo∣ple, for a Light to the Gentiles, to open the blind Eyes, to bring , the Prisoners out of Prison, and them that sit in Darkness out of the Prison-house, Isai. 42.7. And again, I will give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, that thou mayst say, , to the Priso∣ners, Go forth, Chap. 49.9. And a third time, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he hath sent me to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to
those that are bound. Accordingly Philo doth often represent Men brought in bondage to their LustsQuis Haer. Rer. Div. p. 387. E., , as Persons whose Souls are shut up in a Prison-house; and those who have overcome their Lusts and sinful PleasuresQuod omnis probus liber, p. 672: A., , as Persons who are come out of Prison, and have put off their Chains: adding, that God promiseth Liberry to the Souls that seek to him for itQuis rerum Div. Haeres. p. 405. F., , not on∣ly affording them freedom from their bonds, and an Exit from the Prison in which they were kept, but giving them provisions for their journey, and safe conduct. Now the Anti∣diluvians, who lived about the time of Noah, were  in prison upon a double Ac∣count: 1st, By reason of their bondage to Sin; for then all flesh had corrupted their way, their wickedness was great upon the earth, and every imagination of their heart was to do e∣vil, and that continually, Gen. 6.5, 6, 13. And 2dly, They were in Prison or , as having from God received the Sentence of Destruction, if they repented not within a hundred and twenty years: according to these words; My spirit shall not always strive with man for that he is flesh, yet his days shall be a hundred and twenty years, Gen. 6.3. i. e. so long will I expect his Reformation before I bring the Flood upon them. Thus the long suffering of God waited for them in the days of Noah, expecting their Repentance, and keeping them as it were in Prison for the day of Slaughter, if they did not repent. During this time, and before, God sent unto them his Prophets, denouncing by his Spirit his Judgments against the Wicked; for to them Enoch, the seventh Prophet from Adam, pro∣phefied, saying, The Lord cometh with his thousands of Angels to do judgment against all, and to reprove all the ungodly concerning all their ungodly works which they had wickedly committed, and concerning all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners had spoken a∣gainst him, Jude 14, 15. And he sent also Noah to them, a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. who by preparing an Ark before them for his own Preservation, in obedience to the Oracle delivered to him, condemned the Old World, Heb. 11.7. Thus did Christ, by his Spirit, preach to them in the days of Noah: and therefore the Antidiluvian Age is even by the Jews stiled the Age of the Holy Ghost; according to those words, My spirit shall not always strive with man, that is, say Ainsworth and the Bishop of Ely, My Spirit in my Prophets Enoch and Noah, shall not be always chiding, and reproving, and thereby endeavouring to bring men to Repentance, but shall proceed to punish them. Now this Pu∣nishment being the drowning of the Old World, their Spirits have been ever since, Spirits kept in Prison, or reserv'd in chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the Great Day: for, by the consent of the Jewish NationSanhedr. per 10. Halec; 3. The Generation of the Old World have no por∣tion in the World to come, neither shall they stand up in Judgment; for it is said, My Spi∣rit shall not always judge with Man. The Phrase my Spirit, saith Dr. Fuller, is never used of any other but the Spirit of God, and therefore must here be interpreted of the same Spirit. Now from that time to our Saviour's Ad∣vent, God sent no Prophet to the whole Hea∣then World, no Person with Commission to preach to all Nations, or teach the Gospel to every Creature, but suffer'd them to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16. whence they are said to have been disobedient only once of old time, in the days of Noah. Ver. 21. The like figure whereunto (Gr. the Anti-type of which Ark is that) Baptism (which now) saveth us, not (merely as it is) the putting away the fifth of the Flesh, but (as it is) the Answer (or Stipulation) of a good conscience towards God (and the Salva∣tion it works for us,) by (vertue of) the Re∣surrection of Jesus Christ. , by the Resurrection of Jes. Chr.] Who died for our Sins, and rose a∣gain for our Justification, Rom. 4.25. hath by his Resurrection begotten us to a lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. is ri∣sen as the first-fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. and so hath assured us, that they who are Christ's shall also be raised by him to e∣ternal Life, ver. 23. 2 Cor. 4.14. 1 Thess. 4.14. and who being risen, is now in Heaven pro∣moting our Salvation, ver. 22. and preparing Mansions for us, Joh. 14.2. , the answer of a good Conscience.] Therefore, say the Anabaptists, Baptism can∣not be salutary to those Infants who cannot make this answer of a good Conscience. To this I answer, that St. Paul also saith, that the true Circumcision before God, is not the outward Circumcision of the Flesh, but the in∣ternal Circumcision of the Heart and Spirit, Rom. 2.29. But will any one hence argue, that the Jewish Infants, for want of this, were not to be admitted into Covenant with God by Circumcision? And yet the Argument is plainly parallel: the Answer of a good Consci∣ence is required that Baptism may be saluta∣ry; therefore they only are to be baptized who can make this Answer. And the inward Circumcision of the Heart is required as the only acceptable Circumcision in the sight of God: therefore they only are to be circumci∣sed
who have this inward Circumcision of the Heart. The Jews did not admit Proselytes to Circumcision without this Answer of a good Conscience; but yet they admitted their Infants to it without any such thing. Why therefore may we not allow the Christian Church, in the administration of Baptism, to observe the same Custom, admitting the Chil∣dren of their Proselytes to Baptism, as they admitted them both to Circumcision and Bap∣tism. Ver. 22. Who is (Gr. being) gone into heaven, and is at the right-hand of God, (there inter∣ceding for us, and invested with all Power to give eternal life to those whom God hath gi∣ven him, and who is able to save us to the uttermost who come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25.) Angels and Authorities and Powers being made subject to him. (Who therefore will use the good Angels as ministring Spirits sent forth to minister to them who are Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. and will preserve them from those Authorities, and Powers, and evil Spirits, which oppose, and persecute them, and seek their ruin.) CHAP. IV. Ver. 1. FOrasmuch then as Christ hath suf∣fer'd for you in the Flesh, arm your selves with the same mind (or resolution to be conformed to him in his Sufferings, as be∣ing buried with him in Baptism, Rom. 6.4. and so planted together with him in the like∣ness of his death, ver. 5. the old man being crucified with him that the body of Sin might be abolish'd, that henceforth we might not serve Sin), for he that is (thus) dead hath cea∣sed from Sin, Ver. 2. (Insomuch) that he should no lon∣ger live the rest of his time in the flesh (in obe∣dience to the lusts of men ignorant of the Truth, 1 Pet. 1.14.) but to the will of God (Rom. 6.10, 11.) Ver. 3. For the time past of our life may suf∣fice us to have wrought the Will of the Gen∣tiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, (flesh∣ly) lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquet∣tings, and abominable Idolatries, ,] i. e. In Idolatries joined with divers Abominations (i. e. with Drunkenness, Uncleanness, unnatural Cruel∣ties to our own Children, Homicide.) Note here, that this is an Evidence that this Epistle was directed not only to the Jewish Nation, but to the Gentile Converts. Ver. 4. Wherein they think it strange (Gr. wonder) that you run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you. Ver. 5. Who shall give (an) account (of these Sins against Nature) to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. Ver. 6. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead (i. e. to the Gentile World, dead in Trespasses and Sins,) that they might be judged (might judge, condemn, and oppose their former life led) according to men (not enlightned by the Go∣spel,) in the flesh, but (and might) live ac∣cording to God in the spirit. For Explication of these Words, Note, 1. That  the dead, in Scripture doth often signifie not those who in a natural sense are dead by dissolution of the Soul and Body, but those who are spiritually so, as being ali∣enated from the life of God, and dead in tres∣passes and sins; as when the Apostle saith, The Widow that liveth in pleasure is dead whilst she liveth, 1 Tim. 5.6. And Christ un∣to the Church of Sardis, Thou hast a name to live, and art dead, Rev. 3.1. And when he speaks to one of his Disciples thus, Follow thou me, and let the dead bury their dead, Matth. 8.22. This is a Phrase so common with the Jews, that, as Maimonides informs us, they proverbially sayMore Nevoch. lib. 1. Impii etiam vi∣ventes vocantur mortui, the wicked are dead even whilst they live: for he, saithLeg. Alleg. l. 1. p. 45. quod deter. potior. p. 127. Philo, who lives a life of Sin  is dead as to a life of Happiness; his Soul is dead, and even buried in his Lusts and Passions. And because the whole Gentile World lay more especially under these most unhappy circum∣stances, whence the Apostle stiles them Sin∣ners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2.15. it was pro∣verbially said by the Jewish Doctors, Populi terrarum, i. e. Ethnici, non vivunt, the Hea∣thens do not live; and they in Scripture are more peculiarly intended by that Phrase. Hence the Apostle saith to the Ephesians and Colossians, Ephes. 2.1. Col. 2.13. that they were  dead in Trespasses and Sins; and brings in God thus speaking to the Gentiles, Awake thou that sleepest, arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life, Ephe∣sians 5.14. 2. The Ends for which this Gospel was revealed to these Gentiles thus spiritually dead, and buried in Sensuality, were these: 1. , that they might condemn, might strive against, might mortifie those sensual Desires and carnal Ap∣petites, which they indulged to whilst they liv'd  as natural Men, wanting the
Knowledge of God's Will, and the Assistance of his Grace and Spirit. This I conceive to be the genuine Import of the Greek: for, 1. The word Flesh being here set in oppositi∣on to the Spirit, not of Man, but God; or at the least to the renewed Spirit of Man, cannot be reasonably thought to signifie that fleshly Body which we bear about us, but ra∣ther that sinful Flesh which lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. that Law of our Members which wars against the Law of our Minds, Rom. 7.23. that , or fleshly Wis∣dom which is not subject to the Law of God, Rom. 8.7. This being so,  cannot be du∣ly rendred to be condemn'd, judg'd, and pu∣nish'd in the Flesh, that is, the Body, but to strive with, to mortifie, and subdue the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts; which is the common import of the word  both in the Septuagint and the New Testament. So Job 9.3. , if he will con∣tend with God, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. And Chap. 13.19. , who is he that contendeth with me? Isa. 43.26. Put me in remembrance , and let us plead together. Chap. 50.8. He is near that justifieth me, , who is he that contendeth with me. And Chap. 66.16. , by fire will the Lord plead with all flesh. Hos. 2.2. , plead with your Mo∣ther, plead. And Mich. 6.1. Arise , contend against the Mountains. So also Matth. 5.40.  is to him that will contend with thee, and Jude 9.  is contending with the Devil. And this I think sufficient to justifie the rendring these words Actively, without referring to Glassius's Canon [L. 3. Tr. 3. Can. 24.] that Verbs Passive sometimes signifie Actively. Note 3dly, That the Phrase  in the New Testament doth always signifie to live, speak, or act after the manner of mere natural Men, not yet acquainted with the Mind of God, or not assisted by his Spirit: as in those Passages of the Apostle Paul, Speak I these things , according to the Di∣ctates of mere humane Wisdom? saith not the Law the same also? 1 Cor. 9.8. My Doctrine is not , the product of man's Wisdom, but I receiv'd it from the Revelation of Christ Jesus, Gal. 1.11. , I speak what men would from the mere strength of Reason argue, Rom. 3.5. And again, , I speak what is acknowledg'd among men, that a man's testament is accounted sa∣cred, and no man addeth to it, or taketh from it, Gal. 3.15. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus , after the Heathen manner, what advantageth it me if the dead rise not? 1 Cor. 15.32. And lastly, Whereas there are contentions among you, are you not carnal, and walk  as natural men? 1 Cor. 3.3. not as men acted by the Spirit? So that  is, to con∣demn their former Life led as natural men, or as mere Heathens in the Flesh, or to strive a∣gainst that Flesh which they indulg'd to in their Heathen state; and to live unto God in the Spirit, which is the second End for which the Gospel was preach'd unto the Gentiles, is by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit to live according to the Will, and the Example of an Holy God. To this Interpretation of this Text the Con∣text plainly seems to lead; for the Apostle's Argument runs thus: Christ having suffer'd for us in the flesh, it doth become us also, in a spiritual sense, to suffer in the Flesh by the mortification of our fleshly Lusts; that tho we still live in the flesh, we may not hence∣forth live unto the lusts of men, but to the Will of God, ver. 2. I say, the Christian must no longer live after the Will of the Gentiles in Lasciviousness, Lusts, &c. ver. 3. for which things Heathens will be obnoxious to God's just Displeasure at the great day of their Ac∣compts, since for this cause the Gospel hath been preach'd unto them, that they might be engaged by it to condemn, and strive against that fleshly Conversation, in which they lived formerly, according to the Lusts of Men not yet acquainted with the Mind of God, and might henceforward live according to God in the Spirit. Ver. 7. But the end of all things (belong∣ing to the Jewish State mention'd Matt. 24.6. Mark 13.7. Luke 21.9.) is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watch unto Prayer, (ac∣cording to our Lord's advice in that case, Luk. 21.34, 36.) , the end of all things is at hand.] This Phrase, and the Advice upon it, so exactly parallel to what our Lord had spo∣ken, will not suffer us to doubt that the Apo∣stle is here speaking not of the End of the World, or of all things in general, which was not then, and seems not yet to be at hand, but only of the End of the Jewish Church and State, mention'd in the Enquiry of the Apo∣stles, thus, Tell us when  all these things shall be finish'd? Mark 13.4. and in our Saviour's Answer, thus, This generation shall not pass away  till all things be fulfill'd, Luke 21.32. that is,  all these things, Matt. 24.34. Mark 13.30. And 'tis the Observation of Interpreters upon these words , I became all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9.22. and  all things are lawful for me, Ch. 10.23. that the word  must be restrained to the subject matter. Ver. 8. And above all things have fervent Charity among your selves, for Charity will co∣ver the multitude of sins, (which you may have been guilty of in the time of your En∣mity to Christ and his Servants, or those ma∣nifold Infirmities you may have committed in
building Hay and Stubble on the Foundation, to your own great hazard, 1 Cor. 3.12, 15. Or, it covers the Sins of others, preventing them by Patience, not taking notice of them when committed, and concealing them from others: To this sense the words of the Wise∣man lead, Prov. 10.12.) Ver. 9. Use hospitality one towards another without grudging, (or murmuring that you bestow your Charity on them who are not of your own Nation, or are not circumcised, and obedient to the Law, as you think your selves obliged to be.) Ver. 10. As every man hath received the gift (of the Spirit,) even so (let him) minister the same one to another, as becomes good Stew∣ards of the manifold grace of God (to do.) Ver. 11. If any man speak (i. e. teach) let him speak as (he is instructed from) the Ora∣cles of God; if any man minister (as a Dea∣con) let him do it as of the ability that God giveth, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion (ascribed) for ever and ever, Amen. , the Gift.] That the Gift should here signifie Wealth, I cannot think; for tho  sometimes bears that sense, yet  is never used to signifie Wealth, but always hath relation to the spiritual Gifts vouchsaf'd then to the Church of Chirst. 2dly, Because the speaking as the Oracles of God seems plainly to be the same with Prophesying ac∣cording to the Analogy of Faith mention'd Rom. 12.6. and the ministring here with the  there; both which are mention'd as spiritual Gifts according to the Grace given to them. See Note there, and on the helps mention'd 1 Cor. 12.27. Ver. 12. Beloved, think it not strange con∣cerning the fiery trial which is come to try you, (Gr. wonder not at the burning that is among you, and is befallen you for trial,) as though some strange (and unexpected) thing (had) happened to you, (this being only that which was foretold by us, 1 Thess. 3.4. to which you were appointed, and to which you were cal∣led, 1 Pet. 2.21.) Ver. 13. But rejoyce (in it rather) in as much as you are (thus made) partakers of (Sufferings resembling) Christ's sufferings, that (so) when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may (resembling him then in Glory as you do now in Sufferings, Rom. 8.17. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12, &c.) be glad also with exceeding joy. , or partakers of Christ's sufferings.] Because he looks upon the Suffer∣ings of his Members as his own, Acts 9.4. Coloss. 1.24. Ver. 14. (And) if (it so happen that) ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye (in such Sufferings,) for the Spirit of Glo∣ry and of God rests upon you; (so that though) on their part (who are Unbelievers) he (i. e. Christ) is evil spoken of, but (Gr. yet) on your part he is glorified. , the spirit of Glory; or, as some Copies read  of Glory and Power] Is doubtless that Holy Spirit which attended the Preaching of the glorious Gospel, and made it to be the Ministration of the Spirit  in Glory, and by partaking of which Spirit, we Christians are said to be transformed from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9, 18. and who is also stiled  the Spirit of Might, 2 Tim. 1.7. and being promised, and given to those who suffer'd for Christ's sake to abide with them for ever, as their Comfor∣ter, and to help their Infirmities, Rom. 8.26. 2 Tim. 1.7, 8. must make them happy Suf∣ferers, and being also that Spirit by which they were enabled to work many Miracles, and endued with extraordinary Gifts, Christ must be glorified by him, as he foretold he should, Joh. 16.14. Ver. 15. But let (especial care be taken that) none of you suffer as a Murtherer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil-doer, or as a Busie-body in other mens matters. , &c.] Whosoever reads Josephus, will find there was the greatest reason to give these Cautions to the Jewish Nation, which then prodigiously abounded with Thieves, were continually employ'd in murthering not only Heathens, but their own Brethren, were , or as some Copies read , to such an high degree, that he saith they pra∣ctis'd all manner of Injustice and Wickedness that was ever thought of or committed; and , Men who would have the go∣vernment of other Mens Consciences, and over-rule their Actions, especially the Zealots. Ver. 16. Yet if any man suffer as a Christi∣an, (i. e. only on that account) let him not be ashamed, but let him glorifie God on that be∣half. , let him glorifie God.] i. e. Let him give Glory to God, who enables him thus patiently to suffer for his sake; or, let him be careful so to behave himself under his Sufferings, that he may glorifie God by them in the day of Visitation, Chap. 2.12. which day is now at hand. Ver. 17. For the time is come that Judg∣ment must (according to our Lord's Predicti∣on, Matth. 24.21, 22. Mark 13.13. Luk. 21.16, 17.) begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us (believing Jews) what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God? , the End.] Foretold by Christ of the unbelieving Jews. See Note on ver. 7. Ver. 18. And if (some of) the Righteous scarcely be saved, (i. e. preserved from this Burning, Ver. 12. being saved yet so as by Fire, 1 Cor. 3.15.) where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear (in Safety from these dreadful Judgments which are coming on the Jewish Nation)? Prov. 11.31.
Ver. 19. Wherefore (seeing the Sufferings of Christians then will be so little, in com∣parison of those which shall befal the Un∣believers, Ver. 17.18. Seeing the Spirit of Glory and Power shall support and comfort them under these Sufferings, Ver. 14. and Christ hath promised them Protection in that dreadful Day, and said, he that endureth to the End shall be saved, Matth. 24.12, 13.) let them that suffer according to the Will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls (i. e. their Lives) to him in well doing, as to a faithful Creator (who being their Creator, must be able to deliver them; and being Faith∣ful, will not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able, 1 Cor. 10.13.) CHAP. V. Ver. 1. THE Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a Witness of the Sufferings of Jesus Christ, and also (shall be) a partaker of the Glory which shall be revealed: Ver. 2. Feed the Flock which is among you, taking (upon you) the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but with a ready mind. Ver. 3. Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but as Ensamples of the Flock. Ver. 4. And when the great Shepherd shall appear, ye also shall appear with him in Glory, (and so receive a full and better Reward of your Labours than others aim at.) , the Elders that are among you.] That is the Bishops, saith Dr. Hammond, here and wheresoever the Word occurs in the New Testament; the Order of Presbyters being not yet in Being, but only afterwards appointed by St. John. For that the Apostle is here speaking of Elders not by Age but Office, appeareth by his Exhortati∣on directed to them to feed the Flock commit∣ted to their Charge, ver. 2. But this Notion seems not well consistent with what others have discoursed upon this Subject: For, 1st, They who make the Bishop, Priest or Elder, and Deacon, to be appointed as an∣swering to the High-Priest, the Priests, and Lvites, must suppose that all these three Orders were at first appointed; especially in the Church of Jerusalem, as being derived from their Platform. And so must all those learned Men, who say the Church was mo∣delled after the Manner of the Jewish Sanhe∣drim or Synagogue? for as to that, the Parallel must run between the Chief of the Sanhedrim, or of the Synagogue, the Elders and their Mi∣nisterial Officers, and the Bishop, Priests or Elders, and the Deacons; and if the middle Order had been wanting so long as is supposed, the Government of the Church would not have been formed after that Platform; which, as, Haer. 30. § 11. Epiphanius and the Jews inform us, had these several Offices in it. The same may be said of those who make the Elders or Pres∣byters to be answerable to the Seventy, ap∣pointed by Christ as inferior Officers under the Apostles, and make this an Argument of an Inequality betwixt Bishops and Presbyters establish'd in the Church by Christ. 2ly, Hence it must necessarily follow, that not only in the Times, but even in the Wri∣tings of the Apostles, the Names of Presby∣ters and Bishops were so far confounded, that a Presbyter, in their Stile, did always signifie one that was properly a Bishop: which yet the learnedVind. l. 2. c. 13. Bishop Pearson, seems not to allow. 3ly, This seems to make the Work and Of∣fice of a Bishop too great to be discharged by a single Person, especially in such great Church∣es as that of Jerusalem, where there were many Myriads of believing Jews, Acts 21.20. For 'twas his Office, saith that Reverend Person, to be the Teacher of the whole Flock committed to him: Acts 20.28. Ye that are Bishops of the several Churches of Asia, look to the Churches committed to your Trust, to rule and order all the faithful Christians under you. So the Paraphrase. See the Paraphrase and Note on Hebr. 13.7, 17. Where he saith, That to teach, exhort, and confirm, and im∣pose Hands, were all the Bishop's Office in Ju∣daea. He was to exercise the whole Discipline of the Church, by hearing all the Ecclesiasti∣cal Causes, inflicting Censures and receiving Penitents, see the Paraphrase and Note on Titus 3.10. He was to take the principal Care of the Poor, to receive, and distribute to them the Churches Stock. So here, The supreme Trust and Charge of that, saith he, being always reserved to the Apostles and Bishops of the Church. Note F. on 1 Cor. 12.28. He was to visit the Sick, and pray with them; that being, saith he, one Branch of the Office of Bishops. Note on Jam. 5.14. and how one Bishop could perform all this to a Church consisting of many Myriads of Persons, it is not easy to conceive. I therefore think it better to admit of the ordinary Accep∣tation
of the Word Presbyter here; that is, to think they also may be included in the Term. , and also a Partaker of the Glory which shall be revealed]. i. e. Saith one, present at the Discourse concerning the Glory that should be consequent to his Death, the re∣markable Destruction of his Crucifiers, and the Deliverance of his faithful Disciples. But 1st, 'Tis certain that the Scripture mentions nothing of any such Discourse; but only that Moses and Elias then spake of his Decease, which he was to accomplish at Jerusalem, Luke 9.31. And though Peter was then present, he heard not a Word of that Discourse, be∣ing then fast asleep ver. 32. This Glory there∣fore is doubtless the Glory we shall enjoy at the Resurrection, or the Redemption of our Bodies from Corruption, Rom. 8.18, 23. sti∣led the Glory of God, Rom. 5.2. the Glory we shall enjoy when Christ appears, Col. 3.4. When our vile Bodies shall be made like unto Christ's glorious Body, Phil. 3.21. and shall be raised up in Glory, 1 Cor. 15.43. eternal Glory, Ver. 10. this being that we shall en∣joy at the Revelation of Christ Jesus, Ver. 4. 1 Pet. 1.7, 13. Chap. 4.13. of this St. Peter was a Partaker then in the Promise, and in the Earnest of it, the first Fruits of the Spirit. Not by constraint, but willingly; .] Not as it were constrained to it by the dread of what you may suffer, the Woe impendent if you do not perform this Office; but voluntarily, and as a Free-Will-Offering to that God who hath loved you so much, and from a ready Mind to serve the Interest of Souls, as in those Words of St. Paul,  a Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel: but if, , willingly I do this, I have a Re∣ward, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17. , not for filthy lucre.] As did the false Apostles and Judaizers, teaching things they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake, Tit. 1.11. thinking Gain Godliness, 1 Tim. 6.5. , not as Lords over God's Heritage.] Or as it might be ren∣der'd, of the Possessions of the Church. It was the Custom then of many to sell their Heritages, and give the Money to the Gover∣nors and Bishops of the Church, to be distri∣buted to the Use of the poor Christians; and these Inheritances and Monies were stiled , both in the Scriptures and the best Greek Authors, using it for a Patrimony or Heritage obtain'd by Lot, as the Inheritance of the Jews was, Josh. 12.8. whence the Word  is so often used in this Sense through the Book of Joshua and Judges. And so the Bishops, to whose Hands it was committed, are here required not to act as if they were Lords, but only as Stewards of it; and so as to be Examples to others of Free∣dom from Avarice, and Diligence in relieving the Poor, Sick, and Needy. Ver. 5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the Elder (or Aged): yea all of you be subject to one another, (i. e. be as ready to do kind Offices to others, as if ye were subject to them. See Note on Phil. 2.3.) and be ye cloathed with Humility; for God re∣sisteth the Proud, and giveth Grace unto the Humble. , be ye cloathed with Humility.] The Word hath two Significations; it signi∣fies a Frock put over the rest of our Cloaths, and so imports that this Humility should be visible in us above all other Christian Vertues, in our whole Conversation, our Works and Actions. 2ly, It signifies a Belt which gis about our Garments, and so imports that we should tie it fast unto us, and have those Con∣siderations always fixt upon our Spirits, which may still keep us in an humble Frame o Soul. Ver. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God (now coming upon you, Chap. 4.17.) that he may exalt you in due time. .] That is, Submit with Pati∣ence to the Chastisements sent by his Power∣ful Hand upon you, that being truly sensible of the Divine Displeasure, being afflicted and mourning for those Sins which brought these Evils down upon you, and turning unto him that smites you, he may draw nigh to you and in due season work for you a Deliverance from this afflicted State. See this in the Place parallel to this, James 4.7, 10. Ver. 7. Casting all your Care upon him (and committing your selves to the Conduct of his All-wise Providence, Chap. 4.19.) for he caret for you. Ver. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because you Adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walk¦eth about seeking whom he may devour, (and by his Persecutions, tempt to an Apostacy from the Faith, 1 Thes. 3.5. Rev. 2.10.) Ver. 9. Whom resist stedfast in the Faith knowing that the same Afflictions (which yo now endure) are accomplished in your (Chr¦stian) Brethren that are in the World. (See James 4.7.) Ver. 10. But (and) the God of all Grace who hath called us to eternal Glory by Chris Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, mak you perfect (in Patience,) stablish, strengthen settle you. Ver. 11. To him be Glory and Dominion fo ever and ever. Amen. Ver. 12. By Sylvanus a faithful Brother,  I suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting and testifying that this is the true Grace  God in which you (now) stand. , as I suppose.] From these an many like Expressions used in the Epistles o
the Apostles, it is evident that the Divine Af∣fs by which the Holy Ghost assisted them  write, did not dictate the very Words, but only presided over them to preserve them from Error in writing, seeing the Holy Ghost ould not say as I suppose; nor could St. Pe∣ter have used this Phrase, if the Divine Illu∣mination had influenced and instructed him in his Matter. Ver. 13. The Church that is at (Rome fi∣tely called) Babylon, elected together with yea, saluteth you, and so doth Marcus my Son. (i. e. Who as a Son with his Father, hath served me in the Gospel, Phil. 2.22.) , the Church in Babylon.] That Babylon is figuratively here put for Rome, is a Opinion so early delivered byApud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 15. Papias, and which afterwards so generally obtain'd, as we learn from Eusebius,Verbo Marcus, & in Isaiam, c. 47. F. 77. B. St. Jerom and menius on this Place, that I subscribe to the Note at the end of this Epistle, that , it was written from Rome, iled also Babylon by the Author of the Reve∣lations, Chap. 17, and the 18th. For the Apo∣stle must at the writing of it be atEa quae dicuntur Apoc. 18. de Babylone quae est apud Romanos, intelligenda sunt juxta veterum ecclesiae doctorum stiam. Andr. Caesar. in Apoc. c. 55. Rome figuratively, or at some City properly called Babylon. Now as it is uncertain whether St. Peter ever was at Babylon in Chaldea, or in Aegypt, and improbable that he ever made any considerable stay there, so is it very im∣probable he should do it so near his End. At Rome and Antioch, where he confessedly re∣sided, Church-History is copious in giving an Account of his Successors in those Sees; but who can shew any thing of this Nature with reference to either of these Babylons? As to the Reason why Rome is covertly thus repre∣sented by the Name of Babylon, I cannot think with Oecumenius, it was so stiled, , because advanced to as great Eminency as Babylon had ever been, for then why should St. Peter have disguised the Matter? I rather think it was so stiled, either because it did resemble that City in itsSic & Babylon apud Joannem R. urbis figuram portat; proinde & magnae, & regno superbae, & suorum debellatricis. Tert. cont. Judaeos c. 9. p. 193. & contr. Marcion. l. 3. c. 13. Idolatry and Opposition to the Church of God; or rather because it was to be destroyed for ever, as the Prophets had foretold of Babylon; which, though the primitive Christians did believe, it was their Wisdom to conceal. Thus Jerom saith, that the Prophet Jeremiah co∣vertly spake of Babylon, under the Name ofIn Jerem. p. 145. A. Sesack, that he might not incense the Babylonians against him, who besieged Jeru∣salem; and that the Apostle speaks of the Roman Empire under that Name of , that which letteth, that he ight not provoke them to persecute the Christians for speaking of the Roman Empire, which was by them esteemedDempst. p. 8. Imperium sine fine, or Eternal. Ver. 14. Greet ye one another with a Kiss of Charity. Peace be with all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.
THE PREFACE TO THE Second Epistle of St. PETER. , The Second Catholick Epistle of St. Peter.] That this Epistle also was written by the Apo∣stle Peter, is evident beyond all just Exception. (1.) From the Inscription of it, in which the Writer stiles himself, Simon Peter, a Servant and Apostle of Jesus Christ; there being no other Apostle of that Name. Moreover, of this Apostle it is particularly noted in the Scrip∣ture, that he was , Simon called Peter, Matth. 4.18.10.2. , Simon which was Sirnamed Peter, Acts 10.18.11.13. He is stiled Simon Peter once by St. Luke, Chap. 5.8. and by St. John the Evangelist seventeen times, Chap. 1.41.6.8, 68.13.6, 9, 24, 36.18.10, 15, 25.20.2, 6.21.2, 3, 7, 11, 15. Where∣as Symeon Bishop of Jerusalem, to whom Grotius ascribes the writing of this Epistle, was neither Peter, nor Apostle. (2.) From a Concurrence of Circumstances in it relating to St. Peter, and no other; as (1) When he says, He shortly must put off this Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ had shewed him, Chap. 1.14. This well agrees to Simon Peter, to whom our Lord signified what Death he should die, Joh. 21.18, 19. And that this Death should befall him before his coming to the Destruction of Jerusalem, Ver. 22. which was then at hand. See Note on 1 Pet. 4.7. 2ly, He adds, that he was with him in the Holy Mount, when our Lord Jesus was transfigured, and was an Eye-witness of his Majesty, and heard those Words, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Ver. 16, 17, 18. which he could hear only then, no such Words being spo∣ken, John 12.28. to which Grotius would re∣ferr this Passage. Now at our Lord's Trans∣figuration, besides St. Peter, were only present the two Sons of Zebedee, James and John, neither of which were ever thought of to be the Author of this Epistle. 3dly, This also may be gathered from these Words, Chap. 3.1, 2. This Second Epistle, beloved, I write unto you; in which I stir up your sincere Minds by way of remembrance: Ver. 2. That ye may be mindful of the Words which were spoken before by the Holy Prophets, and of the Commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and Saviour. Whence it is manifest, 1st. That this Epistle was writ by an Apostle, and therefore not by Symeon Bishop of Jeru∣salem. 2dly, That it was writ by an Apostle who had before directed an Epistle to the soone Persons. Now though some of the Ancients doubted whether this Second Epistle were Ca∣nonical, yet, Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3. . Ibid. they all owned that it bore his Name and was ascribed to him, and never, that we find, was ascribed to any other Apostle; we therefore have just Reason to conclude, accor∣ding to the Title of it, that it was also the Epi∣stle of Simon Peter, the Apostle of our Lord, to whom both these Epistles expresly are ascri∣bed byPetrus duabus Epistolarum suarum personat tubis, Hom. 7. in Josh. F. 156. , 2 Pet. 3.15. contr. Marcion. p. 58. Vide Firmilianum apud Cyprian. Ep. 75. Ed. Ox. p. 220. & Concil. Laod. Can. 59. Origen, who also adds, That Paul is called his Brother, by Peter the Apostle, which he is only in this Epistle. Being therefore written by an Apostle assisted by the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12. we cannot doubt of the Authority of this Epistle; for whereas Grotius, to avoid the Strength of this Argument, imagines that this Chap∣ter contains a Second Epistle, and that the First Epistle referred to, ended at the close of the Second Chapter of that which is now called the Second Epistle He not only doth this without all Authority of any Ancient Versions or Authors to countenance his Opinion, but against the Frame and the Contexture of Epi∣stles
which usually begin with an Inscription,  not to be found in the third Chapter. As for the time when this Epistle was indi∣d, I lay down this as certain, against Gro∣tius from what hath been discours'd already, that it could not be written after the Destru∣ction of Jerusalem; for St. Peter here saith, that he was shortly to put off his Tabernacle,  to die, whereas he was actually dead in the fourteenth year of Nero, that is, three years before the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. But that it was written but a little before his Death, may justly be concluded from his Decla∣ration that he knew, either by Revelation, or by our Lord's Discourse, that the time of his Death: 2 Pet. 3.14. was suddenly to follow, or was nigh at hand. Of the Persons to whom it was written, we are assured also from those words, This Second Epistle, Beloved, I write unto you, they be∣ing a demonstration that it was written to the very same Persons to whom the first had been directed, viz. to the Converted Jews dispers'd through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 1 Pet. 1.1. And lastly, as for the occasion of his writing, that plainly seems to have been double. 1st. To arm the Jews converted against that fiery trial which was then come upon them, and against that Apostacy from the Faith, that turning a∣way from the holy Commandment, Chap. 2.21. that falling from their own Stedfastness, Chap. 3.17. to which they of that Nation were so prone: And evident it is, that the chief design of the Epistle to the Hebrews was to put a stop unto it: and many Passages in all the Catho∣lick Epistles, not excepting the 2d and 3d Epi∣stles of St. John, are evidently writ for the same purpose. And to warn them of, and to preserve them from, the destructive Doctrines of those Jewish Solifidians who held it unne∣cessary to add unto their Faith Vertue. 2dly, Of those impure Nicolaitans and Simonians, who turn'd the Grace of God into Lascivious∣ness. Of whom see the Notes on the 2d Chap∣ter. 3dly, Of those Scoffers at the Promise of Christ's Coming, as if it were a Promise which never would be verified. But then I am constrained to dissent from the Opinion of the Reverend and the Judicious Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Lightfoot, who con∣ceive that the Apostle doth not discourse of our Lord's coming to the General Judgment in his 3d Chapter, but only of his coming to execute his Judgments on the Jews by the Destruction of Jerusalem. For, not to insist upon this Consi∣deration that this Opinion is wholly new, and contrary to the Judgment of all the Ancients, who own this Epistle, and have occasion to make mention of these words, they all agreeing in this with OEcumenius, that the Apostle speak∣eth  of the End of the World, as is extremely evident 1. From these very words, ver. 7. But the Heavens and Earth which now are, by the same word are kept in store reserved to fire against the day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. And ver. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat; the Earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. To interpret all these words only of the De∣struction of Jerusalem, is to turn them into Metaphor and Allegory; whereas St. Peter plainly says, that as the old World was de∣stroy'd by Water, so shall the World that now is be destroy'd by fire. Here then, as one says truly, is no room for Allegories or Alle∣gorical Expositions; for, as the Heavens and Earth were destroy'd by Water, so are they to be destroy'd by Fire: and if in the first place you understand the natural material World, you must also understand it in the second; they are both Allegories, or neither. 2. Were the Apostle speaking of the Destru∣ction of Jerusalem which happen'd forty seven years after the Death of Christ, and was, accor∣ding to our Lord's Prediction, to fall out whilst some of them whom he spake to were yet li∣ving, what need was there of saying, one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, &c. when he was speaking, it seems, of that which he knew was to happen before four years were expired. And lastly, the solemn Exhortation, Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy Conversations and Godlinesses, look∣ing for, and hastening to the Coming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, that we may be found of him without spot, and blameless? This, I say, sounds too high for the Destruction of Jerusalem, in which they of Pontus and Galatia could not be much concern'd; but 'tis an Exhortation very proper for those who had the lively Idea of the Conflagration of the World, and the tremendous Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men, then set before them. There is, I confess, a middle Opinion be∣twixt both these, which interprets the words of St. Peter in the 3d Chapter, of the Judgment of the Great Whore, or the Antichristian Church mention'd Rev. 17.1. after which is to follow the New Heaven and New Earth promised to the Jews, and to be accomplished in the calling of them to the Christian Faith, and the flowing in of all Nations to them. Concerning which, Note 1st. That this Judgment, according to the Predictions both of the Prophets in the Old, and of St. John in the New Testament, is to
be executed upon her by fire. So Daniel 7.11. The Beast was slain, and his Body destroyed, and given to the burning Flame: and ver. 26. The Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to consume, and to de∣stroy it to the end. Accordingly, in the Judg∣ment of the Whore, she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord that judgeth her. Rev. 17.17. Rev. 18.8, 9, 18. Note 2dly, That it is usual with the Pro∣phets to represent God's Judgments on the Enemies of his Church and People, by the tra∣gical Expressions of burning up the Earth, and dissolving the Heavens. Thus of the Destru∣ction of Babylon, which Name was writ upon the Forehead of the Great Whore, God speaks thus; Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel and with fierce wrath, to lay the Land desolate, for the Stars of Heaven, and the Constellations, shall not give their Light, and the Sun shall be darkned in his going forth, and the Moon shall not give her Light, and I will make the Heavens to shake (or move a∣way) and the Earth shall remove out of its place, Isa. 13.9, 10, 13. The Indignation of the Lord against the Idumaeans, is represent∣ed in these dreadful words, The Mountains shall be melted with their Blood, and (d) all the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a Scroll and all their Host shall fall down as a leaf fall¦eth from the Vine, and as a falling Fig from the Fig-tree. Of the Destruction of Sennache¦rib and his People, God speaketh thus; The Heavens shall vanish away like Smoak, the Earth shall wax old like a Garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner, Isa. 51.6. See Deut. 32.22. Jer. 4.23, 24 Joel 2.30.3.15. Here then we see all the Expressions used in the 3d Chapter of St. Peter used also by the Prophets when they speak of the Desolation of a Nation and People, and e∣specially of the Enemies of the Church; which is sufficient to evince that the Apostle being himself a Jew, and writing to those Jews who were accustomed to these Expressions, might thus set forth the Destruction of the Jewish Church and Nation, as some think he does, and by the new Heavens and new Earth in which dwelleth Righteousness, that Christian State which was to succeed it, or rather the great Destruction of the Beast, mention'd Re∣velations 17th and the 18th, and by the new Heavens and new Earth, that Glorious State of the Church which was to ensue by the Con∣version of the Jewish Nation, and the flowing in of all Nations to them. . Isa. 34.3, 4.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE Second Epistle of St. PETER. CHAP. 1. Ver. 1. SImon Peter, a Servant and Apo∣stle of Jesus Christ (writing) to them that have obtain'd like pre∣cious Faith with us through the Righteousness of God (by Faith, Rom. 1.17.) and (the Sufferings) of our Lord Jesus Christ. , by the Righteousness of God.] That this Phrase signifies our Justifica∣tion through Faith in the Death and Suffer∣ings of Christ, the meritorious cause of it, see Note on Rom. 1.17. Ver. 2. (Wisheth that) Grace and Peace (may) be multiplied (to you) through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord. Ver. 3. According as (it hath been with us already, for) his divine power hath given to us all things that pertain to Life and Godliness, (or, to the Life of Godliness,) through the knowledge of him that hath called us to (Gr. by) Glory and Vertue. , by Glory and Vertue.] i. e. Who hath call'd us with a glorious Calling, as being attended with the glorious Effusion of the Holy Ghost, by reason of which the Revelation of the Gospel is said to be , or  in, and with Glory, 2 Cor. 3.7, 11. and shew'd his Power, Might, and Vertue, by the miraculous Operations with which it was confirm'd. For though Mr. le Clerk is posi∣tive that  no where signifies , yet in Hesychius we read thus, , Ver∣tue, i. e. Divine Power  and Phavorinus saith it is Divine Power , Strength for War, Fortitude, Dexterity in Wrestling. Ver. 4. Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these ye may be partakers of the divine Nature, having escaped the corruption which is in the world through Lust. , by which] If the reading of other Manuscripts , obtain, the sense runs plain and easie thus, by whom thus calling you are given great and precious Promises, Christ ha∣ving brought Light and Immortality to light, 2 Tim. 1.10. and establish'd the New Cove∣nant in better Promises, Hebr. 8.6. But if we retain the common reading  by which, the sense seems to run thus, By which two, the Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon us, as the ear∣nest of them, and the miraculous Operations, as the confirmation of them, and of that Go∣spel which contains them, are given to us great and precious Promises, or rather, by which God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, mention'd ver. 1. and 3, are given great and precious Promises, they being the Promises made by God the Father, 2 Cor. 7.1. and by the Son, 1 Joh. 2.25. and confirmed to us in and through Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 1.20, 21. , Partakers of the divine Nature.] BothPhilo de mut. nom. p. 824. Philo and Josephus repre∣sent them, who had the Gift of Prophecy as having , a Soul inspired by the Deity and by the Holy Spirit dwelling in them made divine. ThusContr. Appion. p. 1052. Josephus saith of one Papius, renowned for his Wisdom, and Foreknowledge of things to come, that he did  partake of the divine Nature. Ver. 5. And besides this, (Gr.  and for this cause) giving all diligence, dd to your Faith Vertue, (or courage in the Pro∣fession of it, and sincerity in the Practice of those things this Faith requires,) and to Ver∣tue (an exact) Knowledge (of your Duty,) Ver. 6. And to Knowledge Temperance, (in
carefully abstaining from those sensual Affe∣ctions, and disorderly Passions, which obstruct the performance of your Duty,) and to Tem∣perance Patience, (under all the Sufferings which may affright you from it,) and to Pa∣tience Godliness, (that Fear of God which will restrain you from Sin, that Love of him which will constrain you to your Duty, that Conformity of Will which will cause your Mind to approve of, your Heart to affect and chuse what is according to his Will, and your whole Man to be exercising it self to God∣liness. Ver. 7. And to Godliness Brotherly-kind∣ness, (i. e. Fervent Love to Christians, as be∣ing Children of our Heavenly Father, and Fellow-members of Christ's Body,) and to Brotherly-kindness Charity (to all Men, as proceeding from the same Stock, having the same Nature, and being subject to the same Necessities.) and for this cause, or as other Manuscripts read,  so ye.] Esthius here probably conjectures, that the Sense hitherto is pendent thus; As you have received from the Gift of God all things necessary to Life and Godliness, fo do ye add, or for this cause add to your Faith Vertue, &c. Ver. 8. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren, (Gr. slothful,) nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. , you will not be slothful] or ne∣gligent in the Concerns of God's Glory and your Soul's Welfare; for Sloth proceeds from want of Faith, or Courage, or Love, nor unfruitful, i. e. unprofitable to others, for that proceeds from want of Brotherly-Kindness or Charity. Ver. 9. But (on the other hand) he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was pur∣ged from his old sins, (by that Baptism in which he being washed from the Guilt of them, engaged to die to Sin, Rom. 6.4.) , He is blind] for want of Know∣ledge, and blinded by his Passions and sensual Affections, and cannot see to the End and De∣sign of Christianity, and the Rewards of Faith and Patience, nor considers he the Obligati∣ons which lie upon him to depart from Ini∣quity. Ver. 10. Wherefore (being called to this Faith) the rather Brethren, give diligence, (Gr. give the more diligence by practising these things,) to make your Calling and Ele∣ction sure; (i. e. to secure to your selves the Blessings of Christianity to which God hath called you; and for which end he hath chosen you to be his People:) for if you do these things, you shall never fall, (or miscarry eter∣nally.) , to make your Calling and Election sure.] Many Manuscripts, and many of the Ancients, add  by good works: and this the Text seems to re∣quire, for it immediately follows, if you do these things ye shall never fall, plainly decla∣ring, that the making of their Calling and Election sure depended on the doing those works of Vertue, Temperance, Patience, God∣liness, Brotherly-kindness, and Charity, men∣tioned before, and so was only a conditional Election upon their perseverance in a Life of Holiness. Ver. 11. For so an entrance shall be mini∣stred to you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. , into the everlasting Kingdom.] As  isLuk. 10.25. Heb. 9.15. Luk. 16.9. 2 Cor. 5.1. 2 Tim. 2.10. Hebr. 5.9. everlasting Life,  an everlasting nheri∣tance,  everlasting Tabernacles,  an everlasting House,  everlasting Glory,  everlasting Salvation, so  is doubtless the everlasting Kingdom prepared for Christ's faithful Servants, and not his vindictive King∣dom over the Jews, nor yet the Kingdom of Saints mentioned by Daniel as never to give place to any other Kingdom, they to whom the Apostle writ being to die long before the coming of that Kingdom. Ver. 12. Wherefore I will not be negligen to put you always in remembrance of these things, though you knew them (before,) and be establish'd in the present truth, (viz. that the Practice of these Christian Vertues is necessary to the making your Calling and Election sure, and to your Entrance into Christ's heavenly Kingdom.) Ver. 13. Yea I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle (of the Body,) to stir you up (to the performance of your Duty,) by putting you (still) in remembrance (of these things.) , in remembrance.] For could we be establish'd in the Belief of heavenly things, and have them still in remembrance, we should not flag in the Performance of our Duty. Ver. 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this tabernacle (by Martyrdom) even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shew'd me (John 21.20.) , hath shew'd me.] Declaring to him in a Vision, sayHegesip. de Excid. Hieros. l. 3. c. 2. Hegesippus andAmbros. Ep. 33. St. Ambrose, that He must go again to Rome
to be Crucified. Thus. Martyr. § 5. St. Polycarp in a sion saw his Pillow, or Night-Cap, burning with Fire, a little before he was consumed by the Flames: And St. Cyprian, by a Vision, was admonished of his Death, and of the Kind of Martyrdom he was to suffer. Pontius in vita Cypr. Ed. Oxon. p. 7. Ver. 15. Moreover, I will endeavour (by leaving these Epistles, designed for that End) that you may be able after my decease, to have these things always in Remembrance. , to make a Remem∣brance of these things.] St. Peter therefore was not of the Opinion that Oral Tradition was a better Way than Writing, to preserve the Memory of these Things, and that with∣out Writing they might be able so to do. Ac∣cordingly. Apud Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 35. Ignatius, advising the Churches to stand fast in the Tradition of the Apostles, thought it necessary, for the greater Security, to commit them to Writing. For, Saith. Dial. contr. Marcion. p. 59. Ori∣gen, That which is delivered only by Mouth quickly vanisheth, as having no certainty. Ver. 16. For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known to you the Power (given to our Lord Christ over all Flesh, that he might give eternal Life to them that believe, John 17.2.) and (the) coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, (to crown them with Glory,) but were Eye-Witnesses of his Majesty. Ver. 17. For he received from God the Fa∣ther, Honour and Glory, when there came such a Voice from the excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Ver. 18. And this Voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with him in the Holy Mount. , from the magnifi∣cent Glory.] Some considering, that in all the three Evangelists the Transfiguration of our Lord is mentioned after he had spoken of the coming of the Son of Man in Glory, or in the Glory of the Father, think this Transfigu∣ration was an Image of that glorious King∣dom he was to erect at the recalling of the Jews; and that St. Peter here refers to this when he saith, we made known to you the power and coming, or the illustrious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; whence Moses and Elias are here seen with him in Glory, and according to some Manuscripts are said to speak of the , i. e. his Glory which was to be hereafter in Jerusalem. But that Glory being not yet come, to what purpose should the Apostle write to them of that Age, to give all Diligence to obtain an Entrance into that Kingdom? Or why doth he so generally pro∣mise an Entrance into it to them who were to die so long before? and were not at all, unless they died Martyrs, to enter into it; nor was it to be an Everlasting, but only a Millennary Kingdom. Wherefore for Explication of the Words, observe concerning the Tranfiguration of our Lord, (1.) That when he was transfi∣gured his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Garments were splendent, Matth. 17.2. and this, saith Nazianzen, God did , shewing what he was to be hereafter, and as an Introduction to that Glory in which he was to shine at the Right Hand of Majesty in the Heavens, for to shine as the Sun, is a Phrase expressing something belonging to Ce∣lestial Majesty, Matth. 13.43. the white and splendid Garments being also proper to Kings and the Royal Ministers of the Heavenly Court, Rev. 3.4. And Hence when Christ is represented as the First-born from the Dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, to whom Power and Glory belonged, he appears in Splendor, as the Sun shining in his Power, Rev. 1.14, 15. And this is the Majesty of Christ of which St. Peter, James and John were Eye-Witnesses on the Mount. 2dly, Of the Testimony given to him; ob∣serve (1.) That it was, This is my beloved Son, i. e. This is he who is Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. and is sat down at the right hand of Ma∣jesty and Glory, Ver. 3. And therefore this is made a Proof of our Lord's Resurrection and Exaltation to the highest Glory, that the Fa∣ther said to him, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee, Acts. 13.33. Hebr. 1.5.5.5. This is he to whom the Father hath given to have Life in himself, John 5.26. and so to raise the Dead, Ver. 24. and give eternal Life to them, John. 17.1, 2. Now all this being comprehended in this Testimony, shews the Truth of what St. Peter said he had declared to them. Note (2dly.) That this Voice was gi∣ven from the magnificent Glory, or bright Cloud which then appeared, and was the con∣stant Symbol of the Divine Presence; see Note on Phil. 2.6. and so assured them this Testimony was given by the God of Truth. Note (3dly.) That this Testimony is delivered in the very Words spoken of that Prophet which should come after Moses, viz. A Pro∣phet will the Lord your God raise unto you like to me, to him shall ye hearken, Deut. 18.15. And so assured them that this beloved Son was that Prophet of whom Moses spake. Note Lastly, That these Words were directed nor to Christ, but to those that attended him, and bad them observe that God the Father here owned him as his only Son, in whom he is well pleased, and as the only Prophet whom they ought to hearken to.
Ver. 19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophesie; whereto you do well that ye take heed, as to a Light that shineth in dark Places, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. , a more sure Word of Prophesie.] This is spoken in com∣parison of the Apostle's Testimony, of what he heard, which to the Jews was not so certain and convincing, as was the Record of their own Prophets; whence the Apostles, both in disputing with the unbelieving Jews, and writing to the Believers among them, confirm their Doctrines from the Writings of the Old Testament. , &c. and the Day Star arise in your Hearts.] Some considering that Balaam Prophesies of the Messiah as a Star that was to come out of Jacob, by which Star, say the three Targums, Berischith Rabba, R. Moses Hadarson, and R. Isaac, is meant the Messiah, compared to a Star, because of the Splendor and Perennity of his Dominion and Kingdom, and who is stiled by St. John, , the bright and morning Star, Rev. 22.16. refer this to Christ's se∣cond coming to convert the Jews, and set up the Kingdom of the Saints, Dan. 7.27. say∣ing, That the Apostle compares the interme∣diate Time in which Antichrist was to reign, to the Night and Darkness, according as the Scripture useth to express the times of Igno∣rance and Idolatry, Eph. 5.8. 1 Thes. 5.4. See Note on Rom. 13.12. And the Time of Christ's Advent to call all Israel, and to bring in with them the fulness of the Gentiles, to the Light dissipating that Darkness; and doth here bid the Jewish Nation to attend to the Prophesies in the Old Testament touching this glorious Time, till it should be accomplished upon them. But the Apostle writes not here to the unbelieving Jews, who are to be the only Subjects of that Calling; but to them who had obtained like pretious, Faith with him. Moreover, That the Time from writing this Epistle till the Conversion of the Jews, which is not yet accomplished, should be ac∣counted as Darkness, or a Time in which the Light or Day appeared not, seems not sutable to that Expression of St. Paul, The Night is far spent, and the Day is at hand. See Note on Rom. 13.12. Nor could he bid those of that Age to expect till that Day Star should arise in their Hearts, which to this very Day is not yet rising. It therefore seems plain to me from these Words, tho' Dr. Ham∣mond and others would interpret them to ano∣ther Sense, that the Apostle speaketh this con∣cerning some other Light that was to en∣lighten and affect their Hearts, and give them full Assurance that our Jesus was the Son of God, the Prophet God had sent into the World. Now this was done by the internal Gifts and Illuminations of the Holy Spirit vouchsafed to Believers; by which, saith the Apostle Paul, The Testimony of Christ, or which the Apostles gave of him,  was confirm'd in or upon them, 1 Cor. 1.6. By which God did , confirm both the Apostles, and those that be∣lieved in the Faith of Christ, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. 5.5. So that the import of the Words seems to be this, till you your selves have those Prophetick Gifts, by which you may be able from what you find in your selves, to know by the Spirit that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, 1 Cor. 12.3. and have that Unction of the Holy Ghost, by which you know all things, 1 John. 2.27. And have also the Scrip∣tures of the New Testament committed to you, which contain a more perfect Light, Rom. 13.14. And are endited also by the Holy Spirit sent down from Heaven, 1. Pet. 1.12. Like to this is that Expression ofL. quis rerum Divin. haeres. p. 404. F. Philo, what Reason is in us, that is the Sun in the World, , both being unto us as a Phosphorus, the Sun giving Light to our Senses, and Reason intellectual Raies to our Concepti∣ons. And when , the Di∣vine Light shines upon us, that of our Reason sets; and when that sets, this ariseth, , and so it was with the Prophets. Ver. 20. Knowing this first, (as the Foun∣dation of all you learn from the Prophetick Writings,) that no Prophesie of Scripture is of private Interpretation. (Gr. Of their own Incitation, Motion, or the Suggestion of their own private Spirits.) Ver. 21. For Prophesie of old time come not by the will of Man: but Holy Men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. .] i. e. Prophesie comes not from the Prophet's own Suggestion, but from the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. That this is the true Sense of these Words appears, (1.) From the Apostle's own Interpretation; for not to be of the Prophet's own Incitation or Suggestion, Ver. 20. is not to come by the Will of Man, Ver. 21. i. e. not by human Reason; but by the Will of God, John 1.13. (2dly.) From the Use of the Phrase; for  according to Phavorinus and Suidas, is , Accession, or Incitation, or insult; and the Word  added to it, must therefore signifie that Prophesie is not of private Impulse or Incitation, whence the Expression used by the true Prophets, is generally this, , the Spirit came upon me, Numb. 24.2. 1 Sam. 10.10. 2 Chron. 15.1.24.20. And (3dly.) From the Nature of the Thing it self,
and the constant Opinion of the Jews about it: which was, as. Quis R. div. Haeres. P. 404. C. . D. . De proem. & poen. p. 711. E. Philo saith, that a Pro∣phet speaketh nothing of himself, but he is the gan of God in what he speaks, God speak∣ing in and by him. Whence to speak of him∣self, or of his own Heart or Mind, is always de the Sign of a false Prophet, whom God ad not sent, Numb. 16.28.22.18.24.13. Jer. 23.16, 26. Ezek. 13.17. Ridiculous therefore, and full of Ignorance is the Infe∣rence of Esthius hence, that the Reformed and their Pastors must not interpret the Scriptures according to their own Sense or Judgments, which surely they may do as well as he, or any other Romish Commentator, who have no∣thing but their own private Sense, for many Interpretations of the Scriptures they discourse upon. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. BUT there were false Prophets among the People, (in the former Ages of the Jewish Church,) as there shall be hereafter) false Teachers among you, who pri∣vately shall bring in damnable Heresies, (i. e. Doctrines tending to the Destruction of them at hold them, and) even denying the Lord at bought them, and (shall) bring upon them∣selves swift Destruction. , False Teachers.] Concern∣ing the Persons chiefly concern'd in this Chap∣ter, and in the parallel Epistle of St. Jude, I d three Opinions. 1. That of Dr. Lightfoot, who thinks these Chapters speak chiefly of the Jews, i. e. of the False Teachers of that Nation. The Se∣cond is, 2. That of the Ancients, who say expresly, , he be∣gins to speak of the Heresie of the Nicolai∣tias. So Oecumenius. The third is, 3. That of the Reverend and Learned Dr. Hammond, and of the Ancients also, That the Apostles speak these things touching the Gnosticks. And this Opinion seems not much to differ from the Second: For the Ancient Fathers say,. Epiph. Haer. 25. § 2. . Timoth. & Damasc. The Gnosticks sprang from the Nicolaitans, and borrowed from them all their Filthiness and Lasciviousness. Moreo∣ver, the Apostle Peter speaketh plainly of False Teachers which were to be hereafter, for Ver. 1, 2, 3. he speaks still in the Future Tense, though both St. Jude in his Epistle, and St. Peter  the following Words, do plainly intimate that some of them were come already; so that in the Exposition of this Chapter, and the Epistle to St. Jude, we have Reason to take in those Hereticks who appeared after the writing these Epistles. Nevertheless, because the Falfe Apostles, and False Teachers of the Jewish Nation, and the Nicolaitans were certainly then come, and we have express and frequent Mention of them in the Epistles of St. Paul, and in the Revelati∣ons of St. John, and because St. Peter speaks of them in the Plural Number; therefore I shall apply the Words to all of them, giving the Preference to them in the Exposition of these Words, who are expresly mentioned in the Holy Scriptures. , there shall be false Teachers among you.] The Apostle writing to the Jews seems by these Words to intimate that these False Teachers should be among the Jewish Converts especially, as be∣ing either Jews by Birth, or Proselytes to that Religion, as was Nicolaus of Antioch, Acts 6.5. but then their entring in among the Jewish Converts, Jud. 4. and being among them in their Feasts of Charity, Ver. 12. their leaving the right way, 2 Pet. 2.15. and their returning with the Dog to the Vomit, make it probable that they once profess'd the Christian Faith, though after they revolted from it, or introduced such Doctrines of Perdition, as fundamentally destroy'd the Faith which they profess'd. , damnable Heresies.] Such as tended to the present Destruction, and future Damnation of them who taught, and who be∣liev'd them. Thus the Doctrine of the False Apostles among the Jews tended to the perver∣ting of Souls, Acts 15.24. To make Christ die in vain, Gal. 2.21. And their Faith to profit them nothing, Gal. 5.2. And Christ be∣come of none Effect unto them, they being by them fallen from Grace, Ver. 5. and become Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. The Heresie of the Nicolaitans is stiled byHaer. 25. § 4. p. 79. Epiphanius, an Heresie which did , destroy them that taught, and them that believed it. Yea, Christ himself declares his hatred of it, Rev. 2.15. And the same all the Fathers say of the Gno∣stick Heresie. , deny∣ing the Lord that bought them.] Christ being never stiled  in the New Te∣stament; and St. Jude distinguishing this , or Master, from our Lord, it seems
most reasonable to interpret this of God the Father, who is said to have bought the Jews, Is he not thy Father who hath bought thee? Deut. 32.5. And the Christians, Ye are bought with a Price, therefore glorifie God with your Souls and Bodies, which are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. Hence also it is truly observed by Esthius, That Christ died for them that perish, and bring Destruction upon themselves. , shall bring upon themselves swift Destruction.] That the Apostatizing Jews did this, the Scripture every where in∣forms us, and the Apostles frequently warn them of it. St. Paul doth it throughout the Epistle to the Hebrews, elsewhere speaking of them as Men whose End is Destruction, Phil. 3.19. On whom should come swift Destructi∣on, 1 Thes. 5.3. As being appointed for Wrath, Ver. 9. St. James, as of Men fatned for a Day of Slaughter, Chap. 5.5. and that suddenly to come upon them, their Judge standing at the Door, Ver. 9. Christ also threatens to them that held the Doctrine of the Nico∣laitans that he would come against them swift∣ly, and fight against them with the Sword of his Mouth, Rev. 2.16. That is, he would de∣stroy them, Rev. 19.15, 21. Accordingly Church History informs us that they were ex∣tinctEuseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 29. , in a very little time. But I find nothing of any such remarkable or swift Destruction which befel the Gnosticks, in Church-History; not one Word that any of them perish'd at the Destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman Army, though doubtless their Iniquities would find them out. We rather read in the Church-History, that they were ne∣ver persecuted by the Heathen Emperors; this being the Observation of the Fathers, that the, &c. . Just. M. Ap. p. 69, 70. Simonians and the Menandrians were never persecuted by the Heathens, their Fury being only poured out upon the Christians. Nor could it probably be otherwise, seeing they made the Doctrine of the Cross no part of their Religion; but. Orig. contr. Cels. l. 6. p. 282. held it lawful in Times of Persecution to deny the Faith, to avoid suffering for it, and counting Idolatry in such Cases a thing indifferent. Whence, saith Origen, they were never persecuted at all. Ver. 2. And many shall follow their perni∣cious ways, by reason of whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of. , &c. many shall follow.] Tha the Judaizers much infested the Christian Church, and perverted many in the Church o Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus and Crete, we lea from St. Paul's Epistles; and that by Reason of the Jewish Zealots, who despised Domini¦ons, and spake evil of Dignities, the way o Truth was evil spoken of, from 1 Pet. 2.12 Indeed the Heathens seem to have made little or no Distinction betwixt the Jews and the Christians that sprang from them; but impu¦ted all the Disturbances they made to Christ, or to the Christians. Hence Suetonius saith of Claudius, ThatSueton. in Claud. Cap. 25. Judoeos impulsore Chre¦sto assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit. He expel'd the Jews from Rome, as being fre∣quently tumultuous through the Instigation of Christ. Of the Nicolaitans Epiphanius saith, That. Her. 25. § 3. Great was the Deceit which they brought upon Mankind. And. Strom. 3. ab init. . Just. M. p. 70. Clemens Alexandrinus professeth to write against them and the Gnosticks, to remove the Scandal which they by their Doctrines might bring upon Chri∣stianity: As Justin Martyr also hints. Yea,. Strom. 3. p. 428. B. Clemens adds, That from these Men who taught that Women should be common, arose the greatest Blasphemy against the Name of Christ or Christians. Moreover, it is to be noted, that instead of , many Copies read, , their Lascivious Ways; which reading may be con∣firmed from St. Jude, who begins his De∣scription of the same Persons thus, They turn the Grace of God, , into Lascivi∣ousness, And the Character agrees in some measure to the False Teachers among the Jews, who taught Fornication and Unclean∣ness. See Note on 1 Cor. 6.13. Eph. 5.6. Practised , the hidden things of Shame, 2 Cor. 4.2. And gloried in their Shame, Phil. 3.19. And whose Exhortation was , from Uncleanness, 1 Thes. 2.3. And many of whose Followers were guilty of Uncleanness, Fornication,  and Lasciviousness, 2 Cor. 12.21. But this is more emphatically the Character of the Ni∣colaitans, and of the Gnosticks, the Successors of them, for they were, saith Oecumenius, , most ungodly in their Principles, and most lascivious in their Lives. Refert com∣ples
& per mixtiones execrabiles obscenas{que} junctus, & quaedam ex ipsis adhuc turpiora, saithPraescript. c. 47. Tertullian; yea things so exceeding y, that we blush to mention them, and therefore pass them by. , saithStrom. 3. p. 436. Clemens of Alexandria. , saithCoteler. tom. 1. p. 286. Da∣a. HenceEp. ad Trall. §. 11. Pseud-Ignatius stiles then  immundissimos Nico∣s amatores libidinis. St. Austin, Sectam pissimam; for, saithApud Cotel. tom. 3. p. 381. Timotheus, , amongst all the Masters of Heresie, none taught such filthy and abominable Actions. Ver. 3. And through Covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandice of you, thse Judgment now of a long time lingreth , and their Damnation slumbreth not. , whose Judgment  of a long time lingreth not.] St. Jude, in  parallel place, ver. 4. saying they were Men  of old signed to this Condemnation, viz. by the Pro∣phecy of Enoch, see the Note there; I think these words may be best rendred thus: To  the Judgment pronounced of old lingreth t, it being a swift Destruction which the false Teachers among the Jews and the Nico∣ans brought upon themselves. See Note  Ver. 1. of this Chapter. Note also, that their Damnation is in the Greek their De∣struction. , through Covetousness.] If  should here and ver. 14. signifie Adulte∣ry, as 1 Thess. 4.6. it seems to do, see Note there, and as Dr. Hammond thinks it doth re, there will be no difficulty in applying ths to the Nicolaitans, as well as to the Gnosticks, and False Teachers among the Jews, the Note on the 2d Verse shewing that this emphatically belonged to them, and gave the ife to that impure Sect. But because they are accused, ver. 15. of following the way of alaam who loved the wages of Unrighteous∣ness, and by St. Jude, ver. 11. of running greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, I think it better to admit of that Sense which our Translation giveth of the Word. And then to apply it at once to the False Teachers among the Jews, and to the Nicolaitans, it seems highly probable from the 6th, the 8th, and the 10th Chapters of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, that the Apostle is there dis∣coursing against the Nicolaitans. Now of these False Teachers he saith that they devou∣red the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.20. St. Paul, in his 2d Epistle to Timothy, chap. 3.6. speaks of a sort of Men who crept into houses, lead∣ing captive silly Women, laden with Sins, and led away with divers Lusts; a Character which perfectly agrees to the Nicolaitans: And speaking to Titus of the same Persons, he saith, Chap. 1.10, 11. they subverted whole houses, teaching things which they ought not for filthy lucre sake. Irenaeus informs us of the, l. 1. c. 1. p. 20. Valentinians, that they would not im∣part their Mysteries to all, but to them only who were able to pay great Sums for them. Whence the Pseud. Ep. ad Magnes. §. 9. Ignatius stiles them, Covetous of what belongs to others, and violent Lovers of Riches. Ver. 4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinn'd, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them to chains of darkness to be re∣served unto Judgment. , casting them down to Hell.] Tar∣tarus, saith Phavorinus, is  the subterrestrial Air, where the Sun comes not. It signifies also, saith Suidas,  the place in the Clouds, or in the Air: hence  and  in Homer, to intimate that Tartarus was the dark Air, as Crates in Stephanus saith. These Angels being therefore before placed in the bright Regions of the heavenly Light, and being now confined to the dark Air, (whence Satan is called the Prince of the Power of the Air) are said to be cast down into Tartarus. And this suits with the Opinion both of the Heathens and the Jews, who held that the Air was full of Spirits or Daemons, [see Note on Ephes. 2.2.] but chiefly of the Ancient Fathers, according to those words of Jerom in his Comment on that Passage of St. Paul against spiritual Wickednesses  in coelestibus, that is, saith he, in the Air;Haec autem omnium doctorum opinio est, quod aër iste qui coelum & terram medius dividens inane appellatur  fit contrariis fortitudinibus. For this is the Opinion of all the Doctors, that the Air, which divides between the Earth and Heaven, is full of contrary Powers. He is stiled the Prince of the Power of the Air, because, saith. In locum. . OEcumenius, He is the Prince of the evil Spirits that are in the Air; not as having Dominion, saith Theophylact, but only his Habitation there. That this was
the Opinion of most of the Ancients, see Pe∣tavius De Angelis, l. 3. c. 4. Now hence it follows, that though the Devil and his An∣gels are at present for ever banish'd from the Divine Presence, and so do suffer the Punish∣ment of loss of the beatifick Vision now; though they are in the Language of Tertullian Praedamnati ad Judicii diem, condemn'd be∣fore hand to the tremendous day; Praedestina∣ti supplicio sempiterno, fore-ordain'd to eter∣nal Punishment, saith St. Austin; reservati in diem judicii, reserv'd to the day of Judg∣ment, say Origen and St. Peter here; or kept in chains of darkness to that day, saith St. Jude; and knowing and believing this, they cannot chuse but tremble, and be fill'd with present Horror; yet is the Doctrine of Rupertus highly probable, That at present they are not suffering in the infernal Flames, but have theirEt nunc quidem in hunc aërem illum esse dejectum, & omnes satellites ejus, quos aëreas catervas dicimus passim in Scripturis habemus — futurum est autem ut in infernum inferiorem videntibus cunctis praecipitetur in igne aeternum qui paratus est ei, & Angelis ejus. Com. in Gen. 17. Residence at present in the dark Air, whence at the day of Judgment they shall be precipitated into the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 1st. Because this seems to have been the Opinion of all Antiquity for five whole Cen∣turies together, as appears not only from their common Doctrine mention'd before, that they at present had their Habitation in the Air, but also from their express words who speak still in the future of their infernal Punish∣ments, saying, as Ap. 1. p. 46. D. Vide p. 45. E. Justin Mart. that they shall be punish'd with eternal Fire, and that the Pressures they now suffer from the Name of Jesus is an Indication of their future Pu∣nishment in everlasting Fire. This he con∣fesseth  that God hath not yet done, but yet he saith, Apol. 2. p. 71. B. Christ hath foretold that he and his Angels shall be cast into the fire, and everlastingly tormented there. And. P. 151. D. Tatianus saith of them, The Lord of all things suffers them to expatiate,  insult till the time of the Dissolution of th World, and till the Judge comes.Desperata conditio corum ex praedamnatione solatium reputat fruendae interim malignitatis ex poenae mora Apol. c. 27. Te¦tullian saith, that their desperate Condition on the account of their being condemn'd before receives some comfort from the delay of the punishment.Destinatam enim sibi cum suis cultoribus poenam praescius perhorrescit. P. 39. Minucius Felix saith, th He foreknowing, trembles at the punishmen appointed for him and those that worship himSed & dominus illorum cum ministris suis comprehendetur, ad poenamque damnabitur, cum quo pariter cu nis turba impiorum pro suis facinribus perpetuo igni cremabitur in aeternum. L. 7. c. 26. p. 729. Lactantius, that at the time of Judgmen this Prince, with his Ministers, will be la hold on, and condemn'd to punishment. 3dly. This must be the Doctrine of thos Fathers who held that the Devil knew n that he should be certainly condemned till ou Lord's Advent, and therefore durst not before Blaspheme God; which was the Doctrine o. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 18. Justin Martyr,Iren. l. 5. c. 26. Irenaeus,. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 18. Eusebiu andEpiph Har. 39. n. 8. Epiphanius; or, as. I 1 Pet. 5.8. OEcumeni interprets him, He did not know it manifestly as being only obscurely hinted by the Prophets but when Christ coming declared manifestly that everlasting Fire was prepared for him and his Angels, he ceased not to practise h Wiles against the Saints. And this Doctrin they founded on these following Scriptures viz. 1. That Question which these Devils pu to Christ, Art thou come to torment us befor the time? Concluding hence, that not tha present Age, but the future, was the tim when these evil Spirits were to be punish'd asDiabolus in hoc seculo neque corripitur pro peccato, neque stagellatur, omnia namque ei servata sunt in fu¦turum, unde & ipse sciens sibi illud statutum tempus esse paenarum dicebat ad salvatorem. Quid venisti ante temp torquere nos? Hom. 8. in Exod. F. 44 H. Non vult Deus Daemonum genus ante tempus damnare. Sciunt enim & ipsi Daemones, quia tempus eorum praesens hoc seculum continet. Propterea denique & Dominum rogabant, ur no torqueret ces ante tempus. Hom. 13. in Numer. F. 116. I. Origen saith twice. They thought saith St. Jerom, ad judicandos se venisse, tha Christ was come to judge them: saith Chryso¦stom, , that h would not stay till the time of Punishment, i. e. the day of Judgment. Hence Maldonate, up¦on the place, admires at the great Consent o the Ancients in this Opinion.
2. This, 2dly, they gathered from those words of Christ, Depart ye wicked into the  prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Whence they concluded withSerm. de Trans. S. Malachiae. S. Bernard, at the Sentence against them was determi∣ned, but was not yet past upon them, and that J Diabolo ignis paratus, etsi nondum ille praecipitatus in ignem, The Fire was indeed prepared for the Devil, but he was not yet cast nto it; concluding, that was only to be doneSunt reservati in diem Judicii. Orig. Indigni sunt qui in praesenti seculo corripiantur, sed in futuro recipient quae erentur. Hom. 8. in Ex. ibid. Dominus in die judicii quasi in uno fasce pariter colligatos mittet in lacum inferni. Hieron. in c. 25. Es. In fine corporeo igne cruciandi, Greg. Servantur in judicium puniendi. Fulg. apud Petav. Tom. 3. . 3. cap. 4. at the end of the World, or at the day of the Great Judgment, or in the World to come. But, 3dly, This they chiefly concluded from these words ofMirum quanto consensu plerique veteres auctores docuerint Daemones ante diem judicii non torqueri, quod Petrus scribat 2 Pet. 2.4. Si Angelis peccantibus non pepercit, &c. Et Judas v. 6. Angeli qui non servarunt suum principatum. Maldonat. in Matth. 8.29. Vide August. l. 21. c. 27. &c. de Civ. Dei. St. Peter and St. Jude, that they were reserved unto the day of Judgment to be punished. Nor is it easie to receive a more natural Consequence than this, They are reserved unto the day of Judg∣ment to be punish'd, therefore they are not punish'd yet with the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And lastly, This they gathered from the Revelations of St. John, who often saith, thatSicut etiam Desertores Angeli, licet secundum modum quendam mortui sunt peccando, quia fontem vitae de∣seruerant qui Deus est — in secundam mortem post ultimam praecipitabantur Judicium. De C. D. l. 13. c. 24. p. 746. C. Vide undem l. 21. c. 23. the old Serpent the Devil shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone at the day of judg∣ment: to which these Sayings of St. Austin to refer. Since then to torment the Devils at our Saviour's Advent, was to torment them be∣fore the time of Torment; seeing our Saviour when he shall pass the final Sentence will on∣ly amand the wicked to the Fire prepared for, not actually tormenting then, the Devil and his Angels, seeing they only are reserved in Chains of darkness to the day of Judgment to be punish'd, and so the Sentence and the Exe∣cution of it is no more pass'd upon them than upon the Prisoner that's kept in Chains for the Assizes; seeing the Devil is only said to be then cast into the Lake of Fire and Brim∣stone, when the Judge sat upon the Throne, and all Men were judg'd according to their WorksRev. 20.10, 15.; there seems sufficient Reason to assert, that even the Devils, and then much less wicked Persons, shall not be tormented in the infernal Flames until the day of Judg∣ment. Ver. 5. And spared not the old world, but sed only Noah the eighth Person, a Preacher of Righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly. , and spared not the old world.] This instance agrees very exactly to those Ni∣colaitans and Gnosticks who had corrupted their ways, as they of the old World did, by taking to them what Women they pleased to enjoy, as far as appears, without any solemnity of Matrimony, Gen. 6.2, 4. for it is only said, that the Sons of God went in unto the Daughters of men; hence are these Giants said to be , violent men who by force invaded them. And also by Ido∣latry. See Ainsworth on Gen. 4.26. , the eighth person.] One would think from Adam, whereas indeed he rather was the tenth from Adam, Gen. 5. and so it is the eighth of them that were saved from the De∣luge, 1 Pet. 3.8. So Plutarch saith of Pelo∣pidas, that he came , unto his house with eleven more, and Polybius of Dione∣sidorus, that , he swam out with two more, so here Noah was saved with seven Persons; so celebrated in History, the Hill where the Ark rested is called the Hill of the eighth or Themanim; and a Village by it bears the same Name. See Dr. Hammond on the place. Ver. 6. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into Ashes, condemn'd them with an overthrow, making them an example to them that afterwards should live ungodly. (See Note on Jude 7.) Ver. 7. And delivered just Lot vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked. Ver. 8. For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing (of them) vexed his Righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. Note here, that true Piety renders the Sin of others not only offensive to the Soul; but even to the Eyes and Ears of just per∣sons; according to that Expression of the Psalmist, Psal. 119.158. I beheld the trans∣gressors, and was grieved because they kept not thy word. Ver. 9. (Then may we rest assured that) the Lord knoweth how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations (as he did Noah, and Lot,) and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judg∣ment to be punished. , The Lord Knoweth.] God's Know∣ledge here includes his Power and his Will. So Psalm 1. Whatsoever the Righteous doth it shall prosper, for the Lord knoweth the way
of the Righteous, v. 6. i. e. and he is able and willing to make it prosper. Matth. 6.31. Take no thought what you shall eat or drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed, for your heavenly Father knoweth you have need of all these things, v. 32. , to the day of judgment to be punished.] Note that this is signally the time when the ungodly shall be punished. 2ly, That the Evils which wicked men suffer in this Life will not Exempt them from fu∣ture Punishments in the World to come; even Sodom and Gomorrah must then suffer, Matth. 10.15.11.22. Ver. 10. But chiefly them who walk after the Flesh in the Lusts of uncleanness, and de∣spise Government, presumptuous are they, self willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. , who walk after the flesh.] See Note on v. 2. , and despise Go∣vernments.] The Note of Esthius on the place is this, that we read not in Church-History that the Gnosticks despised Governments, but rather flatter'd them. What Dr. Hammond saith of their teaching Christians to despise all Authority of Magistrates, or Masters, is not proved by him; for he attempts not to prove that they were  Despisers of Government; and his Attempt to prove that they taught Christian Servants to despise their Masters, from 1 Tim. 6.2. hath been considered already. Nor do I find any thing of this Nature charg'd upon the Nicolaitans. But then it may be noted, that  Dominions and Glories, in the New Testament, doth often signifie the Angelical Powers; as, when Christ is said to be exalted  above all Dominion, Ephes. 1.21. and when  are mention'd among the invisible things of the Creation, Coloss. 1.16. Accordingly some of the Fathers refer this to the. OEcum. Angelical Powers; and this they do with great probability: for, 1. The Apostle Peter here asserts, that they blasphem'd  in things of which they had no knowledge: St. Jude, that they bla∣sphemed things that they knew not: which very well agrees with their bold Assertions touching the Angels; in which they did, as St. Paul saiths,  intrude into those things they had not seen, Coloss. 2.18. but cannot be so well applied to Civi Dignities, of which these Hereticks mus have sufficient Knowledge. 2. The Apostl adds, that whereas these Men did not trem∣ble to blaspheme these Dignities, the holy Angels  durs not use railing or blasphemous words against them. Now they whom Michael and hi good Angels durst not blaspheme, were, saith St. Jude, the Devil and his Angels, who are in Scripture stiled the Principalities, and Powers, and Rulers of the darkness of th World, Eph. 6.12. And therefore they whom these Hereticks blasphem'd must also be An∣gelick Dignities. But against this it is objected, that we rea not in Church-History that the Heresie of the Gnosticks had any thing in it of particular op∣position or defiance to the Angels, but on the contrary, the Aeones noting the Angels make up a great part of their Dignity. Ans. This seems a great Mistake; for bothIren. l. 1. c. 35. St. Irenaeus andEpiph. Haer. 18. §. 2. Epiphanius avert, that when they practis'd their most vile Im∣purities, they invok'd some of the Angels, to whom they did ascribe that work, saying when they perform'd it, , O Angel, I am doing of thy Work, I am em∣ployed in thy Service; which sure must be to blaspheme these Dignities. Moreover, it is evident that the Nicolaitan did also horribly blaspheme them. For, 1st. They made the Angels to be the Off-spring of anAeones refert quosdam turpitudinis natos, & complexus, & permixtiones execrabiles, obscenasque conjunctas, natos praeterea Daemones, & Does, & Spiritus septem. De Praesc. c. 47. obscene and filthy Aon, as both Ter∣tullian and. Haer. 25. §. 5. Epiphanias inform us. 2dly, They add, that thisMatrem viventium. Iren. l. 1. c. 24. Mother appears in a beautiful form to Princes, and extracts their Seed from them with Pleasure, that she may recollect her Power or Vertue dispers'd among many: And from this Hypothesis, saith. Epiph. Haer. 25. §. 2. Epiphanius, Nicholaus brought the mystery of his Filthiness into the World. They doing all their Villanies, I suppose, in imitation of her. Ver. 11. Whereas Angels, which are greater in power and might (than evil Spirits,) bring not railing accusations against them before the Lord. (See Note on Jude 9.) Ver. 12. But these, as natural brute Beasts, (Gr. as irrational natural living Creatures, rather than Men, (made to be taken and de∣stroy'd, (or to raven and destroy,) speak evil
of the things they understand not, (i. e. of the Angelical Powers whom they Blaspheme, . 1.) and shall utterly perish in their Cor∣ruption. This Verse in St. Jude runs thus, But these spe evil of the things they know not, but what they know naturally as brute Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves, Ver. 10. and therefore to make this Verse parallel to it, it seems necessary to make the construction  thus, , but these Blasphemers of Dignities, , Blasphe∣ming in Things of which they have no Know∣ledge, they shall perish in their own Cor∣ruption; as do the natural brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed; to whom they are in this Practice of makingCarpocrates. , cujus exemplum dat , in Genere Boum, Suum, Ovium, & reliquorum omnium. Clem. Alex. Strom. 3. p. 428. C. D. & p. 429. A. all Women common, like: and whose Example they plead in favour of their. Ibid. common Whore∣doms: Especially the Followers of Carpocra∣tes, and his Son Epiphanes. Making. Ibid. D. the Marriage of one a Violation of the Commu∣nity ordained by God, and exemplified in other living Creatures. Ver. 13. And shall receive (Gr. receiving) (by this Destruction, Ver. 12.) the Reward of Unrighteousness, as they that count it Pleasure to riot in the day time: Spots they are and Blemishes, sporting themselves in their own Deceits, whilst they feast with yea. , riot in the Day.] This is exactly true of theTunc Nicolaus, die noctuque nuptias faciens obscoenas & auditus quoque erubescendos coitus somniavit. Hieron. adv. Lacif. F. 53. A. Nicolaitans, who practised their Impurities Day and Night; and held, that. Epiph. Haer. 25. § 1. If a Man were not Lasci∣rious every Day, he could not be saved. Sporting themselves in their own Deceits.] i. e. In those Practices which were the Effects of their deceitful Principles. So that there seems no need of reading , their Love-Feasts; for they were the Feasts of the Church, not of the Hereticks. , when they feast with you.] Of these Feasts see Note on Jude 12. And also Irenaeus's Saying of Marcus and other Here∣ticks, That , they are always accustomed in those Suppers which they make by Lot to play; or as the Latin hath it, Sortibus ludere, to play by Lot; I suppose what Woman they should commit Lewdness with, or who should provide the Supper; which being end∣ed, there follow'd, as. Ap. 2. p. 70. B. C. Justin Martyr hints, the putting out of the Candle, and their promiscuous Lusts, speaking of the Marcio∣nites; and. Strom. l. 3. p. 430. C. D. Clemens Alexandrinus of the Carpocratians. Ver. 14. Having Eyes full of Adultery, that cannot cease from Sin; beguiling unstable Souls: an Heart they have exercised with co∣vetous Practices; cursed Children: Covetous Practices. See Note on Ver. 3. Ver. 15. Which have forsaken the right Way, and are gone astray, following the Way of Ba∣laam the Son of Bosor, who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness: (and to obtain them coun∣selled Balak to entice God's People to commit Fornication with the Midianites, Numb. 31.16. , that is, saith Grotius, of the City of Bosor, as Pethor his City, Numb. 22.5. is called. This in St. Jude runs thus, , they ran forth into the Error of the Reward of Balaam, i. e. the Error which the Children of Israel committed through the Counsel which Balaam gave to Balak. To explain this, let it be noted; 1st. That Balaam not only went with the Princes of Balak, but also had the Reward of his Divination; for 'tis expresly said, Deut. 23.4. Neh. 13.2. That the Ammonites and Moabites hired Balaam. Note, 2dly, That Balaam for this Reward, gave Counsel to Balak to entice the People of Is∣rael to Idolatry and Fornication; this is hinted in those Words, Come therefore I will advertise thee, Numb. 24.14. i. e. what to do to this People now, and what they will do to thee in the latter Days, So the Chaldee Paraphrast upon this Place. I will counsel thee what thou shalt do to this People, that thou mayest make them to sin; So the Jerusalem Targum. This Counsel, saith Josephus, was that Balaam told Balak upon his departure, that the only way to prevail upon this People would be to draw them into Sin; and to that purpose he counsel'd him to tempt them with their Beautiful Women. These were first to
entice the Israelites with their Beauty, and Compliant Conversation, and when they had entangled their Affections, they were to con∣sent to their Embraces, upon Condition that the Israelites would forsake their own Law, and worship the God of the Moabites, Joseph. Antiq. l. 4. c. 6. Note, 3dly, That this Counsel made them err in the Matter of Peor; and so not only to com∣mit Fornication with the Women of Midian, 1 Cor. 10.8. but also to commit Idolatry. Now this Baal Peor, saith St. Jerom and other Criticks, was Priapus, who was worshiped by shewing of their Shame; to which those Words of the Prophet Hosea may refer, They set up Altars to Baal Phegor, and separated themselves to that Shame, Chap. 9.10. And those of Jeremiah, You have set up Altars to Shame, even Altars to burn Incense to Baal, Jer. 11.13. And then as the , They were dispersed, or ran about after the Midianitish Women, answers to the Practice, of those Men who crept into Houses, leading captive silly Women; so the Matter of Baal Peor answers exactly to the execrable Villa∣nies these Men committed cum Membris Pu∣doris. Moreover, This Passage seems to confirm that Exposition which refers what is here spo∣ken, to the Nicolaitans. For St. John speaks thus to the Church of Pergamus, I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who (as he) taught Balak to cast a Stumbling-block be∣fore the Children of Israel, to eat things sacri∣ficed to Idols, and to commit Fornication; so hast thou also them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which I hate. Now the Church-History informs us, this was the Do∣ctrine of the Nicolaitans, that it was lawful to eat things offered to Idols, and to commit Fornication, asTurpissima secta in quâ placet usus indifferens foeminarum. Hi nec ab iis quae Idolis immolantur cibos suos separant. De Haer. c. 5. Iren. l. 1. c. 28. Irenaeus, St. Austin, and others teach. Ver. 16. But was rebuked for his Iniquity: (for) the dumb Ass speaking with Man's Voice, forbad the Madness of the Prophet. The Prophet.] That Balaam was indeed a Prophet of God, and well acquainted with his Revelations, the History in the Book of Numbers will not suffer us to doubt; for those Words, I cannot go beyond the Command∣ment of my God, to do Good or Evil, Numb. 22.18. shew he was not unacquainted with the true God. See also Chap. 24.4. Though after, through a covetous Desire of Gain, he used Enchantments, the Madness of the Pro∣phet appeared in this, that hearing the Ass speak, which argued the miraculous Assi∣stance of God Enabling him so to do, he goes on in his mad Fury, and saith he would kill him. Ver. 17. These are Wells (Gr. Fountains) without Water, Clouds that are carried by Tempest, (unprofitable for any Good, as Foun¦tains without Water; and pernicious as Tem∣pests, which blast and root up all before them) to whom the Mist (Gr. the Blackness) of Darkness is reserved for ever. Ver. 18. For when they speak great swelling Words of Vanity, they allure through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness, (or to Lasciviousness) those who were clean escaped from them that live in Error. , swelling Words of Vanity.] This did the Hereticks many ways; v. g. by their barbarous Names, quibus terreant Auditores by which they affrighted the Hearers, saithHaer. 5. St. Austin andEpiph. Haer. 25. § 3. Epiphanius, and imposed upon them, by those vile Words, or by those proud Words that they are the Spiritual, the perfect, the Seeds of Election, Men who have perfect Knowledge of God. See Note on Jude 19. that they have Grace , from the ineffable and not to be named Conjugation and. Iren. l. 1. p. 28. therefore ought to be always meditating the Mystery of Conjugation; and that. Ibid: he that being in the World does not love a Woman so as to en∣joy her, is not of the Truth, nor shall come unto the Truth, and that except a Man be la∣scivious every Day, he cannot enjoy eternal Life. And that. p. 26. they being spiritual, can∣not receive Corruption by any evil actions that they do, or be hurt by any material Actions, so as to lose their spiritual Substance, in Oppo∣sition to which vain Boasts these Apostles so expresly say, They shall perish in their Cor∣ruption. Ver. 19. Whilst they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the Servants of Corruption: for of what a Man is overcome, of that is he brought in Bondage.
, they promise them Liberty.] They promised them a double Liberty, (1st.). L. 1. cap. 9. p. 72. A Liberty to do any thing they pleased without fear. (2dly.) A Liberty from the Eye and hand of their Judge; as we learn from the , swelling Words of Vanity, cited by Irenaeus from them which are a full Comment  Ver. 18. Ver. 20. For if after they have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the Know∣ledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning. Ver. 21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known it to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them. (Because they sin by Apostacy, against the Light recei∣ved, and with Ingratitude to the Author of it.) From Ver. 18, 20, 21. it seemeth to be strongly argued, That they who were once truly Faithful, may totally and finally fall away. For, 1st. That the Persons here men∣tioned were once truly Faithful, seems evident from this, 1. That they had once , truly and entirely escaped from them that live in Er∣ror, Ver. 18. Being not then entangled with, not overcome by the Pollutions which are in the World, through Lust; but having escaped them through the Knowledge of Christ Jesus: That they turned from the holy Commandment in which they formerly had walked; That they were once wash'd from that Mire to which they returned, Ver. 22. All which cannot be truly said of Hypocritical Professors, who were still in the Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of Ini∣quity. That these Men after fell away totally, and finally, we learn from these Expressions, That they were again allured to Wantonness, That they were again entangled, and overcome by the Pollutions which were in the World through Lust, and therefore brought in Bondage; that they turned from the holy Command delivered to them; yea, with the Dog to the Vomit, and the wash'd Sow to the wallowing in the Mire: and so far, as that it had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness. Ver. 22. But it hath happened to them ac∣cording to the true Proverb, the Dog is turn∣ed to his own Vomit again, and the Sow that was wash'd to her wallowing in the Mire. CHAP. III. Ver. 1. THIS Second Epistle, beloved I now write unto you; in (both) which I stir up your pure Minds by way of remem∣brance. , your sincere Minds.] A sincere desire to know, and regard to the Truth, being once seated in the Mind and Heart, we shall readily embrace, and firmly retain the Truth delivered to us. Ver. 2. That ye may be mindful of the Words which were before spoken by the holy Prophets, (of the Old Testament, Enoch, Jude 14. and Daniel, Chap. 12.2. touching the Judgment of ungodly Men) and of the Commandment of as the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour, (or of the Commandment of the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour, as St. Jude, Ver. 17. that is, to expect patiently, and with unshaken Faith that day, Heb. 10.23, 35.39. Jam. 1.6.5.7, 11. 1 Pet. 1.13.4.1.) That these Words should relate to that no∣table Destruction of the unbelieving Jews, seems not very probable; since the Believers are instructed to be mindful of these Com∣mands, that they might be armed against the Scoffers mentioned Ver. 3. who said, Where is the Promise of his Coming? Now that the thing Questioned by them, was not our Lord's coming to the Destruction of the Jews, but the Judgment of the World, is evident, it being stiled emphatically, , the Day of Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men, Ver. 7, 10, 11, 12. Ver. 3. Knowing this first, that (according to their Predictions) there shall come in the last Days Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts. Since both St. Peter, and, as St. Jude tells us, the rest of the Apostles were so careful to mind those to whom they writ or Preached, of these Scoffers, we may conjecture that these Scoffers were then come; though in respect of the Prophecies concerning them, they were yet to come, whence Jude saith or them, these are they that separate themselves, &c. Ver. 8, 9. , Scoffers.] St. Jude seems to teach us that these Scoffers were the Hereticks mentioned in the former Chapter, viz. the
Simonians, who being Samaritans, held still their old Heresie, That. Epiph. l. 1. p. 25. Haer. Samar. Valentiniani etiam . Just. M. p. 307. p. 253. there should be no Resurrection of the Flesh; and therefore walk∣ed after their own Lusts. For these of whom I have treated and am speaking, are they of whom the Apostles did forewarn you, Ver. 17, 18. Ver. 4. And saying, Where is the Promise of his coming (to judge the World, and raise his faithful Servants from the Dead)? for since the Fathers, (to whom these Promises were made) fell asleep, all things continue as (they were) from the beginning of the Cre∣ation. , viz. .] For from the Day that the Fathers, to whom this Promise of a Resur∣rection and an Heavenly Country, Heb. 11.16. is supposed to be made, and who foretold this Judgment to come upon the Wicked, Jude 14. have slept, we see no such thing made good to them; nothing answering their Pre∣dictions, but all things continue as they were. That  should signifie except that, I find no Instance or Example. Ver. 5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, (Gr. they that are of this Mind are igno∣rant) that by the Word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the Water, (viz. the dry Land) and in the Water, (viz. that part of it which is covered with the Sea.) Ver. 6. Whereby the World that then was, being overflowed with Water, perished. .] That is, They consider not God's Power in making the World, which must enable him also to destroy it, if he please; and that by his Word the Earth was separated from the Waters which covered it, and gathered into its Channels, so that the dry Land, which we call Earth, appeared; and that by these very Waters, descending partly from the Heavens, and partly from the great Deep, Gen. 7.11. the Earth was again overwhelmed for the Sin of the Antediluvians, (Eight Persons only being preserved,) and so those wicked Men which then lived, perished in their Wickedness; and so the Prophecy of Enoch was remarkably fulfill'd upon them. Ver. 7. But the Heavens and Earth which now are, by the same Word are kept in store, (being) reserved unto Fire, against the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly Men, (who, as the Antediluvians have been punish∣ed by Water destroying the World then, shall be punished by Fire destroying it again.) .] From these Words it seems to follow (1st.) That the Day of Judg∣ment and Perdition of ungodly Men, and the Conflagration of the World must be contem∣porary; and that therefore new Heavens and new Earth, in the literal Sense, must vainly be expected before that final Judgment of un∣godly Men. (2dly,) That the Ungodly are not to be judged, or punished by Fire, before the Conflagration of the World: for the Heaven and Earth that now are, are to be burnt up with that very Fire by which the Ungodly are to be destroy'd, they being left in the midst of those Flames, whilst the Godly being snatch'd up into the Air above the reach of them, shall be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thes. 4.16. For the Wicked are reserved unto the Day of Judgment to be punish'd, 2 Pet. 2.9. That Fire in which they are to be tormented and destroyed, is reserved to the same Day, Matth. 25.41, 46. The fallen An∣gels, for whom the Fire is prepared, in which the Wicked shall be punished, are reserved to that Day, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. And Lastly, Sodom and Gomorrah, who perish'd by Fire and Brimstone, are set forth , as an Example of that Punishment the Wicked shall suffer at that great Day of Retribution, 2 Pet. 2.5. Jude 7. they are not therefore to be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone before that Day. Ver. 8. But, (for farther Answer to this Question) beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one Day is with the Lord at a thousand Years, and a thousand Years as one Day. , a thousand Years.] That is, tho' God defer his coming to this Judgment a thou∣sand Years or more, we must not think this long, for in respect of him whose Duration is Eternal, and so who ever lives to make good his Promises and Threats, a thousand Years is as one Day. In like mannerL. 2. Ed. Steph. 1581. p. 67. Zo∣zimus in his History produces a Prediction from the Sybills, or from one Phaellon, and then adds, Let none think that this Prophecy was of some other thing, because it was ful∣filled, , a long time after, , for all time is short to that God who ever is, and ever will be. Mr. Mede indeed saith, that these Words cannot be thus interpreted, because the Question is not whether the time in which they expected the coming of the Lord were long in respect of God, but only in respect of us, and so he would have the Words interpreted thus, The Day of Judgment spoken of shall be a thousand Years. But (1st.) The Text saith not one day shall be a thousand Years, but is as a thousand Years; and that again not absolutely, but only , with respect to God. (2dly,) Here is no Question mentioned touching the Length of
some, either with respect to God, or us, but y touching the Truth of God's Promise, Ver. 4. And to this the Interpretation well agrees, that God's Promise may be true, and in his Time fulfilled, though he who ever lives to make it good, should defer it a thousand Years. And (3dly,) That this respects God's Promise, and not the length of the Day of udgment, is evident from the ensuing Words. Ver. 9. The Lord is not slack concern∣ing his Promise, as some Men count slack∣ness, (concluding thence that he hath chan∣ged his Purpose, or will not perform it,)  is (in this) long suffering to us-ward, not (being) willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. , not being willing t any should perish.] Note here, that when it is said God would have all Men come  Repentance, 'tis certain that this Will re∣fers to all to whom the Preaching of the Gospel is vouchsafed, to all whom in the Times of Ignorance God winked at, for now be commandeth them all every where to repent, Acts 17.30. When therefore it is said, he it not willing any one should perish, he must be supposed to mean, he would have none to whom the Gospel is vouchsafed, to perish. Vain therefore here are the Descants of Esthius upon this Place, as V. G. 1st, When he says God would have none to perish, because he gives to all some general ans of Conversion to God, though they be it sufficient for that End, without those spe∣cial Aids he will not give them. For certain it is, that he who wills not the Means neces∣sary to bring them to Repentance, wills not that they should come to Repentance. And he that determines to withhold the Means, which, being with-held, they must perish, wills they should perish. 2dly, When he restrains this to the Elect, saying, God is not willing any of them should perish. For the Words are too general to admit of this Restriction, for they run thus. 1st. He would have all to come to Repentance; he would not that any should perish. 2dly, He is here speaking of the Day of Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men, and gives this Rea∣son why it is deferr'd, viz. because God is long suffering, and would not any Man should perish. He therefore must in reason be sup∣posed to speak of God's Long-suffering in the General. 3dly, When he adds, He would not any Man should Perish, because he excites good Men to pray they may repent, and so not perish. For if this Prayer be according to the Will of God, then must it also be his Will they should not perish. If it be not, they cannot thus pray in Faith, or with expectance to be heard; because they know, according to his Doctrine, they do not pray according to his Will: nor can God excite them thus to pray. Ver. 10. But (though it be thus deferred for a time, yet) the Day of the Lord will come, as a Thief in the Night, (i. e. suddenly and unexpectedly to them, Luke 21.34. 1 Thes. 5.2, 3.) in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, the Earth also, and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up. Ver. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolv'd, (by Fire design'd to punish the Ungodly) what manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godli∣ness; Ver. 12. Looking for, and hasting to (pre∣pare for) the coming of the Day of God, where∣in the Heavens being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Element shall melt with fervent Heat? , and the Elements being burnt shall be dissolved.] That the Elements cannot be here taken in the common Sense, Mr. Mede proves well, because one of them is that Fire which is to consume these Ele∣ments; but that they signifie the Planets he proves from the Testimonies of. Just. M. Ap. 1. p. 44. A. . Ju∣stin Martyr,Theoph. l. 2. p. 94. B. Lex non solum vetat. . Ibid. p. 110. D. & l. 1. p. 72. A. . Vide ibid. C. Theophilus of Antioch, of Polycrates, and other Ancient Fathers. So , is the Influence of the Stars, Wisd. 7.18. and , the Coele∣stial Signs or Constellations, as Valesius proves (in his Notes upon these Words of Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus;Apud Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 31. , in Asia great Lights are extinct,) out of Diogenes Laertius, and Epiphanius, and since the Planetary Bo∣dies are found to be as much Earth as that we tread on, and borrow all their Light from the Irradiations of the Sun, I think there is no need of those Criticisms which turn , they shall pass away, into they shall be changed; and , they shall be dissolved being burnt, into they shall be refined; where∣as if they be refined as Silver is by Fire, they must be dissolved as that is. Nor see I any Reason why we should prefer either an unusual, or Metaphorical, before the proper import of these Words.
Ver. 13. Nevertheless, we expect (, we also do expect) new Heavens and new Earth, according to his Pro∣mise, in which dwelleth Righteousness. , new heavens and new Earth.] That this cannot refer to the Millennium sup∣posed to be promised in the Revelations of St. John, appears not only because this Epi∣stle was writ before the Revelations, which, saithL. 5. c. 30. Irenaeus, were seen ad finem Domi∣tiani Imperii, about the end of the Reign of Domitian; whereas St. Peter suffered Mar∣tyrdom in the Reign of Nero: but also (1st,) Because the Millennium of St. John is pecu∣liar to the Martyrs, and those who have suf∣fered for the Cause of Christ; the new Hea∣vens and Earth here mentioned, are the com∣mon Expectation of all Christians, who upon this Account are admonished to be found of him without spot, and unblameable, in Peace, Ver. 14. (2dly,) I grant that the Apostle is here speaking of the Destruction not only of the sublunary Heavens and Earth, but also of the Planetary Heavens, Ver. 12. by Fire: But this Concession is so far from doing any Ser∣vice to the Hypothesis of the Millennium of St. John, that it doth perfectly destroy it; for this Conflagration of the World is Con∣temporary with the Day of Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men; and by that very Fire which consumes the World, are they to perish. See note on Ver. 7. So doth the Scripture constantly express the Punishment of the Wicked, saying, That at the end of the World the Angels shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire, Matth. 13.28. And that Christ shall come in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on them, 2 Thes. 1.7, 8. Whereas the Millen∣nium of St. John must be at an end before that Day, for after he had spoken of the first Re∣surrection, and the Conclusion of the thou∣sand Years in which they were to reign who were then raised, and of the Insurrection of Gog and Magog against them, I say after the Conclusion of those Years, doth he introduce one sitting on a great white Throne, and the Dead both small and great standing before him, and being judg'd out of those things which were written in the Books, according to their Works, Rev. 20.13, 14. I also grant, that after the Apostle had spo∣ken of the Conflagration of the World, he hath these Words, We also do expect new Hea∣vens and new Earth; but then I add, that these Words are not to be rendred thus, Ne∣vertheless, after this violent Dissolution of the World, we expect new Heavens and new Earth, which are to succeed them: But rather as Dr. More renders them, But before this Con∣flagration we expect them; or rather, But be∣sides this Conflagration, we expect new Hea∣vens and a new Earth. As if the Apostle should have said, I hitherto have answered this Question of these Scoffers, by shewing what substantial Mutations have been, and will be wrought upon the World by the Word of the Lord, and his coming to judge his Peo∣ple. This also I think fit to add in answer to them, That we Christians expect the coming of the Lord to make such a moral Change in the Affairs of the Church, as will amount to the new Creation of Heaven and Earth promi∣sed to the Jews, Isa. 65.16, 17, 18. So that these Scoffers have no cause to doubt of our Lord's coming in behalf of his faithful Ser∣vants, since he will come to raise his Church, by the calling the Jewish Nation to the Faith, to such a glorious State. Nor is it to be wonder'd that the Apostle should speak of these two things together, in answer to that Question, Where is the Pro∣mise of his coming? seeing the Jews though them connected, expecting these new Heavens and new Earth at the coming of the Messiah, and his coming at the end of the World, ac∣cording to that Question of the Disciple's to our Lord, When is the time of thy coming, and of the end of the World? Matth. 24.3▪ In the end of the World, saith R. Saadiah Gaon, there shall be to the Jews a World full of Joy and Exultation; so that their Heavens and Earth shall be as it were new, as it is said▪ Isa. 65.17. See this more fully in Mr. Mede, p. 535, 536, 537. , according to his Pro∣mise.] This cannot relate, as I have proved, to St. John's Discourse of these new Heavens, &c. for this farther Reason, That he speaks of them only as in Vision, not by way of Pro∣mise; it remains therefore that the new Hea∣vens and new Earth promised by Isaiah, be the thing here referr'd to. Now these new Hea∣vens and new Earth are manifestly promised to the Jewish Nation, to whom also the Apo∣stle here writes; nor can they possibly admit of any other Sense, or be primarily accom∣plish'd upon any other People; for God ha∣ving said by his Prophet, Behold I create new Heavens and a new Earth, immediately adds, Be ye (Jews) glad and rejoice for ever, in what I do create; for behold I create Jerusa∣lem a Rejoicing, and her People a Joy; and I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my People. Now sure this new Heaven and Earth promised to the Jews, must be created before the Conflagration of the World; that is, be∣fore the Jews be burnt to Ashes, they being not like to be converted afterward. St. John indeed speaks of his new Heaven and Earth, after he had mentioned the Day of Judgment; but that he doth this by a Prolepsis is evident from this Consideration, that after
his whole Discourse of these new Heavens and Earth, the new Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, and of the Bride, and the Lamb's Wife,  the Jews converted then to Christ, fol∣l these Words, Behold I come quickly, and  Reward is with me, to render to every one according to his Works, Chap. 22.13. Which Words contain a Repetition of what was said Chap. 20.13. to shew that what was mention∣ed there was not to be accomplish'd till after the Appearance of the new Heavens and the  Earth. Ver. 14. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye  for such things, be diligent that ye may e found of him in peace, without spot, and lameless. , expecting these things.] These Words directed to the Jews then living, seem to prove, that in some inferiour Sense is Promise of the new Heavens, &c. was to e made good in their Times. For why should he exhort them to this Diligence on the Ac∣count of what should only happen One thou∣d seven hundred Years after they were dead? for he plainly speaks to them to whom t. Paul had written, Ver. 16. and therefore to the Jews of that present Age. Ver. 15. And account that the long-suffering if our Lord is designed for (the) Salvation (of you Jews); even as our beloved Paul, accor∣ng to the (Spirit of) Wisdom given unto im, hath written unto you. (In these Words, a. 2.4. Despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness and Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leadeth thee to re∣pentance? And more especially in these, And so all Israel shall be saved, &c. Rom. 11.26. For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all, Ver. 32. See the Preface to the Epistle to the Hebrews.) Ver. 16. As also in all his Epistles, speak∣ing in them of these things: in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to their own Destru∣ction. , as also in all his Epistles.] I do not think it necessary so to understand these Words, as if the Apostle were said to have spoken in all his Epistles, That the Long-suffering of God was designed for their Salvation; for I do not find any thing of that Nature in many of them, he speaks indeed generally of Christ's coming to Judgment in them, but that seems not pertinent to the Text. I therefore give the Sense of the Words thus, As also according to the same Wis∣dom, he hath written in all his Epistles, speak∣ing in them of these things of which I am now discoursing, of the Day of the Lord's coming, and of the Preparation we should make for it. , in which.] This cannot relate to the Epistles of St. Paul, because the Word being of the Neuter Gender, cannot agree with , Epistles, which is of the Femi∣nine; but to those things of which St. Peter had been discoursing in this Chapter, and which were so wrested by the Unlearned and Unstable, that some of them thought long before the writing of this Epistle, That the Day of the Lord was instant, 2 Thes. 2.2. and so became unstable in the Faith, Ver. 15. Some said, The Resurrection was past already, and thereby overthrew the Faith of some, 2 Tim. 2.18. Some wanting Patience to expect it longer, left the Assemblies of Christians, Heb. 10.25. And some questioned whether his Pro∣mise would be made good at all; as here Ver. 4, 9. The Resurrection of the Flesh being by some thought a thing absurd,Carnis salutem negant, & regenerationem ejus spernunt, dicentes non eum capacem esse incorruptibilitatis. Iren. l. 5. c. 2. who held it to be incapable of Salvation, and the Resurre∣ction of the same Body being by some look'd on as a thing impossible, and these seem to be the  here mentioned. Ver. 17. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the Error of the (se) wick∣ed (Scoffers), fall from your own Stedfastness. Ver. 18. But (rather) grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: to him be Glory, both now and for ever. Amen. , grow in Grace.] That Grace signifies generally in the New Testa∣ment, the Favour of God to us, see Note on 2 Cor. 6.1.
THE PREFACE TO THE First General Epistle of St. JOHN. COncerning the Author of this Epistle, all Ages have agreed that it was St. John, the Apostle of our Lord and Saviour. As for the time when it was written, some both Ancient and Modern Writers think his Epistles to be the last of his Works, and there∣fore to have been written in the last years of Domitian. But Dr. Hammond hath very well observed, that it must have been written some time before the Great Destruction which befel the Jews. 1. Because he speaks of the last hour as now at hand; which that it must be understood of the last times of the Jewish State, see Note on Chap. 2.18. 2. Because he speaks of the Antichrist, Chap. 2.18. and the False Prophets, Chap. 4.1. which were then among them, or come into the World; such as Christ tells us were to be the imme∣diate Forerunners of that Destruction, Matth. 24.24. declaring that they went out from them of Judea, ver. 19. 3. It being written by an Apostle of the Circumcision, it is not doubted but it was written to the Jews, but that it was an Epistle to the Parthians, asQu. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 39. St. Austin, Possido∣nius in his Index, and Idacius contra Verim. averr, as I know nothing can be said against it, but that it only is asserted by Authors of a latter date, so if Parthia be taken for the whole Empire as 'twas enlarged by the Arsacidae, it is a farther proof not only that this Epistle was written to the Jews, who, saithAntiq. lib. 18. cap. 16. Jose∣phus, abounded in Babylon and Mesopotamia, and had there three famous Universities, on of them at Neerda mention'd by Josephus, but also that many of the ten Tribes were the converted, they being seated in Mesopotamia and Media, for the Text saith, that they were carried away into Assyria, and placed in Ha∣lah and in Habor by the River Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes, 2 King. 17.6.18.11. Now all these places, saith the learnedIn Assyria vel Mediae parte illi vicinâ reperiuntur loca quorum sacra Historia meminit. Chaluch est Ptolemai Caluchena ad Aquilonem Assyriae, Chabor est ejusdem Ptolemaei mons Chaboras inter Mediam & Assyriam, à quo monte ad Caspium mare euntibus medio forte spacio occurrit Gauzania urbs. Geogr. S. l. 3. c. 14. p. 220. Bochart, are to be found thereabouts; and therefore St. John being an Apostle of the Cir∣cumcision, may well be supposed to have writ∣ten to them, tho perhaps he was never there; as St. Paul writ some of his Epistles to Church∣es he had never seen. Whence it was written, neither Scripture, nor any thing in Antiquity that I have met with, gives any ground for a conjecture. The occasion of it seems to be, 1. To arm the Jewish Converts against those loose and perni∣cious Doctrines which had obtain'd among the Jews, viz. that Solifidian Doctrine of being righteous by Faith, that is, not fruitful in good Works, or without doing Righteousness, 1 Joh. 2.29.3.7, 10. being Children of the Light without walking in the Light, Favou∣rites of God without Obedience to his Laws, or Love to his Servants. 2ly, Against the Madness of their Zealots abounding every where among them, who thought their Zeal for God, and for his Law, would atone for their hatred of, and murther of their Brethren, and for all the other Sins which, saith Josephus, they did so gree∣dily commit. See Note on Rom. 2.1. and on
er. 24. and on James 1.26. And 3ly, To preserve them stedfast in the Truth which they  heard from the beginning against those eceivers, Antichrists, and False Prophets, which were then among them, Chap. 2.19, 26. Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. and to continue them stedfast i the belief that Jesus was the Christ the Son of God, Chap. 5. And here, because that Question hath made so great a noise of late, Whether Salvation or Perdition depends upon believing or rejecting this one Proposition, that Jesus was the Mes∣siah, as saith the Author of the Reasonable∣ness of Christianity, p. 43. adding, p. 47. that all that was to be believed for Justification was no more but this single Proposition, that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ, or the Messiah; I shall endeavour briefly to state, and to explain this matter, and so give farther light to those words of this Epistle, Chap. 4.2, 15. Chap. 5.1, 5. which seem to say the se thing. Whereas then this Author challenges all the Systematical Divines, p. 192. to shew that there was any other Doctrine, upon their As∣sent to which, or Disbelief of it, Men were pronounced Believers or Unbelievers, and ac∣cordingly received into the Church of Christ as Members of his Body, as far as mere be∣lieving could make them so, or else kept out of it: This I shall undertake to shew, 1. From the expres words of Christ, who quires of all his Disciples, in order to their admission into the Church by Baptism, Faith in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. saying. He that believeth (this) and is bapti∣zed, shall be saved; He that believeth not, shall be damn'd, Mark 16.16. He adds with n Asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you, Joh. 6.53. clearly declaring the necessity of faith in his Body given and his Blood shed for the remission of Sins to Justification and Sal∣vation, we being justified by his blood, and through faith in his blood, Rom. 3.25.5.9. 2. From the plain Declarations of St. Paul, who among the first things be preach'd to the Corinthians, as things by the belief of which they should be saved, mentions three Articles; first of all, That Christ died for our sins ac∣cording to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4.2. That he was buried. And 3. That he rose from the dead. In the same Chapter he plain∣ly asserts the Necessity of the believing the Re∣surrection of the Body, ver. 19.32. Among the foundations and first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ from which all Christians were to go n to Perfection, he reckons the Doctrines of Repentance, of Faith towards God, of Bap∣tism, of laying on of hands (for the receiving of the Holy Ghost) of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal Judgment, Hebr. 6.1, 2. Thee therefore were then necessary to be be∣lieved by all Christians. The Doctrine of the Sufficiency of Faith in Christ's Death for Ju∣stification without the works of the Law▪ is by the same Apostle declared to be so necessary, that he saith of them who gainsay'd it, Christ is become of no effect to you, ye are fallen from Grace, Gal. 5.2, 4. Moreover, it will be easie to account for the Practice of our Lord, and his Apostles, who insist so much upon, and lay so great stress upon this one Article, if we consider who they preached to, and how much was contained in, or necessarily depended upon the cordial Belief of this one Article. 1. Then, our Lord and his Apostles whilst he was on Earth, preached only to the Jews, Matth. 10.6. that is, to them to whom per∣tained the Adoption, the Glory, the Cove∣nants, the Giving the Law, the Service of God, and the Promises, Romans 9.4. and to whom were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. i. e. those Scriptures which were able to make them wise to Salvation, with faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.5. i. e. if they, to the belief of them, added Faith in Christ, they teaching them the Knowledge of the true God, and the way in which he would be worshipped, and shewing them what was good, and what the Lord required of them. They also were writ by, and made frequent mention of the Spirit of God, of the New Covenant God would establish with them, of the Suffer∣ings of Christ, and of the Glory that should follow, 1 Peter 1.11. of his Prophetical, Priestly, and his Kingly Office, of an Ema∣nuel that should be born to them, whose Name should be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isaiah 7.1, 14.9.6. It is not there∣fore to be wonder'd that whilst our Saviour was on Earth he only call'd them to Repen∣tance, and Faith in the promised Messiah. Moreover, St. Paul's Sermon Acts 13. was preached to the Children of the stock of Abra∣ham, ver. 26. and yet he preacheth to them not only that Jesus was the Christ, but also that he died, and rose again, and that Re∣mission of Sins was to be obtain'd through his Name, and that by him all that believed were to be justified from all those things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, ver. 38, 39. And though we find him once disputing in the School of one Tyrannus, we seldom find him preach any where but in a Jewish Synagogue. Others al∣so preach'd to the same Persons; for they that were dispersed upon the Persecution of St. Stephen preached to the Jews only, Acts 11.19. We have in the whole Acts of the Apostles mention only of four Persons who were not Jews by birth to whom the Gospel was thus
preach'd; one of these was the Eunuch, who was before a Worshipper of God, and as is pro∣bably conjectured, of the Jews Religion; and therefore came up to Jerusalem to worship. St. Paul preacheth to Lydia in a Jewish Syna∣gogue, Acts 16.13, 14. and she was also one that worship'd God, and so in probability of the Jews Religion. The Centurion to whom St. Peter preach'd was one that feared God, wrought Righteousness, was much in Prayer and Alms, and yet St. Peter, before his Bap∣tism, preaches to him and his friends, of the Word that God sent to the Children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, declaring how he was anointed by God with the Holy Ghost, healed all that were oppressed of the Devil, suffered and rose again, that he was made Lord of all things, that he was ordain'd of God to be the Judge of the quick and the dead, and that through his Name whosoever believed in him should receive Remission of Sins, Act. 10.36, 43. The only Heathen Fa∣mily that St. Paul admits to Baptism, is the Jaylors; and he first Preaches to them the Word of the Lord, Acts 16.32. i. e. say even the Socinians, he summarily expounded to themWoltzog. in locm. who this Jesus, this Son of God, was, what Miracles he did, how he was crucified by the Jews, rais'd up again by God, taken up into Heaven, made Lord of all things; what Promises he had made, what Precepts he en∣join'd. I know this Author saith, that Preach∣ing the Word was only Preaching that Jesus was the Messiah; but the Scriptures cited by him do not say so: for the Word mention'd Acts 10.37. is the whole Word which God sent to the Children of Israel, preaching Peace by Jesus Christ. It is the word of the Gospel, Acts 15.7. It contains the whole ministery of the Gospel, Acts 6.4. All the Council of God being the Word of his Grace which was able to build them up, and give them an in∣heritance among them who were sanctified through faith in Christ, Act. 20.27, 32. It cannot therefore be concluded from the Preach∣ing of our Lord, or his Apostles, that they thought nothing more was necessary to be be∣liev'd by Christians saving this one Article, that Jesus was the Christ. 2dly. The Belief of this Proposition that Christ is the Messiah, and the Son of God, may well be represented as the chief initiating Article of Christian Faith, because where it is heartily profess'd, it carries with it a Profes∣sion of believing all Christ's Sayings, and of obeying all his Precepts: and where it cordi∣ally is embraced, it produceth both this Faith and Practice. That Jesus is the Christ, as it is the principal Article of pure Faith, the most peculiar Doctrine of our Religion, as it stands opposed to that of Judaism; so doth it virtually comprehend all other Doctrines of moment in it, regarding either Faith or Pra∣ctice. For to believe him to be the Christ, is to believe him to be a Prophet sent from God to teach the way of life unto us, John 3.3. even that Prophet which was to come into the world. Hence Christ applies these words to himself, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he hath anointed me to preach the Gospel, &c. Luke 4.18. Now sure we are obliged to embrace as Truth whatsoever was taught by such a Prophet, and to obey all his Precepts upon pain of Destruction; for Whosoever will not hear this Prophet, shall be destroyed from the People, Acts 3.23. Again, To believe him to be the Christ, is to believe him to be the Son of God, according to that Profession of St. Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Matth. 16.16. and the Enquiry of the High Priest, Art thou the Christ, the Son of God? Matth. 26.63. Now this lays an Obligation upon us to hear, that is, obey him; according to those words of God, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him, Matth. 17.5. 'Tis also to believe him to be our Lord, and King, according to those words of the Angel, To you is born a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.11. and of Nathanael, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Now this Relation calls for Obedience; For why, saith our Saviour, call you me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say, Luke 6.46. and that on penalty of Ruin from him when he shall say, Bring these mine Ene∣mies who would not I should reign over them, and slay them before me, Luke 19.27. 'Twas also Jesus who was called Christ, even that Jesus who was to save his People from their Sins, and a Saviour to give Repentance and Remission of Sins, Matth. 1.21. Now upon such a King, and such a Saviour, we may se∣curely rely for the Obtainment of all the Bles∣sings and Rewards which he hath promised to the obedient. Hence we may learn, that it was highly reasonable that the Apostles should begin their Preaching with proving and per∣suading this Doctrine, that they should give such great Commendations, annex such excel∣lent Privileges, offer such high Rewards to the hearty Belief of such a comprehensive Article, and should admit them to Baptism who profess'd it, since by that Baptism, saith this Author, pag. 196, 197. they own'd themselves the Subjects of this Jesus whom they believed to be their Messiah (i. e. the Prophet sent from God to teach them) and received for their Lord and King, and this was the so∣lemn visible Act whereby they who believed
him to be the Messiah, receiv'd him as their King, and profess'd Obedience to him, and so were admitted as Subjects into his King∣dom. For as every one who was circumcised became a Debtor to obey the whole Law of Moses, Gal. 5.3. and therefore to believe it, so every Person baptized, being of Age, doth by that very Baptism profess to believe all the Doctrines, and obey the Precepts of the Holy Jesus, into whose Name he is baptized. And therefore though St. John here says, He that confesseth that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God, Chap. 4.15. and Every one that believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, Chap. 5.1. yet he re∣quires of the same Persons, in order to the same Ends, that they should walk in the truth of the Gospel, in Conformity to the Example of Christ, and to the Love of God, and in Obedi∣ence to his Commands, and adds, that he that is born of God sinneth not, neither can sin; clearly insinuating, that this Proposition, when cordially embraced, will produce a Faith and Practice answerable to it in our Lives.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE First Epistle General of St. JOHN. CHAP. I. Ver. 1. THAT which was from the beginning (of the Gospel Di∣spensation, that) which we have heard, which we have seen, (i. e. discerned as clearly as if we had seen it) with our Eyes, (that) which we have looked upon, and our Hands have (as it were) handled of the Word of Life, declare we to you. Ver. 2. (Nor have you the least Reason to suspect our Testimony, either of this Life, or the Author and Procurer of it:) For the Life (we speak of) was manifested, (in the Author and the Promise of it,) and we have seen, (or known,) and bear witness (to it), and shew unto you that eternal Life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us. .] This I here render, from the beginning of the Gospel Dispensation, be∣cause I find that is the constant import of the Phrase in this Apostle, and elsewhere, when it relates to what Christians had heard and seen, as here. In this Sense is that which you have heard, , from the beginning, used six times by our Apostle in these Epistles; viz. 1 Ep. Chap. 2.7, 24. bis; Chap. 3.11. Ep. 2. Ver. 6. So the Commandment which we have received, , from the beginning, 1 Ep. 2.7. 2 Ep. Ver. 5. doth necessarily import, it being Christ's new Commandment of Love. So , are they who from the be∣ginning of Christ's Preaching were Witnesses of what he said and did, Luke 1.2. And in this Sence Christ saith to his Disciples, you have been with me, , from the be∣ginning, John 15.27. Acts 1.21. , which we have seen.] That is, in Scripture Phrase, said to be seen and look'd upon, which is as truly known and discerned by us, as if we had seen it. So the Jews are said to do the things which they have seen with their Father, John 8.38. and to have seen the end of the Lord's Dealings with Job, James 5.11. So we are said to see God, or not to see him, 1 John 3.6. Ep. 3.11. To see the Life here, Ver. 2. So also , when applied to Spiritual Things, is not to touch with the Hand, but to apprehend with the Mind, Acts 17.27. I confess all these things are more properly true of the Word made Flesh, of whom the Apostles declared what they had heard from him, and seen of him, who saw his Glory, John 1.14. and what one of them had touch'd. But then the  agreeing only to the Divine Nature, a Meta∣phorical Sense must be allowed in seeing and handling that. , that eternal Life which was with the Father.] Thus of our eternal Life the Apostle saith, it is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. And of the Evangelical Dispensation, That before the Re∣velation of it by Christ and his Apostles, it was a Mystery hid in God, Eph. 3.9. But this also may be applied to the Divine , stiled by this Apostle, Life Eternal, Chap. 5.20. who was in the Bosom of the Father, and was manifested to us, John 1.18. Yet two things seem to favour the first Interpre∣tation. 1st, That the Phrase here used, being not , he subsisted in the beginning of all things; but only , he was from the beginning: This Phrase excludes not his Creation, as the other seems to do. And as I have observed, it chiefly is applied by this Apostle, to the beginning of the Gospel Di∣spensation. 2. That though  and , absolute∣ly put, are spoken of Christ; yet  is never used concerning the Person of Christ, but is expresly used of that Word by which eternal Life is manifested; as when we are bid to hold fast , the Word
of Life, Phil. 2.16. and when the Apostles are bid to teach , the Words of this Life, Acts 5.20. See Acts 13.26. Ver. 3. That which we have seen and heard (of the Word of Life) declare we to you, that  also may have fellowship with us (in the sme Life): and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. .] We being Heirs of God, Ja-Heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.17. and be∣ing united to, and having Communion with the Father and the Son, by the Spirit of both dwelling in us, Joh. 14.21, 23. Eph. 2.21, 22 Rom. 8.9, 11. And he being to us the Earnest of this Life, 2 Cor. 1.22.5.5. Eph. 1.13, 14. Who seals us up unto the Day of Redemption, Eph. 4.30. , Fellowship with us.] It doth not follow hence, as Esthius imagines, that no Man can have Fellowship with God, who hath not Fellowship with the Church; (though that be doubtless true of Fellowship with the invisible Church, united to Christ by the Spirit, and so made an Habitation of God through the Spirit, and of Fellowship in Do∣ctrine and Communion with the Church of the Apostles.) For as like precious Faith with us, is only such Faith as we have, 2 Pet. 2.1. so here Fellowship with us, is only such Fellowship as we have. Ver. 4. And these things we write unto you, that your Joy may be full, (i. e. That belie∣ving this Eternal Life, you may rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. For which Cause you must carefully at∣tend to another Message he hath sent by us.) Ver. 5. This then, (And this) is the Mes∣sage we have heard from him, (i. e. from God by Jesus Christ,) and declare unto you, that God is Light, (a pure and spotless Spirit,) and in him is no darkness at all. (Nothing of Impurity or Iniquity in his Commands, which are all Holy, Rom. 7.12. Or in his Actions, as in the Heathen Deities, he being Holy in all his Works.) Ver. 6. (And therefore) If we say that we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Dark∣ness, we lye, and do not (speak) the Truth. Ver. 7. But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, (endeavouring to be Holy, as he is Holy,) we have Fellowship one with ano∣ther, and the Blood of Christ cleanseth us from all (those) Sins (which might obstruct our Communion with the Holy God, and our Attainment of the Life thus manifested to us.) , as he is in the Light.] That this Metaphor of Light relates not to the Knowledge, or the Felicity, but to the Purity of the Divine Nature, appears 1st, from the Injunction to walk in the Light as he is in the Light; for we are not any where bid to resemble God in Knowledge, or in Happiness, but we are commanded to be holy as he is holy. 2dly, From the Darkness set in Opposition to it, which doth not refer so much to the Ignorance of Men, as to the Vi∣ces they practised in a State of Ignorance. See Note on Rom. 13.12. , we have Com∣munion with one another.] Some Manuscripts read, , with him; which either is the true reading, or gives the true Sense of the other reading; i. e. We have Communion with God, and he with us, as is evident from Ver. 6. Moreover, The Apostle had said no∣thing before of our Communion with one another, but only of our Fellowship with God, Ver. 6. With the Father and the Son, Ver. 3. Which makes it reasonable to refer the Words to that Communion of which the Apostle so often speaketh in this Epistle. See Chap. 2.5, 6, 24. Chap. 3.24. Chap. 4.13. , the Blood of Christ cleanseth us from all Sin.] This cannot well relate to that Effect of the Blood of Christ, which we call, Justification by Faith in his Blood, or the Remission of our past Sins by Virtue of our Faith in Christ's dying for us; for that follows immediately upon our Faith, and cannot require that an Habit of Purity, or of walking in the Light, should precede it, it therefore rather seemeth to refer to those sin∣ful Infirmities and Defects, which in this State of Imperfection cleave to our best A∣ctions, and even good Men are still subject to, and which do not deprive us of the Divine Favour, or of an Entrance into that new Je∣rusalem, into which nothing enters that is pol∣luted or unclean; because in this new Cove∣nant of Grace, establish'd in the Death of Christ, his Blood doth cleanse all faithful and sincere Christians from the Guilt of them. Ver. 8. (And of this Expiation we have all need, for) If we say we have no Sin, (to be thus cleansed from,) we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. (For in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. And there∣fore are required to pray daily for the Re∣mission of our Sins, and have even after our Regeneration, need of this Advocate for the Propitiation of our Sins, Chap. 2.1, 2. See 1 Kings 8.46. Eccles. 7.21.) Ver. 9. (But) If we confess (these) our Sins, he (who hath made this new Covenant in the Blood of Christ, that he will be mer∣ciful to our Iniquities, Heb. 8.8.) is faithful (to his Promise,) and just to forgive us our Sins, (upon the Satisfaction made to his Ju∣stice by the Death of Christ,) and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Ver. 10. (But) If we (continue to) say we have not sinned, (and therefore do not need this Expiation through the Blood of Christ,) we make him a Lyar, (who hath declared both in the Old and the New Testament; that all
have sinned and fallen short of the Glory of God, Rom. 3.23.) and the Truth is not in us. Note, The Question is of whom the Apo∣stle speaketh here, whether of sincere Christi∣ans after their Conversion to the Christian Faith, or only of them considered before they entred on that State. That St. John here speaks only of the latter, is argued from these Considerations: 1st. That the Apostle doth plainly teach the contrary to the first Exposition, by saying, he that is born of God sinneth not, Chap. 3.9.5.18. But to this I shall return an answer in the Comment on those Places. 2dly. That the Words run in the Preterper∣fect Tense, if we say, , we have not sinned, whereas some single Acts of lesser Sins they were then still subject to, to whom he speaks. Answ. True; and therefore he adviseth them to confess them, that they might obtain Forgiveness of them: Now Confession of them must be after they have been committed. 3dly, Because this Phrase , to have Sin, is still used of such Sins as will condemn us at the last, Joh. 9.41.15.22, 24.19.11. Answ. The Text cited from Chap. 19.11. is impertinent; the other two may be taken absolutely as to the Matter spoken of. They had been guilty of no Sin of Infidelity, if Christ had not come to them, or if he had not pro∣ved his Mission, Chap. 15.22, 24. or if they had wanted Means to discern the Truth. Chap. 9.41. Nor would their Sin of Infidelity have been condemning, had they confessed it and forsaken it. Since then the Apostle was speaking, Ver. 7. of them who walked in the Light, who had Communion with God, and who were clean∣sed from the Guilt of Sin. And Ver. 8. goes on to add, If we say we have no Sin; it seems more probable, that he speaks there at least of the same Persons. Note also, That some of the Jews professed to beJoseph. de Bello Jud. l. 7. p. 990. B. , supple , free from all Sin and Offence against God; and of such may the last Verse be interpreted: They varying in this from the Doctrine of other Jews; forMore Nevoch. l. 3. c. 36. p. 443. Maimonides truly saith, Nullus homo dar potest qui non peccet, vel ignoranter in dog∣mate & sententia aliqua amplectenda, aut qualitate eligenda quae non eligenda est, vel ob irae, aliorumque affectuum vehementiam & praedominationem. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. MY little Children, these things (concerning the Necessity of walking in the Light, and putting off the Deeds of Darkness) I write unto you, that ye sin not, (i. e. That ye live not in any Course of Sin.) And if any Man (through the In∣firmity of the Flesh be overtaken with a) Sin, we (Christians) have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, (the Just One in whom was no Sin, 1 Pet. 3.18.) Ver. 2 And he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World. , and if any Man sin.] Tho' this is not to be interpreted of Sins of Infir∣mity only, yet since the Apostle is here speak∣ing of his little Children, whose past Sins were already forgiven them for his Name's sake, Ver. 12, 15. and the Apostle would not en∣courage them in wilful or habitual Sins, I think, as it relates to them, it chiefly is to be referr'd to those Sins of Ignorance, Weak∣ness and Infirmity, which will be pardoned by the Tenour of the New Covenant, through Christ's Intercession. , he is the Propitiation for our Sins.] In the Old Testa∣ment the Sin-Offering which made Atonement for a Trespass, that it might be forgiven, is called , the Ram of Atonement, Lev. 6.6, 7. Numb. 5.8. And that which in the Law is , to bring an Offering for Sin, is in Ezekiel, , to bring an Atonement, or Propitiation, Ezek. 44.27. When therefore it is said here of Jesus Christ, that he is , the Propitiation for our Sins; and Chap. 4.10. That God sent him into the World to be , the Propitiation for our Sins; have we not Reason to conclude he was so our Propitiation, as were all the Sin-Offerings of the Jews for them; viz. by suffering in our stead, to make Atonement for our Sins, and so to render God propitious to us in the Forgiveness of them? Moreover, Why is he stiled Jesus Christ the Just, or Righteous, who made Propitiation for our Sins, if he in∣tended not to intimate that the Just suffered instead of the Unjust, to make Atonement for their Sins? To this Crellius replies, That  should be here rendred not the Just, but Faithful. Answ. This is to say, it must here signifie not what it ordinarily and truly signifies, but what it both improperly and rarely signifies, and when it is ascribed to Christ, as here it
is it never signifies; for it is ascribed to him elsewhere ten times in the New Testament, Mat. 27.24. Luke 23.47. Acts 3.14.7.52.22.14. 2 Tim. 4.8. 1 Pet. 3.18. Rev. 16.5. and in those Places it doth always signifie that just or righteous Person; yea, in this very Chapter and the next, it is twice spoken of him, first in these Words, Ver. 29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doth Righteousness is born of him. And Chap. 3.7. He that doth Righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. Where it is evident that it retains its proper Sense: Why therefore, in the Place contested, should it import what, when it is applied to Christ it never signifies? Object. And whereas Crellius objects, that the Apostle speaks of Christ here as of our Advocate in Heaven, where he doth not satis∣fie God, or suffer any Punishmnnt on our Account. Answ. I answer, That seeing Christ there intercedes by Virtue of his Blood shed to sa∣tisfie for our Offences, and of the Death he suffered as the Punishment of our Iniquities; the Parallel runs clearly thus, That as the Sa∣crifices of the Old Testament were slain, and the Blood shed, before it was brought to the Mercy-Seat, and yet the High-Priest made Atonement with it, when at his Entrance into the Holy Place, he offered up that Blood to God in his peculiar Presence; so though our Lord was slain, and shed his Blood on Earth, yet may he make Atonement in the Presence of God with it, by Virtue of the Sufferings he endured when his Blood was shed. , for the Sins of the whole World.] That is, of all Men in general; for when he saith, he is the Propitiation for our Sins, sure he intends this Comfort to them all to whom he speaks, and means not that Christ was the Propitiation for some of their Sins only; for this would have left them all in doubt whether this Advocate, and this Pro∣pitiation did belong to them, but would have comforted none of them. When then he adds, he is the Propitiation not for our Sins only, but for the Sins of the whole World, he in like manner must extend this Phrase to all Men in the World. Again, when he saith he is the Propitiation for our Sins, he doth not mean that he was so sufficiently, but not intentionally; for what Comfort would that afford them, that his Death was sufficient to procure the Pardon of their Sins, had God designed it for that End, unless they also knew that he intended it for their Propitiation: When therefore he pro∣ceeds to say, and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World, he must mean also, that he was the Propitiation for their Sins, not only sufficiently, but also in his gracious Inten∣tion. And indeed otherwise it might as pro∣perly have been said of the fallen Angels, or the whole Host of Devils, he is the Propitiation for their Sins, as for the Sins of those who are not elected, seeing had God designed it for that End, Christ's Death, by reason of its intrinsick Value, might have been sufficient to procure Atonement for the Sins of fallen An∣gels. Lastly, The Import of these Words cannot be only this, He died, or is the Pro∣pitiation for the Sins of the Elect throughout the World. For 1st, The whole World, in Scripture, never signifies the Elect only, in opposition to the Wicked in the whole World; but in this very Epistle, and in these Words, We know that we are of God, and that the whole World lies in Wickedness, Chap. 5.19. it plainly signifies the Wicked of the World, in opposition to the faithful Christian. 2dly, Would it not be strange, and alien from the Mind of Scripture, to say, The whole World is elected to Salvation, the whole World shall be justified by Christ, and sanctified by his Spi∣rit dwelling in them, and obtain an happy Re∣surrection; and yet all this must be true of the whole World of the Elect: Why there∣fore is it no where equally affirmed of the whole World, as that Christ died, and is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, if they be Words of equal Latitude and Truth? These Arguments are as strong against the Exposition of others, who say the Apo∣stle means not only for the Sins of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles. Ver. 3. And hereby (Gr. in this) we know that we know (Gr. have known) him, (truly and acceptably), if we keep his Command∣ments. Note, It is a Rule in Divinity, That Verba notitiae denotant affectum, adde & effectum. i. e. That when the Knowledge of God, or Christ, is put absolutely, it signifies a Know∣ledge which is fruitful in Love and Obedi∣ence, as the Effect of that Love and Know∣ledge. Whence they who disobey him, are still in Scripture said not to know God, 1 Sam. 2.12. Hos. 5.14. Jer. 2.8.9.3. Tit. 1.16. and here Ver. 4. And they that do what is acceptable and delightful to him, are said to know him, Jer. 22.15, 16.24.7.31.33, 34. Hos. 2.19, 20. Joh. 10.4. Eph. 3.19. Moreover, 'Tis observable, that many of the Jews had an Apprehension that their Knowledge and Belief of the true God, would be sufficient for their Justification and Accep∣tance with him; whence they are represented as boasting in God, and in the Knowledge of his Will, Rom. 2.17, 18. And expecting Ju∣stification on this account, That they believed there was one God, James 2.19. And this might cause the Apostle to be so diligent in teaching them that the true Knowledge of God consisted in keeping his Commandments. And to add, Ver. 4. He that saith I (have) know (n) him, and keepeth not his Commandments, is a Liar,
and the truth is not in him. (He is a false Pretender to the Knowledge of God, for such Persons do in Words profess to know God, but in Works they deny him, being disobedi∣ent, Tit. 1.16. They likewise know not Je∣sus Christ according to the Truth, Eph. 4.21.) Ver. 5. But whoso keepeth his Command∣ments, in him verily is the Love of God per∣fected: hereby know we that we are in him. , the Love of God perfected.] The Love of God here may signifie either God's Love to us, as when 'tis said, Who shall separate us from the Love of God which is (shewed to us) in Christ Jesus, Rom. 8.39. And that the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, through the Spirit that he hath gi∣ven us, Rom. 5.5. See Jude 21. and then this Love is perfected in us by that Assurance the Holy Spirit giveth of it, and that humble confidence we have of it, because we keep his Commandments, Chap. 3.21, 22. So the Apostle seems to interpret this Perfection in Love, Chap. 4.16, 17, 18. Or, 2dly, This Love may signifie our Love to God and Christ, as when Christ upbraids the Pharisees with the want of the Love of God, Luke 11.42. And saith to the Jews, I know that you have not the Love of God in you, John 5.42. And when Christ saith, He that hath my Command∣ments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me, and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, John 14.21. And Ver. 23. If any Man love me he will keep my Word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and take up our abode with him. And this Love is perfected in us, by keeping his Com∣mandments, because that shews we are fully instructed in the Nature of that Love, which is one Sense of Perfection. See Note on 1 Cor. 2.6. And it engages us to the sincere Performance of our whole Duty to God, which is another Sense of the Word Perfection: And hereby we know that we are in him, even by this Spirit, by which God abideth in us, Chap. 3.24. And who sheds abroad the Sense of the Divine Love in our Hearts. Note also, That hence we may pass a cer∣tain estimate of necessary and Fundamental Doctrines; for if they be such as are necessa∣ry to the Love of God to us, or to that Love of ours to him, which consists in keeping his Commandments, they are Doctrines truly ne∣cessary to Salvation: If not, they cannot be so; because we may truly love God, and abide in his Love, without the Knowledge of them. Ver. 6. He that saith he abideth in him, (in Christ by the Spirit,) ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked. For seeing we abide in God the Father and the Son, only by the Communion of the Spi∣rit, Chap. 3.24.4.13. whence he that is in Christ is one Spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6.17. and he that hath not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, Rom. 8.9. we that are animated with the same Spirit that was in Christ, as we are enabled, so also are we thereby enga∣ged to walk after his Example, or to walk in the Light as he is in the Light, Chap. 1.7. Ver. 7. Brethren, I write no new Command∣ment unto you, (when I thus call upon you to walk in the Light as he is in the Light, or to walk as Christ walked,) but an old Command∣ment which you had from the beginning: (of Christ's Preaching, John 3.21.8.12.12.35. see Note on Chap. 1. Ver. 1.) the Old Com∣mandment is that Word which ye have heard from the beginning. , no new Commandment.] Most Interpreters conceive this relates to the Commandment of Christian Love, that being the Commandment which they are said to have heard from the beginning, Chap. 3.11. and said to be on that Account no new Com∣mandment, Eph. 2.5. and yet being stiled by Christ a new Commandment. John 13.34. Nor are the Arguments of Episcopius against this Exposition cogent. For whereas, Obj. 1. He objects that these Words seem to be spoken to remove the thoughts of some, that he was propounding a new Doctrine which they had not learned; whereas no Man who was acquainted with the Law of Moses, or even with that of Nature, could think the Law of Charity was new. Answ. I answer, It is not the Law of Cha∣rity in general, which our Lord and his Apo∣stle stile a new Commandment; but that of loving one another as he had loved us, John 13.34, 35. And this might justly be look'd on as a new Commandment, it being a Com∣mandment to lay down our Lives for the Bre∣thren, Chap. 3.16. And therefore a Com∣mandment not contained in the Law of Na∣ture, nor in that of Moses. Obj. 2. Whereas he adds that these Words, I write unto you, seem to respect not any thing that was to follow, but which was said before, and to contain this Sense, When I write this to you, I write nothing new. Answ. I answer, that it may be so; for ha∣ving told us, That he that saith he abideth in Christ, ought also to walk as he walked; he may well be conceived to have an especial Eye to the great Example of Love Christ shewed to Mankind, both in his Life and Death. Yet his Exposition given in the Paraphrase seems also very probable, by reason of the following Words, Because the Darkness is past, and the true Light now shineth; and therefore I shall have respect to both. Ver. 8. Again, a new Commandment I write unto you; which thing is true in him, (who is the Author of it; for no such Light ever came into the World before, and no such Love was manifested to the World before,) and in you: (who before were Darkness, but are now
light in the Lord, Eph. 5.8. Children of the light, and of the day, 1 Thess. 5.5. and to whom not long ago the light appeared, 2 Cor. 4.6. and ye are taught of God to love one another, 1 Thess. 4.9.) for (by your late re∣ceiving the Gospel) the (former) darkness (you were in) is past, and the true light now shineth (in, and upon you; wherefore the ight of Ignorance and Darkness being far spent, and the day being nigh at hand, and shining more and more upon you, you are ob∣liged to put off the works of darkness, and to put on the armour of light, Rom. 13.12.) Or thus: Again, (being now to speak to you of Christian Love) a new Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him (for thus he speaks, A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved you, Joh. 13.34.) and in you: because (it shews) the darkness (you were in whilst Jews, bearing affection only to them of their own Nation and Religion) is past, and the true light (of the Gospel) now shi∣neth (upon you.) The Ceremonials of the Law are some∣times called a Shadow, but never Darkness; and though the Alexandrian Manuscripts read  a Shadow, yet because all other Copies read  Darkness, and the following words ver. 9. and 11. shew that this is the true read∣ing, and because it is so easie in short writing to mistake  for , the Interpretation of these words which depends upon that reading cannot be relied on. Ver. 9. He that saith he is in the light (that he lives under the influences of the light of the Gospel, and walks according to it,) and (yet) hateth his Brother (wishing ill to him, and from that Disaffection doing ill Offices to him) is (whatever he professeth to the contrary,) in darkness until now. (But) Ver. 10. He that loveth his Brother (as Christ loved us, being willing to do him all kind Offices which he is able, from Love to God, and as a Fellow-member of Christ's bo∣dy,) abideth in the light, and there is no oc∣casion of stumbling (Gr. no scandal) in him. .] i. e. There is no∣thing at which he will fall or stumble. So Psal. 119.156. Great peace have they that love thy Law,  and they have no stumbling-block. The Labour of Love they must undergo, the Evils they may be exposed to, will not hinder them from doing the Duty they owe to God, and to their Bro∣ther for his sake; but they go on securely and chearfully in it, for perfect Love casts out Fear, Chap. 4.18. Ver. 11. But he that hateth his Brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and know∣eth not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath blinded his eyes. (Joh. 12.35.) .] i. e. He lives in great ig∣norance of his Duty, and of the way to Life, as not guiding his Actions by that light of the Gospel which hath appeared to him. Ver. 12. I write unto you little Children, because your sins are forgiven for his names sake. Ver. 13. I write unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I write unto you young Men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you little Children, because ye have known the Father. Ver. 14. I have written unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I have written unto you young Men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wick∣ed one. Note, That these words may either relate to the foregoing, and then they are to be in∣terpreted as Motives to walk in the Light, and as Christ walked, and in particular to walk in Christian Love, thus; I have written to you Children touching this Love, and walk∣ing in the Light, and after Christ's Example, because your Sins have been forgiven for his Name sake, and so in gratitude to him who hath procured the pardon of them, you ought to walk as he walk'd, and to love the Bre∣thren: Ye also have known the Father, and had experience of his Love to you, and there∣fore stand obliged to imitate his Love to you, and to walk in the Light, that you may still have Fellowship with him. I have written to you Fathers, because ye have known him in whom you believe from the Beginning; i. e. have long profess'd the Christian Faith, and so have better Know∣ledge of your Duty, have more Experience of the Comforts and Pleasures of the ways of God, and more Strength to walk in the Light, and more Experience of the Love of God, to engage you to an Imitation of it. I have written to you young Men because ye are strong by virtue of the Word of God abiding in you, and by the Sword of the Spirit, and the Shield of Faith, have been enabled successfully to combat, and overcome that wicked one, who tempts you to the deeds of Darkness, and to Hatred of the Brethren, Chap. 3.10. If they relate to the words following, they must be an Exhortation to little Children to take off their Affections from the World, and place them upon God and Christ, on the ac∣count of the Love and Mercy shew'd to them by God the Father through Christ. To the Fathers so to do, because they have been so long dead to the World, and have had so long Experience of the Benefit of a prevailing Love to the Father, and the Son. To the young Men so to do, because they had overcome the wicked one, all whose Temptations arise from some Allurements or Affrightments of the World. Or lastly, The words may be ex∣tended
to all he saith to them in this whole Epistle; and then both Expositions may take place. Ver. 15. Love not the world, i. e. neither the men of the world (who will not own you, but hate, and persecute you, Chap. 3.1, 13. and who live in wickedness, Chap. 5.19. so as to be conformed to their manners, Rom. 12.2.) nor the things of the world, (the Pleasures, Honours, or Enjoyments of them, so as to cleave to them, Matt. 6.24. or to be unwil∣ling to part with them for Christ's sake, and to secure the favour of God, Matt. 19.28.) for he that (thus) loveth the world, the love of the Father is not in him, (for seeing God is to be loved above all, he loves him not at all truly, who cleaves to any other thing in opposition to him, or hazards his Favour to secure it.) Ver. 16. For all that is in (vogue or esteem with the men of) the world the lusts of the flesh, (all voluptuous Enjoyments which tend to Sensuality and Intemperance, and making provision for the flesh) the lust of the eye, (the desire of Gold, Silver, stately Houses, rich Furniture, fair Gardens, which tend to gratifie the eye,) the pride of life, (the de∣sire of places of Dignity, high Titles, all the Honour, Glory, and Splendour of the World which tends to gratifie our Pride,) are not of the Father, (they are not Desires excited by him, nor is it according to his Will, that we should set our hearts upon them,) but are (the Desires) of (the Men of) the world, (whose chief concern is, to gratifie these sen∣sual Appetites.) Ver. 17. And the world passeth away, and the (things which minister to the) lusts there∣of; but he that doth the will of God abideth for ever. Ver. 18. Little Children, it is the last time (or hour of the Jewish OEconomy,) and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall (shortly) come, (so) even now are there many Antichrists, (i. e. Opposers of Christ, and Denyers of him to be the Christ, ver. 22.) whereby ye may know that this is the last time. , Antichrist cometh.] To wit, then in the last hour, this being repre∣sented as the Character by which they might know that the last hour was now come. 'Tis manifest that the last hour cannot signifie the End of the World, or include the times of the last Judgment, but must be restrained to the last times of the Jewish State which only then were instant, or at hand. 2dly, The , Antichrist, then in being, if it refer to any Nation, must be the Nation of the unbelieving Jews persecuting and opposing Christianity with their whole Might, and denying Jesus to be the Christ or promised Messiah; and then the many An∣tichrists here mention'd may be the false Apo∣stles, and deceitful Workers, who transform'd themselves into Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. who preach'd Christ not sincerely, but out of contention, Philip. 1.15. who as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so also did resist the Truth, 2 Tim. 3.8. who were men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth, 1 Tim. 6.5. Ver. 19. They went out from us (Christi∣ans of Judea, Acts 15.1. and from us the Apostles, Acts 15.24.) but they were not of us (but were false Brethren, Gal. 2.4. and false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13.) for if they had been of us (conspiring with us the Apostles and true Churches of Christ in the Doctrine and Truth of the Gospel,) they would no doubt (Gr.  they might have still) con∣tinued with us (preaching that Doctrine which we teach,) but (they went out from us) that it might be made manifest that they were not all (Gr. that they all were not) of us. , that they all were not of us.] So ver. 21.  no lye is of the Truth: , no flesh should be saved, Matt. 24.22.  no flesh shall be justified, Rom. 3.20. See Gen. 4.15. Psal. 143.2. Luk. 1.37. , they went out from us] of Judea. For some, , go∣ing out from Judea, taught the Brethren, that except they were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be saved, Act. 15.1. and from the Apostles; for so they speak, we have heard that, , some go∣ing out from us, have troubled you with words perverting your souls, saying that ye ought to be circumcised, and to keep the Law, ver. 24. The Persons who taught these Doctrines are stiled  false Brethren, Gal. 2.4.  false Apostles, deceitful Workers, Ministers of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.13, 15. Dogs, Evil workers, the Concision, Philip. 3.2. their Doctrine tended to the Subversion of Souls, Acts 15.24. to the corrupting, and turning the minds of men from the simplicity of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3. to hinder the truth of the Go∣spel from continuing with them, Gal. 2.5. to make Christ die in vain, ver. 21. to cause Christians to fall from Grace, so that Christ should profit them nothing, Gal. 5.2, 4. So that they were False Prophets, False Apostles, and Antichrists, in the worst of Senses; and by going out from the Apostles and the Churches of Judea to preach this destructive Doctrine to the Gentiles, which both the whole Church of Judea and the Apostles, assembled for that very purpose, flatly disown'd and censured, it sufficiently appeared that all the Preachers of these Doctrines so opposite to Christianity, and destructive of it, were not of them. These therefore, doubtless, were some of those ma∣ny Antichrists which the Apostle speaks of here as writing to the Jews; and they also divided and separated themselves from the Church, and became Hereticks under the name
of Cerinthians, Nazarenes, and Ebionites. Cerinthus spread his Heresie in, Theodoret. Haer. Sab. l. 2. c. 3. Asia, the Province of St. John, saith Theodoret; and was. Ibid. c. 1. Contemporary with the Apostles. Whence, Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 14. Rogatus ab Asiae Episcopis adversus Cerinthum, thsoe Haereticos, & maxime tunc Ebionitarum dogma consurgens qui asserunt Christum ante Mariam non fuisse, pulsus est divinam ejus Nativitatem edicere. Hieron. in Johan. the Church desired him to write against Cerinthus and the Ebionites; and. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 14. St. John left the Bath because Cerinthus the Enemy of the Truth was in it. Moreover, these words, they were not of us, cannot be interpreted of the Elect, but of the Church in general; for from them they went out, and with them might have remained, not from the Elect who are not visible, nor could they have remained with the Church of the Elect, who were never of them. 2dly, Their going out from them for a season was no certain Argument they were not of the Elect, since 'tis confessed they may fall totally, though not finally. Ver. 20. But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things, (ye to whom I write; which shews he speaks not of the Christians in general, but of them in parti∣cular.) , from the holy one.] i. e. From Jesus Christ emphatically so called, Act. 3.14. Apoc. 3.7. But then that Unction is the holy Spirit which he hath given to them that be∣lieve. For he being anointed with the oyl of gladness above his fellows, Psal. 45.7. anoint∣ed by God with the Holy Ghost, Acts 10.38. this Grace is given to Christians according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Eph. 4.7. and we all beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same like∣ness as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. See the Note there. , and ye know all things] Be∣longing to the saving Truths of the Gospel, he being promised to teach them all things, Joh. 14.26. and to lead them into all truth, Joh. 16.13. So. OEcumenius; You have received in Baptism the Unction of the Holy Spirit, who leads you into all truth. Ver. 21. I have not written to you, because you know not the truth, (i. e. to instruct you as Persons ignorant of it,) but because ye know it, and that no lye (utter'd by these Antichrists and false Prophets) is of (or hath any communion with) the truth (of the Gospel.) Ver. 22. Who is a lyar, but he who denieth that Jesus is the Christ? (i. e. who so empha∣tically deserves that Title, seeing) he is Anti∣christ (by way of eminency) who denieth the Father and the Son. Ver. 23. (And let not the Jewish Antichrists pretend this belongs not to them who know the Father, for) Whosoever denieth the Son (of God) the same hath not (the true know∣ledge of) the Father. , that denieth the Father, or hath not the Father.] To deny the Father here, is not to deny him to be the true God, as the Heathens did, but (1.) To deny the truth of his testimony: for, He that believeth not the testimony which God hath given to his Son, hath made him a lyar, Chap. 5.10. where∣as he that receives his testimony, hath set to his seal that God is true, Joh. 3.33. (2.) To deny the Doctrine of the Father, or which proceedeth from him; for, He whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God, Joh. 3.34. Whence it is evident, that he who denieth the Son, cannot thus retain the true know∣ledge of the Father, because no man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him, Joh. 1.18. He only hath done it; for no man knoweth the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Matt. 11.27. By him only can we come acceptably to the Father, so as to have life; for he is the way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14.6. And by him only are we taught how to worship the Father in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.23, 24. Hence Christ so often tells the Jews they therefore wanted the true Knowledge of the Father, because they knew not him, saying, Ye neither know me nor my Father; if ye had known me, ye would have known the Father also, Joh. 8.19, and 55.14.7. and these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor me, Joh. 16.3. Ver. 24. Let that (Doctrine) abide in you which you have heard from the beginning (preached to you;) for if that which you have heard from the beginning shall remain (and bring forth its due fruits) in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father, (united to them by the Spirit, who also will instruct you in the saving knowledge of them both, Joh. 14.23.6.56.) Ver. 25. And this is the promise which he hath promised us (who thus remain in him, viz.) eternal life. For the fruit of the spirit is life, Rom. 8.6, 11, 13, 16, 17. Gal. 6.8. and he is given as the earnest of our future inheritance, to seal us up to the day of redemption, 2 Cor. 1.22.5.5. Eph. 1.13, 14.4.30. And this Life he hath often promised to us, Joh. 5.25,
26, 29.6.27, 29, 33, 39, 40, 47, 50, 51, 54, 57, 58. Ver. 26. These things have I written con∣cerning them that deceive you, (i. e. who en∣deavour so to do:) Ver. 27. But (this not out of absolute ne∣cessity; as if through ignorance you could not otherwise be preserved from their Seductions, ver. 21. for) the anointing which ye have re∣ceived from him (who is your Head) abideth in (or among) you, and (so) you need not that any man should teach you, but as the same anointing (i. e. the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge) teacheth you of all things (ne∣cessary,) and (for) it is truth, and is no lye, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him. Note. The Quakers and other Sectaries hence argue against the necessity of the Mini∣sterial Function, or any Teachers of the Word, it being here said, you need not that any teach you, &c. And others say, This seems to make all Scripture, and all that the Apostle writ to them, needless. But for An∣swer to this Objection, I say, 1st, That it must be granted, that in those times of the Effusion of the Spirit, and his miraculous Gifts upon Believers, this Uncti∣on was promised to teach them all things ne∣cessary, who had then no other Rule of know∣ing what was so, but by the teaching of the Apostles and Prophets then among them, acted by this Spirit, and teaching in their Assemblies, and doing other publick Offices by this Affla∣tus, and by the Spirit of Wisdom and Instru∣ction then imparted to them, and hereby they were enabled to distinguish betwixt Preten∣ders to the Spirit, and those who really were acted by him. See Note on Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. and to know they dwell in Christ, because he had thus given them of this Spirit, John 3.24.4.13. Which things do certainly im∣ply, that they who then had the Spirit, could certainly know they had it, and make an Ar∣gument of it to try the Doctrines and Spirits of others, and much more in themselves; but now these sensible Indications, and extraordi∣nary Gifts of the Spirit are long since ceased, and therefore now they are to be directed by those Writings which were Endited for their perpetual Use, by Men assisted with that Spi∣rit, who led them into all Truth; and surely if in those times when the Gifts of the Spirit were so generally vouchsafed, they were yet taught by Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, assisted by the Spirit for that work, 'tis reasonable to believe that now these Gifts are ceased, Believers should be yet instructed by Pastors and Doctors assisted by the Scri∣ptures indited by these Spiritual Men. And therefore, 2dly, It is observable that the Apostle doth not here absolutely say, they need not any one should teach them, but only that they need not any one should teach them but as this Unction taught them. Now the Apostles having this Unction in the highest Measure, these Words cannot exclude their Teachings, or render them unnecessary, but rather must confirm them as a standing Rule to all Poste∣rity. Till then these Sectaries can shew that they have still such an immediate and an ex∣traordinary Afflatus of the Holy Spirit, as was then vouchsafed to the Primitive Chri∣stians, they cannot hence conclude the out∣ward Ministery of the Word, by Pastors and Doctors set apart for that Work, to be unne∣cessary. Ver. 28. And now, (, now therefore,) little Children, abide in him (in the Profession and Practice of what he hath taught you,) that when he shall appear we may have Confidence, (of the Life promised to them that do so, Ver. 25.) and may not be ashamed before him, (Gr. may not be put to shame by him, or go ashamed from him) at his coming (to Judg∣ment, Chap. 4.17. as being judged by him unworthy of this Life, as we shall not be, if we be found doing Righteousness; for) Ver. 29. If we know that he is righteous, we know that every one that doth Righteous∣ness is born of him. (As being born again of the Spirit derived from him, and so become a Son of God, and an Heir of Life, Rom. 8.14, 17. and by this Spirit sealed up unto the Day of Redemption, Eph. 4.30.) CHAP. III. Ver. 1. BEhold what manner of Love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God: therefore the World knoweth us not, (i. e. doth not ac∣knowledge and affect us Christians,) because it knew him not. (The Heathens being wholly ignorant of the true God, and the Jews not knowing him according to his Will, John 8.55.15.21.16.3. And as he had discovered himself to them by his Son, 1 John 2.23. And this may comfort you against the Perse∣cutions of the World, that 'tis their want of that saving Knowledge of the true God, which ministers so great Advantage to you, which causes them to disaffect you.) .] The Jews were stiled the Chil∣dren, and the Sons of God, because they own∣ed him as their God and Father, and entred into covenant to serve him; and so became an holy People to the Lord; and he had cho∣sen them to be his People, Deut. 14.1. So we are all the sons of God through Faith in
Christ Jesus Gal. 3.26. Joh. 1.12. The Land in which they dwelt is stiled the Lord's Land, Hos. 9.3. And they as being his first-born, Ex. 4.22. Have it given them for an inheri∣tance; but we, as being in a more spiritual sense the Sons of God, are heirs of God, joynt heirs of Christ, as being those that shall reign with him in his heavenly Kingdom, . 8.17. See the Note there. They in that land enjoyed the Majestick Presence of that God who dwelt among them: and therefore saith he, the Land is mine, Lev. 25.23. We as his Sons shall be admitted to his celestial Presence, where we shall see him as he is, . 2. The enjoyment of the Land was unto them a type of the Heavenly Canaan which the Faithful among them were to enjoy; and therefore they are represented as Strangers and Sojourners with him in it. Whence the Apostle tells them, that there remained yet  Rest for the people of God, Heb. 4.9. And the Patriarchs are said to have confessed that they were Strangers, and Pilgrims upon earth, and thereby to declare that they desired, and ought a better Country, that is, an heavenly, and that upon this account God called himself their God, viz. the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, because he had prepared for them  City, Hebr. 11.13, 16. Now because they in their own persons could not enjoy this hea∣venly Country without a Resurrection, hence the Evangelist informs us, that they were the Sons of God, , as being Sons of the Resurrection; the Redemption of their Bodies from Corruption, and the , Re∣viviscence, of that which once died and saw Corruption, being the consequent of this , Adoption, or Sonship of God's Chil∣dren; hence therefore doth our Saviour firm∣ly prove the Resurrection from those words, I in the God of Abraham, &c. Matth. 22.32. Luk. 20.36, 37. And thus you see how great is the love of God in owning us as his Sons, and have also a just Comment on the follow∣ing words. Ver. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it doth not appear what we shall be (made farther Partakers of, as the compleat Import of that Title): but this we know, that when he doth appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. , when he doth appear.] Note here, 1st, That as the Hebrew Particle , so the Conjunction  signifies as well when, or postquam, after that, as if. So Judg. 6.3. , when Israel sowed, 1 Sam. 1.22. , when I have weaned him. Prov. 3.24. , when thou leest down thou shalt not be afraid. So Judg. 21.21. Psal. 138.7. Prov. 4.12. See Nold Partic. p. 87. 89. So Joh. 12.32. , when I am lifted up. 13.20. , when I send. 14.3. , when I go away. Et 16.7. Note, 2dly, That this is spoken of Christ seems evident. First, From the Word , which is used of Christ, Ver. 5. and agrees properly to him alone. And Secondly, From the Phrase we shall be like him, viz. Who shall change our vile Bodies into the likeness of his glorious Body, Phil. 3.21. And cause us to bear the Image of the Lord from Heaven, by being raised with glorious and incorrupti∣ble Bodies, 1 Cor. 15.47, 49. And from the Words, We shall see him as he is; i. e. in his Glory; this being his Prayer, That they whom God had given him, might be with him and behold his Glory, John 17.24. Ver. 3. And every man that hath this hope in him, (of seeing him in Glory) doth purifie himself as he is pure. (In whom was no Sin, Ver. 5.) .] For he being manifested to take away our Sins, Ver. 5. and to destroy the Works of the Devil in us, Ver. 8. they who expect to be made like to him hereafter, must be so here in Purity and Righteousness. But then let it be noted, 1. That this Imitation doth not require our Likeness to him we are to imitate in the Manner or inward Principle of his Actions, but only in the Quality, and as far as Humane Frailty will permit us, in the Measure of them: For Instance, it is as necessary for God to be absolutely perfect in Holiness and Good∣ness, as to be God; and yet we must be holy as he is holy, and perfect as our Heavenly Fa∣ther is perfect. And it is generally asserted in the Schools, That the Obedience and perfect Holiness of Christ, did necessarily result from the most intimate Union of the Divine and Humane Nature, and from that Grace of Unction which he received without measure; whereas our Holiness and Obedience must be Acts of Choice, and so our Holiness and Vir∣tue will proceed not from an inward Principle which doth necessitate us to be good, but from the Choice of our own Wills; and yet we must walk as he walked, and must purifie our selves as he is pure. 2dly, This Imitation doth not require an absolute Equality, or full Proportion of our Actions to the Example set before us, this being not consistent with the Frailty of our humane Nature. For the Example here is that of the Holy Jesus, in whom was no Sin, and who performed perfect Obedience to the whole Law of God, whereas in many things we offend all, and our Obedience will be still imperfect in this Life. When therefore we are commanded to be holy and perfect as God is, to walk as Christ walked, and to purifie our selves as he is pure, 'tis sicut Similitudinis, non aequalitatis: i. e. The Word as, binds us not to equal them in Holiness and Perfection; but to bear such a Likeness to them in these Perfections, as may discover that we truly aim at being holy in all manner of Conversation,
and heartily endeavour to continue so, through the whole Tenour of our Lives. Vain then is that Objection of the Socinians, That were Christ truly God, we could not possibly expect, nor therefore would it be our Duty to imitate him; for seeing the Exam∣ple of God himself is made the Matter of our Imitation, the Argument must equally con∣clude against the Deity of God the Father. In a Word, a Likeness to him as far as hu∣mane Frailty will permit, may be our Duty though he should be God; a perfect Likeness to him who did no Sin, could never be our Duty, though he were but Man. Ver. 4. Whosoever committeth Sin, trans∣gresseth also the Law: for Sin is the Trans∣gression of the Law. , he that committeth Sin.] i. e. Who lives in the Commission of it, lives in an Opposition to the Law of God. For he is of the Devil, Ver. 8. He is not born of God, Ver. 9. Which could not be truly said of him that is Guilty of any one Sin, or Violation of God's holy Law. Ver. 5. And ye know that he (i. e. Christ, Ver. 3.) was manifested to take away our Sins; (and not only by Suffering to remove the Guilt of our past Sins, but also to puri∣fie us from the Power and Dominion of it, that henceforth we might not serve Sin, Rom. 6.6. that , being freed from Sin we might live unto Righteousness; 1 Pet. 2.24.) and in him is no Sin, (and so our Likeness to him must consist in ceasing from it.) Ver. 6. Whosoever (therefore) abideth in him, sinneth not: whosoever (thus) sinneth, hath not seen him, neither known him (as the Truth is in Jesus, Eph. 4.21.) Ver. 7. Little Children let no Man deceive you, with Pretensions that Faith without Works of Righteousness will make you Righ∣teous before God, for only) he that doth Righteousness is Righteous, even as he (i. e. Christ) is Righteous (by doing the Will of his Father, John 15.10.) Ver. 8. He that committeth Sin, is of the Devil; for the Devil (thus) sinneth from the beginning. To this End was the Son of God manifested (to the World), that he might de∣stroy the Works of the Devil. Ver. 9. Whosoever is born of God, doth not commit Sin; for his Seed (the Word of God, Matth. 13. 1 Pet. 1.23.) remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. , of God.] By the Spirit and the Word, John 3.6, 8. Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. That is, he is preserved from, and hath his Heart framed into an hatred and loathing of Sin. 1. From the Word of God treasured up in his Heart, demonstrating to him the Vile∣ness of Sin, that he may hate the Danger of it, that he may flie from it; I have hid thy Word in my Heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psal. 119.11. And by attending to it as his Rule, and taking heed to his Ways, ac∣cording to this Word, ib. Ver. 9.2. By the Holy Spirit, abiding in him as a new Princi∣ple of Life lusting against the Flesh, so that we cannot do the Things which that would have us do, Gal. 5.16, 17. , he that committeth Sin, Ver. 6, 8, 9.] i. e. He that lives or goes on in any way of Sin. That this is the true Im∣port of this Phrase in the Writings of this Apostle, will appear, (1st,) From the same Phrase used in his Gospel, , Whosoever committeth Sin, is the Servant of Sin, John 8.34. Now to be the Servant of Sin, is plainly to continue, and to live in it, Rom. 6.1, 2. To yield obedience to it in the lustings of it, Ver. 12. For then Sin reigns in our mortal Bodies, Ibid. And we are Slaves and Subjects to it, then doth it , Lord it over us, and we are , Servants to yield Obedience to it, Ver. 14, 16. Though the Conscience may boggle at it, our Reason may condemn it, our Will be some∣what averse to it, so that in obeying it we do the Evil we would not; yet if , We are so entangled as to be overcome by it: We are Servants to Corruption, for of what a Man is overcome, to that is he brought in Bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19, 20. If the Law of our Members leads us captive to the Law of Sin, Rom. 7.23. So that we yield our Mem∣bers Instruments of Unrighteousness to Sin, we so commit Sin as to be the Servants of Sin. And he that is born of God, cannot (thus) sin, because by that new Birth he is made free from (the Service of) Sin, John 8.36. And become a Servant to Righteousness, Rom. 6.18. He hath that Seed within him, which alienates his Mind and his Affections from Sin, and that Spirit which causes him to mortifie the Deeds of the Flesh, Rom. 8.13. To die to Sin and to live to God, Rom. 6.10. (2dly,) From those Words, neither can Sin, for so he doth not do it, as he cannot do it. Now that doth not import that a good Man cannot be overtaken with a Fault, Gal. 6.1. No, even those little Children whose Sins are forgiven, and who have known the Father, may and will be obnoxious still to some Infir∣mities, and Wandrings out of the Way, Chap. 2.1. They may Sin not unto Death, and therefore may have still the Spiritual Life re∣maining in them, Chap. 5.16, 17, 18. But the true import of thatIta de Catone Min. Velleius Patere. Homo virtuti simillimus & per omnia ingenio diis quam hominibus propior, qui nunquam recte fecit ut facere videretur, sed quia aliter facere non poterat. Hist. R. l. 2. c. 35. Omnibus huma∣nis s immunis, ibid. Phrase is this, That he hath such an inward Frame of Heart,
such a Disposition of Spirit, as renders Sin exceeding odious and hateful to him; so that he cannot entertain the Thoughts of doing it, or a Temptation to commit it, without the utmost Detestation, and the greatest Horror, and so can very rarely▪ and only through Sur∣prize, or want of due Deliberation, or thro' such violent Temptations as prevent or hinder his Consideration, be obnoxious to them; and when he comes to consider of such an Action, is presently condemning himself for it, bit∣terly repenting of it, and for the future watch∣ing most carefully against it. Thus they that are evil cannot speak good things, Matth. 12.24. A good Tree cannot bring forth bad Fruit, Matth. 17.18. The World cannot hate those that are of it, John 7.7. The Jews could not hear Christ's Word, John 8.43. Could not be∣lieve, John. 12.39. The World could not re∣ceive the Spirit, John 14.17. They that are in the Flesh cannot please God, Rom. 8.7, 8. The natural Man cannot know the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. The Church of Ephesus could not bear the Wicked, Rev. 2.2. (3dly,) From the Phrase, He that commit∣teth Sin is of the Devil; for 'tis not he who committeth one or more Sins of Infirmity, for so did Christ's Disciples while they were with him; nor he who committeth one great Sin through the Power of a strong Temptati∣on, of which he bitterly repents, and from which he returns to his Obedience; for thus did David and St. Peter, who yet were not then the Children of the Devil: but they who comply with the Lusts of Satan, and who will do them, John 8.44. The other Interpretations which are given of these Words, seem either vain and imperti∣nent, or false and dangerous. And, 1. Vain is that Sense which some put upon these Words, viz. He that is born of God, non debet peccare, ought not to sin; or that it is absurd for him to sin; for the Apostle speaks not of what he ought not to do, but of what he doth not. Such is that also of those Fa∣thers, who interpret this of him who is per∣fectly born of God, by a , or a Re∣surrection from the Dead; for the Apostle speaks not of what he shall not do hereafter, but of what he doth not do at present. 2. False seems to be the Sense which Ori∣gen, St. Jerom, and Ambrose put upon the the Words, That he that is born of God sinneth not, quamdiu renatus est, whilst he is born of God, because he ceaseth to be a Child of God when he sins; for this is not only confuted by the Example of David and St. Peter, whose Faith under that great Miscarriage failed not, Luke 22.32. but by the Words of this Apo∣stle, Little Children, if we sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, Chap. 2.1. who yet is only the Advo∣cate for the Sons of God. For the same Rea∣son I cannot assent to that Exposition which saith, a Child of God cannot be guilty of any great or deliberate Crime, as Tertullian De Pudicitia, Cap. 19. 3. Dangerous is the Exposition ofIn Septuag. Serm. 1. St. Bernard, That they who are born of God sin not, Quia etiamsi peccent, peccata illis neutiquam imputentur, because their Sins will never be imputed to them. And of those who think it sufficient to say, He sins not without great reluctancy, or not willingly, the Evil that he doth being that which he would not do; for the Will of that Man, who after some Contest in his Soul, yields to the Commission of Sin, is more strongly enclined to sin, than to the avoiding of it; and so is not renewed. Nor doth the Apostle say, He that is born of God Sins not willingly, or without Renitency, but absolutely, He doth not commit Sin. I conclude this Note with that of our Ju∣diciousAdvers. c. 34. p. 346. Gataker, He that is born of God sinneth not; that is, vitam à peccato immunem quantum potest sibi proponit, nec peccato unquam sponte dat operam; si aliquando praeter animi propositum deliquerit, non in eodem persistit, sed errore agnito ad institutum vitae pristinum, quamprimum quantumque potest, festinus re∣vertitur. Ver. 10. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil. Who∣soever doth not righteousness is not of God, neither (is) he (so) that loveth not his bro∣ther, (and so both these are children of the Devil.) , that doth not righteous∣ness.] That is, he that doth not from an heart studious of conformity to him who is righteous, v. 7. and in obedience to his law commanding us to live righteously, exercise himself in sincere endeavours of walking righ∣teously through the general course of his Life, is not a Child of God, because he only is born of God, and hath the divine Nature in him, who thus doth righteousness, 1 Joh. 2.29. And he who doth not in truth, and in Acti∣ons demonstrating the sincerity of his affecti∣on to his Brother, v. 18. shew his love to him, he hath no true Love to God, Chap. 4.21. and so is not born of God, nor can he be the Child of God, since he obeys not his Com∣mandments, Chap. 5.1. Ver. 11. For this is the message which ye heard from the beginning, (or from the first preaching of the Gospel,) that we should love one another, (from a pure heart fervently, 1 Pet. 1.23. and as Christ hath loved us, Joh. 15.12.) Ver. 12. (And if we be not children of the
Devill, but of God, we shall) Not (be) as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and (there∣fore) slew his Brother, (viz.) because his own works were evil, and his Brother's righteous, (as God himself testified by respecting the Of∣fering not of Cain but Abel, and this begat in him that hatred which concluded in his Bro∣ther's death.) Ver. 13. (And) Marvel not, my Brethren, if (in like manner) the world (the Seed of Cain, who are also of that wicked one, Joh. 8.44. 1 Joh. 5.19.) hate you. i. e. If they persecute and kill the Just, as being Condemners of their Actions, and alien from their ways and manners, in Affection, Aim, Desires, and therefore hated by them, Joh. 15.19. for whatsoever they may do to destroy this life. Ver. 14. We know that we have passed from death unto life (i. e. that we have obtained a right to escape Death eternal, and enjoy ever∣lasting Life, Joh. 5.24.) because we love the Brethren (in deed and truth, v. 18. for this is a sign that we are translated from darkness to light, Chap. 2.10. and so are children of the light, yea that we are born of God, Chap. 4.7. and therefore children and heirs of God, Rom. 8.17.) he that loveth not his brother abideth in (the state, and under the sentence of) death (he is still in the darkness of Sin and Ignorance, Chap. 2.11. which will end in eter∣nal darkness.) Ver. 15. (For) Whosoever hateth his brother is (in the disposition of his Heart and the Construction of God's Law) a murtherer, (Matth. 5.21, 22.) and ye know that no mur∣therer (being so great and wilful a Violater of the Moral Law) hath eternal life abiding in him. (He therefore must be exposed to Death eternal, till with holy David, by a deep and long Repentance, he is delivered from blood-guiltiness.) Ver. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God (to us,) because he (who was his beloved Son, at his command, Joh. 10.18.) laid down his life for us, (i. e. for our Salvation and the propitiation of our Sins;) and we also ought (in imitation of this Example) to lay down our lives (i. e. expose them to the death) for (the salvation of) the brethren: (Going on in the prosecution of our duty, to win them to life eternal, though with the hazard, and even the loss, of this temporal life.) Ver. 17. But (if Love requite us thus to part with even life for them, then) whoso∣ever hath this world's goods, and seeth his bro∣ther have need (of some of them,) and (yet) shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, (not being moved out of compassion to his indigence to give him what he hath to spare,) how dwelleth the love of God in him? Ver. 18. My little Children, let us not love in word or in tongue only, (Jam. 2.16.) but in deed and in truth, (in true affection of heart, 1 Pet. 1.22. and in sincerity of action, Rom. 12.9. by love serving one another, Gal. 5.13. not pitying only, but relieving them accord∣ing to their wants, and our ability to supply them.) Ver. 19. And hereby we (may) know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. , we are of the truth.] i. e. We are rightly acquainted with, and tru∣ly live according to the Rules delivered in that Gospel which is emphatically stiled the Truth. See Note on Rom. 2.8. This is the Truth so often mention'd in these Epistles, 1 Joh. 1.6, 8.2.4, 21.4.6. 2 Epist. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Epist. 3.3, 4, 8, 12. and in the Gospel Chap. 1.14, 17.3.21.4.23, 24.5.33.8.32.17.17.18.37. , and shall per∣suade our hearts.] viz. that we are so in the fight of God. Ver. 20. For if our heart (the inward wit∣ness of our Thoughts and Actions) condemn us (of want of Sincerity and Obedience to the Truth of the Gospel) God is greater than our hearts (both in Holiness to condemn) and (in Knowledge to perceive the evil of them, for he) knoweth all things. Ver. 21. (Whereas) beloved if our hearts (after a diligent search of them, and a com∣paring of our Actions with the Law of Li∣berty) condemn us not (of Insincerity in our Obedience,) then have we (humble) confidence with God (in our Addresses.) Ver. 22. And whatsoever we ask (according to his will, Joh. 5.14.) we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight. Ver. 23. And he that keepeth his command∣ments dwelleth in him (i. e. in God) and be (God) in him, and hereby we know that he abideth in us by (the efficacious Gifts of) the spirit which he hath given us. , by the Spirit.] So the word Spirit is taken in the words following Chap. 4.1. and so was he given in those times to them that believed, Acts 5.32.
CHAP. IV. Ver. 1. BEloved, believe not every (preten∣der to the) Spirit (of God,) but try the Spirits, whether they be of God (or not,) because many false Prophets are gone  into the world, (pretending to be the Christ, or the Messiah promised to the Jews.) Ver. 2. (And for your direction in this trial;) Hereby know ye the Spirit of God (from that of error;) every Spirit (i. e. person pre∣tending to the Spirit of God, or of prophe∣cy) which confesseth that Jesus Christ (Gr. Je∣sus Christ which) is come in the flesh, is of God. Ver. 3. And every (pretender to the) Spi∣rit which confesseth not that Jesus Christ (Gr. Jesus Christ which) is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is that Spirit of Antichrist, thereof ye have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the world. Note, The Jews being then generally in expectation of their Messiah, were divided in∣to two parts, a Remnant who believ'd that he was come already, and that our Jesus was the very Person promised under that Character, and a more prevailing part of them who rejected him, and looked for another. Now among these appeared many who took upon them to be the Messiah, or the Prophet pro∣mised by Moses like unto him, saying, Lo Christ is here, and lo he is there: (See the Note on Matt. 24.24, 26.) And these decla∣ring themselves Prophets, must also pretend to the Spirit of Prophecy, and do this as Jose∣phus saith they did,  under the pretence of a divine Afflatus. These, saith the Apostle here, are Antichrists, i. e. Pre∣tenders falsly to be Christ, in opposition to him who truly was so; nor could they belong to him, or truly confess him who was the word made flesh. Now the strength of this Argu∣ment depends on these Considerations, that the effusion of the Spirit promised in the times of the Messiah could only belong to them who owned and believed in the true Messiah, this being made one character of the true Messiah, that he should baptize them who believed in him, with the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. This pro∣mise of the Father, as the Holy Ghost is stiled, was to be sent by Christ, Luk. 24.49. to his Disciples, Joh. 16.7.15.26. to be sent in his name, Joh. 14.26. And when he came, his office was to enable those who received him to testifie of Christ that he was indeed risen from the dead, and was the Christ, Joh. 15.26. Act. 1.8.5.32. and to convince the world of sin because they believed not in him, Joh. 16.9. The condition of receiving him was Faith in Christ, Joh. 7.37. Act. 2.38, 39. And by his assistance did his Disciples prove that Jesus Christ who appeared to the Jews in flesh, and was crucified among them, was the Christ. He therefore who was made par∣taker of the  of the Holy Ghost must be one who believed in that Jesus who suffer∣ed in the flesh for us; and therefore they who denied this, could not be assisted by the Spirit who was only sent by him, and given to be∣lievers: whence the Apostle saith, That no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus A∣nathema, as these false Prophets who own'd him not must do, 1 Cor. 12.3, and that no man could say that Jesus was the Christ but by the Holy Ghost: that is, he could not confess; and testifie to the World this Truth, but by the assistance of the Holy Ghost promised; and given to Believers for that end. See v. 6, 13, 14, 15. Note therefore, that the Apostle is not here speaking of the trial of Doctrine, but of Spi∣rits, nor of the Faith necessary to be believed to Salvation, but only of the Faith necessary to the reception of the Holy Ghost, that Unction which would teach them all things; 1 Joh. 2.27. Ver. 4. Ye (to whom he hath given this Spirit Chap. 3.24.) are of God, little children; and have overcome them, (these Antichrists and false Prophets;) because greater is he (the Spirit) that is in you, than he (the Spirit) which is in the world. .] The Doctrine which you preach and confirm by these Gifts and Distri∣butions of the Holy Ghost, hath mightily prevailed over all the opposition which the unbelieving Jews, and their false Prophets, and false Apostles, make against it; because the Spirit which acts in them is only able to work by them, , false, Counter∣feit, and lying Wonders; whereas the Spirit that is in you enables you to confirm the Truth with real Miracles, and Signs, and divers Di∣stributions of the Holy Ghost by which God beareth witness to the truth of that Doctrine which you preach, Hebr. 2.4. Rom. 15.19. 1 Thess. 1.5. Ver. 5. They (these Antichrists and False Prophets) are of the world, (setting up to be temporal Princes, and to give to the Jews dominion over the Heathen World,) and there∣fore speak they of the World, (i. e. of that tem∣poral Dominion over the Heathens, which the Carnal Jews expect, when their Messiah doth appear,) and the world (he that is worldly-minded) heareth them. Dominion over the Heathens.] That the hopes of this encourag'd some of them to set up for the Messiah, and others to fight, see the Testimonies of Josephus; Note on James 4.
v. 1, 2, 3. And on this account they rejected the true Messiah because his Kingdom was not of this world. Ver. 6. We are of God (Deriving our Faith and Doctrine from that Jesus who was a pro∣phet sent from God, and delivered his Do∣ctrine in his name. As therefore he said to the Jews then, so we his Disciples say now) he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. (Joh. 8.47.6.45.) hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of Error (see Note on v. 1, 2, 3.) When the Romish Prelates have once pro∣ved they are of God, as the Apostles did, it will be time to consider the inference of Esthi∣us from this place, that he that is of God must hear their Prelates, and their Church, and come to them to be resolved of any doubt by them. Ver. 7. Beloved let us (who are of God, v. 6.) love one another, for love is of God (the fruit of his good Spirit in us, Gal. 5.22. 1 Pet. 1.22.) and every one that loveth is born of God, (by the Spirit, Joh. 3.5.) and (this resemblance he hath to him, in love to mankind in general, and to those he hath so highly loved in particular, v. 9, 10. shews that he) knoweth God (aright, because he keepeth his Commandments, Chap. 2.3, 4.) Ver. 8. He that loveth not (his Brother) knoweth not (Gr. hath not known) God (a∣right,) for God is (the God of) love. , God is love.] The Apostle by these words intends not to express what God is in his essence, or to say, as the Schools do, that he is Love essentially, and Love causali∣ter as being the Cause, or objective, as being the Object of our Love, but that he is so de∣monstrative, and , shewing great Philanthropy to Men in all his dealings with them, or his dispensations toward them: as appears from the two following Verses. Ver. 9. In this was manifested (the Great∣ness of) the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, (and freely gave him up to the death, Rom. 8.32.) that we might live through him. Ver. 10. Herein is (the demonstration of his) love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us (first, v. 19.) and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our Sins, (which de∣served death, and so to fit us for eternal life.) .] Here the Apostle most lively doth express the Freedom, and the Greatness of the love of God; the Freedom of it, in that he loved us first, when there was nothing in us to deserve or move affection, but our Misery; but many things which both deserv'd, and might have mov'd him to the execution of his Wrath, we being Enemies to God by wicked works. The Greatness of it, 1. In the Person sending, the great God of heaven who humbles himself even to behold what's done in heaven and earth; oh! there∣fore what is man that he should be thus mind∣ful of him? 2ly. The Person sent,  only begotten,  his proper Son, Rom. 8.32. for if to call God , his proper Father, was to make himself equal to God, Joh. 5.18. the Father himself by calling him his proper Son must equally exalt him. Hence even Episcopius here declares him to be so called, because essentiam suam à Patre per ve∣ram Generationem accepisset, he had received his Essence from the Father by a true Genera∣tion: For it is certain that the Apostle is here extolling the Love of God to the highest pitch, and therefore must use this Phrase the only be∣gotten Son of God in the sublimest sense in which that word is used in the Scripture. 3dly. The Place whither he was sent, into the world which lay in wickedness. 4thly, The Er∣rand for which he was sent, 1. To give up him∣self a Sacrifice for the Propitiation of our Sins. See Note on Chap. 2. v. 2. 2dly, To procure to us, who were dead in trespasses and Sins, eternal life. Ver. 11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Ver. 12. (And say not, that it is enough that you love God again, though you love not your Brother, ver. 20. for) No man hath seen God at any time, (as we daily see and converse with our Brother, and therefore if we love not him whom we have seen, how can we love God whom we have not seen, ver. 20. but) if we love one another (after his Example, though we see him not we may be sure that) God dwelleth in us (by his Spirit,) and (that) his love is perfected in us. , his love is perfected in us.] He then loves us entirely, according to those words of Christ, If any man keep my words my father will love him, and we will come un∣to him, and take up our abode with him, Joh. 14.23. Or then is our love to him entire, be∣cause then we love him so as to keep his com∣mandments, Chap. 2.5. and so as to follow that example of Love which he hath set us; and as he is, so are we in the world, ver. 17. Ver. 13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and be in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit, (who by his powerful Energies proves whose Spirit he is.) Ver. 14. And (by the Spirit given to us according to his Promise) we have seen, (i. e. perceived,) and do testifie, that the Father hath sent his Son to be the Saviour of the world. (See Note on ver. 3.) Ver. 15. Whosoever, (believing this our Te∣stimony,) shall (from his heart believe and Rom. 10.9, 19.) confess, that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God (by the spirit of Adoption.) For to as many as received him gave he pow∣er to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name, John 1.12. And be∣cause we are Sons, God hath sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba Father, . 4.6. Only let it be noted, that this hearty Confession must be attended with a readiness to believe all that this Son of God hath taught us in his Father's name, for if he say the truth, why do we not believe him? Joh. 1 46. and a firm purpose to obey his Com∣mandments, for why call we him Lord, Lord, and do not the things that he saith? Luk. 6.46. Ver. 16. And we (by this Spirit) have known, and believed the love that God hath (shewed) to us, (in sending his Son to be the Saviour of the World. v. 10, 11, 14.) God is love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him, (v. 7.) Ver. 17. Herein is our Love made perfect, (i. e. exactly corresponding to the divine Pat∣tern and Command, Note on ver. 12. so) that We (who thus love) may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world, (conforming our selves to the pattern of God's affection to mankind, and walking as Christ walked, Chap. 2.6.) Ver. 18. There is no fear (of failing at that day) in love (thus perfect,) but perfect love casteth out fear, for (that) fear (which takes away this boldness) hath torment in it, (tor∣ments the mind with dreadful Expectations, and) he that (thus) feareth is not made per∣fect in love. , there is no fear in love.] Christ having so expresly promised a Come ye blessed to the charitable person, Matt. 25.34, 35, 36. and the Apostle recommending it as the most excellent of Christian Graces, 1 Cor. 13.13. and the fulfilling of the Law, Rom. 13.8, 10. when this Love is made perfect in us, it may well give Boldness, and cast out fear of Condemnation in the day of Judg∣ment. Others expound the words thus; There is no fear of what we may lose or suffer, in (perfect) love (of our Brother,) but (such) Love casteth out (this) Fear, for fear (of what we may lose or suffer) hath torment in it: (And therefore) he that thus feareth is not made perfect in love (to him.) Ver. 19. We love him, (and testifie this love to him by loving our Brother for his sake, after his Example, and in Obedience to his Command,) because he loved us first. That is, Whosoever thus loves God, and shews it by loving thus his Brother, can chal∣lenge nothing on that account as due from God, it being God's preventing Love to him, which gave the rife to all the Love he bears to God, or to his Brother for his sake. If therefore any person be constrained by this Love to that Obedience which testifies the sincerity of his Affection to God, or to imi∣tate his Love to us by servile Love to the Bre∣thren, 'tis the divine Philanthropy which hath excited this Affection in him. Or if  be the Subjunctive Mood, the sense runs thus. Let the great Love of God to us, mentioned ver. 9, 10. provoke us to returns of Love to him, and to our Brethren for his sake, since we do hypocritically pretend to love him, if we do not shew it by fervent Charity towards his Children, and our Brethren: for, Ver. 20. If any man say, I love God, and (yet) hateth his brother, he is a Lyar; for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen. That is, If what we have more opportuni∣ty to do, and can perform with less difficulty, we do not do, how shall we perform what is more difficult? Now we have our Christian Brethren still in our view, they are the Ob∣ject of our Senses, we daily converse with them, and their Wants and Miseries being the Objects of our Senses, must naturally move Compassion in us; and so it is less diffi∣cult to express our Love to them, than to that God whom we have not seen, and who is only present to our Minds by raised Medi∣tations, which do not naturally occur to us, and which we cannot long continue, and so is more difficult than the Love of our Brother. Ver. 21. And (he moreover shews, by his Disobedience to the Command of God, the want of true Affection to him; for) this Com∣mandment have we from him, that he who loveth God love his Brother also. CHAP. V. Ver. 1. WHosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and every one that loveth him that begat, lo∣veth him also that is begotten of him, (as be∣ing by this new birth Partaker of the divine Nature, and created anew after the Image of God, Ephes. 4.24. Coloss. 3.10.) , is born of God.] The Jews gloried in this Title, that they were the Chil∣dren of God, and had him for their Father, John 8.41, 42, 54. they being called his Sons, Deut. 14.1.32.19. Psal. 72.15. and his first-born, Exod. 4.22. The Apostle therefore here informs them, that this Relation would stand them in no stead unless they were born again of Water, and of the Spirit, John 3.5. or baptized into the Name of Christ, and by that Faith had Power to become the Sons of God, John 1.12. and also loved those Christians which were born of him, which the unbelie∣ving Jews and the false Teachers among them were so far from doing, that they every where
persecuted the true Believers. See Note on Chap. 3.1. Ver. 2. (And this Note is reciprocal, for) By this we know that we love the Children of God, when we love God, and keep his com∣mandments, (when our affection to God pre∣vails upon us, to do to them all acts of Charity he hath required, and by his Example recom∣mended to us, 1 Joh. 3.11, 23.4.21.) Ver. 3. For this is (the genuine test of) the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments (to the true lover of him) are not grievous. , are not grievous.] Because his Will is conformed to the Will of God, and so he only doth what he would do, and his Affections are chiefly placed upon him, and so he is then doing what he chuseth and delighteth in, and it cannot be grievous to be employed as we would, and as we do de∣light to be; moreover, God's Command∣ments cannot be grievous to him. Ver. 4. For whosoever is born of God over∣cometh the World, (his Affections are taken from it and set upon his God, and so it can∣not be grievous to him to part with it, or suffer the loss of any worldly Good to secure the divine Favour;) and this is the Victory which overcometh the world, even our Faith (to wit, that Faith which is the Substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Hebr. 11.1. which gives us the Assu∣rance of a better and a more enduring Sub∣stance, and so makes us take joyfully the spoil∣ing of our Goods, Heb. 10.34. and patiently endure those light afflictions which are but for a season, as knowing they work for us an ex∣ceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.) Ver. 5. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? (and so the Author of eternal Salvati∣on to all that obey him? for hence we know that we have eternal life, ver. 11, 12, 13.) Ver. 6. This is he that came by (or with the testimony of) water and blood, not by water only, but by water and blood; and it is the Spirit that beareth witness, (and on his Testimony we may rely,) because the Spirit is truth. That came.] Viz. In the name of God, Mat. 21.9. in his Father's name, Joh. 5.43. See Mat. 11.3. John 1.9, 15. Mat. 21.9. , by water.] That is, with the testimony of Water, or the testimony given to him by St. John at his Baptism; for when John was baptizing he testified of him, say∣ing, This is he that cometh after me, who was before me, John 1.27, 28. He also declar'd that he came baptizing for this very end, that he might be made manifest to Israel, ver. 31. and testified saying, I saw the spirit descend∣ing from heaven like a dove, and it abode up∣on him: And I knew him not; but he that sent me to baptize with Water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God, ver. 32, 33, 34. Hence is he sti∣led a man sent from God, who came for a wit∣ness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe, ver. 6, 7, 8. Hence do St. John's Disciples say to him, He to whom thou bearest witness baptizeth, John 3.26. And Christ himself appealeth to his Testimony, John 5.32, 33. Now this Testimony could not be rejected by them, for all men held John as a Prophet. Nor durst the Pharisees themselves deny that his Testi∣mony was from Heaven, Matt. 21.25, 26. , and blood.] For he died in Te∣stimony of this Truth, and came into the World for this end, that he might bear wit∣ness to the truth, Joh. 18.37. Whence he is said to witness before Pontius Pilate a good Confession, viz. That he was the Son of God, or Messiah, the King of the Jews, 1 Tim. 6.13. This he also testified to the High Priest, Matt. 26.63, 64. And for this Testi∣mony was he condemned as worthy of death, ver. 66. For this they mock him at his Suf∣ferings, that he said he was the Son of God, Matt. 27.43. Mark 15.32. And at his Death he commends his Spirit to God as his Father, Luke 23.36, 46. The Miracles which at∣tended his Crucifixion were so great, that they forced the Jews, the Centurion, and those that were with him, to confess truly this was the Son of God, Matt. 27.54. and the whole multitude to smite their Breasts, Luke 23.48. In a word, the Spirit which assisted the Baptist proclaimed him the Lamb of God who taketh away the Sins of the World, Joh. 1.30. And that supposeth he was to offer up himself unto the Death, for the Propitiation of their Sins. Yea he himself doth frequent∣ly declare, that he was to be slain, Matth. 16.21. to be delivered into the hands of men, and kill'd, Matt. 17.22, 23. to be condemned to death, Matt. 20.18, 19. and to rise again the third day. That he was to be lifted up upon the Cross, Joh. 3.14. and that being thus lifted up, he would draw all men to him, John 12.32. Now what Impostor would lay this as the Foundation of the Truth of all his Say∣ings, and all the hopes of any Blessings which were to be expected from him, that he should be crucify'd, and die an ignominious and pain∣ful death? Or, What could tempt him thus to die who had no hopes to rise again, if he were not the true Messiah, or the Son of God? How was it possible he should be raised from the Dead, but by the mighty Power of God? And is it reasonable to imagine that the God of Truth should thus exert the Greatness of his Power in Confirmation of a Lye? That he should work so great a Miracle in favour of
a vile Impostor falsly usurping his Name? or give such large Credentials to one who falsly did pretend to be a Prophet sent from God, and to be honoured as his Son by all men. , &c. and 'tis the spirit that beareth witness.] Here it is to be noted, that the Witness in this Verse is only stiled , viz. that Spirit which enabled Christ to heal Diseases, cast out Devils, raise the Dead, and work all sorts of Miracles, for Confir∣mation of his Mission; but in the 7th Verse he is stiled  the Holy Ghost, which doth distinctly signifie the inward Gifts by which the Understanding is enlightned, and is enabled to perform things which by Nature it could not do without the immedi∣ate Workings of the Holy Ghost, as v. g. the Gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith, Prophecy, discerning of Spirits, the Gift of Tongues, and the Interpretation of them. That there is ground for this Distinction, will appear from these Considerations: 1. Because our Saviour, whilst he was on Earth, gave to his Apostles and the Seventy Disciples Power to heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, and cast out Devils; Matt. 10.8. Luk. 10.9. And yet the Evan∣gelist St. John informs us that the Holy Ghost was not yet, because that Jesus was not glo∣rified, Joh. 7.39. Our Saviour also tells his Disciples, that the Holy Ghost would not come till he departed, John 16.7. And St. Peter, that our Lord being exalted to the right hand of God, received the Promise of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.33. The Holy Ghost must there∣fore signifie something distinct from the pow∣er of working Miracles. 2. The Prophecy of Joel, which by S. Peter is mention'd as the Promise on which the Gi∣ving of the Holy Ghost was founded, is only a Promise of Visions, Dreams, and Prophe∣cies, but not of Miracles; and the Gifts of the Spirit, mention'd by the Prophet Isaiah, are only those of Wisdom, Knowledge, Un∣derstanding, Counsel, Courage, Piety, and of the Fear of the Lord, no mention being made there of Signs and Wonders. 3. Because throughout the History of the Acts of the Apostles, where St. Luke hath oc∣casion to mention the Miracles which the Apostles and primitive Professors did, he al∣ways uses the words , Wonders, Signs, Powers; but where he speaks of Persons prophesying, or speaking with Tongues, he doth as constantly ascribe this to the Holy Ghost descending on them. And lastly, where the Scripture mentions these things together, it puts a manifest di∣stinction betwixt Signs and Wonders, and the Gifts and Distributions of the Holy Ghost. Thus God, saith the Apostle, bore witness to the Doctrine which they preach'd by Signs and Wonders, and divers Miracles, , and Distributions of the Holy Ghost, Hebr. 2.4. See Rom. 15.19. Galat. 3.5. The Spirit therefore bore witness to Christ on Earth by the enabling him to do so many mighty works in confirmation of his Mission, to heal all manner of Diseases, Sicknesses, and Maladies, to command the Wind and Seas to be obedient to him, to cast out De∣vils, and to raise the dead, and by assisting his Apostles and Disciples to do these things in his name. For that not only his Disciples, but even our Lord himself, did cast out De∣vils by the Spirit of God, he himself expresly testifies, Matt. 12.28. and saith moreover, that in him was fulfilled that of Isaiah, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, wherefore he hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken in heart, to preach deliverance to the Captives (to Sin and Satan,) and to give sight to the blind, Luke 4.18, 20. Hence St. Peter speaks thus to Cornelius, and his Friends, You know how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, Acts 10.38. And to these works thus wrought by the assistance of the Spirit of God, our Lord doth frequently appeal as to a sure Testimony that God had sent him. For the works, saith he, that I do in my fathers name bear witness of me, John 10.24. and 5.36. yea they shew that the Father was in him, and he in the Father, Joh. 10.37, 38. and 14.10, 11. Ver. 7. (The Law judges that sufficiently proved which is confirmed by two or three witnesses, Deut. 19.15. That Jesus is the Son of God, v. 5. is thus proved by witnes∣ses from Heaven, and on earth,) For there are three that bear witness (to this truth) in (and from) heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one (as in Testimony, so in Essence.) , there are three that bear witness in Heaven, &c.] I shall say nothing of the Dispute whether this Verse be Genuine or not, seeing the Learned Dr. Mills treats so copiously on that Subject in his Edition of the New Testament. I only note, that the places cited from Tertullian and St. Cyprian agree not exactly with the words of St. John, seeing they speak de Patre Filio & Spiritu Sancto, not of the Father, the word, and the Holy Ghost. The Objections of Scblictingius against this Verse are these, Obj. 1. That this Verse, though it be intro∣duced with  for, hath no coherence with the former Verse. Answ. It coheres well with it thus, the wit∣ness of the Spirit ought in this matter to be received, because he is the Spirit of Truth sent from the Father, and the Son; for in the Te∣stimony of this Holy Spirit sent down from Heaven, is contained the witness of the Fa∣ther,
and the Son also, so that we may truly say there be three that bear witness. Obj. 2. But if so, the Testimony of the Fa∣ther is included in the Testimony of the Holy Ghost. Answ. True. And by this these three Wit∣nesses become one in Testimony, and yet they differ as the person sending, and the person sent. Obj. 3. The , or Word, is the Son of God; and therefore to say he testifies of the Son of God, is to make him testifie of himself. Answ. It is confess'd that the same Person is both the , and the Son of God, but the thing testified is not that Christ was the , or the Son of God by eternal Genera∣tion, or by his miraculous Conception, but that he was the Christ the promised Messiah, and in that sense the Son of God; and to this the Divine Nature might give Testimony. , the Father] Testified this at his Baptism by his Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, &c. Mat. 3.17. and at his Transfiguration saying again, this is my beloved Son, hear him, Mat. 17.5, 6. See Note on 2 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. and chiefly by sending the Holy Ghost which he had promi∣sed in the times of the Messiah, and who is therefore stiled the Promise of the Father, Luk. 24.49. Act. 1.4. , the Word.] Not only by appear∣ing to St. Stephen, Act. 7.56. and saying to Saul, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Acts 9.5. but chiefly by shedding the Spirit on the Apostles, and other Believers, according to his Promise; for he being exalted to the right hand of God, and receiving from the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, hath, saith St. Peter, shed forth this which ye now see and hear; wherefore let all the House of Israel know, that God hath made this Jesus Lord, and Christ, Act. 2.33, 36. , the Holy Ghost.] The Power from on high they were to be endued with Luk. 24.49. by falling down from Heaven upon his Disciples, whence they were fil∣led with the Holy Ghost, and spake with Tongues to Men of all Nations the wonderful things of God. Till his descent upon them, they were not to stir from Jerusalem, as being nor fitted for their work, Act. 1.4. but when he was once given, then were they to appear as his Witnesses, v. 8. And by the Holy Ghost thus given to them that believ'd, they pro∣ved, and bare witness that God had exalted Jesus to his right hand to be a Prince, and a Saviour, Act. 5.31, 32. And this our Lord, by his Omniscience, foretold that he should testi∣fie of him, Joh. 15.26. yea that at his coming he should convince the world of Sin because they believed not in him, of (his) righteous∣ness, because he was gone to the Father, and of judgment, because the Prince of the World was judg'd, and cast out of his Kingdom by him, Joh. 15.9, 10, 11. Joh. 12.31. And thus 'tis easie to discern how these three are one in Testimony, because both the Father, and the Son, give in their Testimony by the Holy Ghost; but then if these be three Witnesses properly so called, they must be three Persons, and more especially the Holy Ghost by whom the other persons do bear wit∣ness, must be so; and if his Testimony be al∣so the Testimony of God the Father and the Word, he must be one in Essence with them: for if the Spirit be a Creature, how can his Testimony be formally the Testimony of God? as it is stiled v. 9, 10. Ver. 8. And there are three that bear wit∣ness on earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one. , agree in one.] If by , v. 7. were meant no more than  here, why did the Apostle change the words, since these three also are one in Testimony, as that im∣ports this only, that they confirm this funda∣mental Truth, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. Especially if we consider what is in∣sinuated v. 6. that of these three the Spirit only beareth witness properly, the other by some action of the Spirit attending them, and by the Testimony of others of it; the Water by the Spirit's descending on Christ whilst he was in the Water, and the Baptist's Testimo∣ny that by this sign God had declared to him that he was the Christ; the Blood as it as∣sures us that he who shed it died for the Truth. Ver. 9. If we receive the witness of men (in these Cases) the witness of God is grea∣ter (of more Validity and Certainty than that of men, he being neither liable to Ignorance, nor Falshood; and if his Testimony be of such force, we must believe that Jesus is the Christ) for this is the Testimony of God which he hath testified of his Son. , if we re∣ceive the witness of men.] This is not so to be interpreted, as if the three Witnesses on Earth related only to the Testimony of Men, and the three from Heaven only to the Testi∣mony of God; and so the Apostle intended here to signifie we had greater reason to be∣lieve the Witnesses in Heaven than those on Earth; for, 1. The Testimony of the Spirit, and of the Holy Ghost, are of equal Certain∣ty and Validity: and 2. John Baptist being sent from God, Joh. 1.6. and his Baptism be∣ing from Heaven, and not of Men, Matth. 21.25. was also in effect the Testimony of God. The Import therefore of these words is rather this: If the Testimony of two or three Men be thought sufficient to give Cre∣dit to any Matter in all Courts of Judicature, surely the Testimony of that God, v. 8. who cannot lye, or deceive us, must be of greater force and strength to produce Faith in us.
Ver. 10. He that believeth on the Son hath the witness in himself, (as having in himself that Spirit of God which gives this Testimo∣ny to Christ,) he that believeth not (this Te∣stimony of) God hath made him a lyar, be∣cause he believeth not that record which God ve of his Son. Ver. 11. And this is the (subject of this) record, that God hath given to us (Christians the promise of) eternal life, and that life is i his son, (he being the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. this life being hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.4. and he being our life, ibid. he being the Author and Procurer of it, and having power to confer it on us, Joh. 17.2.) Ver. 12. He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life. (For we are all the children of God through faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.26. and if children then eirs, Rom. 8.17.) Ver. 13. These things have I written to you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know ye have (by Promise a right to, and by the Spirit an earnest of) eternal life, and that ye may (more firmly) believe in the name of the Son of God. Ver. 14. And this is the (farther) confidence that we have in (and through) him, that if we ask any thing (of God, Chap. 3.21, 22.) accor∣ding to his will, he heareth us, (according to Christ's Promise, Joh. 14.13, 14.15.7, 16.16.23, 24.) Ver. 15. And if we know that he heareth s whatever we (thus) ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him, Ch. 3.22. Ver. 16. If any man see his (sick) brother  a sin which is not unto death, (i. e. for which God hath not peremptorily threatned, and required that he should die for it, as he did to them that were guilty of Murther, Gen. 9.5, 6. Numb. 35.30, 31. and for Idolatry, Deut. 17.2, 3, 4, 5.) he shall ask (of God Restoration of his Life and Health,) and he shall give him life for them that sin not (thus) unto death. There is a sin unto death (of which God hath denounced that he that doth it shall die for it.) I do not say that he shall pray for it, (i. e. for deliverance of the person guilty of it from death.) Ver. 17. All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin (of Unrighteousness against our Brother, which is) not unto death, (the Law requiring not that the guilty person should die for it, but only that he should bring his Offering, and make reparation for it.) , a sin unto death.] Note here, That the Phrase he shall give him life, cannot be reasonably interpreted of eternal Life, for that depends not on the Prayers of other Men, nor can they be certain that their Intercession shall prevail for it, since it be∣longs only to them who truly repent, and re∣form their Lives. 2. Because the Person to be pray'd for is one that hath not sinn'd unto death, i. e. hath not committed a Sin which renders him obnoxious to Death eternal. 3. They who interpret this Phrase a sin unto death, of a Sin on which eternal Death will certainly follow by the Decree of God, 1. Make the Duty here enjoin'd impracti∣cable; for who can know when his Brother's Sin is thus to Death or not, who is acquaint∣ed with any such Decree of God? 2. They make the difference betwixt a Sin unto Death, and not to Death, to consist not in the nature of the Sins themselves, but in the Decree by God pass'd upon the Sinner. 3. They make the Apostle say, he dares not encourage them to pray for the Salvation of them who are at present in a state of Death and Condemnation, which is against the tenour of the Scripture. See Rom. 10.1. The words if a man see his brother sin a sin not unto death, seem like to those of St. Paul, if he see him overtaken with a fault, Gal. 6.1. i. e. with an act of Injustice against his Brother, to awaken him out of which Sin God hath inflicted Sickness on him, as he did on the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.30. The words Let him ask and he shall give him life, seem parallel to those of St. James, The prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. See the Note on Jam. 5.15. If this Interpretation will not stand good, consider, that after all the Mira∣cles and Distributions of the Holy Ghost vouchsafed in confirmation of the Gospel, too many of the Jews Apostatized from the Pro∣fession of it, relapsing to their former Ju∣daism. And this Apostacy may here be term∣ed the sin unto death; it being also that which our Saviour represents as the Sin against the Holy Ghost which should not be forgiven, Mat. 12.32. And they who commit it being Men, saith the Apostle, whom it is impossible to renew unto Repentance, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and to whom there remaineth nothing but fearful looking for of judgment, Heb. 10.26, 27. the Apostle might well add, I do not say that you shall pray for them. Ver. 18. We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not, (thus Chap. 3.15.) but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and the wicked one toucheth him not. (See Note on Chap. 3.9. Ver. 19. And we know that we are (begot∣ten) of God, and (that) the whole world lieth still in wickedness. .] In Satan, who worketh in the children of disobedience, Eph. 3.2. and leads them captive at his will, 2 Tim. 2.26. Whence by Faith in Christ we are said to be translated from the power of darkness, Col. 1.13. from the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. and recovered from the snare of the Devil. Ver. 20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is (the) true
(God): and we are in him that is true, (even, or to wit) in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and (in him is) eternal life. , he is the true God.] That this is not spoken of Christ the Socini∣ans endeavour to prove, because the Article is here added to the word  God; which is never, say they, done when Christ is called God: But this is manifestly false, for Thomas saith expresly of him,  my Lord and my God, Joh. 20.28. and the Apo∣stle,  who is God over all, blessed for ever, Rom. 9.5. We prove that this is spoken of Christ, 1. Because the demonstrative Pronoun  most appositely relates to that which imme∣diately went before; now this is Jesus Christ the Son of God. To this the Socinians answer, That this is not always so; these Relatives often referring to what isSee Cl. Art. Critic. part 2. c. 9. p. 121. more remote: and so this  may refer to the true God going before. To this we reply, 1. That when this happens to be so, the necessity of referring it to what is more re∣mote is evident from the Text, and necessary from the nature of the thing; as when 'tis said Acts 4.11.  this is the stone set at nought by you Builders, this cannot be referr'd to the Man that was made whole, ver. 10. and Acts 7.19.  he dealt subtilly with our Nation, this cannot refer to Joseph, but to the King of Egypt. So also Acts 10.5, 6.2 Thess. 2.9.2 Joh. 7. But here is no necessity of referring the Pronoun to any thing more remote, but on supposition that Christ is not truly God. 2. This never happens when the Pronoun relates to any thing that is spoken of profes∣sedly, but only when the nearest Antecedent is only mention'd accidentally, and by the bye. So Ep. 2.7. Many Deceivers are gone out in∣to the world who confess not that Jesus is the Christ,  he is a Deceiver and an Anti∣christ. Where, the Pronoun refers not to Christ, because he is there mention'd only by accident, as being the object of the Errour of these Seducers: and so it is in all the other places cited. But here the Apostle is profes∣sedly speaking of Christ through the whole Verse, and of the Father, only as we by Christ are taught to know him. And, 3. To refer this to the true God going be∣fore, makes the Apostle guilty of a Tautolo∣gy, by saying, the true God, he is the true God. 2. Of the same Person it is here said, He is the true God, and eternal life. Now eter∣nal life is in this very Chapter thrice ascribed to the Son as the Author of it, ver. 11, 12, 13. He is stiled  life Joh. 1.4.5.11.14.6.17.2. our life Col. 3.4. Christ is here also stiled  the true, as also Rev. 3.7.19.11. for otherwise the Greek should have been  that we may or might be, to answer to  that we might know, and not  we are in the true. Ver. 21. (Having therefore this knowledge of the true God) Little Children, keep your selves from Idols (or false Gods,) Amen. , from the Idols, or false Gods of the Heathens, among whom you live: so 1 Thess. 1.9. They turned  from Idols to the true and living God; thus an Idol is nothing in the world, i. e. no true God, because there is but one true God, 2 Cor. 8.4. Thus to eat things offer'd to Idols  with conscience of the Idol, is to eat it with apprehension that there was somewhat of Power or Vertue in the God to whom 'twas offer'd. Nevertheless, be∣cause these false Gods were still represented by, and worshipped in their Images, and they were thoughtUt eos possimus coram & cominus intueri, affari de proximo, & cum praesentibus quodammodo venerationum colloquia miscere, sub axe enim nudo, & sub aethereo tegmine invocati nihil audiunt, &c. Ethnicus apud Arnob. l. 6. p. 192. necessary to the Worship of their Deities, therefore the Apostle useth here the word Idols, and equally forbids that way of worshipping the true God.
THE PREFACE TO THE Second Epistle of St. JOHN. THAT St. John the Apostle was the Author of the First Epistle, is con∣fessed by all the Ancients, and that the same Person was the Author of this Epistle, is evident from the exact Agreement of almost every Word of this with the former, except the Preface and Conclusion. For, 1st, These Words in the Fifth Verse, I write no new Commandment to you, but that which you have had from the beginning, that ye love one another, are the same with those Ep. 1. Chap. 2.8, 10. Chap. 3.10. 2dly, These Words in the Sixth Verse, This is Love, that we walk after his Com∣mandments, are the same with 1 Ep. 5.3. and the following Words are in sense the same with Chap. 4.21. 3dly, These Words in the Seventh Verse, For many Deceivers are gone out into the World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh; he is a Deceiver and an Antichrist, are in sense the same with 1 John 2.18, 19, 26. Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. 4thly, These Words Ver. 9. He that trans∣gresseth and abideth not in the Doctrine of Christ, hath not God; he that abideth in the Doctrine of Christ, hath the Father and the Son, are in Sense the same with 1 John 23, 24. 5thly, These Words, Ver. 12. That your Joy may be full, are expresly found 1 John 1.4. Moreover, the Arguments which Grotius advances to the contrary, as Magna Argu∣menta, are of no Force against, but rather may be used as Confirmations of this Assertion, That St. John the Apostle was the Author of this Epistle. For whereas it is objected that Eusebius puts this and the following Epistle among the doubtful Epistles, leaving it uncer∣tain whether they were written by the Apostle, or by John Bishop of Ephesus, to whom they were ascribed, saith St. Jerom, it is to be noted from Eusebius, that though by some they were doubted of, yet. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 25. were they known to many of the Ancients. Yea, This Second Epistle is cited twice by Irenaeus, as the Genu∣ine Epistle of St. John the Apostle and Disci∣ple of our Lord declaring that they who de∣nied that Jesus Christ was come in the Flesh, wereJoannes Discipulus Christi in praedictâ Epistolâ fugere eos praecepit, dicens, multi Seductores exierunt in hunc Mundum, i non confitentur Jesum Christum in Carne venisse; hic est Seductor, & Antichristus; videte eos, ne perdatis quod operati estis. L. 3. c. 18. p. 278. Seducers and Antichrists, Ver. 7th and the 8th, and they who bid the. L. 1. c. 13. p. 94. A. Here∣tick good Speed, are Partakers of his Evil Deeds; which are the Words found, Ver. 10. And in the Council of Carthage, held Anno Domini 256.Joannes Apostolus in Epistolâ suâ pofuit dicens, si quis ad vos venit & doctrinam Christi non habet, nolite eum in Dmm vestram admittere, & Ave eine dixeritis. Apud Cypr. p. 242. Aurelius cites the Tenth Verse as the Words of St. John the Apostle of the Lord.
. Strom. 2. p. 389.Clemens of Alexandria makes mention of the larger Epistle of St. John, which suppo∣seth he had writ one or more shorter. And. Haer. 51. § 24. Epiphanius saith, That the Alogi, who rejected his Gospel and Revelations, would perhaps reject his Epistles also. So that we have here the Testimony both of the East and of the West, concerning the true Au∣thor of this Epistle, that it was John the Apo∣stle and Disciple of our Lord; which sure must be Proof sufficient against a bare Doubt, or the Silence of some Men about this Matter, of which OrigenConcedamur & secundam & tertiam . Orig. apud Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 25. p. 227. speaks. The other Ar∣guments of Grotius are so fully answered by Dr. Hammond in his Preface to this Epistle, that 'tis superfluous to say any thing more upon that Subject. As for the Name Catholick, that also seems to be given to this and the following Epistle, not as being written to all in general, some of the Ancients conceiving this was written only to one Family, as was the other to one Person; but asNot. in Epist. Barnab. p. 6. Cotelerius notes, because they were admitted by many Churches, and read as Ca∣tholick Epistles.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE Second Epistle of St. JOHN. Ver. 1. THE Elder to the Elect Lady and her Children whom I love in the truth; and not only I, but also all that have known the truth. , the Elder.] That the Apostle should in this Epistle conceal his Name, as in the former he had done, is so far from being an Argument to conclude he was not the Author of it, that it proves rather the contrary, he being, as it is observed by Dr. Hammond, the only Apostle that affected to conceal his Name; and who, in his Gospel scarce ever speaks of himself without some Circumlocution. That he should call himself Elder, and not Apostle, as St. Peter also doth, is no more an Argument against the Apostleship of the one than of the other. The word Elder be∣ing a Name of Honour and Dignity belong∣ing to the chief of their Tribes, agrees very well with the Office of the Apostles, set over the twelve Tribes of the House of Israel. But if this Epistle was written before the Destru∣ction of Jerusalem, as is probably collected from that Caution given in it, ver. 7, 8. to be∣ware of the Deceivers that were gone out into the world, that they might not lose the things which they had wrought, The Apostle could not then be so aged when he writ it as he is generally thought to have been, though he might be then seventy years old, and therefore aged. See Note on Philemon, ver. 9. , to the Elect Lady.] That the Apostle wrote this Epistle to a single Person who was of honourable Descent, and therefore stiled Lady, will not follow from the men∣tion of her Children, ver. 4. seeing that Phrase is used both of the Members of the Jewish and the Christian Church, Isa. 54.1. Gal. 4.25, 27, 28, 31. nor from the words I hope to come to you, and speak mouth to mouth; for so St. Paul did to the Church of Jerusalem, when he declared to them what things God had wrought by him and Barnabas, Acts 15.4. and so might St. John do to that or any other Church. It seems rather, from the words I have many things to write to you, and from the Children of the Elect Sister, mention'd ver. 12, 13. that it should be some Christian Church. And then I think there is great rea∣son to conjecture it must not be that of Ephe∣sus, but some Jewish Church, and most pro∣bably that of Jerusalem, the Mother of all Churches. For, 1. All the other Epistles, excepting that one to Gaius, which pass under the name of Catholick, were written to the Jews; and so this probably must be so. 2. As other Churches are stiled  elected together with her, 1 Pet. 5.13. So is the Church of the Jews stiled throughout the Old Testament the Elect, and the Converts of them in the New the Elect, Matth. 24.22. and the Election, Rom. 11.5, 7. 3. The Phrase the word that ye have heard, the truth you have receiv'd  from the beginning, seems most properly to agree to them to whom it was necessary that the word of God should be first preached, Acts 13.41. 4. This Church being that Church from whence the Word came out to all other Churches, who all received of her spiritual things, she may on that account by the Apo∣stle of the Circumcision be well stiled , as being the Lady and Mother of all other Churches: and so we find that anciently both she and her Bishops were at first preferr'd
before other Bishops and Churches; whence theAd Ecclesiam Hierosolymitanam praecipuè omnes favorem impendunt, quasi Matri Christiani nominis. Vide Cotelerium Not. in lib. 2. Recogn. p. 338, 339. Emperour Justinus, in his Epistle to Pope Hormisda, saith, that All Churches favour the Church of Jerusalem, as being the Mother of all Churches. Ver. 2. For the truths sake which dwelleth in us, and shall be with us for ever. , for ever.] This seems to assert the Perpetuity and Indefectibility of the Church of God; for where the Truth of the Gospel is for ever, there must be a Church for ever. Ver. 3. Grace be with you, mercy and peace▪ from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father in truth and love, (or the true and beloved Son of the Fa∣ther.) Ver. 4. I rejoyced greatly that I found (those) of thy Children walking in the Truth, as we have receiv'd a Commandment from the Father. , in the Truth.] i. e. In the Do∣ctrine of Christ, as the Father hath com∣manded, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear him, Mat. 17.5. Ver. 5. And now I beseech thee, Lady, not as though I wrote a new Commandment, but that which we had from the beginning (of the Gospel,) that we love one another. (See Note on 1 Joh. 2.7.) Ver. 6. And this is love, that we walk after his Commandment; (Chap. 5.3.) and this is the Commandment, that as ye have heard from the beginning ye should walk in it, (Chap. 2.24. i. e. we should continue walking ac∣cording to the Truth of the Gospel, which it concerns us now especially to be careful of.) Ver. 7. For many Deceivers are gone out into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, (or Jesus Christ coming in the flesh.) This is a Deceiver, and an Antichrist. (See Note on Chap. 2.18, 22. Chap. 4.1, 2, 3.) , coming in the flesh.] It ap∣pears from the Epistles of Ignatius to the Church of Smyrna, that there were then He∣reticks, or rather Infidels, who denied that Jesus Christ had taken upon him true flesh, saying, He, §. 2. , §. 5. Vide §. 4. & 7. only had the appearance of it, and suffer'd only in appearance. And these are thought to have been the Followers of Simon Magus, who taking upon him to be Christ, said, that. Theod. Haer. Fab. lib. 1. cap. 1. He appeared in Judea as a Man, not being so; and seem'd to suffer when he did not so. Saturninus, one of his Followers, taught thatPutative visum hominem. Iren. l. 1. c. 22. . Epiph. Haer. 22. §. 1. Christ only ap∣peared as a Man, and suffer'd in appearance only. But the Apostle here could not put in this Caution against him, because he was not yet in being when this Epistle was endited. According to the other rendring of the words, denying Jesus Christ who is come in the flesh, they will signifie the same as denying him to be the Messiah, and so respect the unbelieving Jews▪ and be designed to establish the  whom he writ, against that Apostacy which was then among the Jewish Converts. Ver. 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not the things that we have wrought, but that we may receive a full Reward. , that we lose not — a full re∣ward.] Hence it follows, 1. That it is not only lawful, but is the duty of a Christian to serve God with respect to the recompence of Reward. 2. That they who once walk'd in the Truth as they had receiv'd a Command∣ment, ver. 4. had Christian Charity, ver. 5. even that Love which enabled them to walk according to God's Commandments, ver. 6. might lose those things which they had wrought. Ver. 9. Whosoever transgresseth, and abi∣deth not in the Doctrine of Christ, hath not God: he that abideth in the Doctrine of Christ he hath both the Father and the Son. , he that abideth in the Doctrine of Christ.] These words being in sense the same with those we find 1 John 2.22, 23, 24. seem to shew that the Doctrine of Christ here mention'd is the fundamental Ar∣ticle that Jesus is the Christ; and then the not abiding in it must be the Apostatizing from it to Judaism, which St. Paul, and the Apostles of the Circumcision, so much la∣boured to prevent. Ver. 10. If there come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed, (i. e. have no familiarity with him, and wish him no success in his Enterprizes.) , bid him not God speed.] This Precept seems to be taken from the Jews, who were forbid to say Lightf. Harm. p. 153. God speed to a man that was excommunicated, or was doing any evil Action. Hence is it forbidden by theirBuxt. in voce . Canons, to say God speed
to a man that is plowing on the Sabbath-day. They also are forbid to come within four Cu∣bits of an Heretick, or of a person excommu∣nicated; and much more to admit him into their Houses. But yet this doth not forbid us to shew Humanity towards a distressed He∣retick, (seeing he ceaseth not to be of the num∣ber of those whom we should pity and pray for,) but only is a prohibition from doing any thing which imports a consent to, or appro∣bation of his evil Actions. Ver. 11. For he that biddth im God spe is partaker of his evil deeds, (as shewing Friendship to him that does them, and wish∣ing well to them; for by this he shews that he is willing he should succeed in them.) Ver. 12. Having many things to write unto you, I would not write (them) with paper and ink, (as I do this Epistle,) but I trust (, for I hope, say some Copies) to come unto you, and speak face to face, that your joy may be full. Ver. 13. The Children of thy Elect Sister ret thee. Amen. (See Note on ver. 1.)
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE Third Epistle of St. JOHN. i. e. The Third Epistle General of the Apostle John.] That this Epistle was written by the Author of the First and Second, and therefore by St. John the Apostle, appears by the Agreement of them in Words and Phrases. For, 1st, The Elder, Ver. 1. I rejoiced greatly that thou walkest in the Truth, Ver. 3. He that doth Good is of God, he that doth Evil hath not seen God, Ver. 9. are the usual Phra∣ses of the First and Second Epistles. 2dly, Those Words, I have no greater Joy than to hear that my Children walk in the Truth, are in Sense the same with the Fourth Verse of the Second Epistle. The Thirteenth and Fourteenth Verses are in Words the same with the Twelfth Verse of that Epistle. 3dly, Those Words, Ver. 12. And we bear Witness, and ye know that our Witness is true, do Characterize this Apostle: For as they are Words of Confirmation, importing an Apostolical Authority; so are they twice used by this Apostle, John 19.35.21.24. and by him only. Ver. 1. The Elder to the beloved Gaius, whom I love in the Truth. (i. e. With great Sincerity.) Gaius.] This Gaius who is here commend∣ed for his Charity to, and Entertainment both of the Brethren and Strangers, Ver. 5. and especially of those who went out from the Church of Jerusalem to preach the Go∣spel among the Gentiles, and who had given Testimony of his Love before the Church, seems to be Gaius of Corinth, stiled by St. Paul, Gaius my Host, and of the whole Church, Rom. 16.23. where there is Intimation of his Cha∣rity to the Brethren and to himself, given by St. Paul to those at Rome, and so a Testimo∣ny of it, from one of them who went out to preach the Gospel among the Gentiles, taking nothing of them. And indeed Paul and Bar∣nabas went out upon this Errand first from Antioch, by the Direction of the Spirit, Acts 13.4. Then from Jerusalem, being sent by that Church to Antioch, Acts 15.30. And they went out , for the Name of Christ. Ver. 26. Taking nothing of the Gentiles. 1 Cor. 9.5, 6. So did also Titus and Timothy, and all that were sent by St. Paul to Achaia. 2 Cor. 12.17, 18. So did they at Thessalonica, 1 Thes. 2.9. And so did none of the rest of the Apostles or Brethren of the Lord. 1 Cor. 9.5, 6. So that we have no Ground from Scripture to refer this to any other. And whereas it is said that Gaius of Corinth was the Convert of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.14. whereas this Gaius is here stiled one of St. John's Children, and so must be suppo∣sed to have been the Convert of St. John: To this it may be answered, that St. John calls all to whom he writes, his Children, 1 John 2.1, 12, 18, 28.3.7, 18.5.21. and so the Word Children signifies with him, no more than the Word Christian Brethren, and El∣ders and Fathers being oft of the same im∣port, he stiling himself an Elder, may well call them he writes to Children. Ver. 2. Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be in Health, (, in all things temporal,) even as thy Soul prospereth in all things (spiritual). Ver. 3. For I rejoiced greatly when the Bre∣thren came (out of Judea,) and testified of the Truth (of the Gospel) that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the Truth. (Confirming their Testimony by thy Conversation.)
Ver. 4. I have no greater Joy than to hear that my Children walk in the Truth. , than to hear.] This Constructi∣on of the Conjunction , saith Betuleius, is sufficient to shew that this is the Epistle of St. John, it being almost peculiar to him to use this Conjunction for , or , or , as John 15.8. In this is my Father glorified, he, when you bring forth much Fruit. And Ver. 13. Greater Love than this hath no Man, i. e. , than that a Man lay down his Life for the Brethren. Chap. 16.2. The Time will come, , when they will put you out of the Synagogues. And Ver. 32. The Hour cometh h, when you shall be scattered. See Note on 1 John 4.17. Ver. 5. Beloved, thou doest faithfully, (as becomes a faithful Christian,) whatsoever thou doest to the Brethren, and to Strangers; (whom thou receivest into thy House, Rom. 16.23.) Ver. 6. Who have born witness of thy Cha∣rity before the Church, whom if thou bring forward on their Journey after a Godly Sort, (i. e. with such Charity and Care as becomes one who considers that he Performs these Things not to Men only, but to God and Christ, whose Ministers they are,) thou shalt do well. , whom if thou bring forward as is worthy of God.] i. e. As it is fit to receive the Ministers of God. So to receive Phoebe, , is to re∣ceive her as it becometh Christians, to receive the Saints, Rom. 16.2. The Word , is the Word still used concerning them who are to be sent forward in preaching the Go∣spel, or in their Travels concerning the Af∣fairs of the Church. See Acts 15.3.20.38.21.5. Rom. 15.24. 1 Cor. 16.6, 11. 2 Cor. 1.16. Tit. 3.13. Ver. 7. Because that for his Name's sake they went forth, (to preach the Gospel, Acts 15.26.) taking nothing of the Gentiles, (to whom they preached the Gospel without Charge, 1 Cor. 9.18.) , for his Name's sake they went forth.] That is, saith one, they were expell'd, or cast out; referring this to the Christians, who by the Persecution of the unbelieving Jews, were driven from Je∣rusalem, Acts 8.1. But, 1st, The Word , they went forth, is only used in the forcible Sense, when mention is made of De∣vils going forth from those they possessed, at Christ's Command, and never of any Chri∣stians expell'd from any Place for the Profes∣sion of Christianity. 2dly, The Apostle speaks manifestly here of those who went out as the Apostles and Ministers of Christ to preach to the Gentiles, whereas they of the Di∣spersion, mentioned Acts 8.1. went out to avoid Persecutions, and preached to the Jews only, not thinking it lawful to have converse with, or preach to the Gentiles, Acts 11.19. Ver. 8. We therefore ought to receive such, that we (Christians who do not preach it,) may (yet) be Fellow-helpers to the Truth. (By helping them that do so.) Ver. 9. I wrote to the Church, but Diotre∣phes, who loves to have the Preeminence, re∣ceiveth us not. , I wrote.] I had written, so the Vulgar; I would have writ, so the Syriack; the Hebrews often use the Praeteritum for the Plusquam Perfectum; and Vossius observes of the Aorist, that it is so called because it is used sometimes for the Perfect, and some∣times for the Preterperfect Tense, and then  may be rendred, I had written. See Examples of this Nature, Note on 1 Cor. 5.9. The Apostle then seems here to obviate an Objection why he writes to Gaius, a single Person, and not to the whole Church; declaring that he would have writ to the Church, but then Diotrephes, and his Party, would have hindred the Effect of his Writing. Now who this Diotrephes was, is wholly uncer∣tain: I see no ground for the Conjecture of Grotius, that he was a Gentile Convert, who would not admit those Jews, who professing Christianity, still observed the Rites of the Law, into the Christian Assemblies. Estius on the contrary, conjectures that he was one of those Jewish Zealots, who held it necessa∣ry, That even the Gentile Converts should be Circumcised and observe the Law, and reje∣cted those who had declared for the contrary; as we know from St. Paul and the Council at Jerusalem, St. John had done; and that there were Men in Corinth and Galatia, who upon this Account opposed the Apostles, we learn from those Epistles: But read not of any Gentile Converts, who would not receive the weak Jews, or be hospitable to them on the Account of their Observance of the Law, much less of any of them who opposed them∣selves to the Apostles upon this Account. Moreover, the Subject of the Apostle's Wri∣ting being to exhort Christians to receive them who had gone out to preach the Gospel among the Gentiles, taking nothing of them, and all that did so, as far as we know any thing of them, being against these Impositi∣ons, the Apostle could not fear they should not be received, because Observers of the Law; but on the contrary, because they were dead to the Law. Ver. 10. Wherefore if I come, I will re∣member the Deeds which he doth, prating a∣gainst us, (me and the other Apostles, who thought not fit to lay this Burthen on the be∣lieving Gentiles,) with malicious Words: and not content therewith, neither doth he himself receive the Brethren, but forbiddeth them that would, and casteth them out of the Church. (As the Jews did the Uncircum∣cised
out of their Society. See Note on James 2.12.) , I will remember his Works.] Pri∣vate Offences against our selves must be for∣given and forgotten, but When the Offence , is an Impediment to the Faith, and very prejudicial to the Church, it is to te opposed, and openly re∣proved. Ver. 11. Beloved, follow not that which is Evil, (after the Example of Diotrephes,) but that which is Good, (as Demetrius doth, for) he that doth Good is of God, (who is Good to all,) be that doth Evil hath not seen God (1 John 3.6, 10.) Ver. 12. Demetrius hath a good Report of all Men, and of the Truth it self: yea, and we also bear Record (of him); and ye know that our Record is true. (Joh. 19.35.21.14) Ver. 13. Having many things (which it would be profitable) to write, I would not with Ink and Pen write unto thee: Ver. 14. But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall speak Face to Face. Peace be to thee. Our Friends salute thee Greet the Friends by Name.
THE PREFACE TO THE General Epistle of St. JƲDE. HAVING Proved, Note on Ver. 1. That Jude the Apostle was the Au∣thor of this Epistle, I have nothing more to add, by way of Preface to it, but the Words of the learned Dr. Leightfoot, which are these: As the Second Epistle of St. Peter, and this of Jude, are very near akin in Style, Matter, and Subject; so is it fairly conjectu∣rable that they were not far removed in time, speaking both of wicked Ones, and Wicked∣ness at the same Height and Ripeness. It may be Jude stands up in the Charge of his Brother James among the Circumcision of Ju∣daea, and directs his Epistle to all those who were sanctified and preserved in those Apo∣statizing Times, as his Brother had done to all the Twelve Tribes in general. In citing the Story of Michael the Arch-Angel contending with the Devil about the Body of Moses, Ver. 9. he doth but the same that St. Paul doth in naming Jannes and Jambres, 2 Tim. 3.8. namely, alledge a Sto∣ry which was current, and owned among the Nation, though there was no such thing in Scripture; and so he argueth with them from their own Authors and Concessions: For among the Talmudists there seems to be some∣thing like the Relicks of such a Matter, viz. of Michael and the Angel of Death dispu∣ting, or discoursing about fetching away the Soul of Moses. His alledging the Prophecy of Enoch, is an arguing of the very like Nature; as re∣citing, and referring to some known and common Tradition that they had among them. To this purpose the Book Sepher Jesher, an Hebrew Writer, speaketh of Enoch after such a Tenour; and in both these he useth their own Testimonies against themselves, as if he should have said at large, These Men speak evil of Dignities, whereas they have, and own a Story for current, that even Michael the Arch-Angel did not speak evil of the Devil, when he was striving with him about the Body of Moses. And whereas they shew and own a Prophecy of Enoch, of God coming in Judgment, these are the very Men to whom this Matter is to be applied. Which Words give a sufficient Answer to the only Ob∣jection made against the Authority of this Book; viz. That it cites Apocryphal Wri∣tings.
A Paraphrase with Annotations ON THE General Epistle of St. JUDE. Ver. 1. JUDE the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the Fa∣ther, and preserved by Jesus Christ, and called: (Gr. to the called who have been sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in (the faith of) Jesus Christ.) , the brother of James.] This Characteristick is sufficient to assure us this Epistle can belong only to Jude the Apostle, distinguished from Judas Iscariot by this Ti∣tle, that he was Judas the brother of James, Luk. 6.16. and to confirm the Title given to this Epistle by the Ancients, The general Epistle of Jude the Apostle; this being a plain Demonstration of the point. Grotius will have these words, the brother of James, to be the Addition of some Transcriber; but this being said without any proof, lays the whole Scripture uncertain, since every Man may say, if that will be sufficient without proof, that what he dislikes is the Addition of some Tran∣scriber.De Hab. Mul. l. 1. c. 13. Tertullian is positive that Enoch apud Judam Apostolum testimonium possidet, hath the testimony of Jude the Apostle to con∣firm his Prophecy; and among the Apostles of Christ,Hom. 7. in Josh. F. 156. E. Origen reckons Peter the Writer of two Epistles, and James, and Jude. That in this Epistle he doth not style himself an Apostle, can be no Argument to conclude he was not an Apostle, since the same Argument would prove that St. James, St. John, and even St. Paul, were no Apostles. Ver. 2. Mercy, and Peace, and Love, to you be multiplied. Ver. 3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common Faith, it was needful for me (Gr. I thought it necessary) to write unto you, and exhort you that you should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints. , the faith once deli∣vered to the Saints.] Here, saith Esthius, the Apostle insinuates that which the Fathers teach, viz. That nothing can be added to the Faith because it was delivered all at once as a Depositum, so to be kept that nothing ought to be added to it, or taken from it. Whence it is evident to a Demonstration, that the new Articles added by the Trent Council to the Apostles Creed, can be no Articles of Chri∣stian Faith, as being not delivered by Christ or his Apostles to the World, nor known un∣to the Christians for many Ages after their Decease. Ver. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, (Gr. for certain men have entred, viz. into the Church,) who were before or∣dained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of God into Lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. , before ordain∣ed to this condemnation.] Gr. Of whom it was before written that this should be their Con∣demnation. For that this cannot be meant of any divine Ordination or Appointment of them to eternal Condemnation, is evident, 1. Because it cannot be thought, without horrour, that God doth thus ordain Men to Perdition before they had a Being. 2. The Word  here relates not unto Sin, but Pu∣nishment, the fruit of Sin. So Mark 12.40. They shall receive  greater pu∣nishment. Rom. 2.3. Think'st thou this, oh man, that thou shalt avoid  the judgment, or punishment, of God? Now God ordaineth none to Punishment but Sin∣ners and ungodly Men, as these Persons here are styled. And, 3. These were Men of whom it was before written, or prophesied, that they should be condemned for their Wickedness;
for, v. 14. Enoch  prophesied before  (or of) these men, saying, That God would e  to do judgment upon all, and to reprove all the ungodly among them. And in the parallel place of St. Peter (2 Pet. 2.3.) their Punishment is styled  the punishment long ago denounced against them, viz. that they should be reserved unto the day of judgment to be punished, ver. 9. that they should perish in their corruption, ver. 12. they being the Men to whom the blackness of dark∣ness was reserved for ever, ver. 13. And this is the very thing that both St. Peter from ver. 4. to the 13. and St. Jude from this Verse to the 16th, set themselves to prove. And this also is the import of the word , Rom. 15.4.  Whatsoever things were before written, were before written for our instruction. And Gal. 3.1. See the Note there. He speaks thus of them, saith. OEcume∣nius, because St. Peter and St. Paul had before spoken of them, that in the last time there should come such Deceivers; and before them Christ himself, saying many shall come in my name and deceive many. And against this In∣terpretation of OEcumenius and Dr. Hammond there lies only this Objection, that the Judg∣ment mention'd by Christ and his Apostles not long before, cannot so properly be called  the Judgment long ago denoun∣ced, nor could these ungodly men be styled  the men prophesied of of old, on that account, so well as if this be re∣ferr'd to the Prophecy of Enoch, Jude 14. or to the words spoken before by the holy Pro∣phets. 2 Pet. 3.2. For  and  join'd with , seem plainly to import some ancient Time in which this Judgment was denounced against these ungodly men. , turning the Grace of God into Lasciviousness.] This agrees exactly with the lewd Doctrine of the Nicolaitans mention'd Note on 2 Pet. 2. and as exactly with the Do∣ctrine of Simon Magus, that they who believ'd in him and his Helena might freely do what they listed, secundum enim ipsius Gratiam sal∣vari, sed non secundum operas justas, Men be∣ing to be saved by his Grace and not by good Works, Iren. l. 1. c. 20. Theodoret Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 1. .] The words may be thus rendred, and denying Jesus Christ our only Master, God, and Lord. And that they ought to be thus rendred, is argued, 1. Because one Article only is put before all these words ; which shews they all belong to the same person. 2. Because the person who is here  the only Master God, is by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1. styled  the Lord that bought them: now it is Christ that bought us with the price of his own blood. To the first of these Arguments Grotius and Woltzogenius answer, That it is common in Scripture to affix one and the same Article to divers persons, and in particular to God the Father, and to Christ: as, v. g. No Fornicator or unclean person shall have any in∣heritance in the Kingdom  of Christ and of God, Eph. 5.5. I charge thee  before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Tim. 5.21. which 2 Tim. 4.1. is . And 2 Pet. 1.2. in the knowledge  of God and our Lord Jesus Christ. See 1 Tim. 6.13. To the second Argument it may be answered, That in Scripture not only Christ, but the Father, is said to have bought and purchased us, Acts 20.28. 1 Cor. 6.20. And that he is the Per∣son intended by St. Peter, see the Note there. And seeing the word  is never else∣where ascribed to Christ, I think our Version which puts the Comma after God, is without just exception. Note also, that Simon Magus denied both the God of Israel and Jesus Christ, declaring that he himself was thatJust. M. Apol. 2. p. 69. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. Theodoret. Haer. Fab. l. 1. c. 1. infi∣nite Power which appeared to the Samaritans as the Father, and to the Jews as the Son of God; and so he and his Followers denied both the Father and the Son. Ver. 5. I will therefore put you in remem∣brance, though you once knew this, how that the Lord having saved the people (of Israel, of whom you are a part,) out of the Land of Egypt, afterwards destroyed them that be∣lieved not. , them that believed not.] i. e. saith Grotius, those that obeyed not; for such shew they believe not at all, or not aright. But this Note is needless here; for the Scri∣pture expresly saith, they perished in the Wil∣derness because they believed not in God, but tempted, i. e. distrusted, him ten times, Num. 14.22. Psal. 106.24. And St. Paul, We see then they could not enter in because of Unbe∣lief, Hebr. 3.18, 19. Hebr. 4.2. Ver. 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. , not keeping their original estate, , but leaving their proper habitation.] That which we are to enjoy for ever, is in the style of Scripture called  our own, that which is proper to us; that which we
are to leave to others , as in those words, If you have been unfaithful in that which is another man's, who will give you that which is your own, Luke 16.12. These An∣gels being therefore primarily designed to live for ever in the highest Heavens, the Regions of Light and Bliss, they are here styled their proper Habitation. See Note on 2 Pet. 2.4. Ver. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha and the Cities about them, in like manner giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange (Gr. other) flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. , fornicating then, and going after other flesh, in like man∣ner] as these do now. Of both these Crimes the Nicolaitans were notoriously guilty: for, 1. They held that Matrimony was a mere hu∣mane Institution, that obliged no Man's Con∣science; and so did indiscretè vivere, with∣out making any difference betwixt one Wo∣man and another. And, 2. They practised unnatural Lusts and Sodomitical Copulations; as may be proved from the Testimonies ofDcuerunt . Const. Apost. l. 6. c. 10. p. 273. . Strom. l. 3. p. 436. Vide Reliqua. . Epiph. Haer. 25. §. 1, 2. Irenaeus, Clemens of Alexandria, the Con∣stitutions of the Apostles, Epiphanius, and others. , are set forth for an example, suffering the venge∣ance of eternal fire.] That this is spoken not of the Cities themselves, but of the Inhabi∣tants which dwell in them, i. e. of them who had given themselves over to Fornicati∣on, and gone after strange flesh, is evident; but yet I conceive they are said to suffer the vengeance of eternal Fire not because their Souls are at present punished in Hell Fire, but because they and their Cities perished by that Fire from Heaven which brought a perpetual and irrepairable Destruction on them and their Cities. For, 1. We have proved, Note on 2 Pet. 2.6.3.7. that even the Devils them∣selves are not tormented at present in that in∣fernal Fire, but only will be cast into it at the day of Judgment; and therefore neither do the wicked Sodomites yet suffer in those Flames. 2. I would admonish you, saith the Apostle, though you once knew this that Sodom and Gomorrah thus suffer'd the vengeance of eternal fire. Now from the History of Ge∣nesis, and the Writings of the Prophets, they might know that these Cities, and the Inha∣bitants of them, were overthrown  with a perpetual desolation, Zeph. 2.9. but they could not know from thence that their Souls were afterwards cast into Hell Fire. 3. , an Example, is to be taken from something visible to, or knowable by all who were to be terrified by it, especially when it is  an Example manifested, and proposed: now such was not the Punishment of their Souls in Hell Fire; but nothing was more known and celebrated among Authors Sacred and Profane, Jewish, Christian, and Heathen Writers, than  the Fire that fell down upon Pentapolis, or the five Cities of Sodom, they being men∣tioned still in Scripture as the Cities which God overthrew with a perpetual Desolation; in the Apocryphal Writings, the waste Land that yet smoaketh, and the Plants bearing fruit that never come to ripeness, being, saith the Book of Wisdom,  a testimo∣ny of their Wickedness, Wisd. 10.7. and of the divine Vengeance on them for it. The Author of the History of the Maccabees saith, that God destroying them by fire and brimstone, Macc. 3.2.5.  left them an Example to the Ages to come., &c. L. 2. de vita Mos. p. 512. D. Philo saith, that the Cinders, Brimstone, and Smoak, and the obscure flame as it were of a Fire burning, yet appearing about Syria, are Memorials of the perpetual Evils which hap∣pen'd to them.. De Bell. Jud. l. 5. c. 27. Josephus adds, that the things which are said of Sodom  are confirm'd by ocular Inspection, there being yet visible some Relicks of the Fire coming down from Heaven, and the shadows of the five Cities. This Region, say. Ep. 1. §. 17. Just. M. Apol. 2. p. 88. Ter∣tul. Apol. c. 40. Chrysost. in Ep. 1. ad Thessal. Hom. 8. , &c. Clemens Ro∣manus and other Christian Writers, being con∣demn'd by Fire and Brimstone, made it appa∣rent that God reserves the wicked for Punish∣ment and Stripes. EvenHaud procul inde campi quos ferunt olim uberes fulminum itu arsisse. Postea—igne coelesti flagrasse, Tac. Hist. p. 618. de coelo tactum testatur humus nigra & in cinerem soluta. Solin. c. 6. Vid. Strab. l. 16. p. 764. Diod. Sic. l. 19. p. 724. Heathen Wri∣ters do confess, that 'twas traditionally recei∣ved, that formerly there were fruitful Fields and large Cities which were afterwards consu∣med by Thunder and Lightning. And, 4. This Sense may farther be confirmed from the pa∣rallel place of St. Peter, who saith, that God reducing the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes, condemned (the Inhabitants of) them by that overthrow, purposing them for an Ex∣ample of his vindictive Justice upon them who afterwards should live ungodly: where plainly the , the Reduction of those Cities with their Inhabitants into Ashes, or the burning them by Fire and Brimstone falling down from
Heaven, is mentioned as the thing which placed them as an Example of God's Ven∣geance on the Ungodly to all future Ages; nor could any thing be a more fit Example of it; for since St. Peter hath informed us, That the Heavens and Earth that now are, are re∣served to Fire against the Day of Judgment and Destruction of ungodly Men, when the Earth and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up, what could be a more exact Em∣blem of that Day, when God will come in fla∣ming Fire to take Vengeance on the Wicked, and leave them burning with the Earth for ever, than was this burning of the Cities and the Inhabitants of Sodom, by Fire and Brimstone falling down from Heaven; nor is there any thing more common and familiar in Scripture, than to represent a thorow and irreparable Vastation, whose Effects and Signs should be still remaining, by the Word , which we here render Eternal. I will set thee , in Places desolate, of Old, Ezek. 26.20. I will destroy thee, and thou shalt be no more, , for ever, Ver. 21. I will make thee, , a perpetual Desola∣tion, and thy Cities shall be built no more, Chap. 35.9. See also Ezek. 36.2. Isa. 58.12. They have caused them to stumble in their Ways, to make their Land desolate, and , a perpetual Hissing, Jer. 18.15, 16. I will bring upon you, , an everlasting Reproach, and a perpetual Shame which shall not be forgotten, Jer. 23.40.25.9. I will make the Land of the Chaldaeans a perpetual Desolation, , they shall sleep, , a perpetual Sleep, Jer. 51.39. And this especially is threatned, where the De∣struction of a Nation or People is likened to the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah; thus Babylon shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, , it shall never be inhabited, Isa. 13.19, 20. And again Jer. 50.40. The like is said of Edom, Jer. 49.17, 18. and of Moab, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the Children of Ammon as Gomorrah, , a perpetual Desolation, Zeph. 2.9. Ver. 8. Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. , these filthy Dreamers.] These Dreamers of Dreams, or vain Imaginati∣ons, for I find not that the Word  bears any impure Sense, as  sometimes doth. The Apostle therefore seems to refer to their delirous Fancies of their filthy Aeones, Pru∣nice and Calacanth, which gave the rise to all the Filthiness the Nicolaitans committed; and after them the Gnosticks and the Carpo∣cratians. See the Note on 2 Pet. 2.11. And therefore Clemens of Alexandria saith of these Nicolaitans, and their Successors the Gnosticks and the Carpocratians, That (i) St. Jude speaks of them in these Words Prophetically, the Nicolaitans being only then in being, and the Gnosticks and Carpocratians succeeding them. Ver. 9. Yet Michael the Arch-Angel, when contending with the Devil, he disputed about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing Accusation, but said, The Lord re∣buke thee. , about the Body of Moses.] That the Body of the Jews, and their Service should be here called the Body of Moses, and that these Words are to be re∣ferred to Zach. 3.1. seems not very proba∣ble; seeing in that Prophet there is no men∣tion of Michael, or of the Body, or the Death of Moses. Nor doth Onias speak of the Body of Moses, 2 Macc. 15.12. but , of the whole Jew∣ish Nation. Moreover, That Moses was bu∣ried not by the Jews, we learn from the Scri∣pture, which saith, No Man knoweth of his Sepulchre unto this Day, Deut. 34.6. and thereforeDe Vita Mosis, l. 3. p. 538. D. Philo saith, He was buried , not by Men, but Angels, that there was an Alterca∣tion betwixt Michael the Arch-Angel, and Samael the Prince of Devils about the Death of Moses, we learn from theVide Libr. de Morte Mosis, p. 161. & seq. Traditions of the Jews, and 'tis most probable it was not only that his Sepulchre might be un∣known, least the Jews, who were prone to Idolatry, should Worship him, but about the Ascent of it into Heaven, he being taken away as Enoch and Elias were, and not dy∣ing the common Death of all Men, (which Satan contended he ought to do,Oecum. in locum. , for killing the Aegyptian,) but disappearing only. Hence the Jews say, Ascendit ad ministrandum Excelso, that he as∣cended to minister to the Lord: AndDe Sacr. Abel & Cain, p. 102. C. Phi∣lo saith, God brought him , say∣ing to him, stand with me, and that by the Word of God, , he was translated, whence he was present with Elias at the Transfiguration of our Lord. Ver. 10. But these speak evil of the things they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute Beasts; in those things they corrupt themselves. The Things they know not. See Note on 2 Pet. 2.12. . Strom. l. 3. p. 425.
Ver. 11. Wo unto them, for they are gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, and perished in the Gainsaying of Core. , in the way of Cain.] Se∣ducing their Brethren as he did, to their De∣struction. . Oecumenius. After the Error of Balaam.] See Note on 2 Pet. 2.15. , and perished in the Gainsaying of Core.] i. e. saith Grotius, shall certainly perish in it: For, as he, so they be∣ing unworthy, usurp , the Digni∣ty of Teachers: Being, saith St. Peter, , false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1. pretending to be Inspired Prophets, when in∣deed they are , Dreamers of vain Dreams; and to be Apostles, when they are only false Apostles. Ver. 12. These are Spots in your Feasts of Charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear (of Intemperance, or eating things offered to Idols): Clouds they are without Water, carried about of Winds; Trees whose Fruit withereth, without Fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the Roots. Ver. 13. Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own Shame; wandring Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever. , Spots.] , the Word signifies a Rock, saith Phavorinus. They are hollow Stones or Rocks in the Sea, against which Ships split, say the Lexicons; , Rocks which are pernicious to Navigators, who fall upon them unawares; to which these Persons are compared, because , they bring an unexpected Mischief upon them that feast with them. , in their Feasts of Charity.] I see no Necessity of referring this to the Chri∣stians Love-Feasts, celebrated after the Holy Sacrament. It is observed by Dr. Lightfoot, Note on 1 Cor. 10.16. that in the Evening of the Sabbath the Jews had their , or Communion, when the Inhabitants of the same City met together in a common Place to eat together; and that they had near to their Synagogues their Xenodochia, or Places where Strangers were entertained at the Pub∣lick Charge, and where they had their Dor∣mitory, these surely were more likely Places for such Persons to come to, and play their Pranks in, than the Love-Feasts of the Chri∣stians. , Clouds without Water, car∣ried about with the Wind.] Such Clouds, saith Oecumenius, refresh no Places with their Showers, for they have no Water in them; but they blacken and darken the Places over which they hang: Even so these Men distill the Waters of Life upon none; but blacken them with their filthy Practices, being mo∣ved to them by the impulse of Satan, as these Clouds are moved by the Winds. , Trees without Fruit, twice dead.] i. e. saith Oecumenius, By casting their Fruit and their Leaves too, which give a Beauty to them. And something like this, saith he, happens to these Men, who twice dye, ca∣sting of their Fruit, , and putting away the Beauty of a sober Conver∣sation, whence they are rooted up out of the Garden of the Church of God. , Raging Waves of the Sea.] To which, saith he, they are likened for the Instability of their Life, . , wandring Stars.] The Jews, saith Grotius, were wont to call them who took upon them to be Teachers, Stars: So the Apostle calls these False Teachers, Wan∣dring Stars; because they kept not their Sta∣tion, but wandred from the Truth, having no true Light in them. Ver. 14. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of (Gr. to) these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with Ten Thousand of his Saints, Ver. 15. To execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly Deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him. .] From these Words we learn that Enoch was a Prophet, which he shewed even in the Name he gave to his Son Methu∣salah, by the Spirit of Prophecy, which signi∣fies, saithPhaleg. l. 2. c. 3. Bochartus, That when he is dead shall ensue an Inundation of Waters. Whence that of Stephanus concerning Enoch, or Hannock, , there was an Ora∣cle given out, that when he was dead all Men should be destroyed. , he before prophesied to them.] This is said very appositely, the Pro∣phecy of Enoch being directed to them, who in like manner had corrupted their Ways by Carnality, or Fornication, Gen. 6.2. and by Idolatry, Chap. 4.26. , with his Ten Thousand Myriads.] i. e. With his glorious Atten∣dance of Myriads of Angels, so called, Heb.
12.22. So was he present at Mount Sinah when he delivered the Law, whence the Psal∣mist saith, The Chariot of God is Myriads of Angels. So the Chaldee, nd the Lord is among them as in Sinai, Psal. 68.18. So Deut. 33.2. The Lord cometh from Sinah with his Myriads of Holy Ones: With Myri∣ads of Holy Angels, say the Talmud of Jeru∣salem and Jonathan, and Zach. 14.5. The Lord my God shall come, and all his Holy Ones with him. i. e. And all his Guard of Angels. Those who attend him sitting on his Throne, Dan. 7.10. Or, Coming to execute Judgment, Matth. 16.27.25.31. 2 Thess. 1.7. Ver. 16. These are Murmurers, Complain∣ers walking after their own Lusts; and their Mouth speaketh great swelling Words, having Mens Persons in Admiration because of Ad∣vantage. Murmurers and Complainers.] I find no∣thing of this Nature applicable to the Nico∣laitans and Gnosticks, in Church-History, only the Apostle having said, Be ye not Idolaters nor Fornicators, with respect to them, 1 Cor. 10.7, 8. adds, Neither be ye Murmurers; Ver. 10. And the Pseud-Ignatius calls them, , Malos Calumniatores, Ep. ad Trall. § 11. But the Jews, of whom the Nicolai∣tans were a part, were notorious for their Complaints against the Providence which seemed to neglect, and deal so hardly with such Zealots for God as they were, as you may see in Josephus de Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 34. p. 990. B. , Great swelling Words.] This Dr. Hammond refers to Simon Magus, exalt∣ing himself above all that is called God, and making himself God; but  being only proud swelling Words, called by St. Pe∣ter in the parallel place, , Swelling Words of Vanity, by which they allu∣red through the Lusts of the Flesh to Lascivi∣ousness, those who were clean escaped from them that live in Error, 2 Pet. 2.18. I think it may more probably refer to the Words re∣lating to their Lusts, mentioned in the Note upon that Place. , because of Advantage.] See Note on 2 Pet. 2.3, 14. Ver. 17. But Beloved, remember ye the Words which were spoken before of (by) the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ: Ver. 18. How that they told you there should be Mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly Lusts. (See Note on 2 Pet. 3.2, 3.) Ver. 19. These are they that separate them∣selves, sensual, having not the Spirit. , separating them∣selves.] Of the Jewish Zealots we read, that they separated, and withdrew from all who were not circumcised, Acts 11.3. Gal. 2.12. But of the Nicolaitans and Gnosticks we read no such thing; but rather, that they assem∣bled with the Christians in their Feasts of Love, Ver. 12.2 Pet. 2.13. , therefore as it respects them, may rather sig∣nifie that they distinguished themselves from others as more perfect, and as , by NatureSeipsos, . Iren. l. 1. p. 26. C. . P. 28. B. Spiritual, stiling all other Christians, , Animal Men, which per∣haps made the Apostle return this Character upon them, as being truly sensual Persons. Ver. 20. But ye Beloved, building up your selves in your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost. , in the Holy Ghost.] The Holy Ghost in the New Testament, always signifies either the Person or some Afflatus or  of the Spirit; and seeing the Person of the Holy Ghost cannot here well be under∣stood, it seems to follow that the Apostle here speaketh of that Gift of Prayer, which by the Holy Spirit was conferr'd upon them in their Publick Assemblies, and Christian Exercises, where they prayed by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15. and spake to one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, being filled with the Spirit, Eph. 5.18, 19. Col. 3.16. And so this Passage is interpreted by. Oecumenius and Dr. Hammond. Ver. 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life. , keep your selves, &c.] Hence it is evident, That we are not so kept by the Power of God, but that something must be done on our parts, to preserve our selves in the Divine Favour. Ver. 22. And of some have Compassion, ma∣king a difference, (betwixt the Beguilers thro' Subtilty, and the beguiled thro' Simplicity.) , making, or putting a diffe∣rence.] Discerning which of them are to be treated with this Mercy, which of them with sharp reproof. That this is the true Sense of the Word , see Note on Rom. 14.23. Oecumenius and some Manuscripts read not , of some have Compassion, but
, some reprove, putting a difference betwixt them who are to be rejected, and who only are to be reproved. Ver. 23. And other save with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire, hating even the Gar∣ment spotted with the Flesh. , hating even the Gar∣ment, &c.] To hate and fly the Garments spotted with the Flesh, is only to hate every thing that doth defile, though in the least de∣gree, for so the leprous and unclean Garments did. This Text can therefore yield no Argu∣ment against the Use of our Ceremonies, till it be proved that there is some Defilement or Impurity in the Use of them. Ver. 24. Now unto him that is able (and willing to do his part, see Note on Rom. 14.4.) to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy, Ver. 25. To the only wise God (who alone is infinite in Wisdom, and hath that Wisdom from himself,) our Saviour, be Glory and Ma∣jesty, Dominion and Power (ascribed) now and ever. Amen.
A TREATISE OF THE True Millennium: Shewing that it is not a REIGN of PERSONS Raised from the Dead, BUT OF THE CHURCH Flourishing Gloriously for a THOUSAND YEARS AFTER THE Conversion of the Iews, AND THE Flowing in of all Nations to them thus Converted TO THE CHRISTIAN FAITH.
THE PREFACE. SCaliger was pleased to say, Calvinus sapuit quia non scri∣psit in Apocalypsin, Calvin was wise because he did not write upon the Revelations. I confess I do it not for want of Wisdom; that is, because I neither have sufficient Reading, nor Judgment, to discern the true Intendment of the Prophecies contained in that Book. But yet conceiving that I have either found out the true Sense of Those Words Chap. 20.4. which usually are alleged as the Foundation of the sup∣posed Millennium, or Resurrection of the Martyrs to reign with Christ on Earth a thousand years, or at the least have said what is sufficient to shew it is not necessary to understand them in a proper sense; I have comprised my Sentiments of that Controversie in the ensuing Treatise: which I submit to the Judgment of the Reader.
The Introduction. HAving employ'd some Thoughts upon the Mystery of the Conversion of the Jewish Nation, mention'd by St. Paul, Rom. 11. and comparing the glorious things he there says of it, with what the Prophets had foretold of the same thing in very high Expressions; I began to compare them with what was written in the Revelations concerning the New Jerusalem, the New Heavens, and New Earth, and the Bride of the Lamb made ready for a Marriage with him; and finding that this Bride was thought, by the best Commentators, to be the Jewish Church and Nation, Represented formerly by our Saviour as not ha∣ving on her Wedding-Garment, Matth. 22.12. not being ready to enter in with the Bridegroom, Chap. 25.10. that the New Heavens and New Earth were the very Things promised to the Jews, that the New Jerusalem was described in the very words of the Prophets and Jewish Writers, speaking of that glorious State they ex∣pected towards the End of the World; I was strongly inclined to conceive this glorious Conversion which, S. Paul saith, shall be even to the Gentile, , life from the dead, Rom. 11.15. and which is by the Prophets frequently re∣presented as the , i. e. the New Birth, Reviviscence, Resurrection of their Dead, Church, and Nation by the Messiah; so that  Death should be no more, Rev. 21.4. might be the very Resurrection intended by St. John, and the flourishing Condition and Union both of the Jewish and the Gen∣tile Church thus raised from the Dead, and so continuing in Peace and Plenty, with a great Encrease of Knowledge, and of Righteousness, and a Return of the Pri∣mitive Purity of Doctrine, and of Manners, might be the Reign of the Saints on Earth a thousand Years, which the Apostle mentions: This naturally led me to a Discourse of the Millennium; which being framed according to this new Hypo∣thesis, I shall now offer it to the Consideration of the Learned, in the following Method. 1. I shall state the true Millennium of the Ancients: shewing how far it was re∣ceived, and by whom opposed in the four first Centuries, and what were the par∣ticular Opinions which then obtained concerning the Millennium; and how far the Modern Patrons of the Millenary State have discarded the Receiv'd Opinion of the Ancients who embrac'd that Doctrine. 2. I shall shew what Reason I have to conceive that this Millennium is to begin with the Conversion of the Jewish Nation; and doth indeed relate to the most hap∣py State and flourishing Condition the Church of Christ shall at that time enjoy. 3. I shall attempt to Answer all that hath been offer'd to prove a proper and literal Resurrection of the Martyrs, and other Christian Sufferers, and Saints to Reign on earth a thousand years; considering the Pretences of them who place this Reign before the Conflagration of the World, as most of the Assertors of this Do∣ctrine do; and of the Reverend Dr. Burnet, who makes it to begin after the Con∣flagration of the World. And, 4. I shall offer some Arguments against this Doctrine of the Millennium, or of the literal Resurrection of the Saints and Martyrs, to Reign on Earth a thousand years.
OF THE MILLENNIUM OF THE Ancient Doctors of the CHURCH. CHAP. I. That the Doctrine of the Millennium was never generally received in the Church of Christ, is proved, 1. From the Testimony of Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, § I. Of Eusebius, Ori∣gen and Stephanus Gobarus, and the Distinction which then obtained betwixt the Allegorists and the Disciples of the Letter, § II. An Answer to the Pretended Tradition of Papias, mentioned by Irenaeus, § III. The Millennium of the Ancients differed from that which is now asserted by the most judicious of the modern Millennaries in Five Particulars: (1st,) The Ancients generally held, That the Temple, or City of Jerusalem should be new built. (2dly,) That all the Just were then to rise, and not Martyrs only. (3dly,) That Jesus Christ should then Reign on Earth. (4thly,) That they should fare Deliciously, and enjoy Corporal Delights. (5thly,) That they should get Children; all which Things are denied by the Modern Millennaries, § IV. The Necessity of these Doctrines according to the Literal Scriptures cited for the Millennium, by those Ancients who espoused that Doctrine, § V. This Error of some of the Fathers, as to the Millennium, w ll not invalidate their Authority as to any thing delivered by them as Eye-Witnesses, or which they deliver as the Practice of the Church of Christ in their Days, § VI. THE Patrons of the Millennium do usually say, Their Doctrine was both generally received in the Three First Centuries, and was derived by Tradition from the Apostles; and that the first Man who oppos'd it was Dionysius of Alexandria. In Oppositi∣on to this Pretence, I shall endeavour to make it appear, I. That this Opinion was never generally received in the Church of Christ. II. That there is no just Ground to think it was derived from the Apostles, but rather from a Mistake of the Words of the Author of the Apocalypse; or from the Notions of the Jews, and of the Sibylline Author. See L. 2, L 3, L. 4. III. That the new Patrons of the Millen∣nium differ in many Things of Moment from the Ancient Assertors of it, and have indeed scarce any Suffrage of Antiquity for that Millennium which they do so stifly maintain. And, § I. That this Opinion was never general∣ly received in the Church of Christ, appears sufficiently from the Confessions and very Words of the Two first Assertors of it, whose Writings are still extant; viz. Justin Martyr and Irenaeus. I begin with Irenaeus, because his Words will justifie the ancient Reading of the Words of Justin Martyr, against the Criticism upon them, or rather the Corru∣ption of them byP. 533, 534. Mr. Mead andDe Poenis & Satif. Human. l. 5. c. 7. Mr. Daille. Irenaeus therefore speaks thus,L. 5. c. 33. I am not ignorant that some among us, who be∣lieve in divers Nations, and by various Works, and who believing do consent with the Just, do yet endeavour, transferre haec, Gr. ,
to turn these things into Metaphors, or to carry them from their proper to an improper Sense, as Metaphors are wont to do: That this is his meaning is evident from these Words following,Quoniam igitur transferuntur quorundam sententiae ab Haereticis sermonibus, & sunt ignorantes Dispositiones Dei, & Mysterium Justorum Resurrectionis, & Regni quodest principium incorruptelae, per quod Regnum, qui digni fuerint, assuescun capere Deum. L. 5. c. 32. p. 495. But if some have at∣tempted to allegorize these things, they have not been found in all things consistent with themselves, and may be convinced from the Words themselves. Again he complains, ThatEt rursus, quoniam autem quidam ex his qui putantur rectè credidisse, supergrediuntur ordinem promotionis Justo∣rum, & modos meditationis ad incorruptelam, ignorant Haereticos sensus in se habentes, &c. C. 31. the Sentiments of some were carried away by the Discourses of the Hereticks; so that they were ignorant of the Appointments of God, and the Mystery of the Resurrection of the Just, and the Kingdom. Here then we may evidently discern Three Sorts of Men, 1. The Hereticks denying the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the Millennium. 2dly, The exactly Orthodox asserting both the Resurre∣ction and the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth. 3dly, The Believers who consented with the Just, and yet endeavour'd to allegorize, and turn into Metaphor all those Scriptures he had produced for a proper Reign of Christ, and who had Sentiments rather agreeing with those Hereticks who denied, than those ex∣actly Orthodox, who maintain'd this Reign of Christ on Earth. Now these being almost a Translation of the Words of Justin Martyr, they vindicate the reading of all the Manu∣script Copies of that Writer, and exclude the Bold Criticism of Daille and Mr. Mead.; Dial. cum Tryph. p. 306. Tell me truly, says Trypho, Do you (Christians) indeed confess that Jerusalem shall be built again, and that your People shall be gathered together (there,) and rejoice with Christ, together with the Patriarchs, and Pro∣phets, and those of our Nation, or those who are made Proselytes before the coming of your Christ, or before you expect your Christ shall come (to Judgment?) or do you only confess this, that thou mayest seem to overcome us in Questions? Here you see that Justin Martyr did before , confess these things, as he doth plainly, p. 243. where Trypho having put the Question thus, What! Do you say that none of us shall have any Inheritance in the Holy Mount of God? Justin Martyr replies, I say not so, but that the Gentiles who repent, and believe in Christ, shall inherit (it) with all the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and the Just which proceed from Jacob; and therefore he here answers thus,. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 306. I have before confessed that I and many others are of this Mind, that these things shall happen. But then again I have intimated to you, That many Christians of a pure and pious Judgment, do not own this. (I speak of Christians of a pure and pious Judgment,) for as for those who are called Christians, but indeed are Atheists, and un∣godly, and Hereticks, I have told you already, that they teach things wholly blasphemous, atheistical, and absurd, (and therefore are not to come into the Account of Christians.) If therefore you have met with some of them who blaspheme the God of Abraham, Isaac and Ja∣cob, and deny the Resurrection of the Dead, that confess not this, you are not to esteem them Christians, (or to take an estimate of the Doctrines of the Christians from them.) They indeed deny the Resurrection of the Flesh and the Millennium,. P. 307. But I and all Christians who are exactly and in all things Orthodox, know there will be a Resurrection of the Flesh, and a Millennium in Jerusalem built, adorned, and enlarged. Here then, as in Irenaeus, is a plain distinction of three sorts of Men, (1.) Of Hereticks, that were , en∣tirely Blasphemers of the God of Israel, and Denyers of the Resurrection of the Flesh, and consequently of the Millennium which suppo∣sed this Resurrection. 2dly, Of Christians who were , in all things Ortho∣dox, who owned both the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the Millennium: and Justin Mar∣tyr being of this Opinion, and declaring here that he thought it a Doctrine delivered by God, it could not be expected that he should affirm of them that held it not, that they were of a right Opinion in all things. 3dly, Of many Christians of a pure and pious Judgment, who did not own this Millennium. Object. But where, saith Mr. Daille, had he made mention before of any such? I answer with another Question, Where had he made mention before of the many who confessed the Millennium, as he here saith he had? Mr. Daille should have considered that Justin's
Memory could not serve him to write down all he had discoursed with Trypho, or that he might not think that part of his Discourse necessary to be afterwards committed unto Writing; and then this Objection would not have seemed of force sufficient to have autho∣rized him to change Justin's words, without any consent of Copies, into the direct contra∣dictory words, and for Christians  of a pure Judgment, to read Christians  of an impure Judgment, since such bold Criticisms will evacuate both the Sense and Force of any Testimony. §. II. 2dly, This is still farther evident from the Ancient Writers of the Church, who plainly tell us, that this was a particular Opi∣nion of some Doctors of the Church, and ne∣ver was received by all. It had its Rise, saith Eusebius, from Papias, a Man of slender Judg∣ment;. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 39. But the Antiquity of the Man pre∣vailed with many of the Ecclesiasticks to be of that Opinion, particularly with Irenaeus, and if there were any other of the same Judgment with him. Now he that confesseth that most of the Ecclesiasticks were of that Opinion, plain∣ly denies that all were of it. He that parti∣cularly speaks of Irenaeus, adding if there were any other of the same Judgment, seems to in∣timate they were not many. Origen, in his Philocalia [c. 26. p. 99.] saith, they were only  some that held this Doctrine, and that so clancularly that it had not yet come to the ears of the Heathens: and in his Prolegomena to the Canticles [f. 69. B.] that they were only Simpliciores quidam some of the simpler sort of Christians. Besides, of all the Fathers of the Christian Church, none hath spoken more severely, and more contemptibly of that Do∣ctrine than Origen, who represents it as a wicked Doctrine, a Reproach to Christianity; the Heathens, saith he, having better Senti∣ments than these. He therefore being then the great Doctor of the Church, and continu∣ing in great Authority amongst all Church∣men for above an hundred years; his Scholars being also the most celebrated Doctors of that Age, and one of them, viz. Dionysius Alexan∣drinus, undertaking to confute this Doctrine; and his Philocalia, where we find these severe Sayings, being a Collection of the two great Lights of the fourth Century, St. Basil and Gregory the Divine; it cannot be doubted but the Opinion then lost ground daily, and was generally decryed by the Learned of those Centuries. In a word,Apud Photium Cod. 232. p. 894. Stephanus Goba∣rus, in his Account of Opinions in which the Fathers differed from each other, reckons this as the tenth, That the Just shall rise first, and live deliciously a thousand years, eating, drink∣ing, and getting Children; and that there should be no precedence in the Resurrection, no mil∣lennary Delights, no Marriage then. 3dly, This will be more evident if it be con∣sider'd, that as the Doctors of the Church were then of different Opinions, so were they then distinguished by different Names, as they who denied the Millennium, saith Irenaeus, attempted to allegorize the places produced by others for it, so had they upon that ac∣count the name of Allegorists, and there∣fore Nepos, a Man, saith Eusebius, [l. 7. c. 24.] from Dionysius of Alexandria, other∣wise Orthodox, but a Writer for the Millen∣nium, styled his Book, , or Refutation of the Allegorists. Accordingly in, l. 2. c. 12. f. 135. B col. 1. B c. Origen, they who deny the Millennium, are , they who interpret the Sayings of the Prophets by a Trope, and they who assert it, are stiled Solius literae discipuli, Disciples of the Letter of the Scripture only; the first saith he, assert Horum vim figuraliter intelligi debere, the Pas∣sages which they produce from Scripture ought to be figuratively understood; the others, saith he, understand the Scripture Judaico sensu, after the manner of the Jews.. Haer. 77. §. 26. p. 1031. Epiphanius speaking of the Millennium asserted by Apolli∣naris, saith, There is indeed a Millennium mentioned by St. John, but the most, and those pious Men, look upon those Words as true in∣deed, but to be taken in a spiritual sense. And here it may deserve to be observed by the by, that the Primitive Fathers derived al∣most all their considerable Errors from the Jews, viz. That Angels had to do with Wo∣men, and begot Giants of them, That the World was to end soon after the coming of the Messiah, That Elias was in person to usher in his second Advent. § III. 2dly, As for the pretended Traditi∣on from the Apostle John touching this Do∣ctrine, it is only mentioned by Irenaeus, as re∣ceived from Papias, and the Words in which it is delivered are sufficient to demonstrate the incredibility, and the apparent folly of it: For these Elders pretend to have heard from St.
John, these Romantick Words,Quemadmodum Presbyteri meminerunt, qui Joannem Discipulum Domini viderunt, audisse de eo, quemadmodum de temporibus illis docebat Dominus & dicebat, veniet dies in quibus vineae nascentur singulae decem millia palmitum habentes, & in uno palmite dena millia brachiorum, & in uno vero palmite dena millia flagellorum, & in unoquo{que} flagello dena mil∣lia botruum, & in unoquo{que} botra dena millia acinorum, & unumquodque acinum expressum dabit viginti quin{que} metretas vini, & cum eorum apprehenderit aliquis Sanctorum hotrum, alius clamabit botrus, ego melior sum, me sume, per me Dominum benedic, l. 5. c. 33. The days shall come in which there shall be Vines which shall severally have ten thousand Branches, and every of these Branches shall have ten thousand lesser Branches, and every of these Branches shall have ten thousand Twigs, and every one of these Twigs shall have ten thousand clusters of Grapes, and in every one of these clusters shall be ten thou∣sand Grapes, and every one of these Grapes, being pressed, shall give twenty five Metretas, (that is, according to the mildest computati∣on, 275 Gallons) of Wine; and when one shall take hold of one of these sacred Bunches, a∣nother shall cry out, I am a better Bunch, take me, and by me bless the Lord; to omit what he says from the same Tradition of e∣very Grain of Wheat, and of Apples, Seeds and Herbs. Now can any Man be so wholly bereft of sense, as to imagine this stuff could ever come out of the mouth of an Apostle? No certainly, he had it only from the convert∣ed Jews, in whose Writings some Learned Persons have informed me, the words cited by Irenaeus from Papias, are yet to be found. As for Papias the only Voucher of this Tradition, Eusebius informs us, he was a man of a very slender Judgment, as the Story cited by Ire∣naeus from the fourth Book of his Discourse may abundantly convince us, there being scarcely any things in the most infamous of Romish Legends, more fabulous than, as Euse∣bius truly saith, his traditional Relations were. §. IV. 3dly, That the new Patrons of the Millennium differ in many things of moment from the Antients, and have indeed scarce any Suffrage of Antiquity for that Millen∣nium they maintain, will be apparent from a just representation of the Millennium of the Antients: For, 1. The Ancient Millennaries generally held, that the Temple or the City of Jerusalem should be rebuilt, and that the Land of Ju∣daea should be the habitation of those who were to Reign on Earth a thousand years. So Justin M. [Dial. cum Tryph. p. 243. c.] tells the Jews, that the believing Gentiles should then dwell  in the holy Mount, and that they should then acknowledge him [p. 259. c.] , in the same place of Jerusalem where they had crucified him: He confesses also to Try∣pho, [p. 306. B. 307 B.] , that the place of Jerusalem should be built, and that the Saints should spend a thousand years in Jerusalem, built, adorned and augmented, and that all Christians entire∣ly Orthodox knew this would be so; and there∣fore they all, saith he, [p. 312. B.] expected, , Christ to appear in Jerusalem.Restituet illos in terram ipsorum quam dedit patribus ipsorum, Iren. l. 5. c. 34. & c. 35. Sed in Regni temporibus Revocata (l. renovata) terra à Christo & reaedificata Hierusalem. In the times of that King∣dom Jerusalem shall be built, saith Irenaeus, and the Jews shall be restored to the Land he gave to their Fathers.In terra cum his ipse regnabit, & condet sanctam civitatem, & erit Regnum justorum mille annis, Epit. §. 11. p. 758. He (i. e. Christ) shall build the holy City, saith Lactan∣tius, and there shall be the Reign of the Just for a thousand years. St. Barnaby is very po∣sitive,. §. 16. that the very temple which was destroyed by their Enemies shall be rebuilt glo∣riously. They feign to themselves, saith Origen,, l. 2. c. 12. that the terrestrial Jerusalem shall be re∣built with pretious Stones, and that the Alient shall be their Servants to rebuild it.Adversus Irenaeum Dionysius Ecclesiae Alexandrinae Pontisex elegantem scribit librum, irridens mille annorum fa∣bulam, & auream at{que} gemmatam in terris Hierusalem instaurationem Templi, &c. Hieron. praefat. in lib. 18. com. in Isaiam. Hence Dionysius of Alexandria in his Book writ a∣gainst them, derides their Golden Jerusalem upon Earth, adorned with Jewels, and the re∣storation of the Temple. Whereas scarce any of our new Millennaries dare assert, that this shall be the place of the Habitation of the raised Saints, and one of them makes the whole Earth to become a Paradise for the Reception of them. 2dly, They held this Resurrection was not to be confined to the Martyrs only, but that all the Just were then to rise, and Reign with Christ; this Justin M. confesses touching all Christian People, all the believing Gentiles, and the just Progeny of Jacob in the forecited places. Irenaeus frequently declares of the Just in general, that they shall arise to inhe∣rit the Promises.l. 3. contr. Mar. c. ult. verba, vide infra. Tertullian affirms, that some shall rise sooner, and some later, but that all the Just shall rise within the time of the Millennium. This Millennium, saith La∣ctantius,Verum ille cum deleverit injustitiam, ac justos qui à principio fuerint ad vitam restauraverit, mille annis inter ho∣mines versabitur, eos{que} justissimo imperio reget. Lib. 7. c. 24. p. 722. belongs to all the Just which e∣ver
were from the beginning of the World. Whereas the Millennaries of this Age do ge∣nerally, with Dr. Burnet,B. 4. ch. 4. p. 151, 152. say the first Resurrection, and the Reign of Christ seem to be appropriated to the Martyrs, Rev. 20.4. Moreover, the Antients extend this Reign on Earth, not only to the Dead, but to the Just also who shall be then alive at this first Resurrection; this being a necessary conse∣quent of the former Doctrine, that this Mil∣lennium belongs to all the Just. Thus Irenaeus, amongst those who are to enjoy the Millen∣nium, reckonsEt illos quos Dominus in carne inveniet expectantes eum de coelis, & perpessos tribulationem, qui & effugerint iniqui manus. Lib. 5. c. 35. those whom the Lord shall find in the flesh expecting him from Heaven, who having suffered Tribulation, did neverthe∣less escape the hands of the Wicked.Tum qui erunt in corporibus vivi non morientur, sed per eosdem mille annos infinitam multitudinem generabunt, & erit Soboles eorum Sancta. Lib. 7. c. 24. p. 722. Then they that are found living shall not die, saith Lactantius: Whereas 'tis inconsistent with the Hypothesis of Dr. Burnet, that any of the Just should be then living, since this Mil∣lennium only begins after the Conflagration of the World, and the burning of all things that are in it. 3dly, The Antients generally consent in this, that Jesus Christ shall then come down from Heaven, and be seen on Earth, and Reign there with his Servants. Papias, the first Asser∣tor of this Doctrine, declares that. Apud Euseb. l. 3. c. 39. p. 112. c. it shall be a Reign of Christ bodily upon Earth. Justin M. tells the Jews that they should then see him whom they had pierced, and this in that very place of Jerusalem where they had cru∣cified him, that both they and Christians should then be gathered together, and rejoice with him. Victorinus saith,In qua regnabunt Justi in terra crescentes ex visione Domini. c. 35. . c. 36. this is that true Sabbath in quo Christus cum electis suis reg∣naturus est, in which Christ is to Reign with his Elect; and Lactantius saith expresly, That Mille annos inter homines versabitur, he shall be conversant with Men a thousand Years.De fabrica Mundi apud D. Doct. Cave, p. 104. Epit. p. 722. Irenaeus seems not so clear as to this matter; yet he declares the Just shall Reign on Earth encreasing by the Vision of Christ; for saith he, Christ will be every where seen as Men are worthy to see him: That which seems most expresly in him to relate to this Affair, is this, that discoursing of our Lord's Promise to drink new Wine with his Disciples in the Kingdom of Heaven, he declares,Ne{que} autem sursum insuper coelesti loco constitutus cum suis potest intelligi bibens vitis generationem. l. 5. c. 33. This cannot be done by him whilst he remains in those Celestial Regions. But Nepos was ex∣press in this, That. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 24. after this Resurrection the Kingdom of Christ was to be on Earth a thousand years, and the Saints were to Reign with him in Pleasures, or faring deliciously there; and therefore Dionysius saith of him, and the Brethren that magnified his Book, That. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 24. p. 271. they had no sublime or magnificent thoughts of the glorious and divine Advent of our Lord, or of our Resurrection, and our ga∣thering together, and assimilation to Christ, but hoped then for little and mortal things, and such as men now hope for in the Kingdom of God. 4thly, They all declare they shall then fare deliciously, and shall enjoy the richest Wines, and most delicious Fruits, build Houses, plant Vineyards, and eat the Fruits of them: Thus Justin M.Dial. cum Tryph. p. 308. understands those Words of E∣saiah (ch. 65.21.) of the Millennium, viz. they shall build Houses, and inhabit them, and they shall plant Vineyards, and eat the Fruit of them. And Irenaeus saith,Haec sunt in regni temporibus, hoc est in septima die, quae est verum justorum Sabbatum, in quâ nonfacient omne ter∣tenum opus, sed adjacentem habebunt-paratam mensm à Deo pascentem eos epulis omnibus. l. 5. c. 33. . Apollinaris apud Epiph. Haer. 77. p. 1032. They shall have a Table prepared for them by God, who shall feed them with Dainties; adding, that the Promises he had cited, Creaturae epulatio∣nem significant, do signifie the Banquets they should have upon the Creature: Hence doth he tell us of the prodigious Clusters of Grapes, and Ears of Corn, the Vines and the Earth shall then bring forth.Chap. 34. Terra vero aperiet faecunditatem suam, & uberrimas fruges suâ sponte generabit, Rupes montium melle sudabnt, per rivos vina decurrent, & flumina lacte inundabunt. l. 7. c. 24. The Earth, saith Lactantius, shall open its fertility, and of its own accord produce Fruits plentifully, the Rocks of the Mountains shall sweat with Honey, Wines shall run down with Streams, and the Rivers flow like Milk. Of this Opinion doubtless was Tertullian in his Book de spe fidelium: And Nepos, who promised, saith Dionysius of Alexandria, a thousand Years of corporal De∣lights on Earth. Accordingly Gennadius saith,
Non quod ad cibum vel ad potum pertinet ficut Papia Authore, Irenaeus, Tertullianus, & Lactantius acquiescunt, ne{que} post (l. per) mille annos post resurrectionem Regnum Christi in terra futurum, & sanctos cum illo in deliciis regnaturos speramus, sicut Nepos docuit, qui primam justorum resurrectionem, & secundam impiorum confinxit. Eccles. dogm. c. 55. In the Divine Promises we believe nothing concerning Meat and Drink, as Irenaeus, Ter∣tullian, and Lactantius teach from their Au∣thor Papias, nor of the Reign a thousand Years with Christ on Earth after the Resurrection, and the Saints reigning deliciously with him, as Nepos taught. St. Austin therefore saith of this Opinion,Sed cum eos qui tunc resurrexerint dicunt immoderatissimis carnalibus epulis vacaturos, in quibus cibus sit tant & potus ut non solum nullam modestiam teneant, sed modum quo{que} ipsius incredulitatis excedant, nullo modo ista possunt nisi de carnalibus credi. De C. D. l. 20. c. 7. That it might be tolerable if they mentioned any spiritual Delights which the Saints might enjoy by Christs Presence; but since they affirm, that they who then rise shall enjoy carnal and immoderate Banquets of Meat and Drink without modesty, these things can only be believed by carnal Men. And because all this Plenty could not be procured and en∣joyed, these Houses could not be built, nor these Vineyards planted, nor this Wine brought into the Fat, nor this Corn into the Barn, thresh'd, ground, and made fit for these new raised Inhabitants, without hands: The An∣tients have made Provision for this also, tel∣ling us, That they shall beBarnab. §. 6. , such as shall lord it upon Earth; and thereforel. 5. c. 33. Irenaeus saith that which was spoken to Jacob, The Nations shall serve, and Princes shall bow down to thee, Gen. 27.27, 28. Ad tempora Regni sine contradictione perti∣net, quando regnabunt Justi surgentes a mor∣tuis, without all contradiction belongs to this Millennary Kingdom.Gentes vero non extinguentur omnino, sed quidam relinquentur in victoriam Dei ut triumphentur à justis, & ut subj∣gentur perpetuae servituti. Lact. l. 7. c. 24. vide Epit. §. 11. The Nations shall not utterly be destroyed, saith Lactantius, but some of them shall be left to be triumphed over by the Just, and subjected to perpetual Slave∣ry.Quinetiam ministros deliciarum harum dandos sibi alienigenas putant, quos vel Aratores habeant, vel structores paris∣tum à quibus diruta ipsorum & collapsa civitas extruatur, & arbitrantur quod facultates eorum accipiant ad edendum, & in divitiis eorum dominentur ut veniant & afferant sibi aurum, & thus, & lapides pretiosos. , l. 2. c. 12. They think, saith Origen, that A∣liens shall be given them to be Ministers of their Delights, who shall either serve at the Plow, or be their Masons, and Carpenters to build up their fallen City, and they suppose they shall have of their Provisions to eat, and have dominion over their Riches, so that they shall come and offer to them Gold and Frankincense, and pretious Stones. Dr. Burnet must either produce these servile Nations, as he hath done Gog or Magog, out of the Mud, or his Opinion must fall into it, unless he hopes to avoid this, by saying, that in this State it will be part of their Diversion and Entertainment to learn Mechanicks. p. 213. And because Men can hardly do this whole business without Beasts, the Ancients have made Provision of them also, subjecting to them not only Sheep, and Goats, and Oxen or Bulls, but Wolves, and Bears, and Leo∣pards, and Lions, whichOportet subjecta esse omnia animalia homini. l. 5. c. 33. with all other Animals, saith Irenaeus, shall be then subject to Man. And that the Doctor may not be at a loss for the production of these Beasts,Apud Photium Cod. 232. p. 894. Stephanus Gobarus informs him the Doctrine of the Antients was this, That the Just should rise first, , and all those living Creatures with them. Now the New Millennaries as they say little of these Slaves, and these Brute Beasts, who are so necessary for the enjoyment of the universal Plenty, and the Goods of Fortune prepared in this State, so are they shie of owning Futuras corporis voluptates & luxurias, such Luxu∣ries and Bodily Pleasures, as Origen saith,. l. 2. cap. 12. p. 135. B. the Millennaries of his time did expect. For, 5thly, In their Millennium they were not only to Feast and Junket it, but also to get Children.Ipsi sunt de quibus ait Propheta, & derelicti multiplicabuntur in terra, & quotquot ex credentibus ad hoc praeparai Deus ad derelictos multiplicandos in terra, & sub regno sanctorum fieri & ministrari huic Jerusalem. l. 5. c. 35. The Virgins, saith Ire∣naeus, shall rejoice in the Assemblies of the Young Men, and they that are left shall be mul∣tiplied upon Earth: Accordingly he speaks of some Believers whom God had prepared to multiply those who were left upon the Earth to be under the Kingdom of the Saints, and minister to this Jerusalem. They shall beget an infinite multitude, saith Lactantius,Qui remanserint multiplicabuntur super terram. l. 5. c. 34. and their Seed shall be holy: To their other Luxuries, saith Origen,. l. 2. c. 12. they add, Nup∣tiarum conventiones, & filiorum procreationes etiam post resurrectionem futuras, the Solem∣nities of Marriage, and the Procreation of Children even after the Resurrection: And again,. Com. in Matth. ed. Huet. p. 498. E. They think, saith He, that after the Resurrection, we shall eat, and drink cor∣poreal
Meats, and shall use those conjugal Du∣ties by which our Prayers are hindred, and which cannot be performed without some im∣purity: And a third time. Philocal. cap. 26. p. 99. they believe, That after the Resurrection we shall, accord∣ing to the chief Promises of the Gospel, eat, and drink, and as some of them say, beget Children; these things, saith He, should they ce to the Ears of Heathens, would lay a great imputation of Folly upon Christianity, since many Heathens have better Opinions than these are: So much are they mistaken who reckon Origen among the Patrons of the Millennium. Stephanus Gobarus gives us the Opinion of the Millennaries in these words,. Apud Phoc. Cod. 232. p. 894. The Just shall rise first, and for a thou∣sand Years shall fare deliciously, eating, and drinking, and getting Children, and after this shall be the general Resurrection. Methodius is the only person who. Apud Epiph. Haer. 64. §. 32. denies they shall be thus employ'd after the Resurrection; and with him doubtless all our Modern Millenna∣ries do agree, as knowing this unworthy to be the matter of a Gospel Promise. §. V. Moreover, if we consider the Scrip∣tures on which the Ancients grounded this Millennium, we shall perceive it necessary that all these Doctrines should be maintain∣ed by them. For, 1. That the Temple, or City of Jerusalem should be new built, and that the Land of Ju∣dea should be the Habitation of those who are to enjoy this New Heaven, and Earth, can never reasonably be denied by those who interpret the Sayings of the Prophets literally, since they so plainly, and so fully speak of a Mount Zion to be established upon the top of the Mountains, Isa. 2.2. — 27.13. — 56.7. and of God's Promises to beautifie the place of his Sanctuary the House of his Glory, and to make the place of his Feet glorious, Ch. 60.7, 13. and of all Nations flowing in to her, and being gathered to her, and of all Nations and Tongues coming to see her Glory, Isa. 60.5.66.18. when God had brought them a∣gain into their own Land. 2dly, That this Resurrection must belong to all faithful Christians, and that they must all Reign with Christ on Earth will follow from the literal interpretation of those words of St. John,. Just. M.  p. 308. Thou hast redeemed us to God by thy Blood out of every Kindred and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and hast made us to be Kings, and Priests to God, and we shall Reign on Earth, Rev. 5.9, 10. For, according to the import of these words, if, as Dr. Burnet saith, they belong to the first Resurrecti∣on, all that have been redeemed by the Blood of Christ, must Reign on Earth. This fol∣lows also from those words, I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and (of them) which had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, and which had not received his mark upon their Foreheads, nor upon their Hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thou∣sand Years, Rev. 20.4. for, they who wor∣shipped not the Beast, are all they whose Names were written in the Book of Life, Rev. 13.8.17.8. This follows from St. Peter's New Heaven, and New Earth, if truly interpreted by Dr. Burnet of this Resurrection; for these, saith He, we Christians do expect, and there∣fore are concerned to be found of him without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.13, 14. This follows from the Words of St. Paul, if they belong to the Millennium, as he saith they do, for they introduce the whole Creation groaning to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and all that had the first Fruits of the Spirit, groaning for the Adoption, i. e. for the Redemption of their Bodies from Corrup∣tion, Rom. 8.16, 23. 3dly, They must bring Christ from Heaven to Reign on Earth, who contend that this Reign is the very time of the restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. for the Heavens are on∣ly to contain him till that time, and who in∣fer this Reign of Christ from those Words, They that have part in the first Resurrection, shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall Reign with him a thousand Years; for if they Reign on Earth without him, they do not Reign there with him. Moreover, if he con∣tinue still at the right hand of God, with what propriety is this Resurrection called, , the presence, the appearance of our Lord, and that from Heaven. 4thly, That in this Millennium they must fare deliciously, drink precious Wines, and have those splendid Banquetings of which the Fathers often speak, must follow from the
application of all those Passages to this State, which say, The meek shall inherit the Earth, that they shall drink new Wine with Christ in his Kingdom, that they shall receiveQuae enim sunt in hoc seculo centupla, & prandia exhibita, & caenae quae redduntur pauperibus, hac sunt in Regni temporibus. Iren. l. 5. c. 33. an hundred sold increase of Goods and Lands, that there shall be then a recompence of their Alms given, and their Feasts made for the Poor, and from all the Prophets say of the fruitfulness of the Earth, and of the temporal Blessings they shall then enjoy. 5thly, That the Nations shall then serve them, and even build up Jerusalem for them, cannot be denied by them who literally inter∣pret those Words of the Prophets, The Sons of Strangers shall build up thy Walls, and their Kings shall minister to thee: The Sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy Feet: And the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, Isa. 60.10, 12, 13. And Strangers shall stand and feed your Flocks, and the Sons of the Alien shall be your Plow∣men, and your Vine-dressers; ye shall eat the Riches of the Gentiles, and in their Glory shall you boast your selves, Ch. 61.5. See also Ch. 49.22, 23.] And, 6thly, That they shall have Wives and Children, and as Irenaeus saith, shall be mul∣tiplied upon the Earth, must follow from the literal Exposition of our Saviour's Promise, That they who have lost, or forsaken Wife, or Children for his sake, shall receive an hun∣dred fold; for Children cannot lawfully be begotten without Wives, and the use of the Marriage-bed: And lastly, whereas the Mil∣lennium of the Reverend Doctor Burnet is to begin after the Conflagration of the World, that of the Antients is still placed before it; we expect it, saith Justin Martyr,. Dial. p. 306. before Christ's coming to Judgment.Haec est Ratio Regni terreni post cujus mille Annos intra quam aetatem includitur sanctorum Resurrectio pro meritis maturius vel tardius resurgentium, tunc & mundi destructione, & judicii conflagratione commissa, demutti in atmo in Angelicam substantiam scilicer per illud incorruptelae super indumentum transferrentur in coeleste Regnum. Contr. Marcion. l. 3. c. ult. After this, saith Tertullian, shall be the destruction of the World, and the Conflagration at the day of Judgment, and we shall be changed in a mo∣ment into an Angelical Substance.P st haec renovabit Deus mundum, & transformabit justos in figuram Angelorum ut immortalitatis veste do∣ti rviant Deo in sempiternum. Epit. c. 11. p. 759. God shall after this reign on Earth a thousand Years, renew the World, saith Lactantius. It therefore deserves to be admired, that learned Men with so much confidence, make use of these Testimonies of Scripture, and these Authorities of the Fathers, to establish their Millennium, and yet so stifly should de∣ny the Consequences which flow so natural∣ly from those Scriptures, and reject what these Antients so generally delivered as a part of that Doctrine. But to insist no longer on these things, hence I suppose it evident, First, That the Doctrine of the Millennium was not the general Doctrine of the Primi∣tive Church from the times of the Apostle to the Nicene Council, as Doctor Burnet hath asserted; for then it could have made no Schisms in the Church, asB. 4. ch. 6. p. 173. . Euseb. l. 7. c. 24. Dionysius of Alexandria saith it did, declaring how fully he confuted it, and reconciled the Brethren that were contending about it, and prevailed upon Coracius the Author, and Ring-leader of this Doctrine, to own he was convinced of his Error, and promise he would no more embrace, or discourse of it to the people. 2dly, That the old Doctrine of the Mil∣lennium differed in many material Points from that which is asserted by the new Pa∣trons of it. §. VI. If any Man think it not safe to dis∣cover so much of the nakedness of the Fa∣thers as I have done in this Chapter, I An∣swer: First, That I think it more safe than to let it be confidently said and believed, that they were all Millennaries from the first to the fourth Century, seeing that shakes the Foun∣dations of Episcopacy, and the Translation of the Sabbath to the Lord's Day, and other Constitutions derived from the Apostles. 2dly, I Answer, That this Mistake of the Fathers in a matter which they received from the Traditions, and Notions of the Jews, will not invalidate their Authority in any thing delivered by them as witnesses of what they saw with their own eyes, or declared to have been then the practice of the Church of Christ, nor will it affect their Testimony in any other Doctrine which they neither did or could receive, only on the Authority of the Jewish Doctors.
CHAP. II. How far I differ from the Ancient and Modern Millennaries, and in what I agree with them, §. I. The Proposition that the true Millennium is only a Reign of the Converted Jews, and of the Gentiles flowing in to them, Ibid. Where it is noted, 1. That all spiritual Blessings have been still conveyed from the Jews to other Nations. 2. That there will be a glorious Conversion of the Jews to the Christian Faith, §. II. That the Description of this Conver∣sion of the Jews made by their own Prophets and Writers, answers fully to the Millennium of St. John, which he speaks of in the very words of the said Prophets, §. III. The Chara∣cters which the Patrons of the Millennium give of those times accord exactly with the Cha∣racters given by the Prophets of the Conversion of the Jews, §. IV. The Prophets seem to intimate that this Conversion shall be effected by a full influence of the Holy Ghost upon them, §. V. All the Passages cited to this Effect from the Jewish Writers speak only of the Millennium, the Resurrection, the New Heavens and Earth belonging to the Jewish Na∣tion, §. VI. HAving thus given you a just Account of the Millennium of the Ancients, and of the true Extent of that Opi∣nion in the Primitive Ages of the Church; I proceed now to shew in what things I agree with the Assertors of that Do∣ctrine, and how far I find my self constrained by the force of Truth to differ from them. §. I. I believe then, That after the Fall of Antichrist there shall be such a Glorious state of the Church by the Conversion of the Jews to the Christian Faith, as shall be to it Life from the Dead; that it shall then flourish in Peace and Plenty, in Righteousness and Holi∣ness, and in a pious Off-spring; that then shall begin a glorious and undisturbed Reign of Christ over both Jew and Gentile, to con∣tinue a thousand years during the time of Sa∣tan's binding. And that as John the Baptist was Elias because he came in the Spirit, and Power of Elias; so shall this be the Church of Martyrs, and of those who had not recei∣ved the Mark of the Beast, because of their entire Freedom from all the Doctrines and Practices of the Antichristian Church, and be∣cause the Spirit and Purity of the Times of the Primitive Martyrs shall return. And therefore, 1. I agree with the Patrons of the Millen∣nium in this, That I believe Satan hath not yet been bound a thousand years, nor will he be so bound till the time of the Calling of the Jews, and the time of St. John's Millen∣nium. 2. I agree with them in this, That the true Millennium will not begin till the Fall of An∣tichrist; nor will the Jews be Converted till that time, the Idolatry of the Roman Church being one great Obstacle of their Conversion. 3. I agree both with the Modern and the Ancient Millennaries, That then shall be great Peace and Plenty, and great measures of Knowledge and of Righteousness in the whole Church of God. I therefore only differ from the Ancient Millennaries in three things. 1. In denying Christ's personal Reign upon Earth during this thousand years; and in this both Dr. Burnet and Mr. Mead expresly have renounc'd their Doctrine. 2. Though I dare not absolutely deny what they all positively affirm, That the City of Jerusalem shall be then rebuilt, and the Con∣verted Jews shall return to it, because this probably may be collected from those words of Christ, Jerusalem shall be trodden down till the time of the Gentiles is come in, Luk, 21.24. and all the Prophets seem to declare the Jews shall then return to their own Land, Jer. 31.38, 39, 40. yet do I confidently deny what Barnabas, and others of them, do contend for; viz. That the Temple of Jerusalem shall be then built again: for this is contrary not on∣ly to the plain Declaration of St. John, who saith, I saw no Temple in this New Jerusa∣lem, Rev. 21.22. whence I infer there is to be no Temple in any part of it, but to the whole Design of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which is to shew the Dissolution of the Tem∣ple Service for the weakness and unprofitable∣ness of it; that the Jewish Tabernacle was only a Figure of the true and the more perfect Ta∣bernacle which the Lord pitched, and not Man; the Jewish Sanctuary only a worldly Sanctua∣ry, a Pattern, and a Figure of the heavenly one into which Christ our High Priest is en∣ter'd, Hebr. 8.2.9.2, 11, 23, 24. Now such a Temple, such a Sanctuary, and such Service, cannot be sutable to the most glorious and splendid times of the Christian Church; and therefore the Apostle saith, The Lord God
omnipotent, and the Lamb, shall be their Temple. 3. I differ both from the Ancient and the Modern Millennaries as far as they assert that this shall be a Reign of such Christians as have suffer'd under the Heathen Persecutors, or by the Rage of Antichrist; making it only a Reign of the Converted Jews and of the Gen∣tiles then flowing in to them, and uniting into one Church with them. This I believe to be indeed the truth of this mistaken Doctrine, and therefore I shall set my self more fully to ex∣plain, and to confirm it. Let it be noted therefore, §. II. 1. That as the Jews were the first Nation which were owned by God as his Peo∣ple, and therefore are styled his first-born, Exod. 4.22. Israel his elect, Isa. 54.4. the children of Jacob his chosen ones, 1 Chron. 16.13. Psal. 105.6. God having chosen them to be a peculiar treasure to himself above all the people of the earth, Exod. 19.5. Deut. 7.6. so all Nations of the World have ever since re∣ceived the Word of God and the true Religi∣on from the Jewish Nation, and Jerusalem hath been still the Mother of all other Church∣es. Before the Advent of our Lord and Sa∣viour, to them alone, saith the Apostle Paul, belonged the Adoption, the Glory, and the Co∣venant, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises, Rom. 9.3. and none then could be joined to the Lord, Isa. 56.3. and worship him aright, unless he join'd himself to the Jews, and became a Worshipper of the God of Israel, or a Mem∣ber of that Church. After Christ's coming in the Flesh, the Go∣spel was first sent to them, as being the Chil∣dren of the Kingdom, Matth. 8.12. our Lord exercised his Ministry only among them, whence he is styled the Minister of the Cir∣cumcision, Rom. 15.8. and saith, he was not then sent to any but only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matth. 15.24. And send∣ing his Apostles, he forbids them, whilst he was on Earth, to go into the way of the Gen∣tiles, or to enter into any City of Samaria, Matth. 10.5. but saith to them, Go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. After his Ascension, they were charged to begin their Preaching at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. as ac∣cordingly they did, preaching the word to none but the Jews only, Acts 11.19. Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles, first offers his Mini∣stry to them, preaching Christ in their Syna∣gogues, as his manner was, Acts 9.20.13.5.14.1.17.12, 17.18.4. and declaring it was necessary that the word of God should be first spoken to them, Acts 13.46. the Gospel being the power of God to Salvation to every one that believeth, to the Jew first, Rom. 2.10. and that through their fall, and rejection of it, the Gospel came unto the Gentiles, Rom. 11.28. the halt, lame, and blind, being called to this Feast, because those Guests first bidden refused to come, Luke 14.21. Note also, That notwithstanding the Infi∣delity of many of them, the first Church that ever received the Gospel, the Doctrine, the Sacraments of the New Testament, was the Jewish Church, Acts 2.42.47. All the Church∣es of the Gentiles received the Gospel from them, they being made partakers of their spi∣ritual things, Rom. 15.27. and the word of God coming out from them to other Churches, 1 Cor. 14.36. they being all grafted into their good Olive tree. Hence, in the Primitive Times, the Church of Jerusalem had the pre-eminence above all other Churches; to her they went for the decision of their Controversies, Acts 15. and the Bishop of Jerusalem is therefore styled by the AncientsCotel. Not. pag. 138. the first Bishop, the Guide of Priests, the Top of the Heads, the Bishop, and Chief of the Apostles; and the Church of Jerusalem is said to be the Church cui omnes favorem impendunt quasi matri Christiani no∣minis, which all favoured as the Mother of Christians. After the Fall of Antichrist, and before the second Coming of our Lord to Judgment, the Jews shall be converted, and become a most famous Church again. For this Mystery the Apostle hath revealed, that Blindness in part hath hapned to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written in the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 59.20. There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; for this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord, when I shall take away their sins. These words are as a Key to the great things said by Isaiah touching the Jewish Na∣tion, and teach us to interpret them of their glorious Conversion to the Christian Faith, and the gathering them out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and Nation, and People, that at the blowing of the great Trumpet they may come from the land of Assyria and Egypt, and may worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusa∣lem, Isa. 27.13. and they may fear the Lord from the West, and his glory from the rising of the Sun, Isa. 59.19. This is that day when the Lord shall set his hand  a second time to recover the remnant of his people, and shall assemble the out-casts of Israel, and gather toge∣ther the dispersed of Judah from the four cor∣ners of the earth, Isa. 11.11, 12. when he will so bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy on the whole house of Israel, as to leave none of them any more there, nor hide his face any more from them, Ezek. 39.25, 28, 29.
when he shall so plant them in their Land, that they shall no more be pulled up out of the Land that he hath given them, Amos 9.14, 15. So Tobit saith, That when , the times of the Age shall be accom∣plished, they shall return from all places of their Captivity, and build up Jerusalem glori∣ously, and the House of God shall be built in it gloriously, as the Prophets have spoken there∣of, Tobit 14.51, 6, 7. And when they shall be thus converted, and receive the Gospel, then shall Salvation be again derived from them to the Gentiles, and they shall be the Means of converting such of them as still remain to be converted, and shall draw them to as great Purity and Zeal, and as great knowledge of the Truth as ever the Church enjoy'd: For, saith the Apostle, If the Fall of them be the Riches of the World, and the diminishing them the Riches of the Gentiles, how much more their Fulness? and if the cast∣ing away of them be the reconciling of the World, what shall be the reconciling them but Life from the Dead, to the same World? Rom. 11.12, 15. Of this the Prophets speak very fully, saying, In that Day there shall be a Root of Jesse which shall stand for an En∣sign to the People, and to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be Glory, Isa. 11.11. Behold, saith God, I will then lift up my hands to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the People, and they shall bring thy Sons in their Arms, and thy Daughters shall be carri∣ed upon their Shoulders, and Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their Faces towards the Earth, and lick up the Dust of thy Feet, Isa. 49.22, 23. Behold, thou shalt call a Nation that thou knowest not, and Nations that have not known thee, shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy One of Israel, for he hath glo∣rified thee, Isa. 55.5. The Lord God that ga∣thereth the outcasts of Israel, saith, Yet will I gather others to him besides those that are ga∣thered to him, ch. 56.8. And the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the bright∣ness of thy Rising, lift up thine Eyes round a∣about, and see; all they gather themselves to∣gether, they come to thee, thy Sons shall come from far, and thy Daughters shall be nursed at thy side; the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come to thee, ch. 60.3, 4, 5. And the Sons of Strangers shall build up thy Walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee; there∣fore thy Gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut day or night, that men may bring unto thee the Forces of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought. For the Na∣tion and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish, and shall be utterly wasted, ver. 10, 11, 12. Thou shalt suck the Milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the Breasts of Kings, ver. 16. Ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord; Men shall call you the Ministers of our God, ch. 61.6, 9. Ye shall eat the Riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall you boast your selves, ch. 62.2. The Gentiles shall see thy righte∣ousness, and all Kings thy glory. Behold, I will extend Peace to her like a River, and the Glory of the Gentiles like a flowing Stream, ch. 66.12. I will gather all Nations and Tongues, and they shall come and see my glo∣ry, ver. 18. And they shall bring all their Brethren for an offering to the Lord out of all Nations to my holy mountain Jerusalem, and I will also take of them for Priests and for Levites, saith the Lord, ver. 20.21, 22. For as the new Heavens, and the new Earth which I shall make, shall remain before me, sith the Lord, so shall their seed, and their Name re∣main. Many Nations, saith Tobit, shall come from far to the Name of the Lord God, with Gifts in their hands, even Gifts to the King of Heaven, when his Tabernacle shall be built again with Joy, and he shall make his Captives joyful in Jerusalem; yea, all Nations shall turn, and fear the Lord God truly, chap. 13.10, 11. §. III. Now here 'tis easie to observe, how fully this Description of the Conversion of the Jews by their Prophets, answers to the Millennium of St. John, who useth the very Words by which the Prophets had foretold their glorious Conversion, and saith, they shall be then accomplished. And, First, St. John speaks of a Reviviscence of the Church of the Primitive Martyrs that suf∣fered for the Testimony of Jesus, and for the Word of God, Rev 20.4. See Chap. 3. §. I. and with them of all the Just. Now the ve∣ry Words  and , used by St. John, are very frequently used by the Pro∣phets to express the glorious State of the Jewish Church; and by St. Paul, to signifie the flourishing Condition of the Gentiles then. St. John saith, They who enjoy this Millennium, shall be Priests to God and Christ, Rev. 20.6. And the Prophet Isaiah saith of the Converted Jews, Ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord; men shall call you the Ministers of our God, ch. 6.6. And of the Gentiles that come to them, I will take of them to be Priests and Levites, ch. 65.20. This was the very thing promised to the Jewish Nation when God entred into Cove∣nant with them, That they should be a King∣dom of Priests, Ex. 19.6. , a kingly Priesthood, saith the Septuagint, , i. e. Kings and Priests, saith the Targum.. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 334. 6. This all Christians are already made, saith St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.5. and St. John,
Rev. 16.5, 10. We are, saith Justin Martyr, truly Priests to God; it therefore may be ex∣pected we should be more eminently so in that glorious State of the Church. 2dly, St. John speaks of a new Heaven and a new Earth that he saw, saying, The former Heaven and Earth were passed away, Rev. 21.1. and introduceth our Lord, saying, Behold, I make all things new, ver. 5. And the Prophet Isaiah introduceth God thus, speaking at the Conversion of the Jews, Be∣hold, I create new Heavens and new Earth, and the former shall not be remembred nor come into my mind, Isa. 65.17. And again, I have put my Word in thy mouth, that I may plant the Heavens, and lay the Foundations of the Earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my People, ch. 51.16. And, Thirdly, In the very Words of the Author of the Reve∣lations, Behold, I make things new, ch. 43.18, 19. Seeing then these new Heavens and new Earth must be contemporary with the Conversion of the Jews, sure they must be before the Conflagration of the World, i. e. before the Jewish Nation be consumed to Ashes, and therefore can be only a new Heaven and new Earth, in that mo∣ral sense in which Maimonides explains the Phrase,Quod dixi creabo novos coelos, &c. id ita intelligo quod vos positurus sum in laetitiam perpetuam loco luct∣s & anxietatis prioris, ne{que} illius luctus prioris memoria sit mansura. More Nevoch. part 2. ch. 29. p. 268. when he says, It signifies, that God will place them in perpetual Joy, in lieu of their former Sorrow and Anxiety; so that the Memory of their former Sorrow shall no more remain. I confess, there is this peculiarity in St. John's new Earth, that it is said of it, , and the Sea is not yet, because he had all along represented the Beast as as∣cending out of the Abyss, and sitting upon many Waters, which were the People, and Multitude, and Nations, and Tongues, that had submitted to her, Rev. 17.1. — 8.15. Now because the Beast was utterly destroyed, and Satan was bound up for a thousand years, and Gog and Magog were not to be gathered till then, nor were the Armies of the Beast which were slain, to rise again till the thou∣sand years were past, Rev. 19.21. — 20.6. Therefore the Apostle saith, That in this new Earth the Sea was not yet. 3dly, St. John saith, I heard a great Voice from Heaven, saying, The tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and and they shall be his People, and God himself with them shall be their God, Rev. 21.3. And Ezekiel the other Prophet, who by the An∣cients is supposed to speak of the Millen∣nium, saith in like manner, I will make a Co∣venant of Peace with them, and will place them, and multiply them, and will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore; my Taber∣nacle also shall be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, Ezek. 37.26, 27. 4thly, St. John saith, God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain, for the former things are passed away, Rev. 21.4. So also saith the Prophet Isaiah of Jerusalem, That after the former Heaven and Earth were passed away, the voice of Weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of Crying, Ch. 65.19. That the Lord will wipe away Tears from all Faces, Ch. 25.8. That they shall not Hunger, nor Thirst, neither shall the Heat nor Sun smite them, for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the Springs of Water shall he guide them, Ch. 49.10. Which Words exactly answer to those of St. John. Rev. 7.16, 17. 5thly, St. John saith, The Building of the Wall of the City was of Jasper, and the City was of pure Gold like unto clear Glass, and the Foundations of the Wall of the City were gar∣nished with all manner of pretious Stones, Rev. 21.18, 19. And Isaias saith, I will lay thy Stones with fair Colours, and thy Foundations with Saphires, and I will make thy Windows of Agats, and thy Gates of Carbuncles, and all thy Borders of pleasant Stones, Ch. 54.11, 12. And Tobit saith, Jerusalem shall be built up with Saphires, and Emeralds, and pretious Stones; thy Walls, and Towers, and Battle∣ments with pure Gold; and the Streets of Je∣rusalem shall be paved with Beril, Carbuncle, and Stones of Ophir, Ch. 13.16, 17, 18. 6thly, St. John speaks of the Tree of Life planted there, and of a pure River of Water of Life proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1, 2. And the Pro∣phet Zachary speaks of Living Water going out of Jerusalem, Ch. 14.8. And he that pas∣seth under the name of Esdras, saith, They shall have the Tree of Life planted for an or∣nament of sweet savour; For unto you, saith he, is Paradise opened, the Tree of Life is planted, 2 Esdr. 2.12. 7thly, St. John saith, There shall be no Night there, and they need no Candle, neither Light of the Sun, Chap. 22.5. Isaias saith the same, Ch. 60.19. And the Prophet Za∣chariah saith, It shall be one day which shall be known unto the Lord, not day nor night, and it shall come to pass that at the evening-time it shall be light, Ch. 14.7. Moreover, St. John so represents the Scene of things following the Fall of Antichrist, as plainly to inform us, That he is speaking of this glorious Conversion of the Jewish Na∣tion, and God's marrying her again whom he
had formerly divorced; for as the Church of Christ is represented as the Israel of God, Gal. 1.16. the Commonwealth of Israel, Eph. 2.12. the Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4.26. the Celestial Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. So St. John represents the new Scene of things in the same Language, saying, I John saw the holy City, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.2. And again, He shewed me the great City, the holy Jerusa∣lem, descending out of Heaven from God, ver. 10. Now that this great and holy City, this new Jerusalem, is the Jewish Church converted to God; the Characters he gives of it will not suffer us to doubt: For, First, He saith, The City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof, Rev. 21.23. So saith God of the Conversion of the Jews. They shall call the City of the Lord, the Zion, the holy one of Israel, Es. 60.14. Thou shalt tall thy Walls Salvation, and thy Gates praise; the Sun shall be no more thy Light by day, nei∣ther for Brightness shall the Moon give Light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory. He saith, The Gates of this City shall not be shut at all by day, neither shall there be any night there, and they shall bring the Glory, and Ho∣nour, , the substance of the Nations un∣to it, ver. 25, 26. Even as Isaias had said, Thy Gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the Wealth of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought, Isa. 60.11. Last∣ly, he saith, The Nations of them that are sa∣ved, shall walk in the Light of this City, and the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honour to it, ver. 24. which I have shew∣ed to be the very thing foretold by the Pro∣phets at the Conversion of the Jewish Na∣tion. Add to this, That he introduceth this holy City, this new Jerusalem, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, Rev. 21.2. and saith, Come hither, I will shew thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, ver. 9.10. and then shews the great City, the holy Jerusalem; and ch. 19.7, 8. he saith, He heard a Voice, saying, The Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife hath made her self ready; and to her was grant∣ed, that she should be arrayed in fine Linnen, clear and white, for the fine Linnen is the Righteousness of the Saints. Now thus have the Prophets represented the Jewish Church, converted to God: Hence is she introduced, speaking thus, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath cloathed me with the garments of Sal∣vation, he hath covered me with the robe of Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh him∣self with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with Jewels, Isa. 61.10. And again, Thou shalt no more be termed forsaken, nei∣ther shall thy Land any more be termed deso∣late, but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy Land Beulah, for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy Land shall be married, ch. 62.4. and ver. 5. For as a Young Man marrieth a Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry thee; and as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. §. IV. Add to this, that all the Characters which the Patrons of the Millennium give of those times, exactly accord with the Cha∣racters given by the Prophets of the Conver∣sion of the Jews, and are many of them ta∣ken from the very Words of the Prophets, foretelling those times: For instance, First, Indolence and Plenty, saith Dr. Bur∣net, [B. 4. c. 7. p. 183.] seem to be two In∣gredients of this happy State. Accordingly the Prophets every where speak, how the riches of the Gentiles shall then flow in to them, Isa. 60.5, 11. and they shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, ch. 61.6. that there shall be then no Hunger nor Thirst, no Heat nor Sun to smite them, no Voice of Crying or Weeping. See Isa. 35.10. 2dly, That it shall be a time of universal Peace and Freedom from War and Persecution, [Ib. p. 184.] and this he proves from the Words of the Prophets, declaring, That at the day, that time when God shall create new Heavens and new Earth, the Lamb and the Lion shall lie down together, and the suck∣ing Child shall play with the Basilisk, and they shall not hurt in all my holy Mountain, as it is written, Es. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. and ch. 65.25. and saying, That the Nations shall be at their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning-hooks; Nation shall not lift up a Sword a∣gainst Nation, neither shall they learn War a∣ny more, Is. 2.4. Mich. 4.3. as appears also from the Promises, That God will then make her Officers peace, Is. 60.17. and will extend peace to her as a River, ch. 66.12. 3dly, That it shall be a Kingdom of Righte∣ousness, [Ibid.] Accordingly of this holy City Jerusalem, it is said, There shall no more come into thee, the uncircumcised and unclean, Isa. 52.1. An high-way shall be there, and it shall be called the way of Holiness, the Unclean shall not pass over it, ch. 35.8. which exactly answers to those Words of St. John, Into the holy City shall nothing enter that is polluted or unclean, Rev. 21.27. And again, Thy people shall be all righteous, ch. 61.21. See Zeph. 3.9. Zach. 14.20, 21. Moreover this, saith he, [p. 185.] will be a State under a peculiar Presence and divine Conduct, because the Tabernacle of God will be with Men, and he will dwell with them; and this we see was promised at the Conversion of the Jewish Nation, Ezek. 37.27. The last Character, saith he, that belongs to
this State, or rather to those that enjoy it, is this, that they are Kings and Priests unto God; and this also, we have shewed to be promised to the Converted Jews, Es. 61.6. — 65.20. I add, That as the ancient Fathers general∣ly held that the time would come when all Israel should be saved, and be converted to the Christian Faith; so did they as generally con∣ceive that this should happen at the Close of the WorldIn the End of the World, 2 Esdr. 2.34.6.15, 25., and about the time of our Sa∣viour's second coming: and most of 'em speak of it as a branch of the Millennium. So Justin M. says once and again, thatP. 232. D. . then the Jews shall see, and shall acknowledge him whom they have pierced; and he confesses to Trypho,P. 249. C. that Jerusalem shall be rebuilt, and that, p. 306. Christians shall rejoyce with Christ together with the Patriarchs and Prophets, and with the Jews and their Proselites, i. e. the Nations then flowing in to them before the co∣ming of our Lord. SoL. 5. c. 34. Irenaeus declares, that then God will restore them to the Land which he had promised, and given to their Fa∣thers, and they shall dwell in it in hope. AndAdv. Marc. l. 5. c. 9. p. 472. C. Tertullian saith, that he will then own the Circumcision, Et Abrahae gentem, cum ultimo venerit, acceptatione & benedictione dignabi∣tur, and at his last coming will vouchsafe to ac∣cept, and bless the seed of Abraham. And this is sutable to the ancient Opinion of theR. Saadiae Gaon Sepher Haemunot. Jews, that in the end of the World there should be to them a world full of joy and exaltation, so that their Heaven and Earth should as it were be renewed, according to the words of Isaiah, Chap. 65.17. So the Targum upon those words of Hosea, The Children of Israel shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. §. V. Nor is it to be wonder'd that there should be then such a glorious Conversion of them, and such a flowing in of the Nations to them, seeing the Prophets seem to intimate there shall be then a full Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon them, somewhat resembling that which was vouchsafed to the first Ages of Christianity. So the Prophet Isaiah speaks of the Desolation of the City , until the Spirit be poured up∣on them from on high, Isa. 32.15. which is the very Phrase in which our Lord promiseth the Spirit to his Apostles, Luke 24.49. St. Paul proves their Conversion from those words of the Prophet Isaiah, The Deliverer shall come out of Zion, and shall turn away iniquity from Jacob: with which these are immediately connected, And this is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed from henceforth for ever, Chap. 59.20, 21. And again, Chap. 44.3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my Blessing on thy off-spring. So Ezek. 36.24. I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of all coun∣tries, and will bring you into your own land. And ver. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. And Ch. 39.28, 29. I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them any more there, neither will I hide my face any more from them, for I have poured out my Spirit up∣on the house of Israel, saith the Lord. And this seems plainly to be hinted in these words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 3.15, 16, 17. Even unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart. Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away; for the Lord is (the giver of) that Spirit, or  where the Lord is, there is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liber∣ty, from subjection to the Law, and from that veil which hinders them from turning to Christ. To this Mr. Mead (pag. 761, 767.) con∣jectures there shall be added a Vision of Jesus Christ to them; for saith God by his Prophet Zachariah, Chap. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Suppli∣cations, and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him. And Christ being ask'd, What shall be the sign of the End of the World, Matt. 24.3. saith ver. 30. Then shall appear the sign of the son of man in Hea∣ven, and then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the son of man co∣ming in the clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory. He speaks to the Jews thus; Verily, I say unto you, yet a little while, and you shall not see me till you say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, Matth. 23.39. Or that according to the ancient and gene∣ral Doctrine both of Jew and Christian, they shall have an Elias sent to instruct them, a Deliverer  for the sake of Sion, as the Septuagint, Isa. 59.20. For, saith he, It may be fit to conceive magnificently of so great a work of God towards a People for whom he hath formerly shewed so many wonders; especially this being the greatest work of mercy and won∣der
that ever he did for them, far beyond the bringing them forth of Egypt, and leading them in the wilderness. And to this he refers these words of Ecclesiasticus, Elias was ordained to turn the hearts of the father to the son, and to restore, , the Tribes of Jacob: , Blessed are they that see thee, and are adorned with love, for we shall surely live, Ecclus 48.10, 11. Where note, that their Conversion is again represented by a new life, and by the very word used concerning the Souls of the Martyrs which were slain, Rev. 20.4. §. VI. Add to this, That as all the ancient Millenaries held that this Reign on Earth should be atJustin. M. Iren. Tertul. supra. Jerusalem, and that the Jews converted then should reign together with the Christians; so all the Passages cited from Jewish Writers concerning the Millen∣nium, speak only of the Millennium of the Resurrection, the new Heavens and new Earth the Jewish Nation shall enjoy. This is appa∣rent from those words on which the Midrash Tehillim founds this Millennium, viz. Com∣fort us according to the days in which thou hast afflicted us, Psal. 90.15. in Babylon, in Greece, in Rome. From the words cited by Galatinus, l. 12. c. 1. from R. Eliezer, ch. 34. As I live, saith the Lord, I will raise you in the time to come, in the Resurrection of the dead, and I will gather you, with all Israel, into the land of Israel. From those cited from R. Saadias on Dan. 7.18. Because the Jews rebelled a∣gainst their Lord, their Kingdom shall be ta∣ken from them, and given to the four Mo∣narchies who shall possess it in this World, and shall subdue and carry captive Israel till the age to come in which the Messiah shall reign. From the Targum on Hos. 14.8. They shall be gathered from the midst of their captivity; and on Psal. 50.4. From the Passage quoted by Galatinus, l. 11. c. 1. From the Book Bera∣coth, that Israel shall no more make mention of their departure out of Egypt in the age to come, in the days of the Messiah. And from the words cited by Mr. Mead, Luke 21.24. The Jews shall be carried captives into all Nations till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, and then shall they see the Son of Man coming in the clouds. From the words of Tobit cited by Mr. Mead, p. 579. Then the children of Israel shall go into a very long captivity, but the bles∣sed God shall remember them, and gather them from the four corners of the earth. Accord∣ingly Mr. Mead sums up their Opinion thus, They expect their Forefathers, at least such as were just and holy, should rise in the begin∣ning of the same Millennium, and reign in the Land of Israel with their Off-spring under the Messiah. And, saith he, I can hardly be∣lieve that all the smoak of Tradition could arise but from some fire of Truth anciently made known unto them. And this I freely grant, and do indeed suppose by asserting a Predicti∣on of such a general Call of the Jews near the close of the World, as they styled , a reviving, and a Resurrection of them. But how comes this Tradition to relate to Christian Martyrs beheaded for the name of Christ, or to be fulfilled in the Resurrection of them on∣ly who are chiefly Christians, not of the Jews, but of the Gentiles? Mr. Mead solves the matter thus, p. 604. Under the second sort of these Reigners I would in a particular respect understand the Nation of the Jews then con∣verted to the Christian Faith; who coming in toward the end of the day, may, above all others, be said to be those who had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, nor had received his mark upon their foreheads or their hands. And thus will Truth prevail at last, but to the ruin of this literal Resurrection: for how can they literally be said to live again, and to have a part in the first Resurrection, who were never slain for the Faith? and who are not to be converted, say their own Prophecies and Tra∣ditions, till God createth a new Heaven and a new Earth, and much less till the Fall of Babylon.
CHAP. III. This Chapter contains an Answer to all the Arguments produc'd from Scripture, to prove this literal Resurrection of the Martyrs, and this Reign of them on Earth a thousand Years, viz. 1. To the chief Argument for this Opinion, from Rev. 20.4, 5, 6. §. I. To 2 Pet 3. from vers. 5.13. §. II. To Heb. 25. compared with Chap. 1.6. §. III. To Matth. 5.5. The Meek shall inherit the Earth, §. IV. To Rom. 8.19, 20. The Creature shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, §. V. To Act. 3.20.21. The Heavens must receive him till the time of the restitution of all things, §. VI. To Matth. 19.27, 28, 29. Ye that have followed me in the Regeneration, shall fit upon twelve Thrones, §. VII. And they shall receive an hundred fold now in this life. Ibid. I Proceed now to the Arguments produced from Scripture for the Doctrine of the Millennium, to which I hope to return a clear and satisfactory Answer, beginning with those Words of the Revelations in which all the Assertors of this Doctrine place their Confidence. And they are these: §. I. Arg. 1. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given to them: and I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had re∣received his Mark upon their Foreheads, or in their Hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand Years, Rev. 20.4. But the rest of the Dead lived not again till the thousand Years were finished. This is the first Resurrection, vers. 5. Blessed and holy is he who hath part in the first Resurrection: on such the second Death hath no power, but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thou∣sand Years, vers. 6. First, Here, say they, is mention of a First Resurrection, antecedent to the General Re∣surrection of the Just, who are not to live a∣gain till they who first rise have reigned a thousand Years on Earth. 2dly, This Resurrection, say they, is proper to those who were slain for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God, and were not Worshippers of the Beast. 3dly, This Resurrection, say they, is not a metaphorical, but a proper Resurrection; for the Souls, i. e. the persons of them that were slain live again. 4thly. They do reign with Christ a thou∣sand Years, and that Reign, say most of them, is to be upon Earth; therefore there is to be a Reign of those Martyrs who were slain for the Testimony of Jesus and the Word of God upon Earth a thousand Years. Now in answer to this Argument, let it be noted: Answ. 1. That it is not the Bodies, but the Souls of them that are beheaded who are said to live; now the word , rendred Soul, occurs six times in this Book, this place ex∣cepted; and in all these places, it signifies either the Soul in separation, or distinction from the Body, or the living Soul; for, Chap. 6.9. The Souls under the Altar, not only cry with a loud Voice, but they are clothed with white Robes, ver. 10, 11. which Expressions cannot be well applyed to Dead Bodies. Chap. 8.9. The , are the Creatures having Animal Souls by which they lived, Chap. 12.11. It plainly signifies their Lives, i. e. the Souls by which Men live, Chap. 16.3. It is expresly , the Living Soul, Chap. 18.13. It signifies the Lives of Men, or else the Souls of Men which they did hunt for, or devour, as Ezek. 13.18, 20. — 22.25. and ver. 14th. , is the desire not of the Body but the Soul; Why therefore must this Word be here supposed to signifie that dead Body in opposition to the Soul, which alone properly can be said to rise, and live again? 2dly, Let it be noted, that a proper and a literal Resurrection is never in the whole New Testament expressed, or represented to us by the living of the Soul, but always by the li∣ving, raising, or the resuscitation of the Dead, the raising of the Bodies of the Saints, of them that slept in the Dust, or in their Graves and Sepulchres, or who were buried in the Sea or in the Earth; if then the Holy Ghost here meant a literal and proper Resurrection, why doth he so much vary from the Terms he constantly doth use elsewhere, whenever he discourseth of such a Resurrection, and take up with the Terms so oft applied in Scripture to a Moral, and Metaphorical Resurrection? as we shall see hereafter.
Answ. 2. 2dly, I grant that here is men∣tion of a First Resurrection antecedent to the General and proper Resurrection, but then it plainly is a Resurrection in which all that are blessed and holy, and over whom the se∣cond Death hath no power, have a part, ver. 6. and they are all whose Names are written in the Book of Life, ver. 14, 15. It is a Resur∣rection of all who had not worshipped the Beast, ver. 4. and they are all the same Per∣sons, Rev. 13.8. It is a Resurrection of those who are made Kings and Priests to God and Christ, which all good Christians are, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. and therefore not of Martyrs only. Again, It is a Resurrection before the Day of Judgment, and before the Sea, and Death, and the Grave deliver up their Dead, as the words following intimate, ver. 12, 13. viz. I saw the Dead, small and great stand before God, and the Books were opened; and another Book, which is the Book of Life, and the Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according to their Works. And the Sea gave up her Dead that were in it: and Death and Hades delivered up their Dead that were in them: and they were judged every Man according to his Works. Where note, that the Dead delivered up were all that were judged according to their Works. It also is a Resurrection before Christ's co∣ming to render to every Man as his Works shall be; for this He after promiseth to do, Chap. 22.12. whereas, according to the Do∣ctrine of the Millennium, Christ had already given to them whom he had raised to reign with him on Earth, the Blessing promised to him that overcometh, Rev. 2.26, 27. — 3.21.5.10. 3dly, The rest of the Dead that lived not again until the thousand Years were finished, are not the Just, but the Synagogue of Satan, Gog and Magog, ver. 8. for St. John, Chap. 19. represents the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, with the Aies which were in Hea∣ven making War with the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies, and giving their Flesh to be meat unto them; in which War the Beast was taken, and the false Prophet, and cast a∣live into a lake of Fire, ver. 20. And then it follows thus, , and the rest of them, who were gathered together to make War with this King of Kings were slain with the Sword that came out of his Mouth, and all the Fowls were filled with their Flesh, ver. 21. Now it being by the Pagan Empe∣rors first, and by the Beast afterwards, That Satan, the great Dragon, made War with the Seed of the Woman which kept the Command∣ments of God, and had the Testimony of Je∣sus Christ, Rev. 12.17. these Instruments of Satan being thus slain, and overcome by Christ, Satan is bound a thousand Years, i. e. He is so long disabled from persecuting and molesting the Church of Christ, and during this space She is raised up to her Primitive Purity, and flourisheth Gloriously, and so is represented, as having a Resurrection from the Dead: This thousand Years being ended, Satan is let loose again, and gathers again his Instruments, i. e. the Nations which are in the four quarters of the Earth, Gog and Magog to Battel, and they compass the Camp of the Saints, Rev. 20.8, 9. And this is the living of the rest of the Dead again after the thousand Years was ended, ver. 5. for it is on∣ly , the rest that were slain, Chap. 19.21. that lived again; it is only those who had no share in the First Resurrection, and so were neither blessed nor holy, ver. 6. nor had their Names written in the Book of Life; and consequently those on whom the Second Death had place, which Death they suffered when Fire came down from Heaven and de∣vour'd them, and they were cast into the Lake of Fire with the Devil, ver. 10, 15. And that  the rest, Chap. 19.21. and Chap. 20.5. should signifie the same Per∣sons, cannot seem strange, if we consider that only four Verses intervene betwixt them. And that they must be the same Persons, is evident from the connexion of the words, thus, the rest of the Dead lived not till the thousand Years of Satan's Binding and the Saints Reign was ended, ver. 5. And when those thousand Years were ended, Satan was loosed, and gathered them together against that Church of Christ, which had thus Reigned a thousand Years, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. And this interpretation of the rest of the Dead rising again, gives a clear Answer to the Objection of Mr. Mead, against the other Sen∣ses commonly imposed upon these Words, viz. That it would be a most harsh and vio∣lent Interpretation, to say the Dead, and the living again of the Dead, should not be taken in the same sense; for according to this Ex∣position, they are exactly taken in the same sense, the Dead Church living again in the same Metaphorical Sense, in which the rest of the Dead, the Enemies of the Church live again, at the end of the thousand Years when Satan is loosed, and gathers them to Battel against the Church. 4thly, The Souls of them who were slain for the Testimony of Jesus, and for the Word of God, are those Christians who were slain in the time of the Ten Persecutions, and the Souls of them who worshipped not the Beast, are those Christians who chose rather to die, or suffer Persecution, than to be guilty of Romish Idolatry: And they are said to live again as the Beast which had received , the Wound of Death, and one of whose Heads was wounded to Death, , lived again, Rev. 13.3, 12. viz. in the Suc∣cession of the Antichristian Beast, to him which exercised the power of the Heathen Emperors over the Earth, and reviv'd the Ido∣latry
of the Heathen Empire. And as the two Witnesses, when slain, are said to live again, the spirit of life from God entring into them, Rev. 11.7, 11. because a succession of Men of the same Faith, and the same opposition to the Beast, revive, and flourish after they were slain. Some here reply, that this was spoken of the two Churches, that they were slain, and lived again, not of the Supposita. But why then may not the words of St. John be spoken of the Church of Jew and Gentile then revi∣ving, and not of the Supposita? Moreover, these two Witnesses are said to be slain, ver. 7. and their dead bodies to lie in the streets of the great City, ver. 8. to be seen lying there three days and an half, and not to be suffer'd to be put into their Graves, ver. 9. and after three days and an half, the Spirit of God is said to enter into them, to make them stand upon their feet, and live again. If therefore nothing of this be spoken of the Supposita, why should those words, I saw the souls of them who were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and they li∣ved again, be spoken of the Supposita, and not of the Churches of the Converted Jews and Gentiles? this being the Prophetick Scheme by which the Scripture still represents the glorious Restoration of God's Church and People. For, 1. The Restoration of the Church is some∣times represented as a Resurrection of it from the dead. So saith the Prophet Isaiah, , thy dead shall arise, and be raised out of their tombs, Chap. 26.19. So God speaks to the Jewish Nation by Ezekiel, say∣ing, I will open your graves, and cause you to come out of your graves, and bring you into the Land of Israel, Ezek. 37.13, 14. The Pro∣phet Hosea speaks thus, in three days  we shall rise up again, and we shall live before him, Hos. 6.2. And the Apostle speak∣ing of this very matter, viz. the Conversion of the Jews, saith, it shall be even to the Gentiles , as life from the dead. Rom. 11.15. Here then is a Resurrection of the Church of God agreeable to that which our Interpretation of this Passage of the Reve∣lations doth import: nor is there any more reason to say the words of St. John respect the Supposita, and not the Churches, than to say the same of many of the places cited. Moreover, the Scripture doth more fre∣quently mention the Restoration of the Church, and her Return from a low, captive, and afflicted State, under the Metaphor of a new Life, a Life from the dead, a Reviviscence of God's Church and People. Thus when God moved the Persian Kings to let the Jews return to their own Land, he is by Ezra said to give them  a Reviviscence, Ezra 9.9. The Psalmist speaking of himself as the Text, or of God's People also saith the Mar∣ginal Reading, useth these words, Thou which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me (marg. us) again, and shall bring me up again (Marg. us, . marg. us) from the depth of the Earth, Psal. 71.20. And the Church speaketh thus to God,  thou wilt quicken us, and we will call upon thy name, Psal. 80.18. And again, Thou wilt return  and revive us, and thy people shall rejoyce in thee, Psal. 85.6.  Thy dead men shall live, Isa. 26.19. say Symmachus and Theodotion.  We shall live in his sight, saith the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 6.2, 3. and Ch. 14.17. They shall live with their Chil∣dren and return again, saith the Prophet Za∣chary, Chap. 10.8, 9. The Son of Syrach saith, at the coming of Elias,  we shall live again, Chap. 48.11. But the chief Seat of this Metaphor is in the 37th Chapter of Ezekiel, where God is introduced inquiring of the Jews in Babylon,  can these Bones live, ver. 3. and promising to put into them  the breath of life, ver. 5. and saying, I will put my Spirit into you  and ye shall live, and bidding the Prophet blow upon them  that they may live, ver. 9. and declaring, that when he had done so, breath entred into them,  and they lived again, and stood upon their feet, ver. 10. In all which places the very word which S. John useth to express the first Resurrection, is here used to express the Return of the Church from her Obscurity and Thraldom to a glorious state. Why therefore may not the Word in St. John bear that sense which it so often bears in the Prophetick Writings, and twice in the, Luke 15.32. Rom. 11.15. New Testament, when spoken of the Gentiles? It hence at least appears, that by this Interpretation I put no force upon the words, but do expound them in the familiar sense in which they are still used upon the like occasion in the Prophetick Writings. Now it is generally areed by those who own this Conversion of the Jews, that it is not to commence till after the Destruction of the Beast, or the Downfal of Antichrist, men∣tion'd Chap. 18. and therefore in the next Chapter he begins his Discourse upon it, say∣ing, Chap. 19.7. The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her self rea∣dy, i. e. she who was formerly put away, and the door shut upon her because she was notNot  Ready. prepared for the Bridegroom's coming, Matth. 25.10. was now to be married to God again. And Chap. 21. he reassumes this matter, and shews the Bride the Lamb's Wife in such a de∣scription, as will not suffer us to doubt she is the Jewish Nation converted to the Chri∣stian Faith: for, he calls her the Holy City, and the New Jerusalem, and tells us in the
very words of Isaiah; Chap. 60.3, 10. that the Nations which shall be saved shall walk in the light of this City. He calleth her also the Bride to be married to the Lamb; which is the Description the Prophets make of this converted Nation, viz. as of a Bride adorned with her Jewels, and as one that is to be mar∣ried to the Lord, Isa. 61.10.62.4, 5. And he goes on in a continual Description of this New Jerusalem in the words of the Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel speaking of the Conversion of the Jewish Nation. The City also coming down from Heaven, ver. 10. is the new Church of the converted Jews, said to come down from Heaven, according to the Hebrew Phrase, be∣cause of that divine Wisdom, and those spi∣ritual Gifts and Graces with which she shall be adorned from Heaven: for as they were wont to say of one who treated of sublime heavenly things, that he did Euxt. Floril. p. 4. ascend into Heaven, and spake as one who was admitted into the divine Councils, Deut. 30.11, 12. Prov. 30.3. and of those who heard these things that they were exalted to Heaven, Matth. 11.23. so the pouring down of these Gifts and Blessings is represented as the opening of Heaven, and letting them down upon the Earth. Thus when S. John receives his Prophecy, he sees a door opened in Heaven, and hears a Voice saying come up hither, and I will shew thee what shall be hereafter, Rev. 4.1. Where note, that the Voice he heard then was as the Voice of a Trumpet: and so the very same Voice he heard when he was in the Spirit, Rev. 1.10. The two Witnesses also, when they live again, are called up into Heaven, Rev. 11.11, 12. as being filled with heavenly Wisdom. And since the spiritual Gifts imparted to the Church are said to come from above, from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. and they who were made Partakers of them to have tasted  of the heavenly gift; seeing the Church of Christ is the Je∣rusalem which is from above, Gal. 4.26. the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. it is no won∣der that she is represented here as coming down from Heaven, when she was as it were to have a new Birth which is from above, Joh. 3.3. and to be adorned with spiritual blessings in hea∣venly things in Christ Jesus, Eph. 1.3. and to be reduced to her primitive lustre and pu∣rity; for then shall the purity of the Church return, and be as it was in the times of the first Martyrs for the Faith, and the Gospel shall be professed without any Antichristian mixture, as they who opposed the Beast en∣deavoured to preserve it: and thus shall these Martyrs and Opposers of the Beast live again. A Reverend and Worthy Person, of more than ordinary Skill in matters of this nature, is of opinion; 1st, That the first Resurrection, here men∣tion'd, will be a literal Resurrection of them that have lost their Lives for the Testimony of Christ, to enjoy eternal Life in Heaven a thou∣sand years before the General Resurrection, as the Martyrs of the Old Testament arose with the Body of Christ, Matth. 27.52. They shall reign, saith he, with Christ, not on Earth, but in Heaven, where Christ is, and shall be till he come to Judgment. 2dly, He is of Opinion, That not only the Martyrs shall then rise to heavenly Bliss, but that their Murtherers shall then also rise to eternal Punishment. Which he gathers from those words of Daniel, Chap. 12.2. And ma∣ny of them that sleep in the dust shall arise, some to everlasting Life, and some to everlast∣ing Shame and Contempt. Now, 1st, Against the Doctrine of the first and se∣cond Resurrection, properly so called, I have offered some Arguments in the Annotations on 1 Cor. 15. and Chap. 4. §. 2. I therefore only farther note; First, That St. Matthew speaks not one word of any Martyrs that arose after Christ's Resurrection, but only of the arising of some Saints that slept, and their going into the holy City, and appearing unto many; which seems rather to make it probable they were Sns who had lived in the Memory of thse to whom they appeared, and were known. 2dly, St. Matthew doth not say as St. John doth, that many Souls lived, but that  many Bodies of those that slept arose out of their Sepulchres: his words must therefore be understood of a proper Resurrection of the Bodies of the Saints; but it cannot be hence inferr'd that the words of St. John bear the same sense. 3dly, St. John doth not say his Martyrs shall reign with Christ a thousand years before the general Resurrection, but only, that they shall reign with Christ a thousand years; which seems an odd Expression when applied to them who are rais'd to reign for ever with him. Add to this, that after the Resurrection of St. John's Saints to reign with Christ a thou∣sand years, Satan is loosed, and raises his Ar∣mies to fight against, and compass about  the camp of the Saints, ver. 7, 8, 9. which fairly intimates that the Saints mentioned ver. 6. as Partakers of the first Re∣surrection, were still on Earth, and not reign∣ing with Christ in Heaven. Lastly, The second part of this Opinion seems to contradict many Scriptures which ex∣presly teach that the time of the Punishment of the Wicked, shall be after the Sentence of Absolution hath been passed upon the Blessed, Matth. 25.41,—46. when all the Good have gone into everlasting Life, John 5.28, 29. at the day of Judgment, and when we shall ap∣pear
before the Judgment-seat of Christ, Rom. 2.8, 9, 16. 2 Cor. 5.10. and that they who have persecuted Christ's Members shall be pu∣nished at the Revelation of Christ from Hea∣ven, 2 Thess. 1.6-9. at the Conflagration of the World, 2 Pet. 2.9.3.7. at the day of Judg∣ment, Jude 14, 15. when he cometh in the Clouds, Rev. 1.7. and that the Crown of Glo∣ry shall be given to the Righteous at the same time. See Note on 2 Tim. 4.8. Obj. 2. Some refer to this Millennium those words of Christ, Matth. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth; say∣ing, that neither David, nor our Saviour, could understand this otherwise than of a future State, because it is not the meek, but the great ones of the World, that slice the Earth among them, and Court-flatterers that scramble for Preferment. Answ. But it is evident to a Demonstrati∣on, that David did understand this of the pre∣sent Earth, or of the Land of Canaan; for the Tenour of this whole 37th Psalm is design'd to shew, that Wicked Men shall by God's Judgments suddenly perish, whilst Righteous Men lived easily and quietly in the Land of Canaan. So ver. 9. Evil doers shall be cut off, but they that wait upon the Lord they shall in∣herit the Earth; for yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be, but the meek shall in∣herit the Earth. They that are blessed of him shall inherit the Earth, and they that are cur∣sed of him shall be rooted out. So ver. 34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee  to inherit the Earth: when the wicked are destroyed thou shalt see it. See also ver. 14, 17, 19, 23, 24, 25, 29. 'Tis therefore unadvisedly said, the Psalmist could not understand this of the pre∣sent Earth, and that upon a plain mistake of the Import of the Phrase; as if inheriting the Earth was enjoying a vast Fortune, or a great share of temporal Enjoyments here, whereas the Comfort of this Life, as our Lord teach∣eth, Luke 12.15. Consisteth not in the abun∣dance of the things that we possess. The Phrase rather imports, That Meekness is the best way to procure us a long and peaceable Life on Earth, Psal. 34.12, 14. 1 Pet. 3.10. and that the meek Person shall ordinarily have the most sure enjoyment of these things as far as they are needful; that he shall enjoy them with the greatest Quiet and Tranquillity, with∣out that Strife, Debate, Anxiety, and Trouble, which imbitter the Enjoyment of these things to others; and with the truest Comfort, Sa∣tisfaction, and Contentedness of Mind. For, as Chrysostom well observes upon the place, Because the Jews had been oft taught this Lesson in the Old Testament, our Saviour ad∣dresses himself to them in the Language they had been accustomed to; this Son of David repeateth and confirmeth to them the Promise made by David. And this I judge to be the most natural, and truest Exposition of these Words. Obj. 3. Our Saviour promises to his Disci∣ples and Followers, That for the Losses they should sustain here on his account, and for the sake of his Gospel, they should receive there an hundredfold, and sit upon Thrones with him judging the Tribes of Israel. The Words are these: And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say to you, that ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit on the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit up∣on twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Matth. 19.27, 28. These Thrones must, in all Reason, be the same with the Thrones mentioned Dan. 7.9. Apoc. 20.4. and therefore mark the same time and state. And seeing in those places they plainly signifie the Millennial State, or the Kingdom of Christ and his Saints, they must here signifie the same in this Promise of our Saviour to his suffering Followers. And as to the word , which is here translated Regenera∣tion, 'tis very well known that both the Greek Philosophers and Greek Fathers use that word for the Renovation of the World, which is to be at, or before, the Millennial state. Answ. In Answer to this Argument, I shall not take notice that what the Argument saith is promised to Christ's Disciples and Followers in general, is indeed promised only to his twelve Apostles, to them who had then lost all and followed him, Matth. 19.17. to them who had continued with him in his Temptati∣ons, Luke 22.28. The Thrones here menti∣oned therefore cannot be the Thrones spoken of in Daniel, and the Revelations; for these Thrones are peculiar to the twelve Apostles: those in the Revelations are supposed to be∣long to all that have a share in the first Resur∣rection: the Apostles sit upon these Thrones only to Judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; but they who sit on the Thrones mention'd in the Revelations, are to Rule over the Nations, and Judge them, Rev. 2.26, 27.3.21.5.10.20.4.6. But, 2dly, I grant the , or Regenera∣tion here mentioned, may be referred to the Consummation of the World, and to the new Heavens and Earth of which the Prophets speak; but then I add, this  or new Birth, is only that of the Church of Christ, that  or new Life, that  Life from the dead, she shall receive when all Israel shall be saved, and the Fulness of the Gentiles shall flow in to them. For, 1st, The Persons here to be judged are only the twelve Tribes of Israel, which makes it more than probable, that the whole Promise made to the Apostles respects their Government over these Tribes, coming in at the Close of the World after the Fall of Antichrist; and that not by a Resurrection of their Persons, but by a Reviviscence of that Spirit which resided in
them, and of that Purity and Knowledge which they delivered to the World, and chief∣ly by Admission of their Gospel to be the Standard of their Faith, and the Direction of their Lives. 2dly, It hath been observ'd already, that the Delivery of the Jews from their former Cap∣tivities and Miseries, is always represented as a , a giving of Life, and a Resurrecti∣on to the Jews. And thus may those words of St. John be primarily referr'd to them, viz. I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given to them, Chap. 20.4. though these things belong not to them only, but in general to him that overcometh, Chap. 2.26, 27.3.1. Seeing then their Return from their Captivity is in this Style of the Pro∣phets usually represented as a , a reviving, or new Life; Why may not the time of their most glorious Conversion, and Collection from all the Corners of the Earth, be by our Saviour here represented under that known Metaphor? And this Conversion of the Jewish Nation being by me placed in S. John's Epocha, viz. after the Destruction of the Beast, and the Death and Slaughter of the Armies of them that fought for him, or wor∣shipped his Image, and her converted Mem∣bers being, in my opinion, the very Bride of the Lamb, which had made her self ready, and, after a long Divorce, was now married to God again. I comply in this with all the Ancient Millenaries, and especially with, Dial. cum Tryph. p. 312. B. & p. 307. Justin Martyr, when he saith, this  is the Mystery of the Regeneration of all that expect Jesus Christ to appear at Jerusalem, spoken of by Isaiah, Chap. 66. and that all Christians entirely Orthodox expect to spend a thousand years in Jerusalem, as the Prophet Isaiah hath foretold, saying, There shall be a new Heaven and new Earth. For as these things are spoken by a Prophet of the Jews, one sent to speak these things to them, so is it beyond dispute that they chiefly and imme∣diately concern that Nation, and her  new Birth of a numerous Off-spring after a long Barrenness, Chap. 66.7, 8, 9. and her Ex∣altation to an high Estate of Excellence and Glory; and that so visible to the Gentiles, that all Nations and Tongues shall see their Glory. As for the following words, urged stifly by the ancient and some later Millenaries, viz. And every one that hath forsaken House, or Brethren, or Sister, or Father, or Mother, or Wife and Children, or Lands, for my Name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, Houses, and Brothers, and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands; and in the World to come, eternal Life. It is, in my Opinion, 1st, Very unreasonable to interpret these words of Blessings to be conferr'd upon Men after the Resurrection; for they that are thought worthy to be Sons of the Resurrection, saith our Lord, neither marry, nor are given in marriage, Luke 20.35. Whence therefore should they have these Mothers, and these Children, not to add Wives an hundred fold? They are made like to the Angels at their Re∣surrection; and what should such Angelical Persons do with, what Advantage will they reap from an hundred Houses, or a like En∣crease of Land, on Earth? If you reply, That these words of our Sa∣viour relate not to the first Resurrection, of which this Text, which speaks of Wives and Children, is to be interpreted, but only to the second and general Resurrection; I An∣swer, That the words are general, and there∣fore must include all that are Sons of the Re∣surrection. Moreover, By admitting this dou∣ble Resurrection, the first in which they that are raised might marry, or have Wives and Children, and the second in which they could not, the Objection or Enquiry of the Saddu∣cees is partly left unanswered; for this Di∣stinction doth suppose a Resurrection, in which the ground of their Enquiry might take place. 2dly, This wonderful Encrease is promised  at present,  in this time of life, Mark 10.30. Luke 18.28. in opposition to what they shall receive in the Age to come. Now the Millennium is still placed by Dr. B. in the Age to come after the Conflagration of the World; this Promise therefore cannot re∣fer to his Millennium, nor yet to any other which begins after the Resurrection of these Persons, for that Time can with no propriety of Speech be said to be now, nor can the Blessings then received be said to be received in this life. Moreover, these Blessings are to be received  with Persecutions, it being the known Observation of Criticks andPhavorinus. Grammarians, that  with a Genitive Case signifies with, and denotes  the same time, and only with an Accusative Case signifies after, and denotes  a following time; so that these Persecutions must be contemporary with the Enjoyment of these Blessings, whereas a general Peace, andDr. B. p. 184. freedom from all Persecutions, is made a neces∣sary Character of the Millennial State. Lastly, These words afford an Argument a∣gainst the Doctrine of the Millennium, be∣cause, according to them, the only Blessing to be receiv'd  in the Age
to come is life everlasting, which Blessing is confin'd to Heaven, and not to be enjoyed on Earth, our House eternal being in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. and our inheritance eternal reser∣ved in the Heavens for us: and therefore they to whom the Promise is here made are not in the World to come to live a thousand years on Earth, or to enjoy the temporal Blessings promised here, because they are not to be en∣joyed in the World to come, but now, in this present life, and because the only Blessing-pro∣mised in the World to come is not to be en∣joy'd on Earth, but is reserved in the Heavens for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. Obj. 4. St. Peter, in his Sermon to the Jews after our Saviour's Ascension, tells them that he will come again, and that there will be then a Restitution of all things, such as was promised by the Prophets. The Heavens, saith he, must receive him till the time of Re∣stitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world began, Acts 3.20, 21. Answ. I answer, That these words cannot be meant of a Restitution of all things to their former state; for sure 'tis very improper to say there will be a Restitution of all things to their former state, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets; for since these things relate to the Forerunner of our Lord Christ's coming in the Flesh, his Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, the preach∣ing of the Gospel to the Gentiles, the Reign of Antichrist, the calling of the Jews, and the coming in of the Fullness of the Gentiles, these things may very well be said to be exhi∣bited, performed, accomplished, and consum∣mated; but I see not with what propriety of truth they can be said to be restored to their former States, or be renewed, and therefore  is by the Syri∣ack rendred until the fullness of the time of all things; by the Arabick, till the time in which all things shall be perfected, or finished; byDe Resur. Carn. c. 23. Tertullian, Adusque tempora exhibiti∣onis omnium; byB. l. 3. c. 12. Irenaeus, Usque ad tem∣pus dispositionis omnium, i. e. till the time of the exhibition, or disposal of all things; by OEcumenius, till the time that all things do  come to an end: and for the con∣firmation of this Import of the word, we have the Suffrage of Hesychius and Phavorinus, that  is  the consummation of a thing. Hence then I argue thus against this Doctrine. Since Christ is to continue in Heaven till the Completion, or Consummati∣on of all things spoken by the holy Prophets, if the Millennium were any of them, Christ must continue in Heaven till the Consumma∣tion of that also, and therefore is not to come down from Heaven to reign on Earth till the Millennium be ended; nor can that be contem∣porary with our Lord's second coming, which is from Heaven. The Arguments produced in favour of this Millennium from Rom. 8.19, 20, 21. from 2 Thess. 2.1. from Hebr. 1.6. and 2.5. and from 2 Pet. 3.8-12. are sufficiently answer∣ed in the Notes upon those places.
CHAP. IV. This Chapter contains Arguments against the literal Resurrection, and the Reign of Martyrs upon Earth a thousand Years. First, From the Inconsistency of it with the happy State of Souls departed, §. I. Secondly, From the accurate Description of the Resurrection in the Holy Scripture, without any mention of a first and second Resurrection, and with such De∣scriptions of the Qualities of the Bodies raised, the efficient Cause, of the Time, Circumstan∣ces, and Consequents of it, which suit not with the Doctrine of the Millennium, §. II. Thirdly, From the Inconsistency of it with the Genius of the Christian Faith, and the Na∣ture of the Gospel Promises, §. III. HAVING thus shewed, That Scrip∣ture and Antiquity afford no sure Foundation for this supposed Resur∣rection of the Saints and Martyrs to reign with Christ on Earth a thousand Years; I proceed now to shew the Inconsistence of this Doctrine, with many things delivered in the Holy Scripture. And, §. I. First, This Doctrine seems not well consistent with the happy State of Souls de∣parted, recorded in the Sacred Writings; for can it rationally be supposed, That those Spi∣rits of Just Men made perfect, which are now with Christ, Heb. 12.23. and, being absent from the Body, are present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. Philip. 1.23. should leave those blessed Mansions, or quit that happy State, to live on Earth again a thousand Years? That they who are already entred into Rest, Luke 23.43. and who enjoy all the Delights and Satisfactions which Paradise it self af∣fords, should quit this Station to enjoy Peace and Plenty upon Earth? Can they expect to be more righteous and holy, or to have more divine and heavenly Speculations, or better Company, or a more full Fruition of their Lord on Earth, than they enjoy'd in Paradise? If not, who can imagine, That God should thus degrade them after so long enjoyment of those happy Regions, or that they should voluntarily quit these Mansions for any Tem∣poral Enjoyments of the Body, any Meat or Drink, or Earthly Pleasures, which they had formerly deny'd themselves, and were even dead to whilst they lived here, or for any Temporary Converse upon the Earth in which they only lived as Pilgrims and Strangers, still looking for a better Country, that is an heavenly? Heb. 11.13, 16. And if this Change seems not consistent with the State of happy Souls in general, much less will it comport with those especial Privileges and high Prerogatives supposed, by some Fathers, to belong unto the Souls of Martyrs, viz. that they do instantly receive their Crowns, and are admitted to a fuller Vision, and a more in∣timate Enjoyment of the God of Heaven; for the higher their Advancement is, the greater must their Degradation be, when they return again to live on Earth. So that this Doctrine seems least of all consistent with the State of those Christian Sufferers, who are supposed to be very the Persons for whom it chiefly was designed, and to whom it is chiefly promised. Let us compare the Resurrection mentioned by the Holy Scripture, with that supposed by the Millenaries, and we shall easily discern, That no Man reasonably can desire to enjoy the latter, who can be made partaker of the former. They who believe the Resurrection promi∣sed in Scripture, expect our Lord from Hea∣ven to change their vile Bodies into the like∣ness of Christ's glorious Body, Philip. 3.21. The Millenaries expect him to change, or to restore them into such Bodies as shall be still mortal, corruptible Bodies; for else, what need of Meat and Drink, what Pleasure can they reap of all their Plenty? The first ex∣pect, this corruptible should then put on In∣corruption, this mortal put on Immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. The second, That it should do this only after a thousand Years; for they suppose, [B. 4. c. 9. p. 206.] That Nature may be weak, and they may be desirous to be dissolved in the Millennial State. The first expect, That their dishonourable Bodies should be raised in Glory, ver. 43. The second, That they be first raised with their dishonourable Parts. The first, That the Body should be rai∣sed a Spiritual and a Caelestial Body, bearing the Image of the Heavenly Adam, ver. 44.48. The second, That it be first raised an Earthly Bo∣dy, bearing the Image of the Earthly Adam. And Oh! how inglorious, how despicable is the Resurrection which these Men expect, compared with the Resurrection promised in the Holy Scripture? How much more happy would the Saints and Martyrs be, could they immediately enjoy the Scripture Resurrection,
than by enjoying that which the Millenaries have allotted to them? And why should any one conceive they should not do it? Is it because there is a necessity they should first live on Earth a Thousand Years,Dr. Burnet. B. 4. c. 9. to pre∣pare them for Heaven, and eternal Glory; Ut paulatim assuescant capere Deum, as Irenaeus says,L. 5. c. 32. That they may by degrees inlarge their Capacities, fit and accustom themselves to receive God; or, as he says in another place, That they may become capable of the Glory of the Father, that is, capable of bear∣ing the Glory and Presence of God? Sure, this is not for the Credit of the Martyrs, That they should not be fit or capable to receive God, and enjoy the Glory of the Father, with∣out imploying their Contemplations and De∣votions upon Earth a Thousand Years, when these holy Persons who rise not till the gene∣ral Resurrection shall from that time be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thess. 4.17. and be im∣mediately partakers of the Beatifick Vision? Moreover, What is it that must be thus fit∣ted, and capacitated by Contemplation to re∣ceive God, and to enjoy this Blessed Vision? Is it not the Soul? And can she not as well contemplate him under the Altar, or the Throne, or whilst she doth abide in Paradise? Is coming down from those Caelestial Regions to this dull Earth, the way to elevate the Soul to Heaven? Will putting on a corruptible Body, a Body needing plenty of earthly things, and finding pleasure in them, be the way to quicken and invigorate her heavenly Flights and Aspirations? Or, is there no trueDr. Burnet. p. 203. Friendship, no ingenuous Conversation to be had in Paradise, that the Soul must descend to Earth to enjoy it? Or, is it necessary, asIn qua enim conditione laboraverunt, sive afflicti sunt omnibus modis, probati per sufferentiam, justum est in ipsa recipere eos fructus sufferentiae. Iren. l. 5. 32. Tertullian, andIn compensationem eorum quae in saculo vel despeximus, vel amisimus; siquidem & justum, & Deo dignum, illic exaltare famulos ejus ubi sunt afflicti in nomine ipsius. Tertull. adv. Marcion. l. 3. c. 23. p. 412. others argue, by way of retribution, That the Body which hath suf∣fered, may be rewarded in like kind; i. e. that it may be now gratified with bodily Delights, the Pleasures of the Throat and Palate, fine Cloaths, and innocent Diversions here on Earth? As if a change of this vile Body into the likeness of Christ's glorious Body, were not a better, and far more glorious Reward of all its Sufferings. Arg. 2. §. II. A second Argument against this Doctrine, of a proper Resurrection to reign with Christ a Thousand Years on Earth, is taken from the accurate Description of the Resurrection contained in the Holy Scripture. For, First, In all the Descriptions the Holy Ghost so largely gives us of the Resurrection; and the future Judgment in the Evangelists, and the Epistles, there is no mention of a first and second Resurrection, or of any Preroga∣tive of some Saints above others in it, or of any Precedence of any before others, as to the Resurrection of their Bodies, which might have reasonably been expected, had the Do∣ctrine been then received, in some of those pla∣ces where the thing is so largely and critical∣ly discoursed on, as to inform us twice, That the Order of the Resurrection shall be this, That the Dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Thess. 4.16, 17. and then, We that are alive shall be changed, and that Christ is raised as the first Fruits, and that afterwards they that are Christ's shall be raised at his coming: Here I confess, is mention made of an Order in the Resurrection; for it is said, In Christ shall all be made alive, every Man in his own Order, 1 Cor. 15.23. but then the Order is expres∣sed thus, Christ the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's. Whereas, according to the Millennial Hypothesis, the Words should rather have run thus; Christ the first Fruits, then the Martyrs, and a Thousand Years after, the residue of the Just. In the Epistle to the Thessalonians also, there is no Order of the Resurrection of the Dead mentioned, but of them altogether; and without distinction it is said, Them that sleep in Christ, will God bring with him, and the Dead in Christ shall rise first. In Answer to the Argument, we have been told, ThatDr. Burnet. B. 4. c. 10. p. 217. as Scripture speaks of the Re∣surrection in Gross, without distinguishing first and second, so it speaks of the coming of our Saviour, without distinstion of first and second. But this is a great oversight; for the Scrip∣ture gives express notice of Christ's coming , a second time, for the Salvation of his Servants, Heb. 9.28. and of his coming a∣gain, to receive them into those Mansions he is gone to prepare for them, Joh. 14.3. There being therefore equal reason to expect a like Distinction betwixt the first and second Re∣surrection, properly so called, the constant Si∣lence of the Scriptures as to that matter, is no small prejudice against that Hypothesis which doth suppose a first and second Resur∣rection. 2dly, The Scripture in those places con∣taineth many things which seem most plain∣ly inconsistent with that Doctrine; for either in those places the Scripture speaketh only of the second Resurrection exclusively of the
first, and then it is not true that Mr. Mead asserts, That the Day of Judgment, and the time of the Resurrection, includes both the Millennium and the General Resurrection; or, that the Scripture speaks of the Resurre∣ction in the Gross, without distinguishing be∣twixt the first and second; for, if it speaks only of the second exclusively of the first, it must speak of it distinctly from the first, or it must in those places intend to speak of both conjunctly and without distinction, and then what is said in them must be applicable to them both, without distinction. Whereas, the Scripture in those places speaketh many things: First, As to the Na∣ture of the Resurrection, and the Qualities of the Bodies raised. 2dly, As to the effici∣ent Cause of the Resurrection, our Lord Je∣sus. 3dly, As to the time of the Resurrection. 4thly, As to the Circumstances, and the im∣mediate Consequences of that Resurrection, which are by no means applicable to the first, and the particular Resurrection supposed by the Millenaries, but only to the general Re∣surrection, which all Christians own. And, First, That which the Scripture saith of the Nature and the Qualifications of the Bodies raised, is this, That they shall be raised Glo∣rious, Spiritual, Immortal and Incorruptible Bodies; for then this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Im∣mortality, 1 Cor 15.52, 49. then shall we bear the Image of the heavenly Adam, or of that Lord from Heaven who shall change our vile Bodies into the likeness of his glorious Body, Philip. 3.21. then shall we be cloathed upon with our House from Heaven, and Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, 2 Cor. 5.1, 4. Now, can a Body raised in Glory, i. e. in Cla∣rity and in Splendor, shining like the Sun, and made like to Christ's glorious Body, and like unto the Angels, as they shall be, saith Christ, who are thought worthy of the Resur∣rection, have any need of all the Plenty which Dr. Burnet hath prepared for it on Earth? Can it feed upon, or relish any of the Banquets God, saith Irenaeus, and all the Ancient Mil∣lenaries hath prepared for it? Can a Bo∣dy raised in Power, i. e. free from all Reni∣tency, all Pain and Lasfitude continue still, as Dr. Burnet [B. 4. c. 9. p. 206.] makes the Bodies of his raised Millenaries to do, under such Weakness of Nature as will not suffer them to continue long under strong Passions, or intenseness of Mind? Can a spiritual Body, free from Grosness and Ponderosity, from needing Rest, Sleep, Cloathing, Su∣stenance, receive advantage from that Univer∣sal Plenty, [Ch. 7. p. 184. p. 186.] or need those Goods of Fortune, that external Feli∣city, that Temporal Happiness he hath pro∣vided for it upon Earth? Can these Men raised with immortal and incorruptible Bodies, which have already swallowed up Death in Victory, [p. 206.] wish to be dissolved, as he saith they will? Can the Devil, when loosed, be so foolish, as to summon up his Armies to fight against, and kill them who are im∣mortal, and can die no more? Can Gog and Magog, with all their numerous Host, hope to prevail against them, or even dare to as∣sault such shining radiant Bodies as they then will have? In a word, Can such Bo∣dies need, or receive any farther Exaltation to fit them for Heaven, or for their Elevation into the Clouds, to be for ever with the Lord? If not, What should they do? why should they live a thousand Years, after God hath thus fitted and prepared them for their Habitation in the highest Heavens? I there∣fore do imagine, That when the Patrons of this Millennial Resurrection find themselves thus pressed, they will assign to their new raised Inhabitants of the Earth, a Body capa∣ble of enjoying the good things on Earth, and taking pleasure in those Goods of Fortune they have there provided for them, and leave their Bodies to be changed after the Millen∣nium, into the likeness of Christ's glorious Body, and to suffer then another Change into Caelestial and Spiritual Bodies, tho' not another Resurrection; and it seems necessary for them to admit of the forementioned Absurdities, or to admit of this Hypothesis; for when the A∣postle saith, The Dead shall be raised incor∣ruptible, and we shall be changed, their new raised Inhabitants must belong to the Dead, and so be raised incorruptible, and so incapable of those earthly Goods they mention, as their Reward on Earth, or to the Living, and then they must be changed. And yet this shift is plainly contrary to the Account St. Paul hath given us of the Resurrection of the Bo∣dy; for he expresly saith, That when this corruptible, weak, dishonourable, earthy Bo∣dy shall be raised, it shall be raised in Incor∣ruption, Glory, Power, and be a Spiritual Body: That to the Natural succeeds the Spiritual Body, to the Earthy the Heaven∣ly Body, 1 Cor. 15.43, 44. To the Body bearing the Image of the Earthly, the Body bearing the Image of the Heavenly Adam: Whereas this shift must infer a Body raised not in Glory, or in Incorruption, not a spiri∣tual and an heavenly Body, and so must make these Martyrs twice bear the Image of the earthy Adam, or at least at their Resurrection not to bear the Image of the heavenly. A∣gain, They who are then alive, and shall be changed, saith the Apostle, are only those who never slept in the Grave, ver. 51, 52. Now this cannot be true of Martyrs raised from the Dead, and so the Change here men∣tioned cannot belong to them.
2dly, This Doctrine seems inconsistent with what the Scripture most plainly hath de∣livered concerning our Lord Jesus, the effi∣cient Cause, as well as the Exemplar, of the Resurrection of those that are Christ's; for he that is the Author of this Resurrection, is , the Lord coming down from Heaven, to effect it, 1 Cor. 15.47. our Lord descending down  from the Heavens; 1 Thess. 4.16. the time when God shall give to those that have been persecuted and af∣flicted, Rest with the Apostles, who sure will have a share in the first Resurrection, is the time of the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven, 2 Thess. 1.7. The time of this Millennium, say the Patrons of it, is the time of the Restitution of all things. Now at that time, saith the Apostle Peter, our Jesus is to be sent down from the Hea∣vens, Acts 3.20, 21. they being only to con∣tain him till that time. And one would think that if the Saints must reign with Christ on Earth a thousand years, he must be with them on the Earth; but this the Patrons of the Millennium will by no means own, but took upon it as a great Absurdity. For, that Christ should leave the right hand of his Father, to come and pass a thousand years here below, living upon earth in an heaven∣ly Body; this I confess, saith Dr. BurnetB. 4. c. 10. p. 217., is a thing I never could digest. AndMr. Mead on some Passages of the Revelations, p. 603. I dare not imagine, saith Mr. Mead, of this Presence of Christ in his Kingdom, that it should be a visible Converse upon Earth; for the Kingdom of Christ ever hath, and shall be, Regnum Coelorum, a Kingdom whose Throne and Kingly Residence is in Heaven. Here then the Scripture-Account of the Re∣surrection, that it shall be effected by the Lord Jesus coming down from Heaven, and the Millennium of the Ancients, is at once rejected. For, asFilius hominis veniet, & mille annis inter homines versabitur, eosque justissimo imperio reget. l. 7. c. 24. In terra cum his ipse regnabit Epit. c. 11. p. 758. De Millenariis in genere tradit Hieronymus, quod post Resurrecti∣onem aiunt in carne Dominum cum Sanctis Regnaturum. In voce Papias. Sanctos cum Christo in terra Regnaturos do∣cuit nepos. Gennad. c. 55. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 22. Lactantius saith, the Son of God shall come, and be conversant among Men a thousand years, and rule them with a righteous Empire: he shall reign with them upon Earth. So was this the avowed Doctrine of all the ancient Millenaries; for they not only did assert his Reign on Earth, but assigned Jerusalem as the peculi∣ar place of his Residence whilst he reigned upon it. 3dly, This Doctrine is still more evidently repugnant to the time assigned for the Resur∣rection of the Just; for they are to be rai∣sed, saith the Apostle, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, 1 Cor. 15.52. for the trumpet shall sound, and (then) the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we that are alive, and have not slept, shall be changed. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Here we are taught that the dead in Christ, and so the Martyrs, shall not be raised till our Lord's Descent from Heaven, that then they shall be raised in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye; that, immediately upon their being raised, they that are then alive shall be changed.Ep. To. 3. F. 66. A. St. Jerom there∣fore said, with good ground, that the Apostle by these words, cunctam primae & secundae Resurrectionis excludit fabulam, destroys the Fable of the first and second Resurrection, by asserting that the Resurrection of all that are dead in Christ, and sleep in him, shall be performed in a moment, and in the twink∣ling of an eye, at the sounding of the last Trump, and at the Shout, or Voice, of the last Angel: which leaves no room for a whole thousand years betwixt the first and second Resurrection, unless the Angel should be supposed to shout, or the Trump sound, a thousand years. The hour cometh, saith our Lord, John 5.28. when all that are in the tombs shall hear my voice, and shall come forth. And sure that must be a long hour which lasteth a full thousand years. Again, there shall be pious Persons living and un∣changed, when all the pious that were dead are raised; for the dead in Christ shall rise first, then we that are alive shall be changed, 1 Thess. 4.16, 17. we that have not yet slept, saith the Apostle. Place now the Millennium after the Conflagration of the World, and all things in it, and where will you find these pious Men alive, or how will you preserve them from those Flames?B. 4. c. 10. p. 218, 219. Dr. Burnet finds a great Difficulty, not common to all, as he imagines, but pecu∣liar to his own Invention, of a Millennium after the Conflagration of the present Earth; viz. How Gog and Magog should get into this new Earth, the wicked being all consu∣med in those Flames. He is not hardy enough to say, that this is the Poetick Tale of the
Gyants, though he saith (p. 219.) it hath great affinity with it. And therefore he produces these Men, according to the Philo∣sophy of Lucretius and Mr. Hobbs, (p. 220.) from the slime of the Earth, and the heat of the Sun, as Brute Creatures were at first: but whence come these pious Men that have nor yet slept, into this new Earth, is a fresh Dif∣ficulty; and to this the Doctor hath yet no∣thing to say, for he either thought not of them, or was unwilling to take up with the Rabbinical Notion that they had Eagles wings given them to mount up into the Air whilst the Earth was on fire. 3dly. This Doctrine seems inconsistent with many Circumstances of the Resurrection men∣tioned in the Holy Scripture; for that speaks constantly of the Resurrection of all Saints, as of a Resurrection not to a temporal Life on Earth, but to an eternal in the Heavens. They shall come forth out of their Tombs to the Re∣surrection of Life, John 5.28. He that seeth and believeth in me, He that eateth my flesh hath eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day, Chap. 6.54. That teaches us that when Christ comes again, they shall be recei∣ved into the Heavenly Mansions prepared for them; Joh. 14.2, 3.17.24. and shall be with him where he now is; that when Christ, who is their Life, shall appear, they shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.14. that when he doth ap∣pear, they shall be like him, and see him as he is. Whereas according to the Hypothesis of the Millenaries, when Christ appears, and when he comes again, they who have been his choicest and most faithful Servants, shall not immediately be raised to eternal Life, but first to that Life which is but temporal; they shall not be received into Heavenly, but into Earthly Mansions; they shall not be glorified with him, appear with him in Glory, be like him in his Glory, or see him as he is, till they have spent a thousand Years on Earth to fit them for those blessed Mansions, and to prepare them for this Beatifick Vision. Moreover, it is said of all the Dead in Christ, of all that slept in Jesus, that they shall be raised first, and that then immediately we that are alive shall be snatched up with them in clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and then we shall be for ever with the Lord. Now if this be so, surely we cannot afterwards expect to live on Earth a thousand Years; For asCaten. in Mat. 5. p. 119. Nyssen puts the question, , what need is there that they should live below on earth, who hope thus to live in heaven, and to be ever with the Lord, especially since these words plainly seem to speak not of a temporal, but an eternal Life with Christ, not by enjoy∣ment of him upon Earth, but by Translation from it to Heaven? Again when the same Apo∣stle saith, this I say, Brethren, that flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, neither shall Corruption inherit Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.20. and thence concludes that the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed; does he not sufficiently insinuate that we shall be raised not to enjoy an Earthly but an Heavenly Kingdom; and that our rai∣sed Bodies being glorified, shall not consist of Flesh and Blood? And what then will they do with all that plenty, and that great afflu∣ence of the Goods of Fortune which the Mille∣naries do so highly value? In a word, the com∣fort which the Apostle gives the1 Thess. 1.6.2.14, 15.3.3. 2 Thess. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. Thessa∣lonians concerning their departed Friends who had suffered much Affliction, Persecution, Tribulation, and doubtless many of them Death, for Christ's sake, is only this, that they who remained alive should not prevent them in the enjoyment of the Happiness pro∣mised to the Body, but the dead in Christ should rise first, and then the living should be changed; not this, that these sufferers for the sake of Christ should rise a thousand Years be∣fore the rest to Reign with Christ on Earth, which yet is by the Millenaries deemed great matter of their Consolation, and so was very proper to have been mentioned here, had it been any Article of Christian Faith. Arg. 3. §. 3. 3dly. This Reign of Christi∣ans upon Earth agrees not with the genius of Christian Faith, or with the nature of Christi∣an Promises, or with that frame and temper of Spirit it requires from the Professors of Chri∣stianity. For, 1st. The Christian is represented as one who is entirely dead to the World, and to the things of the World; one who is not to love it, or the things of it, who is to use it as if he used it not, as one whose Conversation is in Heaven, Philip. 3.19. and it is made the Character of one who is an enemy to the Cross of Christ, that he minds earthly things; where∣as if this be a true Gospel-promise made to Christians for their Consolation and Encourage∣ment under the troubles of this present World, that they shall after this Life ended, live a∣gain on Earth a Life of Indolence, and Peace, and Plenty in the Enjoyment of the Goods of Fortune: If this be one great part of the Re∣ward which God had promised to those that suffer for his Name, sure it becomes them to have their Minds and their Affections set up∣on it, to live in expectation of it, and to de∣sire to enjoy these Goods of Fortune, this Peace and Plenty upon Earth; and it would rather be the Character of those who bear the Cross in prospect of these Blessings to mind earthly things. That, saith St. Paul, which makes the sufferings of this present World so light unto us, is this consideration, that we look not at the things which are seen, but which are not
seen, not at things Temporal but Eternal 2 Cor. 4.17.18. even at an house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens, Chap. 5.1. Whereas if this be one of the great and precious Promi∣ses contained in the Gospel, and made for the encouragement of Christians to suffer for Christ's sake they must then look not only at things Eternal, but things Temporal, or for a temporal House on Earth, as well as one eter∣nal in the Heavens, for their supposed Reign on Earth will be but temporal. Again, the Exhortation of our Lord in his admirable Sermon on the Mount runs thus, Lay not up for your selves treasures upon Earth, but lay up treasures in the Heaven, for where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. Mat. 6.19, 20, 21. And again, provide your selves bags that wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens that faileth not, Luk. 12.33, 34. St. Paul exhorts all that are risen with Christ, to set their hearts, and their affections not on things on the earth, but on things above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. and that because they are Dead with Christ unto these worldly things, and their Life in God is hid with Christ; so that when Christ, who is their life, shall appear, they shall appear with him in Glory. And yet if our Lord Christ in that very Sermon, as the Mil∣lenaries suppose, encouraged them to suffer with Patience and Meekness upon this Consi∣deration that they should inherit the Earth, and had pronounced them blessed upon this ac∣count, surely they might have suffered upon this very prospect of laying up for themselves Treasures upon Earth in this Millennium, and might have had their Hearts and Affections placed upon them; for wherefore are they bid to lay up Treasures in the Heaven, and to set their Affections on things above, but because these are the Blessings promised as the reward of Christian Piety and Patience: If then these Blessings to be enjoyed on Earth after the Resur∣rection be one great part of the reward which God hath promised to the Piety and Patience of the Christian, what reason can be given why he should not see, and set his Heart upon them also? If it be so great a Privilege to have a part in the first Resurrection, to enjoy this Indolency, Peace, and Plenty upon Earth, that the Apostle stiles them blessed who have a part in it, should they not seek, and set their Hearts upon that very thing in which their Happiness consists? And yet the comfort which our Lord, and his Apostles do afford these Christian sufferers is only this, that great is their reward in heaven, Mat. 5.12. Luke 6.23. that when they are tried they shall receive a Crown of glory, Jam. 1.12. and that they have in heaven a better, and more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. which as it placeth the Reward and Comfort of Christ's suffering Members not on Earth, but in the Heavens, and so gives us just reason to conclude our Lord, and his Apostles knew nothing of this Reign on Earth, or thought it no great mat∣ter of their consolation; so did it give occa∣sion to the Antients to conclude thus, Oecu. If the inheritance of Martyrs be in heaven, their reign on earth can be no better than a fable. Moreover, It is evident that all the antient. Patrons of the Millennium held that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs and Prophets were to be Sharers with the Christi∣ans in this reign on Earth, and that then would the promised Canaan be made good to them. Whereas the Apostle plainly tells us, that they expected no reward on Earth, nor did they mind that Canaan where they dwelt, but only waited for an heavenly Country; They confessed, saith the Apostle, that they were Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth, that they were not mindful of that Country whence they came out, but sought a better Country, that is, an heavenly, Heb. 11.13, 16. since then these holy Patriarchs, and choice Friends of of God, not only sought not after, but even disclaimed any Inheritance on Earth, seeing the only Country they did expect and look for, was an heavenly Country; seeing this only was the Inheritance God, as their God, provi∣ded for them, and therefore that only which they were to enjoy at their Resurrection, when they compleatly were to be made, and treated as the Sons of God: surely in vain must Christians hope for any Reign on Earth with them, who professing themselves Pilgrims and Strangers in it, declared they were not mind∣ful of such an Habitation in the Land of Ca∣naan, and who are at the Resurrection to be made like the Angels, and to enjoy not any earthly, but that heavenly Country which God hath graciously prepared for them. In a word, to fortel Times of Peace and Plenty to succeeding Ages, to raise the expect∣ation of a People whose Backs are bowed down, and have been long enslaved and afflict∣ed, is very suitable to this divine Oeconomy, but, to promise plenty, and the Goods of Fortune as the reward of Christian Piety and Patience, and let them know that if they suf∣fer for the sake of Christ, he will be sure to raise them up to plentiful enjoyments of the Goods of Fortune, this is too mean, too much beneath the sublime Spirit of Christianity, to be one of her great and precious Promises.
An INDEX of the Greek Words or Phrases ex∣plained in this COMMENTARY. Α , Rom. 5.7. , Rom. 14.16. , 1 Cor. 7.8. , Rom. 16.15. 1 Cor. 7.14. , Heb. 2.11.9.13. , 1 Thes. 5.17. , 1 Cor. 13.6. 2 Tim. 2.19. , 2 Tim. 3.8. Heb. 6.8. , Eph. 2.12. , 1 Joh. 5.6. , 1 Cor. 11.19. , Tit. 3.10. , Col. 3.8. , Philip. 1.10. , 2 Tim. 4.10. , Eph. 2.2. , Eph. 2.11. , Philem. 15. Jud. 7. , 2 Cor. 1.7. , Heb. 1.2. , Heb. 6.5. , Rom. 16.18. Heb. 7.26. , 1 Cor. 7.14. , Heb. 7.4. , Eph. 1.17. , Rom. 10.19. , Rom. 5.19. , 1 John. 13.8, 9. , 1 Pet. 2.24. , Rom. 8.3. 1 Pet. 3.18. , Gal. 2.15. , Rom. 9.4. , Rom. 3.5. 1 Cor. 9.8. , Rom. 6.19. , Eph. 1.10. , 1 Cor. 2.15. , Rom. 12.6. , Rom. 13.2. , 1 Cor. 2.5. , 2 Tim. 4.14. , Eph. 2.16. , Rom. 16.7. Philip. 2.25. , Col. 2.22. , Philip. 2.6. , 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 Pet. 1.5. , 1 Joh. 1.1.2.7. , Rom. 13.13. , Rom. 5.6.14.21. , Eph. 5.18. , Eph. 6.24. , Rom. 2.20. , Heb. 10.4. , Eph. 2.2. Β , Rom. 11.4. , 1 Pet. 5.13. , 2 Pet. 2.15. , 1 Thes. 2.6. , Jam. 2.8. , 1 Tim. 6.9. Γ , 1 Pet. 2.2. , Jam. 4.5. , scripseram, 1 Cor. 5.9. 3 Joh. 9. , Philip. 4.3. , Tit. 1.12. , Rom. 11.10. , Jam. 3.6. , 1 Cor. 7.34. , 1 Cor. 9.5. Δ , 1 Cor. 10.20. , Rom. 6.17. , Jam. 5.16. , 1 Tim. 2.2. , cum Genitivo, per, Heb. 1.2. 1 Tim. 2.15. , Heb. 9.20. , Rom. 12.6. , Rom. 14.1. , Rom. 14.23. Jam. 1.8. , Rom. 11.8. , Eph. 4.8. , Rom. 3.26. , Rom. 1.17. , Rom. 2.26. , Jam. 1.8. , Rom. 1.23. , Rom. 8.30. & p. 252, 253. , Col. 2.20. , 1 Cor. 11.28. Gal. 6.4. , 1 Cor. 7.40▪ 1 Tim. 2.15. Heb. 4.1. , Rom. 8.21. , Heb. 6.4. , 1 Cor. 5.5. , Rom. 11.13. 14.4. Heb. 2.18. Ε , postquam, quando, Heb. 3.7. , Eph. 2.17. , 1 Thes. 5.22. , 1 Pet. 2.9. , Col. 2.23. , quod, 1 Tim. 5.10. Formula jurandi, Heb. 3.11: , siquidem, Eph. 3.2. , 1 Cor. 7.17. pro  & , Col. 1.20. 1 Pet. 1.11. , Heb. 7.15. , Rom. 11.5, 28. , Rom. 16.13. , 1 Pet. 2.9. , Jam. 1.21. , 1 Thes. 2.13. Philip. 2.13. Rom. 11.2 Rom. 11.2 , 1 Cor. 7.13. , Eph. 5.16. , Rom, 9.17. , 1 Joh. 2.19. , 1 Cor. 6.4. , 1 Cor. 11.9. , 1 Cor. 4.9. , Philip. 4.5. , 1 Pet. 3.21. , 1 Cor. 1.2. , Heb. 2.16. , Philip. 1.1. , Eph. 3.1. Heb. 6.4. , Rom. 2.7. , Rom. 2.8. , Rom. 7.22.
, Rom. 13.8. , Heb. 5.7. , Eph. 3.1. , Rom. 13.13. 1 Cor. 14.40. , Eph. 5.4. , Heb. 12.28. Ζ , 1 Thes. 3.8. , Colos. 3.1. , 1 Pet. 2.5. , Heb. 4.12. Η , 1 Cor. 11.27. , 1 Cor. 3.13. , Eph. 5.16. , 2 Pet. 3.7. , Eph. 4.26. Θ , Jam. 1.15. , Rom. 7.4. , Col. 2.18. , 1 Thes. 4.9. , Rom. 9.5. , 2 Tim. 2.19. , Colos. 1.24. , Col. 2.18. , Rom. 12.1. , 1 Pet. 2.5. Ι , 2 Pet. 1.20. , 1 Cor. 14.16. , Rom. 15.16. , 1 Pet. 2.9. , Heb. 2.17. , 1 Joh. 2.2.4.10. , Rom. 3.25. , 1 Cor. 14.13. , Philip. 2.6. Κ , id est, Col. 1.2. idcirco, Heb. 3.19. tunc, Gal. 2.2. , quando, 1 Cor. 1.6. , Heb. 1.3.9.14. , P. 555. , 1 Joh. 2.7, 8. , Tit. 3.8. , per Deum, 1 Cor. 15.15. , Col. 2.18. , 1 Pet. 5.3. , Jam. 4.11. , Rom. 5.10. , Rom. 5.11. , Heb. 3.3. , 1 Tim. 5.11. , Jam. 5.3. , 1 Cor. 7.31. , Eph. 4.9. , Rom. 4.13. , 1 Cor. 10.16. , 1 Pet. 5.5. , Col. 1.6. , 1 Joh. 2.2. , Rom. 5.16.13.2. 1 Cor. 11.29. , 2 Pet. 2.3. , 1 Pet. 4.5. , Rom. 3.4. , 1 Cor. 6.2. , Jam. 5.12. , Rom. 8.19, 22. , Rom. 1.20. , 1 Pet. 2.13. , Philip. 4.5. , 1 Pet. 3.15. , 2 Pet. 2.10. , &c. 1 Tim. 4.2. Λ , Col. 4.17. , Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9. , 2 Pet. 3.5. , Rom. 9.33. , Rom. 5.14. , 1 Cor. 1.5. Heb. 4.13. , Rom. 14.15. Μ , non comparativum sed negativum, 1 Tim. 1.4 , 1 Pet. 1.18. , Jam. 3.5. , 2 Pet. 1.17. , Col. 2.16. , Gal. 2.5. , Col. 1.12. , 1 Tim. 2.5. , Eph. 2.14. , 1 Cor. 4.6. , Rom. 12.3. , si forte, 2 Tim. 2.25. , 1 Cor. 16.2. , Philip. 2.6. , v. 7. , Eph. 5.4. , Jude 9. Ν , verbum obsecrandi, Philem. 20. , 2 Cor. 1.17, 18. , 1 Cor. 6.19. , de mortuis spiritualiter, 1 Pet. 4.6. , de uno, 1 Cor. 15.30. , 1 Cor. 15.54. , Jam. 2.8. , Jam. 1.25. , Rom. 13.12. , Rom. 11.10. Ξ , Eph. 2.19. Ο , 2 Pet. 2.5. , Rom. 10.19.15.2. , 1 Thes. 5.11. , Rom. 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. , Heb. 2.5. , Philip. 2.7. , Rom. 4.17. , Col. 3.17. , 2 Pet. 3.13. , 1 Joh. 1.1. , Eph. 4.26. , 2 Tim. 2.15. , 1 Thes. 5.27. , Rom. 11.8. , 2 Cor. 2.16. Π , Rom. 8.28. , Rom. 3.9. , Eph. 6.13. , Philip. 2.30. , 1 Cor. 11.2. 2 Thes. 2.15. , 2 Tim. 1.12. , Heb. 3.6. , Heb. 2.1. , 2 Tim. 3.10. , 1 Cor. 13.5. , 2 Thes. 2.1. , 1 Cor. 4.15. , Eph. 3.15. , 1 Cor. 7.36. , Rom. 1.24, 28. , 1 Cor. 5.5. , Gal. 1.10. , 2 Thes. 2.11.
, Rom. 7.14. , Heb. 2.18.3.9. , Gal. 6.1. , Heb. 11.37. , 1 Cor. 4.13. , Eph. 1.14. , 1 Cor. 13.4. , Philip. 3.5. , 1 Thes. 4.6. , Col. 3.5. , Col. 2.8. , Eph. 4.5. , Rom. 14.2, 3. , Rom. 1.17. , Jude 3. , Jam. 2.1. , Rom. 11.12. , Col. 2.9. , Eph. 3.19. , Rom. 14.5. , Rom. 8.27. , 1 Cor. 14.14. , Rom. 8.15. , 1 Pet. 4.14. , 1 Cor. 2.15.5.5. Gal. 6.1. , Eph. 4.11. , Philip. 3.20. , Rom. 8.29.11.2. , 1 Pet. 1.20. , 1 Joh. 5.19. , 1 Thes. 4.6. , Tit. 2.2. Philem. 9. , Jam. 5.14. , 1 Pet. 5.1. , de, Heb. 1.7. , Eph. 3.12. 1 Pet. 3.18. , Eph. 3.11. , Rom. 14.13, 21. 1 Cor. 8.13. , Eph. 5.2. , Tit. 1.12. , 1 Cor. 14.16. , Jude 7. , 1 Cor. 3.15. , Jam. 2.1. , Col. 1.15. Ρ , 1 Cor. 4.21. , Heb. 12.24. , Heb. 6.5. Σ , 1 Cor. 3.4. , Rom. 4.1. , 1 Joh. 4.2, 3. , Eph. 5.30. , Rom. 16.20. , 1 Cor. 1.22. , Heb. 2.4. , Rom. 14.21. , Col. 2.17. , Rom. 13.12. , 1 Cor. 1.20. , 1 Tim. 5.6. , Jude 12. , Philip. 2.17. , 1 Tim. 1.18. , 2 Pet. 3.10. , Gal. 4.3. , 2 Thes. 2.1. Jam. 2.4. , 1 Cor. 11.18. , Rom. 8.10. , Philip. 3.21. , Heb. 10.9. Τ , 1 Cor. 14.40. , Jam. 1.9. , 2 Pet. 2.4. , Eph. 2.3. , 1 Tim. 2.15. , 2 Cor. 1.6. , Reb. 2.10.9.10.10.1. , 1 Thes. 2.15. , 1 Cor. 10.11. , 1 Pet. 4.7. , 1 Tim. 5.3. , 1 Pet. 2.8. , Heb. 3.16. , 1 Pet. 3.3. , 2 Pet. 2.13. , Rom. 2.20. Υ , 1 Joh. 5.6. , Rom. 8.14. , Rom. 8.23. , in Gratiam, 1 Cor. 15.30. , 1 Thes. 4.6. , 2 Pet. 2.18. , Rom. 13.11. , Eph. 6.15. , Heb. 10.39. , Heb. 11.1. , Heb. 12.15. Φ , 1 Joh. 3.2. , Heb. 1.3. , Rom. 16.16. , 1 Tim. 3.2. , 1 Pet. 3.14. , Philip. 4.2. , Col. 3.1, 2. , Jam. 1.1. , 1 Pet. 3.19. , 1 Cor. 11.14. Eph. 2.3. , 2 Pet. 1.4. , 2 Pet. 1.19. , Heb. 6.4. , 1 Joh. 2.9. Χ , 2 Joh. 10. , 2 Cor. 6.1. , Col. 3.16. , Eph. 2.8. , Eph. 4.29. , Rom. 1.12. , Heb. 1.3. , Col. 2.14. , Heb. 8.2. , 2 Pet. 3.8. , Rom. 8.1. , Rom. 13.14. , 1 Pet. 1.11. , 1 Pet. 1.11. , Rom. 16.25. , 2 Tim. 1.9. Tit. 1.2. , 1 Pet. 3.3. Ψ , Eph. 5.20. Col. 3.16. , 1 Tim. 6.20. , 1 Joh. 1.1. , 1 Thes. 2.8. , 1 Cor. 2.14. Ω , Rom. 9.32.
A TABLE of PHRASES explained in this COMMENTARY. A ABstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians 5.22 The adoption of sons, Romans 8.23. Ephesians 1.5 Affections set on things above, Colossians 3.2 The afflictions of Christ, Colossians 1.24 All are yours, 1 Corinthians 3.22 To be anathema from Christ, Rom. 9.3 Be angry, and sin not, Ephesians 4.26 The whole armour of God, Ephesians 6.13 To awake out of sleep, Rom. 13.11 B THat which was from the beginning, 1 Joh. 1.1 The breast-plate of faith, 1 Thessalon. 5.8. To be in bondage to corruption, Romans 8.21 The first-born from the dead, Colossians 1.19 To bow down the back, Romans 11.10. To do our own business, 1 Thessalonians 4.11 C TO heap coals of fire upon the head, Ro∣mans 12.20 To be in Christ, Romans 8.1 To be with Christ, Philippians 1.24 His commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3 The coming of our Lord, 2 Thessalonians 2.1 Our conversation is in heaven, Philippians 3.20 To be conformed to the world, Romans 12.2 The course of this world, Ephesians 2.2 The whole creation, Romans 8.22 To corrupt the temple of God, 1 Corinth. 3.17 D DArkness, Romans 13.12 The day of Christ, 1 Thessalonians 5.2 Dead in sins, Ephesians 2.1 Dead to the Law, Romans 7.4 Without the law sin was dead, Romans 7.8 A door of utterance, Ephesians 6.19 Not to doubtful Disputations, Romans 14.1 He that doubteth is damned if he eat, Romans 14.23 The doubtful and double-minded man, Jam. 1.8 E EDification of God, 1 Timothy 1.4 Election of Grace, Rom. 11.5. 1 Pet. 2.9 To esteem others better than our selves, Phi∣lippians 2.3 Evil days, Ephesians 5.16 Eye hath not seen, 1 Corinthians 2.9 To have eyes, and see not, Romans 11.10 F FRom faith to faith, Romans 1.17 Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Rom. 14.23 The whole family in heaven and earth, Eph. 3.15 To deny the father, 1 John 2.23 The feet shod with the preparations of the Gos∣pel of peace, Ephesians 6.15 There is no fear in love, 1 John 4.18 Flesh and blood, Galatians 1.16 Foolish talking and jesting, Ephesians 5.4. Whom he did fore-know, Romans 8.29.11.2 The form of God, Philippians 2.6, 7 The form of a servant, Philippians 2.6, 7 The fruits of righteousness, James 3.18 G TO gather together in one, Ephesians 1.1 Our gathering together in Christ, 2 Thes. 2.1 He gave gifts to men, Ephesians 4.8 The glory of God, Romans 1.23. Philippians 2.6. Hebr. 1.3. Them he also glorified, Romans 8.30 God over all, blessed for ever, Romans 9.5 That God may be all in all, 1 Corinth. 15.28 Grieve not the holy spirit, Ephesians 4.30 To groan one against another, James 5.9 The Gospel preached to the dead, 1 Peter 4.6 H THe hand-writing of ordinances, Colos. 2.14 To be heir of the world, Romans 4.13. To be heir of righteousness, Hebrews 11.7 Damnable heresies, 2 Peter 2.1 Higher than the heavens, Ephesians 4.10 Double honour, 1 Timothy 5.17 The first-fruits holy, Romans 11.16 To be cloathed with humility, 1 Peter 5.5 I FAith is imputed for righteousness, Rom. 4.5 Not to impute sin, Romans 5.13 The inward man, Romans 7.17, 22 To intercede for and against, Romans 11.2 The Saints shall judge the world, and Angels, 1 Corinthians 6.2, 3 K TO know as we ought to know, 1 Corinth. 8.2 The Lord knoweth who are his, 2 Tim. 2.19 L A Lamb without blemish, 1 Peter 1.19 The last times, 1 Tim. 4.1. 2 Tim. 3.1. The elect Lady, John 2. Ephesians 1
The law of liberty, James 1.25 The Royal Law, James 2.8 The length, &c. of the love of Christ, Eph. 3.19 The old leaven, 1 Cor. 5.7 In the likeness of man, Philippians 2.7 A living hope, 1 Peter 1.4 Living stones, 1 Peter 2.5 The Lord is at hand, Philippians 4.5 The lower parts of the earth, Ephesians 4.9 M MAn old and new, Ephesians 4.22 The measure of faith, Romans 12.3 I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, Romans 9.15 The middle wall of partition, Ephesians 2.14 To mind the same thing, Philippians 4.2 To be of the same mind, 1 Corinthians 1.10 To mortifie our earthly members, Colos. 3.5 N TO call upon the name of the Lord, Romans 10.13. 1 Corinthians 1.2 To do all in the name of the Lord, Colos. 3.17 By nature children of wrath, Ephesians 2.3 A new commandment, 1 John 2.7 Brought nigh to God, Ephesians 2.13 The night is far spent, Romans 13.12 O TO be offended, Romans 14.21 If I be offered upon the sacrifice and ser∣vice of your Faith, Philippians 2.17 P PArtaker of the divine nature, 2 Peter 1.4 The peace of God, Philippians 4.7 A peculiar People, 1 Peter 2.9 A perfect man, Ephes. 4.13. Philip. 3.15 Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14.5 Give place to wrath, Romans 12.19 Give not place to the Devil, Ephesians 4.27 To present our bodies a living sacrifice, Ro∣mans 12.1 The Prince of the power of the Air, Eph. 2.2 The children of the promise, Romans 9.8 The proportion of faith, Romans 12.6 An holy Priesthood, 1 Peter 2.5 To put on Christ, Romans 13.14 To perfect according to the Conscience, Heb. 9.10 R FOr this cause have I raised thee up, Ro∣mans 9.17 To reconcile things in heaven and earth, Co∣lossians 1.20 To redeem the time, Ephesians 5.16 The redemption of the body, Romans 8.23 The redemption of the purchased possession, Ephesians 1.14 Reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Tim. 3.8 Reprobate to every good work, Titus 1.16 The righteousness of God, Romans 1.17 He thought it no robbery to be equal with God, Philippians 2.6 S TO deliver to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5 Spiritual sacrifices, 2 Peter 1.5 A shadow of things to come, Colossians 2.17 The day-star rise in your hearts, 2 Peter 1.19 To be scandalized, and to scandalize, Ro∣mans 14.20 In whom all have sinned, Romans 5.12 Many were made sinners, Romans 5.19 Sold under Sin, Romans 7.14 The Sons of God, Romans 8.14 The Revelation of the Sons of God, Rom. 8.21 Bid him not good speed, John 2. Ephesians 10 I speak as a man, Romans 3.5 The spirit of Christ, 1 Peter 1.11 The spirit of slumber, Romans 11.10 With your Spirit, Galatians 6.18 The spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15 Comparing spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.13 A stone of stumbling, Rom. 9.33. 1 Pet. 2.6 To put a stumbling block in our Brother's way, Romans 14.13, 20 To be subject to vanity, Romans 8.20 The sufferings of Christ, 1 Peter 1.12 To let the sun go down upon our wrath, Eph. 4.26 T TEmptation in the flesh, Galatians 4.14 Taught of God, 1 Thessalonians 4.9 Turned aside after Satan, 1 Timothy 5.15 V SUbject to vanity, Romans 8.20 Our vile body, Phillippians 3.21 The day of visitation, 1 Peter 2.12 An unction from the Holy one, 1 John 2.20 An inheritance undefiled, 1 Peter 1.4 To eat, and drink unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.29 W THe wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23 To walk in the light, 1 John 1.7 To walk by the same Rule, Galatians 6.15 Phillipians 3.16 To wax wanton against Christ, 1 Tim. 5.12 To be weak, Romans 5.6.14.2 To be made weak, Romans 14.20 'Tis not of him that willeth, Romans 9.16 Whom he will he hardneth, Romans 9.18 The husband of one wife, 1 Timothy 3.2 The ingrafted word, James 1.21 The living word of God, 1 Peter 1.25 Faith working by love, Galatians 5.6
A TABLE of the MATTERS contained in the COMMENTARY. A. HOW Abraham's Body was dead, when afterwards he begat six Children, Rom. 4.19. how his Faith was without doubting, Rom. 4.20. Some Actions eminently good, and therefore generally commanded, Phil. 4.8. are not particularly commanded, 1 Cor. 9.17. Adoption includes a blessed Resurrection, Rom. 8.23. Gal. 4.7. Eph. 1.4. The Angels mentioned 1 Cor. 11.10. are the evil Angels that seduced Eve. The Angels that fell have their Habitation in the dark Air, and do not at present suffer the Torments of infernal flames, Eph. 2.2. 2 Pet. 2.4. The Worship of Angels forbidden, as not holding the Head. The Foundation of it was laid in the Platonick Philosophy, introduced among the Jews by Philo and the Alexandrian Jews, Col. 2.18.3.17. The Anointing with Oyl, why used in healing of the sick, Jam. 5.14. It affords no foundation for the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, ibid. Antichrist was in being in the time of the Apostles, 1 Joh. 2.17. Men are by God appointed to Punishment for falling into Sin, but not to fall into it, 1 Pet. 2.8. The Apostles taught not that the Resurrection might be in their time, 1 Thess. 4.15. The whole Armour of God explained, and shewed to consist not so much in any immediate Influx of the Power of God, as in such things as either are in us, or are to be used by us, Ephes. 6.14. Divine Assistance necessary to the performance of our Duty, Phil. 4.13. Jam. 1.5. See the Appendix to 2 Cor. 6. B. BAlaam was a Prophet of the true God, 2 Pet. 2.15, 16. Baptism is styled the Lavar of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Baptism is a Rite of Initiation to Christians, as Circumcision was to the Jews, Colos. 2.12. The Baptism of Infants proved from 1 Corinth. 7.14. Coloss. 2.12. An Answer to the Objections from the Faith, Gal. 3.26, 27. and the Answer of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. requi∣red to Baptism. Bishops and Deacons, Phil. 1.1. Thee Senses of the Word Bishop given by the Ancients, all confuting the Presbyterian Hypo∣thesis, 1 Tim. 3.1. See the Preface to the Epistle to Titus. A Bishop how to be the Husband of one Wife, 1 Tim. 3.2. a Lover of Hospitality, Tit. 1.8. one not immers'd in secular Affairs, 2 Tim. 2.5. Boasting is excluded, though good Works are made the Conditions of Salvation, Ephes. 2.10. See 1 Cor. 9.17. None are Members of Christ's Body who are not sincere Christians, united to him by the Spirit, Eph. 4.4. In what sense he that is born of God sinneth not, or doth not commit Sin, 1 Joh. 3.6, 8. C. WHat Charity requires us to do to all; what it permits us not to do to any; what it re∣quires or permits us not to do to our offending Brother, 1 Cor. 13.7. Spiritual Gifts, Alms-deeds, Martyrdom, may be separated from Charity, 1 Cor. 13.3. Cerinthus was contemporary with the Apostles, was an Enemy to St. Paul for teaching that Circumcision, and the Observation of the Law, was not to be imposed upon the Gentiles. He was instructed in Philosophy, and set up in Asia; was zealous for the Observation of the Law. He held that the World was made by Angels, and Jesus to be born of Joseph and Mary as other Men, Coloss. 2.10. The Divine Nature of Jesus Christ is proved 1. From his Titles, he being Jehovah, Rom. 10.13. God, Rom. 14.12. 1 Cor. 10.9. Hebr. 1.8.3.4. the true God, 1 Joh. 5.20. God manifested in the Flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16.
the great God, Tit. 2.13. God over all, blessed for ever, Rom. 9.5. the Lord of all, Rom. 10.12. one in whom dwells the fulness of the God-head, Col. 2.9. and who was in the form of God before he was made Man, Phil. 2.6. 2. From the Divine Worship ascribed to him, he being the Object of Religious Adoration and Invocation, Rom. 10.13. Col. 3.24. 2 Thess. 3.16. 3. From the divine Actions and Attributes ascribed to him, he being the Creator of all things, Col. 1.16. Hebr. 1.2, 10. the Searcher of all hearts, 1 Cor. 4, 5. omnipotent, and the Raiser of the Dead, Phil. 3.21. Col. 1.19. endued with divine Knowledge and Wisdom. The Objections of the Socinians are answered, viz. That there is one God the Father of all, and one Lord Christ, 1 Cor. 8.1. Eph. 4.6. That the head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11.3. That Christ is distinguished from God in these words, Christ is of God, 1 Cor. 3.23. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 2.2. That by him we believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.20. That he is the first-born of every Creature, Col. 1.15. That were he God, we could not be called to imitate him, 1 Joh. 3.3. Christ died for all, 1 Tim. 2.26. for every man, Heb. 2.9. for the whole World, 1 John 2.2. for them that perish, Rom. 14.15. 1 Cor. 8.11. 2 Pet. 2.1. The Church of Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica, when the Apostle writ to them, had no setled Pastors, 1 Thess. 5.13. See the General Preface. Circumcision was esteemed by the Jews as their Righteousness, Rom. 2.13.3.1. Circumcision on the eighth day only regular, Philip. 3.5. The Cloud not only a Pillar going before, but a covering over the Jews, 1 Cor. 10.1. The Coming of our Lord, when mention'd absolutely, refers to his final Advent, 2 Thess. 2.1. when said to be at hand, to his coming to take Vengeance on the unbelieving Jews, Phil. 4.5. Jam. 5.8. Contentment, in what it consists, 1 Tim. 6.8. and what exercise it requires, Phil. 4.13. What things ought not to be matters of Contention among Christians, 2 Tim. 2.14. Arguments against the Vow of Continency, 1 Cor. 7.5, 9, 25. Covetousness is properly Idolatry, Colos. 3.5. The Cup of Blessing how the Communion of the Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16, 21. The Cup is to be received by the Laity, 1 Cor. 11.25. The Custom of the Church is a Rule in matters of Indifferency, 1 Cor. 11.16. D. THE effect of Christ's Death is double, 1. Freedom from Condemnation, or Justification. 2. The vouchsafement of the holy Spirit, Rom. 8.4. We became all obnoxious to Death by one sin of Adam, Rom. 5.12. The Devils are not to be cast into Hell fire till the day of Judgment, 2 Pet. 2.4. One Man makes himself differ from another in spiritual, or virtuous Habits acquired, though not in spiritual Gifts immediately infused, 1 Cor. 4.7. The gift of Discerning Spirits was exercised in chusing Persons meet to do God service in the Ministry, 1 Tim. 1.18. Divorces common on the Womans side among Jews and Gentiles, 1 Cor. 7.11. 1 Tim. 5.10. not permitted in the Christian Law, except in case of Fornination, 1 Cor. 7.10, 13. We must Dye to Sin once for all, Rom. 6.10, 11. E. EDification respects the Knowledge of our Duty. Faith. Love. Rom. 15.2. Union. Elders among the Ruling Elders, both ordained, 1 Tim. 5.17. Jews of two sorts Teaching Elders, both ordained, 1 Tim. 5.17. Election in the Scripture phrase is not of private Persons to Salvation, but of Nations and Churches to enjoy the means of Grace, Rom. 9.11, 12. Coloss, 3.12. 1 Thess. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.9. Election to Salvation is not absolute, or to the means, but conditional upon performance of the means prescribed as necessary for the obtainment of Salvation, and is made sure by good works. 2. Pet. 1.10. Chatholick Epistles when, and why so called. Preface to them. The Epistle to the Romans placed first, as being writ to the Imperial City: St. Peter was not at Rome when it was written. Preface.
The first Epistle to the Corinthians was written by St. Paul when he was at Ephesus, A. D. 57. the second Epistle the Year following. St. Paul writ no third Epistle to them. See the Pre∣face and Note on 1. Cor. 5.9. The Epistle to the Ephesians was writ to them, not to those of Leodicea; the objections to the contrary are answered, Preface and Note on Chap. 1.15.3.2. It is the Epistle from Laodi∣cea mentioned Coloss. 4.16. and was writ not against the Gnosticks, but the judaizing Christians. The Epistle to the Philippians was written when St. Paul was Prisoner at Rome, to warn them not against the Gnosticks, but the judaizing Christians. The Epistle to the Colossians was written when St. Paul had not seen them, against the judai∣zers who endeavour'd to impose the observation of the Law upon the Gentile Converts, Preface. The first Epistle to the Thessalonians was writ not from Athens, but from Corinth, after the Council at Jerusalem. The second was not writ before the first. The first Epistle to Timothy was writ after St. Paul's Enlargement from his Bonds at Rome. The second at the close of St. Paul's Life, and was the last of his Epistles. See the Preface and Notes on Chapter the fourth. The Epistle to Titus was writ after St. Paul's Bonds. The Epistle to Philemon contains very useful matter. The Epistle to the Hebrews was written by St. Paul to the Jews in Judea, to prevent their Apostasie from the Faith, and that not in Hebrew, but in Greek, Preface. The objections of Mr. Clerk are answered, Hebr. 2.3.9.2. The Epistle of St. James, was writ by the Apostle James, the same with James the just, Bi∣shop of Jerusalem, to the twelve Tribes, to correct the errors which had obtained among the Jews, and to comfort the believing Jews under the Persecutions they then suffer'd, Preface. The first Epistle of St. Peter was not written in the 44th Year of Christ, but towards the close of St. Peter's Life, not to the dispersion of believing Jews, mentioned Act. 8.1. but to the great dispersion of the Jews throughout Asia, to encourage them to persevere in the Christian Faith, and to prevent their siding with the Jews in their Rebellion, Pre∣face. The second Epistle was writ by St. Peter a little before the Destruction of Jerusalem, to arm the believing Jews against that fiery Trial which was come upon them, and against those scoffers which questioned the promise of Christ's coming, Preface. The first Epistle of St. John was written before the destruction of Jerusalem, Preface. The second and third Epistles by the same Author. The Epistle of St. Jude was written by Jude the Apostle, and Brother of James. The Essens abstained from Flesh, Wine, Women, and this they did through Philosophy, as did the Pythagoraeans, Colos. 2.21. They had the names of Angels in veneration, and would not touch any unclean thing, Coloss. 2.21, 22, 23. The eternity of future punishments is shew'd to be well consistent both to the Justice and Goodness of God, and the Objections to the contrary are answered, Appendix to 2 Thess. 1. The eternity of future Punishments fully asserted by the Primitive Christians, Heb. 6.2. Both Jews and Christians mourned at the Excommunication of their Members, 1 Cor. 5.2. How far the Laity were concerned in the Excommunication and Absolution of Offenders, 2 Cor. 2.6. F. WHat is the Gift of Faith, 1 Cor. 12.9. Of the nature of Faith, and of Justification by faith alone, Pref. to the Epist. to the Galat. Faith doth oblige us to, but doth not formally include obedience, Rom. 6.1.10.9. Preface to the Epistle to the Galatians, §. 1, 2, 3, 4. It is the act of Faith that justifies, Rom. 4.25. Gal. 3.6. Faith in Christ raised from the dead is justifying Faith, Rom. 4.25.10.9. The Faith once delivered to the Saints admits of no addition, Jud. 3. What is the one Faith mentioned, Eph. 4.5. Faith how made perfect by works, Jam. 2.22. St. Paul, and St. James reconciled, ibid. God why stiled the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Colos. 1.2. The whole Family of God includes the Angels, and the blessed above, and the Saints on Earth, Eph. 3.15. The Fore-knowledge of God discovered in prophetical predictions, 1 Pet. 1.2. Fornication is a work of the flesh, against the moral Law, excluding us from God's Kingdom, rendring us obnoxious to his wrath, and fit to be cast into Hell fire, Preface to the first Epistle to the Corinthians.
What Doctrines are fundamental, 1 Joh. 2.5. It may be a fundamental Error to teach that in the name of Christ as necessary to Salvation, which he hath not taught by himself, or his Apostles, Gal. 1.9. How far the Church of Rome is guilty of this, ibid. G. THe Gentiles how without the Knowledge of God, and without Hope, Eph. 2.12. See Hea∣thens. Revealed before the Calling of the Gentiles how far, and not revealed, Eph. 3.6.10. Why the Holy Ghost is not mentioned in the Prefaces to the Epistles, Colos. 1.2. The Gifts mentioned 1 Cor. 12. severally explained, 1 Cor. 12.12. The Gnosticks held it lawful, in times of Persecution, to deny the Faith, 2 Pet. 2.1. they blasphem'd the Angels, Note on Ver. 10. they taught that Believers might live as they would, they being saved by Grace, and not by good Works, Jud. 4. and yet they call'd themselves the spiritual Men, Ver. 19. they were never persecuted, 2 Pet. 2.4. they despised not Governments, but flattered them, Note on ver. 10. God would have all Men to be saved, 1 Tim. 2.4. and would not that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3.9. God gives Men up to their Lusts, 1. By leaving them destitute of those providential Dispen∣sations which might restrain them. 2. By permitting Satan to delude, and to provoke them to the commission of them, Rom. 1.24. He sends among them strong Delusions, not by inspiring into them any Evil, not by inclining, or exciting them to it, not by necessitating them to sin, but by permitting Satan to do it, 2 Thess. 2.11. The Gospel emphatically styled the Truth, Rom. 2.8. How preached to all the World, Coloss. 1.6. Those who are not Gods by nature, are not to be worshipped, Gal. 4.8. Nor owned to be Gods by Christians, 1 Cor. 8.5. In what sense we are saved by Grace, Eph. 2.9. Tit. 3.5. H. PUre Hands, are Hands free from Blood and Cruelty, from Injustice and Bribery, from Filthiness and Impurity, 1 Tim. 2.9. How God hardned the Heart of Pharaoh, Rom. 9.17. The Jews, Greeks, and Romans, prayed with their Head covered, and their Women with their Hair loose, 1 Cor. 11.5. Heathens believed not the Resurrection of the Body, 1 Thess. 4.14. they had no firm Belief of a future Life, 2 Tim. 1.10. their Philosophy, and vain Deceit, Col. 2.8. they counted simple Fornication no Sin, Eph. 5.6. 1 Thess. 4.5. their secret Mysteries were full of Impurity, Eph. 5.12. they held Drunkenness a Duty in the Solemnities of Bacchus, ver. 18. they practised unnatural Lusts, 1 Thess. 4.5. they were addicted to Lying, Eph. 4.25. and to Stealing, Ver. 28. the Heathens Creed, Hebr. 11.6. They lay under two Infelicities, 1. The want of a Covenant-Relation to God, 2. Subjection to the Delusions of evil Spirits, Col. 2.15. How far we may allow that Heathens, acting according to the Law of Nature, and owning the true God, may be accepted, and rewarded by him, Rom. 2.15. An Heretick is one who maintains some Doctrine or Opinion subverting the Faith, acting, in so doing, against the Convictions of his own Conscience, Tit. 3.10. The Duties of Husbands and Wives, Coloss. 3.18, 19. The Holiness of God in Scripture, what it signifies, 1 Pet. 1.16. I. THE Apostle speaks not of Jacob and Esau personally, but nationally considered, Rom. 9.13. dispersed through Asia, Africa, and Europe, 1 Pet. 1.4. The Jews they had many Proselytes, 1 Pet. 1.1. are stiled the twelve Tribes after their Dispersion, Jam. 1.1. they thought God framed the World with a particular regard to them, 1 Cor. 3.22. they Apostatized from the Roman Government, 1. From desire of Freedom from Tribute, 2. Of Dominion over other Nations, and 3. From an Opinion that they ought to own no other Lord or Master but God only, 1 Pet. 2.16. 1 Tim. 6.2. their corrupt Manners render'd them as bad as Heathens, Rom. 2.1, 13, 22.
Unbelieving Jews, Their loose Doctrines. (First,) That no circumcised Jew went to Hell. (2dly,) That the hearing of the Law, rendred them acceptable to God without the doing of it. (3dly,) That the doing some Pre∣cepts would atone for the neglect of others, Rom. 2.13. Jam. 2.11. How grievously they Persecuted the Christians, and especially the Be∣lieving Jews, Gal. 3.4. Preface to the Epistle of St. James. They in many cases thought themselves obliged to abstain from all Flesh, Rom. 14.2. They suffer'd from the Romans not only in Judea, but in all places where they were seated, Preface to the Epistle of St. James. That there shall be a general Conversion of the Unbelieving Jews, Rom. 11.24, 36. The Words of the Apostle cannot be Expounded of the Spiritual Israel, i. e. the then Be∣lieving Jew and Gentile, Appendix to Rom. 11. p. 68, 69. Nor be applied to any Conversion of the Jews, from the writing that Epistle, till the times of Constantine, From p. 69 to 76. This hath been the constant Doctrine of the Church, p. 66, 67. The Prophesies touching the Calling of the Jews, are not yet fulfilled, p. 76, 77. The Believing Jews, their Apostasie, and the Causes of it, 2 Thess. 2.3. they knew not that the Gentiles should be made Heirs of the same Body, and enjoy the same Privileges with them, Eph. 2.6. The Image of God in Man, consists not primarily in Holiness, but in Dominion, 1 Cor. 11.7. Jam. 3.9. How Christ is the Image of God, Colos. 1.15. What the Imitation of God and Christ requires, 1 Joh. 3.3. Imposition of Hands in Ordination, an Apostolical Tradition derived from the Jews, 1 Tim. 4.14. Of this laying on of Hands, the Apostle speaks, 1 Tim. 5.22. Imposition of Hands after Baptism Apostolical, Heb. 6.2. The necessity of an infallible Guide, not proved from Eph. 4.11, 14. 1 Tim. 3.15. The Book of Job an History, and not a Parable, Jam. 5.11. Justification in St. Paul, implies only the Absolution of a Sinner from his past Sins; this Justification is necessarily by Faith alone, From p. 245. to p. 252. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, in opposition to the Works of the Law, is Fundamen∣tal, Gal. 1.9. A double Justification is mentioned in Scripture, Rom. 2.13. Gal. 3.14. Good Men under the Law were justified by Faith, Gal. 3.14. Quest. Whether all that is necessary to be believed for Justification, be this single Proposi∣tion, That Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ? Preface to the First Epistle of St. John. The Apostles neither taught, nor believ'd, that they might live till the day of Judgment, 1 Thess. 4.17. K. IN what sense Christ's mediatory Kingdom is to last for ever, 1 Cor. 15.28. Prayer for Kings was used constantly by Jews and Christians, 1 Tim. 2.2. God's Knowledge sometimes includes his Power and Will, 2 Pet. 2.9. L. THE Epistle from the Laodiceans is the Epistle to the Ephesians, Col. 4.16. The last Times were in being when the Apostles writ, 1 Tim. 4.1. The Law was given by Angels, as God's Ministers, Heb. 2.2. for the extirpation of Idolatry, Gal. 3.19. The Apostle, Rom. 7. speaks not of a Regenerate Man, but of a Man under the Law before Grace, Rom. 7.25. The Whole Duty of Man is to live Soberly, Righteously, Godly, Tit. 2.13. The love of God signifies, God's love to us, our love to him, and how it is perfected in us, 1 Joh. 2.5.—4.12, 17. The Freedom and Greatness of God's love to us, 1 Job. 4.10. and of the love of Christ. Eph. 3.19. Love is the fulfilling of the Law to God and Man, Rom. 13.10. Obedience to God's Commands the Test of Love, 1 Joh. 5.3. The lustings of the sensual Appetite, are Temptations to Sin, and the Root of Sin, but not Sin imputed, till consented to, Jam. 1.4.
M. THE whole Man consists of Spirit, Soul and Body, 1 Thess. 5.23. The Man of Sin, not Mahomet, not the Papal Hierarchy, not C. Caligula, not Simon Magus, and the Gnosticks, Preface to the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians. But the Jewish Nation, with their Sanhedrin, Scribes and Pharisees, Ibid. The Objections against this Opinion are Answered, Ibid. His coming was to be attended with an Apostasie, from the R. Government, or from the Faith. His Characters, opposition to God and his Church, his exalting himself above all that is called God, his fitting in the Temple of God, his coming with lying Wonders, agree exactly to the Jews, Notes on Chap. 2. The , or he which letteth Claudius, Ibid. Manna was Spiritual Food to the Jews, 1 Cor. 10.3. Marriage, allow'd to the Clergy, Tit. 1.6. Heb. 13.4. no hindrance to Prayer, 1 Cor. 7.5. When seasonable, Ver. 36. it ought to be in the Lord, i. e. of one Christian with another, 1 Cor. 7.39. 1 Pet. 3.7. rejected by some Heathens upon several Accounts, 1 Cor. 7.1. The pretended Sacrifice of the Mass refuted, Heb. 10.18. Christian Matrons are to be grave in Apparel, not costly in Attire, nor much concern'd about it, as becometh Women professing Godliness, 1 Tim. 2.10. 1 Pet. 3.4. The Duty of Masters towards their Servants, Eph. 6.9. Melchisedeck, a Man, not an Angel, not Sem, not the Eternal , how without Father and without Mother, Heb. 7.3. Ministers Maintainance, a standing Ordinance of Christ, 1 Tim. 5.18. The necessity of the Ministerial Function, notwithstanding the Unction from the Holy One, 1 John 2.27. The Millennium not proved, from Christ's Appearance and Kingdom, 2 Tim. 4.1. from the Thousand Years as one Day, 2 Pet. 3.8. from the new Heavens and new Earth, Ver. 13. Confuted, Note on 1 Cor. 15.22, 52. Colos. 3.4. This is a great Mystery, rela not to common Matrimony, but only to the Marriage of Christ with his Church, Eph. 5.32. N. THE Heresie of the Nico∣laitans. was in the time of the Apostles, 2 Pet. 2.1. They deceived many, and caused Christianity to be blasphemed, Note on Ver. 2. They were most impious in their Principles, and lascivous in Manners, Ib. They practised their Impurities in the Day time, Ver. 13. They blasphemed, and spake evil of Angels, Ver. 10. They spake swelling Words of Vanity, Ver. 18. O. ALl Oaths not unlawful, Gal. 1.20. 1 Thes. 5.27. Heb. 6.16. Where the Offence being Scandalous, hath incurred the Censures of the Church, the Pardon of the Church is necessary for the comfort of the Offender, 2 Cor. 2.7. The Offerings of Christians were imploy'd to purchase the Freedom of Christian Servants from their Heathen Masters, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ordination is not therefore a Sacrament, because it was at the first attended with a , 2 Tim. 1.6. None were admitted to it without Tryal, 1 Tim. 3.10. P. PAstors and Teachers were Men endow'd with spiritual Gifts, Eph. 4.11. Patience under Sufferings, gives Experience of the sincerity and constancy of our Faith, Jam. 1.3. Perfect Patience shews us to be entire in Faith, Trust in, Dependance on God, in Resignation to his Will, in Christian Fortitude and Temperance, as to the Pleasures, Honours, and Con∣cernments of this World, in love to God, and to our Brother, Jam. 1.4.
Motives to it from these Considerations; 1. That we only suffer if need be, 1 Pet. 1.6. 2. The loss of fading and unsatisfactory things, Jam. 1.11. And are assured of, 3. Divine Assistances and Consolations under Sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.14. 4. A glorious Reward of all our Sufferings, Jam. 1.12. St. Paul did indeed fight with Beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15.32. What it is to be perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6. Philip. 3.15. Perseverance of true Believers to the end, confuted, Note on Colos. 1.23. 1 Thes. 3.5. Heb. 10.38. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. Second Epist. of St. John, Ver. 8. Not promised in these Words: He shall confirm you to the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. He that hath begun a good Work will perfect it, Philip. 1.6. Faithful is he that hath called you, who also will do it, 1 Thes. 5.24. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. They went out from us, but they were not of us, 1 John 2.19. St. Peter had not been at Rome when St. Paul writ or came to Rome, Rom. 1.15. Nor was he there when he writ his Epistles from Rome, Preface to the First Epistle of St. Peter. He could be only Bishop of the Jewish Church at Rome, Rom. 1.15. He had no Supremacy over the Apostles, Gal. 2.10. The Heathen Philosophers were Vain-glorious, Mercenary and Wicked, 1 Thes. 2.9. Polygamy is forbidden, 1 Cor. 7.4. How the Powers that be are of God, Rom. 3.7. The Words there said, relate to the false and pernicious Opinions of the Jews, Ibid. What Resistance of them is forbidden, Rom. 13.2, 3. This Place declares not how far a Man is the Higher Power, or when he ceaseth to be so, and therefore reacheth not our Controversie, Rom. 13.2. We own him as the Higher Power, to whom we pay Tribute, Rom. 13.6. Prayer must be performed in Faith, Jam. 1.6, 8. without Wrath, 1 Tim. 2.9. The Prayer of Faith mentioned by St. James, was miraculous, Jam. 5.15. What it is to pray without ceasing, 1 Thes. 5.17. Prayer to Saints departed, was not practised by the Apostles, Colos. 4.4. Prayer for the Dead, cannot be proved from the Apostle's Prayer for Onesimus, 2 Tim. 1.18. or from Rom. 15.30. The Pre-existence of Souls confuted, Rom. 9.13. Christ was consecrated to his Priesthood by his Sufferings, Heb. 2.10. and therefore did not properly exercise his Sacerdotal Function till after-Death, Heb. 5.5, 10. by offering his Blood in the Heavens, Rom. 4.25. Three sorts of Promises menti∣oned in the New Testament: The Promise of the Messiah, of the Spirit, of an Eternal Rest, Gal. 3.27. The Gift of Prophesie, 1 Cor. 12.10. Purgatory cannot be proved from 1 Cor. 3.15. Q. HOW the Spirit may be quenched, 1 Thes. 5.19 R. REconciliation and Access to God, is only thro' Christ's suffering for us, Eph. 2.18. The Reason why it must be so, Ibid. Redemption is double, from the guilt of Sin, by the Remission of it. from Death, the Punishment of Sin, by the Redemption of the Bo∣dy from it, Eph. 1.14. the necessity of this Redemption, Ver. 6. Remission of Sins by a free Act of Grace and Mercy, is absolutely necessary to our Access to God, and Relation to him, Eph. 1.7. The Wisdom of this Dispensation, Ver. 8. A Threefold Rest of the Jews in the Land of Canaan, a Rest after the Example of God, a perpetual Sabbatism, Heb. 4.3, 7, 10. The Rest mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 4.16. relates not to the Millennium. Christians had no Rest from Persecution after the Destruction of Jerusalem, Heb. 4.3. Respect of Persons, wherein it consists, Jam. 2.1. That the Resurrection was past already, was the Doctrine of Menander, 2 Tim. 2.18. The Jews held, that the Messiah was to raise the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.22. The Holy Spirit the Principle, or the efficient Cause of the Resurrection, Rom. 8.11.
The Resurrection of the same Body, which was laid down in the Earth, asserted and proved, and the Objections to the contrary are Answered, Preface to the First Ep. to the Corinthians. The Philosophers opposed and derided the Resurrection of the Body, 1 Cor. 15.33. It is to rise clothed upon, 1 Cor. 15.38, 54. and with such Qualities as the Philosophers gave to that Body wich they styled the Vihicle of the Soul, Ver. 44. The Apostle seems to say, That when it enters into Heaven, it will be no longer Flesh and Blood, Ver. 50. The Revelation of Jesus Christ double, by the Preaching of the Gospel to the World, by his Gorious Descent from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.5. Revelation of Sal∣vation double, by the Gospel bringing Life and Immortality to light, at Christ's econd Appearance, without Sin to Salvation, Ibid. Rewards, not of strict Justice or Mrit, but of Grace and Promise, 2 Thes. 1.7. The Righteousness of Christ imputed, no proved from Rom. 5.18. 1 Cor. 1.30. Philip. 3.9. Rome, why called Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13. S. THE Sabbatarian Doctrine confuted, Colos. 2.16. The Christian Sabbath confirmed, 1 Cor. 16.2. Sacrifices of a sweet Odor, were also expiatory Sacifices, Eph. 5.2. Heb. 9.19. What it is to sanctifie God in our Hearts, 1 Pet. 3.15. They who were delivered to Satan, were punished with bdily Diseases, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Tim. 1.20. The Scriptures were written by the Assistance of the Ho Ghost, 1 Pet. 1.12. tho' not al∣ways dictating the very Words, but so presiding over the Apostles as to preserve them from Error, General Preface. They contain all things requisite to Salvation, 2 Tim. 3.17. And were written with sufficient Clearness, 2 Cor. 4.3. No places are cited by the Apostles as out of Scripture, which ere not in the Scriptures of the Old Testament, Jam. 4.6. Justice due to Servants; how they are to be treated, Colos. 4.1. how to demean themselves to their Masters, Colos. 3.22, 23, 24. Every deliberate and wilful Sin committed against the Convictions of the Conscience, is mor∣tal, and deserveth Death, as being a breach of the Gospel Covenant, requiring sincere O∣bedience, Jam. 1.15. — 4.17. The Sins of good Men are not included in those Words, All things shall work together for good to them that love God, Rom. 8.28. God cannot necessitate, or excite to sin, or infuse any evil in us, 2 Thes. 2.11. How we all sinn'd in Adam, Rom. 5.19. Only Personal Sin is imputed, and that is not imputed when it is not punished, Rom. 5.14. What is the Sin unto Death, 1 Joh. 5.17. The Words, those that sleep in Christ, are not to be restrained to the Martyrs, 1 Thes. 4.14. The Souls of the Wicked shall not be annihilated, Appendix to 2 Thes. 1. §. 6. Good Souls departing hence, are with Christ in a far better State, and therefore not in a State of insensibility, Philip. 1.24. But not admitted into Heaven, or enjoying the Vision of God, till the Day of Judgment, 2 Tim. 4.8. The Holy Spirit, is the Object of Religious Worship, Rom. 9.1. Omniscient, is with God, and is God, 1 Cor. 2.11. a Person uncreated, 1 Cor. 12.11. The Spirit of Man derived not from the Parents, but from God, Heb. 12.9. hath a Capacity of Understanding when separated from the Bo∣dy, 2 Cor. 12.3. All Proselytes to the Jewish Religion, or to the Worship of the God of Israel, are styled Strangers by them, Eph. 2.19. Christ suffered in our stead, to bear the punishment of Sins, and to reconcile us to God, Rom. 2.26.—5.10. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Eph. 2.18. Eph. 5.2. 1 Tim. 2.6. Heb. 1.4.—2.17. 1 Pet. 2.34. 1 Pet. 3.18. 1 Joh. 2.2.—4.10. Why it was meet he should thus suffer, Eph. 1.8. Heb. 2.10.—10.14. The Gift of discerning Spirits, 1 Cor. 12.10.
T. TWo things requi∣site to a Temple, First, That it be a place appropriated to God's u, 2dly, That he should dwell in, or be present wit it, 1 Cor. 6.19. That our Bodies are thus the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and therefor to be kept holy, ibid. Temptations are either to Sin, or for Tryal of our Faith; these latter onl are Matter of our Joy, and why they are so, Jam. 1.2. Thanks due to God for all things, Eph. 5.20. Timothy and Titus were not Bishops fixed to a Diocess, But yet they had Episcopal Jurisdictio over Presbyters. Hence it follows: First, That this Superiority cannot be contrary to the Gospel Rule. 2dly, That it is not repugnant to e constitution of Churches in the Apostle's Times, for Men to ave Jurisdiction over more than one particular Congregation. 3dly, That the Apostolical Pwer of governing Churches, might be com∣mitted to others whom hey would intrust with it. 4thly, That they did commit this trust to others, is proved from Scrip∣ture, Tradition and Reason, Preface to the Epistle to Titus. Traditions extra Scriptural not proved, frm Rom. 16.17. o from 1 Cor. 11.2. nor from 2 Thes. 2.14. The Church no sure Keeper of Tradions, 2 Thes. 2.14. Oral Tradition disproved, 2 Pet. 1 15. The Gift of Tongues, imparted er modum habitus. He that pake with them understood himself, 1 Cor. 14.2, 3, 4. His Crme was this, That he chose to shew his Gift in unknown Words, wen he might have spoken intelligibly, Ver. 13. What it is to try the Spits, and how they might then he tryed, 1 Joh. 4.1. Transubstantiation refute, 1 Cor. 11.24. 1 Pet. 2.12. V. THE Unity of te Catholick Church, wherein it consists, Eph. 4.4. Universal Gace taught, 2 Pet. 3.9. W. THE Misterial Function is stiled a Warfare, 1 Tim. 1.18. The Wicked are to be punished, at the Day of Judgment, 2 Pet. 2.9. at the Conflagration of the World, Chap. 3.7. God wil execute the Punishments threatned to the Wicked in the Life to come, App. to 2 Thes. 1. §. 4. Widows, of four Kinds, 1 Tim. 5.3. Who are Widows indeed, Ver. 5. What Widows are to be chosen Deaconesses, and when, Ver. 9, 10. How it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, Rom. 9.16. God worketh in us to will and to do, not by such a Physical Operation as makes it necessary for us to will and do what he would have us, but by a Moral Operation exciting us to will, and suggesting to us what we ought to do, Philip. 2.13. Freedom of Will is put in Opposition to Necessity, 2 Cor. 9.7. Philem. 14. 1 Pet. 5.2. The Word of God heard, read and preach'd, is the ordinary Means of Conversion, Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.25. The Holy Spirit concurs with it, not by a Physical, but Moral Operation, Ibid. The Word of Wisdom, and of Knowledge, 1 Cor. 12.9. The working of Miracles, Ibid. In what sense the Woman shall be saved by Child-bearing, 1 Tim. 2.15. The World to come, either the Age of the Messiah, or, the Kingdom to be erected after the four Monarchies, styled, , Heb. 2.5. Writing is more effectual to convey the Truth to Posterity than Oral Tradition, Philip. 3.1. See Oral Tradition. What it is to write the Law in our Hearts, Heb. 8.10. Z. THE Zeal of the Jews was full of Bitterness, Jam. 3.14. And of Ignorance in the things they were zealous for, 1 Tim. 1.7. T Jewish Zealots, of what Temper they were, Jam. 4.2, 3, 17. FINIS.
