W3273A 99832508 36982
The Compleat SERVANT-MAID; OR, THE Young Maidens Tutor. Directing them how they may fit, and qualifie themselves for any of these Employ∣ments. Viz. Waiting-Woman, House-keeper Chamber-Maid, Cook-Maid, Vnder Cook-Maid, Nursery-Maid, Dairy-Maid, Laundry-Maid, House-Maid Scullery-Maid. Composed for the great benefit and advan∣tage of all young Maidens. LONDON, Printed for T. Passinger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, 1677.
Licensed January, 20. 1676/7 R. L'Estrange.
THE EPISTLE TO ALL Young Maidens. Sweet Hearts, THe great desire I have for your good, advan∣tage and preferment in the world, is such that I respect
it equal with my own, I have therefore with great pains and industry composed this lit∣tle Book, as a Rich Store∣house for you, from whence you may be furnished with such excellent directions as may qualifie you for, and make you capable of serving the greatest person of Honour or Quality, or Gentleman or Gentlewoman either in City or Country: For besides those necessary directions which teaches you how to behave
and carry your self, and per∣form your duty in the several employments of Waiting-wo∣man, House-keeper, Cham∣ber-Maid, Cook-Maid, Vn∣der Cook-Maid, Nursery-Maid, Dairy-Maid, Laun∣dry-Maid, House-Maid, and Scullery-Maid. You have directions for Preserving, Conserving, and Candying, for Writing the most usual hands for Women, as Mixt Hand, Roman and Italian Hands: for Arithmetick,
as much as is necessary for your Sex: also the Art of Carving, and Distilling, with choice Receipts for Physick and Chyrurgery: for Washing and Starching of Tiffanies, Points, and La∣ces: for making of Pies, Custards, Cheesecakes and the like: also for making of Pickles and Sawces, and for dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, and for making several sorts of Creams and Sylla∣bubs.
With variety of choice Receipts for preserving the Hair, Teeth, Face, and keeping the Hands white: Also a Bill of Fare, of the most usual and proper meats for every Month in the Year. So that if you carefully and diligently peruse this Book, and observe the directions therein given, you will soon gain the Title of a Complete Servan-maid, which may be the means of making you a good Mistress: For there
is no Sober, Honest, and Discreet man, but will make choice of one, that hath Gained the Reputation of a Good and Complete Servant, for his Wife, rather than one who can do nothing but Trick up her self fine, an like a Bartholomew Baby is fit for nothing else but to be looked upon. This Consideration, wil I hope, Stir you up to th Attaining of these most Ex∣cellent
Qualifications, and Accomplishments. Which that you may do, is the ear∣nest desire of your Well Wisher.
General DIRECTIONS TO Young Maidens. IF You would endeavour to gain the esteem and re∣putation of a good Ser∣vant, and so procure to your self not only great Wages, but also great gifts and vales, the love and respect of your Lady, Master or Mistress, and the blessing of God Almighty upon all your lawful endeavours, you must in the fir place, be mindful of your duty to your reator, according to the advice of Solo∣ Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creaton in  thy Youth. Be careful that you  rayers morning and evening, that ou red good books, and hear Sermons as often as conveiently you can.
2. That you endeavour carefully to please your Lady, Master or Mistress, be faithful, diligent and suhmisive to them, encline not to sloth or laze in bed, but rise early in a morning. 3. Be humble and modest in your beha∣viour. 4. Be eat, cleanly, and huswifely, in your clothes, and lay up what money can handsomely be spared. 5. Be careful o what is given you, o what you have in your charge, that by so doing you may oblige them to be loving and kind to you, and cause them to speak well of you. 6. Do not kep familiarity with any bu those, with whom you may improve you time. 7. If you are entrusted with any secrets be careful that you reveal them not. 8. Be careful that you wast not, or spoi your Ladies, or Mistresses goods, neither si you up junketing a nights, after your Maste and Mistress be abed. Lastly, If you behave your self civilly, a be neat, cleanly, and careful to , yo will be cherished and encoura not onl with good words but good . Thus have I given you se short directions
in general, I shall now give you par∣ticular directions for every employment, from the Waiting Gentlewoman to the Scul∣lery Maid, that so you may be capable of serving in the highest as well as the lowest place.
Directions for such as desire to be Waiting Gentlewomen. IF You desire to be a Waiting Gentlewo∣man to a person of honour or quality, you must, 1. Learn to dress well. 2. Preserve well. 3. Write well a legible hand, good lan∣guage and good English. 6. Have some skill in Arithmetick. 7. Carve well. Having learned these, you must remem∣ber to be courteous and modest in your be∣haviour, to all persons according to their degree, humble and submissive to your Lord and Lady, or Mser and Mistress, neat in your habit, loving to Servants, Sober in your countenance and discourse, not using any wanton gesture, which may give Gen∣tlemen any occasion to suspect you of levity; and so court you to debauchery, and by that means lose a reputation irrecovera∣bl I shall now give you some short dire∣ctions, whereby you may learn to preserve, write well, carve well, and have some skill in Arithmetick.
Directions for Preserving, Conserving, and Candying. Hw to preserve Barberies. Make choice of the largest and fairest bun∣ches, picking off the withered or shrunk Baberies, and wash them clean, drying them in a clean cloth, after this take a quan∣tity of Barberies, and boyl them in Claret Wine till they be soft, then strain them well thorow a strainer, wringing the juice hard thorow it, boyl this strained Liquor with Sugar till it be thick and very sweet, let it then stand till it be cold, then put your bran∣ches of Barberries into Gally pots, and fill thm up with this Liquor: By this means you will have both the Syrup of Barberies, and their preserves. To Preserve Pears. Take Pears that are sound and newly ga∣thered from the Tree, indifferent ripe, then lay in the bottom of an earthen pot some dried vine leaves, and so make a lay of Pears, and leaves till the pot is filled up, laying be∣twixt each lay some sliced Ginger, then pour in as much old wine as the Pot will hold, laying some heavy thing on the Pears, that
the Pot may not swim. To preserve green Pippins. Take half a score green Pippins from the Tree, pare them, and boil them in a Pottle of water till they are like a pulp, strain them from the cores, then ake two pound of Su∣gar, and mingle it with the Liquor or pulp so strained, then set it on the fire, and as soon as it boyleth put in the Pippins you intend to preserve, so let them boil leasurely till they be enough, when they are preserved they will be green. In like sort you may preserve Quinces, Plumbs, Peaches, and Apricocks, if you take them green. To preserve Black Cherries. Take them fresh or as they come from the Tree and out of the Stalk, take one pound of Sugar for two pounds of Cherries, seeth and clarifie them, and when they are half boyl'd put in your other Cherries, and let them seeth softly together, until the Sugar may be drawn between the fingers like small Threads; when it is almost cold put the Cherries in the Pots with the Stalks downwards. To Preserve Mulbrries. Take Mulberries and add to them their weight in Sugar, having wet your Sugar with some juice of Mulberries, then stir your Su∣gar together and put in your Mulberries, and
boyl them till they are enough, then take them out and boyl the Syrup a while, then put in the Mulberries and let them stand till they be cold. To Preseve Oranges and Lemmons. Take the fairest you can get, and lay them in water three days and three nights, to take a∣way their bitterness, then boyl them in fair water till they be tender, make as much Sy∣rup as will make them swim about the Pan, let them not boyl long, for then the skin will be tough, let them lye all night in the Syrup, that they may soak themselves therein: In the morning boyl the Syrup to a convenient thickness, then with it and the Oranges and Lemmons, fill your Galli∣pots and keep them all the year. In this manner you may preserve Citrons. To Preserve Gooseberries. Let the Gooseberries be gathered with their stalks on, cut off their heads and stone them, then put them in scalding water and let them stand therein a little while, then take their weight of Sugar finely beaten, and lay first a Layer of Sugar then of goose∣berries in your preserving Pot or Skillet, till all be in, put in for every pound of Gooseberries a spoonful of fair water, set them on the Embers till the Sugar be melt∣ed,
then boyl them as fast as you can, till the Syrup be thick enough, when cold put them up. In this manner you may preserve Raspices and Mulberries. To Preserve Roses. Take one pound of Roses, three pound of Sugar, one pint and a little more of Rose-water, make your Syrup first, and let it stand till it be cold, then take your Rose leaves having first clip'd off all the white, put them in the cold Syrup and co∣ver them, let your fire be very soft, that they may only simmer two or three hours, then whilst they are hot, put them out into pots or glasses for your use. To Preserve Cherries. Take Cherries fully ripe and newly ga∣thered, put them to the bottom of the pre∣serving pan, let the Cherries and Sugar be of equal weight, throw some Sugar on the Cherries and set them on a quick fire, and as they boyl throw on the Sugar till the Sy∣rup be thick enough, then take hem out and put them into a Gllipot whilst they are warm, it will not be amiss to add two or three Spoonuls of Rose-water to them. To preserve Ripe Apricocks. Let the weigh of your Sugar equal the weight of your Apricocks, what quantity
soever you have a mind to use, pare and stone your Apricocks, and lay them in the Sugar in the preserving pan all night, and in the morning set them on the embers all night till the Sugar be melted, and then let them stand and scald an hour, then take them off the fire and let them stand in that Syrup two days, and then boyl them sotly, till they be tender and well coloured, and after that when they are coloured, put them up in glasses or pots, which you please. To Preserve green Walnuts. Take Walnuts and boyl them till the wa∣ter tasts bitter, then take them off and put them in cold water and peel off their rind, and put to them as much Sugar as their weight, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on a fire, and when they boyl up, take them off, and let them stand two days, then boyl them again once more. To Preserve Eringo Roots. Take Eringo Roots fair and knotty, one pound, and wash them clean, then set them on the fire and boyl them very tender, peel off their outermost skin, but break them not a you pare them, then let them lye a while in cold water, ater this you must take to every ound of Roots, three qurtes of a pound of
clarified Sugar, and boyl it almost o the height of a Syrrup, and then put in your Roots, but look that they boyl but gently, together, and stir them as little as may be for fear of braking, when they are cold put them up and keep them. To Preserve Ennula-Cmpana Roots. Wash them and scrape them very clean, and cut them thin to the Pith, the length of your litle finger, and as you cut them, put them in water, and let them lye there thirty days, shifting them twice every day to take away the bitterness: Then weigh them, and to every pound of Roots, add twelve ounces of Sugar clarified first, boyl∣ing he Roots very tender, then put them in∣to the Sugar, and let them boyl upon a gen∣tle fire until they be enough, having stood a good while on the fire, pot them up be∣tween hot and cold. To make Conserve of Roses. Take red Rosbuds, clip all he white ei∣ther bruised or wihered rom them, then add to every pound of Roses three pound of Sugar, stamp the Ross very small, put∣ting to them a little juice of Lemons or Rosewater as they become dry: When you think your Roses small enough, then put your Sugar to them, so beat them together
till they be well mingled, then pot it up in Gallipots or Glasses. In this manner is made the conserves of Flowers of Violets, which doth cool and open in a burning fever or Ague, being dissolved in Almond milk and so taken, and excellent good for any inflam∣mation in children. Thus yon may also make the conserve of Cowslips, Marigolds Sage and Scabious, and the like. How to Candy all sorts of Flowers, as they grow wih their Stalk on. Take the Flowers and cut the Stalks som∣what short, then take one pound of the whitest and hardest Sugar you can get, put to it eight spoonuls of Rosewater, and boyl it till it will roul between your little finger and your Thumb, then take it from the fie and cool it with a stick, and as it waxeth cold dip all your flowers, and taking them out again lay them one by one on the botom of a Sieve, then turn a Joynt-stool  the feet upward, set the sieve on  eet thereof, then cover it with a fa linnen cloth, and set a chafing dish of s in the midst of the stool underneath  sieve, and the heat thereof will dry yo andy speedi∣ly, which will look very ply, and keep the whole year.
To Cndy Eringo Roots. Take of your Eringo Roots ready to be preserved and wigh thm, and to every pound of Roots, you must take of the purest Sugar you can get two pound, and clarifie it with the whites of eggs exceeding well, that it may be as clear as Crystal: It bing clarified you must boyl it to the height of Manus Christi, and then dip in your Roots two or three at once, till thy are all can∣died: put them in a stove and so keep them all the year. The best wy to dry Plumbs. Take Plumbs when they are fully grown, with the Stalks to them, however let them be green, split them on the one side, and put them in hot water but not too hot, and so let them stand three or four hours, then to a pound of them take three quarters of a pound of Sugar beaten very fine, and eight spoonuls o water to every pound, set them on hot embers till the Sugar be melted, and er that boyl them till they be very tender,  them stand in their Syrup two or  ys to plump them, then take them out and wash the Syrup from them with warm w, and wipe them dry in a fair Linnen clot, then set them on plaes, and let them dry n a stove, dry them not in an
Oven; for then they will be tough. Colours for Fruit. If you would colour fruit yellow, you must make use of saffron, for the best green colour take sap green, and for the best red, Indian lake, &c. You must be sure to mix the colours with Gum Arabick dissolved in Rosewater. To make Marmelade of Quinces. Take of the fairest Quinces, wash them very clean and stamp them very small, and wring out as much juice as you can, then take other Quinces and cut them in six pie∣ces, put them in a pot and let them be eva∣porated with hot water, until they be tho∣rowly mellow, then take half a pot ull of the former juice, and pour it upon the for∣mer, stewed and cut to pieces, break it well together and put the rest of the juice among it, then wring it thorow a clean thin cloth, seeth no more of this juice at once han will fill a box therewith, and put white Sugar to it as much as you please. How o mae Syup f Violets. Boyl fair water and scum it, and to every ounce so scum'd and boyl'd, take six quar∣ters o the blew of Violets, only shit them
as before nine times, and the last time take nine ounces of Violets, let them stand be∣tween times of shiting twelve hours, keep∣ing the Liquor still on hot embrs, that it may be but milk warm, after the first shift∣ing, you must stamp and strain the last nine ounces of Violets, and put in only the juice of them, then take to every pint of this Liquor thus prepared, one pound of Sugar finely beaten boyl it and keep it stir∣red till all he Sugar be melted, which you must do if you can before it boyl, afterwards boyl it up with a quick fire. To make Syrup of Roses. Take Damas Roses and clip off the white of them, for every pint of water, take six ounces of Roses, boyl your waer first and scum it, then let thm stand twelve urs, winging out the Roses and putting in new eight times, then wringing out the last put in the juice of four ounces only, and so make it up as bfore. To make Syrup of Coltsfoot. Take the leavs of Coltsfoot and wash them very clean, then wipe them wih a clean cloth leaf by la, then dry them well with a cloth, then beat them in a morter and put them in a strainer, and wring all e juice ou of them and put it into glasses,
nd let it stand in them to settle all Night, he next day pour out the clearest of the uice from the grounds into a clear bason, and take for every pint thereof a pound of Suga finely beaten, boyl the juice of Coltsfoot softly on a Charcole fire, and when you have well scum'd it, put in the Sugar according to its proportion, and so let ther boyl together keeping it with due scummin until it will stand on a stiff purl, dropping it on a plate: Then take it from the fire, and pour it thorow a Jelly bag into a fair Bason, putting first a branch or two of Rosmary into the bags bottom, then keep it stirring with a spoon until it be lukewarm, otherwise it will have a Cream upon it, so letting it stand all night, put it in what ves∣sels you think fit to keep it in, for your fu∣ture use and service. By the foresaid rules and directions, you may now make most sorts of Syrups now in use, as Syrup of Wormwood, Betony, Burrage, Bugloss, Carduus, Cammomil, Succory, Endive, Strawberies, Fumitory, Puslain, Sage, Sabious, Scordium, Hous∣leek and the like. Thus having given you some short dire∣ctions for Preferving, Conservig, and
Candying, I shall in the next place give yo some rules and directions, how you may attain to write a good legible Hand. Directions for Writing the most Vsual and Legible Hands for Women; as Mixt Hand, Roman Hand, and I∣talian Hand. Before I come to give you full directions or the writing of the aoresaid Hands, I shall give you some instructions how to make a pen, hold a pen, how to sit to write, together with some other necessaries for writing. How to make a Pen. Having a peknife with a smooth, thin, sharp edge, take the first or second quill of a Goose wing and srape it, then hold it in your lft hand with the feather end from you, beginning even in the back, cut a small piece off sloping, then to make a slit, ente the knife in the midt of he first cut put in a quill and forc it up, so  as you desire the slit should be in lngh, which done cut a piece sloping a way rom the other side a∣bove th slit, and fashion the mo by
writing sample
writing sample
writing sample
off both the sides equally down, then place he nib on the nail of your left hand thumb, nd to end it draw the edge into it slnting, nd being half thorow turn the edge almost ownright and cut it off. How to hold your Pen. Hold the pen in the right hand, with the ollow side downward, on the left side place your Thumb rising in joynt, on the left side you middle finger near half an inch from the end of the Nib, and your forefin∣ger on the top, a small distance from your Thumb. How to sit to write. Chose a foreright light, or one that comes on the left hand, hold your head up he distance of a span from the paper, when you are writing hold not your head one way nor other, but look right forward: Draw in your right elbow, turn your hand outward and bear it lightly, gripe not the pen too hard, with your left hand stay the paper. Necessaries for Writing. Let your Ink be thin, such as may freely run from the pen, let the paper which you write on be white, fine, and well gumm'd, for dispatch procure a round ruler, for cer∣tainty a flat one, at your first writing rule
double lines, with a quill cut forked the depth of your intended letters, or else with a black lead pen: Rub your paper lightly with gum-sandarac beaten fine, and tyed up in a linnen cloth, which makes the pa∣per bear ink better, and the pen run more smooth. Directions for Writing of Mixt Hand. In writing of this Hand, I would advise you to a pen with an even nib, a long slit, and not too hard, rule double lines that you may keep your Letters even at head and foot. Keep a waste paper under your hand, where∣on to try every letter beore you write it fair, at the first write slowly and carefully, diligently mind your Copy, and observe the true proportion and agreement of Letters. First, In their compassing, as the a. b. d. g. o. p. q. &c. which must be made with e∣qual whites. Secondly, In their lengths and depths, keep them even at head and foot. Thirdly, Keep the stems of all letters to an equal height. Fourthly, Let all incline one way, to the right hand or to the left.
Fifthly, In making all heads of long let∣ters, begin them on the left side, then turn your pen to a flat, and draw it down smooth∣ly on the right side. These Rules well observed, will be suffi∣cient for this Hand; therefore I shall pro∣ceed to give you Directions for the Roman Hand. When double lines are ruled, and every thing ready; with an indifferent size pen, well cut, first imitate the small l. n. and o. so long till you can make them well: then proceed to make the small letters that bear resemblance one to another, as the c. e. a o. g. q. then the b. d. f. h. k. l. and A. which stems or body stroaks keep often equal height. Directions for Italian Hand. Since the exact writing of these Hands depends wholly on the form of an Oval, I would advise you to use your hand to the making of a larger and lesser Oval. This Hand must be written with a pen that hath a clear long slit, and a long small nib; and the hand in writing hereof must be bore
lightly and freely. In your imitation, ob∣serve the rule for likeness of letters delive∣red in the Roman. In Joyning you mu unite all such letters, as will naturally joyn by small hair strokes, drawn with the lef corner of the pen; and imitate the Copy. Here place the two Plates. I shall now give you some directions, whereby you may understand so much o Arithmetick, as is necessary for keeping your Accounts; viz. Numeration, Additi∣on and Substraction.
Directions for Arithmetick. Of Numeration. NUmeration is that part of Arithmetick, whereby we may duly value and ex∣press any figure set down in their places, and that you might the better know and under∣stand what it is, I have here inserted the Table of Numeration. C. of Millions. X. of Milions. Millions. C. of Thousands. X. of Thousands. Thousands. Hundreds. Tens. Vnites. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
This Table hath nine places, and in eve∣ry one of them are set the value of each fi∣gure, at the upper end of the Table; so that by this you may learn to express any Number. Every figure hath its denomina∣tion; as one Unites, another Tens, ano∣ther Hundreds, &c. So that if you would number the first line, which are all Ones, you must begin with the first figure on your left hand; look over the head of it, and you will see its denomination, which is hun∣dreds of Millions: you must therefore rec∣kon thus, one hundred and eleven Millions, one hundred and eleven Thousands, one Hundred and Eleven: Two hundred twen∣ty two Millions, two hundred twenty two Thousand, two Hundred Twenty Two: and so of any of the rest of the figures. Thus much for Numeration, which shews you the place of the figures. The next thing you must learn is Addition, which shews you the adding together of figures.
Of Addition. ADdition is that part of Arithmetick, which shews to collect or add divers Summs together, and to express their total value in one Summ. As for example, suppose you had disbur∣sed for your Lady several summs of mo∣ney; as,   lib. For Wine. 5 For Sugar. 4 For Oranges. 3 For Lemons. 2 In all 14 Now, to know how much the total of this is which you have laid out, you must add them up together; beginning at the bottom, say, 2 and 3 makes 5, and  and 5 is 14. So that it doth  the total summ which you  ursed, is 14 pounds; therefore mak  stroke at the bottom, and set down 14 underneath, as you see in the example.
Thus much may suffice for pounds alone, but if your disbursments consist of pounds, shillings, pence and farthings, you must set it down after this manner.   lib. s. d. q. For Wine, 7 12 09 2 For Oranges, 0 17 03 1 For Lemons, 1 02 11 3 For Sugar, 3 09 04 2 For Quinces, 1 15 03 0 For Aprecocks. 0 07 09 0 Total 15 05 05 0 Now to cast up this, you must know that for farthings make one penny, twelve pence make one shilling, twenty shillings make one pound: Therefore, in he first place add up the farthings; saying, 2 and 3 makes 5, and 1 is 6, and 2 is 8, which is all he number of farthings; you must therefore say, 8 farthings make two pence, which you must carry to the next Row to∣wards your left hand, which is pence; set∣ting down a cypher or round 0 underneath the farthings, because there doth remain no odd farthings. Now add up the pence, saying, 2 which you carried, and 9 is 11, and 3 is 14, and 4 is 18, and 11 is 29, and
is 32, and 9 is 41: Then say 41 pence make three shillings, 5 pence; therefore et the 5 pence underneath the title pence, and carry the 3 shillings to the next row on your left hand, which is shillings; saying, 3 which I caried, and 7 is 10, and 15 is 25, and 9 is 34, and 2 is 36, and 17 is 53, nd 12 is 65: Then say 65 shillings make 3 pound 5 shillings; which 5 shillings set down under the row of shillings, and car∣y the 3 pound to the next row on the left and, which is pounds; saying, 3 which  carried and 1 is 4, and 3 is 7, and 1 is 8, and 7 is 15; which 15 set down under the row of pounds: and then you will plainly see, that the total of what you have dis∣bursed comes to fiteen pounds, 5 shillings, and 5 pence. Now to prove whether your Summ be right added or cast up, you must cut off the uppermost line, with a stroke drawn as you may see in this example. Then cast up all lib. s. d. q. 07 12 09 0 00 17 03 01 01 02 11 03 03 09 04 02 01 15 03 00 00 07 09 00 15 05 05 00 07 12 07 02 15 05 05 00 your Summ to that roke; which by so ing, you will find come to seven pound, welve shillings, se∣ven pence, half pen∣ny; which set down
underneath your otal Sum: Then add  Summ with the uppermost line you cut off and if they both make the same Summ  the Total, the Sum is right cast up, otherwise not, as you may see by this example for seven pound, twelve shillings, seve pence half penny, added to the uppermo line, which is seven pound, twelve shilling nine pence, half penny, makes the tot Summ, which is fifteen pound, five shilling five pence. Thus much for Addition; the next thin you are to learn is Substraction.
Of Substraction. THis rule teacheth you to substract a les∣ser sum from a greater, and then to know what remains, as suppose your Lady order you to receive of Iohn Iones, an hun∣dred and twenty pounds, and then to pay o Goodman Stiles seventy five pounds, how would you know what you have remaining in your hands? To do this you must first set down the greatest sum, then underneath the lesser Sum: As for Example. Now subtract the   lib. Received 120 Paid 75 Remains 45 lesser from the great∣er, then you will see what remains which you must do thus: Say 5 from 0 I can∣not, but 5 from 10 and there remains 5. Then say one which I borrowed and 7 is 8, 8 from 12 and there remains 4. which set down under the 7 as you see in the example So you may plainly see if you receive a hun∣dred and twenty pound, and pay away se∣venty five pounds, you must have remaining in your hands forty five pounds.
Another example, Suppose you receiv for your Lady at several imes, these su of money ollowing.   li. s. d. Received 212 14 10   75 09 0   30 12 0   05 04 03 In all 324 00 11 which added up together makes three hun∣dred twenty four pounds and eleven pence. Then suppose you have paid out these   li. s. d. Paid 127 14 06   49 02 04   32 03 09   07 04 10   214 06 05 sums following which added together, makes in the Total that you have paid, two hun∣dred and foureen pounds, six shillings, and five pence. Now to substract and know what you have remaining, set down the total of what you have received, and underneath the to∣tal of what you have paid, thus. Then substract, say∣ing   li. s. d. Received 324 00 11 Paid 214 06 05   109 14 96 five pence from e∣leven pence and there
emains sixpence, which set down under he pence, then say six shillings from nought I cannot, but take 6 shillings from twenty and there remains 14 shillings, which set down right under the shillings, then go to the pounds and say, one that I borrowed and 4 is 5, 5 from 4 I cannot, but take 5 from 14 and there remains 9 which set down right under 4 in the pounds, then say one as I borrowed and one is 2, 2 from 2 and there remains nothing, which set down un∣der, then say 2 from 3 and there remains one, which set down right under the 2 So you will plainly see, there remains one hun∣dred and nine pounds fourteen shillings and sixpence. Now for proof to know whether your sum be right, add the two lowermost lines together, and if they produce the same figures which the uppermost line hath, then is your sum right and not otherwise. Thus huve I briefly and plainly shewn you so much of Arithmetick, as is necessary for your keeping account of what you re∣ceive and disburse for your Lady, Master, or Mistress. I shall now give you some di∣rections for carving.
Directions for Carving. I Shall in the first place acquaint you with those proper terms that are used by the curious in the art of carving. In cutting up all small birds it is proper to say thigh thm, as thigh hat Woodcock, thigh that Pidgean: But as to others say, mince that Plover, wing that Quail, and wing that Partridge, allay that Pheasant, untack that Curlew, unjoynt that Btern, disfigue that Peacock, display that Crane, dismember that Hern, unbrace that mallard, frust that Chicken, spoyl that Hen, sawce that Capon, lift that Swan, reer that Goose, tire that Egg: As to the flesh of Beasts, un∣lace that Coney, break that Deer, leach tha Brawn: For Fish, chine that Salmon, iring that Lamprey, splat that Pike, sawce that Plaice, and sawce that Tench, splay that Bream; side that Haddock, tuk that Bar∣bel, culpon that Trout, transon that Eel, tranch that Sturgeon, tame that Crab, barb that Lobster &c. How to Lift a Swan. Slit her right down in the middle of the
Breast, and so clean thorow the back, from the Neck to the Rump, and so divide her e∣qually in the middle, without tearing the flesh from either part. Having layed it in the dish with the slit side downwards, let your sawce be Chaldron apart in sau∣cers. Hw to Rear or Break a Goose. This must be done by taking off the Legs very fair, then cut off the Bellypiece round, close to the lower end of the breast, lace her down with your knife clean thorow the brest, on each side two thumbs bredth from the Brest bone, then take off the Wings on each side with the flesh which you first laced, raising it up clear from the bone, then cut up the merry thought, and having cut up a∣nother piece of flesh which you formerly la∣ced, then turn your Carkass and cut it a∣sunder, the back bone above the loyn bones, then take the Rump end of the backbone, and lay it at the fore end of the merry-thought with the skin side upward, then lay your pinnion on each side contrary, set your legs on each side contrary behind them, that the bone end of the Legs may stand up cross in the middle of the dish. and the wing pin∣nions
on the out side of them, put under the wing pinnions on each side, the long slices of flesh which you did cut off from the brest bone, and let the ends meet under the leg bons. How to Cut up a Turkey or Bustard. To do this, you must raise up the leg very fair then open the joynt with the point of your sharp knife, yet take not off the leg, then lace down the brest on both sides, and opn the brest pinnion, but take it not off, then rase up the merry-thought betwixt the brest bone and the top of the merry-thought, lace down the flesh on both sides of the brest bone and raise up the flesh called the brawn, turn it outwards on both sides, but break it not, nor cut it off, then cut off the wing pinnion at the joynt next the body, and stick on each side the pinnion in the place where you turn'd out the brawn, but cut off the sharp end of the pinion, take the middle piece and that will just fit the place, you may cut up a Capon or Pheasant the same way, but be sure you cut not off the pinnion of your Capon, but in the place where you put the pinnion of the Turkey, place there your di∣vided Gizard on each side half.
Ho to dismember a Hen. To do this you must take off both the legs and lace it down the breast, then raie up the flesh and take it clean off with the pin∣nion, then stick the head in the brest, set the pinnion on the contrary side of the Carkass, and the legs on the other side, so that the bones ends may meet cross over the Carkass, and the other wing cross over upon the top of the Carkass. How to unbrace a Mallard. Raise up the pinnion and the leg, but take them not off, raise the merry-thought from the brest; and lace it down slopingly, on each side the brest with your knife. To unlace a Coney. In doing this you must turn the back down∣wards, and cut the belly flaps clean off from the kidneys, then put in the point of your knife between the kidneys, and loosen the flesh from each side the bone, then turn up the back of the Rabbet and cut it cross be∣tween the wings, and lace it down close
by the bone on each side, then open the flesh from the bone against the Kidneys, and put the leg open softly with your hand: but pluck it not off, then thrust in your knife betwixt the Ribs and the Kidney, slit it out, then lay the legs close together. How to allay a Pheasant. To do this you must raise his wings and legs, and so proceed as you are before taught in the dismembring a Hen. To display a Crane. In doing this you must unfold his legs and cut off his wings by the joynts, then take up his wings and legs and sawce them with powder of Ginger, mustard, vinegar and slt. You may dismember a Hern in the same manner, and sawce him accord∣ingly. Thus have I given you some short; but necessary directions, which may qualifie you for the waiting upon a person of honour or quality.
Directions for such who intend to be House-keepers to Per∣sons of Honour or Quality. THose persons who would qualifie themselves for this employment, must in their behaviour carry themselves grave, solid and serious; which will inculcate into the beliefs of the persons whom they are to serve, that they will be able to govern a Fa∣mily well. They must endeavour to gain a competent knowledge in Preserving, Con∣serving, and Candying, making of Cates, and all manner of Spoon meats, Jellies and the like. Also in distilling all manner of Waters. They must likewise endeavour to be careful in looking after the rest of the Servants, that every one perform their du∣ty in ther several places, that they keep good hours in their up-rising and lying down, and that no Goods be either spoiled or embezelled. They must be careful also, that all Strangers be nobly and civilly used in their Chambers, and that your Master or
Lady be not dishonoured through neglect or miscarriage of Servants. They must like∣wise endeavour to have a competent know∣ledge in Physick and Chyrurgery, that they may be able to help their Mamed, sick and indigent Neighbours; for commonly, all good and charitable Ladies make this a part of their House-keeper's business. Directions for Distilling of Waters. To make Aqua mirabilis. TAke three pints of White Wine, of A∣qua vitae and juice of Celendine, of each a pint; one dram of Cardamum, one dram of Mellilot-flower, Cubebs a dram, of Gallingal, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Gin∣ger, of each a dram: Mingle all these toge∣ther over night; the next morning et them a stilling in a glass Lymbick. This admi∣rable Water dissolveth the swelling of the Lungs, and restoreth them when perished: It suffereth not the blood to putrifie, neither need he or she to breath a vein, that useth this excellent Water often. It cureth the Heart-burn, and expelleth Melancholy and
Flegm, it expelleth Urine, and preserveth a good colour in the face, and is an utter e∣nemy to the Palsie: Take three spoon-fuls of it at a time, morning or evening, twice a week. To make Dr. Stephens his famous Water. Take a Gallon of Gascoin Wine, of Ginger, Galingal, Cinnamon, Granes, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Annis-seeds, Caraway-seeds, Cori∣ander-seeds, Fenil-seed and Sugar, of every one a dram; then take of Sack and Ale a quart of each; of Cammomile, Sage, Mint, Red Roses, Tyme, Pellitory of the Wall, Wild Marjarom, Wild Tyme, Lavender, Penny-Royal, Fenil Roots, and Setwal Roots, of each half a handful: then beat the Spice small, and bruise the herbs, and put all toge∣ther into the Wine, and so let it stand sixteen hours, stirring it now and then then distil it in a Limbick, with a soft fire. The first pint of the Water by it self, for it is the best. The principal use of this Water is against all old Diseases; it preserveth Youth, com∣forteth the Stomach, cureth the Stone, of what nature soever, using but two spoon∣fuls in seven days. It preserved Dr. Stephens, ten years Bed-rid, that he lived to ninety eight years.
An excellent Water for the Eyes. Take a new laid Egg and roast it hard, then cut the shell in the midst, and take-out the yolk, and put some white Coper as where the yolk was; then bind the egg together again, and then let it lie till it begin to be a Water; then take the White forth from both sides the Egg, and put the same into a glass of fair running Water, and so let it stand a while; then strain it through a fair Linnen Cloth, and keep it close stopped in a glass; and therewith wash your eyes mor∣ning and evening. To make an excellent Plague-water. Take a pound of Rue; Rosemary, Sage, Sorel, Celandine, Mugwort, of the tops of red Brambles, Pimpernel, Wild Dra∣gons, Agrimony, Balm, Angelica of each a pound: Put these together in a pot; then fill it with White Wine above the Herbs, so let it stand four days; then distil it in an A∣lembick for your use.
To make an excellent Surfeit-Water. Take Celandine, Rosemary, Rue, Pel∣litory of Spain, Scbious, Angelica, Pim∣pernel, Wormwood, Mugwort, Betony, Agrimony, Balm, Dragon and Tormen∣til, of each half a pound; shred them ve∣ry small, and put them into a narrow mouth∣ed pot, and put to them five quarts of White Wine; stop it close, and let it stand three days and nights, stirring it morning and eve∣ning; then take the Herbs from the Wine, and distill them in an ordinary Still; and when you have distilled the Herbs, distil the Wine also; wherein is Vertue for a weak Stomach. Take three or four spoonfuls at any time. To make Angelica-Water. Take a handful of Carduus Benedictus, and dry it; then take three ounces of An∣gelica Roots, one dram of Myrrh, half an ounce of Nutmegs, Cinamon, and Ginger, four ounces of each, one dram and an half of Saffron; of Cardonius, Cubebs, Gallin∣gal and Pepper, of each a quarter of an ounce, two drams of Mace, one dram of
Grains; of Lignum Ales, Spikenard, Iun∣cus Odoraus, of each a dram; Sage, Bou∣rage, Bugloss, Violets and Rosemary flowers, of each half an handful: bruise them, and steep them in a pottle of Sack twelve hours, and distil it as the rest. To make Mint-Water. Take two parts of Mint, and one part of Worm-wood, and two parts of Carduus; put these into as much new Milk as will soak them: Let them infuse five or six hours, then distil it as you do Rose-Water; but you must often take off the head, and stir the Water well with a stick. Drink of this Water a Wine-glass full at a time, sweetned with white Sugar to your taste. To make a very good Cordial-Water: without stilling. Take two quarts of Brandy, and keep it in a great glass with a narrow mouth; put into it of Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinamon, Gin∣ger, Cardamum seeds, Coriander seeds, A∣nis-seeds, Liquorish; of each of these half an ounce bruised; Long Pepper and Grains, of each one dram bruised, Elecampane one
quarter of an ounce bruised: Let all these steep in the Brandy a fortnight; then pour it out into a long glass softly, so long as it will run clear: then put more Brandy into the glass where the Ingredients are, and let that stand three weeks; and so long as you find there is any strength in the Ingredients, still put in more Brandy, and let it stand e∣very time longer and longer. Then take your first two quarts of Brandy which you poured of, and put in it four ounces of white Sugar-candy, and so much Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers as will colour it, with store of Leaf Gold: Give two spoonfuls at a time. It is good in case of any Illness or Swoun∣ing, to drive out any infection and veno∣mous humours. To make Poppy Water. Take of Red Poppies four pound, put to them a quart of White Wine, then distil them in a common Still; then let the distil∣led Water be poured upon fresh flowers, and repeated three times; to which add two Nutmegs sliced, Red Poppy flowers a pugil, White Sugar two ounces: set it to the fire to give it a pleasing sharpness, and order it ac∣cording to your taste.
To make Rose-Water. Stamp the Leaves, and first distil the Juice, afterwards distil the leaves; and so you may dispatch more with one Still, than others with three or four; and this Water is every way as Medicinable as the other; ser∣ving well in all Decoctions and Syrups, though it be not altogether so pleasing to the smell. To make Spirit of Roses. Bruise the Rose in his own juice, adding thereto, being temperately warmed, a con∣venient proportion, either of Yeast or Fer∣ment; leave them a few days to ferment, till they get a strong and heady smell near like to Vinegar; then distil them, and draw so long as you find any scent of the Rose to come; then distil again so often, till you have purchased a perfect Spirit of the Rose. You may also ferment the juice of Roses on∣ly, and after distil the same.
To make a most Excellent Waer. Which comforteth the Vital Spirits, and helpeth the inward Diseases which come of Cold, as the Palsie, Contraction of Sin∣news; also it killeth worms, and comforteth the Stomach; it cureth the Dropsie, help∣eth the Stone and Stinking Breath, and maketh one seem young. To make this, take a Gallon of Gscoin Wine; Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs, Grans, Cloves, Annis-seeds, Fenil-seeds, Carraway-seeds, of each one dram: Then take Sugar, Mint, Red Roses, Tyme, Pellitory, Rose∣mary, Wild Tyme, Cammomile, and La∣vender; then beat the Herbs and Spices small, and put it all together into the Wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it divers times; then distil it with a Limbick, and keep the first Water, for it is best. Of a gallon of Wine, you must not take above a quart.
Directions for the making of some of the choicest Receipts in Physick and Chyrurgery. A Receipt for an Ague. TAke the Root of a blew Lilly, scrape it clean, and slice it, and lay it in soak all night in Ale; and in the morning stamp it, and strain it, and give it the Patient to drink, luke warm, an hour before the fit cometh. To cure a Quartan Ague. Take a white Flint-stone, and let it lie in a quick fire until it be red hot; then take some Small Beer and quench it therein: When the fit is coming let the Diseased drink a good draught thereof, and another in the midst of the fit, let this be done our several days both in the fit, and when the fit is coming. This is accounted an excel∣lent Receipt
A very good Receipt to comfort the Stomach. Take two ounces of old Conserve of Red Roses, and of Mithridate two drams; mingle them together, and when you are going to bed, eat thereof the quantity of an Hasle∣nut. This will expel all flatulency, and windiness of the Stomach; drives away raw Humours, and venomous Vapours; helpeth digestion, and dryeth up Rheum, and strengtheneth the Sight and Memory. To cure Corns. Take Beans, and chew them in your mouth, and then tie them fast to your Corns; and it will help. Do this at night. For the Yellow Iaundis: Take a green white Onion, and make a hole where the blade goeth out, to the big∣ness of a Chesnut; then fill the hole with Treacle, being beaten with half an ounce of English Honey, and a little Saffron; and set the honey against the fire, and roast it well, that the Onion do not burn; and
when it is roasted, strain it through a cloth, and give the juice thereof to the Sick three days together, and it shall help them. For the Black Iaundies. Take Fenil seed, Sage, Parsly, Grom∣wel, of each a like quantity, and make Pot∣tage thereof with a piece of good Pork, and eat no other meat that day. For Infction of the Plague. Take a spoonful of Running Water, a good quantity of Treacle, to the bigness of an Hasle-nut: Temper all these together, and heat it luke-warm, and drink it every four and twenty hours. For all Feavers or Agues in Sucking Children. Take Powder of Crystal, and steep it in Wine, and give it the Nurse to drink; also take the Root of Devil's Bit, with the Herb, and hang it about the Child's neck.
For the Head-ach. Take Rose-cakes and stamp them very small in a Morter, with a little Ale, and let them be dryed by the fire on a Pot-sheard, and lay it to the nape of the Neck to Bed∣ward. An excellent Dyet Drink for the Spring, to purge and cleanse the Blood. Take o Scurvygrass half a peck, brook-lime, Watercresses, Agrimony, Maiden-hair, Liverwort, Burrage, Bugloss, Betony, Sage, sweet-Marjarum, Sea-worm wood, tops of green Hops, Fumitory, of each a good handful, of Ivory, Hartshorn, and yellow Saunders of each one ounce, Red∣dock roots two ounces, Purslain, Fennel, As∣paragus roots, of each an ounce, Raisins half a pound, boyl these very well in a Gallon of Beer, then stamp and strain them, and put into it three Gallons of new Beer to work together.
A good Receipt for the Dropsie, either Ho or Cold. Take of tops of red Mint, of Archange or Blind Nettles, and red Sage of either  small quantity, stamp them together and strain the juice of them into some stale Ale so much as will serve to drink morning an evening, do this for ten days together, an God willing it will effect the cure. Another most excellent for the Dropsie. Take green broom and burn it in some clean place, that you may take the ashes o it, take ten or twelve spoonfuls of the same ashes, and boyl them in a pint of Whitewine, till he virtue thereof be in the Wine, then ool it and drein the Wine from the dregs, and make three draughts of the Wine, one fasting in the morning, the other at three in the afternoon, and the other when you go to bed: This seldom fails of the desired effect. How to Prevent the Tooth-ach. Wash your mouth once a week in White∣wine,
in which Spurge hath been oyled, nd you shall never be troubled with the ooth-ach. A Present Remedy for the Tooth-ach. If your Tooth be hollow and paineth you much, take of the herb called Spurge and queeze it, and mingle wheat flower with he milk that issueth from it, with this make  paste, and fill the Cavity of your Tooth herewith, and leaving it there a while, you must change it every two hours, and the Tooth will drop out of it self. A good Receipt for the Sone and Gravel. Take a hard row of a red herring, and dry it upon a Tile in an Oven, then beat it to powder, and take as much as will lye up∣on sixpence every morning fasting, in a glass of Rhenish wine. For the Griping of he Guts. Take Anniseeds, Fennelseeds, Bayberries, Juniper berris, Tormentil, Bistort, Balau∣stins, Pomgranate Pills, each one ounce, Rose leaves a handful, boyl thm in milk,
strain it and add the yolk of an egg,  grains of Laudanum dissolved in he Spirit o Mint, prepare it for a glister and give  warm. The Plaister of Plaisters. Take of Roses beaten to powder two pound and an half, Heifers tallow two pound and a quarter, try it with a gentle fire and cleanse it, when it is cold, scrape a∣way the dross from the bottom, and melt it in a brass vessel, then strew in the Rosi by handfuls, and stir it with a willow Spa∣tula, continually stirring it until it be all stirred and melted, then have ready a ba∣son of pewter, and in it of water of Camo∣mil, of english Briony root, and o Da∣mask Rosewater, of each eight ounces with powder of salt of wormwood, salt of tar∣tar, salt of Scurvygrass, Vitriol, Campho∣nete, of each one ounce and an half, then pour in the melted body, and stir it with the Spatula round continually, until the body have seemingly swallowed up all the salt and waters, continue it stirring until the water appear, and thus work i till the body b as white as snow, then let it stand a month in the water covered from dust,
and when you use it let it not come near a∣ny fire, but work a little at a time until it be as white as snow on the brawn of your hand over against your little finger, spread it on a linnen cloth or leather, for the best plaister in the world, for the Reins in all Accidents, and for all bruises and great conclusions, &c. For the Falling Sickness or Convulsion Fits. Take the dung of a Peacock, make it in∣to powder, and give so much of it to the Patient as will lye upon a shilling, in a little succory water fasting. For the Worms in Children. Take Wormseed and boyl it in beer or ale, and sweeten it with a little clarified ey, and then let them drink it. For a dry Cough. Take Aniseeds, Ash seeds, and Violets, and beat them to powder and stamp them (of each a like quantity) then boyl them to∣gether in fair water till it grows thick, then put it up and let the patient take thereof morning and evening.
For the Ich. Take the juice of Penny-royal, the juice of Savine, Scabious, the juice of Sage, the juice of Pellitory, with some Barrow grease and black Sope, temper all these and make a salve, and with it anoint all your joynts. For Deafness. Take wild mint, mortifie it and sque it in the hand till it rendreth juice, then take it with its juice and put it into the ear, change it often, this will help the deafness if the person ever heard before. To make Oyl of St. Iohns Wort, good for any Ach or Pain. Take a Quart of Sallet Oyl, and put thereto a quart of the flowers of St. John wort well picked, let them lye therein al the Summer, till the seeds o that herb b ripe, the glass must be kept warm, eithe in the Sun or in the water all the summe ill the seeds be ripe, then put in a quart o St. Johns wort seed, and so let it stand
twelve hours, the glass being kept open, then must you boyl the oyl eight hours, the water in the pot full as high as the Oyl in the Glass, when it is cold strain i that the seed rmin not in it, and so keep it for your use. To make an Oinment for any Wound or Sore. Take two pound of Sheep suet or rather Der suet, a pint of Candy-oyl, a quarter of a pound of the newest and best beeswax, melting them altogether and stirring them well, and put to them one ounce of the oyl of Spike, and hal an ounce or the Gold∣smiths Burras, then heat them again and stir them all together, put it up in a Gallipot, and kep it close stopped till you have cause to use it, this is an approved ointment or any wound or sore new or old. A Searcloth for all Achs. Take Rosin one pound, Perresin a quar∣ter of a pound, as much Mastick, Der su∣et the like, Turpentine two ounces, Cloves bruised one ounce, Mace bruised two oun∣ces, Saffron two drachms, boyl all these o∣gether in oyl o Cammomil, and preserve
it for your use, this hath done many good when nothing else would. A mst excllent Balsom for Wounds and other things. Take of Venice Turpentine one pound, of Oyl Olive three pints, yellow Wax half a pound, of Natural Balsom one ounce, Oyl of St. Iohn's Wort one ounce, of Red Saun∣ders one ounce, six spoonuls of Sack, cut the Wax, and melt it on the fire, then let it catch the fire; take it off, and put in the Turpentine to it, having first wshed the Ve∣nice-Turpentine thrice with Damask-Rose-Water; and having mingled your Sllet-Oyl with the Sack, put also the Oly to hem, and put them all on the fire, and stir it till it begin to boil; for if it boil much, it will run over speedily: then suffer it to cool for a night or more, until the Water and Wine be sunk all to the bottom: then make some holes in the Stuff, hat the Water may run out of it; which being done, put it over the fire again, putting to it the Balsom and the Oyl of St. Iohn's-Wort; and when it is melted, then put the Saunders to it; stir it well, that it may incorporate; and when it first begins to boil take it of the fire, and
stir it the space of two hours, till it be grown thick. Then put it up, and keep it for your use, as most precious, for thirty or forty years or more. The Vertues of this most excellent Bal∣som are many. 1. It is good o heal any wound inward or outward, being squirted warm into the inward wound, being applyed to the out∣ward wound with fine lint or linnen, a∣nointing also those parts thereabouts, it not only taketh away the pain, but alo keepeth it from any inflammation, and al∣so draweth forth all broken bones, or any other thing that might putrefie or feer it, so that the brains or inwards, as the Liver, Guts, nor Heart be not troubled, it will heal it in four or five days drssing, so that no∣thing else be applied thereunto. 2. It healeth any burning or scalding, and healeth also any bruise or cut, being first anointed with the said Oyl, and a piece of Linen cloth or Lint dipt in the same, be∣ing warmed and laid unto the place, it will heal it without any scar remaining. 3. It helpeth the head-ach by anointing the Temples and Nostrils therewith. 4. It is good against the Wind-Colick, or stitch in the side, applied there to warm with
hot cloths morning and evening, at both times you may use a quarter of an ounce. 5. It helpeth the biting of a mad dog, or any other beast. 6. It is good against the Plague, anoint∣ing only the Nostrils and the Lips there with in he morning before you go forth. 7. It also healeth a Fisula or an Ulcer, being never so deep in any Part of the body, bing applied as aoresaid is directed for a cut. 8. It is good against worms or Canker, being used as in a cut, but it will require longr ime to help them. 9. It is good for one infected with the Plague or Meazles, so as it be presently ta∣ken in warm broh, the quantity of a quar∣ter of an ounce four mornings together and sweat upon it. 10. I helpeth digestion anointing the Navel and Stomach therewith when the party goeth to bed, it will stanh any blood of a great wound, by putting a plaister of Lint therein, and ying it very hard. 11. Take the quantity of a Nutmeg in sack blood warm and sweat thereon, i bringeth forth all manner of cltted blood, and takes away all Aches.
12. It also healeth the Rose-Gout and Scurvy. 13. It helpeth all pains of womens brests, all chops, or wolf, that cometh with a bruise. 14. It helpeth the small Pox being a∣nointed there with, without any scar. 15. It helpeth all sprains and swellings, and indeed I cannot tell what comes amiss o it. How to help a Stinking breh, which comes from the Stomach. Take two handfuls of Cummin-seds and beat them to powder, and seeth it in a pot∣tle o Whitewine until half be boyled away then give the party a good draught thereof morning and evening as hot as he can suffer it, and in fifteen or sixteen days it will help them. To mke the Leaden Plaister. Take two pound and four ounces of Oyl of Olive of the best, of good red Lead one pound, white lead one pound well beaten to dust, twelve ounces of Spanish sope, and incorporate all these very well together in
an earthen pot, well glazed before you put them to boyl, and when that they are well incorporated that the sope cometh upward, put it upon a small fire of Coals continuing it on the fire, the space of an hour and an half, still stirring it with an iron ball upon the end of a stick, then make the fire some∣thing bigger, unil the redness be turned into a gray colour, but you must not leave stirring till the matter be turn'd into the co∣lour o Oyl or omewhat darker, then drop it upon a wooden Trencher, and if it cleave not to the finger it is enough, then make it up into Roles it will keep twenty years, the older the better. The virtues of this Plaister are several. 1. If it be laid upon the stomach it pro∣voketh appetite, and takeh a way any grief in the stomach. 2. Being laid on the belly it is a present remedy for the Colick. 3. If it be laid to the reins of the back, it is good for the Bloody Flux, Running of the Reins, Heat of the Kidneys, and weak∣ness o the back. 4. It healeth all swellings, bruises, and it taketh a way Ach.
5. It breaketh Fellens, Pushes, and other Imposthumes and healeth them. 6. It draweth out any running humours, without breaking the skin. 7. Being applied to the fundament it healeth any disease there growing. 8. Bing laid to the thoat it is good for the Uvula, it breaketh the headach and is good for the eyes, For the Wind Colick. Take the flowers of Walnuts and dry them to powder, and take of them in your Ale or Beer, or in your broth as you like best, and it will help you. Thus have I given you some short but suitable directions, for the qualifying you either as Waiting-Gentlewomen, to a per∣son of honour or quality, or otherwise to serve them as House-keepers, which qua∣lifications if you will endeavour to at∣tain unto, you will raise your self much both in esteem and fortune. Ladies will much covet and desire your Company, let you have the honour to sit at Table, and have command in the house: You will gain respect from the rest of the Ser∣vants, you will wear good clothes, and
have a considerable Salary. I shall now give some directions to ser∣vants of a lower Rank.
Directions for such who desire to be Chamber-Maids, to Per∣sons of Honour or Quality, or Gentlewomen either in City or Country. WOuld you endeavour to fit your self for this employment, that you may be capable of serving a person of ho∣nour or quality, you must in the first place learn to dress well, that you may be able to supply the place of the Waiting-Woman, should she chance to fall sick or be absent from your Lady, you must also learn to wash fine linnen well, and to starch Tiffies, Lawns, Points and Laces, you mu lie∣wie learn to mend them neatly, and wash white Sarsenets with such lie things. Then you must learn to make your Ladies bed, well, soft, and easie, to lay up her Night-clothes, and see that her Chamber be kept neat and clean, and that nothing be want∣ing which she desires or requires to be done. Then you must learn to be modest in your
deportment or behaviour, to be ready at her call, and to be always diligent, never answering again when she taketh occasion to reprove you, but endeavour to mitigate her anger with pacifying words. Be lo∣ving and courteous to your fellow Servants, not gigling o idling out your time, or wan∣toning in the society of men, you will soon find the benefit thereof. For an honest and sober man will rather make that woman his wife, whom he seeth employed conti∣nually about her business, than one who makes it her business to trifle away her own and others time. Neither will a virtuous and understanding Mistress, long entertain such a Servant whom she finds of such a temper. Be not subject to change, but still remember that a rouling stone never getteth moss, and as you gain but little mo∣ney, so if you rumble up and down you will gain but little credit. If you would fit your self to serve a Gen∣tle woman only, (either in City or Country) you must not only learn how to dress, wash and starch very well, all manner of Tiffanies, Lawns, Points and Laces, and to mend the same, but you must learn to work all sorts of Needle work and plain work, to wash black and white sarsenets, you must know
how to make all manner of spoon meats, to raise Paste, to dress meat well (though not often required thereunto) to make sawces both for fish and flesh, to garnish dishes, to make all sorts of pickles, to see that every thing be served in well and handsomely to the Table iu due time, and to wait with a graceful decorum at Table if need should require, keep your Mistress's Chamber clean and lay up every thing in its due place. You mus also learn to be skilful in buying any thing in the Market if you be entrusted therewith, if there be no Butler in the house. You must see that all things be decent and itting in the Parlour and Dining-Room, you must endeavour to take off your Mi∣stress from all the care you can, giving to her a just and true account of what moneys you lay out for her, shewing yonr self thrifty in all your disbursements. Be careful in o∣verlooking inferiour servants, that they waste nothing which belongs to your Ma∣ster and Mistress. Lastly, you must learn to be diligent to perform whatsoever your Mistress commands you, to be neat in your habit, modest in your carriage, silent when she is angry, willing to please, quick and neat handed about what you have to do. If you attain to these qualifications, and
be of an humble good disposition, you will deserve a good salary, and a great deal of respect, which that you may do I shall give you ome short directions for starching of Tiffany, for making clean Points and La∣ces, for washing and starching of Points, for washing of Sarsenets white or black, and the like, also for raising of paste, ma∣king of spoon meats, sawces and pickles. Directions for Starching of Tiffany. SOap not your Tiffany save only on the Hemns or Laces with Crown Sope, then wash them very well in three Ladders pret∣ty hot, and let your last Ladder be made thin of the Sope, do not rince thm nor wring them hard, then dry them over brimstone, and keep them all the time rom the air for that will spoil them. Then make your starch of a reasonable thickness, and blew it according to your liking, and to a qurter of a pound of Starch put as much Allum as an hazle nut, boyl it very well and strain it, and while it is hot wet your Tiffa∣nies with it very well, and lay them in a cloth to keep them from drying. Then
with your hands clean and dry them, then hold your Tiffanies to a good fire till they be thorow hot, then clap them and rub them between your hands from the fire, till you see they be very clear, then shape them by a piece of paper, cut out by them before they were washed, and iron them with a good hot iron, and then they will look glossy like new Tiffany. Thus you may starch Lawns, but observe to iron them on the wrong side, and upon a cloth wetted and wrung out again, some∣time (if you please instead of starch) you may lay Gum Arabick in Water, and when it is dissolved wet the Lawns in that instead of starch, and hold them to the fire as be∣fore directed, clapping them and rubbing them till they are very clear. Directions for Washing White and Black Sarsenets. LEt them be very smooth and streight up∣on aboard, and if there be any dirty pla∣ces soap them a little, then take a little hard brush and soap it well, then dip the brush in water, and with it make a pretty thick ladder, then take the brush and rub your sarsenet well, the right way of the sarse∣net,
sideways of the brush, and when you have washed one side well, turn it and wash the other. Then have a clean ladder cald∣ing hot, and cast your hoods in double in∣to it and cover it, and still as fast as you wash them cast them into that, you must give them three good washes upon the board, and after the first Ladder let the o∣ther be very hot, and cat them in a sald e∣very time, then make up a scalding hot ladder, into which put some Gum Arabick steeped before in water, and some Smal to blew it a little, let them be doubled up in that, close covered for one hour, when you come for to take them out, be sure you dip them very well all over, and then fold them up to a very little compass, and squeeze them smooth betwixt your hands, then smoak them over brimstone, th draw them between your hands every way till they be little more than half dry, then smooth them with good hot irons the same way you did wash them, and upon the right side of the sarsenet. To wash Coloured Silk. They are done the same way with the white, only there must be no blew nor smoaking over brimstone.
To wash Black Sarsenets. They are washed the same way with the other, only rinc'd in strong beer cold, without any Gum, and iron'd upon the wrong side and on a woollen cloth. To wash Silk Stockings. Make a strong Ladder with soap, and pretty hot, then lay your stockings on a Table, and take a piece of such cloth as the Seamen use for their sails, double it up and rub them soundly with it, turn them first on one side and then on the other, till they have passed through three ladders, then rince them well, and hang them to dry with the wrong side outwards, and when they are near dry, pluck them out with your hands, and smooth them with an iron on the wrong side, To make Clean Points and Laces. Take white bread of half a day old, and cut it in the middle, and pare the Crust round the edge, so that you may not hurt your points when you rub them, then lay
them upon a table on a clean cloth, and rub them very well with the white bread all over, then take a clean little brush and rub over the bread very well, till you think you have rubbed it very clean, then take your point or lace and shake the bread clean off, then take a clean linen cloth and gent∣ly flap it over oftentimes. Thus you may get the soil off rom white Sattin, Taffety, Tabby, or any coloured silk, provided it be not greasie, no too much soil∣ed. Directions to Wash and Starch Points. TAke your points and put them into a Tent, then make a strong Ladder with the best soap you can get, then dip a brush in that ladder, and soundly rub your points on both sides, so do till you have washed it in four Ladders, then wash it in fair wa∣ter alone, then wash it in blew water, and when you have so done take starch made thin with water, and with your brush on the wrong side wash it over with it, so let it dry, then lay your Tent upon a table, and
with an ivory bodkin made for the purpose, run into every close and narrow part of it, to open it betwixt the gimp or overcast, likewise into every Ilet hole, to open them. For the Laces, after you have pulled them out well with your hands, you must iron them on the wrong side: let the water be warm wherewith you make your Ladder, when you take them out of the tent, iron them on the wrong side, let not the water be too blew with which you wash them. To make Clean Gold and Silver Lace. Take the lace off from your garment, and lay it upon a table, and with a brush rub it all over very well with burnt Allum beaten fine, till you find it to become of the right colour, then shake it very well and wipe it very well with a clean linnen cloth oftentimes over. To get Spots of Ink out of Linne Cloth. Before that you suffer it to be washed, lay it all night in urine, the next day rub all the spots in the urine as i you were washing-in
water; then lay it in more urine another night and then rub it again, and so do till you find they be quite out. To get the Stains of Fruits out of any Linnen Ctoth. Take them before they are washed, and with a little butter rub every spot well, then let the cloth lye in scalding hot milk a while and when it is a little cooled, rub the spot∣ted places in the milk till you see they are quite out, and then wash it in water and soap. To take out any greasie Spots out of Silk, Stuff or Cloth. Take a linnen rag and wet it very well in fair water, then with a pair of Tongs put a live sea cole or wood cole upon the rag, and hastily close the rest of the rag a∣bout the cole, and presently lay it upon the greasie spot whilst it is smoking hot, and when you perceive it to cool do so again, and so do till you find the spots are quite ta∣ken out.
How to make clean Plaie. Wash your plate first in soap suds and dry it, then if there be any spots rub them out with salt and vinegar, then anoint your plate all over with vinegar and chalk, then lay it in the Sun or before the fire to dry, then rub it off with warm linnen clothes, very well, and it will look like new. How to keep the Hair Clean, and Pre∣serve it. Take two handfuls of Rosemary, and boyl it softly in a quart of Spring water, till it comes to a pint, and let it be covered all the while, then strain it out and keep it, e∣very morning when you comb your head, dip a spunge in the water and rub up your hair, and it will keep it clean and preserve it, for it is very good for the brain, and will dry up Rheum. To Wash the Face. There i no better thing to wash the face with, to keep it smooth and to scowr it clean, than to wash it every Night with
brandy, wherein you have steeped a little flower of Brimstone, and the next day wipe it only with a cloth. To make a Salve for the Lips. Take two ounces of white Bees wax, and slice it thin, then melt it over the fire, with two ounces or more of Sallet Oyl, and a little white sugar candy, and when you see it is well incorporated, take it off the fire and let it stand till it be cold, then set the skillet on the fire again, till the bottom is warm and so turn it out, anoint your lips, or sore nose or sore nipples with this, and it will heal them. To keep the Teeth clean and sound. Take common white salt one ounce, as much cuttle bone, beat them together and rub your Teeth with them every morning, and then wash them wih fair water. To make the Hands White and Soft. Take Daffadil in clean water till it grow thick, and put thereto powder of Cantari∣um and stir them together, then put there∣to
two eggs, and stir them well together, and with this ointment anoint your hands, and within three or four days using there∣of, they will be white, clear, and soft. To Smooth the Skin, and take away Morphew and Freckles. Anoint your face with the blood of a Hare or Bull, and this will take away mor∣phew and freckles and smooth the skin. Directions for making of Custards, Cheesecakes, Raising of Paste, and making of Tarts end Pyes. To make Custards. Take a quart of Cream and boyl it well with whole spice, then beat the yolks of ten eggs and five whites, mingle them with a little cream, and when your cream is al∣most cold, put your eggs into it and stir them very well, then sweeten it, and put out your Custard into a deep dish all togeher, or else into several small China cups or dishes,
like Coffee dishes and bake them, then if you please you may serve them in with French Comfits strowd on them or without. To make Cheesecakes. Take two Gallons of new milk, put in∣to it two spoonfuls and a half of Runnet, heat the milk little less than blood warm, and cover it close with a cloth till you see the Cheese be gathered, then with a scum∣ming dish gently take out the whey, when you have drained the curd as clean as you can, put it into a Sieve, and let it drain very well there, then to two quarts of Curds take a quart of thick Cream, a pound of sweet butter, twelve eggs, a pound and an half of Currants, a penny worth of Cloves, Nut∣meg and mace beaten, half a pound of good Sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, mingle it well together, and put it into Puff-paste. How to make Puff-paste. Break two eggs in three pints of flower, make it with cold water, then roul it out pretty thick and square, then take so much butter as paste, and divide your butter in∣to
five pieces, that you may lay it on at five several times, roul your paste very broad, and break one part of the said butter in lit∣tle pieces all over your paste, then throw a handful of flower slightly on, then fold up your paste and beat it with a rowling pin, and so roul it out again, thus do five times and then make it up. How to make Paste for all manner of Tarts and Pyes. Take very sweet butter and put it into fair water, and make it boyl on the fire, then take the finest flower you can get, and mix them well together till it come to a paste, and so raise it, but if you doubt it will not be thick enough, then you may mix some yolks of eggs with it, as you temper all your stuff together. To make an Almond Tart. Raise an excellent good paste with six corners an inch deep, then take some blanch∣ed Almonds very finely beaten with Rose∣water, take a pound of Sugar to a pound of Almonds, some grated Nutmeg, a little Cream and strained Spinage, as much as
will cover he Almonds, green, so bake it with a gentle heat in an oven not shutting the door, draw it and stick it with Candied Orange, Citron, and put in red and whie Muscadine. To make a Cowslip Tart. Take the blossoms of a gallon of Cow∣slips, mince them exceeding small and heat them in a morter, put to tem a handful or wo of grated Naples bisquet, and a pint and a half of Cream, boyl them a little on the fire then take them off, and beat in eight eggs with a little Cream, if it doth not thicken, put it on the fire till it doth gently, but take heed it curdles not, season it with Sugar, Rosewater, and a little Salt, bake it in a dish or little open tarts, it is bst to let your cream be cold before you stir in the Eggs. To make an Artichoke Pye. Take the Bottom of six Artichokes, and boyl them very ender, put them in a dish and some vinegar over them, season them with Ginger and Sugar, a little Mace whole and put them in a Coffin of Paste, when
you lay them in, lay some marrow and dates sliced, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom with good store of Butter, when it is half baked take a Gil of Sack being boyl'd first with the Sugar and a peel of Orange, put it into the Pye and set it into the Oven again till you use it. To mke Marrow Pasties. Shred the Marrow and Apples together; and put a little Sugar to them, put them in∣to puff-paste, and fry them in a pan with fresh butter, and serve them up to the Ta∣ble, with a little white Sugar strowed on them. To make a Calves foot Pye. Boyl your Calves feet very well, and then pick all the meat from the Bones, when it is cold, shred it as small as you can, and sea∣son it with Cloves and mace, and put in good store of Currants, Raisins and Prunes, then put it into the Coffin with good store of sweet Butter, then break in a whole stick of Cinamon and a Nutmeg sliced, and season it with salt, then close up the Coffin and only leave a vent hole, put insome liquor made of
Verjuice, Cinnamon and Butter boyled to∣gether, and so serve it. To make an Eel Pye with Oysters. Wash your Eels and gut them, and dry them well in a cloth, to four good Eels al∣low a pint of good Oysters well washed, season them with pepper, salt, and nutmeg and large Mace, put half a pound of butter into the Pye, and half a Lemon sliced, so bake it, when it is drawn, take the yolks of two eggs, a couple of Anchovies dissolved in a little whitewine, with a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, melt it and mix all together aud make a leer of it, and put it into the Pye. To make a Lamb Pye. First cut your Lamb into pieces, and then season it with nutmegs, cloves, and mace, and some salt with currants, raisins of the Sun, and sweet butter. If you would eat it hot, when it is baked put in some yolks of Eggs, with wine vinegar and Sugar beat∣en together, but if you will eat it cold put in no eggs but only vinegar and Sugar.
To make an Egg Pye, or a Minced Pye of Eggs. Take the yolks of two dozen of Eggs hard boyl'd and shred them, take the same quan∣ity of Beef suet, half a pound of Raisins, a pound of Currants well washed and dryed, half a pound of Sugar, a pennyworth of beaten spice, a few carraway seeds, a lit∣tle candied Orange peel shred, a little ver∣juice and Rose-water, fill the Coffin and bake it with a gentle heat. To make a Herring Pye. Put great store of sliced Onions, with Currants and Raisins of the Sun, both a∣bove and under the Herrings, and store of butter, put them into your Pye and bake them. To make a Quince Pye. Take a Gallon of flower, a pound and a half of Butter, six eggs, thirty Quinces, three pound of Sugar, half an ounce of Cin∣namon, the like of Cloves, the like of gin∣ger, a little Rosewater, Make them up into a
Tart, and being baked strow on thm a lit∣tle double refined Sugar. To make an Humble Pye. Lay beef suet minced on the bottom of the Pye, or slices of interlarded bacon, and cut the humbles as big as small dice, cut your bacon in the same form, and season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and salt, fill your Pyes with it with slics of bacon and butter, close it up and bake it, liquor it with Claret, Butter and stript time, and so serve it up. To make a Venison Pasty. When you have powdered your haunch of Venison or the sides of it, by taking a∣way all the bones, sinews, and skin and at, season it with pepper and salt only, beat it with your rowling pin, and propor∣tion it for the pasty, by taking a way from one part and adding to another, your paste being made with a peck of fine flower, and three pound of butter aud twelve eggs, work it up with cold water as stiff a pae as you can, drive it orth or your Pasty, let it be as thick as a mans Thumb, rowl it up upon
a rowling pin, and put under it a couple of sheets of Cap paper, then your white be∣ing already minced and beaten with water, proportion it upon the pasty, to the bredth and length of the Venison, then lay your Venison in the said white, wash it round with a feather and put on a border, season your Venison on the top, and turn over your other leaf of paste, so close up your pasty, hen drive out another border for garnish∣ing the sides up to the top of the Pasty, so close it together by the rowling pin, by rowling it up and down by the sides and ends, and when you have flourished your garnishing and edged your pasy, vent it at the top, set it in the Oven and let it have four or five hours baking at the least, and then draw it. To make a Beef Pasty like Red Deer. Take fresh Beef of the finest without si∣news or suet, and mince it as small as you can, and season it with salt and pepper, and put in two spoonfuls of Malmsie, then take Lard and cut it into small pieces, and lay a layer of Lard and a layer of Beef, and lay a shin of Beef upon it like Venison, and so close it up.
To make an Oister Pye. First dry your Oisters, and then put them into your Coffin, with some butter and whole large mace and then bake it, then take off the Lid and fill it up with more but∣ter, putting some of the Liquor of the Oi∣sters also thereunto, hen season it well with Sugar and serve it up. To make a Goose Pye. Break the bones of your Goose, then per∣boyl him, then season him with pepper and salt, and a little cloves and mce, if you please you may bake a Rabbet or two in it, because your stubble Geese are very fat and your Rabbets dy, you need not Lard either, bake it in good hot butter paste. To make a Veal Pye. When your paste is raised cut your Leg o Veal into pieces, and season it with pepper, numeg and salt, with some whole large mace, and so lay it into your prepared cof∣fin, with good store of raisins of the Sun and Currans, and fill it up with sweet butter,
then close it and set it in the Oven, and when baked serve it in. To make an Eel Pye. Wash, flea and cut your Eels in pieces, put to them a handful of sweet herbs, parsly minced with an Onion, season them with pepper, salt, cloves, mace and nutmeg; and having your Coffin made of good paste, put them in and strew over them two hand∣fuls of Currants, and Lemon cut in slices, hen put on butter and close he Pye, when it is baked put in at the funnel a little sweet butter, whitewine and vinegar, beat up with a couple of yolks of eggs. To make a Warden or Pear Pye. Bake your Wardens or Pears in an Oven with a little water, and a good quantity of Sugar, let your pot be covered with a piece of dough, let them not be fully baked by a quarter of an hour, when they are cold make an high Coffin, and put them in whole, ad∣ding to them some Cloves, whole Cinamon, and Sugar with some of the Liquor in the pot, so bake thm.
To make a Codling Tart. Take green Codlings from the Tree, and codle them in scalding water without break∣ing them, peel the skin from them, and so dvide them into halves, and cut out the cores, and lay them into the Cofin, then put in a good handful of Quinces sliced, a little oringado, and a good quantity of su∣gar, a little Rosewater, then close it up and bake it well. To make a Gooseberry Tart. When your Gooseberries are picked and washed, then boyl them in watr till they will break in a spoon, then strain them and beat hlf a dosen Eggs, and stir them toge∣ther upon a chafing dish of Coals with some Rosewater, then sweeten it very well with Sugar, and always serve it cold. To make an excellent Minc'd Pye. Perboyl Neats Tongues, then peel and hash them with as much as they weigh of beef suet, and stoned raisins and picked cur∣rants, chop all exceeding small that it be
like pap, then mingle a very little Sugar with them, and a little wine and thrust it up, and throw in some thin slices of can∣died Citron peel, and put this into Coffins of fine light well reared crust, half an hours baking will be enough. If you strew a few carraway comfits on the top it will not be amiss. To make a Pidgeon Pye. Truss your pidgeons to bake, and set them, and Lard one half of them with bacon, mince a sew sweet herbs and parsly with a little suet, the yolks of hard eggs and an o∣nion or two, season it with salt, beaten pep∣per, cloves, mace, nutmegs, work it up with a piece of butter, and stuff the bellies of the pidgeons, season them with salt and pepper as before, take also as many Lamb-stones seasoned as before, with six collops of bacon the salt drawn out, then make a large Coffin and put in your Pidgeons, and  you will, put in Lamb-stones and sweet-breads and some Arichoke bottoms or other dry meat to soak up the juice, because the Pye will be very sweet and full of t, then when it comes out of the Oven, put in a lit∣le Whitewine beat up with the yolk of an egg.
To make a Pippin Tart or Pye. Pare your Pippins and cut out the cores, then make your Coffin of good crust, take a good handful of Quinces sliced, and lay at the bottom, then lay your Pippins a top, and fill the holes where the cores were ta∣ken out with syrup os Quinces, then put in Sugar and so close it up, let it be very well baked, for it will ask much soaking, especi∣ally the Quinces. Directions for making of Spoon Meat, as Caudles, Broths, and Iellies. TAke a Pint and a half of the strongest Ale may be gotten, twenty Jordan Almonds clean wiped, but neither washed nor blanched, with two dates minced very small and stamped, then take the pith of young beef the length of twelve inches, lay it in water till the blood be out of it, then strip the skin of it and stamp it with the al∣monds and dates, then strain them all toge∣ther into the Ale, boyl it till it be a little thick, give it the party in a morning fast∣ing
to drink six spoonfuls, and as much when they go to bed. To make an Almond Caudle. Take three pints of Ale and boyl it with cloves and mace, and slice bread in it, then have ready beaten a pound of Almonds blanched, and strain them out with a pint of Whitewine, and thicken the Ale with it, sweeten it if you please, but be sure to scum it well when it boyls. To make a Cordil strengthening broth. Take a Red Cock, strip off the feathers from the skin, then break the bones to shi∣vers with a rowling pin, set it over the fire and just cover it with water, put in some salt and wash the scumming and boyling off it. Put in a handful of hartshorn, a quar∣ter of a pound of blew currants, and as ma∣ny raisins of the Sun stoned, and as many Prunes, four blades of large Mace, a bottom crust of whiteloaf, half an ounce of China root sliced, being steeped three hours before in warm water, boyl in it three or four pie∣ces of gold, strain it and put in a little fine Sugar, and juice of Orange, and so use it.
To make China Broth. Take an ounce of China root clipp'd thin, and steep it in three pints of water all night, or embers covered, the next day take a good Chicken clean picked, and the guts taken out, put in his belly Agrimony and Miden-hair, of each half a handful, raisins of the Sun stoned one good handful, and as much French barley, boyl all these in a Pipkin close covered on a gentle fire, for six or seven hours, let it stand till it be cold, strain it and keep it for your use, take a good draught in the morning, and at four in the after∣noon. To make a Flummery Cadle. When Flummery is made and cold, you may make a pleasant and wholesome Caudle with it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it and boyl it with Ale and Whitewine, then sweeten it to your taste with Sugar, there will remain in the Caudle some Lumps of congealed flummery, which are not un∣grateful.
To make Ielly of Hartshorn. Take four ounces of the shaving of Harts∣horn of the inside, and two quarts of water, put this into a Ppkin and boyl it very gent∣ly till it come to a quart, the hartshorn must be steeped three or four hours first, after∣wards put a little into a sawcer till it be cold, and if it be cold and jellyeth it is boyled e∣nough, then being warm take it off the fire and strain it hard thorow a cloth, and set it a cooling till it be a hard Jelly, then take two whites of eggs and beat them very well, with a sprig of Rosemary or Birch, but not with a spoon, till a water come at the bottom then put these beaten eggs and the water thereof ino a skillet, and all the jelly upon it, with three spoonfuls of damask Rose∣water, and  quarter of a pound of Sugar, and when it boyls stir and layth it pretty well, then strain it thorow a cloth and let it cool, and of this take four spoonfuls in a morning fasting, and at four a clock in he afernoon, and this is very good for the weakness in the back.
To make a Cock broth, very good for weak people. Take a good Cock, pluck, draw, and wash him very well, and bruise his Legs, boyl him in a little water and salt very well for one hour, then add some water where∣in Mutton hath been boyled, and put in a quarter of a pound of French Barley or Rice which you please, with some Time, Winter Savory, and a little Lemon peel, a little Large Mace and sliced Nutmeg with a clove or two, when it is clean scum'd let it only stew till it be enough, then take up the Cock for a while and boyl the broth very well, then put him in again, and heat him thorow∣ly, then serve him into the Table, and Garnish your dsh with Lemon and Bar∣berries. To make White Broth of Chicken or Capon. First boyl the Capon or Chicken in water and salt, then take three pints of strong broth and a quart of Whitewine, and stew it in a Pipkin with a quarter of a pound of Dates, half a pound of fine Sugar, four or five
blades of large mace, the marrow of three marrow bones, a handful of white endive, sew these in a Pipkin very leisurely, that it may but only simper, then being finely stew∣ed and the broth well tasted, strain the yolks of Ten eggs with some of the broth, before you dish up the Capons or Chickens, put the eggs into the broth and keep it stirring that it may not curdle, give it a warm and set it from the fire, the Fowls being dished up, put on the broth, and garnish the meat with dates, marrow, large mace, endive, pre∣served barberries, oranges, boyled skerrets, pomegranates and kernels, make a leaf of Almond paste and Grape verjuice. Directions for making of Pickles and Sawces. How to Pickle Broom buds. TAke as many Broom buds as you please, make Linnen bags and put them in and tye them close, then make some brine wit water and salt and boyl it a little, let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put some bags in them and lay the
weight on them, let it lye there till it look black, and shift it again sill as long as it looks black, boyl them in a little Caldron and put them in vinegar a week or two, and they will be fit to eat. To Pickle Cucumbers. Wash your Cucumbers clean, and dry them in a cloth, then take some water, vinegar, salt, fennel tops and some dill tops and a lit∣tle mace, make it salt enough and sharp e∣nough to the taste, then boyl it a while, and then take it off and let it stand till it be cold then put in the Cucumbers, and lay a board on the top to keep them down, and tye them up close, and within a week they will be fit to eat. To Pickle Artichoke Bottoms. Take the best bottoms of Artichokes and parboyl them, and when they are cold and well drained from the war, and dryed in a cloth to take away all the moisture, then put them into pots, and pour your brine on them, which must be as strong as you can make it, which is done by putting in so much salt to it, as it will receive no more, so that
the salt sinks whole to the bottom, cover o∣ver your Artichokes with this water, and pour upon it some sweet butter melted, to the thickness of two fingers, that no Air may come in, when your Butter is cold set up your Pot in some warm place, cover it close from Vermin, before you put the bot∣toms in the Pot, you should pull off all the Leaves and choak, as they are served at Ta∣ble, the best time to do this is in Autumn, when your Plants produce those which are young and tender, for these you should pickle before they come to open and flower, but not before the heads are round, when you would eat them you must lay them in water, shifting the water several times, then boyl them once again and so serve them. To Pickle Cornelians. Gather the fairest and biggest Cornelians when they first begin to grow red, and after they have lain a while put them up in a Pot or Barrel, filling them up with brine as for Artichokes, and put to them a little green Fennel, and a few Bay Leaves to make them smell wll, then stop them up very close, and let them stand for a Month, if you find them too salt, make the Pickle weaker before you serve them to Table.
To Pickle Red and White Currants. Take Vinegar and Whitewine with so much Sugar as will make it sweet, then take your red and white currants being not fully ripe, and give them one walm, so cover them over in the same pickle, keeping them always under Liquor. To Pickle Artichokes. Take Artichokes before they are too fully grown or two full of strings, and when they are pared round, then nothing is left but the Bottom, boyl them till they be indifferent tender, but not full boyled, take them up and let them be cold, then take good stale Beer and Whitewine, with a great quantity of whole Pepper, so put them up in a barrel with a small quantity of salt, keep them close and it will not be sowr, it will serve for ba∣ked and boyled meats all the Winter. To Pickle Flowers of all Sorts. Put them into a Gallipot or Glass with as much Sugar as they weigh, fill them up with Wine-Vinegar, to a Pint of Vinegar a pound
of Sugar and a pound of flowers, so keep them for Sallads and boyl'd Meats. To Pickle Oisters. Take eight quarts of Oisters and Parboyl them in their own Liquor, then take them out and cleanse them in warm water; then wipe them dry, then take the Liquor they were parboyl'd in, and clear it from the grounds into a large Pipkin or Skillet, put to it a Pottle of good Whitewine, a quart of Wine Vinegar, some Large Mace, whole Pepper and a good quantity of Salt, set it o∣ver the fire and boyl it leisurely, scum it clean, and being well Boyled put the Liquor into Barrels, and when it is cold put in the Oysters and close up the head. Directions for making os Sawces. To make Sawce for Green Geese. TAke the juice o Sorrel mixed with scald∣ed Gooseberries, and served on sippets with Sugar and Beaten Butter, &c.
To make Sawce for Land Fowl. Take boyled prunes and strain them with the Blood of the Fowl, cinamon, ginger, and Sugar, boyl it to an indifferent thickness, and serve it in Sawcers, and serve in the dish with the Fowl, Gravy, and sawce of the same Fowl. To make Divers Sawces for Roast Mutton. 1. Take Gravy, Capers, Samphire, and Salt, and stew them well together. 2. Water, Onion, Claret Wine, sliced Nutmeg, and Gravy boyled up. 3. Whole Onions stewed in strong broth, or Gravy, Whitewine, Pepper, pickled Ca∣pers, Mace, and three or four slices of a Lemon. 4. Mince a little roast Mutton hot from the Spit, and add to it some chop'd parsley and Onions, Verjuice or Vinegar, Ginger and pepper, stew it very tender in a pipkin, and serve it under any Joynt with some gravy of the Mutton. 5. Onions, Claret Liquor, Capers, Claret Gravy, Nutmeg and salt boyl'd together.
6. Chop'd Parsley, Verjuice, Butter, Sugar and Gravy boyled together. 7. Take Vinegar, Butter, and Currants, put them in a Pipkin with sweet herbs fine∣ly minced, the yolks of two hard eggs, and wo or three slices of the brownest of the Leg (mince it also) some Cinnamon, Gin∣ger, Sugar and salt. 8. Pickled Capers and Gravy, or Gravy nd Samphire, cut an inch long. 9. Chop'd Parsly and Vinegar. 10. Salt, Pepper, and juice of O∣nges. 11. Strained Prunes, Wine, and Sugar. 12. Whitewine, Gravy, Large Mace, nd Butter thickned wth two or three olks of Eggs. 13. Oister Liquor and Gravy boyled to∣ether, with eggs and verjuice to thicken t, then juice of Oranges and slices of Le∣mons over all. 14. Onions chop'd with sweet herbs, vi∣egar and salt boyled together. To make Several Sawces for Roast Veal. 1. Gravy, Claret, Nutmeg, Vinegar, Butter, Sugar, and Oranges, melted to∣gether.
2. Juice of Orange, Gravy, Nutmeg, and sliced Lemon on it. 3. Vinegar and Butter. 4. All manner of sweet herbs chop'd small, with the yolks of two or three eggs, and boyl them in Vinegar, Butter, and a few Bread crumbs, Currants, beaten Cin∣namon, Sugar, and a whole Clove or two, put it unde the Veal, with slices of Orange and Lemon about the dish. 5. Claret, Sawce of Boyled Carrots and boyled Quinces, stamped and strained with Lemon, Nutmeg, Pepper, Rose Vinegar, Sugar and Verjuice, boyled to an indifferent height or thickness, with a few whole Cloves. To make Sawces for Red Deer. 1. The Gravy and sweet herbs chop' small and boyled together, or the Grav only. 2. The Juice of Oranges and Lemons an Gravy. 3. A Gallendine sawce made with strain∣ed Bread, Vinegar, Claret Wine, Cinna∣mon, Ginger and Sugar, strain it and beng finely beaten with the spices, boyl it u with a few whole Cloves and a spri o Rosemary.
4. White Bread boyled in water, pretty thick without spices, and put to it some but∣ter, Vinegar and Sugar. If you will stuff or farce any Venison, stick them with Rosemary, Time, Savoury, or Cloves, or else with all manner of sweet herbs minced with Beef suet. To make Sawces for Roast Pork. 1. Gravy, chop'd Sage, and Onions boyl∣ed together with some Pepper. 2. Mustard, Vinegar and Pepper. 3. Apples pared, quartered, and boyled in fair water, with some Sugar and Butter. 4. Gravy, Onions, Vinegar and Pepper. To make Sawces for Rabbets. 1. Beaten Butter, and rub the dish with a Clove of Garlick or Shelot. 2. Sage and Parsly minced, roul it in a ball with some Butter, and fill the belly with this stuffing. 3. Beaten Butter with Lemon and Pep∣per. 4. In the French Fashion, Onions min∣ced small and fryed, and mingle with mu∣stard and ppper.
5. The Rabbet being roasted wash the belly with the Gravy of Mutton, and add to it a slice or two of Lemon. To mabe Sawces for Roast Hens. 1. Take Beer, Salt, the yolks of three hard eggs minced small, grated Bread, three or four spoonfuls of Gravy, and being al∣most boyled, put in the Juice of two or hree Oranges, slices of Lemon and Orange with Lemon peel shred small. 2. Beaten Butter with Juice of Lemon, Oranges and Claret Wine. 3. Gravy and Claret Wine boyled with a piece of an Onion, Nutmeg, and salt, serve it with the slices of Lemons or Oran∣ges, or the Juice of the same. 4. With Oyster Liquor, an Anchovy or two, Nutmeg and Gravy, and rub the dish with a clove of Garlick or Shelot. 5. Take the yolks of hard Eggs and Le∣mon peel, mince them very small and stew them in Whitewine, Salt, and the Gravy of the Fowl. To make Sawces for Roast Chickens. 1. Gravy, and the Juice or slices of O∣range.
2. Butter, Verjuice, and Gravy of the Chicken, or Mutton Gravy. 3. Butter and Vinegar boyled together, put to it a little Sugar, then make thin sops of Bread, lay the Roast Chickens on them, and serve them up ho. 4. Take Sorrel, wash and stamp it, then have thin slices of Manchet, put them in a dish with some Vinegor, strained Sorrel, Su∣gar, some Gravy, beaten Cinnamon, beat∣en Butter, and some slices of Orange or Le∣mon, and strew thereon ome Cinnamon and Sugar. 5. Take sliced Oranges and put to them a little Whitewine, Rosewater, beaten Mace, Ginger, some Sugar and Butter, set them on a chafing dish of Coals and stw thm, then have some slices of Mnchet  lay he Chickens being roasted on th sawce. To make Sawces for Roast Pidgeons. 1. Gravy and Juice of Orange. 2. Boyled Parsly mincd, and put among some Butter, and beaten up thic. 3. Gravy, Claret Wine and an Onion stewed together wih a little salt. 4. Vine leaves roasted wih the Pidgeons
minced, and put in Claret Wine and Salt boyled together, some Butter and Gravy. 5. Sweet Butter and Juice of Orange, beat together and made thick. 6. Minced Onions boyled in Claret Wine almost dry, then put to it Nutmeg, Sugar, Gravy of the Fowl and a little Pepper. 7. Gravy of the Pidgeons only. To make Sawces for all manner of Roast Land Fowl. As, Turkey, Peacock, Pheasant, Parridge, and the like. 1. SLiced Onions being boyled, stir them in some Watr, Salt, Pepper, some Grated Bread, and the Gravy of the Fowl. 2. Take slices of White Bread, and boyl them in fair water with two whole Onions some Gravy, half a gratd Nutmeg and a little salt, strain thm together thorow a strainer, and boyl it up as thick as Water-grewel, then add to it the yolks of two eggs, dissolvd with the juice of two Oran∣ges, &c.
3. Take thin slices of the Manchet, a lit∣tle of the Fowl, some sweet Butter, grated Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, stew all together and being stewed put in a Lemon minced with the peel. 4. Onions sliced and boyled with fair water and a little salt, a few Bread crumbs beaten Pepper, Nutmeg, three spoonfuls of Whitewine, and some Lemon peel fine∣ly minced and boyled all togethet, being almost boyled put in the Juice of an Orange, beaten Butter, and the Gravy of a Fowl. 5. Stamp small Nuts to a pate, with Bread, Nutmeg, Pepper, Saffron, Cloves, and the Juice of Orange and strong Broth, strain and boyl them together pretty thick. 6. Quinces Prunes, Currants and Raisins boyled, Muskified Bisquet boyled, stampt and strained with Whitewine, Rofe-Vine∣gar, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, Juice of Oranges and Sugar, boyl it not too thick. 7. Boyl Carrots and Quinces, strain them with Rose-Vinegar and Verjuice, Sugar, Ci∣namon, Pepper, Nutmeg, boyled with a few whole Cloves and a little Mace. 8. Take a Manchet, pare off the Crust and slice it, then boyl it in fair Water, and
being boyled fomething thick, put in some Whitewine, Wine-Vinegar, Rose or Elder-Vinegar, some Sugar and Butter. 9. Almond paste and Crumbs of Man∣chet, stamp them together with some Su∣gar, Vinegar and salt; strain them with Grape Verjuice, and juice of Oranges, boyl it pretty thick. To make Swce for a Stubble or Fat Goose. 1. Take sowr Apples, slice them and boyl them in Beer all to Mash, then put to them Sugar and beaten Butter, sometimes for variety add Barberries and the Gravy of he owl. 2. Roast sowr Apples or Pippins strain  grated Bread beaten Cin∣namon, Mustard, and boyld Onions strain∣ed and put to it. Sawce for a young Stubble Goose. Take the Liver and Gizzard, mince it ry small with some beaten Spinage, sweet herbs, Sage, Salt and some minced Lard, fill the Belly of the Goose and so sow up the Rump or vent, as also the Neck, Roast it,
and then take out the farsing and put it in a dish then add to it the Gravy of the Goose, Verjuice and Pepper, give it a warm on the fire, and serve it with this sawce in a clean dish. The French Sawce for a Goose, is Butter, Mustard, Sugar, Vinegar, and Barber∣ries. To make Sawces for a Duck or Mallard. 1. Onions sliced, and Carrots cut square like Dice, boyled in Whitewine, strong broth, some Gravy, minced Parsly, Savo∣ry chop'd, Mace and Butter, being stewed together it will serve for divers wild fowl, but most proper for Water fowl. 2. Vinegar and Sugar boyled to a Syrup, with two or three Cloves, and Cinnamon, or Cloves only. 3. Oyster Liquor, Gravy of the Fowl, whole Onions boyled in it, Nutmeg and an Anchovy. If the Fowl be lean arse and Lard them.
To make Sawces for any kind of Roast Sea Fowl MAke a Gallendine with some grated Bread, beaten Cinnamon and Gin∣ger, a quartern of Sugar, a quart of Claret Wine, a pint of Wine-Vinegar, strain the foresaid materials, and boyl hem in a Skil∣let with a few whole Cloves, in the boyl∣ing stir it with a sprig of Rosemary, add a a little Red Saunders and boyl it as thick as Water Grewel. To make Green Sawce for Pork, Goslings, Chickens, Lamb or Kid. Stamp Sorrel with white Bread and pa∣red Pippins in a tone or wooden Morter, put Sugar to it and Wine Vinegar, then strain it thorow a fine cloth pretty thick, dish it in Sawcers and scrape Sugar on it. To make Sawces for Roast or Boyled Salmon. 1. Take the Gravy of the Salmon, or Oy∣ster Liquor boyled up thick with beaten Butter, Claret Wine, Nutmeg, and some slices of Orange.
2. Gravy of the Salmon, Butter, Juice of Orange or Lemon, Sugar and Cinnamon, beat up the same with Butter pretty thick, dish up the Salmon, pour on the sawce and lay on it slices of Lemon. 3. Beaten Butter with slices of Orange or Lemon, or the Juice of them, or Grape Verjuice and Nutmeg. 4. Gravy of the Salmon, two or three Cloves dissolved in it, grated Numeg and grated Bread, beat up thick with Butter, the yolk of an Egg, or slices of Orange wih the juice of it. I should give you now some directions for dressing of Flesh and Fish, but you will find that more properly set down, in my directions to Cook-Maids
Directions for such who desire to be Nursery-Maids to Person of Honour or Quality, or else to Gentlewomen either in City or Country. IF you intend to fit your self for this em∣ployment, you must naturally encline your self to love young Children, o∣therwise you will soon discover your unfit∣ness to manage that charge, you must be very neat and cleanly about them, and care∣ful to keep good hours for them, both to a∣ise and go to bed, likewise to get their Breakfasts and Suppers at good and conve∣nient time. Let them not sit too long but walk them often up and down, especially those who cannot go well of themselves, you must also be extraordinary careful and vigilant, tha they get not any falls through your neglect, or by such falls, many (the cause at first being unperceivable) have grown irrecoverably Lame or Crooked. Therefore i any such thing should happen, be sure you conceal it not, but acquaint your
Lord or Lady, Master or Mistress thereof, with all convenient speed, that so means may be used for the Childs recovery before it be too late, you must be extraordinary careful that you be not churlish or dogged to the Children, but be always merry and pleasant, and contrive and invent pretty sports and pastimes, as will be most uitable and agreeable to the Childrens Age, keep their Linnen and other things always men∣ded, and suffer them not to run too fast to decay. Do not let the Children see that you love any one child above the other, for that will be a means of dejecting and casting down the other. Be careful to hear them read if it be im∣posed upon you, and be not too hasty with them, have a special care how you behave your sel before them, neither speak∣ing nor acting mis-becomingly, lest your bad example prove the subject of their imitation. Consider the chage you ake in hand, and do not desire this employment as too many do, because it is an easie kind os Life, and void of labour and pains taking, thinking also that children are easily pleased with a∣ny thing, you will find the contrary, and
that it is a troublesome employment, and the charge of a greater weight, than such vainly imagine.
Directions for such as desire to be Cook-Maids, in Noble, or Gentlemens Fa∣milies. IF you would fit your self for this em∣ployment, and so consequently gain great wages, good Vales, and the re∣putation of an accomplished Cook, You must learn to be skilful in drssing all sorts of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, to make va∣riety of sawces proper for each of them, to raise all manner of Pastes and Kickshaws, to be curious in garnishing your dishes, and making all manner of Pickles, &c. And as you must now how to dress Meat well, so must you know how to save what is left of that you have dressd, of which you may make both handsome and Toothsome dishes again, to the saving of
your Masters purse, and credit of his Table. You must be sure to be as saving as you can, and cleanly about every thing, seeing likewise that your Kitchin be kept clean, and all things scowred in due time, your Larders also and Cupboards, that there be no bits of bread and Meat lye about them to spoyl and stink. You must be careful that your Meat taint not, for want of good salting. You must also keep good hours for your Meals, other∣wise you put an house quite out of order, do not covet to have the Kitching stuff for your Vales, but rather ask the more wages, for that may make you an ill Huswife of your Masters goods, and teach you to be a Thief, for you would be apt to put that which should go in to the tryed Suet, into your Pot. Lay not all your wages upon your back, but lay up something against sickness, and an hundred other casualties, for you may assure your self it is more commendable, for one in your employment to go decent and clean, than gaudishly fine. I have already in this Book, in my di∣rections to Chamber-Maids, given some directions for Raising of Paste, for making of Sawces and Pickles.
I shall now give you some directions for the best and newest way of dressing of Flesh Fowl and Fish.
Directions for dressing of Flesh, Fowl and Fish. First, For Dressing of Flesh. To Boyl a Leg of Veal and Bacon. LArd your Leg of Veal with Bacon all over, with a little Lemon peelamong it, then boyl it with a middle piece of B∣con, when your Bacon is boyled, cut it in pieces, season it with pepper and dried sage mix'd together, dish up the Veal with the Bacon round about it, send it up with saw∣cers of green sawce, strew over it Parsly and Barberries.
To mke a Friasie of Veal. Cut your Veal in thin slices, beat it well with a rowling pin, season it well with Nutmegs, Lemon and Thyme, fry it slight∣ly in the Pan, then beat two eggs and one spoonful of Verjuice, put it into the pan, stir it together, fry it and dish it. To Roast a Haunch of Venison. If your Venison be seasoned, you must wa∣ter it, and stick it with short sprigs of Rose∣mary, let your sawce be Claret Wine, a handful of grated Bread, Cinnamon, Gin∣ger, Sugar, a little Vinegar, boyl these up so thick as it may only run like Butter, it ought to be sharp and sweet, dish up your meat on your sawce.
To Stew a Leg of Lamb. Cut it in pieces, and put it into your stewing pan, being first seasoned with salt and Nutmeg, and as much Butter as will stew it, with raisins of the Sun, Currants and Gooseberries; when it is stewed make a caudle with the yolks of two or three eggs, and some Wine Vinegar and sugar beaten together, and put it into your Meat and stew-all a little longer together, then dish it, strew sugar on the top and serve it up hot. To make Scoch Colos of Veal Cut out your Veal into very broad slices at and lean, not too thick, take eight eggs beat them very well with a little salt, grate a whole Nutmeg, take a handful of Thyme and strip it, then take a pound of Sawsages half a pint of stewing Oysters, wash and cleanse them from the Gravel, then half ry your Veal with sweet Butter, then put in
your sawsages and oysters, then take a quar∣ter of a pound of Capers, shred them very small with three Anchovies dissolved in Whitewine and fair water, so put in your Eggs, shred Capers and Anchovies, Butter and Spice, and mingle them, and strew them in the Pan upon te Veal and Oysters, serve it with sipits with a little fresh Butter and Vinegar and Lemon sliced, and Barberries with a little salt. You must have a care to keep the Meat sirring, lest the Eggs curdle with the heat of the fire. To Boyl a Chine, Rump, Surloin, Brisket, Rib, Flank, Buttock, or Fillet of Beef. Take any of these pieces of Beef, and give them in summer a Weeks powdering, in winter a Fortnights, you may either stuff them or not, if you stuff them you must do it with all manner of sweet herbs, and fa Beef minced very small, and some Nutmeg mingled together, you may serve them in on bruess, with roots or cabbage boyled in milk, with beaten butter.
To Roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters. Parboyl your Oysters, then mix Winter savory, thyme, parsly and the yolks of five or six hard eggs, and to these a hal-penny loaf of grated Bread, and three or four yolks of eggs, mingle all these together with your hands, when you have spited your Mutton, make holes in it as big as you think conve∣nient, put in your Oysters with your other ingredients, about twenty five or thirty Oi∣sters will be enough, let it roast indifferent long, and take the remainder of a quart of Oysters, and put them into a deep dish with with Claret Wine, put to them two or three Onions cut in halves with two or three An∣chovies, put this into the dripping pan under your Mutton and save your Gravy, and when the meat is enough, put your sawce up∣on the Coals, and put in it the yolk of an egg beaten, grated Nutmeg and sweet Butter, dish your mutton and pour in your Oysters, sawce and all upon it, garnishing your dish with Lemons and Barberries.
To Stew a Rump of Beef. Season your Beef with some Nutmeg gra∣ted, together with some salt and ppper, season it on the bony side and lay it in the Pipkin with the fat side downwards, then take two or three great Onions and a bunch of Rosemary tyed up together, also three pints of Elder Vinegar and three pints of water, stew all these together in a Pipkin close covered over a sot fire three or four hours together, dish it upon sipits, taking off the fat from the Gravy: put some of the Gravy to the Beef and serve it up. To Stew a Breast, Loyn, or Neck of Mutton. Joynt either of these very well, draw it and stuff it with sweet herbs and parsly min∣ced, then put it in a deep stewing dish with the right side downward, put to it so much Whitewine and strong broth as will stew it, set it on the Coals and put to it two or three
Onions, a bundle of sweet herbs and a littl large Mace, when it is almost stewed take  handful of Spinage, Parsly and Endive, an put into it, or else some Gooseberries an Grapes, and in the winter time Samphir and Capers, you may add them at any time  dish up your Mutton and put by the Liquo you do not use, and thicken the other with yolks of Eggs and sweet butter, put on the sawce and herbs over the meat, garnish your dish with Lemon and Barberries. To Farce, or Suff a Fillet of Veal. Take a large Leg of Veal and cut off a couple of Fillets from it, then mince a hand∣full of sweet-herbs and parsly, and the yolks of two or three hard eggs, let all these be minc'd very small, then season it with a cou∣ple of grated Nutmegs and a little salt, and so arce or stuff your Veal, hen lard it with bacon and thyme very well, then let it be roasted, and when it is almost enough, take some of your stuffing and as many currans, about a handful, and put these to a little strong broth, a glass of Claret and a little vi∣negar: a little sugar and some mace, when
your meat is almost ready, take it up and put it into this and let it stew, putting to it a little Butter melted, put your meat in your dish and pour your sawce on it, and serve it up. To Dress a Leg of Mutton, a Savoury Dish. Boyl your Mutton in water and salt for the space of an hour, then cut it into thin sli∣ces and put it into a dish over a chafing dish of Coals without any liquor, and in a little time you will find the Gravy will be liquor enough, then put in a little salt and a little grated Nutmeg, one Onion or two or three Shelots sliced, a sprig of Thyme and Win∣ter Savory, let it stew between dishes till it be almost enough, then put in a piece o fresh Butter, and when it hath stewed a lit∣tle longer, take it up and serve it in, gar∣nish your Dish with pickled Barberries and pickled Oisters.
To Boyl a Fore-Loin of Pork, with good Sawce to it. Let your Pork be reasonably well salted and boyl it very well, then have in readi∣ness a good quantity of Sorrel stript from the stalks, and beaten in a morter as fine as possible you can, then put in a few crumbs of Bread, the yolks of hard eggs with a lit∣tle Mustard and Salt; and so serve in your Pork with this sawce, and garnish your Dish with Parsly, or any other green Leaves.
Directions for Dressing of Fowl. How to Roast a Hen or Pullet. Take a Pullet or Hen full of eggs, draw it and roast it, being roasted break it up and mince the Braun in thin slices, save the Wings whole or not mince the Brauns and save the Rump with the Legs whole, stew all in the Gravy and a little salt, then have a minced Lemon and put it in the gra∣vy, dish the minced Meat in the midst of the dish, and the Thighs, Wings, and Rumps abou it, garnish the dish with O∣range and Lemon quartered, and serve them up covered. To Roast Woodocks the English way. First pull and draw them, then being
washed and trussed Roast them, baste them with Butter and save the Gravy, then make Tosts and Butter them, being roasted bread them with grated bread and Flower, and serve them on a clean dish, on the Tost and Gravy. To Roast Woodcocks the French Way. Being new and fresh killed that day you use them, pull, truss, and lard them with a broad piece o lard or bacon pricked over the Brest, being roasted serve them on broil∣ed Tosts, put in Verjuice or the juice of O∣range with the Gravy, and warmed on a fire. To Roast a Pig the Plain way. Take a Pig, scald and draw it, wash it clear and put some sage in the Belly, prick it up and spit it, being roasted fine and crisp make sawce with chop'd sage and currants, well boyled in vinegar and fair water, then put to them the Gravy of the Pig, a little
grated Bread, the Brains and some Barber∣ries, give these a walm or two and serve the Pig on the sawce with a little beaten Butter. To Roast a Pig otherways. Take a Pig, scald and draw it, then mince some sweet herbs either sage or Penni-royal, and roul it up in a ball with some Butter, prick it up in the Pigs belly and roast him, being roted make swce with Butter, Vi∣negar, the Brains and some Barbrris. To Roast a Hre. Take a Hare, flea it, set it, and lard it with small lard, stick it with Cloves and make a pudding in his Belly with grated Bread, grated Nutmeg and beaten Cinna∣mon, Salt, Currants, Eggs, Cream and Sugar, make it good and stiff, fill the Hare and roast it. If you would have the pud∣ding green, put to it juice of Spinage; If yellow, Saffron: Make for Sawce beaten
Ginger, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Pepper, boyled Prunes and Currants strained, bisket Bread beaten into powder, Sugar and Cloves, all boyled up as thick as Water-Grewel. Land, or Sea Fowl, How to Boil them. HAlf roast your Fowls, sticking on them some Cloves as they roast, save the Gravy, and when they are half roasted put them in a Pipkin with the Gravy, some Claret wine, as much strong Broth as will cover them, Mace, Cloves, Pepper, Gin∣ger, some fryed Onions and Salt, stew all well together, and serve them on carved ippets.
How to Boyl Plovers, Quails, Blackbirds, Rails, Thrushes, Snipes, Wheat ears, Larks and Sparrows. Take them and truss them, or cut off the heads and legs and boyl them, scum your Pipkin aud put therein large Mace, White∣wine, Currants well picked and washed, Dtes, Mrrow, Pepper and Salt, being well stewed, dish them on carved Sippets, thicken the Broth with strained Almonds, Rose-water and Sugar, garnish them with Lemon, Barberries, and grated bread. To Boyl Capons, Pullets, Chickens, Pid∣geons, Pheasants, Parridges. Farce them either with the bone or bon'd, then take off the skin whole, with the neck, wings and legs on, mince the body with some bacon or beef suet, season it with some Nutmeg, Pepper, Cloves, beaten Ginger, Salt, and a few sweet herbs finely mnced, and mingled amongst some three or four
yolks of eggs, some Sugar, whole Grapes, Gooseberries, Brberries and Pistaches, fill the skins and prick them up in the back, then stew them between two dishes with some strong broth, Whitewine, Butter, some large Mace, Marrow, Gooseberries and sweet herbs, being stewed serve them on spets with some Marrow and sliced Lemon, in Winter Currants. To Boyl Cpns or Cckens, with Se . First boyl them in water and salt, then boyl some parsly, sage, two or three hard eggs, chop them, then have a few thin sli∣ces of fine manchet and stew all together, but break not the slices of Bread, stew them with some of the broth wherein the Chick∣ns boyls, some large mace, butter, a little whitewine or vinegar, with a few barber∣ries or grapes, dish up the Capons or Chickens on the sawce, and run hem over with sweet Butter and Lemon cut like dice, the peel cut like small Lard, and boyl a little peel with the Chickens.
To Boyl any large Water Fowl, as Swan, Whopper, Wild or Tame Geese, Crane, Hern, Duck, Mallrd, &c. Take a Goose and salt it two or three days, then truss it to boyl, cut lard as big as your little finger and lard the brest, season the lard with pepper, mace and salt, then boyl it in Beef broth or water and salt, put to it pepper grosly beaten, a handful or two of Bayleaves, Thyme and Rosemary bound up very well, boyl them very well with the Fowl, then prepare some cabbage boyled very well with water and salt, squeeze out the water from it and put it into a pipkin with some strong broth, Claret wine, and a good big Onion or two, season it with pepper, mace and salt, and two or three Anchovies dissolved, stew these together with a Ladle full of sweet Butter and a little Vinegar, and when your Goose is boyled enough, and your Cabbage on sippets, lay on the Goose with some Cabbage on the brest and serve it up. Thus you may dress any large wild Fowl.
To Boyl Pidgeons. Take Pidgeons being finely cleans'd and trussed, put them in a Pipkin or Skillet with some Mutton broth or fair water, set them a boyling and scum them clean, then put to them large Mace or well washed Currants, some strained bread strained with Vinegar and Broth, put it to the Pidgeons with some sweet butter and capers, boyl hem very white, and being boyled serve them on fine carv'd sippets in the broth with some Sugar, garnish them with Lemon, fine Sugar, Mace, Grapes, Gooseberries and Barberries, and run them over with beaten Butter, garnish the dish with grated manchet. To Stew Pidgeons in the French Fashion. Take Pidgeons ready pulled and scalded, take the flesh out of the skin, and leave the skin whole, with the legs and wings hanging to it, mince the bodies with some lard or beef suet together very small, then put to
them some sweet herbs finely minced, and season all with cloves, mace, ginger, pep∣per, some grated bread or parmison grated and yolks of eggs, fill again the skins and prick them up on the back, then put them in a dish with some strong broth and sweet herbs chop'd, large mace, gooseberries, barberries or grapes, then have some cab∣bage letice boyled in water and salt, put to them butter and serve them up on fine sippets. How to Pot up Fowl for to carry to Sea, or otherwise to be spent at home. Take a good company of Ducks or Mal∣lards, pull them and draw them, and lay them in a tub with a little pepper and salt for twenty four hours, then truss them and roast them, and when they are roasted let them drain from their gravy, for that will make them corrupt, then put them hand∣somly into a pot, and take the fat which came from them in the roasting and good store of Butter, and melt them together in a pot set in a kettle of boyling water, put there∣in good store of cloves bruised a little, some
sliced mace, numeg, bayleaves and salt, and let them stew in the butter a while, then while it is hot pour it over your Fowls in the pot, and let the pot be filled so that the Fowls be covered, then lay a Trencher up∣on them, and keep them down with a weight or stone until they be cold, then take of the same kind of spice which you did put into your butter, beat it very fine and strew over it, and lay some bayleaves on the top so cover it up, they will keep a good while, drain your Fowl from the gravy, twenty four hours before you put them into your pot.
Directions for Dressing of Fish. How to Stew a Cap. DRess the Carp and take out the milt, put it in a dish with the Carp, take out the Gall then save the blood, and scotch with your Knife the back of the Carp if the Carp be large, take a quart of Claret or Whitewine, four or five blades of large mace, ten cloves, two large races of ginger sliced, two sliced nutmegs, with the tops of thyme, marjoram, savory, and parsly chop'd very small, four great Onions whole, three or four bayleaves and some salt, stew them all together with the Wine, when the Li∣quor boyls put in the Carp, with a quarter of a pound of Sweet Butter, being stewed enough take a large dish, and laying he Carp therein, pour the sawce thereon with the spices, lay on sliced Lemon with some of the peel cut small, and run it over with beaten Butter, garnish the dish with mn∣chet
grated and searced, and carved sipets laid round the dish, you may or variety, the Carp being scaled, garnish the body with stewed Oisters, some fryed in white butter, some in green made by the juice of spinage. How to Roast a Carp. Take a live Carp draw and wash it, ta∣king away the gall, milt or spawn, then make a pudding with some grated manchet some Almond paste, cream, currants, gra∣ted nutmeg, raw yolks of eggs, sugar, car∣raway seed candied, some salt and lemon, make a stiff pudding, and put it thorow the Gills into the belly of the Carp, then spit it, and when it is roasted make sawce with the Gravy that falls from it, with juice of orange, sugar and cinnamon, beat up the sawce thick with the Butter, and dih it up.
To Stew Oysters. Take a potle o large Oysters, parboyl them in their own liquor, then wash them from the dregs in warm water, and put them in a pipkin with a good big Onion or two, and five or six blades of large mace, a little whole pepper, a sliced nutmeg, a quarter of a pint of whitewine, as much wine vinegar, a quarter of a pound of sweet butter with a little salt, stew them toge∣ther on a soft fire the space of half an hour, then dish them on sipets of french bread, sliced lemon and barberries on that, then run them over with beaten butter, and gar∣nish the dish with grated manchet. To Fry Oysters. Strain the liquor from them, and parboyl them in a Kettle, then dry and rowl them in flower or make a bitter o eggs, flower, a little Cream and salt, dip them therein and fry them in butter beating it up thick,
having warmed the dish rub it with some garlick and lay thereon the Oysters, gar∣nishing the dish with sliees of Orange. To Boyl a Pike. Take your Pike and wash it clean, then truss it whole round with the tale in his mouth, and his back scotched or cut in three places, then boyl it in water, salt and vi∣negar, put not the Pike in till the liquor boyls, and then make it boyl apace, and that will crisp your Pike, but afterwards softly; The Pike being boyled dish it, and garnish the dish with grated white bread, or ginger fine beaten, then beat up the sawce with half a pound of butter, minced Le∣mon or Orange, and pour it on the Pike wih sipets. To make the sawce, you must put into a pipkin a pint of whitewine, sliced ginger, mace, dates quartered, a pint of large Oy∣sters with their liquor, a little vinegar and salt, boyl them a quater of an hour, then mince a few sweet-herbs and pasly, stew them till half the Liquor be consumed.
To Stew a Pike. Take a Pike, flat it and lay it in a dish, when the blood is clean washed out, put to it as much whitewine as will cover it, and set it a stewing, when it boyls put in the Fish and scum it, and put to i some large mace, whole cinnamon and some salt, when tho∣rowly sewed, dish it on sipets finely cr∣e. To Boyl Slmon. Take as much water as will cover your Sal∣mon, then take rosemary, thyme, winter savory and salt, boyl all these very well to∣gether, then put in some wine vinear, and when your Salmon is boyled, let him remain in the same water always until you have oc∣casion to eat of it.
To Roast Salmon. Take a Rand or Jole, cut it into four pie∣ces and season it with a little nutmeg and salt, stick a few cloves and put it on a small spit, put between it some bayleaves, and stick it wih little sprigs of Rosemary, roast it and baste it with Butter, save the gravy, and add to i for sawce some vinegar, but∣ter, and slices of Orange. To Fry Salmon. Take a Jole, Chine or Rand, and fry it in clarified butter, being stiff and crisp fryed, make sawce with a little Claret wine, sweet butter, grated nutmeg, slices of Orange, and Oyster liquor, stew them all together and pour on the sawce, and on that Par∣sly, Alisaunder and Sage leaves fryed in butter. Thus have I given you some short dire∣ctions, for dressing of Flesh, Fowl and Fish.
I shall now give you directions for making bills of fare both first and second course, for every month in the year, and so conclude my directions to Cook-maid.
A BILL OF FARE FOR Every Month in the Year. Ianuary. 1. BRawn and Mustard. 2. Two boyled Capons aud White Broth. 3. A Turkey Roasted. 4. A Shoulder of Mutton hash'd.
5. Two Geese boyled. 6. A Goose roasted. 7. Ribs or Surloin of Beef. 8. Minc'd Pyes. 9. A Loin of Veal. 10. A Pasty of Venison. 11. A Marrow Pye. 12. Roasted Capons. 13. Lamb. 14. Wooodcocks, Partridges, and smaller Birds. Second Course. 1. A Sous'd Pig. 2. A Warden Pye. 3. Dryed Neats Tongues. 4. A sous'd Capon. 5. Pickled Oysters and Mushrooms togeter. 6. Sturgeon. 7. A Goose or Turkey Pye.
February. 1. A Chine of Roast Pork. 2. Veal or Beef roasted. 3. A Lamb Pye and Mince Pyes. 4. A Couple of Wild Ducks. 5. A Couple of Rabbets. 6. Fryed Oysters. 7. A Skirret Pye. Second Course. 1. A Whole Lamb roasted. 2. Three Widgeons. 3. A Pippin Pye. 4. A Iole of Sturgeon. 5. A cold Turkey Pye.
March. 1. NEats Tongue and Vdder 2. Boyled Chickens. 3. A dish of stewed Oysters. 4. A dih of young Rabbets. 5. A Grand Sallet. Second Course. 1. A Dish of Soles or Smelts. 2. Marinate Flounders. 3. A Lambstone Pye. 4. An hundred of Asparagus. 5. A Warden Pye.
April. 1. GReen Geese or Veal and Bacon. 2. A Haunch of Venison roasted. 3. A Lumber Pye. 4. Rabbets and Tarts. Second Course. 1. COld Lamb. 2. Cold Neats Tongue Pye. 3. Salmons, Lobsters, and Prawns. 4. Asparagus.
May. 1. BOyl'd Chickens. 2. Roasted Veal. 3. Roasted Capons. 4. Rabbets. Second Course. 1. ARtichoke Pye hot. 2. Westphalia Bacon and Tarts 3. Sturgeon, Salmon, Lobsters. 4. A dish of Asparagus, 5. A Tanfie.
June. 1. A Neats Tongue or Leg of Mutton and Colliflowers. 2. A Steak Pye. 3. A Shoulder of Mutton. 4. A Forequarter of Lamb. 5. A dish os Pease. Second Course. 1. SWeet-Bread Pye. 2. A Capon. 3. A Gooseherry Tart. 4. Strawberries and Cream, or Strawberries, Whitewine, Rose-water and Sugar.
July. 1. A Westphaliaham and Pidgeons. 2. A Loin of Veal. 3. A Venison Pasty. 4. Roast Capons. Second Course. 1. PEase or French Beans. 2. A Codling Tart. 3. Artichokes, or a Pye made thereof 4. Roast Chickens.
August. 1. CAlves head and Bacon. 2. An Olio or Grand Boyled Meat. 3. A Haunch of Venison. 4. A Pig Roasted. Second Course. 1. MArinate Smelts. 2. A Pidgeon Pye. 3. Roast Chickens. 4. A Tart. 5. Some Cream and Fruit.
September. 1. CApon and White Broth. 2. Neats Tongue and Vdder roasted. 3. A Powdered Gose. 4. A Roast Turkey. Second Course. 1. A Potato Pye. 2. Rost Parridges. 3. A dish of Larks. 4. Creams and Fruit.
October. 1. ROast Veal. 2. Two Brand Geese Roast∣ed. 3. A Grand Salle. 4. Roasted Capons. Second Course. 1. PHeasants, Pouts and Pidgeons. 2. A dish of Quails and Sparrows. 3. A Warden Pye, Tarts and Custards.
November. 1. A Shoulder of Mutton and Oysters. 2. a Loin of Veal. 3. Geese Roasted. 4. A Pasty of Venison. Second Course. 1. TWo Herns one Lded. 2. A Sowsed Turbot. 3. Two Pheasants one lardd. 4. A Rowl of Beef. 5. A Sows'd Mullet and Bafe. 6. Iellies and Tarts.
December. 1. STewed Broth of Mutton and Mrrow Bnes. 2. Lambs head and White Broth. 3. A Chine of Bef roasted. 4. Minc'd Pyes. 5. A Roast Turkey stuck wih Cloves. 6. Two Capons, one larded. Second Course. 1. A Yung Lamb or Kid. 2. Two Brace of Partridges. 3. Bllone Sawsages, Anchovies, mushrooms, Cavier, and pickled Oysters in a dish to∣geher. 4. A Quince Pye. 5. Six Woodcocks.
Directions for Vnder Cook-Maids. IF you would so fit your self for this em∣ployment, as that it may be a means of raising you to higher prefermen, you must be careful to be diligent and willing to do what you are bid to do, and though your employment be greasie and smooty, yet if you be careful you may keep your self rom being nasty. Therefore let it be your care to keep your self neat and clean, ob∣serve every thing in Cookery that is done by your Superior or Head Cook, treasure it up in your memory, and when you meet with a convenient opportunity, put that in practice which you have observed, this course will advance you from a drudge, to be a Cook another day. Every one must have a beginning, and if you be ingenious and bend your mind to it, and be willing to learn, there is none will be so churlish or unkind, as to be unwilling to teach you,
but if you be stubborn and careless, and not give your mind to learn, who do you think will be willing to teach you; you must be∣ware of Gossips and Chairwomen, for they will misadvise you, take heed of the solli∣citations of the flesh for they will undo you, and though you may have mean thoughts of your self, and think none will meddle with such as you, it is a mistake, for some∣times brave Gallants will fall foul upon the Wench in the Scullery.
Directions for such as desire to be Dairy-Maids. THose who would endeavour to gain the esteem and reputation of good Dairy Maids, must be careful that all their Vessels be scalded well, and kept very clean, that they milk their Cattel in due time, for the Kine by custom will ex∣pect it though you neglect, which will tend much to their detriment. The hours and times most approved, and commonly used for milking, are in the Spring and Summer time between five and six in the morning, and between six and seven in the evening: And in the Wintr between seven and eight in the morning, and four and five in the evning. In the next place you must be careful that you do not waste your Cream by giving it away to liquorish persons. You must keep certain days for your chur∣ning, and be sure to make up your Butter
neatly and cleanly, washing it well from the Butter-milk and then salt it well. You must be careful to make your Cheeses good and tender by well ordering of them, and see that your Hogs have the Whey, and that it be not given away to Gossiping and idle people, who live merely upon what they can get from Servants. That you provide your winter Butter and Cheese in summer, as in May: And when your Rowings come in, be sparing of your fire and do not lavish away your Milk, But∣ter, or Cheese. If you have any Fowls to fat, look to them that it may be for your credit and not your shame, when they are brought to Table. When you milk the Cattel, stroke them well, and in the summer time save those strokings by themselves, to put into your Morning milk Cheese. I look upon it to be altogether needless, for to give you any directions for the ma∣king of Butter or Cheese, since there are very few, (especially in the Country) that can be ignorant thereof: I shall only say, that the best time to pot up Butter for win∣ter, is in the month of My, for then the Air is most temperate, and the Butter will take Salt best. Howver it may be done at
any time betwixt May and September. I shall now give you some few directions for made Cream, and for Milk made bet∣ter by art, and so conclude my directions to Dairy-Maids. How to make your ordinary Clouted Cream. Take a quantity of milk from the Cow, and put into a broad earthen pan, and set it over a very slow fire, letting it stand there from morning to night, suffering it not by any means to boyl, then take it off the fire and set it in some place all night to cool, in the morning dish off your Cream, for it will be very thick. To make Fresh Cheese and Cream. Take a Pottle of new milk as it cometh from the Cow, and half a pound of blanch'd Almonds beaten very small, and make a thick Almond milk with a pint of Cream strained, and a little before you go to din∣ner
make it blood warm, and season it with a little Sugar, Rose-water, and ierced Ginger, and put to it a little Runner, and when it is scum'd bread it up and whey it, and put it into a mould and press it with your hand, aud when it is well wheyed, put it into a dish with Cream. To make a Cream of Codlings. After you have scalded your Codlings and peel'd of the skins, and scraped the pulps from the cores with a little Sugar and Rose∣water, strain them, and lay the pulp of your Codlings in a dish, with as much Cream as you please about them. To make a Iunket. Take Ewes or Goats milk, if you have neither of these then take Cows milk, and put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet to it, then pour it out into a dish and let it cool, then strew on cinnamon and sugar, then take some Cream and lay
upon it, scraping Sugar thereon serve it up. To make Rasbery Cream. When you have boyled your Cream take two ladlefulls of it being almost cold, bruise the Rasberrries together with it, and season it with sugar and rose-water, and put it in∣to your Cream stirring it all together, and so dish it up. To make Sow Cream. Break the whites of six Eggs, put thereto a little Rose-water, beat them very well to∣gether with a bunch of Feathers till they come perfectly to resemble snow, then lay on the said snow in heaps upon other cream, that is cold which is made fit for the Table, you may put under your Cream in the bot∣tom of your dish, part of a penny Loaf, and stick therein a branch of Rosemary and Bays and fill your Tree with the said snow, so serve it up.
To make a Syllabub. Take a pint of Verjuice in a bowl, milk the Cow to the Verjuice, then take off the curd, and take sweet Cream and beat them together with a little Sack and Sugar, put it into your Syllabub pot, strew Sugar on it and serve it up. To make a Whipt Syllabub. Take the whites of two Eggs and a pint of Cream, with six spoonfuls of Sack and as much sugar as will sweeten it, then take a birchen rod and whip it, as it riseth in froth scum it, and put it into the Syllabub pot, and so continue it with whipping and scumming till your syllabub Pot be full. To make an Excellent Cream. Take a Quart of Cream and set it a boyl∣ing
with a large mace or two, whilst it is boyling cut some thick sippets, and lay them in a very fine clean dish, then have seven or eight yolks of Eggs strained with Rose-wa∣ter, put some sugar to them, then take the Cream from the fire, put in the Eggs and stir all together, then pour on the slices of fine manchet, and being cold scrape on su∣gar and serve it.
Directions for such who in∣tend to be Laundry-Maids in Great Houses. IF you would have the esteem credit and reputation of a compleat Laundry-Maid, you must observe these follow∣ing directions. First, You must take care of all the Linen in the house (except Points and Laces) and whatever you wash do it quickly and do not let it lye and stink and grow yellow, and so create to your self the trouble of wash∣ing it again before it be used. Secondly, You must take care that all the bracks and rents in the Linen be duly mended. Thirdly, Keep your certain days for washing of your Linen, and other days for washing of such Rooms as are appointed you to wash and keep clean. Fourthly, You must be sparing and not
lavish and wastful of your sope, fire and candle. Fifthly, Entertain no Chairwomen un∣known to your Lady or Mistress: Sixthly, Be careful that your Tubs and Copper, or whatever else you make use of be kept clean, and in good repair. Seventhly, You must be careful that you rise early every morning, but more especi∣ally on washing days. Directions for House-Maids in Great Houses. 1. YOur principal Office is to make clean the greatest part of the House, and see that you suffr no Room to lye foul. 2. That you look well to all the stuff, as Hangings, Chairs, Stools, &c. And ee that they be often brushed and the Beds fre∣quently turn'd. 3. That you do not misplace any thing by carrying it out of one Room to another,
for that is the way to have them lost, or you soundly chid for not keeping them in their proper places. 4. That you be careful and diligent to all strangers, and see that they lack nothing in their Chambers, which your Mistress or Lady will allow, and that your close stools and Chamber pots be duely emptied, and kept clean and sweet. 5. That you help the Laundry-Maid in a morning on the washing day. 6. That in the afternoon you b ready to help the Waiting-woman or House-keeper in their preserving and distilling. Directions for Scullery maids in Great Houses. 1. YOu must be careful to keep sweet and clean, the several Rooms which belongs to your charge, as the Kitchin, Pantry, Wash house, &c. 2. You must wash and scowr all the plates and dishes that are used in the kit∣chin, likewise the dressers and cupboards, also all kettles, pots, pans, chamberpots,
with all other iron, brass, tin, and pew∣ter materials, that belong to the Chambers and Kitchin. 3. You must wash your own Linen, keep∣ing your self sweet and clean, remembring always, so soon as you have made an end of your dirty work, to wash and dress your self neatly, titely and cleanly. Now if you be careful and diligent, and cleanly in performing this place, you will have notice taken of you, and you will be advanced to a higher and more profitable employment. FINIS. Books sold by Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London-Bridge. A French and English Dictionary, com∣posed by Mr. Randolph Cotgrave, Folio. A Mirror or Looking-glass for Saints and Sinners, shewing the justice of God on the one, and his mercy toward the other. Set forth in some thousand of examples by
Sam. Clark late Minister of Bennet Finck Lon∣don, in two Volumes in folio. Royal and Practical Chymistry, by Os∣waldus Crollius, and Iohn Hartman, faithfully rendred into English, folio, price 10 s. Gods Revenge against Murther, by Iohn Reynolds, containing thirty Tragical Stories, digested into six Books newly reprinted, fo∣lio, price 10 s. Lord Bacon's Natural History, folio, price 8 s. Sandy's Travels, containing a description of the Turkish Empire of Egypt, and the holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and I∣slands adjoyning, folio, price 8 s. Markham's Master-piece. Roman Antiquities, by Th. Goodwin, quarto, price 2 s. 6 d. The famous History of the destruction of Troy, in three Books, quarto, price 3 s. Valentine and Orson, price 18 d. Etymologicum parvum, by Francis Gregory, octavo, price 3 s. Chymical essays by Iohn Beguminus, price 1 s. 8 d. Spiritual Antidotes against sinful conta∣gion, by Tho. Doolittle, price 18 d. Pool's Dialogue betwixt a Papist and a Protestant, twelves, price bound 1 s. Monasticon Favershamiense, Or a Descrip∣tion
of the Abby of Faversham, octavo, price bound 18 d. The Christians Crown of Glory, or Holi∣ness the way to Happiness, octavo, price bound 18 d. The Path way to Health, price bound 18 d. The Compleat Academy, or Nursery of Complements, bound 1 s. The Book of Knowledge in three parts, price 10 d. The Book of Palmistry in octavo, price bound 18 d. The Wise Virgin, being a Narrative of Gods dealing with Martha Hatfield, price bound 18 d. The Pilgrims Port, or the weary Mans rest in the Grave, in twelves, price bound 1 s. The famous History of the five wise Phi∣losophers, containing the Life of Iehosaphat, Son of Avenerio, Emperor of Corma, and his wonderful conversion to the Christian Faith. The great Assize, by Sam Smith. The delectable History of Amadis de Gul. The pleasant History of Paladine of England. The Bear-baiting of Women. The History of Fryar Bacon and Fryar Bungy. New conceited Letters. The Jovial Garland, containing all the newest songs that are now used.
The Penitent Prodigal, or a gracious Re∣proof for Pharisaical Saints, by I. H. The Christians best Exercise in the wors of times, by I. H. Scarborough Spaw, being a decription of the nature and virtues of the Spaw of Scar∣borough in Yoshire, by Doctor Wittie. The French Schoolmaster. Farnabies Epigrams. Newton's Art of Logick. Newton's Art of Rhetorick. The famous History of Don Bellianis of Greece, in three parts, being now compleat. The famous History of Montelion, Knight of the Oracle. Hodder's Arithmetick in twelves. Ovid de Tristibus in English. Bishop Hall's Soliloquies in twelves. The Poems of Ben. Iohnson Iunior. A plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments, by Iohn Dod.
