W389 12380023 60730
A TERRIBLE OUT-CRY AGAINST THE LOY∣TERING EXALTED PRELATES: Shewing the danger, and unfitnesse of Conferring them in any Temporall Office or Dignity. Wherein the Devill is proved to be a more di∣ligent Prelate, then any of our English Bishops are, leaving them to the Consideration of the Kings Majestie, and the high Court of PARLIAMENT. By Mr. PRINNE, a faithfull Witnesse of Iesus Christ, and a Sufferer under them. LONDON: Printed for Richard Smethrust. 1641.
A TERRIBLE OVT-CRY against the BISHOPS. THis hath been one great Abuse in England these many yeers, that such Offices as have been of most impor∣tance, and weight, have commonly been committed to Bishops and other Spirituall men; whereby their devillish mischiefs, and inconveniences have hapned in this Realme, to the great dishonour of God, and utter neglect of the flock of Christ, the which three be these. 1. They have had small leasure to attend to their Pastorall Cures, which thereby have been utterly neglected, and left undone. 2. It hath also puft up many Bishops, and other spirituall persons in such haughtinesse, and pride, that they have thought no Nobleman in the Realm worthy to be their equall, and fellow; (whence Hall in his Chronicle observes, 22. H. 8. fol. 184.) that the Authority of Cardinall Woolsey, set the Clergie in such a pride, that they disdained all men, wherefore when he was fallen, they followed after.
3. Where they by this means, knew the very secrets of Princes, they (being in such high Offi∣ces) have caused the same to be known in Rome be∣fore the King could accomplish and bring his in∣tents to passe in England. By this means hath the Papacie been so maintained, and things ordered after their wills, and pleasures, that much mischief hath happened in this Realm, and others, sometime the destruction of Princes, and sometime to the utter undoing of many Common-wealths. Mr. Hooper, both a Bishop and a Martyr of our Church, delivers his judgement of the point, in these ensuing termes: upon the 8. Commandment page 78. For the space of 400. yeers after Christ, (saith he) the Bishops applyed all their wit onely to their own vocation; to the glory of God, and the honour of the Realm they dwelt in; though they had not so much upon their heads, as our Bishops have, yet had they more within their heads, and the Scriptures and Histories testifie. For they applied all the will they had, unto the vocation and mini∣stery of the Church whereunto they were called. But our Bishops have so much wit, that they can rule, and serve (as they say) in both States, in the Church, and also in the Civill Policie, when one of them is more then any man is able to satisfie, let him do alwayes his best diligence. If he be so ne∣cessarie for the Court, that in Civill causes he can not be spared, let him use that vocation, and spare the other. It is not possible he should do both well. It is a great over-sight with Princes, thus to
charge them with two burthens. The Primitive Church had no such Bishops as we. They had such Bishops as did preach many godly Sermons in lesse time, then our Bishops horses be a bridling. If it be so now, let every man judge. If the fourth part of the Bishoprick remained to the Bishop, it were sufficient, the third part to School-masters, the second to poore, and Souldi∣ers were better bestowed. If any be offended with me for this my saying, he loveth not his own health, nor Gods Laws, nor mans. See Bucer, de Regno Christi, li. 2. ca. 12. and in his Apologie he saith: It is both against Gods Laws, and mans, that Bishops and Clergie should be Judges over any Subjects within this Realm, for it is no part of their office. Who would put a sword in a mad mans hand? Thus the good Prelate Mr. Latymer, who gave over his Bishoprick out of conscience, (as Saxton Bishop of Salisbury likewise did) and skipped for joy, being divested of his Bishop-like habite, be∣cause he felt his shoulders so light, and was dis∣charged of so heavie a burthen. How many such Prelates have we now in England? But now for the fault of unpreaching Prelates, me thinks I could guesse what might be said for excusing of them. They are so troubled with lord∣ly living, they be so placed in Palaces, couched in Courts, ruffling in their rents, daunting in their do∣minions, burdened with Embassages, pampring of their panches, like a Monke that maketh his jubilie, munching in their mangers, and moyling
in their gay Manours, and Mansions, and so trou∣bled with loytring in their Lordships, that they cannot attend it. They are otherwise occupied, some in Kings matters, some are Ambassadours, some of the Privy Councell, some furnish the Court, some are Lords of Parliament, some are Presidents, and Controulers of Mints. Well, well, is this their dutie? is this their calling? are these meet Offices for Priests? is it a meet Office for a Minister of Gods word to be Controuler of Mints? is this his charge? who controuls the Devill in his Parish, while he controuls the Mint? As Paul said to the Corinths, 1. Corinth. 6. Is there not among you a wise man, &c. So say I to Eng∣land, Is there never a Nobleman to be a Lord Pre∣sident, what a shame is this? must it needs be a Pre∣late? is there never a wise man in the Realm to be a Controuler of the Mint? I speak it to your shame, If there be never a wise man, make a Water-bearer, a Tinker, a Cobler, a Page to be in that Office. Make a mean Gentleman, a Groome, a Yeoman, make a poore begger Lord President. The King hath a great many Wards; and there is a Court of Wards, why is there not a Schoole for those Wards? why are they not set to schoole where they may learne, that they may serve the King when they come to age; But there is Noble∣men enough for these Offices. And now I would aske a strange question, who is the most diligent Bishop and Prelate in all England, that passeth all the rest in doing his office? I can tell who it is. But now me thinks, I see you listning, hearkning that I
should name him, will you know who it is? I will tell you: It is the Devill: he is never out of his Di∣ocesse, he is never from his cure, he is ever in his Parish: no lording, no loytring can hinder him; ye can never finde him idle I warrant you: and a∣mong all the pack of them that have Curates, the Devill shall go for my money. Oh all ye unpreach∣ing Prelates, learne of the Devill, if you will not learn of God; he will give you an example of di∣ligence in your Office. Verses written by our renowned Poet, Sir Geffry Chaucer many yeers ago, authorised to be printed by Act of Parliament, in the 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 1. THe Emperour yafe the Pope some time, So high Lordship him about, That at last the sely Ryme, The proud Pope put him out. Soe of this Realme is in doubt, But Lords beware, and them defend, For now these folk bene wondrous stout, Moses Law forbad it tho, That Priests should no Lordships weld Christs Gospel biddeth also That they should no Lordships held, Ne Christs Apostles were never so bold No such Lordships to them embrace,
But smeren her sheepe, and keep her fold, God amend hem for his grace, &c. Learne to be diligent for shame, ye Prelates; But God be thanked, there is good hopes; that the King and Parliament will order you, which that they may, God grant. Amen. FINIS.
