E1291_2 50811916 173096
New ERRORS Made Palpable by an old LIGHT: OR A Cheap and easie Me∣thod to Cure the Dissentions of the Time by a Septuagint of Con∣clusions, Composed and Ex∣perimented. BY Anthony Norwood, Esquire. LONDON, Printed by E. G. and are to be sold by CHARLES ADAMS, at the Mary-Gold in Fleet-street over against Feter-Lane, 1652.
LOng preambles to short dis∣courses are like wide Lists to narrow Cloaths, which though they set off the commodity, yet they yeeld no benefit to the Buyers. Instead therefore of a Preface, take (for the better understanding of that which followes) this briefe survey of such politicall Axioms as have been held forth to the people for infallible verties by some of the late Aulicicall pretenders to Divinity. The Episcopall party determine thus. THat by the ordinance of God nationall go∣vernment ought to be successively monarchi∣call, or solely and hereditarily in one. That as the Israelites, so all Nations ought to be governed by Kings; and that Kings may not be resisted, deposed or punished. That as the primitive Christians, so all belee∣ving associations ought to have Bishops to su∣perintend in their Ecclesiasticall polity.
That the Regall and Episcopall offices may be managed by two distinct persons in one and the same Commonwealth; and that both are of di∣vine institution. The Anti-Episcoparian Doctrines, speake to this effect. THat although there be no divine Law by which the government by Kings was con∣stituted, but what was peculiar to the chil∣dren of Israel, yet Regall Government ought to be continued in all Christian associations. That in some cases Kings may be resisted, but may neither be deposed nor punished. That, although there were Bishops and no Kings in that polity which was peculiar to the primitive Christians, yet the government by Bi∣shops is Antichristian and ought to be disconti∣nued. That in civill affaires government ought to be Monarchicall and in one, but in Ecclesiasticall concernments democraticall and by many. This is sum of what they say, and at how wide a distance in opinion, the Prelaticall and Presbyterian Doctors stand in opposition one to the other is manifest by these their publiquely avowed principles; wherein I conceive each of
them to be no less remote from truth; and this I shall endeavor to demonstrate in the insuing propositions, that so the people of the Nation may be no longer blown in sunder, and disjoyn∣ted by such impetuous counterblasts of blind, carnall and selfe-intending Rudiments. Thus then we begin. I. If in the first ages of the world, as well before the floud as after, every Father had by the Law of God and nature, a jurisdiction over his own fa∣mily sole and independent of any other humane authority then was it a sin in any other to usurp upon their jurisdictions in any case whatsoever. But in the first ages of the world, as well be∣fore the floud as after, every Father had by the Law of God and Nature a jurisdiction over his own family sole and independent of any other humane authority. Therefore whosoever did then assume a power over any other Father or his family in any case whatsoever, did therein transgress the ordinance of God. II. If God was displeased with Nimrod, for arro∣gating to himselfe a jurisdiction over more fa∣milies then his own, then was it not lawfull for him so to doe. But God was displeased with Nimrod, for ar∣rogating to himselfe a jurisdiction over more fa∣milies then his own.
Therefore his so doing was not justifiable in the sight of Almighty God. III. If the disposing of the children of Israel into a select fraternity under Kings and Priests, was a typical representation of Christ and his Church, then is it not presidentially obliging. But the disposing of the Children of Israel into a select fraternity under Kings and Priests was a typicall representation of Christ and his Church. Therefore although the institution were from God, yet doth it not oblige all people and in all times. IV. If God was displeased with the Israelites for desiring to be governed by Kings, and if the pre∣cedent government by Judges did continue some hundreds of yeers, without any express dislike from God; then, if all Nations ought to be presidented by them, the government by Judges ought rather to be embraced then that of Kings. But God was displeased with the Israelites, for desiring to be governed by Kings; and the prece∣dent government by Judges did continue 450. yeares, without any express dislike from God, Acts 13. 20. Therefore if all Nations ought to be presiden∣ted by the Israelites, the government by Judges ought rather to be embraced then that of Kings:
V. If nationall government in a military forme be not perpetuated by any universally binding Law of God, and if the Kings of Israel were di∣stinguistable in their office from the Judges of that Nation by their military imployment one∣ly, then is it more reasonable to say that all Na∣tions may be governed by Judges, then that they ought to be everlastingly governed by Kings. But nationall government in a military equi∣page is not perpetuated by any universall Law of God, and the Kings of Israel were distinguish∣able in their office, from the Judges of that Na∣tion by their Military imployment onely. 1 Sam. 10. 1. Therefore it is more rationall to say, that all Nations may be governed by Judges, then that they ought to be everlastingly governed by Kings. VI. If the government of the whole world were at any time in the power of one Man, then if Mo∣narchicall government be instituted by God, it is as lawful to subdivide it into as many Monar∣chies as there are families, as to divide it into so many Kingdomes as are now in Christendome. But the government of the whole world was by the donation of God solely and Monarchi∣cally in Nebuchadnezzar. Jer. 27. 7. Therefore, if Monarchicall government be
instituted by God, it is as lawfull to subdivide it into as many Monarchies as there are families, as to divide it into so many Kingdomes as are now in Christendome. VII. If they who teach, that by the ordinance of God the government of a Christian Common∣wealth ought to be Monarchicall, and in one, do likewise affirme that by the like ordinance two or more ought to bear rule in the same Com∣monwealth, then is their doctrine contradicto∣ry to it selfe. But they who teach, that by the ordinance of God the government of a Christian Common∣wealth ought to be Monarchically in a King, do likewise affirme that the Clergy have by divine right a gubernative power in the same Com∣monwealth. Therefore the Monarchicall Doctors will have something to do to reconcile their own flat con∣tradictions. VIII. If there be nothing in the ordinance to restraine Kings or Bishops to exercise what power, and over what people they please, nor any thing to prohibit the people to have as many, or as few, and what persons they please to be their Kings or Bishops, then is the doctrine of divine ordi∣nation of Kings and Bishops impertinent and inconsistent with peaceable government.
But there is nothing in the ordinance to re∣straine either Kings or Bishops from exercising what power, and over what people they please, nor any thing to prohibit the people from ha∣ving as many, or as few, and what persons they please to be their Kings or Bishops. Therefore the doctrine of divine ordination is impertinent, and not consistent with prudentiall and peaceable principles. IX. If the Ceremoniall Law be abolished, and what∣soever was derived from that Law lost its effica∣cy when that was abrogated, then all formes of government constituted by that Law did deter∣mine with it. But the Ceremoniall Law is abrogated, and whatsoever was derived from that Law lost its efficacy when that was abolished. Therefore all formes of government constitu∣ted by that Law are now determined. X. If neither before the Ceremoniall Law was constituted, nor after it was abolished, God did prescribe the Lawes or any set forme of govern∣ment, by which and none other, he would have all associated people unalterably governed, then is there not now remaining any municipall Lawes or forme of nationall government of an immediate divine institution. But neither before that Law was instituted nor
after it was abrogated did God prescribe any such Lawes, or forme of government. Therefore no such Lawes or forme of govern∣ment are now of an immediate divine instituti∣on. XI. If after the abolition of the Ceremoniall Law no people were confined by God to any posi∣tive and known forme of Polity, then after that Law was abrogated the fathers of families were not restrained by God, of any part of those rights, which were due to them before that Law was in force. But after the abolition of the Ceremoniall Law no people were confined by God to any po∣sitive and known forme of Polity. Therefore after that Law was abrogated the primitive rights of the Fatherhood might revert to them, notwithstanding any ordinance of God to the contrary. XII. If in the Gospell all those who are subordi∣nate to the Father of a family be commanded to obey him in every thing, then Christianity doth not abridge a Father of any part of his pri∣mitive Prerogative. But all those who are subordinate to the Fa∣ther of a family, are commanded in the Gospell to obey him in every thing. Eph. 5. 24. Colo. 3. 20, 22. Therefore a Father of a family loseth no∣thing
of his primitive Prerogative by being con∣verted to the faith. XIII. If meerly by the donation of the graces of the spirit, no Father hath a more particular privi∣ledge, or prerogative then another, then no Christian Father hath more right then another to a gubernative superiority by divine dispensa∣tion. But no Father hath meerly by the donation of the graces of the spirit, a more particular pri∣viledge or prerogative then another. Therefore upon that account, no Father hath by divine dispensation more right then another to a gubernative superiority. XIV. If beleeving Fathers have from God an equall, sole and independent power both by grace and nature, then no man hath a power to compell them to associate in government, or being as∣sociated to impose upon them in causes, either Civill or Ecclesiasticall. But beleeving Fathers have from God an e∣quall, sole and independent power both by grace and nature. Therefore no man hath authority to compell them to associate in government, or being asso∣ciated to impose upon them in causes, either Ci∣vill or Ecclesiasticall.
XV. If no man have a power to impose upon belee∣ving Fathers, or to compell them to associate in government, then may such fathers retaine their native freedome and independency in all causes as well Civill as Ecclesiasticall. But no man hath by divine right a power to impose upon heleeving Fathers, or to compell them to associate. Therefore such Fathers may continue free and independent in both the said causes. XVI. If the preservation of peace and propriety, be the proper end of all nationall government, and if beleeving fathers have a right to preserve their own freedome against an obtruded power; then is it necessary, that in all Christian associations, government be so constituted, that the subordi∣nate Fathers may be convinced of the lawfulness of the power and personall calling of their Ma∣gistrates. But the preservation of peace and propriety is the proper end of all nation all government, and beleeving Fathers have a right to preserve their own freedome against an obtruded power. Therefore it is necessary, that in all Christian associations, government be so constituted, that the subordinate Fathers may be convinced of the lawfulness of the power and personall calling of their Magistrates.
XVII. If Magistrates may sin by usurping upon those over whom they have no warrantable jurisdicti∣on, then some rule is necessary by which they may infallibly know as well to what people, as to what dispensations their authority may law∣fully be extended. But Magistrates may sinne by usurping upon those over whom they have no warrantable ju∣risdiction. Therefore some rule is necessary, by which they may infallibly know as well to what dispensati∣ons, as over what people their authority may lawfully be extended. XVIII. If in a Christian Commonwealth neither pa∣rochiall, provinciall, or Monarchicall Magi∣strates can be known or distinguished in their persons or power by the Law of God, then sub∣ordinates cannot be convinced of the lawfulness of their personall calling and power by any divine directory. But in a Christian Commonwealth neither Parochiall, Provinciall, or Monarchicall Ma∣gistrates can be known or distinguished in their persons or power by the Law of God. Therefore by a divine directory, subordinates cannot be convinced of the lawfulness of the personall calling and power of any such Magi∣gistrates.
XIX. If God hath no where intailed the Govern∣ment of many families upon the eldest Son of the precedent governour, and if the Crown of Jsrael did not descend in a right line by priority of bloud, then is there not either a divine pre∣cent or president to justifie a claime to Magistra∣cy by hereditary succession. But neither hath God intayled the govern∣ment of many families upon the eldest Sonne of the precedent governor, nor did the Crowne of Israel descend in a right line by priority of bloud. Therefore he that claimes a Crown by succes∣sion, wil never be able to make out a good Title by the bare plea of a divine Charter. XX. If the jurisdiction of Augustus Caesar did ex∣tend to the whole known world, then, if go∣vernment ought to be hereditarily monarchi∣call no Nation of the world can at this day be under any known lawfull Monarchicall autho∣rity. But the whole known world was under the jurisdiction of Augustus Caesar. Luke 2. 1. Therefore the severall Nations of the world cannot at this day be under any known lawfull authority, if God hath appointed government to be hereditarily Monarchicall.
XXI. If the last line of English Kings did derive their title to the Crown from Conquest, and if there were any Kings in England before them, then, if the Crowns of Kings ought by the or∣dinance of God to descend to their next legiti∣mate heirs, the title of the last Kings was inva∣lid. But the last line of English Kings did derive their title to the Crown from Conquest, and there were Kings in England before them. Therefore, if the Crownes of Kings ought by Gods ordinance to descend in a right line to their next legitimate heirs, the title of the last Kings was usurped, and whatsoever any of them acted as Kings was unlawfull and is voydable. XXII. If the limits and precincts of no such Magi∣strates are laid out by any divine boundaries, then can they not infallibly know of what peo∣ple they respectively may lawfully take cogni∣sance by any theologicall dispensatory. But the limits and precincts of no such Magi∣strates are laid out by divine boundaries. Therefore of what people they respective may lawfully take cognisance is not determinable by Theology. XXIII. If no such Magistrates be distinguishable in their persons, power or precincts by any divine
directory, then neither Magistrates nor Subor∣dinates can bee convinced of their reciprocall allegeance, but by some humane demonstration. But no such Magistrates are distinguishable in their persons, power or precincts by any divine directory. Therefore neither Parochiall, Provinciall, or Monarchicall Magistrates, nor their Subordi∣nates can be convinced of their reciprocall alle∣geance, but by some humane demonstration. XXIV. If it be a humane Law only by which the per∣sons, power and precincts of all such Magistrates are known and distinguished, so as to create a mutuall allegeance between them and their Sub∣ordinates, then no such allegeance can be created unless some knowne persons have a lawfull power to make Lawes. But it is a humane Law onely by which such persons are so distinguished as to create a mutu∣all allegeance. Therefore, unless some known persons have a lawfull power to make Lawes, no such allege∣ance can be created. XXV. If no man be bound to submit to such Lawes as are constituted by an obtruded power, then the Law-makers ought to have a known lawfull power over that whole community, to which they pretend a power of giving Lawes.
But n o man is bound to submit to Lawes constituted by an obtruded power. Therefore the Law-makers ought to have a known lawful power over the whole Com∣munity. XXVI. If the Authority of the Law makers ought to extend lawfully to the whole Community, then it must be such as relating to all, doth not thereby infringe any known Law of God. But their Authority by whom Lawes are made, ought to extend lawfully to the whole Community. Therefore, it must be such as relating to all, no divine Law is thereby infringed. XXVII. If the Law makers Authority ought to be such as doth not infringe any known Law of God, and if originally the paternal jurisdicti∣on be by divine right sole and independent, then in believing associations, none have a justifiable and satisfactory calling to make Laws and constitute publique Magistrates, either Ci∣vil or Ecclesiastical, but the fathers of families or some deputed by them. But the Authority of Law-makers must be such as doth not trespasse upon any known Law of God, and the paternal Prerogative is sole and independent. Therefore none have a warrantable power to
give Lawes or impose Magistrates either Civil or Ecclesiastical upon believing associates, but the fatherhood or their deputies. XXVIII. If the Magistratical power neither of Kings, Priests, or Judges of Israel, did consist in ma∣king, but in declaring Law, then as they were Kings, Priests, and Judges, they had no Legi∣slative Authority. But the Magistratical power neither of Kings Priests, or Judges of Israel did consist in ma∣king, but in declaring Law. Therefore they had not any Legislative Au∣thority belonging to them, as they were either Kings, Priests, or Judges. XXIX. If neither the Kings, Priests, or Judges of Israel had a Legislative power appending to their offices, and if there be no Law of God that giveth such power to such officers, then neither Kings, Priests, or Judges have by divine right a Legislative power in respect of their offices. But neither the Kings, Priests, or Judges of that Nation had a Legislative power appending to their offices, nor is there any Law of God that giveth such power to such Magistrates. Therefore by divine right, neither Kings, Priests, or Judge have a Legislative power by vertue of any of their offices.
XXX. If in Christian associations none have a war∣rantable and satisfactory calling to make Lawes or constitute publique Magistrates of any sort whatsoever, but the fathers themselves, or some deputed by them, then the Authority of the fa∣therhood of associated Christians, either per∣soually or representatively assembled, is sole in∣dependent and supreme in all causes, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical. But in Christian associations none have a warrantable and satisfactory calling to make Lawes or constitute publick Magistrates of any sort whatsoever, but the fathers themselves or some deputed by them. Therefore the Authority of the fatherhood of associated Christians, either personally or representatively assembled is sole independent and supreme in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. XXXI. If it be not discernable who amongst the in∣dividual members of a Christian Common∣wealth is more particularly inspired with the gifts of the Spirit then another, then in such associations the gifts of the Spirit are not con∣vincing evidence of the lawful calling of any Magistrates. But it is not discernable who amongst the in∣dividual members of a Christian Common∣wealth
is more particularly inspired with the gifts of the spirit then another. Therefore the gifts of the Spirit are not competent to distinguish who in such associati∣ons ought to be Magistrates, and who subor∣dinates. XXXII. If in the associations of believers the gifts of the Spirit be not competent whereby to deter∣mine who ought therein to be Magistrates, then is there no other way to distinguish between Magistrates and subordinates, but by the rule of Nature or consent. But in the associations of believers, the gifts of the Spirit are not competent whereby to de∣termine who ought therein to be Magistrates. Therefore there is no other way to distin∣guish between Magistrates and subordinates in such associations, but by the rule of Nature or Consent. XXXIII. If the Magistrates of a Christian Comonwealth are no other way distinguishable from subor∣dinates but by the rule of Nature or Consent, then the Government of Christian associations falls wholly under a natural and prudential speculation. But the Magistrates of a Christian associati∣on are no other way distinguishable from sub∣ordinates, but by the rule of Nature or Consent.
Therefore the Government of a Christian Commonwealth falls altogether under a natu∣ral and prudential speculation. XXXIV. If the Government of a Christian Com∣monwealth falls wholly under a natural and prudential speculation, then they who are of the Ministerial function have not therein any singular priviledge to a gubernative power by divine dispensation. But the Government of a Christian Com∣monwealth hath its form and being meerly from prudence and Nature. Therefore they who are of the Ministerial function, have therein no singular right to a gu∣bernative power by divine dispensation. XXXV. If no Christian Father be prohibited the Graces of the Spirit, or before association for∣bidden by God to exercise the Ministerial fun∣ction in his own family, then after association they have an equal liberty to officiate therein, notwithstanding any divine prohibition. But no Christian Father is prohibited the Graces of the Spirit, or before association for∣bidden to exercise the Ministerial function in his own family. Therefore, notwithstanding any divine pro∣hibition, they have after association an equal liberty of officiating therein.
XXXVI. If after association the believing fathers of Christian families have an equall liberty to of∣ficiate in the Ministerial function, then in a Christian Commonwealth the personal calling to the Ministerial office proceeds not from di∣vine inauguration. But after association, the associated believing fathers of Christian families have an equal power to officiate in the Ministerial function, notwithstanding any divine prohibition. Therefore the persoual calling to the publike Ministerial office must necessarily proceed from politick and prudential considerations. XXXVII. If in a Christian Commonwealth the perso∣nal disposing of the Ministerial office be from humane institution, and if believing fathers have originally an equal disciplinary power, then meerly the calling to the Ministerial office cannot make a justifiable claim to a disciplina∣ry Authority. But in such a Commonwealth the personal calling to the Ministerial office is from humane institution, and believing fathers have origi∣nally an equal disciplinary power. Therefore a claim to a disciplinary Authori∣ty cannot be made good meerly by the calling to the Ministerial office.
XXXVIII. If the Apostles thought it not reasonable that they should be obstructed in executing their Ministerial office by regulating the distribution of publike Almes to distressed Christian wid∣dowes, and if nothing belonging to discipline agrees better with the preaching of the Gospel then the duties of Charity, then a reason will be hardly found, why they who are set apart for Doctrine must therefore necessarily have to do with discipline. But the Apostles thought it not reasonable that they should be hindered in their Ministeri∣al employment by regulating the distribution of publike Almes to distressed widowes, and no∣thing belonging to discipline agrees better with the drofession of a Minister of the Gospel, then the duties of charity. Act. 6. 2. Therefore an Apostolical reason is not to be found, why the Ministers of the Gospel must necessarily be Magistrates in office. XXXIX. If they who are Ministers in office have not thereby any priviledge to be Magistrates in of∣fice, then the Episcopal office is not inseparably annsxed to the Ministerial function. But ehey who are Ministers in office have not thereby any priviledge to be Magistrates in office. Therefore I cannot conceive it to be any pro∣fanation
of the office, should some Lay-Elders be appointed to supply the places of such Bi∣shops as were in the Churches of the primitive Christians. XL. If the Faith of the primitive Christians was the onely cause why that polity which they had peculiar to themselves, was accounted holy, then is there no cause why some part of the polity of associated believing families should be esteemed more or lesse holy then some other. But the Faith of the primitive Christians was that alone for which the polity which they had peculiar to themselves was accounted holy. Therefore there is no cause why the polity of believing associates should be esteemed more or lesse holy in one part then in another. XLI. If it be through Faith onely that holinesse be imputed to man by God, and if wheresoe∣ver Faith is, there holinesse be imputed, then sanctimony is not to be attributed more to one believing member of a Christian association, then to another. But it is through Faith onely that holinesse is imputed to man by God, and wheresoever Faith is, there holinesse is imputed. Therefore sanctimony is not to be attributed more to one believing member of a Christian Commonwealth then to another. XLII. If holinesse be an attribute belonging as well
to all as to any believers, and to every part as well as to any part of the polity of believing associates, then the native power of a believing Fatherhood is not made lesse by a pretended personal or political holinesse. But holinesse is an attribute belonging as well to all as to any believers, and to every part as well as to any part of the polity of believing associates. Therefore a pretended personal or political holinesse, cannot take away the native power of a believing Fatherhood. XLIII. If the authority of a Christian Common∣wealth be solely and independently in the Fa∣therhood, and if lawfull authority ought to be obeyed, then ought communicated Christians to subscribe wholly to that polity which is consti∣tuted by the Fatherhood, whether personally or electively congregated. But the authority of a Christian Common∣wealth is solely and independently in the Fa∣therhood and lawful authority ought not to be disobeyed. Therefore communicated Christians are reli∣giously bound to subscribe wholly to that poli∣ty which is constituted by the authority of the Fatherhood. XLIIII. If the Fatherhood of associated Christians have a right of power, sole independent and
extendable to the whole Community, then is it no more lawful for any member therein associ∣ated to appeale from their determinations to his own judgement, or to a forraign Judicato∣ry, in matters tending to publike uniform wor∣ship, then in those which tend to the persecuti∣on of peace and prosperity. But the authority of the Fatherhood of associated Christians is sole, independent, and extendably to the whole Community. Therefore it is as unlawful for any associa∣ted member thereof to appeal from their de∣terminations to his own judgement, or to a forraign Judicatory in matters tending to pub∣like uniform worship, as in those which tend to the preservation of peace and propriety. XLV. If the authority of the Fatherhood be sole and independent in all causes, then no forraign power can assume a jurisdiction over any mem∣ber of a Christian association without sin. Bue the authority of the Fatherhood is sole and independent in all causes. Therefore it is a sin for any forraign power to assume a jurisdiction over any member of a Christian association. XLVI. If no forraign power can assume a jurisdi∣ction over any associated members of a Chri∣stian Commonwealth without sin, then the
pretended Roman Hierarchy is a sinful usurpa∣tion. But no forraign power can assume a juris∣diction over any associated members of a Chri∣stian Commonwealth without sin. Therefore the pretended universal Roman Hierarchy is usurpatious and unlawful. XLVII. If the paternal authority be sole, equal, and independent, then none hath by his own right a preheminence above another to act in their National Councels. But the paternal authority is originally sole, equal, and independent. Therefore in a Christian Commonwealth no Father hath by his own right more or lesse power then another, to act in their National Assemblies. XLVIII. If in the associations of believing Fathers, no Father hath a greater priviledge then ano∣ther to act in their National Conventions, then if in their representative Assemblies one can∣not act unless he be elected, no more may any other. But in Christian associations no one Father hath a greater priviledge to act in their Com∣mon-Councels then another. Therefore, if in their representative Conven∣tions one cannot act unless he be elected, no more may any other.
XLIX. If in their representative Councels none hath more power to act then another, unless he be elected, then the pretended power of Kings and Lords spirituall and temporal, to act by vertue of their own rights is not justifyable. But in the representative Councels of associa∣ted beleeving Fathers, none hath more power to act then another, unless he be elected. Therefore the pretended power of Kings and Lords spirituall and temporall to act in such Councels, by vertue of their own rights is not justifiable. L. If custome cannot destroy a right grounded upon an universall Law of God, the the au∣thority of the Fatherhood cannot be voided by any customary claimes. But custome cannot destroy a right grounded upon an universall Law of God. Mat. 15. 3. 4. 9. Therefore no customary claimes can make void the sole and independent authority of a Christian Fatherhood. LI. If the government of a Christian Common∣wealth be solely and independently in the Fa∣therhood then whosoever assumes a power in competition with the Common-councell of a beleeving Fatherhood, usurps upon their autho∣rity, and sins against Gods ordinance.
But the government of a Christian Com∣monwealth is solely and independently in the Fatherhood. Therefore whosoever assumes a power in competition with them, or with their represen∣tatives, doth thereby sin against Gods ordinance. LII. If the Fatherhood of Christian associations have a sole and independent power, and if it be a sin to usurp upon that authority, then may the representative Trustees of the Fatherhood, law∣fully resist any such usurpation. But the authority of the Fatherhood of associ∣ated Christians is sole and independent, and it is a sin to usurp upon that authority. Therefore any such usurpation may lawfully be resisted by the representative Trustees of the Fatherhood. LIII. If it be lawfully in the power of the represen∣tative Trustees of the Fatherhood, to resist any such usurpation; then they are bound in ho∣nour and religion, not to suffer any to be com∣petitors with them in government, if they have a potency wherewith to oppose. But it is lawfully in the power of the represen∣tative Trustees of the Fatherhood to resist any usurped power. Therefore, if they be in a condition to prevent it, it stands not with their honour, nor honesty to suffer any to be their competitors.
LIIII. If the Trustees of the Fatherhood cannot in honor or honesty suffer any to be sharers with them in government, they having a potency to oppose, then had it been dishonest and dishonor∣able in the present Trustees of the Fatherhood, to yield an inherent right in the Militia and Negative voice to a King in their power, who had taken up Arms to maintain the incroach∣ment. But the Trustees of the Fatherhood cannot in honour or honesty suffer any to be sharers with them in government, they being in an op∣posing condition. Therefore had they yeelded an inherent right in the Militia and Negative voice to a King who had put the Nation to a vast expence in a war raised to maintain the incroachment, they had neither done honestly nor honourably. LV. If the supreme power be solely and indepen∣dently in the Fatherhood, and if their present Trustees did by their publique Remonstrances engage the people in a chargable war against the contrary pretences, then if after the sword had determined the controversie, they had yeelded up their sole and independent interests they might deservedly have been noted with the brand of infidelity to all succeeding gene∣rations.
But the supreme authority is solely and in∣dependently in the Fatherhood, and their pre∣sent Trustees had engaged the people in a chargeable war by their publique Remonstrances against the contrary pretensions. Therefore they might deservedly have been noted with the ignominious brand of infideli∣ty to all succeeding generations, had they, after the sword had determined the controversie, yielded up any part of that sole and indepen∣dent authority with which they were intru∣sted. LVI. If the Lawes now in being do not agree in all points with the Lawes of former ages, then, if the present Lawes be of any force, it must ne∣cessarily be acknowledged that humane Lawes are alterable and repealable. But the Lawes now in being do not agree in all points with the Lawes of former ages. Therefore, if the present Lawes be of any force, it must be acknowledged that humane Lawes are alterable and repealeable. LVII. If humane National Lawes may lawfully be altered or repealed, then they may be repealed or altered by that authority, or the like to that by which they were or ought to have been made. But it is lawful to alter or repeal any humane National Lawes.
Therefore they may be altered or repealed by that authority or the like to that by which they were or ought to have been made. LVIII. If humane Lawes may be altered or repealed by that authority or the like to that by which they were made, then the Fatherhood of Chri∣stian associations may alter or repeale any mu∣nicipal Lawes therein constituted. But humane Lawes may be altered or repeal∣ed by that authority or the like to that by which they were or ought to have been made. Therefore the municipal Lawes of Christian associations may be altered or repealed by the Fatherhood or their representatives. LIX. If humane Lawes may be altered or repealed by the Fatherhood, and if Magistrates Parochi∣al, Provincial, and Monarchical be of humane institution, then any such Magistrates may be outed of their authority by an act of the Fa∣therhood, either personally or representatively assembled. But municipal Lawes may be altered or re∣pealed by the Fatherhood, and all such Magi∣strates be of humane institution. Therefore any such Magistrates may be out∣ed of their authority by an act of the Father∣hood
whether personally or representatively assembled. LX. If in the English Nation there hath been at one and the same time, many Kings indepen∣dent one of another, from whom the last Kings could not derive any interest then to make out a justifiable title to the late Kings, it must bee confessed that Kings may be deposed. But in the English Nation, there hath beene at one and the same time, many Kings inde∣pendent one of another, from whom the last Kings could not derive any interest. Therefore the title of the late Kings was in∣valid, unless Kings may lawfully be deposed. LXI. If before association the Fathers of a Christi∣an Commonwealth were equally independent, then after association they are equally obliged to submit to the Lawes therein constituted. But before association, the Fathers of a Christian Commonwealth were equally inde∣pendent. Therefore being associated, they are equally bound to submit to the Lawes therein constitu∣ted. LXII. If the members of a Commonwealth be equal∣ly bound to submit to the Lawes therein consti∣tuted,
then, although the collective body of the Fatherhood be independent, yet independency ceaseth as to any individuall Member. But the Members of a Commonwealth are equally bound to submit to the Lawes therein constituted. Therefore as to any individuall Members of a Commonwealth independency ceaseth after as∣sociation. LXIII. If every individuall Member of a Common∣wealth be equally lyable to the penalties of the Lawes therein constituted, then for the same cause that any one may be put to death, for the same may any other. But every individual member of a Common∣wealth, is equally lyable to the Lawes therein constituted Therefore for the same cause that any one may be put to death, for the same may any o∣ther. LXIV. If the Lawmaker may decree him to death, who acts any thing by which the established go∣vernment of a Commonwealth may be indan∣gered, and if the legislative power be solely in the Fatherhood, then much more may they or∣der him to death, who acts any thing destructive to that authority, by which only such govern∣ment can be established.
But Lawmakers may decree him to death, who acts any thing by which the established government of a Commonwealth may be in∣dangered, and the legislative power is solely in the Fatherhood. Therefore much more may they order him to death, by whom anything is acted destructive to that authority, by which onely such govern∣ment can be established. LXV. If the setting up of the Kings of Israel, is not so clearely approved by God, as the punishing of their offending Kings by death, then it is more reasonable to conclude from what was demonstrated by God to that Nation, that of∣fending Kings ought to be punished, then that the setting up of Kings is necessarily injoyned. But the setting up of Kings, hath not so cleare an approbation from God in that Nation, as the punishing of their offending Kings. 2 Kings 9. ch. 2 Kings 10. 30. Therefore from what was demonstrated by God to the children of Israel, it is more reaso∣nable to conclude, that peccant Kings ought to be punished, then that all Nations ought to be governed by Kings. LXVI. If by the gifts of grace and nature, the Father∣hood of a Christian association, have from God a sole independent and supreme authority, and
if a Christian Fatherhood, Eldership and Pres∣bytery do signifie all one and the same thing, then in such associations Presbyterian Govern∣ment instituted by God is not to be found, but iu the personal or representative Assembly of the Fatherhood. But by the gifts of Grace and Nature, the Fa∣therhood of a Christian association hath from God a sole independent and supreme authority, and a Christian Fatherhood, Eldership, and Presbytery do signifie all one & the same thing. Therefore unlesse it be in the personal or re∣presentative Assembly of the Fatherhood, Pres∣byterian Government instituted by God is not to be found in a Christian Commonwealth; and they who pretending for Presbyterian Govern∣ment do quarrel with the representative Assem∣bly of the Fatherhood, do contend with that for which they seem to contend. LXVII. If in the established Government of a popu∣lous Commonwealth, it be prudentially neces∣sary that there be Governours of different qualifications, to whom those who are subordi∣nate ought to be in subjection; and if where such Governours are, there necessarily must be priority and inferiority, and degrees of both, then in such a Commonwealth the native pari∣ty and equality of the individual subordinate members must be superceded.
But in the established government of a popu∣lous Commonwealth, it is prudentially necessa∣ry that there be Governours of different quali∣fications, to whom those who are subordinate ought to be in subjection, and wheresoever such Governours are, there necessarily must be prio∣rity and inferiority and degrees of both. Therefore the parity and equality of the in∣dividual subordinate members must necessarily be superceded in the established Government of of a populous Commonwealth. LXVIII. If the Fatherhood of a Christian Associa∣tion hath from God by the gifts of Grace and Nature, a sole and independent power in all causes as well spiritual as temporal, then all Oathes and Covenants destructive to their inte∣rests are sinful and void. But the Fatherhood of a Christian Common∣wealth hath from God by the gifts of Grace and Nature a sole and independent power in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. Therefore all such oaths and covenants are sin∣ful and void, as are destructive to their interests. LXIX. If it be inconsistent with the paternal Preroga∣tive to have sharers with them in government, then if any member of a christian association do voluntarily vow allegeance to any other power, be it forraign or domestique, his vow is sinful, and the covenant void.
But it is inconsistent with the paternal Prero∣gative to have sharers with them in govern∣ment. Therefore if any member of a Christian asso∣ciation do vow allegeance to any other power be it forraine or domestique, his vow is sinfull and the covenant void. LXX. If nationall Covenants be grounded upon a humane Law, and if the supreame legislative power ought to be obeyed as well in their abro∣gating as in their making of Lawes, then, if the Law upon which a Covenant is grounded be taken away, the Covenant loseth its force. But nationall Covenants are grounded upon a humane Law, and the supreme legislative po∣wer ought to be obeyed as well in their abroga∣ting, as in their constituting of Lawes. Therefore all such covenants lose their force, if the Law upon which they are grounded bee taken away. Truth is best discerned when in her playnest dress, I have therefore clothed these my concep∣tions in this home-span attyre, that the sense and intendment of the conclusions may be ob∣vious to the meanest capacity; wherein did I conceive the least inconsistency with even and upright reason, they should sooner have felt the flames, then seen the light: But lest I may therein seeme to some, to savor too much of an
affected singularity, I will close up the propo∣sitions with our Saviours example, then which none is more proper for a Christian Mans imi∣tation and direction; and from thence it seems to me, that the most materiall of the prece∣dent inferences may rationally bee dedu∣cted. Amongst the Evangelists, who, being particu∣larly inspired, wrote the story of his life and passion, it is recorded, that hee bestowed a chi∣ding upon Peter, for opposing the Officers and Souldiers of the Common-councell of his own Nation, in the defence of him his Master, when they came to lay violent hands upon him. And that hee himselfe as Man, thought it no sinne to submit his own body even to death, the same Councell judging him guilty of a Crime, meriting so severe a punishment. It was the authority of this Councell, to which our Saviour laid down the dearest of his earthly interests, not to the power of Pilate; for he washed the blood from off his guiltless hands and had the power been solely in him, made his desire to save him manifest, by pleading for his life, and justifying his spotless innocence, say∣ing, I finde no fault in the Man. It was the councell then that gave the condemning sen∣tence against him. Wee have a Law, and by that Law he ought to dye, was the instrumental vote, that sent him an innocent to the meritori∣ous
Cross. Which councel had he not been conscious, that it had lawfully a power over him, his submission thereunto had been a sinne against himselfe, because it was in his power to summon Legions of Angels to his protection. And had he sinned, his suffering had not beene efficacious to Mans salvation. Something may be said, why this example of our Saviours is not altogether pertinent to this purpose. As first in respect of that saying of the Jewes, wherein they disclaime any lawfulness in themselves to put any man to death; from whence it may be alledged, that our Saviour suffered not under the authority of the Jewish Councell, but Pilates jurisdiction. Which is thus answered. It is apparent that the sentence of death was passed upon him by the councel; and that was it which gave Pilate power over his life. And that that Nation had liberty to try offending natives by their own Lawes is not less evi∣dent. Whereby it seemes to me, that (they bring a conquered Nation) the allegeance be∣tweene the Emperour and them, was regulated and circumscribed by reciprocall capitulations, and conditionall Covenants, by which the executing power was reserved to the Emperiall Officer: otherwise the Leviticall Law by which the Israelites were forbidden to suffer a bla∣sphemer to live would have justified them
no less in the execution then in passing the sen∣tence. And therefore although the executing power was consentatively in Pilate (for which cause our Saviour may be said to suffer under him) yet was it authoritatively from that Ma∣gistracy which did yeeld to those conditi∣ons; and that may still be the Common-coun∣cell of his own Nation. Againe, whereas we say that the supreme au∣thority is solely and independently in the El∣dership of associated Christians, it may be ob∣jected, that this example will not make good the assertion: because we finde that Priests, Pharisees and Scribes, were mixed with the El∣ders of the people in that councell by which he was condemned. To this we reply, that. The people of Israel being admonished to make themselves Judges and Officers in all their Tribes, and the Priesthood not being in∣feoffed by God with any judiciary authority, nor the orders of Scribes and Pharisees consti∣tuted by him, if we should say that these Priests, Scribes and Pharisees were made members of that councell by the election of the people, it would be a long while before any thing could be produced to prove the contrary. Besides in matters hard to be judged, the peo∣ple were directed to enquire of the Priests and Levites, & they might therefore be called by the Elders of the people to assist in their Na∣tional
Councels, as it hath been the custom in England for the Judges at Law, and yet not have therein a condemnatory power. And this seems to be intendment of the Text, for after the High Priest had voted his answer to be blasphemous, he refers the sentence to the Councel, and they thereupon condemn him to be guilty of death. Deut. 16. 18. Levit. 17. 9. Marke 14. 64. This was the case of that immaculate Lamb, who being to be offered up an expiation, for sin, was careful to preserve himself without spot, that man might be cleansed from the deep stain of his deadly pollutions, by that his underser∣vedly bleeding Oblation. Christ the anointed and just one was sen∣tenced to death by the unjust verdict of the El∣ders of of his own Nation; and yet he, having power to resist, submitted to the killing con∣demnation; because he knew it was not unjust so to do. Here we have an example beyond ex∣amples; a president equal to a precept. He is safe that can repose upon this Rock, seeing God hath made me a member, I will not scruple to obey such an authority as had power over my head. He did not expostulate the unjust∣nesse of the sentence; nor will I so much esteem of my own worth above his merits, as to think that any priviledge or prerogative can exempt me from being under the lash of the like au∣thority.
So long as live in a society, I must be under some government, and it ought to be such as I may safely submit to. Not meerly for the bene∣fit sake, for if I goe no further, my obedience exceeds not the gratitude of sensuall Beasts, but like a Christian for conscience sake. Not my fancy, but my duty must guide me to be obedi∣ent. I cannot erre by my submission to a law∣ful authority. And I shall hardly be perswaded, that being incorporated into a Christian Socie∣ty, any Magistracy can have so lawfull a power over me, as the Eldership or paternall Councel of my own Nation, till I know upon whose judgement I may rely with better security then upon my allseeing and no sinning Savi∣ours. He was a King, a Priest and a Prophet, who, having a certaine and infallible knowledge of all things, taught us by his example, to be obe∣dient to the determinations of nationall coun∣cels. And what pretenders soever there be to Prophecy, Priesthood or Kingship, who dare trust to their own conceptions, rather then to the path, which he who only can be their Savi∣our hath troden out to them, they are not like∣ly ever to come to the place that hee hath pro∣vided for those who follow and beleeve in him, for he that thinks himselfe wiser then God can∣not put any confidence in God. Adam sins, and in him all Mankinde. To free
Man from the punishment due for sin Christ is promised: God, to shadow forth the designed Christian Church, forms to himselfe a Church of the children of Israel, for whose sakes the I∣dolatrous Kings of Canaan, are destroyed by Gods appointment. The Jsraelites desire, God is displeased, yet gives them Kings reserving the choice to himselfe. These Kings are types of him, who was to suffer for sinne. Some of these Kings are by Gods direction doomed to death for sinning. By Gods predeterminate counsell the Kingship and Priesthood of Israel met both in him, who was preordeined to be a sacrifice for sin: and Christ not without the consent of his Father, together with his life gives up the power of both to a councell of his own Nati∣on. By his death the Law by which those Kings and Priests were constituted is abolished; and all those made Kings and Priests to God the father, who by a true and lively faith, can lay hold up∣on his sons incarnation, passion and resurrecti∣on. Thus were Adams posterity brought from bondage to liberty, from death to life. And whe∣ther the substance of the precedent propositions may not be reasonably collected from this ex∣emplary progress to mans salvation, I leave to be determined by any ingenuous Christian, who will contemplate these circumstances in his so∣ber, selfe-denying, and peace-projecting soli∣tudes. Rev. 1. 6.
To conclude. I am not so wise in my own conceit, as to thinke it impossible for me to be mistaken. It may be that my own blindness hath made me venter thus boldly into publique; but I would be loath that that should lead any other man into the same error. If therefore through the want of judgement, I have in any thing here∣in by me published swarved from the truth, I I doe humbly request, and shall thinke my selfe extreamely happy to have my misapprehensi∣ons laid open by some ingenious and more knowing pen; which being done, let me under∣goe the severest of censures, if I be found in the number of those who hate to be reformed. FINIS.
