A3697mA 99896748 170774
The ARK, its LOSS and RECO∣VERY; Or, some Meditations on the History recorded in the beginning of 1 Sam. in Meeter. THe Ark in Shiloh rested many a year;1 Sam. 1.3. Ch. 2.12. Hophni and Phineas Priests of God were there: Though Priests of God, yet Sons of Belial; The causers of their own, and fathers fall: Their ignorance and scandal did disgrace Their holy function, and that holy place. To such, their linnen Ephods but pretence. It signifies, nor light, nor innocence; But whited Sepulchres; when that, which borders On Atheism, is clad with holy Orders.Ch. 1.12. Their ignorance was gross, they knew not God, Though in his house they had their whole abode:15. Their scandal gross; rapacious gluttony,16. And, its vile off-spring, brutish lechery,22. The women at the Tabernacle doors; This place a stews, those votaries made whores;17. VVherefore their sin was great before the Lord; And men the offrings of the Lord abhorr'd: It was so then, and will be so, where e're A blockish, brutish Clergy, domineer. Their reverend father Eli's made acquainted,22. VVith what debaucheries his Sons were tainted: Sons of the Church; whose blazing-vices will No more be hid, then beacons on a hill. And what says he? alas he's very old;22. And in this cause of God is very cold: A feeble [why d'ye do so? with a why23. Hear I this evil to your infamy?]
Away my Sons; for 'tis no good report,24. I hear from all, that to me do resort; Not only evils, that your selves do do, But that you make the People wicked too: By vile perswasions, and by viler deeds, The Vulgar is corrupted: He proceeds: The Judg shall judg the man, whom men implead; If God's offended, who shall intercede?25. 'Twas good, and grave reproof: but it was less, Then what was meet for such vile wickedness. Oh! that but half so many sav'ry words Might drop from any of those Spiritual LORDS, Who can't but know the common fame's relation, And hear the groans of a whole mourning Nation. But thus their gentle father could not stay them25. From sinning; 'twas because the Lord would slay them. God hardens whom he means to break: thus steel Is poud'red: and his hand they'l surely feel Emptying, and overturning, whom he sees,Zeph. 1: 12. And does permit, to settle on their lees. Mean while doesThat is, Asked of God. Samuel grow; that child of tears,26. Child of a gracious Mothers Vows and prayers; (That, when this cursed crew should be remov'd, He might succeed) of God, and men belov'd. He needs must prosper, whom the Lord does blest: Needs must be lov'd, where God plants loveliness: He needs must thrive, that has a portion, where It can't be lost, as it is often here: Pray'rs put to interest in heav'n are better, Where God by Promises becomes the debtor. Ask'd, and receiv'd of God; return'd; accepted; For, and from, such a child, what may b'expected? And in a dark, and doleful day, 'tis well, God can raise Samuel's for his Israel. A man of Gd to father Eli came;27. Did his Sons vileness, and his mildness blame: In Gods name thus bespeak them: Did I chuse28. Your Fathers for my Priesthood you abuse?
Did I appear in Egypt to relieve them? And after, Israels Offrings did I give them? Did God by Forsan¦rum st & Titu Providence, or by Permission, Advance, and put them in so good condition? Not only save them, when they were so low; But by his bounty made them over flow? Why kick ye at mine offring? (like the teaching29 Of those who often preach 'gainst often preaching). Which I commanded have:why are preferr'd29 Thy graceless Sons before me? thou hast err'd: You feed your Selves, and not my Flock; you snatch What's not your share; you live upon the catch: Things inharmonious are, and out of tune, Where Priests are fat, and sacrifice Jejune. Who honour me I'le honour in mens eyes;30 Lightly esteem'd shall be, who me despise. 'Tis not proud looks, big words, can men exempt From just disgrace, from a deserv'd contempt. The swelling Toad did burst (if tales say true) And then his lothsome garbage came in view. Is not the empty chaff lift up (I pray) In winnowing only to be blown away? 'Tis not the slippery hight secures at all:Psal. 18. Only procures (when't comes) the greater fall. The proudest plumes must down, when God disgraces, By loss of reputations first, then places. Thine arm of strength I will cut off, behold3 In all thine house shall not a man grow old. My pretious time they shall not idly spend; But end their lives for living to no end. Thou bringst an enemy where I do dwell,3 In all the wealth I give to Israel. These are the true state enemies, that fall Like angry Sampson, ruine selves and all: That by their wickedness do mischiefs bring, Upon themselves, their Country, and their King: Those are the real Rebels that are so,ch. 1 Both to their King above, and him below:
These do, not only call in enemies. But make them prosper in their enterprise: These weaken hearts, and hands; divide, confound Councels, and actions; run a State on ground: Not only do their own Estates let fly, But turn a Nations wealth to beggery: And yet (that they may still pass unsuspected) Cry out of others; Oh th'are disaffected. If any man of thine I do reprieve,3. Thine eyes he shall consume, thine heart shall grieve: The spreading branches of thine house I'le lop, Thy buds, thy blossoms, in the flow'r I'le crop:4. And take this for a signal from on high, Hophni, and Phineas, in one day shall die. Thus men of greatest Comforts are depriv'd, When not return'd, from whence they were deriv'd: Thus greatest hopes are dash'd, by God confounded, When upon ought, beside himself, they'r grounded. After which, I a faithful Priest will raise,5. Shall do, what's in my heart, unto my praise: He'l mind my mind; his house shall be secure, Before my Christ for ever to endure.nted Yea, that's a faithful one indeed, that still In all his Ministrations, the will Of God reveal d in's Word does mind; the fashions, Inventions, humours, fancies, pride, or passions, His own, or others, never yields unto: He'l thrive with God, though men do him undo, The face of God for ever shall he see; How e're unfix'd on earth his station be. Then every one, that of thine house remain,6. Shall crouch a petty pension to obtain; Shall beg a piece of Silver, bit of meat; Shall beg an Office, he may have to eat. Such hireling Priests will for a piece of bread,13. Handfuls of Barley, that they may be fed,19. Condemn, whom God acquits, and by a lie Encourage souls, whom God condemns to die.
But see, pride, avarice, to what it tends; Lust, riot, rapine, see but where it ends. Samuel, the Gracious Child, unto the LordCh. 3. Did minister; then precious was the word: The word, when plentiful, had in derision, Grew now esteem'd; there was no open vision. God can inhance his truths, and make men prise His Gospel-light, by hiding't from their eyes. He can make proud despisers, lofty scorners, That slight his word i'th' streets, go seek't in corners,7 Rais't by depressions; free it by restraints;3 By wicked shakings, can make setled saints:4 Thus counterplots he Satan, and his tools:Isa. 29.12, 13. Thus Noph, and Zoan, Councellors are fools. When Elies lamps were dim, Gods lamp had light;2. His Candlestick not yet removed quite,3. Samuel lay down to sleep, whom God doth wake;4. And unto Eli ran he through mistake:5. Thrice thus mistaken, he to Eli ran;6. Nor could discern 'twixt voice of God and man:11. Poor novice! yet he knew not well the Lord;7. Nor fully was reveal'd to him the word. O would too many were not to be found Of riper years, that can't discern the sound Of words of worthy men (unto this hour) From spiritual Gospels mighty saving power! But to old Eli, it Gods call appears;8. Who bids him say, speak Lord, thy servant hears:9. He does so: then the Lord doth farther tell,10. How he would do a thing in Israel, Should make their ears to tingle, who should hear it,11. He'd Judgment bring, and Elies house should bear it.12. Their ears to tingle, that would tickled be? Judgment on those, that hope yet to go free? On Elies house? who's on this message sent, By Elies bouse will certainly be shent: Rough preaching will rough handling meet; suspended At least he'l be, till Elie's power be ended.
When I begin (saith God) I'le make an end; For I have told him, I will Judgments send, For his Sons unrestrained Villanies: I've sworn, it sha'nt be purg'd by sacrifice.4. 'Tis sad! but just: Priests hainous crimes do cry Louder, than others, for severity. If you (by place) draw nigh him; know, he's nigh you. Trembling remember Nadab and Abihu.t. 10.15. Samuel lay til the morn; was then afraid To tell old Eli, what the Lord had said: And well he might, expecting nought but scorn: (I know, by whom, the like would ne're be born.) But Eli will hear all; and does submit:17. 'Tis the Lord: let him do what he sees fit.18. A good Submission: let it pattern be To us in fear'd or felt calamitie: God was with growing Samuel: none of all19. His words to ground did unregarded fall: Him an establish'd Prophet Israel knew:10. 11.To whom in Shiloh God himself did shew. By God he's own'd; to Israel he's known: His Call who'l call in question? who'l disown? 'Tis bold to slight confess'd reality, For want perhaps of some formality. Idle drones, angry Wasps (we know their honey) They'l part with wax to those, will part with money: But Gospel-calls, though they're not legal ones, Will serve for Gospel-ministrations. He need not care, whom Heavens broad-seal confirms, To get earths purchas'd seal, on dirty terms. Now Israel would forth in battel go4. 1. To fight the Philistines their ancient foe: But Oh alas! it was with little gain; Israel is smitten, and four thousand slain. In hast they went, without their God; their loss Returns them back again by weeping-cross. Hot spurs may easily begin a fray, Who, not so easily can win the day.
The Elders pause upon't, and thus advise; Why hath God smote us by our enemies? Affliction makes men serious; then they'l think, Who 'tis, that bores their keel, and why they sink: They now discern, whose arrows 'twere that smot them Although they were Philistian bows that shot them. Come; let us have the Ark among us; then God's hand will save us from the hands of men. The Sons of Eli to the Camp it bring;4. All Israel did shout; the earth did ring:5. When Micha got a vagrant-Levite, heJudg. 17 13 Jer. 7.4 Forthwith expected geat Prosperity; The Temple, Temple of the Lord are these, Were idle words, did idle people please: The Church, the Church, is such an empty noise, Wherewith some vaunt, that vaunt themselves of toys: Even such was this poor Ark; an empty shew When God o'th' Covenant himself withdrew: Could less be look'd for, when such Priests were by? When't had such Cattel in its company.6. The Philistius the noise and news did hear: Thinking the Hebrews God was there, did fear. Did the Philistins fear? fear all ye slighters,7. In any case, against God, to be found fighters. Wo unto us they cry; 'twas never thus; They're mighty Gods; who shall deliver us? 'Twas never thus? Extravagancies use The inconsiderate vulgar to amuse.8. Those are the Gods, that them from Egypt brought; That in the Wilderness such Wonders wrought. Have none, but these, heard Egypts Prodigies?9. Wilderness-works? (Open, O Lord, mens eyes!) Now quit your selves like men, lest they be seen To be our Lords, that have our vassals been. Like men! like devils: for what mortal he Dares to oppose, where God but seems to be? But Tyranny is loth to lose its profit: They'l try to hold their slaves, what e're comes of it.
They fought like men indeed; for Israel10. VVere smitten, fled, and thirty thousand fell; And (which was worst) the Ark of God they gain;11. And (which was just) the Sons of Eli slain. Thus the poor Ark (an Idol made) is taken; Nor helps it self, nor them, of God forsaken. Thus threats are prov'd in their most sad conclusions, Nor Melancholy fancies, nor delusions. A Benjamite that day to Shiloh fled,12. VVith Garments rent, and earth upon his head. Sad news comes Thundring home, and rending hearts; As lightning quick, or feathred wounding darts. He came, where Eli by then way did sit,13. VVho for the Ark was in a trembling fit: Not only for the danger, which appear'd, But conscious of the cause, of what he fear'd. He told the Citizens, they all cry'd out; Eli does hear; demand what means the rout:14. In hast the man comes in; the story told To him (who now was ninety eight years old.)1. Israel is fled; that could not but affect him:17. VVith a great slaughter; that must more deject him: Thy Sons are also dead; that's nigher to him: The Ark is taken; that quite overthrew him: For then he fell, old, heavy, and dime-ye'd,18. He backwards fell, he brake his neck and dy'd: He fell from off the seat, where he had sate Forty years judging Israel in the gate. There lay a Judg condemn'd, and executed: There lay a Purifying Priest polluted: Slain like a sacrifice: one in disgrace. Of reverend age, and honourable place; As man (we may believe) good in the main; As Father; by his fondness justly slain. God gave him raynes, but (as is sadly shown) Throwing them on the mad Colts necks; he's thrown. His grace, and bad-good nature long contended; VVhen this o'recame, it Tragically ended.
When Phineas pregnant Widow heard of all;19. Th' Arks loss, her Fathers, and her Husband fall; She cry'd, gone is our glory with our God:21. She dy'd, and nam'd PosthumousThat is Where is the Glory Ichabod22. The glory gone from Israel doth she cry? Wast with the brethren in iniquity? No; though they rufftled if, yet infamous Were they in life, in death calamitous. Or did old Elie's loss their glory dim? Alas! his glory's losts, e're they lost him. No, no, it was the Ark; for it was there, God's glory shone upon their Hemisphere. She dy'd regardless of her Progeny, Crush'd in the ruines of her Family: Her breath shortn'd by death, short'ns the story; She breaths all in a word, GONE IS OƲR GLORY. The Second Part. THE RECOVERY. THe joll Philistins do homeward hie,Ch. 5.1. With th'Ark, a Trophee of their victory: FromCh. 7.1 Eben ezer (other while, 'tis true, A stone of help, now none, when God withdrew.) To Ashdod, there, their house of gods to stock;2. In Dagon's house they set it by their block. The God of Israel does much abhor it: In Dagons house? Dagon must tumble for it: For, when they early came (perhaps to see3. How well the Ark and Dagon could agree, They found their Idol faln; before the place, Where stood the Ark, Dagon lay on his face. Lets turn our thoughts a while, and view the damp Is cast upon their triumph; see them stamp; Tear their hairs; beat their breasts, perplext to see Their captive-present conqueror to be: Lets view the secret power, and equity, That moves the work of this Catastrophie.
The Ark was Gods appointment; mans conceit Was Dagon, and his worship but a cheat. Humane inventions on the ground must lie, Though shoulder'd up by power and policy, If this be seen in a Philistian land,zek. 43.8. Can post by pillar in the Temple stand? They set him up again, and on the morrow.4. They find him down again, more to their sorrow, Without, or head, or hand, there lay the lump: Only to Dagon now was left the stump. If one fair fall does not make them give o're Their Wrestlings with the Lord, he'l give them more. The former down-fall gently did bespeak'em, And warn them to submit; the next will break 'em. Therefore, nor Priests, nor Worshippers, will tread5. Upon the threshold, where he lost his head. And what is done for men of like conditions, To cure them, does augment their superstitions:er. 51.9. Thus Babylon will not be heal'd at all. Therefore shall irrecoverably fall: Without advising-head, or helping-hand Was now their God; but heavy on the Land. The hand of Israel, s God, the Lord of hosts,6. Was upon Ashdod, and on all its coasts; With Emerods smote he them.— he so thinks fit, While th' Ark's detain'd, they shall not easy sit. They may sow pillows, cushions, to be eas'd;zek. 13.20. But 'twill not do, while God remains displeas'd. The men of Ashdod, when they saw 'twas so;7. When they perceiv'd the cause of all their wo; They said, let's keep the Ark of God no more, Whose hand on us, and Dagon, lies so sore. The eyes of Dagonites are open'd, who Discern for what they're plagu'd, and what to do. Would others, that have felt the hand of God, Would learn of Philistines to hear the rod:8. They call their Lords, their Law-givers, to tell, What should be done with th'Ark of Israel:
Who (loath as yet to let it go) consent, Such was the wisdom of that Parliament) To have it had about to Gath; they'l try Experiments, if there 'twil quiet lye. Thus were the Syrian privy Councellors wise,1 Kin. 20.22. When they their King so gravely did advise To try the Plain, and promis'd him success; When in the event they found it nothing less. Nothing does more 'gainst men God's anger fix, Then when they think to baffle him with tricks. Their law is put in Execution,9. To Gath 'tis carry'd; see what comes thereon: See if the laws of men will bear them out, And justifie their tumbling it about: A very sore destroying whipping-rod Of an avenging, of an angry God. With Emerods also did he smite them all, Princes, and People, high, low, great, and small. Who share in sin, must sorrows also share, What state, or quality, soe're they are. Whilst in their secret parts those Emerods be, Th'afflicted felt, what others could not see: Much like the secret smarts, and inward twinging Of seared hearts, when they are further singeing. The men of Gath, thus wearied with't, would have it10. To Ekron sent; the Ekronites do wave it. They would not have the stone so burthensome,Zach. 12.3. Mat. 21.44. The builders breaking, grinding stone to come Within their quarters, for that they had seen it Hurtful to others; they'l not meddle in it. They all cry'd out, With us it shall not stay: They've brought the Ark to us, that us will slay. What if it do? their Lords seem to reply; Die Martyrs of our Laws, your loyalty. 'Tis four to one; the major part out-vote you; If you obey not, factious we must note you. On t'other hand, the Ekronites do seem, For all this talk, much otherwise to deem.
We think it neither faction, nor treason, T'appeal from you to common sense, and reason. If 't be a law, repeal't; there's nought, but need; And make another better in its stead. They congregate their Lords, and them petition,11. Oh send it to its place with expedition. For if it here with us do longer stay, The hand of God will sweep us all away: Many were dead; the rest were sick; the cry12. Of all the City mounted to the sky. The sky does Eccho 't back unto the ground; And all their neighbours hear the doleful sound. Sev'n months by them the Ark had been restrain'd:6.1. (But if seven years with them 't had been detain'd, What work would it have made? sure at this rate Th'ad all been gone, and their land desolute.) And that it is not so in other places, Where th' Ark's expos'd to manifold disgraces; The appointed worship of the Lord forbidden, And many of his useful talents hidden; Where the Ark, and Samuel are separated; That such a people are not desolated, It only can ascribed be to this, That God long suffering, and patient is. Priests and Diviners next to Convocation2. (To save the remnant of a ruin'd Nation) Are call'd and ask'd; How shall we do (we pray) In sending of this Ark of God away? We cannot keep it longer, needs must send it: Tell us, but how we may not more offend it. It seems among the Lords they had no places;3 No Voters, but advisers in the cases To them propos'd: they are demanded now, Not what is to be done; but only how. In any wise let it not empty go, (Say they) but with a Trespass-offring: so You shall do, what in justice does become you; And know why's hand is not removed from you.
Five Emerods, and five Mice of gold, for all The five Philistian Lords, on whom did fall4. The common Plague; and peradventure these The offended God of Jacob shall appease. Give Glory to the God of Israel,5. nd peradventure then shall all be well. Why then like Pharaoh, and th' Egyptians are ye?6. VVho could not force the Israelites to tarry; Their God wrought wonders on those stubborn-hearted; Made them to let them go, and they departed. 'Tis strange, and w at could never be expected From such Idolaters, unless directed, As Balaam the VVitch: such good advise, Such sober words, whence could they have their rise? Do but observe the principle within; You'l find it fear, not faith, and therefore sin: On Peradventures only they proceed; They could not hope, that God would do't indeed Make a new Cart, tye to't two kine, from whom7. Unus'd to draw, shut up their calves at home; Lay the Ark on it; therein let it ride:8. The Jewels in a coffer by its side: Then let it go; and let us trial make;9. If the way to Bethshemeth then it take, Then 'twas indeed their God, did thus undo us: If not; then 'twas a chance did happen to us. A chance? blind VVizards! Is not yet the hand Of God above perceiv'd against the Land? Shall Fortune rob wise, and just Providence? If you want Faith, where's Reason? where is Sence? When men will still for Signes and Wonders call, The last experiment's their final fall. ll this was done according as instructed;10. And God himself homewards the Ark conducted: The unaccustom'd heifers do not stray;11. ut to Bethshemeth keep the ready way. brutes, that act only by ivstinct, may earken to God, and nature disobey;
No wonder, men of conscience do prefer Gods laws, before the laws of men that err. Nor doubt I, if the Gospel might go free, 'T would run its own course, and most glorious be. Lowing back to their Calves they onward go, To see, if possibly it could be so. The Philistins do follow to the borders: See Nature's God inverting Nature's orders. The Bethshemites were reaping in the Fields,13. When th'Ark to them a joyful object yields. Harvest's a joyful time to all; then more, When God his Ark to Israel did restore, But 'tis as sad to them, that think, and say, The Ark in Harvest-time was ta'ne away. The food for bodies will not much delight, Where there wants food for spiritual appetite.14. The Cart came into Joshuah's grounds, and stood At the great stone: ev'n there they clave the wood O'th' Cart; therewith the beasts to God they burn'd This seen, the Lords o'th' Philistins return'd:16. Left Mice, and Emerods, for each City one;17. Gath, Ekron, Gaza, Ashdod, Askelon. Mice marr'd the Land, and Emerods hurt the men; They left Memorials of both; and then Return'd, return'd? methinks they should have staid, And with the Israelites to God have pray'd, Whereas they only saw't; 'tis poor to see A sacrifice, and not partakers be. Th'ad joyn'd in worship, been with Israel one; Had their Conviction been Conversion: But dogs will to their vomit; swine to mire;2 Pet. 2.22. Philistins to be Philistins desire. They care not to be priviledg'd by God; They only care how to escape his rod. Where the Cart stay'd, they sacrific'd; the place Their holy thankfulness does not disgrace; But rather dignifies; such quick address, Suitable to their present thankefulness
Is better than thanks-givings in disguise. Of fine conceited for mal pageantries. Thus far 'twas well; but wrath (at last alas)19. Against the Bethshemites enkindled was; For that into the Ark irreverently They look't; for which 'bove fifty thousand die. Irreverence will be punish'd in professors, As well as irreligion in oppressors. Too hot the Ark was for its rude bereavers; Too beavy likewise for its rude receivers. They greatly do lament their loss, and cry'd; VVho can before this holy Lord abide?20. How jealous is our God! Can any tell? VVho can with everlasting burnings dwell?Isa. 33.2 To whom shall he go up from us? they sent To Kiriath jearim and represent, How the Philistins brought the Ark again:Ch. 7.1 Pray them to fetch it, with them to remain. They bring it up, where Twenty years it rested: Eleazar for its keeping is invested. There with Abinadab it stay'd, until2. David remov'd it to its holy hill. Rest, O rest, thou Ark of strength, After tossings to and fro; Quietly repose at length, After storms do over blow. Noah's Ark thus quiet sat After the flood on Ararat. Now thy wicked Priests are outed; Dagon's faln to the ground; Wearied Philistins are routed; Bold Peepers have a mortal wound; All thine enemies are crush'd; About thee all the noise is hush'd. Only, let poor Israel's Lamenters for thy privacy Have access to him, that dwellsCh. 7.2. In thee: (and yet remains on high.)
True VVorshippers can never be Content, without approach to thee. The manuscript of God on high,eut. 10., 5. The copy of his Sacred Will Is treasur'd in thy cavity: Glories of heaven do thee fill. The embleme of his presence lies In thee the type of Mysteries. The Mercy-seat is plac't aloft;xod 37., 7. On that the Cherubims do ride; From thence the Oracles are sought; For that the Lord does there reside. How can a soul, that is devout,uitare. Such heavenly glories be without? O thou God o'th' Covenant The Ark o'th' Covenant us restore; Vouchsafe therewith such grace to grant, That we may forfeit it no more. Let Covenant-mercy Covenant-servants free From those, that Covenant-contemners be. Now sing to the praise and glory of God, a part of the 2 Psal. beginning at the 10 vers. Now O ye, &c. As it is meeter'd by Simple Honesty, use this old transla∣tion well; if you will not, use a better. FINIS.
