B2459D E1699_1 99868330 170277
DAVIDS PSALMS IN METRE. Agreeable to the He∣brew, To be sung in usuall TƲNES. To the benefit of the Churches of Christ. By the Reverend Mr. John White Minister of Gods Word in DORCHESTER. I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14, 15. LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin for J. Rothwel, at the Fountain and Bear in Goldsmiths row in Cheapside. 1655.
A PREFACE CONCERNING THIS METRICALL VERSION. THE Holy Scriptures one calls the Mag∣na Charta of a Chri∣stian: the Psalms, an Epitome of the Holy Scriptures. (Rivet. Praefat. in Psal.)
The singing of Psalms was under the Law, is under the Gospel an Holy Ordi∣nance of God, in right per∣formanee whereof, Churches and Christians make heavenly melody in their hearts unto the Lord. Eph. 5.19. What hath been objected to breed a discord,Mr. Jo: Cotton sing∣ing of Psalms, a Gos∣pel Ordinance.Mr. Tho: Ford singing of Psalms, the duty of Christi∣ans under the New Testament, in sundry Sermons on Eph: 5.19Mr. Tho: Manton, Pract: Comment, on James 5.13. and what hath been an∣swered to main∣tain this holy Harmony, may be read by such as consult (a∣mongst others) the Reverend Authours quo∣ted here.
The Metrical Version of these Psalms now tendred, needs no other praise, then to know the Authour and the hand that made it: In honour of whom being requested to say something, I hold my self ob∣liged to give testimony to three things concerning my famous Predecessour, and this his work. I. That deservedly great is the name, & good the memory of Mr. John White late of Dor∣chester, especially in these We∣stern parts, where he was a burning and a shining light ma∣ny years: and though he bee dead, yet by his works that follow him he still speaketh.
II. That this Version per∣fected by his own hand, and much desired by many, had in his life time been Printed, were it not that some others were at that time under Con∣sultation, and strugling which of them should get the Civil sanction; that contest now o∣ver, his Son (with whom he left the Copy) was prevailed with to publish this which was his fathers: and now let it go forth and prosper. III. That though many have done worthily in their essaies to render a better Meeter then the old English Translation (from which some wedded to custome will not vary) yet many more toge∣ther
with my self do think this Reverend Authour, if he have not surpassed them all, (comparisons are odious) yet at least may challenge a place, not amongst Davids thirty, but amongst his first three. He that desireth, 1. To sing Davids own Psalms as neer as may be in Mee∣ter, in Davids own words, without Paraphrase, (which is so much desired in o∣thers) shall finde this Ver∣sion Keep close to Tremel∣lius in Latin, and the new Translation in English, or (where it leaves them) to some elegancy of the He∣brew (wherewith the Learn∣ed
Authour was well ac∣quainted, if he doe com∣pare them. 2. Thus to sing them in good Meeter, and easie Tunes, shall finde Vulgar quanti∣ties, and smooth Verse, without harsh Synalaephas, as in some other Versions. 3. No new Versions, For he saith the old is better, hath not well drank of either; for the old prose needed not more new Translation, then in many places doth the old Meeter: yet where they have done it well, the Au∣thour testifieth his Reve∣rend esteem of those Tran∣slators, by retaining lines,
and sometimes whole Verses of that Translation. To conclude, if this present Version finde that acceptance which a former book of his hath done, (called the way to the Tree of Life, discovered in sundry directions for the profita∣ble reading of the Scriptures; wherein the Morality and per∣petuity of the fourth Commande∣ment in every circumstance there∣of is discovered and cleared, and the nature of a spiritual man described) it will encourage the publication of some o∣ther excellent labours of his that are to follow; which that it may, and especially that the singers of these Psalms may
observe the rules set down by the Authours aforesaid, is the prayer of his unworthy succes∣sour, Stanley Gower. Dorchester, June 13. 1655.
Psalm 1. THrice blessed is he, that to walk in ill mens counsel fears; Nor stands in sinners way, nor sits at rest in scorners chairs. But in the holy Law of God bestows his whole delight, And in that Law doth meditate constantly day and night. He shall be like a planted Tree the streams of waters neer, Which firmly rooted yields his fruit in season every yeer. His leaf shall never fall away, but fresh and green remain; What he well undertakes, it shall a prosperous end attain. With wicked and ungodly men, it shall be nothing so; They shall be like light chaff, which winds tosse and drive to and fro. Therefore shall not the wicked men in judgement shew their face, And in th'assembly of the just, sinners shall have no place.
For the right way of godly men God doth approve and know; And the ill way of wicked men ends in their overthrow. Psalm 2. WHat moves the Gentiles thus to rage, and up in tumults rise? Why do the people such vain things imagine and devise? The Kings stood up, the Counsellors in one consulting were Against Jehovah, and his one anointed one most deare. Let us resolve to break their bonds, and chains in two (say they) And their thick twisted cords from us, let us cast clean away: But he that in the Heavens high, sits quietly, doth smile; And in derision God shall have their vain attempts the while. Then in his indignation, the Lord to them shall say, And in his burning fury them shall trouble in that day. But I my self anointed have my King, and setled well
Upon Mount Zion, where I cause my Holinesse to dwell. My self will publish and declare as his most firm decree, God said to me, Thou art my son, to day begat I thee. Ask me the Heathen, i'le give them an heritage to thee; The ends, and coasts of all the earth, shall thy possession bee. And thou shalt the rebellious break with a strong iron rod; And as a potters vessel thou shalt dash them all abroad. Now then you Kings and Potentates be wise and understand, And learn and be instructed all you Judges of the Land. The Lord Jehovah see you serve, with reverent holy fear; When you rejoice in him, let still trembling of heart appear. Submit with kissings to the Son, and him in love obay, Lest else he angry wax, and so you perish in the way. If but a little once his wrath shall kindle in his brest,
O then, all they that trust in him, shall happy be and blest. Psalm 3. O Lord, how are my foes increast, that vex me grievously? And those that up against me rise, how do they multiply? How many are there to my soul that vaunt and boldly say? God shall not save him, whom he makes his only help and stay. But thou Jehovah art a shield which compasseth me round, My glory, and the raiser of mine head I have thee found. Unto the Lord I lifted up my voice, and loud did cry, And he out of his holy hill answer'd me by and by. I laid me down, and quietly I slept and rose again, Because Jehovah doth himself mine heart and state sustain. If of the people presently ten thousand round about In good array against me stood, I would not fear or doubt.
Rise, Lord, save me my God, thou smot'st the jaws of all my foes, And brok'st the teeth of wicked men, that up against me rose. Unto the Lord Jehovah be ascrib'd salvation; Thine own elected people let thy blessing be upon. Psalm. 4. LOrd, Patron of my righteousnesse, answer me when I cry, When I was in great straits, thou didst set me at liberty. With favour, Lord, respect me now, I sue only for grace; Accept and hear the pray'r that I pour out before thy face. You great mens sons, how long will ye my glory turn to shame? Your whole delight's in vanity, to seek lies is your aime. But know that God hath for himself the godly set apart, And he will hear me when I cry to him with all my heart. Tremble, and fear, and sin no more, with your own hearts advise
Upon your beds, quiet the thoughts which in your minds do rise. Make peace with God by sacrifice of truth and uprightnesse, And in Jehovah put your trust with holy stedfastnesse. Many enquire for worldly good, that they may it embrace; But lift thou up on us, O Lord, the brightnesse of thy face. That hath rejoic'd me more, and made mine heart within more glad, Then those that of their Corn and Wine a large increase have had. With that therefore lie dow will I and sleep in quiet peace, For thou alone, Lord, mak'st me dwell in confidence and ease. Psalm 5. GIve ear unto my words, O Lord, my meditation waigh; Attend to my loud cry, my King, my God, to thee I pray. My pray'r each morning I'le direct in order unto thee, And will look out, each morning, when I cry, thou hearest mee.
For thou art not a God that art pleas'd with iniquitie. Neither shall any evil thing sojourn at all with thee. Mad foolish men shall never stand before thine holy eye, But thou in heart dost hate all those that work iniquitie. And thou shalt utterly destroy all those that utter lies; The man of blouds the Lord abhors, and such as frauds devise. But I in thy large mercies will within thine house appear, And in thine holy Temple thee will worship in thy fear. Because mine enemies watch my steps, Lord, in thy truth lead me, And clear thy way before my face, lest I ensnared be. For there's no firmnesse in their mouth, within them mischief lies, Their throat's an open sepulcher, their tongue speaks flatteries. Destroy them, Lord, and let them still fall by their own counsell; Cast them out in their many sins, against thee that rebell.
As for all those that put their trust in thee, let them rejoice, And always in loud shouts for joy, let them lift up their voice. Because thou sav'st and cover'st them, and those that love thy name, Continually let them likewise be joyful in the same. For thou, Lord, on the righteous wilt cause blessings to abound; And with thy favour as a shield thou wilt him compasse round. Psalm 6. LOrd, let not thy rebukes on me in wrath inflicted be, And in thy burning anger, Lord, forbear to chasten me. Be gracious unto me, O Lord, for I am weak and sore, Lord, heal me, for my very bones are troubled more and more. Yea, and my heavy soul in me is vext exceedingly; But, Lord, how long wilt thou delay to cure my misery?
In favour, Lord, return again, my soul from death set free, And for thy boundlesse mercies sake, save and deliver mee. For none that sleep in death can thee once in remembrance have; Or, who, O Lord, shall praise thy name, that dwelleth in the grave? My mourning hath quite weari'd me, while no relief appears; Each night I make my bed to swim, and wash it with my tears. Sorrow and indignation quite fret and consume mine eyes, And they wax dim and old, because of all mine enemies. Get you away from me, all ye that work iniquity; The Lord himself hath heard my voice, my weeping, and my cry. The Lord my supplication and sute hath heard ev'n now; The Lord will always graciously receive my pray'r I know. Let them be vexed sore and sham'd, that enemies are to me; Yea, let them all turn suddenly back, and ashamed be.
Psalm 7. O Lord my God, I put my trust and rest only on thee; From all that me do persecute, save and deliver mee. Lest as a Lion he my soul tear and in pieces rend, While no deliverer can me from his fierce rage defend. O Lord my God, if I have done this thing, which wrongfully They charge on me, or in mine hands be found iniquity; If I rewarded ill to him that was at peace with me, (Yea, I deliver'd him that was causlesse mine enemie;) Then let my foe pursue my soul, and take it, let him thrust And tread my life to th'earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. For my foes rage lift up thy self, in wrath arise, O Lord; Wake for me to the judgement now commanded by thy Word.
Then shall th'assembly compasse thee, to praise thee publiquely; For their sakes, Lord, return, and take thy Judgement-seat on high, And thou that of the world art Judge, O Lord, now judge thou me According to my righteousnesse, and mine integritie. The Second part. O let the wickeds mischief cease, but stablish stedfastly The just man, O thou righteous God, that reins and hearts dost try. The mighty God he is my shield, from him defence I have, And he alone all those that are upright in heart doth save. The mighty God for righteous men gives judgement righteously, But ev'ry day he threatneth sore such as walk wickedly. If he return not, and repent, the Lord his sword hath whet, And bent his bow, and on the string his arrows ready set. And deadly weapons hath prepar'd, the wicked to destroy, And whet his shafts for those that his pursue and still annoy.
Behold the wicked travails with painful iniquitie, Conceiving mischief, and at length he hath brought forth a lie. He digg'd a ditch, and delv'd it deep, another there to take, But he himself is faln into the pit which he did make. The mischief which he labour'd in returns on his own head, On his own pate the violence comes down where it was bred. For this will I give thanks to God that judgeth righteously, And in my song extol the name of God the Lord most high. Psalm 8. O God, our Lord, through all the earth how glorious is thy name? Above the the Heav'ns thou hast advanc'd thine honour and thy fame. From infants mouths and sucking babes thy praise with power goes, To still thereby thine enemies, and proud avenging foes.
When I behold the Heav'ns above, the works of thine own hand, The moon and stars which thou hast fixt in oder as they stand; What is weak, wretched man, that thou keep'st him in memorie? Or, what is base mans son, that thus thou visit'st him (think I?) Thou mad'st him little lower then the Angels in degree, And hast with honour crowned him, and with great Majestie. And thou hast made him to be Lord o're all works of thine hand, Under his feet thou put'st all things that he might them command. The flocks and oxen all of them to him obedience yield, And thou subjectest unto him the wild beasts of the field. The feth'red birds and fowls of Heav'n the power of man do know, And fishes that walk through the paths of the deep seas below. O God, our Lord, who all these things did'st by thy power frame, How excellent through all the earth is thy most glorious name?
Psalm 9. WIth my whole heart will I set forth thy praise, O Lord my God, And all thy great and wondrous works will publish all abroad. In thee alone will I be glad, and joy exceedingly, And praises will I sing unto thy name, O Lord, most high. When all my foes that me assail'd, are put to shameful flight, Then shall they stumble and fall down, and perish at thy sight. Thou hast in judgement tri'd my cause, and sentence past for me; Thou sittest on thy throne on high, judging with equitie. Thou hast rebuk'd the Heathen folk, and wicked utterly Destroy'd, and hast for evermore wip't out their memory. My foe thy desolations cease henceforth perpetually, Thou hast pluck'd up Towns, and with them remov'd their memory.
But know, the Lord Jehovah shall for evermore remain; His throne he hath established, right judgement to maintain. And he in his due time shall judge the world in righteousnesse, And to his people shall dispence judgement in uprightnesse. An high safe refuge God shall be for those that are opprest, And in the troublous times a place of refuge and of rest. And they that know thy name, in thee their confidence shall place, Thou Lord didst never yet forsake those that do seek thy face. The Second part: O sing ye praises to the Lord, that doth in Zion dwell, Among the people his great acts and works declare and tell: When he for bloods enquires he minds th' afflicted in that day, Forgetting not the cryes of men distressed when they pray. Lord favor me, weigh well the wrongs which I from foes sustain, Who even from the gates of death did'st lift me up again.
That in the gates of Zion I may shew forth all thy praise, In thy salvation shal my soul, O Lord, rejoyce alwayes. The Heathen sink down in the pit that they themselves have made, Their foot is taken in the net which their own hands have laid; God by his judgments is well known which he hath strangely wrought, When sinners hands do make the snares wherein themselves are caught. The wicked into hell shall turn, destruction is their lot, And so shall all the Nations that God remember not. The needy, though distrest a while, shall not be still forgot, And th' expectations of the poor, defer'd, yet perish not. Arise, O Lord, and let not man prevaile still by his might, And let the Heathen folk at length be judged in thy sight. Pursue them with thy terrors Lord, abase, and bring them low, And that they are but poor weak men let all the Nations know.
Psalm 10. WHy dost thou Lord withdraw thy self, and stand so farre from us? Why doest thou hide thy self away, in times so perilous? The wicked persecutes the poor, with pride of heart surpris'd, Let them be taken in the plot which they themselves devis'd. The wicked vaunts of compassing his hearts desire, and blest Accompts the griping covetous, and doth the Lord detest. The wicked man, in pride of heart, cares not to seek or call On God, the Lord is not so much as in his thoughts at all. His wayes are alwayes prosperous, thy judgments are on high Out of his sight, his foes he doth puff at disdainfully. And thus he speaks in pride of heart, I never mov'd shall be, Nor yet in any time to come adversity shall see. With cursing, and deceits, and guile, his mouth is fill'd alwayes,
And mischief, and iniquity under his tongue he layes. In the close places of his Courts he lurks, and secretly The harmless slayes, against the poor his eyes watch privily. And like a Lion in his den, he lurks the poor to take, And when he hath him in his net, the weak his prey doth make; He croutcheth to the ground, and low he bows himself withall, That such as are but poor and weak by his strong ones may fall. He says in's heart, that God these things to mind will never call, He turns away and hides his face, and will not see at all, Arise, stand up, O Lord, our God, stretch out thy mighty arm, Neglect not Lord too long to save the humble soul from harm. How long, O God, shall wicked men contemn the Lord? and say Presumptuously within their heart, God will it not repay: But thou takst notice, Lord, and doest observe mischief and spite, And it in thy due time thou wilt with thine own hand requite.
The poor, that hath none help besides, on thee relyes alone, Thou doest support the fatherless, to thee that make their mone. Lord break the arm of wicked men, and all their pow'r confound, And search out all their wickedness till it no more be found. The Lord is King for evermore, and by his mighty hand The heathen folk are perished, and cast out of his land. The humble and poor mans desires with favor thou hast heard, Yea, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear, thou hast their hearts prepar'd. To judge the helpless, fatherless, and the opprest and poor, That these great men the weak of th'earth may terrifie no more. Psalm 11. I In Jehovah put my trust, why do you to me say? Unto your mountain, like a bird fly speedily away.
For loe the wicked bend their bows, their arrows they prepare Upon the string, to shoot at those in heart that upright are. If the foundations of the State, Judgment and Justice too Be thus destroy'd, the righteous man alas what shall he do? God in his holy Temple is, the Heaven is his Throne, His eys behold, his eye-lids try mens children everyone. Jehovah such as righteous are in tryal doth approve. But hates a wicked man, and such as violence do love; Snares, fire, brimstone, and dreadful storms, from heaven rain shall he On wicked men, and of their cup their portion this shall be. Because the righteous Lord doth still in righteousness delight, His eys with favor do behold all such as be upright.
Psalm 12. HElp now, O Lord, for godly men continually decay, The faithful from the sons of men are taken quite away. Each man unto his neighbor speaks false lyes and vanity, And from a double-heart they talk with lips of flattery. But such smooth flattering lips the Lord will cut off sudainly, And that proud tongue that uttereth such swelling words and high, For with our tongues we will prevail, in pride of heart, they say, Our tongues are ours, who is our Lord that we should him obay? Now for the poor mens spoils (saith God) and groans of men in need, Ile rise, and from those scorners them in safety set with speed. Gods words are pure, and faithful all, like silver that is try'd, And in an earthen furnace hath seven times been purifi'd.
And thou hast promis'd Lord to help and to preserve each one, For evermore in peace, from this ill generation. The wicked walk on every side, and wax exceeding bold, The vilest of the sons of men when they advanc'd behold. Psalm 13. O Lord, how long, for evermore, shall I forgotten be? How long wilt thou thy self withdraw, and hide thy face from me? How long shall I in grief of spirit with mine own soul advise? And how long shall mine enemy thus up above me rise? Hear me, O Lord, my God, my state weigh and consider well, Lighten mine eys, O Lord, lest I in sleep of death do dwell: Lest thus mine enemies vaunt and say, o're him I shall prevail, And all my foes rejoyce when I am mov'd, and like to fail.
But on thy mercy and free grace is all my trust and stay, And in the Lords salvation shall my soul rejoyce alway; And I will sing to thee, O Lord, and make the people know Thy name, when thou thy grace to me shalt bountifully shew. Psalm 14. THere is no God, the fool hath said in heart corrupt they are, Their works most vile, and to do good not one takes any care. The Lord beheld from Heaven high the whole race of mankind, To see if any one were wise, or sought his God to find. They all are gone aside, and are most filthy, there is none Amongst them all doth any good, there is not any one: These workers of iniquity, are they so blinded all? Eating my people up as bread, not one on God doth call.
Yet there, for all their confidence, great terror on them fell, For in the generation of just men God doth dwell. The hopes and counsels of the poor you shame and set at nought, Because he staid himself on God, and help from him hath sought. But who shall give salvation Lord? O that thou wouldst fulfil Thy promise made to Israel from out of Zion hill. When God his people brings again, and sets his captives free, Then Jacob greatly shall rejoyce, and Israel glad shall be. Psalm. 15. WIthin thy Tabernacle, Lord, who shall inhabit still? Or whom wilt thou accept to dwell in they most holy hill? The man that doth uprightly walk, and worketh righteousness, And in his heart speaks truth without fraud or deceitfulness. Who with his tongue backbiteth not, nor doth his fellow wrong,
Nor takes up false reports to hurt his neighbour with his tongue. Who a vile person doth despise, but such as fear the Lord He honors; swears to his own hurt, yet goes not from his word. That upon biting usury his mony hath not lent, Nor doth bribes or rewards receive to hurt the innocent. Who so observeth all these things to do them faithfully, He shall not from his happy state be mov'd eternally. Psalm 16. LOrd keep and save me, for on thee alone mine heart it stai'd. My soul, thou hast said to the Lord, thou art my God, mine aid. My goodness reacheth not to thee, but to the Saints that dwell On earth, my whole delight is set on them that do excell. Their sorrows shall be multipli'd, that vex themselves in vain, And to make haste to other Gods in blind zeal take great pain.
Their drink-offeings of blood, which God abhors, I will not bring, Nor in my lips take up the name of that accursed thing. The Lord the part and portion is of mine inheritance, And of my cap, thou doest my lot maintain, and it advance. The lines that did set out my part in pleasant places fell, The heritage assign'd to me doth in all things excell. Gods counsel mov'd me to this choice, and not mine own sore-sight, Him will I bless, he makes my reins to teach me every night. I set the Lord before me still, he is my strength and stay; Because he is at my right hand, my state shall not decay. Therefore my heart within was glad, my tongue my joys exprest, My flesh, when I ly down in grave, shall in assurance rest; Because thou wilt not alwayes leave my soul in grave to be,
Nor wilt permit thine Holy One corruption to see. Thou wilt shew me the path of life; for in thy presence is Fulness of joy, at thy right hand is everlasting bliss, Psalm 17. HEar my right cause, O Lord, attend when I cry and complain, And hear my pray'r which cometh forth from lips that do not fain. And from thy presence let a just decree come forth for me; With favour let thine eyes behold the things that equal be. Thou visitedst me in the night, and prov'dst my heart and mind, And thou hast me as metals tri'd, yet shalt no falshood find. The words which with my mouth I speak, shall not in any wise Exceed, or vary from the thoughts which in mine heart do rise.
As for the works of men, the word that from thy mouth proceeds Hath kept me from destroyers paths, and following their deeds. Sustain my goings in thy paths, and in that prosperous way Which thou preparest, that my feet slip not, nor state decay. Upon thee have I call'd, O God, for thou wilt surely hear; My Prayer then accept, and to my speech incline thine ear. Thy marvellous loving kindnesse shew, thou that by thy right hand Sav'st those that put their trust in thee, from those that them withstand. The Second Part. O keep me now as thou wouldst keep the apple of thine eye, Under the shadow of thy wings hide me continually, From all that me oppresse and waste, and from that wicked scout, Who are my deadly enemies, and compasse me about. They are inclos'd in their own far of plenty, peace, and ease, And with their mouth they proudly speak, and utter what they please;
And in the way wherein we walk, have compassed us round, And narrowly have watched us, to bow us to the ground. Like to a Lion that his prey pursueth greedily, Like a young Lion lurking in his places secretly. Arise, prevent him, Lord, and cast him down in righteousnesse, And by thy sword from wicked men save my soul in distresse. By thine hand from men of this world, who in this life obtain Large portions, Lord, their belly thou fillest with welcome gain Of thy reserved treasure, they In children multiply, And of their substance leave the rest to their babes when they dye. But as for me, I will behold thy face in righteousnesse, I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likenesse.
Psalm 18. JEhovah, thou that art my strength, Ile love thee tenderly; God is my rock and tow'r, to which in my distresse I fly, My strength, God's my deliverer, my rock on whom I stay, The horn of my salvation, and my high tow'r alway. Upon Jehovah will I call, who hath all praise deserv'd, So shall I from mine enemies be sure to be preserv'd. The cords and sorrows of pale death about beset me round, The torrents of ungodly men did me with fear confound, The doleful sorrows of the grave about environ'd mee, The snares of death prevented me, there was no way to flee. In this distresse to God I call'd, and lift up my loud cry Unto my God, my voice he heard in's Temple by and by. My cry came up before his face, entring into his ear,
Immediately the earth did shake and tremble with great fear. The firm foundations of the hills were moved suddenly, And sorely shook, because his wrath kindled exceedingly. Out of his nostrils went a smoak, out of his mouth a fire Devouring round about, and coals were kindled in his ire. Then he descended from above, and bow'd the Heavens high, And underneath his foot he cast the darknesse of the skie. The Second part: He flew, and rode on Cherubims in wondrous majestie, And on the wings of whirling winds he swiftly flew on high. Darknesse he made his secret place, his tents about him were, Waters obscure and dark, inclos'd in thick clouds of the aire, At the bright lightnings which brake forth, and so before him went, His thick clouds past away, hailstones and coals of fire were sent. The Lord from Heaven thundered, the Highest gave his voice,
Hailstones and burning coals of fire he threw with fearful noise. Such arrows he sent one abroad, and his foes scattered, His lightnings he sent forth in wrath, and them discomfited. At thy rebuke the chanels, Lord, of Rivers were made dry, And at thy blasting breath, the worlds foundations open lie. From Heav'n he sent and took me up, and me in safety plac't, And out of many waters deep he drew me out in hast. From my strong foes that hated me, he then did set me free, I could not stand against them, for they were too strong for mee. They unawares preventing me, surpriz'd me in the day Of my calamity, but then the Lord God was my stay. He brought me out of straights into a place of libertie, And me delivered, because he took delight in me.
The Third Part. According to my righteousnesse the Lord did me regard, After the cleannesse of my hands he gave me my reward. For all the Lords ways have I kept, and walk'd in faithfully. And from the Lord my God have not departed wickedly. For all his judgements carefully I did before me lay, From me his statutes and his laws I did not put away. And in his presence I did walk in all sinceritie, And carefully I kept me from mine own iniquitie. Wherefore after my righteousnesse the Lord rewarded mee, After the cleannesse of my hands which his pure eyes did see. To men of mercy merciful thou wilt thy self declare, And thou wilt shew thy self upright with such as upright are. Pure and sincere thou art to men pure and sincere in heart,
And unto froward men wilt be as crosse and overthwart. For thou the poor afflicted ones wilt save that seek thy face, But men of high and lofty looks wilt bring low and abase. The Lord will light my candle so that it shall shine forth bright; The Lord my God himself will make my darknesse to be light. Yea by thy might I run through Troups of men that me withstand, Over an high strong wall I leapt by pow'r of my Gods hand. The Fourth Part. Perfect and righteous is Gods way, his Word refin'd and tri'd, A buckler is he to all that trusting in him abide. Who save the Lord is God , who but our God's a rock and tow'r? 'Tis God that perfect makes my way, and girdeth me with power. Like to the feet of swiftest hindes he makes my feet to be, And upon my high places sets me in securitie. He strengthneth and instructeth too mine hands to warre and fight,
Mine arm doth break a bow of steel in sunder by his might. The shield of thy salvation, Lord, thou hast given me, Thy gentlenesse hath made me great, thy right hand holdeth me. My paths and steps therein, thou hast enlarged under mee, So that I safely walk, my feet are kept from sliding free. Mine enemies whom I pursu'd, I overtook in flight, Nor did I turn again until they were consumed quite. I have them wounded, so that they could never rise again, Under my feet mine enemies are cast, and fall down slain. Unto the fight and battail thou hast girded me with strength, Such as against me rose, thou hast subdu'd to me at length. And thou hast given me the necks of all my foes, that I Might all them utterly destroy that hate me wrongfully.
The Fifth Part. None came to save them in distresse, though they did cry and call, Yea, though unto the Lord they sought, he answered not at all. Then did I beat them small as dust which winds drive to and fro, And cast them out as dirt which men into the streets do throw. From strivings of the people thou hast me delivered, And of the Heathen people hast made me to be the head. A people whom I have not known to me shall servants be, As soon as they of me do hear, they shall submit to me. Yea, strangers shall submit themselves to me; though feignedly; Their hearts shall fail, and fear in those close places where they lie. The Lord for ever lives, my God be blessed with all praise, The God of my salvation exalted be alwaies. God doth avenge me, and subdue the people under me,
And from my foes delivers me, and safely sets me free. Thou liftest me above all them that up against me rose, And from the men of violence sav'st me that me oppose. Therefore among the Heathen folk to thee give thanks will I, O Lord, and unto thy great name sing praise continually. He great deliverance to his King giveth, and mercy store, To his anointed David, and his seed for evermore. Psalm 19. THE glory of the mighty God the Heavens do declare, His handy-works the Firmament shews forth, and what they are. One day unto another speech utters insensibly, One night unto another shews knowledge of God most high. There is no language, tongue, nor speech where their voice doth not found;
Their line, and well directed course through all the world goes round; And to the utmost ends of th' earth their words and speech are heard, In them he hath for the bright Sun a glorious tent prepar'd. He comes out of his chamber like a bridegroom richly clad, And his swift course each day to run like a strong man is glad. He goes forth from the end of Heav'n, and round it compasseth, Nothing is hidden but his heat and light discovereth. Gods law is perfect, and converts and makes the soul to live, His testimony sure, and doth the simple wisdome give. The statutes of the Lord are right, and joy the heart and minde; Gods precept pure, and giveth light to those that else are blinde. The precepts of the Lord are clean, and still endure they shall; The judgements of the Lord are true, and righteous are they all. Then pure gold, yea then much fine gold, they are more precious,
Then hony and the hony-comb much more delicious. Thy servant by them warned, hath to his ways more regard, In keeping and observing them there shall be great reward. What man the errours of his ways, can fully understand? Cleanse me from secret trespasses against thy just command. And keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me, So I upright and innocent from the great sin shall be. The words which I speak with my mouth, and thoughts within my heart, Accept, O Lord, for thou my rock and my redeemer art. Psalm 20. JEhovah hear and answer thee when thou distrest shalt bee, The name and pow'r of Jacobs God from danger set thee free. The Lord his help for thee out of his sanctuary send, And from Zion his holy Mount, thee succour and defend.
The gifts of thy meat offerings let him remember still, Let thy burnt-sacrifices be accepted with good will. After thine upright hearts desire let him grant unto thee, Let all thy godly counsels still by him accomplish'd bee. In thy salvation will we joy, and in Gods name we will Display our banners, now the Lord all thy requests fulfill. Now know I that the Lord our God his own anointed saves, And from his holy Heaven will hear him in what he craves, With saving strength of his right hand assisting speedily. In Chariots some put confidence, on horses some rely, We our Gods name remember still, unto him do we cry. Now they that stood are brought down low, and are faln suddenly, And we that were faln down rise up, and stand upright withall. Save us, O Lord, and let the King hear us when we do call.
Psalm 21. O Lord, the King shall joyful be in thy great strength and pow'r, Exceedingly his heart doth joy in thee his Saviour. For thou hast now on him bestow'd his own hearts whole desire, Nothing from him thou hast kept back of what he did require. With blessings thou didst him prevent of goodness manifold, And thou hast set upon his head a crown of perfect gold. And when he asked life of thee, thou gav'st it liberally, Yea, even length of many days to last eternally. His glory is exceeding great by thy salvation, Honour and glorious Majesty thou hast laid him upon. Thou hast him as a pattern set of blessings lastingly, And with thy chearful countenance joy'd him exceedingly. For in the Lord the King doth trust, and through his mercy great
Of the most high, he never shall be moved from his seat. The power of thine hand shall reach thine enemies round about, And those that hate thee mortally thy right hand shall finde out. Like fewel in an ov'n consum'd, thine anger make them shall, The Lord shall swallow them in wrath, fire shall devour them all. Their fruit shalt thou destroy, with them from th'earth even all their race, So that their seed amongst the sons of men shall have no place. For they against thee evil did imagine and intend, A crafty purpose which they could not bring unto an end, Therefore shalt thou them like a butt or mark set up and place, And make thine arrows on the string ready against their face. In thy strength and thy might, O Lord, be thou exalted high, So will we sing to thee, and praise thy pow'r continually.
Psalm 22. MY God, my God, why doest thou me forsake, and drawest not nigh To help me, and attend'st the voice of my roaring and cry? In the day time to thee my God, in pray'r I cry and call, By night I am not silent, yet thou hearest not at all. But thou, O Lord, art holy still, and help'st at all essaies, And therefore of thine Israel inhabitest the praise. Our fathers did in time fore-past on thee alone depend, They trusted on thee, and thou didst to them deliv'rance send. They cryed unto thee, and were deliver'd by thy name, On thee alone they put their trust, and were not left to shame. But I a weak worm and no man did seem in most mens eyes, Yea, I am the reproach of men, the people me despise. All they that see me, in disdain laugh me to scorn, and they
Shoot out the lip, and shake the head in scorn, and thus they say, This man wholly repos'd himself on God, and on his might, Then let him save and succour him, if he in him delight. But thou took'st me out of the womb, and thou didst make me rest In hope on thee, when I did hang upon my mothers brest. Ev'n from the womb and brest I was cast wholly upon thee, And from my mothers belly thou art still a God to mee. The Second Part. O be not thou far off from me, since trouble is so nigh, For if thou leave me, there is none to help or stand me by. Many strong bulls have compast me, that I cannot get out, Yea, the strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round about. They gap'd and open'd wide their mouths upon me in that day, Like rav'ning roaring Lions, when they set upon their prey. My loins are loos'd, and I pour'd out as water spilt decay,
Mine heart within my bowels doth like waxe melt quite away. My strength is like a potsherd, dri'd, my tongue that cleaveth fast Unto my jaws, and I am brought to dust of death at last. For many dogs have compast me, the wicked men in bands Assembled have, and me inclos'd, they peirc'd my feet and hands. I may tell all my bones, they look and stare upon me all; They part my garments, and casts lots to whom my coat shall fall. Therefore be not thou far from me, O Lord, in time of need, O thou my strength and onely stay, to help me now make speed. Deliver now my soul and life from the sword by thy pow'r, Mine onely one my darling dear, from dogs that would devour. Pluck me out of the Lions mouth, O Lord, and set me free, Thou from the horns of Unicorns already hast heard me.
The Third Part. Unto my brethren then will I declare and shew thy name, And in the middest of the great assembly, praise the same. Praise him all ye that fear the Lord, him do you magnifie, You Jacobs seed, and fear him all Israels posteritie. For he hath not despis'd nor loath'd th'afflicteds misery, Nor from him hid his face, but hath heard him when he did cry. In the great Congregation my praise shall be of thee, In presence of st as him fear my vows perform'd shall bee. The meek that eat shall be suffie'd, and they that seek his face Shall praise the Lord, your heart shall still live quick'ned by his grace. The ends of th'earth shall turn to God, and this to heart shall lay, The kindreds of the Nations him shall worship in that day. The Kingdomes and Dominions unto the Lord belong,
And onely he hath rule and pow'r, the nations all among. The fat and rich men of the earth shall eat and worship, all The poor that to the dust go down shall bow and on him call. Ev'n those that cannot save their lives, a seed that him obeys, God's generation shall be call'd, and so esteem'd always. And those his righteousnesse and truth shall openly declare, To children after to be born, that these his doings are. Psalm 23. MY shepherd is the living Lord, and he that doth me feed, I cannot then want any thing whereof I stand in need. In pastures green of tender grasse he makes me down to ly, And leads me gently by the streams that run so quietly. He quickens and restores my soul, and safely leads me on In right ways, and in safe streight paths for his name sake alone.
Though I walk through the vale of death, yet will I fear none ill, For thou art with me, and thy rod and staff comfort we still. A table thou prepar'st for me in presence of my foe, Mine head with oil thou dost anoint, my cup doth overflow. Goodnesse and mercy all my days shall surely follow me, And ever in the house of God my dwelling place shall be. Psalm. 24. THe Lords is all the earth, and all the store thereof is his, The world, with all that dwell therein his own possession is. For he hath founded it upon the swelling seas to stand, And stablisht it upon the flouds that flow beneath the land. Who shall ascend into the hill of God the Lord most high, Or stand in his most holy place to dwell continually? The clean of hands, and pure of heart, who unto vanity
Hath not lift up his soul, nor yet hath sworn deceitfully. A plenteous blessing of all good he from the Lord shall have, Faithful and righteous dealing from the God that doth him save. Of those that seek to him, this is the generation, O Jacobs God, that do thy face seek and attend upon. Lift up your heads ye gates, and doors that everlasting bee, You shall by you the entring of the King of glory see. This King of glory who is he? the Lord of strength and might, Mighty in battel, who subdues all that against him fight. Lift up your heads ye gates, and doors that everlasting bee, You shall by you the entring of the King of glory see. But who of glory is the King? the Lord of hosts is he, That is the King to whom most due all praise and glory be.
Psalm 25. O Lord, I do lift up my soul and heart to thee, I trust in thee, O Lord my God, let no shame come to mee. Let not my foes have cause to triumph over mee, Let none of them be made asham'd that alwaies wait on thee. Let them be made asham'd that trespasse without cause. Shew me thy holy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths and laws. Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me I thee pray, Of my salvation thou art God, on thee I wait alway. Thy tender mercies, Lord, think on, and keep in minde, Thy loving kindnesses of old, that I may daily finde. My sins and faults of youth forget, and think on mee, According to thy mercy, Lord, and for thy goodnesse free.
God is exceeding good, upright and faithful too, Therefore will he the sinners teach the way that they should goe. Those that are meek in heart, in judgement he will guide, He will instruct in all his ways the meek and void of pride. The ways of God are truth, and mercy, to preserve All those that keep his Covenant and precepts do observe. Now for thy holy name, O Lord, I thee intreat, To grant me pardon for my sin which is exceeding great. The Second part. What man is he that fears the Lord? him in the way That he should choose to walk therein he will teach day by day. His soul in goodnesse shall continue quietly, The earth shall be an heritage to his posterity. All those that fear the Lord his secret blessing know, His covenant to them he doth by tri'd experience show.
Mine eyes and heart unto the Lord advanced are, For he shall free my feet out of the danger of the snare. Turn thee to me, O Lord, and mercy on me show, I am left comfortlesse alone, and brought exceeding low. The troubles of mine heart greatly enlarged bee, Out of those deep distresses, Lord, bring me, and set me free. Look upon my distresse, take notice of my pain, Forgive and pardon all my sins, and make me whole again. O Lord, behold my foes, how they do still increase, Pursuing me with deadly hate that fain would live in peace. O Lord, preserve my soul, do thou deliver me, And let me not be put to shame, because I trust in thee. Let mine uprightnesse, Lord, and sound integritie, In safety me preserve and deep, for I wait still on thee.
Redeem thine Israel, O Lord, thy people all, From all their trouble and distresse, which daily on them befall. Psalm 26. LOrd, judge me in thy righteousnesse, my paths are upright all, I trusted also in the Lord, therefore I shall not fall. Examine me throughout, O Lord, and try me thoroughly, My reins and heart, and secret thoughts, my God search out and try. Thy loving kindnesse I have set before mine eyes always And in thy truth and perfect law have walked all my days. With vain ungodly persons I delighted not to stay, Nor yet with false dissemblers join'd to travail in their way. Th'assemblies of ill doers, I do hate exceedingly, And with the wicked will not sit, but hate their company. In innocency I will wash mine hands, and so draw neer
Thine Altar, Lord, mine offerings to bring before thee there. That I with voice of hearty thanks may publiquely declare Thy wonders, yea thy works I shall shew forth, and will not spare. The habitation of thine house, Lord, I have loved well, And have delighted in the place where thine honour doth dwell. Gather not, Lord, my soul with men in wicked practice rife, With men of bloud and cruelty, Lord bind nor up my life. Men in whose hand is nothing else but mischief to be found, And whose corrupt right hand with gifts and bribery doth abound. But as for me, I will still walk in mine integrity, Be merciful to me, O Lord, set me at liberty. My foot stands in an even place, set in security, Therefore in the assemblies blesse and praise the Lord will I.
Psalm 27. THe Lord my light and safety is, who shall make me afraid? The Lord is of my life the strength, why should I be dismai'd? When wicked men, mine enemies, came upon me with their power, They stumbled and fell down, my flesh that purpos'd to devour. I fear not though an host encamp against me round about, Though warre be rais'd against me, I confide and do not doubt. One thing have I desir'd of God, that will I seek and crave, That all my days within his house my dwelling I may have. That there I may behold the Lord, and view his beauty still, And to his Temple have recourse, there to enquire his will. He shall me hide in troublous times in his pavillion, The secret of his house, and set my feet a rock upon.
And now mine head shall raised be and lifted up on high, Above all my proud enemies that round about me lie. Then sacrifice of joy will I into his Temple bring, And sing unto the Lord my God, to him I praise will sing. The Second Part. Hear thou, O Lord my God, to thee when with my voice I cry, Have mercy also upon me, answer me speedily. Thou saidst to me, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face and presence, Lord, I seek, Hide not thy face from mee. Thou hast my helper been, in wrath put not away thine own, Leave me not, nor forsake, O God of my salvation. My Father and dear Mother too did their own son forsake, But thou, O Lord, more kind then both, of me the care did take. Teach me, O Lord, in thy safe way, and lead me carefully In a plain path, because my foes do watch me narrowly.
Leave me not to my foes desire, against me there arise Many false witnesses, and such as breath out cruelties. My heart had fail'd me, had I not believ'd that I should see Gods goodnesse in this present life performed unto mee. Wait patiently upon the Lord, and be of courage still, And strengthen thou thine heart in him and wait thou on his will. Psalm 28. O Lord my rock, to thee I cry, be not silent to me, Lest else, to those that to the grave descend, I likened be. The voice of thy suppliant hear, when unto thee I cry, And to thine holy Oracle lift up mine hands on high. With workers of iniquity, Lord, cast me not away, That speak peace to their friends, but hatch mischief in heart all day.
Give them according to their deeds, and as they mischief meant In heart, and wrought it with their hands, give them due punishment. God shall destroy, not build them up, because they have not thought On Gods great works, nor did regard that which his hands have wrought. The Lord be blest, because he heard the voice of my request, The Lord my strength is, and my shield, mine heart on him doth rest. And I am helpt, therefore mine heart is joy'd exceedingly, And I will praise him in my song, and his name magnifie. Yea and the same Lord is the strength of all that are his own, And he the saving health of his anointed is alone. Lord save thy people, blesse thou still thine own inheritance, Feed them, and rule them, and do thou for ever them advance,
Psalm 29. AScribe unto the Lord, ye sons of mighty men and great, Ascribe ye strength unto the Lord our God with glory meet. Unto the Lord the glory give due unto his great name, And in the beauty of holinesse yield worship to the same. Gods voice upon the waters is, the glorious God doth thunder, On many waters doth the Lord send forth his voice of wonder. The voice of God is full of power, it worketh mightily, The voice of God the Lord is full of glorious Majesty. The high strong Cedars broken are, by the Lords mighty voice, Cedars of Lebanon the Lord breaks with that fearful noise. He maketh hills to skip like calves, the mighty Lebanon, Like a young Unicorn, and that great Mountain Sirion.
His voice divides the flames of fire, and makes the desert quake. The Lord the spacious wildernesse of Cadesh makes to shake. Gods voice doth make the hindes to calve, and makes the Forest bare, And in his Temple ev'ry one his glory doth declare. The Lord doth sit upon the flouds, and rules them at his will, The Lord sits as a mighty King, and so continues still. And all this pow'r the Lord shall use his people to uphold, His people God will blesse with peace, and blessings manifold. Psalm 30. LOrd, thou hast me advanc'd, I will exalt thee with my voice, Thou hast not made mine enemies against me to rejoice. O Lord my God, in my distresse, I call'd and cri'd to thee, Thou gav'st me answer to my sute, and thou hast healed mee. Thou hast, O Lord, preserv'd my life, when I was neer the grave,
Thou hast kept me alive, my soul thou from the pit didst save. O all ye holy Saints of his sing ye unto the Lord, In memory of his holinesse, praise him with one accord. His anger but a moment lasts, but life his favour brings, Weeping may last a night, but joy comes when the morning springs. In prosp'rous times I said I shall be moved at no hand, When by thy favour thou hast made my mountain strong to stand. Thou didst but hide thy face, and I was troubled by and by Then cry'd I to the Lord my God, my humble sute made I. What gain is in my bloud when I unto the pit go down? Shall the dust speak and honour thee, shall dust thy truth make known? Hear me, O Lord God, when I pray, have mercy upon me, From me withdraw not thou thy self, but, Lord, mine helper be. My mourning into dancing now, O Lord, is turn'd by thee,
My sackcloth thou tookst off, and hast with gladnesse girded mee. That my tongue may not cease, but still sing praises thee before, O Lord my God, to thee will I give thanks for evermore. Psalm 31. LOrd, let me never be asham'd, because I trust in thee, But in thy righteousnesse and truth save and deliver mee. O Lord, bow down thine ear to me, and quickly set me free, Be thou my strong rock, and an hold of sure defence to mee. Thou art my fortresse and my rock to which I still retire, Lead me for thy name sake therefore and guide me I desire. Thou art my stay and strength alone, pluck me out of the gin And net which privily my foes have laid to take me in. Into thy hands, Lord I commit my spirit which came from thee,
Thou hast O Lord, thou God of truth, sav'd and redeemed mee. All those that idols do regard, and lying vanities, I have abhorr'd, but on the Lord alone my heart relies. I in thy mercy will rejoice, because my miseries Thou weighest, and hast known my soul in all adversities. Into mine enemies hands, thou, Lord, hast not inclosed me, But thou in a large room hast set my feet at libertie. I am in trouble, Lord, to me grant mercy and relief; Mine eyes, my belly, and my soul are quite consum'd with grief. My life is spent with grief, my years in sighes away do flie, My strength doth fail, my bones consume for mine iniquitie. The Second part. Among my foes I was a scorn, my neighbours specially, A fear to friends, they that saw me without away did fly.
I am forgotten as a man that now hath long been dead, And like a broken vessel cast aside and perished. For many slanders I have heard, I saw fear every way, While they against me did conspire to take my life away. But all this while in thee, O Lord, I trusted still for aid, Thou art my Lord and gracious God, my soul within me said. My times are in thine hands alone, save me and set me free From my foes hand, and from all those that persecuted mee. Upon thy servant cause thy face to shine forth graciously, And save me for thy mercies sake, to thee alone I fly. Let me not be asham'd, O Lord, for I have call'd on thee, Let sinners be asham'd, let them in the grave silent bee. To silence put the lying lips, that grievous things do say, And hard reports in pride and scorn of righteous men do lay.
For those that fear thee, how great good hast thou laid up in store, And wrought for them that trust in thee, the sons of men before? In secret of thy presence thou shalt hide them from mens pride, And in a tent from strife of tongues, thou shalt them closely hide. For ever blessed be the name of God the Lord, for he In a strong City wonderful kindnesse hath shew'd to me. For in my haste I said I am cut off before thine eyes, But even then thou heard'st the voice of my complaints and cryes. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, the faithful he preserves, And plentifully doth reward the proud as he deserves. Be of good courage, he your hearts uphold and strengthen shall, All ye that on the Lord do hope, and on his name do call. Psalm 32. BLest be the man whose sin the Lord doth graciously remit,
And whose transgressions he doth both cover and acquit. And blest is he to whom the Lord imputeth not his sin, Who in his heart hath hid no guile, nor fraud hath lodg'd therein. When I my self held silence, then all my bones waxed old With plaints and roarings all the day, through torments manifold. Because by day and night thy hand lay heavy upon me, Which caus'd into the Summers drought my moisture turn'd to be. To thee then I acknowledged my great iniquitie, And did not hide my foulest sins, for thus in haste said I, I will confesse unto the Lord my great transgressions, And thou forgav'st th'iniquity of all my sin at once. For this cause when thou maiest be found, the Saints shall thee intreat, Surely to him shall not approach the flouds of waters great. Thou art my hiding place, and thou from, trouble set'st me free;
And with songs of deliverance thou about doest compasse mee. I will instruct and teach thee in the way that thou shalt goe, And with mine eye of providence direct thee what to doe. Be ye not now like horse and mule that nothing understand, Which thou from harm with bit keep'st in and bridle, with strong hand. Unto the wicked shall be store of sorrows and of woes, But mercies him that trusts in God shall round about inclose. Be glad ye righteous in the Lord, greatly in him rejoice, Let the upright in heart with shouts for joy lift up their voice. Psalm 33. YE that are righteous in the Lord unfeignedly rejoice, It well becomes th'upright in heart to praise him with their voice. Praise God with Harp and Psaltery, unto him praises sing,
Sing to him with an instrument that hath a tenfold string. Sing to the Lord a new fram'd song, aloud with skill him praise, Because his words are true, and right are all his works and ways. The righteous Lord loves righteousnesse, and judgement doth him please, And the whole earth to fill with good, his mercy doth not cease. By the commanding Word of God the Heavens created were, And by his powerful breath the hosts that therein do appear. He gathers up into an heap the waters of the Seas, The depths he in their chanel safe as in a store-house layes. Let therefore all the earth below reverence and fear the Lord, Let all the dwellers in the world still tremble at his Word. He onely spake the word, and all was done that he did will, He gave command, and it stood fast and so continues still. The counsels of the Heathen all, the Lord doth bring to nought,
The multitude he doth defeat in their device and thought. But the deep counsels of the Lord shall stand for ever fast, The wise thoughts of his heart shall to all generations last. The Second Part. The Nation's blest to whom the Lord as their own God is known, And those whom as an heritage he chose to be his own. The Lord from Heaven the sons of men beholds and looks upon, The dwellers of the earth from high his habitation. He fashions all their waies alike, as well the high as low, And he their works considereth, and all their waies doth know. The numbers of a mighty host cannot preserve a King, Neither can any mans great strength to him deliverance bring. An horse is a vain thing to save his rider in the fight, Neither can he deliver one by his great strength and might.
Behold, the Lord doth set his eye with favour on the just, As many as do fear his name, and on his mercy trust. That he from death and dangers deep their soul may safely free, And them alive in famine keep when others pined bee. Our soul still waiteth for the Lord, and doth on him depend, He always is at hand, our help, and shield us to defend. Surely in God our heart is glad, in him it doth delight, For in his holy name we have our trust, and in his might. Let thy mercy, O Lord our God, upon us ever bee, As we at all times do depend and onely trust in thee. Psalm 34. I Will at all times blesse the Lord, and him will magnifie, And with his praises shall my mouth be fill'd continually. My soul in God shall make his boast, by whom relief she had, The humble men shall hear thereof, and be exceeding glad.
O magnifie the Lord with me, and spread abroad his fame, Together with one heart and voice let us extoll his name. In my distresse I sought the Lord, he did my prayer hear, And graciously delivered me from all that I did fear. This mov'd his Saints to look unto and flock to him apace, They came not back asham'd, but were inlightned by his grace. This poor man cry'd unto the Lord, he heard his prayer said they, And him delivered out of all his troubles in that day. Gods Angel doth encamp about all those that do him fear, And safely doth deliver them from dangers that are near. O taste and see that God is good and gracious every way, Blessed is he that maketh him his trust and only stay. All ye his Saints, his holy ones, fear ye the living Lord, For nothing shall they want that him do fear and keep his word.
The lions young may hungry be, and want their needful food, But those that truly seek the Lord, shall not want any good. The Second Part. Come near therefore my children dear, and to my words give ear, I will teach you the perfect way how you the Lord shall fear. What man desireth life, and loves in long life good to see, From evil keep thy tongue, thy lips from speaking guile keep free. Depart from ill, do good, seek peace, pursue it speedily. Gods eyes are on the righteous man, his ears do hear their cry: But against such as evil work, the Lord doth set his face; That their accursed memory in earth may have no place. But such as good and righteous are, the Lord hears when they cry, And them out of their troubles all delivers speedily. The Lord is nigh at hand to them that are in heart contrite,
And saves such as are much cast down, and broken in their spirit. Many are the afflictions a righteous man endures, But out of all deliverance the Lord to him assures. The bones of all such men are so preserved Lord by thee, In all their sufferings not one of them shall broken bee. But evil shall the sinners slay, because he evil wrought, And those that hate Gods Saints shall be to desolation brought. Whereas the Lord his servants souls redeems and setteth free, So that of all that trust in him none desolate shall bee. Psalm 35. PLead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with all their might Against me, fight with them for me that do against me fight, Shew thy self now in arms, the shield and buckler take to thee, And stand up for my help, O Lord, and shew thy self for mee.
Draw out the sword and spear, and stop the way of those that me Pursue, and say unto my soul I will thy Saviour be. Confound them, and put them to shame, that seek my soul to spill, Turn them back, and confound them all that think to work me ill. As chaff before the whirling winds, so let mine enemies bee, And let the Angel of the Lord pursue and make them flee. Let all their way be dark, let them in slippery places fall, And let the Angel of the Lord chase and destroy them all. For without cause they hid for me a net me to ensnare, In pits, which they without a cause, did for my soul prepare. Let unawares destruction come upon him, let the net Ensnare his own feet, which for me he privily had set. Then shall my soul be joyful in the Lord, it shall rejoyce In his salvation, all my bones shall say with joyful voice,
Who's like the Lord that sav'st the poor from him that is too strong For him, the poor and weak from him that spoils and doth him wrong? The Second Part. My crafty foes against me rise, to witnesse things untrue, And to accuse me they devise of things I never knew. For good which I to them had done, they recompence me ill, And cruelly they practised, and sought my soul to spill. But as for me, when they were sick, in sackcloth clad I mourn'd, Fasting with humbled soul I pray'd, my pray'r to me return'd. To him I did behave my self as to a friend or brother, And heavily bowed down as one that mourneth for his mother. But they in mine affliction glad, against me gathered were, Smiters at secret meetings me with their false tongues did teare. With scoffing hypocrites at feasts these men assembled be,
They mock me with their bitter jests, they gnash their teeth on me. But, Lord, how long wilt thou look on? from their spoils rescue mee, And let my soul, my darling, be from lions kept by thee. In the great Congregation then will I give thanks to thee, And where the multitudes resort, my praise of thee shall bee. The Third Part. Let not them over me rejoice, that hate me wrongfully, Nor let my causlesse foes in joy and scorn wink with their eye. For they speak not of peace, but-take deceitful plots in hand, Against all such as harmlesse are, and quiet in the land. And now their mouths they open wide, in scorn and spite at mee. So, so, our hearts desire on him (say they) our eye doth see. All this, O Lord, thine eye hath seen, no longer silent stand, O Lord, be thou not far from me, withhold not still thine hand.
Raise and stir up thy self, and to my judgement, Lord, awake, My just God, and my Lord, do not my righteous cause forsake. After my righteousnesse, my God, now let me judged be, And suffer not mine enemies to triumph over me. In their proud hearts let them not say, so would we have it be, Let them not boast, O Lord, that they have wholly swallow'd me. Shame and confusion come to those that at my hurt are glad, They that against me vaunt themselves, with shame let them be clad. Let them be glad and shout for joy that favour my just way, And let the Lord be magnified, let them all always say. Who in his servants prosp'rous state takes pleasure, and my tongue Shall of thy righteousnesse still talk, and thy praise all day long. Psalm 36. THe wicked mans transgressions within mine heart doe say,
Before his eyes there is no fear of God in all his way. For fondly he sooths up himself in his own eyes to finde, And follow on his wicked ways, which he should hate in's minde. His mouth speaks words of wickednesse, and of deceit, and guile, He wholly leaves off to be wise, or do good all the while. And mischief, lying on his bed, he doth contrive and plot, He sets himself in ways not good, ill he abhorreth not. Thy goodnesse and thy mercy, Lord, are in the Heavens high, Thy truth and faithfulnesse reach up unto the cloudy skie. Thy righteousnesse like mountains high, and thy wise judgements bee Like the great deep, both man and beast preserved are by thee. How precious is thy kindnesse, Lord, to sons of men alway? Under the shadow of thy wings therefore they rest and stay. With fatnesse of thy house they shall be fill'd abundantly,
With streams of thy sweet pleasures still thou dost them satisfie. For of true life the fountain is for ever found with thee, We in thy light and favour shall true light and comfort see. Extend thy loving kindnesse, Lord, to men that thee do know, To men that are upright in heart, to them thy justice show. Against me let not haughty men march with their lofty pace, Nor let the hands of wicked men remove me from my place. Behold, there are they faln down flat that work iniquities, They are cast down, and never shall have power again to rise. Psalm 37. FRet not thy self at wicked men, when great in power they bee, Nor be thou envious at those that work iniquitie. For like the grasse that is cut down, so shall their state decay, And as the green herb from the earth, shall wither quite away.
Trust thou on God the Lord alone, to do good take good heed; Abide thou in the promised land, and by faith live and feed. And in the Lord delight thy self, love him with all thine heart, What ere thy soul shall then desire, he will to thee impart. Commit thy way unto the Lord, by faith on him depend, And he shall bring thine enterprise to a desired end. Then shall he shew thy righteousnesse clear like the shining light, The judgment which approves thy cause as noon day shall be bright. In silence rest on God, for him wait patiently and stay, Fret not thy self, because of him that prospers in his way, Because of any man that brings his wicked works to passe. Cease anger, wrath forbear, fret not thy self in any case, To do ill; for ill doers shall be quite cut off, but all That patiently wait on the Lord the earth inherit shall.
The wicked after a short time, shall not be any more, Thou shalt not finde him in his place, where he remain'd before, But meek and humble men the earth shall quietly possesse, And shall delight themselves in store of peace and plenteousnesse. The Second part. The wicked doth against the just his crafty plots devise, He gnasheth in despight at him, his teeth in furious wise: But all the while the patient Lord laughs at him scornfully, Because he sees his woful day comes on him suddenly. The wicked have drawn out their sword, and they have bent their bow, The man that is upright to kill, and poor to overthrow. But their sword into their own hearts shall enter suddenly, Their bow which they have bended shall in pieces broken lie. A little that a righteous man enjoyes, is better farre,
Then unto many wicked men their stores of riches are. Of wicked and ungodly men, the Lord shall break the arms, But shall the just and righteous men deliver from all harms. The days and states of righteous men God doth regard and see, And their possession in the Land shall everlasting bee. In evil times he shall not be asham'd or terrifi'd, When some in times of famine starve, he shall be satisfi'd. The wicked, and Gods enemies all shall utterly decay, They shall consume like fat of lambs, and as smoak passe away. The wicked borrows at his need, but never cares to pay. Whereas the righteous mercy shews, and freely gives away. For such as God the Lord shall blesse, inherit shall the land, But those that he doth curse shall be cut off by his own hand.
The Third Part. A good mans steps are by the Lord well ordered, and set right, For in the ways of righteous men he greatly doth delight. And though he fall, yet shall he not be cast down utterly, Because the Lord with his right hand upholds him carefully. I have been young, and now am old, just men nor yet their seed I never yet forsaken saw, nor forc'd to beg for need: But he is ever merciful, and lends to such as need, And doth behind him blessings leave unto his godly seed. Wherefore from evil far depart, do good, and then be sure Of such a dwelling and estate, as ever shall endure. For God loves judgement, and his Saints forsakes not utterly, But saves them still, and will cut off sinners posterity. Such as are just and righteous, shall possesse the promis'd land,
And there a sure estate shall have, which shall for ever stand. Season'd with wisdome always is a just mans savoury speech, Rules of judgement and holinesse, his tongue doth daily teach. The Law of God within his heart is hidden carefully, That mans estate shall never fail nor his steps slip awry. The Fourth Part. The wicked for the righteous man doth watch as for his prey, And in his cruel hatred him deviseth how to slay. But the good Lord will never leave the just man in his hands, The righteous he will not condemn, when he in judgement stands. Wait thou on God, and keep his way, thou shalt exalted bee, The land t' inherit, and the fall of wicked shalt thou see. The wicked very great in pow'r, flourishing I have seen, I saw him spreading out himself, like to a lawrel green.
Yet suddenly he past away, and could no more be seen, I sought him narrowly, but could not finde where he had been. Observe and mark the perfect man, the righteous man behold, For that mans days will end in peace, and blessings manifold. But the transgressors all of them shall be destroy'd together, This is the end of wicked men to be cut off for ever, But the salvation of the just is from the Lord alway, In time of trouble and distresse, he is their strength and stay. God shall them keep, and set them free from ill men and uniust, The righteous he shall surely save, because in him they trust. Psalm 38. LOrd, let not thy rebukes on me in wrath inflicted be, And in thy burning anger, Lord, forbear to chasten me.
Thine arrows sticking fast in me, pain me continually, And thine afflicting hand, O Lord, lies on me heavily. Because of thy fierce wrath, my flesh there is no soundnesse in, There is no rest in all my bones, through greatnesse of my sin. Over mine head the chaisements of sin, like flouds are gone, The burthen more then I can bear, lies heavy me upon. My long continued wounds corrupt, and stink most loathsomely, Because by my great foolishnesse, I have provoked thee. I am with pain made crooked quite, and bowed very low, And mourning with an heavy heart all the day long I go. A loathsome sicknesse fills my loins, my flesh hath no sound part, I feeble am, and broken sore, I roar for grief of heart O Lord, my God, my whole desire present before thee lies, My groanings through my great distresse are nor hid from thine eyes.
Mine heart doth pant continually, my strength doth fail me quite, Mine eyes because of daily grief, have wholly lost their sight. Those that once seem'd to be my friends, and lovers, stand aloof From my sores, all my neighbours, yea my kinsmen stand far off. The Second Part. They that did seek my life laid snares, and they that sought the way To do me hurt, spake lies, and thought on treason all the day. But I as deaf seemd not to hear, or any thing regard, And as one dumb, spake not at all, no word from me was heard. Thus amongst men I was as one that could not make reply, One in whose mouth were not reproofs, my self to justifie. For thou, O Lord, art all my hope, to thee make I my moan, Thou wilt hear me, O Lord my God, on thee I wait alone. For I said, lest mines enemies should triumph over me,
For when my foot slips, they themselves against me magnifie. For by the greatnesse of my grief ready to halt am I, My heavy sorrows are before mine eyes continually. I still set out before mine eyes all mine iniquity, And for my grievous sin, how full of fear and care am I? But all mine enemies lively are, and strong their power growes, The number of them doth increase, that causelesse are my foes. They also that ungratefully for good requite me ill, Mine adversaries are, because what's good I follow still. Forsake me not, O Lord my God, be not thou far from me, O Lord of my salvation, make haste to set me free. Psalm 39. I Purpos'd in my heart to look carefully to my way, That I offend not with my tongue, lest it should go astray.
As with a bit I will restrain my mouth with all my might, Not once to whisper all the while the wicked are in sight. As I resolv'd, I silent was and dumb, yea I forbore My just defence, but then my grief was kindled up the more. Mine heart grew hot within my breast, while I was musing long, The fire was kindled up, then spake I rashly with my tongue. By death the measure of my days and end, Lord, make me know, How short they are, how frail I am, Lord, let my death me show. My days thou hast an hand-breadth made, mine age is in thine eye As nothing, sure in his best state man is but vanity. Man walketh like a shade, and doth in vain himself annoy, In getting goods, and cannot tell who shall the same enjoy. And now, O Lord, for what wait I? what here can profit mee? Surely on thee my soul depends, my hope is all in thee.
Then, Lord, from my transgressions all, do thou deliver me, And to the foolish a reproach, Lord, let me never be. I was as dumb, and to complain, no trouble might me move, Because I knew it was thine hand, who dost afflict in love. Lord, take from me thy scourge & plague, I cannot them withstand, I am consumed by the stroak of thine afflicting hand. When with rebukes thou dost correct man for iniquity, Thou fret'st his beauty like a moth; all men are vanity. Lord, hear my sute, attend my cry, answer the tears that fall, I sojourn like a stranger here, as did my Fathers all: O spare a little, give me space my strength for to restore, Before I go away from hence, and shall be seen no more. Psalm 40. I Waited long and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear,
At length to me he did incline, and he my cry did hear. He took me from a dangerous pit, out of the miry clay, And on a rock he set my feet, and stablished my way. He in my mouth put a new song unto our God, of praise, Many shall see it, and shall fear, and trust in God alwayes. Blest is that man that makes the Lord his trust and onely stay, Nor doth the proud regard, nor such as to lies turn away. O Lord my God, full many are the wonders done by thee, And so are all thy thoughts of grace to us-ward, as men see. None can in order them recount unto thee, more they are Then can be numbred up, if I would strive them to declare. Offerings accustom'd, thou dost not, nor sacrifice desire, Sin-offerings thou didst not command, nor offerings made by fire. Mine ears thou op'nest, then said I, lo, now I come to thee,
For in the Volume of thy book 'tis so foretold of mee. My whole delight and pleasure is, my God, to do thy will, Thy Law within mine heart I fixt, that I might it fulfill. Thy righteousnesse I publish, and in great assemblies tell. Lo, I have not refrain'd my lips, O Lord, thou know'st full well. The Second part. Within mine own heart I have not conceal'd thy righteousnesse, But thy salvation have declar'd, thy truth and faithfulnesse. Thy loving kindnesse I hid not, that no man should it know, The trust that in thy truth I finde, to all the Church I show. Thy tender mercies now, O Lord, do not withhold from me, Let truth and loving kindnesse me preserve continually. I am encompast round about with evils manifold, My sins and mine iniquities, on me have taken hold.
They press me down, that I cannot look up, for they are more Then all the hairs upon mine head, my heart fails me therefore. But of thy mercy, gracious Lord, be pleas'd to set me free, With speed, O Lord, do thou afford thy saving help to mee. Together them shame and confound, that seek my soul to spill, Let them be driven back with shame, that wish me hurt or ill. For a reward, unto their shame, let them quite wasted be, That in scorn and rejoycing say, Aha, aha, to me. Let them in thee be glad, and joy, who thee do seek alwaies, Let such as thy salvation love, say still, to God be praise. Yet the Lord thinks upon me still, though poor and weak I be, Thou art my God, my Saviour, stay not, O Lord, from me. Psalm 41. BLessed is he that poor weak mens condition wisely weighs,
And them relieves, the Lord shall him set free in evil days. The Lord will him Preserve alive, and blesse him in the land, And thou wilt not deliver him into his enemies hand. Him will God strengthen on the bed of his pining disease, And in his sicknesse thou wilt make his bed, and give him ease. I said, when I was griev'd, O Lord, be merciful to mee, And heal my soul, for by my sin, I have offended thee. Mine enemies speak ill of me, when shall he die (they say) So that his name from off the earth, may perish quite away? When he to see me comes, he speaks smooth words, but in his heart Doth heap up mischief, which he tells when he doth forth depart. My foes against me do conspire, and whisper secretly Concerning me, to work my hurt, they plot maliciously. Some fearful plague doth cleave to him, (say they) and some strange pain,
And surely, now he lieth down, he shall not rise again. Yea, my familiar friend, whom I trusted assuredly, That eat bread with me, lift his heel against me scornfully. But, Lord, be merciful to me, and up again me raise, That I may justly them requite, according to their waies. By this I know that certainly I favour'd am by thee, That now mine enemy hath no cause to triumph over mee. But as for me, thou me upholdst in mine integritie, Thou sett'st me thee before, and hast me ever in thine eye. The Lord, the God of Israel, blest from everlasting be To everlasting, yea, Amen, Amen, gladly say we, Psalm 42. Like as the hinde after the brooks of waters pants and brays,
So my soul panteth after thee, O Lord my God, always. My soul for God the living Lord, doth thirst uncessantly, O when before the Lord my God, come and appear shall I? Tears flowing from mine eyes, have been my meat both night and day, While to my soul continually where is thy God? they say. My soul in me is poured out, when this I think upon, How I with the great multitude into Gods house had gone. With them into Gods house went I, with voice of joy and praise, With the great multitude that kept the solemn holidays. Why art thou now cast down my soul? what doth disquiet thee? Wait still on God, for him I shall yet praise for helping mee. My God, my soul's cast down, therefore upon thee think I will, From Hermonites and Jordans land, and from the little hill. At thy great water spouts loud noise deep unto deep doth call,
And over me come furiously thy waves and billows all. Yet God his mercies will command by day, by night with me Shall be his song, and pray'r to God, God of my life is he. Thus will I say to God, my rock, why me forgett'st thou so? And why do I thus mourning walk, oppressed with my soe? They wound my soul as with a sword within my bones, when me My foes reproach, and say, my God, where is he, where is he? Why art thou now cast down my soul? why thus with grief opprest, Art thou disquieted in me? in God still hope and rest. For yet I know, I him shall praise, who graciously to me, The health is of my countenance, yea, mine own God is he. Psalm 43. Against th'ungodly plead my cause, O Lord, and judge for me,
And from the man of frauds and wrongs, save me, and set me free. For of my strength thou art the God, why dost thou cast me by? Why mourn I for th'oppression of my strong enemy? Send out thy mercy and thy truth, that they may lead me still, And may me to the Temple guide, and to thine holy hill. Then will I to Gods Altar goe, to God my joy alwaies, Yea, on my harp, O God, my God, will I set forth thy praise. Why art thou now cast down, my soul? what should discourage thee? And why with vexing thoughts art thou disquieted in mee? Still hope in God, for him to praise good cause I still shall have, He of my count'nance is the health, the God that doth me save. Psalm 44. O God, we with our ears have heard, our fathers us have told, What works thou in their days hast done, and in the times of old.
How thou didst drive the Heathen out, and plant them in their land, Mad'st them take root, but didst afflict the Heathen with thine hand. 'Twas not their sword that gate for them possession of the land, Nor did the strength of their own arm, save them from th'enemies hand: But thy right hand, thine arm, the light of thine own countenance, Because them out of thy free love, it pleas'd thee to advance. 'Tis thou, O God, that art my King, command deliverances, For Jacob thine own people, now in time of this distress. Through thy pow'r will we now at once push down our enemies, Through thy name will we tread them down that up against us rise. For neither shall my sword me save, nor trust I in my bow, Thou sav'st us from our foes, and them with shame dost overthrow. In God we all day long do boast, and ever praise thy name, But now thou hast us quite cast off, and hast put us to shame.
Thou with our armies goest not forth, but from our foes dost make Us fly, our haters do our goods spoil for themselves, and take. Amongst the Heathen thou dost us scatter, and give for meat Like sheep, and sell'st us for no price, nor wealth by us dost get. The Second Part. Unto our neighbours a reproach thou makest us to be, They mock us that dwell round about, to them a scorn are we. Yea, thou amongst the Heathen all, a by-word dost us make, The nations proudly in contempt their heads at us do shake. Thus my confusion hast thou made before me still to be, Yea so, that daily shame of face doth wholly cover me. Ev'n for his voice that doth reproach, and utter blasphemy, Because of the avenger, and the cruel enemy. For all this we forgat not thee, nor yet thy covenant brake,
We turn'd not back our hearts from thee, nor did thy paths forsake. Though thou us brak'st in desolate places of Dragons fell, And didst us cover with the shade of dreadful death and hell. If our Gods name we have forgot, or help of idols sought, Shall not God search this out, who knows the hearts most secret thought? Yea, all day long most cruelly, slain for thy name are we, As sheep that are for slaughter kept, so we accompted be. But, Lord awake, why sleepest thou? arise, and us deliver, Stand up, and do not us forsake, nor cast us off for ever. Why doest thou hide thy face, and us in grief and sorrows leave? Our souls stoop to the dust, to th'earth our bellies fast do cleave. Arise now, O thou gracious God, to us an helper be, We pray thee for thy mercies sake, redeem and set us free.
Psalm 45. MIne heart good matter poureth out, touching the King I utter What I compos'd, my tongue the pen is of a ready writer. O thou the fairest of all men, grace to thy lips doth flow, Therefore God blessings evermore will upon thee bestow. Gird now thy sword upon thy thigh, thou that art most of might, Appear in dreadful Majesty, and in thy glory bright. On truth, meeknesse, and justice, ride prosp'ring, in Majesty, Most dreadful things thy strong right hand shall teach thee fearfully. The heart of the Kings enemies, by th'arrows of thy word Is peirc'd, that men fall down to thee, as conquer'd by the sword. Thy roial throne for ever is, (O God) and shall remain, Because thy Kingdomes Scepter still doth righteousnesse maintain.
Justice thou lov'st, and wrong doest hate, above thy fellows, he, Ev'n thine own God, hath oil of joy and gladnesse pour'd on thee. Of Myrrhe, Alloes, and Cassia, a sent thy garments had, Out of thy ivory palaces, whereby they made thee glad. Amongst thine honourable train Kings daughters waiting stand, And thy fair Queen in precious gold, is seen at thy right hand. The Second Part. Hearken, O daughter, well advise, incline and bow thine ear, Thine own people thou must forsake, and fathers house most dear. And then thy beauty of the King shall much desired be, Yet thou must humbly worship him, because thy Lord is he. The daughter there of glorious Tyre, with a rich gift shall be, And all the wealthy of the land shall make their sute to thee. Within doth the Kings daughter sit, all glorious to behold, And all the garments that she wears are wrought of perfect gold.
She shall be brought forth to the King, in robes with needle wrought, The Virgins that do follow her, shall unto thee be brought. They shall be brought with gladness great, and mirth on ev'ry side, Into the palace of the King, and there they shall abide. In stead of those thy parents, whom thou now dost quite forsake, Shall be thy children, whom thou maist in all Lands Princes make. Thy name will I remembred make to all posterity, e therefore shall the people praise to all eternity. Psalm. 46. GOd is our strength and refuge, then when dangers us surround, In troubles great a present help, and ready to be found. Wherefore we will not be afraid, though th' earth removed be, Though mountains hurled be into the middle of the sea.
No, though the deep waters thereof troubled with windes do roar, And their high swellings cause to shake the mountains on the shoar. There is a brook whose pleasant streams Gods City do make glad, The holy place where the most high his tabernacle had. In midst of her God doth abide, nothing can her remove, For God betimes shall succour her, and help her in his love. The Heathen raged furiously, the Kingdomes moved were, He did but utter his loud voice, the earth melted for feare. The Lord of hosts stands on our part, who all things doth command, The God of Jacob's our high place, all evil to withstand. Come, and the works of God behold, and weigh them in your thought, What fearful desolations he in all the world hath wrought. Through th'earth he makes all wars to cease, and them to peace he turns, He breaks the bow, he cuts the spear, with fire the charets burns.
Be still, and know that I am God, and will exalted be, The Heathen me shall magnifie, the earth shall honour me. The Lord of hosts stands on our part, and he doth us defend, And our high place is Jacobs God, on him we do depend. Psalm 47. O Clap your hands with one accord, all people, and rejoice, Be glad, and shout aloud to God, with a triumphing voice. For God most high is terrible, and he must feared be, A great and Universal King O're all the world is he. And under us he shall subdue the people mightily, And all the nations shall bring down under our feet to lie. He chose a goodly heritage for us, the dignity Of his true servant Jacob, whom he lov'd most tenderly.
God with his Ark is now gone up with joy and pleasant noise, The Lord to Zion his own hill, with the loud trumpets voice. Sing praises to our God, sing praise, sing praises to our King, The praise of God the earths great King with understanding sing. God o're the Heathen reigns, and sits upon his holy throne, The voluntary Princes are made with Gods people one. The people of just Abrahams God, for all the shields are his, And power of all the earth, and he highly advanced is. Psalm 48. GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still, Within the City of our God, upon his holy hill. Mount Zion is a pleasant place, the joy of all the land, The City of the mighty God, on her North-side doth stand. A refuge in her palaces, well known is God most high,
For lo, the Kings assembled were, together they past by, They viewed it as they went on, wondring exceedingly, And much astonisht, and away they hasted speedily. There did great terrour seise on them, they stood amaz'd with fear, Their grief was like a womans pains when she a child doth bear. Thus doest thou quickly scatter them, as, if thou do but speak, With a strong Eastern winde thou dost the ships of Tarshish break. I' th' City of the Lord of hosts our God, our eyes have seen It now, as we have heard it hath in former ages been, And so will God establish it. And till thou do fulfill Thy loving kindnesses, we wait within thy Temple still. According to thy name, O God, to th' earths end is thy praise, Thy right hand is of justice full, and righteousnesse always. Let Zion Mount rejoice, because of all thy judgements just,
And daughters of Jerusalem, be glad and in thee trust. Walk round about all Zion hill, and view it well, and goe And tell the towrs that thereupon are builded on a rowe. Consider her fair palaces, and mark her bulwarks well, That to the age to come ye may her strength and beauty tell. Because this God is ours, our God for evermore is he, He will not leave us, but our guide he unto death shall be. Psalm 49. HEar all ye people, hearken all that in the world do dwell: Both high and low, both rich and poor, together mark it well. My mouth to you the precepts sound of wisdome shall impart, Of understanding are the thoughts that issue from my heart. Unto an hidden parable, I will incline mine ear,
And then will open on my harp the wisdome that I hear. Why should I fear in evil time when mine iniquities Of my footsteps surround me with deserv'd calamities? The rich men who do make their wealth their only trust and stay, And boast themselves of their great store of riches that decay; None of them can his brothers life redeem by any way, Nor can he for him unto God sufficient ransome pay, (The price of life's impossible, paid it can never be) That he should alway live on earth, and not corruption see. For that wise men and fools both die, they easily perceive, And being dead, to other men their wealth behinde they leave. Yet their deep thought is, that their house continue ever shall, And their fair dwellings, and their lands, by their own names they call. But all in vain, for no man shall abide continually
In honour here, but shall be like unto the beasts that die. The Second Part. This their ill-grounded folly, is apparent in their way, And yet their fond posterity approve what they do say. Like silly sheep in grave they lie, and death doth them devour, And in the morning shall the just o're them have rule and pow'r. Their beauty shall consume away, and perish in the grave, When for an house in dust they chang'd their sumptuous buildings have. But God will surely me redeem from pow'r of grave and hell, And he at last shall me receive with him in blisse to dwell. When then a man grows very rich, afraid thou must not bee, Nor when the glory of his house thou dost encreased see. For he shall carry nothing hence, when death his days doth end, Nor shall his glory after him into the grave descend.
Though he his soul did seem to blesse, while he on earth did live, (For when thou to thy self dost well, men will thee praises give) Yet shall he to his Fathers goe, that have been dead before, To their own generation that light shall see no more. Man then in honour plac't, that is nor wise, when he shall die, Is no whit better then the beasts that perish utterly. Psalm 50. THe mighty God, the Lord spake, and the earth did call From the Sun rising to the place where it doth set and fall. And out of Zion hill, which by Gods presence there, Of beauty the perfection is, he shines and doth appear. Our God shall come and speak, and silent shall not bee, Before him fire shall waste, and storms shall round about him flee. Then to the Heav'ns above the Lord himself shall call,
And to the earth below, that he may judge his people all. Together let my Saints to me assembled be, Those that by sacrifice have made a covenant with me. And then the Heavens shall his righteousnesse declare, And testifie, for God is Judge, whose judgements righteous are. My people Israel hear, and il'e speak openly, And unto there will testifie, God, even thy God am I. For want of sacrifice, blame thee I never will, Nor for burnt-offerings, for they are brought before me still. I need no bullock take for my use from thy stall, Of the he-goats out of thy folds, I have no need at all. The beasts are all mine own, in forests that abound, And all the cattel that upon a thousand hills are found. The fowls on mountains high are all to me well known,
And all the wilde beasts of the field are with me as mine own. If hunger could me pinch, yet would I not complain To thee, because the world is mine, and all it doth contain. The Second Part. That I the flesh of bulls will eat, canst thou once think? Or else that I to quench my thirst, the bloud of goats will drink? Nay, rather to the Lord thanksgiving offer thou, To the most high perform thy word, and duly pay thy vow. And call thou on my name, when trouble thee dismaies, And then will I deliver thee, and thou shalt give me praise. But what hast thou to doe (to wicked men, saith God) To take my cov'nant in thy mouth or laws declare abroad? Seeing it doth appear thou hat'st instruction, And hast my words behinde thee cast, them not to think upon. When thou a thief dost see, thou join'st with him in sin,
And with unclean adulterers thou hast partaker been. Thy mouth thou usest still to evil to apply, And slie deceits, thy tongue doth join together cunningly. Thou sitt'st, and speak'st to wrong thy brother in his name, And thine own mothers son, thy tongue by slanders doth defame. These things thou thus hast done, and I have silent been, Thou thought'st that I was like to the, and did delight in sin. But I will thee reprove for thine iniquities, And I will them in order set plainly before thine eyes. Consider wisely this, you that forget the Lord, Lest he do you in pieces tear, when none can help afford. Who so doth offer praise, he truly honours mee, And he that orders right his way shall Gods salvation see.
Psal. 51. O Lord have mercy upon me, After thy loving kindnesses, Blot out my sins, according to Thy tender mercies numberlesse. Wash me from mine iniquitie, And throughly cleanse me from my sin, I knowledge my transgressions, My sins before him still have been. Against thee, thee alone I sinn'd, And did those evils in thy sight, To justifie thee when thou speak'st, And clear thee when thou judgest right. Behold, when I was born with pain, I was stain'd with iniquity, My mother that did bring me forth, Before in sin conceived me. Behold, thou in the inward parts Desirest uprightnesse alone, And wisdome in the secret of My soul, to me thou didst make known. With hyssop purge me now, O Lord, And then I shall be clean and bright, And if thou wash me thoroughly, More then the snow I shall be white.
Of joy and gladnesse cause thou me To hear again the pleasant voice, That so the bones that thou hast now By sorrow broken may rejoice. From the beholding of my sin, O Lord, turn thou away thy face, And all my deeds of wickednesse Blot out, and utterly deface. The Second part. O Lord, create in me an heart Clean, and unspotted in thy sight, And do within me Lord renue A spirit constant, free, and right. Cast me not from thy presence out, Nor take thy holy Spirit away, The joy of thy salvation Restore to me again, I pray. With thy free Spirit me still uphold; Transgressors then shall learn of mee, Thy righteous ways, yea sinners then Shall be converted unto thee. Thou God of my salvation, O God, from blouds deliver mee, Then of thy truth and righteousnesse, My tongue aloud shall sing to thee. My lips which now fast closed are, Do thou, Lord, open graciously,
My mouth shall then set forth thy praise, When it is set at liberty. For thou desir'st not sacrifice, That I should it present to thee, Nor in burnt-offerings dost delight, That thou should'st them accept of mee. A broken spirit is to God An acceptable sacrifice, A broken and a contrite spirit, O Lord, thou never wilt despise. Do good in thy good pleasure, Lord, To Zion, and her still sustain, The walls of thy Jerusalem Build thou up now, and still maintain. The sacrifices which they then Shall freely offer up to thee, In truth and uprightnesse of heart, Thou shalt accept most graciously. With burnt-off rings of sundry sorts, With whole burnt-off'rings, in that day They shall their bullocks offer up, And them upon thine Altar lay. Psalm 52. O Mighty man in wickednesse, why dost thou boast with pride?
Be sure the goodnesse of the Lord, for ever shall abide. Thy tongue speaks mischief, which thine heart deviseth wickedly, And like unto a rasor sharp, it works deceitfully. In evil more then any good, thine heart doth take delight, And lying, rather then to speak, and utter what is right. O thou deceitful tongue, thou lov'st words that devour and waste. But God shall justly cut thee down for evermore at last. Thee shall he take away, and pluck out of thy dwelling place, Yea, from the land of life shall he pluck up thy root and race. The righteous man shall this behold, and tremble in that day, And have him in derision, and thus of him shall say. Behold, the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in His store of riches, and himself did strengthen in his sin. But like to a green Olive tree within Gods house am I,
For in his mercy great shall be my trust continually. And I, because thou this hast done, to praise thee will not cease, And still will wait upon thy name, for this thy Saints doth please. Psalm 53. THere is no God, the fool hath said in's heart, corrupt they are, Their works most vile, and to do good, not one takes any care. The Lord beheld from Heaven high, the whole race of mankind, To see if any one were wise, or sought his God to find. They all are gone aside, and are most filthy, there is none Amongst them all doth any good, there is not any one. These workers of iniquity, are they so blinded all, Eating my people up as bread, not one on God doth call. There were they with great fear possest, and stood all as dismaid,
Even where there was no cause at all why they should be afraid. For God his bones that thee besieg'd, hath scattered all abroad, Thou hast consumed them, for they rejected are of God. When God his people brings again, and sets his captives free, Then Jacob greatly shall rejoice, and Israel glad shall bee. Psalm 54. SAve me, O God, by thy great name, by thy strength judge thou me. Lord, hear my pray'r, give ear unto the words I speak to thee. Oppressors for my soul do seek, strangers against me rise, And God the Lord they have not set at all before their eyes. But lo, my God doth give me aid, the Lord is straight at hand, With them that do uphold my soul, the Lord doth ever stand. He shall with plagues reward my foes, for me in wait that ly, According to thy word and truth, cut them off speedily.
Then will I with a willing heart bring sacrifice to thee, And I will praise thy name, O Lord, which hath been good to mee. The Lord hath clearly set me free out of my troubles all, And now mine eye doth plainly see my foes expected fall. Psalm 55. O God, give ear, and do attend to me when I do pray, And from my supplications turn not thy self away. Take heed attentively to me, and patiently me hear, I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise through grief and fear. For the noise of my foes, because the wicked me oppresse, They pour out injuries on me, in wrath and spitefulnesse. With grievous pains my heart is sore disquieted in mee, Nothing but terrours of pale death before mine eyes I see.
Trembling and fearfulnesse of heart take hold and seise on me, Terrour doth me so overwhelm, I no way out can see. I said in heart, O that I had the swift wings of a dove, Then would I fly from wrongs, and to a place of rest remove. Then would I hasten far away, to fly I would not cease, Until in safety I might stay in some great wildernesse. To free my self from injuries, I would escape in haste, Lest tempests should me overtake, or the fierce stormy blast. Destroy, O Lord, and soon confound their tongues, and them divide, For in their Cities, cursed strife, and violence abide. And on their walls both day and night they go about it round, And in the midst doth mischief dwell, and sorrows still abound. Within it, in the midst thereof, is wickednesse espi'd, Deceit and guile do not depart, but in his streets abide.
It was no foe that me reproach'd, For that I could have born, No enemy that lift up himself against me thus in scorn, For then I would have hid my self: Thou didst me this despight, My guide, mine equal, my near friend, in whom I did delight. We oftentimes in counsel did sweetly together talk, And us'd into the house of God in company to walk. The Second Part. Let death upon them seise, and let them quick go down to hell, For wickednesse amongst them is, and reigneth where they dwell. But as for me, upon my God I will not cease to call, And out of all adversities he me deliver shall. Evening, and morning, and at noon, I unto him will pray, And cry aloud, and he my voice shall hear, and what I say. Against me when the battel was, he did my soul set free,
He me preserved still in peace, for many were with mee. God me shall hear, and them afflict, the God that is of old, Because they have no changes, God they fear not, but wax hold. On such as live in peace with him, he fears not to lay hands, And of his cov'nant made with them, breaks wickedly the bands. While he in heart doth harbour war, like butter are his words, While soft as oil his speeches be, yet are they sharp drawn swords. Thy burthen cast upon the Lord, thee sure sustain shall he, The righteous he shall not permit remov'd at all to be. But for these men thou shalt, O Lord, bring them down every one Into the everlasting pit of just destruction. These bloudy and deceitful men shall not live half their days, But I on thee alone, my God, will put my trust always.
Psalm 56. HAve mercy now on me, O God, for man would me devour, He fighteth with me day by day, he troubleth me each hour. Mine enemies that watch for me, wou'd daily swallow me, For those, O thou most high, that fight against me, many be. But when their multitude and power strike terrour into me, Ev'n then do I stay up my heart by resting still on thee. In God, his word and promise, I will praise, and trust in thee, O Lord, and will not fear at all what flesh can do to mee. All my words which I spake, they wrest, and construe at their will, And all the counsel that they take, is how to work me ill. They gathered were, and hid themselves, close watch for me to lay, They mark my steps, when they lay wait to take my life away.
Shall they by their iniquity, escape from judgement free? In thy fierce anger let them Lord, cast down for ever bee. Thou tellest all my wandrings, Lord, thou on my tears dost look, Them in a bottle keep by thee, are they not in thy book? When unto thee I cry, my foes shall turn their backs, and flee, This do I know assuredly, for God doth stand for mee. In God who makes good what he speaks I shall still praise his word, His word which he performs to me, shall I praise in the Lord. In God have I put all my trust, my rock, my rest is he, Therefore I will not be afraid what man can do to me. Thy vows, O Lord, upon me are, I will give praise to thee, For thou hast still my soul from death preserved and set free. And wilt thou not hereafter keep my feet from falling free? That in Gods favour walking, I the light of life may see.
Psalm 57. BE merciful to me, O God, be merciful to mee, Because, according to thy Word, my soul doth trust in thee. Yea in the shadow of thy wings, will I my shadow make, Till these calamities be past, that might me overtake. To God most high, will I in pray'r send up my earnest cry, To that God, who all things for me performeth graciously. From heav'n shall God send, and me save, and them confound, that me Would swallow up, God shall send forth his truth and mercy free. My soul is among lions fierce, and I with them do dwell, That are inflam'd with cruel rage, as set on fire with hell. Base mens sons, who are wholly bent to mischief and to wrong, Their teeth like spears, and arrows fierce, a sharp sword is their tongue.
Be thou exalted now, O God, above the Heavens high, And over all the earth advance thy glorious Majesty. They for my steps a net prepar'd, my soul bow'd down in me, Before me they have digg'd a pit, but faln therein they be. My heart is fixt in me, O God, and setled stedfastly, My heart is fixt, and unto thee sing and give praise will I. My tongue, my glory, up, awake, my harp and psaltery, Yea, I my self will wake betimes, and break my sleep will I. Among the people i le set forth thy praises, O my God, Among the nations I will sing thy praises, O my God. Because unto the height of Heaven thy mercies great ascend, Thy faithfulnesse and constant truth unto the clouds extend. Exalted be thy name, O Lord, above the Heavens high, And over all the earth advance thy glorious Majesty.
Psalm 58. YOu that in counsel sit, do you consult of what is just? And justly judge the sons of men, according to your trust? Yea, in your hearts you wickednesse contrive, and plot, and then Out of the seats of justice weigh out violence to men. The wicked from the very womb erre out of the right way, Yea, from the birth in speaking lies, they straightway go astray. In them the poison you may see of serpents to appear, And like the adder deaf they are, which fast doth stop her ear, From hearkning to the charmers voice at all, although he charm Never so wisely, to inchant her that she do no harm. Break thou their teeth, Lord, in their mouth, wherewith they hurt so sore, Yea, the great teeth break out, O God, of young lions that roar.
So let them slide as waters melt, that run continually, Arrows which they prepare, let them as cut in pieces lie. So let them passe away, as snails to nothing melted bee, As an untimely birth, that they the Sun may never see. Before your brambles prickles hurt, he takes them hence in haste, Alive, and in his wrath he takes them with his whirlwinds blast. The righteous shall rejoice, when he this vengeance just shall see, And in the bloud of wicked men his own feet washt shall bee. Then shall men say, surely there is for righteous men reward, Surely he is a God that doth the earth judge and regard. Psalm 59. DEliver me, O Lord my God, from all mine enemies, Set me in safety from all those that up against me rise.
Deliver me, O Lord, from them that work iniquity, Preserve, and save me from the men of bloud and cruelty. They for my soul do lie in wait, the mighty join in one Against me, Lord, not for my sin or my transgression. They run and do prepare themselves, though I gave no offence, Awake, and from me be not far, look our for my defence. Thou Lord of hosts, and Israels God to judge the world, awake, Spare none that wilfully rebel, but on them vengeance take. At evening they return again, like dogs a noise they make, They grin, they bark, the city round about their course they take. Behold they belch our with their mouths, and in their lips are swords; And boldly say, who doth attend or hearken to your words? But thou, O Lord, that hear'st all this, shalt laugh at them, and smile, And in derision thou shalt have the Heathen all the while.
Because mine enemies are so strong, therefore with confidence Will I depend and rest on God, for he is my defence. The God, whose mercies I have found, shall me prevent, and he On all mine enemies my desire shall fully let me see. The Second Part. Slay them, not lest it be forgot, scatter them by thy pow'r, And from their high state bring them down, O Lord, our shield and towr. For their mouths sin, their wicked words, curses, and lies withall, Which they still utter in their pride, let them be snar'd and fall. Consume, consume them in thy wrath, that they no more may be, And know that God in Jacob rules, to the end of th' earth rules he. At evening let them back return, a noise like dogs to make, To bark, and grin, the city round about their course to take. And let them wander up and down, and seek for food to eat,
And grudge when they do hungry grow, and be not fill'd with meat. But I thy pow'r and mercy too, betimes aloud will praise: For thou my refuge and defence, hast been in troublous days. Yea, I will sing, and praises give, O thou my strength, to thee, For God is my defence, the God of my mercy is hee. Psalm 60. LOrd, thou of late hast cast us off, and scatt'red us abroad, Thou hast been sore displeas'd with us, return to us, O God. Thou mad'st the earth and state to quake, and it thine anger brake, The breaches of it now make up, for it doth sorely shake. Thou shewd'st hard things, and brought'st them on the people that are thine, Thou hast of great astonistment made us to drink the wine. But yet to gather them again, as many as thee fear, A banner thou hast now displaid, to make thy truth appear.
Now that thy people, whom them lov'st, may full deliverance have, Preserve them all with thy right hand, hear me in that I crave. God spake thus in his holinesse, my joy therein is great, I will divide Shechem in parts, and Succoth Valley mere. Gilead I claim as mine by right, Manasseh mine shall be, Ephraim is of my head the strength, Judah gives laws to me. Moab I will my wash-pot make, and Edom, over thee I cast my shoe, Philistia triumph thou over mee. Who can unto the Towns of strength, Or will me safely bring? Who into Edom that strong land, will bring me conquering? Wilt not thou, O our God, that seem'st us lately to reject? Who with our armies when they marcht, to go forth didst neglect? Now give us help, our gracious God, from trouble set us free, For all the help that men can yield, we finde most vain to be.
Now by th'assistance of our God, we shall do valiantly, For he our enemies shall tread down, under our feet to ly. Psalm 61. O God, when I to thee do cry, be pleased me to hear, Attend unto me graciously, and to my pray'r give ear. When grief and fear o'rewhelm my heart, unto thee will I cry, Lead me my God unto the rock that higher is then I. In time of danger thou hast been a shelter safe for me, A tow'r and place of sure defence from my strong enemie. Within thy tent for evermore, I gladly will abide, Under thy wings I trust, and will my self in safety hide. For thou, Lord, didst accept my vows, and all my prayers hear, And gavest me an heritage with those that do thee fear.
The Kings life, Lord, thou wilt prolong, he many days shall see, As many generations shall his life extended be. Before the Lord a dwelling place for ever he shall have, Prepare thy mercy and thy truth, him to preserve and save. So ever thankfully will I Sing praises to thy name, That all my vows I may perform, and daily pay the same. Psalm 62. YEt surely my soul waits on God, and him depends upon, Because all my salvation cometh from him alone. My only refuge, and my rock, and Saviour is he, And strength, I shall not from my state greatly removed be. How long against me do you plot mischief? you shall be all Destroied, like a rotten hedge, or like a bowing wall.
To cast him down is all their plot, they do delight to ly, When with their mouth they seem to blesse, then curse they inwardly. But thou my soul, still wait upon the Lord, and him attend, My expectation wholly doth on him alone depend. He only is my fort and tow'r, and my salvation he, And strength, I shall not from my state greatly removed be. In God is my salvation, my glory only he, My rock of strength, to God I fly, when dangers threaten me. At all times put your trust in him, all people that are his, Pour out your heart before him still, for God our refuge is. Sure men of low degree are vain, and great men are a ly, They in the scales together are lighter then vanity. Trust not in wrong, in robbery, and theft become not vain, See not your heart upon your wealth, when you much riches gain.
God once hath spoken, yea, again, for I have twice heard this, That to God only power belongs, and that all strength is his. And that all mercy, Lord, belongs, and rests alone in thee, For thou shalt every man reward, as his own deeds shall bee. Psalm 63. O God thou art my God, betimes I seek thee, and for thee My soul doth thirst, my flesh doth long, where waters none there bee, In a dry thirsty land, thy pow'r and glory so to see, As in the sanctuary I have formerly seen thee. Because thy loving kindnesses do like it self excell, Therefore my lips shall thankfully thy glorious praises tell. Thus when thou shalt restore me, I will blesse thee all my days, And in thy holy name I will lift up my hands in praise. As with abundant fatnesse, then my soul shall filled bee,
Also my heart with joyful lips, shall praises sing to thee. As oft as I thee in my bed remember with delight, And when on thee I meditate, in watches of the night, Calling to minde how thou hast been my faithful helper still, In the safe shadow of thy wings trust, and rejoice I will. My longing soul doth follow hard, and closely cleave to thee, And thou again with thy right hand in love upholdest mee. But to the grave they shall go down, that would my ruine see, The sword shall slay them, and a prey to foxes they shall bee. But the King shall in God rejoice, and all they glory shall, That swear by him, but stopt shall be the mouth of liars all. Psalm 64. O Lord, when unto thee I pray, unto my voice give ear, From my proud enemies eye preserve, and save my life from fear.
From secret plots of wicked men, Lord, hide me carefully, From th'insurrections of those that work iniquity. Who do their tongues in malice whet, and sharpen them like swords, And set their arrows in their bows, to shoot out bitter words. That so at him that is upright, they may shoot secretly, And without fear of God or men, may strike him suddenly. In evil matters they themselves encourage, and to lay Their snares, in secret they confer; who shall us see? say they. They search out mischief, and perform a through search to their minde, What ere the inmost thoughts of them, and depth of heart can finde. While they thus busie are, at them shall God shoot privily A deadly arrow, and therewith shall wound them suddenly. So they shall make ev'n their own tongue upon themselves to fall, Men seeing them shall flee away from them affrighted all.
For on all men great fear shall fall, they shall Gods work declare, They wisely shall consider then, that these his doings are. In God shall righteous men be glad, and, trusting in his might, Shall greatly glory, even all those that are in heart upright. Psalm 65. PRaise silently for thee, O God, doth wait in Zion hill, And all the vows that they have made to thee, they shall fulfill. O thou that hearest prayers, which to thee presented bee, All sorts of men throughout the world shall come and seek to thee. Iniquities prevail, O Lord, against me day by day, But as for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them clean away. Happy is he whom thou dost choose, and causest to draw near Unto thy self, that he may dwell, and in thy Courts appear. With the great goodnesse of thine house we shall be satisfi'd,
Of thy most holy Temple, which thy self hast sanctifi'd. By terrible and dreadful things, in truth and righteousnesse, O God of our salvation, us thou answerest in distresse; Who art of th'ends of all the earth the confidence and stay, And of the Islands, which within the sea ly far away. The hills and mountains great and high, he hath established, As with a girdle, so with power he is encompassed. The hideous noise of swelling waves thou dost asswage and still, Their waves great noise, and peoples rage restrainest at thy will. Those that in th' utmost parts do dwell, at thy great works do fear, From East to West thou mak'st them sing for joy, both far and near. The earth thou visit'st being dry, and waters with thy springs, And so enricht abundantly by thee, much fruit it brings. Gods river it doth overflow, whose waters plenteous are,
When thou for it providest thus their corn thou dost prepare. By thee the ridges watred are, and furrows setled bee, With showers thou dost soften it, the spring is blest by thee. Thus thou the year abundantly dost with thy goodnesse crown, Thus plentifully upon us thy paths drop fatnesse down. They drop upon the pasture grounds that are in deserts wide, The little hills refresht thereby, rejoice on every side. With flocks the pastures clothed are, the valleys cov'red bee With corn, so that they shout for joy, and also sing to thee. Psalm 66. MAke unto God a joyful noise all lands, and spread his fame, His praise make glorious, and sing forth the honour of his name. Say unto God, how fearful are thy works? thy foes shall all
Through thy great power submit to thee, and down before thee fall. All nations the earth throughout shall worship thee their King, And they shall sing to thee, yea to thy name shall praises sing. Draw near all men, wisely behold what works the Lord hath wrought, Mark well the fearful things that he for man to passe hath brought. The sea into dry land he turn'd, and all his people dry Went through the flouds, there we in him rejoice exceedingly. He rules for ever by his power, his eyes the nations see, Let none of them exalt themselves to him that rebels bee. O let the people blesse our God, and let the chearful voice Of his due praise be heard abroad, with thanks in him rejoice. Which holds and doth preserve our soul in life from day to day, And suffers not our feet to move, or our estate decay. For thou hast proved us, O Lord, as with the fiers heat
Men try their silver, thou hast us trid with affliction great. Thou broughtest us into the net, where in we snared were, Heavy afflictions to our loins thou bound'st and mad'st us bear. The Second Part. Over our heads thou causedst men imperiously to ride, We went through fire and water both, we every way were tri'd. Yet when we had been thus abas'd, and hopelesse seem'd our case, Ev'n then thou brought'st us out into a large and wealthy place. Burnt-offerings now within thine house present to thee will I, And all the vows which I have made, will pay thee faithfully, Which with my lips I uttered, in all my grief and smart, Which I have spoken with my mouth, when troubles vex'd my heart. Burnt-sacrifices I to thee with fatlings offer will, Incense with rams I will present, and beeves and goats will kill.
Come near, and hearken every one whose heart the Lord doth fear, And what he for my soul hath done, you now of me shall hear. To him in mine adversity I with my voice did cry, And with my tongue his holy name I did lift up on high. If in my heart I any way regard iniquity, The Lord I know will not give ear to my voice when I cry. But God did hear me readily, and graciously attend Unto my prayers voice, and cry, which did to him ascend. Blessed now be the Lord my God, who hath not turn'd away His mercy any time from me, for which to him I pray. Psalm 67. HAve mercy, Lord, on us, and blesse us with thy grace, And on us ever cause to shine the brightnesse of thy face.
Thy ways and works to us that all the earth may know, And that thy saving health thou maist unto all Nations show. O let the people all give praise unto thy name, Yea, let the people through the world in praise extoll the same. O let the nations all rejoice, and sing with mirth, For thou in righteousnesse dost judge the nations of the earth. O let the people all give praise unto thy name, Yea, let the people through the world in praise extoll the same. And then the earth shall yield a plentiful increase, And our God, even our own God, shall blesse us all in peace. God shall himself us blesse, who are his people dear, And then the ends of all the earth shall worship him in fear. Psalm 68. LEt God arise, and let his foes be scatter'd in their flight,
And let them all that him do hate, fly from before his sight. Like smoak, so drive thou them away, as wax melts by the fire, Let wicked men before his face, so perish in his ire. But let the righteous men be glad, and in Gods sight rejoice, Exceedingly let them be glad in him with chearful voice. Praise God that on the heavens rides, sing praises to his name; By his name JAH advance him, and rejoice before the same. To such as are left fatherlesse, he is a father kinde, The widows in his holy place him a just Judge shall finde. The barren, God in families doth place, and he from bands Sets free the bound, while rebels dwell in dry and thirsty lands. When thou before the people went'st, redeem'd from great distresse, Marching before them as their guide, through the great wildernesse, Then did thy presence shake the earth, the drops from Heaven fell,
Sinai did shake before the Lord, the God of Israel. Thou didst upon thine heritage pour out a plenteous rain, O God, whereby when it was faint it was refresht again. Thy Congregation dwelt, O Lord, in Canaan land, whereby Thou of thy goodnesse for the poor preparest plenteously. The Second Part. By thy great works thou matter gav'st of publique joy, O God, Great multitude of women it did publish all abroad. The Kings of armies of our foes fled in great haste away, And she that still abode at home, did part and share the prey. And though ye lay among the pots, like doves ye shall appear, Whose wings with silver, and with gold her feathers covered were. When the Almighty by his pow'r great Kings did overthrow, Then was it like to Salmon hill, when it was white with snow. Like unto fruitful Bashan, so is Zion Gods own hill,
Above the height of Bashan hill advanced by his will. Why leap ye you high hills? this is the hill chosen by God, To dwell in, God for ever there will settle his abode. Gods chariots twenty thousand are, his Angels thousands be, Amongst them, as in Sinai mount, in's holy place is he. When thou ascendest up on high triumphing gloriously, A multitude of captives thou leadst in captivity. Thou then bestowedst gifts on men, even such as did rebel, That by thine Ordinances thou in midst of them might'st dwell. All praises be unto our God, we daily loaden be, With his great benefits, alone our Saviour is he. Our God is he that is the God of all salvation, The issues out of death belong to God the Lord alone. But God shall deadly wound the head of all his enemies, The hairy scalp of all that walk still in iniquities.
The Third part. God said, I'le bring them back as I from Bashan did before, And as my people through the seas, I once brought safe to shore. That thou maist dip thy feet in bloud of thy slain enemies, And that thy dogs may lick it up, where spilt on ground it lies. Thy goings they have seen, O God, in glorious majesty, The goings of my God, my King, in his own sanctuary. First, went the singers, next came they on instruments that play, The damsels too their tabrets beat, in midst of that array. Blesse God in your assemblies all, unto him praises sing, All ye that from the fountain doe of blessed Jacob spring. Young Benjamin's there with his Prince, with Judahs companies, And Princes, with them Zebuluns Princes, and Naptalies. Thy Word and thy Commandement this strength to us hath brought, Then, Lord, we pray thee strengthen what thy self for us hath wrought.
Ev'n for thy Temples sake, which thou hast at Jerusalem Set up, to thee shall Princes come, and presents bring with them. Rebuke the Archers company, wanton calves, bulls of might, Till they pay tribute, scatter those that do in wars delight. Then shall the Lords of Egypt come, and presents with them bring, Arabians shall stretch out their hands unto their God and King. Sing ye aloud unto the Lord, ye Kingdomes of the earth, Sing ye unto the Lord our God praises with joy and mirth, Who on the highest Heavens rides, which of old framed were, From whence he sends a mighty voice, a dreadful voice to hear. Ascribe ye strength unto the Lord, his excellency he On Israel shews, and in the clouds his strength he makes us see. Dreadful out of his holy place, and Israels God is he, Who gives his people strength and power, God therefore blessed be.
Psalm 69. SAve and preserve me, O my God, with speed deliver me, The waters so encrease, that to my soul they entred be. I sink in deep mire, where I feel no standing, come am I Into the depths, where waves do me o'reflow continually. And I with crying wearied am, my throat therewith is dry, Mine eyes do fail, while on my God I wait continually. Those men that for no cause at all do hatred bear to me, More then the hairs that are upon mine head, in number be. And mighty are my causlesse foes, who gladly would me slay, Then did they force me to restore what I took not away. Mine errours and my foolishnesse, Lord, thou dost know and see, My sins and all my trespasses cannot be hid from thee.
Let them not for my sake be sham'd, O Lord, that wait on thee, Nor those that seek thee, Israels God for me confounded be. Because I onely for thy sake do suffer this disgrace, And for thy sake and not mine own, shame covers all my face. Ev'n unto mine own brethren I a meer stranger became, And as an alien unto my mothers children am. The fervent zeal hath me consum'd, that to thine house I bear, The scorns wherewith they thee reproach, upon me lighted are. The Second Part. Then humbled I my soul with tears and fasting, and was clad In sackcloth, they reproached me, a proverb me they made. Those that sit in the gate, on me a railing sentence pass, And I the subject of the songs of beastly drunkards was. But, Lord, in an accepted time, my prayer is to thee,
Lord, in thy saving truth, and in great mercy, hear thou mee. Free me out of the filthy mire, my feet from sinking keep, Save me from such as hate my soul, and out of waters deep. Let not the flouds me overflow, nor the depths swallow me; And let not the pits mouth below upon me closed be. Good is thy kindnesse, and thy love, therefore to me give ear, Turn to me for the multitude of thy mercies most dear. O do not from thy servant hide, or turn thy face away, I troubled am on every side, hear me with speed I pray. Unto my troubled soul draw nigh, redeem and set it free, Because of all mine enemies, save and deliver mee. Thou hast known my reproach & shame, and my dishonour seen, Mine adversaries all of them before thee still have been. My heart is broken with reproach, my soul is full of grief,
I lookt, but found no comforter, nor one to give relief. The Third Part. They bitter gall, in stead of meat, unto me given have, When I was thirsty, for my drink sharp vinegar they gave. Let their own table, when they eat, become to them a gin, And that be made a trap, whieh for their welfare should have been. Let both their eyes and minde be dark, that they may nothing see, Make their loins shake continually, wherein their strength should bee. Pour out thine indignation upon them fearfully, And let thy burning anger seise and still upon them lie. And let their stately palaces be desolate within, Those Towns without inhabitant, which had their dwelling been. For him whom thou sinot'st with thy rods, they persecuted more, They talk unto the grief of those whom thou didst wound before.
In thy just judgement leave them Lord, to adde sin unto sin, To thy truth and thy righteousnesse, let them not enter in. Out of the book of living men, blotted be they by thee, And never let them in the roul of just men written bee. But full of sorrows and of grief, and weak and poor am I, O God, let thy salvation now set me up on high. Then will I praise the name of God with songs and melody, And with thanksgiving shall my tongue him greatly magnifie. The Fourth Part. This sacrifice shall please the Lord, that more accept shall he, Then Bull, or Oxe, with hoofs, and horns, if they were brought by me. The meek and humble shall be glad, and joy when this they see, All that seek God, your heart shall live, and full of comfort bee. Because the Lord the poor doth save, when they their prayer make,
And doth not cast off those that are made pris'ners for his sake. Let the high Heav'ns, and all the earth unto him praises give, The spacious seas, with ev'ry thing that there doth move and live. For surely God will Zion save, and Judahs cities build, That men may them possesse, and dwell, and have their houses fill'd. And his own servants godly seed inherit shall the fame, And they shall have their dwelling there, that love his blessed name. Psalm 70. O God, my God, from my distresse be pleas'd to set me free, With speed, O Lord, do thou afford thy saving help to mee. Together shame them, and confound that seek my soul to spill, Let them be driven back with shame, that think or wish me ill. For a reward unto their shame, let them destroyed be,
That in scorn and rejoycing say, aha, aha, to me. Let them in thee be glad and joy, who seek thy face always, Let those that thy salvation love, say still, to God be praise. The Lord yet still doth think on me, though weak and poor I be; Thou art my God, my Saviour, stay not, Lord, long from me. Psalm 71. O Lord, I put my confidence, and trust in thee alone, Let me not be at any time put to confusion. In justice, Lord, deliver me, and help to set me free, Save and preserve me, and incline thy gracious ear to mee. Be thou my strong dwelling, whereto I may all times resort, Thou didst command to save me, Lord, thou art my rock and fort. Out of the hand of wicked men, O Lord, deliver me, Out of the power of th'unjust, and cruel set me free.
For thou, O Lord my God, art still my hope, me to defend, Ev'n from my youth my trust art thou, on thee I do depend. Thou hast sustain'd me from the womb, thou only tookest mee Out of my mothers womb, my praise shall always be of thee. A wonder and a gazing stock to many men am I, But thou art my strong refuge still, to which by faith I fly. Such mercy shew me, that my mouth may filled be alway With matter of thy praise, and of thy glory all the day. Now in this time of my old age, cast me not off from thee, Then when my strength begins to fail, O Lord, forsake not mee. For lo thine enemies speak against thy servant bitterly, And they consult against me, that in wait for me do lie. The Second Part. They say, the God in whom he trusts doth wholly him forsake,
There's none to save him, now let us him persecute and take. Wherefore my Lord my God, from me be not thou far away, But for my help make haste, my God, and make no long delay. Confound, consume them, to my soul that adversaries be, Let shame and scorn o'rewhelm them all that seek to injure me. But I on thee alone will trust, and wait continually, And praise and magnifie thy name, yet more and more will I. My mouth shall publish all the day thy truth and righteousnesse, And thy salvation, though to me they seem quite numberlesse. In thy strength, Lord, not in mine own, I will all undertake, And of thy righteousnesse alone always will mention make. O God, ev'n from my youth thou hast me by experience taught, And hitherto I have declar'd the wonders thou hast wrought. Now then when I am old and gray, forsake me not, O God,
Till to this Age I shew thy strength, and thy pow'r all abroad. And to the Age succeeding too, thy justice very high, For who is like to thee, O God, that dost things wondrously? Thou with great troubles shewedst me, and fill'dst me with great pain, Hast quickned me, and from the grave hast brought me up again. Beyond all this, thou, Lord, shalt make my greatnesse to increase, And thou shalt compasse me about with comforts and with peace. Thee and thy truth i'le praise, O God, the psaltery upon, And with the harp will sing to thee, O Israels holy One. Then greatly shall my lips rejoice, when I shall sing to thee, So shall my soul, which thou hast now redeemed and set free. And of thy justice all the day my tongue shall talk with joy, For thou confound'st and bringst to shame all those that me annoy.
Psalm 72. THe spirit of judgement give, O God, to thine anointed King, And with an upright heart assist his son in governing. So shall he judge with righteousnesse the people of thy fold, The poor that have no helper, he with judgement shall uphold. The barren mountains then shall bring unto his people peace, The small hills shall by justice yield of happinesse increase. The poor of people he shall judge, and of the needy save The children, and in pieces break those that them wronged have. As long as the bright Sun and Moon in Heaven shall appear, Throughout all generations the people shall thee fear. As rain come down on new mown grasse, so us refresh he shall, And like to gentle showrs, which on the parched earth do fall.
The righteous then and godly men shall flourish in his reign, And while the Moon endures, he shall abundant peace maintain. And his rule and dominion shall from sea to sea extend, And from the river it shall reach to the worlds utmost end. Those that in desarts dwell, shall bow before him reverently, His enemies licking the dust, shall down before him lie. The Kings of Tarshish, and the Isles to him shall presents bring, Sheba's and Seba's Kings shall gifts bring to him as their King. The Second Part. Yea all the Kings on ev'ry side shall down before him fall, And serv'd and honoured shall he be by the nations all. The needy and opprest shall he deliver when they cry, Yea, the poor man, and him that hath no man to stand him by. And all the poor and needy ones he shall in mercy spare,
He shall preserve the souls and lives of those that needy are. And from deceit and violence, their soul he shall set free, And in his sight the bloud of them most precious shall bee. Long shall he live, and men shall gold of Sheba to him bring, And they shall always pray for him, and daily blesse their King. On tops of mountains shall be sown of corn an handful small, The fruit thereof shall shake, like to Lebanons Cedars tall. The cities people like the grasse, on th'earth shall flourish sure, And his name through all ages shall for evermore endure. His name shall be continued as long as the Sun shall, In him shall men be blest, him shall all nations blessed call. The holy God of Israel, the Lord God blessed be, Who only can do wondrous things, and doth continually. His glorious name for evermore be blessed by all men,
And with his glory let the earth be fill'd, Amen, Amen. Psalm 73. SUrely to Israel God is good, and gracious is he To all that in their hearts upright and clean before him be. But as for me through thoughts of heart my steps were almost gone, My feet were almost slipt through force of strong temptation. For at the fools that flourished, I fretted enviously, And at the wicked, when I saw their great prosperity. For these in ease live, and do not in pains and torments dye, Their strength is firm, and so it doth abide continually. When others in distresses are, they are not troubled then, Nor are by God or other means plagued like other men.
Therefore pride like a costly chain adorns and sets them out, As a rich garment, violence covers them round about. With fatnesse do their eyes stand out, they such abundance have, And wealth and riches they enjoy more then their heart can crave. They are corrupt in heart and life, and they speak wickedly, And vaunt of their oppressions, yea, they speak loftily. Against Heav'n open they their mouths in vile blaspheming talk, And proudly their unbridled tongue through all the earth doth walk. With this Gods people shaken are, turn back and look about, When they see waters from a cup so full at them wrong out. The Second part. And in their weaknesse thus they say, how doth God all things know? Doth the most high full knowledge take of things done here below? Behold, those the ungodly are, who live in outward peace,
And they do prosper in the world, in riches they increase. Then said I, verily my heart in vain cleansed have I, And to abstain from sin, my hands have washt in purity. For notwithstanding this I still am plagued every day, And ev'ry morning chastisements thou dost upon me lay. If I should thus conclude, against the generation, I, Of thine own children, should offend, and trespasse grievously. But when I thought to search the depth of this great mystery, It was too hard a task for me, and painful in mine eye. Until at last I me betook unto Gods sanctuary, And there out of Gods Word I learn'd what their last end should be. Verily slippery places thou didst choose to set them on, And by thine hand didst cast them down into destruction. How into desolations are they brought suddenly,
With fearful terrours are they all consumed utterly. Like as a dream when one awakes, doth vanish from his eyes, So, Lord, thou when thou risest up their shadow wilt despise. The Third Part. Yet thus was my weak heart a while disquieted in vain, Through indignation my reins were pricked with great pain. So ignorant was I, and like a fool besotted quite, And without understanding, was like a beast in thy sight. Neverthelesse I do remain continually with thee, When I was weak, by my right hand thou fast haft holden mee. Thou by thy faithful counsel wilt me always safely guide, And after me receive with thee in glory to abide. In Heaven whom have I but thee to rest upon alone? And on the earth that I desire, besides thee there is none.
Mine heart and flesh doth fail me both, but God doth fail me never, For he is of mine heart the strength, my portion he for ever. For lo, they that go far from thee, shall perish quite and fall, Those that a whoring go from thee, thou hast destroyed all. But surely it is good for me still to draw near to God, In the Lord God I trust, that I may shew thy works abroad. Psalm 74. O Lord, why hast thou cast us off for ev'r in dangers deep, Why doth thy burning anger smoak against thy pasture sheep? Think on thy Congregation which of old was purchased, Thine heritage which was by thee by thy rod measured. Which thou from cruel bondage by thy pow'r redeemed hast, This mount Zion where thou hast dwelt so long in ages past.
Lift up thy feet now to tread down and ruine utterly Thy foes, that in thine holy place have wrought thus wickedly. For where thy Congregations were, thine enemies roar and cry, And they for signs of triumph have their ensigns set on high. A man was famous, once as he had labour'd painfully, To fell down and to square thick trees thine house to beautifie. But now at once most spitefully they labour to deface, With ax and hammer, carved works of thy most holy place. Thy Temple they have burne with fire, and cast down to the ground, Defiling it, the place where once thy name dwelt much renown'd. Thus in their hearts they say, Let us destroy them out of hand; They have burnt up the Synagogues of God throughout the land. We see no more our wonted signs, our Prophets all are gone, To tell us when these plagues shall end, amongst us there is none.
The Second Part. How long shall these oppressors, Lord, reproach thus scornfully? Shall these thine enemies blaspheme thy name perpetually? why dost thou still turn back thine hand? the right hand of thy strength, Pluck it out of thy bosome now, and make an end at length. For God from the beginning is my King that rules alone, He in the midst of all the earth doth work salvation. Thou didst divide and break the sea by pow'r of thy command, The heads of Dragons in the flouds thou brakest with thine hand. The head thou brak'st in pieces of Leviathan so great, And to the people dwelling in the desart mad'st him meat. Out of cleft rocks, fountains and flouds thou brought'st out plenteously, The mighty flouds of Jordans streams thou madest to be dry. The shining day and the dark night thine and thine onely are,
The bright Sun and his glorious light, thou only didst prepare. Thou all the borders of the earth hast set by thy decree, The Summers heat and Winters cold they both are made by thee. Remember that thy foes, O Lord, reproach'd thee scornfully, That foolish people have thy name blasphem'd most wickedly. Thy Church, thy Turtles soul, do not to wild beasts, Lord, deliver, The Congregation of thy poor do not forget for ever. Respect thy faithful Covenant; for each dark lurking den Of th'earth is now replenisht with dwellings of cruel men. O let not those that are opprest be turned back with shame, But let the poor and needy ones have cause to praise thy name. Arise, O Lord, why sitt'st thou still, thine own cause plead and try, Remember how the foolish thee reproach continually. The voice forget not of thy foes, for these that openly
In tumults up against thee rise, increase continually. Psalm 75. TO thee, O Lord, do we give thanks, to thee we thankful are, For that thy name and pow'r is near, thy wondrous works declare. When I th'assembly undertake, uprightly judge I shall. The earth and dwellers are dissolv'd, I stay her pillars all. To those disturbing fools, I said, deal not so foolishly, And to the proud and wicked men, lift not your horn on high. Advance not your proud horn aloft against the Lord most high, And against his holy decree, speak not presumptuously. For honour and promotion comes neither from the East, Nor from the South can be procur'd, nor purchas'd from the West. But God that governs all the world is the great Judge alone,
He pulls down one, and setteth up another in the throne. God, takes into his hand a cup, the wine therein is red, Ready to drink, with mixture much, and fully tempered. Of this he poureth out, and gives to drink to all about The dregs, the wicked of the earth shall drink, and wring them out. But I for ever will declare and publish all abroad Thy glorious praises, I will sing to thee, O Jacobs God. And all the horns of wicked men shall be cut off by me, But the horns of the righteous shall highly exalted be. Psalm 76. GOd is in Judah known, and there he hath advanc'd his fame, Among his people Israel, great is his glorious name. His Tabernacle to erect in Salem was his will,
And for his constant dwelling place, he chose out Zion hill. The fiery arrows of the bow he brake there by his might, The sword and shield of all his foes, and armies put to flight. Thou art more bright and glorious, and excellent, O God, Then Mountains, and great Monarchs are, that spoil and rob abroad. The stout and valiant men are spoil'd, by sleep of death they fall, No man of might could finde his hands to help himself withall. By thy rebuke and judgment just, O Jacobs God, at last, Those that on horse and Chariots ride into deep sleep are cast. Thou, even thou alone, O Lord, art he whom all should fear, And who dare stand before thy face, if once thy wrath appear? Thou from the highest Heavens mad'st thy judgements to be heard, The earth in silence stood, and was exceedingly afear'd, When God the patron of the poor, in judgement did arise,
To save the humble of the earth from all their enemies, Surely the wrath of man at last shall turn unto thy praise And the remainder of their wrath the Lord restrains and staies. Vow ye, and pay unto the Lord, all ye that are him near, And bring ye presents unto him, that ought to be your fear. For he the spirit of Princes great shall cut off suddenly, And Kings that make the earth to quake, shall sorely terrifie. Psalm 77. I With my voice to God did cry, in my distresse and fear, To God I did lift up my voice, and he to me gave ear. In my distresse I sought the Lord, my sore ran in the night, And ceased not, my soul refus'd all comfort and delight. I thought on God, but then my grief did still on me remain,
My spirit was overwhelmed, though to God I did complain. Thou dost withhold sleep from mine eyes, and keep'st me still awake, Through my fore trouble and great pain, my speech doth me forsake. Then in mine heart I did resolve to think on days of old, And on the works of ancient times which men to us have told. Mine own night songs of former days I thought on seriously, I commun'd with my heart, my spirit made search diligently. And thus I reason'd, will the Lord for ever me reject? And will he look on me no more with gracious respect? What! is his boundlesse mercy now for ever perished? And doth his promise fail, and shall nere be accomplished? Doth God forget himself, and now leave gracious to be? Hath he his tender mercies clean in wrath shut out from me? Then said I, mine infirmity doth cause these doubts and fears,
I will recall what the most high hath done in former years. The Second Part. I will remember of the Lord the great works manifold, And I will surely call to mind thy wondrous works of old. And I also of all thy works will throughly meditate, And of thy doings with my friends will seriously debate. Thy secret ways are best within the sanctuary known; Who hath appear'd so great a God, as our Almighty One? Thou art the mighty powerful God that do'st great works alone, Thou hast thy mighty power made amongst thy people known. Thou hast thy people with thine arm redeemed, and set free Jacobs and Josephs sons, whom thou brought'st from captivitie. The waters deep saw thee, O God, they saw thee and they fled, As much afraid, the depths also were soerly troubled.
The clouds their waters poured our, a sound came from the sky, And then abroad the hail-stone storms as arrows swift did fly. Thy thundring voice was heard in heav'n, thy lightnings that did fly, Lightned the world, the earth did shake and tremble fearfully. Thy way is in the sea, thy paths in which thou ledst thine own, Were in great waters, such footsteps before were never known. By Moses thou, and Aarons hand thy people through the deep And desart, to the promis'd land, ledst like a flock of sheep. Psalm 78. ATtend unto my doctrine all my people, and give ear Attentively unto the words which from my mouth you hear. My mouth shall utter parables, and sayings dark of old, Which we have heard and known, & which our fathers have us told.
We will not hide them from their seed to those unborn that be, Gods praises, strength, and wondrous works which he wrought teach will we. This statute he to Jacob gave, and law to Israel, To charge our fathers that his works they to their seed should tell. That future generations might these things learn and know, That children yet unborn, the same might to their children show. That they Gods works might not forget, but on him stay their heart, And his Commandements might keep, and from them not depart. And might not like their fathers old be disobedient found, Whose heart not right, whose spirit with God nor stedfast was, nor sound. The Ephraimites by Gods just hand, though arm'd and carrying bows, Yet in the day of battel turn'd their backs before their foes. They kept not that just covenant, which God to them did give, And after his most perfect laws they did refuse to live.
But they forgat the weighty works which wrought by him had been, Remembring not those wonders great, which their own eyes had seen. The Second Part. In the whole land of Egypt, and in Zoan field wrought hee, Before their fathers eyes his works most marvellous to see. The sea divided, gave through it a passage to them all, The waters he made stand on heaps which were to them a wall. With a thick cloud he shadowed them while the day was light, And with a pillar of light fire, he led them in the night. And in the thirsty wildernesse the stony rocks he clave, And as from the great depths, from them he drink unto them gave. From those dry and hard rocks he caus'd great streams to issue out, And caus'd the waters to run down like rivers round about. For all this, more and more they did against turn still transgresse,
And the most high they did provoke in the great wildernesse. And in their hearts they God himself tempted by their mistrust, In boldly asking flesh of him to satisfie their lust. Against their God they utter'd words, and spake profanely thus, A Table in the wildernesse can God prepare for us? Behold, he smote the rock, and thence came streams and waters great, But can he give his people bread, and give them flesh to eat? The Lord heard this, and waxed wroth, and kindled was a flame In Jacobs house, and anger great from God on Israel came. The Third Part. Because they did not in their God believe, and rest upon His pow'r and truth, and trusted not in his salvation. Although he his commandement gave to the clouds above, And unto them had opened the doors of Heav'n in love.
And on them Mannah had rain'd down, from thence for them to eat, And had on them bestow'd the Corn of Heaven for their meat. Thus man with food for Angels meet was fed and satisfi'd, He of his bounty meat to them abundantly suppli'd. He caus'd an East-wind in the Heav'ns to passe by his command, The South wind too he caus'd to come by the strength of his hand. And like to dust he rained flesh on them abundantly, And feathered fowls as thick as sands that on the sea-shore lie. In midst of all their Camp, and round about their tents it fell, He gave their own desire, they eat and they were filled well. They were not weaned from their lust, nor turned from their sin, But while their dainty meats were yet their lustful mouths within, On them the wrath of God, which slew the fattest of them, fell, And soon smote down the chosen men and flow'r of Israel.
Nor wrath, nor mercy could prevail to turn them from their sin, But still for all his wondrous works, him they believ'd not in. The Fourth Part. Therefore their days in vanity he did consume and waste, And by his wrath their years away in trouble soon they past When thus he slew them in his wrath, they sought him by and by, And they return'd, and after God enquired speedily. They then remembred that their God, their rock and stay had been, The high God, their redeemer, whom they griev'd thus by their sin. Yet with their mouths they flattred him, and spake but feignedly, And they unto the God of truth with their false tongues did ly. For their false hearts were not with him establisht thoroughly, Nor in his Covenant did they continue stedfastly. But he full of compassion, pardoned their sin, when they
Him sought, destroyed them not, but oft his anger turn'd away, And did not stir up all his wrath, Remembring they were vain Weak flesh, a wind that being past returneth not again. How often had they him provok'd in the wide wildernesse, And in the desart griev'd him still with their rebelliousnesse. Yea, they return'd again, and God they tempted wickedly, And unto Israels holy One, set bounds, his power to try. They thought not on his mighty hand, nor on the day when he From their oppressing enemy them saved and set free. The Fifth Part. His signs in Egypt they forgat, though wrought in their own sight, His wonders great in Zoan field, done by his dreadful might. Nor did consider how he turn'd their rivers into bloud, That neither any man nor beast could drink at any floud.
He sent them divers sorts of flies, which did them sore annoy, And fill'd their Country full of frogs, which did their land destroy. He to the Caterpillers gave th' increase of all their land, And fruits of all their labours to devouring locusts hand. Their fruitful Vines he did destroy, with hail in all their coast, And all their Sycamores he kill'd, with the sharp biting frost. And he deliv'red to the hail their cattel in the field, And to the lightenings their flocks to be destroy'd and kill'd. His burning anger, troubles, wrath and indignation, By sending evil messengers, he did send them upon. He to his anger making way, spar'd not their soul from death, But to the killing pestilence, gave up their life and breath. And in the land of Egypt he all their first-born did smite, And in the tents of Ham the chief of all their strength might.
52 But his own people he brought forth like sheep, and them did guide In safety through the wildernesse while they did there abide. The Sixth Part. He led them safely by his pow'r, they had no cause to feare, But by the seas their enemies all overwhelmed were. He brought them on into the Coasts of his own holy land, Into this Mount Zion, which he did purchase with his hand. For them he cast the Heathen out, and did their land divide, And in their tents he set the tribes of Israel to abide. Yet did they tempt the highest God, and him provoked they, His testimonies they forsook, and did not them obey. But like their fathers turned back, and dealt unfaithfully, Like to a warping bow which shoots from the mark clean awry. They with their Altars him provok'd, set up in places high,
And with their graven images, mov'd him to jealousie. But when into the Lords ears came of those soul sins the cry, He waxed wrath, and Israel he abhorred utterly. So that the Tent of Shiloh he forsook, though lov'd so well, The Tabernacle which he plac't amongst men there to dwell. The Ark his peoples strength he gave into captivity, His glory he gave up into the hand of th'enemy. He gave his people to the sword, and being angry then With his inheritance, the fire consum'd their strongest men. The Seventh Part. Their maids in marriage were not prais'd. their Priests fell by the sword, Widows no solemn mourning did for the deceas'd afford. But then the Lord arose as one that did from sleep awake, And like a Giant that by wine refresht, a shout doth make.
His enemies in the hinder parts he smote both great and small, And thereby on them did he bring a shame perpetuall. But yet the Tabernacle he of Joseph did refuse, The fruitful Tribe of Ephraim, he was not pleas'd to choose. But he the Tribe of Judah chose, that he therein might dwell, Even that holy Mount Zion which he did love so well. There he his sanctuary built, like to a palace high, And like the earth establish'd it to stand continually. And he his servant David chose, his flock to rule and keep, And he out of his favour took him from the folds of sheep. Even from behind the Ews with young, the Lord did him advance, To feed his people Israel, his own inheritance. And so in soundnesse of his heart them faithfully he fed, And he with skilfulnesse of hand them wisely governed.
Psalm 79. O Lord, the Heathen do invade thine heritage, by them Thy Temple is defil'd, on heaps they lay Jerusalem. The bodies of thy Saints they give to fowls of th'air for meat, The flesh of all thy servants dear to the wilde beasts to eat. Like water they have spilt their bloud about Jerusalem, As for their bodies there is none takes care to bury them. To all our neighbours bordering neer, a vile reproach are we, A scorn and mocking stock to those that round about us be. How long, O Lord, for evermore shall thus thine anger last? And shall thy burning jealousie like fire devour and waste? Upon the Heathen pour thy wrath that have not known thy name, And on the Kingdomes all that have not call'd upon the same.
Thy servant Jacob they have now devoured and destroi'd, His habitations they have wholly laid waste and void. O now forget our former sins, and us prevent in haste With tender mercies, for we now down very low are cast. For th'honour of thy holy name, our Saviour us relieve, And for thy names sake purge away our sins, and them forgive. Why should the Heathen say, where is their God? let him be known Among them, by revenging of the bloud-shed of his own. Ev'n in our sight, of prisoners receive the sighs and cry, By thy great power preserve such as appointed are to die. Into their bosomes seven fold to our neighbours, repay Those vile reproaches, Lord, wherewith they lade thee day by day. So we thy folk and pasture sheep, will give thanks unto thee For ever, and shew forth thy praise to all posterity.
Psalm 80. O Thou that Joseph like a flock, shepherd of Israel, Dost lead, shine brightly forth, that dost between the Cherubs dwell. Before Ephraim and Benjamin, and in Manassehs sight, To come and save us in distresse, shew forth thy pow'r and might. Turn us, O God, bring us again from our Captivity, And cause thy face on us to shine, then saved shall we be. O Lord, thou God of hosts, how long wilt thou thus angry bee, Against thy peoples pray'r, and sutes which they present to thee? Thou feedst them with such sorrows, that their bread with tears they eat, Thou dost give them their tears to drink, in measure full and great. Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours that be neer, Our enemies amongst themselves at us do laugh and jeer.
Turn us again, O God of hosts, from our captivitie, And cause thy face on us to shine, then saved shall we be. Thou hast a Vine from Egypt brought by thine out-stretched hand, And thou hast cast the Heathen out, to plant it in their land. A large room thou prepar'dst for it, that it might thrive and grow, And mad'st it fill the land where it had ta'en deep root below. And with the shadow of the same the mountains cov'red were, The boughs that did from it shoot out, like cedars did appeare. Her mighty boughs from sea to sea, she spread on every side, Her branches to the river great Euphrates multipli'd. Why hast thou then her fences all and hedges thus down cast, That all that passe along the way, her branches break and waste? The fierce wilde boar out of the Wood turns up her roots apace, Her branches wilde beasts of the field eat up before our face.
O Lord of hosts return again, we pray thee unto thine, Look down from Heaven and behold and visit this thy Vine. The Vineyard which with thy right hand thou plantedst carefully, The branch which thou mad'st strong, that it might bring forth fruit to thee, Behold, it is burnt up with fire, and it is quite cut down, Thy people perish when thou dost in wrath upon them frown. Upon the man of thy right hand let thy right hand remain, On him whom thou mad'st strong, and didst for thine own self maintain. And then will we no more go back, nor from thee ever fall, O quicken and raise up our hearts, we on thy name will call. Turn us, O God of hosts again from our captivity, And cause thy face on us to shine, then saved shall we be.
Psalm 81. SIng unto God our strength and might, lift up aloud your voice, Unto the God of Jacob sing, and make a joyful noise. Take up unto you now a psalm, the timbrels hither bring, The pleasant harp and psaltery that we may sweetly sing. In the new Moon the Trumpet blow, as God gave us command, On solemn feasts in general assemblies of the Land. For this a statute was ordain'd by God to Israel, A law which Jacobs God them gave, that they might keep it well. In Joseph this a law he made, when he went from the land Of Egypt, where the speech I heard, I did not understand. I from the heavy burthens took his shoulder clean away, His hands were also quite set free from making pots of clay.
In trouble thou didst call on me, and I did set thee free, From the dark cloud whence thunder comes, I straight ways answer'd thee. At the waters of Meribah I did thee prove and try, Where murmuring, thou didst of me ask water, grudgingly. The Second Part. Hear, O my people, and I will declare my law to thee, My servant Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto mee, Besides my self amongst you then no strange God shall allow, Nor worship any other God, nor shall unto it bow. I am the lord thy God, I thee brought up from Egypt land, Open thy mouth, and I will it fill with an open hand. But for all this they would not hear my voice, when I did chuse For mine own people, Israel me did utterly refuse. Therefore in wrath I gave them up by their lusts to be led,
And so in their own counsels still they vainly wandered. O that my people unto me had hearkned what I said, And Israel had walked in my ways, and me obey'd! I would have quickly by my pow'r subdu'd their enemies, And turn'd my hand against all those that did against them rise. Gods enemies should soon themselves have humbled him before, Their states and prosp'rous times should have endur'd for evermore. I would have fed them with the crop and finest of the wheat, And made the rock with honey drop, that they their fill might eat. Psalm 82. IN the assembly of our God the Lord himself doth stand, And he doth judge amongst the gods and rulers of the land. And thus against them pleads, How long will ye unrighteously
Give sentence thus, and wicked men accept so partially? Defend the poor and fatherlesse, when they of wrongs complain, And judge for the afflicted ones, the poor mans cause maintain. Deliver poor and needy men from those of pow'r and might, And from the hand of wicked men let free, and rid them quite. They know not, nor will understand, but vvalk in darknesse on, All the foundations of the earth out of due course are gone. I unto you high titles gave, and said, that Gods you be, That of the highest God you are the children all of ye. But like the rest of mortall men, you die and perish must, And like to other Princes you shall fall and turn to dust. Arise, O God, to judge the earth, do thou thy self advance, Thou shalt all Nations challenge, as thine own inheritance.
Psalm. 83. KEep not thou silence now, O God, no longer hold thy peace, Remove not still, O God, nor cause thy vvorking hand to cease. For now behold thine enemies rise up tumultuously, And they that hate thee vaunt themselves, and lift their heads on high. For they against thy people have conspired craftily, And have against thine hidden ones resolved cruelly. Come, let us cut them off (say they) that they no more may be. A nation, nor shall Israels name be kept in memory. They do all vvith one heart and minde together counsel take, Yea, against thee, O Lord, they do their combination make. There vvere the tents of Edomites, there Ismaels children were, With them were join'd the Moabites, the Hagarens were there.
Gebal and Ammon joined, do with Amalek conspire, With them the Philistims agree, with those that dwell at Tyre. To them hath Ashur join'd his foree, in league with them is he, That to Lots children he an aid and arm of strength may be. As to the Midianites thou didst, so deal thou with them here, As with Jabin and Sisera, the brook of Kison neer. Which were at Endor slain, and there did perish utterly, Their bodies in the fields cast out like dung on earth did lie. The Second Part. Let all their noble men, O Lord, like Zeb and Oreb fall, As Zeba and Zalmunna were, make thou their Princes all. Who proudly said, into our hand let us Gods houses take. Yea, all his houses through the land our own possession make. But, O my God, make thou them like to wheels that cannot stay,
As stubble doth before the winde, so let them fly away. Or as the flame of fire the wood consumeth speedily, And on the mountains burns the thorns and briars when they're dry. As with a tempest with thy wrath pursue them speedily, And vvith thy fury like a storm do thou them terrifie. Cover, O Lord, and fill their face with their deserved shame, That they confounded thus, O Lord, at length may seek thy name. Let them be to confusion brought, and troubled very sore, And put to a perpetual shame, and perish evermore. That men may know that thou whose name Jehovah is alone, Art most high over all the earth, and besides thee is none. Psalm 84. HOw lovely is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me?
Thy Tabernacles glorious more then can expressed be. My soul within me longs, yea faints, the Courts of God to see, My heart and flesh cry out aloud, my living God for thee. (The sparrow findes her out an house, the swallow hath a nest, Wherein she laies her young, but I for my feet finde no rest,) Thine Altars, O thou, Lord of hosts, my Lord God, and my King. Blest are they that dwell in thine house, to thee still praise to sing. Yea, blessed are those men to whom thou art their strength and stay, That with their hearts and whole desires to thine house mindes the way. When through the Valleys dry they go, where wells they dig up still, The rain from Heaven doth them all most plentifully fill. From strength to strength they walk on stil, unwearied they bear Their travel, till before the Lord in Zion all appear. Hearken, O Lord, the God of hosts, to that which I do pray,
O God of Jacob give an ear to that which I do say. O God our shield and our defence, Behold, and look upon, And graciously accept the face of thine anointed one. Because within thine house one day is better to abide, Then in another place to stay a thousand days beside. Much rather would I keep a door in the house of my God, Then dwell in tents of wickednesse, as now I do abroad. For God the Lord our Sun and shield, will grace and glory give, And no good thing withholds from those that do uprightly live. O Lord of hosts, that man is blest, and happy still shall bee, Whose heart by faith doth ever rest and firmly trust in thee.
Psalm 85. O Lord our God, unto thy Land thou hast done graciously, Thou hast brought Jacob back again from his captivity. Thou to thy people didst forgive their great iniquities, And all their sins which they had done hast cov'red from thine eyes. Thou all thy wrath hast quite withdrawn, which on them heavy lay, And from the fiercenesse of thy wrath, hast turned clean away. O God of our salvation, return us back again Unto our former state, from us O Lord, thy wrath refrain. Why? shall thine anger never cease, but still lie upon us? And shall thy wrath itself extend unto all ages thus? Wilt thou not us restore again, and quicken us? that we Who are thy people, evermore in thee may joyful be?
Thy mercy and thy favour, Lord, shew us, and us relieve, And thy salvation in thy love unto us freely give, Now vvill I hear what God will say; for he with peace will blesse His Saints, and folk; but let them not return to foolishnesse. Surely to such as do him fear, is his salvation nigh, That glory now may in our land abide continually. For faithful truth, and mercy free, shall now together meet; And righteousnesse and peace, with kisse shall there each other greet. Truth and uprightnesse on the earth out of mens hearts shall spring; And faithfulnesse from Heaven shall look down, and blessings bring. Yea, every good thing shall the Lord give to us bounteously; And then our lands with fruits shall us abundantly supply. Before his face shall righteousnesse go forth, which shall us lead; And in the way shall set us so that we his steps may tread.
Psalm 86. DO thou, O Lord, bow downn thine ear, and hear me graciously, And help me, and consider, Lord, that poor and weak am I. Preserve my soul, for I am one that favour'd is by thee, O thou my God, thy servant save, that puts his trust in thee. Be merciful to me, O Lord, to thee I daily cry. Rejoice thy servants soul, O Lord, for unto thee do I Lift up my soul, thou Lord art good, and pardon'st graciously, And unto those that call on thee, shew'st mercy plenteously. When I unto thee pray, O Lord, attend and bow thine ear, And of my supplications, the voice be pleas'd to hear. In time when troubles compasse me, I will to thee complain, For certainly I know that thou wilt answer me again.
Amongst such as are Gods esteem'd, none, Lord, is like to thee, Nor any works unto thy works, may once compared bee. The nations all throughout the world which thou didst make and frame, Before thee come, and worship shall, and glorifie thy name. The Second Part. For thou, Lord, art exceeding great, all power is thine own, Thou workest strange and wondrous things, for thou art God alone. Teach me thy way of truth, O Lord, I will walk in the same; Unite my heart and soul in one to fear thy holy name. Thee will I praise, O Lord my God, with all my heart; and I For ever more thine holy name will highly glorifie. Because thy mercy towards me in greatnesse doth excell, My self thou hast delivered even from the lowest hell. O God, the proud against me rise, terrible men are met
In Troups, to seek my life, they have not thee before them set. But thou, full of compassion, Lord, and gracious, hast been found, Long-suffering, and in mercy, and in truth thou dost abound. O turn thee unto me, O Lord, and mercy on me have, Strengthen thy servant, and the son of thine own handmaid save. On me some sign of favour shew, that all my foes may see, And be ashamed, Lord, when thou dost help and comfort mee. Psalm 87. UPon the holy mountains Gods foundations do abide. God Zions gates loves, more then all Jacobs dwellings beside. Exceeding great and glorious things reported are abroad, Of thy great name Jerusalem, thou city of our God. Rahab, and Babylon, with Tyre, and Cush, and Palestine,
To those that know thee will I name, that these converts of thine Were born in them; of Zion too it shall be said, these men Were born in her: the high'st himself shall her establish then. Yea, when God shall his own record, thus shall his reck'ning be, Of any man amongst them nam'd, in Zion born was he. Both singers and the players on instruments there shall be, My springs of graces and of joys, and comforts are in thee. Psal. 88. O Lord, that art the God to me of my salvation, I have cry'd day and night to thee in pray'r, and made my moan. Before thee let my prayer come, hearken unto my cry. My soul is troubled sore, my life unto the grave draws nigh. I counted am as one of those that to the pit descend,
As a weak man they me esteem, and one that hath no friend. Shut out as one dead, like the slain that lie in grave forgot, Quite cut off from thine hand and care, whom thou remembrest not. In a most loathsome dungeon thou hast laid me down below, In darknesse and in dang'rous deeps that do me overflow. Thy fearful indignation upon me hard doth lie, Thou with thy waves and billows dost afflict me grievously. My friends thou hast put far from me, to them I loathsome grow, I am with griefs so compass'd in, that forth I cannot goe. Because of mine affliction, Lord, I daily mourn for grief, I daily call and stretch my hands to thee for some relief. The Second Part. Those that are dead, Lord, wilt thou cause thy wondrous works to see? Shall they arise out of their graves, and praises give to thee?
Shall all thy loving kindnesses men in the grave declare? Or they speak of thy faithfulnesse that in destruction are? Shall in the darknesse be made known thy wonders manifold? In the land of oblivion, shall thy righteousnesse be told? But unto thee do I O Lord, daily lift up my cry, And in the morning with my pray'r prevent thy face will I. Why dost thou then, O Lord, in wrath cast off my soul from thee? And why the favour of thy face dost thou thus hide from mee? I am afflicted from my youth, and ready still to die, Thy terrours which I suffer, still distract me fearfully. The fiercenesse of thy wrath like waves hath clean gone over me, Thy terrours have me quite cut off which I suffer from thee. Like over-flowing waters still they round about me came, And by them all together met encompassed I am.
My friends and such as did me love, thou hast put far from me, And into darknesse them remov'd, that mine acquaintance be. Psal. 89. THE mercies of the Lord will I for ever sing, and will With my mouth shew thy faithfulnesse unto all ages still. For I have said, that mercy shall for ever settled be, Thy faithfulnesse established in Heav'n it self by thee. A Cov'nant with my chosen I have made firm to abide, Which unto David by an oath I surely ratifi'd; That I thy seed establish will for ever to endure, And unto generations all will build thy Throne most sure. The Heav'ns shall shew with joy and mirth thy wondrous works, O Lord, Thy Saints shall in thy Church on earth thy faithfulnesse record.
For in the Heavens to the Lord, who may himself compare? Amongst the sons of mighty ones, who with him equall are? The Saints in their assemblies ought the Lord greatly to fear, He must be rev'renced of all that come about him near. O God, the Lord of hosts, who can like thee a strong Lord be? Thy truth and faithfulnesse do as a girdle compasse thee. The sea though raging furiously, thou rulest at thy will, The waves though mounting up on high, thou makest calm and still. Thou Egypt strongly didst beat down, as one that wounded is, And with thy mighty arm thou hast dispers'd thine enemies. The Second Part. The heaven is thine, the earth is thine, and by thy pow'r and will, The great wide world thou founded hast and all that doth it fill. The North and South from thee alone, their first beginning had,
Both Tabor West, Hermon East, In thy name shall be glad. Thou hast, O God, an arm of strength that worketh mightily, Strong is thy hand, and thy right hand in pow'r exceeding high. In justice, and in judgement, doth thy thrones foundation lie, Mercy and truth shall go before thy face continually. O those that know the joyful sound, a blessed people be, In the light of thy countenance, Lord, they shall walk with thee. All the day long shall they rejoice, because thy name is nigh, And in thy righteousnesse and truth shall be exalted high. For of their strength thou only art the glory and the praise, And in thy favour shall our horn exalted be always. For God the Lord is our defence, who doth us safety bring, The holy One of Israel is our almighty King. Then to thy holy One thou spak'st and saidst in vision,
A mighty one I have advanc'd, and have laid help upon. Whom I out of the people chose, David I did anoint With holy oil, my servant whom I found, and did appoint. The Third Part. With whom my hand and pow'r shall be confirm'd and stablished, And by my mighty arm shall he always be strengthned. The enemy on him shall not any exaction lay, Nor shall the son of wickednesse afflict him any way. I will beat down before his face all his malicious foes, And will them greatly plague that doe in hatred him oppose. With him my mercy and my truth shall be continually, And in my name his horn shall be exalted graciously. The power of his hand will I unto the seas extend, Of the rule of thy right hand shall the rivers be the end,
Thou are my father, he shall cry, thou art my God alone, Thou only art the strength and rock of my salvation. I likewise vvill him make, and call my first-born, my delight, He shall the Kings of th' earth excel in glory and in might. For him my mercy promised, for ever keep I will, And my unchanged Covenant shall with him stand stedfast still. Yea, his seed also will I make for ever to endure, And as the days of heav'n his throne shall stable be and sure. If his children forsake my law, vvalk not in my judgements, But break my statutes, and do not keep my Commandements, The Fourth Part. Then their transgression with the rod visit on them will I, And sharply chastise them with stripes for their iniquity. My loving kindnesse ne'rthelesse I will not utterly
Take from him, nor my faithfulnesse suffer to him to lie. My Covenant shall continue still, that will I never break, Nor ever alter will that thing vvhich once my lips did speak. Once sware I by my holinesse, and that perform will I, With David I will promise keep, to him I will not lie. His seed and his posterity for ever shall endure, And his throne as the Sun shall be before me settled sure. Or as the Moon which in the skie for ever standest fast, A faithful witnesse of my truth, so shall his kingdome last. But now thou wholly hast cast off, and abhorr'd utterly, And hast with thine anointed one been wroth exceedingly. The Covenant with thy servant made, thou wholly broken hast, And hast profan'd his glorious Crown, and to the ground it cast. Yea, farther thou hast broken down in wrath his hedges all,
Thou his strong holds hast overthrown, that they to ruine fall. To all that by the way do passe, a spoil and prey is he, And a reproach he is to those that neer him dwelling be. The Fifth Part. The right hand of his opposites thou hast set up on high, Thou hast made all his enemies rejoice exceedingly. The edge thou also of his sword hast turned in his hand, And hast nor strengthned him, that he might in the battel stand. The brightnesse of his glory thou hast made to cease and waste, And thou his throne of Majesty unto the ground hast cast. Thou of the flower of his youth the days hast shortned, And thou as with a garment, him with shame hast covered. How long, Lord, wilt thou hide thy selfe shall thy wrath ever last? And shall thine anger evermore like fire consume and waste?
47 Remember now how short a time I shall on earth remain, If life be spent in miseries, thou hast made man in vain. What man is he that lives on earth, and death shall never see, And from the power of the grave, what man his soul can free? Thy former loving kindnesses, O Lord, where are they now? Those which in truth and faithfulnesse to David sworn hast thou? Remember, Lord, the soul reproach of all thy servants dear, How I the scorns of mighty ones do in my bosome bear. Wherewith thine enemies, O Lord, reproaches laid upon? Reproaches, on the footsteps of thine own anointed one. Now let the holy Lord our God for us be blest for aye, Amen, amen, with heart and voice, let all the people say.
Psalm 90. A Dwelling place of safety thou hast been to us, O Lord, In all our wandrings in times past a place of sure abode. Before the mountains were brought forth, the earths and worlds great frame, Thou, God, from all eternity for ever art the same. Thou to destruction dost crush weak man with grief and pain, And to the sons of men thou say'st, to dust return again. Though life a thousand years could last, it seemeth in thy sight As yesterday, when it is past, or as a watch by night. Thou like a floud sweep'st them away, and as asleep they be, In morning as the grasse they are, which soon we changed see. In the morning it flourisheth, and grows up fair and green, But in the evening cut down, and with'red it is seen.
By thy wrath in this wildernesse, quickly consum'd are we, And troubled by thine anger fierce, and much affrighted be. Thou all our foul iniquities hast set before thine eyes, And the light of thy countenance our secret sins espies. The Second Part. For all our days do in thy wrath come to a speedy end, And as a tale that men do tell, our days and years we spend. Scarce threescore years and ten, the days of our short life may bee, And if by reason of their strength men fourscore years do see; Yet is the pride of all their strength but pain and misery, And that at length is soon cut down, and we away do fly. Who of the sons of men doth know what pow'r thine anger hath? To bring his heart to fear thee still according to thy wrath. Teach us the number of our days wisely, O Lord, to weigh,
That unto wisdome then betimes our hearts apply we may. How long vvilt thou in wrath proceed? return, some favour show, Of thy decree against thine own, O Lord, repent thee now. O satisfie us speedily, Lord, with thy mercy free, That all our days we all rejoice may, and be glad in thee. According to the days wherein affliction we have had, As years of evil we have seen long time, now make us glad. O let thy work of grace appear now in thy servants sight, And to their children after them shew forth thy grace and might. Lord, let thy beauty be on us, and what we take in hand, Our God establish, all our works strengthen, that they may stand. Psalm 91. HE that within the secret place of the most high doth dwell,
Under th'Almighties shadow shall abide secure and well. Unto the Lord mine heart doth say, he is my refuge still, My God, and my fortresse is he, and in him trust I will. Surely from the sly fowlers snare▪ he will deliver thee, And from the noisom pestilence, his hand shall keep thee free. His feathers shall thee hide, his trust under thy wings shall bee, A buckler and a shield of proof, his truth shall be to thee. So that the terrours of the night thy heart shall not affray, Nor yet the dang'rous arrow shalt thou fear that flies by day. No nor the pestilence that walks in darknesse secretly, Nor yet destruction that doth waste at non-day openly. Though at thy side a thousand fall, and at thy right hand lie Ten thousand dead, yet unto thee it shall not once come nigh. Only thou shalt stand and behold, whilst thou thy self at free,
And of the wicked of the earth the just reward shalt see. The Second Part. Because the Lord, who unto me my refuge is alone, The most high God hath made to thee thine habitation, None evil thou shalt need to fear, it shall not thee befall, Neither to hurt thee any plague come nigh thy dwelling shall. For to his Angels over thee a strict charge he shall give, That safely thee in all thy ways they do keep and preserve. They in their hands shall bear thee up, still waiting thee upon, Lest thou at any time shouldst dash thy foot against a stone. Upon the Adder thou shalt tread, and on the Lion strong, Thy feet on dragons trample shall, and on the Lions yong. Because he set his love on me, deliver him will I, Because my name is known to him I will set him on high.
I, when he calls, will answer him, I will be with him still, In trouble to deliver him, yea, him I honour will. With a long life and many days I vvill him satisfie, And my salvation he shall see, and by experience try. Psalm 92. TO give thanks to the Lord it is a good and comely thing, And to thy name, O thou most high, thine own due praise to sing. Thy loving kindnesse forth to shew in the first morning light, And to declare thy faithfulnesse and thy truth every night; On a ten stringed instrument, and on the psaltery, With solemn sound upon the harp, and grave sweet melody. For with thy works, Lord, thou hast made my soul right glad to be, And in the vvorks vvill I triumph which have been wrought by thee.
O Lord, how glorious and how great are the works of thine hand? So deep thy thoughts and counsels are, none can them understand. The brutish man is far unfit thy secrets to receive, The foolish man cannot in this thy wisdome now perceive. That when like grasse the vvicked spring, and sinners flourish all, It is that they for ever may into destruction fall. But thou, O Lord, who dost them judge, for ever dost remain, And thou most high, above thy foes for evermore shalt reign. The Second Part. For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, thine enemies perish shall, The vvorkers of iniquity they shall be scattered all, But thou shalt like the Unicorns my horn lift up on high, And in my prosperous state with oil, my face anoint shall I. Mine eye shall see my full desire upon mine enemies,
Mine ear shall hear it of all those that up against me rise. But like a palm-tree fresh and green, the righteous flourish shall, Increasing, as in Lebanon do grow the Cedars tall. Those that vvithin the house of God once firmly rooted are, They always shall within the house of our God flourish fair. When they wax old they shall not fail, but still forth fruit shall bring, And they shall not decay, but shall be sat and flourishing. To shew that righteous is the Lord, who doth the righteous blesse, He is my rock, and strength, in him is no unrighteousnesse. Psalm 93. THE Lord doth reign, and he himself hath cloth'd with Majesty, And he is cloth'd with strength, wherewith begirt himself hath he. The world is so established, that mov'd it cannot be.
Thy throne's stablisht of old, thou art from all eternity. The flouds have lifted up, O Lord, the flouds lift up their voice, The flouds have lifted up their waves, and made a dreadful noise. The Lord our God that sits on high, he is more mighty farre, Then mighty waves of seas, then noise of many waters are. Thy testimonies are most sure, and last eternally, O Lord, for ever holinesse thine house shall beautifie. Psal. 94. O Lord God, to avenge all wrongs belongs alone to thee, O God, to whom vengeance belongs, let us thy vengeance see. O thou the Judge of all the earth, lift up thy self on high, Render a just reward to those that deal presumptuously.
O Lord, how long shall all these men, this proud ungodly rout? How long shall all these wicked men, triumphing walk about? How long shal these men hard things speak, and utter cruelty? How long shall they triumph and boast, that work iniquity? They break thy folk in pieces, Lord, by their oppressions, On thine inheritance they do lay great afflictions. Poor widows which are comfortlesse, and strangers they do kill, And murther children fatherlesse after their cruel will. Yet after all these mischiefs done, they say, God shall not see, Nor by the God of Jacob shall these things regarded bee. Ye brutish men among the folk, at length this understand, Ye foolish, will you never learn wisdome at any hand? The Lord did plant the hearing ear, and hear then shall not hee? And he that form'd the seeing eye, shall he not clearly see?
He that the Heathen chastneth, shall not he correct his own? He that man teacheth knowledge, must not all to him be known? The Second Part. The thoughts that are within mans heart the Lord doth know and see, And he discovers thoroughly that vanity they bee. Happy is he, whom thou, O Lord, dost chasten fatherly, And in thy law dost him instruct, and wisdome teach thereby. That thou unto him quiet rest from dangerous days maist give, Until the pit be digg'd for those that do ungodly live. For God the Lord will not cast off his people lov'd freely, Nor will his own inheritance abandon utterly. But his administration shall return to righteousnesse, And all upright in heart on it shall vvait vvith cheerfulnesse. But where is he vvho for me vvill against the vvicked stand?
Who vvil stand up to set me free from vvicked vvorkers hand? Unlesse the Lord had been mine help when none me rescued, My soul had almost in the grave silence inhabited. But when I said within my heart, my foot doth slip away, Thy mercy held me up, O Lord, thy goodnesse me did stay. Ev'n when with multitudes of thoughts my minde was much opprest, My soul did in thy comforts finde even then delight and rest. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, Where mischiefs most unrighteously by law supported be? For they against the life conspire of righteous men and good. And they by law, as vvicked do, condemn the guiltlesse blood. But God alone against them all is my defence and stay, The Lord my God, my refuge is, my rock of strength alway. The Lord our God shall bring on them their own iniquity,
And in their sin shall cut them off, and slay them certainly. Psalm 95. O Come, and let us to the Lord shout, and sing joyfully, And in our rock of health let us rejoice triumphantly. Let us into his presence now make haste with thankful voice, And to him well-composed Psalms sing with a joyful noise. Because this our Lord is a God exceeding great and high, And a great King, above all gods in pow'r and Majesty. Th'unsearched depths of all the earth are in his pow'rful hand, The strength of all the hills is his, and by his might they stand. The wide unruly sea is his, he made it by his hand, And by his power and decree, he formed the dry land. Come, let us worship and bow down, before him let us fall,
And kneel before the Lord our God, for he hath made us all. He is our God, the people we of his own pastures are, And of his hand we are the sheep, left to his only care. To day if you vvill hear his voice, then harden not your heart, As in Masrah and Meribah, ye did in the desart. When your forefathers tempted me, though they my pow'r did prove, In my great vvorks which I them shew'd, and wonders from above. Forty years long I grieved vvas with those men, and I said, This people hath not known my ways, but in their hearts have straid. Wherefore to them, when kindled was my wrath within my breast, I sware they should not enter in to Canaan my rest.
Psalm 96. O Sing you now unto the Lord, new songs with joy and mirth, Sing ye unto the Lord our God, all people on the earth. Sing ye unto the Lord above, and blesse his holy name, Shew his salvation, forth declare from day to day the same. Among the Heathen all declare, and of his glory tell, And the great vvonders manifest to all on earth that dwell. Because the Lord our God is great and greatly prais'd to be, Above all gods to be ador'd, and to be fear'd is he. For all the gods are idols vain, which the blind nations fear, The Lord is only he by whom the Heavens created were. Before him comely honour is, and glorious majesty, And comely beauty and great strength are in his sanctuary.
Ye kindreds of the people all, give to the Lord his right, Give ye unto the Lord above all glory, strength and might. The glory due unto his name, give to the Lord and King, Come ye into his holy Courts, an offering to him bring. In the beauty of holinesse before Jehovah bow, And fear before his presence all the vvhole earth here below. Tell all the Heathen God doth reign and settleth stedfastly The vvorld unmov'd, and he shall judge the people righteously. Then let the Heavens high be glad, and let the earth rejoice, The sea and fulnesse of it, let it roar and make a noise. The field and all that therein is, let it then joyful bee, And in the shady woods themselves, rejoice shall every tree. Before God; for he comes, he comes, the earth to judge and try, He with his truth shall judge the world and nations righteously.
Psal. 97. THE Lord doth reign continually, let all the earth rejoice, And let the multitude of isles for joy lift up their voice. He round about is compassed with thick clouds and darknesse. The stable place are of his throne judgement and righteousnesse. A flaming and devouring fire before him goeth out, Which burneth up and doth consume his enemies round about. His fearful lightnings o're the world, gave forth a shining light, The earth did it behold, and straight did tremble at the sight. And at the presence of the Lord, the hills like wax did melt, When of the Lord of all the earth they had the presence felt. The Heavens high declare and shew his righteousnesse abroad, And the people they do behold the glory of the Lord.
All that fear graven images, confounded may they be, And that of idols boast themselves; all Gods him worship ye. Zion when she heard this report, was glad exceedingly, And Juda's daughters all rejoic'd, for all thy judgements high. For thou far above all the earth, O Lord our God, art high, And art far above all the Gods exalted wondrously. All ye that love the Lord above, hate evil things, for he Saves the souls of his saints, and from the wicked sets them free. For such as righteous are, is sown prosperity and light, And joy and gladnesse for all those in heart that are upright. Rejoice in God the Lord, all ye that walk in righteousnesse, And give thanks at the memory of the Lords holinesse.
Psalm 98. S'ng a new song unto the Lord, for he works wonders great, His own right hand and holy arm the victory did get. Of his salvation hath the Lord discover'd now the light, And hath his righteousnesse reveal'd in all the Heathens sight. His mercy unto Israel, and truth remembred he, And now the ends of all the earth our Gods salvation see. A joyful noise make to the Lord, all people of the earth, Make a loud noise, and praises sing to him with joy and mirth. Sing to the Lord the King with Harps, in psalms lift up your voice, With Trumpets and with Cornets sound, before him, make a noise. Yea, let the sea roar out for joy, and all that is therein, The earth and all that therein dwell, let them be joyful seen.
Let flouds clap hands, and let the hills together joyful be Before the Lord, because the earth to judge now cometh he. The world vvith righteousnesse shall he most justly judge and try, And all the people shall he judge with perfect equity. Psalm 99. THE Lord doth reign, before his face let all the people quake; He sits between the Cherubims, let th'earth be mov'd and shake. The Lord is great in Zion, and above all people high, His dreadful name which holy is, let all men magnifie. The Kings strength also judgement loves, and thou dost equity Stablish, and judgement execute in Jacob righteously. Let now the Lord of all, our God, in praise exalted be, Before his footstool worship him, for holy sure is he.
Moses and Aaron, with his Priests, with those that on him call, Was Samuel, on the Lord they call'd, he answered them all. He in a cloudy pillar spake to them, they his decree And testimonies which they gave them, kept obediently. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God, a pardoning God thou wast To them, though for their practices thou vengeance took'st at last. Exalt on high the Lord our God, and at his holy hill Him worship, for the Lord our God ev'n he is holy still. Psalm 100. ALL people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with cheerful noise. The Lord with gladnesse serve, and come before his face with singing voice. Know ye the Lord our God in deed, without our aid he did us make, We are his flock, he doth us feed, and for his sheep he doth us take.
O enter with thanksgiving then his gates, come to his Courts with praise. And be ye thankful unto him, and blesse his holy name alwaies. Because the Lord our God is good, his mercy is for ever sure, His truth at all times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure. Psalm 101. OF mercy and of judgement sing, O Lord, to thee will I, And in a perfect way will walk wisely and warily. O when will there assistance come from thee, to strengthen mee? Within my house will I walk with a perfect heart with thee. I set no wicked thing before mine eyes, their work I hate That turn aside, it shall not cleave to me at any rate. A froward and rebellious heart I put away from me, And any thing that wicked is, I will not know or see.
I'le cut off him that slandereth his neighbour privily, And a proud heart I will not bear, nor him that looks on high. Upon the faithful of the Land mine eyes shall always be; He that walks in a perfect way, shall servant be to me. He that deceit and guile doth work, in my house shall not dwell, Nor shall he tarry in my sight, that lying tales doth tell. Betimes I will destroy at once the wicked of the Land, That I may from Gods City cut the wicked workers hand. Psalm 102. LOrd, hearken to my pray'r, and let my cry come up to thee, In time of trouble do not hide thy face away from me. Incline thy gracious ear to me, answer me in the day When I do call, for like the smoak way days consume away.
My bones like to an hearth are burnt, mine heart is withered Like grasse, and smitten, that I do forget to eat my bread. By the voice of my groanings, all my bones cleave to my skin, And I like to a Pellican, in wildernesse have been. Or like an Owl in desart, quite cast out of men and gone, I watch, and as a sparrow am, on the house-top alone. My bitter enemies all the day reproaches cast on me, And being mad at me with rage, against me sworn they be. Ashes of mourning I do eat as bread continually, And daily mix my drink with tears, when I weep bitterly. Thy wrath and indignation did cause this grief and pain, For thou hast lift me up on high, and cast me down again. The days of this short life of mine, are like the fleeting shade, And I am withered like the grasse that soon away doth fade.
But though I fail it, thou, O Lord, for ever shalt endure, Thy Covenant continues still unto all ages sure. Thou wilt arise, and mercy now to Zion thou wilt show, For now 'tis time to favour her, yea, the set time is now. For all thy servants in her stones, though in rude heaps they lie, Do pleasure take, her very dust is precious in their eye. The Second Part. Then shall the Heathen people fear the Lords most holy name, The Kings on earth shall reverence thy glory and thy fame, When God shall build up Zion, he in glory shall appear, Hee'll not the lowlies sute despise, he will their prayer hear. This for succeeding ages shall be kept upon record, The people that be thus restor'd, shall blesse and praise the Lord. For he hath lookt down from the height of his own sanctuary,
The Lord with favour th'earth beholds from out of Heaven high; The groanings still to hear of those that doe in prison lie, To set at liberty such as appointed are to die. That they in Zion may declare the Lords most holy name, And in Jerusalem set forth the glory of the same. When people from all Countries shall meet there with one accord, And all the Kingdomes shall submit to serve the highest Lord. My strength he vveakned in the way, and shortened my day. I said in the midst of my days, Lord, take me not away. Thy yeers throughout all ages are, ere time began, thou laidst The Earths foundations, and the Heav'ns vvith thine own hands thou mad'st. Thou shalt endure and still subsist, but they shall wax away, And like a garment shall wax old, and by degrees decay. Thou as a garment shalt them change, and they shall changed be,
But thou dost still abide the same, thy years no end shall see. The children of thy servants shall continually endure, And in thy sight their happy seed shall be establisht sure. Psalm 103. O Blesse and praise the Lord, my soul, and to him thankful be, Yea, let his holy name be blest by all that is in me. The Lord my God blesse, O my soul, shew not thy self unkind, And suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy mind; Who thy sins and offences all forgiveth graciously, And all thy grievous sicknesses heals, and removes from thee. Who from destruction doth thy life redeem and set it free, With tender loving kindnesses, and mercies towards thee. And he vvith all good things thy mouth doth satisfie and fill,
So that thy youth like Eagles doth in strength continue still. For all opprest in righteousnesse the Lord doth judge with speed. His ways to Moses he made known, his acts to Israels seed. The Lord is very gracious, and merciful he is, To anger slow, but plenteous still in mercy to all his. Though he contend vvith man a vvhile, he vvill not always chide, Nor keep his anger in his breast for ever to abide. Nor yet according to our sins the Lord doth us regard, And after our iniquities he doth not us reward. For as the distance is between the earth and heav'n above, So large his mercy is to those that him do fear and love. He hath remov'd our sins from us, and our transgressions all, As far as is the rising Sun full distant from his fall.
The Second Part. And as a father passeth by faults of his children dear, So hath the Lord compassion on those that do him fear. The Lord that made us, know full well our frame and temper must, He cannot but remember still that vve are all but dust. The days of man are like the grasse that quickly doth decay, His flourishing is like the flow'r in field that fades away. For it is gone when ever it the windy storm doth pass, The place shall never know it more vvhere once it standing was. But yet Gods mercy to his saints for ever is and was, And to their childrens children down his righteousnesse doth pass. To all such as his Covenant strive to keep stedfastly, And think on his Commandements to do them faithfully. The Lord his Throne of Majesty in Heaven did prepare,
His kingdome ruleth over all, and all his subjects are. Ye Angels that excel in strength, blesse ye the Lord, that doe His just Commandments, and the voice of his word hearken to. 21 Yea, all ye mighty hosts blesse ye the Lord, and praise him still Ye Ministers that ready are to execute his vvill. Ye all his vvorks in places all vvhere he doth rule as King, Blesse ye the Lord, and thou my soul his praises ever sing. Psalm 104. O Blesse and praise the Lord, my soul, thou art exceeding high, O Lord my God, vvith honour cloth'd, and glorious Majesty. With light as vvith a robe thy self thou cover'st round about, And like a spacious curtain thou the Heavens stretchest out.
The beams of his large Chambers he doth in the waters lay, And on the Clouds as Charets he doth ride and poste away; And on the vvings of vvinds doth vva'k, and he their blasts doth take. For Messengers, his Ministers a flaming fire doth make. The firm foundation of the earth so stedfast he doth lay, That never from the fixed place it may be mov'd away. As with a garment thou the earth with the great deep dost cover, The deep, whose swelling vvaters once the mountains flowed over. At thy pow'rful rebuke, O Lord, they fled and did not stay, And at thy thunders dreadful voice they hasted soon away. Over the mountains they ascend and pass by Valleys low, That to the place which thou for them hadst founded they may goe. There hast thou shut them in vvith bounds vvhich shall them still restrain, That back they never do return the earth to drown again.
Yet to the fruitful Valleys thou by Springs dost vvaters send, Which to the sea among the hills their winding course do bend. These do give drink to every beast that rangeth in the field, And by their vvaters they do quench the thirst of asses vvilde. Neer them their habitations the fowls do build on high, Among the branches they delight to sing melodiously. The Second Part. As for the hills he vvatreth them from his Chambers on high, And with the fruits of his own works the earth doth satisfie. There makes he grasse for beasts to grow, and herb for mans use good, That out of the dead earth he may bring forth sufficient food. And wine to glad mans heart, and oil to make the face shine fair, And Corn for bread, which may the strength of weak mans heart repair.
The tallest Trees, Cedars themselves of Lebanon Gods plants, Are full of sap, that none of them sufficing moisture vvants. In them the birds and fowls of Heaven do choose their nests to make, As for the stork, the fir-trees she doth for her dwelling take. To the wilde Goats the mountains high a place of refuge be, The Conies also to the rock do for their shelter flee. The Moon thou dost appoint by course the seasons to discern, From thee the Sun his certain time of going down doth learn. Thou bringest darknesse on the earth, and it is night, and then Beasts of the forests each of them creeps forth out of his den. After their fearful prey the yong lions do roar and rave, And meat to satisfie themselves of God himself they crave. But when the Sun doth rise, away together they do flie To hide them from the light, and down they in their dens do lie.
Then man may safely come abroad, and to his labour goes, Each to his vvork, vvherein the day till evening he bestows. O Lord, how manifold are all thy vvorks? in wisdome thou Mad'st them, and thou to fill the earth thy riches dost bestow. The Third part. Thou dost this great wide sea likewise replenish, where are things Creeping innumerable, beasts both small and great it brings. There in the swift ships to and fro do passe as in away, There is Leviathan vvhich thou hast made therein to play. These in their divers kinds on thee do wait, and all attend That thou sufficient food to them in season due mayest send. That vvhich thou scatterest to them they gather, thou thine hand Dost open wide, and they are fill'd with good at thy command. Thou hid'st thy face, and then they are troubled with vvant and pain,
Thou tak'st their breath, they die, and to their dust return again. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created by and by, Thus of the whole earth thou the face renew'st continually. The glory shall for ever last of God the Lord of might, And in the works of thy right hand thou greatly shalt delight. If he do but the earth behold, it trembleth fearfully, If he the mountains only touch then smoak they presently. While I do live, unto the Lord i'le sing continually, While I my being have, sing praise unto my God will I. My meditation of the Lord most sweet shall be to me, And in my good and gracious God right joyful shall I be. Let sinners from the earth consume, and wicked be no more, Blesse thou the Lord my soul, praise ye the Lord, and him adore.
Psalm 105. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his name, Among his people shew his works, and spread abroad his fame. O sing ye unto him, sing psalms unto him joyfully, Talk ye of all the wondrous works wrought by his hand most high. Glory ye in his holy name, rejoice vvith one accord, Let all the hearts of them rejoice that truly seek the Lord. Seek ye the Lord, seek ye the Ark of his strength, and his face Seek always that, yea seek I say, his favour and his grace. The wondrous works that he hath done keep still in mindful heart, Let not the judgements of his mouth out of your mind depart. Ye that of faithful Abraham his Covenant are the seed, Ye his elect the children that of Jacob do proceed.
Because he and he only is to us our Lord and God, His judgements manifested are in all the earth abroad. His Covenant he did ever mind, the word which by him was To thousand generations commanded was to pass. Which Covenant he established with faithful Abraham, And unto Isaak by his oath he did renue the same. And unto Jacob for a Law he made it firm and sure, A Covenant to Israel which ever should endure. The Second Part. To them he said, I unto thee the Land of Canaan give, The lot of your inheritance where you and yours may live. Although their number at that time did very small appeare, And in the Land vvherein they liv'd, they then but strangers were. When they vvent on from land to land without a sure abode,
And wandred from one kingdome to another all abroad. Yet all this while he suffered not them any wrong to take, But great and mighty Kings he oft rebuked for their sake. Saying unto them, Touch not those that mine anointed be, And to the Prophets do no harm that doe belong to me. When for a famine he did call upon the Land, that day When he did wholly break of bread, the onely staff and stay; He sent before them Joseph, who was for a servant sold, Whose feet they hurt vvith fetters, he was laid in irons cold. Until the Word went out at last to give him liberty, The Word that from the Lord went out did him in prison try. Then sent the King, and from his bonds to loose him did agree, The Ruler of the people gave command to set him free. And he of his own house did him the sole Commander make,
And of all his possessions made him the charge to take. That he might order by his word the Princes of the Land, And teach all his great Senators wisdome to understand. And while those years of famine were to Egypt Israel came, And Jacob as a sojourner liv'd in the Land of Ham. The third part. For all that did he mightily increase his people there, That stronger then their enemies they by his blessings were, Then did he turn their heart to hate his people vehemently, And ev'n vvith those his servants dear to deal in subtilty. He then his servant Moses sent unto King Pharaoh, And vvith them Aaron whom he chose to let his people goe. They shewed his commanded signs amongst them powerfully, And with their wonders they the land of Him did terrifie.
Thick darknesse upon them he sent, which dark did make the day, And his command and pow'rful Word his creatures did obey. He turn'd their waters into bloud, and all their fish did slay. Their land brought frogs abundantly ev'n where King Pharaoh lay. He spake, and at his voice there came great swarms of noisome flies, And all the quarters of their land vvere fill'd with crawling lice. In stead of milde and gentle rain, upon them hail he sent, And with the hail, affrighting flames of fire consuming went. He smote the Vines and Fig-trees all which in the land did grow, Yea all the Trees within their Coasts did break and overthrow. He gave command, and at his Word the Locust swarmed there, And vvasting Caterpillars came, which without number were. The Fourth Part. And they did eat up all the herb in their kind speedily.
And all the fruits upon the ground devoured utterly. The first-begotten in their land by death he took away, Even the beginning of their strength, suddenly in that day. With store of gold and silver he made them from thence to passe, And amongst all their Tribes throughout no feeble person was. All Egypt was exceeding glad when they did thence depart, For then a dreadful fear of them did fall upon their heart. By day he for a covering spread a cloud, and in the night To guide them rightly in their way by fire he gave them light. They asked, and he brought the quails to them abundantly, And with the bread of heav'n he did their hunger satisfie. He opened them the stony rock, and waters gushed out Within the dry and parched ground like rivers round about Thus dealt he for his promise sake, which he remembred still,
And Abraham who him did serve according to his vvill. His people thus with joy and mirth he forth from bondage brought, His chosen he made glad with all the works which he had wrought. To them the land possessed by the Heathen, then he gave, That of the peoples labours they th'inheritance might have. That they his statutes might observe, and guided by his Word, Might walk in all his holy laws; blesse ye the living Lord. Psalm 106. PRaise ye the Lord, O give you thanks to God, for good is he, And everlasting to his own his grace and mercy be. Who can shew forth the mighty acts and wonders of our God, Who can sufficiently declare his praises all abroad?
Blessed are they that faithfully judgement keep and observe, That at all times do righteousnesse, and do not from it swerve. With favour such as to thine own thou shew'st, remember me, O Lord, and thy salvation I pray thee let me see. That I thy chosens good may see, and in their joy rejoice, And boasting with thine heritage, in joy lift up my voice. With our rebellious fathers we have sinned every one, And trespass'd by iniquity, and wickedly have done. The wonders great which thou, O Lord, hadst done in Egypt land, Our fathers though they knew them not yet did not understand, Nor did thy many mercies they remember thankfully, But at the sea, at the red sea provok'd him grievously. Neverthelesse he saved them for honour of his name, That he might make his people know and spread abroad his fame.
Then the red sea did he rebuke, and dried up it was, Through deep, as through the vvildernesse, he made his people passe. The Second Part. And from his hand that hated them, he did his people save, And from the power of their foes to them redemption gave. Waters cover'd their enemies, not one was left alive. Then they believ'd his Word, and praise to him in songs did give. They soon forgat his works, nor on his counsel did rely, But in the vvildernesse for flesh lusted exceedingly. And in the desart tempted God, who gave them their desire, But leannesse sent on them though they had what they did require. They also Moses in the Camp envied spitefully, And against Aaron murmured, the saint of God most high. Therefore the earth open'd her mouth and Dathan swallowed,
And all the Congregation of Abiram covered. In their assembly kindled was an hot consuming fire, And the devouring flames burnt up the vvicked in Gods ire. In Horeb where God spake, with them they there a calf did frame, A molten image they did make, and worshipped the same. And thus their glory, ev'n their God most vainly changed they Into the likenesse of an oxe that eateth grasse or hay. And they their God and Saviour unkindly did forget, Who had for them in Egypt done things marvellous and great. The Third Part. Wondrous works in the land of Ham and fearful things to see, At the red sea, wherefore he said, that them destroy would hee, Had not his chosen Moses stood before him in the breach, That from destroying them at once, his wrath he might impeach.
Yea, they despis'd that pleasant land vvhich he had sworn to give, And his sure promise and his word, these vvould they not believe. But they did murmure in their Tents, and there rebelled they, And to the vic of God their Lord refused to obey. Therefore he by himself did swear in lifting up his hand, Them in the desart to destroy e're they should see the land. And that in future ages all their seed should be destroi'd, And by his hand be scattered in strange lands far and wide. To Baal-Peor they themselves did join and cleaved fast, And there they of the sacrifice of idols dead did taste. Thus vvith their own inventions they did so far provoke The Lord to anger, that forthwith the plague upon them broke. Then stood up Phinehas in his zeal, and those sinners did slay, And did just judgement execute, and then the plague did stay.
31 And this to him for righteousnesse accompted was by grace, To be rewarded unto him and his, from race to race. The Fourth part. 32 At the waters of Meribah they did him angry make, So that with holy Moses too it vvent ill for their sake. Because vvith grudging they provok'd his spirit so grievously, That he in passion with his lips spake unadvisedly. Nor as the Lord commanded them did they the Nations slay, But with the Heathen mixt themselves, and of them learn'd their way. Thus they did serve their idols, which to them a snare became, Their sons and daughters offered to idols to their shame. And bloud of innocents they did ev'n of their children shed, Whom unto filthy idols they of Canaan offered. Thus vvas the land defil'd vvith bloud, and they with their own vvay,
And with their own inventions a whoring went astray. Therefore against his people was the Lords wrath kindled sore, And ev'n his own inheritance he therefore did abhor. Into the hands of Heathen men he gave them for a prey, Their enemies that hated them, over them bare the sway. The Fifth Part. Their enemies did them oppresse by vigorous commands, And into base subjection they vvere brought under their hands. Full often from distresse had he delivered them before, But vvith their own inventions they still provok't him more. And for their sins they vvere brought low, and weakned grievously, Yet when he saw them in distresse, he hearkned to their cry, And he for them to mind did call his Covenant speedily. And after his rich mercies he repented tenderly.
And favour he caus'd them to finde ev'n in the sight of those That led them captives from their land, and vvere their cruel foes. Save us now, and deliver us, O Lord, our gracious God, And gather us that scatter'd are in Heathen lands abroad. That we unto thy holy name may render thanks alwaies▪ And being saved, joyfully may triumph in thy praise. Blest the Lord God of Israel be to eternity, Let all the people say, Amen, praise ye the Lord on high. Psalm 107. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord our God, for good is he, And his mercies exceeding great to everlasting be. Let the redeemed of the Lord thus of his mercy say, Whom he hath from his enemies hand redeem'd, and brought away.
Out of the lands wherein they were dispersed and distrest, He gathered them from North and South, from East, and from the West. They wandred in the wildernesse in a forsaken way, And where they could no City finde therein to dwell and stay. They hungred and thirsted, in them their soul did pine away, Then they in trouble cri'd to God, and he freed them that day From their distresses, and he led them forth by the right way To Cities that were dwelt in, where they might in safety stay. O give due praises to the Lord for his great goodnesse then, And for his strange and wondrous works amongst the sons of men. For he the longing soul in want doth fully satisfie With goodnesse, souls that hungry be he filleth plenteously. The Second Part. Such as do in sad darknesse sit, and in deaths dismal shade,
Whom sore afflictions bind, as we do men with irons lade. Because against the voice of God they walkt rebelliously, And all the counsel did contemn of him that is most high. Their stout hearts therefore he brought low, with great troubles and grief, And when they fell down there was none to help or give relief. Then did they in their trouble cry unto the Lord for aid, And he freed them from their distresse according as they prai'd. Then did he out of darknesse bring, and from deaths shadow take, And of their great afflictions their bonds in sunder brake. O give due praises to the Lord for his great goodnesse then, And for his strange and wondrous works done to the sons of men. For he the mighty gates of brasse hath broken by his might, And the strong bars of iron he hath cut in sunder quite. Fools by their own transgressions against Gods righteous law,
And by their great iniquities, plagues on themselves do draw. They grow so weak that even their soul all meat doth loath and flie, And brought so low that to the gates of death they do draw nigh. Then in their trouble do they cry unto the Lord for aid, Who saveth them from their distresse according as they prai'd. The third part. For he sent forth his powerful Word which health did soon restore, And kept them from destruction which they were neer before. O give due praises to the Lord for his great goodnesse then, And for his strange and wondrous works done to the sons of men. And let them sacrifices bring of praise and thankfulnesse, And let them his great works declare with songs of joyfulnesse. Such men as do in their weak ships into the seas descend, And in those waters great and deep their businesse do attend.
These men the mighty works of God do with their eyes behold, And in the great deep do observe his wonders manifold. For he sends out his Word, and strait the stormy winds do rise, Which doth the swelling waves thereof lift up unto the skies. Then mount they up to heav'n, and to the depth go down again, Their soul doth faint and melt away with trouble and great pain. And like a drunkard to and fro they reel, with tempests tost, And are as men of wit bereft, and all their skill is lost. Then did they in their trouble cry unto the Lord for aid, Who brought them out of their distresse according as they prai'd. Then is the storm chang'd to a calm according to his will, So that the waves which rag'd before are quiet now and still. The fourth part. Then are they glad, because at rest and quiet now they be,
So to the haven them he brings, which they desire to see. O give due praises to the Lord for his great goodnesse then, And for his strange and wondrous works done to the sons of men. And in the Congregation great him let them magnifie, And there where all the elders meet him praise and glorifie. He to a desart turns a land where waters did abound, And lands where vvater-springs did flow to dry and thirsty ground. A land of pleasant fruits he turns into salt barrennesse, To the inhabitants thereof for their great wickednesse. To standing waters when he will the wildernesse he brings, And he the dry and thirsty land converts to water springs. That those he there may make to dwell that poor and hungry were, That for their habitations they may build a City there, That they may pleasant Vineyards plant, and there may sow their field,
Which unto them abundantly fruits of increase may yield. He also blesseth them that they do mightily increase, And by his goodness suffers not their cattail to decrease. Yet for their sins they are brought low, and minished again, Being afflicted and opprest, and fill'd with grief and pain. On Princes he doth pour contempt and causeth them to stray In the forsaken vvildernesse where is no path nor way. Yet from affliction he the poor advanceth up on high, And makes his family as a flock to grow and multiply. This shall the righteous man behold, and much rejoice shall he, But then of all iniquity the mouth shall stopped be. Whoso is wise and will these things observe well in his minde, The loving kindnesse of the Lord shall surely know and finde.
Psalm 108. O God my heart is firmly fixt, and to thee in a song, I with my glory praise will give both with my heart and tongue. Awake my psaltery and harp, sweet melody to make, And in the morning I my self right early will awake. Among the people I will shew thy praise, O my God, Among the Nations I will sing thy praise all abroad. Because unto the heavens doth thy mercy great ascend, Thy faithfulnesse and truth likewise unto the clouds exd. Doe thou exalt thy self, O Lord, above the heavens high, And over all the earth advance thy glorious majesty. That thine own people whom thou lov'st may full deliverance have, Save thou them still with thy right hand, hear me in what I crave. Thus spake God in his holinesse, my joy therein is great,
Shechem in parts I will divide, and Succoths Valley mete. Gilead I claim as mine by right, Manasseh mine shall be, Ephraim is of my head the strength Judah gives laws to me. Moab I will my wash-pot make, and Edom over thee I cast my shoe, Philistia triumph thou over mee. Into the city fortifi'd, who will me safely bring? Who into Edom will me guide to enter conquering? Wilt not thou, O our God, which seemst us lately to reject, Which with our armies when they march'd to go forth didst neglect? O give us help most gracious Lord, from trouble set us free, Because the help of mortal man we finde most vain to bee. Through God we shall do valiantly, and conquer when we fight, For he it is that shall tread down our enemies by his might.
Psalm 109. O Thou the God whom still I praise, to help me do not cease, When wicked men against me speak, do not thou hold thy peace. The wicked and deceitful mouths against me opened be, And with a false and lying tongue they have accused me. They did beset me round about with words of hateful spight, And though to them I gave no cause, against me they do fight. They for my love became my foes, But I did only pray; Evil for good, and hate for love they to me did repay. Set thou the wicked over him, and ev'n at his right hand Set thou his greatest enemy Satan himself to stand. And when by thee he shall be judg'd, condemned let him bee, And let his prayer turn to sin which he shall make to thee.
Few be his days, and after him his charge let others take. His children let be fatherlesse, his wife a widow make. Yea, let his seed be vagabonds, and beg continually, And from their places desolate seek bread for their supply. Let covetous extortioners take all his goods away, Of all, for which he laboured, let strangers make a prey. Let none shew mercy unto him, let there be none at all That on his children fatherlesse vvill let his mercy fall. The Second Part. Let his posterity from the earth cut off for ever bee, And in the following age his name be blotted out by thee. Let not his fathers wickednesse from Gods remembrance fall, And his own mothers sin let not be blotted out at all. But let them in the sight of God appear continually,
That he may wholly from the earth cut off their memory. Sith mercy he forgat to shew, and did pursue with spight The poor weak man, that him whose heart was broken slay he might. As he did bitter cursing love, so let it on him fall, Let blessing be far from him, as it pleas'd him not at all. As he with cursing cloth'd himself as vvith clothes, let it so Into his bowels and his bones like oil and water go. As his garment that covers him, so let it to him be, And as a girdle wherewith girt continually is he. This the reward be from the Lord unto mine enemies, Who evil speak against my soul and mischief do devise. The Third part. But for thy names sake, O my God, and Lord, do thou for me, From my distresse deliver me, for good thy mercies be.
Because I needy am and poor, and without help distrest, And my afflicted broken heart is wounded in my breast. Like to the shadow that declines so I away do go, And as the locust vvith the vvind am tossed to and fro. My trembling knees are weak and faint, because I long do fast, The fatnesse of my flesh is gone, I do consume and waste. And I a vile reproach and scorn by them was made to be, And they that did upon me look did shake their heads at me. But thou, O Lord, that art my God, save and deliver me, According to thy mercy, Lord, mine aid and succour be. That all men may see and confesse that this is thine own hand, And that thou, Lord, hast this perform'd, they all may understand▪ Whom they curse, do thou blesse, and when they rise up against me, Let them be made ashamed, but let me rejoice in thee.
Let them be clothed all with shame that enemies are to me, Let their contention as a cloak to them a covering be. But vvith my mouth I greatly will praise and advance the Lord, Yea, I among the multitude his praises will record. For at the right hand of the poor he shall stand up to save Him from the cruel hands of those that him condemned have. Psalm 110. THe Lord did say unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, Till I have made thy foes a stool whereon thy foot may stand. The Lord shall out of Zion send the Scepter of thy might, Thy kingdome plant amidst thy foes, and rule it in their sight. To thy fair holy Temple they resort shall willingly, In meeting days when thou thy Word dost publish pow'rfully.
As from the early morning womb the dew falls thick on ground, So shall the young born babes to thee flocking in troups be found. The Lord hath sworn, and of this oath he vvill repent him never, Of th'order of Melchisedek thou art a Priest for ever. The Lord in glory high advanc't, that sits at thy right hand, Shall in his day of wrath strike through great Kings that him withstand. The Heathen he shall judge, and fill the place with bodies dead, And over many Countries he shall smite and wound the head. And in his foes pursute, for haste of waters in the way, Shall drink, and shall advance on high his royal head that day. Psal. 111. PRaise ye the Lord, him will I praise with all my heart and might, In the assembly of the just, and in the Churches sight.
The vvorks of our Almighty God in greatness do excel, And ought to be sought out and seen of all that love them well. His works are honourable all, and shine full gloriously, And his most perfect righteousness endures eternally. The Lord hath made his wondrous works remembred still to be, The Lord is of compassion full, and gracious is he. Of food a portion he doth give to such as him do fear, For his firm Covenant made with them he still in minde doth bear. The power of his works he doth unto his people show, That the Heathens inheritance he might on them bestow. Both truth and judgement are the works wrought by his hand and might, His precepts and Commandments all are very sure and right. Firmly they are established for all eternity, And all of them done and perform'd in truth and equity.
Unto his people vvhom he chose redemption he did send, His Covenant he hath stablisht so that it shall never end. Holy and reverent is the name of our great Lord and King. Only from the true fear of God doth all sound wisdome spring. Good understanding have all they his precepts that fulfill, His glory everlasting is, his praise endureth still. Psal. 112. PRaise ye the Lord. The man is blest that fears the Lord of might, And in his just Commandements that taketh great delight. His holy seed here upon earth shall great and mighty be, The generation of th'upright all men shall blessed see. And in his house there shall be store of wealth and riches sure, And all his righteousness to him for ever shall endure.
Unto the righteous doth arise in midst of darknesse light, Kind and compassionate is he, and leads his life aright. A good man always favour shows, and lendeth willingly, And all his own affairs he guides vvith judgement prosperously. Surely his state is setled so that it shall never move, The just shall be remembred still by men and God above. Of evil tidings that may come, he vvill not be afraid, Because his heart upon his God by faith is fixt and staid. His heart is firmly stablished, afraid he will not be, Until upon his enemies his whole desire he see. He distributes gifts to the poor, and to eternity His justice lasts, his horn shall be with honour raised high. The vvicked seeing it shall grieve, and gnash his teeth in ire, And melt away, yea perish shall the wicked mans desire.
Psalm 113. PRaise ye the Lord, O praise him all ye servants of the Lord, The glorious name of God the Lord, praise ye vvith one accord. From this time forth for evermore the Lords name blessed bee. From East to West, Gods name must be praised by each degree. The Lord's above all Nations high his glory above the sky. Who is like to the Lord our God, whose dwelling is on high? Who notwithstanding doth from thence abase himself so low, As all things in the heav'n and earth still to observe and know. He raiseth up out of the dust the man of low degree, And needy men on high, even from the dunghill lifteth he. That he may raise him at the last, and set him in the seat With Princes, Princes of his own people so high and great.
The barren woman to keep house he maketh, and to be A joyful mother of sweet babes, the Lord our God praise ye. Psalm 114. WHen Israel out from Egypt went, and Jacobs family From people of strange language came vvith a strong hand and high. His sanctuary Judah was, his holy place was there, And his dominion Israel, and they his people vvere. The Sea saw that, and at the sight as men away did fly, And back the river Jordans streams vvere driven mightily. The huge strong mountains skipped then like unto lusty Rams, The little hills strangely did leap like to yong wanton lambs. What ail'd thee thou unruly Sea, that thou thus fledst for fear? Thou Jordan, what sawest thou that back thy vvaters driven vvere?
You huge strong mountains, vvhy skipt ye like unto lusty Rams? You little hills, vvhy did you leap like to young vvanton lambs? Before the presence of the Lord, tremble thou earth and quake, At the presence of Jacobs God be thou moved and shake. Who from the hard and stony rock did pools of vvaters bring, And by his pow'r did turn the flint into a vvater spring. Psalm 115. NOt unto us, (Lord) not to us, give glory to thy name, And of thy mercy and thy truth get thou the only fame. Why should the Heathen people say, vvhere now, vvhere is their God? But our God in the Heavens is, he doth what seems him good. Their idols gold and silver are, vvorks of mens hands they bee, And they have ears but do not hear, and eyes and do not see.
And noses, but they do not smell, a mouth, but do not talk, And hands, but handle not at all, and feet, and do not vvalk. Nor speak they through their throat at all, and they that do them make, Are like to them, and so are they that for their stay them take. O Israel trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he, Trust in him Aarons house, for he their help and shield must be. Trust ye in God who fear the Lord, he is their shield and stay, The Lord of us hath mindful been, vve vvill him blesse alway. He vvill the house of Israel blesse, and Aarons house vvithall, He all that fear the Lord their God, vvill blesse both great and small. God shall encrease you more and more, and all your race with you. You all are blest of God, vvho made the earth and heaven too. The heavens, ye the heavens are the place of Gods abode, But on mens children he the earth hath lib'rally bestow'd.
The dead do not give to the Lord, praise from the grave below, Nor any that into the place of silence down do go. But we his people to the Lord, all praises vvill afford. From this time forth for evermore, praise ye the holy Lord. Psal. 116. I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard hath he, And all my days vvill call on him, who bow'd his ear to me. When the sorrows of cruel death about beset me round, When pains of hell got hold on me, I vvoe and sorrow found. Upon the name of God the Lord, then did I call, and say, Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray. Exceeding gracious is the Lord, and righteous is he, And towards such are distrest, great his compassions be.
The Lord in safety doth preserve all those that simple be, Even I my self was brought down low, and he relieved me. And now my soul sith thou art safe, return unto thy rest, For largely the Lord God to thee his bounty hath exprest. Because my soul from threatned death thou safely hast set free, By thee mine eyes from tears, my feet from falls delivered bee. Before the Lord God in the land of life now vvalk shall I, This I believ'd, therefore I spake, though troubled grievously. The Second Part. I rashly spake in haste, and said, that all men liars be. What shall I render God for all his benefits to me? The joyful cup of saving health in feasts take up will I, And to the name of God my Lord, ascribe all thankfully. The vows vvhich in distress I made, I to the Lord vvill pay,
In presence of his people all ev'n now vvithout delay. The Lord makes great account of all his saints, and in his eyes Exceeding precious is their death, though men do them despise. Truly, Lord, I thy servant am, thy servant, and thy son Of thine hand-maid, my bonds by thee are broken and undone. And I vvill offer up to thee the sacrifice of praise, And thanks, and call upon the name of God the Lord always. The vows vvhich in distress I made, I to the Lord will pay, In presence of his people all, ev'n now vvithout delay. Yea, in the Courts of Gods own house, and in the midst of thee Thou glorious Jerusalem, the Lord God praised be. Psalm 117. O All ye nations of the earth praise ye the Lord always,
And all ye people every vvhere set forth his noble praise. For great his kindness is to us, and the truth of the Lord For ever lasts, the holy Lord praise ye with one accord. Psalm 118. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for good and kind is he, Because his mercies very sure, for everlasting be. Let Israel now confesse that still his mercies still endure. Let Aarons house say now, that still his mercies are most sure. And let them now that fear the Lord, say, that his mercies sure Which he doth for his saints reserve, for ever do endure. In my distress I call'd on God, and he did answer me, In a large place he did me set vvherein I might go free. The Lord himself is on my side, afraid I will not be,
If God stand on my part what hurt can man do unto me? The Lord doth take my part with them that help to succour me, Therefore on those that do me hate, I my desire shall see. Better it is to trust in God, then on man to be staid. Better it is to trust in God, then Princes for their aid. All nations have inclosed me, and me incompass'd round, But in the name of God shall I them conquer and confound. They compast me on every side, they compassed me round, But I vvill surely them destroy, and in Gods name confound. Like bees they compass'd me about, but like the thorns that flame, They quenched are, for them I shall destroy in Gods own name. The Second Part. Thou hast vvith violence at me thrust sore, that fall I might, But yet the Lord sustained me, and made me stand upright.
The Lord is my defence and strength which I depend upon, He is my song, and praise, and he is my salvation. In dwellings of the just is heard the voice and melody Of joy and health: for the right hand of God doth valiantly. The right hand of the mighty God exalted is on high, The right hand of the mighty Lord hath done most valiantly. I shall not die, but live, and shew the Lords works, sorely he Hath chastned me, but unto death hath not delivered me. Set ye vvide open unto me the gates of holiness, That I may enter into them the Lord to praise and bless. This gate of God, there shall with me the righteous enter in. I will praise thee, thou hast me heard, and my salvation been. The stone which by the builders was refused vvith disgrace, Now the head-corner stone is made, and set in chiefest place.
The Third Part. This vvas the mighty vvork of God, this was the Lords own fact, And it is marvellous to behold, vith eyes that noble act. This is the day vvhich God hath made, and hath advanced high, We will therein be glad, and will rejoice exceedingly. O send salvation now, O Lord, I pray thee earnestly, O Lord, I thee beseech to send us now prosperity. Blessed be he that in the name of God comes us to save, You all out of the house of God, the Lord we blessed have. God is the Lord that shews to us light and prosperity, The sacrifice to th'altars horns with coards binde speedily. Thou art my God, and therefore I vvill praises give to thee, Thou art my God, therefore by me thou shalt exalted be. O give you thanks unto the Lord, exceeding good is he,
Because for ever to his saints his mercies lasting be. Psal. 119. BLessed are they that are sincere, and upright in the vvay. Who all their lives vvalk in Gods law, and it in heart obey. Yea, blessed are all those that keep his statutes constantly, And that the Lord vvith their vvhole heart do seek unfeignedly. They also do not willingly practise iniquity, That in the holy ways of God vvalk in sincerity. Thou hast commanded us that in obedience to thy will, With all our care and diligence we keep thy statutes still. O that the whole frame of my way were now directed right, That I thy statutes might observe, and keep vvith all my might. No conscience of my sin shall then bring any shame to me,
When to all thy Commandements my due respect shall be. Then in uprightness of my heart thee vvill I praise, when I Thy righteous judgements shall have learn'd by practise thoroughly. In confidence of help from thee thy statutes keep vvill I, Then fail me not, O Lord, and me forsake not utterly. BETH The Second Part. By vvhat means undefiled may his ways a yong man make? If he according to thy Word, thereto good heed do take. With my whole heart I have thee sought, and thus seeking abide, Let me not vvander from thy ways, nor from them turn aside. Within mine heart and secret thoughts thy Word I have hid still, That I might not at any time offend thy holy will. Thou in thy self art blessed, Lord, goodness abounds in thee, Then for the glory of thy grace, thy statutes teach thou me.
To other men I with my lips declared, and did show The judgements of thy mouth, that them all men might learn and know. Thy testimonies and thy ways have made my heart so glad, As if the riches and the wealth of all the earth I had. Upon thy precepts still shall be my meditation, Thy holy vvays I do respect, and fix mine eyes upon. Upon thy statutes my delight shall be so firmly set, That by thy grace I never vvill thy holy Word forget. GIMEL The third part. According to thy bounty great deal with thy servant, Lord, That I may live, and constantly observe and keep my Word. Let my vveak eyes by thy good spirit so fully opened be, That all the wonders of thy law I may discern and see. I am a stranger on the earth, and wander dang'rously,
Hide not thy laws from me, that they may guide me constantly. My soul within me breaketh, Lord, longing continually For thy judgements, that them I may know and keep faithfully. Thou hast rebuked all the proud, and thy curse on them brought, Because from thy Commandements they erre in deed and thought. Contempt and vile reproach of men let not upon me fall, For I have kept and do observe thy testimonies all. Great Princes sit and speak against thy servant every where, But all my meditations upon thy statutes were. My comfort and my hearts delight thy testimonies be, And what to do in all my doubts they teach and counsel me. DALETH The Fourth Part. My soul doth cleave unto the dust, I hardly life retain, According to thy faithful Word, Lord, quicken me again,
My ways and works I did declare, and did confesse to thee, And thou in mercy didst me hear, thy statutes teach thou me. Make me to understand thy way which thy Commandements show, Then of thy vvonders shall I talk, that others may them know, My soul doth faint and melt away through heaviness and grief, To me according to thy Word send strength and give relief. The ways of men which falshood are, remove far off from me, Grant me to know and keep thy laws which true and righteous be. For I of truth and righteousness have chosen the right way, And all thy laws and judgements I before mine eyes do lay. Unto thy testimonies I did closely stick and cleave, Then to reproach and shame, O Lord,] thy servant never leave. The way of thy Commandements I will run cheerfully, When thou hast by thy spirit mine heart enlarged graciously.
HE The Fifth part. Of thy Commandements, O Lord, teach me the perfect way, That without swarving walk in it unto the end I may. Give me right understanding, then I shall keep faithfully Thy law, and duly it observe with my whole heart will I. By the strength of thy Spirit, Lord, make me to go aright In paths of thy Commandements, for therein I delight. Incline mine heart unto thy laws, and make me them to love, And do all filthy avarice far from my heart remove. From vain desires and worldly lusts. turn back mine eyes and sight, Quicken me by the spirit of life to vvalk thy vvays aright. Confirm thy faithful promise, Lord, which thou hast made to mee, Who am thy servant, and desire to fear and honour thee. Reproach and shame vvhich I do fear, turn thou away from mee,
Who am thy servant, and desire to fear and honour thee. Behold, for thy precepts I long, and love them to obey, Quicken me in thy righteousness, that them fulfill I may. VAU The Sixth Part. Thy mercies great and manifold let me obtain, O Lord, Let me thy saving health enjoy according to thy Word. So shall I stop the slanderous mouths of leud men and unjust, Who me with scorn reproach, because I in thy words do trust. The word of truth out of my mouth do not take utterly, For on thy judgements righteous my hope and trust rely. Then shall I thus encouraged, thy laws continually Observe, yea, keep them whilst I live, for evermore will I. Then shall I in a plain safe way walk on at liberty, For thy Commandements to seek, my self I do apply.
And of thy testimonies I will speak, and not forbear, Before the face of greatest Kings no shame shall make me fear. And walking in obedience to thy just laws, will I Joy and delight my self, for I have lov'd them tenderly. Yea, all my strength will I lift up to vvalk in the right way Of thy statutes, and I therein will meditate alway. ZAIN The seventh part. Thy Word unto thy servant past, remember carefully, Upon vvhich thou hast caused me in hope still to rely. This word my only comfort is, when troubles do me grieve, When I am in distress it doth me quicken and relieve. The proud and scornful men had me in great derision, Yet from obedience to thy law I have not swarv'd or gone. But then, O Lord, thy judgements old, I called back to minde,
Whereby I comforted my self, and cause from grief did find. Horrour hath taken hold on me, and made mine heart to quake, Because of all the wicked ones that do thy law forsake. While in this house of pilgrimage I absent am from thee, Thy statutes still have been my songs, and joy of heart to mee. In the night season I thy name remembred have, O Lord, While others in their beds did sleep, and I have kept thy Word. This comfort which I thus enjoy, I have bestowed by thee, Because thy precepts carefully have been observ'd by me. CHETH The eighth part. I for my portion and my lot have taken thee O Lord, I said, and purpos'd in my heart that I would keep thy word. With my whole heart I thee besought thy favour to afford, Be merciful unto me now, according to thy word.
My former ways I thought upon, and course of life I tri'd, And to thy laws I turn'd my feet, and did not go aside. I did not stay nor linger long, as those that slothful are, But speedily thy laws to keep I did my self prepare. The cruel bands of vvicked men have made of me their prey, Yet vvould I not thy laws forget, nor from them go astray. At midnight vvill I rise from sleep, to blesse and praise thy name, Thy righteous judgements are so great, and of such wondrous fame. Of all those that do sear thy name, companion am I, And of those chat observe and keep thy precepts faithfully. Thy mercies great most gracious Lord, the earth throughout do fill, O teach me how I may obey thy statutes and thy vvill. TETH the ninth Part. With me who thine own servant am, thou hast dealt well, O Lord, Thy bounty thou hast shew'd to me according to thy Word.
Teach me good knowledge how to walk, and good discretion give, For I do thy Commandements approve, and them believe. Before thine hand did me afflict, I err'd and went astray, But now I keep thy holy Word, and by it guide my way. Thou, Lord, art good and gracious, and good doth from thee flow, Then of thy goodness teach me how thy statutes I may know. The proud and vvicked men have forg'd against me many a lie, Yet thy Comwandements still observe with all my heart vvill I. Their hearts by ease as fat as grease, sensless and careless be, But in thy law do I delight, and that is sweet to me. it was exceeding good to me, that thou didst me correct, For as a guide to learn thy law, thy rod did me direct. The law which from thy mouth proceeds is better unto me, Then thousands of tho purest gold and finest silver be.
JOD The tenth part. Thine hands have made & fashioned me, thy breath hath made me live, That I may thy Commandments keep, me understending give. Those that do fear thee will be glad when they my state do see, Because I by thy word have learn'd to put my hope in thee. I know and do confess, O Lord, thy judgements righteous be, And that in very faithfulness thou hast afflicted me. Thy loving kindness now, O Lord, let for my comfort be, According to thy word unto thy servant, help thou me. Thy tender mercies unto me let come, that I may live, For consolation and delight thy law to me doth give. Make thou the proud asham'd, for they vex me vvithout a cause, But I vvill meditate upon thy precpts and thy laws. Let those that do thee truly fear, turn and rejoice with me,
And those that know thy laws let us together joyful be. And in thy righteous statutes, Lord, still let my heart be sound, And then I may assured be no shame shall me confound. CAPH The eleventh part. My soul for thy salvation saints, until I it obtain, Yet doth my hope upon thy words my fainting soul sustain. Mine eies do fail while on thy word I vvait, and thus do say, O when wilt thou me comfort, Lord, why dost thou thus delay. I like a bottle am become that in the smoak is set, Though worn out by afflictions▪ thy law do not forget. How many are thy servants daies, may I yet live to see, When thou wilt judgement execute on those that trouble mee. The proud have digged pits for me that I therein might fall, Which are against thy law: both they and all their works vvithall.
All thy Commandements faithful are, and so esteem'd by me, They persecute me wrongfully thou, Lord, mine helper be. These men on earth had me almost consumed utterly, But I did not thy precepts just forsake unfeignedly. After thy loving kindness, Lord, quicken me speedily, Then all the statutes of thy mouth observe and keep will I. LAMED The twelfth part. Thy word and thy decree, O Lord, still stedfast is and sure, And in the heavens setled course, it ever doth endure. To ev'ry generation thy truth doth stedfast stand, The earth abideth, which thou hast eslablisht by thine hand. The heavens and the earth do still continue to this day, As thou ordain'st, thy servants they are, and thee do obey. Unlesse thy holy law my joy and my delights had been,
When I was so afflicted, I had surely perisht then. Thy holy precepts never shall by me forgotten be, For when my soul was heavie, thou by them hast quickned me. I am thine own, O Lord, do thou thy son and servant save, For with an upright heart thy laws and precepts sought I have. The wicked men me to destroy, did watch me narrowly, But I did thy Commandements consider carefully. Of all perfection here on earth there is an end I see. But thy Commandements very breed and everlasting bee. MEM The thirteenth part. O how do I embrace thy law. with great affection, All the day long it is to me my meditation. By thy Commandements thou hast made me far more wise to be, Then my foes, for thy laws are still with me to counsel me.
In understanding I exceed those that instructed me, Because thy testimonies still my meditation be. In understanding I exceed those that are full of daies, Because I kept and did observe thy precepts and thy waies, And I restrained have my self from every evil way, That I thy holy Word may keep and wholly it obey. From the right judgement of thy mouth I never will depart, For thou in them didst me instructs, and wrot'st them in my heart. How sweet in taste unto say soul thy words and precepts are? No pleasant honie may with them in sweetness once compare. By thy laws and commandements I understanding gate, Therefore as foul and dangerous every false way I hate. NUN The fourteenth part. Thy heavenly Word is to my feet a lamp that shineth bright,
And to direct me in my path, it shineth as a light. I in my heart have vow'd and sworn and it perform I will, That I will keep thy judgements just, and strive them to fulfill. I am afflicted verie much, quicken thou me, O Lord, And in thy goodness raise me up, according to thy Word. The offerings which with voice to thee O Lord, I freely give, Accept, and teach me how I may after thy judgements live. My soul is ever in my hand, great dangers me beset, Yet in my greatest troubles I thy law do not forget. Although the wicked men for me a snare did closely laie, Yet from thy precepts would I not for danger go astraie. Thy laws as mine inheritance I have esteem'd to be For ever, for they of mine heart the joy are unto me. Assisted by thy grace I do mine heart incline and bend,
Thy statutes alwaies to perform, and shall do to the end. SAMECH The fifteenth part. I do abhor unstable hearts, and thoughts, of vanitie, But thy pure and holy law do love exceedingly. Thou art my secret hiding place, and shield of my defence, And on thy faithful Word I fix my hope and confidence. All ye that evil doers be, from me depart away, For the Commandments of my God I purpose to obey. According to thy faithful Word uphold and stablish me, That I may live, and of my hope ashamed may not be. Hold thou me up, then shall I stand in safetie constantly, And to thy statutes I will have respect continually. Thou all that from thy statutes erre, treadst down as things most vile, For their deceit meet falshood is, and will themselves beguile.
Thou all the wicked of the earth dost like the dross remove, Therefore thy testimonies just I fervently do love. My flesh for fear of thee doth quake, when I thy justice see, I of thy judgements am afraid, which high and dreadful be. AIN The sixteenth part. I judgement have to all men done, and given them their right, Then leave me not to them that would oppress me if they might. In mercie for thy servants good, O Lord, a suretie be, And from oppressions of the proud do thou deliver me. Mine eies do fail with looking long for thy salvation, Lord, While the performance I expect of thy most faithful Word. According to thy mercie great with me thy servant deal, Thy statutes and thy holy laws teach, and to me reveal. I am thy servant, Lord, give me a minde to understand
Thy testimonies, so that I may do what they command. Lord it is time for thee to work and shew thy power forth, For wicked men thy holy laws make void and nothing worth. Therefore I thy Commandements and precepts dearly love, Yea, above gold I love them, yea, the finest gold above. And in all things thy precepts all most righteous I esteem, And all false ways I do abhor what ever they may seem. PE The seventeenth part. In truth and wisdome wonderful thy testimonies are, Therefore my soul strives them to keep with diligence and care. The verie entrance of thy Word doth give an heavenly light, Yea, to the simple it doth give an understanding right. My mouth I open'd, and did pant, and almost spent was I, For after thy Commandements I long'd exceedingly. With mercie and compassion, Lord, behold me from above,
As thou wert wont to do to those that thy name fear and love. Direct my footsteps by thy Word, in it my Leader be; Let no iniquity obtain dominion over me. From the oppressions and wrongs of man deliver me, By me with greater freedome then thy precepts kept shall be. Upon thy servant cause to shine the brightness of thy face, And me thy righteous statutes teach, that I may them embrace. Rivers of vvaters did run down from mine eyes when I saw How wicked men run on in sin and do not keep thy law. TSADDI The eighteenth part. Most just and righteous, thou, O Lord, dost to the world appear, And all thy judgements are upright which thou workst everie vvhere. Thy testimonies which thou hast commanded in thy Word, All of them righteous are, and just, faithful and true, O Lord.
My zeal hath even consumed me, because mine enemies Thy holy words forgotten have, and do thy laws despise. Thy holy Word is verie pure, as silver tri'd by fire; Therefore thy servant loveth it, and doth it much desire. Small am I, and by worldly men despised in their sight; Thy precepts yet forget I not, but do in them delight. Thy righteousness most stedfast is, and ever shall endure, Thy law is also truth it self, most constant and most sure. Trouble and anguish have me found, and taken hold on me; Yet in this trouble my delight thy just Commandments be. Eternal righteousness have all thy testimonies; give To me knowledge of them, then I shall comfortably live. KOPH The nineteenth part. To thee vvith my whole heart I cri'd, hear me most gracious Lord,
And then will I thy statutes keep, and vvill obey thy Word. I in my trouble cri'd to thee, do thou me safe preserve, And I thy testimonies then vvill carefully observe. The dawning of the morning I prevented vvith my crie, For in my trouble did my hope upon thy Word relie. Mine eies in waking do prevent the watches of the night, That I might meditate upon thy word of truth and light. After thy loving kindness hear my voice when I do crie, According to thy Word, O Lord, quicken me graciously. Those that in waies of mischief walk, and do pursue me hard, Draw high, and they do not thy law, nor equitie regard. But thou art near to me, and canst their mischief soon prevent, And all thy laws and promises shall prove true in event. This of thy testimonies I have known in times long past,
That them for ever to endure, thou firmly founded hast. RESH The twentieth part. Consider mine affliction, Lord, from trouble free me set, For I in thy most holy law to walk do not forget. Plead my cause, and deliver me, and do my right maintain, According to thy promises, quicken thou me again. Salvation sure is far away from those that wicked are, For they thy statutes do not keep, nor for thy laws do care. O Lord, both great and manifold thy tender mercies be, According to thy judgements then, in mercie quicken me. Many my persecutors are, and enemies of mine, Yet from thy testimonies just, mine heart doth not decline. I greatly grieved was, when I the leud transgressors saw, Because they did not keep thy Word, but sinn'd against thy law.
Consider how I dearly love thy precepts, and thy Word, After thy loving kindness then quicken thou me, O Lord. From the beginning all thy Word hath been most true and sure, Thy righteous judgements everie one for ever shall endure. SCHIN The 21. part. Princes hate persecuted me, although no cause they saw, But still of thy most holy Word mine heart doth stand in aw. In thy most pure and holy Word, as much rejoice do I, As he vvho lighting on great spoil is made rich suddenly. From lying waies, which I abhor, and hate, I do remove, But thy most pure and holy law of truth I dearly love. Deserved praises I do give, sevn times a day to thee, Because thy judgements righteous are, and they have holpen me. Great peace and safety they shall have which do thy statutes love,
No danger shall their blessed state empair or once remove. O Lord, for my salvation I only hope in thee, And strive alwaies thy laws to keep, which thou commandest me. Thy testimonies hath my soul observed carefully; On them my heart is set, and them I love exceedingly. Thy laws and thy Commandments I keep with special care, For all my waies and works (I know) before thee open are. TAU The 22 part. Let my complaint and crie come near before thy presence, Lord, Right understanding give thou me acording to thy Word. And let my supplications come, and have access to thee, According to thy faithful Word, O Lord, deliver me. From a full heart, my thankful lips shall utter forth thy praise, when thou shalt make me understand thy statutes and thy waies.
To speak of thy most holy Word, my tongue shall never cease, For thy Laws and Commandements are perfect righteousness. Let now thy hand and mighty power me succour and relieve, For I thy precepts chose, that I after thy laws might live. I long'd, O Lord, exceedingly for thy salvation, And thy Law is my whole delight and meditation. O let my soul live, and it shall give praises unto thee, And let thy faithful judgements, Lord, still help and succour mee. Like a lost sheep I went astray, thy servant seek and finde, For thy Commandements I do retain still in my minde. Psalm 120. IN my distresse unto the Lord, I did complain and cry, And he forthwith inclin'd to me, and heard me graciously.
From lying lips, O Lord, my soul deliver and set free, From double and deceitful tongues, O Lord, deliver mee. What shall to thy false tongue be done? or giv'n, thou slanderer? Sharp arrows of the mighty man, and coals of Juniper. O woe is me! that I must thus sojourn so long a space In Mesech; and must dwell in tents vvith Kedars cursed race, With him that hateth peace, my soul is forc'd long to abide. For peace I am, but when I speak for war they do provide. Psalm 121. SHall I look up unto the hills, and safety thence expect? From whence doth come the help that me in danger shall protect? My help only from God doth come, who earth and heaven did frame. He staies thy feet, that nothing can remove away the same.
He slumbers not at all, that doth thy soul in safety keep, Behold he that keeps Israel, shall not slumber once or sleep. The Lord thy God thy keeper is, and he doth alwaies stand To be a shadow of defence to thee on thy right hand. Neither the Suns bright burning beams by day shall once thee smite, Nor shall the Moons cold influence hurt thee in the dark night. The Lord alone shall thee preserve safely from, evils all: Yea, he thy soul continually preserve in safety shall. God shall himself thy going our and comming in defend. From this time forth for evermore, till time itself do end. Psalm 122. I Joy'd in heart when thus to me they spake, and fram'd their talk; Unto the house of God the Lord, together let us walk.
Our feet, that once throughout the land had wandred all abroad, In the gates of Jerusalem have found a sure abode. The buildings of Jerusalem in one compacted be, And in religious government her peoples hearts agree. Thither the Tribes of God go up, the Tribes with one accord, Before the Ark of Israel, do blesse and praise the Lord. There are erected Judgement seats, the thrones of equity, The thrones which God to David gave, and his posterity. All ye the seed of Israel, pray still for Zions peace, All those that love Jerusalem, God prosper and encrease. Let peace be still within thy walls, and godly unity, Thy palaces let God enrich with all prosperity, I wish thee now prosperity even for mine own dear friends, And brethrens sake, whose hope of wealth on thine estate depends.
Yea, for the house of God our Lord, my heart shall never cease, Nor hand be wanting to procure thy happiness and peace. Psalm 123. LOrd, from the earth below mine eies life up vvill I To thee whose dwelling is above even in the heavens high. Behold! as servants eies look to their masters hand, As to her mistress hand the maid doth look, and waiting stand: So on the Lord our God we look and do attend, Until he to us favour shew, until he mercy send. Have mercy on us, Lord, on us thy mercy be, For filled with contempt and scorn exceedingly are we. Our soul is greatly fill'd with scorns of men at ease, And with contempt of proud men, who from scoffing never cease.
Psalm 324. HAd not the Lord been on our side, may Israel now confess, Had not the Lord been on our side in time of our distress, When they against us rose inflam'd with rage and cruelty, Like rav'nous beasts they us alive had swallow'd suddenly. Then had their force orewhelm'd our souls, like to a mighty floud Of swelling waves, or raging streams, that cannot be withstood. Then alwaies praised be the Lord, whose mercies ever live, A prey to their devouring teeth, our souls who did not give. For when our souls like harmless birds were snared in that net, That crafty fowlers secretly had round about us set; Our gracious God lookt down from heav'n and brake that secret gin, And wondrously did we escape that were ensnar'd therein.
The hope of all dot help did stand in thy most holy name, Our gracious God, who by thy power didst earth and heaven frame. Psal. 125. ALL those that in the Lord do trust shall be like Zion hill, That cannot be remov'd away but standeth stedfast still. As every way Jerusalem the mountains do defend, So God his people round about abides time without end. Wicked mens power on just mens lot shall not rest still, lest they Through weakness of their spirits at last to sin should fall away. Do good, O Lord, unto all those who are good in thy sight, Ev'n to all those that faithful are, and in their hearts upright. But as for those that turn aside, and love to go astray, Led by their loose and wandring nets in their own crooked way;
God shall to judgement lead them forth vvith vvorkers of all ill, But on the Israel of God peace shall continue still. Psalm 126. WHen Zions sad captivity the Lord again did bring, Like to a dream it seem'd to us, and as a feigned thing. Then was our mouth vvith laughter fill'd, and with singing our tongue, And of this wonder thus they spake the heathen folk among. Great things the Lord hath done for them. Great things (acknowledge we) The Lord hath done for us, for which we glad and thankful be. The rest of our Captivity bring again graciously, Ev'n as the moistning water streams over ground parcht and dry. They that with labour do their seed in tears and sorrow sow, When harvest comes, with songs of joy their Corn shall reap and mowe,
And for a little seed, which he bears out with countenance sad, He brings home with him loads of sheaves vvherewith his heart is glad. Psalm 127. EXcept the Lord the house do build, vain is the workmans pain, Unless the Lord the City keep, the watchman wakes in vain. To rise up early is but vain, in vain late vvatchings are, Vain is it pensively to eat the bread of grief and care. For the beloved of the Lord are so far by him blest, That unto them he largely gives sweet sleep and quiet rest. Lo children are an heritage vvhich doth from God descend, And the wombs fruit is his reward, his blessing doth it send. Children of youth a strong defence are to their parents dear. As arrows to a strong man be when there is cause of fear.
And blessed is the man that hath his quiver full of those; They unashamed in the gate shall speak unto their foes. Psalm 128. BLessed art thou that fearest God, and vvalkest in his way, For of thy labour thou shalt eat, happy art thou I say. Like fruitful Vines on thy house side, so shall thy wife spring out, Thy children stand like olive plants thy table round about. Thus art thou blest that fearest God, who all thy daies shalt see, The promised Jerusalem and her felicitie. Thou shalt thy childrens children see to thy great joyes encrease, And likewise grace on Israel prosperity and peace.
Psalm 129. OFt they (may Israel now say) me from my youth assail'd, Oft they assail'd me from my youth, but never they prevail'd. Upon my back the plowers plow'd, and furrows long did cast, The righteous Lord hath cut the coards of wicked men at last. O let them all confounded be and forced back to fly, That do to Zion hatred bear and cursed enmity. Let these be like the grass, which we on the house tops do see, Which fades and dries away before grown up it fully bee. Whereof the mower cannot finde enough to fill his hand, Nor can the man his bosome fill that puts the sheaves in band. Neither do they say that pass by, upon you blessing be From God the Lord; and in the name of God bless you do we.
Psal. 130. OUt of the depths of miseries, O Lord, I cri'd to thee, Lord hear my voice, let to my pray'r thine ears attentive be. Lord, who shall stand upright, if thou do mark iniquitie? But that of men thou maist be fear'd, forgiveness is with thee. Upon the Lord I wait, my soul doth wait upon the Lord, All the dependance of my heart and hope is in his Word. My soul doth look out for the Lord my God, more watchfully, Then they that have watch'd all the night the morning to descry. Let Israel hope in the Lord, with the Lord mercy is, And with him there is plentiful redemption for all his. And he his Israel shall redeem, and them shall ustifie, And he shall freely them discharge from all iniquitie.
Psal. 131. O Lord, I am not puff'd in minde, I have no scornful eye, I doe not exercise my self in things for me too high. But as the chi'd that newly is wean'd from his mothers breast, So do I, Lord, behave my self in quietness and rest. Let Israel only on the Lord, place all their hope and stay, Both at this present, and henceforth for time to come alway. Psalm 132. REmember Davids troubles, Lord, and how he sware to thee, And how unto the mighty God of Jacob vowed he, Surely I vvill not come into mine house or bed at all,
Nor shall mine eyes take any sleep, nor eye-lids slumber shall, Till for the Lord I choose a place vvhere he may make abode, Till I an habitation finde for Jacobs mighty God. At Shiloh once in Ephraim vve heard it did abide, At Kiriath vve found it a vvhile, the plains and woods beside. Into his Tabernacles now vve know vvhither to go, There vve before his footstool vvil vvorship him bowing low. Arise, O Lord, arise and come into thy place of rest, Thou and the Ark, from whence thy strength thou dost make manifest. Let all thy Priests be clothed vvith thy truth and righteousness, Let all thy saints be blest, that they may shout for joyfulness. And for thy servant Davids sake do not deny thy grace, And of thine own anointed dear turn not away the face.
The Second Part. The Lord to David sware in truth, and vvill not turn from it, The fruit of thy body vvill I cause on thy throne to sit. And if thy sons my cov'nant keep and precepts faithfully, For ever on thy throne shall sit all their posterity. For God mount Zion chosen hath, to dwell there doth he love, There do I love to dwell and rest, and never to remove. And there all her provision I will bless abundantly, And I all those that needy are with bread vvill satisfie. I also vvith salvation vvill clothe her Priests gloriously, And all her saints shall shout aloud for joy exceedingly. And there vvill I make Davids hor to bud and grow in might, For mine anointed I ordaind a shining lamp and bright. As with a garment I vvill clothe his enemies all vvith shame,
But on himself his crown shall still flourish and be of fame. Psalm 133. HOw pleasant and how good is it? how doth that grace excell, When in the unity of love, brethren together dwell? 'Tis like that precious fragrant oyl, that once vvas poured out On Aarons head, and ran his beard and collar round about; Like Hermons dew, or that vvhich doth on Zions hills descend, For there his blessing God commands, ev'n life without an end. Psalm 134. BEhold, and bless the Lord, ye servants of his guard, Which in the house of God the Lord by night do stand and vvard.
Lift up your hands and bless the Lord in holiness, The Lord that earth and heaven made, thee out of Zion blesse. Psalm 135. PRaise ye the Lord, and his great name praise ye vvith one accord, O praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord. All ye that stand in the Lords house, aloud his praises sound, Praise him all ye that in the Courts of our great God are found. Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, yea, praises to him sing, Sing praises to his name, because it is a pleasant thing. For Jacob to himself the Lord of his good vvill chose he, And his peculiar treasure he did Israel take to be. For vvell I know the Lord our God is great in Majesty, And that he is above all gods advanc'd exceeding high.
In heaven and in earth he did vvhat ever him did please, And in deep places here below, and in the swelling seas. He from the ends of th' earth doth cause the vapours to ascend For rain, he lightnings makes, and vvinds doth from his treasures send. All the first-born he smote with death in the Egyptians land, The first-born both of man and beast he slew by hls strong hand. He hath in thee shew'd vvonders great, and tokens vvhich did fall On Egypt, on Pharaoh thy King, and on his servants all. He also nations great and strong smote down, and overthrew, And vvhen his people they oppos'd, their mighty Kings he slew. The Second Part. Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og of Bashan King, Of Canaan he the Kingdomes all did to subjection bring, And for an heritage he gave their land to Israel,
His people, for an heritage for them therein to dwell. Thy name, O Lord God, shall endure, and thy memoriall For evermore shall be preserv'd to generations all. For the Lord God his people vvill at length to judge arise, And vvill repent himself for all his servants miseries. The idolls vvhich are vvorshipped abroad in Heathen lands, They are but gold and silver, all the vvork of mens own hands. A mouth they have, but do not speak, and eyes, but never saw, And they have ears, but nothing hear, their mouth no breath doth draw. As sensless as they be, are those that do them form and make, And so are all that trust in them, and for their gods them take. But bless the everlasting Lord, thou house of Israel, Bless thou the Lord, O Aarons house, vvho onely doth excel. O all ye holy family of Levi bless the Lord,
And all ye that do fear the Lord, bless him vvith one accord. Out of Zion his dwelling place, let the Lord blessed be, Who dwelleth at Jerusalem, the living Lord praise ye. Psalm 136. PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, for still his mercy doth endure. Give thanks unto the God of Gods, for still do last his mercies sure. Give thanks unto the Lord of Lords, for still his mercy doth endure: Which only doth great vvondrous vvorks, for still do last his mercies sure. Who by his vvisdome made the heavens, for still his mercy doth endure. Who stretch'd the earth above the seas, for still do last his mercies sure. Who made the great and glorious light, for still his mercy doth endure: The Sun to guide and rule the day, for still do last his mercies sure. The Moon and Stars to rule by night, for still his mercy doth endure.
10 Which Egypt smote in their first-born, for still do last his mercies sure, And Israel brought out from thence, for still his mercy doth endure, With a strong hand and stretch'd out arm, for still do last his mercies sure. Who into parts the Red Sea cut, for still his mercy doth endure, And through the midst made Israel pass, for still do last his mercies sure: But there drown'd Pharaoh and his host, for still his mercy doth endure. Who through the desart led his folk, for still do last his mercies sure. Who great and mighty Kings didst smite, for still his mercy doth endure. And who the famous Kings did slay, for still do last his mercies sure. As Sihon King of th' Amorites, for still his mercy doth endure, And the great Og of Bashan King, for still do last his mercies sure. And gave their land an heritage, for still his mercy doth endure, Ev'n to his servant Israel, for still do last his mercies sure. Who thought on us in low estate, for still his mercy doth endure,
And from our enemies us redeem'd, for still do last his mercies sure. Who giveth food unto all flesh, for still his mercy doth endure. O to the Lord of heaven give thanks, for still do last his mercies sure. Psalm 137. THE Rivers near of Babylon, there sate vve mournfully, On desolate Zion vve thought and vvept abundantly. Our Harps once instruments of joy, used Gods praise to sound, We hang'd aside on vvillow trees, vvhich planted there we found. For there of us a song they ask'd, that us did captives bring, Our spoilers call'd for mirth, and said, a song of Zion sing. Shall vve those sacred songs ordain'd for praises of our God, Prophane? amongst these heathen vvhere vve scattred lie abroad? O dearly lov'd Jerusalem, O Zions sacred hill,
If I forget you, my right hand shall quite forget her skill. If I forget thee, let my tongue cleave to my palate fast, If I joy till Jerusalems sorrows be over past. Remember Edom, Lord, who in Jerusalems sad day Cry'd out, to the foundations down, raze it, raze it, we say. Daughter of Babel, justly thou ere long destroy'd shalt be, Happy the man thy deeds to us who shall reward to thee. Yea, happy shall he be that plucks thy dearest little ones Out of thy bosome, to dash out their brains against the stones. Psalm 138. WIth my vvhole heart, O gracious Lord, vvill I give praise to thee, Ev'n in the presence of the Gods thou shalt be prais'd by mee. Towards thy holy Temple I will worship, and will praise
Thy name, for all thy kindness great, and for thy truth alwaies. For above all thy name thou hast thy truth advanced high, And faithfully thou answer'st me vvhen I to thee do cry, And in my soul thou gav'st me strength. All Kings on th'earth, O Lord, Shall praise thee when they of thy mouth shall hear the sacred Word. Yea, for the righteous ways and works of God, they all shall sing With joy, for great the glory is of God the Lord and King. Though God be high, the lowly still by him respected be, Whereas the high and proud of heart afar off knoweth he. Walking in midst of troubles, thou reviv'st me, thy right hand Saves me, and stops the wrath of all my foes that me withstand. Thou perfects that which me concerns, thy mercy ever stands, O Lord, then do not thou forsake the work of thine own hands.
Psal. 139. O Lord, thou hast me searcht and known. Thou know'st my sitting down, And mine uprising, yea, my thoughts far off to thee are known. My paths thou compassest about, thou seest when down I lie, And art with all my works and ways acquainted perfectly. No word is in my tongue, O Lord, but it is known to thee, Thou me behind beset'st, before thou lay'st thy hand on mee. So great a depth of knowledge is too wonderful for me, It is so high that it by me cannot attained be. From thy all-seeing Spirit to go, what place seek out shall I? And from thy presence to remove, Lord, whither should I fly? To heaven if I mount up aloft, lo, thou art present there, In hell if I do make my bed, behold, there thou art neer.
Yea, let me take the morning wings and in an instant fly, And sojourn in th'earths utmost parts which in the sea do ly, Yet there to lead and order me thine hand stretcht out shall be, And even there shall thy right hand soar, and take hold on me. Or if I say the darkness shall me cover from thy sight, Then unto thee the darkest night about me shall be light. Yea, darkness hideth not from thee, but night as day is bright, Before thy peircing eyes alike both darkness are and light. The Second Part. My reins, and my most inward parts possessed are by thee, When I was in my mothers womb there hast thou covered me. Thee will I praise, for fearfully and strangely made I am, Thy works are marvellous, my soul right well doth know the same. My substance was not hid from thee, form'd in a secret place,
And in the low dark parts of th'earth beneath I fashion'd was. Thine eyes my shapeless substance saw, and written in thy book Were all my parts, though yet not made, which after fashion took. How precious and how rare, O God, are all thy thoughts to me? Yea, how great is the sum of them, if they accompted be? If I should reckon them, the sum above the sand vvould be, Each morning when I do awake, my thoughts are still with thee. The wicked and ungodly men, Lord, surely thou wilt slay, Therefore far off ye bloudy men, depart from me away. They speak against thee wickedly words of scorn and disdain, Thy enemies blasphemously do take thy name in vain. Hate I not them, Lord, who do thee hate as thine enemies? Am I not s grved at those that up against me rise? I hate them ch a perfect hate, I count them as my foes.
Search me, O Lord, and know my heart, my thoughts try and disclose. Consider, Lord, if wicked way in me there any be, And in thine everlasting way direct and lead thou me. Psalm 140. FRom evil and ungodly men, Lord, save me by thine hand, And from the man of violence, whom I cannot withstand. Whose hearts within imagining malice and mischiefs are, Continually they gathered are together all for war. For slanders like a serpent they their sharpned tongues have whet, And adders deadly poison they under their lips have set. Keep me, O Lord, from wicked hands, from violence me save, Who to destroy me in my paths, a wicked purpose have. The proud a snare, and cords have hid, and for me spread a net,
By the way side where I should pass they gins for me have set. Therefore said I unto the Lord, thou art my God alone, O Lord, hear thou the voice of this my supplication. O God the Lord, thou art the strength of my salvation, In day of battel thou my head hast cover'd safe alone. Grant not, O Lord, what evil men desire most wickedly, Destroy their wicked plots, lest they themselves do magnifie. As for the head and chief of those about that compass me, With mischief out of their own lips, Lord, let them cover'd be. Cast them into the fire, and let coals burning on them fall, Cast them into deep pits, from whence they may not rise at all. Let not an evil speaker be confirm'd on earth below; The violent shall evil haunt unto his overthrow. I know that God the Lord the cause of men in misery
Will still maintain, the right of those that poor and needy be. Surely the righteous shall have cause thy name to bless and praise, And in thy presence the upright shall dwell and live always. Psalm 141. O Lord, unto thee do I cry, come to me speedily, Give ear with favour to my voice when I to thee do cry. As incense let my prayer be set forth before thine eyes, And the up-lifting of mine hands as th' evening sacrifice. O Lord God, a continual watch set thou my mouth before, And of my lips that they may not trespass, keep thou the door. Turn not my heart to any ill, to work a wicked deed, With wicked workers, let not me upon their dainties feed.
But let the righteous smite me, that a kindness is to me, Let him reprove me, that to me a precious oyl shall be, Which shall not break or wound my head, my prayer yet shall be Presented unto God for them in their calamity. When Judges me pursuing shall in stony places fall, My words shall then seem savoury, and men shall hear them all. About the graves devouring mouth our bones lye scatter'd round, As chips of wood which men do cut lye scatter'd on the ground. But, O my Lord and God, mine eyes still look up unto thee, In thee is all my trust, let not my soul forsaken be. Lord, keep me safely from the snare which they for me prepare, And from the subtil gins of them that wicked workers are. Into the nets which they have set let all the wicked fall, Whilest I for whom they them prepar'd, escape from them withall.
Psalm 142. IN my distress unto the Lord, I with my voice did cry, I supplication with my voice made to the Lord on high: My sad complaint I poured out before him in my cry, My trouble I before him shew'd, and great perplexity. My heart orewhelmed was in me, my path was known to thee, In ways where I did walk, a snare they closely laid for mee. I lookt and view'd on my right hand, but I of none was known, All refuge wholly failed me, for my soul car'd not one. Then cry'd I to the Lord, and said, my hope thou only art, And in the land of living men my portion and my part. Hear thou my cry, I am brought low, in mercy set me free From those that do me persecute and are too strong for mee.
My soul from prison bring, that I may praises give to thee. The saints shall compass me about when thou art good to me. Psal. 143. LOrd, hear my pray'r, attend my sute sent up in great distress, And answer me now in thy truth, and in thy righteousness. And do not with thy servant, Lord, in judgement plead at all, For justifi'd be in thy sight not one that liveth shall. My enemy hath pursu'd my soul, my life to ground hath thrown, And made me in the dark to dwell like men dead long agone. Therefore my spirit is overwhelm'd, and pressed down in me, My heart in me is desolate, and doth no comfort see. I call to minde the days of old, on all thy works I thought, Upon the works I meditate which thine own hands have wrought.
Behold, to thee most gracious Lord, I now stretch out my hands, My soul doth greatly thirst for thee like dry and thirsty lands. Hear me with speed, my spirit doth fail, hide not thy face from me, Lest like to them that do go down into the pit I be. In thee I trust, thy kindness make me evry morning finde, Shew me the way wherein to walk, to thee I life my minde. From all mine enemies, O Lord, safely deliver me, To hide my self under thy wings, Lord, unto thee I flee. Thou art my God, thy spirit is good, teach me to do thy will, And in a plain and even ground, Lord, do thou lead me still. Quicken me, Lord, for thy names sake, raise me out of distress, And out of trouble bring my soul, ev'n for thy righteousness. And for thy mercy slay my foes, let all destroyed bee That do afflict my soul, for I a servant am to thee.
Psalm 144. BLessed for ever be the Lord, my only strength and might, Which doth instruct my hands to war, my fingers too to fight. My goodness, sort, deliverer, my tower and shield is he, In him I trust, he doth subdue mine enemies under me. Lord, what is man, that thou of him dost so much knowledge take? Or son of man, that of him thou so great account dost make? Man is like vanity, his days away like shadows sly. Lord, bow the heavens, and come down with power and majesty. The mountains touch, and they shall smoak. Thy lightnings cast abroad, And scatter them, thine arrows shoot, and them destroy, O God. And from above send down thine hand, rid and deliver me From the great waters, from the hand of strangers see me free.
Whose mouth and tongue speak nothing else but foolish vanity, Their right hand is a right hand full of fraud and treachery. I a new song will sing to thee, O God, on Psaltery, And on ten-stringed instruments to thee sing praise will I. It is he onely that to Kings timely salvation sends, His servant David he alone from hurtful sword defends. From strangers hand me rid and save; whose mouth talks vanity, And their right hand a right hand is of fraud and subtilty. That as a plant our sons may be in youth grown to a tree, Our daughters as carv'd corner stones, like a fair palace be. Our garners with provisions may of all sorts full be found, Sheep in our streets, with thousands and ten thousands may abound. Our Oxen be to labour strong, that none do us invade, There be no going out, no cry within our streets be made.
Happy that people are that be in such a case as this, Happy that people are whose God the Lord Almighty is. Psalm 145. THee will I laud my God, O King, and blesse thy name always. Thee vvill I blesse each day, and vvill thy name for ever praise. Great is the Lord, worthy great praise, his greatness none can reach. One race shall to another praise thy works, and vvonders teach. I of thy glorious Majesty the honour vvill record, And will remember all thy works most wonderful O Lord. Men of thine acts the might shall shew, thine acts that dreadful are, And I thy glory to advance, thy greatness vvill declare. The memory of thy goodness great men largely shall express, And shall in joyful songs of praise extoll thy righteousness.
The Lord is gracious, and from him compassions largely flow, In mercy he is very great, and is to anger slow. Good unto all, and over all his tender mercies bee, Yea, all thy vvorks shall praise the, Lord, thy saints shall honour thee. And of thy Kingdomes glory they shall speak, and power shall show, That all the sons of men his works and mighty acts may know, And may thy Kingdomes majesty and glory understand. Thy Kingdoms, Lord, a Kingdome is, that shall for ever stand, And thy dominion through each age Endures, and those that fall, The Lord upholds, those that are bow'd down, he up raiseth all. The Second Part. The eyes of all do wait on thee, and thou dost them relieve, And thou to each sufficing food in season due dost give. Thy bounteous hand thou openest wide, and then thy goodness gives Enough to satisfie the need of ev'ry thing that lives.
The Lord is just in all his ways, his works are holy all. Near all he is that call on him, in truth that on him call. And the desires he vvill fulfill of those that do him fear, Yea, he vvill surely save them all, and he their cry doth hear. The Lord all these preserveth safe that love him in their heart, And he all those that wicked are will utterly subvert. My mouth the praises of the Lord right gladly shall express, Yea, let all flesh his holy name for ever praise and bless. Psalm 146. PRaise ye the Lord, praise God my soul, to God that me doth save, Will I sing praises all my days, whilest I my beeing have. In Kings and Princes put no trust, nor in the sons of men, In whom there is no help at all. He turns to earth, and then
His thoughts do perish in that day. Happy is he vvhose aid Is plac't on Jacobs God, whose hope on God his Lord is staid. Which made the earth and heaven high, the seas that are so deep, And all that therein is, who doth his word for ever keep. Who by judgement th'opprest relieves, to those that hungry be He giveth food, and graciously doth set the prisoners free. The Lord doth send the blind their sight, the Lord again doth raise Those that are bowed down, the Lord favours the just always. The strangers doth the Lord preserve, relieves the fatherless, And widows, but turns up-side down the way of vvickedness. The Lord for evermore shall reign, thy God, O Zion he Unto all generations rules; the Lord still praised be. Psalm 147. PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good unto our God to sing,
For it is pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing. The Lord his own Jerusalem doth raise and build alone, And the out-casts of Israel doth gather into one. He heals the broken in their heart, their sores up he doth binde, He counts the number of the stars, and names for them doth finde. Great is the Lord, and of great power, his wisdome hath no bound. The Lord lifts up the meek, and casts the wicked to the ground. Sing vvith thanksgiving to the Lord, always in him rejoice, Unto the Lord our God sing ye praises with harp and voice. Who ore the Heavens spreads the clouds, who for the earth below Prepareth rain, who makes the grass on mountains high to grow. He gives the beast his food, he feeds the ravens vvhen they cry, His pleasure not in strength of horse, nor in mans legs doth lie. But those that fear the holy Lord and strive him to obey,
And on his mercy set their hope, ev'n his delight are they. The Second Part. O praise the Lord, Jerusalem, thy God, O Zion praise. For he the bars hath strengthened wherewith thy gates he staies. Thy children he hath blest in thee, And in thy borders he Hath setled peace, and with the flow'r of wheat he filleth thee. He sends out his Commandement, his creatures all unto On earth, and swiftly runs the Word which from his mouth doth go. His snow both soft and white like wooll on earth he giveth out, His hoary frost like ashes he doth scatter round about. His ice or hail like morsels he doth cast out with his hand, Before the sharpness of his cold, who able is to stand? He sendeth forth his powerful Word, and melteth them again, His winds he makes to blow, and then the waters flow amain.
The doctrine of his holy Word to Jacob he doth show, His statutes and his judgements he gives Israel to know. He with no nation thus hath dealt, his judgements and his Word Not any one of them hath known; praise ye the living Lord. Psalm 148. PRaise ye the Lord, bless ye the Lord, from Heaven which is on high, And in the places high above him praise and magnifie. All ye his Angels praise ye him, praise ye him all his hosts, Praise ye him Sun, and Moon, and Stats, bright shining in all Coasts. Praise him ye waters 'bove the heavens, ye heaven of heavens on high. The Lords name praise, for by his Word they were made powerfully. He also for eternity hath them establisht sure, And setled by a firm decree for ever to endure.
Praise ye the Lord all ye on earth, all deeps and dragons too. Fire, hail, snow, vapours, stormy winds, at his command that go. Ye mighty mountains, and all hills, fruitful trees, cedars tall, Both creeping things, and flying fowls, and beasts, and cattel all. Kings of the earth, and people all, Princes, and all that be Judges on earth, young men and maids, old men and babes praise ye The Lords great name, for he alone advanced is on high Above the earth, his glory is above the starry sky. He also doth alone exalt the horn, the power, and name Of all his people, which to them is their praise and their fame. Those are the seed of Israel, his holy ones, whom he Makes near by Cov'nant to himself; the Lord alone prase ye.
Psal 149. PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord a new rejoycing song, And let the praise of him be heard his holy saints among. In his Maker let Israel rejoyce, and to him sing, Let all that Zions children are be joyful in their King. And let them in an holy dance praise his most holy name, Let them vvith timbrel and with harp sing praises to the same. For in his people whom he chose, the Lord doth pleasure take, The meek with his salvation he beautiful will make. In all the glory of the Lord let all his saints rejoyce, Let them to him upon their beds in joy lift up their voice. And let them with their mouth sound forth high praises of the Lord, In their hand let them ready have the sharp sword of his Word.
On the rebellious heathen folk, a just revenge to lay, And on the people punishments refusing to obey. To binde their greatest Kings in chains, their Lords in iron strong, Judgement on them to execute, which doth to them belong. Decreed by Gods written Word this shall the honour be To all that are the saints of God; wherefore the Lord praise ye. Psalm 150. PRaise ye the Lord, praise God within his holy place with fear, And in the Firmament praise him whence his pow'r doth appear. And praise him for his mighty acts, and them declare and tell, After his greatnesse praise the Lord, wherein he doth excell. With Trumpets and with Cornets sound, advance his praise on high, Praise him with the melodious harp, and with the Psaltery.
Praise him with timbrel, and with flute, organs and Virginals. Praise with joyfulness of heart upon the loud Cymbals. Praise him on Cymbals sounding loud. Let every thing accord, That breath enjoyes, to praise the Lord. Praise ye the living Lord. FINIS.
