C2498A R175724 47682829 172787
HIS MAJESTIES Most earnest and sincere desire for PEACE. Expressed in two most gracious Messages to the Lords and Commons of Parliament. The first from Evesham July 4. 1644. And the second from Tavestock September 8. 1644. Since the Victory over the Earle of ESSEX. BRISTOLL, Printed by ROBERT BARKER, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most Excel∣lent Majesty: MDC.XLIIII.
To the Lords and Commons of Par∣liament Assembled at VVestminster. CHARLES R. WE being deeply sensible of the miseries and calamities of this Our Kingdom, and of the grievous sufferings of Our poor Subjects, do most earnestly desire that some expedient may be found out, which by the blessing of God, may prevent the further effusion of blood, and restore the Nation to Peace, from the earnest and constant endevouring of which, as no discouragement given Vs on the contra∣ry part shall make Vs cease, so no successe on Ours shall ever divert Vs. For the effecting whereof We are most ready and willing to condescend to all that shall be for the good of Vs and Our People,
whether by way of confirmation of what we have already granted, or of such fur∣ther concession as shall be requisite to the giving a full Assurance of the Perform∣ance of all Our most reall Professions, concerning the maintenance of the true Reformed Protestant Religion esta∣blished in this Kingdom, with due re∣gard to the ease of tender consciences, the just Priviledges of Parliament, and the Liberty and Property of the Sub∣ject, according to the Laws of the Land; As also by granting a generall Pardon without or with exceptions, as shall be thought fit. In order to which blessed Peace, We do desire & propound to the Lords and Commons of Parlia∣ment assembled at Westmnster, That they appoint such, and so many Persons as they shall think fit sufficiently autho∣rized by them to attend Vs at Our Ar∣my, upon safe conduct to come and re∣turn (which We do hereby grant) and conclude wth Vs, how the Premisses and all other things in question betwixt Vs and them, may be fully settled;
whereby all unhappy mistakings be∣twixt Vs and Our People being re∣moved, there may be a present Cessation of Arms, and, as soon as may be, a to∣tall disbanding of all Armies, the Sub∣ject have his due, and We be restored to our Rights. Wherein if this Our offer shall be accepted, there shall be nothing wanting on Our part, which may make Our people secure and happy. Given at Our Court at Evesham the 4. of Iuly, 1644.
To the Lords and Commons of Par∣liament Assembled at VVestminster. CHARLES R. IT having pleased God in so eminent a manner, late∣ly to blesse Our Armies in these Parts with successe, We do not so much joy in that blessing for any other consideration, as for the hopes We have that it may be a meanes to make others lay to heart, as We do, the miseries brought and continued upon Our King∣dom by this unnaturall War, and that it may open your eares, and dispose your mindes, to embrace those offers of Peace and Reconciliation, which have been so often, and so earnestly made unto you by Vs, and from the constant and fer∣vent endevours, of which We are re∣solved never to desist. In Pursuance
whereof, We do, upon this occasion con∣jure you to take into consideration Our (too long neglected) Message of the fourth of July from Evesham, which We again renue unto you. And that you will speedily send Vs such an Answer thereunto, as may shew unto Our poor Subjects, some light of a deliverance from their present calamities by a happy Accomodation, toward which We do here engage the Word of a King, to make good all those things which We have therein promised, and really to en∣devour a happy conclusion of this Trea∣ty. And so God direct you in the wayes of Peace, Given at Our Court at Tavestock the 8. of September, 1644. FINIS.
