C3601A E460_33 R205133 99864571 116802
THE RESOLUTION OF The Prince of Wales, concerning Lieute∣nant Generall Cromwel, and the routng of the Scottish Army, and his present Design with his Shipping. With the Results and Proceedings of the Princes Councell aboard the Admirall, con∣cerning Captain Battens falling in at Tibury Hope, with a Squadron of Ships, to joyn with the Water-men and Sea-men, and an Army from London, for relief of Colchester. Likewise, His Majesties Declaration concerning all those who have taken up Arms against Him and have been gainers by the Wars of ENGLAND and His Resolution thereupon. As also, the most pious, and Christian Expressions of a most Religious, and renowned King, touching his People. royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE LONDON, Printed ANNO DOM. 1648.
THE Kings Maiesties GRACIOUS DCLARATION TO All His subjects in generall, concerning all those who have taken up Arms against Him, and His Resolution to take no revenge upon any who have assisted the Parliament. THE Kings Majesty having received the Message from both Houses of Parlia∣ment, presented by the Right honorable the Earl of Middlesex, who desired his Majesties speedy Answer: Telling him, that their return was limited to 1o dais. The King then askt, whether the ten dayes were not to be counted from that of the delivery of the Message; My
Lord of Middlesex answered. No, Sir, they are to be coun∣ted from the day of our setting forth. The Kings Answer. I have not then five daies allowed me to consider of my Answer, which I presume you expect in writing; And I have none to helpe mee, no not so much as a Clark to transcribe; however I will really contribute my best en∣deavours to a happy eace. After a short pauze, the King further declared, I would have sent to the Parliament, but I desire them to take no∣tice, That my long silence proceeded not from a dull, stu∣pid lazinesse, or my being insensible of my owne or the Kingdoms condiion, but from the incapacity that lay on me by reason of former Votes. But now a way is opened to a treaty, which I ever ap∣prehended, as the only means to a durable peace, I shall cheerfully embrace it, and none shall more speedily run to it, then my self. And for my part, as being more concerned then any one in this Kingdom, nay should I say more then all, I speak it without vanitie, I hope it will be thought no Hi∣perbolicall Expression, for I am assured, whosoever gaines I shall be a loser. His Majestie then read the Votes to himself, and having read them, declared. I like them well, my desires being included in these Votes: for what can I desire more, then to treat with Ho∣nour,
Freedom, and Safetie, upon the propositions, and such other things, as either I or the Houses shall of∣fer. QUERY. His Majestie then askt, Whether the Commissioners to treat were yet nominated? REPLY. My Lord of Middlesex answered, No, Sir. Then the King said, In a Treaty, two sorts of things are considerable, some necessarie, others convenient. Then the King said to them, J will go and apply my self to my Answer, that J may not delay a minute to promote so good a work: And then withdrew, and for that time dis∣missed the Commissioners. And upon the time of the Commissioners waiting on his Majestie to receive his Answer, and upon their en∣trance into the presence, the King said, he was sorry that he was limited to so short a time, and had so little helpes for disparch, yet notwithstanding he had prepared his an∣swer. And immediatly before the reading thereof, used these words, That the last Message he sent to the Houses, was deli∣vered to the Commissioners sealed, And had it beene so presented, it would have been better for Him, but now he thought it fit to send this open, because he could not be in a worse condition, being under so close a Restraint, none being suffered to speak a word to Him, without suspition.
He then produced his Answer, and read it aloud in the presence Chamber, being full of company: and after hee had read it, his Majesty said, That he hoped hee had therein indeavoured to give sa∣tisfaction to his Parliament: there being nothing in it but what he conceived implyed in their Votes. And farther added, That there might be some that would oppose this Treaty, as being gainers by these wars, and therefore desired the continuance of it. Others might think him revengfull, but he declared, he was so far from seeking revenge, That if a straw lay in the way to hurt them, hee would stoop and take it up to pre∣vent it. And further declared in these words, God forgive them, for J do. Then the Commissioners comming to take their leaves of him, he called them to him, and asked them, how they liked his Answer, they told him, They thought and ho∣ped, it would produce a sudden and happy wel grounded peace. By an Eye and Earwitnesse, who not trusting to his memory, made use of his pen: and for the truth whereof, the Relator appeales to the Commissioners themselves, or to any there present, who had the happinesse with him, to hear the most pious, and Christian Expressions of a most Religious King.
The Copy of a Letter from Sandwich in Kent, declaring the Resolu∣tion of the Prince of Wales, concerning the Scots great Overthrow in the North. SIR, I Have received your Letter, together with the Inclosed, wherein you make mention of the great Blow in the North, a copy whereof, we have shot into the two Castles of Deal and San∣down, out of an Arrow, and have sent another aboard the Prince, by a Sea-man whom we had prisoner, who (as we hear) is much troubled thereat, and resolved to draw off his shipping from Margarets Point, and the North Forland, and to send a Squadron of ships towards the Coast of Scarbrough, for the reliefe of that Ca∣stle, and the revolted Governour, and to attend the motion of Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Major Ceneral Lambert. As for the rest of the Navy, we hear that his Highnesse is resolved to stay with them upon the Downs, and to attend the motion of the E. of Warwick, and to guard and secure the nar∣row Seas, conceiving that to be the onliest way for the advancement of his Fathers cause, and to
curb the Rebels, (as he is pleased to call us) who are the main obstructers to this his present De∣sign. Capt. Batten being come from Holland, with a squadron of ships, & joyning with the Prince, a councel was called aboard the Admirall, their results was, whether he should fall in at Tilbury to joyne with all the Water-men and Sea-men upon the River, which with the conjunction of the 10000 promised from London, would be a numerous army for raising of the siege at Col∣chester; but having intelligence of the blasting of their design in London, the Prince hath chan∣ged his resolution, and recalled the votes of the councell. Sandwich 23. August, two in the morning. Per Post. FINIS.
