c4231bb E199_10 E199_11 99860180 157509
THE NATIONALL ASSEMBLY OF SCOTLAND, WITH The OATH taken by the Parliament men, &c. Printed at Edinburgh, by James Bryson, 1641. WHEREUNTO Is annexed his most gracious Majesties SPEECH, To the PARLIAMENT of Scotland, the 17. of August. 1641. C R LONDON, Printed by T. FAVVCET. MDCXLI.
In the Nationall Assembly at Edin∣burgh, the 4. day of August, 1641. THe Assembly seriously considering the present case and condition of this Kirk and Kingdome, what great things the Lord hath done for us; especially since the renuing of our Covenant, notwithstanding our former back-slydings and defection: And if we ei∣ther becomeremisse in the duties of pietie, or shall not constantly hold and keepe our Religion, unto which wee have bound our selves so straitly and so∣lemnly, what dishonour wee doe unto the name of God before men, who have their eyes upon us, and how great judgement wee bring upon our selves. Upon these and the like considerations, The Assem∣bly doth find it most necessary to stir up themselves and to provoke all others, both Ministers and Peo∣ple of all degrees, not only to the religious exercises of publick worship in the congregation, and private worship in their families, and of every one by them∣selves apart; but also to the duties of mutuall edifi∣cation, by instruction, admonition, exhorting one an∣other to forwardnesse in Religion, and comforting one another in whatsoever distresse, and that in all their meetings, whether in the way of civil conver∣sation, or by reason of their particular callings, or a∣ny other occasions offered by divine providence, no corrupt cōmunication proceed out of their mouth,
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. And because the moanes have been, and may still be despised or abused, and particularly the duty of mu∣tuall edification, which have been so little in use, and so few know to practise in the right manner, may be upon the one part subject to the mocking of ungod∣ly and worldly men, who can not endure that in o∣thers which they are not willing to practise them∣selves: And upon the other part, to many errors and abuses, which the godly through their weakenesse may fall, or, by the craftinesse of others, may bee drawn into, Such as are errour, heresie, schisme, scan∣dall, self-conceit, and despising of others, presuming above the common calling of Christians, and usur∣ping that which is proper to the Pastoral vocation, contempt, or mis-regard of the publick means, idle and unprofitable questions, which edifie not, uncha∣ritable censurings, neglect of duties in particular cal∣lings, businesse in other mens matters and callings, and many such evils in doctrine, charity, and man∣ners, which have dolefully rent the bowels of other Kirks, to the great prejudice of the Gospel. Therefore the Assembly moved with the zeale of God against all abuses and corruptions, and accor∣ding to their manifold obligation, most earnestly desiring, and thirsting to promove the worke of re∣formation, and to have the comfort and power of true godlinesse sensible to every soule, and Religion to be universally practised in every family, and by e∣very person at all occasions, doth charge all the Mi∣nisters and members of this Kirk, whom they doe
represent, that according to their severall places and vocations, they endeavour to suppresse all impiety, and mocking of religious exercises; especiall of such as put foule aspersions and factious, or odious names upon the godly; and upon the other part, that in the feare of God they be aware, and spiritually wise, that under the name and pretext of religious exercises, o∣therwise lawfull and necessary, they fall not into the aforesaid abuses; and specially that they eschew all meetings which are apt to breed errour, scandall, schisme, neglect of duties and particular callings, And such other evils as are the works not of the Spi∣rit, but of the flesh, and are contrary to truth and peace; and that the Presbyteries and Synods have a care to take order with such as transgresse the one way or other. In the Assembly at Edinburgh the 6. day of Angust. 1641. SInce it hath pleased God to vouchsafe us the li∣berty of yearely Generall Assemblies, It is or∣dained according to the Acts of the Assembly at E∣dinburgh, 1639. and at Aberdeen, 1640. That no novation in Doctrine, worship or Government bee brought in or practised in this Kirk, unlesse it be first propounded, examined and allowed in the Ge∣nerall Assembly: and that trangressours in this kind bee censured by Presbyteries and Synodes.
