C4606 E731_18 99865965 118223
Clavis ad aperiendum Carceris Ostia. OR, The High Point of the WRIT of Habeas Corpus DISCUSSED. And not onely the several branches of the said Writ, but also the Authorities of both Common and Statute-Law (with divers ancient and obscure Records) produced and cleared. Shewing the Remedies against Illegal and Unjust IMPRISONMENT. (Fit for the perusal of every English-man.) It being the Case of Mr. JOHN STREATER, in Mi∣chaelmas & Hilary-Terms last past, at the Upper-Bench-Bar: he being committed by vertue of an Order of the late Councel of State, and an Order of Parliament of Nov. 21. 1653. Wherein are recited The Arguments of the Prisoner and his Learned Counsel, on the one part; and those of Mr. Attorney-General. on the other. With the Opinion of the Reverend JUDGES upon the whole Matter. Also, a NARRATIVE of Mr. John Lilburn's proceedings in Michaelmas. Term, in order to the obtaining of an Habeas Corpus. Optima Regnandi Norma est custodia Legis: Justitia & fraenare viros Prudentia summa est. London, Printed by James Cottrel; and are to be sold by him at his house on Addle-hill, and by Richard Moone, at the seven stars in Paul's Church-yard, neer the great North-door. 1654.
The Publisher's Apologie. THe Intent of publishing the Proceedings in this Case of Mr. Streater, cannot be taken or look'd upon in the least to re∣flect upon the present Power; neither indeed doth it speak that language: for here you will finde, that under other Powers he could not obtain Justice; yet under this he hath. Nay, I am credibly informed, that his Keeper (upon his Address to the present Power, to know whe∣ther he should return or allow the Habeas Corpus) had this answer, That they would leave the whole business to the Law. And we finde, they did not interpose with their power, in obstructing the course of the Law. The Law is and ought to be the Standard to measure all Causes that arise between party and party, and the Commonwealth and any party. Deut. 17.11. Accor∣ding to the sentence of the Law, shalt thou judge or do. Deut. 27. Cursed be he that removeth his neighbours land∣mark. And vers. 19. Cursed be he that perverteth the judge∣ments of the stranger, fatherless, and widew. That our Laws are our Landmarks, and bounds between those in Authority and our selves, it's known to many, and ought to be known to all. I shall briefly shew what was the ground upon which Mr. Streater (as I suppose) did build his resolution, in
proceeding by Habeas Corpus to obtain his liberty. Af∣ter that, shall present you with some Opinions of the learned in the Law upon the Writ De homine Reple∣giando, and the Writ of Mainprise. As to the Writ of Habeas Corpus, you see here in this a Patern before you; I shall touch upon the other two; these three Writs being the onely Remedies against wrongful, vexatious, and long imprisonment. The grounds upon which he had good encourage∣ment to expect success in his endeavours to obtain his liberty by Habeas Corpus, were, 1. That nothing could (or at least, ought to) stand in force against Law and Reason; or that any Command (although by a Parliament) could over-rule Law. 2. That since the Parliament was dissolved, the Or∣der was void; and finding by the new Constitution of Government, that the Lord Protector did swear to go∣vern by Law. If the Parliament had not dissolved, the Law would have relieved him, if the benefit thereof had been al∣lowed. For no man ought to answer anywhere, but where he ought, and where he may have a like remedy in case of Injustice. Suppose that a man be indicted in Parliament, or o∣therwise prosecuted, and he refuseth to answer; shall that be accounted a Contempt, when the Law hath ap∣pointed he shall answer elsewhere, in the ordinary Courts of Judicature? Parliaments were not cut out to be the Executive Powers. When the Parliament had condemned the Earl of Strafford, they ordered, That their proceedings against him should not be accounted as a President. If a Parliament command a man to be arrested, and
that arrest be not according to the Law, there lieth an Action of false imprisonment against him that so ar∣rested, as against him that arresteth by the Kings com∣mand, as was resolved by the whole Court, in 16 H. 4. It was also resolved by all the Judges of England, That the King cannot arrest any man by his commandment, but by Writ, or by Order or Rule of some Court of justice, where the Cause ought to depend according to Law. So may Parliaments, if they will take upon them the Executive power. If this be binding to a King, it is much more binding to a Parliament; because it is to be presumed, a Parlia∣ment will not break the Law in any point; it is incon∣sistent with their policie and prudence, and the end of the Trust of a Parliament. It hath been the care of Parliaments always to provide to the contrary; as Parl. 42 Edw. 3. chap. 3. it was there provided, That no person should be put to answer, but before Iustices and things of Re∣cord, by due proces, or Writ original, according to the old Law of the Land. And because most offenders are proceeded against as is therein provided, none ought to be proceeded a∣gainst otherwise, for that unaccustomed proceedings deprive a prisoner of making those advantages in his defence which the Law alloweth. Besides, the Jurisdiction of a Parliament may be plea∣ded unto; as in the Case of the Maior of Cambridg, who was summoned before King Rich. 2. in full Parliament, and there impeached of High-treason against the King; and being expresly within the Statute of Treason made in 25 Edw. 3. chap. 12. he surrendered up the Charter of Cambridge, in full Parliament, unto the will and pleasure of the King, as forfeited into his hands for
Treason and Rebellion. Yet as to the point of Trea∣son committed by them, they plead, That the King and his Lords assembled in Parliament had not cognizance or ju∣risdiction to meddle with Treason committed by them. The which Plea was allowed as good in Law. Rot. Parl. 5 Rich. 2. Mem. 9. Numb. 45, 58, 59. But here it may be objected, That the King and the Lords were but a part of the Parliament: the King was but the Executive power, and the Lords the Indicial; and that now the Parliament of the Commons have joyned their Legis∣lative power to the Iudicial and Executive, and exercise all joyntly; and therefore their jurisdiction is not to be pleaded to. To this I answer, That the Legislative power ever did restrain and limit the Executive and Judicial: and the same reason why they did formerly limit it when it was in the Lords and the King, should binde them to limit it in themselves. We may finde that Parliaments have limited them∣selves; as that, 1 H. 4. ch. 14. where it is provided, That from henceforth all the Appeals to be made for things done within the Realm, shall be tried and determined by the good Laws of the Realm. And further, it is provided, That no Appeals be from henceforth made, or any wise pursued in Parliament for any time to come. Never any Parliament declared that they would take upon them to commi Prisoners, or relieve Priso∣ners. But the Parliament of the 17 of the late King hath declared, That it is the right of every individual of this Nation to bevelieved by Habeas Corpus: and have enacted, that the contrary shall not be. All which considered, although it be or should be granted to be an Order of Parliament, yet for that the
Parliament ought not to have done it, I do aver, They have exceeded the limits and bounds of Law and Rea∣son. Therefore he ought to be relieved by Law. Sir Edw. Cook, 4 part Instit. fol. 35. saith, That Parlia∣ments ought to keep within the circle of the Law. The late Parliament, in their Remonstrance of Sept. 2. 1642. (book Declar. p. 693.) took it very hainously, as an unworthy scandal, that the King accused them with disposing of Subjects lives and liberties by their Votes contrary to the law of the Land. Indeed, there is no reason why a Parliament should dispose of any mans liberty by an Order, or that an Or∣der should be a rule for Judges to judg contrary to Law. Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and the Act of the 17 of the late King (all which are but declarations of the good old Law, as Sir Edw. Cook saith, 2 part In∣stit.) do impower the Judges sitting at Westminster-hall with so substantial and unquestionable power to relieve prisoners in case of wrong or long imprison∣ment, that cannot be over-ruled by an Order of Parl. Commands, because they come from a Parliament, are not therefore to be obeyed, but rather for the Law, Reason, and Justice in such Commands. Myrror, chap. 5. sect. 1. saith, that it is an abuse, that ma∣ny Ordinances are grounded upon Pleasure more then upon Law; and that Parliaments ought to follow the rule of Law. It may be objected, That a Parliament are not bound to shew cause, or give a reason for their actings. To this I answer, They are bound to give a reason or shew cause for all their actions or actings in which they will publikely appear, and more especially in a Case of this nature; which though it concern but one man in particular, yet relatively it concerns the whole nation; the Record being of great use.
The end of Society and Laws, is to protect the In∣nocent: and no man ought to be taken out of that pro∣tection, unless he be found to conspire against the good of Society. A Prisoner is look'd upon in Law as one spotted with the leprosie of Infamy; and Imprisonment is accounted a Civil death: it is therefore reasonable, that he that is so wounded and slain in his reputation and livelihood, should know for what, and why he is detained, else it may be an evil president to future Ages; as his reman∣ding the last Term may prove such a president (if fol∣lowed) as may be a strong link in a chain for Slavery. But I hope a succeeding Parliament will do by that, as the late Parliament did in Mr. Hampden's Case. Feb. 26. 164. Ordered, That all the Rolls that had any thing recor∣ded of his Case of Ship-money, should be crossed and razed with a pen, and subscribed by the Clerk of the Parliament. Otherwise it may be an innocent mans case to have high things suggested against him: and if any innocent mans case, it may be every ones; he may be accused by he knows not who, destroyed in prison for he knows not what, and delivered thence he knows not when. Doubtless it was the prudence and policie of our forefathers, to esteem so highly of proceedings by Re∣cord, where the prosecutor and the accusation may ap∣pear to the view of the world. By this, the Nation might have an account of its Free-men. As Parliaments are bound to shew cause in the Case afore-mentioned; so are they also for all Acts or Sta∣tutes, as may be seen in the Preambles to all Statutes, wherein the reasons upon which they are enacted are laid down, to the end that their successors may see up∣on what reason of State they were enacted.
A Parliament is but intrusted with Legislative power, to such an end: it is therefore fit they should in all un∣dertakings declare the grounds thereof, that it may be known they answer the end of their trust. But it cannot be supposed that the Nation ever did or ever will intrust a Parliament with a power to im∣prison men and shew no cause. The Law hath intrusted the Judges of the Upper Bench to relieve; and the Act of the 17 of the late King, intituled, An Act for abolish∣ing the Star-chamber, and regulating the Councel-board, commandeth, that the Iudges of the Kings Bench shall set at liberty any person committed to prison by vertue of a special command, if no cause of imprisonment be shewn upon the Re∣turn of the Habeas Corpus. This it saith is according to the old Law of the land. But it may be objected, The Parliament is a higher Court of Iudicature, and the Upper Bench a lower; and so the inferiour cannot control the superior: if it should be other∣wise, there would never be an end, all would go in a Circle. To this I answer, That his being enlarged cannot be accounted controling the Order of Parliament, in re∣gard the Law doth warrant a discharge. The inferior are not bound to obey the superior, but as the superior commandeth Law or Reason. The Parliament cannot control the Judges of the Upper Bench, when they shall judge according to Law: but a Parliament may control a Judgement there, in case of error of Judgment, & not otherwise. A Parlia∣ment cannot command the Judges of the Upper Bench to give a Judgment for a Plaintiff, when in Law & Rea∣son it ought to be given for the Defendant. If an Habeas Corpus be of sufficient force to bring the body of a Parliaments prisoner to the Bar, that the
Judges may enquire the cause of imprisonment: then, if there appear no cause, the Judges cannot give Judgment for his remanding, although he be prisoner by Order of Parliament, because the Law requireth his discharge. Besides, the Executive power in administration of ju∣stice properly in this Case of relieving prisoners by Ha∣beas Corpus, is by Law setled in the Upper Bench; which cannot be altered, but by Act of Parliament at least. Another Objection may be, That a Parliament is a Le∣gistative power, and therefore this Court cannot relieve a pri∣soner committed by them. To this I answer: If a Parliament be the Legislative power, they ought not to take upon them the Executive. Its contrary to Reason, that one should be incorporated in the other, without a perfect distinction betwixt the one and the other, that the Legislative might check and curb the Executive. It may be further objected, That Parliaments have al∣tered Laws, and may daily, because they are a Legislative power: To this I answer: Statute-law may be altered, but the Fundamental Law cannot be altered; as in case of life, liberty, and estate: it saith they shall not be taken away, but where there is just cause for so doing. Fortescue in his book of the Commendations of the Law of England, saith, The King cannot alter it, for that he governeth as well Politickly as Royally. Much less a Par∣liament, who are altogether Politick, & to that end the Judges ever sate in Parliaments. And the care and duty of Parliaments was lively character'd by the Parl. of 4 Car. who took no small pains in enquiring what the intent of the Law was in the point of a Habeas Corpus. The which Parl. did adjudg the Upper Bench to be the only proper & supreme Court to judge in this point.
It must be supposed that the prisoner was intitled to a claim of like benefit with other or any of this nation. It is contrary to Reason, to suppose that an Order of Parliament can deprive him of the benefit which all men claim, and may & ought to have according to Law. Queen Eliz. being in want of money upon an Expe∣dition into Ireland, a general Benevolence was required: and it went on for a time, so far, as it came to be volun∣tarily levied in the Innes of Court. But not long after (as it was said) when the Queen was informed that this Benevolence was expresly against the Stat. of Rich. 3. and against the Laws, she immediately commanded that the money so levied should be restored back again unto several persons upon whom it was levied. And this Sir Rich. Hutton alledgeth, (in his Argum. in Mr. Hampden's Case) that his proportion was 20 s. which was after repayed. Now if it be the interest and duty of a Prince to keep within the bounds of Law and Reason, it is much more the interest of a Parliament. If it be here objected, That the Parliament might have levied the like sum, upon the like emergencie: I grant it: but the Parliament cannot, neither is it the end of their Trust, to take away any mans life or liber∣ty, and shew no cause: and if there be no cause, it is a∣gainst Reason that they should. There may be reason for levie of money, for common defence. Much more might be offered in this Case, to prove that the prisoner had good authority for what he did, and for his not applying himself to the present Autho∣rito, otherwise then by Law. I think he did like a just man, that would neither have wrong, nor do any. He that buyeth things by weight, will go to the Scales to
weigh them; and stands not to the courtesie of the sel∣ler. The Law and Courts of Justice are the Scales. It is better for those in power to send all Causes to be weighed there, then in their own brests. Now I shall briefly touch upon the Writs, or Keys for the opening of prison-doors. I hope it will not offend, to speak in the language of our Laws. Magna Charta and other good Laws were by Act of Parl appointed to be read four times a yeer, that the people might know their priviledges & just rights. As to the Writ De homine Replegiando, I shall present you with but one example, for that this Writ is upon the matter out of use, and the Writ of Habeas Corpus supplieth and lieth in those Cases wherein it lay. If 2 or 3 men be taken or imprisoned, they may sue a joynt Writ De homine Replegiando: & yet Hilary the 8 H. 4.31. such a Writ sued by two was abated: but yet it seems by Law they may sue joyntly; and the Writ to be such. THe King, to the Sher' of Linc' &c. We command thee that justly and without delay to be replev' thou cause B, C, and D. whom thy self didst take, and taken dost hold, as is said; or whom D and E took, and taken hold, as is said: unless taken they were by our special precept, or of our Chief Justice, or for the death of men, or for our Forest, or any other right wherefore according to the custom of Engl. they are not replevis. That no more a clamour therefore we hear, for defect of justice. Witness, &c. And upon that, he shall have an Alias and a Pluries, and At∣tachment, if need be. But if he who apprehendeth the man do claim him as his villain, and the same is returned by the Sheriff upon the Alias or the Pluries, then the Plaintiff shall have another Writ or Pluries to the Sheriff. Whe Writ of Habeas Corus lieth in all Cafes whatsoever, in point of wrong or long imprisonment, be it by whomsoever. There is also the Writ of Mainprise very fit to be known; and it relieveth against vexatious and long imprisonment in several Cases.
The Writ of Mainprise lieth properly where a man is taken for suspition of Felony, or indicted of Felony, for the which thing by the Law he is baylable and he offereth sufficient surety unto the She∣riff or others who have authority to bayl him and he or they do re∣fuse to let him be bayled; then he who is so kept in prison may sue forth such Writ. THe King, to the Sher' &c. of the part of A taken and detain' in our Goal at Gloucest, for certain Larceny of a certain horse at S. as is said don. Whereof before thee by a certain Inquest by thy Of∣fice taken he is indicted as is said: To Ʋs is shown, that although he frequently offered the justice Mainprise, who him should mainprise, according to form of the Stat. at Westm. of late set forth, in which is contained, That those who of such Larceners before the Sher. or Bay∣lies by inqu. by their Office taken be indicted, are replevisable, so that they be of good name; yet thou those mainpr. from the foresaid R. to take, and him by such mainpr. from the Goal fores. hither hast delayed to deliver, and yet delayest, to the no small loss and grievance of him R. and manifest peril of his life, and against the form of the Stat. a∣foresaid. And because we will not that the same R. in the prison fores. against the form of the Stat. fores. longer to be detain. We comm. thee, that if the same R. be of good name, and by inquest before thee by the Office taken of the Larceny fores. hath been indicted, as fores. is, and for the same Larceny, and no other occasion, in the prison foresaid is de∣tained, and shall finde thee suffic. mainpr. who him will mainpr. to have before our Justic. our Goal aforesaid to deliver, assigne, or to be assi∣gned at the next coming of the same, that Goal to deliv. to stand to the right for the Larceny fores. according to the law and cust. of our Realm of Engl. then him R. from the prison fores. in the mean time cause thou to be delivered by the Mainpr. aboves. according to the form of the Stat. aforesaid. And have there the names of those Mainpr. and this Writ. Witness, &c. But note that it is oued by the Stat. made anno 21 E. 3. chap. 4. That the Sheriff shall not take Indictments by Writs or Commis∣sion directed unto them. And so the Stat. of Westm. 1. chap. 15. for those who shall be bayled. And if a man be indicted of Felony before the Bayliff of the Hun∣dred, and put into the Goal for the same if he offer sufficient sureties to the Bayliffs, and they will not bayl him, then he who is so imprisoned may have such a Writ to the Sheriff as followeth.
THe K. &c. of the part of I. It is shown us, that where as he by certain him emu∣lating of the Larceny of a cert. O of Rich. &c. at R. done as is said before the bayly of E of B. of his Hund. of P. by inquest by office of the same bayly taken, in∣dicted, and on that occasion taken, and in our prison of D. detained is: And although the same I. frequently offered him suffic. Mainpr. who him should mainpr. accor∣ding to the form of the Statute at Westm. of late fet forth; in which is contai. &c. as above: We Command thee, that if the same I. of good name be, and by inquest before the same Baylisss by their Office taken of the Larceny aforesaid indicted hath been, as aforesaid us, and for the same Larceny, &c. as above, &c. And there is another Writ for a man who is taken for suspicion of felony, and kept in prison; and another Writ for him who is arrested and kept in pri∣son for petty Larceny, &c. but then this clause shall be put in the Writ, viz. if of other Larceny before indicted they were not: but this clause, So that of good name they be, shall not be put in that Writ, where it is sued for him who is taken for petty Larceny. And if a man who is of good fame be appealed by an approver, for which cause he is arrested and kept in prison, then he may sue a Writ to the sheriff, to let him be bayled upon good surety. And so if a man be appealed by an Approver, and he be taken and kept in prison, and afterward the Approver dieth, he may sue a Writ to the sheriff to set him at liberty upon sufficient bayl, if he be not a notorious felon, although he be not a man of good fame. And if a man be indicted as accessary to a Murther, as by his assent and pro∣curement, or receit, &c. or of aiding or counselling, &c. and be taken for the fame, he may sue a Writ to the sheriff to take bayl of him, until the principals beconvict or attainted, if they be of good fame. But the stat. of Westm. C. 15. doth not speak so largely as the Writs in the Register do: for the statute doth not speak of Commandment, Abatement, or Consent, &c. And if a man be taken by the Kings Commission, and kept in prison for fe∣lony, or evil doing, he may by his friends put in sureties in the Chancery that he will appear before the Justices, &c. and be of good behaviour, &c. and that body for body: and thereupon he shall have a Writ out of the Chancery unto the sheriff, or to the Constable of the Castle where he is imprisoned, to set him at liberty, if he be imprisoned for that cause, and for no other. And if a man be indicted before Justices of peace of Trespass, and impriso∣ned for the same by Proces, he may sue a Writ out of the Chancery, directed to the sheriff, to take bayl of him to appear before the Justices of the sessions, and set him at liberty. But the Justices of the Peace may take bayl of him, and set him at liberty, if they so please. If a man be indicted of Trespass before the Justices of the peace, and put in prison therefore, he may sue a Certiorare to remove the Judgement into the Kings bench, directed to the Justices of the Peace, & a Hab. Corp. to the goaler, that he bring the party at his costs before the K. in his bench such a day, &c. And if a man be indicted of forestalling, and put in prison for the same, he may sue a Writ out of the Chancery to the sheriff to take bayl of him to ap∣pear before the justices, &c. to answ. the trespass, & then to set him at liberty. And if a man fueth a Writ of Error upon a false judgment given against him in any City or Borough, that he is condemned, and kept in prison, he may
sue a Writ out of the Chancery directed to the Maior or Bayliffs of the City or Borough, to take surety to answer what shall be due to the King and to the party, if the judgment be affirmed; commanding them to set him at liberty. And so if a man sueth an Appeal of Maim against another, and after he is arrested at the suit of the defendant, or of another in any City or Borough, to the intent that he may not sue his Appeal, he may have a Writ out of the Chancery, to the Bayliffs or Maior, that he take the sureties to answer to the party there; and that they set him at liberty. And all those Writs appear in the Register. And if a man be appealed of Robbery, he may sue a Writ out of the Chancery to the Sheriff, that he take sureties of him to appear before the Justices, &c. and that they set him at liberty; and if they have not ar∣rested him, that he do not arrest him, if the party offers to finde such sureties to the sheriff, &c. And if a man be sued in Debt or Trespass, and be arrested by Capia, or Exigent, and kept in prison, he may sue a Writ to the sheriff out of the Chan∣cery, to take bayl of him to appear at a day, &c. and that he set him at liber∣ty, &c. But now by the stat. made anno 23 H. 6. every sheriff is bound to let bayl every one in his custody, who is arrested by Writ, Bill, or Warrant, in any Action personal, or upon Indictment of Trespass, if they offer reason∣able sureties to appear at the day, &c. But persons condemned, or outlawed, or excommunicated, or taken for surety of the Peace, or persons who are committed to prison by commandment of the Justice, and persons wandring, who refuse to serve, who remain in the custody of the sheriff; all those persons are excepted: for the sheriff ought not to let such persons to bayl. If a man be condemned in Trespass before Justices of the Peace, and be arrested and put into prison in the custody of the sheriff, he may sue a Writ out of the Chancery to the sheriff, that he take bayl of him, and set him at liberty; and also he may have a Writ directed to the Justices of the Peace, commanding them to take bayl, and set him at liberty; or if the party do finde sureties in the Chancery to appear and stand right in Law, then he shall have a Writ directed to the Justices of the Peace, or unto the sheriff, to set him at liberty. If a man be bound in a statute-Merchant, payable at a day certain, and at the day he pay part of the money, and hath a release from the Conusee of the residue, if the Conusee sue execution, and arrest the party who hath the release, then the Recognizor may sue in Chancery, &c. by his friends, and finde sureties, as body for body, that he shall appear such a day at the Kings bench, and pay the money there, if he cannot otherwise be discharged; and thereupon he shall have a Writ to the sheriff, reciting the whole matter, and how he hath found sureties in the Chancery, as is aforesaid; commanding him for to set him at liberty; and thereupon, the sheriff ought to set him at liber∣ty: and if he will not so do, he shall have an Alias, and a Pluries, and an Attachment against the sheriff, &c. And if a man be condemned in any Court, and he is taken in execution, and afterwards he is removed by an Habeas Corpus, or a Certiorare in Chan∣cery,
he shall not be bayled, but shall be remanded to prison, there to re∣main according to Law, until he hath satisfied the party plaintiff, &c. 2 H. 5. chap. 2. This is according to the opinion of the Reverend Judge Anthony Fitz-Herbert. I inserted this here, to the end that people may know the Law in this case, and not look upon their prison-walls, and perish for want of advice. This being sufficient to invite those that are wrongfully or vexatiously kept in prison, to endeavour the recovering of their liberties. It also giveth light enough to direct those in such conditions to apply themselves to Counsel learned in the Law, upon whom (in their very taking upon them that pro∣fession) lieth a great trust, the well or ill being of their Clyents and fami∣lies: and possibly one family being destroyed, in them all their posterity are destroyed also. Counsellors in Law are the Champions of their Clyents, whose causes are to be defended by their wisdom, learning and courage. Myrror, ch. 3. sect. 1. And because that commonly people know not all Exceptions in Pleading, Counsel are necessary, who know how to defend their Clyents. I have one word more, which will not be below the greatness of the greatest to take notice of: it is touching Informers or Tale-bearers. Solo∣mon (you know) doth give a notable Character of them. Indeed I can∣not but take notice of them: they are the onely plagues of a Nation. How many families have been, and possibly may be destroyed, in such States and Commonwealths in which they are harboured, countenanced, and encoura∣ged? They have been an ancient grief in this Nation. Against such, many wholesome provisions have been made, as in 27 R. 2. chap. 6. in these words: Whereas many people have been compelled to come before the Kings Councel, or in the Chancery, by Writ grounded upon untrue suggestions; the Chancellor for the time being, by and by after that such suggestions be duely found and proved untrue, shall have power to award and ordain great damages unto him that is so unduly troubled. Perhaps some may say, That many things are timely discovered, and thereby the growth of that which may tend to the disturbing of the publike peace, is pre∣vented. Were it my work, I doubt not but to lay down evident and demonstrable reasons, to convince any rational man of that opinion, so that he should conclude, That nothing can tend more to the detriment of the people in ge∣neral, and more especially to those in power, then the countenancing of In∣formers, or such as make suggestions against any one. Those that practise it, do it either in hope of profit, preferment, favour, or out of envie; and it is worse when neither the suggestions nor the suggestor shall appear, but a man be committed, and stand six or seven months impri∣soned, and know not to the last hour the one or the other; as in this Case. The Law of England seemeth to abhor such devices and ways. Without our Laws, we are no other then slaves. That the people of England, who have lost so much of their blood and treasure in defence of them, may not be deprived of them, is the real wish and desire of
The first Appearance of Captain John Streater, late Quartermaster-General of the Foot in Ireland, at the Bar of the Upper Bench in Westminster-hall, by vertue of an Habeas Corpus. The Habeas Corpus was read. BY the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament. To the Keeper of the prison of the Gate-house in the Liberty of Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, or to his Deputy, These, greet∣ing. We command you that the body of John Streater, in the prison under your custody detained, as it is said, together with the day and cause of his taking and detain∣ing, by whatsoever name the said John is called therein, you have before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster Wednesday next after the morrow of St. Martin, to undergo and receive those things which our said Court of Upper Bench shall then and there order concerning him in this part. And this you must not omit at your peral. And have
you then this Writ. Witness Henry Rolle at Westminster, the 12 day of Novemb. in the yeer of our Lord 1653. By the Court. Ex. Broughton. Capt. Streater. My Lord, I desire that this Writ with the Re∣turn may be filed. Judge. What say you, Mr. Prideaux? Prid. Nothing. Judg. Let it be filed. Have you any Counsel? Cap. Str. Yes, my Lord. Judg. What do you say to it? Cap. Str. I desire to have a copie of the return, and that I may be bayled. Judg. It cannot be: you are committed by the Parliament, and you must shew cause first. Cap. Str. I am ready: I desire to speak to it now, both I and my Counsel. Mr. Twisden. I was a Counsel for the first part of the return, but not for this. Judg. What say you? Mr. Freeman. I desire he may have a copie of the return. Judg. Do so, and let him be here again on Friday next: let it be so. Cap. Str. I desire, my Lord, I may not be put to the trouble to sue for a new Habeas Corpus. And then Mr. Streater not being permitted to speak any more, he was taken away by the Marshal of the Court of the Upper Bench, and carried to the prison of the Upper Bench in Southwark. Colonel Barksted then appeared upon Lieut. Col. Lilburn's Habeas Corpus, and gave this following reason for his not bring∣ing the body of Lieut. Col. Lilburn. According to my Orders (my Lord) and the return of the Habeas Corpus, I brought the body of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn on Mon∣day to the Court; at which time I was ordered to attend the Court again with him here as this day: but this morning I received an Order from the Councel of State to the contrary. And here it is, my Lord.
Clerk. Wednesday, Novemb. 23. Whereas the body of Mr. John Lilburn by an Order of Parlia∣ment was committed to the Tower for the peace of the Nation: And whereas there was an Order to the bringing of him forth thence to the Upper Bench this day; It is ordered by the Councel of State, that they do not bring him, but that he there abide the pleasure of the House. Mr. Lilb. Couns. My Lord, on Munday it was agreed that they should bring him again on Wednesday; and I have no instruction from my Clyent, for I have no access to him, nor he to me. Judg. Well, pray advise with your Clyent. Mr. Lilb. Couns. My Lord, I desire to have an aliis Habeas Corpus. Baxt. I have onely learned, my Lord, to obey Orders; and I shall obey them. Judg. You do well. The Councel of State have a reason for what they do in this business. Mr. Lilb. Couns. My Lord, when must we attend the Court? Judg. On Saturday. The return to the Habeas Corpus for Capt. Streater being filed, the cause of imprisonment shewn in the return was grounded upon two Warrants: first from the Coun∣cel of State. These are to will and require you to take the body of  Strea∣ter, and him you shall safely keep prisoner in your prson of the Gate∣house; he being committed for publishing of Seditious Pamphlets a∣gainst the State. Of which you are not to fail. And for so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given at the Councel of State sitting at Whitehall, the 12 day of Septemb. 1653. To the Keeper of the Gatehouse. S. Moyer, Robert Tichburn Presid. R. Lawrence, John Hewson. The second Warrant was signed by the Speaker by Order of Parliament.
By vertue of an order of Parliament bearing date this present 21 day of November, These are to will and require you to receive and take into your custody the body of John Streater, and him to keep and retain in safe custody, until he shall be delivered by Order of Par∣liament. Whereof you are not to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your peril. Given under my hand this 21 of Novemb. 1653. To the Keeper of the Gatehouse Westminster. Francis Rous Speaker. Upon the reading thereof in Court, this Rule following was ordered to be entered. Wednesday next after eight days of St. Martin, 1653. The Gatehouse Westminster. The Defendant was this day brought into this Court by vertue of a Writ of Habeas Corpus, to undergo, &c. under the custody of the Keeper of the prison of the Gatehouse. And it is ordered by the Court, that the Habeas Corpus and the return thereof be filed, and that the said Streater have copies of the said Writ and return, and that the said Streater be committed to the custody of the Marshal of this Court, and that he have the body of the said Streater in Court upon Friday next, upon the motion of Mr. Freeman. By the Court. The second Appearance of Captain Streater, on Friday the 23 of Novemb. 1653. by vertue of an Habeas Corpus, and the Rule aforesaid of the Court of Up∣per Bench of the 21 present. CAptain Streater being at the Bar, the Clerk read the return, which was onely the Keepers answer to the Habeas Corpus,
which requireth him to shew cause why the prisoner is detained in prison. He in the Return citeth the Warrant, Order, or Mittimus for commitment, and certifieth that is the cause con∣tained in them, and none other. The Return being read, the Judge asked Capt. Streater what he had to say to the Return, and who was his Counsel. Cap. Str. Mr. Norbery, Mr. Freeman, and Mr. Twisden, are Counsel with me. Judg. What say you? Mr. Twisd. I was a Counsel for the first part, but not for the second, for publishing scandalous Pamphlets. If there be no more in it, he may be bayled. Judg. No, there is no more in it. What say you, Mr. Free∣man? Mr. Freem. My Lord, as to the second part of the Return, it is in these words: These are to will and require you to take into your custody the body of John Streater, and him safely keep, till he shall be delivered by Order of Parliament. My Lord, every Return ought to have these two things in it: The Cause, and, How long he shall be a prisoner: and so you have it in Magna Charta, p. 54. My Lord, all Acts of Parliament against the Laws of the Land, are in themselves void. The Law is above the Parlia∣ment. Judg. Good Sir, do not stand to repeat these things be∣fore us. Mr. Freem. My Lord, I do know it; they may pass their Acts according to Law, but not against Law. The Lord Dyer hath it so in his Reports. Judg. When we are in examination of a prisoner, will you come and overthrow the Acts of Parliament? Mr. Freem. My Lord, I refer it to your Lordships judgement, whether this Gentleman ought to be kept in prison without cause shewn. Judg. What say you, Mr. Norbery? Mr. Norb. My Lord, we must look to see if the Return be true: if it be not, we have an Action of the Case against them that made it false. And though we will not say that is false, yet here is no offence recited at all. And, my Lord, all the
Acts are the Acts of this present Parliament: and we look on them to be, or ought to be for the liberty of the people. Judg. What have you to say to the second part of the Re∣turn? As to the first part of the Return, Mr. Prideaux said he should say nothing unto it: therefore the Judges advise Ca∣ptain Streater to speak to the second part of the Return. Now for that the Argument that Captain Streater had pre∣pared, to shew the insufficiencie of the first part of the Return, may be of great use, and fit for publike view, it is thought fit to be inserted here; and after it, his Argument upon the second part of the Return, the which he delivered with an audible voice at the Bar. With the Attorney-Generals Plea thereto, and the Judges Judgement thereupon. Captain Streater's Argument to the first part of the Return. MY Lord, I being brought to this Bar by vertue of a Habeas Corpus, which requireth (by vertue of the Law, which is the Supreme Authority of England, and onely Authority of Parliaments, and all Courts of Judicature) the cause ought to be shewn why I am detained a prisoner upon the return. The first part mentioneth a cause, though not a lawful cause: the se∣cond part sheweth no cause. My Lord, the intent in Law of an Habeas Corpus, is to relieve prisoners, notwithstanding special commands for imprisonment; as appeareth by the Act of Parliament the 17 of the late King, intituled, An Act for the abolishing the Star chamber, and for regu∣lating the Councel-Table: which ordaineth, that notwithstanding special commands for imprisonment, the party so imprisoned shall by an Habeas Corpus be brought before the Judges of one Bench or other. And if the cause of his commitment be legal, he shall be remanded to the prison from whence he came: if no cause (that is to say, a lawful cause) appear, then the prisoner is to be set at liberty: if it be doubtful, then the prisoner is to be bayled.
My Lord, with these agree the learned Arguments of Sir Edw. Cook, Sir Edw. Littleton, and Mr. Selden; together with the Resolves of the Commons in Parliament (1628) thereupon. And the 2 part of Institutes, fol. 52. The Warrant or Mittimus ought to contain a lawful cause. The Writ of Habeas Corpus is the water of life, to revive from the death of imprisonment. Sir Edward Cook in his third general reason why a Habeas Corpus is to remove the body, notwithstanding of special com∣mands, saith, that Imprisonment is accounted in Law a Civil death, where a man is deprived of society, of wife, house, country, friends; and liveth with wicked and wretched men. The Writ of Habeas Corpus, and the benefit thereof by Law, (which is the undeniable right of every English man) is called The high point, the onely point. Nay, the Commons of Parlia∣ment of the 4 of the late King, in the Conference with the Lords, say that they had redeemed the body of Liberty, by clearing this point, that is to say, That in case one be commit∣ted by vertue of special command, he shall have the benefit of the Writ of Habeas Corpus to bring his body with the cause before the Judges of either Bench; where if it be found a law∣ful cause, he shall be remanded; if no cause, delivered; if it be doubtful, then to be bayled. My Lord, I shall make it evidently appear, when I come to make my Exceptions, that there is no lawful cause shewn in the Return to the Habeas Corpus why I should be a prisoner. With your Lordships favour, I shall speak one word or two of the Law of England: I shall shall make use of it anon. It may not improperly be said it is written by the finger of God: it is not unlike (in that where indeed the perfection of it lieth) unto the Laws of the eternal Law-giver: which is, It is as well binding to the Law-giver, as to those that are to give obe∣dience unto it. Anno 42 Edw. 3. chap. 3. No man shall be proceeded against but according to the old Law of the land. There shall be nothing done to the contrary: if it be, it shall be void. If this serve not my turn, I am sure there be enough that speak the language. I would have them; that say, Be it so
and so enacted, and not otherwise. First, I observe here, they command Law. Secondly, that they command that none shall command otherwise but by Law. God himself bindeth himself by his Laws: he is as well bound, as he bindeth those several beings he giveth Laws unto, let them be Eternal, Moral, or Natural. If he maketh a pro∣mise, he performeth it: he must not, he doth not but perform it. If he create a World, and willeth it to continue, he must support it in its beauty and strength, and by his providence sup∣port the several beings in it. My Lord, Law is Supreme: none ought to command contrary to Law. It is not, that he or they are superiour that command, that therefore they should be obeyed: no, it ought to be dili∣gently enquired by the inferiors, whether Superiors command Law, or not: if not, they are not to be obeyed. For, that this is not a Rule amongst men, is the reason so much of Absolute∣ness and Tyranny is so much on foot in the world. Camerarius mentioneth a story of Hen. 2. of France his com∣mitting to prison an Italian Lackey, and shewing no cause of his commitment. The Judges visiting the prisoner, commanded that he should be delivered. The King again committed him, and commanded that he should be executed. The judges not∣withstanding again the second time opened the prison-doors for him, for that the Law warranted them for so doing. Hen. 3. of England commanded Ralph Nevil (Lord Keeper, or Lord Chancellor) to deliver the Great Seal. He refused it, because it was to be disposed of by the Common Councel, or Parlia∣ment of the Kingdom. This is attested by Matthew Paris, Matthew of Westminster. Thomas late Lord Strafford his Plea, that what he did was in obedience to his Superiour the King his Master, could not protect him from condign punishment, for that he had transgressed the Law. Plutarch saith the Spartans were happie in their King Agesi∣laus, who had such a reverend esteem of Law, that he gave obe∣dience to a small scroll of Parchment, which was the summons of his Country for his appearance.
That which will make us happie, must be our Laws; not Men, Councels, or Courts. Aristotle saith, that it is better to govern by good Laws, then good men. My Lord, our Laws are good; they are (as to the intent) the onely preserving Laws in the world: they are the strong holds, the bulwarks to the weakest. Edw. 6. fol. 36. the Law is called The inheritance of every sub∣ject. It is the inheritance of inheritances, and without which inheritance we have no inheritance: we should but be as te∣nants at will, to be turned out of life, liberty and estate at plea∣sure. My Lord, withal, the Law signifieth nothing at all, if there be not a way to obtain the benefit thereof: the which should be as certain and unalterable as the Law it self. And therefore I think that the Statute of 42 Edw. 3. chap. 3. is meant a proceed∣ing by Record, when it saith, that no man shall be proceeded a∣gainst, taken, or imprisoned, but according to the Old Law of the land. The same opinion may pass of the 29 chap. of Magna Charta, which is but an exposition of the good old Law of the Land. Mr. Selden, in his Argument at the Conference of the Lords and Commons 1628. saith, The Law is of no benefit, if that the way be not open to obtain the benefit of the Law. In all which, proceedings by Discretion are justly reproved, for they are of evil consequence, as witness Empson and Dudley in Hen. 7. days, by whom the Subjects were grieved, my Author saith. My Lord, just proceedings are as necessary as just judgements. It is Justice that saveth and that defendeth a Nation, that maketh it happie, fruitful, and prosperous. The Frontiers of a Nation may be guarded with men at Arms, but it will not be preserved thereby; it must be justice in the midst of it: If there be but a man that executeth justice and true judgement, he shall save the City. There may be good reasons given for it. Injustice discon∣tents a people; and usually the foundations of Changes are laid upon the discontent of the people. My Lord, I speak not this as reflecting on this Court, or out
of fear of injustice at this time or place: no, but onely as lay∣ing a sure foundation for my Exceptions. If the Law be supreme, and not to be varied from in the least tittle, then is it a sufficient Sanctuary. Unless this be granted, all my Exceptions will profit me nothing. I ought not to be remanded, because it cannot but appear I have been proceeded against not according to the Law of the land, which is my right: and if my right, every mans right; and if not my right, it is no mans right. 42 Edw. 3. chap. 3. None shall be proceeded against but by pre∣sentment, or things of record, according to the old Law of the land. It is not the Law of our Kings, but the consent of our fore∣fathers: These are our Priviledges, and the present Pow∣er hath declared they will be tender of them. The Writ is by Authority of Parliament. This priviledge of an Habeas Corpus putteth the difference between the Villain and the Free-man. My Lord, I shall now make my Exceptions to the Return. First, the Return is too general, and sheweth not lawful cause why I should be imprisoned. I doubt not but to make it appear: and if so, I ought to be set at liberty without Bayl. The Act of the 17 of the late King provideth, that if no cause be shewn (that is to be understood a lawful cause) then the prisoner shall be discharged. A prisoner is not discharged, if he be bayled, for that he is a prisoner to his Bayl. And if bayled, then it is to be supposed a cause, though such upon which he may be bayled. The cause of imprisonment shewn in the first part of the Re∣turn, is for a Seditious Pamphlet against the State. It doth not name wherein it is seditious: it doth not name what books or pamphlets. 2 Part Instit. fol. 591. on the Statute of 1 Edw. 2. Sir Ed∣ward Cook saith, that the Mittimus or Warrant must contain the cause, though not so certainly as the Indictment ought, yet with so much convenient certainty, as that it may appear judicially what the offence is; as for stealing a horse, or the like. And this is ac∣cording to Reason, which is the mother of Law; which hath
had good authority at this Bar, and now hath, and I hope shall have. As by variety of natures, and forms, and names, several beasts are distinguished: so variety of titles do distinguish books or pamphlets. And for that there is or hath been as ma∣ny several sorts of books or pamphlets distinguishable by their title or name, and matter or subject wherein they are sediti∣ous, as there are several sorts of Beasts distinguishable either by their nature, name, or form; therefore if it be needful, if a man steal a horse, that the Warrant or Mittimus shall say the im∣prisonment is for stealing a horse, and not for stealing of a cow, the same will hold good for cow, ox, or any other creature or thing. If so, it had been as needful for the Return to express what pamphlets or books, either by title or name, matter or subject, for that there are or have been as many several sorts of sediti∣ous pamphlets (so accounted) within these few yeers, of seve∣ral titles, as there are several sorts of Beasts in the world. And therefore seeing the Return doth not shew for which of them I am imprisoned, it must be presumed there is not cause for my imprisonment. Generals are nothing in Law. Again, my Lord, Sir Edw. Cook 4 part Instit. fol. 39. chap. 1. high Court of Parliament, there in these words saith, that by order of Law a man cannot be attainted of high treason, unless the offence be in Law high treason. He ought not to be at∣tainted by general words of high treason by authority of Par∣liament, (as sometime hath been) but the high treason ought to be specially expressed. This is so plain, it need not to be pressed further. Likewise the Resolution of the Commons in Parliament the 4 of the late King, resolveth, that notwithstanding special com∣mands for imprisonment, if there be not lawful cause of im∣prisonment shewed upon the Return of a Habeas Corpus, that then the prisoner shall be acquitted. I have plainly made it appear, that there is no lawful cause; yet notwithstanding I shall back it with Reasons that shall car∣ry sufficient authority with them, to prove my Assertion, That there is not lawful cause, and to prove that my imprisonment
hath not been according to the Law of he land, as is provided in the Act of the 17 of the late King, 42 Edw. 3. chap. 3. 25 Edw. 3. chap. 4. and Magna Charta, chap. 29. All which com∣mand but the Law, or are rather but expositions of the Law. And seeing the Parliament hath left this Court open for any to be relieved, I pray to be relieved. My Lord, I ought to be proceeded against by due course of Law. The Act of the 20 of September 1640. provideth, If it be for Seditious or Treasonable pamphlets, the party shall suffer such penalties as are by the Law of the land provided. By which it appeareth, that they intended no otherwise a man should be proceeded against in this case, but by due course of Law; which is to be by presentment before Justice, or thing of Record, as 42 Edw. 3. chap. 3. At which time, it is usual that the Accusers and the Accused are face to face, and there they the accusers do aver that that is the man that hath so and so offended. Else how shall it be known that this or that is the man meant by the accusers? Besides, my Lord, anno 10 Eliz. chap. 6. it is provided that two Witnesses be as well at the Indictment as the Arraignment. Indictment is an accusation against a man; and it is upon ac∣cusation the Mittimus is made for commitment. It is fit a man at his commitment do know his accusation and accuser: if he do not, he cannot make his defence. It is not fit he should be deprived of any advantage of that kinde. Festus (Acts 25.27.) saith, It seemeth not reasonable that he should send Paul to Augustus Cesar without shewing cause of his imprisonment. There was cause, but not a lawful cause: for he saith, He might have been acquitted, if he had not appealed to Cesar. If it should be objected, that a Privie Councel may for se∣veral secret reasons of State (if they please) commit men, and shew no cause, or at least, not so particular as the Law requi∣reth; Sir Edw. Cook 2 part Instit. fol. 199. sufficiently answereth that, and faith, that the Law admitteth not of matters of Pleasure. My Lord, that good Maxime, that the Safety of the People is the supreme law, hath been mis-interpreted by some that would have
it thus: That if any by their endeavours do threaten distur∣bance to a Government, and that they conceive it safe to take away those disturbers lives, or their liberties, in order to pre∣vent those mischiefs they apprehend they may be instrumental in: if they cannot do it by Law, then they may repair to extra∣ordinary courses. Mr. Sadler, in his book intituled, The Rights of the Kingdom, and Customs of our Ancestors, reporteth, that the old Saxons had a Maxime, that high or extraordinary justice is injustice. My Lord, and Injustice doth a Nation or State more mischief and hurt then all its private or open enemies can do. Now having proved that there is no lawful cause shewn in the Return why I am detained a prisoner, I shall present your Lordship with my second Exception, which is, that there is not alleadged the time when, nor place where the crime was committed that is the pretended cause of my commitment. My Lord, I shall not insist upon matter of fact to any other end, then to shew the insufficiencie of the Return. And that the Law intendeth that cause, nay lawful cause should be shewn of commitment, in the Warrant or Mittimus, upon his first committing, the cause of commitment, may the better prepare his defence. The which the Law intendeth not to deprive a person of. The which he should be deprived of by such Returns. I shall shew your Lordship wherein first it may be alleadged that I did commit a crime at London such a time, when I was at York. Myrrour, chap. 3. sect. 23. One that is appealed of Maim, may plead that he was sick at that time. My Lord, many times such circumstances are the standards to measure the truth or falshood of an accusation. I shall first offer something to prove that the place where the cause of commitment was committed ought to have been shewn in the Return. Pag. 621. Fitz-Herb. Natura Brevium, of a Writ of Mainprise, it is in the beginning of the Writ thus: The King, to the Sheriffs, &c. of he part of A. taken and detained in our Goal at G. for certain Larceny of a horse at S.
Now, my Lord, here is the place alleadged. Sir Edw. Cook 2 part Instit. fol. 317. saith, that Appeals ought to contain, 1. the fact; 2. the year; 3. the day; 4. the hour of the day; 5. the place where the fact was done. Here are many certainties: but the certainty of time and place is not to be omitted; they are two essentials. So that if time and place be not shewn, when and where the crime was done that is alleadged to be the cause of imprison∣ment, it may be concluded that there is no cause, if it was done at no time, nor no place. Another reason why the time when the crime was commit∣ted that is the cause of commitment, ought to be shewn in the Return, is this: If it were granted that it was so, that I did publish seditious pamphlets or books, it may be done seven yeers since, for ought that appeareth in the Return. That the time when the fact was done ought to be shewn, appeareth evidently by the provision that is made in the Act of the 20 of Septemb. 1649. intituled, An Act for preventing of scandalous and seditious books and pamphlets. Provided always, and be it enacted, That no person or persons shall be molested and im∣peached for any of the offences mentioned in this Act, unless he or they be thereof accused within six months after his or their offence so committed or done. Then 13 Eliz. chap. 1. it is provided, that none shall be sued, troubled, or molested for any of the offences contained in that Act, unless they were accused thereof within six months, if the party or parties were out of the Realm. Now for ought there appeareth in the Return, the pretended cause of imprisonment was committed seven yeers since; and it may be as legally presumed to be six or seven yeers since, as four months since. And if so, then I am clear by vertue of those Acts I mentioned: they concern seditious and treasonable books or pamphlets. In a doubtful cause, it is better to acquit the Guilty, then to condemn the Innocent. My third Exception is, That the conclusion of the Return ought to be according to Law, and have these words: To be delivered by due course of Law.
By which is to be understood speedily, at the next Goal-deli∣very. It is not by the Return said by what I shall be deliver∣ed, nor when, whether ever or never delivered: it seemeth to intend a perpetual imprisonment. The which is utterly a∣gainst the Law of the land. 2 Part Instit. fol. 315. chap. 9. on the Stat. Glocest. expedi∣tion ought to be used, to prevent long imprisonment. Imprisonment should be but till the next coming of the Justice. And (saith he) it is the mercifulness of the Law of England, That it willeth that none be ruined by long imprisonment. And therefore the afore-mentioned Writ of Mainprise (ci∣ted in Fitz-Herbert's Natura Brevium) seemeth to take up a complaint, that the people are not onely grieved with wrong imprisonment, but more especially with long imprisonment, in these words: And him by such Mainprise from the Goal aforesaid hast delayed to deliver, to the no small loss and grievance of him the said R. and manifest peril of his life. Brooks 9 Report in Powler's Case, and in the end of the Writ, hath these words: That the subject be not detained so long in prison as till the Justice shall come in Eyer. By all which it appeareth, that the Law relieveth against long or perpetual imprisonment, as also against imprisonment with∣out lawful cause, notwithstanding that it be by special com∣mand. My Lord, my life nor liberty cannot be taken away, but by Law; nor given unto me, but by Law. It is a good Maxime, If we keep the Law, the Law will keep us. It would be sad if a man should be necessitated to plead his cause by the making of friends, when the Law shall not be suf∣ficient to plead in his defence, and when life and liberty shall be disposed of at pleasure. It is provided against in 2 Edw. 3. chap. 2. of Charters of Pardon; where it is ordained and enacted, That such Charters shall not be granted, but onely where the king may do it by his Oath: that is to say, Where a man slayeth another in his own defence, or by Misfortune. This the Law warranteth to be done. Now having proved, that there is no lawful cause shewn in the Return, why I should be a prisoner; together with the
insufficiencie of the Return: if so, it is my priviledge by Law to be discharged and acquitted. And the present power hath declared to be tender of our Rights and Priviledges. We have no rights, priviledges, or proprieties, but what we are instated in by Law. If so, then it is my right not to be deprived of what the Law doth allow me. Your Lordship is a Judge of the Law. Capt. John Streater's Argument to the second part of the return. My Lord, AS to the second part of the Return, that mentioneth an Order of Parliament; I make this Exception, That it doth not mention any cause at all of my imprisonment. And seeing it doth not shew cause, it is of less strength then the former part of the Return; wherein is cause shewn, though not a lawful cause. And therefore there may be no more, but only the bare read∣ing of it, to shew the insufficiencie of that part of the Return. But here if it should be objected, that it is grounded upon an Order of Parliament, and that the Parliament are not bound to shew a cause: Truly I am of opinion that the Parliament would not own any one that should so argue; it being so perfectly repugnant to their Honour, it being condemned in Parliament within our memory, as unjust, illegal, unreasonable, and perfectly contrary to Law: and Law is the onely Scepter of Senates, Parliaments, Councels, Empires, Kings, Princes, Governors, and Magistrates. The late Parliament in their Declaration upon declaring Eng∣land a Free State, (March 17. 1648.) say, that their onely authority is by the Law. Again, they say, that they are sensible of the excellencie and the equality of the law of England. Also, that they shall uphold the true approved Rules of the Law of England. And that the good old Laws & Courts of Justice, and the custom of England, are the badges of our freedom, rights, and priviledges. And this Parliament hath declared, that they will be tender of our Rights and Priviledges. The which we enjoy by our Laws.
29 chap. Magna Charta. None shall be taken or imprisoned but by a legal proceeding according to the old law of the land. The words None shall be taken, imply that none shall take or imprison any contrary to Law. And it cannot be denied but the Law intendeth the prote∣ction of innocent persons in freedom: And there being no cause shewn in the Return, let the command come from whence it will, the Law will warrant a discharge, If it be by an Order of Parliament, if the Order shew not cause of imprisonment, not a cause onely, but a lawful cause. Parliaments ever made Laws, but the Judges of the law judged by those Laws. Who will question, but that the Warrant of a Justice of peace shewing lawful cause of imprisonment, is of greater force in Law, then an Order of Parliament shewing no cause of impri∣sonment? But, my Lord, the Parliament is here; it is their authority that I apply my self unto: there is nothing can be done here but by their authority, that is to say, the Law. And therefore the Law, and several Acts of Parliament, as that of the 17 of the late King, and divers others, say that I shall be discharged. Shall an Order of Parliament over-rule Laws, Statutes, Customes, Usages, and Reason? No, my Lord, doubtless the Parliaments intention in order∣ing that I shall not be delivered but by Order of Parliament, is, that I should be delivered by order of Law, as I here expect now, and do not question in the least. Order of Law may be reckoned as the comeliest of all the Parliaments Orders. Surely none will alleadge that the Parliament intendeth to stop the proceedings of Law that may relieve me, or that this Order of Parliament is superiour to Authority of Parliament that is judicially in this Court. My Lord, the inferiour must give way to the superiour. The same reason that the Commons in Parliament of the 4 of the late King, judged of the invalidity of the Record in James De∣mestris and Caesar's Case, for that it was not argued or debated, it
it was not of weight to be a sufficient Record; the same rea∣son, I say, may be given for an Order of Parliament not to be in force against an Act of Parliament. An Order of Parliament hath but the same proportion with an Act of Parliament, that a Verbal command hath with a com∣mand by Record; for that there are not the debates, delibera∣tions, and three times of reading of an Order of Parliament, as is at the establishing an Act of Parliament. My Lord, besides, any rational man will think that the wis∣dom and prudence of the Parliament is such, that they will not lay up such a portion for their successors and children, as a Re∣cord that shall be a Law or President to after-ages, that shall be in effect, That J. S. was remanded to prison by the vertue of an Order of Parliament, when no cause is shewn in the one part of the Return, nor lawful cause in the other. When the Supreme Authority of Parliament, the Law, and Acts of Parliament that contain Law, say expresly, that if no cause (or lawful cause) be shewn in the Return for imprisonment, that then the prisoner shall be set at liberty. And anno 20 Edw. 3. chap. 1. that if commands come to the contrary, the Judges shall not cease to do even Law and Right. Besides, Sir Edw. Cook. 4 part Instit. chap. 10. High Court of Parliament, intimateth that an Act of Parliament is not plead∣able in a Court of Record, but by Record, or under the Seal. And Mr. Sadler in his book intituled The Rights of the King∣dom, and customs of our ancestors, saith as much. Then much less an Order of Parliament, that is not recorded upon the Par∣liament-Rolls it self. My Lord, it is not to be imagined, neither do I think, that the Parliament expecteth that their Order (the inferiour part of their power) shall take place of the superiour part of their power, the Law, and Acts of Parliament that command Law; which is judicially here, as I said before. My Lord, all Acts of Parliament that are unrepealed, are their own: they are not theirs, when they disown them by re∣pealing; until then they are with not otherwise in force, and are Law. My Lord, a Parliament, as they command Law, may be cal∣led
the Wisdom and Reason of the Nation. Anno 4 H. 7. chap. 12. the Law is called The policie of the na∣tion. Indeed it is so: Justice is the best policie, as I said before. None can demonstrate what Justice is, without the Law be as the golden Mete-wand that Sir Edw. Cook cautions Parlia∣ments to leave all causes to be measured by. 4 part. Instit. fol. 41. Upon the question of H. 8. to the Judges, Whether a man might be attainted of high-treason in Parliament, and not to call him to his answer; the Judges answer was, That an inferiour Court could not in law or justice do so: and their opinion was, that the higher the Court is, the more just they ought to be. It is not to be supposed that a Parliament will act contrary to their wisdom and policie, which is the Law; or that they would have their inferiour power take place of their superiour power. Neither will the Parliament plead against me with their Power, no surely, but by Law, legally; else they would have nailed up my prison-doors with armed men, and never have suffered me to come to this Bar. And if that they had not in∣tended that I should have been acquitted, they doubtless would have shewn cause. I know there can be no lawful cause of im∣sonment shewn against me. My Lord, Job's friends they tell Job that because he was guilty in their opinion in the sight of God of sin, Job 22.4. Will he (meaning God) reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into Judgement? As much as to say, That God would cut him off from amongst men, because he was sinful, and God powerful. But (saith Job, chap. 23.3.) O that I knew where I might finde him! that I might come to his seat! I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments. I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me. WILL HE PLEAD AGAINST ME WITH HIS GREAT POWER? NO. but he would put strength in me. There the righteous might dispute with him, &c. And Chap. 38. vers. 32. God saith, Gird up thy loyns like a man, for I will demand of thee, &c. And here God declareth his power and wisdom visibly in the creation of creatures great in magnitude, as the Leviathan; sweet in influence, as the Pleiades; swiftness and
courage of the horse in day of battel; and so of the whole creation: That this great and glorious eternal God, that gave a being to all beings by one onely conception of his minde; he willed them to be, and they were; this God, you shall finde, pleaded with Job by and by, in Chap. 42. vers. 4. Hear, I be∣seech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me. My Lord, will the Parliament plead against me with their power, that is to say, what they may do? Surely they will not, but rather strengthen me, by affording me the benefit of the Law at this time and place: which is the utmost of what I do expect, and the which they ought to do: by the which I shall arrive at my liberty, which is my right by Law, in regard there appeareth no cause in the one part of the Return, nor lawful cause in the other. My Lord, I have seen the copie of an Order of Parliament bearing date the 21 of November present, that saith, That John Strearer be and do stand committed to the prison of the Gatehouse Westminster, in order to a tral: and that Mr. Speaker do issue a War∣rant accordingly. Without doubt this is the Tryal intended by the Parliament here at this place, To try whether there be cause of imprison∣ment or not. The innocent need no other Tryal. The cause that is already shewn in the first part of the Return, is to be supposed true: And all the cause that was to be shewn, and none other, for that the second part mentioneth no cause at all. And if there had been lawful cause shewn, it i not to be denied but it had been of force. By all which appeareth, that they intended me the benefit of the Law; which speaketh this language, That the innocent shall be acquitted. My Lord, an Order of Parliament is but as the first thoughts of a man, by which he intendeth this or that. An Act of Parliament, and the Law, is like the second, third, and fourth thoughts of a man, wherein he altereth his first re∣solutions formed by his first thoughts, unto more safe and better resolutions.
And it is not contradictory to himself at all, nor never a whit belowe him. My Lord, Here are the Parliaments second, third, and fourt thoughts judicially in this Court, it is Law digested by Councels, debates, time, and practise, into safety and conveni∣ency. The which is for their honor to act by: The benefit there∣of I pray. My Lord, The return saith, I shall not be delivered but by Or∣der of Parliament. The Order of Parliament saith not such a word: But to be committed in order to a Tryal; at which I am. My Lord, The return saith, I shall be committed Prisoner to the Gatehouse by Order of Parliament. The Authority of Parliament, the Law judicially in this Court, hath committed me Prisoner to the Marshall of this Court: Shall this be called a contradiction to the Order of Parliament? no, surely it will not stand so in the opinion of this Court. Neither can it be called a contradiction to the Order of Par∣liament, if I should be discharged of my Imprisonment; be∣cause the Authority of Parliament, the Law, saith, If there be no cause of Imprisonment I shall be discharged. The Law intendeth but three things onely to defend, in which all else is comprehended. They are Life, Liberty, and Estate. Liberty is the chief: not a Liberty to do what one lists, ei∣ther in obeying or in commanding; but a just preserving Liber∣ty that shall be for the good of society. It was this that our fore-Fathers and we have contended for by Arms; and being victorious, will the Parliament deprive us of the benefit of the Law, which is the ornament of our tri∣umph? No, my Lord, they have declared to the contrary that they will not. Something of the like nature may be concluded from the answer of the Councel of State to my Keeper, the Keeper of the Gatehouse, when he desired of them to know their pleasure whether he should allow the Writ of Habeas Corpus or not, in regard I was a Prisoner by their command: Their answer
was, They would leave it unto him. As much as to say, They in∣tended not to deprive me of the benefit of the Law. My Lord chief Justice Hide is not on this bench, who once was, and to his shame did deliver in effect this judgement, That for several reasons of State, the King may do or act contrany to Law. My Lord, I have power to kill this Gentleman next me, but not by Law. It did better become Mr. Atturny-General Heath, that in his pleading for a corrupt interest (in the cause of Sir John He∣ningham and others) at this Barre to alledge, That the King may act above and contrary to the Law; then Mr. Atturny-Ge∣neral Prideaux, that is to plead in the behalf of a State, that some suppose are laying a foundation of the Kingdom of Christ. If he should, it would be the grandest inconsistency that possible could be, to what they have declared, namely, Tenderness of our just rights and priviledges. The which Declaration hath invited a National expectation thereof; the which should be a sufficient Law to them to do nothing that might deprive any individual, though the most in∣ferior and inconsiderable part or person of the whole, because they were comprehended in the whole, unto which these pro∣mises were made. My Lord, Upon the agreement of sharing the Roman Em∣pire made between Octavius Antonius & Pompeius Sextus, it fell out that they agreed to feast aboard of Pompeius his Admiral-Gally lying at an Anchor off of the head of Mount Misena; and when they were all aboard, and merry, Menas the Pyrate came and whispered Pompeius in the ear, Come, saith he, shall I ut Cable, weigh Ancher, and set sail, and not onely make thee Lord of Sicile and Sardina, but of the whole Empire also? No, saith noble Pompeius, I have not learned to break faith, although it were to the gaining of an Empire. When he had invited them to a banquet, they should not be deprived of what they expected by imprisonment or loss of their shares of the Empire. Such advice and such practises do better become Pyrares & Theives, then persons of vertue and honor: the which was in his power to have done. My Lord, Seeing as I say that the Parliament did at the first declare that they would be tender of our rights & priviledges,
and seeing it is our priviledge to have the benefit of the Law: and seeing the Law saith, That if there be no cause, there shall be no imprisonment: and in regard there is no cause shown why I should be a Prisoner; I do aver, that the Parliament cannot have greater dishonor put upon them, then for any one to al∣leadge that they intended imprisonment to me, if there should no cause in Law appear. My Lord, If there be any thing else alleadged to be against me then what appeareth upon the Return and the Record, the Law requireth you not to take notice of it. And seeing there is no cause, there ought be no imprison∣ment: if it should, it would be injustice. Justice is one of the attributes of God, that by his dispensa∣tions he would have administred to men. The administration of injustice, is a perfect fighting against God. I believe the Parliament would not be found fighters against God. My Lord, The Philosopher saith, Where just Law ruleth, there God may be said to rule. If you judge justly, you have no cause to fear. I expect it, as you will answer the contrary at the dreadful day of judgement. Judg. WHat have you to say, Mr. Attorney-General? Prid. That which I have to say, is not to ar∣gue, but to acquaint the Court he is committed by an Order of Parliament, which is not to give an account to the Court. It is their pleasure to commit him, till he be cleared by an Order of the same power. And I hope, my Lord, you will not dis∣pute it; for I know it is fresh in your memory, where Orders of the like nature have been made by the Parliament. He is to remain prisoner by the Authority that put him there. Judg. Yea, as in the case of Lilburn, Chetwin, and others, which after made their address to the Parliament: which if this Gentleman do, I make no question but they will do accor∣ding to Law and Justice by him, and no otherwise, since he is committed by them, and they onely know the cause of his com∣mitment.
Sir Tho. Wid∣drington, Serje∣ant at Law, for the Commonwealth. There has been two Counsel have spoke something in the behalf of the Gentleman at the Bar: one of them pleaded this, That there was an Order of Parliament, but not an Act of Parliament. My Lord, an Order hath fore as well as an Act. As for Mr. Norbery, he said Part of the Return was true, and part was not true. If it be not true, he has an Action of the Case against the Keeper. Again, whereas he says that all Acts of Parliament were made for the li∣berty of the people: truely so they are; but not to give leave to licentiousness. Judg. Mr. Streater, one must be above another, and the infe∣riour must submit to the superiour; and in all justice, an inferiour Court cannot control what the Parliament does. If the Parlia∣ment should do one thing, and we do the contrary here, things woud run round. We must submit to the Legislative power: for if we should free you, and they commit you again, why here would be no end; and there must be an end in all things. Where you say We are not to imprison you without cause shewn: It is true, we are not: But if there be any that do disturb the peace of the Nation, we are to settle things in peace and quiet∣ness: for the cause of the Law is to quiet the Nation. The second thing that hath been objected against the Return was by Mr. Freeman: he says the Parliament has not power to alter the Laws. Why they have the Legislative power, and may alter and order in such sort as they please; they may daily. If they finde any thing that is fit to be reformed, they may alter and re∣form them, and make Laws new. It is strange a Counsellor should say this. Another Objection was, That there was no cause exprest. It's true, here there is not. We are Judges of the Law, and we may call inferiour Courts to an account why they do impri∣son this or that man against the known Laws of the land; and they must shew cause to any man. In this case, if the cause should come before us, we cannot examine it, whether it be true or un∣just: they have the Legislative power. Now whereas you say, It is but an Order of Parliament, and has not been three times read in the House; How can you tell but
that it has been three times read? Indeed they used to read it thrice when the King and House of Lords and Commons sat; and so it may be now, for ought we know. But if it were but once read, we cannot call it into question, but must conceive it was on just grounds: and it may be they thought it not fitting to express a Case in matter of State: for if they should, express the cause, and we not able to judge of it, there would be nothing done in it. Therefore, Gentlemen, we can do no more it; and yet I hope we shall do according to justice, that the people may not be opprest. If it had been a cause we could have med∣led in, something might have been done: but we now see no cause it should be repealed. Justice Garmond. God made man, and gave him a Law to live by: and the Laws of England are grounded on the Laws of God; and in the Laws of England every man is concerned. And now the Parliament of England is grounded on the whole body of the Nation. Now if one power were not above ano∣ther, things would go in a circle, to and fro, and have no end. Now this will bring them to an end, since the whole Law of the Nation is grounded on the Parliaments Laws. Judge Nickols. I am of the same opinion, every thing must be done in order; and God is the God of order, and therefore every thing ought to be done in order, and not in confusion. Now what the Parliament does, we cannot dispute or judge of: their Laws are to binde all people, and we are to believe they had cause for what they did. And for that you say an Order should be read three times: when I was a Parliament-man, divers Acts past with one time reading. In the next place, you did distinguish between an Order and an Act of Parliament. Why their power is a Law, and we cannot dispute any such thing. And whereas you affirm it was once pleaded here, that the King was above the Law, and might do what he pleased against the Law: that it was so here, I do not remember: but the Parliament does not so. Prid. I humbly pray he may be remanded to the Gatehouse again. Judge Nickols. There is a Primum-mobile, or things would come into confusion. The Parliament has the greatest power.
Capt. Str. I desire I might be bayled: I shall be Prisoner nevertheless: the Law accounteth one a Prisoner, though he be bayled: and if not bayled, I may be a Prisoner 100 yeers. Mr. Prid. My Lord, Pray let him be sent to the Gatehouse. Capt. Str. I desire then I may be a Prisoner to this Court. I am a wounded man, and have done service for my Country, and deserve not to be shut up in a close hole. Besides, I have been a Prisoner three days contrary to the Order of Parliament, by Order of Law, to the Marshal of this Court; when the Or∣der of Parliament saith, I shall be a Prisoner to the Gatehouse: and if the Law can warrant the Court for the doing of the one, doubtless it will for the doing of the other. I am sure it is my right by Law. Judge. No, no; no such matter. Prid. My Lord, I heard this man say he has been wounded, and he that he was for the Parliament: but I am informed he was cashiered. He cited the Order of Parliament, and that they did not publish the cause wherefore: but I will speak it publikely, it is in Order to his Tryal. Capt. Str. My Lord, he speaks falsely; I laid down my Commission my self. Judge. We are to judge honorably of the Supreme Power. Capt. Str. You said but now (my Lord) you could judge of nothing but what was before you upon Record. Judge. Let him be sent again to the Gatehouse; he was committed there. And Gentleman, you should do well to ap∣ply your self to the Parliament in the mean time: for while we are possest otherwise, it must be our Office that you must be sent back according to the Order of Parliament. Capt. Str. I never petitioned in my life: I shall not now begin. Prid. When the cause is done, you may leave him as you found him. Judge. You had your Habeas Corpus. Capt. Str. I could wish I had the benefit of it, as is my right by Law. I desire that notice may be taken, that the same judgement and the same Plea were adjudged illegal, arbitrary, and perfectly repugnant to Law, just rights and liberty of the
people, in Parliament, the 4 of the late King 1628, as in the Case of Sir John Heningham, Sir Humphry Hampden, and others, at this Barre. Judge. The King was Plaintiff against them, and he was but a Feoffee in trust: the Parliament is Plaintiff against you, and they are a Legislative Power. The prisoner was carried back to the Gatehouse. The proceeding upon the Habeas Corpus in Hilary-Term. IN the Vacation between Michaelmas and Hilary-Term, the Parliament dissolving, Mr. Streater resolved to apply himself again to the Law; he conceiving that the Order of Parliament was void, inasmuch as the Parliament was dissolved. And accordingly, on Munday 23 January, 1653. being the first sit∣ting of the Judges in Hilary-Term, he had Mr. Dormer of Coun∣sel, who moved the Court for an Habeas Corpus. It was grant∣ed, and made returnable on Thursday the 26 next following. At which time, the Keeper sent the body of Mr. Streater, with a Return of the Habeas Corpus not signed: which being in Court, was refused to be received. Mr. Streat. My Lord, I am here brought to this Bar, by ver∣tue of an Habeas Corpus: I desire that the Writ with the Return may be read. Lord Ch. Just. Let it be read. Mr. Brought. My Lord, the Return is not signed. L. Ch. Just. If the Return be not signed, we cannot take no∣tice of it. Mr. Str. My Lord, I desire that another day may be appointed by Rule of the Court. L. Ch. Just. We cannot do so: we cannot take notice of you, whether you are the person or not, if the Return be not under your Keepers hand. Mr. Str. My Lord, I desire I may have an alias Habeas Corpus. L. Ch. Just. We cannot deny you that. The alias Habeas Corpus was made returnable on Thursday the 31 of January, 1653.
Mr. Str. My Lord, I desire that I may by Rule of Court have assigned of Counsel (with me) Mr. Twisden, Mr. Freeman, Mr. Wilde, Mr. Norbery, and Mr. Dormer. L. Ch. Just. Let them be assigned. Thusday the 31 of January, 1653. Mr. Streater was again brought before the Court of Upper Bench, by vertue of his Habeas Corpus. Mr. Str. My Lord, I am brought hither by vertue of an alias Habeas Corpus. I desire that the Wtit, with the Return, may be read. The Clerk reads the Return. OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England Scotland, and Ireland, &c. To the Keeper of the prison of the Gatehouse Westminster in the County of Middlesex, or his De∣puty there, Greeting. We command you, as formerly we have com∣manded you, that the body of John Streater Gent. in prison under your custody detained, together with the day and cause of his taking and detaining, by whatsoever name the said John is called therein, you have before Us at the Upper Bench in Westminster, upon Mun∣day next after the fifteen days of S. Hilary next to come, to undergo and receive those things which Our Court of Upper Bench aforesaid of him shall consider of in this behalf. And this you must not omit in any wise, and upon peril that will follow thereupon. Witness Henry Rolle at Westminster, the 26 day of January, 1653. And the Return of this Writ appears in a certain Schedule hereunto annexed, and the answer of Aquila Wykes Keeper of the Gatehouse-prison in Westminster. To his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereof, in the Up∣per Bench at Westminster, at the day and place in the Writ to this Schedule annexed named, Do certifie, that before the coming of the said Writ to me directed, that is to say, the 12 day of September 1653. John Streater in the Writ named was committed to my cu∣stody, and is there detained by vertue of a Warrant from the latter Councel of State, the tenor of which Warrant followeth in these words. These are to will and require you to receive into your custo∣dy
the body of John Streater, and him you shall safely keep pri∣soner in the prison of the Gatehouse, he being committed for publishing Seditious Pamphlets against the State. Of which you are not to fail: and for so doing, this shall be your suffici∣ent warrant. Given at the Councel of State at Whitehall, this 12 day of September, 1653. To the Keeper of the Gatehouse. Rob. Tichurn, Presid. H. Lawrence, Sa. Moyer, J. Hewson, Ch. Howard. And the said John Streater is also detained by vertue of a Warrant under the hand of the Speaker of the Parliament; the tenour of which Warrant follows in these words. By vertue of an Order of Parliament bearing date this pre∣sent 21 day of November, These are to will and require you to receive and take into your custody the body of Iohn Strea∣ter, and him to keep and retain in safe custody, until he shall be delivered by Order of Parliament. Whereof you are not to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your peril. Given un∣der my hand this 21 day of November, 1653. Francis Rous, Speaker. And the said John Streater is also detained by Rule of the Upper Bench Court; the tenour of which Rule follows in these words. The Keepers, &c. against Iohn Streater. Friday in fifteen days of S. Martin, 1653. The Defendant was this day brought in Court by vertue of a Rule of this Court, under the custody of the Marshal of this Court: And it is ordered, that the said Marshal do deliver the body of the said Streater to the Keeper of the prison of the Gatehouse in Westminster, to remain under his custody according to the Order of Parliament, upon the motion of Mr. Atturney-General. By the Court. And these are the causes of the detaining the said Iohn Srreater, whose body before the Protector aforesaid I have ready accordingly, at the day and place in the said Writ contained, as I am within com∣manded. Aquila Wykes, Keeper of the Gatehouse. L. Ch. Iust. Mr. Atturney, what say you to it? The prisoner hath been here many times. Attor. Gen. My Lord, I heard not of it. Mr. Str. My Lord, I sent him notice the same daythe Writ was granted.
Mr. Attor. Gen. My Lord, he sent me a man that said he lived in Fleetstreet, I do not know where. L. Ch. Iust. How cometh it that you did not send him other notice? Mr. Str. My Lord, I beseech your Lordship that I may not be intercepted by such pretences, and that I may not suffer any delay, for want of such formalities. My Lord, Mr. Attorney-General hath appeared often enough in this case: he cannot with credit pretend he is unprovided to speak to it. L. Ch. Iust. Let the prisoner be here again on Friday. Mr. Streater was again sent back to the Gatehouse, and was Friday the 3 of February, 1653. brought by Rule upon the Alias Habeas Corpus. Mr. Twisd. My Lord, I desire that the prisoner may be bayled. Mr. Wyld. I desire that the Writ and Return may be filed. L. ch. Just. Mr. Atkin, what have you to say why it may not be filed? Mr. Atk. Nothing, my Lord. L. ch. Iust. Let it be filed, and let the prisoner be here again on Thursday next. Mr. Str. My Lord, I desire that I may have assigned of Coun∣sel with me, Mr. Latch and Mr. Windham. L. ch. Iust. Let it be so. The prisoner was carried by the Marshal of the Upper Bench unto the Upper Bench prison Southwark and on Tuesday the 7 of February 1653. was again brought into Court under the custody of the Marshal of the Court. Mr. Twisd. I desire that the prisoner may be bayled. He is committed by two Orders; the one from the Councel of State, the other from the Speaker of Parliament, by vertue of an Or∣der of Parliament. The Order of Parliament is out of doors, the Parliament being dissolved. Mr. Attorney-General began thus. My Lord, this Gentleman the prisoner stands committed by Order of Parliament: And whereas in his behalf the Counsel assigned for him have alleadged, That the Order of Parliament is void, by reason (as they say) the Parliament is dissolved:
My Lord, Parliaments cannot be dissolved: the Parliament are the same power is in being now. And Parliaments were to be once a yeer, as by the Statute of the 4 of Edw. 3. at which time he may be relieved. In the North parts, the Assizes can be held but once a yeer. But grant that the meaning of the Parliament was to deli∣ver him themselves, and not that they meant the Parliament to be on the 3 of September 1654. yet for that they ordered that he should not be delivered but by Order of Parliament, I con∣ceive he can be delivered no otherwise then by an Order of Parliament, nor by any other but a Parliament. Possibly when that the Parliament consisted of King, Lords, and Commons, an Order of one or two Houses, without a threefold consent, had not been binding: but now the power that was in the Lords and King, are joyned in the Commonse and therefore is of greater force. And it is not material whether they shew cause, or not: there may be good cause: And it cannot be presumed that the Par∣liament would commit a man, and have no cause at all for so doing. But without question, a Parliament may commit men, and shew no cause. But suppose his commitment be in order to a Tryal in Parlia∣ment; will this Court take upon them to judge in the cause? or can they by Habeas Corpus bring the body of the prisoner and the cause before them, out of Parliament? The Lord of Strafford was tryed in Parliament: I believe this Court would not in such a Case remove the Trial before them, nor indeed can they. Upon the Return it appeareth, he is com∣mitted by Order of Parliament, and to be delivered by Order of Parliament: if they had intended he should have been deli∣vered otherwise, they would have either said nothing, or have Ordered he should be delivered according to Law. When Kings die, it is true, that Commissions do cease: but when Parliaments do dissolve, their Acts do not cease. Besides, a Parliament is the Supreme Court, and they do constitute o∣ther Courts; and therefore it is not for other Courts to que∣stion the proceedings of a Parliament.
It will not be expected of me to shew that the Parliament had sufficient matter or cause of imprisonment. To this the Judges answered, No, no: if he had any thing more to speak to the Order of Parliament, that was it that was to be spoken unto. Mr. Ator. My Lord, this Gentleman might make his appli∣cation for his liberty to the present Authority elsewhere; and I doubt not but it would be granted him: for now Parliamen∣tary authority is in one person. My Lord, I doubt not but the Court will be cautious in medling in this case, but will rather remand him to prison, first, for that it may be that the proceedings against him are not yet ripe: it may be yet under examination. Secondly, for that this is the first president of the like nature, and it being of so great and high concernment. Mr. Twisd. My Lord, a Parliament may determine, and Par∣liaments do determine: and when they do, their Orders also determine with them. It is true, that Acts of Parliament do continue: but this is but an Order of Parliament, and not an Act of Parliament. My Lord, we must come hither to be relieved: this is the place, this is the Court appointed for relief in this case: We expect it, and, my Lord, desire that the prisoner may be bayled. Besides, my Lord, this is not an Order of Parliament upon Return, but a Warrant of the Speaker. Mr. Windham, of Counsel with the prisoner. My Lord, it is true, we finde Writs of Errour returnable in Parliament, as in Flower-dew's Case, and in Basset's Case of Errour given in this Court of Kings Bench against Basset, in a Judgement for the King. Rot. Parl. 25 R. 2. Num. 24. This is after trial of Law, and not before. As to the Case of the Lord Strafford, we know not but that by Law he ought to have been appeach'd here. As to the Order, it is determined by Law. Mr. Wylde, of Coun∣sel with the prisoner. My Lord, the Order cannot be a bar but that the prisoner may be bayled. Besides, the Order is void, for that the Parliament disconti∣nueth;
and it is ordained, that he or they that shall say the Par∣liament continueth, shall be guilty of an high offence. An Act or Order of Parliament, is not a Judgement of Par∣liament. We are here coram Protectore. Cap. Str. My Lord, I should not at all undertake at this time, having so many learned Counsel assigned, who attend my cause, and who have sufficiently urged enough Law to war∣rant the Court for my discharge, but that the Attorney-Gene∣ral hath both last Term and this Term endeavoured to asperse me, to discourage the Court, so as to delay or deny me justice; as the last Term, by suggesting to the Court that I was a danger∣ous person, and stood accused in Parliament for high misdemeanours: and said that they were such, and so dangerous, that they for many secret reasons of State thought it convenient not to discover them. And this Term, by saying, the last day of hearing, that I was a stubborn refractory person, and would not make my application to the present Authority, where he assured me that I might have my li∣berty for asking for it; and that my endeavours were to strike at the very power of Parliament. My Lord, as to what great and high matters or things that were by him suggested to this Court to be in Parliament, cer∣tainly it would have appeared upon the Return: they have not been intercepted, as to time, in the making of their Return to the Habeas Corpus: they have also had time to make several Returns; and lastly, to amend the Returns by Rule of Court. Without question, my Lord, if they had had other cause, they would have made it appear. However, your Lordship can take no notice of any thing but what appeareth upon Record. My Lord, as to the other that Mr. Attorney urgeth, that I am a stubborn person, and refuse to make my application to the present Authority: I deny it; my actions give another testimony of me in this applying my self to the present Authority in this maner, and at this place, by Law; this is the proper and onely superiour Court for relief, in case of false or long imprisonment: it ever was in this Court setled by Law, the supreme Authority of this Nation, and the onely Authority of those that will take upon them Supreme Power. The Lord Protector hath sworn
to govern this Nation according to its Laws, Statutes, and Cu∣stomes; and here I make my application to the present Autho∣rity judicially in this Court. The Writ of Habeas Corpus is in the name of the Lord Protector: by which it appeareth, that those suggestions are false, and that I own the present Authori∣ty in its proper Chanel, and own its true Basis, by applying my self to the present Authority here in this Court. My Lord, I should have insisted upon the whole matter now before you; but I see that there hath been enough urged by my Counsel, to shew the invalidity of the Order of Parliament, the onely business where all sticketh. My Lord, I shall not spend time to answer Mr. Attorney-Ge∣neral, for that the substance of his Argument is but of little weight, and not worthy of any answer. Here followeth the Argument that Mr. Streater had prepa∣red to have insisted upon in this place: but for that he perceived the opinion of the Court was, that the Order of Parliament was not in force now, he omitted to urge it further. But for general satisfaction, it is here presented the Reader word for word, according to his copie. I Am brought here by vertue of an Habeas Corpus, which doth require that cause be shewn why I am detained a prisoner; not who committed me to prison. Upon the Return, there is in the first part a cause, but not a lawful cause. In the second part of the Return, no cause at all. My Lord, the intent in Law of a Habeas Corpus, is to relieve prisoners, notwithstanding of special commands for imprison∣ment: as appeareth by the Act of Parliament of the 17 of the late King, intituled, An Act for the abolishing of the Star∣chamber, and for regulating the Councel-Table; which ordaineth, that notwithstanding of special commands for imprisonment, the party so imprisoned shall by an Habeas Corpus be brought before the Judges of one bench or other: and if the cause of his commitment be legal, he shall be remanded; if no cause, (that is to say, a law∣ful cause) he shall be set at liberty: and if it be doubtful, then the prisoner shall be bayled. This Act reciteth several Acts, as that of 17 R. 2. chap. 31.42 Edw. 3. chap. 3.28 Edw. 3. chap. 9. Magna Charta, chap. 29.
and the Petition of Right. These Acts declare that this is the intent and meaning of the aforementioned. My Lord, with these agree the learned Arguments of Sir Edw. Cook, Sir Edw. Littleton, and Mr. Selden; together with the Resolution of the Commons in Parliament 1628 there∣upon, in these words. Die Jovis, 3 Aprilis, 4 Caroli Regis. Resolved upon the question, that no Free-man ought to be detain∣ed or kept in prison, or otherwise restrained, by the command of the King, or the Privie Councel, or any other, unless some cause of the commitment, detainer, or restraint, be expressed, for which by Law he ought to be committed, detained, or restrained. That the Writ of Habeas Corpus may not be denied, but ought to be granted to every man that is committed or detained in prison, or otherwise restrained, though it be by a command of the King, the Privie Councel, or any other, he praying the same. That if a Free-man be committed or detained in prison, or other∣wise restrained, by the command of the King, the Privie Councel, or any other, no cause of such commitment, detainer, or restraint, being expressed, for which by Law he ought to be committed, detained, or restrained, and the same be returned upon an Habeas Corpus gran∣ted for the said party, then he ought to be delivered or bayled. 2 Part Instit. fol. 52. The Warrant or Mittimus ought to con∣tain lawful cause. Sir Edw. Cook in his first general reason why a Habeas Corpus is to remove the body notwithstanding of special commands, saith, that Imprisonment in Law is counted a civil death, when men are taken from their house, wise, children, country, friends, and fa∣miliar acquaintance, to have with wicked and wretched men. Myrror, Chap. 2. Sect. 9. saith of Prisoners and Prisons, thus: A Goal is nothing else but a common prison: and as a Leper, or a man who hath a diseased body, is not to be suffered to dwell or remain a∣mongst men who are sound, &c. therefore mortal offenders ought to be separated from the society of people, to the end the innocent be not infected with their offences. Now, my Lord, if it be so, it was of absolute necessity for the Law to provide against long imprisonment as well as wrong imprisonment, notwithstanding any special commands.
The Writ of Habeas Corpus, and the benefit by Law, is the undeniable right of every English-man: it is called The high point, the onely point. Nay, the Commons in Parliament of the 4 of the late King, in their Conference with the Lords, say, That they had recovered the body of Liberty, by clearing of this point. In this is the onely difference between Slaves and Free-men, Villains and Free-men. My Lord, the Law of England doth settle a freedom in the people of England, in their life, liberty, and estate: it doth re∣lieve against any thing that shall by any be done to their detri∣ment, either in one or other. Myrror, Chap. 2. Sect. 18. of Appeals of Imprisonment, thus: Darling here appealeth Weloc, for that whereas the said Darling, &c. the said Weloc came and arrested the said Darling, brought him to such a place on such a day, and put him into the Stocks or in Irons, or in other pain or inclosure. Such a day, this felo∣ny he did feloniously. My Lord, here we see, the Law ever did allow of a remedy to be had against false imprisonment. Here is no cause of Imprisonment at all shewn, in either one part of the Return or other; Therefore I ought to be set at liberty without Bayl, as is expresly proved in the Act of the 17 of the late King, in these words: If there appear no cause of im∣prisonment upon the Return, then the prisoner shall be set at liberty, and not bayled. My Lord, he that is bayled, is still a prisoner; for he is a prisoner unto his Bayl. If bayled, it is to be presumed a cause, though such upon which he may be bayled. The following clauses of this Act explain the meaning to be so, in these words: If the cause be doubtful, then the prisoner shall be bayled. My Lord, if it should be objected, That the greatest and onely cause of my imprisonment is an Order of Parliament, or a Warrant grounded upon an Order of Parliament, that saith I shall not be deli∣vered but by Order of Parliament: I have seen a copie of the Order of Parliament, wherein there is not any such word men∣tioned; but it onely saith this: That Mr. Speaker do issue forth a Warrant (according to the Order) for my imprisonment, &c.
But for that your Lordship is not to take notice of any thing but what appeareth before you upon Record, I shall make no use of that; I shall not need. First, for that the Order it self is out of doors, the Parlia∣ment being dissolved. Sir Edw. Cook 4 part Instit. fol. 23. Chap. High Court of Par∣liament, saith, That an Ordinance of Parliament bindeth not in succession: Then much less an Order of Parliament. Besides, if Orders of Parliament were binding in succession, there would be no need of Acts of Parliament. And more especially, such Orders are not binding, that there is no Reason or Law in them, but are opposite to Reason and Law. Nay, but an Act of Parliament could not make such a Re∣turn to be good or allowable, as this, that shall mention no cause for which a prisoner is committed: it is against Reason a man should be committed for nothing: and if there appear no cause upon the Return, this Court is to presume there is no cause, and therefore ought to deliver the prisoner, and cannot but look upon such Returns as unreasonable, and against Law. The Doctor and Student, p. 4. chap. 2. saith, That such Statutes, Ordinances, and Prescriptions as are not according to Reason, or are against Reason, they are not Statutes, Ordinances, or Prescriptions, but are things void in Law. Again, my Lord, a Parliament cannot over-rule just procee∣dings in or by this Court, that are according to Law and Ju∣stice: but a Parliament may over-rule proceedings in this Court that have errour, or are not according to Law and Justice. My Lord, we understand Parliaments to be Legislative pow∣ers, and therefore not to be the Executive: it is not for Law∣makers to be Justices of the Peace. A Sheriff cannot be a Ju∣stice where he is Sheriff. There is a Maxime, That Law-makers must suppose all men to be evil, and therefore they make Laws against such offences in all persons: But Judges of the Law must suppse all men good, until conviction. If so, my Lord, a Parliament are not competent Judges who and who not shall be prisoners. But here are the Judges, be∣fore whom I am: here is the place, where I am, that a cause
of that nature should be determined. My Lord, I dare confidently aver, That if ever it had entred into the consideration of our former preceding Parliaments, that a succeeding Parliament would ever do such a thing as commit a man for no cause at all, they would have provided a∣gainst it by an Act of Parliament, in testimony of their abhor∣ring of so great an absurdity as it is. Anno 1 H. 4. chap. 14. it is provided, that Appeals are not in any wise to be pursued in Parliament. No man can imagine it to be lawful in any inferior power to a Parliament. If so, it cannot be lawful in a Superiour power. Upon the Question to the Judges by Hen. 8. Whether a man that was forth-coming might be attainted of high-Treason by Parlia∣ment; their answer was, That an inferiour Court could not do so; they thought a Parliament would not: their opinion was, That the higher a Court is, the more just they ought to be, to give example to inferiour Courts. 4 Part Instit. fol. 37. Chap. High Court of Parliament. If it be necessary for inferiour powers to shew cause of commitment, it is as absolutely necessary that a Superiour Court should. From whence it may be concluded, That were the Parlia∣ment in being, yet I might by Law be relieved by this Court: 1. For that the Law doth warrant my discharge, in case no cause of imprisonment appear in the Return; as by the 17 of the late King, who had then the Executive power in his hands, as Supreme Magistrate: And the same reason why that it should be limited and bounded when it was distinct from the Legisla∣tive and Judicial, may be given why it should be limited when they are all joyned in one; which is, That it may not extend to grieve any, contrary to Reason and Law. 2. That none ought to be taken or arrested, but by such against whom a Remedy may be had in case of false imprisonment. It was Sir John Markham's opinion, That the King could not arrest, because a remedy could not be had against him in case of false imprisonment. Much less a remedy be had against a Parliament that may possibly arrest or commit men upon false suggesti∣ons. Again, my Lord, if it had been an Act of Parliament that
had provided I should be a prisoner in general words, and had provided I should not have had the benefit of an Habeas Corpus, I conceive I might have been relieved by an Habeas Corpus. This I suppose, if in case an Act could be made against Law and Reason, as such an Act as should deprive me of a common benefit that is due unto all, and to every individual, throughout the whole Nation. Parliaments ever made it their work (as in duty they ought) to keep parallel to Law and Reason: they ever did make laws agreeable to both. But the Judges of the law, in open Courts of Judicature, did judge by those laws. Nay, Parliaments ever did advise with the Judges of the law: the Judges of the law were as the Watch-men or Sentinels to the just liberty of the people; and our laws the bulwarks of defence. Mr. Waller, in a Speech in Parliament at a Conference of both Houses, the 6 of July 1641. saith, That out of Parliaments all our Courts of Justice are governed and directed by the Judges of the Law; and in Parliaments, the Lords and Commons were assisted by them: otherwise (saith he) it might be stiled Parliamentum In∣doctorum. And further, he saith, That Judges that delay justice, or give false judgement, or opinions that are contrary to Law, that they are no other then conspirators against the Commonwealth. My Lord, Mr. Attorney-General hath not omitted to possess this Court with strange apprehensions of the dangerousness of me, both in what he urged in this Court the last Term of dan∣gerousness, and this Term of stubbornness: so that as much as in him lay, by his false suggestions, to prevent me of my right by law; as in his words to your Lordship, desiring that I might be remanded till my stomack came down. My Lord, you sit here to raise the spirits, mindes, and sto∣macks of men, by doing of them right by law, to encourage them to improvements and industry, by defending them in life, liberty, and estate, as the law requireth and intendeth. My Lord, Articles were exhibited against Sir Robort Berkly one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, and others. The sub∣stance of the first Article against Sir Robert Berkly, was, That he did traiterously and wickedly endeavour to subvert the Funda∣mental
Laws and established Government of England, by trayterous words, opinions, and judgements. The tenth Article: That the said Sir Robert Berkley being one of the Justices of the court of Kings Bench, and duely sworn as aforesaid, in Trinity-Term 1637. deferred to discharge or bayl A∣lexander Jenings, prisoner in the Fleet, brought by an Habeas Cor∣pus to the bar of the said court; the Return of his commitment be∣ing, That he was committed by two several Warrants of the Lords of the Councel, dated the 5 of November 1636. the first being onely read in Court, expressing no cause; the other, for not paying Messen∣gers sees; he was remanded in Michaelmas-Term. After, the said Jenings being brought by another Habeas Corpus before him, and the same Return, yet the said Sir Robert Berkley refused to dis∣charge him, &c. My Lord, I hope this Court, nay I doubt not but that you will eye the future, and judge according to Law and Reason, not by Discretion. My Lord, such advice followed, as Mr. Attorney gave, is the ordinary cause of Changes in States and Commonwealths. 1. Injustice brings the judgements of God upon a Nation. 2. Injustice discontents a people, and Discontents are the ordinary foundations that Changes are laid upon. It was but the other day the Lord Protector took an Oath to govern according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Nation: And now his Attorney-General would have matters ruled by Discretion in this Court, contrary to Law and Reason, to pull mens stomacks down. My Lord, I make my application to the present Authority in its proper chanel, where of right I ought to be relieved here in this case of mine by an Habeas Corpus. My Lord, I do aver, that my life, liberty, or estate, cannot be taken away, or given unto me, but where the law doth it. My Lord, God himself ruleth by law, Eternal, Moral, and Natural; and they have Certainty in them; and he ruleth not otherwise, or contrary to them. And can it be imagined, that there is a Mortal living, that will think it a diminution to his honour, if men chuse the Law for their Sanctuary, rather then their changeable Affections, and mutable Will and Pleasure?
There is a Maxim, That the Law delighteth in Certainty, and it doth abandon Incertainty, as the mother of all Debate and Con∣fusion; then which there is nothing more odious in Law. My Lord, another reason why I make my application to the pre∣sent Authority this way rather then any other, is, that the Record in this case will be of singular use and benefit, not onely to the present, but to future Ages: the which I do in duty, in regard a man ought to prefer the good of his Country before a private good. The contrary will tend to the subverting of our English Liberties Our fore-Fathers left us a Law, by which we might demand jus∣tice, and not be necessitated to make use of Freinds to beg Justice. Myrror, Chap 3. Section 6. of Exceptions to the Power of a Judge, thus it is: Sir, I demand the hearing and sight of your Commission, by which you claim jurisdiction over me. Anno 13 Ed. 1. Chap 3. When any is impleaded before any Ju∣stices, and doth alleage an Exception, praying that the Justices will allow it; which if they will not allow, &c. he shal require the Justices to put to their Seale, &c. My Lord, this Law of England is a Law of Freedom, and a Law for Free-men, and not for Slaves: It is a Law that setleth a Right in its Subjects. Now, my Lord, having presented your Lordship with what the Law accounteth of Imprisonment, as in the Writ of Mainprize; Whereas thou A hast delayed to deliver B to the no small grie∣vance of him the said B and manifest perill of his life. And pag. 162. Fitz-Herb. Natura Brevium, of the Writ De Homine replegiando. The King. Whereas A hath complained to us, &c. Wee command you that he be repleived, &c. that we may heare no more a clamour for want of justice. Seeing the Law relieveth as well against long Imprisonment as wrong Imprisonment; And seeing that there is no lawfull cause of Imprisonment shown in the first part of the Return, nor Cause at all in the second: Al∣though it be grounded upon an order of Parliament, it is voyd in a two-fold consideration. First, for that the Parliament is dissolved. Secondly, for that it is against Law and Reason. And also, consider∣ing that this Court is the highest Court of Judicature, that can re∣leive in this Case; and it being contrary to Reason, that a Legislative
Power should be an Executive Power, for they will be Parties to judg by their own Law, they will vindicate their own Commands, and will take upon themselves to give their sence, possibly different from the letter of their own Commands. And therefore it is safer for the Judges of the Law to judge by the letter of the Law, and not otherwise. Mr. Robert Brook, Serjeant at Law, in his reading upon the 16 Chap. of Magna Charta, saith, If a man have judgment to be hanged, and if the Sheriff do behead him, it is Murder. The Letter of the Law is duly to be observed, and not to be vari∣ed from, for any pretences of matters of State whatsoever. All which considered, I pray to be discharged, as the Law hath provided. Your Lordship is Judge of the Law. Mr. Atturny. My Lord, for ought we know, this is a Judgment in Parliament. If it be not, yet it hath the same stamp that an Act hath, that is to say, Parliamentary Authority. If this Order be not good, the Prisoner hath an Action of false Imprisonment against the Jaylor. If the Order die by the dissolution of the Parliament, the Jaylor ought to have set the Prison-doors o∣pen unto the Prisoner, at the time of the Dissolution of the Parlia∣ment. Mr. Twisden. My Lord, they have not returned an Order of Parliament, but a Warrant from the Speaker of Parliament. Cheif Justice Rolle. Mr. Atturney, what if the Parliament by Order do appoint a Committee; The Parliament dissolveth: Doth the Committee continue by vertue of that Order, or not? Mr. Atturny. I think the Persons are dissolved: but although it be said by Order of Parliament, I think that is not much materiall whether the word Act, Order, or Ordinance be used. My Lord, it is by Parliament. Lord chief Justice Rolle. By your Favour, Mr. Atturny, it is the word Order, Act, or Ordinance we must take notice of. How shall we know how to judge, but by the Word or Letter to direct us? Judge Aske. Mr. Atturny, If an Order of Parliament shall be in force after the Dissolution of a Parliament, and there be an Order made for the commitment of one or more, as in the Case now under
consideration: I pray which way shall the Subjects be relieved, if not this way? in case we should live to see a Parliament but once in one Age, as in the later end of the Reign of King James, and as in the Reign of the late King. Lord chief Justice Rolle. This Court is the proper Court to re∣lieve in this Case; this Court is a standing Court, and the Law doth adjourn it from time to time: but a Parliament is a new Court; they appear and are alwaies summoned by new Writs. Mr. Atturny. The Prisoner knoweth he might have his Liberty for asking for. Lord chief Justice Rolle. A man is not bound to do that. Well, let the Prisoner be remanded untill Saturday, and then we shall deliver our Opinions: It is a weighty Business: and Gentleman, in the mean time you may make your application otherwaies for your Liberty. Mr. Streater. My Lord, the Law hath provided no other way, and I am bound to take notice of the way the Law hath appointed. Our fore-Fathers knew of no other way. My Lord, I desire that I may have the Liberty to go to my Coun∣sel with my Keeper: both the last Term, and this, I have not at all ad∣vised with my Counsel. Lord chief Justice Rolle. That will not be denied you. Mr. Wilde, My Lord, it was moved this Term, and it was deny∣ed, being opposed by the other side, but it was before the Writ was filed; and I suppose that the Court may grant that Liberty to the Pri∣soner under the custody of their own Marshal. Saturday, February 11. The Prisoner was brought again to the Bar, under the custody of the Marshal of the Court. Lord chief Justice Rolle. Sir, have you your Counsell here? Mr. Streater. Yea, my Lord. Lord chief Justice Rolle. Where are they? Mr. Windham. I am of Counsel for the Prisoner. Mr. Streater. My Lord, Here is also Mr. Wilde. Mr. Freeman. Mr. Norbury. Lord chief Justice Rolle. Deputy-Marshal, go into the Chancery and acquaint Mr. Atturny-General, that we are going to deliver our Opinions in Streaters Case: and if he please to be present, he may; or if he hath any thing more to urge.
Mr.Pain, Dep. Marshal. My Lord, I have been with Mr. At∣turny General; and he saith, he will be here immediately. After a little space of time, Mr. Atturny commeth into the Court. Lord cheif Justice Rolle. Mr. Atturny, here is Mr. Streater a∣gain by Rule of Court; he hath been a long time in Prison, and I see here is nothing come against him that is material. Mr. Serjeant Twisden, of counsel for the Prisoner. My Lord, we desire that he may be bayled. Lord chief Justice Rolle. What, have you any thing more to say, Mr. Atturny? Mr. Attur. My Lord, I thought I should have heard of him, but I did not: the Court must do Justice. He is committed by Or∣der of Parliament. My Lord, if you will undo an Order of Parliament, he is to be de∣livered: but I hope the Court will not. Mr. Windham. The Order of Parliament is undone by the Parli∣aments being dissolved. Mr. Attur. Commissions of Sewers are granted by Parliament, and they do continue after the Parliament is dissolved. Jayl-delive∣ry is but once a year in the North-parts; and I suppose the next Par∣liament will be sitting before he hath been a year in Prison: at which time he may be tryed or delivered. And although this be called an Order of Parliament, yet it was acted by Parliament. Lord chief Justice Rolle. But all that the Parliament acteth, are not Acts of Parliament. The first Part of the Return is too general, it mentioneth not what Books, nor whose Books, or where they were, or when published. The second part of the Return is grounded upon an Order of Par∣liament: we are to take notice when a Parliament sitteth, and also when it is dissolved; or when it endeth, or determineth. Discontinu∣ance is a determination. A Writ of Error many times is made Returnable in the next Parliament; but that lieth after Tryal at Law. The word Order is a proper Phrase to that which is not an Act. An Order of Parliament is not binding in Succession: How shall the next Parliament take notice of a former Parliaments Order? Committees that are appoynted by Order of Parliament do cease
upon the dissolving of the Parliament. I have been of the Parlia∣ment; I ever found Parliaments of the same Opinion. We must looke to the first Imprisonment, and no farther: if you had Returned other Cause, we should have taken notice of it. Wee do not reverse the Order of Parliament; that is reversed by the Parliaments being dissolved; and it being dissolved, there is no vi∣sible way how the Prisoner shall be relieved: though there may be a probable way. Judge Ask. I am of the same Opinion, and that it could not be, that the Order of Parliament, by saying he should not be delivered but by Order of Parliament, but that they meant by the same Par∣liament, and not by a Successive Parliament. If it should be taken to be by Order of the next Parliament, where shall be the Liberty of the Subjects? or how shall they be relieved in long interval of Parliament? as in the Reign of King James, and the Reign of King Charles, we had not Parliaments in many Years together: and al∣though it be so that the Parliament by the Statute of the 4 of Ed. 3. should be once a Year, or oftner, if need be: besides, here is no Succession of Parliament, but a Dissolution. Another Parliament must be another Session, and therefore an Order cannot be in force untill another Session. If they had made an Act of Parliament, or passed a judgment of Parliament, it had been another Case. Upon the consideration of the whole matter, the Judges opinion was, that the Prisoner ought to be discharged, and this Rule entred. Saturday next after eight dayes of the Purif. 1653. The Lord Pro∣tector against Jo. Steater, Gent. The Defendant was brought into Court by the Marshal upon Habeas Corpus, and by the Court discharged of his imprisonment by the motion of Mr. Serjeant Twisden. By the Court. Lord chief Justice Rolle. Sir, you will do well to carry your self conformably to the present Power, and walk inoffensively. Mr. Streater. My Lord, I ever have been, aed I hope shall be, a Subject to Government, so as the Law requireth me to be: It is not my duty to be otherwise subject.
Postscript. IF you observe the tenor of the Writ of Habeas Corpus, as it is observed by Mr. Streater in his last Argument, that the Writ doth onely require that cause be shown why the party is impri∣soned, not who did commit the party to Prison: If any cause lawful was returned, then the party is to continue still in Prison; but with∣out cause, no commitment from what Power soever, can, or ought in Law or Reason to be binding. That it is the cause onely for which a Prisoner is committed, that cutteth the Prisoner off from the benefit of a Habe as Corpus, and not the will pleasure, or power of those in power; Here take Sir Edward Cookes nine general Reasons why a Habeas Corpus is to releive against illegal or long imprisonment. The first general Reason. The first general Reason is drawn arae ipsa, from imprisonment, ex visceribus causae, be it those or other imprisonments, which are divided into three parts. 1. No man can be imprisoned at the will and pleasure of any, but he that is bound, and a villain: for that imprisonment at will, is tailes luy haut, & base, are propria quarto modo to villaines. 2. But if Free-men of England might be imprisoned at the will and pleasure of the King or any others command, then were they in worse case then bond-men and villains: for the Lord of a villain can∣not command another to imprison his villain without cause, as of disobedience, or refusing to serve, as it is agreed in our books. 3. Imprisonment is accounted in Law a civil death, perdit do∣mum, familiam vicinos, patriam, his house, his family, his wife, his children, his neighbours, his country, and to live among wretched wicked men. If a mn be threatned to be killed, he may avoid a Feoffment of
lands, gifts of goods, &c. So it is if he be threatned to be impri∣soned, he shall do the like, for that is a civil death. The second general Reason. The second general Reason is, a minore ad majus; poena corpo∣ralis est majus qualibet pecuniaria; but the King himself cannot impose a sine upon any man; But it must be done judicially by his Judges, per Justiciar' in Cur', non per Regem in Camera: and so it hath been resolved by all the Judges of England. The third general Reason. The third general Reason is drawn from the number and diversaty of remedies, which the Law giveth against imprisonment, viz. bre∣via de homine replegiando, de odio & Atta; de Habe as Corpas, & brev. de manucaptione. The former of these are antiquated, but the Writ de odio & Atia is revived, for that was given by the Stat. of Magna Charta ch. 26. and therefore though it were repealed by the Stat. of 28. Ed. 3. ch. 9. yet it is revived, by the Stat. of 43. Ed. 3. ch. 1. by which it is provided, that all Statutes made against Magna Charta are void. Now the Law would never have given so many remedies, if the free men of England might have been imprisoned at free will & pleasure. The fourth general Reason. The fourth general Reason is drawn from the extent and univer∣sality of the pretended power to imprison: for it should not extend onely to the Commons of the Realm, and their Posterity; but to the Nobility, and their honourable Progenies; to the Bishops and Clergie of the Realm, and their Successors; to all persons, of what condition or sex, or age soever; to all Judges, Officers &c. whose attendance are necessary, without exception of any person. The fifth general Reason. The fifth general Reason is drawn from the indefiniteness of time: the pretended power being limited to no time, it may be perpetual during life. The sixth general Reason. The sixth general Reason is drawn a dedecore, from the loss and dishonor of the English Nation, in two respects, 1. For their va∣lour and power so famous through the whole world. 2. For their industry; for who will endeavour to imploy himself in any profession,
either of War, Liberal Science, or Merchandize, if he be but ten∣nant at will of his liberty? and no tennant at will will support or improve any thing, because he hath no certain Estate; and thus it should be both dedecus & damnum to the English Nation, and it should be no honor to the King, to be a King of slaves. The seventh general Reason. The seventh general Reason is drawn ab utili & inutili, for that appeareth by the Stat. of 36 Ed. 3, that the execution of the Stat. of Magna Charta, 5 Ed. 3.25 Ed. 3. and 28 Ed. 3. are ad∣judged in Parliament to be for the common profit of the King; and of his people, and therefore the pretended power being against the profit of the King and of his people, can be no part of his prero∣gative. The eighth general Reason. The eigth general Reason is drawn a tuto, for it is safe for the King to express the cause of the commitment, and dangerous for him to omit it: for if any be committed without expressing the cause, though he escape, albeit the truth be, it were for treason or felony; but if the cause be expressed to be for suspition of treason or felony, then if he escape, albeit the truth be, it were treason or felony, yet the escape is neither felony nor treason: but if the cause be expressed to be for suspition of treason or felony, then if he escape, albeit he be inno∣cent, it is treason or felony. The last general Reason. The last general Reason is drawn from authorities. 16. H. 6. Means de fait. 182. by the whole Court, the King in his presence cannot command one to be arrested, but an action of false imprison∣ment lies against him that arresteth: 22 H. 7.4. Newton. 1 H. 7.4. the Opinion of Markham chief Justice to Ed. 4. and the reason, be∣cause the party hath no remedy. Fortescue chap. 8. Proprio ore nullus regum nsus est, &c. to commit any man. 4 El. Plo. Com. 236. The common Law hath so admeasured the Kings prerogative, as he cannot prejudice any man in his inheritance; and the greatest inheritance a man hath, is the liberty of his person: all other are accessary to it. FINIS.
