C6133 E398_16 99862191 114342
The Copy of a LETTER Printed at New-Castle, July the 6, 1647. SENT From the Adjutators of the Army under His Excellence Sir Thomas Fairfax, unto their Fellow-Souldiers in the Gar∣risons of New-Castle and Tinmouth. Advising them 1. That they will not suffer themselves to be broken in pieces by any discouragements, but performe the Trust reposed in them in those places of Strength and Confidence wherein they are. 2. That they will not upon any pretended Order whatsoever, betray their Trust, or deliver up their Garrison into the hands of any, untill they shall receive commands from the Generall, whose Warrant only is able to beare them out in it. 3. That they would endeavour to hold correspondence with them, by appointing some faithfull men, who may at all times acquaint them with their condition. With divers other matters of remarkable consequence. London, Printed for Tho. Vere at the upper end of the Old-Bailey.
A Letter from the Adjutators of the Army under his Excellence Sir Tho. Fairfax, &c. Gentlemen and Fellow-Souldiers, YOu being Members of the same bo∣dy with us, it cannot be supposed that we should bee altogether in∣sensible of your sad sufferings, and pressing grievances, or distrustfull of your Fidelity and constant Resolutions, to stick unanimously to us in pursuance of our just and lawfull designes, tending to our and your timely reliefe, and the peace and welfare of the Kingdome: We are not ignorant of the temp∣tations whereunto you are lyable, having so many discouragements, by reason of your want of pay, and distance from us, as also the mis∣representation of us and our proceedings,
whereby you may be in danger either to leave your station, and seeke redresse else-where, or to desert us and our just Cause through mis∣information; we have therefore thought sit to present our selves to you, thus: Viz. Wee feeing our selves and the whole Kingdome laid open to oppression and injury, through the ma∣lice and wicked contrivances of unjust men, have been necessitated to put on man-like Reso∣lutions, and accordingly to act for our lives, and the lives of our fellow Souldiers, who have faithfully served the State, which were wickedly sold into the jawes of Tyranny, and unheard of Cruelty, to satisfie the unlimited lusts of per∣verse men, and finding no other remedy left us but with our swords in our hands to prosecute the enemies of our peace, and endeavour to bring them to condigne punishment; Wee have solemnly engaged our selves not to disband untill we have obtained some security of our lives and just Liberties, and setled this distracted Nation in peace and quiet. But lest our intentions should be presented to you in a false Glasse, we have thought good to let you see the inside of our undertakings, and the sincere intentions of our hearts in our present proceedings: It is not our own In∣terests, or setting up of our owne advantages, or the feeding of our owne Lusts that is in our Eye or Ayme; but it is the Glory of GOD, the just preservation and safetie of
the Kings person, the just Priviledges of Parliament, the redeeming of the Lives and Liberties of the free People of Eng∣land from Tyrannie, Oppression, and In∣justice, the maintenance of just Lawes, and the necessarie support and defence of this Kingdome, together with the free and impar∣tiall distribution of Justice to all, which wee have made our Ayme; and when these our Ends shall be obtained, and Meanes (for the continuance thereof established, wee shall ac∣quiesse and be readie either to lay downe Armes, or otherwise to be imployed for the Service of the Common-wealth. And that you may be not onely willing (as wee beleeve you are) but also able to prosecute effectually the same things with us, we shall offer this ad∣vice to you. I. That you will not suffer your selves to be broken in pieces by any discouragements, but unite your selves in Love, and streng∣then one another in Resolution, to keepe your standing, and per∣forme the trust reposed in you,
in that place of Strength and Consequence wherein you are. II. That you would not (upon any pretended Order whatso∣ever) betray your trust, or deli∣ver up your Garrison into the hands of any, untill you shall re∣ceive Commands from our Ge∣nerall, whose Warrant onely is able to beare you out in it. III. That you would endeavour to hold Correspondence with us, by appointing some faithfull men, who may at all times ac∣quaint us with your Condition, and receive such Information from us, as may concerne you.
And be you assured, that wee shall at all times faithfully stand by you, in all just and lawfull proceedings, and make all your sufferings our owne, and endea∣vour to the utmost of our abili∣ties to manifest our selves the earnest seekers of your, our own, and the Kingdomes welfare, subscribing our selves Vxbridge, 25. Iune, 1647. Yours, and the Kingdomes faithfull friends and servants, chosen to Agitate in behalfe of the Army. Iames Berry Captaines. Iohn Clerke Captaines. Edmund Rolph Captaines. Henry Prittie Captaines. Waldine Lagee Captaines. Ed. Sexdy Generals Regiment. Iohn Tayler Generals Regiment. William Allin Lieut. Gen. Iam. Tirtorington Lieut. Gen.
Iohn Braman Col. Rich. Anthony Wickson Col. Rich. Tho. Shippard Col. Rich. Philip Eyton Colonel VVhaley Iohn Young Colonel VVhaley Barth. Willock Col. Thomlinsons Rich. Clarke Col. Thomlinsons Iohn Willoughby Col. Hortons Tobias Boxe Col. Hortons Nat. Foxgill Col. Hamonds Regi∣ment. Will. Bridgman Col. Hamonds Regi∣ment. Rob. Mason Colonel VValler. Hen. Anderton Colonel VValler. Haste at present prevents us of giving a m large and full accompt of our proceedings, ∣ving formerly sent both Letters and Mes to you, which we hope are come to your hands and shall by the next oportunitie informe you further. FINIS.
