C695 E537_17 R205581 99864924 164854
THE PETITION OF THE JEWES For the Repealing of the Act of Parliament for their banishment out of ENGLAND. Presented to his Excellency and the generall Councell of Officers on Fryday Jan. 5. 1648. With their favourable acceptance thereof. Also a Petition of divers Comman∣manders, prisoners in the Kings Bench, for the releasing of all pri∣soners for Debt, according to the Custome of other Countries. London, Printed for George Roberts, 1649.
To the Right Honourable, THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, (His Excellency) ENGLANES GENERALL, AND The Honourable Councel of Warre, Conveaned for Gods Glory, Izraells Freedom, Peace, and Safety, The humble Petition of Johanna Cartenright, Widdow, and Ebenezer Cartwright her Son, freeborn of England, and now Inhabitants of the City of Amsterdam. Humbly Sheweth, THat your Petitioners being con∣versant in that City, with and amongst some of Izraells race, called
Jewes, and growing sensible of their hea∣vy out-cryes and clamours against the in∣tolerable cruelty of this our English Nati∣on, exercised against them by that (and o∣ther) inhumane exceeding great Massacre of them, in the Raign of RICHARD the second, King of this Land, and their ba∣nishment ever since, with the penalty of death to be inflicted upon any of their re∣turn into this Land, that by discourse with them, and serious perusall of the Prophets, both they and we find, that the time of hercall draweth nigh; whereby they toge∣ther with us, shall come to know the Ema∣nuell, the Lord of life, light, and glory; even as we are now known of him, And that this Nation of ENGLAND, with the Inha∣bitants of the Nether-lands, shall be the first and readiest to transport IZRAELLS Sons & Daughters in their Ships to the Land pro∣mised to their fore-Fathers, ABRAHAM, ISA∣AC, and JACOB, for an everlasting Inheri∣tance. For the glorious manifestation whereof, and pyous meanes thereunto, your Petitio∣ners
humbly pray that the inhumane cruel Statute of banishment made against them, may be repealed, and they under the Christi¦an banner of charity, and brotherly love, may again be received and permitted to trade and dwell amongst you in this Land, as now they do in the Nether-lands. By which act of mercy, your Petitioners are assured of the wrath of God, will be much appeased towards you, for their in∣nocent blood shed, and they thereby dayly enlightened in the saving knowledge of him, for whom they look dayly and expect as their King of eternall glory, and both their and our Lord God of salvation (Christ Jesus.) For the glorious accomplishing whereof, your Petitioners do, and shall e∣ver addresse themselves to the true Peace, and pray; &c. This Petition was presented to the generall Councell of the Officers of the Army, under the Command of his Excelleney, Thomas Lord Fairfax, at White-Hall on Ian. 5. And favourably received with a pro∣mise to take it into speedy consideration, when the present more publike affaires are dispatched.
To his Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairfax, and his Generall Councel of Officers. The most humble Petition of divers Commanders, Prisoners in the Kings Bench, whose names are hereunto subscribed in the behalfe of themselves, and all other their en∣slaved Brethren, imprisoned for Debt. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners with all se∣riousnesse revolving the admira∣ble mercy of God, vouchsafed to this Nation in preserving and carrying on your Excellency & Pyous Army through the many dangers and difficulties (and according to the desires of your Pe∣titioners and all good men) in Crowning you with Victory, and putting this long wisht for opportunity into your hands, of procuring a speedy administration of Jus∣tice for the impartiall punishment of all offenders, to the relief and comfort of the oppressed; your Petitioners are hereby
imbouldned and by your Proposalls and late Declarations encouraged to make their humble addresses to your Excellen∣cy, and the Generall Councell of the Ar∣my. That your Petitioners with all hum∣blenesse and earnestnesse beseech your Excellency, who is the patern and Pa∣tron of Souldiers, first to consider their sad condition (being imprisoned contrary to the Law of God, the fundamentall Lawes of this Kingdone, and the pract∣ice of all States) and peruse their Petiti∣on hereunto annexed, containing their grievances and desires, and as soone as your weighty affaires will permit to take such order (either by presenting the same, or otherwise for your Petioners just relief and liberty without prison Fees, as to your Excellency and the Generall Councells grave wisdome shall seeme expedient,
whereby they may be enabled to attend your Excellencies Command in the Ar∣my or else where. And further your Petitioners hmubly pray, that you would please with all con∣venience, mature some course for the re∣leasing of all Prisoners for debt, espetially the well affected, and in the meane times according to your practice of other Countries, cause their Creditors to main∣taine them according to their qualities, that noe more perish through want, as very many have done already, whose in∣nocent bloud cryes for vengance to the Almighty, and doubtlesse is not the least cause of our present colamities, and of Gods judgments upon us. And as in duty bound, your Petitioners shall pray &c. FINIS.
