C7233A R174338 45097647 171251
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-Bar. 1. GReek Testament, Printed by Jo. Red∣mayn oct. 2. The compleat Vineyard, or the most excellent way for the planting of Vines, by Wil∣liam Hughes in oct. 3. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Authore F. Clerk, oct. 4. A description of Candia in its Ancient and mo∣dern estate, with an account of the siege and surren∣der to the Turks, oct. Price 1s. 5. The deaf and dumb mans discourse, being a dis∣course of such as are born deaf and dumb, shewing how they express the sentiments of their minds, toge∣ther with an account of the rationality of Beasts, par∣ticularly of the Elephant, oct. Price 1s. 6. Des Cartes the Philosopher's life, oct. Price 1s.
7. Gees, steps to the Temple, Twenty fours. 8. The Christian pattern or imitation of Christ. written by Thomas of Kempis, Twenty fours. 9. An answer to Mr. Furguson's doctrine about Christ's Justification and Sanctification, together with an account of the extent of Christ's death, by J. Knowls, oct. Price 1s. 6d. 10. De Mirabilibus Pecci, Carmen, Autho. Tho. Hobs, quar. 11. Sir Henry Blunt's Voyage into the Levant, Twelves. Price 1s. 12. Compleat measurer, or a new and exact way of Measuration by Tho. Hammond oct. Price 1s. 13. Mr. Hobs. Rosetum Geometricum, quar. Pr 3s. 14. Carpenters Rule made easie by Mr. Darling, twelves. 15. The flower-Garden inlarged, shewing how to order and increase all manner of flowers, whether by layers, slips, off-sets, cuttings, seeds, &c. also how to draw a Horizontal Dyal in a Garden, with a Treatise of all Roots, Plants, Trees, Shrubs, Fruits, Herbs, &c in the Kings plantations, twelves, by William Hughes. 16. The Elegant Poems of Dr. Richard Corbet, Dean of Christ Church in Oxford after Bp. of Nor∣ih, twelves. 17. Boccalin's advirtisements from Parnassus, Fol.
18. Ogilby's Virgil, English with Notes and Cuts, oct. 19. Brownlow's reports compleat in 2 parts, quar. 20. The Court of Curiosity, being a very delightful and pleasant fortune-book, an excellent and learned Treatise of Dreams, and an ingenious discourse of Physiognomy: written in French, now Englished the second edition, improved, twelves, Price 2s. 21. Lux mathematica, Author Tho. Hobs. 22. Principia & problemata aliquot Geometrica, ante desparata, &c. Author Tho. Hobs. quar. 23. The American Physitian treating of all the flowers, roots, Plants, and Herbs that grow in his Majesties American plantations by William Hughes, twelves. 24. Lucius Florus translated into English, oct. 25. Caesar's commentaries Englished by Mr. Ed∣monds with notes, fol. 26. Wingates Clerk's tutor in writing and Arith∣metick, oct. 27. The Judges Resolution concerning the several statutes of Bankrupts, oct. 28. Mary Magdalens tears wip'd off. 29. Bishop Sparrow's Rationale on the Common Prayer, twelves. 30. Clarkes Lives of the fathers, School-men, Ancient and Modern Divines, fol.
31 Grotins's Catechism, Greek, Latine and English, with a praxis to the Greek, oct. 32. The great Law of Nature about self-preservati∣on vindicated against the abuses of Mr. Hobs in his Leviathan, twelves. 33. Calliopes Cabbinet opened, wherein all Gentle∣men may be informed how to order themselves for all funerals, feasts, and Heroick meetings, to know all degrees of Honour, and how all persons of all de∣grees are to take place, with a dictionary of all the Terms in Heraldry. 34. A new collection of Songs and Poems, writ∣ten by several Wits now living, oct. 35. A discourse of the Dukedome of Modena, the Native Country of her Royal Highness the Dutchess of York, quar. 36. Brevis Demonstratio, proving the truth and excellency of the Christian Religion by Reason, re∣commendeded to all Rational men by several Emi∣nent Divines in London. twelves. 37. Walton's Lives, of four Eminent men, oct. 38. Nomenclatura, Greek, Latine, and English oct. 39. The Apopthegmes, or witty sentences of Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Chancellor of England, twelves. 40. Parthenissa, a Romance written by the Earl of Orrorey, fol. 41. Cassandra, a Romance, fol.
42. The Primitive institution, or a seasonable dis∣course of Catechizing, wherein is shewed the anti∣quity, benefits and necessity thereof, together with its suitableness to heal the present distempers of the Church by Lancellot Addison, D. D. 43. The present State of the Jewes, wherein is con∣tained an exact account of all their present customes, secular and religious, to which is annexed a discourse of the Misna, Talmud, and Gemara, by Lancellot Ad∣dison, D. D. twelves. 44. Homer's works, translated out of Greek into English by Tho. Hobs, twelves. 45. The Golden Rule of Arithmetick made easie oct. 46. A supplement or third Volum of Mr. Hobs his works. quar. 47. Seventy eight Characters, oct. 48. The Grounds of Soveraignty and Greatness, quar. 49. Camera Regis, or a short view of London containing the antiquity, Frame, Walls, River, Bridg Gates, Tower, Cathedral, Officers, Courts, Cu∣stomes, Franchises, &c. of the said City, oct. 50. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a man drowned in a pit. oct. 51. Mr. Howel's Visitation sermon, quar. 52. The Historians Guide in two parts, containing the most remarkable passages done in England for seventy six years last past, oct.
53. The circumcision of the Great Turks son, and the Ceremony of the Marriage of his Daughter. 54. Naked truth or the intrigues of amorous Fops, oct. 55. Kitchins Court Leet and Court Baron, shewing the power, nature, practice and jurisdiction of these and other Courts, oct. 56. Scarron's Comical Romance, or a facetious Hi∣story of a Company of Stage Players, interwoven with divers choice Novels, rare adventures, and a∣mourous intrigues, written in French by the famous and witty Monsieur Scarron now done into English, by J B. Gent, fol. 57. A Letter about liberty and necessity, written by Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, with observations upon it, by Dr. Benjamin Laney late Bishop of Ely, twelves. 58. A Modest Plea for the Clergy of the Church of England, wherein is briefly considered the Original antiquity, necessity, together with the occasions they are so slighted and contemned, oct. 59. Astrological Judgement, and practice of phy∣sick deduced from the position of the Heavens, at the decumbiture of the sick person, being the thirty years practice of Mr. Richard Saunders, oct. 6. A treatise of Wool and Cattle, shewing how far they raise or abate value of lands in England quar. 61. A discourse whether  may be lawful to take
Use for mony; written by Sir Robert Filmer, and pub∣lished by Sir Roger Twisden, twelves, printed this year, 1678. PLAYES. 1. The white Devil or Vittoria Corombona. 2. The old Troop or Monsieur Raggou. 3. Catalines conspiracy. 4. Amorous gallant or Love and fashion. 5. The mock duellist or French Vallet. 6. Wrangling Lovers or the Invisible Mistris. 7. Tom Essence or the Modish Wife, quar. 8. French Conjurer. 9. Wits led by the Nose. 10. The Rival Kings. 11. The constant Nymph or Rambling shepherd. An Advertisement. There is Printing an excellent Peice of Natural Philosophy in English, never before Printed, written by Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, who is yet living. FINIS.
