D764 E437_2 99864147 161625
A DECLARATION OF The Right Honourable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common-Councell of the City of LONDON, CONCERNING The great and apparent danger of the said City, and the De∣sires and proceedings of the Common-Councell-men therein, in behalf of the Citizens. ALSO, Their present Summons and Directions (in His Majesties Name) to the Trained Bands and Citizens, touching the preservation of the Peace, defence of them∣selves, the City, and the Magistrates thereof. AGreed upon by the Honourable Court at Guild-Hall, on Tuesday last, April 25. 1648. MICHEL. blazon of the City of London LONDON: Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.
A DECLARATION OF The Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councel of the City of LONDON: IN The Name of the Kings most Excellent Majesty; cn∣ceming their present Resolution to preserve and defend the said City and Inhabitants. VPon the 24. and 25. of this in stant Aprill, 1648. the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-councell of the City of London, had a ge∣nerall meeting at Guild-Hall where they spent much time, upon debates and consultations touching the preservation of
the peace, defence of themselves, the City, and the Magi∣strates thereof; as also concerning the apparent danger, that the city is now in at the present. Therefore, according to the desire, and direction of the said Court, the Right Hono∣rable the Lord Mayor agreed upon this ensuing Declarati∣on, and ordered that it should be printed and published, to the end, that all upon sight thereof, doe so order and dispose of their servants, and all others under their charge, that they be not onely kept from committing any outrage or misde∣meanour; but that they and their servants be in a readinesse according to their several capacities, with Arms, Weapons, and Ammunition, for preservation and defence of the said City; a Copy of the said Declaration I shall here give you verbatim. BY THE MAJOR. FOrasmuch, as it is conceived and apprehended by the Common-councell, that the City at the present is in great danger; These are therefore, according to the Desire and Direction of the said Court to will and require you in his Majesties Name, That presently vpon sight hereof, you respectively, with the Constables of your several Precincts, do repair to every Housholder within the same, and give them strict charge and command, that at their perils, they doe so order and dispose of their Servants, and all others vnder their charge, that they be not only kept from committing any
outrage or misdemeanour; But that they and their ser∣vants from time to time be in readinesse, according to their severall capacities▪ with Armes, Weapons, and Ammunitions for preservation of the Peace, defence of themselves, the City, and the Magistrates thereof: And also, that all Persons who are of the Trained Bands of this City, Do from time to time upon the beat of the Drum, repair with all speed to their Colours: And therein demeasn themselves as may conduce to the safe∣ty and welfare of this City. And that you do from time to time certifie vnto me, or some other of his Majesties Justices of the Peace, the Names of such Constables, and others, as you shall finde to be remisse or negligent in the performance of their re∣spective Duties in this behalfe, to the intent, that they may be punished according to the same. And hereof fails you not, as you tender the safety of your selves and the City, and will answer the contrary at your perill. This 25. of April, 1648. MICHEL. To the Deputy, Common-Councell-men, and Constables in the Ward of
BY Letters from Scotland it is further certified, That at Edinburgh the expectation of the malignants are great, and reports variable, but little concluded on: only we hear that they are resolved, that an army shal be sent into Eng∣land, and although many wil not be perswaded to believe it, yet it may now more easily be gathered, that such a thing is intended, and wil speedily be effected, if not prevented; for the Scots army draws Southward, and many of them are ordered to be quartered neer the Borders, the Lord Belca∣rouse Troop have taken up their quarters within five miles of Berwick, having order so to doe. Many other Troopes have quarters assigned them in the South of Scotland, and especialy in the Townes and Villages nrer adjoyning to England; also from other parts of Scotland we perceive the Scots Forces to creep Southward, but they are wary, and do it by little and little, the better to avoid suspition, but if their intents are, as is suspected, England may chance to frustrate their designs, and the Scots after all their jugling be decei∣ved of their expectations. The Parliament of Scotland have given answer to the Eng∣lish Commissioners papers, but it is said to be very unsatis∣factory▪ and that they refer the substance of all to their own Commissioners who are comming into England, of whom the Lord Lec is one to treat with the Parliament, and have Pro∣positions and instructions given them, to treat about setling Religion according to the Covenant for the King his remo∣vall to one of his houses, and a personall treaty with him; as also for disbanding the Army, and other Propositions that I have not as yet; the certainty of the difference between the Clergy and state is as great as ever, they will by no meanes consent to the raising of men, although listing in divers parts of this Kingdome; 'tis supposed 'twill be spee∣dily effected; and because many of the Commanders of the standing Forces of this Kingdome do not concur with them in this design, those Forces are to be disbanded, and the Earl
of Calender is to be General of their new Modell; insomuch, that the Cavees and English Fugitives grow very high, trea∣ting ruine and destruction to the Parliament and their Ad∣herents. But indeed, some dayes there are great hopes of an agreement, and other days the distance is so farre, as scarce any man shal know how neer they are to have an Army: ma∣ny English men are at Edenburgh, and they doe dayly in∣crease. Another great ship came to Leeth Rode on Fryday night last; what she is, is not yet known, but a flying Report of the Prince being in her, but no certainty. Some Irish Re∣bels are come into some of the Scots Islands, and the Marq. of Argyles Regiment are directed, with some others, to march towards them. This is all, I earnestly request a correspon∣dency weekly, and where I shal direct my Letter unto you, that I may take the occasion to subscribe my self. Your oblieged servant, R. V. Barwick 19 April, 1648. SIR, Since the writing hereof we hear that the Parliament of Scotland have given an answer to our Commissioners pa∣pers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory, and that they re∣fer the substance of all to their own Commissioners which are comming into England to treat with the Parliament. IN the Marq. of Argyles Countrey, there is risen up in Arms one commonly called Kolkittoh, which hath cau∣sed some of the Forces that lay in the South of Scotland to march Northward for the suppression of them, all the Of∣ficers in the standing Army of Scotland except Lieutenant General Middleton) have petitioned to the Parliament, and presented these Proposals, viz. 1. That they will be pleased to consult with the Ministers of the Kirk, in relation to their
proceedings touching the Kingdome of England. 2. That they will be pleased not to ingage in a War against England, unlesse the Kirk of Scotland doe concur therein. yours, &c. Sir, Since my last, we have received further intelligence from South-wales, that Col. Horton, and Col. Lewis with their Forces have streightned the enemies quarters, & for∣ced them to a narrower distance, but not without some blowes; for, as it is said, they have had a very hot skirmish, and resolutely maintained by both parties, upon severall charges and conflicts; and afrer some dispute Poyers party retreated, our men pursues; some are wounded, but no great hurt done. Col. Flemming hath lately fell upon the enemy, & took divers prisoners. Col. Okeys Dragoons are joyned with Col. Horton, they have had a hot skirmish with the enemy. By the next you shal hear further, from Your most affectionate friend, T H. Carmarthen 19. April 1648. Imprimatur G. M. FINIS.
