E1234 E153_9 99866746 119031
ARTICLES of Impeachment exhibited in PARLIAMENT, AGAINST SPENCER Earle of Northamp WILLIAM Eatle of Devonsh. HENRY Earle of Dover HENRY Earle of Manmouth, ROBERT Lord Rich, CHARLES Lord Howard Charlton, CHARLES L. Grey of Ruthen THOMAS Lord Coventry, ARTHVR Lord Chapell, &c. For severall high Crimes and Misdemeanors Ordered to be Printed. Hen. Elsing Cler. D. C Whereunto is annexed, The Grounds of the Proceedings of the Parliament from the beginning to this pre∣sent, with the hinderances of their Procee∣dings and causes of these distractions TOGETHER With the severall meanes which they have used to prevent intestine Warre, and to hinder the malignant Designes of the enemies of the Peace of the Kingdome Likewise ordered to be Printed Jo. Browne Cler. Parl. July, 1. LONDON, Printed by T. F. for J. Y. 1642
Articles of Impeachment against the Nine Lords. THe Lords and Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, finding the distractions of the Kingdome to be great, have thought sit to explaine, and remonstrate to the world the grounds of their proceedings, and the causes of these distractions, in these ensuing particulars. 1. The Roote of these mischievous designes 2. The maturity to which they had attained fore the beginning of this Parliament 3. The effectuall meanes which hath beene used for the extirpation of those desperate evils
and the progression which therein has beene made by the wisdome of the Parliament. 4. The wayes of opposition, by which that progresse is interrupted. 5. The courses to be taken for the removing of these obstacles, and for the accomplishing of our faithfull endeavours of restoring the anti∣ent Honour, greatnesse, and security of this Crowne and Nation, the roote of all this mis∣chiefe we find to be a malignant designe of subverting the fundamentall Lawes, upon which the Religion and Justice of this Kingdome are firmely established. The Actors hereof have beene, 1. The Papists, which hate the Lawes, as the obstacles of that subversion of Religion, which they so much long for. 2. Such Councellors, and Courtiers, as for pri∣vate ends, have ingaged themselves to further the interests of Forraigne Princes, or States, to the prejudice of his Majesty, and the State at home. The common Principles by which they governe their Actions, are these.
1. To maintaine continuall Differences be∣twixt the King and the People, upon questions of Prerogative, and Liberty, that so they may gaine to themselves, and their parties, the great∣est places of trust and power in the Kingdome. 2. To suppresse the purity of Religion, and such persons as were best affected to it. 3. To disaffect the King to Parliaments, by slanders, and false imputations, and by putting him upon other wayes of supply, which in show were fuller of advantage, then the ordinary course of Subsidies, which indeed have been the greatest cause of these troubles and distractions under which we suffer. Heere are the Authors, and causes of these distempers made manifest, now it is necessary to declare how farre these mis∣chiefs have extended. Former relations, and precedent Decla∣rations have made some apparent, but yet so great is the power of ambition, that the infliction and execution of the Law upon Strafford, the durance and imprisonment of divers others of that faction, can no
way deterre them from using all meanes to perfect their designes, and finding no way so apt for their purposes, as to fo∣ment lealoufies betwixt the King and Parliament, they have cast many odionse scandals upon the proceedings of Parlia∣ment, nay so farre has their treachery ex∣tonded, that they have seduced divers Members of the Parliament, (namely) Spencer Earle of Northanmpton, William Earle of Devonshire, Henry Earle of Mon∣mouth, Charles Lord Howard of Charlton, Robert Lord Rich, Charles Lord Grey of Ruthen, Thomas Lord Coventry, and Arthur Lord Chapell, who are Impeacht for these high crimes and heinous misdemeanors, following. 1. That contrary to their dutie, they being Peeres of the Realme, and summoned by writ to attend the Parliament, and contrary to an Or∣der of the House of Peeres, of the ninth of A∣prill last, and severall other Orders, requiring the attendance of the said House.
2. That after a Vote passed in both Houses the 20. of May last, that the King seduced by wicked Councell intends to make Warre against his Parliament, &c. It was Voted that the departure of these nine Lords without leave at such a time, when the House had declared that the King intended to make Warre against his Parliament, and their still continuing at Yorke, notwithstanding their summons, and command, is a high affront, and contempt of both Houses, and that the said Lords did as much as in them lav, that the businesse of Parliament might be deserted, and are iustly suspected to pro∣mote a Warre against the Parliament. For that they have by another Order of the 30, of May, beene duly summoned, by the House of Peeres, to make their ap∣pearance before that House, upon the 8. day of June last past, they refused to ap∣peare, and returned a scornefull Answer, by a Letter under their Hand, directed to the Speaker of the Lords House, and
remaining there upon Record. For which Crimes, and misdemeanor (they tending to the dissolution of the Parliament) and disturbance of the King∣dome. It is demanded by the Commons that the said Lords may be brought to their Answer, and receive speedy andex∣emplary punishment, according to their demerits. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this both printed and published. Hen. Elsing, Cler. C. D. FINIS.
