e1180a 99900007 133144
AN ADDITIONALL ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in the PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND, For the morefull Indempnity of the Of∣ficers and Souldiers who have acted by Authority, and for the service of the PARLIAMENT. Together with several VOTES of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, concer∣ning the same. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance and Votes be forthwith printed and published. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.
Die Sabbathi, 5 Junii, 1647. An additionall Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, for the more full indempnity of the Officers and Souldi∣ers who have acted by Authority and for the service of the Parliament. FOrasmuch as in the times of this late Warre and publike distra∣ctions there have been many In∣juries done to private persons and other offences Committed by di∣vers persons bearing Armes in the service of the Parliament, The Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled taking into their Consideration, That it is expedient that the in∣juries and offences aforesaid be pardoned and put in Oblivion rather than by pretence of prosecuti∣on against some few persons, a great number of such who have faithfully served the Parliament be brought into a continuall vexation
for such Actions as the exigencie of Warre hath necessita∣ted them unto, Do therefore Ordaine, and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That all persons who have committed any offences, trespasses, injuries, or other misdemeanours what∣soever, during such time as they have been em∣ployed in Armes, by or for the service of the Par∣liament, be, is, and are hereby discharged and par∣doned of the same, and off and from all prosecu∣tion or damages therefore, either at the Suit of the King or the party grieved, and may in case he or they be questioned therefore, plead the gene∣rall Issues, and give this Ordinance in evidence, which shall be allowed to all intents and purposes as if the same were pleaded in Warre. And in case any shall prosecute any Action or Suit con∣trary to the Tenour of this Ordinance, against any person hereby discharged, after notice given that such person is hereby discharged, the defendant or Defendants so prosecuted shall recover his and their cost against such Prosecutor. Provided also that this Ordinance nor any thing herein contained, shall extend to discharge any such person or persons as aforesaid from making their true and just Accompts to any Committee or Committees of Parliament appointed or to be appointed for that purpose, of what they have ta∣ken, received, or had, for the Service or benefit of the Parliament. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Sabbathi, 5 Junii, 1647. Votes of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the dis∣banding and payment of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army. ORdered by the Lords and Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, That the Common Souldier both of Horse and Foot of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army shall have their full pay upon their disbanding or ingaging for Ireland, deducting for free Quarter, according to the course and Rules of the Army. Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the Offi∣cers of this Army not in Commission, shall likewise have their full pay upon their disbanding, or ingaging for Ireland, de∣ducting for free quarter, according to the course and Rules of the Army.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That there shall be an addition of a Moneths Pay to the commissioned Officers of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, both Horse and Foot, that shall either disband or ingage in the Service of Ireland. Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the De∣claration bearing Date the thirteth of March, 1647. shall be expunged out of the Journall of both Houses; the said De∣claration was accordingly expunged. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Sabbathi, 19 Junii. 1647. THe Lords and Commons in Parliament having well accepted the obedience and readinesse of those Officers and Souldiers who have complied with their Orders, have Ordered and Ordained, and by Authority aforesaid do Order and Ordaine, That all and eve∣ry the said Officers and Souldiers aforesaid, shall e freed, exonerated, acquitted, and discharged, ad are in and hereby declared and adjudged from henceforth to be free, exonerate, acquit, and dis∣charged of and from all and whatsoever prosecuti∣on, judgement of life or member, paines, penal∣ties, and punishments whatsoever incurred or that shall, may, or can, might, could, should, or ought to be inflicted, prosecuted, had, or pursued against them or any of them, for or by reason of the said pretended offence or offences of their departure from their said Colours, or from under the Com∣mand of the said Sir Thomas Fairfax, or from or under the command of any Military Officer or Of∣ficers under him whatsoever. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Veneris, 24 Decemb. 1647. An Ordinance giving power to the Committee of Indempnity, to put in Execution the Ordinances concerning Apprentices Freedomes. BE it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That power be given to the Committee for Indempnity, to put in execution the severall Ordinances con∣cerning Apprentices Freedomes that have served the Parliament in this late Warre, and to receive all complaints made upon them, and to give Redresse to the party grieved, and to allow Costs, Charges, and Damages, as they shall see cause, accord∣ing to the power given them, in cases of Indempnity. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
