e1809 E12_20 99872788 125234
An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: Being a weekly Assesment upon the Countie of Northampton, For the maintaining of the Forces, and preservation of the Garrison, to continue for six moneths following. Die Sabbati 12. Octob. 1644. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that this Ordinance he forthwith printed and published. Ioh. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. London printed for Iohn Wright, in the old Bayley. Octob. 14 1644.
Die Sabbathi 12. Octob. 1644. II is Ordained by the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, That Wil. Lord Fitzwilliams, Sir John Dryden, Sir Christopher Yelverton, Sir Gilbert Pyc∣kering Baronets; Zouch Tate, John Crew, Richard Knightley Esquires, Members of the House of Commons; Sir Rowland St John Knight of the Bath, Sir Edward Nicolls. Sir John Norwich Baronets; Sir Humphrey Orme, Sir Richard Samwell Knights; Richard Knightley of Fawzley, Robert Mildemay, Edward Harby, Edward Only, John Cartwright, Philip Holman, Richard Samwell, Edward Farmer, John Wirley, Edward Shug∣borough, Edward Hanbury, William Lisle, Thomas Elmes, John Cleypoole, Francis Quarles, John Norton, John Breton, and John Thorneton Esquires, and the Major of the Town of Northampton for the time being, or any three or more of them, residing in the Towne of Northampton, for the furnishing of Armes and Ammunition, making Fortificati∣ons, and payment of the Garrisons, Officers, and Souldiers, and other publike necessary Charges for the defence and preservation of the said County from Plunder and Ruine, shall or may from time to time, during the space of sixe moneths, to commence from the ninth day of September 1644. raise in the said County such summes of Money as shall be by them, or any three or more of them thought necessary for the uses aforesaid, the same to be rated and assessed in like sort as was the foure hundred thousand pounds granted by Act this present Parliament, not exceeding the summe of six hundred pounds a week. And for the better levying of the
said summes of Money, the said Committee, or any three or more of them then residing in the Towne of Northampton, shall or may nominate and appoint Treasurers, Collectors, and Assessors in the said County, for Assessing, Receiving, and Collecting the said sums of Money, and shall and may grant Warrants under their hands to any Constable or other person or persons, as well Souldiers, when need shall require, as others, to raise and levie the said sums so to be Assessed and Taxed as aforesaid, upon all such persons up∣on whom any such summes shall be so assessed and set, that doe re∣fuse or neglect to pay the same by way of distresse and sale of the Goods of the persons so assessed and refusing, and two pence for every shilling that shall not be paid upon demand, to beare the charge of those that distraine: And in case any opposition be made, or no Distresse can be found, the said Committee, or any three or more of them residing in Northampton as aforesaid, shall or may commit such person or persons refusing to pay, or not having a suf∣ficient Distresse to be found as aforesaid, to some common Goale within the said County, there to remaine untill payment made of such summe and summes of Money as aforesaid, for which summes so to be raised, the said Committee shall be accomptable to both Houses of Parliament, or such as they have appointed, and to none else. And if any shall refuse or neglect the execution of such Warrants as shall be directed to them by vertue of this Ordinance, it shall be lawfull for the said Committee residing as aforesaid, or any three of them, to punish such person refusing or neglecting by Fine, not exceeding five pounds to be levied as aforesaid. Provided, that where it shall appeare to the said Committee, or any two of them residing as aforesaid, That any person hath beene over-rated to the Tax upon the Bill of 400000 li. an abatement may be made in the Tax of such person by the said Committee, or any two of them residing as aforesaid, according to their discretions. Provi∣ded also, that this present Ordinance shall be no hinderance to Taxes made by any former Ordinance. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
