E2624A E114_30 R11750 99859123 111189
A MESSAGE SENT TO THE PARLIAMENT FROM The Members of the House of Commons at Colchester, informing them of the Passages there, how the multi∣tude doth daily increase, and have plundered the Lady Rivers house at Colchester, and taken from her the value of forty thousand pound in Money, Plate, Jewels, and other things of great worth; threatning moreover to plunder all the Papists houses in Essex, con∣ceiving them to be the causers of the present distractions. Likwise the coming of the Earl of Southampton the Earl of Dorset. and Sr. Iohn Culpeper to both Houses concerning the withdrawing their present forces. Also a true Relation of the manner of taking Dover Castle on Wednesday night Aug. 25. by the Earl of Warwick and M. Dukes. And the taking of a ship that came from Spaine by the Earle of Warwick with 600000 pound, seized upon at Southampton for the use of the Parliament, and Ordered to be brought up to LONDON. Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl. Printed for Iohn Iones. August 27. 1642.
A MESSAGE SENT FROM Colchester to the Parliament, informing them of the Passages there, and how the multitude doth daily increase, and have plundered the Lady Rivers her house, taking away from her the value of forty thousand pound in money, plate, iewels, and many other things of great worth, And how they threaten to plunder all the Papists houses in that Countrey. Also a true Relation of the manner of taking Dover Castle on wednesday night Aug. 24. by the Earl of Warwick and M. Dukes. THe Houses of Par∣liament have recei∣ved information frō Sir Thomas Baring∣ton and M. Grim∣ston, that were sent to Colchester in Es∣sex, that the multi∣tude of people that gathered themselves together by occasion of Sir Iohn Lucas his
providing of horse and ammunition to send to His Maiesty, were very much increased, and that they were so much incensed against the Papists, and others ill-affected to the Parlia∣ment, that they could not appease them, and that they have plundered the Lady Rivers her house at Colchester, and have spoiled and taken away from her in money, plate, iewels, and o∣ther things of value, to the sum of forty thou∣sand pound, withall giving out speeches, and threatning to plunder all the Papists in that County, which (they conceived) were the causers of all these troubles and distractions in the Kingdome, and were the occasions that they, their wives and children were brought in∣to great want and extremity, (by the great de∣cay of trading) and for that they have plotted the ruine and destruction of this Kingdome. The occasion of this multitudes gathering to∣gether in this manner was as followeth. Upon Friday last being the six and twentieth day of August, the House of Commons re∣ceived a Letter from the Maior of Colchester directed to M. Iohn Pym of the House of Com∣mons, declaring the fidelity and good affection of the inhabitants of the said town of Colche∣ster and other townes thereabouts in that good service they performed for the King and Par∣liament in taking away the great store of armes and ammunition that were found in the dwel∣ling
house of Sir Iohn Lucas neere Colchester, and how that a great many Muskets, Pistols, and Carbines were found ready charged; all which was discovered by one Captain Lumley, who forthwith informed the towne thereof; upon whose information the whole towne rose in a great uproare, and within a small time about two thousand people were gathered to∣gether, who forthwith beset the house of the said Sir Iohn Lucas, but were dned entrance for a time; whereupon the people were so in∣raged, that they demanded entrance without delay: they that were within the house percei∣ving the multitude without to be too great for them to make opposition against, opened the gates, where after they had entred, they found twelve Horses fitted for warre, that should have gone to the King the next day, and two hundred men: Diverse of them being exami∣ned concerning the occasion of their being there, would confesse nothing, but said that they were sworne to secresie: the people hear∣ing this answer, were further inraged against Sir Iohn Lucas, insomuch that the Maior was inforced to carrie him home to his own house, to keep him from the violence of the people: Herewithall the people were no whit satisfied, but rather the more inraged (resolving either to have him out, or els they threatned to pull downe the Maiors house) untill he had sent him
to the common Goale. The people yet are in great feare and amazement, and continue together in great multitudes, and will not re∣turne to their habitations untill they have fur∣ther satisfaction concerning him. The Maior not knowing what course to take with the people, nor how to pacifie them, sent with all speed to know the pleasure of the Parlia∣ment concerning the same. After some debate of it in the House of Commons, they desired a Conference with the Lords, where the said Letter was read, and thereupon the Lords and Commons ordered, that Sir Thomas Barring∣ton, and M. Grimstone should goe with all speed downe to Colchester to appease the people, and to give them thankes for their good affe∣ction, and forwardnesse to assist the Parlia∣ment, declaring to them, that the House took it as an acceptable service, desiring them to de∣part to their owne houses. Upon wedneseday night last the foure and twentieth of August, one . Dukes a Merchant that was intrusted for the securing of the Castle of Dover in Kent, caused ten men, armed with swords and Muskets ready charged, to climbe up a steep rock (in the dead time of the night) and to draw up scaling ladders after them, to scale the wals of the Castle, to take it and keep it for the King and Parliament. After they had scaled the wals and got into the Ca∣stle,
these ten Musketiers went to the Court of Guard, consisting but of foure men, who at the sudden appearance of these ten men were so a∣mazed, that they seemed to be in a trance, and demanding of them who kept the keyes of the gate, for feare they directed them to the Porter who kept the keyes, and knocking at his cham∣ber doore, they commanded him to deliver up the keyes to them for the service of the King and Parliament: at first he denied, saying, he would not: whereupon they would have broke open the door, and withall threatning to shoot him, unlesse he would deliver up the keyes: at length he gave them the keyes, and present∣ly they went to the gate and sent post to the Earle of Warwick, who lay nigh Dover with his ships, and immediately sent them threescore Musketiers, besides forty Musketiers more ready prepared which were sent from the Ci∣tizens of Canterbury, who immediately tooke the Castle for the use and service of the King and Parliament, turning out all those whom they suspected to be ill-affected to the Parlia∣ment. Not above two dayes after, upon fri∣day the 26. of August, the Parliament received information of a ship coming from Spaine with 600000. pound coming to Portsmouth, and finding no means to arrive there by reason of the ships which the Earle of Werwick had laid before the towne, and perceiving no possi∣bility
of escaping, being descried by the said ships, they struck in o Southampton, pretending that they came with other merchandize, but being searched, little was found therein but Bullion, which they said was to be coyned here and so it is thought it shall; for, the Parlia∣ment have made stay thereof, and ordered that it shall be brought to London. His Maiesty was gratiously pleased to let the Houses understand that if they will withdraw their forces, and nominate a Committee to treat with others chosen by him, he is willing to stand to such a treaty of pacification they shall agree on. The Lords and Commons in Parliament declare, That all such persons as shall, upon any pretence whatsoever, assist His Maiesty in this Warre, with Horse, Arms, Plate or Money, are Traytors to His Maiesty, the Parliament and Kingdome, and shall be brought to con∣digne punishment for so high an offence. Ordered to be forthwith printed & published, Joh. Brown Cleric. Parliament. FINIS.
