e675a 99897818 170950
blazon or coat of arms
George Keith HIS SAYING, That the Light within is not sufficient to Salvation without something else: PROV'D To be contrary to the Foundation of the Christi∣an Religion. By EDMƲND ELYS. BY the FOUNDATION of Christianity I understand the Ground, or Reason we have to Believe that JE∣SUS CHRIST is a Person ALL-SUFFICIENT to Save his People from their Sins: His People, that is to say, those who put their whole Trust and Confidence in Him, to Deliver them from ALL EVIL, and to bring them to the Everlasting Enjoyment of all that is Truly and Really GOOD for them. The People call'd Quakers plainly, and expresly Declare, that by The Light within, they understand JESUS CHRIST Himself, and all that comes from Him, tending to the CONVICTION, and CON∣VERSION of Sinners. Now since The Light within is the Onely True and Eternal SON of the Onely True and Eternal GOD, LIGHT OF LIGHT, VERY
GOD OF VERY GOD (yet but one God) is it not a kind of Blasphemy to say, That the Light within is not Suf∣ficient without Something Else? How vain and absurd (to say no worse) is G. KEITH's Insulting over G. WHITEHEAD in the Pamphlet he Entitles, G. KEITH's Second Narative, in these words: Here now at length he hath openly shown his Deism and Antichri∣stian Doctrine, for if it be an offensive and false Assertion to say, The Light within is not sufficient to Salvation with∣out something else, the Contradictory must be true, that the Light within is sufficient to salvation without any thing else, and so without Christ's Blood outwardly shed, and his Sacrifice on the Cross, and Intercession for us in Heaven, all which are something else than the Light with∣in Men. Answer; such a Proposition as this, the Light within is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, is to be Rejected for this Reason, that such words imply this false supposition, that there may be something, that is not included in the signification of  Goloss. 1.17. . By him (Jesus Christ, the Light within) all things Consist, that is, they have their Being  in him, whose Nature Praeexistent to the Humane Nature which HE was Pleas'd to Assume for Us Men; even for our Salvation, is the One NATURE, or BE∣ING Absolutely Infinite. I shall here Recite some words of a Letter I sent to G. KEITH in Answer to one I Re∣ceived from Him: You say, the Light within Us could not become a Curse for Us, nor be Hanged on a Tree; To this I Answer, That the Same Person, or HE HIM∣SELF who is the Light within Us, became a Curse for ƲS, and was Hanged on a Tree. You say also, That GOD is in all the Devils, and he is Light Essentially in them all; and yet would it not found harsh to thy Ears to say, The Light in all Devils is sufficient to their Salva∣tion?
&c. Answ. such a saying would indeed sound ve∣ry harsh to my Ears: For GOD is not in the Nature of Devils, as he is in the Nature of Man: For our Salvation, not for the Salvation of Devils, the TRUE LIGHT was Incar∣nate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made Man, and was Crucified also for Ʋs, under Pontius Pilate: He Suffer'd, and was Buryed; & the third Day he Rose again according to the Scrip∣tures, and Ascended into Heaven, and sitteth on the Right Hand of the Father, and he shall come again with Glory to Judge the Quick and the Dead, whose Kingdom shall have no End. Whosoever does not Act contrary to the Manifestation of his present Duty, may be truly said, to walk in Light; and shall from time to time have so much (Explicit, or Implicit) Knowledge of what our Blessed LORD hath done, and Suffer'd in the Flesh, and of his Intercession, &c. as the True Light, the Infinity of Wisdom, Knows to be necessary for him: whosoever therefore Faithfully adheres to the Light within, tho' he be depriv'd of the Sight or Hearing of the Holy Scriptures, of all Good Books, and of all Religi∣ous Society, he shall as certainly Remain in a State of Salva∣tion, as if he had all such outward Means of Grace. I shall say no more at this time, but that I Beseech Almighty GOD to Give his Grace to Thee, and my Dear Christian Reader, That we may know the Love of Christ, which passeth Knowledge; that we may be Fill'd with all the Fulness of GOD. London, Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, next Door to the Meeting-House in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street near the Market, 1697.
