E815A 45578343 172272
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms At the Court at WHITEHALL, March 6. 1664. Present, The Kings most Excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. Lord Archbishop of Canter∣bury. Duke of Buckingham. Duke of Albemarle. Duke of Ormond. Lord Great Chamberlain. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of St. Alban. Earl of Sandwich. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Bathe. Earl of Carlisle. Earl of Lauderdail. Earl of Middleton. Earl of Carbery. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Berkley. Lord Ashley. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Morice. Mr. Secretary Bennet. IT was Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That an Order this day read and approved at the Board, for Dispensing for some time with certain Clauses of several Acts concerning Trade, Shipping and Navigation, be forth∣with Printed and Published. John Nicholas. HIs Majesty, by and with the Advice of His Privy Council, is pleased to Declare and Order, That an Act of Parliament made in the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April in the Twelfth year of
His Majesties Reign, and confirmed by the Parliament begun at Westminster the eighth day of May, in the Thirteenth year of His Majesties Reign, intituled, [An Act for encou∣raging and encreasing of Shipping and Navigation] and all the proceedings therein or thereby di∣rected, Be totally suspended in all the matters and things therein contained, concerning, or relating to any Ships or Vessels, their Ma∣sters or Mariners, their Guns, Furniture, Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel, or to any Goods or Commodities imported, or exported to, or from Norway, or the Baltique Sea. And His Majesty doth further Order, That the said Act, and all the proceedings therein, or thereby directed, be totally suspended in all the matters and things therein contained, con∣cerning or relating to any Ships, or Vessels, their Masters or Mariners, their Guns, Fur∣niture, Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel, or to any Goods or Commodities imported or ex∣ported to, or from any parts of Germany, Flan∣ders or France, whereof the Merchants and Owners shall be His Majesties natural born Subjects. And His Majesty is graciously pleased to declare and grant, That not only His Ma∣jesties natural born Subjects, but all Mer∣chants of any Nation in Amity with His Ma∣jesty, may import from any parts whatsoever, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Masts, Saltpeter, and Copper; and upon importation thereof shall be liable to pay only such Duties, as by the Act of Ton∣nage and Poundage are imposed upon His Majesties natural born Subjects, and no o∣ther; Any thing in the said Act to the con∣trary notwithstanding.
And His Majesty doth further Order, that notwithstanding the said Act for Encouraging and encreasing of Shipping and Navigation, and one other Act made in the said Parliament be∣gun at Westminster the eighth day of May in the thirteenth year of His Majesties Reign, inti∣tuled [An Act for the Encouragement of Trade] or either of them, or any Clause or Clauses in them, or either of them to the contrary, It shall and may be lawful for any English Merchants, and they are hereby authorised, freely and without interruption, to make use of, and em∣ploy any Foreign Ships or Vessels whatso∣ever, Navigated by Mariners or Seamen of any Nation in Amity with His Majesty, for importing or exporting of Goods and Commo∣dities, to or from any Port in England, Ireland, or Wales, to or from any of His Majesties Plantations. Provided, That no Goods or Commodities whatsoever, be by them imported into any of His Majesties said Plantations, but what shall be without fraud, Laden and Shipped in England, Ireland or Wales, and thence directly carried, and from no other place to His Maje∣sties said Plantations. Provided also, That such Goods and Com∣modities as shall be by them laden or taken on Board at His Majesties said Plantations, or any of them, be brought directly from thence to some of His Majesties said Ports in England, Ireland or Wales. And all Governors, and Offi∣cers of the Customs are hereby charged and required, strictly to observe all Rules, Dire∣ctions and Orders for taking of Bonds or o∣ther Securities, and exacting all Forfeitures,
and Penalties by the said Acts or either of them required or enjoyned: save only in the Two Clauses concerning English Ships or English Mariners herein before dispensed with. And lastly, His Majesty doth declare, That this shall continue and be in force during His Majesties pleasure: And when His Majesty shall think fit to determine the Dispensation hereby granted, He will by His Royal Pro∣clamation give six moneths notice thereof, To the end no Merchant or other person herein concerned, may be surprized. Duke of Buckingham. Duke of Albemarle. Duke of Ormond. Lord Great Chamberlain. Earl of St. Alban. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Bathe. Earl of Carlisle. Earl of Lauderdail. Earl of Middleton. Earl of Carbery. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Berkeley. Lord Ashley. Mr. Secretary Morice. Mr. Secretary Bennet. John Nicholas. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1664.
