i132 e409_7 99862826 161187
A LETTER To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS: Concerning The late successful Proceedings of the Lord Inchiquine In the Kingdom of IRELAND. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith Printed and Published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, Sept. 28. 1647.
A Letter to the Honorable VVilliam Lenthal Esq; Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. SIR, BEing constrained by divers neces∣sities of the souldiers to retire a∣bout five weeks sithence out of the field, where I had been in the Rebels Quarters of the County of Limrick, be∣fore I could look into the County of Tipperary; I did after some short refresh∣ment, and the best (though but mean) pro∣vision which I could make for the Sol∣dier, apply my self and this Army forth∣with again into the field: And being for want of Oxen, and other carriages unable to draw forth any Artillery, or to carry any larger proportion of bread then what the Soldiers Knap-sacks would contain, I marched with the Army into this County
which I entered upon on Saturday the third of this instant; and having taken several Castles therein, to the number of ten or twelve, putting to the sword the VVarders of such places as stood in oppo∣sition to the Army; I passed over the Ri∣ver Shewer, not far from the Castle of Cahir, an ancient and eminent hold of the Rebels, environed with two branches of that River, which was observed to be in all appearance of that strength, as it was both by them, and by the Officers of this Army, esteemed impregnable: notwith∣standing which, the importancy of the place being seriously considered by us, we were occasioned to make an attempt up∣on it by this accident; one of our horse-men being plundering neer the Town, was by some of the Rebels wounded and carried a prisoner into the Castle, from whence he was admitted to send for a Chirurgion into our Quarters to dress his wounds, of which we made this use: One Col. James Heppesly, who had former∣ly
served the King, and was (upon some assurance given me by a friend, of his do∣ing service) admitted to come into our Quarters, being an ingenious person, skil∣led in Chirurgery, and in Fortifications, took upon him to go under a disguise into the Castle, and to dress the wounded Trooper, which accordingly he did, with so good caution, and circumspection, as that he discovered perfectly the condition of the Castle in each respect, the weakness of the VVard, and especially some defects in the wall of the outward Bawn, which rendred it assaultable by our men, the ta∣king whereof would probably induce the surrender of the Castle, which he collect∣ed from the observed timorousness of the VVarders; which sorted to so good pur∣pose, as that falling on the place defective, with a party lead on by: Col. Heppesly him∣self, we carried that outward Bawn, and some out Turrets by storm, and with in a few hours after had the Castle surrendred unto us, on Quarter only for life, though
upon entry of it, we found that the same was by no force of ours to be reduced, if the Defendants had not been by Divine Providence deprived of any courage to oppose us. The place is justly looked upon by this Army, as the most important in the whole Province, being of that strength, as not to be taken from us, so long as we have victual to support a Garrison there∣in, whereby a pass is kept open for us to make daily incursions into this countrey, which hath been a principal contributary to the Rebels Army. To the performance of which service, the Soldier was enabled with no other food then the roots under, and corn above the ground (all their cattel being driven away before us out of our reach) of the latter whereof we had great and abun∣dant store, so as we have burned in this County above 20000. l. worth, whereof there could be no use made through want of hand-Mills (for which I have often and
earnestly written) the water-mills being for the most part either burned or de∣serted. From Cahir we marched this instant to the city of Cashel, formerly the Metro∣politans See of this Province, where the Citizens and Inhabitants (amazed at the reducing of Cahir) left open the gates, and fled to the Cathedral, a large and spa∣cious Pile, seated upon a rock neer the wals of the Town, and of late very much fortified, and at present fully manned with divers companies of the Rebels, which will render any attempts we shall make upon it very difficult; notwith∣standing which, we determine by Gods assistance, to leave no means unassayed for the reducing thereof; after which, we de∣sign to fall upon the Town of Fethard an eminent walled Town, and from thence to march unto Cloumel, to reduce which, we have yet no great hopes, in regard we understand that place to be very regularly fortified, and strongly manned, so as with∣out
Artillery there can be no feisible at∣tempt made upon it: But if it shall please God to bless us with success on that place, We may then with confidence assert the Parliaments Interest in this Province to be high, and the Rebels mean, and incon∣siderable. Sir, the Gentry of this coun∣ty, by the reducing of these places, and the burning of their Corn, begin to make suit, that they may be admitted to a con∣tribution, which shall be embraced so far as may conduce to the better carrying on of the War, and supporting of this Army, and advancing (as my zeal and duty ob∣liges me) of the Parliaments service: For which I have no other means, then this of keeping the field: From whence if I shall be driven to our Garrisons by the violence of the weather, or by an over powerful Army, I am utterly ignorant how the Ar∣my may be preserved from starving, with∣out seasonable supplies from the Hono∣rable Houles to whose service I have faith∣fully devoted my self, remaining, Sir, Your humble servant, Inchiquine. Cashel, 12. Sept. 1647.
