K328 669.f.13[64] 99869849 162960
THE KENTISH PETITION: TO THE HONOURABLE, The Commons now sitting in PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of diverse well-affected in the County of Kent, the City and County of Canterbury, together with the Cinque Ports, in the behalfe of themselves and others. Humbly sheweth, THat we cannot but with al thankfulnes take notice of, & acknowledge those Votes that passed this Honorable House, December, 13, 1648, for the dis∣anulling of certain Votes formerly made, and now appearing to be disho∣norable and destructive to the publike good, viz. for the nulling of those Votes which were made for the recalling those former Votes of Non-ad∣dresses to the King; and also for the nulling of those Votes which were for the approbation of the Kings answer to the Propositions as a ground for peace; and for Vo∣ting the whole Treaty in the Isle of Wight, as dishonorble, and destructive to the publike, &c. As being fully convinced of the justice, honour and necessity of the said Votes: and forasmuch as we are confident that justice is the best foundation of a Nation, and the pu∣nishment of offenders a chief branch of justice. We do therefore humbly beseech this Honorable House according to the Armies Remon∣strance (that great and best expedient hitherto proposed for the publike settlement) to proceed to a speedy bringing to justice (that grand Authour of all our miseries) the Person of Him, who as a King ought to have defended us, but as a Tyrant hath actually levied. Arms and waged War against us, together with all other great Delinquents, both in the first and second War, as well those of your own House as any others. And to continue in a speedy vigorous and undaunted acting, with that ever faithfull Ar∣my, in all things that tend to the wel-fare, safety and settlement of the wel-affected people. And your petitioners resolving with their lives and all that's dear to them, to stand by you, shall ever pray, &c. THe Gentlemen of Kent presented this Petition unto the House on Saturday the 23 of December, 1648, The House called them in, and Master Speaker told them, the House looked upon the honest men in Kent, had ever proved faithfull to the Parliament, especially the Eastern part: And for the things petitioned, the House was now in con∣sideration of them: and for the Subscribers, who now shew their good affection, the House gives them thanks. Printed for Hanna Allen, at the Crown in Popes head Alley, 1648.
