L1067A 99896550 133863
Mr. Lenthalls Answer, TO A PAPER, INTITLED, Remarks on Mr. Lenthalls Petition, Now Lying before the Honourable House of Commons. MR. Lenthall Averrs it to be True, that he never Receiv'd of Sr. John Cutler, nor Mr. Bolter, nor any other, upon the account of his Mortgage, any more then 11152l. 04s. 08d. The Rent, and Fine for renewing the Lease of Haseley, to the Deane and Cannons of Windsor, being therin included. And deny's that ever he received any Moneys, directly or indirectly, of the Right Honourable the Earle of Radnor: But what Moneys he did Re∣ceive, was of Mr. Simon Folkes for subsistance Money, pursuant to an Agree∣ment made with him, till the said Mortgage could be removed, and touch∣ing his Granting the Office of, Marshal to Mr. Gimbert, at 1400l. per Ann. Rent, (as Mr. Folkes perpos'd) which proves in the said Grant to be but 1000l. per Ann. for which Moneys he gave Notes under his Hand to Mr. Folkes, Repayable upon Demand. That Mr. Folkes did undertake to remove the said Mortgage, and pay Mr. Bolter 15000l. which he Agreed to take in full discharge of the same, with which he might well be satisfi'd. If Mr. Folkes will declare the Truth of the Agreements betwixt him, Mr. Bolter and Mr. Lenthall, which Mr. Lenthall hopes he will be Compelled to do, before this Honourable House: It will fully shew how Mr. Lenthall hath been impos'd upon. Mr. Bolter in his Answer in the High Court of Chancery upon his Oath, setts forth, no more Moneys pay'd to Mr. Lenthall by Sr. John Cutler nor himself, then the aforesaid summ of 11152l. 04s. 08d. so all the rest of the pretended great Debt upon his Estate and Office is swell'd up by Interest upon Interest and Charges, notwithstanding they have had the Land, and Office in Possession about 8 Years, which always yeilded Mr. Lenthall 2000l. per Ann. so Mr. Lenthall hopes there cannot be above 12000l. really due up∣on the said Mortgage. Mr. Lenthall being in their Power, they having his Estate in Possession, was forced to Sign their unreasonable Accompts, otherwise he must have Starved. SO he Humbly Prays he may be heard by his Councel at the Barr of this Honourable House, to be Releived against so great oppression, and that he may have an order, that all Deeds and Writings may be produced, and Persons concern'd may attend.
