L1056 669.f.26[65] 99869686 163947
LENT. LENT. allegorical depiction of Lent You that love flesh, or to the flesh are given By Lent; unto your shifts you shall be driven In warlike manner hee's to Combat come And unto (many) welkome like Iack. Drum HEre Lent and Shrovetyde, claime their proper right, Are both resolved, and prepar'd to fight. Lent arm'd at all points, from the foot to head A fishing Nett hath for his Banner spread. An Angling rod, he in his hand doth beare To shew that Lakes and Ponds and Rivers cleare Are at his great command, Eele, Carpe, Pike, Tench, Or Lobster which the brinish Sea doth drench. Are his by hook or crooke, his power will get And make all fish that comes into his Nett: A boyling Kettle is his helmet fit (For Lent hath small use for a roasting Spit) Thus mounted on a horse that ne're eat hay Lent meets with Shrovetyde and begins to say: I now am come to mundifie and cleare The base abuses of this last past yeare: Thou puff paunch'd Monster (Shrovetyde) thou art he That wer't ordain'd the latter end to be Of forty five weekes gluttony, now past Which I in seaven weekes come to cleanse at last: Your feasting I will turn to fasting dyet Your Cookes shall have some leasure to be quiet, Your Masques, Pomps, Playes, and all your vaine expence I'le change to sorrow, and to penitence, I will reforme you, and I hither came To keep flesh from you, your proud flesh to tame: Let Butchers cleare their cleavers and their knives Hang up their Axes, let their men or wives Make pricks for future uses, if they please I come to give them all a writ of ease: To Calves, Lambs, Piggs, Hens, Capons, all I give Free leave to multiply, increase and live, There shall no Ven'son be (with swearing) slaine And fishermen shall search the Ocean maine: And sirha (Shrovetyde) I doe further meane Before I goe to make your fat chapps leane: For though like Rebells madd, you roave and stray And feast each friday, and each fasting day, Though you regard no Ember Weeke, nor Law Nor rule or order keeps you under awe, Yet be assur'd that whosoe're wrongs Lent Shall not escape deserved punishment. FINIS. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner, and are to be sold at his Shop at the South Entrance of the Royall Exchange 166
