L1247B 669.f.22[26] 99870117 163609
The Final Protest, and Sense of the CITIE. HAving diligently perused two Printed Papers, bearing date the 14th. of this instant December: The one, in form of a Proclamation concerning the summoning of a Parliament: The other, as an Order of the Common Council, commanding the City to acquiesce in expectation of that Parliament: We find therein contained, matters, so contrary to the Honour of the Nati∣on, and to the Freedom of the City, that we stand obliged, both as Englishmen, and as Citizens, to pro∣test, against the Impositions of the Former, as illegal, and the Concessions of the Latter, as a direct Com∣bination against us. These two Papers are Seconded by a Third: (for the Two are One, both in effect, and Design,) and that is, a Proclamation of Banishment, directing to the late Kings Party, under the notion of the Common Enemy: so that there's no love lost betwixt the Committee of Safety, and the Common Council, when the General provides for the Peace of the City; and the Mayor, for the Safety of the Army; not to argue Acts of Oblivion; and the violation of Publique Faith in the Case: that they Con∣ditioned for their Lives and Liberties▪ and Compounded for their Fortunes. This is not our Concern, what they do suffer; but what we may, if we Trust those, that Keep no Faith with them: And that we'll take a care of: When They are Gone, Then we are the Common Enemy; So are the Laws of God, and of the Nation, and such is every Man that Loves them. What this Malignant Party is, these People talk of, we neither Know, nor Meddle; the Gentry 'tis we Live by, and by the Laws of Gratitude, and Hospitality, we are Bound to Protect them, and as well resolved to do it, within our Walls, against any other Power, than that of the Known Law. The short of the Design is this, a Danger is pretended to the City, from the late Kings party, and to prevent the mischief, the Kind Committee Banishes the Gentlemen; with Order to the Mayor of Wallingford, (late of London) &c.—to make strict Searches for Delinquents. Now in pursuance of this Pretious Order, our Houses must be Forced, and we Disarmed, and Then, our Throats cut, to preserve the City. Let those that would be Chronicled for Slaves, & Fools, Submit to suffer this; and after that Infamous Hour, may a Yellow Coat, and a Wooden Dagger be the Badge, and Distinction of a Citizen. To con∣clude, We our selves are that City, so much the Care and Cry of the Proclamation; and This is our Una∣nimous sence, and Resolve. The Army proposes to Pillage, and Murther us, the Mayor, and his worthy Advisers, Ireton▪ &c.—are to hold our hands, whiles they give the Blow; So, that we are now to pro∣vide both against Force and Treason; having One Enemy within our Walls, and Another in our Coun∣cils. But withall, we have our Swords in our Hands, and our Brains in our Heads; so that only to Strike the One, and to Dis-believe the Other, is to Subdue, and Disappoint them Both. We do therefore de∣clare to the World, that We will by Violence oppose all Violence whatsoever, which is not warrant∣ed by the Letter of the established Law: and that in pursuance of this Duty, both toward the Nati∣on, and City, an Insolent Souldier, and an Apostatized Magistrate shall be to us as the same thing.—Not to word it much further, as we will not be Bafled, by Affronts, so neither will we be Fooled by Flatteries.—After the Loss of Trade, and Liberty, a vast expence of Blood, and Treasure; After many Inju∣ryes received, more Threatned, and none Returned; We made a sober, and Regular Application, to the Autho∣rity of the City, for Redresse. This They Promised, and Wee Expected, til at last, instead of a Reparation for Past Wrongs, or a Security against worse to come; We are paid with an Expectation of a Parliament in Janu∣ary. This is a Logique We understand not. It is in English, Lye still, till you have your Throats cut. It would be well to commit the disposition of our Fortunes, to those people, that are at this In∣stant designing an Execution upon our Persons; and to requite those Worthies, that have already Robb'd us of all we have Lost, with the Offer of that little Rest they have Left. But this will not do our Businesse; we will not have our Murtherers, for our Judges: nor will we wait. That Parliament they Babble of so much, will not soon Vote up the City again out of Ashes, nor all the Saints in that holy Assembly, be able to bring the poor Cobler into the World again, that was Kill'd by order of his Bro∣ther Hewson. No, the Cheat is too stale, and we are Determined to Redeem our selves; but with this Caution; we do solemnly professe, that we will exercise all the Tendernesse which possibly the Case will bear. The Common Soldier is engaged rather out of a Heedelesse, than Malitious Interest: We do therefore Protest, that such of those as shall not evidence their Malice, by their Obstinacy, shall receive a Faire Consideration; But, for such as Lead them, we do Resolve, not to allow Quar∣ter to any one of them, that draws his Sword in the Quarrel: and in Order to the Quicker, and Gentler Dispatch of the Businesse: We conclude with a Text. Fight neither with Small nor Great, but with the King of Israel. And so God give a Blessing to the Endeavours of all Honest Men.
