L1530 E417_3 99863931 116149
A LETTER FROM The Lord Major, Aldermen and Com∣mon-Councel of LONDON, To His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax. WITH Another LETTER from His Excellency to the City, in Answer to the same. Also two Orders and a Letter of the General and ge∣neral Councel of the Army, For the discharging such Soldiers the Army, as formerly served in the KINGS Army: And for the apprehending of others to be tryed by a Councel of WAR, about the late Distra∣ctions in the ARMY. Novem. 25. 1647. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot. LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman, Novem. 27. 1647.
To His Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parlia∣ment of ENGLAND. May it please your Excellency, YOur Letter dated at Kingston the 19 instant, we received this day; and having duly weighed the contents thereof, we cannot but as in the first place (with all due thankfulness) acknowledge the great favor and respect unto this City, for the tenderness and care had by your self and the Army, to preserve it from the least damage or prejudice, and for other favors in the Letter intimated, Do also express our hearty sorrow for your apprehension of Just Occasions and great Provocations to have bin given by this city, which might have diverted that your Honorable favor: And that the Arrears to the Army, or any thing else from this City, have given occa∣sion both of the coming and stay of the Ar∣my
so long about the same, as to oppress these parts, if not the undoing of some, as is expressed in the Letter. And that Colo∣nel Hewson with one thousand Foot should be appointed to come as upon this day, to quarter in this City, & within the Lines of Communication, in such places as he findes fittest, until the service of Collection, and levy both of the Arrears, and penalties im∣posed by Ordinance of Parliament be ac∣complished; Verily, we cannot but with sadness of heart consider how this City (which hath always shewed it self upon all occasions to its power, instrumental for the preservation of Parliament and King∣dom) should now without president have been disturbed and disquieted by the Sol∣diery, and what ill consequence it might produce to the Parliament, City, King∣dom, and Army it self, if not prevented by the wisdom of the Parliament and your Excellency, we are not willing to express: It is our humble Desire, That your Excel∣lency and Councel of War will vouchsafe to take the same into due consideration, as
a matter of great concernment; and to be assured, That we have not obstinately withholden what has been due to the Ar∣my, in affront to the Ordinances and De∣mands of Parliament: And we profess, That we have done, and shall do our best indeavors to further the speedy Collecti∣on, and getting in of the Arrears due from particular inhabitants, upon whom the same are charged by Ordinance of Parlia∣ment. It is also our humble Desire, That your Excellency will be pleased to take a view of the Paper inclosed, of some apparent obstructions presented from us unto the Parliament, touching the not getting in of the Arrears, to the end your Excellency may see the readiness of our indeavors to remove the same: Likewise, That you will be pleased further to consider of the great sums of Money (yet unsatisfied) ex∣hausted from the City by Loans and other∣wise, for service of the Parl. and Kingdom; The Free-quarter of the Army upon Citi∣zens, who have dwellings in the countrey;
The great and many Taxes upon the City; The great decay generally of Trade within the same, and The high prizes of all maner of Victual; All conducing to the impove∣rishment of the people, and obstruction to the ready payment of the Assessments up∣on the City. And for remedy herein, we relie upon your Excellencies goodness, That we doing our indeavors in this busi∣ness, you will be pleased in a short time to remove your Army to a further distance from hence. Lastly, It is our earnest Desire (as for∣merly) to manifest our Integrity and faith∣fulness unto the Parliament and King∣dom, giving to our power all obedience to their Ordinances; and likewise to keep and maintain a right understanding and good correspondency between your Excel∣lency, Councel of War, the Army, and this City. London, 20 Nov. 1647. By Command of the Major, Alder∣men, and Commons of the City ofLONDON in Common-Councel assembled: MICHEL.
To the Right Honorable, The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common-Councel men of the City of London, in Common-Councel assembled. My Lord and Gentlemen, MY last to Your Lordship from King∣ston, was not intended to charge you with the Arrears of the City, or to put the levying thereof upon any other, be∣sides those that are impowered and charged by the Parliament for that purpose; But the business of sending for their assistance some Soldiers into the City being resolved on (as the best way, and of present necessity for the timely and effectual dispatch of that Service) I thought fit by that Letter to acquaint you therewith, both as a respect to your Lord∣ship and the City, and that by you the City might the better understand the Grounds and Intentions of that Resolution (to pre∣vent any inconveniencies from misappre∣hensions thereof:) Nor did I expect that ei∣ther
that Resolution, or the Letter (in stead of a vigorous and speedy dispatch in a busi∣ness so just and necessary) should beget any Interposals or Intercourse tending to further Delays: But since the Parliament hath thought fit to put a stop (for present) to that way of Proceeding (which here was concei∣ved most necessary and agreeable to their Orders) and to undertake some other effe∣ctual course in the business, I shall wait the hoped issue thereof, and of your promised concurrent endeavors; Which if it prove not timely answerable to their Underta∣kings, to your Professions, and the Armies and Kingdoms Expectations, I much doubt the consequences (whatever you or I can do to prevent them) will be every way sad, and that not more to the Parliament, Kingdom or Army, then to the City it self; The safety and prosperity of which, shall be always endeavored as much as lies in the power of Windsor, 24. Nov. 1647. Your faithful Friend and Servant, T: FAIRFAX.
Two Orders of the General and ge∣neral Councel of the ARMY. ACcording to a Resolution of the general Councel, you are upon the issuing forth of this Moneths Pay, to dismiss and discharge, or cause to be dismissed or discharged, all such Sol∣diers as have been entertained in the several Troops of your Regiment, since the day that the Army marched through London; as also all such Soldiers and Officers as have served the King in the late War, and have been entertained in any Troop within your Regiment, since the Engagement of the Ar∣my at Newmarket. Heath: And you are to return to the Commissary of Musters, a List of the Names of all such persons in any Troop, as are to be and shall be so discharged as aforesaid; with a particular Accompt for how much time every one of them, since his Entertainment, doth remain unpaid: The chief Officer of each Troop, at the discharging of them as aforesaid, to give a particular Certificate to each of them accordingly: And you are to give order, That from henceforth no new men be en∣tertained in the room of any that shall be dischar∣ged according to this Order, without further Order from my self. You are likewise to cause Returns to be made from every Troop in your Regiment, of such Subscriptions as have been taken to what
was published from the General at the late Ren∣dezvouz. You are likewise to apprehend in safe custody unto the Head-quarter, the Body of of your Regiment, to answer to such things as shall be objected against them before a Councel of War, concerning the late Disturbances & Distractions by them and others wrought or endeavored in the Ar∣my. You are also to give strict Order, That no person be henceforth permitted to have Quarters with any Troops of your Regiment; who are not actually mustered within the Army. And you are also to give Order, That henceforth no Horseman take above half a Peck of Provender for a day and night for one Horse, upon any pretence whatso∣ever, unless he pay for the same, until further al∣lowance thereof by Order from my self. And these things the Officers of each Troop are to see to at their perils, if (contrary hereto) they suffer such Abuses to be henceforth done to the Country. Given under my Hand at Windsor, this 24. of Novemb. 1647. To Colonel  or the Officer in chief with this Regiment. YOu are on sight hereof forthwith to dismiss and discharge all such Soldiers as have been entertained by you, or any Officer under your Command, since the time that Sir Hardres Waller came down to you with Orders from me, viz.
since the Third of August last, and this you and eve∣ry Officer of the respective Companies under your command, are to see immediately performed, as you will answer the contrary; That the countrey may no longer be burthened with them: And you are to take Order, That from henceforth no more be en∣tertained in the room of any such as shall be so dis∣charged without further Orders. You are likewise to return a List of the Names of all such as shall be so discharged; And also a List of those men that went off with you from the Army, that care may be taken for their Arrears. Given under my Hand at Windsor the 23 day of November, 1647. To Col: Kempson, or the Officer in chief with that Regiment. The like Orders were sent to the Officers in chief with Colonel Oconellies, Colonel Herberts, and Colonel Grays Regiment. And this Letter follow∣ing to the several Committees of Wilts, Glouce∣ster, and Oxfordshire, where those Regiments quartered.
Gentlemen, I Am very sensible of the burthen that lies upon your countrey, by the quartering of those Soldiers that go out for Ireland; And being desirous to lessen it as much as may be, I have sent an Order to the Officer in chief commanding those Forces quar∣tered in your county, forthwith to dismiss and discharge all such Soldiers as have been entertained by them or any Officer under them, since the third of August last, and that the countrey be no longer burthened with them, but that for the future they do take special care no more be entertained in the room of any such as shall be so discharged, without further Orders from the Parlia∣ment or my self: And I hope the Officers will be very careful to see this Order pun∣ctually observed, which I thought fit to give you notice of, to the end the countrey may expect and receive ease accordingly. I remain Windsor, 23 Nov. 1647. Your assured Friend, T: FAIRFAX. FINIS.
