L1864 669.f.11[74] 99871630 162726
LEX TALIONIS: OR, LONDON REVIVED. To the Tune of, Prethy friend leave off this thinking. THe Cavaliers are vanqnish'd quite, The King took from that wicked train, That would deprive him of his rights, And bring in Popery again: The Army and the Parliament, Must now dispute what Government Shall be establish'd in this Nation, Protestants are out of date, Where is that glorious Reformation We contested for of late? Not having forme nor order now, We would serve God if we knew how. The Papist and the Protestant The Round-head and the Cavalier Can neither act nor yet prevent Those dangers which doe now appeare: The Presbyter and Independent, Now are Plaintiffe and Defendant. The Parliament gave a Commission, To their Troops to ketch their King, Not limiting on what condition, So they alive or dead did bring: But now they have him none do know How they his person shall bestow. The Countrey can no longer beare, The City which this War fomented, Must with their neighbours sufferings have, And at their losses be contented: The Apprentices next Tuesday may Conclude a peace to crown their day. The Londoners will fetch their King, The Parliament proclaim'd it so, Sir Thomas would him fain home bring, From whence do these distractions grow? How come the holy Brethren Thus erre, alas they are but men? This Citie who advanced High, A Parliament above their God, Like dust into their faces fly, And for themselves have made a Rod They covenanted to mayntain What priviledge they now disdain. The King who once did rule Supream, Gave power to a Parliament To settle things, but they have clean Depriv'd him of his government: He put a Sword into their hands For which his life in danger stands. Such power the States gave to Sir Thomas, Still presuming he would be Their servant, and perform his promise To serve his Majestie: But he requites them in each thing, As they before have serv'd the King. And thus you see the Heavens were just Who renders every one his due, He that deceives his Masters trust, Shall never finde a servant true: Let each one learn from hence to doe, Even as you would be done unto.
