L3479 E2107_2 99868885 121241
THE PRACTICE OF GODLINES; OR BRIEF RULES Directing Christians how to keep their hearts in a con∣stant holy frame, and how to or∣der their Conversation aright. With an Addition concerning Self-Exami∣nation, and the Nature of Faith. The second Edition Revised and Corrected. By HENRY LƲKIN Minister of the Gospel. Pro. 4.23. Keep thine heart with all diligence. Psal. 50.23. To him that ordereth his conversa∣tion aright, will I shew the salvation of God. London, Printed by A.M. for Tho. Ʋnder∣hill in Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door. 1659.
To The Right Worshipfull Mrs Elizabeth Masham. BEing now upon a review of this small Treatise, to send it a second time to the Press, I thought it a fit season to dedicate it to you, both particularly to com∣mend to you the practice of the Rules therein contained, and likewise that I might here take occasion to give you some Directions for the right improvement of that affliction under which it hath pleas∣ed the Lord of late to exercise you. And although it may be said, that this might have been done rather in the car, then thus on the house top; yet I have chosen rather to do it thus publikely, both for your sake, that you might reckon your self the more oblig'd to observe them, while the
world is witnesse that you wanted not ad∣vice and admonition; and likewise for the sake of others, that (if these Directions be of any use) others may have the benefit of them. I was much induced here to by the complaint which I heard you make, when God had brought you back from the gates of death, and Patience had had its perfect work, in bearing that heavy burden which you lay under, viz. that your great∣est work was yet behind: reckoning it an harder matter to improve an affliction then to undergo it. And indeed so it is, as ap∣peares plainly by the instance of Hezekiah, who was a good man, and did much good in the beginning of his reign, as we may read 2 Chron. 29. and he had the comfort of it when he came to lye on his sick-bed, Isa. 38.3. And how did he plead for the continuance of his life? Vers. 19. Doubt∣lesse upon a good intention, and hope of living (as he had before done) to the glory of God, and doing good in his ge∣neration: But he turned aside as a broken bow, Psal. 78.58. He missed the mark which (without question) he sincerely aimed at. We read of his pomp and worldly greatnesse (through the abuse of which he entail'd a curse upon his peo∣ple whom he lest behind him) but little
of his goodnesse, only that he repented and humbled himself, and so saved his own soul, 2 Chron. 32.25. &c. Now these things are written for our instruction, that we might not fall by the same example of ingratitude. It is an ob∣servation of a Learned man (the Lord Ve∣rulam) that prosperity belongs to the Bles∣sings of the old Testament, adversity to the Blessings of the New. Something indeed there is in his observation, but I am sure, correction accompanied with instruction, was then a Blessing, Psal. 94.12. And with∣out this it is not yet a Blessing, Heb. 12.11. Now that we may know what use to make of affliction, or what lesson we are to learn thereby, we must understand that God sometimes sends affliction on some special errand, with respect to some parti∣cular sinne. And this is evident, either when God dealeth with men by retaliati∣o, as in the case of Adonibezek, Judg. 1.7. or by punishing men in such things as have been the instruments of their sinne, as he made Jeroboams arm wither which he stretched forth against the Prophet, 1 King. 13.4. and many Instances there are of this kind. Sometimes God makes that which is the natural effect of mens sinne, to be the moral effect, or punishment of it. Thus
he punisheth luxury with diseases in the body, Job 20.11. Idlenesse with poverty, Prov. 23.21, &c. and fills men with the sruit of their own doings. Sometimes God bringeth some special sin to remembrance, and awakens conscience to smite them for it, as in the case of Josephs Brethren, Gen. 42.21. Sometimes God saith (in effect) to us, as Christ to Peter, What I do, thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know, Joh. 13.7. At present we may not know the par∣ticular meaning of an affliction, but may understand it better afterwards. But (as the Schoolmen observe) to speak strict∣ly and properly, God hath no end with∣out himself. But when we say, this or that is Gods end in such a passage of his providence which he exerciseth us with, or in such a gist which he bestows on us, the meaning is, that it doth of it self con∣duce to such an end, or is to be improved by us thereunto. Wherefore till it be more evident, what is the special use of any af∣fliction, we must consider what improve∣ment in general may be made of it. And there are five things which I shall pro∣pound to your consideration for this end. First, Consider what was your greatest comfort, and stood you in greatest stead
in the time of distresse, that so you may know what to put the greatest price and value upon, and how to prepare for what trials may befall you in time to come: for the remedies which you have found effe∣ctual at one time, will be usefull to you at another; and we keep the receits of those things by us which we have found to be good by experience. Was it any worldly enjoyment? These I am sure you com∣plained of as miserable Comforters. Can you not rather say with David, Psal. 94.9. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts, O Lord, have refreshed my soul! Oh let not the consolations of God, be small with you! Job 15.11. Labour for more clear evidence of his loving kindness; prize it more then life. And though you should want many other comforts, blesse him for this as long as you live, Psal. 63.3, 4. Was not the Word of God your chief stay and support? Say with David Psal. 119.93. I will never forget thy Precepts, for with them thou hast quickned me. See vers. 49, 50, 54, 97. Was not the testimony of your conscience concerning your sincerity, your great comfort and rejoycing? 2 Cor. 1.12. Exercise your self continually to have a con∣science void of offence in the sight of God and man, Act. 24.16.
Secondly, Consider what was your greatest trouble in your affliction, that so you may take heed of providing sorrow for your self against the time to come. Was it a sense of the neglect of your duty in any thing, or of any thing wherein you have exceeded? Job. 36.9. (For who is it that can say they have herein made their hearts clean? Say unto God (through his Grace) You will do so no more, Job. 34.32. Was it the leaving of any worldly comforts? Be loosing your affections from these things every day by the study of mortification, and take heed of letting your heart cleave to these things, for then you will have the greater trouble at part∣ing. Was it the thought of leaving any that are dear to you, in doubt of their state and condition? labour the more ear∣nestly (by your Prayers, Counsels, Ex∣amples) to have Jesus Christ formed in them, Gal. 4.19. and learn to cast all your care upon the Lord, 1 Pet. 5.7. that so you may with more comfort and satisfaction leave them hereafter. Thirdly, Consider what special expe∣riences you had of the goodnesse of God in your affliction. Had you not received the sentence of death in your self, 2 Cor. 1.9. and yet God was 'intreated for you,
resolve with Divid, Psalm. 116.1, 2. that you will love the Lord for it, and that Prayer shall be your constant resuge so long as you live. Did you not find that really verified, Deut. 32.3. that when your strength was gone, the Lord repented him∣self concerning you, and was the strength of your heart, Psal. 26.37. Never distrust his power or gracious care and providence whatsoever straits you may be brought in∣to. Did you not find his Grace sufficient for you? 2 Cor. 12.9. How oft have I heard you say formerly, That it is an easie matter to believe when our Faith is not put to it; or to cast our selves upon Jesus Christ for salvation in the time of health and pro∣sperity? but the tryal of Faith would be when we come into straits, or draw nigh to the King of terrours. Were you not in your own apprehension even stepping in∣to the grave? Yet then (through grace) you were able, with as much quietnesse and confidence as ever, to venture your soul upon a Promise, and to stay your self upon Jesus Christ. This is one precious fruit of affliction. Tribulation worketh pa∣tience, and patience experience, and experi∣ence hope, Rom. 5.3. The trial of Faith is much more precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. In the Greek it is , agreeing
with , not with . Or if (as Glassius thinks) the words are to be ren∣dred proata fides, the former Substantive being put for an Adjective, yet the sense is the same, viz that it is a tried Faith, that is more precious then gold. Fourthly, Consider the smart and hea∣vinesse of afflicton, and learn hence what sinne is, that brings forth such bitter sruits. Remember the wearisome nights and daies which you spent, and consider how hell will be endured; if affliction on the body for a few daies be so grievous to be born; and learn to pity those that are in the like condition. You know the heart of those that are in affliction, Exo. 23.9. Fifthly, Consider your own promises and resolutions which you made in your affliction. When Sigismund the Emperor, asked the Bishop of Colen, What he should do to be happy; he bad him live as he promi∣sed to do the last time he had the gout or stone. Jacob promised what great things he would do, if God would be with him in his journey, Gen. 28.21, 22. but God must put Jacob in mind of his promise, when he had answered his prayer, Gen. 35.2. We should learn of David to pay our vows to the Lord, which we make in the time of our distresse, Psal. 66.13, 14.
Now for your help in this work, first write down these things which I have here proposed to your consideration. We have the writing of Hezekiah when he was sick and recovered again, Isa. 38.9. And so we find many other godly men in Scri∣pture, leaving such things on Record. What they said in their affliction, what they suf∣fered, how they praied, how God answer∣ed them. Secondly, Be oft reading over these things to revive the remembrance of them, that you may keep your heart duly affected with them. David hath some Psalmes to bring to remembrance, Psal. 38. and Psal. 70. that is to preserve the remembrance of such things as I have here set down. Thirdly, Pray with David 1 Chron. 29.18. that God would keep these things in the imagination of the thought of your heart alwaies, and incline your heart to him. And for the fastening of these things, consider, 1. It is a provoking sin, and a sign of an evil frame of heart, not to be bettered by affliction, Isa. 1.4, 5. Jer. 2.30. 2. We lose our sufferings, and are most miserable (as Austin saith) if we be ne∣ver the better for them, 'Its sad indeed,
to suffer so much in vain, and to have no advantage thereby, Gal. 3.3. It would trouble us to take a great deal of unplea∣sing physick, and pay dear for it, and get no good by it. 3. Where God intends good to any, if lesser afflictions will not serve turn, he will lay on greater; as we may read at large, Lev. 26. and if he give over any, while they are incorrigible, it is in judg∣ment, and severe displeasure, Isa. 1.5. Hos. 4.17. Now my hearts desire, and earnest Prayer to God for you, is, That he would long continue you to be a blessing in the place wherein he hath set you, that your Family may be as it hath long been, a Se∣minary to the Church of God, that Religion may still thrive under the shadow of it, and that the same Faith may dwell in your Children, which hath dwelt in their Pa∣rents, and Parents Parents; that they may stand up in their Generations, to fill up their places, and to be followers of them in their integrity and usefullnesse: For this would be the joy and crown of rejoycing of Your Servant, for Christs sake, H.I. May 30. 1659.
THE INTRODVCTION, Perswading to the practice of the following DIRECTIONS, and answering such Obje∣ctions as are ordinarily made against such a Practice. IF thou art one that fear∣est God, and wouldest gladly walk so as to please him, if thou de∣sirest to exercise thy self unto godliness, to follow after righ∣teousness, godliness, faith, love, pa∣tience, meekness, to fight the good fight of faith, to lay hold on eternall life, to get well through an evill world, and to keep thy self unspotted
of it; this little Book was intended for thine use: and I hope thou wilt, if thou shalt read it, find it fitted there∣to. I confess upon a review of what I had done, in drawing up these Di∣rections, I begun to fear that I might injure the Reader by my studied bre∣vity: I thought some might overlook many things which are of speciall use in a Christians practice, because I have not insisted on them, but heaped them together in short Laonismes; and that others (which are more weak) might not so easily understand many things for want of a larger ex∣plication, or instances for the illustra∣tion of them. For I confess I was the more incurious in the composing hereof, because I had therein a chief respect to those that have attended my Ministery, (wherein I have at se∣verall times more fully explained the things contained therein) who will be able by these short Memorials, (I hope) to call to mind what they have
formerly heard, and after my depar∣ture, to have them in remembrance. But I was a little eased of my fears, when I considered that these things were of daily use to Christians, and therefore they would be put upon a frequent perusall of them, whereby they may more easily both remark and understand those things, which in one cursory reading might escape their observation: yea I have enlarg∣ed somewhat where I thought most needfull (which hath occasioned that disproportion of parts which thou mayest observe in the Book; for it is plainness and usefullness, not neat∣ness or symetry, which I have aimed at. And now Reader, what arguments shall I use to encourage or perswade thee to follow these Directions, when thou hast read them? If there be any regard to be had to the glory of God, to the good of others, to the peace and happiness of thine own soul, think on these things.
First, This is the way to glorifie God in your conversations, when you walk blameless, and harmless as his Children, without rebuke, shining as lights in the world, Phil. 2.15. Mat. 5.16. Joh. 15.8. and the Name of God is dishonoured by the loose, careless walking of Christians, Rom. 2.23, 24. Secondly, This will be a means to recover the lost credit of Christiani∣ty, Christians are not so singular as they should be, Mat. 5.47. they are too much fashioned to this world, Rom. 12.2. hereby prophane ones are hardened against the wayes of God; others confirmed in their prejudice against the principles of our profes∣sion, [the imputation of Christs Righteousness to our justification, the necessity of his grace to our san∣ctification, the certain perseverance of believers, &c.] and all the argu∣ments which we can use to vindicate them from the imputation of che∣rishing
licentiousness, will never con∣vince gainsayers, unless we enforce them by the reall proofs of an holy conversation. See then that you walk circumspectly, Ephes. 5.15. that you may by well-doing put to stlence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.15. That you may cut off eccasion from those that desire occasion, that wherein they glory, they may be found even as you, 2 Cor. 11.12. 3. This will be a means to gain those that are without, 1 Pet. 3.1. and to provoke to emulation, those that are within, 2 Cor. 9.2. 4. This will be a good means to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. compared with ver. 5. In the 10th. verse the Apostle doth re-inforce his exhortation (which he had laid down in the 5th. verse, by a new argument; as if he had said, the rather give diligence to add to faith virtue, &c. to the end you may make your calling and election sure.
5. This will be the way to have comfort both in life and death, the testimony of a good conscience will be a comfort to us in every condi∣tion, 2 Cor. 1.12. especially when we come to lye down in the dust of death, 2 Tim. 4.7. Some will object (it may be) that this is more then needs, and why should we impose any unnecessary burden, upon Chri∣stians? To this I must say, that it is an unsavoury objection, and not be∣coming a godly man. To enquire only what is necessary, and what we must do, if we will get to Heaven, ar∣gues more self-love, then love to God; more care of our own welfare, then of the glory of God, or how we may do those things which may please him. 2. If all the rules which I have gi∣ven, be not necessary by vertue of any speciall command, (as I am sure most of them are,) yet they are ne∣cessary as means to order our conver∣sation
aright. But if thine objection be intended chiefly against this par∣ticular modell which I have drawn up, after so many Treatises on the same subject; I confess then I shall not have so much to say against it; I freely acknowledg that many worthy men have laboured herein, more fit in many respects for such an under∣taking then my self: and I must leave every one to their liberty, to use such helps as seem best to them; only this I shall say, that I think I have not only done that which was done before. Some have indeed writ∣ten excellently at large of these things, but some Christians cannot so easily read larger Treatises, nor so easily gather up the sum of them to carry in their minds; these short rules may be usefull to such; and those that have leisure and opportunity, may make use of them for the clearer explication of these. Some have written excellent brief Manuals, but
have insisted much upon such things as I have here purposely omitted, that I might not actum agere, as vows, meditations, and the use thereof in quickening affections, and strength∣ening resoluions: if thou savourest the things that be of God, I dare com∣mend to thee what hath been written on this subject, by my worthy Friend Mr Tho White. Others have written indeed excellent things on this Sub∣ject; but there is in their Books such a mixture of Popish principles and superstition, that weaker Christians which have not their senses exercised to discern good and evil, can scarce without danger make use of them. In what I have here written I know nothing that is called in question, (especially in the Directions,) by any sober man: for I have kept within the safe bounds of acknowledged truths, to free the Reader from all suspition, (at least from all danger) of being misled into any unsafe paths. If any
shall object against the strictness of this exercise, or course of life, I need say no more to shame such an obje∣ction, but to set before you some brief instances of the heathen piety, shewing how far they went by the light of nature in the observation of these rules which I have laid down; their high esteem of godliness in ge∣nerall, above all other things, they very oft discover in their writings; but we have frequent instances of their practice thereof, in particular duties, as Prayer. It is said of Socra∣tes, that his life was nothing but a continuall Prayer, so frequent was he therein; one passage whereof is re∣ported to be, Date ut sim pulcher in∣tus, & honestus, which is in effect the same with that of David, Psal. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, and renew in me a right spirit. Seneca is an e∣minent example of Ethnick devo∣tion, (I know how he is accused by some, of contradicting his principles
by his practices; yet it appears what their convictions were, however their corrupt affections might prevail against them,) how we should im∣prove the consideration of Gods om∣nipresence; See Senec. Epist. 10. how we should improve the consideration of his providence, Epist. 107. how we should exercise virtue in every con∣dition, Epist. 85. how we should ap∣ply our selves to God in Prayer, Epist. 41. how we should behave our selves in Prayer, Epist. 10. what respect we should have to death and the judge∣ment to come, Epist. 4, 12, 26. how carefull we should be in the spending of our time, lib. de brevitate vitae, in which book he enveighs much a∣gainst mens profuse expence of their time, of which alone we may be in∣nocently covetous. Of the choice of our company, Epist. 7. and our carriage therein. Epist. 10. Sic vive cum hominibus tanquam Deus videat; sic loquere cum Deo tanquam bomines
audiant; we should so converse with men as if God looked on, so speak to God in Prayer, as if men heard us. And of taking an account of our selves every night, how we have spent the day past, we have an admirable example, lib. 3. de Ira, cap. 36. and this last was an ordinary practice with devouter heathens; concerning which, there are famous precepts of Pythagoras in his Golden verses, . i.e. Nec prius in dulcem declines, lumina somnum, Omnia quam longi reputaveris acta dici, Quo praetergressus, quid factum in tempore, quid non, Si dicta & facta per omnia ingre∣diens, Ortu{que} & vespere cuncta revol∣vens, Offensus pravis, da palmam & pre∣mia rectis. The summe of which is, that we
should give no sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eye-lids, till we have examined and passed sentence upon all the actions of the day, approving the good, and condemning the evil. Vid. Arriani Epictet. lib. 3. cap. 10. Auson. Edyll. 8. Much more to like purpose we might be furnished with, out of Plutarch, Epictetus, De la Moth le Vayer, de la Vertu des Pay∣ens, &c. To speak nothing of their putting out their eyes, casting away their riches, retyring from the socie∣ty of men, that they might devote themselyes to a contemplative life; practices which our Christian profes∣sion doth not require, nor the Scri∣ptures allow. The former things ha∣ving the approbation of the Word of God, and the concurrent practice, of holy men mentioned therein, may shame Christians that have more obligations upon them, more light, more means of grace, more assistance of the Spirit, then these heathens had.
Lastly, Some may object against this course, that it is very difficult to observe so many rules, and this would make the Christian life very burdensome: To this I answer, First with Tertullian, Apol. cap. 40. Semper humana gens male de Deo meruit; God hath alwaies been but little beholding to men, who grudge at every thing that God hath rom them: of old they would put off God with any thing, Mal. 1.8, &c. but they thought nothing too much for their Idols, Deut. 32.36. no not their children, Jer. 3.23. It was ordinary for the hea∣thens to object against the Chri∣stian Religion, that it taught many things contrary to reason, when in the mean while their own heathen∣ish superstition contained many things more abhorring from sound reason, then any thing which they could pretend in Christianity, as the Fathers in the Primitive Church
commonly replied in their Apolo∣gies for the Christians. Vide Tertul. de carne Christi, cap. 4. Austin de Civitate Dei, lib. 1. c. p. 14. Joseph. cont. Apion. Origens conference with Alexander Severus, &c. Such unequall dealing hath God alwaies had from men. It were enough to affright men from the profession of Religion, if they should thereby indanger their lives, yet they set light by them for maintaining some point of Honour, and can freely sa∣crifice them (in a duell) to revenge or vainglory: many would account it a grievous bondage to walk cir∣cumspectly, to order all their thoughts, words and actions accor∣ding to rule, to whom a studied carriage, and an industrious acting of the foolish fashions of the times is no trouble: It would seem to many a burden too grievous to be born, to be tied to spend that time in reading the Scriptures (that they
might learn such savoury speeches as would minister grace to others, Eph 4.29. and save their own souls to boot, 2 Tim. 3.15.) which they spend in reading Romances, to learn such vain language as they must reckon for another day. How many are there, that would not for all that Heaven is worth, spend so much time every morning, in a∣dorning the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. as they do in adorning the outward man. I shall con∣clude this first answer with that of Picus Mirandula, Ep. 1. ad Nep. Non potest non extremae esse demen∣tiae, ibi nolle potius laborare, ubi a labore itur ad mercedem, quam ubi a labore itur ad supplicium. It must needs be the greatest folly and mad∣ness in the world, to take more pains, and run greater hazards in the ways of sinne to go to hell, then they need to do in the wayes of God to go to Heaven. Secondly, As
Bishop Hall saith, There is nothing to be gotten by idleness, but misery here, and Hell hereafter: The king∣dom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. A Christians life is a race, a war∣fare; and he must run, strive, fight, if he will win the prize, 1 Cor. 9.24, 25, 26. he must watch and pray, and arm, and stand fast, and quit himself like a man, if he will obtain the Crown, Mat. 26.41. 1 Cor. 16.13. Ephes. 6.13. Thirdly, Thou knowest not how difficult this course is till thou hast been exerci∣sed therein: Non putant fieri quic∣quid facere non possunt: ex infirmi∣tate sua de virtute ferunt senten∣tiam. Sen. Ep 71. who ever learn∣ed any art or mystery, but it seemed very difficult at first? which practice afterward makes easie: there is a mystery in practicall Godliness, as well as in speculative Divinity, which makes it seem hard at first; I
know this is not acquired wholly by industry, and exercise, as other habits are, but exercise doth much facilitate it: Again custom is the greatest Tyrant in the world, Jer. 13.23. whose yoak it is an hard matter to cast off, in those things which afterwards we can easily contemn; how vain would those wayes of sinne seem to many which now they are wedded to? how easie would those wayes of holiness seem to them, the difficulty whereof doth so much affright them; if they would awake to righteousness, and stir up themselves to take hold on the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.34. Isa 64.7. not wavering betwixt God and the world, Jam. 1.6. (for then they are like to be driven and tossed, with every wind of temptation) but cleaving to the Lord with purpose of heart, Acts 11.23. Quam suave mihi subito factum est carere suavitatibus nugarum? quas amttere metus fuit,
jam dimittere gaudium fuit, saith Austin, Confession, lib. 9 cap 1. he had a long time been dallying with sinne, and his thoughts were fluctu∣ating to and fro; but when they came to the consistency of a firm resolution, it was presently a plea∣sure to him, to want his former de∣lightfull vanities; and those things which before he was afraid to lose, he could now joyfully let go. Finally, This practice will not be so difficult, as you may at first su∣spect: because these rules which I have laid down, are a great help to each other. One that had never seen a Watch, or such like work of Art, would wonder how so many wheels should keep such a constant orderly motion: whereas one that understands the manner of their motion, knows that one wheel doth protrude or thrust forward ano∣ther, and that the motion could not easily be so regular, if there were
fewer wheels in it: so it is in this case, one duty puts forward ano∣ther, and doth dispose us to the pra∣ctice of another: or as in the body, labour or exercise begets an appe∣tite, when we have an appetite our food is mort pleasant to us, and it likewise helps digestion, and so our food doth us more good and streng∣thens us to labour; so the more we exercise our selves unto Godliness, the more experience we shall have of our own insufficiency, and of the need that we stand in of a daily supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; and so we shall more prize and en∣deavour to improve those Ordi∣nances which are the ministration of the Spirit, as Prayer and the Word of God: And therefore if men slight Ordinances, 'tis an ill sign that they have grown negligent in the practace of godliness; for he that sets himself to walk so as he may please God, will find all means
little enough to maintain the vi∣gour of his grace; and the more we improve our communion with God in Ordinances, the better shall we be enabled to hold on in a course of godliness; so that as it is in the body naturall and misticall, one member is usefull to another, it is likewise in these duties. I may also add, that the benefits of such a practice, (which I have before recounted) will abundantly recompence any diigence which we can use therein: which hath been confirmed by the experience of those which have been exercised therein: as you may see in Mr Rogers Seaven Treatises, where he tells us Treat 4 cap. 11. of divers godly men, who when they were at first put upon such a course as is here prescribed, looked upon it as a thing impossible to be obser∣ved; but being perswaded to make triall of it, they freely acknowledg∣ed that they found and obtained
more use of their knowledg, more constancy in their course, and sweet delight in serving of God, then ever they looked for, and hereby they came to be better able to per∣form duties, to bear crosses and af∣flictions, to subdue their affections, and to overcome their doubts and fears. Methinks the hope of like success, should encourage any that make Religion their business, to make triall of this practice; those that have more objections yet to make against it, may find them an∣swered in Drexelius his Trismegi∣stus, lib. 1. cap. 7. And now Reader I may conclude with Tertullian de patientia prin: or in the words of Bishop Sales, in the Preface to his Introduction; [I confess I have writ of a devout life, without being devout my self; yet not without a desire of being so, and it is this de∣sire which hath given me courage to instruct thee: for as a great
Learned man said, To study is a good way to learn, to hear is a bet∣ter, but to teach is best of all.] The truth is, I entertained the first thoughts of making these Dire∣ctions thus publike, whilest I was drawing up somewhat for my own use: hoping they might do others more good then my self, which might have better hearts to make use of them, (as indeed I should oft preach with an heavy heart, were it not for hopes that many that hear me, may be more affected with what I speak, then I can get my own dull soul to be,) but I was further en∣couraged to this work, when I con∣sidered what an obligation it would be upon my self, to the most earnest endeavours in the practice of those things which I have thus pressed upon others: for if I should chuse my devise, it should be those words of the Apostle, Rom. 2.21. Which I wish I could as oft suppose my self
to hear sounding in mine ears, as Jerome did the last Trumpet, Thou that teachest another, teachest thou not thy self? and I desire this little Book may come into remembrance with me to shame me when ever I shall (through inadvertency or any other infirmity) swerve from these Rules my self, which I have here set down for the use of others.
THE PRACTICE OF GODLINES. LAbour to improve your acknowledged princi∣ples concerning God. I mean such princi∣ples as are generally without dispute, or hesitancy as∣sented to: unless you think the Word of God to be a cunningly devised fable, 2 Pet. 1.16. or that the Kingdom of God is in word only, and not in power, 1 Cor. 4.20. that Religion is but an empty sound, of no use or vertue, let your faith as the Apostle faith of pa∣tience, Jam. 1.4. have its perfect work, use it as far as it will go, and
you shall find what an influence it will have upon your whole Conver∣sation. True knowledg is the foun∣dation of all Religion, Jer. 22.16. Eph, 4.18. and that knowledg is not right which is not operative and ef∣ectuall, 1 Joh. 2.3, 4. Now there are three things more especially, a fixed apprehension and serious considera∣tion whereof, will be of singular use to us in all the passages of our lives. First, The alsufficiency of God, Gen. 17.1. This makes him the chief good, for this we choose him as our portion, and chief happiness. Now this is the first step which the soul takes towards Heaven, this goes in order before Faith, and Faith is but subordinate hereto, this being the act of the soul about our chief end; Faith respecting the means leading to this end. Why do we beleeve on Jesus Christ? but that we may by him be brought unto God, 1 Pet. 3.18, these two acts are the brief a∣bridgment
of the Gospel, Acts 20.21. so that we see this is essentiall to Christianity to take God for our chief happiness. Now if this were but setled in our hearts, how would it ballast them and keep them sted∣dy, that they would not be tossed up and down with the various oc∣currences of this life, neither lift up with prosperity, nor cast down with adversitys for whether we have more of these things they make no consi∣derable addition to us, God is our happiness and not the Creature; or whether we have less of these things, it is no diminution of our happiness, we still have our portion; we are but as a man that hath turn∣ed his estate into money, though he have not houses, nor lands, nor flocks, nor herds; yet he hath that which answers all things, Eccles. 10.19. so it is with one that hath God for his portion, whose is the earth, and the fullness thereof, Hab. 3.17,
18.1 Cor. 10.28.2 Cor. 6.10. Give twenty pounds to a poor man, and you make him, take so much from him and you undoe him; but it is nothing in a rich mans purse that hath thousands coming in yearly: let an unbeliever lose the world and he loses all, he complains with La∣ban that his gods are gone; let him have these things in abundance, and he is transported like Haman, Esth. 5.11, 12. but these are small things with him, whose portion the Lord is. 2. A second thing which we should alwayes labour for a ferious apprehension of, is Gods omnipre∣sence: by his essence and common providence, he is in all places, Psal. 139.6, &c. and he beholds all things that are done by the sons of men, Heb. 4.13. but he is graciously present in a speciall manner with his own peo∣ple, Isa. 43.2, 5. Now to walk before God, to set his presence before our eyes, doth briefly comprehend all
Religion, Gen. 17.1. Chap. 14.40. 1. This will awe us when we have opportunities and temptations to secret sins, Gen. 39.9. The story is known of Paphnutius who convert∣ed an Harlot by this means. 2. This would possess us with more reverence and godly fear in du∣ties of Gods worship, 1 Cor. 11.10. If the presence of Angels should do this, much more the presence of God. 3. This will comfort us in afflict∣ons, Psal. 23.4, 25, 14. Encourage us against fears, Psal. 16.8. yea, pro∣voke us to diligence in every good work, The eye of the master makes a diligent seruant, Col. 3.22. The A∣postle supposes, that those who o∣therwise are sloathfull and negli∣gent, will yet be diligent while their masters eye is upon them. 3. A third thing which we should alwayes settle in our hearts, is the universall providence of God, ex∣tending
it self to every thing which comes to pass here below, to that which is good, Gen. 31.16, 33, 5, 11. that which is evil, Isa. 42.25. Amos 3.6. to the least things, Mat. 10.28. to those things which are produced by a long series of second causes, Hos. 2.22. Gen. 45.5. to the meerest contingencies, Pro. 16.33. Now be∣sides the occasion which we shall have hereby given us to adore the perfections of God in all his works, Psal. 8. Joh 37.14. Psal. 107.43. we shall have this advantage here∣by, in the enjoyment of mercies. First, It will teach us thankfulness for them, Psal. 40.5. 2. Prevent our abuse of them and teach us to use them for God, Hos. 2.8. Ezek. 16.19. In afflictions this will teach us first to submit patient∣ly to them, as being inflicted by his authority, ordered by his wife provi∣dence, 1 Sam. 3.18. Job 1.21. Joh. 19.11. Psal. 46. throughout.
3. Teach us to make a right use of them, Mic. 6.9. Isa. 42.25. By these instances which I have set down, you muy likewise be directed how to improve other articles of your faith. Direct. 2. What ever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of Je∣sus Christ. This direction is in the very words of the Apostle, Col. 3.17. and though it be a brief dire∣ction, yet there is none that is of more generall and constant use: it is like the Carpenters rule, which he makes use of upon all occasions, there is not an action of our lives wherein we have not some use here∣of Now to do a thing in the name of Christ, imports these three things; 1. To do it by the authority of Christ, Mat. 21.23. Joh. 5.43. 1 Cor. 5.4. 2. In the power and strength of Christ, Mark 16.17. Acts 3.12, 16. Psal. 20.5.
3. For the sake of Christ, or for his honour, Luk. 9.48. Mat. 18.20. So the Dutch Annotations on the place, and the learned Daillè in his excellent Sermon on the same. 1. Then let us make God of our counsell in whatever we take in hand, (This was a common practice amongst the heathen, vatibus solen∣ne fuit nihil serium numine incon∣sulto aggredi. Herbert de veritate.) Isa. 30.1. Hos. 8.4. 1. Because of the absolute authority that he hath o∣ver us, 1 Cor. 6.21. 1 King. 18.21. 2. The dependance we have on his providence, 'tis wisdom to make a vertue of necessity; if we will ven∣ture to do a thing without his mo∣rall permission, or allowance: we cannot do it without his naturall permission or sufferance, Isa. 54.15. Jer. 42.15. Hos. 4.10. 3. We must give an account to him of our a∣ctions, he is our Judg, as well as our Lawgiver, Jam. 4.12. 2 Cor. 5.10.
4. When we have Gods leave, we may go on with comfort, and con∣fidence, Prov. 10.29. We are under his speciall care and providence, Psal. 84.11. Mr Dod would say, he cared not where he was, if he could but answer these two questions well, Who am I? and what do I here? am I a Child of God? and am I in my way? if we were carefull of the discharge of our duty, we might free our selves from all other care; but as it is the humour of every man naturally, to look more after other mens affairs then his own; so we deal after the same manner with God, we busie our selves about his work, the event and success of our affairs, which belong to his provi∣dence to order and direct: and in the mean while neglect our own du∣ty, leaving that to God, usually up∣on pretence of the necessity of his determining grace, which doth no more make void our endeavours in
spirituall actions, then the necessity of the concurrence of his generall providence in our naturall actions. Now for knowing the mind of God in what we go about, we have his Word to direct us. In particular cases where we have no express rule for our direction, our end must di∣rect us, the edification of souls, 1 Cor. 10.23. and the glory of God, (of which more afterwards;) besides God doth by his providence some∣times, and sometimes by making strong impressions upon the will, Acts 20.22. give some hints of his mind, vide Valdesso Consid. 25. but to be sure we must make the former our chief rules to guid us, and fol∣low these last, only when the Word is not clear, and where neither of those mentioned ends which we should propound to our selves, do turn the ballance, but it remains still equally poysed: otherwise we may take the violent inclinations of our
own lusts, for an impression of the spirit, and a temptation for a lead∣ing providence, Deut. 13.3. See 1 Sam. 24.5, 6, 7. II. What we do we should do in the strength of Christ, waiting upon him for the concurrence of his ge∣nerall providence in our ordinary, naturall, and civil actions, James 4.15. of his more speciall providence in extraordinary actions, 1 Sam. 17.45. 2 Chron. 14.11. and of his spe∣ciall grace in spirituall actions, Eph. 6.10. Phil 4.13. 2 Tim. 2.1. So that we should commit all our wayes unto the Lord, Prov. 16.3. venturing up∣on nothing in our practises, which we dare not commend to God, for a blessing in our prayers; our ordi∣nary affairs, we may commit to him by a generall recommendation in our daily prayers: extraordinary af∣fairs by a more particular solemn addressing our selves to him, Gen. 32.10. Neh. 1.4. Esth. 4.16. sudden
emergencies, by short secret eja∣culations, Neh. 2.4. This practice would make us desist from many rash undertakings: we many times unadvisedly rushing upon those things which we should not have a face to own before God in prayer: as the poor man when he had stol∣len a Lamb for the necessities of his family, when having made it ready, he came (as his manner was) to pray for a blessing upon it, his heart smote him, so that he could have no peace till he went and acknowledg∣ed his sin, and made a promise of re∣stitution. III. We should do all for the glo∣ry of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.32. 1. This is the ultimate end of all things, Pro. 16.4. Rom. 11.36. 2. Though the purity of the end will not correct they ciousness of the means, as the popish Casuists teach; yet it will sanctifie all our naturall and civill actions, adopting them as it were
into the number of religious acti∣ons, and inscribing them with holi∣ness to the Lord, Zach. 14.21. Col. 3.23, 24. The poorest servant by discharg∣ing his duty in a right manner, and directing his intention aright, may in the meanest employment serve Jesus Christ, and with confidence expect his reward from him. Of the universall influence that a right di∣rection of our intentions hath upon our whole practice, See Bacons Es∣sayes 57. and Richeomes Adieu de l' Ame devote Devis 59. 3. Without this our spirituall actions are not good, Zach. 7.7. 4. This will prescribe a right manner and measure to all our law∣full actions. I mean such as are in themselves lawfull, as eating, drink∣ing, recreations, and such like: finis dat modum & mensuram medits. And herein Christians had need to be very circumspect, because they
sin most frequently in such actions, licitis perimus omnes, it is said of the old world, Mat. 24.38. that they were eating, drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage; there was no hurt in these actions, if they had ob∣served a due season, manner, and measure in them. Christians startle at such things as swearing, lying, stealing, adultery, &c. but in the use of things lawfull, they are more se∣cure, and so do more easily slide into a sinfull excess. 5. This will direct us (as was before hinted) where our way is doubtfull. Where we have express commands, or prohibitions in the Word of God, our way is plain, there is no question to be made, but in many cases our actions are not determined by any particular direct command, but are left to be guided by Christian prudence; now in such a case, our end will be of much use to guid us; as a man that is to draw a
line, if he have no rule to make it by, he oft casts his eye upon that term, or point to which it is to be drawn; or if a man have a way to go, and there be no beaten path, if he can see the place which he is to go to, his way is to aime at that, and make straight over towards it: so when a case is doubtfull, we should fix our eye upon the glory of God, and see which way hath the most direct tendency thereto, and take that way. Now though we cannot alwayes have an actuall intention of the glory of God, yet we should ha∣bitually intend it, and the more we can actually intend it the better; especially in such actions as are of moment in the course of our lives, we should renew our actuall inten∣tion; and (as was said before) when a case is doubtfull, we should fix our eye upon this end; as a man that is travelling towards a place, suppose to London, he doth not actually
think on the place which he goes to every step he takes, but if he come to a place where there are two wayes, then he bethinks himself of the place which he is going to, that he may take that way which is more likely to lead him thereto. And if any ask now how our na∣turall or civill actions conduce to the glory of God? I answer; First, They may be done to the glory of God, in respect of the man∣ner of them, when we use such mo∣deration, holy fear, heavenly mind∣edness in these actions, that every one may see holiness written upon them, 1 Tim. 6.1. Tit. 2.10. when we observe not a Christian decorum in our naturall and civill actions, it is a dishonour to our profession; Editur quantum esurientes cupiunt, &c. We eat (saith Tertullian of the Christians,) as much as is necessary to satisfie ones appetite; we drink as much as is permitted to Christians
that have a care of their purity; they that sit there take their refreshment with such temperance, as they may remember they are obliged to worship God at night, Apol. cap. 39. Secondly, In respect of their ul∣timate tendency, they may be sub∣servient to the glory of God, though they have not such an im∣mediate connexion therewith, as when we use diligence in our par∣ticular callings, that we may have wherewith to supply the necessities of others, Eph. 4.28. to provide for those belonging to our own charge, 1 Tim. 5.8. that we may with the more freedom wait upon God, be∣ing exempted from perplexing cares, 1 Cor. 7.35. that we may be freed from the temptations of po∣verty, and may not be burdensome to others, Prov. 30.9. 1 Thes. 4.11. So when we study for this end, that we may excell for the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12. When we eat,
drink, use recreations that our bo∣dies may be strengthened, Eccles. 10.17. that so they may be the more fit to serve the soul in its operations, that we may by both soul and body be more fit to honour God in our places; so in our civil visits, we should consider what they will con∣tribute to our chief end, what op∣portunity we may have of doing or receiving good; how far our Chri∣stian profession requires this of us, that we may shew all gentleness to∣wards all men, Tit. 3.2. and add to brotherly kindness charity, 2 Pet. 1.7. Direct. 3. Prize all oportunities of communion with God in his Ordi∣nances; such as Prayer, reading and hearing the Word, Christian pru∣dence must alot the time for these, according to our occasions, oppor∣tuniies, necessities, Psal. 42.1, 2. & 63.1, 2. & 84.1, 2. & 122.1. First, They are our duty, part of that homage which we owe to God,
as our Lord and Lawgiver, by pray∣er to acknowledg our dependance on him, Psal. 65.2. and our subje∣ction to him by sitting down at his feet to receive the Law from his mouth, to take our instruction from him, Deut. 33.3. Secondly, They are our privi∣ledges, which cost two of the great∣est gifts which Heaven could afford, Eph. 2.17. The Son of God, that we might have acceptance, the Spirit of God that we might have assistance; what greater priviledg are we ca∣pable of, then at any time to go and reveal our cause to God, Ier. 20.21. to case our complaints before him, to have leave to beg any thing of him, Ioh. 15.8. Luk. 11.13. to ask sounsell of him, Psal. 119.24. especially when his Word is the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. Gal. 3.2. there be∣ing in our communion with God a transfusion of spirits, he communi∣cating his Spirit or divine nature to
us therein, 2 Cor. 3.18. besides our own pressing necessities which should daily provoke us hereto: the oftner we come to God the more welcome, Cant. 2.14. Jer. 2.32. and the more boldness and liberty of access we shall have, disuse and in∣frequency breeding a strangeness betwixt God and the soul, and deading the heart to communion with him. Direct. 4. Be very serious in the performance of holy duties; be care∣full to joyn therein attention of mind. Ezek. 33.32. sincerity of heart, Psal. 145.18. intension of affictions, Rom. 12.11. Acts 27.7. and holy fear and reverence, Heb. 12.28. Chri∣stians are very faulty in this parti∣cular; for besides their rude irreve∣rent behaviour in holy duties, when the best supply that we can make to the defect of our prayers, (after our hearts have been roving and wan∣dering therein, notwithstanding the
strictest hand that we can keep over them,) is by recollection of all the strength of our souls to enforce them by an hearty Amen. You shall have men off their knees, (if ever they were on them) or ready to run away from the duty when it grows towards an end, as if they were glad that such a task were done. Verily I have oft wondered how such pro∣phaness in divine worship should be consistent with the fear of God, and yet been loath to condemn those that are guilty of it. I can scarce think of this but I am in Pauls case, Acts 17.16. for (as Mirandula saith in another case, That its a wonder that any should doubt of the truth of the Gospel after so ma∣ny proofs of it, but a greater won∣der that any should believe it and live as if it were not true, Ep. 1. ad Nepot. So it is a wonder that any should be so bruitish as to worship a false god, but a greater wonder,
that any worshiping the true God, should worship him as if he were no God. We ought to give the more diligent heed herein, because there is the same time spent in the slight performance of duties, which is spent in a right performance of them; and a man had better sow his ground with good seed though it cost him dear, then with darnell or cockle, though he can have it for nothing: and as we lose the fruit of our duties, and answer of our pray∣ers when we are slight in them, so we lose the sweetness that is to be had in communion with God in them, and that is the reason we come with such dead hearts to du∣ties; and we had need be watchfull herein, because Satan is very busie to interrupt us in holy duties, Luk. 8.12. Zach. 3.1. and our own hearts are very apt to wander therein. Ben∣nard sadly complains of this in his Meditations, cap. 8. and de demo in∣teriori,
cap. 29, & 33. how he scarce could attend to his own prayers, or mind what he said in them himself, and so lost the fruit of them: See Dike on the Heart, cap. 21. Cyprian de Orat. Dom. Now for our help therein, let us first consider the nature of God with whom we have to do; he is a great King, and his Name is dread∣full, Mal. 1.14. read that Chapter throughout, he will not bear it to be put off with slight services, he will have none of his work done negligently, Jer. 48.10. he will be sanctified of all such as draw nigh to him Lev. 10.3. he will be served with fear and trembling, Psal. 2.11. trem∣bling at the Word of God is the Character of a godly man, Isa. 66.2, 4. Ezra 10.3. Secondly, Let us consider the na∣ture of the services wherein we have to do with him, and we may consi∣der them under a threefold notion:
First, as duties; this will lay an awe upon our consciences, and keep us to a due constant observance of them; it is dangerous to free our consciences from this obligation, by laying aside the opinion of duty, for we see by experience how easily men are tempted to a neglect of those things which they look upon as only matter of liberty, and not as necessary duty. 2. Let us consi∣der them as priviledges: this will keep us from that weariness which is ready to grow upon us in them, while we consider them only as bur∣densome tasks, Mal. 1.13. And from resting in the work done, which we shall be apt to do if we look upon them only as duties. 3. Let us consider them as Ta∣lents which we must give an account of, for so they are if we look upon them as means of grace, Luk. 12.48. this will quicken us up to more earnest diligence in the improve∣ment
of them. And for prayer in particular let me add this one word, whenever we draw nigh to God in it, let us but consider what it is, or what we are about, viz The making our requests known to God, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, Phil. 4.6. that so we may be furnish∣ed with expressions, not from our heads, but from our hearts; that our words may not be fetched from our memories or inventions, but from our reall desires and inward affe∣ctions. Direct. 5. Be very carefull net to neglect known duties: We use to ob∣serve in polemicall Divinity, that the plainest truths are least studied, because they are taken for granted, and so men think they need not bu∣sie themselvts about them. I wish we could not make the like observa∣tion in practicall Divinity, though there is not the like reason for the neglect of the practice that there is
of the study of those things which we know, the end of knowledg is pra∣ctice, Deut. 29.29. But so it is usual∣ly, that men are very inquisitive into those things which are doubtfull, as if they wanted matter for the exer∣cise of their zeal, or as if they would complement with God as they sometimes do with men, telling him in effect that they do but wait for an opportunity to serve him, when they overlook ordinary acknow∣ledged duties; like the Jews, which were very forward to enquire whe∣ther they should fast as they had done formerly, and in the mean while they neglected the duties of morality, Mic. 6.7. the greatest questionists are many times the least doers, but as Luther would say, God loves not Quaeristas, but Curristas, not such as will be alwayes enqui∣ring, but such as will be active or doing: if you would know more of the mind of God in things that are
doubtfull, do more of what you al∣ready know, Joh. 7.17. Mind what is your present duty, what is the next step you are to take in the way to Heaven, as the evil of the day, so the duty of the day is sufficient for it. Direct. 6. Labour to know the true bounds of your Christian liberty. Not that you may walk to the ut∣most extent of it, for the satisfying of your naturall desires, nor that you may for any carnall interest basely comply with mens humours; but yet there may be great use of this, both in respect of our selves and others: men do oft lay unneces∣sary burdens upon themselves, binding themselves (where God hath loosed them) to their own great prejudice, like those 1 Cor. 8.7. instances whereof are very obvi∣ous. I would not interpret that place Eccles. 7.16. in favour of luke∣warmness, or to allay mens zeal with the base mixture of carnall policy:
yet doubtless men do sometimes de∣stroy themselves by too much opi∣nionativeness and self-conceit, or over-rigidly insisting on some things where God allows them a greater latitude. See Dr Reynolds on this place, in his most excellent Commentary on Ecclesiastes in the larger English Annotations. But Christians do usually most wrong others hereby: First, In judg∣ing them, and casting them out of their charity for those things which they have liberty in, or which they may lawfully do: strong Christians are not more ready to despise the weak, then the weak are to judg the strong, Rom. 14.3. and I know not which is the greater sin; the former for the most part is worse in respect of its principle from whence it proceeds, but the latter in respect of the ef∣fects of it. But secondly, We further wrong others, in that we do not leave our selves a liberty where God
hath left it us, for accommodating our selves to them, and pleasing them for their good to edification; or as others have it, in that which is good; where we have the true bounds set to man-pleasing, for the matter it must be in that which is good, we must not please their sinfull humours, or comply with their cor∣rupt lusts. Then there must be a right end, it must be for their edifi∣cation, Rom. 15.2. and this rule the Apostle himself put in practice, 1 Cor. 9.19. Chap. 10.33. Direct. 7. Labour to make the best improvement of your time. The Apo∣stle indeed exhorts to redeem time, Eph. 5.16. which is an expression of doubtfull signification, and capable of various interpretations; but in propriety of speech, time that is lost is not to be redeemed; we cannot possibly recover mispent time; re∣deeming time is alike impossible as merit, Luk. 17.10. because all that
we can do in our time is our duty; and it is not in morals as in natu∣rals, where by resting one hour we are able to work more vigorously another, but the more remiss we are, the greater indisposition we bring upon our selves. If a man suffer weeds to grow in his field; though he pluck them up before they seed, or spoyl his corn, yet he loses so much ground as they grow upon: so though God should par∣don the mispending of our time, yet we shall lose the fruit of what we might have (in that time) sown to the Spirit: and as good husbands will lose none of their ground, but have every parcell bring them forth something, so we should endeavour that every parcell of our time may be sown with some seed of righte∣ousness; yea, we should make some improvement of that time in which we do the works of our particular callings to some spirituall advan∣tage,
(if our imployments be such as exercise the hand and not the head) by some usefull meditations; as some will plant their hedg-rowes with fruit trees, reckoning that what they get thereby is clear gain, because they take up no room which might be put to any other use; so what we get by such medi∣tations is clearly gained, because it doth not hinder any other imploy∣ment. But as it is not enough for the husbandman to sow all his ground, but he must observe what agrees best with this or that grain, and as it is not sufficient that he be alwayes employed, unless he observe the due season for his severall affairs, so it is not sufficient that we be alwayes doing that which is materially good, but there must be a prudent choice of the fittest season for every action, for there is for every purpose a time and judgment, therefore is the misery of man great upon him, be∣cause
some few men have the wis∣dome to know time and judgment. Eccl. 8.5, 6. but he is the blessed man, that brings forth fruit in its season, Psal. 1.3. Yet let not your souls enter into the secrets of those, who seeming to themselves to have a perfect understanding of the times and seasons wherein the things foretold in Scripture shall have their accomplishment, think themselves bound to attempt such things as they suppose may be help∣full to the bringing forth of that which divine providence seems to be travelling with, calling this the work of the day, or of their genera∣tion. The good man Moses ran into this mistake, but he was glad to flee for it, and keep sheep fourty years, till he had a more cleer call from God, to undertake that work which he before knew God had designed him for, Acts 7.23, &c. More parti∣cularly let us endeavour to improve
our time well when we are in com∣pany, and when we are alone, for so∣ciety and solitude share our time. First, In company, let us labour to do good or to get good, at least that we do no hurt nor receive any: and to that end, avoid (as much as may be) the society of those with whom we are like neither to do or receive good, and those are such as are pro∣phane scorners, and such as are meerly carnall, and are much our superiours. And when you are in company, make conscience of your words; 1. Because we are very apt to offend in them, Jam. 3.2, 6. We may complain of most mens dis∣courses as Bernard Apolog. ad Guil. Abbat. Nihil de Scripturis nihil de salute agitur animarum, sed nugae & risus & verbae proferuntur in ven∣tum; they are all froth and vanity, there is nothing in them of the Scripture, or of the salvation of mens souls. Ita fabulantur ut qui
sciant Dominum audire, saith Ter∣tullian of the ancient Christians, Apol. cap. 39. they so talk as those who know that God hears them. So Psal. 139.4. Remember the story of him that heard a pen writing be∣hind the curtain while he was under examination, which made him look more narrowly to his words. 2. There is speciall notice taken of them, Mal. 3.16. And 3. We must give an account of them, Mat. 12.36, 37. and that we may never want matter of usefull discourse, let us alwayes be furnished with some profitable questions to propound, 1 King. 10.1, &c. which we may be supplied with, either from what we hear or read daily of the Word of God, or some passages of Gods Pro∣vidence, or our own experience, and this will be usefull both to our selves and others, we may hereby increase our own knowledg, and give others occasion for imploying
their Talents, which many times lye wrapped up useless, either through too much reservedness or slowness of speech, or an over-awing mode∣sty, or because men know not so well how to suit their discourses to the conditions and capacities of o∣thers: and it will not be altogether in vain to propound questions to those that are our equals or below us in understanding. We may like∣wise take occasion from ordinary occurrences to raise spirituall dis∣courses, which was Christs usuall practice, Joh. 4.10, 6, 26. but it is e∣ver necessary that we observe the tempers, faculties, abilities, capaci∣ties, conditions of those with whom we have to do? that we may accom∣modate our selves (as far as may be) thereunto; this will render our so∣ciety more acceptable to others, more profitable both to others and our selves. By observing mens tem∣pers we may the more easily insi∣nuate
what we please into them: by observing their faculties and abili∣ties, we may both please them and profit our selves: because men love to discourse of things belonging to their own faculties, or wherein their abilities chiefly lye, and about those things we may expect the most sa∣tisfying answers from them, if they be such things as may be any ad∣vantage to us to know: if we suit our discourses to mens conditions, it will add much grace and comeli∣ness to our speech, Prov. 15.23. & 25.11. but if we do not in all things ap∣ply our selves to mens capacities, we shall but weary them, and what we labour to pour into them will run beside, Joh. 16.12. Rom. 14.1. But re∣member still to be swift to hear, slow to speak, Jam. 1.19. to shew all meek∣ness towards all men, to speak evil of none, unless you be called thereto, Tit. 3.2. to be sparing of your pro∣mises, and as sparing of your secrets,
unles to such, whose faithfullness you have good experience of, or un∣les they leave as much in pawn with you as you trust with them: for by imparting our secrets to others, we oft put our selves into their power, so that they have a check upon us, according to that, Scire volunt se∣creta domus atque inde timeri, Ju∣ven. Sat. 13. And lastly, Joyn prudence with innocence, that you may neither do wrong nor receive any, Mat 10.16. Psal. 101.2. 2. Labour to spend your time well when you are alone; Take heed to your spirits, Mal. 2.17. there is the beginning of all mischief, Mat. 15.19. then is the season for Satan to come and deal with us about his works of darkness, which he hath to put us upon, therefore we should prevent him by some good and profitable exercise; if David had taken this course, 2 Sam. 11. how much evill
might it have prevented? how much work have we lying upon our hands to take up every spare minute of our lives? how many things are we ignorant of, which we may imploy our solitary time about, in inform∣ing our selves by reading the Word of God, or using the help of others, which we have ready at hand in suh abundance? or if we cannot read the Scriptures, or some other good books, as in a journey, or in our beds in the night, how much work have we to do upon our hearts? How many affections to quicken by holy meditation? how many doubts to resolve, and questi∣ons to answer concerning our own spiritual condition by self-examina∣tion? And for your help in these ex∣ercises, 1. Labour to have the Word of God dwelling richly in you, Prov. 6.12. Mat. 12.35. 2. Have this good treasure in
your heart disposed into some or∣der, when our thoughts lie on a con∣fused heap, we cannot so easily find out what we have occasion to use, let us sometimes look upward to God, consider his Nature, his Attributes, Psal. 104.34. his Wisdom, Goodnes, Power, Faithfulness, which he hath proclaimed in his Word, manifested in his Works, especially in that work of his manifold Wisdom, which is the subject of Angels meditation, Eph. 3.10.1 Pet. 1.11. Sometimes he looking backward on the wayes of Gods providence toward you, Ps. 139.8, &c. 2 Sam. 22.1, &c. or your ways towards God, 1 Tim. 1.13. Sometimes look downwards into your own hearts, see what work of God you can find there, what remainders of sin are stil there. Sometimes look forward to∣wards your end, Meditate on Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell. So there are other usefull Subjects, as the love of God, the excellency of
Christ, the vanity of the World, the sinfulness of sin, the deceit fulness of the heart, which Christians of ordi∣nary capacities that are acquainted with the Scriptures, and use to hear Sermons, may easily improve by Meditation to the quickning of their affections, and strengthening their resolutions, and make your choice of these Subjects to meditate on according to your present state; as in prosperity oft be thinking of such things as may keep your hearts low, as your former condition, and Gods gracious providence in raising you up, if your condition have for∣merly been worse, Gen. 32.10.2 Sa. 7.18. however of the vanity of the creature, the brevity of life, the joys of Heaven, &c. in adversity choose such matter of Meditation, as may be most fit to work you to patience and contentedness, Mic. 7.9. Ezr. 9.13. and then also make diligent search into your own hearts and ways,
to find out what may probably be the cause of Gods contending with you, Ps. 77.6. Job 10.2. & 34.31, 32. 3. Raise up matter of holy Me∣ditation from earthly things; God hath done much for our help in this exercise, by holding forth heavenly mysteries in his Word, in similitudes taken from earthly things, so, that almost every creature, every action may suggest some useful Meditation to us; if we be travelling, if we see a pleasant way, and much company, we do not consider these things, but what way it is that leads to the place we go to; so though the way of sin be pleasant to the flesh, and most walk in it, Mat. 7.13, 14. that should be no temptation to us, because that doth not lead to Heaven whither we go. If we meet with bad lodging or mean entertainment at our Inn, we know it is but for a night, and we shall have better when we come to our journeys end, so though we
have but bad entertainment in this world, we are but strangers, this is but our Inne, we shall be better ac∣commodated when we come to those Mansions which Christ is gone before to prepare for us, Joh. 14.2. The like Meditations may be raised from most occurrences of our life. Direct. 8. Let us continually set before us the perfect patern of our Lord Jesus. We are more easily led by examples than precepts, and Christ is the only perfect patern; o∣thers are to be followed so far only as they follow him, 1 Cor. 11.1. Not that all the actions of Christ are imitable; he was not meer man, but God also, and Mediatour be∣twixt God and Man; and what he did as God, or as Mediator we can∣not imitate him in; but there are di∣vers things wherein the Scripture propounds his examples to us for imitation, as 1. Love, Eph. 5.1, 2. 1 Joh. 3.16.
2. Meekness and Humility, Mat. 11.29. Joh. 13.14. Rom. 15.3. 3. Self-denial, Mat. 16.24. Phil. 2.3, &c. 2 Cor. 8.9. 4. Patience, 1 Pet. 2.21. 5. Making it his work to do good, Act. 10.38. And these are graces which carry a great stroak in all the passages of our lives. Now the example of Christ doth not only serve for our direction, so as we should oft think with our selves in the conduct and manage∣ment of the affairs of our life, what Christ himself would do, or how he would carry himself in such a case, were he upon earth again as former∣ly, that we may behave our selves after the same manner. But 2. It may be for our encouragement; he is of a mean, base spirit, that will not follow where his General leads; Malus miles est qui imperatorem ge∣mens sequitur. Sen. Ep. 107. There∣fore Cato when he was to lead his
souldiers through a place of danger and difficulty, told them he would go before them, and they should not see him drink while they were thir∣sty, nor take his ease while they were weary, nor see any thing in him which should difference him at all from a common souldier, Lucan. l. 9. So Christ may say to us, He took upon him the meanest condition, Phil. 2.6. there is nothing which he calls us to suffer, but he hath suffered worse for us, why should not we then take up our cross and go after him? Yea, 2. after his suffering he was crown∣ed with glory, Heb. 12.2, 3. So, If we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. Mat. 19.28. Direct. 9. Every night take an ac∣count of the passages of the day past. Vid. Bald. de consient. l. 4. c. 2. cas. 2. Examine your selves, how you have observed the fore-mentioned rules, what the constant frame of your
heart hath been, what you have done, upon what grounds, whether it have been with the warrant of Gods Word, for what end, whether it hath had any tendency to the glory of God, and subserviency to your chief end; whether that hath been in your intention; what op∣portunities you have neglected of communion with God, what hath been the carriage of your heart in holy duties, how you have behaved your selves in company, what good you have done, whether any have been the better for you, or you for them, what you have taken into the good treasure of your hearts, and what you have laid out, Mat. 12.35. what temper your heart hath been in when alone: and so you may go over the several passages of the day. Hereby you will always be in some good preparation for death, it will not surprize you wholly unready, when you daily cast up your ac∣counts,
you will be better acquaint∣ed with your own spiritual estate, you will see what progress you make in the way towards Heaven, what ground you gain of your cor∣ruptions, where Satan hath most advantage against you, what sinne you are most frequently overtaken with, what is the weakest place of your soul; you will likewise be kept hereby from lying long in any sinne unrepented of: if David had con∣stantly observed this course, he had never lien so long as he did in carnal security; you may likewise do well to take special notice of the passages of Gods providence towards you. And to keep a record or journal of the more remarkable passages of your lives, is a practice commended by divers godly men from their own experience. For direction wherein, see Mr White in his Treatise of the Power of Godliness, and Mr Bedle in his Diary of a thankefull Christian.
And further this review of Gods dealings with you, and your carri∣age towards him, will furnish you with matter of confession, petition, thanksgiving, and put you upon the fresh exercise of your faith, and renewing your hold on Jesus Christ in your Evening Prayers. Direct. 10. Awake with God in the Morning. I have disposed of this Rule here, because of the de∣pendance which it hath on that which goeth before: This was Da∣vids practice, Psal. 139.17 18. How precious are thy thoughts, i.e. the thoughts which I have of thee; the affix in the Hebrew Notes oft the Object, and not the Subject, as Gen. 16.5. Jer. 32.40. 1. God visits us every morning, Job 7.18. Lam. 3.23. 2. Then our hearts are fittest for heavenly Meditation, when our spi∣rits are refreshed, and our hearts have not yet been intangled with
the things of the world. 3. If holy thoughts do not first take place, Satan will soon thrust in. Our hearts are (as Bernard saith) like a mill that grinds every thing that is put upon it, whether good or bad, Med. devot. eap. 10. See there how he complains of the sad effect of giving way to evil thoughts, how his heart was thereby estranged from the love of heavenly things. 4. This is necessary for getting our hearts into a right frame, for walking with God all the day: if we would have our watch go right all the day, we must wind it up in the morning; so we had need to wind up our hearts every morning, if we would order our conversation aright. 1. Then let us meditate on the goodness of God towards us particularly the night past, our pro∣tection, preservation, refreshment that God should think of us, when we cannot think of him, take care of
us, when we can take none of our selves, watch over us while we sleep, keep us from sleeping the sleep of death; and bethink your selves, what thanks you should render to the Lord for his gracious dealings with you; and how you may return the use of that life to him, which he restores to you every Morning. And to this end. 2. Review the ac∣count which you took of your selvs the night before: See wherein it was that you was most easily over∣taken, where Satan got an advan∣tage against you, whether you were not ready to offend with your tongue in company, whether your heart did not steal from you in holy duties, whether vain thoughts did not devour the time of your soli∣tude, what baits you found your hearts most ready to rise to, what are the usual out-goings of your hearts, what evil haunts they have; whether pride and vain-glory, sen∣suality,
rash anger, peevishness, impatience, or what other sin hath the greatest advantage against you: and consider, what temptations you are lik to meet with that day, which may most endanger you; and ha∣ving found out the plague of your own hearts, 3. Furnish your selves with the strongestarguments against such a sin, (which you may gather up as you meet with them in your hearing or reading) and inforce them upon your own souls, by com∣muning with your hearts, till you have brought your selves to some fixed resolutions of cleaving to the Lord, Act. 11.23. Psal. 119.106. Some advise us for the confirming our resolutions, to lay some penal∣ty upon our selves every time we fail of making them good. Of which you may see several instances in Drexelius his Trismegistus Christi∣anus, lib. 1. cap. 6. But although some of them savour too much of
Popish Superstition, yet godly sor∣row doth work an holy revenge, 2 Cor. 7.11. which we may take up∣on our selves, by denying our selves the use of our lawfull liberty in those things wherein we have abu∣sed it, or wherein we are in danger again to abuse it, if we should take it: and watching our own hearts, as we would watch a thief, when we are cast upon such temptations, as we have formerly been easily en∣snared by, Prov. 23.1, 2. 4. Ha∣ving by the fore-mentioned Medi∣tations brought our hearts to some fixed resolutions; let us not trust to our own purposes, but in the next place, go to God, in whom we have both strength and righteousness, Isa. 45.24. and commit the keeping of our souls to him in well-doing, 1 Pet. 4.19. And as we may be furnished with matter for our prayers in the evening, from the account which we take of our selves, so in the
morning from our early Meditati∣ons, and that is the reason why I have not (as many others that write exercises of devotion) either set down any form of Prayer, or dire∣cted you to any, he will not need any form of Prayer that practices these duties, to lead his affections, or teach him to express his desires before God in secret; and for fami∣ly-duties, it is not my purpose here to treat of them. And if any shall object, That this exercise in the Morning, requires more time than they can spare, being forced to arise to their labour assoon as they awake. I answer, Christians may abound in these things, as their oc∣casions will allow them. Some, I know, cannot spend so much time in them as others, but they may be the briefer; and if they should have no more time to spare, than while they are putting on their cloaths, they may briefly run over some such
things in their thoughts, as I have directed them to, and make a supply to the want of time, by a more earn∣est intention of their minds, to what they are exercised in. HAving in the foregoing Dire∣ctions commended the work of Self-examination to Christians, as an exercise which may justly chal∣lenge a part of their solitary hours, and considering how unskilfull ma∣ny are therein, and yet how need∣full it is for getting and maintaining assurance, which is not only so ge∣nerally desired of all Christians, but of such use to us, in the perform∣ance of Duties, bearing Afflictions, resisting Temptations: (three things wherein our Christian business chief∣ly lies) I have thought good to add something here for the help of the weak therein: I know many have at large treated of this thing, and to
more satisfaction then I can here expect to give: yet it will (I be∣lieve) be an advantage to some, to have these brief Directions at hand, and others which need them not, may let them alone, and they will be no burden to them. I shall com∣prize what I have to say herein un∣der these two Directions. 1. Make choice of fit rules to measure your condition by. 2. Be carefull rightly to apply your selves to these Rules, that you may make a true judgement of your condition thereby. For the first, The Rule that you measure your self by, must be nei∣ther too long, nor too short, but ade∣quate to the state of a Christian; that is, it must not be so long as that all Christians cannot reach it, nor so short as that it will not reach a true Christian, but such as will fit every sincere believer, and none else. Some judge of themselves by
such trials or evidences, as are com∣petent only to those that are of an high growth in Christianity, and have attained to a great measure of grace: These hearing some (per∣haps) glorying in their spiritual en∣joyments; and attainments (the testimony of the Spirit, the sweet ravishments of their souls in com∣munion with Jesus Christ, their con∣tempt of the world, (whether just∣ly or no, God knows.) And others in describing the state of a Christi∣an, shewing rather what of right it should be, then what indeed it is, what Christians ought to be; rather than what they find themselves to be. Or it may be reading in Scri∣pture the high strains of others de∣votion, as David's panting after God, Psal. 42.1, &c. His following hard after him, Psal. 63.8. His dwelling with God by heavenly Me∣ditations, Psal. 139.17, 18. Paul's holy zeal, Act. 20.24. His desire of
being with Christ in glory, Phil. 1.23. The stability and evenness of his spi∣rit in every condition, Phil. 4.12. They begin to lament their own condition; alas, it is not thus with me; how unlike am I to others of the children of God? These are things which I am so farre from ha∣ving attained to, that I despair of ever reaching them. But I may (with a little alteration of the Apo∣stles words, 2 Cor. 10.12.) say of these, That measuring themselves with others, they are not wise. These things may serve for the trial of the growth of their grace, not of the truth of it: They may discover their imperfections, not their unsound∣ness: They may be matter of humi∣liation and emulation to such as have not attained thereto, but not of discouragement or despair. O∣thers on the other hand, bless them∣selves in a fair civil deportment, in a specious performance of duties,
of justice and charity towards men, and piety towards God. Now, these things are good, and it is both honourable to our Christian profes∣sion, and comfortable to our selves, to have the testimony of our consci∣ences concerning these things, but these alone do not reach the state of a true believer; Paul attained thus far before his conversion, Phil. 3.5, &c. So that you see without a care∣full observation of this first Rule, which I have set down; We shall be in danger, either of disquieting our selves with needless fears, or flat∣tering our selves with vain and groundless hopes. 2. You must carefully apply your selves to these Rules. If a man have the most exact measure or rule, if he do not rightly apply what he hath to measure thereunto, but either ruffle it up, or stretch it too much out, he will never take a right mea∣sure of it. Christians are usually
very inquisitive after true Marks or Evidences of a justified person, and when they come to a Minister to consult about their spiritual condi∣tion, or hear them upon an Use of Examination, they expect presently to hear, whether they shall be saved or damned: as if Ministers could as infallibly tell them their future con∣dition, as Conjurers pretend to tell men their Fortune; when alas, after all the Directions that we are able to give, the greatest work remains for Christians to do themselves; and if they be not faithfull to themselves therein, it is impossible for us to help them. 1. Then labour to be well ac∣quainted with your own hearts, ob∣serve diligently the carriage of them, their risings to, or closing with the baits of Satan: their compliance with temptations: their resentments after slips or falls, how they are affe∣cted with them, the outgoings of
them towards God, and towards the Creature, what are their usual haunts. In short, be as curious and critical in observing your selves, as those who are the greatest busie bo∣dies in other mens, matters, can be in the observation of others; that so you may not be strangers at home, but may according to the sage pre∣cept of the Heathen, Know your selves. This is the best knowledge, next to the knowledge of God in Christ, Multae scientiae hominum, sed nulla melior est illa quâ cognos∣cit homo seipsum. Bern. de inter. Do. cap. 29. princ. 2. Do not judge your selves by any particular action, or by the frame of your spirit at some sea∣sons; for an hypocrite may some∣times do that which is materially good, as a godly man may some∣times do that which is evil; whereof David, Samson, Peter, and others in Scripture, are sad instances; so a wic∣ked
man may sometimes have his heart in a serious frame, under the smart of some outward affliction, (when senseconvinces them of that, which at other times they are back∣ward to believe) as Psal. 78.34. or under powerfull convictions of the Word, as those compared with the stony ground, Luk. 8.13. So a godly man may sometimes be in a wofull frame, as David, 2 Sa. 11. one would have thought that had never known him before, that he had been a man of a seared conscience, that had sung away care, and banished the fear of God from before his eyes, and Jonah was little better, Jon. 4.9. but we must observe, what is the constant habitual frame of our hearts, and the ordinary carriage of our lives. A godly man in Scripture is described, not by his particular actions, but by his walking, which imports his ordi∣nary course, and the general tenour of his conversation, Ps. 1.1. & 119.1.
Rom. 8.1. Indeed to be frequently overtaken with sin, is an ill sign, yet to determine, how oft a godly man may be overtaken by temptation, or how many sinfull actions are incon∣sistent with sincerity, is as impossible in Divinity, as to determine in Mo∣rality, how many actions go to the acquiring of an habit. In such a case there is much need of a spiritual dis∣cerning, and a prudent weighing of particular circumstances, sorthe ma∣king of a right and safe judgment. 3. In judging our selves, we must have some respect to natural temper and inclinations, and to the tempta∣tions which our condition layes us most open to. A little sugar serves for sweet wines, but there is more required to sweeten that which is more sharp; so, a little grace makes a great shew in some tempers, and a great deal scarce appears in others; as an eminent man said, of one now in Heaven, That he had grace
enough for ten other men, but scarce enough for himself, which he would himself bewail, saying, he had such a crooked nature, that if God had not given him grace, none would have been able to live a day with him. So likewise the more in of∣fensive lives of some men may be imputed rather to the want of tem∣ptations, then to a greater measure of grace. The truth is, a mans sin∣cerity is much discovered, in keep∣ing him from his own iniquity, Psal. 18.23. (Est virtus placitis abstinu∣isse bonis. Ovid.) and overcoming temptations, when he is assaulted therewith, Prov. 24.10. Yet let a man have an equal tincture of su∣pernatural grace in all the affections of his soul; Let the Spirit of God diffuse it self like leaven, indifferent∣ly through the whole lump; yea, let a man bestow also the most care in watching his own heart, in some
particular outgoings of it, he shall notwithstanding find himself most defective in that very thing; and (as Dr Preston rightly observes) those sins are with the most difficul∣ty mortified, which our natural temper doth most dispose us to. Some affections are more predomi∣nant in one age, some in another: There are youthfull lusts, 2 Tim. 2.22. and infirmities more proper to old age, as covetousness, peevishnes, fear, suspicion, &c. So God likewise suits mens tempers many times, to the imploiments which he reserves them for. Moses was the weekest man on earth, Num. 12.3. and so he had need to be, who had such a per∣verse provoking generation of men to deal with. Luther was a fierce hot spirited man, and he was there∣by fitted for the work which he had to do, which was to stand as a bra∣zen wall against the whole world;
and choler is not only Cos ingenii, to whet the wit (as the Philosophers say) but it adds vigour and activity to mens spirits, fitting them for acti∣on, as the sting in the Bee, without which she is but a drone. And I am inclinable to think, that Luther had as much of the grace of meekness, as of charity or bounty; but being of a generous spirit naturally, he would say, he never found the least inclina∣tion to covetousness, whereas his passionate fierceness made his con∣versation very unpleasing, and put poor Melancthon to cry out, Vince animos, iramque tuam, qui caetera vincis. So for temptations, they may make those graces yield, wherein Christians (if in any) do most ex∣cell, as we see in the case of Job. who was an eminent example of pa∣tience, Jam. 5.11. yet we do not
observe in his story that any grace which he had gave out so much as his patience, because that bare the burden and heat of the day; his condition did most exercise that. And this must be observed both in judging our selves, and others; thou perhaps seest more failings in another than in thy self; be it so, and that thou art not partial to thy self, yet this may be, not because thou hast more grace, but because he hath more temptations. 4. Take heed that thy grace do not make thee to think thy self graceless, or at least less gracious then thou art. There are some things which make Christians seem lesse in their own eyes, then they are: and that is the reason why we ordinarily hear those, who may be thought to have the best hearts, making the saddest complaints against themselves. There are ma∣ny
graces, the more a Christian hath of them, the worse he thinks of himself: 1. The more knowledge a Christian hath, the more he sees of the extent of the Law of God, and the more clear apprehension he hath of his duty; and so he sees more of his own defects. We shall see that this made Paul think worse of himself after his conversion, then he did before; if we compare Phil. 3.5, 6. with Rom. 7.9. 2. The more liveliness and tenderness of spirit a Christian hath, the more sensible he is of his corruption; as those who are more tender and delicate, are more troubled at such things as are offensive to them, then those who are of a more dull heavy temper. 3. The more humility a man hath, the meaner thoughts he hath of himself, and of his services. 4. The more love a man hath to Jesus Christ, the more free he is of his service to
him; and, so more affected with his own infirmities, when he falls short of what he hath an heart to do for him. 5. The more the soul bungers and thirsts after righteous∣ness, the less doth any measure of grace seem, which it hath already received: as a covetous man, who thirsts after more wealth, is always complaining of his poverty, and thinks that to be nothing which he hath already. And as the best Chri∣stians do oft thus wrong themselves; so others that have less of these gra∣ces, are prone to think too highly of themselves. Now before I conclude, I must say something in answer to a Question, which will be easily occasioned, by what hath been already spoken. Since we are to try our selves by an adaequate Rule, and by such Evi∣dences as are competent to all justi∣fied persons, and to them only, What
are those proper Characters of a true Christian? I cannot here discourse at large of the several graces of the Spirit, and shew how they may be distinguished from their counter∣seits: yet that I may do something towards the satisfaction of Christi∣ans in this particular, I shall first endeavour to explain the true Na∣ture of saving Faith, and then to discover so far as I am able, what is the genuine temper and disposition of a child of God. For the first, It is that which our salvation depends upon, and I chuse alwayes to describe it, in the words of our common Catéchism, which I would never willingly swerve from, but keep close to, that so Christians may be more secure in entertaining the truth, and free from suspicion of being misguided by the singular notions of a private spirit. Now there it is described, A saving grace,
whereby we receive Jesus-Christ, and rest upon him for salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel. I confess, I do not look upon this as an acu∣rate definition of Faith, properly so called; yet, as consonant to the Scri∣ptures manner of teaching. Divinity being a practical Discipline, the ho∣ly Ghost in Scripture doth not de∣sine things, as a Philosopher, by their genus & differentia, but by their ef∣fects. See the Scriptures definition of wisdom, Job 28.28. of knowledg, Jer. 16.22. of faith, Heb. 11.1. of the fear of God, Pro. 8.13. of the love of God, 1 Jo. 5.3. of Religion, Jam. 1.27. Faith is properly an assent to any thing upon the authority of him that affirms it, and so more particu∣larly, divine Faith is an assent to any truth upon Gods authority: but because it is not so easie to make a right judgment of the acts of the understanding, as they have an exi∣stence
in their Subject, however we may speak something of the differ∣ence of them, as they are in their Idea. The Scripture takes notice of them when they come lower into the Will, and observes what work they make, or what effect they have there, and thereby judges, whether they be right or no. But let me a little explain this description of Faith, that so we may the better understand the nature of it. It is cal∣led a Grace, because it is a gift free∣ly given, Eph. 2.8. a saving grace, because it is one of those things which accompany salvation, Mark 16.16. It is said to be a grace where∣by we receive Jesus Christ. Now I confess I do not see that the place usually alledged for the proof here∣of, Joh. 1.12. doth convincingly prove it, since it may be otherwise expounded: what inconvenience would follow, if we should take the
word receive in a larger sense, as it is used Matth. 10.14. and the words following not exegeticè, as an exposition of what went before, but restrictivè, as a limi∣tation thereof. The like restri∣ction we have, Psal. 145.18. yet Faith may properly be called a re∣ceiving of Jesus Christ, it being the firstact of the Will about the means leading to our end; which act the Schoolmen call Election (hence I suppose Doctor Ames, Rolloc, and others borrow this term, which they make use of in explaining the Nature of Faith,) which they make to be, an acce∣pting of this or that means, or choosing it before others, (by the approbation of the judgment) as best conducing to the attain∣ment of our end. Or to speak more plainly, and properly (which is best,) if we consider Jesus
Christ as the gift of God, offered to us in the Gospel, (as is expres∣sed in the fore-going descripti∣on,) Faith is our receiving of him, accepting of Gods offer, Taking hold on Gods Covenant, striking hands with him, consent∣ing freely that Christ shall be ours. I cannot stand here to ex∣amine how necessary our acce∣ptation is, to the making a thing our own, or a gift properly to us: Or, whether a man may in any case have, not only Jusad rem, or title, but Jus in re, or possession, without his consent or acceptance: remembring the end of my discourse, which such dis∣quisitions would have little ten∣dency to. Vid. Mestrezat. de la Vertu de la Foy. pag. 97. There∣fore to proceed; It is added in this Description of Faith, That it is a resting upon Jesus Christ
for Salvation. The former words do aptly express the first Act of Faith, which is the souls fixing, or pitching upon Christ in its choice, as the only sufficient means of Salvation. These words hold forth the porro esse, (as I may speak) of Faith, or the conti∣nued Act of it, upon the souls former choice. So that as a lear∣ned man, (Doctor Wallis in his most ingenuous answer to the Lord Brook) doth well observe, It is all one whether we make Faith to be a receiving of Christ for our Saviour, or a resting up∣on him for Salvation. Some choose to express it by the for∣mer Act, some by the latter: for the latter doth necessarily suppose the former, and the former im∣mediately inferre the latter, if we consider how Christ is offer∣ed in the Gospel, that is as the
only Saviour, Act. 4.12. and as a sufficient Saviour, Heb. 7.25. But here observe, That by a re∣sting on Jesus Christ, we do not mean a confirmed hope, or a cer∣tain expectation of Salvation by Jesus Christ: This is an effect of assurance, but the leaning, rol∣ling, staying of the soul upon Je∣sus Christ, which we may con∣ceive of, by the notion which the Scripture oft holds it forth under, a looking to him, or ha∣ving our eyes towards him. Read 2 Chron. 20.12. Psal. 121.1. & 123.1, 2. Isai. 45.22. Jonah 2.4. Micha 7.7. This Act the soul may put forth without Assurance. Of the Difference between these two Acts, see Doctor Ward, De Fide Justificante, cap. 8. & 23. And (in English) Doctor Bolton, Of the Nature of Faith, pag. 60, 61. This latter Act is aptly ex∣pressed
by Master Cotton, (a man of much Christian experience) on 1 John 5.10. whose words I shall set down, because they are suited to the capacity and experience of weak Christians. [There is (saith he) a believing on Christ, when the heart doth not yet rest on him, but roll it self on him; and that may be done while the heart is yet in motion; resting is a setled∣nesse of condition, but rolling is an unsetled tumbling about, some∣times one way, and sometimes another: yet such a Christian be∣lieves on Christ, because he is rolling towards him, that so he may lie on him, Psal. 37.5. Com∣mit thy way to the Lord; ac∣cording to the Original it is, Roll thy way upon the Lord, lean thy soul that way, which is done by rolling thy self towards him, that thou mayest rest upon him, Pro. 16.3.
a man may be said to leane on that whereon be is not setled.] And indeed the Hebrews express the Act of Affiance by the word  which signifies to roll, Psal. 22.8. Let the Reader only ob∣serve, that Mr Cotton takes rest∣ing in a stricter sense, than we do in the former description, when he opposeth it to rolling, he understands thereby the Affi∣ance of Hope, which follows As∣surance. To come then to the Question, Dost thou freely accept of Jesus Christ for thy Saviour? Art thou heartily willing to strike hands with God in the Covenant of Grace? And though thou hast not a particular Assurance that Christ will save thee, Dost thou look towards him? Dost thou roll thy self upon him, though unbelieving thoughts re∣turn oft, and presse hard upon
thee? (As a man may roll a burden upon something, and it may return oft upon him again, before he can make it lie.) Thy condition is very hopefull. But here it will be objected, That there are some that for a time believe, and yet fall away, Luk. 8.13. I confesse this case is very difficult, yet I shall give the Objection a fair hearing before I answer it. Indeed I do believe that there is a real intrinsick difference between the first Act of Justifying Faith, and the Faith of a Temporary: Yet ma∣ny times this difference is not discernable by the persons them∣selves which so believe; That you may understand what I mean: Suppose two men under the same affliction, as the Israelites, Psal. 78.31. &c. or both hearing the Word together, as Luke 8.13.
These men may be so wrought upon, as that they may both make the same resolution (as seems to themselves,) with alike seriousness, and without dissi∣mulation, freely taking Christ for their Saviour, or casting themselves upon him for Salva∣tion, they may have the same apprehensions concerning their own Acts themselves, one of these may fall, the other perse∣vere. This is that which hath been long since taught: see Dyke on the Deceitfullnesse of the Heart, Chap. 20. where speak∣ing of the Israelites, Psalm. 78.34. he sayes, They spake as they thought, and meant to doe. See likewise more sully on this, Do∣ctor Jackson, of Faith, Chap. 7. Paragr. 14. And it is general∣ly acknowledged, That there are not only grosse Hypocrites, that
deceive others, but close Hypo∣crites that deceive themselves. But how comes it to passe, that one stands, and another falls? I answer, As it is in colours, two things may appear at first of the same colour, one abides, the other fades. Now the Rea∣son of this is, there is an addi∣tion of some ingredient, which gives the one a more lasting tin∣cture than the other; one is di∣ed in grain, the other hath but an ordinary die. So to those ra∣tional Motives which are the in∣ducements both to the one, and to the other to believe; there is in one, the addition of a spiri∣tual infusion, which gives to one mans Faith a true and abiding tincture; There is a seed of God abiding in him, 1 John 3.9. You will say, If it be thus, How shall we ever come to any Cer∣tainty
concerning our own Con∣dition, if we may be deceived in the Acts of our own souls? If it be said, That we must know the truth of our Faith by the trial of it in standing out against temptations: This is something indeed. But what time must we take for the tryall of our Faith? When may we confirm the truth of it with a probatum est? When shall I know that the worst try∣all is over? Some stood out in the time of Queen Maries per∣secution, which afterwards fell away in time of liberty and pro∣sperity: Joab turned not after Absalom, but he turned after Adonijah. Though I turn not after one temptation, I may after another. Yea a lesse temptation may overcome me after I have stood out against greater, Ad∣versus majora vigilantibus quae∣dam
incautis minuta subrepunt. Aug. As Lot retained his inte∣grity in Sodome, but miscarried when he was only with his own family, Gen. 19.33. And so we must conclude, There is no assu∣rance to be had (without special revelation,) by this means while we are in this life, Dicique bea∣tus, ante obitum nemo, &c. Ha∣ving thus urged the Objection with all its strength. I answer, There is yet another way for the tryall of our Faith, although ma∣ny times in the first Act of Faith, (as Streso observes) the soul is not so deliberate, it doth not stand to debate the matter long, or to form Syllogismes, but pres∣sed with the apprehension of its danger, layes hold on what is next to save it, and flees for re∣suge to the hope that is set be∣fore it: yet afterwards, when it
comes more deliberately to re∣cognize its former Act, (which he is supposed to have opportu∣nity for, who is enquiring after the sincerity of his Faith,) in this recognition or renewing the Act of Faith, there is that which doth clearly difference it from a temporaries Faith. Therefore there are three things which I shall lay down, which may serve both to direct Christians in the exercise of their Faith, and the sre∣quent renewing of their hold on Je∣sus Christ, and to try the sinceri∣ty of Faith, in the renewed Acts of it. First, Sit downe, and count the cost of being the Disciples of Christ, Luk. 14.26. And see in the two fore-going verses the occasion of these words. Con∣sider, That Christ will rule you if he save you; and that his
Laws are not suited to your car∣nall interests, or corrupt lusts: We must take Christ, as he is of∣fered in the Gospel, God hath condescended there, as farre as he will; he cannot be brought to lower termes. Indeed in the first Act of Faith, usually the soul hath chief respect to pardon, as that which it is then most sen∣sible of the want of: the soul therein flees for refuge to Christ, Heb. 6.18. Flees from the wrath to come, Matth. 3.7. But though pardoning grace be Ratio motiva, or the first inducement to bring us to Jesus Christ, yet it must not be ratio terminativa, or that which must bound our de∣sires after him. Here now the Hypocrite fails, when he comes to see what it is to be a Disciple of Christ, he repents of his re∣pentance, and comes off with a
non putâram: Christ had many followers, while they saw his mi∣racles, and he was likely to be made an earthly King, but they turned their backs on him, when they understood the Nature of his service, John 6.16, 60, 66. Many under the lash of afflicti∣ons, or the convictions of the Word, betake themselves to Christ for shelter, but afterwards despise the simplicity of the Go∣spel, and the strictnesse of holi∣nsse; as one that in a storme takes shelter in a Cottage, where he would not be afterwards per∣swaded to dwell; or borrows a Coat, which after the showr is over he would scorn to wear. But Paul, when he came to make a recognition of his former act, Phil. 3.7, 8. He stands to his former choice and judgement, Those things (saith he) that
were gain to me, I counted losse for Christ: Yea, doubtlesse, and I doe count all things losse, &c. Secondly, Bring your wills to a firm determinate resolution, Ps. 119.106. Acts 11.23. When men have not brought their wills to this consistency, they are like fluid bodies, which, as we say, Facilè continentur alienis termi∣nis, do yield to the form or fi∣gure of every vessel which they are put into. So these double∣minded men are unstable as wa∣ter, like Reuben, Gen. 49.4. fa∣shioning themselves to every oc∣currence, which they meet with, receiving the impression of eve∣ry thing that is applied to them; when the Word comes with pow∣er upon their souls, they are quite born down with it, and are all for Christ; and when the world
and sinne have an opportunity to set upon them, they yeeld thereto. This was (as Maldo∣nate saith) the fault of the sto∣ny ground, they had not Mag∣nam & profundam voluntatem: such unstable men invite tem∣ptations, whereas a firm resolu∣tion prevents them; it discou∣rages the importunity of men, Acts 21.14. Yea, It puts Satan to flight, James 4.7. Vid. Guil. Parisiens. de Tentat. & Resest. prine. Thirdly, Commit the keeping of your souls to God in well-do∣ing, 1 Pet. 4.18. None fitter than Peter to give this counsell, who had found by experience, how vain it is to make resoluti∣ons in our own strength, Matth. 26.33, &c. We must not on∣ly believe on Christ for Salvati∣on, but to be k by his power
to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. and God will not fail such as do thus wait on him, Isai. 40.28. though others (that like young men are most confident of their own strength) may fall. Now then, Canst thou in sincerity goe to God, and say? Lord, I know, that it is no easie matter to deny my self, to cut off my right hand, to pluck out my right eye, to part with those sinnes which are most usefull, most dear to me; yet this I must do, if I will be the Disciple of Christ; yet having counted both the losse and the gain, which I shall thereby have, I freely choose Christ for my por∣tion, let him do what he will with me, and bring me to Hea∣ven which way seems good to him; I am resolved to cleave to him, through the assistance of thy grace, Who (though I am not
able to think any thing of my self, yet) art able to keep that good thing which I commit to thee, 2 Tim. 1.12. I know not what a soul should do more in the act of Faith, if ten Heavens de∣pended upon it. I will very briefly adde some∣thing of the temper of a gracious soul, 1. It hath a true love to Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22. Joh. 14.21. and this is sooner discer∣ned by the inward inclination and affections of the heart, than the outward actions of the life: Dost thou breathe after more inward communion with him? Dost thou lament inwardly after him? Though it may be thou hast not such a melting spirit as Mr Brad∣ford, who could sit and weep at Dinner, till the tears fell on his trencher, because he could love God no more, yet is it a reall
trouble to thee, that thou canst love him no more, nor do him better service? Such a disposi∣tion I am sure cannot be with∣out active endeavours: but these are discoveries of a Divine Na∣ture. 2. A gracious soul is care∣full to please God, though it doth not know whether God love it, or no; This is a true filial dispo∣sition, when a Child is willing to please its Father, and is ready to do any thing wherein it may be serviceable to him, though its Father: will not (it may be) give it a good look, nor take any no∣tice of it: if a soul find this di∣sposition in it self, let it stay it self upon its God, hold thy self by him, he bids thee, he will not cast thee off. Read Isai. 50.10. 3. A Child of God hates sinne, God hates it, Jer. 44.4. and he that is joyned to the Lord is one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.16. And this is discovered in a general aversi∣on from all sinne, hatred is a∣gainst the whole kind: Some men fear sinne, but they do not hate it, many are afraid to be where some Creatures are, lest they should do them hurt; but if they are sure that they are fast chained, they are well enough; but where there is an Antipathy, such cannot endure to be near those Creatures, though they are sure they cannot hurt them: So many are afraid of such sinnes as may damn them, or bring them to shame, or some other incon∣venience in this world; but a godly man abhorres his secret cor∣ruptions, which he knows the best that go to Heaven are trou∣bled with, whilst they are here, and which he knows will not hinder his worldly interest; or
as others aptly illustrate it, many are afraid to touch a cole when it is hot, for fear of burning them: but those who are more curious cannot endure to touch it when it is cold, least it should black them: A wicked man is afraid to meddle with such sins as may damn him; a godly man is offen∣ded with such sins as may defile him. Thus, Reader, I have en∣deavoured to help thee in this great work; but if thou dost not set thy self with all diligence here∣to, my labour is in vain: Yea, so it will be, unless the Lord set in by his own Spirit, to put for∣ward the same. Though the Pro∣phet had told David plainly, That the Lord had put away his sinne, 2 Sam. 12.13. that would not si∣lence the clamours of a guilty con∣science, nor quiet and calm his troubled spirit, but he must sue
to God, to restore to him the joy of his salvation, Psal. 51.12. Some thoughts have offer'd themselves to me of inserting in this Edition some practical cases, which might be occasioned by what is supposed in the fore-going Trea∣tise, and is now more generally re∣ceived amongst Protestants then formerly, viz. That Assurance doth not always follow upon Faith, much less constitute it? Hereup∣on it might be justly questioned, How Christians that want Assu∣rance can pray in Faith, come boldly to the throne of grace, approach with comfort to the Lords Table, rejoyce alwayes in the Lord? &c. which seem to be duties incumbent on every Christian: But I have put off such thoughts at present, intending to reserve these, with many other things, for another Treatise, which
I shall  impart to the world, as I shall see occasion, and have opportunity, and end this matter with the desire of Bernard, Med. cap. 5. Cum coram Deo in lachry∣mis te maceraveris precor te, ut memor sis mei, when thou affli∣ctest thy self in tears before the Lord, I pray thee remember me, least when I have written and preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. FINIS.
ERRATA. EPist. Ded. p. 5. l. 12. for 9. r. 19. p. 7. l. 8. r. Psal. 73.26. p. 8. l. 1. r. . there is somewhere in the Epistle examples for example. p. 11. l. 19. for si. r. sic. p. 28. l. 14. r. Psal. 25.15. p. 30. l. 4. r. may. p. 31. l. 14. r. 1 Cor. 6.20. p. 39. l. 21. r. capiunt. p. 53. l. 10. r. soyl. p. 55. l. 1. dele some. p. 55. some∣thing is misplaced: after Mal 3.16. adde Ita fabulantur, &c. to the second head.
