M1732 E637_16 99865735 117985
A further Discovery of the Mystery of the last times; As an Addition to a little Book, called Some Discoveries of the Mystery of the last Times, bordering upon the Coming of the Lord Jesus. Set forth for the good of all men; but especially of those who in these dissenting times (wherein Ephraim envieth Juda, and Juda vexeth Ephraim) know not where to settle themselves, or to what society of Christians to joyn themselves: wherein is (as simply and plainly, as the Author was able to open those mysterious Scriptures quoted in this following Treatise) shewed the cause of all our divisions and con∣tentions about matters pettaining to Form and Order in the Church of Jesus Christ; and wherein is moderately proved from those Scriptures these particulars. 1. The flourishing and building condition of the Church of Jesus Christ in the time of the Gospel. 2. The slumbring or declining condition of the state of the said Church. 3. The sleepy or dead condition (in respect of outward order) of the said Church, with an Answer to all the objections the Author hath met with touching this subject. 4. That there is to be a most glorious Restoring of the said Church by the Lord Je∣sus himself. 5. That this Restoring will be most sudden and unexpected. 6. Is shewed the severall forms of Governments, which have been enemies unto the people of the Lord Jesus in these severall dispensations; viz. the Dragon, the Beast which did rise out of the sea, the Beast that did rise out of the earth; with the time of prevailing of each Government. 7. Lastly, That the Lord Jesus will by himself destroy all those enemies, and deliver his people, when the Restoration of all things shall be. Hos. 2, 2. 3. Plead with your mother, plead, for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband; let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from be∣tween her breasts; Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born, and make her as a wildernes; and set her as a dry land, and slay her with thirst. Rev. 2. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first work, or else I will come quickly unto thee, and will remove thy Candle stick out of his place, ex∣cept thou repent. Ezek. 16. 3. And say, Thus saith the Lord unto Jerusalem, thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite. Eph. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. Hos. 2. 14. Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wildernesse, and speak comfortably unto her. Rev. 12. 14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might flee into the wilderness unto her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent. Rev. 16. 15. Behold, I come as a thief; blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his gar∣ments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. London, Printed for W. Roybould, at the Unicorn in Paul's Church-yard. 1651.
The Epistle to the Reader. Christian Reader; THou shalt know, that some twenty months since there came out under my name a little Book, in∣tituled, Some Discoveries of the Mysteries of the last Times; which coming into the hands of the men for whom principally it was intended, they, in stead of giving moderate Reasons a∣gainst it, that so the Truth might be found in these disputing times, (wherein every man al∣most shews his judgment in one sort or other, and was the thing I aimed at in publishing of it) began, some of them at the least, to vilifie both me and the work that I had set forth, that it was a weak and simple thing, and not worth the reading; and for my person, as I was credibly informed, it was said, That they thought I did it against my Conscience; a sin, if in me indeed, against the holy Ghost; so unchari∣table were they towards me. Again, there was another sont of men which seemed to approve of the Work; But, say they, You have laid down your judgment so darkly and obscurely, that we are not able to reach your meaning: Which things considered, there came into my thoughts two main ends for which man was created; the one was, to glorifie God his Maker; the other, to be serviceable to all men in his generation: Upon the account of which two ends, but especially of the later, I began to con∣sider, that I was a debter both to the wise and unwise: Therefore to the wise I thus say, that if there be any thing in this following Treatise, that is worth taking notice of, as it is much there should be nothing; that they would esteem it, not according to the worth of the Author, or the manner of the delivery of it, which are both mean and of no esteem; but according to the truth of the thing; Especially, insomuch as Moses being indued with an extraordinary spirit, did not despise the counsell of Jethro, which was a stranger to the Common wealth of Israel: and forasmuch as it pleased God to reveal to shepherds those things which were hid from the
great Rabbins and learned men of that time, as may be seen in the Gospel. And to the unwise I say (If there be any more unwise then my self;) that it pities me to see how we contend for the body, untill we well nigh lose the spirit; how earnest we are for shadows, which must in their due time passe away, untill we endanger to lose the substance; how we quarrel for form and discipline; yea unto bloud, in destroying one another; as hath been seen in this nation, and ought to be lamented, untill we almost for∣get that great and new Commandment, which is the law of Love; and all under pretence of Reforming the Church of Jesus Christ: which upon due consideration made me stand amazed; to see such offences committed amongst Christians in profession, and as seemed zealous on both parts; until entring into a most serious search into the prophesies of the last times, not without the outward means of prayer, and humility, and sincere de∣sire to find out the cause; and knowing that the Lord had promised to reveal his secrets to the humble, upon which I found, and I trust by some brea∣things of the Spirit of God, that these things were foretold; and that Ephra∣im should envy Juda, and Juda vex Ephraim; and that by negative con∣sequence, they should hurt and destroy in the mountain of Gods holiness; and that until there come a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a branch grow out of his root; at which time, the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea; and then the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb; and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, & the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little Child shal lead them; and then there will be such a judg, as shall not execute Judg∣ment after the sight of the Eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his Eares; but with righteousness shall he judg the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the Earth; and he shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked; Isaiah the 11. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 13. untill which time the defenced City shall be desolate, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness; there shall the Calfe feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof; Isaiah 27. 10. Now to both the wise and unwise I say, First, what I have done, is in love to the truth, and to all men; not envying the happiness of any in their wayes of worship, if they find what they professe; but I fear they build again the things which God will have destroyed; and secondly, to be true to the principles within me; that is, to discover the talent which God hath lent me, and put it out to profit, that when the Lord comes he might have his own with van∣tage: And to cleer my self that I have done it in love, I appeal to the men of every profession that have any commerce with me; if they find any
spirit of evill against them in my carriage towards them; but alwayes lo∣ving the Image of God in any of them. I write not this to advance my re∣putation, but to take off all prejudice from my person; that so my worke may take the better effect. Thirdly, in the following Treatise I have not built upon another mans foundation; that is, discoursed of things made ready to my hand; but I have, for the most part, opened such Scriptures as I never met with any exposition, to my best memory, of them; and though I could have wished some abler pen might have opened them, that had been better furnished with gifts and learning, and time convenient for the per∣formance of so weighty a task, being exceeding unfitting for such a labour; yet nevertheless, considering the great necessity of the matter, being a thing of great weight, and not looked into; namely, how the Lord would have his people walk in their waiting for his coming in the last times, wherein I beseech thee to consider, that I have not laid down my grounds and Reasons as infallible verities; but propounding them to the Judgment of all men to examine, with all the meekness I could, fearing to give offence, either to God, or to the Christian in any dispensation; and I hope it will be accepted accordingly. Thus I have made an Apology for my person and practise. Now I come to make an Apologie to the entrance of the matter of my Treatise; therfore, Christian Reader, I desire thou wouldst seriously consider these few particulars. First, that the Lord having establish'd Circumcision in the generation of Abraham; and upon this penalty, that the soul whose foreskin was not circumcised, should be cut off from his people, Gen. 17. 14. yet nevertheless, in case of necessity, the Children of Israel were tolerated tou∣ching this duty during their travell in the wilderness; for the space of forty years, as may be seen, Joshua 3. 5. So likewise, though the Lord Je∣sus did establish the ordinances to be continued in his Church by way of succession; yet nevertheless, they being polluted, and in case of necessity, he will doubtless bear with his people, though they cannot practise ordi∣nances in their purity; especially there being no word for their restoring in that pure way wherein they were delivered. Secondly, the Lord having commanded Moses to make all things after the pattern shewed to him in the mount, touching the sanctuary, Exodus. 25. 40. And also the pattern of the temple unto David, 1 Chron. 28. 11. and commanded the practice of the worship unto the Children of Is∣rael in their generations; yet in case of necessity, when the temple was destroyed, and the people captivated, he bears with them touching those things; even now doubtlesse though the Lord did command his people to walk
in Gospel order untill his Appearing; yet nevertheless they being captivated, and having lost their power to Reform; he bears with them, though they cannot practise ordinances in their purity. Thirdly, that as the fews in the time of the standing of the temple did presume upon the promise of Gods presence unto that place, yea though their works were most wicked; Crying, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, Jeremiah 7. 4. Even so it is well known, how the Catholicks have boasted of the Church of Jesus Christ, that the gates of hell should not prevail against it, applying it to the Church of Rome; yea though their works were most wicked; And I fear me, in all our Refor∣mations we are apt to stick too much to outward order, contenting our selves if we have but the form, and want the substance; and so sud∣denly fall to loosnesse; as the experience of these few years have made ap∣parent. Fourthly, as the Jews in the time of the standing of the temple were exceeding zealous of their outward ceremonies, and neglected the weigh∣tier matters of the law; as Judgment, and mercy, as may be seen Mat. 23. 23. Even so it is to be feared, that in the time of the Gospel we are more zealous of form and order, then of that great commandment of love, which is the fulfilling of the Law. Fifthly, that as the Jews were reproved by our Saviour, Mat. 16. 3. Saying, O ye hypocrites, you can discern the face of the skie; and can∣not you discern the signes of the times? Even so we in this age are bet∣ter able to discern what was done in the first age of the Church in respect of outward order; yet neglecting the inward graces of the spirit, as it was then; but noting the order that was among the Christians, in that time, and con∣tending for it now unto bloud, and never regard the diverse dispensations wherein the Lord is pleased to shew himself unto his people in these last ages; nor once to examine the prophesies of the last times, what shall be done then; but still urging for forme, and order in outward things, till we endanger losing the life of Religion, namely, Faith and a good Con∣science. Sixthly, that as the Jews in contending to keep up their Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, and temple, when the glory was departed from that ministra∣tion; and in striving so long about it, untill their City and Temple was destroyed, and themselves scattered among the nations, the prophesies be∣ing fulfilled upon them; Even so we in this age, strive so much for form and order in outward things, when we may plainly see the glory to be departed from it, as it was in the first Gospell times, until we shall give such an encouragement to the rising of the beast out of the Earth; (For we not
being content with the Earths helping the woman, that is, in swallowing the floud up, which the serpent had cast out of his mouth to carry the wo∣man away, which is now well aswaged, blessed be God therefore,) that it is to be feared that our Contentions will be a means to ruine our selves, and so the beast rise and bring us into bondage to worship his Image, or else to be killed; for the Lord may for a punishment unto us, for our dissention in matters perteining to outward order, stir up such as may give power to the Image of the beast, that the Image of the beast may both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the beast, should be killed. Seventhly, gentle Reader, If none of these Scriptures move thee (which I have quoted in this following treatise) to believe the people of the Lord Jesus must lie in these severall dispensations, before the generall Restoration of all things by the Lord Jesus himself, then let the experi∣ence of the times perswade thee; For if thou diligently consider of the times, thou shalt find that the Church flourished for a time, it then declined or slumbred for another time, the servants have been awake for another time; and for the Jews, they have been asleep or dead in respect of any temple and worship for many ages; and there is a time for the people of the Lord Jesus to be asleep or dead, Matthew 25. 5. in respect of Gospel order, before the great restoring, which we ought with much earnestness to cry unto the Lord for; and this the Scriptures which I have alledged do abun∣dantly prove in my sense; which I am forced to believe, untill I see a bet∣ter given. Eightly, all that I shall desire of thee, will be but this; all those Reasons considered in this following Treatise, that it may but worke some moderate conformity among Christians; or at least, that enmity and bitterness may be laid aside among Christians in profession, and the edge of hatred abated amongst them, in resisting one another unto bloud, for matter pertaining to form and discipline in the Church of Jesus Christ; and let Christians remember, that if what they profess be truth, that it is of a prevailing nature, and will stand when Errour falls; and let them remember that Gamaliels Counsell will prove true; that if it be of God, it will stand in spite of all opposition; and if it be not, it will fall, though we strive never so much to hold it up. Ninthly, Christian Reader, I shall desire thee, that if thou find any thing of God in this following treatise, then let him have the glory, which is worthy of it; and let me have thy prayer that have need of it: and if in this worke God be but so much glorified, as it be but to the
setling of our soules that were distracted, by means of our distem∣pers and contentions about Religion, I have my reward. Lastly, I desire thee Christian Reader, whosoever thou art, though the greatest lover of order in this time of disorder, that if thou see that I have erred in the body of this Treatise, or in any branch thereof, that if thou know my face, or canst with conveniency come to the knowledg of me, that thou wouldst admonish me of it; and if thou know me not, that thou wouldest make it appear wherin I have erred; and if it arise to such a sum, as thou thinkest is worthy of an answer, I promise thee by the word of a Christian that I will (to use Job's expression in Job 31. 36.) take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto me; and if it weigh too heavy for me, that is, if I be not able to reply to it by arguments drawn from Scrip∣ture Rule, then I promise thee by the same word, that I wil, God assisting me, as publickly revoke what I have done, as I have now publickly divulged this in print; however, I shall take thine admonition as an oyntment to my head, and count the stripes of a friend better then the kisses of an enemy. And so leaving thee to the protection of the Almighty, and wishing thee as much happiness both of body and soul, as I would wish my self, I remain thine in the Lord in the duties of Christianity, RICHARD MERCER.
A further Discovery of the Mystery of the last Times, &c. THat great Creatour and Governour of all things, the mighty God, which hath in diverse manners and Administrations spoke unto the fathers by the Prophets, hath in this last age spoken unto us by his Son, this Son which is the Lord Jesus, hath also spoken unto us by him∣self, and by his Apostles, in these last ages in divers manners and administrations, which is that Prophet which we ought to hear in all things, Deut. 18. 15. and to observe his word revealed unto us; and to follow him in all his wayes and dispensations, in which he delivereth himselfe unto his people; For the cleering of which, and to shew the divers wayes of the Lord in his making out of himselfe unto his people: I shall propound these severall particulars unto the consideration of all men. First, That there is a building and flourishing condition of the Church of Jesus Christ in the time of the Gospel. Secondly, That there is a declining and falling off, or slumbring condition of the said Church. Thirdly, That there is a sleepy, or dead condition of all the outward face of the said Church. Fourthly, That there is to be a most glorious restoring of the said Church, by the Lord Jesus himself. Fifthly, That this Restoring will be most sudden and unexpected. Sixthly, I shall shew, (according to the light I have received) the severall formes and goverments in severall ages which shall be enemies unto the people of the Lord Je∣sus in these severall administrations which the Lord Jesus doth suffer his people to ly under. Lastly, That the Lord Jesus will by himself destroy all those Enemies of his people at his next appearing, without the help of any humane power. Now for my more orderly proceeding in the cleering of the truth of these particulars I shall handle them as they ly in order: and shall answer all the objections I have heard made against any of them. And therefore of the first, That there is a building and flourishing condition of the Church of Jesus Christ in the time of the Gospel, is a truth so cleer, as it needs no clee∣ring; for all men know that it did abundantly flourish in the first Gospell times: but for time how long, it will be necessary to treat of; therefore pray note, I conceive the Church did flourish and spread during the time of our Saviour and his Apostles, and during the time of the ten persecutions, untill the time of Constantine the first Chri∣stian Emperour; in all which time, notwithstanding the Church was persecuted and afflicted with sundry miseries, yet by the grace of Christ Jesus she did continually flourish, to the spreading of her self to the utmost parts of the world; and this is that
time, as I conceive, of that battell which was in heaven, in which the great dragon was cast out, that old Serpent called the divel, which deceives the whole world, he was cast into the earth; and his angels were cast out with him, Rev. 12. 9. and this flourishing condition of the people of the Lord Jesus is fully set forth in those seve∣rall places, Rev. 6. 2. & 11. 1. & 12. 1, 2. in all which places there is mention made of a building and increasing condition of the Church of the Lord Jesus; and to this par∣ticular I have met with no objection. But secondly, That the Church did by degrees decline and fall into a slumbring con∣dition, is a truth which needs some cleering: therefore pray mind; our Saviour Mat. 13. 25. speaks of the servants being a sleep; and in his 25 Chapter, and 5th verse he speaks, that while the bridegroome tarried, all slumbred and slept; which cleerly shews, that there was a time in which the peace and tranquility of the Church by that Riches which did come into her by means of Constantine the first Christian Em∣perour, did cause her to be negligent, and to forget her watchfulness, and by de∣grees, to suffer Antichrist to get possession of her; and this is set forth by Saint Paul 2 Thes. 2. 3. where speaking of the day of Christ, he saith that that day shall not come except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdi∣tion; and is further set forth, though mystically, Rev. 8. in the sounding of the 2. 3. 4 and 5 trumpets. I shall speak of the trumpets as they ly in order, where in the 8. verse it is said, And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the Sea, and the third part of the Sea became bloud; and the third part of the Creatures which were in the Sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed; which, as I conceive, at the sounding of the second trumpet the Roman Empire under Constantine being the great mountain (which is a phrase usuall in Scripture) was cast into the sea; that is, as I conceive, into the Church; which is com∣pared unto the sea, by reason of the many afflictions, which like waves follow one in the neck of another, burning with zeale like fire; and the same Emperour granting such priviledges unto the Churches, as immediately the third part of the Creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroy∣ed; that is, the third part of the particular Churches of Jesus Christ began to fall away, and decline from the truth of the Gospel, by means of that outward peace and riches which now they had gained in the world by favour of Princes towards them. But it may be asked this question; what proofe I have to compare the Churches to ships? To which I answer, that Isaiah in the 33. Chapter of his prophesie, com∣pares the Church to a ship, which will be a sufficient answer, as I conceive. And then in the tenth verse it is said, And the third Angell sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the Rivers and the fountains of water; and the name of the star is called Wormwood; and the third part of the waters became wormwood, and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter; which, as I conceive, the starr was the Bishop of Rome, beginning to a∣postate, and by degrees to corrupt the Scripture with his false glosse and corrupt do∣ctrine; in so much, as many seeming Christians died of the waters; that is, of the corrupt glosse and false interpretation of the Scripture. And then at the sounding of the fourth Trumpet, it is said, And the third part of the Sun was smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the stars, so as the third part of them was darkned; and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise; that is, as I conceive, the third part of the spirit began to be darkened in respect of its ope∣ration unto the Lords people, as it was in the first Gospel times, that is, in respect of
those miracles and gifts of the spirit which the former Christians were indued with; and the ordinances like unto the Moon, which received their light from the sun or spi∣rit, began to be corrupted with mens traditions for a third part of them; and the third part of the eminent Christians began to lose their beauty and luster wherein they shi∣ned unto the Church; and the day and night not shining for a third part, I take to bethe Church in generall losing the third part of her beauty; in all which places is laid down, though mystically, the declining condition of the Lords people; and how by degrees the people of the Lord Jesus did fall to a slumbring condition, and did suffer them∣selves to fall off from the integrity of the Gospel. And to this also I have met with no objections, being so known as that it is scarce denied by any man, except it be by Chatholicks. I shall now come to speake of that third particular, namely, That sleepy or dead con∣dition of the people of the Lord Jesus; and for proof of this, pray take notice of these pla∣ces, (for to this condition almost all the Prophets bear witness) namely, Isaiah. 6. 13. the Prophet compare the Church unto a teyl-tree or an oak in winter time, when they cast their leaves; shewing that the deadness of this condition of Gods people will be such, as it will have no outward beauty, but be like a tree in winter time without leaves; yet nevertheless it shall have its substance in it, for the holy seed shall be the sub∣stance thereof. So likewise Isaiah the 10. 25. and 28. 22. the prophet fore-tels that there shall be a consumption in the midst of the land; that is, as I conceive, a sleepiness or deadness upon the outward face of all the Administrations: Likewise in Cha. 32. 13 the prophet foretels, that upon the Land of my people, speaking in the person of God, shall come up bryers and thornes; yea upon all the houses of joy, in the joyous City; and then in the 14. verse he shews how it shall come to passe, that is, because the palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the Cities shall be left, the forts and towers (which I take mystically to signifie the Churches) shall be for dens for ever, a ioy of wild asses, a pa∣sture of flocks; And in the 15. verse he shews the time how long it shall be; which is, untill the spirit shall be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruit∣full field, and the fruitfull field be counted as a forrest: thus much for Isaiah. Now let us here what the Prophet Ezekiel doth speak concerning this matter; for in Chap. 34. 12. speaking of this condition of the people of God, he compares the time therof to a cloudy and dark day wherin the people of the Lord were scattered; so likewise in his 37. Chapter and 11. verse the Prophet brings the people of God complaining, saying, behold our bones are dry, and our hope is lost, we are cut off, for our parts. They acknowledged that they had lain so long in captivity, and scattered among the na∣tions, that they began to doubt of the promises of God for their restoring: And then in the 12. verse he saith, in answer to their complaint, Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come out of your graves; which shews that they were in a dead condition; and also it shews plainely that all this time they were out of order, as touching the worship, or else as touching any Gospel order: Thus far Ezekiel. Daniell in Chapter 7. 25. speaking of that little horn, which I take to be Anti∣christ, that he should think to change times and Lawes, and they should be given into his hands; that is, as I conceive, he should have power to change the times and lawes, which are the ordinances of the Gospel, and to sit in the temple of God, shewing him∣self as if he were God; and to deaden all the outward worship of God, by chang∣ing the ordinances of God: the like to this effect the same prophet, speaking of the pre∣vailing power of Antichrist over the Church of Jesus Christ, in the last times, in chap. 11. 45. saith, He shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas, in the glorious
holy mountain: And thus much for the prophet Daniel, to confirm this thing. Now for the prophet Hosea in Chap 2. 3. of his prophesie; where in the person of God he expostulating with his people, threatens to strip her naked, and set her as in the day in which she was born, and make her like a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst: and then in the 14. verse compared with Ezekiel 20. 35. and Rev. 12. 14. the judgment is fulfilled upon her for her sins. Where pray mark in the Judg∣ment which is threatned upon this people, if they did not repent, the Lord tels them by his prophet that he would make her like a wilderness and dry land; and it is added, and set her as in the day when she was born; now how was it with the people of God in the day before they were born? I mean that new birth, being born by their calling out of the world, being applied to Israell after the flesh, or Israel after the spirit: As for Israel after the flesh, the prophet Ezekiel sets forth their condition in Chapter 16. 3 where he saith, thy birth and thy nativity was of the land of Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite; shewing that there was little difference be∣tween the gentiles and them, untill they were separated asunder by his love towards them, and by that outward order, as Circumcision and Sacrifices, and the worship of the law. So likewise in respect of Israel after the spirit, there was no difference be∣tween the beleevers and unbeleevers untill the Lord called them out by the preaching of the Gospel; as is cleer by all the Epistles of the Apostles unto the severall Chur∣ches: And thus much for Hosea touching this thing. The like hath the prophet A∣mos, speaking of this sleepy or dead condition in respect of outward order, in his 8. chapter, and 9, 10, 11, 12 verses, where in the former part of the chapter, having set before the people their sins and wickednesses, and their oppressions of the poor; he saith in the 9. verse, And it shall come to passe in that day, speaking of the bloudy day, saith the Lord God, that I will cause the Sun to go down at noone, and I will dar∣ken the Earth in the cleer day; and I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentations; and then in the 11 verse it is said, Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will send a famine in the Land, not a famine of bread, or a thirst of water; but of hearing the word of the Lord; and they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North, even unto the East; they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. Lo here friends, what can be more plainly spoken then this prophet speaks of that cloudy day and dark? wherein, as the prophet Micah in chapter 3. 6. and the Sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them; Implying thus much, that in the last ages of the world, during the death of the witnesses, and the time and times and half time, there shall be no appearances of God by gifts and ordinances, but all things in respect of the outward administrations shall be dead and in a barren condition about the woman, that is, the Church in this, dead and sleepy condition of the Lords people. To the like matter the same prophet saith in chapter 9. 9. where he saith, For loe, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, as corn is sifted in a sieve; which sheweth their dispersi∣on and captivity among the nations, without any order in respect of Kingdome and Priesthood, or injoying God in his ordinances in the purity of them: And so much for the prophet Amos. Now for the Prophet Micah, pray hear what he saith con∣cerning this condition of the Lords people in cha. 2. 10. where speaking in the per∣son of God, saith, Arise and depart, for this is not your rest: Why? what is the matter? he saith, because it is polluted, it shall destroy you with a sore destruction; shew∣ing, that their polluting of the ordinances of God was the cause of their destruction and captivity; for he saith in the 12. verse, I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee, I will surely gather the remnant of Israel. The like is said to the same effect in chap.
3. 12. speaking of the cruelty of the Princes, and falsness of the Prophets, he saith, Therefore shall Sion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forrest; thereby shewing the de∣solations which should lie upon all the face of the outward administrations. So like∣wise the same Prophet in his 7. chapter and first verse, speaking in the person of the Church in her complaint, saith, Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grape-gleaning of the vintage, there is no cluster to eat; my soul desired the first ripe fruit; thereby shewing, that in the last times the people of God should be like the summer gatherings, and that there should be no cluster, that is, no assembly or Church congregated together in any Gospel order; but that they should be scattered amongst the Antichristian state, as is cleer in the 2 verse, where it's said, The good man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright amongst men; they all lie in wait for bloud, they bunt every man his brother with a net. And thus much for the Prophet Micah. Now pray hear what the Prophet Zephaniah saith touching this day, or the time of this dispensation of the Lords people; in his first chapter and 15. verse he saith, That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distresse, a day of wast∣ness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darknes: and then in the 17. verse, he saith, I will bring distresse upon men, that they shal walk like blind men; and the reason is given, because they have finned against the Lord. Now heare what the Prophet Zechariah saith touching this dead time of the Lords people, in chapter 14. 5, 6. he saith, speaking of the last times, And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee as ye fled from before the earth-quake in the dayes of Uzziah King of Juda; And then in the sixth verse, it is said, And in that day the light shall not be cleer nor darke, but it shall be one day known unto the Lord; not day nor night, but it shall come to passe that at Eve∣ning time it shall be light; Thereby shewing, that in this gloomy day the people of God shall be in darkness in respect of the light of the spirit, compared to the sun, as it was in the first Gospel times; and all outward administrations shall in that day be darkened upon them. And thus much for proofe from the Prophesies in the old Testament of this sleepy or dead condition of the people of the Lord Jesus in the last times; in which I have quoted but few of the many places which speak of the de∣solating of the outward administrations of the Lords people, and the withdrawing of his spirit, and captivating of his people among the nations and antichristian state, be∣fore that bright day of the Lords appearing to deliver them out of their bondage and captivity, in which the Earth shall be filled with the knowledg of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. I shall now proceed, as the Lord shall enable me, to prove the truth of this sleepy or dead condition from the new Testament; therefore pray mind: our Saviour Mat. the 25 in the parable of the ten virgins, saith, While the bridegroome tarried, all slumbred and slept, thereby shewing that when the bridegroom should appear, the people of the Lord Jesus should be asleep, as touching any outward worship distinct from other Professors: The like also doth the Lord Jesus foretell, Matth. 24. 15. where he saith, When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, then let them that be in Judea flee unto the mountains; that is, as I conceive, when you see all the outward worship polluted, then shift for your selves into the mountains, as the Jews were to shift for themselves into the mountains of the earth, or among the nations of the earth: and those mountains unto which those Christians are ex∣horted to flee unto, I conceive to be the mountains of the Protestant Churches; for as Rome may be accounted a great mountain; so the Protestant Churches may be
termed lesser mountains, unto which the people of the Lord are exhorted to flee. So also he saith in ver. 29. speaking of the darkness of the last times before his appear∣ing, The Sun shall be darkned, and the Moon shall not give her light, the Starrs shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken: thereby shewing the darkness which shall be upon the outward Administrations of the Gospel. So likewise in the 37, 38, 39, 40, 41 verses, speaking of the dark times at his appearing, As it was in the dayes of Noe, so shall it be in the day when the Son of man shall be revealed; then shall two be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other left; two women shall be grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken, the other shall be left: Implying thus much, when the Lord shall appear, all things shall be in a mingled condition, and the people of the Lord Jesus in the same work with the world, and no such difference as is preten∣ded by gifts and ordinances. So in Luke 18. 8. Our Saviour in his exhortation un∣to his disciples to watch and pray, foretels that the darknesse will be such before his bright appearing, that he puts this question; for, saith he, Neverthelesse, when the Son of man cometh, shall he finde faith on the earth? And if faith be so scanty, then doubtless the ordinances in their purity. So in Luke 17. 22. our Saviour tells his disciples, The dayes will come when you shall desire to see one of the dayes of the Son of man, and you shall not see it: which shews, that his people should desire to walk in Gospel order; but saith he, you shall not see it. So the Apostle Paul, 2 Thess. 2. 3. where he saith, Let no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposeth, and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself as if he were God: That is, as I conceive, in sitting and ruling in the Church of God, and defiling all the whole worship of God; so that by degrees the Son or Spirit forsakes that worship, and so the people of the Lord Je∣sus are asleep or dead in respect of that outward order which was in the first Gospel times, by gifts and ordinances in their purity; which is cleer from the 7. verse, where it is said, For the mystery of iniquity doth already work; onely he who now letteth will let, untill he be taken away: that is, as I conceive, untill the Lord have called back all the outgoings of his Spirit from the outward administrations of the Ordinances. And for the cleering of this to be a truth, pray look back unto the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 10. 18. where it is said, Then the glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the Cherubims. And then in the 23d verse of the 11th chapter, it is said, And the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the City, and stood upon the mountain which was on the East side of the City. So that the glory of the Lord was now departed for the sins of his people, from all that outward worship; which is that sleepy or dead condition which we are now treating of. The like we have to the same purpose Rev. 9. 1. when St John saw a starr which was fallen from heaven; which starr I take to be that starr which fell from heaven in the 8th chapter and 10th verse, which I take to be the Bishop of Rome; and, as saith the text, to him was given the key of the bottomlesse pit; and he opened the bottomlesse pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air was darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit: that is, as I conceive, the spirit and whole worship of Jesus Christ, compared to the air, wherein the saints lived spiritually, as their bodies lived in the air naturally: so that now all the outward worship of God is darkened, and his people are asleep or dead in respect of outward order. To the like purpose you have Rev. 11. 2. where the Angel saith, But the Court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not, for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two monthes; thereby shewing, that the ordinances, which I take
to be the outward Court, should be defiled by men, which are gentiles in manners, and to be trodden down, and the ordinances to be polluted, and the holy City to be trodden under feet forty and two months, during the dead condition of the people of the Lord Jesus. Another text to the same purpose you have Rev. 11. 7. where spea∣king of the witnesses, he saith, And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that doth ascend ont of the bottomless pit shall make war with them, and shall over∣come them, and kill them, and their dead bodies shall ly in the streets of the City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt. As much as if he should say, when Antichrist shall have prevailed over the worship, why then the Lords people shall be among the Antichristian state as though they were dead in respect of any outward order, as Lot lay or dwelt in Sodom, and the children of Israel in Egypt, waiting for their Delive∣rer. Another text to the like effect you have Rev. 12. 14. where he saith; And to the woman, meaning the Church, were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might flee into the wilderness into her place; which shews, that the woman, which was the Church, was retired, and not to be seen or discerned. Thus having proved, and I hope cleered that the third dispensation is a sleepy and dead condition, wherein the people of the Lord Jesus must live in captivity under the Antichristian state, without the spirit and ordinances in that purity as was in the first Gospel times; having no other note upon them, but what may be in Earth; or ha∣ving no other form but as having a face like unto a man; So that here will arise a que∣stion necessary to be discussed, and that is, what posture the people of God must waite in untill their Deliverer do come, and deliver them out of this capti∣vity? To which I answer; That all the posture which I find in Scripture for the Saints to wait in during their sleepy or dead condition, is, waiting for the Lord Jesus by watching and prayer, and this is cleer by these Scriptures, Isaiah 8. 17. Micah. 7. 7. Mat. 24. 42. Mar. 13. 35. Luke 12. 36, 37, 39. Rev. 16. 15. and in handling of this particular, that is, the sleepy or dead condition of the Lords people, which is the dis∣pensation which doth precede that glorious dispensation of the Lord Jesus by himselfe unto his people, I shall, the Lord enabling me, answer all the objections which are made against this discourse. As for objections against those texts I have alleadged out of the old Testament, I have not met with any, it being a truth confirmed by experience of all ages, that the Jews and Israelites after the flesh have lain among the nations captivated without any temple, or worship, or kingdome, and priesthood, for many ages; that prophesie being fulfilled upon them, Hosea 3. 4. where it is said; For the Children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an ephod, and without a tera∣phim; which is a Type, as I conceive, of that spirituall captivity of the Lords peo∣ple under Gospel dispensations, which truth is abundantly confirmed by the Prophets and acknowledged almost by all the learned; only herein, as I conceive, they mistake, in that they endeavour to deliver themselves out of this bondage and captivity by themselves, that is, by their own gifts and abilities, without that pure Anoynting of the Spirit, which is prophesied to be poured out in the last times upon the Lords people, when they shall see Eye to Eye, when the Lord shall bring again Sion. And therefore as to the old Testament I shall passe it by, it being not objected against; and as for objections against those texts that I have alleadged out of the new Testament, there are many; as first, it is objected concerning the parable of the tares, that though it be true, say they, that it is the Masters saying, that the tares should
grow with the wheat unto the harvest, yet nevertheless this should be in the world, and not that they should both grow together in the Church; for if they should, then it would contradict Scripture Rule; which is, that the Lord Jesus left power unto his Church to purge themselves, and not to suffer the tares to grow among them. To which I answer, first, pray mind how the Lord Jesus sowed good seed in his field, and gave his servants power to water it, and to weed out all such bad weeds as might grow amongst them; now pray mark, those servants in processe of time fall asleep, and in time forget and neglect their duty; the Divell taking this occasion, soweth his tares amongst them; which when the blade was sprung up and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also, and in time grew too many for the good seed. Secondly, The servants in processe of time begin to wake, and finding the tares by their works to be tares indeed, they begin to be offended at them; whereupon they go to the housholder and say unto him; Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field, whence then hath it tares? he said unto them, An enemy hath done this: The ser∣vants said unto him, Wilt thou that we gather them up? But he said nay; left while you gather out the tares, you roote up the wheat also; let both grow together untill the harvest, at which time I will say to the Reapers, Gather together the tares first, and bind them in bundles to burne them; but gather the wheat into my barn. It is objected again, True, they may grow together in the world, which, as the Lord Jesus expoundeth it, is the field, but they may not be permitted in the Church together. To which I answer, and desire all men to consider the difference of times; for it is not now as it was in the first Gospel times, the servants now have been asleepe, and the Church hath lost her power, the number of tares are above the number of the wheat; besides, the servants have lost that spirit of discerning as they had in the first times; the Sun now is darkned, and the powers of the heaven shaken, that is, removed, and there is not that spirit of infallibility, as was in the first Gospel times, wherein the spirit or pure Anointing was able to try who were tares, and who were good seed, as is clear by our Saviour's words in verse 29. where he saith, Nay, least while yee gather up the tares, yee root up the wheat also with them. Secondly, The Lord Jesus doth now expound the world to be his kingdome, whereas before it was the Church, which was particularly Christ's kingdome; for in the same Chapter where this parable is set forth in verse the 38. he saith, The field is the world; and then in the 41 verse it is said, And they shall gather out of his king∣dome all things that offend, and them that doe iniquity, and shall cast them into a fur∣nace of fire. This is also confirmed in the same Chapter in the parable of the draw∣net, which is cast into the sea, which when it is full, men draw to land, and gather the good into vessels, and cast the bad away; Even so shall it be in the end of the world, the Angels shall come forth and sever the bad from among the just. It is further objected; that whereas the Lord Jesus saith, that he will gather out of his kingdome all things that offend, and them that do iniquity, this kingdome, say they, is that kingdom which the Lord Jesus will purge in the new world; wherein there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord. To which I answer, that although Antichrist hath gotten possession, and doth Rule and Raigne in the Church; yet the Lord doth call it his Church; which I prove from these Scriptures, Isaiah 27. 10, where he saith, yet the defenced Ci∣tie
shall be desolate; and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wildernesse; there shall the calfe feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches therof: and 33. 14. where he saith, The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulnesse hath surprised the hypocrites; who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? which thews that there was sinners in Zion, and hypocrites in them that walked in outward order; for he saith, who amongst us shall dwell in devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with everla∣sting burnings? he doth not say, he that goeth out of this Sion in this or that order; but he that walketh uprightly, and speaketh righteously; he that despiseth the gain of oppression, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his eares from hea∣ring of bloud, that shutteth his eyes from seeing of evill; where note, here is no diffe∣rence between the people of God and the sinners and hypocrites in Zion, but Righ∣teousnesse, and yet Zion: the like Isaiah chap. 49. 17. speaking of the Restoring of the Church, he saith, Thy children shall make hast; thy destroyers and they that made thee wast shall go forth of thee; which thews plainly, that the enemies of the Church were possessed of her, and did destroy her, and make her wast. The like you have Eezekiel 9. when the Lord sends to mark his people, and to destroy those that had polluted his worship in an extraordinary measure, which will bear a Type of the last times, which I suppose cannot be denied, where he saith unto them in the sixth verse, which had the charge to destroy the city; slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women, but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; which shaweth they were mingled one amongst the other; and begin at my Sanctuary; where note, notwithstanding this people had so much polluted his worship, as is ful∣ly set forth in the foregoing chapter, yet the Lord is pleased to call it his sanctuary; and beside, we read of no other sanctuary of the Lords at that time, and therefore the enemies of the Lord were possessed of his Church and sanctuary; the like you have in express termes, the 2 Thessalonians 2. 4. where it is said, speaking of the man of sin, who opposeth and exalteth himself, above all that is called God, or that is wor∣shipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. Now what can be plainer spoken, that notwithstanding antichrist had gotten posses∣sion in the Church of God, and ruled as God therein; yet the Apostle cals it the temple of God? Another objection is made touching the Virgins; for say some men, it is said in the text, Then shall the kingdome of heaven be likened to ten Virgins, which tooke their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom; so say these men, this going forth is as we do now out of Babylon, by the ordinances of the Gospel, as baptizing, laying on of hands, and all those ordinances which the Lord Jesus hath commanded his people to walk in untill his second coming. To which I answer, that I do believe that the going forth of the Virgins was out from the world to professe the name of Christ (and not going out from Babylon, which I shall further cleer) but pray mark, it is said, while the bridgroom tarried, all slumbred and slept; so that here was a slumbring and sleepy condition between the going forth, and the bridegroom's coming, which, as I conceive, is that slumbring and sleepy condition which I have proved from Scripture. Secondly, it is said, and at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the bridegroom cometh, go ye forth to meet him; where pray mark, here is a midnight spoken of, and I thinke there is no man will say, that this midnight was either friday or saturday night, that is, one of these naturall nights, wherein we take our rest; but I conceive it is that midnight or dark∣nesse which lies upon the Church of Jesus Christ, immediately before the Lords bright appearing. Thirdly, it is said, Goe yee forth to meet him, I suppose no man
will affirm it is meant going forth out of a mans house, but it is that going forth out of Babylon, or the Antichristian state by the beleeving Gentiles, which lay in captivity among the Antichristian state; and that going forth of the whole Israel of God after the flesh, from among the nations in which they lay scattered so many a∣ges to meet the Lord in Zion, at the voyce of the great trumpet, when he shall gather together his Elect from the foure windes of the heaven, Isaiah 11. 12. and 27. 13. Mat. 24, 31. and that voice of the second Angel mentioned Rev. 14. 18. and 18. 4. where it is said, come out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues. It is further objected, that in all ages, there have been such in the Church of God as have been but outward professors; and therefore this makes not but that there may be a Church of Jesus Christ distinct from the world, or that of antichrist, and so his people may be in a Church order notwithstanding those proofes you have brought to the contrary. To which I answer, that there was as many foolish as wise, but marke the po∣sture they where in during this time, which was, that while the Bridegroome tarried, all slumbred and slept. Now if it be said, they were asleep in spirit, that is, in such graces of the Spirit, as love to the Lord Jesus, as faith, hope, humility, selse-deniall, and all the graces of the Spirit, wherein they were inwardly alive unto God in this sleepy condition; if so, then sure there was no difference between the wise and the foolish; and then the wise must be in the number of those upon whom the day of the Lord did come and find them sleeping, that is unprepared; which sense be∣ing granted, will overthrow the text it self; for it is said, that their lamps were not out; whereas it was otherwise with the foolish; for it is said, that their lamps were out; so that it must needs follow, that the true sense of the place must be this, That both wise and foolish were asleep in respect of outward order, according to the first Gospel times, or pattern; and so lay together mingled under the bondage of Anti∣christ, and so in that sense the wise were asleep as well as the foolish; ut in respect of those inward graces of the Spirit, as faith, hope, love, selfe-deniall, humility, meekness, and all those graces of the Spirit, they were before the foolish vir∣gins; and this exposition is made good from Canticles 5. 2. where the Church professeth that she is asleep, but her heart waketh. And thus much to this ob∣jection. Another objection is made against the abomination of desolation, spoken of Mat. 24. 15. for say some men, that the abomination spoken of in that place, is the destruction of Jerusalem, which fell out some forty years after our Saviours ascensi∣on; for say they, it is an answer to his Disciples which made the question touching the temple; and besides, it is said, Luke 21. 20. when you shall see Jeru∣salem compassed about with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is neer. To which I answer, and say, that this objection seemeth to have some weight, for I do believe that the destruction of the City and temple is there meant; but that there is another thing meant, I do also affirm; which I shall thus prove; Therefore pray mind, in the beginning of the same chapter, there are three questions demanded by the disciples; one of the destruction of Jerusalem and temple; a second, of the signes of the Lords coming; and a third, of the end of the world: and in the same chapter, there is an answer given to either of them; but in Luke the 21. there is but one questi∣on demanded by the Disciples touching the destruction of the City and temple, and an answer given unto it by our Saviour; and some little hint of the signes going before
the Lords second coming: And then look into the 17. of Luke and 20, and you shal find a question propounded by the Pharisees, and an answer given unto them; that is, That the Kingdome of God is within you; and that the kingdome of God cometh not with observation; neither shall they say, lo here, and lo there; for behold, the kingdome of God is within you. As much as if he should have said unto them; think not that the kingdome of God cometh with the vain pompe of the world, or with the observa∣tion of the Sacrifices of the Temple, or the Ceremonies thereof, which are now en∣ded; but saith he, the Kingdome of God is within you; when you do justice, and love mercy, and walk humbly with your God; and when you fulfill that great command∣ment, which is to love God above all, and your neighbour as your self, as it is cleer from all the Prophers, which call upon them to do Justice, and to love mercy, Psalm 51. 16, 17. Isaiah 33. 15. and 66. 2. Micah 6. 8. Zechariah 8. 16. 17. And likewise ver. 23. there are instructions given unto his Disciples, how they should behave themselves unto his second coming, when once the abomination was set up; for he saith, The dayes will come, when you shall desire to see one of the dayes of the son of man, and you shall not see it; Implying thus much, You shall desire to return unto the wayes of the Lord Jesus, but you shall not, for they are polluted; And you shall have such as shall say unto you, see here, and see there, but he gives the warning, saying, Go not after them, nor follow them; for as the lightning that lightneth out of one part of heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shall the son of man be in his day: which, compared with Mat. 24. 24, 25, 26, 27. veries, fully agree together. So that to me it seems cleer, that there is some other thing meant: besides, pray look in my booke called Some Discoveries of the mysteries of the last times, and you shall find five Reasons given why the polluting of the ordinances is there meant. It may be further objected, that in regard the Lord Jesus gives warning, when his Disciples shall see the abomination set up, that they should flee to the mountains; how I can give it a mysticall meaning, seeing the words are plaine, compa∣red with Luke 21. that it is the besieging and destruction of the Temple and City. For answer unto which, that there is a mystery in the words, I have partly de∣clared already, and shall further cleer it; as first, I desire it may be considered, that the Gospel as touching the believing part, is altogether in a mysterie: secondly consider, that all the Prophesies and predictions of the Gospel are mysteries, and not to be fulfilled in the letter; which is cleer from those places in the same chapter, as verses 26, 27, 28, 29. with the whole following chapter. Thirdly consider, it had been to little purpose for our Savionr to have exhorted his Disciples, and the Jews to have fled into the mountains of the Earth, for they must then have perished for want of subsistence, or else have fell into their Enemies hands; for the Romans would not suffer the Jews to inhabit any part of Judea until they had submitted themselves un. to them; for Josephus, Of the Wars of the Jews, makes mention of a part of the Jews which were fled into a wood for succour, and the Romans made warr against them, and destroyed almost all of them; as may be seen in the history of their Wars; which place, having not the book in my hands, I cannot direct the Reader unto; ther∣fore it must necessarily follow, that it was to the mountains of the nations unto which they were exhorted to flee. It may yet further be objected, how I can prove the nations, or the governments of the nations, either temporall or spirituall, to be mountains. To which I answer, that the Prophets usually apply the name of mountains to the
nations or government and magistracy of the nations; as may be seen Psalm 72. 3. Zechariah 4. 7. Daniel 2. 45. Rev. 6. 15. with divers the like places; now it being so, that the Jews were permitted to flee unto the mountains of the nations, when their City and Temple were destroyed, to hide themselves from the fury of the Romans their Enemies; in like manner, I conceive, the beleeving Gentiles have the like per∣mission to flee to the mountains of the protestant. Churches, to shroud themselves from the fury of their oppressing Enemies, the Christian Romans, when once the Abomination makes the whole worship of the Lord Jesus desolate of the Spi∣rit of God, and they cannot in conscience submit unto it; and the fury of the beast being such, as they that did not submit unto his worship, they were to lose their lives; as the Jews were sure to be cruelly handled if they did not submit to the government of the heathen Romans, And so much to these obje∣ctions. Another objection is made against my exposition of Mat. 24. 29. of the sun, moon and stars, with the powers of the heavens; some saying, that there is meant those crea∣ted lights of the heavens, which guide the times; and by the providence of God enligh∣ten the Earth naturally; others say, the sun signifies Magistracy, and the moon the Ministry. To which I answer, and say, that the Scripture is full of such expressions, as the sun, moon, and starrs; and for the cleering of this figurative speech, I shall be for∣ced to set forth the severall Acceptions wherein the sun, moon, and stars is taken in Scripture. First, sometime the sun, moon, and stars, is taken for those glorious lights of heaven, as Josuah 10. 13. and Isa. 38. 8. with divers the like places, where the sun is taken for the light of heaven. Secondly, somtime the sun, moon, and stars, are taken in a figurative sense, as that which is most excellent amongst men, as the sun signifies that spirit of govern∣ment which naturaly al men that have any excellency of nature fit for government are indued with, as the spirit of counsell, prudence, and fortitude, and the like; which are vertues fit for government, and may be in a naturall man; the moon to figure out the laws of the nations, which are divers according to the policy of every nation; and are changed according as the state of things require, like unto the moon, and receive their light from that spirit of counsell that is in those law-makers which are indued with it; the stars to signifie those eminent counsellers which shine as starrs in any common-wealth; the powers of the heavens to be that Rule of government which is especially exercised in any nation, where those lights are applied unto; and of those sort are these Scriptures, Isaiah 13. 10. and 34. 4. Ezekiel 32. 7. Joel 2. 31. and 3. 15. Rev. 6. 12, 13, 14.. with divers other the like places; and for proof of this, that this is the meaning of the holy Ghost in these places, pray take notice of Isaiah 34. where the same figurative speech is used; in ver. 4, 5. it is said, my sword shall be bathed in heaven; behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment: And then in the 12. verse it is said, They shall call the Nobles thereof to the Kingdome, and none shall be there, and all her Princes shal be as nothing. Which shews plainly what is meant in the 4 verse, where the like figurative speech is u∣sed. And observe also Isaiah 13. 10. Rev. 6. 12, 13, 14. in which places there is mention made of the destruction of the nations; but especially of Baby∣lon. Thirdly, sometime the like figurative speech is used and applied unto the people of God, and then the sun signifies the Spirit of God, which his people are indued
with; the moon, the ordinances of God, as the tabernacle, temple and sacrifices of the law, in that standing; and to the ordinances of the Gospel in the time of that standing; and hath been changed according to the change of times, which the Lord hath been pleased to alter in his Church in severall ages; the starrs to those emi∣nent Saints of God, which as stars did shine in severall ages in the Church of God; the powers of the heavens to be that Ruling power of the Lord Jesus, which his people did act by his Authority in the time of the Gospel, which was in the Church of Jesus Christ, wherein they did receive in, and cast out all such as were meet to receive, or unmeet for their spirituall society; and of this sense are these places of Scripture, Isai. 5. 10. Joel 2. 10. Micah. 3. 6. Matt. 24. 29. Rev. 8. 12. and 9. 2. In which places it is to me evident that those things are meant. But it may be objected, that this is but my exposition, without any Scripture proof for it. To which I answer, and desire all men to weigh diligently those places of Scrip∣ture, as Isaiah 60. 19. 20. where the prophet speaking of the glory of the Church in her Restoring, saith, The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee; meaning, as I conceive, when the Lord restores his Church and people, they shall need none of those secondary means to enlighten them with; but the Lord shall be unto them an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory; and then in the 20. verse it is said, Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon with-draw it self: in which texts are two things considerable to this purpose; first, that the Church hath a sun and moon; secondly, that this sun hath gon down, and this moon withdrawn her self; and I think that no man can find out any fitter ex∣position to the sense of the text then this is, and to the order of the Church in all ages; which some time hath been flourishing with abundance of the Spirit of God, and the laws of the Administrations touching outward order especially kept, and the Church being crowned with her twelve stars, which abundantly did shine in her, and encrease her glory. Sometime again she hath been in captivity, and her temple and ordinan∣ces destroyed, and made desolate of the spirit of God; and the glory of God, in re∣spect of outward administrations, by degrees leaving her for her sins; as it is plain∣ly set forth Ezekiel 10. and 11. chapters; besides, the experience of things in all a∣ges doth confirm this truth, as is cleer unto us in these dayes, and explained by me in my book of some discoveries of the mystery of the last times, page the 14. Secondly, pray take notice of Rev. 12. 1. where Saint John saw a wonder in heaven, a woman cloathed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve starrs; now I think no man will deny, but the Church, which undoubtedly was the woman which was cloathed with the sun, when she had such abundance of the spirit that it sat upon them as fire, and they were filled with the holy Ghost, and spake with tongues, and were enabled with power to distribute the ordinances of the Gospel un∣to whom they did appertain, and when the Church was crowned with twelve stars; namely the twelve Apostles. But it is yet objected, Be it so, that this is true, yet is there no workings of the spirit, are all things so dead, as there is no appearance of God by gifts and ordi∣nances? I answer, I do beleeve that there are some breathings of the Spirit in the Saints; for it is not said, the sun is wholly darkened, but darkned; that is, doth not give that light, as it did in the first Gospel times; and this the very experience of times doth evince; but for the ordinances, which are likened to the moon, they are in a manner wholly darkened, from that they were in the first times; and as for the
stars, the third part of them was darkned in the sounding of the fourth trumpet, Rev. 8. 12. and 12. 4. and they which persisted in the faith, are killed by the beast, Rev. 11. 7. It is further objected, that though it be said, The powers of the heavens shal be shaken, yet it follows not, that they are removed, no more then trees that are shaken of a mighty wind are removed. To which I answer, that shaking in Scripture sense is removing; and this is cleer from that of Haggai 2. 6. where it is said, for thus saith the Lord of hoasts, yet once, it is but a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; which shaking is expounded by the Authour to the Hebrews to be a removing, Hebrews the 12. 27. And thus I hope I have fully answered these obje∣ctions. Another objection is made against that exposition which I make upon that text, Luke 17. 34. where it is said; In that night there shall be two men in one bed, the one shall be taken, the other shall be left; which, say they, is meant, when the Lord appea∣reth, then shall one that is a Christian be at work with an unbeliever; and where it is said, There shall be two in one bed, the one shall be taken the other shall be left; say they, it is meant, the husband may be a believer, and the wife an unbeleever, as it was in the first Gospel times. To which I answer, That the text saith, it is two men, and two women; and therefore it cannot be meant of that matrimonial coupling of man and wife: and touching the two men being in the field together, as it is Matth. 24. that it may be expounded at work together, the one a beleever, the other an unbeleever; this the words going before will cleer; for it is said, Luke 17. 26. As it was in the dayes of Noe, so shall it be in the dayes of the Son of man: likewise, as it was in the dayes of Lot, they did eat, and drink, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone, and destroyed them all. Now we all know, there was no difference between Noe and the world, and Lot and the Sodomltes in any outward worship, but onely they were preachers of righteousnesse; which is cleer by that speech of Abraham, where he prayeth for Sodom, Gen. 18. 24. and saith, Peradventure there be found fifty righteous: so likewise in the dayes of the coming of the Son of man, those that are truly Christians, and watch and pray, cannot but be preachers of righteousnesse; forasmuch as that man that is addicted to sin and uncleannesse, cannot be said in reason to watch over his actions; and he that is praying, or prepared alwayes to pray, cannot be voyd of righteousness to∣wards man. Another Objection is made touching the raising of the Witnesses; for, say they, It is true, the Witnesses are to lie dead, but there is a time for their raising again, and this is our practice; sor we are raising the Witnesses from death to meet the Lord in Sion. To which I answer, That it is true, that the Witnesses are to rise, and to stand up∣on their feet; but the question is, when this should be, which I beleeve, upon exami∣nation, will appear to be when the Lord appears from heaven: which I shall prove thus, as it is said. Rev. 11. 11. and after three dayes and a half, the Spirit of life from God entred into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon all that saw them; which compared with Ezekiel 37. and Rev. 20. 5. will appear to be that resur∣rection spoken of in those two places. But it may be said, Those places speak of the raising of the dead out of their graves, to meet the Lord in Sion; but this of Revel. 11. must be meant of the rai∣sing
the people of the Lord Jesus out of that darkness wherein they lay in the Anti∣christian state. To which I answer, It is true, it seems to be so; but mark well the sense of the place, and you shall finde, it is at the Lords appearing, as to mee it seems cleer from the 12 verse, where it is said, And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither; and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them: which, compared with 1 Thes. 4. it will appear to be when the Lord Jesus appears from heaven with a shout, and the voyce of the archangel, as it is in ver. 16. besides, mark the effects that did follow upon the rising of the witnesses; for it is said, verse 13. And the same hour there was a great Earth-quake, and the tenth part of the City fell; and in the earth-quake were slain of men 7000; and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven; so that I think no man will affirm there is any such effects wrought by any arising from death of the witnesses in these our days; and thus I hope I have answered this objection. It is yet further objected, that the changes that are wrought in this nation, are some tokens of the Lords hand; for we may plainly see that there be many men that were before wicked persons both swearers, and lascivious in their lives and conversa∣tions, that upon their coming in, are changed in their lives; likewise there are many young men, that were of no gifts and parts in the sight of the world, are now able to dispense the word, and to pray very heavenly, somtime to the admiration of the hear∣ers, insomuch as they are forced to say, God is in you of a truth; and therefore this must needs be a testimony, that the hand of God is in this work, and that he will pro∣sper it. To this I answer, and do acknowledg, that this in part is true, and I do acknowledg there are precious Saints among all our professors; neither is it the personall holiness of the men of any profession, that I have any thing to say against, but it is the tying and confirming the presence of God to this or that Administration, out of a good zeal, I hope, but I suppose not according to knowledg; and therefore I would desire all men to consider, that if God be in one profession, he is also as powerfull in another, in those things which are alleaged; for I am able to see no difference in one profession more then in another; but according as men excell one another in parts, education, wit or learning, so they excell one another, but no otherwise; yea those men whose principles are in esteem of most of our professours damnable, have many men amongst them of excellent parts outwardly; besides, take notice, at the most, this is but the day of small things, and the Church is to increase in glory, as it is confessed by all: but I finde no text tending to any encreasing condition before the Lord appear, which will be most sudden and unexpected; which I shall, the Lord enabling mee, prove in its due place: Besides, I pray mark, the first annointing was with abun∣dance of successe, insomuch as thousands were converted at times: but this is no way comparable to that for gifts and graces, neither for powerfull conversion; and therefore it falls short of the first annointing; whereas the later glory is prophesied to exceed the former, as is plain from these Scriptures, Isa. 24. 23. and 60. 20. & 66. 11. Zech. 12. 8. Rev. 14. 1. and 18. 1. with divers other the like places, which I could pro∣duce for proof, if my leisure would permit. Therefore I conclude, that the times of the Reformation of the Church, as they call it, which have happened since the servants have been awake out of their slumbring condition, wherein they have endeavoured with much heat to weed out the tares out of the Church of Jesus Christ, sometimes by the sword of the spirit, when they had no other means; sometimes with the temporall sword, by which occasion hath fol∣lowed
all those miseries which have besell the Christian world, since the first falling off from the Church of Rome, which if they had on both sides followed the houshol∣ders direction, to have let the tares and the wheat grown together, there would not have been so much good wheat rooted up with the tares in that manner; neverthe∣less this hath happened by the Lords permission, so that by this meanes the mountains of the protestant Churches are established, which though it must needs be acknow∣ledged, that as touching their ministry and in respect of their ordinances, they fall short of that purity which was in the first Gospel times, they retaining their office of ministry and ordinances through that corrupt channell of the Church of Rome, yet touching their doctrine, which are the things to be believed, they come neer unto the first times unto which the people of the Lord Jesus are exhorted to flee unto, (though mystically) when once the abomination of disolation standeth in the holy place. It hath further been objected against me, how I being a man of such weake parts, and having no other learning then my Mother was able to teach me, dare meddle with the opening of those darke prophesies, in the Prophets and Re∣velation. To such men I answer, and desire all men to consider, to what end those prophe∣sies were unsealed, Revel. the 22. 10. and left as a monument to the people of the Lord in all ages; and whether they were to lie as a dead letter, or for Gods people to examine, and with humilitie to gaine the sense of them; And if all Scripture were given by inspiration, and is profitable to instruct; then doubtless the prophe∣sies are given to the same end, as well as the other more plainer places of Scripture, especially in those last times, when the prophesies are in part fulfilled, and therefore the more easie to attain the sense of them; besides, take notice, the Lord is pleased to give encouragement unto his people to search them, that so they may understand the meaning of them, as may be seen Isai. 8. 20. Habak. 2. 2. Rev. 13. 18. and 17. 9. upon which accompt I took encouragement to open those places of Scripture quoted in this Treatise; neither can any man, I hope, accuse me with arrogancy in delivering the sense of them; for I have done it with humilitie and much modesty, still consi∣dering the depth of those places, and the mysteriousnesse of them, so that I have been fearfull in a great measure, lest I should happen to be deceived in the sense of them. And this I hope will satisfie those men. It is further objected against me, that the matter is high I treat of, and beyond the reach of ordinary sense; and say they, there is no end of making of many books: And this objection is made by such men as have been very forward to open their prin∣ciples in this way of weiting, in the beginning of these dividing times. To such men I answer, that the more hight there is in the matter treated of, so much the more we ought to search into it, provided it be with humilitie; especially the matters being such as are not hidden things, but things revealed to us and our chil∣dren, and encouragement given unto us to search them; moreover, if the Scripture be the rule by which we ought to square all our actions, and this Scripture containes some dark and mysterious prophesies, whereof it is full; if we will have none of them, then sure we will leave out some part of our direction, and make use of no more then sutes with our affection; and will be guided but with part of our duty, which we pre∣tend to follow; and then this is no sure way, but our practice which we pretend we fetch the rule from the word for, it may haply, it further searched into, (I mean the Scripture) speak against, and so we may be deceived; therefore it is most sure and certain, if we will have our practice warranted by the word, to search into the
whole will of God, yea though the places be mysterious and doubtfull. But I have observed in some men, and those eminent too, that what they professe they labour with much diligence to propagate and to gain disciples to, and when once they have obtai∣ned to any considerable number, and have gotten possession and footing, then what∣soever crosses their practise, and doth not suit with their principles is matter of height, or else frivolous, and not worth the looking on: Whereas those very men in their begin∣nings were the greatest setters on of others to search the Scriptures. It is yet further objected, that this is strange doctrine; what, are you a man alone? hath God hidden those things from all, and onely revealed them unto you? this is most strange and contrary to Reason, that all men should be deceived, and you onely know the truth. To those men I answer, and do acknowledge the doctrine is strange, and I do con∣fesse I do not remember that I ever read of any such thing treated of, and for the most part of the places I have opened in some measure, I do not remember that I ever heard any exposition upon them; yea, I acknowledge that the matter seems sometimes strange to my self, having nothing in me that deserves that the Lord should reveal any thing to me rather then to another; I see in my self so much weakness and deadness to any thing that is good, that it seems to the contrary; but when on the contrary I con∣sider the harmony and agreement which is among the prophets, tending to the same things; and when I consider the experience of the ages past, confirming it, and ma∣king it to appear a truth, in part, without contradictions; and when I consider that the Lord hath in severall ages taught some of his people, yea his prophets by men of inferiour parts to them, as may be seen in Jethro's counsell to Moses, and by Amos, which was a herd-man of Tekoa, which taught Amasiah the priest of Bethel; and when I consider the Lord confounds the wisdome of the world by things of no esteem, and brings to nought things that are, by things that are not; I then take encouragement, and am constrained to beleeve that this is the meaning of the holy Ghost in those places, and shall beleeve untill I do perceive a better sense given; which being done, I hope I shall not be so self-conceited, as to prefer my sense before a better, if it begiven. It is further objected, that we are commanded to come out of Babylon, left we are partakers of her sins, and so receive of her plagues, which is a duty required of us; and besides, we have now an oportunity given us to come out, for the States give us liberty to walk according to Gospel order, and according to our conscience there in, and to gather our selves into bodies. To the first I answer, That it is true, that we are commanded to come out of Ba∣bylon; but it is necessary to know the time when we are to perform that duty, lest hap∣ly we should lose our labour; and I could wish that some man that is so zealous for the performance of that duty; would labour to demonstrate by the Scripture Prophe∣sies, that the time for the performance of this duty were fully come, lest the practice of this duty have no better success then those men in Jeremy 29. 21. namely, Ahab the son of Kolajah, and Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, which were two false prophets; which did perswade the people that they should speedily return from their captivity; con∣trary to the prophesie of Jeremy, which had prophesied their captivity to continue seventy years; which were a duty necessary to be done, for so much as the prophet Da∣niel did understand by books the number of yeers, where of the word of the Lord came to Jeremy the prophet, that hee would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem, Dan. 9. 2. and accordingly did make his prayer for their return. So likewise in the Revelation there are set times for the people of the Lord Jesus to lie in this and that condition, as may be seen in the 11. 12. 13. chapters, which I shall endeavour, the
Lord enabling me, in the sequell of this treatise to make appeare not to be fully accomplished. Besides, take notice of those places which speake of the people of the Lord coming out of Babylon, and you shall finde that Babylon is first fallen, before the Lords people are exhorted to come out of her, as may be seen Rev. 14. 8. and 18. 4. But we do not yet see Babylon fallen, nay rather we see her as high as ever almost; on∣ly we have seen one of his heads wounded to death, but his deadly wound is almost healed; neither do we see any glory, like unto that glory which is spoken of in those two places, to precede the fall of Babylon; neither do we see the Lamb upon mount Sion with his hundred forty and four thousand, neither an Angel come down from heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightned with his glory; which are things which goe before the peoples deliverance: besides, pray marke, that Babylon in the letter was destroyed before the people of God were dilivered; and his people had a Leader to goe before them out of Babylon: Even so likewise, I conceive, that the people of the Lord Jesus are to have a leader or diliverer to goe before them, to call them out of Babylon in the mystery, and to send his Angels to gather together his Elect from the four windes of the heaven, according to those Scriptures, Isai. 11. 11, 12. and 52. 12. and 66. 19, 20. Joel the 3. 11. Obadiah 21. Zechariah 2. 5, 8. Matt. 24. 31. compared with Rev. the 14. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 18. 1, 2, 4. In all which places is men∣tion made of the Lords deliverance of his people by himself, and of sending forth his Angels to declare the fall of Babylon; and to exhort the people of the Lord to come out of her. To the second branch of this objection, I answer; It is true, that the State gives liberty to tender consciences; for which they deserve much honour; but these men must also remember, that as the State gives them liberty, so must they have liberty of God also, which I desire to see proved; for first, if they will come out according to order, they must have their Leader with them, which is the Lord Jesus; for it is said expresly Isaiah the 52. 12. for you shall not go out in hast, nor go out by flight; for the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rereward; But in this refor∣mation which is profest in this nation, in any profession, I see no glory that comes neer the first Gospel times; whereas the coming of the Kingdom of God with power did ex∣ceed the first glory, as may be seen Mat. 17. 2. Secondly, it must be granted, that the nations of Christiandome are all of them at the least Christians at large, as I may term them; that is, professing the name of Christ; now if we follow order, we must reform by the major or greater part, as is the order in all assemblies; as also in the Church of Christ, whilst they had pow∣er, as may be seen in the Churches of Asia: but we cannot reforme that way, because the major part will keep their customes still, be they never so ill; and therefore we cannot this way reform according to order, because the best part is over∣voted: But thirdly, seeing that all our reformers do acknowledg, that the ordinances are corrupted touching Church discipline, and if we will reform we must bring them to the first standard; and because all our ministers have derived their office of ministry through that corrupt channel of the Church of Rome, therefore it must needs follow, that insomuch as the Scripture is acknowledged to be our director in all things, by all Reformers; and for so much as all that enter not by the door are theeves and robbers, John 10. 1. and for as much as none can preach except they be sent, according to the doctrine of Paul, Romans the 10. 15. and for as much as the prophet Isaiah sends us to the Law and to the Testimony, and saith, If they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isaiah 8. 20. and the Apostle Saint Paul, in the
aforesaid text of the Romans alledgeth Scripture for his and others preaching the Gos∣pel, and saith, As it is written, how beautifull are the feet of them that preach the Gos∣pel of peace, and bring glad tydings of good things? therefore I say, If we will reform, being the lesser part, we must necessarily have some Scripture for our warrant, to shew that the time is out for our deliverance, and some mention made in Scrip∣ture of some Anoynting to reform the Church of Jesus Christ after the ordinan∣ces are corrupted or changed, as is acknowledged; which if it can be produced, either by plain letter or by consequence, that when once the ordinances are changed or corrupted that they are to be restored in their purity, and that the people of the Lord Jesus are to gather themselves out of Babylon or the Antichristian state, wherin they lay in captivity among all sorts of men in visible bodies, with all those officers, as Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, as they were in the first Gospel times be∣fore the Lords appearing to restore his people; I shall by the help of God subscribe unto them, and confess my Errour; yet nevertheless there are some texts alledged for the maintenance of it, I shall name them, as I go, and examine them accor∣ding to my understanding, and leave them to the men that alledged them to judg. The first text which is aleadged for the raising of ordinances is from Psalm 75. 2. where the prophet speaking in the person of God, saith, when I shall receive the congre∣gation, I will judg uprightly; whence is inferred, that when the Lord Jesus doth appear, there will be a congregation. To which I answer, and do confess, that the Psalmist in that place speaks of the appearance of Jesus Christ, as is plain from verse the first, where it is said, for that thy name is neer, thy wondrous works declare; but touching that 2 verse from whence that inference is taken, I conceive the true sense is no other, but that before the Lord appeare, the congregation is judged unrighteously by the men of the world, or by such as Rule in the Church of Jesus Christ, having no commission from him, or as it is in Matthew the 24. 48. and Zechariah 11. 16. by that evill servant, which saith in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; but when the Lord doth appear he will take the government of the congregation to himself, and will judg uprightly; Agreeable to those texts of Scriptures Isa. 11. 4. Micah 4. 3. The second text is from Isaiah 10. 27. where it is said, And it shall come to passe in that day, that his bur∣den shall be taken away from off thy shoulders, and his yoake from off thy neck; and the yoake shall be destroyed because of the anyonting; from whence is inferred, that in the last dayes, the Lord will anoynt his people by his Spirit, so that they shall by degrees gather them∣selves out of Babylon, or the antichristian state, into bodies or single fellowships, to meet the Lord in Sion. For answer unto which, pray note the text it self; for it is not said, thou shalt de∣liver thy self because of the anoynting; but it is said, In that day his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and the yoake from off thy neck, and the yoake shall be destroyed because of the annointing: which argueth thus much, that the Lord will deliver his people by the hand of some extraordinary messenger that he wil appoint for that purpose; which, I conceive, is the Lord Jesus; for he alludes unto the deliverance of his people out of Egypt, and to that deliverance from Midian at the rock Oreb, as it is in the foregoing verse, being the 26. Now it is known to all men that in those deliverances there was Moses and Gideon extraordinarily sent to deliver his people; and can it be thought that in that great deliverance of all the deliverances that have happened unto the people of God, that deliverance from sin and death only
excepted, wherin Ephrahim shall no more envy Juda, nor yet Juda vex Ephrahim; and that from thenceforth the wolf and the lamb shall feed together; and that from thenceforth they shall hurt nor destroy no more in the mountain of Gods holinesse, that the Lord will deliver his people by themselves, contrary to his practice in all ages, as may be abundantly proved from Moses, Joshua, Jeptha, Deborah, Barak, unto Zorobabel, which were all types of that great deliverer of his people, as may be seen Haggai 2. 23. where Jesus Christ is set forth under the name of Zorobabel. Beside, pray mark the 33d verse of that 10. of Isaiah, where it is plainly said, Behold the Lord, the Lord of bosts shall lop the bough with terrour, and the high ones of stature shall be hewen down, and the mighty shall be humbled; and he shall cut down the thickets of the forrest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one: Now let any man judge, if this be meant his people by themselves, or else the deliverance to come by some extraordinary messenger. The next two texts which are alleadged for the raising of ordinances, I put them both together, because I suppose they aime at one and the same thing, are the 2 Pet. 2. 11, 14. and the Epistle of Jude ver. 20, 21. where it is said, Wherefore, beloved, seeing you look for such things, be diligent that you may be found of him in peace without spot, and blamelesse; And then in Jude it is said, But ye beloved, edifie your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, and keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternall life. From whence is ga∣thered, that in the last daies the people of the Lord Jesus Christ must walk in Gospel order, being baprized, and gather themselves into visible bodies to meet the Lord in Sion. To which I answer, and desire all men to take notice of the scope of the Apostles in these two places; namely, to arme the Christians unto whom they wrote to take heed of false teachers which were crept in amonst them; to beware of them, and to be watchfull over themselves, and that they should build up themselves in their most holy faith; and therein they do admonish them, as is cleer from the second of Peter 2. 1. and from the Epistle of Jude the 4. and this I do acknowledge was writ unto such men as were in gospel order, and they are admonished to persevere and to conti∣nue in love unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. But these Churches have since fallen asleep, Mathew 13. 15. the ordinances are corrupted or changed, as is acknow∣ledged by these men: now let themselves judge, what is in these Epistles and verses aleadged for the restoring of them; these Churches have lost their power, the sun is gon down over the Prophers, Micah 3. 6. and I looke for some place of Scripture for their raising again before the Lord appear. And thus I hope I have fully answered to those Scriptures. A fourth Scripture which is alledged is Revelation the 2. 23. where it is said, speak∣ing of the woman Jezebel, which did teach and seduce his people, he saith, And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall know; Thereby arguing, that when the Lord appears and destroys Jezebel, that then all the Churches that are in being shall know, and see his judgements upon her. To this I answer, and desire all men to take notice of the contents of this second chapter, which is to approve and to reprove sundry matters among the Churches unto whom St. John wrote; and amongst the rest, the Church of Thyatira is reproved for suffering the woman Jezebel, which calleth her selfe a Prophetesse, to teach and se∣duce his people: and having spoken of the judgements which he will bring upon her, he saith, and all the Churches shall know; that is, say they, al the Churches that are in being when the Lord doth appear shall know how he will punish this woman: now pray
take notice, in the first chapter and 11 verse, St John is commanded to write this Re∣velation in a book, and send it to the seven Churches that are in Asia; and so fulfilling his commission in his exhortation unto the severall Churches, he still concludes with this admonition, Let him that hath an ear hear what the spirit saith unto the Churches; now what Churches are those that are exhorted to hear, the Churches which shall be at the end of the world, or those that St. John wrote unto? I think it is unlikely that St John should write unto Churches in being then, admonithing them to hear, and this to be applied for the raising of Churches at the end of the world or neer that time; and in this verse it is said, and all the Churches shall know: now what shall they know? Why, they shall know, that if this Church of Thyatira will not restaine this woman Jezebel by her power while they have it, that the Lord will execute his power himself, and they shall know it. And where it is aledged that those Churches here spoken of, are those Churches that are in being when the Lord doth appear, I answer, where is the least colour for it in the text? for these Churches are no other but those Churches which are writ unto, which are the seven Churches of Asia, which still are admonished; Let him that hath an ear hear what the spirit saith unto the Churches. Moreover he doth admonish this Church of Thyatira, that if she did not exercise her power, that then all the Churches should know, that I am he that searcheth the reines and the heart, and will give unto every one of you according to your works; that is, as I conceive, if you do your duty, while you have power, and if you ne∣glect your duty having power, the time will come when you shall know that I will reward every one of you according to your works: moreover, experience teacheth us, that those Churches have the candlestick removed from them, and have no be∣ing, and therefore in my judgment it is but a weake foundation to raise ordi∣nances upon, and to gather Churches upon, when once they have lost their power, and are polluted, and Antichrist seated in them. And so much for this Scrip∣ture. A fist and last Scripture which is alledged is from Rev. 18. 20. where the de∣struction of Babylon is set forth, and an exhortation given unto his people, in these words, Rejoyce over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God hath avenged you on her; from whence is inferred, that when the Lord doth destroy Baby∣lon, that then his people being in Church order, having Apostles and Prophets, shall rejoyce for the destruction thereof, To which I answer. First, it is not said heavens, that is, Churches; but heaven, that is, as I conceive, the Church of God in all ages, being now a triumphant Church, their enemies being destroyed, and is exhorted to rejoyce. Secondly, pray mind what the people of the Lord are incited unto; namely to rejoyce, which is fulfilled in the 11. chapter and 16, 17, 18 verses, and in the 15. chapter 2, 3, 4 verses, and 19 chapter 2, 3, 4 verses, compared with Isaiah the 12. chapter: In Rev. 11. 16. you have the foure and twenty elders mentioned, and in ver 19. you have the four and twenty Elders and the foure beasts mentioned, which cannot well be expounded the Churches, and Apostles, and Prophets which shall be in being when the Lord doth appear; now let themselves judge whether here be any thing towards the raising of ordinances or gathering of Churches, for which these Scriptures are brought; for I professe with reverence to all just wayes of God, that to me these Scripturs seem to be a weak foundation to build such a structure upon as is pretended, namely, that the raising of ordinances, as is practised in these daies, is the onely way by which the Lord will by degrees draw and deliver his people out of Babylon to meet him in Sion.
It is yet objected, that is it the Lords own precept, mentioned Matth. 28. saying, Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; and the promise is annexed, and lo I am with you unto the end of the world; whereupon is concluded, that his people are to practise the ordinances in their purity untill the Lord appear. To which I answer, first, that it is acknowledged by these men, that there hath been an interruption both in the succession of the Ministry, and in the corrupting the purity of the ordinances, and I look for some proof from Scripture Rule for their raising, Secondly, it is affirmed by Mr John Saltmarch, who had knowledg in the Greek copies, that the words, unto the end of the world, if truely translated, is but to the end of that age, or administration; and he quotes the Greek text in his book called, some beames of the morning starr, in the margent of the same book, page 134. But thirdly, it is usuall in Scripture phrase, that for End is meant but length of time, and not to the end of the world, or of all ages; as is plain by those places, Lev. 6. 22. and 7, 34, 35. Jer. 33. 21. and 35, 19. But fourthly, if all these considerations fail; then let this answer suffice, namely, by these mens judgments confessed, that whereas there is a promise annexed to the commission, that they, meaning his Apostles and their successors, that if they failed not to do their duty in going and teaching all nations, baptizing them in the purity of the ordinances; that the Lord would not fail to be with them unto the end of the world; but they having failed, as is acknowledged by all our reformers, therefore the Lord is not ingaged to his promise; and is not with his people, as must be acknowledged by all men, as he was in the first Gospel times, in respect of the purity of the ordinances. It is yet further objected, that if the ordinances are polluted or changed, some of them, then it is likely they are all corrupted, and then watching and prayer being also ordinances of Jesus Christ are also corrupted. To this I answer, and shall make a distinction between the ordinances, as first there are ordinances which for the performance of them, there were officers appoin∣ted to the dispensation of them; and these officers had a peculiar charge given them, and had more then an ordinary Spirit given them for the performance of that worke, as may be seen Acts the 2. 4. and their office was to preach, baptize, lay on hands, and administer the Sacrament, and these also were to chuse able men, and to appoint ministers from hand to hand to after times by way of succession; which is cleer from the first of Tim. 4. 14. and 2 Tim. 1. 6. and 2. 2. in all which places there is mention made of the Apostle, and Presbitery in ordaining others for the Ministry; and these had a singular ministry and commission given them for this work, as may be seen Matthew 18. 19. and those that came not into the fold this way, were theeves and robbers, John the 10. 1. Romans the 10. 15. now if those that restore the ordi∣nances, and are the reformers in this age, can shew that they received their office of ministry for the dispensation of ordinances, from hand to hand by succession from the Apostles without interruption or without corrupting both the ministry and ordinan∣ces by coming through that corrupt channell of the Church of Rome; why then I do beleeve they have power to set up the ordinances in their purity; and we are bound to submit unto it; but it being acknowledged there hath been an interruption and cessa∣tion in them by most of our reformers, therefore it remaines that there should be some text or texts of Scripture which should speake of their Restoring after the cessation or corruption, at the least by way of consequence; but as yet I find none produced, or else we goe not to Scripture Rule for all our pra∣ctises.
But secondly, concerning watching and prayer, that although I do consess them to be ordinances; yet they were not delivered by way of succession, but may be in any man, it being a gift given by Gods Spirit without any outward means concur∣ring with it, and was bestowed upon the Gentiles as well as the Jews in the time of the Law, witness Job and Elihu; and was bestowed indifferently upon all men, without the outward means of laying on of hands in the time of the Gospel; either in a gueater or lesser measure, according as the spirit of God was pleased to breath in them; and this may be seen in the example of Cornelius, and of the Eunuch of Ethiopia; though I do acknowledg those gifts and graces of the spirit were highened and enlarged by the practising of the ordinances, Gods Spirit concurring with the outward means whilest the ordinances remained in their purity, and also did continue to breath in the people of God after their ordinances were corrupted, and doth yet without the ordinan∣ces in their purity. It is further objected, that if the people of the Lord Jesus are to ly scattered among the antichristian state without the benefit of ordinances in their purity, or without a∣ny Gospel order, contrary to the common multitude of Christians; that then how can that saying of Saint Paul be fulfilled, which saith, he that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. First, to this I answer, that persecutions in some measure shall cease, and this is no more then what hath been foretold by the Prophets, and by Saint John in his Re∣velation, as may be seen Hosea 2. 14. compared with Revelation 12. 6. 14. where it is said, therefore, Behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak com∣fortably unto her; now what can be here meant, but that the Lord having poured out upon his people the fierceness of his wrath, and visited upon them the days of Balaam, and hath executed his judgements upon them, as it is in the former part of the Chap∣ter; now he begins to speak comfortably unto her, and gives her leave to flye to the mountaines, and to nourish her in the wilderness for a time, times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent? Zech. 14. 5. Mat. 24. 16. Revel. 12. 14. But secondly, though persecution in some measure doth cease, yet it doth not fully cease; for it is said, Revel. the 12. 17. and the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make warre with the remnant of her Seed which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ: in which text pray note two things; First, that the Church is retired into the wilderness, and but a remnant left; Secondly, this rem∣nant keep the Commandements of God and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. From the First I observe, that there is no being of any visible Church having the Or∣dinances in their purity, upon the face of the Earth, during the time, times, and half a time: and from the Second I observe, that notwithstanding there be no visible Church upon Earth; yet there is a remnant that keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ: which Commandments I take to be, to love God above all, and our neighbours as our selves; or if you will, having Faith, Love, Self-denyall, Humility, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, Justice and Righ∣teousness; and by these things give testimomy that they own Jesus Christ: and to such men it is unpossible but that Satan will raise up persecution; for that of Solomon doth in all ages prove true, Prov. the 29. 10. 27. the bloud-thirsty hates the upright, and he that is upright in his way, is abomination to the wicked; and this we finde by proof in these days, that let men be upright in their conversation, these men are alwaies en∣vied of their neighbours, and the good man is alwaies hated of the wicked; for there is a great difference between them: but for that persecution which doth arise unto men because they walk contrary to the practice of the common multitude, that by de∣grees
ordinarily ceaseth, either by length of time, according to the old proverb, being but 9. daies wonder, as we are apt to speak, or else by the multitude which come in and professe it, which makes it cease to be persecuted, which proved true in Con∣stantine and the Roman empire becoming Christians; or else by the loosnesse of the practice of those that professe it, which causeth wicked men to cease to hate them; but for equity, justice, goodnesse, sincerity, righteousnesse, holinesse; these never want per∣secution in some measure, and this the Apostle Peter seems to intimate unto us in his first Epist. 4. 3, 4. where admonishing them, what their conversation was in times past, which saith he, may suffice you to have walked in those lusts which he there names, wherein they think it strange that you runne not with them to the same excesse of riot, speak∣ing evill of you; where he shews plainly, that the cause of their evill speaking was because they were not so loose in their lives as the common multitude. It is further objected, that if the people of the Lord Jesus must wait for their Masters coming by watching and prayer, without gathering themselves into bodies, and must lie in captivitie among all sorts of men, then how shall the people of the Lord Jesus edifie themselves, and build up one another, and gather people unto God by prea∣ching and administring the Sacraments, without some Church-order? I answer, first, all the posture that I can find by a most serious search in the word of God, is watching and prayer, after the abomination which maketh desolate is set up, they being spiritually captivated under mysticall Babylon as the Jews were temporally captivated under literal Babel; and as the Jews were to remember and pray unto God in their temporall captivity, so also are the beleeving Gentiles to remember their Lord, and to pray unto him in their spirituall captivitie. Secondly, As the Jews in their captivitie waited without order in respect of their temple and worship in the time of the seventie years, and also do now in their scat∣tered condition; even so the people of the Lord Jesus must wait without order in their spirituall captivitie by watching and prayer untill their Lord appear to deliver them. Thirdly, Let no man in this condition misdoubt the providence of God, for his hand is not straitned, Isaiah the 50. 2. although the Lord suffer his people to lie in a scattered condition without the outward means of Church order in its puritie; for the same God which fed the children of Israel in the wildernesse with quailes and Manna from heaven, and suffered not their raiments to wax old upon them, nor their foot to swell for forty years, and preserved Moses in the wildernesse to an 120 years of age, yet his eyes were not dim, nor his naturall strength abated, Deuteron. 8. 4. and 33. 7. can preserve his people, if they wait upon him according as he hath pre∣scribed in his word, although they want the outward means of ordinances in their pu∣ritie: And this is no more than he hath promised his people in their wildernesse con∣dition, Hosea the 2, 14, 15. Revel. 12. 14. Fourthly, Let men be answered, that though the ordinanees cannot be practised in their puritie, yet neverthelesse the name of Christ will be taught in the world, and people converted unto him by this means; for this is most certain, let men be never so wicked, yet they will professe the religion of Christ, and some will be converted unto him by that means; for Saint Paul rejoyceth that there were in his time some that preached Christ through envie, which I suppose he would not have done, if there had not been people converted unto him by this means. The last and grand objection which is brought against the people of the Lord Jesus waiting by watching and prayer for their Lords appearing without the benefit of ordinances in their purity, is this, For say they, as the Jews were captivated under
literall Babylon, and did at the 70. years end return and build the second temple: so the beleeving Gentiles having been captivated under mysticall Babylon, are to re∣turn when the 42 months are at an end. To which I answer, that it is true, that the Jews were to lie in bondage, and did return at the end of 70. years, and this is according to the prophesie of Jeremiah, for he had prophesied their captivitie, the time how long, and when they should return and be delivered; and the prophet Isaiah points at the king by name, which should destroy Babylon and deliver his people, Isaiah 45. and the Prophet Daniel in chap. 9. ver. 2. doth acknowledg that he did understand by books that the time was fulfilled, in which Jeremy had prophesied the desolation of Jerusalem, and accordingly doth di∣rect his prayer for their return. Now if there can be brought any such cleer proof as this amounts to for the time of the believing gentiles to be delivered out of mysticall Babylon, or the Antichristian state; yea, if it may be gathered by consequence; then I say, the people of the Lord ought to endeavour their deliverance. And I suppose that those that are most zealous for their delivery, should labour to demonstrate the time to be neer or fully accomplithed for their deliverance, lest they should go about that great work before the time were fully ended, and so fall short of their expectation. Se∣condly, pray mind, this people were to have a leader and conductor, which should be as a governour to go along with them, which was of the Kingly stock of David; and he did lay the foundation of the second Temple, as is cleer from Zec. 4. 9. and Hag. 1. 14. Now what leader or governour is there of the Kingly Stock of David to deliver his people at this time, whereof this first deliverer was a type? neither is there any glory in this restoring that is pretended, like unto that first glory, which was in the first Gospel times, notwithstanding the Lord Jesus speaks of his second coming to be like lightning; nor like unto that appearance of the Lord Jesus in the holy mount, menti∣oned the 2 Pet 1. 17. 18. compared with Mat. 17. 2. But it may be objected that the prophet Haggai saith, Who is left amongst you, that saw this house in his first glory, and how do you see it now? is it not in your eyes in compa∣rison of it as nothing? Haggai 2. 3. And the prophet Zechariah puts the question in chapter 4. 10. Who hath despised the day of small things? So who is this that despi∣seth these days of small things in this building of the second mysticall Temple? To which I answer, That it is true, the people were reproved for despising those poor beginnings in the building of the second temple, and good cause; neither do I de∣spise any poor beginnings in this restoring; but this I admonish those builders of this mysticall temple at this time, that they be sure the time is fully out for their restoring; and to shew some proof from Scripture Rule for their practice; lest haply they may lose their labour, and their work prove but a spark of their own kindling; and this is pro∣fitable counsell unto them: besides the Lord did not build the second Temple under the law immediatly by himself, but stirred up Cyrus and Zorobabell for to perform that work, which were men of infirmities: besides, they had many Enemies which did resist and discourage them, as it is cleer from Ezra and Nehemiah; but for the delive∣rance of the beleeving Gentiles out of mysticall Babylon, the Lord Jesus hath pro∣mised to do it by himself, when he comes to destroy Babylon by the Spirit of his mouth, and with the brightness of his coming, of whom literall Zorobabell was a type, as is cleer from Haggai 2. 23. where it is said, In that day saith the Lord of hosts, will I take thee O Zorobabell my servant, the son of Shealticl; which speech hath reference to the foregoing verse, where the Lord saith, And I will overthrow the throne of the Kingdomes of the heathens; which was not at that day performed, therefore it remains to be preformed when the Lord Jesus shall appear from heaven with his mighty Angels
to destroy Antichrist, and all those nations which have been enemies unto his people, Rev. the 6, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17. Thus I have answered all the objections I have met with, to my best memory, touching those Scriptures I have alledged, to prove the people of God to be in no other posture in respect of ordinances in their purity but watching and prayer, untill the Lord appear and deliver them out of their spirituall captivity under the Antichristian State, after the abomination that maketh the ordinances desolate is fully set up, and the sun darkened; Therefore I shall now come to prove this truth, namely, their watching and prayer during this slee∣py and dead condition, from certain promises of God unto his people, they being out of order. As first, the Lord promises his protection unto all such of his people, as during this desolate condition, did sigh and mourn for all the Abominations that were commit∣ted, which is cleer from Ezekiel 9. 4. compared with Revelation 7. 3. where the Apo∣stle seeth in a vision a man with a writers Inkhorn by his side, and the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the forcheads of the men that figh, and cry for all the Abominations that are done in the midst thereof: where pray note, he doth not say, go and set a mark upon al those, or some of those that walk in outward order, which the Lord himself hath set up, and ap∣pointed his people to walk in; but upon all those that sigh and cry for all the abo∣minations that are committed by those that did walk in the order, or should have done, which the Lord hath appointed; as is cleer from verse the 6. where he saith, And begin at my Sanctuary. Now if it be objected, that we do acknowledg that the Church in all ages have had such as have done abominations in the midst of her; and therfore this makes not but those men that did sigh and mourn did walk in the outward order of God in his Tem∣ple and worship. To this I answer, that this people which the Prophet speaks of, had corrupted the Temple of the Lord, as is cleer from Ezekiel 43. 8. and 44. 8, 9, 10. and that the glory of God was departed from his Temple and worship, as is plain from the 9. chapter and 3 ver. where he saith, And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherub, whereupon he was, unto the threshold of the house: And from chapter 11. 23 where he saith, And the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the City, and stood upon the mountain which is on the East side of the city: where pray note, the glory of God, notwithstanding it was departed from his whole worship, and from his people, being departed out of the city, yet notwithstanding the Lord is pleased to call it his San∣ctuary; and that also although the high Priest, and such as were leaders of the peo∣ple had corrupted his ordinances; as it is in chap. 44. 8. where he saith, and ye have not kept the charge of my holy things; but ye have set keepers of my charge in my San∣ctuary for your selves; which I suppose bears a fit resemblance in the Church of Rome. Secondly, the Lord promiseth his people that he will not reprove them, when he comes to judg them, although they did not at all times perform his outward worship in offerings and sacrifices; as is plain from Psalm. 50. 8. where he saith, I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices and thy burnt offerings to have been continually before me; as if he should have said, notwithstanding thou hast at somtimes neglected my com∣mandments, in respect of outward order, in regard of the ceremonies and sacrifices therof, so as thou hast offered God thanksgiving, and paid thy vowes unto the most highest, and call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me, in the same Psalm, 14. 15. verses, Much more then, I suppose, the Lord
will not reprove us in this sleepy and dead time of the Gospell (wherein all things are corrupted and changed in respect of outward order, and not so much as one text to be found for their restoring) if we walk without the ordinances in their purity by watch∣ing and prayer, keeping Faith and a good Conscience, waiting for the Bridegrooms co∣ming. Thirdly, the Lord threatens all such as walke in outward order, and are wicked, Psalm the 50. 16. and promiseth salvation unto such as without order, walk upright∣ly, in the same Psalm, verse the 23. Where he saith, whoso offereth praise, glorifieth me; and to him that ordereth his conversation aright, will I shew the salvation of God. I shall now proceed, as the Lord shal direct me, to prove that the people of God must wait for the Lord Jesus by watching and prayer without order in the purity thereof, in this sleepy and dead dispensation, from the Lords dehortation of his people from setting up any temple and worship during their captivity and desolate condition wher∣in they lay scattered among the nations; which to me is cleer from Isaiah. 66. 1. where it is said, Thus saith the Lord, the Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my footstoole, where is the house that you build unto me, and where is the place of my rest? for all these things hath my hand made; and all these things have been, saith the Lord. Where pray note, this people are disswaded from building again any Temple or house of God, when once the glory of God is departed from it; for he saith, all these things have been; now what can be more plainly spoken then here it is? for you had a Temple, and it was the place which I did own for my worship; but now he saith in the 3 verse, He that killeth an oxe, is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swines bloud; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed an idol; yea, they have chosen their own wayes, and their soul delighteth in their Abominations. From whence we may gather this instruction; that when once the Lord hath forsaken his own ordinances, and that the glory is departed from that administration, that the same worship is most a∣bominable before God; and that peoples own wayes are as wicked in killing an oxe, thereby to sacrifice unto God, if he have left that worship, as to kill a man is most wicked before God and man; as is cleer from the plain letter of the text. And for con∣firmation of this exposition, because it may seem odious to some men, not well weighing the meaning of the holy Ghost in this place, pray turn to the Acts of the Apo∣stles the 7. 48. 49. where the martyr Saint Stophen alledgeth the same prophesie of Isaiah against the Jews, which laboured to maintain their worship and Temple when the glory of God was departed from it. But I suppose it will be objected; that we acknowledg that concerning the Temple and worship of the Jews, the glory is departed from that administration; and it is most wicked for his people to practise it; but what makes that to us, that are under the admi∣nistration of Gospel order? To which I answer, that I do conceive this was a type of that desolate condition which should befall the Christians under Gospel administrations; And I believe it will be acknowledged, that the glory is departed from the outward administration; for very experience teacheth us, that the sun is darkned in respect of that glory it did shine in in the first Gospel times; and the ordinances changed and corrupted from their first purity. I shal now secondly prove the people of the Lord ought to wait by watching & prayer without the ordinances in their purity, after the glory is departed from them, by our Saviours dehortation of his people from the use of them in their purity, from his own
words, Matthew 24, 25. 26. where he saith, Behold I have told you before; wher∣fore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the desert, goe not forth; behold, he is is in the secret chambers, beleeve it not: where pray marke for our instruction, what he saith, behold I have told you before; as much as if he should have said, take no∣tice of my words, for I have admonished you before hand, that there should be a time wherein you should be perswaded to goe out of your desert condition in some order, which shall seem to be the wayes of God; but he saith, if they shall say unto you, he is in the desert, go not forth; which thews that they were in some desart condition at the same time, which as I conceive, was among the men of the world, or in captivity among the Antichristian State; but saith he, go not forth. I shall shew my thoughts, what I take this desert to be, which I think to be that condition of men which go under the profession of Ramers, or as some call them, Notionists, which walke without order; or such as profess they enjoy God, and have the spirit above the common sort of men which walk in order; which I do believe the experience of things in short time will prove this to be a truth, if we consider what hath come to pass already, if we look upon no other thing but that book lately come forth, Intituled A siery flying Rol; which seems to me, that the Author was not guided by the Spirit of God, neither by the word of God to do any such actions as he is not ashamed to boast of in that book. By secret chambers, I take them to be those single fellowships of men which boast so much of Gospel order, under what title soever they be called; the word in the originall (as say the learned in the tongues) signifies an upper Roome; which may be a state above others, as they boast themselves; I shall shew my proofs and rea∣sons for this exposition. The first is from Luke the 17. 22. where our Saviour saith, The dayes will come when you shall desire to see one of the dayes of the son of man, and you shall not see it. Now what can be there meant, but that you being in a desolate condition, and in captivity, shall desire to returne unto the freedom of the Gospel, to walke in the ordinances thereof, but you shall not? Secondly, my second ground for this exposition is from the glory being depar∣ted from the outward administrations. For after once the abomination is ful∣ly set up, the Church becomes desolate, and is left like a wildernesse, Isaiah the 27. 10. There shall the Calfe feed, and lie down, and consume the bran∣ches thereof; compared with Rev. the 12. 6. 14. as much as if the prophet should have said; there is a time when the holy city shall be left without defence, and shall be the habitation of calfish and beastly men, which shall consume the people thereof. I shall now proceed to my third Reason, taken from Matthew the 24. 24. where it is said, For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signes and wonders, insomuch, as if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect; and from Revelation the 13. 11, 13. where speaking of the second Beast, he saith that he had two horns like a lambe, but he spake like the Dragon; and also he doth great wonders, so that he maketh fire to come down from heaven in the fight of men; where pray note, here is something that is like to the wayes of Christ, for he saith, that if it were possible they should deceive the very Elect; and here is fire made to come down from heaven in the sight of men; now what is this fire, but the Spirit of God, as is pretended, which those that have as they say, attained to the highest perfection, do so much enjoy as that they boast of perfection in this life? A fourth reason is taken from the text it self, where it is said, Behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it not; which chambers, as say the learned in the tongues, in the ori∣ginall,
signifies an upper room, or state above others; now I appeal to any man whether these men, especially those that do profess to come neerest to the wayes of Jesus Christ, do not boast to be above others in the ways of the Lord Jesus: and this is the professi∣nn of all men that reform in those ways, for every profession to esteem his own way a∣bove others. A fifth ground or reason for my exposition of this text to be this, is taken from Matthew the 24. 27. where the coming of the Lrod Jesus is compared to lightning, now what form hath lightning, but only glory? now what glory do we see in any one of these professions above others? only as one man exceeds another in gifts of nature, education, or learning, so they excell one the other; but not as I am able to comprehend, in any other outward glory. Besides, mark, in the first times there was abundance of outward glory, the Spirit sat upon the Apostles like to fire, and they were filled with the holy Ghost, and did work miracles; but this second appea∣ring of the Lord Jesus, will have much more glory; as was seen by Peter James and John in the 17. chapter of Matthew; but among these professions I doe see no glory, to be compared with these first times: And therefore I doe conceive, this is not the appearance of Jesus Christ: And thus much to these texts. Thirdly, I shall come now to prove that the posture the people of the Lord must wait in in this sleepy condition is watching and prayer, without the benefit of ordi∣nances in their purity, untill the Lord appear, from the Lords threatning to over∣turn his own dispensations; which is cleer from Ezekiel the 21. 27. where it is said, I will overturn, overturn, overturn, and it shall be no more untill he come whose right it is, and I will give it him: now what can be more cleerly spoken then here it is; that the Lord will for the sins of his people, destroy all his outward dispensati∣ons? and it is with a threefold overturn; which I expound thus; first the Lord will overturn his first Temple built by Solomon; secondly, the Lord will overturn his se∣cond Temple built by Zorobabell; and thirdly the Lord will overturn that outward worship which was first set up in Gospel order; and all this for the sins of his people: and all this experience teacheth, if there were no other proof for it in Scripture; and saith the text, it shall be no more untill he come whose right it is, and I will give it him: from whence I conclude, that the Lord will overturn his own worships for the sins of his people, then much more these worships which are set up by men, without any Scripture Rule; which I can as yet see produced for their practice. And it shall be no more; from whence I inferr, that there is a time wherein there will be no outward worships and dispensations of God in their purity, but his people must ly in bondage and captivity, and to wait by watching and prayer untill he come whose right it is, and then the Lord will give it him; and this is fulfilled unto the Jewes without contradiction; for they are dispersed among the nations: and touching the believing gentiles, I hope I have sufficiently proved it already in my answers unto all the objections I have yet met withall, and shall goe on further to cleer it. But it may be objected, that this is not meant the Lords overturning his owne dispensations, but such as are set up by men without any warrant from his word. To which I answer, and desire all men to consider the text it self, where it is said, And thou profane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end; thus saith the Lord God, remove the diadem, and take off the crowne, this shall not be the same: where I appeal to any mans conscience, if any thing
can be here meant, but the taking away both of kingdome and priest-hood: Beside, the very experience of the doing of it will evince this to be a truth. Secondly, the Lord having by Zorobabel builded a second temple, which for the sins of his people is destroyed, and his people captivated. And for the third, which is that mysticall temple, I mean those outward dispensations wherein the people of Jesus Christ did walk in Gospel order in the first times, hath not antichrist defiled them, and set up that abomination which hath made all the outward worship desolate, and so the glory is departed from it, as experience teacheth also? so that now it remains, the third overturn being past, that it shall be no more untill he come, whose right it is, and then the Lord will give it him: in the mean time let his people be but diligent in those two duties of watching and prayer, and then I suppose wee need not so much press for outward discipline, as to make it so essentiall as that the people of the Lord cannot be delivered out of Ba∣bylon without it. Fourthly, I shall now come to prove the posture the people of the Lord are to wait in, is watching and prayer, without the benefit of ordinances in their purity, from the Lords being weary (as it were, speaking after the manner of men, with reverence be it spoken) of setting up any more shepherds over them, in any outward order or dispensation; which I shall prove from Zechariah the 11. 9. where it is said, I will not feed you, that that dieth let it die; and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest cat every one the flesh of another. Where note in the 4. verse, the Lord Jesus takes upon him to feed the flock, whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty; now saith he in the sixth verse, I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land; as much as if he should say, I will no more take care over you by shepherds, but loe I will deliver the men, every one into his neigh∣bors hand, and into the hands of his king, and they shall smire the land, and out of their hand I will not deliver them, and this I suppose is spoken touching the de∣struction of the Jews and their worship. Now marke what he saith in the 7. verse, And I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poore of the flock: And I tooke unto me two staves, the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands; by Beauty and Bands, I understand the ordinances of the Gospel, which were Beautiful and bin∣ding then saith he in the 8. verse, Three shepherds also I cut off in one mouth, and my soule loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me; as much as if he should say, those shepherds which I set up in Gospel order did in time forget their charge, and neglect their duty, and I cut them off; now he comes to say in the 9. verse, Then said I, I will not feed you; that that dieth let it die, and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest cat every one the flesh of his neighbour; the residue of the chapter shews the breaking of the two staves, and a prophesie of raising up a shepherd in the land which should not visit the flock; which I take to be that man of sin, spoken of in the 2 Thessalonians 2. 4. where pray note, for the sins of the people of God, he leaves them void of shepherds that shall take care of them, and suffers a shepherd to rule o∣ver them, which should destroy them: and of evill shepherds you may read fully in Jerem. the 23. and Ezek. the 34. I shall in the fifth place come to prove the people of Gods posture to be watching and prayer, without the benefit of ordinances in their purity during the dead con∣dition, from the Churches owne confession walking in outward order; which I prove from Isaiah 26. 19. where it is said, we have been with child, we have been in paine, wee have as it were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen; as much as if the Church
should have said, we have strived to deliver our selves out of our captivity by walking in that order which we have set up, but we have brought forth nothing but wind, neither have we wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen; we have desired to destroy Babylon, and to deliver our selves, but it comes to nothing and to no effect. And then in the next verse, The Lord Je∣sus, as I conceive, answereth her, saying, Thy dead men shall live together, with my dead bodie shall they arise; Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; as much, as if he should have said, although that you now seem dead, and lie in the dust, in re∣spect of outward order, according to the first Gospel times; yet when my dead body, that is, the Church shall arise, why then awake and sing. Now if any should ask any of our professours if they did not travell to bring forth our Lord Jesus, and to destroy antichrist by their walking in those professions, doubtlesse they would answer, yea; for it is the principle of every profession. Sixthly, I shall prove the people of Gods posture to be watching and prayer, du∣ring the dead condition, from the condition the people of God shall be in when he appears and destroyes all their enemies and restores them, they being like a wilder∣nesse, and all false waies in a flourishing condition; this is proved from Isaiah 29 19. where it is said, Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitfull field, and the fruitfull field shall be counted as a forrest? compared with Re∣velation the 12. 14. and Isaiah the 32. 15. where it is said, Ʋntill the spirit be poured out upon us from above, and the wilderness be a fruitfull field, and the fruitfull field be counted as a forrest; now what can be more cleerly spoken then this, touching this thing? for it is the principle of every profession at this day; for they say, that the waies we now practise, are the waies by which the Lord Jesus will more and more draw out his people into Gospel order, untill he have fully brought them out of Babell, and prepared them to meet him in Sion; and this is the saying and tenent of every profession; whereas, contrariwise he saith by his Prophet, that at the time when the spirit is poured out from on high, his people shall be like a wildernesse, and the false worships be counted as a fruitfull field; and then is that great change wrought. But it may be objected, that before we tooke upon us the profession of the Gospel, we were like a wildernesse; but since we came into Gospel order, we have been like a fruitfull field, and this change is now a working. To which I answer, that this change shall not be wrought untill the Lord de∣stroyes Babylon or the antichristian state, and this is cleer by Isaiah the 35. and the first, and so forth; for in the foregoing chapter, being the 34. the Lord sets before us the destruction of all nations, but especially of Idumea, which I conceive in the mystery to be antichrist or false brethren, as Edom was to Israel; and in the 14. verse he comes to say, as it were, that now the people of God are delivered out of her, The wild beasts of the desart shall also meet with the wild beasts of the islands, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; which compared with Revelations the 18. 2. doth fully agree: now mark what followes in the 35. chapter, where it is said, The wilderness and the solitary place shall he glad for them, that is, for their destruction, and the desart shall rejoyce, and blossom as a rose; So that I conclude from this text, if there were no more, that before the Lord destroys antichrist with the spirit of his mouth, and the brightnesse of his coming, the people of the Lord Jesus shall be, in respect of outward order and disci∣pline, like a wildernesse; and desart, and Babylon; and all false waies shall be in a flou∣rishing condition like a fruitfull field. And thus much to this proofe. [While my cogitations were exercised about this Treatise, there came to my
hand a little book written by Thomas Vane Doctor of Divinity, and sometime Chap∣lain to the late King of England, intituled, A lost sheep returned home; or the Motives of the Conversion to the Catholich Faith of Thomas Vane, penned in Paris in the yeer 1648. Which book having read and diligently considered, I found that he did pro∣pound to consideration severall marks of the true Church; where in the 17 and 18 chapters he makes conversion of Kingdoms and Monarchs, and sanctity of doctrine and life to be marks of the true Church, and applyes it to the Church of Rome: which having diligently considered, I was at a pause; but weighing well what this sanctity of doctrine and life was, I found it was chiefly in instructing her children, in not onely confessing themselves to God, but also confessing to the priests; not onely sorrow for sin, but also doing penance for the same, and such as the Church injoyn∣eth, obliging to set times of fasting and prayer, and magnifying the merit of good works, commending the sublime acts of voluntary poverty, chastity and obedience, and the exercising of other great acts of austerity for to subdue sin in the sleth, and to professe our love to Christ in these things: which having diligently considered, mee thought he had almost forgot the true duties of christian Religion, mentioned in those two places, Isai. 58. 6, 7. and James 1. 27. where the Prophet saith thus, Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undoe the heavie burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that you break every yoak? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that is cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Where note, one of the duties of Christianity is to do good to our own flesh; which cannot well be done by afflicting our bodies by unnecessary fastings and great austerity. And the Apostle St. James saith, Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherlesse and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. Which having further considered, I began more fully to understand the sense of those three places of that most Evangelicall Prophet Isaiah, in his 29th chapter and 17th verse, where it is said, Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitfull field and the fruitfull field shall be esteemed as a Forrest? and that text in the 32. chapter, and 15 verse, where it is said, Ʋntill the Spirit be poured out upon us from on high, and the wildernesse be a fruitfull field, and the fruit∣full field be counted as a Forrest: and that text in his 35. chapter and 7 verse, where it is said, And the parched ground shall become a poole; and the thirsty land springs of water; in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be grasse, with reeds and rushes; In all which places, the Prophet testifieth, that in that great change, when the Lord restores his people by pouring out his Spirit from on high, there shall be a fruitfull field which will then be counted as a Forrest; which according to this doctrine, I suppose, cannot well be applied to any but to the Church of Rome, it so flourishing by converting of nations, and by the sanctity of doctrine and life of the chiefe professors thereof; and this I am induced to believe from those two places, Matthew the 23. and 15. where it is said, Wo unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for you compasse sea and land to make one proselite; and when he is made, ye make him two fold more the child of hell then your selves; And that of the Apostle to the Romans, chapter 10. 2. where he saith, speaking of the Jews, For I bear them record, that they have zeal of God, but not according to knowledg; from whence I inferr, that in a corrupt Church, there may be a zeal of God, though not according to know¦ledg, which may reach to the converting of nations, and to abundance of zeal in works of the flesh, such as man is able to devise of himself; and also in that great change there will be a people that in the esteem of the world, and in these actions which are
set forth as marks of the true Church in this book, and place thereof, that before men will be counted a fruitfull field; which shall then prove the Forrest; so much doth the Lord reject mens performances devised by themselves. But I am not igno∣rant that it may be readily objected, that those places of the prophet Isaiah have refe∣rence unto the Jewes, which esteemed themselves as a fruitfull field, and coun∣ted the gentiles as a Forrest; and by our Saviours and his Apostles prea∣ching were converted, and became the fruitfull field, and the Jewes became the forrest. For answer unto which; I do acknowledg that the prophet Isaiah hath prophesies touching the same thing; but those three places speak of that great change at the Lords bright appearing to restore all things; which I shall prove from the texts themselves: where note in the 29. chap. and 20. verse he saith, for the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off: which is not yet performed; for there are many that yet watch for iniquity, and many scorners not cut off. And then in the 22 verse it is said, Therefore thus saith the Lord who redee∣med Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob; Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face wax pale: which shews cleerly that this change was to be wrought when the Lord restored the house of Jacob; and I beleeve no man will say, that Jacob is yet restored: And in the 32. chapter and 13. verse, it is said, speaking of that desolate condition of the Jews, and I conceive mystically also of the beleeving Gentiles, Up∣on the land of my people shall come up thornes and bryers; yea upon all the houses of joy; in the joyous city: and in next verse he shews the reason; because the palaces shall be for∣saken, the multitude of the city shall be left, the forts and towers, (which I conceive are mystically Churches) shall be dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks; But after the Spirit is poured out in the 18. verse he saith, And my people shall dwell in a peace∣able habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places; which cannot yet be applyed unto the Jews, nor yet to the beleeving Gentiles. And touching that text in the 35. chapter pray take notice, that the prophet having in the 34. chapter spoken of the destruction of the nations, but especially of Idumea, or mysticall false brethren, comes in the 35. chapter to say, The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them (that is for their destruction) and the desart shall rejoyce, and blossom as a rose: and then in the second verse it is said, The glory of Le∣banon shall be given unto it; that is, to the wildernesst; and I am sure this is not yet performed, neither to the nations, nor yet to the Church, which in this chapter is compared to a wilderness and parched ground; therefore I conclude, these texts are no way appliable to the Jewes and Gentiles at the Lords first ap∣pearing. And thus much by way of digression: now again to my former mat∣ter:] Seventhly, I shall prove that the people of the Lord Jesus must wait for their Ma∣ster by watching and prayer in this sleepy and dead condition, without the purity of ordinances, by that deaf, lame and blind condition that they shal be found in when the Lord destroys Babylon, and delivers them; and this I shall prove from Isa. the 29. 18. and 35. 5, 6. in which places it is said, Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing, (and why? what is the cause of this great change?) he saith, for in the wilderness shall streams break forth, and waters in the desart; and all this to follow the destruction of the nations, and false brethren, as in the foregoing chapter. Now if it be thus, that when the Lord delivers his people by destroying their Enemies, they shall be blind, lame and deaf, and like a wilderness, which I think no man will be
so impudent as to affirm, that the people of the Lord Jesus shall be blind, lame and deas, and like a wilderness in respect of the graces of the spirit, as faith, hope, love, self-deniall and meekness, but in respect of outward order and discipline; how comes it to passe that we have so many men that boast of the spirit, that they be come to Sion, and enjoy God perfectly, and are not sensible of any sin? and how comes it to passe that we have so much boasting of the purity of ordinances, and of Apostles and Pro∣phets, as it was in the first Gospel times? I profess that if any have such gifts, as they professe that they do enjoy; and have such abundance of the spirit, as that they are per∣fect, as is boasted of, really and indeed, I do acknowledg I come short of them, for I feel no such thing in my selfe; in the mean time, God assisting me, I shall not envy their happiness: but nevertheless, I advise them that they look diligently about them, and be sure on their hand, that they be so indeed, lest they prove to be such as our Saviour forewarneth us of, Matthew the 24. 24. where he saith, For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signes and wonders, that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. And I suppose it is contrary to those Scriptures I have alledged, and many more. Eightly, I shall prove that the people of the Lord Jesus must wait by watching and prayer out of Gospel order in its purity during their captivity, for their deliverer, by the Lords own speech; where he wondereth that there was no intercessor, and saith he, I looked, and there was none to help, Isaiah the 59. 16. and 63. 5. thereby shewing the scarcity of such as should intercede for their deliverance, and how few there should be of such as should lay to heart the judgments of God: now if it be so that the Lord, when he comes, puts a question whether he shall find faith on the earth, Luke 18. 8. and that there will be none of the great ones, which are as shepherds upon the earth, to be an intercessor for his peoples deliverance, and that he that departeth from evill maketh himself a prey, Isaiah 59. 15. Then how comes it to passe that we do vaunt of such Re∣velations, and of such perfection, and of such Church order, as is pretended? Which if the principles of those men be true, which say, that the order which we practise is the way by which the Lord will draw by degrees his people out of Babell into hodies, or single fellowships, to meet the Lord in Sion; which if so, there will be abundance of intercessours, and many to help forward the work, which the Lord professeth in those two places he is left to do alone; namely, to deliver his people. Ninthly, I shall prove the people of the Lord Jesus must wait by watching and prayer without the benefit of ordinances in their purity during the sleepy and dead condition, by the Lords promising to bring the blind by a way that they knew not: and I will lead them in paths that they have not known, Isaiah the 42. 16. now the wayes that are now practised are not wayes which have not been known, but they are such wayes as the people of the Lord did walk in in the first Gospel times, or at the least, an imi∣tation of them, and these may be in a sense called old wayes; but the wayes which the Lord will deliver his people by at that great restoring, will be new wayes, and such as have not been known; therefore according to this text, these are not the wayes the Lord will deliver his people by. Tenthly, I shall prove by way of probability, that it is the will of the Lord Jesus that his people must wait by watching and prayer for their Lords appearing, du∣ring this dead condition, without the benefit of ordinances in their purity; from that evill successe and those sad effects which have befallen the people of God in all their reformations since the rise of Antichrist. I shall begin with the evill suc∣cesse.
As first, where is that Reformation begun in Bohemiah in that Kingdome? is it not come to nothing; or at the least wise growne to a customary performance; and much short of that perfection which we now talk of, and strive so diligently to ob∣tain? Secondly, what is become of the reformation begun by Waldus of Lions; of whom came the Waldenses and Albigenses, which spread abroad in the country of France, Tholouse, Piedmont, and other places of Germany? is it not come to the bare name of Protestants? and though they are something refined from Rome, yet do they fall short of that true reformation which we do see apparently to be necessary, if we could attain unto it. Thirdly, if we look upon that reformation begun by Martin Luther, which was the most excellent of all other; being, as I conceive, that wound which was given unto the beast, Revel. the 13. that did arise out of the sea, which nevertheless did live; of which reformation we in this nation have had proof that it was growne to nothing a most, but formality; and we are returning back with hast to Rome a∣gain, as is witnessed by many godly men observing it, and complaining of it in our dayes. Fourthly, I appeal to any mans experience, what is become of that reformation which was pretended for in the beginning of our troubles, how zealous were our Ministers, for a Reformation, in stirring up the Parliament and people for a Refor∣mation, by displacing our popish and Episcopall Ministers? which being in part per∣formed, and those Ministers got up in their places, how soon did the generallity of them grow cold and negligent in their duty? how busie have they been to look after their profits and preferments, and what hunting of men for tithes and other duties? and what complaints put to the Committees against such men as would not answer their demands in things pertaining unto this life; I leave it to the magistrate, and to any godly man to judg. Fifthly, Notwithstanding that I honour and love the image of God in men of every profession, yet should the State take part with any one of our severall professions, and set it up as a State Religion; I much doubt lest in compass of an age or two, it would decline, and grow into formality, as hath been seen by the foregoing Refor∣mations. I write not this to undervalue mens persons or religion that they professe, but lamenting the miseries we lie under, and grieving to see the little trust that is in man; and how few there be that having attained to that they desire, stand steady in their profession without wavering; I mean not in their profession of outward disci∣pline belonging to outward order; but that Essence and life of Religion, I mean faith and a good conscience. Secondly, I shall prove it by the sad effects which have followed upon all our Re∣formations: as, 1. What miseries did befall that Reformation begun in Bohemia; what cruel wars and bloud-shed did follow upon it in that nation, and the Germanes in opposing them, is best known unto those that are acquainted with their history; Insomuch as their captain Scisca doth boast unto his souldiers, that he had led them to eleven bat∣tels, and in every of them he went away victor; and yet after his death those Bohemi∣ans were overcome, not without much bloud-shed on either side. 2. What miseries did befall the people of the Waldoys or Waldenses in the valleys of Angrogne, Luscerne St. Martin, Perouse, and others in the country of Pledmont? what wars and bloud-shed there hapned, what extremity the poore people were put un∣to by the Lord of Trinity his Army, may be seen in Acts and Monuments the 2 volume page 202.
3. What misery hath befallen in the realme of France, touching dissention about Religion between the Papists and Protestants, containing some Kings raigns: what bloud was shed in those battels and wars between the two parties, may be seen in the Soveraigne power of Paliaments and kingdomes, the 3d part, written by Mr. William Prin, page the 34, and so forth. 4. What wars and bloudshed followed in Germany of late years about Munster, be∣tween the common people and the nobilitie, about matters touching religion, is best known unto those that have read the history. Lastly; What wars and miseries have followed in this nation within this few years, experience hath taught us, the principle quarrell being about religion: and although I do not dispute the lawfulnesse of the Parliaments just warr in respect of civill rights, having my selfe taken part with the Parliament, and by their Authority born arms to defend my civill rights; yet touching religion, when I consider the Lord Jesus being king of peace, me thinks there should no arms be taken up to defend religion: and although I do acknowledg, that it is our Saviours words, that he came not to send peace on the earth, but the sword; that is, after the preaching of the Gospel, there would follow wars and combustions among the nations; yet I do not find, that he left any example by any of his messengers, that private subjects should defend their religion by the sword: neither do I question but that lawfull Authority may defend their religion by armes; but this I find, that in most of our Reformations, England onely excepted, where the change hath been made by the Prince or State, that at one time or other the subjects have taken arms to defend their religion against Au∣thority. These things being considered diligently, I leave it to the judicious rea∣der to judge, whether that of the Prophet Isaiah may not be applied unto all our Re∣formations, I mean in outward discipline and order, in his 50. chapter, verse 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compasse your selves about with sparks; walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled; this shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow; and I shall leave it also to the people of God themselves to consider, if the reformers in those severall ages may not justly take up that complaint of the Church in that 26. of the Prophet Isaiah, verse the 18. We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the earth fallen: which experi∣ence doth fully teach in all those Reformations, for the inhabitants of the world are not yet fallen, which all the foregoing premises diligently considered, makes me un∣doubtedly be perswaded that the Lord will not deliver his people by themselves, in any of those waies which are now practised, but will deliver his people by him∣self, in some extraordinary manner, at his next appearing, which will be like light∣ning. Now the summe of all that hath been said, gathered up together, is this, that du∣ring the sleep of the people of God, the enemies came and sowed tares among the wheat, the servants neglecting their duty of being watchfull; these tares are grown too many for the good seed, and have got possession in the Church, and have captivated the people of God, and have brought them into bondage, under which they must lie untill the great deliverer come to deliver them. But me thinks I heare a question put, which hath already been put to me, that is, What profession is this man of, for he seems to be contrary to all men? this seems to us to be strange doctrine, that the people of God must lie in bondage under the an∣tichristian state, and may not deliver themselves by Gospel order; what profession is this man of?
To which I answer, that I am a man which desires, so farr as my infirmity will give me leave, and the Lord inable me against it, to keep faith and a good Conscience, and by watching and prayer to wait for my Masters coming: and if for my admonition I gain nothing from the men of every profession but evill will, and it may be reproa∣ches, which have happened already, I passe not, if I be judged; leaving the matter to God. However I have not hid my talent in a napkin, but have declared that light I have received, wherein I have not presumed to a prophets office, that is, to declare hidden things; but what is, I conceive, revealed in the word, (though mystically) and I do not remember that ever I heard or read of any that treated of this mater, which did incourage me in the work. And if, as I say, I gain evill will for it, it is no more then what the prophet Jeremiah met with, which he complaines of in chapter 15, 10. where he saith, Wo is me, my Mother, that thou hast born me a man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole Earth; I have not lent on usury, neither have men lent to me on usury, yet every one of them doth curse me; which shewes that he had done nothing in the world worthy of blame, but had behaved him∣selfe honestly among all men; yet neverthelesse, because he taught them to sub∣mit themselves, where God had subjected them; therefore he complaines that every one doth curse him: which if it be my lot, I have done my duty, and shall leave the is∣sue to God. But it may be objected; if we may not look to have the ordinances restored a∣gain in their purity, because the glory is departed from them; why, what is then to be done? To which I answer; that I have propounded my light that I have received, desi∣ring no man to follow it further then he seeth it to be truth; in the mean time I leave every man to walk in humility according to the dictates of his own conscience; and where his conscience leads him, let him practise; but let him beware he do not say, See here is Christ, and see there is Christ; for the next appearing will be a glory so excellent, as it will bury all earthly administrations; and let him also remember, that it is not Circumcision nor uncircumcision that availeth any thing; but a new Creature. And for as much as I as yet can find no Rule in Scripture concerning outward ad∣ministrations for the people of God to walk in after the abomination is set up, which makes the ordinances desolate of the Spirit of God, and drives the glory of God from all outward administrations, as experience teacheth us; therefore my admonition will be this; That let every man strive earnestly by watching and prayer, giving the Lord no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth: and if we in outward carriage towards men do watch over our own corruptions, and order our lives and conversations aright, and in our worship towards God, use prayer and praises from a pure heart, which is the only sacrifice he accepts, we have his promise, which cannot ly, that unto such he will shew the salvation of God, Psalm the 50. 23. And so much for this sleepy and dead condition of the people of the Lord Jesus Christ. It hath been a question put by some to me, how I proved the four beasts which did give glory to God, upon which I grounded my book, called, Some Discoveries of the mysteries of the last times, to be four dispensations of the people of God, under which they ly in severall shapes or conditions; which, to satisfie all men that doubt of the truth of that exposition, I desire such men to look Revelation the 5. 8, 9, 10, verses; where it is said, And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having harpes, and golden viols full of odours, which are she prayers of the Saints; and they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seales thereof, for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and hast made us unto our God Kings, and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth; which proof through a mistake was left out, which now I have inserted to satisfie all men which doubt the truth of it. I shall now in the fourth place, speak of the fourth particular in order; That the Lord Jesus will appear most gloriously to deliver his people by himself; And this all the prophets bear witness unto. As first, the prophet David in the 50. Psalm and 2. verse, where speaking of the Lords glorious appearing, saith, Out of Sion the perfection of beauty hath God shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him: The like in Psalm 45. 3. he saith, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, ô thou most mighty, withthy glory and majesty, and in thy majesty ride on prosperously. The like he saith in Psalm 72. speaking of the peace and righteousness which should flourish in Christs kingdome in the type of Solomon, the 9. verse, And blessed be his glorious name for ever and ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his glory, amen, amen. So in the 97. Psalm the prophet saith, (spea∣king of the glory and majesty of Christs Kingdome) The Lord raigneth, let the earth rejoyce, let the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof; clouds and darkness are round a∣bout him, righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne; a fire goeth before him, and burneth up all his enemies, his lightnings lightned the world: the earth saw and trembled. The like Isaiah, speaking of the glory of Christs kingdome, in chapter 4. 2. and 22. 22, 23. and 63. 1, 2, 3. in all which places of the same prophet, mention is made of abundance of glory, at the Lords appearing to deliver his people. So like∣wise Ezekiel chapter 43. 2. and Daniel chapter 7 14. Hosea 6. 3. Micah 4. 1, 2, 3. Nahum the first and 3. Habakuk 3. 2, 3. in all which places there is mention made, that when the Lord appears and restores his people, there will be abundance of glory. Secondly, I shall proceed to speak of that glory that is set forth in the new Testa∣ment, as Matthew 17. 1. Mark 9. 2. Luke 17. 24. Matthew 24. 27. 2 Thessalonians 2. 8. Rev. 14. 15. and 14. 1. and 18. 1. and 19. 11, 12, 13. In all which places there is men∣tion made of that glorious appearing of the Lord Jesus, when he comes to deliver his people. Now it being so, that the next appearing of the Lord Jesus will be with abundance of glory, according to his own speech unto his disciples, Matthew the 16. 28. which was performed unto Peter, James and John, in Matthew 17. 2. and according as those texts before mentioned do abundantly prove, It will be therefore necessary to see and consider, whether there be any glory at present any way answerable to these texts of Scripture above quoted; or any way coming neer unto it, among the severall pro∣fessions of this age; as for those single congregations which go under the name of Independent, or Baptist, or any other which profess to walk in the way of the Gospel, no nor yet the Seekers, they ascribe unto themselves no such thing. But for those men which go under the vulgar name of Ranters, they do ascribe unto themselves a great perfection; namely, that they are come to Sion, and enjoy God perfectly, and that God is all in all unto them, and that the Son in them hath delivered up the kingdom unto God the Father, as may be seen in their books; therfore let us examine what sign of glory is so excellent amongst them; As first to begin with their persons; as they are men, I am not able to discern as yet, but that they are men subject to the like passions as
other men, and therefore in that respect no such glory; as for those miseries which are incident unto mans life, as hunger, thirst, cold, heat, sicknesse, and diseases which are common to men, they have their part, as other men, for ought I can yet see; and therefore no such glory: As for those gifts and graces of the spirit, as faith, hope, love, self-deniall, meeknesse, temperance, patience I see no greater measure in them then in other Christians; and therefore no such glory: As for perfection and a life free from sin, and uncleannesse, I see no such excel∣lency in them more then in other sorts of Christians, as it were boasting that they can do such and such things, which are in themselves wicked, and yet unto them with∣out sin; therefore in that respect no such glory: As for any spirit of infallibility in them, speaking as the oracles of God, more in them, then in other Christians, I see no difference; nay what prophesies of theirs are come to passe? therefore no such glory in the least degree. Therefore I conceive I may conclude with this argument against them, that the first appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ both in himselfe and in his Apostles was glorious, witnesse the spirit descending like a dove upon him, and also upon his Apostles there did appeal unto them cloven tongues, like un∣to fire, and sat upon them, and they were filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 2. 3, 4. But the second appearance of Jesus Christ will be with much more glory, as may be seen Mathew 17. 2. But that perfection and glory of the Lord Jesus Christ in those men as they pretend, comes short of the glory of the first times, as experience witnesseth; therefore I conceive, I may safely conclude this is no appearance of that second glory which shall be revealed, which the Lord hasten in his due time. I shall now in the fifth place speak of the suddenesse of the Lord his appearance, therefore pray mind the Prophet Isaiah in his 66. 7, 8. where speaking of that mar∣velous change, which shall be wrought in the world at that great restoring of all things; saith, before she (that is, the Church) travelled, she brought forth; before her pain came she was dilivered of a man child; and then he calls upon all to take notice of this strange work, saying, who hath heard such a thing, who hath seen such a thing? shall the earth be made to bring forth in a day, or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Sion travelled, she brought forth her children: shewing the suddenness of that marvellous work which the Lord will perform, when he delivers his people out of their captivity, wherein they have lain captivated among the nations for so many a∣ges. So the Evangelist Matthew speaking of the suddenness of the Lords appearing in chap. 24. 27. saith, For as the lightning cometh out of the East, and shineth unto the west, so shall the coming of the son of man be; now what can be more sudden then lightning? for mark the effects of lightning, it is a glory so sudden and so quick, as a man can∣not compare any thing to be so sudden; for it spreads in a moment so speedily, as a mans thought cannot be more sudden or speedy: so in the same chapter the 44. verse, he saith, therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think not, the son of man cometh; The like Marke 13. 35. speaking of the sudden approach of the Lord Jesus, he exhorteth them; watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house cometh; at even, or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, or in the morning, lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. So Luke the 12. 39. where exhorting them how they should carry themselves in regard of the Lords sudden appearing, he saith, And this know; that if the good man of the house had known at what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to have been broken up; be you therefore ready also, for the son of man cometh in an hour when ye think not on. The like warn∣ing
gives the Apostle Paul, the first Thessalonians 5. 2. in his exhortation unto them he saith, For ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord cometh as a thiefe in the night; for when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destru∣ction as travell upon a woman: so likewise the same Apostle Paul in the first of the Corinthians 15. 52. where speaking of that great change which should be wrought upon those that are alive at the Lords appearing, saith, In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump. In all which places, it is cleer from the word of God without contradiction, that the Lords appearing will be sudden and unex∣pected. I shall now in the sixth place speak of the severall enemies the people of the Lord Jesus have had in these severall dispensations; As first, no sooner did the Lord Jesus appear to go about to exercise his ministry, and to gather disciples, and to make himself known to the world, but the divell, un∣der the notion of the Dragon, by his head, which I conceive were the Emperours; and by his tail, which were false Ministers, with the Scribes and Pharisees, did go about to persecute him, untill hee had by his instruments wrought his death, and so he was caught up to heaven, Revel. the 12. and 5. So likewise, after our Saviours Ascensi∣on into heaven, and the promise of the holy Ghost being come upon the Apostles, and the Church being cloathed with the sun or spirit, and having a crown of twelve starrs, that is, the Apostles beginning to exercise their Commission in distributing the Ordinances, and in gathering of Churches, immediately the Dragon transforms himself into an Angel of light, and creeps in amongst them, and doth trouble and afflict them in their Ministry; and this all the Apostles complain of in their severall Epistles: And these false Apostles which were crept into the Church, I conceive to be the tail of the Dragon, by which he did draw the third part of the starrs of heaven, and did cast them unto the earth. Secondly, the Dragon not being content in persecuting the Church by false Mi∣nisters which were his tail, but he likewise falls to persecute them by his head, which is the Emperour, and the Magistrate of the Empire, which lasted three hundred yeers, all the time of the Ten persecutions, and by troubles and afflictions he doth waste and spoil the Church of Jesus Christ; which time I conceive to be that battell which was in heaven, wherein Michael fought and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels; in which battell the Dragon is cleerly cast out of heaven: For whereas before, when there was but little persecution in respect of the heat which was during the later perse∣cutions, the Dragon had still some false Ministers among the saints, under the vizard of true Christians; now in the heat of this persecution, they all not being sincere, did not abide the tryall; but like as chaffe in a fresh winde is divided from the good seed, so in the violence of persecution the good seed continued immovable, but the chaffe was scattered, and so the Dragon was cast unto the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. And yet notwitstanding all this, the Church increaseth, and go∣eth on conquering in despite of the dragon; for it is said, Revel. 12. 21. And they o∣vercame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto death: Which shews plainly, that notwithstanding the Dragon did what hee could by his head and tail, yet neverthelesse the people of Jesus Christ did still prevail, to the overthrow of the Dragon and his Angels, by the help of Mi∣chael, which is Jesus Christ, and did cast him and his Angels out of heaven unto the earth. And for the exposition of the Dragons head to be such as are in Authority, and for his tail to be false Ministers, it is the exposition of the holy Ghost by Isaiah,
in the 9th chapter and 15th verse, The ancient and honourable he is the head, and the Prophet that teacheth lies he is the tail: And thus the Dragon did afflict the people of the Lord Jesus in the first dispensation, which lasted, according to the accompt of Mr Fox in his Acts and Monuments of the Church of England, to the yeer from the Na∣tivity of Christ 324, in the first Volume, pag. 520. Now the Dragon having received this repulse, being cast unto the earth, he now tryes another course: for whereas he failed by his subtilty in thrusting in false Apo∣stles amongst the Churches, and also failing by his open violence of persecution; he now out of that afflicted estate of the Church wherein persecution followed upon persecution, like the waves of the sea; I say, out of this sea of persecution and troubles of the Church, raises a beast: for no sooner did the Roman Empire become Christian under Constantine, but immediately the Church fals asleep, and loseth her integrity, and by ease and riches, pleasure and profit, she in time becomes of a suf∣ferer a persecuter; and what the divels could not attain one way, he now tryeth ano∣ther way, and prevailes; and whereas Sathan acted by the Roman Empire heathen by open violence, and could do no good; now by the Roman Empire becoming Christian he gaines his desire; and the Roman Empire or beast Christian in conclu∣sion under the name of Christ, persecutes as much as did the Roman Empire, being heathen. But this being a matter of great consequence, needs much proofe, which I shall endeavour to prove, as the Lord shall direct me. As for proofes from history of time, I have but little, being a man unlearned, there∣fore my proofe must be from Scripture, therefore pray mind; you have the dragon in the 12. of the Revelation and 3. verse, set forth by those marks, viz. A great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven Crownes upon his heads; which, I conceive, was the severall Emperours which were Enemies to the people of God, and did persecute them; signified by the number of seaven; and the Crowns were upon these heads, that is, the government rested upon them; he had also ten hornes, which signified the severall nations which were a strength to the Roman Empire, and were under the subjection of the Roman Monarch; now pray mind, in the begin∣ning of the 13. chapter it is said, And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads, and ten hornes; and upon his horns ten crownes, and upon his heads the names of blasphemy; and the beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a lyon, and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great Authority. Now pray mark, that whereas the dragon or Roman Empire heathen had his crowns upon his heads, that is, the government remained among the Emperours touching the administration of the common wealth, and had the ten hornes or ten nations as a strength to the Em∣pire, subject unto them; so the beast which did rise out of the sea, or the Empire Christian, had his crownes upon his horns, that is, upon the nations, which were a strength unto the Empire Christian, and had authority in all civill things, so far as to do the commandments of the Roman bishops; and whereas the heads of the beast had upon them the name of blasphemic; this I take to be the Popes of Rome, being the heads, did arrogate the name of supreme bishop, and did begin to sit in the tem∣ple of God, shewing himself as if he were God, forgiving sins, and doing what he listed in the Church of God; which, without a sufficient warrant from Scripture rule for him to do so, was no better then blasphemy: this beast also was like unto a leopard, that is, all spotted with sin and uncleanness, as his doings in future times makes it appeare; his feet as the feet of a beare, scraping together the goods of the nations unto himself, as is witnessed in Acts and Monuments of the Church of England,
the first volume in many places; and his mouth as the mouth of a lion, speaking cru∣ell things, and commanding all men by his Excommunications, and cursing them to hell if they did not obey all his commandments; and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority, and this the experience of things testifieth; for the Em∣perours by degrees did give unto the Popes great power, insomuch as in time the Popes began to depose Emperours, and set up others in their stead, and left them in time wholly their seat, which was Rome. Now I am perswaded to beleeve that the beast which did arise out the sea, to be the Empire Christian under the Pope, by these ensuing reasons; first, because this beast which did arise out of the sea, is as it were a compound of the three beasts which did arise out of the sea, Daniel the 7. having his body like unto a leopard, imitating the Macedonian Monarch; and his feet as the feet of a bear, like unto the Persian Mo∣narch; and his mouth as the mouth of a lion, speaking with such a commanding voyce, as did the Babylonian Monarch; now these put together, will make the fourth beast, which was dreadfull and terrible. Now what people or government hath been in the world, that hath had and exercised the like cruelty as hath the Roman Empire Christian, under the Pope, especially upon his own subjects? for when I consider what blood hath been spilt by that Romish beast, upon such as any way differed from him in Religion, being put to death with all the rigour that could be imagined, wher∣of burning is the highest; and all to uphold that blasphemous title of Head of the Church; and also when I diligently ponder that infinite blood which hath been spilt among Christian Princes, stirred up thereto by the Pope, somtime for the patrymony of the Church, as they call it, fighting for the temporall possessions of the Church; somtime raised to destroy Hereticks, as he called them, which were protected by their Princes against his fury; somtime by means of schism which happened between the Popes, there being somtimes two, and somtimes three at one time, which amounts to such a summ, as I think cannot be paralelld in the world for infiniteness; no not a∣mong the most barbarous nations. And which is to be much more lamented, it being among such men and such people as acknowledge themselves to be subjects to the Lord, Jesus, which is King of peace; which, how well it hath agreed to their profession I leave it to themselves to judge; so that I conceive that the description of the fourth beast, cannot in all likelyhood be applied to any other then the Roman Empire hea∣then; but more especially to the Roman Empire Christian, Daniel 7. 7. A second reason moving me to beleeve that the beasts which did arise out of the sea to be the Empire Christian under the Pope, is from the dragon giving him his power, and his seat, and great authority; for how can we expound the dragon to be any other then the Roman Empire heathen? and did not the Empire, as soon as it turned Christian almost, come into the Popes hands by degrees, at the least spiritually? So also was not Rome the seat of the Emperor? but it quickly became the feat of the Pope; so likewise how quickly had the Bishop of Rome such Authority as he made Emperours, and again deposed them? A third reason I ground from these prophesies, as Isaiah the 13. 10. and 14. 13, 14. Ezekiel 28. 2, 14, 15. with the whole chapter, Daniel 11. 36. 2 Thess. 2. 4. Revelation 13. 5. In all which places there is mention made of one that shall exalt himself above all, yea above God himselfe, as the most of these prophesies witnesse. Now if there can be any Monarch found, or any government upon earth that doth exalt him∣self as the Pope doth, it may be applied to him; but I never read of any that came neer unto that blasphemy which the Pope hath applied to himselfe, and that hath been by his favorites applied unto him, as to be the universall Bishop, to be the head of
the Church, not to be subject to errour, with divers other the like titles; as you may find in part in the Acts and Monuments of the Church of England; but at large more fully set forth by Bishop Jewel in the Apology of the Church of England, in his answer to Mr. Harding. A fourth Reason which induceth me to beleeve, that the beast that did arise out of the sea to be the Empire Christian under the Pope, is grounded from that glory and outward riches which is to be seen in the Church of Rome, which was prophesied to be enjoyed in these Scriptures; as namely, Isaiah 13. 19. and 14. 4, 11. and 47. 7. Ezekiel. 27. read the whole chapter; Revelations 17. 4. and 18. read the whole chapter: now when I consider the outward poverty and contempt which was upon the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles, and upon the whole Church in the primitive times; and that glory and outward pompe which is and hath been in the Church of Rome, ever since the empire became Christian, I cannot finde but that the Church of Rome must be the beast which did arise out of the sea, and is that woman that was decked with gold, and pearles, and precious stones, Revelation the 17. 4. A Fifth Reason which moves me to beleeve the beast that did come out of the sea to be the Empire Christian under the Pope is by those prophesies, Isaiah 47. 7. Zephaniah 2. 15. Revelation 18. 7. In which places is set forth the flourishing condition of the Enemies of Gods people, and their boasting of their Rule and Authority, and that it should abide for ever; and this I found to be performed in a book lately come to my hand, called, A lost sheep returned home, written by a new converted Catholick, wherein he glorieth in that flourishing condition of the Church of Rome, and that the gates of hel shall not prevail against her, in the latter end of his twenteth chapter, page the 296. A sixth Reason that induceth me to beleeve the Church of Rome to be the beast that did arise out of the sea, I ground from these Scriptures, Isaiah 14. 20. Rev. 17. 6. and 18. 24. in which places Babylon is reproved for destroying of her land and slaying of her people, and in her was found the blood of the prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth: which thing considered; where hath there been more blood spilt of the servants of God then in her? being as it were nothing but destruction at∣tending upon them that in anything transgresse any of her decrees, and canons and constitutions. Seventhly, I am moved to beleeve the Church of Rome ruled by the Pope, to be that beast which did arise out of the sea, which I prove by these Scriptures, Isaiah 24. 5. Daniel. 7. 25. Ezekiel 34. 18. in which places is mentioned those that should change the Lawes, and alter the government of the people of God; as is cleer from those places. Now when I consider how much the ordinances of Jesus Christ are changed in that Church from the first constitutions, I cannot see to whom or to what government these Scriptures can be applied better then to the Church of Rome. The eighth Reason which perswadeth me to beleeve that the Church of Rome un∣der the Pope to be that beast which did arise out of the sea, I ground from these Scriptures, Isaiah the 65. 5. and 66. 5. in which places mention is made of a people, that should boast themselves to be the people of God, and should despise others, and count themselves more holy then any other, and should cast out all other which did any way differ from them; and saying in pretence thereof, Let the Lord be glorified. Now to whom may this be more fitly applied then to the Jewes in the letter, be∣ing once the people of God; and the Church of Rome in the mystery, havinig also
the people of God? and under that notion persecure the people of God both with excommunication, in casting them out of their society, and also not suffering of them to have a being among men? and all this under pretence of glorifying God. Now if there can be any society found in the world which doth so fully agree to this thing, as doth the Church of Rome, why then let it be applied unto them; but I con∣ceive there will be none found that come neer to that people in those things, therefore I conclude and may safely suppose these Scriptures may be applied unto them in the mystery. The ninth Reason which moves me to beleeve the beast which did arise out of the sea to be the Empire Christian under the Pope, I take from Revelation the 17. 5. where speaking of Babylon, he saith, The mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth. Now when I consider that Jerusalem in the letter, did commit so much spirituall whordome against her God, Ezekiel the 16, I conceive there is in the my∣stery some people, which in the Christian Church should commit Idolatry and spi∣rituall whordome against their God, to answer the type before spoken of; and I know not where to apply it so fitly as unto the Church of Rome, which ascribes unto her selfe a title to the Church of Jesus Christ, and was once the people of God. Tenthly, and lastly, I am perswaded that the Church of Rome is that beast which did arise out of the sea, from that text Revelation the 17. 5. where it is said, And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT; where note, all this is done in a mystery; this is not Babylon in the letter, that is, Babylon in plain termes; but it is Babylon in a mystery, the Church of God, as is pretended, which under the title of Christs Church, persecutes his members: and yet not so in a mystery, but that he is discovered of some, and would be of more; but that the word of God must be fulfilled, which saith, For this cause God shall send them strong de∣lusions, that they should beleeve a ly. Thus having discoursed of this beast which did arise out of the sea, which is an E∣nemy unto the people of the Lord Jesus in their slumbring and declining condition, I will, God enabling me, speak some thing of the standing and time of this beast; therfore pray mind; It is said Revelation 11. 2. But the court which is without the tem∣ple (meaning as I conceive the ordinances) leave out, and measure it not; (that is, take no care of it) for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot 42. mouths. By Gentiles I understand not gentiles in profession; for so much as it cannot be said that the Gentiles or heathen do tread under foot the holy city; but by Gentiles in this place I understand men that are gentiles in manners; having in effect forsaken the faith of Christ; which I take to be the Church of Rome, having possession of the Church, or holy city of God, and tread under feet the people of God, and dispense with the ordinancts of God at their pleasure, which is the court or out∣ward part of the temple, which is given to them to tread under feet 42. months. And it is said in the 13. chapter and 5. verse, And there was given unto him (speaking of the beast which did arise out of the sea,) a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemy; and power was given unto him to continue 42. months, (which two texts I conceive do mean one and the same thing) which is, counting a day for a year, 1260. years. Now if this time do begin at the ceasing of the persecution by Licinas Empe∣rour of the East, as I suppose it doth; which was according to Mr. Foxe's Accompt in the year of the nativity of Christ 324. then the time of the Raign of the beast was compleat according to this accompt 1584. which is since according to the accompt of the Church of England 66. years; so that all this time of the Raign of this beast
from the year 324. at the ceasing of the persecution, untill the year 1584. this beast did go on and encrease in power, and did persecute the people of the Lord Jesus. Now if it be said, That there was a time between the raising of persecution by the Dragon, or Empire Heathen, and the persecution by the beast Christian; which, ac∣cording to Mr Fox's accompt was a thousand years. To this I answer, First, That this was the slumbring or sleepie condition of the Church: For as soon as the Church began to have case and riches given her, she fell asleep, and declined; which opportunity being offered, the enemy sowed tares a∣mongst the wheat; and as the tares sprung up and brought forth fruit, they shewed themselves. In which time of the Churches declining the tares were not discovered, and therefore for that time there could not be in reason any persecution, because of the sleep of the servants; and these tares by reason of the sleep of the servants, grew too many for the good seed, and had gotten possession of the Church of God, and did in time grow so wicked, as they caused the servants to awake. But secondly, Although there was no persecution for causes of Religion; yet the Pope or beast Christian was an enemy unto the people of the Lord Jesus in these par∣ticulars; as First, The Pope or bishop of Rome was an enemy unto the people of God, by intruding himself into the Church of God, in claiming to himself to be Universal Bishop, and thereby doing injury to his fellow bishops, and causing contention to arise in the Church of God, contrary to any rule of Scripture. Secondly, he having gotten this universall title unto himself, was an enemie unto the people of God by his negli∣gence in suffering and permitting such grosse errors by degrees to grow in the Church of God; and therby the Pope was an enemy to the people of Jesus Christ in claiming to himself to be head of the Church of Jesus Christ, which is a title peculiarly belon∣ging to the Lord Jesus; and having gotten this title, to suffer the people of the Lord Jesus to be seduced. But then Thirdly, Though there was no persecution in the Church of Rome, or during the raign of the beast christian, for neer one thousand years, in respect of religion, and in respect of any people walking contrary to the common multitude; yet neverthelesse, the Pope with his Clergy, were enemies to the people of the Lord Jesus, and did cause abundance of bloud to be shed by the wars which were raised in the Empire, by means of the Pope striving with the Emperour and other Princes for temporall possessions, and also in striving with the Emperour and other Christian Princes to gain them to submit unto the Popes yoke for many temporall matters; in desposing Emperours and Princes, and setting up others in their steads; where∣by followed miserable wars and devastations in the world, which is lamentable to relate; and in striving with the Emperour and other Christian Princes, to gain out of their hands the election of Bishops, and other head officers in the Church; which the Pope by degrees did wrest out of the hands of the Emperour and other Christian Princes, contrary to the ancient custome of the nations, and for which there was much contention and bloud-shed in the Christian world; besides the op∣pression of him and his officers and legats, in raking together the goods of the Churches in the nations, and setting up of alians and forrainers in the bene∣fices of the nations, but especially here in England, to the impoverishing of the nations, and to the ruine of the people, for want of teaching, as may be seen at large in Acts and Monuments of the Church of England, volume the first; in many places. Fourthly, The Pope or beast Christian, were great enemies unto the people of
the people of the Lord Jesus, in respect of divisions and schisms which were in the Popes Church by means of several Popes; there being somtime two, sometime three, as was in the beginning of the councell of Constance the Emperour, and Christain Princes fal∣ling in dissention and taking parts about them, each maintaining his Pope which that government had set up, insomuch as King Henry the fourth of England, writing to the Pope to be a means to cease the Schisme in the Church, relates to him, that by the vote of men there were to the number of 200000 men slain in the parts of the world, among Christian Princes about the division of the Popes, by means of wars raised up in that quarrel: As also 30000 souldiers slain in war about the Bishop∣prick of Leodiem, between two set up, one by the authority of one Pope, the other by the authority of the other Pope, which relates to such a summe, as I think all men will acknowledg that the Pope or beast Christian hath been an enemie to the people of God, before he began to persecute for the cause of religion; as may be seen in the same letter of King Henry the fourth; Acts and Monuments, page the 720. the first volume. Then fifthly, After the abomination was fully set up, which I take to be in the year 1215. then began to follow persecution for the cause of religion; it being the time that the people of the Lord Jesus were mystically commanded to fly to the moun∣tains, Matthew the 24. when speedily followed the waking of the servants, in which they did desire to deliver themselves, and began to see the grosse and wicked idolatry which was committed, and began to fly and avoid it, and did hope to gather thetares from the good seed, or at least to separate them, and to draw themselves out from amongst them; but alas too late, for antichrist had goten possession; then immedi∣ately followed persecution in such a measure, as I think there was more bloud shed for cause of conscience, then there was in any time of the persecution of the Empire heathen, as it is yet fresh in memory, and may be abundantly seen in the Acts and Monuments of the Church of England. Now sixthly, as the servants began to wake and to look about them and to increase in knowledg, and the time of the prosperity of the beast began to be at the height, and should decay, Martin Luther steps forth, and fulfils that prophesie Revelation the 13. 3 for he gives a wound unto the beast; for whereas the doctrine of merits by works was one of the principal heads of the beast, and the greatest of all his power, this Mar∣tin Luther did oppose with great might, and with much successe, insomuch as he gave a deadly wound unto the beast; but we have sinc eseen by experience this deadly wound healed, and all the world wondreth after the beast in a manner; for they see order in the Church of Rome, though by a wrong power, but amongst us nothing but dis∣order; and this we may speak with grief of heart, and there is reason for it, which I have abundantly proved already, and may further, God assisting me, cleer it here∣after: besides, the loosnesse of Protestants at large, as I may term them, and our di∣visions and loosnesse in our practices makes him get heart, and to hope to gaine all againe of what he hath lost; or at least to hold that which he hath; and this St. John seems to intimate unto us in Revelation the 17. 8. where he saith, When they beheld the beast that was, and is not, and yet is; shewing, as I conceive, that at the change of the beast he should so lose his power, as he should as it were seem not to be, and yet after he should recover strength againe, and have a being, untill the Lord destroy him with the spirit of his mouth, and with the brightnesse of his coming, Isaiah the 11. 42 Thes. 2. 8. which can in reason be expounded to be no other but Rome under the Pope, as I have proved by ten reasons. Now forasmuch as there is one principal text Matthew 24. 15. upon which text de∣pendeth
almost all the following part of the chapter, as an exhortation of the Lord Jesus unto his disciples, how they should carry themselves when once the abomination which makes desolate is set up: and therefore I shall shew what I take this aborninati∣on to be, and therefore pray mind; I take this abomination not to be the destruction of Jerusalem, which did follow within 40. years after the passion of Christ, as I have already proved. But I take this abomination of desolation to be that Idol of the bread which in the Church of Rome is transubstantiated into the reall body of Christ as the Papists teach, or in short, the real presence of the sleshly body of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, as they call it; which Idolatry I take to be the grossest Idolatry that ever was committed by any civill or religious nation or nations, and about which there hath so much bloud of the Saints of Jesus Christ been spilt in the kingdome of the Pope, as the like hath not been seen in any age for one thing. But because this is a matter of much consequence, I shall produce severall reasons for the proofe there∣of. Wherefore my first reason shall be from the text it self, where it is said, When you shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place; that is, something that standeth in the holy place, which drives the presence of Gods spirit out of that place that was once holy. A second reason I take from that text Daniel the 11. 31. which is the place of the prophet, as I conceive, which our Saviour meant, where it is said, speaking of An∣tiochus, And armies shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the Sanctuary of strength, and they shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that ma∣keth desolate: Which text was fulfilled the first of Maccabees, the first chapter 54. ver, which was a type of that abomination which our Saviour speaketh of, meaning, as I conceive that of Daniel the 11. 31. now as Antiochus by his power did pollute the tem∣ple of the Lord, by commanding the daily sacrifice to cease, and did set up the Idol of abomination upon the Altar of God, where by the spirit of God departed from that worship; even so in the mystery the Pope hath changed the communion into the sacri∣fice of the Masse, and real presence in the Sacrament, and caused the people to wor∣ship it, so that by reason of that idolatry, the spirit of God is departed from that ad∣ministration. Thirdly, that whereas the Lord Jesus having instituted his last supper to be pra∣ctised in Remembrance of his death till he come, and made no mention of worshipping it, the Pope contrarily maketh it a sacrifice, and commandeth the people to worship it, thereby forcing the spirit of God from that worship, Luke 22. 19. 1 Corinthians 11. 24. Fourthly, That whereas the Lord hath commanded Exodus the 20. that his peo∣ple should make no graven image, nor the likenesse of any thing in any place, thereby to worship it; the Pope contrary to his command maketh the reall presence in the Sa∣crament daily, under the form of bread, and commandeth the people to worship it, without any warrant from the word for their practice, thereby forcing the people to commit Idolatry; and so driveth the spirit of God from that dispen∣sation. Fifthly, That as the Jews, in time of the standing of the Temple, by their Idola∣try, and by their setting up the image of jealousie in the temple, did cause the spirit of God to depart from that worship, Ezekiel the 8. 5, 6. even so the Pope and his clergy in the mystery hath set up the image of jealousie in the Church, in turning the communion of the Lords supper from its first Institution, into the real presence of Christs fleshly body in forme of bread in the Sacrament, and commanded the peo∣ple
to worship it, thereby grieving the Spirit of God, and causing it to depart from that worship. Sixthly, that as the pastours or shepherds of the Jewes in the time of the standing of the Temple did eat up the good pasture, and drank the deep waters; which I con∣ceive was the ordinances of the Temple with the sacrifices, and did tread down the residue of the pasture with their feet, and foul the water with their feet; and caused the people to eat that which they had trodden, and to drink of the water which they had fouled with their feet, Ezekiel the 34. 18, 19. Even so I conceive the Popes Clergie have defiled the ordinances of Jesus Christ, by altring them from their first constitution, and polluting them with their ceremonies, and causing the people to back them, and use them as they are pleased to command, and to commit Idolatry by them, and especially about the reall presence in the Sacra∣ment; Seventhly, that as Antiochus having set up the Idol of abomination that maketh de∣solate in the temple of God, and commanded the people to offer upon the Altar; and those that refused, he put to death; even so the Pope of Rome having placed the abomi∣nation of desolation, that is, as I conceive, the reall presence in the Sacrament, did persecute and put to death all those that would not worship it, and confesse this doctrine to be truth. Eightly, that as when Antiochus having placed the abomination that maketh de∣solate in the Temple of God, and in the cities of Juda; that then Matthias and his sons fled unto the mountaines for succour, the first of Maccabees 2. 28. Even so the Lord Jesus adviseth his disciples, that when ye therefore shall see the abomination of de∣solation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place, whoso readeth let him understand; then let them that be in Judea fly unto the mountains, Matthew 24. 15, 16. likewise, I conceive, the people of the Lord Jesus in the mystery, are at this present to come out of the Romish Church, and to fly into the mountaines of the protestant Churches; where though in respect of the purity of the ordinances; they come short of the perfection of the first times, having lost their power, and their greatest number being Christians at large, that is, having little else but the bare profession of Jesus Christ; yet in doctrine, which are things to be beleeved, they come neer to the first times, and I do conceive they are the earth (as I shall hereafter shew, God assisting me, when I come to speake of the beast which did arise out of the Earth) unto which the woman fled, Revelation 12. 16. Ninthly, that as Antiochus after he had set up the Abomination which maketh de∣solate in the Temple of God, had such as resisted, and withstood him, and did ex∣ploits, as Matthias, and his sons and brethren, with such as regarded their God; even so when the Pope and his Clergie, having corrupted the ordinances, and set up the abomination which maketh desolate, and commanded the people to worship it; had such as did soon resist and withstand him with the losse of their bloud; and that not a few, but many, as may be seen in Acts and Monuments, at large trea∣ted of. Tenthly, and lastly, that as Antiochus, when he did defile the Temple of Je∣rusalem, and set up the abomination that maketh desolate, had armes to stand on his part, which were the nations that were Enemies unto the Jewes; and had such as did wickedly against the covenant to joyn with him, Daniel the 11. 31, 32. 1. Maccabees 1. 50. Even so the Pope, when he did defile the Church of God, by setting up the a∣bomination that maketh desolate in the Church; I mean the reall presence in the
Sacrament, and command the people to worship it, had armes to stand on his side; and doubtless all that forsook the covenant, being many of the order of Monks, that were the first devisers of transubstantiation; for in a councell which was held in Laterane at Rome, under Pope Innocent the third, were gathered together through the christian world of severall nations to the number of 1300. Bishops; which ina∣cted transubstantiation as a Law to be set up throughout the whole Church in the year 1215. and then in the year 1220, Pope Honorius the third, in another Coun∣cell, inacted Elevation and Adoration of the Sacrament; and thus was the Abo∣mination of desolation set up in the Church of God as a law, and all men com∣manded to worship it; and so the Spirit of God forsook that Administration, as you may see at large Acts and Monuments, the second volume, page the 457. 460. So that from these foregoing Reasons, I supose, I may safely conclude; that it is somthing in the mystery in the church of God, which the Pope is prossessed with, that is, the abomination that maketh desolate, and drives the Spirit of God from his own worship; and I know nothing in the church of Rome whereunto this may be applied so fitly as to the reall presence in the Sacrament, or the fleshly body of Christ under the form of bread; and if this in particular may be applied unto the abomination that maketh desolate, then much more when all the ordinances of Jesus Christ in that Church are corrupted from their first purity; either in substance or in form, by adding many ceremonies unto them, and the people forced to receive them as they command. Thus having finished the description of the Beast which did arise out of the sea, and spoken of the time of his standing and prevailing in the Church; we wil now come to speak, God assisting, something of the beast which is to arise out of the earth: and be∣cause I am not certain whether this beast be up or not, I shall not speak much of him, only I shall speak somthing of the earth from whence this beast doth arise. It is a prin∣ciple amongst men, that earth in Scripture phrase signifies men of earthly condition, being flesh, and not guided by the spirit of God; or if you will, by earth you may take men of the meanest rank and quality in the world, that is, the vulgar multitude; whom Mr. Prin in his Soveraignty of Parliaments and Kingdoms, makes to be the originall of Authority in temporall things; Reasoning thus; that there was a people before there was a King; And this people did originally chuse their King. Now ac∣cording to this principle; If the Soveraignty of Authority remain in the people, from whence the government ariseth, and this Authority, be it a King or common∣wealth, which you will, have power to make Lawes in the church of Christ, and have derived their Authority from the multitude, and ascribe unto themselves the title of Head of the church of Christ; it will come to passe, that the multitude in generall originally, and the King or state derivatively will be the head of the church of Jesus Christ; which hath come to passe already in the severall nations of the protestants; and this Saint John seems to intimate, Revelation the 16. 19. where it is said, And the cities of the nations fell; where note, I conceive Saint John doth not treat in this place of the civill government or state of the nations, which may be applied to the nationall cities; nor yet of the materiall cities of the nations; as London, Paris, or Madrid, which are the head cities of these three nations: but Saint John treats of things in a mystery, speaking of materiall things which have a spirituall sense; and this is eleer in Revelation the 10. 7. where he saith, But in the voyce of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he hath declared by his servants the Prophets; wherein is plainly declared that the prophets in severall ages of the world, have for the most part declared their prophesie in a mystery: and for proof of it, I shall alledg two places of many, name∣ly
Mat. 2. 15. where it is said, That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the pro∣phet, out of Egypt have I called my son. And in ver. 17. it is said, Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah, saying, In Rama was a voyce heard. In which two places can in reason be no other but a mysticall sense meant, and are taken out of Hos. 11. 1. Jer. 31. 15. Now to speak something of this Beast, I desire that these severall places of Scrip∣ture may be considered, as touching the rising of this beast; for it is said, Rev. 9. 11. speaking of the Locusts, that they had a King over them, which is the King or Angel of the bottomless pit; and then in chap. 11. 7. it is said, And when they shall have fini∣shed their testimony, the beast that did ascend out of the bottomless pit shall make warr a∣gainst them; And in chap. 13. 11. he saith, And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and he had two hornes like a lamb, and he spake like the dragon; which three places, I suppose, mean one and the same beast; which may be seen by the cohe∣rence and the agreement of the three texts, being duly considered. Now whether we may take the two hornes to signifie strength, as two Kingdomes, or whether we may take the two hornes to mean some mysticall things, I dare not judg; for so much as I suppose, the beast is not yet fully appeared, but only a preparation for him; but this we may remember, that in the last times, according as our Saviour fore∣told, there should arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signes and wonders, that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect, Mat. 24. 24. and Rev. 9. 7. And the shapes of the Locusts were like unto horses prepared to battell, and on their heads were as it were Crownes of Gold; and their faces were as the faces of men; and they had haire as the hair of women; and in chap. 13. 13. And he doth great won∣ders, so that he makes fire to come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men; and in chap. 16. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the false prophets. In all which places there is mention made of false prophets, which should deceive the people, and should stir up the nations to fight against the Lord Jesus in his people: saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an Image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword and did live, and he had power to give life unto the Image of the beast, that the Image of the beast should speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the beast should be killed. All which things considered, and insomuch as we are fallen into the last times, (not∣withstanding I dare not a ffirm any thing of certain, by means of the darknesse of the mystery, so that untill the prophesies are fufilled, we cannot attain to the opening of them; yet neverthelesse) these exhortations will be necessary for all men to take notice of; first, that insomuch as there shall come such false prophets, as if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect, and that the beast which did arise out of the Earth had two hornes like a lamb; and that by Saint Johns words, he should cause fire to come down from heaven in the sight of men, that is, the spirit, as he pretends; therefore that they would be very wary whom they trust. And secondly, that within the compasse of this ten years, we have had such fair pretences made of reformation a∣mong the clergie; and yet I beleeve, had the time suted with them, they would some∣thing have spoken like the dragon in persecuting such as could not submit themselves to their reformation; as may be seen fully, if men diligently consider their carria∣ges in this age. And thirdly; I shall admonish all those of the nations, which have the rule of the government in their hands, that they would beware what government they set up in the worship of God, and that for these reasons; First, left they make an Image of the beast which had a wound by a sword, and yet did live; Secondly, that they beware of all such as come in sheeps cloathing, and inward∣ly
are ravening wolves; left by their perswasion they cause the Image of the beast both to speak; and to cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the beast, should be killed; that is, by inciting the magistrates to fall to persecuting and killing the ser∣vants of the Lord Jesus, which cannot submit to their government, in spirituall things, which is set up. And thirdly, for so much as the government of the nations ceases to bear the image, or any image of the beast, so long as they do Justice, and relieve the di∣stressed, and defend their people committed to their charge, and for bear to persecute for cause of conscience in spirituall things: because it is the nature of beasts that prey upon others, to devour and kill the innocent sheep, and other creatures that are sub∣ject to their tyranny. And thus much by way of Exhortation to all men, that they be no occasion of setting up the beast. I shall now come to speak of the time of standing and prevailing of this beast, which I take, hath his time of beginning, though not yet discerned, at the decaying of the beast which did arise out of the sea; which was, according to my former accompt, in the yeer 1584, according to Rev. 13. 18. which will be the yeer of our Lord, according to our vulgar accompt 2250. And this I shall prove from the prophesie of Daniel, in chap. 8. 13. where it is said, Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spake, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the hoste to be trodden un∣der foot? And he said unto me, unto 2300 dayes, then shall the sanctuary be cleansed: And it is said, Hos. 6. 2. After two dayes will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Where pray take notice, a day for 1000 yeers accor∣ding to Scripture account, and I suppose these Scriptures mean one and the same thing, accounting two days for 2000 yeers: and where it is said, In the third day he will raise us up, it is meant, the beginning of the third day the Lord will deliver his people. Now if we give 1260 yeers to the first beast, then there will remain but 1040 yeers for the second beast; and this time is shortened, according to that of Matt. 24. 22. and is but the number of 666. according to Revel. 13. 18. Now whereas the prophet Daniel in chap. 12. 11. speaks of 1290 days, and promiseth a blessing unto him that cometh to the 1335 dayes, this I suppose will be the time when there shall be such troubles in the earth at the Lords appearing, wherein he shall destroy all his enemies: but in the number of yeers, I do acknowledg that I cannot bring them to a just summ, forsomuch as the 2300 is not double so much as 1290. But this thing I shall leave to the al∣seeing Providence, as all other things are to be left unto him; but this I conceive is certain, that if we take that Idol of desolation set up by Antiochus in the temple to be it, then the 2300 years are not yet out; and if we take the desolation of Jerusalem by Titus to be it, then the 1290. dayes are much past; and if we take the polluting of the ordinances to be it, then it is not yet fulfilled. However, I must leave it as a secret tou∣ching the time, waiting when the Lord will deliver his people. I shall now come to speak of the seventh particular in order, namely, the Lords de∣livering his people by himselfe, and destroying all their enemies: and this all the prophets bear witness unto; insomuch as Baalam that false prophet speaking of it, Numbers 24. 17, 19. saith, Then shall come a starr out of Jacob, and a scepter shall a∣rise out of Israel, and shall smite all the corners of Moab, and shall destroy all the chil∣dren of Seth: Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the citie: So the prophet David, speaking of the Lords appearing to deliver his people, Psalm the 50. 2. saith, Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, hath God shined; Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: and then in the 5 verse,
he gives out commission, saying, Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice; compared with Matth. 24. 31. and generally al∣most all the prophets speak of the same thing; as Isaiah the 11, the whole chapter; and 63. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verses, and 66. 15. Jeremith the 33. 15. Ezekiel the 34. 11, 12. where he saith, For thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I, even I will both search my sheep, and seek them out, as a shepherd seeketh out his flock, in the day when he is among his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places, where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day; where the matter is laid down so plainly, as cannot be laid down plainer: So the prophet Daniel in chap. 12. 1. Hos. 6. 2, 3. Joel 3. 2, 12, 16. Amos 9, 11, 12. Obad. 17. 18, 21. Mic. 4. 1, 2, 3. and chap. 5. Nah. 1. wholly. Hab. 3. from ver. 3, to 16. Hag. 2. 22, 23. Zech. 9 and 12 chapters, and 14. 3, 5. Mal. 4. wholly, Mat. 24. 31. and 25. from ver. 31 to the end, 1 Thess. 4. 16. and 2 Thess. 2. 8. Rev. 1. 7. and 14. 1. & 18. 1. & 19. 11. to the end: In all which places, and many more, if the prophets were diligently searched that speak of the same thing, is mention made of the Lords appearing to deliver his people, in judging and destroying their enemies, and to destroy all those governments which have been enemies to the people of the Lord Jesus, as may be seen Isa. 13. 10. & 34. 4, 5. Ezek. 32. 7. Rev. 6. 12. to the end, where, as it were, the enemies of the Lords people are summed up in the o∣pening of the sixth Seal, saying, And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a great earth-quake, and the Sun became black as sack-cloth of hair, and the Moon became as blood, and the Starts of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig-tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind, and the heavens departed as a scroll when it is rolled together: that is, as I suppose, the church of Rome, which was once the heaven, when that all her power and glory, with her merchants, shall all be destroyed; com∣pared with Rev. 18. And every mountain and I stand were moved out of their places; that is, as I suppose, all those governments of the nations which have been enemies unto the people of God in all ages, shall be destroyed, which are compared to mountains; com∣pared to Ezek. 32. where the prophet speaking of the destruction of the nations, he still prophesies that they shall be destroyed, and go down into the pit, notwithstanding they had caused their terrour in the land of the living; which, as I conceive, was by being enemies unto the people of God, as may be seen Ezek. 32. 23, 25, 26, 27, 32. By I stands I understand all those spirituall governments of the nations which are gone off from Rome, and practise contrary to her, and yet nevertheless make an image of the beast, and cause all to worship it, by persecuting them for cause of conscience in spiritual things: And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every free man hid themselves in the dens and rocks of the mountains; which shew that the mountains in ver. 14. were mountains in a my∣sticall sense; and said to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? FINIS.
