M925 669.f.26[33] 99869607 163915
Charles, King of England, THe Infinite Eternal Being, the onely True and Living GOD (who formed thee in thy Mothers womb, and brea∣thed into thee the breath of life) Loe he is near thee, his piercing. Witness is within thee, his All-seeing Eie beholds thee, he searches thy heart and tries thy reins, the depths of thy Counsels are discovered to him; O King! Fear and dread be∣fore him. The Lord God Omnipotent, who ruleth in the Kingdoms of men, & disposeth of them as he pleaseth, hath exercised thee with va∣rious vicissitudes, & suffered thee to be a man of sorrows; he hath led thee through many straits, that in thy prosperity thou shouldst remember him, and bow unto him: he hath cast thee down, and he hath raised thee up, and now wonderfully set thee upon thy Father's Throne, even to the amazement of the people; give him the glory of all. Now thou art chief-Ruler of a numerous Nation, a wise and knowing people are thy subjects; O that Solomon's request unto his God were thine, that thou mightst rightly go in and out before this people. Then should di∣vine Wisdom be thy Diadem, and thou shouldst be a blessing to the people. And now that the Lord hath dealt thus bountifully with thee, Come let us Reason together, and expostulate a little what may be for thy good, and what the God of thy life requireth of thee: For know this, O King, that in thy Life and Government consists thy present, future and eternal happiness. I have seen, I have seen the place thou stands on to be slippery ground, and the need thou hast of Divine supportment; for what thy own infirmities, and the iniquities of the people thou lea∣nest to (whose delight is not in the Law of the living God) thy con∣dition certainly is very sad, and to be lamented by all that loves thee. Was it the mind of the Lord in this last overturning and change of Go∣vernment onely to advance an Outward Monarchy, or an eartlily King∣dom? to re-edifie the Towers of Babel? to beautifie an adulterated Harlot, and renounce his Spouse? to crown Babylon and her Merchants, and leave Sion and her children in the dust? Or hath the Lord any pleasure in the flesh-pots of Egypt? or can he have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness? or will he lend his ear to the yelling noise of the wicked? Art thou altogether ignorant of the wonderful things which the Lord will do? Can he forsake his Sion? can he delight himself in Babylon? or thinkest thou he hath forgotten to be gracious to his people? He cannot forget his Own, his Seed is sure to be remembred by him, and the Kings of the Earth must bow before him. There is a people that are near unto thee, and enjoy a liberal share of thy natural affections; but, O King! their hearts are not right be∣fore the Lord, nor are some of them faithful in their love to thee. By their fruits thou shalt know them, if they creep into places of honour, profit and preferment to themselves, if they hunt after the Earth, and mind earthly things, they are of Esau's generation. Beware of them, for they will sooner enrich themselven thy Ruine, then either serve thee or their generation faithfully. There are others also, who with their tongues extol thee, but the guile of their hearts, and the burning heat in their breasts dishonor thee; Rancour and malice remain un∣mortified, and they take counsel together for the blood of the innocent. These men know not how to forgive an enemy: O King! be wise, and let not such have too much influence upon thee. Another sort there is that are of Haman's nature; couldst thou give every individual of them to the half of thy Kingdom, yet while Mordecai sits in the gate, and bows not to that exalted spirit, all would not avail them; Ammon and Amalech will join hand in hand to incense the King against the inno∣cent nd if possible, through their mis-reports and importunity ob∣tain a Decree from Caesar for the Banishment or Destruction of that Peo∣ple. These men with their Dulce Venenum will indanger thee; and if thou givest thy power unto them, will unavoidably be thy Ruine; There∣fore hear O King! and despise not good counsel. Give not the choicest Jewel in thy Crown to such unworthy Coun∣sellors, but stay thy mind upon the the Royal Law written in thy Heart with the finger of the living God; let thy delight be to read and medi∣tate on that golden Book day and night. Make that invaluable Jewel of my God placed in thy soul, the Line or Rule of thy life, and that will make thy Life happy, and thy Reign glorious. 'Tis the spring of Divine Wisdom; Drink thy fill, O King, at that celestial Fountain; drink, I say, abundantly thereat, thou canst never draw it dry. O that thy heart were refreshed with the streams of Eternal life that flows from it. And now the remaining part of my message to thee, is that which the righte∣ous God expecteth from thee. Dwell, O King, in that noble Principle which leads to Mercy and Mo∣deration, Lean no longer upon the Reeds of Egypt, nor trust no more to the inchantments of her Magicians; but let them know thou dwel'st in that wisdom which is above them, and hast now learnt to forgive an Enemy: O King I counsel thee, be drawn no further into Blood; but make them Quondams I require thee, that shall wilfully persist to minister any Woolvish Counsel to thee; Drink no more of their bitter waters. Be cloathed with the Royal Robe of Clemency, and count it thy honor to be affectionately kind to the Kingdom, to pass by injuries, and for∣give wrongs; For to shew mercy is better than to be dyed in blood, and would sooner inthrone thee in the affections of the people, than out∣ward force or violence; and count them not thy friends that counsels thee to the contrary. And as for Religion, This the righteous God requireth of thee: Live in that which is pure and undefiled, and keep within thy Sphere: Force not any to an outward Form; for Conscience is Christ's Throne, and if thou seek'st to Lord it there, or suffers others so to do, thou art an U∣surper, and Sion's King will plead his Controversie with thee, and make War against thee, and be too hard for thee. Therefore O King, let the Seed of God go free, and be no longer oppressed by the Egyptian Task∣masters: Take not that Authority upon thee, which Christ the Son of God never gave unto thee, nor no power; But let every man worship his God as he is perswaded in his conscience; for what is not of faith is sin, and faith is the gift of God. Wouldst thou, O King, be forced to a∣ny form against thy Conscience? Surely not. Then do not thou offer to use sorce against the People, but let equal liberty herein be given to all people, I require it of thee in the Name of the Living God, as their proper right and privilege, and as thou expects his blessing in this world, and in the world to come. And roll away the stone of reproach from this English Nation, which long hath been a professing People; I say re∣move and take away all force and compulsion about Religion, and down with Tythes and all forced maintenance of any Ministry. Ah how many of the dear children of God are now in Bonds, and have been long in several Gaols of this Nation, and some have there ended their daies for conscience sake, because they cannot satisfie a greedy, devou∣ring Antichristian Ministry. Shall not, and hath not the righteous God visited for these things. O let the innnocent sufferings of the righ∣teous Seed come before thee, let the cry of the oppressed pierce through thee, and enter into thy bowels, that thy heart may be filled with com∣passion towards them, and the Prison-doors by thee may be opened for them, and for all that suffer for Righteousness sake: This is a work would make thee glorious, and happy were Englands King, would he thus favour God's people. But if thou still wilt stop thy ears to good counsel, and give away thy power to the Prelates who will persecute, and if thou wilt strengthen the hands of the Uncircumcised Philistins; if thou wilt make Covenant with Death, and let thy little fingers prove heavier then the loins of thy Predecessors, and seek to banish Truth out of thy Coasts, and utterly subvert the Royal Seed; Then know this, O King; The righteous God who set thee upon the Throne, will pluck thee down; He will overthrow on the right hand, and on the left, until Sions enemies be confounded: He will take the King∣dom from thee; He will overturn thy Mountain, and lay thine honor in the Dust, and work deliverance for his people in a way which yet thou seest not; And then shalt thou know the words of Truth are spoken by me, Obsequium amicos Veritas odium parit.Who am Thy Friend, yet shall be contented if I am counted Thy Enemy, Martin Mason. POSTSCRIPT: NEver had King of England more precious Warnings from the life of God, then God hath given unto Thee: Oh King! what shall I say unto Thee? Wilt Thou still cast all his Councels behind Thee? O that Thou wouldst answer his Love unto Thee, by thy Life and Government, in Mercy, Truth, and Righteousness; Let not Truth be despised by Thee, because by the world 'tis mis-reported to Thee; The world loves its own. 'Tis onely TRUTH that is truly ho∣norable; and Vertue is the true Nobility.Virtus est vera Nobilitas. Truth is invincible; the more man seeks to suppress it, the more it grows; the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it; nor can all the strength of E∣gypt daunt or overcome it: Truth is stronger then All; and that is a Measure of it which in Thy Conscience bears its Testimony against all Iniquity. All that strive a∣gainst it (the Truth) shall be broken by it. Therefore O King, keep friendship with it, and consent Thou not to any unrighteous Decree against it; Nor say not within thy self, This Cover shall excuse Me, My Peers, My Prelates, or My Parliament so counsel'd and perswaded Me, for the guilt will stick upon Thee; but in time be a∣waken'd, and let the Ruines of others who are gone before Thee, who once in strength were equal with Thee, be a Warning to Thee; for of a truth Our God is no respecter of persons; if Thou does well, shall Thou not be accepted? But if thou wilt not own God's Light in thy Conscience, and by it be guided, nor remove Oppression and op∣pressing Laws, nor set up Judges as at the beginning, men fearing God, and hating Covetousness, but wilt make war against the Lamb, and suffer thy self to be ensna∣red and seduced by the deceitful Generation; then know assuredly, 'Tis in vain for Thee to strive against Thy Maker, God will be justified when he pleads his Contro∣versie with Thee in the day of thy Calamity, which will assuredly come upon Thee, if in the Light Thou believest not. Wherefore O King be wise, and remember Thou art once more warned. Lincoln the second day of the 9. Mon. 1660. M. M: LONDON, printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Wind-mill, in Martins l'Grand, 1660.
