S2473A 42476336 151325
royal English blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEU ET MON DROIT blazon or coat of arms of the City of London DOMINE DIRIGE NOS
Heraldry Epitomized. Containing a Short & Easy way to Atain that Art. Collected By John Seller or argent purpure vert sable gules azure Antient Antient
HERALDRY EPITOMIZED: CONTAINING A Short and Easie Way to Attain that ART, Explained in divers EXAMPLES: Illustrated with Variety of COATS of ARMS, Not only of the Families of the NOBILITY and GENTRY, But also of COUNTREYS, CITIES, Corporations and Fraternities. Collected by JOHN SELLER. London, Printed, 1682.
HERALDRY. HEraldry is an Art rightly prescribing the true know∣ledge and use of Arms, and consists in Blazoning and Marshalling. Blazon is taken either for an Explication of Arms in apt and significant terms; or else for a display of the Virtues of the Bearers of Arms. Marshalling is the conjoyning of divers Arms into one Shield or Escutcheon, &c. And Arms (saith Cambden) are Ensigns of Honour Born in Banners, Shields and Coats, for no∣tice and distinctions of Families one from another, and are descendable as hereditable to Posterity. Arms in this sence have been of great Antiquity in the world, as appears from Sacred Writ: Particularly from Numb. 2d: wherein every Tribe of Israel was commanded to pitch his Tent under the Standard of his Fathers House. Ensigns of Honour among Military men, have been anci∣ently used in this Kingdom; and the Coats that are now born by the Nobility and Gentry, are visible signs of their Nobility, and shortned Symbols of the Heroical actions of their Predecessors: And the several Divisions of their Shields, ought to shew the Wounds and Cuts received in many various Acts and Heroical Atchievements of their Progenitors, which from them hath been descended down to their Posterity; which principally took its Rise from their Services in the Warres in the Holy Land, wherein several Christian Nations were engaged; every one under their several Banners: As, The English displayed a Red Cross on a white Field: The French and Portugals under a white Cross in a Blew Field:
The Irish, a Red Cross in a yellow Field. The Spaniards, with a Salter Crosse trunked in a white Field: The Scots with St. Andrews Crosse, white in a Blew Field. And the more particular bearings in the Holy Land, was the Crosse Crouched and Crossed, of infinite Varieties, as may be seen in all Military Orders of Chivalry and Knight∣hood: So that all those particular Families, that did signal Service there, have their Shields adorned therewith: As Escalop Shells, Pilgrims Scrips or Staves, Saracens heads, &c. Every Coat of Arms ought to consist of both Mettal and Colour, having some Analogy of the Body and Spirit of the Bearers, represented by the Field and Charge; Rendred in the proper Language of Heraldry, which is called Blazon. The Mettals, Colours and Furres are represented in the first Plate of this book, each of them exprest by several Hatch∣ings of Lines: As, Or, is exprest by Pricks and Points; Ar∣gent, plain, &c. As may be seen under their respective titles: All which are Common Fields in Heraldry, and are subject to Division and Charge: Only observe the Vary, is Armour of it self, being always Argent and Azure. An Explication of the Divisions of several Shields with their Significations. FIrst, of the Crosse, being the most worthy of all Bearings, noting all Divine and Moral Virtues. The Second, is a Chief, which though it consists but of one Line, yet is the Embleme of Fame, who bears her Head in the Clouds, Representing a Head, a Chief, a Commander. The Third is a Fesse, signifying Resolution to action, and is a Military Girole, going out to Conquer. The Fourth, is called a Bend, signifying an old Souldier, and represents the Baltheum Triumphalis, worn by those that have Conquered. The Fifth is a Pale, Representing a Military man in a standing posture, denoting Vigilancy and Diligence, and is as a Colomn or Pillar erected to the Memory of deserving Men.
The Sixth, is a Cheveron, and denoteth an Establish'd House, one that doth enjoy the Spoyls of Arms gain'd in Warres. The Seventh, is the Saltier, which is an Engine of Man∣hood to assault or gain, per Saltum, and denoteth a Po∣litick Souldier. The Eighth is an Escutcheon, representing the property of a good man, who labours to keep a quiet Conscience in his Breast. The Ninth Ordinary, is the Barr, which is never single, and are of the nature of the Scarf worn about the Neck, Arm or Middle: Denoting such as either with Arms or Councel defend their Nation: Two Barrs representing Love and Honour. When a Field is Charged by these Lines drawn straight or thwart, do constitute certain honourable Ordinaries, as being Ordinarily used, and are called Ordinarij. The Differences of the several Brothers are to be placed on the several Escutcheons, with their significations. The Shield being charged with Living Creatures, and principally with the Lyon the King of Beasts, in their seve∣ral Postures, are presented as followeth: First, The Lyon Couchant, signifies Vigilancy, and an Illustrious Hero. Secondly, Rampant, Magnanimous, Noble. Thirdly, Passant, Resolute. Fourthly, Passant, Guardant, Prudent. Fifthly, Saliant, Valiant. Sixthly, Sejant, Advised. Seventhly, Regardant, Circumspect. Eighthly, Double-headed, Politique. Ninthly, Double-Queiv'd, Strenuous. And which you may see answered to the several Figures in the Plate, where the Helmets are expressed. And, because Man as he is the head of the whole Creation, so to bear the Head of any thing is accounted the most Ho∣nourable: And what is gained by Labour and Pains is to be preferred: As the Erased Head is more of Military power than the Couped; the one being torn off, and the other cut off.
Cantons have place among Augmentations: As in the In∣stitution of Barons, each wearing an Escutcheon, or a Can∣ton charged with a sinister hand Gules: And when one Escutcheon is born on another, it signifies that the Husband hath Marryed an Heiress General, and having Issue by her, it is Quartered by the Son, to shew that the Right of her Inheritance is transmitted from her to him: But if she be not an Heiress, he may but impale the Coat on the sinister side, which is called Baron and Feme: As for the outward Ornaments of Mantles, Helmets and Crests, with which the Coats were called altogether Atchiavements. Of the diversity of Helmets. THe Helmet is for the defensive part of the Head, re∣presenting Council; and are thus distinguished, as may appear in the 2d Plate in the Book. The First is that of an Esquire or Gentleman. The Second is that of a Knight. The Third, is that of a Baron Garde Visure, placed in that Ciroulus Aureus, which the King hath conferred on Barons of the Realm with six Pearls only. The Fourth, is that of a Viscount, consisting of the whole Circle of Pearls. The Fifth, is that of an Earl. The Sixth, that of a Marquess. The Seventh is that of a Duke. The Eighth is that of a Prince. And the Ninth is that of a Soveraign, which is the Highest. And for the Manner of Blazoning Coats of Arms, you shall find herein several Examples: As in the Se∣cond Plate answering to the several Figures; and the Escutcheon No 1. Is thus Blazoned: He beareth Sable, a Fesse Dancette Sable, by the Name of Vavasour.
The Escutcheon No 2. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Argent on a Canton Sable, a Lions paw erased in Bend, Or, by the name of Bowthby. The Escutcheon No 3. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Ar∣gent, two Lions pawes issuing out of a Dexter and sinister base points erected in form of a Cheveron Argent, Armed Gules, by the name of Frampton. The Escutcheon No 4. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Argent a Cheveron between three Boars heads erased, Sable, Muzled, Or, by the name of Pennarth of Cornwall. The Escutcheon No 5. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Topaz on a Chief, Diamond, three Lions heads erased of the first, by the name of Richardson, once Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and therefore Blazoned by precious Stones. The Escutcheon No 6. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Azure a Pile waved, issuing out of the Dexter Corner of the Escutcheon Bend-wayes, Or, by the name of Aldam. The Escutcheon No 7. is thus Blazoned: No beareth Ermin a Crosse engralled, Gules, by the Name of Norwood of Lekhampton in the County of Gloueester. The Escutcheon No 8. is thus Blazoned: The Field is Azure, a Bend engrailed Argent Cotissed, Or, by the name of Fortescue of Devon. The Escutcheon No 9. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Sable a Bend Argent, between two Cottises, Dancette, Or, by the name of Clopton. The Escutcheon No 10. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Argent, two Bends, Gules. The Escutcheon No 11. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Argent, three Bends wavy, Azure, by the name of Wilbra∣ham of Cheshire. The Escutcheon No 12. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Gules on a Cheveron Argent with Barres, Gemelles Sable, by the name of Throckmorton of Gloucestershire. The Escutcheon No 13. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Sable, a Pile Argent surmounted of Cheveron, Gules, by the name of Dynton. The Escutcheon No 14. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Sable on a Saltier engrail'd Argent: An Escutcheon, Or Charged with a Crosse, Gules, by the name of Morris.
The Escutcheon No 15. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Argent on a Pale Sable, three Crosses Pattee, Or, within a Bordure, Engrailed of the Second, by the name of Crouch of Alswick in the County of Hertford. Here you may observe, That where you are to Blazon an Escutcheon, wherein are born a Pale and a Bordure, that then you must mention the Pale be∣fore the Bordure. The Escutcheon No 16. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Argent a Fesse and Canton Gules: This Coat of Armour pertained to the Honourable Family of Woodvile. The Escutcheon No 17. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Gules, two Barrs and a Canton Argent: By the Name of Dean of Tatton in the County of Hereford. The Escutcheon No 18. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Sable a Bend and Chief, Or, a Coat or rare bearing. The Escutcheon No. 19. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Or, a Fesse between two Cheverons Sable: This Coat of Ar∣mour was born by Sir John Lisle Knight. The Escutcheon No 20. is thus Blazoned: He beareth Gales a Crosse Argent in the Dexter Quarter, an Escutcheon Or, charged with three Cheveronels of the first, by the name of Sir Owen, which Form of bearing is very rare.
Heraldry Epitomized These are the differences of houses that are added to Coate armour to distinguish the descent of Families whether they be of the first, second, or third house &c. heraldic differences of houses
There is a Care to be taken concerning the honourable parts of the Escucheon and ye lesse Honorable as to location which are obserued as foloweth A The dexter chiefe B The precise middle chief C The sinster chiefe D The honour point. E The fesse point F The numbrill point. G The deaeter base. H The precise middle base I The sinester base. diagram showing position of parts on an escutcheon When any ordinaries are drawne with any of these lines the Blozoner is to say a Bend-Fesse Pale Crosse Bordure or what it is invecked ingrayled wavy or the like. Invecked diagram of blazoned line Ingrayled diagram of blazoned line Wavy diagram of blazoned line Nebule diagram of blazoned line Imbataild or Crenelle diagram of blazoned line Indented diagram of blazoned line Dancette diagram of blazoned line
diagram showing various animal positions The severall sorts of Helmets diagram showing various forms of helmet
family blazons or coats of arms 1 Vavasour 2 Bowtheby 3 Frampton 4 Pindar 5 Richardson 6 Aldam 7 Norwood 8 Fortescue 9 Clopton 10 Haget 11 Wilbraham 12 Throkmorton 13 Dyxton 14 Morris 15 Crowch 16 Woodvile 17 Deane 18 19 Lisle 20 Owen
key to heraldic blazons or coats of arms or argent sable gules azure Vert purpure ermine ermines vayre potent checkey party per pale per fesse per bend PB crenelle sinister per crosse per saltier a qurter canton girone gironey of 8 escocheon an orle
orly voyders flasques flanches corniter componed purflewe gabonated entoyre enaluron a pile 2 pile Walorave transposed Zusto p: flory Hawley cotined Boyle a plain cross Zurth Wavy cock voyded Restwold Ambriated Vpon 3 groes moline patonce flurry avelane P fitched
Patee fitched Cadwallader formy flurry a cost bottony ingrayled Mohun C voped perei Grill C voyded Woodnoth triparted double parted reguled Laurence a saltire Aston counter changed Hunt surmounted Anadrew a pale Hurekly a pallet endorse paletts wavy radiant rayon a bend Scroop wavy Wallop crenello Wattyes
a garter a benlet cotized Bowyer flory Highlord ingrayled Colepepper a ribon a B sinister a scarpe a batune a cost a fesse a barr a Closet b arulet nebule bare of 12 Thynne In Cheife Hungerford dancetty Delamare 3 barrs wavy Samford 3 lozanges Mountagu
issuant Markham naissant Emme erased Govis 3 lyons hea Monke on a bend Wroth a fesse Farmer on a chiefe Wroth in cheveron Frampton 3 gambes Newdigate in saltier con ped erected Vsher 3 lions tailes Corke a tiger Mabb a beare rampant Barnard muzzled Barwick a wolfe Sali Donne passant Low a grayhound Holford Curran Palmer
a Talbot Borgoine heads Burton Reynards Kadrad catts in pale Keate squerrells Lovell connyes Strood a stagg lodged Harthill at gaze Jones tripping springing Gilstand Binfull corse Robertson hinds CT Cotingham St H cooped Rigmaiden caborsed truncked atires vnicorne Harling tripping Musterton currant Farington Cooped Shelter
trouts fretted Trowtback sea crabs Bridger an escallop Prelate shells Malet welks Shelly pine T fructed Pine a limb of a tree reguled Penruddock stocks radic¦ated Retowre laurell lea Leueson holly L pend Inwine peares Stukley pine apples grapes Maroley flower de lis Digby in 1 quar Ashmole lillies Winchestr Colt trefoiles Williamson stipped Lewis sinq-foiles Foley Gilliflour
Hew-bottles Chorley cater foiles Platt culuering Leigh battering Rams Bartey long bows Bowes pheons Rowden a S inpale Dimock conjoyned Stapleton in poynt Paulet lances in B Carlow speareheads Rayce chapletts Richardson shackbolt Nuthall lozanges Hyde masiles on a B Carlton watrbudgetts Hill towteawees Courtney counter changd Hooke mullets Danvers in Chiefe Freake
a cheife Workesley a C indented Butler bend & chiefe saltire & Ch Bruce a cheveron Stafford ingrayled vo Dudley couped Jones a cheveronel a couple close braced Fittz hugh. reversed a file 3 points Barrington a Lion dormāt couchant sejant passant P. gardant Bromfeild saliant Felbrige rampant Stapleton regardan Gavay
Coward Rowch Chained Meredith 2 L passant Somery 2 P gardant Ducy Counterpassāt Glegg Combatant Wycomb endorsed Achilles Rampant Ettritk escallops Russell crowned or Tyson crosseletts Long within a B Henley benlet Church barsgemells Fairfax counter cha Vaughan betweene Hoskins 2 L rampant Dickinson 6 lionesses Morton demy lion Mallory 3 demy L Bennet
a camell pass Camell a bore Trewarthen erected Booth in 3 cupps Boles Cram CT Harman rams heads Bendish holy lambs Rowe an elephant Elfinston crases 3 horses P Stamp Cooped Marsh calves Veale crased Hocknell asses passant Askewe a mule Moile a bull Bovile crased Carfelack truncked Baynham caborsed Gore a F betwee Corke
goate Baker a tired or Gotley an eagle Reddingfeild displayed Winne eagletts Ernly eggles close Child enised Awbrey conjoyned Seymour eagles claw Carthauser a laquise gosse-hawk Veele sparrow hawk Atterton owles Prescot on a bend Savill a raven Corbet Cornish-choug Oneslow burstards ris. Nevill swallows Watton volant Swallow maitletts Wray
charged Sheppard masts coped Cromer sailes Cavill a rudder anchor Goodred a Lighter a shipp P scrips Palmer a T tripled Oldcastle 3 in Chiefe Seller Pigott Disney Turner Waltden Chester Saunders Fairfax Wanley Methven Thomson
Napier Napier Armour Sackeuill Bludworth Pley Vernon Sheldon Dauison Trold Tyrell Petre Weldon Catlin Tose Starling Fox Frederck Herne Webb
cocks Cock capones Capenhurst in their pride Pawne turkey-cocks Yeo bees volan Bye harvest fly Bolowre a greffon Evelin sergreant Read in chiefe Dant L counter a Wevern Drake dragons H Cutler mermaed Ellis otters Lutterell seals feet Yarmouth a leopard lea heads Wentworth apples in base Harlewin a rose Beverley a C between Bish
on a cuton Broadstone hurts Baskerville garbes Preston Cronells Wiseman bills Gibbs Helmetts Mirriet a L between Compton bells Porter hawk bells Ent arches Arches fountaines Sturton tents Tenton a frett Harington frette Whitmore bare bende Dessant a f Morley dolphin-naint Fitz James Hauriant Eeles noiant Ellis pikes edorsā
royal English blazons or coats of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Iohannes Huggford. Ricardus Carewe, Thomas Aldersg
royal English blazons or coats of arms Osburne, Thomas Dudley, Thomas Reynell.
The Seales of ARMES of the Bishops of England; etc in this and the following Page. blazons or coats of arms of English and Welsh bishops Sedes Cantuar blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the archbishop of Canterbury Sedes Eboracens blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the archbishop of York Sedes Londī blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of London Se: Winton: blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Winchester Se: Dunelm: blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Durham Se Eliensis blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Ely Se: Sarum blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Salisbury Se Lincoln blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Lincoln Se Wigorn blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Worcester S: Lichet Cov blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Lichfield Sed: Exon: blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Exeter Se Norvie blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Norwich
S Bath et Wel blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Bath and Wells Se Herefor blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Hereford Se Rossens blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Rochester S Cicestrens blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Chicester Se Petreburg blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Peterborough Se Carliol blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Carlisle Se Oxon blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Oxford Se Glocest blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Gloucester Se Cestrens blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Chester Se Bristol blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Bristol Se Meneven blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Meneven Se Landay blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Landay Se Bangor blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Bangor S St Assaph blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of St Asaph Se Sodorens blazon or coat of arms of the seat of the bishop of Sodor and Man W Sherwin sculp
Reginaldus Corbet  Banco Regis Edwardus Dyer Miles  de Cont: Banco Ricardus miles Capitalis Iohannus  miles Robertus Berkley miles, unus Iusticiariorum ad pla∣cita coram Rege Carolo. Augustinus Nicholls miles, unus Iusticiariorum de Ban∣co, et Caroli Primo: Cancellarius, Thomas Malet miles, unus Iusticiariorum d Banco Regis, Ao 1641. Gulielmus Peryam miles, Capitalis Baro Soaccary, Thomas Meade unus Iusticiariorum de com∣muni. Banco, Nicholaus Hide miles Capitalis Iusticiarius a placita coram Rege Carolo, 1620 Edwardus Merven miles, unus Iusticiariorum ad placita corain Rege. Iacobus Whiteloke miles, unus Iusticiariorum de Banco Regio 1624. Francisc rvey miles, unus Iusrum domi∣ni Regis muni Banco. Thomas Carus unus Iusti∣ciariorum de Banco Regio. Robertus Catlyn miles, Capitalis Iusticiarius Anglia
Walterus Dowriche Iohannes Ashefeilde, Christopherus George Richardus Moldesworth
Richardus Hackluyt Iohannes Agmondesham. Thomas Harrys Iohannes Shurley,
Edwardus Mountague miles. Capitalis Iusti∣ciarius de Banco Henricus Montagu miles, filius Edwards Montagu militis, fily praedicti Edwardi, Capitas lis Iusticiarius, ad placita coram Rege Iacobo Ao 1616, et regni sui 19o. Iohannes Walshe unu Iusticiariorum de O in Banco. Edwardus Sanders miles, Capitalis Baro Scaccarlj. Iohannes Southcote, un Iusticiariorum ad plac coram Rege.
Alfridus Palmer, miles  Baronettus, Attornatus eneralis domini Regis Caroli secundi, Ao 12o. Edwardus Turnor miles (Parliamenti 3o die Ma 13 Caroli Regis 2o feliciter  ti, Domus Com. prolocuto unus Consiliar D. Regis in L eruditus, et Illustr.  ∣cis Eboraci Attornatus generis Arphorus Turnor miles,  Baronum Scaccarij gis Caroli secundi, anno uodecimo, Robertus Hyde miles, unus Iusticiaeriorum de Banco, anno regni Regis Caroli 12o, et Capitalis Iusticiarius ad placita coram Rege terlenda, 15o
Richardus Lewknor Robertus Snagge, Iohannes Savile, Reginaldus Braye,
Georgius Gascoine, Thomas Bowyer, Thomas de lapyend Thomas Hannam,
blazon or coat of arms
MERCERS 1 MERCHANT TAHORS Concordia ParVaeRes Crescunt 7
GROCERS God Grant Grace 2 HABERDASHERS Serve and Gbay 8
DRAPERS. Unto God only be Honor & glory 3 SALTERS. Sal Sapit Dmnia 9
FISHMONGERS. All Worship be to God onely 4 IRONMONGERS. 10
Diers DA GLORIAM DEO 13 Leather Sellers 15
BRVERS IN GOD IS ALL OVR TRVST 14 PEWTERERS IN GOD IS ALL MY TRVST 16
BARBER SVRGIONS DE PrICIPIENCIA DEI 17 WHITE BAKERS PRAISE GOD FOR ALL 19
ARMORERS MAKE ALL SURE 18 WAX CHANDLERS TRUTH IS THE LIGHT 20
TALLOW CHANDLERS ECCE AGUNS DEI QUI LOLLIS PECATIA MUND 21 GIRDLERS GIUE TIANKS TO GOD 23
CUTLERS POUR PORUENIR A BONNE FOY 22 BUTCHERS OIA SUBIECISTI SUB PEDIBUS OUES ET BONES 24
SADLERS OUR TRUST IS IN GOD 25 CORD WAINERS 27
CARPENTERS 26 PAINTERS AMOR OUEAT OBEDIENCIA 28
Curries 29 PLIMMERS IN GOD IS OUR HOPE 31
MASONS IN THE LORD IS AL OUR TRUST 30 IN HOLDERS COM YE BLESSED WHEN I WAS HARBORLES YLLOGED ME 32
THE FOVNDERS 33 THE COOKES 36
THE EMBRODERERS 34 THE POVLTERERS 35 blazons or coats of arms of livery companies of the City of London
