W1006 E51_9 99872059 155180
A LETTER Sent from the RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT Earl of Warwick: To the Right Honorable, The SPEAKER to the House of PEERS: CONCERNING The present state and condition, with the manner of the Raising of the Siege, OF LYME: With a Relation of divers other remarkable passages concerning the Queen, the Prince, and the Lord Hopton, with the deliver∣ing up of Weymouth to the Parliament. Printed according to Order. Printed for Richard Best, June 18. 1644.
A LETTER Sent from the RIGHT HONORABLE, Robert Earle of Warwicke, To the Right Honorable, The Speaker to the House of PEERES. May it please your Lordship: EVer since my last accompt of the State of Lyme, I have continued here for incou∣ragement thereof, and in the intervening time have observed these occurrences; That the enemy hath in these five daies last past shot many vollies of great and small shot in∣to the Towne, which the besieged have recei∣ved; and answered with equall courage as be∣fore. On the twelfth instant, I furnished the Towne with ten barrells of Powder, their store being neere exhausted. On the thirteenth they tooke a prisoner, who gave information that the Lord Hopton had been in the Leaguer
last Sabbath-Day, and demanded five men out of every Company, which he promised to make good by an equall number of prest men, but they were denyed him. From thence (as I heard by one of the Frigots that came from the West on Munday last) he went to Dart∣mouth, whether he came in on Thursday night with seven horse, giving out that he was to raise an Army of fifteene thousand men. The said thirteenth instant, upon desire from the Counsell of Warre in Lyme, I resolved to sent the Boates and small Vessells here to give an Alarme on the East part of Lyme for distracting of the enemy, and drawing him off from the Towne (notice being given of the souldiers affrightment, with what was formerly done in the like kind) which was yesterday put in execution accordingly; the Seamen landing and marching up into the Country, which caused the horse and foote that came downe to attend them to fly to the Hills, and gave the Seamen opportunity to converse with many of the Country peo∣ple, who have appeared generally well af∣fected
to the Parliament, in respect of the great pressures laid upon them by a beggerly and cruell enemy. By some of them I recei∣ved notice that the Lord Hopton had two daies before commanded all there abouts, from six∣teene to sixty, to repaire forthwith to Dor∣chester, with such armes as they could pro∣vide; as also with victualls and money, to withstand some forces expected there sudden∣ly; under command of his Excellency, or sir William Waller, and that some hundreds men had been prest for his service, who had neare all of them made an escape. Yesterday there came aboard me one Lieutenant Farre, of the Lord Broghills Regiment, and his Ensigne, who had the night before they came into Lyme two and twenty of the souldiers under his care. By him I received Intelligence that Prince Maurice had some notice of some forces comming to Dorchester; That the Queen was about ten daies agoe brought to bed at Exeter of a Boy. That many of the Princes Army were ready to come into Lyme, as they could gaine a conveniency. This mor∣ning
about two of the clock my boate came from the Town, with advice that the enemy was drawing off his great Guns, and raysing his siege, which by letters received this day from the Governour was confirmed. The Prince withdrawing himselfe last night a∣bout five of the clocke, and the Army stealing away about two of the clock this morning. At noone I went on shoare, and viewing the workes, I found the enemy to be contrived with strength and much advantage, but the Townesmen so slight, that its neare a miracle they should hold out so long against so vio∣lent and resolved an enemy. The truth is, next to the protection of Heaven, the courage and honesty of the Officers and Souldiers were in a manner their sole defence, they being made instrumentall, and through Gods blessing to the preserving of them in safety and cheere∣fulnesse. When I came amongst the Officers, I found them all worthy of precious esteem, and mo∣destly submitting to the many Inconvenien∣cies, which a long and hard Siege had con∣tracted,
and that nothing is wanting to ren∣der them specially serviceable abroad, but money, for supply whereof they desired me to be an humble Remembrancer, which I need not to second with any Argument besides their own merit, whereof I know the Parlia∣ment will be very sensible, considering the great Advantages that will depend upon their fidelity: I received lately a desire from Plymouth, to move the Parliament for some Money for their Garrison, they having no de∣fect to hinder their marching forth, but of that and a Governour. On Tuesday Sir Iohn Bamfield, Colonell Carre, and their Officers came into this road; and went away in the Hector the same night: And so, that I sup∣pose they are before this time safely landed at their intended Port: I heard a report at Lyme this day, that Weymouth is delivered up to the Parliament, and some Carriages were observed this day to passe from that side towards Exeter; How far that Report may be credited, or another, that Prince Charles was lately at Weymouth, I know not: But
I have renewed my command at the Ships attending that Road, to have a speciall eye on all Vessells that come from those parts. Of these things I thought fit to give advertise∣ment to your Lordship, that the same may be communicable to the House of Peers, of whose commands I shall be most faith∣fully observant; Resting, My LORD, Your humble servant, Warwick. Aboard His Majesties ship James in Lyme road; 15. Junii, 1644. FINIS.
