W2216 E349_20 99861617 113756
The Sope-Patentees Of Londons PETITION Opened and Explained. OR, The Unmasking of these cruel Sope-Patentees deceitful Petition, presented by them to the Honorable House of Commons. Wherein you have a Discovery made (in part and but in part) of the great Sufferings of this Common-wealth: As also of the special Suf∣ferings of some Free-born Subjects in their Li∣berties and Estates, sustained by these cruel SOPE-MONOPOLERS. By Richard Wilkins. Habbac. 2. 12. Woe unto him that buildeth a Town with Blood, and esta∣blisheth a City by Iniquity. Ier. 17. 11. As the Patridge gathereth the yong which he hath not brought forth, so he that getteth Riches and not by right, shall lose them in the midst of his dayes, and at his end shall be a fool. London, Printed by I. F. for Iohn Rothwel, and are to be sold at the Fountain and Sun in Pauls Church-yard, 1646.
THere are three things that these Pa∣tentees are eminently guilty of. First, the Monopolizing of the mystery of Sope-boyling of the whole Kingdom into eight or ten mens hands, to the great oppression of the Com∣mon-wealth, and the ruine of many Families in their Estates and Liberties. Secondly, they have been, and still are, great deceivers of the Subjects, not only by adulterated and base Sope, but also by those ways which I have declared in my Answering their Propositions. In these two particulars you have these three things ob∣servable, First, that to Monopolize, they did take their Patent, and this offence they translate upon the first Sope-Patentees. Secondly, that by Monopolizing, they have been great and barbarous oppressors; this offence they charge upon the Kings Majesty, and the Lords of the Councel. Thirdly, that by several ways they have been great deceivers; and this offence they also unjustly translate upon the ruined and op∣pressed Sope-boylers. The third and last thing which they are eminently guilty of, is this, That by lyes they deceived the Kings Majesty, and Lords of the Councel, & now by lyes they have endeavored to deceive the Honorable and High
Court of Parliament, not only by this vain and deceiving Petition, but also by their Propo∣sitions for the Excise of Sope: All which wic∣kednesse, together with the several aggravations of these Innovators of our Laws and Liberties offences, you have demonstrated in the ensuing Discourse, I could give you many Arguments deductable, from the cryes of the oppressed Sope-boylers; from the cry of this oppressed and deplorable Common-wealth, which calls to our Worthyes for Justice against these cruel, wilful and covetous oppressors and fomentors of our present Troubles; but I will only men∣tion these two; First, that I might keep all men undeceived, for general it concerns all, but espe∣cially our most Honored and Worthy Senators, in that sense which the Scripture speaks (Prov. 24. 21, 22. Hos. 7. 12.) concerning these changers of our Laws: or rather that I may take off that sense which godly & wise men have received of them by their glorious words of deceit, by which they have put a false gloss upō their oppressings; for I finde that with some that fits at the Stern in the City, nay may I not say, it is to be feared with some in the Parliamēt, that the sense of these Patentees sufferings by the cruel oppressions of the first Sope-Projectors (for which they have al∣ready
satisfied themselves) hath swallowed up the sense of their cruel oppressing of others, that the false sense of their being necessitated to take a Patent, hath swallowed up the sense of their delinquency in acting against Law and Liberty of Subject in their taking of their Patent. Secondly, that the executing of judgement upon these Projectors, is the only way as to Judge the poor oppressed Sope-boylers with Righteousness; so it is the only way, and there can (under favor) be no other by which these Patentees can be forced to make restitution to the Common∣wealth, which they have greatly oppressed: For the raising of a Sum of money from these Monopolers answerable to their demerits (which they are able to satisfie) for the benefit of the State, is a Negative restitution to the Common-wealth, that which in∣forces and backs this Argument is this, because that it is consistent to the Intentions, the unwearied and unparallel'd Actings and Declarations of the honorable Houses of Parliament, which I wil make out from three Scriptures: Sure I am, that the Laws and Liberties of this Common-wealth hath been wounded by these Innovators, the sad consequent is the present bleeding condition of this our Nation, by the unnatural Civil War that we have had, and stil is upon us, execution of judgement is the means of healing of us, Ier. 51. 1. Secondly, sure I am, that
your intendments, Right Honorable, is to loose the bands of wickednes, to take off the heavy burthens from the oppressed, to execute judgement upon these fomentors of our present troubles, as wel as others, and God hath accepted and imbraced your intend∣ments, while you are in the way, as the Father the prodigal Son, witnesse the glorious and happy suc∣cesse that God hath given to your Armies: O let not the want of execution of Justice bring our, I hope ungrounded, fears upon us, which is the re∣newing of our troubles by the unfaithfulnesse of Brethren, & so turn the smiles of God into frowns: For your encouragement unto a speedy hearing of the oppressed cries, reade your portion (Right Ho∣norable) given you of God, Isa. 58. 8. The third Scri∣pture is the words of Solomon, recorded Prov. 20. 8. A King that sitteth in the Throne of judgment, chaseth away all evil with his eyes; the Marginal note thus renders it, Where righteous judgment is executed, there sin ceaseth, and vice dares not appear. O remember how their im∣pudency in propounding to you, Right Honora∣ble (that in their Propositions, which is no less then a Monopoly) that which cals upon you for justice, an unparalleld presumption, having ingagement upon me hereunto by Covenant and by trust; let these words of sobernes and truth finde acceptance from him that is a well-wisher to the Kingdoms Peace and happinesse. R. Wilkins.
To the Right Honorable, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses OF The House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of Lieut: Colonel John Hardwick, Captain John Hayes, Edmund Whitwel, Laurence Whitwel, Simon Weedon, Sope-boylers of London, Most humbly sheweth: 1. THat whereas your Petitioners, His Majesties Native Subjects, have been brought up and served in the Art aforesaid, according to the Statute, did use the same till 7. Caroli Rex, wherein divers Projectors (Enemies to the Common-wealth) under the Name of Gen∣tleman Sope-boylers of Westminster (upon false pretences) obtained a Patent under the great Seal, for the ma∣king of white Sope, to the great abuse of His Majesty, and extraor∣dinary damage to the Kingdom. 1. The Petitioners (not being able with good Conscience to comply with them) used their own Trade aforesaid (according to the liberty of the Subject) in a just and legal maner, until for the same they were greatly oppressed (by the said Patentees) by Suits in Star-Chamber, caused them to be Fined in great Sums of money, their persons imprisoned for divers years (some dying in Prison) their houses broken open, their goods Seized (to the Beds they lay on) to
their very great impoverishing, and unexpressible damage being to∣tally disabled from the use of their Trade, to the  Sope-makers to forsake the Kingdom and live Exile in Fo∣raign parts. 3. Ʋnder which heavy burthen and bondage the Petitioners groaned divers years, untill they and others of their Art were forced to buy their Trade and Liberty (which they were born to) by giving the King a greater yearly Revenue then the Projectors did, 4. Neverthelesse many persons (not having been brought up nor served as Apprentises in the Petitioners Art) did use the making of Sope privately and secretly, putting the same to sale, even to the ruine of the Petitioners, and great deceiving of the Kingdom by base Sope. 5. For remedy whereof, and to secure the Revenue, the Petitioners and the rest of the Company were injoyned by His Majesty, and the Lords of the Privy Councel, and bound in 40000. l. Bond, to sup∣presse all such persons from the making Sope, which indeed were prose∣cuted (only) but according to the tenour of the King and Lords Warrants. 6. For so doing, many Suits in Law have been prosecuted against the Petitioners upon the Statute of Monopolize, to the expence of 1000. l. some of them recovering 1000. l. 500. l. 300. l. when the Pe∣titioners proved they were not really dampnified . l. and many more Actions are brought, and threatned to be brought against the Peti∣tioners onely (being but few, to the many which were of their com∣pany) which will tend to the great disinabling of the Petitioners, in being serviceable to the King and Parliament as formerly, and as they still desire, in which cause they have greatly ingaged their purses and persons, but now are like to be utterly undone if not relieved. In tender consideration of the premises, and in regard that your Pe∣titioners are most willing and ready to make satisfaction to their ut∣most abilities, to all that can make it truly appear they are damnified by your Petitioners, (they having paid divers to the value of 6000 l. for satisfaction of which their wrongs the Petitioners never received one peny. And in regard many of the Petitioners company (who received a far greater benefit by His Majesties said grant then the Petitioners did) do refuse to make as is herein desired, and leave the insupportable burthen totally upon the Petitioners, who never acted any thing in the
premises as private persons, but only as Members of their Company for the general service and good of the same: May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly to take the sad condition of the Petitioners into your Pious consideration, and to appoint a Commit∣tee to call all such persons as aforesaid before them, and to examine their particular damages, and to compel all that had benefit by His Majesties said Grant, to joyn with the Petitioners in giving such satisfaction (without Suit in Law) as to the same Committee shall seem most meet. The parties who alleage themselves grieved (by the Petitioners and their Company) being greatly desirous to be relieved by the same means, as by their humble Petition, hereunto annexed, appeareth, whereby the Petitioners may be preserved from utter ruine. And your Petitioners, &c. Having set down and presented to your view the Petition of the last Sope-Patentees, the most ancient and most cruel Mono∣polers of the Art of Sope-boyling, I shall first give you the parts of it, and then explain it; wherein I shall shew, not only the greatnesse of their oppressing Patent, but also their wilful being oppressors and invaders of the Subjects Liberties (which being done, will not only render them to be the greatest oppressors, and most ancient Monopolers, but also men covering the sins with lyes) which at present I shall do it briefly (yet satisfactorily) because their more fuller declaring of their taking a Patent, was not to gain their Trade, but the inriching of themselves by op∣pressing their fellow-Subjects in their Liberties and Estates) is more proper either in answering their Book, Intituled, A true Relation concerning the Sope businesse, or in proof of the Charge which I shall exhibite against them (in the High and Honorable Court of Parliament) for their Delinquency, not only in their taking of their oppressing Patent, but also in their cruel, barba∣rous, and inhumane prosecution of it; in both which I have made some progresse in, and preparation for, 1. The general parts of their Petition are three: 1. The body or subject matter of their Petition, which consists of six particular Branches. 2. The Arguments on which the request of their Petition is grounded. 3. The Requests of their Petition it self.
2. The opening or explanation of this their Petition. In the general part of this their Petition, which is the body or subject matter of the Petition, you shall finde these four things laid down. First, That these Patentees were, by the Patent and practise of the white Sope-Patentees, prohibited their Trade for divers years together: Together with the sad consequences that did fall upon these Petitioners, by reason of the Patent, which they demon∣strate by these five particulars: 1. By vexatious Suits in the Star-Chamber. 2. By the great Fines imposed upon them in that illegal Court. 3. By the long Imprisoning of their persons. 4. By breaking open their houses. 5. By Seizing and carrying away their goods. This first thing, together with these five particulars, declaring these Petitioners sufferings by the Patent and practise of the other Patentees, are expressed in the two first Branches of this Petition. The Answer is, That thought it is an undeniable truth which they have set forth, yet they are not to be thought (or doth render them) the more excuseable; nor is their sin in taking their oppressing Patent ex∣tenuated (thereby) but aggravated; and that for this reason, Be∣cause they acted the sin of others against light, namely, the sin of Oppression, not of an ordinary, but of a scarlet dye; not only acting unrighteous Decrees, but procurers of them, thus making their Prince an oppressor to his people by their false pretences; in not only a Law destroying, but a Land ruinating sin, which they themselves have demonstrated unto us by four things in these first & second Branches (so that I may say unto them as Christ said to the unprofitable servant, They may be judged out of their own mouth) which being well confidered, will render the Petitioners Enemies (as well as the other Patentees) not only to the Kings Majesty, but also to the Law, Liberties and Estates of the Subject in their taking of a Patent. I will only give you one Scripture in∣stance, which doth aptly prove the Argument, and render these Patentees greater offenders and sinners then the other (and then I will name the four particulars by them expressed) Adam sinned as well as the woman in eating the forbidden fruit; and yet it was true which he said to God, The Woman which thou gavest to be
with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat: Nay, his sin was greater then the womans (so is the sin of these Patentees greater then the others) if ye consider these two things: 1. The tempter was stronger that deceived her. 2. He was stronger to resist the temptation. To apply. The first Patentees were Papists, and so were principled to ruinate the Kingdom, and therefore must needs see a goodnesse in a Patent, being agreeable to their principles: So it is said of the woman (but not of the man) that she saw the Tree was good for food: These Patentees are Protestants, at least at large (but, is to be feared, no more) I judge them not) and therefore their principles should have led them, to maintain, not to destroy their King and Kingdom (as now it is) which they have a great share in. And though it be a digression, yet because it is both reasonable and considerable, I will commend four things (in this Chapter considerable) in reference to the Lords judicial proceeding upon man sinning) as to the serious consideration of the Right Honor∣able and High Court of Parliament, by way of president for their imitation, so also to the serious consideration of these Patentees, by way of expectation; namely, That though they endeavor to co∣ver their sin with lyes, they shall not prosper: That though they have got much riches by that which is not right, yet they shall leave them in the midst of their dayes, and their end shall be fools, as the Scripture speaks, Jer. 17. 11. Even then, when from our worthy Senators Justice shall run down like water, and Judgement like a mighty flood; when they shall Judge with righteousnesse the poor, and re∣prove with equity (these Projectors) for the meek of the Earth Isaiah 11. 4. The four things observable are, 1. That God did execute Judgement upon sinners, as he had said, Gen. 2. 17. compared with Chap. 3. 14, 15, 16. Hos. 7. 12. 2. That God began Judgement where sin began, Gen. 3. 14. 3. That God did not only begin Judgement where sin began, but also proceeded on as sin proceeded, Gen. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. 4. The suitablenesse of Gods Judgement to the Nature of sin, this is called, A reproving with equity, Isa. 11. 4. Achan troubled Israel, and the Lord troubled him, Josh. 7 17. The application which I shall observe to you, most Honored and worthy Senators, that youmay bear his Image in this.
1. God executes Iudgement, as he hath said, so must yee against these Monopolors, in respect of those that have been ruinated by them. Statute 21. Jacobi, against Monopolers. 2. God began Iudgement where sin began, so have yee, wit∣nesse your Act of 200000. l. against the first Sope-Patentees. 3. God proceeds on in Iudgement as sin proceeded, so must ye against these Monopolers (as well as others) execute Iudge∣ment. 4. Gods Iudgements are suitable and equal to the sins of men, so must ye reprove with equity these Monopolers; and that you may reprove them with equity, though it is impossible to expresse all the damage which they have done to King and Kingdom, by the obtaining and cruel prosecuting of their illegal Patent; yet this they are guilty of oppression by their Patetnt, to the Sum of Four hundred thousand pounds. I come now to expresse the four particulars which these patentees have expressed, which is appliable to themselves, and renders them greater offenders then the other Sope-Patentees; which are these four: That it was a Patent 1. Against the Law, Liberty and Estates of the Subject. 2. Abusive to the Kings Majesty. 3. Of extraordinary damage to the Kingdom. 4. Which their Consciences could not suffer to comply with. I will conclude speaking to this first general, with this (they have expressed in the last of these four particulars) namely, the tendernesse of these Patentees Consciences, not daring to comply with the other Patentees; and the reason they give is to be taken from, or made up by the other three particu∣lars, and it is this, Because that it was a Patent against Law and Liberty of the Subject, against King and Kingdom; and yet con∣sider how soon were these tender Consciences seared and made hard, for that immediatly they did take up another Patent, more oppressing (in its Covenants) to the Subjects then the other, and were more barbarous, cruel, and oppressive in their prosecution, then the other Patentees; by which it doth appear, That their re∣fusing to joyn with the other Patentees, did not arise either from tendernesse of Conscience, or an unwillingnesse to get riches by oppression (as they falsly pretend, and would make men believe)
but to gain a Patent to themselves to Monopolize the Sope-boyl∣ing Mystery (from all other Sope-boylers) into their own hands, to get riches in abundance (as they did) by oppression. For you must know, that these oppressing cruel Patentees, are not like those sinners which Solomons speaks of, that said, Cast in thy lot amongst us, let us have all one purse, Prov. 1. 14. These men will have no Competiters in their gains, they well knowing by expe∣rience how to suck (out of a Monopelizing Patent) a greater sweetnesse of gain then the other Sope-Projectors, having for twenty years together (before ever any Patent was) gained much riches by Monopolizing the Sope-boyling Mystery solely into eight or ten mens hands, to the ruine of many a Family. I come now to speak to their second general, which is this: Secondly, That these Petitioners did take their Patent only to regain their Trade from the other Patentees, and were forced thereunto: which they demonstrate by these two Arguments: 1. That they did contend for their liberty of Trade, by suffering many years. 2. That confidering they could not gain liberty of Trade by suf∣fering, they were forced to purchase it, by giving the King a greater yearly benefit then the other Sope-Projectors. This second general, as also these two Arguments, you have contained in the third Branch of the subject matter of this their Petition. The Answer which I shall give to it is this: The explaining and shewing wherein the necessity of these Pa∣tentees (taking of their Patent did lie, I will truly demonstrate to you by this ensuing Proposition. The Proposition. That the Petitioners, to Monopolize the Sope-boyling Art into their own hands (from all other Sope-boylers) and to enrich themselves by suppressing and tyranizing over all other Sope-boylers, and by being oppressors of the Common-wealth in this sense and in no other, there was a necessity of their taking of a Patent: But there was not, nor could there be in that sense which they pretend (and would make men believe) that is, To gain liberty of Trade. There are these two parts in this Proposition. 1. That liberty of Trade could not be the Design of these Pro∣jectors in their taking of a Patent.
2. That their Design in taking of their Patent, was to Monopo∣lize the Art of Sope-boyling, and to oppresse. Many Arguments may be given to prove both the parts of the Proposition; but I will only mention these four Reasons at pre∣sent; two to prove the first, and the other two to prove the second part. The two Arguments to prove the first part, namely, That liber∣ty of Trade was not the Design of these Patentees taking of their Patent, which is the Negative part of the Proposition, are, 1. Because, that though there may be a necessity of suffering for, yet there cannot be a necessity of sinning against God, Li∣berties and Laws; and the reason is, because God, Liberties and Laws is to be contended for; yes, it is the duty of Saints, and the duty of Subjects, to contend for their Birth-right, witnesse both the present contention in the Land, and the present ruines that is upon us, the sad consequences of the actings of these Patentees, as well as others, have brought upon us, as I have already shewn. 2. Because that these Petitioners and Patentees, at that time when they did take their Patent, might freely have used the Art of Sope-boyling, and enjoyed liberty of Trade without a Patent; and the Reason why they might have had liberty of Trade with∣out a Patent, is, because the other Patentees were not able any longer to hold their Patent, being disabled to pay the King His yearly Revenue, by these two things: 1. The general distast that the people took against that project. 2. The constant supply of Sope (Imported from Forraign parts and made at home) for the Subjects use. The consideration of this Argument, being judiciously ob∣served, will render these Patentees, not only Enemies to the Com∣mon-wealth, but also wilful introducers of our troubles, and wic∣ked oppressors, because covetous. The two Arguments to prove the second part of the Proposi∣tion, namely, That these Patentees Design in taking of their Patent, was to Monopolize and oppresse, which is the Affir∣mative part, are, 1. Because that these Patentees, by vertue and in prosecution of their said Patent, they did not only prohibite all others from boyl∣ing Sope, and all manner of Sope, but even such as had served themselves Apprentiships, yea, and even such as were as ancient
Sope-boylers as themselves; but also did carry away their goods, and destroy their vessels. 2. If their Design in taking and prosecuting of their Patent were not to Monopolize, then why was the Merchants through∣out the Kingdom (to their great damage and discouragment of Trade) by the cruel practise of these Projectors prohibited, not only the importing of any Pot-ashes to any Port of England, but at London, but also the selling of them (so imported) to any other but themselves. That they did gain such a power, not only to the great damage of the Merchants, and prejudice of all other Sope-makers, but also to the great damage of all other Tradesmen dealing with, and using of Pot-ashes; yea, to the ruine of some Families. I will give you a Copy of the Order of the Star Chamber, which the Merchants were served with, by them moved for, obtained and prosecuted. At Star Chamber the 18. of October. 1637. Present, Lord Archbishop of Cant. Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal. Earl Marshal. Earl of Dorset. Lord Cottington. Mr. Controller. Mr. Secretary Cook. Mr. Secretary Wyndebank. THis day was read to their Lordships an Order of this Board, made the 2. day of May last, touching Pot-ashes, and the re∣straint of the common sale thereof, to the prejudice of the Sope-makers of London, on whose behalf it was now by their Councel prayed that the same Order might be explained and enlarged in these particulars following: First, That no Merchant, or other person or persons whatsoever, should directly or indirectly, by themselves, their Agents, Factors or Servants at any time or times hereafter, Sell, Barter, or do away, or deliver any Pot-ashes whatsoever, to any person or persons what∣soever,
save only to the said Company of Sope-makers of London, who hath promised to furnish Dyers and Leather-dressers with such quantities as they shall use, at the same price for which they are bought, without any increase or further charge in that behalf. Secondly, That no Merchant, or any other person whatsoever, shall land or bring to Shore any Pot-ashes, imported from beyond the Seas, save only at the Port of London, and at no other Port, Ha∣ven, Creek, or place whatsoever. Thirdly, That no person that doth or shall make, or have any Pot ashes, shall Sell, Barter, or do away the same, to any person or persons whatsoever, save only to the Sope-makers of London, that are known lawfully to use that Trade, and not to any undue makers of Sope, or to any other: Neverthelesse, it is not their Lordships pleasure, nor was it now desired, That any Merchant or other should in any wise be restrained to Export out of the Kings Dominions into any of the parts beyond the Seas, any Pot-ashes, Forraign or English, and there to be vended. And their Lordships being informed, That the Merchants having since the Moneth of May last sold 600. Tun of Pot-ashes to the said Company, to the value of Thirteen thousand pounds, or there∣abouts. Sithence neverthelesse, they have brought in and imported about 450. Tun, which if they be disposed to undue makers of Sope, will overthrow the businesse, every Tun of Ashes so used, being near 30. l. losse to the King, besides the Companies losse. It is thereupon Ordered, That the several matters before desired be in all parts observed, by the said Merchants and others, and that that they so govern themselves therein, as that no further Com∣plaint be hereafter made against them, for or concerning any of the premises, And that they cause this Order to be publikely read at their next general meeting, to the end, that they may the better observe the same: Yet notwithstanding, if the Merchants shall finde themselves agrieved in any of the premises, as that they shall think themselves able to give good and sound Reasons, why the same should not be ob∣served, nor injoyned them as aforesaid, then their Lordships do hereby appoint them to give their attendance on the Board the 3. of Novem. next, together with the said Sope-makers, that after due hearing of both sides, such final order may be therein made as shall be fitting. Ex. Dudley Carlton.
By what hath been said, you may see how Absolon like these Patentees have dealt with King and Kingdom: Absolon pretend∣ed Justice and good to the people, but his Design was Rebellion and Treason against his Father David, to aspire his Throne, 2 Sam. 15, 16, and 17. Chapters, you have the History: The consequent was a Civil War, and therein he perished, God catcheth this wicked one in his craftinesse, as Iob speaks, Cap. 5. 13. Even so these Patentees, by their false pretences of good to the people, gained of His Majesty a Patent to Monopolize, and to oppresse thereby to enrich themselves, which was their Design; and how far their Rebellion against King and Kingdom hath a share in the present Miseries and Civil Wars that is now upon us, as Introducers, I shall leave to the judgement and determination of our grave and wise Senators: And why these changers of our Laws should not tremble to consider the nearnesse of their down∣fall, I understand not, because the Scripture speaks positively of their ruine, Prov. 24. 21. compared with the 22. Verse of that Chapter. And Chapter 22. Verse 23. And the rather because they still persist and go on in the self same sinful design, under the self same sinful pretences; for as they then dealt with the King and Kingdom in gaining of their Patent, so now these Patentees deal Absolon like with the Parliament and Kingdom, witnesse their Propositions concerning the Excize of Sope, by them presented to the Honorable House of Commons, which being well consi∣sidered, are to me and others (which well know their workings, and have felt their cruelties) no lesse then a Monopoly, as I have already declared in Answering of them in that sheet of Paper Intituled, A Looking-glasse for Sope-Patentees. Much more may be said against the Propositions (and shall, when Providence gives me a fit opportunity) but I shall not now, because it is a digressi∣on; only I will minde you of a Scripture or two that I cannot omit: Isa. 32. 7. The Lord by the Prophet shews this, That ly∣ing words are the weapons of wicked men to undo the poor: The words in the Text are, For the weapon of the Churl are wicked, he deviseth wicked counsels (what these wicked weapons are, and whereto they tend, you have in the following words) To undo the poor with lying words, and to speak against the poor in judgement. Eccles. 8. 11. Solomon tells us what is the result and use that wic∣ked men make of the delay of Justice, in these words, Because
Sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil: The reason why I could not passe by the citing of these Scriptures, is, because the actings of these Patentees are the Exposition of them. There is a third Scripture, with which I will end this digression, propounding it by way of Question, because the pertinatiousnesse of these Patentees occasion (the High and Honorable Court of Par∣liament) to say, as the Lord said of those wicked ones in the time of the Prophet, Isa. 50. 21. These things hast thou done (what things? namely these things, Thou seest a Thief, and runnest with him; with thy tongue thou forgest deceit, and speakest against thy Brother. V. 18, 19, 20. observe the parrallel) And I kept silence, therefore thou thoughtest I was like thee. (Is it not high time, Right Honorable, to do, with these Projectors, as the Lord said?) But I will reprove thee, and fet them in order before thee. I will now conclude speaking to this second general, shewing how they labor (by vain words) to cover all their cruelty, saying, They were forced to take their Pa∣tent to gain liberty of Trade, which I have by four Arguments proved to be a false pretence, and their Design undoubtedly here∣in, is the endeavoring to divert Justice (now Justice requires resti∣tution) but let the Counsel of God take place in the hearts of Parliament men: Ephes. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words. I come now to speak to the third general head. Thirdly, That many persons, not having been brought up to the said Art, did boil and put to sale, to the ruine of thee Projectors, and the great deceiving of the Kingdom by base Sope, and that they did suppresse: together with the reason why, and the maner how. There is in this third general, contained in the fourth and fifth Branches of their Petition, these two parts: Fist, some thing supposed, which is the Negative part. Secondly, some thing expressed which is the Positive part. 1. That which is supposed consists of these three things. 1. That none was suppressed but such which were not brought up and served Apprentiships to these Patentees Art. 2. That all those that these Patentees did suppresse from boyl∣ing, did boyl illegally. 3. That all the cruelty which these Patentees acted in breaking open mens houses, imprisoning their persons, seizing and carrying away their goods, breaking and spoyling mens materials, and would∣ing
mens persons, is wholly and only chargeable upon the King and the Lords of the Councel. 2. That which is expressed are these four things. 1. That many persons not being brought up in the Art of Sope-boyling, did boyl and put to sale base Sope. 2. That these persons boyling of base Sope, was ruinous to these Projectors, and a deceiving of the Common-wealth. 3. That these Projectors did suppresse them, and were both en∣gaged by Bond, and commanded by the King and Lords Warrants to suppresse them. 4. That these Projectors suppression of them, was only according to the purport and tenour of the said Warrants. The Answer which I shall give to each particular of these two general parts of this third general Head, shall be as they are proposed: and first, I will speak to those three things here ex∣pressed to be supposed and implyed, briefly, 1. That not only many, but all persons (which were not Pa∣tentees) that had served Apprentiships, and had been brought up in the Mystery of Sope, were suppressed (by these Patentees) and prohibited to boil Sope, yea, and some of them their goods Seized, and materials spoiled and destroyed, yea all men hindred, and became a prey to them which did boil for the maintenance of themselves and Families; but if by not being brought up to these Patentees Art, they do mean, were not brought up and served Apprentiships in their Art of Monopolizing the Mystery of Sope-boyling into eight or ten mens hands, then the Supposition is true, but else it is falsly implyed: Now there is this Reason to be given, deductable from their own shewing in the Order of the Star-Chamber, which I have here recited; why by their Art must of necessity be understood their Art of Monopolizing the Sope-boyling Art, because by their own shewing that all men which boled Sope, and was not a Member of their Monopolizing Pa∣tent, were undue boylers of Sope. 2. That all men which these Patentees did suppresse from boil∣ing Sope, did as legally boil as themselves, yea and more legally. 3. Though it be true, that the King and the Lords are not ex∣cuseable, concerning the special and universe sufferings of the Common-wealth, by this Monopolizing and oppressing Patent; yet it doth not lessen or extenuate the offence of these cruel
opressing Patentees, and that for these Reasons: 1. Because these Patentees are not only guilty of acting, but were (by false pretences) the procurers of these illegal and op∣pressive Warrants. 2. Because that they wilfully of purpose to oppresse and Mo∣nopolize, did gain the said Patent and Lords Warrant, though by their own experience did know them to be illegal and oppressive. I come now to speak to the four things expressed, which is the second part of this third general Head; and I shall give you the Answer in these two particulars. The answer to those things expressed, 1. That those persons which these Patentees did suppress from boyling Sope, did boil better Sope then the Patentees, and did sell to the Subjects at cheaper Rates; this I can prove by multitude of Evidences, and Reason tells every rational man, that it had been neither policy or profit for them to have boyled base Sope: The Arguments to prove this are these two: 1. Because that men buying of Sope prohibited by these Pa∣tentees, they did endanger not only the seizing of the said Sope, but also the being much vexed and troubled by the cruel and ille∣gal persecution of their illegal Court; for what Sope was made by any that were not Patentees, being sound, was seized, whether in the hands of maker or buyer of it. 2. Because that when men may buy Sope freely, that will not suffer themselves to be defrauded and run a danger too. This is sufficient for Answer to the first and second particulars, and doth declare, That as this is that false pretence by which they deceive the King, and gained their Patent; so it is their vain words to deceive the Parliament, their end undoubtedly is to di∣vert them from doing Justice, by rendring the oppressing Sope-boylers odious to the Parliament (under the notion of being de∣ceivers of the Common-wealth by base Sope) now they are Pe∣titioning the Parliament for Justice. 2. That they were neither by Bond bound, nor by the Lords Warrant commanded to suppresse any from Sope-boyling (which had a right to boil) as they have alledged; for you must know, that the Lords warrants are not warrants commanding these Patentees to seize Sope against their will, as they do affirm, but are Warrants of Assistances, by these Patentees sued for, and by them procured of the Lords (by the same salfe pretences by which they gained
their Patent, commanding power to Ayd and Assist their cruel, barbarous, and blood-sucking Agents in their execution of the illegal Deputations which these Patentees did issue forth under the Seal of their illegal Company: For confirmation whereof, and to compleat the Answering of this third general Head, I will give you a view of the Lords Warrants by them obtained. VVHereas divers great abuses and deceits have been and are duly committed in the making of Sope, and his Majesty hath now setled the Manufacture thereof under the Government of the Corporation of Sope-makers of the City of London: And whereas divers Misdemeanors have been and are daily committed, as Well in the undue making, buying, and selling of Sope prohibited, not made under the said Rule and Government; as also in resisting and not assisting the Searchers appointed by the Society of London, and their Deputies in the Searching, for seizing and carrying away of the said Sope prohibited: These are therefore to will and require you the Messengers of His Majesties Chamber, or any of you, or any other whom it may concern, That from time to time you Arrest, Apprehend, and take into Custody, all and every such person and per∣sons as the Governor or the Deputy of the said Society of Sope-makers of London for the time being shall nominate and direct you to Apprehend, for their contempt in all or any of the Premises: And also by the like nomination and direction, to make stay and sei∣zure of all the said prohibited Sope, not made under the said Govern∣ment, or to seize and carry away all Lees and other Materials, as Oyl, Tallow, and Pot-ashes, prepared for the undue making of Sope, remaining in the Custody and Charge of any person or persons in any place priviledged or not priviledged; and that every person which shall be so Apprehended, you bring, or cause to be forthwith brought to the Councel Chamber to enter their Appearance, to be proceeded withall according to their demerits. Hereof fail you not at your utter peril. Dated at Whitehall the 28. of July, 1637. To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Iustices of Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, Head-boroughs, and all other His Ma∣jesties Officers and loving Sub∣jects whom it may concern, and especially to the Messengers of His Majesties Chamber, and to every of them. W. Cant. W: Lond: Arundel and Surry, Dorset, Wimbleton, Cottington, Iohn Cook, Tho: Iurman, Fra: Wyndebank.
The fourth and last general Head, which is contained in the sixth and last Branch of their Petition, is this: 4. That many actions upon the Statute against Monopolies have been brought against these Patentees, by the oppressed Sope-boylers of London, for recovery of of their losses and damages▪ which they expresse as a grievance, and demon∣strate it by these two particulars, 1. That by reason of this prosecution they have expended 1000. l. 2. That some have recovered 1000. l. some 500. l. some 300. l. and yet upon proof they have not been damnified five pounds. The Answer that I shall give to both these particulars briefly shall be this; and first to Answer the first particular, which is their expence of One thou∣sand pounds, being prosecuted by Law. The Answer is threefold. 1. The prosecution is a just and legal prosecution for recovery of satisfacti∣on of their several damages and losses, sustained by these cruel projectors bar∣barous prosecution of their illegal Patent; a just means of relief against, and unjust oppression, which hath the stamp of the Parliaments approbation for its vindication. 2. There was a necessity of this prosecution, because that these Patentees would not make restitution without suit of Law, unlesse they will accept of that satisfaction which they will give them, which is not a half peny, no not to some a farthing for a peny, whatever they do pretend. 3. That if they have spent 1000. l. (sure I am that some of it must be spent either in a corrupt or excessive way) as we use to say that Thieves are good Guesse upon the Rode, spend free) yet they have made great advantage by that expence, because the detainer of the complainants money, by vexatious delays, for these five years and upwards, hath been annually at least 1500. l. benefit to them. I come now to speak to the second, which is their expressions, that the recoveries are unreasonable that have been recovered against them; namely, That some have recovered 1000. l. some 500. l. some 300. l. and yet never been damnified five pounds. The Answer is: The falsity of this their affirmation is so obvious, that no rational man will give credit to it, but because it implies either an unrighteousness or oppression in the Law (for so they have and do expresse) and so secretly charge our Law makers) or in the Iury who are Iudges of the damages, I shall by way of vin∣dication of both, thus positively and truly speak. 1. That the recoveries were but 306. l.-13..-4. 150. l. and 90. l. all which some by vertue of the statute were trebled by the Court: Thus you see that these presumptuous oppressors do secretly charge our Law makers of oppression. 2. That the parties did not recover, nor did the Iury award in damages more, no not so much as the Plaintiffs proved that they had sustained by these cruel Patentees. I will now conclude speaking of and to the subject matter or body of their Petition, with the observing some short notes that are deductable, probably from the closier of this first general part of this Petition (which is this) That they have been serviceable (and still desire to be) to the King and
Kingdom, by great engaging of their Purses and Persons. Their ends and intentions in this expression, undoubtedly must of necessity be to render them Friends and not Enemies to King and Kingdom; having hinted to you their end, I will give you the Observations. First, if you consider how these Petitioners are Enemies, as is above ex∣pressed, and then take their being serviceable to King and Kingdom, by way of co-nction; then the probable result of these words may be this: That they have given assistance to both sides. And there is reason to be rendred, Be∣cause that at the breaking up of the last Parliament, May 1640. they did give the King Ten or Twelve thousand pounds to take up their Patent again, (which they had surrendred) in hopes never to see Parliament more in Eng∣land; which money, as was supposed, was given as an additional assistance against the Scots. Secondly, if you consider, That if the Parliament do prevail, thay are ac∣comptable for their Delinquency; then their giving assistance probably is po∣lity, and not piety; self-seeking, not Gods glory; themselves, not the Kingdoms good. Thirdly, if you do consider, That they do oppressively detain the other Petitioners Estate, and the advantage they make of that detainer, to the dis∣abling of them which are cordial for the Parliament (and have as far engaged their persons as those Patentees) it affords these two Propositions. 1. That it is not an ingaging of their own but other mens purses. 2. That their ingaging of their purses is not an advantage but a damage to the Parliaments Cause. I have done with the first general part, I shall only observe some few things from the other two general parts, and so conclude. 1. That these Patentces are most ready and willing to make satisfaction to all that can make it appear that they have wronged them. To this I answer, That their willingnesse that satisfaction should be given, doth not lye in their desire of making restitution, but in this, That they are most willing to be disburthened of the suits at Law against them commenced by the Parliament, forcing their fellow Projectors thereunto. 2. That of all the goods they have forcibly and oppressively taken and spoil∣ed of the other Sope-boylers, they never received one peny. To this I Answer. That all the goods that was by them seized and spoiled of the oppressed Sope-boylers, was seized for the use of these Projectors, one moity thereof, and the other moity for the use of the Kings Majesty, and was by these Pro∣jectors appointment and command, seized and brought to their own houses, and converted to their own use, which is evident by their Patent; by which Grant Col: John Hardwick, Captain John Hayes, Iames Baker, and Ionathan Mot, (Members of that illegal Corporation) were constituted and ordained searchers of the said company, some of them barbarously breaking into hou∣ses, seizing and carrying away mens goods, others receiving in the goods ille∣gally seized and carried away, witnesse the accompt that Col: Iohn Hardwick made in the Exchequer upon his Oath, who was one of the first searchers, and most activest Member of that Patent. There is one thing which I will relate
to you, which is not only an aggravation of this strange, and I presume un∣paralleld presumption of theirs, in daring to present to so Honorable an As∣sembly as the High Honorable House of Commons, so deceiving and vain a Pe∣tition as this; but also discovers to what a height of wickednesse, what dan∣gerous designs coveteousnesse will put men upon: The Relation is this, what these Petitioners have here untruly affirmed, namely, that not one peny of the goods seized came to them. Anthony Whitwel, one of these Sope-Patentees, did falsly depose the same at a Tryal between Iohn Doughty Plaintiff, and Col: Iohn Hardwick, and other Patentees Defendants, which perjury was to the damage of the Plaintiff Doughty 200 l. as the Iury then confessed, and hath been since proved at the Tryal of the Action, upon a statute of perjury, which the said Doughty did bring, and proved against the said Anthony Whitwel, and the Iury did at Tryal finde him guilty of perjury against the Plaintiff, com∣mitted in the former Action to his damage of 200. l. and did finde in dama∣ges, according to the limitation of the statute; but there was a special Ver∣dict found by the direction of the Iudge, for that the Plaintiffs Attorney did not produce a copy of the Original in the former Action, and since hath compounded for the same. I have mentioned this to shew of what validity their words are; and the rather for this reason, because one of the Petitioners hath told me since his conviction, that they all would take the same Oath. Thus you see these men, as they did not leave any way of cruelty unattempted and acted, that might conduce to accomplish their covetous design, though ne∣ver so destructive to the Common-wealth, and ruinous to their fellow sub∣jects in their Estares and Liberties: so now they will not cease covering their sins with lyes, even with an Oath. 3. That many of their company that had greater benefit by their patent then themselves, refuse to joyn in making satisfaction. To this I Answer. 1. That there are not many that refuse had greater benefit. 2. That this is in the most part of it rather a pretence then real matter of complaint; for the petitioners dares not cause all those (which they have no∣minated and presented to the Honorable Committee of the House of Com∣mons for petitions) to be compelled to joyn with them in making restitution, Much more might be spoken to these three particulars, to shew how they endeavour to deceive the Honorable House of Commons by these vain words; but I will neither trouble my self or you, because it is not materiall to the Iudge to hinder him in execution of Iustice, whether the Malefactor be wil∣ling or not willing to be tryed, whether a Malefactor do possesse any of the money which he hath stoln or not possesse, whether the rest of the Malefactors be discovered or not discovered, at present I will conclude with the words of Solomon, Prov. 18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seemeth just, but his neigh∣bor cometh and searcheth him. FINIS.
