W3183 E1149_2 99863788 116003
Prosopopoeia Britannica: Britans Genius, OR, Good-ANGEL, personated; Reasoning and advising, touching the Games now playing, and the Adventures now at Hazard in these Islands; and presaging, also, some future things, not unlikely to come to passe. Discovered, by TERRAE-FILIUS (a well-knowne Lover of the Publike-Peace) when the begetting of Nationall-Quarrell was first feared. Expressed in two Lections, or Readings. For ev'ry thing, which is below the Sun, There is a Time; For some things, more then One: And, if this be well tim'd, the Game is done. To all men, GOD, in Mercy, Once doth come: Calls twice, or thrice; yeā, many times, on some: And they who sleight his Grace, must feel his doome, Since, then, for once abusing Love, some fall; Let it be, seriously, well-weigh'd, of all, What may betide those, who, still, sleight it shall. LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin. 1648.
To the meeke ingenuous Reader. THough much contempt is cast on Poesie, The Meek, and men of Ingenuity, Still, entertaine her with respective eares, When, on her proper Errand, she appeares. For, Sacred-things, and Things most pertinent To Mans well being, by that Instrument, Have been conveyed, ev'n in ev'ry Nation, (Yea, and almost, in ev'ry Generation) Some Poets have prov'd Prophets, to foretell, Things Future, many yeares ere they befell: And sure, the Latines, to imply the same, To Poets, and to Prophets, gave one Name. To You, therefore, this Poem will not seem Unusefull, or unworthy of esteem; Nor shall, to you, the matter be in vaine, Nor want that End, whereto it may pertaine; But, stir up those Affections, and that Care Which may awake you, timely, to prepare Against the sad, and Evill day, wherein The Scorners must have payment for their sin, For, This, will passe by Them, as doth a Blast, Whereof, but few take heed, till it be past, And, leaves Effects behind it, which may show What Blast it was, and whence that wind did blow. To you, therefore, the Author recommends These musings, as to them, among his Friends, Who, shall possesse the Earth, when those who flour, At wholesome Counsell, shall be rooted out. He to your Doome Appeales: And if but Three, Who, zealous of the Publike safety be; Or, but two Wisemen; Or, but One, who loves The Peace of GOD, these Raptures well approves; He, shall be honour'd, by such Approbations, More, then by all the Fooles of these three Nations.
To the scornfully Censorious. WHat have we here? saies pride-puft-ignorance More Poetry? yes foole; more, too, perchance Then thou wilt like; and, more, for thee to jeere, Till foaming at thy mouth, thy Braines appeare Through witlesse Choler, when thy soule shall dread, What, thou with scornfull disrespect, hast read. But, (saies a second) this, eight monthes agoe Appear'd in Manuscript: well, grant it so; What is infer'd? The Author, do not blame, That, untill now, you have not, seen the same; For, Truth gets Licence hardly; and, the Presse VVas, then, at your disposure, not at his. VVho. (saies a third) is he, that, in this wise, Our Genius personates? A fourth, replies, The matter, and the Phrase, their Author shew: SIRS, if ye guesse right, much good do it you. If you, be therewith pleased, so, is he; If not, he, therewith troubled will not be: For, he regards not, so much, how to please, As, how to cure the generall disease. That, is his chiefest aime: to that intent, Himselfe, and fortunes, he hath freely spent, As well as time and words; which, when he dies, VVill gaine him, what your malice, yet, denies. If, you, hereby, shall reap no benefit, The maine obstruction, will be want of wit; Or, in the wanting, rather, of his grace; Whose love, you sleighted, when it offer'd was. Read, if ye list; But, who compos'd the same, Inquire not; for, (although to shew his Name He never was afraid) it sutes not now, With his designe, that he should tell it you; Nor, can it be materiall, so you heed, And prudently consider what ye read: For, whom, or whatsoere, he may appeare, That, will be true, which he expresseth here.
PROSOPOPOEIA BRITANNICA. The Contents of the first Lection THe POET poetizeth, here, Great Britans GENIƲS to appeare; Expostulating (first of all) Some Slips, and Faults in generall. And, tells what of that GAME, he spake, In which, the publike, lies at Stake. Next, shewes, how He doth move the King, Himselfe into his Orbe to bring; What, will, assuredly, succeed, Ʋnlesse, he shall returne with speed; How, and by whom, and likewise, why He hath been hindred to comply; And, that, the Men, and Hopes, which he Depends on, will his ruine be. Then, are declared, some debates Of Prelates temporall estates; What ought to be believ'd, by Him, As touching their old Claimes, and Them; How much, a Prince obliged stands, To keep up, such like Deodands; Pleads, in what case, a State, or King, May sell a Dedicated-Thing; And, makes you, by plaine reason, see How false the claimes of Tyrants bee. Then, having tooke some Blocks away, Which stop the Kings repentance may; Provokes thereto; and (though the root Seems bitter) warrants pleasant fruit. When, in his might, the Dogstar raigned, here, And, when our City, and our Armies, were Made jealous of each other, by their wiles, Who, sought to nourish Discord in these Hes;
Fill'd full of Thoughts, and sad, and sleeplesse lying Upon my Couch, there, silently, surveying With contemplations eyes, the sick estate Of these three Kingdomes, and, their likely Fate; My rambling Fancie (which was newly come, From whence I know not) brought into the room, A reverend Person, who, upon him wore, A Sea-green mantle, which was wrought all o're With silver wavings (well resembling those Which curle the Ocean, when a strong gale blowes) And, had a Verge, or bordering imbost Of Rock-work, like the cliffs, that guard our cost. Rais'd with white Saphirs, looking o're a strand, Bestrow'd with orient Pearls, and golden sand. In his left hand, he seem'd to bring with him A threefold, but a broken Diadem, Each third whereof contained counterfeits, Of many differing shaped Coronets, (Which had adorned it) most part of which Seem'd also, broken, or defaced much; And, not improperly, an emblem were Of something, which this Emperie may feare. With an heroick look, a Princely pace, And awefull presence, entred he the place: But, so, that look, and pace, and presence, had A shaddowing drawne over them, which made Appearance, of a heart displeas'd, and sorry; Yet, gave it, rather, excellence and glory To his demeanure, then diminishment, Of what, beseem'd a Person excellent. Not heeding me; nor seeming much to care Who, then, was present, or, who was not there, A turne or two, he walk'd; rais'd to the skies, (As one admiring) his majestick eyes; And, with hands elevated, and display'd, Thus, like a much displeased Friend, he said,
SEE, SEE! how MISCHIEF, like the Lernean Snake, Renewesher heads, and still new life doth take! The fire of WAR within our feilds did flame, A while ago, and, GODS hand quench'd the same. The match and powder, were together laid In our cheife City; and, he, also staid Those probable effects, which would have shooke These Ilands, if the project, then, had took. As soone as that was past, another Traine Was closely laid, to blow up all againe; And, make these Nations, like the clod-borne brood Of Cadmus, broachers of each others blood. Is there no end of madnesse? but, by fits, Must they, who should be wisest, loose their wits? And, still be forging new Designes and Gins, To plague themselves, and others, for their sins? Will not, the blind, selfe-seeking parties, leave, Snares for themselves, with their own hands to weave? VVill not the Serpent cease to bruise their heels, VVhom he pursues, though broken heads he feels? Nor will the harmlesse Doves, become so wise To know the Birds of prey, through their disguise, Till they are all beguiled with faire showes, And, quite devour'd, by Buzzard, Kites and Crowes? Shall wholsome counsell, alwaies, be withstood? And, will you reinvolve your selves in blood, VVhat ever your best friends endeavour can, And, as it were, in spight of GOD and man? O GOD! what dulnesse hath possest these Nations? VVhen shal the Spirit of Infatuations, Be dispossest, ye Britans? when shall peace Unite your hearts? when shall dissention cease, And, we behold againe within my Coast, Those blessings, which they willfully have lost, VVho, sleighted counsell, when it was in season; And, yet, resolve not, to be rul'd by Reason?
How long! oh LORD! how long shall they neglect The Teachers of a better intellect, And, in those courses frowardly persist, VVhereby, they must arrive at had I wist! How long! shall that contagious Cloud of lies VVhich through the streets, almost each morning flies On paper wings, with slanders, poyson some? To others, instruments of death, become? Corrupt weake judgements? Interupt the choice, Of good things? drown the Pacifying-voice Which, to their great advantage, they might hear, Unlesse deaf Adder-like, they stopt their care? Or, listened to those falshoods, which delude The Wisest, and enrage the multitude? How long! shall men persever to delight In cursed words, and actions of despight? In studying reciprocall disgraces? In flinging durt, into each others faces? And, as it were, in striving, who best may The Devills part, upon each other play. How long! will you in an unhappy course, Run from one bad extreme, into a worse? How long! will you pretend, protest, and vow, To be reform'd, yet, nothing better grow? How long! will you condemne what others do, Yet, tread their paths, yea go beyond them, too, And think it shall enough your selves commend, To publish, wherein others do offend? Or punish them, whose crimes but veniall be, When Capitall-Transgressors may go free? How long! will you observe the scorners Fate, Yet, never mend, before it be too late? How long! shall GOD forbear? how long! for you Befoole the wise, yet fooles no wiser grow? How long! shall he keep off a Forraigne pow'r, VVhile you, at home, each other do devour,
And seek, by ev'ry new Deliverance, Your owne Designes, and profits to advance? As if the publike Mercics, which GOD sends, Were all vouchsafed for your private ends? How long! will you lie underneath the stroke, Yet, his displeasure ev'ry day provoke? Or being frighted from what was misdone, Commit the same fault, when the fear is gone? How long! shall prudence preach a safer way, Yet, you renew your dangers, day by day? And, though you, still are told what will succeed, Still, carelesse be, of taking, timely, heed? How long! will you good principles with-stand, And fortisfie with pebble stones and sand? Or paper workes, and stubble-structures frame, When, round about you, all is in a flame? And, at the givers of good counsell, jeere, That others, may be fooled as you are? How long! will ye, whilst your blind-Harpers play Divisions, Jigs, and fancies, dance the Hay, And, break each others heads, and shins, and faces, At Blind-man-Buffe, (aswell to your disgraces As to your losse and smart) whilst most about you, Both for your madnesse, and your follies, flout you? And whilst thereby your adversaries gaine That, which they could not otherwaies obtain? How long! will you permit, Ambition, Pride, Self-Love or Avarice to be your guide? And persevere to trust, and to commit Your being, unto some who have nor wit, Nor grace, nor modestie? as if ye had Forsworne good counsell, and a Covenant made With your Oppressors, to resigne all pow'r To them, who seeke to prey on what is your? And, still to prostitute your free Elections To strenghthen private ends, and nourish Factions?
How long will they, on whom your Trust is plac't Put off, what should be first, untill the last? How long with they irresolute appeare Whereto they should undoubtedly adhere; And, thereby, keep, from knitting fast together, Divided parts, till there be strength in neither To reunite? Or, till all teare asunder, Like Clouds disperst, by their owne in-bred Thunder? How long shall Knave be Trump? and all the Cards Be pack't, to give unmerited rewards? Or, deale forth undeservedly, to those Who are best friends, the portion of your Foes? And, O! how long shall such men play your Game, Who have betray'd, who will betray the same, And, still promote (though better be profest) A Private, or, a Forraigne Interest? Hear, O ye Islands! harken, and beleeve Your Genius, who, doth see your waies, and greeve. If you shall act, much longer, as ye do, Your City, Army, Priest, and People too; Your King, your chosen Commons, and your Peers, Your Independents, and your Presbyters, The worst disposed, and the best affected; The faithfull, and the man of fraud detected; The Friend, the Foe, the Foole, and he that's wise; The Rich, and he who at his threshold lies; English, Scot, Welsh, and Kerne, shall all together So jumbled be, so juggle with each other, So stagger from their Principles, and Friends, Through foolish hopes, false feares, or private ends; The most shall be deceived, and, undone, To make a winning-Game for Lookers-on. For, these have eyes upon you; and expect, From your encreasing Discords, an effect To their advantage: These, rejoyce to see How senslesse of your owne true peace, you be;
How frowardly you act to your owne cost, And, play for them, that Game which they had lost. With serious, if sleight things I may compare, Ye, Britans are now playing (as it were) A Game at Cards: For, there are many faces, Among you, like Kings, Queens, Knaves, Tens & Aces, Beside the Vulgar pack; and much strange dealing, Strange shuffling, and strange cutting, (worth revealing) Is view'd, whereby the publike hath had wrong, (And many private persons) over-long. Some, by the Players; others by the Foxes, Who have obtain'd the keeping of your Boxes; Some, by their want of skill; and some by betting Upon both sides; by violence, or cheating, Are like to share at last, what you to lose; Then, laugh to scorne, your Folly in the close; Because, you good advantages did sleight, And, plaid your Game no better, when ye might. How have ye lost, what lately you had got? When all men saw, you had the better lot? Of Hearts and Diamonds, you, a while ago, As faire Games had, as any hand could show: But, some by-standers, who, your cards can view, Are much afraid, that now ye have but few. Of Spades and Clubs, yet (if well plaid) ye have Enough at least, whereby your stakes to save. Ye had, but of one Queene, a diffidence; And, shee was plaid away, a good while since: The Knaves are shared so by either side, That, little odds betwixt you is espi'd; And, they, who yet seem Newters, (out of play) At last, may serve to count upon, some way. One King, alone, you have; and what to do With him, a friend of yours could tell you too, But that he is no Player, and he hath spoke, Already, more, then many have well took.
Yet this, I'le say; you cannot make your Game, By all the Kings, or Court-Cards, you could name, As by well-playing him. As you dispose Of him, so, you are like to win, or lose: So, ye shall either gaine or misse, your ends; So, you shall multiply your Foes or Friends: GOD, give you grace to take the safest way; VVhich, (if vaine hopes delude not) yet, ye may. And, GOD, direct him, and incline him too, So prudently to suffer, and to doc, That, he pursue no more sinister ends: For, at this present, upon him depends The Fortune of his House: And, therewithall Shall many other, either stand, or fall, VVhose Fates are yet, by very few discerned To be in his well-doing much concerned: Yea, thereupon, dependeth greater things, Then are the Risings, and the Falls of Kings. My Spirit, therefore, groanes within my brest, And, is with violent desires opprest, That, he, and they, who seem yet stupifi'd Might wake out of their Dreamings, to provide, Against those many mischiefs, which, of late, Have menaced the ruine of this State: And, seeing, by a neare relation, I Am more oblig'd then any Stander-by, To seek your welfare, and prevent your woe, I'le give such hints of what you ought to doe, As are permitted; O! take therefore heed, Of what, ye now shall either hear, or read: For, without Riddles, I will plainly tell, VVhat courses ye may follow, and doe well. First, let your erring, and deluded King, Himselfe, his Crowns, and Scepters humbly bring, And, lay them at his feet, to whom, alone, Belongs the supreme Glorie of each Throne.
For, GOD, will not be mock'd: (though for a space He winks at many, who neglect his Grace) But, will on every one, avengement take VVho, in his wickednesse, doth progresse make. Let him acknowledge that Supremacie, And falling downe, before that Majesty, VVhich is offended, ask to be forgiven For his offence against both earth and heaven. And, that he may obtain it, let him weigh VVhat Common Fame unto his charge doth lay; VVhat just occasion he hath given, why Things are suspected, which he may deny; And, what his heart may justly smite him for; Till, all his errors he doth so abhor, That GOD may pardon them; and men may see, His Grace is greater, then their sinnes can bee. That this be truly done, let him not spare To make his Failings, truly, what they are, By, seecretly, anatomizing them, In every circumstance, 'twixt GOD and him; For, in the world, it hath not yet been knowne, That any King was cast out of his Throne, VVithout a crying-sinne; Or, that God shooke A Kingdome; or, a Nation ever strooke; Or humbled any man, for his offence, And re-advanced, without Penitence: Except, when he, in wrath did them restore, To make their sufferings, and their shame the more. Which, that He may prevent; let him delay No longer, from a penitentiall way: But, make return, before he run so far, As to become a pris'ner at theInsula Vectis. BAR. Or, let him take good heed, when he is there, Lest other mens designs, and his own fear, Or, such vaine hopes, as he hath had too long, Occasion him to fall (by stearing wrong)
On Scylla, or Charybdis: Or, lest, they Who, seek their owne advantage, him betray By practice underhand: For, such as these Will but prolong their owne, and his Disease, With harme to others; and exasperate Those humours, which will hasten on the Fate, That may be fear'd. Thus, therefore, let him do, Yea, do it quickly, and sincerely too. Let him, a while, with-draw himselfe, apart, (Ev'n to the secret closet of his heart) Excluding company; but, chiefly, them Who, from his Duties, long have hindred him, By wicked counsells; or, by flattery, Caus'd him to dote upon a Majesty Which is not reall; and have thereby, turned His glory into shame, and made him scorned. Let him, shut out all those, who shew unto him, Those pictures of himself, which may undo him, And, make him, like Narcissus, on a Bable To dote, till he be fool'd into a Fable. For, some, with so much Piety, besaint him; With such fain'd Excellencies they bepaint him; Yea, they so impudently magnifie him, And, with so much Divinity bely him, As if, to deifie him they profest; Or, else, to canonize him, at the least. And, but, that thousands know him; and, know too, How much, men flatter Kings, (and what they do Who Idolize them) some would halfe believe He were, not only, blamelesse, but conceive That, seldome such a King, or such a man, Had raign'd, or liv'd, since first the world began; And, that these Kingdomes, have afflicted been, Without his fault; yea, for the peoples sin Against his God-head, onely: And, this course Hath made him nothing better; but, much worse;
For, Pharoah-like, it him, still more obdures, And, ev'ry day, new sins, new plagues procures. Let him, with prudent anger, therefore throw Such cheating Glasses from him; and, those too, Which multiply the faults by others done; And, represent offences, where are none, In hope to make themselves the fairer seem, By casting blurs, on other mens esteem: For these Impostors cheat him, with false showes, That, he to save their Stakes, himselfe may lose. Let him take heed of their Compliances, VVho are declined from those Principles, VVhereby, they in meer conscience, and true zeal, Appeared active for the Common-Weal, Against his Int'rest; and, in show are won A counter course, in their Designes, to run, In aid of his desires, with hope of those Rewards, or Honours, which he shall propose: For, on such giddy Turne-coats, all his cost, Time, promises, and favours, will be lost, Both to himselfe and them; Because those flashes, Are but a smoake, rais'd out of Dust, and Ashes, And shap'd unto a Cloud; which, being fill'd VVith noysome Aire, and, thereby, vainly swell'd, Up to a shew of somthing, shall, at last, Vanish to nothing, by a suddain Blast. Let him consider, what sad desolations His wilfulnesse hath brought upon three Nations; Upon himselfe, and Children; what great fears And sorrowes he hath heap'd, now, many years, On others too, aswell as upon them, VVhose peace, and weal, he ought not to contemne: Let him take notice, with how little sense, Of their Afflictions, and of their expence In Blood and Treasure, he hath passed over Those losses which he never can recover.
And let him ponder what may more befall, Unlesse the pow'r of God, prevent it shall. Let him observe, to what despised things, Below the honour, not alone, of Kings, But, of Inferiour Persons, he is brought, By seeking that, which he in vaine hath sought; By list'ning to bad Counsell; and, by still Pursuing those beinnings which were ill. Let him impartially resolve in mind, To what conditions it hath him confin'd; What heights of Glorie it hath cast him from; To what a depth of Troubles, he is come; What meanly-qualified Groomes, of late, He hath been faine, disguis'd, to personate; What triviall Fellowes he is forc'd to feed, Ride, and converse with: yea, let him take heed, From what sleight Jockies, and what Scatter-wits, He seeketh aid, and thereby nothing gets, To further his Designes; nor ought, but Lies, Rodomantadoes, and such Vanities. Nay, let him mark it once, and then againe, What beggerly Companions he is faine To fawne upon; to humour, bribe, and woe, VVith promises of wealth, and honour too, To serve his ends, when thereto they can add No more, then from a Porter may be had; Except it, peradventure, be Returnes Of ruine on themselves, and, on him scornes. Let him examine, by himselfe, alone, VVhat he commited hath, or left undone, For which this Change befalls him; And not dream That, these afflictions have pursued him For other mens transgressions, altogether. And let him seriously consider, whether There can be hearty penitence, or no, For wrongs, without some satisfaction too.
Let him examine, if a sacrifice Of words, and protestations, may suffice For bloodsheds, and those many robberies, VVhich on his Person, and his Partie lies: Or, whether he; and his Prerogatives VVere ever worth so many thousand lives, As they have cost: or, whether, when to make His last accompt, he cometh, GOD will take So triviall an answer, as to say; His will, and pleasure, they would not obey: But rebells were, who did that power resist, VVhich he doth claime, of doing what he list As his Vicegerent, and, as he was taught By those, whom he, to be true Prophets thought. Let him consider, what best guards a Throne, And, keeps him safest, who doth sit thereon; By whom, Kings raigne; why they at first were made; And, for whose sakes, authority they had: That, he may not suppose GOD, did provide His Kingdome, only, to advance his pride; Or, to inflict an heavy curse, upon VVhole Nations, by inslaving all to one. Let him consider, in what infamies A Tyrant lives, in what ancertainties, Feares, doubts, and dangers: and with what esteem, Content and peace, he weares his Diadem, VVho raignes, as knowing, that he had his Crowne More, for his peoples sake, then for his own: And, let him kick away those Parasites, Whose Counsell to Oppression, him invites; Or, foolishly perswades him, to improve Pow'r, wealth, or pleasure, by the losse of love. And, thereby, makes him labour to enjoy That pow'r, which will at last himselfe destroy. Let him consider, soberly, if he In honour, or in conscience, bound may be
Himselfe, for those, to hazard, who, pretended His Honour, and his Rights, to have befriended; Whereas, it may, (by many a circumstance) Be made appeare, that, at their owne advance, They chiefly aim'd; or, to preserve the Lot, VVhich, they had by his Grace, already got. For, to prevent approaching Beggery, Some strengh'ned him in acts of Tyranny; Some, to disturb the waters, that, in them, They might be thriving Fishers, under him. And very few (what e're they counterfeit) To him, adhered, but, to save, or get. Or, though their love ingaged them; yet, none Is bound to more, then can by him be done: Nor is it just, that, he, himselfe should lose, Because, he wanteth pow'r, to save all those VVho stood with him ingaged: Nor, would they Desire it, if they lov'd him, as they say. Let him not trust to those fanatick things, VVho, dote upon the Accidents of Kings, And sleight their Essence: For, as, hitherto These, by their aid, did but themselves undo VVithout his benefit; so shall it be Hereaftet, till their errour they can see. There is no help in humane policy, Nor any way, but down-right honesty To his security; or to redeem Their happinesse who have assisted him: For ev'ry course, and politike designe That, shall be drawne out, by a crooked line, VVill but beget new mischiefs, and inforce New projects, whose effects will still be worse; Till spight of pow'r, and fraud, long swords, and daggers, He stand enrowl'd among the Royall-Beggers; Or, with those Kings, who, from their honour fell, Because, they sleighted those, who wish'd them well.
Let, him not fancy, that their seeming love, VVho Court, him, yet, will worth regarding prove, Though, daily, more and more they shall repaire To kisse his hand; or, fill the emptie aire VVith acclamations; or, although they may Upon his birth, or Coronation day, Make Bonefires, ring the Bells, drink healths unto him, And such like triviall, and rude honours do him; For, herein, these, act but a sensuall part, Delightfull to themselves, without a heart: Some, to expresse their present discontent, And dis-affection to the Parliament: Some, for self-ends; some out of levity; And, many other, they well know not why, Seem zealous of his honour, who would soone, Repent what, they now covet should be done, VVere he restor'd unto them, with that mind VVhereto, as yet, he feemes to be inclin'd; And, they who do this day Hosanna crie, VVould say, perhaps, to morrow, Crucifie. The common People, rather live by sense, Then reason; and so quickly take offence At present suff'rings, that they oft are pleas'd To cut their own throats, that they may be eas'd, And, when it shall distast their Fantasies, VVill tread on what they did Idolatrize. If, therefore, he would in their love confide, And gaine from them, Affections which will bide; He must, protect them from receiving wrong, In things, which to their Freedomes do belong: Of their proprieties, he must take care; And, that their Persons and their purse he spare, Till he shall need them; and untill they see How for his honour, and their good 'twill be. For they will then, be forwarder to give, Then he shall be to ask, or to receive;
And, when just cause the same occasion may, Fling, for his sake, both goods, and lives away. Let this be then his aime, and his intent, VVhen God shall joyne him with his Parliament; VVith Justice, let him round impale his Throne, And, set before it, like King Solomon, A guard of Lions, that, may keep away Those Apes, Baboons, and Foxes, which assay Thereon to make intrusions; or, devise How to invade him, with such flatteries, As may delude him; and, divert him from Those Duties, which his Dignitie become. All his Prerogatives, likewise, let him So mix with equitie; so, circle them With pious Charmes; and, so confine, and awe His Vassalls, by Example, and by Law, That, in all times to come, nor he, nor they Who shall succeed him, find occasions may To dim his glory, or his pow'r to shake; Or, on the Subjects right, a breach to make. So, shall the people their just claimes enjoy, So, you, who do each other now destroy, Shall in each others happinesse delight, And, raise your Mountaine to a glorious height. What, can he more desire, then to excell Among those people, with whom all is well? Whither can he aspire, but to possesse On earth, the chiefest earthly happinesse? And, what can he have lesse, then he now gaines By seeking more, then to a King pertaines? But, lest, what his good Genius would advise, He may, by meanes of their deceits despise, Who have the Jannes and the Jambres been, By whose enchantments, he continues in Obduratenesse: Let him, take speciall care Of those false Priests, and Prophets to beware,
Who sooth him up with lies; and, make him dream, That, by endangering his Crowne for them He should preserve it; and, that, to provide Large meanes to feed their gluttony and pride, Is to promote GODS glory; let him not Believe those truthlesse vanities, a jot. Though some good men, have heretofore been fed With Babels portions, and unforfeited, Preserv'd their innocence, (with much ado) Yet, now, those dainties, have corrupted so This Generation; that, there's cause to doubt Their Charmes. And, therefore, let him shut them out From heart, and eare, (what ever formall shew Of Sanctity, they make in outward view) Believing, that their chiefe intentions here, Are to repaire their breaches; or, endeare, And sweeten, to the ruine of this Nation, Those Philters, and that cup of Fornication, Whereby, their Scarlet Mistresse, giddifies All those, who listen to her Witcheries. Let him, above all others, take good heed Of these deceivers; adde this to his Creed Concerning them; ev'n this, that they are not Gods Prophets; that, GOD owns not for his lot, What they so call; and, that, though him they raise Above the Moone, with attributes of praise; It is, but for the service of the Dragon, Their Lust, their great Diana, or their Dagon, That, they so Court him: yea, though they adore The seat he sits on, as divine (or more) And, canonize him (as it were) for one, Who, all his Predecessors had out-gone In piety, (because, he stourly stands To keep them with full guts, and idle hands) Let him him not be deceiv'd; nor thinke so glorious, So honourable, or, so meritorious,
What he would do for them, (if he were able) For, Jesabel did feed, at her owne table, Eight hundred Prophets; and, appear'd, no doubt, In her owne way, as bounteously devout, As he would be: yet, did her superstition, VVith other sinnes, occasion her perdition: And they were but false prophets, whom she fed, VVho, shortly after, likewise perished. Hypocrisie, and superstition, may Be sooner flattered by such as they, Into stupendions-bounties, then you see The best men can, by true devotion be: And, this, the Sacrifices, Altars, Groves, Shrines, Idols, Temples, and that Bounty proves, VVhich hath been dedicated unto men, To Angells, and to Devills, now and then. Then, let him, nor their Praises prize; nor feare, Against their claimes, that covenant to sweare, VVhich is establish'd by his Parliament, Their mischievous encrochments to prevent: For, though they have made captive his esteem: Not only to their callings, but to them; Nor they, nor that (once theirs) now, sold and bought, Are so divine, as they would have them thought. Yea, though these call it sacriledge, in those VVho, to discharge the publike debts, dispose VVhat was of late, employed, but to feed Bel and the Dragon; and, would scruples breed VVithin his conscience, making him beleeve, That GOD, is rob'd, if others do receive VVhat, lately they possest (and have too long Usurp'd already, to the publike wrong.) Let neither King, nor people, be afraid Or what by these Impostors, hath been said, To save their Kitchenstuffe; and, that their back Hereafter, may not their soft raiment lack.
Let them not fearfull be to sell, or buy Those portions, in their great necessity, Unlesse they sell, or buy them, with a mind, To prey on others rights; or, are inclin'd To have them, though they think it may be sin; And whether right, or wrong be done therein: For, such a man himselfe doth guilty make Of Sacriledge, though but his own he take. A true Disciple, doubtlesse, may injoy Things carnall; and whilst them he doth imploy As he is bound, none ever grudges him Their use; nor doth him, in their use, condemne: But, when, his own false int'rest to advance, He shall mis-name it, Christ's Inheritance, Or otherwise shall mis-imploy the same Against Truths Friends, and honor of GOD's name; He forfeits what he had. Moreover, know, That Christ, whose service they pretend unto, Bequeath'd them no such Lordships, as they claime: Nor Salaries, like those, at which they aime: But giving them Commission (whom he sent His work to do) injoyned them content VVith his allowance; strictly charged them, To trust to none, for wages, but to Him: And, to expect their Labours hire from none, (Or any where) but, where the work is done. But, see, how great a difference now appeares Betwixt these Priests, and Christ's Commissioners: So impudently they do now presume The Titles, and the Wages to assume, VVhich were forbid; so largely, they provide, Not necessaries onely, but for pride, For luxury, and for magnificence, Beyond the limits of a modest Prince; So loose are their deportments, and so vaine; Such Ruffians and Buffoones they entertaine:
Of common faults, and of each crying sin, So manifestly guilty, some have been; So peevish are they, so uncharitable; Amid their plenty, so inhospitable; So ignorant, they have been otherwhile, And their Apostleships do so defile; That, to suppose, CHRISTS Officers were such As they appear, were in effect, as much As to professe, his Kingdome were become Terrestriall, and his Court, indeed, at Rome; And, he who shall receive these, in the name Of CHRISTS Disciples, will receive but shame. 'Tis pitie, that their Bounty, who were Nurses To piety, at first; and, who, their purses So prodigally empti'd, to endow The needy Saints, should so perverted grow; And, that, men were so gracelesse in their use Of Blessings, as to lose them by abuse. Yet, just it was, that they who did suppose GODS bounty, not enough; their owne, should lose. And, that, gifts which he gave not; and, which may Pervert his purpose, should be tooke away; (At least) when their possessors do begin, To turn, what flow'd from vertue, into sin. And, how could you employ their vast wealth better, Then, to discharge that, wherein you were debter By their default, who, sought to have destroy'd Your Birth-rights, by that wealth which they enjoy'd? Since, Offrings made to GOD, (and, which to owne, He doth accept) may be on men bestowne, In times of need, when mercy, justly cries To be prefer'd, before a Sacrifice. Thus, did, without reproofe, the Jewish Kings Buy, otherwhile, with Dedicated things, Their Kingdomes peace; and, purchas'd uncontrold, Their Liberties, with sanctified Gold;
So, with their wealth; by whom your wars begun To pay the Souldier, you have justly done. But, that your King more plainely may espy His disobligement, to the Prelacy; (Which comprehends those Boutefeu's, by whom He, and his people, are almost become The ruine of each other) Be it knowne; These, were, at first, no creatures of his owne, Or, of his Predecessors; though, they gain'd A legall Oath, by them to be maintain'd, As part of holy Church; and, though a while, They sate among the Peerage of this Isle. But, they were first created, to promote The Kingdome of the BEAST, and, to devote Their services to him, in raising high, In making strong, and large, his Emperie; Or, in debasing Kings; and, how, they did Performe that service, you in Stories read. Now, when for bloody tyranny, from hence, That Tyrant was expell'd, by Providence, These also, (if they had not been befriended) Had into banishment, their Chief, attended. But, they pretending to a Reformation, (Perhaps, to keep possession in this Nation, For their grand Signior; and, to bring to passe What, now of late almost effected was,) Obtained grace: And, proving to be fit For their ambition, who aspire to get An arbitrary pow'r, they did arise Almost to all their former dignities; And grew so active, and, so wise became In praying of the Kings, and their owne game, That, here, (as plainely as in France) we see There's no such Tyrants, as where Prelates bee. And, he, perhaps, did mean the self-same thing, Who us'd to say, no Bishops, and no King.
They were advanc'd, like Jeroboams Priests, But to preserve usurped Interests Upon the people; and to help encrease Those claimes, which Tyrants covet to possesse, By falsifying Charters and Commissions, From Sacred Writ, to justifie oppressions: And Jurisdictions, to that end, they had, To force, when wit they wanted, to perswade. Then, to oblige the more, and, that they might Be like to Jereboams Priests, outright; They, from the poorest, and the basest sort Of people, rose, to highest place in Court. This is their Jus Divinum, whatsoe're Their friends, or they, would make themselves appeare: Which, by clear demonstration, I make good, And, not by tales of Tubs, and Robin-Hood. Thus, what they were; and, what they had to do, And, what at best their pride hath brought them to, I have declared; that, your King no more May cheated be by them, as heretofore: Or, think, that Law, or Conscience, him obliges, To keep up their usurped Priviledges, But, thereby know, that, if he shall delight In that, which is indeed the Royall-right; He, their vaine services, no more, will need, And, joy, that from such Flatt'rers he is freed. If any shall object, that, he hath tooke An Oath on their behalfe; that might be spoke Aswell of Kings, perhaps, who tooke away Old Idol-Priesthoods: For, 'tis likely, they Vow'd their protection, when the policy Of Jereboam rais'd his Hi'rarchy To six the Kingdome. But, no Oaths oblige, Which in unlawfull actions would ingage: And, his Oath is not broke by him, who tooke it, When, that, which made it lawfull, doth revoke it.
If it be said, those things to God were given, Which they possest. What then? in earth, and heav'n, God, is the sole possessor of all things; And, (whatsoever any takes, or brings) Hath neither more nor lesse; nor doth allow That any place on earth, or portion, now, Of things meere earthly, should be made appeare More holy, or more his, then others are; For, man intitling GOD, to mens estates, Is, but a Priest-cheat, which he greatly hates. When, you give more to GOD, then he commands, His Thanks is; Who requir'd it at your hands? Nor doth he those Oblations ever prize, Which from a superstitious ground arise; Nor counts, a charitable deed made void, When gifts abused, better are imploy'd. Oh! let not then his hazzards to preserve Their temp'rall claimes, be more then they deserve. Let him not tire himselfe to change a boot, Which he may weare with ease, on either foot. Let him not, by his undue care of these Which were the chiefest cause of his disease, Against his own just Int'rest make him erre, By seeking their advancements to preferre Before his own well-being. Let him not Permit their formall wisdome to besot His understanding so, that he shall scorne This Counsell; or, continue to adjourne Compliance with his people in those things Which are the Cement betwixt them and Kings; And, will be so approved, maugre that VVhich, to deceive him, they both print, and prate. Let him not trust to their inchanting Spells, Nor to the braine of their Achitophells; For, if faint, or false-heartednesse in those Who, for the Publike, his attempts oppose,
Shall not for private, or, by-interest Betray the cause and trust they have profest; GOD, at this present time, will lower bring The tyrannizing pow'r of Priest, and King. Nor King-craft, Priest-craft, nor the policies Of all, who preach or fight up tyrannies, Shall long prevaile, though, to support each other All Europes Tyrants should unite together: But, GOD, when they suppose to reach the tops Of their designs, will frustrate all their hopes; And, cause them to perceive, that he intends To prosper that, whereto they are no friends. Before that day, from all equivocations, From all close ends, and mentall Reservations, Let Charles, begin a resolute retreat; Else (MARK this) when sev'n years he shall compleat Among the Beasts, with Nebuchadnezar, Th'event of his demurrers will appear: And, he, who, yet a Leadstar, might become, Of just Dominion, to all Christendome, Shall misse the best advantage offred, yet, To any, King, who on his Throne did sit. Though clouds rise in the South, and in the North; There is, a Doome-conditionall, gone forth To be reverst, or stand, as he shall, now, His want of prudence, or, his wisdome show, As when the Sun ascends, to run his race, From his ecclipsed honour, and disgrace, He, now, may rise; whereas, if he passe by The present offred opportunity, He may perhaps, begin the fatall dance, Which ev'ry King must foot, who doth advance Himselfe above his bound. He, may, now, make Their expectations frustrate, who, yet, take An old prediction, in that sense, which he Would be unwilling, so fulfill'd should be.
For, through these Islands this Tradition goes, That He, who made the English Damask Rose, Or, els some other, being curious growne, To know the future fortune of his Throne, Receiv'd, in hieroglyphick-wise exprest, Their Portraitures, who, when he was at rest, Should in his Kingdome, after him succeed; VVith words, in Latine Verse, thus Englished: A Man, a Child, a Furious One; A Maid, a Fox, a Lion, None. Vir, Puer, &c. I would not, any much should trust, or feare Such Prophecies; yet, when events appeare To answer unto that which was foretold, Wise men should make what use of them they could: Seek how they might extract, ev'n from the Devills Deceits, an antidote, against his evills; And, so direct their actions, that his Charmes And cheating riddles, may not do them harmes. Lo, that prediction, is this day fulfild; Six, as it was fore-typifi'd, have held The Scepter of that King; and, now there's none, Who either weares the Crowne, or fills the Throne; Nor, any thing to furnish-out the same Belonging to that race, except a Name: And, here shall end that Prophesie, unlesse It further be fulfild through wilfulnesse. If he, who ownes that name, shall harken to Their counsell, who will tell him what to do; That name, at last, much like that stump, may be Which was preserved, when the Royall-tree, Once, representing Nebuchadnezzar, Was felled downe. And, as he did appeare In former Glorie, when he had confest His failings, and the living God profest; So, shall it be with Charles, if he repent; God, will the ruine of his House prevent;
Restore him to his Throne, and make his fame To grow the fairer, through his present shame. But, if he shall defer, till 'tis too late, Let him prepare for King Belshazzars fate, And, let all those, who shall to him adhere, Expect, in his sad dooms, to have a share. As Samuel did for Saul, till God did sling That Tyrant off, and chose another King; So, shall I pray for him (with mourning too) Till I perceive what GOD, and he will do. And, therefore, touching him, I will (before I speake to others) utter somewhat more. By no externall symptoms, can I find That, he doth yet, begin to change his mind; But, so, in his first march proceedeth on, As if, he wrongs receiv'd, but, none had done. And, whereas GOD, for penitence doth call, Doth seem to think, there needeth none at all; But, rather, that his people (if not heav'n) Should supplicate, to be of him forgiven, For suffring, such an Innocent as he, So scandalized, and so wrong'd to be. Yea, and the people (as it is their guize) When some offender at the gallowes dies, Whom they themselves brought thither (do begin, To look more on the streight that he is in, Then, on the reason of it. And as when A Township, having seized guilty men, Who had much wrong'd their servants, stole their goods, Devour'd their cattell, sometime shed their bloods, And, threatned their destruction; in a rage They force them to the stocks, or to the cage, Or to the Justice, and, are like to teare The Rogues in peeces, too, ere they come there: But, when they are examin'd; and when they Must, at their Parish charges them convey
Unto the Goale; be bound to prosecute; Take paines, and spend some money in the suit, That Justice may be done (the Land to free From such a plague as those were like to bee) Then, if the Rascals whine (as they will do) And make their moane, they fain would let them go. Thus, fares it with the people; they complain'd Against the King, of wrongs by him sustain'd, And, of worse like to come. They saw, he drew The Sword upon them, therewith to pursue His Ʋsurpations; and, they were compel'd, To arme, and to oppose him in the field; Where, GOD, the victory bestow'd on them; And, in their owne defence, they conquer'd him. Then, finding, that this Conquest drew on charge, And, that it further would their cost inlarge To keep what they have got, (lest all the cost And blood already wasted, should be lost, And worse things follow,) they impatient grow, And, are discourag'd, and besotted so, That, they begin to pity his estate More then themselves; to scandalize, and hate Ev'n their Deliverers; to underprize GOD'S mercies, their own safety to despise; And, to behave themselves, as if they had An inclination in them to be mad About next Moone in June: Or, had their Doome In spight of their Defenders, to become Perpetuall slaves: And, this base Generation, (Foes to themselves, and to their owne salvation) Have so confirm'd the Kings obduracy, By their imprudence, and apostacy, That, he, perhaps, perswades himselfe, there needs No penitence for any of his deeds Against the publike Rights; and that his ends To compasse, this vaine Rout will yeeld him friends.
Now, therefore, all excuses to prevent, Though I have shew'd, whereof he should repent; Informed how; and in some part, of what; Yet, here Ile touch a little more of that, That He, and they who think him without blame, May somewhat now consider of the same. Deserves it no repentance, to invade Those priviledges which his people had? And those proprieties, which they injoy'd In their estates, unjustly, to make void, Or, from their ancient freedomes, them to thrust? Or, from their due possessions for his lust? Or, maintenance for luxury and pride, By other mens undoings, to provide? And, then by Proclamation, to pretend Some necessary, and some publike end, Which, could be manifest to no mans view, And, which, was generally knowne untrue? VVas it no sinne, by base Monopoles, To raise the price of most commodities? To take away free Trades and occupations; To vex men with perpetuall Molestations, By Courts and Officers, devis'd for nought But, that men into bondage might be brought To his Prerogatives? and by degrees By new exactions, Services, and Fees, Be screw'd up, (through demands, appearing small) Till he hath got a seeming-right in all? For, if that be his due, which was receiv'd; So, is the rest, if Priests may be believ'd. VVas it no fault, deserving penitence, To take away the meanes of their defence, From his most faithfull Subjects? to ingrosse And, raise the price of powder, to their losse, And their apparent danger? to disarme Their persons, who intended him no harme?
To put them under the Command of those Who are their knowne Oppressors and their Foes? To make them lend what he ne're meant to pay? To make them buy what he should give away? To make them give, who had no list thereto; To make men sell, what they would not forgo? To act, what may of all their dues deprive them, And to deny them that, which should relieve them? Deserves it not a sigh, that in his Court Prophanenesse, and Oppressions, were but sport? That, Judges were compell'd to wrest the Lawes? Divines the Scriptures, to maintaine a Cause Which GOD abhorres; that all oppressions should Be there upheld, and sin be uncontrold? That, Schoole-boyes not arriv'd at years of reason, Should suffer death, as culpable of Treason, For childish words; as if Kings grew afraid Through guiltinesse, of what young Infants said? Deserves it not bewailing, to repaire By fines, unjustly rais'd, the House of Prai'r? To punish, men of merit, with disgraces, Dismembrings, Stigmatizing of their faces, Imprisonments, exiles, and separations From friends, wives, children, yea, from all relations, For things not capitall; or, deemed crimes, By Law; or, blamable in better times? Was nothing done, whereof he might repent, When ev'n the speaking of a Parliament, Was made a crime? when Members were confin'd, For doing what by duty was injoyn'd; When all their Priviledges were so broke, That, some should violently have been tooke, Ev'n from their Sanctuary; which, of old To violate, no Tyrant was so bold: And for which act, alone, this free-born Nation, Would quite have ruin'd all his Generation,
In former times; if, they had ere obtain'd So great advantages, as now are gain'd? Deserves it no repentance, to bestow Those honours, which to virtue he doth owe, On vitious men? Or, such as had no worth But, wealth and arrogance, to set them forth? Or, could be instruments to help undo Their honest neighbours, and the Kingdome too? Is it no wrong, to set such Rascalls, over Their well knowne betters, that they may uncover, And rise, and bow, before them; who, are fitter To lacky by their horse, Caroch, or Litter? Or, rather to be baffled, kick'd and scorned, Then, with a Coronet to be adorned? Was nothing purpos'd, fit to be repented, When that Designe was first of all invented, Which, to promote, (and, thereby to inforce) He sent, both for Commanders, and for Horse, To Germany? And, was there nothing plotted, VVhen on our Seas that Spanish Navy sloted, VVhich anchor'd in the Downes? Is there no teare, Or sign due, for those things which acted were Concerning Rochell; whereof, to this day, The Protestants of France complaine, and say, It cannot be, but, that both GOD, and Man VVill vengeance bring, for what they suffred then? Is there no need of penitentiall prayers, For innovating of the Scotch-affaires? For doing, and undoing? For complying, And failing off? For granting, and denying? For all those falsifyings which fore-went The first, the second, and this Parliament? For all those injuries, which have been since? For all the acts of fraud, and violence, Committed in these Islands, since this Warre, By him, and those, which of his party are?
For all these, is there no compunction due, VVhich, he before the world, is bound to shew? No cause, can he discover of contrition, For that Idolatrie, and Superstition, VVhich daily multiplied in these Lands By his connivance, or by his commands? And, by the vaine hopes, fear, or fraud of those Whose piety consists in mimick showes? And, since there is a Statute, in this Isle VVhich treasonable makes, to reconcile This people unto Rome; did it appeare No fault, to tolerate an Agent here, Or Nuntio from the Pope, to innovate In matters of Religion, and the State? Is there not cause enough he should repent (Though no cause else were found) that, he hath spent So many yeares before he doth begin That penitence, which brings forgivenesse in? That he adventured so many falls, Neglected and with-stood so many calls? Made outward shewes, of sorrow and remorse, Yet, was no whit the better, if not worse? That, in his heart, he still prepares for Warre, VVhen all his words for peace, and Treaties are? That, GODS long suffrings, and th' indulgencies Of his wrong'd people, he doth still despise? And, that, although he now is in a chaine, His former hopes, and purposes remaine? If he repent not, may he not at last, Be made repent it, when the time is past? That, he is so unwise, as to provoke Those men so far, by whom his pow'r is broke, As by apparant signes, to let them see His aimes to compasse their destruction bee? And, how, for that intent still meanes are tri'd, All parties, from each other to divide,
And from themselves? Moreover, may he not Find reason to repent, what, by the Scot He hath endeavour'd to effect his ends? What by the Citie, Armie, and his Friends In either House? yea by the people too, That, he may make all Parties help undo Themselves, and him, whose fall till he repent, No pow'r, shall be so powerfull to prevent. For, though they thriv'd a while, both he, and they Whom hee corrupteth, shall descend one way; And, GOD this Kingdome shall in order set, By, men and meanes, not thought upon, as yet. More might be said; much more, to let him see What causes, of repentance there may be; Which I had rather he himselfe should find, (And, seriously consider in his mind) Then hear them from another; and, but that The Common-Voice, these faults enumerate, I, had not mention'd them: nor, shall these prove A blemish to him, if all this may move His heart to Penitence: For, then Ile say Enough, to take all guiltinesse away; And make him cleaner, then he was that morn, In which it was first said, that he was borne. And, GOD, so blesse my hopes, as I intend All this, to bring his troubles to an end; And in this manner do it, that past evills, Nor future sinnes, nor spight of men, or Devills, May power obtaine, to stop him, or to fling him From that estate, whereto, I wish to bring him. The way, by me designed (I confesse) To be a path, full of uneasinesse To flesh and blood; and, not without much terror, At first to those, who liv'd in wayes of error. It is not so with violets bestrow'd, With pinks and roses, as the path way show'd
By his deluding Prelates; but, I'le say, This, confidently, 'tis the safest way, And easiest I could find, for one who had Such long and obstinate by-wand'rings made; And, I unwilling am, he should begin A course, which he might lose his labour in; As those do, who close up a fest'ring wound With healing salves, whilst filth in them is found. My course may harsh appeare, and full of dangers, To them, who to such practises are strangers; Yet, I dare warrantize, (for I can tell) It leads to heaven, although it lies by hell: And that it will at last, be well approved, Of those, who him for his own sake have loved. But, lest, the Maximes, which Court-breeding gives To Kings, and zeal to their Prerogatives, May steell his conscience; and, still, make him dream That, all his Kingdomes, and all things in them, Are his by right: And, that, if it be so, All those endeavourings conducing to The keeping of that Right, may, then be done: And, lest he thence infer, he wrongeth none, On whom, he maketh war, with an intent, Incroachments on his Kingship, to prevent; But, that, they, rather, who have him with-stood, Have down upon their own heads, drawne their blood. To take the frothie vanity of that Conceit away; thus, I expostulate: If Kings have such a right; how, was it gained? From whom, was that Prerogative obtained? For, sure, what ever Parasites may please To feigne; Kings are not Ab Origines; But had beginnings, like to other men, Who rise, and fall; are borne, and die agen; And, came to their preferments, either by GOD's gift, or mans, or else by Victory.
'Twere blasphemy, to say, that God bestow'd That pow'r upon them, which to be allow'd They now contend: and, they from hell did fetch Their text, or comment, who such doctrine preach. It cannot be, that God, who, is Perfection; Goodnesse it selfe; the Essence of Affection; And, Fountaine, out of which free mercie goes, Throughout the whole creation, and or'e-flowes: It cannot be, that from among those creatures, (VVhich are in all things, of the selfe same natures) He should not only, one or two, advance Above the rest, but by his Ordinance Declare it, likewise, to be right and just, In them (even meerly to fullfill their lust) To take from others, when it pleases them, Child, honour, goods, life, liberty and limb; Or, practise cruelties upon them: No, It neither can be, neither is it so: For, in his Word he tells, what Kings should do; There makes description of such Tyrants too, As those, for which their suit his People made, VVhen, in his wrath, a King bestow'd he had; Because, they long'd for that vaine Gallantry, Which they among the Nations, did espie. He, sharply threatens Kings, who tyrannize, Or use their pow'r, in an insulting wise; And sayes, he gave them their Prerogatives, That, men should under them, lead quiet lives; That Swords they have, to execute the Law; Defend the just; ungodly men to awe; And, so to raigne, that no good man might feare The port they carry, or the Sword they beare. VVhence then, obtain'd they that exhorbitant Dominion, whereof, now so much they vaunt? Did first the people, give them such a pow'r And set them up, of purpose to devour,
Vex, and inslave them? That were to conceive A madnesse, which no wise men will beleeve; Nor many fools, their folly so betray, As thus to think; much lesse, the same to say: And, doubtlesse hitherto, no Nation had So little reason, as to grow so mad. Did they then raise themselves, unto their height? VVhere got they pow'r, to conquer such a right? If others helpt them, whither did they run, To keep themselves free, when that deed was done? It seemeth likely, they would stay to share, Their portions, where they so victorious were; And did not sure, intend to set up one, By whom, they would themselves be trod upon. Nor, could those valiant men, become so base, To leave behind them, an inslaved-race, By takeing such conditions, as are now, Impos'd on many Kingdomes, which you know. Or, if a Nation, might be fool'd so much, Who knowes, this Peoples lot, to have been such? What ancient History, or what record Thereof, a testimoniall doth afford? If none, how do your British Tyrants claime What they usurp; and that whereat they aime? If, they obtain'd it by deceiving trust, Which is most true (then, make amends they must) And if spontaneously they do the same, They lose with honour, what they got with blame. If they prescription plead, from times of yore; Time, makes not wrongs, to be the lesse, but more. By Conquest, will they claime it; know ye, then, The Conquerours are conquered agen; And, what time, and the sword away have tore, Time, and the sword, doth righteously restore: And, that, time is no bar to rightfull things; Is for the people, true, as well as Kings;
But how, their Peoples freedomes, goods and lives Shall Kings protect, if their Prerogatives, Should be infring'd, or lost? there is indeed A just Prerogative, that he may need In some Immergencies, which both by reason, And, by the law of nature is in season, When things which for the Publike safety are, Require them; and, when no knowne lawes declare What may be done. In such necessities No Common-Wealth, no prudent man, denies An arbitrary Pow'r, to private men; Much lesse, to Magistrates, and Princes, then. No Nation is so foolish to restrain That just Prerogative, and so make vaine Their owne security: they will and may Be Judge of those necessities; for they Are most concerned in them; and if he Whom they to guard them chose, depriv'd shall be Of meanes to do his duty; they must bear The blame of what ensues: for, he is clear. Thus, I could answer to all other things, Which are objected by usurping Kings, If need requir'd; and bring them light to see, How they by hypocrites, abused be; And, say enough, were he thereto inclin'd, To make your present King, to change his mind. But, GOD, that only turnes the hearts of Kings, And to himself reserves such glorious things, As their conversions; will I hope, in time, Produce that miracle of grace in him: For, if I guesse right, he would now be glad To know, where wholesome counsell might be had; And knowes what 'tis, to want, in his distresse, Such men as dare the truth to him professe, Without regarding carnall hopes, or fear; Or, who displeased, or well pleased are.
There are some Prayers left upon record, That, plead yet, strongly for him, to the Lord; And, which, by his forgot Remembrancer, VVere offered up, for him, in his first year, When that, which now is truly come to passe, By him foreseen, and justly feared was. It may be at this present time, those Praiers Then sent up, for this King, and his affaires, Begin to take effect; for, who doth know What mercies from the Fount of Grace may slow? Or, what for him, those, offerings might prepare Which made, by Faith, in Fiery Trialls were? Oh, if they take effect, and if he find, Such motions (as are wish'd for) in his mind, To spring up; let a blessed deaw from heaven, Descend, that growth unto them, may be given. With true humility, let him begin, To meet them kindly, and to welcome in Those guests, with such respect into his heart, As may there fix them, never to depart. Let not a shame, to be repented of, Or, their derisions, who perhaps will scoffe At such a change, deter from persevering; Or, by their threats, beget in him a fearing Of what may follow: for, it glad shall make, And cheere his Soul, when all their hearts will ake. Let him not entertain the least suspect, His Penitence will want a due effect, If it be true; or, that a guard or wall, From being manifest, restraine it shall, When once it works: Nor let his people feare To trust him, when he proves therein sincere: For, hearty Penitence, is of a straine Not like to that, which hypocrites do faine; But, moving, unresistable, and cleare, When, and in whomsoere, it shall appeare.
Yea, thereunto, so great a pow'r is given, That, hearts, alone, it breaks not ope, but heav'n, And, maketh way to reconcile agen, The greatest sinners, both to GOD and Men. For, whosoere is truly penitent, Meerely with tongue and eies, doth not repent, With vowes, with protestations, and with teares; Or, with such formall complements, as theirs Who keep an out-side-fast, or cloath the back With vestments, and with long cloakes, died black; Or, who make faces, or look for a while, So sad, as if it were a mortall sinne, to smile: But, wheresoere true penitence you see, Like rising up from death to life will be. It wholly changes, and new moulds, new makes That man, within whose heart, it rooting takes. As well within, it cleanseth as without: And, that the truth of it, ye may not doubt, The sinner from ill habits, it estranges; His words, his thoughts, his company it changes: His works, his waies, his plots, and his designes; Of good intentions, giveth certaine signes; He daily growes more fruitfull, takes more care, To be indeed reform'd, then to appeare: Regards not, what of others, he is thought, So, he, unto perfection, may be brought; Fears nothing more, shuns nothing more then sin, And, that abhorred course which he was in. Forgiveth every one, that was his foe; Gives unto all men, that which he doth owe; Shames, neither to bewaile, or to confesse To GOD or men, his former wickednesse; Nor any good advice, will disesteem, How mean soere the counsellor shall seem: And, when the King, thus changed shall return, Who, would desire his coming to adjourn?
When, thus a true repentance doth inprove him, Who would not then, forgive, and trust, and love him? For, when you find a metamorphosis, In him, so supernaturall as this, Nought formerly by him, mis-said, mis-done Or, misconceived, shall be thought upon To future disadvantage, though the sin, Hath black, or, of a scarlet tincture bin. Though, by an over-good conceit of him, Who stood suspected, he restrained them, VVho sought to bring his fathers death to triall, And, gave offence, by giving a deniall To Justice, in that cause, to take her course; And, rais'd suspitions, too, of somewhat worse: Yea, though he were a sinner, twice as bad As he (by those, who love him least) is made; And, had, beside the blood his Partie spilt, More sinne upon him, then the double guilt Of King Mannasseh; he, as pure should grow By such repentance, as the Mountaine snow. And, when to this repentance he is brought, VVho can object? or, how can it be thought, That, in fullfilling of the covenant (As touching him) you shall one title want, Of that Branch, which, expresseth your intent To bring delinquents, to due punishment? For, if you can conceive, what 'tis to bring The lofty heart, and spirit of a King, To stoop so much, as to descend unto VVhat, he that's truly penitent must do; Or, if you could beleive what selfe-denialls, What inward torments, and what fiery trialls Are undergone, and must be passed through By those, who truly penitentiall grow, You would confesse, that, nor restraint, nor chaines, Nor death it selfe, had in them feares or paines,
So terrible, so full of grief and smart, As those, which exercise a contrite heart; And, you would say (when forth this fruit he brings) No sinners; no such Penitents as Kings. Oh what a blessed, what a glorious thing It were Great Britan, to behold thy King Come back thus chang'd; nd with a mind to do, That, which thy Genius hath advis'd him to! And, that, which his owne conscience cannot chuse But tell him, it were madnesse, to refuse! How, would his drooping Subjects, then rejoyce, To bid him welcome, both with heart and voice! How, would his friends triumph, how would his foes, Their aimes, and wicked expectations lose? How would those hypocrites among you tremble, VVho did with him and all the world dissemble! How, would their soules be comforted, who were To him, and to the Common good sincere! And by both sides oppressed, for abiding In their first principles; and, for not siding VVith this, or, with that faction, to make strong, Themselves and other men, in doing wrong! VVhat hopes thereby would other Nations take, That his example would some changes make In their oppressors? How, would they be struck With terrors, who have Tyranny mistook For Kingship; and, by strained Monarchie Themselves infected with Lycanthropie! How, would your noisome Grashoppers, and Flies, Frogs, Lice, and Caterpillers, which arise From their corruptions (fearing to delay, Their lingring here) hop, fly, and crawl away! How, would the BEAST then rage; the Scarlet Whore, Then, curse and raile; the Devills howle and roare; As fearing, they their heights were falling from, And, that the Kingdome, which they hate, were come!
But, his conversion, would not long adjourne Their miseries, to whom he should return, Unlesse they take more care, and, more delight To make their conversations more upright, Then heretofore; unlesse to meet him too, They better shall prepare, then yet they do; Unlesse they more unite; more wise appeare, In resolutions; and then, more adhere To that which is resolv'd; unlesse more jealous They grow of Publike honour, and more zealous Of Publike Faith; more clear in their intent; More diligent, more studious to prevent Supplanting wiles, more sensible of wrong, Sustain'd by them, who to their side belong, More carefull, that their Friends, may firme abide; And, that all others may be satisfi'd According to just hopes; and plainely see The common-good, their chiefest aime to be. For, sure, the Kings repentance will availe But little to their comfort, who shall faile In such like duties; or in meeting him With such affections, as he brings to them. But, when all other sinners grace receive, They shall with Hypocrites, their portion have; And, to their shame and great vexation, then, See those, whom they thought worst, the better men. The British Genius, as, if he had in Some secret Musing, or Devotion been, Here made a pause; and, therefore, here will we Take breath, a little, if you pleased be.
The Contents of the second Lection. THe Genius, here, declares to them Who exercise the Power-supreme, How, they, much mischiefe might prevent: How, they, the people may content: How, keep their Pow'r, and Cause upright, With honour, in their Foes despight; And tenders, that, this may be done, Much to be duly thought upon. Tells, what the people ought to do, To give assistance, thereunto; Perswades, the Nations to agree, Lest by themselves, they ruin'd be; The Factious-parties doth advise, To lay aside their vanities; And, interweaveth, here and there, What, others, may with profit heare. Shewes LONDON, where her wealth doth lie; Speaks reason, to the Soulderie; Minds, to what sort of Irish, you Some share of mercy, should allow: To Preachers, preacheth waies of peace, To further Truth with Righteousnesse: Then drawing toward his conclusion, Presageth Order, from confusion: Informeth, from what Pedigree Good Government deriv'd will bee; And, when that's told you, ye shall heare What's whisper'd, in the Authours eare. THE GENIUS, (whom observe I pray, with heed) With raised eyes, did thus, againe, proceed: How faine would I find words and exhortations, Which, might not now, be lost upon these Nations?
But, cause them to consider, and discerne Those things, which their well-being may concerne? That, all well meant endeavours for their good, Might not be still neglected, or withstood; And, future ages, wonders, what dire Fate, This Generation did infatuate? My breath, hath hitherto, been chiefly spent, The Kings approaching ruine to prevent: By skrewing thoughts into him which may wake him From slumber; and, for peace, industrious make him. Now, I will also, somwhat, say to them, Who stand, in prime relation, unto him; That, if his heart GOD change not, neither he May them destroy, nor they destructive be Unto themselves. And, what, to that good end, I shall advise, is this: Dear friends, atttend. Let those high Courts, by whom the Pow'r-supreme, Is exercised in the name of him Who now is laid aside; let those adventer No longer, to wheele round, without a Center: But, six on somewhat, whereon to be steddie, Before all catch the Staggers, and grow giddie. Let that be rectifi'd, which now, disturbs Their nat'r all motions, in their sev'rall Orbs; Lest if the Nations clash, they thereby crack The wheeles of Government, and make them break Against each other, when there will be here, To mend them, no well-skill'd State-Ingineere. Reduce your wand'ring lights; let ev'ry star VVithin your Firmament keep his own sphere; Lest, if above their Circles they aspire, Like Phaeton, they set the world on fire; Or aid those Comets, which, already glare Prodigiously, to breed combustions here, VVose mischievous effects, you may in vaine Attempt, perhaps, hereafter, to restraine.
Till to the snuffe they blaze; or, till they shall To quench their thirstings, all your blood exhale. This mischief to prevent, let ev'ry wit, And ev'ry Pow'r subordinate, submit To that, which is supreme; ev'n unto that, VVhich for the present, is predominate, For publike safety: And let that abide On Principles, whic neither may divide Or, wound it selfe; lest on it selfe, it draw Contempt, from them, who, thereof stood in awe; And, that contempt so weaken them at length, That they, with losse of honour, lose their strength: For, you have felt, (as well as heard it told) VVhat of Divisions, hath been said of old. Your present postures give occasion may To some, of doubting, whom they should obey; How far forth, their obedience must extend; How long they shall uncertainely attend, The hatching of that Government, which must Continue fixt; and, whereto they may trust. VVhich questionings, and doubtings (though good rea∣son Hath made them in these Islands, now, in season) Enfeeble much your Pow'r; and do beget, (Though seemingly the people do submit) Ill consequences, which will still be worse, Untill you settle on some certaine course: Especially, if they suspect that pow'r, Intendeth not their benefit, but your. Delay not, therefore, that which they expect: And, till a settlement may take effect, (Or, till they better know, what doth pertaine To your new cunb, and also to your reine) With kindnesse mannage them, and condescend To what, may for their satisfaction tend In all just seeming Rights; till they may see, That, by your pow'r, their peace preserv'd shall bee.
And then, if your Authority to own, They shall refuse; so make your courage known, That, none may dare blaspheme, or scandalize, Those needful Pow'rs, and lawful Dignities, Which are above their Censures; least you farther Their Plots, who have no hope, but in disorder; Since, better it becomes, VVisemen to dye In Order, then, to live in Mutiny. Mark, those among you, who, whilst they pretend Your Power, and your Proceedings, to befriend, Impair them, underhand, by driving on Designs, destructive to what should be done. So many Marks, upon them do appear, Declaring to what Party they adhere, That, well they may be known: And, they to whom These are discover'd, find, what will become Of You, and your Affairs, unless, you shall With speed (and wisely) them, in question call. Your greatest Foes, and, they who most may wrong you, Are some, who, dayly Counsel take among you. Your Adversaries, as the Prophet said, Are men of your own Houses, who have playd The parts of Seeming Friends. Of these, therefore, Take heed, and seek to cast them out of door Before they cast out you; Which, were they stronger, Deferred would not be, one minute longer. When you have purg'd your Houses (till which day All will be spoke in vain, that I shall say) Take my advice (for it is genuine, And, that, whereto your Genins doth incline) First, to Debate, and, then, to Question, bring The Government, and what concerns the King; Which, being prudently resolv'd upon, Will save you twenty labours, in that One: And, make, (if you perform, as is profest) An easie passing thorough all the rest.
In your Debates, discover not that spleen Or Virulency, wherein, may be seen, A purpose, nor to give, nor take content; But, so contest, that, when ye shall assent, There may, on you, be seen the fewer scars Of your unhappy and uncivil Wars; And, that it may appear, your strife hath bin, Not, that your VVill, but, that the Truth may win. Yet, lest, whilst you are forced to contest, You may destroy the noblest Interest By dull Indifferency, or want of zeal; Look to the safety of the Common-weal, As to your chief Alligance: For, a King Who makes a claim although the claimed thing. Be due) yet, if he so exacteth it, As, that, it publike danger may beget, Becomes a Traytor to the Royall Trust, In him repos'd; and, merits to be thrust Besides the Throne, if, therein, he persist, To prosecute his private Interest. When, ye are certain, what should be prefer'd, From prosecuting it, be not deter'd; Or, from a stout ingagement, in that Cause, Whereto, you are obliged by the Laws Of GOD, and Nature: For, a work begun With Courage, is as good, as halfway done. Let not the foolish fears, or superstition Of earebor'd slaves (the Foot-stools of Ambition) Who Idolize, and deifie their Kings, As more then mortal, and unbounded things; Let not these fright: But, well examine you What, to the People; what, to them, is due, That, so, your Friends, who see your prudency, May be preserved from Apostacy. Consider, wisely, how with him, you deal, Who, of these Vessels, was esteem'd, erew hile
Both Master, and Chief owner; that, nor he Nor you, may ruin'd, or dishonour'd be, By any practise, which may not befit Your Wisdom, or your Justice, to permit. Force not each other into such a Streight, As, that, there may from thence, be no retreit; Or, means left, for th'one Party to prevent The others fall, although he should repent. But, as, indeed, you hitherto have done, Him, as the Publike Father look upon. And, though his Parasites, have him inrag'd By causeless Jelousies, and far ingag'd Against your Lives, and Freedoms; yet, assay To shew him, all the Mercy, that you may. Ʋlisses did spontaneously assent To be inchained, that, he might prevent The Syrens Charms; and, you, without just blame Have done, (and may, yet do to him) the same Who hath already, been by their inchanting So charm'd, that, very little now is wanting Of his, and your destruction. By his own, And others faults, distemper'd he was grown; And thereby hath indangered, no less His own Safe-being, then the Common-Peace; And, while destructive Courses he shall take, You, are oblig'd to stop, and pull him back; Though, his Seducers, grow inrag'd thereby, And, term you Traytons, for your loyalty. Yea, you may still restrain him, and thereto Add more, if need require it should be so; Till GOD, by his especial grace, hath broght him, To shun the Course, which, evil Counsel taught him; Or, left him so, that, wilfully he shall Without your fault, by his own Projects, fall. I will not counsel, that, ought less you do Then Salus Populi, constrains you to;
For, though the Sheepish Ront, more think upon Things present, then, on what is past and gone; And, seem to have, already, so forgot Late grievances, as if they thought it not So great a plague, to be inslav'd for aye, As present weights to bear, though but one day, Yea, though the most part, of the Common rabble, So sottish, are, and so irrationable, That, out of fear, lest others should enslave them, They would inslave themselves, and those that save them: Yet, must not those, on whom the Land relies, Benummed grow, with such stupidities: For, 'tis a Symptome, of a Sottish Nation, To grow respectless, of Self-preservation; Or, fear to practise, what agrees with Reason, Because, it hath been falsly called Treason, By Parasites, and Priests; who, that a King Might make them something, made him, any thing, Which he desir'd to be; and, hence did rise Abhominable Court-Idolatries. Yea, hence, it was, that, men first grew afraid To think (until of late) what may be said, And must be resolutely done, before GOD, will, these Isles, to their lost Peace restore. A Realm, that fears to call her Trustee, to Accompt, for ought mis-done, or left to do; Is like those Children, who do fear the shows, Which, they themselves set up to scar the Crows: And, they, who think you have no rightful power To curb his fury, who, might you devour; May think, as well, they should not put a clog, Or hang a chain, upon a shepherds dog, Although, he dayly bites, and kills the sheep, Which he was, only, bred, and ed, to keep. In warlike manner, with his Standard rear'd, The King, against you, in the Field appear'd;
And, gave you (as it were) a Summons thither, That, he, and you, might plead you Rights together, By way of Combate; which, your Common-Laws Allow of, for the tryal of that Cause, Whereof there's doubtful proof; And, wherein, none Knows how, to judg aright, but, GOD, alone. This Tryal, both did stand to: By this Tryal, The King, was overcome, without denyal; And did submit. What, had you then to do? But, what you would your selves, be done unto, When your Desires, were made a Rule, whereby Another, might, square out his Charity? Men, do not use to hunt a Beast of prey, To take him, and, then, let him go away. They, who have caught a Lyon, you would blame If they dis-mist him (though he seemed tame) Unchain'd, and without keepers; since, that Creature Is known, of so untamable a Nature, That, he will ravine, as he did before, If, to himself, you leave him any more. Kings, who without controul, the Scepter sward, As tameless are, as Lyons, that have preyd: Which, howsoever, you shall use, or feed them, Wil soon grow dangerous, unless you beed them; You, therefore, must not give them leave to seize, On ought, at will; no, not so much as Flos, Lest, some Prerogative, they thereon found: But, you must circle them within a Bound; And, Laws, and Counsellors provide, whereby You may their Wills, and Judgments, rectifie: And, then, when they by general consents, So furnisht, be, they may be Instruments Of Honor, Peace, and Plenty. And, take this From me, who know best, what, most fitting is For this Isles constitution; That th'increase Of Wealth, and Honor; Settlement of Peace,
And Freedom from Oppressions, (whatsoe're Some dream) shall never be enjoyed here, In any Government, so perfectly, As, by a regulated Monarchy. Shall I advise you to a Treaty, than? No: Tis not now, as when the War began. Before the Tryal, your Trustees, did well To treat for Peace; because, they could not tell What might succeed; and, thought it safer, far, To take some wrong, then seek redress by VVar. But, now, for them to Treat, were to admit That, GOD, had past no Tryal for them, yet. And, those, who thereto would perswade them, now, I shall not for their wisest Friends allow, If Friends: For, that, not only of their prizes Defeats the Conquerors, but, equalizes Them, likewise, with the Conquer'd; and, makes void, What, should by right of Conquest, be injoyd. When he, whose ancient Birth-right was quite lost, Hath by expence of labour, time, and cost, A lawful repossession of it sought, And, at the Law, his suit to Tryal brought; Obtained a Verdict, Judgment, Execution, And, ful possession, without Diminution, What, for a Friend, I pray were such a one? Who should perswade this man, when all were done, To wave his lawful right, so dearly bought, To treat with him, who his undoing sought? And, uncompel'd, refer unto debate, What, he should leave, or take, of that Estate? And, what were that man, but, a Groll, at best, Who, re-adventur'd, thus, his Interest? Nor honester, nor wiser, much, are they Who, now, into a Treaty would betray The Parliament. For, what hath yet been done, If they must Treat, again, for what is won?
Why, did they make good meaning men to fight And lose their lives, to win for them, a Right, Which they must get by Treaty? Why, is he A Prisoner, if a King as yet, he be That's capable of Treating? Or, of more Then you shall seem obliged to restore, In meer humanity? Or, by that band, Whereby, as Christians, you obliged stand, Upon his true Repentance? And, upon Security, like fault, shall not be done? But, if no Treaty, be allow'd, how then Shall you, and he, be reconcil'd agen? By such a Course, as will be generous; And, for our Genius to advise; Ev'n thus: Like honorable Victors, offer him Terms honorable, if he merrit them, By true Repentance (For, it will be more Then can be justly offer'd him before) Lest, you, at last, may be requited ill, If Power he get, before he change his Will. When, you perceive, that, GOD in him hath wrought That mind, whereto you wish he should be brought, Give him Conditions, freely, such, as may Full well become a King, whom, to obey, Acknowledg, and submit to, 'twil beseem Those Nations, who, a good repute esteem. Give him, that Kingly-Liberty, which will Confine him, from all power of doing ill; And, him enable, too, for every thing, Pertaining to the Office of a King: Which, to declare; and, to consider how It shall secured be, I, leave to you; Whom they concern, and, who know how, to make Your own Conditions, if, good heed you take. But, many are suppos'd, to be inclin'd To some new Government, by them design'd,
In whose erection, and establishment, They could receive a great deal more content Then in well regulating, what they had: And, some of these, it may be are so mad, (And so uncharitable) as, in heart To pray, that GOD would rather, quite, depart Both from this King, and all his Generation, Then, frustrate them, or, their vain Expectation. If, there be any such, far, be you from Their evill mind; Let not their secret come Into your Souls: And, though GOD should permit His wilfulness, a little longer, yet; Pronounce your Judgments, warily, on him, Lest, in his Person, you, your selves condemn. And, since, 'tis possible, that, from your sin, His Faylings, and your Plagues, might first begin, (As, once did, from the Peoples, an offence In David, which brought on a pestilence) Consider, 'twil make easie your own Doom, If, toward him, affected you become, As Children ought to be, whose Father hath Attempted their destruction, in his wrath. Yea, careful be, you do not so employ Your pow'r, to cure the Head, that, you destroy Both Head and Body; and, to ease the pains Of Head-ache, that, you knock not out your Brains. That, Limb, which, may be cur'd, cut not away: Those Vessels, which with water, clense ye may Purge not with Fire; For, GOD, shall give an end By his own Pow'r, to what, you cannot mend; And, neither he, nor you, shall rise to stand, But, by advancing Justice, in the Land. Excuse me, if ('twixt what concerns the King, And these Republikes) with some staggering, I seem to Counsel you; One while perswading, That, you oppose with stoutness, his invading
Your Freedoms, and Proprieties; Then, streight Plead (as it were) that, Grace obtain he might; Herein, I say, excuse me: For, it fares With me, as with King David, in his Wars, With Absolom; Against whom, to prevail, He was content; yet, did his death bewail. Loth was he, by a Foc, to be out-braved; Griev'd was he, that, a Son might not be saved; And, him, whom he had sent to overthrow him, He did beseech, that, Mercy, he would show him. The same I do for him: Oh, let him have it If he be qualified to receive it: But, if he still persist, as he begun, Then, do, as GOD shall move you; I, have done. Done, as concerning him: But, much I find Concerning, you, and others, yet, behind; Which must be spoken, for the Reformation, And, Wellfare, of this present Generation: Or, else, (if otherwise it shall succeed) That, Future-Ages may take better heed. For, know, unless ye speedily begin To change the present Posture, you are in; That, you, who, at this day have Pow'r to give Conditions, to your King; shall, to receive Conditions, very glad, ere long, become: Yea, and to buy them, also, with a sum. That, this may be prevented, break the snare, Wherewith, at this time, you ensnarled are. When, you have any thing to act, which may Encrease the Publike suffrance, by delay; Consume not precious howrs, like those who dally, In their Affairs, with Can We? May we? Shall we? Till they, whom you obliged, are to cherish; Through want of Justice, and Subsistence, perish. Or, else, till they, who, yet, are knit together So fall away, from you, and from each other;
That, what you might effect, this present day, Hereafter, you nor can, nor shal, nor may. For, think not, that, the Generalitie, Can long continue in prosperitie, Whilst, you neglect particulars: Or, that You can accomplish, what is aymed at, If you, leave off, to act by rules of Reason, Or, linger out, your works beyond their season. Take, likewise, heed, that, when ye shall propose The way of Peace, lest, there may be of those, Amongst you, who, desire, that course should finde, Obstructions, whereunto, you seem inclinde: Or, who, for secret ends, occasions give, That, their demands, deniall may receive; For, GOD, so hateth double heartedness, That, he will favour no such practises. Then, be as heedfull, if you shall exceed Set-bounds, by some inevitable need, Compelling it; that, when the streight is past, Your selves into a Legal Course, you cast: For, while a Town is burning, that, you see May, then, be done; which, after, may not be. Do, as you would be done to: Give not those Who are your Friends, occasion to be Foes: As you would be Forgiven, those forgive, In whom, a true Repentance you perceive: Not all Offenders; For, sure, no offence Is pardonable without penitence, Since, Mercie deigned to Impenitents Is crueltie, to wronged Innocents. Reward, as well as punish: For, by that You cherish Virtue; Fortifie the State, And, shall gain more, then by the pence you spare, Though, many, of this Thrift, unheedfull are. Against all Enemies, make your defence By prudence, joyn'd with Dove-like Innocence,
Keep firm to your first principles; For, he That standeth fixt; though weak he seems to be Gets strength; and will by standing still, outgo That man, who alwaies wanders too, and fro. Be constant then; Affect vain hopes no more: Do Justice, and shew mercy to the poor. Respect not Persons; but, judge every cause According to right Conscience, and the Laws; Remembring, GOD, all that, to judgement brings, Whether, they sit with Commoners, or Kings. Know, he marks all mens walkings; and, beleeve Such measure, as ye mere ye shall receive; So, as ye answer, poor mens prayers, now, So, GOD will answer, and so prosper you. Make good, the Gifts and Favours you bestow; As well, in deed, be righteous, as in show: Break not, your promises to any one (Especially, to men, for you undone) And, do not let your left-hand, them deprive, Of that, which, with your right-hand, you did give: Nor them repay with scandals, or neglect Who have deserved, not your least, respect: For, privie to such practises, I am Both, to the grief of many, and your shame. When, any one of those free Commoners, Whom you do represent, traduc'd appears, Within your Houses, where, he cannot make Reply thereto: (And, whereof he must take No notice, when thereof he shall be told) Let his Traducers sharply be controld. Or, calld upon, to prove what they have said: That, Innocencie may not be betrayd, By Impudent Detractors; yea, and do That, wrong, as priviledged thereunto. For, what is more Injurious, then disgrace Inflicted, in so eminent a place?
In presence of the Kingdom, as it were, And, whereby, ere a man can be aware, He may be wrong'd, and wounded mortally, And, never know, by whom, or how, or why. Let none aspire, to be a Grandee, thought, Till he his Greatness, worthily hath bought By prudent Honestie; Tri'd Faithfulness, And such like Grandour; nay, let none possess Repute by these, one minute longer, then, The Publike-Rights, and those of private-men, Are, thereby, not infring'd: For, 'tis a wrong To all men, unto whom there doth belong Equality, to bring in such a Cheat Among you, as, a Lesser, and a Great, Or, make Estates, or Titles pass for more Then Cyphers do, within the Counsel-dore. And, doubtless, he unworthily, there, sits Whom, false opinion of his Fellows wits Inslaves in Judgment: and, whose Ignorance Deceived, by a smooth-tongu'd Arrogance, Them, doth advance, to an undue esteem; And (which the more absurd doth make it seem) Superiority, ascribes unto them For that, in which, at home, their wives out-do them. It is a shame, to hear it should be said, (yet, said it is, and done, as well as said) That, if this man, or that; If He, or He, To make the Motion, can procured be; Or, in the Cause, to speak: Or, but to heed The same with favour, it will surely speed: And, that, if it concerns, or may displease But, any one, that is a Friend to these Great Hogen Mogens; then, the Suitor loses His cost, and labour, what means er'e he uses. Yea, though he hath two hundred friends, among Your Members, who, cry shame upon the wrong.
Nay, be not angry that I tell you so, For, he that speaks it, speaks what he doth know, It is this Islands Genius (who doth see, What all your works, and inclinations be) Who saith it: And, for him, your Conscience too, Shall witness, true, what he hath said you do. And, I beseech you, to consider, whether This, were the end, of calling you together. The Shiers, and Burroughs, by whom, they were chose For Deputies, did verily suppose, By their great words at home, their clothes, and faces, That, these, much better, would have fild their places; And, not have proved such, of whom, they may (As you abusively of Taylors, say) Aver, that nine of them, makes but One man: For, twice so many, hardly, make way can By one Grandee, sometimes, and not be thrust From executing, faithfully, his trust: And, therefore, you must speedily provide That, this abuse, be fully rectifi'd. I know, there be among you, those, who burn With zeal to Iustice; and who truly mourn, For those who suffer, (and, that, GOD wil keep These safe; and make them sing, when others weep.) I know, with what Compassion, they pass by Their daily Suitors, who upon them cry: And with what yearning bowels, they bewail, That they for due relief, cannot prevail: I know, with what vexations, they are pained, When Publike Prayers, cannot be obtained: I know their Love, their Patience, and their care With what great strivings, exerciz'd they are: VVhat Diligence they practise, in their Calling, To keep the House, which they are in, from falling, VVhil'st, many seeming-Labourers among them, By false-work, or by Ʋndermining, wrong them,
And, GOD, I know, will them reward at last Though for a while, a bitter cup they taste. But, there ae others, slyly shuffled in Among you, who both shame and grief have been To you, and to your friends: Therefore, lest these By sitting neer you, bring you that disease Which hath polluted them; And, lest thereby They bring, not only, lasting infamy Upon this Parliament, but likewise break it; And, by that Rupture, an occasion make it Of Ruins (without hope of Reparation) To all, the rights and Freedomes, of this Nation: And, that, if these things happen, you that are Excusable, the better may prepare, Against the Mischiefs, threatned; I am bold To tell you, what misdoings I behold, What dangers I may fear, what scandals grow, By former failings; and, what wise men know Will surely follow: whereof since, 'tis but need, That more be said, therewith, I thus proceed. With grief; I speak it, (and, I speak the same Not to asperse, but to prevent the blame And mischief, that may follow) you, have lost Your power, your honour, and your selves almost; And (though, undoubtedly, you do perceive it) Proceed, as if you meant not to beleeve it; Or, were asleep: But, I intend to wake you; Or, speak those words, which will to peeces shake you. Oh hear, hear, hear! and, let not wholsome words Be spent in vain: Nay, let not fire and Swords, Dearth, Pestilence, and Blood, speak, every day, In dreadfull Dialects, that rouze they may Your sleepie Spirits; yet, seem, still, unheard, Or passed over, without due regard, Till, you be trod to dirt, in your own Gore; Or, in the Grave, where you can hear no more.
For Love, for Shame, for Fear; for some respect, Awake, in time, out of your dull neglect Of Publike Safety; and, from dreaming on, In private projects, till you are undone. Hark! how, the Beames of your own Houses cry Against you! hark! hark! how the souls that lye In those Oppressions, which you should redresse Roar out, and groan for sorrow, in distresse; Hark: how your Consciences (though, you contemn, Their clamours, and in secret smother them) Call out, to tell you, what sad dooms attend Your present being, or your latter end, If you awak not, quickly, to prevent The shames and mischiefs which are Imminent. Now, I perceive you are awake: for, Lo, You angry seem, that I have rub'd you so. But, ere you shew your wrath, a little, pause; About you look: see, if there be not cause Of this my seeming boldness. Come, arise, Wipe out the Rheume, and spedom, from your eyes. Walk forth into the Hall at Westminster; Take special notice, what, is talked there. Walk to the City, then, and these you meet At Church, or on the Change, or in the Street, Or at the Tavern, and in all those places, Mark well; and, what is said to your disgraces. Mark, how they sleight you, and, how few there are Who, can with patience, either speak or hear A word in your defence: And, having weigh'd What you shall find, excuse, what I have said. Whence, do their many Imprecations come, And many Cursed Speakings? Flow, they from No cause at all? No question, if they do, Their Curses, and their Imprecations, too, Will fall upon themselves. If, from just cause They do proceed; Look, lest, it vengeance draws.
For, GOD, will Judg between you. If, both give Occasion of offence, both shall receive The recompence deserv'd; and, you, and they, If you repent not, shall be swept away. To Error, therefore, do not Fury add: VVith him, that seeks to cure you, be not mad: But, in your selves, examine patiently VVhat is amiss, and, then, what remedy You may apply. And, I will seek to charm The People, that, mean while, they do no harm. Consider, what vast sums have bin brought in; How, issu'd out, and wasted, they have bin: How partially, your payments, have been made; How little, this man; how much, that man had; How, you to some, make full, and speedy pay, VVhen others, who, deserve as well as they, Must turn Informers, ere they can be paid; And, peradventure, when, they long have plaid That hateful part, with loss of time, and cost, Shall add more damages, to what they lost, By losing former Friends, and getting Foes: VVhich, all their lifetime, they shall never lose. Herewith, sometime, let it be thought upon, How many of your Friends, have been undone By Votes, and Orders, made for their relief, VVhich did but more increase their cost and grief, By making them, from year to year, attend, For, that, which in one week, might have an end; By suffering, your own Warrants, to be slighted: Your own Authority, to be despited; And, to the loss of labour, time, and cost, One Order, by another to be crost, And, that, to be, by Ordinance made voyd, VVhich, by your Gift, they seiz'd, possest, enjoy'd. Yea, and, not without recompence, alone, But, without seeming sense, that wrong was done:
As if it were no mattet, so you made A shew of recompence, though none they had: Or, as if whatsoere you pleas'd to do, Must passe for Justice, though it be not so. GODS WILL, essentiall Justice is indeed: But, that yours is so, it is not my creed. When others have transgrest, do not injoyne The guiltlesse Common-wealth, to pay a Fine, To recompence those Parties, which were grieved; For, that will hardly, Justice be beleived. When hungry suitors, ask for fish, or bread, With stones, or scorpions, let them not be fed; Nor make them wait, ere you an answer give, As if each Person, had three lives, to live; Or, had been borne, no other thing to do, But, wait on you, and loose their labour too. Draw not more suitors, to you in one yeare, Then you are able, in twice six, to heare; Lest, you displease them, whom ye may content, And cause a mischeife, which ye might prevent. But take wise Jethro's Counsell, for the ease, Both of your selves, & those whom you should please. Yea, tire not out your selves, and others too, By taking on you more then you can do. Lest, when attendance, much expence and trouble, Hath made the losse, and suffrance more then double, They grow impatient; and you come to tast The fruit of their impatiency at last. Give Order, how to cure those imperfections, Which have been, heretofore, in your Elections, Lest, Members may among you be emploid, By whom the Publike-Body, be destroid. Let not the Father, there beget the sonne, Though, this in Bodies Naturall, be done. Let none among you, be admitted in, By Marriage, or, being near of kin:
Or, (to the Kingdames just dissatisfaction) For being of this Sect, or of that Faction; As, if among you, some to purchase, meant Inheritances in the Parliament: And, others aim'd by Parties, to endeavour The keeping up Divisions, there, forever. Let it be so no more, if you can Order, That, such an injury proceed no further; But, let the Burroughs, and the Shires be free To make their choice, (as they inclin'd shall bee) According to their customes, till it may Be better done, by some new lawfull way: That, when for Trust-breach, any blamed are, Their chusers, in that blame, a part may beare, If they hereafter, for their private ends, For fear, or love, shall chuse their Foes, or Friends; Their Land-Lords, Kinsmen, Lawyers; or, whom ever They shall not think, will faithfully endeavour, To serve his GOD, the People, and the King, With single heart, in ev'ry lawfull thing. Consider, how in giving a reward, The person, more then merit, you regard. How often that hath been for private ends, Procur'd; and, with relation unto friends. How Offices, and Places are bestowne; How, some have two or three; and others, none, Who, better merit four, if there were any Who could be capable of halfe so many: And, would ye well observ'd, that this is done, As if ye fear'd, as if ye car'd for none; Nor, how, the people, who upon you cry For bread, observe your partiality, In giving that to one, who hath no need, Which would a thousand Starvelings, cloath and feed. Refuse no just complaints; that, men may see You sensible of their oppressions bee:
Yet, to your selves assume not any cause, Which is determinable by the Lawes, In other Courts; unlesse they prove corrupt; Or, till some difficulty interrupt The course of Justice there: And, so provide, To try in course, what is before you tri'd, That you undoe not, e're their cause have end, Those, who with Proofes, and Counsell, must attend. The sad Petition, which the poore man brings, Sleight not, nor make them but meere pocketings, Till they are quite worne out, or quite forgot, Unlesse perchance your store supplies you not With tinder for Tobacco; and, so brings To memorie againe, such triviall things. More mind your promises, of doing right To grieved men, when you thereto have might, And, let them see, that your devoiur you do, As far, as God enables you thereto. Consider, how you Legacies bestow Before you pay those debts, which yet ye owe; Ev'n debts, for which the Publike-Faith doth lie At Pawne; and, is dishonoured thereby: Debts, for which, your poore Creditors have laine In prison, till, their Freedomes to obtaine, They sold their Freeholds, when they had no more To live on; and, had sold their goods before. Debts, which they lent you in your greatest feare; And borrowed for you, when distrest you were. Yea, Debts, which they who sent, then lent you too Their lives, the publike services to do; And, could have lost them, with more joy them they Now live to see, by seeing of this day. How easily, to some doe you afford, Beliefe to their availe, on their bare word! When, in the selfe-same case you are not moved, To do the like for others, who have proved
What they aver'd by vouchers; no, not when It hath been prov'd, by Oathes of honest men. Consider, how, to some you do allow Their dues with interest, who well enough May respite it; and, yet the same deny To him, who felt extreame necessity By loosing part; by lending of the rest; By borrowing more, for you, on interest, Now four yeares due; and, which before he shall In likelihood, be paid; will eat up all. And, let it be consider'd, if it may, What tis, to take his liberty away, To fine him; to permit that through the land, He, for conspiracy, defam'd should stand; And, suffer much more by their impudence Who misinform'd you, of his innocence, And all for nought, but, for informing you What, he was told; what, he beleev'd was true; What, he produc'd his author for, with proofe Of Part, and circumstances too enough, To make all probable; yea, more, for what His Covenant, oblig'd him to relate; And, what his sirst Relator did aver, And will do, still, in each particular. Should I propose, here, as considerable, So many things, to you as I were able, I should as tedious in the same become, As, many times, Committees, are to some. Ile therefore sum up all, in wishing you Of those things which you know, to make reveiw, And see, if these come short, in any thing, Of those, who heretofore misled the King; Or, if their falshoods, or misinformations, Were greater causes, of his abberrations; Or, more dishonour to his Government; Then, these have been unto this Parliament,
Whose Pride, Ambition, Malice, Arrogance, Whose Avarice, Selfe-love, and Ignorance, Whose Insolence, or Cowardice, of late, Have caus'd so many to abhominate Them, and their courses; and nigh turned all, Ev'n all things, both Divine, and Temporall, Into a Chaos. 'Tis not, as is deemed, (And, as perhaps, it hath to many seemed) 'Tis not the City, which hath lately made Those tumults, and those uproars you have had. 'Tis not the Army, whence your mutinies, New plots, and new divisions, do arise; And, whereby, mischiefs daily do encrease To cause a new adjournment of your Peace; The Parl'aments dishonour; separations Between the late united British Nations; And, (if it may be possible) to bring The people of both Kingdomes, and the King, Into a further hatred, of each other. It is not your Dissenting-parties: neither, Those whom ye call Malignants; who were able So weake to make you; so dishonourable; And, in so bad a plight, as you are in, If your owne Members, had not faulty been: Nor had your City, or the Army moved, In any course, which might not be approved, If they had felt no influence upon them, From higher Pow'rs, which thereunto had won them, Nor had so many men, right well-affected, (And by whose purse, and pow'r, you were protected) Been drawne into misactings, and mistakings, (Which falsly are misconstrued forsakings Of their first love) but, that the policies Of some among you, drew before their eyes Those mists; and practised those juggling sleights, Which kept the safest course, out of their sights.
And, what that was, or what that yet, may be, Few, have discover'd, by ought I can see; But, were it knowne, you could not rectifie Those things among you, which are now awry, Till you reforme your selves; for, well ye know, Foul springs above, make filthy streames below. But, why should I complaine of you so much? Alas! you were at first, begotten such; The Fathers of your being, in this Nation, Were an unsound, corrupted Generation; And, did beget a Representative, As like themselves, as ever, man alive Begot a child: with members, crooked, lame, Blind, deaf, and dumb, into the world you came, And, such, they have continu'd ever since: Theirs therefore, is the Fault; theirs the offence. You, that are lawfull Members, have enough: Been plagu'd, and troubled with such rotten stuffe: And, rather should be pitied and aided, In helping you, to purge them, then upbraibed, With their defects. I therefore, have appear'd, That, you, of those obstructions, may be clear'd Which interrupt; and, that, whilst there is time, You may regaine your honour, lost by them: That, I might likewise, help bring back unto you The peoples hearts, and make them firme unto you, By shewing them their errors, and, how, they To late lost happines, may find their way: And, having found it, how they may persever By GOD's assistance, in good waies, for ever. My purpose therefore, in what followes now, Is joyntly, to prefer to them and you, Some things considerable, that may lend Assistance unto that, which I intend. If, good effects this takes, your cares, and feares, Are likely to be shortned many yeares:
For, know, GOD, promises, and threats, are all Contingencies, and but conditionall: If you continue mad, the plagues will last: If you repent, they quickly will be past: Let envy one contribute thereunto A true endeavour, his owne part to do: In what I'm borne for, I will do my best: And, when that's done, GOD, shall performe the rest. The restauration of this Parliament, To their due reputation; to prevent The bondage of the People; and to bring All things to right, betwixt you, and your King, Is that, wherein, I have with good intention, Imploid, long time, the best of my invention; Yet, there appears no likelihood to me, Of saving any one, of all the three, From hazzard, or from plagues, that linger shall, But, by a reconciling of them all. And, I conceive it will deserve more thank; To play the Artist, then the Mountebank; Who leaves the course, that's naturall, and sure; To raise his credit, by a desp'rate cure. He, that, by way of Chymistry would act, And, her Three Principles, hope to compact Into one Body; ere he compasse shall His end, must first, prepare each Minerall Secundum Artem, taking that away, Which hinder their incorporation may; And, adding that, which doth unite their natures: So, he that would this Trinity of creatures Make up againe, in one, must do the same, And, now, about that royall work I am; Which, if I keep a rightly tempred fire, Will bring forth that production I desire. VVith Salt of true sincerity, and reason, Your hearts, and understandings, I would season;
VVith Sulphur of true Magnanimity, Or Courage; with the perfect Mercury Of Christian Prudence, I would temperate, And, so essentially incorporate These, throughout all your Faculties, that none Should hinder that, which I am driving on; And, therefore, have prejected a conclusion Wherein, I'le first begin with an Infusion; Oh, lend me but some water from your eyes, Wherewith to make it; and it shall suffice. Lament, Lament your errors, and begin To see, what great distractions you are in. Of those Precipitations, take more heed, Whereto you now are hasting on with speed; Observe how busily in selfe-destroying, And, raising works, against a free enjoying Of your owne Peace you are. Consider on Your purposes; and that which you have done; And mark, if either those things you pursue, Or, yet intend, are like to profit you, Whilst ev'ry man, (though better be profest) Aimes, but at his owne single interest. By most among you, that is least intended, Which he in outward seeming, hath befriended. By making show, of things that should be done, For publike profit, you so carry on, Your private interest, that very few The generall advantages pursue: Yea, King, Priest, People, Commoner and Peer, So wilfully, to their owne claimes adhere, That, they will much indanger all together; And, prove like fire, and fewell to each other, If, GOD, prevent not, by a selfe-denying; And, by a more considerate complying. Give heed to those Predictions, which foretold Upon good grounds, what, now, yee do behold
To be fullfil'd; and, which, behold ye may To be fullfilling on you, ev'ry day; And, think not, though you them, or him disdaine VVho spake them, that, they were foretold in vaine. Mark how all Parties, and all Factions, run Those courses, wherein, others were undone, Whom they impeached, and condemned, too, But some few mouthes before, for doing so, Remember, and consider, since this War Did first begin, how many changes are To be observ'd: How inconsiderable The meanes, and Persons were, who did enable Your weakned Parties; and oft gave them life When they were stooping, almost, past releef; And, think it possible, there may befall Another change, when you seem sure of all; Because, you neither credit what is told; Nor heedfull are, of that which you behold. Remember and consider, what fair hopes (When an assurance, almost, crown'd their tops,) Have unto nothing vanish'd: what brave showes Of Martiall fortitude, against your foes; Of zealous faithfulnesse unto the State, And piety to GOD, have fail'd of late; And left benighted, an ascending Fame Before 'twas noone, within a Cloud of shame. And think how possible, it may be, yet, To see new stormes, before the sun be set: For, that which hath been, you againe may see, As long, as in the selfesame round, you be. Remember, and consider, in what fear, You have been in: what things then vowed were; What Holinesse, you seemed to pretend; VVhat cause, you then protested to befriend; VVhat Warnings, and what caveats have been given, By judgements, mercies; yea, by men, and heaven:
VVhat private, and what publike fasting daies, What times of giving solemne thanks, and praise, Have celebrated been, without that fruit Which either with Humility, may suit, Or, with true Gratitude: and when you see How full of filthnesse, your best works be, Think, what your worst may prove; and, what event Will follow them, unlesse you shall repent. When, these things you have thought upon, then mind Whereto, your promises, have you design'd, What fearfull Imprecations, you have made; What wonderfull protections, you have had; What witnesses there are, of what you do; VVhat forraigne foes; what foes domestick too, Expect advantage: And, such things, as these VVhen you have thought on, with due seriousnesse, Think, also, what may thereupon redouud, If, falshood in your hearts, be likewise found; And, when you have provoked GOD, and men, What plagues, and horrors, will surprize you, then. Remember, and consider, with what lyings, VVhat perjuries, what falshoods and complyings VVith wicked men and meanes, you have assaid To perfect those Designes, which you have laid; How, every Faction, takes delight to jeer At their owne shame, and, to relate and heare VVith merriment, each others wickednesse, And, what the scurrill Pamphleters expresse, To their reproach, when they should rather mourne, Then impudently laugh themselves to scorne. Beleeve it, till Authority prescribes A mulct for liers (cheifly lying Scribes) And takes more notice of that sleighted sin, VVhich one prime cause of all your strifes have bin, Peace will not settle; for, when one warr's done, Another, by a lie, may be begun.
Weigh, and consider, of what Tyrannies, Of what prophanenesse, of what blasphemies, Of how much malice, and of what black crimes, You have been guilty, (ev'n in these sad times) On either side. And, when you well have thought On these things; think likewise, how much you ought To grieve, and to repent, that, GOD might spare Those threatned judgements, which deserved are; For, 'tis meere madnesse, to expect his grace, Or look for Peace, so long, as in the face Of men, and Angells, you persist in evills, As if you thought, there were nor GOD, nor Devills. Think, and consider, with a serious thought, To what a giddie posture all is brought: In what confusion, your affaires you see, In what amazements, now, the wisest bee; In what a feare, the valiant, and the strong, Now are, or will be, ere it shall be long; How manifold, your sub-divisions are; What symptomes of destruction do appeare; How impudently still, you palliate The falshoods of those Members of the State, And, of those Agents, who abuse their trust; How all things, out of order, they doe thrust, Through want of Justice; how, they daily sad Mens hearts; and how, when they have made them mad, They punish them, because, they could not use Those wits, which their oppressions made them lose. Marke, and consider, with what shamelesnesse, Your Holy Flatt'rers, do bepaint and dresse Their Patrons in the Prliament, as tho It were not possible, they should misdo: How others, make the Army, at the least, S. Michael, and his Angells; how, the rest, So impudently do extoll the King, As if he were a Saint, in ev'ry thing,
And, needed no repentance, for ought done, In former time, or since this Warre begun: And, while such danbings are, consider you, If penitence be likely to ensue, Or wilfulnesse; and, therewith mind I pray, Which of the two are Traytors, either they Who, mind a misled King, or Parl'ament, Of those things which destruction may prevent; Or, they, who fawne, and flatter them to hell, By calling evill doings, doing well: They, who by Justice would uphold the Throne; Or, they, who praise men for what pulls it downe. VVhen these things are consider'd, then to mend What is amisse, your best endeavours bend. Let all those carnall policies, by which The world your understandings doth bewitch, Be laid aside: Let those Designes, wherein 'Tis evidently seen, that you have been Without successe; be quite by you abjur'd: Yea, since experience often hath assur'd That, those effects, which you have had thereby, Did still exasperate, and multiply Your fears, and griefs; mind, what experience showes, And, trust no more, such broken reeds as those. To no Dissenting-party be unjust; Nor falsifie so much, the Common-trust, As by your private mutuall promises, To barter for your owne advantages; Or, in your Treaties, at the publike cost, To seek your selves, till you, and all is lost: But, still in your proceedings, let pure Truth Preserved be, both in your heart, and mouth; So, GOD, who marketh what you act and say, Will help to guide you, out of your dark way; Advance that Kingdome, whereto you pretend; And, make your greatest enemie, your friend:
Yea, make among you, Truth, and Peace prevaile Though King and Parliament, your hopes may faile. Eschew Hypocrisie; take heed of Pride, And, of what thing soever may divide The people, th' Army, or the Parliament; And them into those new Divisions rent, Which at this present are of many feared; And, for which, Engines are in secret reared. But, chiefly at this time, think not in vaine, On that State-Principle, Divide, and Reigne. For, at this Juncture, thereupon depends Your welfare; and your Adversaries ends. Whatever, therefore, shall be now advis'd By others, let not this note be despis'd; Take heed of an Adjournment, till you see The Kingdomes in a better posture bee; Lest, when you are divided from each other, You lose the meanes to meet againe together, By some contrivance; and, by somwhat done, Which at this present day you think not on. Though all are much to blame, let all provide Their best expedients, to amend, or hide Those failings in each other, which will spread No further, by their being covered. Forgive, (as much as may be) one another; That love may knit your scatter'd force together: Lest, on a sudden, some prevailing pow'r, Not yet appearing, all at once devour. Let neither Parliament, nor People spare To keep themselves in armes, as yet they are: For, though the burden, greivous may be thought, Your safety will not be so dearly bought, As your destruction may. Let now, likewise All Pow'rs, all Councells, and Authorities, Use ev'ry prudent way, and means, whereby The people may not feare a Tyranny;
Nor feel a present weight, which may appeare A greater Burthen, then the thing they feare. But, use all cautions, to impose it so, That, such as lay it, may help beare it too; So, shall the people know, 'tis laid on them, For their own safety; and, but for a time. And, that, the threefold Cable be not broke, Which holds your Anchor; let all care be tooke, That, City, Shires, and Army, yeeld and give (As to their Bulworke, and Preservative, Next under GOD) unto this Parl'ament Respect, obedience, and each complement Of duty, which may re-enable them, To vindicate their honour, and esteem, From those obliquities, now thereon throwne By others, and some Members of it owne: Yea, though some part thereof, hath been to blame, (As all Terrestrialls are) know; that, their shame And suffrings, will be yours; know, that the fault Is your, that many of their Members halt: Know, that, their Foes, who seek to aggravate Their crimes to you, have done it out of hate To them, and you; and, not with an intent, That, you should lesse be griev'd, or they repent: But, that, you should be mad, and make them roome, Into their places back againe to come, And double your Oppressions; which, the while With tears they pity, like the Crocodile Yea, know; that, if you in this storme, forsake This Vessell, (though it bruized be, and leake) Your Fortunes, will be therewith shipwrackt found, If that sink, you shall certainly be drown'd. For, in this torne, and ancient Vessell, lies That, which must free you from the slaveries You have been in; and, keep you likewise, free From those, in which, you are afraid to bee.
Herein, are all your stores, for war and peace, Of safety, honour; and, of Trades encrease: And, therefore joyne with courage; use your pow'rs, Wit, wealth, and, ev'ry facultie of yours, To stop the leakes, which it hath lately sprung, To keep it tite, and make it faire and strong. Oh, all you, who have therein fraught, or share, Whether, ye Masters, Captains, Pilots are, Cape-Masters, Souldiers, Sailers, Passengers, Or, (as all some way are) Adventurers; Consider, I beseech you, what a losse There would befall, if some new storme should tosse This Vessell on the Rocks: Or, if there should Some Traytors, in her Cabines, or her hold, Lie closely, unsuspected, or unseen, And blow up all her Decks, and Magazeene, By some concealed traine; or, spring a Leake About the keel, whilst you unwisely seek, (With quarrelling) for vailes, or private shares, Amongst the desperatest Mutineers. The slaves, your pris'ners, and among the rest, Your Malecontents, it may be, will suggest That, your Commanders, and your Pilots may Make prizes of you; and, take all away By Abitrary Pow'r: For, there are some Who (hoping, if you jealous would become, It would effect their ends) have whisperings, Among their other mischiefe-breeding things, To this effect; that, if you make them strong, They will improve that strength, unto your wrong, And, faile your trust, But, dreame not; think not so, Nor, erre you, from your duties, though they do. What change in them soever, might be wrought; What e're they do, yet do you what you ought. Keep to your Principles, though they may range; Saile by the same Card; though the winds do change;
And, that you may not fear what will ensue, Look back, a little, and things past review. When, lately, by an Arbitrary might You were opprest, and in so great a straight, That you perceiv'd no meanes your selves to free, From your oppressions; nor ought like to bee, Whereby, to scape from thrall you should be able; (Without attempts, then deemed treasonable) Loe then, ev'n at that time; and, when your King A double Chaine on you, assay'd to bring, And thought, together in one teame to yoke, His Oxen, and his Asses; then GOD broke The Royall snare: and, wonderfully wrought. For your deliverance, to passe he brought By what was never call'd to that intent; By that, which never more to call he meant; Ev'n by a Parlament: to which he gave A pow'r to be, whilst being it would have; With Priviledges, which by Pow'r-divine, Were made destructive, to his owne designe: For, lawfull pow'r it got, and just occasion, To arme against a tyrannous invasion; And, your estates, and freedomes were defended By that, which for a mischiefe, was intended. So, if this Parl'ament degenerate From what it should be, and from what of late, You thought it was; and, shall imploy that pow'r Which was from you receiv'd; and which is your, To raise themselves, upon a publike wrong; GOD, them will break, when they appear most strong; Cause those, whom they depend on, to deceive them; Of all their expectations, quite bereave them; And by some lawfull way, which yet appears To no mans eye, preserve you from your fears. For, ev'ry tyrannizing pow'r shall clash Against each other, and to pieces dash,
All those, and their designes, who shall comply With any instruments of Tyranny; That passage may be made, to raise up that Which, is the strength and honour of a State. If yet, your former doubtings be not past, But that th' aspersions, which on them are cast, Whom GOD for your deliverers hath chose, Hath shooke you from your confidence in those; Or if defects, which may be found in them, Do either urge, or tempt you to contemne Such instruments; and in your hearts to say, Can these men save us? Mindful be, I pray, What persons, to your aid, GOD, first did call; By what sleight meanes, he hath effected all Your conquests. Yea, by what contrary things: His works, he, often to perfection brings. Consider, how this Army was despis'd And scorned, when it first was modelliz'd: How, likely, were they, whom you first did gather To be your guard, to be your ruine, rather Then to defend you? how, did they protest, And rage, when they against their wills were prest? With how much weakenesse was that work begun? And, yet, thereby what wonders hath GOD done? How, hath he added unto your prevailings, By them, though they their errors had, and failings? How, hath he humbled you by their great pride, Whose seeming vertues, you have glorifi'd? That, you may see a pow'r so excellent, Knowes how to work with any instrument: That, you may find there are some things despis'd. Which have deserved, better to be priz'd; That you may learne, in weak meanes, not to fear; Nor trust too much, in those that mighty are; That, you may know, if your owne waies be streight, You may be safe, though others go not right;
And, though you will not know it; they who live By faith, the truth of these things do perceive; And, would in GOD, find out a place to dwell, Though, there were neither heav'n, earth, nor hell. Then credit must be kept, their pow'r obey'd, On whom your Trust, and Guandianship is laid; And, from that duty, none can be excus'd, Though some among them, have that trust abus'd: For, as he is a man, that hath a soule, Although his body, be with Ulcers fowle, Maim'd, blind and deafe; and, may from you thereby, Claime all the duties of your charity: So, though the Body Representative, May wounds, and many blemishes receive; Yet, therein, is the soule of Government: And, therefore, all you whom they represent, Obedience owe thereto, in ev'ry thing; Excepting an obedience that may bring Those publike hazzards, which are so apparent, That in themselves, they bring a sealed Warrant Of disobligement: And, in those things too, So must you then proceed, in what ye do, That, your owne consciences may truly say, Obedience, onely, made you disobey: And, that, the world may see, by your proceed, That GOD, and justice, have approv'd the deed. Though crack'd, your Bulwork be, and faulty grown; This is no time, to sleight, or pull it downe: But, to repaire it rather, lest you leave Your selves unguarded, and a blow receive. This is no time to shake the Reputation Of those, who are your onely preservation; But, rather, to uphold it, by removing The scandalous; by cherishing, approving, And, strength'ning those, among them, by whose wit, And honesty, they have a being yet.
Informe them better, who are much abus'd, (By false opinions, into them infus'd) And, thereupon your Supreme Court defame; As doing, arbitrarily, the same, Which, was denied lawfull in the King: For, they should know, that ev'n the selfe-same thing May be both just, and unjust: He, doth take Unlawfully, your goods, a prize to make, To satisfie his lust, or, to destroy Those Freedomes, and those Rights, you should enjoy: They, take a portion, from you, orderly, (And thereto forced by necessity) To save your priviledges; and, prevent The losse of all, by that, which they have spent. Their actions, are not bounded, in that Law, Whereby, men out of Parl'ament, should draw The Line of their proceedings; But, by that Which is the first foundation of a State: By that Supreme Law, whereby pow'r they had, To make or change the Lawes, alreadie made; And, for the Publike-safety, to provide: By that Law, they must act; and, are not ti'd To any other, when, necessity Shall, for the weale of your Community, The contrary require: For, otherwise, They meet in vaine, about those remedies, Which are desir'd; and, do but time employ To marre the benefit, they would enjoy; And, strengthen Tyrants, in their usurpations Upon the Rights and Freedomes, of the Nations. Let no men therefore say, when they shall vary From former Lawes, their Acts are arbitrary, Injuriously; since, your experience sees, That strong necessity, at sometimes frees, Ev'n private persons from adhering to, The Letter of the Law, in what they do,
The mannaging of Publike Interests, In th' Agents reputation, much consists. 'Tis Reputation, makes a Kingdome strong, And rich; and keeps it from affronts, and wrong. 'Tis that which maketh Lawes: For, neither wit Nor humane Pow'r, are able to forget That Priviledge; because, if Pow'r should make them A greater Pow'r, by right of Pow'r, would break them. If Wit, and Reason, would a Law devise, There are so many, seeming to be wise, That they would make such over-long debates, And worke so variously, in sev'rall pates, That, if to make a Law, some should agree, By others, it would straight repealed bee. And, if more Settlement, were not obtain'd, By Reputation, then, there can be gain'd By Pow'r, and Wit, or Reason; you, would never Agree; but, fight, or else, debate for ever. Take therefore, of their good repute, a care, On whose repute, your Safeties builded are: For, when that once is lost, it proveth not A Jewell, which may easily be got; Nor, is there any precious stone, yet knowne That gives a fairer lustre to a Crowne. With Reputation, may a single man Doe more sometime, then twenty thousands can. A Cities uproars, sooner it restraines, Then all their Scarlet Gownes, and Golden Chaines: And dares make stand, the peoples rage to stay, When Wit, and Wealth, and Titles run away: Yea, calmes them sooner; and scapes better too, Then honesty, and innocency do. I know not anie thing that can so soone, Bring universall Discords into tune: Nor, know I ought, that's in it self, so vaine, And empty, which doth so much pow'r obtaine
In humane actions; and, there is not now, A Nation, whom it more concernes then you, (Consid'ring, what your present postures are) To keep your Senates reputation cleare. For, should I shew your postures in a glasse, No Puppet-play, that ere devised was, Came neere it; neither did you ever see An Antick, like that shew, which there would bee: Such fruit lesse hopes, such fears, such mimick actions, Such turnings, windings, sidings, such distractions, Were never represented, on the Stage Of anie Common-wealth, in anie Age. There you should view a thousand contradictions, A thousand fancies, fooleries, and fictions, Repeated, personated, sworne, beleeved; And, men, accordingly, made glad or greeved; And, acting that in their false joy, and sorrow, Which they must backward act againe tomorrow. From Ireland, this man bringeth heavy newes; From Scotland, that man little better shewes; One tells what Plots, are in the City laid: Another, of the Army, what is said. A third, with an affrighted look, doth bring A tale of some designement, with the King, By Scots, and by Malignants; and, then stands As if he had new purchas'd Bishops Lands. A fourth is much dismayed by some tales Of risings in the Counties, and in Wales; As if he fear'd a sudden separation From somwhat, which he holds by Sequestration. A fifth hath heard from Holland, or from France, He knowes not what, yet falls into a trance, As if his conscience knew of somwhat done, Which he then wisht, had never been begun. Another shewes, another way, his folly, And looks as sadly, and as melancholy,
As if he were surprized with a dread Of losing some great place, or, of his head. And, at the turning of the wind or tide, Upon some pleasing newes on t'other side, Starts up, as they do, when a Piper plaies, Who, have been bitten by Tarantula's. You, would not, thus, with ev'ry novell noise Be fill'd with Panick feares, and gannick joyes; Or, moved be, with ought, which others did, If you, your owne affaires, would better heed. This, would not be, were men imploid about Internall things, as on those things without; Nor, would they be so giddily affrighted, With things abroad, if things at home be righted. He, that his way, with sobernesse doth go, Dreads not the furious marching of a foe. He, who takes care to keep his conscience clear, Shakes not, when evill tidings he doth hear. He, that indeavours warrantable things, Feares not the pow'r of Senators or Kings; Nor, should you ever need to fear a jot What by the Welch, or Irish, French, or Scot Could be design'd or done; or, what the King With all his party, to effect could bring; Nor, what an open, or a secret foe, By pow'r, or by his policy, could do, Either within these Ilands, or abroad, If you repose true confidence in GOD; And, give him, but sincere, and contrite hearts To joyne, with him, in acting of your parts: No, though your slips, and Ignorances were As many, and as great, as now they are. Let all the sev'rall Nations of these Iles, Who, liv'd in love, and Amity, ere whiles, Unite againe, and seek each others peace; That, their encreasing strifes, and plauges may cease.
Let, our Welch-Britans, (who their actions square By those things, which they but suspect, or heare) Recover, so much, of their humane reason, As teaches them, a difference 'twixt Treason, And Lawes of Nature; that it may make place, To bring them nearer; to the law of Grace. That, so, they may not, still, beleeve, and doe, Both by implicite Faith, and reason, too: For, when they truly know what doth belong Unto themselves, and, their owne right and wrong, They, will the sooner, be informed, then, What duties doe belong to other men; And, grow more wise, by this Epitomie Of Lawes divine, and true morality; Do, as yee would be done to, then, all they VVho pore upon their Law books, ev'ry day; And, would be thought experienced, in all Lawes Cannon, Civill, and Municipall. If this advice they follow, they shall dwell In safety on their hills, and live as well Among their vallies and their Glins, in Wales, As on the fruitful'st Southerne Downes, and Dales: Then let them practise it; and not call to them, A wasting desolation, to undo them. Let them not woo, uncivill civill wars, To clime up to their Mountaines, Rocks and skars: For, if they find them rich, they'l leave them poore; If needy, they will make them need the more; They bring, the worst, into a worse estate; And crash the Bones, where they can suck no fat. Let your Scotch-Britans, so insist upon Their interest, that, nothing may be done, Against their Brethrens rights; and, so preserve Their Leauges, that willfully, they do not swerve From any Branch thereof; and, let them so Observe the Covenant, as men that know
The letter of it, or, a circumstance, Is not to be pursued to th'advance, Or any sense or practise, which may lame The essence, and intentions of the same. For, if they make the letter to extend Beyond the true intention, and the end Of what was covenanted; and, so weaken That Interest for which the same was taken; They are deceivers, and worse hypocrites Then were of old, the cunning Gibeonites. Let, therefore, that stout Nation well advise Among themselves, wherein the diff'rence lies Betwixt the Kingdomes; lest, perhaps, it drawes A mischief on both Nations, without cause; And, bring on those ingagements, which may lose The love, the peace, the honour, and those dues Which now are claim'd; &, make them lose their blood, And Countrey too, as far as it is good. Let them not think, that their accommodation, The profit, or advantage of one Nation, Prefer'd should be, in any thing at all, Before these Islands weal, in generall. Let them seek nothing, but what Iustice may Allow them; lest she take both that away, On which they seiz'd; and, therewith, all the rest, Which, formerly, was lawfully possest. For, Iustice more secures, and more enriches Then policy, although that more bewitches: And, neither wealth, nor honour, can be lost, By honesty; though somtime she be crost. That Nation have done well, to think upon The bringing of the King back to his Throne; If from right Principles the motion came: But, on them it would bring perpetuall shame, If thay recall'd him, without penitence Of those faults, for which they first drove him thence.
For, that they quarrell'd with him first, none doubt; And, they were with the last, who pull'd him out. That people is too wise; to call him home, Ere he shall truly penitent become; And by some satisfying expiations, Hath perfectly secured both the Nations: For, if he bring the same heart back, they know, He will, as soon as he shall able grow, Avenge himselfe on them, as upon those, Who were the first, from whom his troubles rose. Let them not give their friends just cause to lay That to their charge, which Foes of them do say, Their Brethrens portion, let them not envy, Or, looke upon it with an evill eye; Nor, let our English haughtily, despise Their Northerne Brethrens kind compliances; Or, sleight their friendship; or, (puft up with pride) Their want of superfluities, deride: But, by how much more GOD, hath seem'd to blesse, Their Clymate, with a greater fruitfulnesse, So much the more, respectively, let them Be carefull, that they no way do contemn Their Lot; lest GOD, for that in gratitude, Justly permit some other to incrude On their inheritance; and, make them glad To seeke worse habitations, then they had. Yea, let both Nations strive with all their mights, To fortifie each other in their Rights; And be assur'd, that which of them soever Shall first to break their late sworne League endeavour, Shall both be ruin'd; and, if both make void Their solemn Vowes, then both shall be destroy'd. Let both remember well, that Covenant, Which they have sworn; and, how much yet they want Of perfecting their Vowes to God, and Man; That they may keep them better, if they can.
Know; you have entred into leauge together, Not to insnare, but, to secure each other: And, that your Treaties, were not to get more From one or t'other, then they had before, But, that, thereby, they stronger might be made, Against him, who, did all their rights invade. Know, that your Covenant was not contrived, That Christian liberty should be deprived: Or, make that for a Jus divinum go, Which neither was, nor can be proved so. Or, to compell men to renounce, admit; Or, to accord, as those, or these, thought fit; (Or, as the best reformed Churches had it) Ought further then GGDS word authentick made it. It is not possible that any Nation Should make a vow, upon consideration, To pin their Faith upon anothers sleeve; Things to professe, which they cannot beleeve; To practise, what their consciences abhor, And what they find, no lawfull warrant for; But, sure their meaning was, men should assay To get the truths perfection if they may, Till otherwise, they find it; to adhere To those as truths, which truths to them appeare; That, from compulsion, all men should be free, Where doubtings are, till they decided be; And, that, their vow injoyned none to do, More, then their pow'r, and place, oblig'd him too. Let both remember, that, they vowed have The Person of the King, from harme to save; His honour to preserve (and what belongs To him, of right) from violence, and wrongs: But, this remember, too, that, when you made This vow, you likewise, resolutions had, That, therein, his protection should extend. No further, then you thereby might defend
The Kingdomes priveledges, and maintaine Those rights, which to the people appertaine: For, els, you shall betray your greatest trust, And, prove but hypocritically just. Remember, you have vowed to endeavour To bring to publike triall, whomsoever You shall discover, either to divide The Kingdomes, or, to make the people side In factions; and, that, you have vow'd to strive (As you are able) that, they may receive Due punishment: And, mark, if you have bin As faithfull, as you promised therein. Halt not 'twixt two opinions, as ye do; If Baal be to be serv'd, let it be so. Either, you have a pow'r, or you have none: If none; why act yee, still, as ye have done? Either your King, or you, deserveth blame: If you have traitors been, repent the same; Acknowledge it; submit, implore for grace; And let him take againe, his pow'r and place. If he, as much demerit, as you say; Do not your trust, and your own lives betray; But, quit your selves like men, and do your best To vindicate their cause, who are opprest. If both be faulty, then, let both amend; Lest, both be quite destoyed in the end. If, you have drove the naile unto the head, There clinch it; let no more be done, or said: For, why should this brave Island be destroid, That in the mean time, some should be imploid Thereby to raise themselves? and, to prepare Well-feather'd nests, perhaps, some otherwhere? Those evill Counsellers, which late appear'd To be about the King, may now be fear'd To be among your selves; and, they of whom The King, was made most fearfull to become,
Have now compli'd with him; and, justly may King, People, Scotch, and English, if they weigh What hath been done, shake hands, and well agree; For, they are all, as like, as like can be. Come, come, repent together, and forgive; For there's no other means, in peace to live; And, when you are forgiving, let all share A part of Mercy, who repentant are. Let, our seduced Irish, who, among The rest, are yet involved in the throng. Of murth'rous Rebells; but have guiltlesse bin Of their inhumane, and loud crying sin, Find some Gate open, whereby they might gaine An entrance, your forgivnesse to obtaine; (Upon repentance, and on evidence, Produced, differencing their offence:) For, some of them assisted, to their might, Their brethren, in their terrified flight, Against destroiers; and in secret stood Betwixt them, and the seekers of their blood. Some of them, then, so far forth as they durst, Releev'd them in their hunger, and their thirst; Cover'd their nakednesse; and them convei'd (From those, by whom they should have been betraid) To Townes, and Ports, wherein they might avoid That rage, whereby they had been els destroid. If these, withdraw themselves, and back recede From them, whose hands in blood were deeply di'd, Receive them unto mercy; that, you may By justice, therewith mixed, take away That Kingdomes guilt; and, put a difference Betwixt the smaller, and the great offence, That, they, whom other men did hurry on, Against their wills, to be with them, undone, May find a passage, out of that distresse, Which they are in, by others wickednesse;
And, that repentance, may not be without A comfortable hope of some good fruit, To ev'ry sinner, when he shall endeavour A reformation, at what time soever. By this course, you shall make the freer passe, For your owne selves, unto the Throne of grace: By this course, you shall greatly weaken those Who, are your willfull unrepentant foes; And, strengthen much their hands, who have been true To GOD, unto their Countrey, and to you. It may be, too, fullfil'd shall be, thereby, That ancient well knowne Irish Prophecy, By which, unto that Nation, 'twas foretold, That, there would come a time, wherein they should Weepe ore your English Graves: For some, no doubt, Already, tears of pitty have pow'rd out; Ev'n when they saw the cruell butcheries Of guiltlesse Englishmen, before their eies? And, now, shall ore their Graves, for their offence Shed teares againe, through heartie penitence. Let those dissenting Parties, and those Factions Which, long have multiplied your Distractions, Leave of those many names of separations, Of scorne, and disesteem, which in these Nations Do now abound; and wherewith you provoke Each other; and, whereby the peace is broke, And malice nourished: for they prolong Your discords, by a still-renewing wrong. Let, not all those, who term'd, of late, have been Malignants, find that name, still set between Themselves, and others, when they have assaid To make amends, and their redemption paid. For, by that Bar, you keep the Breach unclosed 'Twixt them, whose quarrells might els be composed. For such of them, as only were misled In judgement, have not thereby forfeited
Their honestie; as all those men have done Who wilfully, and knowingly went on. Nor, halfe so much as those, who have compli'd With both sides; or, been false to either side. Yet, trust them not with pow'r, till you have tri'd Their truth; and, till your Peace is fortifi'd. Let Innocents, defend their reputations, As freely, as Knaves make their accusations. Good turnes vouchsafe, to honest men sometime, As willingly, as you do mischieve them: For, to undo a man, you soone give ear; Have tongues to speak, and leisure time to hear, Within an houres warning; but, before You heare him for his good, a year, and more, Yea, sometimes three, four, five, consumed be, Yet, neither end, nor hope of end, hath he. Let those who for your service, fit are knowne, Both by abilities, and courage showne; Those, who for you, their lives have hazarded; Contributed, and lent their childrens bread; For your sakes, brought themselves, and families From plenty, to extreme necessities, (Through want of that respect, which you should show them, Till you have means to pay them what you owe them. Let those, not like old shoes, be hurled by, As if they were not worth your memory, Or fit for nothing; when malignant Jacks, Who laugh, and jeer at you behind your backs, Can fill so manie places; and grow rich, Whilst better men, lie starving in a ditch. If spent your Treasure be, then let them share In your Imployments, till you abler are To pay them what is due; So, you shall ease them: So, you, with hope of better, shall well please them: So, you, in life, and health, may them sustaine, Till you have need of honest men againe:
For, when their Countrey wants help, these, are they Who will not faile her, though them faile she may. Take these last words among you, where they fall; And, as occasion, make them usefull shall: For, your confusion so confoundeth me, That want of method, may excused be, Where all is well intended; and, where nought Is more, then may be profitably taught, Let those among you, who desire to plead For Christian Libertie, take serious heed They make not passages, which may let in Licentiousnesse, and Liberty of sin. Let them not seek to rarifie Devotion, To nothing, but an incorporall notion; Lest, if no place for shadowes, they allow, They never come their substances to know: Lest, if too far away, from Formes they fly, They fall into some fowle deformity; Or, lest, when they think purest light to see, They blinded by an over-weening bee. And, you, who thinke, that by a Law-Divine, There is, one outward forme of Discipline, To be observ'd of all men; and, but one That can be lawfull; which, by you alone, Is now in practise: somewhat bear I pray, With such, as cannnot yet, approve your way To be infallible; or, give consent To make essentiall, what's indifferent. When you possesse the Wheat, brawl not for Darnell, Fight not for shells, when you enjoy the Kernell. If to the true Foundation they adhere, Against their buildings, be not too severe; For, if the Structures they erect thereon, Be Gold, and Silver, they have wisely done: If Straw, and Stubble, theirs will be the losse; The Fiery-triall, will consume the drosse;
And, they themselves, (though from perdition free) Will in themselves, enough afflicted bee. With love and kindnesse, seek to bring them in, Who, by misse-teaching, have deluded been: With patience, and long-suffring, wait upon Your Brethren, as on you, your GOD hath done; And, if their errors be but imperfections, And not of malice, let your good affections Be exercis'd thereby; and, then perchance Your Charity, shall cure their ignorance, And, sooner win them, then your indignation, Severitie, or bitter provocation. Compulsion often formes an Hypocrite, But never makes the will, or heart upright: And he, that would not vaine conclusions try, The consciences of men to rectifie, Must act, by somwhat which is more divine, Then torments, or a Formall Discipline. Speak not in Tempests, when vou would reforme; GOD, oftner comes in Calmes, then in a Storme. Ill words, corrupt good manners; and, there flowes From jeerings, brawlings, from your brawlings, blowes; And, many times, the woundings of your swords, Break not the peace, so much as bitter words. Provide therefore, as wisely as you may To take provoking speeches quite away; Especially among those, who pretend The Cause of GOD, and goodnesse to befriend: For, they, who cannot their sharp tongues restraine, Professe, and talke of Piety, in vaine. Yea, they, who are Truths Champions with their (tongues, And want true love, have done the greatest wrongs. Let not your Supreme City over-swell That Mediocrity, which heeded well, Would more secure her safety, more enlarge Her honour, and diminish more her charge.
Though she be great, let her not seek to awe Those, who, to her, and all the rest give law. Though she be rich, let her not trust unto Her riches; lest at last, they her undo. Though she be strong, let her not boast therein; For, some, by their own strength, have ruin'd bin. Though shee be wise, let her not think to fool Her Tutors, and to set them new to school: But, let her motions, be in her owne sphere, According as her own occasions are; Let her advance her tradings, without wrong To priviledges, which to all belong: Endeavour, by continuall watchfulnesse, Both how, she may prevent, and how suppresse Sedition, routs, and tumults: for these be The bane of Cities: and I do foresee, (Unlesse, prevented, by good taking heed) That thence a mischiefe, may to you proceed, Whereby, you more may suffer, in one hour, Then in an whole year, by a Martiall pow'r. Returne to your first love, and be not jealous Of those, who mean you well, nor over-zealous In prosecuting, or beleeving, all, Which your pretended Lovers counsell shall. Contribute that proportion of due aid, For, publike safety, which on you is laid, According to the Portion of the blessing, Which is thereby; preserv'd, in your possessing, With praiers, and obedience, them assist, Who stand up for the common Interest, And take good heed, lest those who shall pretend Your benefit, may drive some other end; And, overthrow the common peace, and you, By those proceedings, which they now pursue. You have done well, and bravely; loose not then Your thanks, and your deserved praise, agen.
Your, of the Souldiery; Men of the Sword, Receive you Orders too, and take a word Of good advice: for much it will concerne The publike weal, that you your duties learne. Neglect not discipline, thereto adhere; And, therein, alwaies rather be severe Then too remisse: for, when an Army shall Into disorder and confusion fall; Destruction to it selfe, it will become: And, of all enemies, most perilsome To publike safety. And, 'tis better far (Whether it be in time of peace, or war) To suffer, by obedience to good order; Then due redresse, by mutinie, to further. Remember, that, you were not arm'd or paid, To do your own work, but for publike aid: And, that, you to your Officers are bound, No further, then while faithfull they are found To those, who have intrusted them; and, that If they oppresse, there's meanes to regulate What is amisse; and, pow'r that may restraine Their insolencies, if you shall complaine. Think not your selves their creatures, as some name you: For such an attribute doth much defame you. There is in them no power of creation, By dignity, by place, or by Relation, Whereby they any creatures can produce, But sonnes, and daughters, or fleas, wormes, and lice; And these, are (properly) but generated, Or, els, by their corruption propagated. Delay not publike peace, by private hate; Each others noble actions emulate; Out-vie, but them envie not; neither crosse Each other, to your countries further losse. Upon your foes, there's honour to be got Sufficient, with your friends then, quarrell not.
Seek not, to be aveng'd, for that offence, Upon the publike, which your innocence By private hands hath suffred; measure not Your merit, by the conquests, you have got; But, by that worth, which truly is your owne, And, in your heart lies, to the world unknowne Judge not of worth, by actions, and events, (Which fame, it may be, falsly represents) But, by those Principles, and reall worth Whereby the heart is rouz'd and carried forth To noble undertakings: Fame that's won By having gain'd the lot of leading on Your English Mastives, (on whose side befell A victorie, whose author none can tell) Is but of small esteem; for, when confusion Hath brought their skirmishes unto conclusion, He, many times, who merited but shame, Of all that victorie, shall bear the name; And, then, opinion ev'ry day doth add Advantages, till he at last is made So arrogant, that he begins to dream Himselfe to be, what, some have fanci'd him; And, so to act, that they whom he deceiv'd; Shall soone find, what of him should be beleev'd. Be none of these, for, you have lately seen, How, such false fires extinguished have been; And, when with glory, to ascend they think, How, quickly, they descend, in smoke, and stink. Fall not from that, which you have well begun; But, persevere, untill the work be done. An instrument, you are, but, nor the tongue, Nor eye, to whom, direction doth belong: Therefore assume it not; but keepe them free By true obedience, who your keepers be. And, be assur'd, that, if you shall comply With any, to advance a tyranny
Of any kind; or, up to raise, thereby, Licentiousnesse, instead of Liberty: GOD shall let loose a spirit; which will soone Un-nerve your Powres; make it night at noone; Destroy you with a fillip, all together; Puffe you away, like th'atoms of a feather. And you, who (if you arrogate it not Unworthily) are Stewards, for the Lot Of GOD's Annointed; heare a word or two, To mind ye, what ye know ye ought to do. You see, to what confusion all is brought By those men, who themselves have onely sought: And, what destruction will succeed thereon, If in divided paths you still go on. You know, what meanes, and what advantages You have, to keep out, or to fetch in peace: And, I acknowledge, some of you have walked The way of peace, as well as thereof talked: And, trumpet-like, have rais'd your voices high, To wake these Nations from their Lethargie. Let all do so; and joyntly undertake To helpe repaire the Breach they holpe to make; And not contend for that which neither was, Nor is, nor ever can be brought to passe. Make not those things infallible to be, In which so many millions disagree: Make not those things Essentialls to appeare, Which in themselves but Circumstantialls are: And, beare with them (since they the woe must bide) Who give offences, that you may be tri'd. Your Temporalities, claime by your Law, To be your due; and labour not to draw Conclusions for your selves, from inferences, Which make not warrantable your pretences: For, all your claimes, by Ceremoniall dues, Or Customes, appertaining to the Iewes,
Availe you nothing; but enfeeble rather, Those Arguments, which from their Rights you gather. You may as well reduce them back againe To sacrifices, and to entertaine All other services, now obsolete, As, get some things, which you have hope to get; And, whereto you the People would injoyne By humane Law, as due by Law divine: Which, what they are; and how from doubts to cleare them, You shall be told, when you are fit to heare them. From bitter words, and sharp invectives cease; Invoke for grace, and then provoke to peace. From all your Pulpits banish all partaking In Factions; and in weak'ning or strong making This or that Party: and, pull not in, all Those things, which into controversie fall, (Or into question) within cognizance Of your own jurisdiction, to advance Your int'rest: For, all things which can be thought, May, by that rule, within your pow'r be brought: And, by that means, you may recover more Then hath been, here usurped heretofore. Preach Faith, Repentance, Charity, and what May true belief, and good life propagate. Be humble, keep more closely to your charge; And ramble not about so much at large, To fetch in fleeces, out of others flocks, But, be contented with your proper stocks; Lest, as befell of late, and heretofore, Insteed of greater gaine, your losse be more. I more might add; but, you already know it, Oh therefore, in your practise, also, show it. You, hear, what I have said, ye British Nations, To further the desired reparations Of these distracted Kingdomes; and to bring Your King to you, and you unto your King,
If you, and he, the curing will abide; And, for that Blessing, now grow qualifi'd: Or, if not both, that one of you, at least With Peace and safetie may againe be blest: And live to praise GOD, that you forth are brought From that snare, wherewith wilfulnesse is caught. I have not here deceiv'd you with faire showes From old Records, whose credit no man knowes. From temporarie Acts, worme-eaten found; (Of which, none knowes the reason, or the ground) I bring not Presidents, that do belong To things in Fact, which whether right or wrong, Were thereby done, there is no certaintie. You see, I use no kinde of Sophistrie; Nor doe attempt, conclusions here to draw From cheating quirks, or quiddities of Law: From abstruse Principles, Authorities, Unknowne; or, wherein little credit lies: From ought, too Magisteriall for the season; From fraudfull, or adulterated reason; But meerly, from such grounds, and such positions, As yeeld results, without all just suspitions. From nature, common practice, and those things, Whose cleare light meanes of apprehension brings To most capacities; and, (which may best Improve them) they, in language are exprest So plainely; that all those throughout the Land, (Ev'n Children) that can read, may understand. And since, men wand'ring in a wood by night, When they shall through a Glade, behold some light, Take thereby courage, to walke chearly on, In hope, their fears, and toyles, are nearly gone; Ile from a Cloud, flash out a little gleame Of Lightning; and, disclose a little beame, Whereby on you a glimmering, shall be cast, Of what you may attaine to, at the last:
For, I will shew you, by what Pedigree That Government, to you deriv'd shall bee Which will, at last, these British Islands blesse With inward Peace, and outward happinesse. It was of late, a briefe Presage of his, Who, oft, hath truth foretold: And, it is this. When, here, a Scot shall thinke his Throne to set, Above the Circle of a Brittish King; He shall a datelesse Parliament beget, From whence a dreadfull Armed brood shall spring. That off-spring shall beget a wild confusion; Confusion, shall an Anarchy beget; That Anarchy shall bring forth in conclusion, A Creature, which you have no name for, yet: That Creature, shall conceive a sickly State, Which will an Aristocracie produce: The many headed Beast, not liking that, To raise Democracie, shall rather chuse. And, then Democracies production shall A Moone-calfe be; which some a Mole do call. A false Conception of imperfect nature, And, of a shapelesse, and a bruitish feature. All these Descents, shall live, and raigne together; So acting for a while, that few shall know Which of them gets the Sov'raigntie; or whether There be among them, a Supreme, or no. When they with jarres and janglings have defac'd Your triple-building, and themselves nigh worne, Into contempt; they, of one cup shall tast; And, into their first elements returne: Five of them, shall subdue the other five; And, then those five, shall by a doubtfull strife, Each others death so happily centrive, That, they shall die, to live a better life: And, out of their corruption, rise there shall A true Supreme, acknowledged by all.
In which the pow'r of all the five shall bee With Unitie made visible in three. Prince, People, Parl'ament, with Priests and Peers, Shall be, a while, your emulous Grandees; Make a confused Pentarchie, some years, And, leave off their distinct claimes, by degrees: And, then, shall Righteousnesse ascend the Throne; Then, love, and truth, and peace re-enter shall: Then, faith, and reason, shall agree in one; And, all the Vertues to their counsell call. Then, timely out of all these shall arise, That Kingdome, and that happie Government, Which is the scope of all those Prophecies, That future Truths obscurely represent: But how this will be done, few men shall see; For, wrought in clouds and darknesse, it will bee, And, ere it comes to passe, in publike view, Most of these following signes will first ensue. A King, shall willingly himselfe unking; And, thereby grow far greater then before. The Priests, their Priesthood, to contempt shall bring. And Piety shall thereby thrive the more. A Parliament, it selfe shall overthrow; And thereby, shall a better being gaine; The Peers, by setting of themselves below, A more innobling honour shall obtaine: The people for a time shall be inslav'd; And, that shall make them for the future free. By private losse, the publike shall be sav'd; An Army shall by yeelding Victor bee: The Cities wealth, her poverty shall cause: The Lawes corruption, shall reform the Lawes: And, Bullocks, of the largest Northern breed, Shall fatted be, where now scarce sheep can feed. You may perhaps, deride what's here recited, As, heretofore you other Truths have sleighted.
But, part of this Presage you have beheld, Already in obscurity, fulfill'd: The rest shall in the time appointed come; And, sooner, then will pleasing be to some. The last nine signes, or symptomes, of the ten, Which must precede it, shall appear to men Of all conditions: But, our Authour saith, The first, is but in hope, not yet in Faith; And may be, or not be; for, so, or so, That King shall have his lot, as he shall do. If all his sins, he heartily repent, God, will remit, ev'n all his punishment; And, him, unto his Kingdomes, back restore, With greater honour, then he had before. If he remaine impenitent, like Saul, God, from the Throne, shall cast both him, and all His whole Descent; and, leave him not a man To sill it, though he had a Jonathan. If Ahab-like, his mourning hath respects To temporary losses and effects; Like Ahabs, then, it therewithall shall carry, Some benefit, which is but temporary. A reall penitence, though somewhat late, The rigour of his doome may much abate; By leaving him a part of what he had, When he a forfeiture of all hath made: Or else, by rooting out those, who in sin With him, have actually partakers been; And, planting in their steads, a Branch of his, Whose Innocency no way question'd is. For, this hath oft, with good successe been done] In Ages past; not, in this Isle alone, But, in most other Kingdomes: And, if you Will in GOD's Chronicles, but take a view, Of his proceedings; you, in them will see, For what it is, that Princes changed bee:
Why some lose but a part; why some lose all; Why, for a time; why, some for ever fall: Why, some shall but for three descents remaine; And, how they might have had a longer raigne: When war, when pestilence, when dearth, will come Upon a land; when GOD will take it from That land againe; and, how, they may foreknow, When, he will bring a totall overthrow. They, who have learn'd to contemplate aright Those old records, may gaine a true foresight Of many things, whereby to regulate Enormities, both in the Church, and State; Things to themselves pertaining; to their friends, Their Foes, their Policies, their Fates, their ends: And, if this were not so; what, are to you, The stories of the Kingdomes of the Iew, Or of their friends, and foes, more usefull than Those, which concerne the realmes of Powhatan? Or, so available, as those relations, Which memorize the deeds of your own nations? But all this is but words; there must be deeds, Ere to perfection any thing proceeds: You must not everlastingly be stating The Question; or, be seven yeares more debating: For, ere that time, things will too late be done; Which many fear, will come to passe too soone. Expect you, some third persons, should between The King and you, at this time intervene To make attonement? Pray, who should they bee? Who, wisheth you so well? who, doth not see, That, all, 'twixt whom, and you, there be relations, Them qualifying for such mediations, May get more, by your wo, then by your weale? Who knowes not, how with Friends most Friends now deale? And, who perceives not, that those Mediators Have interests, and, many weighty matters,
Pertaining to themselves, which they'l begin On such a faire occasion, to hedge in? And, whereby paradventure they may bring Great disadvantages, upon the King, Or, on the Kingdomes: and perhaps on both, Which to indanger, wisemen would be loth? What then can be effected? or by whom, May your desires, now feiseable become? Since, there is no way open for accesse, Nor any meanes admitted for addresse? The Parliament, conceives it selfe abus'd, In that, their offers have been oft refus'd; And, seems resolv'd, that they will never more Send Messages in vaine, as heretofore: And though the King, were now as penitent, As David and Manasseh, with intent, Unfainedly to satisfie, and do What ever justice doth oblige him to; VVhat ever, you in reason could require, To answer, at the full your owne desire; Or, whatsoe're affections mortifi'd, A contrite heart, or conscience rectifi'd, Should urge him to: yet, now, there is no way, VVhereby, this, may be manifest, you say. Despair not friends: mind what I said before; True penitence, will find, or make a door: Though, it be treason voted, now to bring Or, carry Message, to or from the King: Although his person be retain'd in ward; Attended alwaies, with an armed Guard: Although strong walls, have round inclosed him: Though rocks, far stronger, have surrounded them; Yea, though the rageing, and the roaring seas, Have also, like a mote, incircled these: Through all these difficulties, I could find Conveyances, if thereto he had mind,
To publish his repentance; and prevaile, If to performe his part, he should not faile. Yea, find him meanes, without an obligation To any party, or to any Nation, Or any, but himselfe; to make his peace, VVith honour: and his Kingdomes to possesse. Now, let him neither heed, nor harken to VVhat other men do say, or what they do; For, whatsoever they shall act, or prattle, (VVill be to him, but, fruitlesse tittle tattle) But, let him sit downe, by himselfe alone; And, set down (as, he reads, it hath been done By King Manasseh) most unfain'd confessions Of all his knowne offences, and transgressions; Acknowledge GOD's just dealing in afflicting; His Providence, and mercie, in correcting So like a Father; and, for his attending So long time, for repentance and amending. Let him expresse a resolute intent, To leave to GOD's dispose, the government VVhich he hath mannag'd ill; and to resigne Himselfe, and his, to providence divine, With full assurance, of obtaining place, In his free love, and alsufficient grace. This done; let him, subscribe the same, and spread it, Before the LORD; let him with such teares read it, As may declare, it was his act and deed: Then, seal it, with a Heart, which much doth bleed; And, with a Lion rampant, so reverst, That, none may fear, his rage or bloody thirst. Upon which acts, by meanes of your relation, And, by that spirit of communication, VVhereby, most secret actions, are made knowne, (VVhen to good purposes they may be showne) Ev'n at that point of time, they, who have bin His opposites, will feel, some creeping in,
First, hopes; then Good opinions; and, at last, That which will blot out all Offences past; And make them kill their fat calfe; daunce and sing; That they, have found againe their long lost King. Oh, that I could behold that happy day Of penitence; and, that behold I may Both Parliament, and People meet therein So truly; that, their unrepentant sinne May not, when God hath re-inthroned him, Prolong their woes, or bring new plagues on them. But, who am I, that, either you, or he, Should on my word rely, or take from me Those things which I have said? know, I am that Which is your GENIUS cal'd. If, you ask what A GENIUS is, I will define the same, According to the nature, and the name. So cal'd it is, because, it doth incline With an affection truly Genuine, To draw to good, and to withdraw from ill, Those Persons, both in action and in will, To whom it doth relate; and from disgraces, And spoile, to keep such Persons, and such places. A GENIUS, is an incorporeall creature, Consisting of an intellectuall nature; Which at the selfe-same time, a being had, With that, for whose well being it was made. And, may be cal'd, that Angell, which designeth, Adviseth, moveth, draweth, and inclineth To happinesse; and, naturally restraineth From harme, that creature, whereto it pertaineth: And, this am I to you. Then, have a care, My counsells now, with good respect to heare: For, they, to whom their GENIUS represents, That, which to saftey tends, and harme prevents; If, then, they shall his good advice neglect, And, passe it by, with willfull disrespect;
They shall deservedly, be left to those Ill Angels, whose direction, they have chose: And, what will then succeed, they shall perceive When 'tis too late, their evill choice to leave. Then looking backe, he fixt his eyes on me, And, said; my Secretary thou shalt be To Register, and publish to these Nations, What counsells, warnings, and what exhortations God hath vouchsaf'd them; that what ere betide, His Grace, or Iustice may be glorifi'd. This being said, my FANCY rose, and drew A Curtaine; wherewith, quite beyond my view, This apparition vanish'd. And, I tooke My pen, to put in writing, what was spoke, And publish it to others, that it may Prevent (if possible) your evill day: For, till amendment, or destruction come, The Beasts would preach, should men continue dumb: Yea, what their Genius, now to them doth speake, If they should sleight it, stones would silence breake, To rouze them from their slumbers; or, to tell Succeeding-Ages, how and why they fell. When all was vanish'd; and, I left alone, Intending, what was willed to be done, A feare surpriz'd me; and, a shuddring took me, Which with a long continuing trembling strook me; And my weake heart began to be afraid, To doe what I resolv'd; and, thus it said. Observ'st thou not the madnesse of this Nation, The rage and fury of this Generation? And, how like Swine, before whom Pearles are throwne, They tread the givers of good counsell downe, And, tear them into pieces, by their scornes; Because, they then expected Barley-cornes?
For, ten to one, ev'n some in whose defence, These truths are spoke, will want intelligence To understand them so; and foolishly Charge thee, with standring that Authority Which thou dost honour; and, which (as this day Things go) can saved be no other way. Hast thou, nigh fourty yeers been vext and greoved, By this dull Generation, unreleeved? And having for it, ventured thy life, Ʋndone thy little children, and thy wife, Left them nor house, nor lands, nor cloathes, nor bread, Nor ought wherewith they may be comforted, (In that contagious sicknesse, which this day, Hath driven all thy comforters away) Yea, spent all in their service; and, wilt thou Having obtained words and paper now, Which promise restauration, hazzard all Those hopes, by that, which hereby may befall? Hast thou full five yeers oyl'd and tired been To struggle from the mischiefs thou wert in; With much-much difficultie, got at last, Acknowledgements, of what forborne thou hast? And, probability, that thou perchance Maist get one halfe, by giving, for advance The other moiety? And, meanest thou To lose it all againe, by doing now What this Illusion doth intice thee to? And everlastingly thy selfe undo? For nothing spoken for the publike good, Will to thy benefit be understood, By such as hate thee: And, thou well dost know That thou maist more be mischiev'd by one Foe (Who to the publike faithfulnesse pretends) Then benefited by a hundred friends. Take heed of this temptation; thou hast done Thy share this way. Now, let the world alone:
Provide for thine owne safety and thine ease: As others do, write those things that may please: And thou shalt then be freed from those disgraces, That thou hast suffred: there will then, be places For thee, as well as others: and thou then Shalt favour'd be, as much as other men. Thy peace is made already; not a tongue Doth move against thee; And, thou shalt ere long Of all thy dues be fully repossest, If thou wilt let the world doe what she list. When thus, my owne corruptions from within me, Had spoke, from my good purposes to win me; Another Voice, as coming from behind me, Thus whispered: SON of EARTH, give ear & mind me. Resist thou that suggestion; let it bee But as a Serpent on a stone, to thee, Which finds no entrance: For, it is the seed Of that old Serpent, whereof to take heed Thou hast good cause; since, if his head prevaile To enter, he will slip in to the taile. And, thou a poor flea-biting to avoid, Maist with the stings of Vipers be destroy'd. Feare not those Bug-beares wherewith fooles are frighted; Nor prize those toyes wherewith such are delighted; Fear not the cruell Tyrants of the times; Nor tast their dainties, lest thou act their crimes. Feare not thy Family shall be unfed; For, he that gave them mouths, will give them bread. He that alreadie hath five years maintain'd thee, (Since thou hadst nought left likely to maintaine thee Five moneths) and kept thee all that while aflaot In storms, though thou hadst neither Oar nor boat; He can aswell preserve thee now, as then, With nothing: therefore, seeke to him agen. Think not thy selfe alone, or without friends; For, thousands favour what thy Muse intends:
The well-affected Members of each House, Yea, all among them, who are generous, Will favour thy endeavours; and, be glad, That, in these times, an English-man they had, Whom neither hopes, nor fears, could make affraid To speake, what he thought pertinently said For publike safety; whatsoere he lost: Or, whose designe soere was thereby crost. He, that in times past, did secure thee from Thy foes; will do the same in time to come: For, that thou maist believe he will do so, Already five successions, in a row He hath destroy'd; who, causlessely had sought Thy ruine. Some, of them, (who, lately brought A mischiefe on themselves) now rooted bee From dwelling, where they persecuted thee: The sixth is also ripening to be sent To follow them, unlesse they shall repent. They, whom thou fear'st, if thou shalt constant be In good resolves, will be afraid of thee; For, GOD shall put the feare of thee on those Who to thy principles, and waies, are Foes; Or else, at least, they shall still slumber on; And, let thee speake in vain, as they have done. Discourage not thy selfe, as if thy paine In these indeavours would be quite in vaine; For, GOD will make thy weary Pilgrimage Bring some advantage to this present age, Or to the next. To this work thou wert borne; And, when thou to thy Fathers dost returne, It shall not grieve thee, that thou hast bestowne, More time for publike good, then for thine owne. Thy Faculties were not confer'd on thee For no Imployment; nor imployd to bee In flattering fools: nor, as at first it was, To praise the fading beauties of a face:
Or, play with those affections, which infuse The vaine expressions, that pollute a Muse; But, to provoke to vertue: to deter From vice, all chast affections to prefer; GODS Judgements to declare; his righteousnesse To magnifie; his mercies to confesse: And, whilst thou to this purpose art imploy'd, Fear not to be undone, or be destroy'd: For, by undoing, thou shalt be new-made; By thy destruction, safety shall be had: And, if this Generation shall pursue Thy love with hatred; or with-hold thy due; It shall be one addition to their doome, To be the scorn of ev'ry Age to come. This reconfirm'd my Spirit; and I found My heart with fearlesse courage, to abound. With resolutions, I was fortifi'd; And, throwing all my owne affaires aside, Which most concerned me; I, to write begun What I had heard: and, now, the worke is done, My Conscience is discharg'd; my heart is eas'd; And, therein come what will, I shall be pleas'd. Terrae Filius.
To the Parliaments. IT is not feare, in me; nor it is shame, Which makes me, at this time, conceal my name: But, humble modestie, and consciousnesse, Of that knowne frailty, and unworthinesse, Wherewith my Person, outwardly is cloth'd, Oft, makes my selfe, ev'n of my selfe so loth'd, That (not without good reason) I suspect My purposes, may find the lesse effect, If, ere you tast the fruit, I let you know, In whose poor Garden, GOD, hath made it grow. For, many times, the best wine pleaseth not, Unlesse, we like the Drawer, and the Pot. A homebred Simples vertue, few will owne; A Doctor seemes best skil'd, that is unknowne: Yea, miracles, by Christ, were seldome done, Where, he reputed was, but Josephs son. How ere it please, or may be understood, I dare aver, my purposes were good; And, that, hereby, you have advantages To do your selves an honour, if you please. Therewith, you profit, likewise, may receive, If, thereunto, but those respects you give, Which are, in equity, to those things due, That will both profit, and much honour you. GODS will be done: and, if your will agree With his, then, let your will be done on mee.
Aliquid ex improviso. THe Author will not, now, this Poem send Unto the King; because it may offend. But, if to give it, he had lawfull way, He downe would kneel; and, thus would humbly say. Dear Sir, be pleased to peruse this Book, With undistempred heart, and gracious look; And, though some Passages, may harsh appear, Read out with patience, what is written here: For, as with you, and your affaires it stands, My due allegeance, strictly me commands, That, I should plainely deal, and boldly do, What, my well meaning heart did prompt me to And I have hope, you shall receive by me, A wholsome Pill, although it bitter be. I could not flatter, when you were at height: Nor would I to your suffrings, add the weight Of halfe a graine, (to purchase my own health, Though I were sick) for all your former wealth. So tender am I, and so much afraid, To lay on more, where GOD enough hath laid; Till I may be assur'd, that you contemn His mercies; and proceed, in spight of him. And, I, had now been pleas'd, with words more calme, To have exprest my mind; and with soft balme, To have anointed you; but that thereby, Some (who, it may be, have an evill eye) Might find occasion to obstruct that cure, Which, by this course, may speedy be, and sure. Your wisedome findes my meaning, if your heart Hath any sympathizing with my art; And, I shall soon perceive it, when I know What countenance you hereupon bestow.
If I discover not an operation, According to my honest expectation, I shall desist. But, if respect you give To my intent, in this sharp Corrosive; I shall endeavour, to provide a dos, That may close up your wounds, repair your losse; And, give you good assurance, in the end, That, he who seem'd your foe, hath been your friend: Yea dares be so; if you dare be your owne, Though, ten times more affliction, prest you down; And act for you, as far as he is able, His part, of Mouse and Lion, in the Fable; Though both his foes, and yours stood looking on him, And, threatned all the spight that could be done him: For, with a Theefe, that Penitent shall be, A Crucifying, undergo would he, Much rather, then enjoy his preservation, With Barabbas, by publike acclamation. Quae nocent, docent; BUT, Ex nihilo nihil fit. FINIS.
Faults escaped. SOme faults, have been commited by the Printer; Some, have escap'd the Author, peradventure: The first, correct your selves, as you shall find them; The last, passe by, as if you did not mind them, Forgiving, as of him, you are forgiven; So, we shall all be friends, and reck'nings even. Errata. Pag. 49. lin. 12. read Square out. lin. 32. r. furnish'd be. p. 52. l. 2. read could receive, l. 8. read them of, p. 53. l. 8. read griev'd, p. 54. l. 12. read, they seem. p. 55. l. 9. read all men, p. 57. l. 3. read 'Tis I, (this. l. 27. read yerning p. 59. l. 24. read those, p. 61. l. 6. read 'tis not, p. 67. 5. let ev'ry. p. 68. l. 7. projected, p. 80. l. 6. read beget. p. 84. l. 3. of any sense.
