W541 E274_4 99868905 159486
A Copie of Sir William Wallers Letter, &c. A GREAT VICTORIE, OBTAINED BY Sir WILLIAM WALLER, AND Lievtenant-Generall CROMVVELL, AGAINST Colonell Sir James Long, (High-Sheriffe of Wiltshire) who was driven from the Devizes, and his whole Regi∣ment taken, being the same Horse that conducted the Prince from Oxford to Bristoll, Where were taken Colonell Long, the high Sheriffe. The Under-Sheriffe. Eight Captains. Seven Cornets. Foure hundred Horse. Three hundred forty Armes. Three hundred prisoners. Goring pursued by Sir VVil∣liam VValler. Published according to Order. march .18th LONDON, Printed for Robert Austin. 1645.
A great Victory obtained by Sir William Waller, and Lievtenant-General Crom∣well, against Col. Long, &c. Noble Sir, SInce Colonell LONG was returned from conveighing the Prince, with the Bishop of Armach, and divers of the Oxford Nobility, to Bristoll, we had intelligence, that he was coming towards the Devizes, having a gallant Regiment of Horse, consisting of about 400. men, hereupon Sir WILLIAM WALLER en∣deavoured to get betwixt him and the town; but having a long march, he got to the Devizes, be∣fore Sir WILLIAM approached, and was quar∣tered there, with Colonel Sir CHARLES LLOYD, the Governour thereof, for about two dayes, by which time Sir WILLIAM WALLER made his approach. On Munday the 10. of this present March, he quartered with his whole Army at
Almesbury, Normanton, Lake, Dearne, and Derringron, and that very a strong partie was commanded forth, out of which were drawne divers Scouts, which were sent to∣wards the Devizes, Stepstone, and other parts, to disco∣ver the Enemy, and what strength they were of, some whereof returned in the evening with Intelligence, That Colonell Long was in the Devizes, with a Posse Comitatus, or the Countie Forces, for this Long is the Kings high Sheriffe of the County of Wilts, sonne to Sir Walter Long who lately deceased, who being in drinke, fell from his horse neare Chichister, and broke his necke, and his son hath beene a very active man against the Parliament, ever since he hath begged his Wardship, which put him to much travell and paines, for which he almost spurred the horse to death that had broke his fathers neck; for he had vowed before he came off his back to get his Wardship. This Intelligence caused Sir William to advance to∣wards the Devizes that night, having also advertisement, that the enemies Workes about the town were very slight, and when his Army were on their march about a mile from Amsbury, he drew them up into a Body, and foure out of every Troop, to go on the Forlorne Hope. On Tuesday morning very early, our Forlorne Hope gave the Enemy an Alarum (the whole Army marching all night) upon which all Colonell Longs Regiment, which were quartered in and neare the Devizes, drew into a Bo∣dy, and newes being brought thereof to Sir William, hee made some stay, and at the first seemed rather to prepare for defence, then to give an assault, and divides his Horse into three Brigades, the first commanded by himself, quar∣tered neare Potterne, Woodington, and the Devizes, the next Brigade was commanded by Lievtenant-Generall
Gromwell, and the third by Sir Hadzer VValler a kinsman of Sir VVilliams, which Brigade joyned together, and wheeled about and fetcht a large compasse, that they might not be discovered by the enemy, and fell in between them and the Bath. On Wednesday morning, Sir VVilliam Waller drew up his Forces to fall upon the enemy, and they having disco∣vered that Sir William had a purpose to give them a visit, Colonell Long with the horse left the Devizes, and re∣treated towards Bath, not having notice of Generall Crom∣wells readinesse on that side to receive them, and Sir Charles Lloyd the Governour of the Devizes, with most of the Foot slighted their Workes, and retreated into the Castle, thinking that they were not able to defend the Towne: Sir William hearing that Colonell Long was marching a∣way, he pursued him very close in the Reare, and when the Enemy were a little past Milchin, thinking by the swiftnesse of their march to make their escape away. Colonell Cromwell appeared in the Van, be∣twixt him and Bradford, which having notice of colonell Long, would have returned backe a∣gaine, but could make no way of escape, the pas∣ses being narrow, and the countrey so sortified with quick set hedges, that he was as it were in a pound. VVe took from the Enemy 400. Horse, and 300. Prisoners: we tooke colonell Long him∣self the Kings high Sheriffe, their Commander
in chiefe, Captain Web, and seven Captaines more, the Under-Sheriffe, seven Comets, with many other Officers. We took also 340. Armes; and of this whole Regiment, which was the best (as we understand) the King hath, there escaped but 30. we lost but two men on our side, and but foure of the Enemy were killed. Colonell Ludlow is now (thanks be to God) sole high Sheriffe of this County: his competi∣tor (being now taken prisoner) is in custodia Maris∣callorum, with the greatest part of his Comman∣ders and Officers, and his whole Regiment ut∣terly extirpate. Colonell Ludlowes approach hither is now most earnestly desired to joyn with us, in regard this County, in which we hope there will be found but little opposition, though we have been lately heavy laden with infinite numbers of bar∣barous villains. To God be the praise, who hath so graciously looked upon our sufferings. The Garrison of Langford hearing of so many losses to the Kings Army, in severall places, one upon the necke of another, are in great distraction, and almost hopelesse of subsisting, having not above sixteen Horse, and they are very poore jades, to fetch in provisions, of which it is conceived, they begin to be streightned: and for their
men, they are most of them forced, of which (we hope) there will shortly be given a very good account. We heare Colonell Goring doth still retreat before us: it is thought he intends to joyne with Colonell Barkly the Governour of Excester; and Sir William Waller is mar∣ching towards Colonell Holborne at Tanton, and intends to draw out what strength he can out of Sommer set shire to joynt with him, and so to loose no time to pursue after. So with my due respects and humble service, I rest, Southampton March 14. 1644. Your faithfull and affectionate Servant. Here followeth a Copie of Sir William Wallers owne Letter. SIR, COlonell Cooke and Captaine Butler have written at large unto you, and therefore I shall onely confirme it, that with Gods gracious assistance we have routed the best Regiment the King had in the West, of foure hundred Horse; there escaped not thirty, the Colonell, Sir James Long, eight Captaines, and seven Cornets were taken, and most of the other Officers, with about
three hundred prisoners. This fell out in Wilt∣shire, between Troughbridge and Stepston. We are now marching towards honest Holborne, with wnom (by the grace of God) we will joyn, or stick half way. March 13. 1644. William Waller. A list of what was taken. Col. Sir James Longthe high Sheriffe The Under Sheriff 8. Captaines 7. Cornets 400. Horse 340. Armes 300. Prisoners. Goring pursued by Sir W. Waller. FINIS.
