3018 44920298 173747
¶ A Bryefe summe of the whole Byble. a Chrystian Instruction for al Parsons yonge and olde, to the whiche is annexed the ordenarye for all degrees. Translated out of Doutche into Inglysh by Antony Scoloker. Romano. xv. What thinges soeuer are written, are written for our learning.
The contentes of this booke. Fyrst. THe prologue to the reader. A briefe summe of the byble. Thre thinges necessarie for a man to knowe. The .x. commaundementes of GOD goodly expounded. The prayer of the Lorde, or the pater no¦ster expounded. Instruction of baptisme. Instruction of Christes supper. Instruction for all estates or degrees, and first howe the spirituall Prelates ought to vse them selues amongest the commen people. Howe the commen people ought too be¦haue them selues towardes the prelates. Howe the wordely prelates as Empe∣rour, kinges, princes, lordes Iusticers and officers ought too behaue them sel∣ues in rulynge or gouernynge of their subiectes. Howe subiectes ought to behaue them sel¦ues towardes the superiour powers. How parentes, as father and mother ought to behaue them selues in rlinge & bringing vp of their chyldren. Howe children ought to obey their paren¦tes
or elders. Howe the Lorde and lady, master and mastres ought to behaue them selues towardes their seruauntes. Howe seruauntes shall behaue them sel∣ues towardes their lordes or ladyes, ma¦sters or mastresses. How maried men ought to behaue them selues towardes their wiues. How women ought to lyue with their husbondes. Of the state of matrimony in generall Of the state of virginitie. Of the state of widdowes. Exhortacion to the riche of this worlde. Exhortacion to the poore. Exhortacion to the hanoycraftes man. Exhortacion to relygious or deuoute par¦sones. Exhortacion to the marchaunt. Exhortacion to the husbandman. Exhortacion to souldiours or men of warre. Exhortacion to tolners or custumers. Exhortacion to vzurers. Exhortacion to whoremongers and for∣nicatours. Exhortacion to dronkardes. Exhortacion to all sinners generally.
Exhortacion to all men in generall. Instruction howe men ought to occupy and exercise them selues in their daylye prayers: fyrst, in the morninge when they ryse. At night when they go to bed. When men go to their worke. When men are bounde towardes any. Iourney. When mēne come home agayn or at their iourneys ende. A prayer for Emperour or Kinges. For all teachers of Gods worde. For them that ligh sicke. For all women bound with the lordes handes. For all men in generall. For the Citie or towne wherein a man dwelleth. For all frutes of the earth. Grace before meate. Grace after meate. Conclusion.
The prologue to the reade. FOr asmuche as all he althe welfare & pros∣peritie of mā cōsisteth in the perfect know∣ledge of god & of hym selfe,Hierony∣mus. whiche knowledge euerye mā may haboundauntly fynde in the most holye & sacred scrip∣tures, as in a right cleare mir∣rour, and moost parfecte glasse / in the whiche all men ought to delyte & exercise thēfelues both daye and night, to the amende∣ment of their lyues,Psalm. i. & to the edi∣fiyng of their neighboures, chyl¦dren, housholde or famylie. And considering also yt there are manye in these latter dayes (god amende it) which saye that they are good Chrystiās / & in dede are nothinge lesse.Apocal. ii I haue thefore taken vpon me after my simple vnderstandyng & learning / with the liuing God thorow his moost
holy spirite mought vouchesafe to augmēt strēgthen & encrease in meat all tymes) to set fourth & bringe to lyght a very compen¦dious instructiō, to the prefermē¦te augmētyng & settinge fourth of the laude, prayse, glorye and knowledge of God, & also to the edificacion, profyt, vtilitie and amendemente of all men: & espe∣ciallye to the youth, whiche are of a reasonable age & discrecion. Whiche (as by daylye experience may be sene, through the negli∣gence of their wicked & vngodlye parentes) do so miserably and pi¦tuously rōne astraye, in all ma∣ner of disorder, wantonnes, dis∣obedience, asciuiousnes, and in all kinde of vngodly liuinge. I saye vngodlye parentes:Chrysost▪ super a theum ho∣meli. 49. For if they feared God in very dede, as faythful Christians ought to do, they woulde vndoutedly gue
their vnderlinges chyldren,Aug. ad patres. Pro. xxii sub∣iectes, housholde, or familie, an other example, instruction and chastysement (euery one in his degree) for to leade a Godly and christiā lyfe: walking in the loue & feare of God. But alas, many parentes (which is greatly to be lamented) knowe not thē selues (so farre is this miserable & wret¦ched worlde rōne astray, & cleane out of course) wherein their true christianitie consisteth, or wher∣uppon it is grounded Neyther knowe they anye thinge at all what it is to be a Christiā. Howe is it thē possible that they shulde instructet, eache, and geue good example vnto other, when they thē selues do not know the most wholsome doctrine,Mat. xii. workes and wyll of their master & true guide Iesus Christ?Iohn. i. Thinkinge them selues to bee very perfect Chri∣stians,
when they ones haue re∣ceyued baptisme, & do not consi∣der nor knowe what Iesus sayd vnto Nicodemus.Iohn. 4 and .vii. Except (sayth he) a man be borne of water and of the spirite he can not come in∣to the kingdome of God by these woordes might suche Parsons learne to vnderstande yt we may not oneli put or seke our trust in this that we bee onely baptised in water,Tit. ii. as though we shulde therby become very Christians, without hauing any respect vn¦to any other thing beside.Roma. vi Col. ii. iii But we must alter and chaunge oure owne wicked and sinfull conuer¦sacion with a penytent and so∣rowfull harte for our offences, amending our lyfe and walking in the feare and loue of God, ac∣cording to the spirite of astedfast fayht, bringing fourth the fru∣ytes of charitie,Ephe. iiii towardes our
neyghbours with all lowlynes & mekenes according to the voy¦ce of our good and true shephard Iesus Christ, in all long suffe∣raunce breaking our fleshly Iu∣stes & desires. Oh but howe farre are the moost parte of vs, frome this frutefull vertuous & moost holy christianitie?Mat. xiii yea I dare wel saye, if mē may iudge, the tre by the frutes (as christ sayth men maye) that there is a greate mul¦tytude which beere the name af∣ter christ, christians, whiche not¦withstanding, do far excede the Iewes, Turkes, Sarazens Hea¦then and Paynims in all kynde of abhominable wickednes and vngodly lyuing. For the Sarazens, Turkes & Iewes, are a great deale more ca¦refull & vse muche more diligēce in obseruinge of the Lawe of their ydoll & seducer Mahumeth
then we are in the obseruing of our christen lawe. The Iewes do teache their Chyldrene, as soone as they can speake, to re∣hearse & declare the law of Mo∣ses euen by roote or without the boke. But we wretched catiues are (truly to our greate rebuke & shame) suche neglygente slouth∣full and moost wretched people, that we haue our christen rely∣gion in no reputacion or estyma¦cion, yea, we set in a maner no∣thing at all by it. Whiche holy & moost christen religion, neuerthe¦les God the heauenly father through his only beloued sonne Iesus christ full of grace and ve∣ritie hath declared publyshed & commaunded vnto al men, none excepted, whiche thinge also we christians do promys sweare & advow in our baptisme to ob∣serue and kepe all the dayes of
our lyfe. Nowe might men aske what haue we sworne? & wher∣unto haue we made our vowe & promis in baptime to the intēte wemight kepe the same, and liue as christiās ought to lyue? I ans¦were, reade, searche, & reuise this lytell booke, diligently praying to God for his grace to illu∣minate thyne vnderstan∣dinge, and I hope thou shalt bee the better all the dayes of thy lyfe.
a briefe summe of the whole Byble. Of God. Fyrst the holy Wrytin∣ges of the bible teache vs yt there is one God almightye,Deut. vi. i. Tim. ii. Gen. xvii Exod. xv. Gene. i. Psal. c. iii and .x. Exod. iii. Iere. ix. Roma. ix. i. Lozin. xii. that hath neither beginning nor ēding whiche of his owne good∣nes did create al thinges, of whō all thinges procede, & without whome there is nothinge, which is rightuous and mercifull, and whiche worketh al thinges in al after his wyll, of whome it may not bee demaunded wherfore he doth this or that. The creacion of man. Then that this very God did create Adam the fyrst man after his owne Image & similytude,Esay. xiv and. liiii. Iere. x. & xviii. and dyd ordeyne and appoynte
him lorde of all the creatures in the earth. Synne. Whiche Adam by the enuy of the deuell,Sapi. ii. Roma. v. disobeying the com¦maundement of his maker, did fyrst synne & brought sinne into this world, such & so great that we which be sprong of him after the fleshe, are subdued vnto sin∣ne, death, & dampnaciō, brought vnder the yoke and tiranny of the deuell.Ephe. ii. Chryst was promysed. And further that Chryst Ie∣sus was promysed of God the fa∣ther,Genes. iii xii. xvii. & xxviii. to be a sauyour to this Adā Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Dauid & the other fathers, which shulde delyuer them from their sinnes & tirannye of the deuell, that with a quycke & lyuynge faythwolde
beleue this promis and trust of this Iesus Christ, hoping too haue this delyueraunce of and by him. And truely this promes is very oft rehearsed in the boo∣kes of the olde testament, yea, & the olde Testament is this pro∣mys, as it is called the newe, whiche teacheth that this pro∣mys is fulfylled. The lawe. And that in the meane ceason whyle the fathers loked for sal∣uation and delyueraunce promi¦sed, because mās nature is suche that he not onely can not,Exod. xx. and. xix. but also wyll not cōfesse hymselfe to be a sinner, and specially suche a Sinner that hath neade of the sauinge health promysed,Rom. v. the Lawe was geuen wherthrough men might knowe synne & that they are sinners, when they se that they do none of the thinges
that the law biddeth or cōmaun¦deth them, with so glad and wyl∣lynge a mynde as God requireth but rather agaynst their wylles, without affection, & as though they were constrayned wyth the feare of that hel whiche the lawe threateneth sayinge, cursed bee he that mainteineth not all the wordes of this lawe to kepe thē. And that this law was geuen to the intent that synne & the ma∣lyce of mens hartes beinge the∣reby the better knowen, men shulde the more feruently thryst after the comminge of Chryst,Deut. 27 Gal. iii. i. corin. i. whiche shulde redeame thē from their synnes. As it was figured vnto the Iewes, by manye cere∣monies, hostes & sacrifices, wich were ordeyned of GOD not to the intēt to take awaye sinnes,Heb. xii. but to shewe and declare that he shulde be put awaye by fayth inIoan. i.
the saluaciō promysed thorowe Christ, and whiche nowe be put awaye by the comminge of that Christ, whiche is the very hoost of the father, that taketh awaye all synne. The comming of Christ.Luke. ii. Last of all by the bookes of ye newe testamēt,Gal. iiii. Ephe. i. Roma. v. Tum. . Ephe. ii. Roma. v. Ioan. i. we are taught that Christ whiche was promy∣sed and shadowed in the olde Te∣stament, is sent of the father, at such tyme as he had determined with hym selfe, at suche tyme (I saye) as all wickednes florished. And that he was sent not for ani mans good workes (for they all were synners) but to the intent that he wolde truely shew the haboundaunt ryches of hys gra¦ce,Esay. iiii i. Iohn. ii ii. peter. i. Hebr. ii. whiche he had promised. The lambe of God. In the newe testament ther¦fore
it is moost euid entlye decla∣red, that Iesus Christ the true Lambe and hoste, is come to the arent to reconcile vs to the fa∣ther, paying on the crosse the pu¦nyshment due vnto oure sinnes, and to delyuer vs from the bon∣dage of the deliell (vnto whome we serued through synne) and to make vs the sonnes of God, syth he hath geuen vs the true peace and tranquilitie of con∣science,Rom. v. Iohn. iii. and. vi. that we no longer doo feare the paynes of hell, whiche feare is put awaye bi the fayth, confidence and assuraunce, that the father geueth vs drawynge vs vnto hys sōne. For that faith is the gift of God, whereby we beleue that Christ is come into this worlde to saue sinners, whiche is of so great pyth, that they whiche haue it, desire to perfourme all the duties of loue
to all men, after the example of chryst. The holyghoost. For fayth ones receyued,i. corin. i. and. v. God geueth his holyghost, wherwith he tokeneth and marketh al that beleue,Ephesi. i. wich is the pledge and er¦neste, that we shal surely possesse euerlasting lyfe, and that geueth witnes vnto our spirite,Rom. viii and. v. & graf∣teth this fayth in vs, that we be the sonnes of God, pouring ther¦with yt loue in our hartes which Paule describeth & setteth out to the corinthians.i, cor. xiii. By yt fayth and confidence in Chryst,Galo. v. wiche by loue is mightie in operacion, and that shewed it selfe thorowe the workes of loue, stering men therto, but that Isay we are Iu¦stified, yt is, by yt fayth, Chrystes father (which is become ours al∣so thorowe that Chryst our bro∣ther)Hbr.
counteth vs for rightuous & for his sonnes,Citn. ii. imputing not our sinnes vnto vs thorow his grace. Good workes. To conclude, he came to the intent ye we beyng clensed from our wicked & abhominable sinne and sanctified vnto God the fa¦ther yt is halowed vnto the vse of ye father to exercise good workes, & forsaking ye workes of ye fleashe, shulde feelye serue in rightuous∣nes and holynes al our lyfe lon∣ge,Luke. i. Ephe. ii. thorowe good workes which God hath ordeyned to the intent yt we shulde walke in them, decla¦ring our selues therby to be sure¦ly casted vnto this grace, wyche woorkes who so euer hath not, declareth that he hath not fayth in Christ. Christ our master:
Vnto whome we must come,Mat. xxi. and .xxiii. Iohn. 18. Ephe .v. i. Pet. ii. Hebr. iiii. i. Tim. ii. Hebr. xii. i. Iohn. ii Roma. vi Ion. xiiii Heb. iiii. and folow him with a cherefull harte, that he may instructe and teache vs, for he is oure maister meke & humble of hart he is our exāple of whome we must learne ye rule of good liuing, further he is our priest, hye bishop & onely me∣diatour whiche nowe sitteth on the right hāde of GOD ye father, he is oure aduocate, & prayeth eue for vs, whiche will vndoub∣tedly obteyne what soeuer we desyre enther of hym or of his fa∣ther in his name,i. Tim. i. Mat. xi. If we beleue that he wyll do it, for so hath he promised. Let vs therfore not doubte although we somtime sin¦ne, with a confidence to comme vnto hym, and wyth a lyuinge and vndoubting fayth that we shal obteyne mercy. For therfore came he to thyntent to saue sin∣ners, neyther requireth he anye
thynge more of vs,i. Tess. ii. then to come vnto him without feare. This is yt Christ Iesus, whiche after he hath kylled the name of sinne wt the breth of his mouth, shall sitte in his Maiestie & Iud¦ge all men geuynge vnto euery one ye woorkes of his bodi accor∣ding to yt he hath done,ii. Cor. v. i. cor. v. Mat. xxv whether it be good or bad, & yt shall say vn¦to thē yt shalbe on hys rigthand. Come ye blessed chyldren of my father inheret ye the Kingdome prepared for you from the begin¦ning of the worlde,i. cor. v. And vnto thē that shalbe on his lyft hande, de∣parte frome me ye cursed into e∣uerlastyng fyre, whiche is prepa¦red for the deuell & his aungels.ii. Pet. i. Then shall the ende come, and he shall delyuer vp the kingdome to God the father. To the intent that we shulde knowe this, by the goodnes of
God, working by his holi spirite: are the holy wrytings of the by¦ble geuen vs,Ion. xvii and xx. Tha we shulde know (I say) and beleue yt there is ou God, & Iesus Christe who¦me he hath sent & yt in beleuyng we shulde haue euerlasting lyfe thorow his name.i. cor. iii. An other foun¦dacion then this can no man ha¦ue, & saincte Paule desireth that he beholden a cursed that prea∣cheth any other fayth and salua¦cyon thē onely by Iesus christ,Gal. iii. yea although it were an aungell of heauen. For of him, & thorow hym,Roma.  and for him are all thinges to whome, with the father & the holyghost, be honour and glory foreuermore. Amen. Thre thynges are nedeful & expediēt for a mā to knowe to his saluacion, after that hee is ones come to lawfull or reasonable age and vnderstanding. Fyrst.
A Man must knowe what he ought to doo, and what he ought to leaue, to the intente that he may knowe whiche is good and do the same, and that he also may know whi∣che is euell, and leaue the same. And this do the .x. commaunde∣mentes of God teache hym, cal∣led the lawe geuen by Moses. Secondly. When a man doth ones fele that he of hys owne strength, and power, is not able to doo or to leaue these thynges without the helpe of God (for the fleshe as it is written to the Romaynes, can not fulfyl the Lawe) that he maye knowe where & by whome he may obteyne helpe, comforte, remedye and grace, for too ful∣fyll the lawe. For she muste bee all fulfylled so that ther may not be one Iote or tytle vnfulfilled.
And this theacheth hym the holi christen belefe or Crede. And fy∣nallye, when a man perceyueth his belefe or fayth (in whiche all dependeth and consysteth, to bee feable and weake, that then he may knowe where & by whome he may take his refuge to bee hol¦pen and strenghtened therein. And this teacheth hym the prayer of our lorde Iesus Christ. COncernynge the before na¦med first article,Exod. xix sayncte Paule to the Romaynes in the .iii. chap. sayth on this wyse,Roma. iii By the lawe (sayth he) commeth but the knowledge of synne. Therfore because that no man shulde boaste and baunte hym selfe of his vertue and holynes, but rather with al humilitie low lynes and mekenes, knowledge and confesse with the publicane, howe wretched synfull and my∣serably
he is. I do therfore parti¦cularly declare & set before al mēs¦eyes, the .x. cōmaundementes of our Lorde God almighty geuen vnto Moses in two Tables ma¦de of stone,Antiqui. liori. r. ha. 6. whereof ye euerye table (as Iosephus describeth) particu¦larly cōteyneth fyue commaun∣dementes, In or by the whiche two tables (as it were in a cleare mirrour or glasse) euery mā may most easely see, fele and perceaue the whole estate of his harte. THe fyrst cōmaundement of the fyrst table,Iere. v. teacheth fea¦re, loue, fayth, hope, & sure confidence & trust in God aboue all thynges, and foundeth thus. I am the Lorde thy God whyche haue brought the out of the lande of Egypt frō the house of bondage,Exo. xx. a and .liii. e thou shalt haue no∣ne other Goddes in my sight. That is. Thou shalt ouely praye in spi∣rite,
& veritie vnto god ye creatour ruler, & preseruer of all thynges. Thou shalte loue the same Lorde God wyth al thy harte,Mark. xii Deut. vi. and xxx.v wyth all thy soule, wyth all thy mynde, wyth all thy strēgth. Thou shalt put thy trust, fayth, hope & confi¦dence in him onely. Thou shalte loue him aboue althinges, Thou shalt feare him & serue him onely wt al thi harte, wt al thi minde &c. Now where as I do heare saye, serue him onely, ye may not vn∣derstande but ye seruauntes are bounde to serue their masters, & subiectes heir superiour powers and such lyke, wt al due reuerēce Agaynst this commaundement do. Al they whiche put their trust conforte refuge, confidence and mooste speciall succour and hope more in any creatures (how ho∣ly soeuer they be) thē in God the
father almightie, through his only and derely beloued sonne Iesus Chryst our lorde. The second cōmaundement tea¦cheth an in warde beholding of the inuisible thinges of God (yt is his euerlastyng power & God head) by the meditacion, behol∣ding and consideringe of the vi∣sible thinges,Reg. v. Rom. i. made and created by the infinite power of God, and soundeth thus. Thou shalte make yt no grauē ymage nor any symylitude,Exo. xx. Leuit. xvi neyther of it that is aboue in h auen, nor of it that is beneth vppō the earth, nor of it yt is in the water vnder the earth, worship thē not, nor serue them not, for I the lorde thy God am a gelous God visitinge ye sinne of ye fathers vppō ye chyldrē vnto the thirde & fourth generacyō of thē that hate me, And do mercy vppō many thousandes, that loue me
& kepe my commaundementes. That is. The lorde God forbiddeth not the makinge of Images or symylytudes so farre fourth as they beno abused. But he doth forbidde the Idolatry, supersti∣cion and false relygion whiche these folyshe, braynles, frātyke and mad people haue vsed & yet in many places (God amend it) do vse in runnyng and gadding with thē by the streates bearing them on their shulders, roarynge & cryinge lyke madde people, & lyke Turkes heathen & in fidels (whiche knowe not GOD in dede) in settinge thē in their chur¦ches, houses and els where, in lighting of candelstapers & kne¦ling and crouching before them in gylting and arraying of thē wich veluet, sylke, &c. sufferinge
in the meane ceason our euen Christen to perish for colde & for lacke of succour.Ion. v. Saynt Iohn also reprēhendeth them saying, Babes kepe youre selues frome Images or symylitudes. Lykewise the Prophet Esay sayeth.Ezay. 4  GOD (sayth he) is ge∣lous, he wyll geue his Power to none other, neyther his honour to the Gods. Agaynst this commaunde∣ment do. All they of whome the Pro∣phet Ieremy wryteth in diuere places,Ieremy. i and .iii. they (Isay) whiche for∣sake and leaue God and ronne heare and there to Images and Symylitudes made of stone, wodde golde & syluer, for to ob∣teyne comforte helpe,Sapi. 1  & remedy Neyther are they ashamed to speake wyth hym that his with∣out
soule, and to call for health vnto him that hath no myght, & call for lyfe vnto the deade. THe thyrd cōmaundement teacheth to extolle,Leit. xix eccl. xxiii psal. 11. r Hester. 1 r Dan. 2. r Deut. v. Leit. 24 laude prayse and with all reuerence to magnifye the moost blessed na∣me of God, and soundeth thus. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vayne. For the lorde wall not holde hym vngiltie that taketh hys name in vayne. That is. Thou shalt in no wise sweare nor curse,Leu. xix. b Math. v. Iacob. v. Psalm. lxxiiii. cxiiii. xv but thy saying shalbe yea, yea, and no, no. Feare and tremble when thou namest the same. And be not ashamed to cō∣fesse ye same name before mē, but laude, prayse, blesse & cal vppō ye same moost holy name. If yu art in daunger or in any nede take your refuge to the same name of
the almightie God, as to a moost sure ancker. Agaynst this commaundemēt do all they whiche for a light matter,eccl. xxiii leui. xxiiii i. corin. vi do name the same moost holye name of God, Curse, swea¦re and blaspheme by the same, in sicknes or aduersitie. And they also, whiche vse the same name to sorcery or witchcraft. And they whiche attribute, reken or accompte all honour vnto them selues, Furthermore all they yt take God to witnes in a false matter. And they whiche do not stedfast∣ly trust and beleue to bee true all that whiche God hath spoken & taught. Or thy whiche eyther do heare or se the same moost ho∣ly name dispysed and dishonou∣red,Hebr. vi. & do not withstand the same to the vtter must of their power. But to sweare in a iust cause to
gods honour, and to the proffit of thy neighbour, beyng therto required by the iustice or officer, is not forbidden here. THe fourth Commaundemēt teacheth to haue a quyet harte in God,Mat. xii. i. cor. x. Roma. x. ezay. lvii exod. xx.b & .xxiii.b. ceasing frō al bodely labour, & soundeth thus. Remembre the Sabboth day that thou sanctifye it. Syxe dayes shalt thou labour and do ol thy worke, But the se∣uenth day is ye Sabath of ye lorde thi god. That is. Sease from al bodely labour and trauayle, and frome sinne. and do good restyng in God hea∣ring his worde, & seke rightuous∣nes before thyne eyes al the da∣yes of thy lyfe, sufferinge him to worke thy health and saluacion through Iesus Christ, and rest in hym. Syxe dayes mayest thou la¦bour and do al yt thou haste to do But ye seuēth daye is ye Sabboth
of the lorde thy God, in it thou shalte do no maner of worke, nei¦ther thou nor thy sonne, nor thy doughter nor thy seruaunt, ney¦ther thy cattell, neyther yet the straunger that is within thy ga∣tes. For in sixe dayes the lorde made heauen and earth, and the sea, and al that in them is, and re¦sted the seuenth daye. Wherfore the lorde blessed the seuenth day and hallowed it. Chryst sayd,Mat. xii and .xii. Ezay. lvi. it is lfull to do good on the Sabboth daye. Therfore the sonne of man is lorde euen of the Sabboth daye The lorde sayth by his prophet, kepe equitie and do ryght. &c. Blessed is the mā that doth this, and the mannes chylde whiche kepeth the same. He that taketh hede that he vnhalowe not the Sabboth (yt is) if thou kepe thi selfe yt thou do
not euell for to vnhallowe the Sabboth, but to fulfyl my coue¦naunt (sayth the lord (then shalt thou be called too the pleasaunt holy and glorious Sabboth of the lorde. Where thou shalt be in honour, so that thou do not after thyne owne Imaginacion, ney¦ther seke thyne owne wyll, nor speake thyne owne wordes,Hebr. xiii. Let vs feare therfore (sayth Sainct Paule) leaste anye manne for∣saking the promes of enteringe this rest, shulde seme at any ty∣me to haue bene disapoynted. For to vs is declared the Gospel, as wel as to thē. But it profyted not thē yt they hearde the worde. Because they that hearde it, coupled it not with faith, For we whiche haue beleued, do enter in¦to this rest &c. That is to sai, into eternal life, which christ ye lord of ye Sabboth hath obteined for vs.
Agaynst this cōmaundemēt do all they whiche vppon the sondaye, yea at all tymes when they can or maye, do not heare gods word, for to be taught and instructed by the same. And thei whiche onelye trust vppō theyr owne wisdome. They which at∣tribute their good workes (in ca¦se thei haue any) to them selues, and not to God. Also they which spende and consume their time, vppon Sondayes and other da∣yes in slouthfulnes, in drinking dronke in vayne talke in dicing carding, gaming, fighting, da∣uncing & suche lyke wickednes abusynge the day and tyme, As by experiēce dayly may be sene, at fayrs, assemblies, bankettes and feastes,Esay. v. where as menne ha¦ue greate delyte in harpes, re∣beckes, fiddels, tabrets, flutes pi¦pes & muche drinkinge, but the
poore are litle remembred or re∣garded. And spēd and wast thus their time in al disorder & vngod¦ly liuyng, wher as they ought on such dayes moost of al to hear Gods word, to distribute their al¦mes to ye poore, to visit the sicke, to prayse and thanke god and so confesse and bewayle their syn∣nes whiche they all the weke be¦fore haue committed. THe first cōmaundement teacheth to be subiect & obedient vnto our elders,Deut. xxi: geue. ix. Eccle. iii. as fa∣thers & mothers and superiour powers wyth all humilitie and lowlynes,i. Tit. iii. alwayes in the feare of god, and soundeth thus. Honour thy father and thy mother,Mat. xv. that thy dayes may be longe, in the lande whiche the lorde thy God hath geuen the. That is. Honour thy father & thy mo∣therEccle. vii
frome the whole harte, & for∣get not the sorowfull trauayle that thy mother had with the, re∣membre that thou wast borne thorow them, & how canst yu recō∣pence them the thinges that thei haue done for the?Ephe .v. Mat .xv. Mar .vii. Saynct Pau¦le sayth, honour thy father and thy mother. this is the first com∣maundement that hath any pro¦mes, that thou mayst be in good estate, and lyue long vppon the earth. By this commaundemēte Christe teacheth vs not onely to haue our fther, and mother in reuerence, and to obey them, but also to minister vnto their neces∣sitie. The chyldren of wisdome are,Eccle. iii. a congregacyon of the righ∣tuous. and their exercise is obe∣dience and loue. Heare me youre father (o my deare chyldren) and do therafter, that ye may be safe. For the lord
will haue the father honoured of the chyldrē, and loke what a mo∣ther commaundeth hir children to do, he wyll haue it kept. Who so honoureth his father, shall ha¦ue ioye of hys owne chyldren, And whan he maketh his prayer he shalbe heard. He that honou∣reth his father, shal haue a longe lyfe, and he that is obedient for the lordes sake, his mother shall haue ioye of hym. He that feareth the lorde, ho∣noureth his father and mother, & doth thē seruice as it were to the lorde hym selfe Honour thy fa∣ther, in dede, in worde, and in all pacience, that thou mayest haue hys blessyng. For the blessyng of the father buyldeth the houses of the chyldren, but the Mo∣thers curse roteth out the foun∣dacions, He that forsaketh hys father, shall come to shame, and
he that defieth his mother, is cur¦sed of god. My sonne perfourme thy workes wt louing mekenes, so shalt thou be loued aboue o∣ther, men, & shalte fynde fauoure in the sight of God. Honour the elders that haue cure of soules, as pastoures Curates, Priestes, Scolemasters, declarers & prea∣chers of Gods worde, yea thou shalte honour them with double honour, that is, we ought not o∣nely to be obedient vnto their do¦ctrine and learning, but we are a so bound to finde them bodely foode, sustenaunce and all other necessaries. The scripture sayth,Deut. 25 r Mat. x. a thou shalte not mosell the mouth of the oxe that treadeth out the corne, And the labourer is wor∣thy of his rewarde. Submyt your selues also vnto ye higher powers as Empe∣rour,i. cor. ix. b
Kinges princes and rulers,Hebr. xiii. Rom. xiii a. and. b. and gyue suche tribute, tolle, cu¦stome and honoure as is due too thē, And in lyke case to thy lorde or lady, master or mastres, alway¦es with the feare of God. Agaynst this cōmaundemēt do.Eccle .iii. All they whiche are ashamed of their elders in their pouertie & nede, or they whiche angre them vexe them, curse them murmur, grudde, or are rebels against thē. Furthermore they whiche slaun¦der and blame the ministers of Gods worde. Item all they whiche make any tumulte,i. Pei. iii. Leuit. xix Eccl. viii i. Tim. va ii. Reg. iii Gene. iiii Rom. xii. dissenciō or debate agaynst the superiours, yea al∣though they wer wicked. They whiche wyll not obey their Master & Mastres. They whiche wyll not ryse vp before a graye heade, nor gyue reuerēce vnto the aged.
The sixth commaundement teacheth peace, vnitie and quiet∣nes euery man whether it be frē¦de or foo, and soundeth thus. Thou shalt do no murther. That is. Thou shalt beare no rancour enuy or malice in thi harte,i. Pet. ii. thou shalte not chyde fight, scorne nor mock with any man. Thou shalt not bakbite ney¦ther desier to be auenged. Wyll & wysh them good that do euell. Blesse them that curse you.Matth. v Be not hynderfull to any man in woorde, thought, or dede, yt you may be parfecte chyldrē of your father whiche is in heauen. For he maketh the Sunne too ryse both on the euell & on the good. & sendeth hys rayne on the iust, & on the vn▪ H that loueth
not his brother, abideth in death Whosoeuer hateth his brother, is a murtherer. &c. Agaynst this commaunde∣ment do all they whiche a venge one euell with an other.i. Pet .iii. Whiche are wroth, & angrye wyth their neighbours, Whiche threten pro¦uoke, mocke, deride or dispise their Christian brother. Whiche vpbrayde their neybors, casting them their fautes in theyr tethe. Whiche forgiue not their Enne∣mies, and praye not for them. Whiche chyde, braule, fight and suche lyke. And he that dooth all these before named thinges, doth not onelye agaynst this com∣maundemēt, but also al thei whi¦che do not let, hinder,Lactanti∣us de vero cultu. libr vi. capi. x correct & to their power, punish these before∣named euels. This {con}maundemēt is not trāsgressed by rulers & iu∣sticers in yt they vse the sweardeRom .xiii
of Iustice righfully in punis∣shing of the wicked and in defen¦ding of the good. The seuenth cōmaundemēt teacheth shamefastnes,Esap. i. Math. v. Pro. xxii. honestie and Chastitie, both in wordes dedes and thoughtes, and soun¦deth thus. Thou shalt not commyt adultery. That is. Kepe your fiue sences from wantonnes,Ephe. iiii. Tii. i. iii. and from the wor∣kes of all maner of vncleānes. A voyde & eschewal excesse of deyn¦tie meates and drinkes eschew also,Ezech. xvi all Idelnes & the occasions whiche maye prouoke too wan∣tonnes and vncleannes. Chryst sayth,Math. v. ye haue heard how it was sayed to theim of olde tyme. Thou shalt not commit adulte∣ry, But I saye vnto you, that:
whosoeuer loketh on a wyfe, lu∣sting after her, hath {con}mitted adul¦tery with her already in his har∣te. And saynct Paule sayth,i. corin. vi knowe ye not that your bodies are the members of Christe? shall I nowe take the membres of Christ and make them the mem∣bres of an harlot? God forbydde. Doo ye not knowe that he that coupleth hym selfe with an har∣lot is become on body? for they (sayth he) shalbe two in one flesh But he that is ioyned vnto the lorde, is one spirite. Flye fornica∣cion, Euerye sinne that a man doth, is without the body, but he that is a fornicatour, sinneth a∣gaynst his owne bodye. Eyther know ye not that your bodies are the temple of the holighoost? whiche dwelleth in you, whome ye haue of God. And howe that ye are not your owne, for you
are derelye bought. Therfore glo¦rify god in your bodyes and spi∣rites whiche are gods. Let wed∣loke he had in price in all poyn∣tes, and let the chambre bee vn∣defiled, for whorekepers and ad∣uouterers God wyll iudge.Hebr. xiii. Agaynst this commaunde∣ment do all they whiche beside lauful matrimony haue any car¦nall copulacion, or commyt anie vnclēnces wt vnlyke creatures a∣gaynst nature, & agaynst ye lawe of God. Suche as stirre, moue or prouoke other parsons to leche∣ry and unclennes, with songes, ballettes Riddels, vncomelye lā∣guage, baudy wordes,Amos. vi. gesture, countenaunce, felinge and gro∣pynge. They whiche do not a voyde or eschue al glotony, dron kennes, outrage, ydelnes and a∣fleshly desiers, for suche vices pro∣uoke to al kynde of vnchaste ly∣uying.
And vnder this cōmaunde¦mēt is aprehended rauisshing of women, whorehunting, baudy places, stewes, dishonest houses in a towne or Cytie,Roma. i. whiche are dennes of theues and robbers, to the destruction of mennes goo∣ges, bodies, and soules. And they whiche commit these enormy∣ties, and wickednesses are not o∣nely giltie herin,Iosue. vii Gen. xxxi but also al they whiche suffer thē, and do not per∣turbe, let or hynder them to their power. The eygth commaundemēt teacheth lyberalitie,i. Cor. ix. Pro. xvi. mildenes & through a broken spirite not too esteme riches, and soundeth thus Thou shalt not steale. That is. Be hindefull to no man, but further, helpe, counsell,Math. v. parte and distribute gladly of all that
whiche thou hast receyued more of God then other men, whether it be in woordly goodes and tem¦porall substaunces, or in spiri∣tual giftes, as learning, wisdom and good counsell, yea gyue to hym that asketh,Math. x. Math. vi. and from hym that wolde borrow, turne not thy face. Christ sayth, steale not. De∣fraude or begile no man. If any man will sue the at the Lawe, & take thy coate frome the, let hym haue thy cloke also. Paule also sayth, now is there vtterly a faulte amonge you,i. Cori. vi because ye go to lawe one with an other. Why rather suffer ye not wrōg? why rather suffer ye not your sel¦ues to be robbed?phe. ii ii yea euen your selues do wronge and robbe, & that the brethern. Let hym that did steale, steale no more, but let hym rather labour
with his hādes some good thing, that he may haue to giue to him that nedeth. Agaynst this cōmaundemēt do all vsurers, and they that craf telye defraude, deceyue and be∣gile their neighbour, whether it be priuely or apertlye. And they whiche do pyll and poll other men of their goodes, by false lear¦ning processe, weyght, measure, coyne, ware or marchaundise. Also they whiche kepe a way or withold the labour of ther even Christē,Leuit. xix or deny the debte which is due.i. Ioan. ii They wich do se their neyghbour in nede, and wyl not helpe or succoure hym to their power. They that do not defēde the losse of their neyghbour to their power. And in this cōmaun¦dement is comprehēded all strife, debate and variaunce for fylthy lucres sake. Finally, al yt whiche
in any wise may apparteyne to auarice or couetousnes. THe nynth commaundemēt teaheth alwayes & euery whereto be rightuous,Dan. xiii Psal. vi. lxxii. lxxiii. xvi. Hebr. xii. Pro. xxv. iust true, & vpright in wordes with∣ot al doublenes of harte, and soundeth thus. Thou shalt heare no false witnes agaynst thy neyghbour. That is. A boyde all lyes, and speake alwayes the trueth without res¦pt of money, goodes, difes, re∣wardes, mede, drede, fauoure, fndshippe or hatred, alwayes with stedfastnes. Also faring no man, not regading the losse of body or goodes.i. Pet iii. Iudge alwayes rightfully without exceion of parsones.Mar. iii Refrayning thy on∣g frome euell talke, and thy lyppes that they speake no gile
eschewing euell, & doyng good. For of euery ydell morde yt thou hast spoken,Ephe. iiii must thou gyue ac∣count at the day of Iudgement. Let no filthy communicaciō pro¦cede oute of thy mouth, but yt is good to edify with al. Let al bit∣ternes, fearsnes, wrath, roaryng & cursed speakying be put away frome you. Let no fylthines, fo∣lish talkyng nor testing (whiche are not cōlye) be ones named a∣mong you,Ephesi. v. but rather geuying of thankes. Agaynst this cōmaundement do al they which hide, couer,Math. x. clo∣ke or do not declare the truth. Or they which falsely do enterprete or expound Gods moste blessed worde, turning, wrasting, & wry¦thing the same, to their in sacia∣ble gredenes, auarice,Sapi. i. & couetous¦nes, & not to ye honour of god, nor to ye edifying, & learning of their neighbour.
They wych falsely do lye in the law,Eccle. v. before ye iustice or elswhere. They that speake with two ton¦ges. They that boast thē selues in their euel, & other in their wic∣kednes. They that beare fier in the one hand and water in the o∣ther hāde,Eccle. ii. being double of harte, or waueryng with all windes, as traytours are wont to do. THe tenth commaundement teacheth to dyspyse al trā∣sytorye thynges, and not to couet or desyre the thyng whi¦che is thy neyghbours, & soun∣deth thus. Thou shalt not desyre thy neyghbours house, nor his wyfe nor his seruaunt, nor his mayde, nor hys Oxe, nor his Asse, nor a∣ny thyng yt is thy neyghbours. That is. Let your couersacyon bee
without couetousnes.Luke. xii. Hr. xiii. and bee content with that ye haue alrea¦dy, and couet not that thynge which an other doth possesse but hauing foode and rayment (not further regardinge transytorye thynges) eke,Tim. vi. desyre and wysh for the thynges whiche conty∣nue,Collo. iii. and endure for euermore. What soeuer you wolde ye men shulde do to you euē so do to thē.Mat. vii. To loue a mans neyghboure as him selfe is a greater thinge then al burnt offynges & sacrifices.Mark. xii Be not ouercome wt lust, for the care of this worlde,i. Tim. vi & ye deceytful¦nes of ryches, choke the worde. Godlynes is great riches, if a mā be content wt yt he hath. For we brought nothing into ye worlde, & it is a playne case, yt we shal ca¦ry nothing out. When we haue food & raymēt let vs therwith be
content. They that wyl be riche fal into temptacion and snares, and into many noysom lustes, whiche drowne mē in perdicion, and destruction. For couetousnes is the roote of all euell, wich whylesome lu∣sted after, they erred frō ye fayth, and tangled them selues wyth many sorrowes. Agaynst thys commaunde∣ment do al they whiche through an insatiable couetous harte, not onely do steale and robbe by force, violence or otherwyse, but also they which with an inward desier wold do the same in case it were possible to thē, or that they coulde bryng it to passe. For our sauiour Chryst sayth hym selfe in the Gospell,Math. v. that not onely he whiche hath to do with an o∣ther mans wife, is an aduoute∣rer, But also he wych loketh on
an other mās wife (iustinge after her) hath committed aduouterye wyth her already in hys harte. Thus than is this last cōmaun∣demente of couetyng and desy∣ringe the full summe and conclu¦syon of al the other beforenamed commaundementes.Ecele l. God sayth, Deute .vi. These wordes whiche I com∣maunde the thys day, shalbe in thyne harte, & thou shalte whrit them on thy chyldren, and thou shalte talke of thē whē thou arte at home in thy house, & as thou walkest by ye way, & whan thou lyest downe, & whan thou rysest vp, & thou shalt binde them for a signe vppon thyne hande, & they shale papers of remembraunce, betwene thine eies,Deut. xii. & thou shalte wryte them vppon the postes of thy house, and vppon thy gates.
Take hede, and here all these wordes whiche I cōmaunde the that it maye go well with the, and with thy children, after the for euer,Deut. vi. See thou doo yt whiche is right in the sight of thy lorde, that thou mayste prosper, ye shal not do after all the thynges that seme good in thyne owne eyes,  what soeuer I commaunde you,Deu. xx. vii. yt do, and put nought therto nor take ought therfrom. Cursed be he that maynteyneth not all the wordes of this law to do thē. THese beforenamed tenne commaundemētes dyd the Lorde God,i. eg. vii ake. x gyue vnto Moses hys seruaunt (as we ha¦ue before declared) in two tables made of stone.. xii Wherof in the first is comprehended or conteyned, the first, chefest and moost pryn∣cypal commaundemente,Deu. iiii. of the whiche Chryst speaketh, sayng,
Thou shalte loue the lorde thy God wyth all thy harte, wyth all thy soule and whithe all thy mynde. Thys chefe commaun∣demente and summe of the first table, comprehendeth in it, fyue other speciall commaundemen∣tes, in the whiche we may know and learne, what we ought to do, and to leaue, in that whiche concerneth or toucheth God our heauenly father. And in the seconde table is comprysed the secōde commaun demente, lyke vnto the first, that is to saye, Thou shalt loue thy neyghboure as thy selfe. That is. What soeuer thou woldeste that other men shulde do to the,Mat. vii. do euen the same vnto them. This commaundemente com∣prehendeth also in it, fyue other
commaundementes, in the whi∣che we may learn to know what we ought to do, and to leaue, in that that cōcerneth or toucheth our uen Christē or neyghbour. So yt in these two cōmaundemē¦tes are comprehended the whole lawe and prophetes.Rom. xiii And euery man maye lightly perceyue, that therin, although ye woordes are fewe) are very playnlye and per¦fetlye declared, al kinde of good workes and commaundemētes, whiche in any wyse might bee commaunded or geuen to any mā, both, for to leade a vertuous and Godlye lyfe towardes God, and also howe to vse and behaue ourseues with our neyghbour, both to lyue, & to dye. And who soeuer shall do his vttermost di∣  o the obseruacyon, and  the same, he shall not  hour in the whi∣che
he might sai, what good wor¦kes might I do, whiche might be grateful, pleasaunt & acceptable vnto God? Neyther let no man maruayle although he finde not here commaunded that we shuld do any thyng to our own behou¦fe, but that weshulde do it to the behoufe of other, that is, Fyrst to God and after that to our neygh¦bour. So that although (in ma∣ner of speakinge) a man were blinde yet notwitstanding maie he easelye heare, sea & fele that the fulfillyng of the lawe, dooth cōsist in loue & charitie. I meane not loue, and charite towards our selues, but towardes other. Wherby it maye iustly be sayde, He lyueth best, that lyueth to o∣ther. Agayne, he lyueth worst, ye lyueth to hym selfe. And ther∣fore may easely bee spied how fewe there he whiche lyue well &
vertuously.Rom. xiii Psal. xiii liii. Roma. iii To the whiche the prophet Dauid and. S. Paule iustly say, Ther is not one that lyueth as he ought to lyue, no not one, according as the before named tenne commaundemen∣tes doo require. Here myght a man aske. What remedy then? Is ther no man that lyueth as he ought to do? And it is written in the lawe, Cursed bee euerye mā, whi¦che continueth not in al thinges that are written in the booke of the lawe,al. iii. deu. xxvii to do thē. Who thē can be saued? shall we all be dāpned? Heare the sayinge of.Roma. xii and .iii. S. Paule, God (sayth he) hath comprehen∣ded al men vnder sinne and that by & through the lawe which ge¦ueth vs the knowledge of our sin¦nes, to the intent that he shulde haue mercy on all men, And that
through faith in Iesu Christ our redeamer. By,Act. xiii. in and through whome, all that the carnall men were not able in the fulfyllynge of the lawe, is now al fulfylled & wholy finished for vs, through his precious death. Vanquisshin¦ge, helle, sinne, deuell and euerla¦styng death. Concerninge the seconde article be∣fore rehearsed. S. Paule to the Bala∣thians in the thirde chapter sayth. The rightuous lyueth by fayth. Then of necessite a man must beleue if he will be founde righ∣tuous before God.Rom. x. And for as muche as the same faith or belefe must come through the hearinge of that whiche men ought to be∣leue, Gyue eare, learne and vn∣derstande in the instruction folo∣winge, called Simbolon Aposto¦rum, all that a Christian is che∣fely bounde to beleue. Whiche
is deuyded into thre partes, euē lyke by the same is acknowled∣ged thre parsones,i. John. v. Gen. t. in one indiui∣divle God heade or deitie. THe first part of the Chry∣sten fayth or beleue, ma∣keth mencion of the firste parson of the holy triite, God the hea∣uenly father, and soundeth thus I beleue in God the father almighty maker of Heauen and earth.Malac. 2. Ier. xxxii That is. I know,Exo. xd. Hebr. xl. thynke, and beleue in my harte, that my God is in heauen about, and in the earth beneth, and yt there is none other God, and all thynges he thorow hym and in him He is the maker and creatour of all creatoures what soeuer is in heauen,Ephe. i. & on earth. The lorde is my strength, and glorye, and is become to
me a father and a sauiour. Al∣myghtye is hys name. Lorde who is like vnto the amonge the mightye that art so great in thy holynes,Hebr. i. fearfull and laudable, that shewest wonders and reyg∣nest for euer, and aboue: Lorde God full of compassion and mer∣cye,Exo. xxx. iiii. whiche art not lightly an¦gry, but haboundaunt in mercy and truth, and kepest mercye in store for thousandes,Ephesi. i. and forge∣uest wickednes, trespasse & sinne He hath electe or chosen vs too beehys chyldren through Iesus Chryst. And therfore we shal him onely worshippe, and besydes hym none other God Also we shal feare hym as an almyghtye God,Deut. vi. Psal. ii. xxxiiii. Mat. xii. And as a mercyfull fa∣ther shall we loue him, wyth all our hart with al our soule with al our power and myndes. And
vppon hym must stande all ou hope.Iere. vii. Iacob. i. For he is the father of light of the which al mankind lyueth. Where is there suche a God as thou art (o lorde) that pardo∣nest wickednes and forgeuest of fences, and castest al our synnes into the bottome of the sea? Thus good lorde. I do vtterly renounce & for∣sake the fende of hel, all I dolatry interiour, and exteriour all wit∣checraft, mishelefe & al false doc∣trine which is not Gods worde. I vtterlye departe, fall and flee from all creatures, whiche are in heauē aboue, or in earth beneth, yea, and my selfe also as of my selfe. And do cleaue vnto the one¦ly inuisible and almighty which is without beginnyng, & myth out endyng, whiche hath made all that is made, & whiche ruleth
all after his godly wyl and pro∣uidence. THe secōd parte of the beleue is,Math. i. Esay. vii. of the second parson of the holye trinitie, God the sonne, GOD & mā Iesus Christ our sauiour, and soundeth thus. I beleue in Iesu Christ the onely sonne of God the father, our lorde which was conceyued by the holyghost, borue of the virgin mary. That is. I beleue & knowledge wyth my harte, and confesse wyth my mouth, that the same Iesu christ whiche the Iewes put to death, the very worde, and sede whiche was promised to our forefathers Abrahā, Isaac & Iacob is ye very sonne of the liuing God, God & man, without whome,Iohn. 14. no man commeth to God the father, ney∣ther can bee saued by any thing
that harte can thinke, or mouth can speake, saue onely in and through the same Iēsus Christ, lorde and sauiour of all christian men. The wich to my behoufe, & necessite, was conceyued of the holyghost, aboue al mens vnder∣standyng, and that without the worke of man, and without all fleshly power, to the intent that he of his owne mere mercy (for it so pleased him) shuld clēse, purify and make spirituall both my con¦cepcion & the cōcepcion of al mē, with concepcion is happened in synne. I beleue that he is borne to myne vse & behoufe of ye pure & vndefiled virgin mary, a sonne of God beyng God from the begin∣ning a sōne of mā, now becō mā, to the intēt that he shul make vs the chyldrē of God. Of a virgin, to the intent ye he shuld purify & clēse vs of our spots and synnes.
Suffred vnder ponce pylate was cruci¦fied, deade buried.Luk. xxiiii Mat. 28. Descended into hel. That is. I beleue that he suffred the moost shameful death & tormētes of the crosse, & that for my trans∣gression, iniquite and sinnes, de∣stroying therby all the tormētes of euerlastynge dāpnacion whi∣che I haue deserued. He suffred death,Ezay. liii Apoca. v. Ephe. iiii. Roma. i. Act. v. ii. cor. xxv Hcbr. x. Psal. eiii. ii. cor. xv. wherby he vanquished and ouercame euerlasting death and damnacion, to the intent yt we, through hys death shulde ob¦teyne immortalyte. He was bu∣ried, and descended into hell, to the intent that we (through ba∣ptisme) shuld be buried with him in death, & now walke in a new spirituall lyfe. The thirde daye he rose agayne frō death. He ascēded into heauen. He sitteth at ye right hāde of god ye father almightie
That is. I beleue that he vppon the thirde daye (as a vanquisher of hel, deuel and death) rose agayne for our rigtuousnes geuyng vs an example by the same bys re∣surrectiō, that we also shall ryse frō death at the day of dome. He ascēded into heauen, leading a∣way captiuite captiue,Ephe. iiii to the in∣tēte yt he shuld be a true aduocate & a faythful medial our, betwene God his heauenly father and vs wretched sinners. He sitteth at the right hande of GOD equall wyth hys father,Philip ii. rulyng and ha¦uyng power ouer all thynges, both in heauē & earth. In whose name all knees must bow both in heauen. hell and earth. From thens he shall come to Iudge the quicke and the deade▪
That is. I beleue that the selfe same Iesus Chryst at the day of dome or iudgement (which day is onli knowen to him) lyke as he ascen¦ded into heauē, shall come again to iudge the quicke and the dead The quicke, that are all fayth∣full Christians, & the dead, that are al wicked, vnfaythful & dāp∣ned people. And shall say to the faythful,Mat. 25. and .xx. c. Psal. vi. b mat. vi. b luk. xi. i. c ezay. xx. f Mat. xvi i. Cor. v. Come hether ye blessed of my father, inheret the kyng¦dome whiche is prepared for you from the beginning of the world but (alas) to the dampned shal he saye. Departe frome ye cursed, into the euerlastynge fyre, whi∣che is prepared for the Deuell & hys aungels. The thirde parte of the belefe or fayth, is of God the holyghost the thirde parson of ye blessed tri∣nitie,
sanctifyinge all thynges and soundeth thus. I beleue in the holyghost, The holy catholyke churche. The communion of saynetes. The forgeuenes of synnes. That is. I beleue that no man can at tayne or come vnto God the fa∣ther, than onelye by the woorke and meane of the holighost, who with God the father, through Ie¦su Christ, is woorkinge & geuing lyfe to all thynge, without who me nothyng is lyuyng nor holy Furthermore I beleue that here vppon the earth is a Christiā ca∣tholyke church or congregacion of the faithful, which is nothing els then a communion of the con¦gregacion or assemblinge toge∣ther of faythful christians spiri∣tually in one GOD, in one faith & in one baptisme. Of the which
congregacyō or assemblie Chryst is the head wych congregacyon also is gouerned and daylye en∣creased through the holy ghoste, through or by the administraciō of the holye sacramētes & miste∣ries destributed & geuen to euery one by the handes of the priestes administratours and preachers of Gods worde. Furthermore, I also beleue that no man can bee saued onles he become a felow∣mēbre of this congregaciō, and ye nether Iew, Turke nor heretike cā or may be saued, onles he first be recōsiled & made at one, in & wt the same holy assēbly or cōgrega¦ciō.Mat. vi. In the which, & no where els, is for geuenes of synnes, for she hath receyued ye power of God to binde & to lose This is ye onelye spouse of our lord iesuschrist, whi¦che is not adorned wt glyttering shining costly, or trāsitory thyn∣ges
of this world, nether hauing dominion nor bearing rule in ry¦chesses, kyndoms, gold, or pre∣cious stones, but is abiect, dispi∣sed, persecuted, oppressed, & trou∣bled, yea, in a maner wholy coue¦red, hid and disfigured wt bloude through martirdom of the repro¦bate and vnfaitful, whose surest sygne or token to knowe herby is the declaring & professing of ye gospell, both in word and dede. The resurrection of the body and the lyfe euerlastynge.ezech. xxx Iohn. v. That is. I beleue also that there shalbe a generall resurrection or rising agayne of all men, whiche euer haue bene or euer shall be. So yt this corruptibile and transitory flesh & body, after that it shalbe dead, rotten & turned into earth, shalbe restored vnto lyfe, whiche
lyfe both of the soule and body, I beleue stedfastly, shall neuer ende. To the blessed in euerlasting ioye.Ephe. ii. And to the dampned in e∣uerlastyng sorrow. He that sin∣serely confesseth this (sayth. S. Ignacius) and beleueth it, he is happye. Concernyng the third parte and ar¦ticle before rehearsed,Luk. xxii. ma. xvi. b Luk. xi. b. Chryst in the gos∣pell techeth vs saying Pray, that ye fall not into temptacion. Hauyng respect vnto the worde of him whiche can not lie let vs praye to GOD with the father of the possed yongman, saying, Lorde strengten & en∣crease our fayth, for without the we can do nothyng, so wret¦ched, so corrupt and so frayle is our nature, yea (through her owne loue so blynded, that
that of her owne selfe, she cā not wyll nor obeye the commaunde¦ment of God, so farre is our min∣de and inclynacion ronne astray frome the pristine or former in∣nocency, in the transgressinge of the commaundementes of God, by our first father Adā. So that in case we shulde be compelled to striue agaynst our ennemies the deuell, the worlde and our owne flesh (which standeth vs in hand to do so long as we are cladde wt thys mortall body) wyth our owne strength, without the assis¦tence and helpe of God, we shuld by and by euē at the first assault, and sounde of the trumpet, caste bothe our weapon and shylde frome vs, and wholye despay¦ringe, leaue our courage, fal and yelde,Mat. ix. and suffer oure selues to be ouercome in such wyse yt they shulde easelye beare rule & haue
dominion ouer vs. But the gra∣ce of God workyng in vs a per∣fect fayth and hope with the de∣des of charite is able ynough to worke al thing in vs, wich other wise we shuld not be able to ful∣fyl. Now to ye intent we lose not this fayth or belefe, and that the same decrease or diminish not in vs, but rather may encrease, aug¦ment and waxe fruteful, there is nothynge better,Luk. xi. more profyta∣ble or necessary, then to pray to God without ceasyng. For our lorde Iesus Chryst sayth hym¦selfe, Seke & ye shal finde, knock and it shalbe opened vnto you, pray, & it shalbe geuen vnto you But he that wyll pray to God,Marc. ix. wt an ernest harte, must bee thus disposed. First a mā must knowe hys owne infirmitie, and wea∣kenes, and confesse to haue nede of helpe. For (as we reade) the
sycke hath onelye neade of the Phisician, and hym wyll he glad∣ly helpe, lyke as the blessed vir∣gin mary her selfe witnesseth in her songe,Luke. li. saying he hath fylled the hungry wyth all goodnes, & hath sent the ryche awaye em∣pty and voyde. What auayleth it that thou prayest, when thou doest not know, & fele that thou hast nede? Is it not to scorne, & mocke wyth God? Ipocrisy and fayned prayer? Thou wilt aske, how and in what maner shal we pray to God for to obteyne those thynges whiche are necessarye for vs? Heare therfore, least per∣chaunce thou praye for those thynges whiche are not lawful and mete, in the steade of thē whi¦che are moost necessarye, & pro∣fytable for the. For therby it oft chaunceth that God dooth not heare vs as. S. Iames sayth be
we aske a misse. And as Paule sayth to the Romaynes, we ourselues know not what is moost necessary for vs to aske.Iacob. iiii And therfore the most highest doc¦tour & master Iesus Christ (who best knoweth what is proffyta∣ble & necessarye for our health & saluacyon) hath described and taught vs a moost sure rule how we shulde & ought to praye, set∣tynge GOD his heauenlye Fa∣ther as a sure Marke before our eyes, to whome we shuld lyft vp our hartes, & inwardde though∣tes, to hym (I saye) aboue in the highest, we that labour & are ladē wyth synne, here in this vale of feares. And he sayth, when thou wylt pray, thou shalt pray thus Our father whiche art in heauen,psal. cxiii hallowed be thy name. Now is to bee noted, as be∣fore
sufficientlye is declared, that it is impossible to make an earnest, harty and perfect pray∣er, except a man, first and before all thynges, confesse his owne faute and disease. And therfore I haue set a brief lamentacion and confession before euery peti¦cion of the lordes prayer, to the intent that the sinfull consciēce might therby be stirred & kindled to make the more feruent, & ear∣nest prayer vnto God, desyring hys helpe. And after that, the cō∣tent, and declaracyon of the same ryght goodly expounded and opened to the honour of God, and vtilyte and edifyca∣cyon of all men. First vppon that poynte. Our fa¦ther whiche art in heauen. Confession. O merciful euerlasting god,
moost louynge father, of whome all fatherlye mercy fauour, and goodnes commeth, & procedeth, both in heauen, & erth. I poore miserable and wretched creatur, knowledge, & confesse before thy fatherly mercy, that I, lyke the ryottous sonne, haue despised & not regarded all the same thy fa¦therlye loue and trust, & haue & shewed my selfe dysobediēte to∣wardes the, and haue not geuē eare to thy moost blessed worde, and louyng exhortacyons, but haue folowed the voyce of stra∣ungers, and haue cleaued more to the doctrine of men, then to thy commaundementes. O bountuous louyng God, father of vs all, who manifoldly shewest thy benefyttes, & doest distribute and gyue thy gyftes as wel to ye wicked, as to ye good yea, somtyme more corporally
to the wicked then to the good. I knowledge and cōfesse before the, that I haue not loued other men as my brethern; nor reuerē∣ced them, as thy chyldren but in pride haue exalted my selfe a∣boue my brother, despising, ha¦ting and enuying hym, as ye vn∣faythful seruaunt did his fellow brethern in the Gospel. And fur¦thermore I confesse (mooste mke & louynge father (yt I haue fyrst sought helpe and counsel by the creatures here beneth vppō erth and not by the who art aboue in the heauens euerlastyng and al∣mighty,Mat. 24 and onely canst & wilte helpe, as a good father of vs all, I haue most of all set my though¦tes yea (alas ye whyle) my whole harte, mynde, trust and all my de¦sire vppon erthely temporal and transitory thynges, and haue not lyfted the same vp vnto the
whiche art in heauen, lyke as I ought to haue done, for the whi¦che I crye the mercy. Prayer and confession. O louyng father, thou hast of thyne entier goodnes created vs vppon earth, and for nothing hast thou deliuered vs from euer lastyng death, whiche we were gilty and had deserued. O good father we are not worthy to bee thy chyldren, for we haue syn∣ned agaynst thy rightuousnes.Psal. xv. Neuertheles by the commaun∣dement of thyne onelye sonne, we do boldly say, our father. O thou faythfull father, what shall we gyue the agayne, or where∣with shal we recompence the for thi greate loue & goodnes which thou, through thi mercy & syngu¦ler goodnes, hast geuē vs power to be thi childrē & to becō heyres
of thy kyngdome wyth thy dere sonne Iesus Christ? Thou art truely our faythfull, and trusty father, for thou bearest vs lyke a moost gele and kinde father hys chylde in his armes, & thou ledest vs wyth thy rightaude, that we (although we sometime through weakenes do stumble) are not al together broused,Psal. xv. and destroyed of our enemies,zacha. ii. Thou doest pre∣serue and kepe vs lyke the apple of thyne eyes, and he that tou∣cheth vs (o father) toucheth the. O mylde & lyberall father, howe richely hast thou endued thy chil¦dren,Psal. xxi. wyth ye wholesome meate of thy Godly worde, for nowe do the poore sit downe, they eate and are fylled, & prayse the lorde wyth all them whiche after the mocion of the holyghoost, seke the wyth all their harte. Thou hast geuen that lyuynge water,
where wyth we maye quentche and expeliche drye thurst wyth∣out ceasynge. O father howe lo∣uingly and kyndelye doest thou cal vs, through the mouth of the prophet Ezay, sayinge,Eay. lv. All they that are thurstie, come to the wa¦ters, and ye that haue no money make hast, come but that ye may haue to eate. Come buy wyne, & mylke wythout money or mo∣ney worth. Wherfore do ye laye ot your money for the thyng yt fedeth not, and spende your la∣bour for the thing that satisfieth you not? But harken rather vn∣to me, and ye shal eate of the best, and your soule shall haue her pleasure in plentuousnes. En∣clyne your eares,Act. xiii. d i. Re. v ezch. xxx iii. and come vnto me take hede, & your soule shall lyue. For I wyl make an euerla∣sting couenaunt wt you, euē the sure mercies promised to Dauid.
Therfore moost kinde father,l. Reg. iiii we confesse, and reuerence the lyke chyldren do their father here vp∣pon the harth. Thou dwellest in the heauens wyth thy Aungel∣les, who are not troubled wyth the fleshe but (alas) we dwell vp∣pon this earth, in this miserie in all trouble, aduersite and tēpta∣cion We ought also to bee hea∣uenly separed from al worldely and earthly spottes or wrincles & a pure holy temple of thy holy Maieste.Apo. xxi. Lyke yu hast promysed. They shalbe my people, & I wil∣be their God, & I wil dwel wyth them to the ende of the worlde. O moost wyse father, thou knowest our weakenes and infir¦myte, how that in this heauye burthen of the flesh, no man is pure, no man is vngilty (by or through his owne strength) be∣fore thy face.esay. lxiiii All our rightuous∣nesses
are as the clotes stayned wyth the floure of a woman, we fal euerychone as ye leafe, for our synnes cary vs away lyke the wynde.Treo.  To bryng furth any thing of our selues, wherby we might become rightuous, we are not able. All our fathers (whiche nowe are gone) haue synned & are fallen from the, & are become vnproffitable, neither was there one yt dyd good, But thou lorde hast made vs rightuous, & clēsed vs, so that we are heauēly, and a kyngdome wherin thou sittest. And vnder thy fete, haste thou ye earth to a fotestole, so that we do altogether lye vnder thy myght and power, wyth fleshe & bloude not seking oure owne lust & desi¦re, but thy wyll, not the thinges yt are here in this worlde, but in heauen,eccle. xliii where thy sonne Iesus Chryst sitteth on the righthāde.
The heauēs & firmamēt in their continuall course are obedient vnto the, and serueth vs also con¦tinually, geuing vs light & clea∣renes into the worlde to the ease of al men, as wel the wicked as ye good, by the whiche thy great pi¦tie, mercy and goodnes is expres¦sed & declared vnto al the worlde Moost gētle father, graunt that we may so diligently serue thy maiestie, and all menne for thy take, both wicked and good righ¦tuous & vnrightuous.psal. xviii And bold∣lye declare, & pronounce with∣out ceasynge, (lyke as the hea∣uēs do) thy Godly honour before all men, so that therby thy migh¦tie name may be praysed & mag∣nified for euermore.Lactanti. For we are created and made, through thy goodnes, to thy honour to know ledge, confesse and serue the. Hallowed be thy name.
For all eates. Confession. O heauenly father lorde God, whose name is hallowed aboue all other names euerlastingly, & also called on ouer me in baptis∣me. I confesse before the, that I (alas ye whyle) haue not magni∣fied & worshipped the same name as I ought to do. But haue arro¦gantly and presumptuously at∣tributed al honour vnto my selfe and haue exalted and boasted mi selfe in my workes and dedes, & other thy giftes. Furthermore I haue also made thy name a cloke to myne Idolatry, tyranny, wi∣lines, knauery, also through ypo¦crisy swearyng cursing murmu¦ring and vayne talking, greatly abusing and dishonouring the same, wherfore I crye the mercy Prayer and confession.
Thy name ( father) bee hal∣lowed & magnified for eumore, for vnto the apparteineth al sau de & euerlasting praise, but vnto vs, all shame and confusion, for all that we are, that are we by and through thy mercye, and all what we receyue, we receyue at thy mylde and lyberall handes. So that no mā nedeth to boaste as though he had it of hym selfe. But thou openest thy hand and fyllest al creatures with thy bles¦synges. O moost gentle father, let vs fall frō our selues, wholy abiecting and despayring of our owne flesh, strength, so that we neyther trust to our selues nor yet to our good workes,psal. cxxii but ye we maye fix or sette our eyes vp∣pon the, lyke the seruaunt fixeth or setteth his eyes vppō hys ma∣ster tyll tyme ye thou haue mercy on vs. For if it were not for thy
mercy, were as Sodoma & Go∣mora. There, thy name bee fauctified & blessed from the ry∣syng of the sōne vnto the going downe of the same.Roma. ix. Graunt (o fa¦ther) ye oure soule without cea∣syng and all our strength with∣out lothsomnes or tediousnes, maye laude & prayse the in woor de & dede. And although we dyd al those thinges whiche thou cō∣maundest vs shape in vs suche a harte y• we yet may say that we are vnprofitable seruauntes.Luk. xvii. For if we haue any thyng that good is, it commeth from thy gra¦ce. O father, take frō vs all pride and the loue of our selues to the intent that we esteme our selues no more thē we ought to do, & yt we exalte not our selues aboue other, But that we (thynkyng, & knowyng ye thou hast geuen vs power & strength accordinge to
thy good wil and pleasure) with all humilitie and lowlynes, may walke after thy. Godly coua∣unt and wyll. That we may say with that princely prophet Da∣uid.Psalm. c. xiii. Not vnto vs (o lord) not vn∣to vs, but vnto thy name gyue ye prayse, for thou art onely lorde both of heauen and earth. Thy kyngdome come. Confession.Psalm. lxvi. O lorde God, I complayne, lament and be wayle my miserie vnto ye, that I haue bene captiue (h wretch that I am) in that straunge lande of babilon, in the lande of death, geuyng my mem¦bres to the seruitude of sinne, to striue agaynst thy holy kyng∣dome And although I haue for∣saken ye deuel & all his workes in baptisme, yet al ye notwithstan∣ding, I am become (wo vnto me)
vnfaythful, forsworne and haue fled from the, and ronne to thyne ennemie, Haue mercy on me. Prayer and confession. Come (o lorde) and make thy dwellyng wyth vs, and let vs be attone wyth ye, so that we maye remayne or contine win the, and thou in vs. Long father, make our tree (whiche is barren and nought) moyst, to the intēt that with feruēt loue, it maye, bringe furth ripe pleasaunt and sauery frute. O moost kyude father, gra¦unt that we duely, & iustly may sanctifre and make holy thy, sab¦both day, whiche thou wyth all diligence hast commaunded vs. Suffer all fleshly lustes and wic∣ked desires to cease in vs. And lyke as euery creature, both in heauen and earth, doth obey the, and suffer them selues
to be ruled & gouerned of ye. But so (mot gētle father( drawe and plucke out of our hartes all such thynges as seameth good in our sight, to ye intēt that thou mayest rule vs, not after our but after thyne owne wyl. For we knowe that the wayes of man are not his, and that it lyeth not in man to stirre or leade his wayes whe∣ther he lysteth.Pro. xvi. Thus good lorde) graunt that we paciently & whi¦the a quiet harte, may suffer thy hand whē it toucheth vs, & suffer vs gladly & cherefully to beare all such thinges as it shal please the to laye vppon vs, whether it be good fortune or euell, aduersi¦te, sickenes, shame, stripes, yea, & death also. And sufer our owne nature so to rest, to bee quiet and cease, that she couet, seke and de∣syre not (through superfluitie, and desyre of vengaunce) to
breake or trāgresse the holy sab∣both daye. Thy wyll bee done in earth it is in heauen.Iohn. xii. Luk. xxii. Prayer and coufession. O my lorde God, to the I ma∣ke my mone & complaynt that I haue followed myne owne will, to thy dishonour & to my shame, & haue resisted thy moost Godly wyll, for the whiche I am very sorye. Prayer and confession. Therfore (o moost best father) be not myne but thy wyll fulfil∣led. Thy wyll is done and fulfil∣led in heauen amongest the Aun¦gels, whyche wythout all diffi∣culte do accordynge to thy wyll, & trēble & quake at thy becking. The Sunne and Mone kepe their course, and neuer trans∣gresse
the same. Euen so ought it to be wt vs also, but we wre∣ched synners are to fraile, and in our nature we fynde nothyng that is after thy Godly wyl, but agaynst the and thy moost holy Lawes, thus doth our poysened olde Adam kycke and stryue, ac∣cording to his olde kynde I gra∣unte in dede, that in the in warde man we do fynde a delyte & plea¦sure in thy lawe, but in our fleshly menbres is an other lawe that is, the lawe of the hart. And therfore that we wolde, we do not, but that thynge that we wolde not,Rom. vii. we do. Therfore (O moost louing and gentle Father) gyue vs thy Lawe in wardelye in vs, and write the same in our hartes to the intēt that we may feare and loue the, and walke in thy commaundementes. Gyue vs a newe harte, sēdyng thy spi∣rite
in wardly in vs, that he may kindle vs so myth thy loue, that we maye loue ye with al our hart wyth all our strength, aboue all thynges, and that we maye loue our neyghbour for thy sake in thankefulnes, for the vnspeaka∣ble riches whiche thou hast ha∣boundauntlye poured vppō vs, euen as our selues. For he that hath loue, fulfylleth the lawe, & he that loueth not resteth or stic∣keth in the death. We ought of dutie to be people accordyng to thy harte, doing all thynges ac∣cordyng to thy wyll,Rom. xiii but where is ther one such among vs? And who can giue vs a harte to feare the, and to kepe thy commaunde¦mentes at all tymes, so that it maye happen or chaunce well vnto vs & our chyldren? O lorde thou onelye arte he. Thus (good lorde) clense our hartes, and the
hartes of our sede, that we with all our strength, and wyth al our soule, may loue the and lyue. Make vs whole, thē are we who¦le, Make vs blessed, then are we blessed: For thou art our laude & prayse. Oh, howe oft is our wyll contrarye vnto thy wyll, and a∣gaynst thy lawes? she had manie tymes rather or lyuer that there were no Lawe,Psalm. L. nor no God, nor no trueth. Oh, howe is oure harte and vnderstandyng darke∣ned, so and in such wise that we can not se our selues? therfore) o lorde) haue mercy on vs accor∣ding to thy great mercy, & shape or create in vs a newe harte, and poure thy perfect spirite in vs, so that no more we, but rather thou lyue ī vs, & worke al our workes accordinge vnto thy Godly wil, to the intēt that thy wil be done in earth as it is in heauen, in the
so that the  & rage agaynst thy  eyther let it be sub∣iecte  the euell lustes, but let it be one spirite with thy spirite, And let it haue a pleasure & dis∣pleasure, in that thyng yt thou arte pleased and displeased with Gyue vs this day our dayly breade.Luk. ix. Deut. viii Confession. I can not deny but must ne¦des knowledge and confesse, that I (alas the while, good father) abhorringe the liuinge breade of my soule, haue fylled and fed my soule, wyth the draffe and chaffe of straunge & worldlye doctrine, lyke a swine, wherwith I am be∣come feble, impotent and withe∣red, for the whiche I am sorye, & with al my harte cry the mercy. Prayer and confession.
Thus louing father and ¦uer of al consolacion▪ ou that fedest al flesh. Gyue  bread,psa. cxxxv I meane that , b yt whiche the soule of man is made alyue gyue vs that same at all tymes, to the intēt that we wan¦ting the same, perish not for hun¦ger. Gyue vs faythful and lear∣ned Preachers, that may iustly & duely fede our soules, setting & bearing before vs thine onely sonne Iesus Christ, leauing all fables,Treno. ii. dreames, vayne and false doctrine, to the intente that we thy shepe, bee not slayne vppon thy holy mount in thy holye ta∣bernacle. O louing father, open our eares of vnderstandinge, to the intent that we may vnder∣stand, conceyue, trust & stedfastly beleue ī thi holy worde, & ther by borne a new in a better lyfe thē we haue ledde hitherto, maye wt
Iesus Chrysts thy hildren, be receyued of the ī thy Godly loue and fauour. Lorde of thy clemēci¦mekenes and mercy gyue vs vn¦derstandyng that we may proue the spirites whether they bee of the or of some other,i. Ioan. 4 for the wic∣ked and malignaunt spirite can sōtime alter & chaunge hym selfe into an Aungel of lyght.ii. Cor. xi. O lord drawe vs through thy mercy vn¦to thy sonne Iesus Christ, that we may iustly and perfectly re∣ceaue hym in our hartes,Iohn. vi. for he is the lyuing breade, whiche des∣cended from heauen. Gyue vs also (most gentle father) oure bo∣delye foade, after thy Godly wil Rayne, Sunshine and mete we∣ther for the frutes of thy feldes indue ceason, to thintent that we takyng sufficiently of the same, may laude, prayse and ma∣gnify the. O mooste worthy
father, let vs not bee sorrowfull and carefull for those thynges that we shulde eate and drinke, or where with we shuld be cladde Let vs cast al our care vppon the for thou carest for vs, & thou kno¦west before we aske of the, what is necessary for vs,Mat. vi. yea, many ty¦mes thou geuest it vnto vs be∣fore we aske it. Giue vs not to great abundaunce of ryches, least we be thereby occasioned to exalt our selues against the, and agaynst our neighbours, or that we forget not thy great good∣nes and mercy, neyther gyue vs so great pouertie & nede ye we be cōstrayned to begge breade, or to steale, or prouoked too sweare, & blaspheme, thy holy name through vnpacient suffering. But gyue vs our daylie sustena∣unce, neuertheles accordinge to thy Godly wil. We of duety most
diligently labour & worke, but vnto ye, as he that geueth the en∣crease, we shall cast all our care, we are al in thy hande, & there is none that can resiste thy Godly will Thou (good father) geuest vnto vs,Iob. ix. and hast power to take agayn from vs, yf thou geuest, then doest thou accordyng vnto thy mercye, yf thou takest, then doest thou accordyng vnto thy rightuousnes. Forgyue vs our trespasses as we frogyue them that trespasse agaynst vs.Eccle. 28 Math. 18 Marc. xi. Confession. O heauenly father, I haue bene hardnecked, stifnecked and stubborne against those whiche haue offended me, & haue not wil¦linglye remitted or forgeuen thē their trespasses, but I haue much more accounted and estemed the
offence whiche they haue done agaynst me, then that whiche I haue done agaynst thy Godly maiestie. I haue set the synne of my neyghbour before, & mine be¦hinde,Luke. vi. & haue muche soner spied a mote in my brothers eye, then a blocke in myne owne eye. By reason wherof, I haue not har∣teli or duely (as I ought to haue done) desired that thou woldest forgyue me my synnes, the whi∣che (alas wretch that I am) are ineffabile and innumerable. Wherfore I cry the mercy. Prayer and confession. Meke and gentle father, we are exceding greatly ī thy debte & haue not, nor know not wher∣with to pay the. We know no∣thyng better, then yt we fall pro∣strate before thy fete, and cast vp our eyes towardes the, and cry
the  mercifull and  his ful of thy mercy  that no man is holy nor saued by hys owne workes only,Psal. xxii except thou haue mercy on hym & forgeue him his synnes. Happy are they whose synnes are forgeuen & couered. Happy is that man whose syn∣nes are not imputed or rekened vnto hym.psal. xxxi O mercifull father if we go not about to make our sel¦ues vngilte, fautles or inculpa∣ble, thē shalt thou forgiue vs all oure synnes. And if we through or by confessiō, do knowledge or discouer our sinnes, then shalt thou thy selfe couer them, & cloke or hide our shame. In our spirite (o heauenly father) is a great de¦ceyt, the whiche withoute the brightnes of thy Godlye light, we can neyther see nor knowe. We loue our selues, we seke yt
is ours, we feare adr , we loue not yt, we see not  is thyne yea not so muche as  corporall or bodelye thynges. Therfore we do se our dampna∣cion wherin we are, and there is none that can redeme or dely¦uer vs, excepte we cal & cry vnto the out of the depth. O father forgyue vs our tres¦passes, through thy greate merci lyke as a louinge father forge∣ueth his childe for thou hast pro∣mised it vnto vs sayinge,Ezech. 18. yf ye vn¦godly will turne away from all his sinnes that he hath done and kepe all my commaundementes & do the thing yt is equal & righte doubtles he shal liue & not die for I haue no pleasure in ye death of a sinner (saith the Lorde) but ra∣ther yt he cōuerte & lyue.ii. Pet. iiiIere. iii. Agayne thou hast committed fornicaciō with many louers, yet turne a∣gayn
to me & I wil receaue the. O moost kinde father, thinke vppon thy promises, haue mer∣cye on vs, & forgiue vs oure tres¦passes, as we forgiue thē yt haue trespassed agaynst vs. O moost louing father, we confesse & gra¦unt yt it lyeth not in our power to forgyue our ennemies,Luk. vi. yea, & to loue thē as yu cōmaundest, so is our nature poysoned & infected yt it is impossible for vs to do it. The loue of our selues, which is yt roote of all Synne, seketh al∣wayes yt whiche is hers & not yt which is thyne, or yt which is to thy honour, or yt which is proffi∣table to our neyghbour. Thus (good father) plant in vs ye true brotherly loue, ye we (as yu hast done & taught vs) may wt all our harte loue thē, forgiue thē & pray for thē. Verely I do know (most louig father) yt if we forgiue not
oure neyghbour thou shalt ne∣uer forgiue vs our synnes. Furthermore I knowe that no sacrifice or prayer is accepta¦ble or pleasaunt vnto the, as lon¦ge as we reconsyle not our sel∣ues with our brother. Therfore geue vs grace that we may for∣giue our devtoures, then shalt thou also forgeue vs our offēces, for thou art kynd and full of mer¦cy And thou art come downe from heauen here vpō this earth for synners that repent and a∣mend their lyfe. And let vs not bee led into tempta∣tion.Psal. xii. zacha. 14. i. Pet v. But delyuer vs from euyll. Amen. Confession. O my lord God my heauēly father, I haue oft & many times (alas the while) geuyng place vnto temptacion. Lyke an vn∣faythfull
depute or liuetenaunt who (through slouthfulnes and neglygence, towardes his lorde) yeldeth and geueth ouer hys ca∣stel or bulwarke vnto the enne∣mies, Neyther haue I beue only satisfied wt this miserable wret∣chednes or fragilitie and synne, but haue had pleasure and delite therein, in such maner that I ha¦ue willingly stirred, moued and geuen my selfe ouer and defiled my selfe lyke aswine in the mud∣dy and filthy puddle and myre. And haue not endeuoured my selfe to that whiche is euerla∣sting, and good. Forgeue (o fa∣ther) & helpe the feble and weake, Prayer and confession. O moost bounteous father, thou whiche art a kynde and lo∣uyng helper of all thē that feare the, and call on the in nede,
trouble and persecutiō. Beholde & consider that our life is a strife and continual warrefare here in this world. Our ennemies cease not, the deuell goeth about lyke a roaringe lyon sekinge whome he may deuoure. The glorious & flatteting worlde in lyke case, laugheth vpon vs on euery side. And our owne flesh, and ghostly or inward enemie ceaseth neuer to spurre and striue agaynst the spirite and that so vehemently, that of very necessite we are cō∣pelled to cal vppon the for helpe ayde and comforte, as to a fayth full father, who wil not suffer vs to bee tempted aboue our power but shal faythfull ye helpe vs at oure right side,i. Cor. iiii. to the intente we shulde not be ouercome of our en¦nemies. O comforter and father of al consolacion comfort vs in all our aduersitie, for thou art a
father of all consolacion & thou shalt strength s and make vs alyu eue in the middest of per∣secucion. O lorde we desier not 06 to bee deliuered frō the crosse nor yet that thou take vs from the worlde before yt our houre come whiche thou hast appoynted. But deliuer and make vs fre frō euell and suffer vs not to perishe betwene our ennemies, For if thou diddest not helpe vs, our soule shulde immediatlye dwell in hell, and that fearfull Image of death shuld without ceasyng torment trouble and vexe vs in euerlastyng darkenes in the sna¦tes of hell. O thou speciall helper of all weake and troubled crea∣tures, if thou (accordinge vnto thy Iudgement) suffer vs to fal (for there is no man which hath not synned) yet lyft vs vp a∣gayne. And like as a mother lyst
teth vp her childe that is fallen, euen delyuer vs from all th thynges whiche might or  be hinderfull vnto vs. O mo true father, thou kepest thy coue∣naunt and promis at all tymes and euermore, We trust in ye that lyke as thou ones haste deliuered vs from all euell, through thy Sonne Iesus Christ, thou shalt preserue & saue vs through the effusion and sheddinge of his ho¦ly and precious bloude, with the whiche he hath sprinkled and clensed vs of all our synne vp∣pon the crossr. Conclusion of the lordes prayer or pater noster. This prayer we send vnto ye o almightie, euerlasting God, heauenly Father, stedfastlye tru¦stinge in thy bottomles mercy, and holy promises. For thyne o∣nely
sonne our  Iesus Christ,  aun∣ded  ge, Aske,Luke. xi. & it shalbe e vnto you, knocke, and it shalbe opened vnto you. And what soeuer thou askest be∣leue, and it shal happen vnto the What soeuer thou askest my fa∣ther in my name (sayth Christ) he shall gyue it the. Therfore (o holy father) we come vnto the,Iohn. 14. in the name of thyne onely sonne, not douting but that thou wilt heare vs, But, o lorde, gyue vs our peticion and request, not ac∣cording as it shall seine good in our sight, or accordyng to our wyll, But whē thou shalt thinke it time, and as thou wylt, and by such meanes & wayes as shalbe most agreable to thy Godly wil. A brefe instruction of Baptysme.
THere are the whiche be recorde in heauen,Iohn. v. the ∣ther, the We & th  ghoost, & these thre are due  Our lord Iesus Christ sayde vn¦to his disciples,Mat. xvi Go ye your way into all the worlde, and preach ye Gospell vnto al creatures. Who so beleueth and is baptised, shalbe saued, but who so bele∣ueth not, shalbe dampned. When we then are baptised, we recey∣ue a sure witnes, that al we whi¦che beleue in Chryste, are was∣shed and clensed in the precious bloude of that lābe, Iesus Christ our sauiour whiche was put to death. And the dipping in ye wa∣ter signifieth vnto vs, that we are mortified of synne, of oure owne wyll and of all fleshlye de¦sier, and after this maner are we buried with Chryste in ye fonte. And that we are lifted again out
of the foe  that , yt is  yne which might drge vs to death, in a newe spirituall lyfe. And also yt after this tēporall death, we shal ryse agayne into euerlastinge lyfe. And vppon this we receaue our name, & thus are our names written in the rolle of the chri∣stian knightes of Chryst, vnder the standarde of the holy crosse, as long as we lyue. Prayer. O moost blessed foregoer and guyde of the Christen people Ie¦sus Chryst who, submitting and humblyng thy self vouchsauedst to bee baptised of Iohn in the Iordane, & werest not only bap∣tised in water, but also in bloud and in the holyghoost, vouchsafe euen so to enclyne, bowe and
dispose our outward lyfe, wyth our inwarde my  ctes and desyres in the  rightuousnes, so that we yng now mortified and dead of the olde Adā through thy holy wit∣nes of baptysme, by the worke, & operacion of the holy ghost, may alwayes haue our holye couena¦unt in remembraunce, & before our eyes, that vowe or couena∣unt (I saye) whiche we haue ta∣ken vpon vs in baptysme, to the intent that we maye, as fayth∣full campions, striuyng agaynst the world, the deuell aud ye flesh, vanquish and ouercom thē with all other wych myght bee noy∣some or hinderfull vnto vs. Amē. A bryefe Instruction of christes sup¦per, in the whiche he geueth vs his flesh, and bloud. Saynct Paule sayth to the Corinthians.g. corin. xi. Mat. xxv That wych I de∣liuered
vnto you receyued I of the lorde.Mat. xiii Luke. xxi. For the lord Iesus the same nyght in the whiche he was be∣trayed, toke bread and gaue thā¦kes, and brake it, and sayde, Take ye, and eate ye, this is my bodye, whiche is broken for you. Thys do in the remembra∣unce of me. After the same maner also he toke the cuppe when sup¦per was done, and sayde. This cuppe is the new testament in my bloude, this do (as oft as you drinke it) in the remembraunce of me. For as oft as ye shall eate of thys bread and drinke of this cup, ye shall shewe the Lordes death vntyll he come. Wherfore who soeuer shal eate of this breade, & drike of this cup¦pe of ye lorde vnworthely, shalbe gyltye of the body, and bloude
of the lorde.. corin. xi But let a man exa∣men him selfe, and so let him eate of this breade, and drinke of this cuppe. For he that eateth & drin∣keth vnworthely eateth, & drin∣keth hys owne damnacion, be∣cause he maketh no difference of the lordes body. This hath the sonne of God first instituted vn∣to vs, to the intent we shulde do the same thyng after hym, euen vnto the ende of the worlde, and that we outwardly shulde kepe, holde and exercise oure selues in thys supper of thankesgeuing, hauinge alwayes in remembra∣unce hys inexplycable loue and benefite sshewed towardes vs, & left vs in a Testament to a corro¦boracion or strēthening of our beleue or fayth. Prayer. O most blessed and holy blou∣deshearder
for all synneful crea∣tures Iesus  so our  sen∣ces or vnderstandyng, so and in such wise (I say) that we altoge¦ther through one perfect know∣ledge, in one fayth and in one spi¦rite, may so vse this misterie and holy sacrament in the christen cō¦munion and receaue the same in suche wyse, euen as thou hast instituted it, to the intent that we may come wortely to thy communion, and that we maye there so eate and drinke, and being assembled in feruent cha∣rite and brotherly loue, may de∣clare thy bitter death to eache o∣ther, & haue the same alwayes in our remembraunces, not doubtyng but stedfastly bele∣uyng and contynuinge therby vnto death, that thy holye Bo∣dye and moost precious bloud
hath bee ffred es for all ∣pon he  of  ∣fect att  forgeuenes of all ou ynes. Furthermore gyue vs grace (o lorde) that we and all men maye rightlye and iustly knowe to what end and wherfore thou diddest institute and ordeyne thys new Testament to the intent that we through the same power, with a perfect beleue in the same, may stedfast∣ly continue a∣gaynst our ennemies. Amen. Finis.
The ordenary  Christians to ende a uertuous, and Godly lyfe heare in thys vale of mysery. Translated out of Doutch into Inglish by Anthony Sco∣loker. i. Cor. vii. Let every one abyde in the calling wherin he is called.
To the christen Reader. P , that  h  of our great graund mer Eue, Tim. ii. who after yt she was deceyued, & subdued vnto ye transgression brought forth death vppon all her posterite) declareth that to heale so gread a wound and to appeare beau∣tifully in the eyes of the mighty lorde, whose deare sonne Iesus Chryst sayde. Father those that thou hast geuen vnto me, I wyl that where I am they be also wyth me,Iohn. 17. that they may see my glory. After the fyrst rudiment of a Christian (the whyche is fayth) iii. waytynge virgins, ought to bee attendaunt and seruiceable vnto hym, that in thys vale of mysery intendeth too leade a perfect lyfe, loue holynes and discrecion. Vnder the whiche discrecion, as it may bee ga∣thered by th properte of ye Greke terme in that place,sophrosin. are comprised chastitie, te∣peraunce, modestie and decent shamefast¦nes, because all these vertues are al∣wayes coherent & ioyned together. And holynes lyke as she requireth to flie frō al vice, so doth she require ye exercise of
all vertuous orkes,  hat proce  orow loue.  may be san∣ctifi  ys father. I ha∣ue  them that name. And wyll are it that the loue wherewith thou hast loued me, may be in them, and I in them. Wherfore that by loue, the duetie of all men from the lowest to the highest may bee knowen from the one to the other, Reade ouer thys lytle booke,Iohn. xv. that (walking n the daungerous pathes of thys exyle) thou mayest know how to to bee trayned vnto the mansion place prepared vnto the rightuous that neuer shall haue ende. Fyrst. How the spirituall Prelates ought to vse them selues towardes the commē people. BEholde, I send you forth as shepe, among wolues. Go ye your way, & teache all nacions & baptise thē in the name of the father, & of the sōne
& of the holi ghoost.mat. r 7. c And teach thē to kepe al thynges, what soeuer I haue commaed you.Col. i. a. Ye haue not cho  ut haue chosen you,Iohn. xv. Mat. 0 b & ordeined you that ye go & bryng furth frute. And ye shal beare me witnes, not onely at Ierusalem,Iohn. xv. Act. i. a. and .ii. d. but also throughout the land of Iury, & Samaria, & to ye vttermust coa∣stes of the earth.Ioan. xxc Receyue ye holy∣ghost. Whose sinnes soeuer ye re¦mitt thei are remitted & whose sī¦nes soeuer ye reteyne,Mat. x. mat. 18. b thei are re¦teyned. Verely I say vnto you, what soeuer ye shall binde vppō earth, shalbe bound also ī heauē, and what soeuer ye lowse vppō earth, shalbe also loused in heauē Take hede vnto your selues, and to all the flocke,ct. xx. d. among the whi¦che the Holyghost hath set you to bee bishopes to feade the con∣gregacion of God, whiche he
h  owne  cam¦  ys gone  all heauens,Ephe. iiii. to f a,i. Cor. xii. hath set some to be apost¦les, some to bee prophetes some to bee Euangelistes some to bee shephardes and teachers wherbi¦the saynctes myght bee coupled together thorow commē seruice, to ye edifieng of ye body of Christ.i. Tim. iii Leuit. xxi Ezech. 44 Titu. iii. A byshop must be blamelesse. The husband of one wife, sober discre¦te, manerly hrberous, apt to teach, not geuen to moch wyne, no fighter, not geuen to filthy lu¦cre, but gele abhorring stryfe abhorryng couetousnes, & one that ruleth hys owne house ho∣nestly, hauing obedient chyldrē wyth al honestie. For if he cānot rule hys owne house, howe shall he care for the {con}gregaciō of God? The seruaunt of ye lord ought
not to striue,i. Tim. i Gal. vi. a but to be gētle vnto euery mā apt to teach, are  can forbeare the  with mekenes enforme  resist, if God at any tyme wyl ge¦ue thē repētaunce for to know ye truth, and to turne agayn from the snare of the deuel, which are holdē i prison of him at his wyll. Preach ye worde,2. Tim. 4. beferuent, be it in season or out of ceasō, ipro∣ue, rebuke exhorte wt allong suf¦fering & doctrine. For ye time wil come when they shall not suffer wholsome doctrine, but after their own lustes, shal thei (whose eares itch) get thē, an heap of tea¦chers & shal turne their eares frō the trueth and shalbe geuē vnto fables. But watch thou i al thin¦ges, suffer aduersite, do ye workes of a precher of the gospell, fulfill thine office vnto the vttermust. Se ye thou know ye numbre of thi¦catell,Pro. 27. c
& loke wel to thy flockes.Iohn. 10 Titu. i. b. A Bishop must cleaue fast vnto ye true worde of doctrine, ye he may be able to exhort wyth wholsom learning & to iproue thē that sai agaynst it.i. Pet. v. Acto. v. c. Act. xx. d. The elders which are amōge you I exhort, whiche am also an Elder and a witnes of ye affliction in Christ, & partaker of the glory that shalbe opened. Fede Christes flock whiche is a∣mong you & take ye ouersight of them not as though ye were cō∣pelled therto but willynglye, not for the desire of fylthy lucre,Titu. ii. a but of good mide, not as though ye were lordes ouer ye pharisshēs but ye ye be an exāple to ye flocke Who soeuer wyl be great amōg you let him be your mynister, & whosoeuer wil be chefe,Mat. xx. d. let hym be your seruaunt. Euē like as ye sonne of man came, not to be ser¦ued, but to do seruice & to geue
hys lyfe to a redēption for many Go and preach the Gospell,Mat. x. saying. The kingdom of heauen is at hand, Heale the sicke, clense the lepers, rayse the deade, cast out the deuels, Frely ye haue re¦ceyued, frely gyue agayne.Matth. xx iii. mat. xxv. Who is now a faithful seruaunt, who me hys Lord hath made ruler o∣uer his boushold, that he may gy¦ue them meate in due ceason? Blessed is that seruaunt whome hys lord (whan he commeth) shal finde, so doing. Uerely I say vn∣to you, he shall set hym ouer all his goods. But & if the euell ser∣uante shal saye i his hart,Apoe. xvi. Tush it will be long or my lorde come & begin to smite his fellowes yea and to eate and drinke wyth the drōken, ye same seruauntes Lord shall come in a day whan he lo∣keth not for him, & in an houre ye he is not ware of, & shall heawe
hym in peces & giue hym hys re∣ward wt ypocrites, where shalbe waylinge & gnasshing of teth. I haue made the a watch man vnto the house of Israel,Ezech. 33. that where as y• hearest anye thynge out of my mouth, thou mayest warne them in my behalfe Se that ye do thus in the feare of the lorde,i. para. 19 and faythfully in a perfect hart, in al causes that come vnto you from your brethern (whiche dwell in their Cyties) betwene bloud and bloud, betwene law & commaundement, betwene sta∣tutes & ordenaunces, ye shal en∣forme thē ye they sine not against the lorde, & so the wrath to come vppon you and your bretherne.Luke. x. Possesse neither gold nor siluer. For ye labourer is worthy of hys rewarde. Go not frō house to hou¦se, And into what soeuer cytye you entre, and they receyue
you eate such thinges as are set before you. How the commen people ought to vse and behaue them selues to wardes the spi¦rituall prelaces. Let euery man thys wise e∣steme vs,ii Cor. iiii. i. Cor. vi. Deui. 39. Iere. 34. euē for the ministers of Chryst, & stewardes of the secre∣tes of god. Now is there no more required of the stewardes, then that they bee found faythfull.Eccle. 4. Humble thy soule vnder the el∣der, and bow downe thy head to a man of worshyppe.Ecc. vii. d Deut. xii. Num. viii b. and. c. Feare the lord with all thy soule & honour his ministers, loue thy maker wt al thy strength, & forsake not his seruauntes.. Tim. vc Feare the lord wt all thy soule, & honour his priestes. The Elders ye rule well, are wor∣thy of double honour, moost spe∣cyall ye they whiche labour i the worde & in teachinge.Deut. xxv For ye scri∣pture
sayth▪ Th shalt not mo¦sell the mou of the oxe yt trea∣deth out e corne.i. Thes. v. And ye labou∣rer is worthy of his rewarde We beseke you brethern, yt ye know them which labour among you, & haue the ouersight of you in ye Lorde and geue you exhortaciō,Heb. xiii. that ye haue thē the more ī loue, for their wordes sake and bee at peace with them. Remēbre them whiche haue ye ouersight of you,i. Cor. ix. whiche haue declared vnto you ye word of God. The ende of who¦se conuersacion se that you loke vppō & follow their fayth. Obey thē, & submit your selues vnto thē, for they watch for your sou∣les, euen as they that must gyu accountes therfore. Who goeth a warfare at any tyme vppō his owne wages? Who planteth a vinyarde & eateth not of ye frute therof? Who fedeth a flocke, & ea∣teth
not of ye milke of ye flocke?Rom. xv d Galla. vi If we haue sowen vnto you spiri∣tual thinges, is it a great thyng if we repe your bodely thynges? but if other bee partakes of thys power on you wherfore are not we rather? Know ye not yt they which labour ī ye tēple, haue their liuing of ye tēple?Mat. x. a. And thei ye way¦te at the aulter, enioye the aulter Euen thus also hath ye lorde or∣deyned yt they which preach the Gospel shulde lyue of ye Gospell. Ezechias {con}maunded ye people yt dwelt at Ierusalē,. Para. zi. a. yt they shulde giue porciōs of their goodes vn∣to ye priestes, ye thei might ye more stedfastly ēdure ī ye law of ye lorde. If a matter be to hard for ye in iudgemēt betwene bloude, and bloude,Dent. 18. betwene plee, and plee betwene stroke & stroke. Thou shalt ryse & go to ye priestes ye leui¦tes & to the iudge whiche shalbe
at that  are of them & they shal  how to iudge & thou shalt do therafter, as they say vnto ye. And if any mā deale presumptuouslye, so that he har∣keneth not vnto the priest (which standeth to do seruice vnto the lorde thy God) or to the Iudge, the same shall dye. Howe the worldly and superiour po¦wres, as Emperours, Kinges, Princes, Iudges, & rulers ough to liue with their subiectes. Heare, (o ye kynges) & vnder∣stand.Sap. vi. a O learne ye yt bee Iudges of the endes of ye earth giue eare, ye yt rule ye multitudes,Rom. xiii & delite in much people. For ye power is ge∣uen you of the lord, & the strēgth frome the highest, which shal trie your workes & search out your Imaginaciōs, howe yt ye, beyng officers of his kingdom, haue not executed true iudgement haue
not kept ye lawe of rightuousnes nor walked after ye wll of God. A king shall not haue many horses,Deut. xvii nether shal he haue many wiues, nether shal he gather him syluer & golde to muche. He shall not lyft vp hys hart aboue hys brethern & shal not turne a syde from the commaundementes of God, neither to ye righthand nor to the lyfte hande.Pro. xx. d Mercy, and faythfulnes preserue the Kyng, and with louyng kyndenes hys seate is holden vp.prn. xxix The feare of the king that faythfully iudgeth the pore, shall continue sure for euermore. Lyke as a roaryng lyon, and an hungrye beare, euē so is an vngodly prince ouer the poore people. Where the prince is without vnderstanding there is great oppression and wronge But if he bee such one as hateth couetousnes,Mich. ii. a he shal lōge reygne
Heare,Den. xvii Iere. v. a. Psal. 131 o  of ye house of Iacob,  of ye house of Israel, shu li y know what were  & right but ye hate ye good, & loue ye euil, ye plucke of mens skinnes,Iere. 23 a and. 21. d zacha. vii. b. &. viii. c & the flesh frō their bones. Kepe equitie & rightuous¦nes, delyuer the oppresed frō the power of ye viole it, do not greue nor oppresse the straunger the fa¦therles nor ye widdowe,Psal. ii. a ezay. 37. c & sheade no innocēt bloude in this place. Be wise now therfore (o ye kynges) be warned ye yt are iud∣ges of the earth. Serue the lorde with feare & reioyce before hym wyth reuerēce.Sap. i. a 3. Reg. 3. a Kysse the sonne lest the lorde be angrye, and so ye perish from the right way. O set your affection vppon wisdome. ye that be iudges of the earth.Eccle. vii Iob. ix. a. and. c. Make no labour too bee made a Iudge, except it so were ye yu coul¦dest mightelt put downe wicked∣nes.
Take hede ye  what ye do,Luke. xix. for ye execute  the ∣gement of men,ii. par. xix but of the lorde. And he is wythe you in iudge∣mēt. Therfore let the feare of the lord be wyth you, & beware & do it, for with the lord our God ther is no vnrightuousnes nor res∣pect of parsōs, nor accepting of giftes.Eccl. 4. b. In iudgemēt be mercifull vnto the fatherles as a father, & be in steade of an husband vnto their mother.Pro. ix. a Wyth true iudge∣mēt the king setteth vp the land, but if he be a mā that taketh gif∣tes, he turneth it vpside downe.Dell. xvii Be no accepter of persons, ney∣ther be desirours of gifts, for thei make wise mē blynde & chaunge the wordes of the rightuous. He ye hath respect of persons, ī iudge¦mēt,Pro. ii. doth not wel, & why? He wil do wrong, yea, euen for a pece of breade. A wise iudge wyll ordre his people with discreciō, & whe∣re
a mā of, vnderstāding beareth rule ther eh it well, As ye rud∣ge of the people is hīselfe,Pro. xxix euē so are his officers, & loke what ma∣ner of mā ye ruler of ye citie is, such are they ye dwell therin. The vn∣godly taketh giftes out of the bo¦som to wrast ye wayes of iudge∣ment.Pro. xxvii Apoc xxiii Thou shalte not wrast the righ of the pore ī his cause, kepe ye farre frō false matters,Deu. xvii Exo. xxiii Susan. 8. Ecc. xx.  The in∣nocēt & rightuous shalt thou not slea, Thou shalt take no giftes, for giftes blinde euē thē that are sharpe of sight, & wrast the rygh∣tuous causes.Leuit. 4 Ezay, vi c Pro. iii. a Deut. 17. Ezech. 1 Cursed is he that wrasteth the right of ye widdow, Wo vnto them that are conning men to suppe out wine, and ex∣perte to set vp dronkennes, The¦se gyue sentence with the vngod¦ly for rewardes, but condemne the iust cause of the rightuous. Wo be vnto you (o ye iudges)
that make vnryghtuous lawes,Mat. r3. Ezay. 28. & deuyse thynges Whe bee to harde for to kepe, wher thorow ye pore are oppressed on euery syde, & the innocentes of my people, are therwych robbed of iudge∣ment ye widdowes may be your pray,Eccle. 32. Deu. xvii. & that ye may robbe the fa¦therles If thou be made a ruler, pride not thy selfe there in, but be thou as one of the people. Let him that ruleth be diligent.Rom. xii. How subiectes shall behaue them¦selues towardes theyr superiours, and temporall rulers. The rulers of the people shalt thou not blaspheme.Exod. 2r Act. 23. a. pro. 24. a and. xx. Feare the lord and the kyng, and kepe no company with the slaunderous, for their destruction shall come sodenly. Pray for kinges and rulers. Warne the people that theyi. Tim. ii.
submit the sees vnto princes, & to the higher ctorite,Titu. 3. a. Rom. 5. a 1. pet. 2. a i. pet. ii. b & to o∣bey the officers. Submit your selues vnto all maner ordena∣unce of men for the lordes sake, wheter it be vnto the king as vn¦to the chefe head,Titu. 3. a. or vnto rulers as vnto thei yt are sent of him for the punishmēt of euell doers, but for the prayse of thē that do wel. Let euery soule submit hym selfe to the auctorite of ye higher powers. For there is no power but of God.Rom. xiii The powers yt be are ordeined of God, so yt who soeuer resisteth ye power, resisteth the or denaunce of God.Sapi. vi. 1. pet. a. b And they yt re∣sist, shal receyue to thē selues dā∣pnaciō. For rulers are not to bee feared for good workes, but for euel. And the ruler bearet not the sweard for nought.Rom. xiii For he is the mynister of god a taker of ven∣geaunce too punish hym that
doth euell. Wherfore ye must ne∣des obey not onelye for punish∣mēt, but also because of cōsciēce. For this cause must ye gyue tri∣bute also. For they are gods my∣misters, which mayntein the sa∣me defence, Giue to euerye man therfore his dutie,Rom. xiii Mat. 7. Tribute too whome tribute belōgeth, custom to whome custom is due, feare, to whome feare belōgeth,Mat. 22 c Mat. 7. d Rom. xiii Honour to whome honour perteyneth. Giue vnto the Emperour that which is the emperous. And giue vnto God that whiche is Gods. How parentes as father and mother ough to rule and bryng vp theyr Children in the feare of the lorde. If thow haue sonnes, bring thē vp ī nurtour & learning,Ecc. vii. c and. 1. a and holde thē in awe frō their youth vp. If thou haue doughters, kepe their bodie & shewe not thy selfe
cherefull toward thē. Mary thy doughter, &  shalt thou perfor∣me a we  matter, but gyue her to a man of vnderstandyng. Who so loueth his childe holdeth him stil vnder correctiō ye he may haue Ioye of hym afterwarde.Eccle. 30 He that teacheth his sonne, shall haue Ioye of hym, & nedeth not too bee ashamed among his ac∣qua yntaunce.Pro xiii. c Deut. vi a Wo so enformeth & teacheth his sonne greueth the ennemy, & before frendes ye may haue ioye of him. If thou die yet art thou as though yu were not deade, for thou hast lefte one be∣hinde the ye is like vnto ye. An vn∣tamed horse wil be hard, & a wātō child wil be wilful. If thou brīg vp thy childe delicatelye, he shall make the afrayde, & if thou playe wyth hym, he shall bryng the to heauines. Laugh not wt hī, least thou wepe with him also, & leaste
thy teth bee set on edge at ye last. If thy doughter be wanton kepe her straightli, least she cause thyne enemies laugh ye to scorne and the whole cytie to geue the an euell reporte, and so thou be∣fayne to heare thi shame of eueri man. Thou shalt not holde thy doughter to whoredom, ye ye land fal not to whordome, & ware ful of wickedites. If thy doughter bee not shametast, holde her stra∣yghtli least she abuse her selfe tho¦rowe ouer much libertie. Bewa∣re of al the dishonestie of her eyes There shalbe no whore a∣mong the doughters of Israell,Deut. 23 Num. 25 Mich. i. b Eccl. 22 neyther whorekeper among the sonnes of Israel. A misnurtered sonne is the dishonoure of the fa¦ther, A folish doughter shalbe ly∣tle regarded. And she that com∣meth to dishoneste, bringeth her father in heauines.
A doughter ye is past shame disho¦noureth  father and her husbād,  rate not your childrē,  of a esperate minde He ye spareth the rodde ha¦teth his sōne,Collo. iii. but who so loueth hym, holdeth him eueri nurtour,Pro. 13. c Psal. 23. Heb. xii. b Psal. 33 Ephe. i. a ye fathers prouoke not your chil¦dren vnto wrath, but bring thē vp in the nurtour, and informa∣cion of the lord. Witholde not cor¦rection frō thy chylde for if thou beatest him with ye rodde, he shal not die therof.Pro. 33 and .xiii. c Eccle. 33. Thou smitest him wyth the rodde, but thou dely∣uerest his soule from hell Let the elder man be sober, honest, discre∣te, sounde in the fayth, in loue, in pacience.Litu. ii. c Let the olde women shew them selues as it becometh holynes, that they bee no false accusers, not geuen to much wyne, that they teach honest thynges, that they enforme the
yong women to bee, sober myn∣ded, to loue their husbāds, to ue their children, to be crete, chast huswifly, good, obedient vnto their husbandes, that the word of God be not euel spoken of.Gen. iii Let the yongmen like wise be sober. How youth shall obey their elders, honouring them in the feare of the lorde. Ye children obey your elders in the lord,Ephe vi. a Collo. iii Exodi. xx for that is right. Ho∣nour thy father & thy mother, ye is the first cōmaundement ye hath ani promes, that thou mayst pro¦sper and lyue long vppon earth.Titu. ii. a i. Pet. ii Ecc. vii. c and. iii. a. Let the yongmē be soberminded Ye yonger submit your selues vnto the elder. Honour thy father from thy whole harte, and forget not the sorrowfull trauayle that thy mother had wyth the. Remembre that thou wast
borne thoro , & how caust thou reco thē the things that they haue  for ye:Lob. iii a Holde thy mother in honour all the da∣yes of thylife, For thou oughtest to remembre what,Lob. iiii. & how great parreles the suffred for the ī her wombe. My sonne care and bee wise so shal thyne harte prosper in the way. Let not thyne harte be gelous to follow synners but kepe the styl in the feare of ye lord al the day long.Pro. xxiiii Kepe no compa∣ny with wine bibbers and riot∣tours eateres of flesh for such as be dronkardes and riottoursshal come to pouertie,Pro. xxii. and he that is geuē to much slepe, shal go with a ragged coate. Geue eare vnto thi father that begatte the, and dispise not thy mother whā she is olde. The lord wil haue ye father ho¦noured of ye childrē,Eccle.  & loke what
a mother commaundeth hir chil∣dren to do, he wyll haue it kept. Who so honoreth his father,Exod. r 0 Deut. v. c hys synnes shalbe forgeuen hym, & he that honoureth hys mother, gathereth treasure together. Who so honoreth his father, shall haue ioy of his owne chyldren, & whan he maketh hys prayer, he shalbe hearde. He that feareth the lorde, honoureth hys father and mother, and doth thē seruice, as it were vnto the lorde hym selfe, Honour thy father in dede,Geue. ii.  and. 4 9. Deut. z 4. in worde & in all Pacience, yt thou mayest haue his blessyng for the blessyng of the father buyldeth vp the house of the chyldrē, but the mothers curse, roteth out the foundacions. My sonne make much of thy father in hys age, & greue him not as long as he ly∣ueth. And if his vnderstandyng fayle, haue pacience wyth him▪ &
despise him  th, He y•  come to shame, &  his mo¦ther, is cursed of God.Pro. xix d He yt hur∣teth his father, or shutteth out hys mother, is a shamefull, and an vnworthy sonne.Leuit. xxi Thou shalt rise vp before a gray hede, & shalt gyue reuerence vnto the aged. How the master and mastres ought to vse them selfes towardes their serua∣untes. He that dilicatelye bringeth vp his seruaunt frō a chyld,Pro. xxix shal make hym hys master at length. Where as thi seruaunte worketh truelye, entreat him not euel,Eccle. 7 c nor the hyreling yt is faythfull vnto the. Loue a discrete seruaunt as thyne owne soule. The fodder, ye whippe & the burthē belongeth vnto the asse, meate, correction, and worke vnto the seruaunt. If thou let thy seruaunt laboure,
thou shalt finde rest, but if thou let him go I dell, he shal seke ∣bertie. The yoke, & the whippe bow downe the necke, but tame thou ye euel seruaunt with ban¦des & correctiō. Set him to wor¦ke, for yt belōgeth vnto him, and becommeth hym well If he bee not obediēt, binde his fete, but do not to muche vnto him ī ani¦wise, & without discreciō do no¦thing If thou haue a faythfull seruaunt, let hym be vnto ye as thyne owne soule, for in bloud hast thou gotten him, if ȳ entrea¦test him euel,Collo. iii. & kepest him hard, he wil ronne a way frō ye, ye ma∣sters, do vnto your seruauntes yt which is iust & equal, & knowe yt ye also haue a master ī heauē. ye masters,Ephe vi. a Eccle. zz. Collo. iii c put away your threateninges, & know yt their God, is your God also, neyther is there any respect of persons
with him  lyon in thy owne house, destroying thy houshold foes,Tobi. iii. Deut. 24 & oppres∣sing them yt are vnder the. Who soeuer worketh any thing for the, immediatly geue him his hy¦re, & loke yt thi hyred seruauntes wages remaine not by the ouer night.Leuit. xix Tob. xiiii Eccl. 2. z. b Eccl. z 4 c Eccle. 5. c The workemans labour shal not byde with the vnto the morning, He the defraudeth the labourer of his hyre, is a bloud∣sheader. How seruauntes ought too bee haue them selues in the seruice of theyr ma∣sters or lordes. Dames or mastresses. Let as many seruauntes, as are vnder the yoke, counte their masters worthy of all honour, yt the name of God & his doctrine be not euell spoken of. Se that they whiche haue beleuing ma∣sters, despise thē not, for thei are Brethern, but rather doo them
seruice, for so much as they are beleuing & beloued, & partakers of the benefyte,Col. iii. c. Ephe. vi. Ttu. ii. b i. Pet. ii a ye seruauntes, be obediēt vnto your bodely ma∣sters in all thinges not with eye seruice as menpleasers, but ī sin glenes of harte, fearing God. What soeuer ye do, do it hartely euē as vnto ye lord & not vnto mē. And be sure, that of the lorde, ye shal receaue the reward of the in heritaunce, for ye serue the lorde Christ ye seruauntes be obediēt vnto your masters,Titu. ii. a Ephe. i. a. Col. iii. a. & please thē ī al thinges, not answering thē againe, neither, be ye pikers, but shewe al good saythfulnes, that in al thinges ye may do worship vnto the doctrine of God our sauiour. ye seruauntes obey your masters with all feare, not onely if they be good & curteous but also though they be froward For that is grace, if a man for
consciene tow  God endure gre . For what praise is it if whā ye be buffeted for your fautes ye take it paciēt∣ly. But if whan ye do wel ye suf¦fer wrong, and take it paciently that is grace wyth God. The duety of maried men towardes their wiues. Departe not from a discrete and good woman that is fallen vnto the for thy porcion in the feare of the lorde.Eccle. vii The gift of her honestie is aboue golde. If thou haue a wyfe after thyne owne minde,Eccl. ix. b forsake her not & commit not thy selfe to the hatefull. Vse thy selfe to lyue ioyfull ye wt thy wife whome thou louest all the dayes of thy lyfe (whiche is but vain) that God hath geuen the vnder the sunne all the dayes of thy vanitie,Mat. vi. Pro. v. c. for that is the por∣cion
in this lyfe of al thy labour & trauayle ye thou taken▪ vnder ye sunne, ye husbādes loue your wiues, euen as Christ loued the congregacion,Ephe. v. c Bal. ii. c. Titu. z. c. i. Pet. z. a & gaue hym selfe for it to sanctifye it & clensed it in the fonteyne of water by the worde, to make it vnto him selfe a glorious rgregacion, hauing no spot nor wryncle nor any uch thing but yt it shulde be holi & without blame. So ought mē also to loue their wiues, euē as their own bodies He yt loueth his wife,Mat. v. d loueth him selfe. Who so e∣uer putteth away his wife (ex∣cept it be for fornication) causeth her too breake matrimony.i. Pet. iii a i. Pet. iiii And who so euer marieth hir yt is de∣uorsed, breaketh wedlocke, ye mē dwel wt your wiues accordīg vnto knowledge, geuīg honour vnto ye wife, as vnto ye weaker vessel, & as vnto thē yt are heyres
wyth you of the grace of lyfe, that your prayers be not let. If any man make a vow vnto the lorde or sweare an othe,Num. xxx Deu. xxiii so that he bynde hys soule, he shall not breake his word, but do all that is proceaded out of his mouth. The duetie of maried women to war∣des theyr husbandes. Let the women submit thē selues vnto their husbandes,Ephe. v. c Collo iii c i. pet. iii. a as vnto the lorde. For the husband is the wiues head, euē as Christ also is ye head of the rgregacion & he is the sauiour of hys body. Therefore as the congregacion is in subiection to Christ,Cor. ix. a lykewi¦se let the wiues be in subiection to their husbādes in all thinges. ye women be subiect vnto your husbandes, that euen they whi∣che beleue not the worde,i. Pet. iii. i. Cor. xi a may wythout the worde bee wonne
by your conuerfacion whā they beholde your ruesaciō in feare. Whose apparell shal not be out∣warde with broydred heare,Ephe. v. Collo. iii c ii. Tim. ii and hanging on of golde, or in put∣ting on of gorgious aray but let the inwarde man of the harte be incorrupte wyth a meke, and a quiet spirite whiche before God is much set by For after this ma¦ner in the olde time did the holy women whiche trusted in God, tyer them selues, and were obe∣dient vnto their husbandes, euē as Sara obeyed Abrahā & called him lorde.Gen. xviii Let the women aray them selues in comely apparell withshamefastnes, and discrete behauiour, not wt broydred hear or gold or Pearls or costly aray,i. Tim. ii. but with suche as it becommeth women that professe Godlynes thorow good workes.i Cor. xiiii Ephe. v. Let your wiues kepe silence wyth al sub∣iection.
Suffer not a woman to teach nor to haue atorytie o∣uer the man, but for to be in silē∣ce. For Adam was firste formed,Gen. iii. & then Eue. Adam also was not de¦ceaued, but the woman was de∣ceaued, & hath brought in ye trās¦gression. Notwithstandyng tho∣rowe bearing of childrē she shal∣be saued, if she cotinue in fayth, & in loue & in sanctifyinge wt di∣screcion. Let your wiues kepe silence in the congregacion, for it shal not be permitted vnto thē to speake, but to be vnder obediē¦ce as the law sayth, But if they wil learne any thing let thē axe their husbandes at home.Num. xxx For it becommeth not women to spea∣ke in the congregacion, A man shalbe lord and ruler in his house and the womā shalbe subiect too her husbande. If a maried womā make a vowe, and if she haue let∣ten
go our of hir lyppes a bond ouer hir soule, & her husband hea¦re it, & holdeth his peace therat the same day yt he heareth it, thē her vowe, & band wherwith she hath bounde her selfe ouer hir soule, shall stande in effecte But if her husband forbid her ye same day ye he heareth it, thē is ye vowe louse ye she hath vppon her, & the band also yt she hath lettē go out of her lippes ouer her soule. Of the state of matrimony ī general. In the beginning God crea¦ted man & woman,Mat. i. a Geue. ii. d for this cause shal a man leaue father, and mo∣ther, and cleaue to his wife. And they two shalbe one flesh, nowe are they not twayne, but one fleash. Let no mā therefore put a sonder that which God, hath cou¦pled together. Cor. vii. To awoyde who∣redome, let euery man haue hys
owne wyfe,  let euery woman haue her , let the man gyue vnto the wyfe due be¦neuolence lyke wyse also ye wyfe vnto the mā. The wyfe hath not power ouer her owne body, but the husband, and lykewyse the man hath not power ouer hys owne body, but the wife. With∣drawe not your selues one from an other,Iob. vi. d and. vii. a Ioel. ii. c. except it be with ye con∣sent of both for a tyme that ye may gyue youre selues vnto fa∣styng and prayer, and thē come together agayn, least fathā tpt you for your incontinency.Hebr. xiii. Let wedlocke bee had in price in all pointes, and let the chambre bee vndefyled. For whorekepers & aduoute∣rers God wyll iudge. The lorde fauoureth man, and wyfe that agre well together. Happy is the man that hath a
vertuous wife,Eccle. ii and. ci. d. Eccle. xx vi. d. for the numbre of his yeares shalbe double. A wo¦man shall not seperate her selfe from her husband, but if she sepe∣rate her self, that she remayn vn∣maried, or bee reconsiled to her husband.1. Cor. vii. A womā that is in sub∣iection to the man, is bounde vn¦to the law whyle the man liueth but if the man dye,Rom. vii. thē is she lou¦sed from the lawe that cōcerneth the man. If she be with an other man, whyle her man lyueth, she shalbe called a wedlocke breaker But if the man be dead,Mat. v. d thē is she fre frō the lawe, so that she is no wedlockbreaker if she be with an other man. Of the state of virgins. I say to them that are vnma¦ried & to widdowes (sayth.Cor. 7. a S. Paule) It is good for thē yt they abyde also as Ido.Tim. v. b But if they can
not abstayne, let thē mary, for it is better to mary thē to burne. As cōcerning virgins I haue no commaundemēt of the lorde,1. cor. vii ne∣uertheles I say my good mea∣ning as I haue obteyned mercy of the lord to be faythfull. I sup∣pose it is good for the present ne¦cessite, for it is good for a man so to be.Num. xxx Art thou bound vnto a wi∣fe, seke not to be loused Art ye lou¦sed frō a wife, seke not a wife If a damsell make a vow vnto ye lord while she is in her fathers house, and vnmaried, & her vow or bād ye she maketh ouer her soule cōmeth to her fathers eares, and he holde his peace therto, then all her vo∣wes, and handes that she hath bound her selfe withall ouer her soule, shall stande in effect. Of the state of widdowes.i. Tim. She that is a right widdow
and desolate, putteth her trust  God,Luk. iii. f. ii. Cor. i. & continueth in prayer, & supplication night & day. But she that lyueth in pleasures, is dead euen yet alyue. A widdow must bee without blame.Gala. vi. But if there be any that prouideth not for his owne, & specially for thē of his houshold, the same hath de¦nied the fayth,1. Pet. ii. and is worse then an infydell. Let no widdow bee chosen vnder threscore yere old, & such one as was ye wyfe of one man, & well reported of in good workes if she haue brought vp childrē wel,1. Tim. v. if she haue bene har∣berowes, if she haue wasshed the saictes fete,ii. Pet. iiii if she haue ministred vnto thē whiche were in aduer∣sitie, if she were cōtinually geuē to all maner of good workes. But the younger widdowes refu¦se. For whā they haue begon to waxe wāton against Christ thei
will mary haug  npua∣cion, because  broken the first fayth  this they are ydel, & learne to ronne about frō house to house. Not only are they ydell, but also trifling & bu∣sy bodies, speaking thinges whi¦che are not comly.Num. xxx The vow of a widdow, & of her ye is deuorsed, al that she bindeth her selfe with∣all ouer her soule, shall stand in effect vppon her. Exhortacion to the rich of this worlde. If ryches encrease, set not your hart vppon them.Psal. li It becom¦meth not a couetous man and a nygarde to be rich, & what shuld a nygard do with golde? He that wyth all hys carefulnes hea∣peth together vnrightuously, gathereth for other folkes,Eccl. 23 and an other man shall make good
there wyth his goods. He  wicked vnto him self, how shuld he be good vnto other men? How can such one haue any pleasure of hys goods? there is nothyng worse, then when one disfauou∣reth him self, & this is a reward of his wickednes. If he do ani good he doth it not knowing therof & against his wil, & at the last he de¦clareth his vngraciousnes.Pro. r 7. Eccle. iii. A ni∣garde hath a wicked eye, he tur∣neth away his face and despiseth his owne soule. A couetous man hath neuer in ough in the porciō of wickednes, vntyl ye tyme that he wither awaye, and haue lost his owne soule.Ecc. 24. b Eccle. iiii To. iiii. b Luke. xvi. A wiked eye spa¦reth bread, & ther is scarsenes vp¦pon his table. My sōne do good to thy selfe of that thou hast, and giue the lord hys due offrynges. Do good vnto thy frende before thou dye, and accordyng to thy
abylitie  out   ough  selfe,ob. i.  . Tim. vi & not  Charge thē whiche are  in this woorlde that they be not d, nor trust in the vncerteyne ryches but in that lyuing God (whiche geueth vs aboundauntly all thinges to enioy thē) that thei do good,Mat. vi d that they be ryche in good workes, yt they giue, & distribute with good wyll, gatheryng vp treasure for them selues, a good foundacion agaynst that tyme to come,To. iiii. b that they may lay hand on eternally fe. Geue almes of thy goodes, & turne neuer thi face frō the pore, for almes deliuereth frō death, & suffreth not the soule to come in darkenes. A great confort is al∣mes before the hye God, vnto all them the do it. Let neuer pride haue rule in thy mynde, nor ī thi
woord for in pride began all de∣struction, Happy is the rich that is found without fae,Geue. iii. and  turneth not from the right ay for golde,Eccle. iiii neyther putth hy trust in moni or treasure. Go to know ye rich men, wepe & howle on youre wretchednes that shal come vppō you,Tim. vi your ryches are corrupt your garmētes are mo∣atheatē, your golde and your sil¦uer are canked & the rust of thē shalbe a witnes agaynst you, & shal eate your flesh as it were fy¦re, ye haue heaped treasure toge∣ther in your last dayes.Leuit. x. c Deut. 24 Too. iiii. c Beholde the hyer of the labourers which haue reaped youre owne feldes (which hier is of you kepte backe by fraud) crieth, & ye cries of them whiche haue reaped, are eatred into the eares of ye lord sabaoth.Luke. xv c ye haue lyued in pleasure on the earth & in wantonnes, ye haue
condempned and haue kylled the Iust,Eccle. x. b & he hath not resisted you. There is nothing worse then a couetus mā. What pridest thou thē, O thou asshes: there is not a more wicked thīg thē to loue mo¦ney. And why? such one hath his soule to sel, yet is he but a fyl∣thy donge whyle he lyueth. Although the phisician shew his helpe neuer so long, yet in con∣clusiō it goeth after this maner, to day a kyng, to morrow dead. For whan a man dyeth, he is the hyere of beastes, serpentes & wor¦mes. Wo he vnto the proude wel thy in Sion too suche as thinke them selues so sure vpon the mo∣unt of samaria.Amos. vi. Luke. vi Whiche hold thē selues for the best of the world, and rule that house of Israell e∣uen as they list, beholde s the border of the land of the Phil∣stines wider then yours?
ye are taken out for the euel day, ye that sytte in the stole of: wyl∣fulnes, ye that lyghe vpō beddes of Iuory and vse your wanton∣nes vpon your couches,Iob. xxi. Ezay. v b. Reg. v d ye that eate the best lambes of the flocke & the fattest calues of ye droaue, ye that sing to the lute, & in play¦ing of instrumentes cōpare your selues vnto Dauid, ye that drin¦ke wine out of gobbletes, and a∣noynte your selues wyth ye best oyle,Prouer xi Psal. 40 but no man is sory for Io∣seps hurte. Who so trusteth ī his ryches, shal perish Blessed is he yt considereth the pore, for the lorde shall delyuer hym in the tyme of trouble.Ma. ix. c Luke. xi. d Eccle. 36 Se that ye gather you not treasure vppon earth where rust & mothes corrupt, & where theues breake through & steale, But gather you treasure toge∣ther in heauē where nether rust nor mothes corrupt,Pro xxiiii and where
theues nether breake vp nor yet steale.Luk. xii. c For wher your treasure is ther is your harte also, ye can∣not serue God, and mammon. Make you frindes wyth the vn∣rightuous mammon,Luk. xv. a that whan ye shall haue nede, they maye re¦ceaue you into the euerlastyng tabernacles. All they that wyll be ryche fall into tēptacion and snares and into many folish and noysome lustes,Tim. vi b Pro. 33 whiche drowne men in destruction & dāpnacion. For couetousnes is the roote of all euell, whiche whyse some lu∣sted after, they erred frō the fayth and tangled them selues wyth many sorrowes. Exhortacion to the poore, sicke and impotent Parsons. Blessed are the poore ī spirite,Mat. v. a Luke. vi. Pro. xv for theirs is the kyngdom of hea∣uen. All the dayes of the poore are miserable, but a quiet hart
is a continuall feast. Better is a lytle with the feare of the lorde, thē great treasure,Psal. 36. Pro. xix. Better is the poore that trueth Godly, thē the blasphemer that is but a foole. A poore man leading a godly lyfe, is better then the ryche that go∣eth in fro warde wayes.Pro. 27 a A small thing yt ye rightuous hath is bet∣ter then great ryches of the vn∣godly The lord knoweth the da∣yes of the Godly,Psal. xxx Prou. 15 b Eccl. 28 c i. Tim. vi and there in he ritaunce shal endure for euermo∣re. The lorde is a defence for the pore, a defence in ye tyme of trou¦ble. For the lord forgetteth not ye complaynt of the pore. The lord shal delyuer yu pore frō the migh∣ty, and the wretched and misera∣ble pore sely people, which haue no helpe. The lord wyll not for∣get the pore, the pacient abiding of such as be in trouble shall not perish for euer.Psal. xx. He shalbe fauou∣rable
to the simple and pore, he shall preserue the soules of such as be in aduersitie. He shall dely∣uer their soul? from extorcion & wronge, & deare shall their bloud be in hys sight. The prayer of ye pore goeth out of the mouth, & commeth vnto the eares,Eccle. xxi Exod. v. b and his vengeaunce (or defence) shal com¦and that hastely. A simple man whiche laboureth and worketh, is better then one that is gor∣gious, and wanteth breade. Thou art the poore mans helpe (o lorde) a strength for the ne∣defall in hys necessytie.Pro. xxii. Eccl. x c d Thou art a defence vnto hym agaynst euell wether,Ezay. xxv and a shaddow a∣gaynst the heate. The pore shal not alway be out of remembraunce, the pacient a∣bidyng of such as be in trouble, shall not perishe for euer.Psal. 71 a The lord shall kepe yt simle flocke by
theyr right, defend the childrē of the pore and punishe the wron∣geous doers.Ezay. xii The pore sely peo∣ple couet water, & they can get none, & their tong is waxed dry for thrust, I the lord shal hear thē I the God of Israell wil not for sake thē.Iacob. i a Hath not God chosen ye pore of this world which are rich in fayth, and heyres of the king∣dom whiche he promised to them that loue hym?Eccl. xi. The pore yt wan∣teth strength & hath great pouer¦tie, the eye of God loketh vpō hī to good, setteth him vp from hys lowe estate & lifteth vp his heade Exhortacion to the artificer or handi∣craftes man. In ye sweate of thy face shalt thou eate thy breade,Geue. iii. till thou be turned agayne vnto earth whē∣ce yt art taken. Man is borne to labour,Iob. v. a. like as ye birde for to flye.
An ydell hand maketh pore,Pro. x. a: but a quicke labouringe had maketh riche. Who so gathereth in Som¦mer, is wyse,Eccl. zi. c Rom. xii. but he that is slou∣gish in haruest bringeth him selfe to confusion. In all thy workes be deligent and quicke, so shall there no sicknes happē vnto the.Eccle. x. d Be not proud to do thy worke, & despayre not in the tyme of ad∣uersitie.Pro. xvi. i Who so is slouthful and slacke in hys? about, is the Bro∣ther of hym that is a wayster. Slouthfulnes bryngeth slepe,Pro. xix & an ydell soule shal suffre hungre. The deuises of one that is dili∣gent bring plenteousenes,Pro. xxi a but he that is vnaduised commeth vnto pouertie.ii. Tess. iii He that laboureth not shall not eate. A man shall go forth to his worke, and tyll hys land vnto ye euenīg.psal 103 Thou shalt eate the labours of thyne owne handes,psal. 127 so shal it go wel with the
and thou shalt bee blessed. Thy wife shalbe as a fruteful vie vp¦pō the walles of thy house. Thi chyldren lyke the oliue braun∣ches round about thy table. To thus shal the man be blessed that feareth the lord.Eccl. v. b. Iob. x. b A labouring mā sleapeth swetely, whether it bee litle or much that he eateth, but the aboundaunce of the rich, wil not suffer him to sleap Take not ouer greate trauayle and labour to bee rich.Pro. xxiiii Iere. xvii Eccle. xix A labouringe man yt is geuen vnto dronkennes, shall not be rich. Delyte not thou in slepe,Pro. xv. least thou come vnto pouer te, but open thyne eyes, and thou shalt haue breade inough. All that a man eateth and dryn∣keth yea,Eccl. 3 b what soeuer a man en¦ioyeth of al hys labour, the same is a gyfte of God. Exhortacion to Religious or denout parsons.
Iacob f. c This is a pure reli∣gion ordey ded of god other reli¦gious as f cotes gyr∣dles, bo∣tes et c. are famed Ipoctisy. Eccle. ii.Pure deuocion and vndefy∣led before God the father is this To visite the frendles, & widdo∣wes in their aduersitie, and to kepe him selfe vnspotted of the worlde. If any man among you seame deuout and refrayne not his tong, but deceaue hys owne harte, this mans deuocion is in vayne. The feare of the lorde is the right good, seruice that pre∣serueth, and iustifieth the harte, and geuith mirthe and gladnes. Exhortacion to the marchaunt. It is nough, it is nough saith ye bier, but whē he hath it,Pro. xx he doth prayse it. A false balāce is an ab∣hominaciō vnto ye lord,Pro. xi. a. deale not wrōgfully wt thy neighbour,Leuit. xix wt metyard, weight or mesure, Whā thou sellest ought vnto thi neigh¦bour,Deut. 23. Leuit. xi or biest any thyng of hym
deceyue nor oppresse hym not. Thou shalt not haue in thy bag∣ge two maner of weyghtes, a great and a smal. Neyther shalt thou haue in thy house dyuers measures, a great and a small / ye thy lyfe may be long in the land / which ye lord thy God shall geue the: for wo so euer dothe so, is an abhominaciō vnto the Lord thy God, God knoweth both the de∣ceyuer, & hym that is deceaued.Iob. xii Exhortacion to the husbaudman. Who so tylleth his ground shalbe fylled wyth breade.Pro. xii Who so hoordeth vp his corne, shalbe cursed among the peple / but bles¦syng shal lyght vppon his heade that selleth it.Prone. xi Whan thou hast reaped downe thine haruest / and hast forgottē a sheafe in the felde thou shalte not turne agayne toDeut. 24 Leuit. xix
fech it / but it shalbe for the stran∣ger, the fatherles & the widdow / that ye lorde thy▪ God may blesse the in all the workes of thy han∣des. In lyke case when thou hast plucked thine olyue trees and vi¦nyarde,Leuit. xix Deut. 24 Whan thou reapest thy land thou shalt not reape downe the vttermust borders of it round a bout, nor gather it al clean vp. Euen so lykewise thou shalt not plucke thy vinyarde cleane also / nor gather vp ye grapes that are fallen downe / but shalt leaue thē for the pore and straungers for I am the lord your God. Exhortacion to souldiours or meu of warre. Whan thou goest out to ba∣tayle aginst thine enemies / and seist horses & charets of the peo∣ple more thē thou:Deu. x. a be not afrayd of them. Now / wen ye are come
nigh vnto the battayle, ye prieste shall step furth & speake to ye peo∣ple, and saye vnto thē.Deu. xii. c Num. 14 1. Mat. 4 Deut. xxv Heare (o ye people) ye go this daye into ye batayle against your ennemies, let not your hait faynte. Feare not, be not a frayed of them, for the lorde your God goeth wyth you,Num. xxi to fight for you, agaynst your enemies, that he may saue you. Whan thou commeth nygh vnto a city too fight agaynst it, thou shalt offer thē peace. But if they wyll not deale peaceably with the,Deut. x. c & wil warre with the thē befege it. Whā thou must ligh a lōg seasō before a city agaynst yt which thou makest war to take it, thou shalt not destroy ye trees nor heawe thē down with ye axe for thou mayest eate of the frute, for it is but woode vppon ye felde and no man, & cannot come & be bul warkes against the. But the
trees that thou knowest that mē eate not of, those shalt thou de∣stroy, and rote out, and make bul warkes thereof against the citie that warreth wyth the tyl thou haue ouercome it. Let hym that is a fear de & faynte, turne home agayne.Mat. iii b i. Ieg. 14. It is a smal matter for many to be ouercome with few, yea, ther is no difference too the God that is in heauen-to deliuer bi a greate multitude or by smal companye, for the victory of the battell standeth not in the mul∣titude of ye host but the strength commeth from heauen, ye Soul∣diours do no man wrong,Luk. iii. b and be content with your wages. Exhortacion to custumers toluers, and publicanes. ye custumers and tolners, re¦quire no more of the people then is apoynted you. Exhortacion to lombardes & vzurers.
If thy brother ware pore and fal in decay beside the,Leuit. 25 Exo. xxv Deut. 24 Ezech. 18 thou sha receaue hym as a straunger ∣gest, that he may lyue by the, and thou shalt take no vsury of hym, nor more then thou hast geuen, but shalt fear thy God, that thy brother may lyue beside the. For thou shalt not lend hym thy mo∣ney vppon vsury, nor delyuer hym thy meate vppon aduaun∣tage. Let no man take vsury of his brother.Deut. 24 Ero. xxii Leui. xxv Thou shalt occupye no vsury vnto thy brother, ney∣ther with money nor wyth food nor wyth any maner of thyng ye vsury may bee vsed withall, that the lorde thy God may blesse the in all that thou takest in hand. Whā one of thy brethern is wax¦ed pore in any cyt ye within the land whiche the lord thy GOD shall geue the,Deu. xv a . Iohn. 7 thou shalte not hardē thyne hart, nor withdraw
thyne hande from thy poore bro¦ther, but shall open thyne hand vnto him & send hym according as he hath nede. Beware yt ther be not a point of belial in thine hart, thō  thinke not ye he shal not geue it the agayne. For if thou lokest not frendly vppō thy brother,Rom. x. b & geuest hym nothyng them shal he cry ouer ye vnto the lorde, & it shalbe counted synne vnto ye. But thou shalt geue him For because of it shall ye load thy God blesse the in al thy workes, & in al that thou puttest thy hād vnto. The land shall neuer bee without pore, therfore & maund I the & say, yt thou open thine hā de vnto thy Brother, whiche is nedye and poore in thy land. If thou lend a pore body (sayth god) thou shalte not lye downe to slepe wyth hys pledge,Deu. xiiii shalt delyuer hym his pledge a∣gaine
gayne whan the Sunne goeth downe yt he mai slepe i his owne rayment & Blesse the so shal the same be rekened vnto rightuousnes before ye lord thy God.Psal. xiiii Lord (sayth dauid) who shall dwell in thy tabernacle: Who shal res vp¦pon thy holye hyl. Do that swea¦reth vnto his neighbour and dis¦apointeth him not. He yt geneth not hys money vppon, vsury, & taketh no rewarde, agaynst, the innocent.Ezech. 18 If a man doe Godly, & do the thyng that is equall, and ryght, be greueth no bodye, he geueth hys detter his pledg a∣gayn, he parteth his meat wyth the hungry, he clotheth the na∣ked, he lendeth nothyng vpō, vsu¦ry, he withdraweth his hand frō doyng among, he hādeleth fayth fulli betwixt man & mā.Mat. ii▪ Psal. xiii This is a rightuous man, he shal surely lyue, sayth the lorde God. Thou
hast receyued giftes too shedde bloud. Thou hast taken vsury,Ezech 2 2 & increase Thou haste oppressed thy neyghbours by extorcion, & forgottē me, sayth the lord God. He that hath pitie vppon the po∣re lendeth vnto the lord,Pro. xix. and loke what he layeth out, it shalbe payed hym agayne. Exhortacion to Whore moungers, and fornicatours. The lyppes of an harlot are a dropping hony combe,Pro. v. b. Prouer. 7 and her throte is softer thē oyle. But at the last she is as bytter as wor∣mewode, & as sharpe as a two ed¦ged sworde. Her fete goo downe vnto death, and her steps pearse thorow vnto hel. She regardeth not ye path of life so vnstedfast a∣re her wayes yt ye cast not knowe thē. Heare me therfore (O my sō∣ne) and depart not from the wor¦des
of my mouth. kepe thi waie farre frō her, & come not nygh ye dores of her house. That thou morne not at the last (whē thou hast spent thy body & goods) and then say. Alas, why hated I nur¦tour? Why dyd my hart despise correction? Wherfore was not I obedient vnto the voyce of my teachers and harkened not vnto thē that enformed me?Pro. v. c. Iob. 31. a My son∣ne, whi wilt thou haue pleasure i an harlot, & enbrace the bosom of an other woman? For euery mans wayes are open in ye sight of the lord & he pondreth al their goinges.pro. xxx. c The mouth of an har∣lot is a depe pyt wherin he fal∣leth that the lord is angry with al A folish retcheles womāful of wordes, & suche one as hath no knowledge sitteth in the dores of her house vpon a stoole aboue in the city,Pro. ix. b. to call such as go by,
and walke strayght in their wa∣yes. Who so is ignoraunt (sayth she) let him comhither, and to the vn wise she sayth, stolen waters are swete, & the bread that is pri¦uely eatē, hath a good taste. But they consider not that death is there, & that her gestes go downe to hell. He that loueth harlots,Pro. xxix spēdeth a waye all that he hath. Turne away thi face frō a beau¦tifull woman, & loke not vppon the fayrenes of other. Many a man hath perisshed thorowe the beaut ye of women, for thorow it the desier is kindled as it were a fyre. A whoore is a depe graue and a harlot is a narrdow pit.Eccl. ix. x Mar. v. c She lurketh lyke a these, & those that be not aware, she bryngeth vnto her. Let vs not cōmit who∣redome as some of them dyd, and fell in one day, thre and twenty thousand.
The wyll of God in that ye shuld absteyne from whoredom,ii. Tess 4 Ephe. iiii. Tob. vi. d Roma. i c that euery one of you shulde knowe how to possesse his vessel in holynes and honour, and not in the lust of concupiscence as ye heathen whiche know not God.Ephe. iii Mat. xiid Let no fylthy communication procead oute of thy mouth, but that whyche is good too edify withal. And greue not the spirit of God, wherwith you are sea∣led vnto the day of redemption. Fle whordom,i. Cor. 6. c All synnes that a man doth, are without the body. But he that committeth whore∣dom synneth agaynst hys owne body. Know ye not that your bo¦dye is the Temple of the holy∣ghost? whome ye haue of God, & are not your owne.Gall. v. c i. Cor. vib Aduouterers whoremongers, fornicatours, & vnclean parsons, shall not inhe∣ret the kingdome of God. Shuld
I then (sayth the lorde) for all this haue mercy vppon the?Iere. v thy chyldren haue forsaken me, and sworne by them yt are no Gods. And albeit they were bound too me in mariage, yet they fell to ad¦uoutery, & haunted harlots hou∣ses. In the desyre of vnclenly lust,Ezech 2 2 Iere. ix a they are hecome lyke the sto∣ned horse, euery man neyeth at hys neyghbours wife. Shuld I not correct this, sayth the lorde? And shuld I not be avenged of e∣ueri people that is like vnto this Exhortacion to dronkardes. Wo bee vnto thē that rise vp early, to vse thē in dronkennes,Iob. xxi b & yet at nyght are more superflu∣ous in wine. In whose cōpanie are harpes & lutes tabrettes & pi¦pes. But thei regarde not ye wor¦kes of the lord, & consider not the operacion of his handes.
Wo be vnto them that are con∣ning men to sup out wine,Pro. iii. a and expert to set vp drokennes. Whe¦re is wo? Where is sorrow? Whe¦re is stryfe? Where is brawling? where are woundes without cause?Pro. xxiii Where be read eyes? Is it not amōg those that bee euer at the wine, & seke onelye wher the best is, & occupy thē selues to dri∣ke out goblets, glasses, & cups? Loke not thou vppon the wyne howe read it is, & what colour is in the glasse. It goeth down softly, but at ye last it biteth lyke a serpēt, & styngeth lyke an Ad∣der. And whā a mā is dronke,Luke. xi. c Rom. xiii he casteth hys eyes vnto straunge women, & doth muse vppon fro∣ward thynges. Take hede vnto your selues that your hartes be not ouerladen with excesse of ea¦ting & with dronkennes.ii. Esdraii Wyne is maruel ous strong, and ouer
commeth thē that drinke it / it de∣ceaueth the mind / and bringeth both the pore man & the kyng to dotage & vanitie.Pro. xx Thus doth it with the bondmā / & wt the free / with the poore & rych. It taketh away their vnderstandinge / and maketh thē careles & mery, so yt none of thē remēbreth any heaui¦nes, dette / or duety. It causeth also a man to think that ye thing which he doth is honest & good, & remembreth not in what au∣ctorite he is / & that he ought not to do such thinges. More ouer when men are drinking, they forget all frendship, all brotherlye faythfulnes & loue. But as sone as they are dronken they drawe oute the sweard & wil fight. And whā they are layd down frome their wine / & so rysen vp agayn, they cā not tell what they dyd. Wine is a voluptuous thing &Pro. xx. a
drōkennes causeth sediciō,Ephe. v.b who so delyteth therin, shal neuer bee wyse.Proue. xi Ephe. v. Bee not ye a wyne bybbet for wyne hath destroyed mani a man. O how wel contēt is a wi∣se man with a lytle wine? The fire proueth the hard yron, euen so doth wine proue ye hartes of ye proud, whē their be drōken. Wine soberly dronken, quikeneth the life of mā. If ye drinkest it mesura¦bly, thou shalt be tēperate. Wine was made from ye beginnyng to make mē glad (& not for dronken¦nes) wine measurably drōken, is a reioycyng for y• soule & bodye. But if it bee dronken wt exeos, it maketh bitternes & sorrow vnto the minde. Dronkennes tilleth ye mind of the folish, with shame, & ruine, diminisheth the strength, and maketh woundes. Bee not dronken, for therin is exces. Exhorcaciō vnto al sinners generally
The same soule that sinneth shal dye. The child shal not bea∣re the fathers offence, nether shal the father beare the childes offē∣ce. But the rightuousnes of the rightuous shalbe vpon him selfe and the wickednes of the wicked shalbe vppon him selfe also. But if the vngodlie wyll turne awaie from all his synnes that he hath done & kepe my commaundemē∣tes, & do the thinge that is equall and right, doutles he shall lyue & not dye. And I wyll thinke no more vppon all his sinnes that he did before. For I haue no plea¦sure in ye death of a synner (saith the Lorde God) but rather that he conuert and lyue. A generall exhortacion vnto al men. Thou shalt reprehende thy brother whan he synneth, least hys offence come ouer all men.
Be ye all of one minde, one suf∣fer with an other, loue as bre∣thern, bee pitifull, be curteous. Recompence not euell for euell, nether rebuke for rebuke, but contrary wyse, blesse, & knowe that ye are called therto, euen that ye shulde bee heyres of the blessyng. For who so listeth to ly¦ue,Geue. xii. Mat. xv & wold fayne se good dayes let hym refrayn hys tonge from euell, and hys lyppes that they speake no gyle. Let hym eschue euell and do good. Let hym seke peace, and ensue it. For the eies of the lord are ouer the rightuons, and his eares are open vnto theyr prayes. But the face of the lorde behol∣deth them that do euell. Finis.
A ryght Good¦ly rule how al faithful Chri¦stians ought too occuppye; and exercise them selues in their day¦ly prayers. Luke. xxii. Math. vi. Christ teacheth vs in hys Go∣spell, saying Pray that ye fall not into temptacion. How a man shall behaue hym selfe in the morning when he ry¦seth. Whan thou rysest in the mor¦nyng, loke that thou wyth all humblenes of mind knele downe & lyftyng vp thy harte thy han∣des, and thyne eyes vnto heauē vnto God the father almyghty, praye on this manyer.
The prayer for the mornyng. O Almighty and most gentse God, we thanke the for the swete flepe & cofortable rest ye thou hast geuen vs thys night. And for as much as ye hast cōma∣unded by thi hol worde, that no man shuld be ydle, but alwaies occupied, in vretous exercises euery man accordyng to his cal¦lyng. We most humbly beseche the that thyne eyes may atend vppon vs dayly doinsh vs, in for now out vs, cher she, cōfort and gouerne all our councel, u dyes, & labours. In suche wyse that we maye so spend this day accordyng to thy inost blessed will withoute huringe of oure¦neyghbour, that we may diliēt¦ly and warely eseue and auoy∣de althynges that siilde displea¦se the, set them alwayes before
our eies, lyue in thy feare, & euer worke that, that ma befound acceptable before thy diuine ma¦ieste vnto the prayse of thi moost holy name, through Iesu Christ our sorde. So bee it. An other prayer for the Mornyng. SEing that thou (O heuely father) art that one & alo∣ne almightie god, whiche art in euery place, bholdest the councels, deusses & workes, yea the verxe thoughtes of all men, & geuest to euery one according to their dedes. We beseche the that (for as muche as thou hast moost gracioussye preserued vs thys night) we may not spod this day after our owne minde & pleasure (whyche is alwayes, euell and cked) but earnestly loke vp∣pon, and dylygenly folow thy fatherly wyl, thyne euerlasting
councell, thy healthfull word, & pleasure which is alwayes good perfect and holy, and fulfyll the same wyth good harte, that thy diuine name may alwayes bee sanctifyed, both now & euer for vs myserable synners, through thy derely beloued sonne Iesus Christ, our lord and sauiour So beyt. After that thou hast prayed on this maner (seing that we be all synners) it shall be expedient (if thou hast conuenient leasure therunto) to confesse thy self on this maner vnto God the father. The confession of our synners vnto God the father. O Almyghty God, and hea∣uenly father, maker of hea¦uen & earth, I confesse my selfe vnto the euen frō the very hart,
that I am a miserable wretched and abhomynable synner. And haue wyckedly trangressed all thy holy commaundementes, & the diuine preceptes of thy God¦ly wyl. The synnes (alas which I haue committed in my flesh a∣gaynst the) are so great and so ex¦cedingly increased, that thei are no lesse innumerable then ye san¦des of the sea, And they thrustme downe euen as an intollerable burdē. In these wicked sines (oh lord God) haue I hetherto wal∣ked accordyng to the wyll of the prince of the worlde, whyles I dyd that was pleasaunt too the Fleshe and euell lustes, through vayne thoughtes, the blindnes of my hart, the outward presen∣ce of Godlynes, & fayned fayth. Thys cam too passe (Ah wretch that I am) because that I did ne¦uer earnestly stryue agaynst the
suggestions of Sathan, nor the concupiscences or desyres of the world, nor yet the lustes of my flesh. But filthily obeyed them a thousand tymes more, than the admonicions of thy holy spirite. O lord my God. It cam to passe also, that I dyd set nought by thy Godly counsell dispised thy holy name and feared thy ven∣geaunce and heauy displeasure nothing at al. But what soeuer I haue in this behalfe offended thy most Godly maieste, it fore repenteth me, and the faulte gre∣ueth me euen vnto the very har∣te. And if it were not (o most mee cifull father) that thou haddest layde vp mercy in the bowels, bloud and woundes of Iesus Christ thy sonne and our lorde, for so many as vnfaynedlye re∣pent and truly beleue, be theyr sinnes neuer so great & many I
shuld se none other way but throwe my selfe downe headlōg through disperaciō, into the bot¦tomles pit of hell. But for as much as thou hast set thy welbe loued sonne Iesus Christ to bee our mediatour and mercy stocke. And hast promised grace mercye & forgeuenes of sinnes to as ma¦ny as aske it ī his name, through fayth in his bloud. Therefore in this time of grace & mercy, I mi∣serable synner com nowe vnto the, & desier the milord God that ye wil graunt me, thorowe ye our lord Iesus Christ, a ryght, & true fayth. And for hys sake forgeue me al mi sīnes & make me to wal¦ke daili more & more ī a new hart & in ye frutes of ye holyghost, that I may vtterli despise al ye vngod¦ly lustes of this worlde, & that I may bee found continent, pure of lyuing, temperate, good rygh∣tuous,
honest, diligēt in al good∣nes, meke mercyful modest, hum¦ble and redy to forgeue suche as offend me, euen frō the very har∣te. And so lyue all the dayes of my life accordyng to thy diuine wil and true feare. That I may dye to the worlde to all synne, & to my selfe. And wyth a good cō∣fidence and mery hart, loke for the comming of the lorde and my sauiour Iesus Christ. To whom wyth the and the holyghost bee all honour and glorye for euer, and euer. So be it. Thou mayest (if thou wylt) after thy confession say the lor∣des prayer, called the Pater no∣ster. And so commēding thy selfe vnto God, fall to som honest and vertuous exercise accordyng vn¦to thy callinge, but what soeuer thou doest, do it with purenes of
harte, & wyth synglenes of eye yea so do it, as though God were present, and loked vppon the, as vndoubtedly he doth. The prayer too bee sayd when thou goest to bedde. O God the almighty lord, bi whose ordre and will, the night & darkenes do now approch, where in we shall geue our selues to quiet and slepe. We moost instauntly desier the, that thou graciously receaue vs into thy tuicion and keping, that the prince of darkenes do not hurte vs wyth hys terrours and feres. And although we must slepe be∣cause of our feblenes, yet let our hart and mind watcha vnto the. God thou before vs and shew vs the way as a piller of fyre, that we may follow the as wel ī rest, as in busines and occupacions
of this lyfe. And graunt that we be not founde in thy sight, chyl∣dren of night and darkenes, but of daye & lyght through Iesus Christ our lorde. So be it. An other prayer. THis oure mortal bodie, whi¦che through sinne daylie de cayeth & diminissheth, must at ye last altogether perish & be∣come earth, wherof it is come, & made, and thē shall our vanitie, whiche we through our owne ignoraunce haue made vnto our selues, take an ende. But moost mercifull creatour & maker of all thinges vouchsafe so to breake, deuide and dissolue me thy pore creature, who am gathered, knit and made of the, & graunt that I may alwates haue in mind thī dissolucion, and of whome I am knit together, hauing an eye to
what place I must go, to the in∣tent that Inot beinge prepared, be not brought without nupcial or bridal garment, before thy iud¦gement seat. For like as whē the day is ones past, we giue our sel¦ues to rest, euen so must we, this lyfe being ended, rest in ye death. Nothing is more lyke vnto lyfe then the daye, & nothynge more lyke vnto death thē ye night. And nothyng so lyke the graue or se¦pulchre as the coutch bed or bed stead. Thus good keper, and de∣fender from all euell, graunt vs now lying in impotency & seble¦nes of our selues, that thorough the, we may bee preserued thys nyght from all the assaultes of the deuell of hell. Amen. Whan thou goest to thy labour at worke. Prayer.
O Most kynde, and gentle heauenly father, thou knowest, and hast also taught vs, how great the weakenes of man is, so that no man (without thy Godly help) can do nothing. Thus vouchsafe to sēd vs thi ho∣lye spirite, ye he may strengthen, stirre, and moue our vnderstan∣dyng and reason in al thynges that we thys daye outwardly shal go about and take in hande, or of that we in wardli shal thin¦ke or haue in mynde, too the in∣tent that it may all bee done too thy glory, & to the proffit of our neyghbour. So beit. Whan a man is bounde towarde a∣ny iourney. THis ourlyfe moost merciful lorde, is nothyng els but a pilgrimage, and through fare, for we haue here no aby∣dyng
or dwellyng place. We are com from the, and we must retur¦ne agayne vnto the, But amon∣gest or betwene all the trappes, assaultes, pittes and snares, whi¦che the deuell hath layd out and spred abrode, for vs, blynded in synne, vouchsafe thou, o Lorde Iesu Christ, to lead vs with thy right and, for thou art a true, tru¦sty, and sure frende. Open our eyes, to thintent that we mysse not ye way which yu thy selfe art, but leade vs through and by thi felfe vnto thy father to thintent that all we may bee made one wyth the and hym, euen lyke as thou art one wyth him. O moost mercyful lord lyke as thou doest send thy holy Aungels to bee de∣fenders of as mani as serue and please the wyth a symple inno∣cent and pure hart, by the whi∣che they be led lyke yong childrē
are led of them whiche are elder, & stronger than thei. And lyke as thou diddest vouchsafe too sende thyne Aungell Baphaell, to be a guyde vnto the Sonne of that reuerent man Tobi, vouchsafe euen so (O Lorde) to send vs the same Aungell, although we are not so worthy as the same Tobi was, that he may encourage, & lead vs through that way whi∣che is not pleasaunt vnto vs but vnto the. So be it. Whan a man commeth home or is at his sourness ende. Thankesgeuing and prayer. I Thanke the, o heauenly fa∣ther, for thy great grace, & mercy, which thou hast she∣wed vnto me in going forth and in returnyng or cōming agayne through thi holy blessing which thou geuest vnto all them that
kepe thy holye word, and do ther after. Graunt vs o gracious god here where we haue no abyding or dwellyng place, a sure and quiet consciēce through thy son∣ne Iesus Christ who is our one∣ly rest So be it. For Kinges, Princes and Rulars. Praper. O Lorde of lordes Iesus christ thou art an example and glasse mirroure of thē which gouerne and beare rule of reaimes, countreyes and cities, whom thei ought to follow, for thou art the best & the wisest, and therfore canst thou not erre nor doo any other thyng but well. Vouchsafe with the light of thy clearnes & wt the fire of thy loue to kindle ye hartes of al such as yu through thy Godly prouidence
hast instituted, and ordeyned to bee rulers ouer the people, to the intent that they through the as through or by a foregoing light may se and perceiue what is best to be done, and fulfyll the same and that they takyng the alwa∣ies for a sure marke of their eye, do not that thynge which one∣ly seameth good in their syght, but that whiche may bee too thy honoure, to our proffit & to their health and saluacion, to thintēt also that they may iustlye, and duely minister, and execute their office geueng vnto thē of the so that we wyth thē and thei wyth vs may lead a peaceable, ver∣tuous and quiet lyfe. So beit, For all teachers and preachers of the moost holy word of God. Prayer.
O Mercyfull priest chefe Bi∣shop and true good heard IESVS Chryst, vou∣chesafe through thy holy spirite to strengthen all preachers, and teachers whiche thou hast cal∣led, and sent to be labourers in thy holy haruest, for to breake, and distribute the bread of thy holy word, to thintent that thei may boldly, & earnestly set their soules in the defence of thy holy word, and for their shepe against all the threateninges, and false prophets, whiche go about to se¦duce, and bryng vs out of the right waye, for their bellyes sa¦ke, through their false doctrine, To the intent that they may so teache, and declare vs thy holy lawes and Gospe I that we may be taught and edyfied, and that also thy Godly honour mai day¦ly more, and more bee magny∣fyed
thereby. Amen. For all them which lye in the exte me panges of death, or otherwise. O Pytifull phisicyan & hea∣ler both of soule and body Christ Iesu. Vouchsafe too cast thyne e yes vppon thy poore sin∣nefull creature. N. who lyeth here captiue, & bound wt sicknes turning hys weakenes too thy glory & to his health. And vouch safe good lord, to sende hym pa∣ciēt sufferaunce that he may sted fastly continue to the ende, and that he may with a true and per¦fecte fayth fyght manfully a∣gaynst all temptacions of the deuell, when he maye no longer cotinue. So be it. For all women bound with the lor∣des bandes. Prayer.
Good truharted lorde Iesu Christ, lyke as thou diddest confort & deliuer thy disci∣ples, & all elect & chosen men and women, in al their nede, martir∣dome, and paynes whiche they suffred of the tyrauntes wrong∣fully, and diddest also cure & hea∣le them of their wondes, paynes and smart, thore we hope of the crowne of euerlastyng lyfe. Euē so vouchsafe (thou whiche art a helper of all thē that call on the in trouble and nede) to delyuer this pore, weake vessell which is here bound with a fruit after thi¦ne owne similitude and lykenes (not withstanding that she hath deserued in transgressynge of thy holye commaundement to bryng furth her chyldren in paying, and wo) that she may bee made a glad and ioyfull mo∣ther through that new creature
wyth good spede, that the chyl∣de may haue name and christen∣dome, and that the mother may be purified to thy honour, and to hyr health So beit. For all parsons generally. Prayer. O Worthy brydegrome of all Chrystē soules IESVS Chryst, who hast a lyngu∣ler respect to thy congregacion which thou also promisedst that thou woldest neuer forsake hyr▪ Reioyce augment and encrease the same, through a spirituall conuersion of many new crea∣tures, of them whiche as yet do not perfectly knowe the, too thintente that all we together, through one God, one sautour, one fayth, one baptism, one spiri¦te, one iudgement, and mynde,
may bee made chyldren of  heauenlye   whereof  a co  the one  Iesu Chryst , & aic∣toure of peace loue and good∣nes, mollyfy and soften our har¦tes and all our powers that we (wisshyng all goodnes the one to the other) we specially that beare the name of Christians to the intent that al men may ther¦by bee drawen vnto the, and se that we are thy disciples and followers. For the Cytie or towne where in thou dwellest. Prayer. Except thou (o mercyfull lorde God, almighte) kepe the Citie, the watch men
wake but in vayne that kepe it Therefore o lorde God, send thy holy spirite in the hartes, of thē whiche rule our cytie or towne to the intent that we wyth thē, and they with vs, may lyue in thy Godly feare, so that it may go well wyth vs. And suffre vs not good lorde, to put out trust any more in worldly power as money, horse, weapon, artillery gonnes or stronge walles, but much rather in the whiche art a defender of al thē that put their whole affiaunce and trust in the For all frutes of the earth. Prayer. O Good father and geuer of all goodnes god almightie we poore sely wormes of the earth, labour and take pay∣nes, dyg and delue, tyll & plow,
plant & sowe, & can do no more But thou onely mayest & wylt gene the encrease in due tyme. Therfore moost best, yea, onelye good father and God vouchsafe (through thy diuine prouidēce) to preserue and kepe all the fru∣tes of the earth, & suffre the same to grow and encrease too a per∣fect grouthe, althoughe we are not worthy of it, out for thy na∣mes sake, too the intent we may vse them to our necessitie, & sus∣tinaunce with thankesgeuinge and alwayes to thy glory. So be it. A generall confession. O Lorde God almighty, fa∣ther of mercy and God of all confort,Rom. iii. Gene. vi. and .iii. we thy pore crea∣tures resort vnto the knowled∣ging and cōfessing our selues be¦fore thy glorious maiestie, that we al are greuous sinners & can
of our selues doo nothyng but synne. For al our ymaginaciōs, intentes and thoughtes are en∣clined, and disposed vnto euell from out youth vp.Osee. xiii ii. Cor. ii. Phili. ii. Gene. iii. Ephe. ii. Psal. lii. Iohn. xv. Eza. lxi. ii Iere. xii. Our damp∣nacion commeth of oure selues, we oure selues are not able to thynke a good thought It is thou only that doest worke in vs both the will and the dede. We are but earth and naturallie the children of wrath. We of our sel¦ues are but vayn, yea lighter then vanite it selfe. We can do nothing without the ther is not one of vs whole, we are all vn∣clean and all our rightuousnes is but as a fylthy cloth. We ha∣ue no more power to do good of our selues, then a man of Inde hath power to chaunge his skin¦n, or the leopard hir spots. No∣we according to this euell, and corrupt inclinacion of our na∣ture,
so haue we liued ī thought word and de.danil. ix We haue syed we haue ded, we haue gone back frō thy laid & haue not har∣kened vnto thy worde. We haue not loued the o lorde our god, vs all our harte with all our soule, withall our strength and wyth all our power. We haue bene so∣re transgressours of thy comina∣undementes, we haue not put our whole trust and confidence only in the. We haue in our trou¦bles & nede not sought for helpe onely in the. We haue not called onely vppon thi name, but with false confidence with vayne su∣persticion, and vnaufull othes haue we blasphemed thy name. We haue prayed and made inter¦cession vnto stockes, and stones and made thy creatures our ad∣uocates and mediatours, contra¦ry to thy woorde We haue repo∣sed
our trust and affiance in our owne dedes and in suche woor∣kes as haue bene deuised by mē∣nes fantasies▪ besides the scri∣pture. We haue wandred on vayne pilgrimages offringe vp money, candels and tapers too ymages and relykes, with suche lyke supersticion. We haue bene slouthfull in our busines We ha¦ue not bene feruent and diligēt in doinge of our duetie, special∣ly on such dayes as bee appoin∣ted for ye preaching of thi word, we haue not plyed our selues wholy to learne it, nor occupied our tyme in prayer and geuyng of thankes vnto the. And as tou¦ching ye loue that we ought too haue vnto all men, and women for thy sake, we haue not ben er∣nest in at al tymes We haue not loued our neighbour as our sel∣ues. We haue not done as we wolde bee done vnto. We haue
been vngentle, vnpaciēt, vncur∣teous, froward, angry & displea¦sed, we haue reioyced, in our neighbours hurt, & bene sory of his welfare, We haue bene ledde wt false doctrine & ours frō the way of thy truth. We haue syn∣ned wc our fathers we haue done amys. We haue dealt wickedly. Therfore our moost dere father which art in heauē, for as muche as we haue blasphemed the, and not sought alway the glory of thy name, graunt nowe ye from hense forth thy name maye bee sanctified, and hallowed in vs, Graunt now that thy kingdom may come, and that in steade of sinne & errour, yu onelye mayest raigne ī vs, graunt nowe yt our wil may be cōformable vnto thi¦ne, and that in all aduersitie we may be hartely wel content too suffre thy will to bee done in vs.
Graunte nowe, that we bee ne∣uer destitute of our dayly food, but that we may all way be no∣risshed wyth thy word in our soules, and haue suche a compe∣tent lyuing in this lyfe, as is ne¦cessary for our bodyes Graunt now, that we may euen from our hart rotes forgiue one an o∣ther all maner of trespace, as thou for Iesu Chrystes sake thy sonne hast mercifully forgeuen vs. Graunt now that where as the world the deuell & our owne flesh doth dayly tempt and pro∣uoke vs to synne, we may tho∣row that strength be able to re∣sist all their temtacion. Graunt now that thorow thy helpe and grace, we may be delyuereo from all euell, from all daunger and parell of soule and body, from all synne, hell and damnacion, from all pride, and enuy, from
al wrath and slouthfulnes, from couetous vnmeasurable and fyl¦thy lyuing. Graunt nowe, that from hence forth we maye bee content wyth suche fatherly prouision as thou hast made for vs alredi. Graunt now that we maye bee temperate in eatyng, and drinking. And of so honest and clenly conuersacion, that we gyue no man occasion of e∣uell. Graunt now that in stead of our olde fayned workes we may bee occupyed wyth suche frutes of thy holy spirit as thy word maketh mencion of. Gra∣unt now, that accordyng to thy wholsom moniciō of thy blessed apostle Peter, and of all the scr∣pture besyde,Peter. we may be fayth∣full, true and obedient vnto the kyng our souereygne lorde, and supreme head immediatly vnder chryst. And not onlye vnto all
suche officers as be sent of hym but also vnto al suche wholsom lawes, and iniunctions as by hys auctorite bee made for the tranquilitie & welth of vs hys subiectes. Graunt now that we all may encrease in the knowled¦ge of the, that oure youth may be brought vp in vertu, that chil¦dren maye obeye their fathers, and mothers, ye seruauntes may be true to their masters, that lād lordes may bee gentle to their tenauntes, that husbandes may be louing to their wiues, & wy∣ues lykewise to their husbādes, that men maye kepe their hou∣shold in the feare and knowledge of the that ydle people may bee set to laboure, and that all suche as bee poore in dede, may be wel and louingly prouided for. Gra∣unt that for the loue of the, we may fede the hōgry, gyue drinke
to the thursty, clothe the ked, giue con to  that ee  the that  prig &  such as   now  ther that what soeues thou forbid∣dest, we may forbeare it, & what soeuer thou oendest,  we may euery one in hys call you performe the same, and so conti∣nue in thy seruice tyll our lyes ende, that all our thoughtes, wordes and dedes may redound vnto the glory of the, now and euermore. Amen. Thankes be geuen to God, obedience vnto our prince, and loue to our neyghbours. The oracion of Iob in his most gre∣uous aduersitie and losse of goodes.
Nked cam I out of mi m¦chees wombe, and naked shall I turn agayne. The lorde gaue, and the lorde hath taken away, is it hath leased the lord so is it donne, now blessed be the name of the lorde. Prayer in prosperite. I Geue the thankes, o God almighte whiche not onely hast endued me wyth the gif¦tes of nature, as reason power and strength, but also hast plen∣tifully geuen me the substaunce of thys worlde I knowldge o lorde that these are thy giftes, and confesse wyth holy Sainer Iames that ther is no perfet nor good gift but it commeth frō the (o father of lyght) whiche geuest frelye and castest no man in the teth. I knowledge wyth the pro¦phet Agge, that golde is thyne
and siluer is thine, and to whom it pleaseth the thou geuest it, to the godly, that they may bee thy disposets and distributours ther¦of, and to the vngodly, to heape vp their damnacion wythall. Wherefore my moost mercifull God, I humbly beseke and desire the to frame in me wyth thy ho∣ly spirite a faythfull hart, and ready hand to distribute these thy good giftes accordyng too thy wyll, and pleasure, that I treasure not vp here, where the∣ues may robbe and mothes cor∣rupt, but to treasure in thy hea∣uenly kyngdome, where ney∣ther thefe may steall, nor mothe defyle, too myne owne comfort (whom of thy mercy thou hast promised to reward therfore) too the good example of the humble and meke of thy congregacion and to the glorye of thy name.
To whome with thy sonne an holyghost, bee all honour and prayse worlde without ende. Amen. The maner or saying grace after the doctrine of holy scripture. Grace afore meate. THe eyes of all loke vnto the O lord, and thou geuest thē their food in due ceason, Thou openest thine hand & fyl∣lest euery lyuing creature with thy blessyng. O our father which art in. &c Grace afore meate. I know (sayth the Apostle) and am full certified in the lorde Iesu,Rom. 1 r  that ther is nothyng vn∣cleane of it selfe, but vnto hym that iudgeth it to bee vncleane, to hym it is vncleane. But if thy brother be greued ouer thi meat,
thē wakest thou not now after charit,  not th thy meate him, or  ed O our father wch art in. &c. Grace afore meate. Let not our treasure there∣fore be euell spoken of.Rom. 14 For the kyngdom of God is not meate, and drinke, but rightuousnes & peace and ioye in the holyghost. O our father which art in. &c. Grace afore meate. Meate doth not further vs vnto God. If we eat,i. Cor. 8. we shall not therefore bee the better, If we eat not, we shall not there∣fore bee the worse. But take he∣de that thys your lybertie bee not an occasion of falling to the weake. Grace afore meate. Meate hath God created to bee receaued wyth thankes,i. Tim. of
which beleue and know ye truth. For euen crre of God is good and nong to bee refused that is reaed wth thankes ge∣uyng, for it is sanctified by the woorde of God and prayer. Our father whiche art in. &c. Receaue your meate without grudgyng, Take hede ye neuer abuse the same▪ Geue thankes to God for euery thyng, And alwai prayse his holy name Who so doth not, is sore to blame No e∣uell en ensample se that ye gyue Thus dooth Gods worde tea∣che you to lyue. What soeuer ye doo in word or dede do al in the name of our lorde Iesu Chryst geuyng than¦kes vnto God the father by him. Grace after meate.
T  vs  openyng  for fyllyng  full blessing  the, for thy son  not onely t  from abung o  ∣so to lend vs thy  hat we may euer dee t  vnto the therfore. Amen. Grace after meate. Thankes be vnto the, O lord God almightie (most beare father of heauē) for certifying vs y thi blessed worde, that all kynde of meates are cleane, & we beseche the lend vs thy grace, that we may alway thankfully receaue the same, not onely without su∣persticion or srupulosyte of con¦sciēce, but also without greuing
oure brethern, And s to w in  wy of Godly lo and  wth our mete  hym, for wh  Iesus Christ dyed a  as or vs. Grace after meate. Thākes bee vnto the, O God almightie (moost dere father of heauē (for openyng vnto vs thy blessed worde, which is our trea∣sure, our pearle, yea, & our ryches more precious then eyther golde or precious stone. And we besech yt though corporal meate & drike be no part of thy kyngdome, yet ordre thou vs also in receauing the same, that we neuer geue oc¦casion of slaundring thy woorde or offending the weake. Amen. Grace after meate. Thākes be vnto yt O lord God almighty (moost deare father of heauē) for laying vp our salua∣ciō only in thi selfe, & not in any
kynde of meate. And we besech ye guide vs so in the se therof that we may follow such  make for peace, &  edify one an other  to¦geue vnto the weake  occa∣sion of falling from thy worde. Grace after meate. Thākes bee vnto the O lorde god almight ye most deare father of heauē for ordeyning thy crea¦tures to bee meate foode & fuste naunce vnto out bodyes, & hast sāctified thē by thy blessed word &c. We besech the make vs so to to encrease in stedfastnes of thy Fayth, in perfecte knowledge of thy truth, & in continuaunce of feruēt prayer vnto ye, yt to vs also thei may be sanctified & holy & ye we may euer both thākefully re∣ceaue thē, & vertuouslie vse thē, to ye good ensāple of other. Amē. Blessed is he that exercisethEccl. 50 d
hym selfe in these thynges. And who so taketh suche too hart, shalbe wise. If he do these thin∣ges, he shalbe strōg in all. For the light of  ord leadeth him.Iohn. 14. If ye know there thinges, Blessed are ye if ye do thē.Luk. 11. e Iocob. 4. Iohn. 2. The seruant that knoweth his lordes will, & doth it not, shalbe beaten with many strypes But he that fulfylleth ye worde of God, abideth for euer. These thynges are written to ye intent ye we shuld beleue,Iohn xx d that Ie¦sus Christ is the sōne of God & ye we thorow hym myght haue life euerlastyng, Whiche the chefest goodnes vouchsafe to geue vn∣to al them that shal eyther heare or rede this present lytle boke. FINIS. IMPRINTED AT London, by Robert Stoughton Dwel∣lynge wythin Ludgate at the singne, of the, Byshoppis Myter.
