c7419 99887656 183281
The Cruel LAND-LORD: OR, The Fortunate Husband-man: Containing a sweet and comfortable Cordial, after sharp and sower Sorrow, as you shall find by this following Ditty. To the Tune of, If Love's a sweet Passion, &c. Lord bring my Soule out of Prison. psal. 142. THere was a poor Man liv'd in Somerset-shire, Who by his loving-VVife had five Children dear; And tho' every day he did work and take pains, Yet so great was his charge and so little his gains, That he scarce could get Bread for to feed them with all, VVhen they did to their Father for Nourishment call. All kind of Provision was rais'd in a trice. Being forc'd an compell'd to give double the Price For our Bread▪ corn, and likewi7s;e all manner of Food; From which Conderation we well may conclude, That it must be a sorrow and grief to the poor VVho receive for their VVork not one Penny the more. The Rich at a plentiful Table do feed, VVhile the Poor they are ready to Perish for need; As by woeful Experience we well understand, For there is many good Familes now in this Land, That can hardly bear up, let them do what they can, Ay, and such was the case of this honest poor Man. His VVife she fell Sick, and did languishing lye, At the end of full seventeen VVeeks she did dye; In which time he could ne'er pay the Landlard his Rent, VVho did threaten him daily, That he should be sent To a Prison, where he should for ever remain, For without Rent he ne'er would release him again. He cry'd, Be not so Cruel, Pray Land-lord forbear, You shall not lose one Penny, I'll work and take care For to pay you next Harvest; yet this was in vain, Having bury'd his VVife, and returning again; He arrested this poor Man, and sent him to Iayl, For he had not a friend that would stand for his Bayl. The cries of the Infants did ring in his Ears, And in sorrow they paid a sad trie of Teers; Yet this cruel Oppressor no pity would show, But to Prison the poor Man was orced to go; VVhile his poor little Infants did weep and bewail, Their dear Mother was Dead, and their Father in Iayl, There was a poor VVidow that liv'd in the Town, VVho did readily proffer to part with a Crown Towards raising a Sum, the said Land-lord to pay, Her example was follow'd by others next day; So they quickly releas'd their poor Neighbour from thrall; Having some what to feed his poor Children withal. About five VVeeks after this Action was done, He had an one loving Cousin, a dear Sister's Son, VVho did dye without Issue, and made him his Heir; Horse and Man being sent for to find him out there. For to take Possion of two Hundred a Year, VVhich does lie in the middle of fair Dorset-shire. Soon after he was in Possion of all, He return'd to the Town, for his friends he did call, VVho had hope him from Prison, requiting there love But the poor honest Widow he honour'd above All the rest of his good Benefactors and Friends, For he took her to VVife for to make her amends, Some blam'd him for making that VVidow his VVife, But he answer'd, saying, She saved my Life, Had it not been for her, I in Goal might have dy'd; She's deserying and worthy to be my sweet Bride; I shall always remember her love and good will, And while life does remain I will honour her still. This cruel Oppressor which was so unkind, He began to be vexed and mad in his mind, He that had been his honest mean Tenant before, Was at last the head Land-lord of his and much more; For the cruelty acted when as his Wife dy'd, He was fearful he would probe a Thorn in his side. Whose Sorrow was evermore sharp and severe, Yet he now has no less then two Hundred a Year; Thus we see how good Providence still does take care, Of the, Poor and the Needy, then who shall dispair? Let us trust in God's Mercies, tho' never so poor. It is he that in love can replenish our Store.
