D2774 99890583 183534
The Scotch Wedding: OR, A short and Pretty Way of Wooing. When as Complexions do agree, And all things they are fitting; Why should the time prolonged be, Be quick and mind your Knitting. To a New Northern Tune, much us'd at the Theatres. With Allowance. IN January last, upon a Munday on the Morn; As along the fields I past, to view the Winter Corn: I ligged me behind the Bray, and I saw come o're the Slow, Yean glenting in an Apron, with a bonny brant brow. I had good Morrow fair Maid, and she right courteously, By Fe and Tro, geud Sir, she said, geud day agen to ye; I said to her, fair Maid, quo I, how far intend you now, Quo she geud Sir a mile or two, to yonder bonny Brow. Fair Maid I'm wéel contented, to have like company, For I am ganging on the gate, where you intend to be; When we had walkt a mile or two, I said to her my Dow; May I not lift your Apron, and kiss your bonny Brow. Nay geud Sir you'r mistaken, for I am na'ne of theise; I wot you ha mare bréeding, then lift a wemans clearhes: Ye knw we Mun for modesty, nea at the first time bow, But if we like your company: we are as kind as you. I Teuk her by the hand so smaw, an I led her o're the Lawn, I gave her many a glancing leuk, so did she me again; I led her in amang the Bent, where nean of awe cu'd see, And then quo I my bonny Lass, now wilt thou mow with me. I dare not deathat déed, quo she, for fear I prove with Bearn, And then may I sing lullabee, and live in mickle scorn; Tush fye, quo I, tack thou ne care, fear not with Bearn to be, For weel I wat next Holliday, that I will wed with thee. I laid htr down upon the Green, and said prove kind my dear; We now are safe from being seen, thou néeds nea danger sea: She blush and smiled in my face, my bonny Lad, quo she, Since we are in this uncouth place, deal kindly now with me. I used all my skill and art, her humour for to please; I prickt her, but she felt no smart, but still lay at her ease; At length I put her to the squeak, and claw'd her bonny weam; Quo she, my heart with joy will break, pray let me now gang heam. When we had ane of love our fill, sea weel she pleas'd my mind; I vow'd I wad be constant still, since that she was so kind; Quo I my onely Duck, my dear, now let us twa agree; How to provide cur Bridal chéer, against we wedded be. The warft on't is, my love, quo she, we want a King I trow, Ne'r rack, quo I, leave that to me, i'le sell my Dodded Yow; Miss John the Vicar is my friend, who will be rul'd by me; An hour or twa with us to spend, when we shall wedded be. Weel ha beath bak'd, & boil'd, & roast, upon our Weddding day, And Will the Weaver at my cost shall on the Bag-pipes play; The Lads and Lasses in the Town, shall at our Nuptials be, And thou shalt have a Tawny Gown, sea weel thou pleases me. Now when the Wedding day was come as they did beath conclude, The dinner was in readiness, the liquor it was brew'd; And so they went unto the Kirk, weel wedded for to be; And made a mickle merry feast, and now lives lovingly. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in West-smith field.
