E3002 99887116 181839
England's New Bell-Man. Ringing into all Peoples Ears, God's Dreadful Judgment to this Land and King∣dom, Prognosticated by the great Eclipse of the Sun, March 29. 1652. the strange Effects to continue, 1654, 1655, 1656. to the Amazement of the whole World. To the Tune of, O Man in Disperation. AWake, awake, O England, sweet England now awake And to thy Prayers speedily, do thou thy self betake; The Lord thy God is coming within the Sky so clear, Repent therefore O England, the day that draweth near. The dreadful day of vengeance, is shortly now at hand, When fearful burning fire, shall waste both Sea and Land; And all means hearts shall fail them to see such things appear, Repent, &c. The worldly wise and prudent, shall fall besides their wits, And wish the Hills to fall on them, in these their frantick sits: No succour, help nor comfort, for them shall then appear, Repent, &c. The Seas and Rivers running, shall roar in grievous wise, The Beasts in Pastures feeding, still strain forth grevious cries. The Skies shall flame with fire, the Earth shall burn so clear, Repent therefore O England. the day it draweth near. The glorious holy Angels, shall then their Trumpees sound The dead shall hear their voices, as they lye in the ground; Then all the Graves shall open, and dead men shall appear, Repent, &c. The Devil will be ready then, each Creature to accuse; And shew how in their life time, they did themselves abuse; And every mans own Consceience, for witness shall appear, Repent, &c. The works of every creature, their thoughts and deeds I say, Shall follow them together, in that most dreadful day: And no respect of persons, shall at that day appear, Repent therefore O England the day it draweth near. BVt such as have done justly, shall wear the Crown of Life; The wicked shall be Damned, to sorrow, pain and grief: In boyling brans of Brimstone, with doleful heavy cheer, Repent therefore O England, the day it draweth near. But woe unto that woman, which then with Child shall go, And to the silly Nurses, which do give Suck also; When as the day of Iudgment so grevous shall appear, Repent, &c. And pray with tears most constant, unto the Lord of might, That in the frozen winter you do not take your flight: Nor that upon the Sabbath, that peril do appear, Repent, &c. Let all good Christian people, repent therefore in time; And from their hearts lamenting, each former grievous crime: Prepare themselves with gladness, to watch when Christ shall come; The trump shall sound, and suddain, and no man knows how soon: Repent, &c. For all things are fulfilled, which Christ before had told, Small Faith is now remaining, and Charity's grown cold; Great signs & wonders we have seen within the Earth and Sky, Repent, &c. Why dost thou put thy confidence in strong and stately Towers, Why takest thou such pleasure, in building sumptuous Bowers: Rejoycing in thy Pastures, and Park of fallow Dear; Repent, &c. Why seekest thou deceitfully to purchase treasure great, Or why does thou through Vsury, the bread of poor Men eat? Why doth the life and living, so filthily appear; Repent, &c. Wherefore let all good people upon their knees proceed, In making earnest Prayer for never was more need; That God may spare the punishment even for his mercy meer, And give Grace to bear in mind, the Judgment day is near. FINIS. Printed for A. M. W. O. and Tho. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane.
