E459 99890198 182536
AN ELOGY Upon that never to be forgotten Matron, Old Maddam Gwinn, Who was unfortunately Drown'd in her own Fishpond, on the 29th of July 1679. MOurners prepare, let doleful Ecchoes sound; To rouse the ghost that trace the silent round And Laethe quaff, in their eternal Boles, Once more T'incorporate their departed Souls. Let all Repair, and as Attendants waite; On this untimely Character of Fate. Yet let Elizium Fields be Guarded, sure Great Pluto there, those Fountains must secure. That send such Rivers forth, which once being tain, They yield a pow'r to reassume again A mortal Shape, and once more view the Skies, If Fame be true, at least Poettick Lies Will Pardons meet, whilst Rome can Oaths translate, We have the power to add, Illusterate. Or else dimnsh as occasion's found, For naked Truth received a papal Wound: And therefore dares not venture on the Stage, Least she become the Monster of the Age. But yet, suppose there is such Streams, then know, That our Advice will profit much below. Look too't then Rodamanthus, for now she, Who has Exhausted France and Normandie; Descends thy Shades, and like Bohemoth will, At one sound Draught, whole Floods of Laethe swill. So that the rest may hope to taste in vain, And yet ne'r find a Cordial for their Pain. But since she's gone, our Tiplers need not fear; For whilst she liv'd true Nants was monstrous deer. Yet Brandy-Merchants, sure have cause to grieve; Because her Fate admits of no Reprieve. Die in their Debts she could not, yet they'l find, Their Trad's decay'd, for none is left behind; That in one Day could twenty Quarts consume, And bravely vaunt, she durst it twice presume. Bounteous she was, unto her self and wou'd; Be sure to taste, what e'r she fancied good. As for the Plot, none e'r could tax her (why?) Because her Soul did Active thoughts defye: She hated Treason, and was always bent; To please her self, with Liquid Element. Nor could a superstitious Thought prevail, To make her in Religious Notions fail. No Transubstantiations would she know, But what destill'd from Pallid Wines did flow. Nor any Relict wou'd she own but that, Which good St. Brandy did from France Translat. Her Care was always to adore the Shrine, Or Tavern-Bush, that had the briskest Wine. One thing of her, I almost had forgot; She oft wou'd praise a season'd Brandy Pot. And with such fervent Kisses grace the Cup, That it consented, when she tost it up These are not half her vertuous Deeds, for still, She would a Pipe with Expedition fill. And then cou'd force the Vapours to abound, That Clouds of Smoak would oft invade her round And so like Juno, undescerned sit, By pleasing Arts, not Charms of Magick Wit. But Fortune to the bravest is a Foe, When least deserv'd, she does most envy show. And often vers, at last she joyns with Fate, And persecutes with undeserved Hate. For this good Matron, that so well was fed; By lean-jaw'd Death, was into Bondage led. I will not say with Typhon's her wast Bulk, O'respread nine Acres, yet her mighty Hulk; Six Foot in Compass was suppos'd to be, Too ponderous for a common Destinie. No Fate when she was sober durst assail, Her well-built Structure, nor could ought prevail. Too strong the Basis were, whereon she stood; That sollid Mass, compos'd with Flesh and Blood Had not perfidious Legs and Feet betray'd; The Element could not have Conquest made. But here's the Plot! As Jesuits assist each other, So pow'rful Brandy, help'd its weaker Brother. And both together did effect, what none Could have perform'd; had it been left alone. So Joynt-Conspiracies oft ruine States, Which are too strong, and brave the Vulgar Fates But since this good Matrona's gone, lets pay Her Obsequies, and weep without delay. Let Briny Tears, from watry Fountains flow, And all the Paths with mournful Ciprus strow. Red-Noses, you that live by drinking, must Attend the Hearse, your places are the first. Next after you, in Order must proceed; Those social Topers, that no Quarrels breed. And next those Heroes, who with Smoak and Fire, Can make the Intrels of a Pipe expire. Those Sons of Vulcan, that his Forge Assume; And Caucus like, can belch perpetual Fume. And then those Ladies must Attendants be, Who are most skill'd in Arts of Gallantrie: As such who scorn, to turn their Backs on Men, But if they Close, will Close with them agen. The next that grace this mournful Train must sing A Catch, or Requiem unto Brandy, King Of all the powerful Liquors, thus we shall Close up this Sceen or Pompous Funeral. EPITAPH. HEre lies intomb'd within this Marble Pile, The wonder of her Sex, who for a while; Fate durst not venture on, but taking Breath, He has resin'd her to the Arms of Death. Readers Lament, for seldom shall you find, The weaker Sex to bear so strong a mind. Strengthened with all the Virtues France or'th Rhine, England, o Spain could ere infuse from Wine. But Bacchus unkind did tempt her to ingage, Where she expired by subtle Neptunes Rage. Tho Fate was Cruel, yet her Fame remains; For drinking, none like her the World contains. To after-Ages then, a Stattue raise, That so we may Eternalize her Praise.
