F1599 99887705 183353
The forsaken Maids Frollick OR, A Farewell to fond Love, In which she doth plainly and properly prove, That a flattering tongue is the ruine of Love, And therefore all you that are well in your wits, Beware of Trappans, Maide look to your Hits. The Tune is, The Knight and begger-wench. YOu Females all give ear, To that which I shall declare and listen unto my Song, I lov'd a young man as fair To me he past compare, my too much Love did me wrong, He often did vow and profest, that he would be true to me: But now he's forsworn I scorn for to mourn, Anothers as good as he. The features of his face Did yeild becoming grace, but his tongue & his heart were base: When first he began to toy, I séemed a little coy, and yet my heart leapt for joy. so frollick he was and frée in coakfing and kissing of me, that had he but more me put too't, I had bin as bad as he, His teeth did appear like Pearls His locks they hung down in Curls, May fetter a thousand Girls, His forehead is mounted high And whiter then Ivory, This is a brave man thought I. His lips had a very good smack, His Eyes were-both bonny & black, Thought I, if I wed, For boord or bed, Here's one that will hold me tack. When he about me clung You would think that an Angel sung, So musical was his Tongue, To make my heart believe He could both sigh and grieve, The Devil so tempted Eve, This flattering fauning Elf, When he had got all my pelf, And squandred my goods, He left me i'th sudds And bid me go hang my self.
BVt tarry, soft and fair, More Men in the World there are why should I fall in despair, Since my first Love is spoyl'd And I am yet undefil'd, Ile never be more beguild. his falshood hath set me frée, and now for another Ile be, harm watch, harm catch. he's met with his match. Let him go and be hanged for me. My spirits I will advance I'le learn to sing and dance, but love now and then by chance, If any Man me will boord, Though he swear by his soul & sword, Ile never believe a Word, my reason shall be my guide, my honesty be my pride, for if we grant them a kiss men think that it is, No more but get up and ride. Tis neither the tongue or pen Of any false-hearted men, shall flatter my faith agen, Since my first Love did get My Money by slye deceit, another shall pay the debt. whatever he gives Ile take and merry my self Ile make, Her mind is amiss That really is A Lover for Conscience sake. If a Suitor do turn a Iew, And will not give Love his due, Why should a young Wench be true If Wooing be but the Way To flatter and then betray, We'l flatter as well as they, For they that can break a vow, Teach women what they shall If o play fast and loose Be good for the Goose, Tis good for the Gander too. For if a deceitful man My treasury will Trappan, I'le Coakes him agen if I can, And if there be ne're a hell For Lovers that lies do tell, A Woman may do't as well, If Batchellors prove not true The Maidens may do so too. Tis Wit for Wit, And Hit for Hit, And this is but Qui for Quo. But yet the powers above Do nothing so much approve, as Loyal and constant Love, When honest intent invites And spirit with spirit unites, those Lovers have true delights, When all the deceitful Gives That cozen by twenty and twelves 'tis forty to one e're the Game be done, They shall be deceiv'd themselves. Printed for W. Whitwood at the Golden Bell at Duck-Lane End.
