G1722 99886968 181529
Great News from Guild-Hall: Being an ACCOUNT of Two Trials on Tuesday. The One of an Eminent Shoe-Maker in the City, Who, for Lascivious Violence offered to his Maid, was Fin'd Six Pounds. The Other of a Gentleman, who gave Love-Powder to his Man- and Maid-Sservant; for which he was also Fin'd One Hundred and Fifty Pounds. To the Tune of, The Guinea Wins her. I. DRaw near to hear this Ditty, that I shall lay before You, Committed in the City; and it's true I do assure You. Come all ye Coblers great and small, And Shoemakers that use the Peggin-Aul; Come all, and hear me Prate, just now I shall relate one of your Brother Trade, Did serve his Serving Maid, near Birching Lane, it's said, He dwelt, that did his Serving-maid assault II. He took her by her Hand Sir, and furiously did Kiss Her; But the Jade she would not stand Sir, altho' he did embrace her: Then up her Coats his Hand he thrust, Like a Dog at Bear, he held it fast: I need not tell you what, for you may guess at that, but as some People say, Six Hairs he hawld away, for which he's forc'd to pay Six Pound, the dearest Hairs that ere was found III. Her Master she did Summon, at Guild-hall to appear Sir, Where the Tryal it was Common, for any one to hear Sir, Her Master, being guilty found, Eor the Fact alas! was fin'd Six Pound: for he could not deny't, but that he took her by it, which cost him very dear, a pound for ev'ry Hair, could she but vend her Ware So well, she might buy the Devil out of Hell IV. Now the Tryal it is ended, and the Pulling Jobb is over; Th' Shoemaker was befriended we plainly may discover; For to his Shame it may rebound, That he for evry Hair should pay a Pound for yet they are not so dainty, one Shilling will buy Twenty: you Gallants give good Ear, and do not steal a Hair, lest that you pay severe, For one, may unto twenty Shillings come. The Second Part. Being an Account of a Gentleman, who gave Love-Powder to his Man- and Maid-Servant, &c. I. THE Eleventh Day of June, Sir there happened such an other; But of a different tune Sir, more unhappy than the other: Which likewise was at Guild-Hall try'd, And heavy fell upon the Masters side; for to his Man and Maid, to make 'em Love it's said, Cantary he did give, a Powder to breed Love: and this he did contrive. That he might a reputed Arrest II. He gave 'em both Cantary, to create a mighty Vigour: But he found it quite contrary, it did operate with Rigour. That which should made 'em both have lov'd, A dire Bane to them had well nigh prov'd. for sick they were indeed, so sick they kept their Bed, their Veins it did infect, that few did Life expect: and for this impious Fact, His Fine, is reckon'd Sevenscore Pounds and Tenn. III. Now I give it as a Caution to you, for the future, You make use of no such Potion, lest your Case should be no better▪ For many Tricks I know are done, With this same Philtre or Loves Potion but let me tell you this, it is a sawcy Price; which makes him sadly mone, to part with so much Coyn for one poor Potion. Alas! His is a very wretched Case. London, Printed in the Year, 1695.
