H475A 52614694 175902
ARTICLES Established by Alexander Hamilton, formerly Merchant in Rouen in France, now in Edinburgh, and his Part∣ners, in the Erecting in the said City, a profitable Adven∣ture for the Fortunat, of Fifty Thousand Tickets, of Half a Crown each. December 9. 1698. IN Imitation of that Adventure of 25 Thousand lib sterl. consisting of 50 Thou∣sand Tickets, at 10 shillings Sterl. each, lately erected and finished at London, by Esquire Neal the Groom-Porter with so great Applause; but without the pos∣sibility of more than an fourth Part of his profit because the Sum here proposed, is but 25 Thousand Crowns, consisting of 50 Thousand Tickets, at half a Crown each: considering the Charges and Pains in managing, are much the same Alexander Ha∣milton and his Partners, at the special Request and Desire of many eminent Persons so fond of the Matter, (that they return Money to London to Invest in those Tickets, which would never be done, if it might be on the same terms done here) do in the same manner▪ propose the giving out 50 Thousand Tickets, at  sh. 6. d. per Ticket, which he will begin to do on Thursday the 14 Instant, at the Old Post-Office, on the north side of the Street a  the Cross▪ where the Ad∣venturers shall be attended every Work day, from 8 in the Morning to 4 a Clock at Night: And its hoped all the Tickets may be distributed against the First of March 1694. At which time, it is here proposed to begin to draw at Alexander Crombies Great-room, opposite to the Entry to the Parliament Closs, and to continue dayly and publickly with the assistance of the Overseers, till ended. And if in the above mentioned time the whole number of Tickets be not compleated, the draught shall yet be made for those that have put in, and the Benefits proportioned to the number of Tickets, of which (by the Overseers) a diligent Calculate shall be made. Otherways, the day of Drawing shall be adjourned for some short time, as the Overseers shall think fit, which shall be published by a Placard. Now to answer the 25 Thousand Crown so to be taken, for 50 Thousand Tickets to be given out at  sh. 6. d. sterl. a piece. There will be 250 benefited Tick∣ets, to make up the said 25 Thousand Crowns, abating 10 per Cent. only, to be allow∣ed for the trouble and Charge; and as soon as the 50 Thousand Tickets are given out and compleated, the Overseers after-named shall Meet, and call for the Books, and see all the Money so placed, as to be ready to be payed on demand, to such persons or their lawful Representatives, as shall present the benefited Tickets.
The Benefited Tickets are to be To be payed in ready Money, when required, without any Rebate whatsoever. 1 Ticket of 3000 Crown 1 of 2500 1 of 2000 1 of 1500. 1 of 1000. 1 of 500. 1 of 300. 1 of 200. 2 of 150 Crowns each 300 50 of 100 Crowns each 5000. 40 of 50 Crowns each 2000. 50 of 40 Crowns each 2000. 100 of 20 Crowns each 2000. And to the first Ticket, whether benefited or not, that shall be drawn besides the Benefite that may come out with it. 100. And to the first Person whose Ticket shall be drawn next after all the Benefited Tickets are taken out. 100. And if it should happen that the last Benefited Ticket should be the last drawn, the said 100 Crowns shall be payed, besides what may come by the said benefited Ticket. ANd to farther explain the Practical part of this matter, Nota, Books will be purposly Printed, with Red Rules, containing the whole Number of Tickets, and of these, three of each sort (as here under-described) just Marked and Numbered alike. NO. 1. With the Adventurers Name, or any other Mark he desires to be put. NO. 1. NO. 1. NO. 2. NO. 2. NO. 2. From which Books, the outtermost Ticket signed by Alexander Hamilton the Undertaker, shall be first cut, and given to the Person that so pays the half Crown for it; the next, which will be just like the Ticket given out, is to be cut, and put into a strong Box, whence it is to be drawn: then the third, just
the same with the other two, will remain still in the said Book. So that to whoe∣ver Chance gives a Ticket that Intitles him to a Benefit, must bring or send the said Ticket to the place where the same shall be drawn, and there it must answer (to prevent all mistakes) the Ticket of the same Number drawn, which will likewise answer that that's left in the Book, and it so appearing to do, the Benefit forthwith to be delivered. And now the better to demonstrat how this is to be drawn and done. Note; All Tickets in the second place to cut out of the Book as aforesaid, just numbred and marked like those given out, are in presence of the Managers and Overseers after-named, to be put up into a large Glass, to be Sealed and Lockt up in a strong Box, and there Jumbled together, and kept so Lockt up, till its drawn. And the Blanks with the 250 benefited Tickets, making together 50 Thousand; In like manner, in the presence of the said Managers, are to be put into another such Glass, to be also Sealed up and Lockt in another strong Box, and there so to remain till drawn out, which is to be done thus. An Oval Table is to be set in Alexander Crombies Great Room aforesaid; round which, the Managers and Clerks in Order are to sit. And at one end shall be placed the Box wherein are the Tickets so numbred and markt as aforesaid; and at the other end of the Table, the other such Box wherein are the benefited Tickets and Blanks; out of both which, one by one (by some Strangers) they are all to be drawn. The numbred Tickets as aforesaid, being put in one Glass, and the Blanks and Benefited in another; The said Glasses sealed up: Just before the Tickets are going to be drawn, shall be taken out of the strong Boxes, and shewed to the Company present, with the Numbred Tickets, Blanks, and benefited Tickets in them; And be then shaked and jumbled together, that there may be no placing of either, which Glasses, shall again afterwards be placed in the strong Boxes, from whence all shall be drawn. First, From among the Tickets so Numbred and Marked▪ One shall be drawn, and before it be opened, or known what Number it is, another shall be drawn for it, out of the Blank and benefited Tickets; And if it prove a Blank, it shal be noted down on a Book, kept for that purpose, to the end every person at his pleasure, may know if his Ticket be yet drawn: But if it does prove a benefi∣ted Ticket, that and the Numbred Ticket shall be both filled up together, (but shall be first Noted by the Clerk, with the said numbered Ticket, at the same time drawn, in a Book kept a-part for that purpose) which Note shall be un∣derwrit by two of the Overseers then present; the said Book to be kept, and shewed in publick and private, and Printed, as soon as all the Tickets are drawn out, that all Persons may see, to what Number each Benefit doth belong, and so accordingly come for the same: And all this, to prevent mistakes as afore∣said, and that no possible suspicion may remain, of any foul Play in this thing. In short, whoever is any way possest of any one of these numbered Tickets, so Signed by Alexander Hamilton the Undertaker aforesaid, will this way be certain, that another such Ticket, so numbered and marked, as that he is possest of, shall for him be put in, and drawn, at this adventure, in presence of the Man∣nagers: Where, whether absent or present, he will have an equal share with the rest, for the Benefits proposed; and be sure, that what Sum of Money soever, good Fortune this way shall design him, on production of his Ticket, that Intitles him to it, shall forthwith be paid at demand, free from all charge, or any de∣duction whatever.
And that all possible fairness in seeing the numbered benefited and blank Tickets, duely put in, and duely drawn out, as they ought, and very other thing right done, which ought to be done in this case: The Viscount of Terbat, Lord Register, and the Lord Beilhaven, both Lords of Their Majesties Privy Council, Sir Thomas Livingstaun Major-General of Their Ma∣jesties Forces, and Commander in Chief in Scotland; Patrick Halyburton and William Minzies, present Magistrats of the City; Collonel Richard Cunning∣hame, Sir James Dick of Priest-field, and Edward Marjaribanks, Merchants in the City: All Persons, who have no interest in Co-partnery, or otherways, with the Undertaker ▪ Have been requested, and have undertaken to be Over∣seers, Directors, and Managers of the whole Affair, in which, there is nothing to be ordered, or done, without the Concurrence of three at least of the Persons before-named; so that there will be no room left, to doubt of justness and fair∣ness, throughout the whole mannaging of it; And nothing ever like this was, at so small advantage, proposed. And lastly, That those to whom Fortune dispenses these benefited Tickets, whether absent, or present, may be certainly sure to have the Money in specie, as herein above-exprest. The said Alexander Hamilton the Undertaker, with Archibald Hamilton and James Grahame Merchants, as Sureties for him, have Subscribed a Bond to that purpose; and Consigned it in the Hands of the Over∣seers above-named, to ly depositate for the behove of the Adventurers. Edinburgh, the seventh Day of December 1693. UPon a Petition given in by Alexander Hamilton, Undertaker aforesaid, To the Right Honourable the Lords of Their Majesties Privy Council, Their Lordships, by their Act of the date foresaid, have Discharged any other Person or Per∣sons then the said Alexander Hamilton, to undertake the above Bank, or profitable Adventure for the Fortunat, for the space of Six Months after the Date of the said Act of Privy Council.
