M272 99887224 183470
The maidens reply to the Young mans Resolution. VVherein she sits him in his kind, And lets him know her setled mind, She can as well live single and not marry As well as he without a wife can tarry. To the Tune of the Young Mans Resolution. COme prethée young man do not fout nor think that I do wait your leisure When for a husband I look out, I can have swéet-hearts at my pleasure: But for to sit you in your kind and let you know that I can tarry; I'le tell you plain what you shall find and when I mean with you to marry. When young men do true hearted prove, and leave off their dissimulation When mountains in the water move, and peace shall be in every Nation: When Whales in little dishes swim, and Castles on their back can carry And slovens they go nect and trim, O hen my Love and I will marry. When women go upon their heads and butchers lose the sense of feeling; When Papists throw away their beads and drunkards they do leave off reeling When Brewers are Protections made, and in great winds away are hurried And painted whores leave off their trade O then my Love and ile be married. When Cherries grow on thistle tops, and Roses are on nettles budding, When women hate good sugar-sops and hungry dogs will eat no pudding: When Gold is strown about the stréets and lies from June till January, And every Coward kills all he meets. O then my Love and I will marry. WHen Ladies cease to long for fruit, and Cavaléers do all turn Quakers, When fools do learned men confute and Coblers they turn Comfit-makers: When Art & Ignorance agree and live together & not vary And Peasecods grow on every tree, O then my Love and I will marry. When timerous Hearts the Hounds pursue and Patridges kills Hawks y'th dozen: When New gate thieves to all prove true and quite forsake to cheat and cozen, When Landlors do refuse their Rent, and for the same they néed will carry And when no Fish is eat in Lent, O then my Love and I will marry. When Christmas pies are out of date and good roast beef is out of season When Children do Plumb-pottage hate and Traytors they do love no treason When Vsurers give away their gold and unthrifts they grow wise and wary, And them are young that once were old, O then my Love and I will marry. When pretty maids for swéet-hearts mourn, and women goes to men a wooing When Ice doth in the water burn then there is like to be wise doing When it rains daggers double hatcht, And Hay is made in February Or when the old one she is catcht O then my Love and I will marry When Madam leaves to paint her face, and Vizard masks are out of fashion, When Courtiers they will wear no lace and forward folks are not in passion When we the French new fashions teach and send them over Charon's Ferry, And Ranters leave in tubs to preach O then Love and I will marry. When wild-géese fly into Cooks shops, and sayes unto the Cooks come take me, And Larks do fall as thick as hops into the pies & sayes come bake me When Beggars all turn Gentlemen and baggs of Gold about them carry, Iust at that time, and not till then, I mean with thee my Love to marry. Printed for J. Williamson at the Bible upon London Bridge.
