N1325 99884938 182709
THE KINGS Entertainment at GUILD-HALL OR; Londons Option in Fruition. COome all ye Muses nine, assist me pray, Here's, work enough to hold you all in play; Lend me your aid also, you Graces three, Aglia, Thalia, and Euphrosyne; And yet you're all too few to guide that quill That means in this Days Praise to try its skill; Wonder and silence would it more proclaim, Than words or Poetry it self by name. Scarce was the Sun arose from Tithon's bed, But London was with Galileans spread Gazing at those Solemnities that were Perform'd in rev'rence to their good Lord Mayor; VVho for his most unparall'd Loyalty, His signal Faithfulness and Charity, Unto the King, the City, and the Poor, VVas of the Citizens Elect, by more Unanimous consents than have been known Conferr'd these many years on One alone. VVho (being attended gallantly by all The Senators and Companys of each Hall, All in their several Barges) hence was bor'n Before th' Exchequer Barons to be sworn, Westminster-Ceremonies being past, To London he returns again at last. The River Thames being all over-spread VVith Boats and Barges was quite covered. Hark how the Drums do beat, & Trumpets play, As if Bellona here, or Mars did stay. The very Syrens, they themselves would be Entrapt to hear so sweet a melody. Look how the Streamers and the Flaggs do flutter, And litle Fishes frisking seem to mutter. Nereus and all the Nymphs did sport and play, Rejoycing at the Tryumphs of that day. The very water seemed to be proud To have the honour to bear such a crowd. Now the Lord Mayor on Shore being safely Landed, To the Guild-Hall is as before Attended; Him all the Pageants with applause saluted, Others with Admiration to him shouted; And in this sumptuous state they all Pass through the Streets to Dinner at Guild-Hall VVhere they the Judges meet, & all the Princely T The Duke, the Queen, the King, whom God gran to R To the Right Honourable Sir Robert Viner, K and Baronet, Lord Mayor of the City of Londo Great SIR, SUpporter of our famous City, Now almost gon to ruine, more's the pity! Be you our Sun, and with your rays expel Those threatning Clouds which in our Orb do sw Our greatest expectations, Sir, do lye In your great Prudence, and your Clemency; Londons Vice-roy, may you our Joseph be, Lay up our Corn against a scarcity; That through your Care, this City London may Help all the Neighbourhood when they're at a sta And that it may with Wealth so much abound That Mints of Money may i'th 'Streets be found: VVhich to effect be you our Solomon, VVho Silver caus'd to be as flush as Stone; And when you have so done, may you enjoy There greatest blessings free from all annoy. May London, You, her great Astrea find; May London to you thankful prove and kind; May you of London take a special Care; May London proud be of so good a Mayor; O blest Conjunction! In one man to see Honour and Arts, Wisdom and Piety! Londons great Hector, and Augustus may You out-live Nestor many an happy day. By John Norton, AEtat. suae LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn, for Rowland Reynolds at the Sun and Bible in the Poultery, 1674.
