p2556g-variant 47012610 174550
A Pleasant new Ballad, to sing Evening and Morn, Of the bloody Murder of Sr John Barlycorn, The tune is, Shall I lye beyond thee. AS I went through the North Coun∣try I heard a merry meeting, A peasnt toy and full of joy two Noble-men were greeting, And as they walked forth to sport, upon a Summers day They met another Noble man with whom they'd had a fray. His name was Sir John Barlycorn, he dwelt down in a Vle And had a Kinsman dwelt with him, they called him Thomas Good Ale. Then one named Sir Richard Beer was redy at that tme, And lkewise came a busie Per cal'd Sir William Wite-wine. Some of them fought in a black Iack, some of them in a Can, But yet the chiefest in a black Pot fought like a Noble man: Sir Barlycorn fought in a bowle, who won the victory, Which made them all to chafe and swear, that Barlicorn should dye Some said him kill, some said him drown, some wisht to hang him high, For those that followed Barlycorn they said would bggers dye, Then with a pow they plowed him up, and thus they did Devise To bu him quick within the Earth and swore he should not rise. With harrows strong they came to him ad burst clods o his head, jofu banqet then was made, when Barlycorn was dead. He restd still upon the Earth, till rain from sky did fall, Then he grew up on branches green. which sore amaz'd them all, Increasing thus till Midsomer, he made them all afear'd, For he sprang up on high and got a goodly beard When ripening to St. James-tide, his countenance waxed wan, Yet now full grown in parter strength. and thus became a man, Wherefore with hooks and sickles keen unto the field they hy'd, They cut his leggs off by the knees and limb from limb divide. Then bloodily they cut him down, from place where he did stand, And like a thief for treachery they bound him in a band, So then they took him up again, according to his kind, And plac d him up in severall stakes to wither with the wind. Then with a pitchfork sharp and long they rent him to the heart. And traytor-like for treason vile they bound him in a Cart. And tending him with weapons strong unto the town they high, Whereas they mow'd him in a Mow and so they let him lye. They left him groaning by the walls till all his wounds were sore, And having took him up again, they cast him on a floore, And hired two with holly Clubs to beat at him at once, Who thwackt so hard on Barlicorn the flesh fell from his bones, Then after took hm up again, to please some womens mind, Yea dustd, fand, and sited him, till he was almost bind. Ful fast thy kit him in a sack, which grieved him very sore, And soundly steep him in a fat, for thrée dayes space and more, From whence again they took him out and laid him forth to dry, Then cast him on a Chamber floor and swore that he should Dye, They rub'd and stird him up and down and oft did toyl and ture. The Malt-man likewise vows his death his body should be sure, Thy puld and hol'd him yet up in spite, and threw him on a Kill, Ya dryd him on fire hot the more to work their will, Then to the Mill they forst him straight whereas they bruise his bones. The Miller swore to murder him betwixt a pair of stones. The last time when they took him up and served him worse then that, For with hot scalding liquor store they washt him in a fat. But not content with this God wot they wrought him so much harm. With cruell threat they promise next to beat him into barm, And lying in this danger déep, for fear that he should quarrel, They heav'd him straight out of the fat and turnd him in the barrell, They cor'd and broached it with a Tap so thus hi Death began, And drew out every Dram of blood whilst any drop would run. Some brought in Iacks upon their backs some brought Bowl and paile, Yea every man some weapon had poor Barlicorn to kill. When Sir John Good Ale heard of this, he came with mickle might, And took by strength their tongues away their legs and eke their sight. Sir John at last in his respect, so paid them all their hire, Then some lay bléeding by the walls some tumbling in the mire. Some sadly droaning by the walls some fell ith stréts down right, The wisest of them scarcely knew what he had done ore night. All you'good wives that brew good Ale, God kéep you from all téen, But if you put too much water in, the Divel put out your Eyne. FINIS.
