s1106 52614925 176089
I7 R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ACT, For taking the Test. Edinburgh, May 13. 1685. OVR SOVERAIGN LORD, with Consent of the Estates of Par∣liament, Statutes and Ordains, That all Protestant Heretors, Liferenters, and others having Right to Liferents, Jure Mariti, Wodsetters, Tacks-men having Tacks for longer time than for eighteen years, all Masters of Ships, and such other Burgesses, and Inhabitants of Burghs, whether of Royalty, Regality, or Barony, as are not Heretors, who shall be appointed by the Privy Council, Take the Test, prescrived by the sixth Act of the Parliament 1681. before the first day of No∣vember, for all such as live be-south the River of Tay, and the first day of January next; for all be-north Tay; And for that end, that all Noble-men, and their Eldest Sons, above the Age of eighteen years, shall compear before His Majesties Privy Council; all Masters of Ships, and Burgesses aforesaid, shall compear before the Provost, or Baillies of the Burgh, to which they belong; and all others foresaid, before the Sheriff of the Shire where they live, at some time before the said day, and there shall Swear and Subscrive the said Test, before the Iudge, and Clerk of the Court, with Certification, That such as fail in Swearing and Subscriving the Test, as said is, shall be punished in such pecunial Sums, as the Se∣cret Council shall Determine to be Disposed of by His Majesty, at His Royal Pleasure. It is alwayes Declared, That this Act extends not to Women. And all Clerks are hereby Ordained to send in Lists of such as have taken the Test, within their respective Iurisdicti∣ons, to the Clerks of His Majesties Privy Council, before the first day of February next to come, under the pain of losing their Office, and to be punished otherways as the Privy Council shall Determine. But such as have already Sworn, and Subscrived, shall not be obliged to renew it on this Occasion. And further, His Majesty, with Consent foresaid, Doth Ratifie and Approve what is already done in offering the Test by His Majesties Privy Council, Iustice Court, or any Commissionat from any of them, or by Sheriffs and other Magistrats, Declaring the same to have been good Service to the King and Countrey. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His .
