s1564 52529236 178962 W R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the eighteenth day of April 1695. WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Coun∣cil, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: For∣asmuch as, We by Our Proclamation of the date the twelfth day of February last by past, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did Adjourn the Current Parliament of this Our Antient Kingdom to the twenty first day of March then next to come, now instant, and now all things not being yet in readiness for its Meeting at that Dyet, We have thought fit, that the Ad∣journment thereof shall be continued from the said day until the eighteenth day of April next to come; At which time We are resolved Our Parliament shall Meet: Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Adjourn Our said Current Parliament until the said eighteenth day of April next ensuing the date hereof; Requiring all the Members of Our said Cur∣rent Parliament to attend that day, in the usual way, and under the Certifica∣tions contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that in∣continent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Our Antient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make Intimation, that Our said Parliament of this Kingdom is Adjourned till the said eighteenth day of April next to come. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the nineteenth day of March, and of Our Reign the sixth Year, 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.
