V647A 52529352 179207
The VIRTUES and USES of The Cordial Spirit of Saffron. be taken two three or four Spoonfuls at a time, according as the Stomach is more or less indisposed, and most especially in a Morning after a heat of Wine overnight, walking after it, which effectually cuts the Phlegme, chear∣eth the Spirits dissipates the Cloudy Vapours disturbing the Brain, whets an appetite for Dinner; the rest ot the admirable Virtues of SAFFRON and this Spirit ensue. SAFFRON it self is of such excellent virtue and of so great use among many Nations, as Germans, Polanders, Hungarians, Bohemians, Sclavonians, Croats, Turks, and divers others, that they commonly boil no Flesh, no Fish, no Milk, no Herb, or any thing else fit for Meals, without some Saffron, which they do, both to cause the better Concoction of the Dyet, and to make their own Spirits chearful, and to preserve themselves anainst the injury of corrupted Air, or against the violence of any Distemper: Wherefore the Spirit well made of it, is of such virtue, and of so high esteem in Physik, that it is thught almosl alone to be suffient against any Distemper. MOreover the Spirit of Saffron (taken according to the Directions near the end of this Paper) is of singular use in the following Distempers. viz. Consumption, It so helpeth, that by the blessing of God it easily restoreth the Patient to perfect Health; for it ripeneth the Ulcers of the Lungs, cleanseth, and with a gentle Adstringency and In∣sernative faculty healeth them; it mitigates the Cough, takes away the Distillations of the Brain, and amends the salt and sharp humours. Aslbm, that is, Difficulty of Breathing, and Phtysical (or Tiffical) Persons it much helpeth; for it concocts, ripeneth, and consumeth the crude and gross humours sticking to the Lungs, and restoreth to them the faculty of easie breathing. Melancholy, and sad Constitutions it greatly comforts; for it amends the faults of the Liver and Gall: it dissipates the Hypocondriack flatu∣lency, it strengthneth and comforts the Heart, and wonderfully causeth Mirth. Swooning, herein it is highly worthy of praise; for it happily re∣storeth the Spirits that are lost by their vanishing away through the pores of the Body, by their exceeding subtilty and volatility, &c. Apoplexie, herein it hath a great Power, for it helpeth the Brain, and strengthneth the same, asswaging the Phlegmatick and gross humours, swelling with Wind, and wasting with Acidity the Muscles, and Nerves, freeth the obstructed passages of the Spirits, and shakes off deep and profound drowsiness. Yellow Jaundice, the Spirit of Saffron, with equal quantity of Juice of Lemmons or Water of Sorrel, and sweetned with a little Sugar, is an especial remedy: for it openeth the obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and by natural property from all parts of the Body draweth the Choler, altereth it, and expels it by Urine; whence ensues a beauti∣ful ruddy, healthy Complexion. Plague, Measles, and Small Pox. Both to prevent them, and expel them, its Use is frequently known; for it is of subtle parts, and easily pene∣trates, and causeth Sweat. Agues. In the Cold Fit it may be taken with great Comfort to the Patient. Strangury, Stone, and Gravel. It is of great Worth; for it openeth the Obstructions of the Urinal Passages, asswageth the acrimony of the Hu∣mours, forceth Urin, Gravel, and small Stones, and takes away the Pain. For Womens Terms, and Women in Child-bed, It is a Noble Cordial, It is likewise a great Enemy to Barenness, and highly provoketh Venery. Loosness, Bloody Flux, Griping of the Guts. It is very profitable against these Distempers, for it concoct the raw Phlegm about the Belly and small Guts, that causeth loosness: It corrects the acrimony and sharp∣ness of Humours that irritate and force Nature to go to stool often. It strengthneth the Bowels, and healeth the Ulcers-of the same. Empyema or Impostume, newly begun in the side, it helpeth very much, for it easily disperseth the gathered Humours and flatulency or windiness therein. Trembling of heart: It is very good for them that are troubled with trembling of Heart, for it allayeth the vehement fermentation of Blood; it dissipates the thick and gross vapours enclosed in and about the Heart, and it restoreth chearfulness to the same. Pains, Dulness of Hearing, and Noise of Ears, are remedied by this Spirit; for it disperseth the gross Humours gathered about the Tympanum of the Ears, and dissipates the flatulency enclosed in the Brain, if some Drops thereof be mixed with Womans Milk, or Oyl of Bitter Almonds. It also ripeneth, breaketh, cleanseth, and healeth Ulcers in the Ears, if it be dropped into a roasted Onyon, and be applied to the Ears. Scurvey. This Spirit is most excellent to prevent this Distemper, so epidemical and common, that it becomes the Spring or Cause of many Diseases that perplex Mankind; it likewise in a great measure cures it, and for this end is carried to Sea, for long Voyages, through hot Climates, and is known to restore the Native Vigour, with a good Countenance. Weakness of Stomach, and an inclination to Vomit often, it wonderfully help∣eth, for it concocts, dissipateth, and consumeth the raw humours, dis∣perseth the flatulency, strengtheneth the Stomach, brings a good appetite, and causeth good digestion. In a Bastard Plurisie it is an excellent Remedy, for it openeth the Breast, cuts the Phlegm in it, expelleth the Wind, and freeth the Lungs from all Obstructions. Colds, Indisposition of Body. Take a Spoonful or two in a Morning; for it concocts the Humours in the Stomach, amends the sharpness of them, and dissolves the Phlegm: Yea, this Spirit of Saffron is of so general Use, that it may be mixed with any Physick, proper for any Distemper, to increase its Operating Faculty. Note, A Man or Woman of Age, labouring under the said Distempers, may take one or two Spoonfuls of this Spirit at a time, by it self, if they be not in burning or Hectick Fevers; but if so, let them mix it with some cooling Drink, or Syrrups proper for those Distempers, and take little Quantities of it four times a day, to wit, early in the Morning, between Meals, and late at Night when they go to Bed. The Virtues and Uses of this Spirit of Saffron are taken out of a Letter or Manuscript of a most Learned and long experienced German Physician, G. Agri∣cola, communicated to a Friend of his here, in regard England yields the best Saffron in the World, and makes the least use of it, in reference to their own Health. Translated and Publishied by John Collins e Reg. Soc. Philo∣math. The Coffee-Houses following are furnished therewith. Mr. Alexander Man at Charing Cross. Mr. Vigures in the Old Palace-Yard Westminster. Mr. Brewens near Guild-Hall. Mr. Samuel Booth in Ave-Mary Lane. Mr. Richard Torvers at Temple-Barr. Mr. Ward in Bread-Street. Mr. Earling in Bow-Street Common-Garden. Mr. Thomas Stroud, at the Corner of the Pall-Mall, against St. James's. Mr. John Dicas in Fullers Rents near Grays-Inn. Mr. Henry Gardiner at St. Mary-Overy's Dock. Mr. Bond at Leaden-Hall. Mr. Ogdon without Algate. Mr. Woolfe at the Still-yard. Mr. John Smithiers against the Custom-house. Mr. John Painter in Newmans Court, Cornhill. Mr. Richard Rogerson behind the Exchange. Mr. Kidd in Bartholomew-Lane behind the Exchange. Mr. Thomas Nicholson in Birching Lane. Mr. Tobias Collier in Pye-Corner. Widdow Ward on Snow Hill. Mr. James Probut, at the Rainbow at the Corner of St. Martins Lane. Mr. Heyrick, at the Corner of Charter-house Lane. Mr. Heavysides in Hart-street without Newgate. Widdow Soame against the Boars-head in East-cheape. Mr. John Knight at the Corner of Cow-Lane. Mr. George Dassin against Lincolns-Inn. Mr. Richard Lyon against Doctors-Commons. Mr. Tounsend, in Fryday-street. Mr. Richard Tart in St. Bartholomews Court Smithfield. Mr. George Marmion in St. Martins le Grand, at the Harrow. Mr. Kistel, near the Naggs-head, Cheapside. Mr. Shipton at Fleet-Ditch, near the Derby-Ale-house. Mr. Philip Preston at Exeter Exchange. Mrs. Foord in Devereux Court, near Effex-build∣ings. Mr. Sydenham in Mark-Lane, near the Navy-Office. Mr. Benning next the Bull-Head in Cheapside. Mr. Robert Woolgar in Jewen-Street. Widdow Graces Coffee-house in Clare-Market. The following Person are likewise supplyed therewith for Sale. Mr. Robert Horn, Stationer, at the South-En∣trance of the Royal Exchange. Mr. John Lands, Barber-Chyrurgeon, at the Corner of Ironmonger-Lane, next Guild-Hall. Mr. Collins, Bookseller, at the Middle-Temple-Gate. Mr. Clavel, Bookseller, at the West-end of St. Paul's. Mr. William Miller, Bookseller, against the lit∣tie North-door of St. Paul's Church. Mr. John Seller, the Kings Hydrographer, at the Hermitage Stairs in Wapping, and at his Shop on the West-side of the Royal-Exchange. Mr. John Playford Bookseller, near the Temple-Church. Mr. Thomas Glover, Taylor, at the Blew Pales in Petty-France Westminster. Mr. Northcot Bookseller next the Hoop-Tavern at the Bridge-foot. Mr. Thomas Flowre, Clerk of St. Katherines Cole∣man, in Magpy-Alley in Fanchurch-street. Mr. Edward Painter, Shoomaker in Catt-street, Oxford. The said SPIRIT is distilled from the best sort of Wine and Saffron, and is to be had at the House of Mr. Randal Taylor, Beadle of the Stationers Company, near their Hall by Ludgate; from whence the abovesaid Coffee-House, &c. were furnished therewith: and is sold in Bottles sealed up, the half-Pint Bottle at the Shilling three Penee, the Pint Bottle Half a Crown, and Wuart Bottle a Crown. LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham at the Seven Stars in Ave-Mary Lane.
