W922A 47012709 174676
A WARNING for Married WOMEN: Being an Example of Mrs. JANE REYNOLDS (a West-country Woman) born near Plymouth, who having plighted her Troth to a Seaman, was afterwards marri∣ed to a Carpenter, and at last carried away by a Spiriet, the manner how shall be recited. To a West-country Tune, call'd, The fair Made of Bristol: or, Iohn True, &c. THere dwelt a fair maid in the West, of worthy birth and fame, Near unto Plimoath stately town, Jane Reynolds was her name. This amsel dearly was belov'd, by a proper youth: And what of her is to be said, is known for very truth: Amongst the rest a Seaman brave unto her a wooing came, A comely proper youth he was, James Harris call'd by name. The maid and young man was agreed, as time did then allow, And to each other secretly they made a solemn vow. That they would ever faitful be, whilst Heaven afforded life; He was to be her husband kind, and she his faithful wife. A day appointed was also, when they were to be married, But before these things were brought to pass, matters were strangely carried. All you that faithfull lovers be, give ear and hearken well, And what of them became at last I will directly tell: The young man he was prest to Sea, and forced was to go, His sweet-heart she must stay behind whether she would or no. And after he was from her gone, she three yéars for him staid, Expecting of his coming home, and kept herself a maid. At last news came that he was dead within a forraign land, And how that he was buried, she well did understand. For whose sweet sake the maiden she lamented many a day: And never was she known at all the wanton for to play. A Carpenter that liv'd hard by, when he heard of the same, Like as the other had done before, to her a wooing came. But when that he had gain'd her love, they married were with speed, And four years space (being man and wife) they lovingly agreed. Three pretty children in this time, this lovely couple had, Which made there father's heart rejoyce, and mother wondrous glad. But as occasion serv'd our time, the good man took his way, Some three days journy from his home intending not to stay. But whilst that he was gone away, a spirit in the night, Came to the window to his wife, and did her sorely fright. Which spirit spake like to a man, and unto her did say, 'My dear and only love (quoth he) 'prepare and come away. 'James Harris is my name (quoth he) 'whom thou didst love so dear, 'And I have travel'd for thy sake, 'at least this seven year. 'And now I am return'd again, 'to take thee to my ife, 'And thou with me shalt go to See, 'to end all further strife. O tempt me not, sweet James (quoth she) with thee away to go, If I should leave my children small, alas, what would they do: My husband is a Carpenter, a Carpenter of great fame, I would not for five hundred pounds that he should know the same. 'I might have had a King's daughter, 'and she would have married me, 'But I forsook her golden crown, 'and for the love o hee. 'Therefore if thou't th husband forsake, 'and thy children three also, 'I will forgive thee what is past, 'if thou wilt with me go. I I forsake my husband and my little children three, What means hast thou to bring me to, if I should go with thee? 'I have seven ships upon the sea, 'whn they are come to and, 'Both merriners and merchandize 'shall be at thy command. 'he hip wherein my love shall sail, 'is glorious to behold, 'The sails shall be of finest silk, 'and the mast of shining gold. When he had told her these fair tals, to love him she began Because he was in humane shape, much like unto a man. And so together away they went, from off the English shore, And since that time the womankind, was never seen no more. But when her husband he came home, and found his wife was gone, And left her three sweet pretty babes within the house alone. He beat his breast, he tore his hair, the tears fell from his eyes, And in the open streets he run, with heavy doleful cries. And in this sad distracted case, he hang'd himself for woe, Vpon a tree, near to the place, the truth of all is so. The children now are fatherless, nd left without a guide, But yet no doubt the heavenly Powers, will for them well provide. London: Printed by and for W. O. and are to be sold by the Booksellers.
