O177AA R224310 [ocm]64551531 184678
A LOTTERY Licensed by His Royal Highness the Duke of York, and Assistants of the Corporation of the Royal Fishing, Erected by the Author, for the vending o ertin Volumes of his own Books. WHereas John Ogilby Esq; who hath in several years last past, Printed and Published at his own charge, several Volumes of great Value and Beauty, such as our English Imprimarie had been altogether unacquainted with heretofore, viz. Aesop's Fables Paraphrased and adorn'd with Sculptures, Virgil, Prince of Latine Poets, Translated, Illustrated with Notes, and adorn'd with Sculptures; Homer, Prince of all Poets, his Iliads in like manner, set forth and Dedicated to the King's most Excellent Majesty; and next, a Royal Bible Printed at Cambridge, Dedicated to His Majesty, Illustrated with Maps and Chorographical Presentations, fifty of them being Imperial, to be bound in two, or three great Volumes, with not oly Chorographical, but Historical adornations; and lastly His Majesties Entertainments on the 22. of April, 1661. passing through the City to His Coronation, and His Coronation, wherein is Engraven the whole Caval-Cade, the Triumphal Arches, their Inscriptions, Figures, Aenigmatical Emblems, indeed the whole Poetical Conduct, Illu∣strated and defended by noted Observations, drawn both from Modern, Antient and most Authentick Writers. The Author therefore having a virtuous Ambition, to perfect these his former Labours, being the Work of twenty years, by the Addition of Homer's Odysses, long looked for, now Printed and ready to be Published, with Notes also and Sculptures; and his Aesop's Fables, a scarce Book also reprinted, with additional Annotations, and the adaption of it for the better joyning and binding up with his other Works in a Royal Folio; and having yet upon his hands, to his great prejudice, several of all the fore∣mentioned Volumes, though many of them had a fair reception, by his munificent Friends and Patrons: And that his Majesties imployments calls him suddenly elsewhere, doth as he supposeth by very good advice propound an expeditious means to dispose of this his whole Stock in a few moneths, which else would not drop off Book by Book, in many years. And to those that please and are desirous of them at less than half their well known Price and Value, by putting them thus into the hands of Fortune, a standing LOTTERY, who, though a blind dispencer of her favours, and oftener mistaking on the wrong side, than on the right, shall here send all those Adventurers, who are pleased to put in for their Chance, home contented more or less, since they are all Prizes. To be ordered and disposed after this manner, First, Whosoever will adventure, may be pleased to put in fourty Shillings for each Lot, Of which these are the number and value. The first and greatest, containes these BOOKS. His Majesties Entertainment passing through the City to His Coronation; and Coronation, Valued 2 l. Aesops Fables Paraphrased, in Folio with Sculps and Annotations, never published before, Val. 3 l. 1 Lot Numb. 1.Homers Odysses Translated with Sculps and Anno∣tations, never Published, Val. 4 l. Homers Iliads Translated, and already Published, Val. 5 l. Virgil Translated with Sculp and Annotations, Val. 5 l. A Royal Bible with Chorographical Sculps, Val. 5 l. An Imperial Bible with Chorographical, and an hun∣dred Historical Sculs, Valued 25 l. In all 49. Pounds. 3 Lot Numb. 2.The second Prize contains. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, with Homers Works in two Volumes, Valued 34 l. The third Prize. 3 Lot Num. 3.One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, and an English Virgil, Val. 30 l. The fourth. 1 Lot Num. 4.One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, and a new Aesop, and the Kings Entertainment, Valued 30 l. The fifth. 1 Lot Num. 5.One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, Val. 25 l. 25 l. 20 Lott N. 0.Twenty Prizes, each an Imperial Bible with Choro∣graphical Sculps, at twenty Pound a Lot, Val. 400 l. 400 l. The twenty sixth Prize. One Entertainment, one Aesop, one Virgil, one Bible Royal,5 Lots Num. 7. Homers Iliads and Odysses, Valued 25 l. 25 l. Four Lots more of the same Books, Val. 25 l. 100 l. Five Prizes each containing, 5 Lot Nn. 8.One Aesop one Virgil, two Homers, Valued 17 l 85 l. 5 Lots Num. 9.Five Prizes, one Virgil and two Homers, Valued 14 l. 70 l. 25 Lots N. 10Twenty five Prizes, two Homers, Valued 9 l. 225 l. 90 Lots N. 11.Ninty Prizes, Bibles Verney Royal, Valued 5 l. 450 l. 90 Lots N. 12.Ninty Prizes Virgil, Translated, Valued 5 l. 450 l. 350 Lots N 13.Three hundred and fifty Prizes, Homers Iliads Val. 5 l. 1750 l. 500 Lots N 14.Five hundred Prizes, Odysses, Valued, 4 l. 2000 l. 500 Lots N 15.Five Hundred Aesops, Valued 3 l. 1500 l. 225 Lot N 6.Two Hundred and five and twenty Enertainments, Valued 2 l. 450 l. The number of Blanks, One; Which whosoever draws, shall be presented by the Author. His Majesties Entertainment, being the lowest Prize is a very fair and a scarce Book, valued at fourty Shillings, which is the money that is put in, and it is eight to one, if you draw not higher: The whole value of all the Books as they are apprized at above (being the prices they have been usually disposed at) comes to 7620 l. The number of Lotts in all 1820. at 40 s. each, amounts to 3640 l. So that the adventurers will have the Volumes abovesaid, for less then half of what they would yield in process of time Book by Book. Therefore this seemes rather the reverss of a Lottery; because in all other Lotteries, there is so much gain propos'd, in this so much loss, he wanting time being otherwise imployd, to persue the profit. The Time, the Author doubts not, if Adventurers cheerfully bring in their Money, to be in four moneths, beginning on the 16 of November. 1664. There being 500. Adventurers already. The Places where the Money is to be payd in and they receive their Tickets, which secures them either their Money or their Lots according to the abovesaid proposals; are at the Flying Horse on Corn-hill, Mr. Godfrey Richards Stationer, near the Old Exchange, Mr. Robert Yarway in Wood-Street, Mr. Thomas Roycroft, in Jewen-Street, without Criple ate. Mr. Heuriat, Goldsmith, next door to the Castle Tavern in Fleet-Street. At the Authors House, in Kings Head-Court in Shoe-Lane, and Mr. Francis Coffyn, Scrivener in Russel-Street, Covent Garden. Of the certain Day and Place, there shall be timely notice given.
