18416 S113129 99848368 13458
The Double-armed Man, By the New Inuention: Briefly shewing some famous Exploits atchieued by our Brittish Bowmen: With seuerall Portraitures proper for the Pike and Bow. By W. N. Archer. Printed for I. Grismand, at the signe of the Gun in Pauls Alley, 1625.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, of Great Bri∣taine, France and Jreland KING, Defender of the Faith, &c. Most dread Soveraigne: MAY it please your Maiesty, to call to your remembrance, how, that some twelue months since I presēted vnto You the Copy of these few lines following in approbation of Bowes & Arrowes:
Bowes and Arrowes heretofore haue beene famous weapons of warre, both of∣fensiue and defensiue against the enemies of these Kingdomes: and thereby victori∣ous battels and famous conquests haue bin gotten, though now they are imployed to no vse but for Recreation and sport; but J by practice, with an Jnuention haue attained to this perfection, that a Souldier with his Corslet and Pike may vse his Long-Bow and Arrowes, with great agilitie, more force and aduantage against the Enemy, then euer heretofore, not hindring the vse of Gunnes or other weapons, nor incum∣brance to the Pike or any martiall Disci∣pline, &c. After which, vpon your Maiesties order giuen for the sight thereof, I per∣formed it before you by a Souldier in your Maiesties Parke at S. Iames's: and after that, I petitioned vnto your Ma∣iestie,
that You would bee pleased to giue order that it might be practised in the two Schooles of martiall Discipline, the two Gardens of London and West∣minster (vnto which two I gaue vnto each a Pike and a Bow placed vnto it, and a sheafe of Arrowes) and your Maiesties Answer vnto my Petition (as I was informed) was, That it were meeter for them to practise it of their owne accord. Vpon which Answer from your Maiesty, I solicited those Societies for the practice and exercise of the Bow with the Pike: and accor∣dingly that worthy Societie in the Ar∣tillery Garden in London hath practised it euer since. But because many of that worthy Society haue not heretofore exercised shooting, it doth not take that perfection as yet, which I hope time and practice will bring it vnto:
for it is the exercise of shooting that must make men perfect therein: so that if Statute-Lawes were in force for the exercise of Shooting, as in former times they haue beene, then would this In∣vention of mine be perfitted, and the Brittish Bowmen grow famous againe as in former ages they were. Most Gratious Soueraigne: I haue endeuored my selfe vnto the vtmost of my small abilitie, for the set∣ting forth of this Exercise, and spent my time and meanes for the accom∣plishment of my desires therin: which is, to make those worthy Societies perfect therein, and so generally throughout the Land: & hauing nei∣ther supportation, nor countenance, from any (but God alone) I cannot wholly imploy my selfe thereunto, be∣ing constrained for the maintenance of
my poore estate and family, to wrestle in the world, neyther haue I literature sufficient, for illustration of so worthy a thing, as is this Inuention, if it were perfect: yet that it may not die in obli∣uion, I haue here presented vnto your Maiesty this vnpolished Discourse, shewing herein the antiquitie of the Bow, with part of the famous exploits which were atchieued by the seruice of our Brittish Bowmen, & the Com∣mon-wealths good in the time of the vse thereof. Also, some directions for the practice of the Pike and Bow in Rankes and Fyles, by this Inuention; with some Portraitures of the proper postures belonging thereunto, and the proper words of command for the ex∣ercise thereof: Humbly beseeching your sacred Maiestie, not to reiect it for the rudenesse thereof, for although
the tongue be faultering like Moses, and the hand be rough like Esawes, yet the heart is perfect and constant like Hushai vnto Dauid: Vouchsafe there∣fore, gracious Soueraigne, to grace it with your gracious acceptance; and if it grow to perfection, let God haue the honor, your Soueraigne Maiestie the patronage, and this Common-wealth the benefit. Meane while I will euer pray vnto the Almighty for your Maiesties hap∣pie Reigne, prosperity, and preserua∣tion, both here and hereafter. Your Maiesties most dutifull and loyall Subiect, WILLIAM NEADE, Archer.
TO THE MOST HIGH COVRT OF PAR∣liament, in both Houses assembled. Right Honourable and graue Senators: IT is recorded by diuers Historians, that many renowned Emperors, Kings, and great Potentates, haue exercised shooting for their recreations; and likewise reuerend and religious Bishops after their painfull studie; and also graue and wor∣thy Senators, after their serious imployments, would sometimes for their recreations take their Bowes and Arrowes and exercise Archery: And still it was maintained, and also by Authority com∣manded to be exercised by all degrees both of old and young, and by Statute-Lawes there were pe∣nalties inflicted vpon all those that neglected the same: The chiefe and principall causes were, there∣by to make men apt and fit for seruice in time of wars, & for restraint of vnlawful games & exercises.
But now, by reason the Bow is not vsed in the warres, this Exercise is neglected, for which cause, (Right Honourable and graue Senators) my selfe being an Archer, (and knowing well, that in the hands of our Brittish Nation the Bow and Ar∣rowes is a most famous weapon, and worthy to be preferred before any other weapon whatsoeuer) haue by my industry and practice, with an Inuen∣tion, ioyned the Bow and Pike together, whereby euery practitioner may bee a Double-armed man, and so vse them ioyntly or seuerally for his aduan∣tage: Which inuention, if it were authorized and practised effectually, (as I haue with my great char∣ges and industry Inuented it carefully) I doubt not but God will blesse and prosper our warres by it, like as in times past when the Bow was in vse; and our Brittish Bowmen (as formerly they were) will bee a terror vnto all their enemies, bringing home with them victory and conquest; which that it may be effected accordingly, I will euer pray vn∣to the Almighty, who is the giuer of victories; and euer rest Your Honours most deuoted in all submissiue duty, William Neade Archer.
To the Reader. COurteous Reader, it is ingrafted in∣to all men by the instinct of Na∣ture, to loue their owne Countrie best, and to endeauor in all lawfull (and laudable) meanes for the prosperitie thereof: We know what great paines and perill, our worthy Generals, Captains, and Souldiers vndergoe in their marshall affaires a∣broad, whiles we recreate our selues with ease and plea∣sure at home: But hee that may take pleasure in such recreations, which may redound to the honour and welfare of his Countrie, and will neglect it, such are no louers but rather enemies to their Countrie: And so much I say in approbation of that laudable exercise of Shooting, which [exercise] is now (in this late se∣cure age) altogether neglected, but onely in this Ho∣nourable City of London, where it is countenanced and maintained: And therefore I may not omit to set downe in honour thereof, that once euerie yeare for the incouragement and maintenance of Archery, the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, doth by Procla∣mation giue notice vnto all Archers, of certaine sil∣ner
games, which they freely doe bestow vpon the best deseruers: And this is maintained as a custome vnto this day: And out of those famous Archers were wont to be chosen the chiefest and most fittest, to bee of the Kings Yeomen of his Guard; which incouraged many in hope of such preferments, to exercise shooting, and thereby to be very expert Bowmen: and by these and such like meanes, the best deseruers were preferred, and the King well furnished with all Bowmen, and the whole Land likewise was inuincible by the multi∣tude of Bowmen. And now (courteous Reader) to make thy recrea∣tion to redound to thy honour and thy Countries wel∣fare, I present vnto thee a new Inuention (which is practised and approued of) whereby thou maist bring that famous weapon, the Bow and Arrowes, into the field againe, to doe seruice for thy Prince and Coun∣try: Now if thou wilt endeanor to practise it, as I haue endeauored to inuent it for thee, and so make thy selfe perfect therein by practice, (which thou maist do with little difficulty) then shalt thou againe illumi∣nate the glorious splendor of our Brittish Nation, (which formerly was obtained by the seruice of the Bowmen) and as thy Predecessors haue done, bring home into thy Country Trophees of Victories and Ho∣nour: In hope whereof I euer shall rest Thine assured, W.N. Archer.
Obiections against the vse of the Bow with the Pike: And the Answers thereunto. The Bow is an incumbrance vnto the Pike, in Weight, Tangling, for Close order, Counter-marching, Wheeling. FFrst,  The weight of the Bow, as it is placed, is of no moment; as is explained in the Booke intituled The double armed man. Secondly, for Intangling, either in Close order, in Counter-marching, or in Wheeling: In all which, the Pikeman doth cary his Pike aduanced, and then is the bow directly ouer his head: so that the Bow can be no more incumbrance then his owne body, either to his leader, his follower, his right hand man, or his left hand man. The Bow will be troublesome when you cheeke or trayle your Pike. The Bow is so placed vpon the Pike with the Engine, that if any such seruice be required, (which is very seldome) then may the Bow very readily be slipped off the Pike, and so trailed therewith; and with as great readinesse slipt on againe: And also cheeking may be done with great agility. What vse is for the Bow, when you come to close order. It is obseruable, that when you draw to close order, it is to receiue the enemy at the push of Pike, which when you so close your rankes, yet in file you allow so much distance one from the other, which may giue your armes liberty for to push with your Pike; which the bow doth no way hinder, for it is placed so fast vnto the Pike, that no trouble is therewith. Besides, when your front stands so charged, your middle men, and your reere, may doe good seruice with their arrowes vpon many occasions, for in such close order, you may vse your bow either against horse or foot. Men are not now of that strength to mannage the bow, as heretofore they were, and therefore they cannot now doe exe∣cution as formerly they did. What we want in strength of our predecessors,  e good by our ingeniousnesse: For first, wee haue the helpe of the Pike, which serueth for a Rest for the bow arme, wherby we draw a very strong bow, as the Booke formerly no∣ted doth specific. Secondly, we haue now more exact skill in making both bowes and arrowes, and thereby we can
against:  may be done with great aginity. What vse is for the Bow, when you come to close order. It is obseruable, that when you draw to close order, it is to receiue the enemy at the push of Pike, which when you so close your rankes, yet in file you allow so much distance one from the other, which may giue your armes liberty for to push with your Pike; which the bow doth no way hinder, for it is placed so fast vnto the Pike, that no trouble is therewith. Besides, when your front stands so charged, your middle men, and your reere, may doe good seruice with their arrowes vpon many occasions, for in such close order, you may vse your bow either against horse or foot. Men are not now of that strength to mannage the bow, as heretofore they were, and therefore they cannot now doe exe∣cution as formerly they did. What we want in strength of our predecessors, we make good by our ingeniousnesse: For first, wee haue the helpe of the Pike, which serueth for a Rest for the bow arme, wherby we draw a very strong bow, as the Booke formerly no∣ted doth specifie. Secondly, we haue now more exact skill in making both bowes and arrowes; and thereby we can shoot further, and more piercing, by reason of the aduantage that we haue in our arrowes, which are both nimble and flighty; whereby we are enabled to doe execution at the distance of 16.18. or 20. score yards off. Thirdly, wee doe hereby double seruice, both with the Pike and with the Bow also, whereas without the Bow, the pikeman stands but as a marke for the muskettiers and horsemen, as is explained in the booke formerly named. What hurt can the arrowes doe against armed men? There is neither man nor horse that can be so armed, as to free himselfe from the showers of arrowes, for euery bow∣man may haue two or three arrowes still flying, and therefore no part of the body is free from the arrow; for in the de∣scending, it must hit either the head, face, armes, body, thighes, legs, or feet, both of the leaders and followers, and so both the middle and the reere of the enemies battell are subiect to the arrowes, as well as the front; and likewise both Horsemen, Pikemen, Muskettiers, and also Cannoniers, euen all and euery of these will be so terrified with the obiect, as wel as with the hurt of the showers of arrowes, that the enemy thereby will be made vncapable of doing any seruice. There are not now set battels fought, as formerly were, and therefore the Bow is not seruiceable as heretofore it was. Wheresoeuer the Pike or the Musket are seruiceable, there will the Bow be seruiceable also. Besides, in raine or moist weather the Bow is vsefull: Also with our showers of arrowes we can shoot into any Towne, Castle, Fort, or Trench; as likewise to shoot fire-workes, as the aforesaid Booke mentioneth. And now to cleare all other difficulties which may be obiected against the vse of the Bow in seruice by this inuen∣tion; and also to giue further satisfaction vnto this Honourable Assembly, If it may seeme requisite vnto this Honou∣rable House, to giue order that a selected company of Archers may be admitted to performe such seruice as hath beene specified, and also time and place conuenient for such spectators, as your wisedomes shall thinke meet for censure thereof, we doubt not, by Gods assistance, but to giue such ample satisfaction, that all honourable Commanders and worthy Captaines and Souldiers shall approue thereo. FINIS.
THE DOVBLE-ARMED MAN. GOD Almighty, who is the author of al good vnto Man, putteth into his minde good motions, inuen∣tions, and actions, for his helpe and preseruation. As he did vnto Noah when he built the Arke, whereby both hee and his family were preserued from the Flood. At which time also, the Lord made his Coue∣nant with them, for their comfort, and set his Bow in the Cloud for confirmation thereof: and after∣ward, it pleased God to inspire into man such wis∣dome, and policy, to imitate and make materiall Bowes, for their vse and defence, against the wilde beasts of the field, which otherwise might haue deuoured them: and likewise when enuie and strife grew betwixt man and man, it serued for a chiefe weapon amongst them, to maintaine their rights, and to defend themselues one against the other, & so
by vse the Bow became the best weapon of all others vnto succeeding ages. And after this began the name of Archer; for it is said of Ismael, the sonne of Abraham, that God was with him, and he dwelt in the wildernesse, and was an Archer. So likewise were the two sonnes of Izhac, for Esau was an Archer, and he vsed his Bow for Hun∣ting. But Iacob vsed it for Warres, for hee saith vn∣to his sonne Ioseph, I haue giuen thee one porti∣on of ground, which I got from the Amorite with my Sword, and with my Bow. And so successiuely it was vsed amongst the Is∣raelites, and of great estimation, for King Dauid he saith, that the Lord he teacheth the vse thereof, and likewise inableth a man therevnto in these words, The Lord, saith he, teacheth my hands to Warre, so that a Bow of Steele is broken by mee: and all King Dauids Worthies and chiefe men of Ware, were armed with Bowes and Arrowes. King David also, hee commanded that the chil∣dren should be taught to shoot, & to learne the vse of the Bow, & so to succeeding ages it continued, and was accounted of amongst all the famous Nati∣ons in the world, to be the best Weapon. It is recorded in holy Writ, that the Assyrians they vsed the Bow and Arrowes, in all their warres against the Israelites. The Persians; their Kings were admirable Bow∣men,
and they accounted of it as their best weapon for warres, and still it is in vse with them. And likewise the Romanes in all their conquests, they esteemed of the Bowmen to bee the best and surest souldiers. The Parthians with their Bowes and Arrowes, vanquished the famous Romane Captaine, Crassus, with all his Legions (which came into their coun∣trey to conquer it) and slew them all. The Turkes, they haue vsed this weapon in all their conquests, and doe still vse it, so that by their continuall vse and perfect skill therein, together with their innumerable multitude of Arrowes fly∣ing in the sight of their enemies, when they goe to warres, they are a terrour vnto all their Christian neighbours that inhabit about them, and what King or Potentate is of that force and power, as is the Turke now at this day. But of all the Nations in the world, our Brittish Nation were most excellent and famous, in this weapon the long Bow and Arrowes, before wee were so variable in neglecting the vse thereof. And certainly, if we of all other Nations, being so expert in the vse thereof; and also by agilitie so inabled, I say if we had exercised and vsed the long Bow and Arrowes in the Warres, as heretofore our Predecessors haue done, we had been famous thereby as they were. For then our Brittish Nation were accounted the absolute best warriours in the world, and got
by the vse of the Bow, victorious battailes, and conquests, to their immortall fame and honour, as in our Chronicle-Histories it is recorded, whereof I will set downe some few, omitting many more for brevitie. I will first begin with King William the Conque∣ror, for he conquered this Land by the vse of the Bow, as is recorded by Sr Iohn Haward, in his book of the History of the three first Norman Kings. Also King Edward the third, who hauing title to the Crowne of France, inuaded it, and in a set bat∣tell at Cresse, he subdued the French, so that most of the Nobilitie were either slain, or taken; and also conquered the strong towne of Callis, all which was accomplished by the seruice of the Bowmen. After that, his sonne the famous Prince Edward called the Blacke Prince, hee in a set battell at Poy∣tiers, tooke the French King prisoner, and withall most of the Nobilitie were either slaine or taken: and all these battels and Victories were gotten by the Bowmens seruice. So likewise King Henry the fift, in the battaile at Agincourt, obtained a glorious Victory: In which battaile, as the story saith, were taken and slaine, the flower of all the Nobilitie of France, notwith∣standing the vnequalitie of the number in all these battels, for it is Recorded, that the French excee∣ded the Brittons in number ten for one, and this was atchieued by the seruice of the Bowmen. After this, in the time of King Henry the sixt,
what famous battels were gotten vnder the leading of the Duke of Bedford, then Regent in France, by his valiant Bowmen. I will forbeare to speake of the ciuill Warres here in our owne Land, for they were vnnaturall warres, therefore let them die in obliuion. But after this, King Edward the fourth made a iourney into France with his Bowmen, where hee obtained of the French King, a Peace according to his desire. Likewise when King Henry the seventh came in against Richard the murderous vsurper, & subdued him: in all which Warres, the Bow and Arrowes were altogether their chiefest and best weapons. And likewise King Henry the eight, when hee made his journeys into France, & like a conqueror won the Cities of Turwin, and of Tourney, and af∣terward of Bullen; in all which journeys, hee was furnished with his valiant Bowmen, which still were a terrour vnto their enemies, the showers of Arrowes which they shot, did euen darken the skies, and did so amaze the enemy, that the very ob∣ject thereof, was as grieuous vnto them, as death it selfe, for they are vnauoidable, as did appeare by the many wounds which they gaue vnto all either horse, or foot, for no part of the body, the very eye is not free from the Arrow. And this is certaine, that if either man or horse be wounded with a sheafe Arrow, with a Barb'd head thereon, let it be in what part of the body so euer,
if it doth not deadly execution, it makes him vnca∣pable of doing any seruice, for either they must pull out the Arrow, and so mortifie and rend the flesh, veynes, & sinews, and sometimes in so pulling of the Arrow out, to leaue the head behind, or else cut out the piece, in what place so euer it sticketh. But especially for horse it is acknowledged by all Commanders, that it is the absolute best weapon of all others, for no horse will endure the hurt of an Arrow, but with the smart thereof hee will dis∣order all those about him, and both spoile himselfe and his Rider. But now, by new Inuentions and Stratagems, the old Militarie discipline in the Warres is altered; and therefore the Bow is cast by as altogether vn∣seruiceable in these times. True it is, that many are the Inuentions of man, and haue been from the beginning, some good and well-pleasing to God, and some againe wicked and offensiue both to God, and all good men. Amongst all which, Bartholdus Swart the Fran∣ciscan Fryer, with his most diuellish Inuention of Gunpowder, is the most damnable, and from hell it selfe inuented. But it is now of that estimation, that many other both Inuentions and Weapons, formerly in great account, are quite laid aside as altogether vnneces∣sary, especially with vs, this ancient famous wea∣pon, the Bow and Arrowes is quite extinguished. Other Nations notwithstanding they make vse
of new Inuentions; yet doe they not leaue off these famous ancient Weapons the Bow and Arrowes, as we haue done these many yeares. And because now in these later variable times, since these sulphurious Inuentions haue beene dis∣couered, and thereby the vse of Hand-guns and Muskets haue been in request, the Bow and Ar∣rowes haue been altogether neglected by our Na∣tion, as is aforesaid, because they are thought to be vneffectuall, and not of force to do that execution which the fiery weapons doe. Yet notwithstanding, if the Premises before spo∣ken of be well considered, (viz.) the number of Arrowes still flying, (for euery Archer may shoot sixe Arrowes within the time of the charging, and discharging of one Musket) and the number of Bowmen stil shooting, (for how many so euer they be, they may all shoot together) also the many wounds which the Arrowes doe giue, (for few of them fly in vaine amongst a multitude) together with the terrour of the Obiect, and sight of so ma∣ny voleys of Arrowes still flying vpon the enemy: It cannot bee denied but it must needs disorder them, whether they be horse or foot. Besides, in the raine or moist weather, the Bow and Arrowes are seruiceable, vpon all advantages, when the fiery weapons cannot be vsed. But there is an Obiection to bee made, that it would bee double charges to maintaine Bow∣men in the Warres, and the effects that may be
done thereby, will not counteruaile it. Besides, to haue Bowmen with others in the Warres, according to the Martiall discipline now vsed, This obiection is answered by the chiefe sub∣iect of this Discourse, which shewes that the Pike∣man now is made a Bow∣man also by this new In∣vention pra∣ctised. they would be troublesome vnto the rest, and cannot be placed to doe seruice, as in former times they haue done, by reason there are not in these times, set battailes fought in the field, as in former times haue been: and in those set battels the Bow∣men were placed and barricadoed in, whereby the horsemen could not breake in vpon them; and be∣ing so conueniently placed, to shoot their voleys of Arrowes, thereby to gall and wound the horse, and therewithall to disorder them, and this is said to be the most materiall seruice that the Bowmen did. I will not now further dilate vpon the many good seruices, which the Bowmen haue done in former times, ancient Histories relate suffi∣ciently thereof, as before I haue shewed. But it is apparent by Record, that it was a conquering weapon: for I finde in those battels formerly spo∣ken of, that the Bowmen did so wound & anoy the enemy with Arrows, that they could neither fight nor fly, and that the English like conquerors, did kill and take prisoners whom they listed; so that euery English souldier had two, three, or foure prisoners; and I thinke I may say without offence, that it is a weapon well pleasing to God: But sure I am, it is the cheapest weapon of all others, and the easiest both to be had, and to be practised.
Besides, it was a good Common-wealths handy Trade, and employed many thousands at worke, which liued well thereby; for in euery City and Towne in euery Shire throughout the Land, yea in euery Country Parish, there were of Bowyers, Fletchers, String-makers, and Arrow-head makers, or some others thereunto depending, that liued by their imployment therein. And for recreation and exercise it exceedeth all, it makes vs apt and fit to doe our Prince seruice vpon all sudden occasions, it encreaseth strength and agility, it maintaines health, and expels diseases, It procures a stomack, and causeth good digesture, and being moderate∣ly vsed, the exercise thereof is maintained with ve∣rie small charges, Much more besides may be spoken of this lau∣dable Exercise of Shooting, for the exercise there∣of expels drunkennesse, swearing, dicing, carding, quoyting, cat-playing, besides many other vaine and vngodly vices. Besides, the Sabbath day was not so prophaned when this exercise was vsed, for then the country Famers and Yeomen, with others likewise, with their sonnes and men seruants, notwithstanding they dwelt farre from their Parish Churches, yet would they take their Bowes and Arrowes for their recreation and exercise, and so shoot to their Parish Churches and goe to diuine Seruice, both morning and euening; whereas now, there are many that spend their time much worse vpon the
Sabbath day, either in some of these vnlawfull games or vices before spoken of, or some others as bad, or else sitting in the Alehouse drinking, swearing, sucking Tobacco, and so spending their time and patrimony also, and scarce go to Church, especially to euening Prayer once in a quarter of a yeare. All these premises considered, (obliged mee) both for the honour of God, my bounden duty and allegiance vnto my gracious Soueraigne, with my naturall loue to my country, for the honour and preseruation of the same, both to study and practise how I might be seruiceable thereunto. And thereupon, being an Archer, I practised how to bring that famous ancient weapon, the Long-bow and Arrowes into the field againe, to doe seruice for my Prince and Country, as in for∣mer times they haue done. To this end and purpose I endeauored my selfe many yeares, practising with many inuentions, vntill at last it pleased God to perfect me therein: So that now I doe constantly affirme, not onely by my owne perfect experience and practice, but by the practice of the worthy Society of the traind Band, in the Artillerie Garden in London, it being practised there this twelue months, and approued of, not onely by that worthy Society, and the an∣cient experienced Captaine thereof, Captaine Bingham; but by the approbation of many other honourable Commanders,
That the Souldier with his Corslet and his Pike may be a Bowman also, with great ease and readi∣nesse, with great strength and aduantage, and with∣out incumbrance, and therewith to encounter his enemy in the open field, with the Muskettiers and others; whereas without the Bow the Pikemen are but as a marke for the Muskettiers and Horsemen to play vpon, doing no seruice vntill they come to the push or charge. But now being armed with the Bow, The former Obiection an∣swered. they are ready to come on vpon all aduantages, his Pike be∣ing his barricadoe, and with his Arrowes he shall offend his enemy from 18 or 20 score yards, vnto sixe score yards, as well as the Muskettiers, whe∣ther his enemy be horse or foot, vntill they come to close, which they will hardly do, as many Com∣manders doe verifie, if these weapons were well exercised and practised together, and men made perfect therein, according as is requisite in all other weapons. But some haue obiected, that the weight of the Bow and Arrowes will be too much for the Pike∣man to carie. But it is easily answered, for it is very probable, that the weight is of no moment, for the Bow be∣ing fastned vnto the Pike in the place where they shoulder the Pike, it is thereby caried with great ease: And likewise the Pike is a Rest for the Bow∣arme for drawing of his Bow, being made fast in the place aforesaid with the Engin; for he chargeth
not his Bow-arme with any strength by drawing, but onely to guide his Arrow towards his marke, by which helpe, he may draw a Bow much stron∣ger then otherwise he could doe. I reade also, that in former times when Bow∣men had continued long in the Field, by reason of their lying on the ground, or by some other incon∣ueniences, that thereby they grew weake, so that they were not able to draw their Bowes. But now by this Inuention, with the helpe of the Pike, being a Rest for the Bow-arme, as is afore∣said, the Bowman is inabled to vse his Bow, and to shoot, notwithstanding these inconueniences. For it is probable, that any Archer may draw his Bow with his right arme, which is his drawing arme, when hee cannot beare it out with his left arme, which is his holding-out, or Bow-arme. I haue had conference with some Commanders, debating vpon seruices which may bee done with the Bow and Arrowes, and some are opinioned, that they wil be seruiceable for to shoot fire-works vpon some occasion; and I know by experience, that an Archer may shoot an ounce of fire-worke vpon an Arrow twelue score yards. But they all doe approue, that the Pikemen be∣ing armed with Bowes and Arrowes, according to this Inuention practised, they are thereby enabled to doe very materiall seruice, for the guard of con∣uoyes, which for the most part are assaulted by the horse.
And although now in these times, there are many stratagems vsed in the Warres, which in former times were not; yet notwithstanding I presume, that Bowes and Arrowes vsed by this Inuention, will be found very seruiceable many wayes as yet vndiscouered. And therefore I conclude, that by this Inuenti∣on, the Bow man may performe that seruice many wayes, which in former times hee could not doe, being armed with his Corslet, and barrocadoed with his Pike, and thereby imboldened to come on, as is aforesaid, or if occasion be, vpon any ser∣uice, he may take his Bow from his Pike, and so be a Bowman, or Pikeman alone. Now the perfection of this exercise if they haue been Bowmen, may be attained vnto by practice without any great difficultie, and thereby hee is a Double-Armed man: And for the order and po∣stures belonging to the Pike and Bow, for the true vse thereof, is as followeth. First, the whole body of Pikes must keepe their fyles of Pikes straight by line, for in so doing they may all shoot, as well the middle and the Reare, as the Front, without offending one another. Secondly, euery follower must shoot right ouer his Leaders head, and so shoot thorow his own fyle of Pikes, for that must be his true direction to make his shoot. Thirdly, if the enemy comes on, and that the leaders doe shoot brest high, then are the follow∣ers
to beare their Bowhand euen with the top of his leaders head, for that is the lowest and shortest distance, that they can shoot, standing in their or∣der, and square body. Fourthly, after your last shoot, which is about sixescore yards, you must fasten your Bow, and come vp to your close order for the charge, and if it be for horse, while the fiue or sixe first Ranges stand charged with their Pikes, rested at the foot, and their Swords drawne, the middle & the reare may shoot their voleys of Arrowes, and doe good seruice, whereas without their Bowes they can doe nothing, but stand with their Pikes sloapt, or ported These obseruations for the practice of this exer∣cise, I haue here set downe for instruction vnto all those, that hereafter shall endeuour to practise the same. Here followeth the proper words of command, belonging to this exercise for the Pike and Bow, according as it hath beene practised by the worthy Societie in the Artilerie Garden in London.
The proper words of command for this exercise, are as followeth. Order your Pike. Slope your Pike. Vnfasten your Bow. Draw out your Arrow. Nock your Arrow. Shoot wholly together. Port your Pike and March. Port and Retire. Fasten your Bow. Recouer your Pike. Aduance your Pike. Come vp to your close Order. Charge your Pike. Recouer your Pike. Shoulder your Pike and March. Comport your Pike and March. Here followeth also: Sixe severall Portraitures, most proper for this exercise with the Pike and Bow, by this Invention, with the Observations, and words of command, properly be∣longing to each severall posture.
The Pikeman stands ordered. This Portraiture is first placed, being pro∣perly the first Posture: for the Pikeman standing ordered, is ready also for all other Postures, or service whatsoeuer he shall be commanded: As, Advance your Pike, &c. Shoulder your Pike, and March. Slope your Pike. Vnfasten your bow, and shoot. Port your pike and march. Port your pike and retire, &c.
The Pikeman stands sloapt and shooting. This Portraiture is properly for shooting, with this obseruation, the Butt end of the Pike be fast in the ground at the right foot. The words of command for this posture, are as followeth: Sloape your pike. Vnfasten your bow. Draw out your arrow. Nocke your arrow. Shoot wholly together.
The Pikeman stands ported to march or retire. This Portraiture is most proper for the third place, for after shooting the first volley of Ar∣rowes at the furthest distance, If any fall short, you are ready being so ported, to march ten paces, or more or lesse, as you shall be com∣manded, to shoot your second volley of arrowes; and then againe be∣ing so ported, you are rea∣die to retire, as afore∣said, to shoot the third volley of arrowes. &c. After which, the words of command are, Fasten your bow. And Recouer your pike.
The Pikeman stands charged. This Portraiture is placed next after the former, for when the Souldier hath shot his volleys of arrowes, and fastned his bow, if the enemy will come to the push, then is he readily a pike∣man, and so to receiue his enemy at the push. The words of command for this posture, are as followeth: Aduance your Pike. Come vp to your close Order. Charge your Pike.
The Pikeman stands coucht and charged for the horse, with his Sword drawne. This Portraiture of charging for horse, is to shew, that the Bow is very materiall for this ser∣uice; for the siue or sixe first rankes standing coucht at this charge, the middle and the reare may shoot their volleyes of arrowes, and therewith both gaule, wound, disorder, and kill the enemy, both man and horse. The words of command are, Fiue first Rankes draw your Swords close to your pouldrons. Charge at the foot, and couch low. Middle and Reare, port and come vp to your order, and shoot your Arrowes.
The Pikeman shoulders and marches. This Portraiture of shouldering and marching, is placed to shew with what ease the Bow is caried with the Pike, and with∣out incumbrance vnto the pike∣man, either for cariage or seruice. The words of command for this posture are, Shoulder your Pike and March. Likewise comporting is very proper vpon some occasion for the Pike and Bow: the words are, Comport your Pike and March. FINIS.
