B1441 (both pts.) B1403 (pt. 2) R6530 [ocm]12323164 59498
TWO SHEETS FOR Poor Families. THE FIRST: Instructions to the Ungodly FOR THEIR CONVERSION. By Richard Baxter. LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleet-street: and for Nevill Simmons, Book-seller in Kederminster. 1665.
Two Sheets for Poor Families. I. Instructions to the Ungodly, For their CONVERSION. THough the saving of souls be a matter of unexpressible importance, yet (the Lord have mercy upon them,) what abundance are there that think it not worthy of their serious enquiry; nor Mar. 8. 36. Matth. 6. 33. Job 21. 14. & 22. 17. Psalm 1. 2, 3. Psalm 14. & 12 the reading of a good Book, one hour in a week? For the sake of these careless slothfull sinners, I have here spoken much in a little room, that they may not refuse to read and consider so short a Lesson, unless they think their souls worth nothing! Sinner, as thou wilt shortly an∣swer it before God, deny not to God, to thy self, and me, the sober pondering, and faithful practising, these few Directions.
I. Begin at home and Know thy self: Consider what it is to be a MAN. Thou art made a nobler Crea∣ture then the Urutes. They serve thee, and are Psal. 8. 4, 5, 6. Gen. 1. 26, 27. Gen. 9. 6. Col. 3. 10. governed by thee; and Death ends all their pains and pleasures: But thou hast Reason to Rule thy self and them; to know thy od, and foresee thy End, and know thy way, and do thy duty. Thy Reason, and Free-will, and Executive Power, are part of the Image of God upon thy nature: so is thy Dominon over the Brutes, as (under him) thou art their Owner, their Ruler, and their End. But thy Holy Wisdome, and Good∣ness and Ability is the chief part of his Image, on which thy Happiness depends. Thou hast a soul that cannot be satisfied in Knowing, till thy Knowledge reach to God himself: Nor can it be Disposed off by any other: Nor can it (or the societies of the world) be well go∣verned John 17. 3. 1 Joh. 4. 6, 7. Jer. 9. 24. according to its nature, without regard to his So∣veraign authority, and without the hopes and fears of Joy and Misery hereafter; nor can it be Happy in any thing, but Seeing, and Lovig and Delighting in this Luke 12. 4, 5. Psalm 16. 5. to 11. Isaiah 45. 18. God, as he is revealed in the other world. And is this Nature given thee in vain? If the nature of all things be fitted to its Ʋse and End, then it must needs be so with thine. II. By Knowing thy self then, thou must needs know that there s a GOD: and that he is thy Maker, and infinite in all perfections: and that he is thy Owner, Gen. 1. 1. Revel. 1. 8. Psalm 14. 1. Rom. 1. 19, 20. Psalm 46. 10. Psalm 9. 10. Psalm 100. & 23. Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. Psalm 47. 7. Ezek. 18. 4. Gen. 18. 25. Mal. 1. 6. thy Ruler, and thy Felicity or End. He is mad that seeth not, that such creatures have a Cause or Maker, and that all the Power, and Wisdome, and Goodness of the world, is caused by a Power, and Wisdome, and Goodness, which is greater than that of all the world. And who can be our Owner▪ but He that made us? And who can be our Highest Governour, but our Ow∣ner? whose Infinite Power, Wsdome and Goodness, maketh him only fit thereto? And if he be our Go∣vernour, he must needs have Laws; with Rewards for the good, and Punishment for the bad; and must Judge and Execute accordingly. And if he be our Chiefest Benefactor, and all that we have is from him, and all
our Hope and Happiness is in him, nothing can be more clear than that the very Nature of Man, doth prove, that in hope of future happiness he should absolutely Matth. 22. 37. Jerem. 5. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 8, 9. resign himself to the Will and disposal of this God, and that he should absolutely obey him, and that he should Love and serve him with all his powers. It be∣ing impossible to Love, obey and please that God too much, who is thus our Cause, our End, our All. III. By knowing thus thy self and God, it is easie to know what Primitive Holiness and Godliness is: Even this hearty, entire and absolute resignation, of the soul to Titus  14. 2 Cor. 8. 5. & 6. 16, 17, 18. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Psalm 100. Psalm 37. 4. Psalm 40. 8. Col. 3. 1, 2. Mat. 6. 0, 21. 2 Cor. 4. 1, 18. God, as the Infinite Power, Wisdome and Goodness: as our Creator, our Owner, Governour, and felicity or End: fully submitting to his Disposals; Obeying his Laws, in Hope of his promised Rewards, and Fear of his threatened punishments; and Loving and Delighting in Himself and all his appearances in the world, and Desiring and seeking the endless sight and enjoyment of him in Heavenly Glory: and expressing these Affections in daily Prayer, Thanksgiving and Praise. This is the Use of all thy faculties: the end and business of thy life: the health and happiness of thy soul: This is that Holiness or Godliness which God doth so much call for. IV. And by this it is easie to know, what a state of sin, and ungodliness is. Even the want of all this Holiness; and the setting up of Carnal-SELF instead Psalm 14. & 1. Heb. 12. 14. Rom. 8. 19. 13. John 3. 3, 5, 6. 1 Joh. 2. 15, 16. Ro. 13. 13, 14. Rom. 6. 16. Luke 18. 23. & 14▪ 26. 33▪ of GOD. When men are proudly Great, and Wise, and Good in their own eyes; and would Dispose of themselves and all their concornments; and would Rule themselves, and Please themselves, according to the fleshly Appetite and fancy: and therefore Love most the Pleasures and Profits and Honours of the world, as the provision to satisfie the desires of the Flesh: and God shall be no further Loved, Obeyed, or Pleased, than the Love of Fleshly pleasure will give leave, nor shall have any thing but what the Flesh can spare. This is a wicked, a carnal, an ungodly state; though it break forth in various wayes of sinning.
V. By this, Experience it self may tell you, that most men (yea all, till Grace renew them) are in this ungodly miserable state! (Though only the Scri∣pture tell us how this came to pass.) Though all Rom. 3. Psalm 14. Ephes. 2. 2, 3. Rom. 5. 12, 17, 19. John 3. 6. are not Fornicators, nor Drunkards, nor Extortioners, nor Persecutors, nor live not in the same way of sinning; yet Selfishness and Pride, Sensuality and the Love of worldly things, ignorance and ungodliness, are plainly become the common corruption of the Na∣ture of man: so that their Hearts are turned to the world from God; and filled with impiety, filthiness, and injustice; and their Reason is but a servant to their senses; and their mind, and love, and life is carnal: and this carnal mind is enmity to the Holi∣ness Rom. 8. 5, 6, 7. of God, and cannot be subject to his Law: This corruption is hereditary, and is become as it were a Nature to us; being the mortal malady of all our Natures: And it is easie to know, that such an un∣holy wicked Nature, must needs be loathsome unto God, and unfit for the happy enjoyment of his love, either here, or in the life to come! For, what commu∣nion Psalm 4. 3. 2 Cor. 6. 17. hath Light with Darkness? VI. Hence then it is easie to see what Grace is needfull to a mans salvation. So odious a creature, Psalm 32. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Titus 2. 14. Titus 3. 5, 6, 7, Heb. 14. 14. Mat. 5. 8. such an unthankfull Rebell, that is turned away from God, and set against him, and defiled with all this filth of sin, must needs be both Renewed and Re∣conciled, Sanctified and Pardoned, if ever he will be saved. To Love God and be Beloved by him, and to be Delighted herein, in the sight of his Glory, is the Heaven and Happiness of souls; And all this is contrary to an Unholy State: Till men have New and Holy Hearts, they can neither See God, nor Love him, nor Delight in him, nor take him for their chief content: For the Flesh and World have their Delight and Love. And till sin be pardoned, and Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3. God reconciled to the soul, what Joy or Peace can it expect from him, whose Nature and Justice engageth him to loath and punish it?
VII. And Experience will tell you, how in∣sufficient you are, for either of these two works your selves: To Renew your souls, or to Re∣concile them unto God. Will a Nature that is carnal, resist and overcome the Flesh? and abhorr Psalm 49. 7, 8, 15. 1 Cor. 2. 11. Luke 11. 21. Heb. 14. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 3. the sin which it most dearly lovth? Will a worldly mind overcome the World? When Custome hath rooted your natural corruptions, are they easily root∣ed up? Oh how great and hard a work is it, to cause a blind unbelieving sinner, to set his heart on another world, and lay up all his Hopes in Hea∣ven? and to cast off all the things he feeth, for that God and Glory which he never saw? And for a hardened, worldly, fleshly heart, to become wise and tender, and holy, and heavenly, and abhorr the sin which it most fondly loveth? And what can we do to satisfie Justice, and Reconcile such a Rebel-soul to God? VIII. Nature and Experience having thus ac∣quainted you with your sin and misery, and what you want, will further tell you that God doth not yet deal Act. 14. 17. & 17, 24, 27, 28. Rom. 1. 19. 20. Romans 2. 4. Job 33. 14. to 25. Matth. 12. 42, 43. with you according to your deserts! He giveth you life, and time, and mercies, when your sin had forfeited all these. He obligeth you to Repent and Turn unto him: And therefore experience telling you, that there is some Hope, and that God hath found out some way of shewing mercy to the chil∣dren of Wrath; Reason will command you to en∣quire of all that are fit to teach you, what way of Remedy God hath made known. And, as you may soon discover, that the Religion of Heathens, and Mahometans, is so far from shewing the true Re∣medy, that they are part of the disease it self; so you may learn, that a wonderfull person, the Lord Jesus Christ, hath undertaken the Office of being the Redeemer and Saviour of the world, and that he who Isaiah 9. 6, 7. & 53. Jobn 3. 16. 19. & 1. 1, 3, 4. & . 2. is the Eternal Word and Wisdome of the Father, hath wonderfully appeared in the nature of man, which he took from the Virgin Mary, being conceived by the Holy Ghost; that we might have a Teacher sent from
Heaven, infallibly and easily to acquaint the world with the will of God, and the unseen things of life Acts 2. 22. Heb. 2. 3, 4. John 1. 18. Mat. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 22, 23, 24, 25. Mat. 26, & 27. Acts 1. Heb. 4. Eph. 1. 22, 3. Rom. 5. 1, 3, 9. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Heb. 8. 9. 13. & 8. 6, 7. Heb. 7. 25. 1 Joh. 5. 10. 12. John 5. 22. & 3. 18, 19. Mat. 25. eternal! How God bare witness of his truth, by abundant, open uncontrolled miracles: How he conque∣red Satan, and the world; and gave us an example of perfect Righteousness, and underwent the scorn and cruelty of sinners, and suffered the death of the Cross, as a Sacrifice for our sins, to Reconcile us unto God: How he Rose again the third day, and conquered Death, and lived fourty dayes longer on earth, instructing his Apostles, and giving them Commission to Preach the Gospel to all the world, and then ascended bodily into Heaven, while they gazed after him; How he is now in Heaven both God and Man in one person, the Teacher, and King, and High-Priest of his Church! Of Him must we learn the way of life: By Him must we be Ruled as the Physitianour of souls: All power is given Him in Heaven and Earth: By his Sacrifice, and Merit, and Intercession must we be pardoned and accepted with the Father; and only by him must we come to God! He hath procured and established a Covenant of Grace, which Baptism is the seal of: even [That God will in him be our God, and Reconciled Father, and Christ will be our Saviour, and the Holy Ghost will be our Sanctifier, if we will unfeignedly consent; that is, if penitently and believingly we give up our selves to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in these Relati∣ons.] This Covenant in the tenor of it, is a Deed of Guift, of Christ, and Pardon, and Salvation to all the world, if by true Faith and Repentance they will turn to God! And this shall be the Law accor∣ding to which he will judge all that hear it at the last: For he is made the Judge of all, and will raise all the dead, and will Justifie his Saints, and judge them unto endless Joy and Glory, and condemn the unbelievers, impenitent and ungodly unto endless misery: The soul alone is judged at Death: and body and soul at the Resurrection. This Gospel the Apostles Luke 16. Acts 2. John 17. 23. Preached to the World; and that it might be effe∣ctual to mens salvation, the Holy Ghost was first given
to inspire the Preachers of it, and enable them to speak in various languages, and infallibly agree in Mat. 28. 19, 20. Acts 14. 23. Acts 20. Act. 26. 17, 18. Titus 3. 5, 6. John 3. 5, 6. Romans 8. 9. one, and to work many great and open miracles to prove their word to those they preached to: and by this means they planted the Church; which ordinary Ministers must increase, and teach, and oversee, to the end of the world, till all the Elect be gathered in. And the same Holy Spirit hath undertaken it, as his work, to accompany this Gospel, and by it to convert mens souls, illumi∣nating and sanctifying them; and by a secret Re∣generation to renew their natures, and bring them to that Knowledge, and Obedience and Love of God, which is the Primitive Holiness for which we were created, and from which we fell. And thus by a Saviour and a Sanctifier must all be Reconci∣led and Renewed, that will be Glorified with God in Heaven. All this you may learn from the Sacred Scriptures; which were written by the in∣spiration 2 Tim. 3. 16. Heb. 2. 3, 4. of the Holy Spirit, and sealed by mul∣titudes of open Miracles, and contain the very Image and Superscription of God, and have been received and preserved by the Church, as the certain Oracles of God, and blessed by him through all Generations, to the sanctifying of many souls. IX. When you understand all this, it is time for you to look home, and understand now what state your souls are in. That you were Made capable 2 Cor. 13. 5. Psalm 4. 4. 2 Peter 1. 10. of Holyness and Happiness, you know: that you and all men are fallen from God and Holyness, and Hap∣piness, unto Self, and Sin, and Misery, you know: that you are so far Redeemed by Christ you know, as to have a pardoning and saving Covenant ten∣dered you, and Christ and Mercy offered to your choice. But whether you are truly penitent belie∣vers, and Renewed by the Holy Ghost, and so united unto Christ, this is the question yet unre∣solved: this is the work that is yet to do; without which there is no salvation: And if thou die be∣fore
it is done, woe to thee that ever thou wast a man! Except a man be Regenerate by the Spirit, and Converted, and made a New Creature, and of John 3. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Romans 8. 7, 9. Phil. 3. 18, 20. Carnal be made Spiritual, and of Earthly be made Heavenly, and of selfish and sinfull be made Holy and Obedient to God, he can never be saved, no more than the Devil himself can be saved. And if this be so (as nothing is more sure) I require thee now who readest these words, as thou regard∣est thy salvation, as thou wouldst escape Hell fire, and stand with comfort before Christ and his Angels at the last, that thou soberly con∣sider whether Reason command thee not▪ to try thy state, whether thou art thus Renewed by the Sp∣rit of Christ or not? and to call for help to Acts 16. 14. Acts 2. 37. Acts 16. 30. Acts 11. 23. 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. Rev. 2. 7. those that can advise thee, and follow on the search, till thou know thy case? And if thy soul be a stranger to this Sanctifying work, whether Reason command thee not, without any delay, to make out to Christ, and beg his Spirit, and cast away thy sins, and give up thy self entirely to thy God, thy Saviour and Sanctifier, and enter into his Co∣venant, with a full Resolution never to forsake him? To deny thy self, and the desires of the flesh, and this deceitfull transitory world, and lay out all thy Hopes on Heaven! and speedily, what ever it cost thee, to make sure of the Feli∣city which hath no end. And darest thou refuse this when God and Conscience do command it? And further I advise you, X. Understand how it is that Satan hindereth souls from being sanctified: that you may know how to resst his wiles. Some he deceiveth by malitious suggestions, that holiness is nothing but fansié or hypocrisie! (And if God, and Death, Act. 24. 14. & 28, 22. & 24. 5, 6. and Heaven, and Hell were fancies▪ this might be believed.) Some he debaucheth by the power of flshy appetite and lust, so that their sins will not let their Reason speak Some he keepeth in ut∣ter ignorance, by the evil education of ignorant
Parents, and the negligence of ungodly soul-mur∣dering Mal. 2. 7. 9. Hos. 4. 9. Prov. 13. 20. Eph. 4. 18, 19. Mal. 1. 13. Teachers: Some he deceiveth by worldly Hopes, and keepeth their minds so taken up with worldly things, that the matters of Eternity, can have but some loose uneffectual thoughts, as bad as none: Some are entangled in evil company, who make a scorn of a holy life, or feed them with continual diversions and vain delights: And some are so hardened in their sin, that they are even past feeling, and neither fear Gods wrath, nor care for their salvation, but hear these things as men asleep: and nothing will awake them: Some are discouraged with a conceit that Godli∣ness is a life so grievous, sad, and melancholly, that rather then endure it, they will venture their souls, come on it what will (As if it were a grievous life, to Love God, and Hope for end∣less Joyes, and a pleasant life to Love the world and sin, and live within a step of Hell!) Some that are convinced, do put off their conversion Mat. 25. 3. 8. & 24. 43. 44. with Delayes; and think its time enough here∣after; and are purposing and promising, till it be too late, and life, and time, and hope be ended. John 8. 39. 8. 42. 44. Rom. 3. 1, 2. Gal. 4. 29. Mat. 13. 19, 20, 21, 2. Mat. 15. 2, 3, 6. Gal. 1. 14. And some that see there is a necessity of Holiness, are cheated by some dead opinions, or names, or Shewes and Images of Holiness: Either because they hold a strict opinion: or because they joyn with a Religious Party; or because they are of that which they think is the true Church; or be∣cause they are baptized with water, and observe the outward parts of worship; and perhaps be∣cause they offer God, a great deal of lip-service, and lifeless ceremony, which never savoured of a holy soul. Thus deadness, sensuality; worldliness and Hypocrisie, do hinder millions from sanctification and salvation. XI. If ever thou wouldst be saved, oppress not Reason, by sensuality or diversions: but some∣times Psalm 4. 4. Hag. 1. 5. Deut. 32. 7. 29. retire for sober Consideration. Distracted and sleepy Reason is unuseful: God and Conscience have
a great deal to say to thee; which in a crowd of company and business thou art not fit to hear. It is a dolefull case that a man who hath a God, a Christ, a Soul, a Heaven, a Hell to think of, Job 34. 27. Isaiah 1. 3. Jer. 23. 20. Psalm 119. 59. will allow them none, but running thoughts, and not once in a week bestow one hour in man-like serious Consideration of them! Sure thou hast no greater things to mind. Resolve then sometimes to spend half an hour in the deepest thoughts of thy Everlasting state. XII. Look upon this world and all its Plea∣sures, as a Man of Reason who forseeth the End, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Deut. 32. 29. 1 John 2. 17. 1 Cor. 7. 31. Luk 12. 19, 20. John 14. 1, 2. 1 Thess. 5. 13. and not as a beast, that liveth but by sense on present objects. Do I need to tell thee Man, that thou must dye? Cannot carkasses, and bones, and dust instruct thee, to see the End of Earthly glory, and all the pleasures of the flesh? Is it a Controversie whether thy flesh must shortly perish! and wilt thou yet provide for it before thy soul? What a sad farewell must thou shortly take, of all that worldlings sell their souls for! And O how quickly will this be! Alas man, the day is even at hand. A few dayes more, and thou art gone! And darest thou live unready, and part with Heaven for such a world as this? XIII. And then think soberly of the life to come: what it is for a soul to appear before the Living God, and be judged to Endless Joy or Luke 12. 4. Rom. 10. 14. Eccles. 12. 7. 2 Pet. 3. 11. 2 Cor. 4. 18. Phil. 3. 18, 20. Misery! If the Devil tempt thee to doubt of such a life, remember that Nature, and Scripture, and the worlds Consent, and his own temptations are witnesses against him. O man, canst thou pass one day, in company or alone, in business or in idleness, without some sober thoughts of Everla∣stingness. Nothing more sheweth that the hearts of men are asleep or dead, than that the thoughts of Endless joy or pain, so near at hand, constrain them not be Holy, and overcome not all the temptati∣ons of the flesh, as toyes and inconsiderable things.
XIV. Mark well what mind most men are of, Numb. 23. 10. Mat. 25. 8. & 7. 21, 22. Pro. 1, 23, 24. when they come to die! Unless it be some de∣sperate forsaken wretch, do they not all speak well of a Holy life! and wish that their lives had been spent in the most fervent Love of God, and strictest obedience to his Laws! Do they then, speak well of lust and pleasures, and magnifie the wealth and honours of the world! Had they not then rather die as the most mortified Saints, than as careless, fleshly, worldly sinners! And dost thou see and know this, and yet wilt thou not be instructed, and be wise in time? XV. Think well, what manner of men those were, whose Names are now honoured for their Holiness! What manner of life did Saint Peter, Mat. 23. 29, 30, 31, 33. Heb. 11. 38. John 8. 39. and St. Paul, St. Cyprian, St. Augustine, and all other Saints and Martyrs live? Was it a life of fleshly sports and pleasures! Did they deride or persecute a holy life? Were they not more strictly holy than any that thou knowest. And is he not self condem∣ned, that honoureth the Names of Saints, and will not imitate them? XVI. Think what the difference is between a Christian, and an Heathen. You are loath to be Hea∣thens Matth. 10. 15. Romans 2. Act. 10. 34, 35. or Infidels; But do you think a Christian excelleth them but in Opinion! He that is not Ho∣lier than they, is worse, and shall suffer more than they. XVII. Think what the difference is between a Godly Christian and an Ungodly. Do not all the opposers of Holiness among us, yet speak for the Rom. 2. 28, 29, 24. 12. Matth. 25. 28. Luke 19. 22. Acts 24. 15. Gal. 4. 29. same God, and Christ, and Scripture, and profess the same Creed, and Religion with those whom they oppose? And is not this Christ the Author of our Holiness, and this Scripture the Commander of it? Search and see! whether the difference be not this, that the Godly are serious in their pro∣fession; and the ungodly are Hypocrites, who hate and oppose the practise of the very things which them∣selves
profess; whose Religion serveth but to condemn them, while their lives are contrary to their tongues. XVIII. Understand what the Devils policy Ephes. 4. 14. Acts 20. 30. 1 Cor. 11. 19. 2 Tim. 4. 3. & 2. 14. 16. 1 Tim. 1. 5, 6. Titus 3. 9. Eph. 4. 3. &c. 1 Cor. 12. Mat. 12. 25. Rom. 2. 12. 27. 28, 29. is, by raising so many Sects, and Factions, and Controversies, about Religion in the world. Even to make some think, that they are Religious, be∣cause they can prate for their opinions! or be∣cause they think their party is the best: Because their faction is the Greatest, or the Least, the uppermost, or the suffering side. And to turn holy edifying conference into vain wrangling: And to make men Atheists, suspecting all Religion, and true to none, because of mens diversity of minds: But remember that Christian Religion is but One; and a thing easily known by its ancient Rule; and the Universal Church containing all Christians, is but one. And if carnal interest or opinions so di∣stract men, that one party saith, We are all the Church, and another saith, It is we; (as if the Kitchin were all the House, or one Town or Vil∣lage all the Kingdome) wilt thou be mad with seeing this distraction? Hearken sinner! All these Sects in the day of Judgement shall concurr as wit∣nesses against thee, if thou be unholy▪ because however else they differed, all of them that are Chrstians, professed the necessity of Holiness, and subscribed to that Scripture, which requireth it. Gal. 1. 7, 8. Mat. 28. 20. James 3. 17. Though thou canst not easily resolve every Con∣troversie, thou maist easily know the true Reli∣gion; It is that which Christ and his Apostles taught, which all Christians have professed; which Scripture requireth; which is first pure and then peaceable; most spiritual, heavenly, charitable, and just. XIX. Away from that company which is sen∣sual, Ephes. 5. 11. Prov. 23. 20. 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Psalm 15. 4. Deut. 13. 3. and an enemy to Reason, Sobriety, and Holi∣ness; and consequently to God, themselves and thee. Can they be wise for thee, that are foolish for themselves? or friends to thee that are undoing themselves, or have any pitty on thy soul, when
they make a jeast of their own damnation? Will they help thee to Heaven, who are running so furi∣ously to Hell? Choose better familiars, if thou wouldst be better. XX. Judge not of a Holy life by hearsay: for it cannot so be known. Try it awhile, and then judge John 5. 40. Luke 14. 29, 30. John 6. 35. 37. 45. as thou findest it. Speak not against the things thou knowest not. Hadst thou but lived in the Love of God, and the lively belief of endless Glory, and the delights of Holiness, and the fears of Hell, but for one moneth or day, and with such a heart, hadst cast away thy sin, and called upon God; and Matth. 11. 19. Isaiah 55. 6, 7. Luke 14. 33. ordered thy family in a holy manner, especially on the Lords day; I dare boldly say, experience would constrain thee, to justifie a holy life. But yet I must tell thee, it is not true Holiness, if thou do but Try it with Exceptions and Reserves: If therefore God hath convinced thee that this is his will and way, I adjure thee as in his dreadfull Rev. 22. 17. John 1. 12. Rev. 2. & 3. 1 Joh. 5. 10. 12. Psalm 34. 7. Psalm 73. 26. Mat. 25. Luke 20. 36. Heb. 2. 3. 2 Thes. 2. 12. presence, that thou Delay no longer, but Resolve, and Absolutely give up thy self to God, as thy Hea∣venly Father, thy Saviour and thy Sanctifier, and make an everlasting Covenant with him; and then He and all his Mercies will be thine: His grace will help thee; and his mercy pardon thee: his Ministers will instruct thee, and his people pray for thee, and assist thee: His Angels will guard thee; and his Spirit comfort thee, and when flesh must fail, and thou must leave this world, thy Saviour will then Receive thy soul, and bring it into the participation of his Glory: and he will raise thy body, and justifie thee before the world, and make thee equal to the Angels; and thou shalt Luke 19. 27. Prov. 29. 1. & . 25. Live in the sight and Love of God, and in the Everlasting Pleasures of his Glory. This is the end of Faith and Holiness. But if thou harden thy heart, and refusest mercy, everlasting woe will be thy portion, and then there will be no remedy. And now, Reader, I beg of thee, and I beg of God on my bended knees, that these few words may sink in∣to
thy heart, and that thou wouldst read them over and over again, and bethink thee as a man that must shortly die, whether any deserve thy Love and obedi∣ence more than God? and thy thankful remembrance more than Christ, and thy care and diligence more than thy salvation? Is there any felicity more desirable than Heaven? or any misery more terrible than Hell? or any thing so regardable as that which is Everlasting? Will a few dayes fleshly pleasures pay for the loss of heaven and thy immortal soul? or will thy sin and thy prosperity be sweet at death, and in the day of Judgement? As thou art a man, and as ever thou be∣lievest that there is a God, and a world to come, and as thou carest for thy soul whether it be saved or dam∣ned, I beseech thee, I charge thee, think of these things; think of them once a day at least! think of them with thy most sober serious thoughts! Heaven is not a May∣game! and Hell is not a flea-biting! Make not a jeast of Salvation or Damnation! I know thou livest in a di∣stracted world, where thou maist hear some laughing at such things as these, and scorning at a holy life, and fastening odious reproaches on the godly, and merrily drinking, and playing and prating away their time, and then saying, that they will trust God with their souls, and hope to be saved without so much ado! But if all these men do not change their minds, and be not shortly down in the mouth, and would not be glad to eat their words, and wish that they had lived a holy life, thought it had cost them scorn and suffering in the world, let me bear the shame of a deceiver for ever: But if God and thy Conscience bear witness against thy sin, and tell thee that a Holy life is best, re∣gard not the gainsayings of a Bedlam world, which is drunk with the delusions of the flesh: But Give up thy soul and life to God by Iesus Christ in a faithful Cove∣nant! Delay no longer man, but Resolve; Resove im∣mediately; Resolve unchangeably; and GOD will be thine, and thou shalt be his for ever. Amen, Lord: Have mercy on this sinner, and so let it be Resolved by Thee and him. May 6. 1665. FINIS.
The Second SHEET FOR Poor Families. INSTRUCTIONS FOR A HOLY LIFE. By Richard Baxter. LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleet-street: and for Nevill Simmons, Book-seller in Kederminster. 1665.
The Second Sheet for Poor Familes: INSTRUCTIONS FOR A Holy Life. ALL is not done when men have begun a Religious life: All Trees that blossome prove not fruitfull: Colos. 1. 23. Hebrews 4. 1. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 1 Cor. 3. Gal. 3. & 4. Matthew 13. 41. & 18. 7. and all fruit comes not to perfe∣ction. Many fall off, who seemed to have good beginnings: And many dishonour the Name of Christ, by their scandals and in∣firmities: Many do grieve their Teachers hearts, and lamentably disturb the Church of Christ, by their ignorance, errors, self-conceitedness, unruli∣ness, headiness, contentiousness, sidings and divisi∣ons:
In so much that the scandals and the fewds of Christians, are the great impediment of the Con∣version of the Infidel and Heathen world, by exposing Phil. 3. 21. Acts 20. 30. Christianity to their contempt and scorn, as if it were but the error of men as unholy and worldly and proud as others, that can never agree among themselves: And many by their passions and selfishness are a trouble to the Families and Neighbours where they live: And more by their weaknesses and great di∣stempers, are snares, vexations and burdens to them∣selves. Whereas Christianity in its true constitution, is a life of such Holy Light and Love, such Purity and Matth. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 3 1. 1 Pet. 2. 15. & 1. 8. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Peace, such fruitfulness and Heavenlyness, as if it were accordingly shewed forth in the lives of Chri∣stians, would command admiration and reverence from the world, and do more to their conversion, than swords, or words alone can do: And it would make Christians usefull and amiable to each other; and their lves a feast and pleasure to themselves. I hope it may prove some help to these excellent ends, and to the securing mens salvation, if in a few sound experienced Directions, I open to you the Duties of a Christian life. I. Keep still the true form of Christian Doctrine, De∣sire and Duty orderly printed on your minds: that is, Understand it clearly and distinctly, and remember it. 2 Tim. 1. 13. & 3. 7. Heb. 5. 12. Phil. 1. 9. Rom. 15. 14. I mean the great points of Religion contained in Catechismes: you may still grow in the clearer un∣derstanding of your Catechismes, if you live an hundred years: Let not the words only but the mat∣ter, be as familiar in your minds, as the rooms of your house are. Such solid knowledge will establish you against seduction and unbelief, and will be Eph. 4. 13, 14. Coloss. 1. 9. & 2. 3. & 3. 10. 1 Tim. 6. 4. still within you a ready help for every Grace, and every duty, as the skill of an Artificer is for his work: And for want of this, when you come among Infidels or Hereticks, their reasonings may seem unanswerable to you, and shake, if not over∣throw your faith: And you will easily erre in lesser points, and trouble the Church with your dreams and wranglings. This is the calamity of many Professors;
that while they will be most censorious Judges, in every controversie about Church-matters, they know not well the Doctrine of the Catechism. II. Live dayly by faith on Jesus Christ, as the Me∣diator between God and you: Being well grounded Iohn 17. 3. Ephes. 3. 17, 18. Matth. 28. 19. Eph. 1. 22, 23. & 4. 6. 16. Romans 5. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Iohn 16. 33. 1 Iohn 5. 4. Heb. 4 14. 16. Col. 3. 3, 4. Acts 7. 59. in the Belief of the Gospel, and understanding Christs Office: make use of him still in all your wants. Think on the Fatherly Love of God as coming to you through him alone: and of the Spirit as given by Him your Head; and of the Covenant of Grace as enacted and sealed by him; and of the Ministery as sent by him; and of all time, and helps, and hope as procured and given by him: When you think of sin, and in∣firmity, and temptations, think also of his sufficient pardoning, justifying and victorious grace. When you think of the world, the flesh and the Devil, think how he overcometh them. Let his doctrine and the pattern of his most perfect life, be alwayes before you as your Rule. In all your doubts, and fears, and wants, go to Him in the Spirit and to the Fa∣ther by Him, and Him alone. Take him as the root of your life and mercies, and Live as upon him and by his life. And when you die, resign your souls to Him, that they may be with Him where he is, and see his Glory. To live on Christ, and use Him in every want and address to God, is more then a General confused believing in him. III. So Believe in the Holy Ghost, as to Live and work by Him, as the Body doth by the soul. You are not Baptised into his name in Vain: (But too few Gal. 5. 16. 25. Matth. 28. 19 Iohn 16. 13. Heb. 2 3, 4. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Rom. 8. 9. 13. Iohn 3. 5, 6. understand the sense and reason of it.) The Spirit is sent by Christ for two great works: 1. To the Apostles (and Prophets) to inspire them infallibly to preach the Gospel, and confirm it by miracles, and leave it on record, for following ages in the Holy Scriptures: 2. To all his members, to illuminate and sanctifie them, to believe and obey this Sacred Doctrine (beside his common guift to many to understand and preach it.) The Spirit having first indited the Gospel, doth by it, first Regenerate, and after Govern all
true Believers. He is not now given us; for the revealing of new doctrines, but to understand and obey the doctrine revealed and sealed by him long 2 Tim. 3. 15, 16. Iude 19, 20. Ezech. 36. 27. Isa. 44. 3. Rom. 8. 1. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Zech. 14. 20. ago. As the Sun doth by its sweet and secret influ∣ence, both give and cherish the natural life of things Sensitive and Vegetative; so doth Christ by his Spirit our spiritual life. As you do no work but by your natural life, you should do none but by your spiritual life: you must not only Believe and Love and pray by it; but manage all your Cal∣lings by it: For Holiness to the Lord must be written upon all: All things are sanctified to you, because you being sanctified to God, devote all to Him, and use all for Him: and therefore must do all in the strength and conduct of the Spirit. IV. Live wholly upon GOD, as All in All: As the first Efficient, principal Dirigent, and Fil Cause Rom. 11. 36. 1 Cor. 10. 31. 2 Cor. 5 7, 8.  Iohn 3. 1. Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3. Matth. 22. 37. Ephes. 1. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. of all things. Let Faith, Hope and Love be daily feeding on Him. Let [Our Father which art in Heaven] be first inscribed on your hearts, that he may seem most amiable to you, and you may bold∣ly Trust him, and filial Love may be the spring of duty. Make use of the Son and Spirit to lead you to the Father; and of Faith in Christ to kindle and keep alive the Love of God. The Love of God is our Primitive Holiness, and specially called, with its fruits [Our Sanctification,] which Faith in Christ is but a Means to. Let it be your principal end in studying Christ, to see the Goodness Love and Amia∣bleness of God in him: A condemning God is not so easily loved, as a Gracious Reconciled God. You have so much of the Spirit, as you have Love to God: This is the proper guift of the Spirit to all the Adopted Sons of God, to cause them with filial af∣fection and dependance, to cry Abba Father. Know not, desire not, love not any creature, but purely as subordinate to God! Without him, let it be Nothing to you; But as the Glass without the face; or scat∣tered Letters without the sense; or as the corpse without the soul. Call nothing Prosperity or plea∣sure but his Love; and nothing adversity or misery, Psalm 30. 5.
but his displeasure, and the cause and fruits of it. When any thing would seem Lovely and desirable which is Psalm 63. 3. Phil. 3. 7, 8. Matth. 16. 23. 2 Thess. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 13. 14. against him call it Dung! And hear that man as Sa∣tan or the Serpent, that would entise you from Him: & count him but Vanity, a Worm, and dust, that would affright you from your duty to Him. Fear him much, but Love him more! Let Love be the soul and End of every other duty: It is the end and Reason of all the rest: but it hath no End or Reason, but its Ob∣ject. Think of no other Heaven, and End, and Hap∣piness of man, but LOVE the final act, and GOD the final object: Place not your Religion in any thing but the Love of God with its means and fruits. Own no grief, desire, or joy, but a Mourning, a Seek∣ing, and a Rejoicing Love. V. Live in the Belief, and Hopes of Heaven, and seek it as your part and end; and daily Delight your souls in the forethoughts, of the endless sight and Love of Col 3. 1, 2, 4. Mat. 6. 19, 20, 1. 33. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. & 5. 7. Luke 12. 20. Heb. 6. 20. 1 Cor. 15. 28. Ephes. 4. 6. & 1. 23. Phil. 3. 18. 20. Ps. 73. 25, 26. Iohn 18. 36. God. As God is seen on earth but as in a glass, so is he proportionably enjoyed. But when mourning, seeking Love hath done, and sin and enemies are over∣come, and we behold the Glory of God in Heaven, the Delights of Love will then be perfect. You may desire more on Earth, than you may Hope for. Look not for a Kingdom of this world, nor for Mount Zion in the wilderness. Christ Reigneth on Earth, as Moses in the Camp, to guide us to the Land of Promise: Our perfect blessedness will be, where the Kingdome is delivered up to the Father, and God is All in All. A doubt, or a strange heartless thought of Heaven, is Water cast on the Sacred fire, to quench your Ho∣liness and your Joy. Can you travel one whole day to such an End; and never think of the place that you are going to? which must be intended in every righteous act (either notedly, or by the ready un∣observed act of a potent habit.) When Earth is at the best, it will not be Heaven. You live no further by Faith like Christians, then you either live for Hea∣ven in seeking it, or else upon Heaven in Hope and Ioy. VI. Labour to make Religion your pleasure and de∣light.
Look oft to God, to Heaven, to Christ, to the Spirit, to the Promises, to all your mercies; call over your experiences, and think what matter of high De∣light Psalm 1. 2, 3. & 84. 2. 10. & 63. 3. 5. & 37. 4. & 94. 19. & 119. 47. 70. Isa. 58. 14. Psalm 112. 1. Romans 14. 17. & 5. 1, 3, 5. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Mat. 5. 11, 12. Psalm 32. 11. is still before you: And how unseemly it is, and how injurious to your profession, for one that saith be Hopeth for Heaven, to live as sadly, as those that have no higher Hopes than Earth? How should that man be filled with joy, who must live in the joys of Heaven for ever? Especially rejoyce when the mes∣sengers of Death, do tell you that your Endless Joy is neer. If God and Heaven, with all our mercies in the way, be not Reason enough for a joyful life, there can be none at all. Abhor all suggestions which would make Religion seem a tedious irksome life. And take heed that you represent it not so to others: For you will never make them in Love with that, which you make them not perceive to be delectable and lovely. Not as the Hypocrite, by forcing and framing his Religion to his Carnal mind and pleasure; but bringing up the heart to a holy suitableness, to the pleasures of Religion. VII. Watch as for your souls, against this flattering tempting world; especially when it is represented as more Gal. 6. 14. 1 Ioh 2. 15, 16. Iames 1. 27. & 4. 4, 5. 1 Iohn 5. 4, 5. Rom. 12. 2. Gal. 1. 4. Titus 2. 12. Mat. 19. 24. Luk. 12. 16. 21. & 16. 25. Iames 1. 11. & 5. 1. 2. 4. Luke 8. 14. Heb. 11. 26. sweet and delectable, than God, and Holiness, and Hea∣ven. This world with its Pleasure, Wealth, and Ho∣nours, is it that is put in the ballance by Satan, against God and Holiness and Heaven: And no man shall have better than he chooseth and preferreth. The bait taketh advantage of the brutish part, when Rea∣son is asleep; and if by the help of sense it get the Throne, the Beast will ride and rule the Man; and Reason become a slave to Sensuality. When you hear the Serpent, see his sting: and see Death attending the forbidden fruit. When you are Rising, look down and see how far you have to fall! His Reason as well as faith is weak, who for such fool-gawds, as the pomp and vanities of this world, can forget God and his soul, and death and judgement, Heaven and Hell, yea and deliberately command them to stand by. What Knowledge or Experience can do good on that man, who will venture so much for such a world, which all that have tryed it call Vanity at the last? How deplo∣rate
then is a worldlings case? O fear the world, when it smileth, or seems sweet and amiable. Love it not, if you Love your God and your salvation. VIII. Fly from temptations, and crucifie the flesh, and keep a constant Government over your appetite and Rom. 8. 1. 13. Gal. 5. 24. Rom. 13. 14. Gal. 5. 17. Iude 8. 23. 2 Pet. 2. 10: Eph. 2. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Mat. 6. 13. & 26. 41. Luke 8. 13. senses. Many who had no designed stated vice, of worldly interest, have shamfully fallen by the sudden surprize, of appetite or lust. When custome hath taught these to be greedy and violent, like a hungry Dog, or a lusting Bore, it is not a sluggish wish or purpose, that will mortifie or rule them! How dan∣gerous a case is that man in, who hath so greedy a Beast continually to restrain? that if he do but neg∣lect his watch one hour, is ready to run him head∣long into hell? Who can be safe, that standeth long, on so terrible a precipice? The tears and sor∣rows of many years, may perhaps not repair the loss which one hour or act may bring. The case of Da∣vid and many another, are dreadful warnings. Know what it is that you are most in danger of; whether lust, or idleness, or excess in meat, or drinks, or play; and there set the strongest watch for your preservati∣on. Make it your daily business to mortifie that lust; and scorn that your brutish sense or appetite, should conquer reason. Yet trust not purposes alone; but away from the temptation; Touch not, yea look not on the tempting bait: Keep far enough off, if you desire to be safe. What miseries come from small be∣ginnings! Temptation leads to sin, and small sins to greater, and those to Hell! And sin and Hell are not to be played with. Open your sin or temptation to some friend, that shame may save you from the danger. IX. Keep up a constant skilfull Government, over Iames 1. 19. Iam 3. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 4. Mat 5. 5. Ephes. 4. 2, 3. Col. 3. 12. Iames 1. 26. & 3. 5, 6. your Passions and your Tongues. To this end, keep a tender Conscience, which will smart when in any of these you sin. Let Holy Passions be well ordered: and selfish carnal passions be restrained. Let your Tongues know their duties to God and man, and labour to be skilful and resolute in performing them. Know all the sins of the Tongue, that you may avoid them; for your
innocency and peace do much depend on the prudent Psalm 34. 13. Prov. 18. 21. Government of your Tongues. X. Govern your Thoughts with constant skilful dili∣gence. In ths, right Habts and Affections will do most by enclining them unto Good. Its easie, to Think Deut. 15. 9. 2 Cor. 10. 5. Gen. 6. 5. Psalm 10. 4. Psalm 94. 19. Psal. 119. 113. Prov 12. 5. & 15. 26. on that which we Love. Be not unfurnished of matter for your Thoughts to work upon! And often retire your selves for serious meditation: Be not so solitary and deep in musings, as to over-stretch your thoughts, and confound your minds, or take you off from neces∣sary converse with others: But be sure that you be Considerate, and dwell much at home, and converse most with your consciences and your God! with whom you have the greatest business Leave not your thoughts unimployed, or ungoverned: scatter them not abroad upon impertinent vanities: O that you knew what daily business you have for them! Most men are wick∣ed, Psal. 119 59. Prov. 30. 32. Ier 4. 14. Deut. 32. 29. deceived and undone, because they are inconside∣rate! and dare not or will not retiredly, and soberly use their Reason; or use it but as a slave in chains, in the service of their passion, lust and in∣terests. He was never wise, or good, or happy, who was not soberly and impartially considerate. How to be good, to do good, and finally enjoy good, must be the summ of all your Thoughts. Keep them first Holy, then charitable, clean and chaste. And quickly check them when they look towards sin. XI. Let Time be exceeding pretious in your eyes, and carefully and diligently Redeem it. What haste doth it Ephes. 5. 16. Ioh 14 1, 2. Acts 17. 21. 1 Cor. 7. 29. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Iohn 9. 4. Luk. 19. 42. 44. Psalm 39 4. Mat. 25. 10. 12. make! and how quickly will it be gone? and then how highly will it be valued, when a minute of it can never be recalled. O what important business have we, for every moment of our Time, if we should live a thousand years! Take not that man to be well in his wits, or to know his God, his End, his work, or his danger, who hath time to spare. Redeem it, not only from needless sports, and playes, and idleness, and curiosiy, and complement, and excess of sleep, and chatt, and worldliness; but also from the entanglement of lesser good, which would hinder you from greater. Spend
Time as men that are ready to pass into another world; where every minute must be accounted for; and it must go with us for ever as we lived here. Let not Health deceive you, into the expectation of living long, and so into a sensless negligence: See your glass running, and keep a reckoning of the expense of Time: and spend it just as you would review it when it is gone. XII. Let the Love of all in their several capacities, become as it were your very Nature: and doing them all 1 Tim. 1. 5, 6. Mat. 19. 19. Rom. 13. 10. 1 Iohn 4. 16. Ephes. 4. 2. 15, 16. Col. 2. 2. & 1. 4. 1 Tim. 6. 11. Iames 3. 17. Phil. 2. 1, 2. 1 Thess. 4. 9. Iohn 13. 35. Mat. 5. 44, 45. 1 Cor. 13. Iames 4. 11. Gal. 6. 10. Titus 2. 14. Phil. 2. 10, 21. Rom. 15. . 3. the good you can be very much of the business of your lives. God must be loved in all his creatures: His na∣tural Image on all men; and his spiritual Image on his Saints. Our Neighbour must be Loved as Our selves: that is, our natural neighbour as our natural self, with a Love of Benevolence; and our spiritual neighbour as our spiritual self, with a Love of Complacence. In op∣position to complacence, we may hate our sinful neigh∣bour, as we must our selves (much more:) But in opposition to Benevolence we must neither hate our selves, our neighbour, or our enemy. O that men knew how much of Christianity doth consist in Love, and doing good? With what eyes do they read the Gospel, who see not this in every page? Abhorr all that selfishness, pride, and passion which are the enemies of Love, and those opinions, and factions, and censurings and backbitings, which would destroy it. Take him that speaketh evil of another to you, without a just cause and call, to be Satans messenger, intreating you to hate your Brother, or to abate your Love. For to perswade you, that a man is bad, is directly to per∣swade you so far to hate him. Not that the good and bad must be confounded: but Love will call none Bad without constreining evidence. Rebuke backbiters: Hurt no man, and speak evil of no man; unless it be not only just, but necessary to some greater good. Love is lovely: They that Love shall be beloved. Hating and hurting makes men Hateful. Love thy neighbour as thy self; and, Do as thou wouldst be done by; are the golden Rules of our duty to men; which must be deeply written on your hearts. For want of this, there
is nothing so false, so bad, so cruel, which you may not be drawn to Think, or Say, or Do against your Bre∣thn▪ SELFISHNES and WANT of LOVE, do as naturally tend to Ambition and Covetousness, and thence to cruelty against all that stand in the way of their desires, as the nature of a Wolf to kill the Lambs. All factions, and contentions, and persecutions in the world, proceed from selfishness, and want of charity. Devouring malice is the Devilish nature. Be as zea∣lous in doing good to all, as Satans servants are in hurting. Take it as the use of all your talents, and use them as you would hear of it at last. Let it be your business, and not a matter on the by: Especially for publick good, and mens salvation. And what you cannot do your selves, perswade others to. Give them good Books; and draw them to the means, which are most like to profit them. XIII. Ʋnderstand the right terms of Church-Com∣munion: especially the Unity of the Universal Church, and the Universal Communion which you must hold with 1 Cor. 12. Eph. 4. 3. 16. Col. 1. 4. Heb. 10. 25. Acts 2. 41. & 8. 37. 12, 13. all the parts; and the difference between the Church as Visible and Invisible. For want of these, how woful are our divisions? Read oft, 1 Cor. 12. & Eph. 4. 1. to 17. Iohn 17. 21, 22, 23, Acts 4 32. & 2. 42. 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 13. & 3. 3. Rom. 16. 17. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Thes. 5. 12, 13. Acts 20 30. 1 Cor. 11. 19. Titus 3. 10. Iames 3. Study these well. You must have Ʋnion and Communion in Faith and Love, with all the Christians in the world. And refuse not local communion when you have a just call; so far as they put you not on sinning. Let your usual meeting be with the purest Church, if you law∣fully may, (and still respect the publick good.) But 1 Cor. 1. 2. & 11. 18. 21. & 3. 3, 4. & 1. 12, 13. sometimes occasionally communicate even with defective faulty Churches, so be it they are true Christians, and put you not on sin: that so you may shew, that you own them as Christians, though you disown their cor∣ruptions. Think not your presence maketh all the faults of Ministry, Worship, or people to be yours (for then I would joyn with no Church in the world.) Know that as the mystical Church consisteth of Heart-Covenan∣ters, so doth the Church as Visible consist of Verbal-Covenanters,
which make a credible profession of Consent: And that Nature and Scripture teacheth us to take every mans word as credible, till perfidiousness forfeit his Credit; which forfeiture must be proved, before any sober Profession can be taken, for an insufficient title. Grudge not then at the Communion of any Professed Christian in the Church Visible (Though we Mat. 13. 41. must do our part to cast out the obstinately impenitent by Discipline; which if we cannot do, the fault is not ours.) The presence of hypocrites is no hurt, but oft a mercy to the sincere. How small else would the Church seem in the world? Outward priviledges be∣long Iohn 16. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Rom. 16. 17. Iames 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. to outward Covenanters: and inward mercies to the sincere▪ Division is wounding, and tends to death. Abhor it as you love the Churches welfare or your own: The wisdom from above is, first pure, and then peaceable. Never seperate what God conjoin∣eth. It is the Earthly, sensual, devilish wisdom, which causeth bitter envying, and strife, and confusion and every evil work. Blessed are the Peace-makers. XIV. Take heed of Pride and Self-conceitedness in 1 Tim: 3. 6. Col. 2. 18. 1 Cor. 8. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 6. 1 Tim. 6. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Iames 3. 1. 17. Religion: If once you overvalue your own understand∣ings, your crude conceptions, and gross mistakes, will delight you as some supernal light: and instead of having compassion on the weak, you will be unruly and despisers of your Guides, and censorious contem∣ners of all that differ from you; and persecutors of them if you have power; and will think all intolle∣rable, that take you not as Oracles, and your words as Law. Forget not that the Church hath alwayes suffe∣red by censorious, unruly professors on the one hand, (and O what divisions and scandals have they caused!) as well as by the prophane and persecutors on the other. Take heed of both: And when contentions are afoot, be quiet and silent, and not too forward; and keep up a zeal for Love and Peace. XV. Be faithfull and conscionable in all your Relati∣ons. Eph. 5. & 6. Col. 3. & 4. Rom. 13. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 15. Honour and obey your Parents, and other supe∣riors: Despise not, and resist not Government: If you suffer unjustly by them, be humbled for those sins,
which cause God to turn your Protectors into Afflicters: and instead of murmuring and rebelling against them, reform your selves, and then commit your selves to God. Princes and Pastors I will not speak to: Sub∣jects, and servants, and children, must obey their supe∣riors as the Officers of God. XVI. Keep up the Government of God in your fami∣lies: Holy Families must be chief preservers of the in∣terest Command. 4. Ios. 24. 15. Deut. 6. 6, 7, 8. Daniel 6. of Religion in the world. Let not the world turn Gods service into a customary lifeless form. Read the Scripture, and edifying Books to them: Talk with them seriously about the state of their souls, and everlasting life: Pray with them fervently: Watch over them diligently: Be angry against sin, and meek in your own cause! Be examples of Wisdome, Holiness and Patience: And see that the Lords Day be spent in holy preparation for Eternity. XVII. Let your Callings be managed in Holiness and Laboriousness. Live not in idleness: Be not sloth∣ful Heb. 13. 5. Command. 4. 2 Thess. 3. 10. 12. 1 Thess. 4. 7. 1 Tim. 5. 13. Proverbs 31. 1 Cor. 7. 29. in your work; whether you be bound, or free: In the sweat of your browes you must eat your bread, and labour the six dayes, that you may have to give to him that needeth! slothfulness is sensuality as well as filthier sins. The body (that is able) must have fit employment as well as the soul; or else body and soul will fare the worse. But let all be but as the la∣bour of a Traveller, and aim at God and Heaven in all. XVIII. Deprive not your selves of the benefit of an able faithful Pastor, to whom you may open your case Mal. 2. 7. Eccles. 4. 10, 11. Prov. 12. 1. & 15. 5. 10. 31. Heb. 3. 13. in secret: or at least of a holy faithful friend: And be not displeased at their free reproofs. Wo to him that is alone! How blind and partial are we in our own cause! And how hard is it to know our selves without an able faithful helper? You forfeit this great mercy, when you love a flatterer, and angrily defend your sin. XIX. Prepare for sickness, sufferings, and death: Overvalue not prosperity, nor the favour of man! If Luke 12. 40. 2 Pet. 1. 10. selfish men prove false and cruel to you, even those of
whom you have deserved best, marvel not at it; but pray for your enemies, persecutors and slanderers, that Phil. 1. 21, 23. Ierem. 9. 4, 5. Mat. 7. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 4, 8. God would turn their hearts and pardon them. What a mercy is it to be driven from the world to God? When the Love of the world is the greatest danger of the soul? Be ready to die, and you are ready for any thing: Ask your hearts seriously, what is it that I shall need at a dying hour? and let it speedily be got rea∣dy, and not be to seek in the time of your extremity. XX. Understand the true method of Peace of Consci∣ence, Exod. 34. 6. Heb. 7. 25. Iohn 4. 42. Iohn 3. 16. 1 Tim. 4. 10. & 2. 4: Matth. 28. 19, 20. Rev. 22. 17. Isaiah 55. 6, 7. and judge not of the state of your souls upon deceit∣ful grounds: As presumptuous hopes do keep men from Conversion, and embolden them in sin; so causless fears do hinder our Love and praise of God, by obscu∣ring his Loveliness; And they destroy our Thankful∣ness, and our Delight in God, and make us a burden to our selves, and a grievous stumbling block to others: The General grounds of all your comfort, are 1. The Gracious Nature of God: 2. The sufficiency of Christ, and 3. The Truth and Universality of the Promise, which giveth Christ and Life to All if they will Accept him: But this Acceptance is the proof of your particular title; without which these do but ag∣gravate your sin. Consent to Gods Covenant is the true Condition and proof of your title to God as your Father, Saviour and Sanctifier, and so to the saving blessings of the Covenant: which Consent, if you sur∣vive, must produce the duties which you consent to. He that Heartily consenteth, that God be his God, his Sa∣viour Luke 14. 26. 33. 1 Iohn 2. 15. Mat. 6. 19, 20, 21. 33. Coloss. 3. 1. 4. Rom. 1. 8. 13. and Sanctifier, is in a state of life. But this in∣cludeth the rejection of the world. Much knowledge, and memory, and utterance, and lively Affections, are all very desirable! But you must judge your state by none of these; for they are all uncertain: But 1. If God and Holiness and Heaven have the highest estimati∣on of your practical judgement, as being esteemed Best for you; 2. And be preferred in the Choice and Re∣solution of your Wills, and that Habitually, before all the pleasures of the world: 3. And be first and chiefly sought in your endeavours; this is the infallible proof of your sanctification.
Christian, upon long and serious study and experi∣ence,  dare boldly commend these Directions to thee, as the way of God, which will end in Blessedness. The Lord Resolve and Strengthen thee to obey them. This is the true Constitution of Christianity: This is true Godliness; and this is to be Religious indeed! And all this is no more than to be seriously such as all among us in general words, profess to be. This is the Religion which must difference you from Hypocrites? which must settle you in peace, and make you an ho∣nour to your profession, and a blessing to those that dwell about you! Happy is the Land, the Church, the Family, which doth consist of such as these! These are not they that either Persecute or Divide the Church; or that make their Religion a servant to their Policy, to their Ambitious designs, or fleshly lusts; nor that make it the bellows of Sedition, or Rebellion, or of an envious hurtful zeal; or a snare for the innocent; or a Pistoll to shoot at the upright in heart: These are not they that have been the shame of their profession, the hardening of ungodly men and Infidels, and that have caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. If any man will make a Religion of, or for his Lusts; of Papal tyranny, or Pharisaical formality, or of his pri∣vate opinions, or of proud censoriousness, and contempt of others, and of faction and unwarrantable separations and divisions, and of standing at a more observable distance from common professors of Christianity, than God would have them; or yet of pulling up the hedge of Discipline, and laying Christs Vineyard common to the Wilderness; the storm is coming, when this Re∣ligion founded on the sand will fall, and great will be the fall thereof: When the Religion which consisteth in Faith, and Love to God and Man, in mortifying the flesh, and crucifying the world, in Self-denyal, Humility, and patience, in sincere obedience, and faithfulness in all Relations, in watchfull self-government, in doing good, and in a Divine and Heavenly life, though it will be hated by the ungodly world, shall never be a disho∣nour to your Lord, nor deceive or disappoint your souls. May 10. 1665. FINIS.
