C1022 99825638 206660
THE CASE OF THE BURROUGH OF Dunwich in Suffolk, Ʋpon their Election of Members to serve in the Convention Appointed to meet the 22d. of January 1689. THIS Burrough chooseth by Prescription, and not by Charter, and had Bailiffs before they were a Corporation. Their first Charter was granted by King John, which hath been renewed in divers Kings Reigns; Whereby The Good Men of Dun∣wich are made a Corporation, and have divers Franchises and Priviledges grant∣ed unto them; as to be quit of Toll, Portage, &c. but no mention is made in any of them of Elections to Parliament. About 25 years since the Magistrates began to make profit by Selling Free∣doms of the Corporation, and the Benefit of their Priviledges, granting the same by Deed, under the Seal of the Corporation, to divers Cole-traders and other persons living in Ipswich, Yarmouth, Norwich, and other temoter places, who upon shewing the Common Seal have had Allowances made them according∣ly, and in some late Elections have been admitted to Vote; being above Four hundred in number. Upon Notice given of the Election upon the Prince's Letter, about Three hundred of these, being above thrice as many as the Inhabitants, came to the Election and claim'd a Poll, which was not denied them. The Opinions of the most Eminent and Indifferent Council hath been taken, concerning the Right of these Foreign Freemen, to Vote in Elections; who say, I. That the Right of Choosing is as antiently it was, in the Inhabitants, only, and that the Charters of Incorporation have no Influence upon it. II. That the Charters being granted to the Men of Dunwich, with∣out a Power expressed, To make Foreigners free; such Freedoms granted to Foreigners, are as to the Corporation it self, an abuse, and void. III. That it is not in the Power of the Magistrates to inlarge the Number of Electors, by constituting Foreign Freemen, as many and whom they please. However they thought fit to make the following Return, Viz. CHosen, according to the most Antient Custom, by the Majority of the Free Burgesses inhabiting within this Burrough, the Honourable Roger North and Sir Thomas Allen, to be Representatives, &c. And also Chosen by a lesser number of Burgesses, residing within the Burrough, and by the Major part of the Freemen of the Corporation, who live out of the Burrough, Sir Philip Skippon and Sir Robert Rich, to be likewise Representatives, &c. The said Return is under the Common Seal, according to Custom, and it is humbly hoped, that the said Mr. North and Sir Thomas Allen, in right of all the Inhabitants of the said Burrough, may be admitted to Sit and Act in the said Convention, according to the Trust reposed in them, they being first named: The rather, Because, unless the Persons chosen by the Inhabitants, be allowed to Sit, it may be pretended that the said Burrough, will have no Representatives, in this Convention.
