E1889 [ocm]12066036 196786
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For Excluding such MEMBERS OF Either House of Parliament, As have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to those that Leavie War against the Parliament. Die Sabbathi, 29. Junii, 1644. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed & published: Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the Middle-Temple. Iuly 9. 1644.
Die Sabbathi, 29. Junii, 1644. An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, for the excluding of the Members of ei∣ther House of Parliament, that have deserted the Parliament, and ad∣hered to those that leavie VVarre against the Parliament. THe Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration, That divers Members of both their Houses, have since the beginning of the unhappy distractions now depending, in breach of their duties, withdrawn them∣selves from that attendance upon the
Pub∣l s of gdom in Parliament: To which the necessi∣ties of the Kingdom, and the trust in them reposed, have obliged them; and have also joyned with, and repaired unto that party that is now in Arms against the Parliament, and seriously weighing the great inconvenience and prejudice which hath arisen, and may further arise in respect thereof, the same tending to the scandall and dis∣honour of the Parliament, the discou∣ragement of such as are well-affe∣cted, and the subversion of Religion, Laws and Liberty; by means where∣of the whole Kingdom is neerly inte∣rested and concerned in their said de∣parture and offence: And whereas divers Members of the House of Commons, which have deserted the Parliament, and adhered unto those that leavie War against the Parlia∣ment, have by Iudgement of the House of Commons, been justly disa∣bled
from sitting or continuing any longer Members of the said House du∣ring this present Parliament; By which Iudgement the severall and respective Counties, Cities, Bo∣roughs and places for which they ser∣ved, have right to Elect new Mem∣bers for the Parliament, upon a War∣rant under the hand of the Speaker of the House of Commons, directing a Writ to issue under the Broad-Seal to that purpose. And whereas divers Members of the House of Peers have also deserted the said House of Peers, and adhered to those that leavie War against the Parliament: The Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, do Ordain and Declare, That whatsoever Member of the said House of Peers hath so of∣fended, or hereafter shall so offend as aforesaid, shall be disabled from ha∣ving any voice, or sitting in the said House of Peers during this present
Parliament, untill his readmittance shall be approved of, and consent∣ed unto by both Houses of Parlia∣ment. Provided alwayes, and it is hereby Ordained and Declared, That what∣soever Member of the House of Com∣mons, that heretofore hath deserted, or hereaftet shall desert the Parlia∣ment, and adhere to those that leavie War against the Parliament, is and shall be absolutely disabled from sit∣ting in the said House of Commons during this present Parliament. FINIS.
Die Sabbathi, 29 Iunii, 1644. It is this Day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance bee forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
