E2748A T.2030[5] R25851 99889336 201510
A True Extract Out of the Commons Iournal: OF The most Principal Proceedings of that Honour∣able HOUSE, in this last SHORT MEETING; In order to the Preservation of the KING and KINGDOM From The GROWTH of POPERY, And also For Reducing the Growing Greatness of FRANCE. Printed in
A True Extract Out of the Commons Iournal: &c. Monday, the 29th. of April, 1678, these following Reasons were agreed to be used at a Conference with the LORDS, concerning the Dangers the Nation is in by the Growth of Popery. THE House of Commons taking into serious Consideration the Dangers arising to this Kingdom from the restless En∣deavours of Priests and Jesuites, and other Popish Recusants, to subvert the True Religion planted amongst us, and to re∣duce us again under the Bondage of Roman Superstition and Idolatry, and finding how great boldness they have assumed to themselves from the great remissness and connivance of his Majesty's Officers and Ministers of Justice, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, whereby so many good and necessary Laws, heretofore made against them, have not, of late times, been put in any Effectual Execution: They do therefore think it requisite to apply some Remedy to this growing Evil, especially at this time wherein the Ʋnity of Af∣fections and the mutual Confidence between his Majesty and his Peo∣ple, doth so much conduce to the Preservation of the whole Kingdom. And because they have found by Experience that all those Applycati∣ledgens they have formerly made upon this Subject, have not produced ny Effects answerable to their Expectations, they have endeavoured  discover the Causes and Grounds thereof, which they conceive are rincipally these.
1. The difficulty of convincing a Romish Priest by proving their Ordinations by Authority derived from the Sea of Rome, which makes them more confident to appear in Publick, and perform their Offices and Functions without fear of punishment. 2. That Justices of the Peace are discouraged, because several of those that have been forward in executing the Laws against Papists, in such Countries where they do most abound, have been turned out of Commission, without any apparent Cause, whilst others who have been Popishly inclined, have been continued in Commission, or, put in de Novo. 3. That in several Countries many Protestant Discenters have been Indicted under the Notion of Popish Recusants, and the Penal∣ties of the Laws levyed upon such Protestant Discenters, when the Papists there have been either totally, or for the most part discharged. 4. That the Papists do evade the Penalties of the Laws, by making over their Estates by secret Trusts and fraudulent Conveyances, yet receiving the Profits of them to their own Use and Benefit, whereas in former times considerable Sums of Money were raised by the For∣fitures of Popish Recusants; That now, by the Remissness of some and Discouragements of others of his Majesties Officers and Ministers of Justice, little or nothing is levied upon them, or likely to be levy∣ed hereafter, unless the care thereof be committed to persons Com∣missionated in the several Countries, and the Money arising thereof applyed to some Publick Use, for the Advancement of the Protestant Religion, which may encourage persons to see it Executed. 5. That Persons are not discouraged to bring up their Children, or suffer them to be bred up in the Popish Religion, because they are as capable of Inheriting the Estates of their Parents or Relations, as any other of his Majesties Subjects. The Commons do therefere most earnestly desire your Lordships to consider the Danger and sad Consequences that may befall this King∣dom by the Spreading of that Religion amongst us, and seriously and cordially to joyn with them in removing these and all other Impedi∣ments which obstruct the Course of Justice and the due Execution of the Laws, either by Expediting those Remedies, which have been of∣fered by them to your Lordships, or by proposing such others as may be more Effectual, and that this may be done with all Expeditio because the Commons cannot think it suitable to their Trust for them  consent to lay any further Charge upon the People, how urgent soe the Occasions may be that require it, till their minds be satisfied  all Care and Dilligence is used to secure the Kingdom, and prevent
dangers that may arise from the prevalency and countenance that is gi∣ven to that Party, by some more effectual Course than hath been provided. Examinatur per me, Will. Goldesbrough, Cler. Dom. Com. Saturday, May the 4th. 1678, The House of Commons passed these Votes following. Resolved, That the League Offensive and Defensive with the States General of the Ʋnited Provinces, with the Articles thereunto, are not pursuant to the Adresses of this House, nor consistent with the Good and Safety of the Kingdom. Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that his Majesty be humbly Advised and Desired forthwith to enter into the present Alliances and Confederations with the Emperor, King of Spain, and States General of the United Provinces for the Vigorous carrying on of a War against the French, and for the Good and Safety of his Ma∣jesty and his Kingdoms. Particularly that all Endeavours be used for continuing the States General of the United Provinces in the said Con∣federacy, and that it be agreed by all the said Parties Confederated, to prohibit all Trade between the Subjects, Countries and Dominions of the French King; That no Commodities of France or Dominions of the French King be Imported into their Countries from any place whatsoever. And also that all other Endeavours be used to Invite all other Princes and States into the said Confederation; And that no Truce or Peace be made with the French King by his Majesty, or any of the Confederates without the common consent of All the said Parties. This Seasonable Advice being by Order of the House presented to his Majesty that Evening, produced this Answer following on Mon∣day Morning. Charles R. HIS Majesty having been acquainted with the Votes of this House of the 4th. instant, was very much surprized both with the Matter and Form of them: But if his Majesty had had Exceptions to neither, yet his Majesty having asked the Advice of both Houses, doth not think fit to give any Answer to any thing of that Nature, till he hath a con∣current Advice from both Houses. Given at the Court at White-Hall, the 6th. day of May, 1676.
This Answer having been seriously debated by the House of Com∣mons, they Resolved upon this following Address, which on the 11th. day of May, 1678 was presented to his Majesty in the Banqueting House by the Speaker, attended with a Full House. The Address. WE Your Majesties most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Com∣mons in this present Parliament Assembled, do in all Duty and Thankfulness humbly acknowledge Your Majesties great Grace and Favour in demanding our Advice upon the State of Your Majesties Affaires in this present Juncture, wherein Your Majestes Honour, and the Safety of this Kingdom is so nearly concerned; according to which demand of Your Majesty, we did immediately enter upon Con∣sideration of what was imparted to us by Your Majesties Order; and after serious examination and weighing of the Matter, we did resolve upon an Advice, which because of the urgency of Affairs and the Expedition they required, we did present in that Form that was not usual in a Matter of so great Importance, and which we then di∣rected our Committee to excuse to Your Majesty, upon that conside∣ration, and because we apprehend the Dangers were so eminent that the delay of the least time might be of great prejudice to your Ma∣jesties Service, and the Safety of your Kingdom, after so much time already lost, we thought it necessary to apply immediately to Your Majesty by Our selves, which in a matter of this nature, is wholly in the Choice of this House, and hath been frequently practised by us. And because these Occasions are so pressing upon Your Majesty, and the whole Kingdom deeply sensible thereof, We most humbly beseech Your Majesty to communicae to us the Resolutions Your Majesty hath taken upon our said Advice, that thereby those Eminent Dan∣gers may be timely prevented. And whereas the Commons conceive the present Inconveniencies and Dangers under which the Kingdom now lies, might either totally or in a great measure have been prevented, if Your Majesty had accepted of that Advice, which in all humility and faithfullness we presented to Your Majesty on the 26th. of May last, and which we reiterated to Your Majesty of the 31th. of January ensuing. The Refusing of which Advice, and dismissing of the Parliament in May last, was the occasion of those ill Consequences which have since succeeded both at home and abroad: All which hath arisen from those mis-representations of our Proceedings, which have been suggested to your Majesty by some
particular Persons in a Clandestine way, without the participation and advice (as we conceive) of Your Council-Board, as though we had Invaded your Majesties Prerogative of making Peace or War; Whereas we did only offer our humble Advice in matters wherein the Safety of the Kingdom was concerned, which is a Right was never yet questioned in the times of your Royal Predecessors, and without which Your Majesty can never he safe. Upon which Grounds your Majesty was induced to give us such Answers to these two Addresses, Reject∣ing our Advice, whereby your Majesties good Subjects have been infinitely discouraged, and the State of your Majesties Affaires, re∣duced to a most deplorable condition. We do therefore most humbly de∣sire, That for the good and safety of this Kingdom, and for the satis∣faction of your Subjects, your Majesty would be graciously pleased to Remove those Councellours which advised the Answers to our Ad∣dresses of the 26th of May, and 31st. of January, or either of them. And we do further most humbly desire your Majesty, favourably to accept this our humble Petition and Adress, as proceeding from Hearts entirely devoted to your Majesties Service, and that as we have never yet failed of giving testimony of our Affection and Loyalty to your Majesties Person and Government, so your Majesty may rest confidently assured we shall never be wanting to Support your Ma∣jesties Greatness and Interest, whilst your Majesty relies upon our Coun∣sel, which can have no other End than what sincerely tends thereunto, notwithstanding any sinister or self-interested endeavours to make Im∣pressions on your Majesty to the contrary. And we do further desire your Majesty that the Duke of Lauther∣dale may be removed from your Presence and Councils. This is a True Coppy taken out of the Journal by William Gouldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com. To which his Majesty was pleased immediately to return this Answer. This Address is so Extravagant that I am not willing speedily to give it the Answer it Deserves. FINIS.
