F16 [ocm]11208162 204950
ROME for the Great TƲRKE, OR ELSE, The Great Turke for little ROME. BEING A Briefe Narration of the present Ca∣lamity of the King of HVNGARIES Country, and some other Parts adjacent thereunto. WITH An humble perswasion to all Christian Princes to joyne couragiously and Unanimously together, to lower and suppresse the Pride and Tyranny of this inhumane and young railing Rabshakeh: That boldly Writes himselfe an implacable Enemy to all that professe and owne the Name of CHRISTIANITY. woodcut of man in turban LONDON, Printed by T. F. for F. Coles, in the Old-Baily, 1664.
woodcut of soldier The Preface to the Reader. NOw in the 14. th yeare of King Hezekiah, did Senacherib King of Assyria, come up against all the fenced Cities of Juda, and tooke them. Then Rabshakeh stood and cryed with a lowd voyce in the Jewes language, and spake saying, heare the word of the great King the King of Assyria, thus
saith the King, Let not Hezekiah deceive you; for he shall not be able to deliver you out of his hand; neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us. Then came Eliakim the Son of Hilkiah, which was over the houshold, and Shebna the Scribe, and Joah the Son of Asaph the Recorder, to Hezekiah with their Cloaths rent, and told him the words of Rab∣shakeh, and it came to passe that night, that the An∣gell of the Lord went out and smote in the Campe of the Assyrians, an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and when they arose early in the Morning, behold they were all dead Corps. 2 Kings 18. 13, 28, 29, 30, 37, Chap. 19. 35. &c.
ROME for the Great Turke, OR, ELSE The Great Turke for little ROME. HEroick Christians you doe understand, That we have many Foes within our Land, And 'tis a reall truth you need not doubt it, As we have many in, we have more without it. Witness that Sultan that in Pride declares Hee is 'bove our highest, the Sun, the Moone and Stars, And in the heighth of his ambitious pride Speakes against CHRIST, that for poor sinners dy'd. Comparing Mabomet, a piece of Clay To him that made the World, and springs the Day; And boldly sayes, his Sepulcher or Tower, Is by his potent strength now in his power: His Alcaron, and all the Cheats he hath, He thunders out, to weaken our strong Faith. His Bashaws and his Ianizaries too, Confirmes his haughty language to be true. Likewise Vizier his saucy Generall, Sweares what he sayes, is all Canonicall, And vowes by Mahomet, now they have power They will all Christians in the world devoure.
But let these Catiffes dominere and sweare, And by your leave build castles in the ayre: Wee have a Saviour, though they count him small With one word of his mouth ruines 'em all: And when by them, JEHOVAH'S worke is done, Hee'l make his pale three Moones, to kiss his Son; For if his wrath once throughly kindled be, Hee'l pay 'em home for all their Blasphemie. In the meane time let every Christian Prince Act in his spheare to lower his insolence; And stand not now on trifles, wise men see Tends not to Peace, to Love, nor Unity. And really thorow Faith implore his ayd, That has the Universall fabricke made: Then you shall see what will become of those That are our SAVIOURS, and his Servants foes. And though the Church of Rome we know must downe, Being 'gainst CHRIST, his Scepter and his Crowne. Yet peace and joy will Coronize each one That doth detest the Whore of Babylon; The house of Austria, that all along Hath done Messiah and his servants wrong, His plumes will now be pluckt to let him know They shall be safe when he shall not be so. And when the Turke on them has his desire, He'le burne in Tophet for to make a fire. To reach all Rabshakeh; how they proclaime, Decrees 'gainst Christ, and a true Christians name; And as the people of Israell heretofore, VVe're threat'ned by those that now dare threat no more, Even so these Uipers they shall understand, They fight against a Power that shall Command.
For if the Lord of hosts doth once out-brave 'em, Their three and Thirty Kingdoms, will not save 'em. And though New Hausell, lately surrendred bee To the Giant Turke their greatest Enemy, Before hee goes much further hee may know, That his owne Slaues may worke his owne overthrow. For those poore Captives, that for many yeares, Has serv'd him 'gainst their will with sighs and teares, And in his Gallyes taken uncessant paines, Rowing along their coasts in Iron Chaines, In luring many a blow upon their back. When their sad hearts were ready for to crack; And with their Bastinadoes on their feet, Blow after blow most cruelly doth meer. Their Prayers and tears ere long will sore on high, To ruine him and his Conspiracy. Now I could wish you that drinke Wine in boules, For to survey the misery of these soules; And you that lye upon your beds of Downe, And your soft heads with Roses seems to Crowne, Sits downe to eat, and rises up to play, And with vaine sports do droll your time away; Although that lenity a while forbeares These cases might be ours as well as theirs, Then England be not too secure for feare, Though God has blest and spar'd us many a yeere, If we too long rebell, against his Crowne, Iustice at length, will fairely cut us downe. But to Conclude. Likewise their great Prophet that knowes no more, When he may perish on the Christian shore.
Then I know when Pauls Steeple will be built And her faire Pinacle most richly gilt, And though Hungaria and some other Parts, Suffers a while by his inhumane Darts; GOD in due time, doe what his Forces can, Will wound and spoyle this great Leviathan, And hooke his nostrils for to make him tame, And back againe retreat with griefe and shame: And when hee doth with horrour thus returne, Constantinople will in Sable mourne. Which is not only the hope, but also the beliefe of one that wishes well to all the Protestants in the Christian world. E. F. FINIS. Licenced by Order. Iune, 5. 1664.
