H1403 [ocm]18319816 206502
THE Dutch Prophesie; OR THE ASTROLOGICAL PREDICTIONS OF JOHANNES VELMONT VAN VALKENBURGH O UTRECHT, SURVEYING THE FATE OF THE UNITED PROVINCES For the Ensuing Year, 1674. Finis alterius mali gradus est futuri. LONDON, Printed by E. C. for John Newton. 1673.
THE Dutch Prophesie, OR THE Astrological Predictions, &c. SIR, I Do no sooner received your Command, but I immedi∣ately Addressed my self to Gratifie your Curiosity in procuring an Abstract of the Predictions, or Astronomi∣cal Judgments upon the en∣suing Year, as they are deli∣vered by the most Famous Mathematick of this Age' Johannes Helmont van Val∣kenburgh of Ʋtretcht. He thus Determines upon his Scheme erected for the Spring Quarter. —Several Low Countries shall be sub∣ject
to many and great Inundations, which shall break out with such a Violence, as to Overthrow many great Towns and very considerable Forts, Castles, and stately Fabricks. There shall also be a great Dearth amongst all sorts of Cat∣tle both great and small, many of them Drownded and Starved, and also a great Rott amongst Sheep; caused through the Excessive moist Distemperature of the Season Mankind shall also be Afflicted with divers Sicknesses pro∣ceeding from the abundance of Cold and Moist Humours, caused by Corruption of the Air and unwholsome Diet. That the Commonalty in those Countries shall be much discontented and Weary of their Lives▪ through extream Po¦verty caused by their great Loss of Cattle, &c. Which yet cannot Excuse them from Heavy Impositions and Taxes. Upon the entrance of the Sun into Capricorn, there will happen great and terrible Tempests, and great Losses at Sea, to the great Endammagement of the Merchant. Mars being ready to pass out of Virgo into Segitarie, threatens Was and great Commotions to those Countries more im∣mediately under his Influence with unfortunate success to those who live under the watry Trigon. Saturn in the fourth house is also an Enemy to Peace, and seems wholly to invalidate the benevlent Aspects of the other Planets, which do however strongly incline the endea∣vour of some great Statesmen, to work an accommodation But the two Malevolent Planets do strongly oppose and ap∣pear to have the sole Dominion in the affairs and Transacti∣ons of those Countries more immediately subject to their malicious Influence, which shall cause men to desire War rather than Peace, and to take delight in Slaughter and Ex∣ecution:
And to love Danger, Blood, Fire, and Confusi∣on, and to Court even Death it self, in all its most Hor∣rible shapes, till the minds of men shall be so hardned, that nothing shall seem unlawful to them; but they shall sport themselves in all kind of Cruelty and outrage; and being drunk with Bloud they shall rejoyce in all manner of Ruine and Destruction. Sir, he Sum of what Van Valkenburgh's Predicti∣ Though upon each particular Scheme he does enlarg himself into several Pages. We much sear he will prove too true a Prophet, for though the Generality here are very desirous of Peace▪ ye we can see nothing but preparations for War, and the Military Spirits drive all before them. And those who prudently consider the face of Christendome, 'tis possible they may collect as infallible predictions without consult∣ing the Stars. But this may satisfie you how ready I am to comply with your Desires, when ever you please to Oblige me with an Opportunity. Sir, Since we have begun to Trassique this way, I could wish you would send us over some Intelligence from your English Oracles, which I imagine may be less Ambiguous and more to the purpose; for I can assure you (under our Hogen Mgen Policy) they are not allow'd that License and Freedom as your Interpreters of the
Stars in England, who with such Confidence▪ Transcribe the Book of Fates, and never scruple to Publish the In∣tregues of Heaven. Our Astrologers seem a little better Qualified to be admitted as Secretaries to the Stars, for they only gene∣ral Terms hint at the High Decres of the Heavenly Ca∣bal; though by a kind of mysterious Dilemma, they still hope to Entrap the Event. FINIS.
