H2106A 99828692 206948
THE Historical Parts OF THE Old and New TESTAMENT, IN VERSE. WITH One Hundred and Twenty CUTS, being the best use of Poetry and Sculpture. London, Printed for Sam. Keble at the Great Turk's-Head, in Fleet-street, MDCXCIV.
THE HISTORY of the old & new TESTAMENT described in FIGURES. engraved title page
ERRATA. No. 86. f. Priest, r. prest. No. 77. f. in horror, r. in horror. No. 76. f. depeison, r. decition. No. 108. regard's, with this mark, and f. ill, r. still. No 46. f. he meets, r. he greets.
THE PREFACE. THE Figures or Cuts relating to this Book having, whilst alone met with good Encouragement, it was thought fit that they might be rendered the more useful to add the Explanation of them in Verse; whereby Children may the better retain the Idea of those Figures, which with the Verse will very much induce them to the reading of the Holy Scriptures, and bring them to a more familiar acquaintance with Holy Writ, to the bettering of them here, and their attaining unspeakable Joys and e∣verlasting Bliss in the World to come.
(No. 1.) Sing our first Parents happy state, Aid me, O God, who for thy help do wait; In all the Sacred Work, do thou assist! Be present with me still, and grant the just request. (No. 2.) With our first Parents then begin! Of happy them, and Eden sing! Of Paradice, and the new Creation, 'Ere sin, and foul transgression, Ruin'd the happy state of man; From God and Eden drove with shame.
engraving of biblical scene 1 Gen: 2.3.4. Cap Adam and Euē engraving of biblical scene 2 droue out of Eden 8 And ye Lord god planted a garden, &c: 16 And ye Lord god com̄anded ye man, &c 25 And they were both naked, &c: III 24 So he droue out ye man, & he placed &c.
engraving of biblical scene 3 Cain & Abels sacrafice engraving of biblical scene 4 Cain slaieth Abel IIII 3 Cain brought of ye frute of ye ground &c 4 And Abell he also brought of ye fatlings of his flock and the fat thereof &c: 8 Cain rose up against Abel his brother &c
(No. 3.) Next unhappy Abel, and accursed Cain; Sing Righteous Abel, by his Brother slain. While each his Sacrifice prepares, Heaven in the behalf of Abel streight declares. (No. 4.) Rejected Cain, on murder streight is bent; In murder, he resolves his rage to vent; The Favourite of God, and Heir of all the World, From Life, and from his just Inheritance is hurl'd.
engraving of biblical scene 5 Noah entreth the Arck Gen: 7:1. engraving of biblical scene 6 The waters prevail. 7:12. Gen: 7:1. And ye Lord said unto Noah, come thou and all thy house into &c Gen: 7:12 And ye rain was upon ye earth fortie dayes and fortie nights &c:
(No. 5.) A sinful Deluge, does a watry Deluge cause; And the prevailing Waters, all the World amaze; Noah by God's command, an Ark prepares, Whom God, the only Righteous man declares. (No. 6.) The rowling Ocean over all prevailes, Only the wondrous Ark in Triumph sailes: Of a new World, the fruitful Seed it bears, Its mighty head, o're all the Billows rears,
(No. 7.) At length the Waters to their bounds return, Nor must the World a second Deluge mourn. (No. 8.) On airy Arraret's Head, the Sacred load descends, A perpetual promise, and a radiant Bow defends The rescu'd World from fear of future floods, Tho future Crimes prepare for other rods.
engraving of biblical scene 7 The waters dried up. 8:16. engraving of biblical scene 8 Gods Covenāt w:th Noah Gen: 9.13. Gen: 8.16. Go forth of ye Ark, thou and thy wife, & thy sons, & thy sons wiues &c Gen: 9:13. I do set my bow in ye cloud, & it shall be for a token of ye Covenant &c.
engraving of biblical scene 9 Abra:m entertaineth 3 Angels Gen: 18 8 engraving of biblical scene 10 Lot and his two Daugters Gen: 19:32 Gen: 18.8 And he took butter & milk and ye calfe which he had dressed &c: Gen: 19:32 Come let us make our far: drink wine and we will lie wth: him
(No. 9.) Of Abraham next, and of the wondrous Feast, Where Angels, and where God himself's a Guest. O wondrous! that he who made this mighty frame, With thee to feast should not disdain. (No. 10.) With sadder note of Lot's incestuous, sing! Tho Brother to the Sacred mighty King; Sing mournful tunes of him, and of the Cave, And of the unlawful Wine his Daughters gave, The gloomy, damp, incestuous Cave, Would mournful heavy numbers have; But the unnatural guilt and lust obscene, Choaks and clogs the heavy Song.
(No. 11.) The persecuted Hagar from her Mistress Sarah flies, Thus still the barren Womb, the fruitful envies: But Sarah's after Issue, was the chosen race, And Isaac, all the mightier blessings grace. (No. 12.) Faithful in the greatest tryal Abraham proves, Much he his only Son, but more his God he loves; The strange command, he readily obeys, His hand was strecht and ready, which an Angel stays.
engraving of biblical scene 11 Hagars flight Gen: XVI: 7 engraving of biblical scene 12 Abrams triall Gen: 22:10: 16:7 And ye Angel of the Lord found her by a fountain &c: 22:10 And Abraham stretched forth his hand and tooke his knife &c:
engraving of biblical scene 13 Isaac and Rebekah Gen: 24:17 engraving of biblical scene 14 Abrahams buriall Gen: 25:9 Gen: 24:17 And ye servant ran to meet her & said Let me (I pray thee) drink &c: Gen: 25:9. And his sons Isaac and Ismael buried him in ye caue of Machpelalah
(No. 13.) What surer proof can e're be given, That Sacred knots are ty'd in Heaven? Just as the faithful Servant prays, The fair Rebeckah streight obeys. (No. 14.) To death at length the Father of the faithful yields The solemn Rites perform'd in Ephron's Fields: Isaac and Ismael there inter, And there their mighty Father they deplore.
(No. 15.) The utmost force of hunger here is seen, That Esau his Birthright should disdain; And for a Mess of Pottage, should become Subject to Jacob and the younger Son. (No. 16.) To happy Jacob all the Blessings fall, Belov'd of God, he now inherits all. The Birthright, and his Father's erring hand, Crown him with Blessings, and a full Command.
engraving of biblical scene 15 Iacob and Esau Gen: 25:31 engraving of biblical scene 16 Rebekah and Iacob Gen: 27:8. Gen: 25:31 And Iacob said sell mee this day thy birth right. And Esau said &c Gen: 27:8. Now therefore my son obey my voyce, according to that wch: I &c:
engraving of biblical scene 17 Iacobs Ladder Gen: 28:12 engraving of biblical scene 18 Iacob and Rachell Gen: 29:3 Gen: 212 And he dreamed and behold a ladder set upon ye earth & ye top & Gen: 29:3 And they rolled ye stone frō: ye wells mouth & watred ye sheep &c:
(No. 17.) Dissolv'd in sleep the weary Traveller sees, On a mysterious Ladder reaching to the Skies, Ascending and Descending Angels stand Obeying him who all things does command. (No. 18.) Behold another Marriage made in Heaven, While the fair Rachel is to Jacob given; At Haran's Well, their loves were kindled first, At Laban's House, is kept the marriage Feast.
(No. 19.) Well o're thy Brother Esau may'st thou now prevail When with a wrestling Angel thou could'st dal: Till Morning light the unequal struggle was maintain'd, Whn toucht in th' hollow of his Thigh, the grapple he declin'd. (No. 20.) Blest with the name of Israel he goes on, Conquering an Angel, well might he a man, His vengeful Brother in the utmost Peace he meets, And Esau, with forgiving Love, his Brother greets.
engraving of biblical scene 19 Iacob and ye Angell Gen: 32:24 engraving of biblical scene 20 Iacob meeteth Esau Gen: 33:24 Gen: 32:24: And there wresled a man with him untill ye braking of ye day. Gen: 33:4 And Esau ran to meet him and embraced him and sett on &c:
engraving of biblical scene 21 Dinah Ravished Gen: 34:2 engraving of biblical scene 22 The Shechemites slain 34 26 And when Shechem ye Son of Hamor or ye Hevite Prince of ye countrey &c: And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with ye edge of the sword &c:
(No. 21.) Hamor, like Ely, for his wicked Son must dye, And in the ruines of the murder'd City lie; While Shechem with unlawful Love the beauteous Dinah meets, He and all his Fathers House in murder sleeps. (No. 22.) The Sons of Israel from the Field return'd, With vengeance for their ravisht Sister burn'd: The Shechemites with pretended Circumcision sore, Vanquisht young Shechem's Rape in death deplore.
(No. 23.) While Judah to his Daughter-in-Law denies Shelah, Incestuous, he himself with Tamar lies: Yet ignorant of his guilt, would act the Judge, Till by his Daughter humbled, and the guilty Pledge. (No. 24.) Tamar, by Judah to the Flame's condemn'd, Produc'd the Pledge, which did her life defend. The rash, unhappy, guilty Judah streight Himself condemning, subtle Tamar does acquit.
engraving of biblical scene 23 Iudahs incest Gen: 38:18 engraving of biblical scene 24 Tamar to be burnt: 38:24 And he said what pledge shall I giue and she said thy Signet and &c: And Iudah saied being her forth and let her be burnt &c.
engraving of biblical scene 25 Iosephs dreames. 37.:7 engraving of biblical scene 26 Ioseph sold to ye Ishmelites Gen: 37.28. Gen: 37.7. For behold wee were bindīg sheaues in the field and to my &c: Gen: 37:27. Come let us sell him to ye Ishmelites and lett not our hands &c
(No. 25.) His future Greatness, glorious Dreams reveal, Whom envious Brethren into Aegypt sell. The Sheaves, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars To injur'd Joseph prove Astrologers. (No. 26.) Yet tho his future Glories they foretel, His nearer miseries they conceal: His threatned life, and happy freedom lost, By envious Brethren, who should love him most.
(No. 27.) But Providence had otherwise decreed, In Egypt to preserve the chosen Seed. Hence Joseph is permitted to be sold, That plenteous Aegypt he might after hold. (No. 28.) Joseph by his Mistress courted, flies, While the false adultrous Wife pursues with cries, Which nought availing, she her Lust converts To rage, her Husband too perverts.
engraving of biblical scene 27 Ioseph sold for 20 pieces. Gen: 37.28 engraving of biblical scene 28 Ioseph resisteth his mistrisse 39:12 Gen: 37:28. Then there passed by Midi¦anites marchant men &c: Gen: 39:12 And she caught him by his gament saying Lie with mee &c.
engraving of biblical scene 29 Rahabs covenant Iosh: 2:12 engraving of biblical scene 30 12 stones taken out of Iordan Iosh: 4:2 Iosh: 2:12 Now therefore I pray you swear unto me by ye Lord since I haue &c: Iosh: 4:2. Take you 12 men out of the people out of every tribe, a man &c
(No. 29.) How fair the Harlot Rahab does in History stand, Her Faith and Truth a large Reward command; With Israel, 'gainst her Country she combines, For which her House alone in safety still remains. (No. 30.) When Israel and the Ark through Jordan past, The rowling Waters on a heap were cast: Hence twelve Stones are for a memorial set, Least late Posterity the wonder should forget.
(No. 31.) Jshua at Gilgal, by the express command Of God, does of the Israelites demand, That each the Rite of Circumcision should renew, And the establisht Covenant thereby persue. (No. 32.) Surrounded often by the Ark of God, The Walls of Jericho on the ground are laid: So far an Arm'd a Sacred Power exceeds, So far Divine surpass all Humane deeds.
engraving of biblical scene 31 Circumsision renewed Iosh: 5:3 engraving of biblical scene 32 The Arke of ye Covenant Iosh: 6:4 Iosh: 5:3. And Ioshua made him sharp knives and circumcised ye children &c Iosh: 6:4 And seven priests shall bear. before ye ark 7 trumpets of mans &c:
engraving of biblical scene 33 Fiue Kings hanged Iosua: 10:26. engraving of biblical scene 34 Gideons present. Iudges 6:20. 10:26 And afterward Iosua smot and slew them and hanged ym &c 6:20 And ye angell of God said unto him take ye flesh and ye unleavened &c:
(No. 33.) O Jshua! wondrous was thy Power, when With thy word thou could'st arrest the Sun; Anon five crown'd Heads, to ignominious death When Joshua bids, resign their Royal breath. (No. 34.) While Israel by the Madianites opprest, Longs for deliverance and peaceful rest; Giden encourag'd by an Angel leads The Sacred Host, which with success he heads: His Offering and his Present were approv'd, Which in wondrous Clouds and Fire upwards mov'd.
(No. 35.) Gideon distrustful of success, For signs of victory does press Twice by the Fleece assur'd, to battle leads The Sacred Host, which with success he heads. (No. 36.) Least Israel on Humane Force should now depend, Their Strengths diminisht by express command; And Gideon with three hundred men, who lapt Like Dogs, the numerous Madianite attackt.
engraving of biblical scene 35 Gedeon Fleece Iudg: 6:37 engraving of biblical scene 36 Gideons army Iudg: 6:5: 6.27. Behold I will put a fleece of wooll, in the floor and if the dew 7:5 So he brougt down the people unto ye water; and ye Lord said &c.
engraving of biblical scene 37 Iepthah & his daugter Iudg: 11:39 engraving of biblical scene 38 Their Sacrifices 11:39: And it came to passe at ye end of two months, that she returned to her &c Father who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed &c:
(No. 37.) Oh saddest instance of unhappy vows! The beautious Maid beneath their mischief bows; Jephtha her Father swears, and she obeys, And to her Fathers rashness falls a Sacrifice. (No. 38.) Only this one request she to her Father makes, Whose heart with pitty to the noble Virgin akes; That ranging on the Mountains she might there bewail Her Virgin state, then she a Sacrifice would fall.
(No. 39.) While Manoah and his Wife the joyful news receive Of Sampson's birth, and the deputed Angel streight believe. They with earnest vows a Sacrifice prepare, Its flames the wondrous Angels rear. (No. 40.) As Sampson with his Parents goes, To marry her he so much loves; Assaulted by a Lyon in his way, To his wondrous strength, the Beast becomes a Prey.
engraving of biblical scene 39 Monoahs Sacrifice Iudg: 13:20 engraving of biblical scene 40 Samson killeth a Lion: 14:6. 13:20 For it came to passe when ye flame went up▪ towards heaven 14.6. And ye spirit of ye Lord came mightilie upon him &c:
engraving of biblical scene 41 Samson smiteth ye Philistines Iudg: 1515 engraving of biblical scene 42 Simson carieth away ye Gates Iudg: 16:3 15:15: And he found a new jaw bone of of an Asse, and putforth his hand and &c 16:5 And Samson lay till midnight and arose at midnight and tooke the &c
(No. 41.) Such slaughter with such arms was never known, Thy strength was Heaven's, O Sampson, not thy own: The Spirit of the Lord was mighty on thee now, Alone, the proud Philistians to subdue. (No. 42.) Sampson by Love and Gaza's Walls confin'd, Again by wondrous strength his Fate declin'd; The City Gates away he on his Shoulders bears, Which on the Neighbouring Hills, he as a Trophey rears.
(No. 43.) A false lascivious Woman him subdues, Whom an advers Army conquering views; Sampson by the treacherous Whore's betray'd, Who else, Israel's Yoke, on the Philistines neck had laid. (No. 44.) Now big with Fate, the mighty Sampson bows, And with his last utmost strength subdues his foes; Blinded and derided, he revenge resolves, Tho in the common Ruin he himself involves.
engraving of biblical scene 43 Delilahs falshood Iug: 10▪ 19. engraving of biblical scene 44 Samsons death Iudg: 16:29. 16:19 And she made him sleep upon her lap and she caled for a man and she &c 16:29 And Samson tooke hold of ye two midlepillres upon which the house &c
engraving of biblical scene 45 Naomi & her two daughters. 1:8 Ruth. .2.34 engraving of biblical scene 46 Boaz and Ruth 2:c: 8. v. 8 And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go return &c: :8 Then said Boaz unto Ruth hearest thou not my daughter &
(No. 45.) Happy Naomi with such Daughters blest, Which in thy utmost troubles, give thee ease and rest; Of Faithful tender Ruth each Daughter-in-Law may learn, To love like her, and equal praises earn. (No. 46.) Ruth's faithful Love by Providence is blest, While she in Boaz Love, with plenty meets and rest With eager Love, the humble Ruth he meets, And she in Boaz with surprizing kindnes meets.
(No. 47.) Naomi now inform'd of Boaz Love, Does Ruth by secret steps to marriage move; While Baz more and more the virtuous Maid desires, And seeks with marriage Rites to consecrate his fires. (No. 48.) Mournful Naomi now is happy made, And Boaz triumphs in the charming Maid; Irael's Customs, and the nuptial Rite's observ'd, Give faithful Ruth, the Blessings she deserv'd.
engraving of biblical scene 47 Ruth lieth at Boaz feet. 3:7 engraving of biblical scene 48 He marieth her 4:9 3:7 And when Boaz had eaten & drunk and his heart was merry &c 4:9 And Boaz said unto the elders and unto all the people &c.
engraving of biblical scene 49 Samuell killeth Agag. 1. Sam: 15:33 engraving of biblical scene 50 David killeth Goliah. 1 Sam: 17:51. And Samuell said as thy sword hath made women childlesse so shall &c: Therefore David ran and stood upon the Philistine & tooke his &c:
(No. 49.) While Saul, against th' express command of God, Delivers Agag from the avenging Rod; Samuel, with a juster zeal enflam'd, Slayt Agag, and fullfills the strict command. (No. 50.) Goliah trusting in his strength, blasphemes The God, who Israel still redeems; While David by that God sustain'd, Destroys the Monster with an easie hand.
(No. 51.) Curst be the rage of Saul, and blest be David still, Whose praises every grateful mouth do fill; While Saul with envy meager, seeks to kill The chosen Youth, who Israel's Throne must fill. (No. 52.) What Love can equal that which David bore For Jonathan? or that which he for David wore? Not Womens softest Love surpasses their, When either of the others danger hears.
engraving of biblical scene 51 Saul envieth him. I Sam: 18:11 engraving of biblical scene 52 Ionathans kindnesse II Sam: 20:35 And Saul cast ye Iaudin for he said, I will smite David even to the wall & And it came to passe in ye morning yt Ionathan went out in to ye feild &c:
engraving of biblical scene 53 Nabals churlishnesse I Sam: 25:10 engraving of biblical scene 54 Abigails wisdome I Sam: 25:18 25:10 And Naball answered Davids servants, and said who is David &c. 25:18 Then Abigail made hast and took 200 loaves and 2 botles of wine &
(No. 53.) Tho Power and want the gentle David press, By force of Arms his miseries to redress; Yet gently he to churlish Nabal sues, For that, which none but churlish Nabal would refuse. (No. 54.) David to fierce revenge by Nabal rais'd, By prudent Abigail is streight appeas'd; Who after has the honour to become, The Wife of him who's destin'd to the Throne.
(No. 55.) Nor Dreams, nor Urim, nor the Prophets now, Direct despairing Saul what he should do; To horrid Endor for an Answer he repairs, An Answer paler then his swooning fears. (No. 56.) While wounded and expiring Saul disdains The Philistins should deface his Great Remain: For a cruel favour he to his Servant sues, Which Love it self, compels him to refuse.
engraving of biblical scene 55 The witch of Endor I Sam: 28:8. engraving of biblical scene 56 Sauls death & his armour bearer 28:8 And Saul disguised himselfe and put on other rayment and &c: 52:4 Then said Saul to his armour bearer draw thy sword and &c:
engraving of biblical scene 57 Bethshebas request. 1 Kings. 2.20: engraving of biblical scene 58 He seates his mother on his right hand 2:22 2:20. Then she said I desire one smal petition of thee I pray thee say me &c 2:22: And why doest thou aske Abishag ye Skunamite for Adonijah &c
(No. 57.) Unhappy Adonijah, twice unhappy now, The Kingdom lost to arm'd Benajah's hand must bow: Whilst he to Bathsheba, and she to Solomon repairs For Abishag, of his death resolv'd he hears. (No. 58.) Tho Solomon is seated on the Throne, Hi humble Mother he can ne're disown; But seating her at his right hand he hears, The much displeasing Message which she bears.
(No. 59.) But why Adonijah's death thou should'st command, For courting Abishag, is hard to understand; Why the Great Benajah should be thus employ'd, Or thy elder Brother should so quickly be destroy'd. (No. 60.) Now Solomon his inspir'd Wisdom shews, While he the Harlot▪ false pretences overthrow; By threatned death, to Nature he appeals, Which the true Mother (Israel wondring) streight reveals.
engraving of biblical scene 59 Adonijah slain 2:25. engraving of biblical scene 60 Solomons Iudgment. 5:16: 2:25: And king Solomon sent by ye hand of Benajah ye son of &c 3:16 Then came there two women that were harlots unto the king &c
engraving of biblical scene 61 The Temple begun. 1 Kings. 6:2. engraving of biblical scene 62 Solomons prayer 1 Kings. 8:23 6:2: And ye house wch King Solomon built for the Lord, the length thereof &c 8:23: And he said Lord God of Israell there is no good like thee in heaven &c
(No. 61.) Now Solomon by God's appointment rears, The wondrous Temple, and the work of Years; Himself the Consecrating Priest, by him the People Host, Who under him enjoy their wisht for peace and rest. (No. 62.) While Solomon at the Altar God implores, He with wondrous Priviledges the Temple stores; Obtains of God that he would accept the Vows Of the distrest, who praying towards the Temple bows.
(No. 63.) The Fame of Solomon thro' all the World disperst. The Glorious Southern Queen becomes his guest; Who owns his Wisdom and his Glory more, Than spreadng Fame had ere declar'd before. (No. 64.) Lo! here the cursed force of Woman kind, Lo! here by them the greatest Wisdom blind; Blind to Idolatry, so strong the Female Poyson is That even upon Solomon its effect it cannot miss.
engraving of biblical scene 63 Solomons Magnificence 1 Kings 10:1 engraving of biblical scene 64 His offering to ye Idoll. I Kings. 11:4. 10.1: And ye queen of Sheba heard of ye fame of Solomon concerning &c 11:4: For it come to passe when Solomō was old that his wiues turned away &c
engraving of biblical scene 65 DAVID engraving of biblical scene 66 SOLOMON David king and Prophet author of the Psalmes and reigned 40 yea¦• Solomon reigned in Ierusalem and over all Israell fortie yeares
(No. 65.) Harmonious David, Great Master of the Hebrew Harp, Of Holy Song, and Numbers utmost art: How Pious, and how troubled was thy Reign, Belov'd of God, and of the best of Men. (No. 66.) How large thy Wisdom, and how great thy State, Scarce Fame her self was able to relate; The Queen of Sheba after she had seen, Declar'd the Truth was greater then the Fame.
(No. 67.) How excellent Jehosaphat was thy Reign, If with unlawful Allies thou'dst refus'd to joyn; Had the High places too gone down, Few had ever wore so bright a Crown. (No. 68.) At eight years old, Josias all reforms, And while a Child, such wondrous things performs, So great the Passeover, and so good his Reign, That nought but Sacred Writ our Faith should gain.
engraving of biblical scene 67 IEHOSHAPHAT engraving of biblical scene 68 IOSIAS Iehoshaphat reigned 5 and 20 yeares & conquered ye Amonis Iosias reighned 31 yeares he demo∣lished Idols and brought in &c▪
engraving of biblical scene 69 Ahijahs prophecie I Kings: 11:29: engraving of biblical scene 70 Reboboam King. I. Kings: 12:6. 11:29: And it came to passe at that time when Ieroboam went out of Ierusam &c 12:6 And King Rehoboam consulted with ye old men that stood before &c:
(No. 69.) While Ahijah from Jeroboam tears The new Prophetick Garment which he wears; He Solomon's Apostacy thereby declares Shall, by the Apostate Tribes, be punisht in his Heirs. (No. 70.) While the revolting Tribes on Rehoboam press, To make their seeming heavy burthenless, He with the Aged Counsellors consults, Then foolishly rejects their wise Results.
(No. 71.) What God ordains can never be withstood, Ahijah's Prophecy Rehoboam's self makes good; So when of God forsaken, we forsake our selves, And run on endless Rocks, and Sands, and Shelves. (No. 72.) So Rehoboam by his hot young States-men led, Provokes the Tribes, and Jeroboam at their Head; Gives 'em an Answer which he must after mourn; And they, to your Tents O Israel, return.
engraving of biblical scene 71 Ieroboam accepteth ye young mens counsell. engraving of biblical scene 72 Ieroboam thretneth ye old men: 12:14 12:9. And he said unto them what counsell giue yee, that ye may &c: 12:14: And spoke unto them after the counsell of ye young men saying &c
engraving of biblical scene 73 Elijah prophih against Ahab King 17:1 engraving of biblical scene 74 Elijah and Zarephath i King: 27:9 17:i And Elijah ye Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilliad said unto Ahab &c. 17:9 Arise and get thee to Zerephath which belongeth to Zedon and &c:
(No. 73.) What Emperor ever like Elijah spoke? O Ahab! it shall be rain or drought, as I invoke; Anon by Cheriths Brook, commanded, he retires, Where he is fed by Ravens, and celestial Fires. (No. 74.) Thence by command to Zerephath repairs, And the despairing Widow rescues from her fears, The exhausted Meal and Oyl, by miracle recruits, And all the Widows killing doubts confutes.
(No. 75.) As Ahab to the Prophet cries, Is't thou the Peace of Israel destroys? Elijah boldly to the King replies, Thou and thy Father's House, its Peace annoys. (No. 76.) The Grand Depcision now Elijah makes, Twixt Ahab's Gods, and him whom he invokes; Elijah to Caelestial Fire appeals, Celestial Fire the disputed doubt reveales.
engraving of biblical scene 75 Elijah reprooveth Ahab i King: 18:18. engraving of biblical scene 76 Elijah Sacrificeth i Kings i8:58 i8:i8 And he answered, I haue not trou: Israell, but thou and thy fathers house &c i8 38 And ye fire of ye Lord fell, and consumed ye burnet Sacrifice &c:
engraving of biblical scene 77 Elijah in ye Fiery chariot IId Kin: 11 engraving of biblical scene 78 The Widdows oil II Kings 4:1 2:11: And it came to passe as they still went on and talked &c: 4:1 Now there cryed a certain wo∣man of the wiues of the sons of ye &c
(No. 77.) The Great Elijah, how we all admire! Drawn by flaming Horses in a Coach of Fire; The rappid Whirlewind hastens his ascent, And flaming storms in horror, all the way he went. (No. 78.) As Elijah with compassion to the Widow burn'd, The Pot of Oyl is to a River turn'd; Her debt discharg'd, and she reliev'd, The Cause remov'd for which she griev'd.
(No. 79.) Naaman seven times in Jordan's Sacred stream, Directed by the Prophet, baths and's made whole again; Health and Youth again return, No more a Leper must he mourn. (No. 80.) Jehu, enrag'd at Jezebel, to the Eunuchs calls, Down on the Pavement streight the painted mur∣dress falls, Now Naboth's blood's reveng'd, and Dogs fulfill The Prophecy of them, who righteous blood could spill.
engraving of biblical scene 79 Naamans leprosie cured II King5:14: engraving of biblical scene 80 Iezebels death II: Kings 9:33. 5:14 Then he went down and dipped himselfe seven times in Iordan &c 9:33 And he said throw her down, so they threw her down and &c
engraving of biblical scene 81 The Angells salutation Luc: 1:26 engraving of biblical scene 82 The visitation Luc: 1.39. Luc 1:26 And in ye sixth month ye angell Gabriel was sent from God unto a &c Luc: 1:39 And Mary arose in those dayes and went into ye hill countrey
(No. 81.) While Sacred Mary on the Altar of her heart, Offers the brightest Loves a Lover can impart; Dissolv'd in Sacred Vows and Prayer, She sees the flaming Messenger appear, Who with wondrous words salutes her ear. (No. 82.) Mary now big with God, a visit pays, To the soft Partner of her Sacred Joys: Each with Anthems worship, Heaven, To each the greatest Honours given.
(No. 83.) The Shepherds, harmless as their Flocks, are thought, Worthy the mighty Tidings which the Angel brought; So far an innocent Poverty excells The State in which the greatest Emperor dwells. (No. 84.) That very Law which he destroy'd, He so intrely obey'd; That his Sacred Blood he spilt, Rather then incur the smallest guilt.
engraving of biblical scene 83 The angell and ye Shepheards Lu: 2:10 engraving of biblical scene 84 The Circumcision Luc: 2:21 Luc: 2:10. And ye angell said unto them fear not: for behold I bring &c Luc: 2:21 And when eight day were accomplished for the &c:
engraving of biblical scene 85 Christ preacheth in a ship Mat: 13:2 engraving of biblical scene 86 The Canaan woman Math: 15:22 Mat: 13:2 And a great multitud gathered to gether unto him so that he went &c: Math 15:22: And behold a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts &c
(No. 85.) Where ere the People are prepar'd to hear There stands a Church, and there, As Jesus in the Ship, the Preacher may Instruct the People, and direct their way. (No. 86.) With what wondrous Faith the Canaanitish Woman Priest, The Holy Jesus, for her Child possest? Who grants her sad Request, and more, Declares he nere had met so great a Faith before.
(No. 87.) Never but now was Jesus known to strike, In all his Sacred Story is not found the like; The trading Thieves elsewhere must remove, And the House of God, a House of Prayer prove. (No. 88.) O fearful sound! O fearful day! Which shall our folly or our Wisdom then display; The wise, to endless Joys consign, But fooles, to endless pains confine.
engraving of biblical scene 87 The buiers & sellers whipt out Mat: 21:13 engraving of biblical scene 88 The last Iudgment Mat 25:13 Mat: 21.12 And Iesus went into the Temple of God and castout all them &c Mat: 25:13 Watch therefore for yee know neither ye day nor ye hour wherein &c
engraving of biblical scene 89 The palsy cured Mar: 2:4. engraving of biblical scene 90 Iesus transfigured Mar. 9:2. Mar: 2:4 And when they saw they cold not come nigh unto him &c: Mar 9:2: And after six dayes Iesus taketh wth him Peter Iames and Iohn and &c:
(No. 89.) Again by others Faith, the Patient's cur'd, And by the great Physician's to his Health restor'd; The Physician, both of Bodies and of Souls, Forgives his Sin, and his Disease controules. (No. 90.) A while the Godhead blazes, and he is seen More Glorious than the flaming Sun; His Glories now break forth, transfigur'd he appears Clad in the Sun, which he in Heaven wears.
(No. 91.) O saddest Funeral Rite! and sadder then the Grave, Mary annoints him to his death, who all the World must save: Who ere the vast loss would rightly prize, Should not shed a Tear, but shed his Eyes. (No. 92.) Our dearest Lord is risen from the Dead, So may the Members rise, and joyn the Head: Triumphs and Loves must cellebrate the day, Glowing Loves, and Anthems pay.
engraving of biblical scene 91 Christ head anointed Mat: 26:7 engraving of biblical scene 92 His resurrection Mar 26:1. Mat: 26:7. There came unto him a wo∣man having an alablaster box &c: Mar: 16:1. And when ye Sabath day was past, Mary Magdalene and Mary &c
engraving of biblical scene 93 Iesus brought before Pilate Luk. 13.18 engraving of biblical scene 94 The Iews crown him wth. thorns Ioh: 19:2 Luk 15:18 And they cried out all at ouer saying away with this man &c: Ioh: 19.2: And the soldiers platted a crow̄ of thornes and put it on his head &c:
(No. 93.) Behold the Righteous, by the unjust accus'd, None who deserv'd so well, so ill was ever us'd: Pilate himself, his Innocence proclaim'd, But fearful of the Rabble, grants their curst demand. (No. 94.) Pierst by a Crown of Thornes, his Sacred Head Sheds many a stream of richest purple blood; Thus their Prince and the Messiah, thus they treat, Thus their own Happiness and Glory they defeat.
(No. 95.) Behold the King of Israel hanging on a Tree! Behold him freely laying down his Life for thee! For thee, who careless read'st these Lines, Forgetful of his past, and of thy future pains. (No. 96.) Our infinite Friend is risen from the dead, Let tears of Joy from every eye be shed; Eteral Loves are due to thee: Who from sin hast set us free.
engraving of biblical scene 95 The Crucifiction. Ioh. 19 23 engraving of biblical scene 96 Christs resurrection Iohn 20:1 Ioh: 19:23. Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Iesus, took his garments Ioh: 20:1 The first day of the weeke cometh Mary Magdalene early when &c
engraving of biblical scene 97 Lazerus raised: 11:38: Iohn engraving of biblical scene 98 He washeth ye desciples feet Iohn: 13:5 Iesus therefore again groaning in him∣selfe, cometh to ye graue, It was a &c Aster that he powreth water in to a ba∣son and began to wash ye disciples &c
(No. 97.) Lazarus come forth! the Holy Jesus cries, And the departed Spirit presently obeys; Nor life nor death his Power can withstand, But each obeys his powerful command. (No. 98.) Not all the Triumphs of vain glorious Rome, So Just an admiration claim; As to behold thee Jesus, perfect God and Man, Perform so low an Office to thy own.
(No. 99.) Surely divested of the Humane Nature they must be, Who so inhumanly could have treated thee, Nailing that Sacred body to the Tree, Which he assum'd to save both them and thee. (No. 100.) To Mary Magdalen, the Holy Jesus first appears, And she the tydings first to the Apostles bears; From her Example, let the greatest sinners learn to hope, And to black and sad despair never stoop.
engraving of biblical scene 99 They naile Iesus to ye crosse Ioh: 19:18 engraving of biblical scene 100 Iesus appeareth to Mary Magdalen Ioh: 20:15 Where they crucified him, and two oth∣er wth him on either side, one &c: Iesus saith unto her woman why weepest thou, whom seekest thou. &c
engraving of biblical scene 101 Zacheus ye Publican Luke 19:2: engraving of biblical scene 102 of Cesars tribute Math: 22:15 Lu: 19:2: And behold there was a man named Zacheus which was &c Then went the Pharisees and tooke counsell how they might &c.
(No. 101.) Zacheus short of stature, tall of Faith, The honour to entertain our Saviour hath; Our Saviour and Salvation he at once receives, And his whole House is sav'd, while he believes. (No. 102.) With what a question do the Hypocrites approach Him, who ever, what is Just, was us'd to teach? To God, what to God belongs he gives, While to Coesar he reserves, what Caesar's is.
(No. 103.) Behold him faignting underneath his Cross! Behol how much he suffers to prevent thy loss! What weary steps to death he takes? Which for thee, the great Attonement makes. (No. 104.) How Great's the Triumph of that glorious day, In whih our Saviour past his flaming way? Ascending up to Heaven, where he interceeds for thee, From sin and misery, to set thee free.
engraving of biblical scene 103 Christ beareth his crosse Ioh: 19:17 engraving of biblical scene 104 The ascention of Christ Acts: 1:9. And he bearing his crosse went forth in to a place called ye place &c And when he hod spoken these things while they behold he was taken &
engraving of biblical scene 105 Sauls conversion Act: 9:4. engraving of biblical scene 106 The Taylor converted Act: 16:27 And he sett to ye earth and heard a voye saying unto him Saul, &c And ye keeper of ye prison awaking out of his sleep and seeing the &c:
(No. 105.) The Rage of Saul can now no longer last, But when Jesus calls, must to his Conversion haste; He willingly obeys what ere's enjoyn'd, And by his labours, all the Gentile World is crownd. (No. 106.) The fearful Jaylor suspecting an escape, On his own life, threatens to commit a Rape; But Paul the intended murder presently prevents, And the converted Jaylor, streight repents.
(No. 107.) With what wondrous force, the Great Apostle speaks? That Felix, tho' his Judge, with terror quakes; The amazing Lecture, horrors all his Soul, And thro' his mind, the black Remorses roule. (No. 108.) What small regards to the Peoples Judgment to be had? Now Paul's with them a murderer, now a God; Still to extreams, the uncertain People move, And without a glimpse of reason, hate or love.
engraving of biblical scene 107 Paul accused Act: 24:24. engraving of biblical scene 108 Paul bitt wth a Viper Act: 28:3 And after certain dayes when Felix came wth his wife Drusilla &c: And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid &c:
engraving of biblical scene 109 The coming of ye holy Ghost Act: 2:1 engraving of biblical scene 110 Annanias and Sapphira Act: 5:1. And when ye day of Pentecost was fully come they were all with one &c: But a certain man named Ana∣nias with Sapphira his wife &c
(No. 109.) In cloven tongues, the Holy Ghost descends, And power to the great Apostles lends, The Gospel over all the World to spread, And vice and error too, in triumph lead. (No. 110.) While all, their substance do in common lay, Unhappy Annanias and Saphyra, Reserving part, their lives betray, Which to their avarice, becomes a prey.
(No. 111.) Commanded by the Spirit, Philip joyns The Eunuch, and what he reads explains; Who anon the Sacred Rite of Baptism desires, And Philip streight performs, what he requires. (No. 112.) Nor Chains, nor Prisons, are sufficient to detain Him, whom the Prayers of the Church do claim; From Heaven an Angel's sent to set him free, Which by his Friends can scarce believed be.
engraving of biblical scene 111 Phillip baptized ye Eūuch Act 8:38: engraving of biblical scene 112 Peter led out of Prison Act: 12:7 And hee com̄anded ye Chariot to sta∣nd still and they went down &c. And behold ye Angell of ye Lord came upon him and a light &c
engraving of biblical scene 113 The corn grass, & trees, fired 8.7 engraving of biblical scene 114 The seven Angells soundeth 8:2 8:7: The first angell sounded and there followed hail &c. 8:2: And I saw ye seven angels which stood before god &c.
(No. 113.) While the first Angel does with his Trumpet sound, Hail, and Blood, and Fire descend; Which a third part of th' Trees, and half the Grass destroy, And fruitful Natures product, much annoy. (No. 114.) The seventh Seal is op'd in Heaven, and for the space Of half an hour, silence rules ore all the place; When seven Angels before God appear, Who sounding Trumpets in their hands do bear.
(No. 115.) The sixth Seal is open'd, and the Sun Turns black as night, a bloody Scarlet paints the Moon. The flaming Stars from Heaven fall, The Heavens themselves, are roll'd up like a scroll. (No. 116.) To four Angels power to hurt the Earth is given, And to a fifth, restraining Power from Heaven, Till the Elect were seal'd, and they secure From all the mischiefs of the wasting Power.
engraving of biblical scene 115 The starrs fall from heaven. 6.13 engraving of biblical scene 116 The tribes sealed Rev: 7:1. 6.13. And ye starrs of heaven fell unto ye earth &c. 7.1. And after these things I saw four angels standing &c
engraving of biblical scene 117 Satans rage Rev: 13:1 engraving of biblical scene 118 Rev: 14 1. The lamb on Sion 1:1: And I stood upon ye Sand of ye and saw a beast rise up out of: &c 14:1: And I looked & loe, a Lambe sto∣od on ye mount Sion, &c.
(No. 117.) The Dragon with his own Power the Beast adorns, Rising from the Sea, with seven Heads and ten Horns; The Beast is for his Power ador'd, while he Blas∣phemes The God, who all things by his Power sustains. (No. 118.) On Sions top, the Sacred Lamb appears, With him a chast crowd, who the mark of 's Father bears; To them alone the Priviledge is given, To here the Sacred Song, is sung in Heaven.
(No. 119.) Lo a white Cloud! and onit it seen One sitting, like the Son of Man; Who with a sharp Sickle in his hand, Prepares to reap the wide extended Land. (No. 120.) From the Temple issues now the dread command, To the seven Angels who with Vials stand, Fill'd with the wrath of God, who by him bid Grevious Plagues, on sinful Mortals shed. FINIS. engraving of biblical scene
119 The earth rea Rev: 14 14: engraving of biblical scene 120 The vials of wrath Rev: 16:1 14:14: And I looked and behold a white cloud & upon the cloud &c 16:1: And there came one of ye seven angels &c.
