H1627a C.112.f.9[61] R231437 99888653 195865
Loving Reader, GOd Almighty hath not created, Man for himself, neither for his own ends, but hath given him  natural affection for to love his Fellowes, and loving them, to cure them by all means; and whereas I have many Sciences and Mysteries of Nature, as likewise particular Experiences, new Inentions, natural secret Arts for to cure many and divers great and dangerous accidents, as well nternal as external, specially for Women and young Maidens, could I not forbear to cause these to be prited for to make me known unto every one, without which it would be too long before I should be known. It may be some will say; that this my Science is but a deceitful enterprize, as there are some old Women and Midwifes, who sometimes have a little Book, cut of which they gather their Sciences, whereby they intend to cure all men: But it is not so with me, who have learned these my Sciences of my Father and Husband, who both were Phsicians, and of such esteem amongst Men, as well Noble, as others; that there appeared no accidents, how ever so great in the humane body, as well Men as Women, whereunto their advice had not been required. And whereas many Women became to be subject unto the hereafter specified Diseases, and for shames sake, remained hidden; because they durst not discover them unto any Physician, whereby they were forced to remain in their misery: Therefore my Father and Hus∣band were necessitated to discover such Diseases unto me, and to teach me the curing thereof; whereby (under Gods blessing) I have restored above a thousand Women and young Maidens. FISRT, I cure Women and Maidens of the suffocation or rising of the Mother, which hapneth when the Mother swelleth, or is blown up, or that any rotten substance be in her by restraining of the natural flow∣ing, or some Corruption of Nature, or by some Apostumation, which becomes to rot in the Mother, which appeareth by dissiness of the Head, heaviness, squeamishness in the throat, and upon the Heart so much, that the Patients many times think to dy of it, much tumbling in the Belly, or some other indisposition of the Mother, which cause a great many dangerous accidents or distempers, as Sterility, Obstruction, and many others. SECONDLY, I cure the descending or hanging out of the Mother, whereby the strings wherewith the Mother is tyed unto the body, become to be streatched; be it so, that it is caused by Child birth, hard cof∣fing, or working, or some unnatural moistness; I presently dress, and cure it with such dexterity, that never before the like was seen of any besides me. THIRDLY, I cure Women or Maidens, who cannot get their natural Flux, or who have the same too much, as there are some that have a continual Flux. I cure likewise the white Flux, filthiness of the Mother, after which Women commonly rest fruitless, I make them (by the help of God) fruitful. I cure without delay the griping of the Guts, also the spoiled and lost Appetite, which causeth the pale Colour, and makes Maidens sometimes to have strange stomack, even as Women that are big with Child: For strange things, as Morter, Stone, Sand, Coals, and other like things, which Diseases most become to be caused in the Orifice of the stomack of Maidens, who long for such Food. I cure likewise all Women and Maidens from Vomiting, which proceeds from an obstruction of the Mother. I cure Women of the quivering and shaking, which oftentimes proceeds from the same cause. I have also cured many that had the Dropsie, and were so thick, as if they had been big with Child, and fainted oftentimes. And also such as had the Leprosie, and were oftentimes subject unto great Agues. There is another kind of Disease when the Me∣lancholy is not purged, so that a body alwayes is very sorry and continually troubled with heavy thoughts; wherefore I have cured many that were come so far, that they were in a rage, or mad; so that they en∣deavoured to kill themselves, or another. I cure all sorts of Hemorroides at the Fundament, or Nature of Women, all sorts of Shapes, Warts, or any fleshly Excrescency in the Orifice of the Bladder, or Mother. I close and cure all sorts of Issues in the Fundament: Likewise all Women and Children that are bursten, be it under or above the Navel, although they had been bursten twenty Years. I take the Stone from Women and Maidens without cutting: And there is not, nor never was before me any Woman that ever shewed this rate Art at any Woman, but my self. I have likewise a Physick, which I oftentimes have tried to be good for Persons that are troubled with pains in the Reins, which proceeds from the gravel, or such as have pain in making their Water, or in whom the Stone beginneth to grow, or them that cannot keep their Water, and go leaking, of whatsoever cause it proceeds. I likewise cure all great pains, as the Gout, or pains throughout all the Limbs, that the Arms, or Legs grow crooked, be it by shrinking, or weakning of the Sinnews with great dolors, though the Person had kept his Bed many Years for weakness, I shall make him nimble again, by Gods assistance.
I cure likewise the Morbum Gallicum, or the French POX, and running of the Reins, and all other Venereal Distempers, without fluxing; so that the Husband cannot perceive it from his Wife, nor the Wife from her Husband, in such a manner, that the like never was seen of any besides me. I also cure all Wens, Excrescencies, Boyls, the terrible Canker at Womens Breasts, Mouth, Tongue, Neck, or any other part of the Body, by a peculiar new invented Art. And I cure also divers great Diseases of the Eyes, as Cataracts, Films Pearls: Also the Dropsie, and other like Evils, too long for to relate here. I further make take away all Pock-holes, Freckels, or Wrinkels of the Face. I make the Hair to fall out, where it is too much, and make it grow, where it is too little, and can colour it according to every ones Fancy. I make white all black Teeth, and cure the stinking Breath, and divers other Diseases, which for shortness sake, I here omit, being impossible to specifie all Infirmities in this small Bill. FURTHER, I make known that by the continual Experiences and Science which I had from my Father and Husband, I have many fine Arts, never heard of heretofore, and subtile Chyrurgical Sciences; so that scarce any Disease can besal unto the body of a Woman, however so great, but I have cured the like. Therefore if any one wanreth my Assistance, let him or her come unto me, or let them send their Urine, and I shall tell them the cause of their Distemper. By me Sarah Cornelius de Heusde, Widdow of Dr.Sasbout, and Grand∣mother of the Doctor that had his Stage upon Great Tower-Hill, and did so many Cures before the Fire. Therefore if there be any Person, who hath occasion for this Famous Ope∣ratoress, she liveth at the Sign of the Red Lyon by the Postern Gate, in George Yard, between Great and Little Tower-Hill: She is to be spoken withall from Eight in the Morning, till Eight in the Evening.
