I640 G. 5869[74] R226190 99886563 186783
JE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the other BY THE Lords Justices OF IRELAND, A PROCLAMATION. Requireing all Officers and Soldiers to observe strict Discipline, and for Pay∣ment of Quarters. CHARLES PORTER, CONINGESBY. TO the end their Majesties Forces in this Kingdom may be kept in good Order and Discipline, and their Maje∣sties Subjects not suffer by any disorder or misdemeanor of any Officers or Soldiers within their Majesties Pay and Entertainment, or by their not paying for their Quarters, or by their exacting money from such per∣sons as they are quartered upon, We think fit hereby to declare. First, WHEREAS We have taken care for the pay∣ment of a constant subsistance monthly to all the Offi∣cers and Soldiers in their Majesties Army which hath been duly paid since the first day of January last, Not∣withstanding which, Complaints have been made that many of them have neglected to pay any thing for their dyet. We require the Chief Commanding Officer residing with each Regiment, Troop and Company to cause the dyet and Quarter of the Soldiers under their Command to be constantly paid every week in their respective Quarters out of their said subsistance money, according to the rates herein after mentioned. Secondly, That the Officers and Soldiers in their several Quarters be furnish∣ed only with their Dyet, Lodging, Fire and Candle, and do not demand or take any money or other allowance for Salt, Vinegar or Pepper, nor shall they be fur∣nished with any unless what shall be used at their meals. Thirdly, That no money be taken by Officers or Soldiers unless it be at the request of the Person or Persons they are quartered upon, who shall desire so to do
rather than furnish them with Provisions and Lodging, and in such case the same is not to exceed One Moyety of the summ weekly that such Officer or Soldier is according to the rates herein after mentioned, to allow for his dyet, and that all Persons may know what shall be paid for their dyet, and Quarters. We do hereby publish and declare that every Horse-man is to pay for his dyet and Quar∣ter two shillings and ten pence per week, Every Dragoon two shilling four pence per week. And every Foot Soldier one shilling and nine pence per week. And so proportionably for a longer or a shorter time. Fourthly, That the Quarter-Master or such other Officer as shall be appoint∣ed by the Commanding Officer shall be joyned with the Civil Magistrate in setting out of Quarters, to prevent the frequent Complaints of unequal quartering of Soldiers, every Soldier shall be quartered by name, and not be removed from the Quarters assigned him without Order of his Commissioned Officer, and the Ma∣gistrate, who appointed his Quarters, or the next Iustice of the Peace. Fifthly, We do hereby strickly forbid all Their Majesties Officers and Soldiers to use any violence or threatning words to any Person whatsoever, or give any of∣fence or just cause of complaint for non-payment of their Quarters, at the rates aforesaid, or otherwise, and in case any of the said Officers or Soldiers shall pre∣sume to commit any spoil or disorder or use any violence or threatning words or do not pay their Quarters at the rates aforesaid. We do hereby further declare that besides the ordinary course of Iustice for redress, if the Persons agrieved shall make known the same to the Superiour Officers, the said Officers shall, and are hereby required to cause satisfaction immediately to be made, and that if such Of∣ficer to whom Complaint is made shall forbear or delay the causing due satisfaction to be given as aforesaid, The Persons to whom wrong is done, are to make their further Complaint to any two Iustices of the Peace, of the County, City or Place where the offence is committed, which said Iustices We do require to represent the same forthwith to Vs or to the Chief Governour or Governours of this Kingdom for the time being, that speedy Iustice may be done by reparation of the Injury, and causing the Officers and Soldiers so offending to be punished as the nature and quality of their offence shall deserve. Sixthly, That in case any Officers or Soldiers shall for any reward or considerati∣on leave or change the quarters appointed them, or shall demand or exact money for Quarters, or to exempt any Person from the same, they shall be punished by Ca∣shiering and loss of their Pay. And We do hereby require all Officers and Soldiers in Their Majesties Ser∣vice to behave themselves Orderly in all things according to Law and Mili∣tary Discipline as becomes them. And to the end these Our directions may be publickly made known. We require all Sheriffs of Cities, Counties and Towns Corporate upon Receipt of Printed Copies hereof, to Publish and Affix the same in the usual places within their several Counties that all Persons may take No∣thereof. Given at their Majesties Castle of Dublin, the 23. day of July, 1692. In the fourth Year of their Majesties Reign. By the Lords-Justices Command. Arth. Podmore. DƲBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Assignee of Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the King And Queens Most Excellent Majesties on Ormonde-Key. 1692.
