J72 99829197 207110
A DISCOURSE Concerning GOD'S Foreknowledge, AND Man's Free Agency: WHEREIN Their seeming Opposition is recon∣ciled, and real Consistency De∣monstrated from the Holy Scrip∣tures, and Arguments thence de∣duced. Acts 4.28. For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy Counsel determined before to be done. Phil. 2.12, 13. — Work out your own Sal∣vation with fear and trembling. For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Deut. 30.19. I have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing; therefore choose Life, &c. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1697.
The PREFACE. IF in the Perusal of this small Tract, the Reader finds but small Satisfaction, I hope he will not much wonder at it, when he remembers, that Larger Vo∣lumes, and even Learned Ones too, in Mat∣ters especially of this Nature, do not always answer Expectation. I pretend to no great share of Learning, nor any large measure of Acute Judgment; only I am naturally dispos'd to Thinking and Consideration, and upon the Occasion mentioned at the Entrance of the Ensuing Discourse, which is no ficti∣tious Pretence, but a thing that did really happen about two years agoe, I took a Fancy to set down my thoughts upon this abstruse Subject. Some few that have seen it in Ma∣nuscript, have thought it to be tollerable Sense, and might perhaps be a further Oc∣casion to some Man of better Parts to speak more clearly to the Point, for which cause I am not unwilling to permit it's Pub∣lication; for I believe the Subject has not been hitherto exhausted; and I desire nothing more than to be out-done, or even confuted, by any one that can make things more coherent,
and better vindicate the Divine Attributes. In the mean time,By a Fellow of the R. S. I have met with a Curious Discourse concerning things above Reason, amongst which the Subject here treat∣ed of, is mention'd as one; by which I per∣ceive, that this Essay of mine is not imper∣tinent, tho' perhaps it may be ineffectual, and come far short of the Design. For how can an Ʋnlearned Head (by never so much thinking) think to bring that under Reason, which so great a Wit hath ranked among things above it? So that the importance of the Attempt will not (I fear) account for the ill management of it: Yet its Innocency will (I hope) defend it from any heavy Cen∣sure. If I have not wholly subdu'd my Pro∣vince unto Reason, yet I have given it a kind of Negative Voice; that is, tho' Reason can∣not absolutely command the Affirmative, it shall nevertheless so far rule the Opposer, as to prevent his Negative. Some things must be granted, tho' perhaps not without diffi∣culty, because they cannot be deny'd without far greater Inconvenience. If it be said, We cannot understand how any thing can be certain, and yet contingent; or how a voluntary Action can be foreseen, which depends upon Free-choice, and that at
any time until it be effected, may be either done or let alone. Let such Persons try how they can clear the Inconveniencies of an Ignorant and Imperfect Deity, which will lye hard upon them if they grant not Di∣vine Prescience. On the other side, let them see with what success they can take away distributive Justice, and root out the Noti∣on and Existence of Good and Evil; which task is of Necessity incumbent on them that deny Man to be a Free Agent. If things to come be not foreseen, what will become of Divine Providence? If there be not in Man a free Election, where is sin? for where there is no choice, how can any one choose amiss? To chastise my Child for Dis∣obedience, would be all one as to whip my Clock for going amiss. Either God Al∣mighty foresees things future, or he cannot be God: Either Man is a voluntary Agent, or he cannot be Man. If these things there∣fore will not stand together, Reason it self may seem impertinent, and it's natural Conclusions altogether useless: For, to what purpose is Discourse or Ratiocination, when either there can be no Transgression, or none to take No∣tice of it, and punish it? These are the inconveniencies which men run the hazard of in this matter: For rather
than admit one apparent difficulty, which con∣sists perhaps only in the narrowness of humane understanding, they choose to fill the World with Contradiction and Absurdity. Some will ven∣ture to mix Heaven and Earth together, un∣der a State of War and Rapine, without any sense of Divine Authority to Awe Rebellious Mankind; and others will attempt to turn God out of the World, because they cannot comprehend his Perfections and Operations. But surely it is not advisable to Cashier every thing that puts a stress upon our limitted Faculties, nor run down all those things for false, which consist not well with what we apprehend to be true. To which pur∣pose the Discourse above mentioned contains a parcel of the Noblest Instances, apply'd and manag'd with the greatest Clearness, and to the highest Ends and Advantage, of any Book I have hitherto met with. From thence I gladly learn, that there are certain Pri∣viledg'd Things, which will by no means stoop to Common Reason, nor accommodate themselves to those Rules and Measures which are sufficient for other Matters. Not but that there is a peculiar sort of Reason in these also; for tho' they are above my Reason to apprehend them fully, yet I apprehend very good Reason why they should be so. For, either my Capacity
is bounded, or it is not; if it be, 'tis sure to be over-power'd in grasping an unlimitted thing; if not, it must then be infinite: And since I know many Capacities about the same Level with mine own, and not a few incomparably greater, it must follow, that, not only a mul∣titude of infinites are consistent, but a Num∣ber also of Capacities, each of which is more than infinite; which Conclusion I think is more than sufficiently absurd. Besides, since God cannot do what is inconsistent, or involves a Contradiction, be could not create a Power or Faculty, comprehensive of his own Perfe∣ctions; for that could be no less than infinite. he cannot parcel out his peculiar Attributes unto his Creatures; for that would imply a contradiction. Wherefore the most shallow Reason may conclude, there must of necessity be those things, which the most refined Wit cannot adequately comprehend. And this is so, not only in reference to the Divine Perfections, but in things also of a lower Nature, of which it may not be impro∣per to insert one instance in this place, where∣by an undeniable Truth will appear to be at∣tended with unaccountable difficulty. For the Ensuing Discourse pretends not to answer all the Cavils that may be made against a Meridian Truth, (which yet like the Sun it
self) hath some Obscurities; much less doth it undertake to make men see, who are either blind or shut their Eyes. But the design of it is, to assert from the Scriptures, the Truth of Divine Prescience, and of voluntary Ele∣ction; to evince the necessity of admitting them both; to accommodate the seeming Opposition, and to point out some of those unconcluding Arguments, that mislead Men to apprehend an inconsistence where there is none. But in case I have not performed this with sufficient Strength and Clearness of Expression, it will not be forreign to the matter in hand, to shew by an instance, that somethings may not only be true, but are almost universally acknow∣ledg'd, which yet how they can be so, is insu∣perably hard to be conceived. And this shall be an instance which doth fre∣quently occur to every one that is conversant about Decimal Numbers: Scarce any good Accomptant but understands, no learned man but will acknowledge the force of it. For you may have a small fraction, suppose of a farth∣ing, or of a barley corn, not worth demanding, which yet cannot be deny'd to be infinitely Di∣visible; insomuch, that going about to find some determinate part of such a fraction, as ⅓, ⅕, or the like, you may indeed divide it ac∣cording to Decimal Arithmetick, and you shall
presently come near the truth, and the further you continue your Division, you shall still come the nearer: But though you Divide it everlast∣ingly, you shall never be able to get out entire∣ly the part you aim at, but the Quotient will still be defective, and something will for ever remain of the Dividend. To make out this the more evidently, I put the following Case for an Example: Seven Workmen are to receive for some piece of Work 20 s. to be equally divided amongst them; and supposing my self to be one of the seven, I de∣mand my share; but first I am to compute what it comes to. To do this, I make use of Deci∣mals, which in many Questions are very ex∣peditious, and much in use at this day. It is no more but only to divide 20 by 7: But since there is a remainder, I add Cy∣phers 20 (2.8.5.7 14 60 56 54 35 50 49 1 to the Dividend, and so con∣tinuing the Division to four places. I find in the Quotient this mixt Number, 2. 8. 5. 7. which comes to 2 s. 10 d. 1 q. and something more, which is a solution exact enough for common practice. But this is not all; for there remains one of the Dividend, that is to say, one thousandth part of a Shilling, and of this I demand 1/7, to make up my full proportion of the 20 s. I
there still proceed to Divide, in order to get out my seventh part exactly, but I shall never be able to do it; no, though the Division were to be continued from Age to Age for one thou∣sand years, and after that for another, yet still the Quotient would be too little, and the Dividend inexhaustible. In this plain and familiar Question, re∣solv'd by Decimals, three things are evident. 1. That in a few minutes time an answer may be given, tho' not exact, yet sufficiently true for common use; that is to say, in half an hour at most, I may safely aver it, that so much is my full share, within less than one Millioneth part of a farthing; and yet at the same time, I may be sworn, that the same is not my pro∣portion exactly. 2. Let me continue the Division as far, and as long as I please, I shall come nearer still and nearer to the truth, and every new figure in the Quotient, adds something to my share, which I had not before; it lessens the Dividend and ap∣proaches by various (or rather infinite) de∣grees nearer to 1/7, which is the proportion aim∣ed at. But 3. It can never be accomplisht; Myriads of Ages would not suffice to drain this Fountain. You may suppose (if you please) the Quotient to be extended in Decimal Fractions, as far as
from the Artick to the Antartick Pole; all that would not reach a true seventh part, tho' every figure (as I said) advances something towards it. Let us now lay all this together, here is a Mark to be hit, as suppose it were a Jack lying in a Bowling-Alley, you may aim at it, and presently come within an hair's breadth, your Bowl may be still in motion, and every moment come nearer to the Mark, and yet shall never touch it. This Example in Arithmetick seems to con∣clude no less than those two other Noted Cu∣riosities in Geometry, concerning the Hyper∣bole and Diagonal, and has a respective Af∣finity to them both. For whereas the Hyper∣bole, may have such a Relation to a right line drawn near it, that both being prolonged, it shall come nearer and nearer to the said right Line; yet how far soever both lines be extend∣ed, they shall never meet; this is very nearly resembled in the case before us. And whereas it is impossible to assign any common Measure for the Side and Diagonal of a Square, which shall exactly measure them both, but there will remain a part of the one line, less than the said common measure, after you have made that as little as you please: So here, it is impossible to exhaust Decimal Numbers by sevens, be∣cause
that 7. and 10. (or any number consist∣ing of 1. with the Addition of Cyphers) are so far incommensurable, that nothing above an Ʋnit can be a common Measure to them both. To conclude, from this plain and fa∣miliar instance, may be inferred the endless Divisibility of matter, that the Parts of any thing exceed the whole, and that the whole Globe of Earth is no further divisible, nor can∣not be said to contain a greater Number of Parts, than one small grain of Sand. Now if there be such a mysterious depth in Lines and Numbers, such a boundless Abyss in any small particle of Earth or Clay, that the Wit of Man cannot comprehend it, what shall we say of him that made all things in Number, Weight and Measure? How can we excuse the audacious folly of pretending to measure Eter∣nity by the unequal standard of our Judgment, or Circumscribe infinity within the narrow Cir∣cl of Humane Capacity? Wherefore if the Reader shall dislike the following Discourse, and the Reasons therein made use of, let him for his own satisfaction (and for mine too, if he please) bethink himself of better, and there∣in he may do a piece of service, both useful and acceptable. But for any one to confine the in∣effable perfections of the Supreme Being to his own faculties, is a piece of egregious vanity, and an undertaking altogether desperate.
A DISCOURSE Concerning GOD's Foreknowledge, AND Man's Free Agency. I Happened a while ago, to be present at a Discourse between two Gentle∣men, concerning the fatal Period of Man's Life, or the fixed certainty of Future Events: The one affirming it, from the consideration of God's Fore∣knowledge; the other denying it, from the evident certainty of Man's Free-will. The former urged; what God Foresees, cannot but come to pass; the latter plead∣ed, Man cannot choose, nor refuse, the doing of that, which is certain to be done. I thought there was truth in what they both grounded their Arguments upon, but certain inferences, pretended to be drawn from thence, which this Discourse pro∣duced,
I could by no means approve of, I did therefore interpose a little for an ac∣commodation, but with so ill success, that I have a mind to try, if I can do any better in this Paper. Not that I will pre∣sume to moderate betwixt two Persons, each of them better Learned, and of far greater Abilities than my self. But since their Discourse hath so fix'd the Subject in my mind, that I cannot easily remove it, I will only attempt to clear the Notion a little to my own Apprehension, by setting my thoughts in some kind of order in reference to this matter. I shall therefore endeavour these three things. 1. To assert from Scripture, that God foresees future Events; and that neverthe∣less, Man is a free and voluntary Agent. 2. To shew, how these two things a∣gree together; and detect the fallacy of those Reasonings that represent them in∣consistent. 3. To answer some of those Objections, that are wont to occur in this Debate. I begin with the first, and easiest part of my Task, namely, to assert God's Fore∣knowledge, and Man's Free-will, out of the Scriptures. These are indeed two several subjects, and might challenge each of
them a distinct Head of Discourse: yet I rather chose to manage them both in one, by linking Scriptures together in such sort, that of each couple, the one shall make out Divine Prescience, and the other Hu∣mane Freedom; and being consider'd to∣gether, shall evince, that both these have oft-times been conversant about the same particular event; that is, one Text shall prove God's Fore-knowledge of, and ano∣ther shall evidence Mans Freedom in, doing or refusing the same individual Action. But first, that I may clear my way as much as I can, I must explain the Terms, or give some account, at least, how I understand them. Some indeed except against the word Prescience, and tell us, that God doth not properly fore-see any thing, since he beholdeth all things as present; but this I count is Criticism without Necessi∣ty; for the word is frequently used, as 'tis taken in this Discourse, and is proper e∣nough with respect unto us, and to such things as are not yet in being. What shall be a thousand years hence, is indeed po∣tentially in God, but not yet actually existent: So that his knowledge of such things, is not unfitly called Prescience, as
also the respect and consideration of some∣what that is distant, is called Providence. Now as God's Omnipotence did vertually comprehend from Eternity, all the Crea∣tures that were to be produced in Time; So his Omniscience gives him an entire View and Prospect of all their Actions. They cannot act but by a Power derived from him; how then should they do any thing unknown to him? He knows what himself will bring to pass in spite of all opposition; and he knows what Latitude he will allow his Creatures in their Actions. Since therefore God Almighty knows his own Will, and since Nothing can ever come to pass without his Will, either po∣sitive or permissive; it must follow, that he sees and knows all things and events, which are to come, and not yet actually existent, with equal certainty as if they were present. And this is what I mean by Divine Prescience. I must now fix my Notion of Free-will, and herein I shall carefully avoid all School Controversies about it, or about Com∣mon and Efficacious Grace: As also those Dominican Fancies about a thing they callProv. Letters. Next Power, which is next to none,
and Sufficient Grace, which some think altogether insufficient. These and such like questions I leave to be beaten into Atoms between the Jesuites and Jansenists. And whereas some contend, that it is in every Man's power to do what the Gospel enjoyns: For should God require of any man what is impossible to be done by him, he must needs appear to be a hard Master. Others deny that any man can, or ever will effectually believe and repent without special Grace, which wherever it comes, makes a thorow work of Conversion in the heart, and therefore can never be lost, nor the person in whom it is finally mis∣carry. Others again say, there is a sufficiency of Grace, which with pious endeavours will bring a Man to happiness, yet under a pos∣sibility of Apostatizing, in which case God may and doth sometimes relinquish the Person to final Destruction. And others, to name no more, say, there is a Common Grace, or Universal Talent given to all Men, which tho' of it self, it is by no means sufficient, yet up∣on a conscientious improvement thereof, with earnest Prayer for further daily Sup∣plies, it will please God to bestow such a
Measure, as shall be sufficient to Salva∣tion; whilst those who were intrusted with the same stock, having laid it up in a Napkin, are through their own Default, utterly ruin'd. Yet they add withal, that there are a certain Number, more pecu∣liarly called the Elect, whom Efficacious Grace does seize upon, some in a high Carreer of Wickedness, others at first even against their Will, tho' in the day of Gods Almighty Power, they become a willing People, to that degree, that they desire nothing more than to lay out their lives, to spend and be spent (as St. Paul said) for the advancement of that Grace and Truth whereby they are subdu'd and purified: But these (they say) are not the Rule and Measure of God's dealing with Mankind in general, but are to be look't upon, as certain high and noble Instances of the Freeness and Efficacy of Divine Grace, and of God's exercising an Al∣mighty Prerogative in choosing a Raging Persecutor, or some Atheistical Debau∣chee, to be made a peculiar Favorite and chosen Vessel to himself. Whereas (I say) there are these (and perhaps some other) Opinions, that are wont to fall under consideration, when the
business of Free-will is in debate; I shall not trouble my self to determine which is best, nor is it material to my design: 'Tis not impossible, but with a due Respect unto Persons, Times and Circumstances, there may be something of Truth in them all, and each of them perhaps may be good or bad, according as 'tis manag'd. Truth and Er∣rour I look upon as Gold and Dross: The one is a pure and splendid thing, but may be adulterated or abused, and seldom is without alloy; the other, tho' base and ignoble, contains for the most part some∣thing of true mettal, if duly separated from the rest. This only (under submission) I shall ad∣venture to say as my own present thoughts about this matter, and so proceed; name∣ly, that most men, however under a state of Nature, may do much moral good, which shall not pass unrewarded, and some∣thing too (for ought they can know to the contrary) towards acceptance with God. That many men through the Divine Good∣ness shall be saved, that neither know punctually the time of their Conversion, nor certainly whether they be converted or not. That few there are who attain to that compleat assurance, as to banish at
all times, all manner of Dubitation. That it is all mens duty to seek that they may find, and to wait upon God in the use of those means appointed by him in his word; and we have his promise for success. And, that no man can truly say now, or shall be able to plead at the last day, that he hath used his utmost endeavours, and found them unsuccessful. These and the like con∣siderations may be ground enough for men to be doing good at present, and for their Relyance upon the Goodness of God for the future. But on the other hand, since there is a spiritual as well as a fleshly Wickedness, and Satan is transform'd sometimes into an Angel of Light, and lest Man should be lifted up with an ap∣prehension of certain fine things that he can do; let him remember, that 'tis God who worketh in him both to will and to do of his good pleasure; that of himself he can do nothing, and that all his righ∣teousness is but filthy raggs. And this will help to poise him at the Center between the two Extreams of fainting and presuming, and will discover a necessity of an humble attendance at the Throne of Grace, that God would supply unto him those Divine Aids, and Spiritual Powers, by which he
may be enabled to encounter opposition, and find acceptance in Christ Jesus. And herein perhaps may consist the nar∣rowness of the way that leads to life. For one man, supposing he can do nothing ac∣ceptable to God, resolves to take his ease, until the Spirit, that Wind which blow∣eth where it list, breath upon him; ano∣ther thinks he is able and willing, to do all that God requires; he admires his own good husbandry in the improvement of his Talent, and thanks God, he is not like o∣ther men. Now the way lying in the middle betwixt these Extremities, the least step towards a Carnal Liberty one the one hand, or a Pharisaical Righteousness on the o∣ther, must needs be a deviation from the right path, as this collateral Discourse is a digression from what I intend. But I now return, and do say, that let men establish what Doctrine they please concerning Grace, it will not import the matter in hand, since I shall confine my Notion of Free-Will to those things that are on all hands acknowledged to be within Man's power, supposing only the ordinary con∣currence of God's providence thereunto. I consider then, that Man above other Creatures hath knowledge to judge and
distinguish of things commodious or in∣convenient, beneficial or noxious to him, in the concerns of his Life; and it would be a strange Solaecism in Nature, if he had not the Liberty of choosing the one, and re∣fusing the other. What doth it advantage a Man, to know the difference between a Sheep and a Wolf, if he want the Power or the Will, to make a benefit of the one, and avoid the mischief of the other? Nay I do not see, but this might render Man of all Creatures most miserable, since his knowledge of Good could be no other to him than Gall and Bitterness; whilst he finds himself fatally carried on to Evil. And suppose he had been always predetermined to Good, his knowledge of Evil then had been in vain, or rather indeed it had been impossible; since Man could not have come to the knowledge of Evil, but by doing it. And what could Man under a necessity of always doing good, signifie, more than a good Watch? which tho' it moves regu∣larly, yet is it altogether involuntary, cannot do otherwise, knows not that it moves at all; and consequently is inca∣pable of Praise or Encouragement, Reward or Punishment. Thus if we take away from Man his Faculties of Judging and
Choosing, we make the Lord of the Creation the most contemptible thing in Nature, and put him under the Feet of those Brutes he was made to rule over. So that without voluntary Agency, that is, without a Will and the proper Exer∣cise thereof, Man becomes little better than a Sensless Machine. But now on the contrary, we see plain∣ly, that, by the good Providence and Di∣sposal of Almighty God, men have power to do many things, as namely, to culti∣vate the Earth, to build Houses, to pro∣vide against Hunger and Cold, to educate their Children, to exercise several Arts and Trades, for the Benefit of Humane Life, and to manage all these according to cer∣tain Rules, Methods and Observations, arising partly from Experience, and part∣ly from Mens consulting one another. I say, in all these, and a thousand more par∣ticulars, Men do consider and deliberate, and then pursue their several Designs, some with greater, others with a lesser share of Prudence, but each Imploying his Measure, and accordingly determining to choose this, and refuse the other. In short, I conceive, that God having indued Man with an Understanding to
judge, and a Will to choose, and con∣tinually supplying him with power to act according to his Nature, he doth not or∣dinarily over-power, or impel his Faculties, but leaves him to the free Use and Exer∣cise thereof in things within his proper Sphere. And this is what I mean by Free-will. Now I address to my Province, which is to assert this, together with God's Fore-knowledge of future Events from the Scriptures. The first pair of Scriptures that I im∣ploy for this Service, shall be out of Exo∣dus,Chap. 3.18. Chap. 3.19. where Moses is appointed of God to go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Let us go, we beseech thee, into the Wilder∣ness, &c. It is not easily to be imagined, but that Pharaoh had power to have grant∣ed this Request at first, and the very Re∣quest it self doth strongly imply a Liber∣ty of granting it. No good Master will require any thing of his meanest Servant, with intention to punish him severely for not doing it, and yet secretly contrive means to prevent and disable him, that he cannot do it. To say, that God should send Moses to make a request unto Pharaoh, say∣ing, Let us go, we pray thee, that he should
destroy him at last for refusing, and in the mean time should bind up his heart by some irresistable influence, from all possibility of granting it: This would not only excuse Pharaoh from the guilt of sin, but make an odious representation of the Ever blessed God; as if his Wisdom were exercis'd in laying snares for the innocent, and his pow∣er in their destruction. Should a Writing-Master guide his Scholars hand, to make a blot, or some ill Character, and then beat him for it, whereas being left to himself he would have done better, what could be thought of such behaviour in a Master? and how just would be the Scholar's indignation against him? The sinfulness of an Action consists in this, that it is voluntary, and against the Com∣mand; the nature of a voluntary action is, that 'tis done out of choice and deliberation, when otherwise it might be forborn. Now, either Pharaoh sinn'd in detaining the People, or he did not; if not, wherefore was he destroy'd?Gen. 18.2 Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? If he did, he acted out of Choice, and consequently he might have dismissed the Israelites sooner, if he had pleased. Hence it will also follow, that there
could be no secret Influence, nor any prede∣termining Concourse from God, to bind his Faculties, or take away his Free-agen∣cy; only the Pride of his Heart, despising God's Message to him, and his domineer∣ing Ambition to keep the People in Slavery, did out-weigh (in his unjust Ballance) the other Motives he had to dispense with them. And herein consisteth the nature of Electi∣on, that of two things proposed, with Mo∣tives on either part, a man freely chooseth that which likes him best, in his present Apprehension, tho' at the same time (if he thought good) he might choose the o∣ther. Thus did Pharaoh choose to detain the People, there's his Choice; yet before ever the matter was propounded to him, God himself says,Exod. 3.19. I am sure he will not let you go; here is Fore-knowlege: Therefore Di∣vine Prescience and Humane Liberty are consistent, and have been conversant about the same individual Action. But here an Objection may arise from the seventh Chapter, and the third verse, where God says,Exod. 7.3. He will harden Pharaoh's heart: From whence it might be supposed, that Pharaoh could not act voluntarily, nor be said to have any real Freedom of Will. To this I answer,
1. I will not deny, but that in considera∣tion of Pharaoh's former Wickedness, in dealing so barbarously with the People of Is∣rael, God might forsake him, and give him over to hardness of Heart. But then, 2. I deny that this hardness of heart, by whomsoever, or in what manner so ever it was wrought, could deprive him of the Li∣berty of doing a Civil Act within his power. He might for some self End, or with some ill design, have dismissed the Israelites, and yet still have retained his hard heart; it was but a word speaking, and the business had been done. And it is observable, that while the smart was upon him, he could say,Exod. 9.27, 28. I and my People are wicked; and pro∣mised too, to let the Israelites go; but still, as he found respite, (thinking perhaps the storm was over) he retracted. On the one hand, there was the danger of perishing, or having at least) his Kingdom ruin'd by those Judgments God sent upon him: On the other hand, there was the lust of tyran∣nizing over an enslaved People, and the be∣nefit of their Labours in making Brick. These two weights being opposed each to other in the Scales, sometimes the one, and then presently the other preponderates. And
this purely is deliberation, the result where∣of is choosing, and choosing is the undoubt∣ed property of a free Agent. 3. Concerning the hardening of Pharaoh's heart, the Apprehensions of Learned Men are different; that which to me appears the most reasonable is to this effect, name∣ly, that this induration is not to be under∣stood as any positive Act, or immediate Efficiency from God, whereby Pharaoh's heart was made hard, (much less his Will Predetermin'd) directly and properly, no more than it is to be understood that our Saviours coming was directly and properly to fill the World with Dissentions, because he himself saith expresly, thatLuke 12.51, 52. He came not to bring peace on the Earth, but rather division. The primary intention of the Gospel, no doubt, was Peace and Good Will towards men; but meeting with vari∣ous tempers, and sundry degrees of Cor∣ruption in the hearts of men, it could not choose but occasion dissention and a sword upon the Earth. In like manner the primary intention of God's Judgments, is to reform the World, and bring men to Repentance, whilst in some Persons they have a quite contrary effect. So that, as the Gospel of
Peace was the accidental cause of War, so might God's dealing with Pharaoh tend to harden his Heart, and yet to soften a less rebellious one, as the same Sun beam melt∣eth Wax and hardeneth Clay. And as fin by the commandment becomes exceeding sin∣ful,Rom. 7.11, 13. in so much that the Commandment it self, which was ordained unto life, is found to be unto death: So Pharaoh's stubborness, under the Divine Hand, becomes the more exceeding stubborn; and that Chastisement, which was ordained unto Reformation, did the more effectually promote his destructi∣on. Hence it is highly probable, that, I will harden his heart, may import no more than this, I will bring such things to pass, and in such a manner, as shall through his own Corruptions, render him much more obdurate. That the natural and direct tendency of God's dealing with Pharaoh was to convince him, seems very apparent from these Con∣siderations: 1. He orders Moses to try him with Innocent Miracles, afterwards with smarting ones, by such degrees, till it come at last to the death of his First-born. 2. While the Plagues lay heavy upon him, he gave some signs of a yielding and re∣lenting
temper, but ever in the Intervals he contracted a greater obdurateness. 3. The Judgments of God had their proper Effect upon the Egyptians, so far, that they would gladly have the Israelites dismissed sooner and at last, were not only urgent to have them gone in haste, but willing to part with theirExod. 12.33, 35. Jewels into the bargain. These consi∣derations (I say) seem very much to fa∣vour the forementioned sense of the Place, but whether that be the only true meaning of it, I shall not contend, so long as I can make it good, that Pharaoh was a Free Agent in that particular thing which was foretold by God Almighty. The next double Testimony shall be out ofEzek. 3.4. Ezekiel, where the Prophet is sent to the Israelites, and words put into his Mouth, to warn and dehort them from their wicked ways, lest they should dye. Hence I argue thus; either the House of Israel might have obeyed God's message to them by the Pro∣phet, or else not: If not, how shall we clear the sincerity of God's dealings with them? Or will his message to them appear any more than a Complement? Let us have a Care of intrenching upon Blasphemy. But, if they might have humbled themselves at
the Prophet's voice, as Nineveh did in the like case, it will follow, that they were not by any previous necessity divested of their Liberum Arbitrium, as is also evident from these words so often repeated in the Pro∣phet's Commission, Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear? which is as much as to say, they have their free choice. And what follows?Ezek. 3.7. But the House of Israel will not hearken unto thee. God doth not only afford Liberty and Opportunity of Re∣pentance, but he urges the same by strong pleadings and inducements; and yet at the same time, he foresees a contrary Event. And this is what I undertook to assert from the Scriptures. Again, in the 5th. of Hosea,Hos. 5.5. God foretells, that Israel and Ephraim shall fall in their iniquity, Judah also shall fall with them; yet in the 6th. ChapterHol. 6.1. he exhorts to Repentance. This indeed might have its proper effect too, upon some small remnant that should escapeEzek. 6.8, 9. and remember God among the Nations whither they were to be carried captives. But now there is the same means afforded to those that should fall in their Iniquity, as to the few that should escape; nor doth God's Fore-know∣ledge
of the several Events impose a neces∣sity upon either. He grants Liberty unto both, which he knows a Remnant will make good use of, whilst the greater Number will abuse it to their ruin. Thus it is evi∣dent, that Liberty and Prescience are con∣sistent. It is moreover prophesied, that byHosea 13.1. rea∣son of Idolatry, they shall be as Chaff dri∣ven with a whirlewind out of the Floor, and as smoke out of the Chimney; yet after∣wards, we read in the same Chapter, O Is∣rael thou hast destroyed thy self. We do not use to say, a man destroys himself, that is unwillingly run down by external force, or some inevitable necessity; nor can he that ruines himself charge the fault upon another. If Israel destroys himself, he is surely the Agent of his own destruction; and if so, he is either a Voluntary or an Involuntary Agent; if Involuntary, he cannot be said to destroy himself, no more than a House burns it self when fire is set to it by an In∣cendiary. An Involuntary Agent, as a Sword or a Hammer, can only act as 'tis mannag'd by Hands, and those govern'd by the Will. It remains then, that Israel was the voluntary Agent of his own Ruine; and
since this is foretold of God by the Prophet, it must follow (if the Scriptures be true) that Divine Prescience doth not any way in∣fringe the Liberty, or Free-agency of ra∣tional Creatures. God foresaw, that wicked Hands would be forward enough to deliver up the Divine Person unto Death, who was theAct. 2.23. Lord of Life; nay, his determinate Counsel did con∣cur with his Fore-knowledge, so far as to let it proceed to Execution, as the Learned Mr. Howe observes. And our SaviourMat. 20.17. himself, not only describes particularly the manner and circumstances of his own Death, when yet it was not near at hand, but is said also toJo. 18.4. know all things that should come upon him. Yet if the Actors of this wickedness had been rightly informed what they were about, they would have left their work for other hands. That's very strange (says one of our Disputants) here is an Event secur'd by the determinate counsel of God, here is the place where, the manner how, and the Persons by whom it should be brought to pass, describ'd before hand by our Saviour; can any thing that is so infal∣libly certain admit of an If? Yes, in St. Paul's account it may, and he is a person that de∣serves
some regard, And indeed, his Asser∣tion will appear highly reasonable, when we consider the Princes of this World, so sadly misinformed as they were, and im∣pos'd upon by all the wicked Artifice ima∣ginable, yet we do not find them very eager to be concern'd in the Blood of that just per∣son, when the principal Agent pretendsMat. 27.24. to wash his hands of it, and professesLuke 23.22. he found no cause of death in him. And had it not been for the impetuous Clamours of a wretched People, and the danger of a Tu∣mult, 'tis probable that the malicious con∣trivance of the Priests, and their sham Evi∣dence, would not have weighed against Pi∣late's Native Clemency. What must we then think had been done, in case of a right information? Why the Apostle tells us;1 Cor. 2.8. Had they known it, they would not have cru∣cified the Lord of Glory. This puts it out of all doubt, that they were under no other force than the Result of their own Delibe∣ration. On the one hand, there was the meekness of the Prisoner, the clemency of the Judge, and the disagreement of the Witnesses: On the other hand, there was the influence of the Priests, the ignorance of the Court, and cries of the Multitude; which
kept the business for a while in Equilibrio, but then the fear of a tumult superadded, cast the Scales. Nor were they under any further Necessity of crucifying our Saviour, by means of such a Divine Foresight, that he should be crucified, than they would have been under, in case it were to be sup∣posed, that God had not so punctually fore∣seen, or foretold the same. There are many other places of Scripture, that do evidently prove there is in Man a free Election. Solomon is commended for asking Wisdom,1 Kings 3.1. when he might have asked Riches, length of Days, or Revenge upon his Enemies; and AnaniasAct. 4.5. is the more condemned for falsity about the price of the Land, because that even after it was sold, it was in his own power. Num. 30.1.If a Wife make a Vow, it is left to her Husbands choice, either to establish it, or to make it void. Jos. 24.15.Choose you this day whom you will serve. 2 Sam. 24.12.Go and say unto David, thus saith the Lord, I offer thee three things; choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee. These Scriptures are so clear, they need no Commentary, nor do they admit of any
Objection. And I think there is no less Evi∣dence for Divine Prescience, since all Pro∣phecies and many other Places of Scripture, do either directly, or by just consequence put it beyond Dispute, with all that acknow∣ledge the Authority of that sacred Book. I shall mention no more but this one, and therewith close up this first part of my Un∣dertaking: It is so direct and full to the pur∣pose, as if the Holy Ghost had design'd it to remove all Scruple and Hesitation about that matter.Isa. 36.9. I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done. Had I Leasure now, or Opportunity, to consult the Fathers or Schoolmen; I am in∣clinable to believe, I should have their ge∣neral Suffrage in this matter; but truly those Gentlemen are none of my Familiars, and and I was loath to trouble them. Yet meeting by accident with two of them, which are esteemed no less than Oracles, I made bold to ask them their Opinions in the case. I confess, I was not displeased to find them so very civil, and favourable to the Notions, I had already formed, and in part written down, concerning this Subject. One of
these was the Learned Suarez, who first of all disputing copiously about Man's capacity of acting freely, he brings it last to this issue:Metaph. Tom. 1. p. 338, 339. Experimur enim evidenter, situm esse in no∣stra potestate aliquid agere vel omittere, & ad hoc utimur ratione & discursu ac consultatio∣ne, ut in unam partem potius quàm in aliam in∣clinemur: Est ergo Electio positiva in nostro arbitrio, alioqui fuisset nobis data superfluè, haec deliberandi & consultandi vis. For we find by evident Experience, that it is in our power ei∣ther to do a thing or leave it undone, therefore we reason, argue and deliberate, in order to choose one thing rather than another, 'tis therefore in our power to make a positive choice, or else we have this Capacity given us in vain. This comes close to that point. And then in the next place, he doth no less vigorously maintain God's Fore-knowledge of all E∣vents and Actions, whether voluntary, or contingent, the Sum of which is thus. Iom. 2. p. 92, 93.God cannot (saith he) be ignorant of what he himself doth, or will do, be∣cause he knows his own Will and his power to effect what he wills. Nor can can he be ignorant of what his Creatures do now, or what they shall do hereafter, because whatever is positively good in
their Actions, is by immediate influence from himself; and what there is of pri∣vation or defect, cannot be without his permission, and therefore he cannot be ignorant of mens sinful and wicked acti∣ons. He goes on to shew, that unless God did fore-know from Eternity whatever was, or is to come to pass in time, he could neither be omnipotent nor immu∣table. Not omnipotent, because in refe∣rence to those things whereof he had no foresight, his Providence and Govern∣ment of Affairs must needs be defective. Not Immutable, because something must daily occur to his knowledge which he knew not before. Atque hinc sequitur Deum habere hanc Scientiam Creaturarum quae fiunt in tempore ex aeternitate sua, ut totam illam simul ha∣beat sine successione, quia non potest in se vari∣ationem admittere; item quia non posset Deus habere perfectam providentiam in rebus admi∣nistrandis, nisi haberet omnium praescientiam. Thus far that Eminent Schoolman. The other is the Angelical Thomas Aqui∣nas, as some are pleased to style him. He in his Sum of Theology dispatches me in a few words. For having first described Providence to be a respect to somewhat that is distant,
according to which the occurrences now present are to be ordered, which doth there∣fore necessarily include prescience: He saith afterwards, Providentia Dei est omnium sin∣gularium, nec tamen à rebus excludit contin∣gentiam, nec casum, nec fortunam, nec liberum arbitrium: That the Providence of God ex∣tendeth to all particulars, not excluding Con∣tingency, Chance, Fortune, or Free-will. Add hereunto, that it was allowed St. Au∣gustine as a Maxime, that God by his fore∣knowledge, doth not necessitate, or constrain, the coming to pass of the things foreknown by him. These Testimonies, as they are of un∣questionable Authority, so are they clear, direct, and full to the purpose; and this is all I design for the first general Head. I am now in the second place to attempt certain reasons, or considerations, whereby to accommodate the difference, or at least to lessen the opposition, that seems to be be∣tween Prescience and Free-will. The Heads to be insisted on for that purpose are these three: Namely, The truth of the Holy Scrip∣tures, The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, and the Non-causality of Divine Prescience. First then, I argue from the verity of the Scriptures; for I am not designing to confute
an Atheist, writing only to such as do ac∣knowledge the Truth and Authority of those Sacred Letters; but chiefly (as I said be∣fore) for my own satisfaction. Some young Divines indeed I have observed, who in their first setting out to preach the Word, affect to preach altogether without it, and seem to Triumph in dispelling the darkness of Athe∣ism and Irreligion, by the Gloworm-light of corrupt Nature. Others there are, that prove their Doctrines out of Terence, Tully and Se∣neca; whether it is, because they have not read the Bible, or that they preser the Au∣thority of Heathen Writers before it, or that they would be thought to be profoundly learned, I shall not dispute; but I find other more experienc'd Work-men, who do not trouble themselves to dig below the true foundation, but think the Rock of Ages safe enough for them to build upon. Now, as that Comical sort of Preaching, to vulgar Ears, doth rather Amuse than Edifie: So this Essay (which is not like to be regarded by the Learned) if it should happen to take the Country air, would look very thin with∣out Scripture-Evidence. But if indeed the Scriptures do clearly speak the Substance of what is herein contained, this ought to have the force of a Reason, with all those
that acknowledge the Authority of that Book. Nor will it be material to object, that this Argument doth not sufficiently make out the reasonableness of what is here pleaded for: For as there are several Ranks of Pri∣viledg'd things, which will not condescend to Common Reason, so there are several de∣grees of Reason also, of which the lower ought to yield to the Superiour; and it is the highest reason sure, that God is true, tho' every Man should be found a Lyer. I am by no means against it yet, that Atheism should be encountred upon its own principles, if at least it can be said to have any principles at all; but every Stripling is not a fit Champion for an overgrown Phi∣listine: And I had rather have that Province entirely left to such as can manage it, than have the Truth to suffer by weak Patronage As for those therefore, that expect better proof than from the Word of God, and those natural consequences arising thence, I shall leave them to the discipline of their own Consciences; for if they are not convinced by what Bp. Wilkins, Bp. Ward, Mr. Boyle, Dr. Cudworth, Sir Cha. Wolsely, and some others have already said against Atheism, I shall never hope to give them satisfaction. But as for those two Gentlemen, betwixt
whom the Controversie was started, upon which occasion I scribble down these hasty Notes, they are both of them (I hope) seri∣ous Christians, not doubting in the least the truth of the Scriptures, yet differing vastly in their apprehensions about this matter. One of them is firm in the belief of Divine Prescience, but somewhat Hesitant as to the business of Free-will: The other is so much a Free-willer, that he seems to cashier Di∣vine Prescience; For (says he) if God offer me any good thing, and knows in the mean time I will not accept of it, I am nothing beholding to him for his kind∣ness.— This manner of expression concerning God, is over-bold and fawcy; for we may not speak of him with such a Liberty, as is allowable in other matters. Besides, let us observe the consequence, and we shall find it to be this, that either God Almighty has no knowledge at all of future Events; or else, that all conditional Promises, throughout the whole Scripture, are no more than sha∣dows; the former of which consequences strikes at the Perfection of the Divine Na∣ture, and the latter blurrs the sincerity of the inspired Writings. To which it may be added, that such Doctrine is false, and
injurious to the Goodness of God: For his Benefits offered to Mankind are not to be valued by his Fore-knowledge of Non-ac∣ceptance, but by their own intrinsick worth, and by Man's Capacity of enjoying them if he will. And tho' God doth assuredly know, who will not accept of his kindness, yet he knows at the same time, the fault is in themselves; nor is their refusal any further necessary from any such Divine Foresight, than otherwise it would have been. So that some Persons will indeed seem to have a great Veneration for the Scriptures, and yet own such Principles as render a great part of them insignificant: For, if God's Fore-knowledge necessitate all Events, so that nothing could have fallen out otherwise than it doth; then all Divine Precepts and Rules of Life, all Promises and Threatnings upon certain conditions, are no more but Cheats and empty Formalities. But now, to those that sincerely acknowledge the Di∣vine Authority and Truth of the Scriptures, (as all Christians ought to do) the Argument will lye thus: What ever is entirely true, is also harmo∣nious and self-consistent. But the Scrip∣tures are true. Ergo, &c.
If it be urged, that the Scriptures, as pro∣ceeding from God, are indeed most perfect∣ly and entirely true, yet passing through the hands of so many Men, in various Copies and Versions, from one Language into ano∣ther, it cannot be, but something of humane infirmity must stick to them. This indeed I freely grant; and if any such thing can be made evident in the case before us, it will be very fit to be considered. In the mean time, there can hardly any two things be named that are more clearly and vigorously asserted in Scripture, than are Divine Pre∣science and Free-will, as well in the places above-mentioned, as in divers others. From whence it will follow, that if those places of Scripture be genuine, and no way cor∣rupted (which we must suppose, till the con∣trary be made out) God's Fore-knowledge and Man's Free-agency are not only true, but perfectly harmonious, and consistent each with other, altho' our limitted sight and dazled Eyes cannot fully enable us to behold their Agreement. Nor need we wonder at it, when we con∣sider, that not only in the Scripture, but in Euclid's Elements, and many other Books approved in their kind, are found divers
things, which a great number of Readers, tho' men of good Sense, cannot easily under∣stand or reconcile; and some things of that difficulty, that the greatest Masters of Learn∣ing and Reason, have more than work e∣nough to overcome; of which, if need re∣quired, one might give particular Instances. Who will believe that the least Diameter of a Needle's Point should be Divisible into a Million (or rather infinite) Parts, and yet that a Circle, how large soever, can touch a right line but inThat is, the right line being drawn as a tangent, but not through the Circle. one point only? And since a Globular Body set upon a plain, can reach the same but in one point, and a point is de∣fined to be that, which hath no part, would it not be a strange Paradox to say,Eucl. def. 1 Lib. 3. prop. 36. Lib. 10. prop. 117. A Globe can touch a Plain in no part at all? Yet all this leans upon Mathematical De∣monstration. It is easie to observe, that when any dif∣ficulty, or seeming opposition doth occur in Scripture, which common Readers cannot (and even Learned ones not very easily) re∣concile; two sorts of People, the Prophane and Superstitious, take hold of it to very ill purpose; the one apprehends it their Interest
to have no Religion at all, looks upon the Scripture as a State-contrivance to keep the World in Order and Subjection, and hence they assume a lewd Liberty of turning it in∣to Burlesque and Ridicule; the other sort, being for the most part over eagerly devo∣ted to some Party, have a Religion made up of a few Fractions of Truth, neglecting in the mean time the Sum and Substance. These men pursue, to the best advantage of their Sect, that part of Scripture which hath the kindest Aspect upon their espoused No∣tions, and run it off from the main Body of Truth, to that Extream, that it becomes an Errour in Doctrine, and perhaps too a Rent in the Church. For the Body of Truth may not unfitly be resembled to the Body natural, which cannot live in pieces. That there are unchangeable Decrees of God, I do not doubt; but if that Doctrine be so manag'd as to evacuate Men's Endea∣vours, this surely is an unwarrantable Ex∣tream. Justification by Faith i a great truth; but if it be imprudently carried to that height, as to exclude, or make men neglect a good Life, it will become a dangerous Errour. That Christ dy'd for all, is a glo∣rious Truth, as it is laid down in Scripture; but if some stretch that Doctrine to the actu∣al
Salvation of all Men, and others there∣upon put the whole Business of Salvation within Man's power, these doubtless are vitious Extreams, opening a wide passage for Pride or Prophaneness. The one makes Religion altogether vain, and the other makes the Grace of God not worth look∣ing after. So that whilst Men run into such violent Extremities, they seem to tear off some particular Truths from their Uni∣ty with the whole, which from thence for∣ward turn into Corruption, whilst the main Body of Truth is deserted by them, and be∣comes useless. And this is the case not only of the less considering Sectaries, but even of those who pretend highly to Philosophy, and aspire after the Reputation of Wits: One whereof (sufficiently known) hath improv'd three Syllables to that height, as to render a great part of the Scriptures ridiculous, and the noble Army of Martyrs no other than a Company of wilful and superstitious Fools, in needlesly exposing themselves to flames and tortures.2 Kings 5.19. Go in peace, says the Pro∣phet to Naaman; which single case he ad∣vances to a general Dispensation for any Man to quit his Religion, as oft as it shall be
difficult, and dangerous for him to profess it. And this I take to be the Fountain Cause of all the Divisions that are, or have been a∣mong Christians; namely, that Men will not read the whole Scriptures, and give each part its just weight and measure, duly bal∣lancing and comparing one thing with ano∣ther; but each Man according to his Com∣plexion or Education, or perhaps some pre∣dominant Melancholy, lays hold of that part that suits him best, and makes up a Religion for himself, which is little more than the Result of his natural temper. Here I call to mind a passage of a Non-ju∣rant, which I happen'd to be present at. The Man was reputed among his Neighbours an honest plain Man, but somewhat rash, and of no deep consideration, as may appear by the Story. The Discourse fell out to be a∣bout Swearing, and the Person could not forbear to Declaim bitterly against it, be∣cause it is said,Mat. 5.34. Swear not at all. One of the Company urg'd that of the Hebrews, where the Author speaking of God's con∣firmingHebr. 6.13, 16, 17. his Promise made to Abraham, seems to intimate strongly the necessity of swearing in some cases, not vainly, nor in common discourse, but in a solemn manner,
for the avoiding of Contention, and for confirming of some weighty matter. And the Author doth not only alledge it, without any manner of Reproof, as a practice a∣mongst Men, who use to swear by the great∣er, and amongst whom an Oath for confir∣mation is an End of Strife; but he adds fur∣ther, that God himself, the more abundant∣ly to shew the Immutability of his Counsel, doth condescend to that usage, confirming his promise by an Oath. To all which the Person suddenly replied, the Author was a Lyer in that thing: A decision somewhat surprising, and no less than blasphemy; yet had thus much of Ingenuity in it, as to yield the force of the Argument on no easier terms to be avoided. Thus If Men will needs imagine an Incon∣gruity between Prescience and Free-will, and so reject the one, tho' both are equally asserted in Scripture, I cannot see how they can do it otherwise, than by the Non-jurants Argument. But surely Men of Reason and Sedate Temper, will rather argue thus, that since Prescience and Free-will agree in uno tertio, and that no less than the Word of God; they must not only be agreed betwixt themselves, but both true. And therefore if we cannot get them to fadge together in
our Minds, the Reason must not be any mu∣tual jarring of theirs, but want of room in our Understandings. If that Sacred Book were impartially read, and Religiously at∣tended to, no violence put upon it, but all its parts understood, (as they ought to be) in Congruity with the main Bulk and Sub∣stance of the Doctrine therein contained, it would put an End to this and many other Debates. The Magistrates Sword, and the Peoples Conscience, the Prince's Prerogative, and Subjects Liberty; the Divine Attributes, and the Essential Properties of Humane Na∣ture; would all enjoy their full Exercise and Latitude, without invading one another. And this leads to the next thing I am to con∣sider, Namely, The Harmony of Divine Attributes. Where there are intestine Jarrs and strugling Discord, there is no Unity, nor any thing like Perfection; but those Natural Notions we have of the Being of a God, do at the same time, and with equal Evidence, dictate to us his essential Perfection; therefore to talk of an imperfect Deity, is so great a piece of Non-sense, as cannot sufficiently be expos'd; because there is nothing in the World to which it can be reduced, more ab∣surd than it self. Down-right Atheism is in∣deed
a monstrous thing, yet I think 'tis capa∣bable of a better Colour, than having once acknowledg'd an adorable Supreme Being, at the same time conclude him lame, or de∣ficient. He that looks about him into the World, and yet says in his heart,Psal. 14.1. There is no God, is properly a Fool, and that cannot make a rational Inference, and from the things that are made, cannot so much as con∣clude there must be aRom. 1.20. Maker. And when both his Bible and his own Eyes may inform him, that every House is built by some Man, yetHeb. 3.4. (as if the World must build it self) so foolish is he as not to consider, that he that built all things is God. But now, he that thinks God like unto himselfPsal. 50., that is, sub∣ject to Failing and Imperfections, is styled Improbus,16.21. wicked or detestable, which seems to be the heavier charge of the two. And I have heard of some of the Ancients, Plutarch I think it was, speaking to this ef∣fect; I had rather Posterity should say, there never was such a Man, than that Plutarch was an injurious and vile Person. Now this Foundation, which is deep laid both in Scripture and Natural Reason, name∣ly; that God is every way perfect, is enough
to build my whole Design upon: He is per∣fect in Power,Chron. 20.6. He doth what he will both in Heaven and in Earth; perfect in Justice,Gen. 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? perfect in Knowledge,Job 36.4. Declaring the End from the Beginning. HisRom. 12.2. Will is perfect, hisPsal. 18.30. Law is perfect, his2 Sam. 22.31. Work is perfect, all his Ways are Judgment. If the Streams be so clear, the Fountain must needs be pure. But if any Man now will raise a Dispute amongst the Divine Per∣fections (like that of the Disciples) which should be greatest; or should give so much to one, as to leave nothing for another; he would make strange work. Just as if some Man should be said to be a very prudent and just Person in himself, yet when he comes to deal with his Neighbour, his Prudence undermines his Honesty, and so he would become a Knave, or on the contrary, should his Honesty out-go his Discretion, that would (in some degree) render him a Fool. And this tho' a blunt Comparison, seems to be the very case in Debate. We must however be careful to speak with Reverence and Decorum, even in applying the most just Consequences of o∣ther Deut. 32.4.
Mens Doctrine unto the divine Majesty. The Attributes we are concern'd with in this matter are chiefly two; but by conse∣quence great many more; God's Wisdom, and his Goodness; the former implies Know∣ledge, and that includes Prescience; the lat∣ter comprehends Justice, in which Free-will is strongly implyed. In reference to the first, take but away from God his Fore-knowledge of future Events, and you may almost as well dethrone him; for besides that, it doth clearly infer Ignorance and Im∣perfection, whereby his Wisdon and Know∣ledge will come in Question; it carries with it a kind of Impotency, for he that knows not of an Event before it comes, may be surprised and defeated of his Expectation; and how should he have power to have pre∣vented what he knew not of before? Suarez is positive in the place above-mentioned, That had not God a Fore-knowledge of all things, he were not fit to govern the World. And as for the latter, take away from Man his Free-agency, and you bring him under such a fatality, that he is in no sort Master of his own Actions; and then saith the Learn¦ed Dr. Cudworth,Intellectual World. You take away the foun∣dation of distributive Justice: For what E∣quity
can there be in the Reward or Pu∣nishment of those things, wherein Man has no choice, and which could not possibly have fallen out otherwise? So that here is no denying of either, without rejecting one or more of the Divine Attributes, and so rendring the Blessed God a lame and im∣perfect Being; as if he could not be omni∣scient, but he must be Arbitrary; nor just, without being ignorant. Besides, how can God be said to search the Heart,Rom. 8.27. andJer. 11.20. try the Reins, or to what purpose should he do it, unless he knows the bent and tendency of Men's Minds, and what they will do before they act it? And how can he suit his Providences to his bles∣sedRom. 8.28. Ends and Purposes, for the good of his People, if he knows not the Exigencies that shall befall them? On the other hand, if there be no voluntary Agents in the World, what need any Providence at all? General Laws might serve the turn, 'tis but putting the several Parts and Wheels of the Creati∣on together, and set them a moving like a Pendulum, and they will drive on one ano∣ther; and so Epicurus his Doctrine comes in play, that God regards not particular things. What can we expect but confusion and disor∣der,
whilst we invade the Divine Attributes, or labour to set them at odds one with ano∣ther? But now, if we lay aside all Perverseness and Prepossession, the Harmony of the Di∣vine Perfections will be a most pleasant ob∣ject of our Consideration. God doth not impose a Necessity of sinning upon any Man, but he knows some Men will be ready e∣nough to sin, out of choice. He doth not punish or reward in Men what he acteth himself, or what he causeth them to act without the Intervention of their Wills; but if some will be vertuous, and others viti∣ous, when they might be otherwise, God is just in punishing and rewarding, tho' not ignorant in the mean time, who will de∣serve well or ill at his hands. In a word, God doth know, that Man is a Free-Agent, be∣cause he made him so, and doth daily pre∣serve him in that Capacity; he also knows, that some Men will abuse their Freedom in∣spite of all Invitations and Inducements to the contrary, unless he interpose his Sove∣reign Power (as sometimes I conceive he doth) to move them irresistably unto good. From what hath been said, the Argument will lye thus. God is perfect in all his At∣tributes, and harmonious in all his Actings,
