1818 C.20.f.9[312] 99894399 192775
An Excellent BALLAD OF A Noble Marquess and Patient Grissel. To the Tune of, The Bride's Good-morrow, &c. woodcut A Noble Marquess, As he did ride a Hunting, hard by a Forrest side, A Fair and comely Maiden, As she did sit a Spinning, his gentle Eye espy'd: Most-fair and lovely And of comely grace was she, although in simple attire, She sung full sweetly, With pleasant Voice melodiously, which set the Lord's heart on fire. The more he lookt, the more he might, Beauty bred his Heart's delight: And to his Damsel then he went with speed, God speed, qd. he, thou famous. Flower, Fair Mistress of this homely Bower, Where Love and Vertue dwells with sweet content. With comely Gesture And modest mild Behaviour, she bids him welcome then, She entertained him In faithful friendly manner, and all his Gentlemen: The Noble Marquess In his Heart felt such a flame, which set his Senses all at strife, Quoth he, Fair Maiden, Shew me soon what is thy Name, I mean to make thee my Wife. Grissel is my Name, quoth she, Far unfit for your degree, A silly Maiden, and of Parents poor, Nay, Grissel thou art rich, he said, A vertuous fair and comely Maid; Grant me thy love, nd I will ask no more. At length she consented, And being both contented, they married were with speed; Her Country russet Was chang'd to Silk and Velvet, as to her state agreed: And when that she Was timely tried in the same, her Beauty shin'd most bright, Far staining every other Fair and Princely Dame, that did appear in sight: Many envied her therefore, Because she was of Parents poor, And 'twixt her Lord and she great strife did raise: Some said this, and some said that, And some did call her Begger's Brat, And to her Lord they would her of't dispraise. O Noble Marquess. Quoth they, why dst thou wrong us, thus basely for to wed, Who might have gotten An honourable Lady into your Princely Bed? Who will not now Your noble Issue soon deride, which shall hereafter be born, That are of Blood so base Born by the Mother's side? the which shall bring them in score Put her therefore quite away, And take to you a Lady gay, Whereby your Lineage may renowned be. Thus every day they seem'd to prate, That malic'd Grissel's good Estate; Who all this while took it most patiently.
