10321.5 22915401 25876
ARTICLES TO BE Enquired of within the Diocesse of Rochester in the first Triennall Visitation of the right-Reverend Father in GOD, John, Lord Bishop of Rochester. Holden in the yeere of our Lord God 1638. in the fourteenth yeere of the Reigne of our most gratious Soveraigne Lord CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Brttaine, France and Ireland, Defen∣der of the Faith, &c. ⁂ LONDON. Printed by Richard Hdgeki 1638▪
The tenour of the Oath ministred to the Church-wardens and Sworn-men. YOƲ shall sweare, that all affection, favor, hatred hope of reward a¦gaine, or feare of displeasure, or malice, set aside; you shall upon  consideration of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every si person, of, or within your Parish as hath committed any offence, or ma any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles, or any part branch of them, or which are vehemently suspected, or otherwise defamed any such offence, or fault; wherein you shall deale uprightly, and according truth; neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of corrupt a¦fection sparing to present any, and so conceale the truth; having in this actio God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to cherish virtue, and to suppres vice: So helpe you GOD, and the Contents of this Booke. The charge of the Church-wardens and Sworn-men, set down for the better performance of their duties, and discharge of their Oathes. THey are straightly charged to heare all these Articles read over to the and diligently to enquire thereof; and for that the time is so short in th Visitation that they shall not be able to make a perfect answer unto them all: And that notwithstanding there are many notorious faults presently worthy of pre¦sentment and reformation, they are charged after their returne home, that, to¦gether with their Minister, if he will joyn with them, they do read over all thes Articles, destinctly and lesrly, to the end they may consider of every particu∣lar Article or the offences in them contained, and of such persons in the parish as shall be noted to offend in any of them, and after that to assemble them¦selves in some convenient time together and to make their Bill answering ever Article by it selfe; Which their Presentment or Answer, they shall cause to delivered at the Register his Office before the  day of May next, or else for not delivering in thereof the Church-wardens and Sworn-m are admonished to appeare that day at ten of the clock in the Consistory at R¦chester, to alleage cause why they should not be punished for their negligence contempt therein.
Articles to be enquired of within the Diocesse  Rochester, in the first Triennall-Visitation of the right reuerend Father in God JOHN, Bishop of Rochester, holden in the yeere of our Lord GOD 1638. Articles concerning the Church. WHether have you in your parish-Churches and Chap all things necessarie and requisite for common-Pr and administration of the Sacraments, especially  booke of common Prayer, with the new Kalender,  Homilies both first and second Tome, a decent Sur a Table shewing what degrées of Consanguinty and ¦finity are forbiden in Marriage, set forth by authorit  the yéere of our Lord God 1563. a faire paper book, wherein every Preac (which is a stranger and not Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or ordinary preac there) shall write his name, the day he preacheth and by whose authority is Licensed; the table of the ten Commandements; a convenient P well placed? A comely and decent Table, for the holy Communion, wi faire linnen cloath and some covering of Silke, or comely Carpet to lay on the same; a faire and comely Communion-Cup of silver, and a cover of ¦ver for the same, which may serve also for the ministration of Communi bread; a comely pot to fetch Wine to serve the Lords Table, reserved & k cleane to that use only, and a strong Chest or Box for the almes of the po with thrée locks and keyes to the same, and all other things necessary in  to the premisses? 2 Whether are the afternoone Sermons in your severall Parishes ¦ned into Catechising by question and answer; according to the forme ¦scribed in the booke of common Prayer; and whether doth every Lectu read divine Service according to the Liturgy printed by authority in Surplice and hood before the Lecture? and whether are his Majesties ¦structions in all things fully observed? 3 Whether any hath pulled down or uncovered your Church, Chan or Chappell, or any part of them, or hath pulled down the Bels? whethe your Church or Chappell and the Chancell, well and sufficiently repaire whether doth your Parson, Vicar, or Curate of your Parsonage or Vicar in your parish, kéep the Parsonage or Vicarage-house (with all other the¦es
thereunto apperteining) in good and sufficient reparations? And whe∣ is your Church-yard well fenced and cleanly kept, without any lastall  ther annoyances? Whether your Fonts or Baptisteries be removed from the place where  were wont to stand? or whether any Parsons (leaving the use of them) Christen in Basons, or other vessels, or have taken down the old usuall at, heretofore used in your parish? and whether you have decent Fonts  coverings for them? Whether is therin your parish a sufficient Register book of parchment Christnings Mariages and Burials, provided at the charge of the parish? ther are all the names of those that have béen either Christened, Maried, Buried since the begining of her late Majesties reigne, newly written into said parchment booke? whether doth the Minister every Sunday read the nes publiquely, of those that were either Christened, Married or Buries wéek before? whether have you a publique Chest with thrée locks, for the nister and the two Church-wardens to kéep the said book in, and whether e you brought a Transcript of all the names of such as have béen Christe∣, Married, and Buried this last yéere, into the Registers office, as you are nd to do every yéere hereafter (within a moneth after the feast of Easter) he Constitutions? 6 Is your Church or Chappell decently paved and is your Church-yard ll and orderly kept without abuse? are the bones of the dead decently in∣red, or layd up in some place fit, as beséemeth Christians; and is the ole consecrated ground kept frée from Swine and all other nastines as be∣nes the place so dedicated. 7 Whether your Communion Table be decently rayled in whereby the mmunicant and may receive the holy Sacrament knéeling in an humble man have you a carpet of silke or some other decent stuffe and a faire linnen th to lay thereon at the Communion time, and is the same table ei∣r out of the time of divine Service, or in it abused by sitting, writing, wing Hatts on it; or any other wayes prophaned. Whether have any Monuments or Glasse windowes béen defaced or se inscriptions, lead, stones or any thing else belonging to your Church, Chapell béene at any time purloyned and by whom? Whether have you the Terrier of all the Gleab-lands, meadowes, gar∣s, orchards, houses, stocke, implements, tenements and portions of tithes ther within your Parish or without, belonging to your Parsonage or Vi∣g taken by the view of honest men in your said parish? & whether the same rrier be laid up in the Registry of the Bishop and in whose hands any of n now are? and if you have already no Terrier made in Parchment the Church-wardens and Side-men together with the Parson or Vicar
or in his absence with your Minister are to make deligent inquire, and sentment of the premises, and make, subscribe, and signe the said Terrie aforesaid? Concerning the Clergy. Whether is the whole Service or Common-prayer read in your Chu or Chappell, distinctly and reverently, upon all Sundayes and H¦dayes in such order as is set down in the booke of common Prayer, with any kinde of alteration or omission, and at due and convenient houres? 2 Whether have you any Lecturer in your parish who will not prof his willingnes to take upon him a Living or Benefice with Cure of so or who hath refused a Benefice when it hath béene offered unto him. 3 Hath your Minister or any other Preacher baptized children churc any woman, or ministred the holy Communion in any privat house otherw then by Law is alowed? 4 Doth your Minister endeavour and labour diligently to reclaime  popish Recusants in his Parish from their errours if there be any such a¦ding in your parish? or whether is your Parson, Vicar or Curate over-c¦versant with, or avourer of Recusants whereby he is suspected not to sincere in Religion. 5 Hath your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publike or priv fasts prophecies or exercises not approved by Law or publike authority or ha used to méet in any privat house or place with any person or persons, the to consult how to impeach or deprave the booke of common Prayer, or the d¦ctrine, or discipline of the Church of England. 6 Whether doth your Minister upon Wednesdaies and Fridaies (not b∣ing holy dayes) read in your Church or Chappell the Letany and other Pra¦ers appointed in the said booke for those dayes? And whether doth he som¦time reade the Commination against Sinners, in such order and forme  is there prescribed 7 Whether doth your Parson, Vicar or Curat, in the administration the Lords Supper, of Baptisme, in the solemnization of Marriage Buriall the dead, churching of Women, &c. use the formes prayers and ceremoni prescribed in the Communion book; as namely, whether doth he adminis the Communinon to none but such as do knéele at the receiving thereof; ma the signe of the Crosse upon the Childes fore-head, in the administration  Baptisme; baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers; use the Ri in Mariage; and generally, whether doth he in the dischargeing of all the duties (and when he readeth common-Prayer upon Sundayes & Holy-daie weare a Surplice?
8 Whether doth your Minister or Curate refuse to baptize Children pri∣ly that are in danger of death, if they be thereunto required; and have any ldren died without Baptisme by their default, or do they refuse to ad∣nister the holy Communion to those that lie on their death-beds and desire  same? 9 Whether doth your Minister or Curat, in their Sermons or otherwise ny other, speake against the necessitie or benefit of the Sacraments, If y may conveniently be had? 10 Whether doth your Minister upon Sundayes at Morning prayer; de∣re unto the Parishioners what Holy-dayes & Fasting-dayes are appointed e kept the wéek following, according to the Lawes of this Realme? 11 Whether doth your Minister in the Rogation wéek use the perambula∣n of the circuit of your Parish, appointed by the Law? 12. Whether doth any man, being neither Minister nor Deacon, reade mmon-Prayer openly in your Church or Chappell, or administer the Sacra∣nts or solemnize Matrimonie, or take upon him to practise any other mini∣riall duty in the Church, which is prescribed to be executed particularly by h as are either Ministers or Deacons, and what is his name that so doth? 13 Whether is your Parson Vicar or Curat a Preacher, licensed to preach  lawfull authority? if he be, how many Sermons doth he preach yéerly? if  be not, how many doth he procure to be preached by others? who hath ached them? and whether were they Preachers licensed, as is before e¦ssed? 14 Whether doth your Parson Vicar or Curat, every Sunday and Holy-y (when there is no Sermon) reade, distinctly and plainly, some part of the omilies prescribed and set forth by authority? 15 Whether doth the Parson or Vicar or your Parish, cause or suffer any rat or minister, either to read Service, &c. or to preach, before he the  Curate, be examined and admitted by the Ordinary in writing, and before  the said Curate be thereunto admitted according to law? 16 Whether doth your Preacher in his prayer which he maketh at his rmon, use to pray for his Maiesty, with his whol Title, for our gracious éene, the Prince, and whether doth he in like manner, then pray for the h-Bishops and Bishops, as by Law is also appointed? 17 Whether doth your Minister serve two Cures in one day? 18 Whether your Minister or any other having taking holy orders, hold  conventicles or doth preach in any place, or doth use any other forme of ne Service then is appointed in the booke of common Prayer? 19 Doth your Minister Curat or Lecturer in his or their Sermons de∣r such Doctrine as may tend to obedience and edifying their audito∣  faith and religion without intermedling with matters of state not fit
to be handled in the Pulpit but to be discussed by the wisdome of his Mo and his Councell, and if you finde any herein faulty yée shall present th 20 Whether doth your Parson Vicar or Curat, every Sunday and l day, openly in the Church earnestly call for, heare and instruct all the chil apprentices and servant, of both seres, that be of convenient age within  parish, or at the least so many of them by course as the time will serve, a be may well heare and instruct before Evening Prayer, in the ten Com¦dements, the Articles of the Beliefe, and the Lord Prayer, & diligently  mine, and teach them the Catechisme, as if is now alowed and set forth, i book of common Prayer? 21 Whether is ther any man in your Parish, being neither your Pa Vicar, nor Curat, that taketh upon him to Preach or reade Lectures,  is not licensed thereunto, or who doth not once a yéere (at the least) reade whole Service as it is prescribed in the book of common-Prayer, and ad¦nister both the Sacraments in your said Church or Chappell where h preacheth or readeth, according to the booke of common-Prayer? 22 Whether your Minister hath or doth receive to the holy-Commun any persons that be not of his own parish, and whether they be Sectuarie otherwise infamous, or stained in Religion? 23 Whether doth your Parson, Vicar or Curate, reject any from the h Communion, and for what causes? 24 Whether hath your Parson, Vicar or Curat, or any other Minister party whatsoever, publiquely or privatly preached, or spoken any thing in¦rogation of the booke of common-Prayer, by dispraysing or depraving  same, or any thing therein conteined, or against the present estate of the Ec¦siasticall government established by authority, or against any office, funct or part thereof, affirming the same to be unlawfull, popish, or antichristian 25 Whether hath your Parson or Vicar more benefices then one? I hath not, whether is he resident upon that one? If he be not resident, wh doth he remaine? And whether doth he leave a sufficient Minister and Pr¦cher to supply his abbsence, allowing something yéerly towards the relief the poore? And what doth he so allow, 26 Whether is your Parson or Vicar, who hath two benefices within  Dioces, or one Benefice in this Dioces, and another forth of the same, resid one halfe of the yéere on one of them, and the other halfe yéere, or the grea part thereof upon his other Benefice? And whether doth he leave the Be¦fice in your parish provided of a sufficient Preacher to serve it, and hath a speciall care of some convenient hospitaility to be kept in his absence, ac¦ding to his ability and the proportion of his living? 27 Whether doth your Parson Vicar or Curat, use such decent and co
Whether doth your Parson Vicar or Curat, kéepe any man or woman eir houses, who are suspected to be, either of evill Religion, or of bad  whether be they or any of them negligent persons themselves, or given ankennesse, or to be hunters of Taverns, Ale-houses, or suspected places mon Dicers Swearers, or other wise suspected persons of any notorious e, or light and unséemly behaviour, or give evill example of life? Ecclesiasticall Magistrates and Officers WHether hath any person within your Parish, promised or paid any summe of money or other reward, directly or indirectly by him∣selfe or any other, to any Iudge or Officer of the Ecclesiasticall Court, for avoyding punishment for any Incest, Adultry, Forni∣n, or any other Ecclesiasticall Crime; if so, then with whom, when or hat summe? Item, hath any Chancellor, Arch-Deacon, Officiall or any other exerci∣ Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction within the Dioces; or any Register Appari∣or Minister belonging to the same Ecclesiasticall Court, exacted extraor∣rily, or taken greater Fées then heretofore of late hath béen accustomed?  whether is there a Table of the Rates of al the Fées set up in their seve∣ Courts or Offices; And whether they or any of them, have taken upon  the Office of Informers or Promoters to the Courts, or any other way ed themselves in their Office, contrary unto the Law and Canons in  case provided? Hath any person within your Parish paied or promised any summe of ey or other reward for commutation of penance for any crime of Eccle∣call cognisance? if so then by whom, when and for what and how hath ame béene imployed? Have any Ecclesiasticall Iudges, or their substitutes heard any matters  ffice or correction privatly in their Chambers without their sworne Re∣rs or their deputies presence? Have these other Recusants or any belonging to the Ecclesiasticall rt exacted extraordinary or greater fées then heretofore hath béen accu∣ed, in what manner; whether is a table of the rate of fées set up in their rall Courts and Offices, or whether they or any of them have any way d themselves in their Offices contrary to the Law and Canons in that  provided? whether have they threatned any to present them in the said rt if they would not give them some rewards: and what in thiz or the like e have they taken?
and in what manner is the country overburdened and grieved by the  Apparitors? Physitions and Chyrurgions and Mid-wives HOw many Physitians, Chirurgions and Mid-wives have you in  Parish? how long have they used their severall Sciences or Off and by what authority? and how have they demeaned themselves; the  and of what skill are they accounted to be in their professions? Articles concerning Schoolemasters. WHether every Schoolemaster within your parish in any Nobl Gentlemans house, or in any other place, be of good and sin Religion, Life and Conversation, and be diligent in teaching  bringing up of youth; and whether they have béene examin allowed and licensed  Schoolemastrs, by the Ordinary in that behalf? 2 Whether your Schoolemaster or Schoolmasters, do themselves rece the holy Communion as often as they ought to do, and whether do all th Schollers which be of age sufficient, and of capacity, by instructions com the Communion, either in your own Church, or else where their Pare dwell, once every yéere, and be diligent to heare common Prayer? 3 Whether the Schoolemaster or Schoolemasters, either privat or publi do teach their Schollers the Catechisme authorized by publique Authority  the least once every wéeke, and do instruct and examine them in the same  do teach any other Catechisme? & what Catechisme is that they so do teach▪ 4 Whether your Schoolemaster or Schoolemasters, or any of them  known or suspected to read unto their Schollers privatly, any unlawfull bo or privatly to instruct them in their yong yéeres, either in popery, superstio or disobedience, or contempt to his Majesty and his Lawes Ecclesiasticall publique authority allowed? 5 Doth any teach or kéepe Schoole in the Chancell or Church by w meanes that holy place or the Communion Table may be prophaned, and  windowes broken? Articles concerning the Parishioners, and others of the Laitie. WHether all housholders in your parish, cause their Children, Serv and Apprentices, both mankinde and womankinde, being abo yéeres of age, and under 21 which have not so learned the Cachisme, to e∣
he Church on Sundayes and Holy-dayes at the time appointed for techising, and there diligently and obediently to heare? and what be the nes of those that do not cause their children, servants and apprentices  come to the Church to be examined? Whether there be any in your parish, who will come to heare the Sermon  will not come to publicke to prayers appointed by the booke of common∣ yer making a Schisme or division (as it were) betwéene the use of pub∣ Prayer and Preaching? 3 Whether any not being in holy Orders do execute any priestly or mini∣iall office in your Church Chappell, or Church-yard and what be their es 4 Have any libelled or spoken slanderous words against your minister to  scandall of his vocation? 5 Whether the fift day of November be kept holy and thanksgiving me  God for his Majesties and this States happy deliverance according to the dinance in that behalfe? 6 Whether any in your parish have Married within the degrées by Law pro¦ited, and where and by whom? and whether any couple in you▪ Parish he∣ lawfully married, live apart one from the other without due separation the Law or any that have béene divorced which kéep company with any er at bed or at boord? 7 Whether any withhold the stock of the Church or any goods or any other ngs given to good and charitable uses. 8 Whether there be any person or persons Ecclesiasticall or Temporall thin your parish, or elsewhere within this Diocesse, that have reteined and t in their custody, or that read, sel, utter, dispearce, earry or diliver to o∣rs, any English books or Libels set forth either on this side, or beyond the as, by Papists or Sectaries against the Kings Supremacy, in causes Ec∣siasticall, or against true Religion and Catholique Doctrine now publique∣ professed in this Church, or the government or discipline of the Church of gland, now within this Realme received and established by common autho∣, and what their names and sirnames are? 9 Whether there be in your parish any popish or sectary Recusant or Re¦ants, which for any cause whatsoever, forbeare to come to Church or com∣n Prayer, and what their severall name or names are, and how long they e béen Recusants? 10 Whether doth any refuse to receive the holy Communion at their own nisters hands, either because he is not a Preacher, or because he duely ob∣eth the order of administration appointed by the book of common Prayer,  who they be that do go from their own Parish, to receive at any other Mi∣  Parish upon the day which the
have received the blessed Sacrament, use or resort to Ale-houses, or o places or actions unfit? 11 Whether any of your parishioners do absent themselves from their  Church, and resort to any other place to heare other Preachers, and for  cause? 12 Whether all the people of your parish above 16 yéeres of age, and e¦cially houshoulders, having no lawfull excuse to be absent, do resort with  servants and children to their parish Church or Chappell on the Sundaies  Holydaies to Morning and Evening-Prayer, & who they be, that either ¦ligently or wilfully absent themselves, or do unreverently behave themsel in the Church as men at the time of Prayers, Sermon, and administra of the Sacraments to sit bare? 13 Whether there de any In-kéepers, Ale-wives, Victuallers, or Tipl that suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses, to eate dr or play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowles or such like games, in the tim  common-Prayer or Sermon, on the Sundaies and Holy-dayes; or any ¦chers or other that commonly use to sell meate or other things in the time  common-Prayer, Preaching, or reading of Homilies: and whether in  Faires or common Markets, falling upon the Sundayes, there be shew of any wares: and whether any Markets and selling of wares be used or su¦red in any Church-yeard on the Sunday? 14 Whether the Churchwardens and Sworn-men have concealed  crime or other disorder in their time done in your parish, and have not ¦sented the same to the Bishops, Chancellor, Arch-Deacon, Commissary, or s others that had authority to reforme the same; and whether they or any  them, at any such time as they should have béene at divine Service on S¦dayes and Holydaies, and should there have observed others that were sent, have béen a way themselves? 15 Whether there be any in your Parish, that have not fulfilled th Testators last Will, in paying of Legacies given to the Church, or to of good and godly uses; as to the reliefe of poverty or Orphants, poore Schol poore maidens marriages, high wayes and such like, and by whom they a denyed? 16 Whether there be among you any Blasphemers of the name of G▪ great or often Swearers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Harlots or Whormast▪ Incestuous persons, Bawdes, or receivers of naughty and incontinent sons or harborers of women with childe which be unmarried, conveyin  suffering them to go away before they do any penance; or any that are vi¦montly suspected of any such fault? 17 Whether the Minister and Churchwardens have suffered any Fe
mmer Lord or Ladie or any disguised persons, & players of May-games ay Morrisdancers, at any time to come irreverently into the Church or rch-yeard, and there to dance or play, or shew themselves disguised, and t they be that commit such disorder, or that accompanied or maintained n, or any Playes disorders or prophanations to be commited in the rch? 18 Whether therebe any married women, or others within your parish th after child-birth refuse, to come to the Church in decent sort to give God ks for their delivery, and to heare the Prayers publikely appointed in  behalfe by the book of common-Prayer? 19 Whether any within your parish do resort unto Barns, Fields, Woods, at houses or any other place, for exposition of Scriptures or conferences ether, or that be drawers or perswaders of others to any such schismaticall venticles? 20 Whether any do kéepe their childeren unbaptized longer then is con∣ient, and whether any do carry their children from the Parish they are ne in, to other parishes to be baptized, and to refuse their own parish, or ring strange Ministers into their own houses to baptize their children atly acording to their own fantasies? Concerning Church-wardens and Sidemen. WHether the Church-wardens and Sidemen do, & have done their best endevors to restrein idle persons from wandring, playing, or tipling the time of divine Service or Sermon, and whether they cause the inha∣ants and other in the parish as much as in them is to resort to divine Ser∣e and Sermon. 2 Whether the Church-wardens do present all those who do not send ir Children and Servants to be Catechised. 3 What unmarried woman being gotten with child is gone out of your ish before they might be presented to the Ordinarie or might have done ir penance and out of whose houses have they so departed. 4 Whether and how often have yée suffered any to Preach within your urch or Chappell who was not sufficiently licenced thereunto▪ and whe∣ you take not the best care that every parishioner having passed the  ces of age receive the holy Communion thrice every yeere and that no nger usually come to your Church from their own Parish. 5 Have you at every Communion in your Church or Chappell good pro∣on of Bread and Wine, and those decently brought preserved and pre∣ed.
6 Are there any Legacies with-holden which were given to the Ch in whose hands are these by whom, were they given, and by whom are  with-held? and are the Almes of the Church faithfully distributed to the¦of the poore. 7 Doe yée know of any thing complained of that hath not béene redres Parish Clark and Sexton. HAve you a fit Parish Clark of honest conversation able to read sing  write? are his and the Sextons wages duly payed unto them accord to the antient custome of the Parish; by whom are they chosen: and be t approved of by the Ordinary, be they diligent in their Office and Serv¦able to the Minister and do either of them take upon them to medle with  thing above his Office as churching women buring the dead or the like? Doth your Clark or Sexton kéep the Church cleane and the dores lock at fit times? is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church through his defar are the Communion Table, Font, Books, and other Ornaments of  Church kept faire and cleane? AT the delivery of your Bill of Presentment, you are likewise to set down, Recusants, Men   Recusants, Women   Non-Communicants of both sexes   Communicants of both sexes in the whole Parish   To which the Minister, Churchwardens, and Side-men, must put their han FINIS
