10660 99856552 22122
Fabyans cronycle newly prynted / wyth the cronycle, actes, and dedes done in the tyme of the reygne of the moste excellent prynce kynge Henry the vii. father vnto our most drad soue∣rayne lord kynge Henry the .viii. To whom be all honour, reuerēce, and ioyfull contynaunce of his prosperous reygne, to the pleasure of god and weale of this his realme AMEN. ¶Prentyd at London By wyllyam Rastell. 1533. ❧CVM PRIVILEGIO.
MVSEVM BRITANNICVM British Museum blazon or coat of arms
The table of the fyrste volume of Fabyanes cronycle. ALbyon / and why thys ile of olde tyme so was called, it apereth in the fourth lefe the fyrst chapytre. Brute the sonne of Siluius / and of hys orygynall and fyrste cōmyng into thys lande. ca. ii. folio. iiii. Brute of hys fyrst landynge. ca. iii. fo. v. Thys Brute the son̄ of Siluius Posthumus, descended of the noble blode of Troyans, entred fyrst ye ile of Albion which he after named Bry¦tayne and now is called England, in the yere of the worlde. iiii. thousande lxiii / and before the incarnacyon of Chryst, as in the begynnyng of this worke is more openly shewed / & reyg¦ned yeres .xxiiii. Troynuaunt or London of thys kynge was fyrst foū¦ded. ca. iiii. fo. v. Locrinus or Locryne, the eldeste sonne of Brute / beganne hys reygne ouer Brytayne in the countrye called Leogria or Logiers, that after was named myddell Englande, in ye yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .lxxxvii. and reygned yeres .xx. capi. v. folio. vi. Gwendoloena or Gwendoleyn, ye wyfe of Locryne, began to reygne as quene ouer the Brytons or countrey of Logiers, in the yere of the worlde iiii. thousande .C.vii. and reygned ye¦res. xv. ca. vi. fo. vi. Madan the sonne of Locrine and of the sayd Gwendolyne, began hys reygne ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .C. and xxii / and reygned after the agrement of many wryters and moste yeres .xl. ca. vii. fo. vi. In the seconde yere of thys kyng reygne ended the thyrde age of the world, And Dauyd began to reygne ouer Israell. Menpricus or Mempricius the sonne of Madan, beganne hys rule ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the world .iiii.M.C.lxii / & the yere before Chrystes incarnacyon. and reygned yeres. xx. ca. viii. folio. vi. Ebrancus or Ebrank the sonn̄ of Mempryce, begā to rule the Brytōs in the yere of the worlde .iiii.M.C.lxxxii. & reygned yeres .xii. Thys kyng made the citie of yorke, ye town of Acryncte, & the castelles of Dun∣barre & Eddynbourgh in Scotland ca. ix. fo. vii. Brute vixii scutum or Brute Gre¦neshelde, sonne of Ebranke, was made ruler of the Brytons, in ye yere of the worlde .iiii.M.ii.C.xlii / & reyg¦ned yeres .xii. ca. x. fo. vii. Leylus or Leyr the sonne of the forenamed Brute, beganne hys rule ouer Brytayn, in the yere of ye world iiii.M.ii.C.liiii. and ruled yeres .xxv Thys kynge founded the towne of Carleyll. ca. xi. fo. vii. Lud Hurdibras or Rudibras the sonn̄ of Leyl, begā hys dominiō ouer ye Brytōs, in the yere of ye worlde. iiii.M.ii.C.lxxix. & ruled yeres .xxxix. This kyng made wynchester, Caun¦terbury, & Septō now named Shaf¦tysbury. ca. xii. fo. vii.
Baldud the sonne of Lud, began hys domynyon ouer the Brytaynes, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousād iii.C.xviii / and reygned yeres .xx. Thys kynge founded the towne of Bathe / and the bathes wythin the same after some wryters. ca. xiii. folio. vii. Leyr or Leyer the sonne of Bal∣dud was made ruler ouer the Bry∣tons, in the yere of the worlde .iiii.M iii.C. and .xxxviii / and ruled yeres .lx. Thys kynge made the towne of Ley¦cestre. ca. xiiii. fo. vii. Cordeilla the yongeste doughter of the forenamed Leyer, beganne to rule the Brytons, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .iii.C.xcviii. & ruled yeres .v. ca. xvi. folio. viii. Cunedagius with Marganus his neuewes, sonnes of the two sisters of Cordeilla, beganne theyr dominyon ouer Brytayne, in the yere of ye world iiii. thousande .iiii. hundreth and .iii. & cōtynued yeres .ii. ca. xvii. fo. viii. This Cunedagius forenamed, af¦ter that he in batayll hadde slayne Marganus, beganne hys senyoury ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the worlde .iiii.M.iiii.C.v. and ruled after moste wryters yeres .xxxiii. ca. xviii. fo. ix. Reynaldus or Rilalnus the sonn̄ of Cunedagius, beganne to rule the Brytons, in the yere of the world .iiii. thousande .iiii.C. and .xxxviii. & reyg¦ned yeres .xlv. The .xxxii. yere of this kyng was Rome bylded, of the twoo bretherne Remus and Romulus / whyche was the yere of the worlde ca. xix. fo. ix. Gurgustius Gurgusto or Gorbo∣dian, the sonne of Riuallus, was made ruler of the Brytons, in ye yere of the worlde .iiii.M.iiii.C.lxxxiii. and ruled yeres .xxxviii. ca. xx. fo. ix. Sicillius or Siluius the brother or sonne of Gurgustus, began hys domynyon ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the world .iiii. thousand .v.C. and .xxi. and ruled yeres .xlix. ca. xxi. folio. ix. Iago or Lago the neuewe of Gur¦gustius, was made ruler of Brytayn in ye yere of the world .iiii. thousande v. hundreth .lxx. & reygned yeres .xxv. ca. xxii. fo. ix. Kinimacus the brother of Iago, and after some wryters the sonne of Siluius / began his seygnyorye ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the world iiii. thousand .v.C.xcv. & ruled yeres .liiii. In the .xiiii. yere of thys kynge ended the .iiii. age / & the Iewes were captyued by the Babylons. Also Iso¦pus or Isoppe the feyner of fables, in the latter days of thys Kinimacus in the countre of Grece, florysshed & fayned hys fables. ca. xxiii. fo. ix. Gorbodug whome Geffrey of Mōmouth nameth Grobodugo, son̄ vnto Kinimacus, began hys domy∣nion ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the world .iiii. thousande .vi.C.xlix. & ruled yeres .lxii. Aboute the .xxvi. yere of this kynges reygne was Ho∣liferne slayne of Iudyth the wydow in the chamber of Papiliō. As hath Iacobus Philippus. ca. xxiiii. fo. ix. Ferrex with hys brother Porrex, sonnes of Gorbodug, begā iointly to rule ye Brytōs, in ye yere after Adam iiii.M.vii.C. & .xi. & ruled yeres .v. Here endeth the lyne or ofspryng of Brute. ca. xxv. fo. x.
The storys agre, that after ye deth of the forsayd bretherne / the Brytōs, because there remayned no heyre of them, were in great dyscorde a longe season, & were subdued vnder diuers kynges. But bycause ye foresayd auc¦tours do nat certyfye ye terme of this dyscorde, and also do wryte dyuersly of the reygnes of the forsayd kynges so that some do assyne very few or no certayn yeres, and some other many yeres, so that in thaccomptyng of the yeres and of tymes there appereth a great alteracyō. Therfore it is to be noted, as affermeth Ranulph monke of Chester, Guydo, Galfryde and o∣ther / that Cunedagius onely began to reygne in the yere of the world .iiii tyousande .iiii. hundreth and .v. And he reygned .xxxiii. yeres. whyche ma∣keth the yere of the worlde .iiii.M.iiii.C. and .xxxviii. And furthermore the foresayde authours wyth other afferme, that the .ii. bretherne Beli∣nus and Brennus, dyd enter Italy wyth a great noumber of men, in the xi. yere of Artaxarses the .xi. kynge, of Perse. whyche was the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousand .viii.C. and .xv. and the .viii. yere of the reygne of the forsayd bretherne, as sayeth Marty∣nus super Cronicas. whereby it playnly appereth, that from the laste yere of Cunedage, vntyll the eyghte yere of the foresayd bretherne, there passed .iii.C.lxxvii. yeres And further¦more all wryters afferme, that ye sayd Belinus and Brennus dyd succede theyr father Dumuallo / and that the sayde Dumuallo reygned .xl. yeres. The fyrst yere of whose reygne was the yere of the worlde .iiii.M.vii.C.xlviii. So that from the laste yere of Cunedage, vntyl the fyrst yere of the sayd Dunuallo, there passed .iii.C.xxix. yeres. Of the whych yeres, there passed from the fyrst yere of Riuallus or Renaldus vntyll the laste yere of Porrex .ii. hūdreth .lxxviii. yeres. By whyche accompte it appereth, that the Brytōs, after the deth of the fore sayd bretherne, were in dyscord by the space of .li. yeres. And so the laste yere of the foresayde dyscorde was the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande vii. hundreth .lxvii. ¶Thus endeth the fyrst parte of thys worke that con∣teyneht .viii. hun∣dreth & .iiii. yeres. MUlumtius dūuallo, yt whiche of some wrytters is named Donobant, and sonn̄ of Cloton duke or kynge of Cornewall, was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .vii. hundreth lxviii. and reygned yeres .xi. Thys was the fyrste that bare crowne in Brytayne. Thys also founded the towne of Malmesbury and of Uyes. Thys also began the .iiii. pryncipall hye wayes. ca. xxviii. fo. x. Belinus and Brennus the twoo sonnes of the forenamed Dunuallo, beganne to reygne ioyntly ouer Bry¦tayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande, eyght hūdreth, and .viii. and ruled yeres ioyntly, and Bely∣nus alone .xxvi. Thys Belinus made the towne of Carleyll. Also in London he caused to be made the hauen of Byllyngysgate / and ended the .iiii. wayes begonne of hys fader. Thys also made a tēple in Londō, & named it the Temple of Concorde / whyche after some wryters opynyōs shulde be the Temple barre, now the parysshe churche of the temple as ap¦pereth. ca. xxix. cum folio. xi.
In the tyme in whyche these two bretherne reygned, auctours som∣what dyscorde. For Policronicon sayeth that Belinus wyth Brennus dyd inuade Italy and besege Rome in the .CC.i. yere after the trāsmigra¦gracion of Italy. And also that the same tyme Furius Camillus was dyctatour of Rome. wherby it appe∣reth that Rome was spoyled of them about the yere of the worlde .iiii.M.viii.C. and .x. But Iacobus Phylyp¦pus wyth other sayth that ye forsayd Furius Camillus was dictatour of Rome about the yere of our lord .iiii.M.viii. hundreth .lvi. whereby there appereth a dyfference of .xlvi. yeres. But Radulphus monk of the order of Cystercieū erreth very farre, that affermeth in hys cronycle that ye said bretherne began to reyne ouer Bry∣tayn in the yere of ye world .iiii.M.v.C. and .iiii. whych dyffereth frome o∣ther aboue .ii. hundreth and .l. yere. And where it is noted of some, that ye sayde Belynus reyned .x. yeres / that is supposed for the tymes of hys reyn after hys retorne from Italy. The victory of the sayd bretherne is shewed in the story folowyng. Gurguintus or Gurguyn the son̄ of Belyn, was made kynge of Bry∣tayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .viii.C. and .xxxiiii. & reyg∣ned .xix. yeres. ca. xxxii. fo. xiii. Guithelinus or Guitellius cal∣led in the Englysshe cronycle Guen∣tolyn̄, the sonne of Gurguintus, was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .viii.C. and .liii. and reygned yeres .xxvi. Alexander the great began to reygne aboute the .xxi. yere of thys kynge. ca. xxxiii. fo. xiiii. Sisillius or Cecilius the sonn̄ of Guithelinus, began his reygne ouer the Britons, in the yere of the world iiii. thousande .viii.C.lxxix. and reyg¦ned yeres .vii. ca. xxxiiii. fo. xiiii. Kymerus or Kymere the sonn̄ of Sisillius, begā hys rule ouer ye Bry¦tons, in the yere of the world .iiii.M.viii.C.lxxxvi. and ruled yeres .iii. ca. xxxv. fo. xiiii. Elanius the sonne or brother of Kymerus, beganne hys reygne ouer Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde iiii. thousande .viii. hundreth .lxxxix. & reygned yeres .ix. ca. xxxvi. folio. xiiii. Morindus or Marwyth the ba∣starde sonne of Elanius was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .viii. hundreth xci. and reygned yeres .viii. ca. xxxvii. fo. xiiii. Gorbomannus or after the En∣glysshe cronycle Granbodyan sonne vnto Morindus, was ordeyned king of Brytayne, in the yere of the world iiii. thousand .viii.C.xcviii. and reyg¦ned yeres .xi. ca. xxxviii. fo. xv Archigallo the second sonne of Morindus, beganne hys domynyon ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .ix.C.x. & reyg∣ned yeres .v. ca. xxix. fo. xv. Elidurus the .iii. sonne of Mo∣rindus, began hys domynyon ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the world iiii. thousande .ix.C.xv. and ruled ye∣res .v. ca. xl. fo. xv. Archigallo beforenamed, was by the compassyō of hys brother agayn restored to hys former dygnyte, in ye yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .ix.
hundreth .xx. and reyngned after ye∣res .x. ca. xli. fo. xv. Elidurus beforenamed, was a∣gayne of the Brytons made kynge, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousād ix. hundreth .xxx. and reygned yeres ii. ca. xlii. fo. xv. Uigenius or Migenius wyth Pe¦ridurus hys brother, whyche in the Englyshe cronycle are named Hyga∣mus and Petitur, brethern of Elidu¦rus, deposed by strength theyr sayde brother, and began theyr reygne in ye yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .ix hundreth .xxxii. and reygned ioyntly and alone yeres .ix. Thys peridurus or Petitur made the towne of Pyke∣rynge after the opynyon of dyuerse wryters. ca. xliii. fo. xv. Elidurus beforenamed, was the thyrde tyme restored to the crowne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousād ix. hūdreth .xli. and reygned. the thyrd tyme yeres .iiii. Galfride sayeth ye durynge the lyfe of the foresayd bre∣thern, thys was inclosed in the towre of London. whych yf it be trew, than is nat trew that the floure of hysto∣rys affermeth, whych sayeth that the towre of London was bylded of Cas¦sibelan. ca. xliiii. fo. xvi. Gorbonianus or Gorbomannus the son̄ of Elidure, was made kyng of Brytayne, in the yere of the world iiii. thousande .ix. hundreth .xlv. And after hym reygned .xxxii. kynges, as in the story is after declared / yt which wyth the sayd Gorbonmaus by the reason that foloweth occupyed yeres lxxxvi. And in thys tyme duke Hani∣ball of Cartage about the yere of the worlde began to warre a∣gaynst the Romayns. And Scipio Affrican vanquyshed Hanyball a∣boute the yere of the worlde .v.M. & ix. And about thys tyme Iudas ma∣chabeus duke of Israell began to be theyr capytayne / that is to say in the yere of the worlde .v. thousande .xlvi. or there about. ca. xlvi. fo. xvi. To make the storyes to agre, and to kepe the order of the yeres begon, fyrst it is to be noted that as sheweth Ranulph wyth diuers other, Iulius Cesar made Brytayn trybutary to Rome in the .xlviii. yere before the in¦carnacyon of Chryste, or in the yere of the worlde fyue thousande .C.li. which was in the .ix. yere of Cassybe∣lan. From whēs takyng from ye tyme of Cassybelā before the trybute payd ix. yeres, & for the tyme of the reygne of Lud .xi. yeres / it foloweth congru¦ently that kynge Lud beganne to reygne in the yere of the worlde fyue thousande .C.xxxi. And so frome the last yere of Elidure, vntyll the begynnyng of the reygne of Lud, or in the tyme of ye .xxxiii. kynges / there passed .C.lxxxvi. yeres. Lud the sonne of Hely last kynge of the forsayd .xxxiii, was stablysshed kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde fyue thousande .C.xxxi. and reygned yeres .ix. Thys kynge made Ludgate the westgate of Lon∣don, and walled a parte of the same, and named the cytye Caerlud. ca. xlvii. fo. xvi. Cassibelan the brother of Lud was ordeyned kynge of Brytayn, in the yere of the worlde fyue thou∣sand .C.xlii / and reygned or he were made trybutary to the Romaynes yeres full and more .viii. ca. xlviii. folio. xvi. The begynnyng of thys trybute as hath Peter Pyctauyensis, Poly∣cronycon
and other authours, was in the yere of the worlde .v. thousand C.li / & the .xlviii. yere before Cristes comynge. And Eutropius sayeth in hys cronicle, that Caius Iulius did conquere Brytayn by .ii. yeres before he was create emperour / and he reyg¦ned as emperour .ii. yeres. And fur∣thermore the sayde Eutropius affer∣meth, that Octauian Augustus suc∣cessour of the sayde Iulius, began to reygne in the yere of the worlde .v. thousande .C.lviii. and that he reyg∣ned full .xli. yeres before Cryste was borne. whyche sayeng Iacobus Phi¦lippus and other auctours afferme. wherby it foloweth, that Iulius Ce∣sar subdued Brytayne .xlviii. yeres before the comyng of Cryste, and the yere of the worlde, as before is sayde, v. thousande .C.li. And so it appereth that Cryst was incarnate in the yere of the worlde after the account of the lxx. interpreters .v.M.C.xcix. ¶ Thus endeth the seconde parte that conteyneth .iii. C.lxxxiii. yeres CAssibelan, as before is sayde, was made tributarie to the Romayns, in the yere of the worlde v.M.C.li. and reygned after, yeres vii. ca. l. fo. xviii. Temancius or Tēnancius bro∣ther to Cassibelan, was of the Bry∣taynes ordeyned kyng, in the yere of the worlde .v. thousande .C. and .lvii. and reygned yeres .xxiii. ca. lii. folio. xviii. Kymbelinus the sonne of Thēnā∣cius, was made kyng of the Brytōs, in the yere of the world .v.M.C.lxxx. & reygned yeres .xxxv. All wryters agre that reygnyng thys kyng, oure sauyour Iesus Christ was incarnat. And than began the .vi. age. ca. liii. folio. xviii. Of the tyme of thys kynge Kym∣belyus reygn, dyuers auctours trete very darkly, for fewe of them do nat accoūt any yeres / for the tyme of hys reygne, excepte Peter pictauiensis, & the auctours of the Englysshe boke, whych afferme hym to reygne .xi. ye∣res. But Galfrido of Monmouth sayth, that whanne he had reygned. yeres he begate .ii. sonnes. But the floure of hystoryes wytnes∣seth hym to reygne .xxxv. yeres, and yt Iesus Chryst was borne in .xix. yere of hys reygne, whych wyth other cro¦nycles or tymes dothe somwhat bet∣ter agre. Guiderius the sonne of Kymba∣lyne, was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of our lordes incarnacyō xvi / & in the yere of the worlde .v.M.ii.C.xvii. and reygned yeres .xxviii. ca. liiii. fo. xix. Aruiragus the brother of Guide∣rius, began to reygne ouer the Bry∣tons, in the yere of our lordes incar∣nacyon .xliiii. and reygned yeres .xxx. In thys tyme Glouceter was buyl∣ded of Claudius. And in the .xxvi. yere of thys kynges reygne, whych was the .lxx. yere of the incarnacyō of our lorde / began the fyrst persecuciō of the chrysten men vnder Nero. ca. lv. fo. xix. Marius, whyche the Englysshe cronycle nameth westmere, sonne of Aruiragus, was made kyng of Bry∣tayne / in the yere of our lorde .lxxiiii. and in the yere of the worlde. and reygned yeres .ii. Chester towne of thys kyng was founded. westmer∣lande also of thys kynge toke hys
name. And about the .xxi. yere of this kynges reygne was the second perse¦cucyon, vnder Domicianus. And also the thyrd persecucyon about the xxxv. yere of thys kynge vnder Tra∣tanus. ca. lvii. fo. xx. Coilus the sonn̄ of Marius, was made kyng of Brytayne, in the yere of our lorde .C. and .xxvi. and the yere from the fyrste Adam / and reygned yeres .liii. And about ye .xlv. yere of thys Coilus, was the fourthe persecucyon, vnder Marcus Anto∣nius Amelius. ca. lviii. fo. xxii. Lucius the sonne of Coilus, begā hys reygne ouer the Brytons, in the yere of oure lorde an .C.lxxx. & of the worlde. and reygned ye∣res .xii. Thys was the fyrste chrysten kyng in Brytayne. The image of Cryst at the north dore in the church of Poulys, was founde in the ryuer of Thames by thys Lucius. But an other authoure sayeth that it was founden in ye .xiiii. yere of Coilus or in the yere of the worlde .C.xl. ca. lix. folio. xxii. Of thys Lucius auctours do dout fully treate. For Galfride sayth that Lucius dyed in the yere of our lorde C.lvi. And Guido de Calūpna sayth that Lucius was cristened in the fore sayd yere. And Peter pictauiensis sayth that Lucius began to reygne in the yere of our lorde .C.lxxx. & that he receyued the fayth in the .viii. yere of his reygn. And the Floure of histo¦ryes sayth that he reygned .xii. yeres after the fayth by hym receyued. Fur¦thermore it is shewed in a certeyne table hangyng on the north parte of the quyre of Poules in Londont, hat the sayd Lucius was crowned kyng of Brytayne in the yere of grace .C.xxiii. and that he reygned .lxxvii. ye∣res. And the Englyshe cronycle agreeth therwith of hys coronacion / but it sayth that he reygned but only xii. yeres. And so there appereth a great dyscord betwene these wryters But all agreen that the sayd Lucius was conuerted to ye fayth in the tyme of pope Eleutherius / which after the concordance of many storyes was made pope about the yere of our lord C.lxxviii. wherfore Galfrides sayng is to be denayd, that sayth, he died in the yere of grace .C.lvi. and also the sayeng of Guydo for receyuyng of ye fayth. And rather we oughte to gyue credence to the foresayde table or to Peter pictauiensis that affermeth ye sayd Lucius to reygne .xii. yere. But some wryters that wrote the actes & the reygnes of kynges, haue ouer∣skypt as it semeth the tyme whyche Lucius reygned before he receyued the fayth. And if he reygned before he receyued the fayth .xx. yeres and yt he receyued the faythe in hys .xx. yere, & reygned after .xv. yeres / they haue ac¦coūted the .xv. yere whyche he reyg∣ned as crysten kynge, and haue lette passe the other .xx. yere. And so is it to be thought that the forsayd auctour Peter pictauiens dyd. whych reason beynge alowed, the sayde table maye agre wyth the sayd Peter wythoute any greate dyfference whyche testy∣fyeth ye sayd Lucius to reygne .lxxvii yere as kynge. After whose deth in so moche that he dyed wythout any law¦full heyre / a great contēcion sprange amonge the Brytons that endured by .xv. yeres, as shall apere by the se∣quel. Trouth it is after all histories, that Seuerus a Romayne succeded Lucius in Brytayne. But because ye tyme is nat certaynly sette whan the sayd Seuerus subdued the Brytōs / therfore it is to noted, that whanne it was shewed to the Romaynes of the sedicion and discorde of the Brytōs,
& of the sleyng of the Romayns than beyng in Brytayn / the senate sentte thyder the forsayd Seuerus wyth .ii legions of men. whych bare thē selfe so manfully, that in shorte whyle he compelled the Brytons to obey to the senate. whyche Policronicon affer∣meth to be about the yere of our lord C.xcv. In whyche yere as hath Iaco¦bus Philippus, the sayde Seuerus began to raygne ouer the Romayns. But that dysagreeth from other Cro¦nycles. For Eutropius, Matheolus & the forsayde Iacobus Philippus sayth, that whan the sayde Seuerus had subdued the Arabyes, Parthys, and Gallys, after many battayls he came into Brytayn. where he beynge troubled wyth dyuers chaunces / at laste died in ye towne of yorke. where by it is to be supposed that in ye ende of hys reygn he came hether, & about the .xii. yere of hys reygne ouer the Romayns which was the yere of our lorde .ii.C.vii. and that after he reyg∣ned ouer the Brytons .v. yere. where∣fore it euydētly apereth, that the for∣sayd dyscord dured .xv. yeres / whych tyme Brytayne was wythoute a kynge. Thus endeth the thyrde parte which conteyneth CC.lvi. yeres. SEuerus emperour of Rome, as before is shewed, in the .xii. yere of hys empyre, and yere of oure lord .ii.C. & .vii / beganne hys reygne ouer the Brytōs, and yere of ye world / and reygned as kynge yeres .v. The fyrst persecucyon of the chrysten men, was vnder this Seue∣rus, about the yere of our lord .ii.C.x ca. lxi. fo. xxii. Bassianus the sonn̄ of Seuerus, began hys reygne ouer the Brytons, in the yere of our lorde .ii.C.xii / & the yere of the worlde / and reygned yeres .vi. ca. lxii. folio. xxii. Carassius a yonge and lusty Bry¦tayne of vnknowē blode, by meanes as in hys story sheweth, began hys domynyon ouer the Brytons, in the yere of our lorde .ii.C. and .xviii. and yere of the worlde. & ruled yeres .viii. ca. lxiii. fo. xxiii. Here agayn authours forget ye ye∣res of the kynges folowyng. Of whyche I nat greatly maruyll. For in thys tyme muche discencyon was among the Romayne prynces / & also amonge the Brytons cyuyll warre ceased nat. For they were so styrred wyth dyscencyon and warre, yt none coulde occupy the kyngedome any determynate tyme. For whyche cause and suche lyke, authours coude nat assyne any certeyne tyme to the pryn∣ces as me semeth. But that we maye come to some knowlege / Policroni∣con sheweth that constantius yt was father to Constantine the great, was sente by the senate into Brytayne, about the yere of our lord .ii.C.lxxix. and in the seconde yere of Probrus emperour / that he shuld subdue to ye Romayns Coelus than there kyng. From the whych tyme of the coming of the sayde Constantius vntyll the last yere of Bassianus accountynge bakwarde, there passed .lxi. yeres. In the tyme of whych yeres there reyg∣ned in thys Ilelande these .iiii. kyn∣ges that is to say Carassius, Alectus, Asclepiodotus, and Coelus. Allectus a duke or senatour of Ro¦me, began hys domynyon ouer the Brytons, in the yere of oure lorde .ii.C.xxvi. & of the worlde / & reygned yeres .vi. ca. lxiiii. fo. xxiii.
Asclepeodotus, or after the En∣glysshe boke Asclepades / began hys reygne ouer the Brytons, in the yere of our lorde god .CC.xxxii. And the yere of the worlde / and reyg¦ned yeres .xxx. The syxt persecucyon of crysten men was about the yere of our lorde .CC.xxxviii. vnder Maxi∣mian. The .vii. persecucyon was in ye yere of oure lorde .CC.lv. vnder De∣cius. In ye whych pope Fabyan was martyred. The .viii. persecucion was in the yere of our lord .CC.lx. vnder Ualeryan whych was the .xviii. yere of thys Asclepiodotus. ca. lxv. folio. xxiiiii Coelus or Coyll erle of Colchester, by exytyng of the Brytōs was made kyng of Brytayne, in the yere of oure lord .CC.lxii. & reygned yeres .xxvii. Thys kyng after most wryters made the towne of Colchester in Essex. ca. lxvi. fo. xxiiii Constancius a senatoure of Ro∣me, by reason of maryage knyt wyth Eleyn doughter of Coelus, beganne to reygne as kyng of Brytayne, in ye yere of our lord .CC.lxxxix. and of ye worlde and reygned yeres xxx. The .ix. persecucyon of the crystē¦men was vnder Aurelianus. Saint Albon prothomartyr in the tyme of thys Constancius as some haue, in ye x. persecucyō whych was vnder Dio¦clesian and Maximian, was marty¦red. ca. lxvii fo. xxiiii Constancius surnamed the great, sonn̄ of Constancius and of the holy Heleyne, began his reygne ouer Bry¦tayne, in the yere of oure lorde .iii.C.xix. and of the worlde. / and reygned as kyng yeres .x. ca. lxviii folio. xxv Octauius duke of Iesses or Ie∣wesses, and after named westsaxōs / by extorte power began hys reygne ouer the Brytons, in the yere of oure lorde .iii.C. & .xxix. and of the worlde. and reygned yeres .liiii ca. lxxi fo. xxvii Of thys kynge folowynge called Maximius or after some Maximia¦nus, wryters dyuersly speke / so that some say he raygned few yeres. But in the concordaunce of cronycles, it playnly apereth that the sayd Maxi∣mis began to reygn ouer the Brytōs in the yere of our lord .iii.C.lxxxii / & that he was slayn of Theodosius the elder in the thyrd yere of his reygne, whych began to reygne in the yere of our lord .iii.C.lxxxviii. And so it appereth playnly that he reygned ix. yeres. Maximius or Maximianus, the son̄ of Leonyne brother to Trahern̄ vncle to Helcyne, began hys reygne ouer Brytayn, in the yere of our lord iii.C.lxxxii / and reygned yeres .ix ca. lxxii. fo. xxvii Saynt Ursula wyth her felowes in thys kynges tyme were martyred of Enanus and Melga. Gracianus an offycer or feede knyght of Maximius, began to op∣presse the Brytons, in the yere of our lorde .iii.C.xc / and tyrannysed yeres iiii. ca. lxxiiii fo xxviii The storyes agre, that after that Gracian was slayne / Brytayne was vexed a longe whyle wyth oftē dyscē¦sions & cyuyll warre. But how longe thys dyscord dyd last authours trete diuersly / for some say it lasted .l. yere, & some .xl. & some .xxx. Therfore to know ye certeynty it is requisite that we dylygently serche, howe many ye∣res passed frō the last yere of Graciā
vntyll the begynnynge of the reygne of Constantyne / or the certayn tyme whan Constātyne was made kyng. who as witnesseth Guydo was crow¦ned at Cicester in the yere of our lord iiii.C.xxxv. The floure of hystoryes sayth also that in the thyrde yere of Theodocius the yonger emperour, Constantyne began to rule the Bry∣tons. whych Theodocius begāne to reygne in the yere of our lorde .iiii.C.xxxi. wherby it apereth, that from the last yere of Graciā vntyll the begyn∣nyng of Constantyne, there passed a∣bout .xl. yeres. But the very trewrule is yt in the yere of grace .iiii.C.li. the Saxons fyrst perced Brytayne, and in the thyrd yere of Uortigern. From whych takyng awaye for the reygne of Uortigern .ii. yeres, & fro the reygn of Constācius .v. yere, & fro the reygn of Constātyne .x. yere / it foloweth yt the sayd dyssencion or mysery of the Brytons lasted .xxxix. yeres full. And here ended the trybute that was payd to the Romayns, that had endu¦red aboue .iiii.C.lx. yeres. Thus endeth the fourth parte that enclu∣deth .CC.xxv yeres. ¶ The line of the kynges of Fraunce. PHaramundus the son̄ of Mer¦comirus, began hys reygne as fyrst kyng of Fraunce, in the yere of our lord .iiii.C.xx / and the mysery of the Brytons the .xxvi. yere / & reyg¦ned yeres .xi. ca. lxxviii. folio. xxxi Clodius or Clodio, or after some Crynitus and Capillatus the sonne of Pharamude, was ordeyned the seconde kyng of Fraunce, in the yere of our lord .iiii. hundreth and .xxxi / & the .xxxvii. yere of the myserye of the Brytons / and reygned yeres .xix. capi. lxxix. folio. xxxi Here begynneth the fyfthe parte. COnstantinus the brother of Aldroenus kyng of lytell Bry¦tayne, beganne hys reygn ouer mo∣che Brytayne, Anno domini. iiii. hun¦dreth and .xxxiii / and the yere of Clo∣dio than kynge of Fraunce the thyrd yere / and reygned yeres .x. capi. lxxx folio. xxxii Constantinus the sonne of Con∣stantyne before tyme a monke, was made kynge of moche Brytayne, in the yere of oure lorde .iiii. hundreth and .xliii / and the .xiii. yere of Clo∣dio than kynge of Fraunce / and reyg¦ned yeres .v. ca. lxxxi folio xxxii Uortigerus or Uortigernus duke of Cornewayll or Consull of Iesses, was by treason made kynge, in the yere of our lorde foure hundreth and lxviii / and the .xviii. yere of Clodio than kynge of Fraunce / and reyned yeres .xvii. The Saxons or En¦glysshemen, in the thyrde yere of this kynges reygne fyrste entred thys Ilande. capi. lxxxii folio. xxxii Meroneus neuewe or next allye vnto Clodio, was made kynge of Frenchemen, in the yere of our lorde iiii. hundreth and .l / and the seconde yere of Uortiger than kynge of Bry∣tayne / and reygned yeres .x. capi. lxxxv folio. xxxiiii
Meroneus neuewe or next of Al∣lye vnto Clodio, was made kynge of Frenchemen in the yere of our lorde iiii.C. and .l / and the seconde yere of Uortiger than kyng of Brytayne / & reygned yeres .x. ca. lxxxv. fo. xxxiiii. Chyldericus or Hylderycus the sonne of Meroneus, was ordeyned kyng of Fraunce, in the yere of oure lorde .iiii.C. and .lx / and the .xii. yere of Uortiger than kyng of Brytayne / and reygned yeres .xxiiii. ca. lxxxvi. folio. xxxv. Uortimerus the sonn̄ of Uortiger, was made kyng of Brytayne, in the yere of our lorde .iiii.C.lxxxiiii / & the iiii. yere of Chylderych than kyng of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .vii. ca. lxxxviii. fo. xxxvi. Uortigernus before named, was agayne restored to the kyngdome, in the yere of our lord .iiii.C.lxxi / and ye xi. yere of Chylderyche than kyng of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .ix. In thys kynges tyme aboute the yere of our lorde .iiii.C.lxxvi. the kyngdome of Kent the fyrste kyngdome of the Saxōs, began vnder Hengystas ap¦pereth. fo. xxxvii. ca. lxxxix. folio. xxxvi. Aurelius Ambrosius the seconde sonne of Constantyne, and brother to Constancius the monke slayne by reason of Uortiger, was made kyng of Brytayne, in the yere of oure lorde iiii.C.lxxxi / and the .xi. yere of Chylde¦rych than kyng of Fraūce / and reyg∣ned yeres .xix. In thys kynges tyme about the yere of our lorde .iiii.C.lxxxii. beganne the kyngedome of Southsaxones vnder Ella and hys sonnes. And also in thys kynges tyme that is to saye in the yere of our lorde .iiii.C.lxxx.xii. begāne the king∣dome of Estangles vnder Ufa. But Guydo sayeth it beganne in the yere of oure lorde .v. hundreth .lxx. as appereth. capi. xciiii. fo. xxxviii. Clodoueus the sonne of Chylde∣ricus or Hyldericus before named, was ordeyned kynge of Fraunce, in the yere of oure lorde .iiii. hundreth lxxxiiii / and the thyrde yere of Aure∣lius thanne kynge of Brytayne / and reygned yeres .xxx. Thys was the fyrste crysten kynge whyche re∣ceyued the fayth of saynt Remygius aboute the yere of oure lorde .iiii. hun¦dreth .xcix. whereby it appereth that the fayth came into Brytayne aboue iii. hundreth yere before it came into Fraunce. capi. xcvii. fo. xxxix. Uter surnamed Pendragon, the yongest sonne of Constantyne & bro∣ther to Aurelius, was made kyng of Brytayne, in the yere of our lorde .v.C / and the .xvi. yere of Clodoueus thā kyng of Fraunce / and reygned yeres xvi. ca. c. fo. xli. Clotharius or Lotharius the son̄ of Clodoueus, beganne hys reygne ouer the Frenchemen, in the yere of our lorde .v.C. and .xiiii / and the yere of Uter than kyng of Brytayne / and reygned yeres .l. ca. c.i. fo. xlii. Arthurus the son̄ of Uter begāne hys rygne ouer the Brytōs, in ye yere of our lorde .v.C. and .xvii / & the .iii. yere of Lotharius thanne kynge of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .xxvi. In thys kynges tyme the kyngdom of Saxōs begā vnder Serdicus a∣bout the yere of our lord .v.C.xxiii. ca. c.iiii. fo. xliiii. Constantius the sonne of Cador, began hys reygne ouer the lande of Brytayne, in the yere of our lorde .v.
C. & .xliii / and the .xxix. yere of Lotha∣rius than kynge of Fraunce / & reyg∣ned yeres .iii. Totila kyng of Ostra∣gathoris, about this time spoyled Ro¦me & other cytyes in Italy. ca. c.vii. folio. xlv. Aurelius Conanus the neuewe of Cōstantyne, begā hys reygne ouer Brytayne, in the yere of our lorde .v.C. & .xlvi / and ye .xxxii. yere of Lotha∣rius forenamed / & reygned yeres .ii. In thys kynges tyme the kyngdome of Northumbers began vnder Ida, about the yere of our lord .v.C.xivii. ca. c.viii. fo. xlvi. Uortiporius the son̄ of Aurelius Conanus, began to rule the Brytōs, in the yere of our lord .v.C. & .xlviii / & the yere of Clothare kyng of Fraūce xxxiiii / and reygned yeres .iiii. ca. c.x. fo. xlvii. Malgo the brother of Uortipo∣rius, begā hys reygne ouer the Bry∣tons, in the yere of our lord .v.C. and lii / & .xxxviii. yere of Lothayre forna∣med / & reygned yeres after moste ac∣corde of wryters .xxxv. ca. c.xi. folio. xlvii. Chilpericus the .iii. sonn̄ of Clo∣tharius, began hys reygne ouer the Frenchmē, in the yere of our lorde .v.C. & .lxiiii / & the .xiiii. yere of Malx thā kyng of Brytayne / & reygned yeres xiiii. ca. c.xii. fo. xlvii. Careticus a Bryton of vncowthe byrth began hys tyrāny ouer the Bry¦tons, in the yere of our lord .v.C.lxxx & .vi / & .xxii. yere of Chylperyche than kyng of Fraūce / and tyrannysed ye∣res .iii. ca. c.xviii. fo. liii. Here it is to be noted that after ye sayd Careticus was expulsed out of Brytayne / the Brytōs abode in Cam¦bria & these partes, & fought oftēwith the Saxōs. Of whose captaynes fro thys Careticus vntyll Cadwan, the story remēbreth none. yet by ye cōcor∣daūce of other cronycles & hystories, it apereth yt betwene the laste yere of Careticus & begynnyng of the reygn of Cadwan, there passed about .xxiii. yeres as apereth by ye sequell. Fur∣thermore in this tyme Ethelbert king of Kent receyued the fayth about the yere of oure lorde .v.C.xcvi. Thys Ethelbert bylded Poules church. And about the yere of our lord .vi.C.xiii. began the kyngdome Estsaxons vnder Sebertus. Lotharius or Clotharius ye son̄ of Chylpericus, begā hys reygne ouer the Frēchmē, in the yere of our lord .v C.lxxxviii / & the .ii. yere of Careticus than kynge of Brytayne / & reygned yeres .xliii. ca. c.xxii. fo. lvi. Cadwanus duke of Northwalis, was of ye Brytons chosen kyng, and begā to reygne ouer a parte of Bry∣tōs, in the yere of our lorde .vi.C. and viii / & the .xxv. yere of the secōde Clo∣thayre / & reygned yeres .xxii. In this kynges tyme the kyng done of Mer∣cia began vnder Penda. ca. c.xxviii. folio. lxiiii. Dagobertus ye fyrst of ye name, & sonn̄ of ye secōd Clothayre, begā hys dominiō ouer ye Frēchemē, in the yere of our lord .vi.C. & .xxxi / & ye .viii. yere of Cadwan than kyng of Brytayne / & reygned yeres .xiiii. Saynt Denys with hys felowes were foūd by this king by myracle. ca. c.xxxi. fo. lxv. Cadwallus the son̄ of Cadwan̄ be∣gan hys reygne ouer a parte of Bry∣tayne, in the yere of our lorde .vi.C. & xxxv. and the .iiii. yere of the fyrste
Dagoberte than kynge of Fraūce / & reygned yeres .xlviii. ca. c.xxxiii. folio .lxvii. Elodoueus the yōger sonn̄ of Da¦gobertus, begā hys reygne ouer the Frenchmē, in the yere of our lord .vi.C. & .xlv / and the .x. yere of Cadwall than kyng of Brytayn / & reygned ye¦res .xvi. ca. c.xxxvi. fo. lxxi. Clotharius ye thyrde of that name and sonne of Clodoueus, was made kyng of Fraūce, in ye yere of our lord vi.C.lxii / and the .xxvi. yere of Cad∣wall than kyng of Brytayne / & reyg∣ned yeres .iiii. ca. xxxvii. fo. lxxii. Theodoricus the brother of ye for∣named Lothayre, began hys reygne ouer Fraūce, in the yere of our lorde vi.C.lxvi / and the .xxx. yere of the fore sayd Cadwall than kynge of Bry∣tayne / and reygned yeres .iii. ca. c.xxxviii. fo. lxxii. Chylderycus or Hylderycus ye .iii. sonne of Clodoueus, began his reyg¦ne ouer the Frenchmen, in the yere of our lord .vi.C.lxix / & ye .xxxiii. of Cad∣wall yet kyng of Brytayne / and reyg¦ned yeres .ii. ca. c.xxxix fo. lxxii Cadwaladrus, or after Bede Ced¦walla, sonne of Cadwallo, began to rule the Brytōs, in the yere of oure lorde .vi.C.lxxx. and .iii / & the .xii. yere of Theodoricus thā kyng of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .iii. ca. c.xl. folio .lxxiii. Of the tyme of the raygne of this Cadwalader, autours write diuersly and shew of him as of .ii. seuerall per¦sones▪ For Galfryde & other say that whan he had reygned .xii. yeres, he went to Rome, & thereof pope Ser∣gius was made a monk, and dyed in the yere of our lord .vi.C.lxxix. which sayeng differeth farre from other au¦thours. For Guido de calūma sayeth in hys worke that he shortly gathe∣red of the kynges of Brytayne, that whan Cadwallader that also is na∣med Cadwalla sonne of Cadwallon had peassably gouerned Brytayne iii. yeres, he went to Rome & of pope Sergius was made monk / & ended hys lyfe in the yere of our lord .vi.C.lxxxix. whych sayng Policronicon in hys .v. boke & .xx. chapyter affermeth, where he nameth the sayd Cadwala∣der king of Brytons and westsaxōs, and that kyng Iew or Iue was hys successour. And so by these authours & other which Policronicō alledgeth for hym, as Beda & other, whych na∣me thys Cadwalader Ced walla, it apereth that it was one person & that thys tyme he reygned ouer the Bry∣tons and westsaxones, whyche was last kyng of the stok of the Brytons And because the kynges of westsaō in proces of tyme subdued all the o∣ther kinges / therfore I wyll obserue the order of them vntyll I haue brou¦ghte thys ilande to one monarchy. Here endeth the lyne of the kynges of Brytayne whyche contynued frō the fyrst Brute by .M.viii.C. & .xxii. yeres. Thus endeth the fyft parte whyche includeth .CC.liii. IEwe or Iue of ye blod of Sax∣ons, or after som writers Iuo, beganne hys reygne ouer the west∣saxones to rekyn after the departing of Cadwalader, in the yere of oure lorde .vi. hundreth .lxxx. and .vii / and the .xvi. yere of the seconde Theodori¦cus thanne kynge of Fraunce / and reygned yered .xxxvii. ca. c.xli. folio .lxxvi
Clodoueus the .iii. of that name, & secōd sonne of the second Theodori∣cus, was made kyng of Fraūce, in ye yere of our lord .vi.C.xc / and the .iii. yere of Iewe thā kyng of westsaxo∣nes / & reygned yeres .iii. ca. c.xlii. folio .lxxvi. Chyldebertus the second sonn̄ of Theodoryche, begā hys reygne ouer the Frēchemē, in ye yere of our lord .vi C.lxxx. & .xiii / & the .vi. yere of Iue yet kyng of westsaxones, & reygned ye∣res .xvii. ca. c.xliii. fo. lxxvi. Dagabertus ye secōd of ye name, & sonne of Chyldeberte, was auctory∣sed kyng of Frēchmē, in ye yere of our lord .vii.C. & .x / and the .xxiii. yere of Iewe yet kyng of westsaxones / and reygned yeres .xi. ca. c.xliiii. fo. lxxvi. Daniell yt was named Chylperyk a clerke, was made kyng of Frenche men, in the yere of our lorde .vii.C. & xxi / & the .xxiiii. yere of Iewe yet king of westsaxons and reygned yeres .v. ca. c.xlv. fo. lxxvi. Ethelardus the neuewe of Iewe, begā his reygne ouer ye westsaxōs, in the yere of our lord .vii.C. & .xxiiii / & the thyrde yere of Daniell than king of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .v. ca. c.xlvi. fo. lxxvii. Theodoricus the secōd of ye name, and sonne of the seconde Dagobert, began hys reygne ouer Frenchmen, in the yere of our lord .vii.C. & .xxvi / & the seconde yere of Ethelardus than king of westsaxones / and reygned ye¦res .xiiii. ca. c.xlvii. fo. lxxvii. Cutbertus ye neuewe of Ethelard, began to reygne ouer the westsaxōs, in the yere of our lord .vii.C. & .xxix / & the thyrd yere of the secōd Theodori¦cus / and reygned yeres .xvi. ca. c.xlviii. fo. lxxix. Hyldericus or Chyldericus the se∣conde of ye name, & sonne of Theodo∣ricus, was made kyng of Frenchmē, in the yere of our lord .vii.C. and .xl / & the .xi. yere of Cutbert than kyng of westsaxons / & reygned yeres .x. Here endeth the lyne of Meroneus, & be∣gynneth the lyne of Pepyn. ca. c.xlix. folio .lxxix. Sygebertus the neuewe of Cut∣bert, began hys reygne ouer the west¦saxōs, in the yere of our lord .vii.C. & xlv / & the .v. yere of Hyldericus the se¦cond than kyng of Fraūce / and reyg¦ned yeres .ii. ca. c.l. fo. lxxx. Kenulphus of the blode & lyne of Cerdicus, begā hys reygne ouer the westsaxōs, in the yere of our lord .vii.C. & .xlviii / and ye .vii. yere of Hylderi∣cus thā king of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .xxxi. ca. c.li. fo. lxxxi. Pipinus the secōd sonne of Char¦les Martellus, was fyrst made king of Fraūce of ye blode, in ye yere of our lord .vii.C. & .l / and the second yere of Kenulphus thā kyng of westsaxōs / & reygned yeres .xviii. ca. c.liii. fo. lxxxi. Carolomanus wyth Charlys sur¦named ye great sonnes of Pepyn, be∣gan to reygne ouer Fraūce, in ye yere of our lord .v.C.lxviii / & the .xx. yere of Kenulphus / and reygned yeres ioyntly and Charles alone .xlvii. This Charles was ye fyrst emperour of Romayns of the stok of the Frēch men / and reygned .xiiii. yeres. ca. c.liiii. fo. lxxxiii. Brightricus of the forenamed blod of Cerdicus, was made kyng of west¦saxons, in the yere of our lord .vii.C.lxxvii / and ye .x. yere of Charles than
king of Fraūce / & reygned yeres .xvii About the .ix. yere of thys kynge, the Danes fyrste entred this ile as more playnly apereth in ye story folowyng. ca. c.lvii. fo. lxxxvi. Egbertus, or after the Englysshe boke Edbryght, the son̄ of Alumun∣dus, begā hys reygne ouer the west∣saxōs, in ye yere of our lord .vii.C.lxxx and .xv / & ī the. .xxvii. yere of Charles than kyng of Fraūce / and reygned ye¦res .xxxviii. Thys kyng cōmaunded the Saxōs to be Anglys / & Brytayn to be named Anglia, that in Englād. ca. c.lviii. fo. lxxxvi. Lodouicus the fyrste of ye name & sonne of Charles the great, beganne to reygne as emperour and kyng of Fraūce, in the yere of our lord .viii.C and .xv / & ye .xx. yere of Egbertus thā kyng of westsaxons / and reygned ye¦res .xxvi. ca. c.lix. fo. lxxxvii. Adeulphus or Ethelwolphus the sonne of Egbertus, began hys reygn ouer the westsaxōs and other, in the yere of our lord .viii.C. and .xxxii / and the .xvi. yere of Lowys the fyrst than kyng of Fraūce / & reygned yeres .xxii ca. c.lxii. fo. xci. Charles the second of that name, & yongest sonne of the fyrste Lowys surnamed Balled, beganne to reygn ouer the west parte of Fraunce, in the yere of our lord .viii.C. & .xli / & the .ix. yere of Adeulphus / and reygned ye∣res .xxxviii. The countre of Flaun∣ders in thys Charles dayes began fyrste to bere name, as after in the ende of hys story is shewed. ca. c.lxiii. fo. xcii. Ethelwaldus the eldest sonne of Adeulphus, began hys reygne ouer the westsaxōs, in the yere of our ord viii.C. & .lv / and the .x. yere of Char∣les the Balled than kyng of Fraūce / and reygned but one yere. ca. c.lxvii. folio .xcvi. Ethelbertus the seconde sonne of Adeulphus, was auctorysed kynge of westsaxōs, in the yere of our lorde viii.C. and .lvi / & the .xi. yere of Char∣les the Ballyd yet kyng of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .vi. In the tyme of thys kynges reygne / the .vii. Io∣han whyche was a womā was admit¦ted for pope, aboute the yere of oure lorde .viii.C.lviii, as sayth Iacobus Phylyppus. ca. c.lxviii. fo. xcvi. Etheldredus the thyrde sonne of Adeulphus, was made kyng of west¦saxons wyth other, in the yere of our lorde .viii.C. & .lxiii / & the .xviii. yere of Charles forenamed yet kynge of Fraūce / & reygned yeres .viii. In the tyme of thys kynges reygne, saynte Edmond kynge of Eest Angles was martyred of the princys Danus and Martyrus. ca. c.lxix. fo. xcvi. Aluredus or Alphredus the .iiii. sonne of Adeulphus, in ye yere of our lorde .viii.C.lxxii, began hys reygne ouer the westsaxōs / & the .xxxi. yere of Charles forenamed yet kynge of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .xxviii. ca. clxxi. fo. xcviii. Lowys Balbus, the secōd of that name & sonne of Chales the balled, began hys reygne ouer the Frenche∣men, in ye yere of grace .viii.C.lxviii / and the .vi. yere of Alerude thā kyng of westsaxons / & reygned yeres .ii. ca. c.lxxiiii. fo. ci. Lowys & Charles the sonnes of Lowys Balbus, beganne to reygne ioyntly ouer ye Frenchmē, in the yere of our lord .viii.C. & .lxxx / & the .viii.
yere of Alurede than kyng of westsax¦ons / and reygned yeres .v. ca. lxxv. folio c.ii. Lowys the .iiii. of ye name, & sonne of Charles last remēbred, began hys reygn ouer Fraūce, in ye yere of grace viii.C.lxxx. and .vi / & the .xiiii. yere of Aluredus yet kyng of westsaxons / & reygned yeres viii. ca. lxxvii. fo. c.iiii. Eudo or Oddo the son̄ of Robert erle of Angeowe, began hys reygne ouer the Frēchmen, in the yere of our lord .viii.C.lxxx. & .xv / and the .xxiii. yere of Aluredus yet kyng of westsax¦ons / and reygned yeres .ix. ca. lxxviii. folio. c.iiii. Edwarde surnamed the elder, & sonne of Alurede or Alphrede, began hys reygne ouer the more part of En¦glande, in the yere of our lorde .ix.C. and one / & the .vi. yere of Eudo than kynge of Fraunce / & reygned yeres xxiiii. ca. c.lxxix. fo. c.iiii. Charles surnamed the Simple, & sonn̄ of the .iiii. Lowys, beganen hys reygne ouer the realme of Fraūce, in the yere of our lorde .ix.C.iiii / & ye .iii. yere of Edward than kynge of Eng∣lande / and reygned yeres .xxiiii. ca. c.lxxxi. fo. c.vi. Radulphus the sonne of Rychard duke of Burgoyne, began his reygn ouer Fraūce, in the yere of our lorde ix.C. & .xxii / & the .xxi. yere of Edward yet kyng of Englande / & reygned ye∣res .xii. ca. lxxxiii. fo. c.viii Ethelstanus the sonn̄ of Edward the elder, begā hys reygne ouer the more partye of England, in ye yere of our lord .ix.C. & .xxv. & the thyrde yere of Rauffe thā kyng of Fraūce / & reyg¦ned yeres .xvi. Thys kyng broughte Brytayne or Englāde to one monar∣chy. But yet after some wryters Alu¦rede dyd it. ca. c.lxxxiiii. fo. c.viii. Lowys the .v. of that name, and sonne of Charles the Symple, begā hys reygne ouer Fraūce, in the yere of our lord .ix.C. & .xxxiiii / & ye .ix. yere of Ethelstane thā kyng of Englād / & reygned yeres .xxi. ca. c.lxxxvi. fo. c.x. Edmoūd the brother of Ethelstane & sonne of Edward the elder, began hys reygne ouer Englād, in the yere of our lord .ix.C. & .xli. / & the .vii. yere of ye .v. Lowys than kyng of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .vi. ca. c.lxxxviii. folio. c.xiii. Edredus the brother of Edmoūd, begā his reygne ouer Englād, in the yere of our lorde .ix. & .xlvii / and ye .xiii yere of ye forenamed Lowys yet king of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .ix. ca. c.lxxxix. fo. c.xiiii. Lotharius the eldest sonn̄. of ye .v. Lowis, was anoīted king of Fraūce, in the yere of our lord .ix.C. & .xl / and viii. yere of Edwardus thā kynge of Englād / & reygned yeres after moste wryters .xxxix. ca. c.xc. fo. c.xiiii. Edwynus ye eldest son̄ of Edmoūd brother of Ethelstane, was enoynted kyng of Englāde, in the yere of oure lord .ix.C.lvi / & the secōd yere of Lo∣thayre thā kyng of Fraūce / & reygned yeres .iii. ca. c.xcii. fo. c.xvi. Edgarus the secōd sonn̄ of Edmoūd & brother of Edwyn, begā to reygne ouer Englād, in the yere of grace .ix.C. & .lx / & ye .v. yere of Lotharius than kyng of Fraūce / & reygned yeres .xvi ca. c.xciii. fo. c.xvi. Edward the son̄ of Edgare surna¦med
the Martyr, begā hys reygne ouer the ile of Englād, in the yere of our lorde .ix.C.lxxvii / & the .xxii. yere of Lothayre yet kyng of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .iiii. ca. c.xcvi. fo. c.xix. Egelredus ye sonn̄ also of Edgare, was made kyng of Englād, in ye yere of grace .ix.C.lxxx. &. one / & the .xxvi. yere of Lothayre yet king of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .xxxvi. ca. xcvii. folio. c.xx. Lowys ye .vi. of ye name, & sonne of Lothayr / begā his reygn ouer Fraūc in ye yere of our lord .ix.C.lxxxvi / & the v. yere of Egelbertus thā king of En¦gland / & reygned yeres .iii. In thys kyng endeth the lyne of Pepyn ca. cc.i. fo. c.xxiiii. Hugt Capet ye sonn̄ of Roberte ye tyraūt, descended of Hugh le graūde begā to take vppō hym or vsurpe the crowne of Fraūce, in the yere of oure lord .ix.C. & .ix / and ye .ix. yere of Egel¦rede / and ruled yeres .ix. ca. cc.ii. folio. c.xxvi. Robert the sonn̄ of Hughe, began to reygne ouer the Frēchmē, in ye yere of our lord .ix.C.lxxx / and .xviii. yere of Egelredus than kyng of Englād / and reygned yeres .xxx. ca. cc.iii. folio. c.xxvii. Edmoūde Ironsyde the sonne of Egelredus, with also Canutus ye son̄ of Swanus, begā to reygn ouer En¦glāde, in the yere of our lord .M. and xvii / & ye .xix. yere of Robert thā kinge of Fraūce / & reygned one yere. ca. cc.iiii. fo. c.xxvii. Kanutus which in ye Englysh bo∣ke is named Knougth, begā after the deth of Edmoūd to reygn alone ouer Englād, in the yere of grace .M. and xix / & the .xx. yere of Robert thā kyng of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .xix. ca. cc.v. fo. c.xxviii. Hēry the sonn̄ of Robert begā hys domynyō ouer Fraūce, in the yere of our lord .M. & .xxix / & the .x. yere of Ca¦nutus thā king of Englād, & reygned yeres .xxxi. ca. cc.vii. fo. c.xxx. Harolde surnamed Harefote ye son̄ Canutus, began to reygne ouer Eng¦land, in the yere of our lorde .M. and xxxix / & the .x. yere of Henry thā kyng of Fraūce / and ruled yeres .iii. ca. cc.viii. fo. c.xxxi. Hardikynitus or Hardiknought, ye son̄ of Canutus & of Emma, was made king of Englāde, in the yere of our lord .M. & .xli / & the .xii. yere of Hē¦ry thā kyng of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .ii. In this kyng ended the line of the Danes, that had cōtynued in thys lāde in great persecuciō aboue ii.C.l. yeres. ca. cc.ix. fo. c.xxxii. Edward the holy cōfessour, & son̄ of Egelredus and of Emma his laste wyfe, begā hys reygn ouer the realm of Englād, in the yere of oure lorde a M. and .xliii / & the .iiii. yere of Henry thā kyng of Fraūce / and reygned in vertue and holynes yeres .xxiiii. In this kynges tyme the chapell of wal∣synghm̄ was fyrst bylded, in ye yere of our lord .M.lxi. ca. cc.x. fo. c.xxxiii. Philippe the fyrst of ye name and son̄ of Hēry, begā to gouerne ye Frēch mē, in the yere of our lord a .M.lxviii and the .xvi. yere. of Edward the con¦fessour thā kynge of Englande / and reygned yeres .xlviii. Godfrey of Bulyō & nat Boleyn̄, ī this Philippes tyme gat by strēgth the citie of Hierusalē / & was crowned
king of ye same, in the yere of our lord M.xcix. ca. cc.xv. fo. c.xxxviii. Harolde ye eldest son̄ of erle Good¦wyn, begā to reygn ouer Englyshmē in the yere of our lord .M.lxvi / and ye viii. yere of Philippe than kynge of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .ix. ca. cc.xvi. fo. c.xxxviii. Thus endeth the .vi. parte that conteyneth .iii.C.lxxxi. yeres. WIllyam duke of Normādy the bastarde sonne of Robert the .vi duke of the sayd prouynce, begā hys reygne ouer the realme of Eng∣lande, in the .xv. day of Octobre, and yere of our lord .M.lxvii / & ye .ix. yere of ye fyrst Philipe yet kyng of Fraūce & reygned yere vpō .xxii. In the .xx. yere of thys kyng, the church of saint Poule wyth a great parte of Lōdon was burned. Thys kyns foūded the monasteryes of Batell and Barmū∣desey. ca. cc.xix. fo. c.xlii. wyllyam surnamed the Rede and sonne of wyllyam Cōquerour, began hys reygne ouer Englād, in the mo∣neth of Iuly & yere of our lord a .M.lxxx. & .ix / & .xxxi. yere of Philippe fore¦named yet king of Fraūce & reygned yeres .xii. ca. cc.xxiii. fo. c.xlvii. Henry surnamed Beawclerke and thyrd son̄ of wyllyam Conqueroure, begā hys reygne ouer Englād, in the yere of our lord .M.C. & one / and in the .xliii. yere of the foresayd Phylyp yet kyng of Fraūce / & reygned yeres xxxv. ca. cc.xxvi. fo. c.l. Lowys surnamed the greate, and sonn̄ of ye fyrst Philippe, was enoyn¦ted king of Fraūce, in ye yere our lord M.C. & .vii / and ye .vi. yere of the first Henry than kynge of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .xxix. capi. cc.xxx. folio c.lv. Stephan erle of Boloyng & sonn̄ vnto the erle of Blesens, & of the wy∣ues syster of Hēry the fyrst, begā hys reygne ouer Englāde, in the yere of grace .M.C. & .xxxvi / and the last yere of Lowys the great / & reygned yeres xix. ca. cc.xxxii. fo. c.lvii. Lowys the .viii. of ye name and son̄ of Lowys the great, begā his reygne ouer Fraunce, in the yere of our lord M.C.xxxvi / & the fyrste yere of Ste∣phan than kyng of England / & reyg¦ned yeres .xliii. ca. cc.xxxiiii. folio. c.lx. Henry the seconde of that name, & sonne of Geffrey Plantaginet and of molde the emperesse, begā hys reygn in Englande, in the yere of our lorde M.C. and .lv / and the .xix. yere of Lo¦wys the .viii. than kyng of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .xxxv. Saynt Edwarde the confessour was trāsla∣ted in the .ix. yere of thys kyng. And about the .xvi. yere of hys reygne saīt Thomas of Caunterbury was mar∣tyred. cap. cc.xxxvi. folio. c.lxii. Philippe the second of that name surnamed a Deu don̄e, sonne of the viii. Lowys, beganne hys reygne in Fraunce, in the yere our lord a thou∣sande .C. and .lxxix / and .xxiiii. yere of Henry the seconde than kyng of En∣glande / and reygned yeres .xliii. ca. cc.xli. fo. c.lxviii. Thus endeth the table of the fyrste volume.
FOR THAT IN the accomptynge of the yeres of the worlde; from the creacyon of Adam vnto the incarna∣cyon of Criste; ben many & sondery opynyons / as the Hebrewes, whych accompt for the sayde terme .iii. thou¦sande .ix. hundred .lxiii. yeres / the se∣uenty interpretours reken .v.M.C.lxxx. and .xix. yeres. Some there be, that reken v.M.lxxx. and .xix. yeres / and some v. thousande .CC. & .xxviii. yeres. In the thyrde boke & fyrste chapyter of Polycronycon ben also shewed dyuers opinyons, wherof the gretest nomber and most certayne is v. thousande and .CC. yeres. And in other places also, some rekē mo, and some haue lesse / by reason wherof the tymes ben diuersly sette and accomp¦ted / as the fyrst foūdacyon of Rome / the subuersyon of the famouse cytye of Troye / the fyrst buyldynge of the cytye of London / & dyuerse other old thinges. But for I se, yt the accōpt of ye seuenty interp̄tours is of holy Be∣da, and many other holy wryters al∣lowed and folowyd: therfore I entē¦dynge to shew in this rude worke fo∣lowyng, what yere of ye world Brute entred fyrste thys ile, then called Al∣byon, and now England / purpose to kepe the sayde accompte, wherof the partyculers ensewe: that is to wyt, fyrste from Adam to Noeflowyd .xxii hundred and xlii. yeres From Noe to Abraham flowed .ix hundred and .xlii. yeres. From Abrahā to Dauid flowyd ix. hundred and xl. yeres. From Dauid to the captyuyte of the Iewys passed .iiii. hundred .lxxx. and v. yeres. And from the captyuyte to the co∣mynge of Christe .v. hundred .lxxx. & tenne yeres. The whyche in all make .v. thou¦sande, a hundred, lxxx. and xix. yeres. AFter which accōpt moste accordynge to the purpose of thys worke, all be yt that dyuerse opynyons thereof ben left in writyng and of dyuerse au¦tours: the famous cytye of Troye was subuerted of ye Grekes, as wyt∣nessyth holy Eusebius and other, in the yere of ye world .iiii.M. and .xxiii. Also folowyng the sayd accompt, as wytnessyth the forsayde Euseby & dyuerse other, the cyte of Rome was begon to be buylded in the xi. yere of Ezechias then kynge of Iuda / the whyche yere maketh after the sayde auctours, the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande; foure hundred, lxx. And ye sayd auctours afferme, that the sayd cytye of Rome was edifyed after the subuersion of Troye, iiii. hūdred and xlvii. yeres. By whych reason it must folowe, that is was buylded in the ye¦re of the world, as ys aboue sayde. Peter pictauiensis and other testi¦fye, that Brute entred fyrste the ile of Albyon, now called Englande, in the .xviii. yere of the preste & iudge of Israel named Hely. And as after myth dyuers auctours / the sayde He¦ly beganne to rule the Israelites, the yere of the thyrde age: that is from Abraham to Dauid .viii. hūdred, lxi. whych maketh the yeres of ye worlde foure thousande and .xlv. wherunto yf there be ioyned the aboue sayd .xviii. yeres: then muste yt folow, that Brute shuld entre this lande, in the yere of the worlde foure thousand .lxiii. To this agreeth ye au¦ctour of Polycronicon / whych sayth, that Brute entred Albion .xl. yeres af¦ter
the subuersyon of Troye. whych xl. yeres ioyned to the former sayeng of Eusebius, maketh ye sayd nomber of .iiii. thousande and .lxiii. yeres. Also a wryter of hystoryes called Iacobus Philippus, affermeth that Troye was taken by the Grekes, in the thyrde yere yt Abdon or Labdon, iudged the Israelytes. whych began his rule ouer the sayde Israelytes, af¦ter the accorde of moste wryters / in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande and .xx. wherunto yf there be ioyned thre yeres for ye third yere of his rule, in whyche yere Troye (as before ys sayde) was taken / and .xl. yeres that passed or Brute percyd Albyon: yt muste folowe, ye Brute entred fyrst. thys ile of Albyon (as before is sayd) in the yere of the world .iiii. thousand and .lxiii. Then by these foresayd reasons Brute toke possession of this ile of Al¦byon / in the yere of the worlde, as be¦fore is sayde, before the buyldyng of the cytye of Rome, as by the foresayd reasons may be also prouyd .iiii. hun¦dred and .vii. yeres: and before the in¦carnacyon of our blessyd sauyour fo∣lowynge the same accompte / a thou∣sande an hundred .xxx. and vi. yeres. ¶Thus endeth thaccomptynge of the yeres of the worlde, from the crea¦cyon of Adam vnto the incarnacyon of Chryste. THE PROLOGE WHan I aduertyse in my remembraunce The manyfolde storyes, in order duely sette Of kyng & princes, ye whilom had gouernaūce Of Rome and Italye, and other further fette As of Iewes & Grekes, the whyche haue no let But that men may se in order seryously How longe they reygned, & how successyuely. Of Fraunce and other I myght lykewyse reporte To theyr great honour, as of them doth appere, But to Englande yf I shall resorte Ryght mysty storyes, doutfull and vnclere Of names, of tymes, and of the duraunt yere That kynges or prynces ruled that famouse yle Almoste vncertayne how I shuld guyde my style. And for of cunnynge I am full destytute To brynge to frame so great a mystery: I nyll presume wythout other refute To ioyne suche a worke, or yt to rectyfye To me yt semyth so farre sette awrye In tyme of yeres, to other dyscordaunt That to my dull wytte yt is not atteynaunt To brynge in order a thynge of suche weyght And cause yt to agre wyth other olde storyes,
But yt to remytte to them that ben sleyght And sharpe in lecture, and haue kepte theyr studyes And sought the bokes of many olde hystoryes And haue in cronycles full experyence To frame suche a worke by theyr great prudence. And I lyke ye prētyse, that hewyth the rough stone And bryngeth yt to square wyth hard strokes & many That the mayster after may it ouergone And prynte therin his fygures and his storye Any so to worke yt after his proporcynary That yt may appere to all that shall yt se A thynge ryght perfyte, and well in eche degre. So haue I now sette out this rude warke As rough as the stone not cōmen to the square That the lerned, and the studyed clerke May yt ouer polyshe, and clene do yt pare Flowryshe yt wyth eloquence, wherof yt is bare And frame yt in order, that yet is out of ioynt That it with olde authours may gree in euery poynt. Besechynge hym, that wyll so take the payne Or any other, that lyste on this to loke where any errour in this by hym is sayne It to correcte and mende this rude boke For by hym that neuer yet any order toke Or gre of scole, or sought for great cunnynge This worke is gaderyd wyth small vnderstandynge. Not for any pompe, nor yet for great mede This worke haue I taken on hande to compyle But onely bycause that I wolde sprede The famouse honour of this fertyle yle That hath contynued by many a longe whyle In excellent honour wyth many a royall guyde Of whom the dedes haue sprong to the world wyde. But of those dedes me lyste not here to shewe For in the sequele they shall well appere And in shorte processe, and in as wordes fewe As I goodly may, I shall lynke in fere The storyes of Englande, and fraunce so dere That to the reader yt may well be saye what kynges to gyder ruled these landes twayne. And in the pryncypyll of the reygne of euery kyng
As well of one and other more and lesse what yere of the worlde he toke begynnynge To guyde his realme: and farther besynesse I wyll eke take, to shewe and expresse what terme of yeres euery prynce dyd reygne. And in what honour he dyd his tyme maynteyne. The tyme also how longe the Brytons ruled, And how by Saxons they lastely were put oute. Then of Danes / whyche both landes defoyled By theyr outrage / and of theyr fury stoute: Of whom both nacyons stode longe in great doute, Tyll Fraunce wyth them allyed by maryage And Englande lastely voyded that lynage. Then how the Normayns, by wyllyā cōquerour, Entrede this lande, and helde the seygnory A certayne of tyme, tyll the hygh gouernour Restored the blode of Saxons enterly And of the Scottes, that neuer coude apply To kepe theyr allegeaunce / but many a tyme rebelled And to be true were full often compelled. The fatall warre, that hath dured so longe Twene Fraūce and Englande, to both theyr damage And of the peace, that hath ben vnderfonge Both by great othes / and eke by maryage. Of walys geryshenesse / and of theyr lyght dotage How they were scourged for theyr vnstedfastnesse, wyth dyuers other, whyche I shall after expresse. And for that London, that auncyent cytye Hath euer perseueryd in vertuous noblesse To the great honour, as may consydred be, Of all this lande / in welth and great largesse Therfore I thynke somwhat to expresse Of theyr good order, and cyuyle polycy That they so longe haue ruled theyr cytye by. And of theyr rulers / as they are yerely chosen To rule the cōmonte by theyr dyscrecyon, I shall you shewe, and to you dysclosen The names of mayres and shyryffes of that towne And all suche actes / as by reuolucyone In theyr dayes fyll / so that there shall appere The prynces actes, whyche chaunged yere by yere.
Of Fraunce also the cronycle shall ensew In his dewe order / so that ye may knowe, when they beganne theyr prynces to renewe And from the seruage when they were kept lowe Of the Romayns / whom they dyd ouerthrowe And of theyr names that they whylom dyd chaunge Of theyr fyrst baptysme, and of theyr names straūge. Thus in this boke maye you here and se Of bothe landes the cronycles entyere, wyth other maters / whyche regystred be Of olde wryters, suche as wrote full clere Actes of prynces done both farre and nere, And them engrosed wyth great dylygence: wherby to theyr folowers myght growe experyence. Into .vii. partes I haue this boke dyuyded So that the reder may chose where he wyll. The fyrste conteyneth, how the Brytons guyded This lande from Brute, Moliuncius vntyll. And from Moliuncius I have sette for skyll To the nynthe yere of kynge Cassibelan The seconde parte / for that the Romaynes than Conquered Brytayne. And thens to Seueryne The thyrde parte I haue also assygned. The fourth endyth then at Constantyne. The fyfte at Cadwalader I haue also dyffned. At the conquest I have eke determyned The .vi. parte. And of the Seuenth or laste At our redoubted prynce I haue the ende caste. Henry the .vii. whom god preserue and saue, And hym defende from all aduersyte, Besechynge them that wyll the laboure haue This boke to rede / or any parte to se That where defaute is / yt may corrected be wythout dysdayne / and that they wyll supporte And ayde this worke wyth all theyr comforte. And for this boke includeth storyes fele, And to wchyth thynges done in sondry place So that one tyme muste wyth an other dele To kepe the yeres, the tyme, and the space Therfore this name yt shall now purchace (Concordaunce of storyes) by me prouyded The auctor sans nome fynally deuysed.
And for thys worke may haue the better spede To prayer me thynketh yt is ryght necessarye That I shulde fall, consyderynge my nede That I must haue, for lacke of due studye, where through that connynge and perfyte memory Of thynges taken, when I was yonge and hynde Ben farre sette of, and putte from my mynde. By this is ignoraunce now comen in place And oblyuyon hath sette in hys fote So that knowlege from me they done race, wherby in olde auctours I myght fynde some boot In latyn and frenche, that in theyr dytees swoot These olde wryters haue so compendyously Sette the olde storyes in order dylygently. But in this prayer I thynke nought to be vsed As dyddyn these poetys in theyr olde dayes, whyche made theyr prayers to goddes abused As Iupiter and Mars, that in theyr olde lawes, were named goddes, and fayned in theyr sawes, That they were goddes of batayll and rychesse And hadde in them great vertue and prowesse. For what may helpe these fayned goddes all As Saturne or Mercury, or yet bryght Apollo, Bacchus, or Neptune, or Pluto the thrall, Eolus, Morynos, or blynde Cupido, Or yet that goddesse, the fayre Iuno, Diana, or Pallas, or Ceres the fre, Or yet the Musys that ben thryes thre? wherto shulde I call vnto Caliope Moder of Orpheus, wyth swete armony That of eloquence hath the soueraynte, Or to Carmentis, whyche by her fyrste studye The latyne letters foūde out perfytly Syns all these were mynystres of god immortall And hadde in them no power dyuynall? wherfore to the lorde, that is celestyall I wyll now crye, that of hys influence Of grace and mercy, he wyll a droppe lette fall, And sharpe my wytte wyth suche experience, That this may fynyshe wyth his assystence, wyth fauour of the virgyn, his moder moste excellent, To whom I thus pray, wyth mynde and hole entent.
Assit principio sancta Maria meo. Moste blessyd lady, comforte to suche as calle To the for helpe, in eche necessyte, And what thou aydest, may in no wyse apalle But to the best is formyd in ylke degre: wherfore good lady, I praye yt may please the At my begynnynge my penne so to lede That by thyne ayde this worke may haue good spede THE FYRST CHAPITER. Syns that I haue shewed vnto you, what season and tyme of the yeres of ye world Brute entred fyrste this yle of Albyon: me semyth yt is cōue¦nyent, that I also shew how and for what cause yt was fyrste named Al∣byon. The whych so toke fyrst name, as wytnessyth Strabo and other wri¦ters, of the whyte clyues or rockes, yt stande vppon the sees syde, and are farre seen in clere wether and bryght dayes. wherof it was of olde wryters named Albyon, as yt were the whyte lande. whyche sayenge affermyth al∣so Ranulphe & dyuerse other: so that yt may certaynly be knowen, that yt toke not that fyrste name of Albyne doughter of Dioclecyan kyng of Si¦rye, as in the englyshe cronycle is af¦fermyd. For in all olde storyes or cro¦nycles is not founde, that any suche kynge of that name reygned ouer the Syriens, or yet Assyriens: nor yet any suche storye, that his .xxx. dough∣ters shuld slee theyr .xxx. husbandes, as there is surmysed, was put in wri¦tynge. whyche, yf eny such wonder hadde ben there wrought, shulde not haue ben vnremembred of the wry∣ters & auctours of that partyes: con¦syderynge that many lesse wonders are put in writynge by the sayde wry¦ters. wherfore it ys more apparant, yt yt toke that fyrst name of Albyon, as aboue is sayde / then of Albyne dou∣ghter of the sayde Dioclecyon. And as to the Geaūtes that Brute founde in this yle at his arryuayll, they myght be brought into this lāde by some meane of shyppes or other wyse, rather then to be borne of those women, as there also is imagyned. Of this yle the auctours Alpherd and Beda tell many wonders / which in the fyrst boke of Policronycon are suffyciētly towched, where it is sayd, yt this yle is called an other worlde. For as sayth Solinus, the edge of the Frenche cliffe shuld be the ende of the world, yf this yland ne were not. Many other thynges ben there specy¦fyed, the whyche I passe ouer. Thys yle is closyd on all sydes with ye see / & stretcheth in length out of the sowth into the north / hauynge in the sowthest syde Fraunce / in the south ye land of Spayne / in the north ye coūtre of Norway / & in ye weste the coūtre of Irland. And hath in length from Totnesse to Catenessey .xv. my¦les beyonde Mychell Stowe in Cor¦newayle vpon .viii. hundred myles. And to reken the brede from saynte Dauyds lande in walys called Me∣nema to Douer clyffes: it cōteyneth after moste wryters .iii. hundred my∣les. And yf yt be rekened from ye sayd place in walys, vnto parmouthe in Norfolk, not so much, but lesse by .lx. myles, after some wryters. And Be∣da saith it cōteineth ouer .CC. miles.
And this ile was fyrste as aboue ys sayde, named Albyon: and secunda∣ryly Britayne after Brute: & thyrde  of Anglis by cōmaūdmēt of Egberte kynge of Anglys, and of westsaxons: all be yt that after some wryters yt was called Anglia, after the name of the quene of this lande name Anglia: albe it that therof is founde lytell authoryte. This ile was fyrst cōqueryd by ye Romayns / and so contynued vnto them as trybutary, and vnder theyr rule, as after in the ende of the story of Gracianus shall appere, ouer .iiii. hūdred yeres: secondely by the Sa∣xōs: thyrdely by ye Danys: & fourth∣ly by the Normans: and was deuy∣ded fyrst by Brute in thre partes / as in the storie shall appere folowynge. THE .II. CHAPITER. BRute of the auncyent and no∣ble blode of Troyans, dyscen¦dyd of Eneas a Troyan and of the doughter of Pryame kynge of the Troyans: whyche Eneas receyued of his sayde wyfe a sonne named As∣canius, the whych was kynge of the countre of Italye nexte after hys fa∣ther Eneas. For so yt was, that after the fore∣sayde cytye of Troy was, as before is sayde, by the Grekes subuertyd: Eneas, whyche entendyd to haue sa¦uyd from dethe the fayre Polixena doughter of kynge Pryam / was for that dede by Agamemnon, duke or chyefe leder of the Grekes, exyled frō Troy: the whyche accōpanyed wyth a great nomber of Troyans, wythin iii. yeres after his departynge from Troye, landed in ye coūtre of Italye. And there after dyuerse conflyctys and bataylles hadde wyth Latynus then kynge of Italye: he maryed by the agrement of the sayde Latinus, hys doughter named Lauina. Up∣pon ye which he gatte a sonne, and na¦med hym Syluius Posthumus: of the whych after some wryters descen¦dyd Brutus fyrste kynge of Albyon. But for a more concordaunce of this worke and conuenyencye of yeres, As testyfyeth Policronia, Guydo de Colūna, wryter of storyes, & other: Ascanius the fyrste sonne of Eneas, gotten vppon hys fyrste wyfe, hadde a sonne named Siluius / whyche af∣ter some wryters is named Siluius Eneas: this Siluius Eneas was fa¦ther to Brute. Of this is dyuers opi¦nyons, whereof some are manyfestly shewed in the .xxvii. chapyter of the seconde boke of Polycronycon. Then yt foloweth in ye story: this Brute beyng of the age of .xv. yeres, slewe his father in shotyng at a wyld beste. And as some authours haue / he slewe also hys moder in tyme of his byrth. But for the laste dede, by agrement of all wryters, he was ba∣nyshed the countre: and after by for¦tune landed wyth his conpanye in a prouynce of Grece / where at ye tyme reygned a kyng named Pandrasus, or after some wryters Pandarus: ye whyche kynge, as affermyth Geffrey of Monmouth, was lynyally descen¦dyd of the blode of Achylles. In this prouynce Brute founde many Troyans, as captiuys & thrall to the Grekes, wyth the whyche he conspyred & faughte wyth ye Grekes sondry tymes: & lastely for a fynall concorde toke to wyfe the doughter of the sayd Pandrasus, name Igno¦gen. After whyche maryage solemny¦syd: the sayde Brute, by coūsayle of ye Troyans, with a certayne of shyp∣pes well vytaylled / departed out of Grece, and soughte his aduenture. whyche after many daungers of the
passed / he landed wyth his company in a parte or yle of Affrica named (as sayth Guydo and other) Lergesia. wythin whyche yle at those dayes stode an old temple dedycate in ye ho¦noure of Diua or Diana a goddesse of mysbyleued people. The whyche temple, when Brute had ap{per}ceyuyd anon he yode into yt / where knelyng before the aulter, wyth great deuocy¦on, sayde these versys folowynge. Diua potens nemorum: terror syluestribus apris, Cui licet amfractus ire per aethereos. Infernas{que} domos, terestria iura resolue, Et dic quas terras nos habitare velis. Dic certam sedem qua te venerabor in aemon, Qua tibi virgineis templa dicabo choris. The whyche versys are to be vnder¦standen in our moder tonge as after is expowned. Celestyall goddesse, that weldest fryth a woode The wylde bore & bestes thou feryst by thy myght Guyder of shypmen passynge the ragyone flode. The infernall howses, for and the erth of ryght, Beholde, and serche, and shewe where I shall fyght Tell the certayne place, where euerlastyngly A temple of virgyne to the IBalledyfpe. After whyche prayer & obseruaun∣ces after ye pagan ryte, with great de¦uocyon done and exercysed aboute ye auter of ye sayd goddesse or idolle in those days vsed: Brute fill in a slepe. In tyme of whyche slepe apperyd to hym the sayd goddesse, and sayd to hym in maner & forme as foloweth. Brute sub occasum solis trans Gallica regna Insula in oceano est vnde{que} clausa mari: Insula in oceano est habitata gigantibus olins, Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus apta tuit. Hic de prose tua reges nascentur, & ipsis Totius terrae subditus orbis erit. Hanc pete, nan{que} tibi sedes erit in illa perhennis: Hic fiet natis altera Troia tuis. The whyche versys may be englys∣shed as here after foloweth. Brute, farre by wefe, ouer the lnde of Fraunce An yle in occean there is, all closed wyth the see This yle with gyaūtes whilom inhabyt by chaūce Now beynge defee,  apte for thy people & the. In this of th body kynges borne shalbe And of this yle. thou shall be lorde and kynge Serche this, for here a perpetuall see to the And here to thy childern a new City shal spryng. THE .III. CHAPITER. WHen Brute awoke and remēbred hym of this vysyon: a∣nō he called to hym such as he most tru¦sted / and shewed to them what he had seen & harde. wherof they all beynge greatly reioysed: caused great fa∣res to be made, in the whyche they cast wyne, mylke, and other lycours, wyth dyuerse aromate and spyces of moste swettest odour, as in the olde pagan lawes and rytes were vsed. whyche obseruaunce wyth other done: wyth great ioye and myrthe they entryd into theyr shyppes, and pulled vp theyr sayles, & toke theyr course westwarde. And so sayled by the space of .xxx. dayes passynge by many auentures and daungers / as of Philenes, ye lake called Lacus sa∣linarum or salte lake, or the place where salte is made, the ryuer called Malea, & Hercules pyllers / & came lastly to the see Tyrrhen or Turon, where he encoūtred wyth a small na¦uy of shyppes / of the whyche a Tro∣yane and neuew to Brute called Co∣rineus was captayne. whē eyther of them had saluted other, & reioysed of theyr metynge: they to gyder made towarde land, and landyd in the pro¦uynce of Gallia, now called Guyan: of whyche prouynce at that daye a prynce named Groffari{us} was ruler. The whyche hauyng knowlege of ye landynge of these straunges: wyth his power made towarde them, & to
them gaue batayll. But the Troyās were victours and ouercame Groffa¦rius wyth all his knyghtes. In this batayll was slayne a no∣ble Troyane & neuewe to Brute na¦med Turonus, and there buryed. wherfore in remembraunce of ye sayd Turonus Brute buylded there a cy¦tye, and named yt Turon as some authours testyfye. But it shuld seme by the sayenge of Polycronyca / that thylke cytye Turon was buylded a∣fore: all be yt that ye authour of Cro¦nica cronica{rum} affermyth it to be buyl¦ded by Brute in remembraūce of his sayd cosyn Turonus, whych citye at this daye is yet great fame wyth in the realme of Fraunce. This done, the sayde Brutes & Co¦ineus wyth theyr Troyans toke a∣gayne shyppynge / the whyche after iii. dayes or fewe dayes saylyng, lan¦dyd at an hauen or porte in Corne∣wayll, named at this day Totnesse: & from thens yode serchyng the land and coūtre, the yere as before is sayd iiii. thousande .lxiii / before the buyl∣dynge of Rome folowynge the fore∣sayde accompte .iiii. hundred and .xx. before the incarnacyon of Cryste .xi. hundred, & .xxxvi: and before Alexan¦der the great conquered the worlde, eyght hundred and .xi: also before any kynge reygned ouer the Frenshe men / or that they were clere quyte of theyr trewage agayne ye Romayns, xv. hundred and .lvi. THE .IIII. CHAPITER. REtourne we then to Brute / whyche after his landyng in this ile of Alby¦on: circuyd & ser¦chyd ye land ouer all / and foūde yt full fertyle & plen¦teous of wode and of grasse, and gar¦nysshed with many fayre ryuers and stremes. And in his trauaylynge the lande / he was encountred wyth ma∣ny great and myghty gyauntes / the whych he destroyed. Among ye which as reherseth that Englyshe cronicle: was one of passyng strength named Gogmagog / the whyche he caused to wrestle wyth Cormeus or Coryne his neuewe besyde Douer: in which wrestlinge that gyaūt brake a rybbe in the syde of Cormeus. where tho∣rough Corine{us} beyng sore amoued, wyth great strength supprysed that gyaunt, & cast hym downe the rocke of Douer. By reason wherof as affer¦myth ye said englyshe cronicle, ye place was named the fall of Gogmagog. But after that ye name was chaū¦ged & called the fall of Douer / which to this daye enduryth. For this dede and other Brute gaue vnto his sayd neuewe Corineus or Coryn the hole countre of Cornewayll. And whē Brute had thus destroy¦ed the gyauntes, & serchyd the sayde yle of Albyō thoroughly: he cōmyng by ye ryuer of Thamis, for pleasure ye he had in that ryuer, with also the cō¦modytyes therunto adioynynge / be∣gan there to buylde a cytye in ye remē¦braunce of the cytye of Troye lately subuerted, & named it Troynouant / whyche is as myche to saye as newe Troy: whych name endured tyll the cōmynge of Lud after kynge of Bry¦tayne vpon the tyme of a thousande lxviii. yere. But ye sayd kyng cōmaun¦dyd yt to be called Luddys towne / which by shortnesse of speche is now called London. Then whē Brute had thus buyl∣ded his cytye, & saw yt he was stablys¦shed in his realme quyetly: he thē by thaduise of his lordes / cōmaunded ye sayd ile & coūtre to be called Britayn and his people Brytons / and so con¦tynued his reygne prosperousely.
In the whyche tyme he stablysshed and ordred his people to lyue in tyl∣lynge of theyr lande and otherwyse. This Brute had receyued of his wyfe thre sonnes, wherof the fyrste was named Locrinus or Locryne / ye seconde Cambrius or Cambre / and ye third Albanactus or Albanakt. To the fyrst and eldest, he besette this yle of Brytayne, the whyche after was na¦med myddell Englande / whych is to meane Troynouant, wyth all ye coū∣tres there about lyenge, cōteynynge est, west, & sowth. And for this cause, and for yt shuld sounde towarde the name of the sayd Locryne: this parte of Brytayne was longe after called Loegria or Logiers. To the seconde sonne Cambre, he beset or appoynted to hym the coū¦tre of walys / the whyche was fyrste named after hym Cambria. This in the eest syde was somtyme departed from Englande by the ryuer of Se∣uerne: But now in the north syde the ryuer named Dee at Chester depar∣teth England and walys: and in the sowth the ryuer that is called Uaga at the castell of Strynglyng parteth Englande and walys. To the thyrde sonne Albanakt, he besette the north parte of this yle, and named yt Albyon / or more very¦ly the sayd countre toke after ye name of the sayd thirde sonne, and was cal¦led Albania. This coūtre was after named Scotlande / and is deuyded from Loegria or Logiers, as saythe holy Beda by two armys of ye see, but they mete not. The eest arme of these two begynneth about ii. myles from the mynster of Eburcurynge, in the west syde of Penulton̄. The weste arme of those twayne hath in ye ryght syde or somtyme hadde, a stronge cy¦tye named Acliud, whych in ye Bret∣tysshe tunge was called Clyntton, & stādeth vppon the ryuer called Clynt Thus whē Brute had diuided this yle of Brytayne, as before is shewed in thre partes, and hadde holden the pryncypate therof nobly by the terme of .xxiiii. yeres after most cōcordaūce of writers: he dyed, and was enteryd or buryed at Troynouāt or London. THE .V. CHAPITER. LOcrinus or Lo∣cryne ye fyrst or el∣dest son of Brute was made kynge of Brytayne of ye countre of Logi∣ers / the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .lxxx. and .vii. The whych helde to his parte, as sayth Policro∣nicon, and also Guydo de Columna, the countre that stretcheth from the south see vnto the ryuer of Humbre, as before is expressyd. whyle this Locrinus thus reyg∣ned in Logiers: his brother Albana¦ctus beynge ruler, as before is sayd of Albania or Scotlande, was war∣reyd by a duke, whome the cronycle of Engāld nameth Humbre / ye which slewe Albanakt in playne batayll. ye shall vnderstande yt this Hum¦ber at the daye of his commynge in¦to Albania was not named Humber / but after olde wryters he was called kynge of Hunnys or kyng of Sithia without other addicyon. This kyng as before is sayde, after he thus sub∣duyd Albanactus / held the lande of Albania, tyll after ye Locrinus wyth his brother Cambre, gathered a gret power of men of armys, and yode a∣gaynst the sayde kynge of Hunnys / and by strength of theyr Britons cha¦syd and subduyd the sayde Hūnys so sharpely, that many of thē with theyr kyng were drowned in a ryuer, which departyth England and Scotland. And for so myche as to the wryter of
the storye of Brytons, his name was declared to be Humber: therfore the sayde auctor affermyth, that the sayd Humber ye ryuer toke the fyrste name of hym / whyche yet contynueth to this daye. Furthermore testyfyeth the sayde auctour, that after this victory thus obteyned by these two forsayde bro∣therne: this Locrinus enamowred hym selfe vppon a fayre wenche na∣med Estrylde, and doughter of the forenamed Humber / and her kept vn¦lefully by a certayne of tyme. where wyth his wyfe named Guendoloena beynge sore dyscontent / excyted her fader and frēdes to make warre vp∣pon the sayde Locryne her husbande. In the whyche warre lastly he was slayne / when he hadde reygned or ru¦led Loegria or Logiers after the con¦cordaunce of moste writers .xx. yeres: and was buryed by his fader in the cytye of Troynouaunt / leuyng after hym a yonge sonne gottē vppon his wyfe named Madan. THE VI. CHAPITER. GUēdoloena or Guē¦doleyne the wyfe of Locrinus, & dough¦ter of Corine{us} duke of Cornewayle / for so myche as Ma∣dan her sonne was yonge to gouerne the lande: was by cōmune assent of all ye Brytōs made ruler of the yle of Brytayne, the yere of the world .iiii. thousande, a hūdred and .vii. And so hauyng possession of the sayde yle, wele and dyscretly she ruled yt, to the comfort of her subiec∣tes / tyll the tyme her sonne Madan came vnto hys lawfull age. At the whiche season she gaue ouer the rule and domynyon to hym / after she had ruled (as before ys sayde) thys yle xv. yeres. THE VII. CHAPITER. MAdan the sonne of Locryne & of Guē∣dolyne before na∣med: was made ru¦ler of Britayne, in the yere of ye world iiii. thousande .C. and .xxii. Of thys is lytell or no memory made by any wryters / excepte that some wryte of hym, that he vsed great tyranny a∣monge his Brytons. Neuerthelesse all or the more {per}te of writers agreen / that he ruled this ile of Britayn by ye terme of .xl. yeres. At ye ende of which terme, he beynge at his dysporte or huntyng, was of wyld bestes or wol¦uys slayne or deuouryd: and left af∣ter him two sonnes, as sayth Policro¦nica, named Menprecius & Manli{us}. THE VIII. CHAPITER. MEnprecius the el∣dest sonne of Ma¦dan was made ru¦ler of Brytayne / in the yere of the worlde .iiii thou∣sande .C.lxii. But he reygned not lōge in peace. For his yonger broder Manlius, of a malycyous and coue¦tyse mynde entendynge to be kynge, and to expell or subdue his brother: excyted the Britons, in such wyse to rebell agayne Menprecius, ye great and dedly warre contynued longe amonge them. Howe be yt lastely by mediacyons of frendes, a daye of communycacyon in louynge maner ner attwene these two bretherne was appoynted. At whyche daye of as∣semble Menprici{us} by treason slewe his brother Manlius / after whose deth he lyued in more tranquylite and rest. where through he fyll into slowth, and by meane of slowth into vnlefull lykynge and lechery / and by
that vyce into hatered of his subiec∣tes by takynge of theyre wyues and chylder: and fynally became so vn∣happy, yt he forsoke his lefull wyfe and concudynes, and fyll into the synne of Sodomye. Thus from one vice he grew into a nother / so that he became odyble to god and man: and lastely goyng on huntynge, and lost of his people / was distroyed of wyld bestes, when he had reygned .xx. ye∣res: leuyng after hym a goodly yon¦lynge begoten of his lefull wyfe na∣med Ebranke. THE .IX. CHAPITER. EBranke the sonne of Menpre∣cius was made ruler of this lande of Brytayne / in the yere of the worlde foure thousande a hundred, lxxx. and .ii: and had, as testyfyeth Policronica, Gaufryde, & other wry¦ters .xxi. wyues: of the whych he re∣ceyued .xx. sonnes and .xxx. dough∣ters / wherof the fayrest was named Gwales, or after some Gualea. He sent these doughters to Albia Silui¦us, whych was the .xi. kynge of Ita¦lye, or the .vii kynge of Latynes / to the ende to haue them maryed to the blood of Troyans. This Ebranke was also a man of fayre statute, & of great strengthe, & by his power and myght he enlarged his domynyon / in so myche that he wanne and occu¦pyed a great parte of Germania by ye ayde and helpe of the Latynes / and retourned thēs wyth great pray & ry¦ches. After whych retourne, he buyl¦ded the cytye of Caerbrank now cal∣led yorke: whych shulde be, as sayth the authour named Flos historiarū, or the Floure of historyes wryten in frenche / in the .xxiii. yere of ye reygne of the sayd Ebranke. which accompt to folow, yt shuld seme that Troyno¦uant or Lōdon was buylded before the sayd cytye of yorke, about an hun¦dred and .xl. yeres: supposyng the cy¦tye of London to be begonne in the seconde yere of Brutes reygne. Also he buylded ī Albania or Scot¦lande the castell of Maydens, the whych is called Edynborgh. After which edyfyces ended and made: he wyth a great armye sayled into Gal¦lia nowe Fraunce, and subdued the Gallis, and retourned wyth great triumphe and rychesse. And when he had guyded this lande of Brytayne nobly by the terme of .lx. yeres, after moste concordaunce of wryters, he dyed, and was buryed at Caerbrank or yorke / leuynge after hym for hys heyre his eldest sonne (as sayth Gau¦fryde) named Brute Greneshyelde. THE .X. CHAPITER. BRute Greneshyelde, the sonne of Ebranke, was made gouer¦nour of this lande of Brytayne / the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .ii. hūdred and xlii. Of this Brute is no memory made touchynge any fame / excepte ye Gaufryde sayth that he ru∣led this lande of Brytayne (his fader lyuynge) a certayne tyme / & after his fader by the terme of .xii. yeres. The whyche yeres expyred or endyd: he dyed, and lyeth buryed at Caerbrāk or yorke, leuynge after hym a sonne named Leyll. THE .XI. CHAPITER. LEillus or Leyr son of Brute Greneshielde / was made ru∣ler of Brytayne, in ye yere of ye world iiii.M.CC. & liiii. This was a iuste mā & a louer of peace & equyte / & in his tyme made the town of Caerleyr or Carlyle, and ruled this lande well and honourably by the terme of .xxv. yeres, as testyfyeth the forenamed Gaufryde: and after dyed, and was buryed at Caerleyr be foresayde. But of this Leyr speketh some dele the aboue named authour Floure of
historyes sayeng, yt in the ende of his reygne he fyll to slowth and vnlefull lykyng of his body: by meane wher¦of cyuyle stryfe began to grow with in this realme / ye which was not paci¦fyed by some termes after his dayes: the whyche sayenge is not denyed by the foresayd authour Gaufrid. This Leyll lefte after hym a sonne named Lud, or after some wryters he was named Lud Hurdibras. THE .XII. CHAPITER. LUd or Lud Hurdibras ye son of Leyll, was made ruler of the lande of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .ii. hūdred and .ixxix. This also of Gaufryde is called Hurdibras: the whyche after he was stablyshed in his reygne / ap¦peasyd and drewe to accorde of the dyscorde and varyaunce that hadde spronge in his fathers lyues tyme. The whych discretely appeasyd and endyd / he buylded the towne of Kaer¦kyn, nowe called Caunterbury: the towne also of Kaerguen, now callyd wynton or wynchester: and also a towne called Moūt Paladour, now named Septon or Shaftisbury. In the tyme of buyldyng, of which town of Septon, as affermyth myne au∣thour Gaufride, an egle there spake certayn wordes, ye which he sayth he wyll not declare or wryte for any cer¦taynte. Thus when this sayde Lud hadde ruled this lande nobly by the terme of .xxxix. yeres, he dyed, & lefte after hym a sonne named Baldud. THE .XIII. CHAPITER. BAldud ye sonne of Lud Hurdi¦bras, was made gouernoure of Brytayne in the yere of the world iiii. thousand .iii. hundred and .xviii. This as testyfyed Gaufryde, Poly∣cronica, and other, was well and suf¦fycyently instructe in the connynges or scyēces of astronomy & nigroman¦cye. By thē he made the hote bathes wythin the town of Caerbadon, now named Bathe: the whyche towne or cytye he also buyldyd. But to that re¦pugnyth wyllyam de Malmesbury, saynge that the foresayd hote bathes were made by the industrye, or of the industry of Iulius cesar fyrste empe¦rour of Rome. This Baldud as af¦fermyth the foresayd authour Gau∣fride: taught this lore of nigromācy thorough his realme: & fynally toke in yt such pryde & presumpsyon / yt he toke vpō him to fle in ye ayer. But he fyll vpon the temple of his god Apo¦lyn, & theron was all to torne / when he had ruled Brytayne by the space of .xx. yeres, leuynge after hym a son named Leyr. THE .XIIII. CHAPITER. LEyr ye sonne of Baldud was made ruler ouer ye Britōs, the yere of ye world .iiii.M.ccc. & xxxviii. This Leyr was noble of cōdicyōs, & guyded his land & subiectes in great welth. He made ye towne of Caerleyr nowe called Leyceter or Leycester. And all be yt yt this man helde longe the pryncypate of Brytayne: yet of hym is nothynge left worthy memo∣ry, excepte that Gaufryde sayth, yt he receyued of his wyfe .iii. doughters onely wythout any son / whych were named Gonorilla, Ragan, and Cor∣deilla, the whych he mych loued / but moste specially he loued the yongest, Cordeilla by name. whē this Leyr or Leyth after some wryters, was fallen in competente age, to knowe the mynde of his thre doughters, he fyrst asked Gonorilla the eldeste howe well she loued hym: the whych callyng her goddes to re∣corde, sayd she loued hym more then her owne soule. wyth this answere the father beynge well contented, de¦maunded of Ragan the seconde dou¦ghter, howe well she loued hym.
To whom she answered, and affer∣mynge wyth great othes, sayde that she coude not wyth her tong expresse the great loue that she bare to hym: affermynge furthermore, that she lo¦ued hym aboue all creatures. After these pleasaūt answeres had of those two doughters, he called before hym Cordeilla ye yongest. The whych vn∣derstādyng ye dyssymulacyō of her .ii. susters, entēdyng to proue her fader, sayd: most reuerent fader where my ii. systers haue dyssymuled wyth the with their pleasaūt word fruteles, I knowyng ye great loue & faderly zele, that toward me euer before this time thou hast borne (for ye whych I may not speke to the otherwyse thē my cō¦scyence ledyth me) therfore I saye to the father I haue loued the euer as my fader, & shall cōtynually whyle I lyue, loue the as my naturall father. And yf thou wylt further be inquisy¦tyfe of the loue that I to the bere: I ascertayne the, that asmyche as thou arte worthy to be beloued / euen so myche I loue the and no more. The fader wyth this answere be∣ynge discōtent: maryed his .ii. elder doughters, that one vnto the duke of Cornewayll, & that other vnto the duke of Albania or Scotlande & de¦uyded wyth thē two in maryage his lande of Britayne after his deth, and the one halfe in hand duryng his na¦turall lyfe. And for the thyrde Cor∣deilla reserued nothynge. It so fortuned after / that Aganip¦pus, whych the cronycle of England named Agamp and kyng of Fraūce / harde of ye beaute and womāhode of Cordeilla, and sent vnto her fader, & axyd her in maryage. To whome yt was answered, that the kynge wold gladly gyue to hym his doughter, but for dowar he wolde not departe with: for he had all promysed vnto hys other two doughters. Aganippus thus by his messagy∣ers enfourmed: remembred the ver¦tues of the forenamed Cordeilla / & wythoute promesse of dowar maried the sayde Cordeilla. But here is to be noted / yt where this Aganippus or Agamp is called in dyuerse cronicles kyng of Fraūce: yt can not agre with other hystories, nor wyth the cronycle of Fraunce. For yt is testyfyed by Polycronica, by Peter Pictauyēce, by mayster Ro¦bert Gagwyne, by byshop Antonyne and many other cronicles: that lōge after thys daye was no kynge in Fraunce / nor longe after yt was cal¦led Frauce: but at this daye the in¦habytauntes therof were called Gal¦li, and were trybutaryes vnto Rome wythoute kynge, tyll the tyme of Ua¦lentinianus emperour of Rome / as hereafter in this worke shall be ma∣nyfestly shewed. The storye of Britons sayth, that in the tyme that Leyr reygned in Bri¦tayne: the land of Fraunce was vn¦der the domynyon of .xii. kynges, of the whych Aganippus shuld be one. The whyche sayenge is full vnlyke to be trew, whych myght be prouyd by many reasons, which I passe ouer for length of tyme. THE .XV. CHAPITER. tHen yt foloweth in the story, after this Leyr was fallen in age, these forsayde two du∣kes thynkyng longe or the lordshyp of Brytayne was fallen to theyr han¦des: arrose agayne theyr father (as testifyeth Gaufryde) and beraft hym the gouernaunce of the land vppon certayne cōdycyons to be contynued for terme of lyfe: the whyche in pro∣cesse of tyme more and more were mi¦nyshyd, as well by Maglaunus as by Hēninus husbādes of the forena∣med Gonorild & Ragan. But moste
dyspleased Leyr the vnkyndnesse of his two doughters, consyderynge theyr wordes to hym before spoken and sworne / and now founde & pro∣uyd them all contrarye. For the whyche he beyng of neces¦syte constrayned: fledde his lande, & sayled into Gallia, for to be comfor∣ted of his doughter Cordeilla, wher∣of she hauyng knowlege, of naturall kyndnesse cōforted hī: & after shew∣ynge all the maner to her husbande, by his agrement receyuyd hym & his to her lordes courte / where he was cherished after her beste maner. Longe yt were to shew vnto you ye circumstaunce of ye vtterans of the vnkyndnesse of his two doughters, and of the wordes of comfort gyuen to hym by Aganippus and Cordeil¦la, or of the coūsaile and purueyaūce made by the sayde Aganippus & his lordes for restorynge of Leyr agayn to his dominyō. But fynally he was by the helpe of the sayde Aganippus restored agayne to his lordshyp / and so possessed, lyued as ruler & gouer∣nour therof by the space of .iii. yeres after. In whych season dyed Aganip¦pus. And when this Leyr had ruled this lande by the terme of .xl. yeres, as affermeth dyuerse cronycles, he dyed and was buryed at his towne of Caerleir or Leycestre: leuynge af¦ter hym for to inheryte the lande his doughter Cordeilla. THE .XVI. CHAPITER. COrdeilla the yongeste dough¦ter of Leyr / was by assente of the Brytons made lady of Brytayn / in the yere of ye world .iiii. thousande iii. hundred & .lxxxxviii: the whyche guyded the lande full wysely by the tyme or space of .v. yeres complete. The whyche tyme expyred and rōne her .ii. neuewes called Margan and Cunedagi{us}, sonnes of her .ii. susters came vpon her land / and made ther∣in great waste and destruccyon / and at the laste toke her and cast her into a stronge pryson / where she beynge dyspayred of ye recouery of her estate (as testyfyeth Gaufryde) slewe her selfe, whenne she hadde reygned as before is declared, by the terme of fyue yeres. THE .XVII. CHAPITER. CUnedagius and Marganus neuewes as before is sayde, of Cordeilla, departyd this lande of Brytayne betwene them, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousand .iiii. hun¦dred and .iii. That is to wyt the coū¦trey ouer and beyond Humber fyll to Margan towarde Catenessey: and the other parte of the lande towarde weste as reherseth Gaufride, fyll to Cunedagius. After two yeres were ronne & en∣ded / some euyll dysposyd came vnto Margan, and sayde, that to hym yt was great reproche and dyshonour (consyderynge that he was comen of Gonorilla the elder suster, & of Ma¦glaunus her husbande / & Cunedag was descended of Ragan the yonger and Hemnius her husbande) that he had not ye rule of all ye land: to which sedycyous {per}sons Margan gyuynge credence, was supprysed with pryde and couetyse / and anon by theyr coū¦sayle assembled a great hoste & made warre vpon his sayde brother / bren∣nynge and destroyeng his land with out mercy. wherof Cunedag beynge ware, in all hast gaderyd his people: & after certayne message sent to hym of the reconcylyacyon / seynge there was no peace to be made, but by the iudgement of batayll, he mette wyth his brother in playne felde: where ye goddes were to hym so fauourable, that he slewe myche of the people of
his brother, and cōpellyd hym to fle. After whyche vyctory thus had, he pursued Margan from coūtre to coū¦tre, tyll he came wythin the countre or prouynce of Cambria or walys: in the whyche coūtre the sayde Mar¦gan gaue one other batayll vnto his brother Cunedag: but for he was farre the weker, he there was ouerco¦men and slayne in the felde. whyche felde or coūtre, where the sayd Mar¦gan fought & was slayne, is to thys daye called Glaumargan / whych is to meane in our vulgare tung, Mar¦gan lande. And thus was Margan slayne, whan he hadde regned wyth his brother two yeres. THE .XVIII. CHAPITER. CUnedagius before named the sonne of Hemnius and Ra∣gan yōger doughter or myddell dou¦ghter of Leyr, was made ruler and lorde of all Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .iiii. hun∣dred & .v. Of the whyche is nothyng worthy memorye lefte in wrytyng: but that he guyded ye lande after the deth of his brother well and honora¦bly by the terme of .xxxiii. yeres. After which terme ended, he dyed and was buryed at Troynouant or London: leuynge for his heyre a sonne (as te∣styfyeth Gaufryde) named Riuallo or Rinallo / or after some wryters Reyngnolde. THE .XIX. CHAPITER. BIuallus the sonne of Cune∣dagius, was made gouer∣noure of the Brytons / in the yere of the world .iiii. thousand .iiii. hundred and .xxxviii: the whyche of wryters is called fortunat and restfull. This Riuallus ruled ye Brytōs with great sobernesse, & kepte the lande in great welthe and prosperyte / all be yt that of hym is lefte no specyall memorye of acte done in his tyme / except myn authour sayth, that in ye tyme of his, reygne yt reyned blood by the space of .iii. days contynually wythin the lande of Brytayne. After the whych reyne ensued so great excedynge nō∣ber of multitude of flyes / the which were to the people so noyous and cō¦tagyous, that they slewe myche peo¦ple. And after that (as sayth an olde authour, whose name is vnknowē) ensued great sykenesse and mortally¦tie, to the great desolacyon of thys sayde lande. Then yt foloweth in the story, whē this Riuallus hadde reygned, after moste cōcordaunce of writers, by the terme of .xlvi. yeres: he dyed, & was buryed, as testyfyeth the sayde olde authour, at Caerbrank or yorke / le∣uynge after hym a sonne (as wytnes∣syth Gaufride) named Gurgustius. In the tyme of the reygne of thys kynge, after moste concorde of wry∣ters: ye famous cytye of Rome shuld be buylded / as is shewed more playn¦ly in the treatyse in the begynnyng of this warke. THE .XX. CHAPITER. GUrgustius the sonne of ye fore named Riuallus, was made ruler of Brytayne / in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousane .iiii. hundred lxxxiii. This in ye cronicle of Englād is named Gorbodiam sonne of Reyg¦nold, Of the which is lytell memory made, other of his regne or of his de∣des by any authours or wryters of ye hystorye of Brytayne / excepte the a∣boue named olde authoure, and the authoure called the floure of hysto∣ryes, wytnessyth, that he reygned xxxviii. yeres: leuynge after hym none heyre of his bodye begotten / and lastely dyed and was buryed by his fader at Caerbrank or yorke. Rome as aboue ys towched, was fyrst buylded & edyfyed in the tyme
of Riuallus / and after moste writers In the yere of the worlde .iiii. thou∣sande .iiii. hundred .lxx: after the buyl¦dyng of Troynouāt or London .iiii. hūdred .vii. yeres: whych folowyng that accompte shulde be in the .xxxii. yere of the forsayde Riuallus. THE .XXI. CHAPITER. SIsillius, or after some wry∣ters, Siluius the brother of Gurgustius, as affermeth the fore∣sayde olde cronycle, was made chyef ruler of Brytayne / in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .v. hundred and .xxi. This in ye englyshe boke is named Seyzill. Of the whych is no mency∣on made nother of his reygne nor de¦des, excepte that Geffrey of Mon∣mouth wryter of ye hystoryes of Bry¦tons, sayth that he reygned two ye∣res. whyche sayenge is not accor∣daunte wyth other wryters. But more to the cōuenyency of tyme and agrement of other cronyclers, accor∣dyng to the sayeng of the forenamed old authour: he reygned by ye terme of .xlix. yeres / and after dyed & was buryed at Caerbadon or Bathe / and lefte after hym none heyre of his bo¦dye begotten. THE .XXII. CHAPITER. IAgo or Lago / ye cosyne of Gur¦gustius, as wytnesseth Gau∣fryde, as nexte inherytoure, was made gouernour of Britayne / in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .v. hundred .lxx. This also ys vnmyn∣ded of wryters, other for restfulnesse of tyme, or ellys for rudenesse of his dedes, that clerkes lyste not to spēde any tyme in wrytynge of such dedes. Of hym is nothynge specyfyed, sa∣uynge the forenamed olde authoure ioyneth to his tyme of reygne .xxv. ye¦res: and also he sayth he dyed wyth∣oute issue, and was buryed by hys cosyn at Caerbrank or yorke. THE .XXIII. CHAPITER BInimacus the sonne of Sisil¦li{us} as some wryters haue, but more verytably as sayth the olde cro¦nycle, ye brother of Lago, was made ruler of Brytayne / in the yere of the world .iiii. thousand .iiii. hūdred .lxxx and xv: the whyche (as his brother before hym) passed his tyme without any notable actes or dedes: so that of hym is no more memorye made, thē of his brother. For the more par∣ty they that wrote the faytes & dedes of Brytons, make but a shorte reher¦sayll of these .v. kynges / yt is to saye, from Ryuallo to Gorbodug / sayeng that after Ryuallo succedyd Gurgu¦stius / after hym succedyd Lago, to Lago succedyd Kinimacus / & after Kinimacus succeded Gorbodug. Of these .v. kynges or rulers is made ly¦tell other mencyon. Thenne yt fo∣loweth in the sayd olde cronicle / that when this Kinimacus had reygned liiii. yeres: he dyed and was buryed by his brother at Caerbrāk or york: leuynge after hym a sonne, as testy∣fyeth Flos historiarū / whych sonne was named Gorbodug. THE .XXIIII. CHAPITER. GOrbodug the sonne of Kini∣mac{us}, was made ruler of Bry¦tayne / in the yere of the worlde fo∣lowynge the foresayde accompt .iiii. thousande .v. hundred and .xlix. whych all so passed his tyme lyke vn¦to the forenamed dukes or kynges / wythout any specyall memory of ho∣nour noted by writers. This by most lykelyhode to brynge historyes to ac¦corde: shulde reygne ouer the Bry∣tons the terme of .lxiii. yeres. whych terme endyd, he dyed and lyeth bu∣ryed at new Troy or Lōdon / leuyng
after hym two sonnes named Ferrex and Porrex / or after some wryters Ferreus and Porreus. THE .XXV. CHAPITER. FErrex wyth Porrex hys bro∣ther, sonnes of Gorbodug: were ioyntly made gouernours and dukes of Britayne / in the yere of the worlde foure thousande .vii. hun∣dred and .xi / and contynued in amy¦tye a certayne tyme. After whyche tyme expyred, as witnessyth Policro¦nica and also Gaufride, Porrex be∣ynge couetouse of lordeshyp: gade∣ryd his peple, vnwetynge Ferrex his brother / entendynge to destroy hym. wherof he beynge warned, for lacke of space to assemble his people / for sa¦uegard of his persone, fled sodeynly into Gallia or Fraūce, and axyd ayd of a duke of Gallia named by Gau∣fryde Gunhardus or Suardus: the the whych duke hym ayded and sent hym agayne into Brytayne with his hoste of Gallis. After whose lādynge his brother Porrex with his Brytōs hym mete, and gaue to hym batayll: in the whyche batayll Ferrex was slayne with ye more part of his peple. But here dyscordeth myn authour wyth some other wryters, and wyth the cronycle of Englande: for they te¦styfye, that Porrex was slayne, and Ferrex suruyuyd. But whether of them was lyuyng, the moder of these two brethern named widen settynge a parte all moderly pytye: with help of her women entred the chambre (of hym so lyuynge) by nyght / and hym there slepynge slew cruelly, and cut into small peces. And thus dyed the two foresayde bretherne / after they had thus ruled Brytayne in warre and peace to the agrement of moste wryters .v. yeres. THE .XXVI. CHAPITER. HEre now endeth the lyne or of sprynge of Brute / after the affermaunce of moste wryters. For Gaufride saith after the deth of these forenamed bretherne / great discorde arose amonge the Brytons / y• which longe tyme among them continued: by meane wherof the people and coū¦tre was sore vexed and noyed vnder v. kynges. And further saith Guydo de Columna, that the Brytons ab∣horred the lynage of Gorbodug / for so myche as fyrste that one brother slew that other / and more for the in∣naturall dysposycyon of the morder, that so cruelly slew her owne chylde. The cronycle of Englande sayth, that after the deth of the two forena¦med bretherne / no ryghtfull enhery∣tour was lefte on lyue. wherfore the the people were brought in great dis¦corde / in so myche that the land was deuydyd in foure partyes. So that in Albania was one ruler / in Loe∣gria or Logiers one other ruler / in Cambria the thyrde duke or ruler / & in Cornewayle the .iiii. duke or ru∣ler. But of these .iiii. dukes the en∣glish cronicle alloweth Cloton̄ duke of Cornewayll for moste ryghtefull heyre. Policronyca sayth that after ye deth of the foresayde two bretherne, great dyscorde was in the lande / whyche greuyd the people sore vnder .v. kyn¦ges. But he nother reheseth the na∣mes nor the tymes of theyr regnes / excepte he addeth to, that the sayde dyscorde contynued tyll the tyme of Moliuncius Dumuallo. So yt here appereth no tyme certayn, how lōge this varyaunce and dyscorde amōg the Brytons contynued. But who so lyst to loke vpon a draught made by me in english in ye beginnyng of this boke: he shall se there (yf he please to
caste ouer the tymes and yeres there expressed) that this forsayde discorde contynued nere to the terme of .li. ye∣res. In whyche draught or conceyte yf any man here fynde erroure: of his goodnes lette hym amende & cor¦recte yt / and all other places where he shall by good profe fynde place of correccyon. THE XXVII. CHAPITER. THus here endyth ye fyrst parte of this worke, conteynynge or dyuyded in .vii. partes, as before is shewed. And in a waye of a thank to be gyuen to our moste blessyd ad∣uocate & helper of all wretches, that to her lyste to call / I meane ye moste blessyd vyrgyne our lady saynt Ma¦ry moder of Cryste / for yt her grace hath fortheryd this worke hytherto / and for to impetrate of her the grace and ayde of her moste mercyfull con¦tynuaūce to accomplysh this worke begonne as before is shewed, vnder supporte of her most boūteous grace here wyll I wyth humble mynde sa∣lute her wyth the fyrste ioye of ye .vii. ioyes whych begynneth, Gaude flore virginali &c. Moste virgynall floure of all moste excellent Persynge of angelles the hyest Hierarchy Ioye and be glad, for god omnipotent Hath the lyft vp, and sette moste worthily Aboue the nomber and gloryous company Of his blessyd sayntes, wyth moste hye dignite Nexte after hym moste honoured to be. This fyrst parte to be accompted from the fyrste yere of Brute, vnto the laste yere of the foresayde dys∣corde, or vnto the fyrste yere of Mul∣mutius: includyth of yeres .vii. hun¦dred and foure. ¶Thus endeth the fyrste parte THE SECONDE PARTE. THE .XXVIII. CHAPITER. MUlmutius Dun∣uallo or as some haue Dunuallo Mulmutius, the sonne of Cloten̄ as testyfyeth the englyshe boke, & also Gaufride: was venquesshour of ye other dukes or rulers / and began his reygn ouer the hole monarchy of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousand vii. hundred & .xlviii. This is named in the englyshe cronycle Donebant: the whyche was a noble man, & cau∣syd to be made wythin the cytye of Troynouant a temple, and named it the temple of peace. The whyche af∣ter some opynyons is that place or feld / where ye market of wollen cloth is holden called or named Blakwel∣hall. He also made many good laws the which were long after vsed & cal¦led Mulmuti{us} lawes. These lawes holy Gyldas wrote wyth great dyly¦gence out of the brettishe speche into latyne. And longe tyme here after ye, Aluredus kynge of England turned those lawes oute of latyne into en∣glyshe. He also gaue pryuylege to temples, to plowghes & cytyes, and to the wayes ledynge to ye same. And as some authours wytnesse / he be∣ganne the foure hye wayes of Bry∣tayne / the whych were fynyshed and perfyted of Belinus his sonne, as af¦ter at length shall be declared. The olde cronycle testyfyeth yt this Mul∣mutius, whyche he in his boke na∣meth Molle, made the two townes of Malmesbury and Uyes. And all other writers afferme, that this Mul¦mutius, after he hadde stablyshyd his lande, and sette his Brytons in
good and conuenyent order: by the aduyce of his lordes / he ordeyned hym a crowne or dyademe of gold / & caused hym selfe to be crowned wyth great solempnyte after the vsaunce of pagane lawe then vsed. And for this cause, after the opynyon of some wryters / he is named the fyrste kyng of Britayn. And all ye other before re¦hersyd are named rulers, dukes, or gouernours. Then yt foloweth in the storye / when Mulmuti{us} had guyded ye land well and honorably by the terme of xl. yeres: he dyed and was buryed in the foresayde temple of peace within Troynouant or Lōdon / leuynge af∣ter hym two sonnes named Belinus and Brennus. THE .XXIX. CHAPITER. BElinus and Brenn{us} the two sonnes of Mulmutius: be∣ganne to raygne ioyntly as kynges of Brytayne / in the yere of the world iiii. thousande .viii.C. & viii: so that Belinus held to hym Loegria or Lo¦giers, walys, and Cornewayll / and Brennus held to his parte all ye land ouer & beyonde Humber. with which partycyon eyther of them was cōten¦tyd & pleasyd, as testyfyeth Polycro¦nica, by the terme of .v. yeres. After the whyche terme endyd and expired Brennus entendynge to haue more lande or all: arose agaynste his bro∣ther Belyne, and made vppon hym mortall warre. In the whych warre Brennus was ouersette, and was cō¦pelled to flye the land and sayle vnto Armorica now named lytell Britayn or as sayth Gaufryde, into a countre called Allebrog, as after shalbe more playnely declared / and there allyed hym after the foresayde terme (as be¦fore is sayd) of .v. yeres was expyryd as affermeth Policronica. For Gau¦fryde sayeth in his boke made of the hystory of Brytons / yt after ye terme of .v. yeres afore sayde were expyred and runne, Brennus by sterynge of yonge and euyll counsayll, entēdyng as before is sayde: sayled vnwetyng his brother into Norway, and there maryed the doughter of Elfunge or Elfynge then ruler or duke of Nor∣waye, when this was shewed vnto Belyn, consyderynge the sodayne de¦partyng: in all haste he seasyd Alba∣nia and all the other lande appertey∣nyng to Brenne into his owne hand, and strengthed the cytyes and other stronge places wyth his owne sow∣dyours. wherof when Brenne was warned: he in all possyble haste as∣sembled a great people of the Nor∣wayes, and toke hys shyppynge to sayle into Brytayne. And as he was kepynge his course vpon the see: he was encountred wyth Guilthdacus kynge of Denmarke, the whych had lyen in awayte for hym, for loue of ye wenche yt Brennus had maryed: for before tyme he had requyred her of Elfungeher fader. whē those .ii. flot{is} were mette: strong shotte and fyght was vppon both partyes. But fy∣nally the Danes ouercame the Nor¦wayes or Norganys, and toke the shyppe by strength whych the wēche was in / yt whych anone was brought vnto the shyppe of Guilthdake: and Brenne wyth a fewe of his shyppes lefte was fayne to sauegarde hym selfe by flyght. when Guilthdake hadde thus ob¦teyned ye vyctorye, entendynge to haue sayled towarde Denmarke: in shorte whyle after ye tempestes came so hydous vppon the see, that hys nauye was deuyded and scatered that one frome the other / in suche wyse that he was in fere to haue ben drowned. And at the ende of fyue dayes not wetynge where he was /
wyth fewe shyppes landed in the coū¦tre of Northumberlande, where at that tyme was Belyn prouydyng de¦fence agayne his brothers cōmyng. wherof when word was brought vn¦to Belyn of the landynge of the fore sayde Danoys prynce wyth a small company: he reioysed yt, and cōmaū¦ded hym wyth his shyppes & compa∣ny to be put in sure holde & kepynge. It was not long after but Brēne hadde reculyd and gaderyd to gy∣der the more parte of hys nauye be∣fore (as ye haue harde) chased. And when he hadde theym newely ryg∣gyd and vytayled / he herynge of the aryuayll of Guilthdacus in North∣thūberlād with his wife, sent word{is} of manace vnto his brother Belyn / wyllyng hym to sende vnto hym his wyfe wrōgfully rauyshed by Guilth¦dacus / & also to restore vnto him his land & patrymony / or ellys he wold shorthely inuade his lande, yt for to waste, & his enymy to destroye. The whych desyre or request of Belynus was playnely and shortely denyed. whych knowlege had: Brenn{us} short¦ly after landed in a parte of Albania, and made towarde his brother / and his brother towarde hym: so yt theyr hostes met nere vnto a wood named at that day Calater or Calaterium, where betwene them was a mortall batayll / in so myche that mych peo∣ple fyll vpon both partyes. But last¦ly the Brytons wanne the felde, and chasyd the Norganys or Norways vnto theyr shyppes / chasynge & sle∣yenge them without pyty. And as af¦fermeth myne authour, ye fyght was so cruell and sharpe: that there was slayne to the nomber of .xl.M. men. After this dyscumfyture Brenne was constrayned to flee / and wyth fewe in nomber recoueryd the lande of Gallia. Belinus hauyng thus victorye of his enemyes / after thankes and obla¦cyons made vnto his goddes, after the pagane law: he then assembled his lordes at Caerbrank or yorke, to haue theyr aduyse what he shuld do wyth the prynce of Denmark. In ye whych counsayle yt was concludyd / that the foresayd Guylthdac{us} shulde holde and do homage to the kynge of Britayn for the land of Dēmark, and yerely bere to hym a certayne tri¦bute. whyche done wyth suerty and hostages taken: the sayde Guylth∣dacus wyth his loue was sette at ly∣bertye and leue, to retourne into his owne countre: whych yerely tribute as testyfyeth the englyshe cronycle, was a thousande pounde. THE .XXX. CHAPITER. Then yt foloweth in ye hystory, when Belyn hadde thus vyc¦tory of this enemyes, and was alone possessoure of this realme of Bry∣tayne: the lawes before made by his father he cōfermed, and ordeyned iu∣styce to be mynystred thorough the lande. And for so myche as the .iiii. wayes begon by his fader, were not perfyghtyd and endyd: he therfore causyd workmen to be called, and set theym to paue wyth stone the sayde wayes, that they myght suffycyently be knowen of all waygoers or tra∣ueyllers of the countres as hereaf∣ter ensuyth. The fyrst of these .iiii. wayes was named Fosse, the whyche stretchyd oute of the southe into the north / and begynneth, or at that dayes be∣ganne, at the corner of Totnesse in Cornewayle, and passed forth by De¦uynshyre, Somersetshyre, & so forth by Tutbury vpon Cotteswolde, be∣syde Couētre vnto Leycestre, & from thennes by wylde playnes towarde Newerke, and endyth at the cytye of Lyncoln̄.
The second waye was named wat¦lyngstrete / the which stretcheth ouer thwarte ye wayes of Fosse out of the southest into the northest. This be∣ganne at Douer, and passeth by the myddell of Kente ouer Thamys be∣syde London by weste of westmyn∣ster / and so forth by saynte Albanys in the weste syde of Dunstable, of Stratford, of Towceter, and of we don / by south Kyllyngburne of Kyl∣lebourn̄, by Athicston̄, vnto Gylber∣tes hyll, that now is named wrekyn / and so forth by Seuarn̄ passynge be¦syde wrokceter, & forth vnto Strat∣ton̄ to the myddell of walys vnto a place called Cardycan / at ye Irysh se. The thyrde waye was named Er¦myngstrete. The whyche stretcheth out of the weste northweste vnto the eest southeest, & bygynneth at Me∣nema, the whych is in saynt Dauies lande in weste walys / and so stret∣cheth forth vnto south Hampton̄. The fourth and last waye is called or was called Kykenyldis strete. The which stretcheth forth by worce¦ter, by wycombe, by Birmyngham, by Lychefyld, by Derby, by Chester∣fyeld, by yorke. And so forth vnto Tymmouth: ye whych was suffycyēt¦ly made. He graūted & confermed thē all suche priuyleges as before were graūted by Dūuallo his fader. The whych priuyleges with other lawes by hym made, who yt is desyrous to know: let hym rede ouer ye trāslacy∣on ye holy Gildas made of Mulmu∣tius lawes out of Brytyshe speche in to latyne / and there he shall se the cir¦cumstaunce of euery thynge. In this whyle that Belyn was thus occupyed aboute the nedes of his land / his brother Brenne beyng, as before is sayde, in a prouynce of Gallia takynge sore to mynde hys expulsyon from his naturall coūtre, not hauynge any comforte how he myght attayn to his former dignite, lastely resorted (wyth .xii. persones onely accompanyed) vnto the duke or ruler of that prouynce or countre. For ye shall vnderstande that at those dayes (as testyfyeth Eutropi{us} and other wryters) the Gallis occu∣pyed dyuers countres. And therfore Titus Liuius, whych wrote ye actes and dedes of the Romayns, made dis¦stynccyon of the Gallis / and nameth them that Brēne ladde, when he be∣seigyd the cytye of Rome and after ye capitoyll, Cenonenses Galli / which is to name the Gallis of that coūtre where the cytye of Cena than stode & yet doth (as testyfyeth the authour of cronica cronicarū, and other) in a countre of Italy named at this day Etruria. The whiche cytye, as affer¦men the sayde authours, was fyrste buylded of the foresayde Gallis, in ye tyme of Brenne beyng theyr duke or leder, before the commynge or incar¦nacyon of Cryste .iii. hundred .lxxx. & vi. yeres: whyche maketh the yere of the worlde folowynge the accompte of this worke .iiii. thousand .viii. hun¦dred and .xiii. yeres. Then yt foloweth in ye story, when Brenne was comen to the presence of the duke named by myne authour Gaufride Segin{us} duke of Alebrog / the whyche is to vnderstande duke of Armorica, now named lytell Bry∣tayne, as by Policronica and the en¦glyshe cronycle is suffycyently decla¦red / and shewed vnto hym his aduer¦syte & trouble: ye sayd duke receyued hym into his courte. And for he was personable & well maneryd, hauyng great experyence in hawkynge and huntynge, and other propertyes ap∣perteynynge to a gentylman: he had hym in shorte whyle in especyall fa∣uour before any noble man of hys courte. By meane wherof, he lastly maryed his doughter / vpon condy∣cyon
that yf he dyed wythout Issue∣male, that he then shuld be ruler of ye countre. And yf yt happened hym to haue an heyre male: that then yt not withstādyng, to ayde and helpe hym to recouer his lande before loste. The whych condycyons well and suerly vpon the dukes partye, by the assent of ye nobles of his lāde assured: the said duke within cōpas of ye same yere dyed. After whose deth when by a conuenyent terme, yt was knowen that the duchesse his wyfe was not wyth chyld: all the lordes to Brēne dyd homage, & became his men. To the whych lordes the more to wynne theyr loues, he departed mych of his tresour: and shortly after with theyr assente gadered a great armye / and so in all hast sayled into Britayne to make new warre vppon his brother Belyne / & after a certayn tyme there landed. Of whose landyng when Be¦lyne was enfourmed: he in all haste gaderyd his Brytons in great nom∣ber, & made towarde hym as to hys mortall enemye. But the moder of the two brethern named Cōnuuēna, or after the englysh boke Cornewey / consyderynge ye mortall hateryd at∣twene her two chylder, and in partye of theyr both persones: of a moderly and naturall pyty, went attwene her two sonnes, and vsyd her in such dys¦crete maner and moderly cōpassyon, as shewyng her brestes and other de¦meanures, that at length she accor∣ded them. After whych accorde both bretherne with theyr lordes and fren¦des sped them vnto Troynouant or London / and there after many thyn¦ges orderyd and made for the weale of ye land: they cōdescended & agreed to lede theyr both hostes into Gallia for to subdue to them the sayde coun¦tre. And in as goodly haste as they might p̄pare for ye iourney, they toke shyppyng, & so sayled into a parte of Gallia brennyng & wastynge ye conn¦tre without pyty. And as wytnessyth myn authour Gaufryde, in a shorte whyle they subdued a great parte of Gallia Italy and Germania. But here I entend to leue the far¦ther {pro}cesse of myn authour Gaufrid for so myche as here he varieth from other writers of authority, as Eutro¦pius, Titus Liui{us}, & other, that dyd great dilygence in writynge of ye de∣dys & actes of the Romayns, and of other peple dwellyng at those dayes in Italia, Gallia, & Germania. For where the sayd Gaufryde sayth, yt at such tyme Belyn and Brenne made warre in Italye / Gabius & Porsena were at that day consules of Rome: that sayeng is farre dyscordaunt vn¦to the other foresayd authours. For as they afferme at the tyme whenne Brēne besegyd Rome, Claudi{us} Emi¦lius, & Lucius Lucretius were con∣sulis / & Furius Camillus was at ye tyme dictatour of Rome / and none lyke vnto the other were cōsules ma¦ny yeres before nor after. But trouth yt is that the sayde .ii. bretherne dyd many great actes in ye forenamed countres / but not all ac∣cordynge wyth the sayeng of ye sayd Gaufride. For where he referreth all those dedys to bothe bretherne: the forenamed Titus Liui{us} spekyth but of Brenne onely, as yt shall some dele be touched hereafter. wherefore to folowe the moste wryters / when Belyn hadde dwelled a certayne of tyme wyth hys brother Brenne in those partyes: by agrement of them both, Belyn retourned into Britayn and Brenne remayned there. THE .XXXI. CHAPITER. WHen Belinus or Belyn was re∣tourned into Brytayne: he re∣payred olde cytyes, and buyldyd vp∣pon
the ryuer of Uske a cytye, and called yt Caeruske nere vnto the ry∣uer of Seuerne. This city was after namyd ye cyty of Legiōs, for so mych as ye legions of Romaynes were lod¦gyd wythin ye same citye / & now yt is called Caerleon or Carleon. Also he buylded an hauen wyth a gate there ouer wythin Troynouāt / in ye sum∣mer or pynacle wheron was set a ves¦sell of brasse / in the which was closyd the asshes of his brent body when he was dede. This gate was long after called Belyns or Belin{us} gate / but at this day yt is called Belyngesgate. In this whyle that Belinus was thus occupyed in Brytayne, his bro∣der Brenne desyrous to wynne fame and honoure buylded in Italy and other partes of Gallia these cytyes and townes folowynge. Mediolana or Mylleyn in Lūbardy Papya or Papy. Burgamum or Sena or ☞ Comum or Briria or Uerona or Uincentia or ☞ Cremona or Mantua or The whyche cytyes and townes were buylded of the Gallis, or at the leste new repayred, in the tyme that Brenne was theyr leder or duke / all be yt that some wryters wold meane that Comum & Cremona were buyl¦ded after Brenne was dede. Policro¦nica wytnessyth, that the Senons; whych he meaneth by ye Gallis dwel¦lyng aboute the cytye of Sena / by ye ledyng of Brēnus ouercame the Ro¦maynes .xi. myle from Rome, at the ryuer Albia, & chasyd them to Rome and toke the city vnto the Capitoll / & after leyd syege to ye same Capitol. And vppon a nyght whyle the war∣deyns of ye Capitoll slepte: ye Frēshe¦men or Gallys by a waye vnder the erth / came into the Capitoll & were lykely to haue wonne it. But a noble Romayne named Mallius or Man¦lius Torquatus, awoke by the cryēg or noyse of a gander or gāders. The which Manlius awakyng the other Romaynes, put of the Gallys. For whych cause ye Romayns long tyme after helde a feste of ganders, ye fyrst daye of Iune. Neuerthelesse afterwarde they cal∣led it Inōs feste, for so mych as they thought that Iuno ye goddes had by her influence gyuen that grace vnto the ganders, that they shuld by theyr noyse awake the Romayns. But yet the Gallis or frenchmen held ye Ro∣mayns so short, yt they were cōpelled to gyue vnto Bren theyr duke a thou¦sand poūde weyght of gold, as ther∣of is wytnesse Tit{us} Liuius. And fur¦ther more sayth ye sayd Liui{us}, that ye Gallis slewe of the senatours many in nomber, the whych fyrste they sup¦posed hadde ben goddes bycause of theyr ryche apparell, whych they sat in. But shortly after this the forena∣myd Furius Camillus, whiche was called agayne frō the citye of Ardea, where he was outlawed before, & by the comontye of Rome in this nede made agayne dictatour. The which pursued Brenne and his people, and to theym gaue batayll, sleynge of them a great multytude, and wanne from them all the golde and iewellys that before tyme ye Gal¦lis hadde wonne of the Romaynes. The whyche dede was done, as wyt¦nessyth the foresayd Titus Liuius, the yere after the buyldyng of Rome iii. hundred and .lxv. whych was the yere of the worlde, folowynge the ac¦compt of this worke foure thousand viii. hundred and .xxxv: and before Crystys incarnacyon kepynge the same accompt .iii. hundred and .lxiiii.
Then yt foloweth in the storye of Brenne, when he was thus dyscom¦fyted of the Romaynes: he tourned his people towarde the Macedones or Grekes, and dyuyded his people in two hostes. wherof he reteyned yt one with hym, and that other he sent into a countre called then Gallacia, and after Gallogreci, and lastly Ga¦lates. Then Brenne ouercame the Macedons with theyr duke Sosten̄ and after spoyled the goddes & theyr temples / & sayde in his game, ryche goddes muste gyue to men somedele of theyre rychesse. Also he spoyled the temple of the god Apolyne Del∣phicus standynge in the hyll of the mounte Parnasus. wherfore as testi¦fyeth the wryter Policarpus: the people of that countre prayed to god for helpe / and sodaynly the erth be∣ganne to quake, and a great parte of the hyll fell vpon the hoste of Gallis, and thē slew. And after that ensued and fyll to grounde hayle stones of suche greatnesse, yt yt slew one other great parte of the sayde hoste / & duke Brennus was sore wounded: wher by he fyll in suche dyspayre, that he slew hym self with his owne swerde. No man shall wonder, though thys Apolyn toke wreche of thē that spoy¦led the goddes and theyr temples. For god sufferyd Apolyn to destroy many nacyons, because of theyr tres¦passes and euyll lyuynge. For yt is certayne that spyrytes of the eyre may vse theyr shrewdnes in thē that be of mysbyleue and vse euyll dedes. For grace is wythdrawen from such maner of men: wherfore the spirites haue the more power to hurte and greue them. Then syns I haue here shewed vn¦to you the fyne or ende of Brennus, I shall nowe retourne my style vnto his brother Belynus, the whyche, as before is towched, endeuoryd hym aboute the weale of hys lande of Brytayne and his people duryng ye tyme of his reygne, in executyng of many notable dedes, the whyche for length of tyme I ouer passe: so that lastely he dyed and was buryed, as before is sayde at Belius or Beli∣nus gate wythin Troynouante or London / when he had reygned wyth his brother and alone, after the most concordaūce of wryters .xxvi. yeres, leuyng after hym a sonne called Gur¦guyntus, Gurguynt Brabtruc, or aftersome wryters Gurguynt Bar∣berous, whyche is to meane Gur∣guynt wyth the red berde. THE .XXXII. CHAPITER. GUrguintus or Gurguynt the sonne of Belyne, was made kynge of the lande of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde foure .M.viii. hundred and .xxxiiii. This in the en¦glyshe cronycle is named Corynbra∣tus or Corynbatus. The whych for so myche as the trybute before graū¦ted by Guilthdak kyng of Dēmark, vnto the kynges of Brytayne for a perpetuyty, was denayed: he array∣ed his army and nauye, and sayled into Denmarke / and there wasted and harmed the countre wyth iron and fyre: in such wyse that at length the kynge of Denmarke, wyth the assent of his Baronage, graunted to paye and contynue the foresayde tribute yerely of a thousande poūde. After whyche vyctorye thus hadde of the Danys: he wyth great try∣umphe retourned towarde Britayn. And in kepynge of hys course / he en¦countred wyth a nauye of .xxx. sayle besyde the yle of Orchades full of men and women / of whyche flote the chyefe captayne was called after moste wryters Bartholomew. The whyche when he was brought vnto
the kynges presence, shewyd that he wyth his people were putte or exyled out of the countre of Spayne, and were named Balenses / and had say¦led longe tyme vppon the see, to the ende to fynde some prynce, that wold gyue to them a dwellynge place, and they to become his subiectys & holde theyr lande of hym / besechynge the kynge to haue compassyon of them, and to graunt to them some place to enhabyte them in / & that they shulde no lenger dwell in theyr shyppes, cōsyderyng theyr vytayle was spent by reason of theyr long lyeng vpon ye see. After whych request thus made by theyr captayne / the kyng with the aduyse of his barons, graunted vn∣to them a voyde and waste countre, whyche was and is the farthest ile of all the iles / towarde the weste / the whych yle as sayth the Englyshe cro¦nycle, was then named Irelande, af¦ter the name of theyr captayn called in the Englyshe cronycle Irlamal. But who so wyll knowe the fyrste cause of the namynge of this yle Ir∣lande: lette hym rede the .xxxii. and xxxiii. chapytres of the fyrste boke of Policronica / and there he shall fynd ye more certaynly of ye fyrst namynge therof, with many other thynges tou¦chynge ye sayd yle, the whych I ouer¦passe for length of ye mater. For there he shall be suffyciently enfourmed of that, and also of other thynges. Then yt foloweth in the story, af∣ter this Gurguintus was retourned into his lande of Britayne: he ordey¦ned to be stablyshed & kepte ye lawes made by his forefaders / & exersy∣syd iustyce to his subiectes, and guy∣ded his lande well and nobly by the terme, after moste wryters, of .xix. yeres / and then dyed, and was bu∣ryed at newe Troye or London, or at Caerleon / leuynge after hym a sonne named after myne authoure Guynthelinus, but after some he is named Guyntellius. THE .XXXIII. CHAPITER. GUinthelin{us} or Guintellius ye sonne of Gurguintus / was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of the world .iiii. thousande .viii. hun¦dred and .liii. This is named in the englyshe cronycle Gwentolyne, the whyche guyded his lande and Bry∣tons with great mekenesse and sober¦nesse. He hadde also a noble wyfe called Marcia, instructe and lerned in many scyēces / the whych amonge other noble dedys by her done, stu∣dyed and broughte forth a certayne good and conuenyent lawe amonge the Brytons / the whyche was na∣med longe after the Marcyan lawe. This lawe for that yt was thought both good and necessary, Aluredus, whyche longe after was kynge of Englande, translated oute of Bre∣tyshe into Saxon speche / and then was yt called after that translacyon in the Saxon tonge Marthehelage, whych is to meane the lawe of Mar¦cia. To this womā for her wysdome was committed all the gouernaunce of the lande / in so myche, as wytnes∣syth myne authoure Gaufryde and other, she reygned as quene of Bry¦tayne a certayne tyme after her hus∣bande was dede. But the yeres of her reygne be accompted with the ye¦res of her husbande, or wyth the ye¦res of her sonne Sisillius / so that no tyme asserteyned is to her deputed or sette. Then yt foloweth, whē this Guin¦helinus hadde reygned well and me¦kely by the terme of .xxvi. yeres, he dyed and was buryed at newe Troy or London, leuyng after hym a son named Sisillius or Cecilius.
THE .XXXIIII. CHAPITER. SIsillius or Cecili{us} the sonne of Guynthelinus, was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of the world .iiii. thousande .viii. hundred & lxxix. This in the Englysh cronycle is named Seyzyl. Of whych no men¦cion nor worthy memory is made. Al be yt that Gaufryde meaneth, yt this Sisillius was but .vii. yeres of age when his father dyed. wherfore the charge of the realme was committed vnto Marcia his moder / the which guyded yt well and suffycyently tyll her sayde sonne came to his lawfull age, and then resygnyd to hym all ye rule: whyche so contynued / but how longe he reygned Gaufryde expres∣syth not. wherfore I now folowe the sayenge of the forenamed authoure called the Floure of historyes, which affermeth hym to reygne onely .vii. yeres / all be yt the Englyshe boke sayeth he reygned .xv. yeres, whyche agreeth not so well wyth the concor∣daunce of other historyes & tymes. This Sisillius, as Gaufryde wyt¦nessyth, left after him a sonne named Kymarus / whome the englysh boke nameth Kymor. THE .XXXV. CHAPITER. RImarus the sonne of Sisilli∣us / was made kynge of Bry∣tayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .viii. hundred .lxxx. & vi. This in the englyshe boke is called Kymor / of yt whych is made no men∣cyon nother of hys tyme of reygne, nor of his dedes. For the more partye of wryters re¦herse in moste breuest & shorteste ma¦ner, yt after Kimar{us} reygned Elani{us}. After Elani{us} Morindus. But ye old cronycle, whych I haue before tyme spoken of sayth that this Kymarus, which he nameth Kymarch{us} Elani{us}▪ was a wylde yonge man, and lyued after hys pleasure. wherfore as he was in his dysporte of huntynge, he was by his euyll willers slayne, whē he hadde ruled skarsly .iii. yeres. THE .XXXVI. CHAPITER. ELanius the sonne of Kymar{us}, as wytnessyth the foresayde Floure of cronycles, but the broder of Kimarus as sayth Gaufride / was made kynge of Brytayne, in the ye∣re of the worlde foure thousand .viii. hundred .lxxx. and .ix. the whyche in the englyshe boke is named Howan. Of this also is no mēcyon made nor memory nother of acte nor of reygn, but as the forenamed olde cronycle sayth, that Kymarus and Elanius was one persone / and reygned as be¦fore is sayde: but the abouesayd wri¦ter called Floure of hystoryes sayth, he reygned fully two yeres. THE .XXXVII. CHAPITER. MOrindus the bastarde sonne of Elanius, as sayth Gau∣fryde and other / was made kynge of Brytayne, in ye yere of ye world foure thousande .viii. hundred .lxxx. and .xi. the whych in the englyshe cronicle is called Morwith. This as witnesseth Gaufryde, was goten vppon the concubyne of Elanius named Tan∣guestela, and was a man of worthy fame in dedys of chyualry / but he was so ouercome with wrath & cruel¦nesse, yt lyghtly he slew all men that hym tened or angred. He was also beauteouse of persone and lyberall of gyftes / and wyth that he was of a meruelouse strength, in so mych that he had not his pere wythin his realm of any man of noble byrthe. In his tyme came into Brytayne a prynce oute of a countre called Mau¦ritania / the whyche countre at those dayes is assygned by Strabo ye wry¦ter▪ to be betwene the kyngdomes of
Hungary, and of Beame / the whych prynce wyth his cruell & fyers peo∣ple wasted the lād of Britayne with iron and fyre wythout pytye. wherof Morindus beynge warned / in all haste gaderyd his people, and hym mette / and faught in such wyse, that he chasyd the sayde prynce agayne to the see, and toke many of his sowdy∣ours as prysoners, the whyche in sa∣tysfyeng of his cruelnesse and tyran∣ny, he caused to be put to deth in his syght by dyuerse maners of tormen∣tes / as by heedynge, fleynge, bren¦nynge, and other cruell execucyons. Lastely as testyfyeth Guydo de Co∣lumpna and other, this Morindus walkynge or rydynge vppon the see stronde espyed a wōderfull monstre, the whych of his corage and knyght hod he thought to sle. And by a māly corage and force assayled this mon∣stre or beste, fyghtyng wyth yt a cer∣tayne of tyme. But in conclusyon he was deuoured and swalowyd of the sayd monstre: after he had reygned, after moste wryters, by the terme of viii. yeres / leuynge after hym, as wytnessyth Gaufryde, fyue sonnes, wherof the fyrste was named Gorbo¦mānus: the secunde Archygallo, the thyrde Elidurus, the fourth Uigeni¦us or Nigenius, and the fyfte or yon¦gest, Peredurus. THE .XXXVIII. CHAPITER. GOrbamānus the fyrste sonne of Morind{us} / was made king of Brytayne / in the yere of the world foure thousande .viii. hundred .lxxx. and .xviii. This in the englyshe cro∣nycle ys named Granbodyan / the whyche as testifyeth Gaufryde, was a iuste and ryghtwyse man to ye god¦des and to his people, and yelded to eyther partye that was his / that ys to say to his goddes he yelded due reuerence & sacrifyce / and to the peo¦ple iustyce & equyte. And he renewed and repayred all olde temples tho∣rough his realme, and buylded some newe. And in his tyme was more welth and plente in his realme, mych more thē was in any of his predeces∣sours dayes. But fynally to ye great sorow of all his Brytons / he was ta¦ken wyth sykenesse, and dyed wyth∣out issue of his body, when he hadde reygned after moste wryters by the terme of .xi. yeres. THE .XXXIX. CHAPITER. ARchigallo the seconde sonne of Morindus, and broder vn¦to Gorbomānus, was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of ye worlde foure thousande .ix. hundred and .x. This in the englyshe boke is named Artogayll / the whyche folowed no∣thynge the workes of his brother, but gaue hym selfe all to discencyon and stryfe / and imagyned causes a∣gayne his nobles to put them from theyr goodes and dygnytyes and in theyr places to sette and ordeyne vn¦noble and of rude byrthe and maner / and from the ryche by synystre and wrongfull meanes he plucked theyr ryches and goodes. By whyche inor¦dynate meanes he enryched hym self and impoueryshed his subiectes. For whyche condycyons his lordes & sub¦iectes murmuryd agaynst hym / and lastly of one assent toke him, or more verely, depryuyd hym of all honour and kyngly dygnyte, when he hadde reygned after moste concordaunce of wryters fyue yeres. THE .XL. CHAPITER. ELidrus the thyrde sonne of Morindus, and the brother of Archigallo / was by one assent of the
Brytons made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of the worlde .iiii.M.ix. hundred and .xv. This in ye englyshe cronycle is named Hisider or Eso∣dyr. The which became so myld and benygne to the Brytons, that they gaue to hym a surname, and called hym Elidure ye meke. For he amōge other dedys of mekenes, as he was vpon a daye in his dysporte of hun∣tynge, in a wode nere vnto Caerbrāk or yorke called Calater, or after some wryters Caltras: he fande his elder brother Archigallo late kynge, mas∣kelyng or wandrynge in the thykest of the woode / whome louyngly and charytably he in secrete maner con∣ueyed vnto his owne mancyō into ye cytye then named Aldud or Acliut. And as affermeth myn authour Gau¦fryde, to thentent to brynge his bro∣ther to his former dygnytye as after foloweth: the sayd Elidurus fayned hym selfe syke / and in all haste sente his messagers aboute his realme to gather and assemble the Barons of his lāde. And when the daye of assem¦ble was cōmyn, and his lordes accor¦dynge to his commaundement were present: he called them one by one, as they were of honour, into his se∣crete cubycle or chamber / & there by his wyse & dyscrete wordes as well in benygne and louynge maner, as other wordes and countenaunce ap¦perteynyng to his royall power and dygnyty / he gat graunte of his sayd lordes, that they shuld ayde & strēgth hym to theyr powers, to brynge hys brother Archigallo to his former ho∣nour and regally. After which graūt by the lordes made: he assembled a counsayll of his Brytons at Caer∣brank or yorke / & there caused suche meanes to be made to the cōmons, that in conclusion when the sayd Eli¦durus hadde ruled the lande .v. ye∣res as kynge, he there resygned his crowne and all kyngly power vnto his sayde brother Archigallo. THE .XLI. CHAPITER. WHen Archigallo was thus resto¦red to his kyngly dygnyte, he re¦membred well the euyl lyfe that before tyme he had ladde, and the pu¦nishement which he had suffred for ye same. wherfore in eschewynge of lyke daunger: He chaunged all hys olde condicyons, and became a good and ryghtwyse man, mynystryng to the people equyte and iustyce / & bare hym so nobly agayne his lordes and rulers vnder hym of his landes, that he was belouyd & dradde of all hys subiectes / and so contynued duryng the terme of his naturall lyfe. But fy¦nally he payde the dette of nature, when he hadde reygned nowe lastly after moste wryters .x. yeres / & was buryed, as sayth the sayde olde cro∣nycle at Caerbranke or yorke. THE XLII. CHAPITER. ELidurus before named was agayne by one assent of ye Bry¦tons made kynge / in the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousande .ix. hundred & xxx. But his two yonger bretherne Uigenius and Peredurus, hauynge of hym indignacyon, that he was for his vertue and good gouernaūce so well fauoured with the Brytons: of malyce conspyryd agayne hym / & ga¦theryd an army of soudiours, & made a felde wyth hym. And in the felde toke hym, and commaūded hym vn∣to the towre of Troynouāt as sayth Gaufryde, there as a prysoner to be sauely kepte. After & when he hadde reygned nowe laste by the space, as wytnesseth the old cronycle .ii. yeres. THE .XLIII. CHAPITER. UIgenius and Peredurus ye yongest sonnes of Morind{us},
and bretherne of Elidurus before sayde / were ioyntly made kynges of Brytayne / in the yere of the worlde foure thousande .ix. hundred & .xxxii. These two bretherne are named in ye engleshe cronycle Higanius and Pe¦tytur / the whych as testyfyeth Gau∣fryde departed ye land betwene thē, so yt all ye land from the water of Hūber westwarde, fyll to Uigenius or Nige¦ni{us}: & the other part of the land with also Albania or Scotlande, fyll vn∣to Peredurus. But after the saynge of Guydo de Columna, Uigenius or Nigeni{us} was not kyng, but alonely Peredurus / the whych, as he sayth, helde his brother Elidurus in pry∣son by his owne assent, for so myche as Elidurus was not wyllyng to be kynge. And as affermeth the sayde Guydo / this Peredurus was cruell and tyrannous to the Britayns, and slew and entreated ye lordes in moste cruell maner. wherfore he became so odyous to them / that they rebelled agaynst hym and slew hym. This sayeng contraryeth and en∣pugnyth myne authoure Gaufryde, sayeng yt Uigeni{us} dyed after he had reygned .vii. yeres. After whose deth Peredurus seasyd all the lande into his owne rule / & ruled yt wyth great sobernesse, in such wyse that he excel¦led or was preysed aboue all his bre∣thern, so that Elidur{us} was clene for∣goten of the Brytons. The englysh cronycle also sayth that this Peredu¦rus founded the town of Pikeryng. But fynally he was taken wyth so∣dayne sykenesse / whereof he dyed, when he had reygned wyth his bro∣ther and alone, after the accorde of moste wryters .ix. yeres / leuynge af∣ter hym no chylde to be his heyr. THE .XLIIII. CHAPITER. ELidur{us} before named so soone as Peredurus was dede, for as myche as he was next heyre to the crowne / was taken forth of pryson and made the thyrde tyme kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of ye world .iiii. thousande .ix. hundred and .xli. The whyche as before tyme he had vsyd hym selfe so he contynued styll in my¦nystrynge to all persones ryght and iustyce all the dayes of his lyfe. And lastely beynge of good age he dyed, whē he had now reygned after moste concordaunce of wryters .iiii. yeres / leuynge after hym a son named Gor¦bonianus or Gorbomanus. And as wytnesseth the olde cronycle, and the englyshe cronycle / ye fore named Eli¦durus was buryed at Caerleyl or Karlele. THE .XLV. CHAPITER. YE shall vnderstande yt to the deth of the foresayde Elidure, the wry∣ters of the storye of Brytons wry¦ten dyuersly / so that the one varyeth greatly from the other, both in ye na∣mes, and also in the tyme of theyre reygnes / the which wold aske a long tyme to reherse in order the dyuersy∣tye of that one from the other / & also to some reders ye mater therof shulde be but small pleasure. wherfore to suche as ben desyrous to knowe of ye tyme and season that passed betwene the laste yere of Elidurus, & the fyrst yere of Lud / in whych passe tyme rey¦gned in Britayne .xxxii. or after some writers .xxxiii. kyng: let hym loke in a table before ye begynnynge of this worke. And there he shall se my con∣ceyt for ye declaracyon of ye yeres pas¦sed or spent betwene the forsayd two kynges Elidurus and Lud / prayēge hym or them that so shall loke in the sayde draught, that yf I haue in any poynte erryd, that of theyr goodnes they wolde wyth good delyberacyon correcte and amende yt. But for it se¦meth to me, that of al such authours as I haue redde or seen, Guydo de
Columna reherseth most breuely the passetyme of the sayde kynges: ther¦fore I purpose here to reherse his say¦enge, as he hath left yt to vs in latyn. THE XLVI. CHAPITER. GOrbonian{us} or Gorbomānus the sonne of Regny sonne of Elidure / was made kynge of Bry∣tayne, in the yere of the worlde foure thousande .ix. hundred and .xlv. Af∣ter whom succedyd Margan. After Margā Emerian{us} brother to ye sayd Margan / the whyche Emerianus was depryuyd for his cruelnes. And after hym reygned .xx. kynges succes¦syuely the one after the other / of the whyche, as sayth myn authour Guy¦do, is no mencyon made / eyther for theyr rudenesse, or ellys for crueltye or dyscordaunte meanes or maners vsed in ye tyme of theyr reygnes / the whyche mysorder clerkes disdayned to wryte or put in memory. And next the laste of these foresayd .xx. kynges succedyd Blegabridus a connynge musycyan: the whyche for his excel∣lence in that facultye, was called of the Brytons god of glemen. After Blegabrid{us} was thus kyng and dyed, succeded .ix. kynges / of whome for the former cōsyderacyon is nother name nor tyme of reygne put in memory. The laste of whyche ix. kynges was by the agremēt of all wryters named Hely / whych Hely af¦ter some wryters reygned .xl. yeres, & after some but bare .vii. monethes. In the whych .xxxiii. kynges tymes, passed or flowed (that is to say from the laste yere of Elidure vnto the last yere of the foresayde Hely, as by the fornamed table apperyth) a hūdred and .lxxxvi. yeres. whyche sayde He¦ly lefte after hym .iii. sonnes, named Lud, Cassibellanus, and Neurius. THE .XLVII. CHAPITER. LUd the eldeste sonne of Hely, was made kyng of Brytayn, in the yere of ye worlde .v. thousand a hundred and .xxxi. This mā was ho¦nourable in all his dedes / for he edy¦fyed new temples, and repayred the olde. He also repayred olde cytyes & townes / and specyally in the cytye of Troynouant he causyd many buyl¦dynges to be made / and gyrde the sayde citye about wyth a strong wall of lyme and stone. And in the weste parte of the sayde walle he arreryd a fayre and stronge gate, and com∣maūded it to be called Luddys gate, whych at this daye is clepyd Ludde gate. And for he loued myche this cy¦tye: he vsed myche & moste to lye there. By reason wherof yt was cal∣led Caerlud or Luddys towne / and after by corrupcyon or shortynge of the speche, yt was named London, whych name at this daye remayneth and abydeth. This Lud also, as wytnessyth Gau¦fryde, was strōge and myghty in ar∣mys in subduynge his enymyes. He was also lyberall of gyftes and plen¦tuouse in his houshold / so yt he was myche loued and drad of his Britōs. But when he hadde contynued hys reygn with great honour by ye terme of .xi. yeres: he dyed, & was buryed in his gate called Portlud or Lud∣gate / leuynge after hym, as wytnes¦syth Gaufryde, two sonnes, Andro∣geus, & Temancius or Tenancius. THE .XLVIII. CHAPITER. CAssibellan the brother of Lud was made kyng of Brytayn, in the yere of the worlde .v. thousand a hundred and .xlii. For so myche as the .ii. sonnes before named of Lud were to yonge or insuffycyent for to take on hand so great a charge. But
as wytnessyth the olde cronycle, and also the authour of the Floure of hi∣storyes: thys Cassybellan was not made kynge, but ruler or protectour of the lande, for the tyme of the non-age of the foresayde brethern: all be yt myne authour Gaufryde sayth, yt after Cassibellan was sette in autho∣rite / he became so noble and lyberall, that his name sprange farre / and by his exercysynge of iustyce, the Bry∣tons ought to hym more fauour, thē to eyther of his neuewes. How be yt he cheryshed them, & brought theym forth accordyng to theyr byrth. And when they came vnto yeres of dyscre¦cyon, he gaue to Androge{us} the cytye of London, wyth the dukedome or the erledome of Kent / and to Teman¦cius the dukedome of Cornewayll. In this season was Caius Iuli{us}, the whyche is moste commonly cal∣led Iulius Cesar, sente by the se∣nate of Rome as felowe and consull wyth Lucius Bubulus into Gallia nowe called Fraunce, for to subdue them vnto the empyre of Rome. The whyche Iulius beyng vppon the see syde, after he had ouercome the Gal¦lis, and beholdyng the whyte clyues or rockes of Brytayne: enquyred of the countre, and what people dwel∣led therin. And when he was suffy∣cyently enfourmed of all the commo¦dytyes therof: he had great wyll to brynge the sayde countre vnder the yocke of the Romaynes, for so mych as at those dayes a great parte of the worlde was tributary to Rome. But as sayth myne authour, fyrste he ex∣orted the Britons by writyng & mes∣sagers, to gyue trybute vnto Rome. wherfore Cassybellan hauynge indy¦gnacyon wrote vnto hym sharpe & short answeres, shewyng that he and euery noble man was bounde specy∣ally to kepe his coūtre from seruage / and to kepe his subiectes, that they myght enioy lybertye and franchise. The whyche to obserue, he wold do the vttermost of his power & myght. wyth the which answere Iulius be∣ynge nothynge cōtentyd, in all hast made redy his nauy and people, and sayled towarde Brytayne. And whē the Romaynes were comyn nere the land of Brytayne, & shuld haue lan¦ded: ye Brytons pyght sharpe stakes and longe vppon the bankes / which causyd theym to wynne lande wyth great daunger. And not longe after theyr landynge, Cassibellan wyth a stronge hoste of Britons encountred the Romaynes / gyuynge or yeldyng to them suche fyght and batayll that they were fayne to resorte to theyr shyppes for theyr suertye. Not wyth standyng ye, as witnesseth Gaufride and other / Iulius after he hadde re∣newed his knyghtes, and also ryg∣gyd his nauye: he came agayne the seconde tyme, entendynge to subdue the land to the empyre of Rome. But as before tyme he was by the man∣hode of the kynge and his Brytons manfully and knyghtly wythstāden and chasyd: so this seconde tyme he was in lyke wise ouercome, and com¦pelled to flee wythout honoure. For whych vyctory thus twyes obteyned by the Brytons, Cassibellan enten∣dynge to gyue thanke vnto his god∣des, and rewarde to hys knyghtes: in goodly haste caused an assemble to be made of his lordes & knyghtes at the cytye of Caerlud or London. where after dew obseruaunces done to theyr goddes, after ye vse of theyr pagan lawes, a great and solemne feste was holden by the kynge to all that wolde come, wyth moste lybera¦lytye and plentye in all that was ne∣cessarye to such a feste. And the more to encrease the kynges honoure / and to the more comforte and dilectacion of his lordes and other there beynge
present: there was all maner kyn{is} of games that at those dayes were exercysed and vsed. Contynewynge whyche feste, two noble and yonge knyghtes amonge other hapened to assey eyther other in wrastlyng / wher¦of that one was neuew to kyng Cas¦sibellan named Hirelda / and ye other named Euelinus, was allyed vnto Androgeus erle or duke of London. By meane of this wrastlynge dyuy¦syon or vnfyttynge wordes fyll be∣twene the two yonge knyghtes, yt af¦ter wordes ensued strokes / by meane wherof partyes were takē on eyther syde, whyche ranne to gyder in great re and malyce, so that on eyther part many and diuers were hurte & woun¦ded. Among whome Hirelda neuew to the kynge was slayne / whych cau¦sed great dysturbaunce in the courte and amonge the lordes. when the knowlege of the deth of Hirelda was brought vnto ye kyng: he was therwyth greatly amoued / & entendynge dewe iustice to be hadde & mynystred by thaduyce of his Ba∣rons, causyd the forenamed cosyn of Androgeus Euelinus to be sommo¦ned for to appere before hym & hys counsayll, and there to acquyte hym of suche cryme as to hym was layde for the deth of Hirelda before slayne. But Euelinus by coūsayll of Andro¦geus wythstode that commaunde∣ment / and shortly after the sayde An¦drogeus and Euelyne departed the courte wythoute takynge leue of the kynge. The kynge dysdaynynge this de∣meanure of Androge{us} / after dyuers monycyons to hym gyuen, gathered his knightes and made warre vpon Androgeus. wherfore he cōsyderyng after many ways & meanes thought yt he was not of power to wythstand the kynges great indignacyon / sent his letters vnto Caius Iuli{us} Cesar, shewynge to hym the circumstaunce of the mater / and aduoydynge hym of all gylt, besought and prayed him in moste humble wyse, that he wolde shortly retourne wyth his army into Brytayne / & he wyth his hole power shuld be redy to ayde and helpe hym agayne the Brytons. Of this message was Iulius very glad / and in all haste made towarde Brytayne wyth a great power. To whom ye wynde was so fauourable / yt in short tyme after this message he drew nere ye land. But as affermeth myne authour Gaufryde / or he wold lande, ferynge the treason of Andro¦geus, he receyued frō hym in hostage his sonne named Scena, wyth .xxx. other of the moste noble of his lord∣shyppe / & that done he landed wyth the helpe and ayde of Androgeus. wherof when Cassibellan hadde war¦nynge, in all haste he made towarde the Romaynes / and in a valey nere vnto Dorobernia now named Can∣terbury, there he foūde the hoste of ye said Iuli{us} lodged, & with him Andro¦ge{us} with all his power. After whych knowlege had eyther of other / wyth theyr habyllemētes of warre eyther greued other, tyll at lēgth both host{is} mette hande for hand and faught vy¦gerously, in such wise that many fell on eyther partye. But when the Brytons, as sayth Gaufryde, hadde longe foughten & knyghtly defended the Romaynes: Androge{us} with his peple came by a wynge of the Brytons / and them so sharpely assayled, that they were con¦streyned to forsake the feld and place yt they before had kepte. The whiche flyght dyscōforted so the other, that fynally all fledde and gaue place to the Romaynes, the which pursued & slewe them withoute pytye. So that Cassibellan wyth his Brytons that were lefte, were fayne to gette them
to a place of suerty / there to reste tyll they myght newly prouyde to wyth stande theyr enemyes. But fynally as all wryters agre, Iulius helde the kyng so shorte, that for an vnytye and concorde he was fayne to become trybutary to the Ro¦maynes, and to paye to them yerely a certayne trybute, whych Gaufryd affermeth to be .iii. thousande poūd. And when the sayde trybute was set in a suertye / so that the sayd Romay¦nes were wyth yt contented, and Iu¦lius hadde accomplyshed his wyll & pleasure in thynges to hym thought necessary: he with Androgeus depar¦ted the lande, and so spedde hym to∣warde Rome / where soone after he was agayn, by the will of ye most of ye senatours made emperour. And this tribute thus was graūted when Cas¦sibellan hadde reygned as kynge of Britayne fully .viii. yeres and more. THE .XLIX. CHAPITER. THis begynnynge of this try∣bute payde by Cassibellan vn¦to the Romayns, shuld seme by most concordaunce of wryters to be vpon xl. and .viii. yeres before Crystes in∣carnacyon, or after some .l. But for profe of the fyrste sayenge / I haue shewed my conceyte in the tabyll be¦fore named / the whych I remytte to the correccyon of such as haue {pro}fyte vndertandynge in calculynge of hy¦storyes and tymes. And here I make an ende of the seconde parte of this worke / in yel¦dynge graces to oure moste consola¦tryce, that moste blessed virgyne our lady saynt Mary, the whyche here I agayne salute wyth the seconde of the forsayde .vii. ioyes, whyche be¦gynneth, Gaude sponsa chara dei. &c. Be ioyous thou spouse of god moste Whyche lyke to the sonne, moste clerest of syght When in the daye he shyneth moste clere The worlde illumynest by meanes full ryght And thorowe the vertue of thy full myght Causest the worlde to be resplendissaunt By meane of thy peas, which is full habundaunt. This seconde parte to be accomp¦ted from the last yere of the dyscorde of the Brytons to the ende of the .ix. yere of Cassybellan, includeth of ye∣res .iii. hundred .lxxx. and .iii. THE THYRDE PARTE. THE .L. CHAPITER. THus maye we vn¦derstande, that by the apoyntmēt be¦fore made / Cassi∣bellan contynued styll as kynge and gouernour of this land of Brytayn / whyche by moste cōcordaunce of wri¦ters hadde reygned before or he were made trybutarye vppon .ix. yeres / whyche sayde .ix. yeres made the yere of the worlde folowynge thaccompte before expressyd, fyue thousand a hū¦dred & .l. And after he reygned by tha¦gremēt of all writers as kyng of this lande, fully .vii. yeres. So that in all before the graūte of ye tribute, and af¦ter / he reygned vppon .xvi. yeres. THE .LI. CHAPITER. NOwe then haue I shewyd to you how that Iulius Cesar by ayde and helpe of Androgeus erle of Kent / made this land of Brytayn trybutarye to the Romaynes, when Cassibelan had ben kyng of the sayd lande vppon .ix. yeres / whych .ix. ye¦res I haue sette for the ende of the se¦conde parte of this worke. So that
the .x. yere of Cassibellan is the fyrst yere of the thyrde parte of the sayde worke. Then as all writers testyfye / Cassibellan contynued after the de¦partynge of Iulius, as kyng by the terme or space of .vii. yeres, as before is declared. In the tyme of ye whych vii. yeres is none noble acte nor dede of hym put in memory or wrytynge. But for some wold thynke that af∣ter Caius Iulius Cesar, hadde tho∣rough helpe of Androgeus erle of Kent, and eldest sonne of Lud, thus as before is sayde, subdued Cassibel¦lan: that the sayd Iulius wold haue restoryd the sayde Androgeus to the crowne of Brytayne, as his ryght∣full inherytaūce / and clerely to haue expelled and put oute the sayd Cassi¦bellan from all kyngly dygnyty. To this answereth the olde cronycle and sayth, that Cassibellan was not the sonne of Hely, but that he was the el¦deste sonne of Lud, by reason wherof he was fyrste made kyng / and so as ryghtfull heyre contynued durynge hys lyfe, kynge of Brytayne. The whych when he hadde reygned .ix. ye¦res or he were trybutary, and .vii. ye¦res after as affermeth the sayde olde cronicle in all .xvi. yeres / he thē dyed wythoute issue, and was buryed at Caerbranke or yorke. THE .LII. CHAPITER. TEmanci{us} or Tēnancius the yongest sonne of Lud, as af¦fermeth Gaufryde, was made kyng of ye Brytōs, in the yere of the world fyue thousande a hundred and .lvii. This is named in the englyshe cro∣nycle Tormace, and not kynge, as the sayde boke affermeth. But his el¦der brother, whych in the sayde boke is named Androgen, was after the affyrmaunce of the sayd englyshe cro¦nycle made kynge. But the foresayd Gaufryde and other testyfyen / that for so myche as Androgeus feryd to be euer hated of ye Brytons, for his treason wroughte agaynst the kyng and the lande: he therfore chase to go with Caius Iulius to Rome, rather thē to be kyng of such as he thought wolde neuer haue hym in theyr loue and fauoure. Then yt foloweth in ye storye, this Tēnācius ruled the land with great dylygence and iustyce / and defended the lande well and knyghtly agayne all alyaūtis and straūgers / & payde his trybute to the Romaynes y• Cassi¦bellan had graunted / and lastly dyed when he had reygned after most wry¦ters .xxiii. yeres, and was buryed at Caerlud or London / leuynge after hym a sonne, the whyche was called Kymbeline. THE .LIII. CHAPITER. Kymbelinus or Kymbelyne the sonne of Tēnancius / was of ye Brytōs made kynge, in the yere of the worlde .v. thousande a hundred and .lxxx. This man as wytnesseth Guydo was brought vp at Rome a∣monge the Romaynes, & there made a knyght / and had of them suche fa∣uoure, that he was at lyberty to pay the trybute or not. Of hym is lytell memorye made / excepte all wryters agreen, that in ye season that he was kynge, our sauyoure Cryste Iesus was incarnate of that moste blessyd virgine our lady saynt Mary. which shulde be to accorde historyes, in the xix. yere of his reygne. Of the reygne of this Kymbelyn authours wryte dyuersly / so yt some shewe no yeres, and some but fewe, whych can not accord wyth the tyme of other cronycles. But the authour of the hystorye called Floure of histo¦ryes wytnessyth, yt he reygned .xxxv. yeres. The whyche sayeng who lyst to se ye table before rehersed: he shall
there haue knowlege, that this sayd auctoure accordeth beste wyth other storyes and cronycles. And when that this Kymbelyne had reygned gloryously ouer ye Bry¦tons by all the season before expres∣syd, he dyed & was buryed at Caer∣lud or London / leuynge after hym two sonnes named Guyderius and Aruiragus. NOw before haue I shewed vn¦to you in ye later chapyter, yt Criste was incarnate, in the .xix. yere of Kymbelyne / whyche maketh the yere of the worlde, that is to saye frō the fyrste creacyon of Adam to the in¦carnacyon .v. thousande a hundred lxxx. and .xix. the whyche accompt is approuyd by holy Isodore, Beda, and other. Then Cryste was incarnate the yere of ye world, as before is expressed. From Noes flood or after .ii. thou∣sande ix. hundred and .lvii. After Abraham .ii thousande & .xvii. After Dauid kyng of Israell, a thou¦sande and .lxxv. From or after the trāsmygracyon of the Iewes to Babylon, v. hūdred lxxx. and .x. After Brute entred Britayne .xi. hun¦dred and .xxxvi. After Alexander the great, nere vp∣pon .iii. hundred and .xxv. After the buyldynge of Rome .vii. hū¦dred and .xxix. And in the begynnyng of ye .xlii. yere of Octauius Augustus, then em¦perour of Rome. THE .LIIII. CHAPITER. GUyderius the fyrste sonne of Kymbalyne / beganne his rey¦gne ouer the Britons, the yere of the worlde .v. thousande .CC. & .xvi. And the yere after Cristes incarnacyon ye xvii. yere. This man was welthy & trusted mych in his strēgth. And for he thought the Romayns hadde the forenamed trybute with wronge: he therfore of a knyghtly courage de∣nyed to the Romaynes the sayde try∣bute. wherfore Claudi{us} whych was vncle vnto Caius Caligula the .iiii. emperour of Rome: came into Bry∣tayne with a great armye of Romay¦nes / & as wytnessyth Policronica, cō¦queryd and wanne agayne the sayde trybute wythout great fyght. And yt done / he also subdued the yles of Or¦chades or Orkeys, whych stande be∣yonde Scotlād within the great Oc¦cean / and after tourned agayne to Rome the .vi. moneth after that he came thens. The cronycle of Englande, and al¦so Gaufryde saye, that in the hoste of the Romaynes was a captayne na∣med Hame or Hamo / the whych en∣tendynge hurte and destruccyon of ye Brytons, chaunged his shelde or ar∣mure, & dyd vppon hym the armure of a Britayne. And by that meane as a Briton mysclad, he entred into the thyckest of the hoste / and lastely vn∣to the place where as kynge Guyde∣rius faught, & shortly after slewe the kynge. But Aruiragus seynge this sodayne myschyefe, to the ende yt the Brytons shulde not gyue backe: he hastely causyd hym selfe to be armed wyth the cognysaunce of the kynge. And so for kyng cōtynued the fyght, wyth such māhode, that the Romay¦nes were put to flyght. Thus by accorde of wryters Guy¦derius was slayne of the foresayde Hamo / when he hadde reygned ouer the Brytons by the concordaunce of other hystoryes .xxviii. yeres, leuyng after hym none heyre of his body to guyde the lande after his deth. THE .LV. CHAPITER. ARuiragus the yongest sonne of Kymbelyne, and brother
to Guyderius before slayn, was or∣deyned kyng of Brytons, in the yere of our lorde .xliiii. This in the en∣glyshe boke is named Armager / the whyche as there is shewed, well and knyghtly maynteyned the warre a∣gayne the Romayns, and after slew the forenamed Hamo nere vnto an hauen or porte of the see. And hym so slayne, threwe gobet meale into the same see. And for this skyll, was this hauē longe tyme after called Hamōs hauen / whych at this daye is called Southampton. Then yt foloweth in the .viii. cha∣pyter of the .iiii. boke of Policroni∣con, that Claudius after dyuers hap¦pes of batayll, toke Aruirag{us} to his grace / & brought his doughter Gen¦nissa by name from Rome, and ma∣ried her vnto Aruiragus. And for he wolde make the place of ye maryage more solemne, he therfore called the towne of mariage Claudiocestria af¦ter his name, the whych before was called in bretyshe tunge Caerleon, & after Glouernia after a duke of De∣mecia that hyght Glorio / but nowe this towne is named Glouceter. All otherwyse telleth the englyshe cronycle / & sayth that Armager scom¦fyted Claudius, and compelled hym to gyue his doughter Gēnissa or Gē¦nen to the sayde Armager to wyfe / wyth condycyon that the Romayns shulde neuer after that daye clayme any trybute of Brytayne, excepte al∣onely feawte / whyche sayenge appe∣reth doutefull for dyuers causes. wherof one is, that the sayde Ar∣mager shulde not constrayne Clau∣dius to gyue his doughter to hym / for so myche as the sayde Armager hadde neuer seen the sayde Gennen before tyme, nor knewe not of her cō¦uersacyon. Then meruayle yt were, that he shulde force her father to gyue hym a wyfe, that he hadde cast no loue vnto before tyme. One other reason is, that the sayde cronycle te∣styfyeth / that after he hadde maryed the sayd Gennen, he was at London crowned kynge of Englande. For I wold thinke if he had ouercomē Clau¦dius, as there is surmytted, he wold fyrste haue crowned hym selfe kyng, and then haue maried his doughter. But by the same reason yt certifyeth more strenger the former sayenge of Policronica. For by all lykelyhode Claudius wold not suffer hym to be crowned kyng, tyll he hadde full per¦fourmed his promyse in maryage of his doughter. And all be yt that myne authoure Gaufryde varyeth not myche from the englyshe cronicle: I thynke in ye doynge he toke example of Homer{us}, that wrote the dedis and actes of the Grekes / the whyche shewed and put in memory all the noble actes by thē done, and specyally in the recuyll or boke made by hym of the syege of Troye. But the other dedys con∣cernynge theyr dyshonoure / he hyd yt as mych as he myght. And in lyke maner do many other writers, which I passe ouer. And so Gaufride for he was a Bryton, he shewed the beste for Brytons. Then yt foloweth, after the solem∣nysacyon of this maryage, whyche was with all honour finyshed: Clau¦dius sente certayne legyons of his knyghtes into Irlande to rule that countre, and retourned hym selfe to Rome. THE .LVI. CHAPITER. IT was not longe after the de∣partynge of Claudius: but yt Aruiragus rode aboute his realme, and wyth great dylygence repayred cytyes and townes before decayed & broken wyth the strength of the Ro∣maynes / and entreated his subiectes
wyth suche iustyce and good order, that they loued and drad hym more then any of his progenitours. This in tracte of tyme made hym welthy. And by meane of this welthynes en∣sued pryde / so yt hym thought great shame to be vnder the rule or guy∣dynge of ye Romayns / wherfore last¦ly he denyed the tribute before graū∣ted. wherof when knowlege came vn¦to ye senate of Rome: in all hast was sent a duke of Rome called Uespa∣syan, wyth a certayne of legyons to subdue Aruiragus. ye shall vnderstand, that a legyon of knyghtes, is .vi. thousande .vi. hundred .lxvi. when Uespasyan was landed in Brytayne, as testyfyeth Polycroni∣ca / he spedde hym so, that in shorte whyle he subdued Aruiragus to the empyre, and causyd hym to graunte payment of the foresayde trybute. which was done, as sayth Gaufride by entreatye of the quene Gennissa, and of no constraynt nor coaccyon. when Uespasyan hadde thus reco¦ueryd the trybute, he then also made subiecte to the empyre / an yle in the see lyenge vpon the southsyde of Bri¦tayne, now called the yle of weyght, and after retourned to Rome. when Aruiragus was thus se∣condely brought vnder the yocke of ye Romayns: he became more mylde towarde them / so that whyle he ly∣ued after he payed hys trybute wyth lesse grudge, and contynued hym in theyr fauours, in suche wyse that he was of theym well beloued. And so lastely dyed when he hadde ruled the Brytōs well and nobly by the terme of .xxx. yeres / and was buryed at Caerglon̄, Caerleon̄, Clau¦diocestria, or Glouceter / leuynge after hym a sonne named Marius ∴ THE .LVII. CHAPITER. MArius the sonne of Aruirag{us} was ordeyned kynge of Bry¦tons, in the yere of our lorde .lxxiiii. This in the cronycle of Englande is named westmer. whych Marius, as wytnessyth Gaufryde, was an excel∣lent wyse man / and guyded his Bry¦tons moste honourably, and in grete prosperyte and welthe. In the tyme of the reygne of this Mari{us} a duke or kynge of a nacyon called Pyctes / whych as wytnessyth Uirgilius, are descendyd of a people called of olde tymes Scythis. They also are na∣med Gothis or Hunys. This fore∣sayde leder of Pictes is named of Gaufryde Londricus / the which lan¦ded wyth a great nauy, in the pro∣uynce of Albania now called Scot∣lande / and yt beganne to waste with iron and wyth fyre. wherof whē Ma¦rius was warned / he in all haste as∣sembled his knyghtes, and made to∣warde his enymyes / and gaue vnto them stronge batayll. In the whych Lōdricus or after some Rodic{us} was slayne, and a great parte of his peo∣ple were slayne. In remembraunce of whyche vyctorye, kynge Marius lette arrere a great stone / and in this he commaunded to be grauen Ma∣rii victoria, whych is to meane the victorye of Marius. wyllyam of Malmesburye sayth, that this stone was arered in mynde of Marius the consull of Rome. The englyshe cronycle sayth, that this batayll was foughtē in a place, the whyche now is called Stanys∣more. But where so this stone is set / the countre there aboute was longe after called westmaria, and nowe westmerlande. Then yt foloweth in the story, that
when the resydue of the people of Lo¦dricus, whyche were fledde from the felde, vnderstode that theyr hedde & captayne was slayne: they made hū∣ble request vnto ye kynge, yt he wolde accepte thē vnto his grace / and that he wold graunt to theym some lande and countre to dwell in. whych graū¦ted vnto thē a place in the ferre ende of Scotlande, whyche is named of myne authoure Cathenesia, where the sayd Scythis or Pictes fyrst in∣habyted them. And for so myche as the Brytons dysdayned to gyue vn∣to thē theyr doughters in maryage: therfore they acqueynted them wyth the Iryshe men, and maryed theyr doughters, and grewe in proces in∣to a great people. And for this ally∣aunce attwene the Iryshe and them: theyr countre, as wytnessyth Poli∣cronycon ye .xxxvii. chapyter of hys fyrste boke, was called Irlande, and after Pictauia, & lastely Scotlande. And when Marius had thus sub∣dued his enemyes / he attendyd and sette his mynde to the common wele of this lande and subiectes / and con¦tynued ye resydue of his lyfe in great tranquillite and reste. And so lastely payde his naturall tribute, & was bu¦ryed at Caerleyll, leuyng after hym a sonne named Coill{us} or Coyll, whē he hadde reygned after moste wry∣ters .lii. yeres. THE .LVIII. CHAPITER. COyllus the sonne of Marius was after the deth of his fa∣ther made kynge of Brytons, in the yere of oure lordes incarnacyon a hū¦dred and .xxvi. This was from hys infancy noryshed and brought vppe amonge the Romaynes in Italia or Rome / by reason wherof he was to theym louynge and kynde, and they vnto hym. And he, for so myche as he knewe the power of the Romayns great / in auoydyng of warre & other daunger, payde vnto them the fore∣sayde trybute duryng his lyfe. This Coillus also, as wytnessyth Gau∣fryde, was a lyberall man of gyftes / by reason wherof he obteyned great loue of his nobles, and also of his cō¦mons. And as some authours haue: this Coyll made the towne of Col∣chester / whych at this daye is a fayre town in the shyre of Essex. But other ascrybe yt to Coell or Coill, that was kynge nexte after Asclepeodotus. But when this Coillus hadde rey∣gned in soueraygne peace by ye terme of .liiii. yeres, he dyed and was bu∣ryed at Caerbrank or yorke / & lefte after hym a sonne, the whyche was named Lucius or Lucy. THE .LIX. CHAPITER. LUcius or Lucy the sonne of Coillus, was made kynge of Brytons, in the yere of oure lorde a hundred and .lxxx. The whych in all actes and dedes of goodnes folowed his forefaders / in suche wyse that he of all men was beloued and drad. Of this is litell or none acte notable put in memorye / excepte that all wryters agree, that this Lucius sent to Eleu¦therius then pope of Rome certayne pystles or letters, prayeng hym that he & his Britons myght be receyued to the fayth of Crystes chyrche. wher¦of the pope beynge very ioyous and gladde / sente into Brytayne two noble clerkes named Faganus and Dunianus: or after some, Fuga∣cius and Dimianus. These two good and vertuous clerkes were ho¦nourably receyued of Lucius / the whych by theyr good doctryne and vertuous examples gyuynge, cōuer¦tyd the kynge and a great parte of the Brytons. But for so myche authours & wry∣ters
wryte dyuersly of ye tyme of this receyuynge of the fayth by Lucius / so that the one varyeth greatly from the other: therfore I haue shewed in the forenamed table, that yt shall vnder correccyon appere, yt the fayth was receyued by Lucius, as affer∣meth Petrus Pictauiens. the .viii. ye¦re of the reygne of the sayde Lucius. And yt yere after Cristes incarnacion a hundred & .lxxxviii. The whych Lu¦cye after the fayth thus by hym recey¦ued, by the aduyce of the foresayde clerkes, and wyth the instruccyons sent to theym by the foresayde pope Eleuthery: instituted and ordeyned, that all or the more partye of Arche∣flamynys and flamynys / whyche is to meane archbysshoppes and bys∣shoppes of the pagan lawe, whyche at that daye were in nomber, as wyt¦nessyth Gaufryde and other .iii. of the archeflamynys, and .xxviii. of the flamynys / were made and ordey¦ned archebyshoppes & byshoppes of ye chyrch of Criste, as after foloweth. Archeflamynys byshop∣pes constytuted. THE .LX. CHAPITER. THe fyrste of the archeflamy∣nys see, rule, or iurysdyccyō / was as wytnessyth Gaufride & Poli¦cronica, at London, the seconde at yorke, and the thyrde at Caerurst or Kaerglon̄ or Glouceter. To these .iii. archbyshopes were subiecte the fore¦sayd .xxviii. flamynys or byshoppes. To the archebyshoppes see of Lon∣don was subiecte Cornewayll and all myddel England vnto Humber. To the archebyshoppes see of yorke was subiecte all Northumberlande, from the bowe of Humber, wyth all Scotlande. And to the thyrde arch∣byshoppes see, whych was at Glow¦ceter, was subiecte all walys. In whych prouynce of walys were .vii. byshoppes, where as now ben but iiii. And at ye daye Seuarū departed Brytayne and Cambria or walys. But in the tyme of Saxons, after they had the rule of the lande of Bry¦tayne, as testyfyeth wylhelmus de Pontific, all be yt that saynt Grego∣ry had graunted vnto London pry∣uylege of that archbishoppes see: ne¦uerthelesse saynt Austayn, the which wyth other was sent into Englande by the foresayde Gregorye, tourned the archebyshoppes see out of Lon∣don into Caunterbury, after the deth of saint Gregory, by meanes of pray¦er of kyng Egbert or Ethelbert, and other cytyzeyns & burgesys of Caun¦terbury / where yt hath contynued to this daye / except that for the tyme of Offa kynge of Mercia or Merche∣ryk, for dyspleasure that he hadde to the cytezeyns of Caunterburye by∣nāme and toke from theym that dy∣gnyte / and worshypped Adulphe bys¦shop of Lychefelde wyth the pall of Caunterbury by the assent of Adry∣an the fyrste of that name then pope. Neuerthelesse in the tyme of Kenul∣phus, whyche not longe after was kynge of the sayde Mercia or Mer∣cheryk / yt was agayne restoryd to Caunterbury. The worshyp of ye see of yorke hath endured there alwaye and yet dothe, though Scotland be withdrawē frō his subieccyon. The archbyshoppes see of Caerglon̄ or Glowceter, was tourned frō thēs to Menenia, whych is in ye west syde of Demecia vppon the Iryshe see, whiche now is called saynt Dauids lande. In this pro∣uynce from the dayes of saynt Da∣uid, vnto the dayes of Sampson bys¦shop / sat .xxiii. byshoppes. But in the sayde Sampsons dayes then arche∣byshop, fyll such mortalyte thorowe
walys of the yelowe euyll called the Iaundyes / that myche people therof dyed. wherfore the sayde Sampson toke wyth hym the pall, & sayled in∣to Armorita or lytell Brytayne / and was there bysshoppe of Dolence or Dolences. And from that tyme vnto the fyrst Henrys tyme kyng of En∣glande / hadde sytten at Menenia or saynte Dauids .xxi. byshoppes, and all wythoute pall. But whether yt were for lacke of connynge, or ellys for pouerty, it is not asserteyned. Ne¦uerthelesse alwaye from the tyme of the sayde Sampson vnto the fore∣sayde Henry the fyrste tyme / all the byshoppes of wales were sacred of ye byshoppe of Menenia or saynte Da∣uids. And the archebyshop of Mene¦nia was at all tymes sacred of ye bys∣shoppes of walys, as of his suffra∣gans, and made no profession nor ob¦ieccyon to any other chyrche. But after these dayes other byshoppes yt sat there / were compelled to be sacred at Canterbury. In token of whyche subieccyon Bonyface archbyshoppe of Caūterbury, & legate of the crosse / sange in euery cathedrall chyrche of walys a solemne masse, whyche was done by the sayde Boniface in the tyme of Henry the seconde beynge kynge of Englande. But now ye shall vnderstāde there ben but two prymates or archbys∣shoppes in all Englande and walys. That one ys at Caunterburye, and that other is at yorke. To the pry∣mate of Caunterburye ben subiecte xiii. byshoppes in England, and .iiii. in walys. And the prymate of yorke hath but two suffragans in Englād, which be the byshoppes of Caerleyll and Durham. And who so wyll be further instructe of the order and chaūges of bysshop∣pes see of Englande lette hym rede ouer the .lii.liii.lv.lvi. and lvii. cha¦pyters of the fyrste boke of Polycro¦nycon / or a {per}te of holy Bedys work, whyche he compyled of the same ma¦ter called historia Anglicana: and there he shall haue euery thyng sette out clerely and truely. And for to contynewe my processe of Lucius as wytnessyth myne au∣thoure Gaufride / when he hadde, as before ys sayde stablyssyd & orderyd the foresayde archeflamyns and fla∣myns / and that they were also con∣fermed of the pope: he then endowed them wyth such landes and possessy∣ons, as before tyme were occupyed or gyuen to the maynteynynge and vpholdynge of the pagan rytes and lawe vsyd before tyme. And the tem¦ples of idollys thorough his land he causyd to be dedycate to Iesu Criste and his sayntes / & honoured them wyth myche great and large gyftes. And when he had done, after moste accorde of wryters by ye terme of .xii. yeres: he dyed and was buryed in ye cytye of Claudiocestre or Glouceter without heyre of his body / the which after grewe to great damage of the Brytons, as after shalbe shewed. Of this Lucius yt is shewed in a table hangynge vpon the wall of the north syde of the yle, in the backe of the quere of saynte Paules chyrche in London / that the sayde Lucius reygned ouer the Brytons .lxxvii. ye¦res. And ouer that the authoure of cronica cronicarum testyfyeth, that after Lucius had receyued the fayth, he assembled a great hoste of Bry∣tons and sayled ouer into Gallia or Fraunce / and thens into other coun¦tres passynge by Becia and the cytye called Augusta / & there subdued ma¦ny of the enymyes of Crystes fayth / where after many vertuouse dedys he restyd in good peace. And his su∣ster called Emerita, as sayth the said authour, was also martyred for Cri¦stes
sake. But of this sayeng & other the doute is assoyled in the foresayde table in ye begynnyng of this worke / where yt shall apere, that he reygned but .xii. yeres, as aboue is shewed. And for so myche as in this Luci{us} endeth for a tyme the lyne of Britōs, and the lande after this daye was ru¦led some dele by the Romayns: ther¦fore I will here ende the thyrd parte of this worke. And for ye good spede I haue hyderto had / and to the ende to inpetre the more grace in accom∣plyshyng ye other dele of this worke: I here salute our moste blessyd lady wyth the thyrd ioye of the foresayde vii. ioyes, whyche begynneth. Gaude splendens vas virtutum &c. Hayle and be glad thou vessell moste shynynge Of vertues and grace, at whose commaundement The hole courte of heuen is euer and byddynge And thou also arte amonge them ment Moste benygne and happy to euery good entent As dygne moder of Iesu, with moste excellence Honoured in glorye, with all theyr assystence. This thyrde parte to be accompted from the ende of the .ix. yere of Cassi¦bellan, to the laste yere of Lucius, includeth of yeres two hūdred & .xli. TRouth yt is, as affermyn all wryters / that after the deth of the forenamed Luci{us}, for so mych as of his body remayned non heyre: the Brytons amonge them selfe fyll at great dystaunce and warre. The whyche warre and trouble endured to the greate dystourbaunce of the lande. But howe longe, the certayne is not sette out by any wryter that I haue seen / excepte the englyshe cro∣nycle sayth, that yt endured .l. yeres. The whych sayeng vnder correccyō can not stande wyth the concordaūce of other writers / as yt is more playn¦ly declared in the foresayde table. where also yt shall appere, that the sayde dyscorde amonge the Britons contynued but onely .xv. yeres. After whyche terme of .xv. yeres expyred, as after more clerely shall be shewed: Seuerus beynge thē em¦perour of Rome, beganne his domy¦nyon ouer this lande of Brytayne. So that ye shall nowe vnderstande that ye laste yere of this discorde was the yere of our lorde two hundred & vii. By reason wherof yt foloweth, that the sayde .xv. yeres ioyned vnto the foresayde thyrde parte: that the thyrde part cōteyneth and includeth of yeres .ii. hundred and .lvi. ¶Thus endeth the thyrde parte. THE FOVRTH PARTE. THE .LXI. CHAPITER. SEuer{us} a Romayn at this daye empe¦rour of Rome / be¦gane to rule this lande of Brytayn in the yere of our lordes incarnacy¦on .ii. hūdred and viii. The whych as wytnesseth Gau¦fryde, was before tyme sent from the senate of Rome with two legyons of knyghtes into Brytayne, to appease the warre and stryfe amonge them / and also for to wythstāde the Pictes and other enymyes, whych dayly in¦uaded the land. For dyuers wryters agree, that this Seuer{us} was made emperoure, the yere of Crystes incar¦nacyon a hūdred .lxxx. and .xv / and ruled the sayd empyre after the most wryters .xvi. yeres. By whych rule yt shuld appere that he shuld be takē for gouernour of this realme of Bry¦tayne, the .xii. yere of his empyre.
It is sayde of this man, that after he had subdued the Parthis and the Arabis, he was named Particus / & was sent, as before is sayde, of the se¦nate of Rome into Brytayne / where he causyd to be made at the coste of the commoute, a walle of turues and great stakes of the length, as wytnes syth Policronica of a hundred & .xii. myles / as in the .xviii. chapyter of his .iiii. boke apperyth. This wall af¦ter the exposycyon of the sayde Poly¦cronica, began at the ryuer of Tyne, and enduryd to the Scottyshe see / or from the ende of the lordshyp of Dei¦ra, vnto the sayde Scottyshe see / or after some wryters from Durham, to the see beforesayde. Then yt foloweth, the Pictes with theyr leder Fulgenius / issued from Albany or Scotlande into the lande of Brytayne / and destroyed myche of ye coūtre beyonde Durham. wher∣fore this Seuerus with and hoste of Brytons and of Romaynes mette wyth the sayde Fulgenius in a place nere vnto yorke, where after sore fyght the sayd Seuerus was slayn / when he hadde ruled this lande after moste concordaunce of wryters by ye terme of .v. yeres / and was after bu¦ryed at yorke, leuynge behynde hym two sonnes, that one named Geta, and that other Bassianus. THE .LXII. CHAPITER. BAssianus the sonne of Seue∣rus and of the moders syde a Bryton / beganne to rule this lande of Britayne in the yere of Cirstes in∣carnacyon two hundred and .xii. Of this man spekyth nothynge the en∣glyshe cronycle. But trouth yt is, as wytnessyth Gaufride and other, that after / ye deth of Seuer{us} stryfe arose betwene the Brytons & the Romay∣nes, then beynge wythin the land of Brytayne. For the commons helde for theyr kynge Bassianus, for so myche as he was borne of a Bryton woman. And vpon that other party in lyke maner the Romayns alowed Geta for theyr kyng, because he was descended of a Romayne. And as far ther affermeth the forenamed Gau∣fryde / for this dyscencyon a batayll was hadde betwene the sayd two bre¦therne / in ye whych Geta was slayn, and Bassianus remayned for kynge of all the lande. But frō this sayeng varyeth great¦ly Eutropius, and other that wryte of the cronycles of Rome. For by thē yt is witnessed, that Geta was slayn at a cytye named Edessa, when he faught agayne the Parthiens / and Bassianus succedyd his fader in the dignyte of emperoure / which as in ye sayde cronycle of Rome is testyfyed, was also called Marcus Aurelius Antonnius and Caracalla a man of ryght euyll condycyon, and vnrea∣sonable of lechery, so yt he laye by his stepdame named Iuliana and wed∣dyd her, and dyd other many cruell dedys / and lastely he was slayne at the forenamed cytye of Edessa, when he had ben emperour vpō .vii. yeres. In the tyme that Bassianus was thus kynge of Brytayne, one named Carassius a Bryton of lowe byrthe, but valyant and hardy in mercyall dedys: purchaced of the senate of Rome the kepynge of ye costes of Bry¦tayne, and to wythstāde the malyce of straungers, as Pictes and other. By meane of this, Carassius drewe vnto hym many knyghtes, & specy∣ally of the Brytons / promysynge to them, yt if they wold make hym kyng he wolde clerely delyuer them from all seruytude of ye Romaynes. where thorough ye Britons (as wytnessyth Gaufryde) rebelled agayne Bassia¦nus / and wyth theyr duke and leder Carassius, arreryd agayne hym dede¦ly
warre. By meane wherof Bassia∣nus was slayne, when he hadde ru∣led this land by moste concordaunce vi. yeres. THE .LXIII. CHAPITER. CArassius a Briton of vnkno∣wen byrth was of the Brytōs made ruler, in the yere of our lord .ii. hundred and .xviii. the whych as be∣fore is touched, was by the senate of Rome deputed for a substytute or a ruler vnder the Romaynes, as yt is shewed in theyr cronycles, in the ab∣sence, or whyle Bassianus then em∣perour of Rome and kynge of Bry∣tayne, was occupyed aboute the ne∣des of the empyre. This Carassius for that he was not of power to with¦stande the Pictes / or for the fauoure that he bare towarde thē for aydyng hym agayne the Romayns: he gaue to them the countre of Albania, that now is called Scotlande. But ye shall vnderstande, yt here is not ment all Scotlande. For as wytnessyth Policronica / this parte yt was gyuē thus to the Pictes, was the south parte of Albania, and be∣ganne at Twede, and enduryd to the Scottysh see. Of the kynde of those Pictes is somwhat shewed before in the story of Marius / but more after shall be shewed of them in conueniēt place, bothe of theyr ofsprynge and maners. Then yt foloweth in the story, whē the Romaynes hadde knolege of the deth of Bassianus / anon they sent a duke frō Rome named Alectus with iii. legyons of knyghtes, for to slee Carassius, and to subdue the Bry∣tons to the empyre. To the whyche Alectus fortune was so fauourable, that he chased Carassius, and lastely slew hym / when he hadde ruled the Brytons by most accorde of wryters viii. yeres. But Iacobus Philipp{us} authour of a boke named Supplementū cro∣nicarum sayth, that in the tyme that Maximianus or Maxymyan sur∣named Herculeus, and Dioclecyan Dalmatheus were emperoures of Rome: they harde that this Carassi{us} had taken vpon hym to were ye pur∣pure that onely was reserued to em¦perours / & also yt he ruled the realm of Brytayne as to his synguler vse / and furthermore were credybly en∣fourmed, that Narset{us} an other sub¦stytute hadde or occupyed the eest lā¦des wyth cruell batayll / and other prynces the great coūtre of Affrica / and many other also by the instyga∣cyon and leuyng of one named Achil¦leus hadde subdued the countre of Grece. For whych sayde nouellys & tydynges / these two emperours, to the ende to refourme all these sayde rebellyons, chase vnto them two no∣ble men / of the whyche that one was named Galerius, and that other Cō¦stancius, as cesars or felowes to rule the empyre. And yt done / the sayd .ii. cesars were sent with great powers, that one īto Affrica, and ye other into Egypte. This forenamed Maximy¦an came wyth great power of peo∣ple into Britayne, and ouercame the sayde Carassius more by gyle then by strength / when the sayde Caras∣sius had ruled the Brytons, as sayth the forenamed authour Iacob{us} Phi¦lippus, by the terme of .x. yeres. In the whyche sayeng appereth errour, for dyuersytie of tyme and ye¦res. For after moste accorde of wry∣ters / and also by the affyrmacyon of the sayde Iacobus Philippus, the sayde emperoures Dioclesian & Ma¦xymyan, ruled the empyre of Ro∣me aboute the yere of Crystes incar∣nacyon two hundred and .lxxxx. And this Carassi{us} was ruler in Britayne long before, as in the tyme of Bassia¦nus
emperour of Rome, ye reygned aboute the yere of our lorde two hun¦dred & .xiii. as testyfyeth Polycro∣con and other. Also a boke in frenche called la Me¦re de hystoryes, whyche maye be en∣glyshed ye Moder of hystoryes, sayth that this Carassius was fyrste a trea¦sourer or such a hygh offycer amōge the Romayns. By reason wherof he sought great abundaunce of ryches, and fyll by reason therof in fauoure of the senatours of Rome / so that fy¦nally he was made senatour, and be¦came a man of great authorytye / in so myche that Bassianus then empe∣roure made hym protector of the cy∣tye and countre of Alexandrye. But then he was supprysyd wyth suche pryde, that he exercysed tyranny and other vnlefull meanes, in so exce∣dynge maner that the countre waxed wery of him, and conspired his deth. wherfore after punyshemēt done vp¦on some of his enymyes / he feryng the sequell and reuengement of the same: left that countre and retour∣ned vnto Rome / where after he had a season restyd, he was by the senate of Rome assygned for his sternesse vnto the rule of Brytayne, wyth the ayde of .iii. legyōs of knyghtes. And so beynge garnyshed wyth all abyly mentes of warre, entred this yle of Brytayne / and wyth great trauayle subdued them to the empyre / and so contynued the lyues tyme of the em∣perour Bassianus. But so sone as he was assertayned that ye emperour was slayne at Edes¦sa, as before in the story of Bassian{us} is shewed / thynkynge that amonge the Romaynes shuld growe stryfe & dyssencyon for the electyon of a new emperour / by reason of whych stryfe he myght the rather lyue so farre frō them wythout any correctyon: con∣federyd wyth the Scottes and cer∣tayne other of the Britons / and slew many of the Romaynes, suche of thē as he thought wolde not consent to his treason / and by that meane fy∣nally was made kynge of Brytayne. And so contynued, as affermeth the sayde authour to accompte from his fyrst hauyng rule vnder the Romay¦nes, vnto the tyme yt he was slayne of Alectus .viii. yeres, not wythout exercysynge of his olde accustomed tyrannyes and other vnsyttynge con¦dycyons. THE .LXIIII. CHAPITER. ALectus a duke or consull of Rome, sent as before is sayd from the senate / begāne to rule the Brytons, in the yere of our lorde .ii. hundred & .xxvi. This in the englysh cronycle is named Allec. whych whē he had restoryd the lande to the sub∣ieccyon of Rome / he thē pursued cer¦tayne of the Brytōs, that had fauou¦red Carassi{us} agayne the Romayns. And in that doynge vsed and exercy¦syd many tyrannyes and exaccyons / by reason wherof he fyll in greate grudge of ye Brytons. wherfore they entendynge to oppresse and subdue the power of the Romaynes / purcha¦syd and excyted a noble man of ye Bri¦tons called Asclepiodotus and duke of Cornewayle. The whyche gathe∣ryd a great hoste of the Brytons, and made warre vppon the Romaynes, and chasyd them from coūtre to coū∣tre, & from towne to towne / and last∣ly Alectus wyth his Romayns drew hym to London, and there kept hym for his most suertye. wherof beynge warned Asclepiodotus: he with his Brytons came nere vnto the sayde cytye / where by meanes of prouoca∣cyon on eyther partye vsed, lastely ye Romaynes issued oute of the cytye & gaue batayll to the Brytons. In the
which fyght many fyll on eyther par¦tye / but ye more on the party of ye Ro∣maynes / amonge the whyche was al¦so slayne Alect{us}. wherfore a captayn of the Romaynes called Liuius Gal¦lus, aduertysynge this myschyef, & the great daūger that the Romayns were in: drewe backe into the cytye with the Romaynes that were lefte on lyue, and defendyd yt wyth theyr powers. Thus then appereth, that Alectus was slayne of the Brytons / whyche was by most accorde of writers whē he had ruled this lande vnder ye Ro∣maynes by the terme of .vi. yere. THE .LXV. CHAPITER. ASclepiodotus duke of Cor∣newayle, as sayth Gaufryde (but after the sayeng of Eutropius and Beda, he was presydente of the Pretory of Rome) began his domy∣nyon ouer the Brytons, in the yere of our lorde two hundred and .xxxii. The whych as before is sayde, wyth his Brytons gyrt the cytye of Lon∣don wyth a stronge syege / and kepte the forsayde Liuius Gallus and his Romayns in streyte holde / & finally, as affermyth myne authour Gaufri¦de, with knyghtly force & violēce en∣tred the sayde cytye, and slewe ye fore¦namyd Liuius Gallus nere vnto a broke there at that daye rynnynge, and hym threwe into the sayd broke. By reason wherof long after yt was called Gallus or wallus broke. And at this day ye strete where some tyme ranne the sayde broke, is nowe called walbroke. And after he hadde thus venquyshed the Romayns: he helde this lande a certayn of tyme in peasyble wyse, and ruled the Brytōs wyth good iustyce / in rewardynge & exaltynge the good men, and punys¦shynge of the euyll. In this whyle by styrynge of dys∣claunderous & dyuylyshe persons / a grudge was arreryd attwene the kynge and a duke of his land called Coill or Coillus, the whyche was duke or erle of Kaercolym or Colche¦ster / wherof the cause is not appa∣raunt. But how it was, great people were assembled on both parties / and fynally mette in the feld, where was faughtē a great and stronge batayll. In the whyche Asclepiodotus was slayne / when he had reygned to the concordaunce of other histories, and after the affermaunce of the olde cro¦nycle by the space of .xxx. yeres. THE .LXVI. CHAPITER. COelus erle of Colchester be∣gan hys domynyon ouer the Brytons, in the yere of the incarna∣cyon of Cryste .ii. hoūdred .lxii. This in the englyshe boke is called Coyll / the whiche guyded the lande to the pleasure of the Brytons a certayne tyme. But as wytnesseth Gaufryde, when the senate of Rome had vnder standynge of the deth of Asclepiodo¦tus, they were ioyous of the deth of hym, for so myche as he hadde euer ben an enemye to ye empyre. But for so mych as at that dayes was great dyssencyon amonge them selfe, as wytnesseth ye cronycle of Rome: they coude not conuenyently sende any armye of knyghtes for to warre vp∣pon this Coelus. wherfore he conty∣nued ye longer in reste & good peas. After the cronycle regestred within the monastery of saynt Alboon / the sayd holy martyr suffered his passyō in the yere of our lorde .ii. houndred lxxx. & .vi / whych shulde be the .xxiiii. yere of this present kynge. But thys dyscordeth from suche wryters, as af¦fermen the holy man to be martyred in the .x. persecucyon vnder Diocle∣sian and Maximian emperours. Neuerthelesse at length was sente
from ye senate a noble wyse man cal∣led Constancius / the whiche as affer¦meth the forenamed auctour, had be¦fore tyme subdued to the empyre a great part of the coūtre of Spayne. But that sayenge dysagreeth to the wrytynge of Eutropius. For the coū¦tre of Spayne was not subdued by hym tyll after yt he was emperour. Than it foloweth, whan this Con¦stancius was arryued in Brytayne with his army / anone Coelus assem¦bled his Brytons. But for he dredyd the strength and fame of thys Con∣stācius, he sent to hym an enbassad, affyrmynge vnto hym cōdycyons of peace, wyth graunte of paymentes of the trybute, whych before was de¦nyed / or ellys as meaneth Polycro∣nia, wythin a moneth after the lan∣dynge of this Constancius, Coelus was dede. wherfore the Brytons to haue the more peace / wyllyd this knyghte to take to wyfe Heleyn the doughter of Coelus, wyth the posses¦syon of the lande of Britayne / which by hym was graunted. Then as be∣fore is sayde, Coelus dyed, when he had ruled the Brytons after most ac¦corde of wryters .xxvii. yeres. THE .LXVII. CHAPITER. COnstancius a senatoure of Rome, as sayth Policronica / beganne to rule the Brytons in the yere of oure lorde two hundred .lxxx. and .ix. This as before is shewed ma¦ryed Heleyn the doughter of Coelus last kyng of Brytayne. But ye shall vnderstande, that this Constancius was fyrste maryed vnto Theodora the stepdoughter of Herculeus Ma∣ximian{us} / and had by her syx sonnes. So that this Heleyn was his secōde wyfe, whyche was fayrest of all may¦dens, and therewyth lerned, and suf¦fycyenly lettred. She is also noted of many writers to be a captyue or a prysoner to the Romaynes. Of this Constantius lytell memo¦rye is lefte in the bretyshe or englishe cronycles / excepte that he receyued of the foresayde Heleyn a sonne na∣med Constantinus / the whyche after for his knyghtly & marcyall dedys, was called Constantyne the great. But for the noble dedys of so vy∣ctoryous a duke shuld not be hydde, as was this Cōstantius: therfore I shall now folowe the story of Rome, whych sayth, that for so myche as in the tyme of Dioclesianus and Ma∣ximianus beynge emperours, many coūtres rebellyd agayne the empyre: therfore the sayde emperoures ad∣myttyd this Constantius, and one Galerius as cesars, whych was a di¦gnyte next of authoryte to the empe∣rours. And so ye empyre was at those dayes guyded by two emperours, & by two cesars. This Constātius, as wytnessyth Policronica made sub∣iecte to the empyre the Almaynes, & slewe of theym in one daye .lx. thou∣sande. And after other many vycto∣ryous dedys, when the sayde .ii. em∣perours had of theyr free wylles re∣sygned and gyuen ouer all imperiall dygnyte: thys sayde Constantius with his forenamed felowe Galeri{us}, were made emperours / yt is to wytte Galerius was emperour of all Iliri¦cum, whyche now is named Grecia or Grece wyth all the eest lādes, and Cōstanti{us} hadde to hym all the west landes. But he helde hym contente wyth Gallia or Fraunce, & Spayne with Britayn / & graunted Italia vn¦to Galerius afore sayd. Then he sub¦dued the countre of Spayne, as be∣fore is touched in the storye of Coe∣lus, and a parte of Gallia / and after soiourned and abode in this lande of Brytayne in guydynge & rulynge the same wyth great sobernesse, and ordeyned his sonne gotten vpon He¦layne
to rule Gallia and Spayne. But for to make this story more ap¦parant & open to ye readers, and al∣so to ye herers: it is here to be noted, that Dioclesianus or Dioclesian be¦ganne his empyre ouer the Romay∣nes after moste wryters, in the ye∣re of our lorde two hundred .lxxx. and .vii. and he was emperour .xx. yeres. And this Cōstantius was sent into Brytayne from the senate as be¦fore is sayde, in the seconde yere of ye sayde Dioclesian, or the yere of oure lorde two hundred .lxxx. and .ix. whyche Constancius after he had in due maner spedde the nedes of the empyre, as in subduynge this land of Brytayne, as before is sayde: he retourned agayn to Rome / where he was shortely after made cesar, and so contynued his lyfe, as before ys touchyd. And in the tyme of his beyng thus cesar and rule of Brytayne vnder ye emperour, the blessyd and holy pro∣thomartyr, of Brytayn saynt Alboon at Uerolan was martyred / in the .x. persecucyon of the chyrche, as wyt∣nessyth Policronicon. whyche perse¦cucyon beganne, as testyfye Eusebi{us} and Beda, the .xviii. yere of the fore¦named emperours Dioclesian & Ma¦ximyan, and endured .x. yeres / that is to say in ye eest vnder Dioclesian / and in the weste vnder Mayan. The whyche was so sharpe and fer∣uent, that wythin ye space of one mo¦neth, in dyuers places of the worlde were .xvii. thousande holy men and women martyred for Crystes fayth. And when the sayde emperours left or resygned theyr imperyall dygny∣tye, and adde a pryuate lyfe: this sayde Constancius wyth his felowe Galerius, departyd the empyre be∣twene them, as before is touched / so that he reygned as ruler of Brytayn by the terme of .xvii. yeres and more or he were emperoure. And after as emperour of the weste partye of the empyre▪ and kynge of Brytayn .xii. yeres and more. And so in all ye sayd Cōstantius reygned ouer Brytayne xxx. yeres. And lastely dyed and was buryed at yorke, leuyng after hym ye foresayd son called Cōstantin{us} with¦out mo that any mēcyon is made of. THE .LXVIII. CHAPITER. COnstantinus the sonne of Cō¦stancius, and of Heleyne dou¦ghter of kynge Coelus, in the yere of our lord .iii. hūdred & .xix. was made kynge of Brytayne. Antoninus archbyshop of Florence, & wryter of hystoryes, sheweth in the fyrst chapi¦ter of the .ix. tytle of his worke called S Antonini / that this Cōstantine was made emperour, or beganne to rule the empyre, in the yere of our lor¦des incarnacyon .iii. hundred and .ix. which sayeng also affermeth Uyncēt historyall and other authours / wher¦of the cause is yt the sayde authours accōpt not the yeres of the reygne of Constancius, but folow the accōpte of Galerius felowe of Constancius / whych reygned as emperour but .iii. yeres. After the which rule yt muste nedis folowe, that this Constantyne began his empyre, as the sayd Anto¦ninus wytnessyth / and folowynge ye other accompt yt shulde varye. Then to pursue or contynue ye sto∣rye of this Constantyne / yt foloweth yt at the tyme of the decease of Con∣stancius his fader, he was occupyed in warres in Gallia & those {per}ties. Af¦ter whose deth he by a certayn terme ruled Brytayne, & the other landes, the whyche his fader before helde in due maner. And all be yt yt at ye daye he was a mysereant & pagan: yet he vsed no tyrannyes, nor compelled not the Brytons to refuse the lawe, and to worshyppe idollys, as other
tyrauntes at those dayes vsed. In this whyle that Constantyne ruled thus the weste parte of this empyre / one Maxentius whych was the son of Herculeus Maximian{us}, somtyme felowe in the empyre with Dioclesi∣an as before is shewed / was of the knyghtes of the pretory declared em¦perour. This Maxentius was there worste of all men. And as testyfyeth Eusebius & other / he fyrst began me¦kely, to wynne therby loue & fauour. But when he was stablysshed in au∣thorite / he exercysed all tyrāny, & pur¦sued all crystyens wyth all kynde of torment. Also he expulsed and putte out from Rome & all honour hys fa∣der Hercule{us} Maximian{us}, yt entēdyd agayne to haue ben emperour. Of ye tyranny of this Maxētius when Cō¦stantyne had wyttyng: he assembled a great hoste of Brytons and Gal∣lis, for to oppresse the malyce of the sayde Maxentius. And for to rule and guyde this lād of Brytane in his absence, he depu∣ted and ordeyned a mā of myght cal¦led Octauius / the whych Polycroni¦ca nameth duke of Iewessis, that af¦ter were named west Saxons. And when the sayde Constantyne had all peparyd for his voyage: he betoke the lande of Brytayne vnto the sayd Octauius, and after spedde hym vp¦pon his iourney. And as he was to∣warde his sayde iourney, he sawe in his slepe the sygne of the crosse shy∣nynge in the fyrmament, as yt hadde ben a brennyng lyght of fyre / and an aungell standynge therby and say∣enge: Constantyne toicanata / which is to meane, Constantyne by this to¦ken thou shalte wynne vyctorye. when he awoke, he called this vysy∣on to mynde, and tolde vnto his se∣cretes / by whose counsayll he com∣maunded the sygne of the crosse to be peynted and set in his baners and penons, and all his knyghtes. THE .LXIX. CHAPITER. WHen Constantyne had thus or∣deyned the sygne of the crosse: he spedde hym forth towarde ye sayd tyrante Maxentius / and mette with hym at a brydge called Ponte Mil∣uium. where after lōge fyght, he cha¦syd the sayd Maxentius / & him with a great parte of his hoste drowned in the water of the sayde brydge, when he had reygned as emperour vpō .v. yeres. After which victory thus had: the sayde Constantyne wente vnto Rome / where he was receyued of ye senate wyth moste triumphe. And there caused the signe of the crosse to be peynted in the ryght hādes of the images, whyche the senatours of old tyme had areryd in worshyp of theyr vyctoryes. And vnder the feet of the images / he causyd to be wryten: This is the signe and token of the ly¦uynge god, that maye not be ouer∣comen. Soone after this, Constātyne was conuertyd from his pagan lawe vn∣to Crystes fayth, by vertue of ye bles¦sed Uernacle as some haue ben / or by the good doctryne of that blessyd pope saint Siluester first of y• name / the whyche was made pope in ye yere folowynge Crystes incarnacyon .iii. hundred and .xiii. Then Constan∣tyne opened the prysons, and des∣stroyed the temples of false goddes, and dedycate them in the worshyppe of god and his sayntes. He also ope∣ned them that tofore were shytte and kepte close / and causyd dyuyne ser∣uyce in them to be sayd, and gaue to the chyrche of Rome fyrste possessy∣ons. And also he ordeyned that ye bys¦shoppe of Rome shulde be hedde of all byshoppes, & all other to be obe∣dyent vnto hym. He also bare claye
vppon his shoulders to the founda∣cyon of saynt Peters chyrch, as wyt¦nessyth Policronica and other. Of this fyrste indowement of the chyrch are dyuers thynges shewed, as reherseth Gwaldus Cambrens. saynt Hierom, and other / the whych I ouer passe for lengthynge of tyme of this worke. And whyle that Constantyne was thus occupyed in Rome: hys moder Heleyne then beyng ferre from hym, and herynge that he was become a Crysten man: sent vnto hym letters of recommendacyon, that he had for¦saken the worshyppynge of idollys. But she dyspreysed hym, in that that he worshypped a man that was nay¦led vppon a crosse. But after receyte of these letters / he wrote answere to his moder, that he shulde suffycyent¦ly proue, that he byleued and wor∣shypped hym, that was fyrste crea∣tour and maker of the worlde. And not onely a man but also god & man, with diuers other poyntes touchyng the fayth, whych I ouerpasse. For resonynge and profe of thys, was after assygned .vii. score iewes / and Siluester wyth a certayne nom¦ber of crysten clerkes, to dyspute the artycles of Crystes fayth. where af∣ter dyuers myracles shewed, & good profe made by holy scrypture: the sayde iewes were confounded / and the sayde Heleyne was conuerted vn¦to the fayth of Crystes chyrche / and traueyled soon after to Hierusalem, where she by her industrye and la∣bour fande oute the holy crosse, with the .iii. nayles that oure lorde was nayled wyth to the same crosse. wher¦of she lefte there a parte / and the o∣ther dele was brought vnto Bizan∣cium nowe called Constantyne no∣ble. whyche cytye the sayde Constan¦tyne greatly augmentyd wyth ex∣cellent buyldynge / and therin also caused to be arcryd a chyrch of mer∣uaylous beautye, & named yt So∣phia. when the emperour hadde re∣ceyued the foresayde parte of the cros wyth the .iii. nayles: he after some authours put two of the sayde nay∣les in the brydell of his horse, whych he vsed in batayll. And the thyrde he caste or caused to be caste (as wytnes¦syth saynt Ambrose) in a swalowe of the see called mare Adriaticū. whych swalowe was before that tyme so pe¦ryllous, that vnnethes any shyppe escapyd that daunger / and garnys∣shed the crosse wyth many ryche sto∣nes freyt wyth golde / and after with great reuerēce conueyde it to Rome, as in dyuerse hystories is declaryd. Then this Cōstantyne remoued the emperyall see vnto his cytye of Con∣stantyne the noble / and there for the more partye kepte his emperyall ho¦noure, and other emperours in lyke wyse after hym. By reason wherof the emperours were longe after cal∣led emperours of Constantyne no∣ble. This man was so myghty & mer¦cyall in his feates and all hys de∣dys / that for hys more honoure he had an addycyon putte to his name, and was called for his great myght and power, Constantyne the great. He was also the fyrste crysten empe∣roure / and dyd many notable actes for the weale of Crystes fayth. A∣monge the whyche seuen are noted by the forenamed Antoninus, in the ix. tytle of ye second part of his worke before named: wherof the fyrste was that Cryste shulde be worshypped as god thorough the cyty of Rome. The seconde was, that who so of Iesu Cryste spake any blasphemy, he shulde be greuously punyshed. The thyrde was, what persone that dyd any iniurye or wronge to a
Crysten man / he shuld be depryuyd or put to ye losse of halfe his goodes. The fourth, that lyke as the empe∣rour of Rome is hede of all tēporall prynces: so the byshoppe or pope of Rome is hed of all byshoppes. The fyfte, that what persone fledde to the chyrche for his sauegarde or suerty / that there he shuld be defended from all peryll and daunger. The syxte, that no man shuld presume to buyld any temple or chyrche wythin any cy¦tye or towne, wythout the specyall ly¦cence of his byshoppe. The seuenth, that euery prynce shulde gyue the .x. parte of his possessyons to the buyl∣dyng and meynteynyng of chirches. The whyche lawe he fyrste execu∣ted / and after wyth a pykax or mat∣toke with his owne hande, brake the groūde where as now standeth saint Peters chyrche. and .xii. cophyns or treys full of erth he bare away vpon his shulders / as wytnessyth the fore¦sayde Antoninus and other. But after those manyfolde good dedys / he fyll into the heresye called Ariannys heresy. By meane wherof he was so blynded, that he then be∣came an enymye to Cristes chyrch, & {per}secuted crystē men, & exyled ye pope Siluester / or as some meane ye sayde Siluester fledde the cyte for fere. For this as wytnessyth Iacobus Philippus and other wryters / this Constantyne was smyten wyth the euyll of lepry. For curynge wherof iii. thousand chyldren were brought to thēperours paleys to be slayne, yt he in the blood of them myght be ba∣thed, and so clēsyd of his lepry. But when he saw the childern and the mo¦ders sorowyng for them, he was mo¦ued wyth pytye, and sayd: the dygni¦tye of thēpyre cometh of myldnesse. For yt is demyd, that he shuld dye ye sleeth a chyld in batayll. Then what crueltye were this to sle so many in∣nocentes wylfully? yet better yt were to vs to dye and saue those chylders lyues / then to gette a cruell lyfe by ye deth of so many innocentes. For this myldnesse it is redde that saynt Peter and Poule apperyd to hym the nyght folowynge, warnyng hym to sende agayne for Siluestre ye pope, and he shulde be by hym resto¦ryd to perfytte helthe. whyche was done, and he heled as the legende of sayntes bereth wytnesse. Thus haue I shewed to you a part of the dedys of Constantyne / whych yf I shulde cōtynue the hole processe of his reygne, that endured as em∣peroure by the space of .xxx. yeres: I shulde therof make a large volume. But it concernyth nothynge of then∣tent of this worke, as touchynge the lande of Brytayne: therfore I woll retourne my style to Octauius from whom I haue made a lōg digressyō. THE .LXX. CHAPITER. IN this passetyme whyle Con∣stantyne occupyed hym in ne∣des of thempyre as aboue is shewed: Octauius beynge lieutenant in the lande of Brytayne vnder Constan∣tyne, ruled the lande to the pleasure of the Brytons a certayne of tyme. But when he perceyued that he was in fauoure of them, and that Con∣stantyne was farre from hym / cas∣tynge also in his mynde, that ye sayd Constantyne beyng then emperour, wold or myght not lyghtly retourne into Britayn: he therfore with helpe of his affynyte and frēdes, withstode the Romaynes lefte in Brytayne of Constantyne / and vsurpyd the rule & domynyon of ye lande. wherof whē certayntie came to ye knowlege of Cō¦stantyne: he in all hast sent into Bry¦tayne a duke named Trahern̄, the whyche was vncle vnto Heleyne mo¦der of Constantyne. when this Tra∣hern̄ was arryued in Brytayne with
iii. legions of knyghtes: anon Octa¦uius made towarde hym wyth hys Brytons / and wyth hym mette nere the citye, then called Kaerperis, now called Porte chestre or Porchestre / but more verely in a felde nere vnto the cytye of Kaerguent, that now ys called wynchester / whych felde then was named Maesurian. The .ii. ho∣stes mette wyth great ire, and fough ten longe whyle. But in ye ende Tra¦hern̄ was compelled to forsake the felde / and after drewe wyth his Ro∣maynes towarde Albania or Scot∣lande. wherof Octauius beyng war¦ned, folowed hym / and in the coun∣tre of westmerlande gaue vnto hym the seconde batayll, where then Oc∣tauius was chasyd & Trahern̄ was vyctour / the whych pursued Octa∣uius so egerly, that he cōpelled hym to forsake the lande of Britayne, and to sayle into the countre of Norway for his sauegarde. But yt was not longe after, that the sayde Octauius gaderyd a newe people of Brytons & Norways, and was redy to retourne agayn into Bri¦tayne. In whych tyme, as testyfyeth myne authour Gaufryde / an erle of Brytayne that entyerly loued Octa¦uius, by treason slewe the sayd Tra¦hern̄ a lytell before the landynge of the sayde Octauius. whyche shortly subdued the Romaynes and ye lande to his owne vse. This shuld be after moste concordaunce of wryters, whē Constantyne wyth also the ayde of Trahern̄, hadde ruled this lande of Brytayne by the terme of .x. yeres. THE .LXXI. CHAPITER. OCtaui{us} duke of ye Iessis, other∣wyse westsaxons / beganne his reygne ouer the Brytons, in the yere of our lorde .iii. hundred .xxix. This in the englyshe boke is called Octa∣uian / the whych as testyfyeth Gau∣fryde, gaderyd in shorte whyle after so great plentye of treasoure and ry∣chesse, that he feryd no man / and ru¦led this lande in peasyble wyse. So that of hym or of his actes is left ly∣tell memorye / excepte that when he was fallen into age, by the counsayll of Brytons he sent vnto Rome for a noble yonge man of the aliy of He∣leyne, moder vnto Constantyne cal¦led Maximian{us}, as after more playn¦ly shalbe shewed: all be yt that some aduysed hym to make one Conan Meryadok his cosyne, kynge after hym. But by the instāt labour of Ca¦radok then duke of Cornewayll / Oc¦tauius lastly sent vnto Rome Mau∣ryce the sonne of the forenamed Ca∣radok / to brynge or conuey the sayd Maximianus into Brytayne, for to mary the onely doughter of Octaui∣us / and by reason therof, to enioy ye realme of Brytayne. This Maximi¦an{us} is of some auctour named Maxi¦mius / the whych as wytnessyth Gau¦fride, was the sonne of Leonyne, bro¦ther to Heleyne, and vncle vnto Cō¦stantyne the great. whych saynge af∣fermeth also Iacobus Philipp{us} au∣thour of a boke called Supplemen∣tum cronicarum / wherin he nameth the sayde Maximianus a knyght of the Bryton blood. Then it foloweth, when the forena¦med Maurice had spedde his nedes, so yt he came to the presence of Maxi¦mian{us}, & shewed theffecte of his Mes¦sage: the sayd Maximianus to hym graunted, & in all haste prepared for his voyage into Brytayne / & shortly after with cōuenient cūpany landed at Southampton. wherof beynge warned Conan Meryadok: he wyth a certayne of knyghtes of his affiny¦tye, was purposed to haue frayed with the sayd Maximian{us}, & to haue destressed hym / for so mych as he wel knewe, that by hym he shuld be pu from the rule of the lande. But thys
purpose was let by the commaunde∣ment of the kynge or otherwyse, so yt the sayd Maximianus was cōueyed safely to the kynges presence, & short¦ly after wyth consent of the more par¦tye of his lordes, gaue his doughter vnto the sayde Maximianus wyth possessyon of this yle of Brytayne. The whyche mariage solemnysed & endyd, the sayde Octaui{us} dyed short¦ly after. But howe long he reygned, none of the foresayde authours testy¦stye / excepte dyuers of them agre, yt he contynued his reygne tyll ye tyme that Gracyan and Ualentinyan ru∣led the empyre / the whyche beganne to reygne the yere of our lorde .iii. hū¦dred .lxxx. and .ii. By whyche reason yt muste folowe, that the sayd Octa¦uius reygned at the leest .liiii. yeres. THE .LXXII. CHAPITER. MAximian{us} or Maximi{us} ye son of Leonine & cosyn Germayn of Constantyne the great / was made kynge of Bryton, in the yere of oure lorde .iii. hundred .lxxx. and .ii. Thys in the englyshe boke is named Maxi¦mian / the whych as testyfyeth Gau∣fryde and other, was stalworth and myghty of his handes. But for he was cruell and pursued somdele the cristen: he therfore of all wryters is called Maximian{us} the ty¦rant. Attwene this & Conan before named, was stryfe and debate / and dyuers conflyctes attwene thē was foughten, in the whyche eyther of them spedde dyuersly / all be yt that lastely they were made frendes. So that Maximian{us} reygned a season in quyete, and gaderyd rychesse, & trea¦sour not all wyth out grudge. Laste¦ly he was moued & exyted to warre vpon the Galles / thorow whych coū¦cell he wyth a great hoste of Brytōs sayled into Armorica that now is cal¦led lytell Brytayne / and bare hym so knyghtly, that he subdued that coun¦tre vnto his lordshyp / & after gaue the sayde countre to Conan Merya¦dok, to hold of hym and of the kynge{is} of great Brytayn for euer. And then commaunded the sayde lande to be called lytell Brytayne. For this vyctory his knyghtes pro¦clamed hym emperour. where tho∣rough he beynge the more exaltyd in pryde / passed farther in the landes of the emprye, & vyctoryously subdued a great parte of Gallia or Fraunce, and all Germania. For thys dede / dyuers authours accompt hym false and periuryd. wherfore yt shulde seme that before his departynge frō Rome, he was sworne vnto Gracian and Ualentynyane emperours, that he shuld neuer after clayme any part of the empyre. And also for the bre∣kynge of this othe / he was after cha¦lengyd or blamed of saynt Martyne byshop of Turon. To whom he an∣swered that he was compelled of his knyghtes to take vppon hym as em¦perour / or ellys he shuld of thē haue ben slayne. Neuerthelesse the sayde byshoppe shewed vnto hym, that for his vntrouth he shuld not longe pro¦spere or reygne. After that worde was brought vn¦to the emperours, that Maximian{us} had wyth harde bataylles thus sub∣dued Gallia and Germania: Gra∣cian{us} wyth a great hoste came down to resyste hym. But when he harde of ye marciall dedes of Maximian{us} / he was a drade and fled backe to the citye of Lugdun or Lyōs in Fraūce. where after the sayde Gracian{us} was slayne / and his brother Ualentinian was compelled to flee to Constan∣tyne the noble. Then Maximian{us} to haue the more strength to wythstāde his enimyes: made his sonne named Uictour felowe of the emperour. In
this whyle that Maximian{us} warred thus in Italy: Conan Meryadoke, to whom as before is sayde Maximi¦an{us} had gyuen the land of lytell Bry¦tayne / for so mych as he & his knygh¦tes had no wyll to mary the dough∣ters of Frenschmen, but rather to haue wyues of theyr owne blood: therfore this Conan sent messagers vnto Dionotus then duke of Corne¦wayll, and chyfe ruler of Brytayne / wyllynge hym to sende his dough∣ter Ursula wyth a certayne nomber of virgyns, to be coupled to hym & to his knightes in maryage. The which soone after prepared accordyng ye re∣quest of Conan, the foresayd Ursula accōpanyed wyth .xi. thousande vyr∣gyns, and were sent by her sayde fa∣ther towarde lytell Brytayne / as wit¦nesseth the englyshe cronycle, Gau∣fryde, and also Policronica. But yt shuld appere by the sayeng of Antoninus, Iacob{us} Philippus, and other writers / that this Ursula with her company shulde not be sent forth of mych Brytayne, nor maryed aboute this tyme / but in the tyme of Marcianus beynge emperoure / the whyche began his empyre after most accorde of wryters, in the yere of our lord .iiii. hundred & .li. Of the martyr¦dome of these maydens dyuers au∣thours wryte dyuersly. wherfore I remytte them that wyll haue farther vnderstādyng in this mater, vnto ye legende of saynts redde yerely in the chyrche, where they maye be suffycy¦enly taught and enformed. THE .LXXIII. CHAPITER. ANd as before is shewed Ma¦ximian{us} beynge occupyed in warres in Italy: two dukes named Gwanus, and Melga / the whych as Gaufryde testyfyeth and other, were sent from Gracian and Ualentinian emperours, to punyshe and subdue the Brytons that fauoured the par∣ty of Maximian{us} / warred sore vpon the costes of great Brytayne, and oc¦cupyed a great parte of Albania. wherof when Maximian{us} had know¦lege / he sente into great Brytayne a knyght and captayn named Gracia¦nus or Gracyan. The whyche wyth two legyons of knyghtes bare hym so knyghtly / that in shorte processe he chasyd the sayd .ii. dukes into Ir∣lande / & helde the lande of Brytayne in good peace to the behalfe of Ma∣ximianus. In this whyle Maximian{us} conty∣nuyng his warre agayn the empyre / & entendynge to be emperour: Theo¦docius named the elder then empe∣rour of the eest parte of the world, he¦rynge of the deth of Gracyan, & cha∣synge of Ualentynyan, wyth a great power spedde hym towarde the sayd Maximian{us}. And shortely after at a citye in Italy named Aquilia / toke the sayde Maximian{us}, and hym be¦hedded. when knowlege of the deth of Maximian{us} was comen to Gra∣cyan, that then had the rule of mych Brytayn: he seasyd the land & made hym selfe by strength kynge of Bry∣tayne / whē or after that Maximian{us} had gouerned the same, by most ac∣corde of wryters by the space of .viii. yeres. THE .LXXIIII. CHAPITER. GRacianus the whych of Gau¦fryde is called Municeps, yt maye be taken for an hyred or wa∣ged knyght, or for ye keper of gyftes, or berynge the chyef rule of a cytye: beganne to rule the Brytons, in the yere of oure lorde .iii. hundred .lxxx. & x. The whych exercysyd all tyranny and exaccyon vppon his subiectes / for the which he was had in wonder full hatered amonge the Brytons /
and amonge them cast and sought many wayes and meanes for hys de¦struccyon / but he by dyuers meanes escapyd theyr daungers, and punys∣shed greuously all suche fautours. wherfore lastly as sayth Gaufryde they fyll vpon hym of an hole assent and kylled hym / when he had reyg∣ned or more verely vsurped by the terme of .iiii. yeres. THE .LXXV. CHAPITER. AFter that Gracian was thus slayne of the Brytons / the forsayd Gwanus and Melga kno∣wynge the Brytons to be wythout hed or ruler: assembled also people and retourned into mych Brytayne / wastynge and brennynge on euery syde, and destroyed greate plenty of Brytons, as wytnessyth Gaufryde and other. But Policronica sayth that whan the Romayns knewe of the deth of Gracyan / they sent a knyght called Constantyne to haue the rule of Bry¦tayne and other countrees there a∣bout. But he was after demed an enemye to the empyre, for harme and sathes by hym done in Fraunce. wherfore by commaundement of Ho¦norius then emperour / a knyght or erle called Constancius was sente agayne the forenamed Constantine / and slewe hym at a place or towne called Arelet. After thys the Brytōs were agayne vexed by the Pictes & other straunge nacyons. By reason wherof they were cōstrained to sende agayne to Rome: requyrynge them of ayde, vppon condycyon that they shuld alway be subiecte vnto Rome. The whyche request and promesse thus herde of the senate: Honorius aforenamed was sent into Britayne wyth a legyon of knyghtes / whyche is .vi. thousande .vi. houndred .lxvi. The which legyon with helpe of the Brytons / chasyd ye foresayde Pictes and other enemyes / and taughte the Brytōs to make a walle ouerthwart the lande from see to see / that ys to meane from the water of Humber to the Scottyshe see, and ordeyned thē wardeynes and kepars of the wall / and after retourned to Rome. Thys wall as testyfyeth Policronica, was made of turuys / and strechyd from Pemilton̄ or Penulton̄, vnto ye citye of Acliut or Acliud. But for thys wall was of small strength: the ene¦myes before named dystroyed cer∣tayne partyes of this sayd wall, and ouerrode the countre, and toke grete prayes dayly, & dyd as myche harme as they had done before tyme. wher∣fore the Brytons were constrayned to seke for newe socour to the Ro∣mayns. Then dyd Foloaynes sende an other legion / the whyche agayne chased the sayd Pictes and other ene¦myes / and made than a wall of stone of the thycknesse of .viii. fote, and in heyght .xii. fote, in the selfe place where before Seuerus had made a dyke and wall of turfes. And yt done the Romaynes comforted and exor∣ted the Brytons to be manly and co∣rageous to wythstande theyr ene∣myes / shewyng to them forther that they shuld truste to theyr owne stren¦gthe, for so myche as the Romayns beynge so ferre from thē, myght not lyghtly come from so ferre wyth an armye of knyghtes / & also not wyth∣out great coste and trauayle. After whyche monycyon and exortacyon thus gyuen to the Brytons, by the mouth of the archebysshop of Lon∣don, wyth other instruccyons apper∣teynynge to the feytes of warre: the sayde Romaynes toke leue of ye Bry¦tons, as though they shulde after ye tyme no more retourne īto Britayne But it was not longe after that the Romayns were thus departyd / that
the Pictes and Scottes beganne to breke out of theyr dēnes and caues. These two nacyons after some au∣thours, shulde seme to be one. But by the declaracion of Ranulphe in his .lviii. chapyter of his fyrste boke, they shulde appere to be two maner of peoples / or at the last dwel¦lyd in twoo sondry countres. As the Pictes in the northsyde of Scotlād, or after Beda in ye southsyde, whiche conteyneth Galeway and Lodeway. And the Scottes by ledyng of theyr duke Renda shulde possede Irland: all be yt after an arme of the northe parte of the see passynge by Deyra, shuld departe the Pictes. But in the tyme that ye Saxōs ruled the lande / ye Scottes by maner of treason slew the mighty men and rulers of the Pi¦ctes / and so after kepte that countre for theyr owne. These two nacyons dyscorde in maners, but not in clo∣thynge & in fayth, and in couetyse of the shedynge of mannes blood, they be one. Then as before is sayde, these Pi∣ctes and Scottes entred the lande, and brake ye walle before made, and slewe the wardeyns therof / and after spoyled and robbed the coūtres, and chased so cruelly the commons and other, that they were comfortlesse. By meane wherof the Britons were brought in suche daunger and myse¦rye / that eyther of them robbed and slewe other. And ouer this ye groūde was vntylled and vnsowen / wherof ensued great scarcytye and hunger: and after hunger ensued deth. Thus after one mychyef came an other / as deth vpon deth, and sorow vpon sorow, whych fyll vpō them by stryfe medlyd wyth the great hūger. The whych mysery in this wyse cōty¦nuynge the chyef of them toke ad∣uyse amonge them selfe / and fynally concludyd that for remedye of this myschyef, they wolde sende vnto Ae¦cius then beynge kynge in Fraunce. whyche Aecius was mayster of the chyualry of Honori{us} then emperour, and occupyed in warres in a parte of Gallia. To this Aecius was sent wri¦tyng, wherof theffecte was this. To thy manhode Aecius be it vnderstan¦den the mysery of the Brytons / the whyche straunge nacyons chase vn∣to the see / and the see dryueth vs a∣gayne to straunge nacyons. Of the which ensew two maner of carayns / ye one by violēce of ye enemyes swerd, and that other by wilfull drownyng. But all theyr wrytynge was but in vayne / so that from the sayd Aecius, nor yet from the Romaynes, hadde they no refuge nor comfort. In this whyle the hunger encreased / and the people were so ouerset with theyr eny¦myes, that many of thē were as yol∣den & toke partye agayne theyr own neyghbours. And ye other that were of more power, and dwelled farther wythin the lande / defendyd them in theyr beste maner. Lastely the noble and wysest of them / and specyally ye archbyshop of London wyth other of the lande, kepte a counsayll at Lō¦don. By the whyche yt was conclu∣dyd yt an embassade shulde be made vnto the kynge of lytell Brytayne, to impetre and aske of hym ayde and comforte in theyr great necessyte. Of whyche ambassade the sayde arche∣byshop was appoynted for the chyef and pryncypall / the whych is named of Gaufryde Guethelinus / and of ye englyshe cronycle Gosseleyne. which sayde byshoppe wyth the other vnto hym assygned, so spedde them, that in shorte and conuenyent tyme they came vnto the presence of Aldroen{us} then kynge of lytell Brytayn / and to hym declaryd the effecte of theyr mes¦sage. The whyche hauynge compas¦syon of the lamentable request made
vnto hym by the sayde ambassade / after aduyse taken of hys lordes, he graūted vnto the bysshop, vppon condycyon that yf god sent to them victory of theyr enemyes, that they shulde crowne hys brother kynge of great Brytayne / the whyche he en∣tendyd to sende thyder wyth a con∣uenyent armye. whyche condycyon the sayde bysshoppe wyth the other gladly acceptyd & fermely graūted. So that thus it is apparant vnto you, that this lande was longe with¦out hedde or gouernoure / whyche length of tyme is of some authours determyned to be longe, and of some but shorte / so that lytell certentye is therof lefte. wherfore I haue shewed and dry∣uen certayne reasons after myne o∣pynyon and dull mynde, in the table before expressed / wherin it shall ap∣pere vnder correccyon, that the sayd season and tyme of this land beynge without kynge, to rekyn from the laste yere of Gracian vnto the fyrste yere of Constantyne no we next en∣suynge, was fully .xxxix. yere. FINIT TRIBVYVM. YE shall also forthermore vnder∣stande, that here endeth fynally ye trybute and domynyon of the Ro∣maynes. For after thys daye they had no trybute to them payed / nor no Romayn prynce after this dayes ruled thys lande of Brytayne. The whyche trybute and domynyon en∣dured from the .ix. yere of Cassybel∣lan, vnto the tyme of Seuerus by the terme of two houndred and .lv. yeres. And from the tyme of Seue∣rus vnto the fyrste yere of Gracyan a houndred .lxxx. and .iii. yeres. And from the fyrst yere of Gracyan vnto the laste yere of thys mysery .xliii. ye∣res. So that from the yere that Iu∣lius Cesar made fyrste thys Ile of Brytayne trybutary vnto the empy∣re / vnto the last yere or ende of thys foresayd misery, flowyd .iiii. houn∣dred .xxxi. yeres. But Polycronyca sayth that the Romaynes ruled and had trybute of this lande about .iiii. houndred .lxx. yeres. whyche sayeng is full lyke to be true, yf the ende of theyr dominyon be determyned at ye laste departyng of the Romayns out of thys lande. ANd thus here an ende of the iiii. parte of thys worke / for so myche as the fornamed Gracian{us} was the laste of Romayne kynges yt reygned in myche Brytayne / or that no trybute was after this day payed vnto the Romaynes. wherfore in gyuynge thankes to that moste blessyd vyrgyne our lady saynte Mary, for the good exployte and spede had to thys tyme, and to opteyne her moste habundaūt grace for the perfourmaunce of the reste or other dele of the same: I here with all humblenesse sa¦lute her wyth the iiii. ioye of the forenamed vii. ioyes, the which begynneth, Gaude nexu voluntatis. &c. O excellent pryncesse and quene celestyall / Be ioyous and glad, for thou eternally By knot of charyte, and dygnyte pryncypall Art to the hyghest ioyned celestyally That thou may impetre, what is necessary For thy seruauntes, thou virgyn moste pure Of thy swetteste Ihesu, and optayne it sure. Thys .iiii. parte to be accompted from ye fyrste yere of Seuerus, vnto the last ende or yere of thys misery: includeth of yeres .CC. and .xxvi. Thus endeth the fourth parte.
THE FYFT PARTE. THE .LXXVI. CHAPITER. HEre accordynge to the promyse made by me in ye begynnynge of thys worke: I shall brynge in & shewe vnto you the begynnynge of the reygne of ye kinges of Fraūce / and set them in suche a direct order, that it shalbe apparant to the reder, that it shalbe certaynly knowē what kyng reygned in Fraūce whan such a kyng reygned in Englande. And also I shall somdele touche the actes and dedys of the sayde kynges of Fraunce / so yt the cronycles of bothe realmes shall in this worke appere, and the names of the prynces which at ones reygned in Englande and in Fraunce. Then for the perfourmaūce of the same, fyrste is to be noted, that after the subuercyon of Troye by the Gre¦kes (as in ye begynnyng of this work is shewyd) dyuers Troyans beyng vnder the rule of nobles of the same lygnage, as Helenus sonne of Prya∣mus, Eneas, Anthenorus, & other / serchyd ye worlde & landyd in dyuers coūtrees. As Helen{us} in Grece or Gre¦cia / Eneas in Italia or Italy / & so of other amōg. The whych nobles one named Turchus, & an other named Franco cosyn Germayns / as Tur∣chus the sonne of Troylus, & Frāco or Francio the sonne of Ector / which sayd two cosyns serchyng theyr ad∣uenture: after many & dyuers daun¦gers & ieopardyes passyd by the see, lastly landed in a coūtre called Tra∣cea or Tracia in Grece. And there wyth theyr cōpany enhabyted them nere vnto a ryuer called Dion. And after they hadde contynued there a season of tyme: Turchus departed wyth a certayne of Troyans frō hys sayd cosyn Francio / and sayled after into a countre called Faso the lesse. where he wyth hys people dwelled longe tyme. whyche Faso shulde be in the countre of Sithia. Of thys Turchus dyscendyd as sayth ye Frē∣che cronycle .iiii. maner of people. That is to saye, Austrogothis, Ipo¦gothis, wandalis, and Normans. And Frācio or Frāco remoued after wyth hys company into a countree named Pannoma / whyche countree now shuld seme to be a parte of Hun¦gery or ioynynge nere to it. There nere vnto a ryuer called Thanais they buylded them a cytye, and na∣med it Sicambria / by reason wherof they were longe after called Sicam¦bri. They were also named Franci, as sayth the Frenche cronycle, after thys man Francio. Turpinus that wrote the gestes of the greate Charles / sayth that whan Charles hadde made the countre of Spayne subiecte, and was retourned into Fraunce: he made all the bonde mē dwellynge aboute or nere vnto Pa∣ris or in all Gallia fre, in the wour∣shyppe of saynte Denis and of saynt Iamys of Galis / vppon condycyon that they shulde yerely offre foure pence to thys worke of saynt Denis churche. By reason wherof they we∣re named Franci, as men freed that to fore were bond. Policronica saith they were named Franci of Ualen∣tynyan the emperour, as it were for fyersnes. But how so euer they came by that name they were called Fran∣ci as Frenschemen. This sayd peple were also named long tyme Galli / & were trybutaries to Rome & vnder theyr rule, tyll the
tyme of Ualentinyan emperour, a∣boute the yere of Cryste .iii. hoūdreth & .lxvi. Thys Ualentinyan hauynge the rule of the west parte of ye world made warre vppon a people called Aleynys, that dwelled nere vnto the forenamed Gallis. These Aleynys were egre of fyghte / and ouer yt they were so closyd wyth fennys & mar∣rys, that the Romaynes myghte not wynne to them by force / wherof they often rebellyd agayne the empyre. wherfore in the ende Ualentinyan consyderynge the fyersnes of ye Gal∣lis, wyth theyr nere dwellynge vnto the sayd Aleynys / couenaūted with them yf they wolde subdue the sayde people, they shulde haue releace of .x. yeres trybute. whyche couenaūt well and suffycyently confermed to the Gallis / they in shorte whyle after by theyr knyghthode and polycy, sub∣dued or vtterly chased the sayd Aley¦nys. For the whyche dede they conty¦nued the foresayde .x. yeres wythout payenge of any trybute. whyche .x. yeres ronne and expyred / ye Romay∣nes agayn claymed the former accu∣stomed trybute. To whom it was an¦swered, yt they had redemed the sayd tribute with the price of theyr blood, and ought not any more to be char∣ged with any suche trybute. wyth whych answere the Romay∣nes beynge sore dyscontentyd / made newe warre vpon ye sayd Sicābris. Of whyche warre the Sicambris or Gallis had the worse, and were cha∣syd from theyr citye of Sicambria. Then as wytnessyth Polycronica & other, they drewe nere vnto the wa∣ter of Ryne / and grewe in shorte pro¦cesse to suche a multytude & of suche strength, that they in shorte whyle after by ledynge of theyr .iii. dukes named Marcomirus, Somom{us} or Symon, and Genebaur / warred vp¦pon the landes of the empyre, & such as were subiecte vnto ye same. wherof Theodosius surnamed the yonger then emperour beynge warned: he anone sente .ii. of his dukes wyth a greate hoste for to subdue the sayde Gallis or Sicambris. But they de∣fendyd them so knyghtly, yt the sayde dukes were chasyd / and as wytnes∣syth mayster Robert Gagwyne, a greate nomber of the Romaynes were slayne. THE .LXXVII. CHAPITER. AFter this victory thus optey¦ned by the Sicambris: they waxed so stronge that they wan from the Almaynes dyuers townes and stronge holdes wythin Germania. And after that they opteyned the fa∣mous cytye named Treueris / which as wytnessyth the aucthour of Cro∣nica cronicarum, was fyrst foundyd in the tyme of the patryarche Abra¦ham, before the incarnacyō of Cryst a thousande .ix. houndred .lxv. yeres. And so dayly wan vpon the nacyōs adioynynge to them, tyll they came to the ryuer of Seyn / where they re∣styd them, and buylded the countre all there about. In so mych that they than named them selfe Franci / as men freed and out of all daunger of the empyre of Rome / and theyr land after them they named Fraunce, whyche syns that tyme is greatly encreasyd. So that at this daye it is a countre of great welth & honoure, and conteyneth many prouynces & lordshyppes / as after the affyrmaūs of Policronica is touchyd in ye .xxvii. chapyter of hys fyrste boke / where it is shewed that Gallia which now is Fraunce, had that name Gallia of whytenesse of people. Thys Gallia or Fraunce hath in the North syde, Germania / in the Eest, the ryuer of Ryne / in the Southest, the Alpis or the hyghe mountaynes / and in the
west, the see Occean, whyche is cal∣led both Brytannicum and Gallicū, whyche is to meane, Englyshe see & Frenche see. For yt departyth En∣glande and Fraunce, in the south see of myddell eerth, yt wassheth about by the the prouynce of Narbon. In the tyme of Iulius Cesar, Gallia was departed in thre / but for diuers happes that befell after in that land / the countre and land that stretcheth from the Ryne to Seyn̄, is now cal∣led Gallia Belgica, whyche is very Fraunce. And that countre that stret¦cheth from Seyn̄ to ye ryuer of Leyr, is called Gallia Lugdunensis / wher¦of the ouer parte hyght or is named Burgundia that is Burgoyne, and the nether parte is Nestria or Nor∣mandye. And the countre that stretcheth frō the ryuer of Leyr to the ryuer of Ge∣round, is called Gallia Aquitania / whych is Guyan, and stretcheth out of the eest from the riuer of Roon̄, vn¦to the west Occean. wherof the ouer parte therof hyght Celtica, whyche is to meane Heuenly, because that hyghe mountaynes be therin. From the water of Gerounde to the see of middell eerth, and to the Moū¦taynes called mōtes Pireni or great hylles of Spayne / is clepyd Gallia Narbonensis. And now a parte ther¦of is called Gothia, and some Uasco¦nia, whyche is to meane Gascoyne. And so Gallia is closyd aboute wyth thre noble waters / wyth the ry¦uer of Ryne in the north syde / wyth the ryuer of Roone in the eest / and wyth the Brytyshe occean in ye weste. In Gallia or Fraunce ben many no∣ble cytyes, wherof Parys is hed and pryncypall / whyche in the fyrst foun¦dacyon was clepyd Parydes, after Parides a Troyane, that departed from Troy wyth Eneas and other, as wytnessyth Carinus and other wryters of histories. But the frenche cronycle sayth it was fyrst foūded by ye Sycambris, and named by them Lutecia, before the incarnacyon of Cryste .iii. hundred .lxxx. and .xv. yeres. And in the whyle that the fore¦named Marcomyrus was as there chyefe hedde and gouernour: for the more beauty of the name / and also in mynde of Paris sonne of Pry¦ame kynge of Troye, of the whych he was lynyally descendyd, he ther∣fore chaunged the name, and com∣maunded yt to be called Paris. In Gallia also be these prouynces and lordshyppes folowynge / Bra∣ban, Flaundres, Normandye, Py∣cardye, Brytayn the lesse, Poytowe, Gascoyne, Guyan, Tolowse, Bur∣goyne, Angeo, and Mayne, Pro∣uynce, Champayne, and Aluerne. All whyche sygnouries and lorde∣shippes belonged or apperteyned vn¦to the crowne of Fraunce / all be yt that dyuers of theym hath ben gy∣uen oute by maryage or otherwyse. So that the kynge of Fraunce clay∣meth to be chyef lorde of theym, and at this daye hath the possessyon of them / excepte Burgoyne, Flaundres Braban, and Normandye / for the whyche he is trybutarye vnto the kynge of Englande. Then yt folowyth, when the sayde Gallis or Frenchmen hadde thus cō¦quered these foresayde countres, or the more parte of theym, or at lesse made theym vnto the sayde Gallis trybutary: then the forenamed Mar¦comyrus as theyr chyef hedde or go∣uernour, closyd cytyes wyth stronge walles, and buylded stronge holdes and castelles / and after dyed, leuyng after hym a sonne garnyshed wyth all knyghtly vertue, named Phara∣mundus or Pharamonde.
Francio. THE .LXXVIII. CHAPITER. PHaramund{us} the son of Mar∣comyrus beforenamed / was after the deth of his said fader, made or ordeyned the fyrst kyng of French¦men, by the agrement of hystoryes / & also as affermeth mayster Robert Gagwyne and other, in the yere of our lordes incarnacion foure hūdred and .xx. And of the worlde, or after ye creacyon of the fyrste Adam folow∣ynge the accompte of thys worke, as before is shewed, fyue thousande vi. hundred and .xix. After Brute be∣ganne his domynyon in thys yle of Brytayne, a thousande, fyue hūdred and .lvi. And the yere of mysery of the Brytons .xxvi. Of this Pharamundus is lytell thynge lefte in memory / excepte that myne authoure Gagwyne testyfy∣fyeth, that he made certayne lawes whyche longe tyme enduryd after. But for the names of the lawes and vse of them be derke to englyshe vn∣derstandynge: therfore I ouerpasse theym, and folowe the story / whych affermeth, that when the sayde Pha¦ramonde hadde ruled the Frenchmē well and nobly by the space of .xi. ye∣res, he dyed / and lefte after hym a sonne named Clodio Crinitus or Capellatus. THE .LXXIX. CHAPITER. CLodio ye son of Pharamonde was made kyng of Fraunce, in the yere of our lorde .iiii. hūdred & xxxi. And the .xxxvii. yere of the fore¦sayd mysery of Brytons. The which as before is sayd was surnamed Cri¦nitus and Capellat{us} / by reason wher¦of the kynges of Frenchmen longe tyme after, were called Criniti. This to augment hys lordshyppe, made warre vpon a people called Turyn∣ges / and by great & sore fyght made them at lēgth subiecte to hym / which countre as sayth the frēche cronycle, is a parte of Almayne. And at thys daye or tyme of this Clodio his rey∣gne / the Romaynes had no more of the land of Gallia or Fraūce in theyr rule, then that whyche lyeth from ye ryuer of Leyr vnto ye ryuer of Ryne, whyche is called Gallia Lugdunen∣sis. And when he hadde thus sub∣dued the Turynges / he then sent his espyes ouer the Ryne to se what strength they were of, that inhaby∣ted that countre. And after reporte to hym brought of the sayde espyes, that the countre was fertyll and ryche, and the people therof but of small defence: he with his army ouer spred the countre / and after shortely beseged the cytyes of Cambrey, and Turney and them wanne. But in ye cytye of Turney was a certayn nom¦ber of Romaynes / whyche manfully defendyd the towne longe tyme. And when they {per}ceyued that they myght no lenger holde the towne / they then manfully issued out, and gaue to the Frenchmen harde batayll. But for∣tune was to theym frowarde / so that they were dystressyd. After whyche countres and townes thus goten by Clodio, wyth other vyctoryous de¦des by hym done: he lastely dyed, when he had ruled the frēchmen .xix. yeres wythout issue of his body. Anglia. NOwe then lette vs retourne vnto tharchbyshop of Lōdon and the other Brytons beyng in Bri¦tayne the lesse / the whych vppon the promyse before rehersed, receyued of Albroenus kynge of lytell Bry∣tayne, his brother named Constan∣tyne / ye whych wyth a certayne nom¦ber of knyghtes shortly after lāded at Totnesse in mych Brytayne, & ga¦deryd to them the floure of ye Brytōs
whyche before theyre landynge were hydde in dyuerse places of the lande. By whose power & marcyall knyght¦hod / the enymyes of the lande were shēdfully chasyd and vtterly cōfoun¦ded. whyche victorye thus by the Britōs obteyned: they of one mynde conueyde theyr chefetayne Constan¦tyne vnto the towne of Kaercegent nowe called Cicestre / and there crow¦ned hym (accordynge to the pro∣myse made vnto his brother) kynge of this yle of the more Brytayne. THE .LXXX. CHAPITER. COnstantinus the brother of Aldroe¦nus kynge of ly∣tell Brytayn, was crowned kyng of myche Brytayne, in the yere of oure lorde foure hun∣dred and .xxxiii / and the thyrde yere of Clodio then kynge of Fraunce. The whyche guyded the lande with suche manhode and polyce, that he kepte yt from daunger of enymyes / and for tyme of hys lyfe helde yt in god quyete & reste. Of thys Cōstan¦tyne is lytell mynde made or lefte in wrytynge / excepte that he receyuyd of his wyfe thre sonnes / the whyche he named Constante, Aurely, or Cō¦stantius, Aurelius, Ambrosius, and Uter, whyche was surnamed Pen∣dragon. But for he sawe and perceyuyd, that his eldest sonne named Constāt was dull and insolent of wytte: he therfore made hym a monke in the monasterye of saynte Amphyabyll of wynchester / whyche monasterye at this daye is called saynte Suy∣thynes abbey. And to the other two bretherne he betoke vnto Guethe∣linus archbyshoppe, to noryshe and brynge forth. In the courte of this Cōstantyne, as witnesseth Gaufryde, was a Pict that was myche loued and greatly fauouryd of Constantyne / so that he myghte at all tymes come to the kynges presence. The whyche be¦yng an erraunt traytoure / and sechynge conuenyent tyme to execute his detestable treason: by a secrete meane slewe the kynge in his chamber / when he hadde ben kyng, after moste wryters tenne yeres THE .LXXXI. CHAPITER. COnstantius sonne of Con∣stantyne, by meane of Uorti∣gernus was made kynge of Bry∣tayne, in the yere of our lorde foure hundred and .xliii. This as before is touched, for so myche as his fader thought he was not very apt to take so great a charge as to gouerne the lande after hym, became a relygious man in the monastery before named. Or as some wryters meane, the sayd Constante of pure deuocyon that he hadde to god and saynt Amphiabyl, made hym selfe a monke vnwyt∣tynge the kynge his fader and other his frendes. But how or in what maner so euer he became a monke / trouth it is that Uortigerus or Uortigernus after ye deth of Constantyne, founde suche meanes that he was taken out of the abbey, and crowned kynge of Bry∣tayne. By meane wherof the sayde Uortiger had all the rule of the land so that Constante hadde but onely the name. This Uortyger then con∣syderynge the innocencye and myl∣denes of the kyng / cast in his mynde how he myght be kynge hym selfe. And amonge other meanes / founde
to haue aboute ye kynges persone an hundred Pictes, or after some Scot¦tes / ye whych he ordeyned for a garde for the kynges persone. which done / he bare hym in such wyse agayne the Pictes by meanes of great gyftes & otherwyse, that they at length had Uortyger in such fauoure, that they feryd not to saye openly that Uorty∣ger was more worthy to be kyng thē Constant. In this whyle Uortyger gatte into his possessyon the kynges treasour / and what was of hym cō∣maunded was done, though other therat murmured and grudge. And euer in ryght and wronge he fauou∣red the foresayd Pictes or Scottes. The whyche at length perceyuynge his corrupte mynde, when they sawe that they had conuenyent tyme, fyll vpon the kynge, and hym slewe or murderyd. After whych cruell dede by theym done / they presentyd the hed of Con¦stante vnto Uortiger, then beyng at London. wherof when he was ware / to the ende that the Brytons shulde thynke that dede to be done agayne his mynde and wyll: wepte & made semblaunt of all sorowe and heue∣nes / and causyd the sayde hundred knyghtes to be taken in all haste af∣ter, and theym by dome and lawe of ye lād to be be heddyd / by reason wher¦of he was taken not culpable, or in∣nocent of the kynges deth. when the kynges deth was knowen to suche persones as hadde the kepyng of the two yonger bretherne, Aurelius and Uter: they in all haste for the more sauegarde of them, fledde into lytell Brytayne / & there kept theym tyll yt pleasyd god ortherwyse to purueye for theym. And thus as ye haue herd was kynge Constante slayne / when he hadde reygned after moste wry∣ters fyue yere. THE .LXXXII. CHAPITER. UOrtigernus duke of ye Iues∣ses, or Uortiger{us} erle of Ie∣wesses, after called westsaxons / was made kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of our lorde .iiii. hundred and .xlviii. and the .xviii. yere of Clodio kyng of Fraūce / whych after ye deth of Con∣stant by strength and otherwise was made kynge, and ruled the land not all wythout trouble. For yt was not longe or the Pictes, whych hauyng knowlege of the deth and iudgemēt of theyr knightes and kynsmen, that they inuaded the north partes of the lande, doynge therin great harme and domage. And ouer that many & dyuerse of the great of the Brytons, perceyuyng that the kyng Constant was not murderyd all wythout con∣sent of the sayde Uortyger: rebelled agayne hym / and dayly sent and say led ouer into lytell Brytayne, to the ayde and assystence of the foresayde chyldern of Constant / whyche putte the sayde Uortiger to great vnrest∣fulnesse / and the more for that, that he wyst not nor knewe not in whom he myght putte his truste and con∣fydence in. wyth these perturbaūces was med¦led plenty of corne & frute, yt the lyke therof had not ben sene many yeres passyd. wherwyth was ioyned leche∣ry & pestylence, with many other in∣cōueniences / so ye vice was accōpted for small or none offence. The which reygned not onely in the temporalty, but also in the spiritualtie & hedes of the same. So ye euery mā turned the poynt of his spere agaynst the trewe & innocent man / & the cōmons gaue them all to dronkēnes and ydelnes / where thorough ensued fyghtynge, stryfe, and mych enuy. Of which fore¦sayd myschyues ensued mych morta¦lyte and deth of men, that the lyuyng
scantly suffysed in some countres to bury the dede. And ouer this ye kyng was so hard beset with ye forenamed enymyes / that he was cōstrayned, as affermyth Policronica, to sende for paynems, as the Saxōs, to helpe to withstand his enemyes and defende his lande / and also he dayly ferid the landyng of Aurely and Uther. Uortyger thus beynge beset wyth many aduersytyes in vysytynge hys lande / and then beynge for dyuerse causes hym mouyng at Dorobernia or Caunterbury: tydynges came to hym of the arryuynge of thre longe shyppes full of armed men at the yle of Tenet. wherof fyrst he made coun¦tenaunce as though he hadde ben in doute whether it had ben the two bre¦thern of Constant or none. But whē the same was blowen aboute, yt they were none enymyes: anon he caused the leders of them to be brought vn∣to his presence / freynynge of theym the cause of theyr landyng & of theyr nacyon and countre. The whych an¦swered vnto the kynge and sayd they were of the coūtre of Germany / and put out of theyr countre by a maner sorte or lot at sōdry tymes vsed with in the sayde lande / the whyche was vsed for so myche as the people ther∣in encreasyd so faste, that wythoute such prouysyon had, the coūtre shuld not suffyce for the people / the whych was suche as foloweth. At sondry tymes when the sayd coū¦tre was replenyshed of people: the prynces and rulers therof wolde as∣semble at a certayne place, and call before theym the lusty yonge folkes. Of the whych they wold chose out a certayne nomber / and appoynte to them certayne dukes or leders, with all thyng necessary to the warre. And them so garnyshed / wold cōmaunde to serche theyr aduēture, & to wynne some lande by theyr knyghthode, where they myght inhabyte thēselfe. By whych vse & custome thus longe vsyd / now was fallen to theyr lotte, to do as theyr fore faders had done before theym. wherfore syns fortune had brought them to this land / they besought the kyng, that he wold take them to his seruyce, & they wold be redy to fyght for ye defence of him and his countre. And when the kyng hadde enquyred farther: he foūde that they had two leders named Hengist{us} and Horsus / and they and theyr people were cal∣led Saxons. The kynge thus beyng asserteyned of the maner of these straūgers, and that they were of the gentyle of pa∣gan law: sayde he was very heuy & sory, that they were myscreantes. But he was ioyous & glad of theyr commynge / for so myche as he had nede of suche sowdyours to defende hym and his lande agayne his eny∣myes. And so receyued them to hys wages and seruyce, as is wytnessed of Gaufryde and other mo wryters. THE .LXXXIII. CHAPITER. BEda the holy man sayth, that Uortyger sent for the Saxōs stronge men of armes, that hadde no lande to dwelle in. The whych came in thre longe shyppes called Oby∣las / and receyued a place of hym to dwell in, in the Eest syde of Bry∣tayne called the yle of Tenet besyde Kent. Guillelmus de regibus a wri¦ter of hystoryes ayth, that the Sa∣xons came oute of Germany by wyll to wynne worshyppe & lande / and not by lotte or compulsyon. And also that they worshypped at that dayes a god named woden, and a goddesse named Frya. In the worshyppe of the whyche god the
thyrde feryall daye in the weke they named wodnesd aye / whyche at this daye we call wednysdaye. And in worshyppe of the sayde goddes they called the fyfth daye friys daye / the whyche we call now frydaye. Of these foresayde people came thre maner of people, or thre maner of na¦mes / that is to say Saxōs, Anglys, and Iewetes. Of the Saxons came the eest Saxons, westsaxons, & the south Saxons. Of ye Anglys came the eest Anglys, the myddell Angls or Merceys, whyche helde myddell England, that stretcheth westwarde toward the ryuer of Dee besyde Che¦stre, and to Seuern̄ besyde Shroys¦bury, and so forth to Brystowe / and eestwarde toward the see, and south¦warde to Thamys, and so forth to London, and northwarde to Hum∣ber, and tourned downewarde and westward to the ryuer Mercea / and so forth to the weste see. And of the Iewetys come the Ken¦tyshmen, & men of the yle of weyght. Of the fyrst cōmyng of these Saxōs into great Britayn, authours in par¦ty varrey. wherfore in the table be∣fore named / it shall appere vnder cor¦reccyon, that the forenamed Hengi∣stus and Horsus wyth theyr compa∣ny fyrst landed in the foresayde yle of great Brytayne in the yere of our lorde .iiii. hundred and .l, & the thyrd yere of Uortiger. Then yt foloweth these Saxons wyth the kynges power bete downe the enymyes before sayde, and defen¦dyd the land in most knyghtly wyse, so that the kyng hadde the Saxons in great loue and fauour. whyche fa¦uour Hengistus wel apperceyuyng / vpon a season when he sawe conue∣nyent tyme, he axed of the kynge so myche grounde as the hyde of a bull or other beste wolde compare / which the kynge to hym graunted. After whyche graunt, the sayde Hengyste to the ende to winne a large groūde / causyd the sayd bestes skyn to be cut into a small and slender thonge. And with the same mette out a large and great circuyte of grounde / vpon the whyche he shortly after buylded and sette a large and stronge castell. By reason of whych thonge the sayd castell was lōg afternamed Thonge castell / whyche was sette by the agre¦ment of all wryters in the countre of Lyndesey. After thyse tydynges sprange into Germania, of the plen¦tye and fatnes of the lande of Bry∣tayne, wyth other commodytyes per¦teynyng to the same. By meane wher¦of the Saxons dayely drewe to the sayde lande / and conuenaūted with the Brytons, that the Britons shuld entende theyr worldlynes and other necessaryes / and ye Saxons as theyr sowdiours, shulde defende the land from incursyon of all enymyes. For the whych the Brytons shulde gyue to them competent mete and wages. Then by the sonde of Hengiste, came wyth .xvi. sayles Ronowen the doughter of the sayd Hengist / which was a mayden of excellēt beaute. Af¦ter whose commyng / Hengiste vpon a daye besought the kyng yt he wold se his castell, whyche he had newely edyfyed. To whose request the kyng was agreable / & at the day assygned came to ye sayd castell, where he was ioyously receyued. And there amōge other passetymes the sayde Ronowē wyth a cuppe of golde full of wyne presentyd the kynge, salutynge and sayeng wassayle. The kynge whych before that tyme had herd no lyke sa¦lutacyon, nor yet vnderstode what she ment / axed of her fader what she mente by that worde wassayle. To whom yt was answered by Hengist{us} that yt was a salutacyon of good & gladnesse / and that the kynge shuld
drynke after her, ioynynge there vn∣to this answere, drynke hayl wher¦fore the kyng as he was enfourmed toke the cuppe of the maydens hand and drank / & after beheld the wēche in suche maner, that he was woun∣ded with the darte of the blynde god Cupide, that neuer after he coude wythdrawe his loue from ye wenche / but lastely by instygacyon of the de∣uyll, axed her in maryage of her fa∣der. And by force therof, as wytnes∣syth Policronica, he put from hym his laufull wyfe / of the whyche he had before tyme receyued .iii. noble sonnes called Uortimerus, Caagri¦nus, and Pascentius. Then the kyng gaue vnto Hengistus the lord shyppe of Kent, though Garango∣nus then erle therof therat grudged wyth many of his Brytons. For this and for that that ye kynge had maryed a woman of vncought beleue: well nere all the Brytons forsoke hym and his workes. Neuer¦thelesse some there were as well no∣bles & other, that cōforted the kynge in his euyll doyng. By whych meane and other vnlefull dedys then dayly vsyd / the fayth of Cryste began sore to apalle. And ouer that an heresye called Arianes heresy, began then to sprynge in Brytayn. For the which, two holy byshoppes named Germa∣nus and Lupus, as of Gaufryde is wytnessyd / came into Brytayne to refourme the kynge and all other yt erred from the waye of trouth. Of this holy man saynt Germayn / Uincent historyall sayth, that vpon an euenynge, when the weder was passynge cold, and the snowe fyll ve¦ry faste / he axed lodgyng of the kyng of Brytayne, for hym and his compe¦rys / whych was denyed. Then he af¦ter syttyng vnder a bushe in the feld, the kynges herdmen passyd by / and seynge this byshop wyth his compa∣ny sittyng in the weder / desyred hym to his house to take there such poore lodgynge as he had▪ wherof the bys∣shoppe beynge glad and fayne yode vnto the house of the sayd herdman, the whyche receyued hym wyth glad chere. And for hym and his compa∣ny wysled his wyfe to kyll his onely calfe / and to dresse yt for his gestes souper, ye which was also done. when the holy man had souped, he called to hym his hostes, wyllynge and de∣syrynge her that she shulde dylygent¦ly gader to gyder all the bones of the deed calfe / and them so gaderyd, to wrappe to gyder wythin the skynne of the sayde calfe / & then it lay in the stall before the racke nere vnto the dame. whych done accordyng to the commaundement of the holy man I shortly after the calfe was restoryd to lyfe, and forth wyth ee haye wyth the dame at ye racke. Of whych mer∣uayle all the housholde was great∣ly astonyed / and yeldyd thankynge vnto almyghty god, and to that ho∣ly byshoppe. Uppon the morowe this holy bys∣shoppe toke wyth hym the herdman, & yode vnto the presence of ye kynge / & axed of hym in sharpe wyse, why that ouer nyght he hadde denyed to hym lodgynge. wherwyth the kyng was so abashed, that he hadde no power to gyue vnto the holy man an¦swere. Then saynt Germayne sayde to hym: I charge the in the name of my lorde god, that thou and thyne departe from this paleys / and resy∣gne yt & the rule of thy lande to hym that is more worthy this rome then thou arte. The whyche all thyng by power diuyne was obserued & done / and the sayde herdman by the holy byshoppes authoryte, was sette into ye same dygnyte. Of whom after de∣scendyd all the kynges of Brytayne.
THE .LXXXIIII. CHAPITER. THys story is also confermed of Antonin{us} archebysshoppe of Florence / and at lengthe by hym shewyd in the .xvii. chapyter and .ix. day of the seconde part of hys worke called Som̄ Antonini. But by whō so euer thys story was fyrste wry∣ten: I thynke he was none that dis∣cended of the walshmen, nor yet of theyr blode. For they come all of Pryamys blode, and not of an herd∣man, excepte that they fetche theyr lyne from Dauyd the holy kynge & prophete. Thys storye semeth to be of more fame then of credence. For other wryters tell thys story to be done in the region of Powys by Bu¦ly theyr kynge. And also for so mych as the foresayd authour maketh no mencyon of the more Brytayne nor of the lesse: it is doutefull whyther thys happe fyll in that one regyon or in that other. All be yt in the lyfe of saynte Germayne it ys redde, that the sayde saynte Germayne deposyd Uortiger & enhaunced the herdman, as before is declared, as affermeth Polycronica. Then it foloweth in ye story, when saynte Germayne hadde restoryd some parte of Brytayne to the trewe fayth: he retourned into Fraunce, fro whens he was before comen. But in thys sayde sayenge shuld appere dyscorde in Cronycles. For as at this day was not the fayth of Cryste receyued in Fraunce, as after more clerely shall appere / wher¦fore no bysshoppe of Crystes fayth myghte then kepe any see in Fraun∣ce. And also as affermeth Iacobus Phylyppus and other / holy Remi∣gius was the fyrst yt tourned Fraūce to Crystes relygyon / and that, after moste concorde of wryters, to be in the yere of our lorde .iiii. hundred lxxx. and .xix. and the .xv. yere of the reygne of Clodoueus Lewys fyrste Crysten kyng of ye realme of Fraūce. Then to furnysshe or perfourme the story of Uortiger, nedefull it is or necessary to retourne to the mater where we before lefte. And to shewe that for so moche as the Brytons wythdrewe them from Uortyger / he was therfore constrayned to holde wyth hym the Saxons. By whose counsayle he after sent for Octa the sonne of Hengyst / ye whych brought wyth hym an other company of Saxons. when the lordes of Britayne sawe and consyderyd the greate multytu∣de of Saxons, and theyr dayly re∣payre into thys lande: they assem∣bled them togyder, and shewed to the kyng the inconuenience and ieo∣pardy that myght ensue to hym and hys lande, by reason of the greate power of these straungers / and ad∣uertysed hym in aduoydyng of gre∣ter daunger, to expelle and put them out of hys realme or the more parte of them. But all was in vayne / for Uorty∣ger bare suche a mynde to the Sax∣ons, by reason of hys wyfe / that he preferred the loue of them before the loue of hys owne naturall kynnes∣men and frendes. wherfore the Bry∣tons of one wyll and mynde crow∣ned for theyr kynge Uortimerus the eldest sonne of Uortyger, and depry∣ued hym of all kyngly dygnyte / whē he hadde reygned after moste con∣corde of hystoryes .xvi. yeres. THE .LXXXV. CHAPITER. MEroneus next of allie vnto Clodio last kyng of Fraūce, for so mych as of Clodeo remayned none issue / was made kyng of Fraū¦ce in ye yere of our lorde .iiii. hundred
and .l / and the seconde yere yere of Uortiger than kynge of Brytayne. The whyche was stronge and mar∣cyall in all hys dedes / and there vn∣to ryght profytable for the realme. And amonge other notable dedes by hym done / he slewe in one day of Hu¦nes (the whyche by the commaun∣dement of Attia inuadyd & dystro∣yed dyuers countres, as Italy, Ger¦many, and other) an hundreth and lxxx. thousande / as is wytnessyd of mayster Robert Gagwine compyler and gaderer of the actes and dedes of Frenshmen. Thys forenamed At∣tila was kynge of Hunes / and led in one hoost .ii. hundred thousand men of warre, as testyfyeth Policronica. And after dyuers baytayles by hym wonne / he came into ye feldes called Catulyntes, the whyche conteyned an hundred legys in length and .lxx. in brede, wherof euery lege contey∣neth .iii. Englysshe myles. In the whyche feldes or playnes he was en¦countred wyth the power of the Ro∣maynes / in whose ayde was ye kyng of Fraunce Meroneus, the kynge or duke of Burgoyne, and other. where after a longe fyghte was slayne on bothe sydes the foresayde hundred and .lxxx. thousand. Of the whyche nomber the sayde kynge or duke of Burgoyne was one / as is more playnly shewed in the .xxxiii. chapiter in the .iiii. boke of the sayd Polycro∣nicon, wyth other wonders whyche I ouerpasse. Of thys Meroneus dyscendyd all the kynges of Frensshemen, tyll the tyme of Pepyn the whyche was fa∣ther vnto Charles the greate or em∣perour. And fynally dyed thys Me∣roneus when he had reygned after moste wryters .x. yeres / leuynge af∣ter hym a sonne named Chylderych or Hylderych. THE .LXXXVI. CHAPITER. CHyldericus or Hildericus the sonne of Meroneus / was or∣deyned kyng of Fraunce, in the yere of oure lorde god .iiii. hundred & .lx / & the .xii. yere of Uortiger than kyng of Brytayne. The whiche ensued no thynge the warres of hys father / but allyed hym wyth all vyce and cruel∣nesse, in suche exterme wyse that he became odyble vnto hys subiectes. wherfore the said Childerich / percey¦uyng the murmur & grudge among the people / and ferynge hys sodayne distruccyon: coūsayled wyth a frend and lorde of hys named Guynoma∣dus or Guynemeus / by whose coun¦sayle in auoydynge greater paryll, he auoyded secretely hys lande, and yode vnto the kynge of Thurynges named Besygne, of whom he was ioyously receyued. But the at depar¦tynge of the kynge from ye sayd Guy¦nemeus, he toke a pece of golde and brake it in two peces / wherof ye one pece he delyuered vnto the kynge, & that other pece he kepte to hym self / sayenge to the kynge that whan so euer that he receyued from hym that pece of golde, that he shulde be sure to be restored agayne to hys regally and dygnyte. After the kynge was departed his lande / the Frenshmen of one assent, chase for theyr gouernour and hed a Romayne named Gylf / whyche at that daye hadde a parte of Gallia or Fraunce in hys rule to the behofe of the Romaynes / whyche parte was named or nowe is named Soisons. whā thys Gilf was stablyssed in his authoryte / the forenamed Guyne∣meus behauyd hym in suche wyse towarde thys Gylf, that he had hym in specyall fauour aboue all the no∣bles of Fraunce / and wolde execute no thynge of charge wythout hys
and counsayll. wherof the sayd Guy¦nemeus beynge ware / and remem∣brynge how he myght restore Chyl∣derych to his former dygnyte, aduy∣sed the sayde Gill to sette more gre∣uous taskys vpon the Frenschmen / enfourmynge hym further, that yf any grudged there at, that he shuld punyshe some of the myghtyeste of them / by reason wherof he shulde fere the other. whyche thus done accordynge to the forsayde counsayll / shortely after to brynge his purpose the better ab∣out, the sayde Guynemeus accused certayne rulers of Fraunce suche as he well knewe were great enymyes vnto Chylderych / the whych he cau∣sed to be taken and sent vnto Gill, & Gill vpon them dyd sharpe execucy∣on. In the whyche he so perseuered, that the Frenschmen for remedy com¦playned theym to Guynemeus. To whom it was by hym answered, that he greatly meruayled of theyr vnsta¦stablenesse that they hadde chosen to them a kynge, and now so sodaynly wolde haue hym deposed / shewynge furthermore that other they must cal agayn Childerich that exercysyd his lyfe in voluptuousnesse of lyuynge / or ellys they muste dwell vnder the kynge, whyche is cruell and full of blood shedynge, wyth dyuerse other exhortacyons cōcernynge the agayn callynge of Childerych to his four∣mer dygnyte, whyche for length I omytte and passe ouer. By meane of whyche exhortacyon, Childerich was secretly sent for / and receyued from his trustye frende the foresayde pece of golde / and spedde hym hastely into Fraunce. Agayne whom the foresayde Guynemeus in lykewyse sped hym / so that they met at a castell in the countre of Cham∣pion, where they wyth other to them allyed / gaderyd a great hoste, and made towarde the foresayde Gill or Gillion. The whych hauynge know¦lege of the sayde conspyracye / ordey∣ned an armye of knyghtes, and yode agayne his enymyes. But he was ouerset and compelled for his saue∣garde to fle into the countre of Soi∣sons beforenamed, where he after en¦dyd his naturall lyfe / & Childerych was agayne restoryd & made kynge. Childerych then thus restoryd vn¦to his regally / subdued soone after a Saxon prynce named Onager / & be¦segyd the cytye of Orleaunce, and yt receyued vnto his subieccyon and after passyd the ryuer of Leyr, & sub∣dued to his sygnory the countre of Angeo and Mayne. when the fame of Childerich was brought vnto Basyna the wyfe of Besygne kyng of Turryng{is}: she a∣non forsoke her owne lorde, and sped her into Fraunce, and so to the pre∣sence of Childerich, whom he recey∣ued wyth all gladnes. And when he had of her frayned the cause of her commynge: she answeryd, for that that she knewe and vnderstode to be in hym more vertue and honour, thē in any other mā at ye day lyuyng / she was therefore comyn vnto hym to contynue the remanaunt of her lyfe in his cōpany / addyng also therunto that yf in any countre she knew his better, she wolde then serche see and lande to haue hym to her lord or hus¦bande. But for she was assured, that he had no pere / she besought hym to accepte her in his company. THE .LXXXVII. CHAPITER. THen Childerych puttynge a parte and forgettynge kynde¦nesse to hym before shewyd by her housbande Besynge / maryed the sayde Basina yet beynge a pagan. And when the fyrste nyght was co∣men
that they shulde go to bedde / she exorted hym yt he shulde yt nyght ab∣steyn frō all fleshly lykyng, & watche the gates of his paleys / and to make reporte to her of suche vysyons as he sawe there yt nyght. To the which he was agreable. where he so stan∣dynge, sawe fyrst a multitude of vny∣cornes, lyons, and lybardes, passyng foreby the paleys gate. And wythin a shorte space of tyme after, he sawe a great company of berys & wolues rēnyng after the other. And thyrdly & lastly he sawe a multytude of dog∣ges & other small rauenous bestes / the whyche in hys syghte fyll vppon the other .ii. companyes and vtterly deuoured them all. when he hadde sene the fyne of his vision / not a lytell astonyed, he retur¦ned to hys wyfe / shewynge to her what he hadde sene. To whom she sayd / syr of me ye shal receyue a son / the whyche in all hys dedes shall be noble and honourable, lyke to ye vny¦cornes and lyons shewyd to you in ye fyrst vysyon. Of the whyche shall dis¦cende one other sonne, the whyche shall be rauenous and shall set hys mynde all to pyllage & rauyne, lyke vnto the rauenous wolfe and here. And after hym shall come a chylde or chyldern that shall be of suche in∣solency and wastynge, that lyke as the rauenous hounde stroyeth and wastyth all that he maye tere wyth hys teeth / so shall these persons wast and destroye by theyr folyes all that other noble men hath purchased to theyr handes. And the multytude whyche that ye sawe of other small rauenous bestes / betokeneth the co∣mon people, whyche in those dayes for lacke of a good and wyse prynce shall renne eyther vppon other and robbe and se eche other. Of thys exposycyon the kyng was somdele troubled. But yet he reioy∣sed of the issue that shuld come of his body. Then it foloweth whan thys Chylderych hadde ouercomen some baytayles in Almayne, and them sub¦dued to hys empyre: he lastly dyed when he had reygned, wyth the .viii. yeres allowed to hys reygne for the tyme that he was exyled / and wyth the resydue that he reygned before & after in all .xxiiii. yeres / leuyng after hym a sonne begotten vpon the fore¦named Basina called Clodio or af∣ter moste wryters Clodoueus. Anglia. THE .LXXXVIII. CHAPITER. UOrtimerus the eldest sonne of Uortiger / was by assent of the Brytōs made kyng of Brytayn, in the yere of our lorde .iiii. hundred lxiiii / and the .iiii. yere of Chylderic{us} than kynge of Fraunce. The whych in all hast pursued the Saxons, and gaue vnto them a great batayle vp∣pon the ryuer of Darwent / where he hadde of them vyctory. And secunda¦ryly he faught wih them vppon the foord called Epiord or Agliffhorp. In the whych fyght Catrignus the brother to Uortimer, & Horsus bro∣ther to Hengyst or Cosyn, after long fyght attwene them .ii. eyther of thē slewe other / in whyche fyght also the Brytons were vyctours. The thyrd batayle he faught with them nere vnto the see syde / where also the Brytons chasyd ye Saxōs, and compelled them to take the yle of wyghte for theyr suertye. This batayle as wytnesseth Alfre¦dus; was more wonne by vertue of the prayers of the holy byshop saynt Germayne, than by myght of ye Bry¦tons. For when the holy man sawe ye Brytons gyue backe / he helde hys handes towarde heuen, and cryed thryse alleluya / whyche is to our vn¦derstādyng as mych to saye, as saue vs good lorde. Thorough whyche
prayer the Britons by dyuyne helpe obteyned ye victory of theyr enimyes. The fourth batayll was nere vnto a moore called Cole moore. The whych was long and sore foughten by the Saxons / by reason that the sayde moore closyd a parte of theyr hoste so strongly, that the Brytons myght not winne vnto them for daūger of theyr shot / All be yt that fynal¦ly they were chasyd, and many of thē of cōstraynt drowned and swalowed in the sayde moore And ouer and besyde these foure pryncypall bataylles: Uortimerus had wyth the Saxons dyuers other conflictes / as in Kent, at Thetfoord in Northfolke, and in Essex nere vn¦to Colchestre / & lefte not tyll he had byrafte from them the more parte of such possessyons as before tyme they had wonne / and kepte them onely to the yle of Thanet, the whych Uorty¦mer oftē greuyd by such nauy as he then hadde. when that Ronowen doughter of Hengiste apperceyued the great mys¦chyf, that her fader and the Saxōs were in, by the mraciall knyghthode of Uortymer: she sought suche mea∣nes, that shortly after, as testyfyeth Gaufryde and other, Uortimer was poysoned / when he had ruled the Bri¦tons after moste concorde of wry∣ters seuen yeres. THE .LXXXIX. CHAPITER. UOrtigernus fader of Uorty∣merus last dede, was agayn restoryd to the kyngdome of myche Brytayne / in the yere of oure lordes incarnacyon foure hūdred .lxxi / and the .xi. yere of Childericus then kyng of Fraunce / the whyche all the tyme of the reygne of his sonne Uortimer, had restyd hym in the coūtre of Cam¦bria or walys. where in this passe tyme after some writers, he buyldyd a strōge castel in a place called Gene∣ron̄ or Gwayneren, in the west syde of walys nere vnto the riuer of Gwa¦na, in an hyll or vpon an hyll called Cloarcius. But the olde cronycle be¦fore spoken of, sayth y• this Uortiger was kept somwhat vnder rule of cer¦tayne tutours to hym assygned in ye towne of Caerlegion or Chester / and demeaned hym so well towarde hys sonne in aydynge of hym wyth hys counsayll and otherwyse, that the Brytons for it cast to hym such a fa¦uoure, that they after the deth of Uor¦timer made hym agayne kynge. It was not longe after that Uor∣tiger was thus set in authoryte, but that Hengist{us} percyd this land with a great multytude of Saxons. wher¦of herynge Uortyger / in all haste as¦sembled his Brytons, and made to∣warde them. And when Hengistus hadde experyence of the great hoste of Brytons: he then ordeyned mea∣nes of treaty and peas. where lastly yt was concluded that a certayne nō¦ber of Brytons, and as many of Sa¦xons, shuld vpon a Maye day assem¦ble vppon the playne of Ambrii, now called Salesbury. whyche daye cer∣taynly prefyxyd / Hengistus vsynge a new maner of treason, chargyd all his Saxons by him appoynted, that eche of them shulde putte secretely a longe knyfe in theyr hose / & at suche season as he gaue to thē this watche or by worde, Nempnyth your sexis, that eueryche of them shulde drawe hys knyfe and slee a Bryton, not sparynge any one / except Uortiger ye kyng. And at ye day before appointed the kynge wyth a certayne of Bry∣tons not ware of this purposed trea∣son, came in peasyble wyse to ye place before assygned / where he fande re∣dy Hengistus wyth hys Saxons. The whyche after due obeysaunce
made vnto the kynge / receyued hym with a coūtenaūce of all loue. where after a tyme of cōmunycacyon had / Hengiste beynge mynded to execute his former purposed treason, shew∣ed his watche word. By reason wher¦of anon the Brytons were slayne as shepe amonge woluys, hauynge no maner of wepyn to defēde them self / excepte yt any of them myght by his manhode and strength get the knyfe of his enymye. Amonge the nomber of these Brytons was an Erle called Edoll or Edolf erle of Caerlegion or Chestre / ye whych seynge his felowes and frendes thus murdered, as affer¦meth myne authoure Gaufryde and other: he by his manhode wanne a stake in the hedge or ellys where / wyth the whyche he knyghtly sauyd his owne lyfe, and slewe of the Sa∣xons .xvii, and fledde to the cytye or towne of Ambry nowe named Sa∣lysburye. After whyche treason thus executyd / the kynge remayned wyth Hengistus as prysoner. Of the takynge of Uortyger, and sleynge of the lordes of Brytayne / an authoure called Guillelmus de regibus sayth, that Hengist{us} agreed wyth Uortyger and hys Brytons / and that he shulde enioye the castell by hym before made, wyth a certayn of lande therunto adioynynge for hym and his Saxōs to dwell vpon. And when the sayde agrement was suerly stablyshed / this Hengiste en∣tendynge treason / desyred the kynge wyth a certayn nomber of his lordes to come to hym to dyner wythin his sayde castell. The whych of ye kynge was graunted. And at the daye assy∣gned the kyng with his lordes came to the sayde Thongcastell to dyner / where he wyth his was well and ho∣nourably receyued and also deynte¦ly serued. But when the kynge & his lordes were in theyr moste myrth / this Hen¦giste had commaunded before, yt his owne knyghtes shuld falle at vary∣aūce among thē selfe. whych so done the remenaunt of his Saxons, as yt were in partynge of frayes, shulde fall vppon the Britons & slee theym all, oute take onely the kynge. The whyche was done lyke as ye haue be¦fore harde deuysed / and the kynge was holden as prysoner. THE .XC. CHAPITER. HEngistus then hauynge the kynge as prysoner, & a great parte of the rulers of Britayne thus as before is sayd subdued: was some deale exalted in pryde / and compel∣lyd the kynge to gyue vnto hym, as wytnessyth Policronica, thre prouyn¦ces in the eest parte of Brytayne. whych thre prouynces shuld be Kēt, Southsaxon or Sussex, and Eestan¦glys, whych is to meane Norff. and Suff. as affermeth the authoure of the floure of hystoryes. But Guydo de columna sayth, that the foresayde thre prouynces was Kent, Eestsa∣xon or Essex, and Eestanglys / which is Norff. and Suff. Of the whyche sayde prouynces when Hengist was possessyd / he suffred the kynge to go at his lybertye. And then Hengiste beganne his lordshyppe ouer the pro¦uynce of Kent, and sent other of his Saxōs to beweld the other two pro¦uynces / that is to saye Eestanglys and Eestsaxons, tyll he hadde sente for other of his kynnesmen, yt he entē¦dyd to gyue the sayd {pro}uynces vnto. The kyngdome of Kent here begynnyth THE .XCI. CHAPITER. THus Hengistus beynge in the possessyon of this
prouynce of Kent: comaunded hys Saxons to call yt Hengistus lande / wherof as some authours meane the hole lande of Brytayn toke his fyrst name of Englande. But that sayeng shall appere cōtrary, as shalbe shew∣ed hereafter in the storye of Egbert kynge of westsaxons. The whych af¦ter he had subdued ye more parte of the kyngedomes of Saxōs, & made of all but one monarchye: he then cō¦maundyd this lande to be called An¦glia, & his Saxons Anglys / whych after by corrupcyon of speche was called Englande, and the people En¦glyshemen. This lordshyppe or kyngedome of Kent had his begynnyng vnder Hen¦giste, in the yere of oure lorde after moste concordaunce of wryters, and by reason of ye time .iiii. hūdred .lxxvi. And the fyfte yere of Uortygers last reygne. But Denys and other, that accōpt this kyngdome to begynne in the ye¦re of our lord foure hundred and .lv. allowe the begynnynge therof to be when Hengistus had fyrst gyft of the same, by reason that Uortyger ma∣ryed his doughter. This lordeshyppe conteyned the countre that stretcheth from eest Oc¦cean vnto the ryuer of Thamys / and had vpon the southeest Southerye / and vppon the weste London / vpon the northeest the Thamys aforesayd and Eestsaxon nowe Essex. And this lordshyppe conteyned also the yle of Thanet. whyche lordshyppe or kyngdome endured after moste wryters, from the tyme of the fyrste yere of the rey∣gne of Hengiste, tyll the .xxv. yere of Egbert before named, by the terme of .iii. hundred and .xlii. yeres folow∣ynge that accompte. At whyche sea∣son the sayde Egbert then kynge of westsaxons, subdued Baldredus thē kynge of Kent, and ioyned yt to hys owne kyngdome. Al be yt that the authoure of Po∣licronica affermeth yt to endure by the space of thre hundred and .lxviii, vnder .xv. kynges, wherof Baldre∣dus was the laste: whyche folowyth nere vnto the accompt of Denys be∣fore named. The fyrste crysten kyng of this lordshippe was Ethelbertus, or Ethelbert / the whyche receyued the fayth of Cryste by that holy man saynt Austayne or Augustayne, nere about the yere of our lordes incarna¦cyon foure hundred .lxxx. and .xvi. The whyche Ethelbert caused soone after to be edyfyed the monastery of saynt Peter and Paule, in the eest¦syde or ende of the cytye of Dorober¦nia now Caunterbury. He gaue vn∣to this Austayn and his successours byshoppes of Caunterbury, a place for the byshoppes see at Chrystes chyrche wythin the sayd cytye, & en∣dowed it with many ryche possessiōs. This Hengiste and all the other Saxons whyche ruled the .xvii. pryn¦cypates of Brytayne, as after shall be shewed, are called of moste wry∣ters reguli / whyche is to meane in oure vulgare or speche as small or lytell kynges. So that this Hengist is accompted a lyttell kynge. The whyche when he hadde thus rule of the foresayde .iii. prouynces, he sent for mo Saxons / & gatheryd them yt were sparkled abrode / so yt in these prouynces the fayth of Chryste was all quenchyd and in slepe. Then Hengist wyth Octa his son gaderyd a great strēgth of Saxōs / and faught wyth the Brytons, and ouercame the Brytons, and chasyd them in suche wyse, that Hengiste kepte his lordesshyppe in peace and warre by the space of .xxiiii. yeres, as moste wryters testyfye.
THE .XCII. CHAPITER. NOwe then lette vs retourne agayne to Uortiger / ye which when he sawe the Saxons in suche wyse encrease theyr strength, and the Brytons dayly dyscreace / for as wri¦teth myne authour Gaufryde, yt Sa¦xons had the rule of London, yorke, Lincolne, or Lindecoln̄, and Kaer∣guēt, that is wynchester, wyth other good townes / wherfore as affermeth the sayd Gaufryde, the kyng for fere of ye Saxōs, & also for that y• he was some deale warned of the commyng of the .ii. bretherne Aurely and Uter sonnes of Constantyne: he therfore consyderynge these many and great daungers, fledde into Cambria or walys, and there helde hym for the more suertye / where as wytnessyth the sayde Gaufryde he then buylded the castel before mynded. Of ye which buyldynge and impediment therof / and also of the gettynge or byrthe of Merlyne, and of his prophecyes he made a longe worke, the whyche I passe ouer for dyuerse consyderacy∣ons, & retourne agayne to Uortiger. Trouth yt is, that whyle Uorty∣gernus was thus besyed in walys / the forenamed brethern Aurely and Uter preparyd theyr nauy and men of armys, and passed the see, and lan¦ded at Totnesse as sayth the englysh cronycle. wherof when the Brytons were ware that were disparklyd and seueryd in many coūtres / they drewe to them in all hasty wyse. The which sayde bretherne when they sawe that they hadde a competent nomber of knyghtes / they made towarde wa∣lys to dystresse Uortyger. wherof he beynge warned / for so myche as he well knewe, yt he myght not make sufficyēt defence by strēgth of knyghtes: he therfore garnyshed his castell wyth strength of men and vytayll / entendynge to sauegarde hym selfe by that meane / but all in vayne. For the sayde two bretherne wyth theyr armye, besegyd the sayd castell / and fynally after many as∣sautes, wyth wylde fyre consumed the sayde castell wyth Uortiger, and all that was therin. Of hym yt is redde, that he shulde lye by his owne doughter, in truste ye kynges shulde come of his blood. For the whyche dede he was accur∣syd of saynte Germayne / and lastely ended his lyfe as hefore is expressed, when he hadde reygned nowe laste ix. yeres. THE .XCIII. CHAPITER. AUrelius Ambrosius the se∣conde sonne of Cōstantyne, and brother to Constancius slayne by the treason of Uortyger / was kynge made of the Brytons in the yere of oar lorde .iiii. hundred .lxxx. & one / and the .xxi. yere of Childeric{us} then kynge of Fraunce. Of thys yt is sayd, that when he hard of the dy∣uysion that was in the land of Bry∣tayne betwene Uortiger and the Sa¦xons / and in what maner the Saxōs had subdued the Brytons he in all goodly haste wyth ayde of the kynge of lytell Brytayne, spedde hym into thys lande. where after the aboue sayde vyctory hadde of Uortiger / he spedde hym towarde yorke, as affer∣meth Gaufride, and there chasyd the Saxons that helde the cytye wyth Octa or Osca sonne of Hengist / and toke the sayde Octa, & kepte hym as a prysoner somwhat of tyme. But howe so yt was by treason of his keper or otherwyse he brake pry∣son. And he wyth his fader gaderyd after a great hoste / and mette Aure∣lius & his Brytons at a place called Crekynford, where was foughten a stronge & myghty batayll / to ye losse
of both partyes / but the more losse fyll to the Saxōs. For of them was slayne foure dukes, and .iiii. thou∣sande of other men, & that other dele chasyd to theyr great daunger. yet this not wytstandynge Hengiste con¦tynued his lordshyppe in Kent / and Aurelius Ambrose, whyche the en∣glyshe cronycle nameth Aurilam∣brose, kepte the countre called Logi¦ers or myddell Englande wyth wa∣lys / and chasyd the Saxons y• dwel¦led in ye .ii. forsayd prouynces of eest Saxon and eest Anglis, out of those countres. The seconde kyngdome. THE .XCIIII. CHAPITER. IN this passe tyme a Saxō na¦med Ella, wyth his thre son∣nes called Symen or Symon, Plet¦tynger, and Cissa / came wyth thre shyppes called Obilas, and landed in the south parte of Brytayne, and slewe many Brytons at a place that then was named Cuneueshore / & cha¦sed many vnto a wood thē called An¦dresleger / and after occupyed ye coun¦tre, & inhabyted hym & his Saxons wythin the sayde prouynce / makyng hym selfe kyng and lorde therof. By reason wherof by his might & power the sayd prouynce or countre was af¦ter named ye kyngdome or lordshyp of Southsaxons. The whyche after most concorde of wryters shuld haue his begynnyng y• .xxxii. yere after the fyrst cōmyng of Hēgist. which folow¦ynge ye accompte shuld be in the yere of our lorde .iiii. hundred .lxxxii / and in the seconde yere of Aurely then kynge of Brytayne. This kyngdome or lordshippe had in the eestsyde Kent, in the south the see and the yle of wyght, in the west Hampsyre, and in the northe Sou∣threy / and conteyned as wytnessyth Guydo Southampton, Somerset¦shyre, Deuenshyre / and Cornewayl. Of whyche sayde kyngdome Ethel∣baldus or Ethelwald{us} was the .iiii. kynge, and the fyrste crysten kynge. Thys kyngdome endured shorteste season of all the other kyngdomes, and passyd soonest into the other. For yt endured not aboue an hun∣dred and .xii. yeres, vnder .v. or .vii. kynges at moste. THE .XCV. CHAPITER. THen to returne where we left Aurely, whyche as before ye haue harde helde and occupyed the myddell parte of Brytayne wyth Cā¦bria or walys, dyd hys dylygence to repayre ruynous places, as well tem¦ples as other / and caused ye seruyce of god to be sayde and done, whyche by meane of the Saxons was great¦ly decayde thorough all Brytayne. And after this Aureli{us} beseged y• Sa¦xons in ye hyll of Badon or Badowe, where he slewe many of theym. But dayly the Saxons encreasyd & lan∣ded in myche Brytayn, as after shall appere. For shortely after a Saxon named Porth / landed wyth his two sōnes at an hauē in Southsex. After whome as some authours meane, ye hauē was after called Portismouth, whyche kepeth the name at this day. And in lykewyse they came to lande in dyuers places of Britayne / so that Aurelius had wyth them many con∣flyctys and bataylles, in the whych he spedde dyuersly / for he was som∣tyme vyctour, and some season ouer set. It is wrytē of hym in ye englyshe cronicle and other, that he by ye helpe of Merlyn shuld fetche the great sto¦nes now standynge vpon the playne of Salysburye, and called the stone henge, oute of Irlande, and caused theym to be sette there as they nowe
stande / in remembraunce of the Bry¦tons that there were slayne and bu∣ryed in the tyme of the communyca∣cyon had with Hengiste and his Sa¦xons, as before in the storye of Uor∣tiger is touchyd. But Polycronica alledgyth yt honour vnto Uter Pen¦dragon his brother. In the tyme of this Aurelius, as wytnessyth also ye sayde Policronica / dyed Hengist in his bed, when he had reygned ouer ye Kentysh Saxons .xxiiii. yeres. After whose deth Octa or Osca his sonne, ruled ye sayd kyngdome other .xxiiii. yeres. All be yt that the brytyshe bo∣kes, and also the cronycles of En∣lande sheweth / that after that Aure∣lius had in batayll slayne Hengiste: he toke vnto his grace Octa his son, & gaue vnto hym a dwellynge place in the countre of Galewey for hym & his Saxōs then lefte on lyue. which semeth not to be true, for mater that shall after ensue / and also for y• that before is touchyd of the Pictes and Scottes, in the tyme of the myserye of the Brytons. Then yt foloweth, this Octa nother augmented nor my¦nyshed his lordshyp / but helde hym therwyth contented as his fader had to hym lefte yt. Lastely & in the ende of the reygne of Aurely, Pascentius the yongest son of Uortiger, whiche after ye deth of his fader was fledde into Irland for fere of Aurely, purchasyd ayde of Guilamour kyng of Irlāde. And wyth a great armye inuadyd thys lande of Brytayne by the countre of walys / in takynge the cytye of Me∣nenia, and in wastynge the sayd coū¦tre wyth iron and fyre. In the which season and tyme Aureli{us} laye syke in his cytye of Kaerguent or wynches∣ter. For whych cause he desyred hys brother Uter to gather an hoste of Britōs, & to appease ye malice of Pas¦cencius & his adherētis. The whych accordyngly preparyd his hoste / & at length ouercame the hoste of Pascē∣cius, and slewe hym and the forena∣med Guillamour in the same fyght. In this whyle and season that Uter was thus gone agayne Pascentius / a Saxon or other straūger feynynge hym a Bryton, & a connyng man in physyke, by the intycemet of Pascen¦cius came vnto Aurely, where he lay syke / & by his subtyle & false meanes purchasyd such fauour wyth those yt were nyghe vnto the prynce, that he was put in truste to mynystre medy¦cines vnto the kyng. This is named of writers Coppa or of some Eoppa. The whyche when he had espyed his tyme cōuenyent to brynge about his false purpose / he gaue to Aureli{us} a pocyon enpoysoned / by vyolence wherof he shortely after was dede, when he hadde reygned after moste wryters vppon .xix. yeres. The thyrde or fyfte. THE .XCVI. CHAPITER. IN the tyme of ye reygne of this Aurelius as wytnesseth the au¦thour of Policronica & other / ye kyng¦dome of Eestanglis began vnder a Saxon named Uffa, about the yere of our lorde .iiii. hundred .lxxx. and xii, and the .xi. yere of Aurelius. The whych kyngdome conteyned Norlf. and Suff. nowe called. This hadde in this eest and north sydes, the see / in the northweste, Cambryge shyre / and in the weste, saynte Edmundes dytche, and Hertfordshyre / and in the southe Essex. This lordshyppe was called fyrste Uffynys lordshyp / and the kynges therof were named Uffynys, or after some authoures the people. But fynally they were na¦med eest Anglys. The fyrst cristen kyng of this pryn¦cypate
was Redwaldus the thyrde kynge / but he was not so stedfaste as belonged to his relygyon. His sonne named Corpwaldus was more sted¦faste / whyche after was slayne of a mysbyleuynge man, and for Crystes fayth as some wryte. But Guydo sayth that Sebertus was fyrste cri∣sten kynge of this lordshyppe / & that he made saynt Poulys chyrch of Lō¦don. This vnder .xii. kynges endu∣red, tyll the martyrdome of blessyd saynte Edmunde laste kynge therof / the whych was martyred nere about the yere of our lord .viii. hūdred and lxix. By the whyche reason yt shuld folowe, that this kyngdome shulde endure by the terme of .iii.C.lxxvii. yeres. And of this lordshyp, at that dayes was Elman or Thetforde the chyfe towne. But after Guydo, this lordeshyppe shulde begynne the ye∣re of Grace .v. hundred & .lxx / & then shuld yt endure but .ii. hundred .iiii. score and .xix. yeres. Francia. THE .XCVII. CHAPITER. CLodoueus the sonne of Chil∣dericus or Hildericus before named, was after the deth of his fa∣der ordeyned kynge of Fraunce, in ye yere of oure lorde .iiii. hundred .lxxx. and .iiii / and the thyrde yere of Au∣relius then kyng of Brytayne. This of some wryters is named Clodoue{us} Lowys. The whyche shortely after that he of this realme was authory∣syd for kynge / heryng reporte of the beaute and grete vertue of Clotildis neuewe to Cundebald kynge or ru∣ler of Burgoyne: sente vnto hym a knyght named Aurelius to treat a maryage betwene the kynge and Clotyld or Crotild. The which Cun∣debald more for fere then for loue as¦sentyd. The cause wherof as myn authour sayth was, for yt thys Crotyld was enherytour vnto the sayde lande of Burgoyne / and that she be reason of yt maryage shuld recouer her ryghte and put hym from the rule therof. This Crotild had before that day re¦ceyuyd the fayth of Cryste / and so cō¦tynuynge her relygyon was maryed to Clodoueus then a paynym, and so endured a certayne of tyme. But yet she left not to enduce and tourne her lorde to the fayth in all that she myghte. And after a certayn of tyme she was delyueryd of a sonne / the whyche by meanes of the holy man Remigius byshop of Raynes, and of the quene Crotyld, was crystyned and named Clodomerus / the whych dyed wyth in shorte processe after. For yt happe the kyng sayd that his goddes were dyscontented wyth hym, that he had suffred his chylde to be crystyned, & for wrathe therof had taken frō hym his chylde. The quene takynge the kynges sayenge in pacyence / concey¦ued the seconde sonne, whyche also by the kynges agrement was also baptysed. This also after a certayne of tyme was vexed wyth a greuous sekenes, in suche wyse that yt was lykely to haue dyed. wherfore the kynge was then more impacyent, and blamed ye relygyon of his wyfe in moste impa∣cyent maner. The whych sayenges the quene toke pacyētly, and put all her confidence in god / to whom both she and Remigeus prayed so effec∣tuously, that the chylde was restored vnto perfyte helth. Thus Clodoueus perseuerynge in his erronyous lawe / made warre vp¦pon the Almaynes. In whych warre beynge one daye occupyed in fyght agayne hys enymyes / he wyth hys people was put to the werse. wherof
whan Clodoue{us} was ware / hauyng greate drede of hym selfe, called to mynde the often exortacyon of hys wyfe, and of the greate vertue of her goddes lawe / and sodaynly lyfte his eyen towarde heuen and sayde, god the whyche Clotylde my wyfe doth honoure, now helpe me. And yf this daye I may passe thys daunger and opteyne vyctory / I shall euer after worshyp the wyth true fayth. The whyche prayer skantly fynysshed the Frenchemen by dyuyne power were so vnyed and knyt togyther, and so knyghtly wythstode theyr enemyes / that in shorte whyle after they optey¦ned vyctory. whyche vyctory had / ye kynge with greate tryumphe retour¦ned into Fraunce. wherof whan Clo¦tylde was warned / she anone recey∣ued hym wyth all ioye and gladnes, thankynge her lord god of his great vyctory / but more for that ye he had forsaken hys idolatrye, and was be∣comen seruaunt of ye onely god four∣mer of all the worlde. THE .XCVIII. CHAPITER. IT was not longe after yt bles∣syd Remigius was sent for. The whyche enfourmed the kynge suffycyently in the fayth of Cryst / & vppon an Eester daye folowynge, wyth great solempnyte baptysed the kynge. In tyme of which solempny∣sacyon doynge / the holy Crysine or oyle by neglygence of the mynysters or otherwyse, lackynge / a doue dis∣cendyng from heuen, brought in her becke or byll a vyoll fylled wyth oyle of moste swetest sauour / and delyue∣red it to saynt Remigius. The which was construed to be done by vertue of ye holy ghost. And wyth thys holy oyle whan the kyng was anoynted / the surplusage therof was kept with moste reuerence. I haue herde repor¦ted, that this oyle is kept at the cytye of Reynes or at Parys, and that yt neuer fayleth or wasteth / and that al ryghtfull enherytours of ye crowne of Fraunce be therwyth at theyr co∣ronacyō anoynted. But & it happen any myghty mā to vsurpe ye crowne by myghte / when the bysshoppe co∣meth for thys holy oyle, he fyndeth yt vyoll or glasse drye, and ellys not. To thys reporte euery man maye gyue credence as hym lyketh / for I fande not this wryten in the gospell, nor yet in no boke of holy scrypture. Then it foloweth after thys solēp∣nyte done / the kynge hadde certeyne wordes to the people, in exortynge them to leue theyr idolatrye, and to byleue in Cryste and hys fayth, by whose myghte and power onely he hadde venquysshed hys enemyes. By the whyche exortacyō and other meanes of the holy bysshop Remi∣gius / myche people were some after conuertyd and baptysed. Then the kyng buylded certeyne newe monasteryes / and dedycat the olde temples of idollys in honoure of Crystes sayntes. Among ye which one was nere vnto the cytye of Pa∣rys, in the honour of the apostles Pe¦ter and Paule. It is wytnessed of mayster Robert Gagwyne / that be∣fore these dayes all Frenche kynges vsed to bere in theyr armes .iii. todys But after thys Clodoueus had re∣ceyued Crystes relygyon .iii. floure de lyse were sente to hym by dyuyne power, sette in a shylde of asure / the whyche syns ye tyme hath ben borne of all Frenche kynges. The sayd authour myndeth also that in a monastery of Fraunce cal∣led the monastery of saynte Bartyl∣mewe / was somtyme kepte a clothe of redde sylke, whyche was named the aurysflambe, and borne for a ba∣ner in the felde agayne the Barbaris or hethen people / by vertue wherof
the frenche prynces wan many vyc∣toryes. But after whan thys precy∣ous relyke or aurysflābe was borne agayne Crysten prynces / the vertue therof seasyd, and lastly was lost. But yet the lyke therof is kepte at saynt Denys / and had in greate re∣uerence of the bysshoppes and ab∣bottes of the same place. Then it foloweth in ye storye / whan Clodoueus hadde set hys realme in due order: Clotyld callyng to myn∣de the treason done to her fader, and also the wrongfull wythholdynge of her ryghtfull enherytaunce by her vncle Cundebalde / exorted her lorde Clodoueus to sende an embassade, & to requyre restytucyon of her sayde ryght / yt whych was sone after done. And whan the kynge had receyued an answere, yt the sayd Cundebalde wolde not restore the sayd ryghte of hys wyfe: he in all goodly wyse pre∣pared an armye, and made warre vp¦pon the sayd Cundebalde. And after greate waste and dystruccyon of the coūtre: Clodoueus fynally besegyd hym in a cytye / & after toke the sayd cytye by strength / and the sayd Cun¦debalde wythin ye same as prysoner. But by medyacyon of frendes and greate gyftes / wyth also a yerely try¦bute to be payed to Clodoueus, the sayd Cundebalde was releaced and sette at lybertye. THE .XCIX. CHAPITER. THis voyage thus spedde and orderyd: the kynge lefte be∣hynde hym an armye of .v. thousand knyghtes, vnder the gydyng of Gū∣defyll brother of the foresayd Cun∣debalde / and after retourned into Fraunce. But sone after the kynges departynge / Cundebalde cōtrary to the promyse before made, gaderyd a power of knyghtes, & made warre vppon hys sayde brother / and lastly beseged hym in the cytye of Uienne / where vppon eyther parte was by skyrmysshes & assautes great people slayne. All be yt in the ende Cunde∣balde wanne the cytye / and hys bro∣ther therein beynge, he afterwarde behedyd. About thys tyme great dis¦cencyon grewe atwene Clodoueus and the kynge of Gothys called Ale¦ricus. whyche varyaūce by agremēt of bothe partyes was put to the iu∣gement of Theodorycus than kyng of Longobardes or of Italyās. The whyche after the sayde causes were well and suffycyently argued and de¦batyd before hym and hys coūsayle: he fynally gaue sentence yt a knyght of Clodoueus shulde stande vppon an hylle holdynge a spere vpryghte in hys hande / and that the kynge of Gothys shuld throwe or lay so mych syluer as shulde in processe couer the poynt of the sayd spere. whyche sen∣tence as testyfyeth mayster Robert Gagwyne, the Gothis despysed say∣enge that they had not suffycyent syl¦uer wythin theyr land to perfourme the sayd sentence. And for despyte of the same / certeyne Gothys espyenge a prynce of Fraūce named Paterne, beynge assocyate wyth some dyuerse Frenshmen in a lofte or chamber / the whyche Paterne had ben solycy∣tour for the Frenshe kynge in ye fore¦sayd mater: the sayde Gothys by crafty and false meanes caused the floorth of the sayd chamber to falle / by whyche meane the sayde Paterne was greuously hurte, and many of the other in lykewise, & some slayne. wherof whan Clodoueus had wry¦tynge / he beynge therwyth greatly amoued, and also bycause ye Gothys dysobeyde the foresayd awarde: he gadered shortly after a greate hoste. And after certeyne offerynges done to saynt Martyn / wyth also passyng the ryuer of Uian by myracle and le∣dynge
of an harte: he lastly came to the syghte of hys enemyes. Thenne Clodoueus lodged hys hoost nere vnto the monastery of saint Hillary / where in the nyght before ye batayle, he receyued tokens of vyctory, the whyche I passe ouer. And vppon the morne he set hys people in araye, and made towarde hys enemyes / and mette wyth them in a felde called Noglodien̄, nere vn¦to ye ryuer of Cleue or Clyue. where after sore and longe fyght / he slewe the abouesayde Alaricus kynge of Gothys (as sayth myne authour) wyth hys owne hande. But here shulde seme some dis∣corde of tyme wyth other wryters. For Cronica cronicarum, Iacobus Philippus, and other / testyfye that thys Alaricus was dede many yeres before. For he shulde be kynge of Go¦thys by theyr sayenge in the tyme yt Honorius brother vnto Archadius was emperour whyche was aboute the yere of our lord .iiii. hūdred & .ix. that he began hys empyre. wherfore mayster Robert Gagwyne meaneth some other kynge of Gothys than Alaric{us}. For the sayd authours also affyrmen, that this Alaricus dyed of sodayne sykenesse at a cytye named Cesancia / whā he had reygned after moste wryters .vi. yere. Then it foloweth in ye story / whan Clodoueus had thus opteyned vyc∣tory of the Gothys, and set the coun¦tre of Guyan in order: he sped hym agayne into Fraunce. And when he was comen into the countre of Turon̄ / he was encoūtred wyth embassadours of themperours Anastasius, and presented from the sayd emperour wyth gyftes & greate pryce and honour, and also admyt∣ted for a consull of Rome, whyche at that dayes was a dygnyte of moste honour. whyche done, he remytted the sayd embassade wyth great gyf∣tes. This sayenge is affyrmed of the other wryters / the whych shewe this honour to hym to be done, for as mych as he had ouercomen the Go∣thys, enemyes of Crystes fayth. But they name not the kynges name that then reygned ouer the Gothys. Thys besynesse ouerpassed / Clodo¦ueus contynued hys iourney tyll he came to the monastery or chyrche of faynt Martyn. where wyth great de¦uocyon accordyng to hys former pro¦mysse / he offered his stede that he oc∣cupyed that iourney agayne the Go¦thys. And after for that he entended to occupye the sayd hors yf he hadde lyke nede: he redemed hym wyth a competent summe of golde. But yet the hors myghte not be remoued. Then ye kyng added to an hundreth pecys of golde / which at those dayes were named golden shyllynges / and so receyued hys stede. wherfore the kynge sayd after in game, that saynt Martyn was a good helper at nede / but he was costelewe. Thus thys noble and fyrste cry∣sten prynce cōtynued hys lyfe in no∣ble and marcyall dedys / in augmen∣tynge hys kyngdome by knyghtly batayles and other worldy prouy∣syons / and lastly dyed of goddes vi∣sytacyō with all stedfastnes of fayth, whan he hadde reygned .xxx. yeres / leuyng after hym .iiii. sonnes of Clo¦tylde hys wyfe / that is to saye Clo∣domyrus, Chyldebertus, Theodori∣cus, and Clotharius / or after some Latarius / and was buryed in ye mo∣nastery that he before nere vnto Pa¦rys hadde buylded, wyth suche epy∣taphy or superscripcyon vppon hys tumbe as after shalbe shewed. But or I procede to the declaryng of the foresayd epitaphy / for so mych as I haue hard dyuers hold an opy¦nyon, that the fayth of Cryste was
receyued in Fraunce or it were recey∣ued in this lande of Brytayne: ther∣fore I shall note here the tyme that this Clodoueus fyrst toke baptyme. whyche was as Ranulphe monke & other testyfye, in the .xv. yere of hys reygne / or nere about. whyche was ye yere of our lord .iiii.C.lxxx. & .xix. wherby yt apperyth, consyderynge the tyme of Luci{us} fyrst crystē prynce that euer was of Brytayne as before is shewed / that Cristes fayth was by a longe tyme honoured in Brytayn, or it were honoured in Fraunce / ex∣cepte that suche as holde the forsayd opynyō, accompte the fyrste comyng of Crystes fayth into Brytayne at ye fyrste conuersyon of the Saxons, whenne yt was prechyd by the holy monke saynt Augustyne and hys fe∣lowes / whych is not to the purpose. Than to the foresayde epitaphy or superscrypcyon as foloweth. Diues opum, virtute potens, clarus{que} triumpho, Condidit haue sedem, rex Clodoueus idem. Patricius magno, subsimis fulsit honore. Pfemis amore dei, contempsit credere nusso Lumina qui varijs horrent potenta figuris, Mox pur gatus aquis, & Christi fonte renatus Fragrantem gessit, infulso crisinate crinem. Exemplū'{que} dedit, sequitur quod plurima tura Gentisis populi / spreto{que} errore suorum. Doctorem cultura deum; verum{que} parentem. Hijs felix meritis, superauit gesta priorum Semper concilio, castris bellis{que} tremendus. Hortatu dux ipse bonus, ac pectore fortis Cōstructas acies formauit in a gmine primus. The whyche verses maye be thus expouned in our moder tūge as here after foloweth. Riche of goodes, stronge in vertue, in triumphe re shynynge, Kyng Clodoueus, this temple buyste of stone Fader of comon profete, clad with his honour ex¦cellynge. Replenyshed with goddes loue, despysed hys olde foon And hys pagaun lawe, wyth the straunge fygurs echone. Purgid with holy water, by cristes font born new And holy crisine enointed floured with vertue dew Example gyuyng, hym foloweth many a man, Forsakyng theyr errour and theyr fals goddes all And by his techynge honour but one god than Thus by his merytes he excelled his parentall / And thorough his coūsayle made citye and castell thrall. He was a noble duke, & therwith of grete might And in front of batayle was euer the fyrst knyght Anglia. THE .C. CHAPITER. VTer the laste or yongest sonne of Cōstantyne, and brother of Aure∣lius / was made kyng of Britayn in the yere of our lorde .v. huu∣dred euen / and the .xvi. yere of Clo∣doueus than kynge of Fraunce. Thys as before ys touched, was sur∣named Pendragō. The cause therof was as wytnessyth ye Englysshe cro∣nycle, for so mych as Merlyn lyke∣ned hym vnto a dragō vnder a sterre apperynge in the firmament. wherof there is made a long processe, and by Gaufryde in his Brytyshe boke also affermed / the whych to me semeth of lytell credēce. But trought it is, that after Uter was (as before is sayde) made kynge / he was enamowryd vp¦pon the dukes wyfe of Cornewayll named Igwarne or Igorne / & for to optayn his vnlefull lust, sought ma∣ny & dyuers meanes. So ye lastly he made warre vpō her husbāde named Garol{us} or Gorleis / & at lēgth slew ye
sayde duke at his castell called Tyn¦tagell, standynge in Cornewayle / & after maryed his wyfe, and receyued of her the noble knyght Arthur, and a doughter named Amye, as sayth the englyshe cronycle. More is not lefte of any wryter of authoryte in remembraunce of thys Uter / all be it that some testifye, that he by the helpe of Merlyne shulde fetche Coria gigantum otherwyse called the stone henge, out of Irlād as before I haue shewed in the story of Aurelius. And of Gaufryde ys shewed, that Uter also shulde wynne the forsayde ladye by the enchaunte∣ment of Merlyn. whych is not come¦ly to any chrysten relygyon to gyue to any suche fantastycall illusyons any mynde or credence. wherfore I passe ouer, leuynge all the other ma∣ter, whych also ys there rehersyd of the warre betwene Uter and Osca, sonne of Hengyste, for so mych as it is dyscordaunt vnto other wryters / and fynally conclude that thys Uter Pendragon dyed by force of venym, when he hadde ruled thys yle of Bry¦tayne by the full terme of .xvi yeres / and after was buryed by his brother Aurely in Coria gigantum or stone henge, leuynge after hym the fore∣named sonne the puyssaunt Arthur. Francia. THE .CI. CHAPITER. LOtharius or Clo¦tharius the yon∣gest sonne of Clo¦doue{us} / was made kynge of a parte of Fraunce called Soisons, in ye ye¦re of our lorde .v. hundred and .xiiii / and the .xiiii. yere of Uter then kynge of myche Bry∣tayne. ye shall vnderstande that af∣ter the deth of Clodoueus laste kyng of Fraunce / the lande by hym was dyuyded to hys foure sonnes. That is to say to the eldest sonne Clodomi¦rus was appoynted the lordshyppe of Orlyaunce / to Theodoricus the seconde sonne Austracye / to Childe∣bertus ye thyrd son myddell Fraūce, or the countre lyenge about Paris / and to this Lothayr, the aboue sayd lordshyppe of Soisons. Of whyche sayd lordshyppes eyther of them pos¦sessyd / they were of theyr subiettes called kynges, and so contynued in good reste a certayne of tyme. In the whyche season Clotyld theyr moder, berynge in mynde the vnnaturall deth of her parentes / wylled her son¦nes to venge theyr deth. whych deth as testyfyeth Uincent historyall, and also Antoninus, was in this forme folowynge. Gundenchus the graūd father of Clotildis had .iiii. sonnes / that is to saye Cundebaldus, Gondi¦gisillus, Hilpericus, and Godoma∣rus: To these .iiii. sonnes Gunden¦chus besette the lande of Burgoyne. Gondigisill{us} and Godomar{us} dyed / wherfore the land of Burgoyne fyll to Cundebaldus and Hilpericus. Then Cundebaldus for couetyse of the hole lordeshyp, slew his brother Hilpericus / & fastened a great stone to the necke of his wyfe, and cast her into a depe water. And of hys .ii. dou¦ghters, wherof the eldest hyght Tro¦na / he exyled in poore wede or clo∣thynge. And the yonger he kepte in seruage wythin his owne courte. The whyche after as before is shew∣ed was maryed agayne hys wyll vn¦to Clodoue{us} fader to this Lothari{us}. Then yt foloweth, this Lotharius sonne of Clotild made sharpe warre vpon Sigismonde sonne of Cunde¦baldus, whyche then was dede. In the whyche warre the eldest sonne Clodomyrus was slayne / leuyng af¦ter
hym .iii. sonnes named Theobal¦dus, Guntherus or Guntharre, and Clodoaldus. whych .iii. sonnes toke to her tuycyon and guydynge. But the other brother maynteyned the warre agayn yt Burgoyniōs / in such wyse ye finally they obteyned ye ryght porcyon of theyr moder Clotilde. After thys warre was fynyshed in Burgoyne: Childebertus the thyrd sonne herynge that Almarcus kyng of Spayne mysse entreated his sus∣ter / made warre vppon hym, & lastly hym subdued and sette his suster in her former estate. But whyle the said Childebert was thus in Spayne occupyed: Theodo¦rus his brother toke from hym a cy∣tye to hym belongyng called Moūt∣clere / and slewe the knyghtes which Childebertus had lefte there to kepe the sayd cytye. For this myscheuous dede arose gret debate betwene these two bretherne / but by medyacyon of frendes they were at lēgth accordyd. Then Theodorus sought new mea∣nes of dyspleasure agayne his sayde brother, as well treason as other wyse / the whyche Childebert by his polycye and wysedome & wyth good fortune escapyd. Childebertus than castynge in his mynde how he myght wynne to hym the patrymony or the lordeshyp that lately belōged vnto his eldest broder Clodomyrus: toke counsayle of his brother Clotharius. In such wyse yt they to gyder or of one assent, sent vn¦to theyr moder Clotyld for theyr ne∣uewes, childern of theyr brother And she nothynge mystrustynge theym / sent the sayde childern vnto the sayd ii. brethern. But wythin shorte tyme of theyr commyng vnto theyr sayde vncles, as testifyeth mayster Robert Gagwyne, and also the frēche croni¦cle / Lotharius tyrānously wyth his sworde slew two of ye sayde childern. And then the thyrde fledde for his sa¦uegarde vnto suche as hym fauou∣ryd. He was after agayne taken and compelled to make a solemne othe, yt he shulde become a relygyous man, & neuer clayme any part of his ryght or enherytaunce. By which vnlefull meane the .ii. brothern obteyned the hole lordshyppe of Orleaunce / and partyd the reuennues thereof be∣twene them / but that enduryd but a whyle. And here I passe ouer the so∣rowe that Clotylde made for the chil¦dern of her sonne Clodomyrus / and also the orderyng of the yongest son called Clodoaldus, whyche escaped the daunger of his vncles, as before is shewed / the whyche wolde aske a longe season. THE .CII. CHAPITER. IT was not long after but that the seconde brother kynge or duke of Austracy, dyed of goddes vi¦sytacyon / leuynge after hym a sonne named Theodobertus. The whyche of his two foresayde vncles was gre¦uously warred by lōge tract of tyme, the whyche he defendyd thorough his marciall knighthode. And when he by dyuers meanes hadde sought peace, and myght not purchase it: he then founde suche meanes by ryche gyftes and otherwyse, that he wāne the fauoure of his vncle Childebert / and cherysshyd hym as his frende. Then fyll vnkyndnes betwene Chil¦debert and Lotharius / in so myche that eyther of thē assembled a great hoste to subdue that one the other. But the forenamed Theodobertus made all ye power he myght, to ayde and assyste Chyldebert. So that vp¦pon bothe partyes was a great mul∣tytude of knyghtes armed redy to fyght. Clotilde then herynge of this mortall warre betwene her two son∣nes / and also consyderynge the lyke¦lyhode
of the great effusyon of man¦nes blood that myghte ensue, by the reason of the ioynynge of these foresayd two hostes: in all hast yode vnto the sepulture or shryne of saynt Martyn. where wyth due deuocyon she made her specyall prayers / bese∣chynge god and that blessyd saynt to sende by heuenly power some let or impedyment, yt the sayd hostes shuld not ioyne in batayll. By meane of whyche prayer when the sayde two hostes were in preparyng for to haue ronne to gyther: sodeynly fyll suche a tempeste of wynde and hayll wyth thunder and lyghtnynge, that bothe hostes were so greuously beten with the sayde tempeste and wederynge, that eyther of them had most mynde how they myght defende them selfe from daunger of the said wederyng. And ouer that, as testyfyeth ye aboue named Authour / eyther of the hostes thought in theyr myndes, that they were chased of theyr enimies / in such wyse that eyther of them fledde from other by a longe space. After this eyther of them sent mea¦nes of treatyse eyther to other / and at length confermed a peace betwene them. The whyche peace surely on both partyes assured Childebert ex¦cytyd his brother to warre vppon a people or countre called Terra Co∣nens̄ in the prouynce of Spayn, and besegyd the cytye of Saragounce otherwise called Augusta / & fynally kept the cytesyns so shorte, that they to appeace theyr enimyes, caused the byshoppe of the cytye to open the se∣pulchre of saynt Uyncent, and gyue to Lotharius a parte of y• holy mar¦tyrs bodye. But yet that notwythstandynge / though the syege were wythdrawen and the cytye sparyd: yet the coun∣tre there aboute they pylled and was¦ted wythoute pyte. And after wyth great rychesse of praye, retourned in to Fraunce. where at Paris by Chil¦debert soone after was builded a mo¦nastery in the worshyppe of god and of saynt Uincent / where the foresayd relyke was sette and reuerētly kepte. whych monastery at this daye is cal¦led saynt Germayns de Pree. In thys whyle, I can not saye by what happe / these two brethern new¦ly malygned agayne theyr neuewe Theodobert the son of theyr brother Theodorich. And entendyd by they malyce to byreue hym of the lorde∣shyppe of Austracy. And to that en∣tent gatheryd theyr people to warre vpon the sayde Theodobert. wherof when ye sayd Theodobert was ware, consyderynge he coude not so shorte∣ly assemble his people to wythstande the malyce of his sayd vncles▪ he ¦lowly and good maner rode agayne them in a peasyble wise. And to them behaued hym so well in worde and dede, that they alonely forgaue no hys trespasse / but also sente hym gayne with great rychesse of gyftes. Soone after thys tyme dyed Clotilde the wife of Clodoueus / y• which with great pompe of her two sonnes was buryed by her sayde husbande▪ And shortly after dyed Theodobert aforenamed / leuynge after hym  sonne named Theobalde. In thys passe tyme Lotherius of hys wyfe r¦ceyued .vii. sonnes & two doughters. Of the whyche Cramyris the eldest sonne he sente into Guyan, to haue the rule therof vnder his father. But he contrary to hys fathers mynde / oppressyd the inhabytauntes therof wyth greuous exaccyons and tribu∣te / wherfore hys father beynge dys∣content, called hym thens. Cramy∣ris wyth this beynge sore amoued / in great angre departed his fathers courte, & yode vnto Childebert hys vncle, excytynge hym to make warre
vppon hys father / imagynynge fals occasyons to bryng the two brethern at dystaunce / and made a solemne othe to his vncle, that durynge hys lyfe he shuld strēgth his party agayn his owne father. whyche assuraunce thus made, Chyldebert preparyd hys hoste to warre agayne his bro∣ther Lothari{us}. But ye sayd Lothari{us} of this beynge warned / for such lette as he then haddde, sent agayne hys enymyes two sonnes of hys, named Gunthranus and Aribert{us} / & whyle these two fonnes made toward Chil¦debert, he in that whyle made great waste in the countre of Champayne / and takynge great pryses, returned into hys owne countre of myddell Fraunce. wherof herynge the forena¦med Guntranus and hys brother / and also that in Guyan was moued warre by Cramyr̄: spedde them thy∣der wyth all theyr people. But they dydde nothynge worthye memorye or laude. In thys season dyed the forsayde Chyldeberte brother of Lotharius wythout heyre / when he hadde ruled myddell Fraunce .xivii. yeres, as sayeth the Frenche cronycle / and was enterred in ye monastery of saint Uyncent, otherwyse called saynte Germayne de Pree. THE .CIII. CHAPITER. AFter the deth of Childebert / for so myche as he dyed with¦out heyre, Lotharius forenamed sea¦syd all myddell Fraunce into his pos¦sessyon. And after he hadde somdele sette yt in order / not forgetynge the innaturall rebellyon of hys son Cra¦myris: chase vnto hym a puryd com¦pany of knyghtes and of competent nomber / & in all haste made toward Guyan, where ye sayd Cramyr̄ was then abydynge. But when he harde of the cōmynge of his father agayn hym with his chosyn armye: he with¦drewe hym to the vttermost partyes of Fraunce / and requyryd ayde of a kynge or duke to that partye adioy∣nynge named Gonobalde / the which to hym promised ayde to his power. Lotharius of this affinyte beyng warned / pursued the sayde Gono∣balde so sharpely, that he constray∣ned hym at length to take the chyrch of saynte Martyne, and to holde yt for his sauegarde. But when Lotha¦rius had assayd by dyuerse meanes, as well by fayre promyse as wordes of Manasses, and myght not get the sayde Gonobalde oute of that holy place: he set the chyrche on fyre, and brent the duke in the same / the which shortely after he reedifyed and made in more better maner then yt before hadde ben. when Cramyris was thus dispoyn¦ted of ye ayde of Gonobalde: he then fledde into lyttell Brytayne, and re∣quyred ayde of the erle therof named Cenabutus / where by comforte of yt sayde erle he assembled a great hoste to wythstand his father. wherof the father beynge asserteyned drewe to∣warde hym. And when both hostes were nere: they sent messagers to ye father to entreate a peace. But Lo∣tharius included so many harde con¦dycyons wythin the sayde peace / or as some writersmeane, Cramyris de¦syred such vnlefull desyres of his fa¦ther / that the sayd treaty myght take none effecte. And for truste that he had in the Brytons and his strength he was vtterly bent to trye his cause by dynt of swerde. Lotharius hauynge experiēce that fortune of batayl is in victory dout∣full & vncertayne: he therfore made hys prayer to god / besechynge hym of ayde agayne the innaturall and obstynate rebellyon of his sonne.
After whych prayer endyd / he com∣maunded in the name of god to sette vppon his enymyes. whyche mette with so grete ire / that shortly ye grene feld was dyed into a perfyght redde / and many knyghtes vpon both par∣tyes laye slayne, and gruntynge vp∣pon the erthe. The father comfor∣tynge and callynge vpon his knygh¦tes vppon the one parte, and the son vpon his knyghtes vpon that other parte / eyther of them entendynge ye deth and vtter destruccyon of eche other / thus this batayll hangynge in suspence to whether of them the vy∣ctorye shuld turne: sodeynly the Bri¦tons gaue backe / and gaue place to the Frenchemen. wyth the which the French partye beyng cōforted / enfor¦ced yt Britons wyth so sharpe fyght, that they were compelled to forsake the felde, and toke theym to flyght / whom the Frenchemen chasyd and slewe wythout mercy. In the whyche chase Cramyris wyth hys wyfe and chyldern were ta¦ken and presentyd vnto Lotharius. The whyche shortly after, settynge a parte all faderly loue, compassion, and pytye, causyd a great fyre to be made / into the whyche he commaun¦ded to be caste the sayde Cramyris with also hys wyfe and chyldern. Or as wytnessyth the frenche cronycle, they were all enclosyd in a house / and the house and they to gether con¦sumyd wyth fyre. Thus the moste cruell father with¦out pyte chastysyd ye inobedyent son, to the example and lernyng of other, to bere dewe obedyēce vnto theyr pa¦rentes. After this vyctory and cruell chastysement executed by Lothari{us}: he retourned into Fraunce. And so to the sepulcre or shryne of saynte Martyne / yeldynge to god and hym thankes of thys vyctorye, and offe∣ryd there many & ryche gyftes. And after spedde hym to Soisons / where he as kynge of all Fraunce / excepte the lordshyppe of Austracy, whyche Theobald sonne of his brother sons Theodorich then helde. The father of this Theobald was Theodobert. Then Lotharius seynge hys lande in reste and quyetnesse / gaue hym to huntynge and chace of wylde bestes, a game of great vse amōg all Frēche prynces. In whyche dysporte he beyng one daye greatly trauayled, caught some surfet / of the whyche ensued a mor∣tall sykenes, so that he dyed shortely after, when he hadde reygned as be∣fore is specifyed ouer the lordshyppe of Soysons and other, by the terme of .l. wynter full. And was after bu∣ryed at Soisons with great pompe / leuynge after hym foure sonnes, Gū¦thranus, Aribertus, Chilpericus, & Sigebertus. It is testyfyed of mayster Robert Gagwyne, that saynte Radegunde borne of the countre of Thurynge, of a pagan father named Bernigari¦us, was wyfe to this Lothar̄. whose vertuous lyfe Antonin{us} in his boke called Sm̄ Antonini, in the .viii. cha¦pyter & .xii. tytle of the seconde parte of his worke, shewyth cōpēdyously. Anglia. THE .CIIII. CHAPITER. ARthur{us} the sonne of Uter Pendra∣gon a strepelynge of .xv. yeres of age beganne his rey∣gne as kynge of Brytayne, in the yere of oure lorde v. hundred and .xvii / and the thyrde yere of Lotharius, then kynge of Fraunce, or of a parte therof, as be∣fore is declared. Of this Arthure is
by Gaufryde recyted a longe storye, and alowed by the englysh cronycle, the whyche from other wryters ys greatly dyscordaunte. But yet all au¦thours agreen that he was noble an victoryous in all his dedys. Fayne I wolde declare the fame of this noble prynce, to the comforte of other to folowe his marcyall de∣dis / so that I myght somwhat iustly fye my reporte by some authoure of authoryte. But the more I am in doute, bycause of the sayenge of Ra¦nulphe monke of Chestre / whyche vouchyth yt vppon wyllyam wry∣ter of hystoryes of kynges, as ys re∣hersed at length in the .vi. chapyter of the .v. boke of Policronicō / which is there open to euery man that ys desyrous to knowe the sayde reporte or opynyon / the whyche for the lēgth therof I ouerpasse. And somwhat to the honour of so great a champyon as was thys Arthur, I shall lay vn∣to the reder, that he may wyth autho¦ryte shewe vnto the herers / and ther wyth gladde the welsheman that he shuld descēde of so noble a vyctour / whych so many dedys of honour exe¦cuted in his dayes. Then as testyfyeth Polycrony∣con and other / Arthur faught .xii. no table batayllis agayne the Saxons, and of them all was victour. wherfore the fyrste was vpon the ryuer of Cleuy / and .iiii. the nexte were foughten vpon the ryuer Dou¦glys, which rynneth vnder the town of wygan, vpon ten myles from the ryuer of Merse in Lancashyre. The .vi. batayll was vppon the ry¦uer called Bassa. The .vii. besyde Lyncoln̄ in a wood called Celidon̄. The .viii. and the .ix. were fough∣ten about yorke. The .x. was about Nycolf towne, whyche is named warwyk as after some wryters. The .xi. was at Bathe / where he longe besegyd Cerdicus kynge of westsaxons. The .xii. and last was at a place cal¦led Badon or Babowe hyll / in which he slewe many Saxons. But that notwythstandynge he myght not cle¦rely voyde them his lande / but that they kepte theyr coūtes, which they were before possessyd of / as Kente, Southerey, and Norff: all be it that some authours testyfy that they held these countres as trybutaryes vnto Arthure. Thys noble warryour as wytnes¦syth holy Gildas, slew with his own hande in one daye by ye helpe of our ladye saynte Marye / whose picture he bare peynted in his shelde, a hun¦dred and .xl. Saxons. whyche shelde he called Prydwen̄ / his swerd was called Caliboure / and his spere was called Ron̄, after the brytyshe tunge or speche. The thyrde or fourth. THE .CV. CHAPITER. ABout the .v. yere of this Arthur, af¦ter the agrement of moste wryters beganne the lord shyppe of westsa¦xōs, vnder ye Sa¦xon called Cerdicus & Kenricus hys sonne. For Denys and other wyt∣nesse, that this lordshyppe or kyng∣dome shulde haue his begynnynge the .lxxi. yere. after the fyrste com∣mynge of Hengiste / or the yere of oure lorde fyue hundred .xxii. which agreeth wyth the .v. yere of Arthure aforesayde. Thys lordshyppe conteyned the weste countre of Englande / as wylt
wyltshyre, Somersetshyre, Berk{is}, Dors. and other / as Deuonshyre, and Cornewayll / and hadde in the Eest syde Southampton / in ye north Thamys the famouse ryuer / in the south and weste the see Occean. This foresayde Cerdicus, whyche of some authours is named Childri∣cus / lāded fyrst at Cerdyshore which nowe is called yermouth, an hauen towne in the countre of Norff. And by helpe of other Saxons then inha¦byted in that countre then called eest Anglys: the sayd Cerdicus at lēgth obteyned the foresayde countre and named yt westsaxon or westsaxonia / and reygned therin as lorde or kyng a certayne of yeres, and Kenric{us} his sonne after hym. The fyrste chrysten kynge of this prouynce was named Kyngilsus / and cōuertyd by meanes of that bles¦sed man Berinus byshoppe of Dor∣chester. To whom Quichelinus bro¦ther of the foresayd Kyngilsus, gaue the sayd cytye to make there hys see, after he also had receyued baptyme of the sayde Berinus. And as Guy∣do wytnessyth the sayde Quicheli∣nus gaue after to the byshoppe of wynchester .vii. myles compasse of lande, to buylde there a byshoppes see / the whyche was accomplyshed and finyshed by Kenwalcus his son. Thys kyngdome enduryd longeste of all the other / whyche were .vii. in nomber, or .vi. besyde thys. Some wryters accompte the terme of the duraunce of thys kyngdome, from Cerdicus to Egbert / and some to the laste yere of Aluredus. But Guydo accomptyth the enduraunce of thys kyngdome, from the fyrste yere of Cerdicus vnto the laste yere of Ed∣warde the cōfessour. By reason wher¦of yt shuld endure fyue hundred and & .liiii. yeres. But moste accordyng∣ly yt shulde be rekened from the fyrst yere of Cerdicus to the laste yere of Aluredus. For he made one monar∣chye of all .vii. kyngdomes / in which tyme dyd flowe or passe thre hūdred lxxviii. yeres. THE .CVI. CHAPITER. NOwe then I wyl returne vnto Ar∣thur / the whych by a longe tyme dwelled in warre and mortall ba∣tayll wyth ye Sa¦xōs, by meane of theyr dayly repayre into this lande. The whyche also a∣lyed them with Pictes and other na¦cyons, and made theyr partye the strenger by ye meane. But yet Arthur by his marciall knyghthod brought theym in suche frame / that he was accōpted for chyef lord of Brytayne. Fynally when he hadde by a longe tyme maynteyned hys warres a∣gayne the Saxons / and specyally a∣gayne Cerdicus or Childricus kyng of westesaxons: he for a fynall con∣corde gaue vnto the sayde Cerdicus as testyfyeth Policronica in the .vi. chapyter of his .v. boke. the two coū¦tres of Hampshyre and Somerset. And when he hadde sette hys lande in some quietnesse, he betoke the rule therof vnto hys neuewe Mordred / and wyth a chosyn armye sayled, as sayth Gaufryde and other, vnto Fraūce / where by the reporte of Gau¦fryde he wrought wonders. But the wryters of Frenche crony¦cles touche nothynge of suche nota∣ble dedes / nor yet the wryters of Ro¦maynes mynde nothynge of suche actes done agayne theyr consull or emperoure called by Gaufryde Lu∣cius Hybert{us}. Therfore I wyll spare all that longe mater: remyttyng the welshemen as touchynge ye processe
vnto the sayd Gaufride. And here I wyll folowe Policronicon, where he sayth, that for as mych as the forena¦med Mordred was desyrous to be kynge / & feryd some dele the myght of Cerdicus kyng of westsaxons: he therfore drewe to hym the sayde Cer¦dicus by great gyftes, as of townes and castelles & other meanes / where thorough the sayd Cerdicus to hym assented, so that Mordred was at London crowned kyng of Brytayn / and Cerdicus after the vse of pagās was at wynchester then called Kaer∣guent crowned kyng of westsaxons. when relacyō came to Arthur of all this treason wrought by his neuewe Mordred: he in all haste made to∣warde Brytayn, as yt is redde in the englyshe cronycle / & lāded at Sand∣wyche, where he was mette of Mor∣dred and hys people / whych gaue vn¦to hym strong batayll in tyme of his landyng, and loste there many of his knyghtes, as the famouse knyghte Gawyne and other. But yet this not withstandyng Arthur at lēgth wāne the lande, and chasyd his enymyes / and after the enterynge of his cosyn Gawyn and other of his knyghtes there slayne, he sette forwarde his hoste to pursue his enymyes. Mor∣dred thus beynge ouersette of his vn¦cle at the see syde / withdrewe hym to wynchester. where he beynge furnys¦shed of newe soudyours, gaue vnto Arthur, as sayth Gaufryde, ye secōde fyghte / wherin also Mordred was put to the worse, and constrayned to flee. Thyrdely and lastely the sayde Mordred faught wyth his vncle Ar¦thur besydes Glastynbury / where af¦ter a longe and daungerouse fyght, Mordred was slayn / & ye victorious Arthur wounded vnto the deth / and after buryed in the vale of Aualon be¦syde Glastynbury beforesayde. Of this laste ende and buryenge of Arthur in the brytyshe bokes are tolde many fables. But to oppresse ye errours of Brytons ye thynke or by∣leue yt Arthur yet lyueth: Policroni¦conshe with in his forenamed chapy¦ter of his .v. boke, yt in the secōde Hen¦ryes tyme kynge of Englande the bonys of the sayd Arthur and Gway¦nour his wyfe were foūden / and trās¦lated into the forsayde chyrch of Gla¦stynbury, and there newe buryed in the yere of our lord .xi. hundred .lxxx. And more specially yt is noted in the xxiii. chapyter of the .vii. boke of Po¦licronicon aboue sayde. wherfore to be at cōclusyon of a fyne of this noble warryour / he was as before is shewed slayne or woun∣ded to deth, when he hadde reygned ouer the Britons by ye terme of .xxvi. yeres / wyllynge before his deth that Constantyne the son of Cador duke of Cornewayle, for so mych as of his bodye remayned none heyre, that he shulde be his heyre and enheryte the land of mych Britayn after his deth. Anglia. THE .CVII. CHAPITER. CONstantinus the son of Cador duke of Cornewayle / by assent of the Bry∣tons was of them crowned kynge of myche Brytayne, in the yere of Cry∣stes incarnacyon fyue hūdred .xliii / and the .xix. yere of Lotharius then kynge of Fraunce. This was nere kynnesman vnto Arthur / and was by the two sonnes of Mordred gre∣uously vexed, for so myche as they claymed the lande by the ryghte or tytle of theyr father. So yt betwene hym and them were foughten many and sondry bataylles. wherof nother
of place nor of tyme is left any con∣uenyent memorye / nor yet of the na¦mes of the sayde two sonnes. But as dyuerse authours agreen, after these forsayde batayllys thus foughten / fynylly the two sonnes of Mordred were constrayned of pure force to seche strong holdes for theyr refuge▪ wherfore that one toke Lon∣don, and that other wynchester. wherof Constantyne beynge war¦ned / lefte not tyll he had slayne that one wythin the monastery of saynte Amphiabil at wynchester / and that other wythin a temple or chyrche of London, whych temple is named of Gaufryde an hous of freres. But ye sayeng is doutefull / for at that days yt is to be supposed that there was none hous of freres within London nor by a longe tyme after. when Constantine hadde thus sub¦dued his enymyes, and thought hym¦selfe in a maner of suertye of his re∣gyon: then fortune as she hadde en∣uyed his glory, arreryd agayne hym his owne kynnesman named Aureli¦us Conanus / the whych agayn hym made mortall batayll / and finally or at the last slewe hym in ye felde, when he hadde reygned after most accorde of wryters .iii. yeres / the whych was then huryed at Stone hyenge by the sepulture of Uter Pēdragon / wyth great solemnytye. THE .CVIII. CHAPITER. AUrelius Conanus the cosyn of Constantync last named / was crowned kyng Brytayne, in the yere of our lord .v. hundred & .xlvi / & the .xxxii. yere of Lothari{us} before na∣med then kynge of Fraunce. This was noble and lyberall. But he was a man that cherysshed suche as loued stryfe and dyscencyon wyth in his lande / and gaue lyghte cre∣dence to them yt accused other, were yt ryght or wronge. And as testyfy∣eth Gaufryde and other / he toke by strength his vncle whyche of ryght shulde haue ben kyng, and caste hym in a strong pryson / and after sew ty∣rannously the .ii. sonnes of his sayd vncle. But he reioysed his reygne but shorte whyle. For as wytnessyth the sayde Gaufryde, when he hadde reygned two yeres he dyed, were yt of the sonde of god or otherwyse / le∣uynge after him a sonne named Uor¦tiporius, as hath the authoure of the boke named Floure of hystoryes. Of this Uortiporius speketh no∣thynge the englyshe cronycle / but tel¦leth of two kynges that shulde rey∣gne nexte after Constantyne both at ones / wherof that one he nameth Adelbryght, and that other Edyll. wherunto none other writer agreeth except that he nameth them for some of the kynges of the Saxons. For a∣boute that tyme reygned in kent or soone after, Ethelbert or Athelbert / whyche myghte be taken of some for Adelbryght. And that other whyche he named Edylf, myght be taken for Ella kynge of Southsaxons. But this Ella shulde not by concorde of wryters be lyuynge at this tyme. It myght wyth more conuenyency ac∣corde, that yt shulde be a kynge of Deira or of Northūberlande named Ella, the whyche reygned more a∣boute this tyme and season. Of these two kynges, the sayde englyshe cronycle telleth a longe pro¦cesse / the whych for I fynde none au¦thour of authoryte that wryteth or speketh of the same, I passe yt ouer. ye shall also furthermore vnder∣stande, that after this daye the Bry¦tons dayly dyscreasyd of lordshyppe and rule wythin Brytayne, & drewe them towarde Cambyr or walys / so that the countre about Chestre was
the chyefe of theyr lordshyp wythin Brytayne. For dayly the Saxons landed wyth companyes, and occu∣pyed ye princypall partes of ye same / as shortely here after shall appere. The fyfthe kyngdome of the Saxons. THE .CIX. CHAPITER. IN the tyme of the reygne of this fore named Aurelius Conanus / as wyt¦nessyth Polycroni¦ca, Guido, & other: beganne the kyng¦dome or lordshyp of Brenicia vnder a Saxon named Ida / the yere of our lorde .v. hundred and .xlvii / and the seconde or laste yere of the sayd Co∣nanus. Thys lordshyp was in the north parte of Brytayne / and grewe in short whyle more & more, so that fynally it was named the kyngdome of Northumberlande. But ye shall vnderstande, that this lordshyp was fyrste deuyded in two kyngdomes / wherof the fyrste, as aboue is sayde was called Brenicia, and that other Deyra. The meris or markis of this kyngdome of Northūberlande were by Easte and by west the occean see / by south the ryuer of Humber, and so downwarde towarde the weste by the endys of ye shyres of Notynghm and Derby, vnto the ryuer of Merse or Mercia / and by north the Scot∣tysshe see, whyche is called forth in Scottysh / & in Brettyshe the werde. The southsyde of thys lordshyppe was called Deyra, whyche is nowe called the bysshopryke of Durham, and the north syde was called Breni¦cia / whyche were than departyd or seuered by the ryuer of Tyne. Deyra conteyned the lande from Humber to the ryuer of Tyne / and Brenicia included the countree from Tyne to the Scottysshe see. In Brenicia regned fyrste as is a∣boue sayd Ida or Idas / & in Deyra regned fyrste Ella / whych lordshyp∣pes began bothe within .iii. yeres. But in processe of tyme bothe in one were named the kyngdome of Nor∣thumberlande / whych so contynued somwhyle vnder one kynge, & somewhyle vnder two, by the terme of .iii. hundred and .xxi. yeres, as sayth Ra¦nulphe munke of Chester. And after furth contynued ye name vnder Sa∣xons and Danes, tyll the comynge of Edredus brother of Ethelstane & son of Edwarde ye elder. The whiche Edredus in the .ix. or last yere of hys reygne, ioyned thys to hys owne kyngdome. By which reasō it shulde seme, that thys kyngdome endured vnder that name vpon .iiii. hundred and .ix. yeres. The fyrste crysten prynce of thys kyngdome was named Edwynus / that receyued the fayth of saynt Pau¦lyne, as testyfyeth Guydo. In thys lordshyppe also were included these shyres and countrees nowe called yorke, Notyngham shyre or Snot∣hyngham shyre, Derby shyre, ye bys∣shopryke of Durham, Copelande, and other. Amonge the many kynges yt reyg∣ned in thys lordshyppe, whych after some wryters were to the nomber of xxiii. reygned one accōpted the .viii. kynge by Guydo, named Ethelfrid{us} & sonne of Ethelricus. whych Ethel∣fridus destroyed mo Brytons than all ye other kynges of Saxōs. This was fader to saint Oswold & Oswi. He slewe also many of the Brytōs at a batayle that he had agayn them besyde Kaerlegyon or Chester, and two thousande and a hūdred of mon¦kes of the house of Bangor, as it ys
testyfyed of Polycronicon in the .x. chapyter of hys .v. boke / the whyche monkes were comen thyder to praye for the good spede of the Brytons. And ouer thys forsayde nomber of monkes .l. fled / whereby they wyth theyr leder named Brucyuall were sauyd. Of suche a nomber of mon∣kes of one house / myghte be demyd a wonder. But the sayd Policroni∣ca, wyth Guydo, and other wryters / affermyn that in that house of Ban∣gor were at those dayes for the more party thre tymes. vii, hundred mon∣kes, the whych lyued by the trauayle of theyr handes onely. The forenamed Oswye, was after Oswolde kynge of thys prouynce / whych gaue wyth hys doughter El∣fleda a nonne .xii. lordshyppes into ye chyrche, to buylde wyth .xii. monaste¦ryes / whereof .vi. of the sayde lord∣shyppes were in Brenicia, and .vi. in Deyra / as sayth Guydo. And also Ranulphe in hys .v. boke of Poly∣cronyca and .xvi. chapyter affermyth the same. THE .CX. CHAPITER. UOrtipori{us} sonne of Aureli{us} Conanus after the opynyon before sayd / was ordeyned kynge of Brytayne in the yere of our lorde .v. hundred and .xlviii. and the .xxxiiii. yere of Clotharius thenne kynge of Fraunce. Of the whych is lytell me∣mory lefte in any cronycler or wry∣ter / excepte yt Guydo testyfyeth hym to be a vyctoryous knyght / shewyng breefly that he in sondry batayles scomfyted the Saxons / and defen∣dyd hys lande and Brytons from ye daunger of them and other that the Saxons alyed them wyth. In the tyme of the reygne of thys kynge / a Saxon named Ella the son of Iffus, began to reygne in ye south syde of the kyngdome of Northum∣berlande called Deyra / as before is touchyd in the chapyter of the sayde kyngdome. Then yt foloweth / whan this Uor¦tiporius hadde ruled the Brytons knyghtly by the terme of .iiii. yeres / he dyed, and was put to hys fader / leuynge none heyre of hys body. For as myche as all wryters agre∣en, that the kynges of westsaxon at length subdued all the other kyng∣domes / and made of the hole land of mych Brytayne but one kyngdome or monarchye / and all other as well of Brytons as of Saxons fayled or lefte of, that all onely excepted: ther∣fore I entende to brynge in, the na∣me of euerych kyng of westsaxon frō the fyrst Cerdycus or Chyldricus, & ioyne them wyth the kynges of Bry¦tons / for so long as hereafter ye sayd Brytons contynued theyr reygne wythin any parte of Brytayne. THE .CXI. CHAPITER. MAlgo a duke of the Brytons and neuewe of Aureli{us} Co∣nanus, as sayth the authour of the Floure of hystories / begā his reigne ouer the Brytons in the yere of oure lorde .v. hundred .lii / and the .xxxviii. yere of Clotharius then styll kynge of Fraunce / and also the .xv. yere of Kenricus the sonne of Cerdicus and seconde kyng of westsaxō aforesayd: accomptyng .xv. yeres of the reygne of hys fader, as Guydo allowyth. Thys Malgo after ye accorde of all wryters that make mencyon / was ye comlyest and moost personable man of all Brytons than lyuyng, & there∣wyth endowed with knyghtly man∣hode. The whyche wythstode ye Sa∣xons and kepte them of, that they da¦maged not the lande / the whyche he then had possessyon of. And as wyt∣nessyth Gaufryde & other / he by hys manhode subdued ye iles of Iseland,
Orchades or Orkeys, and Norway wyth other. In the tyme of the reygne of thys Malgo / reygned in the lordshyp or kyngdome of Kent Ethelbertus / the whych as wytnessyth Polycronycō, assembled an hoste of hys knyghtes, and gaue batayle vnto Ceawlmus sonne of Kenricus and then kyng of westsaxon / the cause whereof ys not expressyd. But thys batayle was ye fyrste batayle that was foughten by twene the Saxons, after that they opteyned lande and dwellynge with in Brytayne / whyche was foughten in a place called wylbaldowne. And in the fyghte was slayne .ii. dukes of Ethelbertus / and hym selfe with his people chasyd. Also yt'ys wytnessyd of the sayde Polycronica, that ye yere folowynge Cutwolfus the brother of Ceawim{us} before named / faughte strongely a∣gayn the Brytons at Bedforde / and berafte them .iiii. cytyes or townes named Liganbroght, Egelsborgth, Besyngton, and Euysham. Then to retorne agayn to Malgo kynge of the Brytons / the authour of the Floure of historyes sayth, that not wythstandynge the many ver∣tues, the whyche god had endowed hym wyth / he lastely forgate god for sakynge all vertue, and gaue hym to sondry vices and synnes, wherof the odible synnes of Sodomy was one / wherfore fell to hym great {per}secucyō of hys enemyes the Saxons, as be∣fore sōdele is shewyd & more ensueth It was not longe after the forena∣med batayle done at Bedforde / but that the foresayd Cutwolfus dyed. But yet hys sayd brother Ceawlm{us} couetouse of worshyppe, mayntey∣ned hys warre agayne the Brytons / so that after he made a newe voyage agayne them, and made of them an other scomfyture / & toke from them ye famous cytyes of Bathe, of Glou¦ceter, and wrceter / whyche shulde be by ye meanynge of Ranulfe about the yere of the reygne of thys Mal∣go .xxix. Of all thys spekyth nothynge the cronycle of England / but he maketh hys processe of a kynge named Cor∣tyf. By the whyche as yt shulde seme by the rehersall folowynge that he makyth of Gurmunde / that Careti∣cus ruled the Brytōs nexte after the deth of thys Malgo / as when the tyme cometh more playnly yt shall appere. Then it foloweth aboute the .xxxiii. yere of thys Malgo / Ce∣awlmus before named gadered hys Saxons, and foughte wyth the Bry¦tons at a place called Fechanlege. where after longe fyght Ceawlmus chasyd the Brytons, & wan of them vyctory. But hys brother called Cu∣tha, was slayne in ye fyght / for whom he made greate sorowe. Thus in his latter dayes Malgo beynge oppres∣syd & pursued of hys enemyes lastly dyed / when he hadde reygned after moste cōcorde of storyes .xxxv. yeres. Francia. THE .CXII. CHAPITER. CHilperic{us} the .iii. son of Lotharius or Clotharius be¦fore named / begā hys reygne ouer ye parte of Fraūce called Soysons, in the yere of oure lorde god .v. hundred .lxiiii / and the xiiii. yere of Malgo then kynge of Brytayne. Thys not beyng content wyth suche as hys fader had hym be set / so soone as the obsequy and en∣terremēt of his fader was fynysshed, he spedde hym vnto Parys and pos∣sessyd hym of hys faders treasoure. wherof his .iii. bretherne beyng war∣ned
/ purchasyd to thē such frēdshyp of the nobles of Fraunce, that they vnwetynge theyr sayd broder hadde entre into Paris / and lykely to haue takyn hym there in, yf he had not the soner escaped. For thys incōuenyence grete discē∣cyon was lykely to haue growen by twene these .iiii. bretherne / hadde not ben the mediacyon of frendes vpon bothe partyes. The whyche by good & polityke wayes, at length pacyfied all varyaūces amonge them / & con∣cluded for a fynall pease, yt eyther of the sayd bretherne shuld hold hym cō¦tent with such porcyō as was before assygned to thē by theyr fader. That is to saye to the eldest brother named Aribert{us} or after some wryters Che∣rebris, shulde falle the countrey that is lyenge about Paris called mydle Fraunce / to Guntranus shulde falle the prouynce of Orleaunce / and to thys Chylpericus / the prouynce of Soysons / and to Sygebertus the yongest brother, shulde belonge the countrey of Mees or of Austracy. whych lordshyp begynneth at Cham¦peyne as affyrmeth the Frenche cro∣nicle, and stretchyth to the lordshyp or prouynce of Lorayne vppon one parte, & to Almayne vppō that other part. After which cōcorde & agremēt thus fynysshed / eyther of ye sayd bre∣thern depted vnto his {pro}per lordshyp If I shulde here discribe the ma∣ners & condycyons of these .iiii. pryn¦ces / or to expresse ye vnlauful lechery of the eldest brother Aribertus, in re∣fusyng hys laufull wyfe Ingebryda or Ingeberta / or of the rauyshement of wyues & virgyns by hym done / or yet the vnstablenesse of lyuyng that was also in ye seconde brother Gun∣tran{us}, with vertues and vyces of the other: I shuld therof make a longe worke. wherfore to brynge this story to some cōuenyēce, I thus begynne. Trouth it is that thys Chilperi∣cus or after some Hilpericus / toke to wyfe the doughter of the kynge of Spayne called Athanahild{us}, whose name was Golsanda. The whyche had to hyr handmayden a mayde cal¦led Fredegunda, the whyche was of passyng beaute, and shappe of body. But to hyr was ioyned subtyll wyt and euyll condycyons / contrary to hyr lady and maysters, which was symple and of vertuous condycyōs. To the yongest brother named Si¦gebert was coupled in mariage the syster of the sayde Golsanda named Brunechildis, or after ye Frensh cro¦nicle Brunecheuste / a woman of per∣uers & wycked cōdicyō as after shall appere. Then it foloweth, Chilpe∣rich within shorte tyme that he was thus maryed vnto Golsanda, caste vnlaufull loue vnto hyr woman Fre¦degūda. By reason wherof fell suche vnkyndnesse bytwene them, ye lastly she was foūden in her chamber dede and strangelyd wyth a corde / whych was done by the hande of hyr hous∣bande, as testyfyeth ye frenche boke. Then secondly he maryed a nother wyfe named Audouera a woman of great byrth: how be it myne authour nor yet ye frenche cronycle declaryth not her progeny / with ye which he cō∣tynued & kepte hyr after hyr honour. But yet he withdrew not hys vnlau¦full loue frō ye forenamed Fredegūd. In thys passetyme / cause of warre was moued bytwene Sigebert the yonger brother, and men of the coun¦trey of Sweuy / for the whyche the sayde Sigebert requyred ayde of hys brother Chilperich. At whose request he in all haste assembled hys people and spedde hym towarde hys brother / leuynge hys wyfe greate wyth chylde, in the kepynge of the soresayde Fredegunde. Of the why∣che wyfe as testyfyeth the Frenche
booke, he hadde before receyued .iii. sonnes named Theodobertus, Me∣ronens, and Clodoueus. It was not longe after that Chil∣periche, as before is sayd, in ayde of his brother was departed / but that his wyfe was delyueryd of a dough∣ter. And when thys chylde shulde be confermed of the byshoppe / this Fre∣degunde entendynge to make a de∣uorce betwene Chilperich & his wife, by her subtyle and false coniectoure counsayled the quene that she shulde for the more honoure conferme her own childe. And the quene trustyng her counsayle / supposynge her coun¦sayle hadde ben for the beste, confer∣med her owne chylde. THE .CXIII. CHAPITER. IN this whyle the kynge wyth his brother occupyed in warre agayne y• Suytzers or men of Swe¦uy / bare them so knyghtly, that they subdued theyr enymyes, and after re¦tourned into theyr countres. wherof when Fredegunde was ware, she in secrete maner mette with the kynge / & shewyd to hym all the demeanure of his wyfe, but nothyng of her own crafty workyng, wherewyth kyng was greuously dyscontente in shew∣ynge of his outwarde contenaunce / and sayd, yf that were true, she shuld from hym be deuorcyd / and that she shulde be quene in her stede. After this the kynge commynge to his paleys / the quene to the entēt to be the more accepted in his presence, not knowynge of the malicyous wor¦kynge of Fredegūde, brought in her armes the yonge baby, to the whych she was moder bothe naturally and spirytually / and welcommed ye kyng her lorde in ryght humble maner, sa∣lutynge hym wyth wordes of all cō∣forte. But the kyng beynge warned of her symple demeanure / & as some authours wryte, glad that he hadde occasyon to fynde mater to her of dis¦pleasure / blamed her in greuous ma¦ner, and commaunded her out of his presence for that tyme / & after by coū¦sayle of spyrytuall men, causyd her from hym to be deuorcyd / & her wyth her yonge doughter to be put into an house of relygyon, to the whyche he gaue possessyons for the fyndyng of her and of her yonge doughter na∣med Childeynda. And when Chilperic{us} hadde thus fynyshed this foresayde besynesse / he shortely after toke to wyfe the forna¦med Fredegūd, not without grudge of some of hys lordes and other. It was not longe after this ma∣ryage, that stryfe and discencyon fell betwene this Chilpericus and Sige¦bert hys brother / the whyche grewe for certayne lande that Chilpericus claymed to haue of hys brother a∣fore sayde. Then Chilpericus assem∣bled hys knyghtes and made warre vppon the lande of hys brother Si∣gebert / the whyche then was besyed in lyke warre agayne a people called Hunes / by reason wherof Chilperic{us} hadde the more fordell, and wan by strength the cytye of Reynys. But yt was not longe after or Si¦gebert was warned of his brothers vnkyndnesse. wherfore he after hys enymyes were by hym somdele sub∣dued / went wyth hys armye into the countre of Soysons belongynge to his brother Chilperic{us} / and warred in lykewyse in that lande as hys bro¦ther dyd in his / and at length toke ye cytye of Soysons, and therin the el∣dest son of Chilperic{us} named Theo∣dobert, and helde hym as his pryso∣ner. Then Chilpericus herynge of the scomfyture of his people and ta∣kynge of his sonne, was agayne hys brother more feruently amoued / and
caste in his mynde all wayes & mea∣nes howe he myghte reuenge hym vppon hys brother. But yt was in vayne. For his brother at that tyme had such auauntage of hym / that he well apperceyuyd, that he had no bet¦ter meane then a treaty of peace, by meane wherof he shortly after obtey¦ned his sonne out of daunger, wyth other thynges concernynge his pro∣fyte / assurynge to hys sayde brother by solemne othe, that after that daye he shuld neuer were armes, nor yet warrey his brother. This cōcorde and vnite in due ma¦ner fynyshed, & suffycyently by both counsayles stablysshed / yet Chilperi¦cus beynge alwayes mynded to be re¦uengyd vpon his brother Sigebert / sent his yongest sonne named Clodo¦ueus, and caused hym to warre vpon a cytye called Burdeaux, in the pro∣nice of Neustria / now called Normā dye. But by the manhode of a cap¦tayne of Sigebert named Singul∣phus, the sayd Clodoueus was ouer comen and compelled to voyde the countre, and so fledde to Paris. For thys happe Chilpericus was fyryd with all malyce / and in all hast commaunded hys forenamed sonne Theodobert wyth a great armye to inuade the sayd coūtrey of Neustria, or Normandye. The whyche ac∣cordynge to hys fathers commaun∣dement spedde him thyder / and there by hys extorte myghte and power, toke many cytyes and stronge hol∣des / not sparynge chyrches, howses of relygyon, as nunnes and other / and robbed and spoyled the countre in moste cruell wyse. Lastly this persecucion thus done, a cheuetayne or duke named Gun∣doaldus of the erldome of Poitowe / assembled a great power, and wyth∣stode Theodobert / and fynally slew hym in playne batayll, and a great parte of hys people. wherof herynge Chilpericus gatheryd a great hoste, and yode into the countrey of Cham¦payne / wastynge and destroyenge the countrey wyth fyre and iron to the vttermoste of hys power, and at length toke the cytye of Reynes, and spoylyd yt wythout mercy. THE .CXIIII. CHAPITER. SIgebertus aduer¦tysynge / and cas∣tynge in hys myn¦de the innaturall dysposycyō of his brother / percey∣uyng well that he entendyd hys vt∣ter destruccyon: {pro}uyded in his beste maner for to wythstande his malyce. And for to brynge his continued ma¦lyce to a fynall ende / he gatheryd to hym a puysant power / and after sped hym towarde his sayd brother. wher¦of Chilpericus beynge aduertysed / by hys couert meanes sought ways of entreaty and peace, in suche wyse that or the hostes mette, a peace was concluded. Then these two bretherne thus ac¦cordyd / condescendyd in shorte tyme after to make warre vppon theyr bro¦ther Gunthranus then lorde of Or∣leaunce / the whyche sygnory at that daye belonged to the countrey or pro¦uynce of Burgoyne. The cause of this warre is not expressyd / except yt they enuyed theyr brother to haue so great lordshyp. But by medyatours on both partes / after great aray pur¦ueyed on all sydes, a concorde and peace was concludyd in the temple of saynt Lowpe at ye cytye of Trois in Uyncent. when this sayd peace was fynyshed / the sayd .iii. brethern in syght depar∣tyd as frendes eyther of theym from
other. But as peace somtyme conten¦tyth not saudyours / & specially such as delyte them in pyllage and robbe¦ry: ryght so amonge the knightes of Sigebert was spronge a great ru∣moure / sayeng that they were not cō¦tente and rewardyd for theyr great laboure and trauayle accordynge to theyr desert / and specyally for ye fyrst iourney of these .ii hadde agayne his brother Chilpericus / thynkynge the peace wyth hym made was nothyng honorable, consyderyng ye great dou¦blenesse and vntrouth that in hym was prouyd. For the whyche they ex¦cytyd Sygebert in all that in theym was / to breke those boūdes of peace, and to make newe warre vpon hym. And in lyke maner some euyll dyspo¦syd persons were more agreable to warre then to peace, vppon the party of Chilpericus, and murmured in ly¦kewise. And for they thought to haue ben better rewarded of Sygebert, then they were of theyr own maister, they therfore lefte hym and yode to ye hoste of Sygeberte. By whose euey¦tynge & report, Sygebert was more kyndelyd to sette vppon his brother. Chilpericus hauynge notycyon of hys brothers purpose / wyth also the murmoure and departynge of hys knyghtes, and hauynge in the other somme mystruste: he anon wyth his wyfe and chyldren and chefe of hys treasoure, went vnto ye cyty of Tour¦ney / entēdyng to kepe that for theyr and hys sauegarde. But when Sy∣gebert knew therof, he was nothyng in the pursuynge of hym foūde slow / but foloweth streyght after, and clo¦syd hym wythin the sayde cytye with a stronge syege / where Chilpericus was in a maner dyspayred of ye wel∣fare of hym & hys Fredegunde. But she that was replenyshed of all ini∣quyte, called to her two wycked per∣sones / and promysed vnto theym great gyftes, yf they wolde by ve∣nym or otherwyse slee her brother Sigebert. The whyche two felowes dysceyued wyth the fayre speche and great gyftes of the sayde Fredegun∣da, toke vppon theym that vnlefull charge / and by theyr subtell & false imagynacyon, brought theyr cur∣sed purpose to an ende / but to theyr owne confusyon. For after they had wounded the kynge Sygebert to deth, and wolde then haue escapyd / the kynges knyghtes espyeng theyr treason, fell soone vppon them, and all to hewed them. And when ye deth of the kynge was knowen / a great noyse and crye was areryd in the hoste. By meane wherof the kynges deth was blowen in to the cytye, and after to the ceres of Chilpericus / wherof he was not a lytell ameruay∣led, nor wolde to yt geue ferme cre∣dence, tyll he was enfourmed of hys wyfe Fredegunde of all hyr subtyle workynge. It was not longe after or the kny∣ghtes or some of the captaynes of the hoste of Sygebert presentyd thē vnto Chylpericus, besegynge hym of hys grace and pardon / the whych he gladly accepted. And when he hadde sette hys charges in order / he then commaunded prouysyon to be made for the beryenge of hys sayd brother wythin the monasterye of saynte Medarde of Soysons. And when all that besynesse after a kyngely maner where fynyshed and endyd / he then exylyd Brunechyel∣dys and Childebert, the wyfe and sonne of hys brother Sygebert, vn∣to the cytye of Roane / takynge from theym great treasour that they were possessyd of. But shortly after the sonne of Sygebert by helpe of Gun debolde or Gundealde duke of Poy towe here before named / was dely∣ueryd from the daunger of the sayde
Chilperycus, and sent into his owne lordeshyppe of Austracye, whych his father Sygebert was lorde of. In thys passetyme he hadde sent hys sonne Meroneus into a coūtrey called Buturynges, to appeace cer∣tayne rebellyons there areysyd. But when he hard of the deth of his vncle Sygebert / and of the be∣ynge of hys wyfe Bruncchyelde at the cytye of Roane / he sette a parte all the charge of his father, and sped hym streyght thyder, kepynge com∣panye wyth her. In whome he toke suche consolacoin and pleasure / that lastely he maryed her, and kepte her as hys wyfe. And when hys father was therof warned / he feryd leste by the counsayle of hys sayde wyfe, he wolde arryse agayne hym / wherfore he in all haste assembled hys people, and spedde hym towarde Roane. when tydynges came to Mero∣neus of the conunynge of hys father wyth so great araye / and he as then vupurucyed of strength of knightes to resyste hys father / for hys moste suertye fled wyth hys vnlefull wyfe to the temple or chyrche of saynte Martyne, takynge the pryuylege therof for theyr defence. And when Chilpericus hadde temptyd by ma∣ny sondry meanes to haue them out of the sayde pryuylege, and myghte not wythout brekynge of the same: he to brynge aboute hys cautelouse purpose, made to theym assuryd pro¦myse, that yf they wyllfully wolde re¦nounce the sayde place, and putte theym in hys grace / he wolde vtter∣lye pardon theyr trespace, and suffer theym from that tyme for to conty∣nue theyr lyfe to gether as man and wyfe. Uppon whyche promyse the sayd Merone{is} wyth his wyfe renoū¦ced the sayde pryuylege, and putte theym hole in the kynges mercy / the whyche them receyuyd wyth all con¦tenaunce of loue and fauoure, and theym festyd and cherysshyd louyng¦ly, by the space of two dayes onely. But the thyrde daye the feaste was fynyshed / for then he sent his sonne vnto Parys vnder sure guydes / and there causyd hym to be professyd in a house of relygyon. But by the mea¦nes of hys vncle Gunthranus he was after taken thens / and so resto∣ryd to hys former knyghthode. For the whych his father hym newly pursued and cōstrayned hym to take for hys sauegarde ye chyrche of saynt Martyne in Turon. And when he was warned that his fader perforce wold take hym thens / he then fledde vnto a cytye of Cham¦payne accompanyed wyth .vi. ser∣uauntes onely / where he was in so great fere to be taken and in suche despayre to obteyne grace of hys fa∣ther, that he causyd one of the sayde vi. persones to slee hym wyth hys sworde / & the foresayd Bruncchyel∣dis hys wyfe put in sure kepynge. THE .CXV. CHAPITER. CHilperic{us} then be∣ynge asserteyned of the doth of hys sonne Meroneus, & the sure kepyng of Brunechieldis, he thoughte hym¦selfe somdele assu∣ryd / for ye mystruste yt he had in them many tymes inquieted hym. But yet he was not ī quiete or reste. For short¦ly after ye peple of Turon rebellyd a∣gayne him. Agayn whom he sent his son Clodoueus / & a noble man of his courte named Desideri{us}, ye which he sent as a gyde & a counsayloure of his sayd son. And vpon the party of his enymyes was a captayne of the kynge Gunthranus / for so mych as the said Gunthranus claymed parte
of those landes about Turon. This captayne named Momelues heryng of the cōmynge of the foresayd hoste, wyth a chosen cōpany made taward them / and gaue vnto Clodoueus a great sharpe fyght / and not without great losse of his men wanne of hym the felde, and compellyd hym to for∣sake that countre. Thus Chilperyche was wrapped in warre and troubles of the worlde, sometyme wyth ryght, & some whyle wyth wronge / so that he some tyme wanne worshyppe and other whyle he loste. wherof to tell all the cyrcum¦staunce I thynke yt shulde be tedy∣ouse bothe to the reders / and also to ye herers. wherfore I passe ouer, in a∣brydgynge and shortynge somedele of this storye. Then foloweth within ye storye / af¦ter Chylpericus had by intycemēt of Fredegunde / wrongfully tormentyd the archebyshoppe of Roan named Breteste, & hym after the sufferaunce of many vylanyes exyled (for the whych and other god sent vnto hym some correccyom, in takynge awaye by sodeyne deth the chyldern that he had by Fredegunde) he then began to knowe god, and toke great repen¦taunce / in promysynge to god amen¦dement of his lyfe. And to thentent that he might haue the more prayers of the comyn people to stand in state of grace: he fyrst releasyd a greuous trybute or imposicyon that he hadde lately sette vpon all vynes thorough his regyon. And that done he reedy∣fyed olde chyrches and some he made newe, and endowed them with great possessyons. And ouer thys he rele∣uyd greatly ye poore people, by enlar¦gynge of his lyberall almes / and be∣came very humble and meke, where before tyme he was ryght sterne and cruell. But lyke as oftē it happeneth that hote loue is soone colde / so thys sodayne deuocyon was soone aswa∣ged. For lyke as hys troubles began to aswage, and his prosperyte to en∣crease: ryght so hys olde cōdycyons beganne in hym to reuyue and quyc¦ken / so that at length he retourned to hys olde accustomed vyces. In this tyme a pleople called Lon¦gobardes, and now Italyans / war∣red sore vppon the landes of the em¦pyre. wherfore Mauricius then be∣ynge emperour of Constantyne the noble / for so mych as he tought that the frenche kynges myght was lesse coste and payne to subdue them, then he myght beyng so farre from them / he therfore sent to hym a great sūme of golde / wyth letters of recommen∣dacyon, exortyng hym in the defence of the chyrche of Rome, to assemble hys people and to withstande ye sayd Longobardes / and not to sease ther of tyll he hadde expellyd theym from the landes of the empyre. whyche somme of golde he goodly receyuyd / promysynge to the bryn∣gers therof, that he wyth all dyly∣gence shulde execute the vttermoste of his power to accomplyshe the re∣queste of the emperoure. And accor∣dynge to a parcell of his sayde pro∣myse / he assembled a great people, and made towarde the sayde Longo¦bardes. Of whom the sayde Longo∣bardes ferynge ye great myght, made meane of entreaty / offrynge to hym great summes of money. By reason wherof he lefte theym in reste, and so retourned into Fraunce. when Mau¦ricius had vnderstandyng yt the fore¦sayde enymyes remayned styll in the foresayde landes, and contynued in theyr malice: he sent agayne to Chil∣pericus / requyryng hym other to per¦forme his promyse or ellys to restore hys money, whych he had takē for ye perfourmaunce of the same. But all was in vayne / for he wolde neyther
execute that one nor that other. But at lēgth as affermeth myne authour, he was by goddes ordynaunce com∣pelled for to restore the sayde money or a great parte therof, by meane of his suster wyth her chylde that was as a prysoner to the sayde emperour, whyche suster was before tyme ma∣ryed vnto the kynge of Spayne. THE .CXVI. CHAPITER. CHilpericus thus encreasynge in vyce and dyshonoure, laste¦ly repugned agayne god / so that he fell into that detestable heresye of the Arianes / and commaūded certayne artycles of the same touchyng the de¦uysyon of the trynyte to be prechyd thorough hys regyon. But the holy byshoppe of Towres withstode that precepte, and blamed hym greuous∣ly for that dede / all be yt the sayd bys¦shop named Gregory wyth great as¦systence of the other byshoppes of Fraunce, hadde great laboure to re∣moue hym from the sayde opynyon. This with many other crymes pas¦sed by Chilpericus / Fredegunde, whyche euer encreasyd in peruerse & malycyouse purpose, soughte many vnlefull meanes howe she myghte brynge to confusyon the thyrd sonne of her husbonde / knowynge well ye whyle he leuyd, her chyldern shulde neuer enheryte the crowne of Fraun¦ce. This purpose to brynge about many and dyuerse wayes she attem∣ted, whyche were longe to reherse. But fynally she causyd hym wrong∣fully to be accusyd, & by meane ther∣of to be caste in pryson. where he so beynge, she hyred a felon to sle hym / and after shewyd to her husbande yt the sayde Clodoueus hadde stayne hym selfe. In profe wherof she hadde appoynted the foresayde murderer to leue a sworde styckyng in hym, as thoughe he hadde wylfully slayne hym selfe vppon the same sworde. whyche when the kynge sawe / he de∣med hym gylty of such offense as be¦fore was putte vppon hym. ye haue harde before of the sonne of Sygeberte named Childebert, that was delyuered from the handes of Chilpericus his vncle by the mea¦nes of Gundoald duke or erle of Poi¦towe / the whyche in this tyme was growen to mannes stature and ruled at this daye his enherytaunce of Au¦stracye, not wythout great stryfe had betwene hym and hys sayde vncle, whych were to long to wryte ye cyrcū¦staunce therof. wherof at this daye somdele was vndyscussyd / all be yt they at thys daye vsyd eyther other as frendes. About this tyme the other vncle of Chyldebert called Gūthran{us} / sought occasyon agayne hym, for cause of a byshop named Theodor{us}, & byshop of Marsill or Marsyle / ye which was put from his see by Gūthranus, and receyuyd of Chyldebert, and by hym agayne restoryd to the sayde see of Marsyle. For the whych Gunthrane was sore amoued / and entendyd to make warre vpon hym. But by me∣dyatours it was somdeale appeasyd and sette in quyete / vppon certeyne condycyons to be obserued and also perfourmed vpon the party of Gun¦thranus / the whyche after were not vppon his syde kept nor performed. wherfore after request to hym made for reformacyon of all such poyntes / and answere agayne receyuyd of no reformacyon: Chyldebert to haue hys partye the strenger / and also for that that he well knewe, that hys vn¦cle Chilpericus bare towarde the sayde Gunthranus not very fra∣ternall loue / he therfore sente vnto hym a noble man of hys courte na∣med Gyllon, requiryng hym of ayde
agayne hys vncle / the whych by ma¦ny-seasons had as well broken pro∣myse agayne hym, as nowe he hadde agayne Childebert. Of this Chilpe riche beynge ryght fayne, assentyd to the desyre of Gyllon / and after in all haste preparyd theyr hostes / and by two sondry companyes inuadyd the countres of Orleaunce, wherof Gun¦thranus was kynge or ruler. But ye inhabytauntes of that prouynce de∣fendyd theym in so stronge maner / yt theyr enymyes hadde of theym lytell auauntage. In whyche meane sea∣son Gunthran{us} assembled a myghty hoste, and spedde hym towarde his enymyes, at a place called Medio∣lan̄, he supprysed a parte of hys sayd enymies / and after drewe nere to the great nomber of bothe hostes, where was made preparacyon on bothe sy∣des to haue foughten. But as before tyme ye haue often harde, that by dis¦crete & wyse men the fyght was put by, and meanes of accorde was foun¦den: so nowe at this tyme by labour of good and wise prelates and other / these kynnesmen were sette in vnyte, and departed without great shedyng of crysten bloode. In this passetyme / deth whych spa¦ryth no creature, berafte Chilperic{us} a sonne borne of Fredegūde and na∣med Theodorus / for the whyche the kynge and also the quene toke great heuynesse. But as she yt was prōpte & redy to all euyll / cast in her mynde that thys chylde was slayne by poy∣son, or by some other purposed ma∣lyce. For the whyche lastely was ac∣cusyd a baylyfe or lefe offycer called Monuole, with diuers wytches and sorseresses, that shuld imagyne this chyldes deth. The whych she payned and tormētyd in such wyse / that last¦ly the sayde wytches confessed, that they hadde destroyed the chylde, and not wythoute consente of the sayde Monuole. wherfore she after caused the sayde sorceresses to dye by cruell deth, as by fyre and otherwyse / and the sayde baylyffe to be so tourmen∣tyd that he dyed soone after. The frenche cronycle sayth, that by the meane of the takynge a way of the lyfe of the kynges chylde / a chyld of the sayde Monuole was restoryd to helth, whych before was in great ieoperdye / whyche is for folys to be∣leue. Thys sorow and heuenesse of Chilpericus and Fredegunde hys wyfe / was somdele aswaged by the byrthe of a son shortly after borne of ye sayd Fredegunde / whych the kyng lette call Lotharius, or Clotharius. For ioye wherof the kyng lette open the prysones / and suffred the pryso∣ners to goo at theyr lyberte / and spe∣cyally suche as concerned causes tou¦chynge hym selfe for dette or other∣wyse, with other thynges cōcernyng hys honoure. But lyke as dame Fortune is ac∣customed to medle her ioyes of thys world wyth some bytternesse: so dyd she now with Chilperic{us}. For where he was nowe in great tranquillyte and reste / and thought to haue ladde the resydue of his lyfe in pleasure: so deynly word was brought vnto hym that hys brother Gunthranus, and hys neuewe Childebert / was allyed and fermely accorded to make warre vppon hym / for the whych they had assemblyd a great army. wherfore he in all haste commaunded all his trea¦sour and chyfe iewellys to be had to the cytye of Cambria / where he wyth his wyfe and frendes entended to cō¦tynue the resydue of his lyfe. And yt done spedde hym thyder in all haste / and fortyfyed the sayde cytye in such wyse, that he feryd lytle or nothynge hys enymyes / where he so kepte hym wythin the sayde cytye a certayne of tyme. And whē he sawe nor hard not
of the commynge of his sayd broder nor neuewe / he then walkyd more at large / and sportyd hym in haukynge and chase of the wylde bestes, as wol¦ues and other / whych at those dayes was greatly vsyd of the kynges of Fraunce, and yet is contynued. Uppon a day as he was purposyd towarde this dysporte, and all thyng redy preparyd for the same / so that the quene thought veryly he had be gone oute of the paleys / for what happe I can not tell, the quene yode into her chāber, and there rested her vppon her bedde. where she so lyeng the kynge passyd by / & wyth a lytle wande, whych he bare in his hande, in maner of game strake the quene with yt vppon the backe. The quene supposynge the kynge had ben gone to the felde, and not lokyng vp sayd, Laundrye why dareste thou thus stryke me. This Laundrye was a great man in the kynges courte / and hadde ben peramoure to the quene longe tyme. But the kynge herynge these wordes, made semblaunt as he hadde not herde them, and so passyd on hys waye. THE .CXVII. CHAPITER. FRedegunda apperceyuynge & after seynge yt was the kyng, to whome she hadde thus sayde / sore was abasshed, and in great fere and agony. And after she had by a longe season coniected in her mynde what remedy she myght fynde for this mis¦happe: she lastely dyuely shely deter∣myned to sle her sayd husbande and lorde. And this to brynge about she sent in all haste for the sayde Laun∣drye, and shewed to hym in order all the cyrcumstaunce of the foresayde mater. wherafter he was strykē with suche a fere / that his wytte and coun¦sayle faylyd hym to deuyse in such a case any remedy. wherfore the quene as she that was fully determyned to execute her detestable & cursyd pur∣pose / sayde to hym boldely: Laūdry thou seest well yt this case is brought to so strayte a poynt, that other thou muste thynke to destroy my lord and husbande, or ellys thou and I muste both be shamefully confounded. Of whyche thou well knowest our owne is moste to be regarded / therfore dys∣pose the to do after my counsayll. Thou knowest well that the kynge is accustomed to come late from hys dysporte. wherfore prouyde to the a certayne, that thou well trustyst / and in the euenynge when he retourneth aspye thy tyme and fall vppon hym sodeynly, and so rydde hym. And af¦ter make an out crye, & sende to serch about as thou woldest take the homi¦cydes / & cause some of thyne own cō¦panye to flee frō the, as though thou shuldest thē pursue. Laundry heryng this cursyd coūsayll, alowed it well & therunto assentyd / and incontynent¦ly went aboute the perfourmaunce of the same. And when he hadde pur¦ueyde his accessaryes / he towarde nyght assemblyd thē, gyuynge to thē informacyon how they in yt mischyef shuld behaue them in that thyng, ta¦kynge of them assuryd othes, for ke¦pyng of his coūsayle. The kyng not mysdemynge any thynge of thys con¦spyred treason / toke his delectacyon and pleasoure in folowynge of hys game, so that he loste myche of hys company / and towarde nyght as he before tyme was accustomed, wyth fewe accōpanyed drewe homewarde. wherof Laundry beyng warned / met the kynge salutynge hym and sayng that he was comen wyth hys compa¦ny to cōdute hym home, for so mych as he douted how he was garnyshed of his meyneyall seruaūtes or other. What shuld I lenger make delaye
or farther reharsall in thys matyer, or to tell the cyrcumstaunce of thys purposyd treason. But fynally when the kynge was nere hys paleys / or as reherseth the Frenche cronycle wythin the courte of hys paleys / as he lyght from hys horse he was so∣deynly wounded to the herte, that he streyght fell to the erth dede. After whyche murder thus com∣mytted: a greate crye was areryd, the kynge ys slayne / so yt thys Laun¦drye made in great haste to be called certeyne persons to attende vppon ye corps, whyle he wyth other pursued suche as were dempte gylty of thys offence. But lastly he retourned, and sayd that thys dede was done by the knyghtes of Chyldebert / the whych by the derkenes of the nyght were escapyd. To shewe here the vayne and dis∣symuled sorowe yt Fredegund made for the kynge, it were but lettyng of tyme. For euery wyse man knoweth well, that all suche as ben of that dis¦posycyon, can fayne ryghte well in suche semblable casys. But to my purpose / when the kynge was thus slayne, and at that tyme nother the quene nor yet Laundrye suspectyd / prouysyon was made for enterryng of ye corps. The whyche was shortly after shypped at the next ryuer / and so conuayed vnto saynt Germayns de Pree before spoken of / and there wyth greate solēpnyty buryed, when he hadde regned, as before is sayde xxiiii. yeres / leuynge after hym a son before mynded called Clotharius or Lotharius. Thus as affermyth myn authour mayster Robert Gagwyne endyd Chylperych myserably his lyfe / whi∣che in pryde and mysery before tyme it cōtynued. And where in his lyfe he cherysshed no frende / at hys ende he fande few or no frendes. Thys gaue the patrymony of ye chyrche to lewde & symple clerkys, and was an enmye to all holy relygyous places / and fa¦uored more suche as had lately bene conuerted to the fayth, than he dyd them that had cōtynued by holy lyfe a longe season therin / & gaue vnto such persons the rule of Crystes chyr¦che. Amonge the whyche, one there was of perfyght lyuyng and byshop of Parys / that garnysshed hys tōbe with this cpytaphy as after in meter foloweth. Ecclesiae specusum, patriae vigor, ara reorum, Et pater & medicus, pastor, amor{que} gregit, Gernianus Virtuti, fide corde ore beatus: Carne tenet tumulum, mentis honore posunt. Vir cui dura nihil nocuerunt fata sepulchri. Viuit enim, nam mors quam tulit ipsa timet. Creuit ad hue pocius, iustus post funera: nam qu Fictile vas fucrat, gemma superba micat. Huius opē ac meritū mutis data verba loquūtur. Redditus & caecis, praedicatore dies Nunc vir apostolicus, rapiens de carne tropheum. Iure triumphale confidet arce throni. The whych verses in our mother tunge, maye thus be expounded in meters as foloweth. Myrrour to the chyrche, and of the countrey the strength. Compassyon of gylty, to them shewynge mercy, A fader and a leche, an herde and louer at length Of hys people / cosyn to vertue and of allye In fayth and in herte, and eke in mouth holy, Of whom the flesshe now holdyth thys sepulture. But the spyryte is in heuen euer to endure.
To thys nothynge noyed, nor faute of sepulture. He lyueth southly / for deth whyche he not drede / Hath hym hense tane. But yet he hoped sure / Thys ryghtwyse man, though somtyme he were ladde. As a bryttell vessell, whych myth the erth was cladde And somewhyle felle, yet ofte he rose anone / Wherfore he now shyneth as doth an Orient stone. By helpe and meryte now hath the dumbe hys speche Of thys blessyd man, and to the blynde hys syghte Restoryd of god / as thys daye doth vs teche. And he of the flesshe hath gotten now the fyght And vpperhande wyth a tryumphant myght By vertue wherof he lyke a conquerour. Of the hygh heuyn, nowe fytteth in the tower. Thus maye ye well apperceyue and knowe / that as erthly men fa∣uoure, so woll they wryte / as nowe shewyth by thys superscrypcyō. But to god all thyng is manyfestyd and knowen / and nothynge to hym hyd, whatsoeuer erthly man wryteth / or demyth / to whom all the premysses I remytte. Anglia. THE .CXVIII. CHAPITER. CAreticus or Lare¦ticus after yt wry∣tynge of Guydo, of whom nother yt progeny nor yet other addicyon of honour is of wry∣ters of hym remē∣bred / began to rule the Brytons, the yere of our lord .v. hundred .iiii. score and .vi. as the sayde authour recor∣dyth / and ye .xxii. yere of Chylperyche than kynge of Fraunce / and also the ix. yere of Ceawlmus then kynge of westsaxons. Thys as wytnessyth all wryters was a louer of cyuyle ba∣tayle & was worst of all men / so yt he was odible to god and his subiectes, in suche wyse that they excyted the Saxons to warre vpon hym, as te∣styfyeth Guydo / & chasyd hym from cytye to cytye, & towne to towne, tyll they had berafte hym the most parte of suche lande as hys predeces soure Malgo had holdē before hym. But Polycronycō, Gaufryde and other, adde more there vnto / & sayen yt for as mych as the Saxons knew of the discensyon betwene Careticus and hys Brytons / they in all haste sent into Irelande for the kynge cal¦led Gurmundus Affrican{us} / ye which of some wryters are named two per∣sons, as Gurmūdus and Affrican{us}. But by the rehersall that Ranulfe monke of Chester maketh in ye .xxiii. chapyter of hys fyrste boke of Poly∣cronycō, it shulde seme, that he shuld be named Gurmundus / the whyche by hys meanynge shulde warre in Brytayne and Fraunce, whyle hys brother Turgecius regned as kyng in Irelande, as in the sayd chapyter is more at lengthe declared. whyche fayd Gurmundus with the strength of ye Saxons, warred so sore agayne the Brytōs / that lastly the sayd Care¦ticus was fayne to take the towne of Kaersegent now called Sichester / & therein besegyd hym wyth hys Bry∣tons by a certeyne of tyme / where by dayly skyrmysshes and assautes he
loste mych of hys people. when Careticus had a season as∣sayed and prouyd the strength of his enemyes / and sawe that they encrea∣syd, and hys knyghtes lassed & my∣nysshed: he sodenly lefte that towne / and with a certeyne of Brytons toke ouer Seuarne water, and so into wa¦lys then callyd Cābria. whych shuld be after moste accorde of wryters, ye iii. yere of ye reygne of this Caretic{us}. About thys tyme as meaneth An∣toninus / the great Gregory then be∣yuge a monke and after pope, sawe at Rome childyrn of Anglis or Sax¦ons to sell at Rome. And whē he had aryd of them what coūtrey they were of, and it was answered to hym that they were named Anglis / he sayde ye Alleluya shulde be songe in that coū¦tree, that so fayre chylderne were borne in Alleluya before in the .iiii. score and .viii. chapyter rehersyd / ys there takē after ye exposycyō of saynt Austayne, for ayde and helpe of god. But here it is ment for louynge and praysynge of god / as to hym ye laude and thankes shulde be gyuen vnto, that sendyth to men so fayre frewte. wherfore as after shalbe shewyd the sayd Gregory beynge Pope / sent yt holy man Austayne wyth other, for to preache to the sayde Anglis the fayth of Cryste. Then to retourne to Careticus, whom the Englysh cronycle nameth Cortife. Trouth it is, that after he wyth his Brytons were dryuen into Cambria or walis: yet he lefte not contynually to make reyses and as∣sautes vppon the Saxons nexte to hym adioynaunte. In thys tyme or soone after / ruled Ethelfridus the north Saxons. For as wytnesseth the foresayde authour Guydo / he began the reygne of Dei∣ra and Brenicia, in the yere of oure lorde .v.C.lxxx. & .xiii. This is Ethel∣fridus son of Ethelricus, ye pursued so sore the Brytons, & slewe so great a nomber of ye monkes of the towne of Bangor, as is before rehersyd in the .C. and .ix. chapyter of this worke The whyche dayly warred vpon the Brytons, & the Brytons vpon hym / so y• he destroyed or subuerted myche of Crystes fayth wyth the helpe of ye foresayd Gurmunde thorough Loe∣gria or myddle England / in so mych that the bysshoppes of London and yorke wyth other mynysters of the chyrche, wyth such goodes & relykes as they myght cary, fled into dyuerse countrees / so that theyr chyrchdores were shytte after them, or ellys occu¦pyed in worship of theyr fals goddes Thus the fayth that had endured in Brytayne from the tyme of Luci{us} fyrst crysten kynge in Brytayne tyll thys daye, nere vppon the season of iiii.C. yeres and odde / was well nere extyncte thorough all the lande. And when ye forenamed Gurmūde had fynysshed hys tyrannye wythin the land of Brytayne / he then sayled into Fraunce, where he was after slayne, as wytnessyth Polycronycō / all be it ye french cronycle speketh no¦thyng of any such man duryng thys persecucyon, as wytnessyth Guydo. The chyrche or monastery before buylded in Uerolamy nowe called saynte Albanes, was by the sayde myscreauntes beten downe / whyche there was buylded of the Brytōs in the honoure of ye holy prothomartyr saynt Albō, with diuerse many other the whyche are loste out of memory. Duryng also this trouble bytwene the Saxons & Brytōs / the lordshyp or kyngdome of Eest Saxon began to take place as after shalbe shewed. THE .CXIX. CHAPITER. IN thys tyme also after the ac∣corde of moste wryters, as wyt¦nessyth Polycronyca & other, Ethel∣bert{us}
reygned in Kent / & by knyght∣hode and greate myghte bare hym / and behaued hym so victoryously, that he enlarged hys kyngdome to the boundys of Humbyr. In which tyme Gregory, whyche for hys nota¦ble dedes was surnamed great / was made pope of Rome. The whych as before is touchyd in the precedynge chapyter / hauynge compassyon that the coūtre from whens so fayre chyl∣derne came as he before had seyne, shulde be inhabyte wyth Pagans or people of mysbyleue / sent into Bry∣tayne that holy man Austayne wyth other of hys bretherne, to preche to the Anglis the fayth of Cryste. But as wytnessyth Antoninus in the .iii. chapyter & .xii. tytle of hys foresayde worke, when Austayn was .iii. dayes iourney gone and passed / suche a so∣deyne fere entryd in hym and hys fe∣loushyppe, that they turned agayne. Then Gregory cōforted the sayd cō∣pany / and sent them wyth letters to the bysshop Arelatensis / wyllynge hym to helpe and ayde Austayne in all that in hym nedyd. The tenoure of whyche letters and other sent to Ethelbert kynge of Kent wyth theyr answeres / are wrytē with other que∣styons in the regester of Gregory, & in the bokes of Beda and other. Austayne thus comfortyd / sped his iourney, and landed in the Eest syde of Kent in the ile of Thauet wyth .xl. felowes / wherof some were interpre¦tours or such as cowde speke all lan¦gages. Nere vnto the place before named where holy Austayne landed stode at those dayes the manoyre or palayes of the sayd kyng Ethelbert / wherof at thys daye appere somme of the ruynous walles, & is called of the inhabytaunces of that ile Rych∣bourgh. It is apparent betwene the ile & the towne of Sandwych, vpon a myle & a halfe from the sayd towne Eestwarde from Caunterbury. Thē when Austayne was landed, he sent the sayde interpretours vnto Ethel∣berte / sayenge yt they were sent from Rome for the hele and saluacyon of the kynge & hys realme. The kynge before tyme had herde of the fayth of Cryst / for he hadde to wyfe as sayth Polycronycon a french woman that was cristened / and had receyued hyr vppon condycyon that he shuld suf∣fer hyr to lyue after hyr lawe. Then after a certeyne tyme ye kyng spoke with Austayne / but that was without ye house after the maner of hys lawe. Agayn his comyng he ar∣reryd a baner of ye crucifyx, & sange ye lateny, & preachyd to hym the worde of god. Then ye kyng sayd it is fayre that ye promyse. But for it is to me vncowth & new / I may not so soone assent to you. But for ye be comen so farre for my sake / ye shalbe fayre en∣treatyd, and haue all thynge yt is to you necessary / & we graunte to you leue to torne of our people whom ye maye. when they had receyued thys cōfort of the kynge / they went wyth processyō to the cytye of Dorobernia or Caūterbury, syngynge Alleluya / where they lad theyr lyues as holy faders dyd in the begynnynge of the chyrch / as in fastyng, prayeng, wat∣chyng, & preachynge of the worde of helth / & sange masses / and crystened such as they cōuertyd in ye Eest syde of the cytie in the old chyrch of saynt Martyne, vnto the tyme yt the kyng was cōuertyd. At length when the kyng had well consyderyd the cōuer¦sacyō & holy lyfe of Austayn and his felowes, he harde them more gladly / and lastly by theyr good exortacyōs and gostly loue, was by them cōuer∣tyd & crystened / in ye yere of our lorde after moste accorde of wryters .v.C. lxxx. & xvi / and the .xxxvi. yere of hys reygne, as affermeth Policronicon.
Then he gaue to Austayne a place for his bishoppes see at Cristes chyr∣che in Dorobernia / and buylded the abbey of saynte Peter and Paule in the eest syde of the sayde cytye / where after Austayne and all the kynges of Kent were buryed / and that place is nowe called saynte Augustyne. In thys whyle Augustyne saylyd into Fraunce to the byshoppe Arela∣tens̄ / and was of hym sacryd arche∣byshoppe. when holy Gregory was certyfy∣ed of the good expedycyon of Augu∣styne / he sent then to him mo helpers as Melyt{us}, Iust{us}, & Paulinus, with bokes and relykes of holy sayntes / and answeres to saynte Augustynes questyons / that was that all suche goodes as fell to the chyrche shulde be deuyded in foūre {per}tes / that is to meane the fyrste shuld go to the hous¦holde of the byshoppes house and charge of the same / the seconde to the clergy / the thyrde to the amendemēt of chyrches / the fourth to the relyfe of the poore people and other dedys of mercye. when Austayne hadde baptyzed a great part of the kyngdome of Kent / he after made two archebyshoppes by the cōmaundement of saynte Gre¦gorye, as wytnessyth Polycronicon: that one at London, and that other at porke / and by the helpe of Ethel∣bert, he assembled and gatheryd to∣gether the byshoppes and doctoures of Brytayne, that were before dysper¦kled. The place of assemble was cal¦lyd longe after Austeyns oke, whych is expowned to be Austeyns strēgth, and is in the marche of wykeres and of the westsaxons. In thys place he charged the sayd byshoppes, yt they shulde wyth hym preache the worde of god to the An∣glys / and also that they shuld amōg them selfe amende certayne errours then vsyd in the chyrche, and specyal¦ly for kepynge of theyr Ester tyde. where agayne the byshoppes of Bry¦tayne helde opynyon, tyll Austayne by hys prayers shewyd there a my∣racle by a blynde Angle or Saxon. After the whyche myracle shewed / ye sayd byshoppes applyed them to the wyll of Austayne in that cause. But for all this there was of theym that sayd, that they myghte not leue the custome, whych they so longe hadde continued, wythout assent of all such as hadde vsyd the same. Then he ga¦theryd a synode / to the whyche came seuen byshoppes of Brytons, wyth the wysest mē of that famouse abbey of Bangor, But fyrste they toke coū¦sayle of an holy man and heremyte / whether they shulde be obedyent to Austayne or not. The heremyte sayd yf ye fynde hym humble or meke, as to Crystes dyscyple belonged / yt then they shulde assent to hym. whych me¦kenesse they shulde perceyue in hym, yf he at theyr commynge into the sy∣node or councell, arose agayne them. when the sayde byshoppes entred ye sayde synode / Austayne sate styll in the chayre and remouyd not. wher∣fore they were wroth and dysdaynyd hym, and wolde not obey to hys re∣questes. Then he sayd to them / syns ye woll not assente to my hestes ge∣nerally / assent ye to me specyally in thre thynges. The fyrste is, yt ye kepe Ester daye in due fourme and tyme as yt is or∣deynyd. The seconde, that ye geue crysten∣dome to the chyldern in the maner yt is vsed in the chyrche of Rome. And the thyrde is, that ye preache vnto the Anglys the word of god, as a fore tymes I haue exhorted you. And all the other deale I shall suffer you to amende and refourme wyth∣in your selfe / but they wold not ther∣of.
of. Then saynt Augustyne sayde vn¦to them, and warned them by maner of inspyracyon / that syns they wold not receyue peace of theyr bretherne, they shulde of other receyue warre & wreche / the whyche was after put in experyence by Ethelfrydus kynge of Northumberlande. Longe yt were to tell the cyrcum∣staūce of the lyfe of this blessyd man, wherfore I passe ouer. Lastly whē he hadde in one daye crystyned .x. thou¦sande of Saxons or Anglys, in the weste ryuer that is called Swale be∣syde yorke, and knewe that he shuld shortely dye after / he ordeyned a suc¦cessour named Laurence whyle he ly¦ued / for the state of holy chyrche in Brytayn was as yet but rude & boys¦tous. But in yt doynge he folowed the ensample of Peter that was fyrst pope / whyche made Clement by his lyfe helper and successour. Also this Augustyne made Mellitus bysshop of London and of Eestsaxōs / whych after moste wryters were then newly entred the lande. The ryuer of Tha¦mys departed theym and Kent / and after dyed and was buryed in ye mo∣nastery before rehersed, wythoute the wallys of Dorobernia or Caun∣terburye. THE .CXX. CHAPITER. EThelbertus then confermyd in the fayth / among other cost¦ly dedys beganne he foundacyon of Paulys chyrche wythin the cytye of London / and ordeyned yt for the bys¦shoppes see of London. For the arch¦byshoppes see that before tyme was at London / was by Augustyne and Ethelbert at the prayer of ye cytezyns of Dorobernia trāslated to the sayde cytye / as in the .lix. chapyter of thys treatyse yt is more at length decla∣red. But of the buyldynge of thys chyrche of saynt Paule, dyuerse opy¦nyons ben. For some wryters testy∣fye, that yt was buylded or begonne to buylde, by Sygebertus kynge of Eestanglys, but more veryly kynge of Eestsaxōs or Eestsex. This Ethel∣bert also foūded the chyrche of sayne Andrew, in the cytye of Dorubres in Kent nowe called Rochester / of the whyche Iustus was byshoppe ordey¦ned before of saynt Albane. About ye tyme or a season after / the forenamed Ethelfrydus, whyche in the englyshe cronycle is named El∣fryde / foughte wyth the Brytons at the cytye of Legyscestre or Chestre / & slew of the Brytons a great nomber. At whyche tyme and season, a great nomber of the monkes of Bangor were also there assembled, for to pray for the good spede of the Brytons. wherof when Ethelfrydus was war¦ned / he fell also vppon theym, and flewe of theym at that tyme, as wyt∣nessyth dyuers authours .xxi. hūdred as yt is before shewyd in the .C. and ix. chapyter of this boke. This forenamed Ethelbert excy∣ted a dweller or cytezen of London, to make a chyrche or chapell in the worshyp of saynte Peter, in the west ende of London then called Thor∣ney, and now the towne of westmyn∣ster / the whyche that tyme was for∣growen wyth bushes and beres ex∣cedyngly. where the sayde cytezen be ganne, and buylded the fyrst chyrche of westmynster in ye honour of saynt Peter, whych was after by saynt Ed¦warde the cōfessour enlarged or new buylded. But of the thyrde Henry, when he reygned as kynge of En∣gland / yt was newe edyfyed & made as yt now is a beauteous monaste∣ry, and rychely endowed bothe wyth possessyon and relykes, and ryche iewellys. It is shewyd in the Englyshe cro∣nycle
of Englande / that thys Ethel∣bert shulde be slayne in a fyghte be∣twene hym and Ethelfryde kynge of Northumberlande. But Policroni∣con sayth that he dyed and went to heuen / when he hadde reygned ouer the lordshyppe of Kent .lvi. yeres / and the .xxi. yere after that he hadde receyuyd Crystendome. The kyngdome of Eestsaxons. THE .CXXI. CHAPITER. DUrynge also the foresayde persecu∣cyon of ye Brytōs, or any ruler of thē were specyally na¦med / beganne the reygne of Eestsa∣xons as wytnessyth Policronicon, vnder Sebertus theyr fyrste kynge / nere about the yere of our lordes in∣carnacyon .vi. hundred and .xiiii. All be yt that Guydo de Columna sayth that yt beganne nere about the tyme and season, when the kyngdome of Eestanglys beganne. But I folowe Polycronicon / for he leyeth holy Be¦da for his Authour in myche of his worke. This kyngdome whych is to meane Essex / hadde in the eest syde the see / in the weste Myddelsex and London / in the southe the cyuer of Thamys / & in the north Suffolke / and endured after moste wryters by the terme of two hundred and odde yeres. But by y• sayeng of Policroni¦ca yt shuld not endure ouer two hun¦dred yeres. Neuerthelesse yt shulde appere by the storye of Edwarde the elder sonne of Aluredus, yt yt shulde cōtynue vnder the Danys and other wyse, tyll the .viii. yere of his reygne. And by that reason yt shulde endure two hundred .lxxx. & .xiii. yeres. The contynuaūce therof is more doutfull to be iustly determyned, for so myche as wryters be of dyuers opynyons of the begynnyng therof. All be it ye Polycronycon in the .li. chapyter of hys fyrste boke, sayth that yt began vnder Sebertus, and vnder .x. kyn∣ges / tyll Egbertus kynge of westsa∣xons subdued yt and ioyned yt to his owne kyngedome. The fyrste crysten kynge of thys lordshyppe was the forenamed Se∣bertus, conuertyd by meanes of Mel¦litus byshoppe of London, as sayth Guydo. But after hys sayeng thys Sebertus shulde be the thyrd kynge of Essex. All wryters agreen that the kynges of thys lordshyp were more comynly named vnder kynges, and were more subiecte to other kyn∣ges / and chefely vnto the kynges of Mercia or Mercheryke. Then to retourne agayn vnto the Brytons, whyche by all this season occupyed a parte of Cornewayl and the countres of Cambria / as Uene∣docia, whyche now is called North∣walys, ad Demecea whych now is called Southwalys / and there held them in makynge assautes vpon the Saxons, as before is touchyd, some whyle in one coste, and some whyle in that other, vnder sondrye dukes, as witnessyth Gaufryde and also the englysh cronycle. The whych so con¦tynued after moste accorde of tyme, and to accorde thys hystorye wyth other, by the terme of .xxiiii. yeres / ouer and aboue thre yeres alowed for the reygne of Careticus aforesayd. So that from the fyrste yere of Care¦tycus, to the laste of these .xxiiii. ye∣res. / expyryd or flowyd .xxvii. yeres. At whyche tyme the Brytons of one assent chase for theyr hedde or ruler, y• duke of Uenedocia, or Southwa∣lys, named Cadwanus.
Francia. THE .CXXII. CHAPITER. CLotharius or Lo∣tharius the sonne of Chilpericus, & second of yt name / was made kynge of a parte of Fraū∣ce in ye yere of oure lorde .v. hundred lxxx. and .viii / and the .ii. yere of Ca∣reticus then kynge of the Brytons. Thys Clotharius by the reporte of mayster Robert Gagwyne, is notyd to be descendyd of Clodoue{us} Lowis fyrste crystened kynge of Fraunce / & not expressely to be the sonne of Chil∣pericus. But for so myche as in the cronycle of Chilperych, I haue shewed to you somwhat of the dedys of Fredegund wyfe of Chylperiche: therfore I en∣tende in the declarynge of thys story of Clothayre, to expresse the rema∣naunte, in as shorte wyse as I good¦ly may. And fyrst ye shall vnderstād, that after thys fredegunde had as before is shewed, causyd her lorde to be slayne: she ferynge that at length her vntrouth shulde be dyscoueryd / wyth all her goodes in shorte tyme after yode vnto Paris / and there in the monasterye or house of our ladye held her. And for she wold be in more suerty / and also her son the sayd Clo¦tharius shuld be the strēger in his do¦mynyon and kingdome: therfore she sent messengers vnto Gunthranus kynge of Orleaunce & brother to her lorde Chilperich / requyryng hym of fauoure and ayde / & that he wolde of his goodnesse be tutour & defendour of her yonge sonne Clotharius. The whych not denyenge the requeste of Fredegunde, spedde towarde Paris in all haste / where wyth the assent of other nobles of the realme, he toke the gydynge of the yonge kynge. By whose aduyse and cōmaundement, the sayde Clotharius was conueyd & shewyd thorough many of the chefe cytyes of his lande. But in lykewyse as Gunthranus wyth other bysyed theym selfe to strength Lotharius in hys ryghte / euen so were other of the nobles of Fraūce (by the meanes of Brunechyeldis, wyfe some tyme of Sygebert, yongest sonne of Lo∣thayre the fyrst / the whyche Syge∣bert receyued of hys sayde wyfe two sonnes named Chilperich and Chyl∣debert / of the whych two, Chilperich suruyued the other) that dyd all theyr entent to promote Chyldebert to the porcyon of hys father / that Chilperi¦cus father of Lotharius occupyed af¦ter the deth of Sigebert forenamed. Here dyscordeth the frenche crony∣cle frō myne authour Gagwyne. For there yt is sayd, ye Brunechield with the other of her assent / wold then by theyr meanes haue p̄ferred a bastard son of the forenamed Sygebert cal∣led Theodoric{us}, to the kyngdome of Fraūce. An other authour sayth that this Theodorich was the son of Chil¦deric{us} afore named, whyche was the sonne of Sygebert. But to folowe mayster Gagwyne / This Childebert whych by ye former sayeng rehersyd in yt .C. and .xiiii. cha¦piter of this treatyse, was delyueryd from ye handes of Chilperich his vn¦cle, by meanes of the erle of Poytow named Gūdebald: this with a small cōpany came vnto Paris / where of ye cytesēs he was kept out. For ye which soon after he sent a noble man of his named Gillon with other, as ambas¦sadours vnto Gūthran{us}. And where among other thynges of hym requy¦red, they axed of him Fredegūd to suf¦fer deth, for y• she had by her subtylty caused to be murdred bothe Syge∣bert father to theyr kynge, and also
Chilpericus her owne husbande: yt was of him vtterly denyed. Wherfore this sayd Gyllon sayd vnto Gūthra¦nus / syr kynge knowe thou for cer∣tayne, synnes thou haste refused this peace to the offeryd of thy neuewe / that the deth of thy brother shall cle∣u to thy hedde. wyth these wordes the kynge beynge greatly amoued / commaunded the ambassadours to be putte oute of his court / and when they were in the strete, all fylthe and ordoure to be caste vppon theym as enymytyes. And varyaunces thus kyndelyng betwene these two kinges / Gunthra¦nus soone after sent Fredegunde in∣to Neustria or Normandy / & caused her there to be kepte not farre from ye citye of Roan, whyther to her came many noble men of Fraūce in cōfor∣tynge her, and also mouynge her for the trouble she was in / promysynge to her ayde to the vttermoste of theyr power. But when that Fredegunde apperceyuyd the great fauoure that Brunechyelde stode in, of the no∣bles of Orleaunce or Fraunce, she en¦uyenge her welth and honoure, cal∣led to her an homycyde & a felon cal∣led Holderyche / to whom the sayde Fredegūde pmysyd great treasour, yf he coude by venyme or otherwyse brynge to deth the sayde Brunechiel¦dis. By meane of whych promyse he graūted to brynge her entent about / & shortely after drewe vnto the court of the sayde Brunechyeldis. where he fyll in suche famylyaryte wyth dy¦uerse of her courte, that he came ma∣ny seasons to the p̄sence of ye quene. But by what happe I can not saye / lastely he was taken in suspeccyon / and so tormentyd & pyned, that he cō¦fessyd ye cause of his thyder cōmyng, and by whom he was sent / with all ye other cyrcūstaunce of the matter. Af¦ter whych cōfessyon so made / he was to betyn & arrayed in moste vyle ma¦ner, and so sent agayn to Fredegūd. And when he was comen to her pre∣sence, and shewed what tourment he had suffred for her cause: she incon∣tynēt in fulfyllyng of her malycyous purpose / commaunded that his han¦des and fete shulde be stryken of and so lette go / to the ende that yt shulde be thought that she had not desyred hym to that besynesse. Aboute thys tyme & season arose a yonge mā in a corner of Fraunce / the whych by his subtyle wytte named hym selfe to be the sonne of the fyrst Lotharius, and brother vnto Gunthran{us}. The which by synystre meanes and crafty, gatte the fauoure of the lordes of Guyan / and by theyr assystence held and occu¦pyed a great parte therof. And after somdele of hys counsay les to Gunthranus by hys espyes dis¦closyd / this sayde yonge man beyng named Gūdoaldus, sent vnto Gun∣thranus an ambassade / and requy∣ryd hym to be restoryd to a porcyon of hys faders goodes. Addyng ther∣to that yf he denyed / the sayde Gun∣doaldus wolde wyth a strong armye repayre out of Gwyan, and get hys ryght wyth strength / & that to bryng about he shulde also haue great ayde of Chyldebert his neuewe aboue na¦med. whan kynge Gunthranus had at leyser herde the message: he in dys¦daynyng the same cōmaunded them to be sette vppon horse backes theyr facys towarde the tayle / and so with betynge and vylanye to be dryuen thorough the town. It was not long after that a daye was appoyntyd be∣twene Gunthranus and Childebert / at whych day both prynces met with great companyes & lordes. And whē they were sette in theyr counsayll / Gunthran{us} cōmaunded the foresayd messyngers of Gundoaldus to be brought to fore them, & there agayne
to recyte, theyr foresayde message. whych done, he shewyd furthermore that the sayd Gundoalde had before tyme dispoyled the doughter of Chil peryche named Rygonde, of all such rychesse as she wyth her conueyed, when she went towarde Spayne to be maryed / of the whyche some lor∣des of Childebert were of counsayll. whyche vnto the sayde two prynces was thought trewe / for so myche as the sayde lordes then accusyd, were absent from that great counsayll. THE .CXXIII. CHAPITER. AFter many and great actes concludyd by thys counsayll betwene these two foresayd prynces: Gunthranus in open audyence ad∣mytted hys neuewe Chyldebert for his heyre, for so mych as he had none heyre of hys bodye / commyttynge the rule therof to hym before all that were there. And after toke hym a{per}te, and shewyd to hym whych of his no¦bles he shulde take to counsayll, and whyche he shuld refuse. And specyal¦ly he warnyd hym to be well ware of hys moder Brunechyeldis, for that he knewe in her so great vntrouthe & subtylty / and also of Gyllon the bys∣shoppe, the whyche he also sayde he was not to be trusted. when he had thus aduertysed hys neuewe, they both retourned vnto the place of coū¦sayll / where by them and theyr coun¦sayllys certayn thynges concernyng the comone wele were sette in an or∣der. And that done, the sayde coun∣sayll was fynyshed / and purueyaūce for theyr dyner pronyded, the pryn∣ces wyth theyr baronye went vnto dyner. In the season of whych dyner the sayde Gunthranus sayde vnto ye great nomber of lordes beynge pre∣sente / ye my lordes and nobles of Fraunce, the whych to me haue euer more ben true and dere / here is myn neuew, the whyche as myne heyre I haue allowed and ordeynyd, whome I praye you to honoure, and wyth true fayth be vnto hym obedyent as to your kyng. For of ye great worthy¦nesse that of hym is to come, I am in great hope / whyche is allyed wyth myght and vertue. And to the aug∣mentacyon of these wordes / shortely after restored to hym all such cytyes, as Chilpericus by hys lyfe had with holden from hym. And soone after eyther from other in moste humble & louynge maner departyd. Of thys peace betwene these two prynces thus stablysshyd, the fame ranne wyde. wherfore certayne lor∣des beyng vppon the partye of Gun¦doaldus refused hym / and went vn∣to the party of Gunthranus. Soone after wyth hys people Gū∣doaldus resortyd vnto a cytye ouer the ryuer of Gerounde named Con∣uena / where for the strength therof, he thought to abyde hys fortune. wherof when Gunthranus was war¦ned / he in goodly spede made thyder warde, and layd hys people nere vn¦to the sayde cytye. But when he had espyed the strēgth therof / and knew well yt was daungerous for to ob∣teyn: he thē vsyd gyle, where strēgth myghte not preuayle / and deuysed or forged certayn letters in the name of Brunechyeldys, wherin was fay∣ned, that the sayde Brunechyeldys shulde desyre Gundoaldus in all ha¦sty wyse, to resorte vnto the cytye of Burdeaux. Of whyche fraude Gundoaldus no thynge suspectynge / commaundyd hys treasoure wyth other hys stuffe vnder saufe gydynge thyderward to be conueyed. wherof the knightes of Gunthran{us} hauyng knowlege, with a stronge cōpany made ouer the fore sayd water of Geroūde, & layde such
watche for them, that they encoun∣tred the sayde people that caryed the sayde treasure and stuffe / and par∣force toke it from the knyghtes of Gundoaldus and presentyd it vnto Gunthranus. Lyke as before ye haue harde that certeyne lordes of the hoste of Gun∣doalde fled vnto the hoste of Gun∣thranus / so in thys passe tyme .iiii. capytaynes or rulers of the hoste of Gunthranus fled vnto Gundoalde / yt whych myne authour nameth De∣siderius, Mommolus, Bladascus, and Sagyttaryus. whyche .iiii. after theyr comynge to Gundoalde stode in such fauour / that he was by theyr counsayle myche what aduysed and gyded. It was not longe after that ye knyghtes of Gunthranus had thus wonne ye foresayd treasoure & stuffe / that Gundoald was so sore pursued that he was fayne to close hym wyth in a stronge cytye / the whyche Len∣degylsus mayster of the hoste of Gū¦thranus assayled by dyuerse feates of warre to wynne. But whā he saw hys labour lost / than he cautelously fande y• meane to speke secretly with one of the foresayde .iiii. capytaynes named Mommolus, and wyth hym treatyd of the betrayenge of ye cytye. The whyche after many and longe exhortacyons, wyth the assuraūce of theyr lyues and other, graūtyd vnto the sayd treason / whereof the maner shulde be thus. Thys sayd Mommo¦lus wyth the forenamed Bladascus and other of that affynyte / shulde set a fyre an olde temple wythin yt citye. And when the people of ye citye were besyed to quenche the fyre / the sayde Mommolus wyth hys adherentes to open the gates, & so to let in Lyn∣degylsus and hys knyghtes. But yet thys treason set a parte / Mōmo∣lus goeth to Gōdoalde, and sheweth to hym the greate daunger that he standeth in of his enemyes. wherfore he counsayled hym that he wyth the other rulers about hym go vnto the tentys of Gunthranus and yelde them all vnto hys grace and mercy. And also to the entent that he shuld there shewe and proue, that he was the indubytate son of the fyrste Clothayre / the whyche to the kynge and all his hoste was very doutfull, and the more bycause he so fled from them. whan Gundoaldus had at ley soure harde the counsayle of Mom∣mole, gyuynge to hym credence / for so mych as by hys counsayle before tymes he had fortheryd hys causes / and also by comfort that he reportyd to haue by meanes of Lyndegylsus before named: he settyng a parte all fere, wyth certayne nomber in peasy¦ble wyse issued the cytye. And whan he had a lyttell space gone: ii. erles of Gunthranus hoste named Bole and Boson receyued hym, and delyuered hym to the power of Lyndegylsus / and Mommole retourned wyth the other of his confederey, vnto ye citye / and closed faste the gates bytwene ye citye and the pauyllyons of Gūthra∣nus. where was a lytell coppyd hyll / to the heyght whereof whan Gundo¦alde was comen, the sayd Bosō hym sodeynly threwe downe. And as he was rollynge downe the hyll / with a great stone he strake him on the hed, by vyolēce wherof he was forthwith slayne or dede. And Mommole, the whych as before is towched was re∣entred the citye / fyrste dyspoyled the goodes of the sayd Gundoalde / and after fell vpon the citesyns, and rob∣bed and spoyled them in lyke maner, not sparynge prestes nor other / and after brente chyrches, temples, and houses without pytye / whyche done he sped hym vnto the tentys of Lyn¦degylsus. But he not beynge sure of the sauegarde of the sayde Mōmole
and hys cōpany from the murmoure of hys knyghtes / or more veryly for he wolde not be a knowen of the pro¦uyded deth of theym / commaunded the sayde Mōmole wyth hys adhe∣rentes to tary without, & not to come in the prese of hys knyghtes, tyll he had somedele pacyfyed them. whiche was done, but not all without strife / for some there were that beganne to quarell wyth hym and hys. But whē Lyndegylse sawe that this Mōmole and his company were somdele with¦drawē frō his pauylyon, he made a to¦ken to hys knyghtes / whereby they knowyng his mynde, fell vpon him & slewe hym. Sagyttarius one of the foresayde .iiii. of that company, the whyche myne authour reporteth to be a byshoppe, fledde to haue saue∣garded hym self / but in his flyght he was slayne. And whē these enymyes where thus brought out of lyfe / Gun¦thranus commaūded the goodes of the sayde Mommole to be broughte vnto hys tresorye / whyche were of great valure, and after were egallye deuyded betwene hym and Childe∣bert hys neuewe. It was not longe after but certayne tokens & fygures appered in the fyrmament, the which by astronomers were iuged the fyne of some prynce / whyche after a yere shewyd to be true. For the sayd Gun¦thranus dyed vpon a yere folowyng the sayd fygures or sygnes / when he hadde ben kyng of Orleaunce by the terme of .xxxvii. yeres / and was bu∣ryed wyth great pompe in the cytye of Cabylon wythin the prouynce of Burgoyne, in ye monastery of saynte Marke, whyche he before had buyl∣ded / and lefte for hys heyre of that kyngdome his neuewe the foresayde Chyldebert. THE .CXXIIII. CHAPITER. CHildebertus then hauyng the rule & possessyon of hys owne enherytaunce, that ys to saye of Au∣stracy, and also of Orleaunce / cas∣tynge in his mynde howe he myghte be reuenged of Fredegunde, ye which as before is shewed in the .C. & .xiii. chapyter of this lybell slewe hys fa∣ther Sygebert: called vnto hym his olde frende and councelloure Gun∣debald erle of Poytowe / and then cō¦maunded yt he shuld with his power inuade the countre of Soysons, the whyche was in the rule of Clothari∣us. wherof Fredegunde beyng war¦ned / assembled to her ye lordes of the countrey, and exhorted them to wyth¦stande the malyce of theyr enymyes / shewynge to them furthermore that that thynge they shuld of iustyce and equyte do, consyderynge that theyr kynge Clotharius was yet tender of age, and hadde as yet no knyghtely prowesse to defende hym self and his lande. And after a longe exhortacy∣on to them made / she wyth her sonne prepared to go agayne the sayde eny¦myes. And when all thynge to the warre was preparyd and redy / she wyth a great army made toward the hoste of Gundebalde. And when she knewe she was nere vnto the hoste / she commaundyd her captaynes to reste & fortyfye her people vppon all {per}tes for brekyng in of her enymyes. And agayne nyghte she called to her Laundry her olde paramoure wyth other / wyllyng them that in the dede of the nyght they wolde manfully set vppon the other partye / for so myche as she sayde to them that she was cer¦taynly enfourmed by her espies, that her sayde enymyes were sore weryed by reason of that dayes laboure. Af∣ter whose counseyll the sayde Laun¦dry wyth other wrought / and sup∣prysed theyr enymyes so vnwarelye, that of theym she slewe a parte & cha¦syd the remanaunt. And that done spedde them vnto Champayne nere
vnto Reynes, and spoyled and brent a parte of that countre. Thys feat of warre thus compassyd by the subtyle wytte of Fredegunde was nere to a place called Truet. Then Childebert entendyd after certentye hadde of the ouerthrowe of Gundebalde, for to haue made newe warre vppon Fredegunde. But he was let by meane of the Longobar∣dis, whyche than made warre vpon hym. Of the whyche warre he hadde somdeale his entent / and more shuld yf Mauricius emperour of Constā∣tyne the noble had kept all promesse with hym before made. After ye which warre in party endyd, he retourned into hys owne countree / and shortly after he and also hys wyfe dyed, and not wythout suspeccyon of venym / leuyng after hym two sōnes named Theodobert and Theodorych / gy∣uynge to the eldest the lordshyppe of Austraci, and to the yonger the pro∣uynce of Burgoyne. About thys tyme the Hunes brake out of theyr places, and warryd vpō certeyne partyes of myddle Fraunce and dyd therein greate harme. But lastly by meanes of greate gyftes by them receyued / they left the countre & drewe towarde Soysons. Agayne whom Fredegūde gaderyng a grete powar / sent Clotharius hyr sonne & kynge, to the entent to defende the sayd Hunes / that they shulde not in∣uade theyr countrees. And shortly after bothe hostes mette in the felde / where after longe and sharpe fyght the Frenchmen were vyctours, and chased the Hunes in suche wyse, that the more parte of them were slayne and taken, for the whyche vyctory Fredegunde made excedynge ioye to hyr son Clothayre / & receyued hym with greate pleasure, and excedynge gyftes. After the whyche passyd not longe whyle, but that she fell syke & dyed / and than buryed by hyr hous∣bonde Chylperich. whan the forenamed bretherne had knowlege of the deth of Fredegūde / they by the exhortacyon and styryng of Brunechieldis theyr graundmo∣ther, callyng to mynde the wronges to theyr auncesters done by Frede∣gund, and somdele by Lothayre: as¦sembled a greate powar, & met wyth Lothayre and hys powar at the ry∣uer of Arrune or Aruēne. In ye which place was so sore fyght and so many slayne, that the cource of the ryuer was let, by the multytude of the ca∣ryens or dede bodyes yt were therein caste. But the more parte fell of the knyghtes of Lothayre / so yt he was forcyd to forsake the feld, and thens to flee to the cyty of Meleon, & from thens to Parys: whom the sayde bretherne folowed / & compelled hym to make peas after theyr pleasure. The effecte of which peas was this. Theodobert ye elder brother of these two, shuld enioye all the lande lyeng bytwene the ryuer of Seyn & Leyr, vnto the Bryttysh Occean, or the see of lytell Brytayne. And Theodorich the yonger brother, to haue all the lande from the sayd ryuer of Seyn vnto the ryuer of Isayr to the brynk of the see. And to Clothayr shuld re∣mayne .xii. prouinces, which the sayd two ryuers of Isayr and Seyne flo∣wen by or thorough. whyche peas thus confermed and graūted / Theodobert to whom Neu¦stria or Normandye belonged, sent thyder a cheuetayne of hys court cal¦led Berthalde, to defende the sayde countre. But Clothayre of thys for∣mer accorde beynge nothynge con∣tentyd / sent his sonne Merone{us} vn∣der the gydynge of Laundry prefect or ruler of hys paleys into Neu∣stria to warre in that countrey. And for so mych as Berthalde sawe
well he lakked power to wythstande so great an host / he therfore toke the cytye of Orleaunce, tyll he had gade¦ryd more company. Then Laundry seasyd that parte of ye coūtrey, & cam to the wallys of the cytye / and by dy¦uerse wordes of reproche, excyted ye sayde Berthalde to gyue batayll to hym in the playne felde. The whych he refusyd because of the inequalyte of nomber of knyghtes. But he offe¦ryd to issue out of ye cytye, & to fyght wyth Laundry hande to hand / wyth that he myght be assuryd agayne his people / the whyche offer Laundrye refusyd. It was not longe after or bothe kynges wyth great hostes drewe in∣to that countrey / and at the ryuer of Stampis mette, where betwene thē was foughten a stronge batayll. But by the polycye of Theodobert / Lothary was putte to a disuaūtage. For whyle the sayde Lotharye was cōueyeng hys people ouer the ryuer at a narowe passage / Theodobert be¦ganne so fyersly and kepte the passa¦ge so streyt, that the peple of Clotha¦rye came not two partes of theym to the felde. Neuerthelesse the fyght cō¦tynued by a longe season / in whyche tyme Berthalde encountred many ty¦mes Laundrye, and prouoked hym to batayll / but euer that other refu∣syd. Lastly he seynge and knowyng well that he shuld wynne great wors¦shyppe and also profyte, yf he myght slee or take this Laūdry / he therfore put hym selfe in the more daunger of hys enymys, and fynally of thē was slayn. But Theodobert in pursuyng Lotharye and in comfortynge of his knyghtes bare hym so well, that he causyd his enimyes to lese grounde / and at length put them to flyght, the whyche he foloweth to the gates of Parys, to the great damage of ye peo¦ple of Lothary. In this chase was ta¦ken Meroneus the sonne of Clotha¦rye wyth many other / but Laundry was goten wythin the cytye. And when Theodobert had thus goten the vyctory of hys enemyes / he lyste no lenger to tary about them at that season / but shortly after retourned to hys countre. In the court of Theodorich broder of this Theodobert, was at this day dwellynge an Italian named Pro∣thadi{us} / the whyche as myne authour sayth was paramour vnto Brune∣chyeld before sayd. The which, Bru¦nechyeld by hyr meanes had exalted from poore estate vnto hyghe autho¦ryte / the whyche was of a subtyle & far castynge wytte, and therwyth ex∣cedynge couetous / and in greate fa∣uour of the kynge, but to all hys lor∣des odyous & hatefull: for the which vnlefull meanes by hym to the no∣bles and comons of the lande vsed / & for the yll condycyons and bad coun¦ceyll that Brunechyelde & thys Pro¦thadi{us} vsed within ye court of Theo∣dobert / he bannysshed them both as well of hys lande as of hys courte. wherfore euer after they malygned agayne Theodobert. And for the ex∣ecucyon of theyr malicious purpose / they tolde vnto Theodoryche, that hys enemy and not brother Theodo¦bert, had wythdrawen from hym the chefe of hys faders treasoure / alled∣gyng also, that he was not the sonne of Chyldebert hys fader, but gotten of a gardener / and wyllyd hym ther∣fore to sende vnto hym and to aske restytucyon of the sayde goodes. By the whyche wycked counceyle Theo¦doryche was so lad, that he sent vn∣to hys brother / and in suche wyse so vexyd and styryd hym, that dedely malice was kyndelyd betwene them. In so myche that eyther of them as∣sembled great hostes / and lastely met nere vnto a towne named Carysse.
where the sayde hostes beynge redy to haue runne togyders / the lordes of Theodoberte so demeaned them vnto hym, that by theyr wyse coun∣sayle he agreed to sende to hys bro∣ther, and to haue a cōmunicacyon of peas. And whan the embassade was comen to the pauylyon of Theodo¦ryche, and there had shewyd the vn∣kyndnesse of thys warre, wyth the ieopardy that myghte ensue of the same / anone the foresayde Protha∣dius toke vppon hym the answere, & sayd: it is not requysyte so lyghtly to graunte peas / but necessary it is to attempte the wyll of our enemye by batayle, whether he woll be agre∣able to condescende to our desyres. The whyche wordes thus expressyd of hym, anone the more party of the lordes dysdayned it / and conspyryd wythin them selfe howe they myghte putte hym to deth. And forthwyth arose amonge them such a murmur, that ye kynge apperceyued well that they entendyd some harme to Pro∣thadius. For the whyche he called vnto hym a knyght named Uselyne / chargynge hym to go vnto the lor∣des, commaundynge them that they in no wyse shulde do any harme to Prothadius. The whyche Uselyne beynge of the mynde of the other / sayd that the kynge wolde that they shulde slee Prothayde. After whyche message done / they ranne in all haste and hym slewe, as he sate playenge at dyce or tables wyth one Peter a physicyon / and that done all hoolly ranne vnto ye kynges tent, besechyng hym to take no dyspleasure of ye deth of so euyll a man, that as well was knowē, was enemye to all frendshyp and peas. But for Theodoryche ap∣perceyued well, that he cowde not reuenge hys deth wythout ponyshe∣mēt of a multytude / he therfore toke pacience, and suffred the offence to passe vnpunysshed. After whyche man thus murdered / bothe prynces without notable acte de{per}ted eyther into hys countree. THE .CXXV. CHAPITER TO thys daye Theodoryche had taken no wyfe / all be yt of hys concubyne he receyued two sonnes. He therfore by thaduertyse∣ment of hys frendes, set hys mynde to mary some noble woman / & soone after sent certeyne ambassadours vn¦to Berthric{us} then kyng of Spayne / wyllyng to graūte vnto hym Mem∣berge his doughter in mariage. The whiche vppon certeyne condicyons was perfourmed, and wyth greate ryches to hym shortly after sent and maryed /  by a certayn tyme well en¦treated & cheryshed. But that season rōne & spent / Brunechyeld so turned the kynges mynde from the quene, that lastely he wyth suche treasoure and iewellys as he of her receyued, sent her home agayn. The whych in∣iury Berthricus her father toke at herte greuously / & shortly after sente hys messengers vnto Clothary kyng of Soysons, requiryng hym of ayde to warre vppon Theodoriche, which hadde done vnto hym great dysplea¦sure / and the rather for ye warre that the sayde Theodoryche wyth his bro¦ther lately made agayne hym / the whyche wyth both theyr strengthes they myghte then well reuenge. To whome Clotharius graūted. And to haue hys party the stronger, he sente vnto hys neuewe Theodobert and brother to Theodoriche, to styre hym agayne hys sayde brother. wherof when Berthricus hadde re∣ceyuyd knowlege of hys sayde mes∣sengers / he thē sent vnto Agon king of Longobardys / or more veryly Adoaldus the .v. kynge after Alboy¦nus / requyryng hym in lyke maner.
And he desyrous of wreche / made faste and sure promyse to gyue ayde to the vttermoste of his power. when Theodoryche was warned of the cōspyracy of these .iiii. kynges, that entendyd to warre ioyntly vp∣pon hym / he was therwyth greatly amoued, and prouyded for hys de∣fence in his best maner. Then Theo¦dobert trustyng the appoyntmēt be∣fore made, assembled a great hoste / and made spede fyrst toward ye place bytwene theym appoynted, whyche was nere to ye castell of Salas. But or any preparacyon was made to∣warde batayle / a meane was founde that the forenamed two bretherne shulde mete eyther wyth other, accō∣panyed wyth .x. thousand knyghtes. But Theodobertus enterynge to dysceyue hys sayd brother, & to force hym to graūte to his pleasure / brou∣ghte wyth hym ferre aboue ye nōber. wherfore Theodoricus beynge ouer¦sette wyth strength / graunted all his brothers wyll. whych was that ouer certeyne thynges and appoyntemen¦tes concluded bytwene Berthricus and hym / Theodobert shulde holde to hym and his heyres two lordship∣pes called Champayne and Turon. whych conclusyon fynysshed / eyther takynge leue of other departyd vnto theyr countreys / but not wythout greate vnrestfulnesse of the sayde Theodorych, berynge in mynde the wronge doynge of hys brother. wherfore he shortly after made mea∣nes to hys neuewe Clothayre desy∣rynge hym that he wolde not assyste hys brother agayne hym / but to suf∣fer hys quarell to be demyd by dynt of swerde bytwene theym two. This requeste, Lothayre by the aduyse of saynte Columbane munke of Ire∣lande than beynge in those costes, graunted. And the french cronicle sayth, that he was warned of thys foresayd ho∣ly munke and abbot, that he shulde not medle bytwene the sayd two bre∣therne / for so myche as yt was pro∣uyded of god, that he shuld be heyre to them bothe. whan Theodorych had receyued thys answere, he gaderyd his strēgth and spedde hym vppon hys iourney to the cytye of Langresse, and from thens to Uerdune or Uerdoune. Theodoberte hauynge knowlege of hys malycyouse brothers purpose, gaderyd in Austracy a greate hoste / and so sped hym tyll he came to the cytye of Toull. where bothe hostes shortely after met / and in the feldes or playnes nere to the cytye foughte a stronge batayle. In the which was slayne greate people vppon bothe sydes / but the more parte vppon the syde of Theodobert. wherfore he fy∣nally was compelled to forsake the felde, and fled vnto Coleyne. where he gaderyng a newe powar / fought agayne wyth hys brother. In the whyche fyght he had lyke fortune / & was agayn chasyd to hys grete sha∣me and losse / whom Theodoricus as hys mortall enemye folowed, fy∣rynge and wastynge the countreys as he went / in so myche that the in∣habytauntes of the coūtreys fell be∣fore hym, besechynge his grace, that for the offence of one man, he wolde not destroye so many innocentes / as∣surynge hym forthermore that they wolde become hys lyegemen, and holde theyr lande of hym for euer. At whyche request he sayde gladly he wolde to them graunte theyr pe∣tycyon, yf that they wolde presente to hym the hedde of hys brother. After the whych answere by them of Theodorych receyued / they amonge them selfe appoynted out a certayne of persones moste apte to theyr pur∣pose / and wyllyd theym to go vnto
Theodobert to execute theyr entent. The whyche sped theyr iourney tyll they came to the presence of Theodo¦bert / & shewyd vnto hym that yf he wolde be agreable to departe wyth suche stuffe and iewellys as he had of hys faders, so that Theodoryche myghte be partener therof / he shulde haue perfyght amyte and rest wyth hym. To the whyche wordes he gy∣uynge confydence and truste / called wyth hym the sayde persones / and brought them into ye howses, where the sayd stuffe and iewellys lay. And whyle he was busyed to deuyde out and appoynte ye porcyon of hys, one of the sayde persons slewe hym so∣deynly / and after of one agrement strake of hys hed, and in secrete wyse caused yt to be conueyed vnto hys brother. whan Theodoryche hadde receyued the hed of hys brother, he sped hym to Coleyne where this trea¦son was wrought / and receyued the cytye into hys possessyon, wyth all ye kyngdome of Austracy to hys bro∣ther belongynge. And when he had there ordred hys nedes after hys mynde / wyth two sonnes and an ex∣cedynge fayre doughter of Theodo∣bert, he spedde hym vnto Mees the chefe cytye of Austracy / where wyth hym met hys graundmoder Brune∣chyelde. The whyche perseuerynge in all malyce and myschefe / caused ye sayd two sonnes to be shortly slayn. Theodorych then restoryd or dely∣uered vnto Clothayre, all such lādes as to hym he had before promysed. Theodoryche thus endynge hys warre, the whyche by a longe season spent hys tyme in kepynge of concu∣bynes / was nowe rauyshed wyth the beaute of his brothers doughter, the whyche he hadde brought from Co∣leyne. But that doyng Brunechyeld wythstode wyth all her power, be∣cause the mayde was so ee of hys kynne. For the whych he beyng with herfore dyscōtent sayde, o thou most wycked & false woman / dyd not thou make me to beleue, that Theodobert was not the sonne of my father / but that he was the sonne of a gardyner. For what cause hast thou caused me to {per}secute my brother, and lastely to lee hym. After the whyche wordes he wolde haue slayne her, yf he of his lordes hadde not ben letted. whyche dede not forgotten of this vngoodly woman / euer after imagyned howe she myght brynge Theodoryche out of lyfe. And lastely she hyryd such as were about hym to consent to her ini¦quyte / so that vpon a season when he came out of his stew or bayn, he axyd drynke by ye force wherof he was poy¦soned & yed soone after, whē he had reygned .xviii. yeres. Howe be yt An¦toninus in the .vi. chapyter & .xii. ty¦tle of the seconde parte of hys worke, sayth that he was brent wyth fyre by the dyuyne power. THE .CXXVI. CHAPITER. NOw that I haue shewed vn∣to you the fyne & ende of these two bretherne / by reason of whose deth the hole pryncypate of Fraunce fell vnto the abouenamed Clothayr: I shall now expresse vnto you the de¦dys by hym done after he hadde all the rule onely. So yt was that ye forenamed Bru¦nechyelde malygned euer agayn Lo¦thayr. And to the fortheraūce of her malyce▪ she behauyd her in such wise wyth some of the rulers & lordes of Austracy, that she caused them to ad¦mytte owne named Sygebert to be ryghtfull enherytoure of that lande▪ But for that some of them had good experyence of theyll dysposycyon of this woman / they therfore sent two noblemen of that lande name Pe∣pyn
and Arnold vnto Clothayre / wil¦lynge hym to sende hastely into that prouynce. After the whyche message by these two lordes reported, Clotha¦rius shortely after spedde hym into Austracy / and at a castell called Ca∣thomat he lodgyd hym with hys peo¦ple. whereof herynge Brunechielde sent vnto hym / & gaue vnto hym mo¦nicyon that he shuld voyde the land, for so myche as Sygebert the eldest sonne of Theodoryche was therof ryghtefull enherytour. ye haue harde before that Theodo¦ryche vsyd lemmans / of the whyche he receyued foure sonnes, yt is to say Sygebert, Corbe, Chyldebert, and Merone. wherfore ye foresayde Bru∣nechyelde entendynge to dystourbe Lothayre and all the lande / fortyfy∣ed the sayd Sygebert to clayme the lande of Austracye. And when Clo∣thayre hadde receyued knowlege of this maundemēt from Brunechielde or Bruncheuste / he sent to her answe¦re that he wolde assemble the lordes of Austracy, and be demed by theym, whyther thys land belonged to hym, or Sygebert. And she ferynge that sentence / excyted people of the pro∣uynce of Germanye to strength her partye, wyth all the people that she myght make of the sayde countre of Austracy. And that to bryng about / she sente one Garnery an other Al∣bon. Of this Garnery she hadde su∣speccyon that he shuld fauour ye par∣tye of Lothayre / wherfore to Albone hys felowe she sente letters, that he shulde put the sayde Garnery away. whē Albone had ouer rad the letter / he brake yt in peces & threwe theym from hym. And afterwarde a frende of Garneryes gaderyd the peces / and so ioyned theym that he concey∣uyd the sentence of the letter, and forthwyth shewyd yt vnto Garnery. when Garnery perceyued the maly∣cyous entent of Brunechielde, he kepte yt secrete to hym selfe: all be it that he by his secrete meanes caused the Germanyes that they shuld take no partye wyth Brunechyelde. And that done he retourned into Bur∣goyne / where wyth her and in her cō¦panye he solycyted so the lordes of Burgoyne, that some of them abhor¦red the crudelite of that woman. And when Garnery hadde in thys wyse compassed hys maters / he sent vnto Lothayr, & shewyd that yf he myght haue hys grace and safecondute / he wolde come to hym and shew to hym thynges concernynge hys aduaun∣tage. All the whyche was graunted. Then Clothayre by counsayle of ye sayd Garnery assembled his power / & shortly sente a strenght of theym in to Champayne and Cathaloyne / where yt was shewed that Sigebert hadde gatheryd great strenghtys. Then forsoke the party of Sigebert many nobles of Austracye / amonge the whyche myne authoure nameth Rucco, Sigoldus, and Enulanus, and yelded them to the mercy of Clo¦thayre. Then shortly after the hostes of Clothayre and Sygebert mette / where Garnerye, by tokens betwene hym and dyuerse of the captaynes of Sygebert before assygned, ye sayd captaynes wyth theyr people wyth∣drewe them, so that Sygebert wyth hys two bretherne Corbo and Mero¦neus gaue backe whyle they came to the ryuer of Sigoune / where after lytle resystence the foresayde two bre∣therne were taken. But the frenche cronicle sayth that all foure brethern were there taken. All be yt mayster Gagwyn sayth, that Sygeberte by the vertue of hys horse escapyd / so that he was not after that daye seen. And soone after thys victory Bru¦nechyeldes, which also of the frenche cronycle ys named Bruneheuste /
was broughte as prysoner vnto the presence of Lothayre, wyth a suster of Theodoryche, whych Garnery or Gerney hadde taken in the tentes of his enymyes. Then Lotharius forth¦wyth commaūded Corbon to be be∣hedded / and preseruyd Meroneus, for so mych as he was to hym godfa¦ther / and euer after cheryshed hym as his kynnesman. Lotharius thus hauyng ye victory of his enimyes, made great ioy. And after he hadde somedeale sette that countrey and other in quyete / he then toke aduyse of hys lordes howe he shulde be demeaned wyth Brune∣chielde, that hadde ben authoryce of so manyfolde mychyefes and crymy∣nous ded{is}. The whych of one cōsent and mynde condescendyd & agreed, that she shuld be put to moste payn∣full and vyle deth. And fynally after fore betynges she was sette vppon a horse / and so conueyed thorough the hoste / that all men myghte beholde and se her / and after brought agayn to ye kynges presence. where then the kynge rehersed vnto her a longe pro¦cesse of all her murdurs, conspyra∣cis, and wycked dedes / affermynge that she hadde ben the occasyon and cause of the deth of .x. prynces, be∣syde other meane persones. And whē he hadde sayde hys pleasure / he then commaunded her to be bounden to a wylde horse tayle by the here of her hedde / and so to be drawen whyle she were dede. And when this iudgement was exe¦cuted / she by the lycence of the kynge was buryed in an house of relygyon wythin the cytye of Hosdon̄ or Os∣don̄, that she before tyme hadde buyl¦dyd in the honoure of saynte Mar∣tyne, besyde other many that she in her lyfe buyldyd in dyuerse other pla¦ces, endowyng them wyth great and ryche possessyons. THE .CXXVII. CHAPITER. THus dame Fortune fauoured the partye of Lotharius / that this kyngdome, whyche hadde from the tyme of Clodoueus Lewes cōty¦nued vnder .iiii. gouernours or ru∣lers for the more partye, nowe was fallen to hym / so that he hadde all vn¦der obeysaunce and rule / then anon thys Lotharius made Garnery pre∣fecte and mayster of hys paleys / and releasyd vnto the Longebardes or Lombardes a trybute of .xii. thou∣sand pounde yerely payde to the kyn¦ges of Frannce / the whych was fyrst sette vppon theym by Gunthranus hys vncle. And in thys whyle to hys more en∣creace of wordely ioye / he receyuyd of hys wyfe Bergeruda a sonne, the whych he named Dagobertus. The whyche when he came to couenable age / he betoke to the lore of Arnolde then byshoppe of Mes. And when the fyrste wyfe of Lotharius was ded / he maryed a seconde named Si¦childe, of whom he receyued a chyld and named yt Haybert. when Dago¦bert the fyrste sonne was comen to a lawfull age / after vsuell custome of all prynces of Fraunce, he gaue hym myche to the chase of wylde bestys. And as by chaunce one daye he fo∣lowed the chace of an hert / and tryed yt so sore yt he broughte hym to a bay in a place that then was called the strete of Catulyen. In the whyche strete was then an old lytle chapell / to the whyche the forsayde herte en∣tred, and there helde hym / all be yt that a great nomber of houndes fo∣lowed hym to ye chapell dore, & none of theym wold enter, but there stode bayenge. And when Dagobertus came after and behelde the maner of the houndes, and dyd what he coude to cause them to entre the chapel and
myghte not / he thus departed wyth∣out more doynge at that season, not wythout great merulynge in hys mynde. It was not longe after, that Clo∣thayr cōsyderynge the frowardnesse of growyng in his sonne Dagobert / assygned to hym a tutour or lerner of worldely and knyghtely maners, whose name was Sadragesyle. And for his sonne shulde haue hym in the more awe and fere / the kyng gaue vn¦to the sayde tutoure the dukedome of Guyan. But so yt was one daye that for a cause thys Sadragesyle wold haue chastyzed this Dagobert / wherof he beyng ware, associated vn¦to hym certayne wanton persones and bete his mayster / & after in way of dyspyte caused the berd of hys tu∣tour to be shauen of. For the whyche dede Lothayre was agayne hym gre¦uously dyspleasyd / & in greatire and haste, sente for hys sonne Dagobert. But he feryng punyshement, wyth∣drewe hym, and went vnto the fore∣named chapell / trustyng veryly that wheretofore a beste was shewid such comforte, that he by holy prayers shulde there be comforted tyll suche tyme as he myghte atteyne vnto the grace of hys father. ye shall vnderstande that before tyme after he hadde experyence of that wonder shewyd by the herte / he lerned that the holy martyrs saynte Denys, and hys two felowes Rusti∣cus and Eleutherius shulde be bu∣ryed wythin the sayde chapell / the whych were martyryd in the persecu¦cyon of Domycyane the emperour, aboute the yere of Crystes incarnacy¦on .lxxx. and .xvi. In the honoure of ye whych martyrs the foresayd poore chapell was arreryd, as witnessyth the frenche cronycel, by the meanes of a deuout french man whose name ys not expressyd. Thus Dagobert in thys chapell abydynge in prayer / in the fyrste nyght he beyng in slepe, ap¦peryd vnto hym .iii. olde faders, say¦enge vnto hym / yonge man we be those martyrs, whyche many yeres passyd were slayne for the fayth of Cryste, and buryed in thys place by Catula that good woman. whyche place is not duely nor suffyciently ho¦noured / nor yet the people of Fraūce hath not vs in due reuerēce and wor¦shyppe. And therfore when thou art of myghte and power, then remem∣bre vs, and helpe thys place to be otherwyse buyldyd / whych shall not be longe to. And for thou shalte not take thys for a dreme or fantasye / dygge hereafter thys grounde, and thou shalte fynde oure thre bodyes hole and vncorrupt / and vppon eue¦ryche of vs our names with letters fresshely wryten. And after thys they vanyshed awaye. when Dagobert awoke / he called well to mynde thys vysyon. And pro¦mysed inwardely betwene god and hym, that yf he were recouncylyd to hys father as to hym they hadde promysed / he wolde fulfyll that they hadde desyryd. After thys the father beynge warnyd that Dagobert was in thys chapell / sent vnto the place certayne of hys knyghtes to pull or take hym thens per force. And when they came wythin a myle of ye sayde chapell / they were so astonyed that they myghte not go one fote forwar∣de to do the beste they coude. when they hadde long stryuē with oute preuaylynge / they retournyd to the kynge, and shewed to hym ye trouthe in all thynge as they had done. The kynge beynge dyscontent wyth theyr reporte, blamed theym, and sayde that they feryd hys sonne, for the whyche cause they hadde fayned that excuse.
And incontynently he sente forth an other company / the which were delte wyth in lyke maner as ye other. were Lothari{us} somdele troubled wyth the reporte of his seruauntes / consyde∣ryd the chapell to be nere vnto Pa∣ris where he then lay / & cōmaundyd his horse to be brought, for he wolde proue the mater hym selfe. But lyke as his seruauntes were seruyd, euen so became of hym / so that he myghte go or ryde frowarde or sydewarde / but towarde the chapell myght he in no wyse atteyne. when this was knowen to ye kyng / he cōsydered well yt was the handy∣worke of god. wherfore by fayre and easy meanes he called home his son, and recouncylyd hym, and forgaue all trespace. To this accordyth the le¦gende of the lyfe of saynte Denys, wyth more that shall after folowe in the storye of this Dagobert. After thys reconcylyacyon, Lotha¦rius ordeyned vnder hym hys sonne Dagobert to be ruler of the sygnory of Austracye. But whyther yt were by the elacyon of hys owne mynde, or by badde counsayll, he shortely af¦ter rebellyd agayne hys father / and wolde haue reteyned that prouynce to his owne vse. For thys were chosen .xii. noble men of Fraūce, to arbytre and deme betwene the father and the son. The whyche Lordes after they had longe debated this mater / by fayre entrea∣tyse contentyd so the father, that he gaue vnto the sonne the sayde lord∣shyppe of Austracy. Soone after thys accorde, Clo∣thayre made warre vppon the Go∣this or Saxons / and them at length subdued. For yt is to be knowē, that lyke as the sayde Saxons inuadyd myche Brytayne or Englande / in ly∣kewyse warryd they in Fraunce / and lastely subdued the prouynce of Neustria and named yt after theym Normandye, as after in the storye of Charlis the symple shall more euy∣dently appere. Of thys vyctorye of Saxons ys made a longe rehersayll / and howe lastly when Clothayre hadde slayne the kynge or ruler of theym named Berthrande, he after yode into the countrey of Germanye, and slewe man and chylde that passyd ye length of hys swerde. Of this and other dedes by this Lo¦thayre done, I myght make a longe worke / but I passe ouer. Then yt foloweth, when Lothayre hadde set his countrey in some reste / he assembled hys lordes at a cytye or towne called Traacas or Trecas. And after dyuers maters dyscussyd and endyd / he axed of theym perfyte allegeaunce and fydelite to hym and hys heyres to be kepte. The wyche by the sayde lordes fyrmely promy∣sed and assuryd / he commaundyd e∣ueryche of theym to repayre to theyr owne countreys. And soone after he made an assemble of hys byshoppes and spyrytuall men at the cytye or towne of Troys / by whose counsayl∣lys he orderyd thynges and maters concernynge the wele of the chyrche. And shortly after he was vexyd with greuous sekenes / wherof he fynally dyed, when he hadde reygned after moste wryters .xliii. yeres, leuynge for heyre the forenamed Dagobert / the whyche enterryd hys fader wyth great pōpe at the abbey of saynt Uin¦cent wythoute the wallys of Paris / the whiche abbey is at thys daye cal¦led saynte Germaynes. The foresayde yeres accomptyd for the reygne of Lothayre / be ac∣comptyd from the fyrste daye that he was ordeyned kynge of Soysons, vnto the daye of hys deth. wherof he reygnyd after some wryters ouer a
parte .xxvii. yeres / & ouerall Fraūce xvi. yeres. whyche make the full of xliii. yeres. Anglia. THE .CXXVIII. CHAPITER. CAdwanus or Ca∣dwan, the whyche of Guydo ys na∣med duke of Uene¦doyce or of North¦walys / was by one assente of the Britōs lastly ma∣de theyr souerayne or gouernour, in the yere of our lorde .vi. hundred and xiii / and the .xxv. yere of the seconde Clothayre kynge of Fraunce / and al¦so the fyrst yere of Colwolphus then kynge of westsoxons / accomptynge for the reygne of Ceawlmus kynge of the sayde westsaxons .xxxi. yeres. And for Colricus nexte succedynge hym .v. yeres. ye haue before hard what dyscorde and trouble was amonge the Bry∣tons in the tyme of Careticus laste kynge & longe after, by reason wher of the Saxōs wanne the more land / and as before is rehersyd in the .C. and .xx. chapyter, howe Ethelfryde kynge of Northumberlande ouer set the Brytons at the cytye of Chestre / & forcyd thē to take ouer Seuarne, and so into walys / where they then chase thys Eadwane to theyr duke and leder. The whyche after he was putte in authoryte / assembled hys Brytons, and came agayne into Bri¦tayne / and gaue batayll vnto the sayde Ethelfryde. In the whych they spedde dyuersly, so that some season the Saxons wanne / and some while the Brytons. But the Brytons held Chestre & other good townes / whych they hadde recoueryd sene theyr last commynge. It shulde seme by the meanynge of Policronica, that thys Cadwan or Cedwall shulde at length slee the sayde Ethelfryde and Osricus bothe kynges of Brennicia and Deyra. But Guydo and also Gaufryde wyt¦nessen, that after thys Cadwan had the better of Ethelfryde / by medya∣tours yt was agreed that Ethelfryd shulde enioye all the lande ouer and beyonde Humber vnto Scotlande / and Cadwan shulde haue the lande from Humber towarde the sowthe. To the whyche sayenge agreeth the englyshe cronycle, affermynge also that he shulde be the sonne of Brucy¦uall kynge of Leyceter, the whych of other wryters is not testyfyed. It is also there shewed that after ye sayde accorde betwene Ethelfryde & Cadwan confyrmed / that they conty¦nued durynge the lyfe of Cadwan as two especiall louers and frendes / and durynge the reygne of this Cad¦wan the two sonnes of Colric{us}, Kyn¦gilsus and Quichillynus, after the deth of theyr fathers brother Colwol¦phus, ruled ioyntly the pryncypate of westsaxons. The whyche in theyr begynnynge faught agayn the Bry∣tons at Ampton besyde Oxynford / & wanne of them the towne & other hol¦des, whyche the Brytons in yt coūtre occupyed. But by agrement of wry∣ters this Cadwan was not at this cō¦flycte, nor yet medlyd hym so farre within ye land. But as yt shuld seme by Guydo / these Brytons shulde be some cōpany that shulde lyue vnder trybute of the Saxons / ye whych for the manhode yt they hard reported of Cadwan, rebelled agayn ye Saxons. Then it foloweth, whē this Cadwan had thus contynued his amite wyth Ethelfryde / a chaunge fell, that this Ethelfryde for hatered or otherwise put frō hym hys wyfe beynge great wyth chylde, & toke to hym an other.
wherfore thys woman beynge reed∣lesse / callyng to mynde ye great loue, that was betwene her husbande and Cadwan, she went vnto hym, and spe¦cyally besoughte hym to recoenyle her lorde & husbande, that she myght be restoryd to hys company. But for Cadwan after many meanes and re¦questis myght not bryng that about / he therfore tenderynge her necessyte, kepte her in hys owne courte tyll she were lyghted. The whyche at tyme brought fourth a man chylde whom she lette call Edwyn. And soone af∣ter was the wyfe of Cadwan delyue¦ryd of a sonne, whom the father cal∣lyd Cadwalyn. But the authour of the Floure of hystoryes sayth yt these two chyldern were long borne before this tyme. The whych shuld seme to be true, for so myche as this Cadwa∣lyn was of lawfull age to beweld his lande whē his father dyed / the which he coude not do, yf he hadde nowe be borne. But as affermeth Policrony¦con, yt shulde seme lyke to a fable, all the rehersayll that Gaufride maketh in the ende of hys boke / as well for Cadwalyn and Edwyn, as for the other cyrcūstaunce of the mater there rehersyd. whych varyeth from other wryters both for the tyme, and also for the mater, as somdeale is more in the hystorye hereof before made men¦cyon / and also by the cōtynuaūce of this storye. For as Giraldus Cam∣brens and other seyen / this Edwyn was the sonne of Elle or Ella kynge of Deyra / the whyche was persecu∣tyd of Ethelfridus before named thē kynge of both prouynces, that is to meane Brennicia and Deyra, so sore that he was compellyd to flee to Re∣dwaldus then kynge of Gestanglys. The whyche for mede or fere of the sayde Ethelfride, was lastely consen¦tynge to haue betrayed Edwyn / of whyche daunger the sayde Edwyn was delyueryd by warnynge of a frende of hys. After this escape as Edwyn satte vppon a time in a great study alone / a straunger apperyd to hym sodeyn¦ly, and sayde, I know well the cause of thy thought and heuynes. Ther∣fore yf thyn enymyes were slayne, & thou restoryd vnto thy kyngdome & sette the in better maner then any of thy forefathers / woldyst thou not ad¦mytte such one for thy frende, and as¦sent and do by his rede and coūsayll. yes trewly sayd Edwyn / and that I surely and fastely promise the. Then this man layd his hand vpon Edwy¦nes hedde and sayde to hym, Edwyn when this token is broughte to the / then haue thou mynde of this tyme of trybulacyon, and of this promyse thou haste made. And anon as thys was spoken this man vanyshed out of his syght sodeynly. In a conuenyent season after, Ed∣wyn assemblyd hys hoste and gaue batayll vnto Ethelfryde in the coun¦trey of Mercia by eest the ryuer of Idle / and slewe hym in that fyghte, wyth a great nōber of his knyghtes / and thē seasyd in his possessyon both the foresayde pryncypates / and was kynge of Northumberlande by the terme of .xvii. yeres. ye shall vnderstande that the fore∣named Ethelfride hadde .iii. sonnes, whyche are mynded besyde other. The fyrste & eldest was named Eau∣fricus, the seconde Oswaldus, and the thyrde Oswye. The fyrst was of lawfull age / so that he myght helpe and shyft for hym selfe. But Oswald was but .xii. yeres of age / and Oswy farre yonger. wherfore theyr war∣deyns immediatly after theyr faders deth, sente theym into Armorica or lytell Brytayne, there to be brought vppe / or more veryly into Albania or Scotlande.
THE .CXXIX. CHAPITER. ABoute this tyme and season, as wytnessen Policronica, Guydo, and other / began the kyng∣dome or lordshyp of Mercia, vnder the stronge paynym and Saxon cal∣led Penda. The whyche Mercia or Mercherike conteyned Huntyngdon shyre, Hertfortshyre, Gloucetershyre, wyth dyuers other / and was grettest and largeste of all the other / & was closyd in ye west syde wyth the ryuer of Dee, stretchynge to Chestre & Se¦uarne, and so to Shrouesburye and Brystowe / in the eest yt was closyd wyth the see Occean / in the South with Thamys vnto London / and in the north with ye ryuer of Hōber / and had hys begynnynge vnder the fore named Penda, as the accorde of dy∣uerse authours wytnessyth, in the yere of oure lordes incarnacyon .vi. hundred & .xxvi / and after the fyrste commynge of Hengyste a hundred and lxxvi. yeres. All be yt that of the fyrste kyng dyuerse opynyons there ben / wherof a cause maye be, for so myche as this lordshyppe in the fyrst begynnyng was departyd in .iii / that is to say y• fyrst was called eest Mer∣cia, the .ii. was named myddell Mer¦cia, and the .iii. weste Mercia. But after yt was brought to one pryncy∣pate & called Mercherike, or of some wryter myddell Englande. Of thys lordshyppe the fyrste crysten kynge was called wolpherus that was the sonne of the forenamed Penda. But of all the kynges of thys kyngdome of Mercia, whych were .xviii. in nom¦ber, as testyfyeth Policronica / Offa was of moste myght and power, as after shall more playnly appere. This lordshippe endured to reken moste certaynly, tyll the yere of oure lorde .viii. hundred and .lxxvi. In the whych yere Alurede or Alhered then kynge of westsaxons, ioyned yt vnto his owne kyngdome / whych by that accompte shulde be two hundred & .l. yeres. All be yt that some accompte the enduraūce therof, to the last yere of Burdredus that was putte out by the Danes / by whyche rekenynge yt shulde then endure .iiii. yeres lesse. And some wryters accōpte the terme therof whyle the tyme of Edward cal¦led the elder / whych after the deth of his fader Alured put out the Danes from the sayde lordshyppe, and ioy∣ned yt agayne to westsaxon / and by that accompte yt shulde laste .ii. hun¦dred .lxxx. yeres and odde. ye shall also vnderstande, that in this kyngdome reygned dyuerse ho∣ly kynges, whyche nowe be alowed by the chyrche for sayntes / as Offa, Kenelphus, Kenelm{us}, and other, as hereafter somedeale shall appere. I haue seen an old regyster within the chyrche of Poulys of London / wherin ys conteyned many thynges concernynge the fyrst foundacyon of that chyrch, wyth certayne olde cro∣nycles of thys lande. Amonge the whyche yt is there notyd, that in the tyme and season when Cadwan was kynge or ruler of the Brytons / that in the same moment and tyme rey∣gned in dyuers partes of this lande these .vii. kynges vnder wryten. As fyrste Sybertus, that then was kynge of Eestsaxons no Essex, Red∣waldus was then kynge of Eestan∣glys now Norff. and Suff. Ethel∣bertus was then kyng of Kēt, Ethel¦wald{us} was kynge of Southsex. Kyn¦gylsus was kynge of westsaxons. Penda was kynge of Mercheryke. And Ethelfridus was then kynge of the North coūtre or Northumb. All whyche regyster this worke accor∣dyth with, yf the storys of this Cad∣wan, Careticus, & Cadwall be due∣ly serchyd.
THE .CXXX. CHAPITER LEtte vs than retourne to the perfourmaūce of the story of Cadwan / and of such dedes as were done in his dayes. About the .xiiii. yere of his reygne, Quincellinus y• was brother vnto Kyngylsus, and kynge with hym, as before in the .C. and .xxviii. chapyter is touchyd, ru∣led ye westsaxōs / sent vpon an Eester day a swerdman to sle Edwyn kyng of Northumberland. This swerde∣man came to a cytye besyde the wa∣ter of Darwent in Derbysshyre, and wayted his tyme / and lastly fand the kynge smally accompanyed, and en∣tended to haue ronne thorough the kynge wyth a sworde enuenemed. But one Lilla the kynges trusty ser∣uaunt, dysgarnysshed of shylde or other wepyn to defende his mayster / starte betwene the knyg & the sword, and was stryken thorough the body and dyed / and the kynge was woun∣ded with the same stroke. And after he woūded the thyrde / and was takē and confessyd by whom he was sent to worke that treason. The other knyght that was secondly wounded dyed / and the kynge laye after longe syke or he were helyd. And the same nyght folowynge the quene was de∣lyuered of a doughter / the whyche kyng Edwyn caused to be crystened of Paulinus ye bysshop, in tokē that he wolde fulfylle all suche promyse as he before had made. And she was named Enfleda / and halowed vnto god. And after whytsontyde y• kyng beynge scantly hole of the wounde, assembled his hoste & made towarde the kynges of westsaxon / and after a greate and sore fyghte venquysshed them and theyr hoste. But Edwyn for all thys vyctory and other thyn∣ges gyuen to hym of god / as he that was in helthe of the worlde, forgate his former promesse, and had lytell mynde therof / excepte that he by the preachyng of Paulinus forsoke his maumētrye, and for his excuse sayde that he myghte not clerely renye his olde lawe that his forefaders hadde kepte so longe, and sodeynly be cry∣stened without authoryte and good aduyse of hys counceyle. He also re∣ceyued letters of exhortacyon and cō¦forte to take the baptyme, from ye .v. Boniface thā pope. The whiche also sent to the quene lyke letters, with a myrrour garnysshed with syluer and a combe of iuory, and for the kyng a shyrte wrought in sōdry places with letters of golde. But all this preuay¦led nothynge. Then Paulin{us} made his specyall prayers to god / and had it shewed to hym by reuelacyon, of the token that was gyuen to Edwyn in tyme of his trybulacyon. After the which know∣lege hadde / Paulinus shortly after came vnto the kyng / and layeng his hande on hys hed, frayned of hym whyther he had any lyke remēbraū∣ce of any lyke token. The whyche whan the kynge hadde confessyd / the holy bysshoppe sayde vnto hym. Lo thou hast ouercomen thyne enemyes and wonne thy kyngdome, & holdest it in moste large wyse / therfore per∣fourme thy promesse, and be trew to hym that hath holpen thy. It was not longe after that the kynge assemblyd hys counceyll / and by theyr agremēt he was of the sayd Paulinus byshop of yorke baptysed wythin the sayde cytye the .xi. yere of hys reygne / and the yere of grace, as testifyeth Guido .vi.C.xxvii. He was the fyrste crysten kyng that reygned in that coūtrey. And after hym many of hys lordes & subiectes were also crystened of the sayd Paulinus / and the flamyns or bysshoppes of theyr false goddes, were turned to Crystes
faythe. In token wherof they armed them as knyghtes, & bestrode good horses / where before by theyr lawe they myghte vse none armoure nor ryde but onely on a mare. From that tyme forthwardes by the term of .vi. yeres, durynge the lyfe of kynge Edwyn, Paulinus cry¦stened contynuelly in bothe prouyn∣ces of Deyra and in Brēnicia in the ryuers of Gweuy & Swala, whyche he vsed for hys fontes / and preached in the shyre of Lyndesey / and buyl∣ded there a chyrche of stone at Lyn∣decoln or Lyncolne. In thys tyme was so great peace in that kyngdome of Edwyne, that a woman myghte haue gone from one towne to an other without grefe or noyaunce. And for the refresshynge of waye goers / this Edwyn ordeyned at clere wellys cuppes or dysshes of iron or brasse to be fastened to postes stan∣dynge by the sayd wellys sydes, and no man was so hardy to take awaye those cuppes / he kept so good iustyce and with that he was knyghtely of hys dedes. He was the fyrste that wanne this ile of Eubonia now called the ile of man. And by hys meanes / Orpewal¦dus or Corpewaldus, the sonne of Redwaldus kynge of Eest anglis or Norphis / to whom as before is tou∣chyd Edwyn had fledde for socoure, was conuerted to the true fayth, and a greate parte of his men with hym. And for this Edwyn excellyd ye other kynges / they enuyed at hym, and spe¦cyally Penda kynge of Mercia / the whyche excyted Cadwan kynge of Brytons agayne hym. So that they two assemblyd a great hoste agayne Edwyn, and lastly met in a palce cal¦led Hatfelde / and after sharpe fyght on bothe sydes there Edwyne was slayne, whan he had reygned ouer ye Northumbris .xvii. yeres, in the yere of our lorde, as sayth Guydo .vi.C. xxxiii. when these two kynges Cad∣wan or Cedwalla and Penda, hadde thus ouercomen the kynge and hym slayne and mych of hys people / they became so cruell to men of that coun¦trey, that they destroyed therin mych people, as men, women, & chyldren, as well religyous as other. wherfore Paulinus the archebysshop behol∣dyng theyr cruelnesse / toke with him the quene & Enfleda hyr doughter, & fled by water into Kent. And for the bysshoprych of Rochester was than voyde, by reason that Romanus the last bysshop was adreynte / Paulyne was there ordeyned and made bys∣shop of that see, and there dyed. And also lefte there his Paull, as affyr∣meth Policronycon and other / the archebysshoppes see of yorke was voyde .xxx. yeres after. But ye quene whyche was named Etherberga be∣came a menchon, & sayled into Gal∣lia or Fraunce / wherein an abbaye called Brydgence or Bryggence, she lyued an holy lyfe and dyed / and hyr doughter Enfleda cōtynued hyr pro¦fessyon, and was afterwarde abbesse of Strenshalt in the vale of whitby. After the deth of Edwyn Osrycus that was the sonne of Elfric{us} which was brother of Ethelfridus, toke vp¦pon hym to be kynge of Deyra / and Eaufricus the eldest sonne of Ethel∣frida, as before in the .C. and. xxviii. chapiter is touched, was made kyng of Brennicia / the whyche turned thē both frō Crystes fayth, and became myscreaūtes. For the whych goddes wrech fell vpon them in short whyle after / for they were bothe slayne in ye yere folowynge, of ye fornamed Cad∣wan and Penda. And whan these sayde two kynges were thus slayne / Oswalde y• second sonne of Ethelfrid began his reygne
ouer the prouynce of Brennicia, as chefe of that kyngdome of Northum¦berlande / and had the rule of Deira in lyke wyse. wherof whan Cadwan or Cedwalla was ware / he gathered hys Brytons and thoughte to slee Oswalde as he hadde before slayne his brother Eaufricus. But Oswald whan he was warned of the greate strength of thys Cadwan / he made his prayers to god, and besoughte hym mekely of helpe to withstande his enemyes. And or he yode to prayer he arreryd a crosse of tre / be∣fore the whyche he knelyd a longe whyle in a felde / whyche longe after was called Heuynfelde, and at thys daye is had in greate worshyppe. That place is nere vnto the town or chyrche of Agustalde in Brennicia / the whyche chyrche was there buyl∣ded by Oswalde after the wynnyng of that batayle. And of the spones of that crosse are tolde many wounders the whiche I ouer passe. Than after Oswalde had prayed for the saluacyon of hys people / the two hostes met in a felde named thā Denysborne or Denyslake, where was foughten a stronge batayle. But fynally Cadwan, whyche Po∣lycronyca nameth Cedwalla, was slayne and his people chasyd / which were farre excedynge the nomber of Oswaldus hoste / whanne the sayde Cadwan had reygned ouer the Bry∣tons after moste accorde of wryters and also of the tyme, by the terme of xxii. yeres / leuynge after hym a son, as affermeth Gaufryde, named Cad¦wallus or Cadwalyn. Francia. THE .CXXXI. CHAPITER. DAgobertus the fyrste of that name, and sonne of Clothayr before rehersed / beganne his reygne ouer the hole monarchye of Fraunce in the yere of our lorde .vi. hundred xxxi / and the .xviii. yere of Cadwan than kynge of Brytons. The which at the tyme of hys faders deth was in the prouynce of Austracy, gyuen to hym by his fader, as before is she∣wed in the .C.xxvii. chapyter prece∣dynge. But anone as worde came to hym of hys faders decease / he sped hym well accompanyed into Fraūce. And when he was comen to the cyty of Reynes thyder came vnto hym many nobles / as well out of Bur∣goyne as out of other partyes of Fraunce, and dyd vnto hym feauty and homage. It is shewed in the .C.xxvi. chapy∣ter of thys worke, how Clothayre had by his seconde wyfe a sonne na∣med Heybert / the which claymed his parte of the kyngdome of Fraunce, and for ye same began to make some styrynge. But by the good polycy & meanes of one Brunulphe vncle to the sayd Haybert, and brother to Si¦chyld hys moder, the mater was ap∣peased / so that he had vnto hym cer∣teyne cytyes assygned, wyth landes in Guyan. with the whiche he was cōtentyd / & ordeyned Tholouse for the chefe cytye of hys pryncypate. And after that peace confermed / Da¦gobert was in quiete by the terme of iii. yeres folowyng. But the .iiii. yere the Gascoynes rebelled agayn hym / the whych by hys manhode he short∣ly subdued. And whan he had set his lande in a quyetnesse / he called to mynde ye promyse before tyme which he hadde made to saynt Denys and hys felowes. wherfore he with great solempnite caused the groūd, where these holy bodyes laye to be openyd / and wyth great reuerēce to be taken vp. Upon the whych bodyes he fand fresshely wryten eyther of theyr na∣mes, so that he myghte perfyghtely knowe that one from that other / and
then caused thē to be layd in a sump∣tuouse shryne. And ouer them in the sayd place he buylded a royall myn∣ster of lyme and stone, and conue∣ryd it with plates of syluer in stede of sclate or leade / and assygned vnto ye prestes and mynysters therof greate and ryche possessyons. And for so goodly a temple that was of suche beautye outwarde, shulde not lacke of garnysshynge within: he therfore causyd hangynges to be made to hange within the same temple / of the whiche tapettes suche as scruyd for the quere, were garnyshed & set with dyuerse stones in those dayes vsed. And by the foresayde place or shryne where the holy martyrs bodyes laye he ordeyned a cheste or trūke of clene syluer / to the entēt yt all such iewelles and ryche gyftes as were offered to ye holy sayntes, shulde therin be kept to the vse of the mynysters of ye same place, and ouer that endowed yt same place with many greate lybertyes & pryuyleges. And this place thus fy∣nysshed / he caused a crosse of golde to be made, & to be garnysshed with moste precyous stones of a greate bygnesse and value / and caused it to be set ouer the hyghe aulter wythin the sayde monastery. This translacyon of these blessyd sayntes shulde be as wytnessyth the Frēche Cronycle, in the .v. yere of the reygne of the sayd Dagobert / which made ye yere of our lorde .vi.C.xxxvi. The which whā he had clerely with all honour and due reuerence fynys∣shed / he thā vysyted and cyrcued his lande in mynystrynge iustyce to all persons / and ordeyned such meanes as bylles of supplicacyon and other, that the causes and maters of poore men myghte come to his knowlege by meane wherof he gate great loue and fauour of his comons. But amonge hys many notable dedes / one dede by hym was com∣mytted, the whyche somdeale longe after blemysshyd hys honour. And that was that he without iudgement or processe of the lawes / caused to be slayne the forenamed Brunulphe vncle vnto Haybert hys brother, for malyce yt he bare to hym, for the fa∣uouryng of ye sayd Haybertis party. After thys the kynge was deuor∣syd from his wyfe named Gertrude, for that she was bareyne & broughte forthe no frute / and was after ma∣ryed to a fayre wenche named Ra∣netrude, of the whyche he receyued at conuenyent tyme after, a son that was named Sigebert. Of this chyld it is told that whan he was brought to the holy bysshoppe Amandus to be confermed, beyng than of the age of .xl. dayes / and the bysshoppe sayd ouer hym certeyne prayers concer∣nynge the offyce of confyrmacyon, and none of the cyrcumstauntes by neglygēce gaue answere vnto ye bys∣shop at conuenyent tyme: the chylde by dyuyne power sayde, Amen, in so lowde maner that all the people a∣bout standynge myghte well vnder stande it / whereof the bysshoppe and all the people were hougely amer∣uayled. Than it foloweth, this Dagobert all thys passetyme was ruled by a noble man of Fraunce, or more pro∣perly of the prouynce of Austracy, named in the Frenche booke saynte Arnulphe bysshoppe of Mees / and by Pepyn, whyche was ruler of the kynges paleys. By whyche season, he and also hys lande were in greate honour and prosperyte, tyll the deth of the forenamed Arnulphe / whych dyed about the season that the kyng beganne to alter and chaunge his cō¦dycyons, to the hurte of hys comons and of hys lande.
THE .CXXXII. CHAPITER. DAgobertus yt be∣fore exercised hym in all honour and vertue, beganne now to exercise in∣iustyce and tyran∣nye / in pyllynge hys commons by exaccyons and try¦butes, in suche wyse that those that dwellyd in the outwarde partyes of hys realme, and nere vnto the Tur∣kys and other straunge landes and nacions, were fayne to be vnder the rule of theym then of theyr owne na∣turall prynce. But howe so euer he bare hym agayne hys subiectes, in pyllynge and takyng from thē what he myght yet he euer hadde such a fa¦uour to saynt Denys, that he gaue to hym what he myghte purchace, were yt wyth ryght or otherwyse. Conty∣nuynge whyche season / he went in∣to the countrey of Poytiers and rob¦byd and spoyled there the chyrche of saynte Hyllary, of many great iewel¦lys / and after toke wyth hym the bo¦dye of that blessyd man, and causyd yt to be hadde into the monasterye of saynt Denys, & there shrynyd hym. And that done / he destroyed the coū∣trey of Poytiers wyth iron and fyre / and the wallys of the cytye he made playne wyth the grounde. And for yt more cruelty or terrour to the people to be shewyd / he eryd the stretys of the sayde cytye, and sewe theym wythsalte for a sygne and token that he wolde haue that cytye subuer∣tyd for euer. The whyche ruyne to thys daye appereth / for there where the olde cytye stode, is now called ye olde Poytiers / and where that other standyth nowe, is called the newe cy¦tye of Poytiers. The cause of thys destruccion of the citye & countre as sayeth mayster Roberte Gagwyne / was for, that that ye erle of Poytiers rebellyd agayne the kynge. Thus this man that whylome was a lambe / was now turned to a tygre. And ouer hys cruelnesse he was gy∣uen to all sensuall luste of hys body / in so myche that where so he rode he hadde folowynge hym a company of strumpettes, besyde suche as he kept in dyuerse places of his realme, ap∣pareylyd and fed lyke vnto quenes. For thys rule & other vyces vsyd by the kynge / Pepyn then mayster of the paleys was put in great wyte and blame of dyuerse lordes of the lande / thynkynge that by hys coun∣sayle and sufferaunce, the kyng was so lad and guyded. This was ye fyrst Pepyn. The seconde was mayster of the placys in that tyme of the se∣conde reygne of the fyrste Theo∣doricus / and was surnamed Uetul{us} and Breuis, whyche is to meane old and lytle. And ye .iii. Pepyn was son of Carolus Marcellus. The fyrste Pepyn was graundefader to the se∣conde by the moders syde / and the se¦conde was graunsyr to the .iii. by ye mannes syde. whyche thyrde Pepyn was by hole assent of Frenchmen or∣deyned kyng of Fraūce as after shall appere / & was father vnto the kynge named Charlis the great and empe∣rour of Rome. All whyche Pepyns descendyd of the blood of Austracye / and hadde great possessyons wythin that prouynce. when the forenamed Pepyn vnderstode the grudge and murmour of the lordes, whyche they bare agayne hym for the kynges de∣meanour / he by theyr aduyces toke vnto hym a nother great lorde na∣med Martyn, to be vnto hym assy∣stent / and ouer that he caused ye bles∣syd man Amandus to accompany ye kynge. By whose coūsayle the kyng somdeale refrayned hym from vyce / but not all as the good byshop hym
aduertysed. In this tyme Heybart the kynges halfe brother dyed, and also hys son shortly after named Chilperych. By reason of whose dethes / the lordshyp and countrey of Tholouse fell to the possessyon of Dagobert. It was not longe after that a people called As∣clauons or Sclauons, made warre vpon the coūtrey of Austracy. These also are called Bulgaris, and ioyne vppon a parte of Austracy. Of these tydynges when Dagobert was ler∣ned / he sped hym into Austracy, and there assembled a myghtye hoste of knyghtes / & so sped him tyll he came nere hys enymyes. But ye sayd Scla¦uons hauynge knowlege of the kyn∣ges great hoste, agreed by oratours to hym sent, to contynue the trybute that they before tyme payde / ye which was yerely fyue hūdred oxen. where thorough ye warre was appesyd for that tyme / and newe allyaunce vpon both partyes confermed. After the whych peace thus stablys¦shyd / ye kyng made his son Sigebert as kynge & ruler of that lordshyp of Austracy / assygnynge to hym the bis¦shop of Colayn named Cunbert, and the erle Palatyne named Agasyle, to be hys tutours and rulers conty∣nuynge his yeres of youth. And that done, ye kyng retourned into Fraūce, where soone after he receyued of hys wyfe a sonne named Clodoueus, the whych of many wryters is called Lodouicus or Lowes. To thys Lo∣wes the father at couenable tyme af∣ter gaue the countyes of Burgoyne and Neustria or Normandy. Then the kynge graunted to the house of saynte Denys, a fayre to be kepte yerely in the moneth of Iune in a felde nere vnto the sayde mona∣sterye / and that no marchaunte of Paris nor good towne there about; shulde sell any marchaundyse but onely in the fayre / wyth many other customes to the great auauncement of that house. And after the kynge hadde subdu∣ed the Gascoynes, and the Brytons of Armorica or lytle Brytayne / he then assembled a multytude of bys∣shoppes for to dedycate and halowe the monasterye of saynte Denys in moste solemne wyse. where a great myracle was shewyd of the clensyng of a leper or lazar / that durynge the nyght laye wythin the sayde chyrch, and there beyng in his deuoute pray¦ers, sawe our sauyour Cryste accom¦panyed wyth Peter and Paule, and also the holy martyrs saynte Denys wyth hys two felowes, entre the chyrche by one of the wyndowes / and after halowed the sayde chyrch. whyche after came to the sayd lazar / and commaunded hym to shew vnto the byshoppes, yt he in proper person hadde halowed the sayd chyrche / and for a token and knowlege of ye same, he hadde receyued hys helthe. And for more recorde of the trouth of this mater / our sauyour Cryste, as wyt∣nessyth mayster Robert Gagwyn, & also the frenche cronicle, drewe of the skynne of the face of the sayde lazar, and threwe yt agayne a stone, where yt remayneth at thys daye to be sene. The whyche token when Dagobert and his byshoppes vppon the morne after behelde and sawe / they beynge greatly ameruaylyd, laft of any for∣ther besynesse touchynge the dedyfy∣enge of the sayde chyrche. For thys myracle great concurse of people ye∣rely in the .vi. kalendis of Marche cōmyth wyth great deuocyon vnto ye sayd monastery, there makyng theyr oblacions / fermly beleuyng that the sayde chyrch was halowed with Cry¦stes own hand. when Dagobert had this besynesse wyth other {per}fyted & en¦dyd / he then called a great counsayll
of his lordes spyrytuall and tēporall at hys cytye of Biguage, where he beyng set betwene his .ii. sonnes Si¦gebert & Clodoueus / he made a long preposycyon & oracyon concernynge the allegyaunce / whyche he exhorted hys lordes to owe and bere to hym for the terme of his lyfe, and after to hys two sonnes there beynge pren∣sent. And then he exhorted his .ii. son∣nes charitably to loue / and that they shulde in moste fraternall wyse con∣tynue theyr lyues. The whyche pre∣posycyon fynyshed / he there in that presence made his testament, that be¦fore he hadde causyd to be wryten in iiii. sondry skynnes endentyd, to be rad, and then sealyd wyth certayn of theyr sealys / wherof that one he wyl∣lyd to be kept in the treasory of saynt Denys, the .ii. in the treasorye of the cytye of Lyons, the .iii. in the tresory of Mees in Austracy, whyche howe is named Lorayne, and the .iiii. in the kynges tresorye. And when the kynge had orderyd hys matiers som deale to hys purpose / he dyssoluyd thys counsayll, and cōmaundyd eue¦ryche estate vnto hys owne countre / and after was somwhat besyed wyth the rebellyon of the forenamed Bry∣tōs and Gascoynes & such other ma∣ters, the whyche I passe ouer for length of tyme. Then the kynge lastely was syke of the flyx / and was brought by hys desyre vnto the monastery of saynte Denys. where after he had commyt∣ted hys wyse Nantyld wyth her son Clodoue{us} vnto the guydyng & tuy∣cyon of a noble man of Fraūce, & thē mayster of hys Paleys named Agay¦nus / he dyed, when he had reygned xiiii. yeres / & was buryed with great pompe in the forenamed monastery. Of this Dagobert is reported by myne authour, & also the frenche cro¦nycle besyde other wryters, that an holy ancre or heremyte of Fraunce beynge in his medytacyons, shuld se a company of fendes / whyche beyng in the see shuld haue amonge theym in a bote the soule of Dagobert, and were conueyenge yt towarde payne. But thys spiryte ceasyd not to crye & to call to saynt Denis and his felow¦es for helpe / the whyche lastely came clad in whyte vestymentes & delyue∣red that soule from the paynes of his enymyes, and conueyed it vnto euer¦lastynge ioy / as more at length and wyth more cyrcūstaunce yt ys decla¦red in the bokys beforesayde. Anglia. THE .CXXXIII. CHAPITER. CAdwallus or Cadwalyne the sonne of Cadwan lastely spo∣ken of in ye cronycle of mych Britayn as testyfyeth Guydo, Gaufryde, and other / beganne hys reygne ouer the Brytons in the yere of Crystes incar¦nacyon .vi. hundred & .xxxv / & ye fyrst yere of the fyrst Dagobert then kyng of Fraunce / and also the .xii. yere of Kyngilsus & Quichillinus then kyn¦ges of westsaxon. This Cadwallus was stronge and myghty, & warryd strongly vpon the Saxōs nere vnto hym / and wanne from them both cas¦tels and townes, and droue theym backe into the lande towarde Lon∣don. wherof herynge Penda kynge of Mercia / he assembled his Saxōs and made towarde Cadwall. But he was in the ende dystressyd / and fayn to seche and purchace the fauoure of Cadwal, and lyue vnder his tribute. This Penda after this was in great fauour with Cadwall / in so myche yt he toke parte wyth Cadwall agayne his other Saxon kynges, as after shall appere. About thys tyme Kyn∣gylsus one of the kynges of westsa∣xons
/ was by the doctryne of ye bles∣syd man Berin{us} cōuertyd to ye ryght beleue, and cristyned of hym at the ci¦tye of Dortyke or Dorchester. And Oswald kynge of Northumberland was hys godfather / and weddyd his doughter afterwarde. And then that cytye was geuen to the byshop, to the ende that he shuld there ordeyne hys see / where the sayde Berin{us} sat .xiiii. yeres after, & there was buryed / tyll Beda bishop of wynchester trāslatyd his body to ye citye of wynchester: all be it yt the chanōs of Dorchester sayē, that the sayd bodye of holy Beryne was not taken thens but a nother in the stede of hym. And yet in tokē ther¦of / a beers of wonder worke stādyth at this day ouer that graue / where ye holy man was fyrst buryed. It shuld seme that this cytye of Dorchester is now called Dorset. Thys see was in the tyme of wyllyam conqueroure chaunged to Lyncolne. About thys tyme Sigebertus or after some Segebertus kynge of Eestenglande or Norfolke, whyche reygned there next his brother Corp¦waldus / ordeyned letters to be ler∣nyd, and set scolys in dyuerse places of his kyngdome / and ordeyned ouer thē schole maysters & pedagoges, as he somtyme hadde seen in Fraunce. The whyche Sygebert was conuer¦tyd to Crystes fayth by the doctryne of an holy man named Felix / ye which he was fyrste acqueynted wyth in Fraūce or in Burgoyne. The whych Felix came soone after that acqueyn¦taunce into Eestanglia or Norfolke / where the kynge made hym byshop of Dūwyche nowe called Thetford. Lastelye the kynge betoke hys kyng¦dome vnto hys neuew Egritus / and became a munke in an abbay whych he hym selfe buyldyd. But when Penda kynge of Mer∣cia warryd after in that coūtrey / the sayde Sygebert was agayne hys wyll pulled oute of the sayde mona∣stery, and went in armes, or as some testyfye vnarmyd wyth a whyte rod in hys hande nycely, & so was slayne, and well nere all his hoste of knygh∣tes that came wyth hym to that feld. By this rehersayll apperyth here dyscorde of wryters of the begyn∣nyng of this sayd kyngdome of Eest¦anglis. For yf yt were true that this beganne as wytnessyth Policrony∣con in the .iiii. chapyter of hys fyfte boke, in the yere of grace .iiii. hūdred lxxx. and .xii, as before also I haue shewed in the .lxxx. and .xvi. chapyter of this worke: then myght yt not a∣gree wyth conuenyency of tyme, that this Sygebert or Sebert shulde rey¦gne as kynge at those dayes nowe mynded. wherfore ye sayenge of Guy¦do is more concordaunte / whyche shewyth this kyngdome to haue his begynnynge in the yere of grace .v.C. & .lxx, as in the ende of the forsayd chapyter yt is there shortly touched. Then yt foloweth in the story / af∣ter the deth of this Sigebert, Anna was made kyng of Eestanglis. And durynge the reygne of Sige∣bertus, befell the wōder yt is tolde of that holy man Furce{us} / as is shewed at lēgth in the .xiii. chapiter of the .v. boke of Policronicon aforesayd / and in the .xiii. tytle of the .vi. chapyter of the .ii. parte of ye famous worke cal∣led Summa Antonini. And about this season reygned or began to reygne the cursyd secte of ye detestable & false prophete Macho∣met / ye which syns ye tyme hath so en¦fected / yt it hath enfectyd .ii. prīcipall {per}tes of ye world, as Asia, & Affrica / & the more part of ye third named Eu¦ropa / & dayly wynneth vpon the cry¦sten peple great lādes & possessions. Aboute the .vii. yere of thys forena∣med Cadwall kynge of Britons / rey¦gned
in Kent a Saxon kyng named Ercombertus, the whyche had that pryncypate .xx. yeres nobly. And amonge other of hys famous dedys / he reuyued and quyckened agayne the fayth of Cryste, that in some places of hys kyngedome was sore appallyd. For he destroyed the temples of false goddes thorough all that countrey / and ordeyned by the aduyse of his clergye, the tyme of lente to be fasted. He wedded the dou¦ghter of Anna kynge of Eestanglis named Sexburga / of whom he recey¦uyd a doughter and named her Eu∣kengoda / ye whyche after was a men¦chon or nunne in the abbey of Bryd¦gence in Fraunce before mynded, where Ethelburga ye wyfe somtyme of Edwyn kynge of Northoumber∣lande serued god, as in the hundred and .xxx. chapyter precedynge yt ys shewed / and eyther of them was ab∣besse of the same place. And though at those dayes there were many ab∣beys in thys yle of myche Brytayne / yet many both of men and of women sayled into other landes / as Fraūce, and Burgoyne and other places, be∣cause the conuersacyon and lyuynge of those countres were of more fame and perfeccyon then was then vsyd in thys yle of Brytayne. About thys tyme as yt were about the .viii. yere of Cadwall / dyed kyn¦gylsus kyng of westsaxons, when he had reygned with his brother and a∣lone .xxxi. yeres. And Kenwalcus his sonne was kynge after hym / ye which in ye begynnyng of his reygne wolde not be crystyned / & forsoke hys wyfe the doughter of Pēda, & toke to hym a nother. wherfore Penda in aduen∣gynge hys doughter / gatheryd hys hoste, and chasyd Kynwalcus out of his kyngdome / & kept hym thens .iii. yeres. By whyche season was Anna kynge of Eestanglis / & there conuer¦tyd to the feyth of Cryste, & cristyned of Felix aforenamed then byshoppe of Dūwyke or Thetforde / and after he recoueryd hys kyngdome, by the ayde and assystence of the sayde An∣na. when Kenwalcus was restoryd to hys lande / he made a byshoppes see at Kaerguent or wynchestre / and ordeyned there a byshop named Agil¦bert a frenche man of byrthe, but he was called out of Irlād. The which when he had sytten there a certayn of tyme / he was put thēs I ne wote for what cause / and in his place was set an other named wyn. Of this wyn, as sayeth Policronicon, the towne of wynchester toke ye name, as he de∣claryth in ye .liii. chapyter of his fyrst boke / as yt were wynnes cytye. But he was also putthens / and then was Leutherius byshop, and after Leu∣therius succedyd Cedda. And after Theodorus the archbyshop of Caun¦terbury ordeyned two byshoppes to that prouynce of westsaxō. That one at wynchester / & to that was subiecte two coūtreys Southrey and South hampshyre. And that other see he or∣deyned at Shyreborne, to the which were subiecte .vi. coūtreys, that is to saye Berkshyre, wyltshyre, Somer∣setshyre, Dorsetshyre, Deuenshyre, & Cornewayll. But in wyllyam the cō¦querours tyme ye see of Shyreborne was tourned to Salysbury with the see of Rāmysburye. It was not longe after that Ken∣walcus was warreyd with the kyng of Brytons / the whyche fought with hym at a place called wyght Gosne∣borough, and were of him there ouer¦comyn. Then Cadwall assembled a newe hoste of Brytons / and mette wyth Kenwalcus at a place called the hyll of Pent / where after longe fyghte the Brytons were putte to flyghte.
YE haue harde before how that bles¦syd man Oswall the son of Ethel∣fryde, was ordeyned kynge of Northumberlande / the whyche con∣tynued hys lyfe in iustyce and ver∣tue as kynge, by the terme of .ix. ye∣res. But Penda kynge of Mercia, that to hym & to all crysten men had great disdayne and enuye / about the ix. yere of Cadwall made warre vp∣pon Oswald, and slew hym in a feld callyd Meserfeld / where after hys deth god shewed for hym many my∣racles. But after one yere of his deth Oswy his yonger brother recoueryd the kyngdome / and buryed his hed in the chyrcheyarde of Lyndesar, for the bodye was conueyed by the Pa∣gans and deuyded in sundry peces. But yt is sayde that the hed is nowe at Durham betwene saynt Cutbert∣tus armes. And the other parte of ye bodye whyche was longe after foun¦den / was had to the abbay of Bur∣deaux, by Ostrida doughter of Os∣wy & quene of Mercia. where straūg¦nesse was made by the ruler of that hous for the receyte of those relykes, tyll a myracle or dyuyne token there was shewyd. But after the sayde bo¦dye & bones were brought to Glow∣ceter to an hous of chanōs / and one of hys armes is at Peterboroughe, hole of fleshe & fell as some haue and tellen. whan Oswy had a season ru∣lyd hys kyngdome / he fande vnle∣full meanes to slee Oswyn that was kynge of Deyra. This Oswyn was the son of Eaufrycus eldest brother of Oswalde / whyche Oswyn was good of condycyon, and there wyth both meke and mylde. when thys Os¦wyn was slayn by the consent of his neuewe Oswy / then Oswy toke to hym as felow of that kyngdome his broders sonne Odylwaldus the son of Oswalde. Thys Oswalde gaue vnto Cedda byshoppe of whynches∣ter before named a groūde in a place of the North coūtrey in the hygh hyl¦les called Lastyngaye, for to buylde vpon an abbay, which he there buyl¦dyd / & after there taught his brother Chymbyllus how he shuld rule that place. Pēda kynge of Mercia, which forgate not the strengthynge and fa¦uourynge that Anna kynge of Eest∣anglys had shewyd to Kenwalchus hys doughters husband and his eny¦mye / gaderyd a power of knyghtes, and yode agayne the sayde Anna, & slewe hym in playne batayll. And the same yere one Botulphus buyldyd an abbay besyde Lindecolne or Lin∣colne, in a place that hyght I canno. And as wytnessyth Beda in the .iiii. chapiter of his thyrd boke / thys yere whych shuld be the .xxi. yere of ye reygne of Cadwall, Penda that of thys former vyctory was supprysyd wyth great pryde, came wyth hys hoste into the boundes of Northum∣land / entendynge to slee Oswy, as before he had slayne his brother Os∣walde. wherof whē Oswy was ware he assemblyd hys knyghtes & made towarde hym. And for affynyte of maryage ye was betwene theyr chyl∣dren, as after shall be shewed, and other causes / Oswy offeryd to hym many great offers, to the entente to haue had hym refused that batayll, & to haue hadde peace with hym. when Oswy perceyued the obstyna∣cye and pryde of Pēda, and saw that by no reasonable offers he myghte of hym wynne no peace / he sayde / sens thys paynym can not receyue our gyftes and proffers that we ha∣ue offeryd to hym, we shall offer thē to hym that can receyue theym. And anon he made hys auowe vn∣to god, that yf he myght haue vycto¦ry of his enymyes, he shuld offer his
doughter Elfleda to hym wyth suf∣fycyent possessyons for to buylde .xii. abbayes / and after ioyned in batayll with the sayde Penda in the coūtrey of Ledis not farre from yorke / which was so sore foughten, yt the lyke ther¦of was not seen many yeres beforne. But fynally Penda was slayne, and xxx. of his chefe captayns with hym / and yet he had thryes the people that Oswy hadde. And those that scaped the shot and the swerde / were for the more partye drowned in the ryuer of wynwed, whyche was nere vnto the place of that batayll. And among the prysoners that were taken at this felde / the wyfe of Penda was one, and her sonnes vncle named Egfri∣dus was an other. Then Oswy yel∣ded hys thankes to god / and accor∣dynge to hys former promyse, he of∣fryd hys doughter Elfleda or Enfle¦da of the age of .iii. yeres vnto god, and toke her to the lore of Hylda ab∣besse of Hertsey or Hertis iland. And after that the sayde Hylda remoued to the abbaye of Stremshalte in the vale of whitby .xxx. myle from yorke / where she was after abbesse, & ye sayd Elfleda also. And Oswy as he had promysed / gaue landes and rentes to buyld .xii. abbeys. wherof .vi. were in the prouynce of Brēnicia, and .vi. in the prouynce of Deyra. This fornamed Penda hadde dy∣uerse sonnes by accorde of wryters / that is to meane wolfer{us} weda, and Egfridus, besyde other not mynded. To this seconde sonne weda, Oswy had beforetyme maryed a doughter of his by cōsent of Penda his fader / The whyche weda by helpe of Oswy was made kynge of south Mercia, the whyche lordshyp is seueryd from the northe Mercia by the ryuer of Trent, and conteyned by recorde of holy Beda fyue thousande houshol∣des. This weda also promysed when he maryed the sayd doughter of Os∣wy, that he shulde become a crysten man / the whyche he perfourmyd af∣ter the deth of his father. But when he hadde scantly reygned thre yeres ouer the sayd Southmercis / he was by the treason of hys wyfe slayne. And after that kyngdome fell to wol¦ferus the other brother / the whyche hadde weddyd the doughter of Er∣combert kynge of Kent named Er∣menylda. This wolferus was short¦ly after crystyned or before / so that he is accōpted for the fyrste cristened kyng that reygned in Mercia. This was fader to Keneredus, & that holy virgyne and menchon wereburga. And for yt is longe that I spake of Kenwalcus kynge of westsaxons / yt is to be noted that after he hadde ouercomen the Brytons, as before is shewyd, and at that tyme had not perfyted the byshoppes see of Kaer∣guent or wynchester, he then besyed hym there about. And accordyng to the wyll of kyngylsus hys father / he gaue to the sustentacyon of the sayd see all the lande whyche laye wythin vii. myles of the sayde cytye, as af∣fermeth the authoure of the Floure of hystoryes / and fynyshed yt som∣dele to hys purpose. But let no man thynke that it was buylded as yt is nowe. For nother yt nor none other ben at this daye stan¦dynge monastery, paleys, nor other / but yt they haue ben sens those daies alteryd, and new chaūged, and some clerely throwē downe, and some new buylded / all be yt that many stande vppon theyr fyrste foundacyon as thys yet dothe. Soone after that Kenwalcus had endyd this worke / he made warre vp¦pon wolfer{us} of Mercia. But in that iourney fortune was not to hym fa∣uourable / for he loste thereby, & wan nothynge of hys entent.
It was not long after that Ercom¦bert kynge of Kent dyed / and his son Egbert was kyng after hym .ix. yere. And soone thereafter fell great mor¦talyte and sekenesse in thys lande of Brytayne / the whyche cōtynued and encreasyd more and more durynge ye lyfe of Cadwall now kyng of Bry∣tons and of Cadwaldyr hys succes∣sour or sonne, after some writers. In the whyche season and begynnynge of this mortalyte and sekenesse, dyed many byshoppes in this lande / in so myche that Uitalcanus then beynge pope, ordeyned Theodorus archbys¦shoppe of Caūterbury to haue ye rule of the chyrches of Brytayne. Somwhat before this tyme, Benet that was in good fauour wyth kyng Ofwy, & dyscendyd of ryche kynne forsoke seruyce and house, and all hys kynred, and became Crystes ser¦uaunt. He went .v. sythes to Rome and came agayne / and at euery tyme he brought wyth hym relykes or bo∣kes of Crystes lore. And lastely he was made munke / and buyldyd .ii. abbeys, that one ouer agayn ye other vppon the ryuer of wyre, that ren∣neth in the countrey of. This Benet was the fyrst yt brought the crafte of glasyng into this lande / and he was Abbot of both the fore∣sayde abbayes / and toke to hys lore Beda when he was but .vii. yeres of age, and taughte hym durynge hys lyfe. Of the vertue and pacyence of thys holy munke and byshoppe Be∣net, I myghte make a longe reher∣sayll. But for the holynes of his lyfe is declaryd in the legende of sayntes and other bokes of authoryte / here for lengthynge of the tyme I ouer passe yt, and wyll retourne agayne to Oswy. The whyche when he had longe reygned ouer the Northum∣bers / he made Cedda that was ab∣botte of Lastyngay, archbishoppe of yorke, more by wyll then by skyll / and put out wylfrida the archbishop of that see. But yt was not longe af∣ter that Cedda was depryued of that dygnyte by the authoryte of tharche∣bisshop Theodorus / as he depryuyd dyuerse other that tyme, whych came to theyr benefyces agayne the ordy∣naunce of the holy lawes of Crystes chyrche / and made hym by great in∣staunce after thys, byshoppe of west∣saxons. And about the .xxx. yere of the reygne of Cadwall Cissa that was father to Ine kynge of westsa∣xons / buyldyd ye abbey of Abyndon. In these dayes the munkes and cler¦gye of Brytayne, set all theyr myn∣des to serue god and not the worlde, the herte and not the wombe. wher∣fore they were then hadde in great re¦uerence & honour / so yt they were thē receyuyd wyth all worshyp. And as they went by ye stretys & wayes / men that sawe them, wold ronne to them and desyre thē blessynges. And well was hym that thē myght gyue vnto them possessyons, & buyldyd to them houses & chyrches. But as they en∣creasyd in ryches of the worldly trea¦soure / so they dyscreaced in heuenly treasour / as in the dayes of Alure∣dus somdeale beganne, and sythen that tyme hath spronge not all to the pleasure of god / wherof all is to be cōmytted to his pleasure. Then they plyed nothynge that was worldely / but gaue them to prechynge and te∣chynge of the worde of our sauyour / and folowyd the lyfe that they prea∣chyd, by gyuynge of good example. And ouer that they were so voyde of couetyse, that they receyuyd no pos∣sessyons, but yf yt were perforce. THE .CXXXV. CHAPITER. OSwy kynge of Northumber∣lande dyed / and Edfrydus his
sonne was kyng after hym .xv. yeres Hys fader had reygned wyth hys fe∣lowes Oswynus and Odyswalde xxviii. yeres. Edfrydus or Egfrydus had to wyfe that holy woman Ethel¦fryde, yt before was the wyfe of Ton¦bert{us} prynce of the south Eyrwayes, the whyche whan Egfrydus hadde holden .xii. yeres as hys wyfe, and myghte not in that whyle haue leue of hyr to deale wyth hyr carnally for prayer nor great gyfte / he then gaue to hyr lycence to be a menchyon at Colud vnder Aebba, that than was awnte vnto hym. And after she reme¦ned to Ely, and there was abbesse, & lyued in greate penaunce and absty∣nence / and dyed there, after she had ben .vii. yere abesse. And Kenwalcus kynge of weste Saxon, dyed about the yere of the reygne of Cadwall kyng of Brytōs, the .xxxix. when he had regned ouer them .xxx. yeres. And hys sonne Ke∣newinus succedyd hym / after that Sexburga hys mother or wyfe to hys fader, had ruled that prouynce one yere. Cedda the bysshop of westsaxons dyed / and hys deken wenfrede was hys successoure. And whan he was put down / the abbot of Medāpstede that now is called Peterboroughe, was there bysshop after hym. Sone after this tyme dyed wyna bysshop of Lōdon / after whom was bysshop Erkenwald, the whych was brother to Ethelburga or Alborough the Menchen, and after abbesse of Berkynge in Essex. Thys holy bys∣shop Erkenwalde foundyd the mo∣nasteryes of Chertsey in Southery, and Berkynge afore sayde / whyche place hath ben preserued sens ye fyrst foundacyon. But that of Chertsey was throwen downe by the Danes and reedyfyed by Edgar kynge of Englande, as after foloweth. After the deth of wolpherus kyng of Mercia / reygned hys brother E∣theldredus. And the wyfe of wolphe¦rus named Ermenilda, was made a menchon at Ely / and wereburga his doughter was also made a nonne at Trikyngham, and dyed at hambur∣gam, where she laye in the Erth .iii. hundred yeres hole and sounde / and after that she was conueyde to Che∣ster. Thys Etheldredus kynge of Mercia had .iii. holy doughters / yt is to say Mylburga, Myldreda, and Mylguida / and a sonne of great ho∣lynesse named Meresyn. But after some wryters all these forsayde chyl¦dren shulde be the chyldren of wol∣pherus and not of Etheldrede. And wolpherus also had .ii. holy susters named Kynedda and Kyneswyda, bothe nonnes and buryed at Peter∣borough / where saynte Ethelwolde buyldyd after an abbey of maydens. ye haue harde before how wylfryd was put out of ye see of yorke / where∣fore he went to Rome and complay∣ned hym to Agathon the pope / and was well allowed in some thynges. But the kynge and Theodorus had there such protectours and frendes / that he retourned without spedynge of hys cause. wherfore he retourned vnto the South Saxons, and buyl¦ded an abbey in Silesey, and prea∣chyd to the south Saxons .xv. yeres, and conuertyd myche people / and shewed there a greate wonder. For where by ye terme of .iii. yeres before hys commynge there fell no rayne vppon the grounde / by hys prayer / god sent to them rayne, & the groūde began to burgen and wax grene, yt before was bareyn & dryed for lacke of water. He also taught to them the crafte of fysshynge. Egfrydus kynge of Northumber∣lande claymed the lande that Ethel∣drede kynge of Mercia helde / for the
whyche dyuerse assembles of treaty bytwene them were had, but all were dyssoluyd wythout agremēt. where∣fore eyther {per}ty gathered hys strēgth and met vppon a playne nere vnto ye ryuer of Trent / where was foughtē bytwene them a longe and sharpe fyght. In the whiche among a great nombre on bothe parties, was slayn ye brother of Egfryde named Elswy¦nus / but Edfryde or Egfryde had the better. Than after this batayle meanes of peace were agayn trea∣tyd / so yt fynally Edfryde had great summes of Money in recompence∣ment of his Brothers deth / & so re∣styd the sayd .ii. kynges accorded. In this batayll was takē as priso∣ner a knyght of Egfryde, the which after hys takynge was solde to one Fryson by the knyghtes of Ethel∣fryde. This Fryson to thentent to haue his prysoner the shortelyer redemed kept hym in bandes of iron which prysoner had to his brother a preest & a vertuous man, that for the delyuere of his brother prayed dayly By meane of whose prayers as oftē as ye sayd preste sang masse / so often were the bandes of iron lousyd from the prysoner duryng the tyme of the masse. The whyche so cōtynued, tyll he was clerely delyuered, and hys raunson payde. And in thys yere apperyd stella co¦mata a blasynge sterre, whyche beto∣keneth deth or mortalyte of ye people And in the yere folowynge dyed of ye Epedemye sykenesse, the holy abbes of Ely saynt Etheldrede / hyr suster Sexburga that somtyme hadde ben wyfe to Ercobert kyng of Kent, was hyr successoure. And thys yere also dyed Helda ye holy abbesse of whythy before spoken of, whiche was neuew to Edwyne lately kynge of Northū∣berlande. In thys abbey were also bretherne vnder the rule of Hylda, as at these dayes ben at Syō vnder the abbesse there. wherfore sondry of thē were made bisshoppes, as Besa, wylfryde, and other. Amonge these bretherne was one named Cedman a man of greate perfeccyon / ye which by inspyracyon was taught to make dytyes and songes to moue men to deuocion, wherin he passyd all other at those dayes. Soone after thys tyme Theodor{us} for dyuerse causes, kepte a synode or counceyll of Bysshoppes and other men of the chyrche at Hatfelde. By authoryte of whych counceyll he de∣uyded the prouynce of Mercia, that Sexwolphus then ruled alone, into v. bysshopryches / that is one to Che∣stre, the seconde to worcetyr, ye thyrd to Lychefelde, the fourth to Cedema in Lyndesey, & the .v. to Dorchester. About the .xlvi. yere of the reygne of Cadwall, Kenewynus kynge of westsaxons had occasyon of warre agayne ye Brytons, so that they met nere vnto the west see / where after a sharpe skyrmysshe ye Brytōs were chasyd. And soone after Egfrydus kynge of Northumberlande made warre vpon the Pyctes or Scottes / bycause they fauouryd greatly ye cest anglis agayne hym. But lastly by colour or fleyng backe / they brought Edfryde into a streyte amonge Hyl∣les and mountaynes, and slewe hym there with a grete part of his people. And after his deth a bastard brother of hys named Alfridus Notus was kynge of Northumberlande, & reyg∣ned there .xviii. yeres, as wytnessyth willyam wryter of storyes of kynges And shortly after dyed Cadwall or Cadwalyne kynge of Brytōs / when he hadde reygned as testyfyeth Gal∣fryde, Guydo, & other .xlviii. yeres. But nother Polycronyca, nor none of the other authours of authoryte, which Policronica allegyd / shewyth
any lyke actes of thys Cadwall as Galfryde doth / nor yet that he shuld be buryed to the terrour and fere of the Saxons / or an image of brasse set of hym vppon an horse ouer the west gate of Londō called Ludgate or yet the chyrche of saynt Martyne there now stondynge shulde be buyl¦dyd by the Brytons, to the ende to pray for the sayd Cadwall and hys Frendes / or ye Cadwaladrus, whych of Beda is named Cedwalla, shulde be hys sonne / as of ye sayd Gaufryde is affermed. Francia. THE .CXXXVI. CHAPITER. CLodoueus ye yon∣ger sonne of Da∣gobert, & of Nau∣tylda hys wyfe / be¦ganne hys reygne ouer the myddell parte of Fraunce and other partes therof, in the yere of our lorde .vi.C.xlv / and the .x. yere of Cadwall then kynge of Brytons. And hys elder brother Sigebert was made kynge of Austracy or Lorayne accordynge to the wyll of Dagobert theyr fader. Thys as before is sayd of some wry¦ters is called Lowes / the which was guyded by hys mother & by the coū∣seyle of Agaynus than mayster of hys Paleys / to whom the fader had by hys lyfe commytted hym, for he at thys daye was yonge of age and of dyscrecyon. And shortly after he was made kynge / all suche porcyon as belonged to the ryght of hys bro∣ther Sigebert, which was the thyrd of hys faders treasour and iewelles, was to hym delyuered. whych dystry¦bucyon made / he sped hym to Orle∣aunce, and thyder called to hym the lordes of Burgoyne, and receyued of them feauty and homage / & ordey¦ned there for hys leutenaunte or de∣putye a noble Burgonyon named Flantas̄ / & gaue to hym in mariage the neuew of hys mother Nautylda named Ranebert. And after with a due charge to hym gyuen for guy∣dyng of the sayd countrey / sent hym and the other lordes into Burgoyn. But wythin a season of tyme after wilibaldus a great man of birth and myght, enuyed this Flantas̄ / in su∣che wyse that he had hym in dysday∣nynge, and began to dystourbe the countrey & the kynges peace. wher∣of herynge Clodoueus / in all hast commaunded the sayd wilibaldus to appere before hym. But whyle wilibaldus sent an erle & a bysshop to ye kynges courte to purchace hym frendys about the kynge / he was in that whyle slayne by the gyle of hys enemy Flantas̄. About the .iiii. yere of the reygne of Clodoueus dyed his mother Nau∣tylda, a woman of great wisdome & of vertuous condicion / and was ho¦norably buryed by Dagobert hyr husbande in the church of saynt De∣nys. Soone after ensued such scar∣cety of corne / y• whete & other grey∣nes were at an excedynge pryce. For after the rate of money nowe currāt, a quarter of whete was worth .ii. markes & a halfe / by meane of which scarcitye myche poore people were famisshed & dyed for defaut. where∣fore the kyng entendyng a remedy for the nedy people / causyd ȳe house or church of saynt Denys that his fader before tyme had coueryd with plates of syluer, to be rased of & co∣ueryd with lede / & that syluer to be dystributyd amonge the poore co∣mōs, to socoure thē agayn the great and huge famyn that then reygned / all be it that this ded was somedea∣le withstanden by Agulphus Abbot of that place for that tyme.
About the .viii. yere of his reygne / the firste Pepyn that than ruled the house of Sigebert kyng of Austra∣cy, dyed. And soone after dyed Agay¦nus mayster of the paleys of Clodo∣ueus. For which .ii. princis in eyther Countreys that they rulyd, great dole and sorowe was for theym ma∣de. After the deth of which sayd Prī∣cis / a noble man & cosyn to Dago∣berte late kynge, was chosen may∣ster of the paleys with Clodoueus Thus kynge Clodoueus otherwy¦se called Lowes, contynued his rey∣gne in great peace & prosperyte, tyll lastly it fell in his mīde that he wol∣de vysyte ye sepulcre of saynt Denys where after he had done certayne obseruaūces, and made his prayers / he wolde nedely se the holy relykes and handle them. wyth the doynge whereof it semed the holy martyrs were not contentyd. For immedy∣ately ensued suche a derknes, that the kynge and all that were aboute hym were wyth it greately astonyed and aferde, in so mych that the kyng loste the vse of reason, and wente from hym selfe more than two ye∣res folowynge. It is wryten of some authours, that the kynge han∣delyd the body of saynte Denys so rabbysshely that he brake one of his armes. But the Frenche booke and mayster Roberte Gagwyne sayen, yt he dysseueryd one of the armes from the sayd holy body / the whych he af∣ter whan he was somdele restoryd to hys helthe, closyd in golde and pre∣cyous stoones, and restored it to the sayd monasterye / and lyued vppon two yeres folowynge that he was amendyd, but not lyke vnto hys for∣mer beynge / so yt he lastly dyed whan he had reygned syke and hole by ye terme of .xvi. yeres, not without vyce as glotony, lechery, & excedyng aue¦ryce. And was buryed by hys paren∣tes in the monasterye forenamed / le∣uynge after hym thre sonnes named Clotharius, Chyldericus, and Theo¦dorych. After whose deth hys wyfe named Batylde / became a nonne in the monastery of Corbye, that she be¦fore tyme had newly renued or reedy¦fyed / and ended there in holy lyfe. THE .CXXXVII. CHAPITER CLotharius the eldest sonne of Clodoueus / was ordeyned kynge of Fraunce, in the yere of our lordes incarnacyon .vi. hundred .lxii / and the .xxvi. yere of Cadwall than kynge of Brytōs. The whych anone as he was somwhat stablysshed / he made the mayster of hys palayes, a myghty man and tyrannous of con∣dycyon named Eboryn / as shall ap∣pere by hys condycyons ensuynge, whan the tyme conuenyent of the ex∣pressement of them shall come. But of thys Clotharius is lefte nothyng in wrytynge of worthy memory / ex∣cepte that the Frenche cronicle sayth that he reygned .iiii. yeres. THE .CXXXVIII. CHAPITER. THeodoricus the second sonne of Clodoueus / beganne hys reygne ouer the Frenchemen, in the yere of grace .vi. hundred .lxvi / and the .xxx. yere of Cadwall than kynge of Brytons. The whych by coūceyll of his lordes sent his yonger brother Chylderych into the lordshyp of Au∣stracy or Lorayne, to guyde that coūtrey / wyth the ayde and assystence of wolphanus a noble man of ye coun∣trey. For Sigeberte laste kynge of that prouynce / was before this tyme dede wythout heyre of hys body. This Theodorych gaue hym all to slowth & rest / so that the gouernaūce of the realme was all in the power of
the mayster of ye paleys, whych was styll contynuynge, the forenamed Eboryne. The whyche among other cruell dedys by hym done / he empry¦soned the holy bishoppe of Oston cal¦led Leodegayr. And lastely after ma¦ny tormentes and vylanyes to hym done / he raced hys eyen oute of hys hedde. This dede wyth many other to the kynges dyshonour he momy¦syd / which all were layd to ye kynges charge, for so myche as the kynge kept most what his paleys. Except ye one season of the yere in the moneth of may / he shulde be broughte wyth great pompe into a place where the people shulde behold hym, and gyue and offer vnto him gyftes / and retur¦ne vnto ye paleys yt he was broughte fro, and there to reste all the yere fo∣lowynge. By meane wherof Eboryn dyd what to hym was lykynge / and vexyd and troubled the people gre∣uously. wherfore by one assent ye lor∣des assembled theym / and by autho∣ryte depryued the kynge of all digny¦tye / and closyd hym in a monastery, there to contynue the resydue of hys lyfe, when he hadde borne the name of a kynge wythout execucyon of the acte therunto belongynge .iii. yeres / and the cruell Eboryn they exyled to Luxon or Luxunborgh in the pro∣uynce of Burgoyne / and not to de∣parte thens vppon payn of hys lyfe. THE .CXXXIX. CHAPITER. CHildericus or Hildericus the thyrde sonne of Clodoueus, that was sent to rule the prouynce of Austracy / was ordeyned kynge of Fraunce in the yere of grace .vi. hun¦dred .lxix. & the .xxxiii. yere of Cadwal before named. Of the whyche dede the sayde lordes shortely after repen∣ded thē. For this Chylderych which was yonge and of lyght maners, op¦pressyd his subiectes greuously / and vsed the lawes of hys progenytours after hys pleasure and wyll / & wold nothynge be aduertised nor ruled by wolphanus before named, ye whyche was before tyme assigned to hym for hys counceyllour and guyde. But in augmentynge his malyce / he caused a noble mā of his realme named Bo¦lyde, wythout gylte or trespace or greuous offence doynge, to be boun¦den to a stake, and there betyn tyll he yelded the spyrite. For ye whych cruel¦tye and other / the lordes wyth the cō¦mons murmuryd sore agayne hym, ferynge lyke punyssyon wythout de∣seruynge. wherfore they conspyryd agaynste hym, and moste specyally two noble men of byrth & of myghte named Iugebert & Amabert. which two wyth other awayted theyr tyme & season whē they myght fynde tyme cōueniēt to bryng ye kyng out of lyfe. And vpon a daye when yt kyng with his wyfe and small companye wyth theym, were in the wood in theyr dys¦porte and game / the sayde two lor∣des accompanyed purposely fell vp∣pon hym & slewe hym there and hys wyfe also great wyth chyld, ye which ranne betwene her lord and them, to ye entent to haue sauyd her lord and husbande from the dynt of ye sworde. The whyche dede was done when ye sayde Childeriche had reygned ouer the Frenchemen after moste wryters two yeres. THE .CXL. CHAPITER. THeodoricus before deposyd / was by the lordes of Fraūce agayne restoryd to hys former dy∣gnyty, in the yere of our lorde .vi. hū¦dred .lx. and .xi / and the .xxxv. yere of Cadwall forenamed. Therof when Eboryn was warned, he anon drew vnto the kynges presence. By whose fauour & hys owne strength he was
agayne restoryd to his former digny¦tie & honour / so that he was in lyke authorite as he before tyme had ben. Then he gatheryd to hym great strength, and chasyd Lyndesyle then mayster of the paleys vnto a place named Boccauyle / and shortly after was possessyd of the kynges treaso∣rye. After the which season, this Ebo¦ryn faynynge loue and amytye vnto the sayde Lyndesyle, trayterouslye slewe hym. And when Eboryne had thus delyuerid Līdesyle / he thought he myght the better exercyse his olde tyranny and wylfull actes. So that then he exylyd dyuerse prelates and men of the chyrche / and sette in theyr places suche as hym lyked. wherof the nobles of Fraunce beynge aduer¦tysed / and specyally Martyne and Pepyn two of the most nobles of the regyon: they called to them assystēce to wythstande the tyrannye of Ebo∣ryne / the whyche yf yt myghte be so sufferyd, shulde destroye the comon¦wele of the lande. Then this Pepyn (whyche after the rehersayle before made in the .C. and .xxxii. chapyter, shulde be the seconde of that name, and surnamed Uetulus and Breuis / also yet by conuenyency of the tyme to me yt semeth to be one man that ruled in the tyme of Dagobert and nowe, all be yt the frenche cronycle meaneth two sondry persones) wyth the forenamed Martyne, assembled a great hoste, and gaue batayll vnto the sayde Eboryn. But that was to theyr harme / for the loste they felde, and were coacted to flee, the one to the cytye of Laon, and that other to Austracye. And Eboryne whych amonge vsed his accustomyd treason, vnder dyssy¦myled loue slew the sayde Martyne, as he before had slayne Lyndesyle. In thys tyme flouryd Harmefre∣ditus a nere kynnesman of the holy byshop Leodegayre, that Eboryn be¦fore had martyred, as before is shew¦yd. The whyche Harmefreditus be∣rynge in mynde the passyon of hys sayde kynnesman / waytyd his tyme, and slewe the sayde Eboryne. After whose deth dyssencyon grewe amōg the Frenche men, for the admyssyon of a mayster of the paleys / all be yt that after the sayde varyaunce one Graccon was chosen and admytted. But yt was longe after that Gyllo∣marus his sonne, putte hys father from the rule therof. Thys after he hadde a whyle occupyed / he dyed of sodayne deth. After whom succedyd agayne hys father Graccon or Ga∣racon / the whyche also dyed shortely after. Then beganne newe questyons a∣monge the nobles of Fraūce for this offyce / so that lastely they chase a man of lowe byrth and vnmete to that Rome named Bethayr or Bar∣thayr. But Pepyn whych by all this season was in ye coūtrey of Austracy, and harde of the contrauersies and dyuerse opynyons of the Frenche men / assembled to him a strōge hoste, and spedde hym towarde the kynge / entendynge to haue the rule of hym, rather then suche other that were of lesse authoryte and honoure. wherof the kynge beynge warned / by the pro¦uysyon of Barthayer foresayde, he gatheryd hys armye and mette with Pepyn. And after a sharpe fyghte betwene bothe hostes hadde / Bar∣thayre was slayne and the kyng cha¦syd / and finally was forced to admyt Pepyn for the mayster and gouer∣nour of his paleys. But for as mych as Pepyn had thē the rule of Austra¦cy, and myght not well ouerse bothe charges / he therfore purueyed vnder hym a substitute named Nordobert, whyle he returned into Austracy or Lorayne. And shortly after dyed the
kynge / when he hadde borne ye name therof by the terme of .xix. yeres / le∣uynge after hym two sonnes named Clodoueus and Childebertus. Anglia. THE .CXL. CHAPITER. CAdwaladrus that of ye reuerente Be∣da is named Ced∣walla / beganne to aryse and rule the Brytons and also the westsaxons, in the yere of grace vi. hundred .lxxx. and thre / and ye .xii. yere of Theodoricus then kynge of Fraunce / and also the last yere of Ke¦newinus or Kentwinus then kynge of westsaxon. This of Gaufryde and other authours wyth ye englyshe cro¦nicle is called the sonne of Cedwall. But wyllyam that wrote the actes & dedys of kynges sayth, that he was the sonne of Kenebryght / and descen¦dyd lynyally of the blode of Cerdic{us} the fyrste kynge of the westsaxons. The which Cadwaladyr or Cedwal¦la made warre vpon Lothari{us} kyng of Kent, and destroyed myche of that prouynce / and wan the yle of wyght, and gaue the fourth parte therof vn¦to saynte wylfryde / in the whyche sayde .iiii. parte were accompted .iii. hundred housholdes. The whyle that Calwaladyr was besyed in one parte of Kent / his bro∣ther named Mulkyn wyth a certayn of knyghtes was beseged, and laste¦ly brente in a nother parte therof. In reuengement wherof, Cadwaladyr of new destroyed a more parte of the sayde prouynce. Contynuynge the whyche warre, Lotharius forenamed was woūded and dyed. After whom Edricus was kynge / ye whych reygned but a shorte season. Aboute this tyme saynte Cutbert was byshop of Hogulstald or Dur∣ham / & after byshop of Lyndefarn. But lastely he rufusyd that / and be¦came an anker in the yle of Farne, and there dyed. This ile now is cal∣led holy ilande. Thē Cadwaladyr made warre vp¦pon Athelwold kynge of Southsa∣xons or Southsex / and slewe hym in playne batayll, and after made hys prouynce thrall to hym. But thys agreeth not with ye former sayeng re¦hersyd in the .lxxx. & .xiiii. chapyter of this worke precedynge / where yt is sayde that the kyngdome of South∣saxons enduryd but a hundred .xii. ye¦res. By whyche reason this Ethel∣wolde or Athelwolde shulde not at this season be kyng of Southsaxōs. For the terme of a hundred and .xii. yeres was expyrd more then .lxxx. and .viii. yeres before this daye. But ye shall vnderstande yt this forsayde terme of a hundred and .xii. yeres / is ment for the contynuaunce of this kyngedome or they were subdued, and the kynges therof named vnder kynges as this Ethelwold was. Then yt foloweth when Cadwa∣ladyr hadde ruled the Brytons and also the westsaxons, by the terme of thre yeres, as wytnessyth Ranulphe munke of Chester / he then of pure de¦uocyon renouncyd the pompe and pryde of the worlde, and yode in pyl¦grymage to Rome / where of the fyrst Sergius then pope, he was confyr∣myd and after made a white munke, and contynued there hys lyfe tyme in perfyte holynes. Of thys Cadwaladyr or Cedwal¦la many and dyuers opynyons are wryten of authours, both of hys rey¦gne and also of the contynuaunce therof / and ouer that, of the tyme whē he forsoke hys lande. wherin is great varyaunce, as I haue shewed
in the table in the begynnyng of this symple worke. So that it shuld seme that these two names shulde sounde to be sondry persones / wherof the cō¦trary is a certayned by the foresayde Ranulphe / where as he sayeth that Cadwaladr{us} or Cedwalla was but one persone, the whyche was laste kyng of Britons and of westsaxons. Also for so mych as they ioyned next vnto Cambria or walys. If I shuld here bryng in the cause of the auoydynge of thys lande by Cadwaladyr, as is rehersyd by Gau¦fryde / yt wolde aske a longe tracte of tyme / and also to me yt apperyth the more doutefull, that yt is not te∣styfyed of the authour of Policrony¦con / consyderynge the great nomber of authours, whyche he sought and allegyd for his authoryte, as yt shew¦yth in the fyrste chapyter of his fyrst boke. And specyally syns that ho∣ly Gyldas and Bede is amonge the sayde authours accomptyd / ye whych dyd great dilygence in serchynge of the dedes and actes of the Brytons / and of the aungellis monycyon that to hym was geuen / with also the pro¦phecye of Merlyn, that the Brytons shulde not recouer this lande tyll the relykes of Cadwaladyr wyth other of holy saintes, were brought hyther out of Rome. I hold that for no part of my beleue though many welshe∣men yt do. wherfore to folowe the moste authoryte as before is sayde / when this Cadwaladyr had reygned thre yeres, he went to Rome / & there lastely dyed, and was buryed in the chyrche of saynt Peter, with this epy¦thaphye or superscrypcyon vppon his toumbe, as foloweth in metyr, Culmen opus sobolem pollencia regna triumphos, Eximias proceros moenia castra lares, Quae{que} patrum virtus, & quae congesserat ipse. Cadwald armipotens, linquit amore dei. The whyche versys may be englys∣shed in maner as foloweth. worshypfull ryches, kynred, trium∣phes assuryd, Plenteous welth, wyth clothes rych¦ly dyghte, Houses, castellys, and townes strōg¦ly muryd, And other honours whyche by hys parentes myght / And his ownes this marcyall ver∣tuous knyghte, Cadwalde the stronge, descendyd of kynges bloode, For Crystes loue renouncyd all hys good. And thus here endeth the lyfe & rule of the Brytons nowe called welshe¦men / whych toke that name of theyr duke or leder as sayth Guydo called wallo or Guallo / or ellys of a quene of walys named Galaes or walaes. But how so ye name came first to thē, onw are they called welshe mē, yt som¦tyme were named Brytons or Bru∣tons, descendyd fyrste of Troyans, and after of Brute, & lastely of Dū∣wallo Moliuncius or Molmucius Dūwallo. All be yt they were gretly mynglyd or medelyd wyth other na∣cyōs, as Romayns, Pictes, & other / as by the redyng of the premisses ye may wel perceyue & know. And now be they englyshe, that in theyr begyn¦nyng were named Saxōs or Anglis But yet for so myche as welchmē extolle so hougely theyr blode & ally∣aūce, fetchyng yt frō Pryam but not from Eneas, & regarded so lytle the progeny or lynyall descent of ye Sa∣xōs or Anglis: therfore to ye entēt to kele somwhat theyr hygh corage, or to opp̄sse in {per}ty their brutyshe blast{is}, I will bryng in here ye sayng of Guy¦do & other, ye auaūce the blode or dys¦sent of the Saxōs to be farre aboue the Britons / as they yt ar descendyd of goddes & men immortall / where
the Britons clayme the ofsprynge to come of men they were mortall / & not moste to be alowed in honour, yf they thynke vppon Eneas vntrouth and treason. Then to folowe the foresayde au∣thour Guydo, that sayth. woden, of whom the Saxons taken theyr ory∣gynall, was ye sonne of Frealoffe the sonne of Fredewolfe, the sonne of Flyn, the son of Flokwald, the son of Geta, that was the sonne of Minos, that is nexte in honour to Pluto god of hell, and chefe iudge of his infer∣nall iurisdyccyon. Therfore ye welshe men here after nurture lere. And dyspyse not Saxōs that ben to god so nere. Thus then apperyth by the con∣ueyaunce of this worke, yt the last or thyrd yere of Cadwaldyr was ye yere of grace .vi. hundred .lxxx. & vi. which maketh the yere of ye worlde .v. thou∣sand .viii. hūdred .lxxx. & .v. By which reason yt apperyth, that the Britons had the rule of this land for the more party, to reken frō the fyrst cōmynge of the duke or leader Brute, by the space of a thousande .viii. hundred & xxii. yeres. And thus here an ende of the fyfte parte of this worke, for the consyde∣racyon before rehersyd, that Briton kynges after this day, reygned none in this realme / and the Saxons or Anglis began fully to haue domyny¦on therof. wherfore as before tyme I haue vsed and done in the other parties be¦fore specyfyed, so now I here agayn salute and gyue thankes to that moste excellēt virgyn our lady saynt Mary, with the .v. ioy∣es of the forenamed seuen ioyes, begynnynge. Gaude mater miserorum &c. Thou mother to wretches and other disconsolate, Hayll and be glad, for god of worldes all To them that here in this presente state Done to the worshyppe, he rewarde shall, Wyth condygne meryte passynge all temporall, In heuen to be stallyd, wyth moste felicyte, Euermore to reygne with thy sonne and th. This .v. parte to be accompted from the laste yere of the mysery of Bry∣tons, or the fyrste yere of Constan∣tyne brother to kynge of Armorica / vnto the thyrd or last yere of Cadwa¦ladyr, includyth of yeres .CCliii. Thus endyth the fyfte parte. THE SEXTE PARTE. After that Cadwaladyr was thus departyd ye londe / as some authours meane, this lande of Brytayne was in great dyscensyon, by meane of the Brytons and Saxons, by the terme of a .xi. yeres. And ouer that the mor¦talyte before spoken of encreasyd so hugely, and therewyth great hun∣ger & famyne ouer sprad the lande / that by occasion of one and other the people of this realme was wonder∣fully mynyshed & lassed / so ferforthly that as wytnessyth Gaufryde & also the englyshe cronycle, the quycke bo¦dyes suffysed not to bury ye ded. But in so mych as of this spekyth not the mūke of Chester nor other authours as before is shewyd in the forsayde table, the whych I remytte to the cor¦reccyon of such as be lerned / and not onely to englyshe reders as there is fortherly declaryd: I therfore, as be¦fore is sayd folow the sayd Ranulph mūke of Chester / where he sayth that Iewe or Iue was kynge of westsa∣xons
next after ye forenamed Cadwa¦ladyr. The whych I shall fyrst shew the story of, and so of the successours of hym in that kyngedome, for that that they subdued lastly all the other kyngedomes / and somdeale touche of the other kyngdomes or lordshyp¦pes as tyme conuenyente shall re∣quyre / in expressynge of the storyes of the sayd westsaxon kynges, tyll the lande be brought agayne to one monarchye. And for the dyuysyon of the sayde kyngdomes stande somdeale farte a¦sonder / so that to the reders yt were somwhat paynfull to serche for eue∣ryche of them: I therfore haue sette them out in the compasse folowyng, that yt maye appere to the reder the begynnynge of eueryche of theym / and howe longe a season or tyme ey∣ther of the sayde kyngdomes conty∣nued or enduryd / the names also of euery kyngdome / and in what parte of thys lande euery lordshyp was sta¦blyshed for the tyme and sette. THE .CXLI. CHAPITER. IUe or Iewe discen¦dyd of the blode of Saxons / was ru∣ler or kyng of west¦saxons, nexte after that ye forenamed Cadwaladyr had renounced the pompe of the worlde. The whyche to folowe the opynyon of Policronicon, began hys reygne the yere of grace .vi. hundred .lxxx. & vii, and the .xvi. yere of the seconde Theodoricus then kynge of Fraūce / and ruled the westsaxons knyghtly, and maynteyned such warre agayn the Kentyshe Saxons, yt the men of Dorobernia or Caunterbury graun¦tyd vnto hym to haue peace. And al∣so for a recompensement of the deth of Mulkynge brother to Cadwala∣dyr before slayne, as is shewed in the precedynge chapyter by the sayde Kentyshe Saxons / they gaue vnto hym for the sayd consyderacyōs thre thousande pounde. About ye yere of the reygne of Iue / the holy man Cutlake about ye .xxiiii. yere of his age, renouncyd the pōpe and pryde of this worlde / and toke ye order of munkes in the abbay of Re∣pyndon. And the .iii. yere after he wēt to Crowlande / and there lad for the whyle an holy Ankers lyfe, and dyd there many myracles, and there fy∣nally was buryed. In whyche yle and place of hys bu¦ryenge standeth nowe a fayre abbay, the whyche for the greate resorte of gestes that thyther drawyth, and for the good and frendely chere that ge∣stes there receyue and take / the sayd place hath purchasyd a surname and is named Crowlande the curteys / the whyche is a place of good fame. And there lyeth also the holy confes∣soure Neotus, somtyme dyscyple of Erkenwalde byshoppe of London. In the .xi. yere of the reygne of Iue, befell the wounder and mer∣uayle that ys tolde of Bryghtwal∣dus / the whyche after he hadde ben a longe whyle ded, was restoryd to lyfe agayne, and tolde many thyn¦ges of great wonder to many men / whereby he causyd great almys, and many other dedes of charyte to be executyd. And after the dysposycyon of hys owne goodes, by the agremēt of his wyfe he went vnto ye abbay of Mayl¦roos / and there in great holynes con¦tynued the resydue of his lyfe. About the .xvi. yere of the reygne of Iue / Etheldredus before mynded in the .C. & xxxv. chapiter kyng of Mer¦cia, forsoke this wordly honour, and
became a munke at Bardeney / when he hadde longe tyme rulyd the men of Mercia or myddell Anglys. Hys brother Kenredus was kynge after hym / the whych also after he had rey¦gned fyue yeres, lefte his kyngdome vnto Colredus the sonne of hys vn∣cle / and he wyth Offa the sonne of Iue now kynge of westsaxons, and wyth Egwinus byshop of wykcies or of wyke, whych see is now at wor¦ceter / wyth thys forsayde companye this Kenredus yode vnto Rome in pilgrimage and there endyd his life. And aboute the .xviii. yere of the reygne of Iue dyed the holy byshop Aldelme, whyche fyrste was munke and abbot of Malmesbury, and the laste byshoppe. Of hym yt is writen, that when he was styryd by his gost¦ly enymy to the synne of the fleshe / he to do the more torment to hym selfe and of hys body / wolde holde within his bedde by hym a fayre mayden, by so longe tyme as he myght say ouer the hole sauter / all be yt that such ho¦lynesse is no artycle of saynt Benet∣tis lore, yor yet for dyuerse inconue∣nyence moste alowyd by holy doc∣tours. And amonge many of his ver¦tuous & holy dedys / Ranulph mūke of Chester she with, that for the same of hys holynes sprange wyde, Ser∣gius the fyrste of that name beynge pope, sente for hym to Rome. In whyche season of his there beynge / the sayde Sergius was accusyd or defamed of the gettynge of a chylde, the whyche the .ix. daye of the sayde chyldes age, was brought to holy Al¦delme to be crystyned. By vertue of whose prayer, the sayde chylde an∣swered vnto certayn questyons, and cleryd the pope of that cryme yt was before put vppon hym. Nere about the .xxiii. yere of Iue / Colredus then kynge of Mercia, for cause of variaunce betwene him and Ine vnremembred of myn authour, assembled hys knyghtes, and began to warre vppon hym. wherof ye other hauynge knowlege, in lykewyse ga∣theryd his power / and lastely met to both theyr harmes, at a place called wodynsburgth. where after longe fyght eyther of them sped so vnhap∣pely, that yt was not knowen whe∣ther hoste hadde moste domage. And nere about ye .xxv. yere of Iue, as wytnessyth holy Beda / saynte Io¦han of Beuerlay that then was bys∣shoppe of yorke, dyed / and was bu∣ryed in the porche of the mynster of Deyrwood or Beuerlay. Thē Iewe or Iue callynge to mynde the coun∣sayll of holy Aldelme, yt beforetyme had coūsaylyd hym to buylde an ab∣bay at Glastenbury / began the sayd worke about the .xxxii. yere of his rey¦gne / and founded there an abbaye, the whyche contynued prosperously tyll ye comynge of ye Danis / by whose cruelty yt was then sore blemyshed. But afterward by the helpe of saynt Dunstane, in the tymes of Edmond and Edgare, yt was agayne suffycy¦ently repayred, & so cōtynued tyll the comyng of the Normās / after which season yt was agayne besette wyth hard happes. But now at this daye yt standeth a place of great welthe and honour. Then yt folowyth, when Iue had ruled the westsaxons nobly by the terme of .xxxvii. yeres / by the assy∣duate labour of hys holy wyfe Ethel¦burga, as she that longe had labou∣red hym to leue the world and coude not brynge about her purpose / vpon a season when the kyng and she had restyd them in a fayre paleys rychely behanged, and were vpon the morne thens departed, she by her commaun¦dement caused the sayd paleys to be replenysshyd wyth all kynd of fylth and dunge / and hogges and vyle be∣stes
there in to be layde, as well in ye chambers as other houses of offyce. And when she knewe that thys pa∣leys was thus deformyd / she be∣sought the kynge to vysyte the sayde paleys. And when she had broughte hym therunto, she sayde to hym: I praye you my lorde behold now this house. where are now the ryche tap∣pets and clothes of gold and of silke and other ryche apparell that we left here thys other daye. And where be the delyces and plesaunt seruytours and costly dyshes, that you and I la¦tely were seruyd wyth. Be not all these passyd and gone? My lorde in lyke maner shall we passe and soden¦ly, as ye se these worldely thynges ben passyd. And oure bodyes whych now ben delycately kepyd / shall fall and turne into fylth of ye erthe. wher∣fore haue in mynde my wordes that before this tyme to you I haue often shewyd & told / and busy you to pur∣chase that paleys ye euer shal endure in ioy wythout transmutacyon. By meane of these wordes & other / the quene turnyd so ye kynges mynd, that shortly after he resygned the go¦uernaunce of his kyngdome vnto Ethellardus his neuewe / & he for the loue of Cryste toke vpon hym the ha¦byte of a poore man / and settynge a parte all pompe and pryde of thys worlde, accompanyed hym in the fe∣lowshyp of poore men, and yode vn∣to Rome in pylgrymage wyth great deuocyon, when he hadde ben kynge of the westsaxons, as before is sayde xxxvii. yeres. After whose departyng the foresayde Etheldreda hys wyfe went vnto barkynge .vii. mylys frō London / where in the abbay before of Erkenwalde foundyd, she conty∣nued and ended an holy lyfe, whē she hadde ben abbesse of the same place a certayn of tyme. It is sayd & testi¦fyed of wyllyam wryter of kynges, that this Iue was the fyrste kynge that grauntyd a peny of euery fyre house thorow this realm to be payed to the courte of Rome, whych at this daye is called Rome stote or Peter pens, and yet is payed in many pla¦ces of Englande. But why yt was graunted the cause is not here shew∣ed, how be it yt shall be shewyd after. Francia. THE .CXLII. CHAPITER. CLodoueus ye thyrd of ye name, & son of the secōd Theo¦doricus / beganne his domynyon o∣uer the realme of Fraunce, in the ye¦re of grace .vi. hon¦dred .lxxx. and .x / and the thyrd yere of Iue then kyng of westsaxons. Of this Clodoueus is of wryters lefte no maner of memorye soundynge to good or euyll / but Pepyn before na∣med contynued as master of the pa∣leys by all the tyme of the reygne of ye sayd Clodoueus. The whych after that he hadde borne the name by the space of .iii. yeres, he dyed wythoute yssue / and was buryed by his father. By reason of whose deth the sayde kyngedome fell by successyon vnto hys brother Childebert. THE .CXLIII. CHAPITER. CHildebertus the second sonne to Theodoryche, and brother of Clodoueus foresayde / began his domynyon ouer ye realme of Fraūce, in the yere of grace .vi. hundred .lxxx. and .xiii / and the .vi. yere of Iue then kynge of westsaxons. In tyme of whose reygne also the foresayde Pe∣pyn contynued as chefe ruler of the kynges house / all be yt ye he for such other charge as he had of ouerseyng
of the realme, set in hys place a sub∣sttute or depute, as his sonne Gri∣monart and other. Thys Pepyn contrary to the lawe of the chyrche / helde besyde hys law∣full wyfe called Pletrude, a womā named Alpayd. For the whyche the holy bysshop of Treet named Lam∣berte, blamynge and rebukynge the sayde Pepyn / of the brother of the forenamed Alpayde, whyche is cal∣led Dodon or Dodoin, was slayne & martyred, in the yere of our lorde .vi. hundred .lxxx. and .xii / as testyfyeth Antoninus in the .vi. chapyter of the iii. tytle of the seconde parte of hys worke called summa Antonini. And as affermeth the sayde Antoninus & also the Frenche cronycle / the sayde Pepyn receyued of the sayd Alpayde a sonne, whom he named Charlys / whyche Charlys was after surna∣med Marcellus, & was ryghte pro∣fytable to the realme of Fraunce, as after shall appere. Of the foresayd kyng Chyldebert is nothynge lefte in wrytyng worthy memory / excepte that he receyued of hys wyfe a sonne named Dagobert / and kepte the name of a kynge by ye terme of .xvii. yeres, as sayth the cro∣nycle in French / and than dyed / and was buryed in the abbey of Caus in ye chyrch or chapell of saīt Stephan. THE .CXLIIII. CHAPITER DAgobert{us} the seconde of that name, and sonne of Chylde∣bert before named / began his reygne ouer the Frenchmen, in the yere of grace .vii. hundred and .x / & the .xxiii. of Iue than kynge of westsaxons. The whyche was vnder the rule of Plectrude the wyfe of Pepyn than dede, and of Theodowald than may∣ster of the paleys. Thys Plectrude as before is shewed was stepmother to Charlys sonne of Pepyn and of Alpayde, wherfore she berynge ma∣lyce to the sayd Charlys, caused hym to be holden as prysoner wythin Co¦leyne, where he so as prysoner remay¦nynge / the foresayd Theoldowalde exercysed suche tyrannys, and putte vpon the people suche exaccyons, ye dyscensyon grewe bytwene hym and the lordes of Fraūce, so that dyuers cōflyctes and skyrmysshes were had amonge the nobles of Fraunce / for partyes were taken vpon eyther sy∣des, whereby the kynges partye at length was wekyd. And fynally the sayd Theoldowalde was depryued of hys rome / and one Rangafredus was made mayster of ye paleys. The whyche beynge Accompanyed with conuenyent strength / toke with hym the kynge, and cōueyed hym thorow the forest of Charbōnur, tyll he came vnto ye ryuer of Mense. In ye which passetyme the forenamed Charlys beynge, as aboue is sayde prysoner / by fauoure of hys kepars or other∣wyse, brake pryson and escapyd. And shortly after dyed the kynge / whan he hadde reygned or borne the name of a kynge as other of hys pro¦genytours hadde done, by ye terme of .xi. yeres / leuyng after hym nother chylde, as than knowynge, nor nere of a lye / whyche was cause of mysor∣der of the tytle of Fraunce, as after∣warde shall appere. THE .CXLV. CHAPITER. DAnyell that of ye Frenchmen was after named Chilperich was by assente of them made kynge, in the yere of grace .vii. hundred and xxi / and the .xxxiiii. yere of Iue than kynge of westsaxons. Thus as testyfyeth mayster Ro∣bert Gagwyne and also the Frenche cronycle, was a preste or clerke / and
for his wysedome was cherysshed be¦fore tyme in the kynges paleys / in ye whyche tyme and season he sufferyd hys crowne to be ouer growen. Or ellys after Antoninus, this Danyell after ye deth of Dagobert, for so mych as he lefte after hym none of ye royall blode / the Frenchemen supposynge hym to be apte for ye rule of the lond, for suche experyence as before tyme in hym had be proued / kepte hym se∣crete a certeyne of tyme tyll his heyre was fully growen / and than decla∣red hym to be the brother of Dago∣bert, and chaungyd hys name / and called hym Chylperych / & so by one assente admytted hym for kynge of Fraunce. Charles before spoken of sonne of Pepyn, beynge escapyd the daunger of prysonement / sought and compas¦syd by all maner of wayes, how he myghte obteyne the rome that some∣tyme hys fader occupyed. And thys to brynge to effecte / he purchasyd to hym a yonglynge of fayre & goodly maners & stature named Clothayre, and sayd that he was descendyd of ye royall blode of Fraunce / by meane wherof in shorte tyme he gaderyd to hym greate strength. wherof heryng Chylperych / commaunded Ranga∣frede to assemble hys knyghtes to wythstōde the purpose of Charlys. And soone after bothe hostes mette, nere vnto the forenamed ryuer of Mense / where was foughte a strong and cruell batayle / of ye whych Ran∣gafrede was vyctor, and compellyd Charles to forsake the felde. But he shortly afterward assemblyd and ga∣deryd agayne togyder all suche as before were dysperklyd / and fought efte wyth the sayde Rangafrede at a Place called Ablane. Of the whyche batayle wyth great dyffyculte Char∣lys was lastly wyctour / and chasyd Rangafrede, and hys hoste greatly demynysshed & lassyd. Than thyrdly these two hostes met in a felde called the wyne felde / where also was pre∣sent the sayd Danyell or Chilperych hauynge in hys ayde amonge other prynces the duke of Gascoyne / and there fought a sore & cruell batayle. wherof lastly was vyctor the sayde Charlys / and constrayned the kyng wyth the sayde duke to fle vnto Or∣leaunce. where they takynge wyth them suche treasoure as belonged to the kynge / fled from thens vnto the Duchye of Gascoyne. whan Charlys conceyued that the kynge was escapyd hys daunger, & knewe that Raganfrede was in the cyty of Aungiēs / he sped him thether in all haste: and compassyd the citye wyth so stronge a syege, that fynally he obteyned the cytye wyth all that was therin. But it was not longe af¦ter that Charlys shewed vnto Ragā¦frede suche benyuolence, that he was set at hys lyberte and fredome. The next yere folowyng the duke of Gascoyn before mynded, hauyng parfyte informacyon by ambassade or otherwyse / that Charlys entēdyd to make sharpe & cruell warre vpon the Gascoynes, for that that they fa∣uouryd and kepte wyth them Da∣nyell or Chilperych / he in auoydyng the sayde daūger of warre, in shorte tyme after sent vnto Charlys, vnder certayne condycyons bytwene them agreed, the sayd Chylperyche / wyth al such treasour & iewellys as to him or the crowne of Fraunce belongyd. In thys passetyme & season dyed the forenamed Clothayre, that Char¦les before had made kyng. wherfore to the more restfulnesse of ye realme, he allowed the forenamed Chylpe∣ryche for kyng / and he as mayster of the kynges paleys, as other his pre∣decessours, ruled the land of Fraūce. Than Charlys hauynge thus the
rule and gouernaunce / ruled it well and substancyally, and defended yt from all enemyes durynge the lyfe of the sayd Chylperyche. And after the whych / Chylperych whan he had contynued as kynge by the terme of v. yeres dyed / and was buryed, as sayth the Frenche cronycle in ye citye of Noen or Noyen / wythout issue of hys body. Anglia. THE .CXLVI. CHAPITER. EThelardus the neuew of Iue / be¦gan hys reygne ouer the westsa∣xons, in the yere of grace .vii. hun∣dred and .xxiiii / & the thyrde yere of Danyell otherwyse called Chylpe∣ryche than kynge of Fraunce. Thys after some wryters is named Ethel∣dredus. In the tyme of hys reygne, Ofric{us} as kynge reygned in Northumber∣lande / to whom holy Beda wrote the story called historia Anglicana / or more verely to hys successoure Col∣woifus. Of the whyche Beda and of hys workes Ranulphe mūke of Che¦ster sheweth a compedyous processe, in the .xxiii. chapyter of hys .v. boke called Policronycon. The forsayd Ofricus is named in the Englyshe cronycle Osbryght / of the whyche in the sayde cronycle is rehersed a longe worke. But for I se no authour of authoryte afferme the same / I therfore in thys worke passe it ouer. It shulde appere also by the mea∣nynge of Polycronycon, that about thys tyme dyed Etheldredus before touchyd kyng of Mercia / the which whan he had longe tyme ruled that countrey, he lastlye renouncyd the pompe of thys worlde, & was shorne a munke at Bardony. Of ye soresayd Ethelarde kyng of westsaxon, is lefte no memory of any actes or dedes by hym done. But as agree many wryters, he dyed whan he hadde reygned .v. yeres, wythout issue of hys body. And in Northumberlande after ye forenamed Ofricus, reygned Col∣wolphus / after whom Egbertus / & after whom Oswolph / and after Os¦wolphe reygned Ethelbald or Ethel¦walde. All be it that dyuers au∣thours of these names of kynges & contynuaunce of theyr reygnes so dyuersly & sundryly report & wryte. Francia. THE .CXLVII. CHAPITER. THeodoricus, the whyche of mayster Robert Gagwyne is alowed to be the sonne of ye seconde Dagobert / began hys reygne ouer ye Frenchmen, in the yere of grace .vii. hundred and .xxvi / and the seconde yere of Ethelardus than kyng of westsaxōs. The which was from hys yonge and tender age fosteryd and norysshed in a house of nonnys in womans clothynge / and lastly espyed, and by cōsent of Char∣lys mayster of the paleys admytted for kynge. After the whych solempnyte fynys¦shed / Charlys herynge of the rebel∣lyon of a people called the Sweuys or Swetesers / assembled an hoste, & lastly them subdued. whyche done / he turned hym toward an other part of the Almaynes, and in lyke wyse ouercame them / and after retourned into Fraunce wyth greate tryumphe and ryches, that he hadde wonne at
those two iourneyes. It was not longe afterward, that Charlys had thus subdued the fore∣sayde people of Almayne, wyth also a greate parte of Germany / but that tydyng came to hym, yt Endo duke of Gascoyne rebelled agayne ye kyng of Fraūce. wherfore he in all goodly haste preparyd hys armye, and sped hym into Gascoyne / where he made so cruell warre, that he in short tyme damagyd greatly the countrey / and held the duke Endo so streyte, that he was compellyd to hyde hym in se∣crete places of the countreye / where after greate serche he myghte not be founde, wherfore he settynge the coū¦trey in some restfulnesse, retourned hym into Fraunce. whan Endo was sure of the re∣tourne of Charlys into Fraunce / for so mych as he had prouyd the mar∣cyall knyghthode of hym, and knew well he myghte not hym selfe wyth∣stand hys knyghtly power / he there∣fore allyed hym wyth the kynge of Spayne than beyng a pagan or mys¦creaunt and named Abyderamus, and excyted and styred hym to make warre vppon the lande of Fraunce / promysynge to hym not all onely vyctory, but also that londe to hym and to hys heyres for euer. Uppon comforte of whyche promyse, and al∣so ayde of the sayde Endo / thys fore¦named Arbyderamus thrystyng cry∣sten mannys blode, and entendynge vtter desolacyon and destruccyon of the realme of Fraunce / assemblyd an excedynge hooste of people, and wyth theyr wyues chyldren and ca∣tayle entryd the londe of Fraunce. And what they wan, they enioyed it as theyr owne. And so in processe came vnto the cytye of Burdeaux / the whych after a certayne tyme of ye cytesens defendyd, the sayde mys∣creaūtes wan into theyr possessyon, and dystroyed the people thereof, with all theyr chyrches and temples of the same. And from thens passyng the countreye in wastynge it wyth iron and wyth fyre, lastly came vnto Poytiers. whyche cytye as before ye haue harde in the story of the fyrste Dagoberte in the .C. and .xxxii. cha∣pyter, was by hym subuertyd / and at thys daye newely reedyfyed. Thys cytye also of them posses∣syd / they in lyke maner as they had dalte wyth Burdeaux, so dyd they wyth thys / not sparynge that holy place of saynt Hyllary, but dyd vnto yt greate shame & vylany. And from thens they yode vnto Towers / wa∣stynge and sleynge the people wyth∣out mercy by all the waye that they passyd, and wasted that cytye as they had done the other. In the whyche passetyme Char∣lys herynge of the cruelte of this Ar∣bideramus / assembled hys power, and shortly met with hym nere vnto Towers. where he bare hym so knyghtely / that he slewe of the Pa∣ganys to excedynge a nomber to be accordaunt wyth reason. But for I se it testyfyed of so many wryters yt boldeth me to expresse the nomber / whyche was .iii. hundred .iiii. score and .v. thousande and odde. And of the Frenchemen were slayne but .xv. hundred onely. For the whyche vyctoryous acte / the sayde Charlys obteyned a sur¦name, and was called after that day Carolus Martellus, the whyche is to meane Charles the hamer. For lyke as the hamer maketh all metal∣lys plyable / so Charlys made hys foes or enemies pliable to his hestis. And as the hamer cutteth, breketh, or dysseueryth iron and other harde metallys / so dyd thys Charlys dys∣mēber & cut or breke the enemyes of Fraūce thorough his high prowesse.
It is shewyd in the bokes called Cronica cronicarum, Supplemen∣tum cronicarum, Policronica, and other / that this vyctory was obtey∣ned by Charlis of the Sarasins, but not as inhabytauns or incolers of Spayne / but that they were yssuyd out of Africa, and then warryd and hadde wonne great countreys in Spayne. The whyche is more ac∣cordaunt wyth hystoryes. For in the plegys or rehersayllys of the names of kynges of Spayne, I fynde no kynge of that name. Then yt folow∣eth in the story / when Charlis Mar¦tell hadde thus obteyned vyctory, he cōmaūded all ye pillage to be brought to one place. That done, he deuyded it amonge hys knyghtes. And short¦ly after Endo knowlegynge hys of∣fence, and sekyng meanes of mercy / was agayne restoryd to the lande of Gascoyne. THE .CXLVIII. CHAPITER. CHarles Martell hauynge the duke of Gascoyne thus recoū¦cylyd / sent hym wyth a certayne of knyghtes agayn the reste of the sayd Sarazyns / the whyche by hys man hode he oppressyd and subdued, and clerely voydyd the lande of theym. Then soone vpon this beganne the Burgonyons to rebelle / and made sharpe warre vpon the Frenchemen nexte adioynaunte to them, and dyd vnto the countrey and inhabitaūtes of the same great harme. The which warre / the sayde Martell that therin toke great payne, not without great payne, lastely yt appeasyd and them subduyd. In tyme of the whyche warre so contynuynge / Endo before rehersyd duke of Gascoyne dyed. wherfore Charlis to sette that prouynce in an order and due obeysaunce, yode the∣ther. where he beynge busyed about the nedes of the same / tydynges to hym were broughte that the wanda∣lys which ben of the kynde or lynage of the Hunys before touched, hadde entred the land wyth an houge pow∣er and in wastynge the countrey, ap¦prochyd ye citye of Senōs or Sens, and yt enuyroned or beclypped wyth a stronge syege. But by the vertue and strength of the archbyshop of ye cytye named Ebe, Ebbe, or Obbo, wyth the assystence of the cytezyns of the same / the sayde cytye was defen∣dyd and delyueryd from the power of the fayde wandalys / & the power of them abbatyd and subduyd. For these manyfolde incurcyons and assautys of enymyes, and rebel∣lyon of the countrees that were sub∣iecte to the crowne of Fraunce / the treasour of Fraunce, & specyally of ye temporall people was sore minyshed and wastyd. wherfore in defence of all the lande / Charlis Martell made requeste to the spirituall men / & with great dyffyculte hadde yt graunted, that he myght leuy certayne dymys to wage therwith soudyours, & pre∣payre other necessaryes for ye warre. Thys after the opinyon of some wri¦ters, was the fyrste tyme that euery spirytuall mannes money wythin ye realme was occupyed to temporall vse. wherfore as yt is reported of dy¦uerse cronyclars / the sayde Charlis when he was ded, was sene by the byshoppe of Orleaunce named Ethe¦reus, to be in great payne and tour∣ment. Then Charlis moued his hoste to∣warde the Burgonyons, that agayn were of newe styred and exhortyd by dyuerse persones to newe rebellyon. And after his comynge thyther, dyd execucyon vppon suche persons as he founde culpable / and not without batayll, sette the country agayne in
quyet / & then retourned into Fraūce. But he rested not longe there, or he harde worde that the Almaynes, whyche dwellyd ouer or beyonde the ryuer called the Ryne / brake ouer in to Fraunce. These people are named in ye Frenche boke Sesues / ye which dyd great domage vpon the coun∣treys adioynynge to the sayde ryuer. But yt was not long after, or he had theym chasyd and subduyd / wyth al so an nother people called the Hunis or Gothys, that he before hadde also vaynquyshed. The whych after this seconde scōfyture / they assocyat vnto theym the kinge of Longobardes na¦myd Luytprandus. By whose assys¦tens and power, the forsayde Gothis wan the citye of Auygnon and other stronge holdes, to the great hurte of the Frenche men. And for at this season Charlis was greued wyth sykenesse / he therfore sent his brother named Chyldebert to wythstande the sayde enymyes / ye whyche bare hym so manfully, that he chasyd the sayde enymyes. But thys saynge dyscordyth wyth other authours, whyche shewen that betwene this Charlis and Luytpran¦dus was contynuall amyte & frend∣shyppe / in so myche that Luytpran∣dus ayded & assysted the sayde Char¦lis to auoyde ye Sarasins that were entryd a countrey of Fraunce called then Gallia cisalpina. In this tyme that Fraunce was thus wrapped in these harde happes and batayllys / dyed the kyng Theo¦doricus, when he hadde occupied the name onely of a kynge .xiiii. yeres. Anglia. THE .CXLIX. CHAPITER. CUtbertus the neuew of Ethe∣lard{us} / began his reygne ouer ye westsaxōs, in the yere of grace .vii. hūdred & .xxix / and the thyrde yere of the seconde Theodoricus then kyng of Fraunce. In tyme of whose reygn Colwolphus reygned in Northum∣berland / to whome as before in the story of Ethelarde is touched, holy Beda wrote the story called Historia Anglicana. About the .ii. yere of the reygne of this Cutberte apperyd in the fyrmament .ii. blasynge starrys or .ii. starris wyth crestes / & caste as yt were brennynge brondes towarde the Northe. And about the .vi. yere of the reygn of Cutbert dyed the foresayde holy Beda / the which in his tyme made & wrote .lxxviii. bokes, ouer and besyde his manyfold workes of vertue that he vsyd by all his lyfe tyme. It ys told of hym, that in his later dayes when he was blynd, he was brought by ye frawde of his leder vnto a great hepe of stonys / the whych his leder shewyd to hym was an assemble of men and women, that were thether comyn to here hym preache the word of god. Then he thynkynge hys re∣porte to be true / anon wyth great de¦uocyon beganne there a collacyon. And therof when he came to the ende the stonys by dyuyne power, in lyke¦nesse of a great multytude of people sayd Amen / or after the sayng of An¦toninus, Deo gratias. He was so noble of lernynge and ex¦cellent in connynge / that the fyrste Sergius pope of Rome sent for him to assoyle q̄styons there made in the popes vniuersyte. Also his connyng is apparent in the bokes whyche he wrote super Genesim, super Thobi∣am, super Esdriam, su{per} Neemiam, wyth other, whyche wolde aske a longe tracte of tyme to reherse, wyth also the omelies made vppon the gos¦pellys / but I passe ouer▪ when he was dede / he was buryed at ye abbay of Gyruy / all be yt the comynyng is
that he restyth now wyth saynte Cut¦bert of Durham. About the .ix. yere of this kynges reygne / the holy vyr¦gyne saynt Fredeswide dyed. Of her yt is sayde, for vylanye that to her shulde haue ben done, by a kynge in Oxynford / that kynges of England at the seasons syns haue sparyd to entre that towne for drede of mys∣happe. who so wyll knowe the cyrcū¦staunce of the mater, and the holy∣nesse of her lyfe / lette hym serche the workes of holy Gyldas, where he shall be suffycyently informed. Soone after thys tyme and sea∣son / Colwolphus kynge of Northū∣berlande when he had reygned .viii. yeres, he resygned his domynyon to his cosyn Egbertus / and was shorne a monke in the abbay of Geruy, or after some wryters in the abbay of Lyndesar or holy ylande. Thus for as mych as lytle is shew¦yd of the dedis of Cutbert kynge of westsaxons, therfore I haue made the more rehersayll of other chynges done in his tyme. For of hym is no∣thynge lefte in wrytynge worthy to be remembryd or mynded / sauynge that he often and many tymes made warre vppon Ethelwalde kynge of Mercia and spedde therin diuersly / & lastely dyed when he had reygned after moste wryters .xvi. yeres. Francia. THE .CXLIX. CHAPITER. HIlderic{us} or Chil¦dericus ye second of that name, & sonne of Theo∣doricus / began his reygne ouer the Frenshemen in ye yere of our lordes incarnacyon .vii. hūdred and xl / and the .xi. yere of Cutbertus then kynge of westsaxons. Of the whych for his dulnesse and hys other enor∣mytes in hym exercysed / lytle or no thynge of his actes or dedes are put in memorye. ye haue before in the story of Theo∣doryche, harde of the puyssaunt and stronge dedys of Charlis Martell / the whyche styll durynge his lyfe, cōtynued in great honour, to the great suertye of the realme of Fraūce, and to the great terrour and fere of theyr enymyes / wherof to reherse all the cyrcumstaunce yt wolde occupye a longe tyme. wherfore shortely to con¦clude / lastely after hys manyfolde trauayllys susteyned for the weale of the realme of Fraunce, he dyed / leuynge after hym thre sonnes, that is to wytte Charlemayne, Pepyn, and Gryffon / to the whyche he be∣quethed his possessions and goodes. But for the yongest named Gryffon helde hym not contentyd wyth suche bequest as hys father to hym gaue / he therfore made warre vppon hys other two bretherne. The whyche be¦haued theym so wysely / that wyth∣out notable batayll, they toke theyr sayde brother, and putte hym in a safe kepynge. And that done / the sayde two bretherne assemblyd theyr knyghtes, and spedde theym agayn Hanualde duke of Guyan, then re∣bellyng agayn the crown of Fraūce. The whych duke with the countrey, they brought vnder theyr fyrste obey¦saunce. After the whyche victorye of the sayde coūtrey obteyned, the sayd two bretherne spedde them to the cy¦tye of Poytyers, where they by ad∣uyse of the nobles of the lande, con∣syderynge the vnablenesse of Hilde∣ryche ye kynge, that he was vnsuffy∣cyent to rule so great a charge / dy∣uyded the lande of Fraunce betwene theym. So that eyther of them shuld
vnder the kynge, rule and gouerne suche porcyon as then there was to them appoynted. After the whyche porcyon Charl∣mayne herynge of the dyuysyon and stryfe amonge the Almaynes / as thynge belongynge to hys charge, spedde hym thyther in all haste. And after a parte of that countrey wastyd and spoylyd / and dyuerse of theyr stronge holdys caste playne wyth the erthe / he brought theym to due subieccyon. And soone after he went agayne the Bauarys / ye whyche by his knyghte¦ly strength, he appeased in lykewyse. In all whyche tyme and season / Pe∣pyn hys brother was occupyed in defendynge of the other partyes of Fraunce. Then this foresayde Charlmayne steryd by dyuyne inspyracyon, or as some authours meane, as he before tyme hadde auowyd / sodeynely re∣nouncyd and gaue ouer all worlde∣ly prosperyte and domynyon, and with pure deuocyon yode to Rome. where of the pope then named za∣charias / he wyth all honour and ioy was receyuyd, and of hym shorne a munke, and dwelled a season in an abbaye of hym selfe buylded in the mounte Sarapte. But for he sawe that dayly drewe to hym many great lordes of Fraunce / by meane wher∣of he was lette from hys dyuyne ser∣uyce and contemplacyon: he ther∣fore yode thens to the mounte Cas∣syne, & there endyd his naturall lyfe. After whose thus departynge or gyuynge ouer of the sayde Charle∣mayne / Pepyn as onely ruler, toke vppon hym the charge of the hole realme. In thys passe tyme Gryffon the yonger brother was enlargyd from prysone / and by fauoure of hys bre∣therne was assygned to suche posses∣syons, as to hym was demed suffy∣cyent to lede an honorable lyfe. How be yt when he sawe that hys brother Pepyn hadde all the rule and he nothynge: he dysdayned hys sayde brother / and thoughte no len∣ger to contynue in that maner, but to be partener of the rule of the lande as Charlemayne hys brother hadde ben. And this to brynge to hys pur∣pose, he fledde vnto the Saxons, whyche as after shall appere were na¦med Normans. And with the prynce of theym made alyaunce / so that wyth theyr ayde he mouyd warre a∣gayne his brother, and assembled a stronge hoste. wherof Pepyn be∣ynge warnyd, gaderyd hys people / and passynge thorow came to the ry¦uer of Sunaha, or after the latyne tonge Smussaha / and Gryffon sped hym tyll he came to a ryuer called Onacre. whē these .ii. hostes were thus nere, meanes of treatye were soughte on both partyes. Durynge whych com¦munycacyon / Gryffon hauynge sus¦speccyon to the Saxons that were on his parte, leste they wold betraye hym and yelde hym into the handes of his brother, made for that tyme a sleyght agrement / and shortly after departyd from the sayd Saxōs, and fled to the Bauarys or into Bayon. where he allyeng hym wyth dyuerse nobles and barons of Fraunce / ve∣xyd and distourbed sore the duke and lorde of that countrey called Tassy∣lon / and lastly dysceasyd hym of that lordshyppe. wherof Pepyn beynge warned, spedde hym thyther wyth great strength / and so bare hym that he had the better of his brother, and restoryd the sayd Tassylon vnto his right / & after retourned into Fraūce, ledynge wyth hym his brother Gryf∣fon as his prysoner. But ye was not long after, that by
medyatours the sayde Gryffon was reconcilyd to his brother. And for he shuld be cōtent & haue no more cause to vary with his broder, there was as¦sygned to hym, as wytnessyth ye frēch cronicle and other, xii. erldomes with in the realme of Fraunce. wyth the whyche bounteous gyfte he not be¦ynge cōtente / the selfe same yere fled vnto ye duke of Guyan named Gayf∣fer / and wyth hym newly conspyred agayne his sayde brother. But laste∣ly he was there slayne as after shall appere. Pepyn then consyderynge in hys mynde in what daunger and trouble hys father before hym had ruled the lande, & he now for his tyme in lyke agony and trouble / and the kynge, to whome belonged all the charge, kepte hys paleys & folowed all his delytes and pleasures, wythoute ta∣kynge of any payne / wherfore con∣syderynge the premysses, & for a re∣formacyon of the same: sent hys am¦bassade to the pope then beynge za∣charye before named, askyng hys ad¦uyse, whether yt was more necessa∣ry or welfull for the realme of Fraūce that he shulde be admytted for kyng that dyd nothynge but applye hys mynde to all pleasure of hys bodye, wythout cure or charge takynge vp∣pon hym for the guydynge of the lande and the people of the same / or he that toke upon him all the charge and payne, in defence of the lande, and kepynge of the people in due sub¦ieccyon. To this the pope answeryd and wrote vnto Pepyn, that he was beste worthy and moste profytable for the realme to be admyttyd for kynge, that ruled well the comynal∣tye by iustyce and prudence, and the enymyes therof defendyth and sub∣dueth by his polycy and manhode. The whyche answere thus receyued frome the pope, and declared vnto the lordes and barons of the realme: anone they of one assente and mynde procedyd and went to the deposynge and puttynge downe of theyr kynge and gouernour Hylderyche. And in shorte space after closyd hym in a mo¦nastery or house of relygyon, when he hadde ben occupyer of a kynges rome by the name onely .x. yeres. And that done, the Frenche men ele∣ctyd and chase Pepyn for theyr soue¦rayne and kynge. In the whyche Hilderyche or Chil¦derych endyd the lyfe or progeny of Meroneus / of whome the Frenche kynges lynyally descendyd by conty¦nuaunce of tyme as foloweth. Meroneus. x. yeres. Childericus xxiiii. yeres. Clodoueus xxx. yeres. Dagobertus xiiii. yeres. Clodoueus xvi. yeres. Clotharius iiii. yeres. Theodoricus iii. yeres. Childericus ii. yeres. Lotharius l. yeres. Chilpericus xxiiii. yeres. Lotharius xliii. yeres. Clodoueus iii. yeres. Childebertus xvii. yeres. Dagobertus xi. yeres. Danyel v. yeres. Theodoricus xiiii. yeres. Theodoricus xix. yeres Hildericus x. yeres Anglia. THE .CL. CHAPITER. SIgebert{us} or Sig¦bertus the cosyne of Cutbert laste kynge of the west¦saxons / beganne his reygne ouer ye sayd Saxons, in the yeres of ye in∣carnacyon
of Cryst .vii. hūdred and xlv / and the .v. yere of Hilderic{us} then kyng of Fraunce. He was cruell and tyrannous to his subiectes / & turnyd theyr lawes and customes of his fore fathers after his owne wyll and plea¦sure. And for ye one of the noble men of his dominyon somdele sharply ad¦uertysed him to chaūge his maners, and to behaue hym more prudently towarde his pleople / he therfore ma∣lycyously caused hym to be putte to cruell deth. About this tyme Egbertus, after the yonger wylfryde, was made arch¦byshoppe of yorke. The whyche brought agayn thyther the pall that his predecessours hadde forgone, syns the tyme that the fyrst Paulin{us} had lefte that see and fled to Roche∣ster in Kent, and there lefte the sayd pall. This Egbert was brother vn∣to Egbert kyng of Northumberlād / by whose assystence and comforte, he dyd many thynges for the weale of ye see, & made there a noble library. Then yt folowyth, for so myche as the kyng Sygebert contynued in his malyce & cruell condycyons / his subiectes conspired agayn hym, and putte hym from all kyngely dyg∣nyte. So yt he fell after to great de∣solacyon & mysery / in such wyse yt he was founden after in a wood or deso¦late place wandryng alone without cōforte. where he beyng so foundē by a swyne herd or vylayne, some tyme belongyng to the erle Cōbran{us} yt he before tyme wyckydly had slayn / in auengement of his sayd lordes deth slew hym in ye sayd place. which sayd Sigebertus was thus depryued frō al houour / whē he after most writers had reygned or tyrannysed .ii. yeres. THE .CLI. CHAPITER. KEnulphus of the lyne or blode of Cerdicus fyrst kyng of west¦saxons / began hys domynyon ouer the sayde westsaxons in the yere of grace .vii. hundred & .xlviii / and the vii. yere of Hildericus then kynge of Fraunce. The vertue of thys man passyd his fame. For after he hadde with the agrement of the westsaxons depryued Sygebert theyr kynge frō his authorite and regally / he fyrst ap¦peasyd dyuers murmurs and grud∣gis that kyndelyd among his subiec¦tes / & set his lordshyp in great quyet¦nesse and rest touchynge theyr ciuyle dyscorde. About the .viii. yere of the reygne of this Kenulphus / Offa slewe a ty∣raunt named Beoruredus, yt before had slayne Ethelwald kyng of Mer¦cia. After whose deth the sayde Offa as neuew to the sayd Ethelwald, rey¦gned as kynge of that prouynce. Of this Offa is tolde many notable dedes, wherof somwhat I entende to shew. He hadde warre wyth the Nor¦thumbres, & thē for a tyme subdued. He also had warre wyth Etheldrede kynge of eest anglys / and wyth Eg∣bert otherwyse called Pren kynge of Kent. whome he toke prysoner, and led hym bounden wyth hym into Mercia. Then after these vyctoryes, Offa buylded the chyrch of wychcom. In tyme of the whyche buyldynge, in presens of .xiii. byshoppes and ma∣ny other great estatys / kynge Offa enlargyd the sayde Egbert of impry¦sonement. In token wherof the peo¦ple beynge there present / made such an exclamacyon of ioye and glad∣nesse, that the chyrche therof range. Thys kynge Offa hadde suche dys¦pleasure vnto the cytyzens of Caun∣terburye / that he remoued the arch∣byshoppes see by the agremente of the fyrste Adryane then pope, vnto Lychefelde. He also chased the Bry¦tons or welshmē into walys / & made
a famouse dyke betwene walys and the vtter bondys of Mercia or myd∣le Englande / the whyche to this day is named Offedyche. And after he buyldyd there a chyrch, whych longe tyme after was called Offekyrke. This Offa also by angelycall inspy¦racyon, translatyd the holy protho∣martyr saynt Albone / and was fyrst founder of that famous monasterye ouer that holy bodye. The whyche syns the fyrste foundacyon hath by sondry tymes ben perished and hurt by Danys & other / and newely syns that tyme reedyfyed. This holy Al∣bon was martyred as before appe∣ryth in the .lxvii. chapyter and storye of Cōstantius, about the yere of our lorde two hundred .lxxx. and .xvii. By whych reason he shuld lye or he were translatyd, ouer foure hundred and lx. yeres. This Offa also maried one of hys doughters to Bryghtricus y• was kynge of westsaxons. And for that in his tyme was varyaunce be∣twene hym and the Frēche men, that passage of marchauntes was forbo∣den: therfore he sente that famouse doctour Anselmus vnto Charlis the great then kynge of Fraunce, to co∣mon the meanes of a peace. whyche Charlis hadde after thys Anselmus in suche fauour / that he became hys discyple. Then retourne we to Kenelphus / yt whyche before tyme had had often warre wyth Offa, and with hym ma¦ny conflyctes, and lastely agreed. About the .xi. yere of thys Kenelph{us} / Egbert kynge of Northumbres re∣nouncyd his kyngly dignyte, and be¦came a munke. And lastely the sayde Offa, when he had reygned ouer Mercia .xxxix. yeres, as sayth Guydo / he lefte the kyngdome to hys sonne also named Kenelphus, and yode to Rome. And this Kenulph{us} kynge of west¦saxon / kepte strongely hys lordshyp agayn ye power of all his enymyes, & hadde his subiectes in due order of obedyence. Lastly Kenulph was sup¦prysed wyth the loue of a womā that he kept at Merton / and hauntyd her more secretly then stode wyth his ho¦nour. wherof hauynge knowlege a kynnesman of Sygebert late kyng, entendynge to reuēge the deposynge of his kynnesmā / awayted the tyme, and beset the house where Kenulphe & his paramour was smally accōpa∣nyed. But so soone as Kenulph had espyed his enymyes / he serte vppon them, whych as sayth Policronicon were .lxxx. in nōber, and fought with them a longe whyle. But in the ende he was slayn of Clyto or Clyton his enymye. It was not longe after or worde sprang of the kynges deth. wherfore Offric{us} then beynge mayster of the kynges knyghtes / toke wyth hym a certayn of the sayde chyualry, & pur¦sued vpon the sayd murderers / & last¦ly encountred wyth them, and slewe the sayde Clyto theyr captayne with the more parte of his companye. And that done he retourned to Mer∣ton / and there toke the corps of Ke∣nulphe, and with great solemnyte cō¦ueyed yt vnto wynchester / where yt was with all reuerēce enterryd / whē he hadde ruled the westsaxons (all be yt that of hym the englyshe cronycle maketh no mencyon) .xxxi. yeres. Francia. THE .CLII. CHAPITER. PIpinus the secōd sonne of Charlis Martell, began his reygne ouer ye Frenchemen, in ye yere of grace .vii. hundred and .l / &
the seconde yere of Kenulphus then kyng of westsaxons. This as before ye haue harde, was elected to that ho¦noure, by assent of Pope zachary, & the consent of the nobles of Fraūce / and after he was confermyd of the se¦conde Stephan, when he satte after as Pope. The fyrste yere of his reygne / the Saxons otherwyse called Danys or Normannys, beganne to warre vppon hym. The whyche he encoun¦tred at the ryuer of Isayr / and them knyghtly ouercame, and chased and brought them fynally vnder his sub¦ieccyon. And in his returnynge into the countrey of Fraunce / word was brought to him of the deth of his bro¦ther Gryffon / the whych as before is sayde fledde vnto Gayferus duke of Guyan, and there helde hym to the ende for to haue caused the people of Guyan to haue rebellid, and to make warre agayne his brother Pepyn. wherof when some of them consyde∣ryd the malycyous and vnstable con¦dycyons of hym / in auoydyng more daunger, that to theyr countrey by his meanes myght ensue, they fell so¦deynly vppon hym and slew hym. when Pepyn was retourned into Fraunce / he by the aduyse of Remi∣gius then byshoppe of Roan, amen∣dyd the state of the chyrche / and cau∣syd goddes seruyce to be songe, that before tyme hadde ben wyth lytle de¦uocyon and reuerence done and vtte¦ryd. And other spyrytuall thynges that before were mysorderyd / he cau¦sed them to be sette in a better forme. And shortly after Stephā aboue na¦med, confyrmed this Pepyn and his heyres for kynges of Fraunce / and of hym axyd ayde and assystence to wythstāde the power of Aystulphus then kyng of Longobardes / ye which then warryd vppon certayne landes belongyng vnto the chirch of Rome. The whyche kenge Pepyn to hym with good wyll graūtid / & the begyn¦nynge of the nexte yere folowynge, wyth a great hoste enteryd the boun∣des of Italy / and in the same made sharpe and cruell warre. In defence wherof the sayde Aystulphus made his beste prouysyon / and defendyd ye straytes and moūtaynes, by ye which the Frenche men shuld haue further entre into hys lande / and there gaue vnto his enymyes a stronge fyghte. All be yt he wyth his people was for¦cyd to gyue backe / & for hys refuge toke ye citie of Papye. wherof Pepyn hauynge informacyon / beclyppyd ye sayd cytye wyth a strong syege. when Aystulph{us} had a season defen¦ded hys cytye / & saw by experiēce day¦ly his enimyes encreace, & his power mynyshe and feble / in auoydynge of extreme daunger, he sought meanes of peace / and in suche wyse pursued the same, that he finally hadde peace to hym graunted / vppon condycyon that he by a daye lymytted, shuld re∣store to ye pope all ryght to his chirch belongynge, that he or any for hym helde or before tyme hadde wythol∣den / wyth other thynges concer∣nynge the sayde peace. And for the perfourmaunce of the sayde condy∣cyōs / he deliueryd immediatly good hostages and pledgys. After whyche peace thus substancially confermed / Pepyn wyth his hoste wyth great tryumphe retourned into Fraunce. But not wythstandyng this assu¦ryd peace, by the confyrmacyon of othe and other cyrcumstaunce before shewyd / the nexte yere folowynge he trustynge vppon better fortune of warre, denyed and reuokyd all his former grauntes / and refused to do as before he hadde fyrmyly promy∣sed. For this vnstablenes and vn∣trouth to remedy / the pope of newe made requeste vnto Pepyn. The
which wythout longe taryeng resem¦bled his knightes, & made good sped towarde Italy / & not wythout daū∣ger passyd the mountaynes / and fy∣nally besyeged Aystulphus wythin ye foresayd cytye of Papy. By meane wherof he lastly was constrayned to restore certayne cyties and other pos¦sessyons that before tyme he had ta∣ken from the pope. After the whych agrement endyd and perfyted / wythin a shorte terme the sayde Aistulphus beynge in hys dysporte of huntynge, fell from hys horse or with his horse. By vyolence wherof he was so brosyd, that he dyed shortly after / whan he had ru∣led the Longobardes, Lumbardys, or Italyans .viii. yeres. After this vyctory thus obteyned by Pepyn / the lordes and prynces that dwellyd aboute hym, feryd and drad hym, and sought to hym for al∣lyaunce & amyte. Amonge the whych Tassylon duke of Bayon before spo¦ken of, that newly hadde conspyred agayn hym / yelded hym to the kyng, and became hys trewe lyege man / and swore to hym and to hys two sonnes feawte. But the Saxons, whyche in the Frenche boke are named Soysons / coude neuer hold them cōtent with∣out dystorbynge of the Frenchemen. wherfore kynge Pepyn assembled a greate hoste and made towarde thē, and had wyth them dyuerse conflyc∣tes and batayles. So that at length they were dryuen to aske peace / vpō condicyō that yerely after they shuld yelde vnto the kynge of Fraunce iii. hundred good horses in waye of trybute. And that done he retourned into Fraūce / and immedyatly after ordey¦ned by the aduyse of hys counceyle a courte or counceyle / ye whiche at this day is called ye parlyamēt of Fraūce, and is lyke vnto the courte of reque∣stes now at this day holden in Eng∣land. How be it yt of mych greater resort of people, and therwyth veray delayous / in so mych that as I haue herde credyble persons say / some one mater hath hanged there in dysputa¦cyon ouer .xx. yeres. The whych par∣lyament at this daye is kepte at Pa∣rys, at Roan, and other two places of the lande. And for iudges of thys counceyll or parlyament, is deputyd of the kynges coste in euery place where it is kepte an hūdred persons, what of one and what of an other. Than it foloweth, Gayfer duke of Guyan before mynded / of wyll more than of reason, set a trybute or imposycyon vppon the spyrytuall landes wythin hys lande wythout agrement of the clergy. wherfore the byshoppes for a redresse and remedy cōplayned them vnto kynge Pepyn. Then Pepyn sent vnto hym / mone∣stynge hym in fayre and goodly ma∣ner, that he shuld exchew and forbere such doyng. And for the duke wolde not abstayne for the kynges cōmaū∣dement / he in shorte whyle assembled hys army, and entred the territory of Guyan / in wastynge and spoylynge the countrey. And in so shorte whyle after put the duke in suche fere, that he was fayne to aplye hym to ye kyn∣ges mynde and pleasure / and bound hym to restore to the clergy all that he had before taken by extort power. But whan the sayde duke was assu∣ryd of ye kinges retorne into Fraūce / he gathered a strength of knyghtes, and sent theym to the cytye of Cha∣lours in Burgoyne / and dyd that he cowde or myghte to the domage of that towne and countrey. In whych season the kynge was at the towne or cytye called Dury / whyther and to the whyche towne tydynges were brought to hym of the vntrew dea∣lynge
of thys foresayd duke. where wyth he beynge sore dyscontent / re∣tournyd wyth his people into Guyā and therein bete downe many strong holdys & castlellys / and toke or wōne at length burbon, Cancaruyle, and Cleremoūt / and from thens wasting the coūtrey wyth iron and fyre, yode tyll he came to Lymoges. And for ye wynter came on hande / the kyng for the ease and sauegard of his people, strengthyd these foresayde cytyes, townes, and holdes, that he before had wonne / and than yode to a place called Cause or Caus, & there kepte hys crystmasse and ester. And whan the new season was come / not forget¦tynge hys former purpose, reentryd the foresayd duchy of Guyan, in wa¦stynge the londe as he before hadde done / and after toke by strength the cytyes of Burgies and Towrs. In whyche season and tyme the duke wolde neuer apere in playne felde, but kepte hym in strong holdes / & as one was wone, he fled into another. Thys warre thus contynuynge / the countreye and people were sore empouerysshed. wherfore they lastly consyderynge the obstynacy of theyr duke / wyth also the greate daunger which they stode in: murderyd theyr sayde duke / and after yelded them & the coūtrey to the kynges obeysaūce, wyth all suche treasure and iewelles as to the sayd duke belonged / where of Pepyn offerd a great parte of thē vnto saynte Denys. Thys warre thus ended, wyth many other notable workes whereof the rehersall in order wolde aske a longe tracte of tyme: thys vyctory∣ous prynce Pepyn was vexed wyth greuous sykenesse. wherfore in all haste he sped hym vnto saynt Mar∣tynes, where he made certayne obla∣cyons and prayers / and thens hys sykenesse encreasyng, was conueyed vnto Parys / where he shortly after dyed, when he had reygned as kynge by the terme of .xviii. yeres / leuynge after him .ii. sonnes, that is for to say Charle mayne and Charlys. THE .CLIIII. CHAPITER. CArolomanus and Charlys sonnes of Pepyn / begā theyr reygne ioyntly ouer the Frenchmen, in the yere of our lorde .vii. hundred lxviii / and the .xx. yere of Kenulphe than kynge of westesaxons / so that Charlemayne had to his parte myd∣dell Fraunce, and Charlys had Au∣stracy wyth ye other deale of Fraūce. Of ye elder brother Charlemayne lytell is lefte in memory / for he dyed whan he had reygned lytell ouer .ii. yeres. wherfore to Charlys fell the hole realme of Fraunce / the whyche of all the nobles was ioyously ad∣mytted. It was not longe after / Hunyl∣dys whom Pepyn by hys lyfe hadde ordeyned ruler of Guyan, rebellyd agayne the kynge, wherfore Char∣lys preparyd anone hys armye, and sped hym thyder / and in processe of tyme constrayned the sayd Hunyld{us} to forsake the countrey, and for hys tuycyon to flee vnto Lupus than duke of Gascoyne, wherfore Char∣lys beynge aduertysed, sent hys mes¦sage to the sayd Lupus / wyllynge & commaundyng hym that he in spedy maner, shulde sende to hym hys re∣bell Hunyldus, or els he wolde with hys army inuade & spoyle his people and coūtrey. Uppon resceyt of which message, Lupus by coūceyll condes∣cendyd to the kynges pleasure / so yt he causyd Hunyldus to submyt hym vnto the kynges grace and mercy. wherewyth the kynge was so well contentyd, that vppon assuraunce taken of the sayd Hunyldus, yt there after he shulde be of good aberynge
toward the kyng / he clerely forgaue vnto hym all hys former offence. And after he had set that countrey in a rule and order / he retornyd into Fraunce. where to hym soone after came an embassade from the fyrste Adryan than pope / requyrynge hym of ayde agayne Desyderi{us} thā kyng of Longobardys / the whyche than had taken from the chyrche of Rome many cytyes and other possessyons. Than Charlys acceptyng the po∣pes request / or he began any warre agayne the sayde Desyderius, sente vnto hym an embassade / wyllynge and requyrynge hym in all honora∣ble wyse to restore vnto the chyrche of Rome, all suche possessyons as he from the same chyrche before tyme hadde taken and yet withhelde / and also to refrayne hym from all suche warre as he dayly made vppon the londys of the sayd chyrche. But for he sawe no frute ensue of ye message / he made prouysyon for all thyng ne∣defull to such a iourney. And shortly after passed the mountaynes, not all wythout batayle / and in processe cō∣strayned Desyderi{us} to take the cytye of Uercyle. where after he hadde re∣fresshed hys Italyans / he gaue vn∣to the Frenchemen a sharpe and cru∣ell batayle. But in the ende, Desyde¦rius was compellyd to forsake the felde, and fled after to the forenamed cytye of Papy / where he kepte hym as after shall appere a longe whyle. And for to shewe you somewhat of the foresayde batayle / ye shall vn∣derstande that for the greate occysyō of men yt there was slayne / the place was called longe after Mortaria, that is to meane in our vulgare or mother tonge the place of deth. In this fyghte were slayne amonge o∣ther two knyghtes greately famyd, Amys and Amylyon / of whom some fables are reportyd, bycause they were so lyke of semblaunt. These two knyghtes as wytnes∣syth the Frenche story and also An∣toninus / were brought vppe in the court of the foresayde Charles, and wyth hym well cherysshed / and fy∣nally here slayne and buryed after some wryters in the two chappellys, whyche in the foresayde place were buylded to praye for the greate mul∣tytude of the soules of these knygh∣tes that there were slayne. But who that is desyrous to knowe the hole lyfe of those two foresayd knyghtes / let hym ouerse the thyrde chapyter of the .xiiii. tytle of Antoninus / and he shall there fynde a compendyous and goodly story / the whyche for length I ouerpasse and retorne my style agayne to Charlys. The which whan he was ware that Desyderius had taken thys cytye of Papy / and it greatly strengthyd both with men and vytell, in such wyse that he well vnderstode yt it myghte not be short∣ly wonne: he therfore layde about it a stronge syege wyth the ouersyght of sure and wyse capytayns / and af∣ter yode to Rome to vysyte the holy apostles Peter and Poule, and also to speke wyth the pope for dyuers maters. where he taryed a greate parte of the wynter folowynge, and after retorned vnto Papy / whych as yet was not delyueryd nor gyuē vp. But it was not longe after his re∣torne that the cytye was wonne / wherein was takyn as prysoner the sayde Desyderius wyth hys wyfe and chyldren. The whyche to make shorte processe, he at length forcyd hym to restore vnto the pope all such possessyons as he before tyme hadde taken from hys chyrche / and addyd more there vnto, the two cytyes of Spoletys and Beneuent. And fy∣nally depryued hym of all kyngely honoure, and ladde hym as prysoner
into Fraunce / and as a prysoner or exyle from hys naturall countreye kepte hym at the cytye of Lyons, as wytnessyth Cronica cronicarum, Ia¦cobus Philippus, and other. And after by agremēt the pope gaue that kyngdome vnto Pypynus hys son / the whych cōtynued so in the French mens rule and possessyon, ouer the terme of two hundred yeres. For thys vyctoryous dede thus obteyned by Charlis / the forenamed pope graūted vnto hym many great pryuyleges. Amonge the nomber whereof, one was that no pope du∣rynge the lyfe of Charlys, shulde be in no wyse electid or chosyn tyll there came from hym a commaundement to go to that eleccyon. And also he graunted vnto hym inuestyture of benefyces spyrytuall. whyche graun¦tes and pryuyleges were confermed and authorysed in a Synode of an hundreth and .liii. bysshoppes, kepte in Fraunce by cōmaundement of the foresayd Adryan. Of thys Charlys longe and te∣dyous it were to tell the hole of hys actes and dedes. wherfore I entende to towche but a parte of theym / and for the other deale I remitte to them yt haue further desyre of knowlege, vnto the bokes of Turpyn and Egy¦ueaux chaplayne to the sayde Char∣lys / or ellys to the sayd bysshop Tur¦pyn, whyche wrote a longe worke of hys vertuous dedes. THE .CLV. CHAPITER. THis Charlys mar¦cyall after his re∣torne into Fraūce / without there lōge taryeng sped hym agayne to the fore¦named people cal∣led Soysons or Saxons, whyche newly rebellyd / and warryd sharpely vppon them, and fought wyth them sondry batay¦les. Amonge the whyche two ben spe¦cyally noted / whereof that one was foughten at a place called Onacre, and that other at the ryuer of Esam or Hesayre. By whyche two batayls the Saxons loste moch of theyr peo∣ple, and were so sore feblysshed that they were fayne shortely after to put them in the mercy of Charlys. By reason wherof he bonde them vnto certayne lawes and ordynaunces / wherof specyally one as pryncypall of them, was that they frō that daye forth, shulde renounce and forsake theyr worshyppynge of idollys and fals goddes, and beleue in the fayth of Crystes chyrch, wyth many other. For the performynge of the whyche couenauntes / the kyng toke of them good pledgys & hostages. And more ouer to the ende to mynysshe & make lesse theyr strengthe / he chase out of them .x. thousande of the moste apte men for the warrys, and conueyed them wyth hym into Fraunce. And after he hadde clothed them with the mantell of baptyme / takynge of thē assuryd othe to be trewe to hym and to hys heyres: he after inhabyted them in dyuers places of his realme. Of the whyche people, as affermeth myne authoure, descendyd the Flem¦mynges and Brabāders. And thus endyd the warre of the Saxons or Soysons, that hadde contynued by the terme of many yeres passyd. And forthwyth by assent and ad∣uyse of hys counceyle / he preparyd all abilymentes and ordynaunce of warre, to go agayne ye Hunys yt then had wonne great groūd in Spayne. And for to bryng this war to ye more effectuall ende / he chase .xii. perys, which after some wryters are called dozeperys or kynges. Of the whiche
vi. were byshoppes & .vi. temporall lordes. Of the whyche byshoppes thre were named dukes, whych were archbyshops / & .iii. erlys, which were byshoppes. Of the temporall lordes thre were dukes and thre erlys / that is to saye the duke of Burgoyne, the duke of Neustria or Normandy, and the duke of Guyan / & for .iii. erlys, the erle of Palantyne, ye erle of Tho¦lons, and the erle of Champayn. Of yt whyche also some writers afferme, that ye famouse knyghtes Rowland and Olyuer were .ii / as Roulād erle of Palātyne. & Olyuer erle of Tho∣lous. when Charlis had prepared all thynges necessary to this gret iour¦ney / he fyrste made his pylgrymage vnto saynte Denys, and there offerd ryche great gyftes, and after proce∣dyd towarde his iourney / and fyrste besyegyd the citye called Pāpilona / the whych after .iii. monethes he sub¦dued to his obeysaunce. This cytye stode in the entre of Spayne in the montaynes callyd montes Pyreni. After the obteynynge of whyche cy∣tye, and by myracle of saynt Iamys as sayth Antoninus / Charlis com∣maūded all such as to Crystes fayth wolde be conuertyd, shuld be sauyd / & the other to passe by sentence of the sworde. And after he hadde wonne ye fyrste cytye he wanne all the coūtrey adioynynge to the same / by reason wherof he caste great fere vnto the myscreantis / and wan by his strēgth and by appoyntemēt (so that they be¦came his trybutaryes) these coūtres and prouynces hereafter ensuynge / that is to saye as wytnessyth Uyncēt historyall, Antoninus, and other ye land of Laudeluffe, the land of Par∣dis, the lande of Castyll, the lande of Maurys, the prouynce of Nauerne, the countrey of Portyngall, the lāde of Byscaye, & the lande of Palarge / and destroyed in them all idollis and buyldyd in them chyrches and mona¦steryes / and brought the more par∣tye of them to Crystes relygyon. And moste specyally the chyrche of saynt Iamys he buylded in Cōpos∣tella wyth sumptuous coste / & gaue there vnto great possessyons, to the maynteynyng of the diuyne seruyce of god and the mynysters of ye same. And ouer that with the treasour that he gate in these foresayd countreys / he buyldyd many dyuerse chyrches, as well in other places as there. Longe yt were to tell all the cyrcū∣staunce of this vyage and vyctoryes of the same. wherfore I passe ouer. And when Charlys hadde sped hys nedys / he had good wyll to retourne into Fraunce. In the whych retorne Carlis castynge no dought nor pa∣rell / by the treason of Gauelon a knyght or ruler of Gascoyn / ye which Gauelon hadde receyuyd of a Pay∣nym kynge named Marsyll, great & ryche gyftes for to betraye the hoste of Charlis, was dysceyuyd as after shewyth. Thys Gauelon the better to compasse and brynge to effecte his purpose / aduised Charlis wyth a cer¦tayne of his people to passe the porte of Cesayre, and to leue behynde hym in the rerewarde Rouland & Olyuer wyth .xx. thousande of the resydue of his hoste. And when the kynge was passyd wyth his hoste / he gaue war∣nynge vnto the forenamed Marsyll and other, that they shulde close the sayde Rowlande in the place callyd Rounceuale. The whych accordyng to that false counsayll / with an hoste of .lx. thousande or mo, beclyppyd Rowlande and his people on euery syde, and there fell vppon the Crystē men and slew them wythoute mercy or pytye. In the whyche fyght, not wythstandynge the great slaughter that they made of the Sarasyns / fy¦nally was there slayne the sayd Row¦lande,
Olyuer, and many of the no∣bles of Fraunce. But this Gauelon scapyd not wythoute punyshement. For he was after taken / and wyth other to hym condescēdyng, were put to moste cruell deth at the cytye of Aquisgrany. Of thys great vyctory of Charlis in subduynge of Spayn / are dyuers opynyons. For the Frenche cronycle and Antoninus agreen, that it shuld be after that Charlis was ennoynted emperour of Rome. But mayster Ro¦bert Gaywyn and other say, that yt was before he was emperour. Thus this victoryous prynce re∣tournynge into Fraunce, subdued thā after diuerse coūtreys, as Gallia Narbonensis, Campania or Cham∣payn, and Beneuentana, and other / whych of one mynde hadde rebellyd agayne hym. Aboute the .xxxi. yere of his reygne as moste wryters agre / certayne per∣sons of Italy conspyred agayn Leo the .iii. then Pope of Rome, and hym vngoodly entreatyd. But he lastely escapyng theyr daunger / came vnto Charlis, and requyryd hym of hys cōfort and ayde / wherof he was not daungerous. But when he had well serchyd, and vnderstode that ye pope had susteyned wrong / he wyth all dy¦lygence spedde hym thyther. And af¦ter he had subdued ye popes enimies / he restoryd the sayd pope to hys for∣mer dignyte. For the which dede and other that he had done for ye defence of the chyrch of Rome / he was by the sayd pope Leo or Leon sacryd or en∣oyntyd emperour of Rome. THE .CLVI. CHAPITER. CHarlis then thus sacryd as emperour, in the yere of oure lord .viii. hundred and one / when he hadde accomplyshed hys nedys for the weale of the chyrch and the pope, he then wyth great gyftes retourned into Fraunce. In this tyme or soone after as wit¦nessyth the Frenche cronycle, landed in Fraunce the famous clerkes Al∣cinnus or Albinus, Rabanus, & Io∣hannes, and other of the discyples of Beda. The whych Charlis receyued wyth great honour / and by theyr coū¦saylys instytuted and ordeyned fyrst the scole of Paris, and an other at Papia in Italy before minded. wher¦fore yt shulde seme that the sayde Al¦cinnus was not sent for any entrea∣tyse of peace betwene the two real∣mes of Fraunce and great Britayn, as in the storye of Kenulphus before is shewyd. After this tyme and season many great and noble dedis were done by this sayd Charlis, and by his sonnes and capytaynes vnder hym, and by his commaundement. And for the personage of so noble a prynce shuld be had in mynde / ther∣fore dyuerse authours testyfye yt he was fayre & welfaryng of body, and sterne of loke & of face. His body was viii. fote long / & his armes & legges well lengthed & strengthed after the proporcyon of the body. His face of a spāne brede / & his berde very long. Of hys strength wonders are tolde. He wold at one mele ete an hole hare or two hennes, or a hole gose, or lyke quātyte of other mete / & drynke ther to a litle wyne mynglyd with water. Amonge his other notable dedis, he made a brydge ouer the ryuer of Ryne of .v. hūdred pace longe, by the cytye of Magunce. And he buylded as wytnessyth Antonin{us} and other / as many abbayes or monasteryes as there ben letters in the crosse row of the A.B.C. And in the front of eyther of ye sayd abbayes, after the tyme of theyr foū∣dacion
/ he pight or set a letter of gold of the value of an hundred pounde turnoys, whych is nere to the value of englysh money now curraunt .xx. mark. For a poūde turnoys is mych lyke .ii.s.viii.d. starlyng / and a poūd Parysyen is nere vppon .xl.d. star∣lyng. But it standyth at no certayn∣te, for hyghtynge & lowynge of theyr coynes. He also buylded or new reedyfyed the cytye of Aquisgrany / & endowyd the chyrch of our lady there wyth ma¦ny great gyftes and precyouse rely∣ques, whyche yet remayne there to this daye / in whych cytye and nere a¦boute, he vsyd myche to abyde & lye. And for his great dedes & vyctory∣es / he deserued to be named Charlis ye great. And for all his great myght and honour / yet yt not wythstādynge he was meke and lowly in herte, and mylde & gracyous to the poore, and mercyfull to wretches & nedy / & sette his sonnes to lerne, as wel letters as marcyall & knyghtly featys. And his doughter he set to spynnynge & woll worke. And he was expert in all spe∣chys / so that he neded none interpre∣tours to explane or expresse to hym ye message of straunge ambassatours. And in the tyme of his dyner or mea¦les / he vsyd to haue red before hym lessons and pystles / and specyally of the workes of saynte Austayne de Ci¦uitate dei. In hym was nothynge to be dyscommendyd / but that he helde his doughter so longe vnmaryed. This noble man Charlis .iii. yeres before his deth / he hadde peace wyth all countreys, as well suche as were obeysaunt vnto ye empyre, as such as longed to his domynyon of Fraūce. In the tyme of reste amonge other goodly & vertuous dedys, he made hys testamēt / & dystrybuted his tem¦porall mouable goodes in .iii. {per}tes. wherof two part he gaue to ye mayn¦teynynge of bishoppes and other my¦nysters of the chyrch, and for the re∣paracion of chyrches & necessaries to the same, and to the maynteynynge of the dyuyne seruyce of god, with al¦so ayde and fedynge of poore & nedy people / and the thyrde parte to hys chyldren and other of his allye. ye shall vnderstande, this Charlis had in his treasory specyally noted before hys other iewellys, iiii. tables or bordes / wherof thre were of syluer and the fourth of gold. In one was grauē the lykenes of the cytye of Cō¦stantyne the noble, the whych he be∣quath to the chyrche of Romē. In an other was grauen or wrought the ly¦kenysse of the cytye of Rome / & that he gaue to the byshop of Reynes and to his chyrche. And the thyrd table of syluer, wherin was grauen the map¦pa mundi / and the fourth of gold he gaue to his sonnes. Many thynges there were and cau¦sys of the exaltyng of ye fame of this prynce. But among other one is spe¦cyally remembryd of myn authoure Gagwyne / that the kynge of Percye then rulynge a great parte of ye Ori∣ent / sent vnto Charlis an ambassad honorable wyth many ryche presen∣tis. Amonge the whyche was an ho∣rologe of a clocke of laten of a won∣der artyfycyall makyng, that at eue∣ry oure of the daye and nyghte when the sayd clocke shuld stryke, images on horse backe apperyd out of son∣dry places, and after departid agayn by meane of certayne vyces. He sente to hym also tentys of ry∣che sylke and balme naturall, with certayne Olyfauntys / requyrynge hym of amyty and frendshyppe. And in lyke wyse dyd the emperour of Cō¦stantyne the noble / all be yt thathe in his mynde was not well contentyd, that the pope had in ye wyse dyuyded the empyre, and sette suche a man of
myghte in the rome therof. Thys Charlis had dyuers wyues. But of the seconde named Eldegard he receyued .iii. sonnes / that is to say Lewys, Pepyn, & Charlis / ye whyche Pepyn he made kynge of Longobar¦des or Italy, as before is shewyd. Of thys great conqueroure what shulde I holde lenger processe? For lyke as I before shewyd / of his nota¦ble dedys myght I make a great vo¦lume, yf I shuld of them shew the cle¦renesse, and the circūstaunce of euery cōquest that he in his tyme acheuyd. But deth that is to all {per}sones egall / lastly toke him in his dymme daūce, when he had ben kynge of Fraunce with his brother & alone .xlvii. yeres. Of the whyche he ruled the empyre as before is shewyth .xiiii. yeres, in ye yere of his age as sayen the frenche cronycles .lxxii / and was buryed at Aquisgrany wyth great pompe, in ye yere of our lordes incarnacyon .viii. hundred and .xv. wyth this superscri¦pcyon vppon his toumbe. Caroli Magne christianissimi imperatoris Romanorū corpus, sub hoc sepulchro conditū est. which may be englished as folowith. Of Charlis the great and empe∣rour moste crysten. Of Rome, the bodye is hyd thys toumbe wythin. Of the forenamed sonnes of Char∣lys suruyued ye eldest Lewys by na∣me / and the other two Pepin & Char¦lys dyed, before theyr father. Anglia. THE .CLVII. CHAPITER. BRigthricus of the blood of Cerdic{us} fyrst kyng of west¦saxons descēdyd / beganne hys rey∣gne ouer the sayd Saxons, in yere of oure lorde .vii. hundred and .lxxviii / and the .x. yere of Charlis the great then kynge of Fraunce. This before tyme hadde maryed one of the doughters of Offa kynge of Mercia, as before is touchyd / by whose ayde and power he put out of hys rule Egbert the sonne of Alcu∣mundus / the whyche Egbert at that daye was an vnder kynge or ruler in the lordshyppe of westsaxon, whyche Egbert was descendyd of ye blood of the holy Genulphus / of whome som parte of the storye ys declared in the .xxv. chapyter of the .v. boke of Po∣licronica. And after he was thus of Brigthricus expulsyd / he saylyd in∣to Fraunce, and there exercysyd hym¦selfe in featys of warre wyth the kny¦ghtes of Charlys courte, durynge the lyfe of the sayde Brigthricus. About the .ii. yere of thys Brigth¦ricus, was sene in great Brytayne a wonder syghte. For sodeynly as men walked in ye strete / crossys lyke vnto blood fell vppon theyr clothes, and blood fell from heuen lyke drop∣pes of rayne. This after some exposytours / be∣tokened the commynge of the Da∣nes into this lande, the whyche en∣tryd shortely after. For as wytnes∣syth Polycronica, aboute the .ix. yere of Brigthricus the Danys fyrste en¦tryd this lande. In defence wherof / thys sayde kynge sent forth hys ste∣warde of housholde wyth a smalle company, whych shortly was slayn. But by the strength of Brygthricus and the other kynges of Saxons / they were cōpellyd to voyde the land for that tyme and season. Brigthricus thus well & knyght∣ly rulynge his land / his wyfe named Ethelburga not wyth hym cōtentyd as she oughte to be, soughte dyuerse wayes and meanes how she myghte brynge her lorde oute of lyfe / so that
fynally she poysoned hym wyth ma∣ny other of hys housholde meyny. wherfore she ferynge punyshement, fledde into Fraunce / and by suche frēdshyppe as she there hadde, was well cheryshed in Charlis courte sur¦named the great. Of her yt is told, that whan he had hadde some informacyon of the vn∣stablenes of this womans condycy∣ons / he at that season beynge a wy∣dowar, vppon a season in passynge of the tyme wyth her / sayde, nowe I put to youre choyse whyther ye wyll haue me vnto your wedded lorde, or ellys my sonne stādyng here in your presence. And hym that you chose / hym shall you haue and enioye for your husbande. But she chase ye son and lefte the father. Then sayde the kynge / yf thou haddest chosen me, thou shuldest haue hadde my sonne. But for thou haste forsaken me thou shalt haue nother of vs. And after he closyd her in an abbey, where in pro¦cesse a lewde man kept with her such company, that she was voydyd that place / and after demeaned her so vy¦cyously, that in processe of tynie she fell in such pouerte, that she dyed in great penurye and myserye. For the whyche mysse demeanure of this wo¦man, that she had innaturally slayne her lorde and husbande / the kyng of Anglis and specially of westsaxons, wolde not suffer the wyues to be cal∣lyd Sueuys / nor yet suffer them to sette by them in places of great ho∣nour or kyngely sete by a long tyme after. Thus as before is shewyd by the impoysonynge of his own wyfe, dyed ye kynge Brigthricus / when he had ruled ye westsaxōs after most con¦corde of writers by the terme of .xvii. yeres. THE .CLVIII. CHAPITER. EGbertus the sonne of Alcumū¦d{us} as before is shewyd / began hys reygne ouer the westsaxons in ye yere of grace .vii. hundred .lxxx. and xv / and ye .xxvii. yere of Charlis the great then kynge of Fraunce. Thys as before is sayde was dryuen oute of the lande of Britayne by ye strēgth of Brigthricus. But he hauynge knowlege of hys deth / spedde out of Fraunce, and in so knyghtely wyse hym demeaned, that he obteyned the regiment and gouernaunce of the a∣boue sayde kynge. Bernulphus kynge of Mercia had this Egbert in derysyon / and made therof dyuerse scoffys & iapynge ry∣mes, yt which he susteyned for a time. But when he was somdeale stablys∣shed, and hadde prouyd the myndes and hartis of his subiectes / he lastly assembled his knyghtes, and gaue to hym a batayll in a place called Elyn¦dome, in the prouynce of Hampton. And all be yt that in that fyght was great dyuersyte of nomber, as .vi. or viii. agayne one / yet Egbert had the victory. For his knyghtes were lene, megre, pale, and longe brethed, so that they myghte endure to fyghte. But Bernulphus knyghtes were fatte, corpulent, & shorte brethed / so that they were soone ouercome with swet and shorte labour. Here is to be noted, that after the deth of Offa kyng of Mercia or mid¦dell Englande (of whome somwhat is touched in the story of Kenulph{us}) reygned his son Egfert{us} / & after Eg¦fert{us} reygned Kenulfus or Kēwolfus ye which Kenwolphus was father to ye holy martyr Kenelme, & to .ii. fayre vyrgyns Ouindred and Burgenul¦da or Ermenilda. And after Kenwol¦fus succedyd the foresayd Kenelme / and after Kenelme reygned Colwol¦phus / and after hym succedyd Ber∣nulphus before named. Then to retourne agayne to Eg∣bert / the whych when he had as be∣fore
is sayd ouercome Bernulphus, he seasyd that lordshyppe into hys hande. And that done, he made war vppon the Kentyshe Saxons / and at lēgth in lyke wyse of them obteyned vyctorye. And as wytnessyth Poly∣cronica, he also subdued the Nor∣thumbrys / and caused the kynges of these thre kyngdomes to lyue vnder hym as trybutaryes or ioyned them to hys kyngedome as testyfyeth the authour of the Floure of hystories. Thys Egbert also wanne from ye Brytons or walshemen the towne of Chester, that they hadde kepte posses¦syon of tyll that daye. For the whych vyctoryes thus by hym obteyned / he shortely after called a counsayll of his lordes at wynchester / and there by theyr aduysys crowned him kyng and chese lorde of this lande, that to fore thys daye is called Brytayne / and sente then oute into all costes of thys lande his commaundementes and commyssyons, chargyng strayt¦ly that from that day forthward, the Saxons shulde be called Anglys / & the lande Anglia. About the .xxiiii. yere of the reygne of Egbert, whyche shulde be the yere of our lord as meaneth Policronica viii. hundred and .xix. Kenelmus be∣fore mynded the son of Kenwolfus, was admytted for kynge of Mercia, beynge then a chyld of the age of .vii yeres. The whyche by treason of his syster Ouendreda was slayne in a thycke wood, by a tyraunt callid Hes¦bertus / and hys bodye after founde by a pyller of the sonne beame, or of lyght dyuyne that shone from his bo¦dye towarde heuen. It ys also redde of hym, that a coluer bare a scrowle wryten in englyshe then vsed / and lette yt fall from hyr vppon the aul∣ter of saynte Peter in Rome / wherof the wordes were these. At clense in Cowbacch, Kenelme Kenebern lyeth vnder Thorne hewyd beweuyd. whyche is to meane in englyshe now vsyd: at Clent in Cow vale vnder a thorne, lyeth Kenelmus hedlesse slayne by fraude. when this holy body was founde, and was borne towarde the place of his sepulture / his forenamed syster entendynge some derysyon or other vylanye to be done to the corps, le∣nyd oute of a wyndowe where by the corps shulde passe. And to bryng her malycyouse purpose aboute, I note by what sorcery she ment / there she redde the psalme of the Sauter / be∣gynnynge Deus laudem, bacward, But what so her entente was / she there incontynently fell blynde, and her eyen dystylled dropes of blood, that fell vppon the Sauter boke. The which in token of goddes wret∣che, in that boke remayne at thys daye to be sene. Of the holynes of thys martyr & of his vertue, ye legēde of sayntes reportyth the surplusage. In the .xxix. yere of the reygne of Egbert, or after the englyshe crony∣cle Edbryght / the Danys wyth a great hoste enteryd the seconde tyme thys londe, and spoyled the yle of Shepey in Kent or nere to kent. wherof herynge the kynge Egbert / assembled hys people, and met wyth theym at a place callyd Carrum. But he wanne of that fyghte lytell worshyppe / for the Danys compel∣lyd him and his knyghtes to forsake the felde. And by presumpcyon of ye vyctorye they drewe westwarde / and made a confederey wyth weste Bry∣tons that liued in seruage. By whose power they assayllyd Egbertus lan∣des, and dyd myche harme in ma∣ny placys of hys domynyon and el∣lys where / so that after thys daye they were contynuallye abydynge in one place of the realme of En∣glande or other, tyll ye tyme of harde
Kynytus laste kynge of the Danys blood / so that many of theym were maryed to Englishe women, and ma¦ny that nowe ben or in tyme passed were called englyshe men, are dyscen¦dyd of theym. And all be yt that they were many and sondry tymes dry∣uen out of that lande, and chasyd frō one countrey to a nother, as after ye shall here: yet that not wythstādyng they euer gaderyd newe strengthes and power / so that they abode styll wythin the lande. Of the kynge of these Danys, and of what people they be dyscended, dy¦uerse opynyons of wryters there be / whych now I passe ouer, for so mych as I entende to shewe somewhat of theym in this worke folowynge. Then it folowyth in the storye / the tyme contynuyng of the persecucion of these foresayd Paganys and Da¦nes, Egbert or Edbryght dyed / whē he hadde well and nobly ruled the westsaxons and other the more parte of Englande, by the terme after most wryters of .xxxvii. yeres / and was bu¦ryed at wynchester as sayth Guydo, and lefte after hym a sonne named Athenulphus. Francia. THE .CLIX. CHAPITER. LOdouicus ye fyrst of that name, and sonne of Charlis the great / began hys reygne ouer ye realme of Fraū¦ce, & also his em∣pyre ouer the Ro¦maynes, in the yere of grace .viii. hū¦dred and .xv / and the .xx. yere of Eg∣bertus then kynge of westsaxons. Thys for his mekenesse was callyd Lewys the mylde or meke. In tyme of hys fathers decease he was occupyed in Guyan / the whych he before tyme hadde the rule and do¦mynyon of by commaundement of his father. But when he was aduer∣tised of his faders deth, he anon sped hym toward Aquisgrani / so yt ye .xxx. day after hys departyng out of Guy¦an he came vnto the foresayde cytye, where he was mette wyth all the no∣bles and barons of Fraūce. And fyrst or he medled or toke vpon hym any cure or charge of hys owne besynes / he with most deuocyon causyd great obseruaunces and myche dyuyne ser¦uyce to be done aboute the sepulture of his father, whyche obseruaunce & prayers fynyshed and endyd / ye sayde Lewes commaundyd to come before hym dyuerse ambassadours, that frō dyuerse prynces were sent vnto hys father Charlis, and to theym gaue answers concernyng theyr legacyōs and messagis / and then proceded vn¦to the nedes of his realm for ye weale therof and of his people. wherein he beynge besyed / worde was brought to hym of an ambassad royall, yt was comen from Michael the emperour of Constantyne the no¦ble. Agayne the whyche he sent cer∣tayne of hys lordes to receyue them / and so wyth all honour to bryng thē vnto hys presence. Of whose com∣mynge the entente was, to presente hym wyth certayne ryche gyftes, and to desyre hym of his amyte and frendshyppe. Also soone after came vnto hym messengers from the Beneuētanys / offerynge vnto his magnyfycence ob¦ligacyons and bondes to be his true lyeges, and to paye to hym yerely in way of trybute .vi. thousande duca∣tes of gold. A ducate is of sondry va∣luys / but the leste in value is .iii.s.iii.d. ob, and the beste .iiii.s.vii.d. Then the Soysons or Saxons that were so dyuerse of condycyon /
beganne to murmoure and rebell a∣gayne this Lowys. wherfore or he wolde assemble any people agayne theym / he sent thyder certayne per∣sones to know ye cause of theyr rebel¦lyon. And when he was enfourmed, that yt was for the takynge awaye from them of certayne lādes and pos¦sessyons by hys father / he then resto¦red agayne the sayde landes / and so recouncylyd the countrey to his sub¦ieccyon. For this dede some of his lor¦des grudged / and sayde such mylde∣nes was not to be vsyd to people of suche obstynacy and sternesse / but to haue forcyd them by dynte of sworde to haue lyued in due obedyence. In thys passetyme dyed pope Ste¦phan the fourth of that name / after whose deth was elected to that dy∣gnyte the fyrste Pascall, wythout cō¦sente or knowlege of this Lowys, & somdeale to the dyscontentynge of his mynde & pleasure. But in shorte tyme after he receyued such wordes and presentes from the sayde pope, that he was well satysfyed and plea∣syd. And for at those days in Fraūce was vsyd of prestes and men of the chyrche precyouse and shewynge ve∣sture, and golden and riche starynge gyrdelles, with rynges and other or∣namentes of gold / the sayde Lowys purchasyd of the pope a correccyon for all suche as vsyd suche dysordy∣nate apparell / and causyd theym to vse and were browne & sad colours, accordynge to theyr honoures and sadnes. This Lowys hadde thre sonnes, that is to saye Lothayre, whome he made felowe of the empyre / Pepyn the seconde, whome he made duke of Guyan / and Lowys the thyrde, to whom he betoke the rule of Bayton. To this yongeste sonne worde was broughte, that Bernarde a ruler in Italy had assembled a great power / & wyth ye aydes of two other captay¦nes named Iylys and Reyner, the whyche Charlis the great by his lyfe greatly fauouryd / occupyed ye strēg∣thys of the mountaynes, and enten∣dyd to kepe the countrey of Italye from the subieccyon of his father the emperoure. wherof he gyuynge his father knowlege / strong power was gaderyd, as well by the father as by Lothayre his sonne, and sped theym towarde the mountayns. But when the sayde Bernarde was ware of the emperours commyng wyth so great a strength / and consyderyd his lacke of power to mayntayn his purpose / wyth also the great mercy and pytye that he knew to be in the emperour: he submytted hym holy to hys grace and mercy, and dyscoueryd to hym the authours of that rebellyon / the whyche thys Lowys causyd vnder safe kepynge to be hadde vnto the cy¦tye of Aquisgrany. The whyche re∣bellys were the byshop of Mylayne, the byshop of Cremoun, and the bys¦shoppe of Orleaunce. The kynge passed all the wynter folowyng at the foresayde cytye / and lastely caused to be broughte before hym the foresayde transgressours, & examyned the cyrcumstaunce of the foresayd treason, and after remytted them to the rygour of Lowes / where by processe they were condemnyd to deth as many of them as were tem∣porall men. Then the emperour hauynge com¦passion of the forenamed Bernarde, for so myche as he was the sonne of Pepyn laste kynge of Italy, and his nere kynnesman / transmutyd the sen¦tence of deth vnto perpetuyte of pry∣son and losynge of hys syghte. But for the sayde Bernarde, Reyner, and other, chase rather to dye thē to lyue in pryson wyth that deformyte / they passyd by dinte of the sworde, & were
beheddyd within or nere to the sayd cytye of Aquisgrani. And the sayde bysshoppes were depryued of theyr dygnyteys & put into pryuate hou∣ses of relygyon. And whyle thys Lewys was oc∣cupyed in lytell Brytayne, in subdu∣ynge of that countrey / Lothayre the eldest sonne of thys Lewys was sent to rule the lōdes of ye empyre. where he bare hym ryght nobly, and execu∣ted dyuers actes for the weale of the empyre. But in thys season .ii. fren∣des of hys father and hys / were for certeyne crymes to them put, moste cruelly condēpned to vyle deth with in the cytye of Rome. wherof heryng Lothayre than beyng at the cytye of Papy, sent worde therof to hys fa∣ther in all hasty wyse / the which was lyke to haue turnyd ye pope to greate trowble, yf he by polytyke and wyse meanes had not shortly pacifyed the mater. That one of the foresayd two persones so condempned was scrybe to the pope, and that other was Donar. ye shall vnderstande that thys Le¦wys hadde two wyues / by the fyrste he had the forenamed thre sonnes, and of the seconde he receyued a son and named hym Charlys / the which whan he came to mannes stature, was surnamed Charlys ye bolde. He loued entyerly thys Charlys, & wold often kysse hym in the presence of his brethern. For the whych they enuyed theyr sayd brother / and also dysday∣ned theyr father as here after shall appere. Thus in processe of tyme Lewys gaue vnto thys Charlys the coūtrey of Neustria or Normādy / the which causyd greate dyscencyon amonge the bretherne / and also for thys and other causes, Lotharius toke partye agayne hys father. THE .CLX. CHAPITER. THys seconde wyfe of Lewys was named Indith / ye which was accusyd to the pope to be with∣in suche degre of allyaunce to hyr husbonde, that she myghte not law∣fully contynewe hys wyfe. wherfore contrary to the wyll of Leuys, by the laboure of some bysshoppes & other lordes of Fraūce, she was deuorcyd from hym / and put into a house of nonnys, and there straytly kepte. But Lewys for a tyme susteyned thys iniuryes, to ye ende yt he myght know whyther his sonnes fauoured the cause or not. But in processe of tyme whan he hadde experyence of hys frendes / and of hys sonnes / he thā assembled to hym a strong hoste, and recoueryd hys wyfe malgre to all hys enmyes. For the whych dede Lothayre, wyth dyuers of the Ba∣rons of Fraunce, assemblyd theyr people / and entendyd to depryue Le¦wys from all imperyall and kyngly dygnyte. wherfore Lewys ferynge hys sonne and hys assystens / & also for the entent that he myghte assem∣ble the strength of ye empyre: he yode vnto Magunce. And after he hadde purueyed and garnysshed hys rety∣newe / he retornyd toward Fraunce, and met wyth some of hys enemyes and them subdued / and so kepte on hys iourney tyll he came to Aquys∣grany, where he restyd hym and hys people. Thus contynuynge thys dyssen∣cyon / the sonnes sent wrytyng to the pope than beynge named Gregory ye fourth, requyrynge hym of ayde and counceyle to deuyse a concorde and peace bytwene theyr fader and them. At whose request / and for to cause a naturall charyte to be quyckenyd bytwene the father & hys .iii. sonnes / he came in hys proper persone into
Fraunce, and endeuoryd hym to the vttermoste of hys wyttes to agree to the sayd parties. In the tyme of this entreaty made by the pope / I can not saye for what cause, many of the lordes / on the partye of Lowys for∣sooke hym, and fled to the sōnys par¦tye / so that the emperoure was in great feere of hym selfe, & of hys par¦son. whan Lewys had seen his fren¦des thus in tyme of hys nede refuse & flee frome hym, and lefte hym in great feere and daūger of straūgers he than thoughte better for hym to put hym selfe vnder the Rule and tuycion of hys owne chyldren, than to abyde the doute of the sayde straū¦gers. wherfore he sent vnto his sayd sonnes / requyrynge theym to pro∣uyde for his safegarde and assuryn∣ge of his person, and that he were not there oppressyd or murdryd. And within shorte space after this messa∣ge sent to theym withoute answere of them agayne receyuyd, he rode to¦warde theym smally accompanyed. where of than Lothayre and hys bro¦ther hauynge warnynge in all hom∣ble wyse encountred hym, and recey∣ued hym vppon theyr knees / and so cōueyed hym wyth all reuerēce vnto theyr pauylyon or tent. And after for a begynnyng of a peace to be stablys¦shed bytwene hym and them / he to satysfye theyr myndes, refused the forenamed Indith, and closyd her in a place of relygyon called Torton, as testyfyeth myne authour mayster Robert Gagwyne. But the Frenche boke sayth that thys dede was done by Frederyke bysshoppe or Utryke / where fore he was after pyteously slayne by such as fauoured ye quene / and not all wythout her concent, as wytnessyth the sayd cronycle. And whan Lewys had in thys & other thynges agreed vnto hys son∣nes / and thought hym self to be in su¦rete of theyr amyte and fauours: so∣deynly he was cōueyed vnto the mo∣nastery of saynt Medrid / or as sayth the Frenche boke he was conueyed to a towne called in Frenche Melan¦guy, wyth hys yonge sonne Char∣lys. And that done / the sayd thre son∣nes deuyded theyr fathers possessy∣ons amonge theym thre. That is to saye Lothayre the eldeste, had to his porcyon the londes of the empyre / Pepyn, the countrey of Guyan / and to Lewys the yongest, fell the coun∣trey of Bayon. whyche mysery of the emperour whan the pope had beholden & seen / he wyth greate mornynge retorned into Iuly & so vnto Rome. In which tyme of prysonemēt of the emperour the sayd Lewys made dyteys & pys∣telles of greate sorowe and lamenta¦cyon, to the ensample of all erthlye prynces / and to the entent that hys sonnes shulde of hym haue the more compassyon and pytye. The whyche I ouer passe for length of tyme / and the rather, for in tyme of prysonemēt of Edwarde the seconde callyd Car∣naruan was by hym made a lyke cō∣playnt / where of when tyme & place comyth, I entende to expresse some parte therof. whan Lewys had thus a season remayned in pryson / for so myche as the comons shulde not thynke that thys shuld be done by the authoryte of ye thre sonnes onely: therfore they causyd a coūsayle to be callyd at the cytye of Compeyne / & there by theyr meanes and labours causyd theyr father by authoryte of spyrytuall & temporall lordys, to be discharged of all rule and domynyon, as well of the empyre as of the realme of Fraū¦ce, by authoryte of the sayd coūsayle or parliament / and after caused hym to renoūce all hys temporall habyte, and to become a munke in the mona∣stery
of saynt Matke / where he was lefte of his sonne Lothayre, not with out sure watche and kepynge. But full often it is seen, that whā the erthlye power of man faylyth or wekyth / god of hys greate mercy the repentaunt synner to grace callyth, & hym by hys dyuyne power aydeth and strengtheth / and so he dyd thys Lewys. For after thys mysery and trybulacyon thus to hym fallen / the peple in dyuerse placys of this londe murmured and grudgyd very sore, agayne the innaturall dealynge of the sonnes agayne theyr father. In these dayes was a greate ru∣ler in Fraunce named Guyllyam, & stuarde or constable of that lande / ye which wyth one Egebard or Edgare a man of greate byrth and alyaunce, coūsayled togyder for the enlargyng of ye emperour. And lastly wyth ayde of theyr frendes assembled a greate peple. And than drewe vnto them .ii. noble men of Burgoyne called Bar∣narde and Gueryn, the whyche some¦tyme had ben well cherysshed wyth the emperoure Lewys. All thys season Lothayre had re∣styd hym for ye more partye at Aquys¦grany. But whan he harde of the as∣semblynge of these foresayd lordes, he sped hym towarde Parys. And whan he was thyther comen / the fore¦sayd lordes sent vnto hym two noble men Rowlande and Gantelyne / the whych made request vnto Lothayre in the name of the other lordes, that it wolde lyke hym to restore hys fa∣ther vnto hys former dygnyte / wyth other thynges concernynge theyr le∣gacyon. To the whyche two lordes Lothayre gaue answere, that of hys fathers restorynge to hys fyrste or former dygnyte, no man lyuynge wolde be therof more fayne than he wolde. But ye deposyng of hym was done by the hole authoryte of ye land. wherfore yf he shulde be agayne re∣storyd / it must be by the same autho∣ryte, and not by hym onely. All be yt that they myghte knowe of hys be∣nyuolēce and fauour that he bare to∣warde hys father / he wylled them to stonde a parte, whyle he had some cō¦munycacyon of his lordes for ye same mater. By reason wherof were it for fere or for fauour / the emperour was shortly after put at hys lybertye, and restoryd to all hys fyrst honoure and dygnyte / & than with great honoure conueyed to a cytye or towne called Ciriciake, where met wyth hym hys other two sōnes Pepyn and Lewys / and there restyd hym certayne dayes in makyng all feest and ioye / and af∣ter rode vnto Aquysgrany, and there restyd an other season. In whych tyme of hys there beyng / was brought vnto hym from ye place where she had ben prisoner, his wyfe Indyth. But whan Lothari{us} knewe that hys father had hyr agayne re∣ceyued contrary to hys mynde and pleasure / he in wrath & dyspleasure entryd the countrey of Burgoyne / & made in it sharpe and cruell warre, & executed therin many spoylynges and other inordynate dedys. The whyche cruelty to wythstande & let / hys father wyth hys sonne Pepyn wyth a greate hoste sped hym thyder warde. But anone as he had know∣lege therof / mystrustyng his strēgth, he yelded hym vnto his faders grace and mercy / whom the meke fader re∣ceyued and forgaue to hym hys tres∣passe. And after that of hym and dyuerse of hys lordes he had taken assuryd othes and other suretyes / he thā sent the sayd Lothayre into Italy with a certayne nomber of knyghtes, to de∣fende the countrey from daunger of enemyes, and strengthynge of the straytes and mountaynes.
And that wyth other thynges or∣deryd and done for the weale of hys realme / Lewys than toke vpon hym to ryde about hys lande, to thentent that he myghte be somwhat enfor∣med of the rule of hys offycers / and how the countreys were ruled by the rulers of them. And where he found any mysgouernaunce / he punysshed the executers therof, as well ye bys∣shoppes as other, as farre as his au¦thoryte in that behalfe stretchyd. Than Indith consyderynge the emperoure fell into greate age / and hyr sonne and his Charlis by name, had as yet no suffycyent landes nor possessyons to maynteyne any estate wyth: she compassed many wayes in hyr mynde, how she myghte acheue hyr entent, and to brynge it to good purpose. where fynally by counceyll of hyr frendes, to ye ende to purchase the loue and fauour of Lothayre / she axed of hyr lorde and husbonde, that the sayd Lothayre myghte be tutour and gyder of hys yonge sonne Char¦les. Of this request ye emperour was very glad, and graunted hyr, hyr pe∣ticion. And so it fell soone after, cer∣tayne messengers came to the empe∣roure from Lothayre hys sonne. To the whych whan Lewys had gyuen answere to such maters as they were sent fore, and gyuē vnto them other instruccyons / he sent them forthe a∣gayne, and with them certeyne other to wylle his sayd sonne to come vnto hym in as goodly wyse as he myght. But at that season he excusyd hym by sykenesse / and whan he was reco∣uered he fayned an other excuse. In thys meane tyme worde was brougth to the emperoure, that hys sonne Lothayre had greued ye chyrch of Rome / and takyn from it certeyne possessyons. wherewyth Lewys be∣ynge before amoued, sent vnto hys sonne / cōmaundynge hym in sharpe wordes, yt he shulde haue in mynde the othe before by hym made / & that he shulde in exchewynge his dysplea¦sure, make restytucyō of all thynges that he before hadde taken from the chyrch / the whyche cōmaundement Lothayre promysed to obey in all wyse. And where Lewys was deter∣myned to haue gone vnto Rome, to haue sene ye sayd promesse fulfylled / & also to haue spoken wyth the pope for dyuers maters nedefull for the chyrche: he was lette by occasyon of Danes or Normannes, yt than had newly inuaded the lōdes of Fraūce / the whyche he shortly after expellyd and droue out of hys londys. And that done, the emperour yode vnto Aquysgrany / where by the fren¦des of Indith & other of the nobles of Fraunce, the emperour gaue vnto hys yongest sonne Charlis a porcyō of ye empyre, whyche after shall more clerely appere. And soone after at a counsayle holdyn at Cirycyake, be∣fore namyd in the presence of his son Lewys / he gaue to hym the order of knyghthode, & adournyd hym wyth kynges clothynge. And ouer all thys in the presence of many lordes of Fraunce / he gaue to the sayde Charlys the hole coun∣trey of Neustria that now is named Normandye. Of whyche honoure and gyftes though hys moder were ioyous and gladde / yet hys brother Lewys was therewyth nothynge contentyd, whyche of Indith and of hyr frendes was well appercey∣uyd and knowen. wherefore as she before tyme had done / than of newe she made request vnto hyr lorde and husband, that he wolde of hys moste especyall grace graunte vnto hyr, that Lothayre myghte haue the go∣uernaunce of hyr sonne Charlys / the whych of hym was the seconde tyme graunted. Uppon whyche graunte
thus to her made / the emperour sent vnto hys son Lothayre pleasaūt let∣ters, wyllyng hym in all goodly hast to resorte vnto hys court. The which obeyenge hys fathers commaunde∣ment / retourned into Fraunce short¦ly after the receyte of the said letters, and came vnto his father to the citye of Uernayse, of whome he was ioy∣ously receyued. And after he hadde a season dwellyd with the emperour, he gaue vnto hym the coūtrey of Au¦stracy / the whyche countrey as shall after be shewyd in thys Lotharius story, was after his name named Lo¦rayne. But a parte of the sayde pro∣uynce or countrey that stretchyd to∣warde Hungrye / the sayde Lowys gaue vnto his yongest son Charlys. And immedyatly after thys gyftes before many lordes confermyd / the emperoure in presence of the sayd lor¦des, toke Charlys by the hande, and delyueryd hym vnto his brother Lo∣thayre / wyllynge and straytly char∣gynge hym that he shulde take hym vnto his cure, and be to hym as cu∣ryouse as he wolde be vnto hys own chyld, and to guyde hym and his pos∣sessyons, as the father shulde guyde the chylde. And to Charlys he com∣maunded that he shulde take & obey hym as his father, and loue and wor¦shyppe hym as his brother / ye whych vppon eyther partye was promysyd to be obseruyd. And shortly after the sayd Lothayr with his brother Char¦lys, toke congy of father and mo∣ther, and returned agayn into Italy. About this tyme dyed Pepyn the seconde sonne of Lewys, and duke of Guyan / the whych yf all shuld be expressyd, putte his father to great trouble and vexacyon / wherfore for hym was made the lesse mournynge. This left after hym a son named Pe¦pyn, of whome somwhat the storye spekyth after. But now I wyll re∣tourne to Lewys the thyrde sonne of the emperoure. THE .CLXI. CHAPITER. TRouth yt is that whē the yon¦ger brother Lewys sawe the bountye of his father so largely ex∣tende towarde his two brethern, and to hym nothynge / he was therwyth in his mynde greatly dyscontent, all be yt that for the tyme he kepte yt se∣crete to hym selfe. But when he was departyd from hys father, and retur¦nyd to his owne lordshyppe / he gade¦ryd a myghty power, and began to make warre vpon the dwellers nere about the Ryne. wherfore the empe∣rour wyth a conuenyent power ap∣prochyd vnto the citye of Dodayng / and sent from thens vnto hys sayde sonne wordes of reconcylyacyon / by meane wherof the sayde Lowes put hym holy in the grace of hys father, and was to hym reconcyled without shedynge of mannys blood. But whyle the emperour was be∣syde at the citye of Cleremoūt in the countye of Auerne, to set a dyreccion amonge the Gascoynes, for opyny∣ons that were reryd amonge theym for the sonne of Pepyn there lately kynge or duke dyscessyd, whyche son as aboue is sayde was also named Pepyn / and there about had taken great payne and labour: thyther to hym tydynges were newly brought, that hys sayde sonne Lewys hadde wyth ye Saxons or Soysons, & with the Thorynges made alliaunce / and was entryd into Germany, and ther∣in made warre in moste cruell wyse. wyth whyche tydynges Lowis was so greuously passyoned / that to hys great age was by meane of thys vn∣kynde anger, fyxyd a sykenes that lefte hym not whyle he lyued. After yet thys not wythstandyng /
he lyke a strong hartyd knyght shew¦yd forth a good and comfortable coū¦tenaunce. And after he hadde in kny¦ghtly wyse preparyd all thynge ne∣cessarye to the warre / he spedde hym towarde Almayne, and contynued hys iourney tyll he came vnto Tho∣rynge / where a season he restyd hym and his people tyll he myght be bet∣ter assuryd where his sonne Lewys restyd hym. But the sonne hauynge knowlege of the great power of hys father / and also beynge in despayre of purchasynge of mercy, consyde∣ryng his many offences: fled by the coūtrey of Sclauony, and so by that costes retourned into Bayon or Ba∣uery / and so escapyd the daunger of hys father. Then the emperoure beyng surely enformyd of the scape of hys sonne / helde on his iourney tyll he came to Magoūce. And after came vnto the cytye of Uermayse / where he called a counsayle of his lordes spyrytuall and temporall, and ordeyned there dyuerse thynges for the state of the empyre. And more entendyd to haue done / but sykenesse increasyd so sore in hym, that by the space of .xl. days he toke no temporall sustenaunce. But in that tyme he vsyd often to take the blessed sacrament / the which as he often sayde, strengthyd bothe the soule and the bodye. Then he sent for Lothayre to come vnto hym / the whyche wythoute ta∣ryenge obeyed his commaundemēt, and abode styll wyth hym. Of this Lewys Policronicon ma¦keth a shorte rehersall / and sayth y• by his fyrste wyfe named Hermyn∣garde, he had .iii. sonnes / Lothayre, Pepyn and Lewys. The fyrst beyng felowe with his father of the empyre, was crowned of pope Pascall vpon an Ester daye / and he was also kyng of Italy. And Pepyn he made duke of Gascoyne and Guyan. And Lew∣ys was made ruler of Bauary. And by his second wife named In∣dyth and doughter of ye duke of Bay¦on, he hadde Charlis the Ballyd / to whome he gaue the countrey of Bur¦goyn as the sayd Policronica sayth. And for this Lewys was mylde / he was often troubled of hys own men and of other, tyll he delte wyth them more sharpely and wysely, and ruled the people more straytly. It is there also shewyd, that when this Lewys had promotyd a yonge man named Frederyke to the see of Utryke / and to hym hadde gyuen sadde and good exhortacyon, that he shuld folowe the stablenes of hys an¦tecessours, and that he shulde pur∣pose the sothe and trouth wythoute excepcyon of persones / and punyshe mysdoers, as well the ryche as the poore: the sayde byshoppe shulde an¦swere to hym and saye, I beseche thy magestye syr emperour to take in pa¦cyence, that I maye dysclose to the that thynge that hath long walowed & turned in my mynde. Say thy ple¦sure sayd the emperour. I praye thy syr emperour shewe me thy mynde / whyther is more accordynge, to at∣tame thys fyshe here presente fyrste at the hedde or at the tayle. The em∣perour answered shortely and sayd, at the hedde the fyshe shall be fyrste attamyd. So yt is lorde emperoure sayd the byshoppe, that crysten fayth maye cause the to cease of thyne er∣roure, that thy subiectes be not bol∣dyd to folowe thy mysdoynge. wher¦fore fyrste forsake thou thy vnlawe∣full wedloke, that thou haste made wyth Indyth thy nere kynnes wo∣man. By meane of those wordes the kyng was reconcylyd, and lefte the com∣pany of his wyfe, tyll he hadde pur∣chasyd a lycence of the pope. And the
emperour forgaue the sayde byshop all trespassys / but the woman hyred two knyghtes that slewe hym in his vestymentes, when he hadde ended hys masse. After thys the empresse was falsely accused of wronge cryme, and made a menchon. But the same yere the emperoure delyueryd her from that habyte, when he hadde suffycyently prouyd the sayde cryme to be false. Then to retorne where I lefte / whā this Lewys had longe lyen in thys agonyous sykenes, and knewe well that he amendyd nothynge / but fe∣blyd more and more / he commaun∣dyd his iewellys to be broughte be∣fore hym. wherof by hys owne hand he haue a parte vnto the chyrche of Rome / and to Lotharius his sonne there presente he gaue his crowne & his sworde / commaundynge hym straytly vppon his blessynge that he shuld haue in honour hys moder In¦dith, & that to Charlis his brother he shulde owe true loue & amyte, & that he shuld hym & his lādes deffende to the vttermoste of his power. Then the lordes spirituall and tem¦porall, and specyally the archebys∣shoppe of Meaws / made a lamen∣table requeste to the emperoure for his sonne Lewys, that he wolde ac∣cepte hym to his grace and mercye, and to forgyue hym hys insolente and wanton wylde dedys. wherof when the emperour harde / he fell in suche wepynge, that he myghte not speke of a good whyle after. And when he hadde refrayned hym therof / he remembryd to ye lordes the many and great benefytes yt he had done to hym, and the innaturall vn∣kyndnes that the sayd Lewys had a¦gayn shewyd vnto hym / & how often tymes he had perdoned his vnkynd sonnes trespasse. And finally all this not wythstandyng / he was at ye oure in perfyte charite wyth hym, and for∣gaue hym as he trusted to be forgy∣uen / prayenge the lordes there pre∣sent, and specyally chargynge ye sayd byshop, that he wold shew vnto hys sayd son that great daunger that he was in agaynst god for the dysplea∣sures done to him / and specially that he was a cause of the abrygement or shortynge of hys dayes. Then to brynge this story to effect, wherof yf I shuld declare the special tyes therof, wolde aske a longe tyme (for ye shall vnderstand that these .ii. storyes of the great Charlis and of this Lewys, occupye in Frenche of leuys of great scantelyn ouer .lxiiii) wherfore I conclude yt he dyed lyke a good crysten prynce, when he had ben emperour of Rome and kynge of Fraunce by the terme of .xxvi. yeres / and was buryed wyth great solem∣nyte at Meaws or at Mettis by hys mother Hyldegarde as sayth mays∣ter Robert Gaguyne, in the yere of hys age .lxiiii / leuynge af∣ter hym the foresayde thre sonnes Lothayre, Lew¦ys and Charlys the Ballyd. Anglia. THE .CLXII. CHAPITER. ADeulpus or Ethel¦wolphus the son of Egbertus / be∣ganne hys reygne ouer the westesa∣xons or Anglys, in the yere of oure lordes incarnacy∣on .viii. hundred and .xxxii / and the xvii. yere of Lewys the mylde then kynge of Fraunce. Thys in his youth was wyllynge
to be a preste, and was enteryd the order of subdeacon. But there after by dyspensacyon of Pascall the fyrst of that name pope / he was maryed to Osburga a wo∣man of lowe byrthe. By whome he hadde foure sonnes / that is to mea∣ne Ethelwalde, Ethelbert, Ethel∣drede, and Alurede / the whyche af∣ter theyr father reygned as kynges of Englād that one after that other, as after shall appere. This Adeulphus after he hadde a certayne tyme ben kyng / he went to Rome, and toke wyth hym his yon∣gest sonne Alurede or Alphrede / and taryed there by the space of a yere. In the whyche season he repayred the Saxon scole / the whyche before tyme was there founden by Offa kynge of Mercia, as Guydo sayeth and other / but more veryly of Iue kynge of westsaxons, as sayth the authoure of the Floure of historyes. And for that he graunted of euery house of his kyngdome a peny, as in his storye is before shewyd. But thys scole was sore decayed, and the house therof lately brent / the whyche thys Adeulphus newely repayred, and sette yt in better order then yt before was vsyd. Thys kynge also to refourme the greuouse correccyons that he sawe there executyd to Englyshe men for spyrytuall offensys, as in werynge of irons and guyues: he graunted of euery fyre house of hys lande .i. d, as Iue foresayde hadde done. By the whyche sayenge yt shulde seme / that by these two kynges shuld be grauntyd vnto Rome .ii. d. of eue¦ry fyre house thorough theyr lande. But that maye not be so vnder∣stande / for thys Rome scot ys ga∣deryd of euery house a peny wyth∣out more. wherfore yt muste folowe, that yt is mysse taken of wryters, that allege this dede to that one kynge for that other. How be yt, yt maye stande by reason, that Iue made the fyrste graunte, and this kynge after con∣fermyd the same. But the authoure of Cronica cronycarum sayth, that thys Adeulphus graunted to saynte Peter these sayde Peter pens / and spekyth no word of Iue nor of none other. It is also shewyd of this kynge by Policronica / that he shulde for the ac¦quytynge of the chyrches of Englād of all maner of kynges trybute, pay¦ed yerely to Rome thre hundred mar∣kes. That ys to meane to saynte Pe¦ters chyrche a hundred markes / to the lyghte of saynt Paule a hundred marke / and to the popys treasorye a hundred marke. And ouer all thys of hys pure deuocyon, he offred to god & to saynte Peter the .x. parte of hys moueable goodes. And also one cronycler sayth, that thys kynge founded fyrste the vny∣uersytye of Oxynforde / whyche was lykely to be done by Offa kynge of Mercia, for so myche as in his days flowred that famouse clerke Alcu∣mus or Albinus / the whych as sayth the frenche cronycle, was fyrste foū∣der of the scole of Parys and of Pa∣pya, as is before shewyd in ye story of Charlys the great, in the thyrd cha∣pyter of the sayde storye. when Adeulphus hadde thus sped hys besynes and pylgrymage at Rome, he retournyd by Fraunce / where at that tyme was kyng of that lande Charlys the Ballyd, of whom he was ioyouslye receyued. And af∣ter he hadde dysportyd hym there a season / he spousyd the doughter of the sayde Charlys, in the .xx. yere of the reygne of the sayde Adeulphus, as testyfyeth Policronica in the .xxx. chapiter of his .v. boke / whych shuld
be the yere of the reygne of the sayde Charlis the .xi. But of this mariage is nothynge touchyd in the frenche cronycle. Then Adeulphus takynge leue of the kynge / toke shyppynge and lan∣ded in Englande wyth his wyfe In∣dyth by name. And for that he con∣trary the law made in ye tyme of Brig¦thricus, sette his wyfe in the kynges trowne, and magnyfyed her lyke a quene / the lordes of his lande arose agayne hym, and pullyd from hym a great parte of his domynyon, and made his eldeste sonne ruler therof. whyche all was done in reproche of Ethelburga, whyche slew her lorde Brigthricus as before is shewyd. Lastly the mater was appeasyd, and he to his kyngly honour restoryd. About this tyme Bertulph{us} kyng of Mercia, slewe wyckydly in the holy tyme of Penthecoste saynte wyl stone / whose holy bodye was buryed at Repyngedō. And in ye place where thys holy wylstone was slayne stode a pyller of lyghte .xxx. dayes after. And in the yere folowynge dyed the sayde Bertulphus. After whose deth, Burdredus was made kynge of Mercia or myddell Englande / the whyche before tyme hadde spou∣syd the doughter of kynge Adeul∣phus. In the later dayes of thys Adeul∣phus, the Danys dyd myche harme in Lyndesey, and also in kent / and frome thens came to London, and robbed and spoyled the cytye. wher∣fore Adeulphus gaderyd his people, and lastely mette wyth them in Sou¦therey vppon a downe called Oclea / and there dyscomfyted theym, not wythoute shedynge of great plente of the Anglis blood, and forsyd them to take the see / so that after they lan¦ded in eest Anglia as after shall ap∣pere. Then lastely dyed thys good kynge Adeulphus or Ethelwolph{us} / when he hadde ruled hys subictes nobly by accorde of moste wrytes ful¦ly .xxii. yere / and was buryed at wyn¦chester, leuynge after hym four son∣nys aforesayde. Francia. THE .CLXIII. CHAPITER. CHarlys ye yongeste son of Lewys the mylde / began hys reygne ouer the chefe part of Fraū¦ce, in ye yere of our lorde .ix. hundred & .xli / and the .ix. ye¦re of Adeulphus then kynge of west∣saxons / the whyche as before is sayd was surnamed Ballyd. Anon as his father was buryed / his brother Lothayre, to whome the father, as ye fore behaue harde, had cōmyttyd ye guydynge of this Char∣lys, by the entysynge of his brother Lewys malygned agayn this Char¦lis / and sought many wayes to put hym from such landes as his father had gyuen hym. This sayd Lothayr was after the deth of his father empe¦rour / and Lewys the yonger brother was duke or knyght of Bayon. But for Charlis was yongest, and had to his parte the pryncypall porcyon of Fraunce, whych was called myddell Fraunce / therfore his .ii. bretherne & specially Lewys, malygned greuous¦ly agayne hym. wherof this Charlis beynge somdeale infourmed / bare hym so wysely & so egally to his sub∣iectes, that he hadde theyr loues and fauours / and trustyd alway by theyr good ayde that he shulde be of power to wythstande theyr vnkynde ma∣lyce. And lyke as the hydde fyre in processe breketh oute and shewyth great lyght and flammy blase, euen
so dyd thys couerde malyce at the laste breke oute, to great ire and opē wrath. For after foure yeres was passyd / the sayde two bretherne with oute defyaunce or groundely cause of warre, assygned or assembled a great hoste / suche lyke before thys daye hadde not ben sene / and entryd the lymyttes of kynge Charlys. Then Charlis assembled in all ye haste hys lordes / and requyred theyr aydes and counsayll to wythstande the malyce of hys bretherne. And when he hadde knowelege of theyr good myndes, anon theyr knyghtes were gaderyd and all thynge was re¦dy to the fyghte. Nowe in thys whyle the two bre∣therne wyth theyr peple were comen to a place callyd Fountayns or Foū¦tanet, where to Charlis spedde hym. And when both hostes were nere / ey∣ther partye made prouysyon to sub∣due his enymye. Then were the bataylles on bothe partyes orderyd & assygned to theyr standardes and capytaynes, and the wynges set to the moste auauntage. what shuld I lenger processe of this ordynaunce make, fynally the shote of arblasters beganne on both sydes whyche ouer threwe many an horse and man / and specyally the fore ry∣dars, that putte theym selfe in prese wyth theyr longe and sharpe laun∣cys, to wynne the fyrste brunte of the felde. Pytye yt was to beholde the good∣ly bryght armyd knyghtes, lyēg and walowynge wyth theyr great stedys in the felde, wyth dedly woundes ga¦pynge agayne the son, yt were slayne at the fyrst encountre. But when the shote was spent, and the speres to shateryd / then both hostes ranne to gyther wyth Rowlandes songe / so that in shorte whyle the grene felde was dyed into a perfyte redde. For there was heddes, armes, legges, & trunkys of ded mennys bodyes ly∣enge, as thycke as floures growe in tyme of maye in the floryshynge me∣dowys / myserable and pyteouse yt was to beholde the persones halfe ly¦uynge and halfe ded / with theyr gry¦sely woundes pyteously gronynge and cryenge wythoute comforte. So that there was shewyd all rygoure wythoute mercy, and all crueltyes wythout compassyon. Thus duryd this mortall fyghte by a longe season / that doutefull yt was to knowe whyche partye hadde thauaūtage of other. Howbeit Char¦lys was putte to an afterdeale by .ii. meanes. The fyrste was for so mych as Charlis entendyd to haue forbor¦ne, for the reuerence of the hygh feste as the daye of the ascensyon of oure lorde, & that daye not to haue fough¦ten. And the seconde was, that he was farre lesse in nomber. whyche two causes of dysauaūtage not with standynge / yet in the conclusyon he wanne the honoure of that iourney. But not wythoute great losse of hys peple and many of the nobles of his lande / where of the frenche boke re∣hersith the names. But for they be to vs vnknowen, I passe theym ouer. And as yet is testyfyed of many wry¦ters / there was slayne that daye mo Frencheman, then was slayn at any felde euer before that day. wherof the nomber is not expressyd / for yt was so great. Then Lothayre was forced to take Aquisgrany for his safegard, and Lewys ellys where. But Char∣lys wyth a small cōpany that to hym were lefte / folowed his Bretherne, and cōstrayned Lothayre to forsake ye citye, & thens to go vnto Lyon a cy¦tye ye standeth at this day in the vtter most border of Fraūce, & after to Uy¦enne. To ye which citye of Uyen short¦ly after came vnto hym hys brother
Lewys / where they two assembled a newe hoste. In the whych passetyme, as Char¦lis was comynge towarde hys bre∣therne / messyngers mette with hym, sent from his bretherne to comon of a peace. So that fynally he was ac∣cordyd, that the realme of Fraunce shulde be dyuyded in .iii, as the fa∣ther had before dysposyd yt. That is to meane, Lothayr shuld enioy ouer the landes belongyng to the empyre the countrey of Austracy / the whych in processe of tyme was called Lo∣thayre or Lotharingia, whyche is to meane Lorayne after his name. And to Lewys shulde remayne the pro∣uynce of Germany, wyth the coūtrey of Buyan or Benery. And to Char∣lys shulde remayne the countrey cal¦led myddell or chefe Fraunce, wyth the prouynces of Normandy & Bur¦goyne. whyche sayde myddle Fraūce is reportyd to be in space from ye Oc∣cean of Brytayne to the ryuer of Mawze. The whyche concorde thus ferme∣ly stablyshed and fynyshed / eyther of other toke theyr departynge, and re∣sorted vnto theyr owne lordshyppes. But Lothayre dyed shortely after / leuynge after hym thre sonnes, na∣med Lewys, Lothayre, and Charlis. But this deth of Lothayre is not ta∣ken for temporall deth / for yt is sayd yt he forsoke the trauayle of ye world, and became a munke at the abbaye of Pruny, and lyued there a solytary lyfe many yeres after. THE .CLXIIII. CHAPITER. CHarlis ye Ballyd thus beyng in peaseble possessyon of the chefe parte of the realme of Fraunce, and guydynge yt wyth all sobernes and indifferēt iustyce / was well drad and also beloued of his subiectes. In processe of tyme, as vpon .viii. yeres after that Lothayr abouesayd renouncyd the pompe of the worlde / dyed fyrste Charlys the yongest son of the thre of the foresayd Lothayre. And after dyed Lothayre the second sonne / so that the sayde Lewys one∣ly suruyued, whych was after his fa¦ther enoynted emperour. when Charlis kynge of Fraunce knewe certaynely of the deth of these two forsayde brethern, and that with out yssu / anon he assembled his pow¦er and entred the prouynce of Austra¦cy or Lorayne / the which his brother Lothayre hadde gyuen to Lothayre his sonne. And in shorte whyle af¦ter crowned hym kynge of that pro∣uynce, wythin the chyrche of saynte Stephan of the cytye of Meaws, chefe cyty of that lordshyppe & kyng¦dome. wyth the whyche dede Lewys his brother, and kynge of Germany and Bayon was dyscontentyd / thyn¦kyng hym selfe more ryghtfull enhe¦ritour then Charlis, for so myche as he was ye elder brother, and also bro∣ther to the fyrste Lothayre of father & of mother / where as Charlis was but halfe brother, and by the fathers syde onely. For this ye sayd Lewys sent to Char¦lys the Ballyd certayn messyngers / gyuynge to hym monycyon that he shulde call to memory the couenaun¦tes betwene theym before tyme sta∣blyshed / and that he shulde not med∣dell hym nor haue to do wythin the landes of his cosyn lately deed, vnto such tyme as yt were determyned by theyr bothe counsayles, whyther of theym hadde the better ryght / & this to be obseruyd vppon payne of excō∣munycacyon or cursyng. But for to Lewys was well sene, that his brother Charlis nothyng ab¦steyned hym from the occupyenge of the forenamed countrey / he therfore
gaderyd an armye to warre vppon his sayde brother. In the whych passe tyme Charlys toke to his second wyfe a woman na¦myd Rychent or Ricent / the whyche he before tyme hadde vsyd as his cō¦cubyne or paramoure. And soone after the Danys or Nor¦mans inuadyd the landes of Char∣lys / the whych for that tyme he was fayne to appease & please wyth ryche gyftes and other pleasures. Then Charlys receyued from his brother a seconde ambassade or mes∣sage / the whyche shewyd vnto hym excepte he wold voyde his knyghtes and strengthes, that he had sette and put in dyuerse places of the lande of Austracy, he shuld be sure to haue of his sayd brother an enymy / and that in all haste he wolde entre his lande wyth great force and warre. wherup¦pon was suche answere sente, that by both theyr agrementes the mater was hadde in suche cōmunycacyon / that fynally yt was agreed that the sayde landes shulde egally be depar¦tyd betwene them. whyche conclusy¦on perfyted. Lewys wyth his people retournyd into Germany. But yt was not longe after that Lewys repented hym of hys agre∣ment / so that newe legacyons were made vppon both partyes / and laste¦ly wyth myche payne newly agreed. After whyche agrement and accorde fynyshed / Lewys the emperour and sonne of the fyrste Lothayre, sente an ambassade to both the fornamed bre¦therne / admonestynge and warnyng them that nother the one nor ye other shulde intermyt wyth the foresayde landes, for so myche as the ryghte therof belonged to him as next heyre to his brother / and not to them that were a degre forther. The answere of this was deferryd by Charlys / how be it his brother Lewis as sayth myne authour, gaue ouer his parte shortly after to Lewys ye emperour. In this passe tyme Charlys the sonne of Charlis the Ballyd by hys fyrste wyfe, whome the father had made ruler of a countrey called Belge / hadde rulyd hym insolently, and done in that countrey dyuerse outragiouse dedes. For the whyche he beyng cōplayned of, was brought vnto his father / and so by hym com¦maundyd to pryson. But shortely af¦ter he was deliueryd at ye requeste of some nobles of Fraūce / & kept after in his fathers courte, where he conty¦nued but a shorte whyle. For wythin a lytle season after his father beynge at Lyons / he departyd from ye sayde courte, and gaderyd to hym a wylde company of euyll dysposyd persons, and went agayne into the sayd coun¦trey of Belge / and dyd more harme then he had done before season / and so contynuyd a long whyle. But last¦ly he was taken and caste agayne in pryson / where after longe punyshe∣ment he was reued of his syght / and then sent vnto the monastery of Cor∣benyke, there safely to be kepte. But at length by the entycemēt of his vn¦cle Lewys kynge of Germany, and the treason of two mūkes of ye place / he scapyd thens, and fledde vnto the sayd Lewys his vncle. In the which tyme Charlys his father was occu∣pyed in the defence of the Danys or Normannys, that then by strength had wonne the citye of Angyers and done therein myche harme / whome the kynge closyd wythin the sayd cy∣tye wyth a stronge syege, and fynally compellyd theym to seke meanys of peace at the kynges pleasure. After whych peace cōcludyd, and the sayd Danys auoydyd / the kynge reposses¦syd the sayde cytye. It was not longe after, that ty∣dynges were brought vnto Charlis
of the deth of Lewys the emperoure. After knowlege wherof / the kynge sent hys other sonne named Lewys into Austracy, to haue the rule and ye guydynge of ye countrey. And after other thynges ordered for ye weale of hys realme / he wyth a stronge com∣pany of men of armys passyd ye moū¦taynes, and so into Italy towarde Rome. But Lewys hys brother and kynge of Germanye beynge therof warnyd / sent in all haste hys sonne Lewys wyth a stronge hoste to lette hys passage. But how it was for fere or other meane / the sayd Lewys yel∣dyd hym to hys vncle Charlys the Ballyd. wherewith the father beyng greuously dyspleasyd / sent hys se∣conde sonne namyd Charlō, to with∣stande the passage of the sayd Char∣lys. But thys for fere or other cause that he sawe that he myghte not pre∣uayle agayne hys vncle / retornyd hym agayne to hys father. After whose retorne, he for so mych as the sayd Lewys kyng of Germany well perceyued that hys brother Charlys was paste his daunger / he than with a more nomber ioyned vnto his son∣nes hoste, entryd ye londe of Fraūce, in domagynge it to the vttermoste of hys power. In whyche season Charlys the Ballyd kepte on his iourney toward Rome. wherof heryng the .viii. Iohn̄ than pope / sent agayne hym certayn persones of honoure, and welcomyd hym as Augustus or emperour. And after hys comynge thyther the sayde pope receyued hym wyth greate re∣uerence / and crowned hym wyth the imperyall dyademe and denouncyd hym as emperoure. THE .CLXV. CHAPITER. CHarlys ye Ballyd thus beyng authorysed for emperour / ex∣ersyd hym for a tyme for the nedys of the chyrche of Rome / & after toke hys leue of the pope & retorned vnto Papye a cytye of Italy. where he cal¦lynge a generall counceyle of the lor¦des of the empire & other / he by theyr aduyses prouyded and ordered dy∣uerse thynges for the weale of ye sayd empyre. And ouer that by theyr agre¦mentes he ordeyned for hys lyeu te∣naunt or debyte of the sayde empyre in hys absence, a noble man brother to hys wyfe recent named Besonne or Beson / and assygned to hym such people as was thought necessarye and conuenyent. whan Charlys had sped hys ne∣dys in Papye, he hyed hym into Fraunce. But or he came wythin the terrytory therof / word was brought to hym that hys brother Lewys was retorned into hys owne countreye, wythout greate domage done to the realme of Fraunce. In processe the emperoure came to Parys / where he was receyued of the cytesens wyth moste tryumphe & ioye / and kepte hys Eester tyde at saynte Denys. It was not longe after that Char∣lys was thus returnyd into Fraūce / but that he receyued messengers frō hys brother kynge of Germany, the which in his name claymed his part of the empyre as hys ryghte and en∣herytaunce. whiche answere for that tyme was deferryd with pleasaunte wordes / so that at the nexte worde yt he hadde from his sayd brother, was that he was dede and buryed in the chyrche of saynte Nazer in Franke∣borught. wherof whā Charlys was ascerteyned, anone he yode vnto Foū¦tenays / and sent hys messengers to the lordes of the countrey, commaū∣dynge them that they shulde meete hym at the cytye of Mettes. Thys foresayd Lewys lefte after hym two sonnes named Lewys and
Charlon as before is towched / the whych deuyded bytwene them theyr fathers patrymony / so that Lewys had Germany, and Charlon hadde Bayon. Thys Lewys ferynge hys vncle Charlys / gaderyd to hym a stronge power of Saxons and of Thoryn∣ges. And in the tyme of theyr assem∣ble / he sent an ambassade of certeyne byshhoppes & temporall lordes vnto hys vncle Charlys, prayeng hym of hys loue and fauour / wyth other re∣questes to hym made, of the whyche they myghte purchase no graunte. wherof whan they were retornyd he hauynge by them knowlege / ye sayde Lewys incontinently wyth his hoste drewe nere vnto the Ryne. But thys Lewys was not so couert ī his work and assemblynge of hys people / but that hys vncle had therof wyttynge, and purueyed hys people as faste vp¦pon that other syde / so that he wyth an hoste was redy to fyghte with the sayd Lewys. whan Lewys was ware of ye great power that the emperour hadde as∣sembled, he made no haste to passe ye water / but houed and caused his peo¦ple to falle vnto prayer. And Char∣lys also ferynge hys neuewe / vnder a colour sent alegacyon of entreaty. Durynge the whyche entreaty / the emperour contrary to hys honoure, led his peple by a secrete waye thyn∣kyng to haue fallen vpon his neuew sodeynly, and by that meane to haue dystressyd hym. But Lewys beynge ware of hys vncles treason / prouy∣ded so for hys peple, & kepte them in suche araye, that they receyued theyr foo men vpon theyr speres poyntes & to theyr great damage. For where the greate rayne and tedyousnesse of the harde and strayte wayes, whych they hadde passyd, hadde sore tyred and weryed them: than the fresshe fyersnesse of theyr enemyes, whyche they thoughte they shulde haue takē slepynge and vnpurueyed, abasshed thē in such wyse that they were soone ouercomen, and fled from the felde as shepe fle frō the wolfe. By meane of the whych flyght great slaughter of them was made / & many nobles & greate estates of Fraūce both slayne and taken prysoners / and the empe∣roure hym selfe scapyd wyth greate daunger. And of the prysoners that were takē they were so nere spoyled / yt they were fayne to take vyne leues to couer wyth theyr secrete mēbres. ye shall vnderstand y• thys warre bytwene the emperoure Charlys the Ballyd and hys brothers sonne Le∣wys / was for the prouynce of Austra¦cy or Lorayne, the whyche somtyme belonged to the emperoure Lothayr and halfe brother to Charlys. The whych countreye after thys batayle, was by medyatours set in an order. Than the emperoure wyth great trauayle came to a town called Ty∣guy. And Lewys kepte hys waye to Dandonyquyke / and from thens to Ayes the chapell. In this whyle the Danes or Nor¦mans knowynge that Charlys was occupyed in the warre agayne hys neuewe / apparayled them a stronge hoste, and entred ofte the landes of Fraunce. But for Charlys was at ye tyme letted wyth chargeable busy∣nesse / he therfore sent a noble man agayne them called Comarde, vnto the ryuer of Sayne, to wythstande the sayde enemyes. And also to hym was gyuen counceyle, to haue wyth them cōmunicacyon to make a peace yf he myghte. And to thys trouble immedyatly was ioyned another. For ī this tyme and season a cytye belongyng to the chyrch of Rome rebellyd. wherfore to wythstand theyr malyce / the pope
than beynge Iohn̄ the .viii. of that name, sent messengers to Charlys for the defence of the sayd lōdes and other. And soone after the pope for to haste the sayd emperoure, or ellys to quyckē his deputye before named to assemble the Italyans and other people there adioynaūt / came downe to the cytye of Papye, & taryed there the emperours comynge. Charlys thā beset with trowbles / assembled hys knyghtes & sped hym towarde Italy. And whan he was passyd the mountaynes / worde was brought to hym of the popes beynge in Papy / wherfore he sped hym thy∣der with all dylygence. In thys tyme & season Charlone the brother of Lewys and sonne of Lewys kynge of Germany / whyche Charlone as before is shewyd was duke of Bayon or Bayory / gaderyd a stronge hoste, and entred the boun¦des of Italy. wherof herynge ye pope and the emperour, than (as before is sayd) beynge at Papye, busyed in a great counceyle / dissoluyd the same. And the pope incontynētly toke leue of the emperour / & departyd agayne to Rome. And Charlys wyth a great power that he had gaderyd, as well of Italyans as of hys owne people / made towarde hys neuewe. wherof herynge the sayde Charlone / turned agayne by the waye that he had co∣men, tyll he came to hys owne coun∣trey, as sayth myne authour & also ye French boke. But more verely Char¦lone kepyng togyther hys hoste, and hauynge fauour of dyuers lordes of Italye / the emperoure Charlys re∣mouyd to ye cytye of Mantue / where he was grudged wyth a feuer. For remedy wherof he toke a pocyon of a physycyon Iewe named Sedechi∣as, whyche was intoxicat / by meane of whych venemous pocyon he dyed shortly after whan he hadde reygned as kynge & emperoure after moste ac¦corde of writers, by ye space of .xxxvii. yeres, wherof he reygned as empe∣roure .iii. yeres / leuynge after hym a sonne named Lewys, whyche as be∣fore is shewed was ruler of the coū∣trey of Austracy or Lorayne. whan thys Charlys was dede / hys frendes entendynge to haue ca∣ryed the corps into Fraunce / cau∣syd it to be seryd and enoynted wyth ryche and precyous bawmes, and other oyntmentes and aromatykes. But all myghte not stoppe the into∣lerable ayre of hys body / so that they were fayne to bury hym at Uercyle, wythin the monastery of saynt Eu∣seby. where he laye ouer .vii. yeres af¦ter / and then taken vp and conueyed to saynt Denys in Fraūce, and there honorably buryed. THE .CLXVI. CHAPITER IN the tyme of thys Charlys the Ballyd, as wytnessen ma∣ny wryters, began the erledome of Flaunders / the whyche euer before these dayes, the ruler therof was cal¦led the forester of the kynge of Fraū∣ce. whyche erledome had hys begyn¦nynge by thys meane. ye haue harde before in the story of Adeulphus kynge of westsaxons / how in hys retornynge from Rome, he maryed the doughter of Charlys ye Ballyd named Indith. The which Indyth after the deth of her sayde husbonde retornyd by Flaunders to¦warde Fraunce / thynkynge to passe wythout daunger, bycause the sayde countrey was vnder the obedyence or her father. But at those dayes was ruler or forester in that partyes a noble yonge amerous man callyd Bawdewyne / the whyche herynge of the great beautye of thys Indith, gaue attendaunce vppon her. And receyued her in hys best maner, ma∣kyng
to her all the chere that to hym was possyble / and fynally cast to hyr suche loue, that whan she supposed to departe and to haue gone into Fraunce / he delayed the mater in su∣che curteys and wyse maner, that he wan such fauour of her, that she ma∣de no greate haste to departe frome hym / all be it that moste authours agre, that he kepte hyr perforce. whan Charlys hadde wyttynge that Bawdewyne thus helde hys doughter Indith / he sent to hym, straytly chargynge hym to sende ho∣me hys doughter / but that holpe not the mater. Thā he purchasyd agayn hym the censures of holy chyrch, and accursed the sayd Bawdewyne. But whan the kynge conceyued that the yonge man hadde suche loue to In∣dyth that he sette not by that punys∣shement / and also was certeynly en∣formed that hyr harte was gyuen vnto hym: he in processe by ye meane of some bysshoppes and frendes of the sayd Bawdewine, agreed that he shulde take hyr to wyfe / and in the name of hyr dowar, he shulde holde and enioye the sayd countre of Flaū¦ders. And for he wolde haue hys doughter to be the more honoured / he creatyd the sayde Bawdewyne an erle, and commaunded hym to be cal¦led after that daye erle of Flaūders. It is also shewyd in the Frenche cronycle and of other wryters / that thre dayes before hys deth, hys spi∣ryte shulde be rauysshed from hys body, and vnto places of payne and turment / where thys Charlys by the ledynge of an aungell, shulde se hyl∣les and mountaynes brenne, & pyt∣tes full of sulphyr, pytche, and hote boylynge lede. In whyche paynes the sayde Charlys shulde se many of hys progenytours and bysshoppes, that counceyled prynces to debate or stryfe, or gaue counceyle to them to rayse of theyr subiectys vnlefull tas∣kys or imposycyons / wyth many other thynges, whyche I passe ouer for length of the mater. Anglia. THE .CLXVII. CHAPITER. EThelwaldus or Ethelwoldus ye eldeste sonne of Adeulphus, be∣gan hys reygne ouer the weste∣saxons or ouer ye more partye of Englande, in the yere of our lorde viii. hundred and .lv / and the .x. yere of Charlys the Ballyd than kynge of Fraunce. The whyche became so vnhappy / that he maryed ye woman whyche hys father hadde somtyme kepte or holden for hys concubyne, as wytnessyth ye authour of ye Floure of hystoryes. But Polycronycon sayth that he wedded his stepmoder / whyche dysaccordyth wyth the say∣enge of other wryters, which testifye his stepmoder to be maryed to Baw¦dewyn erle of Flaūders, as in ye story of Charlys last before is shewyd. Thys Ethelwolde though it be not expressyd by what hap he dyed, whan he hadde reygned one yere, as sayth Polycronyca. But another cro¦nycle beryth wytnesse, that he was slayne as a martyr, of Hungar and Hubba prynces of Danys. About thys tyme the holy kynge saynt Edmund cōtynued his reygne ouer the Eest Anglis or Norfolke. THE .CLXVIII. CHAPITER. EThelbertus the seconde sonne of Adeulph{us} / began his reygn ouer the more partye of Englande, in the yere of our lorde .viii. hundred lvi / & the .xi. yere of Charlis ye Ballid
then kynge of Fraunce. In whose tyme the Danys wyth more streng∣thes entred ye west part of this land / and robbed and spoyled the coūtrey before theym tyll they came to wyn∣chester / & toke the cytye by strength, and dyd therin what they wold. But the kynge made suche prouysyon / that by hym & his dukes they were forcyd to forsake the cytye. And as they yode toward theyr shippes / they were fought wyth, and a great parte of theym slayne and taken. Of this kynge is nothynge ellys lefte in memory more then before is shewyd / but that he dyed when had reygned after moste wryters .vi. ye∣res / and was buryed at Shyrborne, leuynge after hym none yssu of hys body. wherfore the rule of the lande fell to his brother Etheldrede. THE .CLXIX. CHAPITER. ETheldredus the thyrde sonne of Adeulphus / beganne hys reygne ouer the west Anglis and the more parte Englande, in the yere of our lorde .viii. hundred & .lxiii / & the xviii. yere of Charlis ye Ballyd then kynge of Fraunce. In the begynnyng of this kynges reygne, the Danes landed in eest En¦gland or Norff. and Suff. But they were compellyd to forsake that coun¦trey / and so toke agayne shyppynge and saylyd northwarde, and landed in Northumberlande. where they were mette wyth of the kynges then there reynynge callyd Osbryghte and Ella / whyche gaue to theym a stronge fyghte. But that not wyth∣standynge the Danys wyth helpe of suche as enhabyted ye countrey, wan the cytye of yorke, and helde yt a cer¦tayne of tyme. Then the people of Northumber¦land varyed with in them self / & had more leuer ayde the Danys then to reygne vnder the kyng of westsaxōs. For here is to be notyd that all such kynges as reygned there after Eg∣bert, whyche as before is sayde sub∣dued that prouynce and other / rey∣gned as trybutaryes to the kynge of of westsaxons or Anglys. wherfore Etheldredus herynge of the auauntage that the Danys then had, assembled his people and sped hym thytherwarde / and sente vnto the foresayd two kynges, commaun¦dynge them also to prepare theyr pe¦ple agayne hys cōmynge. But howe yt was or the kynge came wyth hys hoste / the Danys so prouokyd the Northumbres to batayll, that they met in playne feld & foughte a longe batayll. But finally the Danys wan the pryce / and slew both the foresayd kynges wyth a great multytude of theyr people. After whych vyctory they subdued myche of the sayde countrey, and de∣stroyed ye town of Aklynt or Aclynd / the whyche, as testyfyeth Beda, was somtime one of the strongest townes of the Northe. when Etheldrede hadde preparyd all thynge for the warre / and was purposyd towarde the North, for cō¦syderacyon aforesayde: worde was brought vnto the sayde kynge Ethel¦drede of the dyscomfyture of the Nor¦thumbres / and also of dyuerse of the sayde Danys wyth other that were comen to Mercia, and hadde wonne the towne of Snotyngham or No∣tyngham / whyche tydynges lettyd hym of his forth spedde in that iour∣ney. But thys sayenge is dysagrea∣ble vnto Policronicon. For he sayth that the Northumbres were yet of theyr kynge Osbrutus or Osritus after some authours / and chase vnto thē a tyraunt named Ella / by meane wherof great dissensyon grew amōg
them to the great hurte of the coun∣trey. But when the Danys hadde passed the countre, and wonne the cytye of yorke, that then was febly wallyd: then by constraynte and of fere, for the defence of theyr coūtrey, they were fayne to agree and to ga∣ther strengthe on all sydes / so that bothe the foresayde kynges went a∣gayne the foresayd Danis, and both were slayn. After whych scomfyture the people as desolate / some fledde the countrey, and some made peace wyth the Danys, and lyued vnder theyr tuycyon. And so the Danys kepte the possessyon of that coūtrey / in suche wyse that no Angle hadde rule therof, tyll the time of Adelstone or Ethelstone, or after some wryters tyl the tyme of Edredus / so that they helde the possessyon therof ouer the terme of .lx. yeres. Then the Danys beynge thus pos¦sessyd of the Northe countrey / man∣ned the same, & fortyfyed the stronge holdes therof. And the other of them came downe into Mercia or myddell Englande / and wanne a parte ther∣of wyth the forsayde towne of No∣thyngam / and dwellyd there ye more parte of the yere folowynge. wherfore kynge Etheldrede wyth ayde of Burdredus then kynge of Mercia, layde seage vnto the towne. The whyche when the Danys per∣ceyued shulde be wonne / they refu∣syd the towne, and toke the towre or castell, and defendyd yt in so stronge maner, that they helde yt tyll a peas or apoyntement was concludyd be∣twene the two kynges and theym. whyche was that they shulde go free where they wolde, and carye wyth theym theyr horse and harnesse wyth¦out any pyllage. And whē this peace was thus made, eyther of the kinges departed to theyr owne / and the Da∣nys retourned vnto yorke, & dwelled there the yere folowynge. And the yere folowynge that sayde yere / a parte of the sayde Danys ta∣kynge shyppynge in the Northe, en∣tendynge to sayle towarde eest En∣glande / mette in the see wyth a flo∣te of Danys, wherof the captaynes or ledars were named Hynguoar & Hubba. The whyche by exhortacyon of the other commynge oute of the North / made all one course, and last¦ly landed in eest Englande or Norf∣folk / and in processe of time came vn¦to Therforde. Therof herynge Edmundus then kyng of that prouynce / assembled an hoste, that gaue vnto them batayll. But Edmūde and his hoste was for¦sed to forsake ye feld / & the kyng with a few persones fledde vnto the castel of Framilynghā or Framyngeham / whome the Danys pursued. But he in short whyle after yelded hym selfe vnto the persecucyon of the Danys. And for this blessyd man Edmunde wolde not renye or deny Cryste and hys lawys / they therfore moste cruel¦ly bonde him vnto a tree, and causyd hym to be shot to deth / and lastely causyd his hedde to be smytten from the body, & caste amonge the thycke of the bushes. But when his frendes came after to burye this holy trea∣soure and lacked the hed, and made for yt busy serche / the hedde beyng in the clawys of a wylde wolfe spake, & sayde thre tymes dystynctely, here, here, here. By reason of whyche speche they came vnto ye place where the hedde in the sayde bestys kepyng laye. whyche sayde wolfe contrarye to his kynde / anon as he sawe the people, fledde from the hedde and suffred theym to take yt vp / and fo∣lowyd theym after a certayn of tyme as he hadde ben rame. Then they wyth great solempnyte caryed the body and hed vnto Egly∣don
or Eglysdon now callyd saynte Edmundes bury / and there buryed hym, aboute the yere of our lorde as wytnessen Policronica, Guydo, and other, viii. hūdred. & .lxix / as before it is shewyd in ye chapyter of this wor∣ke foure score & .xiv, for whom dayly god shewyd there many miracles. THE .CLXX. CHAPITER. WHan this blessyd Edmūde was thus martyred for the loue that he bare towarde his mayster Criste and his lawes / his brother na¦med Edwoldus settynge a parte the lykynge and pleasure of the worlde, all be yt that to hym belongyd the ryght of that kyngdome, toke vpon hym the habyte of an heremyte, and lyued onely by brede and water at the abbay of Cern̄ in the countye of Dorset / by the clere welle that saynt Austyne by his prayers made to sprynge, when he conuertyd fyrst the Saxons of that prouynce to ye fayth of Cryste. Of this said abbay of Cerū, Policro¦nica sayth yt it was after these dayes ryche and ryght welthy. But the go∣uernours therof mysspent the patry¦mony therof in excesse glotony, & not amonge the seruauntes of god. wherfore he sayth farther, that co∣uetyse and pryde hadde so chaūged all thyng in England in these days / that all thynges that before tyme were gyuē to abbays, were then more wasted in glotony and outrage of the owners, then in sustenaunce and ayde of nedy men and of gestes or nedy waygoers. Albe yt he sayth the fyrst doers or gyuer lose not theyre re¦warde. For theyr wyll and entent is full euenly paysed in a balaunce, be∣fore hym that is the rewarder of all good. But though Treuysa yt was the translatoure of this boke of Po∣lycronycon out of laten into our vul¦gare tunge / reporte this to be done, or thys mysorder to be vsyd in thys dayes, whyche lyued in the tyme of that honorable prynce Edwarde the thyrde / yf he now lyued, he wold not in no gouernours of munkes blacke or yet whyte, laye no suche outrage. For nowe at these dayes pryde and glotony is clerely banyshed frō theyr monasteryes and cellys / and in the rome of pryde wyth hys frende dys∣obedyence, haue they now lodgyd humylyte with his suffer obedyence. And in the stede of glotonye and vn∣clēnesse of lyuynge / haue they nowe newely professyd them vnto all cha∣styte, temperaunce, abstynence, a∣uoydynge all slowth and idelnesse / and exercyse theym in gostely studye and preachynge of the worde of god wyth all dylygence. So that nowe the holy rulys & ordynaunces made by that holy father and abbote saynt Benet, which by ignoraūce haue lōg tyme slepte / nowe by grace of good gouernaunce are newely renyued and quyckened. And here and ende, lest I be accused of dyssymulacyon. Then to retourn vnto the Danys, from whome I haue made a longe dygressyon / trouth yt is that when they hadde as before is sayde, mar∣tyred the blessed man Edmunde, and robbed and spoyled that countrey / and they toke agayne theyr shyppes and landed agayne in Southerye / and there contynued theyr iourney tyll they came to the towne of Re∣dynge, and wanne the towne wyth the castell. Policronyca sayth yt the thyrd day of theyr thyther cōming / Hingwar & Hubba as they wente in purchasyng of prayes, were slayne at a place cal∣led Engelfelde. whyche prynces of Danys thus slayne / the other dele of theym kepte hole to gyther, in suche
wyse that the weste Saxons myght take of theym none auauntage. But yet wythin few dayes after the Da∣nys were holden so shorte, that they were forced to yssue out of the castell, and to defende theym in playne ba∣tayll. In yt whych by cōforte of kyng Etheldrede and of Alurede his bro∣ther / the Danys were dyscomfyted, and many of theym slayne. wherof the other beynge ware / fled agayne to the castell, and kepte theym wyth in the same a certayne of tyme. Then the kynge cōmaunded Etel∣wold then duke of Baroke or Bark∣shyre, to attende wyth hys peple vp∣pon that castell / & to se that the Da¦nys breke not oute at large while he went in other costes of that countrey to subdue other of the sayde Danys But when the Danys knewe of the kynges departure / they brake out so daynly anon of theyr hold, and toke the duke vnpuruayed & slewe hym and myche of hys people / and cau∣sed the other to with drawe them far¦ther from that towne or castell. Then these Danys drewe them to other that were theyr lordes in that coūtrey / and enbatelled them in such wyse, that of theym was gatheryd a stronge hoste. It was not long after duke Ethel wolde was slayne, but the kyng was ascertayned therof. The whyche re∣newed his heuenesse, and made hym full heuy / to consyder the losse of his frende, and the encreace and multy∣plyenge of his enymyes. For ye daye before reporte of these tydynges as affermeth an olde cronycle / worde was brought to hym of the landyng of a Dane named Osryk, whyche of Policronyca is named kyng of Den¦marke. The whyche in shorte tyme after with assystence of the other Da¦nys / hadde gaderyd a great hoste, and were enbatellyd vppon ashe downe. To his batayll Alured was forced by great nede to come before his brother the kynge, that then was herynge of a masse wyth great deuo¦cyon, not knowynge of that hasty spede of his brother. where ye kynge thus beynge in hys medytacyons / ye hostes of Anglys and Danys strake to gyders wyth houge vyolēce. And how be yt the Danys hadde won the hyllande & ye crysten men were in the valley / yet by grace and vertue of ye kynges holy prayers and manhode of theym selfe, they at length wanne the hyll of the Danis, and slew theyr duke or kynge called Osryke, or af∣ter the englyshe cronycle Oseg, and fyue of theyr dukes, wyth myche of theyr people / and chased ye other dele vnto Redynge towne. wherfore the Danys resembled theyr people, and gathered a newe hoste / so that wythin .xv. dayes they mette at a towne called Basynge Stoke / and there gaue batayll vnto the kynge, and hadde the better. Then the kynge gatheryd his peo∣ple, the whych at that felde were cha¦chyd & dysparklyd / and wyth freshe soldyours to theym accompanyed, mette the Danys within two mone∣thes after at a towne called Mer∣ton / and gaue to theym a sharpe ba∣tayll, so that myche people were slayn as well of the crysten as of the Danys. But in the ende the Danys hadde the honour of the felde / and the kynge of Anglys was wounded, and fayne to sauegarde hym selfe by polycy when myght fayled. After these two feldes thus won by the Danys / they obteyned great cyrcuyte of grounde, and destroyed man and chyld that to them were in∣obedyēt. And chyrches and temples they tourned to vse of stables, and other vyle occupacyons. And to this sorowe was added an other.
For where the kyng hoped well to re¦couer his losses by ayde of his subie∣ctes, as wel of other {per}tes of his land as of hys owne of westsaxon / when he hadde sent his commyssyons into Northumberland into Mercia, and éest Anglia: He had of them small or lytell comforte / so that the coūtre of west Saxon was brought in great desolacyon. For the kyng was beset wyth enymyes vpon euery syde / and ouer that his knyghtes and soldy∣ours were tyred & palled wyth ouer watche and laboure. whyche many∣folde aduersytyes and troubles syn∣kynge in the kynges mynde / wyth brose or hurte ensuyng of the woūde before takē at ye batayll besyde Mer∣ton, shortened his dayes / so that he dyed when he had reygned in great persecucion of the Danys after most wryters .viii. yeres, wythout yssue of his body. By reason wherof the rule of the lande fyll vnto hys brother Alurede. It is wytnessyd of some cronycles that not wythstandynge the great trouble and vexacion that this kyng Etheldrede hadde wyth the Danys, he founded the house or college of chanons at Exeter, and was bu∣ryed at the abbaye of wynbourne or wobourne. THE .CLXXI. CHAPITER. ALuredus the .iiii. sonne of Adolfus & brother to Ethel∣dredus laste kynge / beganne his rey¦gne ouer the westsaxons and other prouynces of Englande, in the yere of our lorde .viii. hundred & .lxxii / and the .xxxi. yere of Charlis forenamed, then kyng in Fraunce. This Alured or after some wryters Alphred was xii. yere of age or he were set to scole. But for all that he spedde so well his tyme, that he passed his brother and other that were long set forth before hym. And by the counsayll of Neot{us} or Not{us} / he ordeyned the fyrst gram¦mer scole at Oxenford, & other free scoles, and fraunchaysyd that towne wyth many great lybertyes / & trans∣lated many lawes, & Marcyan lawe and other, out of Bretyshe speche vn¦to Saxon tunge. He was also a sub∣tyll mayster in buyldyng and deuy∣synge therof, and excellent connyng in all huntynge. Fayre he was of sta¦ture / and moste beloued of his father of all his chyldren. Longe tyme it wold aske to reherse all his vertue. But for he was in his youth dysposed to ye syn of the fleshe, and thereby letted from many a ver∣tuous purpose: he lastely after many resystences by hym done to auoyde ye temtacyon therof / besought god en∣terly, that he wold sende to hym som contynuall sykenes in quenchyng of ye vyce, & that he were not vnprofyta¦ble to wordely besynesse & serue god the better. Then at goddes ordynaūce he had ye euyll called Fyc{us} / wyth the whych sekenes he was greued many yeres, and lastely cured of that holy virgyn saynt Modwenna then dwellyng in Irlande. But after this cure by her done she came into Englande, for so myche as her monastery or chyrch yt she there dwelled in was destroyed. wherfore Adulfus father to Alured, knowynge the vertue and holynesse of this mayden / gaue to her ground to buylde vppon .ii. abbays of may∣dens. That is to say one in Arderne at a place callyd Polliswortham, an¦other at Strenesalte in the Northe. But this holy mayden dyed in the yland of Andrese besyde Burton, af∣ter many yeres of the buyldynge of these sayd two abbays, & after .vii. ye¦res yt she had ben closyd within stone walles in the yle before named. when Alurede was cured of this se¦kynes,
to him fyll an other / the which contynued with hym from the .xx. ye∣re of his age tyll the .xlv. yere of hys sayed age. But yt not wythstādynge he wedded a noble woman named Ethelwyda / of the which he receyued two sonnes, Edwarde surnamed the elder, & Egelwarde / & .iii. doughters, Elphleda yt after was ladye of Mer∣cia Ethelgota a mēchon or nūne, & ye thyrd was named Elfrida. The why¦che he caused all as well doughters as other▪ to studye the arte or scyence of grāmer, & to be noryshed wyth all vertue. And when this Alurede was admyttyd to be kynge, he well consy¦deryd the great daunger yt his lande was in. wherfore he gaderyd to hym his lordes / & suche as he myghte not wyn wythout stryfe, he wanne wyth great iustyce and fayre hostes. So yt he shorlty assembled a stronge hoste / and in the seconde moneth yt he was made kynge, he mette wyth the Da∣nys besyde wylton, & yelded to them batayll, but not wythout great losse of men on both partyes. Then he remeuyd his pleople, and in sondry places faught wyth ye Da∣nys in the fyrste yere .vi. tymes. By meane wherof his peple were so sore mynyshed and wekyd / that he was forsed to take peas wyth his enymy∣es, vppon couenaunt that they shuld auoyde the countres & prouynces yt he had domynyon of. Uppon whych agremēt fermely con¦cluded the Danis for a tyme voyded those coūtreys / & drew towarde Lon¦don, & rested theym about ye coste the more parte of the yere folowynge / & from thens to Lyndesey, in robbyng and spoylyng the townes & villages as they wente, & holdynge ye cōmon people vnder theyr seruage / & so con¦tynued ouer the terme of two yeres. But or the thyrde yere were endyd they yode vnto Repindon / and there put down or slewe Burdredus then kyng of Mercia / and betoke ye kyng¦dome vnto a seruaunt of his named Colwolphus, vppon condicyon on that he shulde kepe it to theyr behofe. And then they besegyd a town thereby cal¦led Hambourgth, & assauted yt right sharpely. wherfore the people therof beynge in great drede and fere / toke the body of that holy vyrgyne saynt werbourgth, by vertue of whose bo∣dy the enymyes were somwhat put a backe. And after for a more suerty / ye inhabytauntes of ye towne of Ham∣burgth wyth that holy treasure, fled vnto westchester / where at this daye she lyeth honorably shryned. Then the kyng made oft peas with the Danys, in truste wherof he rode with the fewer peple, wherof they be¦yng ware, layd bushemētes for hym, & set so nere hym, yt they slew a great parte of his cōpany in a nyght as he rode towarde wynchester. For this treason the hyng was sore amouyd agayne the Danys / & in as secrete maner as he myght he assem∣bled a chosen cōpany of knyghtes / & as wytnessyth Guydo, fyll vpon thē sodeynly, & dystressed many of them, and lefte them not tyll he had chased them to Chester, or after an other au¦thour to Exetour. And there kynge Alurede kept the Danys so short / yt he constrayned them to gyue to hym pledges to kepe the peace, & to dwell no lenger there then they myght pur¦uey shyppynge at the next porte to sayle into Denmarke. After which accorde thus fynyshed the kynge returned vnto Mercia or myddell England. And for he harde yt Colwolphus was dede, to whom the Danys had taken that lordshyp to kepe: he therfore seasyd yt kynge∣dome, and ioyned yt to his owne of west Saxons. By whych reason the kyngedome of Mercia surseasyd ye
had continued from theyr fyrst kyng named Penda, as in the chapyter of this worke .C.xxix. precedynge, is more at length declared. Aboute the .v. yere of the reygne of Alurede / the Danys as affermeth Policronica, sayled fro warham to∣warde Exetour / in the whyche iour∣ney they loste .vi. score of theyr small shyppes by a tempeste in the see. But some of them occupyed the towne of Chepynham and the countrey ther∣unto adioynynge / and chasyd ye An∣gles, or made them as subiectes to ye Danys. And so sore the power of thē augmentyd / that the Angles loste dayly and they encresyd / and ye more by reason of the landyng of a prynce of the Danys named Gutteron or Gowthram, whyche ys named kyng of Denmarke. THE .CLXXII. CHAPITER. ALurede beynge thus ouerset in multytude of enymyes, as affermeth Policronica & other / ladde an vncertayne lyfe and vneasy wyth few folkes aboute hym, in the wode coūtrey of Somersetshyre / and had ryght scante to lyue wyth, but suche as he and hys peple myght purchase be huntyng and fyshynge. In which mysery he thus by a certayn of tyme contynuynge / he was by a vysyon to hym shewyd of saynte Cutbert com¦forted, as folowyth. Uppon a tyme when his cōpany was from hym de¦parted & besyed in purchasyng of vy∣tayle, and he for a passetyme was re¦dynge on a boke / a pilgryme came to him and requyred his almes in god∣des name. The kynge lyfte vp hys handes towarde heuen and sayde, I thanke god that of his grace, he vy∣syteth hys poore man this day by an other poore man / and that he woll wytsaue to aske of me yt he hath gy∣uen to me. Then the kynge anon cal¦led his seruaunt that hadde but one lofe and a lytell what of wyne / and badde hym gyue the halfe therof vn∣to the poore man. The whyche recey¦ued yt thankefully / and sodaynly va¦nished from his syght, so that no step of hym was sene in the nesshe fenne or more yt he passed thorough. And also all that was gyuen to hym / was lefte there by in such wyse as yt was to hym gyuen. And shortely after his company returned to theyr maister / and brought wyth theym great plen¦ty of fyshe that they had then taken. The nyght folowynge when the kynge was at his reste / one apperyd to hym in a byshoppes wede, & char∣gyd hym that he shuld loue god, and kepe iustyce, and be mercyable to the poore men, and worshyppe prestes. And sayd more ouer, Alurede Criste knowyth thy cōscience and thy wyll, and nowe wyll put an ende of thy so∣rowe and care. For to morow strong helpers shall come to the, by whose helpe thou shalte subdue thyne eny∣myes. who arte thou sayd the kyng. I am Cutbert sayd he, ye pylgryme yt yester day was here with yt / to whom thou gauest both brede and wyne. I am besy for the and thyne wherfore haue thou mynde hereof when yt is wel with the. But how he had his pil¦gryme in mynde after, by the fredam that he gaue with the possessyons vn¦to Durham chyrche / yt is well and euydently sene. Then Alurede after this vysyon, was wel comforted, and shewed hym more at large / so that dayly resortyd to hym men of wylshyre, Somerset∣shyre, & Hamshyre / tyll that he was strongly companied. Then the kyng put hym in a great ieo{per}dye, as sayth wyllyam de regibus. For he dyd on hym the habite of a mynstrell / & with his instrument of musyke, he entred
the tentes and pauylyons of the Da¦nys / and in shewynge there his en∣terlude & songes, he espyed all theyr slouth and idelnesse, and harde mych of theyr counsayll / and after retour∣ned vnto his company, and tolde to theym all the maner of the Danys. Then the kynge wyth a chosen cō¦pany / fyll vpon ye Danys by nyght, and dystressyd and slewe of theym a great multytude, and chasyd theym from that coste. And when the kyng had thus chasyd the Danys / by coū∣sayll of his knyghtes, he buylded there a toure and named it Edelyng, whyche is to meane in oure speche a toure of noble men. Oute of whych toure he and his soldyers made ma∣ny assautes vppon theyr enymyes, & dyd to them myche harme & scath / and clerely voyded the countrey of them betwene that and Selwood. This Edelynge or Ethelyngyssey, standeth in a great marys or more / so that men may not wyn to yt with∣oute shyppe or bote, and conteynyth no great grounde / but yet therin is venyson and other wyld bestes, and fowle, and fyshe great plenty. Thus kynge Alurede dayly pur∣suyd his enymyes by helpe of god & his subiectes / whyche heryng of his vyctoryes and manfull dedes, drewe to hym dayly out of all costes. By whose powers and assistens he helde the Danys so shorte / that he wanne from them wynchester, & many other good townes / and forced them lastly to seche for peace, the whych was cō¦cludyd vppon certayn couenauntis. wherof one and principall was / that theyr kynge named as before is sayd Guttrun or Gothram, or after ye En¦glyshe cronycle Gurmunde, shuld be crystyned, and a certayne of his du∣kes wyth hym. And for ye kyng wold haue the Danys banyshed out of the west partyes of Englande / he graun¦ted to hym eest Anglia to abyde and dwell in. Then this prynce of Danys accor∣dynge to the couenauntes, was cry∣styned at wynchester / and .xx. of the grettest of his dukes. And to this sayde Danys prynce Alurede was godfather at the funte stone, and na¦med hym Athelstane. And after he hadde a season feasted the sayde Da¦ues / he accordynge to his promys gaue vnto theyr kynge the countrey of eest Anglia, whyche then contey∣ned Norffolk and Suffolk, & parte of Cambrydshyre. And also as wyt∣nessyth Policronica he graūted to ye Danys that were crystened the coun¦trey of Northumberlande. And the other that wold not be crystyned, de∣parted the land & failed into Fraūce / where they restyd theym wyth theyr cosyns and Kynnesmen, that at those dayes wasted the lande of Fraunce, as in the frenche storys is somwhat apparent. when this Danys kynge Athelstane hadde the possessyon of these countreys / ye shall vnderstand yt all suche Angles as dwelled there, and wythin the precyncte of theym, were vnder his obedyence. And all be yt that he helde the sayd prouynce as in fee of ye kyng, and promysed to dwell there as his lyege mā / yet that promyse not wythstandynge, he con¦tynued lyke a tyraunte by the terme of .xi. yeres full, and dyed in the .xii. In the whyche tyme kynge Alu∣rede amended the cytye of Septon̄ that nowe is called Shaftesburye / and other townes and stronge hol∣des yt by the Danys were sore aba∣tyd and enpayred. And as wytnes∣syth Guydo and other / he buylded ye house of nonnes at Shaftesbury, or was fyrste founder therof. He also founded an house of rely¦gyon in the aboue named place of Ethelyngesey / and a nother in wyn∣chester,
that was named the new mo¦nastery. In the whiche he was after buryed. And ouer this he endowed the churche of saynte Cuthberte in Doreham, as before is touched. Aboute the .xv. yere of the reygne of Alurede / ye Danys whiche before as ye haue hard sayled into Fraūce, retorned into Englande and landed in Kent / and so lastly came vnto Ro∣chester and beseged that cytye / and lay there so longe, that they buylded a towre of tymber and not of stone, agayne the gates of the cytye. But by strength of ye cytesyns that towre was destroyed, and the cytye defen∣ded tyll kyng Alurede restowed thē. The whyche hadde made suche pur∣ueyaunce for the dystressyng of them by water and lande / that they were so nere trapped, that for fere they left theyr horses behynde them and fled to theyr shyppes by nyght. But whā the kynge was therof ware / he sent after them & toke .xvi. of theyr shyp∣pes, and slewe many of the sayd Da¦nys. After thys iourney, the kynge retorned to London / and repayred certayne placys therof, that before had ben hurte or febled wyth the Da¦nys / and betoke the guydyng therof vnto Etheldredus than erle or duke of Mercia, to whom as wyfe he had gyuen hys doughter Elfleda. About thys tyme dyed Dunber∣tus than bysshop of wynchester / and the kyng made Dunwolfus bysshop after hym. The whyche as sayth Po¦lycronycon the kynge fande in the wodde kepyng of bestes, in the tyme whan he hym selfe kepte the woddes for fere of the Danys. About the .xxi. yere of the reygne of thys kynge Alurede / the Danys landed in .iiii. places of thys lande, that is to wytte in the Eest England and the North, and in the west in .ii. places. But for ye kynge before theyr landynge had warnynge of the deth of Athelstan̄ kyng of Danys of Eest England, and of other complayntes of ye Danys / he therfore yode thyder in whyche tyme of hys there beynge these tydynges came vnto hym. THE .CLXXIII. CHAPITER WHan kynge Alurede was acer∣tayned of these tydynges / for so mych as some of the sayde Da∣nes were landed in that coste, and knewe well that ye ferther they drewe vnto these partyes, the more they shulde be ayded and strengthed: he therfore sent messengers in all haste vnto Etheldred erle or duke of Mer¦cia / chargynge hym to assemble an hoste of the men of Mercia and the border there about / and to make re∣systens agayne the Danes, whyche landed in the west. And that done / ye kyng sped hym toward hys enmyes, and pursued them so sharpely, that in ye ende he droue them out of Eest Anglia. The whyche than landed in Kent / whyther the kynge wyth hys people spedde hym, and in lyke ma∣ner draue the Danes from thens. How be it of any specyall fyghte or batayle authours therof leue no me∣mory. After thys agayne the Danes toke shyppynge & sayled into North wales, and there robbed and spoyled the Britōs / and from thens retorned by the see into the Eest Anglia, and there rested them, for so mych as the kynge than was gone westwarde. In thys whyle some of the fore∣sayd Danys had wonne the towne of Chester. But for the countrees ad¦ioynaūt presed so sore vppon them / the sayd Danys were compelled to kepe them wythin the sayd towne or cytye, and to defende theym by that maner. But that holdyng of ye towne lasted so longe, that the Danys were
compellyd to eate theyr horses for hunger. But by apoyntement they lastely gaue ouer the towne, & went thens into Northumberland. And in the whyle that the kynge with his hoste spedde hym thyderwarde / they leuynge the stronge holdes and ca∣stels garnysshed wyth men and vy∣tayle, toke agayne shyppynge & fet theyr course in suche wyse that they landed in Sussex / and so came vnto the towne of Lewes, and from thens toward London / & buylded a towre or castell nere vnto the ryuer of Le∣wes. But the Londoners heryng of theyr doynges, māned out a certayn nomber of men of armes / the whiche wyth assystens of the men of ye coun¦tree, put the Danys from that towre and after bete it downe to the groūd. Soone after ye kyng came downe thyder / and for he thoughte that ry∣uer shulde be a meane to brynge ene∣myes efte soones into that countre: therfore he cōmaunded ye streme to be deuyded into diuers stremes / so yt by reasō therof there a shyp myght sayle in tyme afore passed, thā a lytell bote myghte scantly rowe. Than by pre∣sence of the kynge, the Danes were forsed to fle that countre, and from thens toke agayne waye toward wa¦lys, and kept a parte of the ryuer of Seuerne / & vppon the border therof buylded them a castell nere vnto wa¦lys, & so rested them there for a tyme. So that .iii. yeres after thys lande was vexed wyth thre maner of so∣rowes / wyth warre of the Danes, pe¦stylence of men, & moreyne of bestes. whyche troubles & aduersytees not wythstandynge / the kyng knyghtly and manfully resysted the malyce of his enmyes / and thanked god alway what trouble so euer fyll to hym or to hys realme / and susteyned it with greate humylyte and pacyence. It is tolde of hym yt he deuyded ye daye and nyght in thre partyes yf he were not let by warre or other greate besynes. wherof .viii. houres he spēt in study and lernyng of scyence / and other .viii. he spente in preayer and almes dedes wyth other charytable dedes / & other .viii. houres he spent in his natural reste, sustinaūce of his body, & the nedes of the realme. The whych order he kept duely by waxen tapers kepte by certayne persons. Thus thys marcyall knyght con¦tynuyng in all prowesse and vertue, lastly dyed / whan he hadde reygned ouer the more parte of thys lande by the terme of .xxviii. yeres full. And was fyrst buryed at wyltō, and after certayne yeres remoued and caryed vnto wynchester / leuynge after hym a sonne named Edwarde, surnamed Edwarde the elder. For the other bo¦ther called Egelwarde dyed before hys father. Francia. THE .CLXXIIII. CHAPITER. LEwys the second of that name, and sonne of Charlis ye Balled / began hys reygne ouer the Frenchmen, in the yere of our lorde .viii. hūdred lxxviii / and the .vi. yere of Aluredus than kynge of the more parte of En∣glande. Thys was named Lodowi∣cus Balbus, whych is to meane Le∣wys the stamerer / for so mych as he had an impedyment in hys tunge. ye haue before in ye story of Char∣lys the Balled herde, How Charlon the neuew of Charlys foresayd, with hys hoste had entred Italy, and en∣tended towarde Rome. The whyche after the deth of his sayd vncle Char¦lys, kepte on hys waye, & lastly came
vnto Rome. But for the pope than beynge Iohn̄ the .viii. of that name / fauoured the aboue named Lewys Balbus, and entended to make hym emperoure: therfore he refrayned yt enoyntyng of the sayd Charlon. For the whyche dede he fynally was com¦pelled to auoyde the towne & coūtre, & fled into Fraūce. where he beynge honourably of Lewys receyued / de∣clared and admytted hym for empe∣roure, as sheweth the Cronycles of Rome. But after two yeres of hys reygne or short tyme of thys admys∣syon to that dygnyte, thys Lewys dyed. wherfore the sayde pope to en∣ioye hys papasy in reste / retorned to Rome, and anoynted the forenamed Charlon, and crowned hym with the imperyall dyademe / the whyche in ye Roman̄ cronycle is named Carolus tertius, the thyrde emperour, that is to meane of that name. But of all thys speketh nothyng the Frenche Cronycle / excepte that it is there testyfyed, that he was of the sayd pope admytted for emperour. Polycronycon sheweth, that the seconde Lewys kynge of Fraunce, was accursed of the pope Nicolas ye fyrste of that name / for so myche as he refused hys lawfull wyfe, & toke to him his concubine named waldra¦da. But that is vnderstande by Le∣wys the second emperour of that na∣me / whyche was sonne of Lothayre, whyche Lothayre was eldest sonne of Lewys the mylde, as in the story of Charlys the Ballyd appereth. And for the genelogy of Charlis the conqueroure, or of hys ofspyng may the clerelyer appere / and also that ye reder may haue the more certeyne of the names, whych were emperours, whych kynges of Fraunce, & whych were kynges of Germany: I shall in the story of Lewys the .v. (in whome for a tyme surseasyd ye blode) make a remembraunce of euery emperour, & kynges of Fraunce & Germany, that reygned from ye sayd Charlis ye grete or conquerour, tyll Hugh Capet / the whyche Hugh vsurped the crowne of Fraunce, as after shall appere. Than it foloweth in the story, that for partycyon of the lande of Austra¦cy or Lorayn, grudge and varyaūce contynued alwaye bytwene the kyn∣ges of Fraūce & Germany / whyche bothe kynges at thys daye were na∣med Lewys, albeit that the kyng of Fraunce was surnamed Balbus, as before is shewed. For the whych va∣ryaunce by laboure of frendes these two kynges mette at ye cytye or place called Gundeuyle. where after longe cōmunycacyō it was fynally agreed, that the sayde prouynce of Austracy shulde than be deuyded, as it som∣tyme had ben parted bytwene Char∣lys the Balled and Lewys kynge of Germany theyr bothe fathers. After whych peas thus cōcluded, eyther parted from other in frendely wyse. And Lewys Balb{us} yode vnto Ardern̄, where he halowed the feste of Crystmas. And frō thens he yode vnto Compeyne / where he herde of the rebellyon of a marques of hys realme called Barnarde, or more ve¦rely after the Romayn story a mar∣ques of Italy. For thys Barnarde wyth one Helberde had before tyme taken from the chyrche of Rome cer∣teyne possessyons / whyche by meane of thys Lewys & the sentence of the chyrche denounced agayne them by the foresayd pope Iohn̄, were agayn restored, and the partyes also recon∣cyled. But now of newe thys Bar∣narde rebelled agayne. wherfore the pope as to Lewys for the defensour of the chyrch of Rome sent for ayde / for, as before I haue shewed you, thys Lewys of the sayde pope Iohn̄ was authorysed for emperoure. But
for he was not crowned at Rome wyth the imperyall dyademe / he is not accōpted amonge ye emperours. For thys newe rebellyon of Bar∣narde, Lewys assembled hys armye at Cōpayne foresayd / and frō thens rode to ye cytye of Troyes in Uincēt, where he was taken wyth sodayne malady, of ye whyche he dyed shortly after, and not wythout suspeccyon of venym, whan he had ben kynge of Fraunce fully two yeres / leuyng af∣ter hym two sonnes, that is to saye Lewys and Charlys, or after some wryters Charlemayne. THE .CLXXV. CHAPITER. LEwys and Charlys / the son∣nes of Lewys Balbus or Le¦wys ye stamerer / began theyr reygne ouer the Frenchemen, in the yere of oure lordes incarnacion .viii.C.lxxx / and the .viii. yere of ye reygne of Alu∣rede than kynge of Englande. The whyche for they were yonge of age, were put vnder tuyssyō and gydyng of Barnarde the erle of Auuergii / to whom the father by hys lyfe had thē commytted. wherfore the sayd Bar∣narde wyth other of hys affynyte as∣sembled shortly after at Meaux in Lorayne / & thyder called vnto them the lordes of the lande, to treate ma∣ters for the comon weale of ye same. In those dayes was a man of grete myght in Fraūce named Gosseleyn̄ / the whyche enuyed the foresayd erle Barnarde & other, for certayne har∣mes to hym by them done in tyme be fore passed. In auengynge wherof the sayd Gosseleyn̄ intended to putte hym and other from the rule of the land, whych he knew well they shuld occupye whyle the sayd two childern had rule of the same. And thys euyll purpose to brynge to effecte / he went vnto Conrade erle of Parys, and shewed to hym moche of his wyll. And amonge other thyn∣ges lette hym wytte, that yf Lewys kynge of Germany myght with hys helpe be made kynge of Fraūce / that he shulde by hym be greatly auaun∣ced. By whych meanes he caused the sayde Conrade to take hys parte / so that he & other of hys affynyte whan they came vnto the foresayde coun∣sayle at Meaux / sayde that Lewys kynge of Germany, was more apte to rule the lande of Fraūce than any other was. And also after some wry∣ters / these Lewis and Charlys afore sayde were not the legyttymate son∣nes of the forenamed Lewis Balb{us}, but gotten in baste of a concubyne of the sayd Lewys. Thys mater thus debated and argued amonges the coūsayle / lastly by moste in nomber it was agreed, that Lewys kynge of Germanye shulde be by ambassade requyred to come and take vppon hym the rule of the lande of myddell Fraunce. The whych wyth small request was agreable / and in shorte tyme after came vnto the sayd cytye of Meaux, and after to Uerdune. But as soone as the knowlege was come to Bar∣narde and other of hys affynyte / by counceyle of Hughe and Terry two nobles of Fraunce, the bysshop of Orlyaunce with an erle and other were sent to Uerdune vnto the sayd kynge of Germany wyth thys mes∣sage. That yf he were contente to take vnto hym all suche parte of the prouynce of Lorayne, as Char∣lys the Balled kepte from hys fader Lewys, wythout more clayme of the lande or realme of Fraunce / he shuld gladly haue it. And yf nat, he shulde abyde the iugement of Mars and hys batayle. wyth whyche offer Le∣wys was well contented / and beyng of it in a suertye, departed agayne into Germanye.
Thorough that doynge, the fore∣named Gosselyne and Conrade with other of theyr frēd{is}, were with yt sore dyscōtentyd of the departure of Lew¦ys forsayde. But the sayd Bernarde with other of his syde, in goodly hast after cōueyed the sayd two chyldren vnto the citye of Ferrer / & there crow¦ned and proclaymed theym for kyn∣ges, as wytnessyth mayster Robert Gaguyne. But the forenamed Gos∣selyne and Conrade not leuynge so the mater / sente messengers vnto ye quene of Germanye, cōplaynynge theym vnto her of the vnstablenesse and tymerousnesse of her lorde / wher¦by he had not alonely loste the posses¦syon of the realme of Fraunce, but also he hadde put them and all theyr frendes in great fere and daunger. wherof herynge the quene / in her mynde was sore dyscontentyd wyth her lorde and husbande, and as she durste shewyd yt to hym as his re∣proche and dyshonour. And fynally to satysfye the myndes of the sayde Gosselyn̄ and Conrade, she sent into Guyan her brother named Boso / by whose aydes and assystence he was of that prouynce proclaymed kynge. Endurynge whyche troubles / the Danys entred the lande, and came vnto the ryuer of Lyger, and robbed and spoyled the countrey wythoute mercy. wherfore the kynges assem∣bled theyr people / and gaue to them batayll nere vnto the ryuer of Uyen. where they dystressyd the sayde Da∣nys and slewe of them .ix. thousand, and drowned of thē ouer that a grete multytude in the sayde ryuer. After whyche vyctory by the kynges obtey¦ned / a new vexacyon & trouble was to them ascertayned, yt Lewys kyng of Germany with a great puysaunce was comen vnto a place called Du∣cy / and to hym was gone the forena¦med Gosselyn̄ and Conrade with all the power that they myghte make / & by theyr ledynge was from thens cō¦ueyed vnto Rybemaunt. But howe so yt was, for lacke of performaunce of promyse made by the sayde two er¦les vnto the kyng of Germany & not obserued / he herynge of the kynges of Fraunce drawynge towarde hym wyth stronge hoste, cōcluded a peas, and retourned into Germany. And the two bretherne rode to gyder vn∣to the citye of Damens or Demeus / where they deuyded the lande of Fraunce betwene theym. So that Lewes held to hym the coūtrey nere & about Parys, with the prouince of Neustria or Normandye / and Char∣les had vnto his part Burgoyn and Guyan / with promyse made & assu¦red on eyther partye, that eyther of them shulde ayde and assyste other. THE .CLXXVI. CHAPITER. AFter this partycyon betwene the two bretherne thus ma∣de / by the meanes of Lewys kynge of Germany the foresayde erles Gos¦selyn̄ & Conrade were vnto the sayde bretherne recouncyled and agreed. And for to theym redy worde was brought, y• Bose before named kyng of Guyan hadde wonne the cytye of Uyen / & therin lefte his wyfe whyle that he occupyed ye hylles and moun¦taynes beynge there aboute: they ioyntly assembled theyr knyghtes, & sped thē thyther, & layde theyr seage aboute the cytye. But durynge this syege the Danis often wasted ye land of Fraunce. wherfore Lewys the el¦der brother, departed frō that syege / leuynge there his brother Charlys. But or the sayde Lewis myght wyn to the sayde Danys, they as tyraun∣tes and cruell enymyes to Crystes fayth, hadde spoyled many chyrches and temples, and a monasterye of
saynt Peter in Corby, and throwen yt downe to the ground. After which vyle and cruell dede by theym done / Lewys gaue vnto them batayll, and slew of them great nomber, and cha∣sed the remanaunt. But after this vyctorye ensuyd a great wonder. For when the crysten hadde as before is sayde chasyd the pagans or Danys / they retourned as confusyd and dysparkled, lyke as all the hoste of Danys hadde theym pursued / so that well was hym that myghte ronne fastest, and hyde hym selfe from the daunger of his enymy. For yt was thought to them and ap∣parent to theyr syght, that theyr eny¦myes folowed at theyr backes wyth all kynde of wepyn / and yet folowed thē no man. The whych fere & flyght of Frenche men, as sayth myne au∣thour, was sent to theym by dyuyne purueaunce / for so myche as they so often before tyme had won the pryce of theyr enymyes, and had not ther∣fore gyuen due thanke vnto god, but referred yt to theyr owne strenghtes and vertue. Then the Danys herynge of this dysparklyng of the crysten hoste / re∣assembled theyr power and ppayred them to new fyght. wherfore ye kyng called to gyther his knyghtes, so as before is sayd dysparkled / and mette wyth theym nere vnto the aboue na∣med ryuer of Lyger. But when both hostes were wythin a days iourney / the kynge was aduysed by some of his coūsayll, yt he shulde not as then fyght wyth thē. For the whych cause he yode vnto Compeynge, and there kept the feast of Crystemasse. And whyle the kynge was lodged in Cōpeynge / he delyueryd his hoste vnto a noble man of his land named Theodorych / wyllynge hym to go a∣gayne the Danys. Of whose exployt or spede myne authoure maketh no mencyon / but sayeth that soone after the foresayde feast, the kynge spedde him to Turon̄ / where he sent to rayse the Brytōs of lytell Britayn to with stande the foresayde enymyes. In the whyche passetyme he was there taken wyth a maladye, & from thens in a lytter caryed vnto saynte Denis, where he dyed & was buried. Or as sayth maister Gaguyn, he dy∣ed at Turon̄, and was after cōueyed vnto saynt Denys, and there buried. But for all wryters ioyne the reygn of these two bretherne in one / ther∣fore I wyll now shewe vnto you the fyne or conclusyon of the other bro∣ther called Charlys or Charlemayn / the whyche all thys whyle maynte∣ned the syege aboute Uyenne, where his brother as before is touchyd left hym. To whom the lordes of Fraū∣ce sente in all haste, gyuynge to hym knowlege of the deth of his brother / and also of the great daunger that the land was in by reason of the Da¦nys. wherof when the sayd Char∣lys hadde thus wyttynge / he lefte a parte of hys people at the sayde sye∣ge, and wyth the other deale he sped hym towarde Champayne, for so mych as he was enfourmed that the Danys were drawen towarde that coste. And as he was in hys iour∣ney / worde was broughte vnto hym that Uyenne was delyueryd vnto suche persones as he hadde there left to maynteyne the syege. And after thys came a nother mes∣senger / whyche shewyd to hym that the Danys hadde destroyed dyuers chyrches in Champayne and other places / and howe the byshoppe of Meaws that agayne theym hadde ladde an host of people, was of them slayne, and hys people chasyd / and ouer thys at the foresayde ryuer of Lyger an other hoste of Danis, with theyr leder called Hastynges was as∣sembled.
The whych in that partyes wasted the countrey as the other in other places dyd / whyche somdeale apasled the herte of the kynge Char∣lys. How beyt by the comforte that he hadde dayly receyued from the lordes of Fraunce / he kepte on hys iourney, and made towarde the next of his enymyes. But when he drew nere vnto them / were yt for his own cowardyse, or of the counsayll of his lordes / he fell to a communycacyon of peace. And fy∣nally concluded that Godfrey the prynce of Danys, to cōfesse the fayth of Cryste and to be crystened / shulde enioye the hole prouynce of Fryse. And wyth in the same / he wyth hys Danys to inhabyte theym. The whyche condycyon of peace was the begynnynge of greate so∣rowe and losse vnto Fraunce, as af∣ter shall appere. For all be yt that the sayd Godfrey to deceyue the French¦men, shewed outwarde countenaūce to be crysten man for a whyle / he shortely after wyth an hoste of .xl. thousande Danys, entred the land, wastynge the countrey tyll he came to Parys / and layde there hys syege about the same citye. But by the arch byshoppe of Parys then named Ios¦selen̄, and the inhabytaunces of the same, the cytye was manfully defen¦ded / so that he with his Danys was fayne to breke hys syege / and from thens yode to the cytye of Laon̄, and wan yt by strength / and after yt spoy¦led and robbed, and after brent. And fro thens to Soysons in pyllynge and destroyeng the countrey as they went, in so cruell wyse, that the bys∣shoppes and prestys fled from theyr chyrches, wyth relyques and anour∣namentes or ornamētes belongyng to the same / as the bodyes of saynte Germanye, saynte Remigius, and dyuers other. In ye tyme of this persecucyō / lyke as the lande of Englande was in great daunger, so also was the land of Fraunce / by meane of these pa∣gans or myscreauntes Danys. The whyche resortyd from that one real∣me to that other / and releued theym selfe in that one land, whē they were chased oute of that other. But one myshappe amonges other befell in Fraunce at these dayes. For Char∣lys theyr kynge was taken from theym in suche wyse, that no wryter leueth of hym any mencyon how he dyed, nor when he dyed / nor no men∣cyon is made in the frenche cronycle nor of myne auhoure, howe longe whyle he and hys brother Lewys rey¦gned. All by Uyncent historyall, and Antoninus, whych groūded hym vp¦pon the sayde Uyncent, and Iaco∣bus Philippus saye / that these two foresayde bretherne regned togyder and alone, by the terme of .v. yeres wythoute more. And the frenche cronycle and also myne authour sayen, that Lewys dy¦ed wythoute heyre / and that Char∣lys lefte after hym a sonne, whyche was named Lewys, and after for his symple dedes surnamed in laten Ni¦hil faciens, or in frēche Ryen fezant / whyche is to meane in our speche nought doynge. But who that lysteth wele to ad∣uertyse & remēber the order of thys cronycle / he shall fynde in this latter sayenge some dyscorde. For where yt is sayde that thys Charlis shulde leue a sonne after hym, to my yt se∣meth, that consyderynge hys youth he shulde not be of any lawfull age to gette a chylde. For by all lykly∣hode of conuenyence of the storye / yf all be veryfyed as yt is before decla∣red / he coude not passe ye age of .viii. yeres at the moste. wherfore yt muste folowe of a con∣gruence
/ that other they reygned len¦ger tyme, or ellys thys chylde or heyre Lewys aboue named, was the sonne of some other man. But to fo∣lowe myne authour I shall procede as foloweth. THE .CLXXVII. CHAPITER. LEwys the fourth af that na∣me, and sonne of Charlis as before is sayde / beganne his reygne ouer ye Frenchmen, in the yere of our lorde .viii. hundred .lxxx. & .vi / and the .xiiii. yere of Aluredus then kyng of Englande. Of thys Lewys yt ys testyfyed of dyuers wryters, that he shulde enamoure hym selfe vppon a menchon of the monastery of Chyell, and her drawe oute by force, and ma¦rye her vnto his wyfe. For the which dede and other, he purchasyd the a∣boue said name / & was called Lewis nought doynge. In thys tyme the Danys, contra∣ry to theyr {pro}myse before made / made new warre wythin the land of Fraū∣ce. wherfore the Frenchmen hauyng lytell hope in theyr kynge / sente vn∣to Charlon or Charlys ye emperour, sonne of Lewys kynge of Germany as before is shewyd / requyryng him in all humble wyse to vysyte ye realm of Fraunce / and to defende yt from the persecucyon of the Danys. In these dayes also was lyuynge in Fraunce the forenamed Hugh / whych as ye before haue herd / mayn¦teyned the quarell of Lewys & Char¦lys last kynges, agayn Lewys kyng of Germanye. The whyche Hugh of some writers is called Hue le graūd, that is Hugh the great. Thys man gaderyd an hoste of Frenchmen, and gaue batayll vnto the Danys, and slewe of them a great nomber. It shulde seme by the wryters of the frenche storye, that these noble men of Fraunce, as thys Hugh and other, shulde haue the rule of the spy¦rytuall possessyons of abbayes and other houses of relygyon. For of myne Authour mayster Gagwyne, they are in laten named abbates / and in the Frenche boke abbis, whych is to meane abbottes. And also yt is testyfyed of the sayd writers / that this Hugh and Robert erle of Parys, were the fyrst that left the dystrybucyon of those spyrytuall goodes vnto theyr knightes / & gaue ouer that name of abbotte, the why∣che in some other estates contynued tyll the dayes of Roberte kynge of Fraunce. Then yt folowyth, accordynge to the request made vnto the emperour as aboue is shewyd / he gatheryd a stronge hoste of Italyons, and par∣ced the lande of Fraunce / and bare hym so vyctoryously agayne the Da¦nys, that he forced theym to obey to all theyr former promyse & condycy∣ons. But Eusebi{us} and other yt wrote the actes of the emperours / sayen, yt this Charlis whyche they name the thyrd of y• name, and also Grossus, yt is great / subdued the Danys of Fraunce, & compellyd theyr leder or prynce named there Rodefredus, to take the habyte of Crystes relygyon, and receyued hym at the coulde wa / ter. In whyche tyme or soone after (wherof ye tyme is not duely ascertay¦ned) dyed the forenamed kynge Lew¦ys surnamed nought doynge / when he hadde reygned after most wryters viii. yeres / leuyng after hym a sonne named Charlis, yt whyche after was surnamed symple. But for he was to yonge to take vpon hym such a char¦ge / the lordes put hym vnder good & conuenyent guydynge / and chase an other as foloweth to guyde ye lande tyll he were come to hys laufull age, whyche was named Eudo.
THE .CLXXVIII. CHAPITER. EUdo the sonne of Robert erle of Angeowe / beganne his rey¦gne ouer the French men, in the yere of our lorde .viii. hundred .lxxx. & .xv / and the .xxiii. yere of Alurede then kynge of Englande. ye shall vnderstand that the aboue named Robert erle of Angeow was as tutor and guyder vnto the forena¦med kynges of Fraunce Lewys and Charlys / and lastely was slayne of the Danys. The whyche Robert left after hym .ii. sonnes, Eudo and Ro∣bert. whych Eudo for the great fame that he was of, and also for ye great trouth that in hym was prouyd and knowen / ye lordes of one assent chose hym to be kynge of the lande for the terme of his lyfe. And as affermeth the french boke & other he was crow¦ned of walter then archebyshoppe of Senys. Howe be yt this is somdele doutfull to be gyuen credence vnto, for dy∣uers reasons that therunto myghte be made. Mayster Gagwyne sayth, that he hath sene some authoures, that testyfye this forenamed Charlis the symple, to be the lawfull son of Lewys Balbus / and the foresayde Lewys and Charlis late kynges of Fraunce, to be the bastarde sonnes of the sayde Lewys Balbus. Then to folowe the mater, thys Eudo in cōsyderacyon that the sayd Charlis the symple was insuffycyēt to guyde the lande, he was putte vn¦der the guydyng of this sayd Eudo / and he was made kynge in his stede. The whyche myghtly defendyd the lande from all daunger of enymyes. And ouer yt he caused the sayde Char¦lys the symple to be noryshed and broughte vp wyth moste dylygence / so that he was informed & exercysed wyth all vertues doctrine, and other thynges necessarye vnto a prynces son. And finally when this noble and vertuous knyghte Eudo knew yt he shulde dye / he called before hym the lordes & nobles of Fraunce / yt whych he charched by solemne othe, that af∣ter his deth, they immedyatly shulde crowne Charlis for theyr kyng / and dyed soone after, when he hadde rey∣gned as affermeth authours by the terme of .ix. yeres. Anglia. THE .CLXXIX. CHAPITER. EDwarde surna∣med the elder and son of Aluredus / began his reygne ouer ye more part of England, in ye yere of our lord .ix hundred & one / & the .vii. yere of Eudo then kynge of Fraunce. This was lower then hys father in letter and connynge / but he was hygher in honoure & worshyp. By his fyrst wife he had a son named Ethelstane, the whych was kynge af¦ter hym. By his seconde wyfe he had two sonnes Edredus & Edwynus / & vii. doughters. And of ye thyrd wyfe he receyued two sonnes, Edmunde & Edrede / and two doughters Edbur∣ga and Edgina. The fyrste of these .iii. wyfes hyght Edwyna the second hyght Edgina / & the thyrde was named Ethleeswy¦da. Of ye forenamed .vii. doughters, which he had by his second wife / one named Alunda or Almyda, was ma¦ryed to the fyrst Otto the emperour. And a nother named Algina, was maryed to Charlis the symple kyng of west Fraūce. And the yōgest of his doughters as sayth Policronica / he wedded vnto Lewys kyng of Guy∣an. But therof speketh nothyng the
frenche cronicle. He set his sonnes to scole / and his doughters he sette to woll worke, takyng exemple of Char¦lis the conquestour. By authoryte of Formosus the pope, he made .vii. byshoppes in En¦lande. wherof he ordeyned .v. in west Saxon, one in southe Saxon, & one in Mercia at Dorchester. He also for that the munkes of wynchester sayd that his father Alurede walkyd / cau¦sed hym to be remoued vnto the new abbay. About the .v. yere of his rey∣gne Clyto Ethelwaldus a nere kyn∣nesman of his / rebellyd agayn hym, and occupyed ye towne of wymborne besydes Bathe / & toke thens by force & nunne / & went thens vnto the Da∣nys dwellyng in Northūberlande, & excyted them to ryse agayn kyng Ed¦warde. But the kynge pursued hym so sharpely, that he was constrayned to leue the countrey / and sayled into Fraunce, and lefte the nūne behynde hym / the whych the kynge caused to be restoryd agayn to the house yt she was taken fro. The nexte yere folowyng, the sayd Clito wyth his cōpany landed in eest Englande, & gaderyd to hym ye Da∣nys of that countrey, and with theyr ayde destroyed and pylled the coun∣trey about Crekynforde & Criklade. And then passed ye ryuer of Thamis & spoyled the land to Bradenestoke / and so frō thens retourned into eest Anglia, yt is Norffolke & Suffolke. The kynge folowed his enymyes and spoyled of theyr landes, whyche they helde by composycyon from the ryuer of Owse, to the bordure of saynte Edmundus lande / commaun¦dynge hys knyghtes of hys hoste that none shulde dragge or tarye af∣ter hys hoste, for fere that they were not beclyppyd of theyr enmyes. But the Kentyshe men, whych trusted to myche in theyr owne strength, dyso∣beyed that commaundement. wher∣fore the Danys awaytynge theyr praye / fyll vppon them by bushemen¦tes, and slewe the more partye of theym, wherwyth the kyng was sore dyscontentyd. Soone after bothe hostes mette. where after longe fyght Clyto wyth many of the Danys was slayne, and the remenaunt constrayned to seche peace / the whyche was graunted vp¦pon certayne condycyons, that they shulde holde theym wythin the boun¦des to theym lymytted / and ouer that paye yerely a certayne money in waye of trybute. After whyche peace wyth them sta¦blyshed / he repayred cytyes, townes, and castellys, that by the sayde Da∣nys were shatered and broken. And about the .viii. yere of his rey¦gne / kynge Edwarde repayred the wallys and also the cytye of Kaer∣lyon, that now is called Chester. To the whych were great helpers Ethel¦dred{us} duke of Mercia, & Elfleda his wyfe, doughter of Alurede as before is shewyd, & suster of this kynge Ed∣warde. And that done the kynge buylded a stronge castell at Herforde in ye egge of walys. And he enlarged so greatly ye walles of Chester / yt the castell whych before tyme was wyth out the wall, is now wythin. And the .ix. yere of his reygn / Ethel¦dred{us} duke of Mercia by coūsayll of his wyfe trāslated ye bones of ye holy kyng Oswald, frō Bradony to Glou¦cestre / & there buylded a fayre mona¦stery in the worshyp of saynt Peter. In the .xii. yere of kyng Edwardes reygne / the Danes repentynge them of theyr couenauntes before made, myndyng & entēdyng ye breche of the same / assēbled an hoste & met with ye kynge in Staffordeshyre, at a place called Toten halle, and soone after at wodenesseylde. At whyche .ii. pla∣ces
the kynge slew two kynges, two erlys, and many thousandes of the Danys that then occupyed the coun¦trey of Northumberlande. And soon after dyed the noble man Etheldredus duke or erle of Mercia or myddell Englande. After whose deth, the kynge for so myche as he hadde often prouyd her wysedome / he toke the rule of that countrey to hys wyfe Elfleda, London alonely exceptyd, the whyche he toke vnder his onwe rule. THE .CLXXX. CHAPITER. OF this noble woman Elfleda, yf I shulde shewe all the ver∣tues, yt shuld aske a long tyme and leasure. But amonges other of her noble dedes / she buylded and newly repayred many townes, cytyes, and castellys / as Tomworth besyde Ly∣chefeld, Stafforde, warwyke, Shro∣wesbury, watrysbury, Eldysbury, in the forest besyde Chester, that nowe is ouer tourned and destroyed. Also she buylded a cytye wyth a castell in the Northe ende of Mercia vpon yt ry∣uer Merce, that in those dayes was named Runcofan̄, but now yt is cal∣led Runcorn̄. And she also buylded a brydge ouer the ryuer of Seuern̄, whyche is or was named Brymmys¦burye brydge. This stronge virago fauour of cytezeyns and fere of eny∣myes / halpe myche the kyng her bro¦ther, in gyuynge of counsayll & buyl¦dynge of cytyes. Of her is told that when she hadde ones assayed, the wo and sorowe that women fele and suf¦fer in berynge of a chylde, she hated the enbrasynge of her husband euer / and toke wytnesse of god and sayde, that yt was not cōuenyent or semely to a kinges doughter to vse such fles¦shely lykynge, wherof suche sorowe shuld ensue or folowe. In the .xiii. yere of the reygne of this Edwarde / a great nauy of Da∣nys, whych in tyme of Alurede were driuen into Fraunce, now retourned agayn and sayled about the west coū¦trey / and landed in dyuers places, & toke prayes, and went to theyr shyp∣pes agayn. And at one time amōges other they robbed and spoyled at a place called Irchynfeylde, and toke a Brytyshe byshop and caryed hym to theyr shyppes, and fynally raun∣somed hym at .xl. pounde. But as soone as kynge Edwarde had know¦lege of theyr beyng / he assembled his knyghtes, and sped hym westwarde by lande / and sent a nother hoste by shyppe to encounter the Danys vp∣pon the see. wherof heryng the sayd Danys fledde into Irlande / and by that course voyded the land and han¦des of the kynge. Then the kynge for strengthynge of the countrey / made a castell at the mouth of the water of Auene, and a nother castell at Bokyngham / and the thyrd faste therby, yt is to meane vpon eyther syde of ye ryuer of Owse¦one. And after retourned into Nor∣thamtonshyre and Bedfordshyre, & faughte there wyth the Danys of these coūtres / and at length subdued the wyth theyr leder or duke cal∣led Turketyllus. About the .xvii. yere of this kynges reygned / Elfleda lady of Mercia be¦fore mynded, gaderyd her knightes. And where the Brytons or walshe men brake into the lande about Bre¦kenoke, she wyth her people wyth∣stode theym / and amonge other pry∣soners & prayes, toke there the quene of walshemen. And the yere folowynge kynge Ed¦warde buylded or newly reedyfyed the townes of Towsetour and wyg∣more / and destroyed the castell that the Danys hadde made at Temes∣forde.
And that yere the noble Elfle¦da wanne the towne of Derby from the power of the Danys / where they put her in such aduēture, that foure knyghtes, whyche were called Gar∣deyns of her corps, were slayne faste by her. And ye .xviii. yere of his reygne dyed that noble pryncesse Elfleda in the moneth of Iune / and was buryed in the monastery of saynt Peter, which her lorde and she before tyme hadde buylded wythin the towne of Glou∣cetour as aboue is touched, ouer the bones of that holy kynge saynte Os∣walde / whyche monastery was after throwen to grounde by the Danys. But Aldredus byshop both of yorke & of worcetour, made there an other / whyche is now chefe house or abbay of that towne or cytye. when Elfleda was deed / her dough¦ter named Elswyna helde the lorde∣shyppe of Mercia a season. But for the kynge cōsydered yt to be to great a thynge for her to rule / he therfore dyscharged her therof, and ioyned it to his kyngedome, but not all wyth∣out stryfe. For dyuers townes kepte of the kyng for a tyme / as Snotyn∣gham or Nothyngam, Tomworth, Derbye, and other / supposynge the doughter wold haue defended them as the mother by her lyfe had done. But finally they came to the kynges subieccyon. Henry archbyshoppe of Huntyng∣don, that wrote myche of the crony∣cles of Englande / in prayse of thys noble woman Elfleda made dyuers dytyes / of the whyche some ben ex∣pressyd as foloweth. Cesers tryūphes were not so myche to prayse, As was of Elfleda, that sheldes so ofte dyd rayse Agayne her enymyes this noble ven queresse Uirago and made whose vertue can I not expresse. WHen Edwarde hadde reconciled these foresayde townes / he then buylded a new towne for agayn the olde towne of Nothyngham, on the south syde of the ryuer of Trent / and made a brydge ouer the sayd ry∣uer betwene the sayd .ii. twones. And as wytnessyth Policronica, the yere folowynge in the sayde towne or cy∣tye of Notyngham, two kinges, that is to saye, of Scotlande and walys yeldyd them vnto kynge Edwarde. The cause why, nor of warre be∣twene theym to be contynued, is not of hym expressyd. How be yt dyuers bokes of writers of cronycles of Englande, as of Ma¦rian{us} the Scot, wyllam of Malmes∣bury, Henry of Huntyngdon, & other yt is shewyd that this Edwarde sub¦dued the kynges of Scotlande and of Cūbrys, aboute the .ix. yere of hys reygne. And of the sayde authours yt is also testifyed, that about the .xx. yere of the reygne of the sayde Ed∣warde, these sayde kynges of Scot∣tes and Cumbrys, shulde chose this kynge Edwarde for theyr chefe lord and patrone, whyche shuld be about this season before expressyd. Then this noble prynce Edwarde, after these thynges set by hym in an order / he in the northe ende of Mer∣cia by the ryuer of Merce, buylded a cytye or towne, and named yt Thyl∣wall, and strengthyd yt wyth knygh¦tes. And after repayred the cytye of Maynchester / that sore was defaced with warre of ye Danys. After which notable dedis by ye puyssaunt prynce fynyshed / wyth the maryage of hys chylder and many other, whyche I omytte and passe ouer for length of tyme: fynally this noble man dyed, when he hadde reygned wyth great
trauayle by the terme of .xxiiii. yeres at Faryngdon / and from thens con∣ueyed to wynchester, and there ente∣ryd in the monastery of saynt Swy∣thyne / leuyng after hym dyuers son∣nes as before is shewed, of the which Ethelstane was eldest. Francia. THE .CLXXXI. CHAPITER. CHarlys surnamed the symple, & sonne of Lewys the .iiii. or Ryen Fayzand / began hys reygne ouer the Frenche∣men, in the yere of our lordes incar∣nacyon, as wytnessyth Iacob{us} Phi∣lippus and other .ix. hundred & .iiii / and the thyrde yere of Edwarde the elder than kynge of Englande. In tyme of whose reygne the Danys, whyche contynuelly ouer the terme of .l. wynters / that is to saye from ye x. yere of Charlys the Ballyd som∣tyme kynge of Fraunce, vnto ye sayd dayes, had wasted and spoyled the lande, not wythstandyng ye agremen¦tes made bytwene Charlys the em∣perour and them, as before in ye story of the .iiii. Lewys is shewed: yet they wyth greate hostes aryued in the coū¦tre of Neustria or Normandy, & rob∣bed and spoyled the countre before them, and slewe the people thereof wythout pytye / and from cytye to cy∣tye kepte on theyr iourney tyll they came vnto the cytye of Roan. wherof the bysshop beynge in greate drede, of subuersyon of the cytye and de∣struccyon of the crysten people wyth in the same / delyuered the cytye by appoyntment, that he wyth ye people myghte departe thens wythout bo∣dely harme / whyche vnto the sayde Danys was a greate strength, and hurte to the lande of Fraunce. Of thys hoste of Danys was ru∣ler and leder a myscreaunt named Rollo / the whyche was a man of lowe byrthe, but he was of greate strength. The whyche whan he had a season rested hym and hys hoste, & refresshed them wythin the cytye of Roan / he than set forth hys waye, cō¦maūdyng hys vawnewarde to kepe theyr iourney towarde Parys. And for ye more spede to be made / he shyp¦ped hys Danis ryght there / and one parte he sent by the ryuer of Sean, the seconde by the ryuer of Lyger or Leyr, and the thyrde by the water Geronde. Than the Danys that passyd by the ryuer of Leyr came at length to the cyte of Nauntes / and wan that cytye by strength, and slewe therin moche people. And the byshop of the same named Guymerte beynge at masse, they slewe at the aulter. And whan they had spoyled that cytye & the countre there about / than yode they to the cytye of Angiers, & brent and robbyd it most cruelly. And that done they yode vnto Towres, and layde syege to that cytye. The which by the presens of the holy body of saynt Martyne, whych at that tyme was wythin ye cytye / it was a whyle preserued. But soone after the mun∣kes feryng the sworde of the Danys fled the cytye secretly, and toke the body wyth them. And soone after the Danes had the towne at theyr wyll / and brent the abbay before the town or stādynge without the towne / and spoyled and robbed the cytye & tow∣nes thorough the countre of Guyan. whan the Danys had thus sub∣dued the more parte of Neustria or Normandy. They wyth theyr duke Rollo by ye ryuer of Seyn̄ drewe to∣warde Parys. And fyrst entred the landes of Burgoyne and Auerne & in effecte to Senons. wherof heryng
the monkes of the monastery of Flo¦ry, where the body of saynte Benet than rested, they toke that holy trea∣soure and bare it vnto Orlyaunce / & layde it in the chyrche of saynt Any∣an, tyll the persecucyon were ouer passed. Of thys monastery was at that dayes lyuynge a defensour by pro∣myse before made, whose name in la¦tyne is called Sigillosus, & in Frēch Sigillophes an erle / whych was ta∣ken for patrone of the same abbaye. To whom in the nyght folowynge that the monkes were fled, as before is sayd / saynt Benet appered, & bla∣med hym yt he none other wyse had defended ye place of hys Sepulture. wyth whych visyon the sayd erle be∣ynge feryd / gaderyd vnto hym vpon the daye folowyng such small power as he than myghte make, & set vpon the Danys and draue them backe, & slewe of them a great nomber. And ye prayes that he there wan, he offered to god and saynte Benet / by whose prayers he knewe well that he optey¦ned that vyctory. In tyme yt the Danys thus per∣secuted the countre of Fraunce, and the kynge was not of power them to resyst / for so mych as Charles knew well that the bysshop of Roan na∣med Franke, was in good fauour of Rollo: he therfore sent hym in am∣bassade to the sayd Rollo, to requyre a trewe or trewse for thre monethes / the whych was graūted. The which trewse ended, the sayd Rollo beseged the cytye of Chartrys. Duryng whi∣che syege / the duke of Burgoyne na∣med Richarde wyth hys retynue as∣sayled the Danys. In tyme of which fyght Ebalde erle of Poytowe was present, and draue backe ye Danys. wherwyth the bysshop of the cytye beynge encoraged / toke wyth hym ye smocke of our lady, whyche at those dayes was kepte there wyth greate reuerence / and wyth the cytesyns & other issued out of the cytye, & made vpon the Danys a great scomfyture So that by the prowesse of the fore∣sayde two temporall lordes, and as∣systens of this spyrituall man / Rollo was compelled to fle and forsake his siege, & not without huge slaughter. Rollo then hauynge greate dys∣dayne and dyspleasure of thys ouer¦throwe and scumfyture of hys Da∣nys / reassembled them that were a∣brode scatered, and cōmaunded thē to ouer ryde the countre, and to de∣stroye it in all that they myght. After whych cōmaundement thus to them gyuen / this cruell people slewe man, women, & chylde, that were not apte to do to them seruyce / and brent the chyrches and temples, and rauyshed virgyns as well religious as other / So that miserable it was to beholde the greate abhomynacyon of these tyrannous Danys, that brent, rob∣bed; and slewe that innocent people wythout mercy. The lordes and comons thus be∣set with cruell fury of theyr enmyes, assembled them by sondry cōpanyes and went vnto the kynge / shewynge vnto hym theyr mysery, and blamed as they durste hys ferefulnesse and negligence, that he nor none for hym otherwyse wythstode the crueltye of the Danys / that hadde destroyed a greate parte of hys lande. THE .CLXXXII. CHAPITER. CHarlys herynge this exclama¦cyon of hys subgettes, and cō¦syderyng hys lacke of power to with¦stande that malyce of hys enemyes, was ryght pensyfe and heuy in hys herte / and castynge in hys mynde many sondry wayes, he lastly deter∣myned to sende agayne the aboue
named Frank byshop of Roan vnto Rollo prynce of Danys / shewynge hym that yf he wolde renye hys pa∣gan lawe and become a crysten man, he wolde to hym gyue in maryage Gylda his doughter, wyth the hole countre of Neustria for her dowar. whan Rollo had receyued this ty¦dynges from the kyng by the mouth of his frende Frank / he somwhat at∣tempred hys fury and crueltye, and condescended to a trewe, by the coun¦sayle of hys lordes for ye terme of .iii. monethes / in the whyche tyme he myghte haue some cōmunycacyon wyth the kynge, for ferther processe of thys mater. So that after it was concluded by the counsayle of bothe prynces / that theyr metynge shulde be vpon ye ryuer or flode named Ept. where shortly after the sayd prynces had cōmunycacyon the one wyth the other / theyr people standynge vpon eyther syde of the sayd ryuer. where it was concluded, that Rollo shulde forsake hys pagan lawe, and take vppon hym the lyuerey of Crystes baptym / and after to marye the fore∣named Gylda, and to receyue wyth her as is aboue shewed. whyche con∣clusyon thus taken eyther fro other departed / and shortly after at the cy∣tye of Roan, all the foresayd coue∣naūtes were executed and fulfylled. And whan the sayd Rollo was cry∣stened / his name was chaunged and called Robert, after the erle of Poy∣towe / whyche receyued hym at the fonte stone. Of thys Rollo or Robert, dyscen∣ded lynyally duke wyllyam of Nor∣mandy, whych conquered England / as after shalbe more clerely shewed. Than this Robert thus crystened, was seased of the coūtre of Neustria / whom the kynge created duke, and named hym duke of Neustria. But it was not longe after, yt this name of Neustria was chaunged & called Normandye / after the name of Normayns, or men commyng out of the North / or of Nor, that is to meane North, and men, whyche two syllables togyder make Norman, or a man of the North. whyche Normans or Danys af∣ter the exposycyon of mayster Gag∣wyne / shulde be descended of the na∣cyon called the Gothes. whyche Go∣thes of the cytye or men of Sithica ben descended. The whyche Gothys in the dayes of the grete Cōstantine / for theyr feersnesse and cruelty, were dryuen from theyr countre then by them inhabyted nere vnto the ryuer called Thamys, in ye North partyes of Europe / and nowe ben inhabyted in Dacia, whych in our speche is cal¦led Dēmarke. And where some men holde an opynyon, that Danys and Saxons shulde be one maner of peo¦ple / it may congruly folowe. For Sa¦xons ben of the coūtre of Germany / and contayne the lande after the say∣enge of Strabo, in the west parte of Germania. From the flode called Ui¦stergus or wysera, vnto the famous ryuer called the Ryne. And Dacia or Denmarke is in the North partyes. Than to retorne to thys Rollo or Robert / the story sayth yt he became a good crysten man. In token wher∣of as affermeth the French boke / he gaue vnto dyuers chyrches and mo∣nasteryes of Fraunce greate gyftes, as well of possessions as of mouable goodes / & contynued hys pease with the kyng as he before had promised. After whyche pease thus stablys∣shed bytwene the kynge and the Da¦nys / Robert brother vnto Eudo last kyng of Fraūce, contrary hys trouth and allegyaunce, seased certayne cy∣tyes and other holdes of the kynges enherytaunce. wherfore the kynge seynge that he coude not refourme
hym of that errour, by no meanes of entreaty or other lyke wayes / assem∣bled an hoste and met wyth hym in playne batayle / in the whych ye sayde Robert was slayne. Thys Robert hadde a suster, whyche was maryed vnto Hebert erle of Uermendoys / whyche erle herynge of the deth of his brother in lawe, by enticement of hys wyfe, as the story demeth, mette the kynge at the retorne of the felde / and requyred hym in moste humble wyse, that he wolde vouchesafe to lodge wyth hym in hys manour cal∣led the castell of Perone. The kynge castynge no parell, thanked hym of hys kynde request, and graūted to go wyth hym / where he was receyued and fested wyth all honoure. But whan thys erle hadde conueyed the kynges frendes and strength from hym / he thā kepte him there as a prisoner or murdred hym / so that he neuer came at large after. whyche tydynges certaynly knowē / Algina wyfe vnto the sayd Charlys the symple mystrustynge the French¦men / wyth fewe accōpanyed toke se∣crete shyppyng / and wyth her yonge sonne named Lewys sayled into En¦glande, there to be comforted of her fader Edwarde surnamed the elder. And thus ended the reygne of thys Charlys the symple / whan he hadde reygned after the sayeng of Uynsent hystoryall and other, by the terme of xvi. yere full / leuynge after hym the foresayde chylde named Lewys. THE .CLXXXIII. CHAPITER. RAdulphus the sonne of Ry∣charde duke of Burgoyne / be¦gan his reygne ouer the Frēchmen, in the yere of our lorde .ix. hundred & xxii / and the .xxi. yere of Edwarde ye elder than kynge of Englande. Here is to be noted that for so mych as Algina wyfe vnto Charlys the symple, was thus secretly voyded ye lande of Fraunce wyth her sonne Le¦wys / and that the lande myghte not be wyth out a ruler / the lordes as∣sembled at Parys, and there toke theyr counsayle for the admyssyon of an hed or kyng of the lande. which lordes after longe debatynge of this mater, fynally agreed that thys abo¦ueramed Radulphus or Rauf. son of the duke of Burgoyne, as aboue is sayd / as nexte heyre to the crowne shulde be admytted for kynge, and so was admytted. Of the whyche ly∣tell of hys dedes are put in memory / except that in the tyme of hys reygne the Sarasyns entred the lande of Burgoyne wyth a grete armye, and dyd mych harme in that duchy. wher¦fore the kynge gaderynge his hoste, met wyth them at a place called in la¦tyne Carrolas, and in French Callo the lasse / where the Frenchmen were vyctours, but nat wythout greate losse of theyr people. Than it foloweth, whanne thys Rauff. had ruled the lande of Fraūce by ye space of .xii. yeres / he dyed with out issue male. And was buryed in the chyrche of saynte Calumb in the prouynce of Senys. Anglia. THE .CLXXXIIII. CHAPITER. EThelstan̄ ye son of Edwarde the elder, began hys reygne ouer the more part of En¦glande, in ye yere of our lorde .ix. hundred & .xxv / and the thyrde yere of Rauff. than kynge of Fraunce. In the fyrst yere of the reygne of Ethelstan̄ / the holy chyld Dunstane was borne in the coūtre of Glasten∣bury,
whose lyfe shone after wyth many myracles. This was somtyme abbot of Glastē¦bury / & lastly archbyshop of Caunter¦bury. whose holynes & {pro}phecyes are shewed at length, in the .vi. chapyter of the .xvi. tytle of the worke called Sin̄ Antonini, and in the legende of the chyrche also. In the seconde yere of the reygne of Ethelstane / for an vnytye and a peace to be hadde betwene the kyng and the Danis of Northumberland, he maryed to Sithyric{us} theyr kyng his suster. But after .v. yeres this Si¦thyricus dyed. After whose deth he seasyd the countrey into hys owne hande / and put oute the sonne of the foresayd Sythyricus. And when he hadde thus accorded wyth the Da∣nys of Northumberlande / he shortly after made subiect to him Cōstantyn kynge of Scottes. But the sayd Cō¦stantyne meked hym so lowely to the kynge / that he restoryd hym to hys former dygnytye. wherfore the sayd Constantyne sayde in prayse of the kynge / that yt was more honour to make a kynge, then to be a kynge. whyche acte was done by the affyr∣maunce of Polycronycon, in the ye∣re of grace .ix. hundred & .xxvi / which then after that saynge shuld be the se¦conde yere of the reygn of this Ethel¦stane. It is testyfyed of Policro¦nica, that thys Ethelstane shuld ma¦rye one of his susters named Editha or Edyth, vnto Otto the fyrst of that name emperour of Almayne, and re∣ceyued from hym many precyous ie∣wellys and relyques. But of this spe¦keth nothyng the cronicle of Romay¦nes. Howe be yt yt is shewyd there, that the foresayd Ottho or Otto had a wyfe named Alunda / whych as be¦fore is sayde in the storye of Edward the elder, myght be the doughter of the sayd Edward and of Edgina his seconde wyfe. But Uincentius histo¦rialis sayth / that Henry duke of Sa¦xony, whyche was father vnto the fyrste Otto / sent vnto Ethelstane, re∣quyrynge of hym hys suster to mary vnto his sonne Otto. By whych rea∣son I maye folowe, that this Ottho maryed the suster of Ethelstane, but not Edythe. Of these foresayde iewelles sent by Otto / one was a precyouse vessell of stone called Onechynus / whych was of suche clerenesse, & also so subtily & craftely wrought, that yt apperyd to mannes syght as grene corne hadde growen wythin yt, and moued and waued as corne doth standyng in the felde. More ouer in yt apperyd vy∣nes burgenyng and berynge fruyte / and men also to syght mouynge and styrynge. He also receyued the great Constantynes sworde / wherin was grauen wyth great letters of golde, the name of the owner. And the hyl∣tes therof were coueryd wyth great plates of golde. And one of the nay∣les was fastenyd to the crosse of the sayd sworde, that Criste suffred with his passyon. But in thys reporte or saynge, Polycronycon varyeth from his former sayng / were he reporteth two of the sayd nayles to be spent vp¦pon the brydell of the sayde Constan¦tyne, and the thyrde nayle to be caste into a daūgerous swalowe of the see, as before is rehersed in the .lxix. chapi¦ter of thys worke. He also receyued the spere of Charlys the gret, whych after the opynyon of some wryters, was the spere that Longeus opened wyth Crystes syde. And the baner of saynte Morys, a relyque of greate pryce / wyth a part of the holy crosse, and a parte of the crown of thorne of our sauyoure. Of the whych iewellys kyng Ethel¦stane gaue a parte vnto saynte Swi¦thunys of wynchester / and some he
gaue vnto ye abbay of Malmesbury. I haue sene a cronycle of Englād, which testyfyeth, that this Ethilstan̄ was ye fyrst kynge that euer was en∣oynted in this land. All be yt I fynd therof lytell authorytye / excepte that Guydo and other testyfyen, that he was crowned at the kynges towne nowe called Kyngestone, x. myles from London, of Athelyne their arch¦byshoppe of Caunterbury. But that proueth not or argueth hym to be the fyrste for that reason. For ryghte so was his fader Edwarde crowned of Plemounde archbyshoppe of the sayde see. But Guydo aforesayd af∣fyrmeth that Alurede graund fader to thys Ethylstane / was enoyntyd kyng by authoryte of Leo ye .v. then pope. wherfore it agreeth better that he shulde be the fyrste. Then yt foloweth in the story, that aboute the .viii. yere of the reygne of thys Ethilstane, dyed Frystane byshoppe of wynchester / and Bry∣stane was byshoppe after hym. Of whom yt is radde, that he sange eue¦ry daye masse for all Crysten soules. And as the byshoppe Brystane went vppon a nyght about a chirch yerde, and sayde hys deuocyons for all cry∣sten soules, and lastly sayde, requies∣cant in pace / he harde a voyce as yt hadde ben a great hoste of people saynge. Amen. Soone after Constantyne kynge of Scottes, brake couenaunt wyth kynge Ethylstane. wherfore he as∣sembled his knyghtes and made to∣warde Scotlande. And in hys way he tourned to saynte Iohn̄ of Be∣uerley and offeryd there hys knyfe vppon the aulter / sayenge that yf he retourned wyth vyctorye, he shulde redeme hys knyfe wyth a noble pry∣ce / and that done proceded vppon hys iourney, and in cōclusyon scom¦fyted the Scottes, and broughte theym agayne vnto dewe subieccy∣on. And after accordynge to the pro∣myse before made / he retourned to yorke, and so to the chyrche where the corps of saynt Iohn̄ of Beuerley laye / redemynge his knyfe worthely as he before hadde promysed. In the .vi. chapyter of the .vi. boke of Polycronycon / yt is remembred that kynge Ethilstane after this sub¦duynge of the Scottes, beyng wyth hys lordes and famylyers nere vnto the castell of Dunbar / prayed to god and saynte Iohn̄ yf Beuerley, that in that countrey he myght leue some remembraunce or token, that those that then were lyuynge, and also suche as shulde come after, myghte knowe that the Scottes by ryghte shulde be subiectes to Englyshmen. And soone after wyth hys sworde he smote vppon a great stone standyng nere vnto the sayd castell / with why∣che stroke the stone was ryuen to an elle in length, that in the tyme of Ed¦warde the thyrde was there remay∣nyng to be sene. And whyther at this daye yt is so / that I am in doute. ye haue harde before, that kynge Ethilstane after the deth of Sythe¦ricus kynge of Northumberlande / seasyd that lande or prouynce into hys owne handes, and putte out his sonne. whyche after allyed hym with Constantyne kynge of Scottes, and maryed his doughter. By whose sty¦rynge and exhortacyon, he gatheryd a company of Danys, Scottes, and other / and entred the mouth of Hum¦ber wyth a stronge nauy. wherof herynge Ethilstane, in all goodly haste prepared hys armye / and at length met wyth hym and his people at a place called Brymforde, where he hadde a great and solemne vyctorye. For as yt is shewyd in the foresayde chapyter and boke / after the kynge by helpe of god and saynt
Adelyne hadde defended the subtyll assaute made vppon hym by nyghte of his enymyes / he vppon the morne by helpe of hys brother Edmunde & Dodo the archbyshoppe, chased his sayde enymyes, and slew there Con¦stantyne kynge of Scottes, and .v. small or vnder kynges, and .xii. du∣kes, wyth the more partye of all the straūge nacyons at ye tyme there ga¦deryd. whyche batayll shuld be done by the meanyng of the sayd Policro¦nicon, about ye last yere of his reygn. THE .CLXXXV. CHAPITER. IT is also testyfyed of dyuers wryters, that Ethylstane af∣ter this vyctory thus obteyned of the Danys and Scottes, or Scottes & Danys / he also subdued the Northe Brytons that dwelled at Herforde & there about / and compelled theym to pay to hym yerely for a tribute .iii. hū¦dred pounde of syluer, xxv. hundred hede of nete, and .xx. pounde in gold. But Guydo sayth that kynge Ethil¦stane caused to come before hym at Herforde cytye the rulers of all the North Brytayne / & there had wyth them suche communycacyon / that he forced them to graunte vnto hym as a yerely trybute .xx. pounde of gold. iii. hundred poūde in syluer, & of hed∣des of nete .xxv. hundred / wyth dog∣ges & haukes to a certayne nomber. After whych vyctories he went vnto Exeter, and repayred yt & the wal∣lys therof suffycyently. Dane Iohn̄ Lydgate a munke somtyme of saynt Edmundes bury, made a goodly treatyse of this kyng Ethilstane / shewynge that he was in so great persecucyon of the Danys, yt he was constrayned to call at wyn¦chester a great counsayll of his lor∣des. where after longe debatyng of the mater, & dyuers ambassades and messages sent about by ye kyng & the Danys / It was fastly cōcluded that the kynge shuld puruey hym a cham¦pyon to fyghte wyth Colibronde or Colbronde a geaunt & Dane, which the Danys had appoynted for theyr cheuetayne. wherfore the kyng enser¦chyng thorough his landes for such a knyght, & myght none fynde / was in great daunger & dystresse & heuy∣nesse. And for so mych as he well per¦ceuyd ye mannes power fayled / he by the aduyse of lordes spyrituall & tem¦porall fyll to fastynge & prayer, and cōtynued therin by a certayn of time, wyth perfyte & charitable deuocyon. In tyme of whyche sayde absty∣nence / a vysyon was shewed vnto Ethilstane, cōfortyng hym, & also cō¦maundyng hym, yt erely vppon the next mornynge he shuld stand at the North gate of the citye of winchester and there he shuld fynde amonges ye porayll / a pylgryme clad in palmers wede, whome he shulde chose for his champyon. After whyche vysyon thus to hym shewyd, he dyd accor∣dyngly / and founde a man of good∣ly stature, and somdeale stryken in age, and clade as he was monyshed by the vysyon. wherof he fyrste ga∣ue vnto god thankynges / and after made request to this pylgryme, that he wold take vpon hym thys batayll for the defence of the lande / whyche layde for hym many reasonable excu¦ses, as well for his age as otherwise. How be it finally he graūted ye kyng to fullfyll his request and cōmaunde¦ment. And at the daye before lymyt∣ted and assygned met in the feld with the forenamed geaunt called Col∣bronde, wythoute the gate of ye cytye in a medow or pasture called Hyde∣mede / where betwene them two was faughten a longe and cruell fyghte, so that the kynge was in great fere of hys champyon. But fynally by
helpe of god the pylgryme wanne the honoure of that fyghte / and slew that geaunt that was of excedynge stature, and therunto of great and passynge strength. whyche vycto¦rye by the pylgryme thus by grace obteyned / the kynge wyth his baro∣ny fette hym into the citye of wynche¦ster wyth solemne processyon, and cō¦ueyed hym vnto the cathedral chirch of the same / where he thanked god wyth great deuocyon, & offryd there the axe, wyth the whych he had slayn the Danys champyon. After whych oblacyon with dew reuerence & other obseruances by hym and other fy∣nyshed / the kynge caused hym to be conueyed vnto hys courte, where he taryed that nyght wyth myche daun¦ger. And vppon the morne erely he made suche meanes / that he wolde nedely departe, and yt in the same ap¦parell yt he came thyther. when the kynge was aduertysed that his pyl∣gryme wold so hastly departe / whom he entendyd to haue holden wyth hym in his courte, and to haue en∣dowed with ryche possessyons: he cō¦maunded hym to be broughte vnto hys presence. And when he sawe he coude not cause him to tary, he requi¦red hym to shewe his name / wherof also he besought the kyng to pardon hym. wherfore the kyng cōsyderyng hys hasty departynge, wyth many other thynges in hym to be consyde∣red / was the more desyrous to haue of hym some knowlege. And for that he was effectuose in his desyre, when the pylgryme perceyuyd that he coude not wyth the kynges plea∣sure departe wythoute dysclosynge of hys name / he sayde he myght not dyscouer hys name wythin the wal¦les of the cytye, wythoute the offence of hys conscyence. wherfore the kyng graunted to go wyth hym tyll he were in the brode feldes. Uppon whyche graunt thus made / the kynge commaunded dy∣uers great gyftes to be to hym pre∣sented, whyche all he vtterly refused. Shortely to cōclude / the kyng wyth a certayne of his lordes conueyed this sayd pylgryme vnto the townes ende. And when he was thyther cō∣men / he there requyred of the perfor¦maunce of the promyse. where thys pylgryme syttynge one his kne / be∣soughte the kynge of his especyall grace, that he wolde put a parte his lordes and other, so that he myghte shewe vnto hym his name onely. whyche done / he in moste humble wyse besoughte hym, that he wolde kepe hys name secrete for the space of .xxiiii. oures. where of by ye kyng af¦fyrmaunce to hym fyrmely made / he shewed vnto hym, that he was hys naturall lyege man and subiect, and that his name was Guy of warwike. Of whyche tydynges the kyng was very ioyous, and offeryd hym then of newe many ryche rewardes and gyftes. But all was in vayne, for he wolde nothynge receyue / so that the kynge and he lastely departed wyth wepynge eyen. And after as affyr∣meth my sayde authoure / not farre from warwyke in a wyldernesse, he purchased by goddes purueyaunce a lodgynge in a heremytage / where by the terme of two yeres and more he dwelled & kept an harde lyfe. And herynge that dame Felyce his owne wyfe fed dayly .xiii. poore men for Cristes sake / he went thyther son¦dry tymes and fette there his aimes / hys sayde wyfe then lyenge at the ca¦stell of warwyke, not knowynge of any man what he was / tyll lastely he was visited with so sore sykenes, that he knew well that he shuld dye. wherefore he sente hys weddynge rynge vnto hys wyfe / requyrynge her in all haste to come and speke
wyth hym. whych she obeyed in hum¦ble wyse / and sped her vnto the sayd Heremytage wyth all womanly dy∣lygence, and fande hym deed at her commynge / whom she besprent with many a salt tere. And as she was en∣fourmed of the messenger as he dyed she buryed hym ryghte there. And more ouer as saith my sayd authour he monyshed her by the sayd messen∣ger, that she shulde prouyde for her selfe / for she shuld also alter her mor¦tall lyfe the .xv. day folowyng. which also she obeyed, and made suche pro∣uisyon, that she was in that place bu¦ryed by hym. All whyche mater the sayde Dane Iohn̄ Lydgate affyr∣meth, that he toke out of the boke of Gerarde Cambres̄ / whyche wrote mych of the dedes and storyes of the prynces of Englande, as Policroni∣ca and other authour testyfyen / and as the sayde Lydgate in the ende of his sayde treatyse wytnessyth, as by the mater folowynge appereth. For more authorite, as of this mater This translacyon, such as in sentēce Out of laten made by the cronycler Called of old Gerardus Cambrēce / whyche wrote the dedes, wyth great dylygence. Of them that were in weste Saxon crowned kynges, Greatly cōmendyd for theyr knyght¦ly excellence Guy of warwyke, in hys famouse wrytynges. AL whyche sayde treatyse is shewyd at length in meter of viii. stauys, after the maner of the precedentes, by the dylygent labour of the sayde Dane Iohn̄ Lydgate. The whyche I haue here sette in / for so mych as yt concernyth mater that was done in the tyme of the reygne of thys Ethylstane. The whyche af¦ter the accorde of moste wryters▪ broughte thys lande agayne to one monarchye / and reygned as kynge therof by the full terme of .xvi. yeres / and was buryed at the monastery of Malmysbury, leuynge after hym no chylde. wherfore the rule of the land fyll vnto Edmunde his brother. Francia. THE .CLXXXVI. CHAPITER. LEwys the sonne of Charlis ye sym¦ple / beganne hys reygne ouer the Frenchmen, in ye yere of our lorde ix. hundred and xxxiiii / and the .ix yere of Ethelstane then kynge of En¦glande. ye haue harde before in the ende of the storye of Charlys ye sym∣ple, how Elgina the quene wyth Le¦wys her yonger sonne, was fledde into England to her father Edward the elder. wherfore ye lordes of Fraū¦ce not knowynge where she with the Chylde was gone / chose the forena∣med Rauf. for theyr kynge. After whose deth the said lordes of Fraūce beynge ascertayned of the beynge of the sayd Lewys in England / sent vn¦to hym the archbyshop of Senys, & Hughe surnamed le graunde / desy∣rynge hym to restore into Fraunce, and take therof possessyon. Then Elgina herynge the message of the lordes, and trustyng vnto thē / by counsayll of her frendes made her redy wyth her son, & sayled shortly af¦ter into Fraunce. where she was re∣ceyued wyth myche honour / & short∣ly after crowned her sonne Lewys kynge / at the cytye of Laon̄. This Lewys is named ye .v. Lewys. In the thyrde yere of whose reygne fyll a scarcytye of corne & vytayll / by
reason wherof ensued a great famyn in so myche that people voyded the realme, & many dyed for defaut. For as wytnesseth the frenche cronycle / a quarter of whete was then worth .xx. poūde. of ye money / which is of value after sterlynge money .l.s. or there a∣bout. This kyng beryng in mynd the murder and treason done agayn his father by Hebert, as before in the storye of Charlis the symple is decla¦red / cast and ymagined in his mynde how he myght wythout shedynge of blood, reuenge the deth of his fader / and after many ymagynacyons and thought is reuolued in his mynde, he lastely dyuysed a letter / the whych he charged a seruaunt of his to brynge to hys presence when he was sette a∣monge his lordes in counsayll. when kynge Lewys hadde compassed this in hys mynde / he for nedes of hys realme called a great coūsayll of his barony at Laon̄ / whyther amonges the other, the sayde Heberte erle of Uermendoys was warned to come. And when the kynge was ascertay∣ned of theyr commynges / he apoyn∣ted a secrete cōpanye in harnes to be in a secrete chamber, nere vnto the place of the sayde counsayll / and at conuenient tyme after yode vnto the same, and all his lordes wyth hym. And when he hadde a season commo¦ned wyth hys lordes of suche ma∣ters as hym lyked / sodeynly came one to hym and sayd that a man was cōmen wyth a letter dyrected to hys grace oute of Englande / the whych he commaunded to be broughte vn∣to hys syghte. when the kyng hadde vnfolde the letter, and radde a parte therof, he smyled. whereof the lordes beynge ware purposed the kynge to haue re¦ceyued some iewyllys or ioyous no∣uellys oute of Englande. whyle the kynge was aboute to de∣lyuer this letter to his scribe or secre¦tory / one of hys lordes sayde vnto hym. Syr we truste ye haue some io∣cande & mery tydynges oute of En∣glāde, that ye haue cause of smilyng. I shall shewe the cause to you sayde the kyng. There is dwellyngin En¦gland a kynnesman of myne named Harman / the whych is a man of gret myghte, and myne especyall frende. He shewyth me by this letter, that an husbandeman or a vyleyne badde or requyred hys lorde vnto his howse to dyner / and vnder the coloure ther¦of he slewe hys sayde lorde. And for the sayde Harman thynketh the law of that lande to fauourable for such an haynous dede / hetherfore writeth to me to haue myne aduyse in thys mater. wherfore sens ye be all pre∣sent / I praye you shewe to me your opynyons in this mater. whych with one voyce sayde yt the murderer was worthy to suffer the moste shamefull and cruell deth, & to be hanged and strangled in a rope. But for ye kynge wolde be certaynely enfourmed of the consentes of theym all / he began at the hygest, and so pursued theym tyll he came to Hebert erle of Uermē¦doys / the whych alowed the sentēce as the other hadde done. Then the kynge made a token to ye walshemen betwene hym & them be∣fore appoynted / so ye anon they were present. & sette sure hold vppon the sayde Hebert. To whom the kynge sayd, Hebert thou art the husbond∣man or vilayne yt I haue spoken of / whych slew his lord vnder colour of byddynge or gestynge hym in hys house. For traytoursly thou dydeste requyre my lorde and father vnder thyne house or castell of Peron̄ / and there not remembrynge the kyndnes to the by hym before dayes shewyd, nor thyne allegyauntes and trouthe that toward hym thou shuldest haue
borne / kept hym lyke a prysoner and lastely murderyd hym, to the greate daunger agayne god, & to the world shame. wherfore accordynge to thy desert, and after thyne own sentence and iudgemēt / take now thy reward and guardon. After whyche sentence thus gyuen by the kynge / the sayde Hebert was by the executers ladde vnto an hylle wythout the citye of Laon̄ / and there most shamefully hanged. whych hyll for that cause was named Hebertes hyll longe tyme after. About thys tyme the seconde duke of Normandy named wyllyam lon∣ga Spata, ye son of Rollo or Robert fyrste duke of Normandy / was slay∣ne by treason of one Arnolde erle of Flaūdres / for encheson that the sayd wyllyam ayded a noble man of Py∣cardy named Herloyn̄, agayne the sayde Arnolde. This wyllyam left after hym a son named Richarde / whych at the tyme of his fathers deth was not of suffy∣cient age to rule so gret a dukedome. wherfore Lewys kynge of Fraunce desyrous of that prouynce, whyche of late dayes belonged to his anteces¦sours and progenitours / sought be∣syly the wayes and meanes, to haue this chylde Rycharde vnder his tuy∣cyon & gydynge. And this to brynge to effecte spedde hym vnto Roan̄ / callynge there before hym the lordes and rulers of the countrey / hauynge vnto them many plesaunt and fayre wordes, in promysyng to them ayde and assystence to reuenge the deth of theyr lorde and duke / and in the con∣clusyon desyred of them yt he myght haue the noryshynge and bryngyng vp of the chylde, tyll he came to hys lawfull age. whyche thynge thus by the kynge desyred / the lordes anon coniectured in theyr myndes, yt he desyred the ke¦pyng of theyr yonge lord, to ye ende yt he myghte ye more easely obteyne the possession of that dukedome. For the whych, the lordes and other of the cy¦tye were in great rumour and grud∣ge agayne the kynge. wherof he be∣ynge monyshed, to appeace the mul∣tytude / the kynge toke the chylde in his armes, and so bare hym into the place of the assemble of the people / & there shewyd vnto theym wyth affyr¦maunce of great othes, that hys en∣tent was onely for ye wele of the child and for defence of hys countrey, and not to clayme any ryghte or tytle of the duchy / excepte onely the homage therof, whyche belongeth to hym by iuste tytle. By meane of whyche fayre speche, the kynge obteyned his purpose, and caried the chyld with hym into Fraū¦ce, not forgetynge the vnkynde dea∣lynge of the Normans. when Arnolde erle of Flaūdres vn∣derstode that to the kynge of Fraūce the guydynge of ye yonge chyld was commytted, ferynge yt he wyth pow∣er of the Normans wolde ronne vp∣pon hym reuengynge of the chyl∣des fathers deth / sent vnto the kyng x. pounde weyghte of golde, wherof euery pounde cōteyneth .xii. ounces, and euery oūce in value of fyne gold xl.s / so that after this rate his pre∣sente shulde be in value to ye summe of .ii. hundred & .xl. pounde. All be yt mayster Gagwyne sayth he sent vn∣to hym but .xl. marke / besechyng him to be his good and gracyous lorde, and not to gyue to hasty credence to hys accusours. For he in suche wyse wolde declare hym selfe, and delyuer vnto the kynge the murderers of duke wyllyam / he meane wherof he shulde certaynly know, that he was innocēte of the sayd dukes deth. And ouer this he made a frende about the kynge, whyche spake good wordes
for hym, & put in the kynges mynde the great hurtes & iniuryes that he and his progenytours hadde sustey∣ned of the Danys or Normans. By meane whereof this murdour was forgoten / & more and more the kyng malygned agayne the Normans / and to the chylde he bare not so good mynde as some men thoughte that he wolde do. Uppon a daye when the kyng was retourned from hys dysporte of hun¦tynge / a lyght cōplaynt was brouht to hym of the chylde Rycharde, of an offence that he had commytted. For the which he rebuked him otherwyse then was syttyng to his honour, and called hym opprobryously, and thre∣tened hym greuously / and after that caused hym to be kept more straytly, then he before hadde vsed to be. To this chylde Rycharde was as∣sygned a mayster or teacher named Osmunde / whyche Osmunde hadde a famylyer named Iuon̄. These two apperceyuynge the kynges indygna¦cyon that he bare towarde the chyld / studyed for his enlargynge, and last¦ly coūsaylyd hym that he shuld fayne hym self syke. The whych was done, in suche wyse that all suche as away¦ted vppon hym, supposed hym to be very syke, by reason wherof his ke∣pers toke the lesse cure of hym. wherof Osmunde beynge ware, and also beynge sure of the kynge / made a great trusse of herbes or grasse, wherin he wrapped the chyld, and so conueyed hym oute of the cytye of Laon̄ / and there receyued hym an horse redy for the iourney / & so sped hym vnto Cosuy, and delyueryd the chylde to the captayne of that town. And from thēs he rode all nyght tyll he came vnto Senlys / & there shew∣ed all hys doynge vnto ye erle of that coūtrey named Bernard, which was nere kynnesman vnto ye yonge duke. THE .CLXXXVII. CHAPITER. BErnarde hauynge knowlege of the escape of his kynnesmā Rycharde / sente in all haste vnto Hugh le graunde erle of Parys, for to haue his ayde and assystence. The whych without taryeng assēbled his knyghtes, and conueyed the chylde from Cousy to Senlys or Saynlys to his neuewe Bernarde / where he was receyued wyth mych ioye and honoure. when Lewys was ascertayned of the scape of Rycharde, and howe he was in the guydynge of Hughe the great or graunde / anon he sent vnto hym, gyuynge hym in commaunde∣ment that he shulde restore the chyld to hym. The whyche excused hym, and sayde that the chylde was in the kepynge of erle Bernarde and not in hys. The kynge seynge how he was de∣luded / sente for Arnolde or Arnulfe erle of Flaundres / whyche at his cō∣maundement counsayled the kynge to wynne Hugh le graūde with riche behestes or gyftes. After whose coun¦sayll worchynge / kynge Lewys wyl¦led the sayd Hugh to mete with hym at the crosse of Compeyn̄, where the sayd Hugh shortly after met with the kynge. To whome the kynge promy¦sed great parte of the duchy of Nor∣mandy / wyth that that he wolde re∣fuse the partye of the Normans, and take his parte agayne them. By mea¦ne of which promises this erle Hugh was ouercomē / and agreed with the kynge to warre vppon one parte of the countrey, whyle he warred vpon that other. And forthwyth receyuyd an armye of the kynge, and spedde hym to Bayon̄, & made cruell warre vppon that countrey. And kynge Le¦wys entryd vppon the prouynce of Caux / and wasted and spoyled that
Coste in all that he myghte. whan Barnarde the Dane, and also Barnarde erle of Senlys, con∣ceyued ye vntrouth of Hugh le graūt, and also the greate hostes that they were beset wyth / by theyr counsayles and other they sent vnto the kynge certayne messengers, gyuynge them in commaundement to saye, that in vayne the kynge hadde entred that countre with his armye / for the citye of Roan and all the prouince was at hys commaundement. Besechynge hym not to waste nor spoyle the coū∣tre but to ayde and helpe defende it agayne theyr enemyes. Of thys message the kynge was ryght fayne / and forthwith sped him tyll he came to Roan, wher he was accordynge to hys honour receyued. For the whyche cause he sent in all hast vnto Arnulfe erle of Flaūders / monassynge hym that he sease of his warres in Bayon, tyll he receyued farther knowlege. The kyng thus restyng in Roan, deuysed hys maters at hys pleasure / so that the Normayns obeyed them to all hys requestes. And for ye good aberynge that Barnarde the Dane was of agayne the kynge / he graun∣ted to hym the gydynge of the yonge duke. And whan he shulde departe / he ordeyned as hys deputye one na∣med Raoull or Rauf. The whyche after the kynges departure, behaued hym so cruelly to the Normans / that they were very irke of hym. And ouer thys the foresayd Barnard fe∣rynge the kynges retorne, and other more greuous punysshement than they before hadde susteyned / sent his messengers vnto Grolle kynge of Denmarke than beynge at Chyer∣bourk / wyllyng hym to assemble his people / and to make of them two ho∣stes. wherof to sende ye one by lande, and that other by water / & so to entre the coūtre of Normandy in wastyng and spoylynge it / by reason wherof he myghte brynge the kynge to some cōmunycacyon. whych all was done as the sayd Barnarde had deuysed. whan the kynge had wyttyng of the Danys, that wyth so grete a mul¦tytude were entred the prouynce of Normandy / he assembled hys hoste and sped hym thytherwarde / and in processe of tyme came vnto the cytye of Roane. where by hys counsayle it was condyscended, that a metynge and frendly communycacyon shulde be had bytwene the kynge & the sayd Grolle, at a place called in Frenche Herlycum. where at the day appoyn∣ted bothe prynces mette, wyth bothe hostes standynge or hauynge a lytell dystaūce of. And whyle the two pryn¦ces were there in communycacyon of the deth and murder of duke willm̄ / a Dane markynge Herloyne (For whose causes, as before is shewed duke willm̄ was slayne) with a spere wounded hym so greuously that he dyed forthwyth, whych dede hys bro¦ther called Lambert wyth other of ye Frenchmen entendynge to reuenge, wyth theyr wepons fylle vppon the Danys / whyche them receyued with greate vyolence. So that of that a fraye ensued a skyrmysshe / and after the skyrmysshe a sore batayle. For bothe hostes ioyned on bothe sydes / and faught cruelly eyther with other a longe whyle. But in the ende the Frenchmen had the worse, and were compelled to flee. And the kynge to saue hys lyfe fledde also / whyche by reason of hys vntrusty horse was ta¦ken and kepte secrete a certayne of tyme by his taker. But lastly he was discouered and brougth to the cytye of Roane as a prysoner. The kynge thus beynge in holde vnder the kepynge of the Danys / Engeberge hys wyfe makynge for
hym grete dole and sorowe / toke her iourney to the kynge of Germany, whose doughter she was / besechyng hym to prouyde for the delyuerye of her lorde and husbande. But of hym had she no socour / but rather dyscō∣fort / shewyng to her that the trowble that her husbande susteyned he had well deserued, for his vnstedfastnesse that he agayne wyllyam the duke & Rycharde hys sonne had vsed. wherfore the quene beynge thus answered of her father / rode vnto Hugh le graunde, besechyng hym of helpe in this greate nede. The which at the request of the quene sent vnto Barnard erle of Senlys / requiryng to moue some wayes to the Danys for the enlargynge of the kynge. By whose labour and meanys lastely a counsayle was kepte at saynt Clere vpon the ryuer of Ept. where after many argumentes & reasons made / fynally it was agreed that the kyng shulde be enlarged tyll an other day of cōmunycacyon / layenge for pled∣ges hys sonne and heyre named Lo∣thayr, the bysshop of Senlys, and ye bysshop of Beauuayze. whyche done the kynge was set at large, and forth wyth rode vnto the cytye of Laon. where he abode the other daye of cō∣munycacyon / whyche after was hol∣den at ye foresayd ryuer of Ept. And concluded a peas, whyche lasted but a shorte whyle after. Thys peas thus confermed / Grol¦lo the kynge of Danys wyth greate gyftes was retorned from whens he was desyred. And Richarde the yon∣ge duke toke vpon hym the rule of hys owne Signory / and grewe and encreased forthwardly. wherof Hugh the graunde takyng hede / and behol¦dynge hys wyse demeanure and con¦uersacyon / made suche labour and meanes vnto Barnarde erle of Sen¦lis, yt he maried to him his doughter named Emmacet. wherof beynge en∣fourmed the French kynge / caste in hys mynde thys greate alyaunce by¦twene the yonge duke and two grete perys of hys lande / and thoughte yt these .iii. knt in amyte and alyaunce shulde dysturbe hym whan them ly∣ked. wherof he called to hym Arnold erle of Flaunders / by whose coun∣sayle he sent the sayde Arnolde vnto Ottho kynge of Germany / requy∣rynge hym of ayde to warre vpon ye Normayns, and to breke thys affy∣nyte of thys yonge duke, & of Hugh le graunde, and of Barnarde erle of Senlys / and for his labour he shuld haue to hym and to hys heyres the prouynce or lordshyp of Lorayne. Ottho wyth thys couetous pro∣messe deceyued, assēbled his knygh∣tes / and at the day and place appoyn¦ted met wyth the kynge / and wyth theyr people sped them to Roan, and layde siege vnto ye cytye. And whyle the kynges were occupyed in wa∣stynge and brennynge the vylages nere vnto the cytye / to put the Nor∣mans in the more fere, Ottho sent hys neuewe wyth a certayne of hys people in secrete wyse to the gates of the cytye. But whan he was comen to the gate that opened towarde the ryuer of Sayn̄, and thoughte there to wynne hys enterpryse / ye cytesyns issued out vppon hym sodeynly, and gaue to hym batayle / and slewe hym and many of hys company, and the remenaunt they chased frō the wal∣les of the cytye. whan Ottho had wyttyng of the ouerthrowe of hys men and deth of his neuew, whom he entyrely loued / he made inward heuynesse, and caste in his minde how he myght reuenge the deth of hys neuewe. But whan he approched the cytye, and behelde the strength therof, wyth also the fy∣ersnesse of the Normādes / he repen∣ted
hym of enterprysyng of that iour¦ney / and torned all hys hatered vnto Arnolde erle of Flaunders, by whose sterynge and counsayle that vyage was fyrste begon / in so mych that he sought the meanes to brynge ye sayd Arnolde into the handes of the Nor∣mans. wherof Arnolde beynge warned / trussed his stuffe and harneys secret∣ly, and in the nyght stale away / and so retorned into Flaunders with his retynew. The whych thyng knowen to the two kynges / in as secrete wise as they myghte departed also from ye siege. But yet therof theyr enmyes beynge ware / pursued them & slewe many of theyr company. And or the yere that thys was done in, had rōne hys full compas, Lewys the kynge dyed and was buryed in the temple of the holy bysshoppe saynte Remy∣gius wythin the cytye of Raynys / whan he had reygned in great trou∣ble .xxi. yeres / leuynge for hys heyre a sonne named Lothayr. Anglia. THE .CLXXXVIII. CHAPITER. EDmunde ye bro∣ther of Ethel∣stan̄ and sonne of Edwarde the elder, & of Ethel¦wyda the thyrde wyfe of the sayd Edwarde / begā hys reygne ouer Englande, in the yere of our lorde .ix. hundred and .xl / and the .vii. yere of the .v. Lewys thā kynge of Fraunce. In the fyrste yere of hys reygne, the Danys of Northumberland re∣belled agayne hym. And for to make theyr party the strōger / they sent for a prynce of Danys named Aulaffe than beynge in Irlande. The which brought wyth hym an other prynce or ruler of Danys named Reygnald wyth a great hoste of Danys & other straūge nacyons / and entred the fore¦sayd countre, and warred vppon the next borders, in wastynge and spoy∣lynge the inhabytaūtes of the same. wherof whan kyng Edmund was warned / anone he assembled his peo¦ple and sped hym toward ye countre / and lastly faught wyth the two sayd prynces of the Danys, or at the leest chaced them from towne to towne tyll he forsyd them wyth all theyr cō∣pany of straunge nacyons to forsake vtterly that prouynce / and bet down that countre of Cumberlande yt had mych fauoured and ayded the sayde enmyes agayne hym / and toke ther∣in greate prayes, and deuyded them amōges hys knyghtes. And ye done / other for the good seruyce that Mal¦colyn̄ kynge of Scotlande hadde in thys vyage done vnto the kynge, or for the trowth and allegyaunce that he in tyme folowyng shulde bere vn¦to hym, or for bothe / the kynge gaue there to the sayd Malcolyn̄ the coun¦tre of Cumberlande, and seased all ye resydue of the kyngdom or lordshyp of Northumberlande, and ioyned it vnto hys owne kyngdome. But yet ye Danys retorned agayn in the tyme of Edredus the nexte kynge as after shalbe shewed / so that as yet the fyne or ende of thys kyng∣dome is not accompted. In thys Edmundus dayes the authour of Polycronyca sayth, that whan Edmunde hadde ended hys iourney, and set that countree in an order / he toke wyth hym the bones of the holy abbot Colfrydus, and of that holy abbesse Hylda, & brought theym vnto Glastenbury, and there shryned theym. This Colfryde was abbot of Bedas abbey, or of the ab∣bey of Gyrwye / & Hilda was abbesse of Stenshalt or whytby. And as af∣fermeth
ye sayd authour, both places ben in ye North partyes of England. Thys kynge Edwarde had a no∣ble woman to wyfe named Elgina / of whom he receyued two sonnes na¦med Edwyne and Edgar. And as testyfyeth Henry arche∣dekē of Huntyngdon / thys Edward had ofte warre wyth the Danes / the whyche as he affermeth helde than many good townes in myddle En∣gland, as Lyncoln̄, Nothinghm̄, Der¦by, Stafforde, & Laycetour / ye which by his knyghtly manhode he wanne from them. And by the helpe of holy Dunstan / he amēded many thynges within his realm yt had bē lōge tyme misordered by meane of ye Danys. Of the ende or fyne of thys Ed∣munde dyuers opynyons there be. For Marianus the Scot sayth, that whyle thys kynge Edmunde ende∣uered hym selfe to saue his sewer frō the daūger of hys enemye, that wold haue slayne hym at Pulkerchyrche / the kynge in ryddynge of the fraye was wounded to the deth, and dyed shortly after. But wyllyam de regibus sayth, that the kynge beynge at a feest at ye foresayd towne or place, vppon the daye of saynte Augustyne / espyed a felon syttyng in ye halle named Leof, whych he before tyme for hys felony hadde exyled / and lept ouer the table and plucked that thefe by the here of the hedde to the grounde. In whych doynge the sayd felon wyth a knyfe wounded the kynge to the deth / and also wyth the same knyfe wounded many other of the kynges seruaun∣tes / and at length was all to hewen & dyed forthwyth. If this be trewe / it shulde seme that kynges at those dayes vsed not the honour that they nowe haue and exercyse. But whych of these two meanes was vsed in the kynges deth / by agreemēt of all wry¦ters thys kynge dyed, whan he had reygned .vi. yeres and more / & was buryed at Glastenbury the whyche before he hadde sumptuously repay∣red / and lafte after hym two yonge sonnes, as before is remembred, Ed¦wyne and Edgar. But for they were to yonge to rule the lande / therfore ye rule therof was cōmytted to Edred{us} theyr vncle & brother to theyr fader. THE .CLXXXIX. CHAPITER. EDredus ye brother of Edmūde and sonne of Edwarde the el∣der, and of Ethylswyda hys thyrde wyfe / began his reygne ouer the real¦me of Englande, in the yere of our lorde .ix. hundred and .lxvii / and the xiii. yere of the fyfte Lewys thā kyng of Fraunce. The whych as before is towched was admytted kyng by au∣thoryte of hys barony. For so myche as the two forenamed chylderne of Edmunde, Edwyn and Edgar, were thought to yonge and insuffycyent to take vpon them so great a charge. The whyche Edrede was enoynted kynge of Oddo archbyshop of Caū∣terbury in ye towne of Kyngestowne. And soone after he warred vpon the Danys, that then were reentred into Northumberland / or after some wry¦ters, there dwellynge vnder trybute of the kynge, subdued before of Ed∣munde hys brother / and bette theym downe, and caused theym to holde and obeye vnto theyr former coue∣nauntes. And the Scottes than be∣gan to varye which he also brought vnto due obedyence. After a certayne terme / ye Danys of Northumberlande, whyche euer contynued full of gyle and dowble∣nesse, not beyng content to holde the couenaūtes before made & promisses vnto Edredus the kynge / called vn∣to theym theyr olde accessaryes and
helpers, and bereuyd from the kyn∣ges subiectes the cytye of yorke and other stronge townes and castelles, to the great hurte of the coūtrey, and vtter dyspleasure of the kynge. wherfore he beynge therof aduerty∣sed / in goodly and conuenyent haste assembled hys people, and spedde hym thyther, and destroyed myche of the lande. And in that fury brent the abbey of Rypon, whyche the Danys kept for a fortresse and strength / and wan from them myche of the streng∣thes that they to fore had wōne / and broughte theym agayne vnder hys subieccyon. when this kynge Edrede had thus spedde hys iourney, and was retour¦nynge into Englande, nothynge su∣spectynge the sayde Danys / a com∣pany of them by the excytyng of Hyr¦cus a kyng or prynce of the Danys, thē folowyd the kinges hoste, and on thys halfe yorke fyll vppon the kyn∣ges rerewarde, and destroyed & slew many a man. For the whyche doyng the kynge was sore amoued / & tour∣ned hys people agayne, entendynge to haue destroyed ye countrey vtterly. wherof the Danys beynge ware / so lowely meked theym vnto hym, & gaue to hym suche gyftes, that the kyng refrayned hym of the great yre that he had purposed to theym. But amonges other articles yt he bounde them vnto / one was that they shuld banyshe and vtterly refuse theyr fore sayde duke or kynge called Hyrcus. whyche thynge with dyuers and ma¦ny other graunted & fermely bounde to kepe, as well by hostages taken as other suertye / the kynge re∣tourned into England ioynyng this kyngedome to hys other. So that here is rekened the ende of this kyng¦dome / whyche shulde endure as be∣fore is shewyd in the .C.ix. chapyter of thys worke, by the terme of foure hundred & .ix. yeres. In the same yere that the kynge hadde thus subdued the danys, a strong sykenesse toke hym / wherfore he sent for holy byshoppe Dunstane to come vnto hym. The whych Dun¦stane in goynge towarde the kynge / harde a voyce saye vnto hym, now re¦styth kynge Edredus in peace. At tyme of whych voyce thus sayenge / the horse of that holy byshop fyll to the grounde and dyed, wythout hur∣tynge of hys mayster. Then this holy man continued his iourney, and fande the kynge dede at his commynge / whome he buryed wyth great reuerence, in the mona∣stery or cathedrall chyrche of the cy∣tye of wynchester, in the .xxviii. yere of his age, and the .x. yere of hys rey¦gne, as testyfyeth Guydo and other. THE .CXC. CHAPITER. LOtharius the el∣dest sonne of the v. Lewys / began his reygne ouer the Frenchemen, in the yere of our lordes incarnacy on .ix. hundred & lv / and ye .viii. yere of Edredus then kynge of Englande. Thys Lothayr by meanes of Thebaude or Theo∣balde erle of Chartres, toke partye agayne Rycharde duke of Norman¦dye. And for to haue agayn hym som groūdely cause, he sent vnto ye duke, monyshynge hym to haue in mynde, the fayth and allegyaunce that the dukes of Normandye ought to bere vnto the kynges of Fraūce. And for maynteynynge of the same, and for other maters that he hadde to speke wyth hym of / he wylled hym to come to a place appoynted, where all such
maters myght haue farther expedici¦on. All whyche commaundement or request was graunted of the duke. when the kynge had receyued this answere from the duke, wherof he de¦myd before the contrary / he sent for Arnolde erle of Flaundres, Godfrey erle of Angewe, and Theobalde be∣fore named. By whose counsaylles after many argumentes made / the kynge agreed to call the duke vnto the ryuer of Isayr, & there to betraye hym. At which daye & place appoyn¦ted / ye duke with a cōuenyent cōpany came vnto the sayd ryuersyde, there abydyng the cōmyng of Lothayr vp¦pon ye other syde / whyche lastly came thyther wyth a great people. wherof when the duke was ware he fered treason / for the whyche cause he sent espyes to knowe of the kynges en∣tent. And they as wyse mē espyed all the purpose of the hoste / and shorte∣ly retourned, and shewed to the du∣ke that he was in great daunger. The whyche shortely after apperyd / for the Frenchemen began to passe the ryuer in great nomber. Then duke Rychard consyderyng that he was of so litell myght to with stande the great power of the Frēche hoste / sente a parte of his men to de∣fende the passage, & wyth the reme∣naunt retourned vnto the cytye of Roan̄. wherof the kynge beyng ware that the duke was hym escaped / cal∣led agayne his people, & wyth great dyspleasure retourned vnto Laon. It was not longe after yt the kyng assembled a great hoste of Burgony¦ons and Frenchemen / & entred into Normandye, and beseged the cytye of Bayon, and lastly wanne it by the treason of one Gylberde a smyth be∣longynge vnto ye erle Theobald a∣boue named. when the kynge hadde thus wōne ye citye of Bayon / he beto¦ke the kepynge therof vnto the sayde erle. The whyche puttynge therin a strength of knyghtes / yode vnto a ca¦stell called Harmauyle, & besegyd yt wyth a certayn of knyghtes. In why¦che season the kynge for nedes of his realme / retourned into Fraunce. when duke Rycharde was ware of the kynges departure / he wyth hys people passed the water of Sayn̄ / & costed the countrey, & fyll sodaynely vppon erle Theobalde lyenge at the foresayd syege / and slewe of his men vi. hūdred & .xl. persons / and put the erle in such a fere, that he scaped with great daunger, and fledde with smal company, tyll he came to his owne ci¦tye of Charters. Then duke Rycharde consyderyng the great malice of his foon & strēgth of them / sent vnto the kynge of Den¦marke then named Erarde, requy∣ryng him of ayde or helpe for to with¦stande the malyce of his enymyes. The whych Erarde receyued glad∣ly that message, & promysed to them all theyr request / & shortely after sent to the sayd duke a great army of Da¦nys, which sped thē by ye see tyll they came to to the place where the water of Sayn̄ falleth into the see. wherof the duke beynge aduertysed, in short space drew vnto them wyth his peo∣ple / and so with them entred the coū∣trey of ye erle of Chartris, in wastyng & destroynge it wythout mercy / and after entred the landes of Fraunce, in pyllynge, robbynge, brennynge, & wastynge yt, and slew ye people with out mercy and pytye. For this mysery & tyranny thus ex∣ercysed by the Danys / ye kyng beyng therwyth confused, sente for the bys∣shoppes of his land, to haue theyr ad¦uyce. Amonges the which the bishop of Chartris beynge present, was by the hole counsayll admitted to go to the duke, and knowe the cause why that he beynge a crysten man, made
suche destruccyon of the crysten peo∣ple, and occupyed the land of crysten men with so manyfolde harmes and seathes / and to conclude the trew or trewce for a certayne of tyme. The sayde byshoppe accomplyssynge the kynges pleasure, was answered of the duke / that this vexacyon that he put the lande of Fraunce to, was for the iniurye yt the kyng hadde before tyme done vnto hym / & yet cōtynued the same in holdynge from hym hys cytye of Bayon, the whych he hadde gyuen to his great enymy the erle of Chartris. So that in conclusyon a restraynte of warre was graunted, vppon condycyon that by a day assy∣gned, the kynge wold apoynte a day of communycacyon / and in the mea∣ne tyme restore vnto hym hys cytye of Bayon. when the kynge had receyued ye an¦swere from the duke / he made suche meanes that ye duke receyued his city of Bayon, with all dyspeasure forgy¦uen agayn ye forenamed Theobald. whych was done by medyacyon of a relygyous munke, as affermeth the Frenche boke. And after the daye of metynge was appoynted at a place called Gyndolfoss. where the duke made ordynaūce for receyuynge of ye kyng / and cōmaunded the paynyms and Danis to behaue them reuerent¦ly agayne the kynge and his people / the whych was obeyed in all due ma¦ner. And ye kyng there receyued with myche honour, hadde vnto the duke many goodly wordes, requyrynge hym to forget all his former vnkynd¦nesse, trustynge to shewe vnto hym suche pleasures in tyme to come, that shulde recompence all the former dis¦pleasures and vnkyndnes by him be¦fore commytted. wyth whyche fayre speche the duke takynge yt wythout dyssymulacyon, was well satysfyed and content / so that after assuraunce of amytye and peace betwene theym stablysshed, eyther gyuynge vnto other great and ryche gyftes, they de¦parted as frendes. The whych peas contynued durynge theyr lyues. THE .CXCI. CHAPITER. LOthayre thus beyng in loue and amytye wyth the Nor∣mans / caste in his mynde howe he myght wynne from his neuewe Ot∣thon kynge of Germany, ye prouynce of Austracy or Lorayn, yt in tyme pas¦sed was belongynge to his progeny tours. And this to brynge to effecte / he gaderyd in right secret wyse a cho¦sen host of Frenchemen, & with them passed the countrey, in such wise that he was entred the cytye of Aquisgra¦ni, or any great fame or noyse were therof made. wherwith Ottho beyng dysmade / fledde for that season, & suf¦fred the sayde Lothayr for that tyme to execute his pleasure / so yt the sayd Lothayre spoyled the kynges paleys and other places, to the great enry∣chinge of hym & his hoste. And when he hadde taryed there a certayne of tyme, he retourned wythout batayll wyth great pompe into Fraunce. It is shewyd before in the begyn∣nyng of the story of Ethelstane kyng of England / that Henry duke of Sa¦xony, the whyche is ment for Germa¦ny, sent vnto the sayde Ethilstane to haue his suster Alunda to mary vn∣to his sonne Ottho or Otthon. ye shall vnderstande this Henry is of some wryters admytted for empe¦rour. But his sonne Ottho forena∣med, was emperour in dede / whose sonne this Ottho was abouenamed, and called the seconde of that name, and emperour after hys father, and son of the forenamed Alunda suster to Ethilstane. Then this second Ottho emperour
& kyng of Germany, beyng thus as ye haue hard surprised of his neuew Lothayre kyng of west Fraunce / ga∣deryd a stronge hoste and entred the realm of Fraūce. And as wytnessyth Gerardus wryter of hystoryes, des∣troyed the coūtrey of Soysons / and lastly came vnto Paris, and brent ye suburbes of that cytye, and hadde a great parte of his wyll of the sayde Lothayre. But the frenche cronycle varyeth from this saynge / and sayth that Lothayr (by the helpe of the du∣ke of burgoyne and of Hugh Capet erle of Paris, after ye sayd Otthō had fyred the suburbes of the citye of Pa¦rys) issued out of the towne & faught wyth the emperoure, and compelled him to gyue backe and fle. whom the kynge pursued tyll he came to the ry¦uer of Isayr or Sue / where eyther hoste encoūtred wyth other & faught cruelly. But at length the emperour was forced to forsake ye feld / & mych of his people slayn and droned with in the said ryuer. And so grete a nom¦ber as affermeth the frenche storye / that the course of the water was stop¦ped, and ouerflowed the feldes nere vnto the sayde ryuer. But this victory not wythstādyng as wytnessyth mayster Gagwyn / the kynge cōtrary the mynde of the duke of Burgoyne, and also of Hugh Ca¦pet / releasyd vnto the emperour the tytle and ryghte of Lorayne. The whyche was cause of couetynge of the realme by the sayde Hugh, and vsurpynge of the same, as affermeth the sayde authoure. whyche agre∣ment betwene the two princes stablis¦shed and ended, eyther retourned in∣to his own countrey. After the which season no notable dede is put in me∣mory of the sayde Lothayre / so that he fynally sykened and dyed, in the yere of our lorde .ix hundred .lxxx. & vi, when he had ruled his pryncypat vygurously by the full terme of .xxx. wynter / and was buried in the myn∣ster of saynte Remigius in the cytye of Raynes, leuynge after hym a son named Lewys. Anglia. THE .CXCII. CHAPITER. Edredus or Ed∣wyne the eldeste son of Edmund brother of Ethil stane / began his reygne ouer En¦glande, in the ye¦re of our lord .ix. hundred & .lvi / and the second yere of Lothayre then kynge of Fraunce. This Edwyne was crowned kynge at Kyngistone or Kyngestowne be∣syde London, of the archbyshoppe of Caunterbury. The whych selfe daye of his {pro}fessyon or coronacion / broke sodeynly from his lordes, & entred a secrete chāber, & there occupyed him selfe synfully wyth a nother mannes wyfe. wherof saynt Dūstane hauyng knowlege, rebuked and blamed hym greuously / & caused the woman to be voyded from his bed and company. whose husband as one authour testy¦fyeth he slew, for to haue ye vnlawful vse of her beaute / not cōsideryng ye al¦lyaūce of affynyte of kynred betwene them, affermeth ye sayde authour. Guydo writer of storyes sayth, that Edwyn cōtrary ye lawes of ye chyrch, held a woman as his cōcubyne. wher¦fore holy Dūstane accused him vnto Oddo archbishop of Caūterbury, by whose power the kynge was causyd to refuse & forsake the cōpany of that woman. For the which dede Edwyn bare great malice vnto the holy man Dunstane / & at length by his extorte power, banyshed hym his lande, and forced hym for a season to holde hym
in Flaunders. And for the malyce ye he bare towarde hym, he dyd myche dyspleasure to all blacke munkes of Englande / in so myche that at Mal∣mysbury he put oute the mōkes and set in seculer prestes in theyr stede. It is rad of hym that he also toke from the chyrch what he myght / and specyally from the blacke monkes. In so myche that such precyouse ie∣wellys as Ethylstane hadde before receyued from Othon̄ the emperour, gyuē vnto wynchester and Malmys¦bury / he toke theym thens and gaue theym vnto alyauntes and straun∣gers. And thus was not onely vn∣kynde to god / but also he vsyd suche tyranny, and other vnlefull meanes to hys subiectes, that lastely they re∣belled agayn hym / and specyally the inhabytaūtes of the countre of Mer¦cia or myddell Englande, and also of Northumbers / and put hym clerely from all kyngely honour and dygny¦tye, when he had reygned after most wryters the full terme of .iiii. yeres / and was buryed after in ye cathedrall chyrche of wynchester, leuynge none heyre of his body / wherfore the rule of the lande fyll vnto Edgar his yon¦ger brother. Antoninus archebyshop of Florēce in this worke often before mynded, amonges many myracles and ver∣tues actes, which he in ye .vi. chapiter of ye .xvi. title of his boke called Sm̄ Antonini / reherseth of this holy man Dunstan̄, & sayth that when he had vnderstandynge of the deth of thys Edwyn̄ by reuelacyon or otherwyse, he made hys specyall prayer to god to know what state the soule of Ed∣wyn̄ was in. To whome after thys prayer made / apperyd to the sayde Dūstane a great company of fēdes, turmentynge the soule of the sayde Edwyn, and ledynge yt vnto the pla¦ces of peyne. The whyche when this holy man hadde sene, he fell to great wepynge and sorowe / besechynge god with most deuocyon to haue py∣tye and compassyon of that soule. And whyle he was occupied in his prayer, the sayde cōpany of fendes re¦turned wyth yellynge and cryenge / shewynge to hym that thorough hys prayer, the angelles of god had by∣rafte from them the soule of Edwyn. THE .CXCIII. CHAPITER. EDgar the seconde sonne of Ed¦munde and brother of Edwyn laste kynge / began hys reygne ouer the realme of Englande, in the yere of our lorde .ix. hundred and .lx / and the .v. yere of Lotharius then kynge of Fraunce. The whyche of dyuers wryters is wytnessed to be of the age of .xvi. yere, when he was admytted for kynge / and that he was not crow¦ned kynge tyll he hadde reygned the full terme of .xii. yeres. whych terme ended and expyred / he was enoynted and crowned kynge in the cytye of Bathe, vppon a whytsondaye / fal∣lyng then vpon the .xv. day in May, of Dunstane and Oswolde byshop∣pes, that one of Caunterburye, and that other of yorke. In the begynnynge of his reygn he called home holy Dunstane / that before was exyled of kyng Edwyne / whych Dunstane harde aungellys synge, peace be to the lande of En∣glyshemen. Then he made Dūstane that was abbot of Glastenburye, byshoppe of worceter / and vnyed and knyt into one, the prouynce and lorshyppes of Englande, and made of theym one monarchye and kyngedome. In many places he putte away cler∣kes and prestes that lyued vycyous¦ly / and sette there for theym mun∣kes. And as wytnessyth Guydo, Po¦licronica,
and other / he buylded and repayred to the nomber of .xl. houses of relygyon / wherof Abyndon, Pe∣terburgh, Thorney, Ramesey, and wylton̄ were parcell of theym. And at wynchester in the newe ab∣bay he putte in munkes / where be∣fore dayes were seculer prestes. The cause wherof was, for so myche as the prestes fled or neglygently slow∣thed the dyuyne seruyce of god, and sette vykers in theyr places, whyle they lyued at theyr pleasure in other places, and spente the patrymo∣nye of that chyrche after theyr sen∣suall wyll. Then kynge Edgar gaue to the vy¦kers the lande that before belonged to the prebendaryes / trustynge ther∣by that they wolde do theyr duetyes. But yt was not longe to, or the sayd vycares were as neglygent as the other. wherfore fynally, the kyng by authoryte of pope Iohn̄ the .xiii. of that name, voyded clerely the pres∣tes & ordeyned there mōkes / though some of hys prelates where not ther∣wyth contented. This Edgar kepte suche iustyce, and dyd so sharpe execucyon / that neuer before his days was vsyd lesse felony or robberyes. And for he wold haue the rauenous bestes destroyed thorough hys lande / he caused Lud¦wallus prynce or kynge of walys, to yelde to hym yerely by way of try∣bute thre hundred woluys. By mea∣ne wherof wythin the space of .iiii. ye¦res after, in Englande and walys myght scantely be founden one wolf a lyue. It is wytnessyd of dyuers authours that Kynadus kynge of Scotlande dispysed Edgar, for that that he was lytell of stature. wherof Edgar be∣ynge warned / desyred the sayd Kyna¦dus to dyner, and made to him good countenaunce. After whych dyner en¦ded / he toke the sayd Kynadus by ye arme, and so wyth hym helde compa¦ny tyll they came into ye feldes. where beynge dysseuered from bothe theyr seruauntes / Edgar drew from vnder his garment two swordes, & desyred Kynadus to take the chose of theym, & sayd to hym: nowe thou hast good laysure to a saye thy strength wyth myne, that before tyme thou haste so myche dyspysed. And lette vs nowe proue whyche is more worthy to be subiecte to other. It is not syttynge for a knyghte to make great boste at the borde, and to do lytell in felde. when the Scottyshe kynge hard the kyng thus challenge hym / he knew well his wordes before spoken were disclosyd to ye kynge / wherof he was not a litle abashed. But for apeace ye kynge / he behaued hym so lowely, and gaue to hym suche plesaunte wordes, that the kynge forgaue the trespace. This Edgar amonge other of hys polytyke dedes / vsed in the somer tyme to scowre the see wyth certayne shyppes of warre. And agayn ye wyn¦ter he prouyded to laye the sayd shyp¦pes in sure hauens / and had redy in his owne seruyce, and in hys lordes houses, a certayne nomber of sody∣ours that were alway redy when the kyng had nede of them. And his shyp maysters were in wages wyth hym thorough the yere / that euer attēdyd vpon the shippes, to se that nothyng fayled that vnto theym was necessa∣ry. By meane wherof he kepte hys land in great quyete fro outward en¦myes. And in the wynter he vsed to ryde ouer the land, and to se how hys offycers entreated the people. And yf any were accused of extorcyon or other crymes, and agayne them suf∣fycyently proued / he dyd vppon all suche sharpe correccyon. And for so mych as in his days grete
multytude of Danys dwelled in dy∣uers places of England, which vsed many vyces / & specyally great dryn∣kynge, wherof ensued dronkenesse and many other vices, to the euyll ex¦amples and hurte of hys commons and subiectes: he therfore ordeyned certayne cuppes with pynnes or nay¦les set in them / and ordeyned & made a law, that what person dranke past that marke at one drought, shuld for fayte a certayn peny. wherof the one half shuld fall to the accusour, & that other half to the ruler of ye brough or towne that the offence was done in. It is told of this Edgar by dyuers authours, yt he vpon a season beyng at Chester, entred ye ryuer of Dee / & there syttynge in a bote, toke the ru∣le of the helme, and caused .viii. kyn¦ges, whyche of Guydo are called re∣gul, whyche is to meane small or ly¦tell kynges or vnder kinges, ye why∣che he commaunded to rowe hym vp and downe the ryuer vnto saynte Iohn̄s chyrche, and from thens to hys owne paleys / in token yt he was lorde & kynge of so many prouynces. This noble Edgar had two wy∣ues. By the fyrste yt was called Egel¦fleda the whyte / he hadde a son that was named Edwarde. He was after kynge, and slayne by reason of hys stepmoder Alfrita, called in the en∣glyshe cronycle Estrylde. And vpon his seconde wyfe Alfrida or Estrylde he gat a son named Egelredus, or af¦ter the englyshe boke Eldrede / which was kynge after Edwarde the mar∣tyr, as after shall be shewyd. And of saynte wylfryth, whych of some wry¦ters is accōpted for a mēchon, he had a doughter named saynte Edyth in {pro}cesse of ryme. But this was of bast and not in wedloke. For as Guydo and Policronicon testyfyen / this vir¦gyne wylfryth knowynge that the kyng caste to her vnlawfull loue, put vppon her the habyte of a nūne, thyn¦kyng thereby to wythdrawe the kyn¦ges loue. But that not wythstan∣dynge, she was at length brought to the kynges bedde. For whych dede he was greatly blamed of the holy byshop Dunstane / and dyd therfore vii. yere penaūce, by the heste or byd∣dynge of the sayde Dunstane. And the forenamed wylfrith after ye chyld borne lyued so relygyousely / yt she is now cōpted for a saynt in heuen. Of her doughter Edyth yt is radde, that at lawefull age she was at wylton̄ shorne a nunne / where she vsyd more gayer apparell then was thought cō¦uenyent to her religyon. For ye which she beynge blamed of the holy bys∣shop Ethelwolde answered. Goddes dome that maye not fayle is pleasyd onely wyth conscyence. wherfore I truste that vnder these clothes maye be as clene a soule, as vnder other ye ben of lasse shewynge. Many ver∣tues ben rehersed of this holy virgyn Edyth, in the .ix. chapyter of the .vi. boke of Policronycon. The which I passe ouer for length of the mater. THE .CXCIII. CHAPITER. EDgar thus rulynge the lande after the deth of his fyrst wyfe Egelfleda / worde was broughte to hym of ye beaute of Alfrida or Estrild doughter of Orgarus erle of Deuen¦shire. wherfore he sent a knight of his court named Ethelwold, to espy whe¦ther the mayde were of such beautye as she was reported of or not / char∣gynge hym yf she were so beauty∣ous, that then he shulde aske her to wyfe for the kynge. But this knyght hauyng syght of this mayden, was so wounded wyth the darte of the blynde god Cupyde, that he forgate his trouth and alle∣giaunce, yt he shuld owe to his may∣ster
and souerayne / and retourned, shewynge to the kynge, that she was nothynge of the beaute that she was reported of, but of meane fayrenesse as other women were. wherfore he besought the kynge consyderyng she was her fathers heyre & a good ma∣ryage / that he wolde be so good lord to hym as to wryte vnto her fader, yt he myght haue her to wyfe. The why the grace he obteyned, and at length was maryed vnto her. In processe of tyme the fame of the beaute of thys woman sprange so wyde, that lastly yt came to the erys of Edgar. wherwyth the kynge in mynde beynge sore dyscontentyd wyth Ethilwolde, whyche hym had dysceyued / yet kepte good counte∣naunce, and made semblaunte, as though he hadde nothynge forced yt mater. And vpon a tyme as yt were in game / warned this Ethilwolde, yt then was an erle by reason of hys wyfe or otherwyse, that he wold lod∣ge one nyght in his house / & appoyn¦ted the daye when yt shulde be. wyth thys monyssyon the erle beynge no∣thynge contented / ranne home nygh deed for fere, and prayed his wyfe of helpe in that tyme of nede, and yt she wold in all that she myght make her self as fowle and as vnsemely as she coude / and shewed to her all the resy¦due of ye mater. Then ye woman cast in her mynde the great dyspleasure yt might ensue toward her agayn god, to make that fowle, whych he hadde made goodly and fayre / and also to her lorde and husbande agayne the kynge, thynkyng that he shuld cause her thus to do, to the ende to mocke and dysceyue hym. wherfore in con∣syderacyon of the premysses, she en∣ourned her in moste costly and shew∣ynge aparayll. And ouer yt yf dame nature hadde had any thynge forgo∣ten or mysprinted in her / she left not that by womās helpe might be amen¦ded or refourmed / and at the kynges cōmynge receyued hym wyth all ioy and gladnesse. By whyche meanes this yonge amorous kyng was soon caught in the dyuylles snare / so that he sette reason a parte, and folowed his own sensualyte. And for to bryng his purpose the better about, he kept forth a countenaunce as he had ben well contentyd wyth all thynge, and desyred the erle, that he wolde wyth hym ryde on huntyng into the wood of welwerley that now is called hore wood / where he awaytynge his sea∣son & tyme, strake the erle thorough the bodye wyth his shafte / so that he dyed soon after. And then he maryed this Elfryda or Estrylde shortely, & hadde by her Egelredus as before I haue shewyd. For the whyche dede sayth Ranulf, this Elfrida buylded an house of nunnes at warwell. But other authours saye, yt was for the slayeng of her stepson Edwarde. Also the englyshe cronycle sheweth that this Ethilwolde was slayne by an other meane and not by the kyng. About this tyme dyed Oddo arch¦byshoppe af Caunterbury, that was of the nacyon of Danys. Of hym is tolde a longe processe in the .x. chapy¦ter of the .vi. boke of Polycronycon. And after hym Bryglinus, that then was byshoppe of wynchester, was made hys successour. But for he was not suffycyent for so great a charge / he went agayne to wynchester. And holy Dunstane byshop of London & of worceter, was sacryd archbys∣shoppe of Caunterbury / and went to Rome and receyued the palle of pope Iohn̄ the .xiii. of that name. This Dunstane was fyrste abbot of Glas∣tynbury, and byshoppe of London & worceter, and lastely archbyshoppe of Caunterbury. In his dayes the order of munkes was religyous and
Full of vertues. For it hadde relygy¦ous rulers, clere of scyence and of clergy / so that then men were lad as mych wyth other dedes and good ex¦amples of vertuous lyuynge as by theyr famous & vertuous prechyng. Than Edgare as before ys sayde was crowned kynge at the cytye of Bathe, of Dunstane archbysshop of Caunterbury, and Oswolde archbys¦shop of yorke, whan he hadde ruled thys lande .xii. yeres. The cause why it was so longe or this Edgar were enoynted / was as testyfyeth Guydo for hys vnlefull Lechery, and specy∣ally for the offence done wyth wyl∣fryde. For the whyche dede he was of Dunstane ioyned to .vii. yeres pe∣naunce. The whyche penaunce du∣rynge, he was kept from the sayd en∣oyntement as affermeth the sayde Guydo. But for what cause so euer it was / by agrement of dyuers wry∣ters, he was not crowned tyll he had reygned .xii. yeres. It is also tolde of thys Edgare, that he beynge vpon a season at the towne of Anduyr / he was enamou∣red vpon a noble mannes doughter whyche was of passynge beautye / & made suche meanes by force or other wyse, that the parentes were agreed that the kynge shulde haue hys plea¦sure. But the moder subtyll of wytte bethoughte her of a whyle / and sent a seruaunt of hers, whych was both comely and fayre to the kynges bed. In the mornynge whan the daye be¦gan to waxe clere / the woman began to styrre, and wolde haue departed from the kynge. But the kynge re∣frayned her and asked the cause of her so hasty departyng. For I muste be at my worke wyth my felowes sayde the woman, at myne houre to kepe my taske. And whan the kynge had questyoned wyth her further, he lerned that she was a bonde woman / and asked of the kynge fredome for y• nyghtis seruyce. The kyng at this had good game / and cherysshed that damosell so after, that he made her lady of Lordes. For these insolent & wanton dedes / it is sayde that by the counsayle of the holy Dunstane, he buylded & repayred so many abbeys and houses of relygyon as aboue is rehersed. Thus thys noble Edgare passyng his tyme in vertue medled with vyce lastly had wyttynge of the rebellyon of ye Brytaynes or walshmen, wher∣fore he assembled hys knyghtes, and entred the lande, and dyd them grete harme and waste. And among other prayes, spoyled the countre of Gla∣morgan̄ / and also toke or spoyled the countre of Ono / and toke the bell of saynt Eltutus, which serued for hys chyrche, that was taken by vyolence wyth other stuffe, & hanged it about an horse necke. In puttynge it to tē∣porall seruyce to the dyspleasure of that saynte. But for the vyolent ta∣kynge therof, as Ranulf expresseth / in an vndertyde whan kyng Edgar was layde to take hys reste, the sayd Eltutus apered and smote the kyng vppon the breste wyth a spere. So yt the kynge awoke wyth that stroke / and charged that the belle shulde be restored to the chyrche of Saynt Eltu¦tus, and all other thynges that were taken wyth the same. But the kynge dyed wythin .x. dayes after / whan he had reygned after moste wryters the full terme of .xvi. yeres. And was bu¦ryed at Glastenbury / leuynge after hym two sonnes, Edwarde the mar∣tyr & Egelred{us}, by .ii. sondry wyues. Henricus the hystographer made of hym these verses folowynge. Ayder of the poore, and punyssher of trespasse, The gyuer of worshyp, kyng Edgar is now gone
To the kyngdome of heuen / whyche lyke to prayse was As Salomon, that for wysdome a∣boue all shone A fader in peas, a lyone to his foone Founder of temples, of monkes stronge patrone, Oppresser of all wronge, and of iu∣styce guardone. WIllelmus de regibus testifyeth, that in the yere of our lorde .M.lii, whiche was after the deth of this noble kynge Edgar .lxxvi. yeres / an abbot of Glastenbury named Ayle∣warde, dygged the graue of this no∣ble man vnreuerently. At whyche tyme the body was foūden hole and so full of flesshe, that the body wolde not entre into a newe cheste without pressynge. By reason wherof fresshe droppes of blode issued out of the same body. Than the abbot foresayd fyll sodeynly madde, and went out of the chyrch, and brake hys necke, and so dyed. Than the body was put in a shryne that he before tyme had gy∣uen to the place, & set vppon ye auter / wyth the hed of saynt Apolinare and other relyques of saynt Uyncent, the whych ye kyng Edgare before dayes had brought thyther and gyuen to ye house. wherfore it maye well appere to all that rede thys story, that what lyuynge thys man was demed of, yt he purged hym in suche wyse by pe∣naūce, that he made a seth and amen¦des to goddes pleasure. THE .CXCV. CHAPITER. IN ye story of thys noble prynce Edgare, I fynde wryten a sto¦ry, the whyche is alleged by the au∣thour, yt it shulde be done by a kyng of Syrye named Cambyses, in the tyme of the reygne of thys Edgare. But in that sayenge he varyeth frō other authours and wryters very farre / as Uincencius hystorialis, An¦toninus, Ranulphus and other. For all be it the sayde acte was done by ye sayd Cambyse, as the forenamed au¦thoure affermeth / yet it was by the sayd Cambyses executed, longe be∣fore the incarnacyon of Cryste. For thys Cambyses was the sonne of Ci¦rus kyng of Parsys and of Medis, whyche reygned ouer those prouyn∣ces about the yere of the worlde .iiii. thousand .lxx, before the commynge of Cryste folowyng the accompte of thys worke .xi. hundred yeres & .xxix. But it myghte be, yt the whyte mon∣ke that was authoure or wryter of this acte to the story of Edgare / was moued for the greate iustyce that he radde in the story of thys Edgare, thynkyng to enhaunce it by the rea∣son herof / where he sayth that in the tyme of thys Cābyses, a iudge was to hym accused and conuycte vppon the same accusacyon, that he hadde gyuen a wronge sentence by meane of takynge of mede. wherfore thys Cambyses to the terrour and fere of other / commaunded the sayde iudge to be flayne quycke, and the skynne to be spred ouer the place or stole of iudgement / and that done, made the sone of the foresayd iudge to sytte as iudge in the place, where hys fader before sat / wyth these verses wryten vppon the face of the sayde place of iudgement as foloweth. Sede sedens ista, iudex inflexibilis sta, A manibus reuoces munus, ab aure preces Sit tibi sucerna, sex, sux, pessis{que} paterna Qua recedes natus, pro patre sponte datus. whyche verses maye be englysshed in maner and fourme as foloweth. Thou that syttest in thys iudycyall place,
Sytte vp ryght, & holde thyne han∣des from mede, Thyne erys from prayer, & fauoure from the chace / Let lawe be thy gyde, kepe iustyce in thy rede. Thy faders skynne, whych doth thy chayer sprede, Haue in thy mynde, fall not to lyke offence Leste for thy faute thou make lyke recompence. AS I haue before shewed this acte was put in execucyon ye xi.C. yere and odde before the com∣mynge of Cryste. And syns the sayd cōmynge or incarnacyon haue expy∣red .xv. hundred yeres & more / which all maketh ouer two thousande .vi. hundred yeres. In all whyche tyme I haue nat radde in any cronycle of thys lande nor other where, that any iudge hath ben put to lyke sentence. wherfore it is to presuppose, that in the lawes bothe spyrytuall & tempo¦rall / all iudges haue wel borne these verses in mynde, and exercysed them in mynystrynge of dewe iustyce, as perfytely as theyr cusshons had ben fresshely lyned wyth the foresayde skinne / & emprīted so narowly these verses in the boke of theyr cōscience, that they in all theyr iudgementes set asyde all parcyalyte and fauour / and holde theyr handes from all me∣des and rewardes / so that now it is thus wyth more, or ellys thus it shulde be. THE .CXCVI. CHAPITER. EDwarde the sonne of Edgare and of hys fyrste wyfe named Egelfleda / beganne hys reygn ouer thys realme of Englande, in the yere of our lorde .ix. hundred and .lxxvii / and the .xii. yere of Lothayre than kynge of Fraunce. ye shall vnderstand that after the deth of Edgare / stryfe arose amonge the lordes for admyssyon of theyr kyng. For Elfryda or Estrylde with Alphrede duke of Mercia / made dy∣uers frendes to haue her sonne Egel¦redus promoted to that dygnite, a chylde of .vii. yeres of age, that she & he myghte haue the rule of the land. But holy Dunstane wyth ayde of other bysshoppes, and of the erle of eest Englande or Essex / wythstode so that doynge, that he crowned thys Edwarde kynge at ye towne of Kyn∣gestowne / to the greuous dysplea∣sure of hys sayd moder Elfryda and other of her affynyte. In the tyme of thys Edward ap¦pered stella cometa, a blasing sterre / wherafter ensued many inconueny∣ences as well to men as to bestes, as sykenesse, hunger, moreyne, & other lyke myseryes. But none of this fyll in the dayes of this Edwarde, but af¦ter hys deth. The forenamed Alphe∣rus duke of Mercia, whyche in all thynges fauoured mych the dedes of the quene / put out ye monkes at wyn¦chester, that kyng Edgare as before is shewed had there set in / & brought in for theym wanton clerkes / or as Ranulphe sayth clerkes wyth con∣cubynes. But Dunstane and the erle of Essex wythsayde that doyng / and helde agayne the duke and suche as fauoured hys partye. For the whych arose greate stryfe bytwene the pre∣stes and the monkes of Englande. For ye clerkes that were before tyme put out by Edgare / sayd that it were a wretched and cursed dede, that a newe comon company vnknowen shulde put out olde landysmen from theyr place / nor it shulde not be plea∣syng to god yt had graunted ye place to the olde wōner / nor no good man ought to alowe suche doynge, for the ensample that therof myght ensewe.
The monkes sayde yetCryste alowed nother the olde dweller, nor yet the persone. But who so wolde take the crosse of penaunce vppon hym, and folow Cryste in vertuous lyuynge / he shulde be hys dyscyple. For thys was holden a generall counsayle of bysshoppes and all the clergy of the land at wynchester / where holy Dū∣stane helde wyth the vertuous. And whyle they were there in greate ar∣gument for thys mater, as dyuers wryters testyfyē / a rode there beyng or standynge in the wall spake myra¦culously, and sayd that Dunstanes wayes was good and trewe. But for all thys the stryfe seased not. In so mych that a new assemble of the cler¦gye and other was appoynted after at a place called the strete of Calue / where the counsayle was kept in an vpper lofte. In thys counsayle Dū∣stane was greuously despysed and rebuked of some vnskylfull mē. But yet he kept hys opynyon grounded vpon iustyce and vertue. And whyle they were there in thys greate dyuy∣syon and argument, whyche waye shulde be admytted and alowed / so∣deynly the ioystes of the lofte fayled, and the people fell downe, so yt many were slayne & greuously hurte. But holy Dunstane escaped, wyth fewe other that toke hys partye vnhurte. This wonder with the other, caused sylence amonges them that entēded to maynteyne this foresayd quarell / so that Dunstane had all hys wyll. Thus passynge the tyme of the reygne of Edwarde the kynge / he came vppon a season from huntyng in the forest or woode after some wry¦ters, nere to the castell of Corfe in ye west countre. where he losynge hys company and seruauntes, resorted vnto the castell before sayd / where at that tyme hys moder with her sonne Egelred{us} kept her housholde. whan the quene was warned of hys com∣mynge / anone she called to a seruaūt of hers whych she mych trusted, and tolde to hym all her counsayle / shew∣ynge to hym forther how he shulde behaue hym in accomplysshynge of her wyll and mynde. And that done / she went towarde the kynge, and re∣ceyued hym wyth all outwarde glad¦nesse / and desyred hym to tary wyth her that nyght. But he in curteyse maner excused hym selfe / & for spede desyred to drynke vpon hys horse syt¦tyng, ye whych was shortly brought. And whyle the cuppe was at hys mouth / the seruaunt before of the quene enfourmed, strake hym to the herte wyth a sworde or a longe dag∣ger sharpe on both sydes. After whi∣che stroke by the kynge receyued / he toke the horse wyth the spores and ranne towarde the place that he was comen fro, or ellys suche waye as he supposed to mete of hys company. But he bled so sore that for fayntnes he fyll from hys horse, hys one fote beynge faste in the styrroppe. By rea¦son wherof he was drawen of ye horse ouer wayes and feldes, tyll he came to a place named than Corysgate, where he was founden dede. And for ye maner of hys deth was vnknowē▪ and also he for kynge not knowen / he was buryed vnworthely at the towne of warehm̄, and there rested by the terme of .iii. yeres after. In whyche tyme and season god shewed for hym dyuers myracles / as syghte to the blynde, helthe to the syke, and herynge to ye defe, wyth dyuers other whyche I ouer passe. wherof herynge hys stepmoder, began to take repentaunce, and en∣tended to vysyte hym by way of pyl∣grymage. But how or for what cau∣se she entended inwardly I can nat saye / but the horse or beest yt she rode vpon, myght not nyghe ye place / by a
certayne space, for betynge or any other thynge that to hym myght be done by man. But after this by her meanes he was translated from thēs to Septon̄, that now is called Shaf¦tesbury / & there buried with great ho¦nour. But syn that tyme parte of his bodye was translated to the abbaye of Leof besyde Hereforde in the edge of walys / and some parte therof to Abyndon̄. And yt is reported that at Shaftesbury remayne hys lunges / and ben shewed in the place that is called Edwardysstowe. For the murder of this blessed man / yt is sayde as before is shewed in the story of Edgar, that his stepmother foūded two monasteryes of women / ye one at Ambrisbury, and that other at warwell. In the whyche place of warwell in her latter dayes, she refu¦synge the pompe of the worlde, helde there a solytary and strayte lyfe / and ended her lyfe wyth great penaunce and repentaunce, and was there bu∣ryed when she dyed. Thus as ye haue harde was this vertuous yonge kynge Edwarde martyred, whē he had reygned after most wryters .iiii. yeres, leuyng none yssue / wherfore the rule of the lande fyll to Egelredus his brother. THE .CXCVII. CHAPITER. EGelredus the sonne of Edgar and Alfrida or Estryld his last wyfe / beganne his reygne ouer En∣glande, in the yere of our lorde .ix hū¦dred & .lxxxi / and the .xxvi. yere of Lo¦thayre then kynge of Fraunce. This is named of some wryters E∣theldredus, and in the englyshe cro∣nycle Eldrede. In whose begynnyng the grounde waxed bareyne / and all myseryes before bodyd by the appe∣rynge of the blasynge starre, in the dayes of Edwarde the martyr, nowe beganne to take place and encreace vppon the erth. This as the other of his {pro}genytours, was crowned kyng at Kyngestone, of the holy archbys∣shoppe Dunstane, and of Oswalde archebyshop of yorke. To whome as yt is redde in the lyfe of saynt Dun∣stane amonges his prophecyes / that in the day of his coronacyon, he sayd vnto the kynge: for thou comest to this kingdome by the deth of thy bro¦ther, in whose deth Englyshemen cō¦spyred with thy wykked moder / they shall not be wythout blood shedynge and sworde, tyll there come people of vnknowen tunge, and brynge them into thraldome. And thys trespace shall not be clensyd wythoute longe vengeaunce. Of this Egelred{us} wryters agreen, that he was goodly of shappe and of vysage / but that was mynged wyth lechery and cruelty. It is also redde that when holy Dunstane shuld cry∣sten hym / as he helde hym ouer the fonte, he felyd the holy lyker wyth ye fruyte of his wombe. wherfore holy Dunstane sware by god and by hys mother / this shalbe vnkynde to god and his chyrche. whych fayled not in his forth goynge / for he was vngra¦cyous in his begynnynge, wretched in ye myddell of his lyfe, and hatefull to men in the ende therof. In the seconde yere of his reygn / a cloude was sene in Englande, the whyche appered halfe lyke blood, & the other halfe lyke fyre / and chaun∣ged after into sundry colours, & dys∣aperyd at the laste. In the thyrd yere of his reygn, ye Danys aryued in sun¦dry places of his lande / as in the yle of Thanet besyde Kente, in Corne∣wayll, and Sussex, and dyd in those costes myche harme. And after some of theym came to London / but there they were put of. How be yt they de∣stroyed a great part of Chestershyre.
And in the ende of the same yere, a great parte of the cytye of London was wasted with fyre. But how it be¦ganne myne authour myndeth not. But ye shall vnderstand, that at this daye the cytye of London had moste housynge and buyldynge from Lud¦gate towarde westmester / and lytell or none where ye chefe or herte of the cytye is nowe / excepte in dyuers pla¦ces was housing, but they stode with oute order. So that many townes and cytyes, as Caunterbury, yorke, and other dyuers in Englande / pas∣sed London in buyldynge at those days, as I haue sene or knowē by an olde boke somtyme in the Guyldehal of London named Domys day. But after the cōquest yt encreaced & short¦ly after passed & excelled all ye other. About the .viii. yere of this kyn∣ges reygne / the kynge maryed erle Egbertus doughter named Ethelgi¦na or Elgina. Of the whyche in pro∣cesse of time he receyued a son named Edmunde, whyche after was surna¦med Ironsyde / and .ii. other sonnes named Edwyn and Ethylstane, and a doughter named Edgina. In this pastyme dyed saynt Ethil∣walde byshop of wynchester. He was borne in wynchester, and noryshed vnder holy Dunstane at Glastenbu¦ry, and there shorne monke / and af∣ter was chosen abbot of Abyndon, in the tyme of the reygne of kynge Edredus. And in the tyme of Edgar he was sacryd byshoppe of wynche∣ster / where he made an abbay of nun∣nes, and translated saynt Swythy∣nes body out of the erth. After whyche sayde Ethelwalde, ho¦ly Alphegus abbot then of Bathe was sacred byshoppe of wynchester / the whyche after was archebishoppe of Caunterbury, and martyred haste¦ly of the cruell Danys, as after shall be shewed. About the .ix. yere of Egelredus / for stryfe yt was betwene the byshop of Rochester and hym, he wyth his knyghtes beseged the sayde cytye. wherof holy Dūstane sent to ye kyng, amonyssynge hym that he shulde re∣frayne hym of that cruelty, & suffre ye byshop and his citye in peace, oneles that he offended saynte Andrewe pa∣trone of that citye. But this message mylded nothyng ye kynges courage. Then thys blessed man sent to hym a hundred pounde in gold, wyllyng hym to refrayne of that outrage / the whyche he receyued and brake the syege. Then blessyd Dunstane sente this message to the kyng: For thou haste preferred golde before god, and syluer before the apostle, and coue∣tyse before me / right so euyll happes shall come vnto the, but not whyle I am in lyfe. But the kynge toke lytell regarde to those wordes, but conty∣nued in his insolent & cursed dedes. About the .xi. yere of his reygne, dy∣ed that blessed archbyshoppe saynte Dunstane. Of whom Ranulff in the xiii. chapyter of his .vi. boke of Po∣licronycon, maketh rehersall of dy∣uers of his vertues and myracles / the whyche I passe ouer, and the ra∣ther bycause his legēde or lyfe is ma¦nyfest. Siricus was archbyshop af∣ter hym, & after hym wulricus. And after wulricus, blessed Elpheg{us} was archbyshop of that see. It was not longe after the deth of holy Dunstane, but that the Danys perced England in many and sondry places of the lande / in suche wyse that the kynge was to seke, to which coste he shuld go fyrst to wythstande his enymyes. And in conclusyon in auoydynge of more harme / he was compellyd to appeace theym wyth great summes of money. But when ye money was spent / they fyll to new robbynge of the people. Then the
kynge graunted more money. But for all that the Danys robbed and spoyled ye coūtrey of Northūberlād, and besyeged London at the laste. And for augmentacyon of the kyn∣ges sorowe / Elfricus that then was mayster or admyrall of the kynges nauy, fled as a false traytour. And after that recōcyled & fled the second tyme to the Danys. wherfore ye kyng in wreche of the father / commaūded the eyen of his sonne Algarus, to be plucked or done out of his hedde. But whyle this persecucion thus contynued / by meanes of the holy byshoppe of wynchester Elphegus, a peace was concluded for a tyme be¦twene the kyng and the Danys. And the prynce or chefe captayne of them named Aulaff, was so exorted by the said holy byshop / yt he became a cristē man, to whome the kynge was god∣father / so that after the sayde Aulaff retorned to his owne, without doyng of more harme / so that for a whyle the warre of Danys seased. But whyle that rested / the blody flyx wyth a brennynge feuer vexed the people thorough the lande, that myche folke therof dyed. Contynuynge whyche mysery / the Danys agayne assayled the lande, & dyd in dyuers places great harme / so that for lacke of a good hed or go¦uernour, many thynges in the land peryshed. For the lordes were at such dyssencyon that one with that other / that when they were assembled to speke or treate of peace betwene that one lorde and that other, and yf any good thynge were dyuysed for the hurte of theyr enymyes / anone the Danys were warned therof by some of the same counsayll. wherof were suspected Elfricus and Edricus. And to this sorowe was ioyned hun¦ger and penury amonges the com∣mons, that eueryche of theym was constrayned to plucke and stele from other / so that what by the pyllage of the Danys, and inwarde theuys and brybours, this lande was broughte in great mysery and myschefe. THE .CXCVIII. CHAPITER. EGelredus then wrapped in mi¦sery / lefte not to gader of hys subiectes what he myght, as well by vnlaufull meanes as otherwyse. For as sayth Ranulfe myne authour / he wold for fayned or small causes, dys∣heryte mē of theyr possessyōs / & after cause men to redeme theyr owne for great summes of money. And ouer that he walowed in lechery, gyuyng hym to all vycyous and incontynent lyfe of his body. By whych vngracy¦ous meanes, he brought this land in such ruyne, that what he myght not helpe by strēgth, he warred wyth mo¦ney. So yt from the fyrst entre of the Danys as testyfyeth Policronica in the .xviii. chapyter of his .vi. boke, & also Guydo wyth other authours / that from the fyrst trybute of .x. thou sande pounde, he broughte yt at the laste in processe of .v. or .vi. yeres to xl. thousande pounde. The whyche yerely durynge his lyfe and after, to the commynge of saynte Edwarde, was leuyed of his subiectes / and na∣med for the contynuance therof Da∣ne gelt. whyche is or was to meane money payde to the Danys, or short¦ly, Dane money. In this tyme as yt were about the xv. yere of his reygne, dyed saynt Os¦walde the archbyshoppe of Caunter¦bury. And soone after dyed Ethelgi∣na the quene. And the body of saynte Cuthbert was translated from holy ylande to Durham / in the whyche yle he helde anankers lyfe, as yt is before shewyd in the storye of Cad∣walader.
Thus contynuynge this lande vn¦der the greuous tribute of the Da∣nys, and also by susteynynge of ma∣ny villanyes and iniuryes by the En¦glyshe men of the sayde Danys, as after somdele shall appere / this Egel¦redus by counsayll of his famylyers about the .xxi. yere of hys reygn / ma∣ryed Emma ye doughter of Rychard duke of Normandy, before mynded in the storye of Lewys the .v. and Lothayre hys sonne kynges of Fraūce. The whyche Rycharde was the thyrde duke of Normandy, and the fyrste that name / and also was sur¦named Rycharde wythoute fere or the hardy / as more of hym shall be shewyd in the storye of the .vi. Lewis kynge of Fraunce. By reason of maryenge of this Em¦ma, whych in ye Frenche cronycle is named the flowre of Normandye / thys Egelredus was greatly enhaū¦ced in hys owne mynde. By presum¦pcyon wherof he sent into all good burghes, cytyes, and townes of his lande, secrete and strayte commys∣syons / chargynge the rulers that vppon a certayne day, that is to say vppon the daye of saynte Bryce at an houre assygned in euery place of hys lande, the Danys shulde be so∣deynly slayne. And so yt was done. And as the cōmon fame telleth, yt this murder beganne at a lytell towne in Hertefordeshyre, wythin xxiiii. myles of London called wele∣wyn̄ or welwyn̄. For the whyche dedeyt toke fyrst that name / as who wolde wene, that the wele of the coū∣trey was there fyrste wonne. But who that well cōsydereth the sequell of thys storye / shall fynde lytell wyn¦nynge or weale ensuyenge of thys dede. But or I procede further / here I wyll touche somewhat of the pryde and abusyō of ye Danis, that they ex∣ercysed in Englande, in some parte therof, as I haue sene in an olde cro¦nycle, wherof the authoure ys vn∣knowen. There it is shewyd, that the Danys by strength caused husbande men to ere and sowe the lande, and do all other vyle laboure that belon∣ged to husbandrye / and the Dane helde hys wyfe at hys pleasure, with doughter and seruaunt. And when the husbandeman came home / he shulde scantly haue of hys owne as seruaūtes had, so that the Dane had all hys commaundement, and ete and dranke hys fyll of the beste / whē the owner hadde scantely hys fyll of the worste. And ouer that the comon people were so of theym oppressyd / that for fere and drede, they called theym in euery suche house as they hadde rule of, Lorde Dane. But in processe of tyme, after the Danys were voyded the lande / thys worde Lord Dane, was in de∣rysyon and despyte of the Danys, turned by the Englyshemen into a name of opprobrye and called Lur∣dayne / whyche to our dayes ys not forgotten. But when one Englyshe∣mā woll rebuke an other / he woll for the more rebuke call hym Lurdayn. Then to retourne to our fyrste mater. Treuthe yt is that when the Danys were thus murdred thorugh Englande / tydynges therof sprange into Denmarke. whyche kyndeled in theym suche a fury / that the kyng therof named Swanus, assembled shortely a great hoste and nauye of Danys, and in shorte processe after landed in Cornewayll. And by trea∣son of a Norman named Hugh, why∣che by fauoure of the quene Emma was made erle of Deuenshyre / the sayd Swanus toke Exetour, and af¦ter bette downe the wallys. Then he entred further into the lande. In whyche season the kynge
sent vnto Edric{us} / chargyng hym to assemble the weste Saxons, and to wythstande the further entre of the Danys. The whyche accordynge to his commyssyon assembled the weste Saxōs / and made good contenaūce to wythstand the sayd enymyes. But when the hostes shulde ioyne / were it for fere or for treason, he fayned hym syke and fled from hys people. The whych for lacke of an hed were fayn to gyue backe / to theyr hurte, and to theyr enimyes great auauntage and comforte. wherfore the Danys resorted then to wylton̄ and Shyrborn̄ / and anon spoyled both those townes, and there refresshed theym. But for Swanus had wittynge that the kynge was cō¦myng towarde hym wyth the power of his lande / he therfore departed thens and retourned wyth great pyl¦lage to his shyppes / & sayled aboute the lande, and lastely landed in Nor∣folke. where he wastynge and spoy∣lynge the countrey / came in processe vnto the cytye of Norwyche and rob¦bed and spoyled yt / and after yode to Thetforde, and dyd lykewise to that towne, and fyred yt and destroyed ye countrey nere there about. But soone after a noble man of that countrey called duke Uskatell mette wyth the hoste of Danys, and gaue vnto them an hard and sharpe batayll / and slewe many of the eny∣myes and put them backe. For this, and for hūger that then assailed this lande / Swanus returned ofte vnto his shyppes, & departed agayne into Denmarke, & taryed there all ye wyn¦ter folowynge. In whyche season he made great prouysyon to reenter the lande of Englande. THE .CXCIX. CHAPITER. ABout the .xxvi. yere of the rey¦gne of Egelredus the forena¦med Swanus with a stronge army, landed at Sandwyche / and spoyled all the coūtrey nere vnto the see syde, and rested hym there tyll he harde of an armye cōmynge agayn hym. And when he was ware therof, he retour∣ned to his shyppes agayne / and he∣rynge the kyng was farre westward, he landed in Sussex, and spoyled yt wonder sore. And when he there was warned of the cōmynge of a batayll of Englyshemen, anon he toke shyp¦pynge agayne. So that when the en¦glyshemen wende to haue met wyth them in one coste / then wolde they so¦daynly lande in a nother. And when ye kyng prouyded to mete wyth thē vppon the see / other they wold fayne to flee, or ellys they shulde wyth gyf¦tes blynde the admyrall of the kyn∣ges nauy. By whyche subtylytye and crafty meanes, they weryed and tyred the hoste of Englyshmē. And where euer they went / they slew, brent, and rob∣bed wythout compassyon and pytye. The kynge then beyng at Shrewes¦bury, & herynge of the great sleyght and cruelty of the Danys / called his counsayll to rede what were beste to be done for ye defence of his enmyes. where it was concluded, that ye kyng to haue peace with the Danys, shuld pay vnto them .xxx. thousande poūd. But whyle this was in doynge, the Danys destroyed a grete part of Ba¦roke or Barkshyre. when this peace was thus made / Swanus wyth his company retour¦ned into Denmarke. And ye yere fo∣lowynge / the kynge made Edricus forenamed duke of Mercia. Thys Edricus was of lowe byrth, ryche, of tunge false, and subtyll of wyt, softe and eloquēt of speche, vntrusty and false of thoughte and promyse / as of hym somdeale before is shewyd, and after more shall appere.
In the .xxvii. yere of Egelredus / a prynce of Danys named Turkyllus landed in Kent. The whyche so gre∣uously warred in that coūtrey / that the Kentyshemen were fayn to make theyr peace, and so departed. And yet the persecucyon of Danys seased not. For in one countre of En¦glande or other / they euer in whylys robbed & pilled the Englishmen. So yt all the coūtrey a longe the coste, frō the Northe parte of Englande vnto the yle of wyghte / was by theym de∣stroyed or hugely sette a backe. And when the kynge entended to make prouysyon for to wythstande theym / euer Edricus wolde counsayll hym to the contrarye / shewynge hym that he shulde spende hys treasour & tra∣uayle his people in vayne. By mean wherof the Danys entred .l. myles wythin the lande / and brent and rob¦bed by dyuers tymes many vylages & townes. So that they encreased & waxed passynge ryche / and the En∣lyshemen nedy, bare, & poore. Thus contynuynge this mysery / Swanus or after the englyshe Swayne then beyng in Denmarke, and heryng of the encreace of his people within En¦glande / repented hym of his former couenauntes, and thought yt the hole domynyon of Englād shulde belong to hym of ryght. For the whyche he prepared his armye & nauy in moste defensyble wyse / and sped hym into England, & to the ryuer of Humber, and landed in Northumberlande. where the erle or ruler of that coun¦trey wyth all the rulers of the same, sware feaute vnto the sayde Swa∣nus, and promysed to kepe that coun¦trey vnto hys vse. And when he had done hys wyll in that coste / he en∣tred agayne the water, and by the ry¦uer of Trent he passed to Gaynys∣burghe, and so by North watlyng∣strete / and subdued the inhabytaun∣tes of that coūtrey, and forced theym to gyue vnto hym pledges. whyche pledges, wyth also his nauy / he be∣toke vnto Canutus his sonne, whyle, he wente farther into the lande. And that done, he wyth his▪ people kepte on his iourney tyl he▪ came into Mer¦cia, kyllynge and slayeng the men of that prouynce / And reserued the women to vnclene lyuynge, as well the relygyous as other / and toke by strength wynchester and Oxenford, and dyd in them what he lyked. And after he hadde thus passed the lande / he drewe the nexte waye to∣warde London. But in passynge the ryuer of Thames he loste some parte of hys people / other for lacke of a brydge or for ieopardynge theyr pas¦sage vnauysely. And so in processe he came vnto London / where at that tyme kynge Egelredus was. wher∣fore Swanus lefte the cytye, and drewe into Kente, and so towarde Caunterbury wythoute lette, wel∣dynge the countrey at hys wyll / and lastely beseged that cytye. The why∣che manfully defended theyr eny∣myes by the space of .xx. dayes. whyche syege beganne vpon the day of saynte Mathewe in the moneth of September, and endured as is a∣boue sayde / and then taken by the treason of a deken named Almari∣cus / the whyche beforetyme blessed Elphegus then archebyshop of that see, hadde preserued from deth. Then the Danys fyred the cytye when they before had spoyled it / and toke the archebyshop and put him in strayte pryson. And the monkes of saynt Augustynes abbey they tythed that is to meane they slew .ix. by cruel torment, and the tenth they kepte a lyue / the whych after was solde and sette to all seruyle laboure. And as wytnessyth Antoninus or Uyncent hystoryall / they slewe and broughte
in seruage ouer the summe of .ix. hun¦dred persones of relygyon / they slew of men, women, & chyldren, beyonde the nōber of .viii. thousand. As with myche more cruelty yt is shewyd, in the .vii. chapyter of the .xvi. tytle of the worke of the sayde Antoninus. And fynally for this blessed man El∣phegus wolde not condescende to gyue vnto them as sayth Policroni∣ca .iii. thousande pounde / after they had kept hym in harde pryson by the space of .vii. monethes, vppon an Ester euē they after many vylanyes to hym done at Grenewyche wythin thre myles of London, they stoned hym to deth. where he lay in the feld vnburyed a certayne of tyme / and af¦ter caryed to London, and buryed re¦uerētly in the chyrch of saynt Paule. But afterward in tyme of Canutus, he was taken vp agayne and caryed to his owne chyrche. Of this blyssed Elphegus Antoninus and also Poli¦cronicon shewen many vertues and myracles / the whyche I passe ouer for lengthynge of the tyme. THE .CC. CHAPITER. IN this pastyme, kynge Egelre¦dus ferynge the ende of thys persecucyon / sent Emma the quene wyth her two sonnes Alphrede and Edwarde, vnto Rycharde the second of ye name, then fourth duke of Nor∣mandy, whych was brother vnto the sayde Emma / wyth whome also he sent the byshoppe of London. About the .xxxiiii. yere of the reygne of Egelredus / the Danis when they hadde wonne a great part of the coū¦trey of westsaxon, retorned agayn to¦warde London. wherof herynge the Londoners sent vnto theym certayn gyftes and pledges. In all thys season myne authoure maketh no mynde, that euer the king gaue vnto the Denys any notable batayll / but kepte hym in holdes or places, for his owne sauegarde, and lytell fruyte or profyte to his lande. At the laste he was chaced vnto the yle of wyghte / where wyth a secrete companye, he helde a great parte of the wynter / and fynally wythout ca∣tall or comforte, sayled ouer to hys wyfe into Normādy / and there held hym a certayne of tyme. whan Swanus was ascertayned of the departynge of Egelredus out of the lande, he was enflamed wyth excedynge pryde / so that he arrered excedynge imposycyons of the peo∣ple, and greued them wonderfully. And amonges other of his tyrānyes he asked a great summe of money of saynt Edmundes landes. whych the rulers denayed / for so myche as they claymed to be free of all kynges try∣bute. For thys he entred the terytory of saynte Edmunde, and wasted and spoyled the countrey / and ouer that despysed that holy martyr, wyth ma¦nassyng of the place of his sepulture. wherfore the men of that countrey fe¦rynge this tyraunt, gaue them to fa∣stynge and prayer / so that shortly af∣ter he was stycked in an euenynge a∣monges his knyghtes, with ye sword of saynte Edmunde in the towne of Shetforde as sayth Guydo / but af∣ter Policronicon & other in the town of Gaynesborugh. where he dyed wyth yellynge and cryenge the thyrd daye after. In fere wherof, Canutus hys son after that he was kynge, closed in ye land of that holy martyr with a depe dyche / and graunted to the inhaby∣tauntes therof great fredam, & quyt them of all kyngly taske or trybute. And after buylded a chyrch ouer the place of his sepulture / and ordeyned there an house of munkes, & endued them wyth fayre possessyons. And af¦ter
yt was vsed that kynges of En∣gland when they were crowned, sent for an offerynge theyr crownes vnto saynte Edmundes shryne / and rede∣med them aftewardes wyth a condy¦gne pryce. when Egelredus hadde wrytynge of the deth of Swanus / by procure∣ment of his frendes / he made mea∣nes to retourne to hys owne. By whose meanes he was sent for, wyth condycyon that he shulde refourme his olde condycyons. Ad for perfour¦maūce of the same, he sent his son Ed¦warde into Englande before hym. And in the lent folowynge the kyng came hym selfe, and wyth his people sped hym towarde Lyndesey. where Canutus was at that tyme resseaūt, not prouyded of the kynges so hasty commynge. wherfore he beynge not purueyed to wythstande the kynge, fledde into Sandewyche in Kente. And for he there proued suche persones as be∣fore tyme his fader and he hadde ta¦ken pledges of, & fande them not per¦seueraunt in theyr {pro}misses / he made to be cutte of all the noses and hādes of the sayd Englyshe people, and say¦led into Denmarke when he had do / and retourned the nexte yere wyth a great nauy, and sayled about ye land, and toke prayes in the South coun¦trey. wherof the kynges eldest sonne named Edmunde, made prouysyon wyth ye ayde of Edricus to go agayn hym. But when he shulde haue met with Edric{us} at a place assigned & his host, he was of hym dysceyued / wher¦fore he was compelled to gyue place to his enymyes. And as yt was after knowen, the sayde Edricus had pro∣mysed his fauour and ayde vnto the sayde Canutus. By reason wherof Canutus entred the countre of west Saxon / and for∣sed them to swere to him feauty, and to gyue vnto him pledges / and other countreys adioynyng dyd the same. In this seasan Egelredus beyng at London, was taken wyth a gre∣uous sykenes & dyed / and was there buryed in the chyrch of saynt Paule, where at this day in ye North yle be∣hynde the quere, apperyth in the wal a token of hys sepulture / whyche rey¦gned, or as say Policronicon & other, beseged Englande, by the terme of xxxvi. yeres full / leuynge after hym a sonne named Edmunde Iron syde ouer Alphrede and Edwarde sonnes of Emma. Francia. THE .CCI. CHAPITER. LEwys the .vi. of that name & son of Lothayre / be∣gan hys reygne ouer Fraunce, in the yere of our lor¦des incarnacyon ix. hundred and lxxxvi / and the .v. yere of Egelredus than kyng of England. Of y• whiche other for hys youth or for the short∣nesse of hys reygne, lytell of hys de∣des is laft in memory / excepte that ye Frenche boke wytnessyth, that for he hadde none issue, and Hugh Capet before in the story of Lothayre myn∣ded, was hys famylyer and chyefe coūsayler / he shuld therfore ordeyne and admytte the sayd Hugh for hys heyre. But more verely as before is touched in the aboue named story, & in the ende therof, thys Hugh was stronge and myghty, and in the later dayes of Lothayre coueted the rule of the lande. wherfore after the deth of this Lewys, for so mych as he laft no chyld after hym / he than hauyng ye chyefe rule of Fraunce, by strength and power made hym selfe kynge.
But for I promysed in the story of Egelredus, somwhat to shewe of Rycharde the fyrst of that name and thyrde duke of Normandye / I shall somdele length thys story wyth the story of the sayd Rycharde. Thys Rycharde as afferme all wryters, was named Rychard wythout fere. And for thys cause that foloweth, as testyfyeth the Frenche boke. He vsed mych to byd hys bedys for all crystē soules. And vpon a nyght whan he had longe watched / he entred a chyr¦che, where stode a corps vnburyed & no man watchynge it. And whyle he sayd hys orysons for that soule and other / he layed hys gloues vppon a deske by hym. And whan he had en∣ded hys deuocyons, he went out of ye chyrche for gettynge hys gloues be∣hynde. But shortly after he remem∣bred hym of them / and retorned to∣warde the chyrche for to fetche hys sayd glouys. whan he came at the chyrch dore / he founde ye corps there standynge, wyth hys armes spradde abrode, and makynge greate noyse and crye. wherfore the duke made ye sygne of ye crosse in hys forehed, and coniured the corps that he shulde re∣ste, but all was in vayne. wherof the duke drewe hys sword and stroke at the corps, and to hys thynkyng par∣ted hym in two peces. And that done entred the chyrche, fet hys glouys, & so departed. And for this chaunce he ordeyned after thorough hys realme that a corps shulde be watched the fyrste nyght or lenger, as men hadde deuocyon. which gyse was somtyme vsed in Englande, and begon of the Normans as men may coniecture, after they had fyrste conquered thys lande. Polycronycon sheweth in the .vii. chapyter of hys .vi. boke, that thys duke Rycharde dremed on a nyght that a monke of the house of saynte Audoenus in Roan, as he went to∣warde hys lemman by nyght / fyll be¦syde a brydge and was drowned. whose soule after was in stryfe by∣twene an angell and a fende. The whyche after a longe stryfe / condes∣cended to put the iudgement in duke Rycharde. Than the duke gaue sen∣tence, that the soule shuld be restored agayne to the body / and then ye body to be set vppon ye brydge that before he was fallen fro. And yf he than went to hys lemman he shuld be the fendes / and yf nat, he shulde than be saued. And whan thys sentence was put in execucyon, the monke fledde vnto the chyrche therby. Uppon the morne whan the duke awoke, & cal∣led thys vysyon to hys memory / to knowe the certaynte therof, he went vnto the sayd chyrche, and fande the monke there hys clothes yet wete / & after went to the abbot of that place, and tolde to hym all thys dede, ad∣uertysynge hym to take better ouer∣syght of hys flocke. To these narracyons the herers may gyue credence as them lyketh. For they be nother in the pystle nor yet in the gospell. All be it Antonin{us} archbysshop of Florence, whan he re¦herseth any lyke narracyons, whych he thynketh somwhat doutefull / he ioyneth these wordes and sayth, piū¦est credere. The thyrde narracyon is tolde of thys duke / whych by all pre∣sumpcyon was regestred of some wo¦men scrybe. Thys duke wyth Gun∣nore hys wyfe, lyued longe whyle a dyshonest lyfe, and contrary to the lawes of the chyrch. wherof his peo∣ple murmured sore / so that at length by the holsome doctryne of some of hys clerkes or spyrytuall men, he ma¦ryed her to hys lawfull wyfe. The fyrste nyght after ye weddynge / were it in game or otherwyse, the duchesse torned her buttocke in ye dukes lappe as
she before tyme hadde neuer done. whan the duke frayned the cause of her so doyng / for now (sayd she) may I do what me lyketh / where before I myghte do but what you lyked. Upon thys Gunnore he gate besyde other chylder, Emma that was the wyfe of Egelred{us} as before ye haue harde / and dyed whan he had ruled Normandy by the terme of .lii. yeres. Than to retourne to the .vi. Le∣wys kyng of Fraunce, from whome we haue made a longe dygressyon / as wytnesseth mayster Gagwyne he dyed in the yere of our lorde .ix. hun∣dred .lxxxix, whē he had reygned. iii. yeres / and was buryed at Cōpayne. ye shall vnderstande that this Le¦wys was the last kynge of the blode of Pepyn. And for I promysed be∣fore to shewe the dyscent of the sayde Pepyn, to the ende that ye maye the better know thys story / and also to knowe the kynges of Fraunce from the kynges of Germany, which both discended of thys Pepyn: hereafter I shall more clerely set it out in braū¦ches. But fyrste I woll expresse the kynges of Fraunce as they reygned lynially / and ioyne to eyther of them the terme that he reygned, that there by it maye appere howe longe thys blode continued in ye house of Fraunce, or it were empeched by Hugh Ca∣pet, as after appe∣reth. The yeres. Pepyn. xviii. Charlys. xlvii. Lewys the fyrste. xxvi. Charlys the Ballyd. xxxvii. Lewys balbus. ii. Lewys and Charlys. v. Lewys the fourth. viii. Eudo. ix. Charlys the symple. xvii. Radulphus. xii. Lewys vnus. xxi. Lotharius. xxx. Lewys the syxte. iii. OF the whyche kynges .ii. were not of that blode, as Eudo and Radulphus / but admytted of the ba¦rony of Fraunce to rule the lande, tyll two of that progeny / that is to meane Charlys the symple, and Le∣wys the .v, were comen to theyr law∣full age. So that from the fyrst yere of Pepyn, whyche began his reygne in the yere of grace .vii. hundred & .l. to the fyrst yere of Hugh Capet that began hys reygne in the yere of our lorde god .ix. hun∣dred and lxxxix / expyred or passed .ii. hun∣dred & .xxxix. yeres.
Pypyn the fader of Charlys the greate. Charlys the great emperour. Lowys the fyrste, emperour The kynges of Germany. Lothayre emperour / and the sonne of Le∣wys the fyrst. Lowys emperour the sonne of Lothayre. Lothayre the seconde the son of Lothayre. Charlys the .iii. and sonne of Lothayre. Lewys kyng of Ger¦many and broder vn∣to the sayd Lo∣thayre. Lewys the sonne of Lewys / whyche was broder vnto Charlys grossu emperour. Lewys the son of Le¦wys / which of some ys compted em∣perour. Arnusphus the sonne of Lewys emperour. Lewys the sonne of Arnulph, last empe¦rour of Fraunce. The kynges of Fraunce. Charlys the ballyd the sonne of Lewys the fyrst of hys .ii. wyfe emperour Lewys Balbus the son of Charlys the Ballyd Lewys & Charlys sonnes of Lewys Balbus. Lewys the .iiii. and son of the foresayd Charlys. Charlys the symple the sonne of Lewys the forth. Lewys the .v. and the sonne of Char∣lys the symple. Lothayre the sonne of the foresayde Lewys. Lewys the sonne of Lothayr / and the last kyng of that flock.
THE .CCII. CHAPITER. HUgh the sonne of Robert the tyraunt, descended of Hugh le¦graunde / beganne to take the rule, or to vsurpe the crowne of Fraunce, in the yere of our lorde .ix. hundred and .lxxxix / and the .viii. yere of Egel¦redus than kynge of Englande. Thys as wytnessyth the Frenche Cronycle was erle of Parys, and marshall of Fraunce. And as sayth Antoninus, he maryed one of the doughters of Edwarde the elder. Thys also was named Capet, for so myche as in hys youth / he vsed in game to laye asyde hys felowes ho∣des. In whose begynnyng / Charlys that was the brother to Lothayre, and vncle vnto Lewys the .vi. laste kynge, herynge of the deth of hys neuewe Lewys wythout issue / as nexte heyre, wyth ayde of some lor∣des of Fraunce, and also of Loreyn, the whyche than he was lorde of, gadered an army and entred Fraun∣ce / and than came to the cytye of La∣one. wythin whyche cytye / he wyth hys wyfe and people, by the treason of the bysshoppe of the same cytye, was taken and delyuered wyth hys wyfe and chylder into the handes of hys enemyes / the whyche sent them to Orleaunce there sauely to be kept. Than thys Hugh was crowned in the cytye of Rayns / and welded the lande wyth more suerty. How be it the erle of Flaunders named Ar∣nulphus or Arnolde before spoken of, wolde not be vnder hys obedy∣ence. wherfore thys Hugh assembled hys kynghtes / and by hys strength toke from hym the coutre of Artoys, wyth many stronge holdes and ca∣stels / and lastly forced the sayd Ar∣nolde to fle into Normandy, to aske ayde of Richarde the fyrste of that name, before spoken of in the story of the .vi. Lewys. By whose mea∣nes after some wryters / wyllyam Longa Spata fader to ye sayd duke Richarde was slayne. But that not wythstandynge, by frendshyp of the sayde duke Richarde, thys Arnolde was reconcyled vnto the kynge, and contynued after as hys subiecte. In the cytye of Rayns was arch bysshoppe at thys daye a noble pre∣late named Arnolde, sonne of baste of Lothayre, and neuewe to Char∣lys than prysoner, as before is tou∣ched. The whyche for malyce that the kynge bare vnto hym, for cause of the forenamed Charlys / called a counsayle of the clergy of hys lande, and layde agayne hym suche obiec∣cyons, that he by theyr assent was putte from that benefyce, and sente hym to Orlyaunce there also to be kepte in pryson. And set in hys place one Gylberte, or after the Frenche boke Gerbres, a connynge man in phylosophy / whiche had before tyme ben tutor or mayster to Robert sonne of the sayde Hugh. But after .iii. ye∣res / pope Iohn̄ the .xvi. of that name sent downe hys maundement vnto Guyan archebysshop of Sens / char¦gynge hym that he sholde remoue ye sayde Gerbers, and restore the sayde Arnolde to hys proper see. whyche was done shortely after / and ye sayde Gerbers was after this preferred by one of the Othons emperour vnto ye chyrche of Rauenne, and contynued there tyll the deth of the .xvii. Iohn̄. After whose deth he was electe pope of Rome / and was named the secōde Siluester, & lyued as pope .iiii. yeres Than it followeth in the story / whan thys Hugh had reygned full viii. yeares and more, he dyed in the yere of our lorde .ix. hundred .xciii. and was buryed at saynte Denys leuynge after hym a sonne named Robert.
THE .CCIII. CHAPITER. RObert the sonne of Hugh Ca∣pet, beganne his reygn, in the yere of our lord .ix. hundred & .xcviii / and the .xvii. yere of Egelredus then kynge of Englande. This was cōnynge in many scyen∣ces, and a man of good maner & ver¦tue. He made dyuers hymnes, sequen¦ces, & respondes / as O Iuda et Hie∣rusulem, O cōstantia martyrum, As sit nobis scti spūs gratia, or more cō∣gruely, Sancti spiritus assit nobis gratia, wyth dyuers other. In ye beginnyng of his reygn / while Bowcharde erle of Meleon̄ was at the kynges court, Galtyer or walter a knyghte and seruaunt of the sayde Bowcharde, to whom the sayd Bow¦charde hadde delyuered his castell of Meleon̄ to kepe in his absence / for great gyftes the sayde walter hadde delyuered the sayde castell unto Eu∣do erle of Carnotens. wherfore the kyng at the request of the sayd Bow¦charde, sente streyghte commaunde∣ment vnto the sayd Eudo / chargyng hym in all goodly wyse to restore the sayde castell vnto Bowcharde. The whyche commaundement he vtterly refused to obey. For ye whych ȳe kyng beyng so amoued / sent for Rycharde the seconde of that name, then .iiii. duke of Normandy / and wyth theyr both armyes besyeged the castell vp∣pon euery parte, and at length wan yt and toke the sayd walter wythin the same / whom the kinge for his vn¦trouthe commaunded soone after to be hanged vppon a gybet, and the ca¦stell to be restored vnto ye forenamed Bowcharde / and after returned eue¦ry man to his owne. In the tyme of the reygne of thys Robert / dyd Henry then duke of Burgoyne. The whyche for lacke of yssue of his body, bequethed his dukedome vnto kynge Robert. But the Burgonyons wythstode that le∣gacy / and drewe to theym for an hed & captayne Lawdry erle of Neuers / and wyth hym helde by strength or for a strength the cytye of Anxerre. wherof herynge kyng Robert / sente for the foresayde duke of Norman∣dye, and so spedde theym towarde Burgoyne and besyeged the forsayd cytye. But at length ye cytye was yol¦den / and Lawdry put at the kynges grace. And that done, the kyng with his hoste besyeged a nother stronge cytye called Aualon̄ / and not wyth∣out great daunger wanne yt also at length / and after receyued the coun∣trey wyth dew obeysaunce, and orde¦red yt at hys own pleasure, and so re¦tourned into Fraunce. Arnolde erle of Sens vsed great ty¦ranny amonges the byshoppes & my¦nysters of the chyrche. wherfore Leo¦phricus byshop of that see, thorough the ayde and counsayll of Regnalde byshop of Parys / put oute the sayde Arnolde, and delyuered the cytye vn¦to kynge Robert. But the brother of the sayde Arnolde with a certayne of his knyghtes, fled to the castell and yt helde wyth strength. wherfore the kynge layde syege to the sayd castel, and at length wan yt / and toke the brother of Arnolde named Fromōde and sent him to Orleaūce there to be prisoned, where he dyed shortly after This Robert as saith the frenche boke buylded fyrst ye castell of Moūt fort. He founded also dyuers mona∣steryes and tēples / and at Orleaūce the tēple of saint Anyan̄ / at Stamps a chyrche of our lady / & dyuers other in dyuers places of hys realme. And he endowed the chyrche of saynte De¦nys wyth many great lyberties / and hadde especyall deuocyon to saynte ypolyte ouer all other sayntes. It is radde of this kynge Robert,
that vppon a season when he hadde longe whyLe lyen at the syege of a ca¦stell nere vnto Orleaunce, and sawe yt was defuse to wynne be strength / he vpon ye daye of saynt Anyan yode vnto Orleaunce, & there in the quere bare a cope, and dyd helpe to synge the dyuyne seruyce. And after when he was in his deuocyōs in the masse whyle / when the preste was at the cō¦secracion and sayd thryse Agn{us} dei, the walles of the castell fyll wythout stroke of gunne or other engyne, and hys enemyes submytted them to hys grace. Many vertues myght I shew more of this vertuous price / y• which I passe ouer for length of the tyme / and conclude thus, that when he had reygned after moste accorde of wry∣ters, and ruled hys lande nobly .xxx. yeres, he dyed, and was buryed in the house of saynte Denys / leuynge after him of his fyrst wife Constaūce a sonne named Henry, and one other named Robert / and of hys seconde wyfe .ii. sonnes named Symonde and Almaryche. But yt shulde seme by the sequele of the next storye, that Constaunce shuld be laste wyfe, & the other the fyrste / and deuorced from hym for some cause, so that her chyl∣dern shulde not be legyttymat / all be yt the authoure of this maketh no mencyon. Anglia. THE .CCIIII. CHAPITER. EDmunde Iron∣syde the sonne of Egelredus, and also Canutus ye sonne of Swa∣nus kyng of Dē¦marke / beganne to rule the En∣glyshemen, in the yere of our lorde a thousande & .xvi / and the .xix. yere of Robert then kynge of Fraunce. For ye Londoners wyth assystēce of some of ye lordes of England fauoured Ed¦mūde. But the more party of the lor¦des fauoured Canut{us} / & specylly the spiritualtye, ye before tyme had swor∣ne feauty to hys father. And he then beynge at Southampton̄ / swore to them to be vnto them a good & trewe iustice, and to entreate the people so∣berly and ryghte wysely. Then Ed∣munde beynge of the archbyshop of yorke crowned at Lōdon, and the so∣lemnyte fynyshed and ended / he sped hym into westsaxon, and subdued yt countrey. In whych tyme Canutus, whych in ye englyshe storye is called Knough / drewe wyth hys people to Lōdon, and wold there haue entred. But that was hym forboden of the Londoners. For the whiche he layde hys ordynaunce aboute the cytye, en tendynge to haue entred perforce. But it was not long or he was fayne to breke his syege & to depart thens. when Canutus was put of from London / he drewe westwarde, and mette in processe wyth Edmunde in Dorsetshyre besyde Gyllyngham / where betwene theym was foughten a stronge and cruell batayll. But in the ende Canutus was ouercomen & compelled to forsake the felde. After thys they mette agayne in worceter shyre / where they fought a more strō¦ger batayll. For this was so strong∣ly bydden by, ye men coude not iudge whych parte had the better, or which the worse. But as wytnessyth Poli∣cronica eyther of theym departed frō other, eyther for werynesse of fyghte or for lak of the daye. But vppon the morne folowynge both hostes ioyned agayne, & fought egerly. Contynuynge whych fyght Edricus espyenge Edmunde to be at auauntage of wynnynge of the feld, sodaynly pyght a dede mannys hed
vppon a spere hed, and cryed to the hoste of Englyssmen, fle fle ye En∣glyshemen & saue your selfe / loo here is the hedde of Edmūde your kyng. But Edmunde therof beynge war∣ned / spedde hym towarde that parte of the felde, and behaued hym so com¦fortably amonges hys men, that by hys knyghtely courage hys people recoueryd that they before had loste / and cōtynued the batayll tyll nyght, in suche wyse that he hadde rather the better then the worse / and cau∣sed Canutus to refuse that countrey, and to retourne towarde London a∣gayne. Then Edmunde beyng ad¦uertysed that Canutus was retour∣ned towarde London / he folowed hym and passed the ryuer of Tha∣mys, and delyueryd the cytye from daunger of the Danys / and after∣warde encountred the Danys at a place called Brentforde, where with them he had a cruell fyght / and scom fyted theym at length. In thys passe tyme Emma ye wyfe of Egelredus, ferynge the fortune of the warre / sent her two sonnes Al¦phrede and Edwarde, vnto her bro∣ther Richarde the seconde of that na∣me and fourth duke of Normandy. But Edricus then, whyche as be¦fore is sayd, was euer subtyle of wyt, consyderynge the good fortune of Edmunde and hys knyghtely cou∣rage / thought that at length he shuld ouercome the Danys. wherfore to saue hys lande, and also to brynge aboute hys malycyouse treason / he sought the wayes and meanes howe he myght stande in hys grace and fa¦uour. And at length obteyned his en¦tente / and swore to hym to be hys trewe subiecte. when kynge Edmunde had a sea∣son soiorned at Lōdon / he then made towarde the Danys that then were in Kent, and met wyth thē at a place called Okefforde or Otforde, & there scomfyted them, and chasyd Canut{us} to the yle of Shepey. And there Ca∣nutus toke shypyng / & sayled about the land, & entred lastely in ye coūtrey of Mercia & spoyled a parte therof. Then the two hostes met soone af¦ter at a place called Asshedown, whe∣re after longe fyghte Edricus wyth his retynew fledde to the comforte of the Danys. By meane wherof kyng Edmunde was put to the worse / for many noble men were slayne vppon his party. Amonges the whyche the byshop of Lyncoln̄ & the abbot of Ra¦mysey were two / that thyther were come to treate a peace betwene bothe prynces. But whē this was layde to ye charge of Edric{us} / he by his vntrew meanes so excused hym, that no man myght charge hym with any defaut. Thus contynuynge thys mortall warre betwyxte these two marcyall prynces, to the grete desolacyō & mor¦talyte of the people / one of the knygh¦tes of the partye of Edmunde gatte hym to an hyghe place, where he myght be somwhat harde of ye hoste / and spake in thys wyse: Dayly we dye, and no man hath the vyctorye. For Edmunde may not be ouercome for his great strength / and Canutus may not be ouercome for fauoure of Fortune. what shall then be ye fruyte of thys cōtynuall stryfe? None other but when the knyghtes ben all slayn on eyther partyes / then the dukes compelled by nede shall accorde, or ellys they shall fyght alone wythout knyghtes. Then syn this shall be the ende / why do they not one of these two? If they accorde / why is not this kyngedome suffycynt for twayne, yt somtyme suffysed for .vii. If theyr couetyse of lordshyppes be so great, y• eyther hath indygnacyon to take and haue parte wyth other, or ellys that one to be vnder that other / then
lette them fyghte alone, that woll be the lordes alone left. If all mē fyght, all men be slayne / by meane wherof no men shall be left to be vnder theyr lordshyp or ledyng of dukes, nor yet to defende the kynge agayne stronge enymyes or nacyons. These wordes thus spoken / were ryght wele alowed of both hostes. For as affermeth myne author / at this time a trewce was made betwen both prynces far a certayne tyme. Af¦ter whych peace ended / were yt by oc¦casyon of these wordes or otherwise, the sayde two dukes Edmunde and Canutus agreed to trye theyr qua∣relles betwene them two onely. And for thys was assygned by theyr both agrementes, a lytell yle called then Olney nere vnto Glouceter, or after some wryters named Olenege, by∣cleped wyth the water of Seuerne. In whyche place at the daye appoyn¦ted, the two chāpyons met wythoute company or assistence wythin ye sayd yle / the hostes of bothe partyes stan¦dynge wythoute the yle, and there a∣bydynge the fortune of thys batayll. There eyther proued other fyrste wyth sharpe speres, and after wyth kene and cuttynge swordes. what shall I of thys make lenger proces / when eyther hadde other well pro∣ued and assayed, by receyuynge of harde and sore strokes / by the fyrste mocyon of Canutus, as moste wry∣ters testyfyen, they lastely accorded and kyssed to gyther as louers, to the great comforte of bothe hostes. And shortely after by the aduyce of bothe theyr counsaylles, condescen∣ded vppon partycyon of the lande / whyche immedyately was done to bothe theyr agrementes, and loued after as two bretherne duryng theyr naturall lyues. But the serpent Idre of enuy and false conspyracye, which euer burnyd in the harte of Edricus was kyndeled so sore, that of pure force yt must breke out vpon a lyght flambe / so what he myghte not ac∣complyshe by his owne persone, he fulfylled by his sonne, as testyfyen dyuerse authours. For as affermeth Guydo / this sonne of Edricus away tynge his tyme, espyed when ye kyng was at the wyddraught to purge na¦ture / and wyth a spere strake hym in¦to the foundement and so into the bo¦dye, wherof kynge Edmunde dyed shortly after at Oxen. The king thus beynge slayne / anon Edricus thyn∣kynge therby to be greatly exalted, spedde hym in all haste vnto Canu∣tus, and saluted hym as kynge / and shewed hym of thys treason onely for hys loue done. when Canutus hadde well vnderstandyng of ye con∣fessyon of Edricus, he lyke a dyscrete and ryghtous prynce sayd vnto hym in thys wyse. For thou haste Edri∣cus for the loue thou berest vnto me, slayne thyne naturall lorde, whyche I moste loued / I shall exalte thyne hed aboue al the lordes of England. And forthwyth commaunded hym to be taken, and hys hedde to be stry¦ken of, and pyght on a spere hedde, and after sette vppon the higest gate of London. But Marianus the Scot telleth, that Edmunde dyed at London by naturall sekenesse, a∣bout the feste of saynt Andrewe. And the englyshe cronycle affermeth the forenamed treason / but by a nother maner of doynge. But howe so euer this noble prynce dyed / trouth yt is after agrement of moste wryters, yt he ended hys lyfe, when he hadde reygned one yere & more, as myche as from the moneth of Iune vnto the ende of Nouember / and was bu∣ryed at Glastenbury by hys graund∣father Edgare. Policronica shew∣eth in the .xviii. chapyter of hys .vi. boke, that Canutus after the deth
of Edmunde gave vnto Edricus the lordeshyppe of Mercia / and by hys counsayll exyled the brother of Ed∣munde called the kynge of chorles / and thorough his con̄sayle executed many cruell dedes. Of this Edmūde remayned two sonnes, that is to wyt Edmunde and Edwarde. THE .CCV. CHAPITER. CAnutus or Knougth after the Englyshe cronycle, sonne of Swanus as before is touched, and yonger brother as appereth by ye sto∣ry folowynge / began his domynyon alone ouer Englande, in the yere of our lorde a thousande & .xix / and the xxi. yere of Robert then kyng of Fraū¦ce. The whyche anon after the deth of Edmunde assembled a counsayll at London / where among other thyn¦ges in that coūsayll debated, a ques∣tyon was put, whether in the compo¦sicyon made betwene Edmunde and Canutus, any speciall remembraūce was made for the chyldren or bre∣thern of Edmunde, for any partycy∣on of any parte of the lande. wherunto yt was answered of the lordes naye. Affermyng farthermore wyth othe for the kynges pleasure, that they to the vttermoste of theyr powers wolde put of that blood of Edmunde in all that they myght By reason of whyche answere & pro∣myse / they thought many of them to haue standen in the great grace and fauoure of the kynge / but yt turned all otherwyse. For many of them, or the more par¦tye, such as Canutus apperceyued & knewe, that they beforetyme were sworne to Edmunde and his heyres, & also were natyue Englishe men / he mystrusted & disdaned euer after. In so myche that some he exyled, & some were slayn, and some by goddes pu∣nyshement dyed sodaynly. But amonge all Edricus wyth his sugred wordes contynued in the kyn¦ges fauoure as sayth Marianus be¦fore mynded. By whose counsayll & other / he shortely after outlawed the foresayde brother of Edmunde sur∣named kynge Charlis, as before is touched. But he afterwarde was re¦concyled to the kynges fauour, and lastely slayne of his owne seruaūtes. Canutus also by the sayde coun∣sayll, sent the .ii. sonnes of Edmūde, named as before is sayde Edmunde & Edwarde, vnto his brother Swa∣nus then kynge of Denmarke, to be slayne after the oppynyon of some wryters. But he abhorrynge that dede / sente theym to Salomon then kynge of Hungarye as wytnessyth Guydo and other. where in processe of tyme Edmunde dyed / and his bro¦ther Edwarde in tracte of tyme ma∣ryed Agatha the doughter of the .iiii. Henry then emperour of Almayne. Of the whyche Edwarde and Aga∣tha procedyd Margarete that after was quene of Scotlande / and Cry∣styane that was a menchon, and a sonne named Edgar and surnamed Ethelynge. Thys Edwarde of the cronycles of England is named Edwarde the outlawe / for so myche as he neuer re¦turned into Englande as sayth the sayde englyshe cronycle, after hys fyrste exyle. Then to returne vnto Canus / the whyche after some thynges orderyd in his lande, deuyded his sayd lande in foure partes. That is to meane the fyrst princypall which at those dayes was westsaxon, he helde vnder hys owne gydyng. Eestenglande, whych cōteyned Norff. & Suff. he betoke to the rule of ye erle, Turkyll{us} a Dane / of whome somwhat is in the .iii. cha∣pyter of ye story of Egelred{us}. Mercia
he betoke to the subtell erle Edricus. And the .iiii. Northumberlande, vn∣to a Dane named Hircius. But lyke as the man of Inde at no tyme chaū¦ged his colour / so this Edricus chaū¦ged neuer his fals maners. But not wythstandynge the great benefytes that he dayly receyued of his pryn∣ces / there as he to other hadde ben false and dysceyuable in dayes past, euen so nowe he demeaned hym a∣gayne Canutus. wherfore he beynge accused & pro¦ued wyth defaute / was commaūded of the kyng to haue iudgement. The whyche was done immediatly / & his hedde for dyuerse causes smyten of / and yt wyth the bodye for spyte caste into a fowle and fylthy place. But Ranulf sayth that he was slayne by the kynges agrement wythin his pa¦leys at London / and his body wyth the hed throwne after into the towne dyche. Thus wyth shame he ended, that in falshode & dyssymulacyō had contynued myche of his lyfe. Aboute the .ix. yere of his reygne, Canut{us} called a parliament at Oxen¦ford / where amonges other thynges yt was enacted, that Englyshmen & Danys shuld holde the lawes of Ed∣gar lately kynge. In this pastyme dyed Swanus brother to Canutus kynge of Den∣marke wythout issue / wherfore that lande fyll to Canutus. For the which cause he wyth a stronge army sayled thyther to take the possessyon, and to set the countrey in an order / or after some wryters to apeas & wythstande the wandelys, yt then had perced that lande and done therin myche harme. where Goodwyn̄ the erle, whose dou¦ghter Edwarde the confessour after maryed / wyth a certayne nomber of Englyshmen fyll vpon ye wandalys by nyght, & dystressed theym in suche wyse, that Canutus had of them his pleasure. For this dede the kyng had erle Goodwyn̄ euer after in good fa∣uoure, and loued Englyshmen more specyally. And when he was retur∣ned into Englande / he shortely after or before, maryed Emma the wyfe la¦tely of Egelredus. Of the whych he receyued in processe of tyme a son & named hym Hardicunitus, or after some Hardykynitus / & after the En¦glyshe boke Hardyknough. And aboute this tyme fyll voyde y• see of Lyndesser or Durham, to the whyche by dyuyne inspyracyon and knowlege receyued by a voyce from the tumbe of saynt Cuthbert / blessed Edmūde after thre yere of vacacyon was electe to that see. But ye shal vn¦derstande that thys was not saynte Edmunde of Ponteney. For he was archbyshoppe of Caunterbury in the dayes of Henry the thyrde. THE .CXCVI. CHAPITER. CAnutus about the .vii. yere of his reygne / by exhortacyon of Egelnothus then archbishop of Caūterbury, translated the body of saynt Elphegus late archbyshoppe of the sayd see, martyred by the Danys, as before is shewed in the seconde chapi¦ter of the storye of Egelredus / and shryued hym in hys owne chyrche of Caunterbury foresayde. In the tyme also of thys Canu∣tus / aboute the .xvi. yere of hys rey∣gne, the Scottes rebelled agayne hym. wherfore he with a great army entred Scotlande / & at length ouer∣came the kynge of that lande named then Malcolyne, and brought them agayne to hys subieccyon, as is re∣corded in the bokes of Marianus the Scot. By reason of whych vycto¦ry Canutus was then kynge of .iiii. kyngdoms / of England, of Scotlād of Denmarke, and Norwaye. Then
as wytnessyth dyuerse authours af∣ter he had betaken this lande of En∣glande to the gydynge of Leofricus Egelnothus, and other / he then re∣turned into Denmarke. And from thēs he yode to Rome in the .xv. yere of his reygn, & made there great offe¦rynges to saynte Peter and Poule / & redemed the scole of Saxons fre of all former trybute graunted, as be∣fore in the storyes of Iue and Offa and other kynges of Saxons is som deale more touched. whyche redemp¦cyon of tribute as sayth Guydo, was called Rome Scot. But it shall seme in that sayenge some douteth / for so myche as at thys daye in dyuers pla¦ces of Englād, as in Northampton∣shyre and other, the peter pens are yet gaderyd. Canutus also after he had in Rome accomplyshed his pur∣pose / he in hys returne towarde En¦glande executed wonderfull dedes of almes, in releuynge of the poore and other goftly workes / & payde great good for raunsom of crysten pryso∣ners / amonges other of his dedes, It is wytnessyd that he shulde agree with the pope that was called Benet the .viii. of that name, & pay to hym certayne summes of money, that his archbyshoppes after yt daye myghte haue the pall wythoute payenge of money therfore. And whē he was comen in the citye of Papia in Italy, in hys way home warde, he there brought the arme of saynte Augustyne the doctour for a hundred pounde of syluer and a ta∣lent of golde. And here is to be noted that there be thre maners of talētes. The fyrst and grettest is of y• weyght of .vi. score pounde weyghte / the se∣conde of the weyght of .lxxii pounde / and the thyrde and leest of .l. pounde weyght. Then yf we reken this ta∣lent with the leest / in a poūde of gold after troye weyght, is .xii. vuces, and in .l. pounde is .vi. hūdred vnces, and euery vnce of fyne golde is worth xl.s. By whyche reason this talent shulde be in value to the summe of xii. hundred pounde. This precyous relyque ye kyng gaue vnto his trusty frende Leofricus / ye whych he myche loued and trusted / and remayned at Couentre many yeres after. whyle Canutus was occupyed in thys iourney / cōplaynt was brought vnto hym of some mysse demeanurs and rule, that were occupyed and exercysed in his absence wythin this realme. wherfore he wrote home let∣ters to the lordes / chargynge theym straytely, that all such defautes were redressed agayne hys cōmyng home. Thys kynge as wythnesseth Guy¦do was of great magnyfycence / and vsed suche iustyce and temperaunce, that in his dayes in the weste partes of the worlde, was no prynce of re∣nowne as was Canutus. And ouer that he was gretly beloued & dradde of hys subiectes. In the tyme of this Canutus, as tessyfyeth Guillelmus de pontifici∣bus / a munke of Glastēbury named Bryghtwolde, whyche was after bys¦shop of wylton, beynge in hys con∣templacyon and prayer, bethoughte hym on the lynage of Englyshe kyn¦ges. And in that thought fyll into a slumber / in whyche tyme of his slepe he sawe saynte Peter the apostle stan¦dynge by hym, and holdynge in hys hande Edwarde the sonne of Egelre¦dus which then was in Normandy / the whyche to his thynkynge, he saw saynte Peter saker ye sayde Edward as kynge of Englande. And shewed to hym farther how holy this Ed∣warde shulde be in hys lyuynge, and how he shuld reygne as kynge .xxiii. yeres. Then thys monke frayned saynt Peter of the ofsprynge of thys Edwarde, and who shulde be kynge
after hym. To the whyche questyon was answered by Peter, the kynge∣dome of Englyshemen is the kynge∣dome of god / wherfore the kynges therof shall stande at goddes puruy∣aunce. And also a nother doctour cal¦led Henry of Huntyngdon / shewyd that an holy man warned Englyshe men, y• a lorde whyche they thought nothynge vppon, shulde come out of Fraunce & brynge them ryght lowe. In the tyme also of thys Canut{us} by agrement of many wryters fyll one thynge worthy mynde and me∣mory. In a town of Saxony named Calbis, in ye dyocesys of Magburgh and parysshe of saynt Magii / xviii. men and .xv. women vppon the euen of the Natyuyte of our lorde began a daunce about the chyrche yarde of saynt Magu afore sayd / the person or other prestes beyng than at masse wythin ye same chyrche. which beyng troubled wyth the noyse of the myn∣strellys, & also the dynne of the sayde men and women / sent vnto them in monysshynge them to seace of that doynge. But all was in vayne / for they wolde not seace of theyr dysport for any commaūdement yt to thē was gyuen. wherwyth the preste beynge dyscontented, that they none other wyse reuerenced ye sacrament, noryed that solempne season / besought god and saynte Magii that they shulde contynue theyr daunce by the space of an hole yere. The whyche prayer was harde / in suche wyse that they contynued the same songe & daunce tyll that daye twelue monethes, and neuer eate nor dranke nor rested thē in all ye season. And moreouer dewe nor rayne fyll vppon them in all that yere / nor garment nor no thyng that was about them was impayred shoo nor other. At the yeres ende / Horo∣bertus archbysshop of that dyocesys came vnto ye sayde place and lowsed them of that bonde whych the preste had bounde them in / and before the awlter of the chyrche them reconsy∣led. Of the whyche a prestes dough∣ter and two other dyed forth wyth / and the remenaunt yode to reste and slepte by the space of .iii. dayes and iii. nyghtes folowynge. where after some of them dyed / and suche as ly∣ued fell lame of theyr lymmes. And one of the same .xviii. men beyng na∣med Ubertus or Hupertus, wrote thys wonder wyth hys owne hande for a more recorde of the trowth. Then let vs retorne to Canutus / of whom it is redde that after hys cōmyng from Rome, he beganne som∣dele to presume in pryde, & set more by hym selfe than good wysdome wolde. In tyme of whyche exaltacyō of hys mynde / he went vnto the Ta∣mys syde, and behelde howe the wa∣ter swelled or flowed. And so stan∣dynge nere the water / the water tou∣ched hys fete. Than he charged the water that he shuld flowe no hygher and that in no wyse he shulde to wche hys lordes clothes. But the water kepte his course and wette at length the kynges thyes. wherewyth ye kyng abasshed sterte backe and sayde, all erthly kynges may know that theyr powers be vayne / and that none is worthy to haue the name of a kynge but he that hath all thynges subiecte to hys hestes, as here is shewed by worchynge of hys treature by thys water. And for thys as wytnesseth Polycronycon and other / he offered hys crowne to ye rode of wynchester, and neuer bare it vpon his hed after. It is also wytnessed of the sayde authour / that Canutus maryed hys doughter hadde by hys laste wyfe, vnto Henry sonne of Conradus the emperour, the seconde of that name / as also it is testyfyed of the authour of Cronica cronicarum.
And he repayred many monaste∣ryes / and specyally suche as before tyme were hurte or throwne downe in the tyme of hys fathers persecu∣cyon. And began and ended the mo∣nastery of saynt Edmundes Bury / & endowed it wyth ryche possessyons as before is towched. And dyed fy∣nally at Shaftesbury, and was bu∣ryed at wynchester, whan he hadde reygned .xix. yeres / leuyng after hym two sonnes of hys wyues / the eldest was named Harolde and the yonger Hardykynytus / the whyche lyuyng hys fader was made kynge of Den∣marke. Francia. THE .CCVII. CHAPITER. HEnry the sonne of Robert / begā hys domynyon ouer the French men, in the yere of our lord. M.xxix / and the .x. yere of Canutus than kynge of Englande. To the whyche Henry / Cōstantyne the mo∣der was so vnkynde, that she by her meanes wolde haue preferred her yonger sonne Roberte duke of Bur∣goyne, to the rule of the lande before thys Henry / so that by her meanes, bothe cytyes and castels were wyth holden from hym, and was by her & suche other as toke her parte so ouer lad, that he was forced to resorte to Robert than duke of Normandy, for to aske helpe of hym to wythstande hys enemyes. ye shall vnderstande that this Ro∣bert was the .vi. duke of Normandy, and sonne of Richarde the seconde / and also father vnto wyllyā bastard that conquered Englande. Thys Roberte was lyberall and noble of condycyon / but defamed of ye deth of hys elder brother Rychard the thyrde. For the whyche murder as wytnessyth dyuers authours / the vii. yere of hys dowchery he went to Iherusalem, and dyd in that pylgre mage many honourable and liberall actes / the whyche in good order ben remembred in the .xix. chapyter of the vi. boke of Polycronicon. This Robert receyued kyng Hen¦ry wyth all honour, and gaue vnto hym greate and ryche gyftes, & sent for hys frendes and knyghtes / so ye the kynge had by hys ayde a greate & myghty hoste. And retorned agayn into Fraunce / and in short whyle af∣ter recouered from hys sayde moder bothe cytyes, townes, and castelles, that she and her fautours from hym wythhelde. And fynally agreed so wyth her / that he and she contynued frendes theyr lyfe tymes enduryng. After whyche accorde / about the .v. yere of hys reygne he made warre vppon Eudo erle of Champayne, & vppon Baldewine erle of Flaūders / and in processe of tyme wan frō them certayne cytyes and castelles, the whyche Constance his moder hadde before tymes gyuen to them in tyme of dyscencyon. In thys warre was slayne Eudo erle of Champayne. wherfore hys .ii. sonnes Stephen & Thybaud mayn∣teyned the warre agayne the kynge / but to theyr bothe harmes in ye ende. For Stephen loste therby the cytyes of Chartres and towers, and Thy∣baude ye cytyes of Troyes & Maulx wyth other. whan Henry hadde ended thys warre & set hys lande in some quyet∣nesse / he thā buylded a monastery of saynt Martyne called Des Chāps besyde Parys, and set therin seculer prestes. In thys passetyme Robert duke
of Normandy moued in conscyence to vysyte the holy sepulture of oure lorde, called before hym hys lordes of hys lande / wyllynge and cōmaun¦dynge them to owe theyr trewe alle∣gaunce vnto hys yonger sonne wyl∣lyam, and to take hym for theyr lord and duke yf he retorne not agayne. And to thys / he caused to swere Ro∣bert than archbysshop of Roan, with the other of hys lordes / and after de∣parted vppon the sayd iourney, and dyed in the cytye of Bethenia as he was cōmynge homewarde. wherof ye lordes of Normandy beynge asser∣tayned, accepted the foresayde wylly¦am to theyr lorde and souerayne. Of thys wyllyams procreacyon / yt is wytnessed of Uyncent hystory all and other, that his father passynge by the cytye or towne of Faloys in Normandy, he sawe a company of maydens daunsynge by the strete. Amonges the whych was one of pas¦synge beautye called Arlet, and dou∣ghter to a skynner. To ye which duke Robert caste vnlefull loue / in suche wyse yt he caused her to be broughte to his bed the nyght folowyng, and helde her to his concubyne a certayn of tyme after / & begat on her this wyl¦lyam. whē his moder was wyth him cōceyued / she dremed that her bowel lys were sprad ouer all Normandye and Englande. And when he was borne of his moders wombe / he fyll to the groūde, and closed his handes wyth powder of the flore or paue∣ment. Therfore the mydwyfe made and exclamacyon, and sayd this chyld shall be a kynge. Then yt foloweth / when thys wyl¦lyam was thus admitted duke, some of his lordes by the meane of ye kyng of Fraūce, began to wythdraw them from hym. In so myche ye erle Gyl∣bert to whome duke Robert had be∣taken hys ponge sonne to gyde was slayne, and other that were especyall frendes to the chylde. There was fyghtyng and manslaughter and the countrey fowle faren with, by reason of the opynyons that were amonges them selfe / wherof Guy a Burgoyn was one of the chefe causers. For he with his adherentes sayde alwayes; that they wolde haue no bastarde to be ruler of them. This Guy as saith the frēche boke was nere kynnesman vnto ye yonge duke, descendyd of the doughter of the seconde Rycharde / and entended to haue ben duke hym selfe. For the which he ensensed ye kyng of Fraūce agayn hym in all that he myght / but at length duke wyllyam toke hym and put hym to deth. Thus the Frenche kynge forget∣tynge ye kyndnesse shewyd to hym by duke Robert hys father, toke partye agayne hym to the vttermoste / and ordeyned hym .ii. hostes. wherof one he delyueryd to his brother Alma∣ryk / and warned hym to eutre ye coun¦trey of Caus / and he hym selfe ladde that other, and entred with it the coū¦trey of Eurour. But wyllyam not ferynge the kyn¦ges great power / beynge growen wele towarde mannes stature, lyke a luste yonge knyght made towarde the kynges brother / & gaue to hym batayll, & hym ouercame, and chased the Frenchemen to theyr great byla∣ny. wherof heryng the Frenche kyng wyth his people spedde hym toward wyllyam to reuenge the shame done to his men. But in cōclusyon he wan there no honoure. Then peace was made betwene the kyng and ye duke / and the Frenche prysoners were de∣lyueryd. But this peace enduryed not long / for the Frēch kyng callynge to remē¦braūce the losse of hys men at Mort mere or dede see, wyth other dysa∣uauntages
by hym sustayned of the sayde duke wyllyam / called to hys ayde Geoffrey erle of Aungiers. And whan hys hoste was assembled / they entred ye prouynce of Normādy, & cō¦tynued theyr iourney tyll they came to an arme of the see, where the hoste shulde passe ouer. Of thys new warre duke wyllyā beynge warned / in all haste assem∣bled hys Normans and sped hym ye next waye to mete the Frenchemen. In thys meane whyle the Frenche kynge had passed the water wyth cer¦tayne of hys hoste, trustyng that the remenauaūt shulde haue folowed. But soone after the water flowed so faste that hys people myghte not passe. And in thys whyle came the duke and set vpon the kynges hoste, and bet theym downe cruelly / so that at length the kynge was compelled to flee, and loste a great nomber of his knyghtes, to consyder them ye were slayne wyth the other that were ta∣ken prysoners. whan kynge Henry had well dys∣gested in hys mynde, the wrongfull trouble that he by enuyous persons hadde put the duke vnto, and remē∣bred the yll expedycyon that he had in that warre / he recōsyled hym selfe, and made meanes that the duke and he myghte be agreed and accorded. The whyche by dyscrete solycytours was shortely after brought to good effecte / so that they contynued as frē¦des durynge theyr lyues after. Than Henry abstayned hym from all warre / & vsed the reste of hys lyfe in peas and quyetnesse. Thys Hen∣ry had two wyues / and of the laste whyche was doughter to the kynge of Russy, he had .iii. sonnes / that is to say Phylyp, y• whych he made kyng of Fraunce by hys lyfe, Robert that was after duke of Burgoyne, and Hughe that was after named Hugh le graunde, and was fader to Raufe erle of Uermendoyse. And in thys kynges dayes / Bur∣goyne that had ben vnder ye Frenche kynges obeysaunce ouer a hundred and .xxx. yeres, refused the Frenche kynge, aparte of them, & torned vnto Conradus the seconde of that name than emperour. So that that parte whyche stretched to Champayne be∣longed to Fraunce / and that other parte whyche stretched toward Ba∣saynz belonged to the Almayns. And that yere that the kynge had admytted hys sonne Phylyp to the gydynge of the realme / he dyed, and was buryed at saynt Denys / leuyng after hym the issue forenamed, whan he hadde reygned after moste wry∣ters .xxxi. yeres. Anglia. THE .CCVIII. CHAPITER. HArold the sonne of Canutus, & of Elgma ye er∣lys doughter of Hampton / begā his reygne ouer Englande, in ye yere of our lor∣des incarnacyon. M. xxxix / and the x. yere of Henry thā kyng of Fraūce. Thys for his delyuernesse & swyfte∣nesse, was surnamed Harefote. In whose begynnynge stryfe was a∣monge the lordes, for so myche as of hys byrthe shulde be doughte, why∣ther he were the kynges son or not / and specyally erle Goodwyne, that dyd the vttermoste of hys power to sette hym by, and put Hardykynitus his brother to that honour. But Leo frycus that Canutus so mych loued and trusted, wyth the ayde of the Da¦nes / wythstode so myghtely Good∣wyne and hys sonnes, that they fay∣led
of theyr purpose. Anone as thys Harold was crow∣ned kynge / he banysshed hys stepmo¦der Emma, and toke from her suche goodes and iewelles as she had. The whych Emma sayled than into Flaū¦ders, and there of Bawdewyne the erle was reuerently receyued, & there abode durynge the lyfe of thys Ha∣rolde. The whyche contynued hys lyfe to lytell fruyte or profyte of the land, nor yet of the subiectes / so that of hym, other for ye vyce that clerkes lyste nat to put in memory, other for the rudenesse, whyche is worthy no memory, nothynge of hym is put in remembraunce / but that he dyed at London, or after some at Oxenford, & was buryed at westmynster, when he had reygned as moste wryters a∣green .iii. yeres and odde monethes / leuynge after hym none heyre. wher∣fore hys brother kyng of Denmarke was next kynge after hym. THE .CCIX. CHAPITER. HArdikynytus the sonne of Ca∣nutus & of Emma / was made kyng of England, in the yere of our lordes incarnacyon. M.xli / and the xii. yere of Henry than kyng of Fraū¦ce. Thys of some wryters is named Hardykynytus and Hardyknough / and was anone after the deth of hys brother sent for into Denmarke, and receyued ioyously, and crowned at Londō of Ethelnotus than archybys∣shop of Caunterbury. But this was of suche cruelty, that he sent Alfry∣cus archbysshoppe of yorke and erle Goodwyne vnto westmynster / com∣maundynge them for the iniury by hys brother Harolde before done vn¦to his moder Emma, that they shuld drawe the corps out of ye place where it was buryed, and to be throwen in¦to the ryuer of Thamys / which was done accordynge to hys wyll. whych corps after as testyfyeth Guydo and other, was founden by a fyssher / and buryed vnreuerently within the chyr¦cheyarde of saynt Clement standyng wythout the Temple barre of Lon∣don. And as Polycronycon sayth / for a more curelty he caused fyrst the hed of hys sayd brother to be smyten from the body, and than throwen in to the sayd ryuer. Lette the herers to thys gyue credence as them lyke / for to me it semeth though the kyng had ben of suche cruelty, that the bysshop forenamed wolde not haue ben the executour of so fowle a dede. Thys kyng also leuyed the fore∣named trybute named Dane gelt, & spent it to the lytell comforte of the realme / but gaue vnto shypmen and maryners, and other lewde persons, greate and vnsyttynge fees and wa∣ges / and was of suche prodegalyte, that his bourdes and tabelles of his courte were spred .iiii. tymes in the daye / and the people serued of great excesse both of mete & also of drynke. wyth leuyeng of the foresayd try bute the comons greatly grudged / so that in worceter two of hys ser∣uauntes, whyche were assygned to gader that money were there slayne. For the whyche dede the kynge was so sore dyspleased, yt he brent a great parte of that towne. Thys Hardykynutus after some authours, maryed hys syster named Gunylda vnto the thyrde Henry em∣perour. The whych was of passyng beaute / and was the doughter also of Emma laste wyfe of Canutus. But in processe of tyme thys Gunyl∣da was falsely accused of spowse∣brech / for tryall wherof she was put to her champyon. wherfore she beynge in greate agony / lastely tru∣styng to god, and knowyng her selfe without gylte of that offence, putte a
chyld that she wyth her had brought out of Englande in stede of the cham¦pyon. The whyche fought wyth a man of geauntes stature / and fynal∣ly hym slew, and broughte vnto con¦fusyon. when Gunylda by dyuyne power hadde thus clered her selfe / she vtter¦ly refused the emperours company, and ended her lyfe in the seruyce of hym the onely god, that so hadde de¦fended her ryght. But yt shulde appere by Polycro∣nycon, and also by Antoninus / that thys mayden was maryed to ye sayde Henry by the lyfe of her father Canu¦tus, and also durynge the lyfe of the sayde Henryes father named Conra¦dus the second, as before is touched in the storye of the sayde Canutus / and not by thys Hardykinytus her brother. It is rad that the kynge betoke all the rule of the lande vnto hys moder and erle Goodwyn / the whyche had maryed as wytnessyth the englyshe cronycle, the doughter of Canutus gotten vppon hys fyrste wyfe Elgi∣na. By whome many thynges were mysse orderyd / and specyally by the subtylyte of this erle Goodwyn. This erle had many sonnes, as wyt∣nesseth Polycrony con in the .xxv. cha¦pyter of hys .vi. boke. By his fyrste wyfe that was kynge Canutus sys∣ter, & not hys doughter as is aboue sayde / he hadde one sonne. The why¦che by vndyscrete strykynge of an horse, was throwen into the Tha∣mys and drowned. And the mother was lastely smyttē wyth lyghtenyng and so dyed. Of whome yt is there remembred, that she was so vngra∣cyous and of so vyle condycyon / that she set yonge womē to horedome, for to gader by that vnlefull meane ry∣ches. After the whyche wyfe so dyed, he maryed the seconde / of whome he receyued .vi. sonnes. That is to wyt Swanus, Harolde, Tostius, wyl∣notus, Sirthe or Surthe, and Leof¦fricus / and a doughter named Godi¦tha, whych after was maryed to Ed¦warde the confessour. The two sonnes of Egelredus Al∣phredus and Edwarde, whych as ye before haue hard were sent into Nor¦mādy by Emma theyr mother / came in ye tyme of the reygne of thys kyng into Englande, for to vysyte and se theyr mother / & brought wyth them a great nomber of Normans. Then thys Goodwyne ymagyned in hys mynde howe he myght preferre hys doughter Godyth to one of these bre¦therne / and thoughte in his mynde yt the eldest wold dysdayne that mary∣age. And for he thought to ioyne her vnto the yonger, and to make hym kynge and her quene / he compassed the deth of ye elder. And by this mean Goodwyn warned the lordes of En∣glande / and sayde yt was a great ieo¦perdye for the lande, to suffer so ma∣ny straungers to entre the land with¦out lycence / wherfore yt were neces∣sary that they were punyshed to the example of other. By whych meanes he gat authoryte to order that mater as to hym semed beste or of his owne power, because he was of moste myght nexte the kynge. wherfore he yode and mette wyth the sayde Nor∣mans / and slewe of theym the moste nomber. For vppon Guylde downe he slewe alway .ix. & saued the .x. And yet for he thoughte to many by that meane lefte a lyue / he eft agayne ty∣thed agayne the sayd tythe, and slew euery tenth knyght of them and that by cruell deth / as wyndynge theyr guttes out of theyr bodyes, as sayth Polycronycon / and amonge other put out the eyen of the elder brother Alphredus, & sent hym to Ely, where he dyed in short tyme after / all be it ye
englyshe boke sayth yt he was slayne by the forenamed tormente. And Ed¦warde was conueyed and by some other waye broughte to hys mother. But she ferynge the treason of Good wyne, sente hym soone ouer the see agayne. Howe be yt the ynglyshe cro¦nycle telleth all otherwyse. when Goodwyne was after accused for thys cruell dede / he sware depely yt he was forced of the kynge so for to do. But in one cronicle, I fynde that thys dede was executed by Good∣wyne in the tyme of Harolde Hare∣fote beynge kynge. Then yt foloweth in the story / this kynge Hardykynytus beynge at a feste at Lambehyth besyde London, mery and iocande / whyle he stode drynkynge he fyll downe sodaynly, and dyed / or waxed dumbe, and lay tyll the .viii. daye after, the whyche was the .viii. daye of the moneth of Iune / and then dyed, when he hadde reygned after moste wryters two ye¦res / leuynge after hym none yssue of his bodye lawfull, and was bury∣ed by his father at wynchester. Thus here endeth the lyne or of∣sprynge of Swanus and all other Danys / so that after thys kynge, the blood of Danys was clerely extyncte and putte oute from all kyngly dygnyte wyth∣in thys realme of En∣glande. And also the persecution of thē seased clerely af¦ter thys kyn∣ges deth. The whyche had contynued, to rekē from theyr fyrst lan¦dynge in tyme of Brightricus kyng of west Saxon, & the .ix. yere of his reygne, as in ye storye before is rehersed / by ye terme of .CC.lv. yeres. THE .CCX. CHAPITER. EDward the son of Egelredus & of Emma hys last wyfe / began his reygne ouer England, in the yere of our lord M .xliii / and the xiiii. yere of Henry then kynge of Fraunce. The whyche after the deth of Hardykinitus was sente for into Normandye / and pledges layde for hym, that he wythout fraude shulde be made kynge. And then he came wyth a few straunges. But as sayth Marianus / some of the lordes had sent for Edwarde the outlaw son of Edmunde Ironsyde, for to be theyr kynge. But after the affyrmaunce of the said authour / when he knew that Edwarde hys neuewe was in posses¦syon of the lande, he wolde medle hym no farther. Then thys Edwarde by the great aduyse of Goodwyn̄ erle of west Sa¦xon, and of Leofric{us} erle of Chester / was crowned kyng at westmynster, of Edsius then archbyshop of Caun¦terbury / & wedded in processe of time after, Goditha the doughter of erle Goodwyne, whych of Guydo is cal∣led Editha. The whych he entreatyd in suche wyse / yt he put her not from his bed, nor yet delte wyth her fleshe∣ly. whyther yt were for hate of her kynne, or forloue of chastite, ye trouth is not shewed. But all wryters a∣green that he cōtynued his lyfe with outen offence wyth women. This kyng discharged Engleshmen of ye great tribute called Dane gelt, yt whych before is sundry tyme spoken of / so yt after ye daye yt was no more gaderyd. And also he subdued ye Bry¦tons or walshmen that made warre
wythin the bondes of ye land. But af¦ter yt theyr duke or leder called Gryf¦fyn or Gryffyth, with ayde of ye Irysh men entred the ryuer of Seuerne, & toke many prayes, and departed a∣gayne wythout fyght. In the tyme of the reygne of thys Edwarde / Emma his moder was accused to be familyer with ye byshop of winchester. Upō which accusaciō, by coūsayll of erle Goodwyn̄ he toke from her many of her iewellys, & cau¦sed her to be keptsomdele more strait¦ly in the abbay of warwell / and the byshop he cōmytted to the examyna∣cyon and correccyon of the clergye. But his moder more sorowynge the defame of Alwyn̄ the byshoppe then her awne estate / wrote vnto dyuers byshoppes, and besought them of iu¦styce / affermynge yt she was redy to abyde all leful & most sharpest triall. Then dyuers of ye byshoppes made laboure to the kynge for her and for the byshop. But Robert then arche∣byshop of Caunterbury / beyng wyth theyr laboure dyscontended, sayde to them in this maner. My brethern bis¦shoppes sayd he, how dare ye defende her that is a wyld beste and not a wo¦man? she hath defamed her own son the kynge, and nempned her leche∣rours lemman goddes owne preste. But be yt so that the woman wolde purge the preste / who shall then pur∣ge the woman, that is accused to be consentynge to the deth of her sonne Alphred, and procured venym to the poysonyng of her son Edwarde. But how so yt be that she be gylty or gylt¦lesse / yf she woll go barefoted for her selfe .iiii. steppes & for the byshop .v, contynually vpon .ix. plough sharys brennynge and fyre hote / then yf she escape harmelesse, he shall be as∣soyled of this chalenge and she also. Thys was of her graunted, and the daye of purgacyon assygned. At which day ye kyng & grete part of his lordes were present / but this Robert fayled, were yt for pyte or otherwyse. Thys Robert was a monke of an house in Normandy, and came ouer by the sonde of the kynge / and was fyrste made bysshoppe of London, and after archbysshopppe of Caun∣terbury. Then the nyght before Em¦ma shulde make her purgacyon / she went vnto the shryne of saynt Swy¦thune at wynchester / and there kne∣led all that night in prayer and recey¦ued dyuyne cōforte. Upon the morne she was blyndefelde / and ladde vnto the place betwene .ii. men, where the iron laye glowynge hote / and passed the .ix. sharys vnhurte. Then at last she sayde. Good lorde when shall I come to the place of my purgacyon. when they opened her eyen, and she sawe that she was paste the payne / she kneled downe and thanked God and saynte Swythune. Then the kynge repented hym / and restored to her that he before hadde taken from her, and asked of her forgyuenesse. But the archebyshoppe of Caunter∣burye fledde into Normandye. And thys Emma gaue then vnto the mo∣nastery of that holy confessour saynt Swythune .ix. maners / and the bys∣shoppe other .ix. as affermeth Poly∣cronica and other. It was not long after, that kyng Edwarde gaderyd a stronge nauye at Southampton̄, or more verely in the hauen of Sandwyche / for so myche as he was warned that Swa¦nus kynge of Denmarke entended to make warre vppon hym. But Polycronycon sayth that he gade∣deryd thys nauy to wythstande Ha¦rolde Harfagar then kyng of North ganys, that entended to haue en∣tred Englande. But he was letted by ye forenamed Swan{us}, yt shortely after made warre vpō ye sayd Harold
An other cronycle shewyth, that the Danys and Norgayns, whyche is to meane men of Norway / were a∣greed to come ioyntly into England. And whyle the kynge was shyppyng of his mne / one brought forth a bole full of mede or meth to drynke vpon bon vyage. And after that came bole after bole / so that after drynke came dronkenes, & after iangelyng / & ian∣gelynge tourned into stryfe, & stryfe tourned into fyghtynge / where tho∣rough many were slayne / & the other turned to theyr owne, so that that iourney was lefte of. But the legēde of hys lyfe in the chyrche telleth / that he beynge at masse in the chyrche of westmynster vppon a whytsondaye, in the tyme of the leuacyon of the sa∣crament he laught. wherof the lor∣des beynge aboute hym meruayled greatly / and after frayned of hym the cause. wherūto he answered and sayde, that the Danys wyth the Nor¦wayes of one assente were purposed to haue comen into thys lande, and here haue taken prayes. But as the kynge of Danys shuld haue entred hys shyp, he fyll into the see and was drowned / so that I truste in my days they shall not, nor none other straun¦gers make any warre in this lande. THE .CCXI. CHAPITER. IN the tyme of thys Edwarde fyll passynge great snowe, the whyche began in the begynnynge of Ianuary, and so contynued tyll the xvii. daye of Marche or saynte Pa¦trykes daye / wherof the great quan¦tyte fyll in the weste countreys of Englande. And after that ensued great deth of men, and moreyne of beftes / and by lyghtnynge the corne vpon the ground that yere was won¦derfull brent and wasted. Aboute the .x. yere of Edwarde as moueth Policronyca, and in the mo¦neth of September / Eustace erle of Bolongn̄ came a lande at Douer / whyche erle hadde wedded after the sayenge of the sayde authour, kynge Edwardes syster. Thys was parted frome hys companye in so secrete wyse, that hys knyghtes were fayne to serche for hym / wenynge to them that he hadde ben slayne by some of the dwellers of the towne. In the whyche serche they demeaned theym so vndyscretely, that they slewe a cy∣tezyne of Douer. By meane wher∣of the people arose / and in the ques∣tyonynge of thys mannes deth, ran at length vppon the erles company, and slewe .xx. of hys men, and woun¦ded many mo. Hastely the erle appe∣ryd and toke his mennys parte. But in conclusyon he was fayne to wyth∣drawe hym selfe with a few persons, and rode vnto the kynge then beyng at Glouceter / and made vnto hym a greuous complaynte of the men of Douer. Then erle Goodwyne, for so moch as to hym was commytted the rule of Kente / was charged to ryde thy∣ther, and to take wreche of the inha∣bytaūtes of that towne. But he with sayde that commaundement / and counsayled the kyng to sende for the wardeyns of the castell of Douer and rulers of the towne, for to an∣swere to suche maters as were layde agayne them, and yf they were gylty to punyshe them, and ellys not. This answere of Goodwyn̄ plea¦sed nothynge the kynge, nor suche as were aboute hym / wherfore ma∣ny mo lordes were sent for. Amonge the which Leofricus erle of Chester, and Sewarde erle of Northumber∣land of myne authour ben named. After whych assemble of ye lord{is} erle Goodwyne had suche monycyon of some of ye counsayll, yt he wythdrewe
hym from the courte, and gadered to hym strength of knyghtes out of dy¦uers shyres, as west Saxon & Kent / and houed at Beuerston̄ tyl his son∣nes came vnto him with more peple Soone after came vnto hym his el∣dest son named Swanus, & brought wyth hym a fayre companye that he hadde arreyred in Oxenfordeshyre & Gloucetershyre / and Harolde hys other sonne, wyth a feleshyppe that he had assembled in eest Englande, and Huntyngdon̄shyre / so that of these people was made a great hoste. Then Goodwyn̄ to the kyng was accused, for gaderynge of so great an hoste. But he excused hym, and sayde, yt was done to wythstand the walyshmen. The whyche contrary proued / he was cōmaunded to sende awaye the people, and to come wyth a certayne nomber vnto the courte. But that he refused. Then the kyng wyth hys counsayll beynge at Lon∣don / Goodwyn and Harold was eft sent for, and charged to come to the courte wyth .xii. persones wythoute mo / and to render into the kynges handes all knightes fees that he and Harolde his sonne hadde wythin En¦glande. To thys by theym was an∣swered, that they myghte not come to the counsayll of treachours and gylefull men / and that also wyth so fewe men in nomber, they mygthe not wythoute parell or shame passe by the countrey. In thys whyle a parte of Good∣wyns knyghtes wythdrewe theym, and hys power beganne to mynyshe and the kynge in thys whyle hadde gaderyd a stronge hoste. Then pro∣clamacyons were made, that Good∣wyne shuld come to the courte as be¦fore is sayd / or auoyde the land with in fyue dayes. wherfore Goodwyne consyderyng the ieopardy yt he was in / toke wyth hym .iii. of his sonnes, that is to meane Swanus, Tosty, & Gurthe / and sayled into Flaundres▪ where he was receyued of the erle Baldwyn after some wryters / whose doughter Swanus his sonne hadde before spoused & was named Iudeth And Harolde and Leofricus two of his other sonnes with a few shyppes sayled out frō Brystow into Irland. when the kynge was ascertayned that erle Goodwyne wyth hys fyue sonnes was in thys maner departed oute of his lande / he shortly after cal∣led a parlyament / and by authoryte of the same, outlowed Goodwyne & hys .iii. sonnes that were gone wyth hym. And that done he put his owne wyfe and doughter of Goodwyn̄ in∣to the abbaye of warwell wyth one mayden, as sayth Marianus. And so Goodwyn̄ and hys sayde sonnes contynued two yeres outlawed. In the whyche season he or hys retynue toke dyuers tymes prayes in ye mar∣ches of Englande / and in the ende drewe to hym suche strength, that he was purposed to haue entred the lande wyth force, and to haue war∣red vppon the kynge. But by medya¦tours that fauoured erle Goodwyn, a peace was made betwene ye kynge and hym / so that in processe he was receyued to grace wyth hys sonnes / & hys doughter restored to her fyrste and former honoure. And for thys peace to be contynued / for Good∣wyns parte was delyueryd for pled∣kes a sonne of hys called wylnotus, and a sonne of Swanus named Ha∣cum or Hacun. The whyche .ii. pled¦ges kynge Edwarde sent vnto wyl∣lyam duke of Normandy to be kept. And Algarus the sonne of Leofric{us} erle of Chester, to whbme the kynge had gyuen the erledome of Harold, & ruled yt dyscretely in tyme of his ab∣sence / at hys returne delyuered yt to him again, gladly & without grudge
THE .CCXII. CHAPITER. DUrynge the tyme of this out lauwry of Goodwyne / wyl∣lyam bastarde duke of Normandye came with a goodly cōpany into this land, and was honorably receyued / to whom the kyng made great chere. And after he hadde taryed here a cer¦tayne of tyme to his agrement and pleasure / he retourned to hys owne wyth great gyftes & pleasures. And Emma the kinges moder dyed short¦ly after, and was buryed a wynche∣ster. And Swanus the eldest sonne of Goodwyne went to Hierusalem, and from thens towarde Lycia / and dyed by the waye of colde, that he had taken of goynge barefote. Then the Normans that had gyuen to the kynge euyll counsaylles agayne En¦glyshemen / were by Goodwyne and his frendes exyled. Among the why∣che Robert archebyshop af Caunter¦bury that hadde spoken sore agayne theym was one / whych after went to Rome to complayn to the pope then Leon̄ the .ix. or Uyctour the seconde. And whē he had receyued letters of ye pope directed to ye kyng / he returned to his abbay of Gemeticum in Nor∣mandye, where he somtyme had ben munke and abbot / and there dyed. After hym Stigandus was made his successoure / the whyche as sayth Policronicon, had before tyme lefte the byshopryche of Shyrborne, and toke the see of wynchester by strēgth. He also vsed fayres of holy chyrche thynges / and was a lewde or vnlet∣tred man, as the more part of the bys¦shoppes of Englande at those dayes were. And ouer that he passed other in ryches and dyssymulacyon. But yet he neuer had ye palle from Rome, though there be great sale that ma∣keth many maystryes. Then was openly spoken that he was not worthy a byshopryche, that coude vse ye bragge or pompe of the worlde, the vse of voluptuosyte, of glotony and Lechery, the shynynge araye of clothynge, the countenaun¦ce of knyghtes, and the gaderynge of horsemen, and thynketh full ly∣tell on the profyte of soules. And yf men sayde to theym that a byshoppe shulde be chosen for holynesse of ly∣uyng, and for hys good clergye, and not for couetyse of money / they wold answere as foloweth, Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tēpore mores. The whyche verse maye be englyshed in thys maner. As tyme requyreth, so men done theym vse. In wynter warme clothes, in somer lyght and lesse. In tyme of sadnesse men done ga∣mys refuse. And in myrthe tyme, men myrthes theym dresse. So in tyme passed, was vsed great sadnesse In the chyrche. But nowe men lyghte be. wherfore the maners muste wyth men agree. SO that by such light answere they planed or excused ye shar∣penesse of theyr mysse lyuynge. About this tyme, whyche shuld by Ranulff be about the .xii. yeare of ye rey¦gne of Edward / Marian{us} the Scot that before I haue often named, that wrote myche of ye dedes of ye kynges of England / at the age of .xxv. yeres forsoke the world, & went on pylgry∣mage / & was after shorne munke at Coleyne in Almayne in the abbay of Scottes. whyche Marianus after some wryters was in great fauoure with Malcolyne kyng of Scottes. In the .xiii. yere of kynge Edward the Scottes rebelled agayn ye kyng. wherfore Sewarde erle of Northum¦berlande,
by the kynges commaun∣dement gadered a great hoste and en¦tred that lande / and behaued hym so manfully, that in processe he sub∣dued the Scottes, & chased ye kynge out of his coūtrey / so that after kyng Edwarde gaue that kyngedome vn¦to Malcolyn̄ sonne of the kynge of Cumbrys, to beholden of hym & hys heyres kynges, as chefe lordes of Scotlande. Uppon Ester mondaye aboute the sayde yere Goodwyn̄ syttynge at the kynges bourde wyth other lordes in ye castell of wyndsore / yt happed one of the kynges cuppe berers to stum∣ble and to recouer agayne, so that he shedde none of the drynke. wherat Goodwyn̄ lough, and sayde, nowe that one brother hath susteyned that other. wherby he ment that the one fote or legge hathe sustayned ye other from fallynge. wyth whyche wordes the kyng marked him & sayd, Ryght so my brother Alfrede shuld haue hol¦den me, ne had Goodwyn ben. The erle then conceyued that the kynge suspected hym of hys brothers deth / and sayde vnto the kynge in defen∣dynge hys vntrouth: syr as I per∣ceyue well it is told to the, yt I shuld be ye cause of thy brothers deth. So mought I sauely swalowe this mor fel of brede yt I here hold in my hāde, as I am giltlesse of the dede. But as soone as he had receyued the brede / forthwyth he was choked. Then the kynge commaūded hym to be drawē from the table / and so was conueyed to wynchester, and there buryed. Marianus sayth that as erle Good∣wyn̄ sat at the kynges table at wyn∣chester / he was sodaynly taken with a palsye or some other sykenes vpon the Ester mondaye, and dyed ye thyrd day after. And his lordshyppes were gyuen vnto Harold his eldest sonne then lyuynge / & Haroldes erledome was gyuen to Algarus the sonne of Leofricus, whych was the erledome of Oxenford after some wryters. It was not longe after ye kynge Ed∣warde sent vnto the .iiii. Henry than emperour of Almayne, Aldredus bys¦shop of worceter, wyth other noble men / prayenge hym that he wolde sende vnto England hys cosyn Ed∣warde sonne of Edmūde Ironsyde / for so myche as he entended to make hym hys heyre. The whyche request was fulfylled, so that he came into Englande soone after / the whych as ye haue harde before, was named Edwarde the outlawe. But as witnessyth Guydo and other the yere after that he came into En∣glande, he dyed at London, and was buryed at westmynster. Thys yere folowynge kynge Ed∣warde thorough yll counsayll exiled wythout gylte Algarus the sonne of Leofricus. The whych assocyat hym wyth Gryffyne kynge or duke of wa∣lys / and destroyed ye countre of Har∣forde, & dyd mych harme to ye towne, and set the mynster on fyre, and slew vii. chanons therof. Then the kyng sent Harolde agayn hym / the whiche chased the walshmen into theyr own boundes, and recoueryd the sayde towne by appoyntement holden by the sayde Algarus, and amended all hurtes before done by the walshmē / and lastely recouncyled the sayde Algarus and his companye vnto the kynges grace. THE .CCXIII. CHAPITER. ABoute the .xv. yere of kynge Edwarde / dyed ye noble duke Sewarde ruler of Northumberland of the flux, of whome Guydo reher∣seth dyuers notable actes whyche I passe ouer. Of whom yt is radde that when he sawe well he shulde dye, he
caused hys armour to be put vppon hym / and so armed and syttynge in a cheyre, hauynge all the ryghtes of the chyrch sayde, that so yt became a knyght and man of honour to dye, & not lyenge as an other mene man / and so dyed, & was buryed at yorke. And hys erledome was after gyuen to Tosty or Costy son of Goodwyn̄. In the yere folowynge or .xvi. yere of kynge Edwarde, dyed also ye good erle Leofricus erle of Mercia and of Chester / and was buryed in the ab∣bay of Couentre, the whyche before he hadde buylded. This man pur∣chased many great pryuyleges for ye towne of Couentre / and made it free of all maner of toll, excepte onely of horse. For the whyche to haue al∣so free / the comen fame telleth, that after longe requeste made vnto hym by his wyfe named Godina, he graū¦ted her to haue yt therof freed / wyth that that she wolde ryde naked tho∣rough the towne / by meane wherof yt was freed. Then Algarus hys son was erle after hym. Harolde then the eldeste sonne of Goodwyn̄ / was in great authoryte, & ruled myche of the kynges armye. The yere folowyng Algarus was accused by malyce / & exylded the land. wherfore he fled agayne to Gryffyne duke of walis as he before had done, of whom he was ioyously receyuyd and maynteyned. The kynge therof beyng infourmed, sent Harolde into walys to make warre vppon Gryf∣fyne. The whyche quytte hym in so knyghtely wyse / that he chased the walshmen, brent the sayde Gryffyns paleys at a place callyd Rutlan̄, and his nauy, and then returned into En¦glande about mydlent. But aboute rogacyon dayes nexte folowyng, the sayde Harolde with his brother Tos¦ty was sente thyther agayne, wyth a stronge army. At whyche season they destroyed a great parte of walys, & in conclusion brought the walshmen vnto dew subieccyon, and forced thē to gyue pledges for the contynuance of the same. And that done pursued so sore vppon the sayde Gryffyne, that in the ende his owne people for purchase of theyr owne lyues, slewe the sayde Gryffyne, and sent his hed vnto Harolde in the moneth of Au∣guste / so that after the deth of thys Griffyne by the commaundement of the kynge, the coūtrey of walys was commytted to the gydynge of the .ii. bretherne of Gryffyne / the whyche had fauoured more the kynges par∣ty in tyme of the foresayd warre then theyr brother. And this warre in wa¦lys thus brought to ende / Harold by his polycy recouncyled agayne Alga¦rus erle of Mercia to ye kyng{is} grace, so that he contynued in hys fauoure durynge hys lyfe after. About thys tyme a woman of Bak¦ley in Barkshyre vsed yll craftes of sorcery. The whyche as she was syt∣tynge vpon a daye at a feste or great dyner / a crowe that she had lykyng∣ly fedde and brought vp, kreked lou¦der then he was accustomed to do▪ when the woman harde that noyse her knyfe fyll out of her hande, & she waxed sodaynly pale. And with yt she beganne to syghe and sorow / & sayd alas, this daye is my soule comen to the laste sorow. And so after that she had spoken those wordes / a messan∣ger came to her, and sayde that her son and all her mayny was dede so∣daynly. Then she was conueyed to her owne and was full syke. wher∣fore in haste she sent for an other son of hers that was a monke, & a dough¦ter yt was a nunne / at whose cōmyng she sayd to them in thys wyse. I am the woman that haue vsed yll crafte and enyll lyuynge / and in vayne I hoped to haue ben saued by your be∣des
and prayers. But now I praye you that ye woll releue my tourmen¦tes and paynes / for of my soule the iudgement is gyuen. wherfore in ca∣se that ye maye kepe my body from tourment, sewe it in an hartes skyn, and laye it in a troughe of stone and hyll it wyth lede close and iuste / and after do bynde it wyth barres of iron in moste strongest and sure wise, and cause ye .xl. {per}sons to synge psalmes by nyght, and vppon the morne as many masses. And yf I lye so stylle iii. nyghtes, than burye my body on the .iiii. daye. But all thys was for noughte. For the fyrste nyght whyle the psalmes were in sayeng / ye strōge bandes were sodaynly to brokē / and one wyth a gresely loke was sene vp¦pon an horse backe all blacke, & cast thys woman behynde hym, & so rode forth wyth so greate crye and noyse, that it was harde as sayth Polycro¦nycon .iiii. myles thens. Thys wolde I not haue shewed, but that I fynde it wryten and recor¦ded of diuers authours. Than to retourne to our fourmer story / as wytnessyth myne authoure Ranulfe, about ye .xx. yere of ye reygne of kynge Edwarde / Harolde sayled towarde Normandye to vysyte hys brother wylnotus and Hacun hys neuewe / the which as ye before haue harde were layde there for pledges for the peas to beholden vppon erle Goodwyns syde agayne the kynge. But he in his course of saylyng was weder dryuen by tempeste into the countre or prouynce of Pontyfe, or more verely into the puynce of Poūtyth / where he was taken as a pry∣soner, and sent vnto duke wyllyam of Normandy. The whyche forced hym to swere, that he in tyme folow∣ynge shulde marye hys doughter / & that after the deth of kynge Edward he shulde kepe the lande of England to hys behofe, accordyng to the wyll and mynde of Edwarde after some wryters. And after the opynyon of a nother cronycle wryten in latyn / the sayd Harolde for to be in the more fa¦uour of duke wyllyā, shewed to hym that kynge Edwarde in presence of hys barony, had admytted the sayde wyllyam for his heyre / and couenaū¦ted wyth hym, that yf he ouerlyued the kyng, he wold in saue wyse kepe the lande to hys vse. For the whyche tydynges & promyse wyllyam graū∣ted to hym hys doughter to wyfe, yt than was wythin lawfull yeres of maryage wyth greate dower. And for to cause Harolde to be the more stabler in hys promyse kepynge / he delyuered to hym Hacun hys neuew and sonne of hys brother Swanus, whyche he myche desyred, and kepte styll wylnotus the brother of ye sayd Harolde. After whiche couenauntes suffycyentely stablysshed and enac∣ted / Harold departed from duke wyl¦lyam wyth greate and ryche gyftes, and in processe of tyme landed in En¦glande. And at hys comynge to the kynges presence / he shewed to hym all that he had done in the foresayde maters / where wyth the kynge was well cōtented, as affermeth the sayd latyne cronycle. THE .CCXIIII. CHAPITER. IN the .xxii. yere of kynge Ed∣warde as testyfyeth Ranulfe / Tostius the brother of Harolde was for cause not shewed disconted in the kynges courte, and went vnto Har∣forde in the marche of walys / where at that tyme the seruauntes of Ha∣rold by cōmaūdement of theyr may∣ster were besyed to make prouysyon for to receyue the kynge. But whan thys Tostius was thyder comen / he cruelly slewe the sayde seruaūtes of
hys brother, & hacked them in small pecys, and caste them after in mere∣sowce or salte. And that done sent worde vnto the kynge, yt yf he wolde come vnto hys feest, he shulde lacke no powdered mete, what so euer he hadde besyde. Thys cruell dede sprange wyde, so that for it he was hated of all mē / in so mych that hys owne tenauntes the men of Northūberland, of which prouynce he than was lorde of, arose agayne hym and toke frō hym that he hadde / and lastely chaced hym in∣to Flaunders wyth a fewe persons than a waytynge vppon hym. But ye vertuouse kyng Edward not beyng contented wyth the comons doynge, consyderynge it to be done wythout hys aduyce and cōmaūdement / sent thyder Harolde to do correccyon vp∣pon the heddes or capytayns of the Northumbers. wherof they beynge acerteyned cōtynued theyr strength and mette wyth Harolde & hys peo∣ple / and sent hym to vnderstāde that they were frely borne, and frely nou∣rysshed, & that they myght nat suffer no cruelnesse of dukes. Also they had lerned of theyr elders & soueraynes to meyntayn fredom or to suffer deth and to lyue in quyetnesse vnder an easy duke. whan Harolde had recey∣ued thys message, and aduertysed ye strength of the Northūbers / he per∣ceyued well that wythout greate ef∣fusyon of blode he myghte not cor∣recte the mysse doers. wherfore it se∣med to hym better to fauour the coū∣tree, than to take hede of the syngu∣ler profyte of hys brother / so that he retorned to the kynge wyth thys an∣swere, and purchased theyr pardon of hym / and also procured so ye kyng, ye he assygned to them an other duke or erle that was named Malcarus. And Tostius hys brother wyth hys wyfe & chyldern remayned in Flaun¦ders, durynge the kynges lyfe. Kynge Edwarde in the .xxii. yere of hys reygne, syttyng at mete vpon Eester day in his paleys of westmyn¦ster, sodaynly lowghe, whan other dyd talke and eate. whan thys bles∣syd man had dyned, and was entred into his chamber / his famylyers as∣ked of hym ye cause of hys lawghyng To whom he answered / for ye same selfe tyme sayd he .vii. slepers, that in the mount Seleon besydes Ephe¦sym in Asya the lasse, had slepte two hundred yeres or there about vpon the ryght syde / the selfe same tyme they tourned them, and shall slepe agayne vpon that other syde .lxxiiii. yeres. Though thys be tolde of Ra∣nulphe & other / syth in thys sayenge appereth some dyscordaunce wyth other wryters / & also wyth the for∣mer sayenge of the sayde Ranulphe in the .xxii. chapyter of hys .iiii. boke of Polycronycō, where he sayth that the sayd .vii. slepers were closed in ye caue / the fyrst yere of Decius, and so sleped contynuyngly to the laste ty∣me or yeres of Theodocius the you∣ger than emperour / by whyche rea∣son they shulde slepe about ye season or space of .ii. hundred yere as aboue is sayd / and than arose and shewed them to that sayd Theodocius empe¦rour and many other / & dyed soone after, as wytnessyth Uincencius hy∣storialis, Antoninus, Iacobus Phi∣lippus, and other: wherfore it can not stande wyth reasō, yt they shulde slepe vpon ye other syde after ye tour∣nyng .lxxiiii. yeres, as is aboue sayd / nor that they shulde sterue in ye tyme of thys holy kynge and confessoure. For hys tyme of reygne was after ye tyme of Theodoci{us} aforesayd, more than .vi. hundred yeres. But yf it be ment by some other. For there are vii. other slepers spoken of in ye .xxvi. chapyter of the fyrste boke of Poly∣cronycon,
that hath slepte in a no∣ther caue many yeres. wherfore I remytte thys vnto other, and folowe the order of the story. wherein it is founde, that whan this blessed kyng Edwarde had receyued by dyuyne monycyon, that he shulde chaunge thys transitory and bryckell lyfe for the lyfe euerlastynge / he sykened in the Crystmasse weke. In tyme of whych sykenesse was shewed to hym a vysyon, that he after shewed vnto suche as were about hym / and sayde two men of relygion came to me that I somtyme was famylyer wyth in Normandye / and shewed that they were sent from god vnto me, to gyue vnto me warynynge of such thynges as foloweth. And fyrste they sayde that for the dukes, bysshoppes, and abbotes of Englande, be not goddes seruauntes, but the deuyllys / god hath taken thys kyngdome into the handes of enemyes for a tyme / and fendes shall walke and destroble the people. Than I besought god that the people myghte haue warnynge, and do penaunce and be delyuered, as the people were of the cytye of Ni¦nyue. Nay sayde they / for these men be so indurate of harte, ye they shulde do no worthy penaunce, nor to them god shall shewe hys mercy nor forgy¦uenesse. Than I asked of them / whā myghte be hope of mercy and pardō. They answered / whan a grene tree is hewen downe, and a parte therof cut from the stocke, and layde .iii. fourlonge from the stocke / and wyth¦out mannes helpe or hande shall re∣tourne to his stocke or rote, and take agayne hys shappe, and than flou∣ryshe and brynge forth fruyte. whan thys is done / than maye be hope of comforte and of remedy. In the tyme that this blessyd man shewed thus thys vysyon / was pre∣sent there wyth other, Stygandus archebysshoppe of Caunterbury. The whyche sayde vnto the other, that the kynge raued or ellys doted for age and sykenesse, as olde men done / and accompted these wordes for foly and vanyte. But not longe after Englande felte and conceyued thys prophecye / whan it was in sub∣ieccyon of straungers and alyauntes as after shall be shewed. Than who that is desyrous to knowe the exposycion of the prophe∣cye of the grene tree / lette hym rede in the ende of the lyfe of thys glory∣ous kynge and confessoure, transla∣ted by wyllyam Caxton, in the boke called the Legende of sayntes / and there he shall fynde it. All be it that in other places I haue sene it other∣wyse interpreted / the whyche I re∣mytte to them that haue experyence in suche facultye. And to conclude thys storye / trouth it is that this bles¦syd kynge dyed the .iiii. daye of Ia∣nuary, whan he hadde reygned .xxiii. yeres, vii. monethes, and odde days / and was buryed in the monastery of westmynster, y• whych he before had gretly augmēted & repayred / but nat in that maner and fourme that it is nowe in. For the chyrche that nowe there standeth, was so reedyfyed and buylded newe of Henry the thyrde and sonne of kynge Iohn̄. The whi∣che also after some wryters / transla∣ted thys blessyd kynge Edwarde from the lower parte of ye chyr∣che, and shryned hym there he now lyeth. And this kynge Edwarde laft after hym no chylde / for he was accompted for a vyrgyn whan he dyed.
Francia. THE .CCXV. CHAPITER. PHylyp the fyrst of that name & son of Henry / began his dominiō ouer the Frenchemen, in the yere of our lorde .M.lviii / & the .xvi. yere of Ed¦warde the confessour than kynge of Englande. And of thys Phylyp it is radde, that he maryed a wyfe named Berta the doughter of Baldewyne erle of Holland and of Fryce. Of the whyche Berta this Philyp receyued a sonne and named hym Lewis / and a doughter ye was called Cunstaūce. But in processe of tyme he haunted so myche the company of a woman named Bertande, that he hated hys laufull wyfe / and at length helde her in pryson, and kept that other in her stede / and gatte vppon the sayd Ber¦trande two sonnes named Phylyp & Florys, and a doughter which myne authour nameth not. For thys ad∣uoutry, he was often monysshed of ye pope, that he shulde leue the compa∣nye of that yll woman, and take to hym hys lawfull wyfe yt he so longe had holden in pryson within hys ca∣stell of Monsfruell. And for he wolde not be obedyent vnto the popes coū¦sayll / he was fynally accused of pope Urbane the seconde of that name. By meane wherof he was reconcy∣led and restored agayne to his wyfe, and refused hys concubyne. And in the tyme of thys Phylyp / Godfrey de Bolliō with many other crysten prynces, at the exortacyon of Peter the heremyte, sayled into the holy lande / and wanne the cytye of Hierusalē out of the Sarasyns han¦des. whyche prynces lastly crowned the sayd Godfrey kynge of the sayde cytye. And after it so contynued in possessyon of crysten men, by ye terme of foure score and tenne yeres, vnder ix. crysten kinges / and lenger myght haue endured, hadde not discencyon fallen amonges them selfe. And so by Antoninus, Peter Disrey, and other it is manyfestely shewed. Thys vya∣ge after moste accorde of wryters, begā in the yere of grace .M.lxxxvi. and the .xxvii. yere of thys Phylyp. And the sayd Godfrey was crowned kynge of the sayde cytye of Hierusa∣lem after the affyrmaunce of ye sayde wryters, in the yere of grace a thou∣sande and foure score and .xix. Of thys Phylyp lytell worthy me∣mory is lefte in wrytynge. For lyke as hys fader Henry made hym kyng by his lyfe, and suffered hym to haue the rule of the lande / ryght so thys Phylyp after a certayne of tyme, cō∣mytted the rule of the lande vnto Le¦wys his sonne. And he sette hys mynde to huntynge and other dys∣portes / and so ladde hys lyfe in all slowthe and idelnesse. Than Lewys takynge vppon hym the charge of the realme / sub∣dued the erle of Mounte Merusy & other / that laboured to take from the chyrche of saynt Denys certayn pre∣uyleges / and also constrayned them to restore and satysfye all hurtes and harmes to the sayde chyrche by them done. Thys Lewys as affermeth the Frenche cronycle, maryed the dough¦ter of Guy erle of Cotcheforde / the whyche after for nerenesse of kynne was deforced from the sayde Le∣wys, to the greate dyspleasour of the sayde erle Guy. wherfore he moued warre agayne the sayd Lewys, and toke from hym certayne holdes and castelles / of the whyche the castell of Gurney was one. But at length Le∣wys had ye better of that warre, and
recoueryd diuers of the sayd holdes. And amonges other prysoners by hym and his knyghtes takē / he toke a myghty and stronge captayn of the sayde erle Guy named Hombolde, the whyche he sente to the castell of Stampes, there sauely to be kepte. Durynge whyche warre, Philyppe the kynge sykened / and dyed the yere of grace .M. a hundred & .vi, when he hadde rygned full .xlviii. yere / and was buried at saint Benet sur Loyt. THE .CCXVI. CHAPITER. HArolde ye second son of erle Good¦wyne, and laste kynge of Sa∣xons / began to rule the realme of Englande ye v. daye of Ia∣nuary, and the yere of our lorde .M. and .lxvi / and the .viii. yere of Phy∣lyp the fyrst then kynge of Fraunce. This as moste myghty, for so myche as the blessyd kynge Edwarde dyed wythout yssue, not myndyng the pro¦mysse of hym before made vnto wyl∣lyam duke of Normādy as before I haue shewed / toke vpō him as kyng, and was crowned of Aldredus then byshoppe of yorke. All be yt as affer∣meth Guydo and other, some of the lordes entended to haue made Ed∣gare Adelynge kynge / whyche Ed∣gare as affermeth ye sayde authours, was sonne to Edwarde that was the sonne of Edmund Ironsyde, and na¦med of some Edwarde the outlawe. But for this Edgare was yong, and specyally for Harolde was strong of knightes and rychesse / he wanne the reygne. Howe be yt Marianus sayth that kyng Edwarde ordeyned before his deth, that Harolde shuld be kyng after hym. By reason wherof, the lor¦des crowned hym therupppon at westmynster. Anon as he was crowned / he be∣ganne to fordoo euyll lawes and cu∣stomes before vsed, and stablysshed the good lawes, and specyally suche as were for the defence of holy chirch and punyshed the euyll doers, to the fere and example of other. In shorte tyme after that Harolde was thus made kynges / Tosty or Costy hys brother, whyche as before is sayde, was of the Northumbers chased into Flaundres, made hym a nauy of .lx. small sayles, and sayled about the ile of wyght, & toke prayes wythin the sayd yle and other places of Kent. And from thens he sayled in to Lynsey, & dyd there myche harme both with fyre and sworde. But soon after he was chased thens by Edwyn̄ and Malcharus erles of Mercia & of Northumberlande. And then he sayled into Scotland, & taryed there tyll the somer after. when Tostius was thus wyth hys robbers chased / then Harolde Harfa¦gar kynge of Northganys or Nor∣ways, wyth a great nauy of .iii. hun∣dred shyppes or mo, entred ye mouth of the ryuer of Tyne. Thys Harolde Harfagar as sayth Guyde, was the sonne of Canutus, and kyng of Den¦marke and of Norway. The whych heryng of the deth of holy Edward / purueyed ye sayd great armye to wyn Englande, as his ryghtfull enhery∣taunce. when Harolde was warned of thys great flote of Danys / he sent vnto the forenamed erles or dukes of Mercia and of Northumberland / commaundyng them to wythstande theyr landrynge, whyle he gadered hys strength. Then the foresayde du¦kes spedde theym towarde the Da∣nys, and gaue vnto them a sharpe & stronge fyght. But in conclusyon the
Englyshemen were put to the worse, and were fayne to gyue backe / so yt the enymyes entred farther into the lande. The kyng herynge of the scō∣fyture of hys people, made the more haste towarde hys enymyes / so that the .vi. day after he came to Stemys¦forde brydge. In thys whyle was Tostius before named come oute of Scotlande, and gone to the partye of the Danys agayne hys owne bro¦ther. In thys foresayde place bothe hostes ioyned / and faught then there a sharpe cruell batayll. wherin fyll many a sturdy knyght vppon the en¦glyshe partye, but mo vppon the Da¦nys syde / so that in the ende Harolde theyr kynge was slayne, and that of the hande of Harolde kynge of En∣lande as sayth Guydo / and Tostius was also slayne in the same fyghte. Olanus broter to the sayth Harolde Harfagar, with Paulus duke of the yles of Orkeys / were there taken pri¦soners. The whyche the kynge cau∣sed to hym to be sworne, to kepe such promises as they to hym there made, and toke good pledges for perfor∣maunce of the same, and after suffred theym to retourne from thens they were comen. It ys also specyally remembred of the sayd authour / that one knyght stode vppon the foresayde brydge, and wyth his axe defended the pas∣sage maugre the hole hoste of ye En∣glyshemen, and slew .xl. Englyshmen or mo wyth hys axe / and myght not be ouercomen, tyll an Englysheman went vnder the brydge and stycked hym vpwarde wyth hys spere tho∣rough an hole of the brydge. For thys vyctory Harolde was sup¦pressed wyth pryde, and also wyth co¦uetouse / so that he dyuyded not the prayes of hys enymyes amonge hys knyghtes, but kepte theym to hym selfe / or gaue parte vnto suche ny∣ghtes as he fauoured, and spared to them that had well deserued / by rea∣son wherof he loste the fauour of ma¦ny of hys knyghtes. In thys passetyme / the doughter of duke wyllyam, the whych Harold shuld haue maried, dyed within age. wherfore Harold thought hī ye more discharged of his {pro}mise before made to her fader. But duke willyam war¦ned Harolde of couenauntes broken, and medled menasses wyth prayers by sondry tymes. wherunto Harolde answered, that a nyce folyshe coue∣naunte ought not to be holden / & na¦mely ye behest of other mennys ryght and kyngdome, wythout the hole as¦sent of the senatours of ye same land. And farthermore a lewde othe might and ought to be broken / and specyal¦ly when yt is compelled to be sworne for nede or for drede. Uppon these answers receyued by duke wyllyam from Harolde / in the whyle that messangers went & came, duke wyllyam gadered hys knygh∣tes, and prepared his nauy and all other thinges necessary to the warre, & had assent of the lordes of his land to ayde and assyste hym in his iour∣ney. And ouer that he in such wise en¦formed the pope, then beynge named Alexander the second / yt he cōformed hym in takynge of that vyage / and sent vnto hym a banner, the whyche he willed hym to bere in the shyp that he hym self shuld sayle in. And so be∣ynge purueyed of all thynges concer¦nyng his iourney, he sped hym to the see syde, & toke shyppynge in the ha¦uen of faynt Ualery / where he taryed a longe tyme or he myght haue a co∣uenable wynde. For ye whych his sol¦dyours murmured & grudged / and sayd it was a woodnesse & great dys∣pleasynge to god, to desyre an other manns kyngdome by strength / & na¦mely when god wythsayde yt by the
workynge of his element. At the laste when duke wyllyam had longe bydden and houed for the wynde / he commaunded to brynge forth ye body of saynt Ualery, and to be sette vppon the see stronde. The whyche done / the wynde shortely af∣ter came about and fylled the sayles. Then wyllyam thanked god & saynt Ualery / and toke shortely after shyp¦pynge, and helde his course to warde Englande / vppon thys grounde & tytle folowynge. The fyrste and pryncypall was to chalenge his ryghte / and to haue the domynyon of the lande that to hym was gyuen (as he affermed) of kyng Edwarde the confessoure and hys neuewe. The seconde was, to take wreche of his deth & cruell murdour of hys neuew Alfrede, and brother of ye bles¦syd kynge Edwarde / that was slayn of erle Goodwyne and his adheren∣tes, as before ye haue harde in the storye of Hardykinitus / the whyche dede he ascrybed chefely vnto Ha∣rolde And the thyrde was, for to auenge the wronge done vnto Ro∣bert archebyshop of Caunterburye / whych as he was enformed / was exi¦led by the meanes and labour of Ha¦rolde, in the tyme of Edwarde the cō¦fessour, as before is shewed. THE .CCXVII. CHAPITER. DUke wyllyam kepynpe hys course / landed in processe of tyme at Hastynge in Sussex, in a place called Peuenessey. And in hys goynge oute of his shyp, and takyng the land / hys one fote slode, and that other stacke faste in the sande. The whych espyenge one of his knyghtes yt was nere vnto hym / cryed alowde and sayd, now syr duke thou holdest Englande, and thou shalte soone be tourned from a duke to a kynge. The duke of this made game, and en¦tred further into the lande / and made his proclamacyons and cryes, that no man shuld take any prayes, or do any force to the people. For he sayde that yt was reasonable that he shuld spare that thynge that shulde be hys owne. Harolde in thys whyle was in the North partes of Englande, and had wittynge of the landynge of the Nor¦mayns / and sped hym towarde them in all that he myghte, and gatheryd his strength by the countreys as he came. But the duke made so good spede, that he came to Lōdon before the kynge. where he was holden out, tyll he had made good suertye, that he and hys people shulde passe tho∣rough the cytye wythout taryenge. The whyche was obseruyd. And so he passyng the cytye / passed the brid∣ge, and went ouer into Sussex. Kynge Harolde entendynge to know the strēgth of his enmyes, sent espyes into the dukes hoste / the why¦che made reporte vnto the kynge, that all duke wyllyams soldyours were prestes. For they had theyr ouer lyppes and chekes shauen / and the Englyshmen at these dayes vsed the here of theyr ouer lyppes shadde and not shauen. But Harold to that answered and sayde, they be no pre∣stes, but are stalworth and sturdye knyghtes. Then Gurth or Surth one of the yongeste bretherne of Harolde / coun¦sayled hym that he shulde stande a parte, and suffer hym wyth other of hys lordes to fyght with ye Normās, for so myche as he was sworne to the duke and they were not / aled∣gynge furthermore, that yf they were ouerthrowen, yt yet he myght defende hys quarell and fyghte for the countrey.
In this meane tyme wyllyam sent a monke vnto Harold, and proferred to hym thre maner of wayes / and to chose one of the thre. The fyrste, that accordynge to his othe he shulde render the lande, or de¦lyuer yt vnto the possessyons of wyl∣lyam. And ye done / to take yt agayne of hym, and hold yt of hym as in fee / & so to reygne vnder hym for terme of hys lyfe / and after his deth to re∣tourne yt to the sayd wyllyam, or to suche one of his sonnes as he wolde assigne it vnto. Or secondly, leue the kyngedome without more stryfe. Or thyrdely in exchewynge of shedynge of the more plenty of Crysten mēnes blood / that he wold defende his qua∣rell in hys owne persone agayne the duke / and they two onely to trye the mater by dynte of sworde. But Ha∣rolde refused these offers / and sayde he wolde trye his quarell by dynt of swordis, and not by one sworde / and that he and hys knyghtes wolde de∣fende theyr coūtrey agayn all straūge nacyons, prayenge to god to deme the ryghte betwene them twayne. when duke wyllyam hadde recey∣ued this answere from Harolde, and same well that there was no meane but fortune in batayll: he charged his people yt myght watche, to occu∣pye theym in prayer / and specylly the prestes and the religious people, where the Englyshemen gaue them all to drynke and songe. Then vppon the morowe beynge saterdaye, and the .xiiii. daye of Oc∣ctober, and the daye of saynte Ca∣lyxte the pope / bothe hostes assay∣led other, in that place where as nowe standeth the abbay of Batayll in Sussex. In the begynnyge of thys batayll / a banner or a banneret called Thylfer a Norman splayed before the hoste of Normans / and slewe an Englysheman or knyghte that came agayne hym / and after that one other, and so the thyrde, and was slayne at the laste. Then the seltrons smote to gy∣ther wyth a great noyse and crye, and faughte sore a longe season. And the Englyshmen defended them manfully / and the better for that that they kepte theym hole to gy∣ther wythoute scaterynge or spryn∣gynge a brode. The whyche when wyllyam apperceyued / he gaue a sygne vnto hys knyghtes, that they shulde gyue backe, and make coun∣tenaunce as they dyd flee. Then the Normans imbatelled the fote men, and sette horse men for wynges on euery syde. By the whyche wyle the Englyshemen were descueryd, and soone oute of araye / and the Nor∣mans tourned agayne vpon ye En∣glyshemen, and slewe theym downe on euery syde. Thys batayll was sore foughten of the Englyshemen / that duke wyllyam was thryse felled that day by reason that thre horse were that daye slayne vnder hym. Lastely Ha∣rolde was wounded in the eye wyth an arowe, and fyll to the grounde and was slayne, and hys people sca∣tered / so that well was hym that myghte saue hym selfe by fleynge Then duke wyllyam buryed hys men that there were slayne / and fuf∣fred hys enymyes to do the same. Of the deth of thys Harolde ys dyuersly wryten. For Geraldus Crambrens. in hys boke called Iti∣nerarius sayth, yt after Harolde had receyued many woundes, and loste hys lefte eye / he fledde from that felde to the countrey of Chester, and lyued longe after an holy lyfe as an ancre, in the selle of saynte Iamys faste by saynt Iohn̄s chyrch, & made there an holy ende. when ye deth of Harold was knowen
to the erles of Mercia and of Nor∣thumberlande / the whyche for streyt¦nesse of waye myght not bryng theyr people to that felde / or ellys for that that they wylfully wythdrew theym selfe from Harolde, bycause he none otherwise departed ye prayes amon∣ges them and theyr knyghtes at the former feld of Norgaynes: then they drewe the next waye to London, and take Agatha Harold{is} wyfe and sent her to Chester. And they and Aldre∣dus byshoppe of yorke with the Lon¦doners / agreed and promysed eyther vnto other, that they wold make Ed¦gare Athelynge kynge, and defende hys ryghte to the vttermoste of theyr powers. But that promyse not wythstan∣dynge, when they harde of the great strength that dayly fell to duke wyl∣lyam and of hys prouysyons / they were fayne to breke that appoynte∣ment. And the sayd erles submytted them, and gaue vnto hym pledges, and became to hym his lyege men by homage and feautye. And thus when Harolde hadde ru¦led the lande from the .v. daye of Ia¦nuary to the .xiiii. daye of October / he was slayne, when he had reygned ix. monethes and odde dayes / and was buryed at the monasterye of the holy crosse of waltham, whyche he before hadde founded, and set therin chanons, and gaue vnto theym fayre possessyons. And here endeth for a time y• blood of Saxons / the whych contynued to reken from Hengestus fyrste reygne, by the space or tyme of .v. hundred and .lxxxxi. yeres. And yf yt be reke∣ned from the begynnyng of the west Saxōs / then yt endureth by ye terme of .v. hundred .lxv. yeres. whych cōty¦nued as rulers & kinges of this land all the sayd tyme / onely except y• that passed betwene the fyrst yeres Canu¦tus, and the laste yere of Hardekyni∣tus. In the whyche season passed or flowed vpon .xxiiii. yeres. All be yt yt the persecucyon of the Danys lasted mych lenger, as to fore I have shew¦ed in ye story of ye forenamed Kynit{us}. THE .CCXVIII. CHAPITER. THen for as myche that god of his vnknowen iudgementes to man, and by his hygh & hyd coun¦sayll, wolde suffer this duke to con∣quere so noble a lande, and to be lord and souerayne ouer so many noble enherytours, as were & now be with in the same: I thynke yt cōuenyent to shew here the dyscent of the sayde duke / and how nere of blood he was vnto the blessed kynge Edwarde the confessour. wherfore as before to you I haue shewed in the storye of Charlys the Symple somtyme kynge of Fraūce / a myscreaunt or a pagan named Rol¦lo {per}secuted sore the realm of Fraūce- & lastely wan by strength the citye of Roan the hed or chefe cytye of Nor∣mandy. And in conclusyon for a fy∣nall peace betwene the sayde kynge and Rollo to be had / the sayde Rollo was crystened & named Robert, and maryed Silla the doughter of ye said Charlys. To whom ye kyng gaue in waye of Dower, ye hole duchy of Nor¦mandy. The whych Robert after he was crystened / ruled that dukedome as a good crysten man, by the terme of .xiiii. yeres / and receyued of ye sayd Silla a son, and named hym wylly∣am / the whyche after was surnamed Longa spata, as who wold saye wyl¦lyam wyth a longe sworde. This wyllyam was duke after his fader .xxv. yeres / and lefte after hym a sonne named Rycharde, whych as before is shewed in the storye of Lew es ye .vi. was named Richard ye hardy.
Then Rycharde the hardy was the thyrde duke, and reygned .lii. ye¦res / & had by hys wyfe a son named Rycharde the good, and Emma that was wyfe to Egelredus and mother to saynte Edwarde the confessoure. After hym the Good Rycharde was duke, and reygned .xxviii. yeres / and lefte after hym two sonnes, that is to say Rycharde and Robert. The fyrste after two yeres was slayne by treason of hys brother Robert / so that Robert was then duke and rey∣gned .ix. yeres. The whyche Ro∣bert, as yt is before shewed in the sto¦rye of Henry kyng of Fraunce / was father vnto this duke wyllyam. And thys wyllyam was the .vii. duke of Normandye / and ruled yt or he con∣quered Englande after moste wry∣ters .xxx. yeres. whereby yt appereth, that Emma was aunte to duke Robert, father of wyllyam Conquerour. And saynte Edwarde and this duke wyllyam were by ye fathers syde cosyn armay nes remoued as sheweth by thys draught folowynge. Th fyrste duke Rollo or Robert the fyrste duke. The seconde duke. Wyllyam longa pata sonne of Ro¦bert and the second duke. The thyrde duke. Rycharde the hardy the son of Wyllyam and .iii. duke Rycharde the ood and sonne of Rychard the fyrst Emma moder of Edward confes sour & doughter of the sayd Richard The .iiii. duke Rycharde the .ii surnamed ye good a son of Rychard the fyrst & .iiii. duke. The fyft duke Rychard ye thyrd son of Richard .ii. and .v. duke Brethern. The syxte duke Robertus the son of Rycharde ii. and Brother of Rycharde .iii. & vi. duke. Brethern. Wyllyam the sonne of Robert / & the .vii. duke and noble conque¦rour.
ANd thus here an ende of the .vi. part of thys worke / for so myche as the lande was here conquered, and put vnder the rule of an other nacyon. wherfore as before I haue vsed and done, to gyue than∣kes vnto that moste blessyd vyrgyn our lady saynt Mary, as furtherer and conductryce of thys worke / so here agayn I salute and hayle her wyth the .vi. ioye of the fornamed vii. ioyes, thus begynnynge, Gaude virgo mater Christi, tu quae sola &c. All hayle and be gladde moste noble and moder dere Of Iesu Chryste, vyrgyne moste pure and clene. Deseruynge onely by grace and lyuynge moste clere, To be of that dygnyte, thou celestyall quene, To perce the heuens that beeth so serene. And nexte to the trone of the hygh Trynyte, Thou arte admytted for to holde thy see. THys .vi. parte to be accompted from the fyrste ye∣re of Iue, vnto the laste daye of the reygne of Ha∣rolde, or begynnynge of wyllyam Conqueroure / includeth of yeres .iii. hundred and .lxxx. yeres and one. ANd so thys lande was conquered after the fyrst com¦mynge of Brute, to folowe thaccōpte of thys worke / by the force of thys duke wyllyam & hys Normans, ii. thou¦sande .ii. hundred and two yeres. ¶Thus endeth the syxt parte. THE .VII. PARTE. NOw shaketh my hāde, my pen waxeth dulle, Forweried & tyred, seyng this worke so lōg / The authours so rawe, & so farre to culle, Dymme & derke, & straunge to vnderstond, And farre out of tune to make trew songe, The storyes and yeres to make accordaunte, That yt to the reder myght shew trewe and plesaunt. But vnder correccyon all thynge may be borne, And so I remytte yt to suche as ben experte / Prayenge to theym, as I haue done beforne, To fauour and correcte / so that vnder couerte Of theyr proteccyon, this may shewe a parte, Holsome and playne, fruytefull and profytable, And to the reders and herers, ioyous and delectable.
For were not that / I dueste not farther wade, The streme is so depe, and therto so daungerous. But one thynge there is, that somwhat doth me glade, The great daunger and storyes doughtous, Ben ouer passed / so that more bounteous, The authours ben / and more manyfestly The storyes folowynge they done certyfye. wherfore as before to you I dyd promyse / Thys .vii. parte nowe I wolde take in hande. Besechynge alwayes in moste humble wyse, The welle of bountye, that flowre moste adorande, By whose humylyte man fyrste comforte fande, And was redemed from hys captyuyte / This parte to fynyshe, she wyll myne helper be. And brynge to ende thys worke that I haue take On hande to wryte, onely of entent, To brynge to lyght, and for yt shulde not shake, The olde honoure that to Englande was ment Of famous wryters, whyche haue theyr duytes sent, Unto theyr folowers, all vyces to subdue, Honoure to maynteyne, and to exalte vertue. Here after folowyth the storye of duke wyllyam Conqueroure. THE .CCXIX. CHAPITER. WIllyā duke of Nor¦mandye surnamed Conquerour, baste sonne of Robert ye vi. duke of that said dukedome, and ne∣uew vnto Edward the confessour, as before is shewed / beganne hys domynyon ouer thys realme of Englande, the .xv. daye of October, in the yere of our lordes in∣carnacyon a thousand & .lxvii / and ye ix. yere of the fyrste Phylyppe then kyng of Fraunce / and was crowned kynge of the same vppon Crystmas daye nexte folowynge, of Aldredus archbyshoppe of yorke, for so myche as at that tyme Stigandus archbys¦shoppe of Caunterbury was then ab¦sent, or durste not come in the p̄sence of the kynge / to whome he ought no great fauour, as in the sequele shall appere. when wyllyam had sette in quyet a great parte of thys lande, he betoke the gydyng therof to his brother the byshop of Bayon / and in lent folow∣ynge sayled into Normandye / and led wyth hym the chefe rulers of En¦gland, for doute of sturryng in tyme of his absence. Amonge the whyche, the two erles Marcar{us} and Edwyne rulers of Northumberlande & Mer∣cia were two / wyth also Stigandus and Edgare Ethelynge. To the why the Stigandus wyllyam shewed great reuerence and coūtenaunce of fauoure. But all proued to great dis¦symulacyon after / as was shewed by the depryuynge of the sayd Stigan∣dus,
and prysonment of hym in wyn¦chester towne, by a longe terme and season. In the next wynter, whan wyl∣lyam had sped hys besynesse in Nor¦mandy / he retourned into England wyth greate pompe, and sette a gre∣uous trybute vpon the Englyshmen By reason wherof some partyes of the lande rebelled agayne hym, and specyally the cytye of Excetour, the whyche defended hym for a certayne of tyme. But lastly by force he wanne the sayde cytye, and punysshed the cytesyns greuously. For thys and other sterne dedes of wyllyam / Marcharus erle of Nor¦thumberlande, wyth Edgare Athe∣lynge and dyuers other, as hys mo∣der and two systers Margarete and Crystyan, sayled into Scotlande. But another cronycle telleth, yt Ed∣gare entendynge wyth Agatha hys moder and hys two systers, to haue sayled into Almayne where he was borne / was by tempest of the see dry∣uen into Scotlande. where of Mal∣colyne than kynge of Scottes they were ioyously receyued. And in pro∣cesse of tyme the sayde Malcolyne caste suche loue vnto the sayd Mar∣garet / that he toke her to wyfe / as be¦fore is touched in the fyrste chapyter of the story of Canut{us}. Of the which Margaret the sayde Malcolyne re∣ceyued .ii. doughters and .vi. sonnes. wherof thre named Edgare, Alexaū∣der, & Dauyd, were kynges of Scot¦lande nexte folowynge theyr fader. And Molde one of ye foresayd dough¦ters was after maryed vnto the fyrst Henry kynge of Englande. And the other doughter Mary / was maryed to Eustace erle of Bolongii. Of Molde the fyrste doughter / Henry receyued .ii. sonnes named wyllyam and Rychard, the whych bothe dyed before theyr fader / as after in ye story of the sayd Henry shall appere. And he receyued also two doughters na∣med Molde and Mary / whych Mol¦de or Mawde was maryed to ye fyfte Henry emperour of Almayne. After whose deth she was agayne maryed to Godfrey of Geoffrey Plātagenet erle of Aungeowe. Of whom descen∣ded Henry surnamed shorte mantell, and kynge of Englande, called Hen∣ry the seconde. And the other dough∣ter Mary was maryed vnto the erle of Blaynes / of whō descended Mol∣de or Mawde, that was wyfe vnto kynge Stephen. Than it foloweth, that thys wyl∣lyam after thys foresayd trybute so leuyed of the Englysshemen, and knowynge of the depertynge of the lordes foresayde, kepte the other the streyter. But it was not longe after that Marcharus was reconsyled to the kynges grace / and fayled agayn as folowynge shall be shewed. For thys and other causes whyche were tedyous to shewe / wyllyam exalted the Normans, and gaue vnto them the chyefe possessyons of the lande / so that they dayly encreased in great honour and welth, and the Englysh men as faste decayed. Kynge wyllyā also made .iiii. stronge castels / where of two be sette at yorke, the thyrde at Lyndetyngham or Notynghm, and manned them wyth Normans, and the .iiii. at Lyncolne. About the thyrde yere of his reygne Harolde & Canutus sonnes of Swa¦nus kynge of Denmarke, came on lande in the North of Humber wyth a stronge nauy / and in all haste drew them towarde yorke. Than the Nor¦mans whyche hadde the rule of the towne and castelles, feryng that the Englysshemen wolde ayde the Da∣nys, and wyth the houses of the sub∣urbes of the towne haue fylled the towne dyches / sette the suburbes on
fyre. wherof ye flame was so bygge, and wyth the wynde so stronge / that it toke into the cytye, & brent a parte therof, wyth the mynster of saynt Pe¦ter. In tyme wherof the Danys by fauour of some of the citesyns entred the cytye / and slewe more than thre thousande of the Normans. But it was not longe or kynge wyllyam chased the Danys to theyr shyppes / and toke so greate dysplea∣sure wyth the inhabytauntes of that prouynce, that he destroyed the land lyenge bytwene yorke and Durham in suche wyse, that .ix. yeres after or there about, the lande laye vnlabo∣red & vntylled / onely out taken saynt Iohn̄s lande of Beuerley, the which was for borne by reason of a wreche done by dyuyne power, vpon one of kynge wyllyams knyghtes. The whych as he was besyed in wastyng and spoylynge of the sayde countre, fyll sodeynly wyth hys horse / so that hys horse brake hys necke, and the knyghtes face was turned to his backe. And of the famyne that the people of that countre susteyned / wonders are reported, that they shuld eate all maner of vermyn, as cattes, rattes, dogges, & other / so harde they were kepte by the warre of the kyng. And in that yere also Molde or Mawde the wyfe of kynge wyllyā / was crow¦ned quene of England, of Aldredus archebysshop of yorke. In the .iiii. yere of the reygne of thys kynge the Scottes with Mal∣colyne theyr kynge entred Northum¦berlande / and wasted and destroyed sore that countre, and slewe there in myche people / and many they toke prysoners, & helde thē as bonde men. But in the .vi. yere of hys kyng∣dome, wyllyam made such warre vp¦pon the Scottes / that he lastely for∣ced the sayde Malcolyne to swere to hym bothe homage and feauty / as it is wytnessed of wyllyam of Malmes¦bery and other wryters. THE .CCXX. CHAPITER. Kynge willyam by counsayle of the erle of Hortford and other, caused the abbeyes of Englande to be serched. And what money in them at that season was founde / he caused it to be brought to hys treasour. For the whyche dede after the exposycyō of some authours / the sayd erle was punysshed, as after shall be shewed. Soone vpon thys in the tyme by twene Easter and wytsontyde / was holden a solempne counsayle at wyn¦chester of the clergy of Englande. At the whyche counsayle were presente two cardynalles, sent from ye second Alexaunder than pope. In thys coū∣sayle, Stygandus archebysshop of Caūterbury was depryued from his dygnytye / and that for thre skylles. The fyrste was / for that he had hol∣den wrongfully that bysshopryche, whyle Robert the archebysshop was lyuynge. The seconde cause was / for that he hadde receyued the Paule of pope Benet the .v. of that name. And the thyrde cause was / for that he oc∣cupyed the sayd Paule wythout ly∣cence & lefull authoryte of ye courte of Rome. Than Stigand{us} proued that be∣nyuolence of kynge wyllyam. For where before he made to him louyng and frendly countenaūce, & dyd vnto hym greate reuerence / than he chaū∣ged all his myldenesse into sternesse, and exceuted hym by ye popes autho¦ryte / so that in the ende Stigandus was depryued of hys dygnytye, and kepte in wynchester as a prysoner ye terme of hys lyfe. It is recorded of hym that he was so couetous and sparyng, yt he wold
take nothynge of hys owne / & vsed to swere by Alhalowes, that he had not one peny. But that othe was pro¦ued vntrewe after hys deth, by a ly∣tell keye that was founde fastened about hys necke. For by that keye was founden greate treasour vnder the erth in mo places than one. In thys counsayle also were put downe dyuers other bysshoppes, ab∣botes, and pryours, by the meanes of kynge wyllyam / and all to the en∣tent that he myghte preferre Nor∣mans to the rule of the chyrch, as he hadde preferred hys knyghtes to the rule of the tēperaltye, that he myght stande in the more suerty of the land. In thys counsayle saynt wolstan̄ that than was bysshop of worceter / axed besely of the kynge certayne pos¦sessyons fallen into hys handes, by the deth of Aldred{us} laste archbyshop of yorke, that were wyth holden by ye sayd Aldredus. But the kyng myght not here than of any suche maters, for hurtyng of the lyberty of the chyr¦che of yorke. Than vpon wytsonday after / the kynge gaue the sayd archebysshop∣ryche of yorke vnto Thomas a cha∣non of Bayon / & sent for Lamfrank an other Norman than abbot of Ca¦domonency, and gaue vnto hym the archebysshopryche of Caunterbury. Thys Lamfranke was an Italyan borne / and was perfytely lerned in ye scyence of theologye or holy wrytte, & ryght apte in gouernynge of thyn∣ges bothe spyrytuall and temporall. Upon our lady daye the Assumpcyō the kynge made hym archebysshop of Caūterbury. Than Thomas that was chosen archebysshop of yorke / came vnto Lamfranke for to be sa∣cred as the vsage wolde. Of whom Lamfranke axed an othe, & his pro∣fessyon in wrytynge concernyng his obedyence. Thomas answered and sayde that he wolde neuer do that / but yf he myghte therof here suffy∣cyent authoryte and skylfull reasons & byndynge, by the whyche it myght be knowen that he shulde so do with out any preiudyce of hys chyrche. Than Lamfranke shewed and pro∣ued skylfully, that hys askynge was reasonable and ryghtfull. But yet Thomas wolde not assent / but with sayde it and went for that tyme from Lamfrank vnsacred / & shewed vnto the kyng, that Lamfranke entended to do wronge to hym and to his chyr¦che of yorke. Than the kyng callyng Lamfrank before hym sayd, than he trusted more in his cunnyng than he dyd in good fayth or reason. But he answered so reasonably vnto ye kyng that in the ende Thomas by the cō∣maundement of the kyng was fayne to come agayne to Lamfranke to be sacred / and wrote hys professyō with hys owne hande of hys obedyence and radde it / in the whyche was con∣teyned that he shulde be obedyent in all that belongeth to the worshyp of god and all crystē fayth▪ which done, he was sacred & so de{per}ted. And short¦ly after Lamfranke axed & toke pro∣fessyō of all ye byshoppes of Englād. THE .CCXXI. CHAPITER. IN the .v. yere of wyllyam the conquerours reygne / Edwyn and Marcharus erle of Mercia and of Northumberlande, beynge in fere of daunger, voyded ye kynges court secretly, and were rebelles som what of tyme. But at length it turned to bothe theyr harmes. For Edwyne was slayn as he went toward Scot¦lande / and erle Marcharus wyth ye bysshop of Dorcham named Egel∣wynus, toke the ile of Ely for theyr sauegarde. But the kynge held them so shorte, that in processe they were
fayne to yelde them to the kynges grace and mercy. Than he sent the bysshop to the abbey of Abyndon to be kept there as a prysoner / where he was so dayntely fed, that he dyed for hunger. But some wryters testyfye that he was so hyghe herted, that af∣ter he knewe he shuld remayne there as prysoner / he wolde neuer ete mete after. And erle Marcharus was had to the towre of London. In the .vi. yere of hys reygne / kyng wyllyam, as before is touched went wyth a great army into Scot∣land / and subdued Malcoyne theyr kynge, as before I haue shewed in the precedynge chapyter. In the .vii. yere of kyng wyllyam / Thomas archebysshop of yorke not beynge content to be vnder the rule and obedyence of Lamfranke, ap∣pealed to the courte of Rome / so that the sayde two archbysshoppes appe∣red both in proper persone before the pope Alexaunder afore named. In whose presence Lamfranke was so well fauoured, that where Thomas aboue named and Remigius byshop of Dorchester, were for skylfull cau∣ses depryued of theyr croyses and rynges / he by hys fauour & meanes restored them to theyr former dygny¦tees. The cause of Thomas was, for that he had holpen duke wyllyam to warde hys iourney into Englande. For the whyche the sayd duke pro∣mysed hym a bysshopryche yf he op∣teyned vyctory. And ye other was de∣priued, for yt he was proued a prestes sonne. Than Thomas moued the cause of the prymacy of Caunterbu∣ry, & of subieccyon that to hym shuld belonge / and sayde that these two sees were farre asonder, that is to meane Caunterbury and yorke / and that nother of them by the constytu∣cyons of Gregory shulde be subiecte vnto other / but that the one is more worthy than the other, for so myche as he is of elder tyme. To thys an∣swered Lamfranke and sayd / that ye constytucyons of Gregory made no mencyō of Caūterbury, but of yorke & London. Than the pope remytted thys mater to be determyned before ye kyng & the byshoppes of England / and gaue ye palle vnto Lamfranke. But for this terme or word palle, is to many one vnknowen / I shall therfore here shewe vnto you what thynge it is. This palle is an indu∣ment y• euery archbyshop must haue / & is not in full authoryte of an arch∣byshoppe, tyll he haue receyued hys palle of the pope / and is a thynge of white like to ye breded of a stole. But it is of a nother fassyon. For where ye stole is made in length, and is worne about the prestes necke / thys is ioy∣ned togyder aboue, so that it lyeth a parte therof vppon the shulders. And that one ende hangeth streyght downe to the grounde before, and that other behynde, garnysshed in dyuers places, therof wyth crosses. And where the stole is worne nexte vnto the albe whan the preste is re∣uested to masse / thys palle is wor∣ne vpon thys vestymente ouermoste of all, whan an archebysshoppe syn∣geth hys masse. whan Lamfranke had thus sped hys nedys at Rome / he wyth ye other two bysshoppes retourned into En∣glande / where thys mater hangyng in varyaunce bytwene the sayde two archebysshoppes, was had in cōmu∣nycacion. For tryall wherof Bedaes story was brought forth▪ where in it appered, that from the fyrste Augu / styns tyme to Bedaes last dayes, vp¦pon the season of a hundred & .xxxix. yeres / the archbysshop of Caunter∣bury had prymacy of all the bysshop¦pes of England thā called Brytayn, and of Irlande also / and that the
archbyshoppes of Caunterbury had kept coūsayles nere vnto yorke, and cleped therunto the bysshoppes of yorke / and made some byshoppes, & depryued dyuers from theyr dygny∣tyes / and to this were adioyned cer∣tayne pryuyleges, that were graun∣ted for this maner of doynge. when Thomas had harde all the allegacyons, he denyed all / and layd for hym the pystle, in the whych pope Gregorye demed that the chyrche of yorke and of London shulde be euen perys / and neyther of theym subiecte to other. To this was answered by Lam∣frank, that he was not byshop of Lō¦don, nor this questyon was not mo∣ued for the chyrche of London. But Thomas sayde that Grego∣ry had graūted to Augustyne, power to haue vnder hym all ye byshoppes of Englande / and that London at ye day was the pryncypall see of all En¦glande. All be yt yt the popes mynde was, that betwene Lōdon and yorke shulde be no dyuersyte of honour, be¦cause they were archeflamynes / and that by theyr vnyte all other myghte lye vnder dewe obedyence. And though Augustyne chaunged ye see from London to Caunterbury / yet Gregory wolde not that Augustyne successours shuld be aboue the bys∣shoppes of yorke. For he wolde then haue set in hys epystle these wordes folowynge: I graunte to the Augu¦styne and to thy successours. But for he wold yt no such power shuld stret∣che to his successours / therefore he made no mēcyon of his successours. Lamfranke to this answered and sayd, If that authoryte were graun¦ted to Augustyne alone & not to hys successours / yt was a symple gyfte yt the pope gaue vnto Augustyne, that was so famylyer wyth hym / and na∣mely whyle Augustine ordeyned nor sacred no byshoppe of yorke whyle he lyued. For ye see was full durynge his lyfe / by reason wherof he put not hys authoryte in execucyon. But pry¦uyleges of popes confermeth this di¦gnyte to Augustynes successours of Caunterbury / and demeth that yt is skyll and good reason, that all the chyrches of Englande shulde take lore and lyghte of that place. For of that welle or place proceded fyrst the doctrine of Cristes fayth. And where thou sayest Thomas, that Gregory myght yf he had wolde, haue confyr¦med all thynge vndowtably wyth thys worde successours / that is soth. But yet the lackynge of this worde, dothe no preiudyce to the chyrche of Caunterbury. For when that Cryste sayde to Peter, I shall gyue to the the kayes of the kingdome of heuen / he myght haue also sayd yf he wold, I graunt the same power to thy suc∣cessours. And though he sayde not so / yet he ment the successours of Pe¦ter, nothynge of reuerence nor yet of authoryte / but the dyspensacyon of holy chyrche and offyce of the same, was and is holy in theym, whyche onely spryngeth by vertue of Cryste into Peter, and from Peter into his successours. And yf thou can dyscer∣ne betwene false and soth / loke what hath strength in all, hath strength in the parte / and what hath strength in the more, hath also strēgth in ye lesse. The chyrche of Rome is as yt were all of all chyrches / & other chyrches ben as membres therof: lyke as one man is the kynd of all synguler men, and euery synguler man is the kynd of all mankynde: so in some maner of wyfe the chyrch and the see of Ro∣me is as yt were the kynde, and con∣teyneth all, in comparyson to other chyrches / and yet in euery chyrch re∣mayneth the full holenes of Crystes fayth. And also the chyrche of Rome
is greattest of all chirches / and what hath strength in that chyrche, shall haue strēgth in lesse chyrches / so that the power that is fyrste gyuen to eue¦ry chyrche, shall sprynge into the suc¦cessours of the same / but yf yt be by some specyall thynge excepted & out taken. Therfore I cōclude as Cryst sayde to Peter, so he sayde to all the byshoppes of Rome / and so conse∣quētly was sayde to Augustynes suc¦cessours of Gregorye, as was sayde vnto Augustyne. wherfore yt muste appere, that lyke as Caunterbury is subiecte to Rome, so muste yorke be subiecte to Caunterbury / whych sent to yorke prechours, to teache and preache vnto them the ryghte fayth. And where thou sayeste that Grego∣ry wolde that Augustyne shuld haue his see at London, yt may not stand wyth reason. For who wolde trowe that so noble a discyple as Augustyn was / wold wythstande or do agayn hys maysters wyll, or agayne holy decrees. And yf yt were so as thou haste alledged / what is that to me, that am not bishop of London as oft before I haue sayd. Therfore yf this mater may thus sease wythout more stryfe / so be yt ended. And yf thou de¦syrest contynuaunce of plee / I shall not fayle the, but defende my ryghte and offyce gladly. By these reasons & other at length Thomas was ouercomen / and graūted gladly that the farther brynke of Humber shulde be the begynnyng of hys dioces. And ouer yt yt was there demed, that in all thynges concer∣nynge the worshyppe of god and the fayth of holy chyrch / the archbyshop of yorke shuld be subiecte to the arch¦byshoppe of Caunterburye. So that yf the archebyshoppe of Caunterbu∣rye wolde call a coūsayll in any parte of Englande / the archebyshoppe of yorke shulde be therat, wyth all the byshoppes of hys prouynce / and be also obediēt vnto the lawfull hestes. And at all seasons when the archbys¦shop of Caunterbury shuld be sacred the archebyshoppe of yorke, with the byshoppes of ye chyrche, shulde come to Caūterbury and saker hym there. And yf the archebyshoppe of yorke shuld be stalled or sacred / thē shall he come to Caunterburye, and ellys where in all Englande, where the archebyshop of Caunterburye woll hym assygne, and there to be sacred of hym / and he shall make to hym an othe with professyon and obedyence. when Lamfranke harde this iudge¦ment gyuen thus / he reioysed in∣wardely. And for yt shulde remayne of recorde that his successours shuld not newely plede for that cause / he caused yt to be regestred in moste sub¦stancyall wyse. And ouer that sent a pystle for that cause to Alexander forenamed pope of all this doenge, wyth the professyon of Thomas the archbyshop foresayd. Of this Lam∣frank is many notable thynges wry¦ten of diuers writers. And after some he is admytted for a saynte. THE .CCXXII. CHAPITER. ABoute the .x. yere of kynge wyllyams reygne / Roger erle of Hereforde, by whose counsayl the kynge as before ys sayde hadde serched all the abbayes of England, whyche erle hadde wedded hys sys∣ter vnto Rauf erle of eest Angles / that is to saye, of Norf. and Suff, agayne the kynges mynde / he wyth the sayde Raufe made conspyracy a∣gayne the kynge / & caused an other erle by theyr subtyle meanes to be agreable vnto theyr vntrouth, why∣che erle had to name walref. But at length when thys erle walref hadde knowen the fyne of theyr entent / he
went vnto Lamfranke, and shewed to hym the hole mater. By whose counsayll he shortely after sayled vn∣to the kyng then beynge in Norman¦dye / and dysclosed the mater to hym, and putte hym holy in hys grace and mercye. when the kynge had harde of these tydynges / he made good semblaunt vnto this erle walref, and sped hym the faster into Englande. But howe so yt was, the forenamed two erles were warned of dysclosynge of this mater / in such wyse yt they gaderyd to theym suche strength, that ye kyng coude not haue them at his pleasure, but as he was fayne by stronge hāde to chase and outlawe theym. And for he fayled of his purpose of them, he emprysoned erle walref at wyn∣chester / and lastely caused hym to be hedded, more of tyranny, then of iu∣styce, as affermeth myne authoure / whose corps was buryed at the ab∣bay of Crowlande. In the .xi. yere was holden a great counsayll or synode of the clergye of the lande in saynt Paules chyrche of London / where amōges many thyn¦ges ordeyned for the rule of ye chyrch of England, dyuers byshoppes sees were transported from one place to another / as Selwey to Chychester, Kyrton̄ to Exeter, welles to Bathe, Shyrbourne to Salysbury, Dor∣chester to Lyncolne, and the see of Lychefelde to Chester. whyche thyn¦ges thus ordered, wyth many other for the chyrche / the sayde counsayll was dyssolued. In the .xiii. yere of hys reygne / af∣ter the deth of Herman byshoppe of Salysbury, succeded Osmūde ye kyn¦ges chaunceller. The whyche buyl∣ded there a new chyrch / and brought thyther clerkes that were garnyshed wyth vertue and connynge. And he hym self wrote & bounde bokes that were occupyed in the dyuyne seruyce of the chyrche, as the ordynall or consuetudynary, the whyche at this daye is occupyed in the more partye of Englande, wyth walys, and Ir∣lande, and is nowe named Salysbu¦ry vse, or the ordynary after Salys¦bury vse. In the .xv. yere of his reygne Ro¦bert the eldest sonne of kynge wylly∣am, the whyche was surnamed Cur¦those or Shorthose and shorte bote also / for he myght not haue the du∣chy of Normandy, whych his father hadde somtyme assygned and gyuen vnto hym, and after for hys wylde∣nesse hadde agayne resumed yt / he wyth fauoure and ayde of ye French kynge Phylyppe and of Lewys hys sonne, toke prays in that duchy, and put hys father to myche trouble / in so myche that at length the father & the sonne met in playne felde with .ii. great hostes / and eyther wyth other faught a cruell batayll. It is radde that durynge thys ba∣tayll wyllyam was throwē from his horse, and in great ieopardy of hys lyfe. wherof hys sonne Robert beyng ware / was so moued wyth pytye, yt he rescowed his father, and delyue∣red hym free from all daunger of his enymyes. But howe so yt betyde of the kynge / trouth yt is that many of his men were slayn, & his second son wyllyam the rede sore hurte, so that in the ende kynge wylliam was fayn to refuse the felde, and gatte at that tyme none aduauntage of his sayde sonne. For the whiche dede and rebel¦lyon thus made by the sonne / ye fader accursed hym after the opynyon of some wryters. whyle kyng wyllyam was thus oc¦cupyed in Normandy / the Northum¦bers waxte sterne & rebell, and slewe in theyr rage walkerus the bishop of Durham / but for what cause myne
authour expressyth not. Aboute thys tyme, warynge erle of Shrewesbury made two abbayes in the worshyp of god and saynte Myl¦borgh / wherof one was set in the sub¦urbes of Shrewesbury, and ye other at wenioke. In the .xvii. yere of kyng wyllyam / a cursed stryfe was arered betwene Thurstone abbot of Glastenbury a Norman, and his munkes. wherof a part of the cause was, that the abbot despysed, & wold haue set a part such songe and offices, as by pope Grego¦ry and Augustyn his dyscyple, of old tyme to them was assygned / & wolde haue compelled them to haue folow∣ed the vse of one wyllyā of Fescamp̄. And ouer that this Thurstone was∣ted and spēded the goodes of ye place inordynatly, in lechery and by other insolent meanes / and wythdrew frō the munkes theyr olde accustomed dyet. For the whyche causes fyrst be¦ganne great wordes wyth chydyng, and after strokes and fyghtes / so yt the abbot gat vnto hym armed men, and fyll vppon hys munkes, & slewe two of them at ye hygh alter, and woū¦ded of theym .xviii. And the munkes wyth fourmes and candelstyckes defended theym, in suche wyse that they hurte many of the armed men. Then the complaynte was brought before the kyng / by whose iudgemēt Thurstone was agayne returned vn¦to Cadony frō whēs he was brought and the mūkes were spredde abrode into dyuers houses thorough En∣glande. But yt is sayde that in the tyme of wyllyā the Rede / this Thur¦ston̄ obteyned the rule of that abbay agayne for the pryce of .v. hundred pounde. In the .xix. yere of his reygne, kyng willyam then raysed a new maner of trybute. For he caused to be gadered thorough England of euery hyde of lande .vi. s̄. An hyde of lande contey¦neth .v. yerdes / and euery yerde con¦teyneth foure acres. And so an hyde of lande conteyneth .xx. acres, an a∣cre conteyneth .xl. perches in length and .iiii. in brede / & .iiii. acres make a yerde / and .v. yerdes make an hyde / and .viii. hydes make a knightes fee. By the whyche reason a knyghtes fee shuld welde a hundred & .lx. acres / and that is demed for a plough tyll a yere. And not longe after he caused to be serchyd howe myche lande eche of hys barons helde / how many knygh¦tes fees / how many townes / & what nombre of men and of bestes were wyth in this lande / wherof he com∣maunded a boke to be made, whyche all was done. For the whyche dede, this lande was after greued wyth many sondry plages as after shall appere. In the .xx. yere of the rey∣gne of kynge wyllyam / Canutus kynge of Denmarke wyth helpe of the Flemmynges, to whome he was called wyth a great armye came to∣warde Englande. But by the prouy¦syon of the kynge they were so fered, that they were let of theyr iourney. Then kyng wyllyam gaue vnto .iii. of his champyons .iii. byshopryches. To Moryce he gaue London, to wil¦lyam he gaue Thetforde, and to Ro∣bert he gaue Chester / whych Robert was after remoued to Couentre. Of this Robert reporteth Ranulfe, that he scraped frō one beme of his chirch in Couentre .v. hūdred marke, to fyll wyth ye hande of kyng wyllyam. For erle Leofricus yt was duke of Mer∣cia in the tyme of Edwarde the cōfs∣sour / had adourned that chyrch with great ryches of golde, syluer, & other precyous iewelles. In thys yere Edgare Ethelynge, whych was reconcyled vnto the kyn¦ges fauoure / by lycence of the kynge
sayled into Apulia. Then beganne the forsayde pla∣ges to sprynge. For greate morayne fell vppon the brute bestes, and bren¦nyng feuours amonges the people, and also great hūger and barreynes of ye erth. Also in this yere great hurt was done in many places of ye lande by fyre, and specyally in the cytye of London / where vpon the .vii. day of the moneth of Iulii sodayne fyre be∣gan, the whyche brent a great parte of the chyrche of saynte Paule, wyth also a great parte of the cytye. Then kynge wyllyam beynge in Normandye was syke, and kept his hamber at Roan̄ a longe time. wher¦fore Phylyppe the Frenche kynge in hys game sayde that wyllyam lay in chyldbedde, and noryshed hys fatte wombe. The whyche wordes when they were blowen to kynge wyllyās crys, he was greuously dyscontent and sayde, when I am chyrched I shall offer to hym a thousande can∣dellys lyghte, wyth the whyche he shall holde hym smally contented. The whyche promyse he after perfor¦med. For in the moneth of Iuly whē Corne, fruyt, and grapes were moste florishynge / he entred Fraunce with a great army / and sette on fyre many cytyes and townes in the west syde of Fraunce / and lastely came to the cytye of Meaus, and fyred yt & brent a parte therof wyth the chyrch of our lady / wherin he brent a womā beyng closed in the walle of the sayd chyrch as a recluse. But of this thynge speketh not the cronycle of Fraunce / Nor yet for the more parte of any thynge that soun∣deth to theyr dyshonour done vnto theym by Englyshemen. In this hete, or as some wryters ha∣ue by ye lepyng of an horse / kyng wyl¦lyam toke such a dysease or sykenes, that yt was the cause of hys deth. And when he felt hym thus greued / he called his sonnes before hym, and exhorted theym in his beste maner, that they shulde charytably loue and fauoure euery of them the other, and holde to gyder as louyng bretherne / & after made his testamēt, and therin ordeyned wyllyam Ruffus or wylly∣am the rede to be kynge of England. And Normandye he beset vnto Ro∣ber Curthose. And to Henry his yon¦gest sonne he bequethed his treasour and mouable goodes. And that done he enfourmed hys two eldest sonnes of the dysposycyon of both peoples / and warned wyllyam to be louynge and lyberall to his subiectes, and Ro¦bert to be sterne and sturdy vnto his. Then he was moued with myldenes and delyueryd from prison hys own brother the byshop of Bayon, Mar∣charus erle of Northūberlande. wyl∣notus the sonne of Harolde, or after some the sonne of Goodwyne, that was sent to wyllyā by Edwarde the confessour to remayne for a pledge for his sayde fader Goodwyn. And shortely after these thynges wyth other done / he dyed in Normandye, and was buryed in ye cytye of Caan̄ / when he had reygned as kyng of En¦glande .xxi. yeres and vppon .x. mo∣nethes, in the moneth of Iuly, and the yere of hys duchery the .lii. when wyllyam was dede / men spake of hym as they do of other prynces / and sayd that he was wyse and gylefull, ryche and couetous, & loued well to be magnifyed and pray¦sed / a fayre speker & a greatr dyssy∣muler, a man of skylfull stature but somdeale fatte in the bely, sterne of face and stronge in armys, and ther∣wyth bolde / and had therwyth great pleasure in huntyng and in makyng of great festes. But he passed al other in leuyenge of taskes. whyche con∣dycyon hys subiectes construed .iii.
maner of wayes / and saydeyt was to the entente that he wolde excell all other in rychesse, or ellys for to withstāde and defende his enymyes, or ellys to staunche the appetyte of his couetyse mynde. He buylded .ii. abbayes in Englande / one at batayl in Sussex where he wanne the felde agayne Harolde, and is at thys daye called the abbay of Batail / & ye other he sette besyde London vppon the south syde of Thamys, and named yt Barmoundesay. And in Norman¦dye he buylded two also. Thys man made the newe forest in the countrey of Southampton / the whyche to brynge aboute he caste downe dyuers chyrches by the space of .xxx. myles, and replenyshed yt wyth wylde bestes / and made harde and sharpe lawes for the encreasyng of them, as losyng of eyen and other. And he helde Englyshemen so lowe, that in hys dayes was almoste no Englyshe man that bare any offyce of honoure or rule. But yet some∣deale he fauoured the cytye of Lon∣don, and graunted to the cytezens the fyrste charter that euer they had / the whych is wryten in Saxon tun∣ge, and sealed wyth grene waxe, and expressed in .viii. or .ix. lynes. THE .CCXXIII. CHAPITER. Wyllyam Rufus or wyllyam the erede, the second sonne of wyllyam Conque∣rour / beganne hys reygne ouer En∣glande, in the mo∣neth of Iulye, and the yere of our lorde a thousande & .lxxxix / and the xxxi. yere of the fyrste Phylyppe then kynge of Fraunce. Ranulfe monke of Chester shew∣eth in hys boke of Polycronycon, yt Robert Curthose eldest sonne of wyl¦lyam Conquerour, was at the tyme of hys fathers deth absent. The why¦che heryng that his father hadde pre¦ferred hys yonger brother to ye kyng¦dome of Englande, was therwyth greatly amoued / in so myche that he layde his dukedome to pledge to his brother Henry / and wyth that good gatheryd to him a stronge army, and so landed at Hampton̄. wherof wyllyam hys brother be∣ynge warned, in all haste sent vnto hym messangers / to whome he gaue cōmyssyon to say in maner as folow∣eth. Thy brother wyllyam prayeth yt to take no grefe with yt he hath done, for he clepeth hym selfe not kynge, but as vnder kynge to reygne vnder the, and by helpe of the that arte gret¦ter then he & better, & rather borne. And yf thou consyder yt well, he hath nothynge mysused hym agayn the. For he hath taken vppon hym for a tyme bycause of thyne absence. But for he is nowe in authoryte by thy sufferaunce / he prayeth yt he may vnder the so contyue, payeng to the yerely .iii. thousande marke, wyth cōdycyon that who so ouer lyueth may enioye the kyngdome. when Robert had harde that message to the ende, he wagged hys hedde, as he that con¦ceyued some doublenesse in thys re∣porte. But for he was lyberall and al¦lowed more the honour then he dyd hys profyte, as in other thynges fo∣lowyng of his dedes yt shall appere / therfore he lyghtely assented to all that was desyred, and returned short¦ly after into Normandye wyth plea∣saunt wordes wythout profyte. Thys wyllyam was crowned the xxvii. daye of September, vppon the daye of saynte Cosma and Da∣myan, and was well ayded of Lam∣frāk whyle he lyued. He was dyuers & unstable of maners / so yt betwene hym & his lordes was oftē dyssencyō. In ye spryngyng of somer folowyng
hys coronacyon / Odo byshoppe of Bayō, whych as before ye haue hard was delyuered out of pryson by wyl¦liam Cōquerour, came into Englād. whom the kynge ioyously receyued / and gaue vnto hym shortly after the erledome of Kent. But he toke vp∣pon hym in processe of tyme to rule, in suche wyse as the kynge grudged wyth hys doynge. And for thys the kynge and his sayde vncle fyll at vn¦kyndnesse / so yt he withdrew hym frō the kynge, and alyed hym wyth the byshop of Durham, the erles of Nor¦thūberland and Shrewesbury, with other.Confede¦racy. The whyche confederyd to gy¦der / toke partye agayne the kynge, and dyd thynges to his dyspleasure and hurte. And amonges other da∣mages by theym done, Roger de Mount Gomoryk erle of Shrewes∣bury, destroyed the countrey and en∣des of England vnto worceter town wyth ayde of the walshemen. But in the ende thorough the prayer of the holy byshoppe wolstane / the walshe∣men were so weked and febled, that a few knyghtes scomfyted of them a great hoste. when kyng wyllyam conceyued, ye well nere all the Normans toke par¦tye agayne hym / he then forced of ne¦cessyte drewe to hym the Englyshe∣men. And fauoured them by giftes & easy lawes / so that by theyr strength he lastely recouered the erle of Shre¦wesburye, and chased some other of hys enymyes / and shortely after oc∣cupyed the castell and strong holdes in Kent belongynge to byshop Odo hys forsayde vncle / and in the ende cōpelled hym to forswere England. And yt done he besyeged ye citie of Ro¦chester, wherin the byshoppe of Dur¦ham, the erle of Northumberland, and other noble men were gadered / and wan yt at length by appoynte∣ment, so that hys enymyes were vn∣to hym reconcyled. In the thyrde yere of hys reygne dyed Lamfrank / when he hadde ben archbyshop of Caunterburye .xviii. yeres. By whose meanes the mōkes of Englande were brought to the vse of theyr holy relygyon / the whych be¦fore hys commynge lyued more lyke to seculer prestes thē religious men / and exercysed them in huntynge and hawkynge for to auoyde idelnesse, & dysynge and cardynge in the wynter nyghtes, that they myght be redy to kepe theyr howres and nyghtly ser∣uyce. And in theyr apparel they were lyke vnto consules and not vnto mū¦kes, wyth many other deformytyes. The whych in ye begynnyng of Lam¦frank / he of policye suffered for a sea¦son, lest he had brought all in his top atones, and therby myght haue cau∣sed some scysme or varyaūce to haue rysen in the chyrche. In auoydynge wherof wyth other inconuenyences / he lytell and lytell refrayned them of theyr outrage / and in {pro}cesse of tyme caused and constrayned them to lyue after the constitucyons and rules of theyr relygyon. Aboute thys tyme, Robert Cur∣those duke of Normandy, entēdynge to take hys vyage into the holy lande / layde his dukedome to wedde to hys brother wyllyam for .x. thou¦sande pounde. For leuyenge wherof kynge wyllyam set a taske vpon his commons and subiectes, and reysed a farre excidynge some vnder colour of the same / so that byshoppes mel∣ted theyr vessell, and lordes spoyled theyr tenauntes. The kynge of Scottes also brake the peace before made with wyllyam Conquerour, and wasted and toke prayes ut the countrey of Northum∣berlande. Then the kynge prouyded a nauy and sayled thyther in the wyn¦ter tyme. But by ye tempest of the see,
halfe his nauy or a great parte of yt was drowned / and many of his kny∣ghtes were loste for colde and hun∣ger. But yet in the ende after dyuers conflyctes and bykerynges, by me∣diacyon of frendes a peace and vny∣te was concluded / so that Malcolyn then kynge of Scottes shuld be obe¦dyent to kynge wyllyam, vnder the same othe that he was before tyme sworne vnto hys father / and kynge willyam shuld yerely gyue vnto him in ye way of a fee .xii. markes of gold. In the fourth yere of his reygne, and the fyft daye of October / pas∣syng great tempest of wederyng fell in soudry places of Englande, and specyally in ye towne of wynchecome. For there by tempeste of thūder and lyghtenyng, a parte of ye steple of the chyrch was throwen downe / and the crycyfyx wyth the ymage of our lady also standynge vpon the roode lofte, was in lykewyse ouerthrowen and broke and shatered. And after folow∣ed a contagye and a fowle stenche / ye whych endured tyll the munkes had gone in processyon about the chyrch, and all the houses adioynyng to that abbay and other places. Also thys yere at Lōdon was great harme done by force of the wynde / which blewe with such violence yt yt ouerturned or ryued as wytnessyth Polycronycon, ouer the nōber of .vi. hundred houses. And ye rofe of saynt Mary Bow in chepe was also ryued wherwith two men were slayne. And also at Salesburye was hurte done wyth ye same wynde or ye lyke therof. In the .v. yere of wyllyās reygne / he went into Northumberlande, and repayred suche holdes and castelles as the Scottes by theyr warrys had blemyshed and apayred / and caused a new castell to be made at Caercol ye cytye or towne, whych the Danys of two hundred yeres passed hadde de∣stroyed. Then ye kyng returned vnto Gloucester / where he was greuous¦ly veryd wyth sykenesse, so that he wende he shulde haue dyed. In tyme wherof he toke great repentaunce, & {pro}mysed yf he myght escape, he wold neuer sell mo benefices / & ouer that he wold amēde hys lyuyng & become a new mā. But after he was restored to helth, that promyse was shortely forgoten. And in that yere he gaue vnto Anselme the archbyshopryche of yorke. But he myghte take of yt but as the kynges pleasure was, tyll suche tyme as the kyng hadde taken his trybute therof. And more ouer he auouched, that the see of Lyncoln̄ be longed to the see of yorke / tyll the bis∣shoppe of Lyncolne had pleased him wyth a great summe of money, as .v. thousande marke after the wrytyng of Ranulfe. In the .vi. yere of hys reygne were excedynge floodes, wherof the lyke in many yeres passed hadde not ben sene. And after that ensued wonder∣full frost / whych frose the great stre¦mes in suche wyse, ye horse and carte passed ouer ye gret ryuers. And in the ende when the yse melted and brake / the payse therof brake many a stron∣ge brydge, bothe of tymber and of stone. THE .CCXXIIII. CHAPITER. ABout thys tyme the welshe∣men with theyr kyng or duke named Rees, brake out vppon the Englyshmen in the Bordour, where standeth the castell of Brekenocke / and there made masteryes for a whi∣le. But in the ende his people were chaced and slayne / and he wounded to deth, so that he dyed the .iii. daye folowynge. Thys Rees is accom∣pted of wryters, to be the laste kynge of walys. For after thys daye they
were so daūted / that kynges of En∣glande had them in suche rule, that they were vnder more stedfaste obe∣dyence than they were before tyme. How be it they rebellyd full often as after shall appere. And the yere folowyng kyng wyl¦lyam to haue ye countrey in the more quyet / hewe downe mych of ye wood, and buylded in sundry places strong castels and pyles / by meane wherof more and more they were plucked to obedyēce. But not shortely after / but specyally in the dayes of Edwarde ye fyrste and Edwarde the thyrde. Malcolyn kyng of Scotland came vnto Glowcester to comon wyth the kynge of dyuers maters, and to take a fynall agremēt. But for kyng wyl∣lyam wolde haue demyd hym in hys courte / therfore Malcoline departed from the kynge in great dyspleasur. For the whyche and other causes, the warre bytwene England and Scot∣lande was reuyued / so that vppon saynt Bricius daye folowyng, Mal¦colyne wyth hys retynewe foughte wyth an erle named Robert and thā erle of Northumberlande / and there was slayne wyth hys eldest sonne Edwarde. For sorowe wherof Mar∣garet quene of Scotlande and syster vnto Edgare Ethelynge, as in the fyrste chapyter of the story of wyllyā Conqueroure is shewed, dyed soone after. Than the Scottes made Dun¦walde brother of Malcolyne theyr kynge, and put by hys sonnes. But by the ayde of kynge wyllyam / Ed∣gare whyche of some wryters is na∣med Dunkam, was made kynge, as eldest sonne of Malcolyne. In the .vii. yere of the reygne of kynge wyllyam / Auncelyne or An∣selme that was archbyshop of yorke, was remoued to Caunterbury as af¦fermeth one cronycle. But Polycro∣nycon and Guydo sayen, that Hugh erle of Chester beynge sycke and dis∣eased / in the .vi. yere of wyllyam Ru∣fus, sent into Normādy for Anselme than abbot of Barry for thre causes. The fyrste to vysyte and se hym, and to be reconcyled of hym, as the man that he moste trusted. The seconde cause was, that he shuld releue some abbays of Englande, that the kynge vexed wyth greuous trybutes. And the thyrd cause was, yt he shuld foūd an abbay at Chester / whych place he after buylded, & made one Rycharde his chapleyne fyrst abbot of ye place / and sone after he was made archbys¦shop of Caunterbury. where by it ap∣pereth that the sayd see was voyde ouer the terme of thre yeres. Thys sayd .vii. yere / Englande & Normandye were greued wyth try∣bute and moreyne of men, so sharply that tyllynge of the erth was spared or putte of for that yere / & there after ensued great hūger. Thys yere also ye Scottes slewe theyr kyng Edgar, and restored agayn to the rule of the lande the forenamed Dunwalde. And many grysly and vncouth sygh¦tes were thys yere sene in England / as hostes of men fightyng in ye skye, and fyre lemys & other. And the holy bysshop wolstone of worceter dyed soone after / of whom it is shewed yt he sondry tymes warned & rebuked Englyshmen for theyr mysseliuyng / and sayd for theyr offenses they were so punysshed of the Normans. But the Englyshmen excused them selfe, and sayde that the Normans were worse in lyuynge than they. where vnto the byshop answered and sayd / that god vsed the wyckednesse of thē in Englyshmen. For by the Wycked punysshe¦ment. wycked he punysshed ye wycked. And so doth god suffer the deuyll to punysshe syn¦ners in hell / & he hym selfe is punys∣shed wyth them. Of thys wolstone it is radde, that
kynge wyllyam wold haue put hym from hys see, to the entente that he myghte put another into hys see. wherof thys holy man beynge war∣ned / yode vnto the kynge and sayde to hym: I am enfourmed that thou wylte take from me, the whiche a bet¦ter man thā thou arte gaue vnto me. wherfore of whom that I receyued so noble a gyfte, to hym wyll I gyue it agayn / and than take it from hym yf thou may. And whan he hadde so sayde to the kynge, he yode to the se∣pulture of Edward the confessoure / and after yt he had made his prayers there, he pytched hys crosse in ye mar∣ble stone that laye vppon the graue. But no man myghte plucke out the staffe, tyll wolston came thyther hym selfe and pulled it out at the kynges cōmaundement. wherfore the kynge seyng that maruayle / suffred hym to enioye hys benefyce styll. In the .x. yere of willyam Rufus / stryfe and dyscencyon fell bytwene hym and Anselme bysshop of Caun∣terbury / for Anselme myght nat call hys synodys nor correcte the byshop¦pes, but as the kynge wolde. The kynge also chalenged the inuestiture of bysshoppes, and pylled the spyry∣tualtye and temporaltye with vnrea¦sonable taskes & trybutes / the which he spent vpon the towre of London, & the makynge of westmynster hall. And ouer that the kynges seruaun∣tes, greued and pylled englysshmen. vnreasonably. And to thys mysery was ioyned the vnsaceable couetous of Ranulphe that was somtyme cha¦pelayne vnto wyllyam conquerour / the whyche was at thys day the kyn¦ges procuratour, and gadered hys taskes ouer all. He was so couetous and so euyll dysposed, that he wolde leuye .iii. taskys for two. He pylled the ryche, and bare downe the poore, and caused many men to lose theyr landes for smal causes / and therfore the kynge had hym in hys synguler fauoure. And by hys meanes byshop¦rykes were boughte and solde as playnly as other marchaundyses. For that tyme, clerkes vsed busshed and brayded heddys, longe tayled & blasynge clothes, shynynge golden gyrdels / and rode wyth gylte spur∣res, wyth vsynge of dyuers other enormytees. All whyche vyces An∣selme wolde haue corrected / but he lacked assystence of hys bretherne ye bysshoppes. For the whyche cause & other he departed the londe. where∣wyth the kyng beynge mysse conten∣ted / sente after hym suche persons as robbed and spoyled hym, and en∣treted hym in most cruell maner. For the whyche dede Raufe bysshoppe of Chychester blamed the kynge / and also rebuked all such bysshoppes as had refused the partye of Anselme, & had fauoured the kynge in causes cō¦cernynge the foresayde varyaunce. And forthermore he wythstode the kynge and hys offycers in takynge of fynes of prestes for cryme of forni¦cacyon. For whyche causes the kyng wyth the sayd Raufe was sore amo∣ued and dyscontented / and opteyned such fauour, that he suspēded many chyrches of hys dyoses. But in the ende, Raufe demeaned hym in suche wyse that he hadde hys owne wyll / and his chyrches enlarged and freed that before were stopped wyth thor∣nes. And the kynge gaue vnto hym ye fynes of prestes within his dyosis / and endued ye see of Chychester with many greate gyftes. And vpon a tyme kynge wyllyam was rydynge towarde hys dysporte of huntynge / and sodeynly a messen∣ger came vnto hym and sayde, that the cytye of Cenemonia in Norman¦dye was beseyged. wherfore he wyth¦out longe taryenge or aduysement,
toke the streyght way to these syde / and sent to hys lordes, chargynge them to folow. whan the sayd lordes came to hys presence / they aduysed hym to tarye tyll his people were as∣sembled. But he wolde nothynge do after theyr counsayle / but sayd, such as hym loued, he shortely wyste well wolde folowe hym, and so yode to shyp, settyng aparte all parels. The mayster of the shyp was afrayde, he sawe the weder so darke & so clowdy / and counceyled the kynge to tary tyll the wynde wolde blowe more fa∣uorably. But he commaunded hym to make all the spede that he cowde vpon hys lyfe / sayenge that he neuer harde that euer any kyng was drow¦ned. And so he passed the see and lan¦ded in Normandy / and gathered to hym there hys knyghtes. whan the capytayne of the syege, whose name was Helyas, knewe of the kynges landyng / he fered, and anone began to breke the syege. But by treason he was taken and brought to the kyn∣ges presence. To whom the kynge shewed suche pytye, that he suffered hym to be at hys lybertye. whyche af¦ter the opynyon of wyllyam de regi∣bus, was done more of pryde than of compassyon. THE .CCXXV. CHAPITER. IN the .xi. yere of the reygne of thys wyllyam the rede / at a towne called Fynchanster in the coūtrey of Barke shyre, a welle caste out blode as before it hadde done water. And after by the space of .xv. dayes, great flames of fyre were sene in the elemēt in sundry places and tymes. Thys yere also ye two erles of Shre¦wesbury and of Chester eyther na∣med Hugh / by the kynges commaū∣dement entred wyth theyr knyghtes the ile of Man or Anglesaye, & slewe therin many welshemen, and gelded many moo. Amonge the whyche a preste named Kynredus was drawē out of a chyrch and serued of ye same wyse / and also cut hys tunge out of hys hed, and put out hys one eye. But this preste was of such vertue, that by myracle he was restored to helthe within .iii. dayes ensuynge. In the whyche season and tyme, the kynge of Northganys or Nor∣waye wan the iles called than Orca¦des and now Orkeys / & after came wyth hys strength into the foresayd ile of Man, where at the same season were the sayde two erles. Than by∣twene them was mortall fyght / in ye whyche Hugh erle of Shrewesbury was stryken with an arowe in ye eye, and dyed wythin .viii. dayes after. But as sayth Guydo, the Danys were chased, and the Englysshemen hadde the vyctory. Kyng wylliam was mych in Nor¦mandye / for so myche as Robert his brother was all thys season in the holy land / of whose actes shall some deale be towched in ye story of Henry the fyrste. And wyllyam had myche payne to rule the Normans / for they rebelled often agayne hym. In the .xii. yere of hys reygne / he came out of Normandye, and when he saw the hall of westmynster yt he had caused to be buylded / he was therwyth dyscontented, that it was so lytell. wherfore as it is rehersed of some wryters / he entended yf he had lyued to haue made a larger, and yt to haue serued for a chaumber. Robert Losaunge, that somtyme had ben abbot of Ramsey, and than bysshop of Thetforde by gyfte of a thousand pounde to the kyng / repen¦ted hym after, and bewept that vn∣skylfull dede / and toke hys waye to Rome, and dyd for it hys enioyned penaunce / and after retorned into
Englande, and turned hys see from Thetforde to Norwyche / & founded there a fayre monastery of hys owne goodes, & not of the patrymony of crystes chyrch. But therin is a dowt to consyder. For he was fyrste an ab∣bot and after a bysshop. About thys tyme, by the meanes of one Stephen Hardynge a munke of Sherbourne / an Englyshman of ye order of Sisteaux or whyte mūkes had hys begynnynge in the wylder∣nesse of Cystery within the prouynce of Burgoyne, as wytnesseth Ranulf munke of Chester. But other wry∣ters, as Jacobus Phylyppus, & the authour of Cronica cronicarū, Ma∣theolus, wyth other / sayen that this Stephen was the second abbot of ye place / & yt it was fyrste foūded by the meanes of one Robert abbot of Mo¦lynēse, in the yere of grace .M.xcviii. whyche to folow theyr sayeng, shuld be in the .ix. yere of the reygne of this kyng. This order was after brought into Englande by one called walter Espeke, that foūded the fyrste abbay of that relygyon at Ryuall, about ye yere of grace .xi.C.xxxi. The whyche shulde be about the .xxxi. yere of the fyrste Henry than kyng of England. Somwhat of theyr relygyon is tow¦ched in the .x. chapyter of the .viii. boke of Polycronycon. After that kynge wyllyam, as be∣fore is sayde, was retourned out of Normandy / many wonderfull pro∣dygyes and tokyns were shewed in England / as the swellyng or rysyng of ye water of Thamys, in suche wyse that it drowned dyuers townes, and dyd mych harme by out passyng his boundys in dyuers places about Lō¦don and ellys where. Also the deuyll was sene walke in mannes lykenesse wyth dyuers other thynges whyche I ouerpasse. The kyng was warned of this, and tolde by his famylyers yt god was not cōtent with his lyuing. But he set all at nought, and made of it a scoffe or a iape. In the .xiii. yere of his reygne and begynnynge thereof, as the thyrde daye of Auguste after the sayenge of Ranulfe / thys kyng wyllyam beyng at hys dysporte of huntynge wythin the newe forest, by glaunsynge of an arowe shot of a knyght named wal∣ter Tyrell, was wounded to the deth in the .xliiii. yere of hys age. After whyche dede the sayde walter esca∣ped and saued hym self, for few there were that hym pursued. And so the kynge thus wounded, was layde vp¦pon an horse lytter, and so conueyed to wynchester / where shortly after he dyed and was buryed. Of this man myghte be made a myche lenger story, yf all hys dedes shulde be towched. The whych toke vpon hym great thynges / and mych gretter entēded yf he myght haue ly∣ued. The daye before he was slayne one axed of hym where he wold kepe hys Crystmasse. At Poytiers sayde the kynge / for the erle entendeth to go towarde Hierusalem / and I woll assaye to haue hys erledome in mor∣gage / for well I knowe he must che∣uyche for money to perfourme that iourney. The day that wyllyā dyed / he helde in his hādes the .iii. bysshop¦ryches / of Caūterbury, of winchester and of Salysbury / and dyuers ab∣bayes, of the whyche he let some to terme. Also he refrayned y• money y• of olde tyme was payed to Rome cal¦led Rome scotte.Roma scotte. Of this wyllyā re∣portyth Henry of Hūtyngdō / & sayth yt though this mā were lyght of som thynges, yet he was stedfast & stable of his promyse / so yt what he {pro}mysed good or euyll shuld be {per}formed. And though he were named couetous / yet it shuld seme yt he was liberall, as sheweth by this narracyō folowyng.
Upon a season when the abbot of a place in Englande was dede / two munkes of the same place, the which before hadde gatheryd money, made theyr frendes to kynge willyam / and offered large offers eyther of them to be promoted to that dygnyte. There was also a thyrde munke, the which of mekenesse & of humylyte folowed the other two / to the entent that vp∣pon hym that the kynge had admyt∣ted for abbot, he wolde haue gyuen attendaunce, and as his chapelayn to haue wyth hym returned. The kynge called before hym the .ii. mun∣kys seuerally, and eyther out profe∣red other. And as he caste hys eye a¦syde / he espyed the thyrd, the whych he demed hadde comen also for the same cause. Then the kynge called hym / and asked yf he wold geue any more then his bretherne had offered, to be abbot. But he answered to the kynge and sayde, that he wolde no∣ther offer nor yet gyue for yt one pe∣ny / nor wold haue so great a charge by any meane wrongefull. when the kynge had well vnderstanden thys thyrde munkes answere / he sayde that he was best worthy to be abbot, and to haue the rule of so holy a char¦ge / and so he gaue vnto hym that be¦nefyce, wythout takynge any peny. Thys kynge wyllyam vsed alway lemmans / wherfore he dyed without yssue legyttymat, when he had rey∣ned as before is sayde fully .xii. yeres and odde dayes. THE .CCXXVI. CHAPITER. HEnry the .iii. son of wyllyam Cō∣querour & fyrste of yt name, why∣che for his con∣nynge was sur∣named beuclerk began hys rey∣gne and domynyon as kynge of En¦glande, the .v. daye of August, in the yere of our lorde .xi. hundred & one / and the .xliii. yere of the fyrste Phy∣lyppe then kynge of Fraunce / & was crowned at westmynster ryght short¦ly after, of Thomas archebyshoppe of yorke, and Morys byshoppe of London. This Henry in his youth plyed him to such studye, that he was instructe in the .vii. artes lyberall. Anon he made holy chyrche free / & vsed saynt Edwardes lawes, wyth the amende¦mēt of them. He put out of his courte nyce and wāton men / and closed Ra¦nulphe byshoppe of Durham in the towre of Lōdon, ye which as ye before haue harde was so great wyth wyl∣lyam his brother / and sent for Ansel∣me archebyshoppe of Caunterburye, whyche before was fledde fro the ty∣ranny of wyllyam Rufus. Iustyce and cōty¦nence. This Henry chastysed the olde vn¦trewe mesure, and made a yerde of ye length of hys owne arme / wyth dy∣uers other thynges reformyng, that longe before his days had ben mysse vsed / and abhorred excesse of metys and drynkes / & vsed to fyght more wyth coūsayll then wyth sworde. In the seconde yere of his reygne / Robert hys brother, that by all thys season hadde ben occupyed in war∣res vppon Cristes enymyes, hauyng worde of the deth of hys brother wyl¦lyam, and howe his brother Henry hadde taken vpon hym as kynge / re¦turned into Normandy, and there made preparacyon for to come into Englande. In this season also was brokē out of pryson Ranulfe byshoppe of Dur¦ham, and comen to the sayde Robert into Normandy. The whych excyted duke Robert in all that he myght to warre vppon hys brother Henry / so that he assembled a stronge armye of
knyghtes, and toke shyppynge, and landed in processe of tyme at Portys¦mouth. But by medyacyon a peace was made / and that in suche condy∣cion, that he shuld haue .iii. thousand markes yerely, as before was pro∣mysed vnto hym by willyam Rufus his brother wyth other condycyons of successyon and other thynges, the whyche I ouerpasse for length of tyme. Thus Robert beynge con∣tented contrary to the myndes of his lordes, after he a season hadde dys∣ported hym in Englande retourned into Normandy / where of his lordes he was for thys & other dedes before done as after is shewed, lytle or lesse and lesse setby. For all be yt that by hys fathers lyfe he hadde vyctorye, and vtterly dyspleased hym as some deale before ys touched / yet by hys manhode and manfull dedes, he fell into the fauoure of the people, and dyd many and great notable actes / and specyally at the wynnyng of the cytye of Acon vppon the myscreaun¦tes and turkes. For the whyche de∣des yt apperyth by the sequele of the storye that he was also in the fauour of god. For when the eleccyon shuld be made for the kynge of Hierusa∣lem, and certayne prynces and pryn∣ces peeres by ordynaunce made, stode wyth theyr tapers abydynge the dyuyne purueyaunce, that who∣se taper were fyrst wyth heuenly fyre lyghtened shulde be admytted for kynge / the taper of thys duke Ro∣bert was fyrste onely. wherfore by dy¦uyne purueyaunce he was then cho∣sen kynge of Hierusalem. The why∣che he refused, for the payne and tra∣uayle that he shuld haue wyth all / & also for the couetyse of the crowne of Englande. For as soone as he hadde knowlege of the deth of his brother willyam / anon he parted the coūtrey and sped hym homewarde in all that he myght. For the whych dede as af¦fermeth myne authour, he spedde the worse in all his dedes after. Thys Robert was wyse in coun∣sayll, stronge in batayll, and also ryght lyberall / and in hys retourne from Hierusalem, maryed the dough¦ter of wyllyam de Auersana lorde of Apulia, wyth whome he receyued grete sōmes of money for her dower, the whych by meane of his liberalyte he spent shortly after. Then fortune beganne to frowne vppon duke Ro∣bert / and sette his owne lordes so a∣gayn hym, that they sent vnto kyng Henry hys brother / wyllynge hym to come into Normandye, and they wolde delyuer the coūtrey vnto him, and holde hym for theyr chefe lorde and ruler. wherunto, as sayth the en¦glyshe cronycle, kynge Henry soone cōsented. But or euer thys warre be¦twene the sayde duke Robert & kyng Henry beganne / thys Henry maryed Mawde or Molde the doughter of Malcolyne kyng of Scotlande, and of Margarete hys wyfe doughter of Edwarde the outlawe, as in the be∣gynnyng of wyllyam Conqueroure is thouched. Of the whyche Molde thys Henry receyuyd after some wry¦ters two sonnes and .ii. doughters / yt is to saye wyllyam and Rycharde, Mawde & Mary. And also the sayd authour wyth other saye / that Ro∣bert duke of Normandye came into Englande in the fourth yere of the reygne of kynge Henry, and hadde good chere of his brother and syster. For the which he at the request of his sayde syster, released to his brother ye forenamed trybute of .iii. thousand markes. But by yll tale tellers & co∣uetous of signory, this broderly loue was after dissolued / in such wise that the kynge with a strong army sayled into Normandy / and held his broder Robert with so sharpe warre, that he
chased hym from one countrey to an¦other / and wanne from hym Roan, Caan, Faloys, and all the good tow¦nes of Normandye / and lastely con∣strayned hym to aske helpe of Phy∣lyppe kyng of Fraunce, & after of the erle of Flaūdres / but he fayled helpe of them both. Then wyth such pow∣er as he could make, he gaue batayll vnto his brother kynge Henry. In the whyche he was taken, and sent ouer into England, and put into the castell of Cardyffe in walys / where he remayned as prisoner whyle he ly¦ued. And when he was dede he was buryed at Glowcester. In this tyme and season, as it were in ye .iii. yere of kyng Henry / ye chyrch of saynt Barthelmew in Smythfeld of London was begonne to be foun∣ded, of a mynstrell of this kyng Hen¦ry named Rayer / and after perfour∣med and ended by good and well dis¦posed cytezens of the citye of Lōdon. This place of Smythfelde was at ye day a lay stowe of al ordure or fylth, and the place where felons and other transgressours of the kynges lawes were put to execucyon. THE .CCXXVII. CHAPITER. SO as kynge Henry hadde fy∣nyshed his warre in Norman¦dye, & was returned into Englande / Robert de Bolesyn, which was the el¦dest sonne of Roger de mount Gome¦ryk erle of Shrewesburye / arose a∣gayne the kynge, and manned his ca¦stellys of Shrewesbury, of Brugg of Arundell, and of Tekynhyll, and incoraged the walshmen agayne the kyng. But the kyng pursued so cruel¦ly the sayd Robert, yt wythin .xl. days he wan all thoses castellis & slew ma¦ny of his men, and gat the fauour of the walshmen by gyftes and plesaūt wordes / and also compelled the sayd Robert to forsake Englād, The why¦che then sayled into a corner of Nor∣mādye & kept him there secretely, tyll such tyme as to hym was thyther co¦men willyā erle of Cornewall / which wyllyam was also erle of Nortom in Normandye. when these two erles were assocyat / they gaderyd to them a great strength of Normans, & dyd great harme wythin the prouynce. wherfore the kynge sayled thyther & made sharpe warre vppon them. In the whych he loste many of his men. But in ye ende he put frō them theyr strength, and toke theym both pry∣soners, and so helde them ye terme of theyr lyues. And that done, he sette that coūtrey in good reste and peace, and after retourned into Englande. After whyche returne / kynge Henry made sharpe lawes agayne theues and other that vsed vnleful meanes. In whyche lawes was conteyned lo¦synge of lyfe, of eyes, of stones, and other members of man as the gylte requyred. And soone after Anselme archbys∣shoppe of Caunterbury, assembled a great coūsayll at London of the cler∣gy of England. By authoryte of the which coūsayll / dyuers abbotes and other were put from theyr dygnytie, for that they had taken before tyme theyr abbayes by vnlefull meanes. Prestes wyues And amōges all other decrees one was, ye prestes shulde forgo theyr wy¦ues. Then strife fell betwen ye kyng & Anselme / for that that he wold not sa¦cre the prestes that hadde taken in∣uestyture of lewde mennys handes, whyche before was forboden vppon payne of cursynge. But Gyralde archebyshoppe of yorke / for the plea¦sure of the kynge sacred suche bys∣shoppes. wherfore Anselme beynge dyscōtent / departed ye land and yode to Rome, to shewe thys wyth other thynges to the pope, whyche at that
daye by moste accorde of wryters shulde be Pascall the seconde. In the .vi. of the kynge, the coun∣trey of Flaūdres was sore blemyshed and hurte by meane of the see, so that the Flemynges yode aboute to haue socoure of dwellynge, and requyred of the kyng to haue lycence that they might inhabyt them in the eest parte of the ryuer of Twede, the whych to them was graunted. But after a cer¦tayn of yeres they were remoued ito westwalys, where they remayned a longe whyle / but after they sprad all Englande ouer. In the .vii. yere of thys kynge / vp∣pon a frydaye at nyghte in the fyrste weke of clene lent, was sene an vn∣couth starre betwene ye south and the weste, the whyche nyghtely appered at one howre, and cōtynued so by the space of .xxv. days. And fore agaynst that oute of the eest parte / appered a great leuyn or beme of bryghtnes, whyche stretched towarde the sayde starre. And vppon shere thursdaye nexte ensuynge, were sene two monys / that one in the eest, and that other in the weste. And in thys yere / Anselme by the kynges agrement, returned agayne from Rome / and shortely after cal∣led a conuocacyon at London. In the whyche by the popes authoryte yt was newely conformed and ena∣cted, that no temporall man after that daye shuld make inuesture with crosse or wyth rynge. In the .viii. yere of the reygne of kynge Henry / the fourth Henry em∣perour of Almayne, the whyche had maryed Molde the eldeste doughter of kynge Henry, when she was of the age of .v. yeres / prysoned pope Pas∣call and dyuerse of the cardynallys. This Henry also warred agayne his father Henry the .iii / and lastely caste hym in stronge pryson. For the why∣che dede as assermeth Ranulphe / he wylfully when he had ruled the em∣pyre .xx. yere / resygned hys dygnyte into the handes of Calixtus ye secōde of that name then pope / & after came secretely into England, & vnto Che∣ster, vnwyttynge hys wyfe or any of hys frendes / where he lyued longe after a strayte lyfe, and was buryed there at laste. But to this sayeng dys¦agreeth the wryters of the storyes of emperours. For of them yt is wytnes¦sed / that this Henry the emperour af¦ter he had ruled the empyre as before is sayd .xx. wynter, he dyed at a place in Almayn called Spyre / and there was buryed, wyth this scrypture vp¦pon his toumbe. Filius hic, pater hic, auus hic, preauus iacet hic. whyche is to meane in our vul¦gare tunge as foloweth. The son here lyeth, with also ye fader The belsyre, for & ye great graūfader. when Henry the emperour was thus dede as after yt shalbe shewed, when conuenyency of tyme requy∣reth / what became of his wife it shall there be declared. In the .ix. yere of ye reygne of kyng Henry / the archebyshoppe Anselme professed Gerarde archbyshoppe of yorke to the yoke of hys obedyence, as he was before taught by the lore of Lamfranke his predecessour. And the .x. daye of Auguste folowynge, he sacred .v. byshoppes at one tyme / as of wynchester; of Salysbury, of Exeter, of Herforde, and of Glamur∣gan. And kynge Henry ordeyned a byshoppes see at Ely / and ordeyned there Henry that hadde ben bishoppe of Bangor / and besette Cambrydgeshyre to the see of Ely. And to the bis¦shoppes see of Lyncolne, he gaue his owne towne of Spaldynge, for he hadde mynyshed that see by the pre∣ferment of Ely.
In the .x. yere dyed Anselme arch¦byshop of Caunterbury. After whose deth that see was voyde .v. yeres / & the goodes of the chyrch spent to the kynges vse. And whē he was prayed to helpe ye chyrch, that was wythout an hedde and a pastor / he vsed to an∣swere that his fader and also his bro¦ther had accustomed, to set there the beste proued men yt they might fynd. And to the entente that he myght do the same / he toke the more tyme & lay¦sure. wyth suche mylde answeres he so put of the tyme, that be fylled hys cofers wyth the great sommes of ye benefyce. And who that is desyrous to knowe of the great vertue of thys byshoppe Anselme / lette hym rede in the .xiiii. chapyter of the .vii. boke of Polycronycon; & there he shall fynde a parte therof. About this tyme as wytnesseth the frenche cronycle / a cōtrauersy began betwene the kyng and Lewys kyng of Fraunce son to Phylyp the fyrste. This Lewys was surnamed Lewis the great, other for hys bygnesse of person, or ellys for greatnesse of hys dedes. This Lewys sent vnto kyng Henry beynge in Normandy / & gaue vnto hym monycyon of homage for the duchy of Normandy / & also that he shulde restore vnto hym or bete down to the groūde, the castell of Gy¦sours / & also to recompence and re∣store for hurtes and harmes that his Normans hadde done in those par∣tes. But all this of kyng Henry was denyed / and shortely after skyrmys∣shes and cocke fyghtes beganne be∣twene the sayde two prynces, kynge Henry lyenge at the sayde castell of Gysours, and Lewys at a place cal∣led mounte Calue. But thys encrea¦sed in suche wyse, that after eyther prynce soughte more rome places, whose knyghtes sundry tymes met. But of any notable batayll I fynde no remembraunce / all be yt that the sayde warre contynued by the terme of two yeres. In the ende of whych two yeres wyllyam the eldest sonne of kynge Henry, beynge a chyld and wythin age / contented so well the mynde of Lewys, that he refrayned of hys warre for that tyme. In the .xiii. yere, at Shrewesbu∣rye was a great erth quake, and at Nothyngham from the morne to the vndertyde. The ryuer of Trent was so fordryed in the moneth of June, as sayth Guydo, that men wente ouer drye. And the starre called stel∣la cometa or the blasynge sterre ape∣ryde soone after. Theruppon folow∣ed an harde wynter, great deth of the people, and scarcete of vitayll by the great moreyn of bestes. In thys yere also the kynge founded the ab∣bay of Hyde wythoute the wallys of wynchester, that of olde tyme was wythin the wallys. THE .CCXXVIII. CHAPITER. IN the .xv. yere of hys reygne / ye kynge entēdyd to haue mo∣ted Faricus abbot of Abyndon, vn∣to the see of Caunterburye. But by a counsayll kept at wyndesoure of bys¦shoppes, ye kynges mynde was chaū¦ged / and to that see was then admyt¦ted Raufe that was byshoppe of Ro∣chester. And the same yere one Thur¦stone was chosen archebyshoppe of yorke / the whyche wythsayde hys professyon of obedience that he shuld owe to the see of Caunterbury / wher¦fore at lengthe he was depryuyd of hys dygnyte. But after by laboure that he made to Pascall the pope be∣fore named / the sayde pope wrote vnto the kynge that he shulde re∣store Thurstone agayne to the see of yorke. By whyche meane he was a∣gayne restoryd / but yet he disdayned
to do hys lawefull obedyence vnto Raufe archebyshope of Caunterbu∣ry. Then the stryfe was renewed, which Lamfranke before as ye haue harde in the thyrde chapyter of wyl∣lyam Conquerour, dyd appeace / and was brought in argument before the pope. The whyche at the kynges re∣quest, promysed yt he wolde nothyng do nor ordeyne, that shuld be deroga¦cion to the archbyshop of Caunterbu¦ry, or to the dygnyte of his chyrche. But in cōclusion the pope gaue such a defuse sentence in thys mater, that he lefte the stryfe vndetermyned and vnassoyled. And when ye kynges pro¦curatours wyth also the archbyshop of Caunterbury were absent / were yt for nede or for fauour, the pope was so bowed, that he forsoke ye olde rule vsed before hys days, and sacred the sayde Thurstone, and gaue vnto hym the pawle. For this dede ye kyng was sore dyscontented wyth Thur∣stone, and warned hym the entre of his lande. wherfore the pope wrote after shortely to the kynge / wyllyng hym to suffer Thurstone to occupye his see peaseably, or he shulde be ac∣cused and suspended by the dygnyte of the offyce of Caunterbury / and so Thurstone enioyed his see. In the yere of our lorde .xi. hundred & .xviii. as sayth the frenche cronicle, whyche was the .xvii. yere of thys kyng Henry the fyrst / the warre was agayn quyckened betwen kyng Hen¦ry and Lewys kynge of Fraunce. wherof was the occasyon, as sayth the sayde frenche cronycle, Thy∣baude erle of Chartres. whych Thy¦baude was greuyd by the Frenche kynge, and for necessyte requyred kynge Henry of ayde and helpe, to whome the kynge as to hys kynnes∣man sent ayde and socoure. And af∣terwarde the kynge sayled ouer with a stronge armye / and sente a noble¦man named Stephan into the lord∣shyppe of Brye, to defendeyt agayn the Frenche kynge. when Lewys vn¦sterstode that kynge Henry was lan∣ded in Normandye wyth so great power / he in all haste assembled a stronge power, and drewe hym to∣warde the kynge. But there were so stronge holdes mannyd wyth Nor∣mans, & also such depe and great ry¦uers / that the Frenche kynge myght not wynne vnto kynge Henry. Then lastely by a feate of warre whyche were longe to reherse, he wan a town named Lyngues in Cause / in the whyche towne was a brydge to passe the ryuer of Thee, and so into Nor∣mandye. when a certayne of the knyghtes of Lewes had thus wonne the foresayd towne / the sayd Lewes wyth his peo¦ple spedde hym shortly after, and res¦cued his foresayde knightes / & then spoyled and robbed the towne the whyche was ryche, for so myche as yt hadde ben in quyet and rest many yeres before. He also slewe and toke prysoners all ye Normans there dwel¦lyng, & put in theyr stede Frenchmē. And that done he sped hym towarde kynge Henry, the which was at a ca∣stell called Male assyse / & there made purueyaunce for the defence of the Frenchmen. And when he hadde gar¦nyshed yt to hys pleasure he depar∣ted thens. But not longe after the Frenche kynge came thyther wyth his hole hoste of Frenchmen / and af¦ter many sore & cruell assautys, wan the sayde castell / and bette yt downe euen wyth the grounde. After whych season as sayth the sayd cronicle, fell to the Frenche kynge many and dy∣uerse mysfortunes. For shortely af∣ter amonge other myssechaunces / a noble captayn of hys named Angue∣ran de Chanmount, the whyche had done myche harme in Normandye
to kynge Henry, and wonne there some castelles and other stronge hol¦des, dyed sodeynly. And in shorte tyme after / Baldewyne erle of Flaūdres a man of great strēgth and puys¦saunce, as he beseaged a castell was wounded in the face, and dyed wyth in .vi. dayes after. Then Fauques erle of Aungeos, in whom also this Lewys affyed mych and trusted / ma¦ryed his doughter vnto willyam the eldest sonne of kynge Henry / and re∣fused the kynge of Fraunce parte, and ayded and assysted kynge Hen∣ry in all that he myght / so that dayly the power of kyng Henry encreased, and the Frenche kynges mynyshed. Lastely these two prynces met wyth theyr both hostes in playne feld, and foughte a dedely and cruell batayll. where in the ende the Frenche kynge was ouercomen, and loste myche of his people / and was cōpelled to flee vnto a place called Audely for his sa∣uegarde. But thys ouerthrowe of Frenchemen is excused in the moste fayrest maner / so yt they excuse them selfe, and saye that kynge Henry set vppon kynge Lewys, when he was not ware, but hys knyghtes all oute of aray & order, and also kyng Henry had farre excedynge nomber of men ouer that theyr kyng had / with other wordes of boste of them selfe, & slaun¦der of Englyshemen, the whyche as to me appereth is an augmentacyon of theyr owne shame. But Ranulfe the munke sayth shortely, that kyng Henry ouercame the Frenche kynge royally in batayll. Then yt foloweth in ye story / fynal¦ly these sayde prynces were agreed / and wyllyam the sonne of kyng Hen¦ry dyd homage vnto ye French kyng for the landes of Normandye, by the agrement of his fader. For the kyng thought hym selfe to good to be vn∣der the obeysaūce of ye Frenche kyng Then kynge Henry caused hys free men of Englande and of Norman¦dy, to do homage vnto his sonne wyllyam. And soone after Fouques before na¦med lefte hys erledome of Angeer or Angiers, in guydyng of kynge Hen¦ry, and yode hym selfe into the holy lande / and wylled in his testament, that yf he retourned not agayne, that the sayde erledome shulde remayne vnto his sonne in lawe wyllyam, son of kynge Henry, whyche hadde ma∣ryed hys doughter. About the .xx. yere of the reygne of kyng Henry / quene Molde or Maw¦de hys wyfe dyed in Normandy / the whyche in her youthe was set by her father kyng of Scottes into a nun∣ry, and there ware & vsed the vayle and habyte of a nunne. For the whi∣che cause when kynge Henry was a∣greable to take her vnto wyfe, thys mater fell in great despucyon / & An∣selme then archebyshop of Caunter∣bury was sore agayne that maryage a season of tyme. But at length yt was suffycyētly proued that she was there as a fygure, a woman worynge that habyte wythoute professyon of order. And this was thus ordered by her father, to the ende to put by vn∣worthy wowers. Thys of wryters was reputed for a blessyd and holy woman, after the lyuynge of a world¦ly woman. when kynge Henry had contynued in Normandy vppon the season and terme of .iii. yeres / he toke shyppyng at Haterflete in Normandy, and say¦led happely into Englande the same day, that is to meane ye .xxiiii. day of Nouember as sayth some wryters. And shortly after willyā duke of Nor¦mandy, wyth Rycharde his brother, Notha the countesse of Persye, Ry∣charde erle of Chester, with his wyfe the kynges nyce, and the archdekyn
of Herforde and other, to the nom∣ber of a hundred & .lx. persones / toke shyppynge at the sayde porte, & were all drowned, a bocher onely excepte. whyche mysfortune fell by the ouer∣syght of the maister and other, which fell at a dyssencyon in the nyghte a∣monge them selfe / by reason wherof they ranne vppon a rocke as shewed the foresayde bocher. From this daūger wyllyam duke of Normādy was escaped, and was in the shyppe bote nere vnto the lande. But when he harde the lamētable crye of the Coū∣tesse Notha / he commaunded the rowers to returne and saue the sayd Countesse. whych done by what mys¦fortune I can not saye, after she was receyued into the bote, were it by tem¦peste or ouer chargynge of the bote or otherwise / they were all swalowid of the see, so that none of them was after foūde but {per}te of theyr goodes. Of this duke wyllyā some desclaun¦derous wordes are lefte in memory, both in the englyshe cronycle and al¦so of other wryters / the whyche I ouerpasse. THE .CCXXIX. CHAPITER. IN the .xxi. yere of hys reygne / kynge Henry made ye parke of wodestoke be syde Oxenforde, with other plesures to the same. And Fou¦ques erle of Angiers returned out of the holy land, and maryed the syster of her that before he had maryed vn∣to wyllam duke of Normandye, vn∣to the son of Robert Curthose / and gaue wyth her the erledome of Co∣nomanna. And stryfe began to kyn∣dell betwene kynge Henry & the sayd Fouques, for the wytholdyng of the dowre or ioynture of hys fyrste dou∣ghter, maryed wnto wyllyam the kynges sonne. In the .xxiii. yere of kynge Henry, dyed Raufe archbyshoppe of Caun∣terbury / and one named wyllyā was set in ye see after hym. And the kynge in thys yere beganne the foundacy∣on of ye abbay of Redyng. And Iohn̄ a cardynall of Rome was sente from Calyxte the seconde of that name thē beynge pope, for certayne maters cō∣cernynge the pope. In the tyme of whyche hys so beynge here, the car∣dynall made sharpe processe agayne prestes that norysshed Crysten moy∣les / and rebuked them by open pub∣lyshement and otherwyse, so that he wan hym here but small & lytle fa∣uoure. But this dyssymuled doctour toke so great feruence in the correccy¦on of the iudgement of prestes of En¦glande, that he forgate the lore and coūsayll of his famous pope Caton / whyche in the boke of his counsayll or of wysedome thus sayth: Quae cuspare soses, ea tu ne feceris ipse. Turpe est doctori, cum cuspa redarguit ipsum. The whyche two verses maye be en¦glyshed as foloweth, Auyse ye well, let reason be thy guyde when other folke thou arte aboute to blame / That suche defaute in the be not espyed. For yf there be / then shalt thou haue the shame. A mannes honoure suche thynges woll reclayme. It ys full foule when that a man woll chese If that hys dede agayne hys wor∣des preche. This coūsayll was not remembred of the sayd Cardynall. For in the eue¦nynge after he had lewdely blowen his horne, and sayde it was a detesta¦ble synne to aryse from the syde of a strumpet & sacre the body of Cryste / he was taken wyth a strumpet to his open shame and rebuke. In the .xxv. yere of kynge Henry
was called a counsayll at London / where the spyrytualty condescended that the kynges offycers shulde pu∣nyshe prestes that cheryshed the fore¦sayde mulys. But the sayd offycers toke money, and sufferyd the prestes to spurre theyr mulys at theyr plea∣sure. whyche offyce at this daye is so clerely renoūced of al spyritual men / yt neyther kyng nor bishop taketh for yt any synes, nor yet correccyon ne∣cessarye to be done for the same. In the .xxvii. yere of his reygne as reporteth an olde Cronycle / the gray freres by procuryng of ye kyng came fyrste into Englande, and had theyr fyrst house buylded at Caunterbury. And aboute this tyme by moste ac∣corde of writers, dyed Henry the .iiii. emperour of that name / whyche as before is touched maryed Molde the doughter of kyng Henry. After who∣se deth the sayde empresse came vnto her father into Normandye. when kyng Henry was ascertaynted of the deth of Henry the emperour / for so myche as he hadde none heyre male, he caused soone after the more party of hys lordes of England as well spi¦rytuall as temporall, to swere in his presence, that they shuld kepe ye land of Englande to the vse of Mawde ye empresse, yf he dyed wythoute yssue male, and she then suruyued In the .xxviii. yere of kyng. Henry / Geffrey Plātagenet erle of Angeou maryed Molde the empresse. Of the whyche two descended Henry the se∣cond, that after Stephan was kyng of Englande. In this yere also the kynge had dyuers monycyons and vysyons. For amonge other ferefull dremys / he saw a great company of clerkys with dyuerse wepons, why∣che manassed hym for dette that he shuld owe vnto them. And when they were passed / he thought yt he was ma¦nassed to deth of his own knyghtes. And lastely apperyd to hym a great company of byshoppes / whych thre∣tened hym, and wolde haue smytten hym wyth theyr crosses. By this mo¦nicyon he toke remorce in his conscy¦ence, and dyd great dedes of charyte in Normandye where he hadde sene these visyons. And after his cōmyng then into Englande / in satysfaccyon of wronges done to the chyrche as af¦fermeth Guydo, he then founded the abbay of Redynge before spoken of. And ouer that he releasyd vnto En∣glyshe men the Dane gelt, that was by his father & his brother renewed. In the .xxx. yere of this kyng Hen¦ry, dyed the erle of Flaundres / and kynge Henry as sayth Ranulfe, was by agrement of Lewys the Frenche kyng made erle, as next heyr & enhe∣rytour to the sayde erledome. But it is not there expressed by what maner of tytle or successyon. In the .xxxii. yere of the kyng, dyed Robert Curthose the kynges broder the whyche he hadde kept as pryso∣ner in the castell of Cardyfe from the iiii. yere of his reygn or there about / whose corps as before is shewed, was buryed at Glouceter before the hyghe alter. And aboute this tyme was founded the pryorye of Norton in the prouynce of Chester, by one wyllyam the sonne of Nychelle. And the abbay of Combremer in the same prouynce, was also founded aboute the same tyme. In the .xxxv. yere of kynge Henry / was borne of Molde the empresse, Henry shorte mantell or Henry the se¦conde. The whyche as after shall be shewed was consentynge to the mar¦tyrdome of saynt Thomas of Caun¦terburye. Kynge Henry beyng in Normandy after some writers, fell from or wyth hys horse / whereof he cought hys deth. But Ranulphe sayth he toke a
surfet by etynge of a lamprey & ther of dyet, when he hadde reygned full xxxv. yeres and odde monethes. Then ye kynges bowellys were dra∣wen out of hys body, and then salted wyth myche salte. And for to auoyde the stenche whych hadde infected ma¦ny men / the body was lastely closed in a bulles skynne, and yet yt was not all stynted. He that clensed the hed, dyed of the stenche of the brayn. Then lastely the body was brought into England, & buryed in the abbay of Redynge that he had before foun¦ded. Then ye fame of hym was blow¦en abrode as yt is blowen of other prynces / and sayde yt he passed other men in .iii. thynges. In wytte, in elo¦quence, and fortune of batayll. And other sayde he was ouercomen wyth iii. vyces / wyth couetyse, wyth cruel¦ty, and wyth luste of lechery. One other made these verys of hym as folowen. Kynge Henry is dede, bewte of the world, for whom great dole Goddes now maken for theyr kynde brother. For he is sole, Mercurius in speche, Marce in ba∣tayll, harte stronge Appollo, Iupiter in hest, egall with Saturne and enymye to Cupido. Kyng he was of right, & man of most myght, and glorious in raynyng. And when he left his crowne, thē fell honour downe, for mysse of suche a kynge. Normandy than gan lowre, for losse of theyr floure, & sange wel away. Englande made mone, & Scotlande dyd grone, for to se that daye. Francia. THE .CCXXX. CHAPITER. LEwys the sonne of the fyrste Phylyp beganne hys reygne ouer the Frenchemen, in the yere of our lorde .xi. hundred & .vii. to reken his begynnynge from the deth of his father / and the .vi. yere of the fyrste Henry then kyng of England. This Lewys as before is touched, was ad¦mytted to the rule of the land certayn yeres or hys father dyed, and was surnamed Lewes the great for gros∣senesse of his body. Anon as this Lewys had fynyshed the obsequy of the funerallys of hys father / he wythoute taryenge called a counsayll of hys lordes spyrytuall and temporall at the cytye of Orle∣aunce / where of the byshoppe of the same see wyth other adioynynge, he was solemnly anoynted & crowned. But not wythout grudge of the arch¦byshoppe of Raynes / for so mych as of custome the Frenche kynges vsed there to be crowned. Soone after the coronacyon of Lewys / Guy le Rous, and Guy de Cressy his sonne, whych before tyme hadde ben at debate and warre with Lewys, and Lewys had from them taken ye castel of Gurnaye / this Guy le Rous wyth hys sonne seynge they might not preuayle agayn the kyng, awayted theyr tyme and season, and espyed when Endo hys owne broder and erle of Corbueyll went forth on huntynge, and toke hym, & as a pry∣soner kept hym in the castell of Baw¦dum. whereof the cause was, for so myche as the sayde Endo wolde not assyste nor ayde ye sayd Guyle Rous his brother agayne the kynge. when thys was knowen, anon the frendes and tenauntes of the sayde erle shew¦yd this mater vnto the kynge / bese∣chynge hym that he wolde ayde and assyste theym to recouer theyr natu∣rall lorde. wherunto the kynge gran̄ted / and forth wyth sent a knyght or captayn of his named Auncelyne, ac¦companyed with .xl. horsmen before / for so myche as yt was shewyd vnto
the kyng, yt such as had ye rule of the castell wolde receyue suche persones as were sent from hym, and delyuer the castell wyth the prysoner vnto them. Uppon whyche appoyntemēt thys Ancelyne as before is sayd was sent to entre this castell. But all con¦trary to the former {pro}mise made / this Auncelyne was betrayed and taken, and many of his men slayne, & hym selfe set in prison, where the sayd erle of Corbuayll was. wherof when the kynge was enfourmed / he was pas∣synge greuously dyscontent. wher∣fore in all haste he sped him thyther, & compassed ye castell wyth a stronge syege / and those that were wythin de¦fended them manfully. In the tyme of the whyche syege nother Guy the fader, nor Guy hys sonne, were with in the sayde castell of Baudum. But Guy ye son as a lusty and iu∣perdous knyght / put hym self in ad∣uenture dyuers wayes and tymes to haue entred the sayde castell for com¦fort of his men / but all was in vayn. Fynally the kynge made so sore and cruell assautes, that he wan the fyrst warde wyth great dyffycultye, and after the hole / and delyueryd the erle and Auncelyn his stewarde, ye which were in great doute of theyr lyues. And such as he toke prysoners of the soldyours / some he put to deth, and some he prisoned to theyr lyues ende, to the terrour and fere of other. In processe of tyme after at a place called the Roche of Guy, whych one Guy of olde tyme had buylded / dwel lyd at this daye one of that stocke na¦med also Guy, the whyche hadde to wyfe a fayre and good woman, the doughter of one wyllyā a Norman. whyche wyllyam entendynge to dys¦heryte the sayde Guy, and to be lord of that stronge place / vppon a tyme when the sayde Guy was in ye chyrch or chapell to here his dyuyne seruyce entred the chyrche wyth a certayn of harnessed knightes vnder theyr man tellys, and fell vppon hym and all to hewe hym. wherof herynge the wyfe / ranne as a madde woman, and fell vppon her husbande, to the entēt to saue hym from the strokes. But the tyrauntes were so cruell, yt they forbare nothynge of theyr cruel tye / but wounded her wyth her hus∣bande, so that both were slayne / and that done entred the castell, and slew all suche as they found therin. when this willyam fader to ye wife of Guy, or broder to her as affermeth maister Robert Gagwyne, was possessed of ye castell of Guyon / he thought ther∣by to rule all the countrey enuyron. But the gentylles and commons he rynge of thys shamefull murder / as∣sembled thē to gither / & of one mynde whyle some of them yode to the kyng to enfurme hym of that cruell dede, the other prepared abyllementes of warre, and layde syege to the sayde castell. The kynge Lewys he∣rynge of this shamfull dede, and the wynnynge of so stronge an holde, fe¦rynge the rescue of Englishmen and Normans, leste that castell by that meane myghte fall in theyr handes / sent his commyssyon vnto the rulers of that countrey, chargynge theym wyth all dylygence to assaute that place. And yf they myght wynne yt / to put the executours of that murder vnto moste shamefull deth. whyche commaundement receyued from the kynge / stronge assaute & cruell was made, & manfully yt was defended. But the losse ran to theym of the cas∣tell / so that in processe of tyme when this willyam conceyued well that he myght not contynue the defence ther¦of, he began to treate & agreed, that yf he myghte haue free yssue for hym and hys, & assuraunce that he wyth his knyghtes myght go quyetly vn∣to
a place that he wold chose / he wold then delyuer the castell wyth all that was therin. The whyche requeste of dyuerse of the hedde captaynes was graunted and sworne. But so soone as the castell was delyuered, and the Frenchemen entred / the multytude not wythstandynge the former pro∣myse and othe, fell vppon the sayde wyllyam and his soudyours, & them put vnto deth by many cruell tormē¦tes / & fynally caste all theyr careyns into the ryuer of Sayne, vppon the brynke wherof the sayde roche and castell was standynge. And shortely after this, ensued the warre betwene this Lewys & kynge Henry of Englande, as yt is before shewyd in ye .x. yere of ye sayde Henry. And after the warre ended betwene these two prynces / Hugh Puyssake a man of great myght at those dayes in Fraunce, rebelled agayne ye kyng / and warred greuously vppon or a∣gayn the countesse of Chartres / and robbed and pylled the chyrches of ye countrey, as well as other places / so that the sayd coūtesse with her yonge sonne Thybaude, were fayne to seke socoure of the kynge. wherfore the kynge called a counsayll at hys citye of Meleyne / where agayne the sayd Hugh many greuous complayntes were put. But for so myche as ye sayd Hugh at that tyme was not present, to make answere vnto such thynges as then was layde to his charge / the kynge commaunded that the castell of Terry or of Thoree in all haste shulde be manned & vytayled, to the ende that by the comforte & strength of that castell, the kynge yf nede re∣quyred myght lay syege to the castell of Puyssake, for so mych as that one was nere adioynynge vnto ye other. In whych passe tyme the sayd Hugh was somoned to appere before the kynge and his counsayll / but he refu¦sed to appere. when the kynge was enfourmed of the garnyshyng of ye castell of Thor∣re, and of the disobedyence of Hugh / he assembled a stronge hoste, and cō∣passed the castell of Puyssake with a syege / and set Thybaude son of the countesse vppon that syde that stode towarde the prouynce of Chartres, so that stronge assautes and cruell warre was made on euery parte. what shulde I make longe processe / to tell of the ferefull shot of the gon∣nys vppon bothe partyes, or of the sharpe shot of Arowes, the castynge of stonys, or scalynge of the wallys, or fyllynge of the dyches, the fyryng of the gates, or yet the mortall and cruell fyght on bothe partes / nor of ye manyfold dede bodyes & maymed, by reason of ye sayd assautes / or yet ye manasses or mockes, or great bosus or crakes vsed of the souldyours du¦rynge this syege. But fynally after the kynge hadde lyen before the sayd castell a certayne of tyme, he wanne yt by pure force, and toke the sayde Hughe wyth hys accessaryes. The whyche he commaunded to be kepte as prysoners in the castell of Thorre for a season. Then the kynge caste downe the sayde castell of Puyssake to the grounde, excepte a lytle towre made of tymber, the whyche he reser¦uyd for a lodgynge. And that done some of the forsayd prysoners he put to deth, and some he dysherityd after the grefe of theyr offence. And so this foresayd countesse of Charters with her sonne Thybaude was in quyete of theyr countrey and castell of Puys¦sake belongynge to the sayde erle∣dome. But howe yt was / in pro∣cesse of tyme folowynge thys Thy∣baude entended to haue reedyfyed there a newe castell / wherby as the kinge was enformed, he wold haue encroched thynges appertaynynge
to the crowne of Fraunce / wherfore the kynge wythstode yt. For this / a grudge fell betwene the kynge and erle Thybaude / so that in processe dedely warre was made betwen thē. The whyche contynued in such wise to theyr both damages / that fynal∣ly the warre was agayne reuyued betwene kynge Lewys and kynge Henry, as in the .xvii. yere of the rey∣gne of the sayde Henry is declared, by meane of thys warre betwene the kynge and this erle Thybaude. wherof the cyrcumstaunce wold axe a longe leysure to reherse, as yt is shewyd in the frenche storye. But fy∣nally this erle Thybaude loste none honour / all be yt that the frenche cro¦nycle wonderfully fauoreth ye party of the Frenche kynge, that the rea∣der maye well apperceyue, Quis pin xit leonem. THE .CCXXXI. CHAPITER. THis Lewys also hadde great warre wyth Henry the fourth of that name emperour / the whyche maryed Molde the doughter of Hen¦ry the fyrste kynge of England, as before is shewed. whefore the occasy¦on was as sayth the Frenche crony∣cle / for so myche as the sayd Henry the emperour hadde before tyme ben accursed of Gelasius the seconde of that name then pope, at Raynes a ci¦tye in Fraunce. For the whych cause as there is surmytted / the sayde em∣peroure assembled an huge hoste of Almaynes and Italyens, and entred the lande of Fraunce, and dyd therin myche harme. But in the ende when he knew of the great prouisyon ye Le¦wis made to mete him, & of his great power / he then as affermeth ye frēch cronycle, wythdrewe hym / and so a∣uoyded the lande of Fraūce wythout stroke strykyng. But of this speketh nothyng the authour that wrote the story of this Henry the emperour. After this the erle of Flaundres named Charlys, the systers sonne of kynge Lewys nexte duke after Bal∣dewyn, whych dyed as before is sayd in the thyrde chapyter of the story of kyng Henry, of a woūde in his face / this foresayd Charlys was sore ha∣ted of the prouoste of Brudgys. The whyche to bryng his malyce to some effecte / counsayled wyth hys adhe∣rentes how he myght slee the sayde Charlys. By whose coūsayle a mea∣ne was founde to brynge the erle to Brudgys a towne of Flaundres, for the wele of the sayde towne. After whose commynge vppon a daye he beynge in a chyrche and herynge his dyuyne seruyce, was slayne of ye sayd prouoste and his complycys. wherof herynge kynge Lewys / anon wyth a great army entred Flaundres, and besyeged the town of Brudges, and lastely toke the sayde prouoste. The whyche fyrst was bounden to a post, & then his eyen wyth a reede stryken out of hys hed / And then shot wyth arowes / & lastely set vppon a whele, where he remayned tyl he dyed. And a felowe of hys named Bartopus, ye whyche was consentyng to the same murder / was hanged vppon a galos by the waste and armys / and by hym amastyfe or great curre dogge, the whyche as soon euer he was smytten bote vppon the sayde Bartopus / so that in processe he all to rent hym, & dyd to hym so great payne, that laste¦ly he endyd his lyfe in great mysery. In the time of ye reygn of this Lew¦ys / the bishop of Clermōde was voy¦ded his see by the cruelnes of the erle of Auerne, wherfore the kyng assem¦bled his knyghtes / and by strength, set the byshoppe in hys place agayne maugry his enymyes. And agayne the second tyme when he was eft put
out by the sayde erle / the kynge resto¦ryd hym / and toke suche pledges of the erle, that he remayned after in good quyet. In ye later dayes of this Lewys / his eldest sonne named Phy¦lyppe wyth a conuenyent company, vppon a daye for his dysporte rode about certayne stretys of the cytye of Parys / and as he rode, an hogge so∣deynly starte amonge the horse fete of the chylde / wherwyth the horse be∣ynge frayde lepte sodeynly, and cast the chylde to the grounde, wyth so great vyolence that he dyed ye nyght folowynge. For this myssehappe the kynge toke great heuynesse / so that he waxed dayly more feble. And for he was vnweldly by reason of ouer ladynge of fleshe, and myghte not well trauayll / he therfore by the ad∣uyce of hys lordes, admytted hys se¦conde sonne named Lewys to the rule of the realme, and hym he crow¦ned by his lyfe tyme / and also mary∣ed hym vnto Elynoure the dough∣ter of the duke of Guyan, by whych he was inherytoure vnto her father. And shortely after the kynge syke∣ned / and to hys great payne in an horse lytter was brought vnto saynt Denys. where he lyenge a season syke, and knew that the owre of deth was nere / commaunded suche as were aboute hym that they shulde spredde a tapytte vppon the ground, and then laye hym vppon the sayde tappette, and vppon hym to be made a crosse of asshes / whyche all was done accordynge to his commaun∣dement. And there he so laye tyll he dyed, in the yere of hys reygne to re¦ken from the deth of his father to his owne endynge daye .xxx. yeres / so that he reygned .xxix yeres full and odde monethes / and was buryed in the monastery of saynte Denys with great pompe, wyth thys scrypture fo¦lowynge vppon his tombe. Illustris genitor Lodouict rex Lodouicus, Vir clemens, Christi seruorum semper amicus: Institui fecit pastorem canonicorum, In sella veteri trans flumen Parisiorum. Hane vir magnanimus asmi victoris amore, Auro reliquijs ornauit rebus honore. Sancti Dionysi, qui seruas corpus humatum, Martyr & antisles, Lodouici solue reatum. whyche versys may be expowned in our vulgar as foloweth: The noble father of Lewys, Lewys the kynge. To Crystes seruauntes ryght meke and louynge / Caused to be made of chanons an howse, In a selle of Paris where the streme flowes / whyche this man myghty for loue of saynte Victor, wyth golde an relyquys enorued with great honor. wherfore saynte Denys, whyche ke∣pest hys body graued, Martyr and bishoppe / pray that his soule be saued. Angsia. THE .CCXXXII. CHAPITER. STephan erle of Boloyn, and son of the erle of Ble∣sence, and of the wyues syster of Henry the fyrst na¦med Mary / be∣ganne his reygne ouer the realme of Englande, in the yere of our lord .xi.C.xxxvi / & the first yere of Lewes ye .viii. of yt name then kyng of Fraunce. This was a noble man and hardy. But contrarye hys othe, after the affyrmaunce of some wryters that he made to Molde the empresse / he toke vpon hym ye crow∣ne / and was crowned vppon saynte Stephans daye in the Crystemasse
weke at westmynster, of the archbis∣shoppe of Caunterbury, the whyche in lykewyse had made lyke othe vn∣to the sayde empresse, in presence of her fader as before is touched. In pu¦nyshment wherof as men denied / the sayde archbyshoppe dyed shortly af∣ter. And many other lordes whyche dyd accordyng lyke / went not quyte wythout punyshement. A great cau∣ser of this periurye as rehersyth one authour, was this / one Hugh Bygot stewarde somtyme wyth Henry the fyrste / immedyatly after the deceace of the sayde Henry, came vnto En∣gland / and before the sayde archbys∣shop and other lordes of the lande, toke wyllfully an othe / & sware that he was present a lytle before the kyn¦ges deth, when kynge Henry admyt¦ted & chase for hys heyre to be kynge after hym Stephan hys neuewe / for so myche as Molde his doughter had dyscontented hym. wher vnto the archbyshoppe wyth the other lor∣des gaue to hasty credence. But this Hugh scaped not vnpunyshed / for he dyed myserably in a shorte tyme after. when kyng Stephan was crowned he sware before the lordes at Oxyn∣forde, that he wolde not holde in hys hand the benefyces that voyded / and that he wold forgyue the Dane gelt as kyng Henry before hym had done wyth other thynges whyche I passe ouer. And for this Stephan drad the cōmynge of the empresse / he therfore gaue lycence vnto his lordes, yt eue∣ry of them myght buylde a castell or strong fortres vpon his own groūd. And soone after he agreed wyth Da∣uyd kynge of Scottes, & receyued of hym homage, after he had from hym wonne some townes and holdes. The towne of Exetoure rebellyd a∣gayne the kynge in the seconde yere of hys reygne. But he in the ende he subdued theym. And wyllyam arch¦byshoppe of Caunterburye dyed the same yere / whose benefyce was af∣ter gyuen to Thibaude abbot of Bec¦co in Normandye. About the fourth yere of his rey∣gne / Dauyd kynge of Scottys re∣pentynge hym of hys former agre∣ment made wyth the kynge, entred of newe the boundes of Northum∣berlande aboute the ryuer of Theyse towarde the prouynce of yorke, and brent and slewe the people in moste cruell wyse / not sparynge man, wo∣man, nor chylde. Agayne whome Thurstone by the kynges cōmaunde¦ment was sent. The whych wyth his power quytte hym so knyghtly, that he ouer threwe the hoste of Scottes, and slewe of theym a great nomber, and compellyd theym to wythdrawe agayne into Scotlande. In the which passetyme ye kyng layde syege to the castell of Bedforde and wanne yt. And that done / he then made a vyage into Scotlande, where he dyd lytle to hys pleasure or profyte. Then in his retourne homewarde he toke Alexaunder byshoppe of Lyn∣colne / and helde hym in duresse tyll he hadde yelded or gyuen vnto hym the castell of Newerke. And then he chased Nygellus byshop of Ely. Also in thys furye he toke suche displeasure with his louynge frende Roger byshop of Salysburye / that he caste hym in bondes tyll the sayde Roger hadde rendred vnto hym the two castellys of Uyes and Shyr∣burne. For the whyche thys Roger in remembrynge the great ingraty∣tude of the kynge / toke such thought that he dyed shortely after / and left in redy coyne .xl. thousande marke, whyche after hys deth came to the kynges cofers. One cronycle sayth that kynge Ste¦phan obteyned these foresayde castel¦lys,
to the entent he myght fortyfye theym wyth his knyghtes to wyth∣stande the empresse, whose cūmynge he euer fered. And ye yere folowynge he wāne wyth strength the castellys of Glowceter, of Herford, of webley, of Brystowe, of Dudley, & of Shre∣wesburye / for the whyche cause Ro∣bert erle of Glouceter began to wyth¦drawe hys allegeaunce from kynge Stephan. This Robert was the son of Henry the fyrst by reason of baste / and for thys dyspleasure sent letters vnto Molde the empresse hys syster, promysynge to her great ayde to wynne her ryght. In the meane whyle that the em∣presse made prouysyon for her iour∣ney / kynge Stephan concluded a maryage betwene Eustace his sonne and Constaunce the kynges syster of Fraunce, doughter of Lewys the great / the whyche contynued the a∣myte betwene England and Fraūce. Then in the moneth of Iuly and vi. yere of Stephan / Molde the em¦presse as testyfyeth Henry the cha∣non in hys .ix. boke, entred this land by the porte of Portesmouthe / and so kepte on her iourney tyll she came to Brystowe, and dyd great harme by the meane of her passage through the countrey. In whyche tyme of her sayde landynge, kyng Stephan laye at the syege of walyngforde ca∣stell. But as soone as he harde of the landynge of the empresse / he anon sente oute commyssyons for more strength, and so drewe towarde hys enymyes. But in this tyme and sea∣son Robert erle of Glowceter, and Ranulfe erle of Chester, wente vn∣to the empresse wyth all the power that they might make. The empresse herynge the great power commynge wyth the kynge / drewe to the cytye of Nycoll now called Lyncolne, and there helde her a longe season for all that the kyng myght do. But lastely the empresse wyth her people esca∣ped / and the kynge was possessyd of the cytye, and there bode tyll Candel¦mas. After whyche season / erle Ro∣bert and Ranulfe before named, with a great power of walshmen, & ye po∣wer of the empresse, came agayn the kynge. where as when bothe hostes were nere ioynyng / the erle Ranulfe of Chester spake to his knightes and sayd: I requyre you that I that am cause of your parell, may be the fyrst that shall entre into the parell. Then answered erle Robert and sayd / yt is not vnworthy to the yt axeste the fyrst stroke and dignyte of this fyght. For to the yt is syttynge, for noblesse of blood and vertue of strength, in the whyche thou passest other men. But the kinges false othe moueth men to warre and to fyght / where we muste now wynne the mastry or be ouerco∣mē. And he yt hath none other socour, is cōstrayned to defende hym by kny¦ghtly and stronge dedes of armes & of manhode. And so shall we now a∣gayne theym that by entryked wyth gyle & wyckednesse / as Robert erle of Mellent, the erle also of Albe∣marll, and Symon of Hampton, the which is a man of great boste and of small myght. Then kyng Stephan prepayred to set forwarde hys people / and erle Baudewyne had wordes of comfort to the kynges peple,Thre thynges requysyte to fyght & sayde: Men yt shall fyghte / to theym is behouefull thre thynges. The fyrst is ryght of ye cause, leste men fal in parell of soule. The second is quantyte of men of ar¦mys, leste men be oppreste wyth exce¦dynge nomber. And the thyrde is the effecte corage of strēgth of knightes, yt the quarel shuld not fayle for lacke of hardy and assured fyghtynge. As touchynge whyche thre poyntes I truste we be well sped. But & ye take
hede farthermore what enymyes we haue / fyrste we haue agayne vs Ro∣bert erle of Glouceter, whyche vseth great manasses, and executeth lytle or small dedys. In mouth he is a ly∣on / but in harte he is a shepe. He is pompous in speche, and darke in vn¦derstandyng. There is also Ranulfe erle of Chester / a man wythout rea∣son and full of folehardynesse / redy and preste to all conspyracy and vn∣stedfastnesse of maner and dedes, has¦ty and furyouse of hart, and vnware of parellys. He assayeth oft to acheue great dedes / but he bryngeth none to effecte. And what he fyrsly and fres¦shely begynneth / he cowardely and fayntly forsaketh, as vnhappy and vngracyous in all his dedys / and is ouercomen in euery place. For he holdeth wyth hym banyshed men & scullers. And the mo of them that be in a company, the soner they be ouer¦comē / and weke they be in fyghtyng, for eyther of theym putteth truste in his felowe whyle hym selfe is ouer∣throwen. But or he myght haue finyshed his wordes to moste mennys audyence / the crye of the enymyes, wyth noyse of trumpettes and gruntyng of hor∣sys approched and smote to gyther / and forth go the arowes, and grese∣ly & cruell fyghte was contynued vp¦pon bothe sydes for the whyle yt yt en¦duryd. where through the grene feld was turned into a perfyte redde / so that many a pale & wan vysage was there sene yeldynge the gooste, wyth armys and legges disseueryd and de¦parted. A longe whyle thys fyghte stode in questyon, whyther partye shulde obteyne vyctorye. But in the ende kynge Stephans partye gaue backe and fledde / and he full knyght¦ly abode on felde wyth a fewe of his knyghtes, and was taken, and so was brought vnto the empresse / the whyche commaunded hym to be con¦ueyed vnder sure kepyng vnto Brys¦towe, where he was kepte as a pry∣soner from the sayde tyme of Candel¦masse vnto holy Roode daye next en¦suynge. Aboute this tyme was founded the Abbay of Stratforth Langthorne wythin .iiii. myles of London, by a knyght called syr wyllyam de Moūt¦fychet. THE .CCXXXIII. CHAPITER. WHen the empresse hadde wonne this vyctorye, and had commyt¦ted the kyng to warde, as before ye haue harde / she was not therwith a lytle exalted / but thoughte in her mynde that she was in a suerty of the possessyon of the hole realme. But she was disceyued / for Kent toke par¦tye wyth kynge Stephan. But yet after this victory thus obteyned, the empresse came vnto wynchester, and after to wyltone, to Oxenforde, to Redynge, and to saynte Albonys / into the whyche cytyes and townes she was receyued wyth all honoure. And fynally she came to London, for to entre the state of the lande. At her whyche there beynge / the quene made assyduat laboure for the dely∣uerye of the kynge her husbande / promysynge that he shulde surren∣der the lande into her possessyon, and he to be come a religyous man, other ellys a pylgryme to hys lyues ende. But all was in vayne / for she myght purchace no grace as then vppon no maner of condycyons. The cy∣tezens of London also made great laboure, that they myghte vse the lawys of Edwarde the confessoure, as they were graunted by wyllyam Conqueroure / and not the lawys of her father, whyche were of more straytnesse. wherof in no wyse
they of her coūsayll myght haue any graunte. For this the cytezens were dyscontentyd / and knowynge that the countrey of Kent wolde strength theyr partye, ordeyned to haue taken her. But she beynge therof warned / departed in haste, and lefte behynde her hyr store of housholde, and so fledde vnto Oxynforde / where she abode her people, the whyche was deuyded and scateryd. And in thys whyle she sente vnto Dauyd kynge of Scottes and her vncle for to ayde her, the whyche in all haste came vn¦to her / and so yode to wynchester, where she layde syege to the byshop∣pes towre, the whyche the kyn∣ges brother at that tyme helde wyth strength. Then the quene wyth ayde of her frendes, of Kentyshemen and other / made a stronge hoste / wherof was ca¦pytayne a knyght named Guyllyam de Pre. whē the empresse harde of ye great strength of the quene, and saw that her owne mynyshed rather then encreasyd / she fled secretely and esca¦ped vnto Glouceter. And erle Ro∣bert her brother was taken soone af∣ter, and put in pryson. Then Dauyd kynge of Scottes herynge of thys / returned into Scotland. Then mea¦nes was made vpon eyther syde, for deliuery and exchaunge of the pryso∣ners / so that fynally yt was agreed that the kynge shulde be delyueryd for erle Robert. But or thys agre∣ment were concluded myche sorowe was wroughte wythin thys realme. For the empresse pylled and spoyled on hyr partye / and the quene by pro∣myses and manaces borowed & toke vppō ye other syde / & the soudyours stale and extorcyoned vpō both par∣tyes / so that riche men were made ne¦dy, and the poore were oppressed. In thys meane whyle the empresse retourned agayne to Oxynforde & vytayled and manned yt in her beste maner. Then lastely the kyng was delyue¦red vpon holy Roode day in haruest, and soon after he becleped Oxynford wyth a stronge syege, from the tyme of Mychelmasse vnto the season of Crystemas / at whyche tyme and sea¦son the empresse vsed a new gyle for constraynte and necessyte of vytayle. In that tyme was great plente of snow fallen vppon the grounde / and the frost was therwyth so great, that Thamys wyth other great ryuers were then frosen ouer / so that man & horse myghte passe ye water vppō the yse. The empresse then constrayned of nede as before is sayd, apparayled her and her companye in whyte clo∣thynge, whych a farre of apered lyke the snow / and so vpon a plumpe go∣yng to gyther as nere as they myght escaped the daunger of theyr fone / & so came to walyngforde. And thens in processe of tyme she wyth a small companye departed, and retourned fynally into Normandye vnto her husbande. So soon as the empresse was thus departed from Oxenforde, the town was yelden vnto ye kynge / where the kyng had mich of the empresse stue as wel harnes as other stuffe of hous¦holde. Thē he entendyd to haue pur∣sued her. But tydyng{us} were brought vnto hym, yt Ranulfe erle of Chester wyth an hoste of walshmen was com¦myng towarde hym. But by medya∣cyon of frendes thys Ranulfe in the ende to the kynge was reconcyled, and was wyth hym agreed. About this tyme and season as yt is testyfyed of dyuerse authours / the Iewes vpon Ester euyn crucyfyed a chylde named wyllyam, in the cy∣tye of Norwyche. And in the tyme of Henry the second, about ye .vi. yere of his reygn as sayth Policronicon,
they crucified an other at Glouceter. In the .xxii. yere of his reygn / kyng Stephan was agayne crowned at Lyncolne. And soon after he toke frō Ranulphe erle of Chester the castell of Lyncolne. Robert erle of Glouceter made also newe warre vppon the kynge / & had the better of the kynge at wyltone, so that the kynge was lyke to haue fal∣len in Robertys daūger. But yet the kynge escaped wyth myche payne. And there was taken a baron of the kynges named syr willyam Martel, for whose delyuery the kynge gaue after to the sayde erle the castell of Shyrbourne. And that done yt sayd erle Robert began to foūde a stronge castell at Faryngdone. wherof the kynge beynge enfourmed, assembled his knyghtes and sped hym thyther∣warde / by meane wherof the worke was for that tyme empeached & let. In the .xv. yere of the reygne of kynge Stephan / the ryuer of Tha∣mys was so strongely ouerfrosen, that horse and carte passed ouer vp∣pon the yse. In the .xvi. yere / Ranulphe erle of Chester dyed, that was surnamed Gercyous, and was the .iiii. erle after the conqueste / and his sonne Hughe was erle after hym, which was a mā of great strength and vertue. And in the same yere, as wytnessyth Guydo and other / dyed Geffrey Plantage∣net husband of Molde the empresse. After whose deth, Henry short man∣tell that was the son of the sayde Gef¦frey and Molde / was made duke of Angeous & Normandye. The which in few yeres after maryed Elyanour the doughter of the erle of Poytow / the whych Elyanour was before ma¦ryed vnto Lewys kynge of Fraūce, and from hym deuorced for nerenes of blood, when he hadde receyued of her .ii. doughters named Mary and Alys, as wytnessyth the frenche cro∣nycle. And so this Henry was erle of Angeous by his fader, duke of Nor∣mandy by his mother, & erle of Poy∣towse by his wyfe. It was not longe after, that Eu∣stace the sonne of kynge Stephan wyth ayde of the Frenche kyng, war¦red vppon Henry duke of Norman∣dye / the whyche after some wryters was ymagyned by Stephan his fa∣ther, to the entent to let or stop hym yt he shuld not come into England to clayme his enherytaunce. But duke Henry defended hym so knyghtly, yt the sayde Eustace wanne therby lyt∣le honour or profyte. An old cronycle sheweth, that kyng Stephan entended to haue crowned the sayde Eustace his sonne kyng of Englande by his dayes / but the bys¦shoppes of Englande refused ye dede by cōmaundement of the pope. In the .xxvii. yere / the kynge layd syege vnto the castelles of Newebe∣ry, of walyngforde, and of warwyke or warwell / the whyche hadde ben kepte by the empresse frendes from the tyme of her departyng vnto that daye, and hoped of rescous by Hen∣ry duke of Normandy. But ye kynge then wan the castellys of Newebery and of warwell / and walyngforde defended the holders tyl the cōmyng of Henry the duke. The whyche in the ende of ye sayde yere wyth a great armye entred Englande / and fyrste wanne the castell of Malmysburye. And thens he yode to London / and wanne the towre, as myche by Poly¦cy and by fayre {pro}myse as by strēgth. And suche stuffe of vytayle and ar∣moure as he fande therin / he sent to walyngforde. And that done he wēt to the towne of walyngforde / & wan such holdes as were there about. Then kyng Stepan wyth his pow¦er drewe towarde the duke / and fy∣nally
by meane of medyatours, as Thybaude archbyshoppe of Caūter∣bury and other / both prynces to co∣mon of peace, met nere vnto ye water of Uryn or Urn. But as fast as some laboured to haue peace, so fast other laboured to haue warre / so that at that communacacyon the peace was not concluded. After the kynge and the duke were departed / the kynge yode towarde Epyswyche in Suff. And the duke toke the way to Srewesbury / where he wan the castell of the sayde town. From thens the duke wente to Not∣hyngham and wan the towne. wher¦fore the soldyours that helde the ca∣stell, seynge that the towne toke {per}tye wyth the duke / brake out vppon the nyght, and fyred the town and brent a great parte therof. In this while dyed and was drow¦ned Eustace the sonne of kynge Ste¦phan / and was buried at Feuersham in Kent in the abbay that his father before had buylded. Thybaude archbyshop of Caun∣terbury left not to labour & conclude ye peace betwene ye kyng & the duke / & endeuored hym selfe therin so dyly∣gently, wyth the assystence of other, that in the yere folowynge the peace was cōcluded vppon dyurese condy¦cyons. wherof one was, that ye kyng shulde contynue as kynge durynge his lyfe / and immedyatly after ye con¦clusion of this peace, the sayd Henry shuld be proclaymed in all the chefe cytyes and townes of Englande for heyr apparant, & be kynge after the deth of the sayde Stephan / and that the kynge shulde take hym for hys son of adopcyon and ryghtefull heyr vnto the crowne. To the whyche co∣uenaūtes iustly to be holden / ye kyng was fyrste sworne, and after his lor∣des spyrytuall and temporall / and so yode bothe to London, where they were royally receyued. And when ye kyng had fested the duke, and gyuen to hym ryche gyftes / he toke leue of the kynge, and so returned into Nor¦mandye, as affyrmeth the sayde au∣thour the Floure of historyes. Howe be yt the cronycle of England sayth, that the accorde was made vpon dy∣uysyon of the lande betwene theym / that is to meane that both shuld rey∣gne to gyther, and eyther of them to enioye halfe the lande. But how that dyuysyon was made, or whych parte of the lande eueryche of them shulde hold / no mēcion therof is made. And the former accorde shuld be as abue is sayde, concluded .viii. days folow¦ynge the Epyphanye of our lorde in the towne of Oxenford. And ye kyng dyed in the moneth of October fo∣lowyng, when he had reygned .xviii. yeres full and odde monethes / and was enterred in theforsayde abbay of Feuyrsham. Of dyuers authours as Ranulfe and other / yt is recorded that thys Stephan lyued in great vexacyon and trouble all the terme of hys rey∣gne. It is sayde also that thys Ste∣phan maryed Molde or Mawde the doughter of Mary / the whyche was the doughter of Henry the fyrst, and countesse of Boloyne / by whome he claymed the tytle to be crowned, as by the yonger doughter of Hen∣ry the fyrst / and Henry shorte man∣tell claymed by the elder. But after most certenty of wryters / this Ste∣phan was sonne of Eustace erle of Boloyne, and of Mary syster vnto Molde that was maryed vnto Hen∣ry the fyrste / whych Molde and Ma¦ry were doughters of Margarete wife of Malcolyn kyng of Scottes / whyche Margaret was syster to Ed¦gare Ethelynge, and doughter of Edwarde the outlawe, that was the sonne of Edmunde Ironsyde. Then
the eldest syster Molde, bare Molde the empresse by Henry the fyrste. And Molde ye empresse doughter of Henry the fyrst / hadde by her second husbande Geffrey Plantagenet Hen¦ry the seconde. And so by Henry shorte mantell or Henry the seconde, returneth the bloode of the Saxons to the crowne of Englande, and so it dyd by Stephan / but moste conue∣nyently by Henry the fyrst, as by the dyssent of his mother. By whych rea¦son yt foloweth, that the blood of wil¦lyam conquerour continued but .lxx. yeres / yf it be accompted from ye fyrst yere of wyllyam Conquerour, vnto the laste yere of Henry the fyrste. Thys kynge Stephan at the re∣quest of Molde hys wyfe / buylded in the yere of grace .xi. hundred .xl, ye ab∣bey of Coggeshale in Essex, and set therin whyte mūkes. Also about the same tyme he founded the abbay of Feuersham in Kent / where he nowe corporally resteth. And the thyrde he founded in Furneys in Lancashyre / and all he garnyshed wyth munkys of Cysteaux order / & dyed as before is sayde wythout yssue of his body. Francia. THE .CCXXXIIII. CHAPITER. LEwys the .viii. of that name, & son of Lewys ye great began his reygn ouer the Frenche men, in ye yere of our lord .xi. hun∣dred & .xxxvi / & ye fyrst yere of Stephan then kyng of Englande. This also is called the yonger Lewys / in whose begyn∣nynge Iohannes de tēporibus dyed. Thys Iohn̄ was somtyme a squyer in the house of Charlys the conque∣rour / the whyche lyued ouer .iii. hun¦dred yeres, for whyche cause he was named Iohn̄ of tyme, as he yt myght remēber thinges done of longe tyme passed. This Lewys at ye tyme of his fathers deth, was in the countrey of Guyan, for to receyue the dower of his wyfe Elyanour, as before in the storye and seconde chapyter of kyng Stephan is touched. But when he harde of ye deth of his father / he sped hym into Fraūce. where after the ne¦cessaryes for the weale of his realme ordeyned / he maryed his wyues sys∣ter named Alys, vnto Arnolde erle of Uermendoze. After whyche ma∣ryage solempnysed / tydynges were broughte vnto hym, that the crysten people beynge in the holy lande as warryours vppon the Turkes and Sarasyns, were dystressed and ouer¦throwen / and dyuerse stronge hol∣des from them taken and wonne. wherfore by the exhortacyon of that holy mūke Bernarde, whych at this day is called saynt Bernard / ye sayd Lewys, wyth also Conradus the .iii. of that name then emperour of Al∣mayne, wyth Alphon then kynge of Spayne, wyth dyuerse other nobles of Fraunce & other prouynces / toke vpon them the crosse, and prouyded for the expedycyon of that iourney, in the .iiii. yere of hys reygne after some wryters. But of the takyng of hys iourney dyuers writers holde di¦uers oppinyons / so that the doute re¦steth betwene the yere of our lord .xi. hundred & .xl, and the yere of .xi. hun¦dred and .l. when all thynges were redy for that iourney / the kynge, the quene, wyth the floure of the chyualry of Fraūce set forthwarde vppon that iourney / and came in processe of tyme vnto Constantyn the noble / where he met wyth Conradus the emperour, and Alphons kynge of Spayne. whom the prynce Emanuell then empe∣rour
of Constantyne the noble recey¦ued ioyusly / and made to theym by his outwarde contenaunce louynge and frendely chere / and promised vn¦to theym ayde in that iourney bothe of vitayll and also for guydes for the nexte and surest waye. But he con∣trary to his promyse dyd dysapoynte theym, and nothynge ayded theym. For he delyueryd vnto theym meale myngeled wyth lyme, wherof grewe myche harme to the crysten hoste af∣ter. And also he assygned vnto them suche guydes, as brought them into places and coūtreys of sterylyte and other daunger / so that hastely the Frenche kyng wyth great dyffyculte and losse of his men, came vnto the ci¦tye of Danas, and becleped yt with a stronge syege / the whych he assau∣ted and enpayred very sore, and was lykely to haue wonne yt, yf he had as¦sauted ye place styll where he began. But by counsayll of some false cry∣sten men, the whyche as wytnesseth Peter Dysroye and other had taken mede of the Turkes / the kynge by theyr counsayll remoued the ordy∣naunce from the weker place vnto ye strōger. where after dyuers assautes made / the kyng conceyued well yt he was dysceyued. A cause of this trea¦son as sayth ye foresayde Peter was this. The erle of Flaūdres, which by dyuerse experymētes saw that the cy¦tye was lyke to be goten / made sup∣plycacyon to the kynge and the lor∣des, that he myghte haue the rule of the cytye at suche tyme as yt were wonne / the which to hym was graū¦ted. wherof beynge aduertysed dy∣uerse Suryons of ye coūtrey borne, dysdayned that a straunger shuld be lorde of theyr enherytaunce / and for that condescēded and agreed to that treason, by mean wherof the crysten prynces loste theyr trauell. Then the crysten prynces seynge yt they were thus deluded / toke theyr aduyce howe they myght contynewe theyr pylgrimage vnto the holy citye of Hierusalem. But in this counsayl sourded and quykened so many opy¦nyons / that eche was contraryous vnto other. By mean wherof the em¦perour was so dyscontented / that he toke leue of the Frenche kynge and other, and so returned into hys own countrey. But the Frenche kynge ta¦ryed there in that costes a yere after / and dyd there but lytle worthye any memory. All be yt of this vyage the frenche boke maketh a great & longe processe, touchynge the wynnyng of the cytye of Anteoche / wyth hys be∣ynge and counsayllys kepynge wyth¦in Hierusalem, & other thinges there rehersed. But for I se the mater dys∣agreable to other wryters, and also thynke that myche therof is fayned / I therfore passe yt ouer, howe be yt that to some persones suche fablys ben full pleasaunte to here. wherfore all suche I remytte vnto the sayde french cronicle / & somwhat I shall fo¦lowe the authour Gyrald{us}, yt which wyth other testyfyen, that Lewys in his returne towarde Fraunce waxed syke for ye long forberyng of his wife. wherfore by thaduyce of phisycyons & also of byshops / he was coūsayled to take a wenche because his wyfe was so farre from hym. But ye kyng wythstode that counseyll / and sayde that hym hadde bene leuer to be syke and dye of goddes hande / then to lyue in spouse brekynge,A kynges chasye, & offende hys lawes. And so the kyng put him¦selfe to the mercy of god and recey∣ued helth shortly after. Also it is told of hym that he vsed to faste euery fry¦daye brede and water / and by his fa¦mylyers he was counsayled that he shulde leue that faste for wekynge of hym selfe / & fede a hundred of poore men euery frydaye, the whyche vnto
god shuld be myche more acceptable. To this he answered and sayde, we wold gladly fede so many poore men or mo / but our fastynge woll we not breke. For wythout the profyte that yt doth vnto the soule, yt profyteth also right myche to the body. For the purgacyon and reste of one daye, hel¦peth myche to put of the superfluyte of the other / and also yt maketh the sharper apetyte. when Lewys was retourned into Fraunce / for what happe yt is of the frenche cronycle made doutefull, he was from Elyanour hys wyfe deuor¦ced, of the whych he hadde receyued before .ii. doughters as before is tou¦ched / the whyche in processe of tyme folowynge, was maried vnto Henry duke of Normandy. whych maryage was a new occasyon of the warre be∣twene Englande and Fraunce. For the landes of Poytowe, wyth Gas∣coyne and Guyan, Lewys claymed by his former possessyon, & Henry by reason of the maryag of ye sayd Elya¦nour, as heyr to the sayde landes. Of the whyche warre shalbe shewed in the story of ye sayde Henry folowyng. After whyche deuorce thus made / kynge Lewys maryed the yongeste doughter of the kynge of Spayne that was named Cūstaunce / and she dyed of her fyrst chylde. Then for so myche as kynge Lewys hadde none heyr male / by coūsayll of his barony he maryed the thyrd wyfe, the whych was the yongeste doughter of Thy∣baude erle of Bloys, & was named Alys. This sayde erle dyed / and left after hym .iiii. sonnes and .v. dough∣ters. The eldest sonne named Henry was erle of Troys / the seconde na∣med Thybaude was erle of Bloys / the thyrd named Stephan was erle of Sancorum or Sauncorer / and ye fourth named wyllyam was archbys¦shoppe of Raynes. The eldeste of the doughters was duches of Bur∣goyne / the seconde was countesse of Barre / the thyrde was maryed fyrst to the duke of Puell, and after to a knyght named syr william de Goer, the fourth was countesse of Perche / and the fyfte as before is sayd quene of Fraūce, whych was a woman gar¦nyshed wyth many vertues as the storye declareth. THE .CCXXXV. CHAPITER. IN processe of tyme after the so¦lemnisacyon of this maryage / complaynte was brought before the kynge of the erles of Cleremoūt and Puy or Puyll, sonne of the duke be∣fore rehersyd, and of the erle of Plo∣met / that they shuld spoyle and wast the chyrches and landes to the sayde chyrches belongynge. For the which dedys the kynge commaunded the sayd .iii. erlys to warde / but not with out warre and shedynge of blood. And after the subduynge of ye sayd thre erlys / a knyght or great man of myght called wyllyam ye erle of Cha¦lon, wyth a company of tyrauntes as¦sembled for to robbe and spoyle the chyrche of saynte Peter of Cluny in Burgoyne. wherof herynge the pres¦tes and mynysters of the chyrche / to the entent to mytygate & to appeace the cruelty of the sayde tyraūtes, dyd vpon them the ornamentes of ye sayd chyrche / and yode agayne them with processyon, wyth a great companye them folowynge of the people of the towne and the countrey there about, in peseable and charytable wyse. But when the sayde tyrauntes ap∣proched vnto the sayde cōpany / with out compassyon and pyty, as turkes ranne vppon crysten men, or wyth lesse Pytye / so ranne they vppon the prestes and other, and spoyled them of all the sayde ornamētes / and slew
of that cōpany to the nomber of .v. hū¦dred or mo / & after spoyled the sayde chyrche, of suche stuffe as was therin lefte. It was not longe after or kynge Lewys had wyttynge of this cruell dede. wherfore in auengynge the chyrche / he gatheryd a conueny∣ent power and spedde hym thyther. But the sayde wyllyam erle of Cha∣lon herynge of the kynges cōmynge, fled ye coūtrey / so yt the kyng myght haue no certayne knowlege where he became. wherfore the kyng entred and seased his landes, and gaue the moyty therof to ye duke of Burgoyn as chefe lorde of that soyle / and that other halfe he gaue vnto the erle of Neuers, to whose auncetry in tyme passed the sayd moyty apperteyned. And that done he commaunded in∣quyry to be made of his accessaryes / the prebensons or prebendars of the whyche he punyshed by dyuerse ma∣ner of tormentes and dethes, to the great contentacyon of the countrey. when the kynge hadde thus fy∣nished this vyage and was returned into Fraunce / soon after was know¦lege brought vnto him, that the Bur¦gonyons & men of the towne of Uer∣deley, rebelled agayne the hed chyrch or abbay of that towne / and entēdyd to haue done some vylany to the ab∣bot and munkes of the same / wher∣fore the kynge spedde hym thyther in all haste. But for theyr sauergarde the munkes were compelled to forty¦fye the chyrche, and to defende them by force of armys / so that betwene them and the Burgonions many an arbalaster and stone was shot & cast. And for the kynge myght not so hast¦ly furnyshe hym of his soldyours / he therfore sent vnto the erle of Neuers by whose meane as to the kyng was shewed this ryot began / commaun∣dynge hym that he shuld se this ryot appeased, and that the chyrch of Uer¦deley were restored of suche harmys as to theym was done by the inhaby¦tauntes of the towne. But of thys cō¦maundement the erle set but lytle / so that the burgeses perseuered in theyr erroure. wherfore the abbot sente a∣gayne to the kynge / besechyng hym of his moste gracyouse ayde and so∣coure. Then the kynge herynge of the erles dysobedyence, was ther∣wyth greatly dyspleasyd / and suspe∣cted ye erle to be partye in the cause, & sped hym ye faster thetherwarde. But when the erle was enfourmed of the kynges cōmynge he somdeale feryd / and mette wyth the kynge at a place called Moret, and there demeaned hym in suche wyse, that the kyng for¦gaue his offense. Then he promysed that the kynges pleasure shulde be fullfylled in all thynge as he hadde before cōmaunded, wyth more as yt lyked hym to dyuyse. Uppon whych promyse so made / he commaunded that the Burgonyons shulde fyrste refrayne theym of that rebellyon a∣gayn the chyrch / and that they shuld newly be sworne to be obedient vnto the abbot and vnto hys successours as theyr p̄decessours had ben / & ouer that for the hurtes & harmys yt they had done to the place at that season, they shulde paye to the sayde abbot and couēt .lx. thousand sous. A sous is in value after sterlyng money i.d. ob / so that .lx. thousand sous amoun¦teth in sterlyng money .iii. hundred & lxxv. pounde. After whych ende thus made / the kynge retourned into Fraunce. It was not longe after, that ye kyng receyued of quene Alys hys wyfe a sonne, and named yt Phylyppe. But for ye kyng Lewys had made many pylgrymages, and vsed many ways of charyte, in gyuynge of almes and otherwyse; for to haue a sonne to be his heyre / therfore he surnamed this
chylde A dieu done, a chyld gyuen of god. Then thys Lewys for the intollerable dedes of the Iewes whi¦che in these dayes had great inhaby∣tynge wyth in the lande of Fraūce, & vsed vsery & sleynge of Crysten chyl∣dren / he ponyshed many by deth, and many he banyshed his lande / but yet many remayned. Of this Lewys dedes is lytle more cronacled / excepte when his son Phi¦lyppe was of the age of .xiii. yeres, his fader caused hym to be crowned, and resygned to hym all the rule of the lande / and dyed the yere folow∣ynge at Parys in the moneth of Oc∣tober, in the yere of grace .xi. hūdred and .lxxix. By whyche reason he rey∣gned, to reken from his faders deth to his owne, vppon .xliii. yeres / and was rychely enterred by ye meane of his last wife at the monastery of Bar¦bell / the whyche he founded in hys yonge days. After whose deth ye sayd quene Alys adorned his sepulture in the moste rychest maner, wyth gold, syluer, and precyous gemmys / vp∣pon whose tombe was grauen these two versis folowyng, as a counsayll left vnto his sonne Phylyppe. superos tu, qui super es successor honoris Degener es, si degeneris a laude prioris. whyche versys are to be vnderstan∣den as after foloweth. Nowe take good hede, thou that doest ouer lyue, Hym that in honoure and vertue dyd excelle. Se thou alter not, nor thy selfe depryue / But folowe hym, which was of ho¦noure the well. For yf thou do not / men shall of the tell, Thou arte degenerate and growen out of kynde / Thy progenytours laude hauynge nothynge in mynde. Anglia. THE .CCXXXVI. CHAPITER. HEnry the second of that named, & sonne of Geffrey Plātagenet erle of Angeou, and of Molde ye em∣presse doughter of Henry ye first, began hys reygn ouer the realme of England, in the moneth of October, the yere of our lorde god .xi. hundred and .lv / and. ye xix. yere of Lewys the viii. then kynge of Fraunce. Thys Henry was somdeale redde of face, & brode of breste, shorte of body, & ther¦wyth fatte / the whych to aswage he toke the lesse of metes and drynkes, and exercysed myche huntynge. He was resonable of speche and well let¦tered & orped, and also noble in kny∣ghthode, wyse in counsayll, and dred to myche distenyes. He was also free and lyberall to straūgers, and harde and holdynge from hys famylyers & seruauntes. And whome he loued en¦terely or hated / harde it was to turne hym to the contrary. He was slowe of answere, vnstedfaste of promyse, gylefull of dede, open spouse breker, hamour of holy chyrch, and alwayes vnkynde to god. He also loued reste and peace, to the ende he myghte the more folowe hys delectacyon & plea∣sure / wyth mo vyces rehersed by Gy¦ralde, the whyche for length I passe ouer. This Henry yet, as wytnessyth Ranulfe, was not all bareyn of ver∣tues. For he was of so gret courage∣ousnes, that he wolde often say that all the world suffysyth not to a cora∣gyous harte. And he encreasyd hys herytage so myghtyly, that he wanne Irlande by strength / and toke wyl∣lyam kynge of Scottes, and ioyned that kyngdome to his owne. From
the suthe Occean to the north ylan∣des of Orkeys / he closed all the lan¦des as yt were vnder one pryncy∣pate / and spradde so largely hys empyre, that men rede not of none of hys progenytours that hadde so many prouynces and countreys vn∣der theyr domynyon and rule. For besyde the realme of Englande / he hadde in hys rule Normandy, Gas∣coyn, and Guyan, Angeou and Chy∣non. And he made subiecte to hym Aluerne and other landes. And by hys wyfe, he obteyned as her ryghte the mountes and hyllys of Spayne called montes Pyrany. Of the why∣che wyfe Elynoure by name, de∣uorced, as before ys sayde, from the viii. Lewys kynge of Fraunce / he receyued .vi. sonnes and thre dough¦ters. Of the sonnes fyue were na∣med wyllyam, Henry, Rycharde, Godfrey, and Iohn̄. The eldeste of the maydens hight Molde or Mau∣de, and was maryed to the duke of Saxon / the seconde Elyanoure to the kynge of Spayne / and the thyrd named Iane, to wyllyam kynge of Scycyle. Thys Henry was prosperouse in hys begynnynge, and vnfortunate in hys ende, and specyally in the last fyue yeres of hys reygne. For in the fyrst of those fyue yeres, his strength beganne to mynyshe / the seconde ye∣re he loste a vyage in Irlande / the thyrde he loste Aluerne agayne the kynge of Fraunce / the fourth yere he loste Butyrycan / and the fyfte ye∣re he loste the cytye of Cenomenea and Turon, wyth many holdes to theym belongynge. Thys Henry the seconde ascertay¦ned of the deth of Stephan / spedde hym into Englande / and was crow¦ned the sondaye before Crystemasse daye of Theobalde archbyshoppe of Caunterbury in westmynster chyrch. The fyrste yere of hys reygne he subdued Irlande. And soone after Thomas Beketh, whyche after was byshoppe of Caunterbury, was ma∣de chaunceller of Englonde. This kynge caste downe dyuers castellys, that before in tyme of kynge Ste∣phan were buylded / other for dys∣pleasure of the owners, or ellys for the fere they shulde be strengthed a∣gayne hym. And also he banyshed many of the lordes and gentylmen, that kynge Stephan hadde in hys fauoure. Aboute the thyrde yere of hys rey∣gne in the moneth of October, were sene in the fyrmament two sunnys / and in the mone was sene a redde crosse. But of thys wonder sheweth the authoure of Cronica cronicarū / and sayth that aboute thys tyme in Italy in the moneth of Nouember, appered thre sunnys by the space of thre owres in the weste / and the yere folowynge appered thre monys, whereof the myddle mone hadde a redde crosse ouerthwarte the face. whyche there ys noted for a prodygy or a token of the scysme, that after fell amonges the cardinallys for elec¦cyon of the pope Alexāder the thyrd / whyche scysme by meane of the fyrste Frederyke then emperoure, endu∣red almoste .xx. yeres. Also aboute this tyme Adryan the fourthe of that name was pope, an Englysheman borne in the towne of saynte Albon of whome is more de∣clared in the begynnynge of the .xxii. chapyter of the .vii. boke of Poly∣cronycon. Also in thys yere the kynge wente wyth a stronge armye into walys / and after he hadde sette that coun∣trey in an order and quyet, he buyl∣dyd a stronge castell at Rutlande,
and founded the abbaye of Basynge¦werke. In the .vi yere of hys reygne / thys Henry maryed hys seconde son Hen∣ry, vnto the kynges doughter of Fraūce, that is to meane Lewys the viii / whyche the sayde Lewys recey∣ued of hys seconde wyfe named Con¦staunce, the doughter of the kyng of Spayne, as before ye haue harde in the seconde chapyter of ye story of the sayd Lewys. This mayden was na∣med Margaret. By reason of whych maryage, was appeased the warre that was begonne betwene Fraunce and Englande for the landes of Poy¦owe and other, the whyche kynge Henry helde by reason of hys wyfe. In ye whych warre mych harme was done / and more wolde haue ensued, yf yt hadde not by thys meane haue ben agreed. In the .vii. yere of his reygn, Theo¦balde archbyshoppe of Caunterbu∣ry dyed / and Thomas Beket chaun¦celler of Englande was archebys∣shoppe▪ after hym, of whome more shall folowe. In the same yere kyng Henry with a stronge hoste yode to Scotlande / and made so cruell warre vppon wil¦lyam kynge of that lande, that laste∣ly he was taken / and dyd to the sayd Henry recompensacyon, in yeldynge vnto hym the cytye of Carlell, the castell of Bamburghe, the newe ca∣stell vpon Tyne, wyth dyuers other holdes / and a great parte of Nor∣thumberlande, the whyche he hadde wonne from the borderers. And af∣ter fewtye and homage done by the sayde wyllyam vnto the kynge, and a certayne summe of money by hym promysed wythin .ix. monethes fo∣lowynge / the kynge suffred hym to go at large. But an other authour sayth, that the kynge of Scottys was not taken / but strongely besye∣ged in a towne or castell, so that fy∣nally he was forced to agree to the foresayde couenauntes. In the .viii. yere, the cytye of Caū¦terburye was fyred by neglygence, & a great part therof brente. And in that season, the archbyshoppe Thomas beganne to re∣plye agayne ye kynges mynde, for thynges that the kynge dyd exercyse agayn the liberties of the chyrche. THE .CCXXXVII. CHAPITER. IN the .ix. yere of hys reygne / the kynge for dyuerse causes cōcernyng ye nedes of his real¦me, called a parlia¦ment at hys towne of Northampton. Durynge whyche parlyament / dyssencyon fell betwen the kynge and Thomas archbyshop of Caunterburye, for dyuerse actes and ordinaunces that the kyng there procured, to passe agayne the lyber∣tyes of holy chyrch / the whych Tho¦mas gaynstode and denyed. wher∣fore the kynge toke a great dysplea∣sure with Thomas / in so myche that shortely after he was fayne to flee the lande / and in processe of tyme spedde hym to Rome, where he com∣playned hym to Alexaunder the .iii. of that name then pope / and there contynued, and in Fraunce, and in other places, in poore estate by terme of .vi. yeres and more. when kynge Henry hadde certayne vnderstan∣dynge, that Thomas was thus de∣parted out of hys lande / he seased
his maners and temporall landes in¦to hys hande / so that hys mouable goodes were spoyled and rauenyd amonge the kynges offycers. In the .xiiii. yere of his reygne / the kynge crowned Henry hys eldest sonne then lyuynge kynge of En∣glande at westmynster. whyche was done to the derogacyon or harme of the archbyshoppe Thomas, as yt is wytnessyd in hys legende / and for that doynge Roger archbyshoppe of yorke whyche crowned hym was ac¦cursed. But an other authour sayth that the kynge crowned Henry hys sonne, to the ende he myght haue ful power and authoryte to rule thys lande and the people of the same, whyle hys father was occupyed in Normandye and other countreys, where hys landes laye. In myche of thys season that thys blessyd man Thomas was thus ba¦nyshed the lande / the kynge sente ouer byshoppes and proctours, to complayne vppon hym to the pope / for well nere all the bishoppes of En¦glande were agayne hym. And yf a∣ny toke hys parte, they durste not speke for the displeasure of theyr tem¦porall lorde / so that this blessed man defended the quarell of the chyrche alone. In the .xvi. yere of ye reygne of kyng Henry / Lewys the kynge of Fraūce, agreed kynge Henry and the archbys¦shoppe, the kynge then beynge in Normandye. Uppon whyche agre∣ment thys blessyd man came to hys owne chyrche of Caunterbury / and there so restynge hym, sente for such persones as had spoyled and taken perforce the goodes of the chyrche / aduertysynge theym by fayre mea∣nes to restore the sayde goodes, and to be reconcyled to the chyrche as trewe crysten men shulde. But when he sawe that he myght not reconcyle theym by fayre meanes / he then vsed compulsaryes, and denounced them accursed but if they restored the goo∣des of the chyrche by a certayne day. wherewyth the partyes beynge agre¦ued / sayled ouer to the kynge into Normandye / and shewyd vnto hym greuous complayntes, and more gre¦uouse then the cause or mater requy∣red. For the whych, the kynge which hadde not yet quenched the bronde of malyce in hys harte the whyche he bare agayne thys holy man, gaue lyght credence vnto those complayn¦tes, and was sore & feruētly amoued agayne the holy man Thomas / in so myche that vppon a daye herynge the complayntes of this blessyd man¦nes aduersaryes, he sayd in oppē au¦dyence of hys knyghtes, that yf he had any good knyghtes about hym, he had ben aduēged of that traytour longe or that tyme. At the tyme of whyche wordes vtterynge / was pre¦sent syr wyllyam Bryton, syr Hugh Moruyle, syr wyllyam Tracy, and syr Regnolde fytz Urle. whych foure knyghtes, thynkyng that they shuld to theyr mayster do a synguler plea∣sure yf they slewe thys blessyd man / hastely takynge aduyse eche of them of other, of one wyll and mynde toke shyppyng and sayled to Douer / and in all haste spedde theym vnto Caun¦terburye / where the .v. daye of Crist¦masse they executed theyr tyrannye, and martyred that blessyd archebys∣shoppe at that aulter of sayne Benet wythin hys owne chyrche, in the ye∣re of our lordes incarnacyon a thou∣sande, a hundred, and .lxx, as yt ys wytnessyd by these versys folowyng Anno milleno, centeno, septuageno, Anglorum primas, corruit ense Thomas. The whych is to vnderstande in our
vulgare / as thus. ¶The yere, to reken from Crystes incarnacyon, A thousande an hundred and seuen∣tye therunto / The prymate of Englande wyth great abomynacyon, was slayne wyth sworde, Thomas that wolde not do The kynges hest, whyche erred the ryghte fro Of the chyrche and lybertyes of the same. wherby of honoure he wanne perpe∣tuall fame. After this cruell dede thus by the foure knyghtes done, wherwyth the kynge after some wryters was not contented / the kynges fortune be∣ganne to decreace and fall / so that he hadde after thys many aduersy∣teys, where before he knewe not of lyke trouble. In the .xvii. yere of his reygne, the kynge made a iourney into Irland / where wyth great trauayle he sub∣dued the Iryshe. And after wyth helpe of the prymate and byshoppe of Arnache, he refourmed the maner of the dwellers and people of that countrey, and that in thre thynges specyally. Fyrste in rulynge and or∣derynge of the chyrche by the cura∣tes, & how they shuld order theyr dy / uyne seruyce, and mynyster the sa∣cramente of matrymonye as yt was in Englande and other crysten regy¦ons. The seconde was, how that the laye people shuld behaue theym to theyr curates, and what wyse they shulde paye and offer to god theyr tythes. The thyrde was for makyng of theyr testamentes. Thys was or∣deyned that euery man shulde make hys laste wyll in p̄sence of his neygh¦bours / or at leste cause yt to be rede in theyr presence. And fyrste he shuld reken what he ought / and to sette so myche of hys goodes. And yf he had a wyfe and chyldren, then the resy∣due of hys goodes hys dettys beyng payde to be deuyded in thre partes / one to the wyfe, the seconde for the chyldren, and the thyrde to be spente for the weale of the soule. And yf he hadde no chyldren / then the halfe to hys soule, and that other halfe to his wyfe. And yf he hadde no wyfe nor chyldren / then to dyspose hys goo∣des at hys pleasure. In the returne of the kynge oute of Irlande / was a wonder thynge shewed vnto hym vppon whyteson∣daye, whyche in the calender is cal∣led dominica in Albys. whē the kyng shuld take his horse / sodeynly appe∣red vnto hym a man of pale & wanne colour barefote, and in a whyte kyr∣tell / the whyche bodely spake vnto the kynge in the langage of duche / and sayde syr kynge, Criste greetyth the wele, and hys mylde moder ma∣ry, with also Iohn̄ Baptyst and Pe¦ter / and commaunde the streyghtly that no Markettes, nor seruyle wor∣kes be holden vppon the sondaye in the landes of thy lordeshyppe, oute take that longeth to dressynge of mete. And yf thou do after thys byd¦dynge / I assure the that all thynge that thou begynnest to good entent or of good purpose, thou shalt bryng yt to good ende. The kynge ly∣ked nothynge thys speche / and sayd to the knyghte that helde hys bry∣dell, Aske of thys chorle whether he haue dremed all thys that he telleth. wherunto thys man answered, why∣ther I haue mette thys tale in my dreme or not / take thou hede well of my saynge. For and thou do not as I haue aduertysed the, & amende thy lyfe / thou shalte shortely here
suche thynges that thou shalte be he¦uy fore to thy lyues ende. The kyng toke all in game / and the man va∣nyshed sodeynly, that the kyng & his knyghtes wonderyd of hys depar∣tynge. wherof when the kynge was warned, both of hys fyrste sodeynly apperynge, and of hys departynge / the kynge sette yt nere hys mynde, and entendyd to do some thynges af¦ter that mannys counsayll. But how yt was yt had no forwarde. After that the blessed man Tho∣mas was martyred / the munkes by assent of the kynge, chase Rycharde pryour of Douer / the whyche was a man of euyll lyuynge, and wasted the goodes of ye chyrch inordynatly. THE .CCXXXVIII. CHAPITER. ABoute the .xx. ye∣re of the kynges reygne / he pur∣chased a dyspensa¦cyon for the vya∣ge that before he hadde solempnely auowed before .ii. cardynallys, to go into the holy lan∣de, and to ieoperde hys proper per∣sone agaynst Crystes enymyes. The whyche dyspensacyon was graun∣tyd vppon one condycyon, that he shulde buylde thre abbays in En∣glande. In fulfyllynge wherof the kynge put oute of the howse of wal¦tham seculer chanons / and set there in theyr stede chanons reguler. And for the seconde he auoyded the mun∣kes oute of the house of Aumbrysbu¦ry / and sette there menchons that he hadde brought from beyonde the see. And for the thyrde he renewed cour∣sely the charter house of wytham be¦syde Salysburye. By whyche thre dedes he thought hym selfe excused of hys former promyse. Then beganne his sonnes to make warre vppon hym, the whyche were ayded by the Scottyshe kynge and the two erles of Chester and of Lyn¦colne. The cause of whyche warre was after the declaracyon of some wryters, for so myche as the kynge hadde emprysoned Elyanoure hys wyfe, and kepte that wenche Rosa∣mounde agayne all good order. But other say yt was for certayne landes in Normandye / whyche by ayde of the Frenche kynge, Rycharde the .iii. sonne of byrthe and seconde then ly¦uynge, wolde haue taken from hys father. Of thys warre speketh no∣thynge the frenche cronycle. Then as testyfyeth Ranulfe / this innaturall warre endured by the ter∣me of two yeres, to the great dystur¦baunce of the kynge and of hys real∣me / tyll the kynge wyth great deuo¦cyon vysyted the graue of the holy martyr saynte Thomas. After why∣che pylgrymage was by hym fynys¦shed / in shorte processe after wylly¦am kynge of Scottes, and the two forenamed erlys of Chester and Lyn¦colne, were taken at the castell of An¦wyke. But yet he lefte not the com¦pany of the forenamed Rosamunde / to the whych wenche he hadde made an house of wonder workyng, so that no creature man or woman myghte wynne to her but yf he were instructe by the kynge or suche as were ryght secrete with hym touchynge that ma¦ter. Thys house after some wry∣ters was named Labyrinthus or De¦dalus worke or house, whyche ys to meane after moste exposytours, an howse wroughte lyke vnto a knot in a garden called a mase. But the com¦mon fame telleth, that lastely the quene wan to her by a clew of threde
or sylke / and delte wyth her in suche maner, that she lyued not longe af∣ter. Of the maner of her deth spe∣kyth nothynge myne authoure / but when she was dede she was buryed at the howse or monasterye of God∣destow besyde Oxenforde, with these versys vppon her toumbe. Hic iacet in tūba Rosa mūdi, sed nō rosa mūda. Non redolet sed olet, quae redolere solet. The whythe versys, to our vnder¦standynge may thus as folowyth be englyshed and expowned. The Rose of the worlde, but not the clene floure. Is here now grauen / to whom bew∣tye was lent. In thys graue full darke nowe ys her bowre, That by her lyfe was swete and redolent. But now yt she is frō this lyfeblente / Though she were swete, nowe fow∣ly doth she stynke / A myrrour good for all that on her thynke. Longe tyme after the deth of the sayde Rosamounde, in the sayde ab∣baye was shewed a cofer of the sayd wenches of the length of two fote / in whych apperyd fyghtynge geaūtes, stertlynge of bestes, swymmynge of fyshes, and flyenge of fowlys. In the forsayde .xx. yere after the opynyon of Guydo / the kynge had the seconde monicyon of mendynge of hys lyfe, by an Iryshe man yt told vnto hym many secret tokens, why∣che the kynge supposyd no man had knowen but hym selfe. But yet the kynge toke lytell hede therunto. In the .xxii. yere of his reygne, after the forsayde takynge of ye Scottyshe kynge and .ii. erlys / the .xi. day before Septēber, wyllyam kynge of Scot∣tys by assent of the lordes spyrytuall and temporall, dyd homage to kyng Henry at hys cytye of yorke. where the sayde wyllyam graunted by hys letters patentys, that he and his suc∣cessours kynges of Scotland, shuld make theyr homage and fydelyte vn¦to the kynges of Englande as often as they shalbe necessaryly requyred. And in sygne and token of that sub∣ieccyon / the kyng of Scottes offered hys hatte & his sadell vppon the aul¦ter of saint Peter in ye chyrch of york. whyche for a remembraunce of that dede / the sayd hat & sadell were there kepte many yeres after. And ouer yt the lordes of Scotland swore, that if theyr kynge at any tyme wold wyth∣drawe hym from allegeaunce / they wold all aryse agayn hym, and be to hym as enymyes, tyll he were retur∣ned to his fayth & kepyng of his pro¦myse. And for the more strēgth of the sayd cōposycyon, the kynge of Scot¦tis came after to ye kyng Henries par¦lyament holden at Northāpton, and a nother season into Normandye. Ranulfe munke of Chester sayth, that Lewys the .viii. of that name kynge of Fraunce / delyueryd vnto kynge Henry a doughter of hys to haue in guydynge, and to haue ben maryed vnto Rycharde hys son / the whyche after the deth of Rosamoūde he defloured of her vyrgynyte. After whyche dede, as affermyth the sayde authoure, the kynge was in wyll to haue wedded that damoysell. For ex¦pedicyon wherof he made great mea¦nes ta Hugūcia a cardynall then be∣ynge in his land, that he wold make a dyuorce betwene hym and Elya∣noure the quene. And thys he dyd, to the ende to haue the more fauoure of the Frenchemen, that by theyr ayde he myghte the better dysheryte hys sonnes. But he fayled of his purpose and also yt turned to hys owne har∣me. For by this means, he caused the
sayde Rycharde hys sonne to shewe all hys demeanour vnto the Frenche kynge / so that by hys informacyon vnkyndnesse kyndled betwene them two / & therof ensued mortall warre, as sayth the englyshe cronycle, and also Polycronycon. But of thys warre speketh nothynge the frenche cronycle / nor of none other durynge the lyfe of the sayd Lewys after this daye, which dyed in the .xxiiii. yere of thys Henry. But the warre that was betwen the two kynges of England and of Fraunce / was betwene thys Henry and Phylyppe sonne of thys Lewys, as after shalbe shewed. About the .xxiiii. yere of thys kyng as wytnessen dyuerse wryters / fell wonderfull wederynge and tempest of thunder in myddewynter tyme in Hampshyre and other places / by vio¦lence wherof a preste amonges other was slayn. And in the somer folow∣ynge about Mary Magdalene tyde, fell hayle of suche bygnesse, yt yt slew both men and bestes. And about this tyme were the bonys of kynge Ar∣ture and his wyfe Gueynour founde in the vale of Aualon / whose here of the hed of the sayde Gweynour was then hole and of freshe coloure / but so soone as yt was touched, yt fell in powder. whyche bonys were trans∣lated and buryed wythin the chyrche of Glastenburye / and were founden by a synger of gestis vnder an holow oke .xv. fote wythin the grounde. whyche fyndynge and translatynge is an obiecte to ye fantastycall sayeng of the walshemen, that afferme hys commynge agayne to reygne as he before dyd. Then hadde kynge Henry the se∣conde monycyon by a knyghte cal∣led syr wyllyam Chesterby or Lyn∣desey / the whyche warned hym spe∣cyally for the reformacyon of .vii. ar∣tycles. The fyrste was, that he shuld sette better dylygence to the defence of holy chyrche / and maynteynynge of the same. The seconde, that he shulde se hys lawes executed, wyth better iustice then at those days was vsed. The thyrd was, that he shuld surmyse no mater agayn ryche men / and by that mean plucke from them theyr landes & goodes. The fourth that he shulde restore all suche lan∣des and goodes gotten by suche vn∣lawfull meanes or by any other. The fyfte, that he shuld for no mede¦tarye ryghtfull sentence / but suffer the ryght to haue hys processe. The vi, that he shulde se to the payment of hys subiectes for suche stuffe as was dayly taken to his vse / & also to the payment of hys seruauntes and souldyours wages, whych dayly fell to robbynge for defaute. The .vii. and the laste was, that he shulde in all haste voyde the Iewys of hys lande, whyche dayly wrought great sorowe to his commons / and to leue theym somwhat to spende in theyr iourney. But as he toke the other monycyons, so he toke thys / and cōtynued hys lyfe as he before hadde done. THE .CCXXXIX. CHAPITER. IN the .xxviii. yere of his reygn after moste writers, dy∣ed Henry his el∣deste sonne then lyuynge / ye whych as before is sayde was crowned to the derogacyon of the martyr saynte Thomas. And in thys yere / whyche shulde be the .iiii. yere of Phylyppe the seconde, or of Phylyppe surnamed Gyuen of god / the warre beganne betwene kynge Henry and hym. wherof was occa∣syon
as testyfyeth the sayd Frenche cronycle, the denyenge of the defer∣rynge of homage, that shuld be done to the sayde Phylyppe of Rycharde then eldest sonne of kyng Henry / for the lādes of Poytow. An other cause also was / that where certayne coue∣nauntes were stablyshed and enrol∣led betwene kynge Henry and Lew∣ys father of thys Phylyp, at the ma∣ryage of Henry his sonne and Mar∣garete syster of Phylyppe, for cer∣tayne holdes and castellys wherof ye castell of Gysours was one / whych were delyueryd in dower wyth the sayde Margarete, vppon condycy∣on that yf the sayde Henry hadde ys∣sue by ye sayde Margarete, then the sayde castellys to remayne to the sayde heyres / and yf the sayde yonge Henry dyed without yssue of ye sayde Margarete, that then the sayde ca∣stellys and holdes to be reuerted vn∣to the crowne of Fraunce: and for that kynge Henry denyed or defer∣red these two poyntes, and wold not answere when he was called / the Frenche kynge therfore entred the land of Barry wyth great strength; and wasted the countrey of Guyan wythout mercy. wherof kynge Hen¦ry beynge warned / in all haste assem¦bled hys people then beynge in Nor¦mandye, and dew hym towarde the Frenche kynge / whyche then hadde layde syege vnto the castell called in frenche Raoull, or the castell of Roaull. when both hostes were nere and ly¦kely to haue ioyned / medyatours were sente vppon bothe partyes to treate a peace. By meane wherof in processe a trewce was taken for a cer¦tayne terme / so that eyther hoste de∣parted wythoute strykynge of stroke at that season. About thys tyme dyed Rycharde archebyshoppe of Caunterbury. Of hym yt is redde that a voyce or vysy∣on was shewed to hym, saynge to hym in the mouthe of Cryste: For thou haste wasted the goodes of my chyrch, I shal rote the out of ye erthe. with which wordes he was so frayd, that he dyed shortly after. Then was Baldewyn byshoppe of worceter ad¦mytted to that see, though the mun∣kys of Caunterburye wythsayde yt wyth all theyr power. In the .xxx. yere of the kynge / Hera¦clius patryarke of Hierusalem came in to England, to haue ayde agayne the Sarazyns that had wonne great parte of the landes that Cristen men had in the holy lande / and for to de∣fende the holy cytye, whyche by Sa¦ladyne prynce of Surey was wonne shortely after. For by the reporte of Peter Dysroy, whyche made a boke in frenche of the wynnynge and lo∣synge of the sayde cytye / yt appereth that yt was wōne by Godfrey de Bu¦lyon, in the yere of Crystes incarna∣cyon a thousande .lxxx. and .xix / and so cōtynued vnder the rule of .ix. cry∣sten kynges, tyll the laste kynge na¦med Guyde Lesyngham or Lesyn∣guam loste yt wyth the holy crosse, in the yere of our lorde .xi. hundred lxxx. and .ix. whych maketh the yere of the reygn of thys kyng Henry the xxxiiii. Then yt foloweth in the sto¦ry / this Heraclius made besy request vnto the kynge for ayde, and profe∣red to hym the keys of the cytye and of our lordes graue / and letters of Luci{us} ye thyrd of yt name then pope, chargyng him that he shuld take vp¦pon hym ye iourney, & to haue mynde of the othe yt he before time had ma∣de. The kyng deferred this answere and Baldwyne the archbyshop prea¦ched & exhorted men to take ye crosse / by whose meanes many there were ye
auowed that iourney. Lastely the kynge gaue answere, and sayde that he myghte not leue hys lande wyth∣oute kepynge / nor yet leue yt to the praye and robbory of Frenchemen. But he wolde gyue largely of hys owne, to suche as wolde take vp∣pon theym that vyage. wyth thys answere the patryarke was dyscon∣tent / and sayde we seke a man and not money. welnere euery crysten re¦gyon sendyth vnto vs money / but no lande sendyth to vs a prynce. Therfore we aske a prynce that ne∣deth money / and not money that ne¦deth a prynce. But the kynge layde for hym suche excuses, that the pa∣tryarke departed from hym dyscon∣tentyd and comfortelesse. wherof the kynge beynge aduertysed / enten∣dynge somwhat to recomforte hym wyth pleasaunte wordes, folowed hym vnto the see syde. But the more the kynge thought to satysfye hym wyth hys fayre speche, the more the patryarke was dyscontented / in so myche that at the laste he sayde vn∣to hym. Hytherto thou haste reygned gloryously. But here after thou shalt be forsaken of him yt thou at thys ty∣me forsakeste. Thynke on hym what he hath gyuen to the / and what thou haste yelden to hym agayne. Howe fyrste thou were false vnto the kyng of Fraunce / and after slewe that ho∣ly man Thomas of Caunterburye / and lastely thou forsakeste the pro∣teccyon of Crystes fayth. The kyng was amoued wyth these wordes, & sayde vnto the patriarke. Though all the men of my lande were one bo¦dye, and spake wyth one mouth / they durste not speke to me such wor¦dys. No wonder sayde the patryar∣ke, for they loue thyne and not the. That ys to meane, they loue thy goodes temporall, and fere the for losse of promocyon / but they loue not thy soule. And when he hadde so sayde / he offeryd hys hedde to the kynge sayenge, Do by me, ryghte as thou dyddest by that blessyd man Thomas of Caunterburye. For I hadde leuer to be slayne of the, then of ye Sarasyns. For thou arte worse then any Sarasyn / and thy people folowyth praye and not a man. But the kynge kepte hys pacyence, and sayde I maye not wende oute of my lande / for myne owne sonnes wyll arryse agayne me when I were ab∣sent.A pacyēt man No wonder sayde the patry∣arke. For of the deuyll they cōme, and to the deuyll they shall / and so departyd from the kynge in great ire. After the patryarke was thus departyd / the kynge sente John̄ his seconde sonne into Irlande. In the whyche vyage he spente the kynge great goodys, and dyd lytle profyte or none. In the .xxxi. yere of kynge Henry / the Iewes crucyfyed a chylde in the towne of Burye in Suff. named Ro¦bert / for whome god shewyd after many myracles. And the .xxxii. yere, the kynge ma∣de a vyage into Irlande to redresse thynges there oute of order. But for¦tune was to hym so contrarye that he loste hys trauayle, lyke as the ye∣re before hys sonne Iohn̄ had done. In the .xxxiii. yere of thys kynge Henry / at Dunstable in the ayre was sene a crucyfyxe, and Cryste nayled theron / whyche apperyd vy¦sybly to many a mannys syghte. And in thys yere the kynge loste the countrey of Aluerne / when he hadde spente great goodes aboute the de∣fence of the same. Howe be yt of this warre speketh nothynge the frenche cronycle.
THE .CCXI. CHAPITER. IN the .xxxiiii. yere of the kynge / Ry∣charde the erle of Poytowe arrered warre agayn king Henry hys father, & toke party with the Frenche kynge. By meane of the whyche warre / all suche summys of money as were before gatheryd by dymys and otherwyse, for the hel∣pynge of the croysye to be made in¦to the holy lande, by the sayde Ry∣charde and by many other nobles of the lande, were spente in the same in∣naturall warre / wherfore the kynge sayled into Normandy with a strōge armye. But or the kynge were there landed / the sayde Rycharde by helpe of the Frenchemen hadde wonne the cytyes of Towres, of Meaus, and also the castellys of Raoull and Gy∣sours wyth other. At the laste the Frenche kyng Phylyppe the second, wyth the sayde Rycharde came vnto the cytye of Cenomanna / entendyng to laye syege vnto the same. wherof kynge Henry beynge warned / sette the suburbes on fyre, bycause hys enmyes shuld in thē haue no socour. But the flame of the fyre was by the wynde dryuen into the cytye so sharpely, that the kyng was compel¦led to forsake yt. wherwyth ye kynge was so amoued / that in hys depar∣tynge from the cytye he sayde these wordes. For thou haste taken from me thys daye the cytye that I moste loued in the worlde, I shall acquyte the / for after thys tyme I shall by∣nome the that thynge, yt shuld most haue pleased the in me, whych ys myne harte. After thys he loste more dayly / so that hys enymyes preuayled stron∣gely agayne hym. It is rede of hym / that he shulde be at so great an after deale in thys warre / that hastely he shuld put hym in the kynge of Fraunces mercy, his honoure and hys crowne reserued. But this is doutefull of credēce. For sure I am, yf the Frenche kyng had suche auauntage of hym / yt shulde not haue fallen throughe the boke, but haue ben regystred in the moste auauntynge maner / where as in the frenche cronycle is touched no word of lyke mater. But trowth yt ys that fortune was to him contrary, in such wyse that wyth or for anger and im∣pacyence, he fell into a feuer. wherof he lastely dyed in the castell of Cono∣meus or of Chynon in Normandye, in the moneth of Iuly, when he had reygned .xxxiiii. yeres and .viii. mo∣nethes wyth oddes dayes / and was buryed at Fount Ebrade, wyth thys epytaphy vppon his tombe. Sufficit hic tumulus, cui non sufficerat orbis. Res breuis est ampla, cui fuit ampla breuis. Rex Henricus eram: mihi plurima regna subegi. Multiplici{que} modo, dux{que} comes{que} sui. Cui satis ad votum non essent omnia terrae Climita, terrae modo sufficit octo pedun Qui legis haec, pensa discrimina mortis: & in me Humanae speculum conditionis habe. Quod petis instante operare bonum, quia mundus Transit, & incatos mors inopina rapit. The whyche versys are thus myche to meane in sentence. ¶Suffysyth nowe this graue, to whom all erthly thynge Syffysyd not / my mynde so hyghe was sette. Tyme that was shorte, my name wyde dyd sprynge / whyche fame by deth is into shorte∣nesse fette. Kynge Henry was I called, no man I thought my bette.
whose mynde sometyme all erth not suffysed / viii. fote of ground now hath my bo¦dye comprysed. Thou that thys redest / the parell of deth, and in me Thou mayste beholde the course of euery wyght That erthely is. wherfore prouyde and se, That thou well maye do, shortely do yt, and tyght. Defer not the tyme / for I ascertayne the ryght, The world is transytory / and vnwa¦rely men taketh Cruell deth, from whome non estate escapeth. Gerardus Cambrens̄, whyche in hys boke of dystynccyons sette oute the lyfe of thys Henry / sayth drede∣full yt is to allege agayne hym that maye putte a man oute of lande, and to descrybe hym wyth many wor∣des, that may exyle a man wyth one worde. wherfore yt were a notable dede to tell the sothe of a prynces de∣dys, and offende the prynce in no meane. But yet when the prynce ys passed and gone / then men wyll tal∣ke without fere, that before tyme they spared for fere. Then to folow the sooth, this kyng Henry noryshed stryfe amonge hys chyldern wyth all dylygēce / hopyng therby to lyue hym selfe in the more reste. when men wolde aske of hym when he wolde leue his great dedes / he vsed to answere that the worlde shulde fayle, or a courageouse harte shulde sease of great dedes. He was pereles in chyualry, in warre, and in lecherye. He wedded Elyanoure wyfe of Lewys kynge of Fraunce / contrary to the commaundement of hys father. For he hadde shewed to hym that he hadde lyen by her, when he was the sayde kynges stewarde. He reygned .xxvi. yeres somdeale to hys wordely blysse, and foure ye∣res somwhat to hys payne / but the laste fyue yeres to hys great trowe∣ble and sorow. Farthermore the sayd Gerarde descryueth the progenye of thys Henry / whyche I ouer passe be∣cause yt is so common. Rycharde hys sonne wolde often tell that wonder / and vsed to saye, no meruayle though they greued the peple that were comon of such kynd. For of ye deuyll they came, and to the dyuyll they shall. It ys also redde of thys Henry, that in a chaumber at wyndesore he caused to be paynted an egle wyth foure byrdes / wherof thre of theym all rased the bodye of the olde egle, and the fourth was cratchynge at the olde eglys eyen. when the ques∣tyon was asked of hym what thyng that pycture shuld sygnyfye / yt was answered by hym: thys olde egle (sayde he) is my selfe / and these .iiii. eglys betoken my foure sonnes, the whyche sease not to pursue my deth. And specyally my yongeste sonne Iohn̄, whyche nowe I loue moste / shall most specyally awayte and ima¦gen my deth. Francia. THE .CCXLI. CHAPITER. PHylyp the seconde of that name, sur∣named Dyeu do∣ne or gyuē of god, and sonne vnto ye viii. Lewys / be∣ganne to reygne ouer the realme of
Fraunce, in the yere of our lorde .xi. hundred and .lxxix / and the .xxiii. yere of Henry the seconde than kynge of Englonde. whyche sayde Phylyppe reygned somwhat of tyme by the lyfe of hys father / which tyme is accomp¦ted vnto the reygne of hys father. Thys in the fyrst yere of hys rey∣gne, for the great enormytyes that the Iewes vsed wythin the realme of Fraunce / as crucyfyenge of chyl∣dren, and exercysynge of theyr dete∣stable vsery: he after due profe made put the malefactours to dethe / and the other in auoydynge more daun∣ger / he exyled and put clere out of hys realme. This Phylyp also as before in the story of Henry the seconde is tow∣ched, excyted the sonnes of the sayde Henry to make warre vppon theyr father / by whyche meane thys Phy¦lyppe gate many holdes and townes from the sayde Henry wythin hys duchy of Guyon. But after the deth of Henry / thys Phylyppe gaue ouer all the sayde holdes and townes, vn∣to Rycharde the eldeste sonne of the sayde Henry / and receyued of hym homage for the same. And as wyt∣nessyth the French cronycle / the sayd Rychard in token of obedyence, was present at the coronacion of the sayd Phylyppe. But ye shall vnderstande that than he was not kynge of En∣glande .x. yeres after. But yf yt so were that he were present at the sayd coronacyon / yet was he duke of Guy¦on onely. Aboute the thyrde yere of hys rey∣gne / Eraclius patryarke of Hierusa¦lem came into Fraunce, and requy∣red ayde of thys kynge Phylyppe to wythstande the furye and persecu∣cyon, whyche Saladyne prynce of Turkes hadde excuted and dayly contynued in the countrey of Pale∣stina agayne the Cristen to the great destruccyon of theym and vndoyng of the countrey, and great ieoper∣dye of the losynge of the holy cytye of Hierusalem. For thys the kynge assembled a great counsayll at hys cytye of Parys / where the sayde Era¦clius made requeste to the kynge as before he hadde done to Henry the seconde. For he was in Fraunce in the yere of our lorde .xi. hundred .lxxx. and two / and in Englande he was in the yere of grace .xi. hundred .lxxx. and .vii. After whyche counsayll there so holden / yt was agreed that the kynge wyth ayde of the byshop∣pes and other of the spyrytualtye, shulde ayde the sayde patryarke / the whyche where sette forthe in all pos∣syble haste. But after the reporte of Peter Dysroye, whyche made a re∣cule or lytle boke of the wynnynge and losyng of Hierusalem / they with mo crysten prynces were dryuen by tempeste of the see vnto the porte of Damas / where vnder coloure of a fayned trewce, they were taken and caste the moste parte of theym in pryson. And when kynge Phylyppe hadde thus delyuered the patryarke / he then gatheryd hys knyghtes and made an armye agayne Hugh duke of Burgoyne / the whyche at that season and tyme hadde beclypped the castell of Uergye wyth a stronge syege / and hadde promysed not to de¦parte thens, tyll such tyme as he had wonne that holde by appoytement or otherwyse. And for the defence of rescouse that myghte be made for the same / he hadde māned foure castellys or tow∣res there vnto adioynaunte, wyth great strength of men of armys. But
after the kynge was thyder comen wyth hys hoste, the sayde towrs were sone ouertourned / and ye kynge wyth a certayne of hys people, of Guy capytayne of the sayde castell of Uergy was ioyously into the sa∣me receyued / and rendred to hym the castell, and became hys lege man. where wyth the sayde Hugh beynge ore amoued and dyscontented, se∣ynge there he was dyspoynted of his purpose / departed thens wyth hys ordynaunce and people, and robbed and spoyled the coūtre there aboute / sparynge nother chyrche nor howse of relygyō / in so cruell and greuous maner, that the bysshoppes and ab∣bottes of that partye of Burgoyne made pyteous request vnto the sayd Phylyp, that he of his specyall grace wolde ayde and socoure them and theyr chyrches agayne the tyranny of the sayde duke Hugh. The kynge beynge moued wyth thys pyteous requeste / made sharpe warre vppon the sayde Hugh / and at length wan from hym a stronge castell named Chastelone. where wyth all the duke was put to suche a studyall and fere that he was forsed to seche meanes of treaty and of peace. wherof the cō∣clusyon was, that he shulde paye vn∣to the chyrches before by hym hur∣ted & harmed .xxx. thousande pownd. whyche conclusyon taken and sure∣lye sette for the same / the kynge re∣torned vnto Parys. where the kyng so restynge hym a certeyne of tyme, and hauynge experyence of the intol¦lerable and foule stenches that dayly grewe by the fylthe of the erthe and myre in the stretes / made prouysyon dylygently wyth ayde and helpe of the cytesens, whyche as than hadde londe wythin the cytye, that the stre∣tes were shortely paued after. And at thys tyme whanne the cytye was thus paued, as affermen many au∣thours / the name of it was chaun∣ged from Lutesse or Lewcesse vnto Parysse. THE .CCXLII. CHAPITER. IN the .vii. yere of thys kynge Phy∣lyp, as sayth the Frēche boke / Mar¦garete syster vnto thys Phylyp, late wyfe vnto Henry late deceased, and eldeste sonne of Henry the seconde kynge at this day of Englande, was maryed vnto Be∣las kynge of Hungry. In the .x. yere of thys kyng Phy∣lyp / the cytye of Hierusalem was ta∣ken of Saladyne prynce of Egypte / and Guy de Lesyngnan laste crysten kynge of that cytye, wyth the holy crosse was taken in the felde / whych after that daye came neuer into cry∣sten mennes possessyon. Of thys so∣rowe & heuynesse worde was brou∣ghte vnto kynge Phylyp, wyth re∣queste of ayde to reskue certeyne cy∣tyes, as yet rested vnder the domy∣nyon of the crysten / as Tyre, Try∣ple, and Antioch, wyth other small holdes. For sauegarde wherof many nobles of Fraunce toke vpon them the crosse / as the duke of Burgoyn, the erle of Flaunders, Theobalde erle of Bloyes, the erle of Rochfod, the erle of Champayne, wyth many other noble knyghtes / whyche for lengthe I passe ouer, and also the re∣porte of theyr dedys, for so myche as it cōcernyth nothyng the mater that I haue promysed to speke of. In this iourney also kynge Phy∣lyppe entēded to haue gone / and for the same great taskes & dymys were leuyed through oute his realme, the
whyche to this daye are called Sa∣ladynes dymes. But the lette of this iourney as sayth the french cronycle was Rycharde duke of Guyan / and after his father Henry the seconde, that made warre vppon the Frenche kynge, as before is touched in the sto¦rye of the sayd Henry. Duryng why¦che warre the sayde Henry dyed, in the .xi yere of thys sayde Phylyppe. About thys season and tyme / the Iewes whych by meane of great gyf¦tes, had agayn purchased theyr dwel¦lynge wythin the coūtrey of Fraūce, wherof a wedowe was lady and ma∣stresse called Branous / in absence of the kynge toke a Crysten man, & sur¦mysed agayne hym felonye and mur¦der. For the whyche by fauoure of the sayde lady / the sayde Iewes set a crowne of thorne vppon the sayd cry¦sten mannys hedde, and after scour∣ged hym, and lastely in derysyon of Crystes relygyon and despyte of the same, crucyfyed the same persone. wherof when the kynge was enfour∣med / in all haste he sent into the sayd coūtrey or castell of Brayon, and sur¦prysed the sayde Iewys so sodaynly that none escaped / and brent there of them to the nomber of .lxxx. for theyr malycyouse and abhomynable dede. In the .xi yere of the reygne of thys Phylyppe, dyed Isabell the quene of Fraūce his wyfe / a womā of good fame and of great vertue. In the .xii. yere of his reygne as sayth the frenche boke / thys Phylyp toke vppon hym the crosse, hauynge promyse of kyng Rychard then new¦ly crowned kyng of Englād, to kepe company wyth hym in that iourney. But he kept not promyse. wherwith thys Phylyppe beynge dyscontēted / sayled before and layde syege vnto the cytye of Acon or Acre. From this sayenge varyeth Policronica, and al¦so Peter Desroy. For Polycronycon sayth, that after the kynges of En∣glande and of Fraunce, hadde made suerty betwen them for performaūce of this iourney / they both to gyther taryed at Turon in Fraunce, for to abyde the somer tyde. And at spryn∣gynge of the yere / they of one wyll & purpose, toke theyr vyage towarde the holy lande / that ys to wytte that one by water and that other by land / and mette agayne in Cecilia. where the Frēche kynge de{per}ted from hym / and so sayled to the sayde cytye of A∣cone or Acre, and layde hys syege there vnto. In whych pastyme kyng Rycharde warred vppon the kynge of Sypres, & hym wyth his land sub¦dued / & after came vnto Acon̄, where the Frenche kyng had longe lyen at syege without gettynge of any great auauntage of his enymyes / saynge vnto kynge Rycharde that he hadde spared the wynnynge of the towne tyll hys commynge, to the ende that he at his commyng myght be partey¦ner as well of the honoure as of the wynnynge. But how it was, such vn¦kyndenesse fell betwene theym there, after they hadde woonne the sayde towne, as after in story of kynge Ry¦charde shalbe shewed, that this kyng Phylyppe retourned into Fraunce shortely after. In the whych returne the sayde Phylyppe sykened, and the duke of Burgoyne dyed. And when kyng Phylyppe a season had soiour¦ned in Fraūce / he maryed Iugebert the doughter of the kynge of Den∣marke. The whyche maryage, as sayth Ranulfe, was desyred of the Frenche kynge, to haue wyth her graunted the tytle whyche the Da∣nes had vnto the crown of England, wyth also .x. thousand markes of syl¦uer, for to wynne wyth ye sayd ryght and tytle. But yt was not longe or
she were frō hym deuorced, for cause of alyaūce of gossypred or otherwise. Howe be yt in processe of tyme after / the said Iugebert was to him agayn ioyned by the authoryte of Pope In¦nocent the thyrd of that name, in the yere of grace .xii. hūdred and .ix. and yere of reygne of this Philyppe .xxx / so that the sayde Iugebert was de∣uorced frome her lorde by the terme of .xvii. yeres or theruppon. In whych tyme and season the sayd Phylyppe had maryed the doughter of Phylyppe duke of Sweuy, that then was returned vnto her father. THE .CCXLIII. CHAPITER. Kynge Phylyp for dyspleasure whych he bare towarde kyng Rycharde / made sharpe and cruell warre vpon the Normans, and wan therein dyuerse holdes and townes / and fynally layde syege vnto the cy∣tye of Roan. wherof herynge Iohn̄ erle of Huntyngeton, or after some erle of Oxenforde brother to kynge Rycharde, whome the Frenche boke nameth Iohn̄ withoute lande / wyth the erle of Arundell and other noble men, spedde hym into Normandye / and so ayded the cytezens and the sol¦dyours of Roan, that as testyfyeth the frēche cronycle, the French kyng was so moued wyth the warre and defence of the same towne, that in a passynge fury consyderyng the wyn¦ter season drewe vppon, and that he myght not carye awaye his gunnes and other great ordynaunces / he set all vppon a fyre / and so wyth great agony departed. And within thre mo¦nethes after he layde syege vnto the castell of Uernyel / where whē he had lyen .iii. wekes or more, a messynger came vnto hym and sayde, that the cytye Euroux was taken of the Nor¦mans / and the people therof taken prysoners. wherfore in all haste he departed, and rescued the sayd cytye and prysoners / and that done retour¦ned to the foresayde syege / and assye∣ged yt so strōgely, that lastely he had yt delyueryd by appoyntement. By thys season was kynge Ry∣charde delyueryd out of the handes of the duke of Ostryge. And then be∣ganne the warre to be more cruell / whych here I passe ouer, for so mych as I entende to shew the effecte ther¦of in the storye of kynge Rycharde folowynge. Aboute the .xviii. yere of the reygn of thys Phylyppe / fell such plenty of water, that the groūde was therwith so bucked and drowned, that corne & other frutes by reason therof great¦ly decayed and scanted, in such wyse that whete was shortly after at .xx.s a quarter after sterlynge money. In the .xx. yere of the reygn of this Phylyppe / dyed Rycharde kynge of England / to whom was heyre Iohn̄ before named his brother. The why∣che cōcluded a trewce wyth this Phi¦lyppe for certayne yeres, as after in the storye of this Iohn̄ shall more cle¦rely appere. And soone there after meanes were made to kyng Phylyp, that he shuld receyue agayne vnto his company Iugebert hys wyfe / and to renounce Mary doughter of the duke of Swe¦uy, or after some authours, the dou∣ghter of the duke of Bohemy. But the kynge wyth this mocyon was no¦thynge contentyd / nor yet agreable to folow any such mocion or request. wherfore the prelasy of the lande as∣semled theym in counsayll / and by a full and hole authoryte, seynge they myghte not induce the kynge to no conformyte or agrement to resume hys lawfull wyfe, and to refuse that
other / they denounsed hym and hys realme accursed. wherwith the kyng was so amoued and vexed / that he depryued certayne bysshoppes from theyr sees / and also toke in hys pos∣sessyon the spyrytuall goodes / and prysoned many prestes and other re∣lygyous men / and ouer that closed the sayde Iugebert wythin the ca∣stell of Sampys / and forthermore greued hys comons wyth greuous exaccyons and taxys. Than wythin a shorte terme after Iohn̄ de saynte Poule cardynall, and Athā or Othe∣mon bysshoppe of Osty and legate of the pope of Rome, wyth the arche∣bysshoppe of Burdeaux and other / by the commaundement of the pope than Innocent the thyrde, kepte a greate counceyle in the cytye of Sor¦sore. where the kynge was monys∣shed to apere / for so mych as before he hadde graunted to be recon∣cyled vnto hys fyrste wyfe. where thys mater hynge in argument be∣fore the spyrytuall iudges by ye space of .xv. dayes, wythout sentence gy∣uynge. wherfore the kynge beynge wyth the delayes dyscontented / so∣denly wyth hys wyfe departed, wyth¦out takynge of them any congye or leue / sendynge them vnderstandyng that as yet he wolde be aduysed or he were dysseuered from hys wyfe. wherof whan the sayd Iohn̄ cardy∣nall and the other bysshoppes hadde wyttynge / accomptynge theyr la∣boure loste, they retourned shortely after vnto Rome, and shewed vnto the pope all as they hadde done. And soone there after kyng Iohn̄ was honorably receyued of thys kynge Phylyppe, as in the story of the sayd Iohn̄ shall be more playnly shewed. And in the yere folowynge, which shulde be in the begynnynge of the xxiii. yere of thys Phylyppe, dyed Mary hys wyfe / whyche he wrong∣fully had holden cōtrary to the law of the chyrche by the terme of tenne yeres or there vppon. Of the why∣che Mary he hadde receyued a man chylde and a doughter / the whyche after were made legyttymate by In∣nocent the thyrde, though some no∣ble men of Fraunce there agayne grudged. THE .CCXLIIII. CHAPITER. IT was not longe after, that ye kyng assembled greate people and enten∣dyd to haue en∣tred the landys of the erle Rossell, & o Roger de Rose / of the whyche he hadde broughte before hym many greuous complayntes, of greate ex∣torcyons and exaccyōs that the sayd erle and Roger hadde executed and done vppon the chyrches nere to the valey of Soysons / and wolde not refrayne for all the kynges cōmaun¦dement. wherfore he rygged hys armye and drewe towarde them. But as soone as they were aduerty∣sed of the kynges comynge / anone they submytted them to the kynges grace / oblygynge them selfe to make restytucyon accordynge to the kyn∣ges pleasure, to all suche places and persons as they hadde offended. And thys acte thus fynysshed / kyng Phylyppe returned vnto a place by∣twene Uerdon, and the ile Audely / in the whyche place the kynge hadde appoynted a great counsayle or par¦lyament. where amonge other ma∣ters yt was concluded, that Iohn̄ kynge of Englande shulde be somo∣ned to appere as the Frenche kyn∣ges
lyege man, at the same parlya∣ment to be holden at parys wythin xv. dayes of Ester / to answere suffy∣cyently to the kyng vppon such ques¦tyons as there shulde be purposed vnto hym, for the duchy of Norman¦dye, for the coūtrey of Aungeou and of Poytyers. But for yt kynge John̄ came not at that day appoynted, nor none for hym accordynge to the mo∣nyshement to hym gyuen, therfore thys kynge Philypppe not withstan¦dynge the amytye and trewce before confermed, assembled hys hoste and entred the duchye of Normandye, and made therin sharpe and cruell warre / and wanne a castell therein named Bonte or Bowte, and brused or crased the castellys of Gentylyne and Gurney / and seased all ye landes whyche Hugh de Gurney helde, and gyue theym vnto the duke of Bry∣tayne. And also he gaue vnto hym the erledome of Aungeou, and two hundred knyghtes prysones of Nor¦mans and Englyshe wyth a great summe of money. It was not longe after that the du¦ke of Brytayne was departyd from the kynge / but that he wyth suche power as he myght make entred the countrey of Aungeou, to take therof possessyon. where in shorte space he was encountred of kynge John̄, and fought to geder a cruell batell. In the whyche in the ende the duke was put to the worse / for the more parte of hys people were slayne, and hym selfe wyth Hugh le Bruns, Godfrey de Lesygnan, and many other no∣bles of Fraunce and also of Bry∣tayne, were taken prysoners. wyth whyche tydynges the Frenche kyng was greuously dyscontentyd. And where as at that tyme he had becle∣ped ye castell of Arches wyth a strong syege / he remoued from thens and and yode to the citye of Towres and brent a part therof. But as testifyeth the frenche cronycle he taryed not the commynge of kynge Iohn̄. But for that wynter was commynge to∣warde / he ceasyd of hys warrys for that yere, and so drewe hym into Fraunce ∴ In the yere folowynge, whyche was the yere of this Phylyp .xxiiii, & of kynge Iohn̄ the .iiii. yere / ye warre newely began, whyche I ouer passe, for as mych as yt shall be shewyd in the storye of kynge Iohn̄. In the .xxvi. yere thys Phylyppe Almaricus a studyent of Paris held certayne opynyons of heresye. Of the whyche when he was abiured / he toke suche thought that he dyed shortely after. It was not longe af∣ter but that other clerkys and study∣auntys helde an other erronyous opynyon cōcernynge ye vnyon of the trynyte. Of the whyche nomber Pe∣ter byshoppe of Parys, and one Ga∣ryne a man of great connynge were two / the whyche were degraded, & after cōsumyd wyth fyre / and the bo¦dy of the forenamed Almaricus was agayne taken oute of the erthe, and after brent. Nere about the .xxx. yere of the rey∣gne of thys Phylyppe / for consyde∣racyon as sayth the frenche boke, that Iohn̄ kynge of Englande had exylyd dyuerse of hys byshoppes, and taken from them theyr possessy∣ons and goodes / the whyche to this kynge Phylyp were comen for ayde and socour: he therfore mouyd with pytye, assembled a great hoste, and entendyd to haue sayled into En∣glande to haue refourmed these ma∣ters. wyth the whyche hoste he pas∣sed tyll he came to Grauenynge by lande, where he appoynted hys na∣uey to mete wyth hym. And to the
same place also Ferrande then erle of Flaundres had affermely promy∣syd to come, wyth the ayde of hys Flemynges / where the kynge for hym taryed a certayne of tyme. But shortely after the kynge was ascer∣tayned that the sayde erle was alyed wyth kynge Iohn̄ hys enymye / and purposed to ayde hys partye in all that he myghte. wherof the occasyon was as affermeth the sayde Frenche cronycle, for so myche as Lewys el∣dest sonne of kynge Phylyppe helde from the sayde Farrande two castel¦lys or townes named saynte Omer and Are. when kynge Phylyppe appercey∣ued that he was thus of the erle dys∣poynted / he by coūsayll of his Baro∣nye putte by hys iourney into En∣glande, and assayled the countrey of Flaundres / and so yode vnto Cassyle a lytell from Grauelynge, & wyth sharpe assaute wanne the sayd towne / and so from thens to Bru∣gys / and commaunded hys nauy to be brought vnto the hauē of Sluse, whyche is wythin shorte waye of Brugys. And when he hadde execu¦ted hys pleasure at Brugys, leuyng a certayn of his peple for to strength hys Nauy / he yode vnto Gaunte, and there rested hym and hys peo∣ple. In whyche season Regnolde erle of Boleyne, Guyllyam longe Espe, or Guyllyam wyth the longe sworde, wyth a crewe of Englyshe men aryued in Flaundres / to whom shortely drewe Ferraunde the erle wyth a great power of Flemynges. The whyche shypped theym in small caruyles and barkes and other shyp¦pys of aduaūtage / and wyth a fyerse corage sette vppon the Frenche kyn∣ges nauey lyenge at Sluse as before is shewed / where was foughten a stronge and cruell batayll. But in the ende the Flemynges hadde the vyctorye, and hadde the rule of all the frenche flote, the whyche in nom¦ber as testyfyeth the sayd frenche cro¦nycle, were a thousande & ten sayle. The whyche for nomber and great∣nesse myghte not all lye wythin the hauyn / but spradde a great parte of the ryuer besyde. whyche so lyenge wythout the hauen, the Flemynges conueyed thens / and after layde or∣dinaunce to the towne of Sluse, and assyeged yt. Kynge Phylyppe herynge of the losse of hys nauye, and of the assau∣tynge of the towne of Sluse, in all haste spedde hym thyther / and there in suche wyse resysted hys enymyes, that he slew of them vpon two thou∣sande / and toke of theym dyuerse prysoners, and rescued the towne. But for he sawe he myght not reco∣uer hys shyppes beynge wythin the hauyn / he causyd theym to be dys∣charged of vytell and other ne∣cessaryes, and after set them on fyre and the towne al¦so / and that done, to∣ke certayne hosta¦ges of Brugis of Gaunte and of Ipre, and so retourned into Fraunce. THE .CCXLV. CHAPITER. WHen kynge Phy∣lippe was returned into Fraunce / yt was not longe af∣ter, that by the mea¦nes of some well dy¦sposyd persones, he was reconcyled and toke to hym his lawfull wyfe Ingeberta or Inge∣bert,
doughter of the kynge of Den∣marke / whyche was great comforte to all hys people. And thys yt nowe apperyth that the sayde Ingebert was from her lorde or husbande by the terme of .xvi. yeres and more, as before yt is touched in the seconde chapyter of thys storye. In the yere of grace .xii. hūdred .xiiii. as sayth the frenche boke, whyche maketh the yere of the reygne of this Philyppe .xxxv / Otho the .iiii. of that name and duke of Saxony, whyche of some of the electours was chosen for emperour / in the quarell of kyng Iohn̄ intred ye prouince of Henaude, and there beynge accompanyed with Reygnolde erle of Boleyne, Far∣raunde erle of Flaundres, and dy∣uerse other nobles, as well of En∣glande, Saxonye, and other pla∣ces / made prouysyon to fyght wyth kynge Phylyppe, whyche then war∣red in Flaūdres / so that the Frenche kynge was at the castell of Peron, and Otho was at the castell of Ua∣lensyens or Ualenseus. About Mary Madgdaleyns tyde, the Frenche kynge in wastyng ye coū¦trey of Flaūdres came vnto the town of Turney / and Otho returned from the foresayde castell, and came vnto the castell or towne named Mor∣tenge, the whyche was but .vi. myle from Turney. wherof herynge the kynge, entendyd to haue set in shorte tyme vppon hys enymyes. But by the aduyse of hys barons he was let∣ted / for so myche as the wayes and places were streyghte and narowe towarde hys enymyes. For the why∣che consyderacyon by counsayll of hys sayde barones he was letted, and retourned towarde Henawde for to haue more larger playnes. So that after saynte Iamys daye he re∣tourned / purposynge that nyghte to haue lyen and also his hoste at the castell called Lylly. But he was let∣ted of hys purpose. For Otho whych was warned of hys remouynge, de∣med hym to haue fled and pursued after the vaungarde of the kynge / of the whyche were captaynes the vy¦counte of Mylyon, and one named Fryer Garnye / the whyche was a a fryer and relygyous man, a man of great counsayll and hardynesse. These beynge accompanyed wyth iiii. thounsande men / rode tyll they came to an hyll or lytle Mountayne, where they espyed the auauntage of Otho and hys hoste. wherfore fryer Garny retourned to gyue the kynge knowlege / and the vycounte remay¦ned in the place, and houed with his companye. when the kynge hadde knowlege of the commynge of his enymyes / he in good maner kepte on hys iour∣ney. In whyche season Otho, wyth hys people came vnto ye ryuer which was somdeale daungerous to passe / howe be yt in processe he passed yt. And when he & his hoste were ouer / he made waye towarde Turney / in so myche that the Uycounte & his cō¦pany demed them to haue retourned to Turney. But so soone as Fryer Garny was returned vnto the sayde mount, anon he demed the coūtrary / & sayd precysely that other they must gyue batayll to theyr enimyes, or el∣lys they must fle wyth shame. In thys whyle the kynges people came vnto a brydge where they shulde passe ouer. And the cautele of hys enymyes was, that when the kynge wyth the more parte of hys people hadde ben passed that brydge / they wolde haue sette vppon the rere∣warde, and haue dystressyd theym / and so haue kepte that brydge that the kynge shulde not haue socoured
his people. But or the kynge were passed the fyght was begonne / in so myche that hydeous crye came to the kynges crys, at armys at armys, to harneys to harnes, our enymyes be come. Nere vnto the kyng was a chapell halowed in the honour and worshyp of saynte Peter / wherunto the kyng yode and made there hys deuoute prayers / and that done armed hym, and lepte to horse ioyously cryenge / as barons at armys. Then the Ory¦flambe which was passed ye brydge, was countermaunded. And then began the trumpettys and tabours to blowe / whyche reuyued the pal∣led hartes, and caused theym to for∣gete the drede of deth. But for the kynges people myght not so hastely retourne and passe the brydge / the kynge as a valyaunt knyghte toke hys horse wyth hys spurrys, and set forwarde to encourage the other of hys knyghtes / so that his enymyes herynge of hys commynge, were somdeale dyscoraged and gaue place vnto the kynges hoste. Then Otho herynge of the kynges retourne, en¦batayled hys people. But so yt was that he toke the northe parte of the felde / by reason wherof the sonne was in hys face to hys afterdeale / for that was excedynge hote ouer the other. Then was the batell be∣gonne in dyuers partyes of the felde so cruelly that many a mā was there ouerthrowen. The whyche endured be a longe space, in suche wyse that harde yt was to dyscerne whyche par¦tye hadde the better of that other. Eyther prynce enforcyd so strayte∣ly that other / that eyther of theym were vnhorsed and in great ieoper∣dye. If here I shulde reherse the vyctoryouse dedys of the Frenche kynge and hys knyghtes in order, after the expressement of the frenche boke / I shulde therof make a longe storye. But trouth yt is that in the ende / Otho was compelled to for∣sake the felde, to the great losse of hys people / and Feraunte the erle of Flaunders was taken wyth many other, as Reygnolde erle of Boleyn, and .xxviii. other of name. And one thynge hardely me semeth to be credence gyuen vnto, rehersyd by the frenche cronycle, whych sayth that of all the frenche hoste myssed but one syngle man / the whyche af∣ter was founde amonge the dede Al∣maynes sore wounded, and after cu¦red and helyd agayne. whyche maye be tolde for a great wonder / consy∣derynge the sayde fyghte lasted ouer foure howres, as testyfyeth the sayd cronycle. But sure the authoure or the wryter ouerseeth hym selfe in that reporte / for he shewyth before in the dyuysynge of the fyghte of thys batell, that when kynge Phy∣lyppe was felled from hys horse, two of hys knyghtes were slayne ryghte before hym / that one named Guyl∣lyam de longe Champe, and that other Gerarde le Tirne. But maister Robert Gagwyne expressyth thys more clerely / sayenge that after the felde was done and the emperoure was fledde, leuynge hys banner of splayed Egle behynde hym / a bys∣shement of the nomber of .vii. hun∣dred men recoueryd that standarde, and so kepte theym to gyther. wher∣of when the kynge was enfourmed / he sente agayne them one of hys kny¦ghtes called syr Thomas Ualary, accōpanyed wyth .l. fotemen & two thousand horse men. The whych dys¦tressyd ye sayd cōpany, wythout losse of one man as before is sayde. And more ouer the sayd authour sayth / yt vppon the partye of the sayde Otho
of knyghtes and gylte harnesse were slayne a thousande & fyue hundred / and of other horse men and fote men a hundred and fyfty thousande. But of ye Frenche men whych shulde be sureste of rekenynge / he maketh no mencyon. But trouth it is, that in all the cronycle thoroughe the Frenche boke rehersed / all thynge touchynge theyr honour is decla∣red and shewed to the vttermoste. And that whyche concerneth theyr dyshonoure or losse, yt ys ouer sub∣tely excused / or so darkely or mystly wryten, that the reader therof shall hardely come to the knowlege of the trouthe. And that is well apparent in the storyes of Phylyppe de Ua∣loys and of kynge John̄ hys sonne, in expressement of theyr faytes done and exercysed agayne the thyrde Ed¦warde kyng of England and prynce Edwarde hys sonne. Than it foloweth in ye story / whan Phylyp hadde obteyned this greate vyctory of hys enemyes, and orde∣red other thynges concernynge hys people, as countermaūdynge them the next waye vnto theyr countrees / he wyth hys prysoners spedde hym to Parys / and there of hys greate bounte graunted to the sayde erlys of Boleyne and Flaunders theyr ly∣ues, but not of prysonement. For the erle of Boleyne was sent vnto the castell of Peron / and Feraunt erle of Flaunders was commytted to the castell or towre of Louour wythout the wallys of the cytye of Parys thā newly made. But wythin lesse than xv. monethes after / by labour of his wyfe, he with other of hys lyege men was delyuered / payenge theyr fy∣naunces, and perfourmyng of other streyght condycyons. THE .CCXLVI. CHAPITER. IT was not longe after that kynge Phylyppe re∣assembled hys knyghtes, and spedde hym towarde the countrey of Poytow. wherof beynge warned the erle of Thoners that than was chefe ruler of that countrey vnder kyng Iohn̄, seynge the feblenesse of the comons that dayly were vexed wyth warre, and also the losse of kynge John̄s frendes, not wythstandyng the sayd Iohn̄ was than wythin twenty my∣les / yet he made suche meanes to kynge Phylyppe by the laboure of Peter than duke or erle of Brytayn, that the sayde kynge accepted the same erle to hys grace / and graun∣ted to hym and hys a trewce for .iiii. yeres. But that not wythstandyng / the kynge kept on hys iourney to∣warde kynge Iohn̄. wherof kynge Iohn̄ beynge enfourmed / and also of the peace bytwene the erle of Tho¦ners and the Frenche kynge: he by meanes of one Roberte a legate of Rome sought meanes of treaty and of peace / so that in processe by dyly∣gence of the sayde Robert and other, a peace was concluded for .v. yeres. whyche peace concluded and assured eyther kynge returned into theyr owne prouynces. wythin short whyle after ye Fren∣che kyng was returned into Fraūce / he called to mynde the great vyctory had of the Almayns / wyth also one other whych Lewys his son about ye same tyme had agayne or of kynge Iohn̄ in the countre of Aungeou, at the castell of Moyne or Mayne. For the whyche .ii. vyctoryes, the kynge edyfyed a monastery besyde the cyty of Sayntles, in the honour of saynt Uyctor / and endowed it wyth fayre and ryche possessyons, and named it the abbey of saynt Uyctor.
In the .xxxvi. yere of the reygne of thys Phylyppe / Lewys hys sonne by procurynge and sturrynge of the lordes of Englande, sayled into the sayde prouynces / as more playnely shall be shewed in the .xvi. yere of the reygne of kynge Iohn̄. Many mo storyes & actes myght I brynge in and set in thys story of thys kynge Phylyppe, yf I shulde folowe the Frenche boke. For he ma¦keth there a rehersayll that contey∣neth .xxxix. greate leuys of parche∣myne. Of the whyche I haue taken out suche as to me semeth moste con¦uenyent / and haue ouer passed the other for lengthe of the tyme. Than it foloweth / thys Phylyp after these dayes drewe hym to more quyet and reste / so that after thys peace or trewce cōcluded wyth kyng Iohn̄ of Englande, the authour spe∣keth not or myndeth of any noble dede by hym done. So that in the ye¦re of our lorde .xii. hundred and .xxii, whyche shulde be the yere of hys rey¦gne .xliii / the sayd authour begyn∣neth, and sayth that in that foresayd yere apered a greate eclypce of the son, wherof the lyke hadde not ben seen in many yeres passed. And in the yere folowynge dyed thys Phylyppe in the moneth of Iu¦nii, whan he hadde reygned vppon xliiii. yeres. Before whose deth ape∣red a great comete or blasyng starre / the whyche the Frenche men, wyth also the foresayde eclypce / they ad∣iudged for pronostiquys and tokens of the kynges deth / the whyche was buryed wyth excellent pompe in the monastery of saynt Denys, in the ye∣re of our lorde a thousand two hun∣dred and .xxiii. and of hys age .lviii / leuynge after hym the fore named Lewys / whyche was enoynted kyng after hym. Thys Phylyppe amonges other notable thynges ordeyned in hys te∣stament / be sette to the aydynge and wynnynge of the holy cytye of Hie∣rusalem thre hundred thousande pownde of Parys money / to the ho∣spytall in Mount forte a hundred thousande pownde / and to be dystry¦buted amonges the poore comons of hys londe he gaue twenty thou∣sande pownde. But here is to be noted, there is a great dyuersyte bytwene a pownd of Parys money and a pownde of sterlynge money. For a pownde of Parys money is but two shyllynges and .vi. pence sterlynge, or nere there about. And so it foloweth that a thousande pownde of Parys, is but a hundred fyue and twenty pownde sterlynge. By whyche accompte it foloweth that thys kynge gaue to the ayde of the ho∣ly londe .xxxvii. thou∣sande and fyue hun¦dred pownde sterlynge / to the hospytall xii. thousande and fyue hundred pownde sterlynge / and to the poore peo∣ple two thou∣sand & fyue hundred pownde. And thus here I make an ende of thys volume, for cause and cō∣syderacyon, as after is shewed in the begynnynge of the nexte volume, more manyfestely.
¶Lenuoye. PRece forth rude volume / and recōmende me, To my derest frende experte in all scyence. Praye hym at leysour the to ouerse. And where in meter or prose he fyndeth offence, Or congrewe englysshe, or of perfyte sentence / Humbly hym praye that he woll the correcte, whyche in all hys faytes is so cyrcumspecte. And shewe to hym forther hys meryt to encreace, The seconde volume ys redy to hym dyght. Praye hym he woll not therfore wyth the sursease, Tyll that thy felow, he haue by hys insyght And by hys scyence brought in so good plyght, That to all readers it maye be delectable, And to the herers frutefull and profytable. And not to dysdayne my malapert rudenesse / That to hys payne I shulde thus boldely sende. Or hym to wyll to suche greate besynesse, So rude a worke to correcte and amende. But shew hym sothely that all that I entende, Is for to enhaunce hys prayse and greae laude / As he shall knowe I truste wythout frawde.
¶The seconde volume of Fabyans cronycle Conteynyng the cronycles of Eng∣lande and of Fraunce, from the be∣gynnyng of the reygne of king Rycharch the fyrste, vntyll the begynnyng of the reyne of our moste redoubted so∣uerayne lord kynge Henry the .viii.❧ ¶Prentyd at London By wyllyam Rastell. 1533 ❧CVM PRIVILEGIO.
THE TABLE. THere begynneth the table of the seconde volume, whiche denounces and sheweth all the ac∣tes done in euery kyn∣ges dayes contey∣ned in the sayde volume / and that euery acte fo∣lowes by letter and by the noūber of ye lefe, as in thys sayd ta∣ble is expressed / and begyn¦neth at the wardes of London & at kynge Rycharde the fyrste / whose actes more at lēgth in thys sayd volume shalbe shewed, wyth o∣ther kinges ensuyng by letter in this sayd table / as fyrste. A.B.C. and so forthe. ACrys a stronge ci∣tye in the holy lād was wonne by the crysten as appe∣reth. fo. iiii Actes of the great Cane of Tartaris folio xxiii Abbotte of waltham was accorded wyth the citesyns of Lōdon. fo. xxviii Accorde made betwene kyng Henry the .iii. and hys barons. fo. xxxviii Actes done in Hethenes / by Lowys the Frenche kyng. fo. xlviii Acris or Acon abouenamed cytye wōne agayn by y• Turkes. fo. lxix Accorde or agrement was made by∣twene Englād & Scotlād. fo. xc Actes were made for weryng of sylk. folio xci Actes in Fraunce done by the duke of Lancastre. fo. ciii Actes made by Frēchmē for the occu¦pyeng of ye admissiō of ye enherytour of Fraunce. folio cxxxvii Accorde made betwene the dukes of Orleaunce and of Burgoyne. fo. clx Accusacyōs by the duke of Burgoyn agayn the duke of Orleaunce. fo. clxi Accorde made betwene the sayde du∣kes. folio clxi Acte made for gyuynge of lyuereys. folio clxv Actes made agayn straungers / se in folio. clxxc Actes made for halowynge of the sondaye wythin the cytye of Londō. folio cxcii Abbay of Bury was spoyled. fo. cxiii Adyme was graunted to kyng Hēry the fyft. fo. clxxvii A quyndecyme was graūted to king Henry the .iii. fo. xxi A letter deuysed by the barōs & sente to kyng Henry the .iii. fo. xxxvii A letter was sent by Rychard kynge of Romayns to the barōs. fo. xxxvii A quarter of where was solde for. ii.s. folio xc A fraye was made in Fletestrete vpō a bakers seruaunt. fo. cxlv A fray made in Fletestrete by one Her bottell. fo. cxcii Andrewe Trollop dysceyued the lor∣des. folio cciii A letter sent by Edward the .iii. vnto the kyng of Fraunce. fo. xciiii Agrement was made with the Scot¦tes. folio. lxiii Answere made by the French kynge to kyng Edwardes letter. fo. xcv Answere made by the French kynge to kynge Henry. fo. clxxi Ambassade sent by the French kynge into Englande. fo. lxxxix Ambassade sent agayne by the sayde kynge. folio lxxxix Ambassade sent into Fraūce. fo. lxxxix Ambassade sent frō the pope. fo. ccviii A parte of London brydge fylle into Thamys. fo. lxxxix Ayde graunted by kynge Iohan. folio cxxiii Ayde was graunted by the inhaby∣tauntes
of the countre of Langue∣dok. folio cxxiiii. Archebysshoppe of Orleaunce was slayne. fo. lxx. Archbysshop of Caunterbury was slayne. folio cxlii. Archebysshop of Caunterbury ma∣keth a collacyon. folio cliiii. Archebysshop of yorke wyth other was taken in batayle. fo. clxvii Artycles of treason layde agayne syr Roger Mortymer. fo. lxxxviii Artycles of peace ratyfyed bytwene kynge Edwarde and kynge Iohn̄. folio cvi. Artycles of dyspleasure shewed in wrytynge by the duke of Glocester agayne the bysshop of wynchester. folio clxxx. Archebysshop of yorke ouerturneth the Scottes. folio xcix. Artycles of peace concluded bytwen the erle of Flaunders and hys sub∣iectes. folio cxxxix. Assembles made by lordes. fo. cxliiii. Annyuersary honourable was foū∣den in Poulys chyrche. fo. cxi. Auoutry was espyed. fo. ccxiii. BArons warre began to grow in the .xli. yere of kyng Henry the thyrde. folio. xxx. Barōs warre receyued and of newe kyndeled in the .xliiii. yere of Henry the thyrde. folio xxxiii. Barons assembled theyr companyes in the marches of wales in the .xlvi yere of the sayd kynge. fo. xxxiiii. Barons entred the cytye of London folio xxxv. Barōs dyscorded among them selfe. folio xxxviii. Barons were chasyd the .xiiii. yere of Edwarde the seconde. fo. lxxix. Batayle of Lewys bytwene kynge Henry the .iii. & the barons. fo. xxxvii Batayle called the whyte batayle, loke in the .xi. yere of Edwarde the seconde. folio. lxxvii. Batayle of Burbrydge bytwen king Edwarde the seconde and the barōs in hys .xiiii. yere. fo. lxxix. Batayle very cruell agaynste the Scotte called Halydon. fo. lxxxix. Batayle of Swyn or Sluce vppon the see / bytwene the Frenchmen and Edwarde the thyrde, in the .xv. yere of hys reygne. fo. xciii. Batayle of Cressey in the .xxi. yere of Edwarde the thyrde. fo. xcviii. Batayle of Potyers bytwene kynge Edwarde the thyrde and the French kynge. folio ciii. Batayle bytwene kynge Phylyp of Fraunce and the towne of Cassile in Flaunders. fo. cxvii. Batayle of Shrowysbery / in the .iii. yere of Henry the fourth. fo. clxvii. Batayle at Blak pole / in the .vi. yere of Henry the .iiii. fo. clxvii. Batayle of Agyncourt / in the thyrde yere of Henry the .v. fo. clxxii. Batayle of saynte Albons fyrste the xxxiii. yere of Henry the .vi. fo. cc. Blore heth felde apperys in ye .xxxvii yere of kynge Henry the .vi. fo. cciii. Batayle of Ludlowe / as it doth ap∣pere in folio cciii. Batayle of Northamton / as appe∣reth in folio cciiii. Batayle of wakefelde apperys and the batayle of sayn Albons. fo. ccv. Batayle of yorke or Towton or Shyrborne. fo. ccvi. Barnet felde. fo. ccxix. Batayle of Tewkesbury. fo. ccxx. Bartrā de Cleycō warred in Spayn and chasyd the kynge. fo. cix. Blasynge sterre apperys in folio .xc. and fo. cxviii. and fo. clix Blanke charters vses in Eng. fo. cli. Brekyng of peace bytwen England and Fraunce / loke in the .xliii. yere of kynge Edwarde the .iii. fo. cxi. Brest a stronge towne of Brytayne besyeged. fo. cxiii.
Benyuolence was fyrste foūded and graūted in Edwarde the .iiii. dayes folio ccxxv. Bysshop Groostehede and of his ac∣tes apperyth in ye .xxxiii. yere of kyng Henry the thyrde. folio xxvi. Bysshop of Exceter was beheded ap¦peryth in the .xviii. yere of Edwarde the seconde. folio lxxxii. Bysshop of Norwyche made warre in Spayne by the popes cōmaunde¦ment in the .vi. yere of Rycharde the seconde. folio cxliii. Bysshop of London hath a memory of the cytesyns of London. fo. cxlvii. Bysshop of wynchester lent to kyng Henry the fyfte .xx. thousand poūde. folio clxxvii. Bysshop of wynchester foresayd crea¦ted cardynall. folio. clxxx Bysshop of Salysbury was slayne in the ende of .xxviii. of Henry the .vi. as more playnly is shewed fo. cxcviii. Bysshop of Chychester called Rey∣nolde Pecok was abiured of heresye folio ccii. Boke of prophecy was founden by a Iewe in Spayne. folio xxiiii Blode of Cryste was broughte into westmynster by kynge Henry the .iii. folio xxv. Bonifacius pope of hys cōdycyons. folio. lxxi. Bull of the pope manyfested at Pou¦lys crosse. folio xxxiii Busshe, Baggot and Grene and of theyr actes. folio cli. Brytōs resyst ye Frenchmē. fo. xxxix. CHarles the .v. of that name & surnamed the fayre, and bro∣ther to Phylyp surnamed the longe, sonne of the .iiii. Phylyp, began hys reygne ouer the realme of Fraunce, in the yere of grace .M.iii. hundreth and .xxii / and the .xv. yere of the secōd Edwarde kynge of Englande, and reygned yeres .vi. folio. lxxxiiii. Cardynalles that were sent into En¦glande from the pope were robbed / appereth in the .ix. yere of Edwarde the seconde. folio lxxvi. Caen a stronge towne in Norman∣dye besyeged by kynge Edward the thyrde and won it. folio xcviii. Calys besyeged and gotten by kyng Edwarde the thyrde. folio xcix. Cardynall sent from the pope / labou¦red for peas. folio ciii. Castell of Pount was yolden vp by appoyntement. folio cxxv. Careckes .iii. were taken by the duke of Clarence and the erle of Kente. fo∣lio. clxvii. Charyte of kynge Lewys. folio i. Charles de Ualoys brother to Phy∣lyppe le Beawe & vncle vnto Char∣les the .v. foresayd dyed. folio. lxxxvi. Charles de Bloys was slayne in the batayle bytwene syr Iohn̄ Mount∣forte and the sayd Charlys. fo. cix. Charles the .vi. of that name & sonne of Iohn̄, bēganne to rule the French men, in the yere of our lorde .M.iii.C.lxiiii / & .xxxviii. yere of the thyrde Edwarde kynge of Englande / and reygned yeres .xvi. folio xxxvi. Charles the .vii. of ye name a yonge chylde and sonne of the .vi. Charlys, began hys reygne ouer Fraunce, in the moneth of september and yere of our lorde a thousand .iii. hūdreth and lxxx / and the thyrde yere of the secōde Rycharde then kyng of Englande / & reygned yeres .xlii. folio clv. Charles the .viii. of that name, and sonne vnto Charles the .vi. as sayen the Frenche authours / but the En∣glysshe wryters sheweth the cōtrary, as in the story of thys Charles shall appere / thys began to reygne ouer ye Frenchmen, in the yere of our lorde thousande .iii. hūdreth and .xxii / and the laste yere of Henry the .v. thenne kynge of England / & reygned yeres xxxvi. folio ccvii.
Chauntryes foūded in Poulys chur¦che in London. fo. cxi Cerymonyes for the coronacyon of kynge Henry the .iiii / as appereth. folio clxiii Creacyō of dukes by kyng Rychard the .ii. fo. cxliii Clement pope dyspleased, for that he myght gyue no bysshopryches withī the realme of Englande / in the .xviii yere of kyng Edwarde the .iii. as ape¦reth. fo. xcvi Cytezyns of London / are tolle free. folio xx Cytezyns of Londn were arrested. folio. xxx Clerkes of Orleaunces wythstande the kynge of Fraunces commaunde∣ment. fo. cxix Churche or monastery of westmyn∣ster was ended of buyldyng / as ape∣reth. fo. lviii Condycions made by the borough-maysters of the towne of Burgys a∣gaynst theyr erle. fo. lxxxvi Constable of Fraunce was murdred by the aduyse of Charles kyng of Na¦uerne. fo. cxxii Constable of the towre of London was drowned whose name was cal∣led syr Thomas Ramston̄ / as appe∣reth. folio clxviii Constantynoble was wonne by the Turkys / as it is shewed in. folio cxcix Colacyon made by the archebysshop of Caunterbury to the lordes for the deposycyon of kyng Rycharde the .ii. folio cliiii Conclusyon of maryage by kynge Henry the .vi. fo. cxcii Condycyons of kynge Lowys / as is shewed. fo. ccxxii Commynge of the emperoure into Fraunce and of hys honourable re∣ceyte. folio cxxxvii Composycyon was made betwene kynge Henry the syxte and the duke of yorke / as appereth. folio ccv Copy of a letter sent from Edwarde the .iii. vnto the Frenche kynge / and answere to the same made / loke in. folio. xcv Copy of an instrument made for de∣posyng of kyng Rycharde / as is she∣wed. folio cliii Copye of a byll put into the parlya∣ment house for the temporaltees / as is shewed. fo. clxix Copy of a letter sent by the bysshope of wynchester vnto the duke of Bed∣forde. folio clxxxi Copy of a pardon made by the kyng vnto the cytezyns of London / as ape¦reth. fo xli Correccyon of aduoutry / as is she∣wed. folio lxxiii Coronacion of quene Katheryne / as appereth. fo clxxvi. Courses of seruyce for the feest of the sayd coronacyon. fo. clxxvi Corps of kynge Henry the .v. was with great solempnite brought vnto the monastery of westminster / as ape¦reth. fo. clxxi Countesse of Henawde laboured to make a peace betwene kyng Edward the thyrd & kynge Phylyp of Fraūce folio xcv Couenauntes betwene the regente & the kynge of Nauerne are expressed and shewed. folio. cxxxi Couenauntes of maryage betwene kynge Henry the .v. and the Frenche kyng beholde in. fo. clxxv Crossed treers came fyrste into Eng∣lāde / in the .iii. yere of kyng Edward the .ii. folio lxxv Crucyfix of golde belongyng to sait Denys church in Fraunce was axed by the kyng of the monkes for ayde folio. cxx DAme Blaunche was ayded / by Phylip the French kynge as appereth. folio. lii
Dame Elynour Cobham was arre∣sted of treason / as it is shewed in. folio cxci Dauyd brother of Lewyn prynce of walys wrought treason / as it is she∣wed in. fo. lvii Dauyd aforesayd was taken. folio lviii Daunsynge wonderfull beholde. folio lix Derthe of corne. folio lx Dede knyght apered to one mayster Morres in walys. fo. xiii Derknesse intollerable fylle in Pau∣lys churche the bysshoppe beynge at masse. folio xxi Deuorce betwene Charlys ye French kynge and Blaūche / as it is shewed. folio lxxxiiii Dede corpsys what noumbre in one yere were buryed in London. fo. c Depe a towne in Normandy was strongly assayled by the lord Talbot. folio cxcii Denham esquyer toke the lorde Ry∣uers at Sand wyche. folio cciiii Dyscencyon amonge the lordes of Englande. fo. xxxii Dyscencion fyll amōge the lordes in Normandy. fo. cxix Dyscencion grewe betwene ye Frēche kynge and the kynge of Nauerne. folio cxxii Dyscencyon fylle amonge the Frēch men for cessynge of an ayde. folio cxxiii Dyscencyon grewe amonge the thre astates of the realme of Fraunce. folio cxxvi Dyuers inconuenyences fyll in Eng¦lande and in Fraunce / as is shewed. folio c Dyuerse vysyons and meruayles were sene in the ayer / as it is shewed. folio cviii Duke of Ostryche dyed / and the ho∣stages of kynge Rycharde were free delyuered. folio ix Duke of Lancasters actes. folio ciii Duke Iohn̄ of Lācastre made warre in Fraunce. folio cxi Duke of Lancastre passed thorugh Fraunce wythoute fyghte. folio cxiii Duke of Burgoyn complayneth vp¦pon syr Iohn̄ Chalous knyghte. folio cxviii Duke of Normandy maketh hys oracion to the cytesyns of Parys. folio cxxviii Duke foresayde was proclaymed regente of Fraunce / as it is shewed. folio cxxx Duke of Lancastre reentred Fraūce. folio cxxxvi Duke of Lācastre warred in Spayn̄ folio cxlv Duke of Glouceter spake sharpe wordes to kyng Rycharde the secōd. folio cxlix Duke of Glouceter was arested and murdered. folio cxlix Dukes of Herforde and of North∣folke fyll at dyscencyon for cause she¦wed. folio cl Duke of Lancastre claymed the crowne. folio cliii Duke of Orleaunce laboured agaīst the vnyuersyte of Parys. folio clx Duke of Orleaunce was slayne. folio clx Dukes of Orleaunce & of Burgoyn maketh new warre. fo. clx Duke of Burgoyne was slayne. folio clxiii Dukes and barons were put to deth for treason. folio clxv Duke of Clarence was slayn. folio clxxvii Duke of Glouceter was made pro∣tectour of Englande / in the fyrste yere of the reygne of kynge Henry the syxte and the duke of Bedforde, regente of Fraunce / as it is
shewed in. fo. c.lxxix Duke of Bedforde wynneth holdes in Fraunce / se in. fo. clxxx Duchesse of Holād was taken pryso∣ner / loke in. fo. clxxxi Duke of Alenson was delyuered for hys raunsom. fo. clxxxii Duke of Northfolke was in greate ieopardy of drownyng. fo. clxxxiii Duke of Burgoyne turned from the Englysshe partye to ye French partye as is shewed in. fo. clxxxviii Duke of Burgoyn layde syege to Ca¦lays. fo. clxxxix Dukes & erles were created / as ape∣reth in. fo. cxciii Duke of Suffolke was arrested. folio. cxcv Duke of Somerset was arrested as sheweth in. fo. c.xcviii Duke of yorke gathered people / as apereth in. fo. cxcviii Duke of yorke dyscharge of hys pro¦tectourshyp. fo. cci Duke of yorke and othe were attayn¦ted as apereth in. fo. cciiii Duke of Bukkyngham & many o∣ther were slayne. fo. cciiii Duke of yorke taketh the kynges royall see. fo. ccv Duke of yorke with other was slayn folio. ccv Duke of Burgoyne assisteth ye Frēch kynges sonne agaynst hys father / as is shewed in. fo. ccix Duke of Brytayn & other conspyred agayne theyr kyng. fo. ccix Duke of Somerset wyth other put to deth. fo. ccxv Duke of Clarence wyth other lāded at Dartmouh. fo. ccxviii Duke of Exceter was founde dede in the see. folio. ccxxi Duke Clarence was drowned in wyne. fo. ccxxii Duke of Glouceter was made pro∣tectour. fo. ccxxiiii Duke of Bukkyngham sheweth the tytle of kyng Rychard. fo. ccxxv Duke of Glouceter taketh possessyō at westmynster / as appereth. folio. ccxxv Duke of Bukkyngham cōspyreth a∣gaynst kyng Rychard / & was taken & beheded at Salysbury. fo. ccxxv Duke of Orleaūce was taken in ba∣tayll as is shewed. fo. ccxxviii Duke of Brytayne dyed whereby great warre foloweth / as it is she∣wed. fo. ccxxviii EDwarde the fyrste of that na∣me & sonne of Henry ye thyrde, surnamed Edwarde Longe shanke / began hys reygne ouer England the xvii. daye of Nouembre the morowe after saynt Edmond the archbisshop in the yere of our lorde .M.CC lxxii / & the .ii. yere of the .iii. Phylype than kynge of Fraunce / & reygned nobly yeres .xxxiiii. fo. lv Elyanoure mother to kyng Richard was enlarged. fo. iiii Edmounde Crouchbak was maried to the doughter of ye erle of Amnarle as apereth in. fo. xliiii Edmoūd wodstocke wroughte trea∣son. fo. lxxxviii Edward the sonne of Henry foresayd distressed the barons / as it is shewed folio. xxxix Edwarde forsayd dystressed the Ba¦rons the seconde tyme / as is shewed folio. xxxix Edwarde the holy kyng and confes∣sour was translated / as it shewed in folio. xliiii Edwarde was crossed into the holy lande / and of hys feates there done. folio. xlv Edwarde of Carnaruan / as apereth folio. lviii Edward the second called Edwarde Carnaruan, the sonne of the fyrst Ed¦warde / began hys domynyon ouer Englande in the moneth of Iuly
and yere of our lorde god .M.iii.C. & vii / and the .xxi. yere of the .iiii. Phy∣lyppe or Philip the fayre than kynge of Fraunce / and reygned yeres full xix. fo. lxxiiii. Edwarde the fyrst maryed to hys .ii. wyfe the Frenche kynges syster. folio. lxv. Edwarde the .iii. of that name, & son̄ of Edwarde the secōde and of dame Isabell the doughter of Philippe le Beawe, or the .iiii. Phylyp late kyng of Fraunce / whych Edwarde aboute the age of .xv. yeres began hys reygn ouer the realme of England the .xxv. daye of Ianuary, in the yere of grace M.iii.C. & .xxvi / and the .iiii. yere of Charles the fayre thā king of Fraūce the whyche reygned yeres .li. folio. lxxxvi. Edwarde Carnaruan / was mysera∣bly slayne as is shewed. fo. lxxxvii. Edwarde Bayloll was made kynge of Scottes. fo. lxxxviii. Edwarde the .iii. sayled into Braban wyth hys wyfe loke in. fo. xci. Edward the .iii. chalēged ye hole king¦dome of Fraunce. fo. xciii. Edward the eldest son̄ of the duke of yorke was electe for king of Englād loke in. fo. cc.vi. Edwarde the .iiii. of that name and eldest sone of Rychard duke of yorke whych was proclaymed heyre parāt to the crowne, began hys domynyon ouer the realme of Englande, in the iiii. day of Marche in ye yere of grace M.iiii.C.lx / & the .ii. yere of the .xi. Lo¦wys than kyng of Fraūce / & reygned at that tyme .viii. monethes & yeres viii. fo. cc.xiiii. Edwarde the .iiii. beforenamed wan the felde of Barnet vpon Ester daye agayne kyng Hēry the .vi. in the yere of grace .M.iiii.C.lxxi. & yere of Lo∣wys the French kyng aforesayd / and reygned after that day .x. monethes / and yeres .xii. So that fyrste & laste he reygned ouer .vii. monethes assyg¦ned to Henry the .vi. dayes .xxxvi. mo¦nethes & yeres .xxi. or wyth the sayde monethes of Henry the .vi. set to Ed∣wardes reygne make .xxii. yeres and odde dayes. fo. cc.xx. Edwarde the .v. of that name & sonne of Edward the .iiii. of the age of .xiiii. yeres and lasse, began to reygne as kyng of Englād the .x. daye of Apryll & yere of our lord .M.iiii.lxxxiii. & the xxxv. yere of the .xi. Lowys thā kyng of Fraunce / and reygned tyll the .xx. day of Iuly next folowyng / in which season passed dayes .lxxii. folio. cc.xxiiii. Elizabeth the holy womā doughter of the kyng of Hungery. fo. xxi. Eleanoure quene & of her progenye / loke in. fo. lxi. Emperoure of Almayne came into England. fo. c.lxvii Emperour forsayd came agayn into thys lande. fo. c.lxxii Enuye of Frenchmen. fo. v Enguerram was put to deth. folio. lxxxiii. Epytaphye of Rychard the fyrste / as apereth in. fo. x Epytaphye of Frederyke the empe∣rour. fo. xxv Epytaphye of Edward the fyrst / loke in. fo. lxviii. Epytaphye of Edward the .iii. folio. cxvi Epytaphye of kyng Rycharde the .ii. loke in. fo. clxvi Erthquake fell in Englād. fo. xxv Erle of Penbroke was ouerset with Frenchmen & other. fo. cxiii Expressemēt of the grudges atwene kyng Rychard the fyrst & the Frēche kynge. fo. iiii Eugeny pope and of hys actes. folio. clxxxvii FAlse Cryst was crucyfyed / as is shewed in. fo. xix
False clerke of Oxenforde whych fay¦ned hym selfe madde, came to wod∣stocke entēdyng to haue slayne king Henry the .iii. fo. xxii Faytes or actes of warre done at Dō¦stable. fo. xcvi Fysshes wonderfull takē in the .xxxv yere of kyng Hēry the .vi. fo. cci Floren̄ of golde was made by kynge Edward the .iii. fo. xcvii Fryers mynors came fyrst into Eng¦lande / loke in. fo. xix Fryers Augustynes in the .xxxv. yere of kynge Hēry the .iii. buylded theyr house, in a place in walys called wod¦hous as is shewed. fo. xxvi Fryers were put to deth loke in. folio. clix Frenche kyng sent for hys doughter that was kynge Rychardes wyfe. folio. clix Frēch nauy dyscōfyted. fo. clxxiiii. Froste excedyng / loke in. fo. clxviii GAscoynes make warre agaīst Frenchmē borderers in kyng Charles the .v. days as is shewed in folio. lxxxvi Gabell or taxe reysed vppon salte in Fraunce / loke in. fo. cxix Guynes castell was yoldē to English¦men / loke in. fo. ci Grudge betwene Baldwyn and his monkes. fo. vii Grudge arose betwene kyng Iohn̄ & hys lordes. fo. xvi. Grudge and dyspleasure betwene ye bysshop of wynchester and the duke of Glouceter / it is shewed in. folio. clxxxi Grudge and murmure toke place a∣monge the nobles of Fraunce / as ap¦pereth. fo. cc.xxviii HArme done by thonder / as ap∣pereth in. fo. cvii Hawe wythout reuerence of the sa∣crament was slayne in the churche. folio. cxli Hastynges lord Chamberleyne was sodeynly put to deth. fo. ccxxiiii Henry the thyrd of that name & sonn̄ of king Iohn̄, a chyld of .x. yeres / be∣gan to reygne ouer Englāde, in the moneth of Octobre, and yere of oure lorde .M.CC. & .xvii / and the .xxxvii. yere of Phylype thā kyng of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .lvi fo. xviii Henry Bolyng broke ye .iiii. of ye name and sonne & heyre of Iohn̄ of Gaunt duke of Lācastre / the whyche Iohn̄ was secōd sonne of Edwarde the .iii. lyuyng after theyr father, or the .iii. sonne to rekyn prynce Edward / this Henry after the deposiciō of Rychard in the ende of the moneth of Septē∣bre, begā to reygne ouer Englāde, in the yere of our lorde .M.iii.C.lxxx. & xix / and the .xix. yere of Charles ye .vii than kyng of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .xiii. fo. clxiii Henry the .vi. of that name & sonn̄ of Henry the .v. of ye name & sonne of Hē¦ry the .iiii. began hys reygne ouer the realme of Englād, vppon the morne after saynt Cuthbertys day or ye .xi. day of Marche, in the ende of ye yere of grace .M.iiii.C. & .xiii / and ye .xxii yere of Charles the .vii. than kyng of Fraūce / and reygned yeres .ix. fo .clxx Hēry the .v. & dame Kateryne dough∣ter of Charles the .vi. or .vii. a chylde of halfe yere of age / begā hys reygne ouer Englād & Fraūce, in the ende of the moneth of Iuly, and yere of our lord .M.iiii.C. & .xxii / and ye fyrst yere of Charles the .vii. or viii. ye thāne a∣monge the Frenchemē was allowed for kyng / and reygned yeres .xxxix. folio. clxxix Henry of Derby wyth other landed at Rauēspore / as is shewed. fo. cli Henry the fyfte foresayd sayled into Fraunce / loke in. fo. clxxii Henry Derby forenamed and of hys
issue is shewed. fo. cxliiii Henry the .iiii. aforesayd maryed the duchesse of Brytayne. fo. clxvi Heresye of Iohn̄ wyclyf apereth. folio. cxlvii Heretykes taken in saynt Gyles feld and after brent. fo. clxxi Homage done by lordes of Almay∣ne, to Rycharde erle of Cornewayll brother to kyng Henry the thyrde. folio xxxviii Homage done by the kyng of Scot∣tes to kyng .E. the .iii. fo. lxxxix Hughe holy bysshoppe of Lyncolne dyed. fo. xi Iohn̄ brother to Rycharde the fyrste was ordeyned kynge of Englande, in the moneth of Apryll & yere of our lord .M.C.xcix / & the .xx. yere of the second Phylyp than kyng of Fraunce / and reygned yere .xvii. The interdiccion of thys lande, begā in the .vi. yere of thys kynge, & endu∣red tyll the .xiii. yere. Henry the sonne of Alwyn, in the .x. yere of thys kynge was admytted for the fyrste mayre of Lōdō. And in the sayd .x. yere of king Iohn̄, London brydge was begon to be made of stone. fo. x Iohn̄ the fyrst in Fraunce of that name & sonne of Phylyp de Ualoys, began hys reygne ouer the lande of Fraunce, in the moneth of August & yere of our lord .M.iii.C. & .l / and the xxxiiii. yere of ye thyrd Edward kyng of England / & reygned yeres. xiiii. Thys kynge was taken prysoner of Edwarde, the prynce of Englande at the batayll of Poytyers in Fraūce folio. cxxiii Iaphet was gotten by kynge Ry∣chard. fo. v Iakys de Artyuyle fauoured the En¦glysshe partye. fo. xciii Iacke Strawe & wyll waw made an insurreccyon. fo. cxlii Iacke Sharpe was taken and putt to deth. folio. clxxxv Iacke Cade and hys felowes. folio. cxcvi Iacke Cade wroughte moche of hys wyll in London / & after robbed & so slayne. fo. cxcvii Iewes were banysshed thys lande. folio. lx Iewes were spoyled & slayne. fo. clv. Iohn̄ brother of kyng Rychard was prowd. fo. iii Iohn̄ reconcyled to hys brother ape∣reth in. fo. viii Iohn̄ duke of Lancaster dyed / as is shewed. fo. c.l. Iohn̄ duke of Bedforde dyed. folio. clxxxviii Inquysycyons were made vpon the rulers of London / as is shewed in. folio. xxix Iordan of the ile of Gascoyne grewe out of kynde. fo. lxxxv Inglysshe lordes wanne fyrst vppon Frenchmen. fo. xcviii Inglysshe soudyours slayne vnder safe conduyt. fo. cxxii Itenerarii plees were holden in South werke. fo. xxxi Ile of Ely holdeth banysshed men. folio. xlii Ile of Rodes fyrst wonne. fo. lxxv Isabell late wyfe vnto kynge Ry∣charde / was maryed to the eldest son̄ of the duke of Orleaunce. fo. clx Issue & dyssent of syr Roger Morty∣mer. fo. cxliiii Iustyces or iuges punysshed. fo. lx Iustes holden in Smythfelde. folio. cxliiii KInge Iohn̄ and hys lāde was enterdyted. fo. x Kynge Iohn̄ was reconcyled to the churche. fo. xvi Kyng Henry the .iii. sayled into Nor∣mandy. fo. xxiiii Kynge Henry the .iii. in proper {per}sone sat in iugement. fo. xxix
Kynge Iohn̄s fury serche in. fo xiiii Kynge Iohn̄ of Fraunce was taken prysoner. folio ciii Kyng Iohn̄ was delyuered. fo. cvii Kyng Iohn̄ dyed in Englande. folio cviii Kyng Rychard sought many prouy∣syons. folio iiii Kynge Rycharde sayled into ye holy lande. folio iiii Kynge Rychard was takē prysoner. folio vi Kyng Rychard was delyuered. folio. vii Hynge Rycharde sayled into Nor∣mandy. folio ix Kynge Rycharde assayled the castell of Gysors. folio x Kynge Rycharde was slayne. fo. x Kynge Henry the thyrd frayneth coū¦sayll of the mayre. folio. xxxiiii Kynge Henry sayled into Fraunce to be presente at the Frenche kynges parlyament. folio. xxxv Kynge Henry was taken of hys ba∣rons. folio xxxvii Kynge Henry layd hys syege to Lon¦don as it is shewed. folio xliii Kynge Henry chosed shyrefes. folio xliii Kynge Lowys toke vppon hym the crosse. folio xlviii Kynge Edwarde the fyrst buylde ca∣stelles in walys. folio lviii Kynge Edwarde sayled into Fraūce. folio lix Kynge Edwarde the .ii. was taken / & also resygned the crowne. fo. lxxxii Kynge Edward the .iii. came secretly to London. folio xcvi Kynge Edwarde warred sharply in Fraunce. folio xcvii Kynge Edwarde chased the Spa∣nyardes from the see. fo. ci Kynge Edwarde yode into Scot∣lande. fo. cii Kynge of Scottes was delyuered. folio ciiii Kynge Edward spedde hym toward Parys. fo. cv Kynge of Nauerne was sodaynly ta¦ken / as it is shewed. fo. cxxiii Kynge of Nauerne was set at large. folio cxxvii Kynge Edwarde warred newly in Fraunce. fo. cxxxv Kynge Iohan was receyued into Fraunce. fo. cxxxv Kynge of Nauerne became feodory vnto the French kynge. fo. cxxxvi Kynge of Ermonye asked ayde of kynge Rycharde the .ii. fo. cxliii Kyng Rychard ayded the Ianuayes folio cxlv Kyng Rychard maryed the Frenche kynges doughter. fo. cxlvii Kyng Richard sayled into Irelande. folio cli Kyng Richarde was myserably put to dethe. fo. clxv Kyng Henry the .iiii. maryed the du∣chesse of Brytayne. fo. clx Kyng Henry the .v. sayled into Nor∣mandy. fo. clxxiii Kynge Henry maryed the Frenche kynges doughter. fo. clxxv Kynge Henry was receyued into Lō¦don. fo. clxxvi Kyng Henry and hys wyfe sat crow∣ned in Parys. fo. clxxvii Kyng Henry the .vi. shewed hys ver∣tue beholde. fo. clxxix Kyng Henry was dubbed knyghte. folio clxxxii Kinge Hēry was crowned. fo. clxxxiii Kynge Henry was crowned at Pa∣rys. fo. clxxxv Kynge of Scottes was murdered. folio cxc Kyng Hēry the .vi. was taken. fo. ccv Kyng Edward the .iiii. was receyued into London. fo. ccvii Kynge Edwarde ayded the duke of Burgoyne. fo. ccxiii Kyng Edwarde spoused dame Eliza¦beth Graye. fo. ccxvi
Kynge Edwarde fledde thys lande. folio ccxviii Kynge Henry was taken oute of the towre. fo. ccxviii Kynge Edwarde was proclaymed vsurper. fo. ccxix Kynge Edwarde landed at Rauyn∣spore. fo. ccxix Kynge Edwarde repossessed / as ape∣reth. folio. ccxx Kyng Hēry the .vi. dyed in the towre of London. fo. ccxx Kyng Edwardes chyldren were takē out of seyntwary. fo. ccxxiiii LAzars of Languedok were brent. fo. lxxxiiii Letter sente by the barons to kynge Henry. fo. xxxvii Lewelyn prynce of walys rebelled. folio lvi Lewelyn was slayne / as appereth. folio lvii Letter takked vpō the crosse in chepe folio. lxxxi Lordes assemble at Arundell / as ape¦reth. folio cxlix Lordes put to deth. fo. clxxii Lordes fledde from Lodlowe feelde. folio. cciii Lordes proclaymed traytours / as is shewed. folio cciiii Lordes came to London. fo. cciiii Lordes of Fraunce warre vpō theyr kynge. fo. ccx Lordes contynue theyr malyce / as is shewed. fo. ccxi Lordes dyscorde wythin them selfe. folio ccxii Lorde Morley appeled the erle of Salysbury / as it is shewed in. fo∣lio. clxv Lorde Straunge / and syr Iohanne Trussell fyghte in the churche for cause shewed in. folio clxxiiii Lorde Talbot was slayne / as appe∣reth. fo. cc Lorde Egremonde was commytted to Newgate / as is shewed. fo. ccii Lorde wellys conspyred agayne the kynge. folio ccxviii Lorde chamberlayne beheded / as is shewed. fo. ccxx Losse of Normandy / as is shewed. folio cxcviii Lowys sonne vnto the French kyng warred in Englande. fo. xvii Lowys retourned into Fraunce / as appereth. fo. xviii Lowys sayled into the holy lande. folio xxv Lowys gaue sentence agayne the ba¦rons. fo. xxxvi Lowys the .ix. of that name and son̄ of Phylyp the seconde, beganne hys reygne ouer the Frenchemen, in the yere of oure lorde .M.CC. and .xxiii / and the .vi. yere of the thyrde kynge Henry than kyng of Englande / and reygned yeres .iii. By thys kynge re∣tourned the blode of Charles into ye possessyon of the crowne of Fraunce. folio xlvi Lowys the .x. of that name a chylde of .xii. yeres, and sonne of the aboue∣named the .ix. Lowys whyche is na∣med saynt Lowys / began his reygne ouer Fraunce, in the yere of our lord M.CC. and .xxvi / and the .ix. yere of the iii. Henry than kinge of Englād / and reygned yeres .xliii / as appereth folio. xlvii Lowys the .xi. by accompt and sonne of Phylyp the .iiii, beganne to reygn ouer Fraunce, in the yere of our lord M.CCC. and .xv / and the .viii. yere of the seconde Edwarde than kynge of Englande, and reygned yeres .ii. folio lxxxiii Lowys the .xii. of ye name afte the ac∣cōpt of thys boke, & .x. after the frēche accōpt, wherof ye cause is before she∣wed, son̄ of the laste Charles / begā to rule ye Frenchmē, in ye yere of our lord M.iiii.C. and .lviii / & .xxxvi. yere of Hēry the .vi. thā kyng of Englande, &
reygned yeres .xxvi. fo. ccix Lowys refused lordes company and counsayll. fo. ccix Lowys rescueth Parys. fo. ccx Losse of townes and castelles in Nor¦mandy. folio cxxxvii MAruayles sene in the fyrma∣ment. folio xii Mayre of London presenment / loke in. folio xxvii Mayr and hys bretherne foūd gylty in hurtyng the cōmons. fo. xxix Mayre and cytezeyns agreed to the lordes. fo. xxxi Macys of syluer were fyrste graūted to offycers of London. fo. xci Men of Norwyche enraged. fo. xlv Manhode of Mathew de Roya. foli. liiii Marchaunte straungers encroched vpō the cytezyns of Lōdon and were punysshed. fo. lix Maddocke a walshman rebelled / as it is shewed. fo. lxi Mariage of the .ii. Edward. fo. lxxiiii Malyce sprange amonge the lordes of Flaunders. fo. lxxxv marueylous heyle fylle. fo. lx Mychaell Tony mayre of London adiuged / loke in. fo. lvi mortmayne was fyrst enacted. fo. lvi Mortymer was howgely auaunced. folio lxxxvii Mortymer was put to deth / as it is shewed. fo. lxxxviii money borowed of the cytye of Lon∣don. folio xcii Martyn Pysdo Parycyen / was put to cruell deth. fo. cxxxv maner of cysme in the church of Ro∣me / loke in. fo. cxxxviii Maner of the metyng of the kynges of Englande & of Fraunce. fo. cxlvii many knyghtes of the bathe made. folio clxiii Maruayles of Thamys. fo. clxx masses ordeyned by kyng Henry the fyfte / as it is shewed in. folio. clxxviii Maner of treaty betwene the landes of Englande and of Fraunce / loke in folio clxxxviii maryage was dyspoynted. fo. cxcii Maryage concluded. fo. cxciii manhode of chalons. fo. cxcv Maximilian and the Frenche kynge dyscorden. fo. ccxxviii Margaret syster vnto Edwarde the iiii. departed from London towarde the see. fo. ccxvii monycyon dyuyne was gyuen to the Frenche kynge. fo. clviii Mountague a noble man was slayn folio clx mummyng made for treason / as is shewed. fo. clxv Murder was punysshed. fo. clxvii NOumbre of wardes in ye citye of London. fo. ii Names of twelfe perys of England. folio xxx New tolle was brought vp. fo. xliiii Nycholas Brembre wyth other was put to deth. fo. cxliiii Nauye of Frenchemen dystressed / as is shewed. fo. lv Newe coyne of syluer was stryken. folio. lvii New dyspleasure kynge Rycharde toke agayne ye cytye of London. fo. cl Newe coyne of golde smitten / as ap∣pereth in. fo. clxx OCtoboon the popes legate was pursued of the clergy of Eng∣lande for causes shewed in. fo. xxii Occasyon of the fraye in Fletestrete. folio. cxlv Occasyon of dyspleasure betwene kynge Rycharde and the duke of Glouceter. fo. cxlix Of the chere and curious receyuyng of kyng Henry by the Frēnche kyng. folio xxxii Offycers charged and dyscharged /
as it is shewed. folio. xxxiii Of kyng Iohn̄s pledges. fo. cviii Ordre of seruytoures in the tyme of quene Katherins coronaciō. fo. clxxvi Orleaunce that cytye was besyeged folio. clxxxii Othes sworne by the kynges of Eng¦lande and of Fraunce for peace ke∣folio. cvii Olyuer Dāman and Danyell some∣tyme chyef counsayllours of Lowys the Frenche kynge were hanged / as appereth. fo. ccxxviii PReface of thys werke / as ape∣reth. fo. I Peace was taken betwene the kyn∣ges of Englande and of Fraunce. folio xi Phylyp kynge of Fraunce warred vpon kyng Iohn̄. fo. xi Phylyp brake the peace. fo. xii Pope Innocente sente vnto kynge Iohn̄. fo. xiii Parlyamente holden at London. fo∣lio. xix Pyers of Pountfret for hys vertue put to deth. fo. xvii Parlyament holden at Mertone. folio xxii Periurye was punysshed / as appe∣reth. fo. xxv Parlyament holden at Oxenforde. as apereth. fo. xxx Parlyament holden at westmynster. folio xxxi Parlyament holden at Oxenforde. as is shewed. fo. xxxvi Parlyament holden at westmynster. folio xxxviii Parlyament holden at westmynster. folio xlv Peace was made betwene the kynge and Gylbert de Clare / as is shewed. folio xliii. Punysshement of Londoners / as is shewed. fo. xl Phylyp the thyrde of that name and sonne of saynte Lowys, was made kynge of Fraunce, in the yere of our lorde .M.CC.lxx / and the .liii. yere of the thyrde Henry than kynge of Eng¦lande / and reygned yeres .xv. fo. li Phylyp the .iiii. of that name and son̄ of the .iii. Phylyp la beawe or fayre / began to reygne ouer Fraunce, in ye yere of our lorde a .M.CC.lxxxvi / & the .xiiii. yere of the fyrste Edwarde than kyng of England / and reygned yeres .xxxix. fo. lxviii Phylyp the .v. of that name and sur∣named the longe, sonne of the fourth Philyppe and brother to Lowys the xi. by accompt / begā hys reygne ouer Fraunce, in the yere of grace a .M.iii C. and .xvii / & the .x. yere of Edwarde the .ii. than kynge of Englande / and reygned yeres .v. fo. lxxxiii Phylyppe de Ualoys, erle of Ua∣loys, and the sonne of Charlys de Ualoys brother to the fourthe Phi∣lippe / was nat wythoute some stryfe chosen and ordeyned for protectoure of the lande of Fraunce, and after kyng of the same, the .ii. daye of Fe∣bruary, in the yere of oure lorde .M.iii.C. and .xxviii / and the .ii. yere of Edwarde the .iii. than kyng of Eng∣lande / and reygned in greate trouble yeres .xxii. fo. cxvi Phylyppes actes in Italye / as appe¦reth. folio. liiii Parlyament holden at westmynster. folio lvi Plees remoued from London / as is shewed. fo. lvi Punysshement for murdre / as appe∣reth. folio. lviii Parlyament holden at westmynster folio. lix Parlyament holden at London / as apereth. folio lxxv Peace concluded betwene Fraunce & Flaundres. fo. lxxiii Parlyament holden at London / as apereth. fo. lxxxviii
Parlyament holden at westmynster as is shewed in. fo. xci Parlyament holden at Northamptō as is shewed. folio xli Parlyament holdē at yorke. fo. lxxix Parlyament holden at Northamp∣ton / as appereth in. fo. lxxxvii Parlyament holden at Salysbury / as appereth in. folio lxxxvii Parlyament holden at Burye / as is shewed. folio. cxciiii Parlyament holden at Couentre be∣holde in. folio cciiii Parlyament holden at Leyceter / as is shewed. folio clxxi Parlyament holden at Leyceter cal¦led Battys / as is shewed. fo. clxxxii Paulys steple sette on fyre. fo. cxciii Pagentes and other ordenaunces made by Lōdoners for the receyuyng of the kynge. fo. clxxxv Parys was loste by treason / as it is shewed. fo. clxii Peace concluded betwene the regent and the kyng of Nauerne. fo. cxxxv Peter kynge of Castyle was behe∣ded / as is shewed in. fo. cxi Peryn was drawē out of the church / and hanged / as is shewed. fo. cxxix Plees put in exercyse for the countre of Arthoys. folio cxvii Plees remoued frome London to yorke / as is shewed in. fo. cxlvi Pryde of the Frenche kynge / as it is shewed in. fo. lxxiii Prynce Edwarde maryed the erle of Henawdes doughter. fo. lxxxi QUene hythe was fyrste let to ferme to the cytesyns of Lon∣don / as appereth. fo. xxvi Quest passed betwene the abbot of westmynster and the cytye of Londō as is shewed in. fo. xxxv Quene of Englande sayled into Fraunce for cause. fo. lxxxi Quene of Englande was proclay∣med enemye. fo. lxxxi Quene foresayd landed in England by strength. fo. lxxxi Quene Anne was speciall good lady to the cytye of London. fo. cxlvi Quene Anne dyed. fo. cxlvii Quene Margarete was receyued of the Londoners. fo. cxciii Quene Margarete made a voyage into Englande. fo. ccxv Quene Margaret was taken / as is shewed in. fo. ccxx RIcharde the fyrst of that name and sonne of Hēry the second, began to reygne in Englande, in the yere of our lorde .M.C.xci / & the .xi. yere of the second Phylyp / & reygned yeres wyth odde monethes .x. In the fyrste yere of thys kynge the cytye of London was commytted to the rule of two baylyfes / whyche so cōtynued tyll the .x. yere of kyng Iohn̄, as it is shewed in. fo. iii Rycharde the .ii. of that name, & sonn̄ of prynce Edwarde sonn̄ of Edward the .iii / began hys reygne ouer Eng∣lande, the .xii. daye of Iuny, in ye yere of our lord .M.iii.C.lxxvii / & the .xiii yere of the .v. Charles than kynge of Fraunce / and reygned yeres .xxii. folio cxlii Rycharde the .iii. of that name & bro∣ther vnto Edwarde the .iiii. beynge duke of Glouceter and protectour of England, began to vsurpe the .xxvi. daye of Iuny / in the yere of our lord M.iiii.C.lxxxiii. & yere of Lowis thā kyng of Fraunce / and so contynued yeres .ii. full / & as moche as from the xx. day of Iuny to the .xxii. day of Au¦gust / by dayes .lvii. fo. ccxxv Ranulphe erle of Chester and of hys doughters. fo. xxi Rayne excedyng. fo. lxxvii Resygnacyon of the duchye of Nor∣mandy. folio xxxii Resygnacyon of kynge Rycharde. folio clii
Resygnacyon shewed in the parlya∣ment. folio cliii Robert Knollys knyghte and of hys feates. folio ciiii Robert Knollys toke saynt Omiers / and other holdes. fo. cxi SAuoye a place of honoure in London was brent by the cō∣mons. folio. cxlii Saynt mary Oueryes in South∣werke was fyrste bylded. fo. xv Saīt Stephyns chapell of westmyn¦ster begonne. fo. cix Syege layde to saynte Omyers folio xciiii Syege layde to Amyās. fo cxxxiiii Scottysshe kynge dyd homage to kyng Iohn̄. fo. xi Scottes brekyng theyr othe. fo. lxiii Scottes were subdued. fo. lxiii Scottes had peace to theyr aduaun∣tage. fo. lxxxvii Scottes were agayne ouerturned. folio lxxxviii Scotisshe kynge taken prysoner. folio cii Spensers were banysshed. fo. lxxviii Spensers bothe the father and the some were put to deth. fo. lxxxii Sōne was turned to the coloure of blode. folio lxxx TAnner a vyllayne surmysed hym heyre to the crowne of Englande. fo. lxxvi Table of syluer was gyuen to kyng Rychard. fo. cxlvii Templers knyghtes of religyō were dystroyed. fo. lxxii The sentence agayne kynge Iohan was denounced. fo. xiii The wardys of London were cessed folio xcii Thre fyftenes were graunted at one tyme. folio cxi Tytle or ryghte whyche the kyng of Englande hath vnto Scotlāde / se in folio lxii Tytle of Edwarde the thyrde whych he hadde to the crowne of Fraunce. folio cxvi Tytle of the duke of Glouceter had to the crowne was shewed at Paules crosse. fo. ccxxiiii WArdes and churches wythin Lō¦don. fo. ii Uaryaunce began betwene the pope and kyng Iohn̄. fo. xii Uaryaunce betwene Londō & North ampton fo. xxxiii warre betwene the kynge of Englād and of Fraunce. fo. xiii warre was concluded betwene the sayd landes. fo. cxxxiiii warre betwene kynge Iohn̄ and hys lordes. fo. xvii warre was made in Normandy / as appereth. fo. lxii warre made in Guyan wyth fortune therof. fo. lxxx warre betwene the Frenche kynge & the kynge of Nauerne. fo. cxxiii warde and maryage of heyres was graunted to the kynge. fo. xx wyllyam walworthe slewe Iacke Strawe. folio cxlii Usurers were punysshed / as it appe∣reth. folio cxxi ☞Here endeth the seconde Table.
THE PROLOGE. NOw for as mych as we be comen to the tyme, that officers were cho¦sen and chargyd wyth the rule of the cytye of Lon∣don / yt is necessary that here we do shewe what offycers they were, & of the name that to them was admitted ad gyuen. Then ye shall vnderstand that at the commynge of wyllyam cō¦querour into thys lande, as euydent¦ly apperyth by the charter of hym to the cytezens of London graunted / that before those dayes and then, the rulers of the sayde cytezens were na∣med Port greuys / whyche worde ys diriuate or made of .ii. saxon wordes, as port and greue. Port is to meane a town, and greue is ment for a gar∣dyen or ruler / as who wolde meane, gardeyn, ruler, or keper of the town. These of olde tyme, wyth the lawes and customys then vsyd within thys cytye / were regystred in a boke cal∣led the Domysday in Saxon tunge then vsed. But in later dayes when the sayde lawes and customes alte∣ryd and chaunged, and for consyde∣racyon also that the sayde boke was of small hande and sore defacyd, yt was the lesse set by, so that yt was en¦befelyd or loste / so that the remem∣braunce of suche rulers as were be∣fore the dayes of thys Rycharde the fyrst, whose story shall next ensue, are loste and forgoten. wherfore nowe I shall begynne at the fyrste yere of the sayde fyrste Ry∣charde, the whyche of some wryters is surnamed Cure de Lyon / and so contynew the names of all offycers, as well baylyuys, mayres, and shry∣ues, tyll the laste yeres of Rycharde the thyrde kynge in dede and not of ryght. whyche baylyues I shall ap∣poynt the rule of, from Mychelmas to Mychelmas / and the mayres frō suche tyme and season as nowe ys ac¦customyd & vsed, that is to saye from the daye of Symon and Iude vnto the same feste nexte ensuynge / vpon whyche daye the newe mayre taketh hys charge at the Guylde hall, and the olde mayre is there and then dys¦charged of the sayde offyce of may∣raltye. Nowe wolde I fayne In wordes playne Some honour sayne And brynge to mynde Of that auncyent cytye That so goodly is to se And full trewe euer hath be And also full kynde. To prynce and kynge That hath borne iuste rulynge Syn the fyrste wynnynge Of thys Ilande by Brute So that in great honour By passynge of many a showre It hath euer borne the flowre And laudable brute. Of euery cytye and towne To seche the worlde rowne Neuer yet caste downe As other many haue be As Rome and Carthage Hierusalem the sage wyth many other of age In storye as ye maye se Thys so oldely founded Is so surely groundyd That no man may confounde yt It is so sure a stone That yt is vppon sette For though some haue yt thrette wyth manasses grym and great yet hurte hadde yt none Cryste is the very stone
That the cytye is sette vppon whyche from all hys foon Hath euer preseruyd yt By meane of dyuyne seruyce That in contynuall wyse Is kepte in deuout guyse wythin the mure of yt As houses of relygyon In dyuerse places of thys towne whyche in great deuocyon Ben euer occupyed when one hath done another begyn So that of prayer they neuer blyn Suche order is these houses wythin wyth all vertue allyed. The paryshe chyrches to reken Of whych nomber as I shall speken wherin speke many preste and deken And Cryste dayly they serue By meane of whyche sacryfyce I truste that he in all wyse Thys cytye for her seruyce Doth euer more preserue. This citie I meane is Troynouaūt where honour & worshyp doth haūte wyth vertue and ryches accordaūte No cytye to yt lyke To speke of euery commodytye Fleshe and fyshe and all dentye Cloth and sylke wyth wyne plentye That is for hole and syke. Brede and ale wyth spycys fyne wyth houses fayre to soupe & dyne Nothynge lackynke that is cōdygne For man that is on molde wyth ryuers freshe & holsom ayer wyth women that be good and fayre And to thys cytye done repayre Of straungers many folde. The vytayle that herein is spente In thre housholdes dayly tente Betwene Rome and ryche Kent Are none may theym compare As of the mayre and shriues twayne what myght I of the iustyce sayne Kepte wythin this cytye playne It were longe to declare. For though I shulde all day tell Or that wyth my ryme dogerell Myght I not yet halfe do spell Thys townes great honoure Therfore shortely as I began Pray for yt both chylde and man That yt may continue and To bere of all the floure And so to dwell in reste and peace Good lorde graunt that yt not sease But euer to haue more encreace If yt be thy wyll And to contynue the olde fame The kynges chaūber yt ye right name London to kepe wythout blame As yt hath hyther tyll. who so hym lyketh these vsys to rede with fauour I pray he will thē spell. Let not the rudenesse of theym hym lede, For to despraue thys ryme dogerell. Som {per}te of ye honour it doth you tel Of thys olde cytye Troynouaunt. But not therof the halfe dell / Cōnynge in the maker is so adaunt But though he had the eloquence Of Tully, and the moralytye Of Seneck, and the influence Of the swyte sugred Armonye, Of that fayre ladye Caliope: yet had he not cōnynge perfyght, Thys cytye to prayse in eche degre / As yt shulde duely aske of ryght. HEre after I shall declare the wardes of this foresayd citye / with also ye parysh chyrches yt stande within the sayd wardes. And after I shal shew to you ye housys of religyō
standyng in the cyrcuyte of the same cytye. The warde of the towre wherin are thre paryshe chyrches. .i. Saynt Olaue Alhalown at Barkynge. Saynt Dunstane. Byllyngysgate. .ii. Saynt Botulphe Saynt George in podynge lane Saynt Andrewe in Estchepe Saynt Margarete callyd Patens. Saynte Mary hyll. Lande brydge warde. .iii. Saynte Benet at Grace chyrche Saynt Leonarde in Estchepe Saynt Margarete in Brydgstret Saynte Magne in Brydgestrete. Dowgate warde .iiii. Saynte Laurence Pountenay Alhalown the more Alhalown the lesse. walbroke warde. .v. Saynt Iohn̄ in walbroke Saynt Mary Bothawe Saynte Swythyne in Candelwyke strete. Saynte Stephan in walbroke Saynt Mary wolchyrch in ye pultry Saynt Syth in Boclerysbury. Candelwyke strete warde .vi. Saynte Martyne Orgor Saynt Clement Saynt Mychaell in Crockyd lane Saynte Mary Apchyrche. Langbourne warde .vii. Alhalown Stanis in Lumbarstrete Saynt Gabryell Saynt Denys in Fanchyrche strete Saynt Edmund Saynte Nycolas Acon Saynt Mary wolnoth in Lumbar∣de strete. Algate warde. .viii. Saynt Andrewe vndershaft Saynt Kateryns by Crystes chyrch Saynt Kateryne Colman. Porte Sowkyn warde. .ix. Saynt Botulphe without Algate. Lyme strete warde. .x. Saynt Mary Naxe. Byshoppes gate warde. .xi. Saynt Botholphe at the gate Saynt Alborgth. Alhalowns wythin saynt Helyns. Cornehyll warde .xii. Saynt Mychaell Saynt Petyr Bradstrete warde. .xiii. Saynt Martyne Owtewyche Saynt Benet Fynke Saynt Barthelmew the lytle Saynt Crystofer. Saynt Petyr the poore Alhalowns in the walle. Colmanstrete warde .xiiii. Saynt Stephan. Saynte Olaff in the Iury. Saynt Margaret in Lothbery. Chepe warde. .xv. Saynt Laurence in the Iury Saynt Mary Bowe Alhalowns in Hony lane Saynte Mary of Colchyrche Saynt Myldredys in the Pultry Saynt Benet shorhogge Saynte Martyne Ponyers Saynt Martyn in Iremongerlane Saynt Mary. Cordwayner strete warde .xvi. Saynt Mary or Aldermary
Saynt Ancelyne Saynte Pancras. Quene hyth warde .xvii. Saynte Mychaell. Saynt Mary somerset Saynt Mary Mouthawe Saynt Nycholas Olaffe Saynt Nycholas colde abbey Saynt Petyr. Bredstrete warde .xviii. Alhalows in Bred strete. Saynt Myldrede Saynt Mathye Saynt Iohn̄ euangelyst Saynt Augustyne at Poules gate Saynt Margarete moyses Saynt Botolphe. Saynt Margarete in Fryday strete. Uyntry warde .xix. Saynt Martyne Saynt Mychell colege Saynt Thomas apostle Saynt Iamys Garlyke hyth Trynyte in knyghtryder strete. Baynarde castell warde. .xx. Saynte Andrew Saynt Benet Saynt George Saynt Mary Magdaleyne in olde Fyshe strete. Faryngedon warde wyth in .xxi. Saynt yeuan Saynt Nicholas in ye Flesheshāblis Saynt Faythys in Powlys chyrche Saynt Martyne wythin Ludgate Taynt Mychaell at Querne Saynt Fauster in fauster lane Saynt Petyr at the crosse of Chepe Saynte Gregory in Ponlys chyrch¦yarde. Saynte Genyn wythin saynte Mar¦tyne the graunte. Faryngdon warde wythout .xxii. Saynt Dunston Saynt Bryde Saynt Andrew in Holborne Saint Sepulcre without Newgate Aldrysgate warde .xxiii. Saynt Botolphe wythout the gate Saynte Anne Saynt Iohn̄ zachary Saynt Leonarde in Fauster lane Saynt Mary stanynge Saynt Mathew in syluer strete. Bassynges haue warde .xxiiii. Saynte Mychaell there. Crepelgate warde xxv. Saynte Mary magdaleyn in mylke strete. Saynt Mary in Aldermanbury Saynt Mychaell in Hogynlane Saynt Albons in woodstrete Saynt Alphy by Crepulgate Saynt Olaff in Syluer strete Saynt Gylys wythout the gate. The summe of the paryshe chyr∣ches wythin London .C.xiii. HEre after ensue the howsys of relygyon, monasteryes, colleges, chapellys, and other be∣ynge no paryshe chyrches wythin the cytye. The cathedrall chyrch of saynt Pou¦le in the ende of Chepe. The pryory of saynte Barthelmewe in Smythfelde. The hospytall or spytyll a cell of the sayde pryory. The charter house standyng wythin the warde of Crepulgate. Elsynge spytall wythin the sayde warde. The chapell of our Lady of Bedlem in Byshoppes gate warde. The house of saynt Elyne in ye same warde of nunnys,
The pryory of Crystes chyrche with in Algate. Saynte Anne abbaye wythin Port∣sokyn warde of whyte munkys. The howse of ye Meneressys of close nunnys wythin the same warde. The chapel of our lady of Barkyng in the towre warde. An howse of crossed frerys in the same warde. A colege of saynt Antony in ye warde of Bredstrete. A colege of saynte Thomas called Acrys standynge in Chepe. An house of frere Augustynes in Brode strete warde. An house of gray frerys standyng in the warde Faryngedon wythin. An house of blacke freres standynge by Ludgate within ye foresaid warde An house of whyte freres standynge in Flete strete. A chyrche or college called the Tem∣ple standynge at Temple barre. A chapel standyng in pardon chyrch yarde wythin Poulys. A chapell standyng in ye chirch yarde at Poulys ouer the charnell house. A chapell standynge wythin Crepell gate saynt Iamys in the wall. A chapell called Pappey stādyng be¦syde Bishoppes gate founded by the prestes of that fraternyte. A chapel of corp{us} Cristi in ye Pultry. A chapell of saynt Thomas of Caū∣terbury stādyng vpon Lōdonbridge. A chapell standynge in yelde Hall yarde of our Lady. A colege of prestes standynge by Poulys called saynte Martyne le graunde. The summe of housys of relygy∣on, chapellys, and other .xxvii. westmynster. The abbbaye of westmynster The kynges newe chapell Saynte Stephans chapell Saynt Margaretes chyrche. A chapell at Totehyll A chapell of saynt Anne in Totehyll strete. Saynte Iamys in the felde. A chapell at Rauncyuale. A paryshe chyrche therby of saynte Martyne. A chapell of our lady of Pewe. Chyrches, monasteryes, chapel∣lys and other housys wherin god is dayly seruyd / standynge in the cyr∣cuyte of the cytye wythoute the wal∣lys and fyrste. wythoute Algate. A paryshe chyrche of our ladye stan∣dynge wythoute the barrys called whyte chapell. A colege of saynte Katheryne stan∣dynge on the eest ende of the towre of London. A paryshe chyrch or chapell wythin the sayde towre, of saynte Peter. Southwarke. The monastery of Bermundsey A paryshe chyrch of Mary Magda∣leyne standynge faste by. A paryshe chyrche of saynt George. A paryshe chyrch of saynt Magaret- An hospitall or college of saynt Tho¦mas. A paryshe chyrche of saynte Olas. A monastery of chanōs callyd saynt. Mary Ouereys / and with a paryshe chyrche of saynt Mary Magdaleyn standynge faste thereby. wythout the Temple barre. A paryshe chyrch of saynte Clement. A chapell of saynte Spyryte. Saynte Ursula at strande. wythoute Smythfelde. The pryorye of saynte Iohn̄ in Hie∣rusalem. A house of nūnys named Clerkēwel A a chapell in pardon chyrche yarde
wythout Byshoppes gate. Shordyche paryshe chyrche. Saynte Mary spytell. A house of nunnys callyd Halywell. And of the dyuyne houses without the cytye .xxviii. The summe of all the dyuyne hou¦ses wythin the cytye and wythoute is a hundred and .lxviii. RIcharde the fyrst of that name, and seconde sonne of Henry the second / beganne hys rey∣gne ouer Englād in the moneth of Iuly, and yere of our lorde .x. hundred .lxxx. and .x / and the .xi. yere of the seconde Phylyppe then kynge of Fraunce. Thys Rycharde prouyded besely to sette good rule in Normādy, when he hadde harde of hys fathers deth, and after spedde him into England / where he was ioyously receyued / & in the moneth of September folow¦ynge and thyrde daye, he was crow∣ned at westmynster of Baldwyn arch¦byshoppe of Caunterburye. Uppon the whyche daye the Iewys of En∣glande, and specyally suche as dwel¦lyd within London and nere about / assembled of them a certayn nomber, and presumyd farther then requyred for theyr authoryte. For whyche pre∣sumpcyon they were fyrste rebuked, & after one of thē strykē. which thyng sene of the cōmon people, supposyd that to be done by the kynges com∣maundement. wherfore in a fury as those that they hated as the deuyll for theyr vsury & other vnhappy con¦dycyons, they fell vppon theym, and chased them to theyr houses, & them robbed and spoyled wythout pytye, and brent some of theyr housis / wher of the rumour ranne to westmynster to ye kynges audyēce. wherfore in all haste he sent downe / gyuyng strayte cōmaundement that they shuld cease of that ryot. But the people were in suche ire and wodenesse, that they re¦frayned not for all the kinges sonde, tyll they hadde executed the fyne of theyr malyce. And all be yt that thys ryot was after greuously shewyd a∣gayne the commons of the cytye / yet yt passed vnpunyshed, for the great nomber of the transgressours. And the sayde daye of coronacyon / all prysoners that lay in any pryson aboute London at the kynges sute, or for other small or fayned accyons, were frely delyueryd. Soone after the kynge gaue ma∣ny dygnytyes / and to hys brother Iohn̄ he gaue the prouynces of No∣tyngham, Deuonshyre, and Corne∣wall / and creatyd hym erle of Lan∣caster. And then the kynge ordeyned the cytye of London to be ruled by two baylyues whose names were as foloweth. Anno domini .M.C.xc.   Anno domini .M.C.xci.   Henry of Cornehyll   Balliui   Anno primo.   Rycharde fyz Ryuer.   IT was not longe after that ye the kynge hadde thus exalted hys brother Iohn̄ as before is shew∣wyd / but that he also preferryd hym to the maryage of the erle of Glouce¦ters doughter / by reason wherof he
was lorde of that erledome. These great auaūcementis made him after vnkynde to his broder / and by pryde therof to coueyt afterwarde the hole kyngdome. Thys yere kynge Rycharde was as∣soyled of the offence that he had vsyd in rebellyon agayne hys father. In recompēsacyon wherof as testyfyeth the authour Guydo / he voluntaryly toke vppon hym and promysed to warre vppon Crystes enymyes. All be yt that other wryters shewe, that yt was for that that hys father had so wylled hym by hys lyfe. But for what cause, so yt was, preparacyon and prouysyon for that iourney was made from that daye forthwarde. Thys yere also the kynge enlarged Elyanoure hys moder / whyche long before at the commaundement of his father her husbande, was as a pryso¦ner kepte in secrete kepynge. After whych enlargyng, ye land was mych guydyd by her counsayll. And thys yere, as sayth Ranulfe / kynge Ry∣charde gaue ouer the castellis of Bar¦wyke and Rochysburghe to ye Scot∣tyshe kyng, for the summe of .x. thou¦sande pounde, for the exployte of his voyage. And farther more he sold to the olde byshoppe of Durham hys owne prouynce for a great summe of money, and creatyd hym erle of the same. wherfore the kynge sayde af∣ter in game, I am a wonders crafty man / for I haue made a new erle of an old byshop. By suche meanes the kyng emptyed many byshoppes and ryche prestys bagges and fylled hys cofers. And ouer that he graunted oute annuytyes and fees oute of the crowne, as though he roughte no∣thynge of hys retournynge. For this dede some of hys famylyers as they durste blamed hym. But he sayde to thē yt in tyme of nede, it was good po¦lycy for a man to ayde hym wyth his owne. And more ouer he ioyned ther to, that yf London were hys / at that tyme of nede he wolde sell yt, yf he myght gete a conuenyent marchaūt that for yt were able to paye. An other waye he hadde also to ga∣ther money / for he hadde lycence of pope Innocent the thyrd of that na∣me, to dyspence wyth suche as hym lyked wythin his realme for takyng vppon theym the crosse. Anno domini .M.C.xci.   Anno domini .M.C.xcii.   Iohn̄ Herlyon.   Balliui   Anno secundo   Roger duke.   IN the seconde yere in the mo∣neth of October / kynge Ry∣charde betoke the guydynge of the lande vnto the byshoppe of Ely then chaunceller of Englande, and sayled into Normandye / where settynge the coūtrey vnder sadde guydyng, short¦ly after mette with the Frenche kyng Phylyp the second / the whych ioynt∣ly yode to Turon, and there ouer pas¦syd the shortnesse of wynter. In why¦che passe tyme makynge eyther wyth other assuraunce for contynuaunce of so great a iourney / at the sprynge of ye yere these two princes toke theyr voyage towarde the holy lande / that is to meane kyng Rycharde by ye see, and knnge Phylyppe by the lande / and appoynted to mete agayn in the land of Scicilia or Scycyll. In this meane tyme, in England the Iewes in dyuers places of ye realme, as Lyn¦colne, Staunforde, and Lynne were robbed and spoyled / and at yorke, to
the nomber of foure hundred & mo, cutte theyr mayster veynes and bled to deth. The two kynges accordynge to theyr appoyntemēt met in Scycyll / where grudge beganne to kyndle be¦twene theym for correccyon of theyr souldyours. Then the French kyng departyd agayne from kynge Ry∣charde / the whyche there made cer∣tayne ordynaunces for warre, as a towre or castell of tymber whyche he named Mategryffons / and also pro¦uyded for vytayll for both hostes. In thys tyme also the kynge of Cyprys hadde taken two shyppes of kynge Rycharde, and denyed the de∣lyuery of theym. wherfore the sayde Rycharde entryd the land of Cypris makynge therin sharpe warre / & cha¦syd so the kynge from cytye to cytye, that lastely he yelded him vnto kyng Rycharde, vppon condicyon that he shulde not be throwen in bondes of iron / wherof kynge Rycharde in ke∣pynge of hys promyse caste hym in bondes of syluer. when kynge Rycharde hadde dwel¦lyd there vppon two monethes, and hadde taken his pleasure of that coū¦trey, and taken amendes at his own wyll for hys shyppes / then he depar∣ted from the sayde yle of Cypris, and sayled towarde Acon or Acris. In whyche course so kepynge towarde Acris / he encountred a great shyppe of the Soudans of Sury, fraughte wyth great ryches, and toke yt / and so came at length to ye cytye of Acris, where at that tyme lay before ye sayd towne the Frenche kynge wyth hys hoste / and had lost a lytle before two thousande of hys men, whyche were partyd from hys hoste to haue done an enterpryse vppon the Turkes / but they were layde for & dystressed. Then as testyfyeth Peter Dysroy, kynge Rycharde was ioyously recey¦ued of the Frenche kynge. After whose commynge yt was not longe that the sayd cytye was gyuen vp by appoyntement as foloweth, and as affermeth the sayde Peter, and also the cronycle of Fraunce. Fyrste that the Sarasyns shulde departe out of the cytye / leuynge behynde theym horse, harneys, vytayll, and all other thynge belongynge to warre. Also they shulde cause to be restoryd all such prysoners of crystē men as they had vnder theyr kepyng, wyth other couenauntes whyche I passe ouer. And thus was the cytye of Acris yel¦den into the crysten mennes handes, in the moneth of Auguste, & the yere of our lorde .xi. hundred .lxxx. and, xii. But when yt came to the partyng of the praye of the cytye / there beganne malyce to kyndle hys bronde, whych was not lyghtly after quenchyd. Of thys varyance betwene these two kynges of England & of Fraūce dyuers maners are shewyd. For Po¦lycronica sayth that yt beganne by reason that kynge Rycharde denyed vnto kynge Phylyp halfe hys wyn∣nynges in Cypris, accordyng to the couenauntis betwene theym assured at Turon. But kyng Rychard sayd that the cōuencyon there made / stret¦ched no forther then to suche goodes as was wonne wythin the lymytes or boundes of the holy lande. An¦other grudge was, by reason that the French kyng ayded not ye erle of Champeyne beynge in dystresse of nede. wherfore the sayde erle beynge discontent sayde to the Frēche kyng. Syr hytherto I haue done accor∣dynge to my dutye / but hereafter I shall do as I am compellyd be nede. For your grace hath hytherto cherys¦shed me but for myn / but now I shal go to hym yt is more redy to gyue thē to take / and so departed to kyng Ry¦charde, of the whyche he had all hys
pleasure. The thyrde cause was as sayth Ranulph, for as mych as kyng Rycharde at hys begynnyng in Scy¦cyll maryed the syster of the kynge of Nauerne / where before he hadde promysed to mary the syster of the sayde kynge Phylyppe. But of these artycles speketh nothyng the french cronycle / all be it he layeth greate de¦faute vnto kynge Rycharde / sayeng in sedycyous and vyle wordys, that kyng Rycharde falsly brake hys ap∣poyntmentes, and kepte no promesse that by hym was made. Moreouer the sayd cronycle sayth that he solde the ile of Cyprys vnto the Templers for .xxx. thousande marke / and after toke it agayne frō them by strength, and delyuered it vnto Guy de Le∣sygnan that was the laste crystened kynge of Hierusalem. And ouer this the sayde frenche cronycle sayth, that he toke from a knyght of the duke of Ostrych the sayd dukes banner / and in despyte of the sayde duke trade it vnderfote, and dyd vnto it all the de¦spyte he myghte. And ouer all thys, where as Conradus Markes of Ty¦re was traytorously slayn by two of his owne seruauntes / that kyng Ry¦charde shulde laye the charge therof vnto the frenche kynge. For these grudges and sykenesse, wyth also fere of treason to be wrou∣ght bytwene Saladyne the Soudā, and kynge Rycharde as affermeth or allegeth the foresayde authoure / kynge Phylyppe wyth a small com∣pany of shyppes departed from Acō or Acris, & sayled to Puyll or Poyll / and there restynge hym a season, cō∣tynued hys iourney vnto Rome, and so lastely into hys owne prouynce of Fraunce. Anno domini .M.C.xcii.   Anno domini .M.C.xciii.   wyllyam Hauershall.   Balliui   Anno .iii.   Iohn̄ Buknot.   IN the thyrde yere and moneth of Nouember, when the Fren∣che kynge was thus departed / kyng Rychard with the duke of Burgoyn whom the French kynge hadde lefte behynde hym to haue the rule of the Frenche hoste lafte and remaynyng in Acre and the countre there about, called before hym dyuers persons or pledges of Turkes, for the perfour∣maunce of certayne appoyntemen∣tes taken wyth them at ye wynnynge or gyuynge vp of the sayde cytye of Acris. wherof one especiall couenaūt was, that by a certayne daye than ex∣pyred, they shulde cause ye holy crosse to be restored vnto the crysten pryn∣ces. The whyche for he saw well that they wolde not or myghte not per∣fourme / he therfore put in execucyon of Turkes ouer the noumber of .v. thousande as testyfyeth the Frenche cronycle. But that agreed not all of the beste wyth the former sayeng / cō∣syderynge the cytye was delyuered by appoyntement, there shulde not so many Turkes remayne there. But Peter Dysroye sayth, that for bre∣kynge of thys appoyntement, kynge Rycharde put to deth all suche Tur∣kes as were than wythin the cytye of Acris / whyche maye be ment by the hostages or pledges. It was not longe after that ty∣dynges were brought vnto kyng Ry¦charde, that the cytye of Hierusalem was wythout any greate strength of Soldyours, and that it myghte be wonne wyth easy labour. wherfore kyng Rychard assembled the lordes
to haue theyr coūsayll / where it was cōcluded that euery capyteyne shuld prepare hym to go thyther. Uppon whyche agrement, the crysten hoste sped them in such wyse, yt they were within .v. myles of ye sayd city of Hie¦rusalem / where they toke a new coū¦sayll how they shuld order them and theyr people to lay theyr syege about the cytye. In whyche coūsayll it was concluded, yt kynge Rycharde wyth hys Englyshe men shulde haue the vawewarde / and the duke of Bur∣goyne the rere warde. After whyche conclusyon taken / the kynge spedde hym vppon his waye towarde the cy¦tye. But by what myshappe or mys∣fortune I can not saye / so soone as the kynge was departed, the duke called the lordes of Fraunce before hym / and sayde, yt is euydent vnto you, that all be yt our hedde and so∣uerayne lorde is absent, the floure of the chyualry of Fraūce is present. And yf any thyng be done to the ho∣nour of the Crysten, and reproche of infydels / yt is most lykely to be done by vs, consyderyng yt insuffycyencye of Englyshemen and other. yet ne∣uerthelesse, what someuer honoure grow by our dedis to ye cristen hoste / yt shall be accompted vnto kyng Ry¦charde because of hys presence / so yt we shall haue all the payne and tra∣uayll, and Englyshemen shall haue the honour. wherfore if ye wyll do by my counsayll / we wyll returne vnto Acrys, and there tarye tyll we se far∣ther. Some agreed to this counsayll and the more in nomber / & the other spedde them in all haste after kynge Rycharde, and shewed to hym of the dukes returne / wherof he beynge so enfourmed returned also vnto Acris. It was not longe after that the sayd duke was taken wyth greuous sykenesse and dyed. And about that tyme also dyed Baldewyn archbys∣shoppe of Caunterburye / whyche a∣monge other lordes of Englande, accompanyed the kynge in that iour¦ney. Anno domini .M.C.xciii.   Anno domini .M.C.xciiii.   Nycholas Duke.   Balliui   Anno quarto.   Petyr Nowlay.   ABout the season of Mychel∣masse, in ye .iiii. yere of the rey∣gne of thys sayde Rycharde / tydyn∣ges were brought to hym yt the town or castell of Iapheth was besyeged of Salādyne / and lykely to be soone wonne, wythout the crysten were the sooner ayded. wherfore kynge Ry∣charde, whych Peter Dysroy calleth the good kynge Rycharde / sped hym thyther with his army by water, and sent a nother hoste of Frēchemen and other by lande. But so yt was or the cristen myght wynne thyther / y• sayd towne and castell were wonne / and the prysoners therin taken, were sent by water towarde such prysones as Salandyne hadde appoynted them vnto. wyth the whyche of good for∣tune kynge Rycharde mette, & them rescowyd. And that done, wyth the Turkes whyche theym conueyed he put in sure holde / and helde on hys iourney to Iapheth / and there by strength rescuyd the towne & castell, ond restoryd the crysten to theyr for∣mer possessyon, and left wyth theym more strength of knyghtes. And for to be the more feryd of the myscreaū∣tes / kynge Rycharde caused hys pry¦soners to hym belongynge to be slayne, where other solde theym to
theyr great auaūtage / by mean wher of he was hadde in wonderfull fere of the Turkes. Then kynge Rycharde after thys victory hadde at Iapheth / wonne .ii. strong holdes callyd Daron and Ga¦dres, and strengthyd them wyth cry¦sten knyghtes. And wyth such goo∣des as he there wāne of the Turkes, he repayred the castel of Ascalon and other, that greatly was impayred by the warre of the Turkes. In thys season and tyme ye kyng Rycharde was thus occupyed in the holy lande / the byshoppe of Ely as before is sayde hauynge the rule of Englande, dyd many cruell dedys / and oppressyd the clergy and also the lay fee. He wolde cōmenly ryde with a thousande horse / and greued ab∣beys by meane of hys gestys or lod∣gynge wyth theym. Also he helde in hys handes the see of yorke for longe season. And after ye deth of Balwyne dede as before is shewed in the holy land / he also toke the see of Caunter¦bury vnder hys rule. Then he pry∣ued Geffrey that was chosen to the ee of yorke of hys mouables / & caste him as prisoner in ye towre of Lōdon. And soon after called a counsayll at westmynster as the kynges procura¦tour, and as legate of the pope then Innocent the .iii. At thys counsayll Hughe Nouaunt then byshoppe of Chester, & great famylyer of the sayd byshoppe of Ely / putte forth a com∣playnt agayne ye munkes of Couen¦tre, that they hadde shed the sayde Hughys blood before the hygh aul∣ter of theyr chyrche. For whych cause the byshoppe of Ely demyd, that the sayde munkys shulde be putte from theyr sayde abbey, & clerkes shuld be set there for thē / so that by myght the munkes were put thens and dysper¦bled about in sondry placis, and cler¦kes wyth prebendys set in theyr stal∣lys. For thys dede sayth Guydo and other, that thys Hugh byshoppe of Chester hadde thus causyd the mun∣kes of Couentre to lose theyr lande and house / he toke therfore so great repentaunce, that vppon hys deth bed he axed of god that for a due and conuenyent penaunce, he myght re∣deme that offence by the lyeng in the fyre of purgatory from ye daye of his deth vnto the generall day of dome. Also the forenamed byshoppe of Ely called in proper name wyllyam de longe shampe / contynuynge hys tyrannyes, pryuyd Hugh byshoppe of Durham of all maner worshippe / and greued the byshoppe of wynche¦ster, and wretched nygh all the lande. But so faste as thys innaturall or euyll dysposyd man besyed hym to vex and greue the crysten men in En¦gland / so fast besyed this good kyng Rycharde to vexe & dere the infydels of Sury. So yt dayly he wanne of theym / or at the leste putte theym from the wynnynge of suche townes and holdes, as they by theyr great strength entendyd to haue wonne. Anno domini .M.C.xciiii.   Anno domini .M.C.xcv.   Roger Duke.   Balliui   Anno quinto   Rycharde fyz Aleyn.   IN the ende of September and begynnynge of the fyfte yere of kynge Rycharde / Guy de Lesyn∣geman laste crysten kynge of Hieru∣salem dyed / & Choras a noble Cry∣sten man captayne of a towne called Sur, was shortly after slayne by the Turkes, whose wyfe for as mych as
she was ryghtfull enherytour of the crowne of Hierusalē / the kyng gaue her in maryage vnto ye erle of Cham¦payne. And for kynge Rycharde per¦ceyued well ȳe cristen hoste mynyshed dayly, as well by infyrmytyes as lacke of vytayll and otherwyse / he sought meanes of a peace or trewce for a tyme, and had yt graunted for thre yeres. The whyche peace sta∣blyshed and proclaymed in the hoste and countrey nere about / kynge Ry¦charde betoke the rule and guydyng of the Cristen vnto the erle of Cham¦payne / promysynge hym or ye trewce were endyd to come wyth a stronger hoste, and wyth goddes myght to set hym in possessyon of the cytye of Hie¦rusalem as the ryght of his wyfe. Then Hubert byshop of Salysbu∣ry yode forth hym selfe from ye kyng to the holy citye / and offeryd there an hoste, and retourned agayne to the kynge. After whose returne, ye kynge takynge leue of the erle of Cham∣payne and other / toke his shyppyng at Acrys or Acon, whyche ys named Tholomayda also / and so returned to the yle of Cypre or Cyprys. Thens the kynge sent the quene hys wyfe and her syster wyth ye more parte of hys people vnto Scycyll / and he wyth a small company for he myghte not endure the softenesse of the see, toke his shyppynge in the mo¦neth of September, and sayled wyth a stronge wynde towarde a coūtrey callyd Histria. But he was dryuen by force of wederynge betwene Ue∣nyse and Aquinilia or Aquilegia, and houyd there a season, and costed hyther and thyther / so that lastely he was espyed and taken of the duke of Ostrychys men. Anno domini .M.C.xcv.   Anno domini .M.C.xcvi.   wyllyam fyz Isabell.   Balliui   Anno sexto.   wyllyam fyz Arnolde.   ABout the moneth of Octo∣ber & .vi. yere of hys reygne / thys good kynge Rycharde was ta∣ken in fourme folowynge. As he lay thus as before is sayde, betwene Ue∣nyce and Aquilegia a {pro}uynce of the duke of Ostrych / one Meynart of Gorezeyn ruler of that countrey vn∣der the foresayde duke, made out cer¦tayne souldyours for to haue taken hym. But he by hys prouydence and manhode escapyd ye sayd Maynarde or Maynart / how be yt that some of hys knyghtes were there takyn. Then kynge Rycharde passed ye coū∣trey secretly, tyll he came to a towne named Frysake. In thys towne was then prouoste or ruler a knyght cal∣led Frederyk de saynt Soom / ye why¦che also dyd hys deuoure to take the kynge, and toke .vi. of his knyghtes prysoners / but hym selfe wyth the remenaunt of hys company escaped. Then the kynge seynge that he was in daunger of hys enymyes / drewe more into the way towarde Almayn. But thys was soone knowen of hys enymyes / so that by the meanes of one called Duke of Lymple and co∣syn to the emperoure / all the wayes were closyd in suche wyse, that in the ende kynge Rycharde was taken by the seruauntes of the sayd duke, nere vnto a citye or towne called Menne or Meune, wythin the lande or ter∣rytory of the emperoure / and after brought vnto the sayde duke Lym∣ple, or after some to the duke of Ost∣riche / ye which spoyled hym of all yt he hadde, and after caste hym in prison,
and there streyghtely kepte hym by the space of a moneth / and at the mo¦nethes ende sente hym vnto Henry the .vi. of that name, or after some wryters the .v. sonne of the fyrst Fre¦deryke then emperour of Almayne / the whyche helde hym in more vyle pryson from that tyme tyll lent after and couenauntyd wyth the duke of Ostryche to haue the thyrde parte of the profyte that came of kynge Ry∣charde. About the sonday of Pal¦mys the emperour brought forth the kynge before the lordes of Almayne, there to gyue answere vnto suche thynges as shuld be layde vnto hym. where he came forth wyth so good a coūtenaunce, & also answered so dys∣cretely and dyrectely to all maters layde vnto hys charge / that the em∣peroure was not alonely bende to shewe to hym mercy, but also he dyd to hym honour and worshyppe / and helde hym at more libertye after that daye. It is redde of thys Rycharde, that durynge the tyme of hys imprysone∣ment he shuld sle a lyon, and tere the harte oute of hys bodye, where tho∣rough he shulde deserue the name of Rycharde Cure de Lyon / and yt he shuld wyth a stroke of his fyst sle the emperours sonne, and also deflorysh the emperours doughter. But these are fablys ymagined by englysh tale tellers, to auaunce theyr kynge Ry∣charde / as the Brytons by theyr fay∣ned talys auaunced theyr kynge Ar∣ture. In this passetyme wyllyam Longeshamp byshop of Ely, conty∣nuynge his crudelyte and tyrannye wythin Englande / was lastely by strength of the lordes put oute of the lande. Then he came to the kynge be¦ynge prysoner, & shewyd for hym self the beste he coude. But when he saw he myght not begyle the kynge wyth his sugryd wordes, he hadde small truste of the kynges fauour / & retur∣ned into Fraunce, to tarye there the kynges commynge. Thys yere Iohn̄ the kynges bro∣ther by excityng of the French kyng, when he harde of the takyng and im¦prisonynge of hys brother / began to make warre within ye lande / & toke by strength ye castelles of wyndesour and of Notyngham & other. And the frenche kyng vpon his partye made strong warre in Normādy, as it is be¦fore shewed in the story of the second Phylyppe than kynge of Fraunce. Anno domini .M.Cxcvi.   Anno domini .M.C.xcvii.   Robert Besaunt.   Balliui   Anno .vii.   Iokell Iosne.   IN the .vii. yere of kynge Ry∣charde / Hubert byshoppe of Salysbury, the whych hadde accom¦panyed the kynge in that voyage, and was sente wyth the quene into Scycyll, retourned or came to the kyng where he was prysoner. whom the kynge sente soone after into En∣glande, to haue the guydynge ther∣of, and also to treate wyth the lordes and commons of hys realme, howe he myghte be sette at lybertye. It was not long after the cōmyng home of this Hubert, but the mūkes of the house of Cristes chyrch of Caū¦terburye chase hym to the archebys∣shoppes see / and hadde the palle, and was stallyd soone after. This was easy to the mūkes / how well ye sharp∣nes of Baldwyne had somdeale gre¦ued theym. And though thys Bald¦wyne were a good man & holy in his
lyuynge / yet one thyng he dyd to the derogacyon of the munkes of Caun¦terburye / for he purposyd to put the prerogatiue of the eleccyon of the archbishoppe from the munkes. And because therof, he beganne to buylde great houses nere vnto the munkes chyrche, by fauour of the kynge Hen¦ry the seconde (but not wythout she∣dynge of blood) and there entendyd to haue set in secular chanons with prebendys and suffraganes of bys∣shoppes for to treate wyth the sayde chanons of the foresayde eleccyon, & to put by the mūkes clerely. But the munkes when they sawe they myght no lenger resyst Baldwyn, they then appealed to the pope Innocent the thyrde / by whose cōmaundemēt that worke ceasyd, and so stode vnfynys∣shed tyll the sayde Baldwyne was dede. After whose deth the munkes made that worke playne wyth the grounde. Treuisa translatoure of Policronycon, sayth yt was won∣der that Baldwyn wolde in that ma∣ner deale wyth the munkes / consyde¦ryng he was fyrst archdeacon, & then white munke, and then abbot, & after byshop of worceter, and last archbys¦shoppe / & to brynge men of more im∣perfyte lyfe, into ye place of men more perfyte, & to chaunge religyous men for seculer men. But yet the sayde Treuisa allowyth Baldwynes dede or entent for good. For he sayth that Criste was the hedde of holy chyrch, and callid and made his apostles bys¦shoppes / but none of them was mun¦ke or yet frere. wherfore Baldwyne dyd better to preferre the relygyon whyche Cryste made, then the rely∣gyon whyche was instytuted and or∣deyned by man. Anno domini .M.C.xcvii.   Anno domini .M.C.xcviii.   Gerarde de Antiloche.   Balliui   Anno .viii.   Robert Duraunt.   IN in the moneth of Ianuary, and .viii. yere of the reygne of kynge Rycharde, when the sayde Ry¦charde had sufferyd harde prysone∣ment vppon the terme of a yere and thre monethes / he was deliuered out of Pryson for the summe of an hun∣dred thousande pounde of sterlynge money. For pledge wherof he lefte in the kepynge of the emperoure the bys∣shoppes of Roan and of Bathe. But not for all / for a great parte was pay¦ed or the kynge were delyueryd.Ornamē¦tes of the chyrche folde. For payment of whyche raunsom all the wolle of whyte munkes & chanons was taken and solde, & rynges and crosses of prelates, wyth vessels and chalyces of all chyrches thorough ye land / & ouer that .xxvii. shrynes were scraped or spoylyd of ye gold & syluer that vppon theym before tyme was layd / for no pryuylege of holy chyrch nor other persone at that season was sparyd. Then kynge Rycharde came vnto Swyne in Flaūdres, and taryed there two monethes / other to abyde the wynde, or ellys to make prouysyon for thynges whych he ne∣ded. There the emperours men had almost taken him agayn. So the em¦perour forthought ye deliuery of king Rychard, as Pharao forthought the delyuery of the chyldren of Israel. Then the kyng toke shippyng, and lāded in ye ende of Marche at Sand¦wyche / & from thens came streyghte vnto Lōdon, where he was receyued wyth all ioye and honour. And when he had a season rested hym there / he wyth a certayn nomber of knyghtes rode to Nothyngam, & wan ye castell
and after the castell of Tykhyll by force of armes, and set the wardeyns of theym in warde. And that done he called a counsayll of hys lordes at wynchester / where by authoryte of the sayd coūsayll, he depryued Iohn̄ hys brother then beynge in Fraunce of all honour / and toke from hym al suche landes as he before had gyuen to hym / & crowned hym soone after agayn kyng of England in the sayd cytye of wynchester. After the whych coronacyon he called a parlyament / by vertue wherof he resumyd all pa∣rētes and annuytees, fees and other grauntes before hys voyage by hym solde and graunted / and caused the partyes to be contentyd wyth such re¦uenous and profytes as they had re¦ceyued of the sayde offyces or landes in tyme of hys absence / and sparyd not any persone for any sufficience of wrytyng yt to hym before was made. when kynge Rycharde hadde by these foresayd meanes gaderyd some money / he then in the moneth of Iu¦ly sayled into Fraunce, and besegyd a castell callyd Arques, and spedde there as wytnessyth Polycronyca dy¦uersly. whyche worde dyuersly may well here be spoken. For who so re∣dyth the frenche cronycle / he shall fynde that the Frenche kynge was vyctor. But and he rede the englyshe boke / than shall he fynde kynge Ry∣charde vyctour. wherfore me thyn∣keth Ranulphe sayde well / when he sayde they spedde dyuersely. For yt is so dyuerse by the reporte of wry∣ters, that the certayntie to whom the honoure shulde be gyuen is harde to be knowen. All be yt that in the coun¦trey of Bloys, as wytnessyth ye sayde frenche cronycle / kynge Rycharde scaryd the Frenche hoste, and toke the kynges somer horse, wyth parte of hys treasour. But in shorte whyle after / a trewce was concludyd be∣twene these two kynges for a yere. Then Iohn̄ whyche hadde tour∣ned to the Frenche kyng agayne his owne brother, seynge that the fame and honoure of hys brother, & feble∣nesse of his own power, made mea∣nes to Elyanoure hys mother / by whose medyacyon he was recōcyled to hys brother the kynge, & after be∣came hys trew knyght. when the kynge and hys brother Iohn̄ were thus agreed / they rode ouer the lande to vysyte ye countreys and se howe they were guyded by the offycers of the kynge. Amonge other two there were, whyche shewyd that they wolde do many thynges to the kynges profyte, the one was abbot of Cadonence wythin Normandye / and that other was named wyllyam wyth the longe berde. The abbot warned the kynge of the fraude of hys offycers / wherby he thought by the ponyshement of hys offycers, he shulde wynne great fauoure of the people. Then thys abbot gate a war¦rant of the kynge / and at London callyd dyuerse offycers before hym, for to yelde to hym theyr accompte. But he dyed shortly / so that hys pur¦pose came to small effecte. And wyl¦lyam wyth the longe berde shewyd to the kynge the outrage of the ryche men / whych as he sayd sparyd theyr owne and pyllyd the poore people. It is sayd that this willyam was borne in London / & purchasyd that name by vse of hys berde. He was sharpe of wytte and somedeale let∣tred, a bold man of speche and sadde of countenaunce, and toke vppon hym greatter dedes then he coulde welde / and some he vsyd cruelly, as apperyth in appechynge of hys own brother of treason the whyche was a Burges of London, and to hym hadde shewed great kyndnesse in his youthe.
This willyam styred and excyted the cōmon peple to desyre & loue fredom̄ and lybertye / and blamed the excesse and outrage of ryche men. By suche meanys he drew to hym many great companyes / and wyth all hys power defended the poore mennys cause a∣gayne the ryche / and accused dyuers to the kynge, shewyng that by theyr meanys the kynge loste many forfay¦tes & escheatys. For this, gentylmen and men of honour malygned agayn hym. But he had such cōforte of the kynge, that he kepte on his purpose. Then the kynge beynge warned of the congregacyons that thys wylly∣am made / commaūded hym to cease of such doynges, yt the people myght exercise theyr artes & occupacyōs / by reason wherof it was left for a while. But it was not long or the people fo¦lowed hym as they before that tyme had done. Then he made vnto them colacyons or exhortacyons / and toke for hys anteteme, Haurietis aquas in gau∣dio de fontibus saluatoris. That is to mean, ye shall drawe in ioye waters of the wellis of our sauyour. And to this he added, I am sayde he the sauyour of poore men: ye be poore, and haue assayed ye harde handes of riche men. Now draw ye therfore holefull wa∣ter of lore of my wellys, & that wyth ioy / for the tyme of your vysytacyon is comen. I shall (sayde he) departe waters from waters / by waters I vnderstande the people. Then shall I departe the people whychis good and meke, from the people that ys wycked and prowde / and I shall dys¦seuyr the good and the ylle, as the lyght is departed from ye darkenes. when thys came to the knowlege of the archebyshoppe of Caunterbury / he by counsayll of the lordes of the spyrytualty sent vnto this wyllyam / commaundynge hym to appere be∣fore the lordes of the kynges coun∣sayll, to answere vnto suche maters as there shulde be layde vnto hym. At whyche daye thys wyllyam appe∣red, hauyng wyth hym a multytude of people, in so myche that the lordes were of hym adrad. For the whyche cause they remyttyd hym wyth ple∣saunt wordes for ye time / & commaun¦dyd certayne persones in secrete ma∣ner to espye when he were voyde of hys company, and then to take hym, and to put hym in sure kepyng. The whyche accordynge to the commaun¦dement at tyme conuenyent as they thought sette vpon hym and to haue taken hym. But he wyth an axe resy¦sted theym and slewe one of theym / and after fled to saynt Mary Bowe chyrche of Chepe, and toke that for his sauegarde / defendynge hym by strength and not by the suffrages of the chyrche, for to hym drew shortley great multytude of people. But in shorte processe by meane of the hed∣dys and rulers of the cytye the peo∣ple mynyshed / so yt in shorte tyme he was lefte wyth few personys, & after by fyre cōpellyd to forsake the chyrch and so was taken, but not wythoute shedynge of blood. After whyche ta∣kynge he was areygned before the iudges / & there wyth .ix. of his adhe∣rētes caste and iudged to dye, & was hanged & they wyth hym the day fo∣lowynge. But yet the rumour seased not / for ye cōmon peple reysed a great cryme vpon the archbyshop of Caun¦terbury & other / and sayd yt by theyr meanes willyam, whych was an in∣nocēt of such crymes as were obiecte & put agayne hym, & was a defendor of the poore people agayn extorcyo∣ners & wronge doers, was by theym put wrongfully to deth / approuyng him an holy mā & martyr by this tale folowyng / sayeng yt a man beyng sy∣ke of the feuers, was cured by vertue of a cheyn whych this wyllyam was
bounde wythin tyme of his dures of imprysonement / which by a preste of the allye of the sayde wyllyam was openly declared & preached. wherby he brought the people in suche an er∣rour, that they gaue credence to hys wordes / & secretly in the nyght cōuey¦ed away the iebet that he was hāged vppon, & scraped away ye blood that was shed of him when he was taken or ellys when he was hedded & quar¦teryd, so yt they made there an holow place by fetchyng away of that erth / and sayde yt syke men & women were cured of dyuerse sykenesse by vertue of that blood & erth. By these means and blowynge of fame / ye place was the more vysyted by women & vndys¦crete {per}sones, of the whych some wat¦ched there the hole nyght in prayer / so that the lenger thys cōtynued, the more dysclaunder was anotyd to the iustyces, and to suche as put hym to deth. Not wythstandyng in processe of tyme, when hys actes were publys¦shed, as the sleynge of a man wyth hys owne hande, and vsynge of hys concubyne wythin saynte Mary chyrche in tyme of hys there beynge, as he openly cōfessed in the houre of hys dethe, wyth other detestable cry∣mes: somwhat keled the great flame of the hasty pilgrymage. But not cle¦rely / tyll the archebyshoppe of Caū∣terbury accursed ye preste yt broughte vp the fyrste fable / and also causyd that place to be watched, that suche idolatry shuld there no more be used Anno domini .M.C.xcviii.   Anno domini .M.C.xcix.   Roger Blount.   Balliui   Anno .ix.   Nycholas Duke.   IN the moneth of Apryll and ix. yere of kynge Rycharde, when he had prouided to sende forth xx. thousand poūde to the emperour, for full payment of hys raunsome / the pledges whyche had lyen for the same, came sodeynly into England / and shewed vnto the kyng that after his departynge, the emperour sente them vnto the duke of Ostrych, to re¦mayne with him tyll the money were payde. And forther there they shewed that the sayd duke was accursed of ye pope yt then was Innocent ye thyrde, by reason of his wronge done to the kynge / & that his prouynce was gre¦uyd wyth many myscheues. And as the duke rode forth on a daye in hys disport beyng saynt Stephans day, he hurte his fote in such wyse wyth a thorne or other venym / whyche ran∣cled & grewe so sore, ye lastly he shuld dye or cutte yt of. But in hope of re¦couery he contynued tyll in the ende he was warned that he shulde dye. Then he sent for his byshoppes, and axyd to be assoyled of the sentence of the chyrche whyche he stode in. The whyche was denyed hym / excepte he wolde swere to stande and abyde the ordynaūce and dome of holy chyrch, touchynge the wronge that he hadde done to kynge Rycharde. The duke sware, and was assoyled / and short∣ly after the two byshoppes pledgys for ye money were delyuered at theyr lybertye. Then kynge Rycharde callyng to mynde that the vttermost daye of the trewes takē betwene hym and the Frenche kynge approched / made hym redy and sayled into Nor¦mandye, where before his commyng the Frenche kynge by occasyon of the Normannis as sayth the frenche boke, was entred the coūtrey of Bur¦gys / towarde whom kyng Rycharde
sped hym wyth all possyble spede / so that both hostes laye partyd wyth a ryuer called Osson or Ossyne. Then to folowe the sayenge of the frenche boke, for so myche as the en¦glyshe cronycle spekyth lytle or no∣thynge of thys acte / lette wyse men that here thys cronycle, constrew yt after theyr dyscrecyons. For all be yt the Frencheman wrote yt to the ho∣nour of Frenchmen / yet to other that shall rede or here yt, because yt soun∣dyth so nere vntrouth, yt shal rather redounde vnto theyr dyshonour. For the Frenche cronicle sayth, that these two hostes thus as aboue is sayde lyenge to gyther wythout skyrmshe or assaute / kynge Rycharde contra∣ry the opinyon and mynde of hys lor¦des, wyth a few accompanyed and vnharnaysed, shuld come to ye Frēche kynges tente / and there in presence of hys lordes shulde do homage to the Frenche kynge for the duchye of Normandye and coūteys of Angeou and of Poytyers, and there swore to the kynge to kepe peace duryng his lyfe / and after .viii. dayes met agayn and fynyshed the sayde peace, wyth assuryd othe vppon eyther partye / and after departed as frendes eyther resortyng into theyr owne countrey. But yt semed a feynte peace. For within foure monethes or lesse folow¦ynge / kynge Rycharde wyth hys hoste entred the prouynce of Berry / and layd syege to the castell of wyer¦soune, and gate yt by strength / and after yode to the castell of Noryn∣courte / the whyche was delyueryd to hym by appoyntement. when kyng Phylyppe harde of the wynnynge and ouerthrowe of the ca¦stell of wyersoun / he in damagynge of kynge Rychard layde syege to the castell of Aubeuyle, and yt assayled egerly. Buy yt was so stronge and so well defendyd by the Normannys, that the Frenche kynge was holden of. when kynge Rycharde had gar∣nyshed and fortifyed the castell of Noryncourte wyth all thynge neces∣sarye to the warre / he drewe hym to∣warde Aubeuyle to remoue kynge Phylyppe from that syege, and fell vppon the Frenche men vnwarely. But the Frenchemen quyt theym so knyghtly, that they chased kyng Ry¦charde and hys people / and toke a Norman knyghte named Guy de Thonars a man of great hardynes. And then kynge Phylyppe returned to the castel and towne of Aubeuyle / and assauted it more sharpely, so that in the ende ye souldyours of the town yeldyd yt wyth the castell for a cer∣tayne summe of money. And when he hadde possessyon of the towne / he threw downe the castell playne wyth the ground, and after strengthed the towne wyth Frenche men / and then yode to the castell of Gysours / and from thēs resorted to the forenamed castell of Noryncourte, and assayled yt in so cruell maner, that shortely he wanne yt / and toke therin .xv. knygh¦tes and .xxiiii. yemen, wyth plente of vytayll and armour. In thys tyme and season kynge Richarde gadered newe strength, and allyed hym wyth Baldwyn erle of Flaūdres and with Renolde erle of Dampmartyn and of Boleyne. By whose meanes as wytnessyth the frenche boke, kynge Rychard wasted sore the countrey of Fraunce / and brent therin some tow¦nes and vyllages, and toke therein many ryche prayes. Anno domini .M.C.xcix.   Anno domini .M.CC.   Constantyne fyz Arnolde.   Balliui   Anno .x.   Robert le Beawe.  
ABout the begynnynge of the moneth of October, and .x. ye¦re of Rycharde / the sayde Rycharde entryd the countrey of Unequecyne wyth a stronge hoste / and made ther∣in cruell warre, in destroyenge of the countrey / and assauted the castell of Gysours / and threwe to grounde a stronge holde called Courcellys, and brent there about many vyllages. wherwyth kynge Phylyppe was so greuousely amouyd / yt wyth a small noumber of knyghtes he percyd the hoste of Englyshemen, and entryd the castell or towne of Gysours. But of his men were taken a certayn nō∣ber / as Alayne de Russy, Mathewe de Melly, Guyllyam de Mello, and many other. wyth the whyche pry∣soners and many riche prayes, kyng Richarde then departed, leuynge the Frenche kynge wythin Gysours. It was not longe after that kynge Rycharde was thus departed / but that kyng Phylyp callyng to mynde the great losse and dishonour that he had receyued by that warre of kynge Rycharde, assembled a great army, and entred the duchy of Normandy / and wasted the coūtrey from Nues∣bourth to Beawmōt le Rogyer. And that done he returned into Fraunce / and lycēcyd hys knyghtes to go eche man into hys owne countrey. when kynge Phylyppe hadde thus fynyshed hys warre in Normandye / kynge Rycharde then wyth hys ar∣mye entred the forenamed countrey of Unequecyn, and also Beawuoy∣syn / and toke wythin theym as he be¦fore had done ryche & many prayes / and with theym departed. whom the byshop of Beawuays beyng a good knyghte and hardy of his handes, wyth a companye of knyghtes, and other / folowyd to haue rescowyd the prysoners that kynge Rycharde had taken. But they were taken / and a certayne of hys company slayne. Then the erle of Flaundres by the ayde of the Englyshe men, toke the towne of saynt Omer from ye Frēche men. In this season Innocent the Pope before named, sente a legate into Fraunce named Peter de Capys, to refourme the warre betwene the two prynces. The whyche at that tyme was in such dysioynte that he coulde not brynge yt to any frame / and spe∣cyally as sayth the Frenche boke, be∣cause kynge Richarde wolde not de∣lyuer hostages & gagys as ye Frēche kynge wolde. Then kynge Rycharde after Crist∣mas besyeged a castel nere vnto Ly∣mogys. Thys castell in ye Frēche cro¦nycle is called Chalons / & in the en∣glyshe boke yt is named Gayllarde. The cause of this syege as saith most wryters, was for certayne ryche trea¦sour founden wythin the lordshyppe or sygnyory of kynge Rycharde / the whyche one wydomer vycounte of Lemonke hadde founden and wyth helde from kynge Rycharde / and for hys sauegarde fledde vnto the fore∣named castell / and defendyd yt man∣fully from the fyrste weke of lent, tyll the .vi. daye of Apryll. Uppon the whyche daye kynge Rycharde wal∣kynge vnwysely about the castell to espye the feblenes therof / one named Betrāde Guedon markyd the kynge and wounded him in the hedde, or af¦ter some writers, in ye arme with a ve∣nemous quarell. After which woūde receyued by the kynge, he commaun¦ded sharpe assaute to be made / in the whyche assaute the castell was won. Then he made enquery who yt was that so had wounded him / the which was brought vnto the kynges pre∣sence, and named hym self as aboue is sayde, or after some writers Peter Basyle. Then the kynge demaūded
of him why he shuld so lye in a wayte to hurte hym, rather then any of his felowys. For thou slew my father & my bretherne sayde he / wherfore I entendyd to auenge theyr deth, what someuer became of me. Then ye kyng forgaue hym his offence and sufferyd him to go at lyberte. And the other of ye soudyours taken in that castell, the kynge commaunded to be hanged. But Polycronycon sayth, that after kynge Rycharde was dede / the duke of Braban whych then was present, causyd the sayde Bartrande to be ta¦ken and flayne quycke and after han¦ged. Then kynge Rycharde dyed the .iii. daye after, that is to say, the ix. daye of Apryll / and was buryed at Fount Eborard at the fete of hys father. Howe be yt some wryters say that his harte was buryed at Roan, his body as before is sayde, and hys bowellys at Carleyll in Englande / when he hadde reygned .ix. yeres .ix. monethes and odde dayes, leuynge after hym none yssue. Of thys Ry∣charde a metrycyan made these ver∣sys folowynge. Christe, tui calicis praedo fit praeda caducis & re breui reiecis, qui tollit aera crucis. Viscera Carleolum, corpus fons seruat Ebardi. Et cor Rothamagū magne Richarde tuum In terra diuiditur, vnus quia plus fuit vno. Non superest vno gratia tanta viro. The which versys may be englys¦shyd as foloweth. Cryste, of the these whyche on the ryght hande was, And axyd mercy, to vs thou made a praye / That we lyke wyse shulde for our trespasse, Axe of the mercy and shewe no delay, Nor for erthly thynges caste our self away. For who of thy crosse accompteth lyt¦tell store / The meryte of thy passyon he losyth euermore. Thys manfull knyghte thys prynce vyctoryouse, whyche toke thy crosse on hym wyth great payne / He folowed the thefe and axyd mer∣cy thus. For hys offence he warred thy foes agayne / And shadde theyr blood on hyll and eke on playne. And all for loue good lorde he hadde to the. wherfore swyte Iesu on hym thou haue pytye. Of whom the bowellys at Carleyll / and the trunke At fount Ebrarde full rychely ys dyght. The harte at Roan into the erthe ys sunke Of the worthy Rycharde. And so in thre is twyght, That more than one whylom was in myght. In erthe is separate that lyuynge more then one was, and of grace founde lyke to hym none. IOhn̄ brother of ye aboue named Ry∣charde, & yongeste son of Henry the se¦conde / was ordey∣ned or proclamed kyng of England, the tenth day of Apryll in the begyn∣nynge of the yere of our lorde .xi. hun¦dred .lxxx. & .xix / and the .xx. yere of the seconde Phylyppe then kynge of Fraunce. Thys Iohn̄ at the daye of his brothers deth was in Norman¦dy / where at Chynon as soon as his brother Rycharde was dyseasyd, he
possessyd hym of hys brothers trea∣sour / and sent Hubert archbyshoppe of Caunterbury into Englande, to make prouisyon for his coronacyon. And vppon Ester daye folowyng he was gyrde with the sworde of the du¦chy of Brytayne / & sayled soon after into Englād. where he was crowned kynge at westmynster vppon holy thursday next folowynge of the fore∣named Hubert. After whyche solem∣nitye done / he ordeyned the same Hu¦bert chaunceller of Englande. In thys whyle the Frenche kynge helde a counsayll at Cenomannia in Turon / where to the derogacyon of kynge Iohn̄, Arture the son of Gef∣frey Plantagenet and neuewe to the sayde Iohn̄, was made duke of Bry¦tayne. whyche incontynently after wyth a great army entryd the coun∣trey of Angeou, and toke possessyon therof. And kynge Phylyppe wyth hys people entryd the duchy of Nor¦mandy, and layde syege to the cytye of Euroux / and wanne yt, wyth all the stronge holdes there about / and stuffyd theym wyth vytayll, & streng¦thed them with his owne knyghtes / and that done wasted & spoyled the the countrey tyll he came to the cytye of Meaus. where met wyth hym the forenamed Arture / & dyd to hym ho∣mage for the countrey of Angiers. In the moneth of May, Elyanour somtyme wyfe of Henry the seconde, and mother to kyng Rycharde, came into Fraunce / and so to the kynge to Meaus foresayde, and made to hym homage for the coūtrey of Poytiers, as her enherytaunce. And soone af∣ter the kinge retourned into Fraūce / and the duke of Britayne wyth hym whyche as yet was within age. Kynge Iohn̄ heryng of this warre in Normandy, and losse of the coun¦treys aboue named / assembled a coū¦sayll and axid ayde of his lordes and cōmons, to wynne agayne ye foresayd landes / & had it graunted after some wryters .iii.s. of euery plough land thorough Englande, besyde ye subsy¦dy of ye spyrytuall landes. And when he hadde made redy for that belon∣ged to hys voyage / he about heruest sayled into Normandy / where he ta∣ryed tyll Octobre folowynge, spen∣dynge the tyme to hys losse and dys∣honoure. Anno domini .M.CC.   Anno domini .M.CCi.   Arnolde fyz Arnolde.   Balliui   Anno primo   Rycharde fyz Darty.   AFter Mychelmas in the mo∣neth of October, and fyrste yere of the reygne of kynge Iohn̄ / a trewce or peace was concluded be∣twene the two kynges of Englande and of Fraunce, from that daye tyll mydsomer nexte folowynge / and in lyke wyse betwene the French kyng, and Baldwyne erle of Flaundres. And thys yere was made a deuorce betwene kynge. Iohn̄ and hys wyfe the erle of Glocetyrs doughter, be∣cause of nerenesse of bloode. And af∣ter was he maryed vnto Isabell the doughter of the erle of Engole∣sym in Fraunce, and had by her two sonnys Henry and Rychard, and .iii. doughters Isabell, Elyanoure, and Iane. Thys yere dyed at London blessyd Hugh byshop of Lyncoln̄ / and was conueyed to his owne chyrch & there enterryd. For whom god hath shew∣yd many myracles, so that at thys daye
he ys authorysed by the chyrche for a saynte. At mydlent after, kyng Iohn̄ sayled agayne into Normandy. And after Ester he mette with kynge Phy¦lyppe betwene Uernon and the yle Audeley / where the peace betwene both realmes was stablyshed and cō¦fermed for terme of theyr two lyues / and the landes deuyded betwene the two kynges, as eyther of them shuld holde theym contentyd for theyr ly∣ues after. And in shorte tyme after, Lewys the eldest son of kynge Phy∣lyppe, maryed dame Blanch dough¦ter to Alphons kynge of Castylle, and neuewe to kynge Iohn̄. To the whyche Lewys / kyng Iohn̄ for loue of that woman shewyd to hym great bountye / and gaue vnto her many ryche gyftes. In the moneth of Iuly folowyng kyng Iohn̄ rode into Fraūce, where he was receyued of the Frēche kynge wyth myche honour / and so cōueyed into saynte Denys, where he was re¦ceyued wyth processyon. And vppon the morow the Frenche kyng accom¦panyed hym vnto Parys / where he was receyued of the cytezens wyth great reuerēce / and presentyd by the prouoste of the towne in name of the hole cytye wyth ryche presentis. And there kynge Phylyppe festyd hym in hys owne paleys / & gaue vnto hym and hys lordes and seruauntes ma∣ny ryche gyftes / and after conueyd hym forth of that citye, and toke leue of hym in moste louynge wyse. And when kynge Iohn̄ hadde spedde his maters in Normandy / he then retur¦ned into Englande. Anno domini .M.CCi.   Anno domini .M.CCii.   Roger Desert.   Balliui   Anno secun.   Iamys fyz Barth.   IN ye moneth of december and seconde yere of kynge Iohn̄ / Ranulphe erle of Chestre by the ex∣ample afore shewed by kynge Iohn̄, lefte hys owne wyfe named Constaū¦ce and countesse of Brytayne, whych before he had maried by counsayll of kynge Henry the seconde / & wedded one Clemens. One cronycle sayth he dyd so, because he wolde haue yssue. But the sayd authour sayth that af∣ter hys opynyon, he dyspleased god so greatly that god wolde suffer hym to haue none yssue / but the rather for that dede dyed wythout. About thys tyme after opynyon of moste wryters / the people or nacyon callyd Tartares beganne theyr do∣mynyon. These men dwellyd vnder the hyllys of Inde, yt belonged to pre¦ster Iohn̄ / & chase of them self a capi¦tayn of low byrth called Dauid / & so wyth wyues and chyldren passed the next countreys wyth robbynge and spoylyng, and grew shortly in great strength / and after subdued the par∣tes & many other vycyne countreys / and grewe lastely vnto great domy∣nyon and lordshyppe in the eest par∣tes of the worlde / so that lately theyr prynce or souerayne ys called the great Cahan. In this yere as wytnessyth Poly∣cronycon, the kynge of Scottys dyd homage to kynge Iohn̄ at Lyncoln̄, and sware vpon the crosse of Hubert archbishoppe of Caunterbury, in the presence of a legate of Rome, & .xiii. byshoppes, to be trew lyege man to hym and to hys heyres kynges. And in this yere one Estate called abbot of Flay, came into Englande /
and amonge other myracles by hym shewyd, he blessed a well besyde the towne of wye in kent / so ye men and women drynkyng of that water were curyd of dyuerse maladyes. But last¦ly he dyspleasyd so the byshoppes of England, yt he was glade to leue the lande, & after sayled into Normandy Anno domini .M.CC.ii.   Anno domini .M.CC.iii.   Arnolde.   Balliui   Anno .iii.   Rycharde   About the moneth of Decem∣ber, in ye thyrd yere of Iohn̄s reygn in the prouynce of yorke, were sene .v. moonys. One in the Eest, the seconde in the weste, the thyrd in the North, ye fourth in the South, and the fyfte as it were set in the myddes of the other / and yode .vi. tymes in compassynge the other, as yt were by the space of an howre / and vanyshed away soone after. Thys yere in the moneth of February / kynge Phylyp callyd a parliamēt at Uerdon / where yt was amonge other maters conclu¦ded, that kynge Iohn̄ as hys lyege man shulde appere at his parlyamēt holdē at Paris wythin .xv. dayes of Eester next folowynge. But for so myche as kynge Iohn̄ nor none for hym apperyd to shewe some lawfull impedymēt / the Frenche kynge ther¦fore entryd the duchy of Normandy, and toke the castellys of Bounte, of Gentelyne, and Gurnay / and seased into hys handes all suche landes as Hugh de Gurnay held, & gaue them vnto Arture foresayde duke of Bry∣tayne. And more ouer he gaue to the said Arture ye coūtye of Angeou, with two hundred prysoners, and a cer∣tayne of money to defende the sayde countrey agayn kynge Iohn̄. when kynge Iohn̄ had vnderstan∣dynge of all the cruell dealynge of kynge Phylyppe / he callyd a coun∣sayll and there asked ayde, and was graunted a new ayde to wythstande the Frenche kynges malyce. And a∣bout Lammasse after, the kyng with a fayre cōpany sayled into Norman∣dye / and so spedde hym into the coun¦trey of Angeou, for so myche as he was enfourmed that Arture hys ne∣uew and duke of Brytayne warryd wythin the same / and toke hym pry∣soner with certayne other knyghtes, as syr Hugh le Bruns, syr Godfrey de Losyngham, wyth dyuerse other. At whych tyme kynge Phylyppe lay at the syege of the castell of Arques / and herynge of thys dyscomfyture, brake vp hys syege to the entent to haue rescowyd the sayde duke. But when he was warned that he shulde come to shorte / he then chaunged his purpose and went vnto the cytye of Towrys, and wanne yt by strength. And after for that wynter drew nere, he returned into Fraunce. In which season also kynge Iohn̄ retourned wyth his prysoners into Englande. In this yere by counsayl of the burgeysys of the cytye of London / were chosen .xxxv. of the moste sub∣stancyall and wyseste myn / whyche after some were called the counsayll of the cytye. Of the whych yerely the bailyuys were chosen / and after the mayre and shryues were taken of the same nomber. Anno domini .M.CC.iii.   Anno domini .M.CC.iiii. Balliui Normand Blondell Anno .iiii.   Iohn̄ of Ely.  
IN thys fourthe yere of kynge Iohn̄, were sene many wonder¦full tokens. For ouer the wynter, the whyche passyd in length and harde∣nesse many yeres before gone / won∣derfull wederynge, as of excedynge lyghtenynges, thunders, and other stormes of wynde and rayne appe∣tyd / and therwyth hayle of the byg∣nesse of hennes egges, the whyche pe¦rished frute and corne / besydes other hurtes and harmes done vppon hou¦ses and yong catell goynge a brode. Also spyrites were sene in the ayer in lykenesse of foulys, berynge fyre in theyr bylles / the whych sette on fyre dyuerse houses. And soone there af∣ter dyed Hubert archbyshop of Caun¦terbury. In whose place was chosen cōtrarye to the mynde of ye kynge, by the more partye of the couent of Caū¦terburye, mayster Stephan Lang∣ton. All be yt some there were that ac¦cordynge to the kynges pleasure, na¦med the byshoppe of Norwyche, and some other. For thys eleccyon the kynge was greuousely amouyd a∣gayne the munkes / and wolde in no wyse alowe or admyt theyr eleccyon. wherfore they sent theyr eleccyon vn¦to pope Innocynt the thyrde / ye why∣che admytted the sayde mayster Ste¦phan and refused the other, and sa∣cryd hym at Uyterb a citye of Italy / and sent hym after with letters of co¦mendacyon vnto kyng Iohn̄ to take the possessyon and frutes of his bene¦fyce. Kynge Iohn̄ wyth thys was sore amouyd / in so myche yt he war∣ned hym his lande and dyuers of the munkes of Caunterbury that fauo∣red hys cause. Aboute Ester kynge Iohn̄ sayled into Normandye / for the Frenche kynge had recommencyd his warre in the countye of Guyan, and wanne therin dayly dyuerse stronge holdes and castellys / and alleyd wyth hym the erle of Alenson / and hadde great ayd of the Portuyns and Brytons. And when he had brought that coun¦trey vnder his subieccyon / he then re¦tourned by Normandye and wanne Conket, the vale of Ruell, and the yle of Audeley. In this season the forenamed pope sente the abbot of Casmer into Fraunce, to refourme these two prynces. with whome was also accompanyed the abbot of Cres¦sons / the whyche endeuored theym so, that they were nere agreed of a peace. But for they wolde that the Frenche kynge shulde repayre and amēde suche houses of relygyon, as he had hurte & ouerthrowen in Guy∣an and other places belongynge to the crowne of Englande / therfore he forsoke the peace / not withstandyng that kynge Iohn̄ in lyke wyse shuld haue repayred all lyke houses apper¦teynynge vnto ye crowne of Fraunce. Then the Frenche kynge in the ende of Auguste layde syege to the castell of Raydepount / & assauted yt by the terme of .xv. dayes contynual¦ly. But the soundyours wythin defen¦dyd yt so manfully, that they slewe many of theyr enymyes / so ye kynge Phylyppe was fayne to gyue backe, tyll he hadde deuysed newe engynes after the warre fassyon. By reason wherof he lastely wanne the sayde castell / and toke there .xx. knyghtes, and an hundred and .vii. yomen and other, and .xxi. arblasters. And when he hadde fortefyed that castell wyth Frenche men / he then yode to the ca¦stell of Gaylarde, and layde hys or∣dynaunce to that, as he hadde done to that other. But he laye there a mo¦neth or he myghte do to yt any hurte or harme. In all whych season kyng Iohn̄ warryd vppon the Borderers of Fraunce / but of hys vyctoryes I fynde lytle wryten.
Anno domini .M.CC.iiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.v.   water Browne.   Balliui.   Anno .v.   wyllyam Chaumberleyn.   IN this yere, that is to saye the .v. ye¦re of kynge Iohn̄ / by reason of the vn¦reasonable wede∣rynge, that in the last yere fell / whete was solde for .xv.s. a quarter. Kyng Iohn̄ in the somer folowyng maryed hys bastarde doughter vnto Lewelin prīce of walys / & gaue with her the castell and lorshippe of Elyn∣gesmere, beynge in the marches of South walys. In Morgans land in walys soon after a knyght apered after his deth to one callid master Moris / to whom by hys lyues tyme he hadde ben spe∣cyall louer and frende. The whyche knyght by his dayes was well lette∣ryd / and vsyd for hys recreacyon to make versys wyth this mayster Mo¦rys, so that the one shulde begynne the metyr and the other shulde ende yt. At whyche tyme of his apperaūce the knyght sayde to mayster Moris, mayster Morys I woll yt thou ende thys verse, Destruet hee regnum rex regum. Nay sayd mayster Moris, ende thou yt / for thou haste all moste made the hole thy selfe. Then sayd the knyght for that I se now thou arte olde and slow, I wyll ende yt my sefe. Destruct hoc regnum, rex regum dupliciplage. The whyche verse maye be englys¦shed as foloweth. The kynge of kynges that lorde that ruleth all, And in whose power all thynges is conteyned / Thys realme for synne he destroye shall wyth dowble plage, be therof ascertayned / Excepte the people here after be refrayned From synne, and them to vertuous lyfe alye, And vyce before vsyd utterly renye. Thys yere the pope sente letters of recommendacyon vnto kynge Io¦han / shewynge that he hadde fauo∣rablye harde hys proctours for all suche maters as they hadde layde agayne the archebyshoppe of Caun¦terburye and some of hys munkys, that he shulde not of ryght be admyt¦tyd to that see. But for the sayde maters of ob∣ieccyon were by hym and hys courte thoughte insuffycyent / he there∣fore exorted and wyllyd hym to ac∣cepte the sayde archebyshopppe to hys grace, and suffre hym to enioye the frutes of hys benefyce / and the munkes by hym exyled, to retourne vnto theyr proper abbay. But the more hys lordes and fren∣des aduysed hym to folowe the po∣pes mynde, the more was he mo∣uyd to the contrarye / in suche maner
that the popes messengers returned wythoute spede of theyr message. yet haue ye harde before, how the Frenche kynge laye about the castell of Gayllarde / and myght not wynne yt by the space of a moneth. wherfore he after sente for newe ordynaunce, and assayled yt so fyersly, that wyth∣in .xx. dayes after he wanne the sayd castell, to the great losse of men on partyes / and toke prysoners there wythin .xxxvi. knyghtes, besyde the other nomber of yomen and arblas∣ters / and that done seasyd the coun∣trey there about, and strengthed the sayde castell wyth hys owne men / and then wyth great pryde returned into Fraunce. Anno domini .M.CC.v.   Anno domini .M.CC.vi.   Thomas Haueryll.   Balliui.   Anno .vi.   Hamonde Bronde.   ABout that season after My∣chelmas, in the vi. yere of the reygn of kyng Iohn̄ / came downe a streyght commaundement from the pope, that excepte the kynge wolde peasybly suffer the archbyshoppe of Caunterbury to occupy hys see, and the munkes theyr abbay, thay ye land shulde be enterdyted / chargynge these foure bishoppes folowyng, that is to saye wyllyam then byshoppe of London, Eustace byshoppe of Ely, walter byshoppe of wynchester, and Gylys byshoppe of Herforde, to de∣nounce the kynge and his lande ac∣cursyd, yf he ye cumaundement dyso∣beyed. Then these foure byshops wyth other to thē assocyate / made in∣staunte labour to the kynge, for the obseruynge of the popes commaun∣dement, and to exchewe the sen∣sours of the chyrche. But all was in vayne. wherefore the .iiii. sayed bys∣shoppes accordyng to the popes wry¦tynge to them sent / the morow folow¦ynge our ladye day annūcyacyon, or the .xxvi. daye of Marche, denoun∣cyd kynge Iohn̄ wyth his realme of Englande accursyd / and shyt faste the dores of the chyrches and other places where dyuyne seruyce before was vsyd, fyrste in London, and af∣ter in all placys as they wente tho∣rough the lande. The kyng for thys dede was so amouyd wyth the sayde foure byshoppes, that he seased all the temporalties to them belongyng into hys handes / and put theym in such fere, that they forsoke this land, and sayled to the archbyshop of Caū¦terburye. In thys yere at Oxēforde in Suff. was taken a fyshe in ye see of forme lyke to a man / and was kepte .vi. mo¦nethes after vpon lande wyth rawe fleshe and fyshe / and after for they coude haue no speche of yt, they caste yt into the see agayne. Anno domini .M.CC.vi.   Anno domini .M.CC.vii.   Iohn̄ walgraue.   Balliui.   Anno .vii.   Rycharde of wynchester.   IN the moneth of nouēber and vii. yere of the kynge / one na∣med Hugh Oysell for treason at Lon was drawen and hanged. And thys yere in ye moneth of May, the French kynge entryd into Normandy wyth
a strōge power / and wanne there the castellys of Faloys, and Dafyount or Danffrount and after seasyd all the landes to the sayde castell belon∣gynge, and so tyll he came to a place called saynte Mychaell in the parell of the see. when the Normannes sawe that kynge Phylyppe thus subdued the stronge holdes of Normandye, and that kynge Iohn̄ to the countrarye made no defence / ye capytayns of Cō¦staunce, of Bayoux or Bayon, of Lyseux, of Anreuches, and Enroux yelded them all to the French kyng, and became hys lyege men / so that he was in possessyon of the substaū∣ce of the duchye of Normandye, ex∣cepte Roan and other few castellys. Then kynge Phylyppe seynge these stronge holdes thus yeldyd vn¦to hym / layed hys syege to the cyty of Roan. where after he hadde lyen a season / the capytayne of the towne desyred a respyte of .xxx. days, gyuynge pledges and hostages, that yf the cytye were not by kynge Iohn̄ or hys assygnes rescwyd wyth in the foresayde terme, they wolde yelde the cytye vnto the French kyn∣ge. And in lyke wyse was appoynte∣ment taken for the castellys named Arquys and Uermeyll. In whyche tyme for that no socoure came / both cytye and castellys were delyueryd into the Frenche kynges handes. And thus hadde thys seconde Phy∣lyppe the possessyon of Normandye / whyche no Frenche kynge hadde sen the tyme of Charlys the symple, why¦che gaue the same duchye to Rollo leder of the Normannys, wyth Gyl∣la hys doughter in maryge / synne the whyche tyme hadde passed ouer iii. hundred yeres. when the Frenche kynge had thus brought into his subiccyon ye duchye of Normandye / he then about saynt Laurence tyde yode into the countye of Guyan, and wanne there the cy∣tye of Poytyers, wyth all the castel∣lys and townes to the sayde cytye be¦longynge. and when he hadde sette that countrey in an order and rule / he spedde hym into Fraunce wyth great pompe and glory. It ys affermed of some authours, that the Frenche kynge made thys warre vppon kynge Iohn̄ by excy∣tynge of the pope, for hys contuma∣cye agane the chyrche. In thys yere also was a com∣munycacyon of a peace to be hadde betwene kynge Iohn̄ and the arche∣byshope of Caunterbury / and was dryuen to a nere poynte of accorde, except restitucyon that kynge Iohn̄ shulde haue made to the archebys∣shop and other bishoppes, the which his offycers hadde taken in the tyme of theyr absence. To the whych resty¦tucyon kynge Iohn̄ in no wyse wold be agreable / wherfore the sayd com∣munycacyon toke none affecte. After thys communycacyon / kynge Iohn̄ was so frette wyth malyce, that in a fury he let proclayme in sondry pla∣cys of hys realme, that all suche per∣sonys as hadde landes and possessy∣ons wythin Englande spyrytuall or temporall, that they shulde returne into Englande by Mychelmas next folowynge / or ellys to be clerely ex¦cludyd from all suche landes. And ouer that streyght commaundement was gyuen to eueryche officer in his countrey, to make besye serche, yf any wrytynges were broughte from the courte of Rome, to any prelate of thys realme / and yf any suche were founden, to brynge hym and his wry¦tynges to the kynges presence. And more ouer that they shuld sease to the kynges vse, all suche landes as to any person were gyuen by the sayde archbyshoppe or by the pryour
of Caunterbury, syn the tyme of elec¦cyon of the sayd archebyshoppe / and the woodes of the same to be fellyd and solde in all haste. Anno domini .M.CC.vii.   Anno domini .M.CC.viii   Roger wynchester.   Balliui.   Anno .viii.   Edmunde hardell.   UPpon the fyrste daye of the moneth of October, and .viii. yere of ye reygne of the kyng / his fyrst sonne Henry by name was borne of dame Isabell his second wyfe in the cytye of wynchester. And thys yere re¦bellyd the Iryshemē, and dyd myche harme in that countrey. whych rebel¦lyon after some wryters was, for so myche as the kynge wolde haue le∣uyed of thē greuous taskys to haue made warre wyth vppon the French kynge. But at lengthe they greuyd or dyspleasyd the kyng in such wyse, that he was fayne to sette a taske tho¦rough hys land to oppresse theyr ma¦lyce. And ouer that he asked of the whyte munkes of England .vi. thou¦sande marke. But they excused them by theyr generall hedde / so that the kynge toke wyth theym great dys∣pleasure. By reason wherof after his retourne oute of Irlande, he vexyd theym sore / and gatheryd of theym more then before he hadde desyred / and caused some abbottys to forsake theyr houses. Then he wyth a puyssaunte armye wente into Irelande, and shortely subdued theym / and after he hadde sette the countrey in a rule, he retour¦ned into Englande. Anno domini .M.CC.viii.   Anno domini .M.CC.ix.   Serle the mercer.   Balliui.   Anno .ix.   Hugh of saynt Albon.   IN this .ix. yere the kyng consy¦derynge the great losse whych he had susteyned by the Frēche kyng in Normandy, & also in Angeou and Poyteau / made {pro}uysyon of all thyn¦ges belongynge to the warre / and af¦ter about mydsomer sayled ouer the see, and landed at Rochell in Poyte¦au wyth a myghty hoste. At whyche season the Frenche kynge was at Thymon and fortyfyed yt / wyth al∣so the castellys of London and My∣rable, and ye town of Poytyers why∣che lytle before he had wonne / and af¦ter wythoute taryenge returned into Fraunce. Then kynge Iohn̄ he∣rynge of the Frenche kynges depar∣tynge / sped him to Angiers & wanne that towne wyth lytle payne, and de¦stroyed ye sayd towne. Thyther came to hym the vycoūt of Thonars, why∣che before was for drede become the Frenche kynges man / & by his ayde kynge Iohn̄ then recoueryd some parte of that countrey. In thys meane whyle kynge Phy∣lyppe gatheryd a new hoste / and he∣rynge of the vnstedfastnes of the vy¦coūt of Thonars, entryd ye landes of the sayde vycounte, and wasted and spoyled the countrey withoute pyty. Then kynge Iohn̄ spedde hym to∣warde the Frenche kynge / so that in shorte processe of tyme the two ho∣stys were wythin lytle dystaunce. But by what meane of fortune I can
not saye (for the meane therof ys not expressyd) the two kynges there toke peace for two yeres folowynge / and after eyther of theym retourned into his owne countrey. In this yere the pope beyng ascer∣teyned of ye cruelnesse of kyng Iohn̄ executed agayne the whyte munkes of hys lande / and also of his obstyna¦cye that he perseuered in agayne ho∣ly chyrche: sent done a new commys¦syon / by vertue wherof the curse of enterdytynge was newly denoūcyd and manyfestyd in sondry places of England. And ouer that the pope by authoryte of the sayde bulle, assoyled or acquyted all the lordes of Englād as well spyrytuall as temporall, of all homage and feauty that they of ryght owyd to the kynge / to the en∣tent that they shulde aryse agayne hym, and depryue hym of all kyngly honour. But all this myght not mo∣ue the kynge from hys errour. ABout the feast of saynt Me∣dard, in the moneth of Iuny and later ende of this foresayd .ix. ye¦re / the forenamed bayllyues were ad¦mytted to ye offyce / and the olde, that is to meane Roger wynchester and Edmunde Hardell were dischargyd, for so myche as they wythstode the kinges purueyour of whete, & wold not suffer him to conuey certayn me∣sures of whete oute of the cytye tyll the cytye were storyd. For thys the kynge toke such dyspleasure, that he sent downe streyght cōmaundement vnto the .xxxv. heddes or rulers of the cytye, that they shulde dyscharge the sayde two bayllyuys, and to put theym in pryson tyll they knewe the kynges further pleasure. wherfore the sayd .xxv. persons toke aduyse / & appoynted a certayne of theym selfe wyth other, and rode to the kynge then beynge at Langley, to empeter grace for the sayde bayllyues / shew∣ynge forther that at that season such dystresse of where was in ye cyty, that the common people were lyke to ha∣ue made an insurreccyon for the sa∣me. By whyche meanes and frende∣shyppe whyche they had in the court, the kynge was so satysfyed that he releasyd theym from pryson. And in short tyme after, the cytesyns of Lon¦don made such sute to the kyng, that they had graunted to them by ye kyn∣ges letters patentes,Fyrst mayred yryffe that they shuld yerely chose to them self a mayre and two shryues. After whyche graunte to theym confermyd / they amonge them self ordeyned, that the two shry¦ues shulde be chosen yerely vppon saynte Mathewes daye .ix. dayes before Mychelmas, and vppon Mi¦chelmas daye to take theyr charge / and the mayre to be chosen vppon the same daye, and chargyd wyth the other vppon the sayde daye of Mychelmas / all be yt that now yt is otherwyse orderyd. Anno domini .M.CC.ix.   Anno domini .M.CC.x. Primus maior.       Peter Duke.   Henry fyz Alwyn.   Anno .x.   Thomas Neell.   IN the daye of saynte Mychael the archaūgell, and .x. yere of kynge Iohn̄ / Henry the sonne of Al¦wyne was sworne & charged as fyrst
mayre of London / and Peter duke, wyth Thomas Neell sworn for shry¦ues / and the name of bayllyues was after this daye clerely auoyded wyth in the sayde cytye from that daye fore¦warde. Also where before thys tyme the brydge ouer Thamys at Lōdon, was made of tymber, and was ruled guydyd, or repayred by a fraternyte or college of prestes. This yere by the great ayde of the cytesyns of Lon∣don and other passyng that way, the sayde brydge was begonne to be edy¦fyed of stone. And in thys yere ye mo¦nastery of saynte Mary Ouereys in South warke, was begonne of to be buylded. And in thys yere the pope sente two legates, or after some writers one legate named Pan¦dulphus / the whyche in the popys name had many sore wordes of mo∣nycyon of obedience to kynge Iohn̄ / and charged hym to suffre the arche¦byshoppe of Caunterburye wyth the pryour and munkes of the same, to enioy theyr ryghtes and possessyons wythin Englande / and taryed here a certayne of tyme to brynge hys pur∣pose aboute. But all was in vayne / for he yode agayn to Rome wythout releasynge of the enterdytynge. Of ye maner of this enterdyccyon of this lande, haue I sene dyuerse opy∣nyons. As some there be ye saye, that the lande was enterdyted thorouly / and the chyrches, and housys of rely¦gyon closyd, that no where was vsed masse nor dyuyne seruyce. By which reason none of the .vii. sacramētes in all this terme shulde be minystred or occupyed, nor chylde crystenyd, nor man confessyd, nor maryed. But yt was not so streyghte / for there were dyuerse places in Englande whyche were occupyed wyth dyuyne seruyce all that season, by lycence purchasyd then or before. Also chyldren were crystyned thorough all the land, and men houselyd and anelyd / excepte suche persones as were excepted by name in the bull, or knowē for may∣teyners of the kynges yll entent. Anno domini .M.CC.x.   Anno domini .M.CC.xi   Peter yonge   Henry fyz Alwyn.   Anno .xii.   wyllyam Elande.   IN this yere whych was the .xi. yere of kynge Iohn̄ after myd∣somer, or the terme of the trewce were fylly runne / kynge Phylyppe wyth a stronge hoste entryd the countye of Guyan, and made newe warre vpon the vycounte of Thonars / and toke hys castell called Parteny, wyth dy∣uerse other stronge holdes to ye sayd vycounte belongynge, and mannyd theym wyth Frenche men / and ordey¦ned one Guyllyam de Roches mar∣shall of Fraunce chefe ruler of that countrey / and after retourned into Fraunce. But yt was not longe af∣ter the kynge was departed / but that the sayd vycount of Thonars made sharpe warre vpon the Frenchemen, with such power as he myght make / and recoueryd a parte of hys lande. But one daye when he hadde wonne a lytle holde, and taken therin a cer∣tayne of prysoners / in his retourne towarde hys holde where he lodged, he was supprysed wyth the forena∣med Guyllyam de Roches & a great multytude of Frenchemen / of ye why¦che after longe fyght he was fynally taken, wyth syr Hyugh Thonars hys brother, syr Aymery de Lesyng∣nam sonne of the erle of Poytyers, & to the nomber of .l. persones of his cōpany / ye whyche were all as pryso¦ners, then sent vnto ye Frenche kyng.
Anno domini .M.CC.xi.   Anno domini .M.CC.xii.   Adam whetley.   Henry fyz Alwyne.   Anno .xii.   Stephan le Graas.   IN this .xii. yere of kyng Iohn̄ the pope sente agayne Pan∣dulphe his legate / and monyshed the kynge in sharpe maner that he shuld receyue mayster Stephan Langton to hys benefyce of the see of Caunter¦bury, and the pryour wyth hys mun¦kes vnto theyr abbay. Then ye kyng callynge to mynde the daūgers whi∣che he was wrappyd in, both wyth∣in hys owne realme and also in Nor¦mandy, and the hurtes whyche day∣ly grew to hym by the same / made a promyse by othe that he wold be obe¦dyent vnto the courte of Rome, and stande and obey all thynge, that the same court woll adiudge hym. Upon whyche promyse so made / the legate sent knowlege vnto the pope, & had commaundement from hym that he shulde bynde the kynge to these arty¦cles folowynge. Fyrste that he shuld peasybly suffer ye forenamed mayster Stephan Langton to entre his land and to enioye the archebyshopryche of Caunterburye, wyth all profytes and frutes belongynge to the same. Secondaryly, that he shulde in lyke maner and forme receyue the pryour of Caunterburye and hys munkys, wyth all other before tyme exyled for the archbyshoppes cause / and not at any tyme here after vex or punyshe any of the sayde persones spyrytuall or temporall, for any of those causes. Thyrdely that he shulde restore vnto the sayd archbyshop & to all ye other, all such goodes as were before tyme taken from any of them by hys offy∣cers, syn the tyme of thys varyance growynge. And fourthly y• he shulde yelde vp into the handes of the pope, all his ryght and tytle that he hadde vnto the crowne of Englande, wyth all reueneus, honoures, and pro∣fytes belongyng to the same, as well temporall as spyrytuall / and to hold yt euer after both he and hys heyres of the pope & his successours as feo¦daryes of the pope. And when these artycles were graunted, and the lor∣des of the lande sworne to the mayn∣tenaunce of the same / the kynge kne¦lyng vpon hys knees toke the crown from hys hedde, and sayde these wor¦des folowynge to the legate delyue∣rynge hym the crowne. Here I re∣sygne vp the crowne of the realme of Englande and Irlande into the po∣pes handes Innocent the thyrd / and put me holy in hys mercy and ordy∣naunce. After rehersall of which wor¦des, Pamdulphe toke the crowne of the kynge, and kepte the possessyon therof .v. dayes after, in token of pos¦sessyon of the sayde realme of En∣gland. And whē ye sayd .v. days were expyred / the kyng resumyd ye crowne of Pandulphe, by vertue of a band or instrument made vnto the pope, ye whyche at length is sette out in the cronycle of Englande and other pla¦ces. wherof the effecte is, yt the sayde kynge Iohn̄ & his heyres, shuld euer after be feodaryes vnto the forena∣myd pope Innocent and to hys law∣full successours popys of Rome / and to pay yerely to the chyrche of Rome a thousande marke of syluer that ys to saye for Englande .vii. hndred marke, and for Irlande .iii. hundred marke. And yf he or hys heyr fayled or brake that paymēt / that then they shulde fayle of theyr ryghte of the crowne. But Polycronycon sayth vii. hūdred marke for Englande and
two hundred marke for Irlande. For the whyche summes after the af¦fyrmaunce of that authour Guydo, the money called Peter pen. Peter pens are at thys daye gatheryd in sondry places of Englande. Anno domini .M.CC.xii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xiii.   Iosne fyz Pet.   Henry fyz Aleyn.   Anno .xiii.   Iohn̄ Garlonde.   IN this .xiii. yere of kyng Ihon̄ and moneth of February / may¦ster Stephan Langton archebyshop of Caunterbury, wyth the other exy∣lys landed in Englande / and after in processe of tyme met wyth the kynge at wynchester. where the kyng recey¦uyd hym with a ioyouse coūtenaūce, and after there was assoyled of the sayde archebyshop. But yet was not the interdiccyon of the land releasyd / for so myche as the kyng at that day hadde not made restitucyon vnto the archbyshope and other, accordynge to the thyrde artycle before rehersyd. For the whych as testyfyeth the En∣glyshe boke, he payed vnto the arch∣byshoppe thre thousande marke / and to the other by partyculers .xv. thou∣sande marke. After whyche thynges performed and done / the interdyccy¦on was adnullyd and fordone, in the moneth of Iuly, and yere of our lord xii hundred and .xii / when yt had stan¦den in force full .vi. yeres, & as mych as from the .xxvi. daye vnto the mo∣neth of Iuly, whyche is vppon .iii. monethes and odde dayes. Anno domini .M.CC.xiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xiiii.   Raufe Eylande   Henry fyz Alwyn.   Anno .xiiii.   Constantyne le Iosne.   IN thys .xiiii. yere of the kyng / for that he wolde not holde the lawes of saynte Edwarde, and also for displeasure that he bare to diuers of them, for they wolde not fauoure hym agayne the pope / and for other causes whyche here be not manyfes∣tyd / the kyng fell at dyssencyon with hys lordes, in so mych that great peo¦ple were reysyd on eyther partyes. But for the kynges partye was the stronger / the erle of Chester with the other lordes toke the cytye of Lon∣don, and helde them therin a certayn of tyme. The whych cronycle of Cax∣ton wyth other, sayen that a great parte of this varyaūce betwene kyng Iohn̄ and his barons was, for be∣cause the kynge wolde wythout skyl¦full dome haue exyled the sayde erle of Chester / whyche to hym hadde no cause, but for so myche as before sea¦sons he hadde often tymes aduysed the kynge to leue hys cruelnesse and his accustomed auowtry, the whych he exercysyd wyth his brothers wyfe and other. But by the meanes of the archebyshoppe of Caunterbury and other prelatys / a peace was taken for a whyle. In this yere vppon the daye of the translacyon of saynt Benet, or ye .xi. day of Iuly / a great parte of the Bo¦rough of Southwarke was brent And in the moneth of Auguste nexte folowynge, was great and myche harme done in London by fyre. Soone after to stablyshe the peace
betwene the kynge and hys lordes, an assemble was made on Berham downe / where the kynge and the lor¦des mette wyth great strenght vpon eyther syde. where a charter or wry∣tyng was dyuysed and made, & there sealyd by the kynge / so that the ba∣ronye was wyth yt contentyd, and departyd in peasyble wyse eueryche man into hys countrey. Anno domini .M.CC.xiiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xv.   Martyne fyz Alys.   Roger fyz Aleyn.   Anno .xv.   Peter Batte.   IN thys .xv. yere of the kynge / the peace whych in the laste ye¦re was betwene kyng Iohn̄ and his baronyes agreed, was by the kynge vyolate and broken. wherfore the lor¦des assembled to them great powers & made sharpe & cruell warre vppon the kynge / in so myche that he was constrayned to sende into Norman∣dye for ayde and socoure, & into other places. Then shortely after came in∣to Englande a Norman knyghte, whyche brought wyth hym a compa¦nye of Normannes, Flemmynges, & Pycardes. This knyght or capitayn was named Foukes de Brent / ye whi¦che wyth his company was so cruell, that he destroyed as well relygyous houses as other, and wrought mych harme to the lande, and putte the lordes to the worse. Then the kynge made Foukes and other of hys com¦pany wardeyns of castellys & strūge holdes in Englād. The lordes seyng the kynge perseuer in hys wronge, and wolde in no wyse be enduced to holde his owne grauntes / but to exe∣cute all thynge after pleasure, and nothynge after lawe or iustyce: cast in theyr myndes howe they myghte brynge the lande in a better rule or state / and by one aduyse and consent wrote vnto Phylyp kyng of Fraūce, that he wolde sende some noble man into Englande / and they wolde ren∣dre ye lande vnto hym. In this whyle kyng Iohn̄ causid to be drawen and hangyd at London one Pyers of Pomfrette / for the sayde Peter had monyshed dyuers mysse happes that shulde come to hym for his vycyous lyfe / and also for he had often war∣ned kynge Iohn̄ that he shuld reygn but .xiiii. yeres / the whyche he ment wythout payenge of trybute. For af¦ter he was become feodary to the po∣pe / he thought the pope reygned as pryncypall lorde of the land and not he. For the whyche and for other ma¦lyce he putte that vertuous man to deth. Of whom in ye .xxxiii. chapiter of the .vii. boke of Policronycon are ma¦ny vertues shewed / the which I ouer passe for lengthynge of the tyme. Anno domini .M.CC.xv.   Anno domini .M.CC.xvi.   Salomon Basynge.   Roger fyz Aleyn.   Anno .xvi.   Hugh Basynge.   UPpon saynt Andrewes euen or the .xxix. daye of Nouem∣ber, in the .xvi. yere of hys reygne / kynge Iohn̄ after he had lyen a cer∣tayne of tyme wyth hys ordynaunce aboute the castell of Rouchester in Kent, he wanne the sayde castell, and toke therin certayne gentylmen that
hadde conspyred agayne hym, the whyche he sente to dyuers prysons. And the barons helde theym to gy∣ther at London, abydynge the com∣mynge of Lewys son to the Frenche kynge, the whyche nere about ascen∣cyon tyde landed in Englande wyth a stronge armye / and so came to Ro∣chester, and layd syege to the castell, and wāne yt wyth lytle payne, for so mych as yt was greatly febled wyth the assaurys lately made by kynge Iohn̄, and syn that tyme not suffy∣cyently repayred. And when he had wonne the sayde castell, he caused all the straungers therein taken, to be hanged / and after came to London, where certayne allyaunces and coue¦nauntes were stablished betwene the lordes & hym, and receyued of them homage as affermeth Policronicon. And after theyr maters betwen them there fynyshed / he with the lordes de¦parted from London, and gatte the castellys of Rygat, of Gylforde, and and of Frenham / and from thens to wynchester, where the cytye was yel¦den vnto them, wyth all the holdes and castellys there about, as wolne∣sey, Odyham, and Beawmere. And about saynte Margaretes daye, he wyth the lordes came agayne to Lon¦don / at whose commynge the towre of London was gyuen vp to theym by appoyntement. And where Roger fyz Aleyn hadde tyll that tyme rulyd the cytye of London as mayre / he for so myche as he was accusyd to the lordes to be fauorable to the kynges partye, was then dyscarged of that offyce / and one called Serle Mercer was chosen in hys place, and so cōty¦nued tyll Mychelmas folowynge. In thys passe tyme kynge Iohn̄ beynge thus ouer sette wyth hys lor¦des, sent messengers to ye pope / shew¦ynge to hym the rebellyon of hys lordes, and how they laboryd hys de¦struccyon. wherfore the pope in all haste sent a legate into Englande na¦med Gualo or Swalo / the whyche after hys commynge, commaunded Lewys to returne into Fraunce / and laboryd to the vttermost of his pow∣er, to appease the kynge and hys ba¦ronye. But all hys laboure was in vayne. Anno domini .M.CC.xvi.   Anno domini .M.CC.vxii.   Iohn̄ Trauers.   wyllyam Hardell.   Anno .xvii.   Andrewe Newlande.   IN thys .xvii. yere of kynge Io¦han / the warre betwene hym and his lordes styll contynuynge, he dyed of the flyxe, as testyfyeth Poly∣lycronycon, at the towne of Newer∣ke, vppon the daye of saynte Calyxte the pope, or the .xiiii. day of October. How be yt the Englyshe boke or cro∣nycle sayeth, that he dyed at Seby∣nyshede an abbay aboute Lyncoln̄, by the impoysonynge of a munke of the same house, the daye after saynte Luke or the .xviii. daye of October / and was buryed at the cytye of wyn∣chester. But the authour of Policro¦nycon sayth he was bowelled at Crongthon abbaye / and buryed at worceter in the myddle of the quyer of munkes, when he hadde reygned xvi. yeres .vi. monethis & .iiii. dayes / leuynge after hym two sonnes, Hen∣ry and Rycharde, wyth sondry dou∣ghters. Of thys Iohn̄ yt is redde, that he founded the abbay of Belewe in the new forest / in recompensacyon of the
paysh chyrches which he there ouer turnyd to enlarge that forest / and an abbay of blacke munkes in the cytye of wynchester, where after ye sayeng of the englyshe cronycle he shulde be buryed. This kynge Iohn̄ also after some wryters, maryed one of hys dough∣ters vnto Otto the fourth of ye name emperour of Almayne and duke of Saxony / the whyche helde warre a∣gayne kynge Phylyppe of Fraunce, as in the .v. chapyter of the storye of the sayde Phylyp before is declared. whyche Otto for hys rapyne and ex∣torcyon done to the chyrch of Rome, was accursyd / and the sayd Phylyp and also kynge Iohn̄ for theyr dyso∣bedyence to the chyrche were also ac¦cursyd / the whyche warred eyther wyth other / so that eyther of thē gre∣uyd and vexid other, to the great hyn¦deraūcis of them and eyther of them. For the whyche consyderacyon a me¦trycyan made these balades of them as foloweth. O quam mirabilia, good lorde thy workes been In punyshement of synners by thy myght wondersly / As by old storyes yt is playnely seen. One synner the other hath correcte vtterly. As Alexander, wyth Iulius, Pom∣pey, and Tholomy, And many other whych as thy scour¦gys were, To punyshe synners and theym self also dere. In lyke wyse nowe reader, yf thou lyste take hyde, And well reuolue in mynde thys hystorye Of these thre prynces, and loke well on theyr dede / Thou shalte conceyue that they dyd wyckydly. I meane kynge Iohn̄, Phylyppe, and Ottony / whyche vnto synne made them selfe so thrall, That of pope Innocent they were ac¦cursyd all. wherfore god sufferyd that one the other to greue, And warre & chase wyth dedely hate and stryfe. Glad that one the other to mischeue / Manassynge eche other wyth spere, sworde, and knyfe / wyth cruell batayll durynge theyr synfull lyfe. wherfore I maye conclude, in factis horum, That multa sunt flagella peccatorū. HEnry the thyrde of ye name, & el∣dest son of kyng Iohn̄, a chylde of the age of .ix. yeres / beganne hys reygne ouer the realm of En¦glande, the .xx. daye of the moneth of October in the yere of our lorde .M. two hundred and .xvi / and the .xxxvi. yere of the seconde Phylyp yet kyng of Fraunce. ye haue before harde of the cruell warre, whyche Lewys son vnto the Frenche kynge wyth the ayde of the baronys of Englande, maynteynyd agayne kynge Iohn̄. The whyche after the deth of the sayde Iohn̄ con∣tynued / for as mych as then some of the lordes that before hadde mayn∣teyned the quarell of Lewis now for¦soke hym, & toke parte with this Hen¦ry as theyr naturall and souerayne lorde. wherof the chefe were the erles of Penbroke & of Chester / the whych wyth theyr retynewe helde sharpe
warre wyth the sayde Lewys & his affynyte, the whych entēdyd to haue ben kynge of Englande, by reason of couenaūtes made wyth certayne lor¦des of the lande, when he was fyrste sent for by them. wherfore the forsayd erles wyth the other of theyr partye, to make theyr partye the strōger / pro¦claymed the sayde Henry kynge of Englande, vppon the foresayde .xx. daye of Octobre thorough the cytye of London / and in all possyble haste after made prouysyon for hys coro∣nacyon / so that vppon the daye of Symonde and Iude next ensuynge, he was crowned at Glouceter, of Peter then byshoppe of wynche∣ster / Lewys the Frenche kynges son beynge then at Lyncolne. In which yere stode styll as gouernoure of the cytye of London tyll Mychelmas nexte folowynge. Anno domini .M.CC.xvii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xviii.   Iohn̄ Trauers.   wyllyam Hardell.   Anno .i.   Andrewe Newlande.   SO soone as the kynge was crowned / cōmyssyons where sent ouer in his name into all places of Englande, to gather strength of men to wythstand the forenamed Le¦wys / & to put hym wyth his Frenche men and other allyaunces out of the land, whych then hadde vnder theyr rule and custodye the castellys of Berkhamsted, of Hertford, & dyuers other. And for thys Lewys wold not sease of hys warre and retourne into Fraunce / therfore the foresayd Gwa¦lo or Swalo the popys legate, accur¦syd hym fyrste by name, and after all such as hym maynteyned or fauored in thys warre agayne kynge Henry. Then the forenamed erlys accompa¦nyed wyth wyllyam erle Marshall of Englande, wyllyam le Bruyz erle of Ferrys, wyth many other yode to Lyncolne / and wanne that town vp∣pon the straūgers. where was slayne a French man called erle of Perches wyth many other souldyours. And there was takē of Englyshmē Serle erle of wynchester, and Hūryde Bo∣hum erle of Herforde, wyth dyuerse other of name. And in thys whyle Lewelyn prynce of walis, for that he ayded the partye of Lewys was ac∣cursyd, and his lande enterdyted. After the towne of Lyncolne was thus wōne from the Frenchmen, Le¦wys wyth other parte of his souldy∣ours drewe towarde London / for so myche as word was brought to hym that his fader had sent to hym a new company of souldyours, the whyche shulde lande in Englande shortely. Trouth yt was that such an ayde of souldyours was made by the Frēche kyng, & cōmyttyd to a capytayn why¦che in the cronycle is named Eustace the mūke / the whych was encoūtryd vpon the see with a capytayn or may¦ster of the .v. portis called Hubert at Burgh, & gaue to hym batayll, and scomfyght hym at length / & sent the hed of ye sayd Eustace vnto ye kynge. when Lewys harde of these tydyu∣ges, and consydered howe dayly his strength mynyshed / he was more in∣clynable vnto peace / so ye in cōclusion he toke money as sayth Policronica & yelded vp his castellis & strengthis which he held / & after was assoyled, & so returned into Fraūce. But of this money ye Lewis receyued, ben diuers opinyons / for the englyshe boke na∣myth yt a thousande marke, and the frenche boke sayth .xv.M. marke.
Anno domini .M.CC.xviii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xix.   Thomas Bokerell.   Robert Serle.   Anno .ii.   Rafe Gylande.   IN thys seconde yere of kynge Henry, when the lande was voyded of the stran̄gers / then inquy¦sycyons were made to knowe what persones hadde fauored the partye of Lewys agayne the kynge / of the whyche the kynge pardonyd many of the lay fee. But ye spyrytuall were put to suche fynes, ye they were com∣pellyd to laye that they myghte to pledge to please the kynge / and ouer that to sue to Rome to be assoylyd. And thys yere Ranulphe erle of Che¦ster, for consyderacyons hym mo∣uynge / toke hys iourney into the ho¦ly lande. But one cronycle sayth he toke that iourney vppon hym, for so myche as hadde contrarye hys alle∣geaunce, made homage vnto Lewis aboue named / and for malyce whych he bare towarde kynge Iohn̄, enten¦dyd at the tyme of that homage do∣ynge to haue made the sayde Lewys kynge of Englande. Anno domini .M.CC.xix.   Anno domini .M.CC.xx.   Benetle Ceytur.   Robert Serle.   Anno .iii.   wyllyam Blounde.   IN thys thyrde yere of kynge Henry, a parlyament was hol¦den at London / by vertue wherof was graunted to the kynge .ii.s. of euery plough lande thorough En∣gland / whych was for ye charge that he before had wyth Lewys warre. Al¦so this yere saynt Thomas of Caun¦terbury was trāslated in the .vii. day of this moneth of Iuly / the whyche was done wyth so great a charge vn¦to mayster Stephan Langton then archibishop of Caunterbury, that the charge therof was not contented ma¦ny yeres after ye deth of the said Ste¦phan. And thys yere as wytnessyth Polycronycon, kynge Henry began the new worke of the chyrche of west¦mynster / whyche after that sayenge shuld be in the .xii. yere of hys age. Anno domini .M.CC.xx.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxi.   Iohn̄ wayle.   Robert Serle.   Anno .iiii.   Iosnele Spycer.   IN thys yere Alexander kynge of Scottes, maryed dame Ia¦ne or Iohan the syster of kynge Hen¦ry. And this yere was great harme done in Englande by vyolence of a whyrlewynde / and fyry dragons, and spyrytys were sene fleynge in the ayer. And this yere were procla¦macyons made in London and tho∣rough out Englande, ye all straun∣gers shuld auoyde the lande by My¦chelmasse next folowyng / except such as came wyth marchaūdyse, and to make sale of them vnder the kynges saufe cōduyt. which was chefely ma∣de to auoyde Foukes de Brent and his complycys, whyche kepte the ca¦stell of Bedforde agayne the kynges
wyll and pleasure. And in thys yere was kynge Henry secondaryly crow¦ned at westmynster the .xvii. daye of May. And thys yere the cytye called Damas in the holy land, was by cry¦sten men gotten from the Turkys. And thys yere came out of the holy lande into Englande Ranulphe erle of Chester, and beganne to buyld the castellys of Charteley & of Bestone / & after he buylded the abbay of De∣lartesse of ye whyte oder. For charge and coste of whyche sayde castellys & abbay / he toke toll thorough all hys lordshyp, of all such as passyd ye way wyth any chafire or marchaundyse. Anno domini .M.CC.xii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxii.   Rycharde wymbeday.   Robert Serle.   Anno .v.   Iohn̄ wayell.   IN thys .v. yere of kynge Hen¦ry / at Oxenforde was holden a generall coūsayll of the byshoppes and clergye of thys lande. In tyme of whyche counsayle a man was ta∣ken, the whyche shewyd hym selfe to be Cryste, and preached many thyn∣ges of errour, whyche the clerkes at those dayes vsyd. And to approue that he was Iesus the sonne of god, and that he was comen to refourme those errours and other / he shewyd the carectys and tokens of woun∣des in hys bodye, handes, and fete, like to Iesus that was nayled on the crosse. Then he was apposyd and approuyd a false dyssymuler. wher∣fore by dome of ye counsayll he was iudgyd o be nayled to the crosse, and so delyueryd to the executours / the whyche at a place callyd Albur∣burye nayled hym to a crosse tyll he was dede. Also this yere the kynge layde sye∣ge vnto the castell of Bedforde that Fowkys de Brent hadde so longe holden by strength. Thys syege be∣ganne vppon the euen of the Assen∣cyon of our lorde / and so contynued tyll our Lady daye assumpcyon. In whyche passetyme many stronge as∣sautys were made, to the great losse of men on bothe partyes. But fynal¦ly aboute thys foresayde daye of as∣sumpcyon, yt was taken by fyerse assaute. wherein was taken the fore∣named Fowkys de Brent, and vpon the nōber of .lxxx. souldyours, wher∣of the more parte were put to deth: and the sayde Fowkys after he had lyen a certayne of tyme in pryson, was for his fynaunce delyueryd and flemyd the lande. And in this yere came the frere Mynors fyrst into En¦glande. These are graye freres of the order of saynte Fraunces / whych yf that be trewe, they shulde come in to Englande vppon .vi yeres before the deth of saynt Fraunces. For af∣ter affyrmaunce of the authoure of Cronica cronicarum, Iacobus Phi¦lippus and other / saynte Fraunces dyed in the yere of grace .xii. hūdred and .xxvii. And that order was fyrst confyrmed of Honorius the thyrde of that name pope of Rome, in the yere of grace .xii. hundred and .xxiiii. Thys order fyrste beganne vnder a fewe nomber of frerys at the cytye of Caunterbury / and after came vnto London, and restyd theym there tyll they hadde an house there foundyd by Isabell wyfe of Edwarde the se¦conde, as after shall be shewyd in the storye of the sayde Edwarde / all be yt the sayde house was begonne of Margarete the wyfe of Edwarde the fyrste.
Anno domini .M.CC.xxii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxiii.   Rycharde Renger.   Robert Serle.   Anno .vi.   Ioseus le Iosne.   IN thys .vi. yere of the reygne of kynge Henry, a conspyracy was made by one Constantyne the sonne of Arnulphe wythin the cytye of London / for the whyche he was drawen and hāged the morow folow¦ynge our Lady daye Assumpcyon. This conspyracy was dysclosed by a cytezyn named walter Bokerell / and was so heynous & greuous to ye king that he was in mynde & purpose to haue throwen downe ye wallys of the cytye. But when he had well concey¦ued that the persones whych entēded this cōspiracy were but of the rascal∣lys of the cytye, & that none of ye hed∣dys or rulers of the same were ther∣unto consentynge / he aswagyd hys ire and greuouse dyspleasure, whych he entendyd towarde the cytye. Anno domini .M.CC.xxiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxiiii.   Rycharde Iyoner.   Robert Serle.   Anno .vii.   Thomas Lamberde.   IN this seuenth yere / Iohan kynge of Hierusalem came in∣to Englande, and requyred ayde of kyng Henry to wynne agayne that holy cytye / but he retourned wyth small comforte. And about this tyme Iohn̄ the sonne of Dauid erle of An¦gwyshe in Scotland, and nere kyn∣nesman vnto Ranulphe of Chester, maryed the doughter of Lewelyn prynce of walys / as yt were for a fy∣nall accorde betwene the sayde Lewe¦lyne and Ranulphe euer after to be contynued. Anno domini .M.CC.xxiiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxv.   wyllyam Ioynour.   Rycharde Reynger.   Anno .viii.   Thomas Lamberte.   IN thys .viii. yere of kyng Hen¦ry / a parlyament was holden at where among other thyn∣ges / the lordes and baronye of the lande graunted vnto the kynge and to his heyres kynges,The graūt of warde & maryage the warde and mariage of theyr heyres / which dede was after of lerned men called Initi¦um malorū, that is to meane the be∣gynnynge of yllys or of harmes. Anno domini .M.CC.xxv.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxvi.   Iohn̄ Trauers.   Rycharde Renger   Anno .ix.   Andrew Bokerell.   IN thys .ix. yere of kynge Hen∣ry / Frederyke the seconde of that name, & emperour of Almayne, for his contumacy agayn the chyrch of Rome was accursyd of the .ix. Gre¦gory then pope. wherfore soon after
he toke two cardynallys and dyuers prelatys as they were goynge to a generall counsayle kepte by the sayd pope, at a place callyd Spolete a cy∣tye of Italye. Anno domini .M.CC.xxvi.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxvii.   Roger Duke.   Rycharde Renger.   Anno .x.   Martyne fyz wyllyam.   IN thys .x. yere of the reygne of kynge Henry / the plees of the crowne were pletyd in the towre of London. In this yere also as wyt¦nessyth the Frenche cronycle, dy∣uerse souldyours, whyche as to thys daye kepte certayne castellys in the countye of Poytiers, as the castell of Monstruell the castell of Nyort, and the townes of Angely and of Rochel were by the Frenche kynge so assau∣tyd, that they were constrayned to gyue them ouer to the Frenche kyng then beyng Lewis the nynthe of that name / or after some writers the .viii, and sonne of Phylyppe the seconde. Anno domini .M.CC.xxvii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxviii.   Stephan Bokerell.   Roger Duke.   Anno .xi.   Henry Cobham.   IN thys .xi. yere of thys kynge Henry / the shyrywyke of Lon∣don and of Mydd. were lettyne to ferme for the summe of .iii. hundred poūde, by yere to the shryues of Lon∣don. And the .xviii. daye of February the same yere, was graunted by the kynge that all werys in Thamys shulde by plucked vppe and destroy∣ed for euer. And the .xvi. daye of Marche folowynge, the kynge graū¦ted by hys charter ensealyd, that the cytyzens of London shulde passe toll free thorough all Englande. And yf any cytezyns were cōstrayned in any cytye, borough or towne in England to paye any toll / yt then the shryues of London to attache any man com∣mynge to London of the sayde cytye borough or towne where suche toll was payed / and hym and hys goo∣dys to wythholde and kepe, tyll the cytesyners of London be restoryd of all suche money payed for the sayde tolle, wyth all costes and damagys sustayned for the same. And the xviii. daye of Auguste folowynge, the kyng graūted to ye sayd cytesyns of London wareyn / that is to mea∣ne that the cytesyns haue free lyber∣tye of huntynge certayne cyrcuyte aboute London. And in thys yere the towne of Lymosyn wyth dyuers holdes in Pyerregot and Aluerne in the countye of Guyan, were ge∣uen vppe to the forenamed Lewys the Frenche kynge. wherfore the kynge sente ouer hys brother Ry∣charde erle of Cornewayll shortely after / whyche landed at Burdeaux wyth .iii. hundred saylles. Anno domini .M.CC.xxviii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxix.   Stephan Bokerell.   Roger Duke.   Anno .xii.   Henry Cobham.  
IN the begynnyge of thys .xii. yere of kynge Henry / mayster Stephan Langton archbyshoppe of Caunterburye dyed / and the great deane of Paulys mayster Rycharde wethyrshed was hys successour. And in thys tyme the fraunchyse and ly∣bertyes of the citye were by the kyng confyrmyd / & to eueryche of ye shery¦ues was graūted to haue .ii. clerkes & .ii. officers wythout mo. And to the citesyns of Lōdon was also graūted thys yere, that they shuld haue & vse a common seale. And in this yere Ry¦charde erle of Cornewayll besyeged the town of saynt Machayre in Guy¦an. And whan he hadde wonne yt by strength / he then layed hys syege to ye town of Rochell, tyll yt was resto∣ryd by the marshall of Fraunce. Anno domini .M.CC.xxix.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxx.   walter wynchester.   Roger Duke.   Anno .xiii.   Robert fyz Iohn̄.   In this xiii. yere of kynge Hen¦ry / vppon Trynyte sondaye, or after an other authour vpon whyt sondaye, whyle the byshoppe of Lon¦don was at the hygh masse in saynte Paulys chyrch of Lōdon, fell sodeyn¦ly suche thyckenesse of darkenesse of cloudes, and therwyth suche stenche and tempeste of thunder and lyghte∣nynge, that the people there assem∣blyd voyded the chyrche / and the vy∣caryes and chanons forsoke theyr deskys, that the byshoppe remayned in great fere alone / excepte a fewe of his menyall seruauntys and suche as attendyd vpon hym at the aulter. Also in thys yere the fame of that blessyd woman Elyzabeth doughter of the kynge of Hungarye beganne to spredde. The whyche before and after the deth of her husbande Lan∣graue duke of Thorynge in Al∣mayne, shamyd not for Crystes sake to weshe the sorys and bylys of la∣zars and of other poore men, be∣syde other manyfolde dedes of cha∣ryte. By vertue of whyche blessyd and vertuouse lyfe / she by her lyfe thoroughe the power of god shewed many and dyuerse myracles. Among the whyche by her prayer .xvi. men were from deth to lyfe arreryd / and a man borne blynde, to syght resto∣ryd. wherfore by Gregorye the .ix. of that name and pope of Rome / she was amonge the college of the bles∣sed nomber of sayntes ascrybyd and alowed / and commaunded her feast to be halowed the .xiii. kalendas of December. Anno domini .M.CC.xxx.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxi.   Rycharde fyz wyllyam.   Roger Duke.   Anno .xiiii.   Iohn̄ wodbourne.   IN this .xiiii. yere of the kinge was ordeyned by the mayre, and rulers of the cytye of London, that no shryue of that cytye shulde cō¦tynew lenger in offyce then one yere. wherof the cause was, that dyuerse of theym by contynuaunce of theyr offyce dyd dyuerse extorcyons, and toke brybys of vytellers wyth other defautys / whyche were founde and prouyd preiudycyall & hurtefull to the common weale of the sayde citye.
Anno domini .M.CC.xxxi.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxii.   Mychaell of saynte Elene.   Roger Duke.   Anno .v.   walter Denfelde.   IN this .xv. yere, the kynge had graūted tyll hym a quindecim or fyftene of the temporaltye / and a dyme and an halfe of the spyrytual∣ty, to recouer hys lādes loste in Nor¦mandy, Guyan, and Poyteau. And in this yere Huberte of Burgth, yt at this daye was chefe iustyce of En∣glande, hadde greuyd or dyspleased the kynge in suche wyse, that he was compellyd to fle the kynges syght. But he was so strayghtly pursued, yt he was taken in a chapell of Brent∣wood in Essex / and so cast in pryson at the kynges commaūdement. But after by labour of the blessyd byshop Edmunde of Pountenay, he was re¦cōcylyd to the kynges fauour / when he had ben prysoned vppon .iiii. mo¦nethes, and exyled vppon .xiii. mo∣nethis. And this yere was done grete harme in London by fyre / the whych beganne in an house of a widowe na¦med dame Iane Lambert. Anno domini .M.CC.xxxii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxiii.   Henry Eldementon.   Andrew Bukerell.   Anno .xvi.   Gerarde Batte.   IN this .xvi. yere / kynge Henry vppon complaynt brought be¦fore hym, by the frendes of Lewelyn prynce of walys, ye willyam le Bruce or Brunze shuld cōspyre agayne the kynge / or after some, for he kepte vn∣lawfully the wyfe of the forenamyd Hauylyn: he was after longe pryso¦nement hanged. And this yere dyed Ranulphe erle of Chester, Lyncolne, & Hūtyngedon. And his systers son named Iohn̄, sonne vnto the erle of Angwyshe as before in ye .vii. yere of this kyng is declared was his heyre, and helde that lordshyp after hym. This Iohn̄ of moste wryters is cal∣led Iohn̄ Scot / for so myche as his father was a Scotte. This foresayd Ranulphe hadde no chylde, all be yt he hadde .iiii. systers. The eldeste hyght Molde or Mawde / and was maryed to Dauid erle of Angwyshe, and was moder to ye foresayde Iohn̄ Scot. The seconde was named Ha∣wys, and was maryed vnto the erle of Arundell, The thyrd Agnes, was ioyned to the erle of Derbye. And the fourth named Mabely, was ma¦ryed vnto the erle of wynchester cal∣led Robert Quynacye. Thys Ra∣nulphe dyed at walyngforde / and was buryed in the chapter house of the munkys at Chester / and ordey∣ned the forenamed Iohn̄ Scotte to be hys heyre, for that he wolde not haue so noble a lordshyppe runne a∣monge or to be dyuyded betwene so many dystanys. And thys yere dyed mayster Rycharde wethyrshed arch∣byshoppe of Caunterburye / whose successour was blessyd Edmunde of Pountenay. Anno domini .M.CC.xxxiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxiiii.   Symonde fyz Marre.   Andrew Bukerell.   Anno .xvii.   Roger Blounte.  
IN this .xvii. yere of the reygne of kyng Henry / the forenamed Edmunde of Pountenay or of Abyn¦don, was sacred archebyshop of Caū¦terburye. He was named of Pounte¦nay, for so myche as he was buryed at Pountnay in Burgoyne. And he was named Edmunde of Abyndon by reason he was borne ī Albyndon. Thys blessyd man as before in the xv. yere is shewyd / reconcylyd Hu∣bert of Burgth to the kinges grace, and causyd hym to be restored to his former offyce, as chefe iustyce of this lande. In thys yere also the kyng beganne the foundacyon of the ho∣spytayll of saynte Iohn̄ wythout the Eestgate of Oxenforde. In whyche yere also fyll wonderfull wether, as thunder and lyghtenynge vnlyke vnto other.An erth¦quake. And theruppon folowed an erthquake, to the great fere of the inhabytauntys of Huntyngdon, and nere there aboute. Anno domini .M.CC.xxxiiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxv.   Rafe Aschewy.   Andrew Bukerell.   Anno .xviii.   Iohn̄ Norman.   IN thys .xviii. yere of kynge Henry / the Iewys dwellynge at Norwyche were broughte to fore the kyng at westmynster, to answere to a complaynte made agayne them by one callyd Iohn̄ Toly of the sayd towne of Norwyche, that they shuld stele a chylde, and yt cyrcumcysyd of the age of a yere, and after kepte the same chyld secret to the entent to crucyfye yt, in despyte of Crystes re∣lygyon. But howe the mater was fo¦lowed, or howe so the Iewys acquy¦tyd theym selfe by theyr answere / trouthe yt is that they retourned vn∣punyshed. And in thys yere Frede∣ryke the second of that name, and em¦perour of Almayne / maryed the sy∣ster of kynge Henry named Isabell, as testyfyeth Policronica. Anno domini .M.CC.xxxv.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxvi.   Gerarde Batte.   Andrew Bukerell.   Anno .xix.   Robert Ardell.   IN thys .xix yere. the morow af¦ter saynte Hyllary, or the .xiiii. daye of Ianuary / Edmunde archbys¦shoppe of Caunterburye spowsyd the kynge and Eleanoure the dou∣ghter of the erle of Prouynce in his cytye of Caunterburye. And in the vtas of the sayde Hyllary / she was crowned at westmynster as quene of Englande. where in the felde by westmynster lyenge at the weste ende of the chyrche, was kepte royall solempnite and goodly iustes, by the space of .viii. dayes. And the same yere the statute of Merton was enac¦ted / whych is to meane certayn actes made by acte of parlyament, holden by the kynge & his lordes & cōmons at ye towne of Merton.Statute of Mer∣ton. where among other actys was ordeynyd a remedy for wydowes that were defrauded of theyr dowers / & also how heires with in age shuld be intreated / & remedies for such as were stolen or with holdē cōtrary ye gardeyns willis. But more certaynly yt was ordeyned at a {per}lya¦mēt at Merton foresayd, which was holdē the .xxx. yere of this kyng, in ye morowe folowyng the daye of saynt Martyn, or the .xii. day of Nouēber.
Anno domini .M.CC.xxxvi.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxvii.   Henry Cobham.   Andrew Bukerell.   Anno .xx.   Iurden Couentre.   IN this .xx. yere of kynge Hen∣ry / Iohn̄ Scot before named erle of Chester, dyed wythoute yssue male. whefore the kynge cōsyderyng the great prerogatyues belongynge to that erledome, gaue vnto his dou¦ghters other possessyons, & toke the erledome into hys own hand. Thys Iohn̄ dyed at Dorondale / and was buryed amonge hys antecessours at Chester, as affyrmeth Policronycon. And also he sayth that he dyed wyth¦out any chylde / and that the foresayd exchaunge was made wyth the fore∣named systers of Ranulphe, before expressyd in ye .xvi. yere of this kyng. Anno domini .M.CC.xxxvii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxviii.   Iohn̄ Thesalan.   Andrew Bukerell.   Anno .xxi.   Gerarde Cordwaner.   IN this .xxi. yere, Octoboon a legate of the .ix. Gregory and pope, came into Englande / and or∣deyned many good ordynauncys for the chyrche. But not all to the plea∣sure of the yonge clergy of England. wherfore as he one daye passed tho∣rough Oxenford, the scolars sought occasyon agayn his seruauntes and fought wyth them, & slew one of the same / and put the legate in suche fere, that he for his sauegarde toke ye bel¦fray of Osney / and there helde hym tyll the kynges mynysters cōmynge from Abyndon wyth strength, mede∣lyd with fayre wordes deliueryd him and conueyed hym after wyth a com¦petente companye vnto walyngford. where he accursyd the misdoers, and punyshed theym in suche wyse, that the regentes & maysters of that vny∣uersyte were lastely compellyd to go barefote thorough Chepe to Paulys at London, and there to aske of hym forgyues, and hadde that trespace wyth great dyffyculte forgyuen. Anno domini .M.CC.xxxviii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xxxix.   Iohn̄ whylhale.   Rycharde Renger   Anno .xxii.   Iohn̄ Goundresse.   IN thys .xxii. yere / a false clerke of the foresayde vnyuersyte of Oxenforde, whyche feyned hym selfe madde, and beforetyme had espyed the secret places of the kinges court / came by a wyndowe towarde the kin¦ges chamber at hys maner of wood∣stoke, entendynge to haue slayne the kynge. But he was espyed by a wo∣man and taken / and so conueyed to Couentre, and there arreygnyd of that dede. where after lawfull pro∣uys of hys malycyous entent made, he for the same was there drawen & hanged. And in thys yere vppon the euen of saynte Botolphe / or the xxvi. daye of Iuny, was borne at westmynster Edward that after was surnamed Longeshanke. This after his father was kynge.
Anno domini .M.CC.xxxix.   Anno domini .M.CC.xl.   Remonde Bengly.   wyllyam Ioynour.   Anno .xxiii.   Rafe Aschewy.   IN this .xxiii. yere of kyng Hen¦ry / before the tyme of the elec∣cyon of the shryues of London, one Symōde fyz Mary, whych before in the .xvii yere of the kynge had ben in that offyce, had purchased a cōmaun¦dement of the kynge dyrected to the mayre and rulers of the cytye, yt they shulde cause hym to be electe to that offyce for that yere folowynge. But the mayre wyth the heddes of the cy∣tye, consyderynge that commaunde¦ment to be a derogacyon vnto the ly¦bertyes of ye cytye, wythstode yt / and chase the forenamed Rafe Ashwy, & put the sayde Symonde by / for the whyche he complayned hym to the kynge. Then the kynge sente for the mayre and the rulers of the city / and hadde vnto theym many wordes of dyspleasure, for the dysobeyenge of his cōmaundement / and fardermore discharged willyam Ioynour which that yere was agayne chosen newely to be mayre for the yere folowynge / and chargyd the cytesyns to procede to a newe eleccyon for theyr mayre. whyche then to satysfye the kynges pleasure, chase Gerarde Batte. By whose meanys and good polycye the sayde mayr wyth the cytesyns demea¦ned theym so well to the kynge, that they obteyned hys gracious fauour, and causyd the forsayde Symonde to fayle of his purpose / and was not after admyttyd to that offyce, tyll he hadde submyttyd hym to the rule of the mayre and rulers of the same cy∣tye. The whyche Symonde beha∣ued him so well after, that he was ad¦myttyd for an alderman. But in short processe after he demeanyd him so yll, and so contraryously vnto the weale and good order of the cytye / that he was dyscharged of hys alder¦manshyp, and dyschargyd from all rule and counsayll of the cytye, as in the .xxxiiii. yere of thys kynge fo∣lowynge is touched. Anno domini .M.CC.xl.   Anno domini .M.CC.xli.   Iohn̄ Gysors.   Gerarde Batte.   Anno .xxiiii.   Mychaell Tony.   IN thys .xxiiii. yere of kynge Henry / saynte Paulys chyrch of London was newely halowyd. And the great Chaan of Tartarys before in the seconde yere of kynge Iohn̄ myndyd or touched of theyr be¦gynnynge, in thys yere after he had from the Turkys wonne myche of the Eest landes, he sent an hoste into the lande of Hūgary / the whych held the people of that countrey so shorte, that as witnessyth the authour of Po¦licronica and other, they were con∣strayned of necessyte to ete theyr own chyldren and other vnlefull metys. But the authoure of Cronica croni∣carum sayth, that this mysery fell to the peple of Hungary, in the yere of our lorde .xii. hundred and .xxi. whyche after that sayenge shulde be in the fyfte yere of thys kynge.
Anno domini .M.CC.xli.   Anno domini .M.CC.xlii.   Iohn̄ Uyoll.   Remonde Bengley.   Anno .xxv.   Thomas Duresyne.   IN this .xxv. yere of kynge Hen¦ry / Gerarde Batte was agayn chosen mayre for this present yere. And after whose eleccyon, he was by the worshipfull of the citye conueyed vnto woodstoke, and presentyd after the custome vnto the kynge. But the kynge enfourmed of hys laste yeres dealynge, by suche as ought to hym no good wyll / sayde that he wolde not admytte hym to that offyce, tyll such tyme as he came to westmynster wyth whyche answere the sayde Ge∣rarde wyth his companye returned vnto London. It was not longe af∣ter or the kyng came to westmynster / where accordynge to theyr dutye the cytesyns of London agayn awayted vppon the kynge to know his plea∣sure.The  pre¦sence where the kynge callyd before hym the sayde mayre / and after cer∣tayne questyons to hym put, he cau∣sed hym to be sworne in his presence. After whyche othe to hym geuen / the kynge charged hym by vertue of the same, that he shulde not take of the bakers and bruers and other vytel∣lars of the cytye .xl. pounde, whyche other of his predecessours, and also he that laste yere hadde taken. And also that he incontynently after hys commynge to London, shuld restore vnto the sayd vytellars and other cy¦tesyns, all suche money as he hadde wyth wronge in that precedyng yere taken of the comynaltye of the citye. But for the sayde Gerarde allegyd for hym certayne consideracyons, be sechynge the kynge to pardon hym of that restytucyon / the kynge in dys¦pleasure swore a great othe, that he shulde not that yere be mayre, nor at any tyme there after. And so the com∣mons certyfyed of the kynges plea∣sure, chase in his place or stede / Rey∣ner de Bungaye. And this yere the kynge yode into walys. wherof he∣rynge Dauid then prynce of walys, mette wyth the kyng at Ruthlande / and submyttyd hym to the kynges grace. Also this yere the blessyd Ed∣munde archebyshoppe of Caunter∣bury, beynge at Pountnay in the pro¦uynce of Burgoyne dyed / and there was buryed / & was after translatyd into ye same place within .x. yeres af¦ter his deth, by commaundement of Innocent the fourthe then pope of Rome / because of his manyfolde my¦racles whyche god shewyd for hym after hys deth. All be yt in hys legen¦de yt is shewyd that he dyed twentye myle from Pountnay called Soly / and was after buryed and transla∣ted at Poūtnay. Of this blessed man Polycronycon shewyth many ver∣tuyes in the .xxxv. chapiter of his .vii. boke, whyche here I ouer passe for lengthynge of the tyme. And thys ye¦re one wyllyam of the Marshe, was at London for treason drawen and hanged. Fyrst older men of London. Thys yere also were alder men fyrste chosen wythin the cytye of London / whyche then hadde the rule of the cytye and of the wardes of the same / and were then yerely chaū¦gyd, as now the shryues be chaūged. Anno domini .M.CC.xlii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xliii.   Iohn̄ fyz Iohn̄.   Remonde Bongley.   Anno .xxvi.   Rafe Ashewy.  
IN this .xxvi. yere of kyng Hen¦ry / Bonyface was sacryd arch¦byshoppe of Caunterbury. And this yere the kyng wyth a fayre company saylyd into Normandy. whyche vy∣age as sayth ye frenche cronycle was made by the styrynge of a Frenche man named erle of the Marche / for so myche as ye sayd erle refusyd to do homage vnto Alphons brother vnto Lewys the .x. of that name, and sur∣named saynte Lewys then kynge of Fraunce. Thys Lewys the yere be∣fore hadde maryed his sayde brother vnto the doughter of the erle of Tho¦louse / and hadde gyuen to his sayde brother the erledome of Poyteau, wyth all the landes of Aluerne. By reason wherof he wold haue cau¦syd the sayd erle of Marche, to haue done homage vnto the sayde Alphōs for such landes as the sayd erle held of the sayde erledome of Poytyers. But for ye sayd erle of Marche knew well that the ryght of Guyan belon∣gyd to the kinge of England / he ther¦fore, and for other allyaunces made bewene kynge Henry and hym, refu∣syd the doynge of that homage / and after came to kynge Henry, and excy¦tyd hym to make warre vppon the Frenche kynge. By reason wherof the kynge made prouysyon, and so landed with a stronge power at Bur¦deaux. After the affyrmaunce of the frenche boke, this erle of the Mar∣chis had maryed the mother of kyng Henry. Then it folowyth in this whyle the Frenche kynge warryd vppon ye lan¦des of the erle of Marche / and hadde wōne .ii. castellys of his named Foūteneys and Uyllers, wyth dyuerse other whych I passe ouer. And when he had beten downe some of them, & some storyd with new soudyours / he then went vnto a castel named Mau¦coune, and brake a brydge after him, for so myche as he was warned that the kynge of Englande was nere vn¦to hym. At the sayd brydge was a lyt¦tell skyrmyshe / but lytle harme was there done. Then the Frenche kynge toke the way ouer the ryuer of Tha∣rent towarde Taylbourgh, wastyng and destroyenge the countrey as he went / and so forth towarde the town callyd Saynces. And kynge Henry wyth hys hoste made towarde hym in al that he myght. In kepyng this course / the vawarde of the kynge en¦countryd wyth the erle of Boleyne, whyche was vppon the Frenche kyn¦gys partye. That season the erle of Saynces bare the banner of ye erle Marches, beyng in ye vaward of the kynge. Betwene these two erles was sore fyght / so that many a man vp∣pon both partyes was slayn / among the whych the sayde erle of Saynces was slayne. Then came on bothe strengthes vppon eyther syde, so that both kynges fought in that batayll / and great slaughter of men was vp¦pon both sydes. But in the ende the Frenche men were vyctours, & toke prysoners .xxii. men of name, as kny∣ghtes and of hygher degre, and .iii. clerkes of great fame and ryches, be¦syde other to the nomber of .v. hūdred of meane people as wytnessyth the frenche boke. But of these men of na∣me, nor yet of the ryche clerkes, none is named, nor yet shewyd what good they payed for theyr raōsome. wher∣fore me lyste to wryte no farther of this great victory / all be it yt the sayd boke sayth farther, that kyng Henry for fere tourned backe vnto Burde∣aux / and there made meanes to the kynge of Fraunce for a peace. But of all thys fynde I no worde in the englyshe cronycles. Then the erle of Marches by mea∣ne of his sonne, was reconcyled vnto the Frenche kynge, amd restoryd to
hys landes / excepte thre castellys, whyche were named Mespyne, Cre∣taye, and Estardye / the whyche the Frenche kynge retayned in his owne possessyon. And soone after came vn¦to the Frenche kynge the lordes of the castellys of Myrabell, & of Mor∣taynge / submyttynge theym also vn¦to the kynges grace / besechyng hym of pardon, that they hadde so to his hygh dyspleasure fauored hys enymy the kynge of Englande. And after came in dyuerse other lordes & capytaynes / so that he was in posses¦syon of all the countrey of Guyan & Poyteau, vnto ye ryuer of Gyroūde. I haue rehersyd the more of thys cronycle of Fraunce / to the entente that the reders may well apperceyue the pryde and boste of the Frēchmen. For in all theyr wrytynge, when they come to any mater that soūdyth any thynge to theyr honour / yt is wryten in the lengest and most shewyng ma¦ner to theyr honour and worshyppe. But as I haue sayde before in the v. capyter of the storye of the .ii. Phy¦lyppe kynge of Fraunce / yf yt sound any thynge to theyr dyshonour, then shall yt be abreuyatyd or hyd, that the trouth shall not be knowen. And that appereth well here by theyr own wrytynge. For in ye .vii. yere of kyng Iohn̄, yt is shewyd howe Phylyppe the seconde then kynge of Fraunce had wonne all Normandy and Guy¦an. And yet at thys daye thys kynge Lewys warryd agayne in the same countrey / so that they euer tell of the wynnyng, but they touche nothynge of the agayne losynge. Then yt folowyth in the storye / when kynge Henry hadde as before is sayde, concludyd the foresayde peace, of the which by myne authour is no terme sette / the kynge retour∣ned into Englande. Anno domini .M.CC.xliii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xliiii.   Hugh Blount.   Rafe Ashewy.   Anno .xxvii.   Adam Basynge.   IN this .xxvii. yere, the kynge returned from Burdeaux into Englande. And thys yere the plees of the crowne were kept in the towre of London. And thys yere Gryffyth, whych was sonne of Lewelyn lately prynce of walys, entendyng to haue broken pryson / fell ouer the wall of the inner warde of the towre of Lon¦don and brake hys necke. Anno domini .M.CC.xliiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xlv.   Rafe Spycer.   Mychael Tony.   Anno .xxviii.   Nycholas Batte.   IN thys .xxviii. yere of kynge Henry as testyfyeth Polycro∣nycon / a Iew dygged the grounde in a place in Spayn called Tholeet, to the entent to make him a more lar¦ger vyne yerde. where in tyme of his dyggynge he fande a stone closyd on all partyes. But for he perceyued yt to be holowe he brake the stone / and founde therein a boke as bygge as a sawter, wyth leuys all of tree. This boke was wryte in nthre dyuers lan∣guagys, in greke, in ebrewe, and in latyne / and the mater therof was of
thre worldes that shuld come. Of the whyche he poyntyd the commynge of Cryste to the begynnynge of the thyrde worlde, whyche was expressyd in thys maner of wyse. In the begyn¦nynge of the thyrde worlde, goddes son shall be borne of a mayde. when the Iewe had well beholden the con∣tentys of the boke, and sawe that yt conteyned so longe tyme as from A∣dam to Anticriste, and shewyd many prophecyes that were fulfyllyd and paste / he anon renouncyd hys iuda∣isme or Moysen lawe, and was cry∣styned, and lyued after as a crysten man. Anno domini .M.CC.xlv.   Anno domini .M.CC.xlvi   Robert Cornehyll.   Iohn̄ Gysors.   Anno .xxix.   Adam Bewly.   IN thys .xxix. yere / Nycholas Batte contrary the ordynaūce before in the .xiiii. yere of thys kynge made, was agayne chosen shryue of London. For the whych he was con¦uycte of periurye / and so dyscharged and punyshed. And for yt Mychaell Tony, whych for this yere also was chosen mayre, was by deposycyon of the Aldermen founde gyltye in the sayde cryme of periurye: therfore he was deposyd from his offyce & punis¦shed. And for hym was chosen mayre Iohan Gysours / and for Nicholas Batte was chosen shryue Robert of Cornhyll. In this yere also as te∣styfyeth Ieffrey of Monmouth / Ro∣bert Grosehed thē byshoppe of Lyn∣colne, wyth other prelatys of ye land, complayned theym vnto the kynge of the waste of the goodes and patry monye of the chyrche, whyche dayly was wasted and mysspent by the aly∣aunt byshoppes and clerkes of this lande. Of the whych straungers one named mayster Martyne, and nere kynnysman of Innocent the thyrde late pope was one. The whyche the kynge by helpe of the Englyshe bys∣shoppes auoyded, wyth other lyke offendours out thys realme. Also in thys yere the patryarke of Hierusa∣lem, sente vnto the kynge a neume of bloode / whych was kepte at saynt Thomas of Acris in Lōdon tyll the yere folowynge. Anno domini .M.CC.xlvi.   Anno domini .M.CC.xlvii.   Symonde fyz Mary.   Iohn̄ Gysors.   Anno .xxx.   Lawrence Frowyke.   IN this yere theneume of blood sent before to the kynge / was wyth moste solemne processyon, the kynge wyth great noumber of hys lordes beynge presente, conueyed from saynt Thomas fore sayd vnto westmynster, in ryght solemne wyse wyth processyon & other acccordyng obseruaunces to suche a relyke ap∣perteynynge. And in this yere dyed Frederike the emperour of Almayn / whyche as before is touchyd in the xviii. yere of this kyng, maryed Isa∣bell syster vnto the kynge. The why¦che for his rebellyon agayn ye chyrch of Rome, was accursyd fyrste of the ix. Gregory / and lastely of Innocēt the .iiii. he was agayne cursyd and depryued of his imperyall dygnyte / gyuynge commyssyon & lycēce to the
electours of the emperoure, to chose a new. The whyche were of so many myndes in theyr eleccyon, that some chase the duke of Thoryng, some the erle of Holande, and some chase the kynges brother Richarde erle of Cor¦newayll, whyche causyd stryfe that enduryd longe after / so that the one∣ly emperoure of Almayne was not of all men alowyd, tyll Radulphus duke or erle of Habspurghe in Al∣mayne, was chosen by one assente to that dygnyte / and therunto admit¦tyd by Gregory the .ix. of that name, in the yere of our lorde .xii. hundred and .lxxiii. And so that varyaunce en¦duryd vppon .xxvii. yeres, to ye great impoueryshyng of Italy, and the lan¦des of the empyre. Then as before is sayd this Frederyk dyed vnassoyled, & was buryed in a cytye called Feren¦ciola, wyth thys superscrypcyon vp∣pon hys toumbe. Si probitas, sensus, virtutis gratia, census, Nobilitas orti, possent refistere morte: Non foret extinctus, Fredericus qui iacet intus. whyche versys are thus myche to meane in Englyshe. If excellente of wytte, or grace of good vertue, Or nobylnesse of byrth myght vnto deth resyste / Then shuld thys Frederyke mortall fate exchewe, whych hym hath closyd here now in hys chyste. But none of these maye erthly man assyste To stryue wyth deth / but all muste pay hym dette, Noble and innoble there nothynge maye lette. An other versyfyoure made these .ii. versys folowynge, of the interpreta∣cyon of this name Frederyke. Frefremit in mundo, de deprimit alua profundo. Re res rimatur, cus cuspide cuncta minatur. The whyche may in this maner of wyse be englyshed. Fre fretyth thys worlde / and de con∣foundyth all, Hyghe thynges of honoure, into de∣penesse darke. Rsercheth besyly ye goodes generall Of thys worlde both of the laye and clerke. Makynge no questyon in hys moste cruell werke, And cus with sworde all thyng doth manace. And thys is Frederyke all deuoyde of grace. Anno domini .M.CC.xlvii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xlviii.   Iohn̄ Uoyle.   Pyers Aleyne.   Anno .xxxi.   Nycholas Batte.   IN thys .xxxi. yere of the reygn of kyng Henry / Lewys which is surnamed saynt Lewis then kyng of Fraunce, with a conuenyent hoste sayled into the holy lande / and there warred vpon Crystes enymyes, and wanne the cytye of Damas at hys fyrste landynge / & after taryed there frō ye begynnynge of ye moneth of Iu¦ny, to the .xxii. day of Nouember / and after departyd thens towarde Baby¦lon, entendynge to haue layde syege to the cytye. But fortune was to him so cōtrarye, that by sykenesse & other casueltyes he loste myche of his peo∣ple / and in the ende was hym selfe ta¦ken prisoner of the Turkis, as more playnely shall be shewed in the story of the sayde Lewys folowynge. And in this yere was a myghty erth¦quake in Englande, that the lyke to yt was not sene many yeres before.
Also thys yere the kynge seasyd the fraunchyse of the cytye of Lon∣don vppon the euen of saynte Bar∣tholomew, for a iudgement that was gyuen by the mayre and aldermen agayne a wedowe named Margaret Uyell / and commyttyd the rule of the cytye to wyllyam Haueryll and Edwarde of westmynster, tyll our ladye daye nexte folowynge. At whyche season the mayre and shry∣ues were agayne to theyr offyces ad∣myttyd. Anno domini .M.CC.xlviii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xlix.   Nycholas Ioy.   Mychaell Tony.   Anno .xxxii.   Geffrey wynton.   IN thys .xxxii. yere of the kyng the wharfe of London callyd quene hythe, was taken to ferme by the comynaltye of the cytye, to paye yerely therefore .l. pounde. The why∣che was then commytted to the shry∣ues charge / and so hath contynuyd euer sen that tyme to thys daye. whereof the profytys and tollys are so sore mynyshed, that at thys daye yt is lytle worth ouer .xx. marke or xv. pounde one yere wyth a nother. And thys yere fell great dystempe∣raunce of wether, in suche wyse that the grounde was bareyne vppon the same / and other myshappys folow∣yd anon theurppon. And thys yere when the mater aforenamed of Mar¦garete Uyell wydow was well exa∣myned / the iudgement therof was founden good and trewe. wherfore the cytezens enioyed the lybertyes wythoute interrupcyon / all be yt the kynge was wyth theym some what agreuyd, for so myche as they at his requeste wolde not exchaunge wyth the abbot of westmynster, suche lyber¦tyes as they hadde in Myddelsex of the kynges graunte, for other to be hadde in other places. Anno domini .M.CC.xlix.   Anno domini .M.CC.l.   Rafe hardell.   Roger fyz Roger.   Anno .xxxiii.   Iohn̄ Tosalane.   IN the .xxxiii. yere of kyng Hen¦ry in the moneth of October dyed Robert Grosthede byshoppe of Lyncolne. He was the maker of the boke callyd Pety Caton and ma∣ny other. This Robert for so mich as ye .iiii. In¦nocent pope, greuyd ye chyrch of En∣glāde with taskis & paymētes agayn reason / he therfore sente vnto hym a sharpe pystle. This pope than gaue vnto a chylde a neuew of hys, a cha¦nonry whych fell voyde in the chyrch of Lyncolne / and sent the chylde vn∣to the byshoppe, chargynge hym to admytte the sayd chylde, and to sette hym in hys place. But thys bys∣shoppe boldely denyed the resceyt of the chyld / & wrote vnto the pope yt he wold not nor shuld receyue such to ye cure of soule, yt could not rule the self. Therfore this Robert was somoned to apere before ye pope,An appele from the pope. & therupon ac∣cursyd. Thē he appealyd frō Innocē¦tis courte vnto Crystes owne trone. Then after the deth of thys Robert as the pope laye in hys bedde at hys reste / one aperyd to hym in clothyng
of a byshoppe, and sayde to hym a∣ryse wretche and come to thy dome / and after smote hym wych hys crosse vpon the lefte syde. Upon the morne after, the pope was foūden dede, and hys bedde all blody. But of thys is nothynge in the cronycle or storye of Innocent. After that sayenge of Polycrony∣con, this byshoppe Grostehede shuld dye in the .xxxvii. yere of thys kynge Henry / the whyche sayenge agreeth better with the storye, except that the sayde pope lyued after the deth of the sayde byshoppe .vi. yere. Anno domini .M.CC.l.   Anno domini .M.CC.li.   Humfrey Basse.   Iohn̄ Norman.   Anno .xxxiiii.   wyllyam fyz Rycharde.   IN this .xxxiiii. yere was an ex∣cedynge wynde, the whyche in sondry places of England dyd great harme / whyche was in the begyn∣nynge of this yere vppon the daye of Symon and Iude. About thys tyme in the duchy of Burgoyne as testy∣fyeth Fasciculus temporū and other an hyll remouyd from hys proper place, and glode by many a myle / and lastely ioyned hym vnto other hyllys. In the whyche glydynge or ronnynge, the sayde hyll oppressyd or slewe v. thousande people. And thys yere Symon fyz mary alder∣man of London / for hys dysobedy∣ence and euyll counsaill that he gaue vnto Margarete Uyell, before in the xxxi. yere of thys kynge touchyd, wyth other secret labours and ma∣ters entendyd by hym to the hurte of the cytye, was dyschargyd of hys al∣dermanshyppe, and put oute of the counsayll of the cytye. Anno domini .M.CC.li.   Anno domini .M.CC.lii.   Laurence Frowyke.   Adam Basynge.   Anno .xxxv.   Nycholas Batte.   IN thys .xxxv. yere of kynge Henry, beganne the frere Au∣gustynes to buylde or inhabyte them in walys, in a place callyd wood∣house. And in this yere maryed kyng Hen¦ry his doughter Mary, or after some wryters Margarete, vnto Alexan∣der kynge of Scottys at the cytye of yorke / and dyd receyue homage of the sayde Alexander for the kynge∣dome of Scottes, or for the prouyn∣ce of Scotlande, in lyke maner as many of his progenytours had done dyuerse and many tymes before / as in this worke both before thys tyme and also after is shewyd. Anno domini .M.CC.li.   Anno domini .M.CC.lii.   wyllyam Durham.   Iohn̄ Toleson.   Anno .xxxvi.   Thomas wymborne.  
IN thys .xxxvi. yere, the kynge graunted vnto the shryues of London, that they shulde yerely be alowyed of .vii. pounde, for certayne pryuyleges or grounde belongynge to saynte Paules chyrche / the whych at this daye is allowyd by the Ba∣rons of the kynges excheker, to eue∣rey shryue when they make theyr ac∣compte in the offyce of the pype. Also thys yere was graūted by the kynge for the citesens more ease / that where before tyme they vsyd yerely to pre∣sent theyr mayre to ye kynges presen∣ce, in any such place as he then were in Englande, that nowe from thys tyme forthwarde they shulde for lac∣ke of the kynges presence beynge at westmynster, presente theyr mayre so chosen vnto the barons of hys Excheker / and there to be sworne & admyttyd as he before tymes was before the kynge. Anno domini .M.CC.lii.   Anno domini .M.CC.liii.   Iohn̄ Northampton.   Nycholas Batte.   Anno .xxxvii.   Rycharde Pycarde.   IN thys .xxxvii. yere / the water of the see aboute the daye of saynte Paulyn in the moneth of Ia∣nuary rose of suche heyghte, that yt drowned many vyllagys and hou∣sys nere vnto yt in dyuerse places of Englande. And thys yere the kynge, the quene, and syr Edwarde his son, wyth Bonyface archebyshoppe of Caunterburye, and dyuerse other no¦bles of the realme / sayled into Nor¦mandye and taryed at Burdeaux a certayne of tyme. But of theyr dedys or cause of theyr saylynge thyther, is no mencyon made in the cronycle of England. How be yt in the Frēche boke yt is shewed, yt the cause was to ioyne Edwarde the kynges sonne vnto the syster of ye kyng of Spayne by maryage. This yere also the water of Tha∣mys sprange so hygh, that yt drow∣ned many housys about the waters syde / by meane wherof myche ma∣chaundyse was peryshed and loste. And thys yere the cytezyns hadde graunted of the kynge, that no cyte∣syns shulde paye scauage or tolle for any bestes by them brought, as they before tymes hadde vsyd. Anno domini .M.CC.liii.   Anno domini .M.CC.liiii.   Robert Belyngton.   Rycharde Hardell.   Anno .xxxviii.   Ranfe Aschewye.   IN thys .xxxviii. yere, by procu¦rement of syr Rycharde erle of Cornewayll, for dyspleasure whyche he bare towarde ye citye for exchaūge of certayne grounde to the same be∣longynge / the kynge vnder coloure that the mayre hadde not done due execucyon vppon the bakers for lac∣kynge of theyr syzys, seased the lyber¦tyes of the cytye. That ys to be vn∣derstanden, that where the mayre and comynaltye of the cytye, hadde by the kynges graunte the cytye to ferme wyth dyuerse customys and offyces, for astynted and ascertay∣ned summe of money / now the kyng sette in offycers at hys pleasure, the whiche were accomptable vnto hym
for all reuenues and profytes that grew wythin the sayde cytye. But wythin foure dayes folowynge the feste of saynte Edmunde the byshop, or by the .xix. daye of Nouember / the cytesyns agreed wyth the sayde erle for .vi. hundred marke. After whych agrement wyth hym concluded, they soone after were restoryd vnto theyr lybertyes. This yere syr Edward the kynges sonne and heyre was maryed vnto Eleanour ye kinges sister of Spayn. And in the Cristmas weke, the kyng landed at Douer, and ye quene wyth hym, wyth many other lordes. when the kynge was comen to London, he was lodgyd in the towre / where he sent for to come vnto hym the mayre and the shryues, wyth whom he re∣soued greuously for the escape of one callyd Iohn̄ Gate. This Iohn̄ had murderyd a pryour allyed vnto the kynge. The mayre layde the charge of this mater from hym vnto ye shry∣ues, for so myche as to theym belon∣ged the kepynge of all prysons wyth in the cytye / so that the mayre retur∣nyd home, and the shriues remayned there as prisoners by ye space of a mo∣neth after or more. And in theyr pla∣ces and for theym were chosen Ste¦uen Oystergate & Henry walmoode. But how the old shryues passyd out of the kynges daunger I fynde not. Anno domini .M.CC.liiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lv.   Stephan Oystergate.   Rycharde Hader.   Anno .xxxix.   Henry walmoode   IN this .xxxix. yere in the feaste of saynte Etheldrede / dame Eleanour wyfe vnto the kynges son syr Edwarde, came vnto London / where she was honorably receued of the cytesyns, and the cytye rychely curteyned and garnyshed wyth dy∣uerse ryche clothes / where the kynge was present at her commynge. And she was honorably cōueyed through the cytye to saynte Iohn̄s wythoute Smythfelde, and there lodgyd for a whyle. But after she was remouyd vnto Sauoy. It was not longe after yt the kyng seasyd the lybertyes of the cytye, for certayne money whyche ye quene clay¦med for her ryght of the cytesyns / so that about saynte Martyns tyde in Nouēber, they gaue vnto his grace iiii. hundred marke, and then were re¦storyd to theyr sayde lybertyes / and the kynges vnder treasourer dischat yd, the whych for ye tyme was made custos or keper of the cytye. In the feast of saynte Scycyle, or the .xxii. daye of nouember ensuynge, were brought vnto westmynster .lxxx. and xxii. Iewes from Lyncoln̄ / the which were also accusyd of the crucyfyenge of a chyld at Lyncolne in the despyte of Crystes relygyon / whyche Iewes were after sent vnto ye towre of Lon∣don. Of the whyche in processe of tyme after, xviii. were conuycte and hangyd / & the tother remayned long after in pryson. In the vygyll of saynt Andrew syr Edwarde the kyn¦ges sonne came to London from be∣yonde the see. And the kyng of Scot¦tys with the quene hys wyfe came in the somer season vnto the kynge to hys maner of woodstoke / where he dysportyd hym a season, and after re∣turned into Scotlande / leuynge his wyfe wyth her mother tyll she were lyghted of chylde. And vppon ye day of the decollacyon of saynte Iohn̄ /
the kynge, the quene, and the quene of Scottes came to London / where they were honorably receyued, and so conueyed vnto westmynster. Anno domini .M.CC.lv.   Anno domini .M.CC.lvi.   Mathew Bokerell.   Rycharde Hardell.   Anno .xl.   Iohn̄ Mynoure.   IN thys .xl. yere, entryd ye land dyuers lordes of Almayne / the whych in Crystmas weke vppon the day of ye Innocentes, made homage vnto syr Rychard erle of Cornewayl & brother to the kynge / the whych as then stoode kyng of Almayne and of Romayns. And the thursdaye nexte folowynge he departed from the kyn¦ges courte, and spedde hym wyth his wyfe and syr Henry his sonne vnto the see syde / and after toke shyppyng in Iarnesay the .xxvii. day of Apryll, and landed at Dordreth in Holande the fyrste daye of Maye nexte en∣suynge. And vppon assencyon day after, he was crowned kynge of Ro∣mayns in the citye of Aquisgranum. Thys yere vppon the fyrste daye of Auguste / the kynge toke hys iourney towarde walys, for to sub∣due Lewelyn the sonne of Gryffyth the whyche wyth his welshemen re∣bellyd agayne the kynge, for so mych as syr Edwarde hys son to whom he hadde lytle before geuē the erledome of Chester, wolde haue chaunged some of theyr skyttyshe condycyons. And for to bryng hys purpose the bet∣ter aboute / he sente for an armye of souldiours into Irlande, and taryed for theyr commynge at hys castell of Genocke. But the yere passed farre on or hys people were gatheryd / so that by the aduyse of hys lordes he strengthyd there a certayne castellys and returned for that yere into En∣glande. And aboute the feaste of the Naty∣uyte of our ladye / a concorde and a peace was cōcluded betwene ye Lon∣dyners & the abbot of the holy crosse of waltham / the whych hadde ben in suyte many yeres before, for cer∣tayne dystresses takē by the abbottis offycers of the Lōdoners, when they came wyth theyr mercymonyes vnto the fayre of waltham / where as now yt is agreed that all suche dystressys shulde be restoryd / and yf any were peryshed or loste for longe kepynge, that then the abbot to contente and pay to the partyes the value in mo∣ney, of suche distressys so peryshed or loste / and that the cytesyns shulde enioy the lybertyes of that fayre euer after, wythoute payenge of any tol∣lage or toll. Anno domini .M.CC.lvi.   Anno domini .M.CC.lvii.   Rycharde Ewell.   Rycharde Hardell.   Anno .xii.   wyllyam Ashewy.   IN this .xli. yere & begynnynge of the same, was founden in the kynges warderobe at wyndesore a byll or rolle closyd in grene waxe, and not knowē from whens yt shuld come / in the whyche rolle was cōtey¦ned dyuerse articles agayne ye mayre and rulers of the cytye of London, and that by theym the comynaltye of the cytye was greuously tasked and
wrongyd. whyche byll was presen∣tyd at length to the kynge. wherup∣pon he anon sent Iohn̄ Mancell one of his iustycys vnto London / and there in the feaste of the conuersyon of saynt Paule by the kynges autho¦ryte, callyd at Paulys crosse a Folk∣mot / beynge there presente syr Ry∣charde de Clare erle of Glouceter, & dyuerse other of the kynges coun∣sayll. where the sayde Iohn̄ Man∣cell causyd the sayde rolle to be redde before the comynaltye of the cytye / & after shewyd to the people that ye kyn¦ges pleasure and mynde was, that they shuld be rulyd with iustyce / and that the lybertyes of the cytye shuld be maynteyned in euery poynte. And yf the kynge myghte knowe those persones that so hadde wrongyd the cominaltye of the citye / they shuld be greuously punyshed to the example of other. And that done, the sayde Iohn̄ Mansell chargyd the mayre, that euery Alderman in hys warde shulde vppon the morowe folowyng assemble hys wardemote / & that all those wardemotys shuld assemble in one place, and chuse of theym selfe wythout any counsayll or aduyse of any of theyr aldermē .xxxvi. persons, and them to present before the lordes and hym, at the same houre of ye next day in the byshoppes paleys at Pau¦lys. Then vppon the morow all thynge was done accordynge to hys commaundement. And when ye sayd xxxvi. persones were presentyd be∣fore the sayde Iohn̄ Mansell, Henry Baa iustycys & other / the sayd Iohn̄ sayde vnto theym, that they vppon theyr othe shuld certyfye all such per¦sones as they knewe gylty in the ar∣tycles before vnto the comynaltye shewyd. wherunto the sayde .xxxvi. cy¦tesyns answeryd, yt yt was contrary theyr lybertyes to be sworne so ma∣ny, for any mater of trespas betwene the kynge and any of hys cytezyns / wherfore they requyred a sparynge. wyth whych answere the sayd Iohn̄ Mansell beynge dyscontentyd / war∣nyd theym to appere before the kyn∣ges coūsayll at ye Guyldehall vppon the morowe folowynge / where they kepte theyr daye. And thyther came the sayde iustycys Iohn̄ Mansell, & Henry Baa, syr Henry wengham chaunceller of Englande, Phylyppe Louell vndertreasorer, and dyuerse other of the kynges counsayll. Then the sayde Iohn̄ Mansell exor¦tyd the sayde personys to be sworne by many meanys, as he the other daye hadde done. But all was in vayne / for they excusyd theym alway that yt was contrary theyr othe and lybertye of theyr cytye. wherfore the kynges counsayll departed from the hall in partye dyscontentyd, & shew∣yd vnto the kynge the demeanour of the sayde cytesyns. Uppon the euen of ye Purificacyon of our lady, yt mayre beyng warned yt the kyng shuld come to westmynster / he wyth the more parte of the Alder∣men rode vnto Knyghtbrydge, and houyd there to salute the kynge, and to knowe his forther pleasure. But when the kynge came nere that place and harde of theyr beynge there / he sent vnto them a squyre of houshold and chargyd theym that they shulde not presume to come in hys syght. wyth whyche message they beynge greatly dyscōfortyd, retourned home to the cytye. Afterwarde in the Octa¦uys of the puryfycacyon of our La∣dye, returned from the courte My∣chaell Tony and Adam Basynge / the whyche before were sente by the mayre to such frendes as they had in the courte, to knowe the cause of the kynges hyghe dyspleasure. The whych brought worde that the kyng was well mynded vnto the citye / but
he was in full purpose to haue suche persones chastised that hadde oppres¦syd the comynaltye of the same. Up∣pon the morow folowynge, came vn∣to ye Guyldhall Iohn̄ Mansell wyth other of the kynges counsayll / the whych to the people there assembled, shewyd many fayre & plesaunt wor∣des. Amonge the whych he declared that the kynges mynde & wyll was, to correcte all suche persones as had oppressyd the comynaltye of that his deryste belouyd cytye / and asked of the commons whyther they wolde be agreable vnto the same. The whych incontynently many suche as knewe litle what the mater ment, cryed with out dyscrecyon, ye, ye, ye, nothynge re¦gardynge the lybertye of the cytye. And after ye graūt thus had of the cō∣mons / the sayde Iohn̄ Mansell dys∣chargyd the mayre, shryues, & cham∣berleyn of theyr offyces / and delyue∣ryd the custodye therof vnto the con∣stable of the towre / and putte in the rome of the shryues Mychaell To∣ny and Iohn̄ Audryan. And ouer that, all rollys of tollys and talla∣ges before made, were delyueryd vn¦to the sayd Iohn̄ Māsell / the whych he there sealyd and redeliueryd them vnto the chamberleyne. when the cō∣mons hadde beholden all thys besy∣nesse, they retourned vnto theyr hou¦sys all confusyd. This mater thus orderyd / the sayd Iohn̄ Mansell wyth dyuerse of the kynges counsayll kept theyr courtes dayly the sondayes excepte, tyll the fyrste sondaye of lent, the whych that yere was the .xxv. daye of February / callyng before hym .xii. wardes, of ye cytye. Of the whyche .xii. wardes of eueryche of them was takē thre men, so▪ that of those .xii. wardes .xxxvi. mē were impanellyd and sworne, for to enquyre of the foresayd artycles, and what personys of the cytye had offen¦dyd in them. This courte thus kept and holden at Guyldehall / no man was callyd to answere, nor no ques∣tyon put vnto any person by the sayd enquest or by any other. Uppon the sayd sonday of lent, the mayre, alder¦men, and shryues, wyth the sayd en∣queste, & foure men of euery warde, were chargyd to appere at westmyn∣ster before the kynge / at whych appe∣raunce they were coūtermaūdyd tyll vppon the nexte morowe. At whyche season they commyng into the kyn∣ges exchekyr / fonde syttyng there the erles of Glouceter, and of warwyke, Iohn̄ Mansell, Henry Baa iusticys, the cōstable of the towre, the custos of the cytye, and dyuers other of the kynges counsayll. Then was callyd by name Rafe hardell that yere may e, Nycholas Batte, Nycholas fyz Iosne, Mathew Bokerel, Iohn̄ To¦lesham, and Iohn̄ le Mynoure alder¦men. Then sayde Iohn̄ Mansell, yt the kynge by his lawes and inquysy¦cyon of the cytesyns of the cytye, had founden theym culpable, that they had wronged and hurte the comynal¦tye of hys cytye by dyuers meanes, as by the sayde inquysycyons appe∣ryd / and forthwyth causyd yt to be redde before them. And whē the more parte therof was redde, he sayd vnto theym: thus may you se that the co∣mynaltye of the sayde cytye hath ben by you greuously oppressyd / and by your meanys and counsayll the com¦mon weale of the same dystroyed, as by alterynge of the tollys and other good auncyent customys, turnynge them to your synguler auauntage & lucre. All whyche maters the sayde Rafe and his company denyed / and that the commons was not by any suche meanys by them nor none of them greuyd or hurte / and that they offryd to be iustyfyed and iudged by the lawe and customys of the cytye.
Then Henry Baa iustyce, askyd of them whyther they wolde byde the aduenture of the enquery that they hadde harde redde before / or ellys stande vppon the sayeng of the other wardes, that yet had not ben sworne, but they kepte theym to theyr fyrste answere. Then Iohn̄ Mansell fray¦ned of ye mayre what was theyr lawe and custome. The mayre answered and sayde, that for trespace of a cyte∣syn done agayne ye kynge, he shulde defende hym by .xii. of the sayde cyte∣syns / and for murder or sleynge of a man by .xxx. cytesyns / & for trespace agayn a straunger by the othe of .vi. and hym selfe. Then after many rea¦sons made by the sayde Iohn̄ Man∣sell, and also by the mayre and his al¦dermen / daye was gyuen to them to appere vppon the morow before the kynge and his counsell. Uppon the day folowynge ye kyng wyth many of his lordes syttynge in the sayde exchekyr, the foresayde in∣quysycyon was redde. And that done the mayre and aldermen were called in by name / and two aldermen more whyche before were not callyd / that is to saye Arnolde Thedmare & Hen¦ry walmode. when Rafe Hardell had harde the kynge speke in the mater / he toke suche fere that he and Nycho¦las Batte wythout farther answere, put them in the kynges grace / sauyd to theym theyr lybertyes and fraun∣chyses of the cytye. But the other .vi. besought the kyng of his ryght wyse¦nes that they myghte then be demyd after the lawes and customys of the cytye. Then was layde vnto theyr charge that ouer many wronges by theym done to the kynge and the co∣mynaltye of the cytye, they had alte∣ryd ye kynges beame, and orderyd it to the aduauntage of them selfe and other ryche men of the cytye. wherun to the partyes answeryd, and sayde that the alteracion of the beame was not done by them onely / but by ye ad∣uyce and consente of .v. hundred of the beste of the cytye. For where be∣fore tyme the weyer vsyd the lene hys draught towarde the marchaundyse so that the byar hadde by that meane x. or xii. pounde in a draught to hys aduauntage, and the seller so myche dysauauntage / nowe for indyfferen∣cye and egalytye of both personys or marchaūtys, was ordeyned that the beame shulde stand vpryght, ye clee therof enclynynge to neyther partie / as yt doth in weyenge of golde and syluer / and the byer to haue alowed of the seller for all thynges .iiii. poūde onely in euery draught. After these reasons and other by theym made / the kynge commaun∣ded that vpon the mornynge folow∣ynge, a folkmoot shulde be callyd at Paulys crosse / & so that courte was dyssoluyd, and the mayre & the other returned to London. Uppon the mo∣rowe the folkmoot beynge at Paw∣les crosse assemblyd / these .vi. alder∣men heryng the murmuracion of the common people, and knowynge that the aldermen nor the worshypfull of the city shuld haue litle or no sayeng in thys mater, ferynge theyr cause yode into a chanons house of Pow∣lys / where at that tyme the sayde Io¦han Mansel and other sent from the kynge taryed the assemblynge of the people / and shewyd vnto theym that they entedyd not any lenger to plede wyth the kynge, but were contentyd to put them fully in the kynges gra∣ce and mercy / sauyng alway to them and all other cytesyns theyr lybertye and fraunchyse of the cyte. After whyche agrement the sayde. Iohan Mansell wyth the other came vnto the courte of Folkmoot / where vnto the people was rehersyd a fayre and a pleasaunt tale, promysyng to them
that theyr lybertyes shulde be hooly and inuyolatly preseruyd by ye kyng, wyth many other thynges to ye great comforte of the common people. And lastely was axyd of them wheter the law and custome were such as aboue is rehersyd or no. wherunto lyke vn∣dyscret and vnlerned people they an¦sweryd & cryed rabbyshely nay, nay, nay / not wythstādynge that the sayd law and custome hadde before tymes ben vsed tyme oute of mynde. But to thys was nother mayre nor alder∣men nor other of the great of the cy∣tye that myghte impugne or make any reason, for the vpholdynge of theyr auncyent lawys or customys. And no wonder though the kynge were thus hedy or greuouse to the cy¦tye / for by suche euyll dysposyd and malycyouse people as he had aboute hym, the lande was yll rulyd, & mych myschefe was vsyd. wherof ensuyd myche sorow after, as ye shall here in the sequele of the storye. Then Iohn̄ Mansell callyd the mayre and alder¦men before hym / and chargyd them to be at westmynster the morowe fo∣lowynge, to gyue attendaunce vp∣pon the kynges grace. Uppon the morow the mayre and aldermen ta∣ryenge the kynges commynge in the great hall at westmynster / lastely the kynge came into saynte Stephaus chapell. where a season he helde a coū∣sayll wyth his lordes / and after yode into the chekyr chamber, & there sat hym downe and hys lordes aboute hym. Anon after the mayre and alder¦men were callyd into the sayde cham¦ber, and soone there after callyd by name, and commaundyd to stande nere to the barre. Then Henry Baa iustyce sayde vnto the mayre and the vii. aldermen, that for so myche as by fourme of the kynges lawes, they were founde culpable in certayne ar∣ticles touchynge trāsgressyon agayn the kynge / therfore the courte awar¦dyd that they shulde make fyne and raunsome after the dyscrecyon of the sayde courte. But for they hadde put theym in the kynges grace and mer∣cy / the kynge hath commaundyd the fyne to be put in respyte, that ye be not payned so greuously as ye haue deseruyd. After whyche iudgement gyuen, they kneled downe / and then the mayre wyth wepynge terys, than¦ked the kynge of his bountye & good¦nesse, and besought hym to be good and gracyous lorde vnto the cytye, and vnto them as hys faythfull sub∣iectys. whereunto the kynge made none answere, but rose streyght vppe and so yode hys waye leuynge them there. Anon as the kynge was depar¦tyd, they were all arestyd and kepte there, tyll they had founden suerty / and eueryche alderman of theym dys¦charged of his warde & offyce yt they had wythin the cytye. But shortly af∣ter they put in suertyes, and so retur¦nyd heuely to London And shortely after was wyllyam fyz Rycharde by the kynges commaundement made mayre, and Thomas fyz Thomas and wyllyam Grappysgate shryues. After this, daye by daye the chamber¦layn was callyd to accōpte before the sayde Iohn̄ Mansell, of all suche tol¦lys as were gadered in tyme of the mayraltie of Iohn̄ Tolesham and of Rafe Hardell / beynge present to here the sayde accompte dyuerse of the co¦mynaltie of the cytye, but none of the heddys. By the whyche accompt no defaute myght be arrectyd vnto any of the forenamed persones conuycte afore the kynge. By reason wherof dyuerse of theym were admyttyd to the kynges fauour shortly after, and restored to theyr offyces agayne / but not wythout payeng of money, wher of the certaynte is not knowen. And in this yere whete was so scāte,
yt was solde at London for .xxiiii.s. a quarter. And scanter shulde haue ben, yf plenty hadde not come out of Almayne / for in Fraunce and Nor∣mandye yt fayled in lykewyse. By meane of this derth & scarcytie, mych poore people dyed for hunger / and many of dyuerse countreys of En∣glande came vnto the citye, and nere there aboute for comforte of vytayll / for yt then was better chepe in Lon∣don then in many shyres of England there aboute. And soone after was the forenamed Iohn̄ Mansell made knyghte & chefe iustyce of England. IN thys .xli. yere also / ye kynge about the feast of saynt Barna be in the moneth of Iuny, kepte hys hyghe courte of parlyament at hys towne of Oxenforde. Thys of some wryters is named insane parliamen¦tum) that is to meane the woode or madde parlyament. For at this coun¦sayll were made many actys agayne the kynges prerogatyue & pleasure, for the reformacion of the state of the lande / whyche after prouyd to the cō¦fusyon and hurte of the lande, & deth and destruccyon of many noble men / so that by occasyon therof began the famouse stryfe callyd at thys day the Barons warre. wherof ensued mych myschefe as hereafter shalbe shewyd and declared more at large. Then as aboue is sayde, to auoyde the enormytes and to refourme the euyll rule then vsyd in the lande, by suche personys as dayly were about the kynge / many and dyuerse ordy∣naunces were made, wherof the te∣noure is sette oute in the ende of this boke. wherunto the kynge somdeale agayne hys wyll, wyth syr Edwarde hys sonne and other agreed. And for these actys shulde be holden ferme & stable / at thys parlyament was cho∣syn .xii. Perys, whyche were named Douze Peris / to whō authorite was gyuen by strength of this parliamēt. to correcte all such as offendyd in bre¦kynge of these ordinaūces and other, by the sayd twelue Perys after to be deuysed and orderyd, touchyng and cōcernynge ye same mater & purpose. Of whyche .xii. Perys the names en¦sue. Fyrste the archebyshop of Caun¦terburye, the byshoppe of worceter, syr Roger Bygotte then erle of Norf¦folk and marshall of Englande, syr Symonde de Moūtforde erle of Ley¦ceter, syr Rychard Clare erle of Glou¦ceter, syr Humfrey Bothum-erle of Herforde, of warwyke, and of Arun¦dell, syr Iohn̄ Mansell chefe iustyce of Englande, syr Roger Mortymer, syr Hugh Bygraue, syr Petyr de Sa¦uoy, syr Iamys Audeley, and syr Pe¦ter de Mountforde. And for the kyn¦ges brother vppon the moders syde, that is to saye syr Eym erle of wyn∣chester, syr wyllyam de Ualaūce, syr Godfrey de Lindesey, and syr Guyde Lyndesey, wold not assente vnto the foresayde ordynaunces / they wyth∣drew them toward the see syde wyth suche stuffe as they hadde, and wold haue departyd ye land yf they myght then haue had shyppynge / for lacke wherof they were fayne to retourne, and so yode vnto wynchester. But yt was not longe after that they were lycensyd to departe the lande wyth a certayne companye, and a certayne summe of money to paye for theyr co¦stys / and theyr daye sette by Bartyl∣mew tyde to auoyde vppon payne of prysonement, whyche daye by them was kepte. It was not longe after the fynys∣shynge of this parlyament, but that stryfe and varyaūce began to kyndle betwene the kynge and the erlys of Leyceter and of Glouceter, by meane of such offycers as the sayd erles had remouyd and put other in theyr ro∣mys.
Amonge the whyche Iohan Māsell was dyscarged of his offyce. and syr Hugh Bygotte then admyt∣ted for hym. And for the foresayde Pyers harde of the murmure in the courte, ferynge that the kynge shuld be aduertysed shortely to alter from his promyse / therfore they entēdyng to make theyr partye the strōger, vp∣pon the morowe folowynge Marye Magdaleyns daye / the kyng beyng at westmynster, the erle Marshall, the erle of Leyceter, wyth dyuerse other came vnto the Guyldehall of Lōdon, where the mayre, aldermen, and comynaltye of the cytye were as∣sembled / where the sayd lordes shew¦yd an instrument or wrytynge, at the whyche hynge many labellys wyth sealys, as the kynges seale, syr Ed∣warde hys sonnes seale, wyth many other of the nobles of the lande, the whyche was the contente of the arty¦cles whych were ordeyned and made at Oxenforde / wyllynge the mayre and aldermen (cūsyderynge the sayd actys were made to the honoure of god, fydelyte vnto the kynge, & pro∣fyte of the realme) that they wold al∣so in vpholdynge of the same, sette theyr common seale of the cytye. Af∣ter which requeste thus to the mayre and the cytesyns made, after aduyse and counsayll amonge theym selfe taken / they desyred a sparyng of the lordes, tyll they myght speke wyth ye kyng and know his pleasure in that behafe. But fynally no sparynge at that tyme myghte be graunted / so that in the ende by the laboure that the lordes made, wyth helpe of suche solycytoures as they hadde wythin the cytye, the common seale was put to, and the mayre and dyuerse of the cytye sworne to maynteyne the same / theyr allegeaunce sauyd to the kyng wyth preseruacyon of the lybertyes and fraunchyses / and so departed. Then daye by daye after the sayd douze Perys assemblyd at the newe temple in where they kept theyr counsaylys and courtes for the reformacyon of the olde greuys / and remoued from the kynge dyuerse of hys menyall of houselde, and sette in theyr places and offycys suche as lyked theym. And vppon the .ix. daye of August / proclamacyon was made in dyuerse accustomyd places of the sayde cy∣tye, that none of the kynges takers shulde take any thynge wythin the cytye wythout the wyll of the owner, excepte two tunne of wyne, whyche the kyng accustomably hadde of eue¦ry shyppe commynge from Burde∣aux, payenge but .xl.s. for a tunne. By meane of whyche proclamacyon nothynge was taken by the kynges offycers, but yt were streyght payed fore wythin the cytye and lybertye of the same / whyche vsaunce conty∣nued but a whyle. Anno domini .M.CC.lvii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lviii. Draper. Thomas fyz Rycharde.   Rycharde Hardell.   Anno .xlii.   Robert Catelyon.   IN this .xlii. yere / the kyng held one parlyamēt at westmynster and a nother, or ellys prorogyd the same to wynchester. And in this ye∣re, syr Hugh Bygotte iustyce, wyth Roger Turkelay and other kept his courte at saynte Sauyours / and helde there the plees callyd Itinerii,
The wyche is to meane the trauay¦lynge or the waye plees. For ye shall vnderstande that at those dayes they were kepte in dyuerse places of En∣glande, whyche nowe ben holden at westmynster / and iudgys ordeyned to kepe a cyrcuyte, as now they kepe the syzys in tyme of vacacyō. At this sayde courte these iudges ponyshed sore baylyes and other oycers, that before theym were conuycte for dy∣uers trespassys / and specyally for ta¦kynge of merceamentes otherwyse then the lawe theym commaundyd. For the whych the sayd chefe iustyce prysoned them / and after sessyd them at greuous fynys. Also he somonyd the cytesyns of London to come vn∣to the sayde courte, for tollys that they hadde taken vppon the farther syde of the water. But yt was answe¦red that the tollys that they there to∣ke were takē lawfully, as they were redy to proue in places and court cō¦uenyent to the same, whyche was wythin the precyncte of theyr lyber∣tye. But not wythstandynge that an¦swere, the sayde syr Hughe chargyd vppon queste .xii. knyghtes of Su∣rey, to enquyre of that mater and other / the whych acquyted the sayde cytesyns, and shewyd that the sayde tolle belongyd to them of ryghte. In processe of tyme after, the sayd syr Hugh wyth other came to Guyld hall, and kepte hys courte and plees there, wythout all order of lawe, and contrarye to the lybertyes of the cy∣tye / and there punyshed the bakers for lacke of syze by the Tumberell, where before tymes they were punys¦shed by the pyllory / and orderyd ma∣ny thynges at hys wyll, more then by any good order of lawe. Thys yere vppon Candelmasse e∣uen came vnto Lōdon from beyonde the see Rycharde kynge of Almayne and erle of Cornewayll, wyth hys wyfe and chyldren / whyche had ben there and taken possessyon of that kyngedome as before is shewyd. Agayne whose commynge the cytye of London was rychely hāged wyth clothes of sylke and aras / & ioyous∣ly he was receyuyd of the cytesyns. Anno domini .M.CC.lviii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lix. Peperer. Iohn̄ Adryan.   Iohn̄ Gysours.   Anno .xliii.   Robert Cornehyll.   IN thys .xliii. yere, the frydaye folowynge the feaste of Sy∣monde and Iude, in the parlyament holden at westmynster / were radde in presence of all the lordes and co∣mynaltye at sondry tymes, all the ac∣tys and ordynaūces before made in ye parliament holden at Oxenforde, wyth certayn other artycles by ye fore sayd xii. Peers there vnto added. Af∣ter redyng of which articles, there be¦ynge reuested the archebyshoppe of Caunterbury, wyth dyuerse other to the nomber of .ix. byshoppes, besyde abbotes & other / denouncyd all them accursyd that attemptyd in worde or dede to breke the sayd actes or any of them. Scutage In this parilamēt also was graunted vnto the kynge a taske cal¦lyd the Scutage / that is to meane xl.s. of euery knyghtes fee thorough Englande / the whyche extendyd to a great summe of money. For after dyuerse writers, there be in Englāde in possessyon of the spyrytualtye and of the temporaltye, or at that dayes were, ouer & beyonde .lx M. kyngh∣tes fees. whych after y• rate shuld ex∣tēde vnto .vi. score .M.li. & more. And yf it shuld be gadered of ye tēporal mē
onely / than yt shulde not amounte ouer the summe of .lxiiii. thousande pounde. The kynge vppon the daye of saynte Leonarde, or the .vi. daye of Nouember came vnto Pawlys, where by his commaundement was assembled the courte of Folkmoot / where the kynge accordynge to the former ordynaunces made, axyd ly∣cence of the comynaltye of the cytye for to passe the see / & promysed there in the presence of a great multytu∣de of people, that he wolde be good and gracyous lorde vnto the cytye, by the mouth of syr Hugh Bygotte hys chefe iustyce, and to maynteyne theyr lybertyes vnhurte. For yt why∣che the people for ioye made an exce∣dynge showte. Uppon the .viii. day of Nouember the kynge rode thoroughe the citye to¦warde the see syde. And vppon the daye of saynte Bryce or the .xiii. daye of Nouember he toke hys shyppe, and so sayled vnto Burdeaux. where when he had taryed a season, he rode vnto the Frenche kynge then beyng holy Lewys or the tenth Lewys vn∣to Paris. Of whom he was honora∣bly receyued, and lodged hym in his own paleys by ye space of an hole we∣ke makynge to hym great feast, & gy∣uynge to hym and hys ryche & many gyftes. And from thens kynge Hen∣ry rode vnto saynte Denys / where of the abbot and conuent he was re∣ceyued wyth processyon, and taryed there by the space of a moneth. In whyche season a maryage was con∣cludyd betwene Iohn̄ duke of Bry∣tayne and one of his doughters. And at hys departynge he gaue to the ab∣bot a cuppe of golde, & a basyn wyth an ewer of syluer. And for hys more consolacyon / kyng Lewys assygned vnto hym a certayne lordes & other noble men of Fraunce to gyue atten¦daunce vppon hym, and to conuey hym, and to shewe hym a parte of Fraunce, wyth all dysporte and hun¦tynge and haukynge and other ma∣ny pleasures of the countrey. In whych passe tyme the Frenche kyng assembled hys parlyament at Pa∣rys / where he shewyd vnto hys lor∣des that hys conscyence was grud∣gyd, wyth ye withholdyng of all such landes as Phylyppe the second wan from kynge Iohn̄ in Normandye / vpon ye whych he desyred theyr fayth¦full and frutefull counsayll. where after many reasons and argumen∣tes made, yt was concludyd for a fy∣nall concorde to be hadde betwene kynge Henry and hym, that yf kyng Henry wyth the agremente of hys lordes wolde resygne into the Fren∣che kynges handes, all suche tytle and ryghte as he hadde in the hole duchye of Normandye, of Ange∣ou, poyteau, and Mayne, for hym and for his heyres for euer / that then the Frenche kynge of his great boun¦tye and grace, shulde gyue vnto the kynge of Englande and to hys hey∣res kynges, the lordshyppe of Guy∣an, Angeou, and Mayne / and byryghtfull tytle callyd euer after duke of Guyan / and ouer that he shulde be admyttyd for a Pere of Fraunce. to all whyche condycyons as affyr∣myth and wytnessyth the Frenche cronycle, kynge Henry at hys retour¦ne from hys dysporte was agreable / and wyth consente of hys baronye, and in theyr presence, wyth also the baronye of Fraunce, dyd hys ho∣mage vnto the sayde Lewys for the duchye of Guyan, and after made hys othe accordynge to the same. And after great gyftes receyued on eyther syde / kynge Henry retourned vnto Burdeaux. Of thys peace and concorde speketh a cronyculer named Guydo or Guy / & sayth that kyng Henry sayled into
Fraunce, and asked restytucyon of the forenamed Frenche kyng, of all suche landes as hys ayle Phylyppe the seconde had wyth extorte power taken from kynge Iohn̄ hys father. But for he fande the Frenche kynge straunge in his answere, & also had lytle truste in hys lordes for to haue theyr ayde / he fell to agrement wyth the Frenche kynge, and solde to hym all his tytle that he had in Norman¦dye, Gascoyn, and Guyan / y• whych extendyd to the yerely value of .xx. thousande pounde / takynge for the same tytle .iii. hūdred thousand poūd of small Turon money, whereof a pounde is in value after sterlynge money but .ii.s.iii.. or there about / so that he shulde after that rate haue for his sayde tytle after the value of sterlynge money .xxxiii. thousand se∣uen hundred and .l. pounde. In the season and tyme that kyng Henry was thus occupyed in Fraun¦ce / dyssencyon fell in Englande be∣twene syr Edwarde the kynges son, and syr Rycharde erle of Glouceter. For appeasyng wherof a parleamēt, whyche is to meane a counsayll of hys lordes was callyd at westmyn∣ster / whyche contynued by the space of .iii. wekes and more. To the why∣che counsayll the lordes came wyth greate companyes / and specyally the sayde syr Edwarde, and the erle of Glouceter, the whyche entendyd to haue lodged within the city. wher¦fore the mayre yode vnto the byshop of worceter, and syr Hugh Bygotte, and syr Phylyppe Basset, to whome the kynge wyth the archbyshoppe of Caunterburye had taken the rule of the lande in hys absence / the whyche all went vnto the kynge of Almayne to haue hys aduyse in that mater. where it was concludyd, that nother the sayde Edwarde nor the erle shuld come wythin the cytye then there to be lodgyd, nor none that helde vp∣pon eyther of that partyes. And for∣ther yt was prouyded, that all suche wythin the cytye as were of the age of .xv. yeres and aboue, shulde be in harnes to watche and kepe the cytye bothe daye and nyght / and that the gates shulde be kept shyt vppon the daye, and a certayne men in harneys to kepe euery gate of the cytye. And soone after for the sauegarde of the cytye, and sure kepynge of the peace wythin the same / the kynge of Ro∣maynes wyth the sayde syr Hughe and syr Phylyppe, came into the cy∣tye and there were lodged with theyr companyes / and suche other as they wolde assygne to strength the cytye yf nede requyred. Then aboute the feaste of saynte Marke the kynge came to London from beyonde the see, and was lod∣gyd at the byshoppe of Londons pa∣leys. After whose commynge by his assygnement, the erle of Glouceter was then lodged wythin the cytye, and syr Edwarde hys sonne was lod¦gyd in hys owne palays at westmyn¦ster. And soone after the kynge com∣maunded hym to be lodgyd at saynt Iohn̄s / and all the other lordes were lodgyd in other places wythoute the cytye. And the kyng of Romayns re∣moued agayne to westmynster. In whych tyme a direccyon was takē be¦twene the sayd {per}tyes, & a new assem∣ble and parlyament assygned to be kept at westmynster in the quindena of saynt Iohn̄ Baptyst. And for that then all thynge myght not be sette in an order, yt was prorogyd vnto the feast of saynt Edwarde / at the which season all thyng was put at reste for a whyle. In this yere also fell that happe of the Iewe of Tewkysbury / whyche fell into a gonge vppon the saterdaye, and wolde not for reue∣rēce of his sabbot day be plucked out
wherof heryng the erle of Glouceter, that the Iewe dyd so great reuerence to hys sabbot daye / thought he wold do as myche to his holy daye whych was sondaye / and so kept hym there tyll monday, at which season he was founden dede. Anno domini .M.CC.lix.   Anno domini .M.CC.lx.   Adam Brownynge.   wyllyam fyz Rycharde.   Anno .xliiii.   Rycharde Couentre.   IN this .xliiii. yere, soone after the feast of Symonde and Iu∣de, the kynge kept a royall feaste at westmynster, where he made dyuerse knyghtes. Amonge the whych Iohn̄ duke of Brytayne, whyche had ma∣ryed one of the kynges doughters was there made knyght. And soone after was syr Hughe spencer made chefe iustyce. After ye feast of Cādelmasse, ye kyng commaūdyd a folkmoot to be called at Paulys crosse / where he in proper persone, wyth the kynge of Almayn, the archebyshoppe of Caunterbury, and many other nobles came. where the kynge commaundyd vnto the mayre, that euery strypelynge of the age of .xii. yeres and aboue, shuld be before his aldermā be sworn the day folowynge, to be trew to the kyng & to hys heyres kynges of Englande / and that the gates of the cytye were kepte wyth armyd men as before by the kynge of Romaynes was dyuy∣syd. This yere also at a fayre kept at Northampton, varyaunce fell be∣twene the Lōdoners and men of the towne / so that betwene the cytesyns and them contynued longe sute and plee, for a mā of Northampton that then was slayne, to the great vexa∣cyon & trouble of both partyes. But in the ende the cytye had the better. This yere also aboute Eester, the Barons of the lande, wyth the con∣sente of the Perys / dyschargyd syr Hugh le spencer, and admyttyd for hym syr Phylyp Basset in his rome of chefe iustyce vnwittyng the kyng. For whych cause and other, grudge and dyspleasure beganne of newe to kyndle betwene the kynge and hys lordes, whyche encreasyd more and more. But by polycy of the kynge of Almayne and some prelatys of the land, yt was set in quyet for a whyle, hardely to the ende of that yere. Anno domini .M.CC.lx.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxi.   Iohn̄ Northampton.   wyllyam fyz Rycharde.   Anno .xlv.   Rycharde Pycarde.   IN this .xlv. yere, shortely after Alhalowyn daye, the Barons admyttyd and made shryues of dy∣uerse shyres of Englande, and dys∣chargyd suche as the kynge before had admyttyd / and named them Gar∣dayns and kepers of the countyes & shyres. And ouer that the Barons wolde not suffer the iustyce that the kynge hadde admyttyd, to kepe the plees & lawes callyd Itinerarii / but suche as were of theyr admyssyon. wherwith the kynge was greuously dyscontented / in so mych ye after that season he laboured that he myght do dysanull the former ordynaunces &
statutes, and to cause them to be bro∣ken / in so myche that vppon the se∣conde sondaye of lent folowynge, the kynge commaundyd to be redde at Paules crosse, a bull of the graunte of pope Urban the .iiii. of that name, as a confyrmacyō of an other bull be¦fore purchased of hys predecessoure Alexander the .iiii, for to assoyle the kynge and all other that before had sworne to the mayntenaunce of the foresayde artycles made at Oxen∣forde / and after causyd the sayde ab∣solucyon to be shewyd thorough the realme of Englande, walys, and Ir¦lande / gyuynge streyghte charge to all his subiectys, that none be so har¦dy to wythstāde nor dysobey the sayd absolucyon. And yf any were foūden dysobedyent to his commaundemēt, that he were streyght put in pryson, and not to be raunsomyd nor delyue¦ryd tyll ye kynges pleasure were for∣ther knowen. About the feast of saynt Albon, in the moneth of Iuny / the kynge of Almayne toke shyppyng and sayled into Almayne. And the kynge at a folkmoot holden vppon the sonday after saynt Peters daye in ye moneth of Iuly, hadde lycence to sayle into Fraunce. And the morowe after he departyd from London towarde the sees syde, wyth the quene and other lordes / hys two sonnes syr Edward and syr Edmunde beynge at that sea¦son in Guyan. when the kyng hadde ben a season in Fraunce, he returnyd vnto Burdeaux, where he fell syke / by occasyon wherof he taryed in tho∣se partyes tyll saynte Nycholas tyde nexte folowynge. And in thys yere dyed Rycharde Clare erle of Glow∣ceter / and syr Gylbert de Clare hys sonne was erle after hym. To whom the father gaue great charge that he shulde vpholde the forenamed ordy∣naunces. Anno domini .M.CC.lxi.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxii.   Phylyppe walbroke.   Thomas fyz Thomas   Anno .xlvi.   Rycharde Tayloure.   IN thys .xlvi. yere in the feaste of saynte Martyne, or the .xi. day of Nouēber / a Iew fell at vary∣aunce wyth a crysten man in Col∣chyrch in the warde of Chepe / & woū¦dyd the crysten man within the same chyrche, wherfore the people of the citye in a fury pursued the sayd Iew to hys house, and there slew hym / & after fell vpon the other Iewes, and robbyd and slew many of them. And the euen of saynte Thomas the apostle folowynge, the kyng lan∣ded in Englande at Douer / & came to Lōdon the wednysdaye before .xii. day. This yere ye froste began about saynt Nycholas daye / and so conty∣nued by ye space of a moneth & more, so feruently that Thamys was ouer froren, that men passed ouer on hors¦backe. And in the same wynter ye kyn¦ges lytell halle at westmynster, with other houses adioynyng to the same were peryshed wyth fyre, by the ne∣glygence of a seruaūt of the kynges. In this yere also vnkyndnesse be¦ganne to growe betwene the Londo¦ners and the Constable of the towre / for that he cōtrary the lybertye of the cytye toke certayne shyppes passyng by the towre wyth whete and other vytayll, and toke yt into the sayde towre, makynge the price at his plea¦sure. wherfore great harme had en∣sued, had not ben the polycy of wyse men. whyche was shewyd vnto the
kynges counsayll / by whose dyreccy on the matter was cōmytyd vnto syr Phyllyppe Basset then chefe iustyce and other, to set an order and rule be¦twene the sayde partyes. Then be∣fore hym were brought all euydēces and pryuyleges for the aduauntage of both partyes / where fynally after longe plee & argument, yt was fyr∣mely demyd and adiudgyd, that yf the constable or any other offycer of the towre wold at any tyme take any whete or other vytayll to the vse of the kyng or of ye towre, that he shuld come vnto the market holden wyth in the cytye, and there to haue yt .ii.d in a quarter wythin ye mayres pryce / and other vitayll after the same rate. And if he or any of his offycers wold do contrarye to that ordynaūce / that then the shryues shulde make report vnto the kynges counsayll, and to wythstāde hym in all that he myght / so that the kynges peace were kepte. In this yere also many murmures and grudgis were tolde in many pla¦ces of the land / supposynge ye warre shulde in shorte processe haue ensued betwene the kyng and his lordes, for the bull of dyspensacyon before in that other yere shewyd. But by help and mediacyon of good & wyse men / these murmures & grudges were so appeasyd, that the kynge agreed a∣gayn to the mayntenaūce of the sayd statutes / & sent hys wryttes, wherin the sayde artycles were comprysed, into all shyres of England / gyuynge streyght commaūdement to all men to obserue and kepe the same, and suche other as were to theym ioyned by the dyscrecyon of the erle marshall the erle of Leyceter, syr Phylyp Bas¦set, syr Hugh Bygot, and other / the whyche shortely after was reuoked and denyed. wheruppon the archbys¦shoppe of Caunterbury, feryng that after myght ensue, made hym an er¦rande to Rome / and so by lycence of the kyng and of the lordes departed the lande, and so kepte hym out tyll the trouble was appeased and seased Then vppon mydlent sondaye, the mayre and the commons beynge pre¦sent, at a folkemote holden at Pau∣lys crosse before syr Philyppe Basset and other of the kynges counsayll / the mayre was sworne to be trewe to the kynge and to his heyres kynges. And vppon the morowe at Guylde hall, euery alderman in presence of the mayre toke the same othe. And vppon the sondaye folowyng, euery strypelynge of the age of .xii. yeres & aboue, before hys alderman in hys warde was newly charged wyth the same othe. Then the dyspleasure be∣twene the kynge and hys Barons be¦gan to appere and dysclose, whyche longe whyle hadde ben kepte secret / in so myche that dyuers of theym as∣sembled in the marches of walis, and gatheryd vnto them stronge power / and sent a letter vnto the kynge vn∣der the seale of syr Rogyer Clyfford, besechynge hym to haue in remem∣braunce the othe & manyfolde pro∣myse that he hadde made, for the ob∣seruynge of the statutes made at his towne of Oxenforde, wyth other or∣dinaūces made to the honour of god, for fayth and allegeaūce to hys per∣sone, and weale & profyte of all hys realme / wyllyng hym farder to with stande and defye all suche persones, as wyll be agayne the sayde actes, sa¦uynge the quene and her chyldern. After the whyche letter thus sent, and receyuynge of yt none answere / the sayde Barons wyth banner dys∣played wēt agayn such as they knew yt helde agayne the sayd actys. And fyrste at Herforde they toke the bys∣shoppe of that see, and as many of hys chanōs as were allyaūtes born / and toke such treasour, and catell as
they there fande, and bare yt wyth theym. And after yode and sent vnto suche maners as the sayde byshoppe and chanons hadde, and them spoy∣led and robbed / and some of theym threw to the grounde and consumed wyth fyre / and put the sayde byshop and chanons in sure kepyng, and set other in theyr places / and after went vnto the other costes where they sup¦posyd to fynde of theyr enymyes / ke¦pynge theyr course toward London, berynge before them a banner of the kynges armys / & so holdynge theyr iourney, myche people drewe vnto them. In the whyche progresse euer as they fande any that they knew to be agayne the mayntenaūce of ye sayd actes / they imprysoned thē & spoyled theyr places, were they spyrytuall or temporall men. And in dyuers of the kynges castellys they set in such per∣sones as to them lyked, and put out suche as there were set in by ye kyng / and gaue vnto theym an othe that they shulde be trew and faythfull to the kyng, and kepe those castelles to hys vse and weale of the realme. About mydsomer when they drewe nere to London / they sent a letter vn¦to the mayre and aldermē, vnder the seale of syr Symonde Mountforde / wyllynge to know of theym whyther they wolde obserue the actys and sta¦tutes made in the parlyament of Ox¦enforde or not, or ellys they wolde ayde and assyste such persons as en¦tendyd the breche of the same / & sent vnto theym a copye of the sayd actes with a prouiso, that yf any that there were specyfyed were to the hurte of the realme or common weale of the same, that they then by dyscrete per∣sones of the lande, shulde be alteryd and amendyd. The whych copye the mayre bare vnto the kynge then be∣yng at the towre, accompanyed with the quene and the kynge of Almayne whyche lately was retourned from beyonde the see, and syr Edward his son, wyth other of his counsayll. Then the kynge entendynge to knowe the mynde of the cytye, axyd the mayre what he thoughte of those ordynaunces and actes / knowynge well that before hys commynge thy∣ther, he hadde counsayled wyth the aldermen and some commons of the cytye. The mayre then abashed with that questyon / besought the kynge yt he myght comon wyth his bretherne the aldermen / and he shuld shew vn¦to hym his and theyr opinyons. But the kynge sayde he wolde here his ad¦uyse wythout more counsayll. Then the mayre boldely sayde, that before tymes he wyth his bretherne and co∣mynaltye of the cytye, by hys com∣maundement were sworne to mayn∣teyne all actys made to the honoure of god, to the fayth of the kynge and profyte of the realme / whyche othe by hys lycence and moste gracyous fauour they entended to obserue and kepe. And more ouer to auoyde all occasion that might grow of grudge or varyaunce betwene his grace and his Barons wythin the cytye / they wolde auoyde all allyauntes & straū¦gers out therof, yf his grace were so contentyd. whych answere the kyng shewyd as he were therwyth pleasyd so that the mayre with his fauour de¦parted, and sente answere to the ba∣rons to the same accordynge / theyr ly¦bertyes alway vpholden and saued. Then shortely after, for so myche as dyuerse noble men of the lande whyche helde agayne those statutes, were ryden towarde Douer, & there entēdyd to haue taken shyppyng for¦fere of the barons / the kynge sent af¦ter them diuers persones of his hous¦holde, and of the cytesyns of Lōdon, to refourme and enduce theym to re∣tourne, and to tarye wyth the kyng.
And in that season all allyauntes, the whych were taken suspecte of a∣ny fauour owynge to that one parte or to that other, were auoyded the cy¦tye. But yt was not longe after that syr Edwarde the kynges sonne, sette them or many of them in offices with in the castell of wyndesore. Than watche was kepte dayly wythin the cytye / and in the nyghtes a certayne were assigned to ryde about ye town, wyth a certayn fotemen assygned to theym, to serche all the towne ouer. But of that insued harme. For while the rydyng watche was in one place of the cytye / some euyll dysposyd per¦sones vnder colour of watche men, and to seche for straungers, robbed and spoyled many houses within the citye. For remedy wherof a standyng watche was ordeyned in euery ward. And the kynge herynge of the Ba∣rons nere commynge vnto the cytye / departed thens shortely after. Then the Barons entryd the cytye the sonday before saynt Margarets daye. And shortely after the kynge re¦turned to westmyster, with the quene and other of his counsayll. And soon after by the consent of the kynge and the Barons / syr Hughe le Spenser was made chefe iustyce and keper of the towre. Uppon the morow folowynge Ma¦ry Magdaleyne daye, a wryt was di¦rected vnto ye mayre and aldermen / chargynge them yt the kynges peace were fermely kepte wythin the citye. For in the same wryt yt was also ex∣pressyd, that the kynge and hys Ba∣rons were louyngly agreed. Farther more was by the sayd wryt cōmaun∣dyd, that yf wythin the precyncte of theyr fraūches, were any persone or persones knowen, that wolde wyth∣stande the foresayde ordynaunces & statutes / that all such shulde be at∣tached and put in pryson, and theyr goodes attached for the kynge tyll they knew his forther pleasure. ye shall vnderstande that whyle ye lordes laye thus wythin the cytye / dy¦uerse conuenticulis and gaderyngis were made of the citesyns and other, that robbed in dyuerse places of the cytye, and dyd myche harme. The whyche was smally corrected / they were so borne oute and maynteyned by theyr maysters. And the commōs of the citye were farre oute of rule by insensyng of ryotouse {per}sons / that in assembles and courtes that thē were kepte at Guyldhall or other places, symple and vndyscret persons shuld haue the voyce, and the worshypfull mē lytell or nothyng regarded / wher¦of ensuyd dayly myche vnhappynes and sorow, as after shall appere. The Barons then to obteyne the more fauour of ye cytye / wyllyd them to shewe yf they hadde any of theyr li¦bertyes wythdrawē, that they myght agayne to theym be restored / and al∣so to dyuyse some new to theyr weale and profyte, and they wolde laboure to the kynge that they myghte haue theym graunted. For the whych com¦forte of the lordes, the mayre called the commons to the Guyldhall, and shewed to them the beneuolēce of the sayd lordes / & willed them that euery ofycer for hys offyce, to deuyse such thynges as myght be benefycyall for the cytye. wheruppon they counsayl¦led to gyther, and made a note in pa¦per of dyuers statutes, prouysyons, and ordynaunces to be graunted / whyche myght more properly be na∣med abhomynacyons.Singla profyte. For they were deuysed to theyr synguler profyte, & to ye great hurt of all other marchaū¦tes commynge to the citye, and to all other fayres and markettes of En∣glande / and also preiudycyall to the vnyuersall weale of the realme. The whyche when they were ouersene by
the heddes of the cytye / yt was shew¦yd vnto the sayd cōmons, that theyr ordynaunces were not lefull nor cha¦rytable orderyd, and therfore they knewe well they shulde not be ad∣mytted / wyllyng thē to deuyse other. But all was in vayne. By meane wherof both those & other that were ryght necessary for the cōmon weale of the cytye, were reiected & put of. Then ye Barons vpon the morowe folowynge saynt Iamys daye, depar¦ted from London towarde wynde∣sore, to se the gydynge of the castell. where at theyr commynge they putte out the foresayde allyauntes before set in by syr Edward the kinges son / the whyche assocyat wyth other yode vnto Fulham, where the kynge then lay / and shewyd to hym that the Ba¦rons had spoyled them of suche goo∣des as they hadde, and that wythout cause. But the kynge put them of for that season, and warned them to sue to hym agayne about Mychelmasse when more of his coūsayll was with hym / & then they shuld haue iustyce. Uppon the second daye folowyng the feaste of saynte Mathew, or the xxiii. daye of september / the kynge, the quene, with his sonnes and other nobles of thys land / toke shyppyng and sayled into Fraunce, to be pre∣sent at the Frenche kynges parlya∣ament then holden at Bonony. And the morow after the octabis of saynt Mychaell, he landed agayne at Do¦uer. And the frydaye folowynge he came vnto London. And vppon the tuesday folowyng, passed a queste of .xii. knyghtes of Mydd sworne vpon a iury, betwene the abbot of westmynster and the cy∣tye / for certayne pryuyleges that the cytesyns of London claymed wyth∣in westmynster. where by the sayde iurye it was founden before Gylbert of Prestone then chefe Baron of the kynges excheker, that the sryues of London at those days myght law¦fully enter into the town of westmyn¦ster, and all other tenemētes that the abbot then hadde wythin Myddel∣sex, & vnto the gate of the sayd abbay and there to make summons and dy¦strayne for lacke of apparaunce, all and eueryche tenaunte of the sayde abbot. About the quindena of saynt My∣chaell / the fourmer complaynt of the allyauntes and other, whyche as a∣boue ye haue harde, was shewed be∣fore the kyng and ye lordes in the par¦lyament holden at westmynster. where lastely yt was sentencyd, that the Barons shulde restore all suche goodes as they and theyr companye hadde taken from all suche persons before that daye, as well to allyaun∣tes as other both spyrytuall and tem¦porall / and also that suche menyall seruauntes as shulde be dayly in the kynges house and about his person, shulde be suche as the kynge wolde chose and admyt hym selfe / the why∣che ii. artycles the Barons vtterly denyed. wherfore the olde rancoure toke place / and dyssencyon kyndled his fyre of malyce agayn, betwen the kynge and his lordes feruently. Anno domini .M.CC.lxii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxiii.   Robert Moumplere.   Thomas fyz Thomas   Anno .xlvii.   Robert de Suff.   IN thys .xlvii. yere, by procure¦ment and styrynge of the Ba∣rons, the commons of the cytye of London, chase vnto theyr mayre for
that yere Thomas fyz Thomas, and wythout counsayll of the aldermen sware at Guyldehall vppon the day of Symon and Iude / and made no presentement of hym vppon the mo∣rowe folowynge, nother to the kyng nor yet to the Barons of the kynges excheker, as they of ryght ought to haue done. For the whych presump∣cyon the kynge was greuously dys∣contentyd agayne the cytye. Soone after the kynge aduertysynge well yt the citye wolde take the Barons par¦tye / and causyd syr Edwarde his son to take the castell of wyndesore by a trayne. wherof when he knewe that he was in possessyon / the kynge erly in a mornynge a lytell to fore Cryste∣mas departed from westmynster, & rode vnto the sayde castell / whyther shortely after came also many of the lordes that were vppon the kynges partye. And as faste the lordes and knyghtes whych helde wyth the erle of Leyceter, drew them toward Lon¦lon / so yt on eyther partye was mych people assembled. In the whyche passe tyme some well dysposyd, labo¦ryd a concorde betwene the kynge & hys lordes. By whose meanes fynal∣ly yt was agreed by bothe partyes, that all maters concernynge the fore sayde artycles of statutes and ordy∣naūces made at Oxenford, and after by the .xii. Perys / that the Frenche kynge shuld deme and iudge, whych shulde be holden and whyche not. And as he demyd / both partyes pro¦mysed assuredly to abyde. Upon whi¦che agrement copyes were made of the sayde statutes / and wyth letters shewynge the effecte of the fourmer agrement sent vnto the sayde kynge of Fraunce / then beynge saynt Lew∣ys. And in the Crystmas weke folow¦ynge / the kyng toke shyppynge with syr Edward his son and other of his counsayll / and sayled into Fraunce, for the foresayde cause. And for the partye of the sayd Barons, was sent ouer syr Peter de Mountforde and other. Then before Lewys kynge of Fraunce those statutes were sore ar∣gued vppon both parties. How be yt in the ende, the Frenche kynge cal∣lynge before hym both parties vpon the day before ye conuersyon of saynt Paule, or the .xxiiii. daye of Ianua∣ry / syttynge in iudgement gaue ex∣presse sentence that all and eueryche of the sayde statutes and ordynaun∣ces, shulde be from ye daye foreward vtterly foredone and set at noughte / and all suche bandes and promyses that the kyng or any other had made for the mayntenaunce of the same, shulde be adnulled & cancellyd / and the kynge and all other, for any ma∣ter concernynge those statutes set at lybertye. After whyche sentence thus gyuen the kynge retourned into En∣glande / so that he came to London the .xv. daye of Februarye. But the Barons beynge sore amoued wyth this sentence, & notynge greate par∣cyaltye vnto the Frenche kynge / de∣parted from London westwarde, & so into the marchys of walys, where they drew to them great power, and warred vppon the landes and castel∣lys of syr Roger Mortymer, & threw some of them vnto the grounde, and spoyled of hys what they myghte fynde / and ouer that brent of hys ma¦nours and houses. In whose ayde syr Edwarde the kynges sonne com∣mynge, hys people were dystressyd and he almoste taken. For redresse of whyche maters, a newe parlyamēt was appoynted to be holdē at Oxen¦forde in the quindena of Eester nexte folowynge, whyche came neuer to ef¦fecte. All be yt an other cronicle sayth that from this parlyament then hol∣den at Oxenforde, the kynge and his lordes parted all dyscorded. Then
the barons drewe towarde London / & the kynge remayned at woodstok. And then newe assuraunce by wry∣tynge endentyd was made betwene the comynaltye of the cytye and the Barons, wythoute consent of many of the rulers of the sayde cytye. wher¦fore the commons as men enraged made of theym self two capytaynes, whych they named constables of the cytye / yt is to say Thomas de Pywel¦don & Stephan Bukerel. At whose commaundement by tollynge of the great belle of Paules, all the cytye shulde be redy shortely in harnes, to gyue attendaunce vppon theyr sayd capytaynes. About the begynnynge of lent / the constable of the towre, syr Hughe le Spenser, came wyth a fayre compa¦ny of men of armys before hym into the cytye, and desyred assystence of the forenamed constables. The why∣che commaunded the sayd belle to be olled. By meane wherof the people shyt theyr shoppes, and came out in harneys in great multytude. The whyche after proclamacyon made, that they shulde olowe theyr capy∣taynes, wythout knowlege what to do or whyther to go, folowed theyr sayde capytaynes / and so yode vnto Thystelworth vppon two myles be∣yonde westmynster, & there spoyled the manour of the kynge of Romay∣nes, and sette yt after vppon a fyre. And that done, hys water mylles & other commodities that he there had put theym to vtter ruyne. And after wyth great noyse and crye, returned vnto London. This dede as sayth myne authour was cause of the mortall warre fo∣lowynge. For where before tyme the sayde kynge of Romaynes hadde ben for allyaunce that was betwene hym and the erle of Glouceter, a trea¦tye of peace to be hadde betwene the kynge and his Barons / after that dede done he was enymy vnto them to the vttermoste of his power. The kynge herynge of thys ry∣gaderyd vnto him great power. And for he harde that syr Peter de Moūt forde was at Northampton, gathe∣rynge of people to strength the Ba∣rons partye / he spedde hym thyder, and wanne the towne vppon hym by force, and slewe many of hys men / and fynally toke hym & syr Symon the son of the erle of Leyceter, wyth dyuers other on lyue / the which with many burgeyses of that towne that hadde take theyr partyes, the kynge sent vnto dyuers prysons / and some he closyd wythin the castell of ye same towne. In thys passe tyme on Palmeson∣daye weke all the Iewes in London were spoyled and robbed / & the nom∣ber of .v. hūdred of them were slayn, and dyuers of theyr mansyons brent and destroyed / and suche as of them were saued, were conueyed for great mede vnto the towre / and there kept from the fury of the commons. wher¦of the occasyon was, for so myche as a Iewe wolde haue forced a crysten man to haue gyuē to hym more then ii.d. for the vsure of .xx.s. for a weke. For ye shall vnderstand that at those dayes, by lycence graunted vnto the Iewes of the kynge. they myght ta∣ke by vsury of euery man yt of theym wolde borowe money .ii.d. of a poūd for a weke lendyng / and so of greter & of smaller summes after that rate. And soon after the Iewes were thus punyshed / many houses of relygyon wythin ye citye and nere there about, were serched for goodes of alliaūtis / and myche founde. wherof a parte was brought vnto the lordis / but the more parte was stolen and brybed, In whyche season the kynge passed by diuers coūtreys / and lastely came
into Southsex with a strong power. wherof herynge the lordes made pre¦paracyon to go towardes hym. In all whyche tyme the wardeyns of the v. portes kepte the see wyth shyppes, that no straungers shulde entre the lande to ayde the kynge agayne the Barons. Then in the ende of Apryll the Ba¦rons wyth a multytude of the cytye, whyche they put in vawarde / depar∣ted from London, takyng theyr iour¦ney towarde the kynge. And when they were well onwarde vpon theyre way / worde was brought vnto them that the kynge wyth an huge power was at Lewys. wherfore they by an hole assent dy∣uysed a letter / and sent yt in ye name of all the Barons vnto the kynge, whose names here vnder folowe but not all. Syr Symonde de Mounforde erle of Leyceter, and hyghe stewarde of Englande. Syr Gylbert de Clare, erle of Glou∣ceter. Syr Robert Ferres, erle of Derby. Syr Hugh le Spenser chefe iustice / and syr Henry de Mountford son and heyre to the erle of Leyceter. Syr Rycharde Gray. Syr Henry Hastynges. Syr Iohn̄ fyz Iohn̄. Syr Robert de Uenpount. Syr Iohn̄ Gyuyle. Syr Robert Roos. Syr wyllyam Marmyon. Baldwyne wake. Syr Gylbert Gyfforde. Syr Nycholas de Megraue. Syr Godfrey de Lucy. Syr Iohn̄ de Ueysy. Syr wyllyam de Mounthdesey. whyche letter sealed wyth the sea∣les of the sayde erle of Leycester, and of Glouceter conteyned as foloweth TO the most excellent lord the kynge,A eter sent by the  to the kyng Henry by the grace of god kynge of Englande, lorde of Ir¦lande, and duke of Gwyan / the Ba∣rons & other faythfull your seruaun¦tes, theyr fydelyte and othe to god and to you coueytynge to kepe, sen∣dyng to you due salutyng with all re¦uerence and honour, vnder due obey¦saunce. Lyketh yt youre hyghnes to vnderstāde, that many beyng about you haue before tymes shewyd vnto your lordshyppe of vs many euyll & vntrewe reportes / and haue founde suggestyons not alonely of vs, but also of your selfe to brynge this your realme vnto subuersyon. Know your excellency, that we entende nothyng but helth and suerty to your person, to the vttermoste of our powers / and not onely to our enmyes, but also to yours and of all this youre realme, we entende vtter greuaunce and cor¦reccyon. Besechynge your grace her after to gyue vnto theym lytell cre∣dēce / for ye shall fynde vs your trew and faythfull subiectes to the vtter moste of our powers. And we erle of Leyceter, and erle of Glouceter, at the request of other and for our selfe, haue put to our seales / the .x. day of the moneth of May. The answere vnto this fore∣sayde letter. HEnry by ye grace of god, kyng of Englande, lorde of Irland and duke of Guyan / to Symonde de Mountforde, & Gylbert de Clare, & theyr cōplyces. where as by warre & generall {per}turbaūce in this our real¦me by you begon & contynued, wyth also brennynges, and other hurtes and enormytyes that euydently ap∣peryth that your fydelyte to vs due, ye haue not kept, nor ye suerty of our person ye haue lytell regarded / for so mych as our lord{is} & other our trusty
frendes whyche dayly byde wyth vs ye veryn and greue, and theym pur∣sue to the vttermost of your powers / and yet dayly entēde, as ye by the re∣porte of your letters haue vs ascer∣tayned: we the greue of them admyt & take for our owne, specyally when they for theyr fydelyte whyche they to vs dayly impende, stande and a∣byde by vs to oppresse your ifidelyte and vntrouthe. wherfore of your fa∣uoure or assuraunce we sette lyttell store / but you as our enymyes we vt¦terly defye, wytnesse our selfe at our towne of Lewys, the .xii. daye of this moneth of May. And ouer this the kyng of Romay¦nes, syr Edwarde the kynges sonne, and the other lordes beyng thē with the kynge / sente vnto them a nother letter, wherof the tenour ensuyth. RIcharde by the grace of god kynge of Romaynes alwaye Augustus, and Edwarde the noble fyrst begotten son of the kyng of En¦gland, all other Barons fermely stan¦dynge and abydynge wyth our soue¦rayne lorde the kynge, to Symonde be Moūtford, Gylbert de Clare, and all other theyr false felowes. By the letters whych ye sent vnto the kynge our moste souerayne lorde; we vnder stande that we are defyed of you. Ne¦uerthelesse this worde of dyffyaunce apperyd vnto vs suffycyently before, by the depredacyon and brennyng of our manours, and carienge away of our goodes. wherfore we wyll that ye vnderstande, that we defye you as our mortall & publyke enmyes. And when so euer we may come to reuēge¦ment of the iniuryes yt ye to vs haue done / we shal acquit it to ye vttermost of our powers. And where ye put vp¦pon vs, that nother trewe nor good counsayll to our souerayne lorde the kynge we gyue / ye therin say falsely and vntrewly. And yf ye saieng ye syr Symonde de Mountforde and syr Gylbert de Clare wyll iustifye in the courte of our souerayne lord / we are redy to purchase to you suerty & safe commynge, that there we may proue our trew and faythfull innocencye, & your false and traytorouse lyenge. wytnessyd wyth ye seales of Rychard kynge of Romaynes, & syr Edwarde forenamed. Gyuen at Lewys the .xii. daye of May. WHen the Baronys had receyued these letters from the kyng and his lordes / they perceyued well that there was none other mean, but defēde theyr cause by dynt of sword. wherfore they puttyng theyr trust in god / spedde theym forth toward the kynge. And vppon a wednysday be∣ynge then the .xxiiii. daye of May, er¦ly in the mornynge both hostes met. where after the Lōdoners had gyuen the fyrst assaute, they were betyn bac∣ke / so that they began to draw from the sharpe shot and strokes, to the dis¦comforte of the Barons hoste. But ye Barons encoraged and comforted theyr men in suche wyse, that not alo¦nely the freshe and lusty knyghtes fought egerly, but also suche as be∣fore were scomfyted, recoueryd theyr vertue & strength, & fought wythout fere, in so myche that the kynges va∣ward lost theyr places.Cruell and detestable Batayle. Then was the felde coueryd wyth dede bodyes / & gaspynge & gronyng was hard on euery syde. For eyther was desyrous for to bryng the other out of life. And the fader sparyd not the son, nor the son yt fader. Allyaūce at ye tyme was turned vnto dyffyaunce / and crysten blood that daye was shad wythoute pytie. Thus duryng the cruell fyght by the more parte of ye day, lastely the victory fyll to the Barons / so yt there was taken the kynge, & the kynge of Romayns, syr Edwarde the kynges
son, wyth many other noble men to the nomber of .xxv. Barons and Ba¦nerettes / & people slayn a great mul∣tytude ouer .xx. thousande as sayth myne authours. when the Barons had thus obtey∣ned vyctorye, prouysyon was made for ye saufe kepyng of the prysoners / so that all were sent vnto dyuers ca∣stellys and prysons, except the kyng, his brother the kynge of Almayne, & syr Edwarde his son / the whych the Barons helde wyth theym tyll they came to London. Then a new graunte was made by the kynge, that the foresayd statutes shuld stande in strength. And yf any were thought vnreasonable / they to be corrected and amendyd by foure noble men of the realme / that is to meane .ii. of the spyrytualtye, and .ii. of the temporaltye. And yf those .iiii. myght not agree / that then the erle of Angeou and duke of Burgoyn to be iudges of that mater. And this to be fermely holden and obeyed by the kynge and hys brother / the kynges graunted that theyr sonnes & heyres shuld remayne wyth the Barons as prysoners, tyll all thynge were fynys¦shed accordynge to the former agre∣ment. And vppon thys was a parly¦ament appoynted, to be holden at London at Penthecoste folowynge / but that came neuer to purpose. Thē the tuesday before the Assencyon day peace was proclaimed in London be¦twene the kynge and hys Barons. And vppon the daye folowynge, the kynge & the Barons came vnto Lon∣don / with the kynge of Romayns, & syr Edwarde the kynge sonne. Then syr Edward as pledge for the kyng, and syr Henry sonne vnto the kynge of Almayn were sent vnto the toure, and there lodged / and from thēs vn∣to Douer castell. And the kyng was lodged in the byshoppes palays by Paules / and the kynge of Almayne with dyuers other within the towre. Then yt was agreed by the kynge, that for his more suertye, and for the weale of the lande / that the erle of Leyceter shuld be ressyaūt in the kyn¦ges courte. Uppon the whyche agre¦ment & other, many of the prysoners were set at large. In this passe tyme before the felde of Lewys / ye quene & the kyng of Ro∣mayns had sent ouer ye see for souldy ours, to ayde the kynge agayne the Barons / whych now were comen in great nomber vnto Douer, & there houed in ye see to haue lāded. wherof herynge the Barons sent the kyng of Romayns to the castell of Berkham stede as prisoner, tyll the sayde ally∣auntes were retourned / and caused kynge Henry wyth a great power to ryde thyder, and force the sayde hoste of straungers to retourne into theyr owne countreys. And when the kynge had returned the sayde straungers / he shortly after wyth agrement of the barons sayled ouer into Fraunce, and retourned a∣gayne wythin short terme. Anno domini .M.CC.lxiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxiiii.   Osbert wynter.   Thomas fyz Thomas.   Anno .xlviii.   Phylyppe Taylour.   IN this .xlviii. yere / the lordes of the marches about the feast of Crystmasse, assembled theym in those costes, and dyd myche harme vppon the lordeshyppes and ma∣nours of the erlys of Leyceter and of Glouceter standynge in the mar∣ches of walys. wherfore the kynge
rode shortely after to Glouceter, and called there a counsayl of his lordes. By authoryte of whych counsayll yt was enacted, that as many of ye sayd lordes as came not in by the octauis of saynte Hyllary nexte folowynge, & yelded them vnto the kynges grace, shuld be exyled. And by the sayd coū¦sayll was also agreed, that in ye sayd octaues shulde a parlyament be hol¦dyn at westmynster. At whyche daye the kyng wyth his lordes spyrytuall and temporall and commons of hys lande, beganne his forsayde parlya∣ment. Durynge the whyche yt was there shewed the kynge beynge pre∣sent, that he nor syr Edward his son nor none of theym, shulde after that daye greue or cause to be greuyd, the erles of Leyceter and of Glouceter, ye Barons, Banerettes or knyghtes, the citesyns of London and Barons of the .v. portes / nor none other {per}sons or persones of hyghe or low degree, that was vpon the partye of the sayd erles, for any mater of dyspleasure done agayne the kynge and the sayd syr Edwarde his sonne, at any tyme before that day. And that to vphold / the kynge before hys lordes was sworne. And after that was shewed and rad a charter of pardon concer∣nynge the sayde cause / and a confyr∣macyon of the statutes of the foreste, wyth many other actes and statutes before graunted of the kynge. Then in the feaste of saynt Gregory folow∣ynge, or the .xii. daye of Marche / syr Edwarde the kynges son, yt beforne was also sworn to performe such pro¦myses as the kyng had made before in the parliament, was delyueryd at lyberte / & also syr Henry the kynges son of Almayne, the whych had ben kept as pledge as ye before haue har¦de vppon the terme of .ix. monethes & odde dayes / vpon assuraūce made, that ye sayd syr Edwarde shuld dwel and abyde in the kynges courte, and not to departe from thens wythoute lycence of the kyng and of a certayne of the Barons. After this many in∣strumentes & bandes were made by the kynge and syr Edwarde his son, for the performaunce of couenaunts & paccyons made betwene the kynge and the Barons, whyche shortly af∣ter came to small effecte. In the season betwene Easter and Penthecoste, for orderynge of the a∣foresaid statutes made at Oxenford, fell deffencyon betwene the erles of Leyceter & of Glouceter / so that wor¦des of dyspleasure was vtteryd be∣tweene them, the kynge and they also beynge then at Glouceter. Then the kynge and his Barons had laboure to set theym at vnyte and reste. And vppon the see the Barons of the .v. portes robbed and spoyled all men that they myght take / sparynge nother Englyshe marchauntes nor other. Of whych prayes as ye cōmon fame then went, some of the Barons of the lande hadde good parte. In the whytson weke folowynge, ye kynge wyth the erle of Leyceter, and syr Edwarde hys sonne, wyth many other lordes beynge at Herforde in ye edge of walys / the sayd syr Edward secretly and wythout lycence depar∣ted from the courte, and yode vnto Chester / where he accōpanyed to him the erle of Glouceter and ye lordes of the Marches, the erle of warēne, syr Roger Mortymer and other / & from thens went vnto Glouceter, breking the brydges as he went, to the entent that he were not folowed tyll he had assembled his power. when knowlege of thys came vnto the erle of Leyceter / he in al hast sent vnto syr Symōde his son, yt he shuld gather his knyghtes vnto hym. The which accordyng to ye cōmaundemēt assembled vnto hym myche people, &
with them drew toward wynchester / so that he came before the cytye vp∣pon the euyn of the translacyon of saynte Swythyn, or the .xiiii. daye of the moneth of Iulye. where he was shyt out, for so mych as the cytesyns knewe not whyther he came as the kynges frende or not. And also lytell before they hadde receyued a letter from syr Edwarde, wyllynge theym to holde theym out of the cytye. For these causes the citesyns closed theyr gates agayn the sayd syr Symonde and hys companye. But yt was not longe or the cytye was yelden. Then they spoyled the town / and slewe the more partye of the Iewes that dwel∣lyd wythin the same. And that done, layd syege vnto the castell and assau¦ted it. But for tydynges were fayned of the cōmynge of syr Edwarde with hys power / they departyd shortely thens, and so yode vnto Kenelworth. Uppon the laste daye of Iuly / syr Edwarde wyth hys hoste came vnto Kenelworth foresaid, and fyll sodayn¦ly vppon the hoste of the forenamed syr Symonde, and wyth shedynge of lytell blood, toke there prysoners the erle of Oxenforde, wyllyam de mount Canyse, Adam de Newmar∣ket, syr Balwyne wake, and Hughe Neuyle, wyth dyuers other / and syr Symonde fledde into the castell and so escaped. Then these forenamed prysoners were all sent vnto Glouce¦ter / and there putte in suer kepynge. In this meane whyle syr Symon∣de erle of Leyceter, toke leue of the kynge / whyche then from Herforde passed the ryuer of Seuerne, and so yode vnto worceter. And ye erle with great payne passed the brydges be∣fore by syr Edwarde broken, and pas¦sed the coūtreys in gaderynge of peo¦ple as he went / so yt in processe he had wyth hym stronge power. wherof he¦rynge syr Edwarde, costed towarde hym / and the .vi. daye of August met wyth hym at Euysham in worceter shyre / where betwene theym was foughten a cruell fyght. In yt whych at length was slayn the sayd syr Sy¦monde, and syr Henry his sonne and heyre, syr Hughele Spenser, syr Pe¦ter de Mountforde, and many other noble men that helde vppon the Ba∣rons partye. After whych scomfyture, some ma¦lycyous dysposed persons, in despyte of the erle cut of his hode & his dimys¦saryes, and fastyned them vppon ey¦ther syde of hys nose / and after made a present therof vnto the wyfe of syr Roger Mortymer. Hys fete also and his handes were cut from the body, and sente to sondry places / and the trunke of hys bodye buryed wythin the chyrch of Euysham. Of this erle speketh Ranulphe mūke of Chester in his boke of Policronycon, and cal¦leth hym Symon the ryght wise / say¦ynge that god wrought for hym my¦racles after his deth, the whyche for¦fere of the kynge and syr Edwarde his sonne were kept close and secret, so that no man durste speke of them. Soone after this victory thus obtey¦ned by syr Edward, ye kyng & he met / by whose authorytyes all prysoners thē which were in hold in dyuers pla¦ces, by y• cōmaundemēt of ye sayd syr Edward, were set at lybertie / & many other dayly accused & set in for them. And about the natyuyte of our lady, a parliamēt was holdē at winchester where by authoryte of ye same, all sta¦tutes & ordinaūces before made by ye Barons at Oxenforde in the .xli. yere of ye kyng, were vtterly fordone & set at nought / and all bondes & wrytyn¦ges made by the kyng or any other for the obseruynge of the same, were cancellyd and broken. Also at thys coūsayll was ordeyned, that all such as had fauoured the Barons, were
they in pryson or at large / shulde be disherited. And then ye kyng resumed into his hande, all grauntes before made and gyuen to any person. And for syr Symounde de Mountforde myght not agree wyth the kynge at the parlyament / he was restored to the castel of Kenelworth, as he before was assured / the whyche he wyth syr Henry de Hastynges and other kept longe after. when the parlyament was ended / the kyng came vnto wyndesore with a great power, entendynge as the fame then went to destroye the cytye of London, for the great ire and dys¦pleasure that he hadde vnto yt. wher¦of heryng the mayre and aldermen, were striken in a wonderfull fere / all be yt many of the rabbysh and wylde cōmoners, were in full purpose to haue defended the cytye agayne the kynge. And thus amonge them were dyuers and many opinyons. And no wonder / for at those dayes the cytye was inhabyted with many maner of nacyons, whyche then were admyt∣ted for cytesyns. LAstely by grace and sad coun¦sayll of the beste of the cytye / they condescended to make a supply¦cacyon to ye kynge, & send yt by some religyous person. Of the which they made dyuers, and sent them by son∣dry persones / but all auayled ryght nought. For the kynge was so gre∣uously encensyd by some of his coun¦sayll agayne the cytesyns, yt he wold not loke vppon none of theyr supply¦cacyons. And yf any man spake / for theym / he soone wold make such coū¦tenaunce, that men whyche were in his fauoure feryd to speke for them. Then the cytesyns were counsayled by theyr frēdes, yt they shuld make a writyng, and seale yt with theyr com¦mon seale / by vertue whereof they shulde offer theym selfe to put theym holly in the kynges grace and mer∣cy touchynge theyr lyues & goodes. Accordynge to the whyche counsayll they deuysed a wrytynge, and sealed yt wyth theyr cōmon seale / and that done chose .viii. persons of the cytye such as had frēdes in the courte, and sent them toward wyndesore the .vi. daye of October. Uppon whych day they encountered beyonde Colbroke a knyght of the kinges callyd syr Ro¦ger Leyborne, the whych turned the sayde .viii. persones vnto the cytye / and he also rode wyth theym tyll he came nere vnto the cytye, and there departed from them, and rode vppon the backe syde of the towne vnto the toure. But at his departynge he wyl led them to warne the mayre wyth a certayne of the cytye, to mete wyth hym vppon the morow at Berkynge chyrche, whyche standeth nere vnto the towre. Uppon the morow when the mayre and the sayde syr Roger were met / he after a longe processe made, shewed to them of the kynges greuous displeasure whyche he bare towarde the cytye / and the meanes that hadde be vsed by theyr frendes and louers, to obteyne grace for the cytye. Lastely he expressed yt no grace for them myght be had / excepte they wolde by theyr common seale bynde theym selfe fully and holly to stande at ye kynges grace, and to put in his mercy theyr lyues and goodes. wher¦unto in the ende the cytesyns graun∣ted, and delyueryd the forsayde wry¦tynge vnto the foresayd Roger / pray¦enge hym to be good meane for them to ye kynge. The whych departyd to∣warde ye kyng vpon the morow, and returned agayne the .vi. daye after / and wylled the mayre and aldermen to mete wyth hym agayne at the fore¦sayd chirch. where he shewyd to them that the kynge by great instaunce of
theyr frendes hadde receyued theyr wyrtynge / and wold fyrste for the be¦gynnynge of cōtentacion of his myn¦de, that all the chaynes / whych stode in euery strete and lanes ende wyth¦in the cytye, shuld be lousyd frō theyr postes, and the post also drawen out of the erthe, and all to be brought vn¦to the towre / and that done, that the mayre wyth a certayne of ye cytesyns to the nomber of .xl. persones, shuld the daye folowynge be at wyndesore to comferme the graunt of theyr wry¦tyng. And yt they shuld go & come in safe & suer wise / he delyuered to them the kynges letter & seale for ye terme of foure dayes. whyche all was done accordynge to theyr former deuyse / and the mayre wyth the foresayd per¦sones was redy at wyndesore vppon the morow beynge sondaye by one of the clocke / and there taryed tyll .iiii. of the same daye. At whyche season the kynge commynge from his dys∣porte, entred the castell wythout con¦tenaunce or castyng his eyen vppon the Londoners. And when the kyng and his peole was entred the castell / the Londoners wolde haue folowed. But they were warned to abide with out. Then short tyme after the kyng causyd a proclamacyon to be made, that no man of hygh or low degre, to the Londoners shulde make any say¦ynges of dyspleasure, or make to thē any quarell. And in the euenynge came vnto them the foresayd syr Ro¦ger & syr Robert waleys knyghtes, and brought theym into the castell / and sayde the kynges pleasure was not to speke wyth them that nyght. And after the sayde knyghtes dely∣ueryd them vnto the cōstable of ye ca¦stell / which closyd them all in a large toure, where that nyght they hadde small chere and worse lodgynge. Then vppon the morowe beynge mondaye towarde nyght / they were taken oute of that toure, and delyue¦ryd vnto ye baylly of the sayd castell, and lodged by his assygnement / ex∣cept .v. persons, that is to mene Tho¦mas fyz Thomas then mayre, My∣chaell Tony, Stephan Bukkerell, Thomas Pywellyson, and Iohn̄ de Flete. The whyche .v. persones the kynge hadde gyuen to syr Edwarde his sonne / at whose commaundemēt they remayned styll in the saide tou∣re longe after, not wythstandynge the kynges saue conduyte to theym as before is shewed, made. when ty¦dynges hereof came vnto the cyte of London / all be yt that for fere many before were auoyded, then there a∣uoyded many mo / & conueyed theyr goodes in secrete wyse, into dyuers countreys of Englande, so that ma∣ny of them neuer returned after. Anno domini .M.CC.lxiiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxv.   Thomas de la Fourdeous.   Thomas fyz Thomas.   Anno .xlix.   Gregory Rokkylse.   IN thys .xlix. yere, vppon the daye of saynt Leonarde or the vi. daye of Nouember / ye kyng came vnto westmynster. And shortly after he gaue vnto diuers of his houshold seruaūtes, vpon thre score houses & housholdes wythin the citye / so yt the owners were compellyd to agre and redeme theyr houses and housholde wyth all goodes as in them were, or ellys to auoyde, and suffer such per∣sons to enter as ye sayd houses were gyuē vnto / & not alonely that, but al¦so all suche landes and tenementes,
goodes & catalles, as the sayde cyte∣zeyns had in any other places of En∣glande. And than he made custos or gardeyn of the cytye, syr Othon con¦stable of the toure / whych syr Othon chase to be bayllyues vnder hym, and to be to hym accomptable to the vse of the kyng, Iohn̄ Adrian, & wal¦ter Heruy cytezeyns of the same cy∣tye. And after thys the kynge toke pledges of the best mēnes sonnes of the cytye, that hys peas shulde be su∣rely kepte within the same. The whi¦che were put in the toure of Londō, and there kepte at the coste of theyr parentes. And shortly after by great laboure & suyte made / all the forsayd persones which were in the kepynge of ye bayly of the castell of wyndesore iiii. onely except, that is to saye Ry∣charde Bonauenture, Symō de Ha∣disstok, wyllyam de Kent, & wyllyam de Grouceter / all the other Lōdoners xxxiili s nōber, were delyuered & ca∣me to erondon the Thursday folo∣wynge the feast of saynte Luke, in ye xxi. day of Nouember / & the other .ix. were kepte styll in the toure of wyn∣desore. Then dayly suyte & laboure was made vnto ye kynge to haue hys gra∣cyous fauour / and to know hys plea¦sure what fyne he wolde haue of the cytye, for theyr transgressyons & dis∣pleasure by theym to hym done. For the whyche the kynge asked .xl.M.li and fermely helde hym at .l.M. mar¦ke. But the cytye layde for them that the poore commons of the cytye, whe¦reof many were auoyded were the trespassours / and ouer that the best men of the cytye by these ryotous {per}∣sones, were spoyled and robbed / and by the rouers also of the see, as the wardeynes of yt .v. portes and other, in thys troublous seasō they had lost a great part of theyr substance. For the whych cōsyderacyons and many other whyche were tedyous to wryt the cytezeyns besought the kynge of hys most gracious fauour and pyte, and to take of theym as they myght bere. Thys matter thus hangyng / the kynge vppon seynt Nycholas euyn departed from westmynster towarde Northampton. And lytell before hys departynge / ordeyned syr Iohn̄ lynd knyght and mayster Iohn̄ waldren clerke, to be gardeynes of the cytye & toure / the whyche were named in the kynges writtynge Senesshalles or stewardes of the cytye. Uppon the daye folowynge that the kynge was ryden / these .ii. forenamed stewardes sent for .xxiiii. of the mooste notable men of the cytye, and warned theym to apere the day folowynge before ye kynges counsayle at westmynster / where at theyr apparaunce was she∣wed vnto them by syr Roger Leybor¦ne, that the kynges mynde was, that they shulde haue the rule of the cytye in hys absens vnder the foresaid Se∣nesshalles & for to se good rule kept wythin ye cytye / they shuld be sworne there before hys counsayle. The which there were then sworn & countermaunded vnto the cytye. And alwaye labour was made vnto the kynge for the fyne of the cytye / so that in the Crystmas weke an ende was made wyth the kyng, by labour of suche frendes as the cytye had a∣bout hym, for the summe of .xx.M. marke, for all transgressyons and of¦fences by them before done / certayne persones excepted whyche the kynge had gyuē to syr Edwarde hys sonne, beynge as before is sayde in the tour of wynsore. For the paymēt of which summe at dayes by agremēt set / syr Roger Leyborne & mayster Roberte wareyn clerke, were assigned to take the suertyes for ye same. After whych suertye by theym receyued, and sente
vnto the kynge to Northamptō / the kynge sent immedyatly after vnto ye cytezeyns, a charter vnder his brode seale, whereof the effecte ensueth. HEnry by the grace of god, kīg of Englande, lord of Irlande and duke of Guyan / to al men helth. Knowe ye that for the fyne of .xx.M. marke, the whyche our cytezeyns of London to vs made, for the redemp∣cyon of the transgressions and tres∣paces to vs, to our quene, to our no∣ble brother Rycharde kynge of Al∣mayne, and to Edward our fyrst be∣gotē sonne done / we remytte and par¦done for vs and for our heyres to the sayd cytezeyns and theyre heyres, as moche as in vs is / so that they haue and enioye all theyre former graun∣tes and lybertees, rentes and profit∣tes, from the feste of Crystmas laste paste / and also that the sayde cyte∣zeyns haue to theym all forfaytes of all malefactours of ye cytye, which in the parturbaūce before made were endyted, or for the same be yet for to be endyted / Excepte the goodes and catalles of theym, of the whyche we haue gyuen the bodyes vnto our for∣sayd sonne Edwarde / and except the rentes and tenemētes of all those cy∣tezeyns, whyche now be and shalbe our eschete by reason of the forsayde transgressyons. And that all pryso∣ners whyche now in our prysons re∣mayne, be freely delyuered / excepte those {per}sones whose bodyes we haue gyuē to Edwarde our sonne. And yt the sayd cytezeyns be as fre as they before the sayd transgressyons were, in all partes and costes of thys our landes. In wytnes whereof we haue made these letters patentes / wytnes¦seth my selfe at Northampton, the .x. day of Ianuarii, the yere of our reyg¦ne .xlix. After whyche pardone by the cyte¦zeyns receyued / all pledges for them beyng in the toure of Londō, And al∣so .iiii. of them that were in the toure of wyndesore, that is to say Rychard Bonauenture, Symō de Hadistoke, wyllyam of Kente, and wyllyam of Glouceter, were delyuered. Thanne also was dyscharged the forenamed stewardes syr Iohn̄ Lynde & may∣ster Iohn̄ waldrē / and the cytezeyns of them selfe chose for mayre wyllyā Fyz Rychard, and for shyreffes Tho¦mas de la fourde, & Gregory de Rok¦kysley. Than for leuyng of this fyne were set as well seruauntes couenāt men, as housholders / & many refu∣ced the lyberties of the cytye for to be quyt of that charge. whyle the kynge lay thus at Nort¦hampton / syr Symō de Mountford put hym vpon the dome of the Po∣pes legat Octobonus, yt before was come into thys lāde to refourme thin¦ges in the chyrche of Englande, and also to set vnyte & reste betwene the kynge and hys lordes. To whose do me, & also of the kynge of romayns, the forsayde syr Symond had boun∣den hym to stande. Upon whych pro¦myse and bande, he was lybertied to be at large in the kynges courte, and so contynued a season. But in ye ende when the kyng was commē into Lō∣don, he departed sodaynly out of the courte & rode vnto wynchelsee, whe∣re he accompanyed hym with the ro∣uers of the see / and after some pryses taken, departed from theym and so sayled into Fraunce, and put hym in seruyce with holy Lowis than kyng of that prouynce. Thys yere also vppon the euyn of saynt Iohn̄ baptyst / the kynge begā hys syege about the castell of Kenel∣worth with a mighty power. But syr Hēry Hastynges, with suche as were within it, defended it so strōgly, that the kynge and all hys power myght
nat wynne the sayde castell of a lōge tyme, as after in the nexte yere shall appere. It is before shewed, howe ye quene by her purueiaūs had caused an host of straungers to prepare them to co∣me into Englande, for to ayde her lorde the kynge agayn the barons: She had also purchased a curse of ye Pope, to acurse all the sayde barons and all theyre ayders & helpers / and had commyssiōs dyrected to certayn bysshoppes of Englande, to execute the same / as of London, and of wyn∣chester, and of Chychester / the which for fere of the barons than denyed & deferred the execucyon and sentence of the sayd curse. wherfore the quene made newe laboure to the pope than Urban the .iiii. and had it graū∣ted, that the sayde Bysshoppes for theyr dysobedyence shulde be correc∣ted. And for thys, Octobon the fore∣sayde legate, thys yere at a counsayl holden by hym and the clergy of En∣glande at Paules chyrche in Londō suspended the sayde Bysshoppes, & theym sente vnto Rome to be assoy∣led of the pope, beynge at thys daye Clement the .iiii. Anno domini .M.CC.lxv.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxvi.   Edwarde Blont.   Thomas fiz Thomas.   Anno. .l.   Peter Aunger.   IN thys .l. yere vppon the euyn of saynt Thomas the apostle before Crystmas, was yelden by ap∣poyntement the castel of Kenelworth At the whyche the kynge with hys power had lyen as before is sayd, frō mydsomer tyll that day / and thā gy∣uen ouer by syr Henry Hastynges & hys complyeys, vppon condycyon yt he and all the other shulde haue lyfe and lym, and horse & harneys, with all thynges within the castell to thē belongynge / and a certayne tyme of leyser to cary a way the same. And in thys yere in the tyme of Lent / were ye wardeyns of the .v. portes recōcyled to ye kynge, by fauour of syr Edward the kynges sonne. And natwithstan∣dynge the greate harmys they had done by rouyng vppon the see, aswel to Englysshe marchauntes as to o∣ther / they had to them confermed all theyr fourmer pryuyleges. And ouer that to theym was graūted, yt yf any man Englysshe or other wolde sewe for restitucyon of good by thē before taken, or for the deth of any of theyre frendes before slayne / that all suche complayntes shuld be sued & shewed in theyr court{is} / & there to haue theyr maters determyned & nat ellys whe∣re. But what the cause was of thys ende thus made atwene ye kyng & thē it is nat shewed. But ye cōmon fame at yt day ran yt the sayd wardeins of ye v. portes had at thys day ye dominiō of the see. wherfore ye kyng was fayn to folowe theyr pleasures. About the feast of Philip & Iacob ye kyng helde hys parlyamēt at Nort hāpton. At yt whych were cōfermed ye olde fraunchyses & lybertyes, by the kyng{is} progenytours before graūted vnto the cytye of Lōdon, with a new graūt for ye shyre of Middelsex. And at thys parlyament were dysheryted many noble men of the lande, yt befo∣re tyme had taken the barons partie. For whyche cause they accompanied theym togyder, & robbed and reuyd in diuers coostes of the lande / & toke the towne of Lyncoln̄ & spoyled it, & after raunsomed many of the ryche burgeyses of the towne / and toke the ile of Ely, & strēgthed it in suche wyse that they helde it longe after.
Anno domini .M.CC.lxvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxvii.   Iohn̄ Adryan.   willm̄ Fiz Rycharde.   Anno .li   Luke Badecot.   IN thys .li. yere / at the chosyng of the mayre, certayne con∣trauersies fyll attwene the rulers & the commons of the cytye of Lon∣don. wherfore by aduice of the mayre and aldermen / syr Roger Leydorne with other came vnto ye Guylhalle, beyng harnesed vnder theyr gownes and vppon the fryday folowyng Al∣halowyn called the commons to the eleccion of the new mayre / where the best of the cytye gaue ye nominacyō vnto Alei sowch / & diuerse of ye other cryed vpon Thomas fyz Thomas, whych at that tyme was prysoner in wyndesore castell / wherfore the sayd Roger with ye assystence of the mayre and other, toke the sayde Rascal and euyll disposed persones, and sent thē vnto dyuers prysons. Thys yere al∣so the gentylmen that helde the Ile of Ely brake oute sondry tymes and dyd moche harme in Northfolke, & in Suffolke, and Cambrydgeshyre / and toke the cytie of Norwyche / and after the spoylynge thereof, caryed awaye with theym many of the cyte∣zeyns beynge ryche, and fynaunced theym at great summes of money / & lyued therein that Ile lyke vnto out lawes. By thys and other, many hur¦tes in dyuers places of the lāde was done, by theuys and other yll dyspo∣sed people / whereof the charge was euer layde vnto the fore name gentil¦men. Thē the legate laboured vnto the kynge, that the sayde disheryted gentylmen myght purchase theyr lā¦des of hym by fyne and raunsome. By whose laboure the kynge lastly agreed, that the sayd gentylmē shuld haue theyr landes agayne by fynes of .v. yere value of theyr lande. As he that myght dyspende .xx.li. by yere, shulde paye an. C.li. and so other af∣ter that rate, except syr Robert ferers Erle of Derby, syr Iohn̄ de la warre and hym that strake of ye fyste of the kynges purseuaūt. And some other persones whyche were of small ha∣uoure, shulde be fyned by discrecyon of the kynges counsayll / but this to∣ke no conclusyon. Anno domini .M.CC.lxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxviii.   Thomas Basynge.   Aleyn South.   Anno .lii.   Robert de Cornehylf.   IN thys .lii. yere, for what hap is nat expressed, syr Gylbert de Clare erle of Gloceter refused ye king and in the marche of walys gadered vnto hī a stronge power. To whome also drewe syr Iohn̄ Eyuile & other of the company disherited. And after the feest of Crystmasse, with a greate hoost came nere vnto London / that tyme the Popes legate Octobonus beynge lodged at the toure of Lōdō. whan the mayre and aldermen of the cytye were ware of the erles com¦mynge, with so stronge a power, nat knowynge whether he were the kyn∣ges frende or nat / shytte the gates a∣gayne hys fore ryders. And for the kynge nor none of hys coūsayll was than nere vnto the cytye / the mayre and aldermen went vnto the legate,
and requyred hys counsayl, whether they shulde suffre the erle to entre īto the cytye or nat / wherunto the lega∣te answered that he thought nat the contrary / for he knewe wele that he was the kynges trewe subyect & frē∣de. It was nat lōge after that a mes∣sanger came from the erle vnto the mayre, wyllynge to haue lycence to passe thorugh the cytye into South∣werke, where he entendyd to lodge hym and hys people / whyche was graunted / and so the erle passed tho∣rough the cytye, and was lodged in South werke. To whō came shortly after by Southerey, syde syr Iohn̄ Eyuile with a greate company. Than the mayre kepte the gate of ye brydge shyt, and watched it dayly with a certayne of armyd men, and euery nyght caused the draw brydge to be drawen, & the waters syde day∣ly and nyghtly to be watched with many armyd men. In lytell processe of tyme after / the legate and the erle agreed in suche wyse, that the erle by hys aduyce was suffered with a cer∣tayne of hys people to be lodged within ye cytye. By reason wherof he dayly drewe more & more of hys peo∣ple into the cytye / so that fynally ma¦ny thynges were ordered by hym, & many of the commons toke hys par∣tye agayne the mayre and aldermen. Then in the Easter weke he toke ye keyes of the brydge and of the gates from the offycers of the cytye, and de¦lyuered them to such as pleased hym and receyued into the cytye many of the dysherited persones, and gaue to them fre lybertye to passe the brydge by all houres of the daye & ye nyghte. The mayre of all thys sente worde vnto the kynge, whych than was ga¦deryng of hys power in Northfolke, and made hasty spede towarde Lon∣don. In whyche meane tyme the erle with hys company made bulwerkes and barbycanys atwene the toure & the cytye, and caste dykes & trenches in some places of ye cytye, & fortyfyed it wonderously. Then many of ye cytezeyns feryng a newe insurreccyon, voyded the cy∣tye as secretly as they myght / whose goodes the erle seased to hys owne vse: or suffred hys men to spoyle thē at theyr pleasure. Than the commōs of the cytye forgat theyr late punyssh¦ment / and as men without drede of god or of theyr kynge, toke certayne of the aldermen & caste theym in pry¦sone, and sequestred theyr goodes, & dyspoyled moche therof. And ther∣vppon ranne to the Guyldhalle, and there chose for theyr mayre or for cu∣stos or ruler of the cytye syr Rychard de Culworth knyght, and for bayly∣ues Roberte de Lynton and Roger Marshall / and dyscharged the olde mayre and sheryffes. And that done, all suche prysoners as were in New∣gate, Ludgate, and Crepylgate, or in any other prysons within the cytie for bycause of the barons warre be∣fore passed / they were delyuered & set at lybertye. whan the legate beheld all thys re¦belliō and dyscorde / he repented hym of hys fourmer counsayll gyuē vnto the mayre. And for he sawe he might nat refourme the erle of hys errour / he thretened hym wyth the censurs of the chyrch, and to accurse hym as the dysheryted were. And vpon thys he commaunded the deuyne seruyce to be sayd without note, & the chyrch dores to be shytte in tyme of the serui¦ce doynge, & that no belle were ronge vnto the sayde seruyce / and all to the entent yt the disheryted, whych stode accursed shuld nat entre ye churches to here the deuyne seruyce of god. Then vpō .iii. wekes after Easter / the kynge came to Ham̄ .iii. myles from London, and was lodged hym
selfe in the abbaye of whyte monkes of Stratforde. whyther came vnto hym the legate soone after, and was lodgid also in the same abbay / where for streyghtnes of lodgyng his horse and mules were sette wythin the clos¦ter of the sayde abbay. Then the kyn¦ges hoste made dayly assautes vpon the cytye / and gunnes and other or∣dynaunces was shot into the cytye, whyche lytell or nothynge hurte the towne, yt was so strongly fortyfyed. In this season ye legate vpon his partye, and the kynge of Romaynes vppon the other partye, for allyaūce that was betwene hym and the erle of Glouceter / labored so to the kyng that a reformacyon of peace was spo¦ken of. Durynge whyche treaty the souldyours lyenge in Southwerke, made many robboryes in Southery and other places / and rowed ouer to westmynster, and spoyled there the kynges paleys, and deuoured hys wyne, and brake ye glasse of the wyn∣dowes / and all other necessaryes to that paleys they destroyed & wasted / and somtymes came in lyke wyse in∣to Lōdon and robbyd there also. Of whyche there was taken .iiii. yt bare the Conysaunce of the erle of Der∣by / the whyche the erle caused theyr handes and legges to be bounden, and then put into a sacke, and so cast into the Thamys. About the feast of saynt Barnabe / the peace betwene the kynge and the erle of Glouceter was concludyd. After the whyche conclusyon ta∣ken / the erle remouyd out of the cy∣tye, & was lodged agayne in South werke. And the kyng entryd the citye the sondaye before mydsomer daye. And forth wyth the kynges procla∣macyons were made through the cy∣tye, of the peace betwene the kyng & the erle. And after was gyuen liberte to ye dysheryted persons yt they shuld haue .xi. dayes respyte to shyft for them selfe / that is to meane other to auoyde to suche places where they myght be in some suertye, or ellys to agre to the former composycyon ma∣de by the legate, and to paye the .v. parte of the slynte of theyr landes / certayne persones to be exceptyd, as before is rehersyd. And as touchyng to the erle and suche other as before were not dysheryted, wyth also the cytesyns of London, to be clerely for¦gyuen and pardoned. And then was restoryd to theyr of∣fyces Aleyn Sowch for mayre, and Thomas Basynge and Robert de Cornehyll for shyreffes. And the al∣dermen whych before were deposyd, were agayn restored to theyr wardes and offyces. Uppon the wednysday folowynge, the legate interdyted all the cytye. which endured from .vi. of the clocke in the mornyng, tyll .iii. of the clocke the next day at after none / and then yt dyschargyd, vppon the othe of .ii. commons sworne in the name of all the cytye, that the cytye shulde stande to the ordynaunce and iudgement of holy chyrche. But an other cronycle sayth, that this interdyccyon shulde haue contynued longer, ne had ben the sterenesse of the Londoners / why¦che helde the legate so streyght, that they enforced hym to wythdraw that sentence vppon the foresayde condy∣cyon. Then after this, all the bul¦werkes and barbycans made by the erle in the cytye were plucked clene vppe / and the dyches fyllyd, that no parte of theym was sene. when the cy¦tesyns shulde haue theyr newe par∣don graūted / an obstacle was made, for so myche as they as yet hadde not recompensyd the kynge of Ro∣maynes for the subuersyon of his ma¦nour of Thystylworth. For the why∣che was axed .vi. thousande marke /
so that fynally wyth great laboure and frendshyppe, thy agreed to gyue vnto hym for amendes a thousande marke, to be payed in two yeres. It was longe after the kynge acce∣ptyd to his grace syr Iohn̄ Eyuyle, syr Nycholas de Segraue, syr willy¦am Marmeryn or Mermyon, syr Ri¦charde Gray, syr Iohn̄ fyz Iohn̄, and syr Gylbert de Lucy, with other. And accorde was also made betwene syr Edwarde the kynges sonne, and the forenamed erle of Glouceter. And then was all fortresses and other de∣fences which before tyme were made in Southwerke and in other places ioynynge to the same, pulled vp and destroyed / and the erle and all other souldyours clene voyded. And after all thynges set in order and reste, ex∣cepte such as yet kept the yle of Ely / the kynge rode to Shrowysburye, where he taried a season, for to cōmon of maters betwene hym and Lewe∣lyn prynce of walys. The kynge thus beyng at Shrow¦ysbury / a wrytte was dyrectyd to syr Aleyn Souch mayre of Lōdon, viii. dayes before Mychelmas from the kynge / chargynge hym that the cy∣tesyns shuld not procede to eleccyon of newe shyreffes tyll his commynge to London, but to suffer the olde to abyde styll in offyce. Anno domini .M.CC.lxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxix.   wyllyam de Durham.   Aleyn Souch.   Anno .liii   walter Henry.   IN this .liii. yere in the moneth of Nouember, fyll a varyaūce betwene the felyshyppes of goldsmy¦thes and tayllours of London. why∣che grew to makynge of partyes / so that wyth the goldsmythes toke par¦tye the felyshyp or craft of / & wyth the tayllours helde ye craft of stayners.Drf ta∣kyng. By meane of thys myche people nyghtly gaderyd in the stre∣tes in harneys. And at length as yt were prouyded, ye thyrd nyght, of the sayde partyes met vpon the nomber of .v. hūdred men on both sydes, and ran to gyther wyth such violence, yt some were slayn and many woūded, Then outcrie was made / so yt the shy reffes with strength of other cōmons came to the ryddynge of theym, and of theym toke certayn persones / and sent them vnto dyuers prysons / and vppon the morowe suche serche was made, that the moste of the chefe cau¦sers of that fray were taken and put in warde. Then vppon the freday folowyng saynt Katheryns day, sessyons were kepte at Newgate by the mayre and Laurēce de Broke iustyce and other / where .xxx. of the sayd persones were arregned of felony, and .xiii. of them caste and hanged. And for one God∣frey de Beuerlay holpe to arme one of the sayd persons, he was also caste amonge the other. In lent folowyng the kynge beyng at westmynster com¦maūded the mayre of London to pre¦sent vnto hym .vi. persones such as were able to be shyriffes. Of the why¦che .vi. so presented, ye kyng chase .ii. for to be shyreffes / that is to say wyl∣lyam de Durham and walter Hen¦ry / and then caused theym to be sworne, that they shulde gader the profytes of the cytye, and to gyue a trewe accompte before the Barons of the excheker. And the morow after saynt Iamis daye, or the .xxvi. daye of Iuly / the kynge dyscharged syr Aleyn Souch
mayre, and made Stephā Edworth constable of the toure, and custos of the cytye of London. Of these rulers of the cytye after the yere that Tho∣mas fyz Thomas was mayre are dy¦uers oppynyons. For after some wri¦ters, from that yere, whyche as the xlviii. yere of kynge Henry tyll the lviii. yere, of hys reygne, in the why∣che yere Iohan Adryan draper was mayre / were all custodyes and gar∣deyns and no mayres / and who to ye was then constable of the towre of Lōdon, was also custos of the cytye. About this tyme also by medyacy on and meanes of syr Edwarde / all suche dysheryted persones as kepte the yle of Ely, were reconcyled vnto the kynge / and all fortresses and de∣fences therin by theym made, pluc∣ked away and destroyed. And in thys moneth of Iuly, Oc∣tobonus the legat after he had made many good rules in the chyrche, not wythoute great charge of dymes le∣uyed of the same / toke his leue of the kynge, and rode towarde the see syde with great treasour, and so returned in processe of tyme to Rome. where after Innocent the fyft, about the ye¦re of our lorde .xii. hundred & .lxxvi. he was chosen and created pope, and then named Adryan yt .v. of yt name, and dyed wythin .l. dayes of his eley¦on. This yere also, for so myche as many of the cytesyns of London for the great imposycyon & charge that they were sette at, towarde the fyne of .xx. thousande marke forenamed wyth other charges, voyde the cytye wyth theyr housholdes and goodes, & enhabited them in dyues places of the lande, thynkynge therby to be ac¦quited of the sayd sessyng or charge / the other of the cytye whych remay∣ned, made instant laboure to ye kyng and had yt graunted, that all suche as for the sayde cause hadde voyded theyr goodes out of the cytye, shulde be distrayned by the shyryff of ye shyre where they then dwelled, and forcyd to paye all suche summes as they be∣fore were assessyd at. And in the moneth of September, the forenamed .v. cytesyns whych re¦mayned prysoners in the towre of wyndefore, that is to saye Thomas fyz Thomas, Mychaell Tony, Ste∣phan Buckerell, Thomas Pywelys¦don and Iohn̄ de la Flete, as before in the ende of the .xlviii. yere is expres¦syd / made at thys season theyr ende wyth syr Edwarde the kynges sonne for great summes of money, & were delyueryd. Anno domini .M.CC.lxix.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxx.   wyllyam Haddystoke.   Thomas fiz Thomas.   Anno .liiii.   Anketyll de Aluerne.   IN this .liiii. yere, beganne an harde froste about the feaste of saynt Andrew, and enduryd tyll yt was nere vnto Candelmasse. The whych was so feruent, that Thamys aboue the bridge betwene London & westmynster was so harde frosyn, ye men and bestes passed ouer on fote from Lambhyth to westmynste / and so vpward in dyuers places to Kyng¦stone / and marchaundyse was cary∣ed from Sandwych & other hauens of the see vnto London by lande, for that shyppes at ye season myghte not entre into the ryuer of Thamys. And about the feaste of saynte Ue∣dast fyll suche plent of water, ye Tha¦mys flowed and rose so hyghe, y• the lyke therof was not sene by men then lyuynge wherof ensued mych harme
about London / for the selers by the water syde were all drowned, and in theym great plente of marchaundyse peryshed and loste. In this yere in the begynnynge of lent / ye kynge gaue vnto syr Edward his son the rule of the cytye of Lon∣don, with all reuenues and profytes to yt belongynge. After whyche gyft ye sayd syr Edwarde made syr Hugh the son of Othon cōstable of ye towre and custos of the cytye. And vppon the .ix. daye of Apryll ensuynge / syr Edmunde the kynges other sonne surnamed Crouch bake, maryed at westminster the doughter of the erle of Aumarle. For solemp∣nyte wherof, the kynge kept there in ye great hall a great honorable feaste the sondaye folowynge. And vppon the daye of saynte Er∣kenwalde, or the laste daye of Apryll nexte ensuynge / syr Edwarde ye kyn¦ges sonne commaunded the citesyns of London to presente vnto hym .vi. persones able to be shyreffes of Lon¦don. Of the whyche he admytted to that offyce wyllyam de Hadestoke & Anketyll de Aluerne / & sware them to be accomptauntes as theyr prede∣cessours were. And the .vi. daye of May folowyng p̄sentyd at ye Guyld hall, and there chargyd of new. At these dayes a newe custome or toll was vsed to be payed by the cyty¦syns of London vnto the kynge / whych toll syr Edwarde then hadde letten so ferme to a marchaunt straūger for .xx. marke by yere. wherfore the cytesysn not wyllynge to be vn∣der the rule of a straūger, made grete suyte vnto the sayde syr Edwarde / and lastely agreed wyth hym to bye the sayde tolle free, for the summe of two hundred marke. And in the ende of this yere, that is to meane the .xiii. daye of October / the kynge lette translate wyth great solemnytye, the holy body of saynte Edwarde kynge and confessour, that before laye in the syde of the quere where the monkes nowe synge, into the chapell at the backe of the hyghe aulter of westmynster abbay / & there layde yt in a ryche shryne. And in this yere the kynge hadde graunted vnto hym towarde his vyage purpo¦syd by hym into the holy lande, the xx. peny of euery mannes substaunce mouable thorough out hys lande of the lay fee / and of the spyrytualty by assent of ye .x. Gregorye then pope .iii. dysmes, to be leuyed in thre yeres. Anno domini .M.CC.lxx.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxi.   walter Porter.   Iohn̄ Adryan Uyntyner.   Anno .lv.   Iohn̄ Taylour.   IN thys .lv. yere, the kynge of Romains cōcludid a couenaūt betwen ye kyng & syr Gylbert de Cla∣re erle of Glouceter, for a vyage to be taken into the holy lande by the sayd erle for the kynge. For the whych vy∣age the saide erle shuld haue toward his charge .viii thousand mark, and at the takyng of his shyppyng other iiii. thousande marke, and to be redy by the fyrst daye of May next folow∣ynge / and yf the erle were not redy at the see syde at that day with his com¦pany to take his shyppynge, he shuld then forfayte to ye kyng .ii.M. marke. For suertie wherof ye sayde erle shuld delyuer into the kynges possessyon his castell of Henleger standynge vp¦pon ye marche of walis. But this cam after to no purpose, wherfore ye cause
is not shewyd. But ye iourney was perfourmed by syr Edwarde the kyn¦ges sonne, as after shall be to you de¦clared. In this passe tyme the cy∣tesyns of London contentyd so well syr Edwardes mynde, that he labou¦red so for them to the kynges grace, that they had then theyr chartour so cōfermyd, that they shuld after theyr auncyent lybertyes chose of them self a mayre and two shryues / and ye sayd shryues to haue the offyces therun∣to belongynge to ferme, as they to fore hadde / excepte that wheretofore they payde for the fee ferme .iii. hun∣dred and l. punde, nowe they shulde pay .iiii. hundred and .l. poūde. After whyche confyrmacyon thus graūted and passed by ye kynges brode seale / the cytesyns vppon the .xiiii. daye of Iuly assembled at the Guyldhall, & chase for theyr mayre Iohn̄ Adryan draper / and for shyreffes walter Por¦ter and Iohn̄ Tayller. And vppon ye xvi. daye folowynge syr Edwarde be¦ynge present, presented them vnto ye king at westminster / where they were admitted & sworne. And then was syr Hugh of Othon dyschargyd of that rule of the cytye. Then the citesyns of theyr fre wyll gaue vnto the kynge an .C. marke / & to syr Edwarde .v. hūdred marke / whyche gyft the kyng well accepted. And soone after they receyued theyr chartour of confyrmacyon, berynge date the .xxi. day of Iuly, and yere of the kynges reygne .lv. And for the former conuencyon be¦twene the kyng and the erle of Glou¦ceter was not holden / syr Edwarde toke vppon hym the kynges crosse. To whom the kynge gaue all suche money as was graunted of ye lay fee as before is shewyd, & then toke his leue of the kyng / and after toke shyp¦pynge at Douer the .xx. daye of Au∣gust, and so sayled to Burbeaux with his wyfe and other noble company. And for that holy Lewys then kyng of Fraunce was gone, he taryed at Burdeaux a certayne season / and af∣ter sped hym with his forsayd compa¦ny toward ye cytye of Thunys, where ye Frenche kyng was. But or he came thyder saynt Lewys was dede. And ye peace cōcluded betwene Phylyppe hys son and the kynge of Thunys. wherfore syr Edwarde entendynge to greue goddes enmyes, wyth some knygtes of Fraunce whych entēded the same / toke leue of the Frenche kynge and of syr Charls hys vncle then kynge of Scycyle / & sayled fur∣ther into the holy lande, and arryued at a porte of Acris or Acon. For at ye daye in the holy lande was no mo cy¦tyes in the possessyon of cristen men, but that and the cytye of Tyre / wyth certayne castellys, wherunto the cry¦sten fled often for socoure agayne the Sarazyns. when syr Edwarde was comē to ye cytye of Acon / ye crysten knyghtes re¦ceyued hym with gret honour & glad¦nesse, and lodged hym in theyr beste maner. where he taryed by the space of a yere after, as aftermeth ye french cronycle. For yt was not longe after his commynge thyder, but that the Soudane of Sury (the whych had wonne al the countreys there about) came thyther wyth a great power of Sarazyns, and assauted the towne vygurously. But syr Edwarde with the ayde of crysten men bare hym so knyghtly, that he defended the cytye and the castellys to the same belon∣gynge, & terrytores of the same / that the Soudane for all hys great mul∣tytude and power gate there lyteil honoure / notwytstandynge that he hadde in hys hoste, as affyrmeth the frenche cronycle, ouer an hundred thousande Sarazyns. And more af∣fyrmeth the sayde cronycle, that syr
Edwarde in his polycyes and man∣full actes so honorably behauyd him that he neuer dyd such acte in all his lyfe folowynge / all be it that after he dyd many of grete honour. But none that was lyke vnto the actes that he there accomplyshed and brought vn¦to ende. By reason wherof his name amonge infidelys was had in memo¦ry many yeres after. Of the honoure of thys marcyall knyght I haue shewed the lenger re∣hersall, for so myche as I fynde yt te¦styfyed of the French men / the which I knowe well by theyr other crony∣cles that they make of Englysh pryn¦ces must be of great authoryte, or el∣lys by them yt shuld not so specyally haue ben noted. And more ouer I am assured, that yf a Frenche prynce had deseruyd suche a generall pryce / yt shulde haue ben set out and artycu¦led euery acte thereof, that yt shulde haue conteyned a large worke, & the specyaltyes therof declared to theyre moste laude and honour. Then thys noble prynce beynge thus in Acon, and dayly puttynge the Suryens to shame and great damages / they se∣ynge they might not preuayle agayn hym by strength of vatayll, cast how they myght destroy hym by treason / and sente vnto hym a Sarazyne in name of a messanger, the whyche in tellynge of hys fayned message, woū¦ded hym wyth a knyfe enuenomyd / of the whyche wounde he laye longe or he were therof cured. But after confessyon made by the Sarazyn of all hys cōpassed treason, he was put vnto cruell deth. In thys yere also fyll downe the steple of saynt Mary Bow in Chepe of Lōdon, & slew women & chyldren. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxii.   Gregory Rokkysle.   Iohn̄ Adryan wyntener   Anno .lvi.   Henry waleys.   IN this .lvi. yere, in the moneth of Nouember at the parliamēt holden at westmynster / the marchaū¦tes of Lōdon and other places of En¦glande, complayned them to ye kyng that the countesse of Flaundres had taken from them certayne gooddes amountynge to a great summe. Up∣pon whych complaynt the kyng sent to her to make restytucyon. But for noe was had / the kyng cōmaunded that all men born in ye partyes in En¦glande shulde be arrested, and they & theyr goodes to be vnder suer ke∣pynge. By the whych meane in con∣clusyon she sent ouer embassadours, and besought the kyng that his mar¦chaūtes myght vse theyr entercourse into Flaūdres as they before tymes had done, & such lossis as before was by theym susteyned, shulde be recom¦pensyd. And so soone after, an amy∣tye betwene the kynge and her was concluded. De &  of Ry¦chard kynge of smayne. In this yere about ye ende of Mar¦che dyed Rychard kynge of Almayn and erle of Cornewayle brother to the kynge / and was buryed at Hay∣lys an abbaye of whyte monkes by hym before tymes buylded, after he hadde ben kynge of Almayne by the terme of .xv. yeres. But after the re∣hersall made before in the .xxx. yere of this kyng Henry, he shuld reygne xvi. yeres. In the moneth of Iuny, ye monaste¦ry of ye Trinite in ye citie of Norwiche was consumed wyth fyre / by reason of a fraye made betwene seruauntes of the abbaye and some of the cyte∣zeyns
of the cytye / whyche grewe to a great skyrmysshe. For the pryour of the same and other of the monkes purueyed sowdyours, and helde ye belfray and the chyrch by force of ar∣mys / and threwe out stones & dartes and shotte many arrowes, by reason wherof many of ye towne were bothe wounded & slayne, whyche broughte the comons and yonge men in suche a furye and madnesse, that they fyrid the gates / and after forced the fyre with rede and drye woode, that the chyrche wyth the bookes & all other ornamentes of the same, and all hou¦ses of offyce belongynge to the same abbey, were clene brent and throwen downe / so that nothynge was preser¦ued / excepte a lytell Chapell. whā ty∣dynges of thys ryot came to ye kyng{is} knowlege / he was therwith greuous¦ly dyspleased, so that he rode thyder soone after / and there commaunded questes to be charged of knyghtes & esquyres that dwelled in the countre aboute / and to endyte all suche per∣sones as were occasyoners and exe∣cutours of that dede. By reason of whyche enquery, fynally were caste and iuged vppon the nombre. of .xxx. yonge men of the towne / the whyche were after drawen to the place of exe¦cucyon and there hanged and brent to the great dyscomfyture & sorowe of the cytezeyns. For they thought ye pryour of the place was the occasyo∣ner of all that myschyef / whych was borne out & defended by the bysshop of Norwyche than beyng named Ro¦ger. And this yere were diuers prody¦gies & straūge tokens sene in dyuers places of Englande amōge / ye whych at Grenewyche besyde London a lā∣be was yenyd,A mōster hauynge .ii. perfyte bo¦dyes wyth all membres, and but one heed. Anno domini .M.C.lxxii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxiii.   Rycharde Parys.   Syr walter Henry.   Anno .lvii.   Iohn̄ Bedyll.   IN thys .lvii. yere of kynge Hēry and begynnynge of the same, the kynge sy¦kened / so that he was forcyd to kepe his bed at westmin¦ster, where he called before hym syr Gylberte de Clare erle of Glouceter and caused hym to be newly sworne to kepe the peas of the lande, to the behofe of Edwarde hys sonne / and than dyed vppon the daye of saynte Edmunde the bysshoppe, or the .xvi. day of Nouembre / and was buryed vppon the southesyde of saynte Ed∣warde in westmynster, whenne he had reygned .lvi. yeres & .xxviii. days leuynge after hym syr Edwarde be∣forenamed for hys heyre, & Edmūde Crowchbak. In a table hāgyng vpō the tombe of the sayd Henry are writ¦ten these verses folowynge. Tercius Henricus iacet hic, pietatis amicus Ecclesiam strauit istam, quam post renouauit Reddat ei munus, qui regnat trinus & vnus. The whyche may be Englysshed as foloweth. The frende of pyte and of almesse dede Henry the thyrde whylome of Eng∣lande kynge. who thys chyrch brake, & after hys mede Agayn renewed into this fayre buyl¦dynge
Nowe resteth in here, whyche dyd so great a thynge He yelde hys mede, that lorde in deyite That as one god reygneth in perso∣nes thre. Francia. LOwys the .ix. of ye name and sonne vnto the seconde Phylyp, begā his reygne ouer the realme of Fraūce in the yere of our lorde .xii.C.xxiii. and the .vii. yere of the thyrde Hēry then kynge of Englande. Thys Lo∣wys was crowned at Raynes vpon the daye of saynt Sixtus the pope or the .vi. day of August. By the meane of thys Lowys as testifieth the frēshe cronycle, retourned the blode of Pe∣pyn to the enherytaunce of the crow∣ne of Fraunce, whose name was Isa¦bell doughter of Bawdewyn erle of Henaut / whych Bawdewyn was dis¦cendyd of Ermengaunte, somtyme countesse of Namoure, whyche was doughter to Charles duke of Lo∣rayne / the whyche Charles was ly∣nyally dyscended of Charles the Cō∣querour that was sonne of Charles Martellus the sonne of Pepyn. whan thys Lowys had passed the solempnytye of hys coronacyon / he made a vyage into ye countre of Poy∣tiers, and there wanne from the En∣glysshe men certayne castelles & tow¦nes, as before in the .x. yere of Henry the thyrde is touched. The whyche vyage by hym fynysshed / he at ye con¦templacyon and prayer of kyng Io∣han kynge of Hierusalem, toke vpō hym the crosse to warre vpō the Tur¦kes / and after all thynges for that vyage made redy, passed with hys hoost by Burgys & Neuers, and so to Lyon / and from Lyon to Auygnd the whyche for dysobedyence to the chyrche of Rome had stande accursed vppon the terme of .vii. yeres. But where as kynge Lowys supposed he shulde haue passed with hys people as he had passed the other cytyes / ye cytezeyns closed the gates agayne hym, & wolde nat suffre hym nor hys to come within the cytye. wherfore the kynge commaunded assaute to be made / and so continued there hys siege tyll the myddell of Au¦gust, the whyche was begon aboute the ende of Nouēbre / and loste there many of hys men / amōge the whych Guy erle of saynte Paule a man of great fame was one, with ye bysshop of Lemeryk and other, to the nōbre of .ii.M. or theraboute. wherewith thys Lowys was so amoued, that he made a solempne othe, that he wolde nat departe thens tyll he had wonne the towne. when that the rulers of the towne had knowlege of the kynges aowe and promesse that he had made / they toke aduysemente / and shortly after sent vnto the kynge .ii. noble men of the cytye to entreate and common of peas. But peas was to them vtterly denyed / except they wolde submytte theym hooly to the correccyon of the pope. For the offence done to god & hys chyrch of Rome / & after to stāde to the kynges dome, for dysplea∣sure done agayne hym. In the ende thoughe thys condycyon were great¦ly agayne theyr mynde / it was lastly agreed vnto, and the kynge with his people was receyued into the cytye. And after he had restyd hym there a season, that the cytezens had agreed theym with the popes legate, and re∣ceyued of hym absoluciō / with a new bysshop named Peter Corbio of the popes eleccyon than Gregory the .ix. with other thynges done accordinge
to the sayd popes commaundement: Then kynge Lowys commaunded fyrste the dyches of the towne to be fylled playne with the grounde. And that done, he caused to be caste vnto the erthe .iii.C. of ye fayrest houses of the cytye. And after certayne sūmes of money by hym receyued towarde hys charge / he departed thens to∣warde Tholowse / & there by aduyce of hys barony, for so moche as wyn∣ter was towarde he retourned into Fraunce / & so sped hym on hys iour∣ney, that vppō the euyn of all Sain¦tes he came to a place called Moūte Pauncer in the prouynce of Aluerne where he was takē with stronge sy∣kenesse, and dyed within .iiii. dayes after, whose corps with grete honour was conueyed vnto saynt Denys, & there buryed by hys father / when he had reygned .iii. yeres / leuynge after hym a sonne, the whych is nowe na∣med saint Lowys, and was than of ye age of .xii. yeres or nere thereaboute. LOwys the .x. of that name sur¦named saint Lowys, and son of the .ix. Lowys laste kynge / began hys reygne ouer the lande of Fraūce in the moneth of Nouember, and ye∣re of grace .xii.C. & .xxvi. and ye .x. ye∣re of Henry the .iii. then kynge of En¦glande. The whyche for hys tender∣nesse of youthe, was thought insuffi∣cyent to take so greate a charge / and specyally of ye duke of Brytayne thā named Peter Mancler, the whyche encensed and styred many noble men agayne the sayde Lowys. But at length by prouysyon of quene Blan¦che hys mother and other lordes, he subdued hys enemyes / & at Raynes was crowned in the moneth of Decē∣ber folowyng, of the bysshop of Soy sons, for so moche as at that tyme ye see of Raynes was voyde. The .iiii. yere of hys reygne and of hys age .xvii. he buylded the house of relygyon called Royan mount / & set∣therin monkes of Cysteauxe ordre whyte monkes, and endewed theym with ryche possessyons. It was nat longe after that great varyaunce fyll betwene the vnyuer∣sytye or studientes of Parys and the cytezeyns of the same / in suche wyse that the studyentes were in purpose to haue lafte ye cytye, & to haue kepte theyr study ellys where. Of ye whych stryfe the frenche boke expresseth nat the cause / but saythe that the kynge made good spede to agree theym, for so moche as kyng Hēry of Englande had made laboure to the sayde stu∣dyentes to come into hys countre, & to enhabyte theym there with many great pryueleges. But in cōclusion ye frenche kynge so entreated thē, that they agreed to reste there styll. And that of a congruēce / for they myghte dwell in no lande, where they shulde more surely be defended.The ome de Lyce. For ye kyng of Fraunce bereth the floure de Lyce for one of that causes, that is to saye for to defende the clergy. And the fayth of Chryste betokeneth the myd¦dle leef. And the thyrde betokeneth Chyualry. So that by the chyualry the clergy is defended, whych may¦teyne the faythe of the holy chyrche. Aboute thys season kynge Lowys maryed to hys fere Margarete the doughter of the erle of Prouynce. Soone after ye matrymony was so∣lepnysed / Frederyk the secōde before in ye story of Hēry the .iii. mynded Em¦perour of Almayne, set vnto Lowis requyrynge hi ye he wolde mete hym at a place called Ualcolour, to ye en∣de that he myght commō with hym: whyche request kynge Lowys accep∣ted / & with a goodly company kepte there hys daye of metynge. But whan the Emperour was ware that he was commen thyder wyth suche a company / he fayned hym syke,
and broke hys appoyntement. wher∣fore the frenshmen construyed, that yf the kynge had comen thyder with a small or weke company / he wolde haue conueyed hym into hyghe Al∣mayn, and there to haue kepte hym tyll he had of hym hys pleasure, con∣cernynge the warre betwene kynge Henry and hym, or in other thynges. But when kynge Lowys espyed the delucyon of the Emperour / he then retourned into Fraunce. It was nat longe after that ye kynge was enfour¦med of the obstynacy of the Albygen¦sis / the whyche of longe tyme had bē effected with dyuers poyntes of hery¦sy, and many tymes recōcyled by the kynges of Fraunce and other / & yet fallen agayne to the sayde errour / wherfore the kynge sent vnto syr Io¦han Beawmount the whych ioyned vnto theym / chargynge hym to en∣uade that countre, and to waste and distroy it, tyll he had forced theym to restore to the chyrch suche goodes as they before had taken frome it / and ouer that to cause theym to make a∣mendes to the good chrysten people, whyche they had harmed by meanes of theyr rapynes and exorcyōs. Upō whyche commaundement thus frō ye kynge receyued / the sayde Iohan with a competent nombre of knygh∣tes entred the sayd coūtre, and layde syege to a strōg castell named Moūt Royall. And after many forte as∣sautes wanne the sayd castell & man¦ned it with Frenchemen. And than yode to an other stronge holde than named Saygos / and there lykewyse ordered the same. And after wastyng the countre, wan̄e from theym many townes & holdes / so that in the ende he forced the chyefrules of that pro∣uynce to obey theym to all hys hest{is} / and delyuered to hym suertyes or ho¦stagys for the perfourmaunce of the same. So yt he retourned into Frāce with greate pompe and honour / and receyued of the kyng at hys home cōmynge great thanke, with many ry∣che gyftes. Aboute the .xv. yere of kynge Lowys / the warre was quyc∣kened betwene thys Lowys & Hēry the .iii. than kynge of Englande, for causes before shewed in the .xxvi. ye∣re of the sayde Henry. And after that warre as there is shewed ended / the kynge, whyche was towarde the cy∣tye of Lyon to haue vysyted the po∣pe Innocent the .iiii. whyche thyder was fled for fere of Frederik the fore named Emperour / was taken with a sykenesse named dyssenterya of the flux. wherwith he was so greuously vexed, that he laye longe at a towne called Poyntoyse / and was in great ieopardy of lyfe / where lastly after many pylgrymages for hym done, with prayers and other obseruaun∣ces longe to accompt / lastly it came to hys mynde, that yf it pleased god to restore hym to hys helth, he wolde make a vyage into the holy lande, & there warre vpon Chrystes enemyes After whyche promyse solemply auo¦wed / he mended dayly, and was sone after restored vnto hys helthe. whan the kynge was recouered and retor∣ned vnto Parys / he called a coūsayll of spyrytuall and temporall, & there shewed vnto theym of the promesse whyche he had made / requyryng thē of theyr assystence and ayde / wherin he fonde hys lordes were agreable. And in the tyme and season yt pro∣uysyon was made for that iourney / the kynge wyth a goodly company rode vnto the abbey of Cluny, to vy∣syte the foresayd pope / and he taryed with hym .xv. dayes. And after hys matter with hym sped, wyth playne remyssyon to hym graunted, and all other that kept with hym that vyage he retourned into Fraunce. And vpō wytsondaye folowynge / he kepte a
great courte of hys landes at Meleō where in presence of them, he called before hym Beatryce doughter vnto the erle of Prouince and syster to the quene hys wyfe / and there gaue her in maryage vnto Charles hys bro∣ther, and made hym there knyghte, with many other for hys loue. And ye day folowyng he gaue vnto the sayd Charles the erledome of Amo with ye lordshyp of Mayn. And soone after he rode to Paris, where he assembled many of his lordes to hold with hym hys iourney. THe fryday folowynge ye feaste of Penthecoste, in the yere of our lorde .xii.C. and .xliiii. & the .xxii. yere of the reygned of ye sayd Lowys he with many of his lordes departed from Parys vppon hys iournay to∣warde the holy lande. In which was croysed also ye archbyshops of Bour¦ges, and of Raynes, the bysshoppes of Laon, of Orleaunce, and of Beau¦uais, ye erles of Artoys, of saynt Pau∣le, of Bloy, of Barre, of Marche, and of Moūtfort, with many other noble men whyche were longe to reherce. with the whyche company the kyng passed thorugh Burgoyn̄ / and so to Lyō the vttermost border of Fraūce where the kynge fonde at ye tyme the forenamed pope, which there taryed for fere of the Emperour Frederyke. whan the kyng a season had there taryed with the pope / he sent forth ye bawe warde of hys host towarde the place called Aque Mort. And shortly after folowed hym selfe with the rest of hys people. But certayn of hys va¦warde passynge by a castell called ye Roche of Clin / were spoyled and rob¦bed, and some slayne. wherof ye kyng beyng enformed, charged hys knygh¦tes to assaute the sayde castell. The whych was done / and the Souldy∣ours hanged, and the castell made playne with the grounde. And after he helde on hys way tyll he came to the forsayd porte of Aque Mort or ye deed see / where he toke shyppynge, & so sayled forthe vppon Bartylmewe euyn or the .xxiiii. day of August / and lāded after in the prouynce of Cipre / where he taryed all the wynter folo∣wyng, for some parte of his host that as yet was behynde. wherof ye kynge he was ioyously receyued / and at his departynge thens, kept cōpany with hym in the same iourney. But there fortune began to frowne vpon kyng Lowys. For in the tyme of hys there taryenge moche of hys people syke∣ned and dyed. Amonge the whyche, passed to god these men of name folo¦wynge / the bysshop of Bauuais, the erles of Mountforde, of Barre, and of Uendosme, with dyuers other to ye nombre of .ii.C.xl. whan kynge Lo∣wys not all without troubles, as dys¦cencions amōge his people, and daūger of takynge of the see, had passed the wynter and a parte of the begyn¦nynge of the yere / lastly aboute Try¦nyte sondaye he toke shyppynge at the porte of Cypre then named Dom¦meton or Dōmeson, and landed nere vnto the cytye of Damasse or Da∣myet the frydaye after. whan the cry∣sten host were comyn nere vnto the porte of Damasse / the kynge caused theym to be shypped in small vessels and so in ordre to sayle or rowe to∣warde the cytye. But the Sarazeyns beynge ware of theyr commynge, is∣sued oute of the cytye, and defended the porte vygorously / so that many a crysten man was slayne at that re∣counter. But in the ende the dys∣comfyture tourned vpon the Sara∣seyns. For the chyefe capytayne of the towne wyth .ii. Admyralles were there slayne, & many of theyr knygh∣tes. Then they gaue backe vnto ye towne, and suffered the crysten to lande. The kynge then pyghte hys
pauylyons, and strengthed hys felde for sodayne brekynge out of the Tur¦kes / and so rested hym and hys peo∣ple the sonday and mōday folowing. As faste as the crysten made prouy∣syon to ordre for theyr suer lyenge in the felde, so faste the Turkes within the towne made purueyaunce to con¦ueye suche goodes as they myghte out of the cytye / and lastly sette the houses on fyre, & voyded vnknow∣ynge to the crysten hoost. Anone as the flambe of the fyre appered / the cri¦sten men without resystence entred ye cytye and quenched the fyre, & after possessed the cytye. Here I passe ouer certayne legaciōs and messages sent fro a prynce of the Oryēt vnto kynge Lowys / wherin appereth more fame of wordes than of thynges of trouth Then the temples and synagoges of the cytye were hallowed & occupyed to crysten mennes vse. And there the kynge with hys hoost rested hym tyll the moneth of Nouēber folowynge / in the whych season came vnto hym the erle of Poytyers with a fayre cō∣pany. Then kynge Lowys with hys people departed from Damasse ye .xx. day of Nouembre, by the ryuer of Ni¦lus, passynge with small vesselles to¦warde a stronge holde called Maf∣four / whyther at lengthe they came with greate daunger. How be it they myght nat come nere vnto the towne to laye theyr syege therunto, bycause of a ryuer there rūnyng named Tha¦noys or Thanoes. wherfore ye kyng pyght hys Pauylyons betwene the sayd ryuer and the ryuer of Nylus. In thys whyle ye the crysten hoost was thus lodged / worde was brou∣ghte to the kynge that the Sowdan of Babylon was dede, the whych be∣fore hys deth had prouyded a greate host to be sent into Egypte to wyth∣stāde the crysten hoost / & had commit¦ted the rule therof vnto an hardy and valiaūt Turke named Saphardyn. The whyche wyth a greate people came downe to thys towne of Maf∣four or Macour, & there dayly made assautes vpon the crysten hoost / so yt betwene theym were had many by∣kerynges & skyrmysshes to bothe damages. Lastly the kynge aduerty synge in hys mynde that he myghte nothynge dere the Sarazeyns, with oute he myght passe ye ryuer of Tha¦noys / cōcluded by aduyce of hys ma¦ryners to make a brydge of shyppes so that fynally he cheyned and faste∣ned hys shyppes togyder, in suche wise that a passage was made for his knyghtes. whan the Turkes espyed thys or∣denaūce / and apperceyued well that yf the crystē hoost had passed that ry∣uer, it shulde be to theyr greate dys∣auaūtage, anone with all ordenaūce and shot that they myght make, they dyd the vttermest of theyr powers to let the perfytyng of thys brydge and passage of the crysten hoost. And to thys fyll an other contraryte to the crysten. For the water of that ryuer whyche was brode and depe was so troublous of wawe, that the brydge therwith was all to shaken / & daun∣gerous to stande on. But these Turkes entendynge to damage the cristen / left a certayne to defende the passage, whyle the other by a forde or passage vnknowen to ye crysten men, came ouer the ryuer / & assauted the Frenchmen egerly / so ye there was betwene theym foughten a cruell batayle. Howe be it thorugh dyuyne power of god, the Turkes were ouerset, and many of thē slayne and taken. The whyche batayll was foughten vpon the daye of saynt Fa¦byan and Sebastyan, or the .xx. daye of Ianuarii. But yet myght nat the crystē wyn ouer the ryuer. For dayly the strength of the coūtres there nere
came downe and fortefyed the hoost of the Sarazyns more & more. The day folowynge the Puryfyca¦cyon of our Lady, blewe suche a tem¦pest of wynde, y• it dyd moche harme bothe to the shyppes, and also to the tentes and pauylyons of the cry∣sten host. And with that scarcite of vi¦tayle began to appere / so yt the kyng determyned to retourne agayn vnto Damasse. WHen the Turkes espyed the re∣tourne of the Frenchemen / they ordeyned .iiii. barges or suche lyke vessayles / and stuffed them with pytche, rosyn, grece, and other ly∣quet and brēnyng stuffe / and in the nyght sodaynly brought thē a borde where the crysten flote lay / and then cast on them Grekysh fyre, ye whyche anone set them in a lyghte fyre. By reason wherof the crysten flote was in great ieopardy, and with great la∣boure preserued from brēnyng. For thys despyte that the Sarazyns had done to the crysten / the kyng was so therwyth amoued, that he sayde and promysed that he wolde nat departe thens tyl he had done to the Turkes some dyspleasure. And vpon enquy∣sycyō made / he was enfourmed of a passage or foorde, that was within .iii. myles of hys pauylion▪ wherupō he called a counsayll of hys lordes, & shewed to them his purpose / gyuyng vnto the erle of Artoyes the ledynge of hys forewarde / & charged hym yt whan he were passed the foorde, that he shuld tary there tyll ye other deale of the host were ouer passed. whan al thynges was ordered to the kynges mynde / the sayd erle with hys com∣pany set forthwarde, and passed the sayd foorde wythout daunger / and there forgettynge what▪ to hym was before commaunded of the kynge, set forth incontynētly towarde the Tur¦kes, whyche he weale knewe kepte ye place where the brydge was before made. And there faughte with theym which were al vnpurueyed, & vnkno¦wynge of hys sodeyne commynge. wherfore he slewe many of theym / & after chased the other, whyche for so∣coure fledde vnto the cytye of Maf∣sour foresayd / whome he folowed so egerly, that in ye entryng of the cytye he entred with theym, and there was slayne with a certayn of hys knygh∣tes. By reason wherof ye Soldyours of the towne were so encoraged, that they issued out vpon the crysten and draue them backe tyll they sawe the kynges power come / & then retour∣ned to the cytye & shytte with strēgth theyr gates. Thā kyng Lowis being ascertayned of the sayd erles dethe, made for hym great dole. And after prouysyon made for the lodgynge of hys people / he thē made dyuers bryd¦ges & passages ouer ye ryuer of Tha∣noyes. And for the crysten host shuld be assured frō the sodayne & vnware assautes & reprochys of ye infydelies / therfore he closed theym wythin a strength of a dyche & pale, that theyr enemyes myght no waye haue waye into them / & named that strengthe a park. In the whyche the crysten host there lodged all the season of Lent. In ye whych tyme ye yōge Sowdā came downe wyth a great host of peo¦ple. And for he myght nat lodge hys people within the towne / therfore he made an other lyke parke vnto the cristen men, & there closed hys peple / so that betwene the crysten and them was many conflyctes and assautes / somtyme to the losse of that one, and eft to the losse of that other. But the Sowdane made all the meanes he myght to kepe vytayll frome the cry∣sten hoost / & stopped all the passages betwene Damasse & them, that from thēs they myght haue no socour. By meane wherof dysseases & sykenesse
fyll amonge the crysten, so that they dyed hougely. when kynge Lowys was ware of these miseries on euery syde, he sente to the Sowdane to haue a truce for a certayne tyme. But in conclusion none wolde be to hym graūted. wher¦fore of necessyte he was forced to bre¦ke hys felde, & wyth as good polycy as he myght drewe hym to the ryuer of Nylus / & so by shyp passed downe by the sayd ryuer towarde Damasse. But he passed nat ferre or yt he was assauted on euery syde / so yt the fight contynued styll without seasynge, to the great losse of the crysten host. Then lastly came the Sowdane with a fresshe cōpany / & beset ye kyng so about, that in the ende he was ta∣ken, wyth hys .ii. bretherne Charles & Robert, the erle of Poytyers, ye erle of Angeou, the erle of Flaunders, the duke of Brytayne, the erle of Soy∣sōs. And in ye fyght was slayne / y• bys¦shoppes of Langrees, & of Soysons with many other of whome ye names be nat put in wryttynge. when kyng Lowys was thus takē he was syke. wherfore with all dyly∣gence the Sowdan cōmaunded hym to be conueyed vnto Massoure / and after caused all the other of hys men to be slayne as many as were woun∣ded or syke, excepte they were men of great fame, by whome great aduaun¦tage myghte ryse by reason of theyr raunsome. And thus was the cristen host takē & spoyled of the Sarazyns the thursday next folowyng the feast of Easter, in the yere of our lord .M.ii.C.l. and the .xxiiii. yere of ye reygne of thys kynge Lowys. The whyche after wyth the other of the nobles of Fraunce were sent vnto Babylon or Cayer / & there kept in sōdry prysōs. IN processe of tyme it was a∣greed, that kyng Lowis shuld be delyuered fro pryson & conueyed saufly into the handes of crystēdome vpon condycyon that he shulde fyrst render and gyue vp into the Sow∣dans power the cytye of Damasse, wyth all suche prysoners as he had of Turkes and Sarazyns at that daye in hys power / and ouer that he shulde yelde by a certayne daye a cer¦tayne summe of besauntes, whyche after the frenche boke shulde be .viii.M. Besauntes Sarazyn. But Peter Dysroy sayth .iii.C.M. Besauntes. Of these Besauntes I haue ler∣ned there shuld be .ii. That one is cal¦led a Bezaunde Imperyall, and the other a Bezaunte Ducall. The Be∣zaunde Imperyall is worth .l. duca∣tes, & the Ducal Bezaunde is worth xx. ducates. A ducate whyche is na∣med a ducat de camera, is worth .iiii.s.viii.d. A ducat Papall & Uenyziā be of lasse value, as .iii.d. or .iiii.d in a pece. Then yf hys raunsome be este∣myd after ye imperyail Bezaunde, he payde after the rate of .iiii.s.vi.d. the ducate / and after the summe of .viii.M. Bezaundes in sterlynge money lxxxx.M.li. And for thys the Sow∣dane promysed to delyuer all suche prysoners as he had in hys prysons of crystē men. But in yt he brake pro∣myse / for of .xii. thousande he deliue¦red scarsly .iii. In thys tyme of ta∣kynge of the Frenche kynge / a com∣pany of yonge men assembled theym togyder in Fraūce / and vnder theyr capytayne, whyche toke vppon hym lyke a bysshoppe, passed by Parys & Orleaunce and other good townes of Fraunce, sayeng that they wolde restore the kynge to hys lybertye. But lastely whan they drewe nere to the porte of the deed see, where they shulde haue taken shyppynge / there they fyll to all thefte and auou¦try. wherfore the people of that coū∣tre sette vppon theym, and slewe
theyr capytayne and the more parte of theyr cōpany where thorugh that symple feleshyp whyche named them selfe Shepherdes, was dysseuered & sparkelyd. whan thys blessed kyng Lowys was delyuered from the daūger of hys enemyes, & was broughte out of Egypte into Syrye / he there executed many dedes of charyte and of mekenes, and repayred the cytye of Ioppen and other standyng vpon the see syde / and from thens went on pylgrymage vnto Nazareth, and to the mount of Thabor. And when he was retourned vnto Ioppen / he re∣ceyued there tydynges of the deth of dame Blāch his mother. where after dyuers obseruan̄ces & prayers done for the soule of hys mother / he toke there shyppynge and sayled towarde Fraunce. And nat withoute trauayle and trouble of the see, at the ende of xii. wekes he landed in the Hauen of Marcyll or Martyll / and so sped his iournay that he came to Parys, in ye yere of our lorde .xii.C. and .liiii. and the .vi yere after that he toke vppon hym the voyage / where of the cyte∣zeyns he was receyued wyth mooste honoure and gladnes. And there cal∣lynge a coūsayl / he refourmed many thynges for the weale of hys realme, & made one lawe whych is specyally remēbred / that is that no man beyng in auctorytye of any hygh offyce, as Prouost, Pretour, or any lyke office, shuld bye any landes or rētes within that lordshype yt he had rule of. And for that cause that he shuld nat extort or wronge, or bye suche landes ye bet¦ter chepe by reason of hys myghte or power. At thys day the Prouosty or chyef rule or offyce was in the handes of ye cytezeyns of Parys, by reason of a seale therof made to theym by the kynges progenytours. By meane wherof many iniuryes and wronges were done vnto the common people, and many theuys and other trans∣gressours by fauoure and money pas∣sed vnpunysshed. wherof thys bles∣sed kynge Lowys beyng enfourmed vpon suffycyent profe made, dyschar¦ged the cytezeyns therof / and assyg∣ned a man named Stephan Boyle in that offyce / assygnynge to hym ye¦rely a certayne stipend for executyng of that office / and ordeyned that euer after, the Prouost of Parys shuld be named by the kynge and hys heyres kynges. He also made ordenaunces to a∣uoyde strumpettes out of the cytye, and punysshement for all accustoma¦ble great swerers / wyth many other good ordenaunces and lawes, the whyche I passe ouer for lengthynge of the tyme. In this tyme and season were aby¦dynge in Fraunce in a place called saynt Nicholas de Boys .iii. chyldrē borne in Flaundres / the whych were sent thyder to lern ye maner of fraūce & also to teche ye chyldrē of a knyghte named syr Guyllm̄ de Brunz to shot. These chyldrē vpon a season passed the boūdes of the abbey groūde & en∣tred the warrayn of a lord of Fraūce called Enguerran lorde of Coucy, & there chased and shote at Conyes for theyr disport. The whych were there takē of the seruaūtes of the sayd En∣guerran, & presented to theyr lorde / ye whych of hasty cruelnesse caused the iii. chyldrē with out pyte to be hāged. wherof heryng ye Abbot of saint Ny¦cholas, cōplayned hym with the assy¦stēce of ye fornamed syr Guillm̄ vnto the kyng. The whych incōtynētly sēt to the sayd Enguerrā, charging hym to apere before hys barony, to answe¦re to such matters as there shuld be layd vnto his charge. wher in ye ende after many reasōs for hym layde / he by great instāce of hys frendes was
pardoned of yt greuous offence wyth cōdicion folowyng / that is to meane fyrst he shuld pay vnto the kynge .x.M.li. of Parys money, whych is to meane .xii.C. & .l.li. sterling. And ouer that he shuld warre vpō goddes ene∣myes in Syria by the space of .iii. ye¦res contynually, vpon hys owne cost and charge. And thyrdely he shulde buylde a chapel wherin two preestes shuld synge for euer, for the soules of the sayd infauntes. Or after mayster Gagwyne, with the forsayd .x.M.li. & other ayde of the kynge / the hospy∣tall in Parys named ye house of god in Pontoyse, with the frayter of the freer minors or gray freers in Paris were made and repayred. Than after many dedes of charite done by this vertuous prince / as ma¦kynge of dyuers houses of relygyon seruyng of the poore people with his owne handes, with fastinges & other infynyte dedes of pytye: he lastly in the .xxxiii. yere of hys reygne honou∣rably receyued Hēry the .iii. thā kyng of Englande / and stablyshed with hym a peas as before in the .xliiii. ye∣re of the reygne of the sayd Henry is declared. And that done / he in the .xxxvi. yere of hys reygne, maryed hys eldest son Phylyp vnto Isabell the doughter of Iamys kyng of Aragon. By rea∣son of whyche maryage / the frenshe kyng gaue ouer to the sayd Iamys, all suche ryght as he had in the lord∣shyppes of Besac, Dampierre, Rous¦selion, and Barsellon. And the sayde Iamys acquyted & gaue ouer to Lo¦wys, all suche ryghte and tytle as he had in the lordshypes of Carcasson, of Bygorre, and of Anilly. And soone after he sente Charles hys brother at the request of the .iiii. Alexaundre than pope, into Cicilia with a great power, to withstande ye vyolence of Manfrede sonne of Fre∣deryke the second than Emperoure / the whych agayne ryghte withhelde that kyngdome frome the chyrche of Rome. whome Charles after longe fyght, at a place named Boneuente slewe in batayll / and after was made kyng of the sayd countre by auctory∣tye of the sayde pope Alexaunder / payenge yerely vnto the chyrche of Rome .xl.M. ducates, which is moch lyke after the rate of sterlyng money viii.M.vi.C.lxvi.li.xiii.s.iiii.d. euery ducat accōpted at .iiii.s.iiii.d. IT fyll so after, that in the .xlii. yere of kynge Lowys / Pope Clement the .iiii. of that name, sent a legate vnto Lowys, requyryng hym to ayde the crysten whyche in Siria were greuously warred with ye Tur∣kes and Sarazyns. At whose request the kyng called a counsayll / wherin it was agreed yt socour shuld be made wherfore the kynge with hys .iii. son¦nes, Phylyp, Iohn, & Peter, toke on them the crosse. And in the fyrste day of May, the yere of hys reygne .xliii / he with hys sayde sonnes and many other lordes of Fraunce as well spi∣rytuall as temporall, departed from Parys / and frome thens rode vnto Cluny, where he rested hym .iiii. days And from thēs sped hys iourney tyll he came to the forenamed porte of yt deed see. where mette with hym a car¦dynall and legate of Rome, with dy∣uers other bysshoppes of Fraunce, the kyng of Nauarne, the dukes son of Brytayn, Alphōs erle of Poytiers the erles of Artoys and of Flaūdres, with many other. And whyle the kynge wyth hys hoost laye at the sayde porte taryeng a conuenable wynde / a dyssencyon fyll betwene the Catholeynes and the men of Prouynce / so that a∣monge theym was foughten suche a skyrmysshe, that betwene theym
was slayne vpon a hondreth men / and many mo wounded or the stryfe myght be all seased. Soone after the kynge wyth hys lordes toke shyppynge / and sayled with great daunger of tempest, tyll lastly he came to the ile of Sardynes where the crysten host rested theym a season / and after kept theyr cours til they came to the porte of Thunys or Cartage, the .xviii. day of the moneth of Iulii / where they rested in theyr shyppes that nyght. Upō the morne whan they shuld lande / all the porte was beset with Turkes and infyde∣les, whych shotte dartes and kast sto¦nes, to the greuaunce of the crysten host / so that they wanne lande wyth great dyffyculte & payne. whan the kynge was landed, he lodged hys people / and after sent to serche for fresshe water to refresshe with hys hooste. In whyche meane whyle the Admyrall of the kynges nauy came vnto the kynge / requy∣ryng hī to haue a certayne of knygh∣tes assygned vnto hym / trustynge in god to wyn shortly the towne. And so sped hym, and assauted the towne. But anone as the capytayne of the towne was ware of theyr commyng / he with a great company issued oute of the towne, and forced the crysten hoost to gyue backe. wherfore kynge Lowys sent the Marshal of hys host with a certayne nombre of knyghtes to socoure the sayd Admyrall / and in tyme of the fyght gatte betwene the Sarazyns and the towne / so that whyle some faught with the Turkes the other wanne the towne / wherof the Turkes beynge ware fled soone after / but nat without great slaugh∣ter of thē. For after that fyght, many of theym whyche escaped frō the ba∣tayll, were after slayne in cauernys and holes where they hyd theym in the grounde. whan the towne of Car¦tage or Thunis was by ye cristē thus wonne / anone the kynge commaun∣ded the dede bodyes to be caste out, & the towne to be clēsyd of all ordours and fylthes. And when all was done as the kynge had commaunded / he then entred the towne, and lodged within as many as the towne wolde holde. And ye other he fortyfyed with dyches and other strengthes, to pre∣serue them from theyr enemyes / and so taryed there the cōmyng of Char∣les hys brother and kyng of Cycilia. It was nat lōge after that the cytye or towne was wonne, but yt the kyng of Thunys with a great host of Tur¦kes came nere to the towne, & made showys & offers / but they abode not therby. One day the erle of Artoys in one company, and a knyghte called syr Peter Cabellane in an other com¦panye / gatte betwene the see and the Turkes that they were compelled to fyght / so that betwene theym was a cruell fyghte, & many slayne vppō both sydes. But in the ende the Tur¦kes were scomfyted & chaced to theyr shyppes. In thys fyghte were slayne ii. cristen knyghtes, named le Chaste¦layn and syr Iohn̄ de Ronssoylyers. After thys batayll or fyght / the Sa∣razyns made no great assautes. But thē by reason of the unholsomnes of that countre, sykenes fyll amonge ye crysten hoost / so that the people dyed faste. And shortly after the kyng was takē with suche a flixe, and therwith an agu that he kept hys bedde. And after the ryghtes of the chryche takē, and certayne monycyons gyuen to hys sonne Phylyp how he shulde be¦haue hym in gydynge of the realme of Fraunce / knowynge the houre of dethe approched, charged suche as were aboute hym that they shuld lay hym vpon a bed of asshes & powdre. where he so lyeng a season in prayer expyred, the day folowyng saint Bar¦tholomeus
tholomeus day, or the .xxv. day of Au¦gust, when he had reygned .xliiii. ye∣res lackynge .ii. monethes / leuynge after hym the .iii. forenamed sonnes Phylyp, Iohn̄, & Peter. Thē the Bowellys were buryed in Cecilia / and the body enbawmed with ryche oyn∣tementes, was recaryed vnto saynte Denys of Fraūce, & therwith greate reuerence entered. The whych after for hys myracles, of ye .vii. Bonyface was sette amonge the nombre of sayntes. PHylyp the thyrde of that name, and sonne of saynt Lo¦wys / beganne his reygne ouer the realme of Fraūce the .xxvi. daye of yt moneth of September, in the yere of our lord .xii.C.lxx. and the .liiii. yere of Henry the .iii. than kynge of Eng∣lande / and began than as before is shewed in Affrica, at the towne or cy∣tye of Thunys or Cartage / accōpa∣nyed with Charles hys vncle kynge of Cycyll, the whych came to ye porte of Thunys the same day that kynge Lowys dyed / & after taryed there & had many conflictes wyth the Tur∣kes / and bare hym so manfully, that in the ende he forced ye kynge of Thu¦nys to seche to hym for a peas. The which was cōcluded for .x. yeres with certayne condycyōs of payeng of cer¦tayne money for ye kynge of Fraūces costes, and certayne trowages of old tyme due vnto the kyng of Cycyll ye rely to be payde / with many other ar∣tycles concernynge the same peace whyche I passe ouer. After whyce peas concluded and assured / the kynges of Fraunce and Cycyll toke shyppynge at the sayde porte of Thunys, & sayled towarde theyr countrees with great daunger of tempest of the see / & in processe of tyme landed in Cycyll, where Philip with greate reuerence & obseruaūce in mount Royall buryed ye bowelles of his father. And yt done he toke his iourney towarde Fraunce thorughe Italy. In whyche iourney dyed Isa¦bell hys wyfe, & ye kyng of Nauerne & Mary hys wyfe, with many other to the nombre of .iii.M. and mo. Lastly the kyng came vnto the cy∣ty of Uiterbe / where the cardynalles & other spyrytuall men were in coun¦sayll for the chosyng of a newe pope. For at ye tyme the see was voyde by the deth of Clement the .iiii. But that eleccion was so dyuers, that .ii. yeres expyred or they myght agree vpon a new pastor. And thā they agreed vpō Theobalde archidiacon of Landēsse named after the .x. Gregory. Frō Uiterbe the kyng rode to the moūt of Flaston̄, & so ouer to the coūtre of Tuscayne, & so to the mount of Bergue, & then to ye cytye of Florēce & from thens to Boloyng le Greysse and frō thens to Cremoygū, where ye kynges officers were nat all well en¦treated. In recōpensement wherof / ye mayre & burgeyses of that towne pre¦sented the kyng with .vii. stedes trap¦ped in cloth of sylke & other presētes whych the kyng with curteys & thāk¦full wordes refused. Then frō thens the kyng departed to Milan, & from Milan to Annergeaux, and so to Su¦sane a cytye of Sauoy / and after pas¦sed the moūtaygnes, & so into the va¦lys of Moryen / and frō thens tour∣ned towarde the cytye of Lyōs vpon Rosne, and so to the cytye of Mastō in Burgoyn̄ / and passed ye coūtre tyl they came to the abbey of Cluny, and frō thens into the coūtre of Chāpayn & so to the city of Trois / and frō thēs passed the countrees, tyll he came to the lordshype of Parys, and so into the cytye of Parys.
Here I passe ouer the great prouy¦syon made by the cytesyns of Parys for the receyuynge of theyr pryncys / yt is to mene, the corps of Lewys, and theyr naturall prynce Phylyppe hys son / and of the obseruaunces done, and great assembles of the lordes spi¦rytuall and temporall to welcome theyr prynce, and doynge of theyr du¦ties euery man according to honour. But after al these ceremonies in due order fynyshed / prouysyon was ma∣de for the coronacyon of the kynge. The whyche was crowned at the cy¦tye of Raynes, vppon the daye of the assumpcyon of our lady, in the yere of grace .xii. hundred .lxxi. SHortely after that the solemp¦nyte of this coronacyon was passed, kynge Phylyppe for his re∣creacyon rode into the countrey of Uermendoyse. where after he had de¦restyd hym a season / Robert erle of Artoys requyred hym to vysyte hys countrey. where he was receyuyd of the burgeysys of Artoys wyth great honour and gladnes / and there was feastyd with all disport and gladnes by a certayne of tyme after. The whi¦che expyryd, he returned into Fraūce About the thryde yere of his rey∣gne / the erle of Foys contrary ye kyn¦ges pleasure, toke partye agayn Ge¦tarde a knyght & lorde of the castell of Casseboun or Tasseboun / ye which before had slayn ye brother of the erle of Armenac specyall frēd of the sayd erle of Foyz. whyche sayde two erles to reuenge the deth of theyr sayd bro¦ther, pursued the sayde Gerarde so narrowly, that for his sauegarde he refused his owne castell, and fled vn¦to a castell of the kynges / and there helde hym wyth his wyfe, chyldren, and substaūce. But when the two er¦les were ware therof / they sped them thyder wyth theyr powers. and layd syege to the castell / and in the ende threwe it downe to the grounde, and slewe all the souldyours that they there founde, as well the kynges ser∣uauntes as other, hopynge to haue founde theyr enymye Gerarde, the whyche was escapyd thens secretly. when the rumour of this dede came vnto the kynge / he dysdayned sore that dede, and toke yt ryght grevous¦ly. In so myche that he called hys lordes, and by theyr counsayll assem¦bled hys knyghtes, and entred wyth force the prouince of the erle of Foyz. The whyche herynge of the kynges great dyspleasure / fortyfyed hys ca∣stell and there helde hym. The which was so besette wyth rokkes of stone, that the kynge myght not wynne to yt wyth ease. wherfore the kynge cō∣maunded the rokkes to be cutte with masons and other worke men / & ma∣de a solempne othe, that he wold not depart thens or he hadde the erle and his castell at his pleasure. when the erle hadde beholden the great power of his enymyes, and the prouysyon of the kyng to wynne his castell, wyth other ieopardyes / he made meanes to the kynge for grace and fynally putte hym and his into his mercy. Then the kynge commaū¦ded hym to be bounde, and so to be conueyed to the casrell of Beauque∣su, where he was imprysoned by an hole yere after. And the kyng ea∣sed all hys landes, and set a certayne of hys knyghtes to kepe hys castell / and caryed hys wyfe and chyldren wyth hym into Fraunce. But after a yere runne / the kynge was so la∣boured to by the frendes of the sayd erle, that he was eularged from pry¦son, and vppon suertye suffred to serue in the kynges courte. where he bare hym so well, yt fynally the kyng made hym knyght, & restored hym to all his lādes. But what fyll of ye erle of Armenac the story sheweth not.
Aboute the .vi. yere of his reygne / kynge Phylyppe maryed Mary the doughter of the erle of Burbon, or af¦ter some the doughter of Iohan the duke of Braban / the whych he loued entyerly. wherof Peter de Broshe then beynge lorde chamberlayne, ha¦uynge enuy and disdayn / sought the wayes and meanes to mynyshe the great loue betwene her lord and her / and fonde by his meane that a sonne of ye kynges named Lewys was pry∣soned, the whyche dede he by subtyle & secrete meanes, as though yt had nothyng comen of hym, layde yt to ye charge of the quene. For this ye kyng made many maner of inquysycyons as well by sorcery as other. But in al his workes he found his quene gylt∣lesse. wherfore he sufferyd the mater to passe, tyll he myght haue more as∣sured profe in that mater. Aboute thys season Ferdinandus kynge of Castyle, that before tyme hadde maryed Blanche doughter of saynt Lewis, dyed / leuyng after hym two sonnes borne of ye sayd Blanch, named Ferdinande and Alphons / whych by couenaunt at the mariage made shulde be heyres vnto the kyng¦dome of Spayne and Castyle. But the father of this Ferdinande so be∣ynge dede / contrary hys honour and promise, wrote vnto the lordes of Ca∣style / amonestynge theym that they shulde admytte for theyr kynge hys seconde son named Sāxyon or San¦xio, and swere to hym both feautye & homage. The whyche was all done accordyng to hys commaundement / so that Blanche was dyspoynted of her dower, and her chyldern of theyr ryght and enherytaūce. For ye which kyng Phylyppe her brother was gre∣uously dyscontētyd / and for reforma cyon therof sente vnto the kynge of Spayn his chefe boteler wyth other, desyryng hym to perfourme all such couenaūtes as betwene hym and his fader were cōcluded, at the maryage of his syster Blanche / or at the laste yf that he refusyd yt to do, yt he wold sende hys sayde syster wyth her two chyldern sauely into Fraunce. In cō¦clusyon ye mother wyth her two chyl¦dern were brought by the sayde bote¦ler vnto the kynge, wythoute other pleasure other in worde or in dede. For the whyche he the yere folokyng gaderyd a stronge hoste, and passed wyth theym by Poyteau and Gas∣coyne, tyll he came vnto a towne ioy¦nynge to the border of Spayne na∣med Sainterre / where the kyng met another party of his hoste. There by counsayll of some of his lordes, the kynge concluded to retourne into Fraunce, for daunger of wynter that was cōmynge and other hyd causes. But the rumour in the hoste went, yt some of the kynges counsayll hadde receyued rewardes of the kynge of Spayn. By meane wherof the kyng loste that iourney, and returned into Fraunce to his great dyshonour and damage. In tyme of kynge Phylyppes re∣turne into Fraunce / tydynges were broughte to hym, that Eustace de Beau Marche, whom the kyng had appointed to haue the gydyng of the countrey or kyngdome of Nauarye / was besyeged in the citye of Pampu¦lyne. wherfore ye kyng cōmaunded ye erle of Artoys to spede hym thyder, to rescowe the sayde Eustace. The whyche behauyd hym so manfully, that he rescowed the sayde Eustace / and chasyd Garsymerans chefe styr∣rer of that rebellion, and brought the people of that countrey agayne to due subieccyon. whyle the erle of Ar¦toys was thus occcupyed in the sayd countrey / messangers came to hym from the kynge of Spayne / requy∣rynge hym sene that he was so nere,
that he was so nere, yt he wold come & disport him there for a season. wher of ye erle of Artoys sent kyng Philip worde / & hauyng of hym lycēce yode vnto the sayd kyng of Spayn, as to his nere kynnesmā / & there disported him a certayn of tyme to his great cō¦solaciō. In which season diuers let¦ters came out of Fraūce frō some of ye kinges coūsall. By reason wherof ye kynge of Spayne was informed of mych of the Frēche kinges coūsayll. which letters he shewed vnto ye erle of Artoys / sayēg yt he was not without frēdes in Fraūce. But he wold not dis¦close what {per}sons they were. whē the erle had taryed in Spayn a cōpetent seasō / he toke leue of ye king, & de{per}ted with great giftes / & so sped hym, ye in {pro}cesse of tyme he cam vnto ye king of Fraūce / & at cōuenient leyser shewed vnto hym of the letters shewed vnto him by ye kyng of Spayn / wherof the king was not a litle ameruayled. It was not lōge after yt a currour or mes¦sanger, which vsed to bere letters frō Pet de Brosh vnto ye king of Spayn fyll syke at an abbay. where when he knew he shuld die / were it by exortaci¦on of his gostly fader or otherwyse, he called to hym ye abbot or hed of ye house / chargyng him yt he wold dely¦uer such letters as he there had vnto ye Frēche kyng{is} own {per}son / & after dy∣ed. After whose deth ye said religyous man in cōuenyet hast sped hym vnto ye kinges court, & presented him with the said letters / shewyng vnto him ye mynde of ye sayd messanger. which let¦ters when the kyng had vnclosyd / he anon knew yt his chāberlayne Peter de Broshe was the discloser of all his coūsaylles. wherfore forthwith he cō¦maūded ye said Peter to be had vnder saufe kepyng. wherof heryng the bys¦shop of Bayon fled streyght ye lande, & so yode vnto Rome. The kynge thē yode vnto Paris / where he called a coūsayl of his lordes to examyne ye sayd Peter. where finally he was iud¦ged to be hāged. After which iudge∣mēt he was cōmytted vnto ward, tyll ye morow folowyng. At which season long before the son rysyng / yo duke of Burgoyn, the duke of Braban, the erle of Artoys, with ye prouost of Pa¦ris, came vnto the gayole, & there re¦ceyued the said Peter, & saw him han¦ged or the sonne were vp. IT was not long after ye Peter was thus put to deth, but mea¦nes were made betwene these .ii. kyn¦ges / so that a day of metyng was ap¦poynted, yt the said kyng, shuld mete to haue cōmunycacion, for the mater cōcernyng the wrōges done to dame Blanche & her .ii. chyldren beforena∣med. wherfore ye king of Spayn cam vnto ye citie of Bayon / & king Philip to a town in ȳ prouynce of Tholouse named Moūt marchaūt. where these two princes beyng in cōmunicacyon of ye foresayd mater / certayn messan∣gers cam to thē frō ye pope then Man¦tyne ye .iiii / chargyng them vpō payn of fallyng into ye cēsures of yt chirch, that they agree & fall vnto accorde, that warre betwen theym be not exer¦cysed. By reason wherof kyng Phy¦lyp remitted the mater to ye pope, & re¦turned vnto Tholouse. where mette him the kyng of Aragon named Pe¦ter. The which after he had there ta∣ryed with kyng Philip a tyme at his pleasure / he toke his leue of ye kynge & after went into Catholoyne, where he met with Cōstance his wife & dou¦ghter of Manfred somtyme kyng of Scycyll / y• which was pryued of his lyfe & kyngdome by Charles broder of saint Lewis, as before in ye .iiii. cha¦pyter of the storye of saynt Lewys is shortly touched. This Cōstance in all yt she might exorted her husbād to¦gader his people, & to enter ye land of Scicill, ascertainyng him yt ye Scicil¦lyens
wolde take his patye agayne Charles, for so myche as they well knew that she was rightfull heyre to that kyngdome. In thys tyme and season whyche was the .x. yere of kynge Phylyppe / the ryuer of Sayne rose of suche an hyght, that yt compassed the cytye of Parys in suche wyse, that no man myght come thyther wythoute bote or barge. And the water passed wyth suche vyolence, that yt brake vi. arches of the great brydge of Pa¦rys, and one of the small brydges. Then let vs turne to ye kyng of Ara¦gon, whych by incensyng of his wyfe gadered his peple / and vnder colour that he wold haue gone agaynste the Turkes, hadde graunte of the pope to receyue ye dymes of his owne land for certayne yeres. whyle this was in doynge / he sent certayne persones into Scycyle to see the state of that countrey. The whyche made confede¦racyes wyth dyuers great men of Scycylyens / and ouer that brought wyth theym dyuers of the rulers to the presence of ye kynge. wyth whom the sayd Peter made certayn appoyn¦tementes / and after retourned them into Scycyle. where after theyr re∣turne, they cousayled so wyth theyr rulers of Palermo, and Messene, & of other cytyes, that in one nyght all the Frenche men in Scycylle were slayne / and after in most cruell wyse slewe the women as wel those yt were wyth chylde as other, and lefte few or none of the Frenche men in all the chefe cytyes or townes of Scicyll on lyue. whē tydynges of this myschyef was brought vnto Charles beynge then in the countrey of Angeou / he sent messangers vnto the pope Mar¦tyne the .iiii / requyrynge his ayde to defende his enymyes. The whych in all hast sent vnto Palermo ye byshop of saynte Sabyne, to charge the cy∣tesyns vppon payne of cursynge, to obey vnto Charles for theyr kyng & to none other. But the rulers of Pa¦lermo and also of Messene wold not suffer the sayd byshoppe to passe any farther. And also sayde that Peter was entred the countrey, of whome they wolde holde and on none other / wyth whyche answere he was fayne to retourne. In this whyle Charles hadde sent vnto his neuew Phylyppe kynge of Fraūce / the whyche wyth his power to reuoke Peter from Scycyll, ente∣ryd the lande of Aragon by Purpu∣nyan / and toke the cytye of Ieane. In whyche passe tyme Charles en∣tred Scycyl, and besyeged Messene. But the towne was so strongely for∣tyfyed, that he loste there his labour. wherfore he left that syege, and yode into the playnes of saynt Martyne / and there taryed the cōmynge of hys son then prynce of Salerne. The pope thē accursed Peter, for as much as certayne worde was broughte to hym that he hadde proclaymed hym selfe kynge of Scycyll. And to the en¦tent to styre the more people agayne hym / he gaue his lande of Aragon vnto Charlys erle of Ualoys & son of kynge Phylyp of Fraunce. when Phylyppe as before is sayde kynge of Fraūce had won Ieane / for as myche as the ways towarde Ara¦gon were harde to passe, as well for prouysyons made by the enmyes as otherwyse / the kyng therfore sought great aduyse how he myght with lest daunger wyn to his enymyes. And after many meanes sought / a Russy¦lyan was broughte vnto the kynges presence / the whyche assured yt kyng to gyde him away into Aragon with out the daunger of his enymyes. wherof the kynge beynge glad pro∣mysed to the sayde Russylyan fredo∣me and lybertye with other great re∣wardes,
whyche then stode as pryso¦ner to the Frenche men. After whych promyse made / the kyng put hym & the more parte of his hoste vnder the ledynge of the sayd Russylyan. And for to blynde ye more his enymyes / he sent a parte of his hoste towarde the mountaynes, to make a shewe as though all the hoste hadde passed the same waye. when kynge Phylyp had orderyd all thynge after his mynde, he cōmaunded the forewade of hys people to folowe the sayd Russilyan / the whyche brought theym a strayte and narrow way, all to growen with wood & busshes to the kynges great trauayle and all hys. But fynally he brought them into the playns where theyr enmyes lay, so that they made prouysyon in orderynge of theyr peo¦ple to set vppon the Aragons. wher∣of the Aragons beynge ware / suppo¦synge the Frenche men myght not so lyghtly haue wonne vnto theym, be∣ynge then oute of aray and dyspur∣ueyed to fyght, fled vnto the next hol¦des / leuyng to ye Frenche men mych of theyr vytayll and harneys. when kynge Phylyp had sene that his enmyes had forsaken theyr feld / he restyd him there a season after his trauayle / and after yode to a towne named Pyerlaat and besyeged yt. wherof the soudyours after they had a season defended that towne / in the deade of the night fyred y• sayd town And departed when they had done. But the Frenche men wan shortely into the town and quenched the fyre. and after the kyng had manned and vytaylled yt / he then went to a town named Goron, and layde his syege there about / where he lay long after. YE haue harde in the precedynge yere, howe Charles kynge of Scy¦cyll laye in the playnes of saynte Martyne, there abydynge the com∣mynge of his son the prynce of Sa∣lerne. whyther lastely cam vnto him his sayde son, the duke of Burgoyn, the erle of Alanson, Peter brother to kyng Phylyp, Robert erle of Artoys the erles of Dampmartyne, & of Bo¦lygygne, wyth the lorde of Mounte Morency, and many other nobles of Fraunce and Burgoyne. After com∣myng of which lordes / Charles with baner dysplayed sped hym towarde his enymyes, and so passed the lande of Calabre wythout fyght / and sente his son to Naples with a part of his hoste / and hym selfe kept on his iour¦ney tyll he came vnto Prouynce. where he heryng of the great puruey¦aūce that Peter kyng of Aragon had made of shyppes, to sayle toward the lande of Naples / sent certayn letters vnto the prynce his sonne, that in no wise he shuld set vppon his enmyes / but kepe hym within the cytye of Na¦ples, tyll he sent vnto hym such shyp¦pes and galeys as he then had redy māned to be sent vnto hym from the hauen of Marcylle. whych messan∣ger & letters were taken wyth ye Ara¦gons / by reason wherof they knewe myche of kynge Charles consayll. It was not longe after or the na∣uaye of the kynge of Aragons wyth great tryumphe and pryde came vn∣to Naples / & prouokyd so ye Frenche men to fyght,To myche  cause of repētaūce that lastely the prynce wyth suche shyppes and companye as he myght make, made out vppon them, and fought wyth them a long fyghte. But in the ende the Frenche men were betyn and ouercomen, and the prynce wyth the more partye of his shyppes taken, and sent to Con∣stance quene of Aragon / and remay∣ned longe after vndelyueryd wyth many other prysoners. wythin a short season after this scō¦fiture Charlys cam vnto Naples / by
whych tyme myche of the town was tourned agayn hym, so that the most parte of the French soudyours were slayne and fled the towne. wherfore after that Charlys was entred he pu¦nyshed them ryght cruelly, by diuers maner of tourmentes. And when he hadde done there his wyll, he retour¦ned into Calabre / where mette wyth hym Robert erle of Artoys. where they toke theyr counsayll howe they might passe the water of Phaar, and to laye theyr syege vnto the cytye of Messene. But for dyuers causes he was counsayled to the contrarye / so that he toke shyppynge at an hauen called Brandyse. But or hys people were all shyppyd / such a sykenesse toke hym, that he was hadde agayn to lande and dyed shortely after, not wythoute suspeccyon of venyme. whose corps was then conueyed to Naples, and there buried, in the yere of our lorde .xxii. hundred & .lxxxiiii, and the .xiiii. yere of the reygne of Phylyppe his neuewe then kynge of Fraunce. Of whyche tydynges Pe∣ter kynge of Aragon reioysed not a lytell, when word therof to hym was broughte / the whyche before that ty∣me had betaken the rule of the lande of Scycyll to Constaunce hys wyfe then beynge in the citye of Palermo. And he hym selfe wyth a stronge na∣uye sayled into Aragon for to rescow the cytye of Geron, whych was besye¦ged of kynge Phylyppe as ye before haue harde. And when he wyth hys people were there landid / he toke his counsayll how he myght most greue the Frenche hoste. Fynally he conclu¦ded that he wolde make a busshemēt wyth a certayne nomber of his kny∣ghtes / and lye in awayte to take the vytayll that was brought to the host from the porte of Russylyan / whyche porte was foure myles frō the Frēch hoste. Uppon whyche conclusyon so taken / he wyth two thousande cho∣sen mē, lodged them where the pray shulde passe, and was espyed of the Frenche men. wherof beynge war∣ned the constable of Fraūce, & syr Io¦hon Harcourt thē marshal of ye hoste toke wyth them the erle of Marches wyth dyuers other knyghtes to the nomber of .v. hundred speres, wyth a certayne of fotemen, and went to∣warde theyr enmyes. But when they came nere vnto theym, and saw they were so many in nomber / they feryd to set forthwarde, tyll they were com¦forted by the wordes of a knyghte in theyr companye called Mathew de Roya sayeng as foloweth. O ye noble knyghtes, beholde in your syghtes the enymyes whych ye haue farre sought. Lette vs now re∣member that thys is the daye of the assumpcyon of our blessed Lady / and truste we in her that she wyll help vs agayne them yt ben putte out of holy chyrche by cursyng. For lyke meryte shall to vs grow to reuenge ye iniuri∣es done vnto the chyrche, as though we faught agayn the enmyes of Cry¦stes fayth. By meane of whyche wordes they were so encouraged, that wythoute fere they sette vppon theyr enymyes, so that betwene them was cōmensed a sore and cruell fyght, cōtynuyng a longe season or yt myght be knowen whyche parte hadde the auaūtage of the other. At the laste the kyng was drawen from his horse, and cōstray∣ned to fyghte wyth the other on fote so that he was in great ieoperdye to haue ben taken. But by his owne knighthode & good helpe of his men he recoueryd his horse agayne. when yt French men were ware ye the kyng was there in hys owne persone / they were the more egre vppon the Ara∣gons, to the entente to haue taken or siayne theyr kynge. So that fynally
they compelled theym to forsake the felde, & to saue them selfe by flyght, by reason wherof the kynge with the more parte of his knyghtes were sa∣ued from the daūger of theyr enemy∣es. But in this fyght Peter kyuge of Aragone was so hurte that he dy∣ed shortly after. whan these foresayd knyghtes with theyr prysoners were returned vnto the Frenche kynge, & had shewed vnto hym of that vycto∣ry, he reioyced therof greatly / & more wolde haue done, yf he had knowen how sore his enemy Peter was woū∣ded. But to brynge to fyne his pur∣pose, he dayly more and more assau∣ted the towne. In ye tyme that Gereonde or Gy∣rōde was thus besyeged of ye Frēche kynge / the erle of Foyz, that to the capytayne of the towne ought great fauour, many tymes by lycence of ye kynge yode into the towne, and had dyuers comunycacyons with hym / so that he lastly knowynge the sayde towne to be bare of vytayle, shewed to the kynge that he wolde laboure the sayde capytayne named syr Ray∣mōde de Cerdon, yt the towne myght be gyuē vp into the kynges handes / so that soone after yt sayde capytayne desyred a respyte of .viii. dayes, to send vnto ye king of Aragō to knowe whether he wolde rescowe the towne or nat. Upon y• whiche graūte made / the messangers were sente, and retur¦ned with a certaynte of the kynges dethe. Upon whiche knowledge had / the sayde capytayne agreed to dely∣uer the towne, vpon cōdicion to haue with thē suche mouables as he with ye cytezyns & sowdyours had within the towne. All whiche condicions as∣sured / the kynge receyued the towne of Geronde into his possessyon. The whiche whan he had manned with knyghtes of his owne / he the by cou∣sayle, whiche tourned after to his harme, diuided his nauy / and sente a parte of them into Fraunce, and the other into Tholous, wher the kynge entended to tary the wynter folow∣ynge. But so spone as his nauy was thus deuyded / the Aragons mette with them that rested in the hauen of Russilian / and gaue to them suche ba¦tayle, that they toke many of them / and slewe the kynges admyrall, and many other noble men of Fraunce / and helde the Frenchemen so shorte, that for so moche as they wolde nat that so good shyppes shulde come to the handes of theyr enemyes, they set fyre vpon the remenaūt & brent thē / and after resorted vnto the kynge. whē kynge Phylyp was ascertay∣ned of the losse of his nauy / he toke it greuously / in somoche that for that and other thynges that he myght not brynge to his purpose, he fyll into a feuer & was therwith greatly anoy∣ed. Than for strengthe of his enemy∣es, whiche kepte the passage of the mountaynes called in latyn Mōtes Pireni / and for wekyng of hym selfe by reason of his sekenesse / he passed by the strayte places, tyll he came to Parpynyan, where his sekenes en∣creased so sore, that he dyed in shorte tyme of his thyder cōmynge in yt mo∣neth of October, whā he had regned xv. yeres lackynge certayne dayes. whose bowelles were buried at Ner∣bon, and his body at saynt Denys. This Phylyp had .ii. wyues. By the fyrst Isabel by name / and dough¦ter of the kynge of Aragon, Iaques or Iames by name, he had .iii. sōnes / Lewes whiche was poysoned, Phy∣lyp whiche for his beaute and fayre shappe was named Phylyp le Beau or Phylyp the fayre, & Charles the Ualoys. And by Mary his wyfe and doughter of the duke of Braban / he had Lewes, Margaret, & Blaūche / whiche Margarete was after mary∣ed
to Edwarde the fyrste than kynge of Englande. Thus endeth Phylyp the .iii. of Fraunce. Anglia. EDwarde ye fyrst of that name, & sone of Henry ye thyrde, surna∣med lōge shāke / begā his reygne ouer Englāde, in the moneth of Nouember / and .xvii. day of ye same, and the yere of our lorde .xii.C.lxxii. & seconde yere of the thyrde Phylyp than kynge of Fraunce. This Ed∣warde as before is shewed, in the .lv. yere of his father, was in ye holy lāde whan his father dyed / & there at the cytie of Acon or Acris he dyd many feates of warre / wherof the cronycle maketh certayne mencyon. where he beynge so exercysed in Marciall ac∣tes / tidīges was brought vnto hym, that his father was deed. wherfore in all hast he spedde hym into Englād / so that he came to London the secōde day of August, and was crowned at westmynster the .xiiii. day of Decem∣ber folowyuge, whiche was in the be¦gynnynge of the seconde yere of his reygne. Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxiii.   Iohan Horne.   Syr walter Heruy.   Anno primo.   walter Potter.   IN this fyrst yere of kynge Ed∣warde the fyrst / vpon the daye of Symon and Iude, were certayne attemptes made by some of the cyty¦zyns to haue made suche a mayre as they had lysted / but for they were dys¦poynted of theyr accessaryes, they let for that tyme / whiche in the yere fo∣lowyng vpon the same day toke fur∣ther effecte, as in the begynnynge of the nexte yere shalbe towched. In ye ende of this yere and seconde day of Auguste / kynge Edwarde came to London from his great iourney of ye holy lande. where of the cytezyns he was receyued with all ioy & honour, and so conueyed vnto westmynster / where he kepte great obseruaunces for his father by a certayne tyme af∣ter. Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxiiii.   Nicholas wynchester.   Henry waleys.   Anno .ii.   Henry Couentre.   IN thys seconde yere of this kynge / and daye of Symon & Iude / whan Phylyp le Tayloure / which before was chose to be mayre, shulde as that daye haue taken his charge in the Guyldehall of Londō / dyuers cytezyns put hym besyde the mayres seet / and set therin syr walter Heruy, that the yere before had been mayre. For the whiche great rumour and grudge arose amonge the cyte∣zyns / wherfore the mater was after brought before the kyng / the whiche herynge the reasons of bothe party∣es / for somoche as he coude not agre theym / he putte bothe the sayde syr
walter and the sayd Phylyp asyde / and chase Henry Forwyk for custos of the cytye / the whych so contynued tyll Cādelmas after. At whych tyme by dyscrete and wyse peasyble mea∣nes / the forenamed syr walter Heruy was set in auctorite as mayre, and so contynued the full of the yere after. Thys yere vppon the .xiiii. daye of Decembre / was the kynge crowned at westmynster, of mayster Roberte kylwarby than archebisshop of Caū¦terbury. For Bonyface hys predeces∣sour dyed the yere that kynge Henry dyed. At thys coronaciō was present Alexandre kynge of Scottes / the whyche vpon the morowe folowyng dyd homage to kyng Edward for the kyngdome of Scotlande. After the Solempnytie of the coro¦nacyon was ended / the kyng heryng of the rebellyon of Lewelyne prynce of walys, that dysdayned to come to hys coronacyon / anone gathered a stronge power, & wēt into yt prouince & subdued yc sayd Lewelyn. And after retourned, & ordeyned certayne newe lawes for ye welth of yc realme, whych are to lōge here to reherce. Amōg the whych one was, yt bakers makinge brede lackyng the weyghte assygned after the pryce of corne / shuld fyrst be punysshed by losse of hys brede, and the seconde tyme by prysonemente, and the thyrdly by the correccyon of the Pyllory / and millers for steling of corne to be chastised by the tūbrell. And thys to be put in execucyon, he gaue auctorytie to all mayres, baylif¦fes, and other offycers thorugh Eng¦lande / and specyally to the mayre of London. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxv.   Lucas Patencourt.   Gregory Rokkisle.   Anno .iii.   Henry Frowyke.   IN the thyrde yere / the kyng cō¦fermed the lybertyes of yc cytie of London, and graunted to thē som newe. And thys yere he helde hys great court of parlyamente at west∣mynster / and gaue monycyon to Le∣welyn prynce of walys to come vnto the same / the whyche presūptuously that denyed. wherfore the kyng after Easter entred agayue into walys / & so warred vppon Lewelyne, that he was cōstreyned to submyt hym vnto the kynges grace / and opteyned it wyth greate difficultye. Then kyng Edwarde buylded the castel of Flynt / and strenghthyd the castell of Rutlande and other with Englysshe men, to kepe the walshemem in due obedyence / and toke of theyr prynce a greate summe of money / whych of some wryters is named .l.M.i. and of some .l.M. marke, & of some other lasse / & so retourned into Englande. In thys yere one water Haruy, whych the fyrste yere of thys kynge, after longe contrauersie and stryfe yt he had kept with ye aldermen of Lōdon / at a folkmote kepte at Poules crosse was made mayre of London / and so contynued to the hurte of the cytye that yere: thys yere was he ac¦cused of dyuers periuries & other de∣testable dedes cōtrary hys othe. For the whyche, & for makynge of assem∣bles of the commons whiche fauou∣red hym in hys yll dedes, he was de∣pryued of hys aldermanshyppe and counsayle of the cytye for euer / & foūde suertye of twelf honeste persones, that he shulde be good of berynge, for kepyng of ye kynges peas within the cytye for terme of hys lyfe after.
Anno domini .xii.C.lxxv.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxvi.   Iohn̄ Horne.   Gregory Rokkysle.   Anno .iiii.   Rauffe Blount.   IN thys .iiii. yere of kynge Ed∣warde Michael Tony, whych in tyme of warre had wyth the walsh men demeaned hym otherwyse than stode with his trouth and alegeaūce, was accused of treason, and therof ar¦reygned, iuged, and dāpned / & after was drawen, hanged, & quartered. Statute of MpmaynAnd thys yere was the statute of Mortmayne enacted fyrste / whyche is to meane that no man shulde gyue into the chyrch, any landes or rētes wythout a specyal lycence of ye kyng / whyche acte syne that tyme hath ben more strongly enacted, and deuysed wyth many addycyons thereunto augmented or annexyd. Anno domini .xii.C.lxxvi.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxvii.   Robert Bracy.   Gregory Rokkisle.   Anno .v.   Rauffe Fenour.   IN this .v. yere. of the reygne of kyng Edwarde / pope Nycho∣las the thyrde of that name, made doctour Robert kylwarby than be∣ynge archebysshop of Caunterbury a cardynal of Rome / and admytted to that see a frere named doctour Io¦han Pekham. And in thys yere the kyng gaue vnto Dauyd brother to Lewelyne prynce of walys, the lordshyppe of Froddesham. The whyche Dauyd dwelled in the kynges court, and dyd vnto hym plesaunte seruyce, to the entent to spye the kynges secret coū∣sayll. And yf any thynge were spo∣ken or done to the hurte of hys bro∣ther, that he therof myghte gyue to hym warnynge, as after by hys dede appered. Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxviii.   Iohan Adryan.   Gregory Rokkysle.   Anno .vi.   walter Langely.   IN thys .vi. yere the kyng com¦maunded the courtes of his la¦wes, as ye kniges bēche, yt chaūcery, yc comō place, & the excheker, to be remo¦ued vnto Shrewysbury / where My∣ghelmas terme was holdē & kept, but agayne Hillary terme, yt bokes & offi∣cers was cōtermaūded agayn to west mynster to be there holdé. In whych caryeng of ye recordes to & fro / they by reason of great plēte of rayne whi¦che in yt season fyl, caught great hurt & were fore defaced / in so moche yt the bokes were greatly imperysshed, & ye clerkes had great laboure to brynge them to theyr former state. Anno domini .xii.C.lxxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxix.   Robert Basynge.   Gregory Rokkysle.   Anno .vii.   wyllyam Mazerer.  
IN this .vii. yere, the kyng held hys parlyament at London / whyche was chefely set for the refor∣macion of the kynges coygne, which was clypped in suche wyse, that yt was therby wonderfully mynyshed and empayred. In the season of this parlyamēt, ma¦ny of the Iewes of Lōdon and other places were taken and put in holde for money clyppyng. And in Decem¦ber folowyng certayn enq̄stes were charged in Lōdon to enquyre of the sayd Iewes and other that so hadde blemyshed the kynges coygne. By the whyche enquestes the Iewes of the cytye wyth dyuerse goldesmy∣thes that kepte exchange of syluer, were indyted. And the mondaye folowynge the Purifycacion of our lady / the mayre wyth dyuers iustices of the lande sat at London / where before them was caste .ii. hundred .lxxx. and .xvii. per∣sones. Of the whych but .iii. englysh men / and all the other were Iewes and Iewes borne, all be yt that ma∣ny of theym were borne in England, and therfore of some wryters they be named Englyshe Iewes / the why∣che were all at sondry times & places put in execucyon. In this yere also began the foun∣dacyon of the chyrche of the freer pre¦chour or blacke freres by Ludgate, by theyr founder. And in this yere the town, of Bosten was greatly blemyshed wyth fyre. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxix.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxx.   Thomas Box.   Gregory Rokkysle.   Anno .viii.   Rauffe More.   IN thys .viii. yere / the kynge caused in syluer the halfe pe∣ny to be coygned / where before tyme other coygnes of metall rāne among the people, to theyr great noyaunce and losse / and farthynges of syluer were also coygned the selfe tyme.Fr coyg∣nyng of half pens and far¦thynges. And the wynter folowynge, aboute the daye of saynte Denys, or the .ix. daye of October / fell suche plence of snowe, that thereof ensued myche harme. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxx.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxi.   wyllyam Faryngdon.   Gregory Rokkysle.   Anno .ix.   Nycholas wynchester.   IN thys .ix. yere of kynge Ed∣warde / Dauid the brother of Lewelyn prynce of walys, the whych as ye before haue harde dwelled in the kynges courte to knowe the kyu¦ges counsayll, and therof enforme his brother / whē he had that he way¦ted for, he secretly gat hym into wa¦lys to his brother, and hym excyted agayn the kyng in all that he myght and caused his brother to man and vytayll dyuers castelles within wa∣lys / & specyally the castell of Swan∣don, wherin he mych trusted / and ga¦theryd vnto hym the walshemen by gyftes and other meanes, so that he was very stronge. wherof when the kynge was infor¦med / he wolde therunto gyue no cre¦dence, tyll he had sent thyther and re¦ceyued from thēs the certaynte. But for so myche as wynter was toward,
and he myghte nat conueniently go thyder wyth any power / he therfore prouyded to send men and vytayl, to strength the castelles of Flynt & Rut¦lande, and other holdes, whyche he there had / and wyth prouysyō made to warre vppon theym in the begyn∣nynge of the nexte yere, suffered that wynter to passe. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxi.   Anno dn̄i. xii.C.lxxxii.   wyllyam Mazerer.   Henry waleys.   Anno .x.   Nycholas wynchester.   IN thys .x. yere / ye kyng heryng more and more of the vnsted∣fastnes of the walshe men / for to let them of theyr purpose to greue hys holdes beforenamed, he sente thyder with a crewe of sowdyours, the erles of Northumberland and of Surrey. with whome amonge other went syr Rogyer Clyfforde, syr wyllyam Lyn¦desey, syr Rycharde Tanny, & many other noble knyghtes and squyres. The whyche with greate corage en∣trede into walys, and made with the walshemen many skyrmysshes / tyll lastly vpon Palme sondaye, Dauyd with a great power of walshmē met with the sayde lordes & knyghtes at a place nere to a towne called Hanar¦dyne / where betwene thē was a sore fyght. But in the ende the losse fyll to the Englysshmen. For there were slayne syr wyllyam Lyndesey, syr Ry¦charde Tanny, with many other / and syr Rogyer Clyfforde was taken. After whyche ouerthrowe of the En∣glysshmen / the sayde Dauyd layde syege vnto the castelles of Flynt and of Rutlande. And his brother in that season warred and occupyed the lan¦des of syr Edmunde Mortymer / and wanne the towne called Lambatre vaure / and there threwe the walles therof downe to the grounde. Thys towne is also called Abreswith. It was nat longe after or the brute of thys ouerthrowe of the Englysshmē came vnto ye towne. wherfore he sped hym the faster thyderwarde. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxxiii.   Rauffe Blunt.   Henry walys.   Anno .xi.   Hawkyn Betnell.   IN thys .xi. yere vppon the day of saynte Leonarde or the syxt daye of Nouembre, whyle kynge Edwarde was thus occupyed in re∣scowynge of hys men, whyche were besyged of Dauyd / syr Rogyer Clyf¦forde wyth other, whyche entended to make a reysynge vppon the walsh men, was drowned by foly vppon a brydge made of bargys and plankes to haue passed a water, betwene Snowdon and Anglyssey. And the thyrde daye of Decembre folo∣wynge / was Lewelyne prynce of walys slayne by syr Edmunde Mor¦tymer and hys company / and hys hed sente vnto the kynge thā beyng at Rutlande. The whyche he sent vnto London / chargynge that yt be¦set vppon the toure of London. Of thys Lewelyne a walshe metrycian made these foure verses folowynge.
Hic iacet Anglorum tortor, tutor venedorum. Princeps wallorum, Lewelinus regula morum, Gemma ceuorum, flos regum preteritorum, Forma futurorum, dux, laus, lex, lux populorum. whyche verses are thus to meane as foloweth. Of Englysshmen the scourge, of walshe the prote∣ctoure, Lewelyn the prynce, rule of all vertue, Gemme of all lyuers, and of all other the floure, whyche vnto dethe hath payde hys dette due, Of kynges a mirrour that after hym shall sue, Duke and prayse, and of the lawe the ryght, Here in thys graue, of people lyeth the lyght. But an Englysshe metrician wrote other .iiii. verses in dyspraysynge of the sayd Lewelyn as foloweth. Hic iacet errorum princeps, ac predo virorum, Proditor Anglorum, fax liuida secta reorum, Numen wallorum, trux, dux, homicida piorum, Fex troianorum, stirps, mendax, causa masorum. The whyche maye in thys wyse be Englysshed. Here lyeth of errour the prynce yf yewyll ken, These, and robbour, & traytour to Englysshmen. A dym bronde, a sect of doers yll, God of walshmen, cruell without skyll In sleyng the good / and leder of the badde. Lastly rewarded as he deserued hadde. Of Troyans blode the drastes, and nat sede. A rote of falshode, and cause of many yll dede. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxiiii.   Iordan Goodchepe.   Henry waleys.   Anno .xii.   Martyn Box.   IN thys .xii. yere, the kynge be∣ynge stylle in walys, pursued Dauyd the brother of Lewelyn from towne to towne / so that lastly he was taken and broughte vnto the kynge aboute the natyuyte of saynt Iohn̄ / and so holden in warde tyll the kyng had there sped hys nedes. Then the kyng had all the countre at hys wyl, and gaue vnto Englyssh lordes tow¦nes in the myddes of walys / and de∣uyded the coūtre into shyres / and or∣deyned there shyryfes and other offy¦cers as then were vsed in Englande. At Aberconow he made a stronge ca¦stell, where before was a house of whyte monkes. The whych he remo¦uyd thens, and ordeyned for them in some other place. He also made than the castel of Carnaruā fast by Snow¦don, and repayred agayne the towne of Lambatre or Abreswyth which Le¦welyn had before betyn downe. Also he garuysshed the castelles and hol¦des standyng vpon the see syde with Englysshmen / and made Englysshe¦men lordes of the groundes belon∣gyng to the same. And whan ye kyng had set that coūtre in rule / thē about Mychelmasse he retourned so Shre¦wysbury, where he set a parlyament. In the tyme wherof the forsayd Da¦uyd as chyef styrrer & begynner of al thys warre / was there deinyd to be drawen, hāged, & quartered / & so he was shortly after at ye sayde towne of Shrewysbury, & hys hede sent to Lōdon, & set by the hed of hys brother Lewelyn. And thys yere was the fyrste son of kyng Edwarde borne, whyle the kyng was in walys at ye castel of Car¦naruan. By reason wherof he was after named Edward of Carnaruan. He was born vpō ye day of saīt Mark or ye .xxv. day of April. This yere also one Laurēce Duket a cytezyn of Lō∣dō, was foūde dede & hanged within sait Mary bow chyrch of chepe. For ye which enqueres were made, & lastely for yt dede were ataynted these .vii. {per}¦sons folowing, yt is to say, Reygnold
of lancaster, Robert Pynnot, Paule of Stepynhith, Thomas Cordway¦ner, Iohn̄ Tolanson, Thomas Rus¦sell, and Robert Scotte / the whyche were all for that dede drawyn & han∣ged. And a woman for the same dede was also brent. And Rauffe Crepyn, Iourdan Good chepe, Gilbert Clerk and Geffrey Clerke, were also attaīt for the same cause. But they were re∣pryed and sent vnto the toure of Lō∣don / where they remayned lōge after and lastly delyuered. And in thys ye∣re the greate conduyte standynge a∣gayne saynte Thomas of Acres in Chepe, was begon to be made. In this yere also stryfe and vnkindenes beganne to kyndelle betweene the kynge & the erle of Leycester / whych after grewe to the great dysturbaūce of dyuers townes of Englande, and specyally of the cytye of London as after some dele shall appere. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.lxxxv.   Stephen Corn̄hyll.   Gregory Rokesle.   Anno .xiii.   Robert Rokesby.   IN thys .xiii. yere vpon the day of the conuersiō of saynt Pau¦le or ye .xxv. day of Ianuarii / ye kynge ceased the fraunchese and lybertyes into hys handes, and discharged the mayre of London thā beyng Grego∣ry Rokkisle / & admytted for custos or gardeyn of the cytye Stephā Sā¦dewyche. The whyche contynued in that offyce tyll the mōday folowyng the puryfycacyon of our Lady. At whyche season the sayd Stephā was dyscharged / and syr Iohn̄ Breton̄ knyght charged for the resydue of ye yere. The cause of thys dyspleasure that the kyng had vnto the cytye is nat shewed of no certaynte. But in an olde panflete it appereth, that the sayd Gregory Rokkisley toke cer∣tayne brybes of the bakers, and suf∣fered them to sell brede lackynge .vi. vnces / or .vii. oz in a peny lofe, for ye whyche the kynge shuld be sore dys∣pleased. But yet to me it semeth no conuenyent cause, to sease the lyber∣tyes of the cytie for the offence of one man. wherfore it is to presuppose, yt it was for a more greuous cause. And in this yere was fully fynisshed and ended the new werke of ye chyrch of westmynster vnto the ende of the quere, begonne as before is shewed / in the thyrde yere of the .iii. Hēry. By whyche reason it shuld apere, yt thys chyrche shuld be in edyfyenge vpon lxvi. yeres. Of the fyrste fundacyon of thys chyrche are dyuers opiniōs. For as before is shewed in ye thyrde Chapytre of the story of Carce, and v. parte of thys werke / thys chyrche was fyrste founded by a cytezeyne of Londō, and after reedyfyed by saynt Edwarde, and lastly by kynge Hēry the .iii. But in the same abbey of west mynster, where of lykelyhode ye most certaynte is to be had / it is regystred that thys sayd chyrche was a temple of the Brytons longe or they recey∣ued the fayth of Chryste. And in the tyme of theyr crysten kynge Lucius, it was hallowed of Augustyne & hys felowes. And secundaryly it was re∣edyfyed by Sebertus than kynge of Estsaxons or Essex, aboute the tyme whan Ethelbert kyng of Kent buyl∣ded saynt Paules chyrch of Londō. whyche was after the tyme that Lu∣cyus receyued the fayth of Chryste, vppon .iiii.C. yeres. Than thyrdly it was buylded by saynt Edwarde the
confessoure / whiche reygned vpon CCCC. and .xl. yeres after the sayde Sebertus. And fourthly or lastly by the foresayd Henry ye thyrde, whiche began his reygne after the dethe of saynt Edwarde .C.l. yeres. Anno domini .xii.C.lxxxv.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxvi.   walter Blount.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xiiii.   Iohan wade.   IN the .xiiii. yere of kynge Ed∣warde, at a parliament holden at westmynster were made yt statutes called Additamenta Gloucestrie / whiche is to meane addiciōs of statutes, made and put to suche as before tyme were made at ye parlyamēt holdē at Glou∣ceter. The which statutes were made to refourme suche {per}sones as mysu∣sed the landes and tenementes com∣mynge to them by reason of ye dower or landes of theyr wyues / so that the the chyldren of the seconde husbande putt by ye ryghtfull enherytoures / or suche as were nexte alyed vnto the fyrst donours. By reason of whiche statutes and addicions now in this parliamēt made, suche mysorder was refourmed. In this yere or nere there aboute, in a towne of Almayne called Tra∣iect / many men and women (as wyt∣nesseth ye auctour of Cronica cronicarum) were daūsyng vpō a brydge / whiche lay ouer a ryuer called Moose. In whiche tyme of theyr dysporte & daū∣synge, came by a preest berynge the sacramēt towarde a seke man / wher∣of the sayd men and women beynge in reuell toke no regarde vnto the sa¦crament, nor dyd to it any honour & reuerence. But were it by the wreche of god or otherwyse / shortly after the preest was passed ouer, the brydge brake, by meanes wherof, nere vnto the nombre of .CC. persones were drowned. And aboute this same sea∣son in the coūtre called in Englysshe the Swetezers / a woman was dely∣uered of a chylde, that from ye nauyll vpwarde had .ii. complete bodyes, as iiii. armes, and two hedes, with two bodyes to the wast / and downeward but .ii. legges / the whiche with ye fore sayd armes be clypped eyther others body. And an other woman bare a chylde or a monstre / wherof the heed and the face was lyke vnto a man, & all the body lyke vnto a lyon / with tayle and fete and all other fetures accordynge to the same. In this yere also a cytezyn of Lon¦don named Thomas Pywylesdon, yt whiche in ye tyme of ye barons warre before in the story of kynge Henry shewed, had ben a capytayne / and a great styrrer of the commons of the sayd cytie, for to maynteyne the ba∣rons partie agayne the kynge / was newly accused, that he with other of euyll dysposycyon, shulde make con∣uentycles and assembles to the newe dystourbaunce of the cytie. wherof re¦porte was made vnto the kynge / the whiche remytted the enquery therof vnto syr Rauffe Sandewyche than custos or gardeyne of the cytie. Thē the sayde Thomas with other was putte in sure kepynge tyll the mater were duly enquyred of. After whiche inquysycyon made and founde, re∣porte was made vnto the kynge. Then the kyng sent downe a wrytte / and commaunded it to be proclay∣med shortly after within the boun∣des of the cytye / wherof the effecte was thus, that the sayde Thomas
Pywelysdō, wylyam de Heywoode, Rycharde de Coundris, Rycharde le Cofferre, Robert de Derby, Albyne de Darby, wyllyam Mayo Mercer, and Iuo Lyng Draper / with diuers other to ye nōbre of .l. persones, shuld be banysshed out of yt cytye for euer. And if any of the sayd .lviii. persones were at that tyme of the proclamaciō voyded ye cytye for fere or otherwyse / that they shuld so remayne, and nat to retourne vnto the cytie vpō payne of lyfe losynge. In thys yere also, where as of olde tyme longe before thys season, ye mar¦chauntes straūgers commynge with theyr marchaundyse, were lodged within cytezeyns of the cytye of Lon¦don, and solde all theyr marchaundy¦ses by the procuryng of hys host / for the whyche hys sayd hoost had a cer∣tayne of euery .li: by meanes of the sayd marchauntes straūgers it was at thys daye brought to passe, yt they myght hyre to thē houses for to dwel in, and for stowage of theyr wares so that no cytezeyne shulde entermedle hym with the sayd straūgers nor yet theyr wares / by meane whereof they vsed many disceytes, bothe i vtteraū¦ce of false wares, and also by theyr weyghtes whyche they vsed in theyr owne houses, to the great hurt of the hole realme of Englande. wherfore sodaynly serche was made, and theyr weyghtes founde and proued false. And ouer yt all suche wares as they shuld have weyed at the kynges bea∣me / they weyed moche therof in theyr sayd houses, to the hynderaunce of ye kynges custome. For whyche offēces agayne theym proued / to the nombre of .xx. of the sayd straungers were ar∣rested, and sent vnto the toure of Lō∣don, and theyr weyghtes brent & con¦sumed in westchepe of London, the thursdaye before the feast of Symon and Iude. And fynally the sayd mar¦chauntes were delyuered by fyne ma¦kynge to the kyng of a thousande .li, when they had suffered by a season harde & vyle prysonement. Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxvi.   Anno dn̄i. xii.C.lxxxvii.   Thomas Crosse.   Syr Iohn̄ Bryton.   Anno .xv.   wyllyam Hawteyn.   IN thys .xv. yere, the Iewes of Englande were sessed at great summes of money whych they payd vnto the kyng. But of one other au∣ctour it is sayd, that the commons of Englande graunted to the kyng the v. parte of theyr mouables for to haue the Iewes banysshe out the lā∣de. For whiche cause the sayd Iewes to put the commons from theyr pur∣pose, gaue of theyr free wylles great summes of money to ye kyng. whych sayeng appereth to be trewe / for the sayd Iewes were exyled within few yeres after. Thys yere about the begynnynge of May the kynge sayled to Bur∣deux / and frome thens he rode into Fraunce, where as witnesseth ye frēsh boke he was honourably receyued of Phylyp le Beau or Philyp the fayre than kynge of Fraunce / and after re¦ceyued homage of the sayd Edward for the duchy of Guyan. And when kynge Edwarde had taryed a season in Fraunce, he retourned vnto Bur∣deux / whyther came vnto hym a cer∣tayne ambassadours from the kyng of Spayne, with the whych he helde longe dalyaunce. wherfore of ye frēsh kyng he was suspected, that he shuld allye hym with the kyng of Spayne
agayne the Frenche kynge. And thys yere as testyfyeth Poli∣cronycon, the somer was so excedyng vote, that men dyed for hete. And thys yere whete was so plen¦tuous, that it was solde at London for .xl.vi. a quarter. Anno domini .xii.C.lxxxvii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxviii.   wyllyam Herforde.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xvi.   Thomas Stanys.   IN thys .vvi. yere of kynge Ed¦warde / saynt Thomas of Her∣forde was translated. And thys yere fyll dystaūce betwene syr Payne Tip toft wardeyn of certayn castels in wa¦lys, & a walsh knyght called syr Ries ap Mordek. So yt sundry skyrmys∣shes were foughten betwene them, & many men slayne vpon bothe sydes, to the great dystourbaunce of all ye countre. Thys yere vpon saynt Margaretes euyn, or the .xix. daye of Iulii / fyll wonderfull great hayle, that the lyke therof was nat of men than lyuynge seen. And after that ensued cōtynuell rayne / whyche dystēperyd the groūd in such wyse, that the yere folowyng whete was sold for .xviii.d. a busshel, and thys yere for .xiiii.d. And so en∣creased yerely after duryng ye reygne of the kynge, and after in hys sōnes days, tyll it was lastly solde for .xl.s. a quarter and aboue. Anno domini .xii.C.lxxxviii.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxix.   wyllyam Betayn.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xvii.   Iohn̄ of Caunterbury.   IN thys .xvii. yere, the warre be¦fore in the yere laste paste, be∣twene syr Payn Typtoft syr Ryes contynuynge / to the entente that the sayd Ryes myght reuenge hys cause agayne the sayd syr Payne, he arre∣cyd a greate multytude of walshemē and brent and wasted dyuers fow∣nes in walys / so that the kynge then beynge in Normandy, sente  the tle of Cornewayll then beynge the kynges lyeu tenaunte in Englande, that he shuld sende thyder an army of knyghtes to withstande the maly¦ce of the walshmen. The whych pre∣paryd shortly an army, & yode with them into the borders of Northewa∣lys. where he with hys cōpany bare hym so knyghtly, that in the ende the sayd Ryes was takē & brought vnto porke / where he was after drawen, hanged, and quartered. Anno domini .xii.C.lxxxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xc.   Full  saynt Edmunde.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xviii.   Salaman Langforde.   IN thys .xviii. yere vppon once Lady cuyn Assumpcion / kyng Edwarde was honorably receyued of the cytezeyns of London, and so conueyed vnto westmynster / where shortely after were broughte before
hym many greuous complayntes of dyuers of hys iustyces; as syr Tho∣mas weylande, Adam Stretton and other. The whych the kynge caused streyghtly to be examyned / and lastly were founde gylty, of such trespasses and causes as they were accused of. wherfore some of theym were outla¦wed and loste suche goodes as they hadde / and the other punysshed by longe enprysonemente, and lastely delyuered by payenge of greate fy∣nes. Anno domini .M.CC.lxc.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxci.   Thomas Romayn.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xix.   wyllyam de Lyre.   IN thys .xix. yere, the kynge or∣deyned yt all woll whych shuld be sold vnto straungers, shulde be brought vnto Sandewyche / where the staple therof longe after was, as it is now at ye towne of Caleys. And thys yere were the Iewes banysshed the lande, for the whych cause the cō∣mons gaue vnto the kyng a quinde¦cym or fyftene. Thys yere also syr Gylbert de Cla∣re erle of Glouceter, maryed dame Iane doughter of kyng Edwarde. Thys was called Iohanne of Acrys for she was born at Acrys, whē kyng Edwarde was there vpon hys great iourney. And soone there after in the same yere, the duke of Brabannys sonne wedded Margarete the syster of the sayd Iohanne. Anno domini .xii.C.lxci.   Anno domini .M.CC.lxcii.   Rauffe Blount.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xx.   Hamonde Boxe.   IN thys .xx. yere & begynnynge of the maryes yere, and also of the kynges .xx. yere / that is to meane vpon the euyn of saynt Andrewe or the .xxix. day of Nouēbre / dyed quene Elyanore the kynges wyfe, and was buryed at westmynster in the chapel of saynt Edwarde at the fete of Hēry the thyrde. where she hath .ii. were ta¦pers brennyng vpon her tumbe both daye and nyght / whyche so hath con∣tynued syne the day of her buryenge to thys present daye. Thys gentyll woman as before is towched in the xxxviii. yere of kyng Henry the third, was syster vnto the kyng of Spayn By whome kyng Edwarde had .iiii. sonnes / that is to saye, Iohn, Henry, Alphons, and Edwarde. whych Ed∣warde succeded his father, by reason that the other .iii. died before theyr fa¦ther. Also he had by her .v. doughters The fyrste Elyanore, was maryed vnto wyllyam erle of Barre / the se∣conde Iohan of Acrys, was maryed as before is sayde vnto the erle of Glouceter / the thyrde Margarete, was maryed to the dukes sonne of Brabāt / the .iiii. Mary by name, was made a menchon at Ambrysbury / & the .v. named Elyzabeth, was maried vnto the erle of Holande / and after hys deth she was maryed vnto Hum¦freye Boherum erle of Hereforde. And thys yere dyed also the olde quene Elyanore wyfe vnto Hēry the thyrde and mother to thys kyng Ed∣warde / whose herte was buryed at
the graye freres in London, and her body at Ambrysbury in the house of Nunnes. Anno domini .M.CC.xcii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xciii.   Henry Bale.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xxi.   Elys Russell.   IN thys .xxi. yere, the kyng hel∣de hys great courte of parlya∣ment at London / to the whyche with dyuers lordes of that prouince came the kyng of Scottes. And after he had contynued there a conuenyente season / he was cōueyed with dyuers lordes ferre vpō hys iourney towar∣de hys owne countre. And in thys yere, as one Rychard Bagle offycer of the sheryfes of Lon¦don, was ledynge a prysoner towar∣de the Gayole, the whyche he before had arrested / thre men rescowed the sayde prysoner, and toke hym from the offycer. The whych were pursu¦ed and taken / and by iugemente and lawe than vsed broughte into west∣chepe, and there had theyr ryghte handes smyten of by the wrestes. Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xciii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xciiii.   Robert Rokysley.   Rauffe Sandewyche.   Anno .xxii.   Martyn Awbry.   IN the .xxii. yere of kynge Ed∣warde, vpon the daye of saynt Tyburce and Ualeryan, or the .xiiii. daye of May / fyll a wōderfull snow and therwith and excedynge wynde. By vyolence wherof greate harme was done in sundry places of Eng∣lande. In remembraunce whereof a Metrycyan made these verses folow¦ynge. Crastino Tiburci sanctorum Valeriani, Nix cadit immanis, ventus vehemens boriasis, Euulsit siluas, vulsit quas reperit herbas, des dampnose detexit & impituose, Quas clam prostrauit / sic plurima dāpna parait. The whyche verses may thus be En¦glysshed as here after foloweth. The morow folowynge Tiburce & Valerian The blessed sayntes / of snow fyll suche plentie, That at that day was no lyuyng man, That myght remembre of so great quantyte. The Northyn wynde blewe wyth such fyerste, That houses, trees, with herbys it ouer cast. And many other harmes by sande & eke by see, Of that wynde came, the whyse that it dyd laste. IN thys yere also about ye ende of the moneth of Iulu, dyed freer Pekham than archebysshop of Caunterbury. In whose see was af∣ter stalled mayster Robert of wyn∣chester. And aboute the myddes of Sep∣tembre folowynge / the erle of Barre a frenche man, maryed Elyanore ye kynges doughter in ye towne of Bry¦stowe. And about the ende of thys ye¦re dyed Alexandre kyng of Scottes / where soone after ensuyd great war∣re and trouble, for the enherytaunce of that lande, as in some parte shall after appere. And thys yere whete was solde at London for .ii. s. a busshell. In this yere also as wytnesseth the Frenche cronycle Phylyp le Beawe thā kyng of Fraunce made warre in Gascoyne
and Guyau, for the cause as there is shewed / sayeng that kyng Edwarde vnder coloure to haue made a vyage into the holy lande, gathered a great army, and sodeynly entred into Nor¦mandy bothe by lande and water, & dyd moche harme in spoylynge and takyng dyuers shyppes of Fraunce, and brynnyng and spoylyng diuers townes of the same / and after came vnto the towne of Rochell, where to it the Englysshemen made dyuers as¦sautes, wherby the dwellers & also the towne susteyned moche harme. wherof the kynge of Fraunce be∣ynge enfourmed / sent vnto kyng Ed¦ward, monisshing hym to come vnto hys parlyamente, & also to make sa∣tysfaccyon for suche harmys as hys people had done within hys domy∣nyon of Fraunce and Normandy. But for that kyng Edwarde refused that to do / therfore ye sayd Phylyp le Beawe sent Rauffe de Neell thā cō∣stable of Fraunce into Gascoygne with a greate & myghty power / the whyche made sharpe warre vppon ye Gascoynes. But the Gascoines with helpe of the Englysshemen defended theym in suche wyse, that great hurt was done vpon bothe partyes. Thā fynally as testifyeth the sayd frenche cronycle, to the entent that kyng Ed¦warde myghte make the better clay∣me to al the hole duchy of Normādy / he sent the Frenche kynge worde, yt he wolde gyue ouer into hys handes the duchye of Guyan & holde no lan∣de of the kyng of Fraunce. Anno domini .M.CC.xciiii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xcv.   Henry Boxe.   Syr Iohn̄ Bryton.   Anno .xxiii.   Richarde Glouceter.   IN thys .xxiii. yere / the walshe∣men by styrryng of one named Madok, rebelled agayne the kynge. wherfore he in all haste spedde hym vnto westchester / and about the feast of saynte Nycholas, wan frome the walshmen the ile called Anglesya or the ile of Manne, and buylded newe the cytye & castell of Beau Maryse / and broughte the vnstedfast walshe∣men to newe reclayme / & then caused the woodes of ye countre to be hewyn downe, wherein before tymes they vsed to hyde theym as a cony dothe in hys claper / and repayred so the ca¦stelles and stronge holdes with buyl¦dynge of some newe,Bew the beatiemen wre trap∣ned from va∣nyn. that he caused the walshmē to thryue agayne theyr wylles. For by the strengthe of those castelles, they were kepte from theyr olde accustomed rauyns and stelyn∣ges / and put so in execucyon by the rulers of the sayd castelles & stronge holdes, that they fyll vnto occupa∣cyon and to byenge and sellyng and gathered treasoure, and beganne to lyue after the maner of Englisshemē, so that more and more that coun∣tre grewe to more restefulnesse and peace. In thys yere also the frenchemen arryued at Douer wyth a certayne of shyppes, beynge vnder the rule of syr Mathew de mounte morency and of syr Iohan Harcourte knygh¦tes / and spoyled that towne, and brent a parte of yt. In whych skyrmysshe was slayne or martyred an holy man named saynte Thomas of Douer. And in this yere as testifieth ye frenche croni¦cle / Charles de Ualoys brother vnto
kyng Phylyp of Fraunce, was sent by hys sayd brother into Gascoygne with a greate hooste. The whyche Charles layde hys syege vnto the ca¦stell of Ryon / wherin at that tyme were syr Iohan Seyn Iohn̄, & Iohn̄ de Brytayne / the whych manfully & vygorously defendyd the sayd castel agayne the Frenchmen all that yere and more, as in the next yere shall ap¦pere. Anno domini .M.CC.xcv.   Anno dn̄i. xii.C.xcvi.   Iohn̄ Dunstable.   Syr Iohn̄ Bryton.   Anno .xxiiii.   Adam Halyngbery.   IN this .xxiiii. yere / the kyng for the great warre yt he had wyth the Frenche kyng and els where, cō∣maunded a new subsidie to be leuied vpon all the sarplers of wolle goyng out of Englande, with all fellys and hydes in lyke maner. And ouer that, all suche money as before was graū¦ted by the clergy of Englande towar¦de the defence of the holy lande / the kyng then for reporte that he hadde from Rome of the popes maners thā Bonyface the .viii, cōmaunded it to be brought vnto hys tresoury. And by a cōuocaciō made of the sayd cler∣gye / he had graunted towarde hys nedes halfe of theyr spyrytuall & tem¦porall landes, begynnyng at .xx. mar¦ke benifice, & so ascendyng vpward / the whych was nat payd in one yere, but by deuided porcions in .iii. yeres ensuyng. And of the lay fee or tem∣porall men of Englāde, he had graūted to hym the .x. peny of theyr moua¦bles / the which was payd in .ii. yeres next ensuyng. And thys yere in ye mo¦neth of Marche, was drawen & han∣ged at London for treason done in Fraunce, a knyghte called syr Tho∣mas Turbeuyle. And aboute ye tyme of Easter whan Charlys de Ualoys as ye before in that other yere haue harde, had lyen longe at the castell of Ryon, & myght nothyng wynne vpō the Englyshmen, but dayly loste of the best of hys knyghtes / he sent for more ayde and socoure. At whyche tyme came vnto hym syr Rauffe Ne∣le constable of Fraunce with a fressh company, and thā assawted it of new But whan they had lyen there a sea∣son, & sawe they preuayled nothynge agayn theyr enemys / they yode vnto an holde there by named Poudency, and it assauted for so moche as the more nombre of the sowdyours there were Normans / and after .viii. days by appoyntemente or otherwyse gat the sayd holde, so that all the Englis¦shemen had theyr lybertye & goodes and the Normans taken as pryso∣ners / the whyche they brought after vnto the castell of Ryon, and there in syghte of the sowdyours, hanged al or the more partye of the sayde Nor∣mans.Crueltye. whan the Gascoynes beynge wythin the towne and castell of Ry∣ons, sawe then theyr cosyns and coū¦trey men hanged before theyr eyen / they caste in theyr myndes that yt was done by treason of the Englyssh¦men, and that they wolde at length deale wyth them in lyke maner. By reason wherof stryfe and varyaūce arose betwene the Englysshemē and the Gascoygnes / so that eyther of theym feryd the treason of the other. For the whyche cause, syr Iohan Seyn Iohan, syr Iohn̄ de Britayn, syr Robert Typtoft, syr Rauffe Tā¦ny, syr Hugh Bardolfe, & syr Adam Cretynge, with dyuers other fledde
by see and in that maner saued them selfe / and soone after the sayd towne and castell of Ryons was wonne by the Frenchemen, and the inhabytaū∣tes of the same sworne vnto the frēch kynge. ye haue harde before in the .xxii. yere of thys kynge, howe after the dethe of Alexander kyng of Scottes many questyons fyll amonge y• sayd scottes, who by ryght of enherytaūce shulde be kynge of that lande / consy¦derynge that the sayde Alexander had lefte after hym thre doughters, the whyche lyuyng theyr father were maryed. The fyrste to syr Iohan Bayloll, the seconde to Roberte le Bruze, and the thyrde to one named Hastynges. Many of the lordes of Scotlande wolde haue crowned syr Iohan Bayloll, by reason that he maryed the eldest of the doughters. But the frendes of Robert le Bruze withstode it with all theyr power. And other there were that hede with Hastynges / so that after greate stryfe and longe varyaunce, the mat¦ter was broughte before kynge Ed∣warde as chyef lord and soueraygne of that lande / promysinge to hym to abyde all suche determynacyon and iugemente as he shulde sette therin. Than kynge Edwarde to the ende that the scottes shulde knowe perfy∣tely, that the kyng of Englāde ought of ryghte to be there chyefe hede and soueraygne / shewed vnto theym suche olde wrytynges as he lyttell tofore had caused to be serched and founde / in the whyche it was contey¦ned by the auctorytye of olde crony∣cles and wryters, as Maryanus ye scotte, wyllyam of Malmesbury, Roger of Huntyngdon, and other, that in the yere of our lorde .ix.C.xx, kynge Edwarde the elder made sub∣get vnto hym the kynges of Cum∣brys and scottes. Also in the yere of grace .ix.C. and xxi. the foresayd scottes & Cumbrys, chase the sayd Edwarde the elder to be theyr chyefe lord and patron. And in ye yere of our lord .ix.C.xxvi. Ethel¦stane than kynge of Englande sub∣dued constantyne than kyng of scot¦tes / and after admytted the sayd Con¦stantyne to reygne as kynge vnder him, by othe of obeysaūs, with feaute and homage. Also Edredus brother to the sayde Ethelstane, subdued of newe the scottes with the Northum∣brys / and receyued of them agayne othe and homage. And ouer that it is founde in the sayd cronycles, that Edgar ouercame Alphunius the son of Kynadus kynge of Scottes, and receyued of hym feawty & homage / and helde hym vnder hys obeysaūce as he had done hys father Kynadus before tyme. Moreouer it is there wytnessed / that Canutus in the .xvi. yere of hys reygne. subdued Malco∣lyne than kyng of scottes, and recey¦ued of hym feawty and homage. Furthermore wyllyam Conquerour in the .vi. yere of his reygne, subdued Malcolyne kyng of Scotlande / the whyche before tymes had receyued the sayde kyngdome of the gyfte of Edwarde kynge and confessoure. And wyllyam the rede dyd in lyke∣wyse vnto the sayde Malcolyne, and vnto hys two sonnes that reygned in Scotlande the one after the other. Also Dauyd kynge of scottes dyd homage vnto Stephane than kyng of Englande. And wyllyam kynge of scottes dyd homage vnto Henry the thyrde, at the tyme of hys coronacyon / and after came vnto hys father Henry the seconde, whan the forenamed Hē¦ry was deed in Normandy, & made hys homage to hym agayne. Thys Henry that was sonne vnto Henry the seconde is of many
wryters named Henry the thyrd, for so moche as he was the .iii. kyng that was crowned of that name. But for he dyed before hys father, hys dedes ben lytell spoken of / so that of some wryters he is nothyng mynded. And it foloweth in the story, howe that Alexādre kyng of Scottes in yt .xxxv. yere of Hēry the thyrd, or son of kyng Iohn̄, maryed at yorke Margarete doughter of the sayd Henry / and dyd vnto hym homage for the realme of Scotlande / and boūde hym and hys heyres kynges of Scotlande by hys letters patentes, to be trewe vnto the sayd Hēry, & vnto his heyres kynges of Englande, lyke as before tyme wyllyam kyng of Scottes had obly¦ged hym vnto the seconde Henry / as before in the .xxii. yere of hys reygne is more manyfestly shewed. And more to them was shewed y• popes bulles, the whych were sent be¦fore tymes into Scotlande / by aucto¦ryte wherof the kynges of Scotlāde were accursed for they wolde nat be obedyent to theyr lordes kynges of Englande. WHan all these presedentes were sene by ye Scottes / a day was as∣sygned of metyng at Norhm̄ in the marches betwene Englande and Scotlande, whyther vnto the kyng, came the chief rulers of the Scottes. where they excused them to be boūde vnto the kyng for the obseruynge of the kynges ordenaunce, for so moche as they lacked a kynge & an hede, by whome all suche ordenaunces shuld be maynteyned and holdē. But after by aduyce of bothe parties / agremēt was made by the scottes, that they shuld be bounde to obey the kynges iugement. wheruppon bondes were made vpon bothe partyes / that is to meane the kyng was bounde to thē in an hondreth thousande pounde, yt within .ii. monethes after he had re∣ceyued the possessyon of the lande, he shulde gyue it vnto hym that was thought most ryghtfull enherytour. And the scottes were agayne boūde vnto hym, that they shuld holde fer∣me & stable all suche decre and iuge∣ment as the kyng shuld gyue in that mater / and also that they shulde vp∣holde & maynteyne for theyr kyng & ruler, hym that the kynge shulde ad∣mitte & chose, and none other, After whych bondes made and delyuered vpon bothe sydes / the scottes seased kyng Edwarde, and delyuered vnto hym by theyr chartours the possessiō of Scotlande, with castelles, with rightes, with customes, and al other appertynaūces to that kyngdome be¦longynge / and sette wardeynes in the townes, maners, and castelles, that shuld saue to hym that the kyng admytted, al aduauntages and pro∣fytes, of the sayde townes and other in that meane whyle growyng. And whan all assuraūce was ma¦de and fynysshed to the agrement of bothe parties / the kyng called before hym and hys counsayll all those par¦tyes that made clayme vnto ye kyng∣dome of Scotlande. And after theyr reasons were wele and suffycyently argued and debated vpon al sydes, by aduyce aswell of some of the lor∣des of Scotlande as by hys owne counsayll he fynally admytted for kynge syr Iohan Bayloll as moste ryghtefull enherytour to the crowne of Scotlande. The whych receyued it of hym thankefully / and for the same in presence of the barony of En¦glande and of Scotlande, dyd vnto the sayde kynge Edwarde hys ho∣mage, and sware vnto hym feawty. And that done the scottes with theyr newe kynge retourned into Scot∣lande. And thys yere was takē the fore∣named
Madok or Meredok / whych as ye before haue herde in the .xxiii. yere, caused the walshemen to rebell and was drawyn and hanged at London. Anno domini .xii.C.cxvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.cxvii.   Thomas de Suff.   Syr Iohn̄ Bryton.   Anno .xxv.   Adam de Fullam.   IN thys .xxv. yere the kyng com¦maunded in dyuers shyres of Englande, great quantyte of whee to be gadered, & sent it into Gascoyne and Guyan, to the nombre of an. C.M. quarters after some writers / and soone after sent thyder syr Edmunde hys brother erle of Lancastre, syr Hē¦ry Lacy erle of Lyncolne, & syr wyl∣lyam Ueysy barō, with diuers other lordes & knyghtes, to strength suche people as he there had redy, whyle he prepared an other army to haue a¦gaynst the scottes. ye haue herde in the precedynge chapytre, howe syr Iohan Bayloll kyng of scottes made othe & homage vnto kyng Edwarde for ye kyngdom of Scotlande. Of the whych othe he shortly repēted hym after, by meane of coūsayll of the abbot of Menros as sayth Polycronycō. All be it that it shuld seme to be as wel by the coū∣sayll of the kyng of Fraūce, by wor∣des that ben wrytten in the frenche cronycle. But how so it was by one or by both / full vntrewly he forsoke hys former othe & promyse, & arrered warre agayne the kynge. wherfore kyng Edward sped hym thyder with a great hoost / & in processe layde hys syege vnto the towne of Berwyk. But the scottes defēded it egerly, & bete the Englysshe men backe, and brent some of the Englyssh shyppes. wyth the whyche enterpryse they were so enflamyd wyth pryde, that in derisiō of the kyng, they made this mokkysshe ryme folowyng. ¶what wenys kyng Edwarde with hys longe shankys, To haue wonne Berwyke / all oure vnthankys. Gaas pykes hym And whan he hath it Gaas dykys hym. WHan kynge Edwarde herde of ye pryde of the scottes, and knewe of theyr scornefull ryme / he was somdeale amoued / & encouraged his knyghtes in suche wyse, that they wanne the dyche of the towne / & after in processe with greate laboure and daunger, the Bulwerkes / so that they came vnto the gates, and made there so stronge assawte, that in the ende they wanne the towne, & slewe of the scottes as wytnesseth dyuers wryters ouer the nombre of .xxv.M. and tooke prysoners syr wyllyam Douglas, syr Symon de Freysell, the erle Patryk, & syr Robert Bruze, wyth dyuers other / and in shorte tyme after the wardeyn of the castell of Berwyke seynge that to hym was sent no socoure / yelded vp the sayd castell by appoyntement. And whā the kyng had possession of the towne and castell of Berwyke / he than strengthed theym wyth Englysshe men. And after wanne the holdes of Tyndall of Exham, of wyerbyrd, and of Lamerstoke, wyth dyuers other. And whyle yt kyng Edwarde was thus besyed about the wynnyng of these forsayd holdes / he sēt syr Hugh
Spencer. with syr Hugh Percy and other noble men, with a parte of his host, to laye siege vnto Dunbarre. where whē they had layne a certayne of tyme, an host of Scottes came thy¦der to remoue the syege, with whome the Englysshe men had a fyers / and cruel batayle. But in ye ende by helpe of god and saynt George, the En∣glysshe mē had the vyctorye / & slewe of the Scottes aboue the nombre of .xx.M, and lost of the Englysshe com¦pany a very fewe in nombre. wher∣fore the Englysshe mē in reproche of the Scottes, made this ryme folow∣ynge. These scaterande Scottes Holde we for sottes Of wrenches vnware Erly in a mornynge In an euyll tymynge Came they to Dunbarre. ANd after this vyctorye, the towne & castell of Dunbarre was wonne / in the whiche were takē prysoners thre erles, vii. barons, and xxvii. knyghtes, with dyuers men of the churche. Than the kynge spedde hym to Edenborow, and in processe of tyme wanne the towne with the castell. In the whiche were founde ye regalyes of Scotlāde, yt is to meane the crowne with the septre & clothe of astate / the whiche after were offe∣red by kynge Edwarde at the shryne of saynt Edwarde vpon the morowe after the feast of saynt Botholfe, or ye xviii. day of Iunii, in the yere folow∣ynge. And when the kynge had thus subdued the Scottes, and set the coū¦tre in a rule / he retourned with many prysoners into Englāde. In whiche tyme and season the Englysshemen susteyned many harde shoures in Gascoyne & Gyan. Among ye whiche one is remembred in the Frenche cro¦nycle / sayenge that Edmunde duke or erle of Lancastre, dyed at Bayon. After whose dethe whyle the towne and other stronge holdes prepared them to withstande the Frenchemen Robert erle of Artoys, whiche a lytel tofore had encoūtred with syr Iohn̄, & had ben of hym ouerset, resembled his cōpany / and made hym an other skyrmysshe. In the whiche he slewe vpon an hundreth Englysshmē and Gascoynes, and toke prysoners the forenamed syr Iohan Seyn Iohan, syr wyllyam Mortymer, and other, to the nombre of .lxx, y• whiche were sente into Fraunce vnto dyuers pry∣sones. Anno dn̄i. xii.C.xcvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xcviii.   Iohn̄ de Stortforde.   Syr Iohn̄ Bryton.   Anno .xxvi.   wyllyam de Stortforde.   IN this .xxvi. yere / kynge Ed∣warde with a pusaunte armye in the moneth of August, toke shyp∣pynge at douer, & sayled into Flaun∣ders, to ayde and to helpe Guy than erle of Flaunders agayne ye Frenche kynge. The which at that tyme was sore warreyd of the Frenche kynge, in somoche that he hadde wonne the towne of Margquet and the countre theraboute. And for to put the sayde Guy vnto the more trouble / the sayd Frenche kynge caused Robert erle of Artoys to inuade the coūtre of Flaū∣dres toward Pycardy / & encountred with ye sayd Guy nere vnto a towne called Furnes. wher atwene ye said .ii. erles was foughtē a sharpe batal / so
that many men were slayne vpon bothe partyes. After whiche fyght the Erle of Flaunders spedde hym towarde Gaunt, where as kynde Ed¦warde than soiourned / & the erle of Artoys drewe hym towarde ye Frēche kynge, the whiche shortly after was receyued into the towne of Bruges. In whiche tyme and season whyle ye sayd .ii. kynges laye thus at eyther towne, a meane of peas was there treated of / so that fynally a peas was cōcluded atwene the .ii. kynges, and atwene the Frenche kynge and Guy erle of Flaūders, vnto the feest of all sayntes than next ensuenge. And frō that day, vnto the feast of all sayntes thā .ii. yeres folowyng. After whiche peas so stablysshed / kynge Edwarde departed from the towne of Gaunte & yode to Burdeaux. And ye Frenche kynge retourned into Fraunce. And prysoners were delyuered on bothe partyes. Frenche .In this tyme and season whyle kynge Edwarde was thus occupy∣ed in Flaūders / the Scottes by the entysement of the Frenche kynge, to the entent to cause kynge Edwarde to kepe his countre, & that he shulde nat ayde the erle of Flaunders, be∣ganne to make warre vpon the kyn∣ges soudyours, whiche ye kynge had lafte there in dyuers holdes. And al∣so entred vpon ye borders of Northū∣berlande, & made sharpe warre vpon the inhabytauntes of that countre. And for that syr Iohn̄ Bayloll theyr kynge, after some wryters, was at y• tyme prysoner in the towre of Lon∣don, or els voyded the coūtre for fere of the kynge of Englande: therfore the sayde Scottes made them a ca∣pytayne / the whiche was named wyl¦lyam waleys a man of vnknowen or lowe byrth, to whom they obeyed as vnto theyr kynge. Anone as ye kynge herde of the rebellyon of the Scot∣tes, which to hym was no great won¦der consyderynge theyr greate vn∣stedfastnesse / he wrote his letters vnto syr Hēry Persy erle of Northū∣berlande, to syr wyllyam Latymer, and to syr Hugh Cressyngham than tresourer of Englande, and to other, that they in all goodly haste shulde make prouysyon to withstande the Scottes. The whiche persones after receyte of the kynges letters, spedde them all in spedy maner / so that they entred Scotlande shortly after, and cōpelled ye Scottes to returne backe vnto a towne named Streuelyn, where ī a skyrmyssh foughtē atwene the Englysshe and the Scottes, syr Hugh Cressyngham forenamed with dyuers Englysshemen was slayne. But yet the Scottes were holden so strayte of the Englysshe hoost, that after that skyrmysshe they wolde nat of a certayne tyme come in playne felde, but kepte theym within theyr castelles and strōge holdes. And this yere atwene Easter and wytsontyde certayne {per}sones of Londō brake vp the tunne in the warde of Cornhyll, and toke out certayne persones that thyder were commytted by syr Iohn̄ Bryton, then custos or gardeyn of the cytie, for nyght walkynge. For y• whiche ryot, the sayde persones, that is to meane Thomas Romayne and viii. other, were afterwarde greuous¦ly punysshed / as fyrst by prysonmēt, and after by fynes. And this yere the kynge in ye moneth of October came into Englāde, and so to wynchester / where the cytezyns of London made suche laboure vnto his grace, that shortly after they opteyned graunte of theyr lyberties and fraunchyses, that had in some parte be kepte from them by ye terme of .xii. yeres & more. So that vpon the daye of the trans∣lacyon of saynt Edwarde kynge and confessour next folowyng, they chase
them a mayre of them selfe / where by all the foresayd tyme theyr custos or gardeyn was appoynted by ye kyng, or by suche as ye kyng wold assygne. But ye shall vnderstande that this was not redemed without great sum¦mes of money. For after some wry∣ters the cytezyns payde for it to the kynge .iii M. marke. Also this yere kyng Edwarde put out of his proteccyon certayne Aly∣auntes, whiche were rychely benefy∣ced in England. The cause was for the sayd alyauntes wolde nat ayde ye kynge with theyr goodes, as ye other of his lande dyd / but purchased an inibicyon of pope Boniface the .viii, that they and theyr goodes shulde be fre from all the kynges dymes or taskys. Therfore ye kyng ceased theyr temporaltyes, and suffered thē with theyr spyritualtes tyl they were agre¦ed with the kynge. Anno domini .M.CC.xcviii.   Anno domini .M.CC.xcix.   Richarde Reffham.   Henry waleys.   Anno .xxvii.   Thomas Sely.   IN this .xxvi. yere after Chryst∣masse, certayne persones made a dyggyng and a serche in ye churche of saynt Martynes le graūde in Lō∣don, for certayne tresoure that there shulde be hydde, as it was reported of a gardiner. But theyr labour was in vayne, for nothynge was there founde. For the whiche dede ye deane of Poules the seconde sonday of lent folowynge, denounced all thē accur∣sed that were at that dede doynge, or consentynge to the same. In this yere aboute ye begynnyng of Aprell, the kynge rode towarde Scotlande / and appoynted his lor∣des with theyr companyes to mete with hym at yorke. where with hym met a great hoost, yt whiche he ladde into Scotlande, and brent and spoy¦led the countre as he went / and tary∣ed a season at Barwyke. And from thens he spedde hym in wynnynge of the townes and castelles as he went, tyll he came nere to a towne named Fawkyrk or Fankyrk. where vpon ye day of mary Magdaleyne, or ye .xxii. day of Iulii, met with hym ye power of Scotlande, and gaue vnto hym a sore fyght. But in the ende the vycto¦ry fyll vnto the Englysshmē / so that of the Scottes were slayne in ye felde as affyrme dyuers wryters, ouer the nombre of .xxxii.M. and of Englyssh¦men but barely .xxviii. persones. Af∣ter whiche scomfyture the Scottes yelded to the kynge the more partye of the stronge holdes & castelles, that they tofore had holden agayne hym, and made vnto hym newe othe and promysse, and yelded them selfe vnto his grace and mercy. And whan he had set that countre in an ordre and rule / he thā retourned into Englāde, and so to Lōdon. where by ye aduyce of some of his counsayll, he sodeynly dāpned certayn coynes of money cal¦led pollardes, crocardes, & rosaries / & caused thē to be broughte to newe coynage to his great aduaūtage. ye haue before herde in that other yere, how that a truce or a peas was stablysshed at wene the kynge and ye kynge of Fraunce, for the space of .ii. yeres and more / the whiche fynally was concluded this yere, that kynge Edwarde for a peas to be had by∣twene both regyons, shulde take vn∣to wyfe Margarete the suster of Phi¦lip le Beawe / then kynge of Fraūce.
The whyche Margarete whyle the kyng was in Scotlāde was brought vnto Douer, and so vnto Caunter∣bury / where the kyng spoused her in the moneth of Septembre as wyt∣nesseth the Frenche cronycle / and re∣ceyued of her in processe of tyme folo¦wyng two sonnes named Thomas and Edmunde, and a doughter na∣med Margarete. The fyrste of the sonnes was surnamed Thomas of Brothertō, and the seconde Edmūde wodestoke. Anno domini .M.CC.xcix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.   Iohn̄ Armenter.   Elys Russell.   Anno .xxviii.   Henry Fryngeryth.   IN thys .xxviii. yere / the kynge herynge of the vntrowth and rebellyon of the scottes, made the .iii. vyage into Scotlāde / and bare hym so knyghtly, that in shorte processe after hys commynge he subdued the more parte of the lande. And after he sped hym vnto the castell of Estryue¦lyn, wherin were many of the greate lordes of Scotlande / and enuyro∣ned the sayd castel with a strōg siege. But he laye there somwhat oftyme without wynnynge of any great ad∣uauntage, or hurte doynge vnto the scottes. wherfore of polycy he caused to be made .ii. payre of galowes in ye syght of the castell / and after cōmaū∣ded proclamacyons to be cryed, that yf the scottes by a certayn day wolde yelde that castell to the kynge, they shuld haue lyfe & lym̄e. And yf nat, but that he wanne it by strength / as many as were within the sayd castel, shuld be hāged vpon those gybettes, none astate nor persone to be excep∣ted. In processe of tyme whan ye scot¦tes had well dygestyd thys proclama¦cyon, and sawe the strength of theyr enemyes, & cōsydered theyr owne fe∣blenes & lak of socoure / they assented fynally to yelde theym & theyr castell vnto the kyng / whyche shortly after was done. wherof kyng Edwarde be¦yng possessed, stuffed it with Englissh knyghtes / & after toke a newe othe of the lordes and capytaynes the whyche he founde closed within that castell, of trewe & feythfull allegeaū∣ce / & after sufferyd them to go where theym lyked. And whan wyllyam walys, whych as before is sayd pretended the rule & gouernaunce of Scotlande, harde tell that the stronge castell of Estry∣uelyne was yelden vnto kynge Ed∣warde / & that lordes and knyghtes therin founden in whyche he moche affyed, were sworne to the kynges al¦legeaunce: he feryd sore leste ye sayd company wolde betray hym, & bring hym vnto ye kyng. wherfore he with hys adherentes withdrewe hym into the mareyses & other daūgerous pla¦ces, where he thoughte he was in suertye for pursuynge of the kynges hooste. Then the poore commons of the lande presented theym by great com¦panyes, and put theym holy in the kynges grace & mercy / so that the kynge thought then that he was in peasyble possessyon, or in a greate suertye of the lande. wherfore after he had caused to be sworn vnto hym the rulers of dyuers borughes cy∣tyes, & townes, with other offycers of the lande / he retourned vnto Ber¦wyke, & so into Englande, and lastly vnto westmynster. In thys tyme & season that ye kyng
was thus occupyed aboute his war∣res in Scotlande / the quene was cō∣ueyed vnto London. Agayne whom the cytezyns vpon the nombre of .vi.C. rode ī one lyuerey of rede & whyte, with the conysaunce of dyuers my∣steryes brodered vpon theyr sleues, and receyued her .iiii. myles without the cytie / & so conueyed her thorugh y• cytie, whiche then was garnysshed and behanged with tapettes & arras and other clothes of sylke and ryches in most goodly wyse, vnto westmyn∣ster, and there lodged. whan the kynge this yere re∣tourned out of Scotlande / he caused shortly after an Inqui∣ciō de Troyl¦basion. inquysycyon to be made thorugh his lande / the whiche after was named Troilbaston̄. This was made vpon al offycers, as may∣res, shyreffes, baylyffes, excheters, & many other that had mysborne them in theyr sayd offyces, and had extor∣cioned or mystreated ye kynges lyege people otherwyse than was accor∣dynge with the good ordre of theyr sayd offyces. By meane of whiche in∣quisicyon many were accused, and redemed theyr offyces by greuous fynes, to the kynges great lucre and auauntage. Other meanes were foū∣dē, also, as forfaites again ye crowne / the whiche broughte great summes of money to the kynges cofers, to∣warde the great charge of his war∣res yt he susteyned in wales, Fraūce, and Scotlande, as before is shewed. this yere also the kynge for cōplaynt that was brought vnto hym by may¦ster walter Langton bysshop of Che∣ster, of syr Edwarde his eldest sone, for that he with Pyers of Gaueston̄ and other insolent persones had bro∣ken the sayde parke of the sayde bys∣shop, & ryottously destroyed ye game within it: he therfore inprysoned the sayd syr Edwarde his son̄e with his complyces. And in processe of tyme after, when the kynge was thorugh∣ly enformed of ye lassiuyous & wantō disposiciōs of the sayd Pyers of Ga∣ueston̄ / for that he shulde nat enduce the forenamed syr Edwarde to be of lyke dysposycyon: he therfore banys∣shed the sayd Pyer of Gaueston̄ out of Englande for euer. But after the dethe of kynge Edwarde ye banyssh∣mente was soone denulled by Ed∣ward his sone / wherof ensued moche harme and trouble, as after shalbe shewed. Anno domini .M.CCC.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCi.   Luke Hauerynge.   Elys Russell.   Anno .xxix.   Rycharde Champeis.   IN this .xxix. yere of kynge Ed∣warde / dyed Edmunde erle of Cornewayle, the sonne of Rycharde somtyme erle of the sayd coūtre and kynge of Almayne, without yssue. wherfore that erledome retourned agayne to the crowne of Englande. And in this yere the kynge gaue vnto syr Edwarde his sone the pryn∣cypate of wales / and ioyned there vn¦to the sayd erledome of Cornewayle. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.i.   Anno dn̄i. M.iii.C.ii.   Robert Caller.   Iohn̄ Blount.   Anno .xxx.   Peter Bosham.  
IN thys .xxx. yere / the kyng hel¦de hys greate counsayll of par¦lyamente at hys cytye of Caunter∣bury. Anno domini .M.CCC.ii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.iii.   Hugh Pourt.   Iohn̄ Blount.   Anno .xxxi.   Symon Parys.   Anno domini .xiii.C.iii.   Anno domini .xiii.C.iiii.   wyllam Combmartyn.   Iohn̄ Blount.   Anno .xxxii.   Iohn̄ de Burfforde.   Anno domini .M.CCC.iiii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.v.   Rogyer Parys.   Iohn̄ Blount.   Anno .xxxiii.   Iohn̄ Lyncoln̄.   IN this .xxxiii. yere / wyllyā wa¦leys that vnto the kyng hadde done so many dyspleasures and trea¦sons, agayne the trouth and allege∣aunce of hys othe, as some deale be∣fore is shewed / was takē at the town named saint Domynyk in Scotlād, and sent vnto London, and there ar∣raygnyd / and vpon the euyn of saynt Bartylmewe, drawen, hanged, and quartered / and hys hedde set vppon London brydge, and hys .iiii. quar∣ters sent into Scotlande, & there hā¦ged vpon the gates of certayne tow∣nes of the lāde. And at Myghelmas folowynge, the kynge holdynge hys parlyament at westmynster / thyder came out of Scotlande the bysshop of saint Andrewes, Robert le Bruze, syr Symon de Frysell erle of Dun∣barre, syr Iohn̄ of Cambrees erle of Atles, and syr Iohn̄ Comyn with o∣ther / the whyce voluntarylye were sworne in presence of the kynge and hys lordes, that they shuld be trewe vnto the kynge of Englande, & kepe the lande of Scotlande to hys vse a∣gayne all other persones. And yf any rebell or other malycyous persone di¦stourbed the lāde, or breke ye kynges peas / they shulde cause hym to be ta¦ken, and sent vnto the kynge / wyth many other articles cōcernyng theyr allegeaunce, the whyche full falsely they brake and contraryed shortely after. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.v.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.vi.   Raynold Doderell.   Iohn̄ Blount.   Anno .xxxiiii.   wyllyam Cansyn.   IN thys .xxxiiii. yere / Robert le Bruze contrary hys othe to kynge Edwarde before made, assem∣bled the lordes of Scotlande / and by the coūsayll of thabbot of Stone and other that fauoured hys vntrouthe, he sent vnto the pope than Clement the .v, for a dyspensacyō of hys othe before made vnto kynge Edwarde / and surmysed to hym that kyng Ed∣warde vexed and greuyd the realme of Scotlande wrongfully, whereupō
the pope wrote vnto kyng Edwarde to leue of suche doynges. And whyle thys matter was thus complayned on vnto the pope / ye sayd Robert le Bruze made all the labour he myght vnto ye lordes of Scotlāde that he were admytted for kyng of ye regyon / so that vpon the daye of the concepcyon of our Lady, or the .viii. day of Decembre, a great assemble of the lordes was made at the abbey of Stone. And vpō the day folowyng, by the meanes of the abbot of yt place many of the sayd lordes assented to ye wyl of the sayd Robert, except syr Io¦han Comyn onely. The whych in de∣fence of hys trouthe and othe before sworne vnto kyng Edwarde, many reasons & excuses made / and fynally sayd that he wolde nat false hys othe for no man. For thys the sayd syr Io¦han Comyn had great maugre of syr Robert le Bruze, & many of ye nobles of Scotlande. But he helde hys op∣pynyon so fermely, that other began to take hys parte / that in that coun∣sayll rose suche contrariete of opy∣nyons and reasons, that the sayd coū¦sayll was dyssolued, and a newe sette at the graye freers of Dunfrize after Candelmas next ensuyng. At whych daye of assemble whenne the cause of theyr meting was by Robert le Bruze denoūced and shewed / & many of the great lordes of the land had graūted to hym theyr aydes & assistence: the forenamed syr Iohn̄ Comyn & other sat styll and sayd no worde. whyche Robert le Bruze marked well, and to hym sayd: And you syr Iohn̄ I trust for defence and weale of thys realme ye wyll nat be behynde. wherunto he answered, syr I wolde that ye and al my lordes here present knowe well, that for the weale and defence in the ryght of thys lande, I wolde stande with it to the vttermost of my power. But for I se that ye entēde rather the subuercyon than the weale therof / I wyll therfore ye know, I shal nother ayde you with counsayll nor yet with strength.Shamfull minder. Some other also there were whose names the auctoure myndeth nat, whyche allowed the sayenge of the sayde syr Iohn̄ / and in some wor∣des admytted hys sadde and trewe answere. For the whyche Roberte le Bruze was so amoued, that when syr Iohn̄ Comyn with syr Rogyer hys brother was departed from the coun¦sayll, and was comyn into the chyrch of the freers / Robert le Bruze hym fo¦lowyd and wounded to the deth with his swerde / and after slew syr Rogier hys brother, whyche wolde haue de∣fended the foresayde syr Iohn̄. After whose deth lytell or no resystēce was made agayne the vntrewe meane & dedes of the sayd. Robert le Bruze / so that he at saynte Iohn̄s towne was crowned kynge shortly after. It was nat longe after that kyng Edwarde was monysshed of all this vntrouth of the scottes / wherfore he prepared hym to wende thyder. And at Penthecoste he helde a great feaste of hys barony at westmyster / & du∣rynge that feast made a greate nōbre of knyghtes ouer .CC. after mooste wryters. And that feast ended / he sēt with a fayre company of knyghtes syr Aymer de Ualaunce erle of Pen∣broke, and syr Henry Percy erle of Northumberlande into Scotlāde / & sped hym selfe wyth hys hoost soone after. Than about the feast of the assūp¦cyon of our Lady / the kyng faughte with the sayd Robert le Bruze and al the power of Scotlande,Victory a∣gaynste the Scottes. in a playne nere vnto saynt Iohn̄s towne. And after lōge fyght and great slaughter of the scottes to ye nombre of .vii.M, he chased the scottes. In whyche cha¦se syr Symon de Fryseyll erle of Dū∣barre was takē, with also the bishop¦pes
of saint Adrews and of Bastoon, the abbot of Stoon or Scoon, & syr Iohn̄ Chambres erle of Atles. which bysshoppes and abbot kyng Edward sent after vnto innocēt the .v. thā po∣pe,Byshoppes periured. with reporte of theyr {per}iury, & how they were taken armed in the felde to shede the blode of cristē men. And ye tē¦porall lordes he sent into Englāde, & so vnto the towre of Londō. And Ro¦bert le Bruze after thys scomfyture & losse of hys chyef frēdes, feryng lest ye scottes with suche Englysshmen as kyng Edward laft there wolde aryse agayne hym / all comfortles fledde vnto the kynge of Norwaye, & there abode duryng whyle kyng Edwarde lyued. whan thys noble prynce Edward had thus subdued ye scottes / he yel∣ded thankes to god of hys vyctorye. And whē he was ascertayned of the auoydyng of Robert le Bruze, & had set ye lāde in a quiet & ordre / he retour¦ned into Englande. In thys passetyme were ye forena∣med lordes of Scotlāde areygned at Londō / & vpō the euyn of the Naty∣uyte of our Lady put to deth, & theyr heddes after set vpō Londō brydge. And shortly after was Iohn̄ waleys brother vnto wyllyā waleys (whych for lyke treason was put to deth in ye preceding yere) taken & hāged & quar¦teryd. And some scottes that were ta∣ken as prysoners, remayned lōge in Englāde or they myght acquite theyr fynaunce. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.vi.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.vii.   Symon Bolet.   Iohn̄ Blount.   Anno .xxxv.   Godfrey de la Conduyt.   IN thys .xxxv. yere ye kynge for certayne causes hym mouyng, retourned agayne into Scotlande. Or after some wryters he taryed at Berwyke, & helde hys Crystmasse & Easter in those partyes / & came nat into Englāde after he had scōfyted ye scottes. In the season of somer as he was retournyng into Englāde / a sy¦kenes toke hym so feruētly, ye he knew wele he shuld dye. wherfore he beyng at Burgthe vpō the sande beyonde Carleyll / called to hym syr Aymer de Ualance erle of Pēbroke, syr Henry Percy erle of Northūberlande, syr Hē¦ry Lacy erle of Lyncoln̄, & syr Robert Clyfforde barō / & caused them to be∣sworne before hym, yt they shuld crow¦ne hys sonne Edwarde in as conue∣nyent tyme after hys dethe as they myght / and kepe the lande to hys vse tyll he were crowned. And that othe by the sayd barons takē / he called before hym hys sonne Edwarde, and charged hym with dy¦uers poyntes vpon the charge of his blessynge. Amonge the whyche one specyall was, yt he shuld neuer after that daye suffre Pyers of Gaueston to retourne into Englande / & so lyke a good crysten prynce dyed shortly af¦ter, vpon the day of the translaciō of saynt Thomas of Caunterbury, or ye vii. day of the moneth of Iulii / whan he had reygned .xxxiiii. yeres, vii. mo∣neths & odde days / & after with great solēpnite cōueyed vnto westmynster, & there buryed in ye chapell of saīt Ed¦warde vpō the southsyde, in a playne tombe of marble at the hed of hys fa∣ther. This noble mā had .ii. wyfes / by the whych as before is shewed in the xx. & .xxvii. yeres of his reygne, he had issue as in the sayd yeres appereth. Of thys noble prīce a vercifyer made these .ii. verses folowynge.
Dū viuit rex, & valuit sua magna potestas, Fraus latuit, pax magna fuit, regnauit honestas. whych verses maye be englysshed in thys maner folowynge. ¶whyle lyued thys kyng / By hys power all thynge was in good plyght. For gyle was hydde, Great peace was kydde, And honeste had myghte. An other vercifyer also of him made these verses folowynge / and cau∣sed them to be hanged ouer the place of hys sepulture. Mors est mesta nimis, magnos quia iungit in imis. Maxima mors minimis, cōiungēs vltima primis. Nullus in orbe fuit homo viuens, ne valet esse, Qui non morte ruit, est hinc exit necesse. Nobilis & fortis, tibi tu confidere noli. Omnia sunt mortis, sibi subdit singula soli. De mundi medio, magnum mors impia nouit. Anglia pre tedio satis anxïa plangere nouit. Corruit Edwardus vario veneratus honore, Rex nuper & nardus fragans virtutis odore, Corde leopardus, inuictus & abs{que} pauore, Ad rixam tardus, discretus & eucharis ore, Viribus armorum quasi gigas, ardua gessit Colla superborum prudens per prelia pressit, Inter Flandrenses fortuna sibi bene fauit, Vt quo{que} Wallenses, & scotos subpeditauit. Rex bonus abs{que} pare, strenue sua regna regebat, Quod natura dare potuit bonitatis habebat, Actio iusticiae, pax regni, sanctio legis, Et fuga nequicie, premunt preconia regis. Gloria tota ruit, regem capit haec modo fossa. Rex quando{que} fuit, nunc nil nisi puluis & ossa. Pilius ipse dei, quem corde colebat et ore, Gaudia donet ei, nullo permixto dolore. The whych verses, to the entent yt they shuld be had in mynde, & also yt the reder myght haue ye more desyre to ouer rede thē / I haue therfore set them out in baladde royall, after my rude makynge as foloweth. This sorowfull deth whiche bryngeth great full lowe, And mooste & leest he ioyneth into one / Thys man to whome hys pere was nat knowe, Hath now subdued / nat sparyng hym alone, whyche of all other thys worlde to ouergone, None was to be spared / of so great equytie As he, if any, for noblesse spared shuld be. Therfore thou noble or myghty, truste none other grace, But thou shalt pay to deth thy naturall dette And lyke as he from thys worlde dyd chace Thys myghty prynce, & from his frendes fette, For whome all Englande loude mourned and grette: So shalt thou & other in dethes snare fall None shall escape, to rekyn kyndes all Edwarde with many & dyuers graces endowed / And lyke as Nardus moost swetest of odoure, In smellynge passeth, and moost he is allowed, Of all swete odours / so dyd thys knyghtly floure, By vertuous actes surmount in honoure, All other princes / whose herte was lybarde lyke, And without fere, were he hole or syke. This prynce was slowe to all maner of stryfe, Discrete, & wyse, and trewe of hys worde, In armys a geaunt / terme of all hys lyfe Excellyng actes doyng by dynt of the sworde, Subduyd the proude, of prudence he bare the horde, Of Flaunders by fate he had great amyte And Walshe, and Scottes, by strength subdued he Thys good kyng perelesse, hys landes fermly gyded. what nature myght gyue, he fayled it nothynge / No parte of bounte frō hys was discided / He was iustice and peace, & of law stablysshynge, And chaser of iniquyte by hys vertuous lyuyng, In whome these graces with innumerable mo, Fermly were roted, that deth hath tane vs fro. That whylom was a kyng, now is but duste & bone. All glorie is fallen, & thys pytte kepeth the kynge. But he that yeldeth all thyng by hys one, The sonne of god, to whome aboue all thynge with herte and mouth he dyd due worshyppyng / That lorde of hys ioy perdurable to laste, Graunt hym sorowlesse euermore to taste.
PHylyp the .iiii. of that name & sonne of the thyrde Phy¦lyp, whyche was surnamed Philyp¦le Beawe or Phy∣lyp the fayre / begā hys reygne ouer ye realme of Fraunce, in the yere of gra¦ce .M.CC.lxxxvi, & the .viii. yere of ye fyrste Edwarde thā kyng of Englād. Thys for warre that he had with the duke of Gelderlande / arreryd greate imposycyons thorugh hys lāde, both of the spyrytualtye and also of the tē¦poraltye. About the .iiii. yere. of hys reygne / the prynce of Salerne, that long had ben holden in pryson by the kynge of Aragon, was delyuered vpon a hard condycyon as foloweth, fyrst that he shuld to the vttermoost of hys power labour a concorde and peas betwene the chyrch of Rome and the Aragōs / & that done to set a peas betwene the Frenche kyng & hym. And ouer that to paye in the ende of .xv. monethes nexte ensuynge, an .C.M. Floryns for hys raunsome. A Floryn is in va¦lue after sterlyng money .ii.s.x.d, & so he shuld pay after ye value of englis¦she money .xvii.M. & .v.C.li. And y• after that day he shuld neuer bere ar¦mys agayne the kyng of Aragō. And yf within the terme of .iii. yeres nexte ensuyng, he myght nat conclude the foresayd peas / she shuld then retourn and yelde hym selfe prysoner as he before was. All whyche couenauntes fermely to be holden, he fyrst made so¦lempne othe / & after delyuered to the kynge certayne hostages and so de∣parted. But thys composycyon or agre∣ment was thoughte so vnresonable vnto hys frendes, that he was coun∣sayled by them that he shuld sue vnto the pope for a dyspensacyon of hys othe / & y• had, they wolde helpe hym to recouer hys foresayd hostages. Af¦ter whose coūsayl he y• yere folowyng made suche labour vnto Honorius ye iiii. of ye name thā pope, that he alone¦ly opteyned nat soluciō of hys othe, but also by hī he was declared kyng of Scicill / & of pope Nycholas ye .iiii successoure of the foresayd Honorius after confermyd. Thys prynce of Sa¦lerne as ye before haue herde in ye sto¦rye of Phylyp the thyrde and .iii. and iiii. chapyters of the same, was sonne vnto Charles brother of saynte Lo∣wys & kyng of Scicill. And the fore∣named kynge of Aragō that hym vp¦pon the abouesayd cōdiciōs thus de∣lyuered, was sonne vnto Peter kyng of Aragō, whych as before in the sto∣rye of ye foresayd thyrd Philip, helde warre with hym & with ye sayd Char∣les. This prince of Salerne was also named Charles after the name of his father / the whych after hys admyssiō of ye pope, was crowned kyng of Sci¦cil in ye cytie of Palermo soone after / & defended the lāde knyghtly agayne the Aragōs, with helpe of the Frēche men by the terme of .v. yeres after. At whych termes ende Alphōs thā kyng of Aragō dyed / & Iaques or Iames, to whome the foresayd Alphons had be take the rule of Scicill, & held war¦re with the forenamed Charles, was as brother & next heyre vnto the crow¦ne of Aragō, admitted kynge of ye re∣gyon. After whych admissiō, he short¦ly after cōcluded a peas with ye sayde Charles / & redelyuered vnto hym all suche hostages & pledges as hys bro¦ther Alphōs had before tyme of hym receyued, for kepyng of the former cō¦uencions. And for a more stablysshe∣mēt of the same peas / ye sayd Iames toke to wyfe one of the doughters of the sayde Charles. About the .vi. yere of the reygne of this Philip / certayne sowdyours of
Fraunce to the nombre. of .xv. hon∣dreth, whyche were sent by the procu¦rement of pope Nycholas the fourth vnto Acrys, to fortifye that towne cō¦trary the truce betwene the crysten & the Sowdan before concluded for ye terme of .ii. yeres / brake oute of the towne and castelles adioynant, and spoyled and robbed suche Sarazyns as to that towne were dwelling nere and dyd vnto them all the sorowe & shame that they myght. wherof the Sowdan hauynge knowlege, was therwith greatly amoued. But yet or he wolde attēpte any warre agayn the crysten / he sent vnto the captayne of the cytye of Acone, & wylled hym to sende vnto hym suche persones as had broken the peace, and done that iniurye to hys people. And yf he it re¦fused, he sente them worde he shulde nat blynne tyll he had dystroyed thē / as lately before he had done the inha¦bytauntes of the cytye of Tryple. But they sette hys manace at nou∣ghte, for so moche as they thoughte them able to withstande hys malyce. Upon whyche answere, the Sowdan made great prouysyon to besiege the sayd cytye. In whyche passe tyme in Fraūce was borne of dame Iohāne or Iane than quene of Fraunce, Lowys the kynges eldest sonne, that after his fa¦ther was kyng of Fraunce. when the Sowdan had prepared all thyng necessary for that iournay / he sped hym wyth an innumerable multytude of Sarazyns towarde ye cytye of Acon or Acris. In whyche iournay he was taken with so gre∣uous sykenesse, that he knew well he shulde shortly dye. wherfore he cal∣lynge before hym hys admyralles / charged a certayne of theym to kepe forthe theyr iourney towarde Acon, whyle the remenaunt retourned into Egypt / & there to create hys sonne Sowdan. After whyche creacyon he charged them that they shulde cause hys sayde sonne to haste hym vnto ye sayd siege / & soone after dyed. Then all thynges was ordeyned as he before had deuysed / and ye cytie was besegyd with a stronge hoost of Sarazyns, the whyche assauted yt cruelly by the space of .vi. wekes. In whyche season the crysten defended it so manfully, that the Sarazyns myght therof gette none aduaūtage At the ende of thys .vi. wekes, came the yonge Sowdan wyth a fresshe hoost / the whyche made such a dynne and noyse wyth theyr tabours & hor¦nys and other mynstrelsy that they at those dayes vsed, that it was hy∣dous & ferefull to here. And after they had rested theym .ii. dayes, and prepared for the ryggynge of theyr ordenaunce / they assauted the cytye xiiii. dayes contynually. In whyche season moche people was slayne vpō bothe partyes / but the more nombre of the cytye. For by the vyolence of theyr ordenaunce they ouer threwe moche housynge within the cytye / where with moche people were op∣pressed and slayne aswell mā as wo∣man & chylde. At the ende of thys .xiiii. dayes, when the rulers of the cytye had seen the harme that they had receyued by thys fyers and cruell assaute / aswell in losse of theyr sowdyours, as of the great enpeyrynge of theyr wallys & other defences of theyr cytye / they fe¦ryd sore, for y• whych they of one assēt cōdyssēded & sent soone after by theyr shyppes, a great nōbre of olde men & womē & chyldren vnapt for ye warre, with ye reliques & treasours of ye cytie into Sicill. It was nat lōge after or ye Sarazyns made a newe assaute y• cōtinued .iiii. days / by meane wherof the cytye was sore defaced. Then the kyng of Cyprys, whych at y• day was
there as one of the chyef rulers in the cytye, fayned hym lyke. wherfore in ye nyght folowyng desyryng a knyght of the cytye to kepe hys watche / he co¦wardly & shamefully with .iiii.M. mē toke shipping & sayled thens / leuyng the cytye in all daunger. Uppon the morowe whan the certaynte of thys was knowē / the patryarke of Hieru∣salem with other there laft to the nō∣bre of .vii.M. or therupō, sent vnto ye Sowdā for a trewce for .ii. moneths But none they myghte purchase / & therfore they defendyd them in ye best maner they myght. But shortly after for lak of defēce vpon the wallys, the Sarazyns fylled the dykes / & so soon after upō the .xxv. day of May {per}force entred in the cytye, & slewe such peo∣ple therin as they there foūde. Than the Sowdan gaue the pray of ye cytie vnto hys knyghtes / & after spoylyng of the same, caused the wallys & tou∣res to be rased vnto the groūde / & the houses, aswell churches, temples, & all other, were clerely brēt & distroyed And thus was ye noble cytie of Acris, whych is also called Tholomayda, subuerted / the whyche was the chyef porte or hauyn towne for crystē mē to lande at, when any hoste or power of them shuld entre into the holy lāde / & had cōtynued for the more partye in the possessiō of cristē mē, by the terme of .C.lx. yeres and aboue. IN the .vii. yere of thys kynge Phylyp / the erle of Armenake was accused of certayne poyntes of treason, by syr Raymonde Barnade erle of Foyz. where vpon, a day of ba¦tayll betwene these .ii. erles was ap∣poynted to be foughten at Gysours, in the kynges presence and of hys ba¦rony. But after by the great instaūce & laboure made by syr Robert erle of Artoys, ye batayll was fordone. In the .vii. yere of hys reygne, he gadered a great talke of his cōmōs. And in the yere foresayde, at a feaste holden at Cōpeyne, he made aboue vi. score knyghtes. And in the .x. yere / ye glorious con∣fessoure saynt Lowys, grandfather vnto this Philip, was the day folow¦ynge saynt Bartylmew the apostle, translated into a ryche shryne in the monastery of saynt Denys / ye whych the yere before of Bonyface the .viii. thā pope, for hys great myracles was wrytten in the Cathologe or nombre of sayntes. In the .xi. yere of hys reygne / syr Robert of Artoys entred the towne of saynt Omers, & toke therin many Burgonions & other as prysoners / & soone after mette wyth Guy duke of Burgoyne at a towne called Furnes where betwene theym was foughten a stronge fyghte, and many men slayne vppon eyther syde. But lastly the victorye fyll to syr Robert of Ar∣toys / so that he put the duke to flight & toke there prysoners Henry erle of Dabencourt, & syr Guyllyam de Uyl¦lers, & other. After whyche vyctorye by hym thus opteyned / ye sayd towne of Furnes was yolden vnto hym, & a greate parte of the vale of Cassyle. In thys yere also the warre be∣twene thys kynge Phylyp and Ed∣warde the fyrste than kynge of Eng∣lande, was put in vre, for so moche as the sayde Edwarde toke partye wyth the sayde duke or erle of Flaun¦dres / as it is at length sette out in the xxii.xxiiii.xxvi. yeres of the sayde Ed∣warde, wherefore here nowe I passe it over. In the .xiii. yere of thys Phylyp, whā the trewce before sette betwene kyng Edwarde & hym and the erle of Flaūdres was expired / he sēt syr Char¦les de Ualoys his brother with great power into Flaūdres, ye whych made sharpe warre vppon the Flemynges,
and toke from theym the townes of Douay and Bethune / & after yode towarde the hauē towne of Dam or Dan \ where he was encoūtred of Ro¦bert sonne vnto ye erle, where atwene them was foughten a cruell fyght, to the great scathe of bothe partyes / for eyther departed from other without great auaunte or bost. Thā the sayd Robert with his company drewe to∣warde Gaunt / and the sayd syr Char¦les after the departynge of the sayde Robert, layd hys syege vnto the fore¦sayd towne of Dāme. In this passe tyme the archebys∣shop of Orleaunce was slayne by a knyghte called syr Gautier / for so∣moch as the sayd bysshop, as ye fame than went, had dyfflorysshed a may∣den and doughter of ye sayd syr Gau∣tier. And for hym was chosen to that dygnyte mayster Barthrāde doctour of diuinyte. Than to retourne where we lafte of the foresayd warre of Flaundres / the sayd syr Charles so sharpely as∣sauted the towne of Dam, yt in short proces after it was yoldē vnto hym. And than he prepared hym to lay his syege aboute the forenamed towne of Gaunt. wherof whan Guy erle of Flaunders was ware, consyderynge he myght nat shortly be ayded of the kynge of Englande, whiche thā war¦red vpon the Scottes, as ī the .xxvii. yere of Edwarde the fyrst it doth ap∣pere / he than made meanes vnto the sayd syr Charles de Ualoys, that he woldc be a meane to the kynge, that he myght be accepted vnto his grace and mercy. So that by his meanes, the sayde syr Guy with Roberte his sonne, vpon certayne conuencyons in shorte tyme after was reconcyled vnto the Frenche kynge. But whyle these conuencyōs were perfourmed / the sayde erle with his sonne Robert were kepte in a lyberall pryson. And the countye of Flaundres by the as∣sygment af the kynge, for the whyle was commytted vnto the rule of Ia∣ques de saynt Paule knyghte. The whiche entreated ye cōmunes of that lāde sternly, & oppressed thē with im∣posycyons & taskes / in so moche yt in ye .xvi. yere of the kynge, a certayne of ye towne of Courtray in Flaundres after certayn skyrmysshes & loueday made, the cōmune people in a nyghte slewe ye foresayd syr Iaques, and as many Frēchmē as they myght fynde within the towne. After whiche mur∣der was knowen in Brugys and in other townes of Flaūdres / anone by yll coūsayll they also chased al suche Frēchemē as by ye foresayde Iaques were put in dyuers offyces within ye sayd townes / & made them strōge to make defence agayne ye Frēch kyng. wherof whā ye Frēche kynge was ascertayned / he sente thyder with a stronge companye, the erle of saynt Poule, the erle of Boleygne, syr Ro∣bert erle of Artoys, & Robert ye sonne of the erle of Cleremount, with dy∣uers other noble mē of Fraūce. The whiche sped thē towarde Brugys / & in ye playnes atwene Courtray and Brugys pyght there pauylyons and tentes. For they myght not come no nere vnto Brugys, for so moche as ye Flemynges had brokē ye brydge ouer the ryuer yt there rūneth / the whiche lastly nat without great slaughter of mē of both partyes was by ye Frēche mē reedified & made / so yt the Frēche hoste passed ye ryuer, & layde theyr or denauce nere to ye towne of Brugys. But the Flemynges had so garnys∣shed theyr towne with defence of sow¦dyours, that they fered the Frenche men lytell or nothynge. And of one thynge they bare theym the bolder, for soo moche as they hadde within the towne one of the sonnes of Guy theyr erle, the whiche before was
scaped from ye Frēche kynges prysō Thus the Frenchemen lyenge be∣fore the towne / many frayes and by∣kerynges were made atwene the Fle¦mynges and them, to theyr both pay∣nes. Lastly a day of batayll by ye pro∣uocacyon and dyspyteous wordes of the Frenchmē was appoynted to be holden atwene them, vpon the wed∣nysday beynge than the .vii. day of ye moneth of Iulii. At whiche daye the Flemynges beynge confessed and re∣conciled to god, as they shulde forth∣with haue de{per}ted out of this worlde / in sober wyse, groūdynge them vp∣on a ryghtfull and good quarel, that day to lyue and dye for the defence & ryght of theyr countre, yssued out of ye town in good ordre / beryng before them certayne relyques of sayntes, in the whiche they had great truste & allyance. Anone as the nobles of Fraunce behelde the countenaūce of theyr ene¦myes, dysdaynynge them as vylay∣nes & artyfycers / trustynge so moche in theyr strēgthes, that they thought shortly to ouer ryde theym, & bere thē downe with strēgthe of theyr horses / and without ordre ran with great ire vpon theyr enemyes, thynkynge to haue oppressed them at ye fyrst brōte. But the Flemynges with theyr ar∣balasters and theyr longe mareys py¦kes set aslope before them / wounded so theyr horses, that they lay tumbe∣lynge one in the others necke / so that they were the letters of the other whi¦che were on fote, that they myght not exercyse theyr feat of armes. And al∣so the shotte that was shotte on the Frenche partye dyd asmoche harme to those horse mē as it dyd vnto theyr enemyes. So that in shorte whyle ye felde was all spred with slayne hor∣ses and clene armed men. wherof syr Roberte Erle of Artoys beyng ware and seynge these noble speres thus slayne vpon the felde / auaūced hym with his company, and slewe & woū∣ded of the Fleminges great nombre, so yt they fledde before hym as shepe before the wolfe / & put further backe that hoost of Flemynges, than they by the fyrst metyng had auaūced thē self. And yfayde of Guy de Namour sone vnto the erle of Flaunders, had nat the soner been comyn vnto them / the sayde erle of Artoys had that day wonne the renowne of the felde. Thā the sayd Guy with a fresshe compa∣pany of Almaynes and other bolde sowdyours coragyously entred the felde, and bete downe ye Frenchemen egerly. Than was the medle newe begon, in so feruent wyse that men & horse fyll downe to the grounde won¦dersly thycke. And euer the erle of Ar¦toys where so euer he wente he slewe moche people before hym. But the Flemynges kept them so hole togy∣der, yt he myght neuer dysseuer them / and slewe of the nobles of Fraunce great plentye. whiche mortalite thus contynuynge, ye stremes of blode ran wonders to beholde. And alway the Frenche partye weked more & more. Lastly the erles of saynt Poule and of Boleyn, with Robert the sonne of this erle of Cleremounte, and other with the nombre of .ii.M. horsemen, seynge the rage and woodnes of the Flemynges, whiche so cruelly slewe and bet downe the Frenche men / set∣tynge a parte all honour and knyght hode, shamefully fled out of the feld / leuyng the erle of Artoys in ye myd∣del of his enemyes, whiche lyke vn∣to the lyon rampaunte contynued in one, sleynge & kyllynge the Flemyn∣ges without mercy or pyte. But the Flemynges lyke wood tygres were so enraged vpon the Frenchemen, ye they wolde neuer leue them, tyll they by pure force draue them into theyr tentes / where they slewe of theym a
a great multytude. In this batayll were slayne the foresayd erle of Artoys, Godfray de Braban nere kynnesman to the sayd erle & lorde of wyrson, Adam the erle of Dabenmale, Iohn̄ the sonne of ye erle of Henaut, Rauf de Neell cōsta∣ble of Fraunce, Guy his brother mar¦shal of the hoste, Renolde de Try, Es¦mer chamberlayne of Cancaruyle, Iaques ye sonne of Godfrey de Bra∣ban, Pyers Floot, & Iohan Bruillis maister of ye arbalasters knyghtes, & many mo mē of name to the nombre of .CC. and aboue / besyde esquyers and other men of lower degrees, as yomen, gromes, pages, to the nōbre of .xii.M. The whiche after this vyc∣torye the Flemynges dyspoyled, and suffred the caryns of them to lye in ye felde, that all wylde bestes & fowles myght them perysshe and deuoure. whan this yonge knyght syr Guy hadde thus opteyned vyctorye of the Frenchmen, he reioyced not a lytle / and soone therafter layde syege vnto the Ile or a castell soo named, and gat it also were it by trecheri or other wyse. Then the townes of Iper, of Gaunt, of Douaye, and diuers other of that countre, obeyed to hym / and cōdyscended and agreed to take par∣tye eyther of them with other agayne the Frenche kynge. Than kynge Phylyp herynge of the great dysconfyture of his men / made countenaunce of mournynge, and specyally for his true knyght the erle of Artoys. Kynge Phylyp then after for to reuenge the foresayd dysplea∣sure to hym doone by ye Flemynges / assembled by our lady day Assumpsi¦on next ensuynge, an excedynge nom¦bre of men of armes / entendynge to haue entred Flaundres, & vtterly to haue destroyed a great parte of that countre / & so drewe towarde his ene∣myes, so that he pyght ye tētes of his vanward within .ii. myles of his ene¦myes / and there lay to his excedynge charge, cōsiderynge the great multy¦tude of his hoost by all ye moneth of Septēbre. Of ye nōbre of this hoost I haue doubte to wryte. For mayster Gagwyn sayth, ye nōbre was so great yt it may nat be byleued / & yt sheweth wel by ye expressemēt of ye nōbre made by ye Frenche cronycle. For he saythe they were an hūdreth tyme an .C.M, & .xl. tymes .xl.M. By whiche sayeng somdele appereth, how ye Frenchmē cā make men soūge. But how it was for all this great & excedynge nōbre of Frēchmē / ye Flemynges laye styll vnhurte or assawted. And fynally vp on a great substancyall cause, as ye after shal here, this great hoste was dissolued or returned euery mā to his awne / & kynge Phylyp with smal ho¦nour into Fraūce / wherof ye Frēchmē sayth ye occasion or cause was thus. Kynge Edward of Englāde whi∣che vnto ye Flemynges bare great af¦feccion, cōsideryng ye great daunger they were in, and he at ye tyme myght nat thē ayde nor socour / of a pollicy cast in his mynde / & with an heuy or mornynge coūtenaūce,Aryght no∣table policy shewed vnto ye quene & syster vnto kyng Phylyp, ye he was very heuy & sorowfull for his brother & hers ye kyng of Fraūce. wherof, whē & wherfore she had fray∣ned the cause / he answered & sayde yt he had certayne knowlege yt at suche tyme as the Flemynges & he shulde mete in batayle that his lordes & cō∣pany shulde leaue hym amonge his enemyes / for he was solde vnto them before hande. wherof whan ye quene was thus ascertayned / anone in all possible hast she sent letters & messan¦gers vnto the Frenche kynge, coun∣faylynge hym to be well ware of that treason and daunger. To the whi∣che he gyuynge credence / shortely
after sente frome hym the sayd great company of people, and he with a cer¦tayne as aboue is sayd retourned īto Fraunce. After whyche departynge, the fle∣mynges were so bolde, y• forthe wyth they entred into Pycardy & the coun¦tre of Artoys, and spoyled & brent dy¦uers townes of the same. But in the yere folowyng as testyfyeth the sayd frēche cronicle / ye Flemynges of Bru¦ges were foughten with of Otthon than duke of Burgoyn, to whome by reason of maryage the Frenche kyng had gyuen the erledome of Artoys / & he of them slewe with the ayde of the Frenchemen .xv. thousande. In thys .xvii. yere about mydso∣somer / Phylyp an other sonne of the erle of Flaundres, whyche had by a certayn terme passed ben in the court of Charles de Ualoys, & by hym put in truste to receyue certayne summes of money in Scicill to ye vse of pope Bonyface the .viii, sodaynely depar∣ted / and with a stronge company of Almaynes came into Flaundres, to ayde & assiste his brother. whome the Flemynges or Brabanders receyued with great ioy / & by the comforte of hym inuaded the borders & landes of the Frenche kyng / & boldly assautyd the castell of saynt Omers. But for they there gat none aduauntage, but loste many of theyr men / they for∣soke that & yode vnto a towne belon¦gyng to the Frēche kyng called Tho¦rouan Moryne / the whyche in pro∣cesse they wanne and spoyled. About thys tyme dyed Bonyface the .viii. of that name than pope,Boniface the viii. pope a man of euyll name and fame / the whyche by hys trechery caused hys predecessour Ce¦lestyne the .v. that was a good & holy man, to resygne and leue his papacie And by thys meane, when thys sayd Celestyne had syttē in Peters chayre a short tyme / this Bonyface espyeng hys innocency, whyche was all sette to the seruice of god, as he before had vsed hym ī ledyng of an ankers lyfe, thoughte howe he myght bryng hym in mynde to resigne hys hyghe office to him. And it to bring about he fyrst made hym frendes secretely / & after hyred one of the cubyclers of ye pope, that he in the dede nyght shuld speke in a rede, and saye, Celestyne yf thou wylt be sauyd & be partyner of blysse renounce thys pōpe of the worlde, & serue me as thou before dyd. Or after the latyn storye, yf Celestynus wyl be sauyd / let hym clerely the papall dyg¦nyte resygne. whych voyce this ghost¦ly mā sundry tymes heryng, thought veryly it had ben a deuyne mocyon. wherfore in all that he myghte, he la∣boured to be dyscharged / so that at ye ende of .v. monethes he resigned. And shortly after was the foresayd Bony¦face admytted. The whyche nat be∣ynge contented with hys synystre op¦teynyng of thys hygh dygnyte, but ye he for fere lest ye sayd Celestyne shuld repent hym of hys insolent dede, and by strengthe of some prynces be resto¦red agayne to hys former dygnite / he therfore wolde nat suffre the sayd Ce¦lestine to retourne to wildernes there to contynewe hys olde accustomed lyfe, but helde hym in a castell as pry¦soner / where for sorowe and euyll ke¦pynge he dyed shortly after. For the whyche thys Bonyface was nat vnpunysshed. For over the sorow & trouble that he durynge the terme of hys papacy suffred, whyche was nat a lytell / in the ende of .viii. ye¦res he was taken by strēgth and put in pryson / where so miserably & cruel¦ly he was entreated, that or he dyed, what for madnesse or for hunger, he ete hys owne handes / & so in mysery ended hys lyfe within .xxiiii. dayes of hys inprysonement. Than to retourne where I laft, &
to shewe you ferther of the warre atwene Fraūce & Flaundres / trouth it is that the Frēche men with ye ayde of the Henaudours, made sondry & many tymes assautes vpon the Fle∣mynges. In the whiche dyuers chaū¦ces of ye warre fyll / so that yf that one had the better at one tyme, that other had as moche aduauntage the nexte tyme. For reformacyon of whiche warre / syr Guy with his son̄e before∣named erle of Flaundres, that by all this season had cōtynued in ye Frēche kynges pryson, were suffred to go in to Flaunders / vpon condycyon that yf they myght pacyfye the countre to the kynges pleasure, that then they shulde styll enioye theyr lyberte and go at large / or els to retourne againe as prysoners. The whiche erle with his sayd sonne dyd what they cowde to reconcyle the sayde Flemynges. But al theyr trauayle was in vayne / so that by y• day to them appoynted, they retourned to theyr former pry∣son. wherfore the kynge in the .xviii. yere of his reygne, assembled a mesu∣rable hoste of people. In the whiche were accompted for noble capytay∣nes vnder the kynge, syr Charles de Ualoys brother to the kyng, Lewys erle of Euroux that othe brother to ye kyng, Guy erle of saint Paule, Iohn̄ erle of Dampmartyn. whiche noble men with many other mette with the kyng at a towne called Mount. And whē they had a season rested there / by meane of messangers goyng atwene kynge Phylyp and the Flemynges, a day of batayll was atwene theym appoynted, to be foughten vppon the .xvi. daye of Auguste in ye aboue sayd .xviii. yere. At whiche day ye Fle∣mynges of Brugys and ye other tow¦nes set forthe theyr ordenaunce, and made them a stronge felde / and en∣batayled them in suche wyse, that the Frenchemen made daūgerous to set vpon them. Then meanes of treatye were offered / so that the daye passed without stroke strykynge. But in the euenynge / the Flemyn¦ges thynkynge to take auauntage vpon theyr enemyes, came so soden∣ly vpon the Frenchmen, that hardly the kynge myght be armed, or they had slayne two men within his tent. wherfore hasty spede was made, so that the kynge was goten to hors∣backe / and forthwith by his marcy∣all power made waye thorough his enemyes, and slewe theym without mercy. And by the knyghtly example of hym / the remenaunt of his lordes quytte theym so honorably, that the poore Flemynges were layde in the feld bathynge in theyr owne blode to a great nombre / and lastly cōstray¦ned to flee shamefully, and to leue theyr ordenaūce behynde them. And yf nyght hadde nat fallen on / it is to deme that many mo of theym shulde haue ben slayne / consyderynge the great fyersnesse of theyr enemyes, and the excedyng rancour of malyce that the Frenchmen to theym bare. But yet the Frenchemen escaped not without losse of some noble men. For in that batayll was slayne the erle of Ancerre, and dyuers other knyghtes and men of fame. After whiche scom∣fyture and chasynge of the Flemyn∣ges / the kynge for darknesse was set vnto his tentes with torche lyghte. where after he hadde buried the dede bodyes slayne in that felde, and also garnysshedde some stronge castelles with his knyghtes, to the ende that the Flemynges shulde nat breke to∣ferre abrode / knowynge that with his enemyes he shulde that yere haue no mo playne batayles, he retour∣ned agayne into Fraunce. IN ye .xix. yere of kyng Phylyp / by meanes of Enguerrā a mā
in especyall fauoure with the kynge, a peas betwene Fraunce and Flaun¦dres was concluded the whych as ye shal after here dured but short whyle Nat withstandynge by the reason of thys peas, Robert de Bethune and wyllyam hys brother / whyche by all thys seasō with theyr father syr Guy erle of Flaundres had contynued in pleasaunt or esy pryson, were now de¦lyuered. But the father was dede in the moneth of February before the cō¦clusyon of thys peas passed / & by licē¦ce of the French kyng caryed to Mar¦quet a town in Flaundres, and there buryed. In the .xx. yere of thys kyng Phil¦lip / a great dyssencyon & stryfe fylle betwene the ryche mē or gouernours of Parys, & ye comynaltie of the same for heythyng of ye rent of dyuers hou¦ses aparteynyg to ye sayd cominaltie. wherfore the sayd comons secretely accōpanyed them in greate nombre / and yode vnto the house of Stephan Barbet that was accused to be occa∣syoner of that dede, & spoyled it. And after that they yode to a maner of his in the counntre named Courtile Bar¦bet, and it in lykemaner spoyled / and that done set it in fyre, and brent it. And the orcharde of the same, whych was passynge commodious and plea¦saunt / they defaced and vtterly dy∣stroyed. And nat yet with thys beyng con¦tent / they retourned agayne vnto the house of the sayde Stephan / and all such wynes as were within hys sel∣lers, dranke of them tyll they were wood drunkē. And what they myght nat in that wyse deuoure / they bette out the heddes and let the wyne rōne in the strete. And all formys, stolys, & other vtensillis in the house, by them foundyn all to brake in peces / and of federbeddes rypped ye tykys, & helde theym in the wynde that the fethers myght be blowyn a way and lost for¦euer / and vnrypped the house in dy∣uers places, that the rayne and other wederyng myghte entre, as than fyll about ye tyme soone after Crystmas. And thus contynuyng in theyr fury and rage / after the dyspoylynge and defasyng of these foresayd houses, as men nat knowynge what they than dyd / yode streyght in greate nombre vnto the place of the templers there nere, where at that season kyng Phi∣lyp with a certayn of hys barōs was than lodged / & there kept the entrees of that place in suche wyse, that no man myghte yssue nor entre but at theyr pleasures / and suche metes as were brought thyder to the kynges vse and hys housholde, they cast it in the myre and fylth of the strete. The kyng and his lordes seynge the rage of thys rude and vnresonable people sent vnto them the prouost of ye cytie with some of hys lordes / the whyche gaue vnto them so pleasaunt & com∣fortable wordes, that at length he re∣tourned theym in peasyble maner to theyr houses. But vpon the morowe folowynge / the kyng nat forgettyng thys rage and ryot of the people, cō∣maunded many of the sayde comons to be attached, and to be sent vnto dy¦uers prysons. And vpon Candelmasse euyn folo¦wyng, for the same ryot .xxviii. of thē were hanged at .iiii. entrees of ye cytie of Parys / ye is to say .vii. at Louure, vii. towarde the partyes of saynt An¦toyne .vii. at a place toward the roule & other .vii. in a place towarde nostre Dame or notyr Dame. whych execu¦cyon caused the cominaltye of ye cytie to lyue longe after in great fere. In the .xxi. yere of the reygne of kyng Philip, whyche maketh the ye∣re of our lorde .xiii.C. and .vii. all be it that other wryters affyrmeth it to be in the yere of grace .xiii.C. and .xi.
all the templers in Fraunce were de¦stroyed, & theyr goodes & possessions thorugh crystendom gyuē (by aucto∣ryte of a synode kept by Clement the v. than pope at the cytye of Narbon in Fraunce) vnto ye relygyō of knygh¦tes of saynte Iohn̄ Baptyst. Thys ordre of templers was destroyed for theyr detestable heresy, whereof they were cōuyct in .x. artycles expressed in the frenche cronycle at length / which here I passe ouer for lengthe of the matter, & also for the rehersall therof is nat fruytefull to all herers or re∣ders In the .xxiii. yere of his reygn / this kyng Philippe, for asmoche as he by some of the electours of the Empyre was chosen Emperoure / he therfore with a great army sped hym toward Rome, and passed thorugh Almayne tyll he came vnto the duchye of Qua rantayne. Of whyche duchye the peo¦ple receyued hym with all honoure. And after he passed the mountaynes and so came vnto Padua / where also he was ioyously receyued where he tarienge a season, receyued from My layne ambassadours / the whyche of∣fered to hym that cytye with all coue¦nable seruyce. And after hys people was to hym more plenarli assembled be than departed from Padua & yode vnto Mylayne. whome the lordes of the cytye met vpon the waye, & con∣ueyed hym vnto the mayster paleys of the cytye, and there lodged hym / & within fewe days after brought hym with great solempnyte vnto the ca∣thedrall churche, and there crowned hym kyng of Lōbardy & called hym Augustus. Thā he departed from Mylayn, and spedde hym to the cytye of Cre∣moyne, & layd siege to the same. But it was to hym shortly yolde. Frō thēs he passed to ye cyte of Bresse, where he was holdē out a lōge whyle. Thyder to hys ayde came many soudyours of ye towne of Pyze / & made there ma¦ny sharpe assautes. In whych assau∣tes Guyde Namoure yt was marshal of the kynges hoost dyed, of hurtes yt he there toke. In pcesse of tyme short¦ly folowing, ye rulers of Bres offered meanes of treaty. But ye kyng was so amoued with ye dethe of hys mar∣shall, yt he wolde graūt to thē no cōdy¦cional peas / but to stāde at his grace & mercy. wherefore they fynally seyng no better meane, offered vnto hym ye keys of the cytye. Thā kyng Philip for othe before made, or for some other excellēcy / cau¦sed anone ye part of the towne dyche fore agayn hys pauiliō to be fylled / & & the walle of ye cytye, with as many houses as stode betwene the walle & the mayster palays of the cytye to be throwyn downe / yt he with hys hoost myght entre ye streyght waye, & so to go or ryde vnto the sayd palays. And whē all thyng was ordered to hys de¦uyse, he entred by ye way the cytye of Cremō, & therin taryed a certayn sea¦son / & toke hys counsayll with ye Ge∣bellynys, how he myghte the cytye of Rome wynne. And whā he had fynys shed ye coūsayl / he toke certayn hosta¦ges of thys cytye of Cremō, ye whych he set vnto Pyze to be kept / & so sped hym towarde Rome, & gettyng many cyties & other holdes by ye way / lastly he came vnto ye cytie named Bowlon la Grasse / whyther cam vnto hi a car dynall or legate sent frō pope Clemēt the .v, to treate of ye state of ye empyre. But how it was the cōtynuaūce or fyne of thys iournay tourned nat to the honour & pleasure of the Frēchmē For after the metyng of the kynge & thys legate, ye matter is no more tou∣ched. For the Frēch kyng was agayn in Fraūce, or the legate myght bryng vnto hym any answere frō the pope. Also it is the more suspect, for of this
matter speketh nothyng mayster Ro¦bert Gagwyne, whyche leueth no∣thynge out of hys boke ye may soūde to the auauncemēt of the French na∣cyon. In the .xxiiii. yere of the reygne of kyng Philip / was brent in dyuers places of Fraunce vpon .lx. templers for the heresy before rehersed. And in the yere folowynge, a new rebellyon began in Flaunders. Of the whyche Robert erle of Flaūders was accused / but he acquyt hym self, & after Guy hys sonne was attached for the same and sent to pryson. Fro the whych he after escaped, for fere of profe to haue ben iustyfyed agayne hym / & retourned vnto Gaunt, where he was defēded fro hys aduersaries / so that the Holanders & Brabāders helde theyr partye agaynst the Frēch kyng, & also agayne theyr owne erle / whych so contynued without any no¦tary batayll, tyll the .xxvi. yere of the reygne of kyng Philip. In the which yere, vpon the euyn of mary Mag∣daleyn at the towne of Courtray in Brabande / was by the bysshops and other spyrituall men of Fraunce and Flaundres a peace cōcluded. wherof the condycyons were, yt the Flemyn∣ges shuld haue pardō & forgyuenesse of all theyr former rebellyon, aswell agayne the kynge as theyr naturall duke. And for thys they shuld paye a certayne summe of syluer, wherof the summe is nat expressed / & ouer that they shulde at theyr proper costes & expenses, bete downe certayne strēg∣thes & holdes as the Frēche kynges depute wolde to them assygne / begyn¦nynge at Gaunt, & so to Bruges, & o∣ther places / & more ouer they shulde yelde vnto Robert theyr erle ye castell of Courtray, with all abylemētes of warre & other necessaries therūto be∣longyng. Al whych cōdicions to ob∣serue, they shuld deliuer vnto ye kyng of Fraūce good hostages. But al this came to small effect, as after shal ap∣pere. IN the .xxvii. yere of thys Phy∣lyp / Iacob the mayster of ye tē∣plers, with an other greate ruler of ye sayd ordre whych was named Uisy∣tour of the same, after longe pryson∣ment were brent at Parys. And in the same yere kynge Phy∣lyp arrered a taxe thorugh Fraunce, whyche before that dayes was neuer herde nor spoken of. Thys was so greuous, that al Normādy, Picardy & Champeygne, allied them togyder & vtterly denayde the paymēt therof. wherof heryng other countrees, toke the same opynyon / so that a greate rumour & murmour was reysed tho∣rugh out ye realme of Fraūce, in such wyse that the kyng for pacyfyeng of the people was fayne to repeale the sayd taxe. In the .xxviii. yere of the reygne of kyng Philip, in ye weke of Easter / the iii. wyfes of the .iii. sonnes of kynge Philip, that is to say Margarete the wyfe of Lowys hys eldest sonne and kyng of Nauerne, Iohanne or Ione the wyf of hys seconde sonne Philip erle of Poytyers, and Blaunche the wyfe of hys thyrde sonne Charles & erle of Marches, were accused of spouse brekyng / and sent frō a place of nunnes where they lay, and con∣ueyed vnto more streyghter kepyng / ye whych .iii. wyfes were al .iii. dough¦ters vnto the duke of Burgoyn. Thā vppon strayte examynacyon made, Margaret and Iohanne were gyl∣tye of that cryme foūd. wherfore they were sent vnto the castell of Gaylard in Normādy, there to be kept as pry∣soners terme of theyr lyues. And the forenamed Blanche, for so moche as she was foundē gyltles / was agayn restored vnto her lorde Charles erle of the Marches. And in shorte tyme after, the two
paramours of the sayd Margaret & Iohanne, that is to saye Philip Dā¦noy, and Gautyer Dānoy or waltier Dannoy knyghtes, men of fame and goodly personage & bretherne / at the kynges commaundement were fyrst brent in the vysage with hote irēs, & after drawē to the gybet at Pōtoyse & there hanged. whyche mysfortune the kynge toke so greuously, that he reioysed neuer after. About the feast of saynte Peter or the begynnyng of August / the kynge herynge of the rebellyon of the Fle∣mynges, by Engwerram hys mooste secrete coūsaylour made an assemble of the cytezyns of Parys / and by the mouth of the saynd Enguerram desy¦ted a subsydye of the sayd cytezeyns, to mayntayne hys warre agayne the Flemynges / the whyche by Stephā Barbet in the name of the hole cytye was graunted. By precidēce wherof, all the great cyties & good townes of Fraūce were charged in lyke maner / whyche caused greate vnkyndnes & grudge of the people towarde ye sayd Enguerram. Than prouysyon was made for a newe iourney into Flaun¦ders / so that the kynge sent hys twoo sonnes and many other nobles of his lande in the moneth of Septembre folowynge, into the sayd countre of Flaūders. The whyche made good spede, & layde fyrste theyr siege to the castel of the Ile and wanne it / & after that entred towarde other strōge hol¦des. But the flemynges put them of / and gaue vnto the Frenche hoost so sharpe assautes, that in processe they were constrayned to retourne into Fraunce wyth smal honoure. wherof the great defaute was layde vpō En¦guerram, and vpō one of the sonnes of the erle of Flaundres / whych lytel tofore by meanes of ye sayd Enguerrā was made erle of Neuers. In the mo¦neth of Nouembre folowyng / kynge Phylyp beyng at foūtayne Beliaunt in the prouynce of Gastenoys, was taken with suche sykenesse and dyed shortly after when he had reygned .xxviii. yeres and more / and hys body after caryed vnto saynt Dionise, and there buryed leuing after hym ye thre forenamed sonnes, Lowys, Philyp, & Charlys / & a doughter named Isa¦bell, whych before tyme was maryed vnto the seconde Edwarde thā kyng of Englande. Anglia. EDwarde the se∣conde of yt name & sōne of Edwar¦de the fyrst, born at Carnaruan in a towne of wa∣lys / beganne his reygne ouer En∣glande, in the moneth of Iulii & .viii. day of the sayd moneth, in the yere of our lord .xiii.C. & .vii / & the .xxi. yere of the .iiii. Phylip than kyng of Frau¦ce. The whych was crowned at west∣mynster the .xiiii. daye of Decembre, after the oppiniō of dyuers wryters. But Ranulph mōke of Chester in his boke of Policronicon sayth, yt he was crowned in the forsayd monastery of the bisshop of wynchester, the sonday in quinquagesima, whych is the .xiiii. day after the closyng of Alleluya / & of the bisshoppe of wynchester, for so moche as Robert than archebisshope of Caūterbury was than out of Eng¦lande. Thys Edwarde was fayre of body & great of strengthe but vnsted faste of maners, & vyle in cōdicions. For he wolde refuse the company of lordes & men of honour / & haūte hym with vylayns & vyle {per}sones. He also gaue hym to great drynkyng / & light¦ly he wolde dyscouer thīges of great coūsayl. with these & many other dis∣alowable condicions he was exercy∣sed / whych tourned hym to great dis∣honour, & hys lordes to great vnrest,
as by the sequele of thys hys story shall appere. Anone as hys father was buryed, and hys exequy scantly fynysshed / he forgettynge the hyghe & chargeable commaūdement of hys sayd father, sent in all haste for hys olde compere Pyers of Gaustone. The whych he receyued wyth all ioy & gladnesse, & auaunced hym to moche honour. And thus passed the season of ye olde mayre and shyreffes of London / so yt at the feastes of Myghelmas & Sy∣mon & Iude folowyng, ye olde mayre and shyreffes, that is to meane syr Io¦han Blount, Symon Bolet & God∣frey at the conduyt were dyscharged, and the newe as vnder foloweth ad∣mytted. Iuno domini .M.CCC.vii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.viii.   Nycholas Pygotte.   Syr Iohn̄ Blount.   Anno primo.   Myghell Drury.   IN thys begynnynge of thys mayres yere, and fyrst yere of ye kynge / the sayd kynge Edwarde in the moneth of Decembre sayled into Fraūce / and the .xv. day of Ianuarii folowynge, at Boleyn in Pycardy maryed Isabell the doughter of Phi¦lyp le Beaw than kyng of Fraunce / & soon after retourned with her into Englande, & so vnto London / where of the cytezeyns they were ioyously receyued, and so conueyed vnto west mynster / where as before is shewed vpon the sonday in quinquagesima they were bothe solemply crowned. At whyche coronacyon was so exce∣dynge prease, that a knyghte called syr Iohn̄ Bakwell was thrested to deth. Than the kynge gaue shortely after vnto Pyers of Gauestone the erledome of Cornewayl and the lord shyp of wallyngford, & was ruled all by hys wanton counsayll / & folowed the appetite and pleasure of his body nothynge orderynge by sadnesse nor yet by ordre of lawe or iustyce. In thys yere also floured ye holy man called Robert a chanon of the house of Brydlyngtone / the whyche of some wrytters is accompted for a prophete, for verses that he made of thynges to come after in Englande, whyche I passe ouer at thys tyme. Anno domini .M.CCC.viii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.ix.   wyllyam Basynge.   Nycholas Faryngdone.   Anno .ii.   Iohn̄ Butler.   IN thys .ii. yere / kyng Edward callynge to mynde the dysplea¦sure done vnto hym and to hys fa∣mulyer Pyers of Gauestone, by the bysshoppe of Chester mayster walter Lanton, as before is towched in the xxviii. yere of the reygne of Edwarde hys father / commaunded hym vnto the toure of London, where he was streyghtely kepte many dayes af∣ter. Than the lordes of the lande, and specyally syr Henre Lacy, syr Guy, & syr Aymer de Ualance erle of Lyn∣colne, of warwyke, & of Penbroke / to whome ye noble prince Edwarde ye .i. had gyuē so great charge yt Pyers of Gauestone shuld no more come into
Englande, sawe the rule of the lāde, and howe the kynges treafoure by meane of the sayd pyers was wasted assembled them in counsayll / & of one assent with ayde of other lordes of ye realme spake so with the kynge, that contrary hys pleasure he was auoy∣ded the lande, and banisshed into Ire¦lande for that yere. But the kynge sent vnto hym oftentymes secret mes¦sangers, and comforted hym wyth many ryche gyftes, or made hym hys chyef ruler of the countre. Anno domini .M.CCC.ix.   Anno domini .M.CCC.x.   Iamys of saynt Edmunde.   Thomas Romayne.   Anno .iii.   Roger Palmer.   IN thys .iii. yere / dyuers grud∣ges began to moue & sprynge betwene the kyng and his lordes, for the exilynge of Pyers of Gauestone. wherfore to contente amyte betwene hym & them / the sayd Pyers about ye feast of the natiuite of our Lady was fette home agayne, and so contynued to the more myschyef of ye realme. About thys tyme as testifyeth Cro¦nica Cronicarum & other / the knygh¦tes of the ordre of saynte Iohn̄ Bap∣tyste called saynt Iohn̄ of Hierusalē by theyr knyghtly manhode put out of the ile of Rodes or Rodhis ye Tur¦kys and infidelis, that to that day oc¦cupyed the sayd ile / & after that wan∣ne vpon the sayd Turkys dayly and yerely / so that at thys day they haue in theyr domynyon moche of the lan∣des,The fyrste wynnyng of Rody. whyche at that day and longe af¦ter / was in the power of the sayd Tur¦kes. Thys relygyō also was greatly preferryd by the fall of the templers / whose possessyons and lādes were to them gyuen, as it is before expressed in the thyrde chapytre, and .xxi. yere of Phylyp the fayre. Thys yere also after some wryters the crowched fre¦res came fyrste into Englande. Anno domini .M.CCC.x.   Anno domini .M.CCC.xi.   Symon Croppe.   Rycharde Roffham.   Anno .iiii.   Petyr Blacnay.   IN thys fourthe yere, the rule and power of Pyers of Gaue stone more and more encreasynge / in so moche that he hauynge the guy∣dynge of all the kynges iewellys and treasoure, yode vpon a day vnto west mynster / and there out of the kynges iewell house, toke a table & a payre oftrestyllys of golde / and conueyed them wyth other iewellys oute of the lande, to the greate inpouerysshyng of the same / and ouer that broughte the kynge by meane of hys wanton condycyons to manyfolde vyces, as auoutry and other. wherfore the foresayde lordes se∣ynge the myschyefe that dayly en∣creased by occasyon of thys vnhap∣py man / toke theyr counsayll togy∣ther at Lyncolne / and there conclu∣ded to voyde hym agayne out of En¦glande, so that shortly after he was exyled into Flaunders to the kynges great dyspleasure. Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xii.   Symon Merwode.   Iohn̄ Gysours.   Anno .v.   Rycharde wylforde.  
IN thys .v. yere vpon the day of saynt Bryce,Byrth of Edwarde the thyrde. or the .xiii. daye of Nouembre / was borne at wyndesore the fyrst or eldest sonne of kyng Ed∣warde, yt after hys father was kynge of Englande, and named Edwarde the thyrde. And this yere was agayn reuoked by the kynge Pyers of Ga∣ueston out of Flaunders / the whych after hys agayne commyng, demea∣ned hym worse than he before dyd. In so moche that he dysdayned the lordes of Englande, and of them had many dyspytous and sclaunderouse wordes. wherfore the lordes of one mynde assented to put this Pyers to deth / & soone after assembled theyr powers, and besyeged hym in the ca∣stell of Scarburgh / & in proces wan that castell, & toke hym and brought hym vnto Gauersede besyde war∣wycke / and there the .xix. daye of Iu¦nu smote of hys hede. wherof whan the kynge hadde knowlege, he was greuously dyspleased agayne the sayd lordes / and made hys auowe ye hys deth shuld be reuenged. By meane of thys the rancoure that before betwene the kynge and hys lordes was kendeled, now began fur¦ther to sprede / so that after thys day the kyng sought occasyō agayn hys lordes, howe he myght put theym to greuaunce and dyspleasure. In thys whyle dyed syr Henry Lacy erle of Lyncolne / the whych lyeng vpon his dethe bedde, requyred syr Thomas erle of Lācastre that had maryed hys doughter, that he wolde stande with the other lordes in theyr defence for the weale of Englande. The whyche request the sayd erle graunted / and so fermely kepte or ob¦serued it, that at length he wyth ma∣ny other loste theyr lyues, as after in the story shall be shewed. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xii.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xiii.   Iohn̄ Lambyn.   Iohn̄ Pontenay.   Anno .vi.   Adam Lutekyn.   IN thys .vi. yere / the kyng held hys great court or counceyl of parlyamēt with the lordes spirituall & temporall at London. where by the aduyces of theym many good orde∣naunces and statutes were made, to oppresse the ryottouse and other mys¦cheues that at those days were vsed. Than the kyng was sworne to kepe those ordenaunces, and after all his lordes to theyr powers. After the whyche othe so takyn / Ro∣bert archebysshope of Caunterbury, blessed all theym that vphelde the sayde statutes / and accursed all such as attēpted to breke any of the same. It was nat longe after that worde was broughte vnto the kynge, howe Robert le Bruze was retourned into Scotlande, and hadde caused the Scottes to rebell of newe. ye haue before harde in the .xxxiiii. yere of Edwarde the fyrste, howe the sayd Edward chased the forenamed Roberte le Bruze oute of Scotland into Normandy. But whenne he had harde of the mysguydynge of the realme of Englande, and speci∣ally of the dyuysyon betwene the kynge and hys lordes / he anone wyth a small ayde of the Norgans or Norwayes retourned into Scot∣lande. where he demeaned hym in suche wyse to the lordes of Scotlāde, that he in shorte processe was agayne made kynge of that realme / and war¦red strongely vppon the kynges frē∣des,
and wanne from theym castel∣les and strōge holdes, and wrought vnto Englysshe men moche sorowe and tene. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xiiii.   Adam Burden.   Nicholas Faryngdon.   Anno .vii.   Hugh Gayton.   IN this .vii. yere, for to oppresse ye malice of ye Scottes, ye kyng assembled a great power / and by wa∣ter entred the realme of Scotlande, and destroyed suche vyllages & tow∣nes as lay or stode in his waye. wher of heryng Robert le Bruze, with the power of Scotlande costed towarde the Englysshe men / and vpon ye day of the natyuyte of saynt Iohan the Baptyst, mette with kynge Edwarde & his hoste at a place called Batayle of Estryuelyn. of Estry∣uelyn, nere vnto a Frēche ryuer that than was called Bannockysbourne / where atwene the Englysshe and the Scottes that daye was foughten a cruell batayle. But in the ende the Englysshe men were constrayned to forsake the felde. Thā the Scottes chased so eger∣ly the Englysshe men ye many of thē were drowned in the fore named ry∣uer / and many a noble man of Eng∣lande that day was slayne in that ba¦tayll, as syr Gylbert de Clare erle of Gloucestre, syr Robert Clyfforde, syr Edmunde of Maule the kynges ste∣warde, with other lordes & barones to the noumbre, as wytnesseth Gui∣do de Columpna, of .xlii, & of knygh∣tes and baronettes to the noumbre of .lxvii / ouer .xxii. mē of name which that day, of the Scottes were taken prysoners. And the kynge hym selfe from that batayll scaped with great daūger / & so with a fewe of his hoste yt with hym escaped came vnto Ber∣wyke, and there rested hym a season. Than the Scottes enflamed with pryde, in derysyon of the Englysshe men made this ryme as foloweth. Maydens of Englande sore may ye morne For your lemmans ye haue loste at Bannockysborne. with heue a lowe. what weneth the kynge of En∣glande So soone to haue wonne Scot∣lande, with rumbylow. THis songe was after many dayes songe in daunces in ye carolles of the maydens & mynstrels of Scotlāde, to ye reprofe & dysdayne of Englysshe men, with dyuers other whiche I ouerpasse. And whan kyng Edwarde had a season taryed in Ber¦wyke, and sette that towne in suche suerty as he than myght / he retour∣ned with smal honour into Engl̄ade, & came secretely to westmynster vp∣on the daye of saynt Magne or the xix. day of August. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xv.   Stephan of Abyngdone.   Iohan Gysours.   Anno .viii.   Hamonde Chykwell.  
IN this .viii. yere of kynge Ed∣warde / a vylayn called Iohan Tanner yode aboute in dyuers pla∣ces of Englande,Traiferous pumyd of a agn. & named hymselfe to be the sonne of Edwarde the fyrst / & sayd yt by meane of a falce noryce he was stolne out of his cradell, and Edward whiche was a carters sonne was layde in ye same cradel for hym, & he hym selfe was after hardly fo∣stred and brought vp in the northe paryes of walys. But whan this by layne was layde for to be taken / for fere he fled to the churche of the frere Carmes or the whyte freres of Oxyn¦forde. where he thynkynge to be in a suertye because kyng Edward ye fyrst was theyr founder / rehersed agayne the former sayenge / addynge more there vnto, that it appered well that ye kynge was a carters sonne, for his condycyons were accordynge to the same, as by many famylier examples and customes in hym dayly were ap∣parent. whan he had thus contynued a season not without some rumoure in the lande / lastely he was takē out of that place, & caryed as a felon vn∣to Northampton, and there reygned and iuged for his falsenes, & so draw¦en & hanged. The whiche at ye houre of dethe cōfessed, that he had a fende in his house in the symylytude of a catte / the whiche amonge other pro∣messys to hym made, hadde assured hym that he shulde be kynge of Eng¦lande. And Guydo sayth that he con∣fessed that he had serued the fende .iii. yeres before, to brynge his peruerse purpose aboute. Thus kynge Ed∣warde beset with many aduersytes / kepte a counsayll at London for re∣formacion of ye warre in Scotlande, and other thynges for the welfare of Englāde. Thē was syr Peter Spal∣dynge knyght sente vnto Berwyke with a crewe of sowdiours, for to for¦tyfye that towne, for somoche as the kynge had certayne vnderstādynge, that Robert le Bruze entended hast∣ly to laye his syege to that towne. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xv.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xvi.   Hamonde Goodchepe.   Stephan Abyndon.   Anno .ix.   wyllyam Redynge.   Berwyke losteIN this .ix. yere vpon mydlente sonday, was the towne & castel of Berwyke yelden or loste, by trea∣son of the fore named Peter Spal∣dynge as the cōmune fame went, vn¦to Robert le Bruze kynge of Scot∣tes. This yere also the derth of corne that had encreasyd yerely more and more, from the .xvi. yere of Edwarde the fyrste, was this yere at London solde for .iiii. s. a busshell. And ther∣with also fyll suche a morayne of be∣stes, that al vytayle waxed scant and dere, as after shull be shewed. In this yere also .ii. cardynalles yt were sent into Englāde from the .v. Clement than pope, to set an vnyon & a peace atwene the kynges of Eng¦lāde and of Scottes / were met with vpon the moore of wygylsdone in yorke shyre, & there robbed of suche stuffe and tresure as they with theym broughte. For the whiche robberye great enquery was made / so ye lastly a knyght callyd syr Robert Gylbert Myddelton was accused, and sent to prison for that felony, and after at London drawen and hanged for the same, and his heed set vpon Londō brydge. But the cardynalles recey∣ued of the kynge dowble the value of theyr harmes.
In this yere also fyl so excedynge rayne in the monethes of Iulii and August / that husbandes myght not brynge in theyr lytle store of corne that than stode vpon the grounde / so that where before was great scarcyte of whete, now by this was more / and beues and motons were at excedyng pryces, by reason of the morayne be∣fore spoken of. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xvii.   wyllyam Caston.   Iohan wengraue.   Anno .x.   Raufe Palmer.   IN this yere ye Scottes entred the borders of Northumber∣lande, and robbed and brent the coū∣trey moste cruelly / in somoche y• they brent the howses that women at that tyme laye in chylde bedde, and spa∣red nother man, woman, nor chylde, nother relygyous nor other / and dyd so great harme that ye countrey by it was greatly impouerysshed. To this myschefe was ioyned another myse∣ry. For as before is sayd, vytayll by reason of the morayne was so scante and dere, and whete and other gray∣nes so hyghe prysed / that poore peo∣ple ete horse flesshe & dogges flesshe, and many other vyle bestes, whiche wonder is to byleue. And yet for de∣faute dyed great multytude of peo∣ple in sundry places of the lāde. And whete was solde this yere and ye next folowynge, at Londō for .iiii. marke a quarter and aboue. And after this derthe & scaresytye of vytayle, ensu∣ed mortalytye of mē by goddes hāde and punysshment / so that what with warre of the Scottes, and for hun∣gre, and deth by mortalite and sycke∣nesse / the people of ye lande was won¦derslye wasted and perysshed. But al those monycyons amended not the kynge of his inordynate lyuynge. Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CC.xviii.   Iohan Pryoure.   Iohan wentgraue.   Anno .xi.   wyllyam Furneux.   IN this .xi. yere, ye kynge assem∣bled a newe host and went into Northūberlāde, to resyste the malyce of the Scottes / whiche dayly made assawtes vpon the bordours, and en¦tred ferre within the lande. wherfore for great dystresse & nede of fyghting men, the kynge had moch people out of ye southe and east partyes of Eng∣lande. Amonge the whiche contrary to theyr lybertye, the cyte of London was constrayned to fynde at theyr costes and charge .CC. men, and so sent theym to yorke. whan the kynge at yorke hadde receyued his people frome sundry countrees and good townes of Englande / he with a con∣uenyent noumbre rode towarde Ber∣wyke, & so sped his iournayes that at lengthe he came nere vnto Ber∣wyke, and layde his syege aboute ye fame. But whyle the kynge was be∣syed in assawtynge of the towne / the Scottes brake ouer the water of Swale in great noumbre / & leuynge the cooste where the kynges people laye, in secrete wyse came downe into
the marchis of yorke shyre, and there slewe the people and robbed them in moost cruell wyse. wherefore ye arche bisshop of yorke constrayned of pure necessyte to defende that countre, ga¦thered vnto hym an vnredy & dispur¦ueyed hoost for ye warre, as pryours clerkes, chanons, and other spyrituel men of the churche, wyth husbande men and other vnapte people / and so with great nombre of men and fewe warly or discrete cheuetaynes, yode agayne ye Scottes / and them encoū∣tred at a place called Mitton vppon Swale, the .xii. day of the moneth of Octobre, and gaue vnto thē batayle. But for lacke of wyse and warely pro¦uysyon, the Englysshemē were beset of theyr enemyes vpon euery side / so that of them was slayne a great mul¦tytude, & the remenaunt shamefullye put to flyghte / by reason wherof the sayde archebisshop with the abbot of Selby and other were preseruyd. And for so many spyrytuell mē were slayne in thys batayl / therfore it was after named of many wrytters the whyte batayll. whan the kynge was enfourmed of this ouerthrowe of the Northyrne men, and for it drewe to∣warde wynter / he therfore brake vp hys siege and retourued vnto yorke and soone after forther into Englād. Than was nothyng done without ye aduyces and coūceylys of syr Hughe the spēcers, the father and the sonne. By whose entysemēt many thynges were done in Englande, to the great grudge as well of the noble men of the realme as of the commons of the same / so yt they were had in as greate hatred and indygnacyon, as before tymes was Pyers of Gaeston. And many euyll reportes and great extor¦cyōs were of thē reported, as lightly men shall do that ben oute of the fa∣uoure of the common people. Anno domini .M.CCC.xviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xix.   Iohn̄ Pontenay.   Iohn̄ wengraue.   Anno .xii.   Iohn̄ Dallynge.   IN this .xii. yere, the kyng helde hys greate counceyll at yorke / where cōtrary the mynde of ye lordes syr Hughe Spencer the sonne was made hyghe chaumberlayne of Eng¦lāde. By reason wherof he bare hym so hawtely and so prowde, that no lorde of thys lande myght gaynsaye hym in any thynge that he thoughte good. wherof grewe the occasyon of the barons warre as after foloweth. In thys passetyme for asmoche as ye foresayd cardinalles might nothyng do concernyng the peace betwene En¦glande and Scotlande / the kynge purchased a curse of the .xxii. Iohan then pope, to accurse Robert le Bruze and all suche as wyth hym helde or maynteyned / and it to stande so in strenght, tyll the sayd Robert had re∣compensed kynge Edwarde for all suche harmys as hys lande had by hym receyued / & also tyl he had reedi¦fyed the monasteryes and churches by hym and hys caste downe in Eng¦lande, and restored to them suche spi¦rytuell goodes as the Scottes had reued and taken from them. But all thys auayled nothyng, but putte the kyng and the realme to great coste & charge / so that ye comons were vexed and trowbled many maner of ways / and theyr possessyons and moueable goodes taken from them, vpon sur∣mysed & feyned causes / so that many were vtterly vndoon, and a fewe syn¦guler
& mysguyded persones auaū∣ced. whan the more partye of the ba∣rones of Englande behelde this my∣sery of the people, how they were pu∣nyshed by the hande of god, and al∣so by the ygnoraunce of the kynge / they in secrete maner assembled them togyder at a towne called Shyrborn̄ in , and there condiscēded for a reformacyon of this myschefe, to re¦moue from the kynge the sayd Spēsers bothe the father and the sonne. And this to brynge aboute syr Tho∣mas erle of Lancastre, syr Humfrey Bohum erle of Hereforde, syr Iohan Moubray barō, syr Roger Clyfforde barō, syr Goselyn Danyell barō, syr Roger Toket, Roger Benefeelde, syr Roger Mortymer, Syr whyllyā Sul¦lāde, syr wyllyam Elmynbrydge, syr Iohan Gyfforde, and syr Iohan Ty¦ers barons and knyghtes, with dy∣uers other sware eche of thē to stāde by other, tyll they had amended the state of the realme. And soone after by theyr aduyce and agrement, syr Iohan Moubraye, syr Roger Clyf∣forde, and syr Goselyn Danyel, with a stronge company entred vpon the manours and castelles of the sayde Spensers standynge in the marche of wales, and them spoyled and de∣stroyed. Of the whiche ryot the Spēsers complayned them to the kynge. In punysshent wherof, the kynge cal¦lynge to hym dyuerse of his coūceyll at wyndsore / there determyned that the sayde syr Iohan Moubraye, syr Roger Clyfforde, & syr Goselyn Da¦nyell, with other theyr assystentes, shulde appere before the kynges counsayle shortly after / and there to make answere vpon that ryot. And yf they refused that to do / that than they shulde auoyde the lande shortly after as banysshed men. But no day of apparence by theym was kepte. wherfore proclamacyons were made in dyuers placys of the realme, and at London the .xvi. daye of Marche, that the sayde syr Iohan Moubray, syr Roger Clyfforde and other, shuld auoyde the lande within .x. dayes fo∣lowynge vpon payne of dethe. wher∣of herynge ye lordes and barones be∣fore named, assembled theym a more strenger power / and vpon that sent a messynger vnto ye kynge, besechynge hym humbly to remoue frome his persone and coūseyle the Spensers, ye which dayly dyd vnto hym great dyshonour, and to the comune weale of the realme great hynderaūce. The kynge herynge this humble request, nothynge with it beynge contente, but ferynge greatly the destruccyon of his owne persone / assembled his coūfeyle for reformacyon of this ma∣ter. where it was concluded that the kynge shulde call a parlyamente at London, there to be holden in the  folowynge. And that con∣clusyon so there taken by the sayde counseyle / the kynge sent his letters vnto the sayde barones, commaun∣dynge theym to come vnto the sayde parlyament. The whiche at the day aboue sayde, with a great hoste of men of armes came to London / in a sute of iakettes of cotes of demy par∣tye of yelowe and grene, with a bāde of whyte cast ouerthwarte. For this skyll that parlyamente lōge after of the comune people was called the parlyament of whyte ban∣des. Than for to se the kynges pease were substancyally kepte within the cytye of London / the mayre caused dayly a thousande men well harnes∣sed to watche in dyuers wardes, and at dyuerse gates of ye cytye / ye whiche began at foure of the clocke in the mornynge, and so contynued tyll .vi. at nyghte. At whiche season as ma∣ny were ordeyned too take thanne
the charge of the nyght watche, and so to contynue tyll the houre of .v. in the mornynge. And for thys nyghte watche shuld be surely kept / two al∣dremē nyghtly were assygned to ryde about the cytie with certayne officers of the towne, to see the watchemen wele and dyscretly guyded. And the gates were shyt at .ix. of the clocke, & opened agayne at .vii. on the morow & euery cytezyn warned to haue hys harneys by hym, that he myghte be redy with shorte warnynge when so euer he were called. Thus in ye cytye the sayd watche cō∣tynuyng / the foresayde parlyamente was holden at westmynster / where amonge other thynges for the weale of the lande, as that counceyll than coulde thynke determyned / one was that syr Hugh Spenser the father & syr Hughe the sonne, shuld be banys∣shed out of yt realme of England for terme of lyfe. And soone after that ba∣nysshement was put in execucion / so that they bothe were broughte vnto Douer, there to take shyppynge. where syr Hugh the father made wō∣derfull great moone when he shulde take hys shyp / and cursed hys sonne in presence of suche as had the Guy∣dynge of thē / sayng that by hys mea¦nes he was banysshed from the flour of all landes cristened. Than ye kyng dyssolued the parlyament, and euery man retourned to hys owne. But yt was nat longe after that worde was broughte vnto the kyng, yt syr Hugh Spenser the sonne houyd vpon the cooste of Englande, and toke prayes of all marchaūtes that passed by hys course. But the kyng let as he had knowē of no suche thyng / and suffered that wyth many mo euyl dedes to go vn∣punysshed / the whyche at lengthe he repented full soore, and toke thereof great remors in conscyence, as it ap∣pereth in the ende of hys reygne. Anno domini .M.CCC.xix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xx.   Symon Abyngdon.   Hamonde Chykwell.   Anno .xiii.   Iohn̄ Preston.   IN thys .xiii. yere, the kynge re∣uoked the actes, or withstoode them whyche were made at London in the laste parliament / and called a∣gayne into Englande the Spensers bothe the father & sonne, contrary the wyll of the barons / and set theym in lyke auctoryte as they before had bē to the great dystourbaunce of all the realme. And soon after vnder colour of a tytle made by the quene vnto the castell of Ledys in Kent, whych than belonged vnto syr Barthen de Bla∣dysmore knyght than beynge on the baronys partye / the kynge besyeged the sayd castel / and by helpe of the cy¦tezyns of London lastly wanne it by strength, and spoyled the mouables therof, whych was to a greate value after the sayeng of some wryters. In thys passetyme that the kyng hadde thus called agayne the Spensers, & ruled many thynges after hys sen∣suall apetyte and pleasure, nothyng regardynge the comon weale of the realme / the barons cōsyderyng well that the Spencers shuld in processe bryng the lande in great ruyne, & the kyng to great dyshonoure, entēdyng to refourme the myschyef that therof myght ensu / gadered vnto thē great power. And whyle syr Thomas erle of Lancastre was gatheryng of hys people / ye .ii. Mortymers, yt is to say
syr Roger Mortymer of werke, & syr Roger of wigmoore with other, yode into the marche of walys, & toke by strengthe certayne cytyes & townes belongynge to the Spencers / & pur∣suyd also some of the kynges seruaū¦tes. wherfore the kyng herynge of yt rebellyon of hys lordes, made hasty spede and with a greate hoste came about by Shroysbury, and was nere vnto them or they were ware / so that for fere the sayd Mortymers yelded them vnto the kynges grace & mercy the whiche forthwith were conueyed as prysoners vnto the towre of Lō∣don. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xx.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxi.   Reynolde at Conduyt.   Hamonde Chykwell.   Anno .xiiii.   wyllyam Prodham.   IN thys .xiiii. yere, whā ye kyng had ordered the countre of the marchys foresayd after hys mynde, & had to hym gathered more strength about saynt Chaddys day or begyn∣nynge of Marche, the kyng with hys people came downe to Glowceter / where with hym mette the Spēsers with theyr people. And from thense he yode vnto Lychefeelde / at whyche season the erles of Lancaster and of Herforde were at, and the re¦menaunt of theyr hoste at Burtō vp∣pon Trent / & fortyfyed the brydge yt the kyng myght nat wynne ouer the sayde ryuer. Than the kynge was brought vnto a foorde, & beganne to set ouer his knyghtes, wherof heng the sayde erles / forsooke the sayde towne of, and yode toward the towne or cytye of. But or they myght passe farre vppon theyr iournay / they were encoūtred of syr Aymer de Ualance erle of Penbroke with the Spensers and other of the kynges hoste, vppon the .xii. daye of Marche / and of them ouerset and cō¦strayned to fle, and so yode in proces of tyme to Poūtfret. In thys meane season, the erle Thomas had sente a knyght of hys named Robert Holād into Lancasshyre, for to arere hys te∣nauntes. But when the sayde syr Ro¦bert herde of that skyrmysshe, and howe hys mayster was fled / he than drewe hym to the kynge, and presen∣ted hym with suche companye as he had thā gathered. And thus ye kyng{is} power dayly encreased, and ye batons dyscreased. Thā the baronys heryng of the goyng of syr Robert Holande vnto the kynges pattye, were with it sumdeale abasshed / and tooke theyr counsayll in the freers of Pountfre. where after many opynyons & rea∣sons amonge them debated & argued yt was fynally by them concluded, yt they shuld goo vnto the castel of Dū¦stanborough / & there to holde thē tyll they myght purchase the kynges gra¦ce. And so spedyng theyr iournay thy derwarde with suche people as they than had they came in processe of ty∣me to a towne called Burgh brydge. where they were encountred of syr Andrewe of Harkeley knyght, wyth other that were come out of ye North with a stronge company. The which there nere vnto the sayde towne sette vppon the barones, and in the ende sconfited thē and chased theyr peple. In the whyche fyght was slayne the erle of Herforde, syr Roger Benefeld, and syr wyllyam Sullāde and other and there was taken the erle of Lan¦castre, syr Roger Clyfforde, syr Io∣han Moubraye, syr Roger Tucket∣tes, syr wyllyam Fyzwyllyam, with
dyuerse other, & ladde vnto porke. And thys feelde was foughten as wytnesseth Polycronycon the .xv. daye of Marche, in the ende of yt yere of oure lorde a thousande thre hun∣dreth & twenty. It was nat longe after that syr Hugh Daniell and syr Barthew de Bladysmoore were ta∣ken. And syr Thomas erle of Lanca¦stre was brought agayn to his owne towne of Pountfret / where he was broughte in iugement before syr Ay∣mer de Ualaunce erle of Penbroke, syr Iohan Brytayne erle of Ryche∣mounde, syr Edmunde of woodstoke erle of Kent, syr Hughe Spenser the father▪ and syr Roberte Malmestorp iustyce wyth other / and before them fynally adiuged to haue hys hedde stryken of. whereof execucyon was done the twelef daye of Aprell, in the begynnyng of the yere of grace after the rekenynge of the chyrche of Eng¦lāde .M.CCC.xxi. Of this erle Tho¦mas are dyuerse opynyons. For some wryters shew of hym to be a seynt. But Policronicō in ye .xlii. chapytre of hys .vii. boke sheweth o∣therwyse. But what so euer erthlye men in such thynges deme, it is farre frome the secrete iugemente of god / so that to hym and hys sentence such thynges are to be referred. From thys tyme forthwarde by ye terme of .v. yeres ensuyng, yt fortune of the Spensers hugely encreased, And as faste the quenes dyscreased, tyll she was releued by the kynge of of Fraunce than Charles the .v. of ye name, and brother vnto hyr, as after shalbe shewed. Than to retourne vnto oure former mater, vpon the foresayde daye that erle Thomas was thus put in execu¦cyon / syr Roger Tutkettes, syr wyl∣lyam Fizwyllyā, syr waren of Iselde or Isell, syr Henry of Bradborne, & syr willyā Cheyny Barones & knygh¦tes, were drawen & hanged, & theyr hedes smytren of and sent vnto Lon¦don. whyche all were putte to deth at Poūtfrete foresayd, with an esquyre called Iohan Page. And at yorke soone after was drawen & heded syr Roger Clyfford, syr Iohn̄ Moubray & syr Goselyne Danyell Barons. And at Brystowe syr Hēry womyng¦ton, & syr Henry Monforde Baneret¦tes / & at Glowceter syr Iohn̄ Giffard & syr wyllyā Elmyngbrydge knygh∣tes / and at London syr Iohn̄ Tiers or Tryers baron / and at wynchelse syr Thomas Culpepyr knyght / and at wyndesore syr Fraunceys walden ham baron / and at Caunterbury syr Barthew de Bladismoore, & syr Bar¦tholl de Asbornham baronys. And at Cardeeffe in walys, was putte to lyke execucyon syr wyllyā Flemyng knyght / vpon whose soules and all crysten Iesus haue mercy. whan the kyng had thus subdued his barons / he soone after aboute the feast of the assencyon of oure Lorde, kepte hys parlyamente at yorke. Durynge whyche parlyament syr Hugh Spen¦ser the father was made erle of wyn∣chester, and syr Andrew of Harkeley erle of Carleyle, or after some wry∣ters Cardoyll / and dysheryted all suche as before hadde holden wyth the erles of Lancastre and of Here∣forde, except syr Hugh Dandell and fewe other / the whych syr Hugh was receyued to grace by reason that he had maryed a kynneswoman of the kynges. There was also ordeyned or soone after, that mayster Roberte Baldok a man of euyll fame shuld be chaūce∣ler of Englāde. Than forfaytes & ty¦nes were gathered into the kynges treasoury, without sparyng of pryui leged places or other / so that what myght be foūde, all was seased for ye kyng. By reason wherof moche trea∣soure
was brought vnto the kynges coffers, besyde great thynges yt were brybed and spoyled by the officers of dyuers shyres. Anno domini .M.CCC.xxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxii.   Rycharde Constantyne.   Hamonde Chykwell.   Anno .xv.   Rychard Hakeney.   IN thys .xv. yere the kyng gade¦red the .vi. peny of temporall mennes goodes through Englande, Irelande, & walys, that to hym was graunted at the foresayd parlyamēt, for the defence of the Scottes. which was payed wyth great murmoure & grudge, consyderyng the manyfolde myseryes that the common people at those dayes were wrapped in. This yere also the sone appered to man∣nes syght as blode, and so continued by the space of .vi. houres / that is to meane in the moneth of Octobre and laste daye of the sayde moneth, from vii. of the clocke in the mornyng tyll one of the same day. After some wry∣ters about thys tyme ye Scottes en∣tendyng to wynne an enterpryse in Irelande, and for to wynne that con¦trey to theyr obeysaunce / entered it with a stronge hoste vnder theyr ca∣pytayne Edwarde le Bruze brother to the Scottisshe kyng. But howe it was by ayde of Englysshe men or of them selfe / the Irysshe quyt them so well, and bare thē so manfully that they vaynquysshed the Scottes, and chased thē out of that countrey. In ye whych chase & fyght yt sayd Edward le Bruze / & many of the noble men of Scotlande were slayne. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xxii.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xxiii.   Iohn̄ Grantham.   Hamonde Chykwell.   Anno .xvi.   Rycharde of Ely.   IN this .xvi. yere, ye kyng made greate prouysyon for to make a voyage into Scotland / so yt about the begynnyng of August he entred that countrey. But the Scottes con∣syderyng the great multytude of his hoste, drewe them into the mountay¦nes & other places where as the En∣glysshemen myght nat wynne to thē and all to the entent for to wery and tyre the kynges great hoste. Than di¦erse maladyes fell amonge the En∣glysshmen / so that many of thē dyed and were loste in that iournay, aswel for lacke of vytayl as by infyrmyte & sykenesse / so that the kyng for theyse causes & other, was constrayned to retourne into Englande about ye na∣tyuyte of our Lady. where of the scot¦tes beynge enfourmed / syr Iamys Dowglas with other capytayns of ye Scottes, wyth a stronge hooste fo∣lowed or costed ye kyng, in suche wyse that about the feest of saynte Luke, they had almooste taken the kynge at dyner at an abbey called Bella Launde or Beyghlande. Thant he kynge of pure constraynte defended hym, and withstoode the Scottes as he myghte. But after shorte and weke fyghte the kynge was compelled to flee, & by that meane to saue hym selfe. In thys skyrmysshe was taken syr Iohan Brytayne erle of Rychemōde and the kynges treasoure was there
spoyled and borne away / and the or∣denaunce belongynge to the hoste, great parte of it was by the Scottes conueyed into Scotlande. Than the Scottes in theyr retournyng home∣warde wan the castell of Norham, & robbed the towne of Northallerton and other. Of thys losse and harmes way syr Andrewe of Harkeley put in wyte by mysledynge of the kynges hoste, as in the nexte yere shalbe she∣wed. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxiiii.   Adam Salesbury.   Symon Franceys.   Anno .xvii.   Iohn̄ of Oxynforde.   IN thys .xvii. yere, the kyng be∣ynge enfourmed that he & hys people were so put vnto dyshonoure (as in the precedyng yere is touched) of the Scottes, by ye vntrouth & trea¦son of ye fornamed syr Andrew erle of Carleyl or Cardoyll / sent a knyghte named syr Antony Lucy, for to arest the sayd erle, & to brynge hym safely vnto ye kyng{is} presēce. The which syr Antony sped hym in suche wyse, that vpon the daye of saynt Chadde or ye seconde daye of Marche, the sayde erle was taken, and so kepte in pry∣son lōge after tyl Octobre folowyng at whych seasō as affermeth Geffrey of Monmouthe, at Cardoyll in wa∣lys the sayd syr Andrew was arreg∣ned, & conuyete that he had takē mo∣ney of the Scottes to betray ye kyng hys naturall lorde. For the whyche treason he was there, or after other at westchester or at Shrowysbury drawen & hāged / and hys hede sente after to London and sette vpon the brydge.Decasion  mora . In thys yere the warre begā to Que kyn in Guyan betwene the Englissh men and the Frēche. wherof the occa¦syon was as sayth the Frenche boke, for a bastyle or fortresse made by the lord of Mount Pesayne or Pesart a lord of Gascoyne, vpon the Frenche kynges grounde as the Frenchemen sayd. But the Gascoynes & Englissh men iustyfyed it to be within the ter∣rytorye of Guyan. For thys fyrst be∣gan great wordes, and after Maas¦ses / But lastly mortall warre. So yt the Gascoynes wyth ayde of ye kyng{is} stewarde of Englande, slewe many Frenchemen that came to ouerturne the sayde bastyle. whan Charles the v. or charles the fayre, whych at that daye was kynge of Fraunce, herde of the ouerthrow of the Frenchemē, and howe the Gascoynes fortyfyed the foresayd Bastyle within hys fyg¦nory as he was enfourmed / he sente in all spede wyth a stronge hoste hys vncle Charles de Ualoys / the which made sharpe and cruell warre vpon the Gascoynys, and wanne frome theym the townes of Angeou and Amyas wyth other / and in processe came vnto the towne or cytye of Ryoll, and laye hys syege vnto the same. But the Englysshe wyth the Gascoynes issued out of the towne, and gaue batayll vnto the Frenche men, and put theym to the worse, & slewe vppon fourtene hundreth of theym. Amonge the whyche a lord called the lorde of saynt Florentyne wyth other noble men of Fraunce were slayne / & the other constrayned to lye forther from the towne. Nowe be it in conclusion the sayd towne by apoyntement was yelden to ye Frēch men, vpon condycyon that all suche
Englysshemen as were within that town, shuld go frely with theyr good to Burdeaux / or if they wold remayn there styll, thē to be sworne to ye Frēch kyng, and to dwell there as Frenche men. After whych towne so yelden / syr Edmunde of woodstoke ye kyng{is} brother than beyng at Burdeaux as the kynges deputye, made suche resi¦stens agayne the sayd Charles de Ua¦loys, that a trewce was taken for ye yere. Than about mydlent the kyng hauyng knowlege of thys warre in Guyan, and how the Frenche kynge entended to sease all Gascoyne and Guyan, for brekyng of certayn coue¦nauntes before tyme betwene theym made, & nat by kynge Edwarde par∣fourmed / sent ouer the quene hys wyfe the Frenche kynges syster, to cutreate a concorde & peace betwene thē. And in the beginnyng of August folowynge / syr Roger Mortymer of wygmore, by meane of a slepynge poyson or drynke, that he gaue vnto his kepers as the comon fame went, escaped out of the toure of London, and went to the quene into Fraunce. And soone after were taken within ye castell of wallyngforde, syr Iohan Goldyngton, and syr Edmunde of ye Beche / the which syr Iohn̄ was sent vnto yorke & there hāged and drawē for the barons quarell, and hys hede sent vnto Londō brydge. And about the feast of ye natyuytie of our Lady / the kyng sent ouer syr Edwarde hys sonne into Fraūce, for to do homage vnto the Frenche kynge for ye duchie of Guyan, whome the Frenche kyng Phylip le Beawe receyued ioyously, & caused hym to tary with the quene hys mother in the countre of Pōtyen lenger than kynge Edwarde was pleased. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxv.   Benet of Fulham.   Hamon Chyckwell.   Anno .xviii.   Iohn̄ Canston.   IN thys .xviii. yere, kynge Ed∣warde beynge enfourmed that the Frenche kynge had gyuen vnto syr Edwarde his sonne the duchye of Guyan cōtrary hys mynde and plea∣sure, & that also the quene hys wyfe, nor the sayde syr Edwarde made no spede into Englande, nat wythstan∣dyng hys often sendyng for thē / was with hys sayd wyfe & sōne greuously dyspleased / in so moche that procla∣macyons were made at London in ye moneth of Decembre, yt yf the quene and her sonne entred nat the lande by the octauys of the Epyphany of our Lord next folowyng in peasyble wyse, that they shuld be takē for ene∣myes to the kyng & hys realme of En¦glande. But for the quene fered the trecherye of the Spēsers and other yt were nere vnto the kynge, she abode styll in Fraunce. wherfore kyng Ed∣warde after the expyracyon of ye fore¦sayd day, caused to be seased all such lādes as to hys sayd wyfe and sonne belonged / and the profyttes of them toke to hys owne vse. when this ru∣mour was knowē through the more parte of Englande / dyuerse men of name of the landes, as syr wyllyam Trussell, syr Iohn̄ Cromewell, wyth dyuerse other, departed secretely out of Englande and saylled vnto the quene. whan kynge Edwarde was ware of thys / he sent vnto the Frēch kyng so sharpe and sore letters, that he mo¦nysshed the quene out of hys lande,
and wolde nother ayde hys nor hyr company / but as sayth Iohn̄ Froy∣zarde yt made a compendyous werke in Frenche of the hole lyfe or story of the thyrde Edwarde, and therwyth expressed many other storyes and cro¦nycles, as of Fraunce, Flaunders, & other regions / at thys tyme when ye quene was thus monisshed to auoyd out of Fraūce, syr Iohn̄ de Henawde brother to the erle of Henawde a mā of great fame, was then in the Frēche kynges court. The whych hauynge cōpassyon of the quene & of hyr yōge sonne, requyred her to go with hym vnto hys brothers court foresayde. wherof the quene beyng fayne graū∣ted vnto hys request, and spedde hyr thyther shortly after / where she with hyr company was ioyously & honora¦bly receyued. In the tyme & season yt the quene with hyr sonne lay thus in the court or countrey of the erle of He¦nawde / by meanes of suche as were about hyr, a maryage was cōcluded betwene syr Edwarde hyr sonne, and Philip the sayd erles doughter, vpō certayne condyōs, wherof one was that the sayd erle shuld at his propre costes set ouer into Englande ye sayd syr Edward with a crew of .CCCC. men of armys. For the whych, prouy¦syon was made with all dylygence. Of thys, the fame sprange shortly in Englande. wherfore the kynge in all haste made prouysyon to haue ye ha∣uyns & the portes of hys lāde surely kept, for to resyste the landyng of his enemyes. For subdie wherof / the cyte¦zyns of London were constrayned to fynde at theyr propre costes an hun∣dred men of armys / the whyche con∣trary theyr lybertyes, with a condy∣cyon that after that daye it shulde be no president, they sent vnto Port∣chestre. In thys season & passe tyme the quene with syr Edwarde hyr son with a small company of Englysshe∣men, and a crewe of Henawders, of the whych syr Iohn̄ of Henawde the erles brother was capytayne / toke shyppynge in those partyes / & had ye wynde so fauorable vnto them, that they landed in Englande at a porte called Orwell besyde Harwyche in Suffolke the .xxv. day of Septēbre, without any resistens of mē of warre agayne hyr made. To whome after hyr landyng, the people of the coūtre drewe by great companyes / & so sped hyr towarde London. At thys tyme of the quenes thus lādyng / the kyng was at hys cytye of Londō. But whē he harde of the great people yt drewe to hyr out of all countres, he fered. wherfore in safegardyng of hym self he fled wyth a small companye to∣warde walys / & lefte mayster walter Stapyltō bisshop of Exceter behynd hym, to haue the rule of the cytye of London. It was nat longe after the kynges departyng, that ye quene sent a letter vnto the mayre & comynaltie of the cytye / & requyred of them ayde to subdue the oppressours of ye comō weale of the realme. But to that let∣ter was made none answere. There∣fore she wrote the secōde tyme / aduer¦tysyng them of theyr landynge, & of the entent that she had to refourme ye enormytyes & mysgouernaūce of the lande / in admonestyng them of theyr ayde & socoure, as by the tenure of ye sayd letter more playnly appereth. wherof the circumstaūce I haue left out of thys boke, for so moche as I fynde varyaunce in the contentes thereof / and also for the copyes there of ben sette oute in the cronycles of Englande and dyuers other bokes. Than thys sayde letter was tacked vpon the crosse in Chepe, whyche at that daye was called the newe crosse. In the nyght before the day of saynt Denys or the .ix. day of October. And other copyes of the same were
fastened in dyuerse other places of ye cytye / wherof one was fastened vpō the mayres gate. After whyche letter thus publysshed in the cytye / the bis∣shop of Exceter, to whome as before is sayd the kyng had commytted the rule of the cytye, sent vnto the mayre to haue the keyes of the gates of the cytye by vertue of hys commission. By the whych he stode so fermely, & vsed so sharpe wordes in the kynges name, that varyaunce grew betwene hym & the cytezyns / so ferfourth that the commons of the cytye in theyr rage toke the sayd bysshop the .xiiii. day of Octobre, and hym with .ii. of hys housholde esquyers beheded vn∣reuerently at ye standard in weschep. And the same daye was taken for a spye a cytezyn called Iohn̄ Marshal, whych fauoured the Spensers {per}tye & in ye same place also beheded with∣out processe of lawe. And then the corps of ye sayde bysshop with hys .ii. seruaūtes, were haryed to Thamys syde where the sayd bysshop had be∣gonne to edyfye a toure / and there in the rubbusshe and sande of the same they buryed or conueyed these thre bodyes. whyche dispyte to hym was done after some auctoures, for so moche as he had vsurped of the comō grounde of the cytie in settyng of the sayd toure. But for what cause was he thus vngoodly & vnreuerentely delte with no mencion is made. And in thys passe tyme the quene easely & a foote space folowed ye kyng / which by thys season was cōm to Brystow hauyng with hym the Spēsers & his dyffamed chaūceller mayster Robert Baldocke, syr Iohn̄ erle of Arundell & other. where by theyr counsayls it was agreed, that syr Hugh Spēser the father shulde remayne there and haue the rule of the towne & castell, whyle the kynge with the other toke shyppynge & sayled frome thens into walys to rayse the walshemen. And so the kyng with syr Hugh Spenser the sonne & the other, toke shyppyng at Brystowe & so sayled into ways. when the certaynte therof came vnto the quene anone she sent to Brystow the erle of Kent the kynges brother, syr Iohn̄ of Henawde wyth dyuerse other, for to take syr Hugh Spenser the father. The whyche put them in suche deuour, that they tooke the sayde syr Hugh, and lefte a certayne to holde the towne & castell tyll the quene with hyr power came thyther▪ In the whyche tyme they sped them into walys / and in processe tooke ye kynge, hys chaunceller, the erle of Arundell, and syr Hughe Spenser the sonne, and broughte them all to the towne of Hereforde. And in thys whyle the cytezeyns of London wan the towre of Londō and kept it vnto the quenes vse. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xxv.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xxvi.   Gylbert Moordon.   Rycharde Betayne.   Anno .xix.   Iohn̄ Cotton.   IN thys .xix. yere and begyn∣nynge of thys mayres charge, vppon the morowe folowynge the feaste of Symon and Iude / the same daye that the mayre rode to westmynster to take hys charge, the same day at Brystow was syr Hugh Spenser the father putte to dethe, and after buryed at wynchestre. And vppon saynte Huys daye folo¦wynge, or the .xviii. daye of Nouem¦bre, was syr Hugh hys sonne drawē,
hanged, and quartered at Herforde, and hys hed sent to London and set amonge other vpon the brydge. The comon fame of hym went, that after he was taken, he wolde take no ma∣ner sustenaūce. wherfore he was the sooner put vnto deth. Of this Hugh a versyfyer made these two verses fo¦lowynge. Punis cum lignis a te miser ensis & ignis Hugo securis equus abstulit omne decus. whiche verses to them that vnder stande no latyne, maye in thys wyse be expowned or englysshed. wyth ropes were thou bounde, and on the galowe honge. And from thy body thyne hed wyth swerde was kytte. Thy bowels in the fyre were throwe and burned longe, Thy body in foure pecys eke wyth an axe was slytte, wyth horse before drawyn fewe men pytyenge it / Thus wyth these turmentys for thy synnes sake, from ye wretched Hugh, all wordly welthe was take. In thys meane tyme and season, the kynge was conueyed vnto the ca¦stell of Kenelworthe, and there kepte vnder the garde of syr Henry of Lan¦caster or brother vnto the erle Tho∣mas of Lancaster that was behedyd at Pounfrette. And mayster Robert Baldoke the kynges chauncelloure was sent vnto London, and put into the pryson of Newgate / where after he dyed myserably. The erle Iohn̄ of Arundell was also put to deth at Herforde, wythin foure dayes of syr Hugh the yonger Spenser. Then ye quene wyth syr Edwarde hyr sonne and with a goodly company of lor∣des and gentylmen retourned vnto London / and there of the cytesyns wyth greate honoure and ioye was receyued, vppon the daye of saynte Barbara, or the .iiii. daye of Decem∣ber / and so conueyed vnto westmyn∣ster. where in the octauys of the Epy¦phanye of our lorde, a parlyament was holden / durynge the whych cer∣tayne solēpne messangers were sent vnto the kynge to the castell of Ke∣nelworthe / that is to saye, thre bys∣shoppes, thre erles, two abbottes, ii. barons, and two iustyces, wyth the procuratoure of that parlyament syr wyllyam Trussell, to depose hym of all kyngly dygnytye, as before was agreed by all the lordes spyrytuall and temporall and comons of ye sayd parlyament / and they to resygne vn¦to the kynge, all homages and feau∣tyes to hym before made in the name of all the barony of England. Then the forenamed syr wyllyam Trussell vppon the daye of the conuersyon of saynte Poule or the .xxv. daye of Ia¦nuary, by the authoryte of hys offyce in the presence of the foresayd lordes hadde these wordes folowynge vnto the kynge. I wyllyam Trussell, in ye name of all men of this lande of En∣gland, and procuratoure of this par¦lyament / resygne to the Edwarde, ye homage that was made to the som∣tyme / and from thys tyme forth, de¦pryue the of all kyngly power. And I shall neuer be attendaunt vnto ye as kynge after thys tyme. And thus was Edwarde the seconde deposyd and his sonne made kynge / when he hadde reygned full .xviii. yeres .vi. monethes & odde dayes. Than Ed∣warde thus remaynynge in pryson, as fyrst in the castell of Kenelworth, & after in the castell of Barkle / toke greate repētaūce of hys former lyfe, and made a lamentable complaynte for that he hadde so greuously offen∣ded god▪ wherof a parte I haue after set out / but not all, leste it shulde be
tedyous to the reders or herers. Dampnum mihi con tulit tempore brumali, Fortuna satis aspera vehementis mali. Nullus est tam sapiens, mtis, aut formosus, Tam prudens virtutibus, ceteris{que} famosus, Quin stultus reputabitur, & satis despectus, Si fortuna prosperos aertat effectus. These wyth many other after the same makynge I haue seen / whyche are reported to be of hys owne ma∣kynge in the tyme of hys enprysone∣ment. The whych for length of tyme I haue lefte out of thys worke / and shewd ye effecte of them in Englysh as foloweth. Whan Saturne with his colde isy face, The ground with hys frostys turnyth the grene to whyte, The tyme of wynter which trees doth deface, And causyth all verdure to auoyde quyte / Than fortune, which sharpe was with stormes not alyte, Hath me assautyd with hyr frowarde wyll, And me beclypped with daungers ryght yll. What man in this worlde is so wyse or fayre, So prudent, so vertuese, or famous vnder thayre / But that for a foose, and for a man dispised, Shalbe take whan fortune is from hym deuided? Alas now I crye but no man doth me mooue / For I sue to them that pytye of me haue none. Many with gret honours I dyd whylom auaūce That nowe wyth dyshonoure done me stynge and launce. And suche as somtyme dyd me greatly scere / Me dispise, and let not with sclaūder me to deere O mercyfull god, what loue they dyd me shewe, And with detraccion they do me hacke and hewe. Alas moste synfull wretche why shulde I thus complayne, If god be please  that I shulde thus susteyne? For the great offence before by me doone. wherfore to the good sorde I wyll retourne este soone, And hooly cōmytte me thy great mercy vntyll, And take in pacience all that may be thy wyll, And all onely the srue with all dysygence / Alas that before this tyme I had not that cence. But now good lord, which ae mnipotent Behold me moste wretched and greatly pnitent / And of my trespas forgyuenesse thou me graunt / And by what sorow my carkes is now daunt, Graunte it may be to my sowle remedy, That the sooner I maye attayne it by. For to the swete Iesu I yelde me sore wepynge / And aske of the pardon for my greuous synnynge. Moste blessed Iesu, Roote of all vertue, Graunte I maye the sue, In all humylyte. Sen thou for our good Lyste to shede thy blood And stretche the vpon ye roode For our iniquyte. And thou most myld mother and virgin most pure That bareste swete Iesu the worlde; redempture, That shynyst and flouryshest as floure moste sine / And lyke as nardus of his swete odoure, Passyth all other, so thou in all honoure Surmountes all sayntes by thy great excellence / Wherfore to praye for my greuouse offence, I the beseche, Moste holsome leche That thou wylt seche For me suche grace. That when my body vyle, My soule shall cryle, Thou brynge in short whyle, It in reste and peace. Francia. LEwys the .x. of ye name, and sonne vnto Philyppe le Beawe, or ye .iiii. Philyppe / began his reygne ouer ye realme of Fraūce in the yere of our lorde .M.iii. hundreth and .xv, and the .viii. yere of the seconde Edward then kynge of Englande. Anone as thys Lewys was crowned / Enguer ra, whyche as ye haue herde, was chyefe and moste secrete counccy∣loure wyth Phylyppe the .iiii. laste
kynge of Fraunce, was called to ac∣compte by the meane of Charles de Ualoys vncle vnto thys kynge. And for so moche as the sayd Enguerram had gyuen sharpe and hastye wordes vnto the sayd Charles, in affyrmyng that moche of the kynges treasoure remayned in the handes of the sayde Charles / for thys he toke so great dis¦pleasure agayne the sayd Enguerrā, and bare towarde hym suche rācoure and malyce, that he lefte nat tyll he had bereuyd hym of hys lyfe / so that in processe he was accused of .xxxvi. artycles concerning treason & iniury done unto kyng Philip foresayde, & vnto the realme of Fraunce / ye which articles in ordre are set out in ye frēch cronicle whych I here overpasse. By force wherof thys Enguerram was lastly conuycte and iuged vnto deth and for the same in the euyn of assen¦cion of our Lorde hanged vppon the gybet of Parys. Thys yere also fell greate scarcyte of corne and frute in Fraunce, by meane of vnsesonable wederynge / as was in Englande in the .ix. and .x. yeres, & before & after of the reygne of Edward the seconde at thys day & then kyng of Englande. By reason wherof great famyne and deth of poore people fell in Fraunce, as it then dyd in Englande. ye haue before in the .xxvii. yere of Philip father vnto this Lewys hard howe the Flemynges agayne rebel∣led / & howe by the meane of Enguer¦ram, the Frenche hoste was then re∣tourned with dishonour into Fraūce for reuengemēt wherof, thys Lewys assembled a ryght stronge armye of the more partye of all the noble men of Fraūce / & in the moneth of Septē¦bre entred the countrey of Flaūders & so came vnto ye towne or nere there vnto called Courtray, & lodged hys people nere vnto the ryuer of Lys or Lyse, for so moche as ye brydges ouer that ryuer by the Flemynges were brokē. where the kyng with hys host so lyēge / the Flemynges vpō ye other syde laye in howge nombre for to de∣fende the passage of the Frenchmen. In whyche tyme & season fell suche plenty of rayne, that the ways waxed noyous & foule in all that countrey. By reason whereof vytayll whyche thā was as aboue is sayd scant, was than more scars. And ouer ye the feelde where the hoste laye was so wete & myry / that men and beastes were to greuously noyed. wherefore in conclusyō ye kyng consyderyng those great hynderaun¦ces & harmes to hys lordes & comōs, & that he myght in no maner wynne ouer to hys enemyes / he retourned as other before times had done, with lytell honour into Fraūce / to ye great losse of ye kynges ordenaūce & other stuffe that myght nat be caryed thēs by reason of depenes of the way. For whych cause & causes, the kyng was so soore displeased / yt he made then a great othe, that yf he myght lyue tyll the yere folowyng, yt he shuld be sette so the Flemynges yt they shuld nat es¦cape hys daūger / & yt he shuld neuer take treatye nor ende with thē, except they wolde fully & holy put thē in his grace & mercy. But in the yere folow¦ynge about ye feest of Pentecoste whē the sayd Lewys had scantly reygned ii. yeres, he dyed at Boys in Uyncent & the .vi. daye of Iunii honorablye was buryed at saynt Denyse, leuyng after hym none issue male / wherfore hys brother Phylype succeded hym in the kyngdome. Francia. PHylyp the .v. of that name and brother of the forena∣med Lewys, whyche for his heygth was surnamed Phylyp the longe / began hys reygne ouer ye Frēchmē in ye yere
of our lorde .M.CCC. and .xvii, and the .x. yere of Edwarde the seconde than kynge of Englande. But fyrste he reygned but as regent of Fraūce, for so moche as Clemence the wyfe of kynge Lewys was left of her sayd husbande with chylde. The whiche in processe of tyme was delyuered of a man chylde named Iohan, that dy¦ed shortly after. After whose dethe ye sayd Phylyp was forthwith proclay¦med kynge of Fraunce, and crowned at Parys aboute Chrystmas folow∣ynge / al be it yt the duke of Burgoyn with other for a whyle with sayd that coronacyon / and wolde haue prefer∣red the doughter of Lewys last deed. But other of the lordes and nobles of Fraunce wolde not be agreable, yt a woman shulde enheryte so great a kyngdome. By meane wherof vn∣kyndnes kyndled atwene the kynge and the sayd duke. But by wyse me∣dyatoures they were after acorded, in suche wyse that the sayd duke ma∣ryed the eldest doughter of ye kynge. In this passe tyme suche meanes were made by the Flemynges, that an vnyte and accorde was stablys∣shed atwene Fraunce and them for ye tyme that it helde. whiche peace as testyfyeth the Frenche cronycle, was laboured and ended by a cardynall named Iosselyn, & sent frome ye .xxii. Iohan than pope / so that by medya∣cyon of the sayd cardynall, the erle of Flaūdres was receyued vnto ye kyn∣ges grace / and at Parys dyd vnto ye Frenche kynge his homage, & sware vnto hym feawtye. In the thyrde yere of the reygne of this Phylyp / the prouost of Pa∣rys hauyng in his pryson a Pycarde a man of great rychesse, whiche for fe¦lony or lyke cryme was iudged to be hanged. The sayd prouoste for great benefyte to hym doone, and payment of great summes by ye sayd Pycarde, toke an other poore innocent man & put hym to dethe in stede of the sayd Pycarde. Of the whiche offence whā due profe of it was made before the kynges counceyll / the sayd prouoste for the same dede was put vnto lyke iudgment. In the fyfth yere of the sayd Phy¦lyp, all the lazaryes of the countrey of Langadocke were brente, for so moche as they were accused of theyr owne confessyon proued, that they had poysoned and entended to haue poysoned all the welles of that coun∣trey. And for many Iewes were vn∣to them consentynge / therfore many of them suffered lyke iudgment. In this yere also for somoche as in those dayes in dyuers places of Fraunce, a fonde prophecy was broughte vp amōge the comune people, that shep∣herdes and herdes shulde wynne the holy lande. Than they assembled thē selfe in dyuers places and compa∣nyes, and lastly came togyder at Pa¦rys. where they were so many in nom¦bre, by reason of other of the comune people that fell vnto them, that the Prouost of Parys was not of power to withstande thē / so that they brake prysones and toke out suche perso∣nes as them pleased / and from thens wente beggynge and robbynge tyll they came into Langedocke. where they fel vpon the Iewes, and robbed theym of all suche mouables as they myght fynde, and slewe of theym al∣so. wherfore the other of the Iewes ferynge the sayd comunes / gathered them with theyr wyues & chyldren to the noūbre of .v.C. into a towre, and thought to defende them & theyr wy∣ues and chyldren from the sayd her∣des. But anone as they hadde wyt∣tynge therof / they assawted the sayd towre so egerly, that in the ende se∣ynge they myght not escape, for very despyte they threwe theyr chyldren
downe at theyr hedes / & after slewe eyther other, for they shulde not fall in the handes of theyr enemyes / or elles to auoyde ye peynes of the fyre, whiche the herdes hadde begunne to fasten vpon the sayd towre. whā the sayd Herdes hadde thus robbed and slayne ye Iewes of Langdocke / they departed thens and yode towarde a a countrey called Carcasson, enten∣dynge lyke robbery as they before had vsed. wherof ye countrey beynge warned / stopped & kepte so the pas∣sages, & withstode them with suche power and strengthe, that they dysse¦uered thē selfe by small companyes / so that many of them were taken and hanged, & the other fled in saue gard¦ynge them selfe / and so this folysshe prophecy was ended with synne and shame. Kynge Phylyppe by meane of yll coūseyle sette a great taske vpon his comunes / that is to meane the fyfth parte of theyr mouable goodes. For the whiche, consyderynge he had no charg of warres ī no place, they mur¦mured & grudged wonder sore. But how it was or this taxe was leuyed / he fell in a feuer quarteyne & a great flyx. whiche sekenesse fell vpon hym by prayer of the comunes after the Frenche boke, for leuyenge of ye sayd greuous taxe. Than for hym was made many solempne processyons & other prayers. How be it in lōge pro∣cesse he dyed, whan he had languys∣shedde from the begynnynge of Au∣gust tyl the .viii. day of Ianuary. Up¦on whiche day he dyed, whan he had reygned .iiii. yeres & .vii. monethes & odde dayes / leuynge after hym none heyre male / wherfore the crowne dys¦cēded vnto his brother Charles erle of the Marches. Francia. ¶Charles the fyfth. CArolus the fyfth or Charles the yong∣est of the thre bre∣therne or sonnes of Philyppe le Bewe begāne his reygne ouer ye Frenchmē, in ye moneth of Ia¦nuary & yere of our lorde .M.CCC. and .xxii, and the .xv. yere of ye secōde Edwarde yet kynge of Englande / & was crowned at Raynes the .xii. day of February nexte ensuynge. After whiche solempnyte fynysshed & en∣ded / he in short proces of tyme after sent vnto the .xxii. Iohan than pope, & assertayned hym of ye gossyprede yt was atwene hym and Blanche his wyfe. wherof the examynacyon by ye sayd pope was commytted vnto the bisshoppes of Paris & of Beauuais, & mayster Godfrey de Blessys pro∣thonotayr of the countre of Rome. The whiche after due and perfyte ex¦aminacyon in that mater made / they founde that Mawde countesse of Ar¦toys and mother to the fore named quene Blanche, was godmother vn∣to kynge Charles her husbande. Of the whiche whan they had made re∣porte vnto the pope / he gaue sentēce that the sayd matrymony was not le¦gyttymat / and cōmaunded a deuorce and a separacyon to be made atwene those .ii. persones. The whiche was shortly after executed. In the se∣conde yere of this Charles, dyed Ro¦bert erle of Flaūdres without yssue. wherfore the sayd erledam fell into ye Frenche kynges handes / so that of it he was in processe by thagrement of the lordes of the same, put in peasy∣ble possessyon / all be it the erle of Ne∣uers made therunto a pretēce & tytle. And in this yere kynge Charles about the feest of saynt Mathewe in Septēbre, maryed his seconde wyfe named Mary the syster of the kynge
of Bohemy or Beme, and doughter of Henry erle of Lucenbourgh and late emperoure of Almayne, named in the lyne of the emperours Henry the .viii, or after some wryters ye .vii. Also in y• sayd yere one named Iour¦dan of the Ile / a Gascoyne borne, & a man of noble lynage but lowe & vyle of condycyons, to whom the foresaid pope Iohn̄ in maryage hadde gyuen hys nyese for reuerence of his byrth / thys season by the meane of his vyle condycyons and suche dyshoneste cō¦panye as he drewe vntyll hym, he fell into many sclaūderous vyces / so that lastly he was accused of rape & murder and of felony. Of the whych he was at length in .xviii. artycles by due profe made cōuycte by the lawe, and iudged to be hanged. But the kynge at the request of the pope and for the honoure of hys blode / graun∣ted to hym a charter, and pardoned hym of all former transgressyons. But that not wythstandynge he in processe of tyme fell or retourned vn¦to hys olde accustomyd condicyons. And among other greate crymes by hym executed / he slewe a sergeaunt of armys belongynge to the kynge, that to hym was sent in message. For whyche murder and other detestable dedys, he was newely accused / and vppon that somonyd to apere at Pa¦rys before the kynge and hys coun∣sayle. At whych day of apparence he came to the sayde cytye wyth a great companye, and some noble men whi∣che were to hym nere of kynne / and excused him to the vttermost of theyr powers. But agayne hym and to ac∣cuse hym came many other lordes & barons. Of the whyche the marques of Ampton or Dampton wyth hys sonne were chyefe, that put causes of complaynt agayne hym. The which made suche prouys and declaracyōs agayne the sayde Iourdan, that he was cōmytted vnto the chastelet of Parys, & there to remayne as a pry∣soner. And in processe of tyme suche maters and trespaces were prouyd vpon hym, that he by authoryte of a parlyament holden at Compeyng was lastly iudged to dye. And soone after, that is to meane the .vii. day of Maye, he was drawyn to the gybbet of Parys and there hanged. In the thyrde yere of his reygne / thys Char¦lys gaue vnto the erle of Neuers yt before tyme hadde made clayme to the erledome of Flaunders, y• sayde erledom / the whyche of the Flemyn∣ges and inhabytauntes of that coū∣trey was wel and ioyously receyued. Than he in shorte whyle after gaue vnto the townes of Gaunt, Brugys, Ipre, and other, dyuers pryuyleges and grauntes to theyr great auaun∣tage & profyte. But it was not longe after that he wanne of them as mych grudge and hatred as he to fore had loue & good wyll. And all for a taxe yt he set vpon the dwellers of Brugys and the coūtrey nere there vnto / and specyally of them that dwelled in the countrey. For they thought yt theyr charge exceded farre the charge of ye dwellers within the towne. wherfore by secrete meanys they appoynted a daye of assemble amonge them selfe / and sodeynly well armed entred the towne of Brugys, and slewe therin dyuers of the erles seruauntes, and some of the borough maysters of the sayde towne, suche as they suspected to be of counseyle of the leuyenge of the sayd taske. In the .iiii. yere of his reygne, thys Charlys after the dethe of Mary hys seconde wyfe, by dys∣pensacion of the pope the .xxii. Iohn̄ / he maryed Iane his cosyn Germayn the doughter of Lewys erle of Eu∣roux, and vncle vnto thys kynge Charlys, or brother to hys father Phylyppe le Beawe.
IN this abouesayd .iiii. yere / the quene of Englande and syster vnto thys kyng Charlys of Fraūce, to treate an vnite and peace bytwene hyr lorde and hyr brother, for the warre made in Gascoyne, as before is towched in the .xv. yere of Edward the seconde hyr lorde and husbande / and there taryed, and retourned, as aboue in the sayde yere is expressed. In thys yere also the erle of Flaū¦ders fore named, for suspeccyon that he hadde to Robert of Flaūders hys vncle, leste he for hys synguler auaū¦tage wold supplant hym of that erle dome / he made letters vnto the go∣uernours of the towne, where ye sayd Robert was resyaunt and abydyng, that they shulde put hym to dethe. But by the warnyng of his olde and trusty frende the erlys chaūcellour / he was warned and so auoyded that towne. For thys, greate malyce and rancoure arose bytwene this Robert and the erle, whyche was not short∣ly pacyfyed. But it was not longe after that a nother taske or imposy∣cyon was leuyed of the townes of Gaunt, Brugys, Ipre, and other townys of Flaunders. The whyche taske was leuyed in recompensemēt of suche warres made vpon Flaun∣ders by Phylyp le Beawe / or more dyrectely for paymēt of twelue thou∣sand pownde awardyd by Ioselyn the cardynall, as before is shewed in the seconde yere of the .v. Phylyppe, that the Flemynges shulde paye to the French kyng for byenge of theyr peace. Of thys taske to be leuyers or gaderers was assygned the pryncy∣pall men of the sayde townes / yt whi∣che by theyr demeanure in the leuy∣enge therof demeaned them in suche wyse, that they ranne in great hatred of the comon people. In so myche that they accusyd theym and sayde that they hadde leuyed or gatheryd moche more than the sayde taske amounted. wherfore they desyred of the erlys counsayle, that the sayde persons myghte be called to accoūpt. But thys requeste myght not be op∣teyned / whyche caused the comons to runne in further grudge and mur∣mure. An other thynge also caused suspeccyon / for the erlys counsayle and the sayde collectours hadde so many secrete assembles. At lengthe whan the erlys counsayle appercey∣ued the murmure of the comons / they wyth the collectours condyscen¦dyd for a trayne, to haue taken cer∣teyne capytaynes of the sayd comōs / and sayde that at Turnaye at a daye assygned, the sayd collectours shuld yelde vp theyr accoumpte. At whych daye the erle in proper persone came vnto the sayde towne of Tournaye. And there whan ye erle with the other of hys counceyle shulde haue execu∣ted theyr purposed enter / how it was by some warnyng or monycyon that the comons had, they wythstode the erle and hys companye, and in the ende slewe many of theyr enemyes / and toke the erle and putte hym in sure kepynge wythin the towne of Brugys. But in thys skyrmysshe by meane of ye erlys party, a great part of the foresayde towne was brent. wherfore the towne toke partye with the Flemynges / and were a greate cause that the erle was so taken and putte frome hys entent. Than the foresayde comons to the more dys∣pleasure of the erle / admytted for theyr lorde and capytayne Roberte the vncle of the erle foresayde / and amonge them reputed hym for erle of Flaunders. The whyche for ta∣kynge vpon hym delyuered frō pry∣son hys frende the erlys chauncel∣lour, whyche as aboue is sayde had delyuered hym from former daūger, & made hym chyefe of his counceyle.
But to all thys was the towne of Gaunt repugnaūt / in so moche that mortall warre beganne to sourde be∣twene the sayd towne & the towne of Bruges & other. And so farfourth cō¦tynued / that shortly after the people of Gaunt and of the other townes, met wyth them of Bruges in playne batayll, & fought cruelly. But in the ende they of Gaūt chased thē of Bru¦ges / and slewe of them beyonde fyue hundreth men. But yet the erle was neuer the rather deliuered. After this the Frenche kyng sent vnto them of Bruges, requyryng them in curtoyse maner that they wolde set theyr erle at lybertye. But they sent the messan∣gers agayne wythout spede of theyr message. In thys whyle dyed Charles de Ualoys brother vnto Phylyppe le Beaw, & vncle vnto this kyng Char¦les / the whych languysshed longe in a consumpcyō or he dyed / in so moch that the opynyon of the people was, yt he was so punysshed for the iniury & malyce yt he bare towarde Enguer¦ram / the whyche as ye haue before harde in the fyrste yere of thys kyng, was put vnto deth. And the rather thys fame ran vpon the sayd Char∣les / for so moche as in ye tyme of hys syckenes, he gaue great almesse. And to suche persones as he gaue or sente hys almesse vnto / he wylled them as well to pray for the soule of the sayde Enguerram as for hys owne hele. Thys Charles de Ualoyes left after hym a sonne named Philipe de Ua∣loyes / the whych Phylip for so moch as thys Charles now kyng of fraūce dyed wythout issue, he by fauoure of the lordes of that regyon was made kyng of Fraunce / & put by the ryght and tytle of Edwarde the thyrde thā kyng of Englande, the sonne of Isa¦bel & doughter of Phylyp le Beawe. whych Isabell by dyssent was right∣ful enheritour of ye crowne of Fraūce For whyche tytle was after cruell warre betwene the sayd Edwarde & Phylyp, as in the story of the sayde Edwarde after shall appere. In the v. yere of kyng Charles the Burgh∣maysters & skepyns, yt is to meane the rulers of the towne of Bruges / deliuered theyr erle & set hym at larg vpon certayne condicions folowyng the whych to be obserued they caused hym to be solēply sworne. Fyrste that after that day he shuld nat punysshe nor hurt any of the lande of Flaun∣dres, for any displeasure to hym done or any of hys seruauntes or councel, sen the tyme that he was erle, concer∣nyng any cause of theyr rebellion. Secūdaryly yt he shuld nat abrydge nor mynysshe any of theyr lyberties that they of olde tyme haue had, or by hym newly to theym graunted. Thyrdely, that in all grose maters that concerned the gouernaunce of hys realme / suche as he knewe well dyuerse of them to be expert therein, that he shulde nothynge conclude or do without theyr aduyces and assen∣tys. And fourthly that after that day he shuld neuer vse the counsayl of the abbot of Uersellay / which they knew for theyr dedely enemy, for so moche as they before tyme had slayne hys father named Petyr Floce or Floze in the batayll of Courtray as in the syxtene yere of Phylyppe le Beawe is before shewed, how be it the name of the sayde Petyr is nat there expres¦sed. After whyche artycles wyth other fermely by the erle promysed to be kept and holden / he was deliue¦red & set at large. In the syxte yere of the reygne of thys Charles / a greate dyssencyon and varyaunce aroose betwene the Dolphyne of Uyen and the duke of Sauoy / so that mortall batayll en∣sued vppon the same. In the whyche
moche people were slayne vpon both partyes. But in y• ende the Dolphyn of Uyen had the better / and toke as prysoners in the feelde the duke of Burgoyne and the erle of Ancerne, wyth other noble men. In thys yere also the Gascoynes with ye Englissh men made warre vppon the borders of Fraunce. Agayne whome kynge Charles sent a cosyn of hys, named syr Alphons de Spayne. But he spēt the kyng greate good, and retourned with lytle worshyppe into Fraunce, where he dyed shortely after. Then the kynge sent agayne the sayd Gas∣coynes the erle of Ewe, & syr Robert Barthram than marshall of Fraūce, with dyuerse other noble men. In whyche season the Gascoynes wyth the sayd Englysshemen had gotten the castell of a towne standynge in y• coūtre of Poytyew or Poytyers na∣med saynt Oyngne / within whyche towne the sayd erle & other the nobles of Fraūce were lodged / so yt betwene them dayly cruell assautes were exer¦cysed, to the great hurte of bothe par¦tyes. Lastly betwene thē was a daye of batayll in playne feelde accorded / where the Frenchemen to the entēt to haue the aduaūtage of the sayd feeld & there to enbatayll thē selfe to theyr mooste auaūtage / the day of the sayd appoytemēt issued of yt towne, & yode to the place assygned, whyche was a good dystaunce frome the foresayde towne, & there taryed theyr enemyes. But the Gascoynes entendyng an other purpose, yode streyght vnto yt foresayde towne / and knowyng it to be without greate defence, assauted and shortly gatte it and set it on fyre nat sparynge chyrches nor other pla¦ces of relygyon as affermeth y• frēch boke / and that done retourned vnto the fyresayd castel, and in processe of tyme after retourned agayne into Guyan. whan kynge Charles was assertayned of thys delusion / he was greuously dyscontented agayne the Gascoynes, and manysshed theym very sore. But in the moneth of Decē¦bre shortly ensuynge, he was taken with a greuouse sykenesse / so that he dyed vppon Candelmas euyn folow¦ynge at Boys in Uyncent, and was entered at saynt Denyse whā he had reygned fyue yeres and odde dayes / leuynge after hym none heyre of hys body, excepte the quene was than wyth chylde. whyche chylde dyed soone after ye byrthe. wherfore some questions for that kyngedome were moued as before touched in the ende of the fourthe yere of thys Charles, & after shalbe forther expressed. Anglia. Edwarde the thyrde. EDwarde the .iii. of that name, & sonn̄ of Edward the seconde, and of Isabell ye alo¦nely doughter & chylde of Phy∣lip le Beawe or Phylyppe the fayre, father to Char∣les laste kynge of Fraunce / beganne to reygne as kynge of Englande his father yet lyuynge, the syx & twenty daye of Ianuary, in the ende of the yere of grace a thousande thre hun∣dreth and syx and twenty, and the fourth yere of Charles the fyfth last kynge of Fraunce / and was crow∣ned at westmynster vppon the daye of the puryfycacyon of oure Lady nexte ensuynge. In hys begynnynge came forthe plentye and gracyous happes / for the erthe tooke plentye, the ayre tempoure, the see quyetnesse, and to the chyrche grewe peace.
In thys fyrste yere he confermed the lybertyes and fraunchyses of ye cytye of London / and ordeyned that the mayre for the tyme beyng shuld sytte in all places of iugement within the lyberty of the same for chiefe iustyce, the kynges persone onely excepte / & that euery alderman that hadde ben mayre shuld be iustyce of peace in all London and Myddelsex / & eueryche alderman that hadde not be mayre shulde be iustyce of peace wythin his owne warde. And also he graunted to the cytezyns the fee ferme of Lon∣don for .iii. hundreth pownde / & that they shulde not be constrayned to go out of the cytye to fyghte or defende the land for any nede. Also that after that daye the fraunchyse of the cytye shulde not be seasyd into the kynges handes / but onely for treason or re∣bellyon done by the hole cytye. And Southwerke was admytted to be vnder the correccyon and rule of the citye / and the mayre of London to be baylyffe of Southwerke / and the mayre to chose & ordeyne such a bay∣lyffe of that borough as hym lyked / whiche ordinaunce endureth to this day. In the moneth of Apryll, for so mych as meanes were made by the frere prechours or the blacke freres, for the delyuery of kynge Edwarde the .ii. out of pryson / therfore he was had out of the castell of Kenelworth, & cōueyed vnto ye castel of Berkeley. where after about saynt Mathewys tyde the sayde Edward by y• meanes of syr Roger Mortimer was mysera¦bly slayne. Of this Edward are lyke opinyōs as were of Thomas of Lan¦caster, whyche I referre to goddys iudgement. For certayne it is that for hys former wyld and insolent ly∣uynge he toke greate repentaunce. And so he hadde great cause / for du∣rynge hys reygne there was hedyd and put to deth by iugement, vppon xxviii. barons and knyghtes, ouer yt noble men that were slayne in Scot¦lande by hys infortunyte. Kynge Edwarde as yet beynge of tender age, not passing .xv. yeres / he∣ryng of the great pryde and presūp∣cyon of the Scottes, and howe they dayly warred vpon the borders, and entryd the lande in brennynge and spoylyng his people / assembled hys people about Easter, & so sped hym toward Scotland. In whych meane tyme the Scottes were entred the land, & were comen as farre as Stā∣hop in Uiridale / and had lodged thē in the woddes of Stanhop parke in dyuers bushementys. wherof y• kyng beyng enfourmed, made such prouy∣syon that he beset them roūde about, and trusted well to haue brought thē vnder hys subieccyon. But when the kynge thoughte to be of them moste sure / by treason of some of hys hoste the Scottes were clene escaped and retourned into Scotlande. wherof ye fame ranne vpon syr Roger Morty∣mer. But how so it was y• kyng loste that iournay, and retourned into En¦glande with lytle worshyppe. And here ye shall vnderstand that to this day the olde mayre and shyryes, yt is to meane Hamunde Chyckwell, Benet Fulham, and Iohn̄ Canston, stode in offyce tyll ye day folowyng of Symō & Iude, which was almost y• full of ye fyrst yere of ye sayd Edward the .iii. And then for the residue of the fyrst yere, & for the more party of the second yere, was electe and charged the mayre and shyryffes folowynge. Anno domini .M.CCC.xxvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxvii.   Henry Darcy.   Rycharde Betayne.   Anno .i.   Iohn̄ Hawteyne.  
IN the ende of the fyrste yere of thys kynge Edwarde, & begyn¦nyng o thys mayres yere / the kynge after Crystmas maryed dame Phy∣lyppe ye erles doughter of Henawde in the cytye of yorke, in the euyn of ye conuersiō of saynt Paule, or ye .xxiiii. daye of Ianuary. The parlya¦mēt of Nor¦thamton.And soone after the kyng about ye feast of Pentecoste, helde hys parlya¦ment at Northampton. At the whych parlyament by euyll coūsayl, wherof syr Roger Mortymer & the olde que¦ne bare the blame / the kynge made wyth the Scottes an vnprofytable and a dyshonorable peace. For fyrste he released to theym theyr feauty and homage. Also he delyuered vnto theym olde auncyent wrytyn∣ges sealed wyth the seales of the kynge of Scottes, and of dyuerse lordes of that lande bothe spyry∣tuall & temporall, with many other charters & patentes, by the whyche ye kynges of Scottes oblyged them to be feordaryes vnto yt crowne of Eng∣lande. At whyche season also was de¦lyuered certeyne iewelles, whych be∣fore tymes had ben wōne frō ye Scot¦tes by kynges of England. Amonge the whych the blacke crosse of Scot∣lande is specyally named, a relyke ac¦compted of great preciosyte. And nat alonely the kyng by hys synystre coū¦sayll lost hys tytle and ryght that he had to the realme of Scotlande, as farre as the sayd coūsayl might helpe it / but also all lordes & barones & all other men of England that had any landes or rentes within Scotlande, loste theyr ryghte in lyke maner, ex∣cepte they wolde dwel vpon the sayd landes and becomme the kynge of Scottes lyege men. And soone after was concluded a maryage betwene Dauyd le Bruze sonne of Robert le Bruze, and Iane the kynges syster / whyche of diuerse writers is surna∣med Iane of the towre or Iohan of Towers. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxviii.   Symon Fraunces.   Hamonde Chyckewell.   Anno .ii.   Henry Combmartyn.   IN thys yere, whyche at thys daye was the seconde yere of the kyng / Dauyd foresayd the son of Roberte le Bruze thā kynge of Scot¦tes, maryed vppon the daye of mary Magdaleyne at hys towne than of Berwyke, ye fore named Iane syster vnto the kynge of Englande. But it was nat longe after or the Scot∣tes in despyte of the Englysshemen, called hyr Iane make peace. And also to theyr more derysyon, they made dyuerse truffes, roundes, and songes, of the whyche one is special¦ly remembred as foloweth. ¶Longe beerdys hartles Paynted hoodes wytles Gay cotes graceles Maketh Englande thryfteles. whyche ryme as saythe Guydo was made by the Scottes, pryncy∣pally for the deformyte of clothyng that at those dayes was vsed by En¦glysshemen. Thanne the kynge at hys parlyamēt holden at Salys∣bury, made syr Roger Mortymer erle of the Marche / and syr Iohan of Elthā hys owne brother he made erle of Cornewayll. where after the sayd syr Roger toke moche more vp∣pon hym than other lordes were cō∣tented
wyth / so that by the kynges mother and hym, all thynge was ru∣led and guyded. And suche lordes as before tyme were assygned to haue the rule and guydynge of the kynge, as the erle of kent, syr Edmunde of wodestock ye kynges vncle, ye erle of Lācastre, ye erle marshal with dyuers bysshoppes & barons & knyghtes to the noumbre of .xii. in short proces of tyme for the more party were set by / so that the allonely rule of the lande rested in the quene and the sayde syr Roger. By meane wherof many and great thynges of the realme grewe out of ordre, whiche were tedyous to reherce. Anno domini .M.CCC.xxviii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.xxix.   Rycharde Lazar.   Iohan Grauntham.   Anno .iii.   Henry Gysours.   IN this thyrde mayres yere / y• aboue sayde syr Edmunde of wodestoke erle of kente entendynge the reformacion of the mysse ordre of the realme, beynge enfourmed that his brother syr Edward was in lyfe / deuysed certayne letters towchynge the delyuery of his sayd brother, and sent them to his sayd brother, of whi∣che dede he was shortly after accu∣sed / and by auctoryte of a parlyamēt holden at westmynster aboute Pen∣thecost folowynge, he for that dede was iudged to haue his hede smyten of. wherof execucyon was doone the fyue and twenty day of May folow∣ynge in the foresayd cytye of wynche¦ster. And soone after kyng Edwarde sayled into Fraūce, and dyd homage vnto Phylyp de Ualoyes then new∣ly made kynge of Fraūce, for the du∣chy of Guyan in the towne of Amy∣as. After whiche homage so doone he was rychely feasted of the Frenche kynge, and solaced in dyuerse maner of fourmes / as by iustes, huntynge, hawkynge, and many other pleasu∣res / and then in louynge maner toke his leue of the kynge, and so retur∣ned into Englande. The fyfthtenth day of Iune folowynge, was borne the kynges fyrst sonne, and at wode∣stoke crystened and named Edward / whiche in proces of tyme dyd growe to a noble and famouse man, and is moost comunely called in all crony∣cles prynce Edwarde. Of whome in this story some excellente dedes shall be expressed. In the moneth of Octobre vpon the .xvii. daye & euen of saynt Luke / syr Roger Mortymer before named, bi meanes of syr wylliā Moūtague, syr Rafe Staforde, syr Iohn̄ Neuyle & other, bi a cōpased meane was takē in ye castel of Notynghā / not withstā¦dynge yt the keyes of ye sayde castell were daili & nyghtly vnder his ward and kepynge / the kynge, the quene, the olde quene, with dyuerse other nobles, thā beynge in the same castell lodged. The maner of the takyng of this erle syr Roger Mortymer I passe ouer, for the dyuersyte that I haue sene therof of sundry wryters. But many agreen that he with syr Symonde of Bedforde and other, were in that nyght taken and after sente vnto the towre of London / and there put in strayte kepynge. Then the kynge in shorte processe after cal∣led a parlyament at London, for the reformacyon of many thynges mys∣ordered in the realme, by meane of ye foresayde syr Roger, as the comune fame went than.
Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xl.   Robert of Ely.   Symon Swaylond.   Anno .iiii.   Thomas Harworde.   IN this .iiii. mayres yere & ende of the thyrde yere of this kyng duryng the foresayd parliamente as aboue is touched at Londō, the fore∣sayd syr Roger Mortymer was accu¦sed before the lordes of the parliamēt of these artycles with other / whereof v. I fynde expressed. And fyrste was layed vnto hys charge, that by hys meanes syr Edwarde of Carnaruan by mooste tyrrannouse deth in the ca¦stell of Barkley was murdered. Se∣cundaryly that to the kynges great dyshonoure & dammage, the Scot∣tes by hys meanes & treason escaped frō the kyng at ye parke on Stāhope whych then shuld haue fallen in the kynges daūger, ne had ben yt fauour of the sayd Roger to thē thā shewed. Thyrdely to hym was layed, that he for execuciō of the sayd treason, recey¦ued of ye capytayne of the sayd Scot¦tes named syr Iames Dowglas, great summes of money. And also for lyke mede, he had to the kynges great dyshonoure and hurte of hys realme, concluded a peace betwene ye kyng and the Scottes / & caused to be delyuered vnto theym the charter or endenture called Ragman, wyth many other thynges to the Scottes great aduaūtage & inpouerysshyng of this realme of Englād. Fourthlye was layed to hym, that where by sy∣nystre & vnlefull meanes contrary yt kynges pleasure & wyll, or assente of the lordes of the kynges counsayl, he had gotten into hys possessyō moche of the kynges treasoure / he vnskyl∣fully wasted & mysspent it. By reason wherof the kyng was in necessyte, & dryuen parforce to assaye his frēdes. Fyfthlie, that he also had enpropered vnto hym dyuerse wardes belōgyng to the kyng, to hys great lucre & the kynges great hurt / and that he was more secrete with quene Isabell the kynges mother, than was to goddes pleasure or the kynges honour. The whych artycles wyth other agayne hym proued / he was by auctoryte of the sayd parlyament iuged to dethe. And vpō saynt Andrewes euyn next ensuyng, at London he was drawen & hanged. About the begynnynge of August folowyng syr Edwarde Bay¦loll the sonne of syr Iohan Bayloll some tyme kynge of Scottes, by meanes before purchased, opteyned suche fauoure that wyth the ayde of syr Henry Beawmoūt, syr Dauyd of Stroley, syr Geffery Moubray, and wyth the ayde of .ii.M. Englysshemē entred into Scotlād by water / wher in short space drew vnto thē such mul¦titude of scottes, yt the sayd Edwarde was lord of a greate hoste / & so kepte on his way tyll he came to a place cal¦led Gledismore, or after some writers Crakismoore. where he was encoun¦tred of ye power of Scotlād, & fought there a cruell batayl, in ye which were slayn a great multitude of Scottes. By reason of whych victorie he was crowned kyng of scottes at yt towne of Scone shortly after. And shortly after he mette wyth kynge Edward at the towne of Newe castell, and there vnto hym made hys homage & feawty for the lande of Scotlāde. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxx.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxi.   Iohn̄ Mockynge.   Iohn̄ Pountnay.   Anno .v.   Andrew Awbrey.  
IN thys fyfth mayres yere and syx yere of the kynge in the mo¦neth of Iuly, for so moche as ye Scot¦tes had busyed theym to haue slayne Edwarde Bayloll theyr kynge, and hym had constrayned to auoyde hys lande, or elles to kepe hym in somme stronge holde tyll he myghte by hys frendes or lyeges be socoured / kyng Edwarde for the same entent wyth a stronge power persed the realme of Scotlande, & after layde hys syege vnto the towne of Berwyke. Uppon the .xix. daye of the foresayd moneth of Iuly, the Scottes wyth a greate power purposyng to remoue ye sayde syege, came towarde the sayd towne. wherof kyng Edward beyng enfour¦med, made towarde thē / & ar a place called Halydone hyll, gaue to ye sayd Scottes batayll, & of them had triū∣phaunte vyctorye / in so moche that he slewe of them as testifyen dyuerse wryters, viii. erles, ix. hūdreth knygh¦tes & banerettes, iiii.C. esquyres, and vpon .xxxii.M. of the comon people & of Englysshe men were slayne but onely .xv. persones. After whych vic∣tory thus by the kynge opteyned / the capitayne of Berwyke vpō ye morew folowynge beyng saynt Margaret∣tes day, yelded to the kyng the sayde towne with the castel. And that done kyng Edward betoke the guydyng therof with all other castelles & tow∣nes within that lande, vnto the fore∣named syr Edward Baylol as kyng of Scottes / & shortly after retourned into Englande. Than Dauyd the sonne of Robert le Bruze beynge as before is sayd kyng of Scottes, was constrayned with hys wyfe secretely to sayle into Fraunce / & thyder was brought by a Flemyng named Mar¦cuell as testyfyeth the Frenche crony¦cle. where of Phylyppe de Ualoyes than Frenche kyng / the sayd Dauyd with Iane of the towre his wyfe was receyued. And for theyr comforte the sayde Frenche kyng gaue vnto them the castell of Gaylarde, tyll fortune to them wolde be more frendelye. Thys yere also as wytnesseth ye sayd frenche cronycle, the Frenche kynge sente vnto the kynge of Englande ye bysshop of Beauuays and the hyghe constable of Fraūce / whych shewed vnto kynge Edwarde, that theyr so∣ueraygne lorde entendyd a voyage into the holy lāde / and requyred hym of hys ayde and cōpany for perfour∣maunce of the sayd iournay. where∣unto the kynge gaue answere vnto that request, than whan the Frenche kynge had perfourmed all suche con¦dycions as he before tymes had pro∣mysed to do / than he sayd he shuld be contēted to gyue suche answere vnto yt request by thē in hys name made, as therūto shulde be cōuenient. And more he added to the same, yt he mar∣uayled greatly that the sayd Frenche kynge entended any suche voyage, tyll he had clerelye acquyted hym of the sayd promysse & couenaunt with whyche answere the Frenche kynge was nothynge contented / so that ma¦lyce and murmour grewe and encrea¦sed betwene them dayly after. And an occasyon of thys sharpe answere was, for so moche as kynge Edward was credyble enfourmed, that the Frenche kynge had vytayll and man¦ned .x. greate shyppes to haue saylled into Scotlande, and there to haue warred / the whyche by tempest were wedyr dryuen into Flaunders, & so sore betyn with the see that after they had sold moch of theyr stuffe at ye ha∣uyn of Sluce, they were cōpelled of necessyte to retorne without worship into Fraunce. Thys with other kyn∣delyd suche a dedely hate betwene these .ii. crysten prynces, y• moche cry¦sten blode in {pro}cesse of tyme folowing was for theyr quarelles shadde.
Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xxxi.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xxxii.   Nycholas Pyke.   Iohn̄ Preston.   Anno .vii.   Iohn̄ Husbande.   IN thys .vii. yere in the wynter season, and as sayeth Guydo in the moneth of Nouēbre / the kynge yode agayne towarde Scotlāde and helde hys Crystmas at yorke. And after the solempnytie of that hyghe feast ended, he sped hym into Scot∣lāde / where her layde siege vnto ye ca¦stel of Kylbrydge, & lastely wan it by strengthe / & set the countrey in some quyetnesse. And after retourned vnto Newe castel vpon Tyne, and taryed there a certayne of tyme, and helde there hys feaste of Pentecoste wyth great royalte. whyther within shorte space after came syr Edward Baylol kyng of Scottes / and vpon the day of saint Geruasi & Prothasi, or y• .xix. day of Iune, made his homage vnto kynge Edwarde / and in presence of many other noble mē of bothe lādes, sware vnto hym feawty or fydelyte. And ye done he retourned into Scot¦lande & kyng Edward vnto yorke, & so vnto wyndesore. Thē were al such lordes of Englande as before tyme were in Edward the secondes dayes disseased of suche landes as they had in Scotlād, restored agayne to theyr sayd possessions / & for theym made theyr homage vnto ye kyng of Scot∣tes, sauynge theyr allegeaunce vnto theyr naturall soueraygne lorde. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxiii.   Iohn̄ Hamonde.   Iohan Ponteney.   Anno .viii.   wyllyam Hansarde.   IN thys eyghte yere certayne / ambassadours were sent from Philip de Ualoyes kyng of Fraūce / as the bysshop of Thuroyn, and the lorde of Ferry and Peynguy, for to cōclude certayn artycles of variaūce betwene theyr lord & the kyng of En¦gland. But theyr purpose toke none effecte / except that the kyng graūted to sende vnto the Frēch kyng shortly after, a certayn of hys lordes to haue forther comunycacion with hym tow¦chyng the sayd artycles. The whych promyse he fulfylled as appereth in he next yere ensuyng. Anno domini .M.CCC.xxxiii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.xxxiiii.   Iohan. Hynkstone.   Reynolde at Cunduyte.   Anno .ix.   walter Turke.   IN thys .ix. yere fell excedynge plente of rayne / & therupō en∣suyed great moreyne of beestes. And in the moneth of Decembre the kyng entred agayne into Scotlande, and helde hys Crystmas at the castell of Rokkysborough, the whyche he cau∣sed to be newly repayred. And after thynges there ordered to hys plea∣sure, he retourned into Englande. And soone after he sent the archebys∣shoppe of Cauntorbury, syr Phylip
de Moūtague, & syr Geffrey Scrope vnto the Frenche kynge / to the en∣tent to haue concluded an amyte be∣twene hym and the sayd french kyng whych before was moued by ye frēch ambassade, as before is shewed in the eyghte yere of hys reygne. But whā these sayde lordes were landed in Fraunce, they were longe delayed or they myghte come to the kynges presence / in so moche that they sayd playnly vnto suche lordes of Fraūce as were assygned by ye Frenche kyng to passe the tyme wyth theym, that they supposed that it was nat the kynges pleasure to speke with them. By meane of whyche wordes they were shortly after broughte vnto the kynges presence / of whome they were receyued wyth ioyous counte∣naunce, and so contynued by a cer∣tayne of tyme in furtheryng of theyr ambassade / so yt in processe of tyme a conclusyō of peas to be had betwene Englande and Fraunce was accor∣ded, and so ferfourth spedde, that pro¦clamaciō therof shuld haue bē made in Parys and the countrey there a∣boute vppon the morowe folowynge But how it came in ye kynges mynde the Englysshe ambassadoures were scantlye retourned to theyr lodgyn∣ges, whan they were agayne sente fore / and farther enfourmed thanne, that the kynges pleasure and mynde was to haue Dauyd late kynge of Scottes to be included wythin the same peace / and that he shuld agayn be restored vnto hys kyngdome. whereunto yt was answered by the Englyssh ambassadours, that theyr cōmyssyon stretched nat so farre / nor that theyr prince had gyuen vnto thē any suche auctoryte. wherefore all ye former comunycacyō was reuoked & adnulled / & they retourned into En∣glande wythoute any conclusyon ta∣kynge. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxv.   walter Mordon.   Reynolde at Cunduyte.   Anno .x.   Rycharde Upton.   IN thys .x. yere, for so moche as no conclusyon of vnyte & peas myght be had betwene the kynges of Englande and of Fraunce / therfore warre was proclaymed vpon bothe partyes. The whyche warre was greatly procured by the meane of syr Robert of Artoys, as in the story of Phylyp de Ualoyes shalbe after she∣wed. Then eyther prynce sought ye wayes and meanes howe eyther of theym myghte discontent other / in so moche that the Frenche kynge sente soone after into Scotlande a crewe of Frenchemen, to ayde suche ene∣myes as kynge Edwarde there had. By reason whereof the sayde Scot∣tes made sharpe warre vppon the kynges seruaūtes and frendes, and putte the lande to greate vexacyon and trouble / in so moche that ye kyng was forced to assemble hys power, & to spede hym agayne thyther. Than about mydsomer the kynge entred Scotlande by the see / & warred vpō the Scottes and Frenchemē. Of the whych no notary batayl is specified, except in that iournay the kyng sub∣dued hys enemyes, & toke there dy∣uerse prysoners. Amonge the which one called erle of Morreta Frenche¦man was chyefe, y• after was with o∣ther in {pro}cesse of tyme there deliuered in exchaūge for ye erle of Namur an∣other frēch lord, whych thā was takē by gyle of Scott{is} as he was comyng
towarde saynte Iohfis towne for to ayde the partye of kynge Edwarde. whā kyng Edward had agayn paci∣fyed the Scottes, and takē homage of suche as before rebelled / he than as testyfyeth the Frenche cronicle sta¦blysshed ye fore named Edward Bay¦loll as kyng of Scottes / & commyt∣ted the rule of the lande vnto hym, as he before tymes had done. Than the Scottes for the greate kyndenesse whyche they had founde in the kyng & in recōpēsemēt of the great charge whych he by sundrye tymes had had in the defendyng of theyr enemyes / graunted & bounde them vnto hym & to hys heyres kynges of England, that they shuld ayde & assyste hym a∣gayne all prynces. And whan so euer he had warre, or any kynge of Eng∣lāde beynge ryghtfull enherytoure, agayn any prynce other wythin hys lande or without / ye Scottes at theyr propre costes & expenses shuld fynde iii.C. horsemē well armed, and a .M fotemen well & suffycyently arrayed for the warre / the whiche .xiii.C. men the Scottes shulde wage for an hole yere. And yf the kynge of Englande ended nat hys warre within the yere than he to hyre and wage the sayde Scottes as he doth the other of hys souldyours. After whyche grauntes made, & bondes for the suertie therof receyued by ye kynge, as wytnesseth the Frenche cronycle / the kynge le∣uynge at Edenborough a certayne of hys knyghtes to strength yt Scot¦tes agaynste the Frenchemē, whych compassed all the wayes they myght to brynge Dauyd the sonne of Ro∣bert le Bruze in possessyon of that lāde / he shortlye after retourned into Englande. Anno domini .M.CCC.xxxv.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxvi.   wyllyam Brykelsworthe.   Iohn̄ Pontnay.   Anno .xi.   Iohn̄ Northall.   IN thys .xi yere, ye kynge remē∣brynge the greate charge yt he had with the warre in Scotlāde, and also for the charge yt he dayly had in Guyan, & more contynually shulde haue in defēdyng of ye frēchmē & wyn¦nyng of hys right / he therfore gathe¦red treasour vpō euery syde / & by dy∣uerse & sundry ways wherof ye maner is nat expressed. But so great plente came to hys vse, yt it was scāt thorow out ye realme. By reason of whyche scarcytie, vytayll & moche other Mer¦cimonies were exceding good chepe. For at Lōdō a quarter of whete was solde for .ii.s, a fat oxe for .vi.s.viii.d, a fat shepe for .vi.d. & .viii.d.vi. pe∣iōs for a peny, a fatte goos for .ii.d, a pygge for a peny, & so al other vytayl after ye rate. This yere also vpō holy Rode day or ye .xiiii. day of Septēbre dyed syr Iohn̄ of Elthā erle of Corne wayl & brother vnto ye kyng without issu / wherfore ye sayd erldō fell into ye kynges hāde. This mā lyeth buryed at westmynster vpō ye right hāde of ye hygh aulter. In this yere also apered Stella cometa in englysshe named ye blasyng starre, in an huge stremyng maner / wherof many & dyuerse con∣strucciōs were had amōge the comō people, whych I passe ouer. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxvii.   walter Neale.   Henry Darcy.   Anno .xii.   Nycholas Crane.  
IN thys .xii. yere ye kynge helde hys parlyament, at westmyn∣ster about the tyme of lent. Durynge the whych he made of the erledm of Cornewayle & duchy, & gaue it with the erledam of Chestre vnto Edward hys sonne. And at thys parlyamente were made .vi. erles / that is to say of Derby, of Northampton, of H̄tyng¦don, of Salysbury, of Glouceter, & of Suff▪ as Henry of Lancastre was created erle of Derby or after somme wryters of Leyceter, wyllyam de Bo¦thum erle of Northamptō, wyllyam de Clynton erle of Hūtyngedon, wyl¦lyam de Moūtague erle of Salysbu¦ry, Hugh of Audeley erle of Glouce∣ter, & Robert of Ufforde erle of Suf∣folke. And in thys parlyamente was an acte enacted, that no man shulde were no maner of sylk in gowne, cote or doublet, but yf he myghte spende of good rente an hundreth , by yere, whyche acte was nat longe holden. In thys yere also the kynge amonge dyuerse pryuyleges graūted vnto ye cytezeyns of London, that the offy∣cers of the mayres & sheryfes, shulde from that day forthwarde vse marys of syluer parcell gylte. The kynge of Fraunce thys yere for so moche as he was credybly en∣fourmed, that kyng Edwarde wolde entre the lande of Fraūce, & to make warre vpō thesame, he therfore made great purueyaunce to resyste hym. For the cōmon fame ranne thanne in Fraūce, yt kyng Edward entēded nat onely to clayme Gascoyne & Guyan, but also all Fraunce as hys propre & rightfull enherytaunce in the ryghte of hys mother. wherefore the French kynge assembled an huge hoste, and commytted the rule of it vnto the kynge of Nauerne, and to the erle of Alenson brother vnto the sayde Frenche kynge▪ whyche sayde capy∣taynes wyth theyr people awayted dayly the kynge of Englandes com¦mynge / whyche theym for that yere dyspoynted. But as testyfyeth the same Frenche cronycle / kynge Ed∣warde in thys whyle sent into Flaun¦ders a knyghte called syr Barnarde de Brette, for to treate of an amye betwene hym and the Flemynges. For this cause, the erle of Flaunders whych was very fast with the Frēch kynge, called hys counsayll to hym, to haue theyr aduyce howe he myght beste ordre hym selfe and hys peo∣ple. In whych coūsayll were dyuers opynyons / so that many thoughte it better for dyuerse consyderacyons / whyche were longe to reherce, that the erle shulde rather preferre the amyte of the kynge of Englande thā of the kynge of Fraunce. Of whyche opynyon was a greate furtherer or promoter a knyghte of Flaunders called Countryssye▪ wyth whome the erle beynge for that cause discontent sent hym to pryson. And soone after at the request of the Frenche kynge, whyche layed vnto hys charge that he hadde receyued greate summes of money of the kyng of Englande, for to procure and styre the Flemynges agayne hym / he was behedded, for whyche dede the dwellers of Gaunte and of Bruges were so miscontente, that they vtterly refused ye erle & hys counsayll, & made theym stronge to withstande hys displeasure. Than ye erle was constrayned to gather hys lordes & knyghtes, for the more part of ye cōmons were agayne hym. And in short proces after met in playn ba¦tayll ī a place called Marchie / where after lōge fyghte, the erle & his holte was put to flyghte; & forced for hys safegard to take a castel named Mal or Malet. In which season kyng Ed¦ward beynge enfourmed of ye amytie yt the Flemynges bare towarde hym anon sent vnto them a knyght called
syr Galtyer or walter de Magny, with a goodly company of archers well apoynted / the whyche arryued in an ile called than Cazāter. whome the erle of Flaunders with a certayn of hys knyghtes encountred, & gaue vnto the Englysshemen batayl. But in the ende the erle was shamefully chased, and many of hys gentylmen slayne and takē / as syr Iohn̄ Rodes syr wyllyā Gyll, syr Nycholas Chaū¦cy, with many other slayne. And syr Guy bastarde brother vnto the erle, with dyuerse other taken / of yt which some were sent as prysoners into En¦glande. whan the Frenche kyng had vn∣derstandynge of the deuysyon that was betwene the erle and hys subiec¦tes, & how faythfull ye erle was vnto hym, entendynge to wynne by fayre meanes the fauour of ye Flemynges, whyche he knewe well he myght nat wynne by rygoure. Than he sente vnto Gaūt the bysshop of saynt De∣nys with other / whych made vnto ye rulers of ye towne & of Bruges and other townes there assembled, many fayre behestes & promyses. Amōge ye whych one was, that the Frēch kyng wolde acquyte vnto them & delyuer vnto theyr vse, all suche lordshyppes & seygnoryes as he than withheld of theyrs and hys progenytours before hym. But all was in vayn. For kyng Edward had so sped hys nedes with thē, by the meanes of one named Ia∣ques de artiuele a mā of Gaūt, which was of great substaūce, & passyng o∣ther in boldenes & capacyte of wytte & discreciō yt the sayd towne of Gaūt with Bruges, Ipre, Courtryke or Courtrey, Cassyle, and other there about, condyssended and promysed ioyntly and hooly, to refuse ye Frēche kynge, & to take the kynge of Eng∣landes partye / and the rather for the warre whych before tyme Philip de Ualoyes made vpon them in the be∣gynnyng of hys reygne, as in ye fyrst yere of the story of the sayde Phylyp shall after appere. Anno domini .M.CCC.xxxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxviii.   wyllam of Pountfreyt.   Henry Darcy.   Anno .xiii.   Hugo Marbre.   IN thys .xiii. yere, kynge Ed∣warde with quene Philip hys wyfe, for more assured stablysshemēt of amyte to be had betwene hym and the Holanders, Selāders, & Brabā∣ders, passed the see in the begynnyng of ye moneth of Iunii / & sayled wyth a goodly cōpany into the coūtrey of Brabāt, the quene thā beynge great with chyld, where of the erle of Bra∣bāt he was Honorablie receyued. In whyche season of hys there beynge, kyng Edwarde gat vnto hym many frendes. Amonge the whych Lewys of Bauyere, whych than toke vpon hym as Emperour, all be that before that tyme he was of the .xxii. Iohan than pope accursed, was one. Thys Lewys had such fauoure vnto kyng Edwarde, that he assygned▪ and or∣deyned hym for Uycayr of ye empyre, by reason of whyche offyce kyng Ed¦warde made oute hys commaunde∣mentes, & dyd many thynges to hys aduauntage and profyte. Byrth of Lyonell.In thys season quene Phylyppe lyenge at Andwarpe, was delyue∣red of a man chylde, that was na∣med Lyonell. And Phylyp de Ua∣loys hauynge knowelege of all thys demeanure of kynge Edwarde, ga∣thered vnto hym greate strenthe /
so that he had about hym innumera∣ble people / and taryed with them at Amyas and there about, from ye ende of August tyll ye begynnyng of Octo¦bre. And whā he sawe that kyng Ed¦warde came nat / he deuyded ye great hoste, in retournyng many of theym into theyr owne countreys / and the other he sente vnto stronge holdes & castelles for to let yt passage of kynge Edwarde and hys hoste into the lāde of Fraunce. And in thys passe tyme the Frenche kynge had sent dyuerse shyppes vnto the see wyth men of warre, for to take englysshe marchaū¦tes & other that came in theyr course. And so befelle that they encountred with .ii. great shyppes of Englande called the Edward and the Cristofer the whiche as testyfyeth the Frenche cronycle were freyght with greate ry¦chesse, and also well manned. Anone as eyther was ware of other / gonnes and shot of longe bowes arblasters & were nat spared on nother syde / so that betwene thē was a cruell fyghte but nat egall. For of the Frenchemē were .xiii. sayles great and smal, and of the Englysshe men but fyue that is to meane these two foresayd great shyppes, two barkys, and a caruyll / the whyche thre small shyppes esca∣ped by theyr deliuer saylynge / & the ii. abode and fought beyonde .ix. hou¦res, in so moche that there was slayn vpon both partyes aboue .vi.C. men But in the ende the sayd .ii. shyppes were taken & broughte into ye Frēch kynges stremes / and many of the En¦glysshemen that were sore wounded were cast into the see. In thys yere also the sayd Frenschemē of that Na¦uy landed at Southāpton sodeynly: and spoyled the towne, and brente a great parte therof. And ouer this the Frenche kynge made warre in Gas∣coyn, and wanne there dyuerse smal pyles and one strōge castell standing in the countrey of Gascoyne called Agenoys, whych castell was named Pēne. But all this season was kyng Edwarde in Almayne, & made ally∣aunce with dyuerse prynces of that coūtrey and other / and toke assuraū∣ces of them that they shulde ayde & assyste hym to wynne hys ryght and tytle y• he had to y• crowne of Fraūce, & after returned into Flaūders, wher he taryed all thys mayres yere. Anno domini .M.CCC.xxxviii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.xxxix.   wyllyam Thorney.   Andrew Awbry.   Anno .xiiii.   Roger Forsham.   IN thys .xiiii. yere kynge Ed∣warde spedyng hys busynesse in Almayn & Flaūders, as in ye pre∣cedynge yere is touched, retourned into Englande, and called hys hygh court of parlyament at westmynster about ye tyme of lent. In whyche par¦lyamēt / y• kyng axed of hys cōmons for the mayntenaunce of hys warre, & to recouer hys ryghte in Fraunce ye .v. part of theyr moueable goodes, ye custome of wolles for .ii. yeres to be payed afore hāde, & yt .ix. shefe of eue¦ry mānes corn / yt which at lēgth was graūted. And for ye leuyeng therof, he caused ye lord{is} of euery shyre thorugh hys lāde to answere to hī, euery lorde for yt cyrcuyte he dwelled nere vnto. But or all thys graūt were gadered & payed / the loue of the poore people tourned īto hatred, & prayer into cur¦syng. And for ye kyng shuld nede and occupye for hys prouisiōs moche mo¦ney or this graūt myght be leuied / he
therfore borowed many notable sum¦mes of dyuerse cytyes & partyculer persones of thys lande. Amonge the whyche he than borowed of the cytye of London .xx.M. marke, to be repay¦ed of the money cōmynge of the fore¦sayd graunt / the whych foresayd .xx.M. marke was leuied in the wardes of the cytye in fourme as foloweth. The towre warde was sessed at .iii.C lxv.li, wherof wyllyam of Brykles∣worthe lent .C.li / & the resydue was leuyed of .xii. persones of that warde. Byllyngysgate warde was sessed at vii.C.lxiii.li / wherof Iohn̄ de Caw¦ston lent .ii.C.li, & Aleyn Gyll .ii.C.li and the residue was lēt by .xxvi. per∣ones of that warde. The brydge was sessed at .vii.C.lxv.li.vi.s.viii.d / wherof Iohn̄ Loue∣kyne bare .ii.c.li., Iohn̄ Malwayn / & Rauffe de Lenone .ii.C.li / and the re¦sydue was borne by .xxxiii. persones of that warde. The warde of Dow∣gate was sessed at .vi.C.lx.li.x.s / of ye whych Henry Pycarde lent two .C. marke, Bartholmewe Freslyng and wyllyam Lēglyshe .ii.C. marke / & the resydue was leuyed of .xxv. persones of that warde. Langbourne warde was sessed at .ccc.lii.li. syxe .s.viii.d / wherof Thomas Horwolde lent .C.li, Iohn̄ Peche .C. marke / & the reste was lent by .xv. dwellers of yt warde. walbrooke warde was sessed at .ix C.xi.li, wherof Iohn̄ Adam lent .ii.C li, Iohn̄ de Bery and Symon Py∣stour peperer .ii.C.li, & Adā de Bery and Iohn̄ Not .ii.C. marke / and the rest was leuyed of .xxiii. persones of that warde. Bysshoppisgate warde was sessed at .v.C.lix.li.vi.s.viii.d / wherof Adā Frauncesse lent .ii.C.li, & Symonde Browne and Iohn̄ de saynt Albone ii.C.li / & the resydue was leuyed of x. persones of that warde. Lymestrete warde was sessed at .C x.li / wherof Augustyne waleys lente C.li / and .x.li. was leuyed of .iii. per∣sones of that warde. Cornehyll warde was sessed at .iii.C.xv.li / wherof Iohan Colyng and Robert Manhale drapers bare that one .C.li, and the laste .C. marke and the rest was leuyed of .xx. persones of the sayd warde. Chepe warde was sessed at .v.C.xvii.li.x.s / wherof Barthilmew Tho¦masyn mercer lent .cc. poūde, Stephā Caundysshe draper, wyllyā Holbech & Iohan Harwarde eyther of theym C. marke, Iohn̄ Dolsoby goldsmyth cc. marke, and Iohan Fawkys & Ia¦mys Naware eyther of theym .C.li & the rest was leuyed of .lxi. persones of the same warde. Bradstrete warde was sessed at .v C.lxxx. and .viii.li / wherof Thomas Legge skynner lēt .ccc.li, Iohn̄ Har¦warde stoke .cc. marke / and the resy∣due was leuyed of eyght persones of that warde. Uyntrye warde was sessed at .cccccc.xxxiiii.li.xvi.s.viii.d, wherof walter Turke fysshemonger lent .cc. marke, Iohn̄ Stoday vynte¦ner .C.li / Symonde Bolsely & Iohn̄ Rothynge .cc. marke / and ye rest was leuyed of .xxiiii. persons of ye warde. The warde of Bredstrete was ses¦sed at .cccc.lxi.li.xvi.s.viii.d / wherof Adam Brabesone lent .cc.li, and the rest was leuyed of .xxx. persones of ye warde. The warde of Nuene hyth was sessed at .cccc.xxxv.li.xiii.s.iiii.d wherof Rychard of Kyslyngbury lēt cc.li, & Iohn̄ of Gloucetre .C. marke / and the resydue was leuyed of .xvii. persones of that warde. Cord wayner strete warde was ses¦sed at two thousande and hundreth lxxx.xv.li.iii.s.iiii.d / wherof Andrew Awbrey grocer lente .viii. hundreth marke, wyllyam de Cawstone .cc.li, Iames Andrewe and Thomas Brā¦don eyther of them .ii. hūdreth marke
willyam of worceter .ii.C. marke, Io¦han Bechamp and the wyfe of Iohn̄ Halle eyther of them .C.li, and Iohn̄ Bulle, Iohn̄ Gonwardby, & wyllyā Hampstede eche of them .C. marke / & the reste whyche is .vi. hundreth .lxi.xvi.s.viii.d, was lent by .xliiii. perso∣nes of that warde. The warde of faryngedone within was sessed at .vii.C.xxx.li.xvi.s.viii.d. wherof Gylbert Staynedrope lent ii.C.li. & the reste was leuyed of .lxvii persones of that warde. Faryngdone without the wallys was sessed at .C.xiiii.li.xiii.s.iiii.d. whyche summe was leuyed of .xxi. {per}∣sones of that warde. Crepulgate warde was sessed at iiii.C.lxii.li.x.s / wherof Rychard La¦zar mercer lēt .ii.C. marke, Symōde de Bedyngton .C. marke / and the re∣sydue was leuyed of .xxxvii. persones of the sayd warde. Colmanstrete warde was sessed at M.li.li.xvi.s.viii.d / wherof Symō¦de Fraunces lent .viii.C.li, Henry of warre and Iohn̄ Denys .ii. hūdreth marke / and ye residue was lent by .vi. persones of that warde. Candelwyke strete warde was ses¦sed at .C.xxxiii.li.vi.s.viii.d / yt which sayd summe was leuyed of .xxiii. per¦sones of the sayd warde. The warde of Algate was stynted or sessed at .xxx.li, and leuyed of syx enhabytauntes of the sayd warde. Portsokyn warde was sessed at xxvii.li.x.s, & was leuyed of .vii. per∣sones of that warde. Castell Baynarde warde was ses¦sed at .lxiii.li.vi.s.viii.d, and lent by xii. persones of that warde. Bassyngeshawe warde was sessed at .lxxix.li.xiii.s.iiii.d, and leuyed of syxe persones. Aldryshe gate warde was sette or sessed at .lvii.li.x.s / and layed oute or lente by .v. persones of that warde. whyche summe totall of the foresayd xxv. wardes, amounteth to the sūme of .xiii. thousande .iii. hundreth .lxxx. & fyue .li.xiii.s. & .iiii.d. whyche summe excedeth the summe of twenty thou∣sand marke .li.li.vi.s.viii..d. And ye shall vnderstāde that he y• payed leest towarde thys lowne payed .l.s, & soo ascendyng to these summes aboue re¦hersed. wherof many was sessed at .xl li.l.li. & .lx.li, & many other of dyuerse meane summes. In thys yere also ye kyng chaūged hys coyne, & made the noble and the halfe noble of y• value of syx s.viii.d, whyche at thys day is worthe viii.s.ix.d. or .x.d, & the half noble after the rate yf they kepe the trewe weyghte / and prouided dyuerse other thynges for the weale of hys realme & spede of hys iourney into Fraunce. WHan kyng Edward had set his lande in an ordre, & had all thyng metely proui¦ded for his nede / he than aboute Lam∣messe sayled into Braban, and there helde hys coūsayl with hys frendes / and by theyr aduy¦ces made clayme to ye hole crowne of Fraunce as hys ryghtefull enhery∣taunce / & for more auctorytye of the same entermedeled the armes of En∣gland with ye armys of Fraūce, as ye se them at this daye. Then kynge Phylyp beyng of these thynges war¦ned / gathered an howge hoste, & came with them to a towne called Uermen¦doys. And kyng Edwarde with hys people entred ye coūtrey called The∣resse / & brēt & wasted ye coūtrey before hym. Thā kyng Philip drew toward the Englisshe hoste, and came vnto a place or towne called in frēch Buyrō Fosse / where he entended as sayth y• frenche boke to haue set vpon ye En∣glysshemen.
But by counsayl of hys lordes, for dyuerse causes he was let to hys dyspleasure. For after ye daye, he myght fynde no conuenyent tyme for to assayle hys enemyes / so that in conclusyon eyther hoste departed frō other without batayll or fyght / and kynge Edwarde toke hys wey to∣warde Gaunt, & kyng Phylip retour¦ned into Fraunce. Than kynge Ed∣warde by meanes of hys frende Ia∣ques de Artyuele, had all hys pleasu¦re of the towne of Gaunt / & receyued of them othe and homage. And after dyuerse conclusiōs with them and o∣ther takē / he leuyng there the quene after the testymony of some wryters, retourned agayne into Enlāde / & left with the quene, which thā was great with chylde, ye erles of Salysbury & of Oxynforde / whyche in ye kynges absence ayded well ye Flemynges a∣gayne the Frēch kyng, & dyd dyuerse marcyall actes / whyche I here passe ouer. But ī {pro}ces ye erle of Salysbury was takē prysoner / & diuers englyssh men slayne at ye assaut of a towne cal¦led ye Ile in Flaūders or of flaūders. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xxxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xl.   Adam Lucas.   Andrewe Awbry.   Anno .xv.   Bartholomewe Marres.   IN thys .xv. yere, whyle ye kyng was busyed in Englande to make prouysyō for mete & money to withstande the Frēche kyng, aswell for the warre that the sayde Frenche kyng made vpō the Flemynges & o∣ther beyng ye kynges frendes, as for hys owne particuler causes, ye quene as before is sayd beyng at the towne of Gaunt, was deliuered of a sonne, which after was named Iohn̄, about Crystmas in the begynnynge of thys mayres yere, & ende of this .xiiii. yere. This chyld whā he came to mannes astate, was surnamed Iohn̄ of Gaūt & was fyrst erle of Rychemoūt & after duke of Lācaster. & also fast as kyng Edwarde {pro}uyded for abylemētes of warre in Englāde, so fast & hasty pro¦uysyō made the Frēch kyng to with∣stande kyng Edward both by lāde & by water / so yt he had a great & strōge nauy vpō & see. Kyng Edward thā in ye moneth of Iunii, with .ii.C. sayles tooke shyppynge, & sayled towarde Flaūders / & vpō the see met or came vnto hym syr Robert Morley with ye north nauye of Englāde / so yt he had in al aboue .iii.C. sayles. And at myd somer vppon saynte Iohn̄s euyn he fought with the frēch kynges nauy, whyche lay in a wayte for hym nere to the towne called the Sluse. Of thys nauy whyche were in noumber by the reporte of the frēche boke vpō iiii.C. sayles, wherof were chyefe ad∣myralles syr Hugh Queret, & syr Ny¦cholas Buchet, & one named Barbe Noyre or in Englysh Blacke berde / the whych capytayns or admyralles anone as they espied ye englyssh flote they made towarde thē to begyn the fyght .iiii. galeys set vpō a shyppe of auaūtage which sayled before ye other named ye ryche Oliuer / the which .iiii galeys the fore named Barbe Noyre had the cunduyt of / & assayled thys sayd shyppe on euery parte, & bet her with gunneshot & her men with hayl shot excedyngely / so that of the men within her were many slayn and mo woūded, & lykely to haue ben shortly won ne had bē the rescous of her cō∣pany: thā were the sayd foure galeys soone becleped with ye English nauy, & so cruelly assayled, that they were
borded or they myghte be rescowed. Then approched the hole flote vpon bothe sydes, with hydous & ferefull dynne & noyse of gunnes, with terry∣ble flamynge of wylde fyre & other, with thycke shot of quarelles & arow¦es / and crusshynge of shyppes, ye hy∣dous & wōderfull it was to beholde / so that many a soule was there expel¦led from theyr bodies ī shorte whyle. This mortall and cruell fyght cōty∣nued as sayth the Frenche story by ye space of .viii. howres or more, ī suche wyse ye harde it was to knowe whe∣ther parte had the better / & so many deed and wounded men were cast in∣to the see, that the water whiche was in cyrcuyte aboute them was colou∣red or dyed as reed.The mansy corage of Edward the thyrde. But in ye ende by grace & great māhode of ye kynge, whiche there was sore woūded. And by his great conforte / ye Frenchemen were chased, and many of theyr shyp∣pes bowged & taken with many pry∣soners in them. Amonge the whiche the forenamed admyralles or capy∣taynes, syr Nycholas Buchet & syr Hugh Queret were .ii / the whiche in despyte of the Frenchemen were han¦ged vpon ye sayles of theyr shyppes, which they were takē in. And amōge the shyppes that were at this season taken, were recouered the .ii. foresayd shyppes named the Edwarde and ye Crystofer / the whiche before were ta∣ken by the Frenchemen, as it before is shewed in ye .iii. yere of this kynge. In this batayle also as is testyfyed of many and dyuerse wryters, were slayne vpon the noumber of .xxx.M. Frenchemen / al be it ye Frenche boke nameth so many to be slayne vpon bothe partyes / & excuse this mysfor∣tune by the neglygence of syr Nycho¦las Buchet, whiche kepte the Frēche nauy so longe within the hauen, that they were so closed in with the En∣glysh nauy, yt a great noūbre of them myght neuer stryke stroke nor shote theyr ordenaunce, but to the hurte of theyr owne company. whā kynge Edwarde had optayned this tryum∣phaunt vyctory of his enmyes, he yel¦ded great thākes vnto god. How be it he was fayne to tary a season with in his shyppe, by reason of a woūde ye which he had receyued in his thyghe. In whiche season ye quene his wyfe came to vysyte hym, and retourned agayne vnto Gaūt. And after a fewe dayes passed / ye kynge departed from Swynne, & rode vnto our lady of Ar¦denbourghe / & sent his nauy in the nexte hauen to Brugys, & moche of his people vnto the towne of Gaūt. And whā he had accōplished his pyl¦grymage, he rode vnto Brugys, and from thense vnto Gaūt / where of the dwellers he was ioyously receyued. Than kynge Edwarde there called a great counsayle / by the whiche it was determyned that he shulde pre∣pare .ii. hostes / wherof yt one shuld be of ye mē of Gaūt & of ye townes there aboute, of ye which certayne lordes of Almayne shuld haue ye rule / & ye other hoste shulde be of mē of Brugys & of Englyssh archers / & of ye host was or¦deyned syr Robert of Artoys to be le¦der & capitayne. whā ye sayd .ii. hostes were all garnysshed with all thynge for thē nedeful / ye fyrst of them was sent vnto ye town of Turney, and the other vnto ye towne of saynt Omers. The which .ii. townes at ye day were lyke strēgth vnto Fraūce, as Calays is now vnto England. wherfore the Frēch kynge for the more suretye of them, sent vnto Tournay the erle of Foys & syr Barthā than marshall of Fraūce, with .iiii.M. men of armis, & vnto saynt Omers he sent ye duke of Burgoyn with a great cōpany of lor¦des & other. whā sir Robert of Artois had lyen a certeyn tyme before saynt Omers, & many sharpe assautys by
hym and his people had ben gyuen to it, in the whiche dyuerse fortunes fell & chaunces of warre, which were tedyous and longe to wryte / fynally vpon the morowe after saynt Iames day or the .xxvi. day of Iulii / ye duke of Burgoyne with his retynue yssu∣ed out of the towne, & foughte with ye sayd syr Robert & his people a lōge season. In ye which fyght was slayne of the dukes partye the lorde of Ha∣melcourte, syr Froysard de Beaford, the lorde of saynt Uran a lorde of Spayne, & a Burgonyon lorde cal∣led the lorde of Branges, with other dyuerse knyghtes and gentylmen to the noūber of .liiii. as sayth ye Frēche cronycle / and of the comune people vpon .iii.M. But in short tyme after the power of the duke encreased in suche wyse, that syr Robert with his cōpany was fayne to departe thense, and so yode into Ipre, & there helde hym. Then as aboue is sayde when kynge Edwarde had sent forth ye fore named .ii. hostes / he with the rest of his people yode vnto a place within .ii. Englysshe myles of Tournaye cal¦led in Frēche le Pount de Pree / and there lodged hym & his people. And Phylyp de Ualoys ye Frēche kynge, came with his people vnto an house of relegyon, whiche then was called ye priory of saynt Andrewe. At which two places these two sayde prynces thus lyenge with great strengthes vpon eyther syde / kyng Edwarde by counsceyll of his lordes sent vnto ye Frenche kynge a letter, conteynynge as foloweth. A letter sent by kyng Ed¦ward to the Frēch kyngEDwarde by the grace of god kyng of Englāde & of Fraūce, and lorde of Irelande. Syr Phylyp de Ualoys, by longe tyme we haue ex¦horted by messangers and other ma∣nyfolde maner of wayes, to ye ende yt ye shulde restore vnto vs, & do to vs reason of oure ryghtfull enherytaūce of the realme of Fraunce / the whiche ye haue longe occupyed with great wronge. And for that we se well that ye entende to perseuer in youre iniuryous witholdynge without to do vnto vs reason / for our ryght to demaūde we are entred into our lāde of Flaundres as souerayne lorde of the same, and passe by that countre / doynge you ferther to vnderstande, that we haue taken with the helpe of our lorde Iesu chryst the ryght, with the power of the sayd countrey, and with our people them allyed / behol∣dynge the ryght, which we haue in ye herytage that ye wythholde frome vs with great wronge / and drawe vs towarde you to make a short ende vppon our ryghtfull demaunde and chalenge, yf ye wyll towarde vs ap∣proche. And for so moch that so great power of mē of Armes that came vp∣on our partyes, may not longe holde thē togythers without great destruc∣cyon of ye people. whiche euery good crysten man ought to eschewe / & spe∣cyally a prynce or other that haue the gouernaunce of people. we therfore moche desyre, yt in shorte dayes they may mete. And for to eschewe ye more mortalyte of the people / so that the quarell apparent atwene vs, to the destruccyon of oure chalenge, maye stāde in tryal atwene vs two / whiche thynge we offre vnto you for the cau¦ses aboue sayd. How be it that we re∣membre well the noblenesse of your persone, and your great wysedome & aduysement. And in case that ye wyll not therof / that then in our chalenge be set to afferme the batayll of youre selfe with an hundreth persones of your party of the moste suffycyent / & we in lyke wyse with as many. And yfye wyl that one wey nor the other / that then ye wyll assygne a certayne day before the cytye of Tournay to
fyght with strength agaynst strēgth, within .x. dayes after ye syght of these letters. And we wolde that all the worlde knewe, that these thynges a∣boue sayd in thys oure desyre is nat for pryde nor for great presumpcion / but for that that oure Lorde myghte set the more reste and peace amonge the crysten / and for that that the ene∣myes of god myght be resysted, and crystendome enhaunced. And ye way yt ye wyll chose of these offers aboue∣sayd / wryte agayne to vs by the brin¦ger of these letters, to hym makynge hastye delyueraunce. Gyuen vnder our great seale at Eschine sur le scaut nere vnto the cytye of Tourney, the xv. day of the moneth of Iule. Upon receyt of whych letters the Frenche kynge by the aduice of hys counsayl wrote agayne vnto kynge Edwarde in maner and fourme as foloweth. The Frenche kynges letter. PHilip by ye grace of god kyng of Fraunce / to Edward kyng of Englād. we haue sene a letter sent to Philip de Ualoys brought to our court / in ye which letter were certayn requestes. And for so moche as the sayd letter came nat to vs / the sayde requestes were nat made to vs, lyke as it apereth by the tenoure of ye sayd letter. we therfore to you make none answer. Neuerthelesse for that that we vnderstonde by the sayde letter & otherwyse, that ye are enbatelled in our realme of Fraunce, doyng great domage to vs and our sayd realme, & to the people / moued of wyll with∣out reason, nat regardynge yt which a lyege man ought to regarde to hys lyege and soueraygne lorde / for ye are entred into our homage in youre selfe, a knowelegyng as reason is to the kynge of Fraunce, and promised obeysaunce suche as a lyege man oughte vnto hys soueraygne lorde / lyke as it appereth by youre letters patētes sealed with your great seale, the whyche we haue by vs, and for that shulde you be obedyente vnto vs. Our entente is suche, that whā we shal thynke it good, we shal chase you out of our realme to our honour and mageste royall, and to the profet of our people. And in thys doynge we haue faythfull hope in oure lorde Iesu Chryste, from whome all good to vs commyth. For by your enter∣pryse whyche is of wyll nat reasona∣ble / hathe ben lette the holy voyage ouer the see, and greate quantyte of cristen people put to deth, and ye holy seruyce of god lefte, and holy chyrch vnworshypped & vnhonoured, wyth many great enormyties. And in that that ye thynke to haue the Flemyn∣ges in your ayde / we thynke vs to be assured, that the good townes and the commons wyll behaue theym in suche wyse agayne vs, and agayne our cosyn the erle of Flaunders, that they wyll saue theyr honoure and trouthe. And in that that they haue mysse done tyll nowe, hathe ben by euyll counsayl of suche people which regarde nat the common weale of the people, but of theyr owne profyte onely. Gyuen in the feelde of the pryory of saynt Andrew besyde Ayre vnder the seale of our secrete sygnet in absence of oure greate seale, the thyrty day of the moneth of Iule. It was nat longe after that the Frenche kynge hadde thus rescribed vnto kyng Edwarde, but that a mes¦synger came vnto hym frome Tour¦ney for hasty rescouse / for the towne was dayly and sharplye assauted of the Englysshe hoste. wherefore in all haste he sente thyther the duke of Athenesse, the vycounte of Tho∣nart, the vycount of Dannaye / with dyuerse other to ye noūber of .xv. men of name, with great noūber of peple.
The whych sped thē streyght vnto ye mount of Cassyle. But or they came the sayd mount was gotten by ye Fle¦mynges, so that of theyr lodgynge they were dyspoynted. By reason wherof they fered to set vpon the En¦glysshe hoste, or yet to trauayll for ye remouyng of the sayd syege of Tour¦ney / but toke theyr counceyll & swar¦ed from Cassyle, and entred ye lande of the erle of Barry, and dyd moche harme therein, And when they hadde there executed theyr pleasures / they retourned vnto the Frenche kynge. In thys meane whyle kyng Phi∣lip counsayled with hys lordes, whe¦ther it were better for hym to drawe towarde Tourney to remoue ye siege or to go into Flaunders and to make warre vpon the townes that helde with kyng Edwarde. By whych coū¦sayll it was thought moste honora∣ble, that he shulde endeuer hym selfe to remoue ye sayd syege. After whiche conclusiō so taken / he with hys hoste drewe towarde Tourney / and in the ende lodged hym and hys people at a place or towne called at that daye Bowyns, within .iii. myles of Tour∣ney, in whose cōpany was ye kynge of Nauerne, the kynge of Bohemy or Beame, the dukes of Normandy, & of Loreyne, & of Athenesse or Athēs, the erles of Alensone, of Flaunders, and of Sauoy / with other to the noū¦bre of .xiiii. erles, besyde vycountes, baronettes and knyghtes to a great noumbre. And with kynge Edwarde were these lordes folowynge / the erle of Herford, the erles of Northamptō of Derbye, of Southāpton, of Oxyn¦forde, of Henawd, of Harflete, and of rondell. Also of straungers, the duke of Geldre, and of Sclauonye, & Bra¦bant / with many other vycountes, banerettes, and knyghtes whych I passe ouer. And thus laye these two prynces with two great and myghty hostes within fyue myles, withoute great batayll or fyghte a certayne of tyme. But euer in meane whyle the towne of Tourney was assayled of ye Englysshe men and Flemynges / the whych defended them manfully and well. In the whyche passe tyme the countesse of Henaude whyche was mother vnto the quene of Englāde, and as testyfyeth the Frenche crony¦cle syster vnto the Frenche kynge, a woman of passynge discrecyon and eloquency, with ye ayde of other pryn¦ces as the kyng of Beame and other laboured suche a meane of treaty, yt a daye of dyet was betwene the two kynges appoynted / all be it that dy∣uerse of kyng Edwardes counsayll were sore agayne it, and specyally Iakes de Artyuele. Than for kyng Edwardes party was assygned the bysshoppe of Lyncolne, syr Geffrey Scrope, syr Iohn̄ of Henaude bro∣ther to the erle, & syr wyllyā Cheyny wyth other. And for the Frēche kyng was assygned the kynge of Beame, the erles of Armenake & of Sauoy, syr Lewys de Sauoy and other. And to the ende that thys appoyntement myght take the better effecte / a daye of trewce was concluded tyll mydso¦mer folowynge. But moste wryters testyfyen that kynge Edwarde lefte the syege before Tourney, for defaut of money and neglygēce of his slowe procuratours in Englāde, that sped nat hys nedes there as they shulde. For that one cause and for that other the kynge with hys hoste departed thense vnto Gaunt, and taryed there a certayne of tyme. In whych season the fore named lordes and knyghtes met at Tournay / and there debated the maters of chalenge of kynge Ed¦warde, and certayn artycles concer¦nynge the countrey of Flaunders. In whyche counsayll it was graūted by the Frenche kynges partye, that ye
Frenche kynge shulde frely departe towarde the maryage of kynge Ed∣wardes chyldren, with the hole seyg∣noryes of Gascoyn and Guyan, and the erledome of Poytyers, in so fre maner that no offycer of the French kyng shuld medle or haue to do with in any parte of those lordshyppes. And for Flaūders it was by the sayd lordes graunted, that the commons of that coūtrey in all customes and lawes shuld be iuged & ruled as they of olde tymes had vsed / and also that all bondes and oblygacyons that in tymes passed the chyefe townes had made to the Frenche kynge for any cause, shulde be cancelled and dely∣uered. And of theyr erle they shulde be acquyted in lyke wyse, for all offē¦ces done before that day. Also all cen¦suryes or curses yt they before were wrapped in, shulde be clerelye adnul¦led & reuoked, with other cōclusions and offers, whych I passe ouer. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xl.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xli.   Rycharde Berkynge.   Iohan Oxynforde.   Anno .xvi.   Iohan Rokyslee.   IN thys .xvi. yere / kynge Ed∣warde vpon saynt Andrewes euyn came to the towre of London, and sent for suche lordes as before he hadde made hys procuratours to leuye hys money in hys absence, and for theyr negligēce & mysdemeanure cast thē in prysō. But in this voyage that the kyng passed from that other syde of the see into England / he had excedynge tempest of wether, so that he passed with great fere and daūger whych tempest after the opynyon of some wryters, was rered by the ne∣gromauncers of the French kyng / to the ende to haue peryshed the kyng, or els to gyue hym the lesse courage to take the see agayne. In thys yere also were sent from ye .xii. Benet thā pope two cardynalles, to treate of a peace betwene the kynges of Eng∣lande & of Fraunce. The whych con¦cluded a peace betwene the sayd two kynges, aswell for them as for other countreys whych to thē were allyed, for the terme of .iii. yeres and more. In whyche tyme it was agreed, that bothe the sayd kynges by theyr proc¦tours shulde publysshe & declare be∣fore the pope theyr claymes and cau¦ses, to the ende that by hym and his coūsayl a fynall dyreccion & cōcorde myght be set betwene theym. whych agremente of the sayde cardynalles was thus concluded in the towne called Malestrete, aboute the feaste of saynte Gregory in lente / beynge there presente for the kynge of Eng∣lande, the erles of Derbye and of Northampton wyth other / and for the Frenche, kynge, the dukes of Burbon & of Burgoyne, with other for hys party. But thys agremente stoode to lytle effecte. For it nat wyth standynge the warre betwene these two kynges was contynued, so that eyther fortyfyed theyr frendes and allyes. And soone after happened, that where Iohan duke of Brytayn dyed wythout issu / variaunce fel be∣twene Charles de Bloys and Iohn̄ erle of Mountforde, for the tytle of that dukedome / so that betwene thē mortall warre was exercysed, as in the story of Phylyppe de Ualoyes shall after more playnly be decla∣red. whyche warre so contynuynge / the kynge of Englāde ayded ye party of the erle of Mountforde, and the Frēch king ayded Charles de Bloys
And ouer that duryng the terme of ye sayde treuce,Tinc Bre∣che. the French kyng made warre vpon the Gascoynes, as after shall apere. And in Scotlande some styrynge was made thys yere by ex∣cytynge of the Frenche kynge, in so mych that the kynge was fayne to sende thyder a crewe of soudiours to strength suche holdes as he there helde. And in thys yere was ye quene delyuered of a man chyld at ye towne of Langeley, the whyche after was named Edmunde, and surnamed Ed¦munde of Langley. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xli.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xlii.   Iohn̄ Luskyn.   Symond Fraunces.   Anno .xvii.   Rycharde Kyslyngbury.   IN thys .xvii. yere / kynge Ed∣warde at the request of dyuers of hys yonge lordes and knyghtes, suffered to be exercysed certayn poyn¦tes and feates of warre, as iustys, turnamentes and other. whych were executyd at Dunstable / where the kynge and the quene were present, wyth the more partye of the lordes and ladyes of the lande. Thys yere dyed the forenamed Iohn̄ duke of Brytayne / by reason of whose deth the warre as in the pre¦cedynge yere is touchyd, grewe by¦twene the sayde Charlys de Bloyes and the erle of Mountforde. Thys Charlys de Bloyes made his claym to that duchery, by tytle of his wyfe, that was doughter of Guy vycount of Lymogys, and seconde brother of the foresayde Iohn̄ duke of Bry∣tayne. And Iohn̄ erle of Mount∣fort claymed by the tytle that he was thyrde brother vnto the forenamed duke. But of thys mater I entende to shewe more playnely, and of the ende therof in the story of Phylyp de Ualoys as before I haue sayde / and rather there than here, bycause the fayte therof was not done in En∣glande but in Brytayne, wherof the sayde Phylyppe pretendyd rule and chyefe sygnory. Anno domini .M.CCC.xlii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xliii.   Iohn̄ Stewarde.   Iohn̄ Hamonde.   Anno .xviii.   Iohn̄ Ayleshm̄.   IN thys .xviii. yere, the kynge shortely after Easter callyd a parlyament at westmynster. In tyme wherof Edwarde hys eldeste sonne was creatyd prynce of walys. And many ordynaūces for the weale of ye lande there were enactyd, whych for length I passe ouer. Clement the i. pope.In thys yere also Clement the .vi. of ye name, whyche newly was made pope, toke vpon hym to gyue dyuers bysshopryches and benefyces which then fell voyde in Englande. wher∣wyth the kynge was nothynge con∣tented / in so mych that he sent out cō∣myssyons and strayte commaunde∣mentes, that no man in tyme folow∣ynge shulde present or inducte any suche persone or persones, that so by the pope were promoted wythout ye agremente of the kynge, as farre as towchyd hys prerogatyue. The sayd pope Clement was fyrste archebys∣shoppe of Roan, and munke of saynt Benettes order, a Frencheman of byrth, and before called Peter / a man
of excellent cunnyng, but a waster of goddes patrymony / & promoted to ye dygnyte, by instaunt laboure of the Frenche kyng / which sent hys sonne Iohn̄ duke of Normandy & the duke of Burgoyn vnto the cytye of Auy∣nyon or Auygnō, to procure and fur∣ther the eleccyon. By meane wherof he was there chosen pope aboute the vii. day of May, and tronysed in the sayd moneth of May, in the begyn∣nynge of the yere of grace after thac¦compte of the chyrche of Englande, M.CCC. & .xliii. By meanes and fa∣uoure of whyche pope, the Frenche kynges causes and maters betwene kynge Edwarde and hym were some deale promoted. For as testyfieth the Frenche boke / the French kyng thys yere put to deth one mayster Hēry de Malestrete, a graduat man, and bro¦ther vnto syr Godfrey de Malestrete knyght, lately also put to deth by the sayde Frenche kynge, for theyr fyde∣lyte whyche they bare towarde kyng Edward, as hys feodaryes. wherof kynge Edwarde made hys cōplaynt vnto the pope, of thys and other thynges to be done contrary the con∣stytucyons of the former peace con∣cluded by the two cardynalles / and had therof no remedye. In thys yere also kynge Edwarde made a coyne of fyne golde,kynge Ed∣wardes Flo∣ryne. and named it the Flo∣ryne / that is to say, the peny of the va¦lue of syxe s. viii. d., the halfe peny of the value of thre s. iiii. d, and the far thynge of the value of .xx. d. whyche coyne was ordeyned for hys warres in Fraunce, for the golde therof was nat so fyne as was the noble, whyche he before in hys fourthen yere of hys reygne had caused to be coyned. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xliii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xliiii.   Geffrey wychyngham.   Iohan Hamonde.   Anno .xix.   Thomas Legge.   IN thys .xix. yere, the kyng held a solempne feaste at hys castell of wyndsore / where betwene Candel masse and lent were holden or execu∣ted many marcyall actes, as iustes, tournamentes with diuerse other / at the whyche were present many straū¦gers of other landes.Thorder of the garter. And in ye ende therof, he there deuysed the order of the garter, and after stablisshed it as at thys daye it is contynued. In this yere about midsomer, kyng Edward wyth a stronge armye sayled vnto Sluse, and so into lytle Brytayne. But for he was dyspoynted of the ayde of the Flemynges, by reason of the deth of hys trusty frende Iaques de Artyuele, whyche than was slayn of the Flemynges of Gaunt, by a cō∣spyracy that they made agayne hym by suche as fauoured the partye of ye French kyng / he tourned home into Englande agayne the same yere / le∣uynge behynde hym the erle of Sa∣lysbury with a stronge company, to ayde Iohn̄ erle of Moūtforde agayn syr Charles de Bloys. The whyche Iohn̄ by the ayde of the Englysshmē wan diuerse townes & holdes in Bry¦tayne, vpō the sayd syr Charles & his Frenchmē. But in the ende of thys yere he was taken with such sykenes yt he dyed in a towne called Corenty∣ne. After whose deth the sayd Char∣les posseded the more parte of the du¦chye of Brytayne. Thys yere the kyng sent ye erle of Derby with a strōg army into Guyā for to ayde the erle of Northāpton / whome ye kynge before had left there
at Burdeaux, to strēgth that coūtrey agayne the French men. To whome after the dethe of the forenamed syr Iohn̄ erle of Mountforde, drewe ma¦ny of the soudyours that were on his partye. Anno domini .M.CCC.xliiii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.xlv.   Edmunde Hempnale.   Rychard Lacer.   Anno .xx.   Iohn̄ Glouceter.   IN thys .xx. yere or later ende of the .xix. yere, yt is to wyt aboute saynt Nycholas tyde in the begyn∣nynge of thys mayers yere / the fore∣sayd erles of Derby & Northampton had won the towne & castel of Berga¦rat in Gascoyne, & slewe there the erle of Ualētynoys chefe capytayne ther∣of / & toke there a noble man called ye erle of the Ilys, wyth many other ryche prysoners. And about Apryll ye sayd erles wanne a strōge towne cal∣led the Ryall. wherof heryng Philip de Ualoys, in all haste sent hys sonn̄ Iohn̄ duke of Normandy to wyth∣stande & to gyue batayll vnto ye sayd erles. But whan the sayd duke was nere vnto the Englysshemen, he had suche tydinges of theyr strength that he retourned vnto hys father agayn. For the whych dede hys father wyth hym was greuously discontented / in so moche yt by ye occasiō to auoyd his fathers displeasure, he retourned īto Gascoyne, & layed siege vnto ye castel of Aguyllon / & there remayned tyll ye moneth of August folowing without gettynge of it any aduauntage / at whych season he retourned agayn to his father. After whose departure the erle of Northāpton with hys cōpany gatte a strōge towne called in french la Roche Darien / which is to meane the Roche or Rocke of Aryen. In the tyme of whyche warre thus cōtinued in Brytayne & Guyan / the Frenche kyng made purueyaunce to defende hys lande agayne kyng Edward, for whome he awayted dayly. And kyng Edwarde as faste gathered money, & made hys dayly purueyaunce to pre∣pare hym thyderwarde. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xlv.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xlvi.   Iohn̄ Croydon.   Geffrey wychyngham.   Anno .xxi.   wyllyam Clopton.   IN this .xxi. yere, kyng Edward helde hys parlyament at west∣mynster about the tyme of lent. And in the moneth of Iuly folowynge, he toke shyppynge and sayled into Nor¦mandy, & landed as wytnesseth the Frēche cronicle at a place in that pro¦uynce named in Frenche la Hougne sent Uast, with .xi.C. sayles greate & small, ye .xii. day of ye foresayd moneth of Iuly. And anone as he was lāded, he cōmaunded hys people to waste ye countrey before them. And by the le∣dyng of a knyght called syr Godfrey Harcourte / he was broughte vnto a towne called Melly, and from thens vnto Mountboure, where the kynge wythe all hys people rested hym a season. In the whyche tyme the sayde syr Godfrey brent & spoyled the coūtrey of Cōstantyne there nere adioynyng. Than kyng Edward departed frō ye foresayd towne, & went vnto a strōge towne called Karenten or Karenton / the whyche he gate wyth the castell
to the same belongynge. And so con∣tinued his iourney, yt vpō the .xx. day of ye sayde moneth of Iule, he layed hys syege before the cytye or towne of Caen. wherin were at ye daye chyef capytaynes, the bysshop of Bayen, ye erle of Ewe, the lorde of Turnebu, wyth other dyuerse knyghtes & men of name. Than kyng Edwarde com∣maunded that the sayd towne shulde be assayled / ye whych was done with so great force, & specyally with suche stronge and cōtynuall shot, that the Frenchmē forsoke the wallys & drew them towarde the castell. And in pro∣cesse after longe & cruell fyght, ye En∣glysshemen entred the towne, & there toke prysoners. Amonge the whyche there was taken ye cōstable of Fraūce & the kynges chaūberleyne.Cane con¦quered. Than the Englysshemen spoyled and pyl∣led the towne of Caen / and bare the pyllage vnto theyr shyppes, whyche after was conueyed by them into En¦glande. whan kynge Edwarde had thus spoyled and brent a parte of the towne of Caen, & forced the bysshope of Bayen & the other capytaynes to take the castell for theyr refuge / con∣siderynge the strength of the same he departed thens, and so sped hym to∣warde the cytye of Roan chefe & prin¦cypall cytye of Normandye. But the Frenche kynge with a greate power was in thys whyle comē vnto Roan̄, & had broken the brydges, and stop∣ped the passages in suche wyse, that kynge Edwarde was fayne to leue ye way / so that he costed toward Parys and came to a stronge towne called Uernon, & from thens to a towne na¦med Amyrlene / at whych townes he was resysted & loste some of hys sou∣dyours. And the .xii. daye of Auguste he came to a towne named Poysy, & taryed there .vi. dayes / and from thēs yode vnto saynt Germayn. And euer syr Godfrey de Harcourt byeng in ye vawarde, brent the townes & spoyled the coūtrey as he went And lyke as kyng Edwarde with hys hoste thus passed the coūtrey to∣warde Parys / so in lyke maner the Frenche kynge with hys power, pas∣sed or helde hys way towarde ye sayd cytye / beynge so nere sundry tymes, that eyther hoste had syght of other. But the ryuer of Seyne was euer be¦twene them, so that for it they myght nat ioyne in batayll. whan kyng Ed∣warde was comyn to a towne called saynt Clowe / he set fyre therin, which was sene vnto Parys. whyche put ye cytezeyns in great fere, in so moch as wytnesseth the Frēch cronycle, that if the Frēch kyng had nat ben there pre¦sent / the cytye shulde haue be yelden vnto kyng Edwarde. Thā kyng Ed¦ward seynge he myght nat passe the ryuer of Seyn towarde ye citie of Pa¦rys, occupyed all ye chefe palaysys & royall Manours, where the Frenche kynges were accustomed for to so∣iourne and lye at / & dranke the wyne & occupyed suche stuffe & necessaryes as he there fande. And at hys depar∣tyng set fyre vpō them, & cōsumed the more parte of them. As at poyzy one, at saynt Germayne an other, and at Mount Ioy the thyrde / & brente the towne of Poyzy, reseruyng an house of nunnes, whyche was founded by Phylyp le Beawe father vnto kyng Edwardes wyfe. Here ye shal vnder stāde that the auctours or wryters fa¦uoureth theyr owne nacyon.Affeccyō of Historiogra∣phers. For the Englysshe wryters say, that ye Frēch kyng fledde / & brake the brydges as he went, to the ende that the Englysh hoste shuld nat wynne to the French men to gyue vnto thē batayll. And ye Frenche boke sayeth, that kynge Ed¦warde fled, & wolde nat abyde batayl with the Frenche men / wherefore the Frēch kyng brake the brydges to the entent that ye Englyssh mē shuld nat
escape hys daūger. But howe it was as sayth an other wryter called Iohn̄ Froysarde / the commons of Fraūce thought it a greate dyshonoure vnto all the lande, that the Englyssh hoste shuld so passe thorough the harte or myddell of Fraunce / and to occupye the kynges chief lodgynges, & nat to be foughten with of all that season. whych myght nat be after the opiniō of the sayd common people, wythout great treason of suche as were nere about the kyng. Thā kyng Edward was so closed by reason of brekynge of brydges, yt he was forced to drawe backe, and to reedyfye the brydge of Poyzy. The whiche was repayred in so stronge wyse, that he & hys hoste passed there ouer withoute parell. Howe be it that in the tyme of repay∣rynge of it, the French kyng sent thy¦der .ii.M. men to let the sayde werke. But the archers kept theym of wyth theyr shot, in so sharpe maner, that ye more partye of them was slayne, and the werke {per}fyghted as aboue is sayd Than kyng Edwarde entred the coū¦trey of Pycardy / & the French kynge remoued frome saynte Denys vnto saīt Germains, & frō thens to a town called Aubeuyle in Poyteau, & from thens to Antoygne. In thys whyle kyng Edward with baner dysplayed came vnto the cytye of Beauuayze, & assayled the towne. But the towne was wel garnisshed with soudyours which defēded theyr enemyes vygou¦rously. wherfore kynge Edwarde cō∣syderynge, he myghte nat lyghtely wynne that towne, sette the bulwer∣kes on fyre / and so departed thens, & yode vnto a place called in Frenche Soygnouile or Blāke Tache. where he passed the water of Sum vpon a frydaye the .xxv. daye of August, and lodged hym & hys people nere vnto a forest called Cressy or Crecy. wher∣of whan the French kyng was ware anone he sped hym frome the fore na¦med towne of Antoygne vnto Au∣beuyle agayne. where after he hadde refresshed hym and hys people, he rode vnto an abbey faste by the fore∣named towne of Cressy. In thys passe tyme, Iohn̄ duke of Normandy and sonne of Phylyp de Ualoys, whyche as in the precedyng yere is towched, layd hys syege vnto the castell of Aguyllon, herynge that hys father was thus warreyed wyth the kyng of Englande / brake vp his syege, and came with hys strengthe vnto hys father. THese .ii. greate hostes thus lod∣ged within lytle compasse, nere vnto the forenamed towne of Cressy / vpon the saterdaye folowyng the feaste of saynt Bartholmewe, be∣ynge the .xxvi. day of the monethe of August, eyther cruelly assayled other and foughte there a mortall & sharpe batayll. whereof in the ende kynge Edwarde gloryouslye was victoure, and chaced the Frenche kynge / and slewe in that fyght after the sayenge of moste wryters, the kynge of Bohe¦my or Beame sonne of Henry ye Em∣peroure, vii. or the. eyght, the duke of Loreyne, the erle of Alenson brother vnto the Frēche kynge, Charles erle of Bloys, the erles of Flaunders, of Sancer, of Narcourt, and of Fyen∣nes, wyth dyuerse other to the noum¦ber of eyght bysshoppes and erles, & xvii. lordes of name / and of baneret∣tes, knyghtes, and esquyers, beyōde the noumber of .xvi. hūdreth / so that as concludeth the Frenche hystorye, in that batayll was slayne the floure of the Chyualrye of Fraunce, and of the cōmons vpō .viii.M. men / & that the realme of Fraūce that day sustey¦ned such confusiō, that the lyke ther∣of had nat be sene many yeres passed /
and yt be people and men of no repu¦tacyon, as archers, by the vyolence of theyr importune shot, whych hors nor man myght stande agayne. Thā the Frenche kyng with a small com∣pany fledde sore hurte vnto a towne called Broy, & lodged there ye nyght folowynge. And kyng Edwarde be∣ynge warned that an other hoste of enemyes was commynge towarde hym / abode styll in the same feelde, & set good watches, & made great fyres thorough the hoste, and so cōtynued tyll the monday folowynge. Upon whyche day in the mornynge apered to them a new hoste of Frenche men / to the whych they gaue batayle, and slewe of them more in noumbre thā was slayne vpō the saterday before. But of capytaynes or men of name the auctor reherseth none. Than kyng Edwarde gaue great thankes vnto god of his tryumphāt vyctory / and after departed frō that towne of Cressye, and toke hys waye towarde Moustruell, and from thēs to Boleyne, and lastlye to Caleys. wherof than was capytayne vnder ye Frenche kyng a Burgonyō knyght named syr Iohn̄ de Uyēne / to whom kyng Edwarde sent that he shuld de¦lyuer vnto hym the sayde towne of Caleys. But for the kynge receyued from hym no comfortable answere / he immedyatly layde hys syege vnto the sayd towne, whych was vpon the thyrde day of the moneth of Septē∣bre / & there abode a certayn of tyme in makynge of assautes to the same. In whyche tyme and season the erle of Derby lyenge at Burdeaux, and hauynge the rule of Gascoyne and Guyan / wan dyuerse townes & hol∣des from the Frenchemen, as the townes called Sayntez in Poyteaw saynt Iohn̄ de Angely, and ye towne of Poytyers. In the whyche he had excedyng treasoure and rychesse / soo that he & hys sowdyours were great¦ly enryched, by the pyllage that they wan in those townes and coūtrey to them adioynaunt. And whā the sayd erle had spoyled the sayd townes, & brent a greate parte of the foresayde cytye of Poytyers, and the kynges palays within the same / he than at hys pleasure retourned vnto Bur∣deaux. In thys passe tyme also, the Frēch kyng to the entente to haste kyng Ed¦warde into Englande / sent Dauyd le Bruze some tyme kynge of Scot∣tes, into ye lande with a strōge army. The which gathered vnto hym such lordes and knyghtes of Scotlande as before tymes fauoured hys party and with them entred the boundes of Northumberlande, & spoyled that countrey without pyte. But it shall apere by other auctoures, that thys Dauyd le Bruze at thys daye hadde recouered the crowne of Scotlande / and that Edwarde de Bayloll was than dede, whych before was kynge. Than it foloweth whan the archebis¦shop of yorke with other lordes than lefte in Englande, herde tell that the Scottes were thus entred the lande anone the sayd archebysshppe, with syr Henry Perse, syr Rafe Neuyle, & syr Gilbert Umfreyle knyghtes, and other gentylmen aswell spyrytuall as other, apparayled theyin in theyr best maner and sped them towarde ye Scottes / so that they mette with thē and gaue vnto them batayll vpon ye euyn of saynt Luke or the .xvii. daye of Octobre in a place faste by Durhā called at that daye Neuyles crosse. where god shewed to the Englysshe men suche grace, that they scōfyted ye Scottes, and slew of them great foy¦son / and toke prysoners the sayd Da¦uid le Bruze, syr wyllyam Dowglas syr Thōlyn Fowkys, with other of ye nobles of Scotlande / the whyche
shortely after were surely conueyed vnto the towre of London, and there kepte as prysoners. whā kynge Edward from the .iii. day of Septembre as before is sayd, hadde by sondry tymes assayled the towne of Caleys, and sawe well he he might nat shortly wynne it / he pro¦uyded for hī & hys people to lye there all ye wynter folowynge / so yt for the lodging of hym & his hoste, he made so many houses & lodges, that it se∣med an other Caleys. wherfore in {pro}∣ces of tyme duryng yt syege, of the vy¦telers & suche as dayly resorted vnto ye kynges hoste, it was named newe Caleys. where ye kyng in proper per∣sone abode al the wynter folowyng, & the more parte of the next somer as after shall apere. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xlvi.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xlvii.   Adam Bramson.   Thomas Legge.   Anno .xxii.   Rycharde Basyngstoke.   THys .xxii. yere, kyng Edward after the stormy wynter was ouerpassed / he cōmaunded certayne shyppes to be ioyned mo in noumbre vnto such as before had kept the see, that no vytayll shuld come to the in∣habytaūtes of Caleys / so that ye sayd towne was fayne to holde them con∣tent with such olde store as they had for any newe that to them myghte be cōueyd or sent. And the kynges hoste was plentuously vytaylled by ye Fle¦mynges, & by other vytayllers dayly commyng out of Englande. Kynge Phylyppe hauynge dayly worde of the strength of his enemyes and the encreace of them, as by Ester lynges and other nacions that kyng Edwarde had to hym allyed / & sawe well that withoute the sayde towne were shortly rescowed, it shulde short¦ly be yolden into the handes of hys enemyes, to the great hurte of all the realme of Fraunce: wherfore after a great counsayll holden at Parys, he chaunged hys money to hys greate auaūtage / and ouer that set an inpo∣sicion vppon hys commons, to theyr great grudge & murmure. And that done he toke his leue of saint Denys about the quyndene of Pasche, and so yode vnto a towne called Hesdom̄ where he taryed the gaderyng of hys hoste, so longe that it was nere vnto the feast of mary Magdaleyn or hys people were all assembled. At whych season he set forthwarde to the town of Caleys, to remoue ye kynge of En∣gland from that syeg / and so spedde hym, that about the ende of ye moneth of Iuly, he drewe nere vnto Caleys. The whyche before hys commynge was yolden vnto kyng Edwarde / so that the Frenche cronicle sheweth no thynge of the Frenche kynges shame full departyng, lyke as it is rehersed in the Englysshe cronycle, & of other wryters that wryte of the same. whā Calys was goe. Than after moste wryters, ye town of Caleys was yolden to kynge Ed∣warde about the ende of Septembre after the kynge had contynued there hys siege an hole yere and somedeale more. After receyte wherof he taryed in the towne vppon a moneth, & voy¦ded clene all the olde inhabytauntes and Frenchemen, and stored it wyth Englysshemen, and specyally wyth Kentyshmen. And whan he had sette that towne in a sure ordre and gy∣dynge, and graunted a peace for .ix. monethes at the requeste of two car∣dynalles sente frome the forenamed pope Clement the syxte, to be holden
betwene hym and the Frenche kyng / he sayled wyth great tryumphe into Englande, and came to London a∣boute the feaste of saynte Romayne or the thre and twenty daye of Octo∣bre / where he was ioyously receyued of the cytezeyns, and so cōueyed vnto westmynster. In thys yere also an Englysshe knyght called syr Thomas Agorne, capytayne of the roche of Aryan be∣fore spoken of in the .xx. yere of thys kyng, was fiersly warred of syr Char¦les de Bloys. But after many byke∣rynges & skyrmishes, a day of batayl was set betwene the sayd Charles & Thomas. Or after the Frēche bokes declaration, the sayd Charles assau∣tynge that towne vpō one partie / the sayd syr Thomas wyth a cōpany of stalworth archers & sowdyours, issu∣ed out at an other parte of the towne & beset the sayd syr Charles & hys cō¦pany about / & assayled them in suche wyse, yt in the ende the more partye of hys cōpany was taken and slayne, & the sayd syr Charles there takē amōg the other. And of men of name were there slayne, ye vicoūt of Roan, ye lord Dernall, ye lord of Quyntyne, wyth syr wyllm̄ hys sōne, ye lord of ye castell of Bret, ye lord of the roche, & syr Gef∣frey Turneuew, with many other mē of honour, whych I passe ouer. And after the sayd Charles was healed of suche woūdes as he had receyued in that fyght / he was conueyed into En¦glande, & there kept as prysoner. Anno domini .M.CCC.xlvii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.xlviii.   Henry Pycarde.   Iohn̄ Luskyn.   Anno .xxiii.   Symonde Dolsely.   IN thys .xxiii. yere, fyll great cō∣tynuall rayne from mydsomer to Crystmas, whereof ensued exce∣dynge floddes. By reason wherof the grounde was sore corrupted, so that dyuers inconueniences ensued vpon the same, as sykenes & other, as in ye yeres folowynge shall apere. And in Fraunce thys yere the people dyed wonderfully in dyuers places of the realme / so vehemently that in the cy∣tye of Parys dyed in thys yere or lyt tell more, ouer .l.M. people / and at saynt Denys beyonde .xiiii.M. And in Italy and many other countreys, thys mortalytye aboute thys season reygned also inportunely / and that in Hethēnes aswell as in cristēdome. And in the ende of thys yere about the ende of August / thys mortalytye began in dyuers places of England, and specyally at London / and so con¦tinued to the sayd moneth of August next ensuynge. And vpō that ensued sterylite or bareynes, aswel of the see as of the lande, so that vytaylle and corne was more scante than it was before. Anno domini .M.CCC.xlviii.   Anno dsii .M.CCC.xlix.   Adam Bury.   wyllyam Turke.   Anno .xxiiii.   Rauffe Lynne.   IN thys .xxiiii. yere, the mortali¦tie beforesayde in Englande & specyally in London moost feruētly raynynge / a treasone, as after ap∣pereth was conspyred, to haue brou∣ghte the towne of Caleys agayne
to the Frenche kynges possessyon. Kynge Edwarde beforetyme hadde commytted one of the towres of Ca∣leys vnto a Ianuay to whō he mych trusted. wyth the whyche Ianuay a knyght of Burgoyn named syr God¦frey de Charny, was very famylyer / in so mych that the sayd syr Godfrey at conuenyent leysex brake vnto the sayde Ianuay, for the betrayenge of ye towne of Caleys. The which gaue vnto hym lykynge answere / so that the sayd Ianuay agreed for certayn sōme of money to be payde in hande, to deliuer vnto the sayd syr Godfrey and suche other as he then shulde brynge wyth hym, the towre that he then hadde in kepynge. By meane wherof he shulde shortly after haue the rule of the towne. In tyme of dry¦uynge and of apoyntynge of whiche bargayne as sayth the Frenche cro∣nycle / this Ianuay sent secrete word vnto the kynge of Englande / requy∣rynge hym in secrete wyse to come vnto Caleys. The whyche then hol∣dynge hys Crystmas at Hauerynge Bower in Essex, vppon the morowe after newe yeres daye toke hys shyp¦pynge, and landed that nyght at Ca¦leys, in so secrete maner that fewe of the towne knewe of his there beyng. whan the daye of apoyntmente of delyuery of this foresayd towre was comyn, and thys Ianuay hadde re∣ceyued hys payment / at an houre as∣sygned bytwene the sayde syr God∣frey & hym, a tokē was gyuē by thys sayde Ianuay, that the Frenchmen shulde drawe nere vnto ye sayd towre to wynne theyr pray. Then the sayd syr Godfrey wyth a certayne noumber came wythin ye daūger of the towne of Caleys, war∣nyng ye resydue of hys cōpany that they shuld tary there tyll he were en∣terde ye towne / & than at his sendyng to come in all spedy wyse. But so soone as the sayde syr Godfrey was nere vnto the towre, a busshment of sawdyoures were sente out at a pos∣sterne / the whiche closed hym and his Frenchemen vpon all sydes, & slewe of them many. Amonge the whiche, syr Henry de Boys knyght, with syr Gautyer de Ualence, and syr Robert of Beuuays knyghtes, were slayne / And the sayd syr Godfrey taken sore wounded / and the lorde of Mount∣morency escaped with great daūger, the whithe gaue warnynge vnto the other company and returned theym into Fraunce. Than the sayd God∣frey de Charney was layde vpon a¦borde, and so presented vnto kynge Edwarde the whiche had suche pyte of hym, that he cōmaunded his owne surgyons to loke vnto hym, and to cure hym in theyr best maner. And whā he was somdeale cured he was sente as a prysoner with other into Englande. In this yere also the kynge cau∣sed to be coyned grotes & halfe gro∣tes, the whiche lacked of the weyght of his former coyne .ii. s. vi.d. in a .li. Troy.A great  in Lon¦don. And aboute the ende of Au∣gust sessed the mortalyte or dethe in London / ye whiche was so vehemet and sharpe within ye sayd cytie, that ouer the bodyes buried in churches, and churcheyerdes, monasteries and other accumed buryeng places / was buryed that same yere in the charter∣house yerde of London .l.M. perso∣nes and aboue. This yere also was ye yere of Iu∣bile or clene remyssyon, whiche is kept at Rome at euery .l. wynter ende lyke as the yere of Iubile or grace is contynued at Cauntorbury. And thys yere by the laboure of two cardynalles sent from pope Cle∣mēt the .vi, was a peace cōcluded by∣twene the two kynges of Englande & of Fraūce for a yere, nere vnto the
owne of Caleys. wherefore the sta∣blysshynge of the sayde peace for the sayde yere, assembled the two sayde cardynalles. And for the kynge of Englande, the bysshoppe of Norwy¦che than treasourer and chyefe chan¦celler of the kynge, with other vnto hym by the kynge assygned. And for the Frenche kynge, was there the bysshop of Laone, and the abbot of saynt Denys wyth other. And the .xxiii. daye of the moneth of Auguste. In thys yere and yere of our lorde .xiii. hundreth and fyfthty, dyed Phylyppe de Ualoyes kyng of Fraunce.Dethe of Pylyppe de Valoys. Anno domini .M.CCC.xlix.   Anno domini .M.CCC.l.   Iohn̄ Notte.   Rycharde Kyllyngbury.   Anno .xxv.   wyllyam worcestre.   IN thys .xxv. yere about ye feast of the decollacyon of saynte Iohn̄ Baptyste in the latter ende of August / a noble man of Spayne cal¦led syr Charles, to whome kynge Iohan of Fraunce had newely gyuē the erledome of Angolesme, enten∣dynge to wynne some honoure vpon the Englysshemen, wyth a stronge nauy of Spaynardes entrede ye En∣glysshe stremys, and dyd moche har¦me vnto kynge Edwardes frendes. Kynge Ed∣wardes  on the . So that the kyng about the season abouesayde, mette wyth the sayde nauy vpon the cooste of wynchelsee / where betwene the kynge and them was a longe and mortall fyghte, to ye greate losse of moche people vppon bothe partyes. But in the ende god sente vnto the kyng vyctory / so that he chased hys enemyes, and wanne frome theym .xxii. of theyr shyppes after moost wryters, wyth many pry¦soners. And thys yere syr Thomas of Agorne, whiche as in the .xxii. yere of thys kyng{is} reygne, toke prysoner syr Charles de Bloys and other / was slayne by chaunce medle of a knyght of Fraunce or Brytayne called syr Rauffe de Caours. And thys yere were solempne mes¦sangers sente vnto Rome, for to con∣clude and parfyte the peace betwene the two kynges of Englande and of Fraunce. So that kynge Edward shulde resygne and gyue vp all hys tytle and clayme that he made vnto the crowne of Fraunce / & the French kynge shulde clerely gyue vnto hym all the duchye of Guyan / wyth all suche landes as at any tyme before were taken by any of hys progeny∣toures from it. And that kyng Ed∣warde and hys heyres kynges shuld freely holde and occupye the sayde duchye, wythout doynge of homage to any Frenche kyng after that day. But the conclusyon of thys matyer was so prolonged and deferred by y• pope,Delayes of the course of Rome. and such delayes as dayly ben vsed in the courte of Rome, that the erle of Derby wyth other, whyche were appoynted for the kynge of En¦glande, retourned wythoute spede of theyr cause. wherfore kynge Ed¦warde made new prouisyōs to warre vpon kyng Iohn̄ of Fraunce. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.li.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lii.   Iohn̄ wrothe.   Andrewe Awbry.   Anno .xxvi.   Gybbon̄ Stayndrope.  
IN thys .xxvi. yere, the castel of Guynys was yolden vnto the Englysshmen dwellynge in Caleys / whyche as testyfyeth the French cro¦nicle was done by treason of a Frēch man named Guyllyam de Beaucō∣roy. For the whyche treason the sayd Guyllyam was shortely after put in execucyon in the towne of Amyas. And about the myddell of August vppon the euyn of our Lady assump¦cyon / syr Guy de Neale than mar∣shall of Fraunce, wyth a stronge cō∣pany gaue bataylle vnto the En∣glysshemen than beynge in Brytayn in the whych the sayde syr Guy with the lord of Brykebet and the Chaste leyne of Beaunais, with many other noble men were slayne, & many takē prysoners. Anno domini .M.CCC.li   Anno domini .M.CCC.lii.   Iohn̄ Peche.   Adam Fraunceys.   Anno .xxvii.   Iohn̄ Stodeney.   THe somer of thys .xxvii. yere was so dry, that it was many yeres after called the drye somer. For from the latter ende of Marche tyll the latter ende of Iuly, fyll lytell rayne or none / by reason wherof ma¦ny inconuenyences ensued. And one thynge whyche is spe∣cyally noted / corne the yere folow∣ynge was scante / whereof the pryce thys yere began to enhaunce great¦ly / and beuys and mottons were also dere for scantnesse of grasse and pasture / and that aswell was expert in Fraunce as in the ile of Englāde. Anno domini .M.CCC.lii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.liii.   Iohn̄ welde.   Adam Fraunceys.   Anno .xxviii.   Iohn̄ Lytell.   IN thys .xxviii. yere, kynge Ed∣warde holdynge hys parlya∣ment at westmynster / amonge other thynges there enacted, soone after Pentecoste created the erle of Derby duke of Lācastre, & yr Rauffe Staf¦forde was created erle of Stafforde. Than thys duke of Lancastre was sent agayne ouer the see / wherein the ende of this yere as witnesseth Iohn̄ Froysarde, he was appealed of the duke of Bryswyke a duke of the coū¦tre of Almayne, of certayne wordes contrary hys honoure, for the whych he waged batayll with the sayd duke in the court of the Frenche kyng. Than thys Henry whych of some wryters is named Henry Bolyng∣broke duke of Lancastre, purchased hys sauffe conduyte of the Frenche kyng / and kepte hys day appoynted for that bataylle, in a felde called in Frenche La preauxclers. where for them was ordeyned a place lyested and cloosed in goodly wyse / kynge Iohan beynge presente wyth the more parte of hys nobles of Fraūce. And there came in fyrst into that feld the forenamed duke Appellaūte / & after thys noble duke of Lācastre, to the great honour of all Englande. And soone after dyuers obseruaūces accordyng to the law of armys done & solempne othes taken / eyther set in the rest to haue rōne the fyrst course. But kynge Iohan of hys especyall
grace ceased ye mater, & toke the qua∣rell into hys handes / so that eyther of theym departed the felde wythout any stroke strykynge / and pacyfyed the appeale, to the honoure of the duke of Lancastre as wytnesseth the Frenche boke, nat wyth standynge he was the French kynges enemye. And soone after the sayde duke of Lancastre wyth other nobles assyg∣ned to hym by the kyng of England, wentte to Auynyon, wyth the arche∣bysshoppe of Roan than chaunceller of Fraunce, and the duke of Burbō and other appoynted for the kynge of Fraunce / to conclude efte a peace betwene theyr two prynces. The whyche at the cytye beforesayd were harde at lengthe, before the newe pope than named Innocente the .vi. whych also lyke to hys predecessour was a Frencheman / and cardynall of Lymosyne in Normādy, called by hys proper name Stephan Aubert. In conclusyon after great argumēte made on eyther partye before the po∣pe and hys counsayl / fynally it was agreed, that ye peace betwene the .ii. kynges shuld be kept & holden inuio¦late tyll mydsomer next folowynge. Anno domini .M.CCC.liii.   Anno dn̄i .M.CCC.liiii.   wyllyam Tontynghm̄.   Thomas Legge.   Anno .xxix.   Rycharde Smert.   IN thys .xxix. yere / kynge Ed∣ward by the aduyce of hys coū¦sayll, for so moche as the townes of Flaunders brake theyr promyse be∣fore tyme made, and helde nat the bā¦des of amyte by theym promysed by the lyfe of Iaques de Artyuele, but fauoured the Frēche kynges partye: therefore he with drewe from theym the markettes and staples of wolles, that in sondry townes of Flaunders had than lately by the prouycyon of the foresayd Iaques, to theyr greate aduauntage vsed to be kept / and or∣deyned than the sayde staples to be holden in sondry good townes of En¦glande, as westmynster, Chychester, Lyncolne, Brystowe, and Caunter∣bury. And shortely after Easter / the Frenche kynge sent hys eldest sonne Charles dolphyne of Uyenne into Normandy, for to take the rule of ye countre / and specially for to sease cer¦tayne landes & castelles, whyche at ye daye belonged vnto the kyng of Na∣uerne, whyche than was oute of the Frenche kynges fauour, for the deth of syr Charles of Spayne constable lately of Fraūce, yt he had by his mea¦nes murdered in a towne called the Aygle in Normandy, vpō .ii. yeres be¦fore passed. And whyle ye sayd dolphy¦ne was thus besyed in Normādy / he made suche meanes to ye rulers ther∣of, that they graūted vnto hym ayde of .iii.M. mē for .iii. moneths, at theyr proper costes and charges. Of thys soone after sprange suche tydinges, yt the kyng of Englād was enfourmed that the Frēch kyng had gyuen to hys sonne Charles ye duchy of Normandy with all Gascoygne & Guyan / and howe ye Normānes had graūted vnto ye sayd Charles .iii.M. mē for .iii. moneths, to warre at theyr costes vpō ye Englyshmē / whych as ye Frēch boke testifieth, was graūted to hym onely to defēde ye kyng of Nauer¦ne, yt came to Cōstātyne shortly after, for to repossesse all such lādes as the sayd dolphyn of hys had there seased & for that wyth a bygge armye made warre vpon the sayd dolphyn.
But were it thus or otherwyse / trouth it is as diuers wryters agreē, in the moneth of October and ende of thys yere, prynce Edwarde wyth a great hoste entred Gascoyne, and passed by Tholouse, and passed the ryuer of Gerounde or Geron̄ / and so passed by Carcassyon, and brent the bulwerkes of that cytye / and from thens he rode to Nerbon̄, in pyllyng & spoylynge the countre as he went. And in the same yere kynge Ed∣warde wyth his power landed at his towne of Caleys / where he rested hī by all ye tyme of this mayres yere. And in this yere was the house of the freres Augustynes of Londō fy∣nysshed / whyche was reedyfyed by syr Humfrey Bohum erle of Hert∣forde and Essex, whose body lyeth bu¦ryed in the quere of the sayde house or chyrche before the hygh aulter. Anno domini .M.CCC.liiii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lv.   Thomas Forster.   Symon Franceys.   Anno .xxx.   Thomas Brandon.   IN this .xxx. yere / the kynge as ye before haue herde beyng at Caleys, shortly after the feast of Al∣halloyne toke his iournay towarde the Frenche kynge / and contynued his iournay tyll he came to a towne named Hesden / and brake there the Frenche kynges parke, & toke suche pleasures as hym there lyked. In whiche season of his there beynge, ty¦dynges were brought vnto hym, yt ye Scottes had gotē ye towne of Ber∣wyke, and how they made dayly as∣sautes to wynne the castell. wherfore the kyng made the more hasty spede, and returned to Caleys, and so into Englande. For whiche cause sayth ye Frenche cronycle, yt kynge Edwarde fled from the Frenche kynge, yt than with a strōge power came from Amy as vnto saynt Omers. Than kynge Edwarde sped hym into Scotlande / so yt in the moneth of Ianuary and begynnynge of the xxx. yere of his reygne,Berwyke re¦couered. and .xxvii. day of the sayd moneth, he layd his syege to ye towne of Berwyke / & had it yol∣den vnto hym in shorte processe of tyme after. And that doone he entred ferther into the lande, and subdued ye cheyf townes & holdes as he went / & pursued the Scottysshe kynge so na¦rowly, that in the ende he was fayne to submytte hym to ye kynges grace as prysoner, and resygned his pow∣er into the kynges hande. And whan kynge Edwarde had set that coūtre in a rule / he returned with the Scot∣tysshe kyng agayne into Englande, and called his courte of parlyament at westmynster. In ye whiche amōge other thynges to the kynges auaun∣tage, was graunted to the maynte∣naunce of his warres .l.s. of a sacke of woll, for ye terme of .vi. yeres. But it contynued lenger though the mar∣chaūtes staplers therat grutched. Than let vs now retourne vnto that noble prynce Edward, the fyrst begotten sonne of the kynge / whych by all thys tyme warred vppon the Frenchmen, as in ye precedynge yere is touchyd. So that lastly he retour∣ned to Burdeaux wyth many ryche prysoners and pyllages, to the great honoure of hym selfe, and the greate auauncement of hys soudyours. And all be it that in that countrees, whyche he then passed, were the erles of Armenake, and of Foyze, of Poy∣tyers, and of Cleremount, wyth syr Iames de Burbon̄, and many other
knyghtes, the whyche hadde dowble the people, as testyfyeth the Frenche cronycle, that the prynce had: yet pas¦sed he from Tholous to Nerbon̄, & fro Nerbon̄ to Burdeaux wythout batayle. And after the prynce hadde there a whyle rested hym and hys people, and sent dyuers of hys prysoners in to Englande / he wyth hys hoste en∣tred the prouynce or coūtre of Berry in the moneth of Iuly, & made therin sharpe and cruell warre. In whyche season also ye duke of Lancaster with the ayde of Phylyp brother vnto the kynge of Nauerne, was entred the countre of Constantyne / and so with a cōpany of .iiii. thousand men, came vnto a place called Lyseux vpon the see coste, & remoued a syege of Frēch men, that had lyen at that castell vpō viii. wekes / and after repayred the sayde castell. whan kynge Iohn̄ hadde leuyed many great summes of money, to ye great grudge of hys comons and re∣bellyon of some of the sayd comons, as in the story of kynge Iohn̄ shalbe towched, and preparyd hys hoste / he fyrst made towarde the duke of Lan¦caster. But the sayd duke had so for∣tyfyed ye passage, that he myghte not wynne to hym wythout great ieopar¦dye and daunger. wherfore he lafte that waye, & yode to a castell named Bretnell, and layde hys syege there vnto, and wan it in the ende of .viii. wekes by apoyntement. Then he yode to the castell of Chartres, and taryed there a certayn tyme for more people / and frō thens toke hys iour∣neye towarde prynce Edwarde. The whyche prynce in thys season was passed the ryuer of Loyre or Leyre, & so by ye towne of Romūgtyne / where he was encountred of diuers nobles of Fraunce, and hadde wyth them a sharpe cōflycte. But in the ende god sent to hym the vyctorye / so that he slewe many of hys enemyes, & toke of them many prysoners. Amonge ye whych were taken the lord of Craon̄, and a knyght called syr Bouciquāt, wyth dyuers other to the nomber, as sayth the Frēche boke of .liiii. persōs. And whan he had sent the sayde pry∣soners vnder saufe kepyng to Bur∣deaux, he sped hym toward Towris. And the duke of Lancaster wyth hys company, after he had repayred the foresayd castell of Lyseux, and be¦stowed suche ordenaūce as the Frēch men for haste lafte behynde them at the sayd syege: he than toke his way towarde Bertneyll / & from thens vn¦to Euroux, in brēnyng & wasting the countre and townes as he went / and from thens to Uermeyll in Perch, & toke by strength both the towne and castell. And whan he had spoyled & pylled the towne, he set it on fyre and brent a great part therof. And whan he had done moch of his wyll in that coūtre, he retourned into Brytayne and helde hym there. Kynge Iohn̄ then as aboue is sayde, holdynge hys waye towarde prynce Edward / came to the cytye of Towrys to fortyfye the sayde towne agayne the sayde prynce Edwarde. wherof herynge the prynce toke hys waye toward Poytyers. In holding of whyche way, as testyfyeth ye Frēch boke, a parte of hys hoste mette with an hoste of Frenchmen, & gaue vnto them batayle, & at length chasyd the multytude of them, & slewe an hun∣dreth sowdyours, & toke vpō .lx. pry∣soners. Amonge the whych were ta∣ken the erle of Saūcer, ye erle of Iur¦rygny, the lord Chastelleyn mayster of the kynges palayes, & a knyghte named syr Guyllyam de Daneham / the whyche prysoners were also sent vnto Burdeaux. And soone after prynce Edwarde lodged hym & hys
hoste nere vnto Poytyers. And shor∣tely after that came the French kyng and lodged hym in a place called in Frenche Chamgny, nere also vnto Poytyers / so that the frōtes of bothe hoostes laye wythin a quarter of a myle. Than the cardynall of Perny∣gourt sent from pope Innocent the vi. rode bytwene the kynge and the prynce sondry tymes to haue agreed some treaty and peace bytwen them, yf it myght by hys laboure haue ben opteyned. But whan he sawe hys la∣boure myght not preuayle / he depar¦ted to Poytiers, and taryed there the ende of the batayle. The whych was foughten vpon a mondaye the .xix. daye of Septēber, in the yere of our lorde .xiii.C.lvi, and begynnyng of the .vi. yere of the sayd kynge Iohn̄s reygne, as after shalbe shewed. THan as before is sayde, for so mych as the foresayde cardy∣nall myght not purchase any treaty or meane of peace bytwene these two prynces / prouysyō was made vpon bothe sydes to trye theyr mater by mortall batayle / so yt about the houre of two at after noone of the foresayd mōdayne, ye duke of Athenes or Athēs with such other nobles as were with hym in ye French kynges vaweward set vppon the Englysshe hoste.The batayl of Poytiers. The whyche was myghtely fensyd wyth wood and trees, in suche wyse that ye French speres myght not wyn vnto them. And therwyth the shotte of the Englyshemen was so fyers & sharp, that it turned ouer horse and man. And whyle ye sayde duke of Athenes, wyth syr Iohn̄ de Cleremount than marshall of Fraūce wyth other, thus assayled the prynce & his people vpō one parte / the duke of Normandye kyng Iohn̄s eldest sonne, & the duke of Orleaūce the kynges brother, as∣sayled hym vpon a nother part. The which two dukes were leders of two strōge hostes. But as sayth ye Frēche cronycle, these thre batayls dyd lytle scathe vnto the Englysshemen. But by reason of theyr shotte they were so woūded and many slayne, yt the re∣sydue fledde to the great dyscomfort of the French kynges people. Than kynge Iohn̄ in all that he myght cō∣forted hys people / and wyth a fresshe company set vpon the Englyshmen, that all wayes kept them hole togy∣der, and recyued the Frenchemen vpon theyr wepens poyntes, with so greate force yt in the ende the French men gaue backe, and were vaynquis¦shed by the helpe of god and saynte George / and slayne as wytnessyth ye sayde Frenche cronycle to the nom∣ber of .xvii. hūdreth men of armys, be¦syde other meane sowdyours. Amōg the whych of noble men were slayne, the duke of Burbone, the duke of A∣thenes, syr Iohn̄ de Cleremoūt mar∣shal of Fraūce, syr Reynold Camyan baneret, whyche that daye bare the oryflambe, a specyall relyke that the Frenche kynges vse to bere before them in all batayls, and the bysshop of Chalons, wyth dyuers other to ye nomber of .liiii. banerettes, besyde knyghtes & other. And of prysoners taken at ye batayle, was Iohn̄ kynge of Fraunce, Phylyp hys .iiii. sonne, syr Iaques de Burbon erle of Poy∣tyau and brother vnto the duke of Burbon before slayne, syr Iohn̄ of Artoys erle of Ewe, syr Charlys hys brother erle of Longeuyle, syr Guyf∣farde cosyn germayn vnto the Frēch kynge, syr Iohn̄ de Meleoun erle of Cancaruyle, syr Iohn̄ his sonne and heyre, doctour wyllyam archbysshop of Sens, syr Symon Melon bro∣ther vnto the erle of Cancaruyle and erle of Uandature, the erles of Dāp¦martyne, of Uendosme, of Salys∣bruche, of Moyson, the Marshall of Denehā, & many other, as banerett{is},
knyghtes, and men of name, to the nombre as sayth the Frenche crony∣cle of .xvi. hundreth & aboue. And frō thys batayll escaped by flyght, Char¦les eldest sonne of kynge Iohn̄ and duke of Normādye, the duke of Or∣leaunce, & the duke of Aniowe, wyth fewe other of great fame / the whyche yode streyghte vnto Parys. where shortly after was called a greate coū¦sayll, for maters whyche in the story of kynge Iohanne shall after be shewed. whan the feelde was thus fynys∣shed / prynce Edward after dewe thā¦kes and louynges gyuen to god and saynt George for thys tryūphaūt vyc¦tory / he with his sayd prysoners sped hym toward Burdeaux where ye sayd kyng was kept tyll Easter after. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lv.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lvi.   Rycharde Notynghm̄.   Henry Pycharde.   Anno .xxxi.   Thomas Dosell.   IN thys .xxxi. yere, that is to say the .xvi. daye of the moneth of Apryll / ye noble prynce Edwarde thā vppon the age of .xxviii. yeres, toke shyppynge wyth hys prysoners at Burdeaux, and arryued in Englāde shortly after. And the .xxiiii. daye of Maye / he was with great honoure & gladnesse receyued of the cytezyns of London, and so conueyed vnto the kynges palays at westmynster. wher the kynge syttynge in hys astate in westmynster hal, receyued hym with due honour / and after conueyed to a lodgynge for hym prouyded, where he laye a certayne season. And after was ye sayd French kyng had vnto a place called Sauoy / whyche thanne was a pleasaunt palays & fayre lod∣gynge, belongynge that tyme vnto ye duke of Lancastre / and after brente & dystroyed by Iak Strawe and hys fawtours, in the .iiii. yere of Rychard the seconde nexte kyng of Englande, as in ye sayd yere after shalbe shewed In whyche place the sayde Frenche kynge laye longe after. And in the wynter folowyng were royall iustes holden in smythfelde of Londō,Iustes hol∣dē in Smith¦felde. and many goodly & knyght∣ly feates of armys doon, to the great honoure of the kyng & all his realm, and gladdyng of all beholdours. At the whych dysporte was present / the kyng of Englande, the Frēch kyng, and ye kyng of Scottes / wyth many noble astates of all the .iii. prouinces or kyngdomes / wherof the more par¦tye of the straungers were than pry∣soners. Anno domini .M.CCC.lvi.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lvii.   Stephyn Caundysshe.   Iohn̄ Stody.   Anno xxxii.   Bartylmewe frostelynge.   IN thys .xxxii. yere / pope Inno∣cent the syxte of that name, sent into Englande twoo cardynalles, to treat of a peace betwene ye two kyng{is} The whyche two cardinalles taryed the more parte of a yere in London & other places of the lande, to brynge theyr purpose to some effecte / but they sped lytell of theyr cause. And in thys yere after moste wry¦ters / Dauyd le Bruze kyng of Scot¦tes was delyuered frome the castell
of Odyhm̄ at hys lybertye, whan he had put kynge Edwarde in a suerty of an hundreth thousande markes for hys raunsome. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lvii.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lviii.   Iohn̄ Bernes.   Iohn̄ Luffyn.   Anno .xxxiii.   Iohn̄ Burys.   IN thys .xxxiii. yere, as wytnes∣syth the Frenche cronycle / syr Robert Knollys, syr Iames Pype, with other of theyr retynewe, warred in Brytayne. And as testyfyeth the Frenche cronycle, in the moneth of Marche and x. daye of the sayd mo∣neth / the sayde capytaynes wyth one whyche the Frenche boke nameth Thomlyn Fowke, came erely in the mornynge vnto a towne that was nere vnto Incerre called Kegennes beynge in the rule of Englysshmen / where the sayde capytaynes takyng wyth thē more strēgth,akyng of . yode streyght vnto the foresayde towne of Ancerre beyng wythin two Englyshe myles / and scaled the walles wyth ladders, and quyt them so māfully, that they had the rule of the town or the sonne rysynge. And in that castell was ta∣ken prysoner syr Guyllyam de Cha∣lon the sonne of the erle of Ancerre, hys wyfe, and many other. In takynge of whyche towne and castell fewe folkes were slayne / how be it there were of armed men aboue two thousande, as sowdyours to de∣fende the towne. Then the Englysh∣men serched so nere, that as the comō fame wente, they fande iewellys as they hadde ben preuy to the hydyng of theym, and that of greate value. Amonge the which as sayth the sayd cronycle, they fande certayne skyn∣nes, the whyche were valued at .v. thousande motons of golde. ye shall vnderstande that a moton is a coyne vsed in Fraunce and Brytayne,El moton of golde. and is of value after the rate of sterlynge money vppon .v. s. or there aboute. whan the Englysshemen hadde pylled and spoyled the towne by the space of .viii. dayes, and raunsomed suche as were of any substaunce / then they shewed vnto the rulers of the towne, that they wolde sette it vppon a fyre, excepte that they wold gyue vnto theym a certayne summe of money. For the whych after longe treaty of thys mater / the rulers of ye towne to haue possessyon therof, and to haue it preserued frō fyre / agreed to gyue vnto the Englysshe capy∣taynes .xl. thousande motons, and lx. perlys valued at .x. thousande mo¦tons / whyche .l. thousande motons shulde amounte after the rate of ster¦lynge money to .xii. thousand and .v. hundreth pownde or nere aboute. So that what they fande wythin ye towne of any value, they bare it with theym / excepte the iewellys and or∣namentes of the chyrch of saynt Ger¦mayne / the whyche goodes and ie∣welles they toke for pledge of suche money as was vnpayde of the fore∣sayd .xl.M. motons of golde, for the raūsome of the towne. For ye whyche goodes / the towne of Ancerre was bounde vnto the hedes of the chyrch to pay for, or to redeme ye sayd good{is} by the feastes of mydsomer nexte fo∣lowynge / or ellys to paye yerely in∣perpetuyte to ye sayd chyrch in maner of quyte rent .iii.M. motōs / wherof ye value is shewed in the fyrst chapyter of Phylyp the .iiii. And ouer all thys the dwellers of the towne agreed, that ye Englyshmen shuld brenne the
gates of ye towne / and in dyuers par¦tyes of the towne, throw the wallys to the grounde. Uppon .iiii. dayes folowynge the ende of the sayd agremente / the fore∣sayd syr Iames Pype, and syr Othā of Holande, & other to the nombre of xvi. or .xviii. Englysshmen, entēdyng to haue wonne some enterpryse, were layd for by the sowdyours of a place called the great Semyre / and by thē taken & holden as prysoners. And in the moneth of Apryll next ensuyng, a towne called in Frenche Dabygny sur le Metre, was by the Englysshemen gotten in lyke maner & fourme as was the foresayd towne of Ancerre. And the .ii. daye of Maye was wonne by syr Robert Knolles & hys company, a towne called Chaste¦leyn sur Lounayn / and pylled it as they dyd the other. And after wyth theyr pyllage and prysoners, amōge the whyche were many women and chyldren of .iiii. & of fyue yeres of age / the sayd Englyshmē yode to the new castell vpon Loyre. And ye shall vn∣derstande, that the partye of the En∣glysshemen was greately strengthed by the helpe of the kyng of Nauerne, and of syr Phylyppe his brother and other / as more playnely shalbe she∣wed in the Frenche cronycle, or story of kynge Iohan folowynge. And thus the sayde syr Roberte Knolles, wyth ayde of the kynges men of Nauerne, dayly wanne ma∣ny townes and stronge holdes in Brytayne. Anno domini .M.CCC.lviii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lix.   Symonde wymondham.   Symonde Doffelde.   Anno .xxxiiii.   Iohn̄ Chychester.   IN thys .xxxiiii. yere, or more ve¦ryly in the moneth of Nouem∣bre, & ende of the .xxxiii. yere of kynge Edwardes reygne / he wyth prynce Edward and the duke of Lancastre, wyth a puyssant army landed at Ca¦leys / and from thens passed by lande vnto Artoys, & by Uermendoys to ye cytye of Reynes, and layde hys siege about that cytye / and beclypped it in suche wyse, that no man might entre or go out of the cytye without lycēce of the Englysshemen. whan kynge Edwarde had lyen xl. dayes at the siege of reynes, with∣out great dere or hurt vnto it doyng / he remoued hys syege & passed by the countre of Champayne, tyll he came to a towne called Guyllone / where ye kynge rested hym a season. In which tyme came vnto hym certayne mē of the duchye of Burgoyne, as lordes of dyuers holdes and townes within that duchery / & gaue vnto hym, to ye entent he shuld nat molest or hurte ye countre, ii.C.M. floryns of golde / whyche is to the value of sterlynge money of .xxxv.M.li. And ouer that the sayd Burgonyons couenaunted wyth hym, that they wolde mynystre to hym and his hoste, all such vytay∣les as was in ye countre plentuously for hys money. And that done he de∣parted frome thens, & yode vnto Ne∣uers / and passed there the ryuer of Dyon or Ion̄, and yode to Colāges vpon Ion̄. And from thens in the mo¦neth of Marche and begynnynge of hys .xxxiiii. yere of his reygn, he yode by the countre of Gastenoys toward the cytye of Parys. And prynce Ed∣warde with hys company passed by Moret, tyll he came to an hold which Englysshmē than kept called Tour∣nelles
or Cournelles / before ye which towne or holde lay at that season cer¦tayne Frenchmen in a stronge basty∣le, & assayled the Englyshmen dayly / and remoued nat thens, all be it they were monysshed of the prynces com∣mynge. They trusted so moche in the strength of theyr bastyle, whyche thē disceyued / for wythin .v. dayes of the princes commyng, theyr bastyle was goten, and many of them slayne, and to the nombre of .xlvii. persones of ye company taken prysoners. Amonge the whyche were .iiii. men of name / ye is to saye, the lorde of Bouyle or Bo∣nile, the lorde of Daygreuyle or of Aygreuyle, syr Iohn̄ de Barres, and syr wyllyam de Plassyes. Thus kynge Edwarde wyth hys people spedyng hys iourney toward Parys / vppon the tuysdaye beynge the laste daye of Marche in the weke before Easter, came vnto a place cal∣led the hostell of Chastelon, betwene Moūtlehery and Chastes / & lodged hym wyth a certayne of hys people there. And ye prince with other lordes of hys hoste were lodged in the tow∣nes thereabout, from thens vnto the towne of Corueyll, & an other towne called longe Iumell. Thanne Charles eldest sonne of kynge Iohn̄, and that day regent of Fraunce / made meanes of treaty. whyche was laboured by a freer cal∣led Symonde de Langres, prouyn∣cyal of the freers Iacobynes, & legat of the pope. By whose meanes a day of treaty was appoynted to be holdē vppon good fryday, in the maledery of le longe Iumel. where at the same daye and place, apered for kynge Ed¦wardes partye, the duke of Lācastre, the erles of warwyke & of Northāp∣ton, wyth syr Iohan de Chande, syr waltyer de Manuy, and syr wyllyam Cheyny knyghtes. And for the regēt apered there, the lorde of Fewe than constable of Fraunce, the lorde Bocy quant than marshall of Fraunce, the lord of Sarancyers, the lord of Uyg nay of the coūtre of Uyenne, syr Sy∣mond Bucy, & syr Guychard of Au∣glye knyghtes / whyche treaty came to none effecte. wherfore kynge Edwarde vpon the tuysdaye folowynge Easter daye remoued frome the sayd hostell, and lodged hym nere vnto Parys at a place named Chastellone nere vnto Mountrouge. And the residue of his hoste was lodged at Uauuys, at Uau¦gerart, at Gētylly, and other townes there about. Thā vpō frydaye folow¦ynge, beynge the .x. daye of Apryl / by meanes of ye abbot of Clugny, which newly was sent from the pope Inno¦cēt the .vi, the forsayd lordes & knygh¦tes agayne assembled at a place cal∣led the Bālyē, to treate of an accorde betwene the kynge & the regent. But theyr labour was spent in vayne, as it before had ben. Uppon the sondaye nexte folow∣ynge, a parte of ye kynges hoste came before the towne of Parys, and enba¦taylled theym in a felde faste by saint Marcelles / and taryed there frome the mornynge tyll thre of the clocke at after noone, to abyde batayle of the Frenchemen. The whyche made none yssue oute of cytye / nat∣withstandynge that as testifyeth the Frenche boke, within Parys at that daye were greate plentye of Sowdy¦ours, ouer and besyde the greate foyson of the enhabytauntes of the same. whanne the Englysshemen per∣ceyued that they shulde haue no ba∣tayll of the Parysyens / they aboute thre at after noone departed the feld, and toke theyr waye towarde Char∣tres and so vnto Bōneuale nere vnto Chaceadon. Than kynge Edwarde was lodged at a place calle Dones.
To the whych place came vnto hym out of Parys the byshoppe of Beau¦uayes than chauncellour of Normā¦dye with other / and so behaued them vnto the kynge, that a new daye of treaty was appoynted to be holden at Bretynguy, within a myle or lytell more of Chartres fore sayde, vppon the fyrste day of May next ensuyng. AT whyche daye of apoynte∣mente / the foresayd duke of Lancaster, wyth the sayde erles of warwyke and Northampton, and other / at the sayde place apperyd for kynge Edwarde. And for the regent appered there the forenamed byshop, wyth many other lordes and knygh∣tes and spyrytuall men, to the nom∣ber of .xxii. persons, whose names I ouer passe for lengthynge of tyme. The whyche so dylygently behaued hym, that in the space of .viii. dayes they agreed vpon an vnyte & peace, the whyche was comprysed in .xli. artycles, as at length is rehersed in the Frenche cronycle, wherof the ef∣fecte is thys. The forme of pace be∣twene En∣glande and Fraunce. Fyrste the kynge of England and hys heyres kynges, wyth all the lan¦des as he than hadde in Gascoyne & Guyan / shulde haue to hym and hys heyres for euer / the cytye and castell of Poytyers wyth all the apperte∣naūces to that lordshyp belongyng. Also the cytye of Lymoges, wyth all the lādes of Lymosyne and all other theyr appertenaūces. The cytye and castell of Perygorte, wyth all the lan¦des and reuenues to that lordshyppe belongynge. The erledome of By∣gorre, wyth all thynges to that lord∣shyppe belongyng. The erledome of Poytyau, wyth all the appertenaun∣ces. The sygnorye of Beleuyle. The lordshyp of Exanctys, Exauc∣doure, and Exancon̄. The cytye of Agen, the cytye of Agenoys, the cyty of Caours, and lordshyppe of Caour¦syn. The cytye of Tarbe, the cytye and countre of Gaure, Angoulesme, of Rodes, and of Rouern̄. The lord∣shyppe of Mostruell, wyth all reue∣nues therunto belongynge. The sy∣gnorye of Caleys, of Marquell, of Sandgate, and Colyngn̄. The lord∣shyppe of Hammys, of walys, and of Ouye. And the erledome of Guynes, wyth all profytes therunto belon∣gynge. All whyche lordshyppes, ho∣nours, castels, towres, cytyes, and townes / the kynge of Englange thā Edwarde the thyrde and hys heyres kynges of Englande, shulde haue & holde for euermore, in as royall wyse and lyke maner as done the kynges of Fraunce, without doyng for them any homage, feawty, or other duety. And kynge Edwarde after that daye for hym and his heyres kynges of Englande, shulde clerely renoūce and gyue ouer, all hys tytle, ryght, and interest, that he hadde vnto the crowne of Fraūce, and specyally the name of kynge of Fraunce. Also all hys ryght and tytle that he hadde vnto the duchy of Norman¦dye, of Thorayne, of Aniowe, of Bry¦tayne, and of the souerayntye of the erledome of Flaunders / and of all other lordshyppes, cytyes, castelles, honours, townes, towres, and ma∣nours, that any kynge of Englande before that daye had any ryght vnto wythin the realme of Fraunce / and to holde hym cōtente wyth the aboue named lordshyppes, wythout any forther clayme. Forthermore it was agreed, that the Frenche kynge shulde paye for hys raūsome thre millions of scutes of gold / wherof .ii. shuld alway make a noble Englysh. ye shall vnderstād ye a million of scutes is .x.C. thou∣sande of scutes / whych extende after ye value of sterlyng money, vnto the
summe of .ii.C.l.M. marke. And so thre milions amounte vnto .vii. hun∣dreth & .l.M. marke / whych maketh iuste .v. hundreth thousande pounde of sterlynge money. Of the whych .iii milliōs of scutes, x.C.M. to be payd at Caleys by the fyrste daye of Iuny next folowynge the sayd treaty / & an other .x.C. thousande or milliō to be payde at the sayde towne of Caleys, within .viii. monethes after ye Frēche kynge was commyn vnto Caleys / & the thyrde million to be payde at Lō∣don in two yeres and an halfe. That is to saye at Myghelmasse .xii. mo∣nethes after the agrement made .iiii. C. thousāde scutes, & at Mighelmas next after ensuyng .iiii.C.M. scutes / and at Easter than nexte folowynge ii.C. thousande scutes, in ful paymēt of the thre milliōs or .xxx.C. thousād scutes. And further it was agreed, that after the Frenche kynge was comen vnto Caleys / he shuld rest hym there iiii. monethes. wherof ye fyrst moneth shuld be at ye charg of kyng Edward / & the other .iii. monethes to be at the coste and charge of the sayde Frēche kynge / & to paye for eueryche of the sayde thre monethes, yf he so longe taryed there for the perfourmaūce of the sayde accorde .x. thousande royal les of Fraūce / whyche at that tyme were in value after ye rate of sterlyng money, euery royall .xxi.d. or .xiiii. sous Parys / & so he shulde paye for a monethes charge eyghte hundreth lxxv. pounde. And ouer that it was accorded, ye the Frēche kynge Iohn̄ for ye tyme beynge, nor no kyng of Fraūce after hym, shuld ayde or assist the Scottes agayne kynge Edward, nor agayne hys heyres kynges of Englāde. Nor kynge Edwarde nor hys heyres kyn¦ges, shall allye theym with the Fle∣mynges, nor ayde nor assyste theym agayne the sayde kynge Iohan, nor hys heyres kynges of Fraunce. And for the tytle or ryghte of the duchye of Brytayne, whyche was in questyō betwene the erles of Bloys and of Mountford / it was accorded that bothe kynges beyng at Caleys, the sayd partyes shulde be called be∣fore theym. And yf a peace betwene theym by the two kynges myght nat be set / thā the sayd kynges to assigne certayne indyfferent persons to agre the sayd erles / and they to haue halfe a yere of respyte for to quyet the ma∣ter. And yf the sayde persones so by the kynges assygned, myghte nat agree the sayd erles by that terme / ye than eyther of the sayd erles to make the beste puruyaunce for hym selfe yt eyther of them coude make, wyth the helpe of hys frendes or otherwyse, wherby they myght attayne to theyr ryght & clayme of the sayd duchye. Prouyded alwaye that nother of the sayd kynges nor any of theyr sōnes, shulde ayde or assyste any of ye sayde erles / by reason wherof the peace be∣tweene theym accorded, myghte be lowsed or broken. Also prouyded, ye to whether of the sayd two erles the sayd duchy shuld falle by sentence of man or otherwyse / that the homage for it shall alwaye be done to ye kynge of Fraunce. All whyche ordenaunces & agre∣mentes, wyth many mo, that wolde aske longe leysour to wryte, were ra∣tyfyed and confermed by the instru∣mentes & seales of ye prynce of walys vpon the partye of kynge Edwarde for Englandes partye; & by Charles regent of Fraunce for that partie / as by theyr letters patentes than sealed apered, beryng date that one at Lou¦uers in Normandye the .xvi. daye of May in the yere of grace .xiii.C. & .lx, & that other at Parys the .x. daye of ye sayde moneth and yere.
And ouer that eyther of the sayde ii. prynces, that is to saye Edwarde prynce of walys was sworne in pre∣sence of .vi. Frenche knyghtes, vpon the sacrament of the aulter after ye thyrde Agnus was sayd in tyme of a lowe masse, at the foresayd Louuers songe or sayd, that he to ye vttermoste of hy power, shuld vpholde and kepe the foresayd peace in euery poynt, as ferre as in hym was. And in lyke ma¦ner was Charles thanne regente of Fraunce sworne, in presence of syre Englysshe knyghtes to perfourme the same. After whych treaty thus fynysshed & ended / kyng Edward with hys sō∣nes & nobles of Englāde, toke shyp∣pyng at Hūflete in Normādy vpō the xx. day of May, & sayled into Englād leuyng behynde hym the erle of war∣wyke for to gyde the Englysshemen that remayned in Guyan & other pla¦ces, & to se that the peace whyche thā was proclaymed thorough Fraunce were kept & nat brokē by thē / whyche endured nat lōge wythout vyolacyō as sayth the Frenche boke. HEre I leue a parte the greate reioysyng and honourable re∣ceyuyng of the kyng by the cytezyns of Lōdō, & other ceromonyes / which at thys season I spare, to thentent I may the more substancyally shewe vnto you the fynall ende of thys ac∣corde. Than trouth it is that in thys season of ye kynges beyng in Fraūce / kyng Iohn̄ for hys more consolacyō was remoued from Sauoy vnto the towre of London / where after ye kyn∣ges retourne, he fested the kynge & hys lordes vpon the .xiiii. day of the moneth of Iunii. And the .viii. daye of the moneth of Iule next ensuyng / the Frenche kynge in the mornynge landed at Caleys, and was lodged in the castell, and there abode the com∣mynge of kynge Edwarde. Upon the .ix. day of Octobre / kyng Edwarde arryued at Caleys, & went streyght vnto the castell for to vysite kynge Iohn̄ / the whyche welcomed hym in a louynge and frendly coute∣naunce. And whan the kynge shulde depart to his lodgyng into ye towne / the Frenche kynge requyred hym, yt he wyth hys sonnes shuld dyne with hym vpon the morowe folowynge / whyche of the kynge was graunted to be vpon the monday folowynge, ye xii. daye of the moneth. At which day kynge Edwarde was fyrst set & kept the astate, & than secundaryly ye frēch kynge. Thyrdly the prynce of walys, and fourthly the duke of Lancastre, without mo at ye table. In the tyme of whych dyner came to ye castell the erle of Flaunders / whome the Frēch kyng welcomed in moste louyng ma¦ner. And whan the sayde dyner wyth all honour was ended .ii. of ye kynges sonnes of Englāde, & two of ye Frech kynges, toke leue of theyr fathers & rode towarde Boleyn̄, where at that tyme the regent of Fraūce was. The whyche mette theym in the myd way betwene Caleys and Boleyn̄, & so cō¦ueyed: them vnto Boleyn̄, and rested there wyth theym that nyghte / & vpō the morowe lafte theym there and hym selfe came vnto Caleys, fyrst to hys father / and after hys father and he came bothe to the kynges palays to dyner. whyche kynge Edwarde re¦ceuyed wyth moche ioye & honoure, and made vnto theym a sumptuous feaste. Uppon the fourthtene daye of Octobre the sayde regente departed frome Caleys, and retourned vnto Boleyn̄ / and the two sonnes of kyng Edwarde retourned from Boleyne to Caleys. And vppon a saterdaye the .xxiiii. daye of the moneth of Octobre, both kyng{is} beyng in .ii. trauersys & in one
chapell at Caleys, a masse was sayde before them / to the offeryng of which masse nother of theym came. But whan the pax was borne fyrst to the French kynge, and eft to kynge Ed∣warde, & eyther refused to kysse it fyrste / the Frenche kynge rose vp & came towarde kyng Edwarde.A peasyble kysse. wher¦of he beyng ware rose vp and mette wyth hym, & refused the pax and kys∣sed eyther other. At the whyche masse eyther of them was solemply sworne to maynteyne the articles of the sayd peace. And for more assuraunce of ye same / many lordes vpon bothe par∣tyes were also sworne, to maynteyne the same to theyr powers. ye shal also vnderstande that in thys season that the Frenche kynge soourned thus at Caleys, bothe for the paymente of hys raunsome & also for the deliuery of certayn holdes and townes which as yet were nat deliuered / he putte in such suerties as foloweth. The duke of Orliaunce, the duke of Burgoyn, the duke of Burbone, the erles of An¦geou, of Poyteau, of Bloys, of Alen∣son, of saynte Poule, of Escamps, of Ualentynoys, of Brame, of Ew, of Longeuyle, of Cācaruyle, of Ancerre of Dampmartyne, of Uendature, of Salysbruge, and of Uendosme / the vycountes of Baudemoūt, of Beaw¦mount, & of Ancuerre / the lordes of Craon of Deruall, of Dabyguy, of Cousy, of Fyers, of Preaux, of saynt Uenant, of Garancyers, of Aluerne, of Mountmorency, and of Angest, & also the lord or wardeyne of the fore∣stes / and kynghtes, syr wyllyam de Craon, syr Lowys de Harcourt, syr Iohn̄ de Laguy, and syr Galtyerde Donehame. Of the whyche .xxxviii. persones, dyuers of theym as before is touched were takē prysoners at ye batayll of Poytyers. For the whyche it was agreed, that as many as had nat payde theyr fynaunce before the thyrde daye of Maye laste past, shuld be acquited by the kynges fynaunce, wyth dyuers other condycyōs which I passe ouer. Than vpō the morowe folowyng of the takynge of the foresayde othe by the two kynges, that is to say son daye the xxv. daye of Octobre / the Frenche kyng was freely delyuered, the which the sayd day before noone, departed frome Caleys and rode to∣warde Boleyn. whome kynge Ed∣warde conueyed a myle vppon hys waye. At whyche myles ende they de parted with kyssynge and other lo∣uynge maner / and prynce Edwarde kept on hys waye with kyng Iohn̄, & so conueyed hym to Boloyn / where he taryed that nyghte. And vpon the morowe the sayd prynce Edwarde, & Charles duke of Normandy, wyth ye erle of Escamps and other noble mē there than beynge p̄sent, were agayn sworne to maynteyne and holde the sayde peace, wythout fraude, colour, or dysceyte. And that done the sayde prynce takynge hys leue retourned that nyghte vnto Caleys. And so yt now appereth vnto you, that kynge Iohn̄ stode as prysoner by the space of .iii. yeres, and asmoche as frome the .xix. day of Septembre vnto .xxv. daye of Octobre. And whan kynge Edwarde had sped his nedes at Caleys / he after as shalbe shewed in the yere folowynge sayled into Englande. It is also to be noted, yt thys yere whyle the kyng was occupyed in his warres in Fraunce as before is tou∣ched, the erle of Seynpoule wyth an army of Frenchemen sayled aboute the borders of Kent and Sussex and lāded in sundry places / as Rye, wyn∣chelsee, and Hastynges, and spoyled the townes and slew many of ye men, and dyd moche harme to the poore fysshers.
Anno domini .M.CCC.lix.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lx.   Iohn̄ Denys.   Iohn̄ wroth.   Anno .xxxv.   walter Borney.   UPon the euyn of saynt Quyn tyne, or the .xxx. daye of No∣uembre, in the ende of the .xxxiiii. yere of kyng Edwarde and begynnynge of thys mayres yere / the kynge toke shyppynge at Caleys, and sayled to∣warde Englande / bryngynge wyth hym certayne of hys hostages. That is to saye Lowys the secōde sonne of kynge Iohan newely made duke of Aniou & of Mayn, which before was erle of Angeou / & Iohn̄ hys brother newely made duke of Aluerne and of Berry, which before was erle of Poy¦tyers / whyche erledome nowe belon∣ged to kynge Edwarde by reason of the foresayde treaty. He also hadde wyth hym syr Lowys duke of Bra∣bant, and the erles of Alenson and of Escampes, whyche were nere of the Frenche kynges blode / with eyghte other erles and lordes named in the Frenche cronycle. with the which the kynge lāded at Douer shortly after, and so came to London the .ix. day of Nouembre. And in thys .xxxv. yere, men and beastes were perysshed in Englande in dyuers places wyth thōdre & lygh tenynge / and the fende was sene in mannes lykenesse, & spake vnto men as they trauayled by the waye. Anno domini .M.CCC.lx.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lx.   wyllyam Holbech.   Iohn̄ Pecche.   Anno .xxxvi.   Iames Tame.   IN thys .xxxvi. yere / prynce Ed∣warde wedded the countesse of Kent, whyche before was wyfe vnto syr Thomas Holande / & before that, wyfe vnto the erle of Salesbury and deuorsed frō hym and maryed vnto the sayde syr Thomas. The secōd mortalyte.In thys yere also was great morta¦litie of men in England / duryng the whyche the noble duke Henry of Lācastre dyed. Thys of wryters is na∣med the seconde mortalitie. For it was ye seconde that fylle in thys kyn∣ges dayes. whan duke Henry was dede / syr Iohan of Gaunt the kynges thyrde sonne, whyche had maryed the sayde dukes doughter, was made duke of that duchye. In thys yere also were sene two castels in the ayre. whereof that one appered in the south east, and that o∣ther in the south west / out of ye which at sondry tymes as it were about the noone tyde, issued of eyther of thē an hoste of armed men to mānes syght. And that hoste whyche issued oute of the castell of the south easte appered whyte, and that other apered blacke. These two hostes apered as though they faught eche of them with other, and shewed as the whyte was fyrste vyctoryous, and lastly ouercomen, & so dysapered. In thys yere also a greate com∣pany of dyuers nacyons assembled theym in Brye and Champayne, whereof the ledders or capytaynes were Englysshemen / the whiche dyd moche harme in Fraunce. But after the affyrmaunce of the Frenchē cronycle / thys company
whyche there is called the newe com∣pany, beganne theyr assembles in the forenamed countre of Brye, or kyng Iohn̄ were delyuered frome Caleys. And whan they were ware of hys de∣lyueraūce / they departed out of Brye and yode into Champayne, and toke there diuers holdes, and spoyled and robbed dyuers small townes, & raun¦somed many mē. And in thys yere as sayth the frenche boke, they toke the brydge and towne of saynt Sprytes vpon the daye of the Innocentes or the .xxviii. day of Decembre. And as affermeth Policronycon, aboute the same tyme another company in lyke¦wyse assembled thē in Italye, whiche was called the whyte company / and molested that countre in lyke maner. And in the moneth of Apryll folow∣ynge / kynge Iohn̄ sente the erle of Cācaruyle, the erles of Salesbrugh, of ye Marchez, of Forezstes & of Ioyn guy / the whyche erles with theyr reti¦nue met wyth the sayd company at a place than named Bruke, nere vnto Lyō sur Rosne. At whych place was foughten a cruell fyghte. But in the ende the Frenche men were ouerset & scomfyted / so that the sayde erle of Cancaruyle was takē prysoner, and the two erles of Marchez and Fore∣stes slayne, wyth moche of the comō people. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxi.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lxii.   Iohn̄ of saynt Albones.   Stephen Caundissh.   Anno .xxxvii.   Iames Andrew.   IN thys .xxxvii. yere, vppon the daye of saynt Mauryce, or the xv. daye of Ianuary / blewe so exce∣dyng a wynde yt the lyke thereof was nat sene many yeres passed. This be∣gan about euēsongtyme in ye south / & cōtynued with such sternes yt it blew downe stronge & mighty buyldyng{is}, as to wres, steples, houses, and chym¦neys / & cōtynued for the more partye in suche sternesse by the space of fyue dayes after. And in thys yere & .xxiiii daye of the sayd moneth of Ianuary came Iohn̄ kyng of Fraūce vnto El¦tham besyde Grenewych / and dyned there that daye wyth the kynge. And vpon that after noone, he was hono∣rably conueyed thorough the cytie of London vnto Sanoye, as well by ye cytezyns as other, the whyche mette wyth hym vpō Blakheth wel horsed in a lyuery of one colour. And whyle the sayd kynge Iohn̄ laye at ye sayde place of Sauoy about ye begynnyng of March folowyng, a greuous syke¦nesse toke hym / of the whych he dyed the .viii. daye of Apryl folowynge, in the begynnynge of the yere of grace xiii.C.lxiiii / & after was caryed into Fraūce and buryed at saynt Denys, the .vii. daye of May folowynge. And in thys yere kynge Edwarde created syr Leonel his sonne duke of Clarence, & syr Edmunde hys other sonne erle of Cambryge. And in the ende of thys yere & .xvii. day of Sep∣tembre, began a great frost / ye whych endured to the begynnyng of the mo¦neth of Apryl. By reasō wherof moch harme grew & ensued of the same. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lxiii.   Rycharde Croydon̄.   Iohn̄ Notte.   Anno .xxxviii.   Iohn̄ Hyltoste.  
ANd that yere came .iii. kyn∣ges into Englād for to speke wyth kynge Edwarde. Fyrst ye kyng of Fraunce, the kynge of Sypres, & the kynge of Scottes. IN this .xxxviii. yere, prynce Ed¦ward sayled to Burdeaux and receyued the possessyon of Guyan, ye kynge Edwarde had newely gyuen vnto hym. For the whyche he after dyd hys homage to hys father, in ly∣kewyse and maner as his father & o∣ther kynges of England were wont to do for the sayde duchye vnto the kynges of Fraunce. The ba∣tayle of Dā¦hey. And vpon Myghelmasse day be∣ynge thā vppon a sonday, before the castell of Danhoy fast by the cytye of Uaunes in Brytayne, mette ye hostes of syr Charles de Bloys and of syr Iohn̄ de Mountfort / whyche longe before had stryuē as before is shewed for the sayd duchy of Brytayne / and there foughten a cruell batayll. But by the helpe of god & of the Englysh archers, the victorye fyll to syr Iohn̄ Mountfort. And in that fyghte syr Charles de Bloys was slayne, and many Frenchemen & Brytons that toke hys partye. After whyche victo∣rye, natwythstandynge that the wyfe of the sayde syr Charles laye within that countre / there was agayne the sayde syr Iohn̄ made no resystence, but that he enioyed that countre in peasyble wyse. Thā Charles the .vi. of that name newly crowned kynge of Fraunce, in the ryght of the woman sente ye arche bysshop of Reynes & the Marshal of Fraunce into Brytaygne, for to sette an vnyte and restfull peace betwene the sayd syr Iohn̄, & the laste wyfe of syr Charles. The whyche endeuored them so well, that in the moneth of Apryll folowynge the sayde batayll, they agreed them / so that the enhery∣taunce of that duchye shuld remayne to the sayd syr Iohn̄ & his heyres for euermore / & the wyfe of syr Charles shuld holde her contēted wyth ye erle∣dome of Penyture & the vycoūtye of Lymoges / the whyche of olde tyme belonged to her ancetours. And aboute thys tyme was an ordenaunce and statute made, that sergeauntes & prentyses of the lawe, shulde plede theyr plees in theyr mo¦ther tonge. But that stode but a shorte whyle. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxiii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lxiiii.   Symonde Mordon̄.   Adam of Bury.   Anno .xxxix.   Iohn̄ of Metforde.   IN thys .xxxix. yere after some wryters / kynge Edwarde vp∣pon saynt Stephans daye fynisshed hys warres. wherfore in the worshyp of god and saynt Stephan, he thys yere after the opynyons of the sayde auctours,Foūdacyō of saynt Ste∣phans cha∣pell at West¦mynster. began ye foūdacion of saint Stephans chapell at westmynster. The whyche was fynysshed by Ry∣charde the .ii. and sonne of prynce Ed¦warde next kyng of Englande, after thys thyrde Edwarde. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxv.   Iohn̄ Brykylsworth.   Iohn̄ Luskyn̄.   Anno .xl.   Iohn̄ Drelande.  
IN thys .xl. yere / and moneth of February, was borne the fyrste sonne of prynce Edwarde, and was named Edwarde / the whyche dyed whan he was aboute the age of .vii. yeres. And in thys yere one named Barthran de Claycon a Norman, wyth an armye of Frenchemē entred the lande of Castyle, & warred vpon Peter than kynge of that lande / & so behaued hym, that in lesse than .iiii. monethes space, he chased the sayde Peter out of hys owne lande, & crow¦ned hys brother named Henry kyng of Castyle, at a towne called Bur∣ges vpon Easter daye. wherefore the sayd Peter constrayned of necessyte, was compelled to come to the cytye of Burdeaux, for to haue & aske ayde of prynce Edward. Thys Peter was ryghtefull heyre vnto the crowne of of Castyle, and Henry hys brother af¦ter moste wryters was bastarde. But thys Peter was so vyle of con∣dycyons, that hys subgectes had to hym but lytell fauoure. And so the warre contynued a season betwene hys brother and hym, as after shall appere / in the whych prynce Edward wyth hys archers toke partye wyth thys Peter, and the Frenche kynge wyth hys speres tooke partye wyth Henry. And in thys yere at the kynges cō¦maundement, Adam Bury thanne mayre of London was dyscharged ye xxviii. daye of Ianuary / and for hym electe and chosen mayre Iohn̄ Loue kyn grocer. And as wytnesseth Poly∣cronicon & other /  thys yere was cō∣maunded by the kynge, that Peter pens shulde no more be gadered in Englande, nor payde vnto Rome, as they of longe tyme had ben vsed and graūted, in the tyme of Iuo or Iewe somtyme kynge of west Saxons, as before in hys story is shewed. But howe so at that dayes it was than by the kynge forbodē / yet neuer thelesse at thys present tyme and sea¦son, they be gadered in sondry shyres of Englande. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxv.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxvi.   Iohn̄ warde.   Iohn̄ Louekyn.   Anno .xli.   wyllyam Dykman.   IN thys .xli. yere, was borne the secōde sonn̄ of prynce Edward at Burdeaux named Rychard,Byrth of  the seconde. in the moneth of Apryll and the thyrd daye of the sayd moneth. The sayd prynce Edward wyth the kyng of Nauerne and the foresayd Peter kynge of Ca∣style, mette wyth Henry Bastarde & vsurper of the sayde kyngdome, nere vnto a towne called Domyng / wher betwene them was a cruell and long fyght. Howe be it in the ende the vic∣torye fyll vnto the Englysshemen, & Henry and hys men were chased. In thys bataylle was taken syr Barthram de Glaycon, & syr Arnold Dodenhamme thanne Marshall of Fraunce, wyth other aswell French as Brytaynes / and slayne vppon fyue thousande men vpon the partie of the sayde Henry, and vppon .xvi. hondreth vppon prynce Edwardes partye. After whyche vyctory / the prynce wyth the sayde Peter spedde theym vnto the cytye of Burgys, whyche was yolden to thē shortly after theyr commynge / and after holpe the sayd Peter to wynne other cytyes and hol¦des, so that he taryed there tyll the moneth of August folowynge. At whych season as sayth the cronicle of
Fraunce, he retourned vnto Bur∣deaux wythout paymente of wages for hys sowdyours, that before was to hym by the sayde Peter promysed. In thys season that prynce Ed∣warde was thus in Spayne / Henry Bastarde fledde wyth hys wyfe into Fraunce, & abode in a place or coūtre called Carcasson. But so soone as he was warned that prynce Edwarde was retourned vnto Burdeaux / he gadered to hym a new cōpany, & pas¦sed by the moūtaynes of the forestes / & so entred the sayd lande of Castile, the .xxvii. daye of the moneth of Sep¦tembre folowynge / & had the citie cal¦led Calahore yolded vnto hym. wher¦vnto hym drewe moche people of the countre / so that hys strengthe encrea¦sed hougely. Than frō thens he yode vnto the cytye of Burgys, where he was ioyously receyued / & behaued hym in suche wyse, yt in short whyle after he had the hole rule of the lāde of Castyle / & hys brother was fayne to auoyde the lāde, and to seche ayde of the Sarazyns as affermeth ye fore¦sayde cronycle. And in thys yere aboute the mo∣nethe of Iuny / the company before mynded in the .xxxvi. yere of thys kynge, entred the duchy of Guyan / and there helde them in doyng moch harme to that countre, lyke as they before hadde done in dyuers places of Fraunce by all that season of iiii. yeres passed. And in the moneth of Decembre they departed from thens and yode into the coūtrees of Auerne and Berry. And in the moneth of Fe∣bruary, they passed the ryuer of Loy¦re, and toke the waye towarde Mar∣cyll / and after entred the countre of Burgoyne. And euer as they passed the countrees, they raunsomed men, and spoyled many townes as they wente. And all be it that the French kyng appoynted dyuers of hys lordes and knyghtes to go agayne them / yet at suche seasōs as they drewe nere vnto them, they wolde suffre theym to de∣parte wythout batayl. For they were so many that they were nombred at lx.M. But of theyr capytaynes is none named. Howe be it there were Englyshmen, Gascoynes, Pycardes Frenchemen, men of Nauerne, and of many other nacyons, whych the cronycle reherseth nat / & contynued in theyr force and strengthe longe after, to the greate dammage of the countrees whyche they passed tho∣rough / as Normandy, Gascoygne, Guyan, Burgoyne, and all the chyef countrees of Fraunce / and lyued by rauen and pyllage, to the great enpo¦ueryssynge of the sayde countrees and townes, which they passed by or lodged in. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lxvi.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lxvii.   Iohn̄ Torgolde.   Iames Andrewe.   Anno .xlii.   wyllyam Dykman.   IN thys .xlii. yere / and moneth of Marche, apered Stella cometa, that is a blasynge sterre. And in the moneth of Apryll next ensuynge, that is to saye the syxt day of the sayde moneth / Leonell ye sonne of thys kynge Edwarde entred the cytye of Parys, where he was of the dukes of Berry and Burgoyne ho∣nourably receyued / and so by theym cōueyed vnto theyr brother the kyng of Fraunce vnto Louure, where he at that seasō was lodged. Of whome he was also ioyously receyued & log∣ged
wythin the kynges palays, & dy∣ned & souped wyth the kynge at hys owne table. And vppon the morowe folowynge he dyned wyth the quene at a place of the kynges nere to saint Poule, where the quene thā was lod¦ged. And whan after dyuer he had a whyle daunsed and passed the tyme wyth other dysportes / he than wyth the sayd .ii. dukes was agayne con∣ueyed vnto the kynge, & souped with hym agayne that nyght. And vppon the mornynge beynge tuysdaye, the sayd dukes fested the sayde syr Leo∣nell at a place of theyrs in Parys na¦med Artoys. And vpō the wednesdaye he dyned & souped agayne wyth the quene. And vpon the thursday & morowe folow∣ynge, the sayde syr Leonell toke hys leue of the kyng & quene / the whyche gaue vnto hym gyftes, & to suche as were in hys cōpany, to ye value of .xx.M. floryns & aboue / & was cōueyed wyth noble men, as the erle of Can∣caruyle & other, tyll he was comen to Sens / & wyth knyght{is} tyll he came to the borders of Fraūce / where he gaue vnto theym ryche gyftes wyth great thankes. And after he contynued hys iour¦ney tyll he came vnto ye cytie of My∣layne / where shortly after he maryed the doughter of Galyace duke of the sayde cytye and coūtre, & had by her greate possessyons, by reason that her sayde father dyed shortely after. And in the ende of thys yere, the erles of Armenak, of Bret, and of Pe¦rygort, wyth dyuers other nobles of the duchye of Guyan, appeled the prynce of walys in the Frenche kyn∣ges courte, that he hadde broken the peace, and wronged theym contrary the peace stablysshed betwene Eng∣lande & Fraūce / & requyred the Frēch kyng yt the sayd appeale myght haue due processe agayne the sayd prynce. The whyche as sayth the French cro¦nicle kynge, Charles deferred, for cer¦tayne causes there towched, whyche were to longe to reherce. Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lxvii.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lxviii.   Adam wymbynghm̄.   Symon Mordon̄.   Anno .xlii.   Robert Gyrdeler.   IN thys .xliii. yere, or more cer∣taynly in the ende of the prece∣dynge yere / one walter Bernes mer∣cer, was vpon the day of ye trāslation of saynt Edwarde kyng and confes∣soure or the .xiii. daye of Octobre, cho¦sen by the mayre & aldermen mayre of the cytye of London. But howe it was for lacke of substaunce, or by o∣ther impedymente, which is nat no∣ted, the sayd walter vpon the daye of Symonde & Iude folowynge, whā he shulde haue taken hys othe at Guylde halle apered nat. wherfore in hys rome by eleccyon of the fore∣sayde mayre and aldermen, was ad∣mytted for that yere folowynge Sy∣monde Mordon̄ fysshmonger mayre of that cytye. And in thys yere and moneth of Marche / Peter kynge of Castyle, whyche by the ayde of the Sarazyns dwellyng in the borders of Spayn, hadde wonne and recouered somme parte of the lande of Castyle / encoun¦trede wyth hys bastarde brother Henry beforesayde, and gaue vnto hym batayll nere to a towne called Sybylle. where after longe fyght, the sayde Peter was scomfyted and moche of hys people slayne, and hym selfdryuen vnto a castell / oute of the
whyche he was shortly after by trea∣son gottē, & presented vnto hys bro∣ther forenamed / by whose sentēce he was īmedyatly byheded. After whose deth the sayd Henry enioyed the hole lande of Castyle. whych infortunytie & myschaūce fylle to thys Peter after dyuers wryters, for so moche as he cruelly slew hys owne wyfe ye dough¦ter of the duke of Burbon̄. And in thys yere and moneth of Maye / the kynge of Fraunce in hys hyghe court of parlyamente holdē at Parys, proceded in iugemente vpon the appellacyons before made by the erle of Armenak, the lorde of Bret, and erle of Perogort, agayne prynce Edward, as before is towched in the precedynge yere. wherupon dyscorde and varyaunce began to take place betwene the .ii. kynges / in so moche yt by meane of the sayd .iii. lordes, nat∣wythstandyng that they were before sworne to be to the kyng of Englāde trewe lyege men / dyuers townes of the countre of Poyteaw yelded them to the Frenche kynge, as Albeuyle, Rue, & the more partye of the sayde townes of the sayd countre. wherupō ambassades were sente vppon bothe partyes / & dyuers meanes of treaty were comoned, whyche conteyneth a longe werke, wyth resonynge made vpon the same. But in conclusyō all came to none effecte. So that breche of the peace whych before, betwene ye ii. kynges was so substācially conclu¦ded was brokē / & eyther kyng for his partye made prouysiō for the warre. In so moch ye kynge Charles spedde hym to Roan in Normandy / & there in ye moneth of Iuly rigged his nauy to set theym forewarde for to warre vpon Englande. In whyche tyme & season ye kyng Charles was thus occupyed in Nor∣mādy / the duke of Lācastre lāded at Caleys with a strōge company of ar∣chers & other warryours / & frō thens passed to Thorouēne, & so to Ayre, in wastyng the countre with irne & fyre as he went. wherfore ye French kyng in defence of those partyes, sente the duke of Burgoyne with a puyssaunt armye to withstāde the sayde duke of Lācastre. The whych duke of Bur∣goyne sped hym ī such wyse, yt about ye .xxiiii. day of August he lodged hys hoste vpon the moūtayne of Turne∣han nere vnto Arde. And the English hoste was lodged betwene Gygowne & Arde / so that ye frountes of both ho¦stes were within a myle. Betwene whome were dayly skyrmysshes and small bykerynges without any nota¦rye batayll. And whā the sayd duke of Burgoyn̄ had thus kept the sayde mount, frō the .xxiiii. day of Auguste vnto the .xii. day of Septēbre / he re∣moued hys hoste & yode vnto Hesdē. For the whych dede he was after bla¦med of kyng Charles hys brother. After whych departure of the Frēche¦men / the duke of Lancastre with hys hoste tooke ye waye towarde Caus or Caux, & passed the ryuer of Sūme / & so rode toward Harflew, entendynge as sayth the Frēche boke to haue fy∣red the Frenche kynges nauy. But at theyr cōmyng thyder ye towne was so strōgly māned, yt they dyd there ly¦tell scathe. wherfore the sayd duke de¦parted shortly thens, and spedde hym into the countrye of Poyteau, and so came vnto the towne of Albeuyle. where wythout the Frenchemen en∣countred hym, and gaue vnto hym batayll. In the whych was taken syr Hugh Chastelon̄ knyght with other knyghtes, esquyres, & burgeyses of the towne / and vpō .xvi. score Frēch¦men slayne. whyche sayde prysoners to the nombre of fyue & fourty were sent vnto Caleys / & ye duke with hys company yode vnto Burdeaux, in spoylyng of the Frēchmē as he went.
Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.xlviii.   Anno dn̄i. xiii.C.lix.   Iohn̄ Pyell.   Iohn̄ Chychester.   Anno .xliiii.   Hugh Holdyche.   IN thys .xliiii. yere and moneth of Ianuary, dyed the erle of warwyke at Caleys, after he was re∣tourned from the duke of Lancastre / whyche was a man of great fame. And in ye moneth of August, dyed that noble woman quene Phylype & wyfe vnto Edwarde the thyrde.Dethe of  Phy∣lyppe. The whyche was a greate benefactoure vnto the chanōs of saynt Stephans chapell at westmynster. And soon after dyed dame Blaūch somtyme the wyfe of Henry duke of Lancastre / & was buryed at Poules vpon the nothsyde of the hyghe aul¦ter by her husbande. where she ordey¦ned for hym and her .iiii. chaūtres for euer, & an annyuersarye yerely to be kept. At the whych, ouer great thyn∣ges be set vnto the deane & chanons of the churche / she ordeyned that the mayre beynge presente at the masse, shuld offre .i.d. and take vp .xx.s / the shyryffes eyther of them a peny, and to receyue eyther of them a marke / ye chāberlayn of the cytie .x.s, the sword berer .vi.s..viii.d, and euery officer of the mayres there present .xxii.d, and to euery offycer to the nombre of .viii eyther of theym .viii.d. admytted for the shyreffes. The whyche obyte at thys daye is holden. But by reason that the lande is decayed, these fore∣named summes ben greately mynys∣shed / so that the mayre at thys daye hath but .vi.s.viii.d, bothe the shyref¦fes syxe. s. eyghte. d, and other after that rate. In thys yere also the kynge helde hys parlyament at westmynster. In the whych was graunted vnto hym iii. fyftenes to be payde in .iii. yeres folowynge. And by a conuocacyon of the clergye was also grauted vnto hym .iii. dysmes, to be payde in lyke maner. And in thys yere was the .iii. mor∣talitie, wherof dyed moche people. And suche a morayne fyll also amōg beastes, that the lyke therof was nat seen many yeres before. And vppon that ensued such excessiues of rayne, that corne was therwith drowned in the erthe / and so bukked wyth water, that the yere ensuynge whete was at xl.d. a busshell. And in ye ende of ye moneth of Iuly / syr Robert Knollys accōpanied with dyuers noble men & soudyours, en∣tred saint Omers. And whā they had executed theyr pleasures there & in ye countre enuyrō / they than rode vnto Arras, in wastynge & spoylyng ye coū¦tre as they went. And whan they had brēt the bulwerkes of the sayd town of Arras / they passed by Noyn̄ & Uer¦mendoys / & brente the houses of all such as wolde nat to them gyue due raunsome. And thus holdynge theyr waye / they passed the ryuers of Oyse & of Syre / & so came vnto the citie of Raynes, & passed there the ryuer / and rode towarde Troyes, & passed ye ry∣uers of Aube & of Sayne / & so helde theyr waye to saynt Floryntyne, and there passed the ryuer of Ion / in hol∣dyng theyr cours towarde Ioyngny & so to Corbueyll & Esson or Essoyn. And vppon a mondaye beynge the xxii. day of Septembre / the sayd En∣glysshemen lodged theym vppon the mount of saynte Albone, and in the countre there about. And vpon wed∣nysdaye folowyng, they enbataylled them in a felde betwene the townes of Iunye and Parys.
In all whyche season they passed wythout batayll thorough those fore¦sayd countres, in spoylyng them and raunsomyng the inhabytaūtes ther∣of wythout resystens or impedymēt. And all be it yt in the cytye of Parys at that day were .xii.C. men of armes waged by the Frenche kynge, besyde the sowdyours and strengthe of the cytezeyns of that cytye / yet the sayde hoste of Englysshemen lay as before is sayd enbataylled, tyll it was paste noone of the foresayd daye. At which tyme for so moche as they were credi¦bly enfourmed that they shulde there haue no batayl, they brake theyr feld and sped them to a place or towne cal¦led Antoygny, & there lodged ye night and vpō the morowe toke theyr iour¦ney to warde Normandy. But after .iiii. dayes labour, they tourned theyr waye towarde Estam∣pys or Escamps, by Beause in Gaste¦noys, in pyllynge and domagynge the coūtrees as they before had done / contynuynge theyr iourney tyll they came into the erledome of Angeau / where they wanne by strengthe the town{is} of Uaas & Ruylly, with other stronge holdes thereabout. But than as ye deuyll wold, which is rote of all enuy and dyscorde / the lorde Fytzwater and the lord Graūt∣son, fyll at variaūce wyth syr Robert Knolles and hys companye / whyche grewe to so great hatred and dysplea¦sure, that syr Roberte Knolles wyth the floure of the archers and sow∣dyours, departed from the sayd two lordes, leuynge theym in the forsayd townes of Uaas & Ruylly / & he thā yode into Brytayne. whereof whanne certayntye was broughte vnto the Frenche kynge / anone he cōmaunded syr Berthram de Glaycon̄ newly made marshall of Fraunce, wyth a stronge armye to entre the sayde countye of Angeou, and to make sharpe warre vppon the sayde Englyshmen. The whych vpō the twelf daye of Octobre folowyng, layde syege vnto the sayde towne of Uaas / whereof issued oute the sayde lordes of Fytzwater and Graūtson, and gaue vnto the Marshall batayl. But in the ende the dyscomfyture fyl vnto the Englysshemen / so that of theym was slayne .vi. hundreth, and the reste put vnto the flyght. In the whyche was taken ye sayd lorde Grauntson wyth other. And that done the sayd syr Barthrā yode vnto the towne of Uaas, and gat it by assawte. where also were sayne vpon thre hundreth of Englyshemē, and the other put to flyght, & many taken prysoners. And after thys the sayd Barthram pursued the English men that were fledde, vnto a towne called Uersure. where in assawtynge of the sayd towne, he slewe and toke prysoners vpon .iiii.C. Englyshmē. And thus by stryfe and dyssenc. on a∣monge theym selfe / those that before by amyte and good accorde were vic¦tours, now by hatered and dyscorde were slayne and taken prysoners. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxx.   wyllyam walworth.   Iohn̄ Bernes.   Aonn .xlv.   Robert Gayton̄.   IN thys .xlv. yere & begynnyng of the mometh of Marche / the archebyshoppe of wynchester than beynge a cardynall, and presente at Auynyon wyth pope Gregorye the xi. of that name / was put in com∣myssyon
wyth the archebyshoppe of Beauuays to make or treate a peace and vnyty bytwene the two realmes of Englande and of Fraunce. whych sayd cardynall of wynchester after hys departynge from the pope, came downe toward Meleoune / where by the sayd archbysshop and also cardy¦nall of Beauuays, he was honoura∣bly mette, and so conueyed vnto the cytye of Melcon. And whan he had restyd him there vpon .iiii. dayes / the two cardynalles ensemble sped them vnto Parys / where they wyth kyng Charlys had communycacyō tow∣chynge the sayd peace. And after hys pleasure knowen / the sayde archbys∣shop and cardynall toke hys leue, & was cōueyed toward Caleys / where he toke shyppynge, and so sayled in to Englande / and shewed vnto the kynge the popes pleasure wyth the Frenche kynges answere. And in thys yere folowynge the somertyde in Guyā were made and foughten many and dyuers skyrmys¦shes / in the whyche for the more par∣tye the Englyshemen were put vnto the worse / so that many of them were slayne and taken prysoners, and dy∣uers holdes and townes taken from them / and specyally in the countre of Lymosyne. For by the fyrste daye of the moneth of Iuly, the cytye of Ly∣moges wyth all the coūtre of Lymo¦syne forsayde was vnder the obey∣saunce of the Frenche kyng, as wyt∣nessyth the Frenche Cronycle. wherof the occasyon was as affer¦meth the Englyshe boke,A taske e∣ynge. for so mych as prynce Edward had lately before arreryd of the inhabytauntes of that cytye and countre, a greate and gre∣uous taske, to theyr great hurte and enpouerysshyng / by meanes wherof he loste the loue of the people. whan the Frenche kynge hadde thus opteyned the rule of the coūtre of Lymosyne / he immedyately after sente syr Barthram de Glaycon into the erledome of Poyteawe or Poy∣tyers, and wāne there many townes and castels / & lastly layde hys syege vnto Rochell, as after in the folow∣ynge yere shalbe shewed. A mayres  to the  of the . And to the ende that good and merytoryous dedes shuld be holden in memorye / here is to be noted that the mayre for thys yere beyng Iohā Bernys mercer, gaue vnto the comy¦naltye of the cytye of London a chest wyth thre lockes & keyes, and therin a thousande marke of redy money / wyllyng the keyes therof to be yerely in the kepyng of thre sundry persōs, that is to mene the mayster of ye felys¦shyp of the mercery to haue one, the mayster of the felysshyp of drapars the second, and thyrde to be in the ke¦pynge of the chamberlayne of that cytye. And so therin the sayde thou∣sande marke to be kept / to the entent that at all tymes when any cytesyne wolde borowe any money, that he shulde haue it there for the space of a yere / to laye for suche a summe as he wold haue plate or other iewellys to a suffycyente gayge, so that he exce∣dyd not the summe of an hundreth marke. And for the occupyenge ther∣of yf he were lerned, to saye at hys pleasure De profundis for the soule of Iohn̄ Bernys and all christen sou∣les, as often tymes as in hys summe were comprysed .x. markes. As he that borowed but .x. marke, shulde saye but ouer that prayer. And yf he had .xx. marke / then to saye it twyes, and so after the rate. And yf he were not lerned, then to saye so often hys Pater noster. But how so thys mo∣ney was lent or gyded / at thys daye the cheste remayneth in the chamber of London, wythout money or pled∣ges for the same.
Anno domini .M.CCC.lxx.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxi.   Robert Hatfelde.   Iohn̄ Bernes.   Anno .xlvi.   Robert Gayton̄.   IN thys .xlvi. yere and moneth of February, kynge Edwarde helde hys parlyamente at westmyn∣ster. In the whych he asked of the spi¦rytualtye .l.M.li, & as moch of ye laye fee. The whych by the temporal was graunted / but the clergye kepte them of wyth plesaunt answeres. So that the kyng and hys coūsayll was with them dyscontented / in so moche that to theyr dyspleasures, dyuers offy∣cers, as the chaunceler, the pryuye seale, the tresourer, and other, were re¦moued beyng spyrytuall men / and in theyr offyces & places temporall men set in. And shortly after the foresayde cardynall of Beauuays came into Englande, to treate of the peace be∣twene the .ii. realmes. But he spedde nothyng to the effect therof. wherfore in the moneth of Iuly, ye Frenche kyng sente into the countre of Poyteaw the forenamed syr Bar∣thram de Claycon̄ wyth a stronge ar¦mye / where he wan dyuers holdes & fortresses from the Englyshmen. In whyche season kynge Edwarde for strengthyng of the coūtre, & specially to defende ye towne of Rochell, which as aboue in the other yere is shewed was at this yere besieged by the sayd syr Barthran / sente the erle of Pen∣broke wyth other noble men, to forty fye the sayde towne, and to remoue ye syege. But or he myght wynne to the sayd towne / he was encountred with a flote of Spaynardes, the whyche kyng Henry of Castyle had sent into Fraunce to strength the French kyn¦ges partye. Of the whyche flote after longe and cruell fyght / the sayde erle was taken, wyth syr Guycharde de Angle and other, to the nombre of .C and thre score prysoners / & the more partye of hys men slayne and drow∣ned, wyth the losse of many good shyppes. And in the begynnyng of the mo∣neth of Septembre folowyng, a Gas¦coygne borne, a man of good fame, whome the kyng of England had ad¦mytted for hys lyeutenaunt & gouer¦noure of the countre of Poyteaw, na¦med le Captall de Bueffe / faughte wyth an armye of Frenchmen before a towne named Sonbyse / where in conclusyon hys men were slayne and chased, & he wyth .lxx. of hys partie ta¦ken prysoners. Than the dukes of Berry & of Burgoyne vppon the .vi. daye of Septembre, came before Ro¦chell / and had certayne communica∣ciōs with ye rulers of the sayd towne, for the delyuery therof. In this passe tyme & season, kyng Edward heryng of the takyng of the erle of Pēbroke, & of the losse that he dayly had of hys men in dyuers partyes of Fraunce, with also the ieopardye that ye towne of Rochell and other stode in / made hasty prouysyon, & entendyd to haue passed the see. But the wynde was cō¦traryous, that he myght haue no pas¦sage / wherfore he retourned as sayth Policronicō, agayne into the land. Than vpon the .viii. daye of Sep¦tembre beforesayd, the captayne of Rochell, hauynge no cōforte of short rescous / yelded vppon certayne ap∣poyntementes the sayde towne vnto the forenamed dukes, vnto the Frēch kynges vse. And shortely after were also yolden to theym, the townes of Angolesme, of Exāctes, of saīt Iohn̄ de Angely, wyth dyuers other.
Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxii.   Iohn̄ Phylpotte.   Iohn̄ Pyell.   Anno .xlv.   Nycholas Brember.   IN thys .xlvii. yere / at a wreste∣lynge holden vpon blake Heth besyde London, was slayne a mercer of Londō named Iohn̄ Northwode. For the whyche greate dyssencyon grewe amonge the felyshyppes of ye cytye, to the houge dystourbaunce of it / and a good season after or the ran¦coure thereof myghte be duely ap∣peased. In thys yere also the duke of Lā∣castre syr Iohn̄ of Gaunt, & syr Ed∣mūde his brother erle of Cambriged wedded the two doughters of Peter whyche was late kynge of Castyle, put to deth by Hēry hys bastarde bro¦ther / as before I haue shewed in the xliii. yere of thys kyng{is} reygne. Of ye whyche two doughters syr Iohn̄ of Gaunt maryed the eldest named Cō¦stance, & hys brother the yonger na∣med Isabell / so that by these marya∣ges these .ii. bretherne claymed to be enherytours of the kyngdome of Ca¦style or Spayne. And in thys yere after the duke of Brytayne had receyued many exorta¦cyons & requestes frome the Frenche kyng, to haue hym vpon hys partye: he sente for certayne sowdyours of Englishmen, & strengthed with them some of thys castelles & holdes. wher¦of heryng kyng Charles / sent thyder wyth a stronge power the forenamed syr Barthran de Claycon / warnyng theym to make warre vpon them as an enemye vnto the house of Fraūce. The whyche accordynge to theyr cō∣mission entred the lande of Brytayn, in wastyng it with irne & fyre / and in shorte processe had yolden vnto hym the more partye of the chyef townes, excepte Brest, Aulroy, and Deruall. Than in the ende of Iuny the sayde syr Barthran layd syege vnto Brest / & the lord of Craon wyth other laye before Daruall. In all whyche sea∣son the duke of Brytayne was in En¦glande. For so soone as he hadde as before is sayd, bestowed the foresayd Englyshe sowdyours / he sayled into Englande to speke wyth kynge Ed∣warde. In the moneth of Iuly, the duke of Lācastre wyth syr Iohn̄ de Moūt forde duke of Brytayne & other, with a myghty puyssaunce landed at Ca∣leys. And after they had rested them there a certayn days, they rode vnto Hesden, and lodged them within the parke an other season. And after pas∣sed by Dourlōs, by Benquesne, and so vnto Corbye / where they passed ye ryuer of Some, and rode vnto Roy in Uermendoys / where they rested them by the space of .vii. dayes. At whych terme ende they set fyre vpon the towne, & toke theyr way towarde Laemoys, and burned & spoyled the countre as they wēt. And in processe of tyme passed the ryuers of Osne, Marne, and of Aube, & rode thorugh Chāpayne / & by the erledome of Bra¦me streyghte vnto Guy / & passed the ryuer of Seyn, & so towarde ye ryuer of Leyr, and vnto Marcynguy ye nō∣nery. And whan they were passed the sayd nonnery / they kepte theyr waye towarde the ryuer of Ancherre, and so vnto Burdeaux. In all whyche iourney they passed wythout fyghte or batayll / natwithstādyng the great hurte & domage they dyd vnto ye tow¦nes & coūtres as they passed. Excepte at a place or towne called Orchye, a knyght of Fraūce called syr Iohn̄ de
Uyenne encountred .l. speres and .xx. archers that were strayed from theyr hoste / and set vppon theym, and slew some parte of theym, and toke the re∣sydue of theym prysoners. So that the Frenche boke sayth, for so moche as for lacke of meate for theyr horses and other paynfull thynges that in that iourney to theym happened, that though that iournay were vnto the Englysshemen honorable to ryde so ferre in the kynges lāde vnfough∣ten wyth / yet it was to theym very paynfull, cōsyderyng the manyfolde chaunces fallynge to theym, as losse of horses and other thynges duryng that passage. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxiii.   Iohn̄ Awbry.   Adam of Bury.   Anno .xlviii.   Iohn̄ Fysshyde.   IN thys .xlviii. yere, were sente fro the pope than beyng the .xi. Gregory, the archebysshop of Rauen¦ne, and the bysshop of Carentras / for to treate of the peace, betwene the .ii. kynges of Englande and of Fraūce. The whyche assembled them at Bru¦ges in Flaundres. whyther also for kynge Edwardes partye, came the duke of Lancastre, and the bysshope of Londō, wyth other. And for Char¦les the Frenche kynge, appered there the duke of Burgoyne, & the bisshop of Amyens, and other. The whyche cōmyssioners, after they had spente a greate parte of the lente in disputa∣cions of thys matter / the partyes for the Frenche kynge desyred a lycence of the legates, that they myghte ryde vnto Parys, and shewe vnto ye kyng the offycers of the englysshe partye / and so to retourne with hys pleasur. wherupon it was agreed, that a cer∣tayne shulde ryde & to shew vnto the Frenche kynge, yt the Englysshemen abode styffely vpon the souerayntye, that the kynge of Englande and hys heyres kynges, shal enioy all the for∣mer landes comprysed in the peace made betwene hym and Iohn̄ than kyng of Fraūce / as before is shewed in the .xxxiiii. yere of thys kyng, wyth out homage or other duyte for them doynge. For thys matter as sayth ye Frenche cronycle, kyng Charlys as∣sembled at Parys a great parte of ye nobles of hys realme, wyth many o∣ther wyse mē & doctours of dyuynite, to haue that case suffyciently argued and debated. In the whyche coūsayl it was plenerly determyned, that the kyng myght nat gyue ouer the sayd souerayntye without great peryll of hys soule / as there was shewed by di¦uers resons. whan thys reporte was brought vnto Bruges / ye sayd treaty was dissolued wythoute any conclu∣syon takynge / excepte the peace was contynued tyll the feast of all sayn∣tes next ensuynge. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxiii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxiiii.   Rycharde Lyons.   wyllyam walworth.   Anno .xlix.   wyllyam wodhowce.   IN thys yere, that is to vnder∣stande in the begynnynge of thys mayres yere, and ende of the xlviii. yere of kyng Edwarde / a new
wyse cōplayned vpon to the kyng, yt he was throwen into pryson, where he lay many yeres after. Than kyng Edwarde created Ry¦chard sonn̄ of prynce Edward pryn∣ce of walys / & gaue vnto hym ye erle∣domes of Chester and Cornewayll. And also for the kyng waxed feble & sykely / he than betoke the rule of the lande vnto syr Iohn̄ of Gaunt duke of Lancastre / and ordeyned hym as gouernour of the lande. whyche so contynued durynge hys fathers lyfe. In thys yere also the tenaūtes or menyall seruaūtes of the erle of war¦wyk, made a ryot vpon the monkes of Euyshm̄ / and slewe & hurte many of the abbottes tenauntes, & spoyled and brake hys closures and waryn∣nes, and sewed theyr pondes and wa¦ters, and dyd vnto them many disple¦sures / to the vtter ruyne of that mo∣nastery, ne had the kyng y• soner haue sente downe to the erle hys letters, chargynge hym to sease & withdraw hys men from that ryot. whych after¦warde was pacified, without any no¦tary punysshement of suche persons as were begynners or executours of that ryot. Anno domini .M.CCC.xcvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xcvii.   Androwe Pykman.   Nycholas Bembre.   Anno .lii.   Nycholas Twyforde.   IN thys .lii. yere and .xii. daye of the moneth of Apryl / syr Iohn̄ Mynster worth knyght, for certayne tresons, of the whych he was conuict before the mayre and other iustyces of the kyng in the Guyld halle, was thys foresayd daye at tyborne put in execucion / that is to meane, hanged, heded, and quartered / & hys hed sette after vpō Lōdon brydge. The cause of whose dethe was, for so moche as he beynge put in trust by the kyng, re¦ceyued greate summes of money to paye wyth the kynges sowdyours / the whyche he kepte vnto hys owne vse, and deceyued the kynge and hys sowdiours. And whan therof he was to the kyng accused / he feryng punys¦shement fledde into Fraunce, & there conspyred newly agayne his natural prynce / & so lastly was taken and re∣ceyued hys meryte. Ahysme.In thys yere also began a wōder∣full cysme in the churche of Rome. For after the deth of the pope the .xi. Gregory was chosen .ii. popes. wher¦of the fyrst was named the .vi. Urbā, and that other the seuenth Clement / the fyrste an Italy on borne, and that other a Frencheman. Of the whyche ensued suche dyscorde in eleccyon of the pope, that by the terme of .xxxix. yeres after, there was euer .ii. popes in suche auctorytye, that harde and doughtefull it was to knowe / whe∣ther was indubitat pope. Dethe of kynge Ed∣warde the thyrde. And vpon the .xxii. daye of the mo∣neth of Iuny, dyed at hys manour of Shene now called Rychmoūt, kyng Edward ye thyrde of that name / whā he had reygned .li. yeres and .v. mo∣nethes and odde dayes / leuyng after hym .iiii. sonnes, that is to saye Leo∣nell duke of Clarence, Iohn̄ of Gaūt duke of Lancastre, Edmund of Lāg¦ley duke of yorke, and Thomas of woodstok erle of Cambrydge. Of the whyche sonnes wyth other nobles of hys realme, he was honourably cō∣ueyed frō his sayd manour of Shene vnto the monastery of westmynster, and there solempnely wythin the
chapell of saynt Edwarde vppon the south syde of the shryne, wyth thys Epytaphyor superscrypcion in a ta∣ble hangyng vpon hys tombe. ¶Hic decus Anglorum, flos regum preteritorū, Forma futurorum, rex clemens, pax populorum, Tercius Edwardus regni complens iubileum, Inuictus pardus, pollens bellis Machabeus. The whych is thus to be vnderstāde in our mother tūge as folowynge. Of Englyshe kynges, here lieth the beauteuous floure. Of all before passed, & myrrour to them shall sue A mercifull kynge, of peace conseruatour, The .iij. Edwarde. The deth of whome maye All Englysshmē / for he by knyghtehode due, was lyberde inuict, and by feate Marciall To worthy Machabe in vertu peregall. PHylyp de Ualoys erle of Ualoys, & sonne of Charles de Ualoys brother vnto ye .iiii. Philip was admitted for protectoure of the realme of Fraūce, in the begynnynge of the moneth of February. And vpō Trynite sonday next ensuyng, he with hys wyfe were crowned at Raynes, in ye yere of our lord god a .M.iii.C.xxviii, & the .ii. yere of kyng Edward the .iii. thā be∣ynge in possessiō of the crowne of En¦glande. Betwene thys Philip & the sayd Edward kyng of Englande, as some deale before in the story, & .iiii. yere of Charles the .v. is towched / great disputacions & argumentes a∣rose betwene theyr coūsayles, for the right & tytle to the crowne of Fraūce. For it was thought by the coūsayl of Englāde, for so moche as Edwarde was cosyn to Philip le Beaw, & sonn̄ of ye sayd Philippes doughter, which had no mo chylder but Edwardes mo¦ther / that he shuld rather be kyng of Fraūce than Philip de Ualoys, that was but cosyn germayn to Philip le Beaw, & sonne of hys brother Char∣les. Of whych dispuciōs & argumen¦tes the fynall cōclusion was, y• for an olde decre & law by auctoritye of par∣lyament lōge before made was enac∣ted, that no womā shuld enheryte the crowne of Fraūce / therfore ye tytle of Edward by myght of the Frēchemen was put by, & thys Philip admytted to the gouernaūce of the same. After whych direcciō thus takē, & specially by ye meanes of syr Robert erle of Ar¦toys / thys Philip anone was procla¦med regēt of Fraūce, vnto such tyme as the quene wyfe of Charles the .v. whych thā was wyth chylde were de∣lyuered / & so receyued the rule of the lande as regēt. In tyme wherof, Pe∣ter Remy principall tresorer of kyng Charles last dede / whyche Peter (ly∣uyng the sayd Charles) was accused of myspēdyng of ye kynges tresoure, & enrychyng of hym selfe cōtrary to ryght & reason, so yt his goodes shuld be estemed at .iiii.C.M.li. after Pa∣rys money, wherof ye value is set out in diuers places before in this werke was takē out of pryson & areygned at Parys, & there conuict & adiuged / & vpō the .xxiiii. day of Marche drawē thorugh the cytie, & hanged vpon the comō gybet at Parys. And vpō the fyrst day of Apryll folowyng / the old quene & wyfe of Charles laste kyng, was lighted of chyld, & brought forth a doughter at Boys in Uincēt, which after was named Blanche. wherfore where before the sayd Philip de Ua∣loys ruled before but as regēt / nowe he was allowed & takē for kyng, and crowned as before is sayd at the citie of Raynes,Phylyp de Valoys io¦ned kyng of Fraunce. with ye quene his wyfe vp on Trinite sonday. And whā ye solēp¦nyte of hys coronaciō was ended / he then assembled before hym & hys coū¦sayll
Lowys the erle of Flaūdres, & receyued of hym homage for the sayd erledom. And that done, he besought the kyng of ayde to oppresse certayn townes of hys coūtre whych rebelled agayne hym. wherunto ye kyng graū¦ted / & by counsayll & exortacion of syr Gautyer or walter de Crecy than cō∣stable of Fraunce, the kyng sent oute hys commyssioners / chargynge hys lordes with theyr assygnes & sowdy∣ours, to mete with hym in dyffēsyble arraye at the cytie of Arras, by mary Magdaleyne day next ensuyng. At whyche day the kyng with his lordes and people there meting, toke forewarde vpon hys iourney, & sped hym toward Cassyle a town of Flaū¦dres. where within lytell space of the towne he pyght hys pauylyons and tētes / & wasted and pylled the coūtre thereabout. But the Flemynges ke∣pynge within the sayd towne, fered nothyng the French kyng / but in dy∣rision of hym and of hys lordes, they caused a red cok to be paynted vpō a whyte cloth, & wrote in greate let∣ters in ye sayd clothe thys tyme folow¦ynge, & hāged it out ouer the walles. Quant ce quoc iy chantera. e roy troue ca entrera. ¶whych is thus to meane in our vul¦gare speche. whan that thys cok lo here doth synge, than shall thys founde kynge hys hoste in brynge. WHā thys was redde of the Frēch men, and report made therof vn¦to the kynge / he was therwyth sore amoued / and specyally for that yt they named hym the foundē kyng. Therfore they assayled them strōgly vppon all partyes. But they of the towne defended theym manfully, so that theyr enemyes had of them none aduauntage. Than the kynge sente syr Robert de Flaundres a knyghte of the erles, with a certayne sowdy∣ours / commaundyng hym to assayle the Flemynges toward saint Omers And the erle he monysshed, yt he with hys people shuld assayle thē towarde the yle. Than the comōs of Bruges, Ipre, of Tourney, of Fourneys, and of all Cassyle, assembled theym / and prouyded that a certayne of thē shuld kepe the mount of Cassyle, and ano∣ther company shulde kepe the coūtre towarde Tourney, and the thyrde hoste shulde fortyfye the countre to∣warde the yle. The whiche people ordered euery hoste hys lymit to hym assigned / and dayly skyrmysshed wyth the Frenche men, so that betwene them men were slayne vpon bothe partyes. whan the kyng had thus lyen before the towne a certayn season / the Flemynges nat feryng theyr enemyes, issued oute of the towne, and pyght theyr tētes vp∣pon the mounte of Cassyle, & shewed them boldly vnto theyr enemyes / thā kyng Phylyp seynge the boldnesse of the Flemynges, and howe lytell they fered hym / toke coūsayll of hys lord{is} how he myght cause them to dyscēde the hylle / for so longe as they kepte ye hyll it was iuperdous & perylous to stye towarde theym. Lastly it was a∣greed by the kynge and hys lordes, that syr Robert de Flaundres wyth other, shuld assayle an holde or town thereby called Terroner de Bergner by meane wherof the kyng thoughte that they wolde discende the mount, to rescue the sayd towne. which accor¦dyng to ye kynges mynde was done, and a bulwerke set vppon a fyre. But the kynge had neuer the rather hys entent. For they kepte them and theyr gates in so sure wyse, that the French kyng for al hys great power, myghte to theym do no scathe. In so moche that the kynge consyderynge
theyr strength / was condyscended to famysshe them by hunger, that they myght nat wynly strēgth / & for that toke ye lesse watche or regarde to hys people, but suffered them to play and dysport them out of theyr harneys, eche of thē in others tente / thynkyng hym sure of hys enemyes, for any as∣saute or warre by theym to be procu∣red or attempted agayne hym or hys lordes. But whether it were that hys ene¦myes of this were warned, or that of theyr owne courage and pryde they wolde assayle the frenche hoste / vpon the .xxiiii. daye of Auguste towarde ye nyght, the sayde hoste of Flemynges aualed the mount in as secrete wyse as men of watre myght / & drewe thē towarde the French men, whych thā were vnarmed and in theyr disportes of dysynge and playeng at the chesse & other games. Uppon whome the Flemynges came so sodaynly, yt they slewe many of theyr enemyes, and forced many to fle toward saynt Omers for theyr sauegarde. And so the Flemynges helde on theyr waye tyll they came nere vnto the kynges tent, which thā was also vnarmed. But by the noyse & crye he beynge warned▪ in all haste armed hym. In the whyche season as god wolde for the Frenche hoste / certayne Marshallys of the Frenche hoste wyth a stronge company, retor∣ned from ye assaute of an holde ther∣by, and encountred the Flemynges / and helde wyth them batayll, whyle the kynge and his lordes made them redy. So that in processe the Flemyn¦ges were closed wyth theyr enemyes and had a sharpe and cruell fyghte / wherin they defended theym vygo∣rously. But in the ende the losse of y• felde iourned vpon the Flemynges / so yt the capytayne named  was slayne,Discomfyte of the Fle∣mynge. wyth many other to the nom∣bre of .xviii.M. & aboue as wytnes∣seth the Frenche boke, ouer many whyche were there taken prysoners of poore men and artyfycers / for the multitude of the gentylmē were vpō the erles partye. After whyche victorye thus optey¦ned by the kynge / anone he caused ye sayde towne of Cassell to be set vpon a fyre / & after yode vnto Bruges and had it yolden vnto hym. And in lyke wyse was Ipre, Poperynge, Four∣nays, Tournaye, Terrouer, & many other good townes yoldē vnto hym. Amonge the whyche Gaūt is nat na¦med. wherfore it is to deme, that it was none of those townes yt at thys season rebelled. Thā in short proces folowynge / the kyng had the rule of the hole erledome of Flaunders, and delyuered the possessyon therof vnto Lowys the foresayde erle of that coū¦tre / and after retourned into Fraūce wyth pompe, leuynge the erle in hys countye of Flaundres. Thē whyche dyd after so cruell iustyce vppon hys subiectes, that he put to deth by dy∣uerse tourmentes, as rakkynge, hed∣dynge, & hangynge, in sondry tow∣nes & places of hys lordshyppes, vpō the nōbre of .x.M: ouer & aboue many & dyuers whych were banysshed, som for fewe yeres, some for many, & som for euermore. IN the secōde yere of thys kyng Phylyp / lyke as before is she∣wed in the thyrde yere of kynge Ed∣warde, the sayd Edwarde made hys homage vnto the sayde Phylyp in ye towne of Amyas, for the duchy of Guyon & countye of Poytyers. And soone after thys Phylype sente into Flaundres dyuers bysshoppes and other noble men / by whose meanes ye gates of Brug{is} of Ipre, of Courtray and of other townes, were abated &
throwen downe, for fere lest the sayde townes wolde oft rebell agayne hym or theyr erle. In thys yere also syr Roberte de Artoys began hys plee in parlyamēt agayne Iohan countesse of Artoys for that erledome / in claymynge the ryght therof by certayne endentures of couenaūtes of maryage, betwene syr Phylype de Artoys hys father, & dame Blaūche of Brytayne hys mo∣ther / whyche wrytynges had ben by longe tyme kept from hym and now newly founden. And for to haue the better expedicion in hys matter / he brought vnto the kynge, the erle of Alenson, the duke of Brytayne, with dyuers nobles, the whyche made re∣quest for hym to the kyng yt he might haue iustyce. And with the countesse came the duke of Burgoyne, Lowys erle of Flaundres, and dyuers other noble men, makynge lyke request for her and for her ryght. Than syr Ro∣bert shewed forth a wrytynge sealed wyth the seale of armys of the erle of Artoys, conteynynge that whan the maryage was solēpnysed of syr Phy¦lyp de Artoys father to the sayd Ro∣bert, & of dame Blaunche doughter vnto the duke of Brytayne and mo∣ther vnto the sayd Robert, it was ac∣corded that the sayd syr Phylyp hys father, gaue vnto ye sayd dame Blaū¦che and to her heyres, the erledome of Artoys. whiche wrytynges at the in∣staunce & prayer of the countesse of Artoys, were than delyuered into ye court to be kept / sayeng that the sayd wrytynges were vntrewe & coūterfe¦ted. Upon the whych the sayde coun∣tesse brought suffycient prouffe, that the sayd wrytynges were falsely ma¦de & sealed by a gentylwomā, dough¦ter vnto the lorde of Dygnon of the castell of Bethune / yt whyche was so lerned in Astronomy yt she toke vpon her to shew thynges to come, wherin somtyme she happed vpon the soth / but more oftener she fayled. By meanes of whyche womā an olde chartre sealed wyth the seale of the forenamed syr Phylip was foūd / the whych she craftely toke of, & set it vpon a new writyng made to ye auaū¦tage of the sayd syr Robert of Artoys & after presented them vnto the sayd syr Robert, sayenge yt she had founde thē in the town of Acras. The which he ioyfully receyued, and made hys tytle and clayme vpō the same. This matter thus hāgyng before the kyng and hys lordes / in the .iii. yere of hys reygne in ye cytye of Parys, after due prouffe made vpon the same, the sen∣tence was gyuen agayne syr Robert of Artoys to hys great dyspleasure. In so moche that he sayd openly, by me he was made a kynge, and by me he shalbe dysmyssed yf I maye. And for he fered to be caste in pryson by ye French kyng / he therefore conueyed hys horse and goodes secretely vnto Burdeaux vpon Geroūde, and there toke shyppyng and so passed into En¦glande hys sayd horses and treasour & hym selfe yode vnto hys cosyne the duke of Brabāt. with whome he bode a certayne of tyme / & after passed into Englāde, and excyted kyng Edward hougely for to make warre vpon the Frenche kynge. In the .iiii. yere of ye reygne of this Phylip / the sayd syr Robert was pro¦claymed open enemy to the crown of Fraunce, and hys landes seased into the Frenche kynges handes / and he banysshed the lande for euer, excepte that he within a moneth after Easter next ensuyng, wolde come into ye kyn¦ges court, & submyt hym hooly vnto the kynges grace whyche sentēce pas¦sed agayne hym, for so moche as he apered nat. In ye .vi. yere of the reygne of this Philip / the wyfe of syr Robert of Ar∣toys,
yt whych was syster vnto kyng Philip, was accused to be a great oc¦casioner of the offence of her husbād. For ye which she with her childer was sent into Gastenoys & there holden in strayte pryson. In ye .viii. yere of hys reygne, kyng Philip vysyted diuers parties of his realme / & in ye doynge, vysyted many places of pylgrymages which before he had promysed to seche, for the resti¦tuciō of helth to his eldest sonn̄ Iohn̄ thā duke of Normādy, whych ye yere before my meane of sekenes was in great ieopardy of lyfe / & cōtynuynge the sayd iourney, rode vnto Auygnō and vysyted there ye pope than beyng Benet the .xii. of ye name. And whā he had sped hys nedes wyth hym, he yo∣de into the prouynce of Mercyle for to se there his nauy / and after retour¦ned by Burgoyne, where of the duke he was royally receyued and feested. In which season of his there tarieng a cōplaynt was brought before hym by ye sayd duke, agayne syr Iohn̄ de Chalon, for clayme of certayn lādes within that duchy. The whych vari∣aunce to apese the kyng toke therein somme payne. But no direccion he myght set therein / so yt the sayd duke and syr Iohn̄ departed with wordes of dyffiaūce. And shortly after ye sayd syr Iohn̄ accompanyed with dyuers noble mē of Almayne, entred ye duchy of Burgoyne, and therin dyd moche harme to the coūtre and people / and gat certayne castelles and thē forty∣fyed with Almaynes. Thā ye duke ha¦uyng in his ayde ye kyng of Nauerne the duke of Normādy▪ with ye erle of Escāps and of Flaūdres▪ asseged ye castel of Chausy, & at ye ende of .vi. we¦kes wan ye same / and after yode vnto the cytye of Besenson, & layd siege to it also. But whā he had leyne there a lōge season, he was fayne to cōclude a trewes, his host was in such  of vytayll. By reason of whych peas or trewes ye hostes were deseuered, & the ende of ye warre vnparfyted. But in the ende folowynge, by meane of ye Frēch kyng a dyrecciō was takē be∣twene the sayd {per}tyes. And thys yere kyng Philip sent certayne messēgers vnto kyng Edward, vpō certayn de∣maūdes for ye castel of yaūtes & other for ye which cōtrauersie fyrst begā to kyndle betwene the sayde .ii. prynces as in ye .x. yere of Edward is touched with the other yeres folowyng. In the .ix. yere of this Philip, ape∣red a blasyng sterre. After the whych ensued greate mortalytye within the realme of Fraūce, aswel of men as of beestes. And in this yere a nother mā of ye prouynce of Lāgedok named Ar¦nolde of Normādy, was heded & han¦ged vpō ye cōmon gybet of Parys / for asmoch as by hys meanes it was pro¦ued, that the Englyshmē had wonne the castell of Paracoll. And in the .x. yere of kynge Philip / kyng Edward of Englād sent syr Barnard de Bret into Flaūdres, for causes touched & shewed in the .xii. yere of the sayd Ed¦ward. And in ye .xi yere of this Philip kyng Edward sayled into Brabāt, & alyed hym wyth Lowys ye Empour. And whyle the Frenche kyng taryed with hys hoste at saint Quyntyne in Uermandoys / kyng Edward entred into Fraunce, and spoyled and brent a parte of Treresse, nat without some note or  of Cowardyse arrec∣ted to the Frēch kyng and hys hoste, of hys owne subgectes. And in the same yere, began the towne of Gaūte to rebell wyth other townes of Flaū¦dres, by the mocion of Iaques de Ar¦tyuyle / as in the .xiiii. yere is shewed of kyng Edward the thyrde. In the twelf yere of thys Philip whych ye Frēch boke calleth the yere of confusyon, kynge Edwarde be∣ynge retourned into Englande / the
Frenche kynge assembled a myghty hoste to go agayne the Henauders, Flemynges, & Brytons / & came with the sayde hoste vnto Arras / and sent from thens a part of hys people with hys sonne Iohn̄ than duke of Nor∣mandy into Henaude, for to warre vppon the countrey there. whyche went streyght vnto Cam∣braye / & after layd siege to that castel called Esthandune. And wythin .xv. dayes folowynge the Frenche kynge hys father came vnto the sayd syege wyth innumerable people. The whiche castell at thende of a moneth after the kynges cōmynge was gyuē vp by apoyntement. And that done ye kynge remoued hys siege to a castell of the bysshoppe of Cambray named Thune, standynge vpon the ryuer of Lescaut▪ where the kynge laye longe tyme withoute harme doynge vnto ye sayde castell. At lengthe the duke of Brabant with the erle of Gerle, with a stronge hoste of dyuers nacyons, came for to remoue that siege / so that the Frenche hoste lay vpon that one syde of the ryuer, & the Brabanders vpō that other. But by meane of .iiii. brydges whych were made ouer that ryuer / bothe hostes at sondry tymes mette & faughte dyuers sharpe skyr∣mysshes to the losse of people vppon bothe partyes. But in the ende the castell was so betyn wyth gonnes, yt the capytayne therof put all hys mo∣uables in a shyp / and after wyth such sowdyours as were lefte, entred the sayde shyp, & sette the castell vppon a lyght fyre, wherof whan the Frenche kynge was ware / in all haste he cau∣sed the walles to be scaled, and so en∣tred & stanched the fyre. And the same nyght the hoste of Brabanders de∣parted also. whan the kynge ha thus won thys castell / he than sente the dukes of Normandy & of Burgoyn, vnto a towne named Quesnoy. And whan ye sayd dukes had brent a parte of that towne & other vyllages there about / they retourned agayne vnto ye Frēch hoste. And shortly after the kynge re∣tourned into Fraunce / & there made prouycyon to sende forthe hys nauy to mete wyth kyng Edwarde, whych were to the nombre of .iiii. hūdreth or aboue / the whyche as in the .xv. yere of Edwarde the thyrde is before she∣wed, mette the Englysshe nauy, and there at a place called ye Swyn̄ were ouercommen. AFter thys great victory thus opteyned by the kynge of En¦glande / the Frenche kynge wyth a great hoste herynge comfortable ty∣dynges of the discomfiture of syr Ro¦berte de Artoys, before the towne of saynte Omers, as before in the .xv. yere of kyng Edward is also shewed sped hym tyt he came to the pryory of saynte Andrew. where he taryenge wyth hys people, certayne lettres we¦re sent to hym by kynge Edwarde▪ wherof the tenour with the answere of the same, are set out in the forsayd xv. yere, with other maters appartey¦nynge to the actes of bothe prynces. whan the peace was concluded be∣twene the sayde kynges, as in ye sayd xv. yere is declared / ye kyng of Fraūce retourned to hys owne. And in ye .xiii yere of hys reygne, dyed Iohn̄ duke of Brytayne. After whose deth Char¦les de Bloys & Iohn̄ de Mountfort, claymed seuerally to be enherytours of that duchy. whyche Charles was sonn̄ vnto the erle of Bloys, & neuew vnto the Frenche kynge, by reason y• Margare hys syster was mother vnto the sayde Charles. The whych Charles had maried the doughter of Guy de Brytayne vycount of Lymo¦ges, secōde brother of the forenamed Iohn̄ duke of Brytayne. And y• sayd
Iohn̄ de Moūtforte was the thyrde brother vnto the forsayd Iohn̄ duke of Brytayn now dede. So that thys questyon of thys clayme rested vpon thys poynt, whether the doughter of the secōd brother shuld enheryte ye du¦chy or ye yonger brother, consideryng yt Iohn̄ the eldest brother dyed with∣out heyre of hys body, and Guy the seconde brother without heyre male / wherfore the thyrde brother Iohn̄ de Moūtfort claymed to be duke of Bry¦tayne. whiche case and question was brought before ye Frēch kynge & hys lordes, & there debated & argued by a longe season. But in ye ende sentence passed agayn syr Iohn̄ de Moūtfort / & Charles de Bloys was put in pos∣session of ye duchy by kyng Philip / to whome the sayd Charles dyd hys ho¦mage for the same. For thys sentence arose mortall warre betwene the sayde syr Charles & syr Iohn̄. In the whych the .ii. kyn¦ges of Englande & Fraūce toke par∣tye / so that kyng Edwarde ayded syr Iohn̄ de Moūtfort / & kynge Philip hys neuew syr Charles. Thanne syr Iohanne de Mountforte before the sentence gyuen, feryng the sequell of the same / departed frō the court, and gat hym into a strōge towne of Bry∣tayne, & there held hym. wherof kyng Philip beynge aduertised / sente syr Iohn̄ his sonne duke of Normādy, & hys brother syr Charles erle of Alen¦son, for to warre vpon ye sayd syr Iohn̄ de Moūtsort. The which sped theym with a nōbre of people into Brytayn̄, & besieged a strōge castell stādyng in an yle by ye ryuer of Loyer. And after the wynning therof, they yode vnto ye citie of Naūtes / the which ye cytezyns yelded vnto thē without stroke. And soon after as testifieth ye Frēch story, vpō certayne cōdiciōs & couenātes, ye sayd syr Iohn̄ de Moūtfort yelded hī vnto ye duke of Normādy / ye whyche sēt hym vnto ye kyng his father to Pa¦rys, where by the sayd kynge he was imprysoned in the castell of Louure. But how it was by fauour or other¦wyse▪ he escaped prysō after .ii. yeres prysonemēt. Or after some wryters, he was after .ii. yeres deliuered vpon certayn cōdicions. wherof one was, yt he shulde nat come in Brytayne nor any thynge medle or haue to do in ye coūtre. But thys prysonemente of syr Iohn̄ de Moūtfort nat withstāding / the warre was maynteyned in Bry∣tayn̄ by ye frēdes of the sayd syr Iohn̄ & many town{is} & castelles therof was holdē to the vse of ye sayde syr Iohn̄ / wherof to shew vnto you ye circūstaū∣ce & proces it wolde aske a lōge tyme. But ye cōclusion & fyne of this warre shalbe shewed in ye story of ye .vi. Char¦les & sonn̄ of kyng Iohn̄. In the .xv. yere of this Philip / the erle of Salys¦bury accōpanied with syr Roberte of Artoys & other noble mē, entred Bry¦tayn, & ayded the frēdes of syr Iohn̄ de moūtfort / in doyng great domage to ye coūtre, & brēt moche of ye French kynges nauy.Dth of syr Robert of Artoys. In assaylyng wherof, syr Robert of Artoys was woūded in the thygh with a gunne, whereupō he laye syke / & vpō ye ensued a flux, & so therof dyed, & after cōueyed into En¦glāde, & there buryed. And soon after kyng Edward entred Fraūce wyth a strōg army. But a peas was at wene hym & the Frēche kyng condiscended for a certayne terme by laboure of .ii. cardinales, as before in ye .xvi. yere of kyng Edward is declared, and in this yere kynge Philip arered a taske of his people called a Gabell in Frēche. This was prouyded, yt no subiect of ye kynges nor other within hys lāde, shuld bye any salt but of the kynge & at hys pryce. And ouer that he arered & lowed the coynes & moneys of hys lande, to the greate auaūtage of hym selfe, and enpouerisshyng of his sayd
subiectes by meane wherof he fyll in great hatered of hys people. In the .xvi. yere of hys reygne, a great dyscencion grewe amonge the nobles of Normādy, by reason of par¦tyes takyng, some wyth Iohn̄ of Ha¦recourt, and other wyth syr Roberte Barthran than Marshal of Fraūce, for couenaūtes of maryge apoynted betwene ye sonne of the sayde syr Ro¦bert vpō that one partye, & ye dough∣ter of syr Roger Bacon̄ / whose wyfe or maydes mother was than maryed vnto syr Godfrey de Harecourt, bro∣ther of that aboue sayd syr Iohn̄ vp∣pon the other partye. For varyaūce wherof greate warre was lykely to haue ensued, yf the kynge the sooner had nat sent strayt commaūdement, that eyther partye shulde kepe hys peace, & to apere before hym and hys lordes at Parys, and there to haue theyr greuaūce by hym & hys lordes determyned. At whyche day of apperaunce, the sayde syr Godfrey appered nat, nor none for hym / but cōtrary the kyng{is} commaūdement, assyeged syr wyllin Berthran bysshop of Bayn̄ and bro∣ther to the foresayd syr Roberte than beyng in a castell. And whan he sawe he myght nat preuayll agayne hym / he than drewe vnto the Englysshmē and ayded them agaynst the Frenche kynge. In thys yere also kynge Phylype entendynge to releue the duchye of Burgoyn wyth whete whyche there than was scāt / ordeyned that certayn quarters of whete shulde be gadered in the countrees of Terroner, of Or¦leaunce & Gastenoys, & so sent into Burgoyn. But ye studyaūtes of Orle¦aunce, with the burgeyses & comons of the cytie toke therwith such grefe, that of one mynde they wente downe vnto the ryuer of Loyer, where at ye season certayne shippes laye freyght wyth vytayll to be had vnto the sayd countre, & there fet out the grayen, & spoyled it in suche wyse, that moche therof came neuer to good. And that done many of that company beynge nedy and poore / yode vnto vyllages there by, and robbed ye people, & dyde moche harme. whā the prouost or ru¦ler of Orleaūce behelde thys rage & ryot of the people, and cōsydered the multytude of theym / he forbare for a tyme tyll they were somdele asswa¦ged. And than wyth suche company as he had of hys offycers and other, he toke a certayne of theym, and put theym in sondrye prysons, tyll he knew farther of the kynges pleasur. But it was nat longe after that the other of that affynyte, herynge of the enprysonement of theyr felowes / assēbled theym of newe, and lyke woode men ranne vnto the prysons / & nat a lonely delyuered theyr felowes, but also many other whych laye there for great causes & crymes / & some suche as were cōdempned to deth for theyr transgressyons. whan noticiō of this great outrage and ryot came vnto ye kyng / anone he sent thyder .ii. knygh¦tes of hys court with a puyssaunt ar∣my / chargyng them to take all suche as were occasyoners and begynners of thys Riot / and as many as were founde culpable to be put vnto deth. The whych knyghtes accordyng to theyr commission wyth ayde of ye pro¦uost of Orleaūce, toke suche as were dempte gylte of thys cryme, & hāged them vpon the common gybet or ga∣lous of the cytye, amonge the whych were dyuers clerkes, and one a dea∣ken & within orders. And in the same yere and moneth of Auguste, a noble knyght of Brytayne called syr Oly∣uer de Clycon̄, for treason yt he hadde conspyred agayne kyng Philippe, or for he had fauoured kyng Edward{is} partye was taken by a trayne at a iu¦stes
or tournamēte holden for ye same cause at Parys, and shortly after iud¦ged to deth / as fyrst drawen through the cytye vnto the place of iugement, & theruppon a scaffold purposely or∣deyned was byheded / and after hys body with chaynes hanged vpon the gybet, & hys hed standyng there ouer vpō a stake, or after an other auctour had vnto ye cytye of Nauntes in Bry¦tayne, & there pyght vpon a gate of ye cytye. And in the same moneth syr Godfrey de Harcourte, whych as be¦fore is sayde, alyed hym with kynge Edwarde, and wolde nat apere after certayne sommons / was now opēly banysshed as traytour & enemy to ye crowne of Fraunce. And in the same moneth was syr Iohn̄ de Moūtforte delyuered out of pryson, vppon such condicions as before is rehersed in ye xiii. yere of this kyng. And soon after were put vnto deth at Parys, syr Io¦han de Malestreet, syr Godfrey de Malestreet the father & the sonne, syr Iohn̄ de Moūtalbone, syr wyllyam de Bruys, syr Iohn̄ de Cablat, & syr Iohn̄ de Plessys knyghtes / & esquy∣res, Iohn̄ de Malestrete neuew to ye forsayd knyght{is}, Guyllm̄ de Bruze, Robert de Bruys, Iohn̄ de Senne, and Dauy de Senne. And shortely after at Parys were put in execucion thre Norman knyghtes, for affynyte or fauour, whych they had borne to∣warde syr Godfrey de Harecourt and theyr heddes sent vnto saynte Loup in Constantyne a cytye of Normādy. whych sayd knyghtes were called sir wyllyam Bacon, syr Roulande de la Roche tessone, and syr Rycharde de Percy. IN the .xvii. yere of thys Philip one mayster Henry de Male∣strete clerke & deakē, & brother to the aboue named syr Godfrey before put in execucion, whych sayd mayster Hē¦ry was mayster of the requestes with kyng Philip / for so moch as he after ye deth of hys sayd brother, yode vnto kyng Edward and coūsayled hym a∣gayne kyng Philip, & after by assyg∣nemēt of kynge Edwarde was set in great auctorite wythin the towne of Uannys in Brytayne / whych towne was after goten by the Frenchmē, & he therin as one of the chefe capytay∣nes of the same taken was impryso∣ned within the castell of Parys. Out of the whyche at thys season he was taken thens, and set in a tumbrell, & thereunto fastened wyth chaynes of yren / and so cōueyed bareheded with dynne and crye thorugh ye hygh stre∣tes of Parys, tyll he came vnto ye bys¦shoppes palays of Parys / and there deliuered vnto the bisshop. And soon after by vertue of a commissyō pur∣chased by kynge Philip of the pope, to haue the sayd mayster Henry dys∣graded / he was depryued of all de∣grees and ordres of the churche, and thā deliuered vnto the execucioners. The whyche by .iii. days cōtynuall a certayn season of ye day, set hym vpō a ladder in ye syght of all people / to ye entēt that euery man & chyld might throwe at hym all fylth & ordour of ye strete / the whiche was done without all compassion and pyte, in so cruell wyse, that by the thyrd dayes ende he was dede, and after buryed vnreue∣rently. In the sayde .xvii. yere of kynge Philippe also, as before is shewed in the .xix. yere of kynge Edwarde the thyrde / Iaques de Artyuele, whych was especiall promoter of the sayde kyng Edwardes causes, came vnto ye towne of Gaunt / and shewed vnto theym dyuers apoyntmentes to be holde betwene theym and other tow∣nes of Flaūdres.Iaques de Artyuese murdred. where vpon the .xv. day of Iuly, by diuers cōspiratours of the sayd towne of Gaunte, he was
pursued from one house to an other, and lastly slayne & murdred by them to the kynges of Englande great dis¦pleasure & hurt. wherefore the sayde kyng Edwarde was fayne to retour∣ne into Englande wythoute spede of hys purpose, lyke as before in ye sayd xix. yere of his reygne is declared. In thys yere also and the moneth of De¦cembre, dyed syr Iohn̄ erle of Moūt¦fort, which as before is sayd claymed the duchy of Brytayn / and lefte after hym a sonne named also syr Iohn̄ & erle of Moūtfort, the whyche in lyke¦wyse claymed the sayd duchy of Bry¦tayn, & maynteyned the warre agayn syr Charles de Bloys, as hys father before had done. In the .xviii. yere of kyng Phylyp & fyrste daye of Iuly, at Parys was than putte to deth by cruel execuciō, a cytezyn of Compeyn̄ named Symonde Poylet, a man of greate ryches. The whych for he had sayd in open audience, that the ryght of the crowne of Fraunce belonged more ryghtfully vnto kyng Edward than to kynge Philip / he was fyrste hanged vpon a tree lyke as an oxe is hāged in the bochery, & there dismem¦bred, as fyrst the armys, and after ye legges cut from hys body, and lastly hys hede stryken of, and the trunke of hys body hanged by chaynes vpō the commō gybet of Parys. And vp∣pon a saterdaye beynge the .xxvi. day of August in the foresayde .xviii. yere of kynge Philippe, was foughten at Cressy the batayll before expressed in the .xxi. yere of kynge Edwarde the thyrd / where the floure of the chyual¦ry of Fraūce was slayne & taken pry¦soners. Than soone after kyng Phi∣lippe for the defence of the charge of hys warres, asked a subsidie of the monkes of saynt Denys. And amōg certayne iewelles of that place to be had / he demaūded the greate crucy∣fyx of golde standynge ouer ye hyghe aulter of that monastery. wherunto the monkes answered yt they mighte nat departe with that crucifyxe / for Eugenius the thyrde of that name pope, accursed al them that layd any hande vpon that crucifyxe, to the en∣tent to remoue it from that place, as it appereth by wrytynge set vnder ye fote of the sayd crosse / by whyche an∣swere the kyng was pacifyed. And in the moneth of Decēbre, syr Godfrey de Harecourte wyth a towell double folden about hys necke, came vnto ye presence of kyng Philip, and yelded hym holy to hys mercy and grace / the whyche graunted vnto hym hys pardon. And in shorte whyle after, all the Lumbardes vsurers wythin ye realm of Fraunce, were taken and sente to dyuers prysons. And all suche per∣sones as stode boūden vnto them, for any bargeyn or lone of money by way of vsury, it was ordeyned that ye sayd persones beyng dettours to the sayd vsurers, shulde paye the pryncypall dette vnto the kynge at theyr dayes of payment / & the resydue whyche re∣mayneth to the vsurer for hys lucre of gayne for the lone of hys money, shulde be pardoned to the dettour. And after the sayd Lumbardes vsu∣rers were delyuered from pryson, by payenge of greate and greuous fy∣naunce. In the .xix. yere of thys Philippe, for so moche as wytnesseth the Frēch cronycle, that ye Flemynges by great manacis and perforce, had constray∣ned theyr erle to be assured by bonde of assuraunce vnto the doughter of kyng Edward, contrary hys volūte and wyll / the sayde erle nat wyllyng to accomplysshe that maryage, in the Easter weke by a cautele de{per}ted out of Flaūdres, and came to ye Frenche kyng to Parys / of whome he was ho¦nourably and ioyously receyued.
And in the same yere, one named Gawyn de Belemount an aduocate of the spirituall lawe, entendynge to betray ye cytye of Laon̄ / acqueynted hym with a poore mā than dwellyng in that citie of Meaus named Colyn Tomelyn / ye whych before tyme was fled the cytye of Laon, & was thā for lacke of substaūce comyn to Meaus, & there mayntened a poore lyfe / to ye whyche thys Gawyn resorted & rele∣ued. And lastely whāne he thoughte he was somdele of hym assured, he brake vnto hym hys mynde / & sayd if he wolde be ruled by hym, he wolde restore hym to hys former prosperite & welth / wherūto thys Colyner graū¦ted. Thā anone thys Gawyn shewed hym a lettre, & wylled hym to bere it vnto ye kyng of Englād, with certayn rewarde to hym gyuyng / & also pro∣mysyng of moch more, with that yt he retourned to hym shortly to ye citie of Raynes with āswere of ye same. whā thys poore and indygēt man had re∣ceiued this lettre / he cast many {per}elles in hys mynde. How be it fynally cō∣trary his othe and promyse, he toke hys waye towarde the French kyng, and presented hym with ye letter / in ye whych was expressed all the maner & ordre how the sayd citie of Laō shuld be betrayed. whan the kyng was ad∣uertysed of all the circumstaunce of thys treason / he enfourmed this Co∣lyner how he shuld behaue hym selfe in beryng of hys answere / and prouy¦ded hys tyme accordynge as though he had ben in Englād, & by conueniēt day came vnto hym to Raynys accor¦dyng to the former appoyntmente. In whych season the kynge had sent in secrete maner vnto the prouoste of Raynes, that so soone as the sayd Co¦lyner had shewed to the sayd Gawyn his answere, yt the sayd Gawyn shuld be attached and had vnto pryson / the whyche was accordyngly executed. And in short processe folowynge, for so moch as he was within ordres / he was by the prouost sent vnto ye cytye of Laon, and there put to the bisshop¦pes pryson. But whan ye comōs of ye sayd cytye harde of suche a mā there beyng prysoner, that wolde haue be∣trayed theyr cytie / they assembled thē in great multitude, & wold haue bro∣ken the prysō to ye ende to haue slayn hym. But they were so paciently an∣swered by the bysshoppes offycers, yt they retourned vnto theyr houses. Upon the morow folowyng, to cease ye rumour of ye peple / he was brought vnto his iugement, & there condemp¦ned for his dymeryte vnto perpetual pryson. And more therunto was ad∣ded, yt for his more diffamy & shame, he shulde be sette in a tumbrel vpon hygh bareheded, that of all people he myght be seen / & so with moste shame¦full instrumentes lad throughe the hygh stretes of ye cytye, and brought agayn vnto ye bisshopes pryson, and there to remayne for terme of lyfe. But he was nat fer in such maner cō¦ueyed by ye offycers frō ye Gaole, but the cōmons fyl vpon hym with crye, & castyng of myre & stones / that or he were halfe way lad of hys circuyte or progresse, he was stoned to deth / and after his body buryed within a ma∣roys nere vnto the sayd cytye. And shortely after at Parys was done to cruell deth a cytezyn of ye sayd citie, which entēded to haue betrayed the sayd cytye of Parys. For ye which treason he was fyrst dismēbred of leg¦ges & armes, and after hāged by the nek vpon the gybet of Parys. In the same yere aboute ye feest of saynt Iohn̄ Baptyst / ye Englyshmen yt had holdē the towne & castell called the roch of Aryan in Brytayn, by the terme of two yeres passed, at this sea¦son they were besieged & fiersly assau¦ted by syr Charles de Bloys and his
frendes / in so furyous maner yt they rent wyth great ordenaunce dyuers places of the castell walles / & in pro∣cesse threwe downe the rofe of a chā∣bre where the wyfe of the capytayne of the castell lay in her chyld bed, & so ferre put in fere, that the rulers of the towne and castell graūted to delyuer the towne & castell to ye sayd syr Char¦les, wyth that they myghte departe with theyr lyues & goodes / ye whyche offer to hys payne & charge he refu∣sed. For in short tyme after, syr Tho∣mas of Agorn̄ an englysshe knyghte wyth a strōge company of archers & other sowdyours, rescowed the sayd towne & castell. And after lōge fyght and great daūger, as by lōge proces is declared in the Frēche story / ye sayd syr Thomas toke the sayde Charles de Bloys prysoner, and slewe many of hys lordes, as before is shortely touched in the ende of the .xxii. yere of kyng Edwarde. After whych victory thus opteyned, & hys prysoners put in suer kepynge, he toke ye ordenaūce of the duke left in ye felde wyth other pyllage, & put it wythin the towne & castell aforesayd. And for ye vyllages and mē of the coūtre there about, had ayde the duke agayne the towne and castel / therfore the sayd syr Thomas punysshed the sayd vyllages and ru∣ralles by greuous fynes, & helde thē in great seruytude and daunger / and ouer ye slewe many of theym, & many they helde as drudges & captyues. And thys done the Englysshmen re∣payred agayne the walles and suche other places as were before tyme be∣ten downe by force of the sayd syege & strengthed it in theyr best maner. IT was nat longe after ye kyng Phylype at the requeste of the coūtre, sent thyder the lord of Caron̄ wyth a stronge army / to whome also great multytude of the people of that countre resorted. wyth whose aydes the sayd lorde assayled the sayd town & castell by .ii. dayes contynuell. But the Englysshemē deffended them selfe vygurously / and threw vpō theyr ene¦myes hote boylynge oyles and other gresys, with fyre coles & hote asshes, wherwith they greued theyr enemies paynfully. Thus cōtynuyng the siege / mea∣nes of treaty were offered and cōdys∣sended to yelde the towne, with condi¦cyō that they mynght saufely depart with theyr lyues and goodes / but the Frēchemen and Brytons wolde nat to it be agreable. Than the assaute began of new. And the lord of Caron̄ to encourage hys sowdyours, henge a purse and therein .l. scutes of golde vpon a sperys ende / and cryed wyth lowde voyce, that who that fyrste en∣tred the towne, shulde haue the sayde l. scutes of golde. whan the ianuays or sowdyours of the cytye of Ieane and of the cytye of Italye, harde the promyse of theyr cheuytayne / a cer∣tayne of theym with longe pycaxses and sharpe approched theym vnto ye wallys / and so demeaned them, that in lesse than .v. houres they mynded so the wall, that there fyll thereof as testyfyeth the sayde Frenche crony∣cle the lengthe of .l. fote. By reason wherof entred fyrste the Ianuays / & after the hole hoste. The whych with out compassyon or pyte slewe man, woman, & chylde that came in theyr waye, nat sparynge the chylder that souked vpon the mothers brestes / & spoyled and robbed the towne, euery man gettynge what he myght to his owne aduauntage. And whanne the Frēchmē and Brytons had thus mi∣serably slayne many Englysshmē, & also Brytōs & other inhabytaūtes of the towne / they than assayled the ca∣stel to ye which was fled vpō .ii.C. & .xl
Englyshmē. After dyuers assautes it was offered by the sowdyours of the castell, yt they wolde yelde the castell theyr lyues and goodes saued. And fi¦nally it was agreed, theyr bodies one¦ly to departe, & to be cōueyed .x. miles vpon theyr waye towarde such place as they wolde appoynt. vpō ye which appoyntement .ii. knyghtes Brytons yt is to saye syr Syluester de la Fulle and syr wyllm̄ de Stratton receyued them in theyr cotes, and cōueyed thē with great payne & nat without losse of some. For theyr enemies of ye hoste caste stones at theym, and bete them so with theyr staues, that dyuers of theym dyed / & the remenaunt were broughte nere vnto a castell than in the power of Englysshemen, named Quyntyne. But whan the commōs of ye town there nere, harde of the cōmynge of suche Englysshmen vnder saufe con∣duyt, the whiche before in the batayl of the roche of Arian where syr Char¦les de Bloys was taken, had slayne theyr lord, that is to meane the lorde of Quyntyne / anone they issued oute of the towne / and for they fonde lytel resystence in theyr guydes, they slew theym there excepte one, whych was capytayne of the Englyshmē / whych one of ye sayd knyghtes caused to be set vpon hys horse, & so fledde frō the peryll. And whā the cruell Brytons had thus shamefully slayne the En∣glyshmen / they gadered ye cariens vp on an hepe, & suffered theym there so to lye, to ye ende that beastes & foules myght deuoure them. And in shorte tyme after, ye erle of Flaūdres by mea¦nes of the Frēch kyng left the dough¦ter of kynge Edwarde, and was maryed vnto the doughter of ye duke of Brabant. In the .xx. yere of Phylyp / ye town of Calays was goten, lyke as the cir¦cumstaūce thereof is declared in the xxii. yere of kyng Edward the thyrd. And in the same yere the mortalite or sykenes, whych after reygned in En∣glande reygned nowe feruentely in Fraunce, and moste specially in the cytye of Auynyon / by force wherof ye thyrde parte of the people of ye cytye dyed. And frome thens it came vnto saint Denys, and so vnto Parys. In which coost it was so feruent, yt there dyed in those .ii. townes ouer the nō∣bre of .lvi.M. within ye space of .xviii monethes. And in thys yere the dolphyne of Uyen named syr ymberte, solde hys dolphynage vnto the Frēch kyng / & became a freer at Lyon vpō the rosne of the ordre of the freer prechours or blacke freers. In the .xxi. yere of thys Phylyp / Charles the fyrste begotten sonne of Iohn̄ duke of Normādy eldest sonne of thys Phylip, toke possession of the sayd dolphynage of Uyen. And in the moneth of August folowyng, dyed ye duchesse of Normādy and mother of the sayd Charles. And in the moneth of Decembre folowynge, dyed dame Iane quene of Fraūce & doughter of Robert duke of Burgoyn. And in thys yere was the treason wroughte by syr Godfrey de Charny, to haue a∣gayne wonne the towne of Calays / lyke as I to you before haue shewed in the .xxiiii. yere of kyng Edward ye iii. And in ye moneth of Ianuary next ensuynge & .ix. day of the same / kyng Phylyp spoused hys .ii. wyfe Blaū∣che, somtyme ye doughter of ye quene of Nauerne lately dyscesed, whyche was syster vnto the erle of Foyze. whyche espousayles were secretely done in the manour of Robert erle of Bray. And so the sayde kyng Philip was wydowe frome the .xii. daye of Decembre to the nynthe daye of Ia∣nuary, whyche was by the space of xxviii. dayes. And vpon the .ix. day of
the moneth of February / Iohn̄ duke of Normandy eldeste sonne of thys Philippe, spoused hys seconde wyfe Iohanne Countesse of Boloygne, at a towne called Miriaux nere vnto Meulene. And so he morned for hys wyfe whych was named ye good Du¦chesse of Normandy, by the terme of vi. moneths & .ii. dayes lackynge. In the .xxii. yere of kyng Philip & moneth of Iuly / syr Thomas de Agorne befornamed, was by chaūce medly slayne of a Brytō knyght cal∣led syr Raufe de Cuours. And vpon the .xxiii. daye of August folowynge, dyed syr Phylyp de Ualoys kyng of Fraūce / whā he had reygned ouer ye Frēchmen in great vexaciō & trouble by the space of .xxii. yeres lackynge v. monethes & odde dayes / and was after enterred at saynt Denis by his fyrste wyfe / & left after hī Iohn̄ duke of Normandy for hys heyre. ¶Of kynge Iohn̄. IOhn̄ the fyrste of that name, & sonne of Phylype de Ualoys / began to raygne ouer the Frenchmē, in the moneth of August & yere of our lord. M.CCC. and .l, & .xxiiii. yere of Edwarde the .iii. than kyng of Eng∣lande / & was crowned at Raynes the xxvi. day of Septembre folowynge wyth dame Iohanne hys wyfe. In tyme of the whych solempnite, kyng Iohn̄ dubbed hys eldeste sonne dol∣phyne of Uyen, and Lowys hys .ii. sonne erle of Alēson, knyghtes, with other noble men. And vpon the .xvi. daye of Nouē∣bre folowynge / syr Rauffe erle of Ew and cōstable of Guynes whā it was Frenche, the whych was newly com∣men out of Englande where he had ben longe prysoner / was accused of treason, and so commaūded vnto pry¦son at Parys. within whyche pryson he was shortly after byheded in ye pre¦sence of the duke of Burgoyne and o∣ther nobles. In the thyrde yere of kyng Iohn̄ & viii. day of Ianuary / Charles kyng of Nauerne caused to be slayne with in the towne of Aygle in Normandy syr Charles de Spayne cōstable of Fraūce. For the whych murdre sour∣dyd great warre betwene kynge Io∣han & the sayde kynge of Nauerne / whych contynued many yeres after, natwithstādyng that the sayd kynge of Nauerne had maryed the dough∣ter of ye sayd kyng Iohn̄. Thā by me¦ditaciō of frendes, a peas was dryuē betwene theym / so that kyng Iohan shuld gyue vnto ye kyng of Nauerne, for contētacyon of certayne summes of money yet owynge vnto hym for the dower of hys wyfe, certayne lan∣des within the duchy of Normandy / and ouer that the Frēche kyng shuld pardone all suche persones as were consentynge to the deth of the consta¦ble before murdred. After whych trea¦ty thus concluded / the kynge of Na∣uerne vnder assuraunce of hostage came vnto kyng Iohn̄s presence at Parys. And after he had taried there a season / he departed with dyssy∣mulacion on eyther partye vsed, as after shall appere. In the .iiii. yere of kyng Iohn̄ / syr Godfrey de Harecourt, whych wyth hys sonne & other hadde ben consen∣tynge vnto the deth of the constable of Fraunce, were reconsyled agayne to the kynge. The whyche ensensed hym agayne the kynge of Nauerne by meanes of theyr sinister report / so that the peace betwene theym before cōcluded, was dysapoynted & brokē. And soone vpon thys, syr Robert de Loryze that was chamberlayn vnto kynge Iohn̄, auoyded the courte for fere, leste the sayde syr Godfrey hadde shewed of hym any thynge to the kynge / and so yode vnto the
kynge of Nauerne in Normandy. After whose commyng, the kynge of Nauerne departed shortly thens and sped hym towarde Auynyon. It was nat longe after that the kyng of Na∣uerne was departed out of Normādy but that kyng Iohn̄ sped hym thider, & seased all the landes that the kyng of Nauerne had wythin that duchy / and putte offycers and rulers in hys castelles & townes suche as hym ly∣ked, and dyscharged the other / ex∣cepte .vi. castelles, that is to saye Eu∣roux, le Poūt Audemer, Chirebourt, Ganeray, Auranches, & Martaygn / the whych were holden by the seruaū¦tes of the kynge of Nauerne, & men of Nauerne borne. In the moneth of Ianuary folow¦ynge / syr Robert de Loryze abouena¦med, vnder safe conduyte came vnto kyng Iohn̄ to Parys, and there was to hym in proces reconsyled. And in thys yere were the artycles of peace betwene the kynges of Englāde & of Fraūce prolonged, tyll the feaste of saynt Iohn̄ Baptyst next ensuynge / as before in ye ende of the .xxviii. yere of kyng Edwarde is more at length declared. In thys .v. yere of kyng Iohan & moneth of Apryl / he sent syr Charles hys sonne dolphyne of Uyenne into Normandy, to aske ayde of the Nor∣mannes agayne the kynge of Nauer¦ne. The whyche graunted vnto hym iii.M. men at theyr charge for .iii. mo¦nethes. And in the moneth of August folowynge, the kynge of Nauerne ac¦companyed with .ii.M. sowdiours, came vnto the castell of Constātyne, & there taryed with the sayd people. wyth whose cōmynge the sowdiours of the forenamed .vi. castelles were so well comforted, that they robbed and pylled al ye coūtre about thē. And som of the sayde sowdiours came vnto a castell of ye Frēch kynges named Cō¦ket, & wā it by strēgth, & after vytay∣led & māned it in moste warly wyse / & dyd many other thynges to ye Frēche kyngs great displeasure. The which warre thus cōtynuyng, by medyaciō of frēdes the kynge of Nauarn̄ rode vnto ye dolphyn to a towne called the Uale de Rueyll / where they metyng, and eyther to other shewyng louyng coūtenaunce, vpō ye .xviii. day of Sep¦tēbre they togyder toke theyr way to∣ward Parys. where the kyng of Na∣uarne was brought vnto the French kynges presence.. where he excused hym of all trespasses done agayn the kyng syne ye tyme of ye last accord / be∣sechyng ye kyng to be good and graci¦us lorde vnto hym, and he shulde be to hym as a sonne oughte to be vnto the fader, & as a trew man vnto hys soueraygne lorde. And after the kyng by ye meanes of ye duke of Athe¦nesse, forgaue vnto hym hys offēces, and promysed to stāde hys good and gracyous lord / and so eyther de{per}ted from other in louyng maner. And soone after kyng Iohn̄ gaue vnto ye dolphyn of Uyen syr Charles hys eldest sonn̄ ye duchy of Normādy for ye whyche he dyd vnto hys father homage, in ye house of mayster Mar¦tyn Chanō of Parys, in ye cloyster of the mynster called Noterdame. And by auctoryte of a parlyamēt holdē in the citie of Parys, was graūted vnto kyng Iohn̄ of the thre astates of hys realme / yt is to meane the spiritualte, the lord{is} and nobles, and ye hedes or rulers of cytyes and good townes of hys realme, that he shulde haue .xxx.M. mē waged for a yere, for to defēde hys auncyent enemye the kynge of England. For puruyaūce wherof cer¦tayne persones of the sayd .iii. astates assēbled shortly after, to prouide for ye leuieng of that great sūme of money After whyche prouysion or sessing agreed or concluded by the sayde
persones, and commyssyoners sente out to dyuers coostes and good tow¦nes for the leuyeng of the sayde mo∣ney / in the towne of Arras fyll a dis∣sencyō betwene the ryche & the poore of that towne / the poore sayeng that the ryche men had layde all the bur∣then vpon the poore men, & them self bare lytell charge or none. For thys fyrst began great altercacion of wor∣des, & after enuyed strokes & stripes, so that of the hdes and chyef burge∣ses of the towne were .xvii. men slayne. And the day folowynge they slewe .iiii. mo / & banysshed dyuers yt at that tyme were absent & out of the towne. And so the towne of Arras rested as than in the gydynge of the poore artyfycers of that towne. IN the .vi. yere of the reygne of kynge Iohan and moneth of Marche▪ he beynge accōpanyed with a secret meny, before ye daye departed from the towne of Manuyle / & rode streyghte, he & hys lordes beyng ar∣med, vnto the castell of Rouan / & en∣tred sodaynly into the same. where he fande in the chyefe hall of the castell, syr Charles hys eldest sonne duke of Normandy, Charles kynge of Na∣uerne, syr Iohn̄ erle of Harecourt, ye lordes of Preaux and of Grauyle, & the lorde of Cleremoūt, syr Lowys & syr Guylliam de Harecourt brethern of the foresayd erle, syr Fryquet de Fryquante, the lorde of Tournebu, syr Manbuc de Mamesmares, with Colinet Doubliec and Iohn̄ de Poū¦talu esquyres. The whych lordes and knyghtes the kyng toke at dyner within ye sayd halle / & them toke sodaynly, & diuers of them put vnder sure kepyng. And as soone as the kyng had there takē a small and short repaste / he with his sonnes & other nobles in hys cōpany toke theyr horse & rode into a felde vp¦pon a baksyde of the castell / whether shortly after were brought in bandes the foresayde erle of Harecourt, the lorde of Grauyle, ye foresayd syr Mā∣bue, and Colinet Doubliet. whyche iiii. were there beheded / and after the bodyes of them drawen to the gybet of Roan, & there hanged / and theyr heddes set ouer them vpon the same gybet. At the whyche tyme of the exe∣cucion of hedyng of the sayd .iiii. per¦sones / the Frenche kyng as before is sayde was present in proper person. After the whyche execucion, ye kynge vpon the morowe folowynge delyue¦red many of the other prysoners / so yt there remayned no mo as prysoners but .iii, that is the kyng of Nauerne, syr Fryquet de Fryquant, & Iohn̄ de Pountalu / the whych were sent vnto Parys. where the kynge was kepte in the castel of Louure, and the other ii. in the chastelet. In whiche tyme of hys inprysonemēt / syr Phylype bro∣ther to the kynge, wyth syr Godfrey de Harecourt vncle to the erle lately heded, helde certayn castelles in Nor¦mandy / and came with theyr powers into the countre of Constantyne, and helde it maugre the Frenche kynges wyll and pleasure. In the moneth of Apryll, syr Ar∣nolde de Denham than Marshall of Fraūce, rode by ye kynges sond vnto Arras / & there without great distour¦baunce of the towne, toke vpō an hū∣dreth of suche as before had made ye former rebellion within the same. And vpon the day folowyng / he cau¦sed to be heded in the market place vpon .lx. of the same / & the remenaūt he sent vnto pryson there to abyde ye kynges pleasure. In thys tyme and season was the noble prynce Edwarde at Burdeaux & warred vpon the Frenche kynges landes, lyke as it is before to you she¦wed in the .xxx. yere of kyng Edward
the thyrde. And in the .vii. yere of kyng Iohn̄, & begynnyng of the same, was the ba¦tayll of Poytyers. In ye whych kyng Iohn̄ was taken prysoner of prynce Edwarde, & many of hys lordes takē and slayne, as before in the .xxx. yere of the foresayd Edwarde is declared at lēght. After the which scomfyture / the duke of Normandy whyche hard¦ly escaped from the sayde batayl, en∣tred the cytye of Paryz the .xxix. daye of Septembre / & called there a great coūsayll of ye thre astates of ye realme, and the .xv. daye of Octobre next en∣suynge there to be assēbled. At which daye the sayde duke wyth the sayd .iii astates of the realme beyng in ye par∣lyament chambre / Peter de la Forest archebysshop of Roan and chaūceler of Fraūce, declared there the greate mysfortune that to the lande was la∣tely fallē, by the takyng of theyr hed and prynce / and exorted theym by a lōge oraciō to ayde & assiste euery mā after hys power, for the redeliuery of theyr prynce agayne. whereunto it was answered for theyr clergy or spyrytual / by the mouth of mayster Iohn̄ de Carone thā archebysshop of Raynes / and for the nobles or ye Cheualty of Fraūce, by the mouth of syr Phylype duke of Orleaunce and brother vnto kynge Iohn̄ / & for the commōs of the good townes of Fraūce, by the mouthe of Stepyn Martell burgeys of Parys and prouost of the same, that eyther of them shulde helpe to the vttermost of theyr powers / & prayed that they myght haue conuenient leyser to coū¦sayll and commō for prouyciō of the the same / the whyche to theym was graunted. Than the sayde thre astates helde theyr coūsayll at the fryer mynours or gray fryers in Parys, by the space of .xv. dayes. In whyche season they appoynted amonge theym to the nō∣bre of .l. persones, to take a vyew and make serche of certayne thynges thā myslad and euyll gyded within the realme. The whyche .l. persones whā they had appoynted .vi. of them selfe to go vnto the duke / they in ye names of ye other made request vnto ye duke, that he wolde kepe secrete such thyn∣ges as they entended to shewe vnto hym. which request he graūted. Thā they shewed vnto the duke that the realme before tyme hadde ben mysse∣guyded by offycers / and excepte that remedye for it were shortlye foūden, it shulde stāde in greate parell to be loste. wherfore they besought hym to dyscharge all suche as they wolde name vnto hym, & ouer yt to forfayte theyr goodes vnto the kynges vse. And fyrst they named mayster Peter de la Forest archebisshop of Roan & chaūceler of Fraūce, syr Symōde de Bucy chyfe counceloure of the kyng and chyefe presydente of the parlya∣ment, syr Roberte de Loryze that be∣fore tyme was chaumberlayne vnto the kynge, syr Nycholas Brake knyghte and mayster of the kynges paleys, Engueram of the Celer Bur¦ioys of Parys and vndre tresourer of Fraūce, Iohn̄ Pryll burioys, also soueraygn mayster of the money and mayster of thaccomptys of the kyng, and Iohn̄ Chānean de Charters trea¦sourer of the kynges warres. All whyche offycers the sayde persones wolde that they shuld be dyscharged of all royall oyces for euer. Also the sayd constytuted persones, wolde yt the kynge of Nauerne were delyue∣red free frō pryson / also that he hym selfe wolde be cōtented to be aduerty¦sed and coūceyled by suche as they wolde appoynte vnto hym, that is to saye .iiii. prelates, xii. knyghtes, and xii. burioys. The whych .xxviii. persons shud
shulde haue auctoryte to rule and or∣deyne all thynges necessarye for the realme, and to set in and put oute all offycers apperteynyng to the realm / wyth dyuerse other requestes whych vnto the duke were nothyng agrea∣ble. Upon the whyche requestes, the duke gaue answere yt he wolde glad∣ly fele the opynyon of hys coūceyll, & vpon that shape vnto them some rea¦sonable answere. But fyrste he desy∣red of them to knowe what ayde the iii. astates wolde gyue vnto hym, for the delyuery of hys father. wherunto it was answered, that the clergy had graūted a dyme & a halfe to be payed in a yere, wyth that that they maye haue licence of the pope / and ye lordes asmoche to be leuyed of theyr lādes / and ye comōs the .x. peny of theyr mo∣uable gooddes. Thā vpō the morne folowynge within ye palays of Lou∣ure, ye duke assembled hys coūsayl / & there shewed vnto them the desyre & requeste of the .iii. astates. wherupon were made many reasons / and many messages sent betwene the duke and them, to refourme some parte of the sayde artycles. But it was fermely answered by theym, that excepte he wolde reforme the sayde defautes, & cōferme hym vnto theyr myndes for the comō welth of all the lande / they wolde nat ayde hym with theyr good¦des, lyke as they had to hym shewed. wherfore the duke by secrete meanes sent letters vnto his father, shewyng vnto hym the circumstaūce of all hys matter / the whyche wrote vnto hym agayne, that in no wyse he shulde be agreable vnto the sayde requestes. Thā the duke to ye ende that he wolde nat y• these maters shuld be towched in the open parlyamēt, sent for suche persones as were the chyefe rulers of the sayde .iii. astates / so that to hym came for the clergy the archebysshop¦pes of Raynes and of Lyōs, and the bisshop of Laō / & for the lordes came syr warayne de Lucēbourgh, syr Io∣han de Comflās Marshall of Cham¦peyne, and syr Iohn̄ de Pygueny thā ruler or gouernoure of Artoys / & for the comōs Stephan Martell than prouost of the marchaūtes of Parys, Charles Cusake, with other of other good townes. Than the duke shewed vnto them of certayne newes that he had lately receyued from the kynge hys father / and that done he asked theyr aduices whether it were beste ye daye to shewe theyr requestes openly in the parlia∣ment chaumber, or elles to deferre it for that daye. And lastlye after many reasons made, it was agreed, that it shulde be deferred tyll the .iiii. daye after / at the whyche .iiii. daye ye duke wyth the other assembled in the par∣lyament chambre. At whyche season the duke sayd that he myght nat en∣tende that day to here and argue the sayd requestes, for certayn tydynges that he had lately receyued from his father, and from his vncle the Empe¦rour of Almayne / of the which he thā shewed some opēly, and after dyssol∣ued for that daye the counsayll. In the moneth of Octobre, ye .iii. astates of the prouynce of Langue∣docke, by the auctoryte of the erle of Armenake thā lieutenaūt for ye kyng assembled for to make an ayde for ye kynges delyueraūce. And fyrste they agreed to puruey at theyr propre co∣stes .v.C. mē of armys, wyth a seruy∣ture to eueryche spere / and ouer that a .M. sowdyours on horsebacke, and a .M. of arblasters, wyth .ii.M. of o∣ther called paūsyers in Frenche / all whiche to be waged for an hole yere. The speres to haue for them & theyr custrun euery daye halfe a floreyn, & euery sowdyour and arblaster .viii. floryns for a moneth, and ye paūsiers after the same rate.
Also it was forther ordeyned by the sayd thre estates of Lāguedocke, that no man shulde were any furrys of any greate pryce / and that women shulde leue the ryche atyre of theyr heddys, and were neyther perle nor golde vppon them, nor syluer vppon ther gyrdels, so longe as the kynge remayned prysoner. Also that all ma¦ner of mynstrellys for ye season shuld be put to sylence / wyth dyuers other thynges for y• weale of that prouince whyche wolde aske a longe leysoure to wryte. UPon all sowlyn daye or the seconde daye of Nouember, the duke of Normandye by the ad∣uyce of hys counceyll, dyssoluyd the coūceyll of the thre estates assembled at Parys / and commaunded euery man to retourne vnto his own, with¦out effecte growynge of theyr longe counceyll or assemble. wherwith ma¦ny of the sayd persons were greuous¦ly myscontent / sayeng amonge them selfe that they aperceyued well, that thys was done by the duke, to the en¦tent that the requestes by them deuy¦sed shuld not take place / but that the olde mysgouernaunce shulde conty∣nue, lyke as it befortymes had done. wherfore dyuers of them assembled after agayne at the graye freres, and there made out dyuers copyes of the sayde requestes / to the ende that ey∣ther of them myghte bere them into theyr countreys, and there to shewe them vnto the good townes. And all be it that the duke after this coūceyll thus dyssoluyd, asked ayde of ye cyty of Parys and other good townes to maynteyne his warrys / he was play¦nely answered that they myghte not ayde hym without the sayd thre esta∣tes were agayne reassembled, & that the graunte of the ayde myght passe by theyr authorite / wherunto ye duke in no wyse wolde be agreable. In the moneth of Nouēber afore¦sayde / syr Robert de Cleremoūt than lyeutenaunt for the duke in Normā∣dy, fought wyth syr Phylyp brother vnto the kynge of Nauerne, and syr Godfrey de Harcourt, the which then toke party agayne the Frenche kyng for the deth of his neuewe before put to deth by kynge Iohn̄. The whych knyghtes wyth other helde the more parte of the countre of Constantyne within Normandye, maugre the du∣kes power. In this sayde fyghte the vyctory tourned vnto the Frenche partye / so that the sayde syr Phylyp was chasyd, and syr Godfrey de Har¦court slayne, with .viii. hūdreth men of that party. And the fourth daye of December folowyng, was the castell de la Pount nere vnto Roan, which by a longe season had ben in the rule of the forenamed syr Phylyp, gyuen vp by appoyntement / the whyche by the dukes sowdyours had ben besye¦ged from the moneth of Iuly to that daye / so that than the holders of the sayd Castell departed wyth all theyr goodes, and .vi. thousande frankes for a reward for the yeldyng vp of ye sayd castell. A franke is in value af∣ter sterlyng money .ii.s. or therupon. Upon ye .x. day of December were proclaymed at Parys certayne coy∣nes and values of money newly or∣deyned by the duke, and his coūceyl. wyth the whyche proclamacyon the comons of the cytye were greuously amouyd. And for reformacyon the prouoste of the marchauntes wyth other, yode vpon the seconde day fo∣lowynge vnto the castell or palays of Louure, there to treat with syr Le¦wys erle of Angeou brother vnto the duke and his lyeutenaunt whyle the sayde duke was gone vnto the cytye of Meaus, there to speke wyth Char¦lys of Bohemye or of Beaume then
emperour of Almayne & vncle vnto the sayde duke▪ where the sayde pro∣uoste wyth the other made requeste vnto the erle, that he wolde cease the vse of that money. And yf not / they wolde so demeane them that it shuld not be suffered to be put forth nor ta¦ken within ye cytye. wherupon it was answered by the erle, that he wolde take aduyce of hys counceyll, & vpon the morowe gyue to thē an answere. Upon the daye folowynge / the sayde prouost wyth a greate company of ye cytye retourned. At whyche season the erle in curteyse maner, desyred them to retourne that other daye, for as moche as yet he had not suffycy∣entely commonyd with his coūceyll. Upon the morne the sayd prouost re¦tourned wyth a moche greater com∣pany. where after longe debatynge of the mater, it was agreed by ye sayd erle and prouost and hys company, that the money shuld be stopped and not to be put fourth, tyll they hadde further knowlege of the dukes plea∣sure / for knowlege wherof the erle sent forth messēgers ī all spedy wyse. And in thys passetyme, Peter de la Forest archebysshop of Roan and chaunceller of Fraunce was made & publyshed a cardynal. And the .xxiiii. daye of the moneth of Ianuary, the duke retourned vnto Parys wyth ye sayd cardynall in hys company / the whych for reuerēce of the cardynall, was fette into the cytye wyth proces∣syon and other ceremonyes, as well of the clergy as of the cytesyns. The xxvi. daye of the moneth of Ianuary the prouoste of the marchauntes of Parys with other of the cyty, apered before the dukes counceyll at saynte Germayns. where it was desyred of the sayd prouoste, that he shulde suf∣fer the forsayde money to ronne and be curraunt thorough the cytye. The whyche the sayde prouoste wyth hys company vtterly denyed / and after many greate and bolde wordes, de∣parted from the sayde counceyll in greate ire / and after theyr retourne vnto the cytye, encensyd so the comy∣nalty, that they set a parte all werk∣manshyp and occupacyō in shyttyng in theyr shoppes, and drewe vnto theym theyr armour and harnesse. whan the duke was enfourmed of thys murmour of the comynaltye of the cytye, he sent vnto the prouoste / commaundyng hym strayghtly that the kynges peace were kepte wythin the cytye / and ouer that, that he with a certeyne of the cytesyns shulde a∣pere before hym in the palayes of Louure vppon the morowe folow∣ynge at an houre assygned. At which houre the sayde prouoste wyth hys company came vnto Louure, and so were conueyed into the parlyament chaumber, where the duke wyth hys counceyll was than present. Than ye duke after certayne chalengys made vnto the prouoste for hys obstynacy in thys mater, and mysledyng of the comynaltye of the cytye / sayde vnto hym, that all be it that the kynge by hys prerogatyue myght at hys plea∣sure and for his auaūtage, make his moneys whan he wolde, & so to suf∣fer them to be curraūt thorough his realme: yet for the weale and ease of hys subiectes, consyderynge theyr manyfolde and late charges / he was cōtent that at thys season thys newe money shulde be spared / and that the iii. estates shuld be agayn assembled / & that they shulde depryue all suche persons than beryng offices, as they shulde thynke preiudycyall to the realme / & ouer that to ordeyne suche money as myghte be benefycyall for ye land. Of all whiche graūtes, ye pro∣uost, to ye entent that he myght of au∣thoryte shewe them vnto the comy∣naltye of the cytye desyred wrytyng.
The whyche the duke to appease the people, though it were some deale cō¦trary hys mynde and pleasure, graū∣ted vnto hys request. For the whych graunt, dyuers of the sayd offycers, as the chaunceller or cardynall and other absentyd them selfe, and came not in Parys by a tracte of tyme af∣ter. The .xxx. daye of Ianuary ensu∣ynge / the duke at the requeste of the sayde prouost, sent certeyne offycers vnto the house of syr Symonde de Bucy, and of syr Nycholas Brake, and of Enguerran of the Celer, and of Iohn̄ Prylle, whyche before wyth other were accusyd of mysgouer∣naunce of the realme / whose houses were by the sayd offycers kepte, and inuentuaryes made of suche goodes as than remayned wythin the sayde houses. And that done, the duke sent out commyssyons, that the thre esta∣tes shulde reassemble at Parys the xv. daye of February next folowyng / whyche was obserued and kepte. whan ye sayd .iii. estates were agayne assembled in the parliament chaum∣ber at Parys, in the presence of the duke and hys brethern wyth dyuers other nobles of Fraūce / mayster Ro∣bert Coke bysshop of Laon, by the cō¦maundement of the sayd duke, made a longe preposycyon of the mysguy∣dynge of the kynge and the lande by the meane of yll offycers / as well by chaungynge of the moneys as other many vnlefull excysys and taskys, to the greate inpouerysshynge of the comynaltye of the reame, greate dys∣claunder to the kynge, and to the syn¦guler enrychynge and auauncement of the sayd offycers. wherfore the .iii. estates prayen, and specyally the poore comons, that all such offycers may be remoued from theyr offyces / and other that shall be thought more benefycyall for the kynge and hys realme, to be admitted. Of the which the cardynall was noted for pryncy∣pall / and other to ye noumbre of .xxi. wherof some were ryghte nere vnto the duke. AFter whyche preposicyon or oracyō thus by the sayd bys∣shop ended / syr Iohn̄ de Pygqueny in the name of the .iii. astates, offered that the sayde .iii. astates shuld gyue vnto the kyng .xxx.M. mē for an hole yere / wyth y• that all thynges myght after that daye be ordered as the bys∣shop had before deuysed. All whyche artycles were vnto them by the duke graūted. And inconueniētly all such offycers as they before had named, were clerely auoyded / and other such as by ye sayd .iii. astates were though moste necessary, were put and chosen to theyr roumes / excepte that some of the olde, as maisters of thaccomptes and some of the presydentes & may∣sters of the requestes, were holden in for a tyme, to practes & shewe vnto ye new how they shuld ordre and guyde the sayd offyces. And the .xxvi. daye of the moneth of Marche was a newe money pro∣claymed thorough Parys, suche as the sayde .iii. astates had newly deuy¦sed. Upon the .vi. day of Apryll was proclaymed in Parys, that ye people shulde nat paye suche subsydes as ye iii. astates had ordeyned for the wa∣gynge of .xxx.M. men aforesayde or for the kynges fynaūce / and also that the sayde .iii. astates after that daye shulde no more assemble for any cau¦ses or maters before touched, tyll they had farther knowlege of ye kyn∣ges pleasure. For the whych procla∣macion the cytezyns of Parys were greuously amoued agayne the bys∣shop of Sēs, the erle of Ewe cousyn Germayne to the kynge, and agayn the erle Cācaruyle. By whose mea∣nes they sayde thys proclamacyon
was purchasyd. And treuth it is that the sayd archbysshop of Sens wyth the sayd .ii. erlys, were sent from the kynge from Burdeaux yet there be∣ynge, to the entent that they shuld se the sayde proclamacyon put in vre. But so soone as the sayd proclama∣cyon was made / they herynge of the murmour of the people of the cytye, sped them thens shortely after. Then vpon this ye comons waxed so wyld, that they lefte theyr occupacyons & drewe them to cōuentyculys and cō∣panyes, and hadde many vnsyttyng wordes by the kynge and hys coun∣sayle. wherof in auoydynge of incon¦uenyency / the duke commaunded a watche to be kepte wythin the cytye bothe by daye and by nyght / and cer¦tayne gates of the cytye kept shytte, and the remenaunt watchyd wyth men of armes. Upon the eyght daye of Apryll then beynge Easter euyn, a nother proclamacyon was made all contrary to that other / by vertue wherof it was charged, that the fore∣sayde subsydie shulde be leuyed, and that also the thre estates shulde reas∣semble at Parys the .xv. daye after Easter / and there to procede vpon all such maters as before were by them begonne. Upon the .vi. day of Apryll the Frenche kynge shypped at Bur∣deaux and so was conueyed into En¦glande, lyke as before is shewed in ye xxxi. yere of kynge Edwarde. And aboute mydsomer folowyng, ye duke of Lancaster, whyche by a longe sea∣son had lyen before a towne in Bry∣tayne named Rosne, brake vp hys syege / takyng of them of that towne for a fynaūce .lx.M. scutys of golde. A scute is worth .xi.d. sterling. About the feste of Mary Magdalene in the moneth of Iuly, controuersy and va¦ryaunce began to aryse amonge the parsōs assygned for the thre estates. wherof the cause was, for so mych as the sessyng which they had auewed & sessed for the .xxx.M. men, wolde nat extēde vnto the sūme by large & great sūmes. So yt the clergy answered yt they wolde paye no more than they were fyrst sessed vnto. And in lyke ma¦ner answered such as were apoynted for the lordes & for the good townes. wherfore ye archebysshop of Raynes, whych before was one of the chefe ru¦lers of them, refused theyr partye and drewe hym all to the duke. By mea∣nes of whyche controuersy many of theyr actes fayled / & suche as before were put out of theyr offyces, were a∣gayne restored. About the myddel of August, the duke sent for the prouost & Charles Cusake, wyth Iohn̄ de la Ile / the which bare ye pryncipal rule within the cytye, and also were great sayers & doers in the assembles of the iii. astates, & had takē vpon thē moch rule in ye busynes / so that moche of ye busynes was ruled by them & theyr meanes. To whome the duke gaue strayght commaūdemente, that they shuld cease of theyr auctorities, & nat to deale any more with the rule of the realme, but onely to the good rule & gouernaūce of the cytye of Parys. And that done the duke rode aboute vnto dyuers good townes, & made re¦quest vnto them for ayde / and also to haue the money to be curraūt amōg them, whych as before is shewed the x. daye of Decembre was at Parys proclaymed. But he sped lytle of hys purpose. In thys meane whyle, the cytezyns of Parys of one wyl & mynde, offered before saynt Remyge a taper of waxe of wonderfull lengthe and greate∣nesse / the whyche they ordeyned to brenne day and nyght whyle it wold laste. And shortely after they sent vnto the duke so plesaunt message, yt he retourned agayne vnto the cytye / whome they receyued with all honor
and reuerence. And vpon the morow after hys retourne / the prouost wyth certayne other of the cytye, shewed vnto the duke that they wolde make a greate shyfte for hym towarde the mayntenaunce of hys warres. And to brynge that mater to good conclu¦syon / they besought hym yt he wolde assemble at Parys shortly, a certayn persones of .xx. or .xxx. good townes there nexte adioynaunt. The whych was vnto thē graunted / so yt shortely after there assembled at Parys, vpō lxx. persones / the whyche helde theyr counsayll to gyther by sundry days. Howe be it in the ende they shewed vnto the duke, that nothynge they myght brynge to effecte, without as∣semble of the .iii. astates / & besoughte hym that they myght be efte reassem¦bled / trustyng that by theyr presence the dukes mynde shulde be contente and satysfyed. Upon whyche requeste the duke sent hys cōmyssiōs, chargyng ye sayd iii. astates to apere before hym at Pa¦rys, the wednysday nexte folowynge ye day of al sayntes. And full fayne he was to do all thyng that the citezyns of Parys hym requyred to do / for as testyfyeth the Frenche Cronycle, he was so bare of money that he hadde nat suffycyente to defende hys coty∣dyan charge. IN the .viii. yere of kynge Iohn̄ and wednysday after Alhalo∣wen day / the .iii. astates reassembled at Parys, and helde theyr counsayll within the blacke freers. Durynge whych coūsayll the kyng of Nauern̄ that longe had ben holden in pryson wythin the castell of Alleux, was deli¦uered by the meanes of syr Iohanne Pyquygny, than gouernoure of the countrey of Arthoys / and after con∣ueyed by the sayd Iohn̄ vnto ye town of Amyas. whan ye kyng of Nauerne was thus set at large / anon his syster and other of hys frendes made mea∣nes vnto the duke of Normandy, for an vnyte & a peace to be had betwene them / and by them a meane was foū∣den, that the kyng with such as were in hys company, shulde come vnder saufe conduyt to Parys to common with the duke. whā dyuers of the .iii. astates, as such as were of Chāpeyn and Burgoyn, knewe of the comyng of the kyng of Nauerne vnto Parys / they without leue takyng departed. And vpon the euyn of saynt Andrew the sayd kynge entred Parys wyth a greate companye of men of armes. Amonge the wyche was the bysshop of Parys, with many other of ye sayd cytye. Upon the morowe folowynge the daye of saynt Andrew / the kynge entēdynge to shewe hys mynde vnto the comynalte of the cytye, caused an hyghe scaffolde to be made by ye wall of saynt Germayn where he was lod¦ged. where moche people beynge as∣sembled, he shewed vnto them a lōge processe of hys wrongefull enpryso∣nemente, and of the mysgydynge of the lande by meanes of ille offycers, wyth many couerte wordes to ye dys∣honoure of the Frenche kynge, and iustyfycacion of hym selfe and excu∣synge of hys owne dedes, and so re∣tourned into hys lodgyng. Uppon the thyrde daye of Decem¦ber / the prouoste wyth other of the cytye yode vnto the duke / and in the names of the good townes or commynaltyes of the same, requy∣red of hym that he wolde do vnto the kynge of Nauerne reason and iustyce. To whome it was answered by ye bysshop of Laon, that the duke shuld nat allonly shewe vnto the kyng rea∣son & iustyce / but he shuld also shewe vnto hym frendely brotherhode,
with all grace & curtesy. And all be it that at that season, many of ye dukes coūsayll were present, to whome the gyuyng of that answere had more cō¦ueniently apperteyned thā to ye sayde bisshop / yet they were at that tyme in suche fere, that they durste nat moue any thynge that shuld soūde cōtrary the displeasure of the kynge of Na∣uerne or of the prouoste & other. Thā it was agreed that vpon ye saterdaye folowynge, the kynge and the duke whyche as yet had nat spoken togy∣ther, shuld mete at the place of the sy∣ster of the sayd kyng. where they met with vnfrendely coūtenaūce / & after they had communed there a lōge sea∣son, departed with litle loue or cha∣rite. And vpon the mūday folowyng, were shewed vnto the duke & hys coū¦sayle, certayne requestes desyred by the kyng of Nauerne / the whych the duke was forsed to graunt. whereof the substaunce was, that the kynge shuld haue agayn and enioye al such lādes, castelles, and townes, with all mouables to them belōgynge, as he was in possessyō of ye daye that kyng Iohn̄ was taken within the castel of Roan / and ouer that he shuld be par∣doned of all offences by hym done a∣gayne the crowne of Fraunce before that daye, and all other hys adheren∣tes, or suche as had taken hys partie before yt tyme. And soone vpon thys, was ordeyned that the erle of Har∣court and other, whyche kyng Iohn̄ had caused to be beheded and after to be hāged vppon the commō gybet of Roan, shuld be delyuered vnto theyr frendes, to be buryed at theyr pleasu¦res. After whych conclusions taken, and assuraunces made as farre as the dukes auctoryte wolde extende vnto / syr Almary knyghte, Menlene knyghte, wyth thre or foure men of honoure mo, were sente into Nor∣mandye, to repossesse the kyng of Na¦uerne in all such lādes, castelles, and townes, as he before tyme was in possessiō of, wyth all mouables vnto the sayd landes apperteynynge. And than the sayde kynge and duke helde famylyer company, and dyned and souped togyther often sythes, at the manoir or lodgyng of quene Iohan syster vnto the sayd kynge, and other places. Also the sayde kynge delyuered out of prysone, all prysoners as well spyrytuall as tēporall, suche as were thought any thyng fauourable vnto hys cause. Amonge the whyche some there were, that for theyr demerites were adiuged to perpetuall pry∣sone. In thys tyme & season tydynges sprange within the cytye of Parys, that the kynges of Englande and of Fraunce were agreed, and that kyng Iohan shulde shortely returne into Fraunce. By reason of whyche ty∣dynges, the kyng of Nauerne made the more haste to dyspache hym oute of Parys / so yt he with hys company departed from Parys the .xx. daye of Decēber, & rode toward the cytye of Maunte in Normādy. Soone after the kyng was thus departed / dyuers enemyes to the noumbre of .x. or .xii.C. came within .iiii. or .v. myles of Pa¦rys / whyche were demyd to be of the company of syr Phylip brother vnto the kyng of Nauerne. These robbed and pylled the countrey thereabout / in so moch that the people of the coū¦trey of Preaux and Trappes, and o∣ther there aboute, were constrayned with theyr mouables to flee vnto Pa¦rys. wherfore the duke sente out hys letters and cōmyssyons, for to assem∣ble hys knyghtes to withstande the sayd enemyes. But the sayde cytesyns of Pa∣rys caste an other way / and thought it to be done to the greuaunce or
correccion of them. For dowte wher∣of / the prouost with other that had ye gouernaunce of the cytye, caused the gates to be kepte / and none shuld en∣tre but suche as lyked them. In thys passe tyme the kynge of Nauerne beyng in Normādy, requy∣red delyuere of the castelles of Bret∣nell, of Euroux, and other / the which to hym by ye capytaynes were denied. wherfore he thynkyng that the duke performed nat to hym hys promesse / gathered vnto hym greate strengthe to wynne by strength that he myght nat haue hys former bāde & promes. Of thys was put in greate wyte the bysshop of Laon, whych was ye chefe counceloure of the duke, & especyall frende vnto the kynge / so that what thyng was spoken in the dukes coū∣sayll, was shortly after manifested by hym and hys meanes vnto the kyng of Nauerne. Thys also was one of ye chefe rulers of the assemble of the .iii. astates / and after lefte them and fell by hys greate doublenesse and dyssy∣mylacyon in the dukes fauoure, and so became chefe of hys counsayll, for the whyche of the comon people he was named ye beste with .ii. mouthes. Than the cytezyns of Parys heryng of the denayeng of the sayd castelles vnto the kynge / knewe wel that mor¦tall warre shuld growe betwene hym and ye duke. And for they wolde haue the cytezyns knowē from other straū¦gers / therefore they ordeyned theym hodys parted of rede and blewe / char¦gynge euery man that he shulde nat passe hys lodgynge wythout ye hood and conysaunce. Upon the .viii. daye of Ianuary the kyng of Nauerne entred the cytie of Roan with a great company of mē of armes / and drew vnto hym many englysshe men; and suche as were enemyes vnto the Frenche kynge. And vppon the .xii. daye of Ianuary the sayde kyng assembled the people of that cytye, and made a lyke sermō vnto thē as before he had done vnto the comynaltye of Parys / and dyd a solempne obsequy to be done for the erle of Harcourt and the other wyth hym put to deth, as aboue is sayd by kynge Iohn̄. in thys whyle the duke of Normandy that longe whyle had taryed in Parys, in hope and ayde of the cytezyns / & was euer by the pro∣uoste and other dryuen of from daye to daye: It was aduysed hym by his counsayll, that he shulde shewe hys mynde vnto the comynaltye of the cytye. wherof whan the bysshop of Laon and ye prouost were ware / anone they shewed vnto hym many doutes and impedymentes and also parelles, for to treate with a comynaltye. Nat withstandynge he refused theyr coun¦sayll, & caused the people to be assem¦bled at theyr common hall. whyther he wyth a small company came, the xi. daye of Ianuary aboute .ix. of the clocke in the mornyng / where he she∣wed vnto the commons a longe and a plesaunt oracyon. wherof the effect was, yt he bare very faythfull mynde vnto the cytye / and for the weale ther¦of he wolde put hys lyfe in ieopardy. And where as by hys euyll wyllers he was reported, that he shulde ga∣ther men of armes to greue the citie / he sayd and swore it was neuer hys entencion, but onely to auoyde suche enemyes as dayly pylled and robbed theyr neyghbours and frendes. And where he also knewe well, that great summes of money were gathered of the people towarde the kynges fy∣naunce / he lete theym vnderstande yt no peny thereof was comyn to hys handes. But hys mynde was, that suche persones as hadde receyued that mo¦ney, shulde wyth theyr assystence be
called to a due accompte. whych ora∣cyon wyth many kynde and louynge wordes ended / ye people with it were very well contented / so that of theym he was wel commēded and allowed. Upon the morowe beyng fryday and xii. day of Ianuary / the prouost and other of hys affynyte, herynge of the fauoure that many of the commons bare vnto the duke, and ferynge leste the duke shuld by hys meanes turne the comons vpon them / assembled a great parte of the cytye at a place cal¦led sait Iames hospytall, & specyally suche as they knewe well fauoured theyr partye. whan ye duke was ware of the assemble, anone he spedde hym thyther, hauynge wyth hym the bys∣shop of Laon. where by the mouth of hys chaūceler, he caused to be shewed a parte of the matter whyche he hym selfe had shewed the day before vnto the comynaltye / with more, yt where as such as ought vnto hym no good wylle, reported hym that he kept nat promyse made with the kyng of Na∣uerne / he shewed there the contrary. And yf any thynge were nat to hym parfourmed, it was contrary to hys mynde & pleasure / & that that in hys power lay nat to fulfyl. And so soone as ye chaūceler had ended hys tale / Charles Cusake stode vp to the en∣tent to haue shewed hys mynde. But there was such a rumoure and noyse amonge the people, that he myghte nat be harde / so that thanne the duke parted with suche companye as he brought, excepte the bysshop of Laō, whych taryed there with the prouost and other. And whan the duke was departed Charles Cusake began his tale, & spake boldely agayne the kyn∣ges offycers / and by couerte wordes somwhat agayne the duke. After whyche tale fynysshed one named Iohn̄ de saynte Ounde, whyche by auctoryte of ye thre astates was new∣lye made one of the generall gouer∣nours of the subsydy / stoode vp and sayde, that the prouoste nor no other persone of the thre astates, hadde no peny of that subsydie in theyr hādes / the whiche sayenge the prouoste also affermed. Forthermore shewed than there ye sayde Iohn̄, that certayne knyghtes whyche he there named sent from the duke, had receyued of the sayde sub∣sydye to the summe of .l. or .lx.M. mo tons of golde, the whyche were en∣ployed to no good vse. After whyche processe ended by the sayde Iohan / Charles Cusake agayne beganne to speke, and made a longe comendaciō of the prouydence and good dysposy¦cion of the prouost, whyche had takē vpon hym great payne and displea∣sure, & spent largely of hys owne for ye comō welth of the cytye. wherefore yf he myghte knowe that the comy∣naltye wolde nat ayde and stande by hym for the furtheraūce of the same / he wolde be content to leue of, & gete hym there as he shulde be quyte of al trouble, and also out of the daunger of all hys enemyes. whereunto was anon made a greate exclamacyon by the people, sayenge they wolde lyue and dye wyth hym in that quarell. UPō the .xiii. day of Ianuary / the duke sent for dyuers per∣sones of the thre astates, & exorted theym by goodlye and amyable wor∣des, that they wolde demeane theym agayne hys father and hym, as faythefull and louynge subiectes / and he shulde so reporte theym vnto the kynge, that they of hym shulde haue greate thankes. And as touchynge hym selfe / he wolde be so good lords vnto theym, that they shulde thynke theyr kyn∣denes and fydelyte well bestowed.
bestowed. The whyche graunted vn¦to hym theyr trothe and seruyce to ye vttermoste of theyr powers / aduy∣synge hym to take vpon hym the go∣uernaunce of the realme / for they thought he taryed to long or he toke the rule therof. Than soone vppon thys, the sayd thre estates ordeyned a more feble money than they before had made, to the aduauntage of the duke / to the ende that he sholde wyth¦stand the enemyes forenamed, which as yet remayned in the coūtre about Parys, and pylled the vyllages and toke prysoners / the whych they con∣ueyed vnto suche holdes as they thā helde in that countre. Thus duryng these manyfolde aduersytees amōge the Frenchmen / vpon the .xxiiii. daye of ye sayd moneth of Ianuary, Iohn̄ Baylet treasourer vnto ye duke, was slayne at Parys of a yoman or Uar∣let of the chaunge called Peryne Marke. The whyche Peryne after that cursyd dede done, fledde vnto saynt Mary chyrche. But at nyghte the duke sent syr Iohn̄ de Shalous hys marchall, wyth the prouost of ye cytye named Guillyam Scayse and other / the whyche brake vp the chyr∣che dores and toke the sayde Peryne out by force / and ladde hym vnto pri¦son called the Chastelet. Out of the whych vpon the morne he was takē, and hys handes smytten of / and so drawen vnto the gybet of Parys, & there hanged. But vpon the thyrde daye folowyng, by meanes of the bys¦shop of Parys he was taken downe and buryed wythin the sayd chyrche of our lady, wyth greate reuerence and solempnyte. At whyche obsequy was present the prouoste of the mar∣chauntes, with many other burgesis of the cytye. The fyrste daye of the moneth of February / syr Iohn̄ de Pyquyny came vnto Parys from ye kyng of Nauerne, and made request vnto the duke, of dyuers couenaūtes by hym to be perfourmed towarde ye kynge, whyche as yet were nat accō∣plysshed. whyche requeste the duke toke vnpacyētly / and gaue vnto the sayd syr Iohn̄ many hygh and disple¦saūt wordes. Howe be it in the ende ye bisshop of Laon sayde, that the duke shuld be aduysed vpō ye answere of ye kynges demaūde. Upon ye .iii. daye of February, ye prouost of the marchaū¦tes, wyth certayn of ye vnyuersyte of Parys & other burgeyses, yode vnto the duke vnto Louure. where it was requyred by the sayde persones, that he wolde fulfyll vnto the kyng of Na¦uerne, all suche couenaūtes as were lately made with hym / and specially that the castelles of Euroux & other before named, myghte be delyuered vnto hym accordyng to his apoynte¦mēt. And farthermore it was shewed vnto the duke by a doctoure of diuy∣nyte, that yf he or the kynge of Na∣uerne wolde swarue from any poynt or artycle of the sayde former agre∣mente / that the .iii. astates had vtter∣lye determyned to ayde and assyste hym, that wolde kepe the sayd agre∣ment, & to wythstāde the other that wolde nat obey or vpholde the sayde concorde & agrement. whereunto the duke was wel agreable / sayeng that he had perfourmed all his promesse, excepte the delyuere of certayne ca∣stelles, whyche the capytaynes wyth¦helde contrary hys mynde and plea∣sure / layenge for theyr excuses, that by the kynge hys father to theym they were delyuered, and to hym and none other they wyll delyuer thē agayne. Upon the .xi. day of February, cer¦tayne of the .iii. astates beyng at coū∣sayll in theyr place accustomed / ye pro¦uoste of ye marchaūtes assēbled theyr craftes of ye citie at a place called sait Clowe or Cloy in harnesse.
In whych tyme of hys with them there beyng / an aduocat of the parlia¦mēt called mayster Reynolde Dacy, as he was goyng from the dukes pa¦lays toward his owne house, he was slayne by men of the towne. And soone thereafter the sayd pro∣uost with a great company of armed men entred the palays of Louure / & so with a certayne complyces entred the dukes chaūbre, & there withoute salutyng of the duke sayd vnto hym: Syr dysmay you nothyng whatsom¦euer ye se vs do, for we entende to your persone no harme. And or these wordes were fully ended / his cōpany fell vpon a knyght called syr Nycho¦las de Cōflans thā marshall of Chā¦payne, and vpō syr Robert de Clere∣moūt leuyng vpon the dukes bedde, & slewe them out of hande. whan the duke behelde thys horryble dede, he was in meruelous fere of hys owne persone / & prayed the prouoste wyth hys cappe in hys hāde, that he wolde saufegarde hys persone / the whych y• prouost graunted, with that he wold by hym be aduertysed. Than the sayd .ii. dede corses were drawen downe the steyers withoute pytye / and layed in the court that all men myghte beholde that myserable spectacle. And for the dukes saufe∣garde, the prouost toke vnto hys par¦tye a hood of redde & blewe, ye whiche he put vpon his hed / and the prouost receyued the dukes hood beynge of burnet & garnysshed with a frenge of golde / & so eyther ware others hode all that daye. And that done, the pro∣uoste with hys company wente vnto theyr comon hall / where he shewed vnto the comynalty that the .ii. perso¦nes were especiall enemyes vnto the comon weale, and false traytours to god & to the crowne of Fraunce / and that he and hys adherentes entēded the preseruacion of the commō weale of the realme, and the cytye / & wolde vnderstāde of theym, whether they wolde stande by hym in that doynge or nat. The whyche cryed wyth one voyce ouy, ouy / that is to saye ye, ye. And whan he had receyued this com¦forte of ye people, he retourned agayn vnto the duke. Than he recomforted hym and sayd, that al that was done, was done by thassent of the people, & for to auoyd ye greater inconueniēce. For these that were slayn were great enemyes vnto the common welthe, & traytours vnto the crowne. wherfore he wylled ye duke to alowe that dede / & yf any pardō were requysyte for ye dede or any other to be hadde, that he shulde lyberally graunt it. All which thynges the duke was fayne to saye ye vnto / and prayed hym & the other than also of the cytezyns to be his frē¦des, & he wold in lykewyse be theyrs. And after thys agremēt / the prouost sent for .ii. clothes one of redde / and ye other of blewe / and wylled the duke to make hoodes of the same for al his seruaūtes. And so the duke and hys seruaūtes were clothed in the lyuery of the towne / the blewe set vpon the ryght syde. Than agayne night whā the sayd .ii. corpsys had lyen all daye vpon the stones of the palays / ye pro∣uost commaūded them to be layed in a cart, and so without preest or other reuerence to be cōueyed vnto a place of sait Katheryne there to be buryed. And whanne the sayde corpsys were thus brought vnto the sayde place, yt carter toke one of theyr garmentes for hys laboure, & so departed. It was nat longe after that a mes¦sanger came from the bysshop of Pa¦rys, whyche warned the bretherne of that house to spare the buryenge of syr Robert de Cleremoūt, for asmoch as the bysshope noted hym, accursed for brekyng vp of sait Mary church, whan he by force fette oute Peryne
Marke, as before is shewed. But af∣ter, they and also ye aduocate mayster Reynolde Dacy were buryed secrete¦lye. Uppon the morne folowynge the prouost assembled at the frere Augu∣stynes a great company of the cytye, wyth all suche as then were there of the good townes by reason of ye fore∣sayde coūsayll. To whych assemble, by the mouth of mayster Roberte de Corby a mā of the cytye, was shewed a protestaciō of all the cyrcumstaūce of the foresayd mater / and howe that by the dukes coūsl & also by ye thre astates, many good ynges were cō¦cluded for the deliuery of the kynge / & shulde or that tyme haue comyn to good effecte, ne had ben the enpeche∣ment of .iiii. persons, the whyche at yt season were nat named. Thys busynesse thus cōtynuyng, the kyng of Nauarne came vnto Pa¦rys the .xxvi. daye of February, wyth a good company of armed men / and was cōueyed by the cytezeyns vnto a place of the dukes called the Neell, & there lodged. To whome the prouost with his cōplyces made request, that he wolde make allyaūce with theym, and to supporte theym in that ye they hadde done / the whyche by hym was graūted. Than the quene hys syster and other, made instante laboure to agree hym and the duke. whych in cō¦clusyon toke such effect, yt the kynge shulde haue in recompēcement of his wrōges, the erledom of Bygorre and the vynery of Ramer, with ye erledō of Maston, and other landes to ye ex∣tente of .x.M.li. of Parys money by yere. And ouer that hys syster called quene Blāche, shuld haue ye lordshyp of Morette for her Dowry. After whyche accorde thus concluded / the kynge and the duke kepte together very frēdely and louyng familyarite, dyned and souped eyther with other by many and sundry tymes, & eyther vnto other gaue ryche gyftes. Amōg the whyche one was, that the duke gaue vnto the kyng the sayd place of Neell whych he than lodged in. Upon the .xii. daye of Marche, the duke of Normandye was procla¦med regent of Fraunce thorough ye cytye of Parys / and after thorough all Fraunce. And soone after he de∣parted from Parys, and rode into ye countre of Champayne, where he ta∣ryed a season. And the kynge of Na∣uerne retourned to Maunt in Nor∣mandye. Than the regent drewe vn∣to hym the nobles of Champayne & of Prouynce / and began to manace the prouost and other of Parys, that before had put hym to dyshonoure, and slayne so vylaynously hys trewe counceyllours. And after promesse taken of the erle of Brene and other nobles of that countrey, yt they shuld ayde hym agayne hys fathers rebel∣les and hys enemyes / he than rode vnto the abbey of Ponley in Mon∣struell / and after yode vnto a castell whych belonged vnto quene Blan∣che syster vnto ye kynge of Nauerne, and wyllyd the Capytayne named Tanpyne to delyuer to hym that ca∣stell. The whyche after dyuers de∣nayes, opened the gates and recey∣ued in the regente, and lodged hym therin that nyght. Upon the whyche the regent caused the sayd Tanpyne to swere vnto hym, yt he shulde kepe that castell to his vse / and after made hym styll wardeyne of the same / and so departed thens & rode to Meaux where hys wyfe laye. In thys tyme and season the pro∣uoste of the marchauntes of Parys, herynge of the regentes doynge▪ and of the affynyte that he made with thē of Champayne, fered the sequell ther¦of. wherfore by the aduyse of such as fauoured hys cause / he yode into the castell of Louure, and there toke out
artylery, gunnys, and other abylymē¦tes of warre, and put them in ye store house of the cytye, to be redy whan tyme requered. The regent spedyng hys iournay returned agayne to Cō∣peygn. And where as before was ap¦poynted, that the .iii. astates shulde ye fyrste daye of May assemble at Pa∣rys / the regent thā sent out hys com∣myssiōs, and charged ye sayd .iii. asta∣tes to assemble the thyrde daye of the sayd moneth of May at Compeyng¦ne aforesayde / wherewith the sayde cytezyns of Parys were greatly amo¦ued. At thys assemble was graunted vnto the regent, a subsydy bothe of ye Clergy and also of the laye fee / so yt the regent waxed dayly strōger and stronger. wherof heryng the kyng of Nauerne / remoued from a towne cal¦led Merlo / and with a stronge com∣pany came vnto a place or towne na¦med Domage, purposely for to treate wyth the regent for the cytezeyns of Parys. where in the begynnynge of May yt sayd two prynces met, eyther hauynge greate strengthe of men of armys. WHan the kynge of Nauerne had by .ii. dayes contynuall made re¦queste vnto the regent for the cy¦tezyns of Parys, and myghte natte spede of his requeste / he departed the thyrde daye and rode vnto Parys. where he was honorably receyued & fested by the space of .x. or .xii. dayes. In whyche season he warned theym of the great dyspleasure that ye regēt bare towarde the cytye / and aduysed them to make theym as stronge as they myght. In thys passe tyme the bysshop of Laon beynge with the re∣gent at Cōpeyne, was lyke to haue ben vylonyed by some of the regētes counsayll. wherefore in secrete wyse he departed vnto saynt Denyse / and from thēs he was fette by the kyng{is} seruaūtes of Nauerne vnto Parys / in whome was put great faute of all thys trouble. About the myddell of Maye / one named Guyllyam Cally gathered vnto hym a company in the prouince of Beauaysyn, as of the townes of Cerreux Norecell, Cramoysye, and other there about. The which beyng euyll dysposed, slewe dyuers knygh∣tes and esquyers of that coūtrey, and theyr wyues and seruaūtes / and pyl∣led and spoyled the countrey as they went, and threwe downe certayn py∣les and other strēgthes, and a parte of the castell of Beawmoūt / and for∣ced the duchesse of Orleaunce to for∣sake that castell, that than was there lodged / and for her saufegarde to go vnto Parys. Uppon the .xxx. daye of May / the prouost and other gouernours of ye cytye of Parys, caused Iohn̄ Paret, mayster of the brydge of Parys, and the mayster carpenter of the kynges werkes, to be drawen, hanged, heded and quartered. For it was put vpon them, that they shuld haue broughte into the cytye a certayne noumbre of of the regentes sowdiours, and so to haue betrayed the cytye. And the fore sayde people of Beauuaysyne ga∣thered vnto theym dayly more peple, as labourers and vylaynes / y• which came into the countrey of Mountme¦rencie, & slewe and robbed there ye gē∣tylmen of that countrey as they had done of other, and so passed the coun∣trey without resystence. And ye regēt in thys whyle came to the cytye of Sens in Languedocke, where he was honorably receyued / all be it yt the comons of that cytye & gentyles of that coūtrey, were greatly lenyng vnto the cytezyns of Parys / & there taryed a season to expresse to thē hys mynde. In whyche meane tyme a spy¦cer or grocer namer Gylle of Parys,
wyth one Iohn̄ Uayllaunt prouoste of ye kynges money, with a company of .viii.C. men in harnesse rode vnto the cytye of Meaux / wherof ye mayre of that cytie they were ioyfully recey¦ued, contrary hys promesse before made vnto the regent. where with as¦systence of the sayde mayer & other of that cytye, they entended to haue ta∣ken the wyfe of the sayd regent, with other noble women thā there soiour¦nyng wyth hyr / and so to haue con∣ueyd them vnto Parys, there to haue kepte them tyll the cytezyns myghte purchase the fauour & grace of the regent. But whā the erle of Foyse, whych thanne hadde the rule of the sayde gentylwomen, knewe theyr entente / anone he gathered vnto hym hys cō∣pany / and wyth assystēce also of som of the sayd cytye, he made vppon .vi. or .vii.C. men in harnesse, and yssued boldly agayne the foresayde persons and skyrmysshed wyth theym. In which skyrmysshe in the ende, the mē of Parys were sconfited and chased, & the mayre of Meaus named Iohn̄ Soulas taken with other / which af∣ter for theyr rebellyō were put in exe∣cucion. And after thys victory thus opteyned / & in reuēgemēt of the deth of a knyghte called syr Lewys de Chambly there slayn with other gen¦tylmen / & for the vntrouth of ye cytie: the foresayd erle set fyre vpon a syde of the cytye, & brēt a great parte ther∣of, as well churches as other / which fyre was scātly stenched in .viii. days after. In thys whyle the kynge of Na∣uerne herynge of the greate harme & distrucciō that the company of Guyl¦lyam Calley made of gentylmen in Moūtmerēcy & other places, lyke as before is shewed, yode agayne hym / & nere vnto a place called Cleremoūt encountred hym and his people, and gaue vnto theym batayll, and slewe moch of his people / and toke hym on lyue, & caused hys hede to be stryken of. And soone after, the cytezyns of Parys sente vnto hym / requyrynge hym to drawe towarde thē. At whose requeste he sped hym thytherwarde, and entred the cytye vpō the .xv. daye of Iuny / and was cōueyed vnto sait Germayne in Pree & there lodged. And vpō the morne he wēte vnto the comon halle of the citie / where the co¦mōs beyng assembled, he made vnto them a lōge & plesaunt oraciō, of the great kyndenesse that he had founde in many of ye good townes of Fraūce & specially in the cytye of Parys. For the whych they had bounde hym to take theyr partye agayne all other, makyng none excepcyō. After which tale by hym ended / Charles Cusake stode vp, & shewed vnto the people what ruynous poynt the lāde stode in for lacke of a wyse hedde & gouer∣noure. wherfore he exhorted ye people to chose ye kyng for theyr gouernour. whyche than was so done / & he there toke vpon hym the rule, & promysed with them to lyue and dye. Upon the xxii. day of the sayd moneth of Iuny / ye kyng of Nauerne with a cōpany of vi.M. speres of the citye & other, de∣parted from Parys, and rode vnto a towne called Gonnesse, where an o∣ther company of the cytye taryed for hym / & from thens rode towarde Sē¦lys. But whā the gentylmen of hys hoste vnderstode that he had takē vp¦pon hym to be capytayne of the comi¦naltye, where agayn the more partie of the nobles of Fraunce were of the contrary partye / they left hym many of them, & specially suche as were of the duchye of Burgoyne / and wyth congy of hym taken, resorted into theyr coūtreys. whā the regent had vysyted dyuers countreys, & wonne vnto hym the beniuolence of ye same,
& had also gathered vnto hym greate strength / he spedde hym towarde Pa¦rys / & lodged hym in the ende of the moneth of Iuny, in a place called in Frenche le Pount de Charenton fast by Boyes in Uyncent. In whose cō∣pany were noumbred vpon .xxx.M. horsemen / so that the countre there about was pylled & wasted with that hoste. wherof herynge the kynge of Na∣uerne, retourned backe agayne, and came wyth hys hoste vnto saynt De¦nys wythin .ii. myles of Parys. And the cytye of Parys was kepte daye & nyght, that no man myghte entre or go out, wythout lycēce of ye prouoste & other rulers therof. In this meane whyle that the sayde two prynces lay thus with theyr two hostes about the cytye / quene Iohan syster vnto the kynge, made an instaūt labour vnto the regent for grace for the cytezyns. By whose meanes a comucaciō was appoynted to be holdē betwene the kynge & the regente, the eyght day of Iuly, at a place called ye wynde mylle faste by the house of saynt Anthony. At whyche metynge it was lastly ac∣corded betwene ye sayd prynces, that the kyng of Nauerne shulde do hys best to brynge the cytezyns of Parys vnto due obedyence. And yf he sawe in theym suche obstynacy, that they wolde nat do theyr dutye, & to gyue for theyr rebellyon suche summes of money as by hym & the regent shuld be thought accordynge / that than the kynge shuld vtterly refuse theyr par¦tye, and turne vnto the regēt with all hys power. And ouer that, the kyng for all de∣maundes that he coude aske of the re¦gent for any cause, ouer the agremēt betwene them laste made, shuld haue iii.C.M. floryns of gold, wherof an C.M. to be payed that daye .xii. mo∣nethes, and yerely after .l.M. tyll the fulle were payed. And farther it was accorded, that the kynge after yt daye shulde take partye with the regente agayne all persones, excepte onely ye kynge of Fraunce / And to the ende yt thys accorde shulde be fermely holdē vppon bothe sydes / the bysshoppe of Lyseux there beynge presente, wyth many other lordes, sāge there masse within the tente where thys accorde was concluded / and after agnus dei, sware the two prynces vpon the sa∣crament, that withoute collusyon or fraude they shulde obserue and kepe eueryche artycle of the sayde accord. After whyche conclusyon thus takē / the regent repayred vnto hys hoste, & the kynge vnto saynt Denys. Than vppon the morowe the kynge entred Parys, and conueyed thyther wyth hym but a certayne / & so taryed there all that daye, wythoute any reporte sendyge vnto the regent. And the seconde daye for ye more strēgthynge of the towne, he sent for certayne Englysshe sowdyours, as archers and other, and sette them in the towne wagys / & nother sente nor retourned vnto the regente with any answere. Than towarde the nyght, how it was assaut was made by som of the regentes people vppō a parte of the town, so that dyuers men were slayne vpon bothe sydes / but the mo vppon the partye of the cytye. Than the kynge of Nauerne vpō the morowe retourned vnto sait De∣nys / leuynge within the cytye ye fore∣sayde strēgthe of Englyshmen wyth other. whan the regente was ware of the kynges beynge at saynt Denys / he sent vnto hym, and hym requyred of perfourmaūce of suche accorde as lately betwene theym was condissen¦ded / & syns by hys meanes he myght nat enduce the cytezyns to due obe∣dyence, that he wolde accordynge to hys promesse take partye with hym /
wherby they and other enemyes to y• comon welth, myght be recoūceyled. whereunto the kynge answered and sayd, that the regēt had brokē ye sayd accorde. For where he by hys dyly∣gēce & laboure, had brought the cyte∣zyns to a nere poynt of recōciliacyon & submyssiō / the regent by the meane of that assaute whyche he made vnto the towne, caused the sayd cytezeyns to renoūce all theyr former graunt, & to bynde them vpō theyr former wyl fulnesse. After whyche answere thus gyuen by the kyng / the regēt caused his people to passe ye ryuer of Sayne by a brydge made of botes, and so to brenne the towne of Uyttry & diuers other townes, & robbed & pylled the coūtrey there about. Upō the .xiiii. day of Iuly, dyuers of the towne of Parys issued oute of the towne / & with the ayde of the En∣glyshmen endeuoured them to haue socoured the sayde towne of Uyttry / with also to haue destroyed ye brydg. At whych iournay they bare them so well, that with theyr shotte they woū¦ded many of theyr enemies / and toke prysoner the regentes marshall na∣med syr Reynolde de Fountaynes with dyuers other / & after retourned vnto theyr cytye. Upon the .xix. day of Iuly, ye quene Iohn̄ syster vnto ye kyng of Nauern̄, with the archebysshop of Lyons, the bysshop of Parys, with certayne o∣ther temporall persones of the cytye / yode vnto a place assygned withoute the towne. where with them met the regent & certayne of hys coūsayll / & at lengthe cōcluded an unyte and cō∣corde betwene the sayd regent & cyte¦syns, without farther payne or exac∣ciō to be put vnto them / excepte that the sayd cytesyns shuld humbly sub∣mytte thē vnto the regent, in aknow¦legyng theyr offēce, & askyng of hym mercy & grace for the same / & ouer yt to be ordered forther as the kynge of Nauerne, the sayd quene Iohn̄, with the duke of Orleaūce & the erle of El cāps, wolde deme & adiuge / and that graunted, the regēt to opyn all ways & passages as well by lāde as by wa∣ter, that al marchaūtes may passe as they before tymes vsed / & in lykewise they of the cytye to opyn the gates of the towne, and to receyue all straun∣gers. AFter whych agremente thus cōcluded & agreed, with all o∣ther before made betwene the kyng & the regent to be maynteyned & vphol¦den / the regēt sent from hym moch of hys people / & appoynted the sayd bis¦shoppes & the other for the towne, to mete with hym ye .iiii. day folowynge at a place called Laiguy syr Marne. where he wolde haue also the kynge of Nauerne & the other, to perfyghte and clerely fynysh the sayd agremēt / & vpō thys made proclamacions tho¦rough the hoste, that a good and per¦fyght peace was agreed. wherefore many of the hoste for dyuers causes theym mouynge yode towarde the cytye, trustyng there gladly & louyng¦lye to be receyued. But vpōn ye morne whan they came vnto the gates, they fande them watched with harnessed men, whyche wolde none suffre to entre but suche as them lyked / amōg the whyche one named Macequetta seruaunte of the regētes was mysse entreated. And nat withstādyng that accorde / yet the mouable goodes of suche as were with the regent & had houses within the cytie, where disper¦bled and stroyed. Upon the .xxi. day of Iuly & euyn of mary Magdaleyne, a stryfe began to kyndell within the cytye / so that ye cytesyns complayned them vpon the Englysshemen, surmysynge agayne thē dyuers causes. By meane wher∣of
the comonte in a fury yode vnto the palaye of Necl, where at yt tyme many of the capytaynes of the En∣glysshemen dyned wyth the kynge of Nauerne / vpon whome they fell so∣deynly, and slewe of them vpō .xxiiii. & after in diuers places of ye citie, toke the other deale to the noūbre of .iiii.C. or thereupon, and closed theym in dyuers prysons. with whych doyng, the kynge of Nauerne, with also the prouoste and other the gouernoures of the cytye were right fore disconten¦ted. wherfore vpō the day folowyng, the kynge assembled the comynaltye at theyr comon halle / entendynge by plesaūt wordes to haue caused them to haue ben repētaunt of the murder of the foresayd capytaynes, & also to haue gotten the remenaunte oute of pryson. But the more the kynge spake for the Englysshemen, the more woder were they dysposed agayne theym / sayenge yt those whyche were within the cytye, shulde nat alonely be putte to deth; but also suche as were at sait Denys, whyche there spoyled that towne & countrey enuyron / and had had suche wordes vnto the kynge, yt in the ende he wyth the prouost & the other gouernoures, were fayne to graunte vnto them, that they wolde go with theym for to helpe to dystres the sayde Englysshemen. And so the same daye agayne nyght / the comōs yssued by the gate of saynt Honoure / & the kynge of Nauerne with the pro¦uost & theyr company went out by ye wyndemylle, so that in the sayd assē∣bles of the kynge & the comons were noumbred vppon .xvi.C. speres, and of foote men vpon .viii.M. whan the kynge with hys company was comē into the feelde where the sayd wynde¦mylle stādeth / he houed there well vp on halfe an houre, to se what ye other company wolde do. The whych sent out .iii. speres to espye where the En∣glyshmen were, and espyed of theym vpō .xl. or .l. that apered by a woddes syde nere vnto saynt Clow / and we∣nynge that the sayde Englysshemen there had bē no mo, retourned & she∣wed what they had sene. whereupon the sayde comons in all haste spedde theym thyther. And whā they were within the daunger of theyr shotte / ye Englysshmen issued oute of dyuerse parties of the wode, and woūded and slewe many of them. wherwith the o∣ther beynge fered fled incontinently / whome the Englysshemen pursued so cruelly, that they slewe of the fote men vpon .vi.C. in all. whych season the kyng of Nauern̄ and also ye prouost with theyr peple, stode styl & neuer moued towarde thē for theyr defence or ayde. After thys scomfyture thus susteyned by the Pa¦rysyens / the kyng lefte the cytye and rode vnto saynt Denys / and the pro∣uoste wyth hys company returned vnto Parys. where he was receyued wyth hydyous noyse and crye, aswel of womē as mē, for yt he so cowardly had suffered hys neyghbours to be woūded and slayne. By reasō of this the murmure of the people encreased dayly more and more agayne the pro¦uost / so that in maner a party was ta¦ken betwene the prouoste and the o∣ther gouernours of the cytye and the comynaltye. For the comons wolde haue put to deth many of the pryso∣ners of the Englysshemen / but ye pro¦uost with hys affynyte let them, and preserued them from theyr fury and malyce. And vpon the .xxvii. daye of Iuly beynge frydaye / the sayd prouost be∣yng encōpanyed wyth .viii. score or ii.C. mē in harnesse, yode vnto Louu¦re and other prysons and, toke out ye sayd Englysshemen, & conueyed thē vnto the gate of saynt Honoure / and
so sent theym vnto theyr other felys∣shyp than beyng at saynt Denys. Of whome they were ioyously re∣ceyued and welcomed / & specyally of the kynge of Nauerne, at whose re∣queste as the comō fame went, yt pro∣uost wyth the other rulers of ye town them delyuered. Thus more & more cyuyle dyscorde began to encreace wythin the cytie / so that the rulers of ye cytye were now in as great dought and fere of theyr neyghbours, as be∣fore tyme they were of the regēt & his knyghtes. So that vpō the tuysdaye folow∣ynge beynge the last daye of Iuly / ye prouost wyth other of hys company beyng in harnesse as dayly they were vsed, went to dyner vnto the bastyle of saynt Denys. And there beyng at dyner / the prouost cōmaūded to such as thā kept the keyes of that bastyle, that they shuld delyuer theym vnto Geffrey de Mastō than tresourer of the warres of the kyng of Nauerne. But the porters denayed ye commaū¦demēt / & sayde presysely yt they wolde nat delyuer the keyes to hym nor yet to any straūger. For the whyche an∣swere many hawte wordes were blo∣wen on eyther partye / so that people gadered about them. wherof heryng one named Iohn̄ Maylart, to whom belōged the watche of a quarter of ye cytye / wherein & in whyche quarter the sayde bastyle stode, drewe nere & gaue ere vnto the wordes / & shortly after in bolde maner sayd vnto ye pro¦uost, that the keyes shulde remayne styll with the sayd kepers, & nat to be takē out of theyr possessiō. By meane of whych wordes the prouoste wyth hys company were encensed wyth more malyce / & vttered many hyghe and dysdaynous wordes to fere the sayd Iohn̄ Maylart and the other. wherfore the sayde Iohn̄ Maylart fe¦ryng the prouost, lest he shuld shortly call hys strēgthe to hym, & by meane thereof put hym and other to an af∣terdele / sodenlye gate hym on horse∣backe / & berynge a baner of ye French kynges in hys hande, cryed wyth a∣lowde voyce, Mon ioye saynte De∣nys au Roy et a duke. whā the peo∣ple sawe hym thus ryde aboute, and cryed ioye to the kynge & the duke / anone moche people folowed hym, & cryed in the same wyse. And in lyke∣wyse dyd the prouost & his company, whyche toke the waye towarde the bastyle of saynte Anthony. And the sayde Maylarte rode towarde the market place, & there houed wyth his company. In whyche tyme & season one called Pepyn de Essars, nat kno¦wynge of the feat of Iohn̄ Maylart, in lyke maner gathym on horsbacke / and berynge a baner of the armes of Fraūce, rode about cryeng ye forsayd crye, & so lastly came vnto the other. whyle the commōs were thus assem∣bled in the market place / the prouost came vnto the forsayd bastyle of saīt Anthony / where it was reported to yt kepers of that bastyle, that the pro∣uost hadde lately receyued letters frō the kynge of Nauerne whyche they desyred to se / wherof the prouoste de∣nayed the syghte, & specyally one na∣med Guyffarde. wherefore after som wordes of dyspleasure, one strake at the sayd Guyffarde, & throughe hys harnesse woūded hym. where with ye prouost beyng amoued, made resystē¦ce agayn the sayd kepers / so yt eyther ranne at other wyth theyr wepyns. In whych stryfe the sayd Guyffarde was fyrst slayne / & after the prouoste wyth one of hys cōperes named Sy¦mōde Palmeyr. wherof heryng ye fore sayd Iohn̄ Maylart & hys cōpany, in all haste sped thē thyder & pursued vpō other yt thā were fled for fere / & so streightly serched, yt they fōde one cal¦led Iohn̄ of ye Ile, & Giles Marcell
vnder the prouoste of marchauntes, whych they also slewe without pytie. And after at ye bastyle of saynt Mar∣tyne, they foūde one called Iohn̄ Pa¦ret the yōger, whome they slew also. And soone were they spoyled of all yt they had, and layd naked in the open strete for all men to loke vpon. And whan they .vi. corpsys had so lyen by a certayne tyme / they were than put in a carte & drawen vnto a house of saynt Katheryne, and there buryed vnreuerently. And vpon the morowe folowyng, were taken Charles Cu∣sake, & Iosseron or Geffrey Maston, and put into the chastelet, and there kept in strayte pryson. And thus sea∣sed thys ryot wythin the cytye of Pa∣rys, that had contynued for the more partye by ye space of a yere & .ix. mone¦thes / as from the begynnynge of the moneth of Nouember in the .vii. yere of kyng Iohn̄, vnto thende of ye mo∣neth of Iuly in the .viii. yere of thys sayd kyng / or from the takyng of the duke in hys chaūbre, to the deth of ye prouost by the space of .vi. monethes. After whyche persones thus slayen / the sayd Iohn̄ Maylart sent vnto ye regent, requyrynge hym yt he wolde spede hym vnto ye citie / & in ye meane whyle to sende some noble man to haue the rule of the same. And in that whyle the comōs made serche, & toke many of the former rulers, as Petyr Gylle grocer, which as before is said was capytayne vnto thē yt were sent vnto Meaus. And wyth hym was ta¦ken syr Pyers Caylart knyghte and wardeyne of the castell of Louure. Also one called Iohn̄ Prenost, wyth Petyr Blount. Also a vocate named mayster Peter Puyssour / & a felowe of hys named mayster Iohan Go∣darde. All which {per}sones were shortly after put to deth by sundry tymes, & theyr bodyes cast in to a ryuer called Bone Uoycyne. And vppon the .xii. daye of August, the regent was recey¦ued into Parys with all honour and gladnesse. whereof heryng the kynge of Nauerne, & of the puttyng to deth of Iossran hys tresourer / sente vnto the regēt wordes of defyaūce / letting hym to vnderstande that he wolde be reuenged of that wronge and o∣ther. UPon the .xiiii. day of August, the regent caused to he assem¦bled within the commō hall of Paris the cytezyns / to whom he made a lōg declaracion of the treasons & ryottes done by these persones put to deth, & by the bysshop of Laon & other yet le¦uyng / whych entēded as he sayde to haue made ye kyng of Nauerne kyng of Fraūce, & to haue yelden the cytye of Parys into the power of Englys∣shemen. Thā the kynge of Nauerne with the Englyshmen yode vnto Me¦loon / where they by fauour & strēgth occupyed ye yle, & all yt coūtrey whych stretched toward Byer / & warred vp¦pon the countrey toward Gastenoys & dyd therin moche harme aswell by fyre as otherwyse. And shortly after syr Iohn̄ Pyquegny & syr Robert his brother, whych were capytaynes vn∣der the kyng of Nauern̄, made warre vpō the towne of Turnay and other townes of Pycardy / and slewe many of the common people, and toke pry∣soners of the gentylmen of that coun¦trey to the noumbre of an hundreth & aboue. Amonge the whyche the bysshope of Noyen was takē, and wyth the o∣ther ladde vnto a castell or towne cal¦led Creeyll, wherof the foresayde syr Robert was capytayne / and so conty¦nued in doynge domage in dyuerse places, aswell nere vnto Parys as elles where. Durynge whyche warre thus made by the kynge of Nauerne and hys accessaries / in the moneth of
Septembre and begynnynge of the ix. yere of kynge Iohn̄, the foresayde syr Iohn̄ de Piquegny layd his siege vnto the cytye of Amyas, & wā with∣in the bulwerkes of the same / so that the cytye was lyke to haue ben yeldē vnto hym, ne had ben the rescous of the erle of saynt Poule, which draue the sayd Iohn̄ & hys people a backe. But the sayd syr Iohn̄ wyth ayde of the Englysshemē quytte hym so mā∣fully, that he had the domynyō of all that coūtrey of beawuasyne / so that wyne nor no marchaundyse myghte passe to Tournay nor other townes therabout, without hys saufe cōduyt or lycēce. And in lyke maner syr Ro∣bert knolles capytayne of the Englis¦shemen in Brytayne, gatte there ma∣ny holdes & townes, whyche I passe ouer. Upon the .xxv. day of Octobre, dy¦uers of the burgeysys & rulers of the cytye of Parys, as Iohn̄ Guyffarde, Nycholas Poret, & other to the noū∣bre of .xix. persones, by the cōmaunde¦ment of the regēt were arested & sent vnto pryson / and so remayned by the space of .iiii. dayes. wherfore the frē∣des of the sayd prysoners yode vnto the prouoste of the marchaūtes than named Iohn̄ Culdoe, and requyred hym to make labour with other vnto the regent than beyng at Louure, for the delyuery of theyr frēdes, or at the lest to knowe the cause of theyr inpry¦sonement / whyche requeste ye prouost and other executed. It was answered to them by the regēt, that vppon the morowe he wolde be at theyr commō halle / where before the comynaltye yt cause of theyr inprysonement shulde be shewed. And yf than the cytezyns thoughte good to haue them sette at large / he wolde therwyth holde hym contented. At whyche houre apoyn∣ted, the regente came vnto the sayde halle / and there shewed that one na∣med Iohn̄ Damyens, whyche hadde maryed the doughter of Iohn̄ Resta¦ble one of the sayd prysoners, hadde caused hys sayd father & the other, yt they had allyed theym with the kyng of Nauern cōtrary theyr allegeaūce / wherfore he thought they had deser∣ued to dye. But for the fauoure that he owed vnto the cytye & to them, for they were of good substaūce / he wold nat do any thynge to theym tyll they were enquered of by theyr neygh∣bours. After the whyche declaracion thus made by the regēt / euery man fe¦red to speke any more for theym, but suffered the lawe to haue hys course. Howe be it in the ende they were ac∣quyted of that treason, and fynally delyuered by the ende of the nexte moneth. Uppō the thyrde daye of Decēbre, entred into Parys the cardinalles of Pierregort & of Urgell, to treate a cō¦corde and peace betwene the regente & the kyng of Nauerne. But in cōclu¦syon nothynge they sped of that they came for / wherefore they retourned vnto Auynyon. In whyche retourne they were robbed of great substaūce / wherof Englyshmen bare the disclaū¦der. And thus thys grudge hāgynge betwene the kyng & the regēt / many robberyes & other harmes were done vnto dyuers townes in Fraūce, to ye greate enpouerysshynge of the peple of that lande, and to the greate enry∣chynge of suche Englyshemē as thā were there abydynge in dayely war∣res, bothe wyth the kynge of Na∣uerne & also in Brytayne. For shortely after thys, the fore∣sayde syr Roberte Knolles and other Englysshemen wanne the towne of Ancer and other, lyke as in the thre and thyrty yere of kynge Edwarde is before more at lengthe decla∣red. In ye moneth of May & .xix. day of
the same / ye regēt for tydynges which he had receyued from hys father out of England, by the reporte of ye arche¦bysshop of Sēs & other / assēbled ma¦ny of ye good townes at Paris. But ye ways were so stopped by mē of warre he was fayne to tary tyll the .xxv. day of the sayd moneth folowynge. At whyche season was shewed to ye peo∣ple there assembled, that the kyng of Englande to haue a fynall concorde with ye kyng of Fraunce, wolde haue ouer and aboue hys raunsome, ye du∣chy of Normandy, ye duchy of Guyā, the duchy of Exanctes, the cytye of Ageu, the cytye of Carbe, the cytye of Pierregort, the cytye of Lymoges, ye cytye of Caours, with all the dyoces of the sayde cytyes belōgyng / the erle¦domes of Bygorre, of Poytyers, of Aniowe, and of Mayne, of Thorayn of Bouloyne, of Guynys, of Poūtes∣ses, or Pountyeu / ye townes of Moū¦struell, of Calays, & of Marquet / with all appertenauntes to the sayde duchys, erledomes, cytyes, and tow∣nes belongynge / them to enioye and holde wythout feawte or homage for them doynge, with many other thyn∣ges to the kyng of Englandes great aduauntage. whyche tydynges were ryght dyspleasaunt vnto all that cō∣pany / in so moch that they answered that the sayd treaty was neyther ho∣norable nor profytable. And rather thā the kyng shuld bynde hym & hys lande to suche inconuenience / they wolde prepare to make sharpe warre agayne Englande. wyth whyche an∣swere the sayde assemble was dys∣solued. Upon the .xxviii. day of May, the regent reassembled the sayde people / where it was condyscended that the nobles of the realme with a certayne persones euery man after hys astate, shuld serue the regent in hys warres by ye space of a moneth at theyr owne propre costes. And the cytye of Pa∣rys graūted to fynde to hym at theyr charge .vi.C. speres, iiii.C. archers, & a .M. of other sowdyours. And for so moche as ye other good townes wold nat graūt any subsydie tyll they had spokē with theyr cōmynaltyes / ther∣fore they were licēced to de{per}te home, and to brynge reporte agayn within xiiii. dayes. At whych season they she¦wed vnto ye regent, yt theyr countreys were so pylled & wasted by the kynge of Nauerne and Englyshemen, yt the people myght nothyng ayde hym as they thought to haue done. wherfore with moche payne they graūted to hī viii.M. mē for .iii. monethes. In the begynnyng of the moneth of Iuny, ye regent with a stronge po∣wer sped hym towarde Meleō where the kynge of Nauerne laye with hys people / so that the kyng occupied the coūtrey toward Byeir, and ye regent y• coūtrey towarde Brye. where both hostes thus lyenge withoute notary feate of warre / a treatye of accorde was yet agayne moued at lēgthe, by agrement of ye Parysyens, accorded moche lyke vnto the former accorde concluded at Parys. So yt by media¦cyō of certayn tēporall lordes of both hostes, yt sayd princes agreed to mete at Mēlane / and there to cōclude the sayd peace. where about the .xx. daye of August, wyth hostage delyuered vpon both partyes / the sayd prynces mette / & after rode vnto Pountoyse, where they were both lodged within the castell / where bothe theyr coūsay∣les were assygned to mete for the per fyghtyng of thys accorde. But so it was yt for suche lādes as shuld be as∣sygned vnto ye kyng, they cowde nat agre. wherfore ye regēt in cōclusyō sēt vnto the erle of Stāps or Escamps, chargyng hī to say, yt he to ye entent to haue his good wyl, had offered vnto hym reasonable offers.
whyche yf he wolde accepte, he wolde be fayne therof / and yf nat, he let hym vnderstāde yt he shulde haue no peace wyth hym whyle he lyued. By reason of whyche message, ye coū∣sayles on bothe partyes conceyued none other, but that this treaty shuld haue concluded no amyte nor peace. But howe it was, by counsayll or of hys owne lyberalyte, whan the kyng had degested this mater in his mynd by all that nyght folowynge / he on ye morowe sent for the counsayll of the regent / & wylled them to shewe vnto the regēt, that he consydered well in hys mynde the great daunger & my∣sery whyche the realme of Fraunce stode in. wherfore he beyng of the na∣turall house of Fraūce, and one of ye Flouredelyce / ought to se ye mayn∣tenaunce of the honour of the same. And for that that no ruyne of the sayde realme shulde to hym (yf any fell) after be areted / therfore he was cōtented to set a parte all suche great offers & promyses, as to hym before tyme had ben offered & promysed / & to holde hym onely contented wyth hys owne righte as he before tymes had enioyed. And to ye ende that thys hys wyll & pleasure myght to the peo¦ple be knowen / he wylled the regent that the people of that towne of Poū¦toyse shuld be assembled in the court of that castell, that he myghte de∣clare it to them in propre persone. The whych accordyng to his mynde was done. All whyche rehersall he made before the regēt and comynalte of the towne / promysyng there to de∣lyuer out of hys possessiō all suche townes, castelles, and holdys, as he had won syn he stode enemye to the crowne of Fraūce / & to become true subiecte vnto the kyng, & louyng ne∣uewe and frēde vnto ye regēt frome yt daye foreward. wherof the regēt & all the cōmons were very glad & ioyfull all be it that some trusted lytle to this accorde, nor yet to ye cōtinuaūce ther∣of / consyderynge the manyfolde ac∣cordes whych before tymes had ben betwene them cōcluded. After which accorde thus ended / the kynge wyth hys people retourned to Miant, & ye regēt to Paris / appoyntyng betwene them to meate at Parys the fyrst day of Septembre next folowyng. ACcordyng to ye appoyntmēte made at Pountoyse betwene the kyng and ye regēt / vpon the fyrste day of Septembre & begynnyng of ye x. yere of kyng Iohn̄, the sayd kynge & regent met at Parys / where atwen them was holden famylyer cōpany, and great kyndenesse shewed vppon eyther partye. There also they coun∣ceyled how they shulde withstāde the kyng of Englande, whych entēded to entre Fraunce shortely after wyth a strōge power. And after many amy∣tees and frendely dealynges betwen thē executed / ye kyng rode to Meleō to delyuer that towne and castel into the regentes possessyon as the story sheweth. But whā he was cōmyn thy¦ther, were it with hys wyl or cōtrary / the sowdyours toke greuouse tolles of all wynes and other marchaun∣dyses that passed that waye / whyche after was knowen to be for ye wage & sowde of the Nauaroys and Englis∣shemen, whych helde the sayd towne and castell. And so yt Frenchmē were constrayned to paye the wages of theyr enemyes / whyche greued them very sore, consyderynge that many∣folde harmes and pyllages of theym before were receyued. And after the kyng had auoyded the sayde sowdy∣ours / he departed & rode vnto Maūt leuyng Creyell in the possessiō of En¦glyshmen & other. And ouer these ma¦nyfolde myseryes and myschyeues
thus fallyng in the realme of Fraūce / there fell so great habundaūce of wa¦ter in the Heruest season, that ye corne was loste / so that it rose to an hyghe pryce to the greate damage of the comon people. And in the moneth of Nouembre folowyng / the kynge of Englande, with prynce Edwarde & other many lordes, with a strōge power lāded at Calays / & so perced Fraunce by Ar∣toys in Pycardy & Uermendoys, & subdued the coūtrees before hym tyll he came to Reynes, lyke as before is shewed in the .xxxiiii. & .xxxv. yeres of kyng Edward / where all thys mater wyth ye tenoure of the peace betwene the sayde kynges of Englande and of Fraunce is more at lengthe de∣clared. The laste daye of the moneth of Decembre, one Marten of Pysdo burgeyse of Parys, was drawē vnto the place of iugemēt / & there vpon a scaffolde had fyrste hys armes cutte of & after hys legges by the thyes, & lastly hys hed / & than he was quar∣tered, & hys .iiii. quarters sette vppon iiii. pryncypall gates of the cytye, & hys hede sette vpō the pyllory. The cause of thys iugemente was, for so moche as one called Denysot Pal∣mer, to whome he had discouered his coūsayll, and caused hym to be as an accessary in all hys workes / had ac∣cused hym that the sayd Marten had agreed & couenaunted with certayne offycers & capytaynes of the kyng of Nauern̄, that they at a tyme appoyn¦ted shuld haue entred the cytye of Pa¦rys, & to haue slayne the regente & o∣ther, & to haue had the cytye at theyr rule and pleasure. And so the season thā of ye .x. yere tyl yt moneth of Iuly, passed in the warres & treaty before touched / so that the .viii. day of Iuly, the Frenche kyng lāded at Calays, & there taryed as prysoner tyl the .xxv. daye of Octobre folowynge, as be∣fore in ye .xxxiiii. yere of kyng Edward is more playnly shewed. Than vpon the .xxix. day of Octo¦bre and begynnynge of hys .xi. yere / kyng Iohn̄ came to saynte Omers, where he taryed tyll the fourth daye of Nouembre. And the .xi. day of De∣cember he came vnto saynte Denys / where vnto hym vpō ye .xii. day came the kynge of Nauerne, whyche had nat sene hym sen he was delyuered from pryson / & brought with hym cer¦tayne hostages whyche the Frenche kynge had sente vnto hym for hys saufegarde / puttynge hym holy in ye Frēche kynges grace & mercy. And vpon the morowe folowyng, he was newly sworne vnto the kynge to be hys trew & faythfull sonne & subiect / and the kyng agayn vnto hym, to be hys kynde father & good & gracyous soueraygne lorde. And forthe wyth were sworne the duke of Normandy & Philip brother vnto the sayd kyng of Nauerne, to maynteyne all coue∣nauntes made & to be made betwene the sayd .ii. kynges / so that they were fynisshed & cōcluded by the .xviii. day of Ianuary nexte folowyng. And soone after retourned the sayd kyng of Nauerne vnto Maunt. And kyng Iohn̄ vpon the .xiiii. daye of Decem∣ber wyth great tryumphe was recey¦ued into Parys. And whanne he was comyn vnto hys palays, the prouost of marchaun¦tes wyth certayne burgeyses of the cytye, in the name of the comynaltye of the same, presented hym with a pre¦sent to the value of a .M. marke ster∣lynge. Upon a tuysdaye beyng the fyrste day of Iuly, was foughten a batayll at Parys betwene two knyghtes / wherof the appellaunte was named syr Foukes Dorciat, and the defen∣daūt syr Maugot Mawbert. whych
appellaūt was sore vexed with a fe∣uer quarteyne / by reason wherof and of the great hete that ye day appered, after longe fyght the sayd appellaūt lyght from hys horse for hys refres∣shemēt / wherfore hys frendes of hym were in great doute. But his enemye was also so sore trauayled, yt what for hete & laboure he was also ouer∣come, & was lykely to haue fallen frō hys horse / and or he myght be taken downe he swowned & dyed. whan syr Fowkes was ware of ye feblenesse of hys enemye anon as he might he dressed hym on fote toward hys aduersary, & fande hym starke dede / whyche by lycēce of the kynge was after had out of the feelde, and secretlo buryed / & the sayde syr Fow∣kes for feblenesse was by hys frēdes ladde vnto hys lodgyng. In the .xii. yere of kynge Iohn̄ & xxi. day of Nouembre, Phylyp duke of Burgoyn, erle of Artoys, of Al∣uerne, and of Boloyngn, a chylde of the age of .xiiii. yeres or lesse, dyed at a town nere vnto Rome called Guyō By reason of whose deth kyng Iohn̄ as nexte heyre had after possession of al the sayd lādes, & toke possiō therof shortly after. In the .xiiii. yere of the reygne of kyng Iohn̄ & thyrd day of Ianuary / he for specyall causes hym mouyng, as for the enlargyng of his sonne the duke of Orleaunce & other yet pled∣ges for hys raūsome, toke shyppyng at Boloyne, & so sayled into Englād, and arryued at Douer the .vi, day of the sayde moneth / and after yode to Eltham, and from thēs was cōueyed vnto Lōdon, as before is shewed in the .xxxvii. yere of kyng Edward. In tyme of whose there beyng / syr Bar∣thrā de Glaycon made warre vpō the kynge of Nauerne, & wan from hym the towne of Maunt in Normandy. And by the duke of Normādy soone after was wonne from the sayd kyng the towne of Mēlēce. within ye which were taken dyuers Parysyens, that shortly after for theyr infidelite were put in execuciō at Parys. And thus the warre betwene the kynges of Fraūce & Nauerne was newly begō. Than kynge Iohn̄ beyng as before is sayde in Englande / a greuous ma¦lady toke hym in the begynnynge of Marche, of the whyche he dyed at London vpō the .viii. daye of Apryll folowynge / & so wyth great honoure and solempnyte cōueyed to the sees syde, and there shypped, & thā in pro∣cesse caryed into Fraunce. where vpon the .vii. day of May, and yere of our lorde god .M.CCC.lxiiii. he was solempnely enterred in the monastery of saynt Denys / whā he had reygned .xiii. yeres .vii. mone∣thes and odde dayes / leuynge after hym thre sonnes, that is to say Char¦les, whych was kyng after hym, Le∣wys, and Phylyp. CArolus or Charles ye .vi. of that name or .v. after som wri¦ters, ye eldest sonne of kyng Iohn̄ / be∣ganne hys reygne ouer the realme of Fraūce, the .ix. day of Apryll, in the begynnynge of the yere of our lorde god .M.CCC.lxiiii and the .xxviii. yere of Edwarde the the .iii. than kynge of Englande / and was crowned with dame Iane hys wyfe at Raynes the .xix. day of May folowynge In thys fyrste yere syr Barthran de Glaycon lyeutenaunt of the sayde Charles in Normādy, fought with a capytayne of the kynge of Nauerne named le Captall de Bueffe, nere vnto a place called Cocherell, nere vnto the crosse of saynte Lyeffroy / in
whiche fyght the sayd Captall was scomfited and great noumbre of his people taken and slayne, hym selfe chased & taken / for whome the fren∣che kynge gaue after vnto the sayde syr Barthrā the Erledam of Longe∣uyle. And whā he had receyued him / he sent him vnto a strōge pryson cal∣led the Merchy in Meaux. At Myghelmas folowynge / the duke of Brytayne syr Charlys de Bloyes, and syr Iohn̄ de Moūtfort sonne and heyre to the fore named sir Iohn̄ Mountforde before dede, whi¦che by a longe season bothe father & the sonne had holden warre with the sayd syr Charles, met in playne ba∣tayle / in y• which as before is shewed in the .xxxviii. yere of king Edwarde, the sayde syr Charles was slayne & dyuers noble men of Fraunce with him. In the moneth of Iuny and se∣conde yere of this Charlys, an other accorde was yet concluded atwene this Charles and the kynge of Na∣uerne. By reason of whiche accorde, the Captall of Bueffe was clerely de¦lyuered, and Maunt and Menlene agayne also to the kynge restored. And ouer that to the kynge of Na∣uerne was geuyn for a recompense∣ment, the Erledome of Longeuyle, whiche as aboue is sayd the frenche kyng had gyuen vnto syr Barthran de Glaycon, for to haue the Captall to his prisoner. And also to the sayde kynge of Nauerne was gyuen the lordshyppe of Mountpyller. And in the moneth of February began the warre in Spayne, where prince Ed∣warde ayded Peter kyng of ye lande, as before is shewed ī the .xl. and .xlii. yeres of kynge Edwarde. In the .iiii. yere, the peace atwene the kynges of Englande & of Fraūce began to breke, by meanes of the erle of Armenake & other, as in the .xlii. yere of kynge Edwarde is before shewed. And in the moneth of De∣cembre and the sayd yere, the quene was lyghted of a man Chylde in the Hostell of saynt Paule / the whiche was after christened with excedynge solempnyte ouer other before passed, in the churche of saint Paule in Pa∣rys, the .vi. day of Decembre of the cardinal of Parys. To whome were godfathers the erles of Mountme∣rency and of Dampmartyn, & god∣mother Iane quene of Euroux / and bare the name of Charlys after the erle of Mountmerency. In the .v. yere of this Charlys, he called his counsell of parlyament at Parys. Durynge the whiche, the appella∣cyons of the erle of armenake and other purposed ageyne prynce Ed∣warde, were publysshed and radde / & the answeres of the said prince vpon the sayd appellacyons made, whiche I ouerpasse for length of the mater. But the conclusyon was, that the prince had broken the peas and co∣uenauntes of the same as they there demyd. wherfore all suche townes & holdes as the frenche kyng had got∣ten, he shulde them retayne / & make warre vpon the kynge of Englande for the recouery of the other. where vpon kynge Charles in the moneth of Iuly folowyng, rode vnto Roan, and there rygged his nauye / enten∣dynge as sayth the frenche historye, to haue made warre vpon Englād / and to haue sent thyther his yongest brother Philippe than duke of Bur∣goyne with a stronge armye. But whyle he was there besyed about his purpose / the duke of Lancastre arry∣ued with a strong power at Caleys / and so passed to Tyrwyn, & so vnto Ayr. wherfore kynge Charlys then chaunged his purpose, and sent his sayde brother into those {per}ties. Then by that season that ye sayd duke was prepared with hys people / the en∣glysshemen
were comyn vnto Arde. And the frenche men spedde them in suche wyse, that they logged thē the xxiiii. day of Auguste vpon the moū∣tayne of Tournehawe nere vnto Arde / so that both hoostes were lod∣gyd within an englysshe myle. A∣twene whom were dayly bekeringes and small skyrmysshes. All whyche season the Frenche kyng taryed styll aboute Rowan. Than the king of Nauerne, whi∣che by a longe season had dwellyd in Nauerne, came by shyppe into Con∣stantyne / and sent vnto kynge Char¦lys yt if he were so pleased, he wolde gladly come vnto hym for to shewe to him his mynde. wherfore the king sent vnto hym as hostagys, the erle of Salebruge, the deane of Parys, with .ii. other noble men / the whyche the kynge of Nauerne wolde nat ac∣cepte. In the moneth of Septembre and vpon the .xii. day / when the duke of Burgoyne had lyen as before is sayd nere vnto the englysshe hooste, he that day remoued his people, and so went vnto Hesden. And the En∣glisshe hoost remoued to Caux & o∣ther places, as before I haue shewed to you in the .xliii. yere of kynge Ed∣warde, with other thynges apper∣teyninge vnto the same mater. And in the sayd moneth of Septembre, kynge Charles manned and vitay∣led certayne galeys & other shyppes / and sent them into walys, and so to haue entred into Englāde. But they retourned with lytle worshippe / nat∣withstandynge that he had .ii. noble men of walys named Owan and Iames wynne, whiche made to him faste promesse of great thynges, by reason that they were enemyes vnto the kyng of Englande. For this and for other charges, the kynge called a conuocacyon of the temporalte and spiritualte at Parys. where to mayn¦tayne hys warres, was graunted to hym of all thynge bought & sode excepte vitayle, the .iiii. peny / so that all thynge that was solde by retayle, the seller shuld pay the exaccion / and that whyche was solde by greate, the byer shulde paye the sayd exacci∣on. And the spiritualte graunted a dyme to be payed in .ii. halfe yeres. And the lordes and gentylmen were stynted at a certaintye, after the va∣lue of theyr landes. In the moneth of February, the kyng sent vnto the kynge of Nauerne than beynge at Chierbourgth certayne messyngers, to perfyght an amyte atwene them, leste he toke party agayne hym with the Englysshemen. But thys treatye contynued a longe season / so that ī the .vi. yere & moneth of Iune, the kynge of Nauerne hauyng suffi∣cient hostages, came to the frenche kynge to Uernon. where in conclu∣sion the kynge of Nauerne made his homage vnto the frenche kyng, and became there his feodary / wherof the Frenchemen made moche ioye. Af∣ter whiche accorde / the sayde kynge of Nauerne the thirde day folowing toke his leaue of the kynge, and so rode vnto Eureux. All which season ye warre was cōtynued by Englisshe¦men within the realme of Fraunce & prouince of Brytayne, as before is expressed in the .xliiii.xlv.xlvi. yeres of kynge Edwarde. In the .vii. yere and moneth of Auguste / the duke of Braban with many nobles of Fraunce, mette in playne batayll with ye duke of Iuil∣lers & the duke of Guellre. In which batayll after cruell fyght, the duke of Braban was chased / and vpō his syde slayne the erle of saynt Poule, with many other noble men, whiche the story nameth nat. And vpon the other syde was also slayne the duke of Guellre, with many other vpon
that partye. IN the .xi. yere of kyng Charles & moneth of Maye / he assem∣bled his great coūsell of parlyament at Parys. where amonge many ac∣tes made for ye weale of his realme / he with assente of his lordes and cō∣mons there assembled,At what age the heyre to the crown of Fraūce shuld be crowned. enacted for a lawe after that day to be contynued, that al heyres to ye crowne of Fraūce theyr fathers beynge dede, may be crowned as kynges of Fraunce so soone as they attayned vnto the age of .xiiii. yeres. And in this yere was the treatye of peace laboured by the two cardynalles sent from the pope, as before is shewed in the .xlix. yere of kynge Edwarde. After whyche treatye nat concluded / the kynge of Englande loste dayly of hys landes in Fraunce. For in the moneth of August folowyng, ye duke of Berry, the duke of Angeo, and many other lordes to them assygned in dyuers places, as in Guyan, Angeo, and Mayne / gate and wanne from the Englysshemen many coūtreys, tow∣nes, and castels / as Pierregort, Ro∣uerge, Caoursyn, Bigorre, Basyn∣das, Berregart, Daimet / with many other townes and holdes, whyche wolde aske a lōge leysour to reherce, to the noumbre of .vi. score and .xiiii. what of townes, castelles, and other holdes / whiche in shorte whyle were wonne frome the Englysshemen, in the parties of Fraunce and Bry∣tayne. In the .xiii. yere of this Charles / the Emperour of Rome & Almayne named Charles the .iiii. of that na∣me, came into Fraūce by Cambray, to do certayne pylgrymages at saint Denys and elles where / and so was conueyed with honorable men, as the lorde of Cousy and other, vnto saynt Quintyne / where he taryed Chrystmas daye. And after he was conueyed to a towne called E of Ewe / and from thēce to Noyen, and than to Compeygne / where he was mette with the duke of Burbon and other nobles. Than he rode to Sen¦lys / where he was mette with the dukes of Berry and of Burgoyne, bretherne of the Frenche kynge, and many other, as bisshoppes and other lordes. And ye shall vnderstande that all suche as rode in the compa∣nyes of these forsayde dukes, except bysshops and preestes, rode in theyr lyuereys. As the companye fyrste of the duke of Burbon brother vnto the quene, to the noumbre of .CCC. men, were all cladde in whyte and blewe. The company of the .ii. other dukes, the noumbre of .v.C. men, in blacke and russet / that is to meane the erles and other lordes in clothe of golde, the knyghtes in veluet, the gentylmen in damaske and sattyn, and the yemen in clothe. Thanne from Senlys he was brought vnto Louuris / where mette with hym the duke of Barre, with a companye of CC. horse, and his company cladde in grene and redde. And from thens he was had to saynte Denys vpon the thyrde day of Ianuary / whither the king sent to him a chayre rychely garnysshed, for so moche as he was vexed with the goute. And the quene sente to hym an horse lytter with .ii. whyte palfreys: where he was also mette with a great companye of bys∣shoppes and other spirituall men, as abbottes, priours, and other / and taryed there .ii. dayes. Upon the .v. day of Ianuary be∣ynge monday, he rode towarde Pa∣rys. But or he were halfe a myle frō saynte Denys, he was mette with the prouoste of the marchauntes, with a cōpany of .xv.C. horse, yt cyte∣zens being cladde in whyte and vio∣lette / and so rodde before hym tyll
he came to Parys. whan the kynge was warned that he was nere the ci∣tye, he lepte vpon a whyte palfrey / and accompanied with many lordes and other to the noumbre of a .M. men, all his housholde seruauntes beyng cladde ī one liuerey of browne blewe and darke tawny, and the ser∣uauntes of the dolphyn of Uyen in blewe and cremesyne euery man af∣ter his degree / and so the kyng with his company mette with the empe∣rour at the mylle without the towne called the wynde mylle. where after due salutes made eyther vnto other / the Frenche king put the Emperour vpon his ryght hande, and toke the kynge of Romaynes sonne vnto the emperour vpon his lyfte hande. And so the Frenche kynge rydinge in the myddes, passed thoroughe the hygh stretes of Paris tyll they came to the king{is} palays. where he was lodged with all honoure / & after fested with the kinge and the quene by the space of .xvi. dayes. whiche terme endyd, like as with all honoure he was con∣ueyed into the lande / so with great honour and ryche gyftes he was a∣gayne conueyed out of the lande. In the moneth of Februarye fo∣lowynge and the .vi. daye, dyed the quene of Fraunce in the hostell of saynt Poule in Parys / and after bu∣ryed with great solempnyte and ho∣noure in the monastery of saynt De∣nys. In the moneth of Marche the kynge receyued letters from certeyn lordes of hys lande / in the whyche was conteygned that the kynge of Nauerne had imagened and conspi∣red with one Iaquet de rue his chā∣berlayne, for to poyson hym / the whi¦che Iaquet was than comyn into Fraunce to execute his cursed pur∣pose. wherfore the Frenche kynge layed suche wayte for hym, that he was taken / and founden vpon hym a byll of certayne instruccions, howe he shulde behaue hym selfe in accom¦plysshyng his euyll purpose. Than he was brought vnto the kinges pre¦sence / to whome he confessed the cir∣cumstaunce of all his treason to be done at the commaundement & coun¦sell of the kyng of Nauerne. Soone after the eldest sonne of the kynge of Nauerne, whiche was newely com∣myn into Normandy, sent vnto king Charles / shewynge to hym that if it were his pleasure, he wolde gladlye come vnto hys presence for to speke with hym / with that he myght haue a sure safeconduyt for hym, and all suche as he shulde brynge with him. The whiche to hym was graunted / and vpō the same came vnto Selys where the kynge than was. And af∣ter he had comoned a season with ye kynge / he made to hym requeste for the delyuere of the foresaid Iaket de Rue / layenge for hym sondrye excu∣ses. But whanne the kynge hadde caused the sayd Iaket to be brought forthe before the sayde sonne of the kynge of Nauerne named syr Char∣lys / he auouched suche thynges be∣fore hym that he coude nat denaye, but that his father had commytted many and sondry treasons, as well a∣gayne kynge Iohn̄ as nowe agayne kyng Charles hys sonne. wherfore after diuers assembles and counsels hadde vpon this matter / the kynge and the said sir Charles agreed, that all suche townes and holdes as the sayd kynge of Nauerne had within Normandy, shulde be delyuered vn∣to ye duke of Burgoyne to the Fren∣che kynges vse. And for that {pro}messe shulde be truely parfourmed / ye king firste sware the said syr Charles / and after many of the capitaynes whiche had the rule of the sayd townes and castelles. And for so moche as the sayd syr Charles had there presence
with hym a capitayne named sir Fer¦nande de Oyens, in whose guyding many of the sayde holdes than were, and suspected him that he wolde nat perfourme the sayd promesse / ther∣fore he caused hym to be arested, and to be had vnto prison, tyll the holdes beynge vnder hys guydynge were clerely deliuered. Upon which agre∣ment thus concluded and sworne / ye duke of Burgoyne with the sayd sir Charles and the sayd syr Fernande as a prisoner was sent into Norman¦dye, with a conuenyent army. where wyth awe and fauoure the duke in processe of tyme had to hym delyue∣red, all suche townes and holdes as the kynge of Nauerne there had / ex∣cepte the towne and castell of Chire∣bourgth▪ In whiche passe tyme and season was also taken in a towne cal¦led Bretnell, a secretary to the kyng of Nauerne, with certayne wrytyn∣ges beynge in a coffer within the chambre. By reason of whiche wry∣tynges, and also by the confessyon of the partye / many mo thynges concer¦nyng the confessyon of Iaket de Rue was than manifested and approued: which secretary was named maister Peter de Tertre a frenchman borne. But he had serued the kynge of Na∣uerne by the more terme of hys lyfe. Upon this confessyon made and wry¦ten by the sayde secretary / the kinge called his court of parlyament. A scysme gonne in the chyrche  Rome. Du∣rynge whiche, bothe the said maister Peter and also the sayd Iaket, were brought before the lordes and com∣mons. where theyr confessyons were redde, & they examyned vpon euery artycle of the same, and affyrmed all theyr former sayenges. wherefore shortely after by auctoryte of that court, they were demed to dye for theyr treasons / and so were hangyd and hedyd, and theyr .viii. quarters hangyd at sondry gates and places of Parys. And whan the kyng had receyued into his possession the fore∣sayde holdes belongynge vnto the kynge of Nauerne, the whiche so of∣ten had rebelled agayne his father & hym / he was coūselled by his lordes that he shulde throwe to grounde di∣uers of the sayd castelles / lest ye king of Nauerne them recouered agayne, and by meane of theyr forces worke vnto hym and his realme newe dys∣pleasures. By reason of which coun∣sell, the kynge made euen with the grounde these fortresses folowynge. Fyrst the castell of Bretnell, of Dor∣let, of Beaumoūt le Roger, of Pacy Damyet and cloysters of the same / the towre & castell of Nogent le roy, the castell of Euroux, the castell of Pount Andemer, the castell of Mor∣taygne, and of Ganraux or Ganray, with other in the countrey of Con∣stantyne. But the towne of Chire∣bourgth remayned styll in the pos∣cessyon of the Nauaroys / the whiche with ayde of Englysshe men was kept from the Frenche kynge. And the forenamed syr Farnande was contyrmaūded to prison, for so moch as he was captaine of ye same towne / thinkynge in hym defaute that the sayd towne was nat delyuered with the other. IN the .xiiii. yere of this Char∣les and moneth of August / ty∣thinges came vnto him of the scisme whiche was begonne in the churche of Rome. For after the dethe of the xi. Gregory whiche dyed in the mo∣neth of Apryll fore passed / by meane of the Frenche cardynalles whyche were .xi. in noumbre, after the other Italyen cardynalles wyth other of theyr affinite had elected and chosen a Napolytane and archebysshoppe of Barre, the frenche cardynalles with the election nat beynge conten∣ted,
wyth such as fauoured theyr par¦tye, denounced and publysshed one named Robert cardynall of Basyle, and named hym Clemēt ye .vii, where the fyrst was named Urban ye .vi. Of the maner of thys scysme some what I haue shewed to you in the .lii. yere of Edwarde the .iii. But to expresse ye certaynty of thys scysme / trouth it is that after ye deth of the forenamed .xi. Gregory, the cardynalles beyng in ye cōclau or coūsayll chaumbre where the pope is accustomed to be chosen / ye Romayns beyng in harnesse made suche exclamacions vpon the cardy∣nalles beyng in ye cōclaue for to haue an Italiā pope, yt the cardynalles for fere to be slayn elected and chase one named Bartholmew a Napolytan & archebysshop of Barre, & named Ur∣bā the .vi. But thys after he was ad∣mytted was so proude & so cōbrous, that he ruled all by wyll & nothynge by right or goodly ordre of reason or cōscyence. wherfore the cardynalles beyng repētaunt of yt they had done / a certayne of them in the cytye of Fō¦des, the .xx. day of Septembre elected & chase an other named Roberte car∣dyuall of Basyle, and named hī Cle∣ment the .vii / and by theyr auctorites publysshed hym for very pope, & dys∣alowed that other before chosē. But the Romaynes wolde nat thereunto be agreable / but helde thē vnto theyr former pope. wyth whome also helde ye prouinces of Germany & Pānony, with ye more parte of Italy. And with the laste chosen pope, helde Fraunce, Spayne, Cateloyne, & Englād. And thus began ye scysme, whyche conty∣nued by the terme of .xxxix. yere after. In the .xv. yere of kynge Charles, he for so moche as syr Iohn̄ de Moūt∣forte duke of Brytayne, toke partye wyth the Englyshemē agayn hym, & wolde nat apere at such dayes as to hym were assygned / therfore ye sayde kyng Charles sent into the duchy of Brytayn to sease ye lande into ye kyn∣ges hādes, the duke of Burbō, syr Le¦wys de Sācer marshall of Fraunce, syr Iohanne de Uyenne admyrall of Fraūce, & syr Beriā de Ryuyer hys chāberleyne, wyth other mē of name, with a great cōpany of mē of armes / the whych at theyr cōmyng into Bry¦tayne fāde ye countrey all otherwyse dysposed thā they supposed. For where as they at theyr comyng thou∣ght to haue receyued ye possessiō of yt townes & castelles in peasyble wyse / they were denayed & playnly answe∣red, yt they were sworn to theyr duke to bere to hym trew fidelite & seruice / which they entēded to obserue & kepe wyth whych answere ye sayde duke & hys company were fayne to returne vnto ye French kynge. The whyche shortly after sent thyder ye duke of An¦geou with a strōge army to warre vp¦pon the coūtrey. In whych season syr Iohn̄ de Moūtfort heryng of ye frēch kynges entēt, arryued in Brytayne wyth a cōpany of Englyshe archers. To whome drewe such multitude of Brytone▪ yt the duke of Angeou was fayn to retourne into Fraunce with∣out worshyp there thā wynnyng. In the moneth of Octobre the Fle¦myng{is} of Gaūt & other, for greuous exaccyon vpō thē set, rebelled agayn theyr erle / & slew hys bayly & offycer assigned by ye erle to gather his tolles & after besyeged other townes which toke party with ye erle agayne thē, as Audenarde, Terremonde & other. wherof heryng ye duke of Burgoyn, whose doughter the sayd duke hadde maryed / assembled hys Burgonyōs & sped hym into the marchys of Flaū¦ders, and so layed hys syege vnto Tourney. But the Flemynges defen¦ded the duke in suche wyse, that the duke was agreable to fal to a treaty. In the whyche it was fyrst accorded
and agreed, that the erle at ye request of the duke, shulde pardō & forgyue clerely to hys subiectes, all offences by them to hym done before yt day / & also yt he shuld graunt vnto them all theyr former lyberties & pryuyleges, in as ample & large wyse as they had them graūted at hys fyrste cōmynge in / & maynteyn & vpholde theyr aun∣cyent customes, & to rule theym after the same. Secondarily, if any letters haue ben made & sealed cōtrary theyr pryuyleges sen ye tyme of thys rebel∣lyon, that the erle shall reuoke theym & cancell them for euer. Thyrdely, yt all suche capytaynes of Almayne as at thys tyme haue ben in ye dukes or erles wagys agayn the Flemynges, shalbe solemply sworne, that for any hurt or harme by them in thys warre receyued / they nor none of theyr na∣cion as farre as they may lette it, shal nat hurt nor harme any man of ye coū¦trey of Flaunders at any tyme here aftr in reuengemēt of thys warre. And so fourthly, that of .iiii. of ye best townes of Flaūders, xxv. men to be chosen by the burgesys of the same, the whych shall haue correccion of al defautes nat touchynge lyfe & dethe done by ye Flemynges / & also to haue power to correcte all such as be foūd culpable of the erles counsayll, in cō¦playntes or offences crymynall. Fyft¦ly that the sayde .xxv. persones shall haue auctoryte and power, to make inquysycyon from yere to yere of the gouernaunce of the lande / and what fawtes ben to them presented, as of ten as .xiii. of theym be syttynge togy¦ther in one counsayll, they shal haue full power to gyue sentēce vppon the same / & that sētēce to be obeyed with∣out interrupciō. And what by theym is sentēsed / the erle to vpholde and maynteyne wyth all hys myghte and power. Syxtely it was desyred but nat concluded, that for so moch as ye town of Audenarde & of Terremoūd toke party agayn theyr neyghbours, that the walles of theym in certayne places shuld be euened with ye groūd, in tokē of theyr vnnaturall dealyng. And seuently & lastly it was cōcluded that the prouost of Brugys shuld af∣ter yt daye be put out of the erles coū∣sayll / and nat after therunto to be ad¦mytted wythout cōsent of the forena¦med .xxv. persones. All whych arty∣cles were agreed vnto by the erle, & passed & auctorysed by hys lettre & seale / all be it thys accorde cōtynued no whyle, as here after shall apere. In the .xvi. yere & moneth of Octo¦bre the inhabytauntes of the cyty / or towne of Mountpyller, in the coun∣trey of Languedoke, for an inposiciō or ayde that was put to them by the duke of Angeou, arose by one accord agayne ye mynisters & counceyllours of the duke (whyche duke was lewte∣naunt generall vnder hys brother the Frenche kyng) and wythout rea∣son or dyscrecyō, in theyr furye and rage slewe syr Guyllyam Poncell knyght and chaunceller to the duke, syr Guy Desseryke stuarde of Ro∣uerge, mayster Arnolde gouernour of Mountpyller, mayster Iames de Chainy secretary to the duke, & many other offycers and seruauntes of the sayde duke, to the noūbre of .lxxx. per∣sones. And whā they had them slayn, as tyrauntes natte beynge contente wyth that cruelnesse, they threwe the dede bodyes into dyuerse foule and stynkynge pyttes / nat sufferynge thē to be buryed as crystē men shulde. wherof whā knowlege was brou∣ghte vnto ye duke, he was therewyth greuously amoued / and made hys othe that he shulde punysshe theym to the fere and example of all other / and therupō gathered hys people for to reuenge thys cruel dede. whan the rumour of thys myscheuouse dede
was some deale apeased, and ye wyse men & auncyent of the towne had de∣gested thys hasty and cruel dede, & lo¦ked vpon the ende therof / than they were appalled in theyr myndes, and were very repētaunt of the dede that they had done. And whan they had consydered all thynges, as the dede detestable of it selfe, the great myght of the duke, & ouer yt the ayde whych shuld to hym be gyuen of the kynge / they cōceyued well there was no re∣medy but to seche for meanes of mer¦cye & grace. For opteynynge whereof they made dyuers ways to the duke / but none wold be accepted Lastely in the moneth of Ianuary, whā ye duke had prepayred all thynges necessary to the warre / he toke hys iournay to∣warde the sayd towne of Moūpyler, ledyng wyth hym a stronge hoste of men of armys / vtterly entēdynge to subuerte that towne, & to dystroye y• more parte of the people. whereof he∣rynge the people of the towne, toke theyr aduyce & ordered them as folo∣weth. Fyrst they sent out agayn hym dyuers offycers of the kynges suche as they knewe were in hys fauoure / and ordeyned them to be in a place, & there knelynge to aske grace & mercy for the towne. Secondarily they sent the cardynall of Albany / & thyrdely all the collages and mē of religiō as well nunnys as other / and fourthly they sent the estudyaūtes of the lawe canon and cyuyle, and also of medy¦cyne or physyke / all beynge set vpon eyther syde of the waye where ye duke shuld passe, & knelynge vppon theyr knees, shulde crye wythout ceasynge mercy gracyous prynce mercy. Thā after these were set the consuls or ru∣lers of ye towne, in gownys without theyr clokes vngyrde, euery mā with a corde aboute hys necke, hauynge wyth thē the keys of the cytie. And at the entre of ye cytye, stode the women wyth ye maydēs of the same / & all men chylderne whych were vnder the age of .xiii. yeres. And betwene that age & .vi. yeres, were set next after the stu¦dyaūtes foresayd. whan this innume¦rable people was thus ordered, and eueryche taughte in what wyse they shuld behaue them / vpō the .xxv. day of Ianuary about the houre of .iii, ye duke wyth his people approched the towne / & beholdynge the multytude and the lamentable crye, was some what moued wyth compassyō / and so holdyng hys way, mette wyth ye sayd cardynall. The whyche after conue∣nyēt salutaciō vnto hym made, she∣wed that as a legate & messynger he was sent vnto hym frō the pope Cle∣mēt the .vii, requyryng of hym pardō for the towne and peple of Moūtpil∣ler / admonestyng hym farther in the sayd popes behalfe, that what so euer punysshemēt he dyd vnto the towne, yt he shuld absteyne hym from ye she∣dynge of crystē blode, and specyally of suche as he myght knowe was in∣nocēt of yt dede. To whyche message the duke gaue none answer / but toke the cardynall vppon hys right hāde, and so rode forth togyder. where euer the people kneled on eyther syde of ye way, and cryed lamētably, mercy gra¦cious prynce mercy / and so passed tyl he came where ye cōsuls stode, whiche knelyng offered vnto hym the keyes of ye towne. But he as though he re∣garded thē nat, cast hys loke frō thē & cōmaūded yt senesshal of Beaucayr to receyue ye sayd keys / & so passed on tyll he came vnto ye cōpany of womē; whych relēted his stony hert to se the great lamētaciō they made with theyr wofull crye. wherefore to be rydde of thē, he called vpon his fore ryders to passe on more faster / so that lastly he came to hys lodgynge. WHan the duke was comen vn∣to his lodgynge / anon he com∣maunded
all the offycers of the town with the consulat or rulers of ye same vnto a place called saynt Germayne, & the gates of that place he toke to be watched wyth men of armes / & vpon the morowe folowynge, commaūded all the armoure & artylery belōgyng vnto the towne, to be broughte to a place by hym assygned, & there to be kept by hys offycers. Than the cardi¦nall came agayn vnto the duke, and brought with hym dyuers doctours of diuinite & other, which made vnto hym assyduat labour for mercy to be shewed vnto the towne & to the inha∣bytauntes of the same. But all they coude gt no graūt of hym, but yt as vpon ye morowe they shuld know the sentēce that he wolde gyue vpon the towne and inhabitaūtes of the same. And for yt sentēce myght be well vn∣derstāden of the people, he cōmaūded yt at afternoone a scaffolde shulde be made in the chefe place or strete of the towne. wherupō the morowe beynge the .xxvii. day of Ianuary / dyuers of the dukes coūsayll beyng vpō yt sayd scaffolde, & the people of the town be¦ynge there present as well prysoners as other, after a longe oracion made by the dukes chaūceler of the greate & heynous dede lately there done by the inhabytaūtes of that towne, for ye whych correccyon temporall myghte nat be to greuouse / all be it that the duke at the commaundemente of the pope, & requeste of hys legat & cardy∣nall there present, had mytygate or lessed the punysshmēt, as after shuld well apere by declaracyon of the sen∣tence folowynge / after whych prote∣stacion, the sentēce was proclaymed as foloweth. Fyrste the comynaltye of the town for theyr rebellyon & dysobedience a∣gayne theyr prynce done, shuld paye vnto ye kyng .vi. score .M. frankes, & a franke is worth .ii.s. sterl. And so ye towne shulde be charged wyth .lx.M li. A terryble my  of  execu∣n. And ouer that to paye all such co∣stes & charges, as the duke had spent by occasyon of thys iournay. Secon¦daryly .vi. hundreth persones of the towne such as myght be tryed moste culpable in thys offence, shuld suffre deth. That is to wytte .ii.C. to be han¦ged with chaynes .ii.C. to be beheded & theyr hedes to be sent vnto dyuers good townes of Fraūce / & the other ii.C. suche as of ye .vi.C. shalbe found moste gyltye of the begynnynge of that ryot, shuld be brēt / & that they & also the other .ii.C. whyche shulde be hāged, shuld be caryed vnto dyuerse good townes of Fraunce, & there to haue theyr execuciō, to the vtter fere and terrour of all other / and all theyr goodes to be forfayted to the kynge. Thyrdely two gates of ye towne such as the duke wolde appoynt, with the walles & towres standynge betwene yt sayd gates, to be made playne with the grounde / & the dyke of the towne to be be fylled wyth ye same. Fourthly all maner of ordenaunce & abylymē∣tes for warre belonging to the town, to be forfayted vnto ye kyng. Fyftely, the comynalty of the cytye to buylde a chapell, and to endowe it wyth so moche lāde as myght fynde .vi. pree∣stes there in to synge for euer, and to praye for the soules of the persones before slayne. And the bodyes whych they had throwē before into the foule and stynkyng pyttes / the counsayll and chyefe rulers of the towne, shuld vppon theyr propre backes brynge theym vnto the sayde chappell, and there cause theym solemply to be en∣terred. Syxtly, that all such goo∣des as the sayde persones so slayne hadde wythin the town, or elles were spoyled by the sayde cytezeyns / that it shulde be restored vnto the wyues or nexte kynnesfolkes of theym so dede. whan the proclamacyon of this
sentence was ended, there was an ex∣clamacyō & cryenge of mercy / & suche sorowe & lamētyng made of ye peple, that the noyse therof soūded to the he¦uens. But to brynge thys tragedy to conclusyon / fynally suche laboure was made vnto the duke, aswell by exortacyō of sermons & other, that al thynges were pardoned, excepte the foūdacyon of the chapell / & execucyō of certayne persones, which were ac∣cused to be the occasyoners of thys myschiefe / and also the costes of that iournay, ye which were cessed at .xxiiii M. frākys or .xxiiii.C.li. sterlynges. After whych ende thus made / the cō∣sulat{is} of ye town were restored agayn to theyr habyte & rule / and to theym was admytted all former offices and rule of the towne, except the offyce of bayly wyke. In the moneth of Iuly began the inhabytauntes of Gaūt in Flaūders to rebell agayne theyr erle of newe / ye cause wherof is nat shewed. But they wyth ayde, whych they had of Ipre, Courtray, and other townes, made a great hoste / & yode streyghte vnto a towne in Flaūders called Dyxmew, entendyng to haue takē it. But ye erle beyng warned therof / wyth ayde of Bruges & of Frāk and other, māned out a company agayn the other, and mette with them in playne felde / and after a sharpe skyrmysshe, put theym of Gaūt to flyght, & slewe of them dy¦uers, & toke of them certayne pryso∣ners / & pursued them vnto the town of Ipre, and layed syege to the same. whan the heddes of the towne knew that the erle was there in propre par¦sone / vnder a certayne apoyntement they opened the gates, and receyued hym in. But many of hys enemyes were fled vnto Courtray. And whan the erle had rested hym in y• towne .ii. dayes, & done there some execucyō / he departed thēs and rode vnto Bruges and helde hym there. In whyche sea∣son the other whych as aboue is sayd were fled vnto Courtray / fell at va∣ryaunce within theym selfe, & slewe theyr capytayne / & after fled ye towne & shyfted euery man for hym selfe. Than a knyght called syr Soyer of Gaūt, came vnto the towne of Cour∣tray / and so exorted the rulers of the towne, yt they promysed hym to take hys parte. wherupon he gate a baner of the erles armes in hys hande / and so rydynge aboute that towne cryed, who that wolde take the erles party & hys, lette hym folowe that baner / whome the people folowed in greate noumber. And whā ye erle was asser∣teyned of that dede, & howe the town of Courtray was tourned vnto hys party / anone he assembled of other townes, & also of that, and of Ipre, so moche that hys hoste was estemed at lx.M. mē. wyth the whiche he spedde hym vnto Gaunte, & layed a stronge syege there about. But by the deth of the French kyng whych dyed shortly after, the erle was fayne to chaunge hys mynde, & to remoue hys syege or elles, as some wryters reporte, for strength of the sayde towne, whyche myght nat lyghtly be gottē, for lacke of good vpon ye erles partye to mayn¦teyne that syege.Dethe of kyng Char¦les Thā in the moneth of Septembre and .xxvi. daye of the same / kynge Charles dyed at his ma∣noyr called playsance sur Marne / & was buryed by his wyfe in the mona¦stery of saynt Denys, whan he had reygned .xv. yeres and .vi. monethes wyth odde dayes / leuynge after hym iii. sonnes, Charles which was kyng after hym, and Lewys that he hadde made erle of Ualoys and after duke of Angeowe, and Phylyppe erle of Poytyers. ¶ Anglia.
RIchard the second of that name, and sonn̄ of prynce Ed¦warde eldest sonn̄ of Edwarde ye .iii, a chyld of ye age of a .xi. yeres, begāne hys reygne ouer ye realme of England, ye .xxii. day of Iu¦ny in the yere of our lorde .M.CCC.xxvii / & the .xiii. yere of the .vi. Char∣les than kyng of Fraunce. This Ry∣charde was borne at Burdeaux / of whose byrthe some wryters tell won∣ders, the whyche I passe ouer. And vpon the .xv. daye of Iuly in the yere abouesayd he was crowned at westmynster; beyng the daye of the translacyon of saynt Swythyn. In whyche tyme & season stoode Mayre & shryues of the cytye of Lōdon these persones folowynge. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxviii. Grocer. Andrewe Pykman.   Nycholas Brembre.   Anno. i.   Nycholas Twyfforde.   THe whyche contynued so in theyr offyces, that is to saye ye shryues tyll Myghelmas, & ye mayre tyl the feest of Symon and Iude. At whyche season were chosen & admyt∣ted newe offycers. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxix. Grocer. Iohn̄ Boseham.   Iohn̄ Phylpot.   Anno. ii.   Thomas Cornwaleys.   IN the moneth of August & be∣gynnynge of the secōde yere of kyng Rychard / for varyaunce which was betwene the lorde Latymer & sir Rafe Ferrers vpō that one partye, & syr Robert Hal & Shakerley esquyer vpon that other partye, for a pryso∣ner taken beyōde the see in Spayne, called the lorde of Dene, whome the sayd esquyers helde in theyr possessiō contrary the wylles of the foresayde knyghtes / for the sayde cause ye sayd knyghtes entred the churche of saint Petyr, and there fyndyng ye sayd syr Robert knelynge at masse, wythoute reuerence of the sacrament or place, slewe hym in the churche at ye hyghe masse seasō / & after that other named Shakerley was by theyr meanes a∣rested and had to the towre of Lon∣don, where he was kepte as prysoner longe after. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxx. Grocer. Iohn̄ Heylysdne.   Iohn̄. Hadley.   Anno. iii.   wyllyam Baret.   IN the moneth of May & the la¦ter ende of the seconde yere of kynge Rycharde / certayne Galeys and other shyppes sente by Charles the syxte than kynge of Fraunce, of the whych was chefe patron or capy¦tayne a knyghte named syr Olyuer de Clycon / landed in dyuerse places of Englande and dyd moche harme, & lastly entred the ryuer of Thamis,
and so came to Grauysende where he spoyled the towne and brent a parte thereof and retourned into Fraunce with moche rychesse as affermeth the Frenche cronycle. In this yere also was holden a parlyamente at west∣mynster / in the which was graunted that all men & women beynge of the age of .xiiii. yeres and aboue, shulde paye vnto the kynge .iiii.d. By rea∣son whereof great grudge and mur∣mure grewe amonge the commons as after shall appere. Than with ye money an armye was prepared / and thereof was made chefe gouernoure syr Thomas of woodstoke erle of Cambrydge and vncle vnto ye kyng. The whiche with a company of .vii. or .viii.M. as testifyeth the Frenche cronycle, passed ye water of Summe, in the begynnynge of Auguste, and also begynnynge of the thyrde yere of kynge Rycharde / and so came to Soysons, and passed the ryuers of Oyse and of Marne and other / & so went before Troys and wanne it / and after lodged them atwene newe towne and Sens. And euer as they passed the countreys, other they toke great fynaunces, or elles fyred the townes as they went. And all be it that the Frenche kynge hadde sente agayne them an armye of Frenche∣men to withstande them, they letted them nothinge of theyr purpose / but and they had any skyrmysshes with them, the Frenchemen were put vn∣to the wors / so that they bette them & toke of them dyuers prysoners, and raunsomed them at theyr pleasures. And thus holdynge theyr iourneye, they passed by the countrey of Gasti∣noys, and so into Brytayne / where they were ioyously receyued of syr Iohn̄ de Mountforde duke of that prouince than newly comyn thyther. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxx.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxi. Fysshemonger. walter Doket.   wyllyam walworthe.   Anno. iiii.   wyllyam Knyghthode.   IN this Mayres yere and ende of the thyrde yere of kyng Ry∣charde, towarde the somer season in dyuers places of the lande the com∣mons arose sodainly, and ordeyned to them rulers and capytaynes / and specially in Kent & Essex. The whi∣che named their leders, Iacke straw wylwawe, watte Tyler, Iacke She¦peherde, Tomme Myller, & Hobbe Carter. These vnruled companye gathered vnto them great multitude of the commons / & after spedde them towarde the cytie of London, and assembled them vpon Blacke hethe in Kent, within .iii. myles of Lōdon. And vppon corpus Christi daye be∣ynge thanne the .xi. daye of Iune, they entred the Towre of London / and there the kynge beynge thanne lodged, toke frome thens parforce mayster Sudberye than archebys∣shoppe of Caunterbury, syr Robert Halys lorde or pryour of saynte Io∣hannes, and a whyte frere cōfessour vnto the kynge. whiche .iii. persones with houge noyse & crye they ladde vnto the Hylle of the sayde Towre and smote of theyr heddes. And whan they hadde so done, they re∣turned into Suthewarke by botes and barges, & there slewe and rob∣bed all straungers tha they myghte fynde. And that done they wente to westmynster, & toke with them all maner of Seyntwarymen / & so came vnto ye duke of Lācasters place stan∣ding without ye Temple barre called Sauoye, & spoyled that was therin / and after sette it vpon a fyre, and
brent it. And from thens they yode vnto ye hede place of saynt Iohn̄s in Smythefelde, & dispoiled that place in lyke wyse. Than they entred the citye, and serched the temple & other Innes of courte, and spoyled theyr places & brent theyr bokes of lawe / and slewe as many men of lawe and questmongers as they myght fynde. And that done they went to saynte Martyns the Graunde, & toke with them all sayntwary men, and the pri¦soners of Newgate, Ludgate, & of bothe counters / and distroyed theyr registers and bokes / and in like ma∣ner they dyd with the prysoners of the Marshalsy and kinges benche in Southwerke. whan Iacke Strawe had thus done all thyng at his wyll, & sawe yt no resistence was made agayne him / he was smytten with so houge a pre∣sumpcion, that he thought no man his pere. And so beynge enflamed with yt presumpcion & pryde / he rode vnto the Towre where ye kyng was, beynge smally accompanyed of hys lordes / & caused hym to ryde aboute some parte of the cytie, and so con∣ueyed hym into Smythfelde. where in the kynges presence, he caused a proclamacyon to be made, and dyd full small reuerence vnto the kynge. which mysordre & presūpcyon whan wyllyam walworthe than Mayre of London behelde / of very pure dys∣dayne that he had of his pryde, ran to him sodainly with his swerde, and wounded hym to dethe / & forthwith strake of his hede, and areryd it vpō a speres poynte / and therewith cryed kynge Rycharde, kynge Rycharde. whan the rebelles behelde theyr ca∣pytaynes hede / anone they fledde as shepe. Howe be it many were taken and many were slayne / and the reme¦naunt chased, that the cytie and sub∣barbes of ye same was clene voyded of them yt nyght, whiche was mon∣daye and the .xv. day of Iune. whan the kyng had beholden the great manhode of the Mayre, and assystence of his bretherne the Alder∣men / anone in rewarde of that dede he dubbed the sayde wyllyam wal∣worthe, Nycholas Brembre, Iohn̄ Philpot, Nycholas Twyfforde, Ro∣bert Laūdre, and Roberte Gayton, aldermen, knyghtes. And in this season also called the hurlynge tyme / the cōmons of Nor∣folke and Suffolke came vnto the abbey of Burye, & there slewe one of the kynges Iustyces called Iohn̄ Caundysshe, and the pryour of the place with other / and after spoyled & bare awaye moche thyng out of that sayd place. But after this, aswell the one as the other of these rebelles were taken in dyuers and sondry pla¦ces, and put in execucyon by .x. by .xii. by .xv. and .xx. so that one of them ac∣cused ye other, to the distruction of a great noumbre of them. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxii.   Iohn̄ Rote.   Iohn̄ Northampton.   Anno. v.   Iohn̄ Hynde.   IN this Mayres yere and mo∣neth of Aprell / landed in Kent dame Anne the doughter of Charles the .iiii. late Emperour of Almayne lately dede, and syster vnto wensys∣laus at that day Emperour / the whi¦che of the Mayre & cytezyns of Lon∣don was honorably met vpō blacke hethe, and conueyed with great try∣umphe vnto westmynster the .viii.
day of the moneth of Maye / & shorte¦ly after there solemply maryed vnto kyng Richarde. And about the same season, or after some wryters in the later ende of Iune, was an erthe∣quaue in Englange, that the lyke therof was neuer sene in Englande before that day nor sen. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxiii.   Adam Bame.   Iohn̄ Northampton.   Anno. vi.   Iohn̄ Sely.   IN this yere mayster Henrye Spencer bisshope of Norwy∣che, with a great power of spirituall men and other, croysed by the com∣maundement of the pope than Cle∣ment the .vii. enduryng the scisme be¦fore touched in the laste chapyter of Charles ye .vi. than kynge of Fraūce. This sayd pope gaue this auctoryte to the sayd bysshoppe to make warre vpon the kynge of Spayne as some wryters haue / for so moche as he con¦trarye the sayde popes commaunde∣ment, withhelde certayne possessions belongynge of ryght vnto the duke of Lancastre syr Iohn̄ of Gaunte / and specially vnto dame Constaūce his wyfe. In perfourmaunce of whi∣che acte, the said bysshoppe entryng the countrey of Flaunders, fande there ye flemynges with dyuers mys∣creauntes suche as the foresaid king of the countrey of Spayne had thy∣ther sent, makyng resystence agayne hym. wherfore he made to thē sharpe warre, and wanne vpon them cer∣tayne townes, as Grauelyng, Bur∣burgth, and Dunkyrke / and wanne great and ryche pyllage, so that he & his souldyours stuffed and freight with it as testyfyeth Policronycon, xli. shyppes. But soone after the Flemynges assembled wyth suche strength, that about Dunkyrke they gaue vnto hym suche assaute, that he was constrayned to gyue backe. And for the said shippes and goodes shulde nat come vnto the possessyon of his enemyes / he sette them on fyre within the hauen, and so was wasted bothe shyppes and goodes. And all be it that after this mysse happe he re¦couered his strengthe, & layed syege vnto ye towne of Ipre, and wrought the flemynges moche care and trou∣ble / shortely after suche syckenesses fell amonge his people, as the flyre and other, that his souldyours dyed of them great noumbre / for the whi∣che he was compelled to leaue hys iourney and to retourne into Eng∣lāde. In this yere also was a batayle or feates of armes done in the kyn∣ges palays of westmynster, atwene one called Garton Appellaunt, and syr Iohn̄ Ansley knyght defendaūt / of whiche fyght at length the knight was vyctor, and caused his enemye to yelde hym. For the whiche the sayd Garton was from that place drawen vnto Tyburne, and there hanged for his false accusacyon and surmyse. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxiiii. Grocer. Symonde wynchecombe.   Nycholas Brembre.   Anno. vii.   Iohn̄ more.    
Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxv.   Nycholas Exton.   Nycholas Brembre.   Anno. viii.   Iohn̄ Frenshe.   THis yere king Rycharde hol∣dynge his Christmas at El∣tham / thyther came vnto hym the kynge of Ermony, whiche was cha∣sed out of his lande by the Infydels and Turkes / and required ayde of ye kynge to be restored vnto his domi∣nyon. The kynge fested and com∣forted him according to his honour / & after coūsell taken with hys lordes concerninge that mater, he gaue vn∣to him great sommes of money and other ryche gyftes. with the whiche after he had taryed in Englande vpō ii. monethes, he departed with glad countenaunce. And soone after Ester the kynge with a greate armye yode towarde Scotlāde. But whan he drewe nere vnto the borders / such meanes were sought by the Scottes, that a peace was concluded atwene bothe real∣mes for a certayne tyme. After whi∣che conclusion so taken / the kynge re¦turned vnto yorke and there restyd hym a season. In which tyme vary∣aunce fell atwene Iohn̄ Holāde bro∣ther to the erle of Kent, and the erles sonne of Stafforde / by reason of whi¦che varyaunce, in conclusion ye sayd sonne of the erle was slayne of the hande of the same syr Iohn̄ Hol̄ade / for the whiche dede the kynge was greuously amoued, & departed shor∣tely after with his company toward London. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxv.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxvi. Grocer. Iohn̄ Organ.   Nycholas Brembre.   Anno. ix.   Iohn̄ Chyrcheman.   THis yere kynge Rycharde as∣sembled at westmynster hys highe court of parliamēt. Du∣rynge the whiche amonge other ma∣ny actes in the same counsell conclu∣ded / he created .ii. dukes, a marques, and .v. erles. Of the whiche firste syr Edmonde of Langley the kynges vncle and erle of Cambrydge was created duke of yorke / syr Thomas of woodstoke his other vncle erle of Buckyngham was create duke of Gloucester / syr Lyonell Uere yt was erle of Oxenforde was made mar∣ques of Deuelyn / sir Henry Boling∣brooke sonne and heyre of Iohn̄ of Gaūt duke of Lancastre was made erle of Derby / syr Edwarde sonne & heyre vnto the duke of yorke was made erle of Rutlande / syr Iohn̄ Ho¦lande brother to the erle of Kent was made erle of Huntyngdone / syr Tho¦mas Monbraye was made erle of Notyngham and Marshall of Eng∣lande / and syr Mychaell de la Poole was made erle of Suffolke & Chaū∣celler of Englāde. And by auctoryte of the same parlyamente, syr Roger Mortymer erle of the Marche, and sonne and heyre vnto syr Edmonde Mortymer and of dame Philyppe eldest doughter and heyre vnto syr Lyonell ye seconde sonne of Edward the thyrde, was soone after proclay∣med heyre paraunt vnto the crowne of Englande. The whiche sir Roger
shortely after sayled into Irelande, there to pacifye hys lordeshyppe of wulster, whiche he was lorde of by his foresayde mother. But whyle he was there occupyed aboute the same / the wylde Irysshe came vpon hym in noumbre, and slewe him and moche of his company. This sir Ro¦ger hadde Issue Edmonde / and Ro∣ger, Anne, Alys, and Elynoure that was made a nunne. The .ii. foresaid sonnes died without issue, and Anne eldest doughter was maryed to Ry∣charde erle of Cambrydge, whiche Rycharde was sonne vnto syr Ed∣monde of Langley before named. The which Rycharde hadde issue by the sayde Anne Isabell ladye Bou∣chier, Rycharde that after was duke of yorke & father to kynge Edwarde the .iiii. whiche sayd Richarde erle of Cambridge was put to deth by Hen∣ry the .v. as after shall appere. In this yere also syr Hēry Bolingbroke erle of Derby, maryed the Countesse doughter of Herforde / by whome he was lorde of that countrey. And by her he had issue Henry that after him was kynge, Blaunche duches of Barre, and Philippe that was wed∣ded to the kynge of Denmarke. Also Thomas duke of Clarence, Iohn̄ duke of Bedforde, & Humfrey duke of Gloucester. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxvi.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxvii. Goldesmythe. wyllyam Stondon.   Nycholas Exton.   Anno. x.   wyllyam More.   IN this .x. yere the erle of Arun¦dell was sent into the duchye of Guyan, for to strengthe suche sou¦dyours as the king at that tyme had in those parties / or after some wry∣ters to scoure the see of rouers & ene∣myes. The whiche erle in kepynge his course or passage, encountred a myghtye flote of Flemynges laden with Rochel wyne / & set vpon them, and distressed them & theyr shyppes, and so broughte them vnto dyuers portes of Englāde. By reason wher∣of the sayde wyne was so plenteous in Englande, that a tonne thereof was solde for a marke and .xx.s. the choyse. And amonge other in that flote was taken the Admyralle of Flaunders, whyche remayned here longe after as prysoner. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxviii. Goldesmythe. wyllyam Uenour.   Nycholas Exton.   Anno. xi.   Hughe Fostalfe.   THis .xi. yere of kyng Rycharde / syr Thomas of woodstocke duke of Gloucester, the erle of Arundell, with the erles of war∣wyke, of Derby, and of Notyng∣ham, consyderynge howe the king and hys lande was mysse ladde by a fewe persones aboute the kynge, entendyng reformacion of the same / assembled them to haue a counsell at Radecoke brydge, and after arre∣red great people, & so with a stronge power came to London, & there cau∣sed ye king to call a {per}liament. wherof
herynge maister Alexander Neuyle than archebysshop of yorke, sir Lyo∣nell Uere marques of Deuelyn, and syr Mychaell de la Poole Chaun∣celler and erle of Suffolke, fearyng punisshement fledde the lande, and so died in straunge countreys. Than the kynge by counsell of the other a∣boue named lordes, durynge the par¦lyament caused to be taken syr Ro∣berte Treuylian chefe Iustyce of Englande, syr Nycholas Brembre late mayre of the cytie of London, sir Iohn̄ Salysbury knyghte of hous∣holde, sr Iohn̄ Beauchāp stewarde / also of the kynges house, syr Sy∣monde Burley knyghte, syr Iames Bernes, and syr Robert Belknappe knyghtes, and a sergeaunt of armes called Iohn̄ Uske / the whyche by auctoryte of the sayde parlyamente were conuycte of treason, and for the same put to execucyon at Tybourne and at the Towre hyll. And Iohn̄ Holt, Iohn̄ Locton, Richarde Gray, willyam Burgth, and Roberte Ful∣thorpe iustyce, with the other fore∣sayd lordes, whiche as before is said voyded the lande / were by auctoryte of the sayd court of parlyamente ba∣nysshed & exyled the lande for euer. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxviii.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxix. Goldesmythe. Thomas Austeyne.   Syr Nycholas Twyfforde.   Anno. xii.   Adam Cathyll.   IN the .xii. yere and moneth of Nouembre yet durynge the {per}∣lyament, was executed in Smythe∣fylde of London a marcyall Iustes and tournement / where as all suche persones as came in vpon ye kynges partye, theyr armour and apparayle was garnysshed with whyte hertes & crownes of golde about their nec∣kes. And of that shorte were .xxiiii. with .xxiiii. ladyes also apparayled as aboue is sayd, ladde with .xxiiii. cheynes of golde the horses of them / and so conueyed them thoroughe the cytie vnto Smythefelde frome the Towre of London. where the king, the quene, and many other great esta¦tes beynge present, after proclama∣cions by the herroddes made / many goodly and marcyall actes of warre were there put in vre, to the great re∣creacion and comforte of the kynge and quene and all other beholders of the same. To this dysporte came many straungers. Amonge the whi∣che the erle of saynt Poule, the lorde Ostreuaunt sonne and heyre vnto y• duke of Holāde, and a yonger sonne of the erle of Ostryche, were greatly commended. And whan this Iustes had contynued by sondrye tymes by the space of .xxiiii. dayes, to the great comforte and recreacyon of many yonge and lusty bachellers desyrous to wynne worshyppe, and to the kin∣ges great honoure, that by all that season kepte open housholde for all honeste comers / it was fynysshed, & the straūgers retourned to their coū∣treys with many ryche gyftes. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxix.   Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxx. Grocer. Iohn̄ walcot.   wyllyam Uenour.   Anno. xiii.   Iohn̄ Louene.  
IN thys .xiii. yere of kynge Ry∣chard / an esquier of ye prouince of Nauerne by Fraunce, accused an Englysh esquyer called Iohn̄ welshe of certayne poyntes of treason. For the tryall wherof a day of fyght was betwene them taken, to be foughten in the kynges palays at westmyn∣ster / where eyther of theym kept hys daye & fought there a stronge fyght. But in the ende Iohn̄ welshe was vyctoure / and constrayned that o∣ther to yelde hym. where after he was dyspoyled of hys armoure, and drawen to tyburne, and there hāged for hys vntrouthe. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xc.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xci.   Iohn̄ Fraunces.   Adam Bamme.   Anno. xiiii.   Thomas vyuent.   IN thys .xiiii. yere of kyng Ry∣chard / syr Iohn̄ of Gaūt duke of Lancastre, wyth a goodly cōpany of men of armes sayled into Spayn, to clayme suche landes as he there shulde haue in the ryght of dame Cō¦staunce hys wyfe / whyche was the doughter of Peter ryghtfull kynge of Spayne, as in the .xl. yere of kyng Edward the thyrde is more playnly declared. whan the sayde duke was vpon that other syde of the see / there came vnto hym the kynge of Por∣tyngale wyth a stronge army, and so entred the terrytory of Spayne. But whether it were of the Englishe men longe or of the Portyngaleys / moche harme was done to the Span¦yardes, in robbynge and pyllyng of the countrey / whyche was cause of grudge betwene the kyng of Portyn¦gale and the duke / and caused many Spanyardes whyche oughte to thē good wyll to wythdrawe and depart from them. In reformacyō of which ille, certayn persones aswel English as Portyngaleys that were founde gyltye of suche robbery, were putte vnto deth / by meane whereof the o∣ther fered so, that where by that mea¦ne the kynge and the duke were be∣fore put to great afterdeale, by reasō of reformacyon of that ille they gat dayly vppon theyr enemyes / so that in processe of tyme folowyng, ye kyng of Spayne was dryuen of necessyte to treate wyth the duke of a peace & concorde. Of the whyche peace as wytnesseth Polycronycon in hys last boke and .vii. chapyter / the condyciō was, that fyrste for a fynall concorde the kynge of Spayne shuld marye ye duke eldest doughter name Cōstaūce and that done he shulde gyue vnto ye duke in recōpensacyon of hys costes, so many wedges of golde as shulde charge or lade .viii. charettes / and ouer that yerely durynge the lyues of the sayde duke and hys wyfe, he shuld at hys propre coste and charge delyuer to the dukes assygneys .x.M. marke of golde wythin ye towne of Bayon. And after thys peace was stablys¦shed, and suertyes taken for the per∣fourmaunce of the same / the duke de¦parted wyth the kynge of Portyn∣gale. To whome shortelye after he maryed hys second doughter named dame Anne. In thys yere also for cruel warre whyche the Turkes made agayne the Ianueys or men of Ieane / they requyred ayde of the kynges of Eng∣lande and Fraunce. For whyche cause oute of Englande was sente a noble warryour called erle of Alby wyth two thousande of archers / and
out of Fraunce the duke of Burbon and the erle of Ewe, wyth .xv.C. spe∣res. The whych kept theyr iournay tyll they came vnto a cytye in Bar∣bary named Thunys, & somtyme be∣longynge to the sayde Ianuays. where the sayd Englyshe & Frenche∣men bare them so manfully wyth the ayde of ye Ianuayes, that in proces of tyme they wanne ye sayde cytye frō the Turkes, and put ye Ianuayes a∣gayne in possessyon therof / & toke of theym many prysoners, the whyche were exchaunged for chrysten pryso∣ners before taken / and ouer that for∣sed the sayd Sarazyns to yelde vnto the Ianuayes .x.M. ducates of gold, for confyrmacyon of a peace for a cer¦tayne tyme. But the French cronycle sayth, that for so moche as the duke of Burbon hadde vnderstandynge yt the duke of Lancaster made warre vpon kyng Iohn̄ of Spayn / he ther¦fore lefte thys iournay and ayded hī agayne the sayde duke of Lancaster to hys lytle honour. But howe so euer it was / many of the Englyshmē were loste in those countreys by reason of the flyxe and other sykenesses. Also Antoninus sayeth, that the Sarazyns at thys iourney were nat dyspossessed of the cytye of Thunys / but for a trewes to be hadde for two yeres, they graun∣ted vnto the chrysten men a certayne summe of money, and restytucyon of many chrysten prysoners. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xci.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xcii.   Iohn̄ Chadworth.   Draper.     Iohn̄ Heende.   Anno. xv.   Henry Uamere.   IN thys .xv. yere of kynge Ry∣charde / he kepynge hys Cryst∣mas at hys manour of woodstocke, the erle of Penbrooke beynge yonge of age was desirouse to lern to iuste / and requyred a knyghte named syr Iohn̄ saynte Iohan, to renne wyth hym certayne courses. At whose requeste the sayd knyght ranne with hym in woodstoke parke certayne courses. In the whyche were it wyth stroke or other myshap / the sayd erle receyued there hys dethes wounde & dyed shortly after. In this yere also & moneth of Iuny / a bakers man berynge a basket full of horsebrede to serue hys maysters customers in Fletestrete / whanne he came foreagayn the bysshop of Sa∣lysburyes place standynge in Salys¦bury aley, a seruaunt of the bysshop∣pes starte vnto the basket and toke oute one of the louys. And for the ba¦ker wolde agayne haue recouered hys horse lofe / ye bysshoppes seruaūt wyth hys dagger brake the bakers hed. Than came the inhabytauntes of the strete, & wolde haue broughte the yoman vnto warde for brekynge of the kynges peace. But he was res∣cowed by hys felowes / and so hadde vnto the bysshoppes palays, whyche that daye stoode treasourer of Eng∣lande. For this rescous the people beyng in a fury / in greate multytude gathe¦red aboute the palays, and wolde haue entred parforce to haue set out the yoman. Agayn whome the bysshoppes ser∣uaūtes made resistēce / so yt ye rumour
grewe more and more. And the peple of the cytye, aswell suche as were of yll dysposycion as other, encreased into a greate noumbre. Fame of thys doyng thā sprāge to ye mayer / which in all haste wyth dyuers aldermen & the shyryues, sped hym thyther to se the peace kepte / & dyd that he cowde to withdrawe the people. But after ye mayer & the offycers of the citie were comyn thyder / the cōmons out of all partyes of the cytye drewe thyder, in moche more multytude thanne they had before / so that ye more they were in noumbre, the worse they were to rule. In so moche that they wold nat be satysfyed, but they myghte haue ye yoman delyuered, whose name was walter Romayne. And for to brynge about theyr foly / they made many as¦sautes at the gates of ye sayd palays, the bysshop hym selfe beynge than at wyndesore. Lastly after many show∣tes & lyftes at the gates made, by dys¦cresciō of the mayre & aldermen with other dyscrete comoners of the cytye, the people was mynysshed and sente agayne euery mā to hys dwellynge, & all was set in quyet & reste. whan worde of this came vnto the bisshop, in moch worse maner thā the thynge was in dede / he gyuing light credēce without examinaciō made in the mat¦ter, assocyat vnto hym mayster Arun¦dell than archebisshop of yorke and chaūceler of Englāde / & so greuously enfourmed the kyng, that he toke a∣gayne the cytye ryght greuouse dys∣pleasure / so that in all hast the mayre was sent for to the kynge. At whose commyng was layd vnto his charge great & heynous maters, that he non otherwyse ruled the cytye / but suffe∣red the cytezyns to make suche assau¦tes vppō the kynges hed offycers, to the kynges great dyshonour, & ieo∣pardy of suche great treasoure as he than had of the kynges ī his custody and kepynge. And after broughte vnto the kynges presence / of whome nat wythstādyng hys reasonable ex∣cuse before made, he was of the kyng ryght sore blamed & greuously sayde vnto. Thā was the mayre & the shery¦ues dyscharged of the rule of ye cytie / & the liberties of the same seased into the kynges hādes / & a knyghte of the court called syr Edward Dalīgryge, a good man and fauourable to ye cyte¦zeyns, was made gouernoure of the cytye the .xxi. daye of Iune / & conty∣nued in that offyce to the fyrste daye of Iuly next ensuyng. At whych day beynge in the begynnynge of ye kyn∣ges .xvi. yere of hys reygne, he was discharged / & syr Baldewyn Radyng¦ton knyght putte in hys rome / & so cōtynued tyll the feest of Symōde & Iude folowynge. And for the more dyspleasure of the cytezyns / all plees & sutes kept before tyme in westmyn∣ster hall, were than remoued & holdē at yorke, to the great noyaunce of all the lande / whyche so contynued tyll Crystmas. And in thys mayres yere also, was a great trāslaciō of bisshop¦pes. Thys dyspleasure thus hāgyng towarde the cytye / the cytezyns made contynuall labour vnto the kynges grace, by meanes of the quene and of doctour Grauysende than bysshope of London / whych ought theyr espe¦ciall fauoures vnto the cytye. By whose meanes the cytezeyns were re∣stored vnto theyr lybertyes, & hadde licence to chose of them selfe a mayre & two shyryues / so that vppon saynt Mathewis daye folowynge, they chose for shyryues Gylberte Many∣folde or Manfelde and Thomas Ne¦wyngton / and vppon saynte Edwar¦des daye kynge and confessoure, they chase for theyr mayre wyllyam Stondon Grocer / whyche by the Lyeutenaunte of the towre were at that tyme admytted and sworne.
But yet the kynges dyspleasure was natte reconcyled, nor the cyte∣zeyns admytted vnto hys grace and fauoure. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xcii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xciii. Grocer. Gylbert Manfeylde.   wyllyam Stondon.   Anno. xvi.   Thomas Newynghtyn.   IN thys mayres yere and .xvi. yere of kynge Rycharde / thys newe mayre wyth the worthyest men of the cytye, made assyduat & daylye meanes vnto the kynges grace, for to haue hys moste bounteouse pardō & hys especyall fauoure vnto ye cytye. The whych at lengthe by meanes of such frēdes as they purchased about the kyng / & specyally by laboure of ye good quene Anne, and the fornamed bysshop of London, they were put in good cōforte vpō theyr demeanour & submyssion at the kynges commyng to Londō. Upon whyche cōforte the cytyzyns made royall and costyous purueyaūce to receyue the kynge in theyr best maner / & hauynge monys∣syon that the kyng entended to come vnto hys palays of westmynster, ap∣parayled them in one lyuerey / & to ye noumbre of .iiii.C. horsemen well be seen, mette wyth hym vpon the heth on thys halfe hys manour of shene. where in moste lowlye wyse accor∣dynge to theyr dutyes they submyt∣ted them vnto hys grace / besechynge hym of hys specyall grace & pardon, in all suche thynges as they before ty¦mes had offended agayne hys hygh∣nesse. And to ye entent that hys grace myght se the cōformyte of all hys o∣ther subiectes / the recorder made in∣staūce to hym, that he wolde of hys great bounte take so great peyne vp¦pon hym, as to ryde thorough hys chaumber of London. The whych request he graciously accepted / & so helde on hys iournay tyll he came at Londō brydge / where he was presēted wyth .ii. fayre stedes trapped in ryche cloth of golde par∣tyd of redde and whyte. The whyche present he thākefull receyued / & after helde on hys way tyll he came at the standarde in chepe / the cytezyns of ye cytye stādynge vpō eyther syde of the stretes in theyr lyuereys, and cryeng kyng Rycharde kyng Rychard / and at theyr backes, ye wyndowys & wal∣lys hanged wyth all ryche tapettes & clothes of arasse in moste goodlye & shewyng wyse. And at the sayd stan∣darde in chepe, was ordeyned a sump¦tuouse stage / in the whych were sette diuers personages in ryche apparel. Amonge yt whych an An̄gell was or∣deyned / whyche set a ryche crowne of golde garnysshed wyth stone & perle vppon the kynges hede as he passed by. And that done he rode to Pau∣lys, and there offered, and so rode vnto westmynster / where the mayre and hys company takyng theyr loue returned vnto London. Uppon the morowe whyche was the fyftene daye of the moneth of the sayde mayre and hys bretherne yode vnto westmyn∣ster, & presented there yt kynge wyth two guylte basyns, and in theym two thousande nobles of golde / bese¦chynge hym in moste humble wyse to be good and gracyouse lorde vnto the cytye. The whyche he accepted ryghte fauourably / and gaue vnto theym many comfortable wordes. And the thyrde daye folowynge, they receyued a newe confyrmacion of all theyr olde Fraunchyses and
lybertyes. wherfore by counsayll of theyr frendes, they ordeyned an aul∣ter table of syluer and ouer gylte / & therein ymagery grauen & enameled moste curiously of the story of saynte Edwarde, the whiche was valuyd at a .M. marke / & presented that also, & gaue it vnto the kynge / the which he shortely after offered to the shryne of saynte Edwarde wythin the abbay, where yet it stādes at thys daye. And for the great zele & loue whych ye fore sayde bysshop of Londō ought vnto the cytye, & that by hys meanes theyr lybertyes were agayne restored / they therfore of theyr owne goodly dyspo∣sycion, after hys decease accustomed them, and yet at thys daye done / to go yerely vpō the feestfull dayes fo∣lowynge, yt is to say fyrst the morow after Symōde Iude whych daye the mayer taketh his charge at westmyn¦ster, to Paulys / & there to saye in the west ende of ye churche where he lieth grauen (Deprofundis) for hys soule and all crysten / & in lyke maner vpō Alhalowen daye, Crystmasse daye, & ii. the nexte days folowyng, Newe ye¦res daye, Twelf day, and Cādelmas day / wyth also the morowe after My¦ghelmasse day, vpon the whyche the shyryfes yerely takē theyr charge at westmynster. All whych .ix. days, nat all onely the mayer & hys bretherne vse thys progresse and kepe thys ob∣sequy / but also all the craftes of the cytye in theyr lyueryes vse the same yerely. And whan the kyng had wythdra¦wen as aboue is sayde, hys displea∣sure frō the cytye / thanne at Hyllarye terme folowyng ye feest of Cristmas, all the kynges courtes and plees of the crowne wytl; other retourned frō yorke to westmynster. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xciii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xciiii. Grocer. Drewe Barentyne.   Iohn̄ Hadley.   Anno. xvii.   Rycharde whytyngton.   IN thys mayers begynnyng & xvii. yere of kyng Rycharde, yt is to meane the moneth of Nouēbre / certayn gentylmen of Scotlāde en∣tendynge to wynne honoure, chalen∣ged certayne poyntes of armes. As fyrste the lord Moryf chalenged the erle of Nothyngham & marshall of Englande / syr wyllyā Darel knyght chalēged syr Peter Courtnay knyght & Cokborne esquyer, chalenged syr Nycholas Hawberke knyght. which feates of armes were done in smyth∣felde of London. But Marse was so frendely vnto the Englyshmen, that the honoure of ye iournay went wyth them / in so moche that the erle mar∣shall ouerthrewe hys appellaunte / & so brused hym, that in his returne to∣warde Scotlande he dyed at yorke. And syr wyllyam Darell refused his appellāt or they had ronne theyr full courses. And the thyrde of them, that is to wyt Cocborne, was throwen at the secōd copyng to groūd horse and man. And vpon the .vii. day of Iuny fo∣lowyng, dyed yt gracyouse woman quene Anne / and lieth now buryed at westmynster by hyr lorde kynge Ry∣charde, vpō ye southsyde of saynt Ed∣ward shryne / to whose soul & al cristē our lord be mercyfull. And thys yere in the moneth of Septembre as wit∣nesseth the Frenche cronycle, by mea¦nes of the erle of Derby and other, whych than were in Fraunce for the kynge of Englandes partye / and the
duke of Burbone & the erle of Ewe vpon the French partye wyth other / a trewes was concluded at saynte Omers for .iiii. yeres. But nat wyth∣standyng that peace, the Frenchmen and Englyshemen ranne togyther sundry tymes, whanne the one es∣pyed to haue any auauntage vppon that other. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xciiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xcv. Mercer. wyllyam Brampton.   Iohn̄ Frenshe.   Anno. xviii.   Thomas Knolles.   THys .xviii. yere of kynge Ry∣charde, he shortly after Cryst∣mas wyth a strong army sayled into Ireland. The whych iournay was more to hys charge than honoure. For the maner wherof, syn it soūded to no honoure of the prynce / myne auctor therfore lyste nat in his boke to make any lōge processe of ye mater In this yere also or about this tyme, began the heresy of Iohn̄ wycclyffe to sprynge in Englande / the whyche was greatly auaunced by meane of the scysme in the churche hangynge at those dayes betwene two popes sit¦tynge at ones / the whyche began as before is shewed in the .xxiiii. yere of Charles the .vi. thā kyng of Fraūce, Urban the .vi. and Clement the syxt / & contynued vnder Bonyface the .ix. and Benet the .xiii. Of whyche erro∣nyouse oponyons of the sayd heresy, who so is desyrouse to se the conten∣tes of them / let them serche cronica cronicarum, and there he shall se thē brefely set out. In thys yere also was wonderful tēpest of wynde, by the space of Iuly, August, & specially Septēbre / by vio¦lence wherof in sundry places of this lande, greate and wonderfull hurte was done bothe of churches and hou¦ses. Thys yere dyed Constance secōd wyfe to Iohn̄ duke of Lācastre, and lyeth buryed at Leyceter. Anno domini .M.CCC.xcv.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxcvi. Uytener. Roger Elys.   wyllyam more.   Anno. xix.   wyllyam Sheryngham.   IN the begynnynge of thys mayres yere, and .xix. yere of kynge Rycharde, and .xviii. daye of Nouembre as affermeth ye Frenche cronycle / kyng Rycharde beynge thā at Calays, spowsed or toke to wyfe wythin the churche of saynt Nycho∣las, Isabel the doughter of Charles the .vi. than kyng of Fraunce. whych lady Isabell as wytnesseth the sayde Frenche story, at the day of hyr mar∣ryage was wythin .viii. yeres of age. And as it is regestred in one of ye bo∣kes of guyldehalle of London / the Frenche kynge in propre persone came downe wyth a goodly compa∣nye of lordes and knyghtes, vnto a towne called Arde, whyche standeth vppon the vtter border of Pycardy / where wythin hys owne domynyon a ryche and sumptuouse pauylyon was pyght. And in lyke maner a litle beyonde Guynys wythin the english pale, was another lyke pauylyon pyghte for kynge Rycharde / so that betwene the two sayde pauylyons,
was a distaunce of .lxx. pace. And in the mydway atwene bothe, was or∣dained ye thyrde pauylion / at ye which bothe kinges cōming from eyther of theyr tentes sondry tymes there met, & had communicacion eyther with o∣ther / the wayes or distaunce atwene set with certayne persones apoynted standynge in arme .ii. and .ii / the one syde beynge set with Englysshemen, and that other with Frenche. And a certeyne distaūce from eyther of the ii. first sayde pauilyons, stode bothe hoostes of bothe prynces, or suche cō¦panyes as before either of them was appointed to bryng. Here if I shuld brynge in the dyuers metynges of ye sayd princes, and the curyous serui∣ces that eyther caused other to be fed & serued within eyther of theyr ten∣tes, or of theyr dalyaunce or pasty∣mes continuynge the season of their metynges, and the dyuersyte of the manifolde spices and wynes whiche there was ministred at ye said season, with all ye ryche apparell of the sayde pauilyons & cupbordes garnysshed with plate & rich iewels / it wold aske a lōge tracte of tyme. But who yt is desirous to knowe or here of the cyr∣cumstaūce of all ye premysses / let him rede ye worke of maister Iohn̄ Froy∣sarde made in Frenche / and there he shall se euery thynge touched in an ordre. And here I shall shortly touch the giftes yt were gyuen of eyther of ye princes & of their lordes. And fyrst king Rychard gaue vnto ye Frenche kynge, an hanap or basyn of golde with an ewer to ye same. Thā again∣warde ye Frēche king gaue vnto him iii. stāding cuppes of golde, with co∣uers garnisshed with perle & stone / & a shippe of golde set vpon a bere ry∣chely garnysshed with perle & stone. Than at theyr seconde meting king Rycharde gaue vnto him an ouche set with so fyne stones, yt it was va∣lued at .v.C. marke sterlynge. where agayne the Frenche king gaue vnto him .ii. flaggons of golde / a tablet of golde, and therein an ymage of saint Mychaell rychely garnisshed. Also a tablet of gold with a crucifixe therin well and rychely dyght. Also a tablet of golde with an ymage of the Try∣nite, rychely set with perle and stone. Also a tablet of gold with an ymage of saynt George, in likewise set with perle and stone. whiche all were va∣lued at the summe of .xv.C. marke. Than king Richarde seyng ye boūte of the Frenche kinge / gaue to hym a bauderyke or coler of golde set with greate dyamantes, rubyes, and ba∣lessys, beyng valued at .v.M. mark / the whiche for the preciosyte thereof, that it was of such an excellency and fynesse of stuffe, the Frenche kynge therfore ware it aboute his necke as often as the king and he mette toge∣ther. Than the Frenche kyng gaue vnto hym an ouche, a spyce plate of golde of great weyght, and valued at .ii.M. marke. Many were the ryche gyftes that were receyued of lordes and ladyes of bothe prynces. Amonge the whiche specially are no¦ted .iii. giftes, whiche kyng Richarde gaue vnto the duke of Orleaūce / for the which he receyued agayne of the duke trebyll the value. For where his were valued at a .M. marke / the dukes were valued at thre thousāde marke. Finally whan ye said princes hadde thus eyther solaced with o∣ther, & concluded all maters concer∣nynge the abouesayde maryage / the Frenche kyng delyuered vnto kyng Rycharde dame Isabell his dough∣ter, sayenge these wordes folow∣ynge. Ryght dere beloued sonne, I dely∣uer here to you the creature yt I most loue ī this worlde next my wife & my sonne / besechynge ye father in heuen,
that it may be to his pleasure, and of the weale of you and youre realme / and that the amyte atwene the .ii. re∣almes in auoydyng of effusyon of chrysten mens blode, maye be kepte inuyolet for the terme atwene vs cō∣cluded / whiche terme was .xxx. wyn∣ter as expresseth the Frenche Crony∣cle. After whiche wordes with many thankes giuen vpon eyther parties / preparacyon was made of de{per}tinge. And after kynge Rycharde had con∣ueyed the Frenche kynge towarde Arde / he toke his leaue and returned vnto his wyfe. The which was im∣mediatlye with great honoure con∣ueyed vnto Caleys / and there after to the kyng spoused, as before to you I haue shewed. After the which so∣lempnisacion with al honour ended / the kynge with his yonge wyfe toke shyppyng, and so within short whyle landed at Douer / and from thens sped hym towarde London. wherof the cytezens beynge warned / made out certayne horsemen well appoin∣ted in one lyuetye of coloure, with a conysaunce brodered vpon theyr sle∣ues, whereby euery felyshyppe was knowen from other. The whyche with the Mayre and hys bretherne clothed in scarlet, met the kynge and the quene vpon the Blacke hethe / & after due salutacyon and reuerente welcomes vnto theim made by the mouthe of the recorder, the sayd cy∣tezens conueyed the kynge vpon his wey tyll he came to Newyngton: where the kynge commaunded the Mayre with his company to returne to the cytie / for he with hys lordes & ladyes was appointed that nyght to lye at Kenyngton. It was nat longe after but that she was from Kening∣ton brought with great pompe vnto the Towre of London. At whyche season was so exceding prece at Lon¦don brydge, that by reason therof cer¦tayne persones were thruste to deth / amonge the whyche the pryoure of Typtre a place ī Essex was one. And vpon the morowe folowynge, she was conueyed throughe ye cytie with all honoure that myghte be deuysed vnto westmynster / & there crowned quene vpon the sonday beynge than the .viii. day of Ianuary. In the so∣mer folowynge the kynge by sinistre counsell delyuered vp by a poynte∣ment the towne of Breste in Bry∣tayne to the duke / whiche was occa∣syon of displeasure atwene the kyng and ye duke of Gloucestre hys vncle as in the yere folowyng shalbe more clerely shewed. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxxvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxxvii. Goldesmythe. Thomas wylforde.   Adam Bame.   Anno. xx.   wyllyam Parker.   IN this .xx. yere of kynge Ry∣charde and moneth of Februa∣ry / the kinge holdynge a sumptuous feest in westmynster halle, many of the soudyours whiche were newely comen from the towne of Brest fore∣sayd, presed into the hall, and kepte a rome together. whiche companye whan the duke of Gloucestre hadde beholden / and frayned and knowen what men they were, and howe the sayde towne was gyuen vppe con∣trary his knowlege / was therewith in his mynde sore discomforted. In so moche that whan the kynge was entred hys chaumbre, and fewe nere vnto hym, he sayde vnto the kynge: Syr haue ye nat sene the felawes yt
satte in so great noumbre to daye in your halle at suche a table. And the kynge answered yes, and axed of the duke what cōpany it was. To whom the duke answered & saide, Sir these ben youre souldyours comen from Breste / and as nowe haue nothynge to take to, nor knowen at howe to shyfte for theyr lyuynge / and the ra∣ther for that as I am enfourmed, they haue benne before tyme euyll payed. Than said ye king it is nat my will but yt they shulde be well payed. And if any haue cause to cōplayne, let them shewe it vnto our tresourer, and they shalbe resonably answered. In resonynge of this mater farther / the duke said vnto the kyng, Syr ye ought to put your body to payne for to wynne a strōge holde or towne by feate of warre, or ye toke vpon you to sell or delyuer any towne or strōge holde gotten with great difficulte, by māhode of your noble progenitours. To this ye kyng with chaūged coun∣tenaūce answered & sayd, Uncle how say ye thoses wordes. Than ye duke boldelye recyted ye foresayd wordes. wherunto the king beynge more dis∣contented said, wene ye yt I be a mar¦chaūt or fole to sell my lāde / by saynt Iohn̄ baptist nay. But trothe it is, yt our cosyn the duke of Brytaine hath rendred vnto vs al such sūmes of mo¦ney as our progenitours lente vnto him or his auncetours, vpon the said towne of Brest. For the whiche, rea∣son & good conscience will yt he haue his towne restored agayne. By mea∣ne of whiche wordes thus vttred by the duke / suche rancoure and malyce kyndelyd atwene the kinge & hym, yt it ceased nat tyll the sayde duke was put to dethe by murdre vnlefully. Than the duke apperceyuynge the kinges misledynge by certayne per∣sones about him, entendyng thereof reformacion for ye weale of the kinge and his realme / called vnto him the abbot of saynte Albons, & the abbot & pryour of westmynster, and shewed to them his secrete mynde. By whose counselles he made assemble shortely after at Arundell / to which assemble came at the day appoynted, dyuers lordes bothe spirituall & temporall / as him selfe, the erle of Arundell and other. Also thyther came the erle of Notyngham than marshall of Eng∣lande, the erle of warwyke / & of spi∣rituall lordes, the archebisshoppe of Caunterbury, the abbottes of saynte Albones and of westmynster with other. After whyche assemble thus ma∣de, and eueryche of theym to other sworne within the castell of Arun∣del / the .viii. day of August they toke there theyr counsell, and condiscen∣ded yts dyuers lordes about the king, as the duke of Lancastre, the duke of yorke and other, shulde be putte from suche auctoryte and rule of the lande as they than bare / and other offycers suche as were thought pre∣iudicial vnto the weale of the lande, shulde be dyscharged and punisshed for theyr demerytes. whan this with many other thynges was amonge them concluded / eueryche of theym departed tyll the tyme of an other metynge atwene theym appoynted. But the erle of Notyngham con∣trarye his othe and promyse fearing the sequell of the matter / yode shor∣tely after vnto the kynge, and dys∣couered vnto hym all the premisses. wherefore the kynge in all haste cal∣led a secrete counsell at London in the said erle of Notynghames place, or after some at the place of the erle of Huntyngdone. where it was concludyd yt the sayd erle of Huntyngdone & other, shulde by strengthe fetche vnto the king the erles of Arundell and of warwyke.
And in the meane whyle, the kynge in propre {per}sone arested his vncle syr Thomas of woodestoke at Plasshy in Essex as sayeth the Englysshe cro∣nycle. All be it an other wryter in la∣yne saythe, that kyng Rycharde in propre persone rode vnto the Ma∣noure of Grenewyche in the nyghte tyme, & there toke hym in his bedde, & commaūded hym vnto the Towre of Lōdon / whiche shortely after was conueyed vnto Calays and there py∣teously murderyd. And soone after were the foresayd erles of Arundell & warwyke brought vnto the towre of London, with also syr Iohn̄ Cob∣ham & syr Iohn̄ Cheynye knightes. But the erle of Arundell was taken to bayle and wente at large vnder suertie, tyll the begynnynge of the parlyament. In whiche season dy∣uers other were brought to sondrye prysones. Than the kynge sente out his commissyoners vnto the lordes of his realme, for to come vnto hys parliament / which began after vpon the .xvii. day of Septembre, in the be¦gynninge of the .xxi. yere of ye kynge, and later ende of thys mayres yere. Here it is to be noted, that Adam Bame mayre dyed in the begynning of the moneth of Iune. For whome was after chosen and admytted the viii. day of ye sayd moneth for mayre, Rycharde whytyngton, to occupye the full of that yere / that is to meane tyll the feest of Symonde and Iude. But vpon saynt Edwardes day fo∣lowyng whan the newe mayre is ac∣customed to be chosen / Than was he electe agayne for that yere folow∣ynge. And so he stode in the offyce of mayraltye an hoole yere / and .v. mo∣nethes. Than to returne to our fyrst mater, whan the kyng hadde assem∣bled his lordes / yt whiche came with so stronge and myghtie companyes, that the cytie suffysed nat to lodge the people, but were fayne to be lod∣gyd in small townes and vyllages nere vnto ye same / within short tyme after the sayde parlyamente was be∣gonne, the erles of Arundell and of warwyke were broughte before the lordes of the parlyamente holden at westmynster, and there fynally iud∣ged as foloweth / the erle of Arudell to be ladde on fote from westmynster and place of his iugemēt thoroughe the highe stretes of the cytie vnto the towre hylle, where hys hede to be stryken of / and the erle of warwyke was also iudged to dethe. But for his great age, by meane of hys frendes his iugemente was pardo∣ned and altered to perpetuall prison, where as the kyng wolde cōmaunde hym. whiche after was had vnto ye Ile of Man in Lancasshyre / where he consumed the resydue of hys olde dayes. And the erle of Arundelle accordinge to the sentence vpon him gyuen, vpon the morowe folowyng the feest of saynte Mathewe beynge saterday, & the .xxii. day of Septem∣bre, was ladde on fote vnto ye towre hyll beyng accompanyed with great strengthe of men, for so moche as it was demyd yt he shuld haue ben res∣cued by the waye / how be it none su∣che was attempted / but peasably he was brought vnto the sayde place of execucyon, and there pacientlye & mekely toke his dethe. whose body after was by the freres Augustynes borne vnto theyr place within the warde of Bradestrete of London, & there in the northe syde of the quyer solempnely buryed / and after vpon his graue a sumptuous toumbe of marble stone sette and edifyed. And by auctoryte of the said parlyament, the archebysshoppe of Caunterbury was exyled the realme. And vpon the monday folowynge beynge the xxiiii. daye of Septembre, syr Iohn̄
lord Cobham, and sir Iohn̄ Cheyny knyght, were iudged to be drawen, hanged and quarteryd. But by in∣staunce and labour of their frendes, that iugement was chaunged vnto perpetuall prison. And thys done / ye kynge ordayned a royall feeste, and helde open housholde for all honeste comers. For as affirmeth Peter Pyc∣tauyence a wryter of historyes / this prynce kynge Rycharde passed all o∣ther of his progenytours in lybera∣lytie and bounie. The whiche feest and also parlyament yet holdynge / the kynge created .v. dukes, a mar∣ques, and .v. erles. As fyrste the erle of Derby syr Hēry of Bolygbrooke, sone and heyre of Iohn̄ of Gaunte duke of Lācastre, was created duke of Herforde. The secōde whiche was erle of Rutlande, was created duke of Amnerle. The thyrde beynge erle of Kent, was created duke of Sur∣rey. The fourthe beynge erle of No∣tyngham, was created duke of Nor∣folke. And the fyfte was the erle of Huntyngedon, the whiche than was created duke of Exeter. Also of the erle of Somerset, was made a mar∣ques of Dorset. And for the erles / fyrste the lorde of westmerlande na∣med Dane Ray Neuyll, was made erle of westmerlande / the lorde Tre∣sorer syr wyllyā Scrope, was made ele of wylshyre / and syr Iohn̄ de Mountague was made erle of Sa∣lesbury. And whan this busines was fynisshed / the parlyament was remo¦ued vnto Shrewysbury vnto Hylla¦rye terme / where it was fynysshed to many mennes dyspleasures, & dys∣herytynge of many trewe heyres. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxxviii. Mercer. wyllyam Askeham.   Rycharde whyttyngton.   Anno. xxi.   Iohn̄ wodecoke.   IN this .xxi. yere of kynge Ry∣charde / the people of the lande murmured and grudged sore againe the kynge & his counsell / for so mo∣che as the goodes belongynge vnto the crowne, were disperblyd & gyuen to vnworthy persones / by occasyon whereof dyuers charges and exaccy∣ons were put vpon the people. Also for that the chefe rulers aboute the prynce, were of lowe byrthe and of small reputacyon / and the men of ho¦noure were kepte out of fauoure. Also for that the duke of Glouceter was secretely murdred without pro∣cesse of the lawe / and many thynges elles mysordered by the laste parlya∣ment, whereof the wyte and blame was layed vnto the kynge and other persones after named, as well for wrongefull dysherytynge of sondrye persones at the sayde parlyamente, suche as were menyall seruauntes of the foresayde duke of Gloceter and of the erles of Arundell and of warwyke, contrarye hys owne pro∣clamacyons made concernynge su∣che maters. Also that where dyuers patentes & grauntes passyd the kyn¦ges great seale, as well for pardons and other great maters / yet for the kynges singuler auauntage & suche fewe persones as bare the rule about hym, many of theym were called a∣gayne. Also where for sheryffes and other offycers of all shyres of En∣glande, were wonte to be named .iiii. by discrete {per}sones as iuges & other, of ye whiche the kyng shulde assygne two for the yere folowynge / he of his owne wylle & pleasure wolde refuse them, & chose suche .ii. as hym lyked /
the which he knewe well wolde lene more to his weale, than to the cōmen weale of this lande or of his subiec∣tes. Also that where before tymes ye kynges of Englande vsed to sende out commyssyons vnto burgeses of cyties & townes, to chose of theyr fre lybertie suche knyghtes of the shyre as they thought mooste weale∣full for the comen weale of the sayde shyre & lande / nowe kyng Rycharde wolde appoynte the persones, and wylle them for to chose such as than he named / wherby his singuler cau∣ses were preferred, and the commen causes put by. Also kinge Rycharde thoroughe euyll counsell, commaun¦ded by his letters vnto the sheryffes of all shyres fewe excepted, that all persones of honoure within theyr countyes as well spirytuall as tem∣porall, shulde make certayne othes in generall wordes, and ouer that to wryte and seale certayne bondes for perfourmaunce of the sayde othes / and also for blanke chartour, which many men of substaunce were con∣strayned to seale to theyr great char¦ges. The people contynually mur∣mured and grudgyd, for these iniu∣ryes and many mo, whyche at the tyme of his deposynge were artycu∣led agayne hym in .xxxviii. sondry ar¦tycles / with also the rumoure that ranne vpon hym, that he had letten to ferme the reueneus of ye crowne, to Busshey, Bogot, and Grene / whi∣che caused as well the noble men of the realme to grudge agayn hym as other of the comon people. Thus cō∣tynuynge this mysorder within the lande / dyed syr Iohn̄ of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, at the bysshoppe of Elyes place in Holborne / and from thens was caried vnto saint Pouls, and there vppon the north syde of ye quyre honorably buryed. At whose enterremente all the chefe lordes of Englande were present. For whom after was foūdyd by dame Blaūche hys wyfe an honorable anniuersary, as before I haue shewed in ye .xliiii. yere of Edwarde the thyrde, whiche of right ought to be set in this place. This yere also aboute the feste of saynt Bartholomew, fell discencyon & discorde bytwene ye duke of Her∣forde & the duke of Norfolke. wher∣fore the duke of Herforde accused ye other, that he hadde taken .iiii. thou∣sande marke of the kynges, of suche money as he shulde therwith haue waged certeyne sowdyours at Ca∣leys / whiche he lefte vndone, & toke the same money to hys owne vse. But an other wryter sayth, that as ye sayde two dukes rode vppon a tyme from the parlyament towarde theyr lodgynges / ye duke of Norfolke sayd vnto that other: Syr se you not how varyable the kyng is in his wordes, and how shamefully he putteth his lordes and kynesfolkes to deth, and other exileth and holdeth in pryson. wherfore full necessary it is to take kepe, and not for to truste myche in hys wordes. For without dowte in tyme to come, he wyll by suche lyke meanes brynge vs vnto lyke deth & distruccyon. Of whiche wordes the sayde duke of Herforde accused that other vnto the kynge / wherfore ey∣ther wagyd batayle with other be∣fore the kynge. To whom daye of metynge was gyuen to eyther vpon the .xi. daye of September, to fyghte within lystes at Couētre, where all thynge was ordeyned for. At whiche place at ye day assygned thyder came the sayde two dukes, and appered in the felde before the kynges presence, redy to do theyr batayle. But ye kyng anone forbad that fyght / and forth∣with exyled the duke of Herforde for x. yeres, and the duke of Norfolk for euer / whiche sentence was shortely
after put in execucyon. Thanne the duke of Herforde sayled into Fraūce and there taryed a season. But for lacke of ayde and comforte he depar¦ted thens and came into Brytayne. And the duke of Norfolke passed dy¦uers countreys / and lastely came vn¦to the cytie of Uenyce, and there en∣dyd his lyfe. And soone after thys was maister Roger walden a chape∣leyne of the kynges, made archebys∣shoppe of Caunterbury / the whyche was a speciall louer vnto the citie of London, and made great labour for them vnto the kynges grace, ye gre∣uously with them was of newe dys∣pleased, for so moche as he was en∣fourmed of them, yt they shulde coun¦sell with other sheriffes to withstāde certayne actes made in the laste par∣lyament / for yt which the comynaltie of the cytie was endyted with other sheryffes. In redresse wherof / by coū¦sell of the sayd archebysshoppe, & of maister Robert Braybroke than bis∣shoppe of Lōdon, the cytezens made a lamentable supplicacyon vnto the kinge. whiche by ayde & fauoure of the sayd two bysshoppes & other lo∣uers of ye cytie / ye kinges yre & indig∣nacyon by meane of that lowly sup∣plicacyon was some parte appeased & withdrawen. But yet to contente a {per}te of ye kinges mynde, many blanke chartours were deuysed & broughte into the cytie / which many of ye most substancyall men of the same were fayne to seale, to theyr payne and charge in conclusyon / yt whiche shor∣tely after was vsed thoroughe all countreys of Englande. Anno domini .M.CCC.lxxxxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.lxxxxix. Goldesmythe. Iohn̄ wade.   Drewe Barentyne.   Anno .xxii.   Iohn̄ warner.   IN this .xxii. yere of kynge Ry∣charde / ye cōmon fame ranne, yt the kyng had letton to ferme ye real∣me of Englande vnto sir wyllyam Sope erle of wylshyre & than trea∣sourer of Englāde, to sir Iohn̄ Bus∣shey, syr Iohn Bagot, and syr Henry Grene knightes / ye whyche returned shortly after to their great cōfusyōs. This yere also, Thomas ye son and heyre of ye erle of Arundell lately be∣heded / ye whiche Thomas nat all to his pleasure was kepte in ye house of the duke of Exceter, passed ye see by ye meanes of one wyllyā Scot mercer / & yode vnto his vncle yt archebisshop of Caūterbury, & so contynued with him in the cytie of Colayne than be∣ynge. In this pastyme great puruey¦aunce was made for ye kynges iour∣ney into Irelāde / so yt whan all thin∣ges necessarye to the honoure & nede of the kynge & his people was redy, he set forthwarde vpon his iourney in the moneth of Apryll / leauyng for his leutenaunt in Englange sir Ed∣monde of Langley his vncle & duke of yorke / and after toke shippyng at Brystowe, and sayled with a mighty & stronge hoste into Irelande. where he had so prosperous spede, that in processe of tyme with manhode and good polycie he subdued to him that coūtrey. In the whiche voyage, were it for acte that he dyd or of ye kynges bounte / Henry sone and heyre of the duke of Herforde than exiled, was of ye kyng made knyght. This Henry was after his father crowned kynge of Englande, & named Henry the .v. Kynge Richarde thus beynge oc∣cupyed in Irelande, and receyuynge of the capytaynes of the wylde I∣rysshe into his subieccyon, and orde∣ryng of that countrey to set in an or∣dre and rule / Henry of Bolyngbroke
duke of Herforde before exyled, with the archebysshoppe of Caunterbury and Thomas of Arundel and other, landed with a small company at Ra¦uyns spore in the Northe countrey, in the moneth of August / and vnder colour of the clayme of his ryghtfull enherytaunce, ceysed the people as he wente / to whome in short processe great multytude of the people drewe and gatherd. Of this landyng king Rycharde beynge warned / for hasty spede of returnyng into Englande, left in Irelāde behynde hym moche ordenaūce / and landed at Mylforde hauen in the begynnyng of Septem¦bre, & begynnynge also of the .xxiii. yere of his reygne / & so yode vnto the castell of Flynte in wales, and there rested him and his people / and enten¦ded there to gather vnto hym more strength. In the whiche meane tyme the foresayd Henry that than hadde proclaymed him selfe duke of Lan∣caster in the ryght of Iohn̄ of Gaūte his father, was comyn to Brystowe / and there without resystence toke sir wyllyam Scrope erle of wylshyre & treasourer of Englande, syr Iohn̄ Busshey, and syr Henry Grene. Also there was taken sir Iohn̄ Ba¦got / but after he escaped and fledde into Irelande. Than were the other thre there iuged & put in execucyon. And kinge Rycharde styll beynge at the castell of Flynte / herynge of the great strengthe yt was about ye duke, fearyd sore of him selfe. And in lyke wyse so dyd all suche as were about hym. wherfore syr Thomas Percye erle of worcetyr and than stewarde of the kynges housholde, contrarye his allegeaunce, brake openly the whyte rodde in the hall, & commaun∣dyd euery man to shifte for him selfe. By reason whereof the people voy∣ded, and the kynge lefte without cō∣forte, so that he was shortly after ta∣ken and presented vnto the duke. The whyche put hym vnder safe ke∣pynge / & shortly after spedde him to∣ward Lōdon. And whā he came nere vnto ye cytie / he sente king Rycharde with a secret cōpany vnto ye Towre, there to be safely kepte tyll his com∣myng. wherof many euyll disposed persones of the cytie beyng warned / assembled them in great noumbre, & entended to haue mette him without the towne, & there to haue taken him from such as ladde him, & so to haue slayne him for the great cruelte that he before tyme had vsed vnto the cy∣tie. But as god wolde / the mayre & rulers of the cytie were enfourmed of theyr malycyous purpose, and ga¦thered to theym the worshypfull com¦moners and sadde men / by whose po¦lycyes nat without great diffyculte, they were reuoked frome theyr euyll purpose / all be it that lastynge that rumoure they yode vnto westmyn∣ster, and there toke mayster Iohn̄ Slake deane of the kinges chapell / and frome thens broughte him vnto Newgate, and there caste on hym yrons. Shortly after / the duke came vn¦to London / & there by the consent of kyng Rycharde, a {per}lyament was be¦gone vpon the .xiii. day of ye moneth of Septembre. Endurynge whiche {per}lyament, many accusacyons & arty¦cles of mysrulynge of the lande were layed vnto the charge of thys noble prince kyng Rycharde, whiche be en¦groced at length in .xxxviii. artycles. For the which, volūtarely as it shuld seme by ye copy of an instrumēt here after shewed / he shulde renounce & wylfullye be deposed from all kyng∣lye mageste, the monday beynge the xxix. day of Septembre, and the feest of saynt Myghell the archaungell, in the yere of our lordes incarnacy∣on after the accomte of the churche
of Englande, M.lxxxxix. and the xxiiii. yere of the raygne of the sayde Rycharde. The copye of whiche in∣strumente here vnder ensueth. THis present instrumente made the mondaye the .xxix. daye of Septembre, and feeste of saynt Mychaell tharchaungell, in the yere of our lorde god .M.CCC.lxxx. and xix. and in the .xxiii. yere of kynge Ry¦charde the seconde / wytnesseth, that where by the auctoryte of the lordes spirytuall and temporall of this pre¦sent parlyament and cōmons of the same, the ryght honorable and dys∣crete {per}sons here vnder named, were by the sayde auctoryte assygned to go vnto the towre of London, there to here and testifye suche questyons and answeres as than & there shude be by the said honorable and discrete persones harde: knowe all men to whome these presente letters shall come, that we sir Richarde Scroope archebysshoppe of yorke, Iohn̄ bis∣shoppe of Herforde, Henrye erle of Northumberlande, Rafe erle of west¦merlande, Thomas lorde of Barke∣ley, wyllyam abbot of westmynster, Iohn̄ pryour of Caunterbury, wyl∣lyam Thyrnynge, and Hughe Bur¦nell knyghtes, Iohn̄ Markeham Iustyce, Thomas Stowe, & Iohn̄ Burbage doctours of the lawe Cy∣uyle, Thomas Feryby and Denys Lopham notaryes publyke / the day & yere abouesayd atwene the houres of .viii. & .ix. of ye clocke before noone, were present in the chyefe chaumber of the kynges lodgynge within the sayde place of the towre. where was rehersed vnto the kynge by ye mouth of the forsayde erle of Northumber∣lande, that beforetyme at Conwey in Northwalys the kynge beynge there at hys pleasure and lybertye, promy¦sed vnto the archebysshop of Caun∣terbury than Thomas of Arundell, and vnto the sayde erle of Northum¦berlande / that he for insuffycyency whyche he knewe hymselfe to be of, to occupye so greate a charge as to gouerne thys realme of Englande / he wolde gladly leue of and renoūce the ryght and tytle, aswell of that as of hys tytle to the crowne of Fraūce and hys mageste, vnto Henry duke of Herforde / and that to do in suche conuenyente wyse, as by the lernyd men of hys lande it shulde moste suf∣fyciently be by them deuysed and or∣deyned. To the whyche rehersall the kynge in our sayde presences answe¦red benyngly, and sayde that suche promyse he made / and so to the same he was at that howre in full purpose to perfourme and fulfyll / sauyng he desyred fyrst to haue personal speche wyth the sayde duke and wyth the archebysshoppe of Caunterbery hys cosyns. And ferthermore he desyred to haue a byll drawen of the sayde re¦sygnacyon, that he myghte be per∣fyghte in the rehersall therof. After whiche copy to hym by me the sayde erle delyuered / we the sayde lordes and other departed. And vppon the same after noone the kynge desy∣rynge moche the commynge of the duke of Lancaster / at the laste the sayd duke wyth the archebysshoppe entred the foresayde chaumber / bryn¦gynge wyth theym the lorde Roos, the lorde Burgeyny, and the lorde wylloughby, wyth dyuerse other. where after due obeysaunce done by them vnto the kynge / he famylyarly and wyth a gladde countenaunce to vs aperynge, talked wyth the sayde archebysshop and duke a good sea∣son. And that communycacyon fyny∣shed / the kynge wyth a gladde coun∣tenaunce in presence of vs and the other aboue rehersed, sayde openly that he was redy to renounce and
resygne all his kyngelye mageste, in maner and fourme as he before sea∣sons had promised. And all thoughe he had and myght sufficyently, haue declared his renouncement by the re¦dyng of an other meane persone / yet he for the more suretie of the mater, and for the sayd resygnacyon shulde haue hys full force and strengthe, he therfore redde the scrowle of resigna¦cyon him selfe, in maner and fourme as foloweth. In the name of god Amen. I Ry¦charde by the grace of god kynge of Englande and of Fraūce, and lorde of Irelande / acquyte and assoyle all archebysshoppes, bysshoppes, and other prelates seculer or relygyous, of what dygnite, degre, state, or con¦dicyon that they be of / and also all dukes, marques, erles, barons, lordes, and al myne other lyege men bothe spirituall and seculer, of what maner name or degre they be / frome theyr othe of feaute and homage, & all other dedes and priuileges made vnto me / and from all maner bādes of allegeaunce and regaly or lorde∣shyppe. In the whiche they were, or be bounden to me, or in any other∣wyse constrayned / and theym theyr heyres, and successours for euermore from the same bandes and othes, I release, deliuer, acquite, and let them for fre, dyssolued, and acquyte, and to be harmelesse, for so moche as lon¦geth to my persone, by any maner waye or tytle of ryght yt to me might folowe of the foresayd thynges or of any of them. And also I resygne all my kyngely dygnyte, mageste, and crowne / with all the lordeshyppes, power, & priuyleges to the foresayd kyngely dygnite and crowne belon∣gynge / and all other lordeshyppes and possessyons to me in any maner of wyse pertaynynge, what name & condicyon they be of / out take the landes and possessyons for me and myne obyte purchased and bought. And I renounce all ryghte and co∣loure of ryght, and all maner tytle of possessyon and lordeshyppe, the whyche I euer hadde or haue, or by any maner of meane myght haue in the same lordeshyppes and possessy∣ons or any of them or to them, with any maner ryghtes belongynge or appertayning vnto any parte of thē. And also the rule and gouernaūce of the same kyngedome and lorde∣shyppes, with all admynistracyons of the same / and all thynges & eue∣ryche of theym, that to the hole em∣pyre and iurisdiccyon of the same be¦longeth of right, or in any wyse may belonge. And also I renounce the name, worshyppe, and regalye, and kyngly hyghnesse, clerely, frely, syngulerly, and holly, in the mooste best maner and fourme that I may / and with dede and worde I leaue of and re∣sygne them and go frome theym for euermore / sauyng alwaye to my suc∣cessours kynges of Englāde, all the ryghtes, priuileges, & appurtenaun¦ces to ye said kyngdome & lordeships abouesaid belongynge & appertay∣ninge. For well I wote & knowlege, & deme, my selfe to be and haue ben vnsufficient & vnable, and also vn∣profytable / and for myne open deser¦tes nat vnworthy to be put downe. And I swere vpon ye holy Euāgels here presently with my handes tou∣ched, yt I shal neuer repugne to this resygnacyon, dimyssyon, or yeldyng vp / nor neuer inpugne theym in any maner by worde or by dede, by my selfe nor by none other. Nor I shall nat suffre it to be impugned, ī as mo¦che as in me is preuely nor apperte. But I shall haue, holde, & kepe thys renousing, dimyssyon, & leuynge vp, for ferme and stable for euer more,
in all and in euery parte thereof, so god me helpe and all sayntes, and by this holy euangels by me bodely tou¦ched & kyssed. And for more recorde of the same / here openly I subscrybe and sygne this present resygnacyon with myne owne hande. And forth∣with in our presences and other sub¦scrybed the same / and after delyue∣red it vnto the archebysshope of Can¦terbury / sayng that if it were in his power or at his assignemēt, he wold that the duke of Lancaster there pre¦sent, shulde be his successour & ing after hym. And in token thereof he toke a rynge of golde frō his fynger beynge his sygnet, and put it vpon the sayd dukes fynger / desyrynge & requirynge ye archebysshop of yorke, to shewe and make reporte vnto the lordes of the parlyament of hys voluntary resygnacyon / And also of his entent and good mynde, that he bare towarde his cosyn the duke of Lācaster, to haue him his successour and kyng after him. And this done▪ euery man toke their leaue and retur¦ned to theyr owne. UPon the morowe folowynge beynge tuisday and the laste day of Septembre / all the lordes spi¦rytuall and temporall, with also the commons of the sayde parlyamente assembled at westmynster: where in in the presence of them, the archebys∣shoppe of yorke accordinge vnto the kynges desyre, shewed vnto them se∣ryously the voluntary renounsynge of the kynge / with also the fauoure the whiche he oughte vnto his cosyn ye duke of Lancaster for to haue hym hys successoure. And ouer ye shewed vnto theym, the cedule or byll of re∣nouncemente sygned wyth kynge Rychardes hande. After whyche thynges in ordre by him fynisshed / the questyon was axed fyrste of the lordes, yf they wolde admytte and alowe the sayde renouncement. The whyche whan it was of the lordes graunted and confyrmed / the lyke questyon was axed of the commons / and of theym in lyke maner affyr∣med. After whiche admyssyon, it was than declared, that nat with∣standynge the foresaid renounsynge so by the lordes and commons ad∣mytted / it were nedefull vnto the re∣alme, in auoydyng of all suspeccyon and surmyses of ylle dysposed per∣sones, to haue in wrytynge and re∣gestred, the manyfolde crymes and efautes before done by the sayd Ry¦charde late kynge of Englande / to the ende that they myghte fyrste be openly shewed vnto the people, and after to remayne of recorde amonge the kynges recordes. The whyche were drawen and compyled as be∣fore is sayde in .xxxviii. artycles / and there shewed redy to be radde. But for other causes than more nedefull to be preferred / the redynge of the said artycles at that season were dif∣fered and put of. whyche artycles for that that they wolde aske longe tyme to wryte, & also wolde to some reders e but small pleasure to rede / I haue therfore lefte theym out here of thys worke: which at lengthe are sette ou in the boke of the Mayres, and yere of Drewe Barentyne than mayre of London. Than for so moche as the lordes of the parlyament hadde well consy∣dered this voluntary renouncement of kynge Rycharde / and that it was behouefull & necessary for the weale of the realme to procede vnto the sen¦tence of his deposayll: they there ap∣poynted by auctorytie of the states of the sayde parlyament, the bisshop of saynte Asse, the abbotte of Glas∣tenburye, the erle of Gloucester, the lorde of Barkeley, wyllyam Thyr¦nynge
iustyce, & Thomas Erpyng∣ham and Thomas Graye knightes, that they shulde gyue and ere open sentence to the kynges deposicyon. whervpon the sayde commyssyoners leynge there their hedes together / by good delyberacion, good coūsell, and auysement, and of one assent / a∣greed amonge them, that the bishop of saint Asse shulde publisshe the sen¦tence for theym and in their names, as foloweth. In the name of god Amen. we Iohn̄ bysshope of saynt Asse or Asse∣nence, Iohn̄ abbot of Glastynbury, Rycharde the erle of Glocester, Tho¦mas lorde of Berkeley, wyllyam Thyrnynge Iustyce, Thomas Er∣pyngham and Thomas Graye kny∣ghtes, chosen and deputed specyall commyssaryes by the thre estates of thys present parlyament, represen∣tynge the hole bodye of the realme, for all suche maters by the sayd asta¦tes to vs committed: we vnderstan∣dynge and considerynge the many∣folde crymes, hurtes, and harmes done by Rycharde king of Englāde, and mysgouernaunce of the same by a longe tyme, to the great decaye of the sayde lande, and vtter ruyne of the same shortly to haue ben, ne had the especiall grace of our lorde god therevnto put ye soner remedy / & also furthermore auertysinge yt the sayde kinge Rycharde knowyng his owne insufficiencie, hath of his owne mere volunte and fre wyll, renounced and gyuen vp the rule and gouernaunce of this lande, with all ryghtes and honoures vnto ye same belongynge, and vtterly for his merytes, hath iu∣ged hym selfe nat vnworthy to be de¦posed of all kyngely mageste & asta∣te royall: we the premysses well con¦syderynge by good and dilygente de¦lyberacyon, by the power, name, and auctoryte to vs as aboue is sayd cō∣mytted / pronounce, discerne, and de¦clare, the same kynge Rycharde be∣fore thys to haue be & to be vnprofy∣table, vnable, vnsufficyent, and vn∣worthy, to the rule and gouernaūce of the foresayde realmes and lorde∣shyppes, & all other thappurtenaun∣ces to the same belongynge. And for the same causes, we pryue him of all kyngely dygnyte and worshyppe, of any kynglye worshyppe in him lefte. And we depose him by our sentence ifynityfe / forbyddynge expressely to all archebysshoppes, bysshoppes, & all other prelates, dukes, marque∣ses, erles, barons, and knyghtes, & to all other men of the foresayd kyng¦dome and lordeshyppes, or of other places belongynge to the same real∣mes and lordeshippes, subiectes and lyeges what so euer they be, yt none of them from this tyme forthwarde, to the foresaid Rycharde as kynge & lorde of ye foresayde realmes & lorde∣shyppes, be neyther obedyēte nor at∣tendaunt. After whiche sentence thus open∣lye declared / the said astates admyt∣ted forthwith the same persones for theyr procuratours, to resygne and yelde vp vnto kynge Rycharde, all theyr homage & fealtie whyche they had made & oughte vnto hym before tymes / and for to shewe vnto hym if nede were, all thynges before done that concernyd his deposynge. The whych resygnacyon at that tyme was spared, and put in respite tyll the morowe nexte folowynge. And anone as thys sentence was in thys wyse passyd, and that by reason therof the realme stode voyde without hede or gouernoure for the tyme / the said duke of Lancaster ry∣sing frō ye place where he before sate, & standing where all myght beholde hym / he mekely makynge the sygne of the crosse vppon his forhede and
vpon hys breste, after sylence by an officer was commaunded / sayd vnto the people there beyng these wordes folowyng. In the name of the father & sonne and holy ghoste / I Henry of Lancastre clayme the realme of Eng¦lande and the crowne, with all the ap¦purtenaunces, as I that am dyscen∣ded by ryght lyne of the bloode com∣mynge from that good lorde kynge Henry the thyrde / & through ye ryght that god of hys grace hath sente to me, wyth helpe of my kynne & of my frendes to recouer the same / yt which was in point to be vndone for defaut of good gouernaunce & due iustyce. After whyche wordes thus by hym vttered / he retourned & set him down in the place, where he before had syt∣ten. Than the lordes apperceyuynge and herynge thys clayme thus made by thys noble man / eyther of theym frayned of other what he thoughte. And after a dystaunce or paue of tyme / the archebysshope of Cauntor∣bury hauyng notycyon of the lordes myndes, stode vp & asked of the com¦mons, yf they wolde assente to the lordes / whych in theyr myndes thou¦ghte the clayme by the duke made to he ryghtefull and necessary, for the welthe of the realme & of them all. wherunto with one voyce they cried, ye, ye, ye. After whyche answere / the sayde archebysshop goynge vnto the duke, & settynge hym vpon hys kne, had vnto hym a fewe wordes. The whyche ended he rose / & takynge the duke by the ryght hande▪ ladde hym vnto the kynges sete / & wyth greate reuerence sette hym therein / after a certayne knelynge and orison made by the sayde duke, or he were therein sette. And whan the kynge was thus set in hys trone, to the greate reioy∣synge of the people / the archebys∣shoppe of Cauntorbury beganne there an oracion or colacyon in ma∣ner as after foloweth. U dominabitur in populo, primo Regū capitulo .ix. These ben the wor¦des of the hygh and mooste myghty kynge, spekynge to Samuel hys prophete / techyng hym how he shuld chose and ordeyne a gouernoure of hys people of Israel, whan the sayde people asked of hym a kynge to rule theym. And nat wythout cause maye these wordes be sayde here of oure lorde the kynge that is. For yf they be inwardely conceyued / they shall gyue to vs mater of consolacion and comforte, whan it is sayde that a mā shall haue lordeshyp and rule of the people & nat a chylde. For god threte¦neth nat vs as he sometyme thret the people by I saye, sayenge / sai. 36 Et dabo pueros principes corum, & effeminati do∣minabuntur eis: I shall sayeth our lorde gyue chyldren to be theyr rulers and prynces / and weke or ferefull shall haue domynyon ouer them. But of hys greate mercy he hath vysyted vs I truste hys peculier peo¦ple, and sente vs a man to haue the rule of vs / and putte by chylderne yt before tyme ruled thys lande after chyldysshe condycyons / as by ye wer∣kes of theym it hath ryght lately ap∣pered, to the greate dysturbaunce of all thys realme / and for want or lack of a man. For as sayeth the apostell Paule ad Coryntheos primo. capitulo .xiii. Cum essem▪ paruusus, sapiebam vt paruusus, & so∣quebar vt paruusus. &c. Quam so autem factus sum vi / euacuani quae erant paruusi / That is to meane, whanne I was a chylde, I sauoured and spake as a chylde. But at the tyme whanne I came vnto the state of a man / thanne I putte by all my chyldysshe condy∣cyons.
The apostell sayth he fauoured and spake as a chylde / in whome is no stedfastnesse or constancy. For a chylde wyll lyghtely promyse, and lyghtly he wyll breke hys promyse, & do all thynges that hys appetyte gy∣ueth hym vnto, & forgeteth lyghtely what he hath done. By whych reason it foloweth, that nedely great incon∣uenyence muste fall to that people yt a chylde is ruler and gouernour of. Nor it is nat possyble for that kynge dome to stande in felicite, where such condycyons reygne in the hede and ruler of the same. But now we ought all to reioyse, that all suche defautes ben expelled / and that a man and nat a chylde shall haue lordshyp ouer vs. To whome it belongeth to haue a sure rayne vpon hys tunge, that he maye be knowen fronra chylde, or a man vsyng chyldysche condycyons. Of whome I truste I may say as ye wyse man sayeth in hys Prouerbys Prouerbiorum tercio capitulo. Bea tus homo qui inuenit sapientiam, et qui affluit prudentia The whyche is to meane, Blessed be the man yt hathe sapyence or wysedome, and that ha∣boundeth in prudence. For that man that is ruled by sapience, must nedes loue and drede our lorde god. And who so loueth and dredeth him / must consequentely folowe that he muste kepe hys commaundementes. By force wherof he shall mynyster trewe iustyce vnto his subiectes, and do no wronge nor iniury to any mā / so that than shall folowe the wordes of the wyse man the whyche ben rehersed Prouerbiorum decimo. Benedictio domini super caput iusti, os autem impiorum operit iniquitatem which is to meane, The blessynge of oure lorde god shall a lyght vpon the hede of our kyng, beyng a iuste and right∣wyse man / for the tunge of hym wor∣keth equyte & iustyce. But the tunge of wycked and of synners, couereth iniquyte. And who that werketh or mynystreth iustyce in due ordre / he nat allonely sauegardeth hym selfe, but also holdeth ye people in a surete of restfulnesse / of the whyche ensueth peace & plēte. And therfore it is sayde of the wyse kyng Salomō Ecclesiastes decimo. Beata tetra  tex nobilis est, &  principes vescuntur in tempore sun. whyche is to be vnderstande, that blessed and happy is that lande of the whych the kynge or ruler is noble and wyse / & the prynces ben blessed that lyue in hys tyme. As who wolde say, they may take ex∣aumple of hym to rule & guyde theyr subiectes. For by the discressyon of a noble & wyse mā beyng in auctorite / many euylles be sequestred and put a parte, and all dyssmilers put vnto sylence. For the wyse man cōsidereth & noteth well the great inconuenyen¦ces whyche dayly nowe growe of it / where the chylde or insypyente dryn∣keth the swete & delycyous wordes vnauysydly, & perceyueth nat entoxy¦cacion whyche they ben mynged or myxte with, tyll he be inuyroned and wrapped in al daunger / as lately the experyence therof hath ben apparent to all our syghtes & knowleges, and nat without the great daunger of all this realme. And all was for lacke of wysedome in the ruler whych demed & taught as a chylde, gyuyng sentēce of wylfulnes and nat of reason. So that whyle a chylde reygned, selfe wyll & iuste reygned / & reason wyth good conscyēce were outlawed, with iustyce, stedfastnesse, & many other vertuys. But of thys parell & daun∣ger we ben delyuered by the especyal helpe & grace of god, Quia vir dominabi∣tur tur in populo / that is to meane, he that is nat a chylde but perfyght in reason. For he commeth natte to execute hys owne wyll / but hys wyll that sente
hym, that is to wytte goddes wyl / as a man to whome god of hys habun∣daunte grace hath gyuen perfyghte reason and dyscrescyon, to dyscerne & deme as a perfyght man. wherefore nat alonely of thys man we shall say that he shall dwell in wysedome / but as a perfyght man and nat a chylde, he shall thynke & deme / & haue suche a cyrcūspecte wyth hym, that he shall dylygently foreloke & se that goddes wyll be done and nat hys. And there∣fore nowe I truste the wordes of the wyse man Ecclesiastici decimo shalbe veryfyed in our kynge / sayenge index sapiens iudicabit populum suum, & principatus sensati stabilis erit / that is as sayeth the wyse man, A wyse and dyscrete iuge shall now deme hys people / & the do∣mynyon or lordshyppe of a dyscrete wyse man, shall stande stedfast. wher upon shall than folowe the seconde verse of the same chapyter / sayenge Secundum iudicem populi, sic & ministri eius. &c. that is, Lyke as the hede and soue∣raygne is replenysshed wyth all sa∣pyence and vertue in guydynge of hys people, admynistrynge to theym lawe wyth due & conuenyent iustyce / so shall the subiectes agayn warde be garnysshed wyth awe and louynge drede / & bere vnto hym nexte god all honoure, trouthe, & allegeaunce. So that than it maye be concluded wyth the resydue of the foresayde verses, Qu alis rector est ciuitatis, tales & inhabitantes in ca. whyche is to meane, Suche as ye ruler of the cytye is suche than be the inhabytauntes of the same. So that consequentely it foloweth, a good mayster maketh a good dyscyple. And in lykewyse / an euyll kynge or ruler shall lose hys people, and the cytyes of hys kyngedome shalbe left desolate and vnhabyted. wherefore thus I make an ende, in stede of a chylde wylfully doynge hys luste and pleasure wythout rea∣son / nowe shall a man be lorde and ruler, yt is replenysshed wyth sapiēce and reason / and shall gouerne the people by skylfull domys, settynge a parte all wylfulnesse and pleasure of hym selfe. So that the worde that I beganne wyth, maye be veryfyed of hym, Ecce quia vir dominabitur in populo. The whyche our lorde graunte / and that he maye prosperously reygne to the pleasure of god and welthe of his realme Amen. The whyche oracion beyng thus fynyshed, & the people answerynge wyth greate gladnesse, Amen: the kynge standyng vpon hys fete, sayd vnto the lordes & commons present. Syrs, I thanke you my lordes spy∣rytuall & temporal, and all the states of thys lande / and do you to vnderstāde, that it is nat my wyll, that any man thynke, that by the waye of con∣queste I wolde dysheryte any man of hys herytage, fraunchyse, or other ryghtes that hym oughte to haue of ryghte / nor for to putte hym oute of that whyche he nowe enioyeth, and hath hadde before tyme by custome of good lawe of thys realme / excepte suche pryuate persones as haue ben agayne the good purpose and the cō∣mon profyte of the realme. And thys speche thus fynysshed / all sheryfes and other offycers were put in theyr auctorytyes, whiche sea¦sed for the tyme that the kynges see was voyde / and after euery man de∣parted. And at after noone were procla∣macions made in accustumat places of the cytye, in the name of kynge Henry the fourthe. And vppon the morowe folowynge beynge wen∣nysdaye, and the fyrste daye of Oc∣tober / the procuratours aboue na∣med yode vnto the towre of London & there certified hym of the admissiō
of kyng Henry. And the foresayd iu∣styce wyllyam Thirnynge in ye name of the other, & for all the states of the lande / gaue vppe vnto Rychard late kyng, all homage & fealte to hym be∣fore time due, i lyke maner & fourme as before I haue shewed to you in ye xix. yere of kynge Edwarde the .ii. And thus was the noble prynce pry∣ued of all kyngly dygnyte & honour, by reason of hys euyll counsayll, and suche vnlafull wayes & meanes as he by hys insolency in his realme suf¦fered to be vsed, whan he had reyg∣ned .cxii. yeres thre monethes & .viii. dayes. ¶Charles the .vii. Francia. CArolus or Charles the .vii of ye name, or the .vi. after thac¦compte of ye Frēche hystory, a chylde of xiii. yeres of age, & sonne vnto Char∣les the .vi / began hys reygne ouer the Frenchemen in the moneth of Septembre, & yere of our lorde .M.CCC. & .lxxx / and the thyrde yere of the seconde Rycharde than kyng of Englande. Thys Char¦les was crowned kynge wythin the age of .xiiii. yeres, contrary a lawe made in the .xi. yere of hys father. And where by hym he was commyt∣ted vnto the rule of Lewys his vncle & duke of Angeou, to the tyme of the ful of .xiiii. yeres / yet after the deth of the father, suche vnkyndenesse begā to spryng betwene the lordes of the realme, that for the comon welthe of the same it was agreed by the more partye, that thys Charles shulde be crowned at Raynes i all hasty spede. The whyche was done in short seasō after / & so contynued nat wythoute dysturbaunce of malyce whych kyn∣deled betwene hys two vncles, and other inconueniences, by the space of iii. yeres ensuyng. The .iiii. yere of hys reygne / the cytesyns of Parys murmurynge and grudgynge for dy¦uerse imposycyons & taskes of them, leuyed sodeynly arose in greate mul∣tytude, entendynge to haue dystres∣sed some of the kynges housholde ser¦uaūtes, & such as were men of {per}son. But by medyacyon of one dyscrete parsone named Iohn Marsyle, with assystence of the prouost of the mar∣chauntes, the rumoure was somdele appeased / in so mych that the greate multytude was wythdrawen and re∣tourned to theyr occupacyons. But some euyll dysposed, whyche in su∣spycyous congregacyon euer vse to exyte and styrre the people vnto rob∣bynge and other vnlefull acres / reas¦socyate them, & sayde and cryed that they wolde haue the Iewys banys∣shed the cytye. To whom it was an∣swered that the kynge shuld be enfor¦med of theyr desyre / and that vppon it they shulde haue knowlege of the kynges pleasure, wherupō in a rage they ranne vnto the houses of the Ie¦wes / and entryd them by force, in rob¦bynge and spoylynge them, and bare awaye what they myght cary / in sle∣ynge suche of the Iewes as any resy¦stēce and defence made agayn them / & neuer after restored ye sayd goodes, not wythstandynge that the kyng in that byhalfe gaue sore and strayte cō¦maundementes. It was not longe after that suche as were of ye kynges secrete counsayle, consyderynge the great charges and nedes of ye kyng, and the weykenesse of his treasoure / by authoryte of the kynges cōmyssy∣ons called before them the rulers of Parys, of Roan, and other good cy∣tyes. The whyche beynge assembled, to them was shewed the many and importune charges whyche ye kynge
dayly had for the defēse of hys realm and subiectes. wherfore by all wyse & polytyke meanes that they myghte vse, they exorted the sayde commons to graūte vnto the kynge in waye of subsydye .xii.vi. of the poūde of all wa¦res at that dayes curraūt. To the whyche requeste in conclusyō after aduyse taken of theyr neyghbours / it was answered that the peple were so sore charged in tymes passed, that they myght nat susteyne or bere any more charges, tyll theyr necessytie were otherwyse releuyd / so that in cō¦clusyō at thys season the kynge and hys coūsayll were dyspoynted. In the .vi. yere of thys Charles / ye Flemynges, whych by a certayne sea¦son had rested theym frome batayll / were it for necessyte or synguler coue¦tyze of Lewys theyr duke, he asked of them a greate ayde or taske. And for he knewe well that yf he myghte wynne the fauoure and graūt of the towne of Gaunt, he shulde the soner haue hys pleasure of the resydue / therefore he fyrste began by meanes of fayrenesse. And after whā thereby he sawe he myght take none aduaū∣tage, he added therunto manasses & thretenynges / the whyche nat wyth∣standynge the Flemynges bode sted∣fast in one opynyon, & denayed styfly theyr dukes request. whereuppon he lastly departyng from Gaunt, wyth great displeasure sayd, I shall shewe my selfe to be lorde & soueraygne of thys towne & of the obstynat people of the same. And shortly after ye duke made sharpe warre vpō thē of Gaūt / & they in lykewise defēded them vigu¦rously, so that theyr enemyes wā of them lytle auaūtage. And after thys warre hadde bē a season contynued, nat wythoute losse of many men vp∣pon bothe partyes / the Gaunteners remembrynge the obedyence and fy∣delyte whyche they shulde bere to theyr souerayne lorde & duke, made meanes that they myghte be harde. After graunte whereof, they sente vnto hym certayne oratours whyche hadde vnto hym the wordes in sen∣tence folowynge. Mooste souerayne nexte god, we deny nat but we accept the for our prynce and leder / & to the as thyne it becommeth vs to obey wyth all reason. And thou agayne arte bounde to defende vs. If we any thyng by our ouersyght & neclygence haue agayn the trespassed / we mekely beseche the of forgyuenesse. And furthermore be∣sechynge the, that suche fraunchyses & lybertyes to vs by thy noble pro∣genytours before graūted, thou wyll nat from vs withdraw nor abrydge / by reason wherof thy people of Gaūt maye nat to any taxe contrary theyr volunte be cōstrayned. But & to thy nede of warres thou haue necessytye of ayde of thy commons, they of free wyll all cōstraynte sette a parte, are redy to ayde and helpe the, as fre & as lyberall as thy trewe subiectes. By reason of whyche wordes ye duke was of hys ire towarde theym some what apeased. But after theyr depar¦tyng from the duke or erles presēce / such yonge knyghtes as were of the erles hoste, hadde vnto theym many hygh & dysdaynous wordes / sayeng that they were thrall vnto theyr erle, and that theyr obstynacye shulde be to the vttermoste of theyr reproche & correccyon, and they by coaccion and constraynt forced to do theyr dutye. By occasyō of whyche wordes / the Gaūteners retournyng to theyr for∣mer wylfulnesse, kepte styl theyr for∣mer opynyō, & defended the erle & his people as they before hadde done. wherfore the erle seynge he myghte nat by strēghte preuayle agayne hys enemyes / studied the wayes & mea∣nes to famysshe theym by hunger /
so that by that meane he might draw the towne to hys subieccyō. And that to brynge to effecte he gyrde ye towne about wyth a stronge syege. Than the Gaūteners supprysed wyth more obduracion of herte agayne theyr prynce / made them a capytayne na∣med Phylype Artyuele, the sonne of Iakes de Artyuele before slayne of ye Flemynges / lyke as to you I haue before shewed in the .xvii. yere of Phi¦lippe de Ualoys late kyng of Fraūce The whyche furnysshynge hys peo∣ple wyth all habylymentes of warre / made out of the towne & pyghte hys feelde in a playne ioynynge vnto it / where the erles people & they fought a sharpe fyght & longe. But in ye ende fortune was vnto the erle or duke so frowarde that wyth losse of .v.M. of hys soudyours he was forced to take Bruges for hys suertye. By reason of thys vyctory thys Artyuele beynge nat a lytle suppry∣sed wyth pryde / exorted in such wyse the dwellers wythin the towne of Gaunte, and all suche as were nere neyghbours vnto them, to set a parte all occupacyon aswell husbandry as other, & gyue theyr hole study vnto actes and feates of warre. The erle thus beynge wythin ye town of Bru∣ges / a daye of greate solempnytie ye∣relye holden by them of Bruges ap∣proched, whyche they wordshypped in the honoure of our lordes bloode. To thys daye of solemptye vsed yere¦ly to come, all the inhabytauntes of the vyllages & coūtrey there aboute. whyche daye of feast Phylyp de Arti¦uele callynge to mynde / appoyntyd vnto hī .ii.M of his soudiours / & war¦ned them wyth armoure beynge clad vnder theyr clothes, to ascende by .ii, by thre, by foure, & lyke small compa¦nyes vnto thys feestfull solempnyte / & at such tyme as he gaue warnyng, euery man to be redy wyth swerde in hande, to make rome amōge ye prese to the ende that they myght take the erle than of helpe destytute. whyche cautele thus prepared for / at the day comyn of thys sayde feeste, the towne beynge replenysshed with people / the sayde Artyuele vnsuspect of any per∣sone, with hys company in maner a∣bouesayde entred the towne of Bru∣ges. And whā he sawe his best tyme / he sodeynly cryed, asarmis, asarmes. wyth whyche sodeyn crye the erle be∣ynge astonyed / manfully for a whyle wythstode hys enemyes, and encou∣raged the people agayne them. But for that the Gaunteners were in ar∣moure and the other vnarmed / they of the erles party fled soone. That seynge the erle, wyth great diffyculte fledde / & so lepyng ieopardously into the house of an olde woman, escaped & went vnto Scluse, & there a whyle helde hym. Than thys Artyuele sayeng that by the ayde of theym of Bruges he was dispoynted of the erles takyng / felle vpon the inhabytauntes of the towne, and slewe of theym a certayn / and after wyth greate pompe & pyl∣lage retourned vnto Gaunt. IN the .vii. yere of this Charles / by procuryng of hys vncle Le¦wys duke of Angeou, a taxe was efte axed of the comons of Fraunce. The whych to bryng to effecte many fren∣des & promoters were made, aswell of cytezyns as other. But anone as ye commons of Parys vnderstode of this / they became wylde, & assembled in thycke companies / nat regardyng the reasonable allegacions to theym layed and shewed by Petyr Dylet & Iohn̄ Matsyll, though in them they had great affeccion & truste / but toke them to theyr affeccion & mynde, and made amonge them certayn capytay¦nes & rulers / and kept the watche by
nyght as enemyes had lyen about ye cytye. whyche insurreccyon & rebel∣lyon thus begon wythin the cytye of Parys / the cytye of Roan̄ takynge therof exaumple, arrered a lyke mur¦mure / and sensyd the cytye of Roane wyth lyke prouysyon / & made theym  mamet of a fatte / and vnweldy as a vylayne of the cytye caryed him about the towne in a cart, & named hym in dyrysyō of theyr prynce theyr kynge / & ceased nat to fall into many inconuenyences, as robbyng of holy places and other, nat wythoute she∣dynge of bloode, wherof the cyrcum∣staunce were longe to telle. But as all operaciō of mā hath ende so thys foly and rebellyon of Frenchemen was ceased / & many for the trespasse therof caste in harde & darke pryson. Of the whyche the kynge entended to haue taken cruell correccyon, ne hadde ben the great instaunt labour made by the rulers of the vnyuersyte of Parys, and other suche as were nere aboute the kynge. By whose meanes the multytude was pardo∣ned / and a fewe suche as were the be∣gynners were put in execucyon. And than as testyfyeth myn auctour may¦ster Robert Gagwyne, for to appease the kynges hyghe dyspleasure, to hī was graūted an hūdreth thousande frankes, whyche after sterlynge mo∣ney amoūteth the summe of .x. thou∣sande li. ye haue before harde howe ye erle of Flaūders wyth great ieopardy es∣caped the hādes of Phylyp de Arty∣uele capytayne of Gaūte / & howe he came to Scluse, and there safegar∣ded hym selfe. where wyth all dyly∣gence he gathered vnto hym hys peo¦ple, & made a new reyse vpō the sayd Artyuele. The whyche to hym hadde assocyat as affermeth my sayd auctor xl.M. mē / so that betwene the erle & hym was foughtē a cruell fyghte. wherof in ye ēde Artiuele was agayn vyctour, & cōstrayned the erle to for∣sake the feelde wyth losse of .x.M. of hys knyghtes / & he hym self escaped wyth great daūger vnto they lande of  / and dyuers of hys peo∣ple as Frēchmē and other, in a good noumbre fledde vnto a towne called And werpe / where a season they defē∣ded them agayne the malyce of theyr enemyes. In whyche passe tyme this Artyuele cōiecturyng in hys mynde that the Frenche kynge wolde take the erles patty / sente vnto hym an ambassador message wyth letters / besechynge hym nat to entremedle of thys warre betwene the erle and the Gaūteners / whyche warre the erle had  onely of tyranny and nat of iustyce, entēdyng vtterly to di¦stroy the auncyēte lybertye & fraun∣chyse. Shewyng also farther; that yf he wolde nat as theyr cōtemplacyon & pryer forbere to ayde theyr sayde erle / that thā to defende theyr lyberte & ryght, they wolde seke ayde of the kynge of Englāde. To the whych requeste none answere was made, neyther by the kynge nor by hys coūsayll wherfore thys Artyuele ma¦de strōge prouysyon to wythstande ye Frēche kynge / and sette a certayne of hys soudyours for to kepe the syege before▪ And werpe, whyle he made po¦uysyon for other nedes. In thys meane whyle the erle went vnto the duke of Burgoyn / & they to∣gyther yode after vnto kynge Char∣les / shewyng to him lamētably what wrōges ye erle had susteyned of ye ob∣stynat Gaūteners / besechyng hym of ayde to redres ye sayd wrōges. which cōplaynt the kyng graciously herde / and benyngly graūted to them theyr petycyon. And natwythstandynge that ye dede of wynter was cōmyng, he in all haste assembled hys knygh¦tes / & takynge wyth hym, the Oryf∣flambe,
wyth a myghty stronge hoste perced the coūtrey of Flaunders to∣warde Marquet in the ende of ye mo∣neth of Octobre. wherof heryng Ac∣tyuele / made prouisyon to stoppe the ways,The  of Coutray. by brekyng of brydges and o∣ther meanes / wherby the Frēch hoste was greatly empeched & let / so that wyth great dyffycultye & daunger, they passed ye riuer of Lyze at a brydg longe defended by the inhabytaūtes of the coūtrey, wyth ayde of theyr ca∣pytayne named Peter wood / whiche there was slayne wyth .iii.M. of hys adheretes. After wynnyng of whiche brydge, the Frenche hoste passed the ryuer, & spoyled the countrey before them / whyche vnto them was moche auaylable, for that cyrcuit was inha¦byted with many ryche clothmakers Than the kyng with hys hoste made towarde the mount of Ipre. whereof the dwellers of Ipre beyng ware / fēt out two freers of ye ordre of prechers, to beseche the kynge to accepte that town and dwellers vnto hys mercy, the whych retourned wyth comfo∣table answere. wherfore forthwyth yode forthe .xii. of the notablest of ye towne, & offered the towne and dwel∣lers to be in the kynges power. The whyche offer the kyng accepted / and after entred the towne. Of whome ye kynge receyued .xl.M. frākes, or .iiii.M.li. sterlynge toward the wagyng of hys knyghtes. And shortely after all the vyllages there toward the see submytted them vnto the king / bryn¦gyng vnto hym certayn capytaynes whyche belonged vnto Phylyppe de Artyuele, wyth also fourthy thousād frankes towarde theyr costes / which capytaynes the kynge commaunded to be fourthe wyth beheded. whanne kynge Charles hadde taryed fyue dayes at Ipre / worde was broughte to hym that Phylype Artyuele was commynge towarde hym wyth .lx. thousand mē. wherfore the kyng set forwarde hys hoste, & fo¦lowed after as fast as he myght som deale to hys payne, by reasō of rayne & fowle waye that he passed / so that fynally he approched wythin .iii. my∣les of his enmyes. Upō the morowe folowyng theynge the .v. daye of the moneth of Decembre, & yere of oure lordes incarnacion .M.CCC.lxxx. & viii. and begynnyng of the viii. yere of thys Charles / in a playne nere vnto ye town of Courtray was fough¦ten a cruell batayll. whereof in the be¦gynnyng the Flemynges had the bet¦ter & forced the Frenche hoste to lose place. But in the ende, by specyall cal¦lynge of the Frenche knyghtes vnto our Ladye & other sayntes / halfe by myracle as wytnesseth myne auctor, the Frēchmen opteyned victory, and put the Flemynges to fyght / & them chased in so cruell wye, that by deth in the feelde / & drownyng in mareys and other waters, there was of them slayne at that fyghte vppon .xl.M. Than narowe serche was made for the capytayn Phylyppe de Artyuele. And lastly a flemynge beyng a capy∣tayne of hys sore woūded / sayde that he sawe hym fall in the feelde. where∣uppon serche beyng made / hys caryē was founden oppressed of hys owne people as they fledde. Anone as ty∣dynges came vnto the Flemynges, yt laye about Andwerpe of the losynge of the felde / they in all haste leuynge theyr ordenaūce behynde thē, fledde frō the syege. That perceyuyng theyr enemyes, issued oute of the towne / and slewe of theym many / & many were drowned in fennys and ma∣rycys. whanne the Frenche kynge had opteyned thus this glorious victory he than entred the town of Courtray. where he so restynge hym / oratours
were sent to hym frome the towne of Bruges, whyche than hadde newely taken party wyth Artyuele / & wyth ye paymente of an .C. & .xx.M. frankes or .xii.M.ii. sterlynge money, there made a peace for the sayde towne of Bruges. And whan the kyng shuld depart from Courtray / he commaunded his knyghtes to bete downe the gates of the same, wythoute harme doynge vnto the people. But the Frenchmen berynge in mynde the rebukes and harmes, whyche they before of that towne had susteyned / bete downe great parte of the walles, robbed and slewe moche of the people, & sette fyre vpon the towne whā they had done. In robbynge of thys towne of Cour¦tray▪ dyuers letters were founde of ye towne or cytye of Parys, whych con∣teyned the rebellyō of the Parysyen∣ces before declared, wyth comforte to theym for ayde if they neded whyche letters whā they came vnto the kyn∣ges syght, he was wyth theym of Pa¦rys greuously displeased / and for the same, theym by fyne greuously after punysshed. At such tyme as the kyng hadde thus repossessed the erle of the lordshyp of Flaūders / Gaunt yet re∣maynynge in theyr fyrst errour, held theyr towne so strōgely, that nother kynge nor erle myght wynne within theym. All be it that after the French kynge was retourned into Fraunce / they sent certayn oratours vnto him, the whyche he in no wyse wolde suf∣fer to come in hys syght. In these passed yeres many skyr∣mysshes and fyghtes were done be∣twene the Frēchemen & Englyshmē, whyche some deale are touched in the begynnynge of Rychardes reygne. But nothynge to the honoure of the Frenchemen, as they in theyr crony∣cles boste & auaunce theym selfe. Many mo rebellyōs & insurreccyōs of thys people myght I here brynge in. But for dyuers consyderacions whyche to wyse men maye appere, I thynke it better to spare / & also the re¦hersayll of them wolde aske a longe tracte of tyme. wherefore I passe ouer. AFter the appeasynge of these inordynate insurreccyōs and murmures, & that the lāde was some deale sette in a quyetnes / kyng Char¦les in the begynnynge of the .ix. yere of hys reygne, maryed Isabell the doughter of the duke of Bauary.Deth of Charles kynge of Nauerne. In thys yere also dyed Charles ye kynge of Nauerne a man of great age / and by a wonderfull happe as reherseth myne auetoure. For so it was, that for hys feblenesse or debylyte of age / he by counsayll of physycyons was sowed in a shete wesshed wyth aqua vite, to the ende to rause hys olde body to catche naturall hete. But howe it was, as thys shete was tac∣ked aboute hys bodye / the sewer ta∣kynge hys candell to burne of ye ende of the trede, or he were ware the fyre fastened in the shete / & so brente hys flessh or it myght be lowsed frō hym, that he caught therof suche dyssease, that he dyed the .iii. daye folowyng. whyche myshappe fell to hym after ye opynyon of myne auctour by ye wret¦che of god, as cōdygne meryte for his vnstedfastnesse & vntroth by hym be∣fore vsed, as in sundry places before in the storyes of kyng Iohn̄ & Char∣les hys sonn̄ are manyfestly shewed. In thys yere also a batayll was done at Parys betwene .ii. knyghtes of the duke of Alenson / whereof the cause ensuyeth. Thys sayd duke had in hys court two knyghtes / whereof that one was named Iohn̄ Carengō or Carongyon, and that other Ia∣quet. Gryer, whyche were bothe in good fauoure of theyr mayster.
Thys Carongon, were it for delyte to se straunge countreys, or cause of other auenture as pilgrymage or o∣ther, departed out of Fraūce, leuyng hys wyfe in a castel or fortresse of his owne / whyche wyfe was goodly and fayer. After whose departynge, were it for beauty of the womā or for euyll wyl that he bare towarde hys felow / this Iaquet Gryse entryd the castel, berynge hys wyfe on hande, that he was comyn to se that house, whyche shewed so fayre outwarde. The wo∣man castynge no parell, acceptynge hym for her husbādes frende & hyrs shewed to him the cyrcuite of ye place. But he in contrary awaytynge hys, praye, whan he sawe the womā farre from company, forsed hyr in suche maner, that contrary hyr wyll he cō∣mysed wyth her auoutry. At whose departyng she gaue vnto hym many rebukeful wordes / sayenge playnlye that yf hyr husbāde euer retourned, she wolde of that velany be reuēged. Thys dede was kepte secrete tyll the retourne of hyr husbande. At whose home commyng, she wyth lamētable countenaunce shewed tyll hyr hus∣bande all the demeanure of the sayd Iaquet. After whyche complaynte by hyr husbande well vnderstanden / he yode streyght vnto the duke of Alen∣son / requyryng hym to do correccion vpō the auoutrer, or els yt he myghte trye it with hym in ye felde by fortune of batayll / whereof nother the duke wolde graunt, but brought the qua∣rell before the kyng. By whose agre∣ment and commaundemente a daye by the kynge was sette to fyghte at Parys. whā the daye of batayll was comen / Carogon broughte hys wyfe vnto the place, to iustyfye hyr for∣mer sayenge. After affyrmacyon whereof / eyther fyrste ranne at other wyth sharpe speres. At whyche course Iaquet wounded hys enemie in the thyghe wyth hys spere. But Carongon beynge wyth it nothynge dysmayed / lyght from hys horse, and bare hym so manfully, that he ouer∣came hys aduersarye, & caused hym to confesse hys offence / for the whych he was streyght drawen vnto the gy¦bet of Parys, and there hāged. And to the sayd Carongon the kyng gaue in rewarde a thousande frākes or a hundreth poūde sterlynge money / & ouer that he gaue vnto hym as an annuall fee or rent two hūdreth fran¦kes, whyche is in value of .xx. poūde sterlynge money. In these dayes as wytnesseth Gag¦wynus / an anker berynge in hys hande a rede crosse, a man to loke to of goostlye conuersacyon, came vnto the Frēche kynges court. The which by the housholde seruaūtes or famy∣lyers of the court, was lōge kept frō hys presence / all be it that lastelye he was brought vnto hym. To whome he shewed that he was deuynely mo∣nysshed, that he shulde charge hym to absteyne from hys customable vse in leuyenge so often taskes & subsy∣dyes / & yt he dyd nat, he shulde well vnderstande, that the wrath of god was nere to hym to punysshe hym, yf he refused hys commaūdement. The whyche message the kynge toke at small regarde. But shortly after the quene was delyuered of a doughter that dyed soone after. wherefore the kynge callynge to mynde the ankers wordes / for fere of other punysshe∣ment refrayned a season frome leuy∣enge of trybutes and taskes. But by the exortacion of hys two vnkylles, he in shorte season after tourned to hys former custome. Kynge Charles thus passynge hys tyme wyth greate murmure of hys commons, & rebellyon of the duke of
Brytayn, wyth many other aduersy∣tyes whych were longe to wryte / last¦ly in the .xiiii. yere of hys reygne or nere about, he made warre vpon the people of west Fraunce called in late Cenomanni. whan Charles was entred thys countrey, whyche was in the domy∣nyon of the duke of Brytayn / ye duke sent vnto hym messengers, sayenge to hym that he shulde nat nede to in∣uade hys coūtrey wyth so great strē∣ghte / for he and his shuld be hooly at hys commaundement. But of thys message ye king toke no regard / for as sayth myne auctour, he was nat most wysest prynce, but was ruled by hys housholde seruauntes, and belyued euery lyght tale that was brought to hym / and ouer that he was so lyberal that it was of wyse men accompted more prodygalyte than lyberalitye. As Charles nat wythstandyng this message of ye duke helde on his iour∣nay / commynge nere vnto a woode, he was sodeynly mette of a man lyke vnto a begger whyche sayde vnto hī whither goest thou syr kyng / beware thou go no farther for thou arte be∣trayed / and into the handes of thyne enemyes thyne owne meyny shall de¦lyuer the▪ wyth thys monyssion of thys poore mā / the kynge was asto∣nyed, & stoode styl, and begā to muse. In whyche study he so beyng / one of hys folowers whyche after hym bare his spere, sleped vpō his horse backe / & in hys so slepyng let hys spere fall vpon the helmet of hys felowe▪ wyth whych stroke the kyng was sodeynly fered, thynkynge hys enemyes had commen vnwarely vpō hym where∣fore he in a gere drewe hys swerde & layed about hym at the geynest, and slewe .iiii. of his knyghtes or he were refrayned / and toke therewyth suche an endelye fere, that he fell therwyth dystraughte. wherefore he was to a place there by broughte, & lay there in poynte of deth a longe season after, in so moch that the fame ranne that he was ded. But by prayers & other greate dedes of charyte done for hym / lastely he re¦couered and retourned vnto Parys. And for he was nat yet retourned to hys perfyghte helthe / his two vncles than beynge that one duke of Berry, & that other duke of Burgone, toke vpon them by auctoryte of the esta∣tes of the lande, to rule the realm for that season / in whyche season diuers officers were altered & chaūged. The kyng thus contynuyng his lykenes / many interludes and games were deuysed for the kynges recreacyon & comforte. And vppō a season he beynge lod¦ged in the quenes lodgynge in the subarbes of saynte Marcell / dyuers noble men of the courte made a dys∣guysynge, and apparayled theym in lynnen clothes glewed vnto theyr na¦ked bodyes wyth pytche / & florisshed theym wyth dyuerse colours & oyles so that they were couered all excepte the faces / and thus apparayled with torche lyghte entred the Chaumbre where as the kyng was, and there in goodly maner shewed theyr disport / so that the kynge was therewith wel contented. But were it of rechelesnesse or of some uyl disposed person / fyre was put to the vestures of the disguysers / the whyche anone was vppon suche a flame, that no man there coulde quenche it. wherfore the sayd disguy¦sers beynge by reason of pytche and oyles greuously turmented, ranne into pyttes and waters whyche they myghte sonest attayne nto / and so wyth greate dyffyculte saued theym selfe. In meane tyme whereof, the chaū¦ber beynge wyth the same tyred,
grewe in so greate a flame, that in shorte whyle the more parte of that lodgynge was consumed / to ye great fere of ye kynge and other astates thā there beynge presente, and augmen∣tynge agayne of his former sykenes / so that certayne appoyntementes to be holdē betwene hym and Rychard kynge of Englande, were for that tyme put of. IN the .xvi. yere of thys Char∣les / the maryage of peace be∣twene bothe realmes was concluded and fynysshed at Calays / as before I haue shewed to you in the .xix. yere of kyng Rycharde. And that trium¦phe fynysshed / Charles at the cōtem∣placyon and prayer of the kynge of Hungry, sent vnto hym Phylyp erle of Arroys, wyth dyuers other knygh¦tes in good noumber, to ayde ye sayd kynge agayne the Turkys. The whyche after that they hadde there a season warred / the capytaynes & the more party of the Frenchemen, of the Turkys were dystressed & slayne / & many taken prisoners to theyr great charge. Thys Charles thus contynuyng hys lykenesse / two freres of saynte Augustynes order beynge desyrous of money, toke vppon theym to cure the kyng. And after they had shauen hys hede and mynistred to hym medi¦cyns / the kynge dayly febled in suche wyse yt he was nye dede. For whiche cōsyderacyon / they examyned by phy¦losophers and doctours of physyke & founden vncunnynge, were degra∣ded of theyr presthode, & after behed∣ded. To thys folye were these fre∣tes broughte, by the excytynge of the duke of Burgoyne as the common fame went. In the .xix. yere of thys Charles the lande of Fraunce was greuously vexed wyth the plage of ipydymye / of whyche sykenesse a greate multy∣tude of people dyed. And that yere was there also sene a blasynge starre of wonderfull bygnes, wyth stremes apperynge to mēnes syghte of moste feruent brennynge. In thys yere also Charles herynge of ye subduyng of kynge Rycharde, sente into Eng∣lande two of hys housholde knygh∣tes / requyrynge kynge Henry the fourth than newelye made kynge, to sende home hys doughter Isabell latelye maryed vnto kyng Rychard, wyth suche do war as wyth hyr was promysed. In doynge of whyche message kynge Henry toke such dyspleasure, that as sayeth Gagwinus myne auctour, he threwe the sayde twoo knightes in prysone / where through one of theym named Blanchet dyed in Englande, and that other called Henry, after greate sykenesse retour∣ned into Fraunce. And shortely after kynge Henry sente the sayde dame Isabell vnto Calays / where she was ioyously receyued of the Frenchemen, and so conueyed vnto hyr sayde father, whyche as yet was nat of hys sykenesse cured. By reason whereof among the lordes of Fraūce, eueryche of them coueytyng to haue rule, great dyssencion & ma∣lyce begā to kendle / and specyallye betwene the dukes of Orleaunce, of Burgoyne, and of Berry. Than the duke of Orleaunce entēdyng to pro∣mote hys cause / vnknowyng the o∣ther lordes, allyed hym wyth ye duke of Geldre, & strēghthed hym wyth .v.C. men of hys, & so entred the feeldes of Parys. And in lyke maner ye duke of Burgoyne wyth a stronge cōpany kept an other cooste of ye countrey. Natwythstandyng by meanes of other lordes these two dukes were kept a sunder / & at lenghte yt duke of Orleyaunce by the kynges comaun¦dement
that somewhat was than a∣mended, was ordayned regente of the realme. The whiche anone as he was sette in auctoryte / fell to all ra∣uyne, and oppressed the people with cotydyan taskes and tallages / and ye spirituall men with dymes & other exaccyons. wherfore by reason of the studyentes of Parys, he was at len∣gthe discharged of that dignyte, and the duke of Burgoyne for hym put in auctoryte. Than the duke of Or∣leyaunce beynge discontented, yode vnto Lucēbourgth a towne in highe Almayne, & sought agayne ayde of the duke of Geldre foresayd. But by his frendes he was so aduertysed, yt with his owne folkes he returned in¦to Fraunce. But yet the malyce and stryfe a twene hym and the duke of Burgoyne seased nat. About this season or soone after, dyed the duke of Brytayne. And as affermeth the auctour afore named / kyng Henry ye .iiii. maryed his wyfe. wherof hering ye duke of Burgoyne, with a company of .vi.M. knyghtes entred Brytayne / & there by strength toke from her, her .iii. sonnes named Iohn̄, Richard, & Arthure / & presen∣ted them vnto kynge Charles. In ye xxii. yere of this Charles, was borne of Isabell hys wyfe a man chylde, which also was named Charles / the which after the deth of his father, vn¦to ye great aduersyte of all the realme of Fraūce, was king of that realme / & contrary the appointment taken a twene Henry the .v. after kynge of Englande, and thys Charles the fa∣ther nowe of Fraunce kynge / as af∣ter shall more appere in the story of the sayde kynge Henry the fyfte. In this yere also was dame Isa∣bell somtyme wyfe of Rycharde la∣telye kynge of Englande, maryed vnto Charles eldeste sonne of the duke of Orleyaunce. And Iohn̄ the eldyste of the .iii. forenamed sonnes of the duke of Brytayne lately dede / toke to wyfe Margarete ye doughter of kynge Charles. And Phylyppe duke of Burgoyne dyed soone after / leauynge an heyre after hym named Iohn̄. The whyche after he was gyrde with the swerde of the duchye of Burgoyne / he anone by euyll en∣tysynge and counsell, areryd warre agayne the duke of Orleyaunce, to the great dysturbaunce of all the realme. For the sayde duke of Or∣leyaunce was a prynce of a wonder¦full hyghe courage, and desyrous of great honoure / and after the say∣enge of Gagwynus coueyted to be kynge of Fraunce. The whyche went to Auyngnyon / where as than sate the .xiii. Benet thā pope duryng the scisme, and admytted by some of the Cardynalles after the dethe of Clement ye .vi. To whiche Benet the said duke made great labour, to de∣pryue the Uniuersite of Parys from ye great auctoryte yt it at those dayes stode in / whiche was of merueylous auctoryte than, as sayeth the forena∣med auctour. In thys whyle thus endurynge the lande full of myse∣ryes & aduersites / the quene which yt moche fauoured the dukes partie ac¦companyed with the sayd duke rode to take her dysporte of huntynge in to the countrey of Meldon. To whi¦che place she sente letters vnto the Dolphyn by ye duke of Bauary her brother, that he with hys wyfe whi∣che was doughter vnto the duke of Burgoyne, shulde come for to dys∣porte theym. whereof Iohn̄ thanne duke of Burgoyne beynge warned / suspected the quene, that she wyth ayde of the duke wolde conueye the Dolphyn into Germanye, and there to holde hym at theyr pleasures. And to epeche that purpose / he ī all hae sped him towarde ye Dolphyn /
and contrary the mynde of the duke of Bauarye whiche than was vpon his waye with the sayd Doulphyne towarde the quene, retourned hym and lodged him in a stronge castell called Lupar. whereof herynge the duke of Orleyaunce / assembled to hym a cōpany of .vi. thousande kny∣ghtes & came agayne towarde Pa∣rys, where as that tyme the duke of Burgoyne was. And he herynge of ye dukes cōmyng, made him stronge to receyue hym. To whome the cy∣tezens of Parys were fauourable & aydynge, for the euyll wyll that they before bare vnto the duke of Orley∣aunce / & also for they hoped by hym to be defended from taskes and tal∣lages. Thus contynuynge the pro∣uisyon vpon bothe partyes to mete shortely in playne batayle / suche po∣lytike meanes was foūde by a noble man called Mountague, that a con∣corde and vnyte was for that tyme by hym sette atwene the sayd dukes. And for that newe occasyon shulde nat by presēce kyndle atwene them / therfore ye duke of Orleyaunce with hys company was sent into Guyan, to warre vpon the englysshemen / & that other vnto Calays to lay syege vnto that towne. The which before had prepared a wonderfull engyne sette vpon whelys / by the strength wherof he thoughte to wreke greate dysturbaunce vnto the sayd towne / & as sayth myne auctour Gagwyne, was in great hoope to recouer it a∣gayne to the subieccyon of the house of Fraūce. But that hope was soone dyspayred / for it was nat longe after or the sayd duke by the kynge was countermaunded and returned. And the duke of Orleyaunce, after he knewe that rescous were commyng frō Burdeaux / he remoued his siege layde by hym to Burgus a towne of Guyan / & so returned into Fraunce, to his cōfusyon as after shall appere. IN the .xxvii. yere of this Char∣les / the former malyce and en∣uye contynuyng in the brestes of the sayd dukes of Orleyaunce and of Burgoyne / as the sayd duke of Or∣leyaunce was goynge towarde hys lodgynge in the nyght of the .x. daye of Decembre, fell vpon him certayne knyghtes, of the whiche one named Rafe Auctouyle was leder / & slewe hym nere vnto a gate of the cytie of Parys named Barbet gate. After whyche murder fynysshed / ye sayde sir Rafe with hys adherentes fledde vnto the place of the erle of Ar¦toys, where the duke of Burgoyne vsed accustomably to resorte. And ye dede corps was soone after by suche as came to ye exclamacyō, with also a seruaūt of his with him slaine / borne into ye next houses. whan the rumour of this murder was blowen about ye cytie / anone Lewys vncle vnto the kynge and than kynge of Scecyle, the dukes of Berry and of Burbon with other, drewe thyder / and there with lamentacyon beholdynge the corps, commaunded prouisyon to be made for the buryenge of it within the monastery of Celestynes / where vpon the seconde day folowynge, he was buryed wyth great pompe. whome amōge other lordes folowed to his buryenge the duke of Bur∣goyne, nat without great suspicyon of the sayd murder. And that enterre¦ment with due obseruaunce fynys∣shed / auctoryte was gyuen vnto .ii. knyghtes named Roberte Tuyller & Peter Orpheuer, to make enquery for the murder of this prince. wher∣of the duke of Burgoyne beynge as∣certayned, voyded the cytie, & brake the brydge of saynte Maxence after hym, that pursute after hym shulde nat be made / and so hastely spedde
hym, that that nyght folowynge he came to Andwarpe, whiche is vpon an .C. myle from Parys. whan Char¦les the kyng harde of the escape of ye sayd duke / feryng leste he wolde ac∣cuse hym to be consentyng vnto that euyll dede, sent vnto hym comforta∣ble messages / so that the sayde duke without warre restyd all that wyn∣ter, sometyme in Arthoys, and an o∣ther whyle in Flaunders at his plea¦sure. In the whiche pastyme he sente into dyuers places of Fraunce son∣dry accusacyons of the duke before slayne, that he entēded to depose the kyng, and to take vpon hym the rule & gouernaunce of the realme, and to haue poysoned the sayd kyng, as by dyuers tokens by hym affermed for perfourmaūce of the same. And also that the said duke of Orleyaūce was cause of fyrynge of ye disguysers gar¦mentes before shewed, to the ende to brynge the kyng in more daunger of syckenes, or els to be consumed with the same fyre / with sondry other dista¦macyons, as leuyenge of taskes and imposicyons of the people, to his sin¦guler auauntage and hougely enry∣chynge, wherby he myghte the soner attayn vnto his said purpose. Thus contynuyng this great vnkyndenes atwene the duke of Burgoyne, and the sonne and other of his blode of ye duke of Orleyaunce / the said duke a¦gayne the begynnynge of the yere, herynge that the king and the quene were departed from Parys to Char∣ters, assēbled to hym a strōge power of Holāders & other, and came vnto Parys, in which cytie he moch trus∣ted / to the ende to cause the kynge, ye quene, and the Doulphyn, to whome he hadde maryed hys doughter, for to retourne vnto Parys. And to strengthe hys partye, he broughte with hym wyllyam erle of Hanster / which wyllyam was a man of great strengthe and allyaunce, and hadde maryed hys syster vnto the duke of Burgoyne foresayde / and hys dou∣ghter and heyre vnto one of kyng Charles sonnes / and was gossyppe vnto the quene. For whyche sayde, consyderacyons, the sayde erle enten¦dynge the weale of that realme of Fraunce, laboured suche wayes and meanes, that by hym for that tyme a concorde and vnytie was dryuen and made atwene the two dukes of Orleyaunce and Burgoyne, wyth assured othes and necessary actes to that concorde belongynge / and the king with his retynewe was agayne retourned vnto Parys. These du∣kes thus appeased, and the duke of Burgoyne agayne restored to the go¦uernaunce of the realme / assocyate vnto hym the kynge of Nauerne, whyche varyed nat from his fathers vnstable condycyons / so that by him newe occasyons of strye and vary∣aunce were moued atwene the sayde dukes and theyr allyes. For fyrste they soughte occasyon agayne the forenamed Mountague, a man of great wysedome and honoure in the kynges courte, and especyall frende vnto the duke of Orleyaunce / and by theyr malyce and vntrewe surmy¦ses fynally putte to dethe. And one named Peter Essayer or Sayer thā prouoste of the cytie of Parys or go¦uernoure, they admytted to the rule of the kynges treasoury / and other dyuers offyces suche as were any thynge fauoured of the duke of Or∣leaūce, they clerely dyscharged. The whyche for theyr relefe and comfort resorted vnto the sayde duke, shew∣ynge to him all ye demeanure of their aduersaryes / addynge thervnto, ye all suche conuencyons concernynge the amyte atwene hym and the duke of Burgoyne before sworne & enac∣ted, were clerely adnulled & broken.
with these tydynges the duke beyng fyred with newe malyce, accompa∣nyed to hym the dukes of Berry, of Burbon, and of Alenson, the erles of Rychemounte, of Alyberte, and of Armenake, with other nobles nat a fewe / by whose counsels he deter∣myned to be auenged vpon the duke of Burgoyne & other his fautours. wherof the sayde duke beynge mo∣nisshed, drewe him towarde Parys, and strengthed the fortresses as he yode. To thys duke of Burgoyne was brother the duke of Brabande named Anthony, a man of great poly¦cye and wysedome / the whych fore∣castynge the great shedynge of chry∣sten mannes blode, with many other inconuenyences lykely to haue en∣sued of this varyaunce atwene these two dukes, made suche affectuous labour, that with great diffyculte he pacifyed them agayne for that tyme / and brought them to personall com∣municacyon, and lastely to amyable and frendely departynge. After whi∣che concorde and amyte thus agayn concluded / the duke of Burgoyne de¦parted into Pycardy, leauynge be∣hynde him the fore named Peter Es∣sayr to rule the cytie of Parys. The whiche shortely after drewe to hym suche persones, as before tyme had vexed and distourbed ye duke of Or∣leyaunce frendes & seruauntes with in that cytie. By whose meanes the sayd Peter sought fyrste occasyon a∣gayne a knight named Uenyt Thor¦ney / and by false suggestyon smote fyrste of his hede, and after dyd hys body to be hanged vpon the cōmon gybet of Parys, in dyspyte of ye sayd duke as testifyeth myne Auctoure. wherwith ye duke beynge wondersly amoued / resembled his knyghtes, & spedde hym towarde a towne named And for to strengthe ano∣ther towne named, he sente a certayne nombre of his knyghtes / chargyng them with the dwellers to withstande the force of his enemies. Of this hearynge the duke of Bur∣goyne / anone gathered vnto him the noumbre of .xvi.M. flemynges and Pycardes / and sped hym vnto the sayde towne of And so with his instrumentes of warre assayled the gate of the sayde towne, whyche leadeth towarde saynt Quintyne, yt in shorte space the sayde Flemynges wan the entre of the towne. In why¦che meane season the dwellers wyth the other soudyours by a backe way or water, wherof the maner by thys auctoure is nat expressyd / lefte the towne, & yode vnto the duke of Orley¦aunce beynge as yet at the foresayde towne of whan the Flemyn¦ges were entered the towne, & foūde it deserte of people and pillage / were it for that they lacked theyr praye, or for other cause here nat shewed / they toke suche vnkyndenes agayne the duke, that for prayer nor yet for ma∣nasses they wolde nat with hym any lenger tary / but returned them home in all hastely spede towarde theyr owne countrey. So that the duke was fayne to withdrawe / and for the more suretie, to aske ayde and helpe of Englysshemen / and so was hol∣pen by the prynces comforte Henrye sonne of Henry the .iiii, as after shall be touched in the .xii. yere of the .iiii. Henry. IN the .xxxi. yere of thys kynge Charles, whiche was the .xii. yere of the .iiii. Henry than kynge of Englande / the duke of Orleyaunce seynge his enemye was turned from Parys, caused suche Brydges as be¦fore by his said enemye were broken to be reedyfyed. By the whyche he passed the ryuer tyll he came to saint Denys / where as than he fande a ca¦pytayne
a noble man named syr Iohn̄ Cabylon of the dukes of Bur¦goyne, there lefte by hym to strength the towne. The whiche syr Iohn̄, cō¦sideryng ye wekenes of ye said towne. with also his lacke of strēgth / yelded him & the towne vnto the duke / swe∣rynge to him by solempne othe, that after ye daye he shulde neuer bere ar∣mes agayne hym. In this pastyme an other capytayne of the Burgony∣ons called Gancourt, secretely by night wan vpon the frenche men the brydge of saynte Clodalde. But nat longe after the duke of Orleaunce sent thyther certayne Brytons / the whiche agayne recouered the sayde brydge, & helde it vnto ye sayd dukes vse. In whyche tyme and season the duke of Burgoyne recouerynge hys strength, passed the brydge of Me∣lent, & so came vnto the cytie of Pa∣rys / and the daye folowynge wyth helpe of the cytesyns recouered the abouesayd brydge of saynt Clodald, and dystressed vpon a .M. Brytons, whyche had the warde of the same. Then the duke of Orleaunce made out of saynte Denys ouer Sayne brydge towarde Parys. wherof that other duke beynge warned, refused the cytye / and with the kynge than there beynge present, remouyd wyth the Dolphyne to the towne called Stamps / and sent ye erle of Marche named Iamys, wyth a certeyne kny∣ghtes to a towne named to strength it ageyne the duke of Orle∣aunce. The whyche of the sayde du∣kes knyghtes was encountred with and taken, and so sent to pryson. wherof herynge the duke of Bur∣goyne, in shorte processe after retour¦ned vnto Parys wyth the kyng and dolphyne / and the duke of Orleaūce yode to a towne called Seyntclowe. And in the .xxxii. yere of thys sayd kynge Charles, by counceyll of the duke of Berry and other, seyng that the sayde cytye of Parys was so let agayne hym wyth also the kynge & the dolphine, sent a noble man of his hoste named Alberte vnto Henry the iiii yet kynge of Englande, to re∣quyre hym of ayde to withstande the tyrannye of the duke of Burgoyne, that wyth hys complyces entendyd to subuerte the realme of Fraunce. To this requeste kynge Henry gaue good eare, and lastely graunted to hys petycyon / & sent thyder as sayth the Frenche cronycle, Thomas hys sonne duke of Clarence / also ye duke of yorke, wyth Iohn̄ erle of Corne∣wayle, accompanyed wyth .viii.C. knyghtes and sowdyours, & a thou∣sande archers. The whych company, when they were landed in Fraunce, & herde yt the French lordes were in treaty of peace, & no man to thē gaue wages as they tofore were {pro}mysed / fell vpon a towne called and it ryffled / & therin toke as prysoners the abbot of that monastery wyth other, and cōueyed thē to Burdeaux, and after into Englande / where for theyr fynaunce & other money due of olde by the Frenche kynge, as affer∣meth Gagwyne, they remayned ma∣ny yeres after. And that the Englysh men were thus departed, albeit that in the Englysshe cronycle and .xiii. yere of the forenamed kynge Henry, of them is other report made / the lor¦des of Fraunce retourned to theyr olde discēcyon & contynued in longe stryfe / wherof the cyrcūstaunce were longe and tedyouse to tell, & to shewe the vnstablynesse of them, how some whyle the duke of Orleaunce was fauoured of the kynge and the dol∣phyne, and there agayne the duke of Burgoyne cleyne out of conceyte. The which cōtencyō thus enduryng kyng Henry ye iiii. dyed / and Henry his son ye .v. Henry, was admitted for
kyng of Englande after hym / that shortly after sent his ambassadours vnto the Frenche kynge, arynge of him his doughter Katheryne in ma∣ryage as affirmeth the frenche boke. But dyuers other wryters shewe, yt he asked the hoole landes due to him within the realme of Fraūce, by rea∣son of the composicion made in tyme passed, atwene his progenytour Ed∣warde the thyrde, & Iohn̄ than king of Fraunce. And for he was dysdey∣nously answered / he therfore made vpō them sharpe warre, as in the .iii. yere of ye sayd Hēry after some deale dothe appere. By reason of whyche warre, the cyuyle batayle or stryfe ye longe whyle had cōtynued amonge the frenche men, than dyd aswage. For in the .iii. yere of this Henry, whi¦che was the .xxxv. yere of this Char∣les / the said Henry inuaded ye realme of Fraunce, & had at Egyncourte a tryumphant victory / as in the sayde thyrde yere of Hēry the .v. is more at lengthe declared. Than it foloweth in the story, after many townes and stronge holdes by the englysshe men in sondry places of Fraūce opteined / in ye .xxx. & .viii. yere of this Charles, a frenche man named ye lorde of the Ile of Adam & Iohn̄ Uyllers in pro¦per name, gatheryng to hym a com∣pany of tyrauntes to the nombre of .CCC. or mo / wherof many were old seruaūtes of the kynges housholde, & than put out by ye Dolphyn & other that than had the rule of the kynge / by treason of a clerke opteyned the keyes of one of the Gates of Parys, and so entred the cytie by nyght / & by a watche worde amonge them deuy¦sed, assocyate to them many Burgo∣nyons / and so beynge stronge, yode where the kyng was, and gate ye rule of his {per}sone. And that done, all suche as they myght fynde that than bare any rule, they slewe by one meane & other / so that vpon ye day folowyng, was nombred of dede corfes wythin the cytie vpon .iiii.M. Amonge the whiche, of noble men was Henry de Marle than Chaunceller of Fraūce, & Graunpre with many other. And for to haue the more assystence of the cōmon people / the sayd Uyllers set ye kyng vpon an horse, and ladde hym about the cytie, as he that had small reason to guyde hym selfe / & so ruled all thyng as he & his cōpany wolde. wherfore the Dolphyn feryng to fall in the daunger of so wylde a cōpany, yode to Meldune or / and there called to hym suche as then were lefte on lyne to withstāde these tyrauntes, and ye duke of Burgoyne than beynge within the cytie, & com∣passer of all thys myschefe as some construed and demed. After whyche company to hym gathered he retur∣ned to the cytie of Parys, and assay∣led one of the gates. But whanne he sawe ye cytezens toke partye agayne hym, he thoughte his trauayle loste. wherfore without great assaute ma∣kyng, he called thence his knightes, and so departed agayne to the place whiche he came fro / and from thens vnto Thuron, in appeasynge the countreys & townes as he went, whi¦che at those dayes were farre out of frame. And than in the .xxxix. yere of the sayd Charles / king Henry the .v. landed with a strōge power at a pla∣ce called Touke in Normandy / and after layde syege to manye stronge holdes and townes & them wanne, as Cane, Phaleys, Roan, and other / as in the .vi. yere of the sayd Henrye folowynge is more at lengthe decla∣red. In tyme of whyche warre thus made by kynge Henry / the Dolphyn and the duke of Burgoyne, eyther of them prouyded to defende the ma¦lyce of the other / in so moche that as testyfyeth the frenche cronycle,
the duke was aduysed to haue taken partie with the Englisshemen. This sayeng as wytnesseth an auctour na¦med Floure of hystoryes, which tou∣cheth in laten many gestes & dedes done by kynges of Englāde / sayeth that the Frenche men bryng in that, for to excuse theyr infortune & cow∣erdyse / by reason whereof they loste nat all onely theyr lande, but also the honoure & name of the same. Than lastely the duke beynge of mynde by exortacyon of Phylyppe Iosquyne and Iohn̄ de Tolongn̄, with also a lady called the countesse of Grat / the duke was reconsyled vnto the Dol∣phyne / and a day of metynge apoyn∣ted at Monstruell, where eyther of them shulde be accōpanyed with .x. lordes onely without mo. At why∣che day the sayd prynces with theyr assygned lordes beynge assembled / many reasons and argumētes were layde and replyed vpon bothe sydes. By occasyon wherof one of the Dol∣phyns company sodainly drewe hys knyfe and strake the duke vnto the harte, so that he dyed soone after. whyche murder was supposed to be done by a knyght called Tanguyde de Chastell / whyche oftyme passed had ben famylyer seruaunt with the duke of Orleyaūce before slayne, by meanes of the sayde duke of Bur∣goyne. After whiche murder thus com∣mytted / the lande of Fraunce was broughte in moche more stryfe & va∣ryaunce / in so moche that Phylyppe the sonne of the sayde Iohn̄ duke of Burgoyne beynge than in Parys, & hauynge the rule of ye kynge and the cytie, toke partie with the Englysshe men agayne ye Dolphyn. By reason wherof as sondry wryters agre, king Henryes {per}tie was greatly augmen∣ted & holpen / so that fynally kynge Henry opteyned moche of his wyll / & shortly after maryed dame Kathe∣ryne doughter of Charles kynge in the .xli. yere of his reygne, with assu∣raunce & promyse of the inherytaūce of the realme of Fraunce to him and his heyres after the dethe of the said Charles / as to you more plainly shal be shewed in the .viii. yere of the said Henry the fyfte. After whyche ma∣ryage concluded and fynysshed / yet ye Dolphyn ceased nat to make newe mocyons & sterynges. Durynge the whiche, kynge Charles dyed in Oc∣tobre / and was buryed at saynt De∣nys, whan he had reygned in greate trouble vpō the poynt of .xlii. yeres / leauyng after hym as is affirmed by the forenamed auctour Gaguyne, a sonne & Dolphyn of Uyenne called Charles, whiche after was kyng of Frenchemen, and was named Char∣lys the .vii. or the .viii. after some wryters. Henry the .iiii. Anglia. HEnry the .iiii. of that name, and sonne of Iohn̄ of Gaunte late duke of Lācas∣ter / toke possessy¦on of the domy∣nion of ye realme of Englande as before in the ende of the story of the seconde Rycharde is shewed, vpon the laste daye of Sep∣tembre in the yere of our lorde a .M.CCC.lxxxxix / and in the .xix. yere of Charles ye .vii. than kyng of Fraūce. After whyche possessyon so by hym taken, anone he made newe officers. As the erle of Northumberlande he made Constable of Englande, the erle of westmerlāde was made Mar¦shall, syr Iohn̄ Serle Chaunceller, Iohn̄ Newebery esquyer tresorer, and syr Rycharde Clyfforde knyght
keper of ye priuey signet. And yt done, prouysyon was made for hys corona¦cyon agayne the day of translacyō of saynt Edwarde the confessour nexte than commyng. And the parlyament was prolonged tyll the tuysdaye fo∣lowynge the sayd daye of coronacyō. Than vpō the euyn of the sayd daye of coronacyon, the kynge wythin the towre of Londō made .xli. knyghtes of the bate wherof .iii. were hys owne sonnes,Coronaciō of Henry ye fourth. & .iii. erles, & .v. lordes. And vpon mondaye beynge the sayd daye of saynt Edwarde & the .xiii. daye of October / he was crowned at west∣mynster of the archebysshop of Caū∣torbury. After whych solempnyte fy∣nysshed an honorable feest was hol∣den wythin the greate halle of west∣mynster. where the kyng beyng set in the mydde see of the table / the arche∣bisshop of Caūtorbury with .iii. other prelates were set at the same table vp¦pon the ryght hāde of the kyng / & the archebysshoppe of yorke wyth other iiii. prelates was set vpō that other hāde of the kyng / & Hēry the kynges eldest sonne stoode vppō the ryghte hande wyth a poyntlesse swerde hol∣dyng vp ryght / & the erle of North∣humberlāde newely made constable, stode vpō the left hāde wyth a sharpe swerd holdē vp ryght. And by eyther of those swerdes, stode .ii. other lor∣des holding .ii. scepters. And before ye kyng stode all the dynerwhyle the du¦kes of Amnarle of Surrey & of Exce¦ter, wyth other .ii. lordes. And ye erle of westmerlāde thā newly made Mar¦shal, rode about the halle with many typped staues aboute hym, to se the roume of ye halle kepte, that offycers myghte wyth ease serue the tables. Of the whych tables the chyefe vpō the ryghte syde of the halle was be∣gunne wyth the Barons of the fyue portes, & at the table nexte the cup∣borde vppō the lefte hande, sate the mayre and hys bretherne the aldemē of Londō. whych mayre than beynge Drewe Barentyne goldsmyth, for seruice there by hym that daye done, as other mayres at euery kynges & quenes coronacion vse for to do / had there a stādyng cuppe of golde. Thā after the seconde course was serued / syr Thomas Dymmoke knyght be∣ynge armed at all peaces, & syttynge vpō a good stede, rode to the hygher parte of the halle / & there before the kynge caused an herowde to make proclamacyon, that what mā wolde saye that kynge Hēry was nat ryght full enherytoure of the crowne of En¦gland, & ryghtfully crowned / he was there redy to wage wyth hym batayl than, or suche tyme as it shuld please the kynge to assygne. whyche procla∣macyon he caused to be made after in iii. sundry places of the halle in En∣glyshe & in Frenche, wyth many mo obseruaunces at hys solemnyte exer∣cysed & done, whyche were longe to reherse. Than thys feest wyth all honour en∣ded / vpon the morne beyng tuysday, the parliamēt was agayne begunne. And vpon wednysdaye syr Iohanne Cheyny that before that tyme had oc¦cupyed as speker of that parlyamēt, by hys owne labour for cause of such infyrmytyes as he than hadde, was dyscharged / and a squyer named wyllyam Durwarde was electe to that roume for hym. And thanne was the parlyament and the actes thereof laste called by kynge Rycharde adnulled, and sette at noughte / and the parlyamente holden in the .xi. yere of hys reygne holden for ferme and stable. And the same daye Henry the kynges eldeste sonne was chosen & admytted prynce of walys, and duke of Cornewalle, and erle of Chester, and heyre ap∣paraunte to the crowne. Uppon
the thursdaye folowynge was putte into the comon house a byll, deuysed by syr Iohn̄ Bagot than prysonere in the Towre. whereof the effecte was, that the said sir Iohn̄ confessed that he harde kynge Rycharde saye dyuers tymes and at sondry parlya∣mentes in hys tyme holden, that he wolde haue hys entente and plea∣sure concernynge hys owne maters, what so euer betyde of the resydue. And yf any withstode hys wyll or mynde / he wolde by one meane or other brynge hym out of lyfe. Also he shewed farther, that king Rycharde shulde shewe and saye to hym at Lychefelde, in the .xxi. yere of hys reygne, that he desyred no lenger to lyue, than to see hys lordes & commons to haue hym in as great awe and drede, as euer they had of any of hys progenytours / so that it myghte be cronycled of hym, yt none passed hym of honour and dygnite / with condycyon that he were depo∣sed and put from his sayde dygnytie the morowe after. And yf euer it came so to, that he shulde resygne hys kyngelye magestye / he sayde his mynde was to resygne to the duke of Herforde, as to hym that was moste ableste to occupye that honoure. But one thynge he feared, leste he wolde do tyrannye agayne the chur∣che. More ouer he shewed by ye said byll, that as the sayde syr Iohn̄ Ba∣got rode behynde the duke of Nor∣folke towarde westmynster / the sayd duke layed to hys charge, that he with other of ye kynges counsell had murdred ye duke of Glocetyr / y• which at ye tyme to the said duke he denyed, & sayd at ye day he was on lyue. But within .iii. wekes after, the sayde syr Iohn̄ by ye kynges cōmaundemente was sent with other {per}sones vnto Ca¦lays / where for fere of his owne lyfe, he sawe ye said murdre put in execu∣cion. And farthermore he shewed, yt there was no man of honour at that dayes more in fauour with king Ry¦charde, thā was ye duke of Amnarle / & that by his coūsell he toke ye lordes, & wrought many other thinges after ye said dukes aduyce. Also he shewed, yt he harde the kynge beynge than at Chyltrynlangley swere many great othes, yt the duke of Herforde nowe kyng, shulde neuer returne into En∣glande / and rather than he shulde a∣gayne enheryte hys fathers landes, he wolde gyue them vnto the heyres of the duke of Glocetyr, and of the erles of Arundell, and of warwyke, at the laste parliament adiuged. And farther he shewed, that of all these matters he sent the said duke know∣lege into Fraunce, by one named Ro¦ger Smerte / admonastynge hym to prouyde by his wysedome to wyth∣stande the kynges malyce, whyche shewed hym to be hys mortall ene∣mye. And lastelye he shewed in the sayde byll, that he harde the duke of Amnarle say vnto sir Iohn̄ Busshey and to syr Henry Grene / I had leuer than .x. thousande pound, that thys man were dede. And whan they had axed of him whyche man / he said the duke of Herforde / nat for drede that I haue of hys persone, but for so∣rowe and rumours that he is lykely to make within this realme. whiche bylt was than borne vnto the kyn∣ges parlyamente chaumbre, & there adde. After redynge whereof / the sayd duke of Amnarle stode vp, and sayd as touchynge suche artycles as in that byll were putte agayne hym, they were false and vntrewe, & that he wolde proue vpon hys body or o∣therwyse as the kynge wolde com∣maunde hym. Upon fryday the said syr Iohn̄ Bagot was brought into the sayd parlyament Chambre, and examyned vpon euery artycle of his
byll all the whych he there affermed Than it was axed of hym what he coulde saye ye duke of Exceter. where unto he answered and sayed, that he coulde laye nothyng to hys charge. But there is he sayd a yomā in New¦gate called Halle, yt can say somwhat of you. Than sayd the duke, what so euer he or ye can or lyste to say of me / thys is trouthe that I shall here ex∣presse. Trouth it is that the last tyme that the kyng was at woodstoke, the duke of Northfolke & ye haue hadde me to you into the chapel, and closed the dore vpon vs. And there ye made me to swere vpō the sacrament there present, to kepe suche counsayll as there ye shuld than shewe vnto me. where after ye shewed to me, that ye coulde neuer brynge your purpose a¦bout, whyle syr Iohn̄ of Gaunt late duke of Lācastre lyued. wherfore ye were aduysed for to haue shortely af∣ter a coūsayll at Lychefelde / by the whyche ye cōdiscended yt the sayd syr Iohn̄ shuld be arested, in such maner that he shuld haue occasyō to disobey yt areste / by reason wherof by chaūce medley he shuld be there slayn. wher∣unto my coūsayl thā was, yt the kyng shulde calle hys secrete coūsayll / & yf they agreed thereunto, I for my part wolde agree vnto ye same. To which sayeng syr Iohn̄ Bagot gaue none answere. And vpō saterday, the sayd Bagot & Halle were bothe broughte into the parlyament chaūbre, & there examined / and after coūtrymaunded to prysone. And as soone as they were departed / the lorde Fitz water stoode vp and sayde. Moste redough¦ted souerayne lorde, where as ye duke of Amnarle hath before tymes and nowe lately, excused hym of the deth of the duke of Glouceter / I saye and wyll iustyfye it, that he was cause of hys deth and that I shall proue vpō hys body yf your grace be so conten∣ted. To the cōtrary whereof the duke wyth sharpe wordes answered / so that gaugys of batayll were offered of bothe partyes, and sealed and de∣lyuered vnto the lorde Marshall. Than partyes beganne to be taken amonge the lordes / in so moche that the duke of Surrey toke party with the duke of Amnarle / and sayde that all that by hym was done, was done by constraynte of Rycharde thanne kynge / and he hym selfe and other consented parforce to the same. where agayne the sayde lorde Fytz water and other replyed. wherfore sylence was commaūded / and forth∣wyth the fore named Halle for that he hadde confessed before the lordes, that he was one of theym that putte to deth the duke of Gloucetyr at Ca¦lays / he therefore was iuged to be drawen frome the towre of London vnto tybourne / and there to be han∣ged and quartered. The whyche execucion was done vppon the mondaye folowynge. Thus wyth these causes and many other thys parlyamente contynued, tyll a newe mayre named Thomas Knolles grocer was admytted and sworne, vppon the daye folow∣ynge the feaste of Symonde and Iude. Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xcix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC. Grocer. wyllyam walderne.   Thomas Knolles.   Anno .i.   wyllyam Hyde.  
IN this fyrst yere of king Hen∣ry the .iiii. yet lastinge the fore∣sayd parlyament / vpon the wednys∣daye nexte folowyng the feest of Sy¦monde and Iude, the lorde Morley appealed the erle of Salesburye of treason / & caste his hoode for a gage to trye with him by batayle. The whiche sayenge he replyed / and caste from him his gloues for a gauge, to proue his sayeng false and vntrewe / whiche were there sealed and delyue¦red vnto ye lorde Marshall. And vp∣on the monday passed an act, that no lorde nor other persone of no degre, shulde after that day laye for his ex∣cuse any constraynte or coartynge of hys prynce, in executynge of any wronge iugemente or other crymy∣nous and vnlefull dedes, sayenge yt for feare they durste none otherwyse do / for suche excuse after that daye shall stande hym in none effecte. And also that all sheryffes may yelde ac∣compte in the escheker vppon theyr othes / and that they be chaunged in all shyres yerely. And also that no lorde nor other man of myght, gyue any gownes or lyuereys to any of theyr tenauntes or other persones, excepte onely theyr housholde & mey¦nyall seruaūtes. And also than was enacted, that all repyers and other fysshers from Rye and wynchylsee & other coostes of the sees syde, shulde sell it them selfe in Cornehyll & chepe and other stretes of London, to all men that wolde of theym bye it / ex∣cepte fysshemongers and other that wolde bye the sayde fysshe, to make sale of it agayne. And vpon the wednysday folow∣ynge / was enacted that Rycharde late kynge of Englande, shulde for hys mys gouernaunce of the realme be holdyn in suche prysone as the kynge wolde assygne, durynge hys naturall lyfe. And than the kynge graunted to all persones generall pardones / so that they were fette out of the Chauncerye by Alhalowne∣tyde nexte folowynge / excepte suche persones as were present at the mur¦der of the duke of Gloucester. And in thys whyle was the archebysshop of Caunterbury restored to his chur¦che of Caunterburye / and doctour Roger, whyche there was sette by kynge Rycharde, was remoued and sette in the see of London / with the whyche he was ryghte well conten∣ted. And thanne was the erle of A∣rundelles sonne restored to all hys fathers lades, with dyuers other before by kynge Rycharde dyshery∣ted. And shortely after was the said parlyament dyssolued / and euerye man had deycence to departe to hys owne. And than was Rycharde late kynge had vnto the castell of Ledes in Kente, a there kepte. And pro∣uisyon was hade at wyndesore for the kynge to epe there hys Chryst∣mas. In whiche pastyme the dukes of Amnate, of Surrey, and of Exe∣tyr, wit the erles of Salesburye and of Glocester, with other of theyr affyny / made prouisyon for a dys∣guysynge or a mummynge to be shewe to the king vpon Twelf the nyght / and the tyme was nere at hande and all thynge redy for the same. Upon the sayde .xii. daye came secreteye vnto the kynge the duke of Amnarle / and shewed to hym that he with the other lordes afore na∣med, were appoynted to slee hym in the tyme of the foresayd dysguysyng shewynge / wherfore he aduysed hym to proyde for hys owne suretye. At who'e warnynge the kynge se∣cretelye dparted frome wyndesore / and came the same nyghte to Lon∣don. wherof the sayd lordes beynge ware, and that theyr counsell was bewrayed / fledde in all haste west∣warde.
But the kynge caused hasty pursute to be made after thē / so that shortely after the duke of Surrey & the erle of Salysbury were taken at Syrcetyr / where they were streyght behedyd, and theyr heddes sent at London and sette vpon the brydge. And at Oxenforde were taken syr Thomas Blont and sir Benet Sely knyghtes, and Thomas wyntercell esquyre / the whych were there hedyd and quarteryd, and theyr hedes sent to London brydge. And at Pytwell in Essex was taken syr Iohn̄ Hol∣land duke of Exetyr / & after brought to Plasshy a place faste y, where he was behedyd / and after ys hedde was sent to London and lette there wyth the other vppon  brydge pyght vpon a stake. And  about the same tyme at Bryoe was ta∣ken the lorde Spencer than erle of Glouceter and there bedyd, and hys hede sent vnto London brydge. And in the same yere, s Barnarde Brokeys, syr Iohn̄ Se, syr Iohn̄ Maundeley, and syr Iohi Fereby knyghtes and clerkes, wee taken as prysoners in the towre of Londō / and soone after foriudged, nged and  / and theyr heddes so set vppon London brydge. In hyche passetyme, Rycharde late kyng was remoued frome the castell of Ledys in Kent, and sent vnto Poutfreyt castell. In this yere also as before is tow¦ched in the .xix. yere of the .vii. Char∣lys / kynge Henry sent vnto Ceys Isabell late quene of England, and wyfe vnto Rycharde lately kynge / and wyth hyr greate treasour and many ryce Iewellys, as teyfyeth the Englysshe cronycle / and there re¦ceyued by the Frenchmen undersafe conduyte passynge, and by them con¦ueyed vnto hyr father into Fraūce / and after maryed vnto Charlys son and heyre to the duke of Orleaunce, as before I haue shewed in the .xxii. yere of hyr sayde fathers reygne. Than it foloweth in the story of kynge Henry / whan he hadde ferme∣ly consydered the greate conspyracy agayne hym by the forenamed lor∣des and other persons entendyd and imagyned to hys distruccyon / and releuynge of Rycharde late kynge he in auoydynge of lyke daunger, prouyded to put the sayde Rycharde out of thys present lyfe / and shorte∣ly after the opynyon of moste wry∣ters he sente a knyghte named syr Pyers of Exton vnto Pountfreyte castell / where he wyth .viii. other in hys companye, fell vppon the sayde Rycharde late kynge, and hym my∣serably in hys chaumber slewe / but not wythout reuengemente of hys dethe. For or he were felled to the grounde / he slewe of the sayde .viii. foure men, with an axe of theyr own. But lastely he was wounded to deth by the hande of the sayde syr Pyers of Exton, and so dyed. After execucyon of whyche dedely dede, the sayde syr Pyers toke great repentaunce, in so myche that lamen¦tably he sayde, alas what haue we done / we haue now put to deth hym that hath ben our souerayne & drad lorde, by the space of .xxii. yeres / by reason wherof I shall be reproched of all honoure where so I after thys daye become / and all men shall re∣dounde thys dede to my dyshonour and shame. Other opynyons of the dethe of thys noble prynce are lefte by wryters, as by waye of famyne and other. But thys of moste wry∣ters is testyfyed and alleged. whan the deth of this prynce was publyshed abrode / he was after opē vysaged layed in ye mynster of Poū∣frayt, so yt all men myght know and se that he was dede. And the .xii. daye
of Marche folowynge / he was wyth great solempnyte brought thorough the cytye of London to Paules / and there layed open vysaged agayne, to the ende that hys deth myght be ma∣nyfestly knowen. whyche was dout∣full to many one / & specyally to suche as ought to hym fauoure. And than after a fewe days the sayd corps was caryed vnto the freers of Langley, & there entred. But after he was remo∣ued by kynge Hēry the .v. in the fyrst yere of hys reygne / & wyth great ho∣noure and solempnyte cōueyed vnto the monasterye of westmynster / and there wythin the chapell of saynt Ed¦warde honourably buryed vppō the south syde of saynt Edwardes Shry¦ne, wyth hys epytaphy vppon hys toumbe as foloweth. Prudens & mundus Richardus iure secundus, Per fatum victus, iacet hic sub marmore pictus. Verax sermone fuit, & plenus ratione. Corporae procerus, auimo prudens vt omerus. Ecclesiam fauit, elatos subpeditauit. Quemuis prostrauit regalia qui violauit. ¶ whyche verses are thus to be vn∣derstande in our vulgare & Englysh tonge as foloweth. Parfyght and prudent Rycharde by ryghte the seconde, Vaynquysshed by fortune lyeth here nowe grauen in stone / Trewe of hys worde, & therto well resounde / Semely of persone, & lyke to omer as one In wordely prudence / & euer the churche in cie Vphelde & fauoured, castyng the proud to groūd, And all that wolde hys royall state confounde But yet alas, though that this metyr or ryme Thus doth enbelysshe this noble princes fame, And that some clerke whiche fauoured hym some tyme Lyst by hys connynge, thus to enhaūce his name▪ Yet by his story apereth in hym some blame. wherfore to princes is surest memory, Theyr lyues to exercyse in vertuous constancy. whanne thys mortall prynce was thus dede & grauen / kyng Hēry was inquyet possessyon of the realme / and fande great rychesse yt before tyme to kynge Rycharde belonged. For as wytnesseth Polycronycon, he fande in kyng Rychardes tresoury .iii. hun¦dreth thousande li. of redy coyne / be∣syde iewelles and other ryche vessels whyche were as moche in value or more. And ouer that he espyed in the kepyng of the tresourers hādes, an C. and .l.M. nobles / and iewels and other stuffe that cūteruayled the sayd value. And so it shulde seme ye kynge Rycharde was ryche, whan hys mo∣ney & iewelles amūted to .vii.C.M.li. And in the moneth of Octobre and ende of thys mayers yere / was brent in smythfelde of Londō a preest na∣med syr wyllyam Sawtry, for cer∣tayne poyntts of heresy. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.i. Goldsmyth. Iohn̄ wakele.   Iohn̄ Fraunces.   Anno .ii.   wyllyam Ebot.   IN thys seconde yere of kynge Henry and moneth of Frebrua¦ry / were drawen and hanged for trea¦son a knyghte named syr Roger Cla¦ryngeton at tybourne wyth two of hys seruauntes, the pryour of Lāde, and eyghte freres mynours of gray freres / of the whyche some were bachelers of dyuynyte. And in thys yere began a greate dyscencion in walys, betwene ye lorde Gray Ryffyn, & a welsheman named
Howen of Glendore. whyche Howen gathered to hym greate strenghte of welshemen, and dyd moche harme to that coūtrey / nat sparynge the kyn∣ges lordshyppes nor hys people / and lastlye toke the sayd lorde Gray pry∣soner, & helde hym prysoner, tyll con¦trarye hys wyll he hadde maryed the sayde Howēs doughter. After which matrymony fynysshed / he helde the sayde lorde styl in walys tyll he died, to the kynges great dyspleasure. wherfore the kynge wyth a strōge army spedde hym into walys, for to subdue the sayde Howen̄ & hys adhe¦rentes. But whan the kyng wyth his power was entred ye coūtre / he with hys fawtours fledde in to the moun∣taynes & helde hym there / so that the kyng myght nat wynne to hym with out dystruccion of hys hoste. where∣fore fynally by the aduyce of hys lor∣des, he retourned into Englande for that season. In thys yere also whete & other graynes beganne to fayle / so that a quarter of whete was solde at Lon∣don for .xvi.s / & derer shuld haue bē, had nat ben the prouysyon of mar∣chaūtes that brought rye & rye floure out of Spruce, wherwyth thys lāde was greatly susteyned and eased. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.i.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.ii.   wyllyam Uenour.   Iohn̄ Shadworth.   Anno .iii.   Iohn̄ Fremynghm̄.   IN thys yere / the cōduyte stan∣dyng vpon cornhylle in Lon∣don, was begon to be made. And in the somer folowynge / syr Thomas Percy erle of worceter, and syr Hēry Percy sonne & heyre vnto the erle of Northumberlande, gadered a greate power / and vppō the daye of saynte Praxede the vyrgyne or the .xxi. daye of Iuly,The ba∣tayle of Shrwys∣buy. mette wyth the kynge nere vnto Shrowysbury, and there gaue vnto hī a cruell batayll / but to theyr owne confusion. For in that fyght ye sayd syr Thomas Percy was taken, and hys neuew the foresayde syr Hen¦ry wyth many a stronge man vppon theyr partye was there slayne. And vpō ye kynges partie, the prynce was woūded in the hed / & the erle of Staf¦forde wyth many other slayne. And the .xxv. daye of Iuly folowynge at Shrowysbury, the sayd syr Thomas Percy was beheded / and after hys hed caried to London, & there set vpō the brydge. In thys batayl was many a noble man slayne vpō eyther partye. And it was the more to be noted vengea∣ble / for there the father was slayn of the sonne, & the son of the father, and brother of brother, & neuewe of neue∣we. And in the moneth of August fo∣lowynge, the duchesse of Brytayne landed at Fulmouth in the prouince of Cornwayll, & from thēs was con∣ueyed to wynchester. where in shorte tyme after, kyng Hēry maryed her in the cathedrall churche of the sayde cytye. And soone vpō was the eldest doughter of kyng Hēry named dame Blāche maryed at Coleyn to the du∣kes sonne of Bayer. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.ii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.iii.   Rycharde Merlewe.   Iohn̄ walcot Draper.   Anno .iii.   Robert Chichele.  
IN this yere and .xiiii. day of the moneth of Septembre, was ye foresayd duchesse of Brytayne and wyfe of ye kyng, receyued wyth great honour into the cytye of London / & so by the mayre and the cytezyns con¦ueyed vnto westmynster. where vpō the morowe folowyng she was crow¦ned quene of Englande, wyth greate honoure and solempnite / the cyrcum¦staunce wherof I passe ouer. In this yere also, Rupertus which after the deposynge of wessenselans, was by the electours of the empyre, and by auctoryte of Bonyface ther▪ than pope, admytted for Emperoure of Rome, and came into Englande wyth a goodly companye, onely to se the countre and commodytyes of the same. The whyche of the kynge was honourably receyued and fe∣sted / and lastely conueyed by the kynge towarde the see syde, where eyther departed from other wyth ex∣chaunge of ryche and precious gyft. For thys Rurpartus was named of wryters a man of excellente bounte and largesse. And he gaue more lybe∣rally / for so moche as all the tyme of hys beynge in Englāde, he laye here at the kynges costes. And whyle he was at Londō he was lodged at the house of saynte Iohanns in smyth∣felde. Thys yere also vpō saīt Laurēce euyn or the .ix. day of August / a lorde of Brytayne named the lorde of Ca∣style in Frenche, lāded within a myle of Plymmouth wyth a great cōpany of Normās and Brytons / and came vnto the sayd town, and lodged there all night and spoyled and robbed the sayd towne. And vpon the day folow¦ynge whan they had done what they wolde / they retourned agayne to theyr shyppes, with plente of pyllage and prysoners suche as they fande. Anno domini .M.CCCC.iii.   Anno domini .M.CCCC.iiii.   Thomas Fawconer.   wyllyam Askam.   Anno .v.   Thomas Pooll.   IN thys yere soone after Cādel¦masse, the foresayd lorde of Ca¦style trustynge to wynne a lke enter¦pryse, as in the yere passed he hadde done / he beynge accompanyed wyth a stronge nauy of Frēche men & Bry¦tons, was encountred wyth the En∣glyshe floot within .ii. myles of Deer¦mouth at a place called Blakpooll▪ where after lōge and cruell fyghte ye sayd lord was slayne, wyth the more partye of the people, and dyuers of hys shyppes takē / as wytnesseth the Englysshe cronycle wyth dyuers o∣ther Englysshe auctours. But the Frēche boke excuseth thys scomfy∣ture of Frēchmen, and sayeth that by treason o a Gascoyne named Pey or Perot de Languyle, whyche she∣wed vnto the sayd lorde Castyle that he had espyed certayne Englysshe shyppes in a Greke lyghtly wythout resystence to be takē / caused the sayd lorde to make sayle towarde the sayd towne of Dartmouthe. where after he had contynued a certayne tyme hys course / he espyed the hotefloe of Englyshe men whyche made toward hym / and so at the sayde Blake pool encountd and faughte, and lastely escaped the daunger of hys enemyes as testyfyeth the sayde French cro∣nycle▪ but atte unhurt / for he was so woūded in that fyght that he dyed shortly after. And the moneth of Apryll folow∣ynge,
the duke of Clarence wyth the erle of Kēt & many other lordes, toke shyppynge at Meregate, & so sayled vnto Scluce in Flaūders. And after the sayde duke had there refresshed hym & hys company, he toke shyp∣pynge agayne / and holdynge hys course towarde Swyn̄e, he was en∣coūtred wyth .iii. greate carykes of Ieane / the whyche he assayled, and after longe bekerynge them toke be∣ynge laden wyth marchaūdyse / & so wyth that pray retourned to Cambre before wynchelsee / in the whyche ha∣uen the sayd goodes were cāted and shared. But how it was, by varyaūce amonge them selfe or otherwyse / one of the sayde carykes was sodeynly fyred & so cōsumed. For restytucyon of whyche goodes & shyppes, ye mar∣chaūtes Ianuēce made after great & longe sute to the kyng & his coūsayl / in whyche passetyme they borowed cloth, wolle & other marchaundyses, amountyng vnto great and notable sommes of dyuers marchauntes of Englande. And whanne they sawe that they myghte haue none hope of recouery of theyr loste / they so∣deynly auoyded the lāde, and lafte ye foresayde notable summes vnpayde, to the great hynderaunce and vtter vndoynge of many Englysshe mar∣chauntes. In thys yere a yoman named wyl∣lyam Serle, somtyme yomā of kyng Rychardes Robys, was takē in the marches of Scotlāde and broughte vnto Londō / & there in the guildhall areygned for the murder of the duke of Glouceter at Calays. Upō which murder he was attaynt & conuyct / & vppō the .xx. daye of Octobre he was drawē from the towre vnto tyborne, and there hāged and quartred / & hys hed was after set vpō Londō brydg, & hys .iiii. quarters were sent to .iiii. sondry good townes. Anno domini .M.CCCC.iiii.   Anno domini .M.CCCC.v.   wyllyam Lowfte.   Iohn̄ Hyende Draper.   Anno .vi.   Stephen Spylman.   IN thys yere and moneth of Ia¦nuary, were certayne courses of warre ron in smythfelde, betwene syr Edmūde erle of Kent, & the lorde Moryfa Barō of Scotlāde, vppō ye chalēge of the sayd scottysshe lorde. But the erle of Kēt bare hym so valy auntly, that to hym was gyuē ye price of that iourney to hys great honour. And in the same yere, syr Rycharde Scrope than archebisshop of yorke, and ye lorde Moubraye thā marshal of Englād, with other to them allied / for grudge that they bare agayn the kynge, gadered vnto theym greate strēgth, entēdyng to haue put downe the kynge as the ame than wente. wherof the kyng beyng enfourmed / in all haste sped towarde theym, and met wyth them on thys syde yorke. where after askyrmysshe by the sayd lordes made / they were thā takē and after presented vnto ye king at yorke / where they were bothe demed to suf∣fre deth for theyr rebellyō. A Byshop beheded. Than whan the bysshoppe came vnto the place of execucion / he prayed ye bow∣cher to gyue to hym .v. strokes in the worshyp of christes fyue woundes, & for hys more penaūce. At eueryche of whyche .v. strokes / kynge Henry be∣ynge in hys lodgyng, had a stroke in hys necke / in so moch that he demed that some persone there beynge with hym present hadde stryken him. And forthwyth he was stryken wyth the
plage of lepyr / so that than he knewe it was the hande of god, and repēted hym of that hasty iugement without auctoryte of the churche. And soone after god shewed many myracles for the sayde bysshop / whyche called the kynge vnto the more repen∣taunce. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.v.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.vi.   Henry Barton̄.   Iohn̄ woodcok Mercer.   Anno .vii.   wyllyam Crowner.   IN thys yere, dame Lucye the duke of Myllanys syster came into Englande / and was maryed vnto syr Edmunde Holande erle of Kent, in the churche of saynte Mary ouerey in Southwarke vppon the xxiiii. daye of Ianuary / where the kyng was present and gaue her that daye vnto the preest. And after the solempnyzacion of the maryage was fynysshed / she was wyth greate ho∣nour conueyed vnto the bysshoppe of wynchesters palays there fast by / where that daye for her was holden a sumptuous and pumpous feaste. And in the same yere and moneth of May, dame Phylyppe the yongeste doughter of kynge Henry, accompa∣nyed wyth dyuers lordes spyrytuall and temporall, was shypped in the Northe, and so conueyed into Den∣marke / where in a towne or cytye cal¦led London she was maryed vnto ye kynge of the sayde countre. In thys yere also syr Thomas Ramston̄ than constable of ye towre, by ouersyghte of hys botemen as he wold haue passed the brydge toward the sayde towre, was drowned. And in the same yere, for the greuous cō∣playntes that before tyme hadde ben shewed and euydently proued before the kynges counsayl, and also before the mayre and hys bretherne, of the great dystruccion of frye and yonge fysshe by reason of werys standynge in dyuers places of the ryuer of Tha¦mys, wherby the fysshe of the sayde ryuer was greately mynysshed and wasted / and that also yf the sayd we∣rys so contynued, the sayde ryuer shuld in shorte processe be dystroyed: wherfore the mayre & hys bretherne the aldermen as conseruatours of ye ryuer, made suche laboure vnto the kynge and hys counsayll, that they opteyned commyssyon to pull vp all the werys that stode betwene Londō and .vii. myles beyōde Kynston̄ / and in lykewyse for suche other as stode betwene London and Grauysende, aswell crekes or seuerall groundes and other / the whyche commyssyon by the sayde mayre and hys offycers was thys yere putte in execucyon. And in thys yere syr Robert Knolles knyght, the whyche in Fraunce and Brytayne hadde before tyme done so many victorious actes, as in ye .xxxiii yere of Edward the thyrde and other yeres of hys reygne is somdele tow∣ched / made an ende of hys werke at Rochester brydge and chapell at the sayde brydge fote / and dyed shortely after, whanne he hadde newe reedy∣fyed the body of the whyte fryers churche standynge in Fletestrete, & done to that house many notable be∣nefytes / where after he was buryed in the body of the sayde churche. whyche churche and place was fyrste founded, by the auncetoures of the lorde Gray Cotnore.
Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.vi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.vii.   Nycholas wotton.   Rycharde whytyngton̄ Mercer.   Anno. viii.   Godfrey Brook.   IN thys yere & moneth of No∣uembre, one named the walche clerke, apeched a knyghte called syr Peryuall Sowdan of treason / for tryall wherof daye was gyuen to thē to fyght in smythfylde the day aboue sayde. At whych daye eyther apered, and there faught a season. But in the ende the clerke was recreaūt. where∣fore immedyately he was spoyled of hys armour, & layde vpō an hardyl, and so drawen to tyborne, and there hanged. And in thys yere also, syr Henry erle of Northumberlande & the lorde Bardolf, commyng out of Scotlāde wyth a stronge company, to the dys∣pleasure & hurt of the kynge as they entended / were met and encountred wyth the gentylmen and comons of the northe, and foughten wyth and dystressed / and after strake of theyr heddes, and sente theym to London / whyche thanne were pyghte vppon the brydge amonge many other. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.vii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.viii.   Henry Ponfreyt.   wyllyam Stondon̄ Grocer.   Anno. ix.   Henry Halton.   IN thys yere and moneth of De¦cembre, begā a frost / the which contynued by the space of .xv. wekes after or therupō / so that byrdes were wōderly famysshed and dystressed by violence of the same. And in the same yere / syr Edmōde of Holande erle of Kente, was by the kynge made admyrall of the see. The which scowred & skymmed ye see ryght well and manfully / & lastly lan¦ded in the coost of Brytayne, & besie∣ged there a castell named Briak, and wan it by strength. But in the wyn∣nyng therof he was so dedely woun∣ded wyth an arowe in the hede, that he dyed shortly after. And than hys corps was brought agayn into Eng¦lāde / & buryed amōge his aūcetours. And in the begynnyng of thys yere, was slayne & murdered the duke of Orleaūce in Parys / lyke as before it is more at lēgthe shewed in ye .xxviii. yere of Charles ye .vii. kyng of fraūce. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.viii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.ix.   Thomas Duke.   Drewe Barentyne Goldsmyth.   Anno. x.   wyllyam Norton̄.   IN thys yere the seneshal of He¦naude came into thys lande wyth a goodly companye of Henau∣ders & other straungers / for to do & parfourme certayne faytes of armes agayne dyuers nobles & gentylmen of thys lāde. And fyrste the sayd Se∣neshall chalenged the erle of Somer¦set / and other of hys company other gētylmen of thys lāde, as after shall apere. For executyng of whyche dys∣porte / the place of smythfelde by the
kynge was appoynted, and barred & fensed for the same entent / and daye set for euery mā to be redy by the .xi. daye of. At whych daye the seneshall as chalenger entred ye felde pompously. And after with a goodly company of men of honour, was the erle of Somerset broughte into the same / where they ranne togyder cer∣tayne courses and executed other fay¦tes of armys / wherof the pryse & ho∣nour was gyuen by the herawdes vnto the erle, so that he wanne that day great honour. Than the seconde daye came in a knyght Henauder as Chalengeoure. To whome as defendaunt came syr Rycharde of Arundell knyghte / the whyche ranne certayne courses on horsebak, & after went togyder with axes on fote where syr Rychard was putte to the worse, for the Henauder brought hym vpō hys kne. Than the thyrde daye came in an other knyght of Henaude Chalēger. To whome as defendaunte came in syr Iohn̄ Cornewayl knyght / and so well bare hym, that he put the straun¦ger to the worse. Upon the .iiii. daye came into the felde an esquyre Henau¦der. Agayne whome ranne the sonne of syr Iohan Cheyny. The whych at the seconde course sette hys stroke so egerly, that he ouer threw the Henau¦der horse and mā / for whyche dede ye kyng dubbed hym forthwith knight. Upon the .v. day. played togyder an Henauder and a squyre called Iohn̄ Stewarde / whyche daye also the En¦glyssheman wan the worshyp. Upon the .vi. daye skyrmysshed there togy∣der an Henauder and an Englysshe esquyer named wyllm̄ Porter / the whyche gatte suche worshype of the same Henauder, that the kynge for hys guerdon made hym streyghte knyght. Upon the .vii. daye in lyke∣wyse played insemble an Henauder and one Iohn̄ Stādysshe esquyer / y• whyche semblably for hys prowesse & manly dealyng, was also of ye kyng dubbed knyght. And a Gascoyn̄ that the same day wan ye pryce of an other straunger, was immedyatly made knyghte of ye kyng. And vpō the .viii. daye or laste day of thys chalenger, came into the felde .ii. Henauders. Unto whome came .ii. bretherne be∣yng sowdiours of Calays / ye whyche bekered togyder a lōge seasō, so ye ey∣ther {per}tye receyued plentye of good strokes, tyll peas by ye kyng was cō∣maūded. And so thys chalēge was fy¦nysshed, to ye great honour of ye kyng the whych after feasted these straun∣gers, & wyth ryche gyftes sente and retourned theym agayne to theyr countrees. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.ix.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.x.   Iohn̄ Lawe.   Rycharde Marlowe Irenmonger.   Anno .xi.   wyllyam Chycheley.   IN thys yere & moneth of Mar¦che / a tayloure of London na∣med Iohan Badby, was brente in Smythfelde for heresy: all be it that by meanes of the prynce & one may∣ster Courtnay thanne Chauceller of Oxenforde, he was for a whyle recon¦cyled, and promysed to leue that er∣roure. But whan the sacrament of ye aulter was brought tofore hym / he dyspysed it, and wolde in no wyse therein byleue / wherefore he hadde as he deserued. Of whom a versifier in reproche of hys errour, made these ii. verses folowynge.
Hereticus credat, vt perustus ab orbe recedat, Ne fidē ledat, sathan hūc baratro sibi predat. The whych verses are thus moch to meane in englysshe. The peruerse heretyke, though that he do brenne, And from this worlde be rased vtterly / No force, syn that he lyst nt kenne Our sacred fayth / but it right perversy yst of his wyll erroniously to reply, What force thought sathā with his eternall payne Do hym rewarde, syn he wyll not refrayne. IN thys yere also & moneth of Apryll, wythin the lystes of Smythfeld was foughtē a sore fight betwene an esquyre named Glouce∣ter Appellaūt, & an other esquyre cal¦led Arthur Defendaūt. The whyche acquyted them eyther partye so mā∣fully, that the kynge of hys especyall grace seyng they were bothe so well fyghtyng men, toke the quarell into hys handes, & pardoned the offēce to eyther partye. And thys yere the market howse called the Stokes, stādynge by the churche of saynt Mary wolchurch of London, was begō to be edyfyed. In thys yere also the kyng helde his par¦lyamēt at westmynster.A byll p vppe in the parlyamēt Durynge the whych ye cōmons of thys lāde put vp a byll to the kynge, to take ye tēporall landes out frō spyrytuall mēnes han¦des or possessiō. The effect of whych byll was, yt the tēporaltes dysordinat¦ly wasted by mē of the church, myght suffyce to fynde to ye kynge .xv. erles, xv.C. knightes, vi.M. & ii.C. esqiers & an. C. houses of almes to the releef of poore people mo thā at ye days we¦re wythin Englād. And ouer all these foresayd charges, ye kyng myght put yerely in hys cofers .xx.M.li. Prouy¦ded ye euery erle shuld haue of yerely rēt .iii.M. marke / euery knight an. C marke & .iiii. plough lande / euery es∣quyre .xl. marke by yere wt .ii. plough lāde / & euery house of almesse an. C. marke, with ouersyght of .ii. trew se∣culers vnto euery house. And also wyth prouisiō yt euery towneshyppe shuld kepe all poore people of theyr owne dwellers whych myght nat la∣bour for theyr lyuyng. with cōdicion yt if mo fell in a towne thā the towne might maynteyn, thā the sayd almes houses to releue such townshyppes. And for to beare these charges they alledged by theyr sayd bylle, yt the tē∣poralties beyng in the possessiō of spi¦rytuall mē, amounted to .iii.C. & .xxii.M. marke by yere. wherof they affer∣med to be ī ye see of Caūterbury, with the abbays of cristes church, of saynt Augustyns, Shrowysbury, Cogge∣shale, & saynt Osiys / xx.M. marke by yere. In the see of Durhm̄ & other ab¦beys there, xx.M. marke. In ye see of yorke & abbays there, xx M. marke. In the see of wynchester and abbays there, xx.M. marke. In the see of Lō∣don wyth abbays and other houses there, xx.M. marke. In ye see of Lyn∣coln̄, wyth ye abbays of Peterbourth, Ramsay, and other, xx.M. mark. In the see of Norwych, wyth the abbeys of Bury and other, xx.M. marke. In the see of Hely, wyth the abbays of Hely, Spaldīg & other, xx.M. mark. In the see of Bathe, wyth the abbay of Okynborne & other.xx.M. marke. In the see of worceter, with ye abbays of Euishm̄, Abyngdon̄ & other, xx.M marke. In the see of Chester with pre¦cinct of the same, with the sees of saīt Dauid, of Salysbury, and Exceter wyth theyr precinctes, xx.M. marke. The abbays of Rauens or Reuans, of fountaynes, of Geruons, and dy¦uers other to the nombre .v. mo .xx. thousand marke. The abbays of Ley¦ceter, waltham, Gysbourne, Herton̄ Tircetir, Osney and other, to the nombre of .vi. mo, twenty thousande marke. The abbays of Douers,
Batell, Lewis, Cowentre, Dauētre, and Courney, xx.M. marke. The ab¦bays of Northampton̄, Thortone, Brystow, Kelyngworth, wynchescōb, Hayles, Parchyssor, Fredyswyde, Notley, and Grymmysby, xx.M. marke. The whych forsayd sūmes amoūt to the full of .iii.C.M. marke. And for the odde .xxii.M. marke / they ap∣poynted Herdforde, Rochester, Hun∣tyngdon̄, Swyneshede, Crowlande, Malmesbury, Burton̄, Tewkisbury Dūstable, Shirborn̄, Taunton̄, and Bylande. And ouer thys they alledged by the sayde byll, that ouer and aboue ye sayd sūme of .iii.C. & .xxii.M. marke / dyuers houses of relygion in Eng∣lande, possessed as many temporal∣tyes as myght suffice to fynde yerely xv.M. preestes and clerkes / euery preest to be allowed for hys stypende vii. marke by yere. To ye which byl none answere was made, but that the kyng of thys ma∣ter wolde take delyberaciō & aduyce∣mente / and wyth that answere en∣ded, so that no ferther laboure was made. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.ix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.x.   Iohn̄ Penne.   Thomas Knolles Grocer.   Anno .xii.   Thomas Pyke.   IN thys yere, asquyer of walys named Ryze ap dee, the whych had lōg tyme rebelled agayn ye kyng and rotysfyed the partye of Howan of Glendore / was takē and broughte to London / and there vppon the .ix. daye of Decembre, drawen, hanged, and quartered / and hys hed set vpon the brydge amōge the other. In this yere also was the guylde halle of Lō¦don begonne to be newe edyfyed and of an olde & lytell cotage, made into a fayre and goodly house as it nowe appereth. Anno domini .M.CCCC.x.   Anno domini .M.CCCC.xi.   Iohn̄ Raynewell.   Robert Chycheley Grocer.   Anno .xiii.   wyllyam Cotton̄.   IN thys yere and vpon the .xii. day of Octobre, were thre flo∣des in thamys / whyche thynge no man than lyuynge cowde remembre that lyke to be sene. And in thys yere was the lorde Thomas sonne to the kynge, created duke of Clarence. And in thys yere, the kynge at the requeste of the duke of Orleaunce, sente ouer the forsayd duke his sonne to ayde the sayd duke of Orleaūce agayn the duke of Bur¦goyne. Of whose actes and hys company / I haue before made report in the story of Charles the .vii. kynge of Fraunce. And in thys yere, the kyng caused a newe coyne of nobles to be made, whyche were of lesse value than the olde noble by .iiii.d. in a noble. In thys yere also the kynge crea∣ted Iohn̄ hys son duke of Bedforde. And hys other sonne Humfrey duke of Glounceter. He made also syr Thomas Beauforde erle of Dorset / and the duke of Anmarle he created duke of yorke.
Anno domini .M.CCCC.xi.   Anno domini .M.CCCC.xii.   Rauffe Leuenhm̄.   wyllyam waldren̄ Mercer.   Anno .xiiii.   wyllyam Seuenok.   IN thys yere and .xx. daye of the moneth of Nouembre, was a great counsayll holden at the whyte freers of London. By the whyche it was amonge other thynges conclu∣ded, that for the kynges greate iour∣nay that he entended to take in vysy∣tyng of the holy sepulcre of our lord / certayne Galeys of warre shulde be made, and other purueaunce concer∣nynge the same iournay. whereupon all hasty & possyble spede was made. But after the feaste of Crystemasse, whyle he was makynge hys prayers at saynte Edwardes shryne to take there hys leue, and so to spede hym vpō hys iournay / he became so syke, that suche as were aboute hym fered that he wolde haue dyed ryght there. wherfore they for hys comforte bare hym into the abbottes place, and lod¦ged hym in a chambre / and there vpō a paylet layde hym before the fyre, where he laye in greate agony a cer∣tayne of tyme. At length whā he was commyn to hym selfe nat knowynge where he was / he freyned of suche as than were aboute hym what place yt was. The whych shewed to hym that it belonged vnto the abbot of west∣mynster, and for he felte hym selfe so syke / he commaunded to aske yf that chābre had any speciall name. where unto it was answered, that it was na¦med Hierusalem. Than sayd ye kyng, Louyng be to the father of heuē.Dethe of kyng Hen¦ry the .iiii. For nowe I knowe I shall dye in thys chambre, accordynge to ye prophecye of me beforesayd, that I shuld dye in Hierusalē. And so after he made hym selfe redy / & dyed shortly after vppō ye daye of saynt Cuthbert or the .xx. day of Marche / whā he had reygned .xiii. yeres, v. monethes, & .xxi. dayes / le∣uynge after hym .iiii. sonnes / that is to meane Hēry that was kyng. Tho∣mas ye was duke of Clarence, Iohn̄ duke of Bedforde, and Hūfrey duke of Glouceter / and .ii. doughters, that one beyng quene of Denmarke, and that other duchesse of Barre, as be∣fore is shewed. whan kynge Henry was deed / he was conueyed by water vnto Feuer∣sham, and from thens by lande vnto Caunterbury / and there entered by ye shryne of saynt Thomas. Anglia. ¶Henrici quinti. HEnry the .v▪ of ye name, and sonn̄ of Henry the .iiii begā his reygne ouer this realm of England, the xxi. day of ye mo∣neth of Marche In the yere of our lorde & ende of the same .xiiii.C. &. xii. And in the .xxxii. yere of Charles the .vii. yet kynge of Fraūce. And the .ix. daye of Apryll folowynge, whych was that yere pas¦siō sondaye, beyng a day of excedyng rayne, he was crowned at westmyn∣ster. Thys man before the deth of hys father, applyed hym vnto all vyce & insolency / & drewe vnto hym all riottours & wyldly dysposed {per}so∣nes. But after he was admytted to ye rule of the lande / anon & sodaynly he became a new mā, & tourned all that rage & wyldnes into sobernes & wyse sadnes, & the vyce into cōstāt vertue. And for he wolde cōtinewe ye vertue,
and nat to be reduced thereunto by the famylyarytye of hys olde nyse company / he therfore after rewardes to them gyuen, charged them vppon payne of theyr lyues, that none of thē were so hardy to come wythin .x. my∣le of such place as he were lodged, af∣ter a daye by hym assygned. In thys begynnyng of thys kyng Henry / the olde mayre and shryues continued theyr offices to the termes accustomed. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.ii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.iii.   Rauffe Leuyngham.   wyllyam waldern Mercer.   Anno .i.   wyllyam Seuenok.   ANone as kynge Henry was crowned, and the solempnyte of the feest of Eester was passed / he sent vnto the fryers of Lāgley where the corps of kynge Rycharde was buryed / and caused it to be takē oute of the erth, & so wyth reuerence and solempnyte to be cōueyed vn to west∣mynster / & vppon the southe syde of saynt Edwardes shryne there honou¦rably to be buryed by quene Anne his wyfe▪ whyche there before tyme was enterred. And after a solempne interment there holden / he prouy∣ded that .iiii. tapers shulde brēne day and nyght about hys graue, whyle the world endureth / and one daye in the weke a solempne Dirige, and vp¦pon the morowe a masse of Requiem by note / after whyche masse ended, to be gyuen wekely vnto poore peo∣ple .xi. s. viii.d. in pens. And vpon the daye of hys annyuersary after ye sayd masse of Requiem is songe, to be ye∣rely destrybuted for his soule .xx.li.iii. d. And about Heruest tyme, was syr Iohn̄ Oldcastell knyghte appreched for an heretyke & cōmitted to pryson. But howe it was he escaped for that tyme out of the towre of Londō / and so yode into walys, where he lyned ouer .iiii. yeres after. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xiiii.   Iohn̄ Sutton̄.   wyllm̄ Crowmer Draper.   Anno .ii.   Iohn̄ Mycoll.   IN thys yere and moneth of Ia¦nuary / certayne adherentes of the forenamed syr Iohn̄ Oldcastell, entendynge the dystruccion of thys lande & subuerciō of the same / assem∣bled them in a felde nere vnto saynte Gyles in great nombre. wherof the kynge beyng enfourmed toke ye felde before theym, & so toke a certayne of them. Amonge the whyche was syr Roger Acton̄ knyghte, syr Iohn̄ Be∣uerley preest, and a squyer called syr Iohn̄ Browne. The whyche wyth xxxvi. mo in nombre were after con∣uycte of heresy and treason / and for the same hanged and brent wythin ye sayd felde of saynt Gyles. And in the same yere, Iohn̄ Clay∣don skynner & Rycharde Turmyne baker, were for heresy brente in Smythfelde. And thys yere the kyng helde his parlyamente at Leyceter. where amonge other thynges, the foresayd bylle putte vp by the commons of the lande, for the temporaltyes be∣ynge in ye churche, as it is before tou¦ched ī the .xi. yere of ye .iiii. Hēry, was
agayne mynded. In fere wherof, lest the kyng wolde thereunto gyue any cōfortable audyence as testyfye some wrytters, certayne bysshoppes and other hede men of the churche, putte ye kyng in mynde to clayme his right in Fraunce. And for the exployte thereof, they offcede vnto hym great and notable summes. By reason whereof the sayde byll was agayne put by, and the kynge set hys mynde for the recouery of the same / so that soone after he sente hys letters vnto the Frenche kynge, concernyng that mater / and receyued frome hym an∣swere of dirision as affermeth the En¦glysshe boke. And Gaguynus sayeth in hys Frenche cronycle, that kynge Henry sente hys oratours vnto Charles the vii. thanne kynge of Fraunce, for to haue dame Katheryne hys doughter in mariage / with other requestes tou¦chynge hys ryght and enherytaunce. whereunto it was answered by the counsayll of Fraunce, that the kyng hadde no leyser to entende suche idel¦nesse. wherupon kynge Henry made quycke prouision for to warre vpon the Frenche kynge, as after ap∣pereth. In thys yere also, by procuremēt of Sigismunde thanne Emperour / a greate counsayll or synod of bys∣shoppes were assembled at a cytye in hygh Almayne called constaunce, for the vnion of the churche. And for to auoyde the Scisme, whyche began in the .xiiii. yere of Charles the .vi, as before in the sayde .xiiii. yere is tou∣ched. In the sayd synode or generall counsayll, was the .xxiii. Iohn̄ than pope put downe or resygned by hys volunte. And by auctoryte of ye same coūsayll / the opynyons and heresy of wyklyf were vtterly anulled & damp¦ned / and two of hys disciples there presente named Iohn̄ Hus or Husse and Ierom the herytyke, were there brente And many notable actes for the wele of ye church there were enacted. And fynally whan the sayde coūsayl had endured nere vpon the terme of iiii. yeres / they there by an hole asset chase a newe pope, and named hym the .v. Martyne. whyche occupyed Peters chayre .xiiii. yeres and odde monethes, as indubitat pope, and so other after hym. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xv.   Iohn̄ Mychell.   Thomas Fawcomer Mercer.   Anno .iii.   Thomas Aleyn.   IN thys yere after the kynge had made suffycient prouision for all thynges cōcernyng his warre to be made vpon the Frenche kyng / he wyth hys lordes honourably accō¦panyed, rode thorugh London vpon the .xviii. daye of Iuny, towarde the porte of Southamton̄ / where he had appoynted hys hoste to mete wyth hym. And whyle the kyng there was shyppynge of hys people / dyuers of hys lordes, that is to say syr Richard erle of Cambrydge and brother vnto ye duke of yorke / whyche syr Rychard beryng the name of Langley, hadde wedded dame Anne the doughter of syr Roger Mortymer erle of March and wolster / by whome he had yssue Isabell, whyche after was maryed vnto the lorde Boucher erle of Essex, & Rycharde whyche after was duke of yorke & father to kynge Edward ye iiii. To whome also wasassētyng syr Rycharde Scrop than treasourer of
Englande, and syr Thomas Graye knyght, were there arrestyd for trea∣son, and areygned, and so examyned vppon the same, that the .xxix. day of Iuly folowynge they were all thre behedyd. After whyche execucyon so done / the kynge vpon the morowe or shortely after, wyth hys lordes toke shyppynge there, & landed at a place called Kydcaus in Normandy. And the .xvi. daye of Auguste / he sayde syege vnto the towne of Harflew, & assayled them by land and by water / and contynued so hys syege vnto the xxii. daye of September. At whyche daye as sayth the French Gaguin{us}, it was delyuered by Albert thā there capytayne / vppon condycyon that kynge Henry myghte sauely wynne or passe to Calayes, and so he beyng there, the towne to be yolden vnto hym. But the Frenche wryter Gag∣uinus vpholdeth the honour of the Frenchemen in all that he maye / and boroweth of hys conscyence for spa∣rynge the trouth in reporte of many thynges. For after moste wryters, ye sayde towne after sondry appoynte∣mentes of rescouse / was delyuered vnto the kynge wythout any condy∣cyon the daye aboue. sayde. where af∣ter the kynge had ordeyned syr Tho∣mas Beauforde hys vncle and erle of Dorser capytayne of that towne / he spedde hym towarde Calays. Than the dolphyn with other lor¦des of Fraunce, whyche at that tyme hadde the realme of Fraunce in gouernaunce, for so moche as the Frenche kynge was vysyted wyth suche malady as before I haue she∣wed / brake the brydge to let ye kynge of his passage ouer ye water of Sum. wherfore he was cōstrayned to draw towarde Pycardy / & so passe by ye ry∣uer of Peron̄. wherfore the Frēchmē beynge ware / assembled and lodged thē at certayne townes named Agyn¦court, Rolandcourt, and Blangy, wyth all the power of Fraunce. And whan kyng Henry sawe that he was so besette wyth hys enemies / he in the name of god & saynt George pyght hys felde in a playne betwene the sayd townes of Agyncourte and Blāgy / hauyng in hys companye of hoole men that myght fyght, nat pas¦syng the nombre of .vii.M. But at those dayes the yomen hadde theyr Lymmes at lybertye / for theyr hosyn were than fastened wyth one poynt / and theyr iackes were lōge & easy to shote in, so that they myghte drawe bowes of great strength, & shote aro∣wes of a yerde longe, besyde the hedde. Than the kyng consyderynge the great nombre of hys enemyes, & that the acte of Frenchmē standeth moch in ouer rydyng of theyr aduersaryes by force of speremē / he therfore char∣ged euery boweman to ordeyne hym a sharpe stake, & to pytche it a slope before hym / and whā ye sperys came, somdeale to drawe bak, & so to shote at the horsemen. And at the proper re¦queste of the duke of yorke, he ordey¦ned hym to haue ye vawewarde of ye felde. And whā kyng Hēry had thus prouydently ordered for hys batayll ouer night / vpon the morowe beyng the .xxv. daye of Octobre, and ye daye of the holy martyrs Cryspyne & Crys¦pinian / the kyng caused dyuers mas∣ses to be songen. And where that nyghte before, the Englysshe hoste was occupyed in prayer and con∣fessyon / he thanne caused the bys∣shoppes and other spyrytuall men, to gyue vnto theym generall ab∣solucyon. And that done / wyth a comforta∣ble chere ordered hys people as they shuld fyght, hauyng vnto thē good & comfortable wordes / & so abode ye commynge of theyr enemyes, whych
of dyuers wryters were and are re∣membred to be about .xl. thousande fyghtynge men. The whyche aboute .ix. of ye cloke in the mornynge, wyth greate pryde set vppon the Englysshe hoste / thyn∣kynge to haue ouer ryden them shor∣tely. But the archers, lyke as before they were taught pyght theyr sharpe stakes before them. And whan they sawe the French galantes approche, they a lytell yode backe & receyued them as here after ensueth. The batayll of Agyncourt. THat is to meane, they shotte at theym so feruently, yt what wyth the shotte, and goryng of theyr horses wyth the sharpe stakes, they tumbeled one vpon an other / so that he or they which ranne formest, were the confusyon of hym or them that fo¦lowed / so yt in a shorte whyle a great multytude of horse & men were layd vpon the grounde. And after theyr shotte spent / they layde aboute them with theyr glaynes and axes, that by the greate grace of god and comfor∣table ayde of the kynge, the vyctory fell that daye to the Englysshemen / and with lytell losse of theyr cōpany. For after the opynyon of sondry wry¦ters / were slayne yt daye of Englishe¦men, the dukes of yorke and of Suf¦folke / & not ouer .xxvi. parsons moo. But of Frenchmen were slayne that daye after Englysshe wryters, ouer the nomber of .x. thousande. Albeit ye French Gaguinus sayth, that of the Englyshe hoste were slayne the duke of yorke, and with hym .iiii. hundreth men / and of the French hoste .iiii.M. men of name besyde other / whiche he numbreth not. Also he affermeth to be horsmen at that felde vppon the Frenche par∣tye .x. thousande ouer and besyde the fotemen / and that the Englyshemen were nombred at .xv.C. spere men, & xviii.M. of yomen and archers. At thys sayde batayle was taken prysoners, the duke of Orleaūce, the duke of Burbon̄, ye erle of Uēdosme, of Ewe, of Rychemount, and Bursi∣gaunt thanne marshall of Fraunce / wyth many other knyghtes & esquy∣res, whych were tedyous to name, to the nōber of .xxiiii. hūdreth & aboue, as wytnesseth the boke of mayres. And in thys batayle were slayne of the nobles of Fraunce, the dukes of Barre, of Alanson, and of Brabā, viii. erles, and barons aboue .lxxx. wyth other gentylmen in cote ar∣mours to the nomber of .iii. thousāde and aboue. By reason of whyche pyl¦lage the Englysshemen were greatly auaunced. For the Frenchmen were so assuryd of vyctory by reason of theyr great nōber, that they brought the more plenty of rychesse wyth thē, to the ende to bye prysoners eyther of other / and also after the victory by them opteyned, to shewe vnto En∣glysshemen theyr pryde & pompous araye. But god whyche knewe the presumpcion and pompe tourned all thynge contrary to theyr myndes & ententes. whan the kynge by grace and po∣wer of god, more thā by force of man hadde thus gotten this tryumphaūt vyctorye, and retourned hys people frome the chase of theyr enemyes: tydynges were brought vnto hym, that a newe, hoste of Frēchmen were comynge towarde hym. wherfore he anone commaunded his people to be enbatayled / and that done made pro¦clamacions thorough the hoste, that euery man shulde slee hys prysoner. By reason of whych proclamacyon, the duke of Orleaunce and the other lordes of Fraunce were in such fere, that they anone by lycence of ye kyng
sent such worde vnto the sayd hoste, that they wythdrewe them. And the kynge wyth hys prysoners vpon the morow folowyng toke hys waye to∣ward his towne of Caleys / where he rested hī duryng this mayres tyme. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.v.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.vi.   wyllyam Cambrydge.   Nycholas wotton Draper.   Anno .iii.   Aleyn Euerarde.   THys yere and .xxix. daye of No∣uember, as the mayre rode to∣warde westmynster for to take hys charge / a pursyuaūt of ye kynges came wyth letters vnto the mayre, gyuyng to hym knowlege of the kyn¦ges good spede. wherfore the byshop of wynchester than chaūceller of En∣gland hauynge lyke wyttynge, came that daye to Poulys, and there cau∣sed Te deum to be songē wyth great solempnyte. And in lyke wyse was lyke obseruaunce done in ye parysshe chyrches and other relygyous hou∣ses thorough the cytye of London. And at Poulys, by the sayd chaū¦celler standyng vpon the steppes at the quyerdore, were the sayd tydyn∣ges denounced vnto the people. And vpon the morow folowynge, ye sayd chaunceller wych other bysshoppes and tēporall lordes, wyth a generall procession of the mayre and comynal¦tye of the cytye yode from Poulys to westmynster on fote, and offered at saynt Edwardes shryne, & so retour∣ned to theyr owne houses. Thanne kyng Hēry wyth hys prysoners shyp¦ped at Calays, and so landed at Do∣uer. And after he had ben at Caunter¦bury, and there made hys offerynge vnto saynt Thomas / he than spedde hym on hys iournay tyll he came vnto Eltham, where he rested hym a season. Upon the .xxiii. day of Nouembre he was met with the mayre & hys bre¦therne vpō the Blak heth / & so con∣ueyed wyth all honour thorugh the cytye vnto westmynster, wherein dy∣uers places of the sayd cytye, as the brydge & crosse in chepe, were ordey∣ned certayn pagentes to the kynges great comforte. The maner wherof, with all processyons and other sere∣monies I passe ouer for letthyng of the tyme. In thys yere also Sigismunde Emperour of Almayn came into En¦gland. And in the moneth of May, by the kynges cōmaundement & .vii. daye of the sayd moneth, the mayre and bretherne mette hym vpō Blak¦heth. And at saynt Georges met hym the kyng and hys lordes in great nō¦bre / and so conueyed hym vnto west∣mynster with great honour, & lodged hym in hys own palays. And shortly after was the feast of saynte George holden at wyndesore / whyche before was deferred for hys cōmyng. In ty¦me of whyche solempnyte durynge ye dyuyne seruyce / the kynge kepte the astate. But in syttyng at the feest▪ the Emperour kept ye astate. The seruice & sotyltees of whiche feeste, with syt∣tynge of ye lordes after theyr degrees I passe ouer. And shortly after came the duke of Holande into this lande, for certayne causes concernynge the Emperour. whome the kynge ho∣nourably receyued / and lodged hym in the bisshoppes palays of Ely in Holbourne. And so the kynge en∣treated and chered these straungers that for the season that they taryed in Englande, they laye here at the kynges coste and charge.
And ye emperoure and he were made knyghtes of the garter / and also a greate duke of ye emperours named duke of Bryga. And whan the em∣perour hadde taryed vpō .vii. wekes and odde dayes in Englande / which after some wryters was to thentent to set an vnyte and reste bytwene the Frenche kynge and kynge Hen∣ry: he after toke mynde to retourne into Almayne▪ whom the kynge for hys comforte and nedes that he had to do at Caleys, accompanyed hym thyder / where eyther wyth gyftes & thankes departed from other. And the duke of Hollande went wyth the emperour into Hollande and other countrees. whyle the kynge was thus at Ca¦lys / to hym came thyder vnder saufe conduyt the duke of Burgoyne, and hadde wyth the kynge dyuers com∣munycacyons / and after retourned to hys owne. And soone after ye kyng retourned into Englande / and came to westmynster vpon saynte Lukes euyn or the .xvii. daye of October. Thys yere and season whyle the kynge was at Calayes, yt is to mene vppon the daye of Assumpcyon of our blessed lady / the duke of Bed∣forde accompanyed wyth the erle of Marche and other lordes, hadde a greate conflycte and batayle wyth dyuers carikkes of Ieane and other shyppes. where after longe and sore fyght, ye honour fyll to hym and hys Englysshemen / to the greate losse of the straungers bothe of theyr men, and also of theyr shyppes / as some drowned, & .iii. of the grettest of theyr carykkes taken. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.vi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.vii.   Roberte wodtyngton.   Henry Barton Skynner.   Anno .v.   Iohn̄ Couentre.   THys yere the kynge holdynge hys parlyamēt at westmynster / to hym was graunted by aucto¦ryt of the same a Fyftene. And by a conuocacyon of the clergy was graū¦ted to hym a dyme, for the maynte∣naunce of hys warrys. wheruppon newe prouysyon was made for hys seconde vyage into Fraunce. By authoryte of this parlyament also, Rycharde whyche was sonne & heyre of ye erle of Cambrydge, which erle was put to deth at Southamp∣ton, was created duke of yorke / whi∣che after was maryed vnto Cecyle ye doughter of Daraby erle of westmer¦lande, by reason that he brought his wardshyp of the kynge. By the whi∣che lady Cecyle he hadde Henry that dyed yonge, Edward that after was kynge, Edmunde erle of Rutlande, Anne duchesse of Exceter, Elyzabeth duchesse of Suffolke, George duke of Clarence, Rycharde duke of Glou¦ceter and after kynge, and Marga∣ret duchesse of Burgoyne. And whā all thynge was redy for the kynges vyage / he ordeyned Iohn̄ duke of Bedforde hys brother protectour of thys land in the tyme of his absence. And that done / he wyth hys lordes aboute wytsontyde toke hys shyp∣pyng at Southamptō, and so sayled into Normandye / and landed vpon Lāmas daye at a place called Toke or Towke. And after he was wyth hys hoste there landed, for so moche as he was warned of certayne shyp∣pes of warre ye entendyd to do some harme in Englande beynge than vp¦pon the see: he therfore to wythstāde theyr malycyouse purpose, sent the
erle of Marche, the erle of Huntyng∣don, wyth other, to scowre the see. The whyche encountred the sayde enemyes / and after a lōge and cruell fyght them vēquysshed & ouercame. whyche fyght was vpon the daye of saynt Romayne or the .ix. day of Au∣guste, as hath the Frenche cronycle. And of the French nauy, was chyefe capytayne the vycount of Narbon / whych in that fyght was taken with great plēty of treasour. For as sayth Gaguinus, he with one Mountney an other capytayne, to whom ye sow∣dyours wages was cōmytted / of one assent of theyr synguler lucre wyth∣helde the sayde wages. By reason wherof whan they shuld ioyne in ba∣tayll, many of them wyth theyr shyp∣pes withdrew, & last theyr capitayns in the daūger of theyr enemyes. But this is lyke to be a fayned excuse of ye sayd Gagwyne, to saue the honoure of the Frēchmen / as he many tymes semblably dothe in many places of hys boke. Then to retourne vnto kyng Hen∣ry / whan he was thus landed, he sent vnto ye rulers of the town of Towke and had it vnto hym delyuered. But the castell was defended agayn hym tyll saynt Laurence daye folowyng / the whyche he gaue after vnto hys brother the duke of Clarēce, wyth all the sygnory therunto belongynge. And thys done, the kynge spedde hym toward Cane, & layde his syege therunto vpon ye .xvii. day of the fore¦sayd moneth of August. The whych contynued tyll the feest of the Naty∣uyte of our lady / & than won vpon ye {per}ty yt the duke of Clarēce assawted. But the castel helde by apoyntemēt, yf no rescouse were had tyll the .xiiii. day folowyng. At whych day ye sayd castel was delyuered with other .xiiii strōge holdes, which had before takē ye same apoyntmēt. Than the kynge made the foresayd duke of Clarence capytayne of the sayd town & castell. And in this passetyme were dyuers other townes & strōge holdes goten, by dyuers of ye kynges retynew / as ye erle Marshall, the erle of warwyke & other / ye which wan Louers, Faloys, Newelyn, Cherburgth, Argētyne, & Bayons the citye, with many other strōge abbays & pilys. Thā the king helde there saynt Georges feest, and dubbyd there .xv. knyght{is} of ye Bath / & after cōtynued his warres duryng this mayres yere, in wynnyng vpon the Frēchmen by apoyntement{is} and otherwyse / wherof the cyrcumstaūce were very longe to declare in order. In this yere also, & vpō the festfull day of Ester, tyll a chaunce in Lōdō / which to ye fere of all good crystē men is necessary to be noted.A fraye on Eester day For vpō the hygh & solēpne day, by excytyng of ye deuyll & yll disposyciō of .ii. women, that is to mene the wyfe of the lorde Straūge, & ye wyfe of syr Iohn̄ Trus¦sell knyght / such vnkyndnes fyll by∣twene theyr two husbādes, yt eyther wold haue slayne other within ye pa∣rysh chyrch of saynt Dūstanes in the Eest. In {per}tyng of which persons dy∣uers men were hurt & sore woūded / & one named Thom̄ Petwardē slayne out of hand, which was a freeman & fysshemōger of the cyty. Than lastly both frayers were takē & brought vn¦to the Coūtour in ye Pultry. And for the sayd lorde Straūge was demed culpable of ye begīnyng of this fray / he therfore vpō the sōday folowyng, & for suspendyng of the chyrche, was denoūced acursyd at Poulys crosse & in all parysshe chyrches of Londō. And fynally he was demed to open penaunce & dyd it / and made greate amendes vnto the wyfe of the sayde Thomas for the deth of her husbād. And in the ende of thys yere, where at Lōdō was sold for .ii.s. a busshell.
Anno domini .M.CCCC.xvii.   Anno domini .M.CCCC.xviii.   Henry Rede.   Rycharde Merlowe. Iremonger.   Anno .vi.   Iohn̄ Gedney.   Syr Iohn̄ Oldcastell lorde Cob∣ham put to dethe.IN thys yere syr Iohn̄ Oldca∣stell lorde Cobhm̄ / the whyche as before is shewed in the ende of the fyrste yere of thys kynge, escaped out of the Towre of London / was in the moneth of sent vnto London by the lorde Powys out of walys. The whyche syr Iohn̄ for heresye & treason was conuycte in the moneth of folowynge / and for the same drawen vnto saynt Gyles feld / where he was hanged vppon a newe peyre of galowes wyth chaynes, and after consumed wyth fyre. And about that season, the person of wortham in Norfolke, whyche longe tyme had haunted Newmar∣ket heth, and there robbed & spoyled many of the kynges subgettes / was nowe with his concubyne broughte vnto Newgate where he lastly dyed. And kynge Henry beynge styll in Normandy / deuyded hys people in thre partes. wherof one he reserued vnto hym selfe / the seconde he com∣mytted to the rule of the duke of Cla¦rence / and the thyrde vnto the erle of warwyke. whyche sayde duke & erle employed theyr armes so well and valyauntly, that eyther of theym en∣croched sore vppon the Frenchmen, and wanne from them many stronge holdes and pyles. And the kynge af∣ter longe syeges by hym contynued aboute Argentyne, Cressy, saynte Launde, and other / he then in ye ende of thys yere, that is to saye vppon ye daye of the translacyon of saynt Ed∣warde or the .xiii. daye of October / layde hys syege vnto the cytye of Roan / and contynued the same tyll the .xii. daye of Ianuary folowynge. In the whych passetyme the olde mayre was chaunged to a new as fo¦loweth. Upon the .ix. day of October dyed Iohn̄ Bryan sheryfe / and for hym was chosen to that offyce Iohn̄ Parnes Draper. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xix.   Iohn̄ Bryan.   wyllyam Seuenoke Grocer. Rauffe Barton. Anno .vii.   Iohn̄ Parnesse.   THys yere the foresayde syege aboute the cytye of Roan cō∣tynuynge / vpon the .xii. daye of Ia∣nuary foresayde, the Frenchmen of∣feryd to treate, whych treaty ye kyng admytted vnto the erlys of warwike and Salysbury wyth other. And for the Frenche party, was appoynted the captayne of the cytye named syr Guy de Bocyer & other. By reason of whyche treaty it was agreed, that ye sayd capitayne vpon the .xix. day of the sayd present moneth of Ianuary, at such an houre as it shuld please ye kynge to assygne / shulde delyuer vn¦to suche persons as the kynge wolde appoynte the cytye & castell of Roan in all peasyble wyse / excepte the sayd cytye and castell be rescowyd by the dolphyne of Fraunce before the sayd xix. daye. And the .xxii. daye of the sayd mo∣neth, the inhabytauntes of the sayde cytye to paye vnto the kynge .xv.C. scutes of golde / wherof two shulde alwaye be worth and englysshe noble.
And other .xv. hūdred of lyke scutes, they shulde paye vpon the .xxiii. daye of February next folowynge. whiche couenauntes with many and diuers other cōprysed to .xxv. artycles, were by the assuraunce of both partyes su¦rely ratifyed and assured. And for no rescouse by the sayde dolphyn or any other Frenchman, was made by the daye aboue lymytted / therfore ye said capytayne accordynge to hys bonde and promysse, delyuered the sayd cy∣tye and castell, vppon the .xix. day of Ianuary afore sayde beyng the daye of saynt wolstan. The wynnynge of thys cytye of Roan ascrybeth Gaguinus, vnto ye ciuyle dyscord that was bytwene the cytesyns and theyr fyrste capytayne named erle of Danmale / whom they expulsyd ye cyty with a strong power of Normans. But yet as he affer∣meth, the cytesyns helde the cyty tyll they were cōstrayned for lacke of vy∣tayll to eate horses, dogges, cattes, rattes, and other vermyn. whan kynge Henry had set ye cyty of Roan in an order / he then passed ye countrees towarde Fraunce / so that he subdued the cityes and townes as he rode. And the .xx. daye of Maye he came to Troys in Chāpayne, where he was honourably receyued. In whyche passetyme, Iohn̄ duke of Burgoyne that before tyme had ben the occasyon of the murder of the duke of Orleaunce, was now slayne in the presence of the dolphyn / lyke as before I haue shewed to you in ye xxxix. yere of Charles the .vii. wher∣fore Phylyppe hys sonne and duke after hym, refused the dolphyns par¦tye and drewe hym vnto kynge Hen¦ry / and delyuered to hym the posses∣syon of Charlys the Frenche kynge and dame Katheryne hys doughter, as affermyth Gaguinus. Then were meanes of concorde and vnyte soughte and laboured by the Frenchemen, in so effectuall ma∣ner, that shortely after for a fynall peas to be hadde bytwene both real∣mes / kynge Henry at Troys in Chā¦payne forsayde by the meanes of the sayde Phylyppe duke of Burgoyn, maryed the forenamed Katheryne, vppon Trynite sondaye than beyng the .iii. daye of Iuny. Before solempnysacyon of which maryage a treaty and conclusyon of a peas conteynyng .xxxvii. artycles bytwene bothe kynges was conclu∣ded. wherof ye effecte was, that kyng Henry shulde be admytted and na∣med regent of Fraunce / and yt Char∣les shulde be kynge for terme of hys lyfe, and receyue the issues and pro∣fytes of the same / and quene Isabell hys wyfe to enioye her dower for terme of her lyfe to quenes of Fraūce due and accustomed. And quene Ka∣theryne kynge Henryes wyfe, to ha∣ue her dower in Englande to the va∣lue of .xl. thousande scutes / whyche shulde be in value tenne thousande marke Englysshe. And yf the ouerly¦ued kynge Henry / then she to haue dower of the realme of Fraunce, to ye value .xx. thousande frankes yerely to beleuyed of suche lordshyppes as Blaunche somtyme wyfe to Phylyp¦le Beaw helde. And after the dethe and tyme of the forsayde Charlys, the crowne wyth all ryghtes belon∣gynge to the same of the realme of Fraunce, to remayne vnto kynge Henry and to hys heyres kynges. Bd for the sayde Charlys was vy∣syted wyth sykenesse / the kynge as regent shulde haue the hole gouer∣naunce of the sayde realme and de∣fence of the same / & specyally agayne the dolphyne, whyche entended and dyd hys vttermost power to distour∣be the sayde peas. And that the lor∣des and nobles of Fraunce as well
spyrytuall as temporall shall make othe vnto kynge Henry, to be obedy∣ent vnto his lefull commaundmen∣tes concernynge the foresayd gouer¦naunce and defence / and they with ye hedes and rulers of cytyes, castelles, and townes to mayntayne & vphold the sayde peas to the vttermost of theyr powers / and after the dethe of ye sayd Charles, to become his trewe subiectes and lyege men. And that al suche lordshyppes as after that daye shulde be be conquered or wonne fro the Dolphyn and other dysobedyen∣tes, that they shulde remayne to the vse of the sayd Charles durynge his naturall lyfe. Prouyded that yf any were wonne within ye duchy of Nor∣mandy / that they shulde inconty∣nently remayne to kynge Henryes vse. And that after the dyscease of the sayde Charles, the duchy of Normā∣dy & all other lordshyppes therunto belongynge, to be as one monarchye vnder the crowne of Fraūce. And al∣so that durynge the lyfe of the sayde Charles / kynge Henry shulde nat name or wryte hym selfe kynge of Fraunce. And that the sayd Charles shulde in all his wrytynges name kynge Henry his moost derest sonne Henry kynge of Englande and enhe¦rytour of the crowne of Fraūce. And that none imposycyon or taske shuld be put vpon the comons of Fraunce, but to the necessary defeuce & weale of the realme. And that by the aduyce of bothe coūsayles of the realmes of Englande and of Fraunce, suche sta∣blysshed ordynaūces myght be deuy¦sed, that when the sayde realme of Fraunce shulde fall to the possessyon of kynge Henry or his heyres, that it myght with suche vnyte ioyne vnto the realme of Englāde, ye one kynge myght rule both kyngdomes as one monarchye / reserued alwayes to ey∣ther pryncypate or realme, all rygh∣tes, lybertyes, frāchyses, and lawes / so that nother realme shulde be sub∣iecre vnto other. And that perpetuall amyte and frendshyp with all famy∣lyer conuersacion, aswell by byenge, sellynge, and all other lefull, to be cō¦tonued atwene bothe subiectes for euer / all customes and pryuyleges to eyther realme to be payde and obey∣ed. And that kynge Charles nor Phy¦lyp duke of Burgoyne, shulde make any concorde or pea with the Dol∣phyn of Uyen, without the assent & agrement of kynge Henry. Nor he in lykewyse without the consent of the sayde Charles and Phylyp. And the sayd Charles duryng his lyfe, shulde honorably be founde and entreated / and to haue in his housholde and aboute hym noble men of his owne nacyon, with all other thynges con∣cernynge his estate / and to be lodged in notable places of his realme, wher the people to hym shulde be moste obedyent. After whiche artycles by the con∣sentes of bothe prynces well and no∣bly ratysfyed and confermed, and so∣lempnyzacion of the foresayd mary∣age ended / kyng Henry with his peo¦ple sped hym towarde Parys, where he was honorably receyued. And whan he had with his newe wyfe re∣sted hym there a season / he than with the duke of Burgoyne and dyuers other lordes of Fraunce, layde seyge vnto dyuers townes whiche helde vpon the Dolphyns partye, & them wanne by strengthe or by appoynt∣ment / and lastly layde syege and his ordenaunce aboute a stronge towne named Meldune or Meleon, wher∣of was capytayne a noble warryour named Barbasan, the whiche defen∣ded that towne manfully. Than the kynge seynge the foresayde sternesse of ye capitayne / beclipped that towne with a stronge syege / lyenge hym∣selfe
on that syde towarde the wood, and the duke of Burgoyne vpon the other syde agayne the temple or mo¦nastery of saynt Peter / whiche syege so conued durynge this mayres yere. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xix.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xx.   Robert whytyngham.   Richarde whytyngham Mercer.   Anno .viii.   Iohan Butler.   THis yere continued styll the for¦mer syege aboute Meleon tyll aboute the mydle of Nouem∣bre. At whiche tyme the fore named capytayne sore famysshed, sought me anes of treaty. By meane wherof it was agreed, that he with all other shulde sauely auoyde by a daye lymy¦ted / excepte all suche persones as be∣fore tyme had ben consentynge vnto the dethe of Iohn̄ lateli duke of Bur¦goyne. For the whiche cryme the fore¦named capytayne named Barbasan was after accused with many other / and sent vnto Parys, and there hol∣den in pryson. And that done kynge Henry layde his syege vnto a towne called Melden. The whiche fynally was also gyuen vp by a lyke apoynt∣ment. wherin were founden certayne persones detected of ye foresayde mur¦ther / for the whiche after due examy∣nacyon made, they were hanged vp¦on an elmen tree standynge by ye way ledynge vnto Parys. whan kynge Henry had thus wrouthte moche of his wyll in Fraunce / he toke leue of his father the Frenche kynge / & with the quene his wyfe sayled into Eng∣lande, & landed at Douer vpon Can¦delmas day / leuynge in Fraunce for his deputye his brother the duke of Clarence. Than the kynge sped hym on his iournay towarde London / & came thyder on the .xiiii. daye of Fe∣bruary. And the quene came thyder vpon the .xxi. day of ye same moneth. But here for lengthe of tyme I wyl passe ouer the great and curyous or∣dynaunce prouyded by the cytezyns for the receyuynge of the kynge and quene, aswell of theyr ordinate me∣tynge wyth theym vpon horsebacke, as the sumptuous and honourable dyuyses prepayred wythin the cytye to the kynges and quenes greate reioysynge. And forthe I wyll procede to shewe vnto you some parte of the greate honour, that was vsed and ex¦ercysed vppon the daye of the sayde quenes coronacyon / whyche was af∣ter solempnysed in saynte Peters churche of westmynster, vppon the daye of saynte Mathy the apostle or the foure & twenty day of February. After whyche solempnysacyō in that chyrche endyd / she was conueyed in to the greate halle of westmynster, and there set to dyner. Upon whose ryghte hand satte at the ende of the same table the archebysshop of Caū¦torbury, and Henry surnamed the ryche cardynall of wynchester. And vppon the lefte hande of the quene satte the kynge of Scottes in hys astate / the whyche was seruyd wyth coueryd messe lyke vnto the forena∣med bysshoppes, but after them. And vppon the same hande and syde nere to the bordes ende, satte the duchesse of yorke, and the countesse of Hun∣tyngdon. The erle of ye Marche hol∣dynge a ceptre in hys hande, knelyd vppon the ryght syde. The erle mar¦shall in lyke maner knyled vppon the left hande of the quene. The coū∣tesse of Kente satte vnder the table at the ryght foote / and the countesse
Marshall at the left foote. The duke of Glouceter syr Humfrey as that daye ouerloker / and stode before the quene bare heded. Syr Rychard Ne¦uyll was that day caruer to ye quene / ye erles brother of Suffolk cupberer / syr Iohn̄ Steward Sewar / the lord Clyfford panterer in stede of the erle of warwyk / the lord wyllughby bote¦ler in stede of the erle of Arūdell. The lord Gray Ruthyn or Ryffyn naperer The lord of Awdeley amner in stede of the erle of Cambrydge. The erle of worceter was that daye erle Mar∣shall in absence of the erle Marshall, the whyche rode about the hall vpon a great courser, wyth a multytude of typped staues about hym to kepe the roume in the hall. Of the which hall, the barons of the .v. portes begā the table vpon the ryght hande towarde saynt Stephēs chapell / & beneth thē at the table sat the bowchyers of the chauncery. And vpon the lefte hande next vnto the cupborde, sat the mayre and hys bretherne aldermē of Lōdō. The bysshops began the table fore∣agayne the barons of the .v. portes / & the ladies the table agayn the mayre. Of whyche .ii. tables, for the bysshop¦pes began ye bysshop of London and the bysshop of Durham / and for the ladyes, the countesse of Stafforde / & the coūtesse of Marche. And ye shall vnderstande, that thys feast was all of fysshe. And for the orderyng of the seruice therof were diuers lordes appoynted for hede offycers / as ste∣warde, controller, surueyour, and o∣ther honourable offyces. For the whyche were appoynted the erles of Northumberlande, of westmerland, the lorde Fitz Hughe, the lorde Fur∣neuall, the lorde Gray of wylton̄, the lorde Ferers of Groby, the lord Po∣nynges, the lorde Haryngton̄, ye lord Darcy, the lorde Dacre, and the lord Delaware. The whyche wyth other orderyd the seruyce of the feest as foloweth / & thus for the fyrst course. Brawne and mustarde. Dedellys in Burneux Frument wyth Balien Pyke in Erbage Lamprey powderyd Trought Codlyng Playes fryed Marlyng fryed Crabbys Leche lumbarde florysshed Tartys. And a sotyltye called a Pellycane syttyng on hys nest with her byrdes / and an image of saynte Katheryne holdyng a boke and dysputyng with the doctours / holdynge a reason in her ryghte hande, saynge Madame le Royne, and ye Pellycan as an answere Ce estia signe, et du roy, pur tenir ioy, et a tout sa gent, esse mete sa entent. The seconde course. Gely coloured wyth columbyne floures whyte potage or creme of almandes Breme of the see Counger Solys Cheuen Barbyll wyth Roche Fresshe Samon Halybut Gurnarde Rochet broyled Smelth fryed Creuys or lobster Leche Damask witw the kynges worde or prouerbe flourysshed, Vne sanz plus. Lamprey fresshe baken Flampeyne flourisshed wyth a scochon̄ royall / and therin .iii. crow¦nes of golde plantyd with floure de∣lyce and floures of camemyll wrou∣ghte of confeccions.
And a sotyltye named a Panter wyth an image of saynte Katheryne wyth a whele in her hande / & a rolle wyth a reason in that other hande, sayeng, La Royne ma fise, in ceste ile, per bon reson, aues renount. The thyrde course. Dates in compost Creme motle. Carpe deore. Turbut. Tenche. Perche wyth goion. Fysshe sturgeon wyth welkes Porperies rosted. Mennes fryed. Creuys de eawe douce. Pranys. Elys rosted wyth lamprey. A leche called the whyte leche flourysshed wyth hawthorne leuys and redde hawys. A march payne garnysshed wyth dyuers fygurs of angellys / amonge the whych was set an image of saynt Katheryne holdynge thys reason, I lest escrit, pur voir et eit, per mariage pure cest guerre ne dure. And lastely a sotyltye na∣med a Tigre lokynge in a myrrour / and a man syttynge on horse backe clene armed holdyng in hys armes a Tyger whelpe wyth thys reason, Par force sanz reson ie ay pryse ceste beste. And wyth hys one hande makynge a coūtenaunce of throwynge of myrrours at the great Tygre. The whych held thys reason, Gile the mirrour ma fete distour. And thus wyth all honour was fynysshed thys solempne coronacyō. After the whyche / the quene soiour∣ned in the palays of westmynster tyll Palme sondaye folowynge. And vp¦pon the morne she toke her iournaye towarde wyndesore where the kyng and she helde theyr Eester. And after that hygh feest passed / ye kynge made prouysyon for hys warre in Fraūce, durynge the terme of thys mayres yere. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xx.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxi.   Iohn̄ Boteler.   wyllyam Cambryge Grocer.   Anno .ix.   wyllyam weston.   THis yere vppon Eester euyn, beynge than the .xxii. daye of Apryll, the duke of Clarence brother vnto the king, whō at his departyng out of Fraūce he hadde laft there for his deputye / was at a place called in French Baugy or Bauge, ouerset & slayne, by a Frēch capytayne named syr Iohn̄ de la Croyse. And the erlys of Huntyngdon & of Somerset with many mo gentlymē of England and Gascoyne takē prysoners, to ye kyn∣ges great displeasure. Than shortly after ye king held his pliamēt at west¦mynster. By autoryte wherof & of a cōuocaciō of ye clergy holden at Pou¦lys, was graūted to hym a Fyftene & dyme. And for ye money therof shuld not be hastely called on of ye comōs / the byshop of wynchester of his own fre mynde, lent to the kyng .xx.M.li. And about Pentecoste folowynge kyng Henry shypped at Douer, & say led to Calays / & from thens yode the thyrde tyme into Fraunce, where he warred duryng thys mayres yere. Anno domini .M.CCCC.xxi.   Anno domini .M.CCCC.xxii.   Rycharde Gosselyn.   Robert Chycheley Grocer.   Anno .x.   wyllyam weston.  
IN the begynnyng of thys may¦res yere and .vi. daye of Decē∣bre / was kyng Henry the .vi. borne at wyndesore. And in ye .ix. day of ye sayd moneth began a parlyament at Pou¦lys.Byrthe of  the fyte. By the whych was graunted to the kyng a fyftene and a deme of the clergy. And for the coyne of golde at those dayes was greatly mynysshed wyth clyppyng & wasshyng, to great hurte of the commynaltye / therefore at thys parlyament it was enacted & agreed, that in the paymente of thys ayde to the kyng graunted / hys offy¦cers shulde receyue all lyght coynes of golde, so that they wanted nat in weyghte ouer the rate of .xii.d. in the noble. And yf any noble wāted more than .x.i.d, or any other pese of golde after the rate / thā the owner to make vp the value to .vi.s.viii.d. By reasō of thys also, syluer, as grotes & pens were geson / for all men put forth the golde and made store of syluer. This yere also after Easter, the quene toke shyppyng at Southampton, & say∣led to the kynge into Fraūce / where she was honourably receyued of her father and mother, & of the cytyes & good townes. And in the cytye of Pa¦rys vpon whytsonday, the kyng and she sat crowne at Dyner, whych had nat before tyme ben sene of any kyng of Englande. In thys mayres yere also, but the x. yere of the kyng and .x. daye of Au∣gust / a new wedyrcok was sette vpō the crosse of saynte Paulys steple of London. Thā kyng Hēry beyng styll occupyed in hys warres in Fraunce, & dayly wynnyg vpon the Frenchmē in thys sayd moneth of Auguste and x. yere of hys reygne / he waxed syke at Boys in Uincente, and dyed there lyke a good crysten man vpō the last daye of August, whan he had reyned ix. yeres .v. monethes and .x. dayes / le¦uyng after hym hys onely yonge son Henry of the age of .viii. monethes & odde dayes. And than hys body was enbawmed and ceryd, and after brou¦ghte vnto westmynster / as in the be∣gynnynge of the nexte mayres yere shalbe shewed. And in the moneth of Octobre folowyng, dyed the French kyng father vnto the quene, as in his story before is declared. who that wolde take vppon hym to reherce all the conquestes and triū¦phaunt victoryes opteyned by thys moste vyctorious prynce, wyth other laudable dedes / he shulde to reherce thē ceryously make a great volume. But where to fore I haue shewed to you breuely some part of the famous dedes of thys excellente prynce, tou∣chynge the actuel dedys of his body / nowe I wyl breuely touche the actes done by hym for the meryte of hys soule. And fyrste for asmoche as he knewe well that hys father hadde la∣boured the meanes to depose ye noble prynce Rycharde the second, & after was cōsētyng to his deth / for ye which offence hys sayde father had sente to Rome, of that great crime to be assoy¦led / and was by the pope enioyned, ye lyke as he had beraft hym of hys na∣tural and bodely lyfe for euer in this world, that so by contynuall prayer and suffragyes of ye churche, he shuld cause hys soule to lyue perpetually in the celestyall worlde / whyche pe∣naūce for that hys father by lyfe dyd nat perfourme, thys goostly knyght in most habūdaūt maner {per}fourmed it. For fyst he buylded .iii. houses of relygyon / as the Charterhous of mō¦kes called Shene, the house of close nonnes called Syon, and the thyrde was an house of obseruauntes buyl∣ded vpon that other syde of thamys, and ater let fall by hym for the skyll that foloweth as testyfyeth the boke or Regyster of mayres. where it is reported that after this
noble prynce had thus founded these sayd .iii. houses, and endowed theym wyth cōpetent landes / he of a goost¦ly dysposicion wyth a secrete cōpany for to vpsyt them and to se how they kepte theyr dyuyne seruyce / wolde dyuers tymes go fro hys manour of Shene nowe called Rychemounte vnto the sayde thre places, for ye cau∣ses abouesayde. At whyche tymes and seasons he euer founde the twoo houses of monkes and nonnes occu¦pyed as theyr statutes requyred. But the thyrde hous whyche was of Frenche fryers, he fande sondry ty∣mes neglygente and slacke in doyng of theyr duety. wherefore he called before hym ye father wyth some other of that place, and reasoned wyth thē sharply, why none otherwyse they en¦tended theyr diuyne seruyce, & praied more specyally for hym as they were bounde of duety. whereunto it was after pardon requyred lastely by the sayde father answered, that in conue¦nyent wyse they naturally might nat praye for hym and hys good spede, consyderynge that he dayely warred vpon theyr fathers and kynnesmen, and slewe of theym and spoyled thē dayly / and enpouerysshed that lāde, whyche they of very kynde ought to loue and praye for. After whyche an∣swere thus by them made / the kynge auoyded the hous of them, and tur∣ned the lande thereof to suche vse as hym best lyked, and suffred the hous to fall in ruyne. And ouer thys great acte of foūdyng of these .ii. religious houses / he ordeyned at westmynster to brenne perpetually wythoute ex∣tinccion, iiii. tapers of waxe vppon the sepulture of kyng Rychard / and ouer that he ordeyned therto / to be continued for euer, one day in ye weke a solempne Dirige to be songe, & vp∣pon the morowe a masse / after which masse ended certayn money to be gy¦uē, as before is expressed with other thynges in ye begynnyng of this kyn¦ges reygne. And ouer thys his great besynesse in warre natwithstādyng / this most cristē prīce by his lyfe chase his place of sepulture within the fore¦sayd monastery / & there ordeyned for hym to be songe .iii. masses euery day in the weke whyle the world lasteth, in maner and forme as by these ver∣ses folowyng doth appere. Henrici missae quinti, sunt hic tabulatae. Quae successiue sunt per monachos celebratae. ¶Prima fit Assumptae de festo virginis almae. Poscit pusiremam Christus de morte resur gens. Dominica ¶Prima salutate de festo virginis extat. Nunciat angelicis laudem postrema choreis. unc ¶Esse deum natum de virgine prima fatetur. Commemora natam, sic vltima missa Mariam. Martis ¶Prima celebretur, ad honorem neupmatis almi. Vltima conceptam denunciat esse Mariam. Mercurij ¶Semper prima coli, debet de corpore Christi. Vltima fit fata, de virgine purificata. Iouis ¶Concedet vt prima, celebretur de cruce sancta. At{que} salutate fiet postrema Mariae Veneris ¶Omnes ad sanctos, est prima colenda supernos. Vltima de requie, pro defunctis petit esse. Sabati ¶Semper erit media, de proprietate dei. Omni die ¶Missa Assumptionis Mtiae. Missa dn̄ieae resurrectionis. 1 ¶Missa salutationis Mariae. Missa annūciatiōis Mariae. 2 ¶Missa natiutatis Christi. Missa natiuitatis Mariae. 3 ¶Missa sancti spiritus. Missa conceptionis. 4 ¶Missa corporis Christi. Missa purificationis. 5 ¶Missa sanct̄ae crucis. Missa salutationis Mariae. 6 ¶Missa omnium sanctorum. Missa de requie. 7 ¶Missa diei quotidie.
¶whyche verses may thus to vnletteryd be englysshed. Loo here is noted and put in memory, That ouer these actes noble and Marcyall / Thys excellent prynce, thys fyfte kyng Henry, Hys soule to endowe he was memoryall. For wyth suffrages whyche euer laste shall, Of masses thre that folowe ceryously, At westmynster he ordeyned to be sayde dayly. Sonday.Upon sondaye the fyrste masse to begynne, Deuoutly to be sayd, of the Assumpcion Of our blessed Lady / and nat thereafter blynne, But than the latter of the resurreccion. Monday.And on the mondaye, of the Uisitacion The fyrste masse after ordeyned is. Of the Annunciacion the latter masse sayd is. Tuysday.Upon the tuysday, to kepe the ordre iust, The fyrste to be sayd of crystes Natiuite. Than of our Lady byrth the latter folow muste. wednysdaye.On wednysdaye, the holy ghost halowed to be. And of the Concepcion the thyrd wylled he. Thursdaye.The thursday to synge the fyrste of Corpus xp̄i / Of the Purificacion the laste of our Lady. Frydaye.Upon the frydaye, a masse of crystes crosse / And of the Salutacion the latter for to synge. And for of daye or tyme shuld be no losse Saterdaye.Upon saterdaye, the fyrste of that mornynge A masse of all sayntes to pray for the kynge. Than masse of Requiem to be laste of all. Quotidie.And euery day, the day masse amyd these masses to fall. ¶Lenuoy. ¶ O mercifull god, what a prynce was this, Whiche his short lyfe in marciall actes spent In honour of conquesi / that wonder to me it is, Howe he myght compasse suche dedys excellent / And yet for that his mynde nothynge detent, Al ghostly helthe for his soule to prouide, Cut of his world or he fatally shulde slyde So that though I had Tullyes eloquence, Or of Sek the great moralyte, Or of Salomon the perfyght sapience, Or the swete dyties of dame Caliope: Yet might I nat in prose or other dytte, Accordyngly auaunce this princes fame, And with due honour to enhaunce the same. Consideringe his actes, wherof percell appere In this rude wrke / with many mo left out / The tyme also, whiche was lesse than ten yere, That he so shortly brought all thynge about / By diuine grace forthryd without doute, That myghtfull lorde he hale his ghostly knyght With grace & honour to passe this worldes sight. And to haue rewarde dowble & condigne. And first for marciall actes by hym doone,
To be auaunced amonge the worthys Nye And for his vertues vsed by hym efte soone, With many good dedes which he in erth had done Aboue the Hierarches he is I trust now stalled, That was on erth / kyng of kynges called. Anglia. ¶ Henry the syxte. HEnry the .vi. of ye name, and onely sonne of Henry the .v, & of quene Kathryn dough¦ter of Charles ye seuenth kyng of Fraunce / began hys reygne ouer the realme of Eng∣lande, the fyrst day of September, in the yere of our lorde .M.iiii.C. & .xxii. and in the ende of the laste yere of the reygne of the foresayde .vii. Charles than kyng of Fraunce. Thys Henry for the insufficience of hys age, whyche as before ys she∣wed was but of .viii. monethes and odde days / was commytted vnto the rule of hys vncles, the dukes of Bed¦forde and of Glouceter. The whyche durynge hys none age ruled the real¦mes of Englande & of Fraunce ho∣nourably / as the duke of Glouceter protectour of Englande, and duke of Bedforde regent of Fraunce. Than vpon the .xxi. day of October duryng thys mayres yere Robert Chyceley / dyed at Parys the aboue named vii. Charles kynge of Fraunce. By reason of whose deth, by force of ap∣poyntemēt before made betwene Hē∣ry the .v. and hym, as before is tow∣ched in the seuenth yere of the sayde Henry / the realme of Fraunce & right thereof fylle vnto the yonge kynge Henry. To whose vse the nobles of Fraunce, excepte a fewe of suche as helde wyth the Dolphyne, delyuered the possession therof vnto the duke of Bedforde, as regent therof durynge that nonage of thys kynge. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxiii.   wyllyam Estfeylde.   wyllyam walderne.   Anno primo.   Robert Tatersale.   IN the begynnyng of thys may¦res yere, and fyrste yere of the kyng / that is to say the .vii. daye of ye moneth of Nouembre, the corps of ye excellent prynce kyng Henry the fyft was wyth great solempnyte and ho∣nour brought vnto the monastery of westmynster / and there at the fete of saynt Edward wyth due reuerēce en¦terred / to whose soule Iesus be mer¦cyfull. And vpon the .ix. day of ye sayd moneth, was a parlyament called at westmynster. By reason whereof, the kynges gouernaunce durynge hys nonage was prouyded for / wyth all the rule of bothe realmes of Englād and of Fraunce. And by auctoryte of the same, the duke of Glouceter syr Humfrey, was ordeyned protectoure of England / and duke Iohn̄ of Bed¦forde regent of Fraunce. And du∣rynge the parlyament / was graūted vnto ye kyng for a subsydie for .iii. ye∣res, v. nobles of euery sacke of wolle that shulde passe out of the lande. And the fyrste daye of Marche after, was of hys preestehode deregraded and heretyke named wyllyam Tayl∣lour, and brēt to asshes in smythfeld. whose opynyons for the herynge of them shulde be tedious and vnfrute∣full / I therfore wyll nat wyth theym blot my boke. In thys moneth of Marche also was the town of Poūt
Melane deliuered by apoyntmente vnto the regent of Fraunce. Of the whych apoyntemēt one artycle was, that all horses, abylmētes of warre, harneys, and other, shulde be lefte within the sayd place / and also golde and syluer and other iewelles there to remayne hooly. And yf that any persone were within ye holde founde, whiche before tyme had ben gylty or consentynge to the dethe of the duke of Burgoyne / that he shulde be dely∣uered to the regent / and not to take any benefyte or pryuylege by that ap¦poyntment. And this yere the west gate of the cytye called Newgate, was newly buylded and repayred by the execu∣tours of Rycharde whytyngton late mayre of Londō. And this yere after mydsomer fyll great water or rayne / so that for the more party euery daye atwene the begynnynge of Iuly and ende of Septembre, it rayned lytell or moche / and yet that not withstan∣dynge, that yere was cōuenyent plen¦tye of al grayne, so that whete passed not eyght shyllynges at Lōdon, and malte fyue shyllynges. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxiiii.   Nycholas Iames.   wyllyam Crowmer draper.   Anno .ii.   Thomas wadeforde.   THis yere, that is to meane in the begynnge of this mayres yere and .xiii. day of Nouembre / the kynge and the quene his mother re∣moued from wyndesore towarde Lō¦don, and came that nyght vnto Sta∣nys / and on the moowe beynge son∣day whan he was borne towarde his mothers chare, he shyrled and cryed so feruently, that the noryce with her brestes nor nothynge elles that the quene coude deuyse myght contente hym. wherfore the quene beyng fered that he had ben dyseased, retourned agayne to her chambre / where anone he was in good rest and quyet. This of some wryters is noted for a dy∣uyne monycyon, yt he wolde not tra∣uayle vpon the sonday. But how it was, the quene taryed with hym ther that nyght / & on the moowe he was borne to ye chare with glad semblant & mery chere, and so came to Kynge∣ston that nyght / and vpon ye morow vnto his manour of Kyngeston. Up∣on wednysday, the quene syttynge in her chare and he vpon her lappe, pas¦sed with great tryumphe thorughe the cytye / and so vnto westmynster, where than was holden his parlya∣ment / & there set in his kyngly ma∣geste within the parlyamēt chambre amonge all his lordes, where the speker of the parlyament made a fa∣mous preposicion / wherof the effecte was, of the grace yt god had endewed the realme with, for the presence of so toward a prynce and soueraygne go∣uernour as he was, with many other wordes of commendacyon, which I passe ouer. The .xxvi. day of the same moneth of Nouēbre / the kynge with ye quene remoued from westmynster vnto waltham holy crosse. And after he had there a season soiourned / here moued vnto Hertford, where he held his Crystmasse, and ye kyng of Scot¦tes with hym. And ye foresayd parlya¦mēt was iourned vnto ye .xx. daye of Crystmas. In ye whiche parlyament amonge other actes, was ordeyned yt what prysoner yt for graūd or pety tre¦ason was cōmytted to warde, & after wylfully brake the same, it shulde
be demed pety treason / and that the goodes of hym so escapynge, shulde be forfeyted to the lorde of that soyle that they were founde in. In the mo∣neth of Februari, syr Iames steward kynge of Scottes maried in the face of the churche of saynt mary Ouere∣ys in Southwerke, dame Iohane ye duchesse doughter of Clarence / whi∣che was doughter vnto the erle of Somerset fyrste husbande vnto the sayde duchesse. And the feest was hol¦den in the bysshop of wynchesters place by. And soone after vpon the xiii. day of February, the foresayde parlyament beynge agayne holden at westmynster / for brekynge of the foresayde acte of brekynge of pryson, syr Iohan Mortymer was accused by a yoman named wyllyam Kynge and seruaunt vnto syr Robert Scot knyght and keper of ye towre of Lon∣don, of dyuers poyntes of treason as folowen. Fyrst he coūseyled with the sayd wyllyam Kynge to the ende to breke out of pryson / and promysed to hym for the same, the yerely value of xl.li. lande, & in processe an erledome. Also the sayd Mortymer shulde saye that he wolde go into wales vnto the erle of the Marches / and there he wolde rayse .xl.M. mē, and with that power he wolde entre this lande, and stryke of the heddes of the lorde pro∣tectour and of the bysshop of wynche¦ster, to the entent that he myght tell or play with some of his money. And ferthermore he accused hym, that the sayde Mortymer shulde say, that the erle of Marche shulde be kynge by ryght enherytaunce / & that he hymself was nexte ryghtfull heyre to the sayd crowne after the sayd erle of Marche. wherfore yf the sayde erle wold not take vpon hym ye crowne & rule of ye lande, he sayde that he elles wolde. And ouer this the sayd wylly∣am. alledged to the sayde syr Iohan Mortymer, that he shulde say that yf he fayled of his purpose, and myght not wyn̄e vnto the erle of Marches, that than he wolde sayle vnto ye Dol¦phyn and ayde and take his partye / where he wyst well he shuld be accep∣ted, and haue good ayde of hym to brynge aboute his purpose. All whi∣che maters were duely approued by the sayde wyllyam agayne the sayde syr Iohan, before the lordes and co∣mons of the sayde parlyament / for yt whiche treasons he was after draw∣en and hanged. In this yere also the duke of Bed¦forde beynge in Fraunce as regene, warred strongly vpon ye Dolphyn, & wanne from hym many stronge hol∣des and townes / as Crotey, Basyde, Ryol, Rulay, Gyroūde, Basyle, Mer¦moūde, Mylham, Femel, Seintace, Iensak, Mauron, Duras, Mount∣suer, La venak, Palageeu, Cerneys, Noelam, Cusak, and Doual with dy¦uers other / and so contynued tyll he came vnto Uerneyll in Perche. The whiche he helde so streyght, that last¦ly Gyrande the captayne therof agre¦ed to delyuer it by a certayne day, ex∣cepte he were rescowed. After whiche appoyntment so taken / the sayde Gy¦rande as wytnesseth Gaguinus, sent worde to Charles the .viii. of ye name or ye .vii. after dyuers wryters, which of his fautoures was than accōpted for kyng of Fraūce. And he in all pos¦syble hast, sent thyder ye duke of Alan¦son, ye erle of Turon̄ or of Douglas, of Bowgham or Boucam, of Dau∣mayll, & ye vicoūt of Nerbon̄, with a strōg power of Armenakkes, scottes, & Frēchemē / ye which host or it myght approch to ye sayd towne to make re∣scouse, ye day expired, & it vnto ye duke deliuered. whā ye duke of Alāsō was asserteyned of ye deliuere of ye towne, he toke his aduise of ye other capitay¦nes, whether it was better to retourn
consyderyng the towne was yolden, or to gyue batayll vnto the Englishe men. But fynally for no reproche shuld be to them arected as they had fled for fere / they kept on theyr iour¦nany, & pyght theyr felde in a playne nere vnto the sayd town of Uernoyl. where they beynge strongely enba∣taylled, vpon the .vii. day of the mo∣neth of August, the duke of Bedford wyth hys retynue gaue to thē sharpe and cruell batayll / the whyche endu∣red longe wythoute knowlege of vy∣ctory. But fynally by goddes ordenaūce and power, the vyctyry fyl to the En¦glysshe partye, to the greate losse of theyr enemyes. For in the fyghte was slayne / as testyfyeth the French Gaguyne, the erles of Turon, and Boucam, of Daumayle, wyth the Uycounte of Narbon̄, and dyuers o∣ther men of name. And of the com¦mons were slayne to the nombree of fyue thousande. And there was ta¦ken the duke of Alanson, the Mar¦shall of Fraunce, and other. But ye englysshe wryters affermeth .x.M. to be slayne and mo. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxv.   Symonde Seman.   Iohn̄ Mychell.   Anno .ix.   Iohn̄ Bywater   THys yere after Easter, ye kynge helde hys parlyamente at west∣mynster / the whych began vpō the daye of Etkenwalde or the laste daye of Apryll, And .ii. dayes before, the kynge wyth the quene his moder came thorugh the cytye from wynde∣sore. And whan he came at the west dore of Poulys / the lorde protectour toke him out of the chare, and so was ladde vpon hys fete betwene ye sayde lorde Protectour and the duke of Ex¦ceter, vnto the steppes goyng into ye quyer. Fro whēs he was borne vnto the hygh aulter / and there kneled in a trauers purueyed for hym. And whan he had be there, he yode to the rode of ye north dore and there made hys offerynges. And thenne was he borne into the churche yerde, & there set vpon a fayre courser, and so con∣ueyed thorugh chepe, and the other stretes of the cytye vnto saynt Geor∣ges barre / and so helde hys iournay to hys Manour of Kenyngton̄. And contynuyng the foresayd parlyamēt / the kyng was sondry tymes cōueyed to westmynster / and wythin the par∣lyament chāber kept there his royall astate. By auctoryte whereof, to hym was graunted a subsidye of .xii.d. in the .li. of all maner marchaundyse cō¦myng in or passing out of this realm and .iii.s. of a tunne of wyne for ye ter¦me of .iii. yeres to be holden. And fer∣thermore it was enacted, that all mar¦chaunt straungers shuld be set to an Englysshe hoste wythin .xv. dayes of theyr commyng to theyr porte sale, & to make no sale of any marchaun∣dyse or they were so lodged / & theym wythin .xl. dayes folowynge to make sale of all that they brought. And yf any remayned vnsolde at the sayde xl. dayes ende / that than all such mar¦chaundyse beyng than vnsolde, to be forfayted vnto the kyng. Also that all straungers that caryed any wol∣les out of thys lande, shuld pay .xliii. s.iiii.d. for a sakke custome, where ye Englysshe marchaunte and denyzen payde but .v. nobles / wyth many o∣ther condycyons and penaltyes as well for Englysh as the other mar∣chauntes,
whyche wolde are longe leysour to shewe, enacted and passed durynge thys sayde parlyamente. And the seconde daye of the mo∣neth of Auguste, was yolden vnto the erle of Salysbury appoynted wyth other by the regent, the cytie of Mans, vnder appoyntemente com∣prysed in .ix. articles. wherof one spe∣cyall was, that yf any persones were founde wythin the cytye whyche had ben consentyng vnto the dukes deth Iohan late duke of Burgoyne, that they shulde stande at the grace of the sayde regent. Also thys yere the duke of Glouce¦ter lord protectour, whiche lately be∣fore hadde maryed the duchesse of Holande a woman a greate possesiō / for cause of rule wherof, to haue do∣mynyō of the same, he wyth the sayd duchesse sayled towarde that coūtre, and thereof her subgectes was peasy¦bly and wyth honour receyued. But fynally he had suche chere, yt he was gladde to retourne into Englande, leuynge hys wyfe therein a towne of her owne named Mounse But af¦ter hys departynge, the duke of Bur¦goyne so demeaned hym to the ru∣lers of that towne, were it by batayll or otherwyse, that they deliuered her to the sayde duke / and he forthwyth sente her vnto Gaunte, there to be kepte as prysoner. But by the Fren∣shyppe of one named syr Iaques de la Grayll a Burgonyon knyghte, & her owne polecy / she escaped thens in a mannes clothynge, and came to a towne in zelande named zyryxe / and frome thens to an other towne in zelande called Ghwode or Ghow-Ghowde, where she wythstode the dukes power. Than the duke of Glouceter he∣ryng of the escape of his wyfe, and of the malyce of the duke foresayde / in all haste prouyded a stronge compa∣ny of soudyours and archers, and cō¦mytted them vnto that rule of ye lord Fitzwater. The whych in processe of tyme landed wyth them at a place in zelande called Brewers hauē / where of theyr ēnemyes they were encoun∣tred and dryuē backe, & so retourned into Englande wythoute any greate fete doynge, leuynge the duchesse be∣hynde them for that season. Thys yere about Myghelmasse ye prynce of Portyngale came into En∣glande / & was honourable receyued and fested of the kynges vncles / and taryed here the tyme of thys mayres yere. This yere also began a grudge to kyndle betwene the lorde protec∣tour and hys halfe brother the bys∣shoppe of wynchester / the whyche af∣ter grewe to a greate dystourbaunce of the cytie of London, as in the next mayres yere shalbe shewed. And in the ende of thys yere, were many honeste men of the cytye apeched of treason, by a false and malycyous persone belongynge vnto the sayde bysshoppe / and putte theym vnto greate vexacyon and trouble. whych was done by the procurement of the sayde bysshoppe as the comon fame than wente. And nat alonely men of the cytie were thus vexed, but also o∣ther burgeyses of dyuers good tow∣nes, as Leyceter, Caūterbury, Nor∣thampton, and other. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxv.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxvi.   wyllyam Mylrede.   Iohn̄ Couentre Mercer.   Anno .iiii.   Iohn̄ Brokle.  
IN thys yere the .xxix. daye of Octobre, and selfe same daye that the mayre for the yere folowyng yerely at westmynster taketh hys charge / at suche tyme as he was hol∣dynge hys great dyner, he was by ye lorde protectour sent for in spedy ma¦ner. And whan he was comyn to hys presence / he gaue to hym a streyghte commaundemente, that he shulde se that the cytye were suerly watched in that nyght folowyng, and so it was. Than vpon the morowe folowynge about .ix. of the clok / certayne seruaū¦tes of the forenamed bysshope wolde haue entred by the brydge gate. But the rulers therof wolde nat suffre thē in so great nombre / but kepte theym out by force, lyke as before they were commaunded. wherwyth they beyng greuously dyscontented / gaderyd to them a more nombre of archers and men of armys, and assauted the gate wyth shot & other meanes of warre. In so moche that the commōs of the cytye herynge thereof, shytte in theyr shoppes & sped them thyder in great nombre. And lykely it was to haue ensued great effusyō of blode shortly therupon, ne had ben the dyscrescion of ye mayre and hys brethern, that ex¦orted ye people by all polytyke meane to kepe the kynges peas. And in this passe tyme, the archebysshop of Caū∣torbury, wyth the prynce of Portyn∣gale and other, toke greate laboure vpon them to pacyfye thys varyaūce betwene the lord protectour and the bysshope / in so moche that they rode betwene theym .viii. tymes or they might brynge them to any resonable conformyte. Than lastly they a∣greed to stāde to the rule of the regēt, or of suche as he wolde assygne. wher¦upō ye cytye was set in a more quiete. Thā the bisshop of wynchester wrote a letter vnto ye duke of Bedforde or lord regēt, wherof ye tenure ensueth. RIght hyghe and myghty price & ryght noble, and after one le¦uest erthly lord / I recommaunde me vnto your grace wyth all myne hert. And as ye desyre the welfare of the kyng our soueraygne lorde, & of hys realmes of Englande & of Fraunce, & your owne weale wyth all yours / haste you hyder, for by my trouthe & ye tary longe, we shall put thys lāde in ieopardy wyth a felde / such a bro∣ther ye haue here god make hym a good man. For your wysdome kno∣weth well, that the profyte of Fraūce standeth in the welfare of England. Ryght hygh & myghty prynce, I be∣seche you holde mayster Iohan Est∣court your coūcellour excused of hys taryeng / for it is moche agayne hys wyll. But the counsayll here hath made hym do cōtrary hys mynde. And that it may lyke you to gyue cre¦dēce vnto your chamberlayne syr Ro¦bert Boteler. And the blessed Trinite kepe you. wryten in great haste at Lōdon the laste day of Octobre. Upō the .x. day of Ianuary nexte ensuynge, ye sayde duke of Bedforde wyth hys wyfe came vnto London. And with thē came also the sayd bys¦shop of wynchester. And the mayre & the cytezyns receyued hym at Mer∣ton, & cōueyed hym thorugh ye cytye vnto westmynster / where he was lod¦ged in ye kyng{is} palays / & the bysshop of wynchester was lodged wythin ye abbottes lodgynge. Than vpō the morow folowynge or ye .xi. day of Ianuary / y• mayre pre∣sented the regēt wyth a payere of ba∣syns of syluer & ouer gylte, & in them a .M. marke of golde. But the bis∣shop had so incenced hym agayn the cytye, that they receyued but a small thāke for all theyr labour and coste. Upon ye .xxi. day of February, thā be∣gan a great coūsayl at saīt Albonys / and after it was adiourned vnto
Northampton. But for due conclu∣syons myghte nat be dryuen by the sayde counsayll / therfore vppon the xxv. daye of Marche ensuynge, was called a parlyament at Leyceter / the whyche endured tyll the xv. daye of Iuny folowynge. Thys was cleped of the comon people the parlyament of battes. The cause was, for procla¦macyons were made, that men shuld leue theyr swerdes & other wepyns in theyr innys, the people toke great battes & stauys in theyr neckes / and so folowed theyr lordes & maysters vnto the parlyament. And whan ye wepyn was inhybyted them / thanne they toke stones & plūmettes of lede, and trussed them secretly in theyr sle¦uys & bosomys. Durynge the parlia¦ment / amōge other notable thynges for the weale of the realme, the vary∣aunce that was betwene the forsayd lordes was herin debated & argued. In so moche that the duke of Glou∣ceter put in a byll of cōplaynt, agayn the bysshop conteynyng .vi. artycles. wherof the fyrst was, that where the lorde protectour wolde haue had his lodgynge wythin the towre of Lon∣don / he was by the comforte & ayde defended & let of the bysshop, and of Richard wydeuile esquyer thā being Lyeutenaunt of the same. The secōd was, for that that the bysshop wolde haue remoued ye kyng from Elthm̄ / & haue sette hym at hys gouernaūce, without the aduyce and counsayle of the lorde protectour. The thyrde was, that whan the duke was enfor¦med of the bysshoppes entent / and he entendynge accordynge to his offyce and duetie, in peasyble wyse to haue rydē to ye kyng to haue gyuē vpō him attendaunce: ye bysshop entēdynge ye distrucciō of ye duke, assēbled a great multytude of men of armes and ar∣chers in Southwarke / & ther drewe the cheyne at the brydge fote, and set vp pypes & other engynes to stoppe the kynges hye way / & ordeyned mē to stande in chambres and solers to throwe stones / and by theyr ordenaū¦ces and pollycy, to haue destroyed ye duke and his company. The .iiii. ar∣tycle was, that kynge Henry the fyft shulde by his lyfe tyme shewe vnto ye sayde duke, that by the openynge of a spaynell, a man was taken behynd a tapet in one of the kynges chābres. The whiche man after examyned by the erle of Arundel / confessed that he was sent thyther by ye sayde bysshop, to the ende to murther kynge Henry the forth. After whiche cōfessyon / the sayd erle let sakke that man, and so cast hym into the Thamys. The fyft was, that the sayd Henry the fyft be∣ynge prynce and heyre parant to the crowne / the sayd bysshop shuld come vnto hym and say, that for somoche as his father was vexed with greuo∣us sekenes, & was not apte to come in conuersacion of the people, nor myght not conueniently gyde the re∣alme / that he therfore shulde take vp on hym the rule and gouernaunce of the same, and put his father from all kyngly power. The .vi. and last arty∣cle was, that sediciously the sayd bys¦shop hadde by his letters sent lately vnto the duke of Bedforde / wrong∣fully accused hym, in that he shulde areyse the kynges people, and iupar¦de this lande by a felde / contrary to the kynges peas and comon wele of this lande. All which articles were by ye bys∣shop wele and suffycyently answered and replyed / so yt he layde from hym the blame. And fynally by the prouy∣dent counsayle of the lorde regent / al the sayd artycles and matiers of va∣ryaunce atwene the sayd two lordes hangynge, were put to the examyna∣cyon and iudgmente with the assy∣stence of ye lordes of the parliamēt, of
Henry the archebysshop of Caunter¦bury, of Thomas duke of Exceter, of Iohn̄ duke of Northfolk / Thomas bysshop of Durhm̄, of Phylype bys∣shop of worceter, or Iohn̄ bysshop of Bathe, of Humfrey thā erle of Staf∣forde, of Rauffe lorde Cornewell, & of mayster wyllyam Alnewyke than keper of the preuy seale. The whych lordes wyth assystence of the other lordes of the parlyament, made a de∣cre and a warde / so that eyther party toke other by the hande, wyth frēdly & louyng wordes / none hauyng amē¦des of other, except the bysshope had wordes of submyssyō vnto the duke, in requyryng hym of hys fauoure & good lordshyp. And ye accorde thus fynysshed, the parlyament was ad∣iourned tyll after Easter. Uppon whytsondaye folowynge, was a so¦lempne feest holden at Leyceter for∣sayde / where the regente dubbyd kynge Henry knyghte. And than forthwyth the kynge dubbyd Ry∣charde duke of yorke, that after was father to kynge Edwarde. Also he dubbyd knyghtes, the sonne and heyre of the duke Iohan, duke of Northfolke, and the erles of Oxen∣forde and westmerlande, wyth other lordes and gentylmen to the noum∣bre of .xxxiiii. And after that feeste wyth all ho∣nour was endyd / the kynge wyth the regente and other of hys lordes drew towarde London. And so the regente contynued wyth the kynge in Eng∣lande, by the full terme of thys may∣res yere. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.vi.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.vii.   Iohn̄ Arnolde.   Iohn̄ Raywell Fysshmonger.   Anno .v.   Iohn̄ Hyghthm̄.   IN thys .v. yere and moneth of February / the regent with hys wyfe & housholde meyny passed the see vnto Calays, and so thorugh Py¦cardy into Fraunce. But or he depar¦ted thens, that is to meane vpon the daye of annuncyacion of our Lady / the bysshop of wynchester within the churche of our Lady of Calays was created cardynall, by auctoryte of ye bulles of pope Martyne the .v. of ye name. And after that solēpnyte don / the regente toke hym on hys ryghte hande, & so conueyed hym vnto hys lodgynge. Thys yere was vnresonable of we¦deryng / for it reyned moste part con∣tynually frome Easter to Myghel∣masse, where thorugh hay and corne was greatly hyndered. And in thys yere the duke of Alē∣son, that before was taken prysoner at the batayll of Uernell in Perche, was delyuered for a raunson of .ii.C M. scutes of golde as testyfyeth Ga∣guinus, whyche is fyfty .M. marke sterlyng money. In thys yere also the erle of Sa∣lysbury, whych of dyuers wryters is named the good erle / accompanyed wyth the erle of Suffolke, the lorde Talbot, and other, layde a stronge syege vnto the cytye of Orleaunce, & helde the cytezyns very streyght / and maugre the duke of Orleaunce and the Marshal of Fraunce thanne na∣med Boussaak, the Englysshemen wanne from theym dyuers stronge holdes adioynynge to the cytye / and forced them to brenne a greate parte of the subbarbes of the cytye. But sorowe it is to tell and dool∣full to wryte, whyle one day the sayd good erle syr Thomas Mountagu,
rested hym at a bay wyndow, and be helde the compas of the cytie, and tal¦ked with his familiers / a gonne was leueyled out of the cytie from a place vnknowen, whiche brake the tymbre or stone of the wyndowe with suche vyolence, that the pecys therof all to quasshed the face of the noble erle / in suche wyse that he dyed within thre dayes folowyng. Upon whose soule & all crysten Ihesu haue mercy Amē. This after dyuers wryters was initium malorum. For after this mys¦happe, the Englysshmen loste rather ther than wanne / so that lytell and ly¦tell they loste all theyr possessyon in Fraūce. And all be it that somewhat they gate after / yet for one that they wanne they loste thre, as after shall appere. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.xxviii.   Henry Frowyk.   Iohan Gedney draper.   Anno .vi.   Robert Otley.   IN this .vi. yere & begynnynge of the same / the kyng helde his parlyament at westmynster. By auc∣toryte wherof was graunted to hym a subsydye in maner as foloweth. Fyrst of euery tonne of wyne yt came into this lande, from ye feest of saynt Ambrose or the fourth day of Apryll tyll the ende of that yere, the kynge shulde haue .iii. s. belongynge to a de¦nyzyn or the kynges lyege man. Also of all marchaundyse passynge or cō∣mynge into this lāde, shypped by de∣nyzon / the kynge to haue of euery. xx.s..xii.d. excepte woll, fell, & clothe. Also to hym was graunted, that of all parysshens thorughout his re∣alme beynge the benefyce of the va∣lewe of .x. marke, that .x. of the sayde parysshons shulde paye of theyr mo∣uables syxe shyllynges & eyght pēs, after ye rate of eyght pens euery mā. And of all benefyces that were of .x.li.x. parysshons to paye .xiii.s. and iiii.d. all cytyes and borowes to be excepted. And so rate rate lyke from the lowest benefyce to the hyghest. And for the inhabytauntes of cyties, boroughes it was enacted that eue∣man beynge it valewe of .xx.s. aboue his stuffe of houshold & his apparayl and his wyfes, shulne paye .iiii.d. & so after the rate vnto the rychest. In this yere also and day of saynt Gyles or the fyrste day of Septēbre / the cardynall of wynchester was met by the mayre and his bretherne and certayne cytezyns on horse backe without the cytie, and so broughte vnto his palays in southwerke. Aboute the same tyme, a Bryton that a good wydow and honeste wo∣man hadde cherysshed and brought vp of almes, dwellynge in whyte cha¦pell paresshe without Algate / mur∣dred the sayde woman in a nyght sle¦pynge in her bedde / and after con∣ueyed suche iewelles and stuffe as he myght carye. But he was so pursu∣ed vpon, ye for fere he toke a churche in Estsex, & there forsware ye kynges lande. And ye constables caused hym be brought to London, and so enten∣ded to haue cōueyed hym westward. But so soone as he was commen in to the parysshe where before he had commytted the murther / the wyfes caste vpon hym so moche fylthe and ordure of the strete, & not withstan∣dynge the resystence made by the cō∣stables, they slewe hym there out of hande.
Anno dn̄i M.iiii.C.xxviii.   Anno dn̄i M.iiii.C.xxix.   Thomas Dushous.   Henry Barton skynner.   Anno .vii.   Raffe Holande.   THis yere vpon the .viii. daye of Nouembre / the duke of Norf∣folke accompanyed with many gentylmen, toke his barge at saynt mary Ouereys / entendynge to haue passed thoroughe the brydge, and so vnto Grenewytche. But by the mys∣gydynge of the sterysman, he was set vpon the pyles of the brydge, and ye barge whelmed / so yt all were drow∣ned, excepte the duke and a fewe per∣sones that lepte vpon the pyles, whi∣che after were drawen vp with ropes and so saued. And in the moneth of Iny folowynge, the cardynall of wynchester with a warly company passed the see / entendynge to haue made warre vpon the heretykes or lollers inhabyted in the countre of Prage. But how it was for nede of men that the regēt hadde in Fraūce / the cardynall chaūged his purpose, and taryed there a season with the sayde regent. After some wryters it was for to strengthe and replenysshe certayne holdes, that weked by reason of a cō∣flycte that the Englysshemen hadde with the Frenchemen. At the whiche the lorde Talbot was taken pryso∣ner / and the lorde Scalys with ma∣ny other to the nombre of .iii.M. En∣glysshe men were slayne and taken. But after the opynyon of the Frēche cronycle / this vyctorye shulde be op∣teyned by Iane or Iohan called in Frenche la puzele de dieu, in the .xi. yere of this kynge. Of ye forsayd heretykes of Prage speketh somdeale the auctour of Cro¦nica Cronicarum / and sheweth that the chyef capytaynes of theym were named Procapius, Saplicius, and Lupus a preest, with other bothe ler∣ned and vnlerned. And Policronicō sheweth in ye .xix. chapyter of his laste boke, that in the twelfe yere of kynge Henry, the foresayd thre capytaynes were slayne / with one mayster Peter clerke beynge an Englyssheman ta∣ken on lyue with dyuers other / and of ye sayd heretykes slayne at .ii. iour∣nayes ouer two and twenty thousan¦des. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxx.   wyllyam Ruffe.   wyllyam Estfelde mercer.   Anno .viii.   Raffe Holande.   IN this eyght yere vpon ye day of saynt Leonarde the .vi. day of Nouembre / kynge Henry beynge vpon the age of nyne yeres,Kyng Hen¦ry the .vi. crowned. was so∣lemply crowned ī saint Peters chur¦che of westmynster. At whose corona¦cyon were made syxe & thyrty knygh¦tes of the bathe. And after that so∣lempnyzacyon in the sayde churche fynysshed / an honorable feest in the great hal of westmynster was kepte / where ye kynge syttyng in his astate, was serued with .iii. courses as here vnder ensueth. Frument wyth venyson Uyand royall planted losynges of golde Bore hedes in castelles of golde and enarmed
Befe wyth motten boylyd Capon stewyd Sygnet rosted Heyron rosted Great pyke or luce A rede leche wyth lyons coruyn therein Custarde royall, wyth a lyoparde of golde syttyng therin, and holdyng a floure delyce Frytour of sunne facyon, wyth a floure delyce therein. A sotyltye of saynt Edwarde and saynt Louys armyd, & vppon eyther hys cote armoure / holdyng betwene them a fygure lyke vnto kyng Hēry standynge also in hys cote armoure / and a scrypture passyng from theym both, sayeng beholde .ii. parfight kyn¦ges vnder one cote armour. And vn∣der the fete of the sayde sayntes was wryten thys balade. Holy sayntes, Edwarde and saint Lowice, Conserue this braunche borne of your blessed blode Lyue amonge cristen moste soueraygne of price, Enheritour of the flouredelice so gode / This sixt Henry, to reygne and to be wyse, God graunt he may to be your mode / And that he may resemble your knightehude and vertue, Pray ye hertely vnto our lord Jesu. Uiand blank barred wyth golde Gely party wryten & noted wyth Te deum laudamus. Pygge endored Crane rosted Byttore Conyes Chekyns Partryche Pecok enhakyll Great Breme A whyte leche planted wyth a rede antelop, wyth a crowne aboute hys necke wyth a chayne of golde. Flampayne powdered wyth leopar∣des & floure delyce of golde. A frytoure garnysshed wyth a leopardes hede & .ii. Estryth feders. A sotyltie, an emperour & a kynge arayed in mātelles of garters / which fygured Sigismūde ye emperour and Hēry. the .v. And a fygure lyke vnto kyng Hēry ye .vi, knelyng tofore them wyth this balade takkyd by hym. Agayne miscreaūtes the emperour Sigismūde Hath shewed his myght, which is imperiall. And Henry the .v. a noble knyght was founde For Christes cause in actes marciall / Cherysshed the churche, to lossers gaue a fall, Gyuyng example to kynges that succede, And to theyr braunche here in especiall, Whyle he doth reygne to loue god & drede. Quynces in compost Blaūd sure powderyd wyth quar¦ter foyles gylt Uenyson Egrettes Curlew Cok and partryche Plouer Quayles Snytes Great byrdes Larkys Carpe Crabbe Leche of .iii. colours A bake meate lyke shylde quar∣tered red & whyte, set wyth losynges gylt & floures of borage. A frytour cryspyd. A sotyltie of oure Lady syttynge wyth her chylde in her lappe / and she holding a crowne in her hāde. Saint George & saynt Denys knelynge on eyther syde, p̄sented to her kyng Hen¦ryes fygure beryng in hāde thys ba∣lade as foloweth.
O Blessed lady Christes mother dere, And thou saynt George that called art her knight Holy saint Denys o marter moste entere / The sixt Henry here present in your syght, Shedeth of your grace on hym your heuēly lighte / His tender youth with vertue doth auaunce, Borne by discent & by title of right, Iustly to reygne in Englande & in Fraunce. THis solēpne coronacyon with all honour and ioye finysshed prouycyon was made for the kynges iournay into Fraunce. In whyche passetyme, that is to meane vpon ye xxiii. daye of Ianuary, an heretyke was brent in Smythfelde. And vpon the morowe next folow¦ynge, was in that felde foughten a stronge fyght / betwene Iohn̄ Upton̄ Appellant, & Iohn̄ Downe Defen∣dant. But for they quyt theym bothe so manfully / the kynge at length re∣lesed theyr quarell, and pardoned thē of theyr trespas. Than vppon saynt Georges day folowyng, or the .xxiii. day of Apryll / the kynge toke shyppynge at Douer and landed the same daye at Calays / hauynge in hys company .ii. dukes, of yorke and Northfolke, thre bys∣shoppes, of Bathe, Ely, and Roche∣ster, eyght erles, that is to meane, of Huntyngdon, Stafforde, warwyke, Orenforde, Deuynshyre, Morteyne, of Ewe, and of Urmund / and .xi. ba∣rons, that is to saye, lord Bowchier, Beawmounde, Typtost, Fytzwater, Roos, Arundell, Awdeley, Fawcun∣brydge, Gray, Codnoor, the lorde Scroope, and the lorde wellys. In thys tyme and season that the kynge laye thus at Calays / many skyrmysshes were foughten betwene the Englysshemen and the Frenche∣men in dyuers partyes of Fraunce. And greately the Frenchemen pre∣uayled by ye helpe of a woman / which they as before is touched named the Mayden of god. So that lastly she wyth her company came to a towne called Compeyne, to the entent to re∣moue the syege layde thereunto by ye duke of Burgoyne and other of the Englysshe capytaynes. And therup∣pon the .xxiii. daye of May, she gaue batayll vnto Englysshmen and Bur¦gonyons / and faughte wyth theym longe tyme. But in the ende, by the manhode of a Burgonyon knyghte named syr Iohn̄ Luxemburghe, she was taken on lyue, and her company dystressed, and she caryed to the citie of Roan / and there kept a season, for so moch as she feyned her with child. But whanne the contrary of it was knowen / she was there foriuged and brente. Of thys woman Gaguynus ma∣keth a great processe, of her parenty, and of her fyrste takynge vppon her / whereof a parte I entende to shewe after in the .vi. yere of Charles nexte folowynge kynge of Fraunce. And in thys tyme and season, one Rychard Hounden wolle pakker of London, was conuycte of heresy and brent at towre Hylle. Than kyng Hēry thus lodgynge at Calays, was asserteyned of the takyng of the fore∣sayd woman, by the letters of ye duke of Burgoyne. And after he toke hys small iournayes tyll he came into Fraunce, and so vnto Parys. Of whose cytezyns he was honourably receyued, & taken for the soueraygne & kynge / and there so taryed all thys mayres yere. In whych seasō as wyt¦nesseth Gaguynus / the Frenchemen wan dyuers holdes of Englyshemen and Burgonyōs in the countrey of Brye. And a capytayne named Bar∣basan scomfited .viii.M. Englyshmē and Burgonyōs, at a place called in latyne Cathalamencis, as affermeth the foresayd auctour.
Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxx.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxxi.   water Chertsey.   Nycholas wotton.   Anno .ix.   Robert Large.   THys .ix. yere aboute mydlent / a preest named syr Thomas Bagley and vycar of a vyllage in Es¦sex called Manueden a lytell frome walden, was detect of heresy. Uppon the whych he was degrated, and thā brent in the place of Smythfelde. And soone vpon Easter folowynge / the lorde protectour was warnyd of an assemble of heretykes at Abyndō. wherfore he sent thyder certayn per∣sones, or rode thyder him self as som wryters afferme / & there arrested the baylly of that town named wyllyam Maundeuyle a weuer, the whyche was appoynted for a capytayne of ye sayd heretykes. And for to drawe the people vnto hym / he chaunged hys name & called hym self Iak Sharpe of wygmorys lande in walys. But after he was examyned, he con∣fessed to haue wroughte moch sorow agayne preestes / so that he wolde haue made theyr heddes as chepe as shepe heddes, so that he wolde haue solde .iii. for a peny or .x. after some wryters. And the same season were takē many of hys complycys, which were sent vnto dyuers prysons. And the sayd Iak Sharpe was for his of¦fence, drawen, hanged, and hedyd at the forenamed towne of Abyndon, vpon the tuysday in whytson weke / and hys hede was sent to London, & there pyght vppon the brydge. And the other of hys fawtours were put in execucyon in dyuers places and countrees, to the terrour of other. And vppon the .xiiii. daye of Iuly, that yere was one named Rycharde Russell a wolle man, drawen, han∣ged, and quartered at tyborne for treason. And thys yere the kynge beynge styll in Fraunce / the erle of Arundell accōpanyed wyth .ii.M. of Englyshe sowdyours, sente a certayne of hys companye vnto a town called Beale Mount, to prouoke the Frenchemen to issue out of the towne. whyche smal company whan Bossycant and Seyntrales thā capytaynes beheld / anone they wyth theyr sowdyoures of that towne spedde theym forthe to take the sayde Englysshemen. The whyche lytell and lytell gaue bake, tyll they had tolled the Frenchemen a good space from the town / and thā sette vppon theym wyth a sterne cou¦rage, and helde theym on hande tyll the sayde erle wyth hys company res¦cowed theym. Than betwene theym was a cruell fyghte. But in the ende the Frenchemen were chased / and ye sayde Seyntrayle wyth many foote men of the sayde towne were slayne at that iournay. And shortly after the duke of Burgoyne wyth ayde of the Englysshemen, at a place called Barre, scomfyted a greate company of Frenchemen / and toke .ii. capytay¦nes belongyng to the duke of Barre the whyche were named Renat and Barbazan / for whose raunsome the duke had yelded to hym the Uale of Cassyle in Flaundres. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxii.   Iohn̄ Adyrlee.   Iohn̄ welly Grocer.   Anno .x.   Stphyn Browne.  
Kyng Hen¦ry the .vi. crowned in Parys.IN thys .x. yere and .vii. day of Decēber / kynge Henry the .vi. was crowned in Parys of the cardy¦nall of wynchester. At the whych co∣ronacyon was present the lorde Re∣gent, the duke of Burgoyne, and dy∣uers other nobles of Fraūce / whose names Gaguinus putteth not in his boke, for reproche of the Frenchmen. And after the solempnyte of this fest was ended, wherof the cyrcūstaunce to shewe in order wolde aske a longe leysour / the kynge departed frome Parys, and so came to Roan, where he helde his Crystmas / & that done he sped hym to Caleys. And whan he had soiourned there a season / he toke shyppynge and re∣tourned into Englande, and landed at Douer the .ix. daye of February. Than he was mette vppon Baram Downe or Baram Howth, that ys betwene Douer and Cauntorbury, wyth a greate company of gentyls & comoners of Kent all cladde wyth rede hodes. The whyche accompa∣nyed him tyll he came to Blak Heth / where he was mette with the mayre and the cytesyns of London vpon a thursdaye beynge the .xxi. day of Fe∣bruary / the cytesyns beynge cladde in whyte, wyth dyuers werkes or co∣nysaunces browderyd vppon theyr sleues after the facultye of theyr my∣steryes or craftes. And ye mayre and hys brethern were all clothed in scar¦let. And after due obeysaunce and sa¦lutynge of the kynge / they rode on before hym towarde the cytye. whan the kynge was comen to the brydge / there was deuysed a myghty Gyaūt standynge wyth a swerde drawyn, hauyng thys speche wryten by hym. All tho that ben enemyes to the kyng / I shall them clothe with confusion / Make hym myghty by vertuous lyuyng, His mortall soon to oppresse & bere downe. And hym to encrease as Christes champion, All mischeues from hym to abridge, With grace of god at the entry of this brydge. ANd whan the kynge was pas¦sed the fyrste gate, and was comen to ye drawe brydge, there was ordeyned a goodly towre hāged and apparayled with sylke and clothes of aras in moste ryche wyse. Out of whiche sodaynly appered .iii. ladyes rychely cladde in golde & sylke, with coronettes vpon theyr heddes. wher∣of ye fyrst was named dame Nature, the seconde dame Grace, & the thyrde dame Fortune / the whiche vnto the kynge had this speche. We ladies thre all by one consent, Thre goostly gyftes heuynly & dyuyne, To the sir kynge, as now we do present. And to thyne hyghnes here we do this tyme, Vtterly shewe & them determyne. As I Grace, fyrst at thy comynge, Endowe the with scyence and connynge. And I Nature, with strengthe and fayrnesse, For to be loued and drad of euery wyght. And I Fortune, prosperyte and rychesse, The to defende and to gyue the myght, Longe to enioye and to holde thy trewe ryght, In vertuous lyfe with honour to procede, That thy two ceptours thou may well possede. There was also in the sayd towre xiiii. vyrgyns all clothed in whyte. wherof .vii. stode vpon ye ryght hāde of ye sayd .iii. ladyes, & .vii. vpon ye left hande. The .vii vpon ye ryght hande, had bawderykes of saphyr colour or blewe. And ye other .vii. had theyr gar¦mētes powdred with sterres of gold. Thā the fyrst .vii. presented ye kynge with the .vii. gyftes of ye holy ghost / as sapyence, intellygence, good coun¦sayll, strengthe, cunnynge, pyte, and drede of god. And the other .vii, gaue vnto hym the .vii. gyftes of grace in maner as foloweth.
God the endowe with crowne of glory, And with the ceptre of clennesse and pytye, And with a swerde of myghte and victorye, And with a mantell of prudence clad thou be, A shylde of fayth for to defende the, An helme of helthe wrought to thyne encreace, Gyrte with a gyrdyll of loue and parfyte peace. And after they had thus saluted the kynge / anone they beganne thys roundell wyth an heuenly melodye and songe, as foloweth. Souerayne lorde, welcome to your cytye / Welcome our ioye, and our hartes pleasaunce / Welcome our gladnesse, welcome our suffysaunce, Welcome▪ welcome, ryghte welcome ut ye be / Syngynge before thy royall mageste, We saye with harte withouten varyaunce Souerayne lorde, now welcome out of Fraunce. The mayre and cytesyns with all the comynaltye Reioyse your comynge newly out of Fraunce / Wherby this cytie and they rescuyd be, Of all theyr sorow and former greuaunce, Wherfore they saye and synge without greuance, Welcome welcome, welcome our hartes ioye, Welcome you be vnto your owne newe Troye. Than the kyng rode forth a softe pase tyll he came at the entre of Corn hylle. where vpon ye hylle was ordey∣ned a tabernacle of curyous worke / in the which stode dame Sapyence, and about her the .vii. artes or scyen∣ces lyberall / as fyrst gramer, logike, rhetoryke, musyke, arithmetyke, ge∣ometry, and astronomye / euerych of them exercysynge theyr connynge & facultye, and the lady her selfe hadde thys speche to the kynge. Lo I chyefe pryncesse, dame Sapience, Shewe vnto you this sentence of scripture / Kynges that ben most of excellence, By me they reygne, and moste ioye endure. For through my helpe and my besy cure, To encrease theyr glory and theyr hygh renowne / They shall of wysdome haue full possession. Than the kynge passed on tyll he came to the conduyte in Cornehylle. where was set a pageāt made cercle wyse / & in the summet or toppe ther∣of was set a chyld of wonderfull be∣aute, apparayled lyke a kyng. Upō whose ryght hand satte lady Mercy, & vpon the lefte hande lady Trouth / and ouer them stode dame Clennese embrasyng the kynges trone. Then before the kynge stode two iudges & viii. sergeauntes of the coyfe. And dame Clennesse had thys speche to ye vi. Henry the kynge. Lo by the sentence of prudent Salomon, Mercy and ryght preseruyn euery kynge. And I Clennesse obserued by reason, Kepe his trone from myschyefe and fassynge, And maketh it stronge with longe abydynge. So I conclude that we ladyes thre, A kynge preserue in longe prosperite. And Dauyd sayd, the psalme beryth wytnesse / Lorde god thy dome thou to the kynge / And gyue to hym thy trouth and ryghtwysnesse, The kynges sonne here on erth lyuynge. And thus declared he by his wrytynge That kynges and prynces shuld about thē drawe, Folke that ben trewe and well lerned in lawe. After hys speche thus declared / ye kynge rode forth a quycker pase tyll he came vnto the conduyt in Chepe. where were ordeyned dyuers wellys as ye welle of mercy, ye welle of grace, and the welle of pyte. And at euery welle a lady standynge, that myny∣stred the water of euery welle to such as wold aske it / and that water was turned into good wyne. About these welles were sette dy∣uers trees wyth flouryshynge leues and fruytes, as orenges, almandes pomegarnardes, olyues, lymones, dates, pepys, quynces, blaūderelles, peches, & other more comon fruytes, as costerdes, wardēs pomewardōs,
rycardōs, damysyns, and plūmes, wyth other fruytes longe to reherse / ye which were so cūnyngly wrought, that to many they appered naturall trees growynge. In the bordour of thys delicious place whych was named Paradyse, stode two forgrowen faders, resem∣blynge Enocke and Hely / the whych hadde thys sayenge to the kynge. Ennok fyrste with a benygne chere, Prayed god to vpholde his prosperite / And that none enemyes haue of the power / Nor that no chylde of false iniquyte, Haue power to pertube thy feiycyte. This olde Ennok to processe can well tell, Prayed for the kynge as he rode by the welle. After Helias with his sokkys hore, Sayde well deuoutely sokynge on the kynge / God conserue the and kepe euermore, And make the blyssed here on erth lyuynge And preserue the in all maner thynge, And specyall amonge kynges all, In enemyes handes that thou neuer fall. And that speche fynyshed / ye kyng rode forthe a lytell forther. And there was ordeyned a tower garnysshed wyth the armys of Englande and of Fraunce. Thys tower was wonder∣full to beholde / for there was shewed in order the tytle whyche the kynge hadde vnto the crowne of Fraunce. And vpryght by thys tower stode .ii. grene trees artifycyally wyth grene leuys garnysshed and wrought / that one verynge the genelogy of saynte Edward, and that other of saynt Le∣wys / and garnyshed with leopardes and flourdelyces. And ouer these .ii. foresayde trees was ordeyned the thyrde / whyche was made the forthe spryng of Iesse / wherin was shewed the genelogy of our blessed lady sette out in moste curyous wyse. And vpō the front of thys tower were wryten these verses folowynge. By these .ij. trees whiche here grwe vpright, From saynt Edwarde & also sent I owys / The rote I take, palpable to eche syght, Conueyed by syne from kynges of great pryce, Whiche some bare Leopardes, & som flourdelice / Armys excellent of honour haue no lacke, Which the .vi. Hēry may now bere on his backe, As in degre of iust successiowne, As olde cronicles truely determine / Vnto this kyng is now discended downe, From eyther partye right as any syne. Vpon whose hede now fresshesy doth shyne, Two ryche crownes moche soueraygn & pleasaūce To bringe in peas betwene Englande & Fraūce. Than from thys the kyng passed on tyll he came at the cōduyt at Pau¦lys gate / where was pyghte a cele∣styall trone / and therein was sette a personage of the Trinyte, wyth a multytude of aungels playenge and syngynge vpon all instrumentes of musyk. And vpon the front of ye sayd trone, was wrytten these verses or balades folowynge / the whych were spoken by the father vnto the kyng. To you my aungels this precept ye assure, This prince that is so yonge & tender of age, That ye entende & do your besy cure, To kepe & saue hym from all maner damage, In hys lyfe here duryng all his age, That his renowne may sprede & shyne ferre, And of his two realmes to cease the mortal warre. And I will ferther as I shewe to hym here, Fulfyll hym with ioye & worldly habundaunce / And with lengthe of many a holsome yere, I shall comfort & helpe with all pleasaunce / And of his lieges to haue faythfull obeysaunce / And also multiply & encrease his lyne, And cause his nobles thorugh the worlde shyne. ANd thys done he entred the churcheyarde / where he was mette wyth processyon of the deane & the chanōs of Paulys. wyth whome
also in pontificalibus came the arch∣bysshop of Cauntorbury and chaūce¦ler of Englande, with the bysshop of Lyncolne, of Bathe, of Salysbury, of Norwyche, of Ely, & of Rochestre / the whiche so conueyed hym into the churche, and there made his oblacy∣ons. And that done he toke agayne his stede at the west dore of Paules, and so rode forth vnto westmynker / where agayne he was of the abbot & couent receyued with procession and by them cōueyed vnto saynt Edwar∣des shryne, and there taryed a whyle Te deum was songe in the Quyer. And that finysshed / he was of his lor¦des conueyed vnto his palays. And than the mayre with his cytezyns re∣turned ioyusly to London. Than vpon the saterday folow∣ynge beynge the .xxiii. day of Februa¦rii / the mayre and aldermen yode vn¦to the kyng, and presented hym with an hamper of golde, & therin a thou∣sande poūde of fayre nobles / for the whiche the kynge yelded vnto them louynge thankes. This yere also by reason of ye sow∣dyours of Calays, a restraynte was made there of the wolles / for they were not cōtēt of theyr wages. wher∣fore the regent of Fraūce beynge thā Capytayne of Calays, came downe thyder in the easter weke. At whiche tyme beynge the wednesdaye in the sayde weke, many sowdyoures were arested and put in warde. And whan he had so done, he rode to Tyrewyn / & there by the meanes of the bysshop of Tyrewyn, he maried ye erle of saint Paules doughter / and shortly after returned to Calays, and caused the sayde sowdyours to be enquyred of / and fynally .iiii. of them were demed to dye. whiche .iiii. yt is to say Iohan Maddely; Iohan Lundaye, Tho∣mas Palmer, and Thomas Talbot, were beheded at Calays the .xi. day of Iuny. And an hundreth and .x. sow∣dyours were banysshed the towne / ouer syr score banysshed before that tyme. And vpon mydsomer euen fo∣lowynge, the sayd lorde regent with his newe spouse came vnto London / and so taryed in Englande tyll the la∣ter ende of August. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxiii.   Iohan Olney.   Iohan Parneys Fysshmonger.   Anno .xi.   Iohan Padystey.   IN this .xi. yere after some wry∣ters / was by the auctoryte of pope Martyn̄ the .v. of that name, Countyse of Basyse▪ ye coūsayl of Basyle gadered. Duryng the whiche, the heretykes of Prage otherwyse called of Bohemy or Be∣me were somoned thyder. The whi∣che vnder a suertye or saufe cōduyte, sent thyder for thē with other, an En¦glysshe Clerke named mayster Pe∣ter a renegate. The whiche defended so styfly theyr erronyous opynyons, that they returned without reconsyly∣acyon. Thus hāgynge this coūsayll, pope Martyn dyed / & for hym ws¦chosen Eugeny the fourth.Bugeny; ye pope. The whi¦che beyng admytted, demeaned hym so nycely in the begynnynge, that he was put out of Rome / & dyuers pryn¦ces toke partye agayne hym, in suche wyse that he was lykely to be depo∣sed. But after he bare hym so sadly, yt he recouered such as he had loste, & contynued the see by the space of .xvi. yeres / and ruled so, that of some wry¦ters he is called Eugeni{us} gloriosus. And that is of relygyous men / for vnto theym he hadde a specyall zele
and fauoure. And vpon the eyhgte day of Iuly / kynge Henry this yere beganne his parlyamet at westmyn∣ster, and so contynued it tyll it was Lammas / and than it was aiourned vnto saynt Edwardes daye. And this yere in the southe weste appered a sterre whiche was lyke to a blasynge sterre / and of some it is so named. The erle of Huntyngdon̄ al∣so this yere was sente into Fraunce with a warly company / and dyd ther great feates as saythe the Englyssh cronycle. But of yt is nothynge tow∣ched in the Frenche boke. Anno dn̄i. M.iii.C.xxxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iii.C.xxxiiii.   Thomas Chalton̄.   Iohan Brokley draper.   Anno .xii.   Iohan Lynge.   IN this .xii. yere and .ix. daye of Nouembre / the terment of the erle of saynt Pawle father vnto the duchesse of Bedforde was solemply holdē in Pawles churche of Londō / where the more partye of astates of this realme were present. And the .ix. day of Marche folowynge / the lorde Talbot with a goodly company pas∣sed thoroughe the cytye of London towarde the see into Fraunce / where he wrought moche wo vnto ye Frēch men, wherof the partyculers be not towched. Contynuynge the foresayd warre in Fraūce / the towne of saynt Denys which is within .ii. Englyssh myles of Parys, was goten by trea∣son or practyse of one named Iohan Notyce a knyght of Orleaūce, from Mathew Gougth and Thomas Ky¦ryell capytayns / and slewe there ma∣ny Englysshemen and many they toke prysoners. But soone after the sayde capytaynes with strengthe ta∣ken to theym of the Parysyens and other, layde suche a stronge syege rounde aboute the sayde towne of saynt Denys, that fynally they agre∣ed to redelyuer ye towne, yf they were not rescowed of the Frenche kynge within fyftene dayes / so that ye sayde dayes expyred, it was retourned to the Englysshemē. But this not with standynge the Frenchemen wanne dayly vpon the Englysshe men, both in those partyes and also in Normā∣dy. Amōg whiche gaynes, ye Frēche Gaguyne bryngeth in a matyer of game, as he reherseth to ye mockage of Englysshemen / and saythe that in this yere and feest of Myghelmas at a place called Fewgeri in Guyan, a stronge fyghte was foughten by¦twene the Englysshmen and the Frē¦chemen. Durynge the whiche / one named Boosaprest a Frēch Knyght, for fere fledde frome that fyghte and hydde hym in a couerte of busshes / and there stoode styll tyll the fyghte was ended, and the Englysshemen scomfyted and scared. Of the whiche two of aduenture to sauegarde them selfe fledde to the sayd thycke busshe, where the cowarde Frenche knyghte stode. The whiche whan he hadde espyed and lerned of theym, that the Frenche partye hadde wonne the felde / he became so coragyous, that he forced the sayde two Englysshe∣men to become his prysoners / and so with theym entredde the hoste of the Frenchemē, and bare a countenaūce as he hadde wonne theym in the fore¦sayd fyght. But at lengthe whan all his demeanoure was knowen / he was for his feate hadde in great de∣rysyon, and by his chefe capytayne
named Guyllā de saynt Albyne pry∣ued of his prysones. And in this season also the erle of Arundell, whiche in Normandy had manly borne hym / herynge that one Hyrus a Frenche capytayne hadde fortyfyed a strōge castell named Ger¦borym before distroyed of Englysshe men, toke with hym a certayn of sow dyoures, and gyrde the castell with a stronge syege / and assawted it by son¦dry tymes māfully, as sayth the Frē∣che cronycle. But Gagwyne in his cronycle sayth, that or the syege were fully layde or the castell were fully re¦payred / the sayd Hyrus with his com¦pany yssued out of the castell, & gaue vnto ye sayd erle a cruell skyrmysshe, in the whiche the sayde erle receyued a deedly wounde, and dyed shortly af¦ter. And that vyctory so by ye Frēche men optayned / that castell was to ye hurte of the Englysshemen reedyfy∣ed / and a place called Dyepp̄ with other also wonne from them. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxv.   Thomas Brnwell.   Robertr Olay grocer.   Anno .xiii.   Symonde Eyre.   IN this .xiii. yere and euen of saint Katheryne / began a frost that endured vnto the feast of saynt Scolastica, or the .x. daye of Febru∣ary / the whiche frase the Thamys so feruently, that shyp nor bote myght come with vytayle to London. wher¦fore suche shyppes as came this yere to Thamys mouthe from Burdeux were dyscharged there, and the wyne and other marchaundyse by theym brought, caryed by lāde to the cytie. And in the latter ende of Decembre this yere ended the parlyamente hol∣den at westmynster, begon at Mygh¦elmas terme before passed. This yere also by meanes of the pope than Eugeny the .iiii, at Aras in Pycardy was holden a great coū∣sayle, for to conclude an vnyon and peas atwene the two realmes of Eng¦lande and Fraunce. To the whiche coūsayle, by the sayd popes cōmaūd∣ment came as a persone indyfferent, Nicholas cardynall of ye holy crosse, with syxe Romayne bysshoppes to hym assygned. And for the kynge of Englandes partye was there assyg∣ned the cardynall of wynchester, the archebysshop of yorke, the erles of Huntyngdon̄ and of Suffolke, with dyuers other. And for the Frenche kynge, was there the duke of Bur∣bon̄, the erle of Rychemount, ye arche¦bysshop of Raynys chaunceler than of Fraūce, the deane of Patys with many other whiche I passe ouer. There were also as fortherers of the matyer, the cardynal of Cyprys. And for the duke of Burgoyn̄, was there the bysshop of Cambray, and Nycho¦las Raulyn the sayd dukes chaunce∣ler, with dyuers erles and barons of that duchy. And for the duke of Bry∣tayne, were ther the erles of Alenson and of Barre with other / ouer and aboue dyuers oratoures appoynted for the countye of Flaundres. At whi¦che assemble and counsayll thus hol∣den as testifieth dyuers wryters / ma¦ny great offers by meane of ye aboue named cardynal of holy crosse or aī crosse, to the Englysshe lordes were offered. But as sayth Gaguinus the Englysshemē were so obstinately set on warre / ye reason myght not cōtēt. By reason of whiche obstinaci / ye coū¦sayll was deferred tyll an other day.
At whiche day the Englysshemen en¦tendynge the cōtinuaunce of warre, absentyd theym selfe. wherwith the sayd cardynall beynge dyscontented, made meanes of an entreaty of peas atwene Charles, that toke vpon hym as Frenche kynge, and Phylyp duke of Burgoyn. wherof the sayd Char∣les was so fayne, ye for stablysshynge of the peas, and to satysfye hym for ye murther of his father / he gaue vnto hym all the vtter boundes of Cham∣peyn̄ marching vpon Burgoin, with dyuers cyties, as seynt Quyntyne, Corbie, Peron̄, Abbeuyle, and other, with the countie of Poytyaw & lord∣shyp of Macon̄. And as wytnesseth ye foresayde Gagwyne / many mo thyn∣ges were vnto the duke by the sayde Charles {pro}mysed, whiche after theyr bothe dethes were broken and stode for nought. After whiche peas thus atwene them confermed and proclay¦med / the sayd duke became vtter ene¦mye to the kynge of Englande, as af¦ter shall appere. And soone after the sayd duke began his ordre of the lyle and the golden flese, and ordeyned certayne knyghtes of that ordre / and made therunto many statutes and or¦denaunces, wherof dyuers were lyke vnto the statutes of the garter. And in the ende of this yere and .xiiii. day of Septembre / at Roan̄ in Norman¦dye died the noble prynce Iohn̄ duke of Bedforde and regent of Fraunce / and was after with great solempny∣tie buryed within the churche of no∣tir Dame of the same cytie, where for hym are founded wonderfull thyn∣ges after some mēnes reporte. But for I fynde therof in wrytynge no¦thynge, I passe it ouer. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxxv.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxxvi.   Thomas Catworth.   Henry Frowyk mercer.   Anno .xiiii.   Robert Clopton̄.   IN the .xiiii. yere & begynnynge of the same / the duke of Barre accompanyed with Burgonyōs and Frenchemen, wanne ye towne of Har∣flewe with dyuers other vyllages. And in Apryll folowynge / the sayde duke accompanyed with ye lorde Ter¦uan and the mayster of the kynges chyualry, toke the towne of saynt De¦nys, and slewe therin aboue .iiii.C. Englysshemen / & toke prysoner Tho¦mas Beleamounde theyr capytayne with many other. And than ye Frēche men assawted a towre therby called Ueuen, and toke it by appoyntment. Thā one named Notyce a knyght of Orleaūce, with a strēgth of Knygh¦tes drewe hym nere the cytie of Pa∣rys / and there at a house of relygyon of ye charterhouse ordre, lodged hym beyonde saynt Denys ouer the wa∣ter of Sayn̄ / and cōfedered with cer¦tayne cytezen of the cytie named Mi¦chaell Laylery, Iohan Frountayne, Thomas Pygacen, Iohan de saynt Benoit, Nicholas Lorueyn̄, and Ia¦ques Bergery, for to betraye the cy∣tie, & to brynge it out of ye Englysshe possessyon. The whiche persones be∣ynge hedes of the cytie cōueyed theyr purpose in suche wyse, that they tur∣ned the cōmons of the cytie vpon the Englysshe men / and sodeynly arose agayne them, and by force slewe of them a great nombre, and there they dyd take many prysoners. And as the Englysshe men fledde or faughte by the stretes, the women and other
feble persones cast vpon them stones and hoe lycoures to theyr great con¦fusyon / so yt the Englysshe men were in passynge mysery and desolacyon. In this tyme of persecucion, the bys∣shop of Mor, whiche than was na∣med chaunceler of Englysshe men in those partyes with other / hardly esca¦ped and toke the towre of saynt De∣nys, whiche as yet rested in the En∣glysshe possessyon. Than the other hoste of Frenche∣men herynge of this rumour in the cytie / anone drewe nere, & entred by saynt Iames gate without moche re¦systence / and so enioyed the cytye at theyr pleasure. Than the Englysshemen beynge in the towre of saynt Denys, feryng that they myght not longe holde the sayd place agayne theyr enemies / fyl to a treaty, and cōdyscended to passe fre with theyr lyues. The which whā they shuld passe vpon theyr iournay were diided and scorned of ye Frēche¦nacyon out of all mesure. And whan the cytye of Parys was thus subdu∣ed to the Frenche dominion / anone ye Englyssh people that there abode vn¦der fyne and raunsom, were sworne to Charles the seuenth than takynge vpon hym as Frenche kynge. And anone after were wonne from ye En∣glyssh power, the holdes named Cre¦oll and saynt Germayne. In whiche passe tyme and season, for to strēgthe and haue the gydynge of Normādy / the duke of yorke encompaned with the erle of Salysbury, and the lorde of Fawcoūbrydg sailed into Fraūce. And the erle of Morteyn̄ beynge thā at Calays, made a vyage into Flaun¦dres, and skyrmysshed with them ye bordred vpon Pycardy, and slewe of them ouer. CCCC, and gate a great droue of beestes, and brought them vnto Calays. And for that certaynte was had that Phylyp duke of Bur∣goyn entēded to lay his syege aboute Calays / therfore London and all the good townes of Englāde were char∣ged to sende thyder certayne men wel and suffycyently for the warre ap¦parayled. wherof London sente at theyr charge men. Than vpon the .ix. daye of Iuyll / the duke of Burgoyn with a great multytude of Burgonyons and Fle¦mynges appered before Calays,Calys be∣syeged. and there pyght his pauylyons and ten∣tes / so that euery towne of Flaūdres had theyr tentes by themselfe. At whi¦che season was Lyeutenaunt of Ca∣lays syr Iohn̄ Ratclyf knyght, & of the castell was lieutenaunte the ba∣ron of Dudley. And so that syege en∣dured vpon .iii. wekes. In whiche se∣son many knyghtly actes were done and exercysed vpon bothe partyes, whiche for lengthynge of the tyme I passe. Than vpon the seconde day of August, the duke of Glouceter & pro∣tectour of Englāde with a company of .v.C. sayles as some writers haue, landed at Calays / and entended vp∣on the thyrde day folowynge to haue yssued out of the towne, and to haue gyuen batayll to ye Flemynges. But as testyfyeth all Englysshe wryters / so soone as ye duke of Burgoyn was ware of the great power of the lorde protectour, he toke with hym of his ordenaūce that he myght lyghtly ca¦ry / and the other that were heuy and combrous, he lefte behynde hym. Amonge the whiche one was lefte be¦fore Guynes a great gunne of brasse named Dygon, ouer dyuers serpen∣tynes and other great gunnes. And the Flemynges lefte behynde them a great quantyte of bere, besyde wyne and floure and other vytayle. But of this vyage wryteth other∣wyse Gaguyne / & sayth that ye duke well and manfully, as a valyaunte knyght ī his actes, cōtinued his syge
before Calays ouer two monethes / And there dyd many noble actes in assaylyng of his enemyes. And after ye Flemynges by reason of theyr mur¦mure and rebellion had refused hym, and in maner lafte hym almost with out company / yet not withstādynge he dayly assayled his enemyes / and after with suche small company as was laft hym, whā he sawe he myght not preuayle he returned into his coū∣tre. And so thus alway in all the sayd Gagwynus boke, he wypeth from ye Englysshemen in all that he may the honoure / and excuseth theyr enemy∣es to his power. whan the duke with his host was thus fledde / the lorde protectoure with his people folowed hym into the countre by the space of. xi. dayes. In whiche season he brent but two townes / whiche were named and yet be, Poperynge and Bell / and returned to Calays & after into Eng¦lande. And this yere was the castell or towne of Rokkesborouth in Scot¦lande besyeged of the kynge of Scot¦tes. But so soone as he had wyttyng that syr Rauffe Gray knyght was co¦mynge with a competent nombre for to remoue that siege / anone he depar¦ted, leuynge some parte of his orde¦naunce behynde hym / to his great dyshonoure. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxvii.   Thomas Morsted.   Iohn̄ Mychell.   Anno .xv.   wyllyam Gregory.   IN this .xv. yere & thyrde daye of Ianuarii / quene Katheryne mother vnto Henry the syxte, wyfe of Henry the fyfte, dyed at Barmundis∣sey in southwarke / & after with due solempnyte brought thorughe the cy¦tie, and so conueyed to westmynster / and there buryed in ye myddes of our lady chapel vnder a tōbe of marbell. But whan our soueraygne lorde Hē∣ry the .vii. than beynge kyng, caused the chapell to be taken downe & buyl¦ded a newe, without the lyke ther vn¦to as now to men dothe appere / than the corps of ye excellent prynces was taken vp, and set by the tombe of her lorde and husbande durynge ye tyme of the buyldynge of the sayde newe chapell / and after buryed by her sayd lorde within the sayde chapell. And ye xiiii. day of ye sayd moneth fyll downe sodeynly the furthest gate towarde Southwarke with ye towre therup∣on, and .ii. of the furthest arches of ye sayd brydge, but as god wold no cre¦ature was therwith perysshed, that is to meane of humayne persones. And the .xxi. day of this same mo∣neth of Ianuarii / the kyng beganne his parlyament at westmynster, whi∣che before was purposed to haue ben¦holden at Cambrydge. To this par¦lyament came ye bysshop of Turuyn / and the counsayle of the erle of Ar∣mynak, wherof I fynde not ye cause expressed. And after easter was a day of dyot holdē bytwene Grauenynge and Calays, for maters touchynge ye kynge and the duke of Burgoyne / where for the kynge appered the car∣dynall of Englande, ye duke of Norf∣folke, and the erle of Stafforde, with dyuers other. And for the dukes par∣tye, appered there the duchesse his wyfe, with dyuers other of the sayde dukes counsayle. where by meanes of the sayde persones, an abstynence of warre was taken for a certayne tyme in the duchesse name. For the kynge wolde take none appoyntmēt
with the duke / for somoche as he had gone from his truthe & allegeaunce, that before tyme he had made with ye kynge. And vpon the seconde daye of Iuly this yere dyed quene Iane, the whiche somtyme had ben the wyfe of kynge Henry the .iiii, and before that the wyfe of the duke of Brytayne / & was caryed from Barmundessey to Cauntorbury, and there buryed by her husbāde Henry the .iiii. And this yere fell a chaunce that had not ben sene many yeres before. For all yons dyed in the towre / the whiche had cō∣tynued there a longe season. In this yere also ye kyng of Scot¦tes was trayterously murthered by seruauntes of his owne.kynge of Scottes murdred. Of the whi∣che traytours the capytayne of them was named Robert Grame / y• which after was with other of his company taken and put vnto moost paynfull dethe. This sayd kynge of Scottes had en prysoner fyftene yeres in En¦glande. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxxvii.   Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxxviii.   wyllyam Chapman.   wyllyam Estfelde Mercer.   Anno .xvi.   wyllyam Halys   IN this .xvi. yere and moneth of Nouembre / kynge Henry cau∣sed to be kepte a solempne obyt or ter¦ment within the churche of Paules, for Sygysmonde the emperour and knyght of ye garter. This was a man of merueylous great & worthy fame, as by the auctour of Cronica Cronicarum is expressed. After whose dethe the gy¦dynge of ye empyre fyll to Albert that had maryed the onely doughter of ye sayd Sygysmonde. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xxxix.   Hugh Dyke.   Stephen Browne Grocer.   Anno .xvii.   Nycholas yoo.   IN this yere, vpon newe yeres daye in the after noone, a stake of woode fyll downe sodaynly at Baynardes castell vpon Thamys syde, and slewe .iii. men and hurte dy¦uers other. And at Bedford this yere at the kepynge of a shyre day, by the fallynge of a steyer were .xviii. mur∣thered & slayne / besyde many other sore hurte and maymed. And the last day of Apryll, dyed in Roan syr Ry∣charde Beauchamp called of comon fame ye good erle of warwyke. This was lyeutenaunt of ye kynge in Nor∣mandy, and demened hym there full well and manfully / whose body was after brought vnto warwyke, & there in a newe chapell buylded vpon the southe syde of the quyer, buryed full honorably. This yere also was great dertheA derthe. of corne in Englād & also in Fraūce / in somoche yt a busshell was solde at Lōdon for .iii.s. & iii.s. & iiii.d. And in Fraūce ī Parys, it was at lyke va¦lue. And there also they dyed sore of the sekenesse of ipidimie. For this scar∣cyte of whete in Englande in many places the people made them breed of fetches, pesyn, and benes. And af∣ter some wryters for lacke of these foresayd graynes, some poore people made them breed of Fenecotes. But yet by the prouydence of Stephen
Browne this yere Mayre / many ship¦pes were freyghte with rye out of Pruce, and dyscharged at London, that eased the people nere to the cytie greatly. This of many wryters is na¦med the seconde dere yere. In this yere ended the counsayle or synode holdē at Basyle, begon as before is sayde in the .xi. yere of this kynge.Pope Eu∣geny depo¦sed. By auctoryte of whiche coū∣sayle Eugeny the .iiii. was deposed / & Amedeus a duke and prynce of Sa∣uoy, was chosen for pope in the place of the forenamed Eugeny. But yet he had suche ayde, that he contynued in Rome as pope all his lyues tyme. And that other whiche was named of his ayders Felix the .v, contynued his dygnyte in other places / so that thā arose a great scisme in ye churche, whether of these .ii. was indubitat pope. For some countrees vphelde ye one and some that other / so that ther¦were alowed none of them both / and that was called ye neutralytie. This scysine contynued vpon .ix. yeres, the terme whyle Eugeny lyued. After whose dethe was chosen a cardynall named Thomas Sarazan / and af∣ter was named Nycholas the .v. To whome the sayde Felix after that he was admitted for Peters successour, of his owne good mynde renounced his dygnyte of papacy / and submyt∣ted hym to the rule and obedyence of thē sayd .v. Nycholas thā beynge in∣dubitat pope. And thus cessed y• scys∣me in the churche, whiche had conty∣nued by the terme aboue specyfyed. This Felix was a deuoute prynce & sawe the sones of his sones / and af∣ter lyued a deuoute and holi lyfe, and lastly was chosen pope as before is shewed / for the which he is of dyuers wryters accompted for happy. But and he hadde not medled with the ty¦tle of the churche, and therwith blot∣ted his olde age / he had after the opy¦nyon of other wryters, be named or alowed moche more blessed & happy. And this yere in the moneth of Au∣gust in Lōdon, were two bawdes pu¦nysshed with werynge of ray hodes / & after .xl. dayes enprysonment, they were banysshed the towne and dry∣uen out with most shame. In this yere also the conduyte in Fletestrete was begonne by syr wyllyam Estfelde knyghte and late mayre / and so fynysshed of his good disposicion without cost or charge to the cytie. And he with syr Lewes and Iohan of Estsex were made knygh∣tes of the Bathe in the same yere. And in this yere dyed Robert Chi¦cheley grocer & twyes mayre of Lon∣don / the whiche wylled in his testa∣ment, that vpon his mynde daye a good and competent dyner shulde be ordeyned for .xxiiii.C. poore mē / and that of houssholders of the cytye yf they myght be foūde. And ouer that was .xx.li. destrybuted amōge them / whiche was to euery man two pens. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xxxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xl.   Robert Marchall.   Robert Large mercer.   Anno .xviii.   Phylyp Malpas.   THis .xviii. yere vpon the daye of saynt Botolph or .xvii. day of Iuny / a preste after he was degra∣ted of his prestly dygnyte named syr Rycharde was brent for heresye at ye towre hyll / how wel in his latter day he toke great repentaunce, and dyed goddes man and in the faythe of the churche. This for wordes spoken by his lyfe that the posterne of ye towre
shulde synke as after it dyd, & other fantastycall dedes or wordes / he of many lewde folkes was accompted for an holy man. wherfore after his dethe they came to his place of execu¦cyon, and there made theyr oblacyōs and prayers, and arered a great hepe of stones, and pyght there a crosse by nyght / so that i this meanes a great dysclaunder ran vpon the churche, & specially vpon suche as had put hym to dethe. But to cease that rumoure / cōmaūdment was sent from ye kynge to punysshe all suche as thyder went on pylgrymage. By vertue whereof ye mayre and shyreffes dyd suche dy∣lygēce, that shortly after all ye sekyng and offeryng was fordone and layde aparte. This yere also ye shyreffes of Lon¦don fette out of saynt Martynes le¦graunt .v. persones beynge there in sayntwary / and ladde theym to the countre in bred strete, where they re∣mayned certayne dayes. But those daies expired / they were by ye kynges Iustyces restored vnto sayntwary. In this passetyme the warre atwene Englande & Fraūce endurynge / in a wynter season whan the groūde was couered with a myghty snowe, and therewith all a great frost hadde har¦dened the pondes and dyches / the Englysshmē whiche laye in a strōge holde nyghe vnto a towne called Pountlarge, arayed them in whyte clothes ouer theyr harneys / and so in great nombre approched the dykes, and passed vpon the yse to ye walles and them scaled / and the watche of ye towne slepynge, toke the towne and distressed therin myche people. From the whiche daunger escaped ryghte hardly .ii. capytaynes of that towne named Iohan de Uyllers and Na∣rabon̄ a knyghte Burgonyon. The countre aboute Parys was also sore¦vexed with ye rauyne of wolues, that proclamacyon was made, that euery grene or newe flayn skyn̄e of a wolfe that was brought vnto Parys, ye pro¦uost shulde gyue to the brynger .xx. shelynges or .xx. sous of that countre money / whiche amoūteth to .ii. s. vi. d. sterlynge.Dyfrrcyō of wolf It was not longe after, or Charles the Frenche kynge layde vnto ye foresayd towne a strōg siege. But it by ye duke of yorke & the lorde Talbot was well and knyghtly de∣fended / in somoche ye one tyme they put the Frenchemen to rebuke, and were lykely to haue takē theyr kyng, e had be the soner rescous. Lastly ye duke of yorke and the sayd lord Tal∣bot, for vrgent causes departed thēs to Roan / and betoke the towne to ye rule of syr Gerueys of Cliftō knyght and other, hauynge with them to the nombre of a thousande sowdyours, But the thyrde daye after the dukes departynge / the Frenche kynge so fy¦ersly assayled the towne, that in the ende he wanne it by strengthe, and slewe therin many an Englyssh mā, & toke many prysoners. And soone after was the townes of Meleon, of Corbeyll, and of the Ebreouse, loste from the Englysshmen. For ye shall vnderstande that sondry and many tymes ye townes & holdes in Fraūce were lost and efte wonne. But euer ye more losse turned / to the Englysshe partye, tyll all Normandy were lost, and all other landes of Fraunce ap∣partynynge to the kynge of Eng∣lande. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xl.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xli   Iohan Sutton.   Iohan Paddysley goldsmythe.   Anno .xix.   Wyllyam wetynhale.  
THis .xix. yere began murmure & grudge to breke at large, that before had ben kepte in mewe, atwene {per}sones nere aboute ye kyng, and his vncle the famous Humfrey duke of Gloceter and protectour of the lande. Agayne whome dyuers cō¦iectures were attempted a farre / whi¦che after were sette nere to hym, so yt they lefte not tyll they had broughte hym vnto his confusyon. And fyrste this yere dame Elea∣noure Cobham, whom he was fami¦lier with or she were to hym maryed, was arested of certayne poyntes of treason / and therupon by examynaci¦on conuict, and lastly demed to dwell as an outlawe in the yle of Man, vn¦der the warde of syr Thomas Stan∣leye knyghte. And soone after were arested as ayders and councelers of the foresayd duchesse, mayster Tho∣mas Southwell a Chanon of saynt Stephyns chapell at westmynster, mayster Iohan Hum a chaplayne of the sayde duchesse, and mayster Ro∣ger Bolyngbroke a man experte in nygromancy, & a womā called Mar∣gery Iourdemayne surnamed the wytch of Eye besyde wynchester. To whose charge it was layde that these iiii. persones shulde at the request of the duches, deuyse an ymage of wax lyke vnto ye kyng / the whiche ymage they delte soo with, that by theyr de∣uyslysshe incantacyons and sorcery, they entended to brynge out of lyfe lytell and lytell the kynges person, as they lytell and lytell consumed ye ymage. For the whiche treason and other, fynally they were cōuycte and adiuged to dye. But mayster Tho∣mas Southewell dyed in the towre of London, the nyght before he shuld haue ben iudged on the morne / as in the nexte yere folowynge shalbe de∣clared. ye haue in ye preceding yere herde, how the towne of Pountlarge was wonne by Charles ye toke vpon hym as kyng / wher as mani Englysshmē were taken prysoners and sente to a castell named Coruyle. where they so beynge in pryson, laboured vnto the ruler of that holde, that one of them myght be sette at large to laboure to theyr frēdes for theyr raunsom. The whiche persone whan he was at his lybertye / went vnto a strength there¦by, wherof an aragon knyght was a Capytayne vnder the duke of yorke, and shewed to hym that the castell of Coruyle was but sklenderly māned, and that it myght be wonne by poly¦cy and strengthe. wherupon the sayd capytayne named Frauncys in the nyght folowynge, sette a busshmente nere vnto the sayd castell / and in the daunynge of the mornynge arayed iiii. of his sowdyoures in husband∣mēnes, aray, and sent them with sak∣kes fylled with dyuers fruytes to of∣fer to sell to the occupyers of the ca∣stell. The whiche whan they were co¦myn to the gate, & by theyr langage taken for Frenchemen / anone with∣out suspicion were taken in / and se∣yng that fewe folkes were styrryng, held ye porter muet whyle one gaue the foresayde bushmente knowledge / so that shortly they entred and toke the capytayne in his bedde, and af∣ter spoyled the castell, and delyuered the Englysshe prysoners, and cōuey∣ed the Frēchemē with all the goodes yt they myghte cary out of the castell vnto Roan̄. Upon the day of the translacyon of saynt Edward or the twelfe day of Octobre / vpon whiche daye the mayre is named by the mayre and his bretherne for ye yere folowynge / that day whan the comons of the cy∣tye after theyr auncyēt custome had chosen two alderinē suche as before had ben shyreffes of London and of
myddelsex, that is to wete Roberte Clopton Draper and Rauffe Holād tayllour, and them presented by na∣me vnto the mayre and hys brother than syttynge in the vtter chambre where the mayres courtes ben kepte, to the entent that the sayde mayre & hys brother myghte chose one of the sayde two suche as they thoughte moste necessary and worshypfull for the rome: the sayde mayre and hys brethern chase there Roberte Cloptō and broughte hym after downe vp∣pon hys ryght hande towarde ye hall. whereof whanne certayne tayllours there beynge were ware, and sawe that Rauffe Holāde was nat chosen / anone they cryed, naye naye nat this but Rauffe Holande, wherewyth the olde mayre beynge astonyed, sode stylle vpon the stayer, and commaun¦ded them to kepe silence / & after helde on his waye to the eest ende of ye hall, and there set hym downe, and his bre¦thern about hym. In whyche meane tyme the sayde tayllours had conty∣nued theyr crye, and encensed other of lowe felysshyppes of the cytye as symple persones, to take theyr parte and to crye as faste as they / & wolde nat cease for speche of the mayre nor oyes made by the mayres sergeaunt of armes. wherefore the mayre to appese the rumour, sente downe the shyreffes and commaunded them to take the mysdoers, and to sende thē vnto pryson. The whych precept obserued, and a twelf or syxten of the chiefe of them sent vnto Newgate / the sayde ru∣mour was anone ceased. Of the whyche prysoners some were after fyned and some punysshed by longe inprysonemente. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlii.   wyllyam Cumbys.   Robert Clopton.   Anno .xx.   Rychard Ryche.   IN thys .xx. yere / and in the mo∣neth of folowyng / the partyes before in that other yere ar∣rested for treasō, were brought vnto the guyldhall of London, and there arreygned of such poyntes as before ben reherced / and for ye same fynally mayster Iohn̄ Hum and mayster Ro¦ger Bolynbroke were iudged to be drawen, hanged, & quartered, & the wytche to be brent. But mayster Tho¦mas Sothwell dyed in the towre ye nyght before yt he shuld haue be iud∣ged. Thā accordyng to the sentence of the court before passed / mayster Roger was drawen to tyborne, and there hanged & quartered / the which at ye season toke vpon hys deth, that he was nat gylty of ye treason that he was put to & iuged for. And the next day folowyng was the wytch brente in Smythfelde / and mayster Iohan Hum was pardoned & suyd oute hys charter. This yere also ye lord Talbot layd syege before an hauen towne in Nor¦mandy named Depe, & set hys ordy∣naunce vpō an hylle called Poleet / where amonge other engynes and instrumentes of warre he hadde de∣uysed a myghty towre of tymbre, out of the whyche he shotte hys gunnes and other ordynaunce, and there∣wyth brosyd and crasyd the wallys, and wrought therby greate dysplea∣sure vnto the towne of Depe. In thys towne was capytayne Charlys Mareys a Frenche knyght
knyght / the whyche manfully defen∣ded the towne, tyll vnto hym wyth rescous came Iohn̄ Notice of Orle∣aunce knyght wyth a cōpany of .M. sowdyours. And there after came to the rescous of the sayde towne .ii. o∣ther knyghtes named Arthur de Lō¦geuyle and syr Thomas Droynon, wyth .vi.C. mē. And after thys Char∣les whyche named hym selfe Frēche kyng / sent thyder the thyrde rescous of .v.C. men of armys and a .M. of o∣ther sowdyours, vnder .ii. leders cal∣led Theodalde / & Guyllyam Rycha∣uyll knyghtes. The whyche rescous nat wythstandynge / the sayde lorde Talbot well & māfully cōtynued hys syege, & assawted the towne in ryght cruell maner, so that they were fayne to call for more ayde. whereof the lord Talbot beyng ware, thynkynge that shortly the Frenchmen shuld be con∣strayned to gyue ouer the towne / left the gydyng of the syege vnto syr wyl¦lyam Poyton & syr Iohn̄ Ryppelād or Tryppelande knyght, & after de∣partyd. After whose departyng with in short whyle, ye Dolphyn of Uyēne Lowys by name, and sonne vnto the forenamed Charles Frenche kynge / accompanyed wyth the erle of saynte Paule & other to the nombre of .xvi.C. knyghtes, came vnto the rescous of the sayd towne. And after he had a day rested hym and hys sowdiours he sente the forenamed Theodalde wyth a strength of .iiii.C. men for to assayle the forsayde towre of tymbre / but lytell hurt dyd they therunto. Than the sayd Dolphyn sente an o∣ther strength of .vi.C. men to assayle it / but the Englyshemen quyt theym so manfully that they slew .viii. score Frenchmen, & woūnded ouer .iii.C. wherwyth the Dolphyn beynge gre∣uously amoued / assembled the vtter∣most strength he myght make, aswel of the towne and other, and set vpon the Englysshe men, whiche were ore brused with dayly fyght and fewe in nombre / and fynally scomfited them, and slewe of theym vpon .CCC. and toke ye rest prysoners. Amonge yt whi¦che the foresayd two Englysshe capi¦taynes were taken / and a kynnesmā of the lorde Talbottes or more very∣ly one of his baste sones. And thus was Depe rescowed, & the Englyssh¦men dyscomfyted / after they had mā∣fully maynteyned that syege by the space of .ix. wekes and odde dayes. in Also this yere in ye moneth of Au∣gust was a great affray ī Fletestrete, atwene the getters of the ynnes of courte and the inhabytauntes of the same strete. whiche affray began in ye nyght / and so contynued with assaw¦tes and small by kerynges tyll ye next day. In whiche season moche people of the cytie thyder was gadered / and dyuers men of bothe partyes were slayne and many hurte. But lastly by the presence & dyscrecyon of ye mayer and shyreffes this affraye was appe∣sed. Of the whiche was chyfe occasy¦oner a man of Clyfforde ynne named Herbotell. In this yere also, by certayne am¦bassadoures yt were sente out of En∣glād into Guyon / a maryage was cō¦cluded in the begynnynge of the yere folowynge, atwene the kynge and ye erles doughter of Armenak. whiche conclusion was after dysalowed and put by, by the meanes of the erle of Suffolke. whiche kyndled a newe brande of brunynge enuy atwene ye lorde protectour and hym / and toke fyre in suche wyse that it lefte not tyll bothe partyes with many other were consumed and slayne, wherof ensued moche myschefe within the realme, and losse of all Normandy / as after to you shall appere.
Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlili.   Thomas Beaumount.   Ion̄ Athyrley Irenmonger.   Anno .xxi.   Rycharde Nordon.   IN thys .xxi. yere / the foresayde erle of Suffolke, whych as be∣fore is touched had fordon the cōclu∣syon of the maryage takē by the am∣bassadours, betwene the kyng and ye erle of Armenakes doughter, wente ouer hym selfe wyth other vnto hym assygned / & there in Fraūce conclu∣ded a mariage betwene the kyng and dame Margarete the kynges dough¦ter of Cecyle and of Hierusalem as sayth the Englyshe cronycle. And for that mariage to brynge about / to the sayd kyng of Cecyle was deliuered ye duchye of Angeou and erledome of Mayne, whych are called the keyes of Normandy. But the Frēche wryter Gaguyne sayth in hys latyne cronycle, yt about thys tyme the erle of Suffolke came vnto Charles the Frenche kyng to a towne in Lorayn named Naunce or Naūt, & axed of hym his doughter to be quene of England / but he gyueth to her no name. The whyche request of the sayd Charles to the sayde erle was graūted. Also he affermeth lytel tofore that season, a peace betwene bothe realmes was concluded for the terme of .xxii. moneths / whych peace endured but a whyle after. And thys yere vpon Candelmas euyn, the steple of sait Poules church in Londō was set on fyre by tempest of lyghtnynge / and lastly quēched by greate dylygence and laboure of ma¦ny persones. But of all that there laboured, the morowe masse preeste of Bowe church in chepe was moste commended and noted. Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xliii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xliiii.   Nycholas wyfforde.   Thomas Catworthe Grocer.   Anno .xxii.   Iohn̄ Norman.   THys .xxii. yere / ye erle of Staf¦forde was made or created duke of Bukkyngham, the erle of warwyke, duke of warwyke, the erle of Dorset marques of Dorset, and the erle of Suffolke marquys of Suffolke. The whyche marquys of Suffolke soone after wyth hys wyfe and other honourable persona∣ges aswell of men as of women, with great apparayl of chayres and other costyous ordenaunce for to conuey the forenamed lady Margarete into England, sayled into Fraūce / where they were honourably receyued, and so taryed there all thys may∣res yere. In thys yere was also an acte made by auctoryte of the common coū∣sayll of London, that vppon the son∣daye shuld no maner of thynge with in the fraunchyse of ye citie be bought or solde, nother vytayll nor other thynge / nor none artyfycer shulde brynge hys ware to any man to be worne or occupyed that daye, as tayllours garmentes or cordeway∣ners shoys / and so in lykewyse of all other occupacyons. The whyche ordenaunce helde but a whyle.
Anno dn̄i. M.CCC.xliiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.xlv.   Stephyn Foster.   Henry Frowyke Mercer.   Anno .xxiii.   Hughe wyche.   THys .xxiii. yere and moneth of the foresayd lady Margarete came ouer into Englād / and in the moneth folow∣ynge she was maryed vnto kyng Hē∣ry at a towne called Sowthwyke in the countre of Hamshyre. And frō thens she was honourably conueyed by the lordes and estates of thys lād, whyche mette wyth her in sondry pla¦ces wyth greate retynewe of men in sondry lyueryes, wyth theyr sleuys browdered and som betyn wyth gold smythes werkes in moste costly ma∣ner. And specyally the duke of Glouceter mette wyth her wyth fyue hundreth men in one lyuerey. And so she was conueyed vnto Blacke heth / where vppon the .xviii. day of May she was mette with the mayre, aldermen, and sheryfes of the cytye, and the craftes of the same, in brown blewe wyth brawderyd sleuys. That is to meane euery mystery or crafte wyth conysaunce of hys my∣stery, and red hoodes vppon eyther of theyr heddes / and so the same daye broughte her vnto London, where for her were ordeyned sumptuous and costly pagētes and resemblaūce of dyuerse olde hystoryes, to ye great comforte of her and suche as came wyth her, ye maner whereof I passe ouer for lengthynge of the tyme. And so wyth great tryūphe she was broughte vnto westmynster / where vppon the .xxx. daye of the moneth of Maye, that was the sondaye after Trynyte sondaye, she was solemply crowned. After whyche feeste, iustes were there holden by thre dayes continual within the seyntwary before ye abbey. Of thys maryage are of dyuers wry¦ters lefte dyuers remembraunces / sayenge that thys maryage was vn∣profytable for the realme dyuerse wayes. For fyrste was gyuen vp for her oute of the kynges possession the duchye of Angeou and the erle∣dome of Mayne. And for the costes of her conueynge into thys lande, was axed in playne parlyamente a fyftene and an halfe by the marquys of Suffolke. By reason whereof he grewe in such hatered of the people / that fynally it coste hym hys lyfe. And ouer that it appered that god was nat pleased wyth that mariage. For after thys day the fortune of the worlde beganne to fal from ye kyng, so that he loste hys frendes in Eng∣lande and hys reuenewes in Fraūce. For shortly after all was ruled by the quene and her counsayl / to the great dysprofyte of the kyng & hys realme / and to the greate maugre and oblo∣quy of the quene. The whych as syn that tyme hath ben well prouyd, had many a wrong and false reporte made of her, whych were to longe to reherse. All whyche mysery fyll, for brekynge of the pro∣myse made by the kyng vnto the erle of Armenakkys doughter / as before in the .xx. yere of the kyng is touched as agreeth moste wryters. whyche mysery in thys story shall somdeale appere, as fyrst by the losyng of Nor¦mandy, the deuisiō of the lordes with∣in thys realme, the rebelliō of ye comi¦naltye agayne theyr prynce & soue∣raygne, & fynally the kynge deposed, and the quene wyth the prynce fayne to fle the lande, & loste the rule there∣of for euer.
Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlvii.   Robert Horne.   Iohn̄ Olney Mercer.   Anno .xxv.   Godfrey Boloyne.   THys .xxv. yere, was a parlya∣ment holdē at saynt Edmon∣des Bury in Suffolke. To ye whiche towne all the cōmons of that coūtre were warned to come in theyr moste defēcyble aray, to gyue attendaunce vpō the kyng. And so soone as thys parlyamēt was begō, and the lordes assembled / syr Hūfrey duke of Glou∣ceter and vncle vnto ye kyng, shortly after was arrested by the vycounte Beawmōde thā hygh cōstable of En¦glande / whome accompanied ye duke of Bukkynghm̄ & other. And after this arest was executed / all his owne seruaūtes were put from him / & .xxxii of the pryncypall of theym were also put vnder arest, & sente vnto dyuers prysons / whereof arose a great mur∣mour amonge the people. Than thus cōtynuyng thys par∣lyament, wythin .vi. dayes after the duke was arrested, he was founde dede in hys bedde beynge the .xxiiii. daye of February. Of whose murdre dyuers reportes at made, whyche I passe ouer. Than hys corps was layd opyn yt all mē myght se hym, but no wonde was founde on hym. Of the honou∣rable fame of thys man, a longe style I myght make, of ye good rule that he kepte thys lande in, durynge the none age of the kynge / and of hys ho¦nourable housholde & libertye which passed all other before hys tyme / and trewe of hys allegeaunce that no mā coude with ryght accuse hī, but maly¦cyous persones whych hys glorious honour & fame lafte nat to maligne agayne hym, tyll he were put frome all wordly rule / and specyally for it was thought, that durynge hys lyfe he wolde withstāde the delyuery of Angeou & Mayne before promysed. Thys for hys honourable and lybe∣rall demeanure was surnamed the good duke of Glouceter. Than after he had lyen opyn a season yt all men myghte be assured of hys dethe / the corps was honourably prouided for and so cōueyed vnto saynt Albonys, & there buryed nere vnto the shryne of saynt Albone / to whose soule god be mercyfull Amen. And whan this noble prynce was thus enteryd / fyue persones of hys housholde, that is to saye, syr Roger Chamberlayne knyght, Myddelton Herbarde, & Arthur esquyers, & one Rycharde Nedā yeman, were sente vnto Londō / & there arayned and iu∣ged to be drawē, hāged, and quarte∣red. Of the whych sentēce drawynge & hāgynge were put in execuciō. But whā they were cut downe to be quar¦tered / ye Marquys of Suffolke there beyng presēt, shewed ye kynges char∣tour for thē / & so were deliuered to the great reioysyng of ye multytude of ye people there beyng present. But for thys the grudge & murmour of ye peo¦ple ceased nat agayne the Marquys of Suffolke, for the deth of the good duke of Glouceter / of whose murdre he was specyally suspected. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlviii.   Wyllyam Abraham.   Iohn̄ Gedney Draper.   Anno .xxvi.   Thomas Scot.  
IN thys .xxvi. yere after concor∣daūce of moste wryters or nere there about / ye .xxiii. scisme of ye church ceased, that before had cōtynued be∣twene Eugeny the .iiii. & Felix the .v. vpon .xvi. yeres. Thys scisme as before is touched, began by reason of the deposycyō of the sayde Eugeny at the coūsayll of Basile, for that that he wolde nat ob¦serue the decrees before made in the coūsayll of Cōstaūce, & other causes to hym layde. But yet that deposyng natwythstandynge / perforce he cōty∣nued pope by the terme of .xiiii. yeres after. And the sayde Felix at the sayd coūsayll admitted in lyke maner, cō∣tynued as pope by all that sayde sea∣son / lyke as before to you I haue she∣wed in the .xvii. yere of thys kynge. And as now by exortacyon of crysten prynces, as the kynge of England, whose messangers in ye behalfe were the bysshoppe of Norwyche, and the lord of saint Iohn̄s, & other princes / the sayd pope Felix to sette a perfyte vnyon in the churche, in thys yere of hys owne volūte resigned hys aucto∣rytie of papacy, and submytted hym vnto the obediēce of Nicholas the .v. of that name / nat wythstandynge that the sayde Felix was a man of great byrthe, & allied to the more par¦tye of all crysten prynces. And thys Nycholas a mā of lowe byrthe, & of vnknowē kynred wythin the cytie of Ieane. Than was Felix made legate of Fraunce & cardynal of Sauoye / and lyued after a blessed & holy lyfe & so ended. And as some wryters testifye, god for hym hath shewed dyuers mi∣racles syns he dyed. And for thys scysme thus gracyously was ended / a vercyfyer made thys verse folo∣wynge. ¶Lux fussit mundo, cessit Felix Nicholao. The whych verse is thus to mea∣ne in Englyshe. ¶Lyght into the worlde now dothe sprynge and shyne. ¶For Felix vnto Nicholas all frely doth resyne. Also as testifieth Gaguyne & also some englyshe wryters, yt trewys be∣twene Englād & Fraūce cōtynuyng / a knyght of ye Englysh partie named syr Fraūceys Arrogonoyse, toke a town vpō the borders of Normādy belōgyng vnto ye duke of Brytayne. For yt which he cōplayned hym vnto Charles the Frēch kyng / & he at the sayd dukes request sent vnto ye kyng of Englād Iohn̄ Hanart & Guyllm̄ Cōsynot knyghtes, to axe restitucyō of ye harme. The whych were answe∣red of ye kynges coūsayll, yt the dede was ryght displeasaūt vnto ye kyng / & that ye sayd syr Fraūceys had enter prysed ye fayt of his owne presūpcion & nothyng wyth the kyng{is} mynde or plesure. Thā after this answere thus made / it was agreed by the duke of Somerset thā lieutenaūt vnder the kyng in Normādy, yt a comynycaciō for thy matyer shulde be hadde at a towne named Louers. To the which place at the day assygned apperyd & came certayne persones for both par¦tyes / where they so beyng occupyed, a trayne was cōpassed by the French mē to take frō ye Englyshmen a strōg town or hold named Poūt all Arche, wherof the maner was thys. A Frenche man or Norman be∣ynge a carter, whyche dayly vsed to entre thys towne wyth vytayll and other lodynge of hys carte / seynge the neglygence of the Eng∣glysshemen, howe lyttel hede they toke vnto the watche of the towne, warned a Frenche capytayne named Floquet / annd sayde that wyth ly∣tell helpe that town wolde be goten. For expedycyō wherof, thys Floquet
wyth other couenaunted wyth the sayd carter to bryng about theyr pur¦pose / & ordeyned vnto hym .ii. hardy sowdyours of Frenchemē, whyche bare in theyr neckes .ii. carpēter axes to shewe that they were carpenters. And after agremēt made among thē, how they shuld entre into the towne, & where they shulde mete the carter, whych after hys olde custome entred the gates wythout susspycyon / and soone after wyth his axe in his necke came by one sowdyour, & in a whyle after that other / & so wyth lytell que∣styonyng to them made, passed ye ga∣tes / and so lastly vnto the house of ye carter before appoynted, & there kept them secrete tyll nyght was commyn knowynge well that the hoste of the hous was enemy to Englysshemen, for an iniury to hym of an Englysshe man before done, & shewed to hym all theyr counsayll. The whyche promy∣sed to them all the assystence & ayde that he myght make. In thys nygh∣tes passe tyme for the fortheraunce of thys purpose / the lord of Bressy with a chosen company of knyghtes lod∣ged hym in a busshemēt nere vnto ye towne towarde the gate of saint An∣drewe / & the forenamed Floquet lod¦ged hym wyth an other chosen com∣pany vnder the parte of the towne whych is toward Louers, beīg with hym syr Iamys de Cleremont and o∣ther men of name. These ordenaun∣ces & prouysyons thus ordeyned for / the forenamed carter with his .ii. sow¦dyours forenamed in the sprynge of the mornynge, as in the moneth of Octobre, came erely vnto ye gatewith hys carte, & called the porter by name in fayre maner to opyn ye gate, & pro∣mysed to hym a rewarde for hys la∣bour. The porter knowyng well the carter, & takyng lytell regarde to the other .ii. whyche came with hym / ope¦ned the gate, and sent an other felow of hys to opyn the former gate. whan the fryste was opened / the carter set hys carte in the selfe gate, & drewe to hys purs to gyue to the porter hys re¦ward before {pro}mysed. And as he tolde the money into hys hād / of a falshode he let part of the money fall vpon the groūde. The whych whyle the porter stouped to take vp / the carter wyth his dagger or other wepyn gaue such a stroke vnto ye porter, yt he ne spake nor cryed after. And so soone as this myschyefe was don / so soon was the other porter slayn of ye .ii. sowdiours. And y• done, one of thē rā forth of ye ga¦tes & gaue a sygne vnto the lorde of Bressy / whyche forthwith entred the towne, & toke & slewe all suche as to them made resystēce / & wāne in short whyle ye castell as the towne, & slewe therin moche people, and toke many prysoners. Amonge the whyche as sayeth Gagwyne, the lorde Facoun∣brydge as capytayne of that towne was there taken prysoner. whan this towne was thus won by the cautele of the Frenchemē, & the terme of the trewis was nat yet expyred / thā was labour made vnto the French kynge for restytucyon of thys towne and o∣ther wronges done in wynnyng of ye same. To the whyche it was answe∣red, that yf the Englysshemen wolde restore the towne of Fogyers wyth other harmys there done / that than the Frenchemen shulde restore thys towne wyth the other harmys. For treaty wherof a daye of metyng was apoynted at a place called Boūport / where the tyme was spente in vayne of bothe partyes / so that of ye metyng came none effecte. Of the takynge of thys sayde towne of Fogyers ensuyed moche harme to the Englysshmen / for this was the occasyon, by the whyche the Frenchemen after gatte all Nor∣mandy.
Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlviii   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlix.   Wyllyam Cantlow.   Stephyn Browne Grocer.   Anno .xxvii.   wyllyam Marowe.   IN thys .xxvii. yere as wytnes∣seth the Englysshe cronycle, a knyghte of Fraunce called syr Lo∣wys de Bueyil, chalēged an esquyer of Englande named Rauffe Chalōs of certayne feetes of warre. The whych to approue, a daye to theym was gyuen to mete at a towne in Fraunce named Maunt or Maunce where the French kynge at that day was present. But fortune to Chalōs was so frendely, that he ranne the Frenche knyghte thorugh wyth hys spere / whereof the sayde syr Lowys shortly after dyed. Than this Cha¦lons lyke a charytable crysten man, mourned for hys enemy, and kepte for hym hys obsequy as he had ben hys carnall brother. For the whych dede of ye Frēch kyng he was greatly allowed / all be it he was boūde so to do by the lawe of armys. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xlix.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.l.   wyllyam Hulyn.   Thomas Chalton.   Anno .xxviii.   Thomas Canynges.   IN thys .xxviii. yere / the kynge callyd a parlyaments at west∣mynster, the whyche was adiourned to the blacke freers at London / and after Crystmas to London agayne. In whyche passetyme, as shyp man of the west countre named Roberte of Cane, wyth a fewe shyppes of warre toke an hole flete of marchaūtes cō∣mynge from the Baye beynge ladyn wyth salte / the which were of Pruce, Holande, and zeland, & other parties of Flaunders / and so broughte them to Hampton̄, and there made hys porte sale▪ For the whyche pryse the marchauntes goodes of Englād were arested in dyuers places of flaū¦ders / as Bruges, Ipre, & other good townes / and myghte nat haue the sayd goodes deliuered, tyll they had takē appoyntemēt for to paye for the sayd prise & theyr hurtes & damages. And contynuyng the foresayd par¦lyamēte / the duke of Suffolke was arested, & sent as prysoner to content some myndes vnto the towre / where he was kept at hys plesure a moneth & after delyuered at large / the which dyscontented many mēnes myndes. For to hym was layde the charge of the delyuery of Angeou & Mayne, & the deth of that noble prynce Hum∣frey duke of Glouceter. Than of thys grudge ensued rebellyon of the cōmons, in so moche that they assem¦bled theym in sondry places, & made of them selfe capytaynes, and named them Blewe berde and other counter fayte names / and so entēded to haue gadered more company. But anone as the kynges counsayll was thereof warnyd, they were layde for, and ta∣ken, and putte to dethe. Thanne the foresayde parlya∣mente was adiourned vnto Leyce∣ter / whether came the kynge and wyth hym the duke of Suffolke. Than the commons of the common hous made requeste to the kyng, that all suche persones as were consen∣tynge and laboured for the gyuynge ouer the duchye of Angeou and erle∣dome
of Mayn̄, myght be punisshed. Of whiche offēce to be gyltie / they ac¦cused the foresayd duke of Suffolke, the lorde Sey, the bysshop of Salys¦bury, and one Danyell a gentylman, with Treuylyan & other. Than to ap¦pease the cōmon hous / the duke was exyled for .v. yeres, and the lord Sey as tresorer of Englande / and ye other were put a parte for a whyle, & were promysed to be sent vnto the kynges gayoll or warde. Than the duke in obeynge ye sen∣tence foresayde, sped hym towarde ye sees syde in the moneth of Apryl, and toke his shyppynge in Northfolke, entēding to haue sayled into Fraūce. In kepyng of whiche course / he was mette with a shyppe of warre named Nicholas of the Tower, the whiche toke his shyp. And whā ye capytayne was ware of the duke / anone he toke hym into his owne shyp, and so kept his course towarde Douer. And whā he was comen vnto the rode / anone he caused hym to be confessed of his owne chaplayne / and that done shyp¦mē put hym in a shypbote, and there vpon the syde of the bote, one strake of his hed. whiche hed with the body was soone after conueyed to the lāde of Douer, and there lefte vpon ye san¦des / and the sayd shypmen returned to the see agayne. And thus one mys∣chefe ensued vpon an other, to the dy¦struccyon of the nobles of this lāde. And so vpon the fyrst daye of May, was this deed corps foūde vpon Do¦uer sandes, and after conueyed to his restynge place to This yere also beynge the yere of our lordes in carnacyon .xiiii.C. and .l. was the Iu¦bile or the plenary pardon at Rome, whiche of Englysshmen is called the yere of grace. And this yere a towne in Normā¦dy named Uernoyll, was taken by ye treason of a Frenche baker / the ma∣ner wherof were lōge to wryte. But fynally it came to ye possession of Flo∣quet before rehersed, to the great dy∣struccyon of Englysshmen. For now was ye trewes ended, & mortal warre was executed vpon both {per}tyes / & the Englysshmē vnto ye Frēche wrought moche myschyef dyuers wayes, whi∣che were lōge to wryte. But as to fore I haue shewed to you sondry tymes / the most losse turned euer last warde vpon ye Englyssh {per}tie. For this seasō also were ye townes of Nogēt & poūt Andenere wonne by the erle of saynt Paule & other. And in ye moneth of Iuny this yere,Insurrec∣ciō in Kent. ye cōmons of Kent as¦sēbled thē in great multitude, & chase to them a capitayee, and named hym Mortymer and cosyn of the duke of york / but of most he was named Iak Cade. This kept ye people wondero∣usly togyder / & made suche ordenaū∣ces amonge thē, yt he brought a great nōbre of people of thē vnto ye Blak hethe. where he deuysed a byll of pe∣ticiōs to ye kyng & ye coūsayll / & shew∣ed them what iniuryes & oppressiōs the poore cōmōs suffred, by suche as were aboute ye kynge a fewe {per}sones in nōbre, & all vnder coloure to come to his aboue. The kynges coūsayll se¦ynge this byll, dysalowed it, & coūsay¦led the kynge, whiche by the .vii. day of Iuny had gathered to hī a strōge hoste of people, to go agayne his re∣belles, & to gyue vnto them batayll. Than the kynge, after the sayd rebel¦les had holdē theyr felde vpon blak hethe .vii. dayes / made towarde thē. wherof heryng the capytayne, drewe backe with his people to a vyllage called Seuenok, & there enbatayled▪ thē. Thā it was agreed by ye kynges counsayll, that syr Humfrey Staf∣forde knyght, with wyllyam his bro∣ther, and other certayne gentylmen, shulde folowe the chase / and the kyng with his lordes shuld retourne
vnto Grenewyche, wenynge to them that the rebelles were fledde & gone. But as before I have shewed, whan syr Humfray with his cōpany drewe nere vnto Seuenok / he was wared of ye capytayne that there abode with his people. And whan he had coun∣sayledde with the other gentylmen / lyke a manfull knyghte set vpon the rebelles, and fought with them lōge. But in the ende the capytayne slewe hym & his brother with many other, and caused the rest to gyue backe. Al whiche season the kynges hoste laye styll vpon Blakhethe, beyng amōge them sondry opinions / so that some and many fauoured the capytayne. But fynally whan worde came of ye ouerthrowe of the Staffordes / they sayd playnly and boldly, that excepte the lorde Saye and other before re∣hersed were cōmytted to warde, they wolde take the capytaynes partye. For the appeasynge of the whiche ru¦mour, the lorde Saye was put into ye tower / but that other as thā were not at hande. Thanne the kynge ha∣uynge knowlege of the scomfyture of his men, and also of the rumour of his ostynge people / remoued frome Grenewyche to London / and there with his hoste rested hym a whyle. And so soone as Iak Cade hadde thus ouercomen the Stafforde / he anone apparayled hi with ye knygh∣tes apparayll, and dyd on hym his bryganders set with gylte nayle and his salet and gylte spores. And after he had refresshed his people, he retur¦ned agayne to Blakhethe / and there pyght agayne his feld as here tofore he had done / and laye there from the nyne & twenty daye of Iuny beynge saynte Peters daye, tyll the fyrste day of Iuly. In whiche season came vnto hym the archebysshop of Can∣torbury and the duke of Bukkyng∣ham / with whome they had longe cō¦munycacyon, and fonde hym ryghte dyscrete in his answeres. How be it they coude not cause hi to lay downe his people, and to submyt hym vnto the kynges grace. In this whyle the kynge and the quene herynge of the encreasynge of his rebelles, and also the lordes fe∣rynge theyr owne seruaūtes lest they wolde take the capytaynes partie, re¦moued frome London to Kyllyng∣worth / leuynge ye cyte without ayde, excepte onely the lorde Scales / whi∣che was lefte to kepe the tower, and with hym a manly & warly man na∣med Mathewe Fowth. Than the ca¦pytayne of Kente thus houynge at Blakhethe / to the ende to blynde the more the people, and so brynge hym in fame that he kepte good iustyce, be heded there a pety capytayne of his named Parys / for so moch as he had offended agayne suche ordynaūce as he had stablysshed in his hoste / & he∣rynge yt the kynge and all his lordes were thus departed, drewe hym nere vnto ye cytie. So that vpon the fyrste day of Iuly, he entred the bourgh of Southwarke, beynge than wednes∣day / & lodged hym there that nyght, for he myght not be suffered to entre the cytie. And vpon the same day, the com∣mōs of Essex in great nombre pyght theym a felde vpon the playne at my¦les ende. And vpon the seconde daye of the sayd moneth, the mayre called a common counsayle at the Gyldhall, for to puruey the withstandynge of these rebelles and other matyers. In whiche assemble were dyuers opini∣ons / so that some thought good that the sayde rebelles shulde be receyued into the cytie, and some otherwyse. Amonge the whiche, Roberte Horne stok fysshmonger than beynge an al∣derman, spake sore agayne them that wolde haue them entre. For y• whiche
sayenges, the cōmons were so amo∣ued agayn hym, that they ceased not tyll they had hym cōmytte to warde. And the same afternoone aboute v. of the clok, the capytayne with his people entred by ye brydge. And whā he came vpon the drawe brydge / he hewe the ropes yt drewe the brydge in sondre with his swerde, and so pas¦sed into ye cytie / and made in sondry places therof proclamacyons in the kynges name, that no man in peyne of dethe shulde robbe or take ony thyng parforce without payeng ther¦fore. By reason wherof he wanne ma¦ny hertes of the cōmons of the cytie / but all was done to begyle with the people, as after shall euydently ap∣pere. For he rode thorough dyuers stretes of the cytie / and as he came by London stone, he strake it with his swerde, and sayd now is Mortymer lorde of this cytie. And whan he had thus shewed hymselfe in dyuers pla∣ces of the cytie, & shewed his mynde to ye mayre for ye ordrynge of his peo∣ple / he returned into Southwarke, and there abode as he before hadde done, his people cōmynge & goynge at lawfull houres whan they wolde. Than vpon the morne beynge the thyrde daye of Iuly and frydaye / the sayd capytayne entred agayne the cy¦tie, and caused the lorde Sey to be fet frome the tower and ladde vnto the Guyldhall / where he was areygned before the mayre & other of ye kynges iustyce. In whiche passe tyme he en∣tended to haue brought before ye sayd iustyces the foresayd Robert Horne. But his wyfe and frendes made to hym suche instaūt labour, that fynal∣ly for .v.C. marke he was set at his ly¦bertye. Than the lorde Sey beynge as before is sayde at Guyldhall, desy¦red yt he myght be iudged by his pe∣ers. wherof herynge the capytayne, sent a company of his vnto the hall / the whiche parforce toke hym from the offycers, and so brought hym vn¦to the standarde in the Chepe / where or he were halfe shryuen they strake of his hed / & yt done pyght it on a lōg pole, & so bare it aboute with them. In this tyme and season had the capytayne caused a gentylman to be taken named Cromer, whiche before had ben shyreffe of Kent, and vsed as they sayde some extorcyons. For which cause, or for he had fauou¦red the lorde Sey, by reason that he had maried his doughter / he was ha¦ryed to Myles ende, and there in ye capitaynes presence byheded. And ye same tyme was ther also byheded a man called Baylly / ye cause of whose dethe was this as I haue herd some men reporte. This Baylly was of ye famylyer and olde acqueyntaunce of Iak Cade. wherfore so soone as he espyed hym cōmynge to hym warde, he cast in his mynde that he wolde dyscouer his lyuyng & olde maners, and shewe of his vyle kynne and ly∣nage. wherfore knowynge yt the sayd Baylly vsed to vere scrowes and pro¦phecyes aboute hym, shewyng to his cōpany yt he was an enchaunter and of yll dysposycion, and yt they shulde well knowe by such bokes as he bare vpon hym / and bad them serche, and yf they founde not as he sayde, yt thā they shuld put hym to dethe / whiche all was doone accordynge to his cō∣maundment. whan they had thus be heded these .ii. men / they toke the hede of Croumer & pyght it vpon a pole / and so entred the cytie with the he∣des of the lorde Sey and of Crou∣mer. And as they passed the stretes / they ioyned the poles togyder, & cau¦sed eyther deed mouthe to kysse other dyuers and many tymes. And the capytayne the selfe same daye wente vnto the house of Phylyppe Malpas draper and
and alderman / and robbeb and spoy∣led his house, and toke thens a great substaunce. But he was before war∣ned, and therby conueyed moche of his money and plate, or elles he had ben vndone. At whiche spoylynge were present many poore men of the cytie, whiche at suche tymes ben euer redy in all places to do harme, where suche ryottes ben doone. Thā towarde nyght, he returned into Southwarke / & vpon ye morne reentred ye cytie, and dyned that daye at a place ī saynt Margaret Patyns parysshe called Gherstys hous. And whan he had dyned / lyke an vncur∣teyse gest he robbed hym as the daye before he had Malpas. For which .ii. robberyes, all be it that the porayll & nedy people drewe vnto hym, & were partyners of that yll / the honest and thryfty comoners cast in theyr myn∣des the sequele of this matyer, and fe¦red leste they shulde be delte with in lyke maner / by meane wherof he lost the peoples fauour and hertes. For it was to be thought, yf he had not exe∣cuted that robbery, he myghte haue gone ferre, and brought his purpose to good effecte, yf he hadde entended well. But it is to deme and presup∣pose, that the entent of hym was not good / wherfore it myght not come to ony good conclusyon. Than ye mayre and aldermen with assystence of the worshypfull comeners, seynge this mysdeanour of ye capytayne / in saue∣gardynge of themselfe and of the cy∣tye, toke theyr counsayles how they myght dryue the capytayne and his adherētes from ye cytie, wherin theyr feare was the more, for so moche as the kynge and his lordes with theyr powers were farre from theym. But yet in aduoydynge of apparēt peryl / they condyscended, that they wolde withstande his any more entre into the cytie. For the performaūce wher of ye mayre sent vnto the lorde Sca∣les and Mathewe Gowgth than ha∣uynge the tower in gydynge / & had of them assent to perfourme ye same. Than vpon the .v. day of Iuly ye capytayne beynge in Southwarke, caused a mā to be heded, for cause of his dyspleasure to hym doone as the fame went / & so kepte hym in South¦warke all ye day. How be it he myght haue entred the cytie yf he had wold. And whan nyght was comynge / the mayre and cytezyns with Ma∣thewe Gowth lyke to theyr former appoynmtent kepte the passage of ye brydge beynge sonday, and defended the Kentysshe mē whiche made great force to reenter the cytie. Than the ca¦pytayne seynge this bykerynge be∣gon / yode to harneys, and called his people aboute hym / and set so fyersly vpon the cytezyns, that he draue thē backe from ye stulpes ī Southwarke or brydge fote vnto ye drawe brydge. In defendynge wherof, many a man was drowned and slayne. Amonge yt whiche, of men of name was Iohan Sutton aldermā, Mathewe Gouth gentylman, and Roger Heysande cy¦tezyn. And thus contynued this skyr¦mysshe all nyght tyll .ix. of the clocke vpon the morne / so that somtyme the cytezyns had the better / & thus soone the Kentysmen were vpon the better syde. But euer they kepte them vpon the brydge / so that the cytezyns pas∣sed neuer moche the bulwarke at the byrdge fote, nor ye Kentysshmē moche ferther thā the drawe brydge. Thus cōtynuyng the cruel fyght to the dy∣struccyon of moche people on bothe sydes / lastly after the Kentysshmen were put to the worse, a trewe was agreed for certayne houres. Duryng the whiche trewe, the archebysshop of Cantorbury than chaunceler of Englande, sent a generall pardon to the capytayne for hymselfe, and an
other of hys peple. By reason wherof he & hys company departed the same nyght out of Southwarke / & so re∣tourned euery man to hys owne. Thende of Iacke Cade. But it was nat longe after that the capytayne wyth hys cōpany was thus departed, that proclamacyons were made in dyuers places of Kent, of Southsex, and Sowtherey, that who myghte take the foresayde Iak Cade other on lyue or dede, shulde ha¦ue a .M. marke for hys trauayle. Af∣ter whych proclamacion thus publis∣shed / a gētylmā of Kēt named Alexan¦der Iden̄, awayted so hys tyme that he toke hym in a gardyn in Sussex. where in the takyng of hym the sayd Iak was slayne / & so beynge dede, was brought into Southwarke the daye of the moneth of & there left in the kynges benche for that nyght. And vpon y• morowe the dede corps was drawen thorugh the hyghe stretes of the cytye vnto New gate, & there heded and quartered. whose hede was than sent to Londō brydge / & his .iiii. quarters were sent to .iiii sondry townes of Kent. And thys done / the kyng sent hys commissions into Kent, & rode after hym selfe / and caused enquery to be made of thys riot in Caunterbury / where for the same .viii. men were iu∣ged & put to deth. And in other good townes of Kent & Southsex, dyuers other were put in execucyon for the same ryot. In thys yere also, in the west coū∣tree was slayne the bisshop of Salys¦bury by the commons of that coūtre.Byshop of Salysbury sayne. wherfore after the kyng had sped his besynesse in Kent & Sussex, he rode thyder to se also those malefactours punysshed. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.l.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.li.   Iohn̄ Myddylton.   Nycholas wyfforde Grocer.   Anno .xxix.   wyllyam Dere.   IN thys .xxix. yere vpō sait Leo¦nardes daye or the .vi. daye of Nouembre, began the parlyamente at westmynster. And the fyrste day of Decēbre folowyng / the duke of So∣merset whyche newly was commyn out of Normandy, was putte vnder arest / and his goodes by the cōmons were fowly dyspoyled & borne a waye out of the blak fryers. For at this sea¦son was moche people in the cytie by reason of the parlyament / & specially of lordes seruauntes, whyche were awaytynge vppon theyr lordes and maysters in great multytude. For ye shall vnderstande, ye temporall lord{is} in those dayes kepte other maner of housholdes & other maner of reteyn∣dour of housholde seruauntes and other nombre, ferre excedynge that the lordes at these dayes done. where¦fore at parlyament tymes and other great counsayles / the cytyes or tow∣nes where they assembled, were hou∣gely stuffed wyth people. Than after thys ryot thys commytted / vpon the morowe folowynge proclamacyon was made thorugh the cytye, that no man shulde spoyle or robbe vppon payne of dethe. And the same day at the stādarde in Chepe, was a mā be∣heded for brekyng of the sayd procla¦maciō. And thus begō rumour & ma∣lyce to spryng betwene ye lord{is} of the lāde. And specially ye duke of Somer¦set & other of ye quenes coūsayll were had ī great hatered, for ye losīg of Nor¦mādy / wherof ye chief citie of Roā was lost or gyue vp by apointemēt ye yere precedyng, as witnesseth Gaguynus
vpon cōdycyon that the duke of So∣merset with his wyfe and Englyssh sowyours, shulde with suche goodes as they myghte cary, departe frely from ye cytie. For whiche fre passage he shulde pay vnto ye Frenche kynge lvi.M. scutes which amoūte to .xiiii.M. marke sterlyng. And also he was bounde to delyuer into the Frenche kynges possession, all townes and ca¦stelles that at that daye were in the possessyon of Englysshemen within the duchy of Normandy. For perfor∣maunce of whiche couenauntes, the lorde Talbot was set for one of the pledges / and so by one Floquet be∣fore named all the sayd townes and castelles were by hym to the Frenche kynges vse receyued / Harflete onely excepted. wherof ye capytayne named Cyrson or Curson denyed the delyue¦ry / with assystence of one named syr Thomas Auryngham. The whiche in despyte of all the Frenche kynges power layde bothe by see and lande, helde it from the begynnynge of De∣cembre tyll the moneth of Ianuary / and than for lacke of rescouse gaue it vp by appoynment in ye begynnynge of this mayres yere. For this yel∣dynge vp of Normandy, moche dys∣pleasure grewe vnto the quene and her counceyll / in so moche yt the duke of yorke father vnto kyng Edwarde the .iiii. with many lordes with hym allyed, toke partye agayne hyr and her counsayll / so that mortall warre therof ensued as here after in this sto¦ry wall appere. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.li.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lii.   Mathewe Phylyp.   wyllyam Gregory skynner.   Anno .xxx.   Chrystofer warton.   IN thys .xxx. yere & .xvi. daye of February / the kynge beyng ac¦companied with the duke of Somer¦sette and many other lordes, toke theyr iournay towarde the marchys of walys / for so moche as he was cre¦dibly assertayned, yt the duke of york assysted with dyuers other lordes & mē of name, had in those partyes ga¦thered great strengthe of people, and with them was entrynge the lande / and so helde on his iourney towarde hym. But whan ye duke had wytyng of the kynges great power / he swa∣ued the way from the kynges hoste, and toke the way towarde London. And for he had receyued knowlege from the cytie, yt he myght not there be receyued to refresshe hym and his people / he therwith went ouer Kyng¦stone brydge and so into Kente / and there vpon an hethe called Brente heth, he pyght his felde. wherof the kynge houynge knowlege, sped hym after / and lastly came vnto Blacke hethe & there pyght his felde. where bothe hostes beynge thus enbatay∣led / meidaciō was made of peace by twene both hostes, For furtheraunce wherof / to the duke were sente ye bys∣shoppes of wynchester and of Ely, with the erles of Salysbury and of warwyke. To whome it was answe∣red by the sayd duke, yt he nor none of the company entended none hurte vnto the kynges persone, nor to any of his counsayll beynge louers of ye cōmon weale and of hym and of his lande / but his entēt & purpose was, to remoue from hym a fewe euyll dis¦posed persones, by whose meanes ye cōmon people was greuously opres∣sed, and the comynaltye greatly en∣pouerysshed. Of y• whiche he named
for principall the duke of Somerset. Of whome it was fynally agreed by the kyng▪ that he shulde be cōmytted to warde, there to abyde & answere vnto suche artycles as the duke of yorke wolde lay agayne hym. Upon whych promesse so made by the kyng the fyrst day of Marche beyng thurs¦daye, the duke brake vp hys felde, & so came vnto ye kynges tente / where cōtrary the former promyse made, he fāde the duke of Somerset as chefe awayter & next vnto the kyng. And thā was ye duke of yorke sence before to Londō, & was holden somedeale in maner as prisoner / & more streygh¦ter shuld haue ben kepte, ne had ben tydynges whych dayely sprāge, that syr Edwarde hys sonne thā erle of ye March, was commyng toward Lon¦don wyth a stronge power of welche men & March mē / whych fered so the quene and hyr counsayl, that ye duke was lyberted to go where he wolde. And so after he departed vnto hys owne countrey / and peace was dyssy¦muled wyth feyned loue for a whyle. Ann odn̄i. M.iiii.C.lii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.liii.   Rychard Lee.   Godfrey Feyldynge.   Anno .xxxi.   Rychard Alley.   IN thys .xxxi. yere / ye kynge helde a solempne feest at westmyster vpon the .xii. day of Cristmas / where he created .ii. erles the whyche were hys bretherne vpō the mothers syde quene Katheryne, that after the deth of kynge Henry the .v. was maryed vnto a knyghte of walys named Dwayne, the whych begate vpō hyr these forsayd .ii. sonnes. wherof that one thys sayd daye was created erle of Rychemoūt, which was named sir Edmonde / & the yōger called syr Ias¦per was creat the erle Penbroke. The whych lastly was created duke of Bedforde by our souerayne lorde kyng Hēry the .vii. & so dyed. And in Marche folowyng as witnesseth Ga¦guyne, was the towne of Herfewe wonne by the Frēchmen. And soone after the cytye of Bayons was gyuē vp by appoyntment / so that the soul∣dyours shuld leue theyr armoure be∣hynde them. And for euery woman there beyng was graūted an horse to ryde vpon / & to euery horse mā .x. scu¦tes to pay for theyr costes / & to euery fote man .v. wythout more by theym to be taken. And thys yere the kynge laye longe syke at Claryngdowne / & was in great ieopardye of hys lyfe. And in ye ende of thys mayres yere & begynnynge of the .xxxii. yere of the kyng, that is to meane vpon the day of trāslacyon of saynt Edwarde or ye xiii. day of Octobre / ye quene at west∣mynster was delyuered of a fayre prynce. For the whyche greate reioysyng and gladnesse was made in sundry places of Englande, and specyallye wythin the cyye of London / where of the expressemente of the cyrcum∣staunce wolde are longe leysoure to vtter. Thys prynce beynge wyth all honour and reuerence sacred and crystened, was named Edwarde / and grew after to perfight and good lye personage / and lastly of Edward the fourthe was slayne at Tewkys∣burye feelde, as after to you shall be shewed. whose noble mother susteyned nat a lytle dysclaunder & obloquy of the cōmon peple / sayeng that he was nat the naturall sonne of kynge Henry,
but chaunged in the cradell, to hyr greate dyshonour & heuynesse, which I ouer passe. Thys yere also whyche was the yere of grace .M.iiii C.liii. Mahumet thā prynce of Turkes, in the moneth of Iuny and .iiii. daye of the sayde mo∣neth beynge the thyrde yere of hys empyre or reygne / after .l. dayes of cō¦tynuall assaute by his innumerable multytude of Turkes to the cytye of Constātyne the noble with excedyng force and crueltye made and excercy¦sed,Constanty noble con∣quered of Turkes. wan and opteyned the domynyō and rule of the same / to the greate hynderaūce and shame of all crysten∣dome, and enhaūcynge of the power and myghte of the sayd Turkes. Of the excedynge noumber of men, wo∣men, and chyldren that in that cytye at that daye were slayne / I wyll not speke of, for the great dyuersyte that I haue seen of wryters. Amonge the whyche the emperour named Paleo¦golus with many other nobles of the cytye beynge taken on lyue, were thā behedyd / and many a preste and rely¦gyous man put vnto deth by sundry cruell turmentes. After whych great crueltye, wyth many other longe to reherce put in execucyon / a commaū∣dement passed from the sayde empe∣roure of Turkes, that all chyldren beynge aboue the age of .vi. yeres as well men as women kynde, shulde be streyght put vnto deth / the whyche after some wryters excedyd the nom∣ber of .iiii.M. Here for tydeousnesse and lamentable processe, whyche I myghte shewe in the rehersall of the abomynacyon of the moste damp∣nable and accursyd Turkys, by thē done vnto the crucyfyxe and other images of the chyrches and temples wythin the cytye, I cease. For payne¦full it were to rede, & more paynefull and sorowfull to here, that the fayth of Chryst shulde in so vyle maner be dyspysed. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.liii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.liiii. Draper. Iohn̄ walden.   Iohn̄ Norman.   Anno .xxxii.   Thomas Cooke.   IN thys .xxxii. yere, Iohn̄ Nor∣man foresayd vpō the morowe of Symonde and Iudys day, the ac¦customyd day whan the newe mayre vsyd yerely to tyde wyth greate pōpe vnto westminster to take his charge / this mayre fyrste of all mayres brake that auncyent and olde cōtynued cu∣stome, and was rowed thyther by wa¦ter / for the whiche ye watermen made of hym a roundell or songe to hys great prayse, yt whiche began, Rowe ye bote Norman rowe to thy lemmā, and so forth wyth a longe processe. ye haue in your remēbraunce, how I before in the .xxx. yere of thys kyng shewed to you of the apoyntement ta¦ken bytwene the sayd kyng & ye duke of yorke at Brent heth / which apoyn¦tement as before is sayde, was soone broken and set at nought. By reason wherof greate enuye and dyscencyon grewe bytwene ye kynge and dyuers of hys lordes / and most specyally by¦twene the quenes counseyll and the duke of yorke and hys blode. For all contrary ye kynges promyse, by mea∣nes of the quene, whiche than bare ye cure and charge of the land / the duke of Somerset was sette at large and made capytayne of Caleys, and had as greate rule about the kynge as he before dayes hadde. wherwyth not onely some of the nobles of the land
grudgyd, but also the comons / why∣che by hys counsayll and other than rulers as the fame went, susteyned many greuous imposycyons & char∣ges. Thys fyre, rancour, and enuye by ye space of .xvii. or .xviii. monethes smokynge and brennynge vnder co∣uert dyssymulacyon / now at this day brake out in greate and hote flamys of open warre and wrath / in so mych that the duke of yorke beynge in the Marches of walys, called to hym yt erlys of warwyke & of Salysbury wyth other many honorable knygh∣tes and esquyres, & gathered a strōge hoste of people / and than in the mo∣neth of Apryll toke his iourney to∣warde London, the kynge there thā beynge wyth a greate retynewe of lordes. wherof when the quene and the lordes were aduertysed, that the duke was comynge with so greate power / anone they cast in theyr myn¦des that it was to none of theyr pro∣fytes. And for yt in all possyble haste as they myght / they gathered by the authoryte of the kynges cōmyssyons such strength as they coulde haue / & entended to haue conueyed the kyng westwarde, and not to haue encoun∣tred the duke of yorke. And for the ex¦ecucyon of this purpose / the kynge accōpanyed with hym the dukes of Somerset & of Buckyngham, ye er∣lys of Stafforde & of Northumber∣lande, with the lorde Elyfforde, and other many noble men of the realme, departed vpon the .xx. daye of Maye from westmynster / and so helde hys iourney towarde saynte Albonys. Then the duke of yorke hauynge knowlege of the kynges departynge from London, costed the countrees / and came vnto the ende of saynt Al∣bons vppon the .xxiii. daye of Maye foresayde, then beyuge the thursday before whytsondaye. where whyle meanes of treaty and peace were co∣monyd vppon that one party / ye erle of warwyke wyth his Marche men entryd the towne vppon that other ende, & foughte egerly agayne ye kyn¦ges people / & so contynued the fyght a longe season. But in conclusyon ye vyctory fell to the duke of yorke and his party / in so myche that there was slayne that duke of Somerset, the erle of Northumberlande, and the lorde Clyfforde, wyth many other hono∣ble men of knyghtes & esquyers, whose names were tedious to write. After whyche victory thus opteyned by the duke / he with honour and re∣uerence vpon the morne folowynge conueyed the kynge agayne to Lon∣don, and there lodged hym in the bys¦shoppe of Londons palays. And soone thereupon was called a parly∣ament and holden at westmynster / by authoryte wherof ye duke of yorke was made protectour of Englande, the erle of Salesbury chauncellour, and the erle of warwyke capytayne of Caleys. And all suche persons as before were in authoryte and nere aboute the kynge, were clerely amo∣ued and putte by / and the quene and hyr counsayle that before dayes ru∣led, all vtterly sette a parte concer∣nynge the rule of the kynge and of ye lande. whych contynued for a whyle, as after shall apere. In this yere also as affermeth the Frenche cronycle, this mysery and vnkyndnesse thus reygnynge in En¦glande / the lord Talbot than beyng in Normandy, and in defendynge of the kynges Garysōs was beset with French men at a place named Castil¦lyon, and there strongely assayled. where after longe and cruell fyghte, he with hys sonne and to the nomber of .xl. men of name and .viii. hūdreth of other Englysshe soudyours, were myserably slayne / and many mo ta¦ken prysoners.
Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.liiii   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lv.   Iohn̄ Felde.   Stephan Forster.   Anno .xxxiii.   wyllyam Taylour.   IN thys .xxxiii. yere of Henry ye vi. certayne euyll dysposed per¦sones beynge sentuary men within saynt Martens the graunde, issued out of ye sayde place and frayed with some cytesyns, and of them hurt and maymed / and that done reentred the seintuary. wherewyth the commons beyng amoued, with certeyne rulers of the cytie entred the sayd sayntwa∣ry by force, and pulled out the occa∣syoners of the sayde fraye, and com∣mytted them to prysone. Of this ma∣ter by the deane of saynte Martens and suche as fauoured hym, was a greuous complaynt made vnto the kynge and hys counsayle, of ye mayre and the cytesyns. For dyscharge wherof the recorder of the citie wyth certeyne aldermen to hym assygned, were sente vnto the kyng then lyeng at ye castell of Egle in Herford shyre / where after the mater duly debated before ye kynges coūsayll, they were with letter of commendacyon retour¦nyd vnto the mayre, wyllynge hym to kepe the sayde persons sauely tyll the kynges comynge to London / at whyche season he entended to haue ye mater more clerely examyned. Anno domin .M.iiii.C.lv.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lvi. Grocer. Iohn̄ yonge.   wyllyam Marowe.   Anno .xxxiiii.   Thomas Dulgraue.   IN this yere & moneth of May / an Italyans seruaunt walked thorough Chepe wyth a dagger han¦gynge at hys gyrdell. wherof a mer∣cers seruaunt that before tyme had ben in Italy, and there chalengyd or punysshed for werynge of a lyke we∣pen, chalenged the straunger, & que∣stioned with him how he was so bold to bere such a warrely wepyn, consy∣derynge he was a straunger and out of his natyue countrey, & also know∣ynge that in his countre no straun∣ger shuld be suffered to bere any lyke wepyn. To whyche questyon suche answere was made by the Italyan, that the mercer toke his dagger frō hym, and brake it vppon his hede. The straūger thus beyng delte with complayned hym vnto the mayre / yt whiche vpon the morowe folowyng kepynge a court at the Guyldhall, sent for the yonge man / and after his answere made vnto this complaynt, by agrement of a full courte of alder men, sent the sayde mercer vnto pry∣son. And after thys court was fynys∣shed / for rumour that he harde of, to be amonge the seruauntes of ye mer∣cery, he with the two sheryffes toke his way homeward thorough chepe. But whan he was nere vnto thende of saint Lawrēce lane toward chepe / he was met wyth suche a multytude of mercers seruaūtes and other, that he coulde not passe for ought that he myghte do or speke, tyll he hadde cō∣trarye hys wylle and mynde, delyue∣red the yonge man, that before was commytted by hym and his brethern to warde / and so was he forthwith delyuered. Thys thus done / rumour sprange therof lyghtely aboute the town / in so mych that amonge many
cytesyns, it was construed that thys was done by the assent of the may∣sters and housholders of the merce∣ry, to ye entēt to haue the straungers punysshed, for so myche as they toke from them greate lyuynge by reason of theyr vtteraunce of cloth of golde and sylkes to the estates and lordes of the realme. But how so it was vn¦to men of honeste / to vacabōdes and other that loked for pylfry and ryf∣flynge, it was a great occasyon and styrynge. And that appered well / for the same afternone, sodeynly was as¦sembled a multytude of rascall and poore people of the cytye / whyche wythout hede or guyde ranne vnto certayne Italyans places, and spe∣cyally vnto the Florentynes, Lukes∣sys, and Uenicyans, and toke and spoyled what they in theyr places myghte fynde, and dyd greate hurte in sundry places, but moste in .iiii. houses stādyng in Bredstrete ward / wherof thre stode in saynt Barthelo∣mewys parysshe the lytle, and one in saynte Benettes parysshe, and moch more wolde haue done, had not bene the spedy ayde of the mayre and al∣dermen and worshypfull comoners of the cytye / whyche wyth all dyly∣gence resysted them, and of thē toke dyuers that robbed, and sent theym to Newgate. And fynally not wyth out shedyng of blode and maymyng of dyuers cytesyns, the rumour and people were appeasyd. whan the yon¦ge man begynner of all thys busy∣nesse sawe this inconuenyence ensue of hys wantonesse / were it by coun∣sayll or otherwyse feryng the sequell of the mater, yode streyght vnto west¦mynster / and there taried as a saynt∣wary man, tyll all the mater were en¦dyd. It was not longe after or the duke of Buckyngham with iustyces and other noble men, was sent down from the kynge into the cytye / & char¦ged the mayre by vertue of a com∣myssyō, yt an enquery shulde be made of this ryot. And so by vertue of the sayde cōmyssyon called an Oyer de∣termyner, a day was kepte at Guyld¦hall vpon the day of the moneth of / where the sayde daye sat for iudges ye mayre as the kynges lyeu∣tenaūt, ye duke of Buckyngham vpō his ryght hande, ye chyefe iustyce vp¦pon ye lefte hande, wyth many other men of name whyche I passe ouer. whyle the mayre and the sayd lordes were callyng of the panels of the en∣questes at ye Guyldhall / the other co∣moners of the cytie not beyng cōtent with the order, many of thē secretely armed them in theyr houses / and en¦tēded as the comon fame after went to haue rūge Bow bell, & so to haue reysed & gathered ye comynalty of the cytye / and by force to haue delyuered such persons as before for ye robbery were commytted to warde. But thys mater was so discretely handeled, by the coūsayll and labour of some dys¦crete comoners, whyche appeased theyr neyghbours in such wyse, that all this fyry haste was quenchyd, & came to none effecte / sauyng ye word was brought vnto the duke of Buc∣kyngham, that the comynalty of the cytye were in harnysse, & yf he taryed longe there, he with the other lordes shuld be in great ieopardy. with why¦che vntrew tidinges he beyng fered / hastely toke leue of ye mayre, & so de{per}ted vnto hys lodgyng, and so ceasyd ye enquery for ye day. Upō the morow, for so much as ye mayre had vnderstā¦dynge of ye secrete murmur / he com∣maūded the comō counsayle with all wardeyns of felysshyppys to apere vpō the morow at Guyldhall. where by the recorder in the kinges name, & the mayers as hys lyeutenaunt, was cōmaūded to euerych wardeins, that in that after none folowynge eyther
of them shuld assemble hys hoole fe∣lisshyp at theyr propre hallys / & there to gyue euery cytezyn streyght com∣maundemente, that euery man see & entende to see the kynges peace with in the cytye. And yf they fynde any person that maketh any reasonynge, wherby they myght cōceyue or espye that he fauoured any gatherynge of companyes, or the delyuerey of suche persones as were in warde / that the sayd wardeyns shuld with fayre wor¦des exorte hym to the beste / and with out sygne or token therof shewynge, secretly co bryng the name or names of hym or them vnto the mayre. By meane of whych polycy & good order the cytesyns were brought in suche a quyetnes, that after that day the fore∣sayd enquery was duely pursued / & iii. persones for the sayde ryot put in execucyon and hanged at tybourne. whereof .ii. after some wryters were seyntwarye men of saynt Martyns / and the thyrd was a shypmā or bote∣man. The quene wyth certeyne lordes whyche fauoured her partye / dysday¦ned sore the rule whyche the duke of yorke bare and other / & specyally for that that the sayde duke bare ye name of protectour, whych argued that the kynge was insuffycyent to gouerne the realme / whyche as she thoughte was a great dyshonour to the kynge and to all the realme. wherefore she made suche meanes, and wan by hyr polycy such frendshyp of diuerse of ye lordes bothe spyrytuall and tempo∣rall, that she caused ye duke of yorke to be dyscharged of hys protectour∣shyp, & the erle of Salysbury of hys chauncellershyp / which was cause of newe warre as after shall appere. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lvi.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lvii. Grocer. Iohn̄ Stewarde.   Thomas Canynges.   Anno .xxxv.   Raufe Uerney.   IN thys yere and begynnynge of the same / the quene suspec∣tynge the cytye of London, & demyd it to be more fauourable vnto ye duke of yorkes partye than hyrs / caused ye kynge to remoue from Lōdon vnto Couentre, and there helde hym a lōg season. In whyche tyme the duke of yorke was sent for thyther by pryuey seale, with also the erle of Salesbury & the erle of warwyke / where by co∣uyne of the quene they were all .iii. in great daunger. Howe be it by monys shemēt of theyr frendes they escaped. And soone after the sayd duke or erle went into the Northe / and the erle of warwyke wyth a goodly companye sayled vnto Calays. And shortly af∣ter were taken at Eryth wythin .xii. myles of London .iiii, wōderfull fys∣shys / whereof one was called Mors Maryne, the secōde a Sword fisshe, & the other .ii. were whalys / whyche after some exposytours were prono∣stycacyons of warre & trouble to en∣sue soon after. In this yere also was a great fray in the Northe countrey, betwene the lord Egremōde and the sonnes of the erle of Salysbury / and diuers mē maymed & slayen betwene them. But in the ende the lord Egre∣monde was taken / & howe it was by the dome of the kynges counsayll or otherwyse, the sayd lorde Egremōde was founden in suche defaute, that fynally he was condempned in great summes of money to be payed vnto the sayd erle of Salysbury. For lack of payment whereof, or of puttynge suertye for the same / the sayde lorde
Egremonde was cōmytted to New∣gyte. where after he had contynued a certayne of tyme, he brake the pry∣sone and escapyd with thre other pry¦soners, to the greate charge of the sheryffes. It was not longe after that dys∣cencyon & vnkyndnesse fell bytwene the yonge duke of Somerset and syr Iohn̄ Neuyll sonne vnto the erle of Salysbury, beynge than bothe lod∣ged wythin the cytye. wherof the mayre beyng warned ordeyned such watches and prouysyōs, that yf they had any thynge styrred, he was able to haue subdued bothe partyes, and to haue put thē in warde tyll he had knowē the kynges farther pleasure. wherof the frendes of bothe partyes beynge ware / laboured such meanes that they agreed them for that tyme. In thys also as testyfye the En∣glyshe cronycle and also the French / a nauye or flote of Frenchemen lan∣dyd at Sandwyche, and spoyled and robbed the towne, & excercysed there greate crueltye. Of whych flote was capytayne a Frenche knyght named after the French boke syr Guyllyain de Pomyers. And thys yere after the opynyon of dyuers wryters / began in a cytye of Almayne named Ma∣gounce, the crafte of enprentynge of bokes / whyche sen that tyme hath had wonderfull encreace, as expery∣ence at thys daye proueth. In this yere also the prysoners of Newgate by neglygence of theyr kepers brake out of theyr wardes, and toke the le∣dys of the towre, and it defendyd a longe whyle agayne the sheryffes & all theyr offycers / in so myche that they were forced to call more ayde of the cytesyns of the cytye / by whose ayde they lastly subdued them, and put ye sayd prysoners in more streygh¦ter kepyng. Cronica cronicarū sayth that about thys tyme was suche an erthquake in ye prouynce of Naples, that byforce therof there were perys∣shed ouer .xl.M. crysten soulys. Of the abouesayde spoylynge of Sand∣wyche speketh Polycronycon / and sayeth that syr Pyers de Bresy senes shall of Normandy, wyth the ca∣pytayne of Depe and many other ca¦pytaynes of Fraunce, came wyth a greate & stronge nauy into the Dow¦nys by nyght / and vpon the morowe came certeyne of them vnto Sand∣wych, and there spoyled and robbed the towne, and toke with them great prayes and many ryche prysoners / wherby or by whych sayenge appe∣reth some dyuersyte bytwene the En¦glysshe wryters and the Frenche. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lviii. Mercer. wyllyam Edwarde.   Godfrey Boleyn.   Anno .xxxvi.   Thomas Reyner.   IN thys yere & the thyrde daye of December, Reynolde Pe∣coke than beynge bysshoppe of Chy∣chester / at Lambyth by the archebys∣shop and by a Cot of diuyns, was ab¦iured for an heretyke and hys bokes after brent at Poulys crosse / & hym selfe kepte in mewe euer whyle he ly∣ued after. And soone after, for to ap∣pease thys rancoure and malyce by∣twene the quene and the tother lor∣der / a daye of metynge was appoyn∣ted by the kyng at London, whyther the duke of yorke wyth the other lor∣des were commaunded to come by a certayne daye. In obeynge of which commaundement, the duke of yorke came vnto London the .xxvi. daye of
Ianuary, and was lodged at Bay∣nardes castell. And before hym the xv. day of Ianuary came the erle of Salysbury to Londō, & was lodged at hys place called the Erber. And soone after came vnto Lōdon the du¦kes of Somerset & of Exetyr / & were lodged bothe without temple Barre. And in lykewyse the erle of Northū∣berlande, the lorde Egremonde, & the yōge lorde Clyfforde, came vnto the cytye, and were lodged in the subbar¦bes of the same. And the .xiiii. daye of February came the erle of warwyke from Calays, wyth a great bande of men all arayed in rede iakettes with whyte ragged staues vpon theym / & was lodged at ye gray freres. And last¦ly, that is to saye the .xvii. daye of Marche / the kyng & the quene wyth a great retynewe came vnto Londō / and were lodged in the bysshoppe of Londōs palays. And ye shall vnder∣stāde that wyth these foresayd lordes came greate companyes of mē, in so moche that som had .vi.C. some .v.C & the leest .iiii.C. wherfore the mayre,A good . for so longe as the kyng & the lordes lay thus in the citie, had dayly in har¦nesse .v.M. cytesyns / and rode dayly about the citie & subbarbes of ye same to se the kynges peace were kept. And nyghtly prouyded for .ii.M. mē in harnesse, to gyue attendaūce vpon iii. aldermen / and they to kepe the nyghte watche tyll .vii. of the clocke vppon the morowe, tyll the day wat∣che were assembled. By reason whereof, good ordre and rule was kepte, and no man so hardy ones to attempte the brekynge of the kyn∣ges peace. Durynge thys watche, a great counsayl was holdē by ye kyng and hys lordes. By reason wherof, a dyssymuled vnyte and concorde betwene them was concluded. In token and for ioy wherof, the king, the quene, and all ye sayd lordes, vpon out Lady day an∣nuciacion in lent at Poulys wente solemply in processyon / and soone af¦ter euery lorde departed where hys pleasure was. And in the moneth of folowynge, was a greate fray in flete strete, betwene the mē of courte and the inhabytauntes of the sayd strete / in whyche fray a gentyl∣man beyng ye quenes attourney was slayne. Vpon the thursdaye in whytson∣weke, the duke of Somerset with An¦tony Ryuers and other .iiii, kepte iu∣stes of peace before the quene within the towre of London, agayne thre es∣quyers of the quenes / and in lyke ma∣ner at Grenewych the sonday folow∣ynge. And vpon Trynyty sonday or the monday folowynge, certayne shyppes apperteynyng vnto the erle of warwyke mette wyth a floote of Spanyardes / and after long & cruel fyghte, toke .vi. of theym laden wyth iron and other marchaundyse / and drowned and chased to the noumber of .xxvi, nat without shedyng of blod on bothe partyes / for of the Englysh¦men were slayne an .C. and many mo wounded and sore hurt. In thys yere after some auctours, a marchaunte of Brystowe named Sturmyn, whyche wyth hys shyppe had trauayled in dyuers partyes of Leuaunte and other partyes of the Gest, for so moche as the same ranne vpon hym that he had gotten grene pepyr and other specys to haue sette and sowen in Englande as the fame wente / therefore the Ianuayes way∣ted hym vppon the see, and spoylyd hys shyppe and other. But this is full lyke to be vntrew that the Ianuayes shulde spoyle hym for any suche cause / for there is no nacyon in Englande that de∣lyth so lytle wyth spycys. But were it for thys cause or other,
trouth it is that by that nacyō an of fēce was done / for the whyche all the marchauntes Ianuayes in London were arested and cōmytted to ye flete, tyll they had found en suffycyent suer tye to answere to the premysses. And fynally for the harmys whyche theyr nacyon had done to the sayde Stur∣myn & to thys realme / vi.M. marke was sette to theyr payne to paye. But howe it was payed no mencyon I fynde. In thys yere also was made an ordynaunce by auctorytie of ye kynge and hys counsayll, for the orderynge of the seyntwary men wythin saynte Martyns the graunde. whereof the artycles are at length sette oute in ye boke of. K. wythin the chaumbre of guylde hall in the leefe .CC.xcix. wherof the execucyon of obseruynge were necessary to be vsed / but more pyte it is, fewe poyntes of it ben exer¦cysed. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lix. Draper. Rafe Iosselyn.   Thomas Scotte.   Anno .xxxvii.   Rycharde Nedeham.   THys yere aboute the feeste of Candelmasse, the forsayd dis∣symulyd loueday hāgyng by a small threde, betwene the quene and yt fore named lordes, expressed in the prece∣dynge yere / the kynge and many lor∣des thanne beynge at westmynster, a stray happened to fall betwene a ser∣uaunt of the kynges & a seruaunt of the erles of warwyke / the which hurt the kynges seruaunt & after escaped. wherefore the kynges other meynial seruauntes seynge they myghte nat be auenged vpō the partye that thus had hurt theyr felowe / as the sayde erle of warwyke was commynge frō the coūsayll, & was goynge towarde hys barge, the kynges seruaūtes ca∣me vnwarely vppon hym, so rabbys∣shely that the cookys with theyr spyt¦tys & other offycers wyth other we∣pyns, came runnyng as madde men, entendynge to haue slayne hym, so yt he escaped wyth greate daunger & to¦ke hys barge / & so in all haste rowed to London, nat wythout great may∣mys & hurtys receyued by many of hys seruauntes. For thys the old rā∣cour & malyce whyche neuer was cle¦rely cured, anon begā to breke oute / in so moche that the quenes coūsayll wolde haue had the sayd erle arested and committed vnto the towre. wher¦fore he shortly after departed toward warwyke / and by polycy purchased soone after a commyssiō of the kyng, and so yode or sayled vnto Calays. Thanne encreased thys olde malyce more & more / in so moche that where the quene and hyr coūsayll sawe that they myght nat be auenged vppō the erle, that so vnto Calays was depar¦ted / than they malygned agayne hys father the erle of Salysbury, & ima∣gened how he myght be brought out of lyfe. And in processe of tyme after, as he was rydynge towarde Salys∣bury, or after som from hys lodgyng towarde London / the lorde Audeley wyth a strōg company was assygned to mete wyth hym, & as prysoner to bryng hym vnto Londō. whereof the sayde erle beynge warned, gathered vnto hym the mo men / & kepyng hys iourney, mette wyth the sayd lord Au¦deley at a place called Bloreheth / where both companyes ran together & had there a strōge by keryng. wher∣of in the ende the erle was vyctoure, and slewe there the lorde Audeley &
many of hys retynew. At thys skyr∣mys she were the .ii. sonnes of the sayd erle sore woūded, named sir Thomas and syr Iohn̄ / the whyche shortly af∣ter as they were goynge homeward, were by some of the quenys party ta∣ken, & as prysoners sente vnto Che∣stry. whan thys was knowen vnto ye duke of yorke and to the other lordes of hys party / they knewe & under∣stode that yf they {pro}uyded nat shortly for remedy for them selfe, they shulde all be destroyed. And for that they by one assent gathered to them a strōge hoste of men, as of Marche men and other / & in the moneth of Octobre, yt was in the begynnyng of the .xxxviii yere of the reygne of kynge Henry, & the later ende of thys mayres yere, they drewe them towarde the kynge / to the entent to remoue frō hym such persones as they thought were ene∣myes vnto the commō weale of En∣glande. But the quene and hyr coun¦sayll heryng of the entent & strength of these lordes, caused the kyng in all haste to sende forthe cōmyssyons to gather the people / so that in shorte whyle the kyng was strongely accōpanyed, & so spedde hym vppon hys iourney to warde the duke of yorke & hys company. wherof heryng ye sayd duke, thā beyng wyth hys peple nere vnto the towne of Ludlowe / pyghte there a sure & strōge feelde, that none of hys foes myght vppon any parte entre. where he so lyeng, came to him frome Calays the erle of warwyke wyth a stronge bande of mē / amonge the whyche was Andrewe Trollop and many other of ye best souldiours of Calays. The duke thus kepynge hys feelde vpon that one party, and the kyng wyth hys people vpon that other / vpon the nyght precedyng the daye that bothe hostes shulde haue met / the forenamed Andrewe Trol∣loppe wyth all the chefe soudyours of Calays, secretly departed frome ye dukes hoste, and wente vnto the kyn¦ges, where they were ioyously recey∣ued. whā thys thynge to the duke and the other lordes was asserteyned they were therewhyth sore dysmayed / and specyally for the sayd lordes had to the sayd Andrew shewed the hoole of theyr ententes, whych thanne they knewe well shuld be clerelye dyscoue¦red vnto theyr enemyes. wherfore af∣ter coūsayll for a remedye taken / they concluded to flee, & to leue the feelde standyng as they had ben presente and styll abydyng. And so inconty∣nently the sayd duke wyth hys twoo sonnes & a few other persones fledde towarde walys / and from thens pas∣sed sauely into Irelande. And the erles of Salysbury, of Marche, & of warwyke, and other, wyth a secrete company also depar∣ted and toke the waye into Deuon∣shyre / where a squyer named Iohan Dynham (whyche after was a lorde and hyghe tresourer of Englande, & so lastlye in Henry the .vii. dayes and xvi. yere of hys reygne dyed) bought a shyp for a .C. & .x. markes or a leuen score nobles / and in the same shyppe the sayd lordes went, & so sayled into Gerneley. And whā they had a seasō there soiourned and refresshed them selfe / they departed thens, as in the begynnyng of the nexte mayres yere shalbe clerely shewed. Uppon the morowe whan all thys couyne was knowen to the kynge and the lordes vpon hys party / there was sendynge and rūnynge wyth all spede towarde euery cooste to take these lordes / but none myght be foūde. And forthwith the kyng rode vnto Ludlowe, & dys∣poyled the towne and castell, & sente the duchesse of yorke wyth hyr chyl∣dren vnto the duchesse of Buckyn∣ghā hyr syster / where she rested lōge after.
Anno. dn̄i. M.CCCC.lix.   Anno dn̄i. M.CCCC.lx. Fysshemonger. Hohn̄ Plummer.   wyllyam Hulyn.   Anno .xxxviii.   Iohn̄ Stocker.   THys yere that is to meane vp¦pon the fryday next ensuyng Alhalowen day, after the sayde erles of Salysbury, of Marche, & of war∣wyke had as before is said refresshed them in the ile of Gernesey / they vpō the fryday foresayd lāded at Calays / and there were at a posterne by theyr frēdes ioyously receyued. Thā anon vpon this these foresayd lordes were proclaymed rebellys & traytours / & the yonge duke of Somerset was made capitayne of Calays. wherfore in all haste he made purueyaunce & saylyd thyther to take possessyon of ye town. But he fayled of hys purpose / for the foresayde erles there beynge, kept so ye towne, that there he myght haue no rule / natwythstandyng that he shewed the kynges letter patētys, wyth many other strayght commaū∣dementes of the kynge. For whyche cause the sayd duke yode vnto Guy∣nys, and there helde hym for a seasō. And anone as the sayd duke was lā∣ded / some of the shypmen, which had brought hym thyther, for good wyll that they owed vnto the erle of war∣wyke cōueyed theyr shippes streyght into Calays hauen, & brought wyth them certayne persones named Ge∣nyn Fenbyll, Iohn̄ Felowe, Kayles and Purser, whyche were enemyes vnto the sayde erle of warwyke / the whyche were presented vnto the lor∣des, and soone after wythin the sayd towne of Calays they were beheded. Thys rumoure thus contynuynge / dayly came vnto these lordes greate socoure out of Englāde. And vppon that other partye the duke as before is sayd lyeng in the castel of Guynes gate vnto hym ayde and strengthe of souldyours, & made out and skyr∣mysshed wyth them of Calays many and sundry tymes. In whych assau∣tes many mē were slayen & hurte vp∣pon both partyes / but moste wekyd the dukes partye. For all be that the lordes lost many men / yet they dayly came so thycke to them out of dyuers partyes of Englāde, that theyr losse was nat espyed / so that they wantyd no mē, but money to maynteyn̄ theyr dayly charge with. For remedy wher of they shyfted wyth the staple of Ca∣lays for .xviii.M.li. whyche summes of money whan they had receyued, ye sayd lordes of one assent made ouer ye forenamed mayster Iohn̄ Dynham wyth a stronge company / & sent hym vnto Sandwyche to wynne ye kyn¦ges nauye than there lyenge, and other thynges for theyr nedes neces∣sary. The whyche sped hym in suche wyse, that he toke the lord Ryuers in hys bedde, & wanne the town, & toke the lord Scalys sonne vnto the sayd lord Riuers, with other ryche prayes and after tooke of the kynges nauy what shyppes them lyked, and after retourned vnto Calays / nat without consent & agremēt of many of ye mari¦ners, whych owyd theyr synguler fa¦uours vnto the erle of warwyke. In thys iourney was the sayde Iohan Dynham sore hurt, that he was may med vpon the legge, & haltyd whyle he lyued after. Than after this iour∣ney thus acheuyd / the sayd lordes by tayled and māned the sayd shyppes / & sent wyth them as chefe capytayne the erle of warwyke into Irelande, to speke wyth the duke of yorke, and to haue hys counsayll for maters cō¦cerning theyr charge, as reentre into
this lande and other. where whā he had happelye sped hys nedys, he re∣tourned towarde Calays, bryngyng wyth hym hys mother the coūtesse of Salysbury / & also kepte hys course tyll he came into the west coūtrey. where at that tyme was the duke of Gretyr as admyrall of the see, wyth a competēt noūber of shyppes well mā¦ned / in so moche that the erle of war∣wyke prouyded to haue gyuen ba∣tayll vnto he sayd duke, yf he hadde made any coūtenaunce toward him. But the duke harde suche murmure & speche amōge hys owne company, whych foūded vnto the erle of war∣wykes fauoure, that he thoughte it was more vnto hys profyte to suffre hym to passe than to fight with him. But were it for thys cause or for o∣ther which ye commō fame rūneth vp¦pō which were lōge to wryte / certayn & trouth it is that the sayd erle passed wythout fyghte, & came in sauete to Calays. In thys passe tyme a parlia¦ment or great coūsayll was holdē at Couentre. By auctoryte whereof the duke of yorke and all the other fore∣sayde lordes wyth many other were attaynted, and theyr lādes & goodes seased to the kynges vse. And for the more surer defēce that they shuld nat efte lande in Kēt, prouisiō was made to defende the hauēs & portys vppon the sees syde. And at Sandwyche was ordeyned a new strēgthe wyth a capitayn named syr Symōde Moū∣forde. And ouer thys prouision was ordeyned, that no marchaūt passyng into the costys of Flaūders, shulde passe or go by Calays, for fere that any shuld come to ye ayde of the sayd lordes. But thys prouysyon nat¦wythstandyng / comfort to them was sent dayly out of Englād. Than these lordes herynge of all thys prouysyon made vppō the sees syde to wythstāde theyr lādynge, sent out an other company vnto Sāde∣wyche / the whych there skyrmysshed wyth the sayd syr Symōde Mount∣forde, & in the ende toke hym & brou∣ghte hym vnto Ryse Banke, & there smote of hys hede. The foresayd lor∣des than cōsyderynge the strengthe, whych they had wyth them, and ma∣nyfolde frendes & hartys, which they had in sundry places of Englād / con¦dyscēded for to sayle into Englande, & so to bryng about theyr entēt & pur¦pose. whych was as the cōmon fame went, to put a parte frome the kynge all suche persones as were enemyes to the cōmon weale of the lāde. And thys to bryng aboute, after they had set the towne of Calays in an order & sure kepyng / they toke shyppynge, & so sayled into Englāde, & landed at Douer / and from thēs helde on theyr iourney thorughe Kente, so that they came to Londō the .ii. daye of Iuly. And after they had there refresshed theym and theyr people / they depar∣ted thense, & sped theym towarde the kynge, which at ye same tyme of theyr lādynge was at Couentry, and there gathered his people / & so came vnto  Northampton where he pyght hys felde. wherof the sayd lordes beynge enfourmed, sped them thytherward / so that vpō the .ix. day of Iuly, bothe hostys there mette & foughte there a cruell batayll. But after long fyght, the victory fell vnto the erle of Sa∣lysbury and the other lordes vpō his partye / & the kynges hoste was spar¦cled & chased, & many of hys noble men slayen. Amōge the whyche was the duke of Buckynghan, the erle of Shrowsbury, ye vycoūt Beaumoūd, the lorde Egremōde, wyth many o∣ther knyghtes and esquyers / and the kyng taken in the felde. After whych victory thus by these lordes optey∣ned / they in goodly haste after retour¦ned vnto Londō, and broughte wyth
them the kynge kepyng hys estate, & lodged hym in the bysshop of Londō palays. And after spedye knowelege sent of all the premysses vnto ye duke of yorke yet beyng in Irelāde / a par∣lyamēt in the name of the kyng was than called & holden at westmynster. Durynge whych parlyament ye duke of yorke came vnto westmynster vpō the frydaye before saynte Edwardes day or the .x. day of October, and lod¦ged hym in the kynges palays. wher¦of anone arose a noyse thorugh the cytye, that kynge Henry shuld be de∣posed, & the duke of yorke shulde be kynge. Uppō thys this parlyamente thus contynuynge, the duke came one daye into the parlyament chaum¦ber / & there boldely beyng the lordes present, sette hym downe in the kyn∣ges sete / & so there sittynge, made a pretence and clayme vnto the crown, affermyng it to be hys ryghtfull en∣herytaūce / & had there certayn bolde wordes in iustyfyenge of the same / wherewyth all the lordes presente were greatly dysmayed. For thys, great & many opynions were moued among the lordes. Howe be it aswell dyuers of hys frendes as other, were of the mynde that he shuld nat be ad∣mytted for kynge, duryng the lyfe of kyng Henry. For appeasynge wher∣of, many great coūsayles were kepte aswell at the blacke freres as at west¦mynster. In all whych tyme and season the quene wyth suche lordes as were of hyr affynyte, helde them in the north coūtrey / & assembled to theym greate strengthe in the kynges name, to the ende to subdue as she sayde the kyn∣ges rebelles and enemyes. Thus contynuynge thys vnkyndenesse be∣twene the kynge and the duke / all be it that at that season bothe the kynge and he were bothe lodged within the palays of westmynster / yet wolde he natte for prayer nor instaunce ones bysyte the kynge, nor see hym, tyll the counsayll were concluded vppon some fynall ende concernyug thys greate matter / the whyche so continued the full terme of this may¦res yere. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lx.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxi. Grocer. Rycharde Flemynge.   Rycharde Lee.   Anno .xxxix.   Iohn̄ Lambarde.   THys yere whyche was in the begynnynge of the .xxxlx. yere of kyng Henryes reygne, that is to meane vpō the euyn of all sayntes or the laste day of October / it was con∣dyscended by the lordes spyrytuall & temporall, & by the hole auctoryte of the sayd parliament, that kyng Hēry shuld cōtynue & reygne as kynge du¦rynge hys naturall lyfe / & after hys deth hys sonne prynce Edwarde to be sette a parte, & the duke of yorke & hys heyres to be kynges / & inconty∣nentely the duke to be admytted as protectour and regēt of the lāde. And yf at any tyme after the kynge of hys owne free wyll and mynde were dys∣posed to resygne & gyue vp the rule of the lāde, that thā he shulde resigne vnto the duke yf he than lyued, and to none other / & to hys heyres after hys dayes / wyth many other maters and cōuencyōs whyche were tedious to wryte. All whyche conclusyons as than by mannes wytte myght be assuryd for the parfourmaunce of theym whanne tyme requyred par∣fyghted / the kynge wyth the duke &
many other lordes thā there present, came that nyght to Poulys, & there harde euynsong / & vppon the morow came thyther agayn to masse, where the kyng yode in procession crowned wyth great royalte / & so lay styll in ye bysshoppes palays a season after. And vppon the saterdaye folowynge beyng the .ix. daye of Nouember / the duke was proclaymed throughe the cytye heyre paraunt vnto the crowne of Englāde, & all hys progeny after hym. Than for as moche as quene Margarete accompanyed with price Edwarde hyr sonn̄, the dukes of So¦merset & of Excetyr, and diuers other lordes, helde hyr in the northe as a∣boue is sayd, and wolde nat come at the kynges sendyng for / therefore it was agreed by the lordes thā at Lon¦don presence, that the duke of yorke shulde take wyth hym the erle of Sa¦lysbury wyth a certayne people, to fetche in the sayde quene & lordes a∣bouesayde. The whyche duke & erle departed from Londō with theyr peo¦ple vpon the secōde daye of Decem∣ber / & so spedde theym northwarde. wherof the quene with hyr lordes be∣ynge ware, and hauyng wyth theym a greate strength of Northernemen / mette wyth the duke of yorke vppon the .xxx. daye of December nere vnto a towne in the northe called wakelfeld were betwene them was foughten a sharpe fyght.The  In the whych the duke of yorke was slayne wyth hys sonne called erle of Rutlande, and syr Tho¦mas Neuyll, sonne vnto the erle of Salysbury, wyth many other / and the erle of Salysbury was there ta∣ken on lyue wyth dyuerse other. whanne the lordes vppon the que∣nes partye had gotten thys vyctory / anone they sente theyr prysoners vnto Pountfreyte, the whyche were after there behedyd / that is to meane the erle of Salysbury, a man of Lon¦don named Iohn̄ Narowe, and an o∣ther capytayne named Hāson / whose heddes were sente vnto yorke / and there sette vppon the gates. And whan the quene hadde optey¦nyd thys vyctory / she wyth her rety∣newe drewe toward London / where at that tyme duryng this troublous season, greate watchys were kepte dayely and nyghtelye / and dyuerse opynions were amonge the citesyns. For the mayre and many of the chefe comoners helde vppon the quenes partye / but the comynaltie was with the duke of yorke & hys affynyte. whanne tydynges were broughte vnto the cytye of the commynge of the quene wyth so greate an hoste of Northernemen / anone suche as were of the contrary partye broughte vp a noyse thoroughe the cytye, that she brought those Northernemen to the entente to ryfle and spoyle the citye, where thoroughe she was encreasyd of enemyes. But what so hyr en∣tente was / she wyth hyr people helde on hyr waye tyll she came to saynte Albons. In the whyche meane tyme the erle of warwyke and the duke of Northfolke, whyche by the duke of yorke were assygned to gyue atten∣daunce vppon the kynge / by consent of the kynge, gathered vnto theym strengthe of knyghtes, and mette wyth the quenes hoste at saynt The ba∣tall of sate Al∣bons: Al∣bons foresayde / where betwene them a strōge fyght was foughten vppon shroue tuysday in the mornyng. At yt whych the duke of Northfolke & the sayd erle in the endewere chased / and kyng Henry takē efte vpō the felde & brought vnto the quene. And ye same after noone after some wryters, he made his sonn̄ price Edward knyght whych than was of the age of .viii. ye¦res / wyth other to the noubre of .xxx. persones.
whan quene Margaret was thus commen agayne to hyr aboue / anon she sente vnto the mayre of London, wyllyng & commaundynge hym in ye kynges name that he shuld in all spe¦dy wyse sende to saynt Albonys cer∣tayne cartes wyth lentyn stuffe for ye vytaylyng of her hoste. whyche com∣maundement the mayre obeyed / and wyth great dylygence made prouy∣syon for the sayd vytayll / and sent it in cartys towarde Crepylgate for to haue passed to the quene. where whā it was cōmyn / the commons many there beynge, whych had harde other tydynges of the erle of Marche as af¦ter shalbe shewed / of one mynde with stode the passage of the sayd cartes, & sayde it was nat behouefull to fede theyr enemyes, whyche entended the robbyng of the cytye. And nat wyth∣standynge that the mayre wyth hys bretherne exorted the people in theyr best maner, shewyng to theym many great daungers whyche was lyke to ensue to the cytye yf the sayd dytayll went nat forthe / yet myghte he nat tourne them from theyr obstynat er∣rour but for a cōclusyon was fayne to apoynt the recorder & wyth hym a certayne of aldermē to ryde vnto the kynges coūsayll to Barnet, and to make requeste vnto theym that the Northē mē myght be retorned home for fere of robbynge of the cytye / and ouerthys other secrete frendes were made vnto the quenes grace, to be good & gracyouse vnto the cytye. Duryng whych treaty / dyuers cyte∣syns auoyded the cytye and lande. Amōge the whych Phylip Malpas, whych as before is shewed in the .xx. and .viii. yere of thys kynge, was rob¦bed of Iacke Cade / whyche Malpas & other was mette vpō the see wyth a Frēchman named Columpne, and of hym takē prysoner / & after payed .iiii M. marke for hys raunsome. Thus passyng the tyme / ye tydynges which before were secrete, now were blowē abrode / and openly was tolde that ye erles of Marche & of warwyke, were mette at Cottyswolde, and had gathe¦red vnto thē great strength of Mar∣chemen, & were wel spedde vpō theyr waye to warde London. For knowe∣lege whereof, the kynge and ye quene wyth theyr hoste were retourned Northwarde. But or they departyd from saint Albonis / there was behe∣ded the lord Bonuyle & syr Thomas Teryll knyghet, whyche were taken in the forenamed felde. Thā the du∣chesse of yorke beyng at Lōdon, he∣rynge the losse of thys felde / sent hyr two yonger sonnes, that is to meane George whyche after was duke of Clarēce, and Rychard that after was duke of Glouceter, into Utrych in Almayne / where they remayned a whyle. Thā the foresayd erles of March and of warwyke sped them towarde Londō, in suche wyse that they came thydervpon the thursday in the fyrst weke of lent. To whome resorted all the gētylmen for the more partye of the south & eest partye of Englād. And in thys whyle that they thus re∣sted at London / a great coūsayl was called of all lordes spyrytuall & tem∣porall that than were there aboute. By the whyche fynally after many argumentes made, for so mothe as kynge Henry contrary hys honoure and promysse at the last parlyament made and assured, and also for that y• he was reputed vnable and insuffy∣cyent to rule the realme / was than by theyr assentes deposed and dyschar∣ged of all kyngely honoure and re∣gally. And incontinently by aucto¦ryte of the sayde counsayll and agre∣ment of the commons there present / Edwarde the eldeste sonne vnto the duke of yorke, thā was there elected
and then chosen for kynge of Eng∣lande. After whyche eleccyon and ad¦myssyon / the sayde erle of Marche gyuyng lawde and preyse vnto god, vpō the .iiii. day of Marche accompa¦nyed wyth all the foresayde lordes & multytude of comons, was cōueyed vnto westminster / and there toke pos¦sessyon of the realme of Englāde. And syttynge in hys astate royall in the great halle of the same wyth hys sceptre in hand / a question was axed of the people than presente, yf they wolde admytte hym for theyr kynge & soueraygne lord / the whyche wyth one voyce cryed, ye ye. And thā after ye accustumed vse to kynges to swere and after the othe takē / he went into the abbey, where he was of the abbot & munkys mette wyth processyon, & conueyed vnto saint Edwardes shry¦ne, and there offered as kyng & that done receyued homage & feaute of all suche lordes as there than were pre∣sent. And vpō ye morowe folowynge, were proclamacyōs made in accusto¦mat places of the cytye, in the name of Edwarde the .iiii. thanne kynge of Englande. Vpō whych day the kyng came vnto the palays at Poulys, & there dyned / and there restyd hym a season, in makynge prouysyon to go Northwarde for to subdue hys ene∣myes. Than vpon the saterdaye folowynge beyng the daye of Marche / the erle of warwyke with a great puyssaunce of people depar∣ted oute of London northwarde. And vppon wednysdaye folowynge the kynges fotemen wente towarde the same iourney. And vppon frydaye nexte folow∣ynge, the kynge tooke hys voyage through the cytye wyth a great hāde of men / and so rode forth at Bysshop pesgate. In whych selfe same day, whyche was the .xii. daye of Marche / a grocer of London namyd walter walker, for offence by hym done a∣gayne the kynge, was behedded in Smythfelde. But hys wyfe, whyche after was maryed to Iohn̄ Norlāde grocer & lastely alderman / had suche frendes aboute the kynge, that hyr goodes were nat forfayted to ye kyn∣ges vse. The kyng than so holdyng his iourney, mette wyth his enemies at a vyllage .ix. myles on thys halfe yorke called Towtō or Shyreborn / and vpon Palme sonday gaue vnto theym batayll. The whyche was so cruell, yt in the felde and chace were slayne vppō .xxx. thousande mē ouer the men of name / of the whyche here after some ensue. That is to saye the erle of Northumberlande, the erle of westmerlande, the lorde Clyfforde, ye lorde Eyromonde, syr Iohn̄ syr Andrewe Trollop, and other to the noumber of .xi. or mo. And among other at the same felde was taken the erle of Deuonshyre, & after the erle of wylshyre / whych said erle of Deuonshyre was sente vnto yorke, and there after beheded. Hēry than whyche lately was kynge, with the quene & theyr sonne syr Edward, the duke of Somerset, the lord Rose and other, beynge than at yorke / he∣rynge of the ouerthrowe of theyr peo¦ple, and greate losse of theyr men, in all haste fledde towarde Scotlande. And vppon the morowe folowynge, the kynge wyth moche of hys people entred into yorke, and there held hys Easter tyde. And vpon Easter euyn, tydynges were broughte vnto Lon∣don of the wynnynge of thys felde. wherfore at Poulys Te deum was songē wyth greate solempnyte, & so thorugh the cytye in all paryssh chur¦ches. And thus thys goostly man kynge Hēry lost all, whā he had reyg¦ned ful .xxxviii. yeres .vi. monethes & odde days. And ye noble & moste boū∣teous princesse quene Margarete
of whome many an vntrew surmyse was imagened & tolde / was fayne to flye comfortlesse, and lost all that she had in Englāde for euer. whan that kyng Edwarde with greate solemp∣nyte had holden the feest of Easter at yorke / he than remoued to Durham. And after hys busynesse there fynys∣shed, he retourned agayne South∣warde / & lefte in those partyes ye erle of warwyke to se the rule & guydyng of that countrey. Than the kyng coosted and vysy¦ted the coūtreys Southwarde & Eest¦warde / that about the begynnyng of the moneth of Iuny he came vnto hys manour of shene now called Ry∣chemoūt. In all whych pastyme pur¦ueyaūce was made for the kynges co¦ronacyō. In accōplysshyng whereof the kyng vpō the .xxvii. day of Iuny beyng fryday, departed from ye sayde manour & rode vnto the towre of Lōdon. Upō whome gaue attēdaunce yt mayre & hys bretherne all cladde in scarlet, and to the noumbre of .iiii.C. cōmoners well horsed & cladde all in grene. And vpon the morne beynge saterday / he made there .xxviii. knigh¦tes of the bath, & after that .iiii. moo. And the same after noone he was wyth all honour cōueyed to westmin¦ster / the sayd .xxxii. knyghtes rydyng before hym in blewe gownes & hoo∣des vpon theyr shulders lyke to pre∣stes, with many other goodly and ho¦nourable ceremonyes yt whych were longe to reherse in due order. Corona∣cyon of Ed¦warde the fourth. And vpon the morne beyng sonday & sait Peters day / he was wyth great tryū¦phe of the archebysshop of Caunter∣bury crowned & enoynted before the hygh aulter of saynt Peters churche of westmynster. And after thys solēp¦nysacyon of the crownyng of ye kyng wyth also the sumptuous & honora∣ble feest holdē in westminster hall was fynysshed / the kynge soone after crea¦ted George hys brother duke of Cla¦rence. And in the moneth of Iuly folow¦ynge at the stādarde in chepe, ye hāde of a seruaunte of the kynges called Iohn̄ Dauy was stryken of / for that he had stryken a man wythin the pa∣lays of westmynster. Francia. ¶Carolus .viii CArolus or Charles the .vii. of ye name after the accompte of this boke, or the vii. after the Frēch hystory, sonne of Charlys the .vii. or .vi, beganne hys reygne ouer the Frenchmē in the mo¦neth of October in the yere of oure lorde .M.iiii.C. & .xxii / and in the be∣gynnyng of Henry the .vi. than kyng of Englāde. Of thys Charlys sun¦dry wryters sunderly wryte / in so moche as some afferme hym to be the naturall sonne of Charles the .vii / some afferme hym to be the sonne of the duke of Orleaunce & borne of the quene / and some there ben that name hym the sonn̄ of Charles fore named gotten in the baste, vppon hys mooste beauteous paramour named Agnes / the whych as testyfyeth Gaguynus, excelled all other women in feture & beaute, and for the same to be surna∣med the fayer Agnes. Thys in hyr myddell age dyed / & was so ryche yt hyr testamēt amoūted to .ix.M. scu∣tes in golde, the whyche in sterlynge money amoūteth to the summe of .x.M.li. Thā to retourne to thys Char¦lys / lykely it is that he was nat ye na¦turall sonne of the forenamed Char∣lys, for as moche as hys sayd father ordeyned and wylled the realme of Fraūce vnto Katheryne hys dough∣ter
and wyfe vnto kynge Hēry the .v / and agreed wyth the consente of the more parte of ye lordes of hys realme bothe spyrituall & temporall, that du¦ryng hys lyfe the sayd kynge Henry shuld be regēt of Fraūce, & after hys deth to be kyng of the sayd regō, as more at lengthe before I haue she∣wed vnto you in the .vii. yere of the sayd Henry the .v. But whether he be hys legyttymat sonne or nat, where uppō I purpose no lēger to stande / trouth it is that he was by his father admitted & made dolphyne of Uyen / by reason wherof he was in a greate auctoryte, & wan to hym fauoure of som lordes of Fraūce, whych strōgly maynteyned hys partye durynge the lyfe of kyng Hēry the .v, & after all yt season whyle the duke of Bedforde occupyed there as regent of that re∣gyō, & was of some parties of Fraūce reputed for kyng. Howe be it he was neuer crowned, so lōge as the sayde duke of Bedforde lyued. Neuerthe∣lesse he by meane of polycy & hys frē∣des so defended hym selfe, that lytle by the Englyshemē was wonne vpō hym, of suche lādes as he fyrste was in possessyon of. But polytykely he defended theym, & lytle and lytle so preuayled agayne them, that in the ende he all onely wanne nat to hym the possessiō of that prouince yt which is named Fraūce, but also he wanne to hym in the ende the kynge of En¦glandes olde enherytaunce, that is Normandy, wyth all domynyons to the same apperteynynge. The maner of wynnynge of them I woll nat in thys story speke of, for so moche as in the former yeres of kynge Henry the .vi. I haue there expressed the maner of somme parte therof. But that I shall speke of thē, shalbe of thynges done betwene hym & other prynces. And for that I before in the .viii. yere of Hēry the vi, promysed in the .vi. yere of thys Charles to shewe vnto you som what of the maydē or pucel, which ye Frēch men named La ucesse de dieu. la pucelle de dieu, & her for a messenger from god to be sente reputed / I shall here folow ye saying of Gaguyne, whyche sayeth as folo∣weth. In the .vi. yere or there aboute, to rekyn from the deth of thys Char¦les father / a wēche or mayden beyng bred in a strete or vyllage called in la¦tyne Ualli color, & in thys tyme be∣ynge sprōge to the age of .xx. yeres or there about, hauing to father a poore man named Iakes Delarch and hyr mother Isabell, she also berynge the name of Iane or Iohan / required by dyuers & sundry tymes an vncle of hyrs beyng prefecte of the foresayde vyllage, that he wolde presente hyr vnto the Frēche kynge for thynges cōcernyng greatly the weale of hym & of hys realme. whyche sayd prefect after many delayes, for so moche as in hyr wordes he had lytle truste / yet at lēgthe hyr sayd vncle beynge na∣med Robert Baudryncourt, sent hyr wyth a cōuenyent company vnto the kyng, wyth letters certyfyenge hym of all the maner of thys mayde. wher¦of the sayd Charles beynge assertey∣ned / thought he wold vse som meane to knowe the vertue of thys wenche. And for he had perfyghte experyence that before tymes thys woman had neuer sene hys persone / he thoughte he wolde chaunge hys rome and ha∣byte, to se whether she by hyr vertue coulde knowe hym frome other / and that done, he standynge amonge o∣ther of his familiers as one of them / she was called into the chaumber, & demaunded yf euer before tyme she had sene the kynge. And after she hadde answered nay / she was byddē to espye oute the kynge, whych there stode amonge that companye. The whyche anone wythout dyffi¦culte
him fande and saluted as king, And all be it that he refused hyr reue¦rēce, & sayd yt she erred in hyr choyse / yet she parseuered kneling at his fete and sayde that by goddes puruey∣aūce she was taught that he was hyr very soueraygn prince & none other. wherfore the kynge & all hys lordes had in hyr the more affyaūce, that by hyr the lāde shulde be releuyd, whych at that daye was in passyng mysery. Than after dyuers questyōs to hyr made, what was the cause of hyr thy¦ther commynge / she answered & sayd that she was sent frome god, to sta∣blisshe the kynge in hys realme / and that by hyr she beynge leder & capy∣tayne of hys people, by dyuine grace onely the kynge shulde shortely sub∣due hys enemyes. By reasō of which wordes, the kyng wyth hys lordes were somedeale comforted. Upon thys, armour & sword was sought for this maydē / the whych as sayeth my sayd auctour, was foūden myraculously / wherof the processe to me appereth so darke & fātastycall, yt therewith me list nat to blot my boke but suffre it to passe by. Than thys wēche being purueyed of all thinges necessary to the warre / a company of knyghtes & soudyours to hyr by the kynge was assygned. And so she ry∣dynge as a man & in mānes habyte / contynued by the space of .ii. yeres & more, and dyd many wonderful fea∣tes / and gat from the Englysshemen many strōge townes and holdes. wherefore amonge Frenchemen she was wordshypped for an aūgell or a messynger sent frome god, to releue theyr great myserye. And as affer∣meth the sayd auctour / she by hyr pro¦uydence caused the sayd Charles as kynge of Fraunce to be crowned at Raynes, in the yere of oure lord .M. foure hundreth and .xxix. All be it nouther the Frenche cro∣nycle nor other, whyche I haue sene testyfyeth that / but affermyn that he was nat crowned duryng the lyfe of the duke of Bedforde. But almyghty god whyche for a season suffereth suche sorcery and deuelyssh ways to prospere & reygne, to the cor¦reccyon of synners / lastely to shewe hys power, and that good men shuld nat fall into any erroure, he sheweth the clerenesse of suche mystycall thyn¦ges / and so he dyd in thys.Thende la¦pucelle de dieu. For laste∣ly she by a knyghte Burgonyon was taken, & after sent to Roan, and there brēt for her demerytes, as in the .viii yere of Henry the .vi. is more at lēgth shewed. Thā the tyme forth passyng, and cōtynuall warre betwene Eng∣lande & Fraūce contynuyng / among many trybulacions by thys Charles susteyned, one that was hys owne sonn̄ named Lewys, comforted and assysted by the dukes of Burbō and Alēson wyth other mē of name, rebel¦led agayne hys father, and warred vppon hym / and by strengthe wan frome hym certeyne townes & strong holdes. For remedy whereof / the sayde Charles made warre vppon the forenamed duke of Burbon / and wasted wyth iron and fyre the coun∣treyes of the sayde duke of Burbon. By meane whereof, after thys vn∣kyndely warre hadde duryd by the space of syxe monethes or more / a peace and vnyte betwene the father & sonne was treated / & by meanes of the erle of Ewe, a cōcorde & vnite be∣twene them was fynally cōcluded / & he ye sayd Lewys & all suche as wyth hym were reteyned or allied, were for thys offēce by ye sayd Charles clerely pardoned / one persone all only excep¦ted named Iaket or Iakis, by whose treason the castell of Maxente was loste and taken / for whyche offence he was after drawen, hanged, & also quartered.
Thā in processe of tyme folowyng the flemynges of Gaūte rebelled a∣gayne theyr duke or erle named Phi¦lyp. The cause of whyche rebellyon was, for that he areryd a greuouse taske vpō salte / & put the people ther by to greuouse charge. wherevppon dedely warre betwene the duke and hys subiectys arose, to the dystrucciō of moche people vpō bothe partyes, wherof the cyrcumstaūce were lōg to wryte. Howe be it in the ende ye duke or erle by ayde of the Frēche kynge was vyctour / & helde them of Gaūte so streyghte, that they were compel∣led by force to bye theyr peace wyth great summes of money, & to theyr other many folde domages. About the .xxxi. yere of thys sayde Charles / came vnto hym from pope Nycholas the .v. of that name an am¦bassade, for to requyre ayde agayne the Turkys, for the defēce of Cōstan¦tyne the noble, whyche the Turkys purposed shortly after to assayle. To whyche ambassade by the sayd Char¦lys it was answeryd, that to hym it was right greuouse to here of the in∣tollerable persecucyō, whych ye cristē dayly susteyned of the Turkys. But he was of ye Englysh nacyō so vexed and warred, that he myghte nat leue hys lāde wythout an hedde, to the cō¦forte of other, & to lose hys owne. But to the entent that he before ty∣mes myght haue warred vppon the sayd Turkys / he for that cause onely had offered vnto the kynge of Eng∣lande many reasonable offers. And if of the Englysshe party any lyke of¦fers myghte be to hym profered / he wolde gladly theym accepte, & turne hys spere incōtynētly agayn the fore named Turkes. And ouer that he wolde for the furtheraūce of the mat∣ter, sende wyth them vnto the kynge of Englāde certayne ambassadours, to se yf that as yet any reasonable peace myght be betwene them cōclu∣ded. For accomplisshemēt wherof as testyfyeth myne auctour Gaguynus he sente the archebysshop of Raynes wyth other honorable persones. The whych whan they to kyng Hen¦ry and hys counsayll hadde shewyd theyr legacyō / it was to them shortly answered, that at suche season as the Englysshemē hadde wonne agayne so moche lāde as the Frenchemen by cawtelys had wōne from theym / thā were it good tyme & season to treate of accorde, & nat before. By reason of whiche answere / the popes ambas¦sade retourned to Rome wythoute ayde or comforte. And thus ye Frēche wryters lay euer the charge frō theyr prynce, & put it vnto other. But of thys ambassade or answere, fynde I no memory of any Englysshe wry∣ters. Aboute the .xxxiiii. yere of ye reygn of thys Charlys / Lewys hys sonne before named beynge a mā of greate lyberalitye and largesse, thought his father departed nat wyth hym of his mouables & possessyōs as he hadde cause to do. For the whych by cōfort of yōge persones as he had aboute hym, he rebelled thys seconde tyme agayne hys sayde father / & by reason of hys largesse & lyberalyte, drewe vnto hym moche wāton & wylde peo¦ple / & wyth theyr assystence warred vppō hys fathers frēdes, & entendyd to depryue hys father of all gouer∣naūce of the realme. wherof herynge hys father / in all possyble haste ga∣thered to hym greate strengthe, and spedde hym towarde hys sayd sonn̄. But whā Lewys was warned of the cōmyng of hys father wyth so great an hoste, & consydered hys quarell & wekenesse / he wyth a fewe persones fledde towarde Burgoyne. whereof herynge the father sente in all haste people to kepe the passages / and dyd
that he myghte to haue stopped hym of hys waye. But that prouysyon notwythstandynge / the sayd Lewys escaped, and came sauely vnto the presence of Phylyppe then duke of Burgoyne / the whyche hym recey∣ued wyth gladde chere, and entrea∣tyd hym accordyng to his estate, and so kepte hym durynge his fathers lyfe. Nowbeit he made for hym great sute and labour, to wynne him to his fathers grace. But all was in vayne. For what by obstynacy of the same yt he wolde not submytte hym to his fa¦ther, and comme vnto hys presence when he was sente for, & for the great stomacke of the father, that he wold not be condycyoned with of the son / thys varyaunce contynued bytwene them as aboue is sayd ye terme of his fathers lyfe. In the whyche passe tyme thys Charlys concluded a ma∣ryage bytwene hys doughter called Magdaleyne, and Ladyslaus kyng of Beme, Hungary, and of Polayne. But whyle the bryde wyth great ap∣parayle and pompe was conueyed to¦warde her husbande to be maryed / her sayde husbande was taken so∣denly with sykenesse, and dyed with in .xxiiii. houres after that he fyrste cōplayned hym / whych was by force of poysone as most wryters agreen. Of whych tydynges when Charlys was asserteyned / he therwyth toke such a pēsyffenesse, that he dyed shor∣tely after, whan he had ruled a parte and the hole realme, to reken from ye deth of hys father .xxxvi. yeres. How be it of Frenche wryters no certeyne terme of hys reygne to hym is assyg∣ned / for so myche as kyng Henry the vi. longe after the deth of hys father, was alowyd in Parys and many o∣ther Cytyes of Fraūce for souerayne and kynge of that regyon. Thys Charlys thus beynge dede, lefte af∣ter hym two sonnes / that is to saye Lewys that after hym was kynge, and a yonger named Charlys, wyth ye forenamed doughter named Mag¦daleyne, or after some Margarete. And after wyth greate pompe hys corps was conueyed vnto saynt De¦nys, and there buryed. Francia. Lewys the .xi. LEwys the .xi. of y• name after the ac¦compte of thys boke, and .x. after the Frenche ac∣compte, whereof ye cause is before shewed, sonne to Charles last dede / beganne his do∣minyon ouer the realme of Fraunce, in the moneth of October, in the yere of grace .M.iiii. hundreth and .lviii. and the .xxxvi. yere of Henry the .vi. than kynge of Englande. This of Gaguinus is called the sturdy or fel Lewys. The whiche at the tyme of his fathers deth, beyng, as aboue is sayd vnrecoūsyled in the prouynce of Burgoyne, & herynge of the deth of his father / wyth ayde of the foresayd duke Phylyp shortly entred ye realm of Fraunce, & toke vpon hym ye rule in euery good cytie & town as he pas¦syd as kyng of ye same / so yt many lor¦des & hed offycers drewe vnto hym. By meane wherof he was stronge / & put such vnto sylence, as after ye wyll & purpose of his father wolde haue preferred his yōger son named Char¦lys. Than this Lewys by strengthe of his frendes was shortely after at Raynes crowned kynge of Fraunce. After whyche solempnyte fynysshed, he repayred vnto Parys / and there by consent of hys counceyll made a law, yt no man of what degre that he were, shuld vse hūtyng or hawkynge without special lycēce / & specially for
chasynge or huntyng of woluys / nor to kepe wyth hym any houndes or other instrumētes wherby the game myghte be destroyed. And that done, Phylyp foresayd duke of Burgoyne after counsayll to hym gyuen that he shulde forgette and forgyue all dys∣pleasurs to hym ofore done by any of hys lordes, and them to honoure and cherysshe / & specyally his yonge brother Charlys to norysshe and to departe wyth hym louyngly of hys fathers possessions / toke leue of hym and departed. After whose de{per}ture / he contrary the foresayde counsayll, refused the company of hys lordes & also theyr counsayll / and drewe vnto hym as his chyefe counsaylours vy∣laynes and men of lowe byrth. Of yt whyche, the .iiii. pryncypall were na∣med as foloweth, Iohn̄ de Lude, Iohn̄ Balna, Olyuer Deuyll, whō for the odyousnesse of the name the kynge caused it to be chaunged and to be named Dāman / and the fourth was named Stephan and vssher of the kynges chaumber dore / the whi∣the he promoted to greate honour & dygnytees. Amonge whome Balna beynge a preste, was by hys meanes at length made a cardynall of Rome. Thus he vsynge the counsayle of these persons / murmur and grudge began to sprynge bytwene hym and hys lordes / in so myche that fyrst the duke of Brytayne began to estraūge hym from the kynge, and refused to come vnto hys presence whā he was sente for. wherof herynge the erle of Ewe wyth other, drewe them vnto ye duke. To the whyche party soone af∣ter, ye kynges brother Charlys, with also the duke of Burbon whych had maried the kynges syster, with many other noble men of the realme, resor∣tyd. whan the kynge was ware that hys lordes conspyred agayne hym / ferynge the rebellyon of hys comōs, sent in spedy maner vnto Parys the forenamed Iohn̄ Balna wyth other certeyne persons, to kepe that cytye in due obeysaūce toward hym / thyn∣kynge that the other cytyes & good townes of hys regyon, wolde take ensample therof, and demeane them as that cytye dyd. After whose com∣mynge / the rulers of Parys by the amonystement of the sayd Iohn̄, or∣deyned good and sure watche / and so by that meane kept the cytye in good order. And in the meane season, the kynge gathered to hym great foyson of knyghtes and soudyours, that his hoste was nombred at .xxx. thousand men. And in lyke wyse the other par∣tye hadde assembled as many or mo. And not wythstandyng the assyduat laboure and meanes made by ye duke of Burgoyne, and Carlota wyfe to ye duke of Burbon & syster to the kyng as is aboue sayde, to make an vnyte and peace bytwene Lewys and hys lordes / yet fynally the kynge & they mette in playne batayll at a place cal¦led Chartres, where bytwene theym was a longe and cruell batayll, to ye losse of moche people on bothe par∣tyes. And all be it that the kynge in the begynnynge hadde the better of hys enemyes / yet in the ende he was ouercomen, his men chaced, and he forced to flye, & to take for hys saue∣garde a castell named Mountclere. From the whyche he shortely depar∣tyd, and yode to an other castell cal∣led Corboyll, and from thens lastly vnto Parys / where he entendyd to haue gathered newe people, and to haue reuenged hym of hys enemyes. But by the wyse and good exortacyō of the bysshoppe of Parys, the kyng chaunged hys purpose / and all was set in a quyetnesse for that tyme. But how or in what maner, or what the condycyons of ye accorde were / myne authour dothe not expresse. The
whyche accorde thus concluded / the kynge contynued hys olde maners, and delyted hym more to companye with symple and inreuerent parsons to eate and drynke wyth them, to the ende that he myghte talke of rybau∣dry and vayne and vycyous fables / than to accompany him with his lor¦des, where he myghte haue wonne hym myche honour. Thys Lewys also was of so dyuers and wanton condycyon, that he wolde go more ly¦ker a yoman or a seruyng man, than lyke a prynce. The whyche was for no regardshyp nor sparyng of good / for as before I haue shewed, & also after shall appere, he was a prynce of moste lyberalyte, and therwith an oppressour of hys subiectes. LEwis thus passing his time / was dryuen of necessyte for lacke of money, to a preste of the cy∣tesyns of Parys. The whyche after many excusys by them layd to put it by, and myghte not be alowed / they lastly denayed the kynges pleasure. where wythall he beynge greuously dyscontentyd, remoued diuerse from theyr offyces / and other whych were of the rychest and hed men of ye cyte, he soughte agayne theym surmysed causes / & without prouys or iustyce, put many of them to deth. For these foresayde causes & many other why∣che tedyouse were to expresse, the fore¦sayd lordes agayne assembled theyr people / entēdyng to subdue ye kynge, and to set hys brother in hys place / or to cause hym otherwyse to rule ye comon weale. And to strength the ba¦rons party / Iohn̄ sonne vnto ye duke of Calabre approched to them, wyth a good bande of men. And to them came also the sonne of the duke of Burgoyne named Charlys. All whi∣che barons of one assent mette at a towne called Stampys / where they cōtynued theyr coūsayle by the space of .xv. dayes / and after that coūsayle fynysshed, toke theyr iournaye to∣warde Parys. In whych passe tyme a spye of the duke of Brytaynes, cal∣led Peter Gerold was taken in Pa∣rys, and drawen, hanged, and quar∣tered / and dyuers men and women yt were suspected to owe fauour vnto the lordes, were sacked and caste in to the water of Seyn. Then for to strength and guyde the cytye of Pa∣rys, the kynge sent thyder the erle of Donoyse / by whose prouysyon all warly ordenaunce for to defende theyr enemyes was there preparyd. In the which tyme & season, ye lordes in .iii. partes enbatayled, approched the cytye. wherof ye fyrste hoste ladde Charlys brother vnto the kynge / the seconde the duke of Brytayne / & the thyrd Charlys the sonne to the duke of Burgoyne. Prouyded that Char∣lys fyrste named ladde the myddle¦ward. whā the sayd erle of Donoyse hadde well consydered the strength of the lordes / he sente vnto theym a messanger, sayeng that in his mynde he maruayled to see so greate a mul∣tytude of people assembled agayne the cytye and comon weale of ye land / consyderyng that he was sette there by the kynge as a medyatour and a meane, rather to make peace than warre, yf they were contentyd that by hym any medyacyon myghte be laboured and hadde. But thys came to none effecte, so that small assautes and skyrmysshes ensued, to the lytell domage of bothe partes. In whyche passe tyme the kynge sent by secrete meanes vnto the forenamed Iohn̄ sonne vnto the duke of Calabre / and hym by many meanes instaunted, to leue the company of the lordes. But all his offers auayled ryght nought. Thenne the foresayde lordes thus lyenge before the cytye of Parys, in
the playne where standeth the mona¦stery of saynt Antony / Charlys bro∣ther to the kynge caused .iiii. letters to be deuysed. wherof one he sent to the bysshoppes and spyrytuall men within the cytye / the seconde to the consulles or hed men / the thyrde to ye scolers of the vnyuersyte / and ye .iiii. vnto the comynaltye. Of whyche let¦ters the entent ensueth / that he nor none of hys company was comen thyder as an enemye to the cytye, or to make warre agayne it or the co∣mon weale of the land / but for the en¦creace and augmentacyon therof, to the vttermost of theyr powers. After receyte of whyche letters, and the ma¦ter in them conteyned well vnderstā∣den and debatyd / certeyne oratours for the sayde .iiii. partyes were assyg∣ned / as thre for the spyrytuall men, thre for the consuls, thre for the vny∣uersyte, & thre for comynaltye / whose names I ouer passe. The whyche wyth the bysshop of Parys were sent vnto the barons / & after longe com∣munycacyon wyth them hadde, re∣tourned to the cytie with such report as foloweth. Fyrste the lordes wolde that the inhabytauntes of the cytye shulde cō¦syder the condycyons of the kynge, yt whyche yerely oppressyth his subiec∣tes with taskes and other greuouse seruagys. Secondaryly how he de∣spyseth ye noble blode of hys realme, and draweth to hym vylaynes and men of no reputacyon / by whose coū¦sayls onely all the comon weale of ye land is ruled and guyded. Thyrdely how he ruleth hys subiectes by force and wyll, wythout mynystracyon of iustyce / and hym selfe in all coūsayls and parlyaments is iudge in all cau¦ses, and callyth hys selfe counsayls and parlyamentes, more for hys syn¦guler weale than for the comō weale of his realme. Fourthely how he en∣haunsyth men of lowe byrthe vnto greate honours and causyth noble men to be obedyent vnto them / enten¦dynge to brynge the same ignoble men, for to be egall wyth the prynces of the lande. Fyftely how the lawes be delayed and bolstred by suche as stande in his fauour / where thorugh as thys daye lawe is wyll and wyll is lawe / and no man almoste in any suerty of lyfe or goodes / in so moche that dayly many ben banysshed and put to deth for vnlefull causes / and also to any noble man at this daye no power or rome of honour belon∣geth / so that to wylde bestes in the forestes apperteyneth more lybertye and suertye, than the more partye of the kynges subgettes. Syxtly the greate taskes and summes of money whych dayly be leuyed of the comōs ben not spent in the kynges honou∣rable nedes and for the comon weale of the realme / but are spent nysely & ryottously, and brybed out of ye kyn∣ges cofers. For whyche enormytees & mysgouernaūce with many other / the sayde lordes were thyder comen in defensyble araye, for ye sauegarde of theyr owne persons / as to the hed and pryncypall cytie of the realme, for to haue ayde and counsayle to re∣fourme the foresayd euyls / not with standynge any harme vnto the kyn∣ges persone, or yet to remoue hym from his regally or kyngly maieste / but to enduce hym & aduertyse hym to that that shuld be his honour and the weale of hys realme, and to lyue in welthe and honour as hys noble {pro}genitours haue lyued before hym. For the whyche causes and consyde∣racyons wyth many other whych I passe ouer / the sayde lordes as ye kyn¦ges trewe subeittes and frendes vn∣to the comon weale of the lande and of that cytye, desyre to entre / there to refresshe them and theyr people, and
to pay truely for all thynge that they shulde take, & wythout doyng harme or vyolence to any persone. All why∣che requestes and maters of the lor∣des shewed vnto the inhabytauntes of the cytye, by fauour of some fren∣des that they there had, it was with the more partye well acceptyd, and thought conuenyent that they sayde nobles shuld be receyued into the cy∣tye. How be it that after longe deba∣tynge of thys mater, by meane of the forenamed erle of Donoyse, a spa∣rynge of thys receyte of the lordes shuld be, tyll they had forther know∣lege of the kynges pleasure. whyche prouysyon the sayd erle fande, for so mych as he was secretely warned of the kynges thyder comynge. And vpon thys agremēt the cytye rested. For suertye wherof, suche as were within the cytye of the kynges ser∣uauntes and frendes, rode dayly & nyghtly about ye cyty wyth a stronge company in harneys, to se the people kepte in due order. Than vppon the daye folowynge came vnto Parys a capytayne of ye kynges named Moū¦talbone, and wyth hym a good bend of men / the whyche shewyd vnto the cytesyns that the kyng was comyng out of Normandye with a great host of. The lordes beynge warned / enbatayled them in the fore¦sayde playne of saynte Antoyn, to shewe the strength of theyr hoste vn¦to the cytye, or suche as were therin as theyr enemyes. where they so ly∣enge / certayne knyghtes of the kyn∣ges party, diuerse and sondry tymes brake out by sodeyne resys, and skyr¦mysshed wyth the lordes people, to the lytell hurte of bothe partyes. In the whych passe tyme kynge Le∣wys comynge out of Normandye, was receyued into the cytye. where after hys comynge he put in execu∣cyon .v. persons, named Iohn̄ wor∣ter, Eustace and Arnolde worter, Iohn̄ Coart, and Fraunceys Hasle. The whyche persons were accusyd to hym to be chyefe occasyoners of the legacyon made vnto the lordes. Of whyche sayde .v. persons / thre, as Iohn̄ Coart, Fraunceys Hasle, & Arnolde worter, were messengers as¦sygned in the sayde legacyon for the consuls of Parys / and the forena∣med Eustace worter, was one of the thre assygned for the clergye. The kynge thus beynge in pos∣sessyō of the cytye / many and dyuers assautes and skyrmysshes bytwene hys knyghtes and the lordes were made / but no notary batayle, for the kynge was ferre weker. And ouer that in thys tyme & season, the sayde lordes gat vnto them sondry castels and stronge holdes. Than at length meanes of a peace was offeryd by ye kynge. For concludyng wherof{is} for the kynge was admytted the erle of Mans, with certayne other persons. And for the barons, was assygned Iohn̄ sonne vnto the duke of Cala∣bre, Lewys erle of saynt Poule and other / the whyche assembled and cō∣moued togyder by sondry tymes .ix. dayes. In whyche season came vnto the kynge a newe strength of soudy∣ours out of Normandye / the whych the kyng appoynted to kepe the sub∣arbes of saynt Marcell. Thys trea∣ty thus hangyng wythout conclusyō or ende takynge / vppon the .xiiii. day of October in the .vii. yere of ye reygn of thys Lewys, was proclaymed thorough the cytye and also the hoste a day of lenger treuce / so that thanne the lordes wythdrewe theym vnto theyr stronge holdes and castels, hol¦dynge wyth them many soudyours whyche fyll to robbynge and other vnlefull actes, to the greate daun∣ger and hurte of the lande. And at suche seasons as the arbytrours met
to fynysshe this great mater / among other thynges offeryd by the kynge, he graunted to gyue vnto hys bro∣ther Charlys for hys porcyon, all Champayne wyth the lordshyppe of Brye / the cytyes of Melde, Mon∣struell, and Meldune therof to be ex∣cepted. And vnto Charlys sonne of the duke of Burgoyne, he was con∣tented to gyue so myche money as he hadde spent in that iournay. But all was refused. And fynally for ob∣stynacy of bothe partyes / the daye of expyracyon of the trewe approchyd, wythout hope of accord cōcludyng. wherfore prouysyon for warre vpon bothe partyes was deuysed. Than begā grudge and murmure bytwen the cytesyns and the kynges sowdy∣ours / wherthorough many of the co∣mons hertes turned to the lordes / so that for fere the surer and stronger watches were kepte to the kynges great charge. Shortely after tydyn∣ges were brought vnto the kynge yt the castell of Gysons was of the lor∣des vesyeged / and that also the pre∣fecte of the kynges paleys in Roan, was taken of the cytesyns and hol∣den in prysone. And the daye folow∣ynge came an other messengare, she∣wynge vnto the kynge that the duke of Burbone was by the posterne re∣ceyued into the castell of Roan / and was lykely to haue shortely the rule of the cytye / whyche came to effecte in shorte whyle after. whan the lor∣des hadde gotten the castell and cyty of Roan, whyche is hed cytye of Nor¦mandy as Parys is hed of Fraunce / than in maner of derysyon they sent vnto ye kynge, sayenge that nother with Champayne nor with Bry hys brother Charlys wold be contented, but scantely wyth the hole duchy of Normandy. Than kynge Lewys cō¦syderyng the great auaūtage, which ye lordes had of him, both by strength and fauour of hys comons whyche dayly drewe vnto them by sondry cō¦panyes / in auoydyng of more daun∣ger, concludyd a peas. For perfour∣maūce wherof, he graūted vnto Char¦lys his brother ye hole duchy of Nor∣mandy / takyng to hym in exchaūge the county of Berry. And to Charlis sonne to the duke of Burgoyne, Pe∣ron̄, Roya, & a cytye or towne called in latyne Mondideriū / and therwith he ioyned Gwynary and ye erledome of Boloyne / which lordshyps ye sayd kynge Lewys hadde before tymes bought of duke Phylyp his father. To Iohn̄ of Calabre he graūted all such sūmes of money as he demaun¦dyd, to wage with soudiours to ayde his father agayne Fardynande then kyng of Aragon. And to Iohn̄ duke of Burbon, yt which as before is said had maryed his syster / he graūted all such dowar as to hym was {pro}mysed at ye tyme of maryage / & all such pen∣cyon as he was wont yerely to take, of the graunte of Charlys last kyng within the realme of Fraūce. To the duke of Brytayne was restoryd the erledome of Moūtferard, with great sūmes of money which the kyng had receyued of the sayd county. And to ye erle of Dampmartyne was restored all suche landes as before by acte of parlyamēt were forfayted to ye kyng. To the erle of saynt Poule was resto¦red the offyce of the constablerye of Fraūce / & to other mē of name other notable thynges which I passe ouer. All whyche grauntes fermely and fastely assuryd / proclamacyons were made of thys pease thoroughe the realme of Fraunce. And after thys pease was thus concluded / the kyng and hys lordes mette. To whome he shewed greate semblaunt of kynd∣nesse / and specyally vnto hys bro∣ther. wherin appered great dyssymu¦lacyon, as here after shall appere.
For thys Lewys was of suche con∣dycion, that what he myght not ouer come wyth strength, he wold wynne wyth dyssymulacyon and trechety, After whyche peace thus concluded, and the lordes departed / the kynge festyd the rulers and consuls of the cytye of Parys / and gaue vnto them due thankes, for the greate trouth & fydelyte, whyche they bare towarde hym duryng that troubelous season and graunted vnto them suche thyn¦ges, as then they wolde aske for the weale of that cytye. IT was not longe after, that dyssymulacyon fell bytwene Charlys duke of Normandye, and Iohn̄ foresayde sonne vnto the duke of Calabre and the erle of Damp∣martyne. wherof a parte of the cause was, that the sayde Charlys after theyr thynkyng, hadde not so boun∣teously rewarded them as they had deserued. Of whyche dyscorde kyng Lewys was fayne / and in spedy ma∣ner rode vnto a towne called Argen¦tyne / and there wyth the sayd Iohn̄ than beynge duke of Calabre, by rea¦son of hys fathers deth, helde wyth hym longe and great counsayll, to ye entent to dyspossesse hys brother of the duchy of Normandye. By reason of whych dyscorde bytwene the sayd two dukes / kynge Lewys as ayder of the duke of Calabre, made warre in the partyes of Normandye / and in processe wanne therin dyuers ca∣stels and other stronge holdes, and compelled hys brother to holde the cytye of Roan for hys refuge. where he so beynge / the kyng wanne dayly vppon hym / in so myche that dyuers townes and stronge holdes submyt∣ted them to his grace. wherof hering the cytesyns of Roan, made an am∣bassade vnto the kynge, for purchace of grace for theyr duke and for them selfe. The whych when the duke vn∣derstode, ferynge leste his owne cyte∣syns wolde betraye hym, fled thens / and so yode to Humflewe, and from thens to Cadomy. In whyche passe tyme ye kynge was wyth due honour receyued into ye cytie of Roan / where he remoued many from theyr offices, and of his seruauntes or such as ly∣ked hym put in theyr places / & moch of the ordynaunce and of abylymen¦tes of warre belongynge to ye towne he sent vnto Parys / and the prouost of Roan named Gauyne Manuell he put to deth / & after hys body was cast into the ryuer, and his hed sette vppon a pole / & dyuers of the colege wyth the deane of ye same place were put vnto deth. And all whych tyran∣nye by the kynge executyd, and the towne put in suertye by strength of soudyours / he after spedde hym vn∣to Orleaunce, where as sayth myne authour he puruayed an honorable ambassade, and sent it vnto Edward the .iiii. then kynge of Englande. In the .ix. yere of ye reygne of thys Lewys was so greate a mortalyte of men in Fraunce, that in Parys dyed that yere ouer .xl.M. people. And in thys yere began a grudge to growe bytwene this Lewys and Phylyppe duke of Burgoyne. But it was kept vnkyndely duryng ye lyfe of ye duke, which dyed shortely after. To whom succedyd Charlys his sonne before named, which in processe of tyme ma¦ryed dame Margarete syster vnto kynge Edward ye .iiii. as after shalbe shewyd. It was not longe after that thys Lewys assembled a great hoste of people to make warre vpon Char¦lys duke of Burgoyne. Of whyche people he had cōmytted the rule and charge vnto Iohn̄ Balna, whych at that daye was preste and cardynall / and he as a tēporall capytayne, toke of them the mustyrs & other orders. where at the tēporall lordes dysday∣nynge
/ the erle of Dāpmartyne sayd in the names of them vnto the kyng. Moste redouted souerayne lorde, it hath pleased your hyghnesse to com∣mytte vnto a spyrytuall mā ye charge of your puyssaunt hoste / & he not fe∣rynge god, hath taken vpon hym the cure and charge of them, to the effu∣syon of crystē mēnes blode. wherfore it may lyke your most noble grace, to sende me a temporall man to vysyte his dyocese, and to take the charge of his flocke / whyche is as syttynge for me, as that other dede is for him. At this sayeng the kyng hadde good game / but for all yt he dyd as to hym semyd best. Of this warre bytwene ye kyng & duke Charlys of Burgoyne I entende not to speke / for the mater of it is somdee long and tedyous to wryte. But in this whyle that Lewys was occupyed in thys warre / yt Bry∣tons with an excedynge power assay¦led ye partyes of Norue hauyng Charlis broder vnto Lewis to theyr leder, whych to the duke of Brytayn was fled for ayde & socoure. wherof herynge kyng Lewys / all such hoste of sowdyours as he hadde purposed other wayes, he than ladde agayne hys brother. In whych hoste as after myth myne authour, were an .C.M. men, ouer such as had the guydyng of the ordenaūce. whā Charlys was aduertysed of the greate strength of hys brother / by polytyke meanes he soughte for a peace. And after many delatory communycacyōs and other delayous meanes wroughte vppon bothe partyes / lastely the kynge sent vnto hys brother Iohn̄ Balna car∣dynall wyth other, to shewe vnto hym hys mynde and pleasure. wher∣of whan Charlys was suffycyently instructed / he gaue for an answere, that yf a perfyghte concorde shulde be stablysshed bytwene hys brother and hym, that it shuld be authorysed by the hole concent and counsayle of the barony of the realme. with which answere the kyng beyng contentyd / at Turon in the moneth of Apryll & x. yere of hys reygne, assembled a greate counsayle of hys lordes spyry¦tuall and temporall / in the whyche ye demaūdys of the sayde Charlys and offers of the kyng were shewed. And after the sayd coūsayle had at length reasoned the sayde demaundes and offers / it was fynally determyned, yt the duchy of Normandye was so ap∣prouyd vnto the kynge of Fraunce and to hys heyres kynges, that in no wyse it myghte be dysseueryd from ye crowne. But to the entent that a per¦fyght vnyte myghte be had bytwene the kynge and hys brother / the kyng shall be instaūted to gyue yerely vn∣to hys sayd brother in recōpensemēt of ye sayd duchy .xii. thousand poūde of Turō money / wyth also a certeyn of lande to hym to be assygned wyth the name of a duke / and ouer that ye kynge to be instanted to gyue vnto hym durynge hys naturall lyfe, for suche porcyō as he claymed to be his ryghte wythin the realme .xl.M.li. of annuell rente yerely to hym to be payed of the foresayd Turō money. To all whyche grauntes the kynge was agreed / & ouer that to pardon ye duke of Brytayne all offences nowe newly done agayne hys maieste, and contrary the dukes faythe and alle∣gaunce / and all such lordshyppes as the kynge hadde wonne wythin Bry¦tayne, to restore vnto the duke & hys assygnes. All ye whych offers myght not satysfye the coūsayle of the sayd Charlys / but clerely was set aparte and refused. AFter the foresayd offers were by Charles refused / the kyng in spedy wyse vppon the refusayll sent a stronge hoste into Brytayne, vnder the guydynge of a knyghte
called Arnolde. And in the meane sea¦son the kyng vysytyng the bordours of hys realme / put in execucyon dy∣uerse parsones, suche as were accu∣sed to offende agayne hym. Passynge whych season, were it for the greuys whyche the foresayd hoste wroughte wythin the coūtrey of Brytayne, or for other skyll / the foresayd Charlys & the duke of Brytayne made newe meanes for a peace vnto the kynge / & offered to be contentyd, wyth that they myght stande in hys fauoure & grace, wyth suche proffers as the coū¦sayll of the realme was before tyme agreed and cōdyssended vpon. where unto a sophystycall answere was ma¦de by the kyng / so that the sayd Char¦les at that tyme myghte nat be asser∣teyned of peace or of warre. Howe be it in the yere folowyng by instaūt la∣bour of the fore named Iohn̄ Balna cardynall, the kynge agreed to gyue vnto hys brother Charlys the duchy of Guyan onely. where wyth he helde hym cōtēted / & so ceased of his warre in Normādy. It was nat lōge after that thys sayde Iohn̄ Balna forgetynge ye ma¦nyfolde great benefytes shewed to hī by the kynge / cōspyred agayne hym, & deuysed certayne letters / the which he sent vnto Charlys duke of Bur∣goyne. wherin was cōteyned that he shulde beware and haue hym selfe in good gayte / for the vnyte and peace whyche lately was stablysshed be∣twene the kynge & Charlys hys bro∣ther, was principally to dere & warre vppon hym, & to brynge hym in sub∣ieccyon. wherfore in auoydynge that daūger / he aduysed hym in all possy∣ble haste to assemble hys knyghtys, that he were nat takē vnpurueyed. The whyche letters were it by reasō of the berer or otherwyse, came to ye kynges presence. After receyt of whyche letters, & knowlege of the cō¦tent of them / anone the kynge caused the sayde Iohn̄ Balna to be taken, & to be caste in stronge prysone. And that done he rode vnto Thuron / whyther to hym came hys brother Charles, and to hym dyd homage, & sware vnto him feauty for the duchy of Guyan. And for to knytte the duke of Brytayne more fastly to hym / he sente to hym a sceptre wyth a chayne of golde / the whyche the duke refu∣sed to take, wherewyth Lewys was greuously dyscōtēted. The cause of whyche refusall was, for the sayde duke of Brytayne had lately before that allyed hym wyth Charlys duke of Burgoyne, & had receyued hys ly¦uerey of golden flees. And soone af∣ter, whyche was the .xi. yere of thys Lewys / Carlota hys wyfe was lygh¦ted of a sonn̄, & after named Charles by Charlys hys brother / whych after hys father was kynge of Fraūce. And shortly after by meanes of Char¦lys duke of Guyan, & of the duke of Burbon & other / the duke of Bry∣tayn was recoūcyled vnto the kyng{is} fauoure. And in ye .xii. yere of ye reygn of thys Lewys, dyed by force of veni the aboue named Charlys duke of Guyan. But by whose meanes myne auctour myndeth nat. Than cōtynuynge the warre be∣twene thys Lewys & thys duke of Burgoyne / a marchaunt of Guyan named Itery, which after the deth of the sayd duke of Guyan was fledde vnto the duke of Burgoyne, & wyth hym a seasō remayned / shewed vnto hym many tedyous talys of ye kyng. wherfore the duke apperceyuynge yt he owed to the Frenche kynge no fa∣uoure / exorted hym to poyson ye sayd kynge. And yf he myght brynge to ef¦fecte hys purpose / he shuld therefore haue .l.M. florynes of golde. A flo∣ryne is in value of sterlynge money .iii.s. After whyche promyse and
assuraunce thus made by the duke / thys Itery to brynge hys euyll pur∣pose about, made hys seruaunt na∣med Iohn̄ de Boldy of coūsayll / and promysed to hym greate thynges, yf he wolde take vpon hym that acte. And after graunt hadde of the sayde Iohn̄ / the sayd Itery prouided ye poy¦son, & delyuered it vnto hys sayd ser∣uaūt. The whych incontynētly sped hym vnto Ambasye, where the Frēch kyng than laye / where thys Iohn̄ de Boldy beynge of famylyer acqueyn∣taunce wyth one named Popyn, to ye entent to brynge hys entent ye better to effecte, after assuraūce of othe to hī made to kepe hys counsayll / shewyd vnto hym all hys mynde, & promised to hym .xx.M. florynes yf he wolde helpe to brynge to conclusyon hys purpose. The whyche Popyn made vnto hym assured promyse / & sayde y• to brynge thys mater aboute, it was very expedyent to haue of counsayll the kynges mayster cooke named Co¦lynet / whome he knewe well to wyn, for the great fauoure that eyther of them owed vnto other. And after cō∣munycacyon had wyth the sayd Co∣lynet / the sayd poysone to hym was delyuered. wherwyth the sayd Coly∣net & Popyn hys felowe went a con∣uenyent tyme vnto the kynge, & shewyd to hym the compasse of all ye mater. where after anone the sayde Iohn̄ de Boldy was taken, & confes∣sed the cyrcumstaūce of all the hoole treason / for the whyche at Parys he was after drawen, hanged, and quar¦tered. Soone vpō thys, Frederyke ye iii. of ye name than emperoure of Al∣mayne, sente vnto thys Lewys / wyl¦lyng & requyryng hym that he wolde nat endeuer hym to any peace or ac∣corde with ye duke of Burgoyne. For he entēded in suche wyse to ayde hys partye, yt he trusted in god to brynge the sayde duke to hys due, & conue∣nyent obeysaūce & subiecciō. But the kyng regarded nothynge the empe∣rours request / but cōcluded a trewys wyth the duke for a yere folowynge, by auctoryte of a great counsayll or parlyament. At the whyche the duke of Alēson was iuged to lose hys hed, & hys heredytamentes to be forfay∣ted vnto the kynge. Than it foloweth in the story / or thys foresayde trewys betwene the kynge & Charles the duke were fully expyred / ye sayd Charles made warre vpon the sayd Lewys, and procured kynge Edwarde of Englande, whose syster he had maryed, to make also warre vpon hym. For expedycyon wherof / the sayd kyng Edwarde lan¦ded at Calays shortly after, wyth a competente noumber of soudyours, as after in the .xiiii. yere of the reygne of the sayd Edwarde the .iiii. it shalbe to you more clerely shewed, wyth cō∣clusyon of a peace & other thynges. After yt which peas betwene the sayd ii. kynges agreed / a vnyte and con∣corde was also stablysshed betwene thys Lewys & the duke of Burgoyn for .ix. yeres. About the .xvii. yere of thys Le∣wys / ye steward of Normādy named Lewys Brysey, yt which had maryed the nece of kyng Lewys / beyng war∣ned of ye wāton rule of his wyfe, & of her auoūtry wyth one named Iohn̄ Louyr / vpō a day to proue his sayde wyfe, wēt on hūting / & at his retourn̄ feyned hym wery & feynt for labour, & wēt to his bedde. And she anone de¦myng her husbād to be at his natu∣rall rest / yode streyght vnto ye chāber of ye sayd Iohn Louyr. wherof ye hus∣bād beyng warned / wyth hys swerde in hāde sped hym vnto ye sayd chāber & after ye dore brokē vp by violēce, & fyndyng thē in bedde or other suspe∣ciouse maner, with his sayde swerde slewe first y• sayde Iohn̄ / & after nat¦wythstādyng
her miserable & lamēta¦ble cryēg, & askynge forgyuenes vpō her knees, he also slewher / & after fled tyll he had made hys peace wyth the kyng. Lōge it were & also tediouse to fo∣lowe myne auctour, in declaryng of euery particuler dede done by this Le¦wys. wherfore to shortē this story / trouth it is yt after thys Lewys had by lōg tyme exercised him in warres, he lastly fell in a greuouse sykenesse. The whych cōtinued & so encreased vpō hym / yt he knewe well he shulde nat lōg endure. wherfore he disposed there after / & caused many dedes of alinesse to be done for hym. Amōge y• whych within saīt Iohn̄s church the Baptist within Parys, he foūded cer¦teyn preestes to syng for hym in per∣petuyte. For sustētacion of whome, he gaue of yerely rēte a .M.li. of Pa∣rys money. And so lāguysshyng by ye space of .iii. yeres more before he died passed hys tyme wyth great tribula∣cyon. In the whyche passe tyme ora∣tours were sent from the Flemynges for to conclude a maryage betwene Charles hys eldest sonne, & Marga∣rete than doughter of Maxymylian sonne of Frederyke the emperoure / which Maximiliā before those days had maryed Mary the doughter of Charles duke of Burgoyne. After whych cōclusyon ended & fynysshed / the kyng gaue vnto the sayd orators xxx.M. scutes of golde, whych amoū¦teth to .v.M.li. sterlyng money. And ouer that gaue to them in plate pur∣posely made, to the value of .v C.li. sterlynge. And in the .xxv. yere of the reygne of the sayd Lewys / the fore∣named Margarete a chyld of tender age, wyth great & sumptuouse pōpe was broughte vnto Parys. And frō thens she was conueyed vnto Amba¦sye / and there in the moneth of Iuly, cowpeled by maryage vnto the fore∣named Charles sonn̄ vnto the kyng. After whyche solempnyte fynysshed / the sayd Lewys felyng hys sykenesse more and more encreasyng / vppon a season called hys sayd sonn̄ Charles before hym,The wor∣des of king Lewys dy∣enge to his sonne. and exorted hym in thys wyse as after foloweth. My mooste deryst chylde, I feele & knowe well yt I shall nat tary longe in thys coun∣trey / for I am more nerer myne ende than thou knowest. For I am so con∣tynually greuyd wyth sykenesse, that no medecyne may or can releue me. And thou art he that muste rule this lāde after me. wherfore to the it is spe¦cyally behoueful & necessary, to haue trewe seruaūtes. Amonge many yt I haue proued in my dayes / ii. there ben, the whych I specyally cōmende vnto the / that is to meane Olyuer Damman, and Iohn̄ Doyacos. whose seruyces I haue in suche wyse vsed, that by theyr meanes and coun¦sayll I thynke my lyfe hath ben long preserued. And therefore specially these .ii. kepe nere about yt, nothynge mynysshyng to them of theyr offices or possessyons, that I before tymes to them haue gyuen. And after these ii / take to the for thy counsaylours, Guyot & Bochage / & for to guyde yt warres, Phylyp Desquyer / yt whych in featys of warre as I haue wel po¦ued, hath passyng experiēce. And o∣ther which I haue auaūced to offy∣ces within thys realme / lette them so remayne. And the commons of the lande, the whych by occasyō of war∣res I haue greuously tarid & greatly weked & enpouerysshed / socoure and fauour to thy power. To the Burgo¦nyōs me thought euer good to shew fauoure / or elles me thought it shuld haue sounded to my dyshonour. So I thynke it shalbe good that thou so do. After that kyng Lewys had thus exorted and counsayled hys sonn̄ / he than retourned vnto Turon.
where for the mytygacyon of thys paynfull sykenesse, whyche of myne auctour is called in latyne Morbus Elephantie / he commaunded to be brought before hym all the cunnyng maysters of musyke wythin hys realme, that by the melodyous soūde of theyr instrumentes, he myghte be eased of his peyne. But whan he had assembled of the best an .C. and .xx. in noumber / a fewe shepardes pypes were to hym more solace, than all the other or any parte of them / yt whych he helde styll in hys court, & commaū¦ded that euery day the sayd shepher∣des shulde play a certeyn dystaunce from the place where he laye. And ouer thys he sent for all ankers and other relygyous men that were fa∣med for holy & parfight men / and for them ordeyned places within Turō, that by the meane of theyr prayers he myght be released of hys contynuall paynes. And to haue lenger conty∣naunce of lyfe / myne auctour sayeth yt thys Lewys had so greate a desyre to haue lengthe of lyfe / for so moche as he knewe well that the realme of Fraunce shulde be in great trouble & vexacyon shortly after. But nat wythstandynge all these prouysyons and ordenaunces, wyth many moo whyche longe were to wryte / fynally thys Lewys dyed, whā he hadde ben kyng of Fraūce by the terme of .xxvi. yeres or there vppō / and after was buryed in the churche of our Lady of Raynes, where before tyme he prouy¦ded hys sepulture, & in tyme of hys sykenesse lye in it a certayne season, whyle that certeyne orysons were ouer hym sayde. Anglia. ¶Edwarde the .iiii. EDwarde the .iiii. of that name, son̄ of Rycharde duke of yorke as before is touched / began hys reygne ouer ye realme of Englād the .iiii. daye of Marche in the ende of the yere of grace, to reken after the churche of Englande .M.iiii.C. & .lx / and the .ii. yere of Lewys the .xii. thāne kynge of Fraunce. The whych Edwarde after hys possessyon takynge at westmyn∣ster & gettyng of the feelde at Toutō by yorke, was crowned & anoynted for kynge at westmynster foresayde, the .xxix. daye of Iuny, as before is shewyd in the ende of the laste yere of Henry the .vi. After whyche solemp∣nyte fynysshed / the kynge in August after rode to Cauntorbury / & frome thēs he rode to Sandewyche / and from thens a longe by the sees syde to Southamptō / & so into the march of walys / & retourned by Brystowe, where he was wyth all honour recey¦ued / and after visited sundry parties of hys realme. In whych season or soone after, the tyme of Rychard Lee mayre of Lōdon expyred / and Hughe wyche mercer was admytted for the yere folowynge. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxii.   Iohn̄ Looke.   Hughe wyche.   Anno .i.   George Irelande.   THis yere beyng the later ende of the fyrste yere of Edwarde the .iiii, and the begynnynge of thys mayres yere, that is to say the fourth daye of September / a parlyamente was begonne at westmynster. And
vpon ye morow folowyng dyed Iohn̄ duke of Northfolke / the whyche had ben a speciall ayder of the kyng. And vpō Alhalowen daye before passed / ye kyng created Rycharde hys yonger brother duke of Glouceter, the lorde Bowchyer erle of Essex, & the lorde Fawcumbrydge erle of Kent / & vpon the .xii. day of February, was the erle of Oxenforde, wyth the lorde Aubry hys elder sonne, syr Thomas Todē∣ham̄, willyā Tyrell, & other, brought vnto the towre of Lōdon. And vpon the .xx. day of the sayd moneth, ye sayd lorde Awbry was drawen from west¦mynster vnto the towre hylle, & there beheded. And vpon the .xxiii. daye of the same moneth / syr Thomas Todēham, wyllyā Tyrell, and Iohn̄ Mō∣gomory, were also there beheded. And vpon the fryday next ensuynge, or the .xxvi. daye of the sayd moneth / the erle of Oxenforde was ladde frō westmynster vpon hys feete to ye sayd place of, & there also beheded. whose corps was after borne vnto ye frere Augustynes / and there buryed wythin the quyer for that tyme. And in the later ende of the moneth of Iuly / was the castell of Awnewyke yelden vnto the lorde Hastynges by appoyntement. whan kynge Edwarde was thus stablysshed in this realme / great sute and labour was made to hym for the repayment of the foresayd .xviii.M.li. to hym and other delyuered by the stapelers, as before in ye .xxxviii. yere of Henry the .vi. to you I haue before shewed. wherof was laborer, were it by the agrement of the sayd stapelers or otherwyse, one named Rycharde Heyron a marchaunt, of pregnaunte wyt and of good maner and speche. To whome at length was answered by the kynges counsayll, that ye sayd xviii.M. pounde wyth moch more, the whyche was couertly kept frome the kynges knowlege, belonged of ryght vnto ye erle of wylshyre / which at the tyme of delyuery of the sayde goodes, was hyghe tresourer of En∣glande / and after for treason by him done agayne the kyng, the sayd erles landes and goodes were forfayted vnto the kynge. wherfore the kynge reteyned the sayde .xviii.M.li. as par¦ceyll of hys forfayture, & wolde re∣teyne as hys owne. Upon whych answere / thys heyron seynge that of the kyng he myght haue no remedy, and for so moche as moch of the sayd good belonged to hys charge, he thā resorted vnto the stapelers for contētacyon of the sayd money. But howe it was that there be fāde no comfort / he fynally sued the mayer of the sta∣ple and hys company, and put them vnto greate vexacyon and trouble. And in the ende fande suche fauoure in the courte of Rome / that he denoū¦ced all the merchauntes stapelers ac¦cursed. Howe be it that soone after they purchased an absolucyon. And he in conclusyon after longe beyng ī westmynster as a seyntwary¦man / wythoute recouery of hys co∣stes or dutye, dyed there, beynge greatly endetted vnto many per∣sones. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxii.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxiii.   wyllyam Hampton.   Thomas Cooke.   Anno .ii.   Barth Iamys.   THys yere and begynnyge of ye moneth of Nouember / Mar∣garet late quene of Englād came out of Fraūce īto Scotlād & frō thēs īto
Englande, wyth a strength of Frēch men & Scottes. wherfore the kynge sped hym into the north wyth a strōg hoste. wherof herynge the quene / brake hyr araye and fled / and toke a caruyle, & therein entended to haue sayled into Fraūce. But suche tem∣pest fell vpon the see, that she was cō∣strayned to take a fysshers bote / and by meane therof landed at Barwyke, & so drewe hyr vnto the Scottysshe kynge. And shortly after her lādyng tydynges came to her, that her sayde caruyll was drowned, wythin the whyche she had greate treasoure and other rychesse. And the same daye vpon .iiii.C. of the Frenchemen were dryuen vppon lande nere vnto Bambourth. where they for so moche as they myght nat haue away theyr shyppes, they fyred thē / & after for theyr sauegarde tooke an ilande wythin Northumberland. where they were assayled of one cal∣led Maners wyth other in hys com∣pany / & of them slayne & taken priso∣ners as many as there were. whan ye kynge was ware of the quenes thus auoydynge / he entēded to haue folo∣wed, & to haue made warre vpon the Scottes. But he was than vysyted with the sykenes of pockes, yt he was forced to leue that iournay. In the weke of Crystemas folowynge / the Scottes wyth a strōge power perced the lande, entendynge to haue resco∣wed certayne castelles in the north. But they retourned shortly wythout harme doynge. And shortly after the duke of So∣merset and syr Rauffe Percy, submit¦ted them to the kynges grace. whanne the kynge was cured & retourned southwarde / the Scottes aboute the tyme of lent entred agayn into Englande / & layde a syege vnto Banbourth castell and wanne it, wherfore the kynge in the moneth of Auguste folowynge, rode agayne northewarde wyth hys power / and ouer that vytayled certayne shyppes in the west countre, & manned them, & sent them thyder to make warre vp¦pon the see coost. And in the latter ende of this may¦res yere / the duke of Somerset he∣rynge that kynge Henry was com∣mynge into the lande wyth a newe strength, departed secretly / & wente agayne to hym. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxiiii.   Robert Basset.   Mathewe Phylyp Goldsmyth.   Anno .iii.   Thomas Muschampe.   IN this yere & moneth of May, whyche was in the begynyng of the .iiii. yere of kyng Edwarde / the lorde Iohn̄ of Mountagu hauynge than the rule in the northe partyes, beynge warned of the commynge of Henry late kynge wyth a greate po∣wer out of Scotlande, assembled the Northynmen, and mette wyth hym about Exhm̄, and there skyrmysshed wyth ye Scottes, & at length wan ye vyctory of hys enemyes / and chased Henry so nere, that he wan from him certayne of hys folowers trapped wyth blewe veluet, and hys bycoket garnysshed wyth two crownes of golde and fret wyth perle and ryche stone. He also toke at the sayd iourney ye duke of Somerset, the lorde Hunger¦forde, & the lorde Roos. whych sayde duke was shortly after put to deth at the sayd towne of Exhm̄ / & the other ii. lordes were soon after beheded at
new castell. And other whyche were after that fyght taken in a wood fast by, as syr Phylyp wētworth, syr Ed∣mond Fiz knyghtes, Blacke Iaquis Iohn̄ Bryce, & Thomas Hunt / were also put to deth at Exhm̄ foresayd or Myddelham after some wryters / & syr Thomas Husey knyght was be∣heded at yorke. And in the moneth of Iuly next folowyng, the sayde lorde Mountagu wyth ayde of hys bro∣ther erle of warwyke, wan by strēgth the forenamed castel of Bamburgth / wherin as one of the said capitaynes was taken wyth other, syr Rauffe Gray / whyche shortly after at yorke was drawen hanged & quartered. In such passe tyme in moste secret maner vpon the fyrste daye of May, kynge Edwarde spoused Elizabeth late the wyfe of syr Iohan Graye knyghte / whyche before tyme was slayne at Toweton or yorke felde. whych spousayles were solempnised erely in the mornynge at a towne na∣med Graston nere vnto Stonynge∣stratforde. At whyche maryage was no persones present, but the spouse, the spousesse, the duches of Bedford her mother, the preste, two gentylwo¦men, & a yong mā to helpe the preeste synge. After whyche spousayles en∣ded / he wēt to bedde, & so taried there vpon .iii. or .iiii. houres / and after de∣parted and rode agayne to Stonyng stratforde, and came in maner as though he had ben on huntyng, and there went to bedde agayne. And wythin a daye or .ii. after, he sente to Graston̄ to the lorde Ryuers father vnto hys wyfe, shewyng to hym, that he wolde come and lodge wyth hym a certayne season / where he was re∣ceyued wyth all honoure, & so taryed there by the space of foure dayes. In whyche season she nyghtely to hys bedde was brought, in so secrete ma∣ner that almooste none but her mo∣ther was of counsayll. And so thys maryage was a season kepte secrete after, tyll nedely it muste be dyscoue∣red & dysclosed, by meane of other whyche were offered vnto the kyng, as the quene of Scottes & other. what oblyquy ran after of thys ma∣ryage, howe the kyng was enchaun∣ted by the duchesse of Beforde, and howe after he wolde haue refused her wyth many other thynges concer∣nynge thys matyer / I here paūe it ouer. And thys yere was kynge Henry taken in a wood in the north countre by one named Cantiowe, and pre∣sented to the kynge / and after sente to the towre, where he remayned longe after. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxv.   Iohn̄ Tate.   Rauffe Iosselyne Draper.   Anno .iiii.   Iohn̄ Stone.   IN this yere was a new coyne ordeyned by ye kyng, yt whyche was named ye Royall / & was & yet is in value of .x.s. the halfe royal .v.s / & the ferthyng .ii.s.vi.d. And ouer yt he ordeyned ye secōd coyne of golde & na¦med it ye angel, which was & yet is in value of .vi.s.viii.d / & the half angel iii.s.iiii.d. He ordeyned also a newe coyne of grotes, halfe grotes, & pens whych were of lasse weyght than the olde grote was by .viii.d. in an vnce. And thā was fyne gulde auaūsed frō s. to .xl.s an vnce / & other baser goldes after ye rate. And syluer that before was at .viii. grotes and .xxx.d.
an vunce, was hyghed to .xl.d. an vunce and .iii.s.ii.d. And in thys mayres yere and be∣gynnyng of the .v. yere, that is to say the .xxvi. day of May that yere whyt sonday / quene Elizabeth was crow∣ned at westmynster wyth great solēp¦nytie. At the whyche season at the towre / the nyghte before the corona∣cyon / amonge many knyghtes of the bathe there made, was as of that cō∣pany syr Thomas Cooke, syr Ma∣thewe Phylyp, syr Rauffe Iosselyne, and syr Henry wauyr cytezyns of Lō¦don thanne and there made knygh∣tes. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxv.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxvi.   Syr Henry wauyr.   Rauffe Uerney Mercer.   Anno .v.   wyllyam Constantyne.   IN thys yere, that is to saye the xi. daye of the moneth of Fe∣bruary / was Elizabeth pryncesse and fyrste chylde of kyng Edward borne at westmynster. whose crystenynge was done in the abbaye wyth moste solempnyte. And the more, bycause the kynge was assured of hys physy∣cyons that the quene was conceyued wyth a prynce / and specyally of one named mayster Dominyk, by whose counsayll greate prouysyon was or∣deyned for crystenynge of the sayde prynce. wherfore it was after tolde, that thys mayster Domynyk to the entente to haue greate thanke and rewarde of the kynge / he stode in the second chamber where the quene tra¦uayled, that he myghte be the fyrste that shulde brynge tydynges to the kynge of the byrth of the prynce. And lastly whan he harde the chyld crye / he knocked or called secretly at ye chā¦ber dore, and frayned what the quene had. To whome it was answered by one of the ladyes, what so euer ye que¦nes grace hathe here wythin / suer it is that a fole standeth there wythout. And so confused wyth hys answere / he departed wythoute saynge of the kynge for that tyme. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxvi.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxvii.   Iohn̄ Browne.   Syr Iohn̄ yonge Grocer. Henry Bryce. Anno .vi.   Iohn̄ Stokton.   IN thys yere and moneth of, dyed the forenamed Hē¦ry Bryce / and for hym was chosen immedyatly a sheryfe for thys yere Iohn̄ Stokton. And in the moneth of Iuny folowynge, were certayne actes and feates of warre doone in Smythfeld, betwene syr Antony wy deuyle called lorde Scalys vpō that one partye, and the bastarde of Bur∣goyne chalengour on that one par∣tye. Of whych the lord Scalys wan the honour / for the sayd bastard was at the fyrste course rennynge wyth a sharpe sperys ouerthrowen horse & man. whyche was by the rage of the horse of the sayd bastarde, and nat by violence of the strokē of hys enemy / & by a pyke of iron standyng vppon foreparte of the sadell of ye lord Sca∣lys. wherwyth the horse beyng blynd of the bastarde was stryken into the nose thrylles, and for payne thereof mounted so hyghe vpon the hynder
fete, that he fyll bakwarde. Upon the seconde daye they met there agayne vpon fote, and faughte wyth theyr axes a fewe strokes. But whan the kynge sawe that the lorde Scalys had auauntage of the bastarde, as ye poynt of hys axe in the vysour of his enemyes helmet, and by force therof was lykely to haue borne hym ouer: the kyng in hast cryed to such as had the rule of the felde, that they shulde departe them / and for more spede of the same, caste downe a warderer whych he than helde in hys hande / & so were they departed to the honour of the lorde Scalys for bothe dayes. Upon the morow folowynge & the o∣ther dayes, were certayne actes of warre done betwene dyuers gen∣tylmen of thys lande, and certayne of the sayd bastardes seruauntes. Of the whyche also the Englyshmen wan the honour. In thys yere also one named Iohn̄ Derby alderman, for so moche as he refused to cary or to paye for the caryage awaye of a dede dogge lyenge at hys dore, & for vnsittynge langage whyche he gaue vnto the mayre / he was by a court of aldermen demed to a fyne of .l. poūde whyche he payde euery peny. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxviii.   Humfrey Heyforde.   Thomas Owlegraue.   Anno .vii.   Thomas Stalbroke.   IN thys yere of the mayre, and in the begynnynge of the .viii. yere of thys kyng Edwarde, that is to meane vpon saterday next ensuīg the feest of corpus christi / dame Mar¦garete syster vnto the kyng, rode tho¦rugh London towarde the sees syde to passe into Flaunders, there to be maryed to Charlys duke of Bur∣goyne before named in the story of y• xi. Lowys kyng of Fraūce. After whose departure, syr Thomas Cook late mayre, which before was peched of treason by a seruaūt of the lordes wenlokkes called Hawkyns, and at the request of the sayd lady Marga∣rete vppon suertie suffered to go at large / than was arrested & sent vnto the towre, & his goodes seased by the lorde Ryuerse than tresourer of Eng¦lande / and hys wyfe put oute of hys house, and cōmytted to the charge of the mayer / in whose place she laye a season after. And after the sayde syr Thomas had lyen a tyme in ye towre he was brought vnto the Guyldhal, and there areygned of the sayde trea¦son and quyt by sondry enquestes / & after that commytted vnto the coun∣tour in Bradstrete, and frome thens to the kynges bēche in Southwark. where he laye wythin the sayd prysō tyll hys freendes agreed wyth syr Iohn̄ Brandon than kepar of ye sayd prysō, to take hym home to hys place where to hys great charge he remay∣ned as prysoner longe after. In whych tyme and season he lost moch good / for bothe hys places in the countre and also in London were vnder the gydynge of the sayde lor∣des Ryuers seruauntes, and of the seruauntes of syr Iohn̄ Fogge than vndertresourer / the whych spoyled & dystroyed moche thynge. And ouer that moche of hys iewel¦les and plate wyth great substaunce of the marchaundyse, as cloth of syl∣kes and clothes of aras, were dysco∣uered by suche persones as he hadde betaken the sayd goodes to kepe / & came to ye treasourers handes, which
to the sayd syr Thomas was a great enemye. And fynally after many persecucyons and losses / was com∣pelled as for a fyne sette vppon hym for offence of mysprysyon, to paye, vnto the kynge .viii. thousand poūd. And after he hadde thus agreed, and was at large for the kynges interest / he was thanne in newe trouble a∣gayne the quene. The whyche demaunded of hym as hys ryght, for euery thousande .li. payde vnto the kyng by way of fyne, an hundreth marke. For the whiche he had after longe sute and greate charge / and in conclusion was fayne to agre, and to gyue to her a greate pleasure / besyde many good gyftes that he gaue vnto her counsayll. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxix.   Symonde Smyth.   wyllyam Taylour Grocer.   Anno .viii.   wyllyam Haryot.   THys yere and .xxi. day of Nouē¦bre / a seruaunt of the dukes of Exceter named Rychard Ste∣rys, after hys iugement was drawen thorugh the citie vnto the towre hyl, and there parted in two pesys / that is the hede from the body. And vpon the daye folowynge / two persones beyng named the one Poynys & that other Alforde, were drawē west ward to tyborne / and there whā they shuld haue ben hanged, there chartours were shewed and so preserued. And about thys season or soon af¦ter / was the erle of Oxenford, which before tyme was taken by a surmyse in ielosy of treason awayted for and after deliuered. In the latter ende of this mayres yere, & .ix. yere of ye king / the marchauntes eesterlynges were condempned vnto the marchauntes auenturers Englyssh, after longe & sumptuous exspences in the lawe & before the kynges counsayll / in .xiii.M.v.C. and .xx.li. whereof the pay∣ment was kept secret frome wryters. In thys yere the dyssymuled fa∣uoure, whiche betwene the kyng and the erle of warwyke had styll conty∣nued syne the maryage of the quene, beganne to appere / in so moche that the erle wythdrewe hym frome the kynge, and confedered vnto hym the duke of Clarence that before hadde maryed hys doughter. whereupon the commons of the north beganne to rebell, and chase theym a capytayne, whome they had named Robyn of Ryddysdale. The whyche dyd many feates / and lastly bare hym so wysely, that he & hys cō∣pany were pardoned of the kyng. In the which rumour and styrryng / the lord Ryuers, and syr Iohn̄ hys sonn̄, that before had maryed the old duchesse of Northfolke, lyenge at a place by Charynge crosse called the Muys, were taken by Lyncoln̄shyre men and brought vnto Northamtō, and there beheded. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxix.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxx.   Rycharde Gardyner.   Rycharde Lee Grocer.   Anno .ix.   Robert Drope.  
THys yere soone after Alhalo∣wen tyde, proclamaciōs were made thorugh the cytye of London, that the kynge hadde pardoned the Northyrnmē of theyr ryot / & aswell for the deth of the lorde Ryuers, as all dyspleasures by them before that tyme done. And soone vppon thys, a new styrryng begā in Lyncoln̄ shyre whereof the occasyoner was the lorde wellys, as the fame than went. For whome the kynge sent by fayre mea∣nes, promysyng hym to go safe and come safe as it was sayd. But trouth it is after hys commyng to the kyng had he before suche promyse or nat, he was shortly after beheded. Than in February folowyng / by medyacyon of lordes a treatye of vnytie and concorde was laboured betwene the kyng & hys brother and the erle of warwyke. For whyche cause the sayd erle came thanne vnto London. And shortly after came the sayd duke, as vpon shrouesonday fo∣lowyng. And vpon the thuysday fo∣lowyng, the kynge & the sayde duke mettte at Baynardes castell, where ye duchesse of yorke theyr mother than laye. In the whyche passetyme ye erle of warwyke was retourned to war∣wyke / and there gadered to him such strēgth as he myght make, as it was reported. And in Lyncoln̄shyre / syr Robert wellys sonne vnto the lorde wellys before put to deth, in thys whyle had also assembled a greate bend of men, & purposed to gyue the kyng a felde. Of all whyche tydynges whāne the kynge was assertayned / he wyth his sayd brother the duke spedhim north warde / and in that whyle sente to the sayd syr Robert wellys, wyllyng him to sende home hys people, & come to hym, and he shulde haue hys grace. But that other answered that by like promysse hys father was dysceyued / and that shulde be hys example. But in conclusyon whan the kynge wyth hys power drewe nere vnto hī, he toke suche fere that he fledde / and soone after was taken, and with him syr Thomas Dymmok knyght and other, the whyche were shortly after put to deth. In thys season was the duke of Clarence departed frome the kynge / and was gone vnto the erle of war∣wyke to take hys parte. To whome the kynge in lykewyse sente, yt they shuld come to hys presence wythout fere / where vnto they made a fayned answere. And than consyderynge theyr lacke of power agayne ye kyng / departed and wente to the see syde, & so sayled into Fraunce / and requyred the .xi. Lowys than kyng of that re∣gyon, that he wolde ayde and assyste them to restore kynge Henry to hys ryghtfull enherytaunce. wherof the sayd Lowys beyng gladde, graūted vnto them theyr requeste / & helde thē there, whyle they wyth the counsayll of quene Margarete prouyded for theyr retourne into Englande. whan the sayde lordes were thus departed the lande / the kyng cōmaū∣ded them to be proclaymed as rebel∣les and traytours thorugh oute hys realm. And in the Easter weke folow¦ynge / syr Geffrey Gate & one named Claphā, whyche entended at South ampton to haue taken shyppynge & to haue sayled to the sayde lordes, were there taken by the lorde Ha∣warde and sente vnto warde. whych sayde Clapham was beheded soone after / and the sayde syr Geffrey Gate fande suche frendshyp, that lastly he escaped or was delyuered / so that he yode after to seynt wary. Thanne was the lorde of saynte Iohn̄s arrested. But at instaunce of the archebysshop of Caunterbury, he went a season at large vnder suerty,
and was fynally commytted to the towre. In whych passetyme the erle of Oxenforde gat ouer vnto the fore¦sayd lordes. Thus enduryng thys trouble / a stirrynge was made in the north partyes by the lord Fitz Hugh wherfore the kyng sped hym thyder∣warde. But so soone as the sayd lord knewe of the kynges cōmyng / anone he lefte hys peple & fledde into Scot¦lande. And the kyng whych thā was commyn to yorke, rested hym a sea∣son there and there about. In the moneth of Septembre & .x yere of the kyng / the forsayd duke of Clarence accōpanyed wyth the erles of warwyke of Penbroke & of Oxen¦forde & other many gentylmen, lan∣ded at Dartmouth in Deuynshyre / & there made theyr proclamacyons in the name of kyng Henry the .vi / and so drewe ferther into the lāde. wherof herynge the commons of that coūtre & other / drewe vnto theym by greate companyes. Than the Kentyshemen beganne to were wylde / & assembled theym in great companyes, and so came vnto the out partyes of the cytye of Lon∣don, Radlyffe, saynte Katherynes, and other places, & robbed and spoy∣led the Flemynges and all the bere houses there as they came. Thā the foresayde lordes holding on theyr iournaye / drewe towarde ye kynge beyng in the northe as aboue is sayde. wherof he beyng warned, and hauyng wyth hym as than but small strength wherof some to hym were nat very trusty / he wyth a secret company toke the next waye toward the wash in Lyncolneshyre / and there passed ouer wyth great daunger, nat wythout losse of dyuers of hys com∣pany / and so passed the coūtrees into Flaunders, and stynted nat tyll he came to Charles hys brother thanne duke of Burgoyne / wyth whome he rested a season. whā the quene which than was in the towre harde of the kynges auoydynge / anone she depar¦ted frome thens and yode vnto west∣mynster, and there regystred her selfe for a seyntwary woman / and in lyke wyse dyd many of kynge Edwardes frendes. And than about the begynnynge of Octobre / syr Geffrey Gate that till that tyme had holden the sayde seyn∣twary and other wyth hym, wente vnto the prysons aboute London / & all suche as they had fauoure vnto, toke them out and sette them at lyber¦tye. And than shypmen & other euyll dysposed persones as than drewe to the sayd Geffrey Gate / robbed agayn the berehouses, & set some of them in fyre / and after resorted vnto the ga∣tes of the cytye, & there wolde haue entred by force. But the cytezeyns wythstode theym wyth suche force, that they were compelled to departe thens. Upon the .xii. day of October, the towre was gyuē vp by appoyntmēt / & kyng Henry was takē from the lod¦gyng where he before laye, and was than lodged in the kynges lodgyng wythin the sayde towre. In whyche passetyme the duke & the forsayd lor∣des drewe nere vnto the cytye. And vpon saterday than nexte fo∣lowyng / the sayd duke accompanied wyth ye erles of warwyke & of Shro¦wysbury and the lord Stanley, rode vnto the towre / and there wyth all honour and reuerence fet out kynge Henry, & conueyed hym to Poulys / & there lodged hym in the bysshoppes palays / & so was thā admytted & ta∣ken for kyng thorugh all the lande. Readoptio Henrici .vi. HEnri ye .vi. of that name before by Edwarde ye .iiii. put down,
was agayne restored to the crowne of Englande, the. daye of Octobre, in the yere of grace .M.iiii. C.lxix / and the .x. yere of Edwarde ye iiii / & the .xii. yere of the .xii. Lowys than kynge of Fraunce. In whose begynnyng of readop∣cyon, the erle of worceter whych for hys cruelnesse was called the bochier of England / was taken and putte in streyght pryson. And vppon the xv. daye of October, was the sayde erle aregned at westmynster in the whyte hall, and there endyted of trea¦son / and vpon the mōdaye folowyng adiuged that he shulde go frome the same place vnto the towre hylle, and there to haue hys hede smytten of. But as he was commynge from the sayde place of iugemente toward his execucyon / the people presyd so inpor¦tunatly vpon hym for to se & beholde hym, that the sheryfes were fayne to tourne into the Flete, and there to bo¦rowe gayoll for hym for that nyght. And vpon the morowe after at after¦noone beynge saynt Lukys day and xviii. daye of Octobre / he was ladde to the towre hylle / where he toke his deth full paciently. whose corps was after borne wyth the hedde vnto the blacke freres, and there honourably buryed in a chapell standynge in the body of the churche whych he before tyme had founded. And than was dayly awaytynge vpon the see syde, for the landyng of quene Margaret and prynce Edwarde her sonne / and also prouysyon made for the defence of landynge of kynge Edwarde and hys company. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxx.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxi.   Iohn̄ Crosby. Anno Henrici .vi. primo. Iohn̄ Stokton̄. mercer.       Iohn̄ warde. Anno Edwardi .iiii.x. IN thys yere, whyche was in ye ende of the .x. yere of kyng Ed∣warde, and beginnyng of the readop¦cion of kyng Henry, that is to meane the thyrde daye of Nouembre / quene Elizabeth beynge as before is sayde in westmynster seyntwary, was lygh¦ted of a fayre prynce. And wythin the sayd place the sayd chylde wyth∣out pōpe was after crystened. whose godfathers were the abbot & pryour of the sayd place, & the lady Scrope godmother. And the .xxvi. daye of the sayd moneth folowyng, began a par¦lyament / & frome thens proroged to Paulys, where it cōtynued tyll Crist¦mas. In the parlyamente syr Tho∣mas Cooke before trowbeled as I haue shewed in the .vii. yere of kynge Edwarde, put in a byll into the com∣mon house, to be restored of the lorde Ryuers landes & other occasyoners of hys trowble, to the summe of .xxii.M. marke. Of the whyche he hadde good comforte to haue ben allowed of kynge Henry, if he had prospered / and the rather, for that that he was of the commō house, and therwyth a man of great boldnesse in speche and well spoken, & syngulerly wytted & well reasoned. Than durynge thys parlyament / kyng Edward was proclaymed vsur¦per of the crowne, and the duke of Glouceter hys yonger brother tray∣tour / & both attaynted by auctorytie of the sayd parlyament. And vppon the .xiiii. daye of Fe∣bruary, came the duke of Exceter to London. And the .xxvii. daye of ye sayde moneth, rode the erle of war∣wyke thorugh ye citie toward Douer
for to haue receyued quene Marga∣rete / but he was dyspoynted. For the wynde was to her contrary, that she laye at the see syde taryeng for a con¦uenyent wynde, from Nouember tyl Apryll. And so the sayde erle after he had longe taryed for her at the see syde / was fayne to retourne without spede of hys purpose. Thus duryng thys queysy seasō / the mayre ferynge the retourne of kynge Edwarde fayned hym syke / & so kepte hys house a great season. All whych tyme syr Thomas Cooke whyche than was admytted to hys former rome, was sette in his place, and allowed for hys deputye / whych tourned after to hys greate trowble and sorowe. Than fynally in the begynnynge of the moneth of Apryll / kynge Ed∣warde landed in the north at a place called Rauynspore wyth a small cō∣pany of Flemynges and other, so yt all hys company exceded nat the nō∣ber of .M. persones / & so drewe hym towarde yorke, makyng hys procla∣macyons as he wente in the name of kyng Henry / and shewed to the peo∣ple, that he came for none entent but onely to clayme hys enherytaunce y• dukedome of yorke / & so passed the countres tyll he came to the cytye of yorke, where the cytezyns helde hym oute tyll they knew hys entent. And whan he had shewed vnto theym as he before had done vnto other, & con∣fermed it by an othe / he was there re∣ceyued and refresshed for a certayne tyme, & so departed & helde his waye towarde London / and passed by fa∣uoure & fayer wordes the daūger of the lorde Marquys Mountagu, whyche in that costes laye than in a∣wayte for hym purposely to stoppe hys way, & had people dowble of nō∣bre that kyng Edwarde had of fygh¦tynge men. whā kyng Edwarde was thus passed the sayd Marquys, and sawe that hys strength was greatly amended, & that also dayly the peple drewe to hym / he than made procla∣macyons in hys owne name as king of Englande / & so helde on hys iour∣nay tyll he came vnto London. In whyche passetyme, that is to meane vpon sherethursdaye / the archebys∣shoppe of yorke beynge than at Lon¦dō wyth kyng Henry, to the entent to moue the peoples hertes towarde ye kyng / rode about the towne wyth hī, and shewed hym to the people / the whyche rather withdrewe mēnes her¦tes than other wyse. And in thys sea∣son also syr Thomas Cooke before-named auoyded the lande / entēdyng to haue sayled into Fraunce. But he was taken of a shyp of Flaunders, & hys sonne & heyre wyth hym / and so sette there in pryson many dayes / & lastly was delyuered vnto kyng Ed∣warde. Than vpon sherethursdaye at af∣ter noone, kynge Edwarde was re∣ceyued into the cytye / and so rode to Poulys, and there offered at ye roode of the north dore / and that done yode incontynently into the bysshoppes palays, where he fande kynge Hen∣ry almoste alone. For all such lordes and other as in the mornynge were about hym, whan they harde of king Edwardes commynge, anone they fledde, and euery man was fayne & gladde to saue hym selfe. Than king Edwarde lodged hym / where kynge Henry laye, & put hym vnder safe ke¦pynge / and soo rested hym there tyll Easter euyn. Upon the whyche euyn, heryng of hys brothers cōmynge & ye other lordes wyth hym wyth a strōg hoste vnto saynt Albonis / sped hym thyderward, & lay that nyght at Bar¦net. In whyche season the duke of Clarence contrary hys othe and promyse made vnto the Frenche
kynge refused the tytle of kyng Hen¦ry / and sodaynly wyth the strengthe that he hadde, rode streyghte vnto hys brother kynge Edwarde / wher∣with the other lordes were somdeale abasshed. The whyche not wythstan¦dynge / the sayd lordes, by the specy∣all comforte and exortacyon of the erle of Oxenforde as it was sayde, helde on theyr iournay toward Ber∣net, the sayd erle of Oxenford beyng in the vawarde / and so came vnto ye playne without Bernet, and there pyght theyr felde. Then vpon ye mo∣rowe beynge Easter daye & the .xiiii. daye of Apryll very erly, both hostes mette. wherupō that one party were two knyges present, as Hēry the .vi. whych kynge Edward had brought thyder with hym, and kyng Edward the .iiii. And vpon that other partye was the duke of Exceter, the lorde Marquys Mountagu, and the two erlys of warwyke and of Oxenford, wyth many other men of name. There the sayd erle of Oxenforde and his company quyt them so man∣fully, that he bare ouer that parte of the feeld whyche he sette vppon / so ferforthly ye tydynges came to Lon∣don, that kynge Edwarde had loste the felde. And yf hys men had kepte theyr araye & not fallen to ryfflyng / lykely it hadde bene as it was after tolde, that the vyctory hadde fallen to that partye. But after longe and cruell fyght, in conclusyon kyng Ed¦warde optayned the vpper hande, & slewe of hys ennemyes the marques Mountagu and the erle of warwyk hys brother, wyth many other. And vppon the kynges party was slayne the lorde Barnes. And of the comōs vppon bothe partyes were slayne vpon .xv.C. men and mo. Of the mystes and other impedy¦mentes whyche fyll vpon the lordes party by reason of the incantacyons wrought by fryer Būgey as ye fame wēt, me lyst not to wryte. But trouth it is that after thys vyctory thus wonne by kynge Edwarde / he sente the dede corps of the sayd Marquys and erle of warwyke vnto Poulys chyrche / where they laye two dayes after naked in .ii. coffyns that euery man myghte beholde and se theym. And the same after none came kyng Edwarde agayn vnto London, and offered at ye roode of the North dore at Poulys / and after rode vnto west¦mynster and there lodgyd hym. And soone after that the kynge was thus passed tho▪ ough the cyty, was kyng Henry brought rydynge in a longe gowne of blewe veluet / and so con∣ueyed thoroughe Chepe vnto west∣mynster, and frome thens vnto the Towre / where he remayned as pry∣soner all hys lyues tyme after. The repossessyon of Ed∣warde the .iiii. EDward the .iiii. before na∣med began agayne his do¦mynyon ouer the realme of England, the .xiiii. daye of Apryll, in ye begynnyng of the yere of our lord .M.iiii.C.lxxi / & the .xii. yere of Lewys the Frenche kynge / and reposseded all thynges as he before hadde done. And when the sayde two corps hadde lyen in Poules openly from the Sondaye tyll the Tuysdaye / they were hadde from thens & buryed where ye kynge wolde assygne them. The kynge then beynge in autho∣ryte / made prouysyon for the defence of the landynge of quene Margaret and hyr sonne / the whyche all thys whyle laye at the see syde taryenge the wynde / and so lastely landed at, and came with a strength of Frenchmē & other, as farre within
thē lande as to a vyllage in called Tewkysbury. where the kyng mette wyth her and hyr dystressyd, & chasyd her company and slewe many of them. In the whyche batayle she was taken, & syr Edward her sonne / and so brought vnto the kynge. But after the kynge had questyoned with the sayd syr Edwarde, and he hadde answered vnto hym cōtrary his plea¦sure / he thenne strake hym wyth hys gauntelet vpon the face. After whi∣che stroke so by hym receyued / he was by the kynges seruauntes incō¦tynently slayne vpon the .iiii. daye of the moneth of May. whan kynge Edwarde had thus subdued hys enemyes / anone he sent quene Margarete vnto London, where she restyd a season / and fynal∣ly she was sent home into her coun∣tre. And the goodes of syr Thomas Cook were agayne ceasyd / and hys wyfe put forth, and commaunded to be kepte at the mayers. Uppon the .xiiii. daye of May fo∣lowynge / the bastarde of Fawcon∣brydge, that vnto hym had gaderyd a ryottous and euyll dysposyd com∣panye of shypmen and other, wyth also the assystence of ye comons both of Essex and of Kent / came in greate multytude vnto the cyty of London. And after that the sayd cōpany was denyed passage thorough the cytye / they set vpō dyuers partyes therof, as Bysshoppes gate, Algate, Londō brydge, and alonge the waters syde, and shotte gonnes and arowes, and fyred the gates wyth cruell malyce, as Bysshops gate and Algate / and faught so fyersly that they wanne ye bulwerkes at Algate, and entred a certayne wythin the gate. But the cytesyus wyth comfort and ayde of Robert Baset alderman assygned to the gate / wythstode the sayd rebelles so manfully, that they slewe all such as entred the gate / and compellyd ye other to drawe a backe and forsoke the gate. Uppon whom the cytesyns pursued / and chased theym vnto the forther Stratforde, and slewe & toke many of them prysoners. wherof herynge the other whyche assayled the other partes of the cytie, fledde in lyke wyse. whom the other cytesyns pursued as farre as Dep∣forde, in sleynge and takyng of them prysoners in great nomber, and after them raunsomed as they hadde ben Frenchemen. And the bastarde with hys shypmē were chasyd vnto theyr shyppes lyenge at Blackwall / and there in the chase many slayne. And the sayde bastarde the nyghte folow∣ynge stale out hys shyppes out of ye ryuer / and so departed and escaped for the tyme. Than vpon Assencyon euyn next ensuynge, the corps of Henry the .vi. late kynge was brought vnreuerent¦ly from the tower thorough the high stretes of the cyty vnto Poulys chyr¦che, and there lefte that nyght / and vppon the morowe conueyed wyth gleyuys and other wepens as he be∣fore thyder was brought vnto Cher∣tyssey, and there was buryed. Of the deth of this prince dyuers tales were tolde. But the moste co∣mon fame went, that he was stycked wyth a dagger by the handes of the duke of Glouceter / whyche after Ed¦warde the .iiii. vsurped the crowne, and was kyng as after shall appere. Than kyng Edwarde after thys victory thus hadde at Tewkesbury, retourned vnto London / and vpon the mondaye folowynge Assencyon daye, he toke hys iournay into Kent, hauyng with hym a strength of peo∣ple / and there sette hys iustyces, and made inquysycyons of the ryot be∣fore done by the bastarde and hys ac¦cessaryes. For the whyche at Caun∣terbury
and other good townes in Kent, dyuers were put in execucyon. Of whom the hedes were sent vnto London, and set vpon the brydge. And in lyke maner inquysyciōs were made in Essex / and some also of them put in execucyon. Of whyche a capy∣tayne named Spysynge was han∣ged, and hys hede set vpon Algate. And many of the ryche commons of Kent were set at greuous fynes, both for them selfe and for theyr seruaun∣tes. And when the kyng hadde thus spedde his iournaye / he retourned & came to Londō vpon whytson euyn. And that done, soone after was bys∣shop Neuyll archebysshop of yorke sent vnto Guynes, and there kepte as prysoner longe after. Thys was brother to the lorde marquys Moū∣tagu and to the erle of warwycke. Also in the ende of thys mayers yere, was the forenamed bastarde of Fawconbrydge taken about Sou∣thamton, and there put to execucyō. whose hed was sent to London, and pyght vpon London brydge among other. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxii.   Iohn̄ Aleyn.   wyllyam Edwarde Grocer.   Anno .xi.   Iohn̄ Chelley.   IN thys yere the erle of Oxen∣forde, whych syn the season of Barnet felde hadde holden saynte Myghellys mounte / was by an ap∣poyntement taken thens, and shor∣tely after sente to the castell of Guy∣nes. where he remayned prysoner tyl the last yere of Rycharde the thyrde, whyche was vppon .xii. yeres. In all whyche season my lady hys wyfe myghte neuer be suffered to come to hym / nor hadde any thynge to lyue vpon, but as the people of theyr cha∣rytees wold gyue to her, or what she myghte get wyth her nedell or other suche connyng as she exercysed. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxii.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxiii.   Iohn̄ Browne.   wyllyam Hampton Fysshemonger.   Anno .xii.   Thomas Bledlow.   IN thys yere vpon the syxt day of October, beganne a parlya∣ment at westmynster. By authoryte wherof an ayde was graūted to the kynge, towarde the greate charge of hys warres / the whyche was leuyed of mennes landes, as well of lordes as other. This mayre aboue all other, cor∣rected sore bawdes & strumpettes / & caused theym to be ladde aboute the towne with raye hoddes vpon theyr heddes dyuers & many / and spared none for mede nor for fauour yt were by the lawe attayned / not withstan∣dyng that he myghte haue taken .xl. i. of redy money to hym offered, for to haue spared one from ye iugemēt. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxiiii.   wyllyam Stocker.   Iohn̄ Tate Mercer.   Anno .xiii.   Robert Byllysdon.  
IN thys yere was the duke of Exceter foūden deed in the see bytwene Douer & Calays / but how he was drowned the certaynte is not knowen. In thys mayers yere also was one wyllyam Oldhall condempned, vn∣to a draper of Londō called Chyrsto∣fer Colyns. For the whych condemp¦nacyon he remayned as prysoner in Ludgate. wherupō a season he went at large wyth a keper / he brake from hym, and so escaped / and after was taken and broughte agayne to the sayd prysone. But that not wythstan¦dynge the sayde Chrystofer sued the sheryffes, and caused them to spende great money in defendyng of hys ac¦cyon / and fynally were fayne by way of compremyse to gyue vnto hym an hundreth marke for hys duytye of lxxx.i. and odde. And in thys yere was one Iohn̄ Goos a loller brent at ye Tower hyll for heresye / the whyche before dyer was delyuered to Robert Byllydon one of the sheryffes to put in execu∣cyon that same after none. wherfore he lyke a charytable man hadde hym home to his house, and there exorted hym that he shulde dye a crystenman and renye his fals errours. But that other after longe exortacyon herde, requyred the sheryffe that he myghte haue mate / for he sayde that he was sore hungred. Then the sheryffe com¦maunded hym mete / wherof he toke as he had ayled nothynge / and sayd to suche as stode about hym: I eate now a good and competent dyner / for I shall passe a lytle sharp shower or I go to souper. And when he had dyned he requyred that he myghte shortely be ladde to hys execucyon. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxv.   Edmonde Shaa.   Robert Drop Draper   Anno .xiiii.   Thomas Hylle.   THys yere the kynge entendyng to make a vyage ouer see into Fraunce called before hym his lordes seuerally bothe spyrytuall & temporall, to know theyr good myn¦des, what of theyr free wylles they wolde ayde and depart wyth hym to¦warde the sayd vyage. And after he hadde so knowen theyr good dyspo∣sycion to hym warde / he then sent for the mayre of London and hys bro∣therne the aldermen, and them seue∣rally examyned and exorted to ayde & assyst hym toward the sayd iournay. Of whyche the mayre for hys parte graunted .xxx.li / and of the aldermen some .xx. marke / and the leest .x.li. And that done he sent for all the trusty comoners wythin the sayde cytye / and them exorted in lyke ma∣ner. whyche for the more party graū¦ted to hym the wages of halfe a man for a yere. The whyche amounted to iiii.li.xi.s.iiii.d. And after yt he rode about the more parte of the lande, & vsed the people in such fayre maner, that he reysed therby notable sumes of money. The whyche waye of the leuyeng of thys money was after na¦med a benyuolence. Then the kyng thus hauyng this greate substaunce of goodes / made purueyannce for the sayd iournaye. And vppon the .iiii. daye of Iuly fo∣lowyng, in the .xv. yere of his reygne rode with a goodly cōpany thorugh the cytye towarde the see syde / and so spedde hym to Caleys, and frome thens into Fraunce. wherof herynge Lewys the French kynge / assembled
hys people in greate nomber, and so spedde hym toward the kynge. But when bothe hostes were met / within shorte space suche offers of a peas were proferyd by the Frenche kyng, that fynally bothe prynces agreed vpon a pease to be had for the terme of both theyr lyues, and a yere after, as some wryters haue. For the per∣fourmaunce of whyche sayde pease / bothe prynces after met vpon ye day of the Decollacyon of saynte Iohn̄ the baptyste or the .xxix. daye of Au∣guste, at a place named in Frenche Pynyak / and the .iiii. daye of Nouē∣ber as affermeth Gaguinus. But yt can not stande wyth / for kynge Ed∣warde was receyued agayn into Lō¦don after his retourne out of Fraūce the .xxviii. daye of September. At thys place was a ryuer / vppon the whych a brydge was made such wy∣se, that bothe prynces theron myght mete, wyth suche company as eyther for them had appoynted. There also was ordeyned a place with a party∣cyon bytwene both prynces, yt nother of them myghte entre vnto other / but made wyth a lowpe, that eyther myghte se other & take eyther other by the hande. where at the daye lymyted, eyther mette wyth other hostes standynge a certayne distaunce from the ryuers syde in conuenyent araye. Then the sayde kynges there after salutacyon due made, eyther to other had longe cōmunycacyon. In conclusyon wher¦of, as sayth Gaguyne, a peas was cō¦fyrmed bytwene bothe realmes for vii. yeres. For perfourmaūce wherof as affermeth the sayde authour / the Frenche kynge gaue vnto kyng Ed¦ward incōtinently .lxxv.M. crownes of golde / and yerely after durynge ye sayde .vii. yeres .l.M. crownes. And so he receyued in hande accomptyng euery crowne at .iiii.s.xv.M.li. and yerely after .x.M.li / whych sayde .xv.M.li. the sayd Frēche kyng borowed of his cytesyns of Parys. After thys treuce and peas thus concluded by∣twene these two princes / anone after theyr sonderyng, ploclamaciōs were made therof thorough bothe hostes / and commaundement gyuen to the capytayns, that they shulde prouyde for theyr retourne homewarde. And soone vppon the French kynge sent vnto the dukes of Clarence and of Glouceter with other lordes such as were in kynge Edwardes fauour, greate and costyous gyftes. Of the nyse and wanton dysgysed apparell that kyng Lewys ware vppon hym at that tyme of his metyng I myght make a longe rehersall. But for it shulde sownde more to dysho∣nour of suche a noble man, that was apparayled more lyker a mynstrell thā a prynce royall / therfore I passe it ouer. For all be it yt he was so new∣fangyll in his clothynge / yet had he many vertues. wherof largesse was one / as it appered by sondy gyftes, which he gaue vnto sōdry straūgers, which in his story somdeale I haue towchyd. And also his bounty appe∣ryd by a gyfte yt he gaue vnto ye lorde Hastynges than lord chāberlayn / as xxiiii. dosen of bollys, wherof halfe were gylt & half whyte / which weyed vpō .xvii. nobles euery cup or more. Thē to retourne vnto kynge Ed∣ward / trouth it is yt after ye cōforma∣cyon of ye foresayde peas, kynge Ed∣ward returned to Calys & there shyp¦ped / & so sped hym yt vpon the .xxviii. day of Septēber folowynge, he was with great tryumghe receyued of the mayre & cytesyns of Londō at Blak∣heth, & with all honour by them con∣ueyed thorough the cytye vnto west∣mynster / the mayre and aldermen be¦ynge cladde in scarlet, and the como¦ners to ye nomber of .v.C. in murrey.
Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxv.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxvi.   Hugh Bryce.   Rober Basset Salter   Anno .xv.   Robet Colwych   THys yere this mayre dyd sharp correccyon vppon bakers for makynge of lyght brede / in so moch that he set dyuers vpon ye pyl∣lory. Amonge the whyche in the mo∣neth of Iohn̄ Mondue ba∣ker was there punysshed. And in the moneth of one named wyllyā Hubbard was also there shryned for lyke offence. And a woman named Agnes Deynty was also there punis¦shed for selling false myngyd butter. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxvi.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxvii.   Rycharde Rawson.   Rauffe Iosselyn Draper.   Anno .xvi.   wyllyam Horne.   IN this yere the mayre hauyng a great mynde to haue the wal¦les of the cytye repayred / by a cōsente of the benche and of the comyn coū∣sayle, caused the More felde to be ser¦ched, and there prouyded for bryk & lyme. As fyrste caused the erthe to be dyggyd and tempred, and then sette men or werke to moolde / and thenne sent into the west countre and there purueyed wode for to bren it. And that done sente into Kent, and there purueyed chalke, that shortely was brought into the sayde More felde. And ryght there in a kylle whych he in that season hadde prouyded, was brent and made lyme of a great for∣theraunce of that werke. The mayre then beynge puruey∣ed of bryk and also of lyme, the why∣che was brent within the sayd more / caused by consent of a comen coun∣sayle to be graunted, that in euery parysshe chyrche euery Sondaye, euery parysshon shulde paye toward the charge .v.d. And for an ensam∣ple to other felysshyppes / he caused his owne company to make as mych of the walle as strechyth frome the chyrche of Alhalowen wythin the sayde walle vnto Bysshoppes gate. whyche presydent caused other wor∣shypfull felysshyppes to make the other parter as now appereth newe made / and the more part therof done in thys yere by hys procurynge and callynge vppon of hym. whych was wonderfull that so myche shulde be spedde in one yere, consyderynge the puruyaunce of the stuffe, whych had ben suffycyent for some man to haue purueyed for in an hole yere. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxviii.   Henry Colet.   Humfrey Heyforde Goldsmyth.   Anno .xvii.   Iohn̄ Stocker.   IN thys yere that is to meane the .xvii. daye of February, the duke of Clarence and seconde bro∣ther to the kynge thanne beynge pry¦soner in the towre, was secretely put to deth and drowned in a barell of maluesye wythin the sayde towre. And thys mayre thys yere pursued
also the reparacyon of the wallys / but not so dylygently as hys prede∣cessour dyd / wherfore it was not sped as it myghte haue bene. And also he was a syke and feble man, and had not so sharpe and quycke mynde as that other had. And one other cause was whych ensueth of a generalyte, that for the more partye one mayre wyll not fynysshe that thynge whych that other begynneth. For then they thynke be the dede neuer so good and profytable, that the honoure therof shalbe ascrybed to the begynner and not to the fynyssher. whyche lacke of charyte and desyre of veyn glory, causeth many good actes and dedes to dye and growe out of mynde, to ye greate decaye of the comon weale of the cytye. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxix.   Robert Hardynge.   Rycharde Gardyner Mercer.   Anno .xviii.   Robert Byfelde.   IN thys yere was great morta∣lyte and deth in London and many other partyes of thys realme / the whyche began in the latter ende of Septēber in the precedynge yere / and contynued in thys yere tyll the begynnynge of Nouember. In the whyche passe tyme dyed innumera∣ble people in the sayde cytye, & many places ellys where. In this yere also the mayre beyng at Poules knelyng in hys deuocyōs at saynt Erkenwaldys shryne / Ro∣bert Byfelde one of the shyryffes vn∣auysedly knelyd downe nyghe vnto the mayre. wherof the mayre after re¦sonyd hym, & layde it to hys charge. But that other beynge somdele rude for lacke of connynge / answered the mayre stubbernly, and wolde not be aknowe of hys offence. wherfore the mayre shewed hys behauour both of worde and dede vnto the benche / by authoryte wherof after ye mater had ben there at length debated, the sayd Robert was fyned at .l. pounde, to be payed towarde the reparacion of the conduytes. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxx.   Thomas Ilam.   Bartylmewe Iamys Draper.   Anno .xix   Iohn̄ warde.   IN this yere one called Robert Deynys, for that that he presu¦med to mary an Orphan wythout ly¦cence of ye mayre and aldermen, was for that offence demyd to paye to the chamber as a fyne .xx.li. And in the yere and moneth of / were .iiii. felowes hanged at the Towre hylle / and in∣contynently theyr bodyes wyth the gybbet brent vnto asshes. whych exe¦cucyon was, for that they robbed a chyrche, and entreated the sacramēt of the aulter inreuerently. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxx.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxxi.   wyllyam Danyell.   Iohn̄ Browne.   Anno .xx.   wyllyam Bacon.  
THys yere kynge Edwarde re∣quyred great sūmes of money to hym to be lent of ye cytesyns of London. To whom after dyuers assembles / they graūted to lende vn∣to hym .v. thousande marke. For the leuyenge wherof, a man was chosen of euery ward / that is to meane .xxv. men. The whych .xxv. persons assem¦bled in the Guyldhalle, sessyd all the cyty ouer wyth two persons of euery parysshe to them assygned / whyche sayd .v. thousand marke was repay∣ed in the yere folowynge. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxi.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxii.   Robert Cate.   wyllyam Haryat Draper. wyllyam wykyng. Anno .xxi.   Rycharde Chawry.   THys yere in the moneth of Fe¦bruary, or ende of Ianuary, dyed wyllyam wykynge one of the sheryffes / for whom was imedyately chosen Rycharde Chawry. And in the moneth Iuly folowynge, ye kyng rode on huntynge in to the forest of waltham / where he commaūded the mayre wyth a certayne of hys bro∣therne to come, & to gyue attendaūce vppon hym wyth certayne comeners of the cytye. where when they were com / the kynge caused the game to be brought before them / so yt they sawe course after course, and many a der bothe rede & falowe to be slayne before them. And after that goodly dspot was passyd / the kynge com¦maunded hys offycers to brynge the mayre and hys company vnto a plea¦saūt lodge made all of grene bowys and garnysshed wyth tables & other thynges necessary / where they were set at dyner, and serued wyth many deynty dysshes and of dyuers wynes good pleynty, as whyte rede and cla∣ret / and caused them to be set to dy∣ner or he were seruyd of hys owne / & ouer that caused the lorde chamber∣layn wyth other lordes to hym assyg¦ned, to chere the sayde mayre and his company sondry tymes whyle they were at dyner / & at theyr departynge gaue vnto them of venyson greate pleynty. And in ye moneth of August folowynge, the kynge of hys greate bounte sente vnto the mayresse and her systers aldermennes wyfes two hartes and .vi. buckes, wyth a tonne of wyne to drynke wyth the sayd ve∣nyson. The whyche venyson & wyne was hadde vnto the drapers halle / to whych place at a day assygned the mayre desyred the aldermē and theyr wyfes wyth sondry comoners / and there the venyson wyth many other good dyshes were eryn, and the sayd wyne merely dronken. The cause of whyche bounty thus shewed by the kynge, was as moste men toke it, for that that the mayre was a marchaūt of wonderous auentures into many and sondry countrees. By reason wherof, the kynge had yerely of hym notable summes of money for hys customes, besyde other pleasures yt he hadde shewed to the kynge before tymes. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiii.   wyllyam whyte.   Edmonde Shaa Goldsmyth.   Anno .xxii.   Iohn̄ Mathewe.  
THis yere, that is to meane of ye mayre and begynnynge of the xxiii. yere of the kynge / at west¦mynster vppon the .ix. daye of Apryll dyed the noble prynce Edwarde the iiii. late kynge of Englande. whose corps was after conueyed wyth due solemnyte vnto wyndsore, and there honourably buryed / when he hadde reygned to reken hys begynnynge out of the lande with all other tyme full .xxii. yeres, and as moch as from the .iiii. daye of Marche vnto the .ix. daye of Apryll / leuynge after hym .ii. sonnes, that is to say prynce Edward hys eldest sonne, and Rycharde duke of yorke / and .iii. doughters, as Ely∣sabeth that after was quene, Cecyle, and Katheryne. Edwarde the .v. EDward the .v. of that name & sonn̄ vnto Edwarde ye iiii / beganne hys reygne ouer the realm of Englād ye .xi. day of Apryl in the beginnyng of the yere of our lord god .M.iiii.C.lxxxiii / and the .xxiiii. yere of the .xi. Lewys than kynge of Fraunce. Anone as kynge Edward the .iiii. was dede / grudge and vnkyndnesse beganne to take place bytwene the kynges and the quenes allye. For ye lorde marquys of Dorset brother vn¦to the quene and other of hys affy∣nytye, hadde then the rule & kepyng of thys yonge kynge, whyche at the tyme of hys fathers deth was of the age of .xi. yere or there about / and so beyng in hys guydyng in ye Marche of walys, cōueyed hym toward Lon¦don, and there to make prouysyō for hys coronacyon and for other neces∣sary thynges for hys weale. But the duke of Glouceter brother vnto Ed∣ward the .iiii. entendynge otherwyse as after shall appere / wyth a compe∣tent nōber of gentylmē of the North all clad in blacke, met with ye kynge at Stonyngstratforde / & there after dyssymuled countenaunce made by∣twene hym & the forsayd Marquys, dischargyd him of the rule of ye king, and toke vpon hym the rule / & so frō thens beynge accompanyed with the duke of Buckyngham, broughte the kynge with all honour toward Lon¦dō. wherof heryng quene Elysabeth moder vnto the kyng / feryng the se∣quele of thys besynesse, went or toke sentwary within westmynster wyth her yonger sonne Rycharde the duke of yorke. And the kynge drawynge nere vnto the cytie / vpon the .iiii. day of Maye, was of the mayre and hys cytesyns mette at Harnesey parke / ye mayre and hys bretherne beynge clo¦thed in scarlet, & the cytesyns in vyo∣let to the nōber of .v. hondred horses / and than from thens conueyed vnto the cytye / the kynge beynge in blewe veluet, and all hys lordes and ser∣uaūtes in blacke clothe / and so after cōueyed vnto the byshoppes palays of London and there lodgyd. And shortely after the sayd duke of Glou∣ceter inueleged so the archbisshop of Caūterbury named Bowchyer / that he went wyth hym to the quene Ely∣sabeth, and there made suche assured promyse to the sayde quene, that she vppon the sayd archbyshoppes pro∣myse delyuered vnto them her yon∣ger sonne duke of yorke. And than the sayde duke caused the kynge to be remoued vnto the towre, and hys brother with hym. But the quene for all fayre promyses to her made / kept her and her doughters wythin the foresayde seyntwary / and the duke lodged hym selfe in Crosbyes place in Bysshoppesgate strete.
Than prouision was made for the kynges coronacyō. In whyche passe tyme the duke beynge admytted for lorde protectour / caused syr Antony wydyuyle called lorde Scalys & bro¦ther vnto ye quene a vertuous knight wyth the lorde Rycharde the quenes sonne, syr Rycharde Hawte, and syr Thomas Uaghan̄ knyghtes, to be beheded at Pountfreyt / more of wyll than of iustyce. Than the lorde Pro∣tectour in furtheryng of his purpose and cuyll entent / sente for the more partie of the nobles of the lāde / and behaued hym so couertly in all hys matyers, that fewe vnderstode hys wykked purpose. And so dayely ke∣pynge & holdynge the lordes in coun¦sayll and felynge theyr myndes / so∣daynly vppō the .xiii. daye of Iuny beynge wythin the towre in the coun¦sayll chambre wyth dyuerse lordes wyth hym, as the duke of Bukkyn∣gham, the erle of Derby, the lord Ha¦stynges thā lord Chāberlayne, wyth dyuerse other, an owte crye by hys as¦sent of treason was made in the vtter chambre. wherwyth the sayd lorde Protectour beyng warned / roose vp and yode hym selfe to the chaumber dore, and there receyued in such per∣sones as he before had appoynted to execute hys malycious purpose. The The whych incontynently set hande vpon the forenamed lord Chamber∣layne and other. In the whyche styr∣rynge the erle of Derby was hurt in the face and kept a whyle vnder the holde. Than by cōmaundemente of the sayd lorde Protectour / the sayde lord Chamberlayne in all haste was ladde in the court or playn where the chapell of the towre stādeth / & there wythout iugemēt or lōge tyme of cō∣fessyon or repentaūce, vpō an ende of a lōge & great tymber logge whyche there laye wyth other for the repay∣rynge of the sayd towre, caused hys hedde to be smyten of / and all for he knewe well that he wolde nat assente vnto hys wycked entent. whose body wyth the hed was after caryed vnto wyndesore, and there buryed by the tombe of kyng Edwarde. After whyche cruelte thus done / he shortely after set in sure kepynge suche persones as he suspected to be agayne hym. wherof the bysshoppes of yorke & of Ely were .ii. as it is said And the erle of Derby for fere of hys sonne the lord Strange, lest he shuld haue arered Chesshyre & Lancaster∣shyre agayne hym, was set at large. Than began the lōge couert dyssy¦mulacion, whyche of the lord Prote∣ctour had ben so craftly shadowed, to breke out at large / in so moche that vppō the sondaye folowyng at Pou¦les crosse, hym selfe wyth the duke of Bukkyngham & other lordes beyng present, by the mouth of doctor Rafe Shaa in the tyme of hys sermon, was there shewed openly that ye chyl¦derne of kynge Edward the .iiii. were nat legytymat, nor ryghtfull enheri∣tours of the crowne / wyth many dys¦launderous wordes in preferryng of the tytle of the sayd lord Protectour and in dysanullynge of the other / to the greate abucion of all the audiēce, excepte suche as fauoured the mater whyche were fewe in noumbre, yf the trouth or playnesse myghte haue ben shewed. Of the whyche declaracyon as the fame wente after / the sayde doc∣tour Shaa toke suche repentaunce, that he lyued in lyttell prosperytie after. And the more he was won∣dered of, that he wolde take vppon hym suche a besynesse, consyderynge that he was so famous a man bothe of hys lernynge and also of naturall wytte. Than vppon the tuysdaye fo∣lowynge / an assemble of the cōmons of the cytye was appoynted at the
Guyldhalle. where beynge present the duke of Buckynghā wyth other lordes sente downe frome the sayde lorde protectour / and there in the pre¦sence of the mayre and comynaltye, rehersed the ryght and tytle that the lorde Protectour hadde to be prefer¦red before hys of hys brother kynge Edwarde, to the ryght of the crowne of Englande. The whyche processe was in so eloquent wyse she∣wed and vttred wythout any impe∣dyment of spyttynge or other coun∣tenaunce, and that of a longe whyle, wyth so great sugred wordes of ex∣hortacyon and accordynge sentence, that many a wyse man that day mer∣ueyled and commended hym for the good orderynge of hys wordes, but not for the entent and purpose the whyche theruppon ensued. Uppon the Thursdaye than next ensuynge beynge the .xx. daye of Iu∣ny / the sayde Protectoure takynge then vppon hym as kynge and go∣uernour of the realme / went wyth great pompe vnto westmynster, and there toke possessyon of the same. where he beynge sette in the greate halle in the See royall, wyth ye duke of Norffolke before called the lorde Hawarde vppon the ryght hande, & the duke of Suffolke vppon the left hande / after the royall othe there ta∣ken, called before hym the iudges of the lawe / gyuynge vnto them a long exhortacyon and streyght cōmaunde¦mēt, for ye mynystryng of hys lawes, and to execute iustyce, and that with out delaye. After whyche possessyon takynge, and other ceremonies there done / he was conueyed vnto the kyn¦ges palays wythin westmynster and there lodgyd. In whyche passe tyme, the prynce or of ryght kynge Edwarde the .v. wyth hys brother the duke of yorke, were put vnder suer kepynge wyth∣in the towre / in suche wyse that they neuer came abrode after. And thus ended the reygne of Ed¦warde the .v / when he had borne the name of a kynge by the space of two monethes and .xi. dayes. And vppon the Frydaye beynge the .xxii. daye of Iuny was the sayd lord Protectour proclaymed thorough the cyty kyng of England, by the name of Rychard the thyrde. Then soone after for fere of the quenes blode and other whyche he had in ielousy / he sent for a strength of men out of the North. The which came shortely to London a lytell be∣fore hys coronacyon / and mustred in the More feldes well vppon .iiii.M. men in theyr beste iackes and rusty salattes, wyth a fewe in whyte har∣neys not burnysshed to the sale / and shortely after hys coronacyon were countermaunded home wyth suffy∣cyent rewardes for theyr trauayll. In whyche foresayd passe tyme / ye Marquys of Dorset brother vnto quene Elysabeth yt before was fled, escaped many wonderfull daungers bothe about London, Ely and other places / wherof▪ to wryte the maner & cyrcumstaunce wolde aske a longe and great leysour. Rycharde the thyrde. RIcharde ye thyrde of that name, son to Rycharde late duke of yorke, & yongeste brother vnto Edwarde ye iiii. late kynge / be¦gan his domynyō ouer the realme of Englande the .xx. day of mydsomer moneth, in the yere of our lorde god .M.CCCC.lxxxiii. & the .xxv. yere of the .xi. Lewys than kynge of Fraūce. Of whom tedyous
it is to me to wryte the tragedyous hystory / excepte that I remēber that good it is to wryte and put in remē∣braūce the punyshement of synners, to the ende that other may exchew to fall in lyke daunger. Than it foloweth, anone as thys man had taken vpon hym / he fyll in great hatred of the more party of the nobles of hys realm / in so mych that suche as before loued and praysed hym, and wolde haue ieoparted lyfe and good wyth hym yf he hadde re∣mayned styll as {pro}tectour, now mur∣mured and grudged agayne hym / in suche wyse that fewe or none fauou∣red his partye, except it were for dre∣de or for the great gyftes that they re¦ceyued of hym. By meane wherof he wanne dyuers to folow hys mynde / the whiche after deceyued hym. And after his coronacyon solēp∣nysed, whyche was holden at west∣mynster the .vi. daye of Iuly, where also ye same daye was crowned dame Anne hys wyfe / he then in shorte pro¦cesse folowynge rode Northward to pacyfye that countre, and to redresse certayne ryottes there lately done. In the passe tyme of which iournay / he beynge at yorke created hys legyt¦tymat sonne prynce of walys / & ouer that made hys bastarde sonne capy∣tayne of Caleys, whyche encreaced more grudge to hymwarde as after shall appere. Anno. dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiiii.   Thomas Norland.   Rober Byllysdon Haberdassher.   Anno .ii.   wyllyam Martyn.   IN this yere ye foresayd grudge encreasynge, and the more for as myche as the comon fame wente, that kynge Rycharde hadde within the towre put vnto secret deth ye two sonnes of hys brother Edwarde the iiii. For the whych and other causes hadde within the breste of the duke of Buckyngham / the sayde duke in secrete maner conspyred agayn hym, and allyed hym with dyuers gentyl∣men, to the ende to brynge hys pur∣pose about. But how it was his entente was espyed and shewed vnto the kynge / and the kynge in all haste sent for to take hym, he then beynge small accō¦panyed at hys manour of Brekenok in the Marche of walys. wherof the sayd duke beynge ware, in all hast he fled frō hys sayd manour of Breke∣nok vnto the house of a seruaunt of hys owne called Banaster / and that in so secret maner, that fewe or none of his housholde seruauntes knewe where he was become. In the whyche passe tyme / kynge Rycharde thynkynge that the duke wolde haue assembled his people, & so to haue gyuen to hym batayle, ga¦thered to hym great strength / and af¦ter toke his iournaye westwarde, to haue mette wyth the sayd duke. But whan the kyng was infourmed that he was fledde / anone he made procla¦macyons, that who that myght take the sayd duke, shulde haue for a re∣warde .M.li. of money / and the va∣lue of an hundreth pounde in lande by yere to hym and to hys heyres for euer more. wherof herynge the fore∣sayd Banaster, were it for mede of ye sayd reward, or for the fere of losyng of hys lyfe and good / dyscouered the duke vnto the sheryffe of the shyre / and caused hym to be taken, and so brought vnto Salysbury, where the kynge than laye.
And all be it that that the sayde duke made inportune labour to haue commyn to the kynges presence / yet that natwythstandynge, he was behe¦ded vpon the. daye of the mo∣neth of wythout speche or syght of the kynge. Than all suche gentylmen as had apoynted to mete wyth ye said duke, were so dysmayde, that they knewe nat what for to do / but they that myghte fled the lande, and some toke seyntwary places as they myghte wynne vnto theym. But the kyng to the ende to let them of theyr purpose, sente to the see co∣stes and stopped theyr waye in that he myght. And he wyth a certeyne strength rode vnto Exceter / where about that season was takē syr Tho¦mas Selenger knyght, and .ii. gen∣tylmen that one beyng named Tho∣mas Ramme and that other The whyche .iii. persones were there shortly after beheded And soone after in Kent were takē syr George Browne knyghte, & Ro∣bert Clyfforde esquyer / and brought vnto the towre of London. And vpon the. daye of Octobre, the sayd syr George and Roberte were drawen from westmynster vnto the towre hyll and there beheded. And the same daye were .iiii. per∣sones lately yomen of the crowne wyth kynge Edwarde the .iiii, drawē out of Southwarke thorugh ye cytie vnto tyborne, and there hanged. And whan the kynge had sped hys iour∣nay in the west coūtre / he hasted him towarde London. whereof the mayre & the cytezyns hauynge know¦lege, made prouysyō to receyue him / and vpon that made puruyaunce for horse with violet clothyng and other necessaryes. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxv.   Rychard Chester.   Thomas Hylle. Thomas Bretayne. Anno .ili.   Raffe Astry.   IN the begynnyng of thys may¦res yere and seconde yere of kyng Rycharde / that is to meane vp¦pon the .ix. daye of the moneth of No¦uembre, the mayer and hys brethern beyng cladde in scarlet, & the cyte∣zyns to the nombre of .v.C. or mo in vyolet / met the kynge beyonde Ke∣nyngston in Sutherey / & so brought hym thorugh the cytye to the warde robe besyde the blacke fryers, where for that tyme he was lodged. And in short tyme after was syr Roger Clyf∣forde knyght taken aboute South∣ampton / and from thens sente to the towre of Londō, and after areygned & iuged at westmynster / & frō thens vpon the. daye of drawē vnto the towre hylle. But whan he came fore agayne saynt Martyns le Graūt / by the helpe of a fryer whiche was hys cōfessour, & one of theym yt was next about him, his cordes were so lowsed or cut, that he put hym in deuoyr to haue entred ye seyntwary. And lykely it had ben yt he shuld haue so done / had nat ben the quycke helpe & rescous of the sheryffes and theyr offycers. The whyche constrayned hym to lye downe vppon the hardyll / and newly band hym, and so haryed hym to the sayde place of execucion, where he was deuyded in two pe∣cys / and after hys body wyth the hede was conueyed to the fryeres Augustynes, and there be buryed before saynte Katherynes aulter.
And in the moneth of February folowynge / dyed Rycharde Chester one of the sheryfes. For whome was immedyatly chosen Raffe Astry, to contynue for that yere folowynge. Kynge Rycharde than ledynge hys lyfe in great agony and doubte / tru∣stynge fewe of suche as were aboute hym, spared nat to spende the greate treasour whych before kyng Edward the .iiii. hadde gadered, in guynge of great & large gyftes. By meane wherof he alonly wasted nat ye great treasour of his sayd brother, but also he was in suche daunger, that he bo∣rowed many notable summes of mo∣ney of ryche men of thys realme, and specyally of the cytezyns of London / wherof the leest summe was .xl.li. for suertye wherof he delyuered to them good & suffycyent pledges. In the whyche passetyme many & sondry gentylmen and diuers sheryf¦fes, departed ouer the see into Fraūce and there allyed them wyth that ver¦tuous prynce Henry sonne vnto the erle of Rychemonde, dyscended lyne∣ally from Henry the .iiii. lately kynge of thys realme / and conuenaunted with hym, that if he wolde mary Eli∣zabeth ye eldest doughter of Edwarde the .iiii, they wolde with goddes help strength hym to be kyng of England & ayde hym in suche maner, that he and also she were or myght be posses∣sed of theyr ryghtfull enherytaunce. Amonge the whyche gentylmen / syr Iamys Blount than keper of the ca¦stell of Guynys was one / which with hym conueyed the erle of Oxenford, that longe tofore had ben prysoner wythin the sayd castell. Upon whiche agrement thus con¦cluded / prouysion by them and theyr frendes was made, to sayle into Eng¦lande. And after all thynges prepa∣red / the sayd prynce wyth a small cō∣pany of Englysshe, Frenche, & Bry∣tons, toke shyppynge in Fraunce or Brytayne / and so landed lastly in the porte of Mylbourne in the moneth of August. For whose defence of lan∣dynge kynge Rycharde for so moche as he fered him lytell, made but smal prouision. whyle these foresayde gentylmen of dyuers coostes of Englande esca∣ped as is abouesayde ouer the see / of that affynite was one named wyllyā Colyngbourne taken. And after he had ben holden a season in pryson / he wyth another gentylmā named Tur¦byruyle were brought vnto Guylde hall, and there areygned. But ye sayd Turbyruyle was repryed to pryson / and that other was caste for sondry treasons / & for a tyme, whyche was layde to hys charge that he shulde make in derysyō of the kyng and his counsayll as foloweth. ¶The catte, the ratte, and louell our dogge. Ruleth all England vnder a hogge. THe whych was ment that Ca∣tysby, Ratclyffe, and the lorde Louell, ruled the land vnder ye kyng whych bare the whyte bore for his co¦nysaunce. For the whyche and other vppon the. day of he was put to ye most cruell deth at the towre hyll, where for him were made a new payer of Galowes / vpon the whych after he had hanged a shorte season, he was cutte downe beynge a lyue, and hys bowellys ryped out of hys bely & cast into the fyre there by hym, and lyued tyll the boucher put hys hand into the bulke of his body / in so moche that the sayd in the same instāt O lord Iesu yet more trouble / & so dyed to the great compassyon of moche people. Than to retourne vnto the noble
prynce and hys company, whanne he was commyn vnto the lande / he incō¦tynently kneled downe vpon ye erth / & wyth meke countenaunce & pure de¦uocyon began thys psalme: Iudica me deus, & decerne causam meam. &c. The whyche whan he had fynysshed to ye ende, and kyssed the groūde mekely, and reuerently made the signe of the crosse vppon hym / he commaunded suche as were aboute hym, boldly in the name of god & saynte George to set forewarde. whan the landyng of thys prynce was blowen about the lande / many was the man that drewe vnto hym, aswell suche as were in sondry seyn∣twaryes as other that were abrode / so that hys strēgth encreased shortly. Than the kyng gadered hys power in all haste / and spedde hym in suche wyse, that vpon the .xxii. daye of Au∣gust & begynnyng of the thyrde yere of hys reygne / he mette wyth the said prynce nere vnto a vyllage in Leyce¦tershyre named Bosworth, nere vnto Leyceter. where betwene theym was foughten a sharpe batayll / & sharper shulde haue ben, if the kynges partie had ben fast to hym. But many to∣warde the felde refusyd hym, & yode vnto that other partye. And some stode houynge a ferre of, tyl they saw to the whyche partye the vyctory fyll. In conclusyon kynge Rycharde was slayne / and vppon hys partye ye duke of Northfolke before tyme na∣med lorde Hawarde, wyth Brakyng¦bury Lieutenaunt of the towre, and many other. And amonge other was there taken on lyue the erle of Sur∣rey sonne to the foresayde duke of Northfolke, & sent vnto the towre of London / where he remayned as pry¦soner longe tyme after. Than was the corps of Rychard late king spoyled, & naked as he was borne caste behynde a man / and so caryed vnreuerently ouertwharte ye horse backe vnto the fryers at Leyce¦ter. where after a season that he had lyen that all men myght beholde him he was there wyth lytell reuerence buryed. And thus with misery ended thys prynce / whych ruled most what by rygour and tyrannye, whan he in great trouble & agony had reygned or vsurped by the space of .ii. yeres .ii. monethes and .ii. dayes. And than was the noble prynce Henry admytted for kynge, and so proclaymed kyng by the name of Hē¦ry the .vii. The whych sped hī shortly to London / so that vpopn the .xxviii. daye of the sayd moneth of Auguste, he was by the mayre and the citesyns met in good araye / as the mayre and aldermen in scarlet, and the cytesyns in vyolet, at harnesey parke / & frome thens conueyed thorugh the cytye vnto the bysshop of Londōs palays, and there for that tyme lodged. And vpon the .xi. day of Octobre next folowyng, than beyng the swe∣tynge sykenesse of newe begon / dyed the sayd Thomas Hylle than of Lon¦don mayre. And for hym was chosen as mayre syr wyllyam Stokker knyght & Draper, whyche dyed also of the sayd sykenesse shortly after. And than Iohn̄ warde Grocer was chosen mayre / whyche so contynued tyll the feest of Symonde and Iude folowynge. Francia. Charles the .ix. KArolus or Char∣les ye .ix. or .viii. of ye name, sonn̄ vnto the .xi. Lowys / be∣gā his reygn ouer ye realm of Fraūce the fourth daye of
Septembre in the yere of oure lorde god .M.iiii.C.lxxxiiii / and the secōde yere of Rycharde the thyrd at ye tyme kyng of Englande. Thys Charles was noble of wytte and meke of condycyō / the which his father wolde nat set to lernyng of let¦ters in hys youth, leste that by suche study he shulde at hys lawfull age haue therby the more refrayned hym from knyghtly and marcyall actes. But whan he came to mannes astate he than was ryghte sory, and wolde saye full often to hys famylyers, A prynce is greatly blemysshed, whan he lakketh connynge of lecture. He was also in hys youth so weke & im∣potēt, that he lakked natural strēgth as was accordynge to hys age, in so moche that he myght nat go. And whan he shuld ryde, he had alway on eyther syde of the hors .ii. men to stay hym, and to gyue on hym lyke atten∣daunce. Than after solempnytie of hys coronacyon ended at the cytye of Raynes, whyche there was solempni¦sed wyth great pompe vpō ye sonday nerte ensuyng the feast of saynt De∣nys / commissions were sent out into all coostes of hys domynyon, for to enquere of all superfluous giftes gy¦uen before tyme by hys father / the whyche shortly after were resumed into the kynges handes. And in that season, Olyuer Damman whome Lowys had in many greate romes & offyces set, and by hys dayes hadde hym in synguler loue and fauoure, in so moche as before I haue shewed in the ende of the story of the sayd Lo¦wys, he made a specyall request vnto thys Charles hys sonn̄ that he shuld specyally cherysshe thys sayd Dam∣man / now was appeched of treason wyth one Danyell a Flemynge. The whyche after inquisycyon of theym made / bothe after the lawe of that lande were iuged to deth / and so put in execucyon of hangynge. whose deth of the nobles and astates of the realme was lytell ruyd / consyderyng the rome that he bare by kynge Lo∣wys dayes, and the ignobilitie of his byrth, as an handcrafty mā and bar∣bour. After whose deth a metrycyan compyled these verses folowyng. SVnt tua criminibus ridētia tēpora tōsor Currere, quae subito {pro}uida parc ve∣tat Hoc poteras osim sōge prenoscere damma, Vt saltem horrres tollere cede pios. Te natura humilem cum mater Flandra tulisset, Arte vna noras radere Cesariem. Hunc talem & seruum te saepe Lutetia vidit, Tutus ab hac poteras ducere sorte dies. Raptus ad excelsam, Lodowici principis aulam, Mox herebifur surias, moribus ante venis, Et caput huic tendeus / dū suffers singere ficos, Pre ducibus regi, regulus alter eras. Quid tibi nen sicuit, sobeles tam dira Neronis, Nemo non vixit, te reserente reus, Nemo deisacra censuram, nemo gerebat, Gaudia, qui renuit premere dona tibi Protenus exilium, vel mors vel mulcta negantem Pressit, eras Iudex lictor & exicium. Regnasti, satis est, surgunt nua sedera mundo, Turba coelestorum, territa luce sugit. Agnosce o tosor, quo te scoelus extulit atrox, Et te praecepitem depulit in laqueos. Te Daniel, te dira cohors, te menimius odit, Et scelerum auctorem, dampnatet insequitur. Nescio quid de te superi velfata deponunt, Seu lictore cades, seu cruce liber eas. Vna tamen vulgi constans sententia, furcas Expedit, vt faciet, te periunte odium Interea vinctus, culpas absterge gemendo, Peccasti, morte est nunc redimenda salus. The whyche metyr or verses to theym that haue none vn∣derstandyng in latyne, maye be expou¦ned in ma∣ner as foloweth.
The laughynge tymes wyth theyr crymes spent, Thou barboure are ronne / the whyche by sodayne fate Are nowe forboden. wherof the clere entent Thou myght haue knowen Damma ryght well the state, whan thou by meanes whyche were inordynat, Put vnto deth many an innocent man, By cruell malyce / and well remembred than. That of lowe byrth Flaundres thy mother the fledde, And taught the a crafte, the here well to shaue Lutecia that cytye where thou thy lyfe ledde, wytnesseth the a seruaunt therin thy lyuynge to craue, And for thy dayes an honest lyfe to haue / But whan thou were in Lowys court vp brouht, Than had thou no mynde that thou were come of nought. But lyke the helle hounde thou waxed full furyous, Expressynge thy malyce whan thou to honour styed / Thynkynge for so moche as that prynce bounteuous, Hys hed and berde to the he nought denyed, And wyth all worldly pleasure he also the allyed, The before hys prynces makynge hys gouernour / Thy selfe thou blyndest, wyth wordly vayne honour. whyche made the so proude, thou sonne of harde Neron, That none myght lyue that thou accused of cryme, No man was cursed nor none had punyssyon, That wolde thy hande wyth golde of gyftes lyme / And who that nat hys gyfte offred in tyme, Other deth or exyle to hym was soone applyed / For as iuge and hangman thou all thynge excercysed. Thou reygned longe ynough / but now are sprongē newe Sterrys to the worlde / and fled is nowe clerely The scelerat flokke. wherfore thou barbour yet rewe, Thyne odyous actes whyche haue the sodaynly, Cast downe from welth in snares vytterly. For also Daniell thy moste odyous fere Dampneth the of cryme whyche wyth the dyeth here. I knowe nat what of the the vpper bodyes aboue Haue defyned, whether by sworde or by gybet Thou shuld ende the lyfe. But one thynge I approue, The sentence hooly of the people is sette, That on a galowe thou shuld paye deth hys dette. Inwardly therfore bewayll so thyne offence, That by thys deth, to god thon mayste make recompence.
THus execucyon of thys Dam¦man & hys felowe ended and fynysshed, to the lytell compassion of the people / wythin fewe dayes after another of the affeccionat seruaūtes of kyng Lowys named Iohn̄ Doya¦con for trespasse and hatered by hys occasyon and deserte vnto the com∣mon people, was wyth all shame brought vnto ye market place of Pa∣rys, & there beraft of bothe hys erys. After whych vylony to hym done, he was there ryght banysshed the court for euer. And thus two of the moste special and derest beloued seruauntes and counsayllours of kyng Lowys, were shortly after hys deth broughte vnto confusyon. By reason wherof as af∣fermeth myne auctoure Gaguyne, arose a prouerbe among the Frenche men / sayeng, Principibus obsequi haereditariū non ese. The whyche is to meane, the seruyce of princes is nat hereditable. Thys tyme thus passed wyth many other matyers, whych I ouer passe / the season approched that variaunce and nny began to moue amōg some nobles of the lāde / in so moche that ye duke of Orleaunce dysdayned, that Anne syster to the kynge wyth suche as she wolde call to counsayll, hadde all the rule about the kyng. wherfore he entendyng to haue the sayde rule, for so moche as he had maryed that other doughter of Lowys / gadered vnto hym strength of knyghtes, pur∣posely to remoue from the kyng such as he lyked / and to sette aboute hym suche persones as he thought conue¦nyente. But how it was for lacke of wyse orderynge of hys people or other neglygence / at a place called saint Al¦bynys he was taken of hys aduersa∣ryes / & so by the kyng commaunded to pryson to the castel of Byturicēce, where he remayned lōge tyme after. It was nat longe after, that Mary∣mylyan the whych had maryed duke Charles doughter of Burgoyne, ga∣thered hys soudyours to haue rele∣ued the foresayd duke of Orleaunce out of pryson / but he preuayled nat. Durynge whyche warre, Fraunceys duke of Brytayn dyed / whose dough¦ter named Anne & enherytour of that duchye, Maxymylyan hadde before trouth plyted for hys lawfull wyfe. wherfore he herynge of the deth of ye sayd Fraunceys / shortely entred the terrytory of Brytayne, and seased it for hys. But Charles with his Frēch¦men wythstode hym, by suche force yt he was constrayned to axe helpe of our soueraygne lord kynge Henry ye vii. The whyche in moste bounteous maner ayded & assysted hym bothe wyth men and money / to the kynges excedyng great charge and coste. Howe be in the ende the French kyng had his entent / & than maryed ye said Anne duchesse of Brytayne, and refu¦sed Margarete ye doughter of Mai¦mylyan, whyche he before had ma∣ryed at Ambasy / as before I haue she¦wed to you in the ende of the story of hys father Lowys. After whych vyc∣tory thus opteyned by thys Charles in Brytayn / he made clayme and pre¦tence vnto the lande of Scicilia or Scicilie. And by the exortacion and styrryng of the pope Alexāder the .vi. he wyth a strong hoste entred ye same bothe by lande and by water. To whome was a great ayde the duke of Mylayne / by whose meanes he short¦ly wan a strōge citie or towne named Campania and diuers other townes and in processe Naples the chyef citie that belonged vnto the kyng of Na∣ples. In so moche that he constray∣ned Alphounce that than was kynge of Naples and of Scicile to forsake that countre / and so had the dominiō of the more parte of bothe the sayde
countrees. The whyche when he had set in suche order as he thoughte con¦uenyent / he toke hys iournaye home warde into Fraūce thorough Italy. In whyche passage thys Charlys was beset of the Uenecyans & other Italyans, the whyche entendyd to haue stoppyd hys waye / and metyng wyth hym at a place called in latyne Fornouiences, gaue vnto hym ba∣tayle. wherof as sayth myne authour he wan the vyctory to hys greate ho∣nour, consyderynge his fewe sowdy∣ours agayne theyr multytude and strength. But to thys sayenge repugne the Italyans dwellyng in London / and say that yf the sayd Charlys had not spedde hym fastly into Fraunce, he had not comen there that yere. But how so it was he eetourned home in sauete. And soone after pope Alexāder fore¦sayd toke such dyspleasure agayne ye sayd Charlys, that he styrred almost all crysten prynces of the worlde a∣gayne hym / he hadde such hatred to the great honoure of ye Frēche kynge as sayth myne authour Gagwyne, yt whyche in all hys werkes extolleth the dedes of Frenchemen forther thā maye be veryfyed in moch of his wry¦tynge. But what so he wryte of the pope / it is to be demyd that he wolde not take so great partye agayne this Charlys, and exite other prynces to do the same, excepte it hadde ben for great and vrgēt causes / and not for malyce as he affermeth onely. And thus the sayde Gagwyne en¦deth the story of the sayd Charlys, in the yere of our lorde god .M.iiii.C. xcv / and the .xi. yere of the reygne of the same Charlys thanne presently reygnynge and guydyng the realme of Fraunce / whyche was the .x. yere of our most redoutyd prynce kynge Henry the .vii. Henry the seuenth. HEnry the .vii. of ye name sonne vnto the erle of Riche∣moūt, began his domynyon ouer the realme of En¦glande, the .xxii. daye of Auguste, in ye yere of our lorde god .M.iiii.C.lxxxv / and the secōde yere of the .viii. Charlys then kynge of Fraūce. And the .xxx. daye of October folowynge with great solempnyte ye sayd Henry was crowned at westmynster. And here accordynge to my fyrste sayenge in the begynnynge of thys rude worke, I make an ende of the vii. parte and hole worke, the .vii. day of Nouember in the yere of our lord Iesu Crystes incarnacyon .M.v.C. and .iiii / and the .xx. yere of our moste crysten and drad soueraygne lorde kynge Henry after the conquest of ye name the .vii. For whyche expedycyō and good exployt that I haue hadde in the accomplysshyg of thys work, wherin is included to rekyn from the landynge of Brute in thys ile of Al∣byon, vnto the fyrste yere or begyn∣nyng of the reygne of our most dead sayd souerayne lord, ii.M.vi.C. and xx. yeres: I here agayne salute and gyue thankes vnto that moste ex∣cellent vyrgyn our lady saynt Mary with the last and .vii. ioye of the fore¦sayd, vii. ioyes, begynnynge, Gaude virgo mater pura &c. Be ioyfull and glad virgyn and moder pure For ferme and stedfast thy ioye shall abyde And these .vii. ioyes shall euermore endure, And neuer hereafter minishe by tyme nor by tyde But euer shall encreace orye and abyde, By worldes all, euer in one to laste Tyme to come, tyme presēt, & tyme that is past.
And thus than endyth thys seuenth part, the which from the fyrst yere of wyllyam Conquerour to ye laste yere of Rycharde the thyrde includeth. iiii.C.xvii. yeres. Lenuoy. Limas adest, praecessit opus, ne liidus assis. Lector habent mendas, denia presa suas Quoduis ingenium, quadam vel parte redundat Vel rudū, vel mancū est, vel graue vel fluidū Concio rebra tibi, culpatur furta Maronis, Est Cicero elumbis, pes tibi naso ceser. Non satis historiae, Crispi praefatio quadrat, Nil adeo cultum, liuor iniquus habet. Non minus hoc poterit tantillum capere morsor, Laeserit illustres cum fera lingua viros. Sed quid agas residem, taxabit inertia mutum Scriptorem risor, extenuabit inners. Audendum tamen est, spernendi mlle latratus Occidet a busto murmur & inuidia. The whyche verses to them that ben vnlettered may be Englyshed in ma¦ner and fourme as foloweth. An ende of thys boke, or of thys rude warke Here is now fyned / wherof the sence precedyth. Thou that shall it rede, be thou laye or clerke, Be not enuyous / consyder how it ledyth The reygne of prynces. And where as mendement nedyth, If thou experte be, the fawtes therof amende / And hym ascrybe no sclaunder, that dyd but well entende. Consyder euery scyence, in parte that it is suche, To rude or to curyous, to breef or to longe. Some blamyn! Liuins for that he wrote so moche / Some other Uyrgyle / and Cicero amonge For he was to scarse. Salust that dytyes songe So excelently, yet is he not vnblamed / So that to all men nothynge is duely framed. Than syn the olde wryters whyche were so excellent, Myghte not all men please wyth theyr famous wrytynge / No maruayll though I whyche neuer connynge hnt, Myghte order thys mater to euery mannys lykynge / And specyally to suche as haue theyr delyghtynge, Euer wyth dysclaunder moste wryters to lacke, And barke whyle they maye to sette good wryters a backe. But though that ignoraunce and derysyon ben mette, And reproue the maker in all that they can / why shulde any good worke for theyr malyce be lette. For though they grudge & scorne / yet euery wyse good man, wyll take the entent and prayse the maker than / And hym allow for hys laborous dede / And requyre of god that he maye haue hys mede. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxxv.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxxvi.   Iohn̄ Tate.   Hugh Bryce Goldsmyth.   Anno .i.   Iohn̄ Swan.  
IN thys yere a prest was made to the kynge of .ii.M.li / of the whyche the mercers, grocers, & dra∣pers lent .ix.C.xxxvii.li. and .vi.s. The coronacyō was holden at west∣mynster the .xxx. day of October. And this yere whete was at .iii.s. ye bus∣shell, & baye salt at the same pryce. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxxvi.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxxvii.   Iohn̄ Percyuall.   Syr Henry Colet   Anno .ii.   Hugh Clopton.   In thys yere the kynge maryed kyng Edwardes eldest dough¦ter named Elizabeth. This yere was slayn at Stookfelde the erle of Lyn∣colne. And in the moneth of Septē∣ber was borne prynce Arthur. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxxvii   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.lxxxviii.   Iohn̄ Fenkyll.   wyllyam Horne.   Anno .iii.   wyllyam Remyngton.   THys yere was the quene crow∣ned at westmynster vpon saynt Katheryns daye. And this yere was a prest of .iiii.M.li. / wherof mer¦cers, grocers & Drapers lent .xvi.C. & .xvi.li. And thys yere was an other prest of two thousād. And thys yere Iohn̄ Ashley wyth other two were putte in execucyon at the Towre hylle. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxix.   wyllyam Isaak.   Robert Tate Mercer.   Anno .iiii.   Rafe Tynley.   IN thys yere the comons of the North slewe the erle of Nor∣thumberlande / and Chamberlayne theyr capytayne wyth dyuers other were after at yorke hanged. Thys yere was the taske of the tenth peny of mennes landes and goodes. This yere was the felde ōf Dykys∣mew in Flaunders foughten by the lorde Dawbeney. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.lxxxix.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xc.   wyllyam Capell.   wyllyam whyte   Anno .v.   Iohn̄ Brook.   IN this yere one named Roger Shauelok slew hym selfe. For whose goodes was besynesse bytwen the kynges amner and the sheryffe. But the amner optayned. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xc.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xci.   Henry Coot.   Iohn̄ Mathew Mercer. Robert Reuell. Anno .vi.   Hugh Pemberton.  
IN this yere dyed Robert Reuel shyryffe / & in his stede was cho¦sen Hugh Pēberton. And in March syr Robert chāberlayne knyght was behedyd. And thys yere was a great benyuolence graunted vnto ye kynge for his iournay into Fraūce / where vnto the felysshyp of the Drapers graunted more than any other felys∣shyp of the cytye / and euery aldermā of London that tyme beynge, payed volente & nolente two hundreth pound. Ouer whyche somme the comoners somme extēdyd to .ix.M.vi.C.lxxxii. li.xvii.s.iiii.d. And this yere was a busshell of whete at .xxii.d. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.xci.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.xcii.   Thomas wood   Hugh Clopton Mercer.   Anno .vii.   wyllyam Browne.   IN thys yere a yoman of the crowne named was put to deth at Tybourne for treason. And in thys yere was the cytye of Garnad gottē by ye kyng of Spayn. And ī this yere was syr Iamys Par¦ker knyght slayne in iustynge at Ry∣chemont, with a gentylman named Hugh Uaghan. Also in the moneth of September the kynge toke hys vyage towarde Fraunce. Anno domini .M.iiii.C.xcii   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.xciii.   wyllyam purchase.   wyllyam Martyn Skynner.   Anno .viii.   wyllyam welbek.   IN thys yere vpon the .ix. daye of Nouember, was red a letter in the Guyldhall, yt shewed of a peas cōcluded bytwen the kynges of En∣gland & of Fraūce. And the .xvii. day of December folowynge, the kynge landed at Douer. And the saterdaye before Cristmas he came to westmyn¦ster. Uppon the .xvii. daye of Maye were .iiii. men put to deth at Tyborn for treason. And thys yere in the moneth of October and ende of thys mayres yere, was the fray made vp∣pon the Eesterlynges by the comons of the cytye, and specyally mercers seruauntes. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xciii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xciiii.   Robert Fabyan.   Rafe Astry Fysshemonger.   Anno .ix.   Iohn̄ wyngar.   IN this yere in ye beginnyng, an enquery was made for ye ryot forenamed / for the which many yong men were punysshed by long impry∣sonment. Also vpō the .xxii. day of Fe¦bruary, were regnyd at ye Guyldhall iiii. persons named Thomas Bag∣nall, Iohn̄ Scotte, Iohn̄ Heth, and Iohn̄ Kenyngton / which were taken out of saynte Martyns seyntwary. wherof .iii. were put to deth at Ty∣borne / & Thomas Bagnall was had vnto the towre of London. And the xxvi. day of the sayd moneth, with ye foresayd .iii. persons was put in exe∣cyon willyā Bulkley a yoman of the kynges chāber, and a duche man. Thys yere whete was at .vi.d. a bus¦shell, and bay salt at .iii. d. ob. And thys yere doctor Hylle bysshop of Lō¦don pursued greuously Persy than pryour of Crystes chyrch in Londō.
And in thys yere was the royall feste kept in westmynster halle by ye kyng. This yere in the ende of Apryll was brent in Smithfelde an olde woman for heresye, whych was called moder to the lady yonge. And thys yere the xv. day of August were reyned at the Guyldhalle one named Iohn̄ Nor∣folk, & an other named Iohn̄ white / & cōuict for baudry & set vpō ye pillory. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xciiii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcv.   Nycholas Alwyn.   Rycharde Chawry Salter.   Anno .x.   Iohn̄ warner.   THis yere the daye that ye mayre toke hys charge, in ye afternone came thorugh the cytye Henry duke of yorke a chylde about .iiii. ye∣res of age towarde westmynster ry∣dynge vppon a courser, with many goodly gentylmen to conuey hym. And vpon the .ix. daye of Nouember folowyng, was holden a goodly iu∣styse within the paleys of westmyn∣ster. wherof were chalengeours syr wyllyā de la Pool then duke of Suf¦folk, therle of Essex, syr Robert Cur∣son, & Iohn̄ Pechy esquyre. Also this yere about Cristmas, sir Robert Clif¦ford whych before was fled the land / came agayne & appechyd syr wyllyā Stanley than chamberlayne to the kynge of treason. which syr wyllyam vpon the .xvi. day of February folow¦ynge, for the sayd treason was behe∣dyd at the Tower hylle. And ye same season was adiudged to deth at the Guyldhall the deane of Poulys a fa¦mous doctour & precher, the prouyn¦cyall of the blak freres, and ye pryour of Langley, the person of saynt Ste¦phyns in walbroke named doctour Sutton, syr Thomas Thwatys knyght, Robert Ratclyffe, wyllyam Dawbeney, willyā Cressener esquire with syr Simond Moūford knight, & mo other / wherof ye more part was pardoned. And this yere was whyte heryng at .xl.d. a barel. And this yere began the fyrst trouble of syr wyllyā Capell alderman. And in Iuly Per∣kyn with his rebelles ariued in Kent which named hym selfe Rychard se∣conde sonne of Edward the .iiii. And in ye same moneth was doctour Dra¦per perforce borne out of Poulys, & so ladde to Lābehyth for varyaunce that than was bytwene the bysshop¦pes of Can̄terbury and Londō. And soone after was hanged in sundry costes of Englande an .C. and odde persons of the forenamed rebellys. And thys yere was a perlyamente holden at westmnynster. Also in the moneth of October was an exce∣dynge thunder. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcv.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcvi.   Thomas Kneysworth.   Syr Henry Colette Mercer.   Anno .xi.   Henry Somyr.   IN thys yere in the .xvi. daye of Nouēber, was holden the ser∣geaūtes feste within the bysshop of Elyes place. This yere was the body of Rychard Hakendyes wyfe takyn vp in saynt Mary hyll chyrche hole, yt had lyen in the groūd ouer .C. & .xx. yeres. And thys yere was great bysy¦nesse for the entercourse bytwene En¦gland and Flaunders. And this yere the kynge of Scottes made sharp warro vppon the marches. And this yere many lollers stode wyth fagot∣tes at Poulys crosse.
Anno domini .M.iiii.C.xxvi.   Anno domini .M.iiii.C.cxvii.   Iohn̄ Shaa.   Iohn̄ Tate Mercer.   Anno .xii.   Rycharde Haddon.   THe latter ende of October, by great coūsayll holden at west¦mynster / was graunted to the kynge fer the defence of the Scottes .C.xx.M.li. The .xviii. daye of Nouember was Poulys chyrch suspendyd by a fraye of two yonge men. And in the same moneth was graūted to ye kyng a prest of the cytye of .iiii.M.li. And the same moneth at Calys was behe¦dyd the lord Fitzwater. The .xxi. day of Ianuary a parlyament beganne / wherby was graunted two dymes & a halfe, two aydes and two fyftenys, to leuy the foresayd .C.xx.M.li. And in the moneth of Iuny and .xvii. day were the Cornyshmen dyscōfyted at Blakheth. And vpon the .xxviii. daye of Iuny, the Smyth & a gentylman named Flāmok two capytaynes of ye sayd rebelles, were put in execucyon at Tybourne. And shortely after the lorde Audeley, which was hed capy∣tayne of the sayd rebelles, was put to deth at ye Towre hylle. And this yere was concluded a maryage bytwene my lorde prynce & the kynges dough¦ter of Spayne. Thys yere also the kynge sent into Scotland an army, vnder ye guydyng of the erle of Sur¦rey and the lord Neuyle / the whyche made sharpe warre vpon ye Scottes. And ī ye moneth of October Perkyn landed in Cornwayle, and assayled the towne of Exceter & other townes But fynally he toke the seyntwary of Beawdely / and after was pardo∣ned of hys lyfe. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcvii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcviii.   Bartholomewe Rede.   wyllyam Purchace Mercer.   Anno .xiii.   Thomas wyndowght.   IN this yere vpō the .xxviii. day of Nouēber, the sayd Parkyn was brought thorugh the cyty vnto the Towre, & there left as prysoner. And with hym a tall yomā somtyme sergeaūt ferrour to the kyng / whych ferrour & one named Edwarde, were shortely after put to deth at tibourn. Upon saynte Nycholas daye was a proclamacyō made thorugh ye cytye, of a peas bytwene the realmes of En¦gland & Scotland for terme of both kynges lyues. And in December a carpenter called Godfrey, toke downe the wedercok of Poulys sly∣ple & set it vp agayne. And this yere in Crystmas weke was a part of the kinges palayes of Rychemoūt brent And this yere vppon the .ix. daye of Iuny, the forenamed Parkin beyng at large in the kynges court, went se¦cretely awaye / and lastly went to the fader of Syon. And after the second pardon to hym by the kynge graun∣ted, he was shewed at westmynster & in Chepys syde, with moch wonder∣ment / and fynally had to the Towre and there keped. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcviii.   Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcix.   Thomas Bradbery.   Syr Ion̄ Percyuale.   Anno .xiiii.   Stephyn Ienyns.  
IN thys yere vpō the .xxx. daye of Octobre, came my lord price through ye cytye wyth an honorabell cōpany toward westmynster. And vp¦pon shroue tuysdaye was put in exe∣cuciō at saynt Thomas warrynge, a strepelyng of .xx. yeres of age / whych had auaūced hym selfe to be the sonn̄ or heyre to the erle of warwykes lan∣des, & was the sonne of a cordyner of Londō. And thys yere mayster Iohn̄ Tate aldermā begā ye new edefyinge of saynt Anthonies church. And this yere vpō the .xvi. day of Iuly beynge sonday / & vpō the sonday folowyng, stode .xii. heretykes at Poules crosse shryned wyth fagottes. Anno dn̄i. M.iiii.C.xcix.   Anno dn̄i. M.v.C.   Iamys wylforde.   Nycholas Alwyn.   Anno .xv.   Rychard Brond.   IN this yere the .xvi. day of No∣uēber, was areyned in ye whyte halle at westmynster the forenamed Parkyn & .iii. other. The whych Par¦kyn and one Iohn̄ Awatyr were put shortly after in execuciō at Tyborne. And soone after was the erle of war∣wyke put to deth at the towre hylle / & one Blewet & Astwood at Tyborne. And thys yere in May the kyng & the quene sayled to Calays. And thys yere was Babrā in Northfolke brēt. And in Iuly was an olde heretyke brēt in Smythfelde. And thys yere was a great deth in Londō / whereof died ouer xx.M. of all ages. And this yere dyed doctour Mortō cardynall and chaunceler of Englande in the moneth of October. Anno. dn̄i. M.v.C.   Anno dn̄i. M.v.C.i.   Iohn̄ Hawys.   wyllyam Remyngton.   Anno .xvi.   wyllyam Stede.   IN this yere the .xxi. daye of De¦cēber, in the nyght was an hy∣dyous thūder. And this yere was the name of the kyng{is} palays of Shene chaūged, & called after ye day Ryche∣moūt. And this yere in August depar¦ted secretly out of this lāde, the duke of Suffolke. And the .iiii. daye of Oc¦tober lāded at Plymmowth Kateryn̄ doughter of ye kyng of Spayn. And thys yere was fynysshed by mayster Tate the church of saynt Anthony. Anno domini .M.v.C.i.   Anno domini .M.v.C.ii.   Syr Laurence Aylemer.   Syr Iohn̄ Shaa   Anno .xvii.   Henry Hede.   IN this yere began the mayre & hys bretherne to ryde to the barge & other places. Upō sait Erkē¦waldes day, was my lord prince ma∣ryed to the kyng of Spaynes dough¦ter. And this season the duke of Buk¦kyngham wyth other was chief cha∣lēgeour, at a royall iustyce & turney holdē in the palays of westmynster. And thys yere came a greate ambas∣sade out of Scotlād / by reason wherof cōclusion of maryage was made betwene the king of Scottes & dame Margarete eldest doughter to oure soueraygne lord. Also thys yere was an excedyng great fysshe taken nere
vnto Quynbourgh. And in Marche syr wyllyam of Deuynshyre, syr Ia∣mys Tyrell, & his eldest son̄, & one na¦med welborne, were arested for trea∣son. And in Apryll olowyng dyed ye noble prynce Arthur in the towne of Ludlow. And upō ye last day of April were set vpō ye pyllory .ii. yōgmen, for defamyng of ye kynges coūsayll / and there erys cut of. Also aboute thys tyme yt gray fryers were cōpelled to take theyr old habit russet, as ye shepe doth dye it. And the .vi. day of Maye Iamys Tyrell & syr Iohn̄ wyndhm̄ knyght, were beheded at ye towre hyl And a shypmā for the same treason was the same day drawē to tyborne & there hāged & quartered. And soone after a purseuaūt named Curson, & a yoman called Mathew Ionys, were put in execuciō at Guynys / & all was for aydyng of syr Edmōd De la pool. Also thys yere about mydsomer was takē a felowe whych hadde renewed many of Robī hodes pagētes / which named him selfe Greneleef. And this yere begā the new werke of ye houses offyce wythin the Guyldhall of Lon∣don. And in the ende of October, was proclaymed a peas betwene the king & the archeduke of Burgoyne. And ye sonday before saint Symōd & Iude was shewed a bull / by vertue wherof were denoūced at Poules crosse as ac¦cursed, syr Edmōd de la pool late du¦ke of Suffolke syr Roberte Curson knyght, &.v. other persones. And all such as ayded any of thē agaī ye king. Anno domini .M.v.C.ii.   Anno domini .M.v.C.iii. Goldsmyth. Henry Kebyll.   Bartholmew Rede.   Anno .xviii.   Nycholas Nynys.   IN this yere begā the new werk of the kynges chapell at west∣mynster. And vpō the .xi. daye of Fe∣bruary, dyed quene Elizabeth within the towre lieng in chyldbed. And vpō the fyrst sonday of lēt, was solemply accursed at Poules crosse wyth bel & candell, syr Edmōd de la pool, syr Ro¦bert Curson & other, & all yt the ayded agayn the kyng. And in thēde of the moneth of marche, was ye pryour of ye Charterhous at Shene sinfully mur¦dered wyth an other mūk of the same house, by synyster meanes of a munk of the same place named Good wyne & other mischeuous {per}sones. And this yere the felisshyp of tayllours of Lō∣don purchased a graūt of the king to be called marchaūt tayllours. And ye viii. day of August, was the kynge of Scottes maried vnto ye eldest dough¦ter of ye kyng. Also in Iuly were arey¦ned at the Guyldhall Olyuer saynte Iohn̄, Robert Simpson, wellysorfi before named, Pool bayly of Thorok amp; .iiii. other all beyng cast for treason, whereof the sayde Olyuer and Pool wyth hyppemen were putte in execucion at Tyborne, and the other were pardoned. Anno. dn̄i. M.v.C.iii.   Anno dn̄i. M.v.C.iiii. Draper. Chrystoffer Hawys.   Syr wyllyam Capell. Robert wattes. Anno .xix.   Thomas Granger.   IN thys yere the .xiii. day of No¦uēber, in the palays of ye arche∣bysshop of Caūterbury at Lābehyth was holdē the sergeaūtes feest. And the .xxi. day of Nouēber in the begyn∣nyng of ye nyght, was a dredeful fyre vpō the north ende of Londō brydge. And vppō the .vii. daye of Ianuary
were certeyne houses cōsumed wyth fyre agayn saynt Botulphis churche in Thamys strete. Upō the .xxv. daye of Ianuary, begā a parliamēt at west¦mynster. And ye .xxvii. day of March, was an house brēt agayn saynt Mat¦tyus le graūt. And the same day was hurt done wyth fyre in the paryshe of faynt Peters the pore. And in the forenamed parlyamēt was ordeyned a new coyne of syluer, as grotes, half grotes, & shyllynges with half faces. And in the forsayde parlyamēte was graunted to the kynge an ayde of xxxvi. thousand .li. And a correccyon was dyuysed for clipped grotes. Anno domini .M.v.C.iiii.   Anno domini .M.v.C.v. Grocer. Roger Achylley.   Iohn̄ wyngar.   Anno .xx.   wyllyam Browne.   IN thys yere the cytezyns of Lōdon graūted to the kyng .v.M marke for confermaciō of theyr lyber¦tyes. wherof a .M. marke was payde in hāde, & .iiii.M. mark in .iiii. yeres next ensuyng. Upō sat Georges day ye kyng went in procession in Poules church / where was shewed a legge of saynt George closed in syluer, whych was newly sent to the kyng. And vp∣pō the .xxv. day of Apryll, was a mo∣ney maker one of the coyners of the towre drawē to tyborne, & there han∣ged. And in ye later ende of thys yere, came the thyrde cappe of maynte∣naunce from the pope. Anno domini .M.v.C.v.   Anno domini .M.v.C.vi. Fysshemonger. Rycharde Shore.   Thomas Kneysworth   Anno .xxi.   Roger Groue.   THys yere vppō .xii. euyn, the kinges chāber at Rychemoūt was brēt. And vpō the euyn of saynt Maury begā an hidious wid / which endured vppō .xi. dayes folowynge more or lasse, in cōtynuall blowyng / by meane whereof the wedercok of Poules was blowē downe, & moche other harme done. And by force of thys tempest the archeduke of Bur∣goyne was dryuē to lāde in the west coūtre. And vpō the second sonday of lēt stood at Poules crosse the pryour of saynt Osyes & .v. other heretykes. And in ye ende of ye moneth of March syr Edmōd de la pool was conueyed through the citie vnto the towre, and there left as prysoner. And in Maye moneth was the lord of Burgeueny cōmytteth to the towre, for a certayn displeasure whych cōcerned no trea∣son. Thys yere a new bylded galerey fyll in the nyght at Rychemoūt. And thys yere in the ende of Iuly was a gracyous myracle shewed by oure Lady image of Barkyng, by a may∣den chylde that a carte laden wyth stone yode ouer. Anno domini .M.v.C.vi.   Anno domini .M.v.C.vii. mercer. wyllyam Copynger.   Syr Rychard Haddon. Thomas Iohn̄son. Anno .xxii.   wyllyam Fytz wyllyam.   IN thys yere about Crystmas was the bakers house in war∣wyke lane brēt. And thys yere was a wonderfull easy & softe wynter, with¦ out stormys or frostes. And this yere the kyng of hys goodnesse delyuered
out of all prysons in Lōdō, as many prysoners as laye for .xl.s. & vnder. And this yere was Thomas Kney∣sworth late mayer & hys .ii. shyreffes condēpned to the kyng in great som¦mes of money / ouer paynfull prysone¦ment by theym in the marshalsy su∣steyned. Anno domini .M.v.C.vii.   Anno domini .M.v.C.viii. mercer. wyllyam Butler.   wyllyam Browne.   Anno .xxiii.   Iohn̄ Kyrkby.   THys yere in the ende of April, dyed the sayd wyllyam Brow¦ne / and for hym was immedyatly chosen syr Laurence Aylemer, for the resydue of that yere / Anno supradicto.   Anno supradicto. Draper. wyllyam Butler.   Syr Laurence Aylemer.   Anno predicto.   Iohn̄ Kyrkby.   IN thys yere vpon the last daye of Iuny, was an house in Southwarke nere vnto the brydge consumed wyth fyre. And thys yere was syr wyllyam Capell agayne put in vexacyon, by sute of the kynge, for thynges done by hym in the tyme of hys mayralte. Anno. dn̄i. M.v.C.viii.   Anno dn̄i. M.v.C.ix. Tayllour. Thomas Exmew.   Stephyn Ienyns.   Anno .xxiiii.   Rychard Smyth.   IN the begynnyng of the may∣res tyme, syr wyllyam Capell after his prysonement in the coūtour & shyreffes house, was by the kynges counsayll commaūded to the towre / where he remayned tyll the kynge dyed / & shortly after was delyuered wyth many other. And in lykewyse was syr Laurēce Aylemer dalt with / & cōmytted to the warde or house of Rychard Smyth shryfe / & there re∣mayned as prisoner by ye space aboue sayd.Thys yere vppō the saterdaye next before saynt Georges day in the nyght, whych saterdaye was the .xxi. daye of Apryll, dyed the kynge oure soueraygne lorde at hys manour of Rychemount / vpon whose soule and all chrysten Iesu haue mercy. Amen. And so thys foresayd noble prince reygned .xxiii. yeres and .vii. mone∣thes, and one daye therof lakkynge. THys magnyfycent & excellent prynce Hēry the .vii. thus payed to deth his dette of nature as before is sayd. Of whome suffycient laude & prayse can nat be put in wrytyng, cōsyderyng ye cōtynuall peace & trāquylete whyche he kept thys his lande & comons in / wyth also the subduynge of hys out∣warde enymyes, of the realmes of Fraunce & Scotland by hys greate polycy & wysedome, more thā by she∣dyng of cristē bloode or cruell warre. And euer ruled so myghtly hys sub∣gectes & mynystred to them suche iu∣styce, yt nat allonely they loued and drad hym / but all crysten prynces he∣ryng of hys gloryous fame, were de∣syrous to haue wyth hym amyte &
allyaunce. And for that he in all tēpo¦rall polycies & prouisions exceded all prynces by hys tyme reygnynge / dy∣uers popes, as Alexander the syxte, Pius the .iii, & Iulius the .ii. nowe beynge pope, by theyr tymes eyther of thē sunderly wyth auctorytie & cō∣sent of theyr spyrytuall & deuyne coūsayll, elected & chase thys excellente prynce, and admytted hym for chyefe defensour of Chrystes church, before all other crysten prynces. And for a confermaciō of the same / sente vnto thys inuyncibyll prince by .iii. sundry famous ambassades, thre swerdes with .iii. cappes of mayntenaunce. what myght I wryte of the stedfaste contynēcy, great iustyce, & mercyfull dealyng of thys prynce. what myght I report of hys excellēte wysedome & moste sugred eloquence, or of hys in∣mouable pacience & wonderfull dy∣scressyon. Or what shuld I tell of his most beautyfull byldynges, or exce∣dyng charges of manifest reperaciōs and ouer all thys of hys excedynge treasoure & rychesse innumerabyll. But as who wolde saye, to consider in order all his notabyll actes, which wolde aske a lōge tract of tyme, with also the lyberall & somptuous endo∣wemēt of the monastery of westmyn∣ster & other, to wryte / I myghte con∣clude yt hys actes passed all the noble actes of hys noble {pro}genytours syne the conquest / and may moste cōgruly aboue all erthly prynces, belykened vnto Salamō kyng of ye Israelytes and be called the seconde Salomon for hys great sapience & actes by him done hys lyuys tyme executed. All whyche premysses tenderly conside∣red, euery naturall Englysshmā now lyuyng, hath cause & ought deuoutly to pray for the soule of this moste ex∣cellent prynce Henry the .vii, that he maye atteyne that celestyall mansiō, whych he and all trew crysten soules are enheritours vnto / the which god hym graunt. Amen. And the rather because of the exel¦lēt vertuous bryngyng and leuynge vnto vs by goddes ayde and pro∣uysyon, of our moste gracyous and moste dad soueraygne lord Henry ye viii. of that name, as tyghtfull enhe∣rytour vnto the .ii. crownes of Eng∣lande and of Fraunce. The whyche began hys moste gracyous reygne ye xxii. day of Apryll, in the yere of oure lord god .M.v.C. and .ix. HEnry the .viii. of that name and second sonne of the forenamed ex¦cellente prynce Henry the seuith began his moste gracyous reygn ouer the realme of Englande the .xxii. daye of Apryll, in the yere of our lord god M.v.C. and .ix. To whome by all ho∣nour, reuerēce, & ioyfull contynaūce of prosperous reygn, to the pleasure of god & weale of thys hys realme. Amen. Thus endeth Fabyans cronycle. Printed by .w. Rastell, & fynys∣shed the laste daye of De∣cember, in the yere of our lorde .M.v. C. and XXXiii. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
